The Workes of that Famous Chirurgion Ambrose Parey (Ambroise Paré (Thomas Johnson, trans.), 1634)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/per_uoc-pharmacology-dissertations_1634_ia1515115-30). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

3 


are 


IBROSII were 
Onus 


anAain 


U 
4 H 
i 


- 
a? 


Am 


centinet 


- 


fe 


‘ 


a 


iil 


hii 


t72 CXttiurm, nen 


it 
. 
iq 
4 
4 
+ 
— 
i 
a 
= 


whe 


omer 


4 
= 
=z 
=3 
» 
~ " 
4 > 
4 
| 
— 
| 
| 
3 =? 
- 
A. \ 
= 
| 
33° 
= 
4 
- 
/ 
: 
1 


DEDICATORIE 
thethird, the moit 
ing of France and Polanc 


as ( moft C hy iftian £\ tng ) ive fe be members 0 f nlans 
body by a friendly confent are alwayes bufied, and ftand 
ready to performe thofe functions for which they are appoin- 
ted by nature, for the prefer vation of the whole, of which 
they are barts fo it #5 convenient that we, Which areas it 
were (i. <ens of this earthly fhould be dilt« 


ment ) we have once taken WPOM iss > and content with our prefent eftate, not carted 
away With rafhnes and envy,defire different and divers things whereof we have no 
knowledge. He which doth otherwi/e, perverts and defileswith hated confufion the 
| order and beauty,on Which this Vnivers confifts.W herfore when confidered with 
my felfe, that I was amember of this great Mundane body, and that not altagether 
unprofitable, 7 endeavored earneftly, that all men fhouldbe acquainted With my 
duty, and that it might be knowne how much 7 could profit euery maa. For God ts 
my Wwitnes, and all 00d mien know, that I have now laboured fifty peares with all 
care and paines in the tlluftration and amplification of Chirurgery;and that 7 have 
focertainly touched the marke Whereat f aimed, that Antiquity may feeme to 
h have nothing wherein it may ereceed us, befide the glory of mvention; nor poftertty 
any thing left but a certaine {mall hope to adde fome things, as it  eafie to adde to 
former inventions. Jn performance whereof, F have beene fo prodigall of my felfe, 
‘7 my Watchings, faculties and meanes, that I fpared neither time, labour, nar coft, 
wherby 7 might fatisfe and accomplifh my own defires,this my great work,and the 
defires of the fludious. Netcther may we doubt but their ftudies would at the lengt/ 
waxe cold,if they only furnifhed with the Thearicke and Precepts in Schooles and 
that with much laboure,{hould fee no manuall operation, nor manife/? way of per 
forming the Arte.For which caufe F feeking the praife and profit of the French. 
Nation even with the hinderance of my particular eftate, have endeavored to she 

inftrateana increafe C hyrurgerte bitherto obfcure either by the infelcity of the 
A former 


j 
| | | 
de att | 
& 4 
gent inii.. {ollowing of that calling which ( by Gods appoint- 


The ‘Authors Epitftle Dedicatory. i 


* 


former ages or theenvy of the Profeffors;and not onely with precepts andrules but 


being a lover of carved workes J beautified it with 300. formes, or graven figures 
and apt deliniations in which whofoever hall attentively looke hall finde five bun- 
dred anatomicall,or organicall figures belon eing to the Arte, (if they be reckoned 
particularly). To every of have giventhetr names and [hewed their ufe, 
leaf? they [hould feeme to have beeuerput in vainly for oftentation or delight, 
But although there be few men of this profef]von which can bring fo much authority 
to their Writings either with reafon, or experience as J can, notwithftanding F 
have not beene fo arrogant, but intending to ne my worke, J fir/? communica- 
ted it with men the moft excellent in the Arte of Phificke,who gave me greater in- 
couragement to perfec and publ 1 it that it might be m common ufe profefsing 
they wifhed nothing more, than that it might be turned into Latine,fo by which 
meanes it fhould be knowne to forraigne Nations that there 1s no kind of Learning 
which is not delivered with great dexterity of Wit in this kingdome over which you 
rule.Andthus much F dare boldly affirme, that theres fcarce any, behenever fo 
rately or fupercilions but that he may here find Jomething which may delight him, 
and by which he may better his knowledge. Therefore 1 doubted not to confecrate 
this booke unto your Majeftte both as a Patterne and treafury of my labours afwell 
in refpect of my duty am yours by nature and education ,as that 7 might mant- 


feft to all, your Highnes exceeding bounty towards mein placing me {having heres 


tofore enjoyed the off tc of princt pall urgcon under Kings your Mayefties pres 
deceffors )in the fame dignity , and that of your owne accord. And moreover F did 
conjecture that it would fall out, as now it doth,that this my worke caried through 
the world by the fame of your Majeftie name fhould neither feare the face nor veiw 
of any, fupported by the favour and Mayeftie of a mof? invincible Monarch and 


moft excellent and renowned Prince. Neither did King Charles the ninth of 


happy memory incited by the relation of the moft gractous Queene his Mother,refufe 
to reade it being he underftood it proceeded from him, whohaving happily paffed all 
his time inprivate and publsk employments and converfed With allmen of all forts 
was judged moft worthy to obtaine this favoure, as to have the front of this worke 
adorned and beautified With the [plendor of his prefixed name. F encoura ged by thes 
hope, defiredthat my requeft [hould paff as by a certaine continuation and fuccef« 


fion from a moft powerfull, toa moft Jnvincible King , and doe wholy confecrate 


thefe my labours taken for my Countryes good unto your facred Majeftie. God grant 


that your Majeftie may have happy fuccefJe of all your enterprifes aboundantly 
added to Neftors yeares. 


Paris.8.Feb. Anne Dom. 1 5 79. 
Your mott Chriftian Majcttics 
faithfull Servant 


eImbrofe Tarey. 


soo OM A 


/ 
— re 
/ 
| 
4 
~. 
i 
é 
‘ 


The Preface. 


Ss Olt men derive the Original of Phificke from hex. 


ven; for chofe who hold the beft opinion of che 


|| Creation of the world,afhirme,the Elements being 
created and feparated each from other, man being 
HEAT Y/: -notas yet made; incontinently by the divine de- 
cree,all herbes and plants with infinite variety of 
floures,endewed with various fents, taftes,colours 
and formes,srew and fprung forth of the bowels of the Earth,enri- 
ched with fo many and great vertues, that itmay be thoughta great 
oftence to attribute to any other than the Deity,the benefit of fo greata 
blefiing fo neceffary for fo many ules: Neither could Mans Capacity 
ever have attained to the knowledge of thofe things without the 
guidance of the divine power.For God the great Creator & fafhioner 
of the world, when firft heinfpired Adam by the breath of his mouth 
intoa living and breathing man,he taught him the nature, the proper 
operations, faculties and vertues of all things contained in the circuit 
ofthis Vuiverfe.So that ifthere be any who would afcribethe glory of 
this invention to man, he is condemned ofingratitudeeven by the 
judgment of Pliny. Butthis knowledge was not buryed in oblivion 
with Adam: but by the fame guift of God was given to thofe whom 
he had chofen and ordained for Phificke, to put their helping hands 
to others that ftood in need thereof. Which opinion was not oaly re- 
ceived in thecommon mannerand by the taciteconfent of al Nations; 
bur confirmed by Mofesin the Scripture. Which thing Je/us the fonne 
of Sirach the wifeft amongtt the Iewes ,hath confirmed laying ; Honnor 
theP hyfition with the bonnor due unto him, or the moft Fligh hath created him be- 
caufe of neceffity : and of the Lord commeth i he gift of healing. the Lord hath crea- 
ted Medicines of the Earth and he that s Wife will not abborre them. Give place 
and bonnor to the Phifition,for God hath created bim, let him not goe from thee, for 
thou halt need of him. The Gracians who firlt feeme more fully and with 
greater fameto have profeffedthe Arte of Phificke, dee ina manner 
confent with this opinion,in acknowledging dpolloco have beene the 
Inventorthereof,neither did they it without a reafonable caufe. For 
whether by pollo they may nnderftand the Sun who by its gentle and 
vitall heat doth bring forth;temper and cherifh all things , or els forme 
Heros, who incited by an excellentand almoft divine ven 


Gene/,t. 
3 3. 
I. 


4 | 
| 
| 
| 
10? 
c> 
Ole 
» 
ite 
‘ps 
lid 
gh 
nd 
0 j 
alk 
fs 
“ke 
| ¥ 
int 
tly 
\ 
| 


§ 


The Preface. 


Plin.L.7,¢.2. 


firft taught and put in practile the Medicinall vertues of Herbs ; in 


which fenfe Ovid brings him in {peaking thus « 
Herbs are of mine invention and through all 
The world,they me the firft Phifttian call. 

The original of Phificke arifing from thofe beginnings fhiall alwayes 
becelebrated,as celeftiall and was increafed principally after this mane 
ner.After Apollo, /culapius his fonne inftruéted by his father reduced 
this Arte being as yet rude and vulgar into alitle betterand more ex- 
quifice forme,for which caufe he was reputed worthy to be accounted 
as one of the Gods. At the fametime flourifhed Chironthe Centaure who 
for that he excelled in knowledge of Plants,and taught 4/culapius {as 
many report) their faculties, is thought by Play and fome others to 
have bin the inventor of Phificke. 4/culapius had two fons Podalirius 
and Machaon who following their fathers fleps & profefling Phificke, 
did principally beautifie and practife that part thereof which is called 
Chirurgery, and for that caufe were accounted the Inventers thereof. 
After thofe 4/clepiades left this Arte much enlarged as hereditary to his 
pofterity : by whofe ftudy and diligence, that part of the Arte was ins 
vented and annexed,which by a more curious skillfearcheth out and 
cureth thofe difeafes which lye hid within the body. Hippocrates the 
Coan the fon of Heraclidas borne of the nuble race of 4/depiades, Prince 
of the Phifitiansthat were before him,perfected Philickeand reduced 
it intcoan Arteand wrote divers bookes thereofin Greeke. Galen fuce 
ceeded him{fix hundred yeares after, who was a man moft famous 
not only for his knowledge in Phificke, but alfo in all other fciences, 
who faithfully interpreting every thing that was ob{cureand difficult 
inthe writings of Fiippocrates, enlarged the feience with many voe 
lumes. Thus therfore was the beginning,thus the encreafe and per- 
fecting the Arte of Phificke, as much as can be hoped for from mans 
induftry. Although indeed we cannot deny butthat Experience hath 
much profited this Arte, as ithathand dothmany other. For as men 
perceived that fome things were profitable fome unprofitablefor this 
or that difeafe, they fecit downe, and fo by diligent obfervation and 
marking of fingularities, they eftablifhed univeriall and certaine pres 
cepts and{o brought itintoan Arte. For fo we find recorded in ane 
cient Hiftories,before the invention of Phificke, thacthe Babilonians & 


Affyrians had a cuftome amongft them,to lay their ficke and difeafed 


perfons in the porches and entries of their houfes, or to carry them in. 
tothe ftreets and market places,that fuch as pafled by and faw them, 
might givethem counfell totake thofe things to cure their difeafes, 
which they had formerly found profitablein themfelves or any other 
in the likeaffects,neither might any pafle by 2 ficke man in filence. 
Alfo Strabo writes that ie was a cuftomein Grace that thofe which were 
fickefhould refort to Afculapins his Temple in Epidaurum,that there as 
they flept, by their dreames they might be admonithed by the God 


fre 

m 

la 

pr 
Ai 

i 

Fc 

tre 

| 
fe 

ul 

th 

let 

m 

cre 

m 

fut 

Pay 

Ww 

de 

mi 

h 

the 
thi 

ex 
lar 

Mi 

Ay 

{tif 

m 

by 

ch 

are 

fo 
com 

of 
vail 
lou 

the 


The Preface. 


what meanes they fhould ufe tobe cured , and when they were freed 
from their difeafes, they writ the manner of their infirmities and the 
means by which they were cured in tables & faftned them to the pil. 
lars of the Temple,not only for the glory of the God, but alfo for the 
profit of fuch,as fhould afterwards be affected with che like maladies. 
All which tables(as fame reports) Hippocrates tranfcribed,& fo fré thofe 
drew the Arce of Phificke. Beafts alfo have added much to this Arte. 
For one man was not only inftructed by another,but learned alfo much 
from brute beafts, for they by the onely inftinet of nature have found 
out divers herbs,& remedies, by which they freed & preferved them- 
felves from infirmities,which might prefently be transferred to mans 
ufe. Wherfore céfidering that {uch & fo many have cécurred to bring 
this Arteto perfection, who hereafter dare call in queftion the excel- 
lency therof?cheifly if he refpect the fubject cherof, fans body, a thing 
more noble than all other Mundane thing and for which the reft were 
created. Which thing moved Herophilus in times paft to call Phificions 
The hands of the Gods.Foras we by putting forth our hand ,do helpe any 
roan out of the water or mud into which he is fallen : even fo we doe 
fuftaine thofe that are throwne downe from the top of healthto the 
gates of death by violence of difeales, with happy medicines, & as ir 
were by fome {peciall & divine gift deliver them out of the jawes of 
death . Homer the prince of Greek Poets affirmes that one Phifition is far 
more worthy than many other men.All Antiquity gave Phifitions {uch 
honor,that they worf{hipped them with great veneration as Gods, or 
the fons of their Gods, For who isit whichis not much delighted with 
the divine force of healthfull medicines, with which (we fee by dayly 
experience )Phifitids,as armed with Mercuries rod,do bring back thofe 
languifhing foules which are even entring the gates of death*Hence it 
cometh to pafte thatthe divinePoets of ancient times, as Orphews,and 
Mu/eus& He fiode,& the moft renowned Philofophers Pythagoras Plato, 
Ariftotle Theophraftus ,Chryfppus,Cato Cenforins,& Varro efteemed nothing 
more excellent thanto excell in the knowledge of Medicines, & to tes 
ftifie the fame by written monuments to Polterity. For whatcan be 
more noble or worthy ofa generous difpofition than to attaine to that 
by the benefit of Phificke,that adorned with the ornaments of dignity 
thou maieft have power over other men,& favoured of Princes,Kings 
& Emperours,mayeftappoint & prefcribetothem thofe things which 
are profitable to preferve health, & cure their difeafes ‘ But if you look 
for benefit by fciences ; then knowthat the Profeflors hereof have be- 
fides fufficient gain,acquired much honor & many friends. Hippocrates In waar 
comming to 4bderato cure Democritus of his madnes,not only the MeN fons have 
of theCity, but alfo the women, children & people of every age, fexe & 
ranck went forth to meet him, giving him witha commonconient & 
doud voice the title of a Tutelary Deity and father of their Country. But 
the Athenians, for freeing their Country from the plague, with trium- 
A 3 | 


- In | 
meyes 
ane 
ex- 
ited 
ho 
sto 
rius 
ke, 
led 
eot. 
his 
Shere 
and 
the 
nce 
ced 
(UCs 
ous 
eS, 
ule 
yer. 
ans 
ath 
en 
his | 
ind 
& 
fed 
ine 
es, 
er 
e. 
ere 
as 
hat | | 
| 


The Preface. 


hant pompe celebrated playes to his honor, & boun ciful ly fet upon 
his headas if he had beenea king,aCrowne of gold weighing a 1000. 
peices of their golden coine, & erected his ftatue, for a perpetuall moe 


* 


nument of his piety and Learning. Erafiftratwsthe Nephew of 4ri/totle 


by his daughter, received freely given him by Prolomy king of Egypt, tor me 
the cure of his {on,100. Talents of gold. The Emperour Auguftus ho- fo 
noured Antonius Mufa witha golden ftatue. Quintus Stertimus yearly an 
received out ofthe Emperours Treafury 12000.5 00. peices of gold. In ro 
thetime ofour Grandfathers Petrus Aponenfis called (onciliator was fo chil 
famous through all Jtaly for his knowledge in Phificke, that he could th 
{carfe be intreated tocometo any manof talhia that was fick,unles he mil 
gave him 50. crownes, for every day he was abfent from home : but qi 
when he went tocure Honorius the Bifhop of Tome, he received 400. 
crownes for every day he was abfent,Our French Chronicles relate in C] 
what credit & eftimation James (otterius the Phifition was with Lewis m 
the 11.King of France;for they report he gave him monethly out of his at 
Treafury 10000.crownes.Phifick in tines paft hath bin in fuch efteem re 


with many famous & noble perfonages, that divers Kings & Princes 
delighted with the ftudy therof, & defirous to attaine glory & credite 


cl 

m 

sin therby,called fundry herbs after their own names.For lo Gentian took A 

its name of Gentius king of Jijria.the herb Lyfimachia of Ly fimachusthe of 

al 

b 

m 


king of Macedon the Mithridatick herb or Scordium,ot Mithridates the king 
of ‘+ ontus & Bithinia ; Achillea of Achilles; (entorie of Chiron the Centaure, 
Arthemifia of Arthemifiathe Queen of (aria. Attalus king of Pergamus,Saz 
lomon ot Judea,Evax of Arabia,and the king of Maaritania,were not 


only inflamed witha defire of the knowledye of plants;but either they ar 
have writté booksof it,or for the great cOmodity of potterity,invented ni 
by their skil many choife Antidets compounded of divers fim ples. nei- m 
ther the defire of learning this noble fcience is yet altogether extinét. its 
As may appear by thatmdia plantT obaco,called byfome the noble herb, p 
Catherines herb& Medices herb,but commonly the Queens herb becaufe . fol 
Catherine Medices the mother of our kings, by her tingular {tudy and ins j ang 
duftry made manifeftthe excellent vertue it hath in curing maligne 1S 
ulcers & wounds,which before was unknownto the French.F or thefe 
worthy men underftood that their glory,thus faftened & ingrafted into . 


the deepe,& as it were everliving roots of plants, would never decay; he 
but fhold be propagated coal polterity in many ucceeding ages grow. 
ing up with their fprouting & budding fhouts,ftalks,floures & fruits. 
Neither did thefe famous men whil’ft they adorned this part of phifick 
{offer the other, which treats of the difleétis of mans body,be buried in 
oblivion, & without their knowledge; as inftructed. with the precepts . 
learning of the wifeft men, how artificiall & unimitable by mortall 
hand this fabrick of our body is. Neither is it prebable that Apis, Ofiris a 
and Ptolomy kings of Egypt, Solomon, Alexander the great, Mithridates, 
Attalus feeing they dedicated themfelves wholy to the cétemplation of 


nature 


— 
| if 
| 
Names 
to Plans | 
| 
| 
| | 
| | 
> 


Preface. 
natural things,neglected the ufe of Anatomie, & being men moft de. 
firous to know themfelves,to have beene ignorant of the ftructure of 
there own bodyes being the habitations of their foules immortal] & 
made to the Image of God:feeing they obferved with certaine judg- 
ment the different lights of the Sun,Moone and ftars;and paffed over 
fo many lands, fo many feas, fo many regions fo far remote one from 
another, by waies {fo terrible by reafon of cold uncouthnes,darknes by 
rocks by fire & {word ,with great labour,charge & danger of life,only 
that they might fatisfietheir minds thirfting after the knowledge of 
things. and to have left untouched a thing truly noble admirable, and 
moft worthy of knowledge, ealie to be attained by any, and to be ac- 
quired without any danger of life,or fortunes. 

Seeing there be 3 parts of that Phificke which at this time we profefle, Phitickeise- 
Chirurgery which by theufe of the hand, Diet which with a convenient puns. 
manner of feeding & ordering the body, & Pharmacy that by medicines 
atrempt to expell difeafes,& preferve health; The prime Philitions do 
not without reafon contend which of thefe may be accounted the 
cheife.Certainly Herophili# had Pharmag in {uch elteem,thathethoughe 
medicines were firft mixed & admnittred to the ficke by 4palluo(whom 
Antiquity thoughta great Deity.) And Pliny had{o good an opinion 
of Diet,that he exclaimes;The true remedies & Antidotes againft difz 
eafes are put into the pot & eaten every day by the poore people. Verily 
al learned men confefle that the manner of curing which 1s performed. 
by diet,is much more facile & profperous than that which ts done by 
medicines;as thofe things which fought with much labour and coft, 
aretaken with much loathing,and taken are {earfe recained but retai- f 
ned they oft work with much labour & patne: Which things long ago hi 
moved A4fclepiades to exclude the ufe of medicines, as hurttull to the 
ftomack. Yet if we will beleeve Cel/us neither of thele parts merit the 
preheminéce,but both of them give placeto Chirurgery.For icing that 
fortune is very powerfull in difeafes, & the fame Meats & Medicines 
are often good & often vaine,truly itis hard to fay whether the health 
is recovered by the benefit of Diet and Pharmacy, or by the ftrength of 
the body. Moreover in thofe cafes, in which we moft prevaile with 
medicines,although the profit be moremanifelt, yet itis evident that 
health is often fought in vaine even by thefe things, & often recovered 
without them.As it may be perceived by fome troubled with lore cies, 
& others with Quartaine feavers who having binlong troubled by 
Phifitiss are fometimes healed withourthem.But the effect of Chirur- 
gery as itis very neceflary,fo it is the moft evident amongi{tall the parts 
of phificke.For whos ithout Chirgery can hope co cure broken, or 
luxated parts,who wounds & ulcers, whothe falling of the Matrix,che 
ftonein the bladder,a member infefted with a Gangrene,or Sphaceles 
Befides,this part alfo isthe moftancient ; for Podalirins 8 Machaon fol. 
lowing their Generall Agamemnon co the Trojane wars, poring Re 
ma 


pon 
00. 
otle 
tor 
Lin 
s{o 
uld 
she 
but 
00. 
in 
his 
eem 
ces 
dite 
ook 
masthe 
ing 
ures | 
not 
they 
ited 
nei. 
nct. | 
erb, 
aule 
1 ins 
one 
hefe | 
into 
ay 5 
ow. 
uits. 
ifick 
in 
epts 3 
rtall 
fsris 
ates, 
of | 
ture 


Preface. 


{mal comfort to their fellow Soldiers.Whom notwithltanding Homer 
affirmes not to have given any helpe in the peftilence,nor in divers o- 
ther difeafes, but onely were accuftomed to heale wounds by inftru- 
ments and medicines. And ifthe difficulty of learning it argue the exe 
cellency of the Arte,who can doubt but Chirurgery mutt be the moft 
excellent, feeing that none ought to be accounted a Chirurgeon or 
which can performe his duty, without the knowledge of Diet & Phar- 
macy?But both the other can performe their parts without Chirurgery 
if we may beleeve Galen.But if we confider the matter more neerly ac- 
cording to truth; we fhall underftand thofe three parts have a certaine 
common bond,and are very neere of kinred fo that the one implores 
the ayde of the other; neither can the Philition doe any thing praife 
worthy without the confpiracy and joyntconfent of thefe three, ther- 
fore in ancient times there was but one performer and ufer ofall the 
three parts.But the multitude of men dayly encreafing,and on the con- 
trary mans life decreafing,fo that itdid notfeeme able tofufhife for to 


learne and exercife allthe three, the workmen devided themfelves. 


Wherfore that which happens to any man either by lor, or counfell, 
that let him follow, maintaine and onely ufe,as mindful how fhort his 
life is,and how long the Arte. seis 


— 
* 
The execl- 
lencyv of 
Chirurgery, 
fi 
wie 
¥ 
of 
- 
’ 
| 
> 
| 
> 
’ 


y 


» . * 


Chiefe Chyrurgion, which were fet forth in 
Latine, by James Guillemear, | 


tr, AN Fatroduétion, or compendi~ commonly is performed by the hand, 
ous Way to { hirurgery. | 18. Of the Gout. 
2. Of living creatures and mans ex. | 19. Of the Lues Venerea, and 
cellency. thofe Symptomes that happen by reafon 
3. Of the Anatomy of mans body. | thereof. 
4. Of the witall parts contained in| 20,0f the fall Poxes and Meafels 


the Cheft. and alfoof Wormes, and the Leprofie. 
5. Of the Animall parts placedin| 21. Of Poyfons, and of the biting of 

the head. mad dogges and the /tinging and biting 
6. Of the Mujfclesand Bones, and of yenemous creatures. | 

other extreme parts of the bod y. | 22. OfthePlague. 
7. Of Tumors contrary tonature| 23. Of the Arts to repaire thofe 

11 generall | things which are defective, either by nas 
8. Of Tumors contrary to nature | ture or accident. . 

in particular. | 24. Of the generation of Man. 
9. Of wounds in general, . | 25. Of Monfters and Prodigies. 
10. Of the greene and bloudy wounds\> 26. Of the Faculties of fimple mes 

of each feverall part. dicines, tovether with their compofition 


11 Of Wounds made by Gun-fhot, | and ufe. 
andother fiery Engins, and all forts of | 2°7. Of Distiflations, 


| Weapons, 28. A Treatife of reports, and the 
| 12. Of (ontufions and Gan- | embalming of dead bodies. 

greenes.s | 2G. An Apologie, and Voyages 

13. Of Ulcers, Fiftulaes, and Ha- | ing not in che Latine, but tranila- 

morrotdes. | red out of the laft French Edition, 

4. Of Ligatures, or Bandages. | whomalfol havefollowed inthe 

15. Of Fractures. number of the Bookes, leaft any 


16. Of Luxations, and Straines. | fhouldthinkefome wanting, 
17. Of diverfe affetts of the parts | ding but 26. in the Latine, and 
not agreeable to nature, whofe cure \29, inthe French. 


B 


ner 
O- 
10Fr 
Cr y 
J 
alle 
the 
Ofi- 
r to 
VCS. 
fell, 
t his 
# 


CHAP. I, 


What Chyrargerie i. 


NHYRVRGERIE isan Art, which eeacheth the way by ss 

reafon, how by the operation of the hand we may cure pre- op ~~ crate 
vent and mitigate difeafes, which accidentally happen uuto us, s*ti, 

Ochers have thought good todefcribe it otherwife, as chat; 

it is that part of Phyficke which undertaketh the cure of di- 
|| feafes by the fole induftry of the hand , as by cutting, bur- 
ning, fawing off, uniting fractures, reftoring diflocations, and 
performing other workes, of which we {hall hereafter treate. 
Chyrurgery alfo is thus defined by the Author of the medi- 

cinall Definitions : The quicke motion of an intrepide hand joyned with experience: 
Or an attificiall action by the hands ufed in Phyficke,for fome convenicatiocenr. Yet 
pone muft thinke to attaine to any great perfection in this Art, without the helpe of a | 
the other two parts of Phyficke; I fay of Diet and Pharmacie, and the divers appli- 
cation of proper medicines, re{pecting the condition of the ry 
andthe like circumftances, which comprehended under the names of things natural, *4*5"" 
not naturall,and befides nature (as they commonly callthem ) wee iatend to defcribe 

in their proper place, Butif any reply, that there be many which doe the workes of 
Chirurgery, without any knowledge of fuch like things, who notwithftanding have 
cured defperate difeafes with happy fuccefle; let them take this for an aniwer, that 

fuch things happen rather by chance, than by the induftry of che Art,and chat they 

are not provident that commit themfelves tofuch, Becaufe that for {ome one happy 

chance, athoufand dangerous ctrors happen afterwards, as Galew (in divers pla- 

ces of his Method) fpeakes againft the Emperickes. Wherefore {eeing wee have 

iet downe Chirurgery to be a diligent operation of the hands, ftrengthened by the 

afliftanceof Diet and Pharmacie, wee will now fhew, what, and of what aature the 

operations itare. 


B 2 C HAY. 


= » 
CHAP.E. 
l »* 
— 
( ) 
{ 
A, 
‘av TO OVSrurceri 
» 
' 
4 


The nature of 
a Chirurgion. 


E xperienc: 


morc neceflas 
ry for a Chi- 
rurgie#, thaw 
A rt. 


Examples of 
taking away 
that which ts 
{uperflueus, 


* Two tuni- 
cles of the 


eycs, 


Examples of 
replacing, 


Example of 
feparating 
things joyned 
together. 


HA 


eAn Introduétion, or Compendious 


CuAP. LI, 


. Of Chirurgicall operations. 


Vas is fuperfiuous; to reftore to their places, {uch things as are difplaced ; to 
feparate thofe things which are joyned together ; to joyne thote which are 
feparaied; and to fupply the defeats of nature. Thou thalt fare more eafily and hap- 
pily attaine to the knowledge of thtfe things by long ufe and much exercife, than by 
much reading of Bookes, or daily hearing of Teachers. For {peech how perfpicuous 
and elegant foever it be, cannot fo vively expreffe any thing, as that which is {ubje~ 
&ted to the faithfull eyes and hands. | ee 
Wee have examples of taking away that which abounds, in the amputation, or 
cutting off a finger, if any have fixe on one hand, or any other monitrous member 
that may grow out: inthe lepping off a putrified part inwardly corrupted ; in theex- 
traction of adead child, the fecondine, mole or fuchlike bodies out ofa womans 
wombe; in taking downe of all Tumors, as Wens, Warts, Polypus, Cancers, and 
fiethy excrefcenfes of the like nature; inthe pulling forth of bullets, of pecces of 


Lo things are proper to the dutie ofa Chirurgian; To take away that which 


maile, of darts, arrowes, fhells, {plinters , and of all kind of weapons in what part of 


the body foever they be. And hee taketh away that which redounds, which plucks 
away the haires of the eye-lids which trouble the eye by their turning in towards it: 
whocuts away the web, poflefling all the * admata,and part of the * Cornea: whe let- 
teth forth {ippurared matter ; who taketh out {tenes in what part feever of the body 
they grow; who puls out a rotten or otherwife hurtfull tooth, or cuts a naile that 
runs intothe fleth; whocuts away part of the svalz, or haires that grow onthe eye- 


_lids ; who taketh offa Cataract ; who cuts the navillor fore-skinne of a child newly 


borne, or the skinnie caruncles of womets privities. 

Examples of placing thofe things which are our of their naturall fice, are mani- 
feft in reftoring diflocated bones; in replacing of the guts and kall fallen into the 
ceds, or out of the navillorbelly.by a wound, or of the falling downe of the wombe, 
fundament, or great gut, or the eye hanging out of its circle, or proper place. 

But wee may take examples of difioyning thofe things which are comtinued from 
the fingers growing together, either by fome chance, as burning, or by the imbecilitie 
of the forming facultie: by the difiunctien of the membrane called Hymen, or any e- 


' ther troubling the necke of the wombe, by the diffection of the ligament of the 


Examplefof 
uniting things 


dificoyned, 


B xamples of 
fuplying de= 
5. 


tongue, which biaders children from fucking and {peaking , and of that which hin- 
ders the Glaus trom being uncovered of the foreskinne: by the devifion of a varicous 
veine,or of a halfe cut nerve or tendon,caufing convullion:by the divilionof the mem- 
brane ftopping the auditory paflage,the nofe, mouth, or fundament, or the ftubborne 
{ticking together of the haires of the eye-lids. Referre to this place allthe workes 
done by Caufticks, the Saw, Trepan, Lancet, Cuppingglatles, [ncifion Knife, Lea- 
ches, either for evacuation, derivation or revulfion fake. 

The Chirargion drawes together things {eparated , which healeth weunds by 
ftitching them, by bolftering binding, giving reftro, and fit placing the part: which 
repaires fractures ; reftores luxated parts; who by binding the veflell, ftaicth the 
lene effufion of bloud: who cicatrifeth cloven lips, commonly called hare-lips; who 
reduces to equalitic the cavities ef Vicers, and Fiftula’s, 

But hee repaires thofe things which are defective, either from the infancy, or af- 
terwards by accident, as muchas Art and Nature will fuffer, who {ets onaneare, an 
cy¢, anofe, one or more tecth ; who fils the hollowneffe of the palat eaten by the 
Poxe, witha thinne plate of goldorfilver, or fuch like ; who fupplies the defe@ of 
the ronguc in part cut off, by {ome new addition; who faftens toa hand, an arme or 
legge with At ligaments werkemanlike ; who fits a doublet bumbafted,or madewith 
iror plaresto make the body ftraight ; who fills a fhooe reo big with corke,or faftens 
a flocking or focke to a lame mans girdleto helpe hisgate. We will treare more full 
of all the{c in our following Yorke. Burin performing thofe things with the hands, 


we 


q 
| 
~ 
we 
vid 
r’) 
G10 
mu 
the 
fire 
fir 
as 
rez 
10 
Sele 
aq 
ALK‘ 
| 
pe 
ar 
anc 
Lip 
tAa 
rel 
| 
4 
rol 
Bal 
| ane 
afta 
| 
Cad 
| ail 
| 
4 
Th 
cip 
= 
a 
ihe 


CHAP.2, 


we cannot but caufe paine: (for who can without paine cut off an arme, or legge. de- 
vide and teare afunder the necke of the bladder, reftore bones put out of their places, 
openiulcers, bind up wounds, and appply caureries, and doe {uch lik ¢?) notwithftan- 
ding the matter oftea comesto that pafle, that unlefle wee ufea judicious hand, wee 
mult either die, or leade the remaant of our lives in perpetual mifery, Who 
thercfore can tultly abhorrea Chirurgion for this, or accufe him of crueltie 2 or de- 
fire they may be ferved, as in ancient umes the Romanes ferved Archagatus whoatthe 4,.;. ne 
firft mads hina free of the Citie,bur prefently after,becaufe he did fomwhat too cru- the Chivurs 
cily burre, cutaad performe the othe? workesof agood Chirurgion, they drew him 
from his aoufe into the Campus Martius and there ftened him co death, as wee have 

read it recorded by Sextus Cheroneus Plutarche’s Neece by his daughter, Truly it was 

an inhumane kind of ingratitude, fo cruelly tomurdera man intent to the workes of 

fo neceffary an Art. But rhe Senate could not approve the aét, wherefore to expiate 

che crime as well as then they could, they made his Statue in gold, placed itin e#/cw- 

lepine bis Temple.and dedicated it to his perpetuall memoric.For my part | very well 

like that faying of Ce//ws; A Chirurgeon muft have a ftrong, ftable, and inirepide 4 prefer. 
hand, and a mirde refolute and mercilefle , fo that eo heale him he takethin hand, he ”:7: 


be not moved to make more hafte thanthe thing requires ; or to cut lefle than is need- 7 
propers 


full ; but which doth all things as if he were nothing affected with their cries; not gi- tics ofageod 


ving heed to the judgement of the vaine common peeple, who {pcake illof Chiru rgi- Chirurgion. 
ons becaufe of their ignorance. 


Cuarp. III, 


Of things Natural. 


“8 Hat the Chirurgsion may rightly and according to Art, performe the fore. 

4 {aid workes,he muft fet before his eyes certaine Indications of working: O- 

Su dren therwife he is like to become an Empericke, whom no Arr, no certaine rea- 

fon, but oncly a blind temerity of fortune moves to boldnefle andadion. Thefe whenee 

dications of actions are drawne from things(as theycallthem) naturall, notoaturall, “te muft draw 

and befides nature, and their adjunéts, as it is fingularly delivered of che Ancients, be- 

ing menofan excellent underfianding. Wherefore we will profecute according to 

that order, all the fpeculation of this Art of ours. Firft therefore things naturallarcfo 

termed, becaufe they conftitute and containe the nature of mans body, which wholy are called s- 

depends of the mixture and temperament of the 4. fir{t bodies, as it is fhewed by Hup- lL 

pocrates in his Booke de Natura humana: wherefore the confideration thereof belongs 

to that part of Phyficke which is named PAyfielagta ; as che examination of things not 

macurallto Dretetice, or Diet, becaufe by the ufe of fuch things it indeavours torcraine 

and keepe health: but Therapentice or the part which curesthe difeaies, and all the of Phificke 

befides nature, challenges the contemplation of thofe things which are nora~ 

grecable to nature. Burthe things which are called natural! may be reduced to {even To wha 

heads: belides which there comes inte their fellowfhip, thefe which wee terme things beudes, 


annexed, | 
{ Elements. Age. 
Temperameats. Sexe, 
The feven prin- Humers. | To Colour. 
cipall heads of Parts or members, Compofure. 
things naturall are, | Faculties, emewnat Time or 
Qions. | Region. 
' (Spirits. j LYocation of life, 


B ; 


Way to Chirureery. | 


. 
| 
JS 
or 
* 
ILS 
‘ 
hor 
& 
ni- 
be 
> 
Om 
itis 
©- 
rhe 
DY 
4 
ho 
, an 
tne 
ot 
Or 
ith 
lly Cuapr, 
we 


Elements are 
underftood by 
reafon, not by 
fenfle. 


Why he ex- 
refied the Ez 
ements by 

thefe names 

o! Gualitics. 


Two princi- 
pall qualities 

are in each 

Element, 


Why the Aire 
heats not fo 
vehemently, 
asthe Fire, 


How the E- 
Jements may 
be underftoed 
to be mixed in 
compeaund 


bodic¢s, 


- 


Why of the 
firk qualiries, 
two are ac- 
coumed 
aktive.aid 
twe pailive, 


eAn Introduétion, or Compendious 


Crap. IIII, 


Of Elements. 


tians ) isthe leaft and moft fimple portion of that thing which it compofeth ; 
y or that my {peech may be the more plaine - the foure firft and fimple bodies 
are called Elements ; Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth; which accommodate and fubject 
themfelves as matter tothe promifcuous generation of all things whichthe Heavens 
engirt, whether you underitand thingspeifeatly, or unperfectly mixed. Such Ele- 
ments arc oncly to be conceived in your minde, being itis not granted to any exter-. 
nall fenfe to handle them ia their pure and abfolute nature. VV hich was the caufe chat 
Hippocrates exprcfied them not by the names of fubftances, but of proper qualities ; 
faying, Hot, Cold, Moift, Drie; becaufe fome one of thei¢ qualities is inherent ia 
every Element, as his proper and effentiall forme, not onely according to the exceffe 
of latitude, but alfo of the active facultie; to which is adjoyned another {imple qua- 
litie, and by that reafon principall, but which notwithftanding attainesnotto the 
higheft degree of hiskinde, as you may underftand by Gales inhis firft Booke of Ele- 
ments. So, for example fake, inthe Aire wee obfervetwo qualitics, Heat, and Moi- 
flure, both principal, and not remitted by the commixture of agy contrary quality, 
for otherwile they were not fimple. Therefore thou maift fay, what hinders’ that 
the principall cfic&s of heat fhew not themfelves aswell in the Aire, as in the 
Fire? becaufe as we faid before, alchoughthe Aire have as great a heat according toe 
his nature, extentand degree, no otherwife than Fire hath, yetit is not fo great inits 
active qualitic. Thereafon is, becaufe that the calfa@orie force in the Aire is hinde- 
red, and dulled by focietie of his companion and adjoyred qualitic, that is, Humidity 
whiclt abateth the force of heat, 4s onthe contrary, dsineffe quickneth it. The Ele- 
ments therefore are endewed with thefe qualities. , 


Fire Hot and dric. 
Wames ofthe )Aire Moilt and hot. Names of the 
{ubftances ; Warr¢c * Coldand moift. qualities. 
Earth 


Cald and dric, 


Thete foure Elements in che compofition of naturall bodies, retaine the qualities 
they formerly had, burchat by their mixture and meeting together of contraries, they 
are fomewhat tempered and abated. Burthe Elements are fo mutually mixed one 
with another, and a!l with all, thac nolimple part may be found ;po more than in a 
maile of the Emplaifter Déacslcétheos you can thew any Axanzis, oyle, or litharge by 
it felfe ; all chingsare fo confufed and united by the power of heate, mixing the{mal- 
left particulars with the fmalle!t,and the whole with the whole,ia all parts, You may 
know and perceive this concretion of the foure Elementary fubftances in one com- 
pound body, by tlie power of mixture, ia their diflolution by burning a pile or heape 
of greene wood, For the flame exprefles the Fire, the {moke the Aire, the moifture 
that fweats out at the ends, the Water, andthe afhes, the Earth: You may eafily 
perceive by this example fo familiar andosvious tothe fenfes what diffolution is, 
which is fuccecded by the decay of the compound body onthe centrary, you may 
know that the coagmentation, or uniting and ioyning into one of the firft mixed bo« 
dies is fuch, that there isno part finceere, or without mixture. For ifthe heat which 
is predominant in the fire, thould remaine in the mixture in its perfec vigor, it 
would confume the reft by its pernitious neighbourhood; the like may be {aid of 
Coldoefle, Moifture, and Drineffe ; although of thefe qualities, two have the title of 
AGive, that is, Heat, and Coldnefle, becaufe they are the more powerfull; che other 
two Paffive, becaufe they may {eeme more dull and flow, being compared to the for« 
mer, The temperaments of ai] fublunarie bodies arife from the commixture of 


_thefe fubftances & elementary qualities, which hath bia the principall caufe that mo- 


ved metotreate of che Elements. But I leave the force and effects of the Elementary 
qualities 


N Element (by the definition which is commonly received amongft Phyfi-° 


> 


q 
q 
m 
‘ 
What an Elee a 
ment 1. 
th 
| be 
| lt 
D 
ar 
& 
a} 
wi 
id 
Bi 
| 
| T 
a 
| — 
| 
fr 
| [tc 
| th 
| | 
| 
| 
ce 
{ 
| 


mitics 
they 
}ouc 
im 2 

by 
mal- 
way 
om- 
cape 
‘ture 
alily 
IS, 
may 

hich 
of, it 
mid of 
tle of 
ther 

> 
re of 
mo- 
neary 
lities 


Way to Chiyurgery, 


qualities to fome higher contemplation, concent to have noted this, that of thele firt} 
qualities, (flocalled, becaufe they are primarily and naturally in the foure Er bo- 


dies) others arife and proceed, which aretherefore called the fecond qualities : as of 


manythele, Heauinefie, Lightnefic, varioufly diftributed by the foure Elements, as 
the Heat, or Coldnefle, Moiltnefle or Drineffe, have more power over them, For 
of the Elements, twoare called light, becaufe they naturally affe@ to move tpwards: 
the othertwo heavy, by reafon they are carried downeward by their owne weight, 
So we thinke the fire the lighteft, becaufe it holds the highett place of this lowet 
world; the Aire which is next to itin fice wee account light forthe water which 
lies next to the Aire, we judge heavy ; and cheearti the center of the ft we judzeto 
be the heavielt of them all. Hereupon it is,chat light bodies, and the light pares in bo- 
dics, have moft of the lighter Eltments; as onthe contrary heavy bodies have more 
of the heavier. This is a bricfe defcription of the Elements of this fraile world, which 
are onely to be difcerned by the underftandins, to which [ thinke good co adjoyne 
another defcription of other Elements, as it were arifing or flowing trom the com- 
mixture of the firft ; for befides thefe, there are faid to be Elements of generation and 
Elements of mans body. Whichas they are more corporall,{o alfo are they more ma- 
tothe fenfe.By whichreafon Hippocrates being moved, in his Booke de Natura 
bumana,afcer he had defcribed the nature of Hot, Cold, Moi{t and Drie, he comes to 
take notice of thefe by the order of compolition, Wherefore the Elements of our pe- 
meration, asalfo of all creatures which have bloud, are {eed and menttruous bloud, 
Bus the Elements of our bodies are the folid and fimilar parts erifing from rhofe Ele- 
ments of generation, Of this kind are bones, membranes, ligame nts, veines, arteries, 
and many others manifeft to the eyes, which wee will defcride at large in our 
Treatife of Anatomic. 


V. 


Of Temperaments. 


Temperament 1s defined a proportionable mixture of hort, cold, moift and 
dries or, it is aconcord of the firft difagreeiny faculties. Thar harmony 
{prings from the naixture of the foure firit bodies of the world. This whecher 
Temperamét or concord is givento Plants and brure beai's for the beginning of their 
life, and fo canfequently for their * life and forme, But as Plaats are inicrior ia order 
and dignitic to beafts, fo their * life is more bafe and isfirme, for they have oncly a 
growing facultie by which they may draw an Alimentaric juyce fram the Earth, as 
from their mothers breafts, to preierve them and their life, by which they may grow 
toacertaine bignefic; and laftly, by which they may bring forth their like for ihe 
perpetuall continuance of their kind, Bur the * life of beafts have tothe thres tormer 
the gift of fence annexed ; by bencht whereof, as by a certaine inward knowledge, 
they fhun thofe things that are hurtfull, and follow thofe which proficthem, and by 
the power of their will, they move themfelves whither they pleafe. But the (oule of 
man farre more perfe@ and noble than the reft, arifeth not from thatearth.y mixture 
and temper of the Elements, but acknowledgeth and hatia farre more divine of, 
{pring, as we fhall teach hereafter, 

They devide a Temperament at the firft divifion into two kindes; as one a tempe- 
rate, another an untemperate, The untemperate isof two forts ; tue one wholy vi- 
cious, which hath altogether exceeded the bounds of mediocritie: the other which 
hath fomewhat firaied from the mediocritie of temper, but nerwithitanding is yer 
contained within the limits of health: asthat which brings no juch evident harme to 
the actions, but that it fomewhat hinders them ,fo that they cannot welland pew 
fectly performe their duties. But the vicious Temperament doth three manne® of 
wayes corrupt the funétions either by weakning, depraving or abplifhingthem. For 
fo ftupor, or aftonifhment, diminifheth and floweth the quickneffe of ; con- 
vuliion depraves it ; the Palfie abolifheth it, and taketh it away. The temperate Tem. 
peramcnt 


we 


Cualities are 


called. 


What the fes 
cond qualities 


are. 

bar le-~ 
mencs ‘i¢he, 
what heavy. 


_@ — 
the B- 


lement: of Le 


are. 


Whar the El-s 


ments Of 


bedies. 


Whata 
pei 


Anita. 
Wharthelite 
Dertormes in 
Vilantg. 


Whatin 
braft Se 


Mans foule 
comes trom as 
bove. 


The manifold 
divitonota 
‘Tempetras 
ment. 


A Tempera- 
ment,4d 


Why the 


é 
’ te 
me 
‘t 
t 
are 
i} af” 
a. 
‘sc 
a 
& 
10 
ia 
ia 
A 
seri’ 
i, 
* 
iia 
nde- 
+ = 
é 
¥ 
‘a 


eAn Introduttion, or Compendious 


A temperaz 
ment 44 jufs- 
1am, 


erament is alfo devided into two kinds;which is citker to equallity of weight, or 
Juftice, It iscalled atemperature to weight which arifeth froma the equall force of 
exactlyconcurring qualitics,and as placedina perfect ballance, drawes downe neither 
to this nor that part. They thinke the example of this Temperament te appeare in the 
inner skinne of the fingers ends of a man cemperedto luftice. For feeing the moft CX- 
quifite touch refides there, they ought to be farre from all exce fie of contrartety ; for 
etherwife being corrupted by too muck heat or eold, moifture or drineffe, they could 
give ne certaine judgement of the tangible qualities. For which thing nature hath ex- 
cellently provided in the fabricke and coagmentation of the parts of which the skinne 
confifts. For it is compefed of, hot and moift flefl, and therefore foft, and of a ten- 
don and nerve cold and drie, and therefore hard, which are not oncly equally fitted 
and conjoyred, bit wholy confufed and mixed togéther, by which it comes that re- 
moved frem al! extremes of oppofition, it is placed in the midit, as a rule to judge of 
all the excefles that happentothe touch. So it was fitthe eye, which wastobe the 
inftrument of fight, fhould be tin@ured with ne certaine colour, thar it might be the 
lefle deceived in the judgement of colours. So it was convenient the hearing thould not 
be troubled with any diftinct found, whereby it might more certainly judge of equall 
and unequall feunds, net diftingvifhed by a ratable proportion ; neither wasit fic the 
tongue flhould have aay certaine tatte, left the accefle of that tafte fhould'deceive it im 
knowing and judging of fo many different taftes. ‘The Temperature tempered to 
juftice is thar, which although itisa litele abfent from theexad and fevere parility ef 
mixed qualities, yet hath that equalitie which doth fully aad aboundaatly {ufhce for 
to performe all the functions fitly and perfectly which nature cothrequire, wherefere 
we ean judgeno otherwife of it than by the integritie of the AGions, For hence it 
rooke its name, for as diftributive luktice equally gives to every ene rewards, or pu- 
nifhment according to their deferts , fo nature having regard toall the parts ef the bo- 
die, gives them al] chat temper which may fuffice to perferme thofe dutics, for which 


Thetemperas they arc ordained. Let us foran example confider a Bone ; no man doubts bur thar, 


ment ef a 


bene, 


The kindes of 
untemperate 


tempers. 


like asthe other fimilar parts of the body proceeds fromthe mixture of the foure E- 
lements:but nevertheleffe nature waighing the ufe of it,2nd ordaining it to fupport the 
reft of the body ,weuld have mere of the terreneand drie Element infufed into it, that 
it might be the fironger and firmer to fuftaine weight. But a Ligament, {ecing it was 
made for other ufes, hath lefJeof that earthly drienetic than the bone, burt morcthan 
the flefh, altogether ficted to its nature. So it hath feemed good to nature to endye abl 
the parts of the body, not onely with an equall portion, bur alfo propertion of Ele- 
ments and qualities; wee call that a temperament to luftice : and wee fay that it isin 
Plamts, Brute beafis, and all naturall bodies, which enjey that temper and mediocri- 
tie, which may be agreeable to their nature. Hereupon by comparifen arife cight 
kindes of intemperate tempers, as 


Hot ¢Drineffe 
temperate ind and 
Foare fimple Moitfture, 
temperate ad 
Cold. 
Flot and moift. 
Foure compounds 
Cold and drie. 
Buc thele temperaments are cither ef the whole body, or of fome part thereof 
the Braine, 
principal, as the Hearr, 
and that cither the Liver, 
the Stones, 


syinithe ta ; of the reftof the parts compofed of other which have no principali- 


Againe 


4 
7 
ceo 
ho! 
| the 
Ol 
col 
Ty 

tO}; 
nat 
pe: 
rne 
the 

th 

fo! 

the 
| 10 | 
ari 
tha 
wh 
tate 
a? 
ak 
‘i. 
OT 
to 
ng 
hu 
| ’ 
UN: 
wt 
RS 


Way to Chirurgery. 


Againe, fuch temperaments are either healthfull, which fuffice perfectly to per- 
forme their aGions ; or unhealchfull, which manifeftly hurt them, the fignes whereof 
may beread defcribed by Galen. And you muft obferve that when we fay the body,or 
any part of itis hot, wee underftand more hot thanis fit for one of that kinde whichis 
tempered to juftice; as when we fay 2 man hath a hot liver, wee meane his liver is 
hotter, than aman juftly tempered fhould have ; for all other tempers, whether of 
the whole body ,or any of the pirts thereof, are to be referred to this; and in the cure 
of difcaies we muft looke uponir, asthe marke, and labour to preferve it by the ufe of 
convenient things, as mucii as lies in eur power. Wherefore becau& it is very necefla- 
ry to know the diltin¢tion of temperaments, 1 have choughr good in this place, briefly 
to handle the temperaments of the parts of the body, ages, feafoas of the yeare, hu- 
mers, and medicines, Therefore the temperaments of the parts of our body are of this 
nature, not onely by the judgement of the touch of amans hand which is juftly tem- 
pered ( whois often deceived by flowing heate, which (piead from the heart into all 
the body, imparts acertaine kinde of heate to allthe parts, ) bur alle by the rule of 
their realon, compofure and {ufiance, as 

A Bone isthe moti drieand cold. 

A Griftle leffe than ir. 

A Ligament leffe than a Griftlegg, 

A Tendon is fo much drier and colder than the membrane, by how muchir in 
the fame temper exceedes a Veine and Arterie. Then follow the harder veines, for 
the fofterare in a middle temper of drineffe and moifture, like as the skinne; although 
all both foft and hard, are of acold temper. Wherefore all thei pares of their owne 
nature are cold and without blowd although the veines and arterics waxe hor, by rea- 


_ fon of the heate of the bloud they containe, which notwithitanding alle borrowerh 


that heat from the heart, asa part moft hor, and fofrer than theskinnes the liver next 
followeth the heart, inthe order ofthe hotter parts, which is far fofter thanthe skinne 
it {elfe : for if, according to Ga/ens opinioa, the heart is fomewhat leffle hard thanthe 
skinne, and that is farre harder than the liver, as appeares by rouching them, it mutt 
neceflarily follow thatthe liver much exceedes the skinne in foftnefie; I underfland 
the skinne fimple, and feparated from the flefh lying under ir, to which it, irmely 
cleaves. The fiefh is more meift and hot thanthe skinne, by reafon of the bloud dif 
perfed init. The [pirall marrow is colder and moifter thantheskinne; bur the braine 
fo much exceeds it in moifture, as it is exceeded by the far. The lungs are not fo moitt 
as the fat, and the ipleene, and kidnics, are of the like nature, and neverthelefle they 
arc all moifter than the skinne, 

According tothe diverfities of ages, the cemperaments both of the whole body, 
and all its parts, uadergoe great mutations ; for the bones are farre harder in old men 
than in children, becaufe our life is, as it were a certaine progreffe to dtinelic, which 
when it comes tothe height confequently caufeth death. Wherefore inthis place we 
maft fpcake of the Temperaments of ages, when firft we fhall lave defined what an 
age is. Therefore an age is defined, a {pace of life in which the con(titution of the be- 
die of its felfe and owne accord, undergoeth manifeft changes ; the whole courle of 
life hath foure {uch ages, The firft is childhood, which extends trom the birth ro the 
eighteenth yeare of age, and hatha hot and moift temper, becaule it is next to the hot 
aad moitk beginnings of life, feed and bloud : Youth followeth this which ts prolon- 
ged from the eightcenth, to rhe twentiec fitt yeare, and istemperate, and in the muiit 
of allexcefies ; Mans eftate fucceedeth youth, which they deny co extend beyond the 
thirtie fift yeare of age, in its proper temper it is hotand dric: whereby it commeth 
to pafle that chen the heate is fele more acride and biting, which in childhood 
med milde; becauie the progrefle of the life to drineffe hath much waited cue native 
humiditie, 

Then fuccedes old age ever devided into two parts; the firft whereofextends from 
the thirtie fift, torhe fortie ninth yeare ; thofe of thisage are called old men ( * 4aé we 
commesly callthems middle aged men,) The latter is as it were devided by Galen into 
three degrees; the firft whereof are thofe, who having their ftrength found and hrme 
undergoe civill affaires and bufinefles : which things thofe which arc in the {cond de- 


Lsbh.2.de Tem- 
per. ATs 


NCAAs 


Whar the 
temperaments 
of mansb>- 
cy 


Adfinem lib; 


de temper, 


‘T hetempera- 
MCH OF 


What an ag* 


13, 


id age de- 
vided into 
two parts. 
* | hree dex 
grees of the 
fecond part o 2 
oldace, 


or 
of 
et 
A* 
or 
d 
4a 
- 
ted 
of 
rac 
rne 
hot 
jail 
Bis | 
y OF 
ior 
ere 
eit 
OO- 
ich 
lat, 
bs 
that 
Was 
haa 
abl 
aS if 
|_| 
ali- 
lic 


| 10 eAn Introduétion, or Compendious | 
ree of oldaze cannot doc, becaufe of the dcbilitie of their now decaying ftrength : | dia: 
butthofe which are in the laft degree are afflided with molt extreme weakenefic and cial 
miferie, and are as much deprived of their fences and underftanding, as of the firength and 
of their bodies; whereof arefe this Proverbe, O/d men twice children, T hofe old men of and 
the firft ranke are pleafant, and courteous, and thofe we fay are beginning to grow enci 
F old, or intheir greene old-age; thofe of the fecond fort delight in nothing but the the 
| beord and bed ; but old decreepit men ef the laft order, thinke of nothing elfe, than beit 
Oldmenhave their graves and monuments. Their firme and folid parts are of acoldand drie tem- Bur 
ae perature, by reafonof the decay of the radical] moifture, which the inbred heare by ¢ 
 caufeth in thecontinuance of fo many years. Which thing may happenina fhort dife 
fpace,by the vehement flame ef the fame natural heate,turned by feavours into a hery feat 
heate. But ifany to prove old men moift, will objec, that they cough up, and fpit {eal 
much, I willanfwer him, as an old Doctor once faid ; That a pitcher filled with water day 
may powre forth much moifture; yet no man will deny but that fucha vefiell of its cia! 
owne terrence nature and matter is moft drie. fo old men may plainely be aflirmed {arr 
to be moifl,by reafon of theit defce& of heate,and aboundance of excrements, But this The 
defcription of ages, isnot toberaken fo findly, as alwayes to be meafured by the of 
{paces and diftances of yeares, for there are peany which by their owne mifldemea- and 
nour, feeme clder at fortie, than others docagglittic. but 
Acomparifor . Laltly, the famous Philofopher Pythagoras, devided man life into foure ages, and bee 
ofthefoure by acertaine proportion compared the whole courfe thereof to the foure feafons of of | 
agesto tm, theyeare; as childhood to the Spring, in which all things grow and {prout out, by and 
ettheyeare, reafon of plenty and aboundance of moifture. And youth to the Summer, becaufe of rall 
the vigour and {trength which men enjoy atthatage. And mans eftate, or conftant blo 
age to Autumne, for that then after all the dangers of the forepafied life, the gifts of orr 
difcretion and wit acquire a feafonableneffe, or ripencfie, like as the fruits of the Th: 
| earth enjoy atthar feafon. And lafily, he compares old age tothe fterile and fruitleffe 4h 
Winter, which can cafe and cenfolate its tediou{nefle by ne other meanes, than the lent 
ufe of fruits gathered and ftored up before, which then are of a cold and troublefome wil 
condition. But for extreme old age, which extends to eightie, or a hundred yeares, : tedg 
r it is fo cold and drie, that thofe which arrive at that decrepit age are troublefome, and 
i harfh, touchy, froward, crabby, and oftencomplaining, untill at the length deprived - Phi 
| of all their fenfes, tongue, feet, and underftanding, they doting, returne againe to hay 
childifhneffe, as from che ftatic to the ftart, And thus much of the Temperaments in 
of df es. for 
The tempers But now in like manner we will explaine the temperatures of the feafons of the the 
y “emp yeate, which are foure, the Spring, Summer, Autumne, Winter. The Spring con- the} 
tinucs almoit from the twelth or thirteenth day of March,to che mid{t of May, Hippos at 
crates {eemeth to make it hot andmoift; which opinion feemerh not to have {prung wh 
from the rhing it {elfe, but from an inveterate error of the ancient Philofophers, who defi 
would fit the remperaments of the foure feaions of the yeare, as anf{wering in propor- ap; 
tionto the temperatures of the foure ages. be & 
saat For if the matter come fo a juit triall, all men will fay the Spring is temperate, as wh 
Springistem: that which is in the midft of the excefle of heate, cold, meifture and drinefle ; not the 
a. ae by comparifen becaufe it is hotter than Summer, and colder than W inter; but per 
Aphor.9-ft4.3 Decaufe it hach chart qualitie of its owne proper nature, Wherefore it is {aid of Hippo- lefi 


crates : The Spring is moft holefome and leatt deadly ; if fo be that itkeepe its native 

_ temper, from which if it decline, or fucceeda former untemperate feafon,as Au- 
Or Winter, it will give eccafion to many difeafes defcribed by Hippocrates 
as not thatic breeds them, but becaufe it brings them to fight, which before lay 
. hid in the body. Sucamer is comprehended in the {pace of almoft foure monceths ; it is 
ofa hotand drie temper, a breeder of {uch difeafes as proceed from choler, be- 

caule that humor at this time is heaped up in many bodies by aduftion of bloud bred 

une, the Spring; butall fuch difeafes doe fpeedily runne courfe, The beginning of 
quall, Autumne, ts from the time the Sunne enters into Libra, aad enduresthelike {pace of 
time asthe Spring. But when it is dry, it hath great inequalitie of heate and cold; for 

the mornings and evening being very cold, the noondaycs on the contrary are excee- 


ding 


é 
i 
gtic 
| bE 
ta 
é 
? 
4 


C HAP.é6. Way to hirurgery. 


ding hor, Wherefore many difeafesarein Autumne, and then long and deadly efpe- 
cially ifthey incline to wards winter : becaufeall dayly and fodaine changes ¢o heat 
and cold are dangerous. The winter poffefles the remnant of the yeare, and is celd 
and moift, it encreafes naturall heat, ftirs up the appetite, and augments Phlegme, It prow winter 
encreafes heat by Atiperiflafis, or contrariety of the encompaffing aire, which being increales che 
then cold prohibites the breathing out of heate : whereby it happens that the heat "“*"** 
being driven in and hindered frown diffipation, is ftrengthened by couniting i's forces. 

But it augments Phlegine,for that men are more greedy,the Appetite being encreafed 

by the ftrengthened heat : from whence proceeds much crudity and a large ftore of 

difeafes ,efpecially Chronicke or Long which fpread and encreafe rather in this winter 
feafonthan in any other partof the yeare. Torthisdifcourfe of the temper, of thie 

{cafonsof the yeares, isto be revoked the variety of tempers which Gappens very 

day, which certainly is not tobe neglected, that there may be place of ele&ion,efpe= 

cially if nothing urge. Forhither belongs that faying of Hippocrates. When in the Apher, (4.2 
fame day it is one while hot, another cold, Autunanali difeales are to be expected. 
Therefore an Indicationtaken from hence 1s of great confequence to the judgement 

of difcafes; for if it agree with the dileafe,the difeafe is made more contumacious, 

and dithcule to cure. Whereupon the Patient and Phifition will bave much trouble ; 

but ifoncthe contrary it reclame and diflenr, the health of the Patient is fsoner to 
be expected. Neither is it athing of le{le confequence to know the cuftomes and habits 

of the places and Countries iawhich we live, as alfo the inclination of the Heavens 

and temperature of the Aire ;but let vs leave thefe things to be confidered by Natu- 

rall Philofophers, that we may deliver our judgment of the temperaments of Humors. The temperas 
blood, as that which anfwers tothe Aire in proportion, is of a hoc and moift nature, ments of Hus 
orrather temperate,as Gelen tcftifies ; for, faith he, it is certaine and furethat the 

The blood is neither hor, nor moi bur temperate as ia its firft compofure none of the 

4 firft qualities exceeds other by any manifeftexcefie, ashe repeats it upon the 39. 

fentence. Phlegme,as that which is ofa waterish nature, iscold and moift ;no other- 
wife than Choler being of a fierytemper, is horand dry. But Melancholy affimula- 

ted to Earth, is cold anddry. This which we have {poke. in generall ef Phiegme 1,5. de natura 
and Melancholy, is not alwayestrue in every kind of the faid humors, For {alte enn oe 
Phlegme is of a hot and drytemperature, as aifoall kinds of Melancholy which esemeeen 


The temperas 
have arofe, or {prung by aduftion from the native and Alimentary, as we will reach treet the 


in the followinz Chapier. Now the Temperaments of Medicinshave notthe fame meow Hd 
forme of judgment, as thofe things which we have before fpokenof; as, mot from 
the Elementary quality which conquering in the contention and mixture, obraines ture of media 
the dominion ; but plainly from the effe&s which taken or applycd they imprint in ““* 

a temperate body. For fo we pronounce thofe things hor, cold, moift, or dry, 

which produce the effects of Heate, Coldnes, Moifture or Drynes, Buc we will 

deferthe larger explication of thefe things to that place, where we have peculiarly 

appointed to creat of Medicines; where we willnot fimply enquire whether they 

be hot or cold, but what degree of heate and cold, or the like other quallity: in 

which {ame place we will rouch the temperature and all the Nature of rafts, becaufe 

the certaineft judgment of medicines is dtawne from their tafts. Hitherto of Tem- 
peraments, now we muff {peake of Humors whofe ule in Phyticall {peculation is no 

leffe than that of Temperaments. 


Of Hamors. 


© know the nature of Hemers isa thing notonely neceflary for Phifitions 
alio for Chirurgeons, becanfe there is no difeafé with matter which arifeth tedgeof the 


not from fome one,or the mixture of more Humors.Which thing Hippocrates ares 


underitadding, wrir, every Creature tobe cither ficke orwell according to the Con- Lib. 
dition 


Hum, 


| 
ie 
oth 
ot 
é 
nan 
aT? 
GA "oe 
‘pit 
ater 
, 
its 
i} 
\ 
nea- 
» 
OF 
r 
OF 
itant 
O7 
the 
ia 
ric fie 
nehe 
ares, 
OINIC. 
‘ived | 
~ £O 
the 
COn ~ 
runs 
as 
HOC 
OUL 
lippo- 
“ 
r, be- 
bred 
ng of 
ace of 
ors 1s 
. for 
it 
xXCCCe- 
2 ine 


The helpesof 


What an 
humor 15. 


Cua P.6. 


eAn Introduétion, or Compendious 


dition ofthe Hwmors inthe body. And certainly all putride feavers proceed from the 
putrifaction ef Humors, Neither doc any acknowledge any other originall or diftia&- 
on of the differences of Ab{cefles or Tumors:neither do ulcerated, brok€é or otherwile 
wounded members hope forthe reftauration of continuity, from other than from the 
{weet falling downe of humors to the wounded part. Which is the caufe thar often in 
the cure of thefe affeés, the Phifitions are neceffarily bufied in tempering the Blood, 
that is, bringing toa mediocrity the 4 humors compofing the mafle of blood, if they 
at any time offend in quantity,or quality. For whether if any thing abound, or digrefle 
from the wonted temper in any exceffe of heat,cold svifcofity,groflenes,thinnes,or any 
fuch like quality »none of the accuftomed functions will be well performed.For which 
caufe thofe cheife helpes to preferve and reftore health have beene divinely invented; 
Phelebotomy,or bloodletting which amends the quantity oftoo much blood; and pur- 
ging which corrects and drawes away the vicious now let us begin to {peak 
ofthe Humors,taking our beginning fromthedefinition, 

An Humar(iscalled by Phifitions) what thing fo ever is Liquide and flowing inthe 
body of living Creatures endued with Blood, that is cither natural,or againitnacure, 
The naturall is fo cailed becaufe it is fit to defend, preferve and fuftaine the life of a 


The manifold Creature.Quite different is the nature & reafon of that which is agaia‘t nature.Again 


divifion of 


Humors. 


The material! 
and efReient 


eaules of blood 


What thechy- 


as. 


Where the 
bloed is per- 
tected. 


the former is ¢ither Alimentary, or Excrementitious; The Alimentary whichis fit to 
nourifh the bedy.is that Humor which is contained in the veines and arteries ef aman 
which is (€perate & perfe@lywel,& which isunderftood by the general name of bluod 
which is Jet-out at the opening ofa veine. For blood otherwife taken is an Humor ofa 
certaine kind, diftinguifhed by heate and warmnefle from the other Humors compre- 
hended together with it,in the whole mafle of the blood, W hich thing that « may the 
better be underftood, I have thevght good in this place to declare the gencration of 
Blood by the efficient and materiall caufes, All things which we eate or drink ,are the 
materialls of blood, whichthings drawne into the bottome of the ventricle by its at- | 
tractive force, and there detained, are turned by the force of concoction implanted ia 
it, into a fubRaace liketo Almond Butyr. Which thing although it appeare one and 
like it felfe, yet it confifts of parts of a different nature, which not only the variety of 
meats,but one & the fame meate yeelds of it felf, We terme this Chy/ms(when it is per- 
feGly concoded in the ftomacke). Burthe * Gate-yeine receives it driven fron 
thence intothe {mall guts, and fucked in by the Meferaicke veins, and now having 
gotten a litle rudiment of Change in the way, carries it to the Liver, where by the 
blood-making faculry which ts proper and naturall to this part,it acquires the abfolute 
and perfe& forme of blood. But with that blood at one and the fame and aGion 
allthe humors are made whether Alimentary or excremeatitious. Therefore the 
blood that it may performe its office, that is,the faculty of nutrition, muft neceflari- 
ly be purged and clenfed fromthe two excrementitious humors. Of which the blad- 


The receptacles der of Gall drawes one which we call Yellow Choler, andthe Spleen the other 


ef ~holerand 
Melancholy, 


Poure unlike 


which we terme Melancholy. Thefe two humors are naturail, but not Alimentary, 
or nouri{hing,but of another ufe inthe body, as afterwards we will thew moreae 
large, The blood freed from thefe 2.kinds of excrements is {cat bythe veines and 
Arteries into all parts of the body for their nouritiment. Which although then ix 
fceme to be of one fimple narure, yet norwithftanding it istruly fuch, that foure dif. 


Humersinthe ferent and wnlike fubftances may be obferved in it, as blood properly fo named, 


loody,. 


A comparifon 
of blood and 
Rew vine, 


Phlegme,Cholerand Melancholy,not only diftin@ in colour, butalfo in tafte 
and qualities. Foras Ga/emnotes in his booke De Naturahumane, Melancholy is 
acide or foure, choler bitter,Blood {weet,Phlegme unfavory.But yeu may know the 
variety of their effects, both by the different temper of the nourifhed parts,as alfo 
by the varions condition of the difeafes {priaging fromthence. For therefore fuch 
fubftances ought tobe tempered and mixed amongft themfclves in a certaine pro- 
portion, which remaining, health remaines, but violated, difeafes follow. For all ac- 


_knowledge that an O¢dems is caufed by Phiegmatick, a Scérrbws by Melancholike, an 


Eryfipelas by Cholericke,and a Pbl/eg mone by pure snd laudable bleod. Gaéen teaches 
by a familiar ¢xampleof new wine prefently taken from the prefle, that thcfe 4 {ub- 
itances are con:ained in thatene Mafle,and mixture of bloed. Inwhich every one 

objerves 


obfe; 
the « 
ther 
the 
ficie: 
dreg 
i the ! 
hua 
it m 
| bleo 
laud; 
as to 
and 
laud 
| 
—— 
| 
| perts 
i 
| Cho: 
| 


6. 


the 
wife 
the 
mood, 
rhey 
refle 
rany 
nied. 
pur. 
peak 


Binthe 
cure, 
-ota 
\eain 

ht to 

ofa 

npre- 

iy the 
on of 
re 
its at- 


e and 
of 
is per- 
fron 
aving 
the 
(olute 
re the 
{Tari- 
-blad- 
other 
[arys 
ore at 
and 
ben it 
re 
amed, 
acfie&s 
ts 
yw the 
is alfo 
e {uch 
¢ pro- 
all ace 
ike, an 
meaches 
4 
ry one 
pierves 


micg in 


Way to(biursery. 13. 


obferves 4.diftinct Effences ; for the flower of the wine working up {wims at the top, 
the dregs falldowne to the bottome, burthe crude anu watery moifiure mixed toge- 
ther with the {weet and vinous liquor, is everywhere ditfuicd through the body of 
the wine , the flower of the wine reprefents Choler, which bubliag up on the fupér- 
ficies of blood,as itconcretes and growes cold, {thineth witha golden colour ;the 
dregs Melancholy ,which by reafonef its neavines ever finketh downward, as it were 

the Mudd of the blood; the crude and watery portion Phiegme:for as that crude 
humor,except it be rebellious in quantity ,or ftubborne by its quality, there is hope 

it may be changed into wine,by the naturall heate of the wine ; fo Phlegmewhichis 
blood halfe concoéted,may by the force of native heat be changed into good and blood halfe 
laudable blood. Which is the caufe that nature decreed ,or ordained no peculiar place, 
asto the othex 2.humours, whereby it might be feveres from the blood ; But the true noproper re- 
and perfe& liquor of the wine reprefents the-pure blood, which is the more “=" 
laudable and perfect portion of beththe humors of the confufed Mafie. Ic may 

eafily appeare by the following fcheme, of what kind they allarc,and allo wharthe 
diftin€tion of thefe foure humors may be. 


\Of [uch ufe,sbat it 
| Of Nature |Of indifferent con- \Of Colour red |Of Tafte \chezfly ferwes for 
hot and: fiftance, neither too thicke rofy or Crim-}/weete, the nourt{bment| 
| moy ft, or ra-\nor too thin, (on, the flefhyparts,| 
ther Fempe- 4nd by 
\Blood urate, the weffels im- 
| parts beate to | 
| the whole boay. 
ie fe Of Tafte | Fitto mour ifn the| 
fweet, or \braine and al the 
| | | rather cold and 
| (avery, for moift parts, to 
Of Nature | Of Confiflance |\Of Colour |we com-— |temper the heate| 
| Phlieem watery,cola, liquid, white mend that\of the bloed,and 
moift, water vy its [lipperines| 
whichis \tahelpe the. moti- 
\wnfavory of the ioynts. 
lexpulfive facultyo! 
| ithe guts, attenuates 
Of Nature\Of Confiflance Of Colour of Taffe \the Phlecme clea 
Choler is freer y,hot Thie, | ycalow, butter, ving tothcm, but 
4nd Arie, pale, ithe Alimentary 
ft to moartth the 
| \parts of like tem. 
Stirs up the Ap- | 
petite, mourifhes 
Of tafte \the folecne and ali 
lof Nature|Of Confiflance groffe lof Colour acide, |the parts of like’ 
earthly, 4na , fourc or temper te thas 
chely ‘cold and | biting. Bones, 
| ary, 
C Blood 


* 
* 
4 
| 
‘ 
* 
> 
f 
| 
4 


One andthe 
fame heat ts 
the efixcient 
caufe of all 
humers at the 


fame tA, 


The heate of 
_ the Sunne az 
lone doth 
mele waxe 
and harden 


clay, 


"The divers 
condition of 
the matter a- 
done, is the 
cauie ot yari- 


etc, 


Theefk&e&s of 
Phicgme, 


Compendious Cr 


eA n Introduétion, or 


AP.O. 


Bloud hath its neereft matter from the betrer portion of the Chy /ws : and beirg be- 
gunne to be jaboured in the veines, at length gets forme an d perfection in the liver s 
butit hathits remote matter from meates of good digeftion and quality,feafonably 
eaten after moderate exercife , but for that, one age is better than another, and one 
time of the yeare more convenient than another, For bloud is made more copioutly 
in the Spriag, becaute that feafon of the yeare comes neereft to the temper of the 
bloud, by reafon ef which the bloud is rather to be thought tempesate, than hot and 
moift, for that Ga/en makes the Spring temperate, and belides,at that time bloud-let- 
ting is performed with the beft juccefie: youth isan age very hit for the generation of 
bloud ; or by Ga/ews opinion, rather that part of life, that continues from the 2 Fe tO 
thez5.yeare of our age. Thofe in whom this humor hath the dominion,are beautified 
with a freth and rofie colour, gentle and well natured, pleafant, merry, and facetious. 
The generation of Phiegme is net by the imbecillity of heat, as fome ef the ancients 
thought; who were perlwaded that choler was cavied by asaging, bloud bya mode- 
rate,and phicgme and melancholy, by aremiffe heate. But that opinion is full of ma- 
nifeft errour . for ifit be true that the Chy/ws is Jaboured and made into bloud inthe 
{ame part, and by the fame fire, that is, the liver; from whence in the fame moment of 
time fhould proceed that rong and weake heate, feeinge the whole mafie ef the 
bloud different in its foure cficntial! parts, is perfected and made at the fame time, 
and by the fame equall temper of the fame part, ation, and bloud- making facultie ; 
therefore from whence have we this varictie ofhumors? From hence, for that thofe 
meates by which wee gre nourifhed, enjoy the like condition that our bodics doe, 
from the foure Elements, and the foure firkt qualities ; for it iscertaine, and wee may 
often obferve in what kind foever they be united or joyned together, they retaine a 
certain hot portion imitating the Fire, another cold,the water; another dry ,the carth, 
and laftly, another moift like tothe Aire. Neither can you name any kindeof nou- 
rifhment, how cold focver itbe, not Lettuce it {elfe, in which there is not fome fiery 
force ofheate. Therefore it isno marvell, if one and the {ame heate werking upon 
the fame matter of Chy/ws, varying with fo great diffimilicude of iubftences, aoe by 
its power produce fo unlike humors, as from the hor, Choler; from the cold, 
Phicgme ; and of the others, fuch as their afhiniry of tempe: will permit, 

There is no caufe that any one fhouldthinke that varictie of humors to be caufed 
inus, rather by the diverfity of the ative heate, thanwaxeanda flint placed atthe 
fame time, and in the fame fituation of climate and foile, this to melt by the heat of 
the Sunne, and that {carfeto waxe warme, Therefore that diverfitie of effets isnot 
to be attributed to the force of the efficient caufe, that is,of heate, which is one and of 
one kinde in allofus; but rather tothe materiall caufe, iceing itis compofed of the 
conflux, or mecting together of various fubftances, givesihe heate leave toworke, 
as it were out of its ftore, which may make and produce fromthe hotter part thereof 
Choler, and of the colder, and more rebellious Phlegme. Yet I will not deny but that 
more ’/hlegme, or Choler may be bredin one and the fame body, according to the 
quicker, or flower provocation of the heate; yet neverthelefle it isnot confequent, 
that the originall of Choler fhould be from a more acride, and of Phiegme 
froma more dull heat inthe fame man, Every one of us naturally have a fimple heate, 
and of one kinde, which is the worker of diverfe operations, not of it felfe, feeing it is 
alwayes the fame, and like it felfe, but by the different fitnefle, pliablenefle, or refi- 
itance of the matter on which it workes. Wherefore phleg ne is generated in the 
fame moment of rime, in the fire of the fame part, by the efficiency of the fame heate, 
with the rett of the bloud, of the more cold, liquide, crude, and watery portion of the 
Clylus. W her by it comes to pafle,that it fhewes an expreffe figure of a certainerude 
or unperfect bloud, for which occafion nature hath made it no peculiar receptacle but 
would have it torun friendly with the bloud inthe fame paffages of the veines,that a- 
ny neceffitichappening by famin, or indigency,and in defea of betrer novrifhment,ic 
may Dy a perfecter elaboration quickly aflume the forme of bloud. Cold & rude nou- 
rifhmét make this humor to abound principally in winter, and in thofe which incline 
to old age , by reaion of the fimilitude which phlegme hath with rhat feafon and age. 
It makes a man drowfie, dull, far, and {wollen up, and hafteneth gray haises, Choler 


is 


— 
isa 
Wit! 
| 
or! 
Ais 
' DY 
exp 
de temp. b 
UG 
per 
COO 
tro! 
wats 
Ov! 
a 
| d 
} 
ch 
>\ 
Sila 
not 
wh 
fur 
icr 
Vel 
bo 
| fer 
me 
hay 
| 
Ww 
y 
{ta 
w! 
110 
b: 


P.O. 
irg be- 


liver s 
onably 
done 
of the 
ot and 
ud-lete 
nonof 
sutified 
ctious. 
ncients 
mode- 
| of ma- 
mi inthe 
ent of 
ofthe 
e time, 
cultie 
at thofe 
ics doe, 
ce may 
etaine a 
carth, 
»of nou- 
me fiery 
ng upon 
, doe by 
ne cold, 


me caufed 
Bed atthe 
e heat of 
cis isnot 
1c and of 
‘dof the 
oworke, 
t thereof 
) but that 
ig tothe 
lequent, 
Phiegme 
Ie heate, 
itis 
, or refi- 
ed inthe 
me heate, 
ionof the 
aine rude 
ptacle but 
es that a- 
(hment,ic 
rude pou- 
ch incline 
and age. 


s, Choler 
is 


Way to (hirurgery. 13 


CHAP.6. 


is. as it were a certaine heate and fury of humors which generated in the liver,together 
with the bloud is carried by the veines and arteries through the whole body. Thar 
of it which abounds, is fent,partly into the guts,and partly into the bladder ofthe gail ; 
or isconfumed by tran{piration, or {weates ; It isfomewhat probable that the Arteri- 
all bloud is made more thinne, hot, quicke and pallid, than the bloud of the veines, 
by the commixture of this Alementarie choler. This humor is chiefely bred and 


- expeld in youth,and acrid and bitter meates give matrerto it: but great labours of 


bodie and minde give the occafion. It maketh aman nimble, quicke, ready for all The ea: of 
performance, leane,and quicke to anger, and alforo concoé meates. The Melan- Chole. 
cholicke humor, or Melancholy , being the grofler portion of the bloud, is partly fene 

from the Liver to the Spleenero nourifh it, and partly carried by the veflelsinto the 

reft of the body, and {pent in the nourifhment of the parts endued with an earthly 

drineffe ; it ismade of meates of grofle juyce, and by the perturbations of the minde, 

turned to feare and fadneffe. It is augmented in Autumne, and in the firftand crude —, 
old age; it makes men fad, harfh, conftant, froward, envious and fearefull. All men of Stelandees 
ought to thinke, that fuch humors are wont to move at fet houres of the day, asby a ly. 
certaine peculiar motion or tide, Therefore the bloud Lowes from rhe ninth houre of What moti- 
the night, to the third houre of the day; then Cholerto the ninth of the day; then 7 tae 
Melancholy to the third of the night, the reft of the nighrthat remaines, is under the body. 
dominion of Phiegme. Manifeft examples hereof appeares in the French-Poxe. 

From the elaborate and abfolute maffe of the bloud (as wefaid before ) two kindes 

of humors, as excrements of the fecond concoction, are commonly and naturally fe- 

parated, the one more grofic, the other more thiane. This is called either abfolutely 

choler, or withan adjun@, yellow choler. That is called Melancholy ; whichdrawne 

by the Spleene in athinner portion,and elaborate by the heate of the Arteries, which 

in that part are both many and large, becomes nourifhment to the part ; the remnant 
thereof is carried by the veiny veflell into the orifice of the ventricle, whereby it MAY The xiclan- 
not caufe, bur whet the appetite, and by its aftriGion ftrengthen the actions thereot. choly humor 
But yellow Choler drawne intothe bladder of the gail, remaines there fo long, til] $7 99% 
being troublefome, either in quantitic Or qualitie, it is excluded into the Ours, where- whet the apz 
by it may caft forth the excrements refiding inthem ; the expulfive facultie being P** 
provoked by its acrimony, and by its bitternefle kills the wormes that are bred there, 

This fame humor is accuftomed to die the urine of a yellow colour, There is another a cerons ot 
ferous humor, which truly is not fit to nourifh, but profitable for many other things, wheyishbu- 
which is not an excrement of the fecond, bur ef the firft concoction, Therefore na. “* 

ture would shat mixed with the Chy/es, it fheuld come to the Liver, and not be voi- 

ded with theexcrements, whereby it might alay the groflenefle of the bloud, and 

ferve it foravehicle; for otherwife the bloud could fearle patie through the capillary 

veines ofthe Liver, and paffing the fimous and gibbous parts thereof, come to the 

bollow veinc. Part of this ferous humor {eparated together with the bloud which 

ferves for the nourifhmentof the Reines, and ftraight carried ined the bladder, is tur- 

aed into that urine which we daily make; the other part therefore carried through 

ali the body together with the bloud, performing the like duty of tran{portation, 1s ex- 

cluded by {weats into which it degenerates. Befides the forenamed, the Arabians 

have mentioncd foure other humors, which they terme Alime prary and fecondary, Secundary 
as being the next matter of nourifhment, as thofe foure the bloud containes, the re- 
mote. They have given no name tothe firft kinde, but imagine it to be that humor, 

which hangs ready to fall like to little drops in the utmoft orifices of the veines. They 


call the fecond kinde, * Dew ; being that bumor, whichentred already inte the fub- Rox, 


ftance of the part doth moiften it. The third they call by a Barbarous name Cambinm, 
which already pur ro the part to be noutithed, is there faftened. The fourth named 
Gluten, or Glew, is oncly the propcr and fubftance-making humidity of the - 
fimular parts, not their fubftance, The diftinéion of the degrees of nutrition recited 
by Galen in his Bookes of Natural] faculties, anfwer in proportion to this diftinction 
ofhumors. The firft is, that the bloud flow to the part that requires nourilhment ; 
then that being there arrived, it may be agglutinated ; then laftly, that having loft its 


former forme of nourifhment, it may be aifimulated. 
C 2 Thofe 


a 
y 
. 
. 
P 


eAn Introduétion, or Compendious CHAP.G. 


16 


nature. 


Into what’ 
humors the 
bloud when 

corrupts 
doth degene- 
nerate. 

"The Melan- 
choly humor 
corrupted, 
of three kinds. 


dlbuminea, 


Thole humors are againft nature, which being corrupted, infect the body and the 
parts in which they are contained by the contagion of their corruption, retaining the 
mnamesand titles of the humors, from whofe perfeQion and nature they have revol- 
ted, they all grow hor by puirifaction, although they were formerly owne 
nature cold. And they are corrupted, cither in the vcines oncly, or within and with- 
out the veines; Inthe veines Bloud ara Melancholy ; but both without and within 
the veines, Cholerand Phlegme. When bioud 1s corrupted in tts thinner portion, 
*t turnes into choler,when in its thicker,into Mclancholy;for the bloud becomes faul- 
tie twowmaner of oraies,either by the corruption of its proper fubfiance by putrifacio, 
or by admixtion of another fubftance by infection. T he Melancholy humor which ts 
corrupted in the veines,is of three forts the 1.1 of a choly Juice ify ing, and 
by the force of a {trange heate,turned as it were into alhes, by which tt becomes aduft, 
acrideand biting. The other arifeth from that Choler which reiembles the yolkes of 
epoes, which by aduftion becomes Ieeke-coloured, then zruginous, or of a blewith 
sreene, then red, and iaftly blacke, which is the very wot kinde of Melancholy, hot, 
maligne, eating and exulcerating, and which is never feene or voided with {afetie, 
The third comes from Phlegme putrifying in the veines, which firlt degenerates into 
falte Phlegme, but ftraight by the firength of extrancous heate degenerates into Me- 
lancholy. 
. Acide and very crude,as which hath had none 
: or very litle impreffion of heate but that which 
Vit firft had in the ftomacke. 
andiseither * Salt, whichis bred by the{weet, putrifying 


and adult, or mixture of adult and fale 
| ' ticles. 


Phiegme not naturall | Waterilh, as is that thinne moifture which di- 
jsbred,either fils from the braine by the noftrills. 

| Mucous, as whenthat wateri{his thickened 
| qinto filth by the helpe df (ome accidental! or 
or without | {mall heate. 

we veines, | Glafhe,or* Albuminous, refembling molten 


andisof4. | glafie, or rather the white of anegge, and is 
Uforts, either ; moti cold. 
| Gyp/ea, or Plaifter-like,which is concrete in- 
| to the hardneffe and forme of chalke, as you 
| may icein the joints of the fingers in a knotty 
| Zoute, Or in inveterate diltillations upon the 
(Lungs, 
; Inthe veines, as the * vitelline (like in confiftance to the yolke 
ofa raw egee) which the acrimony of ftrange heate breeds of 
yellow choler, which fame in difeafes altogether deadly. dese. 


peer into greene , xruginous, and laltly into a blue, orco- 
Choler not naturall | lourlike that which is dried by woad. 


is bred, either | The firftis called Porracea or leek-co- 


loured, refembling the juyce of aleeke 
Or inthe capacitic of | in greeneneffe. 

the upper belly as the | The2,. agruginofa, or eruginous, like 

| Yonericie, and tes is | in colourto verdigreaffe. 

{ of five kinds < The 3. blewifh, or woad-coloured, 
like the colour died by woad. 

| The 4.red, differing inthis from bloud, 

| whofe colour it imitates, that it never 

| cOmeth into knots, or clods like bloud. 
The 5. very red, generated by the ex- 

| cefle of the former, which cau(eth bur- 

| ning feavers. 


The 


‘ 
— 
j 
4 
i 
ri 
4 
é 
» 
i 
4 
al 
tT) 
~ 
? 
* 
be 
& 


ndthe 
ng the 
revol- 
owne 
with- 
vithin 
pruon, 
faul. 
lich is 
and 
aduft, 
kes of 
ewith 
hor, 
ifetie, 
Inte 
o Me. 


none 
which 


rifying 
par- 
ich di- 


ckened 
tall or 


olten 
and is 


ete 
as you 
knotty 
on the 


> yolke 
Seeds of 
dese. 
OFCO- 


ek-co- 
aleeke 


pus, like 
toured, 


bloud, 
it never 
bloud. 
che ex- 
eth bur- 


The 


CHAP.6: W. ay ta Chirurcery. 


The kinds offuch choler, are often caft forth by vomit in difeafes, the ftréngeh of = 
the difeafe being patt ; being troublefome to the parts through which they are evacu- 
ated, by their bitternefle, acrimony and biting. 


The Signes of «Sanguine Perfon, 


Thinke it manifeft, becaufe the matter and generation of fleth is principally from 

bloud, that a man of a Hefhy, dente, and folid habite of body, and full of a{weete 
and vaporous juice, isof a Sanguine complexion. And the fame party hatha flou- 
rifhing and roatie coleur in his face, cempered as with an equall mixture of white and Such as the 
reds of white, by reafon of the skinne lying utmoft; of red, becaufe of the bloud ithe sony 
{pred underneath the skinne; for alwayes {uch as the humor is, {uch is the colour in 
the face. In manners hee is courteous, gentle, eafic to be fpoken to, not altogether Themenness 
eftranged from the love of women, of a lovely countenance and {moothe forehead, ns mt 
f{eldome angry, buttaking all things in good part; for as the inclination of humors is, ped wo ‘i 
fo alfois the difpofition ofmanners. “But bioud is thought the mildeft of al! humors, 
but the {trong heate of the inward parts maketh him to eate and drinke freely. Their 
dreames are pleafant, they are troubled with difeates arifing from blond, as frequent 
Phlegmons, and many Sanguine puftles breaking through the skinne,much bi. .ding, 
and menftruous fluxes. Wherefore they can wel] endure bloud-letting, and delight in 
the moderate ufe of cold and drie things; and lafily , are offended by hot and moift 
things. They havea great and ftrong Pulfe,and much urine in quuntirie, but milde 


of qualitic, of anindifferentcolour and fubftance, 
The Signes of 4 Cholericke Perfor. 


Holericke men are of a pale or yellowifh colour, of aleanc, flender and rough Chotericke 
habit of body, gvith faire veines and large Arteries, and 4 ftreng and quicke emaptcam 
Pulie: their skinne Sing touched, feeles hot, dry, hard, rough and harfh, with a ”"”"?™ 
pricking and acred exhalation which breathes forth of their whole body, They caft 

forth much choler by ftoole, vomite and urine, They are of a quicke and nimble wie, 

ftout, hardy and fharpe vindicaters of received injuries, liberall even to prodigalitie, 
aad fomewhat too defirousofglory. Their {leepe is light,and from which they are of Cholericks 
quickly waked; their dreames are fiery, burning, quicke and full of furie ; they are °°" 
delighted with meates and drinkes which are fomewhat more cold and moift, and are 

fubje&to Tertian and burning feavers, the Phrenfic, Iaundife, Inflammations, 

and other cholericke puftules, the Laske, Bloudy fiuxe, and bitterneli¢ of the 

mouth. 


The Sigues of a Phlegmaticke Per fon. 


_™ fometimes livide and fwollen, with their body fat, foft and cold to touch, ned 


They are molefted with Phlegmaticke difeafes , as o¢demaztows tumors,the Dropfie, perfonn 
Quotidians feavers, falling away ef the haires, and catarrhes falling downe upon the 
Lungs, andthe 4/pera Arteria, or VWVealon; they are of a flow capacitie, dull, florh- 
full, droufie, they doe dreame of raines, {nowes, floods, {fwimming, and {uch like, 
that they often imagine themfelves overwhelmed with waters;they vomite up much 
Wateric, and Phlegmaticke matter, or otherwife {pit and evacuate it, and have a foft 
and moift tongue. 
Andthey are troubled witha dogge-like hunger, if itat anytime thould happen 
that their infipide Phiegme become acide; andtheyare flow of digeftion, by rea- 
fon of which they have great ftore of cold and Phlegmatickehumors, whichif they 
be carried downe into the windings of the cholicke-gurt, they canle murmuring and 
noife, and fometimes the Cholicke. bling in the 
For much windis eafily caufed of {uch like Phlegmatick excrements wrought 
| y 


Hofc in whom Phlegme hath the dominion, are of a whitiflcoloured face, and Themanners 


* 
7 
¥ 
P.6 
| 
| 
| 
* 


— 


* 
— 


n, or Compendious C HAr.é. C 


by a {mall and weake heate, fuchas Phlegmaticke perfons have, wh ich by its nattsrail a 
lightneffe is diverily carried through the turnings of the guts, and diltends and twe'ls at 
them up, and whilesitc ftrives for paflage our, it caufeth MuUrmMuUrines and noiles in the colds 
belly, like winde breaking through narrow paflages. a fuy 
Signes of a Melancholtke perfon. cot 
ma 
msn de He face of Melancholy perfons is fwart, their countenance cloudy and often cet 
chely perfons, erucll, their afpetis fad and froward, frequeat Schirrhous, or hard {wellingg, 
tumors ofthe {pleene, Hemorroids Varices (or fwollenveines) 2Quartaine feavers,whe- gin 
ther continuall or intermitting, Qusataine, Sextaine, and Septimane {cavours ; and to by: 
conclude, all fuch wandering feayersoragues fer uponthem. But when it happens cul 
the Melancholy humor is fharpened, either by aduftion, or commixture of Choler, 
then Terters, the blacke Morphew, the Cancer fimp!e and ulcerated, the Leprous 
and filthy fcabbe, {ending forth certaine {caly and branlike excrefcenfes, (being vul- 
early called Saint A¢amas his evill) and the Leprofie it felfe invades them: They have 
Tears {mail veines and art cries, becaufe coldneffe hath dominion over them, whole proper- 
what their. tie is to ftraiten, asthe qualitie of heate is to dilate. Burt if at any time their veines 
bigge, that largenefle is not by reafon of the laudable bloud,contained in thea, 
but from much windinefle ; by occafion whereof it isfomewhat ditiicult tolet them 
bloud; not onely becaufe that when the veine is opened, the bloud flowes flowly eS 
forth, by reafon oi the cold fiownefle of the humors; but much the rather, for that 43 
the veine dothnot receive the impreffion of the Lancet, fliding this way andthat way, pet 
by reafon of the windinefie contained init, and becaufe that the harfh drincefle of the wO 
upper skiane, refiltsche edge of the inftrumenr. Their bodies feeme cold and hard to rh 
Theirdreames the touch, and the eare troubled with cerrible dreames,for they are obferved to feeme anc 
to fee inthenight Devils, Serpents darke dens and caves,fepulchers,dead corpfes, and fro 
many other{uch chings full of horror, by reafon of a blacke vapour, deverfly mox ing _ 
| KH ydrephoti. and difturbing the Braine, which allo wee {ee happens to thofe, * who feare the thi 
Theieman: water, by reafon of the biting ofa mad dogge. You fhall finde them froward, frau- Ar 
dulent, parfimonious, and covetous, even to bafencffe, flow fpeakers, fearefull, 
fad, complainers, carefull, ingenious, lovers of folitarinefle, man-haters, obe Th 


ftinate maintainers of opinions once conceived, flow to anger, but angered not be 
pacified. But when Mclancholy hathexceeded natures and its owne bounds, then bic 
by reafon of putrefaéction and inflammation all things appeare fullof extreme fury and 


avd 
madne fle, fo that they often caft themfelves headlong downe from feme high place, of 
or are otherwife guilty of their owne death, with feare of which netwithftanding vO 
they are rerrified. for 
Fromwhence But we muft note that changes of the native temperament,doe often happenin the nin 
thechangeot cour{e of a mans life, {o that hee which a while agonc was Sanguitic, may now bee Oo! 
temmer, Melancholick,or Phlegmatick;not truly by thé changing of the bloud into 
; (uch humors, but by the mutation of Diet, and the courfe or vocation of life.For none ab 
Hew onemay Of a Sanguine complexion but will prove Cholericke if he eate hot and drie meates, iS | 
et chole- ( 4¢ all like things are cherifhed and preferved by the ule of their like, and contraries At 
| are deftroyed by their contraries ) and weary his body by violent exercifes, and cons | ha 
| tinuall labours ;andif there bea fuppreffion of Cholerickeexcrements, which be- 50 
fore did ircely flow, either by nature, orart, But whofoever feeds upon meates to 
nerating grofie bloud, as Beefe, Venifon, Hare, eld Cheefe, and all fale meates, he ari 
i without alldoubt {liding from his nature, will fall into a Melancholy temper; efpeci- an 
t ally if cothat manner of diet he fhail have a vocation full of cares, turmoiles, m i{cries, Ww 
| itrong and much ftudy, carefull thoughts and feares; andalfoif he fic much,wanting ki 
excreife, for {o the inward heate as it were defrauded of its nourifhment, faints, and ch 
, growes dull, whereupon grofle and droiiic humors abound in the bedy. To this al- oe 
fo the cold and drie condition of the place, in which we live, doth conduce, and the Ol 
| fupprefion of the Malancholy humor accuftomed co be evacuated by the Ha2mor- by 
rhoides, courles, and ftooles. he 
How Pleg- But heacquiresa Phlegmaricke temper whofoever ufeth cold & moift nourifhment, 
mich 


much feeding , who before the former meate is gone out of the belly, fhall ftuffe his 
paunch with more,who prefently after meate runs into violent exerciles.who inhabite 
cold and moift places, who leade their life at cafc in all idleneflz;and laftly who fuffer 
a fuppreflion ofthe Phlegmaticke humour accuftomely evacuated by yvomite, cough, 
or blowing the nofe ,or any other way either by nature or arte. Certainely it is ver 
convenient to know thefe things, that we may difcerne if any at the prefent be Phleg- 
maticke, Melancholicke or of any other temper, whether he be fech by nature, or ne- 
ceflity. Having declared thofe things which concerne the nature of Temperaments 
and deferred the defcription of the parts of the body to our Anatomy, we wil] be- 
gin to fpeake of the faculties governing this our life, when firft we fhall have thowen 
by apracticall demonftration of examples, the ule and certainty of the aforefaid 
rules of Temperaments. 


CHAP. VII. 


Ofthe Prattice of the Aforefaid yules of Temperaments, 


oe ~ Hat we may draw the Theoricke of the Temperaments into practife, ir hath 

{cemed good foravoyding of confulion, which might make this our Intro 

Ke duction feeme ob{cure, if we would profecute the differences of rhe Tem- the world, 


pers of ail men of all Nations, totake thofe Limits, which nature bath placed in the 
world; asSouth, North, Eaftand Weft,and as it were the Center of thule bounds, 
that the defcribed variety'‘of Tempers, in colour, habic, {tudyes, actions, 
and forme of life of men that inhabit thofe Regions fcituated fo farre diftant one 
from another, may be as a furerule, by which we may certainely judge of CVETY The forces of 
mans temperature in particuler, as be fhall appeare to be nearer ,orturther off froma temperatures 
this, ortharregion. Thofewhichinhabite the Southas the Affricans, AEthiopians, 
Arabians and Egyprians,are for the moft part deformed, leane, dusky coloured and ture of the 
pale, with blacke eyesand great lippes, curled haire, anda {mall and thrill voyce. a 
Thofe whichinhabdite the Nerthren partsas the Scythians, Mufcovites, Polonians Of the Nore 
and Germaines,have their faces of colour white mixed witha convenient quantity of “""* 
blood, theirskin fott and delicate, theic haire long, hanging downe and fpreading 
abroad ,and ofa yellowifh, or reddifh colour; of ftature they are commonly tall, & 
of 2 well proportioned, fat and compact habite of body, theircyes gray, their 
voyce ftrong,loud and bigge. Bat thofe who are fcituated betweene thefe two 
former,as the Italians and French, have their faces f{omewhat {warr,are well favoured, 
nimble, flrong, hairy, flender, well in ficth, with their eyes refembling the colour 
of Goates-eyes,and often hollow eyed, having acleere {hril! and pleating voyce. 

The Southerne people are exceeded fo much by the Northerne in firength and 
abilliry of body, as they furpaffe them in witt and the faculties of the minde.Hence The Southern 
ig i¢ you may reade in Hiftories, that the Scythians, Gothes and Vandals vexed apr ea 
Affricke and Spaine wich infinite incurfions, and moft Jarge and famous Empires en 
have beene founded from the Northrto the South; but few or none from the pont 
South tothe North. Therefore the Northren people thinking all right and law 
to confift in Armes, did by Duell onely determine all caufes and controverties 
arifing amoneft the inhabitants, as wee may gather by the ancient lawes, 
and cuftomes of the Lumbards, Englith, Burgonians, Danes and Germaines; and 
we may feein Saxo the Grammarian that fuch a law was once made by Frozte 
kine. of Denmarke. The which cuflome at this day is every where in forceamongft 
the Muskovits. Bur the Soucherne people have alwayes much abborred that fafhicn, 
and have thought it more agreeable to Bealls than Men. Wherefore we never heard 
of any fuch thing ufed by the Aflyrians,Egyptians, Perfians orlewes, But moved 
by the goodnes of their wit, they ere&ted Kingdomes and Empires by the onely 
helpe of Learning and hidden {ciences. For {ceing by nature they are Melancholicke 


by reafonof the dryncile of their temperature, they willingly addict — ~ 
olitarinetic 


icten 
- 
to 
ocns 
rous 
ho: 
* 
» 
. 
rnc 
‘rau 
ot be 
‘and 
lace. 
the 
Inco 
none 
arieg | 
| 
i be- 
> £C. 
he 
| 
TICS, | 
,and 
is 
\ | | 
mor- 
ent 
uch 


Compendious 


iy folitarineffe and contemplation, being endued with a fingular fharpnefle of wit. 
TheSonthern Wherefore the Asthiopians, Egyptians, Africans, lewes, Phenicians, Perfians, 
Affyrians,and Indians,have invented many curious {ciences,revcaled the Mytteries 
| and fecrets of Nature,digefted the Mathematiques into order, ob{erved the moti- 
ons of the heavens,and firft brought in the worfhip and religious facrifices of the 
sods : Even fo tarre thatthe Arabians who live oncly by fiealth, and haveonely a 
Waggon for theit houfe, de boaft thatthey have mariy things diligently and accu- 
rately obferved in Aftrology by their Anccftors,which every day made more accu- 
rateand copious, they,as by an hereditary right,comrend to pofterity, as it 1s recor- 
The Northern dedby Zeo the Africane, But the Northerne people, as the G ermaines,by reafon of 
famous War- the aboundance ofhumours ard blood, by which the minde is as it were opprelt, 
po a apply themfelvesto workes obvious to the fenfes, and which may be done by the 
hand. Fortheir minds oppreft with the earthly maffe of their bodies, are eafily 
drawne from heaven and the contemplation of Celeftiall things, to thefe inferior 
things, as to find out Mines by digging,to buy and caft meitals, co draw and hammer 
out workes of Iron, fteele and braffe.In which things they have proved {fo excellent, 

that the glory of the Inventionof Gunsand Printing belongs tothen. 
Theendow- = Thepeople who inhabite the middle regions betweene thefe,are neither naturally 
fit for the more abftrufe {ciences,as the Southerne people are, nor for Mechanicke 
tweenthem.  workes.as the Northerne,but intcermeddle with civil affaires,commerce and Merchan- 
dizing. But are endued with fuch ftrength of body as may fufhife to avoid and delude 
the crafts and artsof the Southerne Inhabirants; and with fuch wifdome as may be 
fufficient to reftraine the fury and violence of the Northern. How true this is,any one 
may underftand by the example of the Carthagiz4ans and Africans,who when they had 
held /taly for fome yeares bytheir fubtile counfels, crafty fleights and devices; yer 
could not eicape but atthe length their Arts being deluded, and they ipoiled of all 
The Northrea their fortuncs,were brought in fubjeftiontothe Romans, The Gothes,Hannes and o- 
ther Northerne people have {poiled & overrun the Romane Empire by many incur- 
nethowto  fions and inroades, but defticure of counfell & providence, they could not keepe thofe 
uleehe VOY hiags which they had gotten by Armes and valour, Therefcre the opinionof all 
Hiftorians is agrecing in this, chat good lawes, the forme of governing 2 Common. 
wealth, all politicke ordinances, the Arts of difputing and {peaking, have had theig 
Theaboun- beginning fromthe Greeks,Nomanes and French. And from hence in times paitand 
sence or this day 2 greater number of Wrirers, Lawyers and Countellorsof State have 


Lawyerstrom {prung up, thanin allthe worldbefides. Therefore that we may ateribure cheir gifts 


a to each Kegion, we affirme that, The Southerne people are borne and fit for rhe 
{tudies of learning ; the Northerne for warres, and thofe which be betweene them — 
both for Empire and rule. The italian is naturally wife, the Spaniard grave and : 


conftant ; the French quicke and diligent, for you would fay he runs whenhe goes, 
being compared tothe flow and womanifh pace of the Spaniard, which isthe caufe 

that Spaniards are delighted with French fervants for their quicke agillity im difpar- 9 
Themanners Ching buliues. The Eatterne people are {pecially endued with agood, firme and wel! 
ofthe Eaftern tempered wit,not kecping their coun(els fecret and hid. For rhe hatte is ef the nature 
people of the Sunne,and that part of the day which is next to the rifing of the Sunne is couns 
ted rhe right-fide and ftronger , and verily inall living things the right fide is alwayes 
Themanners the more {trong and vigorous. But the Wefterne people are more tender and effemi- 
gs nate, and more clofe intheir cariage and minde, not eafily making any one partaker 
of their fecrets,For the Weft is,as it were fubjét tothe Moone, becaufe at the change 
it alwates inclines to the Welt,wherby ic happens,that it is reputed as noQurnall, fini- 
sue i oct and oppotite to the Eaft ; and the Weil is lefle temperate and wholfome.There- 
windehealth- fore of the windesnoneis more wholf{ome thanthe Eaftwinde which blowes from 


with a moft frefhand healthful gale, yet ic feldome blowes,and but onely 
at Sun-fet. 
The Northerne people are good eaters, but much better drinkers, witty wken they 


eatersand litle moifiened with wine, and talkers of things both to be {poken and concealed, 
drinkers, ot Very conitantin their promifes and agreements, but priocipall keepers and pre- 
fervers of thamefaftnesand chattity, farre different from the inhabitants efth¢e South, 


who 


4 
‘ 
>. 
4 
| 
| 
+. 
| 
4 
| 


ally 
icke 
han- 
lude 
y be 
Fone 
f all 
nd 
hofe 
rf all 

on- 
their 
tand 
have 
gifts 
r the 


hem 


- and 
POCS, 
saule 
{par- 
well 
ature 
ayes 
temi- 
taker 
lange 
lini- 
here- 
from 
onely 


they 
aled, 
d pre- 
outh, 
who 


C P.8: Way to Chirureery. 


25 


who are wonderfull {paring fober,fecret and fubtle,and much addicted to al! forts of 
wicked Luft. Arifforde in his Problemes faith that thofe nations are barbarous and 
eruell bothwhich are burnt with immoderate heate, and which are.oppreft with ex. 
ceffive cold becaufe a foft temper of the Heavens fofeens the Manners and the minde., 
Wherfore beth,as wellthe Northerne,as Scythiansand Germans;and che Sourherne, 
as Africans are cruell;but thefe have this of a certaine naturall ftoutnes,and fouldierlike 
boldnes,and rather of anger,thana wilful! defire of revenge ; becaufe they cannot re- 
{traine by the power of reafonthe fir violent motions of their anger by reafon of the 
heat of their blood. But thofe of a certaine inbred and inhumane pravicy of manners, 
wilfully and willingly premeditating they perierme the workes of crucity, becaule 
they are ofa fad and melancholy nature. You may have an example of the Nerthcrae 
cruelry from the Tranfilvanians again(t their feditious Captaine George, whom they 
pave to be torne in petces alive and devoured by his Soldiers, (being kept fafting tor 
three dayes before for that purpofe ) who was then unbowelled, and rotted, and to by 
themeatenup. The Cruelty of Maznzba/ the Captaine of the Carthaginians may 
{ufhife for an inftance ofthe Southerne cruelty, He left the Romane Captives wearied 
with burdens and the lenght of the way,with the foles oftheir feet cut off; But thofe 
he brought into his tents, oyning brethren and kinfmen together he caufed to fighr, 
neither was fatisfied with blood befere he brought all the victors to one man, Alfo 
we may,f{ee the crucll nature of the Southerne Americans, who dip their children 
in the blood of their faine enemics, then fucke their blood, and banquet with their 
broken and {queafed Limbs. | 

Andasthe Inhabitants of the South are free from divers Plethoricke difeafes, 
which are caufed by aboundance of blood,to which the Northerne peopleare fubjeét, 
as Feavers,Defluxions, Tumors, Madnefle with laughter which caufeth thofe which 
have it to ledpe and dance The people commonly tcrmeit vzttws his 
which admits of no remedy but Mulicke: So they are often moletted with the 
Frenfie invading with madneffe and fury; by the heat. whereof they are often fo ra- 
vithed and carried befides themfelves that they foretell things to come; they are 
terrified with horrible dreamcs,and in their fitsthey {peake in ftrange and forraigne 
tongues, but they are fo fubje& to the fcurfe andall kind of {cabbs and to the Leprofie 
as their homebread difeafe, that nohoufes are fo frequently mete withall by fuchas 
travell through cither of the Mauritania’s, as Holpitalils provided for the Lodging of 
Lepers. 


whearete be 
counteo Bars 


ba: Oils, 


The Nerthrne 
and Southerne 
have each rhaig 
Crugitics, 


“aler. MAx, 


The difeafes 
of the Sous 
thernc pcopls, 


Thofe who inhabit rough and Mountainous places, are more brutifh, tough & able Mountainens, 


to endure labour: but fuch as dwellin plaines, efpecially if they be moorifh,or fennith 
are of a tender body, and fweate much with a litle labour; the truch of which is 


- confirmed by the Hollanders and Frizlinders. Butif the plaine be fuch as is {cort- 


ched by the heate of the Sunne, and blowne upon by much contrariety of windes, it 
breeds men whoare turbulent, not to be tamed, defirous of {edition and nevelry, 
ftubborne, impatient of fervitude, as maybe perceived by the fole example of the 
inhabitants of Narbona province of France. 

Thofe who dwell in poore and barren places are commonly more witty and dilis 
gentand moft patient of labours; the truth of which the famous witts of the Arheni- 
ans, Ligurians and Romances, and the plaine country ofthe Bocotians in Greece, of 
the Campanians in Italy, and ofthe reft ofthe inhabiters adjoyning to the Ligurian 
ica,approves. 


= 
— — — 


HAP, V 
Of the Faculties. 


S Faculty is a certaine power, and efficient caufe,proceeding from the tempe- 
Kp tament ofthe part, and the performer of fome actions of thc body. There are 
three principall Faculties coverning mans bedy as long as it cnjoyes its 
tegrity 


What a facule 
tic 1s. 


3 aculti¢?. 


* 
| if ‘ 
ries 
the 
ad 
1 of : 
eft 
2 
rhe 
ly 
rior 
Cnt. 
Pa 
\ 
i 
| 
Ke 
| “13, 


i>. 


22 eA n Introduftion, or Compendious C uar.7. 


tegrity ;the Animall,Vitall and Naturall. The Animall is feated inthe popceeny 
perament of the Braine, from whence it 1s diftributed by the Nerves into all parts of 
the body which have fenfe and motion. Thisis of three kinds, for one is Moving, an- 
other fenfative ; the third principall The fenfative confitsin the five external fenfes, 
fight,hearing, tafte, imell and rouch. The Moving, principally remaines in the Mutcles 
and nerves,as the firinftruments of voluntary motion, Tbe Principal! comprehends 
the Reafoning faculty, the Memory and Fantafie. Galen w ould have che Common er 
inward fenfe to be comprehended within the compafie of the Fantafie, altheugh 
Ariftotle diftingui fheth betweene them. 

The Vitall abides inthe Hart, from whence heat and life is diftributed by the 
Arteryes to the whole body: this 1s principally hindered in the di‘eafes of the 
Breft; as the Principal! is,when any difeafe aflailes the Braine ; the prime aCtion of the 
vitall faculry is Pulfation, and that continued agitation of the Heart and Arteryes, 
Therriple ute which is of threefold ufe to the body : for by the dilatation of the Heart anc Arteryes 

ofthe Pulfe, the vitall {pirit is cherifhed by the benefit ofthe Aire whichis drawne in; by the 

contraction thereof the vapours of it are purged and {ent forth and the native heat 

| of the whole body is tempered by them both. a . iste) 
| Thenaturall.  Dhelaftis the Natural] faculry which hath chofen its principall ( eate in the Liver,ie 
: facultyis three= {preads or carries the nourifhment over the whole body: but it is diftinguifhed into 3. 
or other faculties; The Generative which ferves for the generation and forming of the 
Iffuc in the wombe; the Growing or increafing facultie which flourifheth from the 

time the ]ffue is formed,untill the perfe& growth of the folid parts into their full 
dimenfions of Length, height and bredth. The nourifhing facultiewhich as fervant 
to both the other repaires and repayes the continuall cftluxe, and wafte of the three- 
WhatNutri- fold fubftance ; for Nutrition is nothing elfe but areplenifhing, orrepairing what{o- 
—— ever is wafted or empticd This nourifhing facultie endures from that time the In- 
fant isformed inthe wombc untill the end of life.[ctis a matter of great confequence 
Koureother in Phificketo know the 4 other faculties, which as fervants attend upon the rouri- 
facultiesarterd (hing faculty ; which are the Attractive ,Rerentive, Digeftive and Expulfive faculty. 
aking — The Attractive drawes that juice which is fit to nouriflithe body, that I fay which Dy 
application may beaffimulated to the part. This is that faculty which in fuch as are 

hunery drawes downe the meat fcarfe chawed, and the drinke fearfe tafted,into the 

onawing and empty ftromacke. The Rententive faculty is that which retaines the 
nourifhment once attracted untill icbe fully laboured and perfectly concoGed; And 

Thenecefity by that meanes it yeelds no fmall afliftance to the Digeftive faculty. For.the naturall 
~ ~ hcatcannot performe the office of concoction, unlefie the meat be embraced by the 
partjaad make fome ftay therein. For otherwife the meate carryed into the ftomacke 

never acquires the forme of Cyl us, uoleffe it flay detained in the wrincles thereof, as 

ina rough paffoge, untill the full time of Chyhfcation, The Digeftive faculty affimu- 

Jatesthe nourifhment, being attracied and detained, into the {ub{tance of that pare 

whofe Faculty itis, by the force of the inbred heate & proper difpoiition or temper 

ofthe part. So the (lomacke plaiaely changes all things which are catand drunke 

into Chy/ws, & the Liver curnes theChy/us into blood But the Bones & Nerves convert 

the red and liquid bload which is brought down uato them by the capillary or {mall 

veins,into 2 white & folid fub@ance. Such concoction is far more laborious in a Bone 

and nerve, thanin the Muiculous fleth, For the blood being not muchdifferent from 

Twoexcre: its Nature, by a light change and concretion turnes into tle fh). But this Concodtion will 
never fatisfiethe defire of Nature ané the parts, unleffe the nourifhment purged from 
itsexcrements,put away the filth and droffe,which muft never enter into the fub- 

ftance of the part. Wherefore there do not onely two forts of excrements remaife of 
the firftand fecond Concoétion,the onethicke, the other thin, as we have faid be- 
fore; butalio from the third Concoétion which is performed in every part. The 
one of which we conceive onely by reafon, being that which vanifheth into Aire 
by infenfidle Tran{piration. The otheris knowne fometimes by {weats, fometimes 
by athicke fatry fubftance ftayning the fhirt; fometimes by the generation of haire 
and nailes whole matter is from fuliginous and earthly excrements of the third Con- 
coction, Wherfore the fourth Faculty was neceflary which might yeeld no fmall 


helpe 


* 
~. 
‘ 

4 

| J 


Nnverc 
{mall 
Bone 

(from 
in will 
lfrom 

{ub- 

une of 

mid be- 
. The 

) Aire 

erimes 

f haire 

Con- 
{mall 
helpe 


23 
helpe to nourifhment;it is called the Expulfive,appointed to expell rhofe { Uperflucus The worke of 
excrements which by no action of heate can obtaine the forme of the part. Such —" 
faculties ferving for nutrition are im fome parts two-fold; as fome ecmmer, the 
benefit of which redounds to the whole body,as in the ventricle,liver & veines; Others 
oncly attending the fervice of thofe partsin which they remaiac, and in fome pars 
ali thefe 4.aiwell commonas proper,are abiding aad refident, as in thofe parts we 
now mentiencd:fome with .he 4. proper have one!y two cmon,as the Gall, Spleene, 

Kidneies and Bladder.Orhers are content enely with the proper, as the fimular and 
Mufculous parts, who if they want any of thele 4.faculties, their health isdecayed cis 
ther by wantof nourifhmentr,an ulcer,or otherwiie. The like unnatural affects happen 
by the deficiency of juft and laudable nourifhment. But if it happen thofe taculties de 
rightly performe their duty the nourifiment is changed into the proper fubitance of 
the part,and is truly afliroulated,as by thefe degrees. Fir ft it muft flow the pare,then de-. 
be joyned to it,then agelurinated, and laftly as we have {aid,affimulated. Now we i 
suf {peake of the Actions which arile from the facultics. 


— OO — 


C Xe 


Of the Actions. 


the facultie depegds on the Temperament, forthe Action on the faculty, 
» and the A& or worke depends upon the Action bya certaine order ef con- 

{equence. But although that the words Actions and Act or worke are often contoun- 

ded,yetthere is this difference betweene them, asthat the Action fignifies the mori- 

onufed in the performance of apy thing ; but the Ac&t or worke, the thing already 

done and performed: for example, Nurritionand the Generating of ficth are naturall 

Actions ; but the parts nourifffed,and ahollow ulcer filled with flefh atethe workes , ya: 

of that motion,or a@ien. Wherfore the A& arifeth fromthe Action, asthe Action andan Aa 

arifeth fromthe faculty, che integrity or perfetion of the inftruments concurring in 

both. For as,if the facultie beeither defective, or hurt,no Action willbe wel! perfor- 

med: founlefiethe Inftruments keepetheir native and due conformiue (which is 

their perfec health, the operator of the Action proper to the inftrument) none of 

thofe things, which ought to be, willbe well performed. Therefore for the perfor- 

mance of biameleffe and perfect actions, it is fra due conformity of the Inftru- 

ment concurie with the faculey. Bur Actionsare two told; for they are either Na- 

turall, or Voluntary. They aretermed Natural, becaufe tlicy are performed not by artural 

our will, but by their owne accord andagiinft our will: As arethatcontinuallmo- “~~ 

tion of the Heart, the beating of che Arteryes,the expulfion of the Excrements, and 

fuch other like which are done in us by the Law ot Nature whether we will, or no, 

Thefe Actions flow cither from the Liver and yeines,or from the Heart and Arteries, 

Wherfore we may comprehend them under the names of Naturall and Vital! Act 

ons.For we mutt attribute his AGion to each faculty, left we may leeme to conftiture 

an idle faculty, and no, way profitable for ufe. The unvoluntary virall actions are the 

dilatation & contraction of the Heart and Arteryes,the which we comprehend under 

the folenaime of che Pulfe: by that they draw in,and by thisthey expell, or drive 

forth, The unvoluntary vitall actions be, 


N Aion or Fundion isan active motion proceeding froma faculty ; foras what “<n 
. 


Generation Generative, | 
Growth and>which proceed from Growing ,and facultie, 
Nutrition Nourifhing 


Generation is nothing elfe than a certaine producing,or acquiring of matter, Md what iis, 


an introducing of a fubftantiall forme into that matter ; this is performed by the af- 
fiftance of 2.faculties ; of thie Altering which doth diverfly prepare and difpofe the 


feed and menflrueus bleodto put onthe formeofa Bone, nerve, fplecne, 
uc 


| 
= i- — 
er 
| 
a 
~ 
i 
* 
oleh 
~ 
@ 
* 
eis 
4 wh 
j 
Cil 
| 
ale 
> 
> tac 
A 
e 
at 
& 
et. & 
= 
<a 
« 


fach like : of the Forming faculty which adornes with figure ,fite and compofition,she 


matter ordered by fo various a preparation. 


WhatGrowth 


What Nutriti« 
on If. 


A&ion volun= 


ta ry. 


* fenz 


How fight is 
performed. 


How hearing. 


How (melling 


Growthis an inlarging of the folide parts into all the dimenfions,the priftine and 


ancient forme remaining fafe and found in figure and folidity. For the perfe@ion of 


every growth is judged onely by the folid parts for if the bedy {well intoa mafle ot 
fiefh.or fat, it (hall not therefore be faid to be growne : but then oncly when the folid 

arts doe in like manner increafe, efpecially the bones, becaufe the growth of the 
whole body fuliowes their increafe, even although at the fame time it waxe leane, 

Nutrition is a perfect affimulation of that nourifhment which is digefted,into the 
nature of the part which digefts. Iris performed by the affiftance of 4. fubitdiary or 
helping actions Attractive, Retentive,Digeftive and Expulfive. 

The voluntary a€tions which we willingly performe, are fo called , becaufe we 
can at our pleafure hinder, ftir up, flow or quicken them. They are three in ge- 
nerall, the {enfitive, mooving,and principall A@ion, The fenfative * Soulecom- 
prehends all things in fine fenfes, in Sight, Hearing, Smell, Tafte and Touch. 
Three things muft neceflarily concurre to the performance of them, the Organe, 
the Afedinm or meane, and the Obje&, The principall Organe, or Inftrument, is 
the Animail fpirit diffafed by thenerves into cach feverall part of the body, by 
which fuch ations are performed. Wherefore for the prefent we will ufe the 
Parts themfeives fortheir Organes. The Meane is a body, whieh carryes the 
Obje& tothe Inflramene. The Obje& isa certaine external] quality, which hath 
powet by a fic Afedéum or Meane to ftirre up and alter the Organe, This will 
be more manifeft by relating the particular funGions of the fenfes by the neceflary 
concurring of thefe rhree, 

Sight, is an action of the feeing facultie, which is done by the Eye ficly com- 
pofed of its coates and humors, and {o confequently the Organicall body of this 
A&ion, The Obje& is a vilitble quality brought to the Eye, Buc fuch an 
Obje& is two-fold; for either it is abfolutely vifible of its felfe,and by its owne 
Nature, as the Sun, the fire, the Moone and Starres: or delires as i¢ were the 
helpe of another that it may be actually fuch, for fo by the comnting of light 
the colours, which were vifible in power onely, being brought to the Eye doe 
feeme and appeare fuch as they actually are. But fuch Obje@s cannot arrive 
at the Eye, but thorough a cleere and illuminate A¢edium, as the Aire, Water, 
Glafle and all forts of Cryftall. 

The Hearing hath for its Organe the Eare and Auditory paflase, which 
goes to the flony bone furnifhed with a Membrane invefting it, an Auditory 
Nerve, and a certaine inward {pirit there conteined. The Obje& isevéry found 
arifing fromthe {mitten or broken Aire, and the Collifion of rwo bodyes meeting 
together. [he Medium isthe encompafii ay Aire whichcarryes the iound ro the Eare, 

Smelling ( according to Gal/ews opinion ) is performed in the Mamillary pro- 
cefles produced from the proper fubftance of the braine, and feated inthe upper 
part of the nofe: although others had rather {melling fhould be made in the 
very foremoft ventricles of the braine. This AGion is weake in man incompa- 
rifon of other Creatures ¢ rhe Obje& thereot is every fmell; or fumide exhalation 
breathing out of bodyes. The Atedrwm by which the Objea is carried tothe nofes 
of Mea, and Birds,is the Aire, but to Fifhes the Water it felfe, The AGion of 


How the tafe cafte is performed by the tongue being tempered well and according to nature, and 


How tou- 


furnithed with a nerve {pred over its upper part frora the third and fourth conjugation 
of the Braine. The Obje@ is * Tafte,of whofe nature and kindes we will treate more at 
large in our Antidotary. The Mediam by which the Object is fo carried to the Organ, 
that it may affed it,is either externall,or internall : The externall is that{pattle which 
doth as it Were anoynt and fupple the tongue ; the internal! is the Spongy flefh of the 
tongue it felfe,which atfeGed with the quality of the Object doth prefently {o poffe ile 
the nerve that is implanted in it,that the kinde and quality thereof by the force of 
the {pirit may be carryed intothe common fenfe. Ail parts endued with a nerve 
enjoy the fenfe of touching, which is cheily done, whena tractable quality doth 


penetrate 


is, 
' 
| 
& 
, 


COHAP.JO: 


Way 


penetrate even to the true and nervous skinne, which lyeth under che Cuticle, or | 

{carfe-skinne; we have formerly noted, that it 1s moft exquifite in the skinne. : 

which invefts the ends of the fingers, The Object is every tractable qualitia, 

whether itbe of the firft ranke of qualities, as Heate, Cold, Moifture, Dryneffe, 

or of the fecond, as Roughnefle, Smoothnelic, Heavinefic, Lightnefle, Hardnefle, 

Seftneffe, Rarity, Denfity , Friability, Vn@uolity, Groflenefle, Thinnefles The 

Medium by whofe procurement the inftrument is afteGed,is either theskinncorthe | 

fieth interwoven with many Nerves. 
The next AGion, is that Motion, which by a peculiar name wee call volun- of mtiea, 

tary; this is performed and accomplifhed by a Mufele, being the proper [nftru- | 

ment of voluntary Motion. Furthermore every motion of 2 member pefleffing 

a Mufcle is taade ecithet by bending and contraction,or by extention. Although 

generally there be fo many differeaces of voluntary metien, as there are kinds , 

of {ite in place; therefore Metion is faid to be made upward, downeward, to the 

righthand, to the left, forward and backward; Hither are referred the many 

kinds of motions, whichthe infinite variety of Mufcles produce in the body, In- How Refpis 

to this ranke ef Voluntary Actions, comes Refpiration, or breathing becaufe ir Ttonmay bs, 

‘ voluntary 

is done bythe helpe of the Mufcles; although it be cheiily to temper the heare motion, 

of the Heart. For wee can make it more quicke, or flow as wee pleafe, which 

are the conditions of a voluntary Motion. 

Lafily, that wee may have fomewhat in which wee may fafely reft and defend 
our {elvesagainftthe many queftions which are commonly moved concerning this 
thing, we muft hold, that Refpiration is undergone and performed by the Animall 
iaculty, but cheifiy inftituted for the vitall, | 

The Principal! AGion and primeamongft the Voluntary is abfolutely divided in Bihar 


three; Imagination, Reafoning and Memory. AGtion, 
~~ Imagination is a certaine expreffing and apprehenfien which difcernes and diftin- | 


ouitheth betweene the fermes and fhapes of things fenfible, or which are kaowneby ~ 
the fenfes. 

Reafoning is a certaine judicial} xftimation of conceived er apprehended formes 
or figures,by a mutuall collating or comparing them rogether. 

Memory is the fure ftorer ofall things, and as it were the Treafuric which - 
the minde often unfolds and opens, the other faculties of the minde being © 
idle and not imployed. But becaufe all the forementioned AGions whether | 
they be Naturall, or Animal! and volustary,are dene and performed by the | | 
a and affitance of the Spirits; Therefore now wee mult fpeake of the 

pirits, 


G Hi A P. Xs 


Of the Spirits, 


Peery fea that it might be avehicle for the faculties (oy whofe power the whole r 
body is governed,) to all the parts,and the prime in{trument for the per- 
Reeaenoes formance of their office. For they being defticute of its {weet approch doc | 
prefently ceafe from action, andas dead do reft from their accuftemed labours. Spitie threse 
From héacc it is that making a variety of Spirits according, to the numberof the ©" 
they have divided them into three as enc Animal] another Vitall ,nothes 
aturall, 
The Animall hath taken his feate in the braine; fer there ic is prepared — 
and made, that from thence conveyed by the Nerves is may impart the 
wer of fence aad Motion to all the reft of the members, Ao argument 
cereof is, that in the great Celd of Winter ,whether by the interceptung them 


in their way, or by the concretion, or as it were freezing of thofe ee 
D 


Lic f{pirit is a fubtileand Aery fubftance, raifed frem the purer blood Wha a {piri 


the 
and 4 
of 
ithe 
ine, 
the 
y or 
we 
uch. 
ane, | 
t, 1s 
DY 
the 
the 
hath 
will 
flary 
‘om 
this 
1 an 
the 
light 
dae 
rrive 
acer, 
yhich 
itory 
ound 
rare, 
pro- 
Ipper | 
n the 
mpa- 
ation | 
bn of 
, and | 
ation 
ore at 
regan, 
vhich 
the 
Ale (fe 
rce of | 
nerve 
‘doth 
etrate 
3 


Naturallfpirit. 


n Introduflion, or Compendious 


C HAP.[0, 


the joynts grow ftiffe, the hands numme, and al! the other partsare dull, deftitute of 
Why focalled their accuttomed 2 gillity of motion, and quicknefle of fenfe, It is called Animal not 
Axims. _becaufeit isthe * Life, but the cheife and prime inftrument thereof ; wherfore it 
hath a moft fubtile 2nd Aery {ubftance: and enjoyes divers names according to 
the various condition of the Senforyes or feates of the fenfes into which it en- 
ters; for that which caufeth the fight, is named the Vifive: you may fee this 
by night, rubbing your cyes, as fparkling like fire, That which is conveyed to 
the Auditorie patlage, is called the Auditive or Hearing; That which ts carried 
to the Inftruments of Touching, is rermed the Tadtive ; and fo of che rett. 
How itis This Animall {pirit is made and laboured in the windings and foldings of the 
made, veines and Arteryes of the braine, of an exquifite fubtile portion of the virall 
brought thither by the Carotsde Arteria, or fleepy Arteryes, and fometimes alto 
of the pure aire, or fweete vapour drawne in by the Nofe in breathing. Hence 
itis, that with Ligatures we oppe the paflage of this {pirit, from the parts we in- 
tend to cut off. An Humor which obftructs or ftopps its paffage,doth the like in 
Apoplexies and Paltfies, whereby it happens that the members {cituate under that 
place doe languifh and feeme dead, fometimes deftitute of motion, fometimes wan- 
ting both fence and motion. 
She Views The Virall {pirit is next to it in dignitie and excellency, which hath its cheife 
_ manfion in the left veatricle of the Heart, from whence through the Channells 
of the Arteryes it flowes into the whole body, to nourifh the heate which res 
fides fixed inthe fubftance of each part, which would perifh in fhore time unleffe it 
fhould be refrefhed by heat flowing thither together with the {pirit.And becaufe itis 
the moft fubrile next to the Animall, Nature (left it fhould vanifh away /wou!d have 


it conteired in the Nervous coat of an Arery, which is five time more thicke than 
the Coate of the veines, as Galen, out of Berophilus, hath recorded. - 


What themat- It is furnifhed with matter from the fubtile exhalation of the blood, and rhar aire 

terofitiss = which we draw in breathing, Wherefore it doth ecafily and quickly perifh by im- 
moderate diffipations of the {pirituous fubftance, and great evacuations; {o it is 
eafily corrupted by the putrifaction of Humors, or breathing in of peftilent aire 
and filthy vapours, which thing is the caufe of the fo fuddaine death of thofe 
which are infected with the Plague. This fpirie is often hindred from ene 
tring into {ome part by reafon of obitruion, fuloefie,or great inflammations, where. 
by it followes that in afhore {pace,by reafon of the decay of the fixed and inbred hear, 
the parts doe eafily fallinto 2 Gangrene and become moitified. 

Thereisfome The Naturall {piric (if fuch there be any) hath its ftarion in the Liver and 

doubrofthe Veines, It is more groffe and dull than the orher, and inferior to them inthe 

dignitie of the Action, and theexcellencie of the ufe. The ufethereof is to helpe 
the concoction both of the whole body, as alfo of each feverall part,andto carry 
bloed and heate tethem, 

Fixed(pirits,  Befides thofe already mentioned, there are other fpirits fixed and implanted 
in the timular and prime parts of the body ‘which alfo are natura!l, and Natives 
of the fame place in which they are feated and placed. And becau!e theyare al- 
fo of an Aery and ficry nature, they are fo joyned or rather vnited to the Nas 
tive heate, that they can nomore be’ feparated from it, than flame from heate; 
wherefore they with thefe chat flowto them are the principall Inftruments of 
the Actions, which are performed in each feverall part; And thefe fixcd {pirits have 

The radicall their nournihment and maintenance from the radicall and firitt- bred moifture,which 

moteurs, is of an Acry and oyly fubftance and is as it werethe foundation of thele Spirits 
and the inbred heat. Therefore without this moifture no man can live a mo- 
ment, Bur alfo the Cheife Inftruments of life are thefe Spirits together with the 
native heate. Wherefore this radicall Moifture being diffipated and wafted, 
(which is the feate, fodder and nourifhment of the Spirits and heate ) how can 
they any longer fubfift and remaine 2? Therefore the confueption of the na- 
tutall heate followeth the decay of this {weer and {ubftance-making moifture , 


Natural! death comjequently death, which happers by the diffipating and refolving of nawrall 
ate, 


But 


J 
| Bee 
r 
| 
° 
bad 
'@ 
| 
‘ 
& 


ein 
that 


1eife 
neils 
} rCe- 
Te it 
itis 
have 
than 


aire 
BY im- 
it is 
aire 
thofe 
Che 
heat, 


r and 
in the 


helpe 
carry 


anted 
atives 
re al- 
e Nase 
heate; 
‘nts of 
shave 
which 
Spirits 
mo- 
@ichrhe 
vafted, 
ow cad 
the 
ifture, 


ni turall 


But 


Way to Chirargery, 


But fince then thefc kinde of Spirits with the naturall heate, is conteined in the 
fubftance of cach fimular part of our body (for otherwife it could nor perfitt y 
it muf neceflarily follow, that there be as many kinds of fixed Spirits, as of 
fimular parts. For becaufe each part hath its proper temper and cncreafe, it 
hath alfo its proper {pirit,and alfo its owne proper fixed and implanted hear, 
which heere hath its abcde, as well as its Griginall, VVhercfore the fpirir 
and heate which is feated in the bone, is different from that, which iseimpact 
into the fubftance of a Nerve, Veine or iuch other fimular pare; becaufe the 
temper of thefe parts is different,as alfo the muxture of the. Elements from 
which they firft arofe and {prung up. Neither is this contemplation of {pirits of 
Small account, for in thefe conti all the force and efhcacy of our Nature, 

Thefe being by any chance diffipated or watted, wee languifh, neither is any The vfeand 
health:to be hoped for, the floure of life withering and decaying by litle and B<<*lity ofthe 
litle, Which thing ought to make us more diligent, to defend them againft the ee 
continuall effluxe of the threefold fubftance. For if they be decayed, there is 
left no proper Indication of curing the difeale, fo that weare often conftrained, 
allother care laid afide, tobetake our felves to the reftoring and repayring the Whar theres 
decayed powers. Vhich is done by meats of good juyce,ecatic to be cone me, 
coced and difributed, good Wines and fragrant {mells. the {pixits, 

But fometimes thefe Spirits are not difipated, but driven in and returned to Whattiere: 
their fountaines, and fo both opprefle and are oppreft; whereupon it happens we ™<°) fer op 
are often forced to dilate and {pread them abroad by binding and rubbing the parts, ipintsis, 
Hitherto wee have {poke of thefe things which are called Naturall, becaufe we 
naturally confit of them; it remaines that, we now fay fomewhat of their Adjuncts 
and aflociates by familiarity of Condition. 


Age: of which, by reafon of the fimilitude of the 
Argument, wee were conftrained to {peake whea 
we handled the Femperatures, 


| Sexe. 
The Adjuncts and Affociates¢ Colour ;ofwhich we have already fpeken. 
to things Naturall, are The Conformation of the inftrumeneal! parts. 


Time, whofe force we havealfo conf{idered. 
| Region, 
| Order of Dict and Condition of life. 


‘Cuarv, Xf, 


Of the Adjant&s of things Natural, 


iS no other thing than the diftinction of Male and Female, 19 what fxeis: 

SNE which this is moft obfervable, that for the parts of the body, and the 

fire of thefe parts, their islitle difference beeweene them, but the Female The of 

is colder thanthe’Male. Wherefore their {permaticall parts are morecold,fofc and 

moy ft, and all there natural] actions leffe vizorous,and more depraved, 
The Nature of Eunuches is to: be referred to that of weomen, as who may feeme Of Eunaches; 

to have degenerated into a womanifh nature,'by deficiency of heare ; theit {mooth 

body and foft and: fhirle voyce doe very much aifimulate weomen, Nowvith{tan- 

ding you muft confider that there be fome Manly weomen, which their manly ° 

voyce and chinne covered with a litle hairinefle doe argue ;and on the contrary, 


there ate fome womanizing, er womanifh men, which therefore we terme dainty and 
Cfteminate. 
D 2 The 


: 


7 
of 
ot 
iC 
to 
his | 
icd 
f 
the 
rall 
2:10 
= 
| 
f 


“Thecommoe at calli 


C HAP.U. 


eAn Introduttion, or Compendious 


Of Hermas Hermaphrodite as of a doubrfull. nature and in the middle of both fexes 
phrodits,  feemmes to participate of both Maleand Female. 
Coleur thebs- The Colour which is predominante in the habire and fuperficies of the body and 
wrayer of the lyes next under the skinne, flewes the temperament of what kinde foever it be; 
for as Galen notes in Comment Aphor.2. Such a colour appeares in us, as 
the contained humor hath, Wherefore it a rofie hew coloure the cheekes, it is 
a fignethe body abeunds with blood, and thar itis carryed abroad by the plenty 
of Spirits. But if the skinne be dyed with a yellow colour, it argues Choler, 
is predominante, if with a whitith and pallide hew, Phicgme ; with a fable and 
dusky, Melancholy.: So the colour of the excrements which are according 
to Nature is not of the leaft confideration. For thus,if an ulcer being broken fend 
forth white matter, it argues the foundnefle of the part from whence it flowes; buc 
if fanious or bloody, greene, blackifh, or of divers colours, it fhewes the weaknes 
of the folide part, which could noraffimulate by concoction the colour of the ex- 
crementitious humor. The like reafon is of unnaturall Tumors; For, as the 
colour, fo the Dominion of the Humor caufing or accompanying the {welling 
commonly is. 


The perfedi- The Confarmitic, and integrity of the Organicall parts is confidered by their 
on oft or figure, greatnefle, number, fituation and mutuall connexion. Wee confider the 
Senfiftsin 4. figure, when wee fay almoft all the externall parts of the body are naturally 
things. round, not osely for fhew, but for neceffitie, that being {mooth, and no way 
cornered, they fhould be lefle obnoxious to externall injuries; wee fpeake of 
Greatnefle, when wee fay, fome are large and chicke, fome lancke and 
leane. But wee confider their number, when we obferve fome parts to abound, 
fome to want, or nothing to be defe&ive or wanting. Wee infinuate fite and 


connexion whev wee fearch, whether every thing be in its proper place, and 
whether they be decently fitted, and well joyned together. 


We have handled the varyeties of the foure feafons of the yeare, when we treated 
of Temperaments. But the confideration of Region (becaufe it hath the fame judg- 
ment that the Aire )fhallbe referred to that difquifition,or enquiry which we entend 
to make of the Aire,amongft the Things not natural]. 

Diet}. The Manner of life and order of Diet are to be diligently obferved by us, 
becaufe they have great power cither to aiter, or preferve the Temperament. 
But becaufe they are of almoft infinite variety,therefore they {carfe feeme poflible 
to fall into Arte, which may profequute all the differences of Diet and vocari- 
ons of life. Wherefore if the oe of Life be laborious, as that of hut 
bandmen, Marriners, and other fuch trades, it flrengthens and dryes the parts of 
the bedy. Although thofe which labour much about Waters, are moft com- 
monly troubled with cold and moyft difeafes although they almoft kill them- 
felves with labour. 
Againe, thofe which deale with Mettalls, as all forts of Smithes, and thofe 
which caft and worke braffe, are more troubled with hotte difeafes, as feavers. 
But if their Calling be fuch as they fit much, and worke all the day long fit- 
ting at home, as fhooemakers; it makes the bedy tender, the tcfh effeminate and 
caufeth great quantity of excrements. A life as well idle and negligent in body, 
as quict in minde,in all riotoufnes and exceffes of Dycr,doth the fame. For 
from hence the body is made fubjeé to the ftone,gravell and Gout. 
ng of life which is perfermed with moderate labour, clothing and 
ditis ofan dyct, feemes very fit and convenient to preferve the naturall temper of the body. 
en ~— The Ingenious Chirurgeon may frame more of himfelfe that may more parti- 
cularly conduce to the examination of thefe things. Therefore, the thi 
turall, and thofe which are neere or Neighbouring to them being thus briefly 


ee the Order feemes to require thac wee make caquiry of Things not 
aturall. 


CuaP, 


* | 
7 
< 4 
i 
| 
* i 
1 
ae 
re 
f 
7 27 


Way to ( birurgery. 29 


CHAP. XII. 


Of things not Naturall, 


wis He things which wee muft now trcate of, have by the latter PhyJitions why they are 
¥ beene termed, Not naturall; becaufe they are not of the numbér of thofe <a!led ching: 

[Seka which enter into the conftitution, or compofure of mans body ; as the “~""*" 

Elements, Humors, and all fuch things which we formerly comprehended vnder 

the same of Naturall : Although they be fuch as are neceflary to preferue and 

defend the body already made and compofed. WVherefore they were called by 

Gaéen Prefervers, becaufe by the due ufe of them the body is preferved in health. Alfe 

they may be called doubeful!l; and Neuters,for that rightly and fitly ufed they 

keepe the body healthfull, but inconfiderately, they caufe difeafes. WVhereby 

it comes to paffe that they may be thought to pertaine to that part of Phi- 

ficke which is of preferving health, not becaufe fome of thefe things fhould 

be abfolutely and of their owne nature whoifome, and others unwholfome, but 

onely by this, that they are, or prove fo by their convenicnt, or prepofterous 

ufe.. Therefore we confider the ufe of fuch like things from 4 conditions,quan- ¢slemtoad 
titie, quality, Occafion, and manner of ufing, if thou fhalt obferve thefe , thou G/auconem. 
fhale atcaine and effect this,chat thofe things which ofthemfelves are as it were, 
doubrfull, fhall bring certaine andundoubted health. For thefe 4. Circumftances 

doe fo farre extend, that in them as in the perfection of Arte, the Rules which 

may be prefcribed to preferve health are contained. But Galen in another place se (enirae, 
hath in 4.words comprehended thefe things not Naturall; as things Taken, Ap- ‘#44 
plyed, Expelled,and te be Done. Things Taken are thofe which are put into 

the body, cither by the mouth or any other way, as the Airc, meate and 

drinke. Things Applyed are thefe which muft touch the body, as the Aire 

now mentioned, affecting the bedy with a diverfe touch of its qualityes of hear, 

cold, moyfture or drynefle, Expelled are, what thiags foever being unprofitable 

are generated in the body and require to be expelled. To be Done are Ia- 

bour, reft, fleepe, watching and the like. We may more diftin’lly and by exprefh- 

on of proper names revoke all thefe things to fixe; which are 


Aire, 

Meat and Drinke, 

Labour and Reft, 

Sleepe and Watching, 

Repletion and Inanition, or things to be expelled, or re- 
tained and kepr, 

Perturbations of the Minde, 


Crap, XIII. 


Of the Aire. 


er ispay Ire is fo neceflary to life, that we cannot live a moment without it, if fo be se 
SVN that breathing,and much more tranfpiration,be not to be leparated from is. 
35 iG “a life. Wherefore it much conducethto know, what Aire is wholfome, 
what uswholfome,and which by contrariery of qualities fights for the 
Patient againit the difeafe,or on the contrary by a fimilitude of qualities fhall nourifh 
the difea ¢, that if it may feeme to burden the Patient by increating or adding to the 
difcafe, we may correé it by Arte. So in curing the wounds of the head, elpe cially 
in Winter, we labour by all che means we may tomake the aire warme. For cold is 
hurtful tothe Braine,Bones, and the wounds of thefe parts;and heat ts comfortable 
and friendly. But alfo the aire being drawne into the body by breathing when ~ 
D 3 


X€S 
ond | 
5 
,as 
t is | 
nty | 
| 
and 
end | 
buc 
nes 
eXx- 
the | 
| 
heir 
the | 
rally 
way 
e of : 
and | 
and 
and 
eated | 
judg- 
ntend 
y Us, 
ment. | 
| 
f hut- 
rts of 
com- 
them- 
thofe 
avers. 
ng {ite 
teand 
body, 

For | 
ag and 
body. 
parti- 
briefly 
igs not 

HAPs 


a 


eAn Introduttion, or Compendious Cra 


What Aire is 
kurttall, 


Three things 
areunders 
ftood by the 
name ofthe 
Rires 


Aphor.q.fe&, 
2 


The force of 
the windes, 


How the 
windes ac- 
quire other 
faculties, than 
they naturally 
have. 

The Wef- 
winde of it 
felteunwhofe- 
fome, 


What force 


ftars hauc 
en the axe, 


is hotter than ordinarie, doth with anew warmth overheate the heart, lungs and 
{piritepand weaken the ftrength by the diffipatien ofthe pirits much attenuated: 
fo being too cold,in like manner the {trength of the faculties faints and growes dull, 
either by fuppreflion of the vapours, or by the in{piffation, or thickn.ng of the 
{pirits. 

Therefore to conclude,that Aire is to be efteemed healthiull which iscleere, fubtile, 
and pure, free and open on every fide, and which is farre remote from all carrion-like 
{mells ef dead carkaffes, or the ftench of any putrifying thing whatloever :the which 
is farre diftant from ftanding pooles, and fennes and caves, fending forth {trong and 
ill vapours; neither too cloudy nor moift by the nearene fie of fome river. 

Such an Aire, I fay, ifit haveavernall temper, is good againftall difeafes. That 
aire which is contrary to this is aleogether unhealthfull, as that which 1s putrid, fhuc 
up, and preft, by the ftraitnefle of neighbouring mountaines, infected with fome 
noyfome vapour. And becaufe I cannot profecute all the conditions of aires, fit for 
the expelling ofall difeates, as which are almoft infinite, it fhali{uthce hereto have 
{erdowne, what we muft underftand by this word Aire, 

Phyfitions commonly ufe to underftand three things, by the nameof Aire ; The 
pref nt ftate of the Aire; The Region in which wee live ; and the feafon of the yeare. 
Wee fooke of this laft, when wee treated of Temperaments, Wherefore wee will 
now ipcake of the two former, The prefent ftate of the Aire, one while for 
fome (mall time, is like the Spring, that 1s tempcrate; otherwhiles like the Summer, 
that is hocanddrie; otherwhiles likethe VVinter, that is cold and moift ; and fome- 
times like the Autumne which is unequall; and this laft conttitution of the Aire, is 
the caufe of many difeafes. VVhen upon the fame day, it is one while hot, another 
cold,we mutt expect Autamniall difeafes. Thefetempers and varieties of conftitutions 
of the Aire, are Chicfely and principally ftirred up by the windes; as which being dif- 
fufed over allthe Aire, fhew no {mall force by their fodaine change, VWVherefore we 
will briefly couch their natures : which blowes from theEaft, is called the Eaft. 
winde,and is of a hot and drie nature,and therefore heaithfull.But the Wefterne winde 
is cold andmoift, and therefore fickly. The South winde is hot and moift, the Author 
of putrifaction and putride difeales. The North winde is cold and drie,therefore heal- 
thy :wherefore it is thought, if it happen to blow in the dogge-dayes,that it makes the 
whole yeare healthful, and purges and takes away the {cedes of putrifaction, if any 
chance to be inthe aire. But this defcription of the foure windes,is then onely thoughe 
to be truc, if we confider the w indes in their Owne proper nature, which they borrow 
from thefe Regions, from which they firft proceede. For otherwife they affec& the 

aire quite contrarie,according te the difpofition of the places over which they came, 
as {newie places, Seaes, Lakes, Rivers, YVoods, or fandy plaines, from whence 
they may borrow new qualitics, with which they may afterwards poflefle the aire, 
and fe confequently our bodies. 

Flence it is we have noted the Wefterne winde unwholfome,and breeding difeafes, 
by reafon of the proper condition of the Region from whence it came; and fuch, 
that is cold and moift ; the Ga/conzes finde it, truly totheir fo great harme, that it {el- 
dome biowes with them, but it brings fome manifeft and great harme, either totheir 
bodies, or fruits of the earth, And yet the Greckes, and Latizes are wont to commend 
it for healthfulnefle, more than the reft. But alfo the rifting and fetting of feme more 
eminent fiars, doe often caufe fuch cold wiades, that the whole aire is cooled, or in- 
fected with fome orher maligne qualitic. For vapours and exhalations are often rai. 
fed by the force ofthe ftars, from whence windes, cloudes, {tormes, whirlewindes, 
lightnings, thunders, haile,{now, raine, earthquakes, inundations, and violent racing 
of the fea;have their original, The exa@ contemplation of which things, although it be 
properto Aftronomers ,Cofmographers,and Geographers, yet Hippocrates could not 
omit it, out that he muft {peake fomthing in his book De aére e-agquis,where he touches 
by the way, the defcription of the neighbouring Regions, and fuch as hee knew. 

From this force of the aire, either hurtfull, or helping in difeafes, came that fa- 
mous ob{crvation of Guide ot Caulias, That wounds of the head are more diflicult ro 
cureat Paris, than at Avignion, and the plaine contrarie of wounds of thelegges; for 
the 


4 
ind 
a 
O 
| 
4 
' 
( 
3 
ty 
‘ 
i 
i 
q 
‘ ‘ 
| 
| 
| 
4 ? 
‘ 
4 
& j 
é 


are. 

will 

for 

ner, 
1s 
ther 
tions 
dif- 
re we 
Katt. 
vinde 
uthor 
heal- 
es the 
if any 
oughe 
DrrOW 
the 
came, 
hence 
e aire, 


leafes, 
dfuch, 
tit fel- 
otheir 
nmend 
e more 
, Or in- 
ten ral. 
raging 
ighit be 
net 
touches 
knew.’ 
‘that fa- 
theult to 
for 


the 


Cuar.is: 


the aire of Paris compared co that of Avignion is cold and moift, wherefore hure- 
fyll and offenfive to the wounds of the head. Onthe contrary, the fameaire, becaule 


icobfcures the {pirits incraflares the bloud,condenfatesthe humors, and makes them 


lefle fit for defluxions, makes the wounds of the legges more cafie to be healed, by 
teafon ic hinders the courfe of the humors, by whofe defluxion the cure is hindered. 
Buric is manifef, that hot and dric places make a greater diilipation of the natural] 
heate, from whence the weakenefle of the powers ; by which fame reafon the Inha- 
bitants of fuch places doe not fo well endure bloudletting ; but more eafily fuffer put- 
gations, though vehement, by reafon of the contumacic of the humor, caufed by dri- 
nefle. To conclude, the aire changes the conftitutions of our bodies, either by its 
qualities,as ific be horter,colder, moilter, or drier ; or by its matter, as if it be prof- 
fer,ormore fubtile than is fit, or corrupted by cxhalations fromthe earth; or bya 
fodaine and unaccuftomed alteration, which any man may prove, who makes a {o. 
daine chang¢out of-a quiet airc into a ftormy and troubied wich many windes. Bur 
becaufe, next to the aire, nothing is fo neceffary to nourifh mans body, as meate and 
drinke, I willnow beginne to {peake of them both, 


CHAP. 


' 


Of Meate and Drinke: 


gen I have thought good to part it into thefe heads,as to confider the goodne fle 


CEOS Hat thisour Treatife of meate and drinke may be morc briefe and plaine, 
as | SS and illnefle of both ofthem, their quantitie, qualitic, cuftome, delight, 


order, time, and to accommodate them all to the ages and fealons of the 


yeare, We judec of the goodneffe and pravity Of meates and d rinkes, from the con- The od 
of 
rilhmetgss, 


dition of the good or vicious humors, of juyce which they beget in us. For evill 
juyce canfeth many difeafes. Ason the contrary, good juice drives away all diicafes 
from the body ,except the faule happen from fome other occation,as from quaatity,or 
too much exceile. Wherefore it is principally neceffary, thatthofe who will pre- 
ferve theit prefent health, and hinder the accefle of difeafes, feede upon things 
of sood nourifhment and digeftion, as are good wine, the yolkes of egges, good 
milke, wheaten bread weil baked, the flefh of Capons, Pertridge, Thruthes, Larkes, 
Veale, Mutton, Kid, and {uch like other, which you may finde mentioned in the 
Bookes which Galenwrit de Alimentorum facultatibws; where aliohe examines thote 
which are of evill juice by their manifeft qualities, as actimony, bitceraefie, faltnetic, 
aciditic, harilinefie and {uch like. | 


But unlefic we ulea convenient quantitic and meafurc in our meates,howloever lau- Theis quan 


dable they be, we thal never reape the(e fruits of health we hoped for.For they yeud 
matter of difeafes, by the onely exceffé of their quantity ; but wee may by this know 
the ferce of quantitie on both parts, becaufe often the poifonous quality of meatcs 
of ill nourifhment doth not hurt, by reafon they were not taken into the body ito a 
ereat quantitie, That meafure ef quantitic is chiefely to be regarded in dilca/es:tor as 


How the aire 
of Paris 
comes te be il] 
Or wounds of 
the head, and 
for chofe 
Of the legge, 


Py what 
meames the 
aire changes 
eur 


Hippocrates {aith, if any give meate to one fick of a feaver,he gives ftrength co the well, 


and increafes the difeafe to the ficke,efpecially ifhe doe not ufea meane. Wherefore 


itis a thing of no {mall confequence, to know what difeafes require aflender and 
what a large diet,of which thing there is large relation made in ther. Section of che 
Aphorifimes of Elzppocrates; where he teachcth, the ficke mutt feed more largely in the 
beginnings of long difeafes, wherby they may be inabled to indure the len gth of the 
difeafe and laft tothe ftate thereof. But in fharpe and violent difeafes, which pretently 
come to their heicht, wee mutt ufe a flender dict ; but moft {lender, when thediicale 
isin the height ; and befides, all our confulrations inthis kinde, muftbe referred tothe 
ftrength of the patients. But thofe who enjoy their perfect health, muft ufc a quanti- 
tie of meate,agreable to their evacuation and tran{piration ; for men by reafon ofthe 
firength oftheir heate, and the more copiows diffipation of the triple fubftance, have 
Sreater appetite, than women reafon, that young pcople, and 
\ 


{uch 


The guantitie 
of meares muft 
titecmed, 
accorvuing te 
roe narure oe 
and ftrength 


ateha 


| 
> 
i 
Ve 
Ke 
icl 
hat 
me 
i 
‘ 
| 
| 
ere 
| 
| ‘ 
‘ 
| 
‘ | 


The qualities. 
of meate, 


Old ageisa 
difeale, 


Apher.16. 
fect.5, 


The farce of 
Cultome, 


Aphor. 91. 
fect, 2- 


Apher. 3 8. 
{c&.2. 


Accuftomed 


meates are 
more grate= 


fuch as grow, need more frequentand plentifull nourifhment, than old men; and alfo 
amongit young men of the likeage, fome doe sig btly rc quite More ccplousnourifh- 
ment than otherfome, that is, according to the quantitie of their evacuations and cu~ 
ftome, Certainly for gluttoay, itis fuch as may be extended to all ; but we all fhould 
take fo much meate and drinke, that our powers may be refrefhed and not opprefled : 
for by the decree of Hippocrates, thele be the two ccmpendiary wayes of preferving 
health; not ro be over- filled with meate, andto be quicke to worke ; andthus much 
of the quantity of meates. Neither muft thefe who are cither found, or licke, have 
leffe regard to the qualities of their meates ; and thofe are either the fir ft, as heating, 
cooling, moiftening,drying; orthe fecond,attenvating, incraffating, obftrudiing, opes 
ning, or fome otherlike, working according to the condition of theirnature. The 
manner of our diet is not onely to be framed accordingto thefe, but alfo to be va- 
ried ; for the prefent ftate of fuch as be in health, requircs to be preferved by the ufe 
oflikethings. As hot and moift nourifhment is to be prefcribed to children, as to 
thofe which are hot and moift: and cold,and dric, toold men, astothofe who are 
cold and drie; if fo be that vulgar faying betrue, thar, Health delights in the ufe of 
likethings. Yet becaufe old age how greenc and new begun howfoever it be, is of it 
felfeas it were, a difeafe, it feemeste be more convenient, both to truth and for 
health, that old people fhould cate meatscontrary to their nature, thatis, hor, and 
moift, that fo wee may deferre as muchas we can, the caufes of death, cold and dri- 
nefle, which haften the deftruction of that age. For wee muft refift difeafes by the 
ufe of their contraries, as thofe things which are contrary to nature. For ctherwife, as 
much meate as you give to the ficke, youadde fo much ftrengthtothe difeafe. And 
thefame isthecaufe why Hippocrates faid, that a moift dict is convenient for all fuch 
as arc ficke of feavers, becaufe afeaver isadrie diftemperature. Therefore wee mutt 
diligently ptie into the nature of the difeafe, thar knowing it, wee may endeavour 
to abate its fury by the ufe of contrarics, 

But if cuftome (as they fay) be another nature, the Phyfition muft have a great care 
of it, both in found and ficke. For this fometimes by little and little and infemfiblely, 
changes our naturall temperament, and inftead thereof gives us aborrowed tem per. 
Wherefore if any would prefently or fodainely change a cuftome which is fometimes 
ilJ, into a better, truly hee will bring more harme, than good; becaufeall fodaine 
changes (according the opinion of Hzpocrates ) are dangerous. Wherefore if neceffi- 
tie require, that we (hould withdraw any thing from our cuftcme, we muft doe ir 
by little and little, that fo nature may by degrees be accuftomed ro contraries withour 
violence, or the difturbancc of its ufuall government. For that meate and drinke 
which is fomewhat worfe, but more pleafant and familiar by cuftome, is to be pre- 
ferred (in Hippocrates opinion)before better, but leffe pleafant and accuftomed.Hence 
isit, that Countrie-men doe very well digeft Becfe and Bacon, which commonly they 
ufe ; but will curne into nidorulent vapours, Partridge, Capons, and other meate of 
good nourifthment, fooner than change them into good and laudable Chylus, The 
caufe of which thing is not onely to be attributed unto the propertic of their ftronger, 
and as it wereburning heate,but much moreto cuftome, which by acertaine kinde of 
familiarity, caufeth that meates of hard digeftion are eafily turned into Jau- 
dablebioud. For the force ofcuftome is fo great, that accuftomed meates are more 
acceptable ; whereby it comes to pafle, that while the ftomacke delightsin them, it 
more ftreightly embraces them, and happily digefts them, without any trouble of 
loathing, vomiting, or heavinefle. All the contrary mecte and happen in the ufe of 
meates which are unpleafant to the tafte and ftomacke. For the ventricle abhorring 
thofe things, makes manifeft ho w it is troubled by its acide and nidorulent belchings, 


- fo by Joathing, saufcoufneffe, vomite, heavinefle, paine of the head, and trouble of the 


mcanes 


more nouriths whole body . 


Wherefore we muft diligently enquire, what meates the Patient chiefely deligh- 
ted in, that by offeringthem, his appetite languifhing by reafon of fome great evacu- 
ation, vornit, or the like, may be ftirred up. For it will be betterand more readily re- 
ftored by things acceptable, though they be fomewhat worfe, as we noted alittle be- 
fore out of Hippocrates. By which words hee plainely tavght, that itis the partof a 


good 


P 
4 
ith 
| 
{ 
” 
‘ 
a 
4) 
> 
, 
oat 
@ 


dalfe 
irifh- 
cu- 
10uld 
‘fled : 
ving 
much 
have 
ting, 

, Opes 
The 
De va- 
heufe 
as to 
O are 
fe of 
is of it 
id for 
and 
id dri- 
yy the 
ife, as 
. And 
ll fuch 
e muft 
avour 


at care 
iblely, 
mper. 
times 
modaine 
rece fli- 
doe it 
mithour 
drinke 
be pre- 
tence 
ly they 
cate of 
The 
onger, 
inde of 
o jJau- 
more 
bem, it 
ble of 
of 
Jorring 
chings, 
of rhe 


deligh- 
tevacu- 
dily re- 
ttle be- 
artof a 


good 


concoct, are not to be eaten before thofe which are eafy of digeftion; neither dric 

and aftringent things, before moiftening and lvofing. 

But on the contrary,all flippery,fat, and liquid things, and which are quickly cham- We mutt bes. 
ged ought to goe before, that fothe belly may be moiftened; anithen aftringent with mort ox 
things mutt follow, that the ftemacke, by their helpe, being thur, and drawne toge- quid meas. 
ther, may more ftraitly comprehend the meate on every fide, and better performe 

the Chylification by its proper heate united and joyned together. 

For this caufe Hippocrates Lib.de vik a in acutis, commands thofe thingsto be al- 
wayes eaten inthe morning, which are fit to loofen the belly, and in the evenings 
fuch as nourifh the body. Yet notwithitanding drinke ought notto preceede, ergoe 
before meate, but onthe contrary meate mult preceede drinke, by the order pre- 

{cribed by him. 

Whether ought wee in our eating to have leffe care of the time, than wee have cf Thetime of 
theorder: for the time of cating of fuch as are hcalehfull, ought to be certaine and “"* 
fixt; for at the accuftomed houre,and when hunger prefles,any found man,andwhich 
is at his owne difpofure may eate, but exercife aud accultemed laboures ought to iieetates 
goe before; for itis fit, accerding tothe precept Of Hippocrates, that labour preceed ™** 
meate, whereby the excrements of the third concocion may be evacuaicd, the native 
heate encreafed, and the folid parts confirmed and ftrengthened, which are three 
commoditics of exercife very neceflary to theconvenient taking of meate,But in ficke 
perfons we can fearfe attend, and give heed to thefe circumttance of time, and ac- 


-cuflomed houre of feeding; for that Indication of giving meate tothe ficke, is the 


beft of all, which isdrawne from the motion of the difeafe, and the declining of the 
fit: for it you give meate in feavers, {pecially the ft then taking the Patient, you 
nourith not him, but che difeafe. Forrhe meat@ then eaten, is corruptedin rhe 
ftomacke, and yeelds fic matter forthe difeafe. For meate (as we no.ed before out 
of Hippocrates ) is irength to the found, and a difeafe to the ficke, unleffe it be eaten 
at convenient time, and diligent care be had of the ftrength of the Patient, and great. 
ne fie of the difeafe. 

But neither is it convenient that the meate fhould be fimple, and of one kinde, but We muf nos 
of many forts, and of divers difhes dreffed after different formes, left mature by the S"emarins 
continual] and hate full feeding upon the fame meate, may at the length loathit, and 
ioneither ftraitly containe it, nor well digeft ir; or the flomacke accuftomed to 
one miggte,taking any loathing thereat,may abhorie al! orher:and as there is no defire 
of that we doe not know, fo the deje Gted apperite cannot be delighted and ftizred up, 
with the pleafure of any meate which can be offered. For wee muft netcredit thofe 
fuperfiitious,or too nice Phyfitions,who thinke the digeftionis hindered by the much 
varietie of meates. 

* The matter is farre otherwife, for by the pleafure of what things faever the fto- Variery of 
macke allurcd doth require, it embraces them more ftraitly, and concods them ™*** 
more perfectly, And our nature is defirous of varictic. 

Moreover, fecing our bedy is compofed ofa folid, moift, and airy fubftance, and why variety 
it may happen, thet by fo many laboures, which we are compelled to undergoe, °° "<" 
and fufaine in this life, one of thefe may fuffer a greater diffipation and loffe than 
another ; therefore the ftomacke is neceflarily compelled to fecke more variety, left 
any thing fhonld be wanting to repaire that which is wafted. But alfo the age and {ca- 
fon of the yeare, yeeld Indications of feeding, for fome things are convenient for a Indications of 
young man, fome for an old, fome in Summer, fome in Winter. Wherefore wee feeding, = 
ovght to know what befits each age and feafon. Children need hoz, moift, and much 


nourifhment, which may not onely {uffice to nourifh, but encreafe the body. —— 
cre 


C HaP.s4. Way to ( birurgery. 33 
| good and prudent Phyfirion co fubfcribe to, and pleafe the palate of his patient. a 
Bur fecing that order ts matt beautifull inailchings, it is truly very neceflary in Theorderos 
eating our meate: for how laudable focverthe meates bee in their quantity and qua- our 
litie, howfoever familiar by ufe, and gratefull by cuftome, yet unleffe they be eaten 
in due order, they wall either trouble or moleft the Lomacke, or be ill, or flowly and 
difficultly concoéted ; wherefore we mutt diligently obferve, what meates muft be 
eatenarthe firft, and what atthe fecond courfe; for thofe meates which be hard to 
| 
| 
| 


fndication 
from the time 
of the yeare, 


What motion 
fignifies, 


Three kinds 
ef frictions, 


Hard. 


Gentle, 


Indifferent. 


The nfe of 
exerciles, 


What the fice 
teft time for 
exerci(e, 


eA n Introduélion, or Compendious C wa 


fore we ought to know what befits each age and ieafon. Children need hor, moift,and 


naturally moft hotin the VVinter feaverilh inSuromer ; {othe 


Cuar XV. 


Of Motion and Refi. 


Ere Phyfitians admonifh us, that by the name of Motion, wemufi under- 
ftand all forts of exercifes,as waiking, leaping, running, riding, playing at 
s tennis, carrying a burden, and the like. Friction or rubbing is of this kinde, 
which in times. paftwas in great ule andcfteeme, neither at this day is it altogether 
neglected by Phyfitians, They mention many kinds of it, but they may be all reduced 
to three, as one gentle, another hard, athird indifferent; and that of the whole bo- 
dy, or ornely of fome part thereof. The friction is called hard, which is made bythe 
rough, or frong preMlre of tHe hands, {punges, or a courfe and new linnencloth - it 


drawes together, condenfates, bindes and hardens the flefh, yetif it bee often and 


long ufed,at lesgeh it rarifies,diffolves,attconates and diminifhes the fleth, andany o- 
ther fubftance of the body 3and alfo it cauleth revulfion, and drawee the defluxion of 
humors from one part to another, The gentle fridtionswhich is performed by the 


- dight rubbing. of the hand, and fuch like, doth the contrarie, as foftens, relaxes, and 


makes the skinne fmooth and unwrinekled, yet unlefle it be long continued it doth 
‘none of thefe, worthy to be {poken of, The indifferentkinds contifting inthe meane 
betwixt the ether two, increafeth the flefh, {wells or puffes up the habite of the body, 
becaufe it retaines the bloud and {pirits which it drawes and {uffers them not to be 
diffipateds 
The bencht of exercife is great, for it incseafes naturall heate, whereby better di- 
geflion toliowes, and by that meanes nourifhment, andthe expulfien of the excre- 
ments, and laftly,a quicker motion of the {pirits, to performe their offices in the bo- 
dic, all the waycs and paffages being cleanfed. Befides, it ftrengthens the re{piraw- 
on, and the other actions of the body, confirmes the habite, and all the limbes of the 
body, by the mutuall attrition of the one with the other, whereby it comesto pafle 
they are not {o quickly wearied withlabour. Hencewe {ee that Country people are 
hot to betiredwithlabour, - 
if any wall reape thefe benefits by exercife, it is nece Mary that he take opportunity 
to begiane his cxercife, and that he{eafonably defift from it, not exercifing himfelfe 
violently and withoutdifcretion ; but at certaine times according toreafon. 
Wherefore thebefttime for ¢xercife will be before meate ( that the appetite may 
be encreaicd by augmenting the naturall heate) all the excrements being evacuated, 
left nature being hungry and empty, dee draw and infufe the ill humors contained 
in the guts, and other parts of the body, into the whole habite, the liver, and other 
noble 


Tas 


| 

much nourifhment, which may notonely tonourih, Dut encrcalc the Doay. 

Bil Wherefore they worft endure fafting, and of them, efpecially thofe who are the 

moft lively and fpiritfull. With old men it is otherwile, for becaule their heate is 

rr {mail,they neede littic nourifhment, andare extinguiihed by much. Wherefore old 

men eafily endure to they ovghtto benourifhed with bet and moilt meates, by 

HH which their folid parts, now growing coldand dric, may be heated and moiftencd, as 

i by the {weet nourifhment of fuch like meates. Middle aged men delight in the mode- , 

ratepfe of contraries to temperthe exceffe oftheir too actide heate. Young people 

astemperate are to be preferved by the ufe-of like things. | 

The manner of diet in Winter muf{be hot and inclining to drinefle. Where fore 

then we may more plentifully ule roficmeéates, firong wincs and {pices ; becaufe in 
the Winter feafon we are troubled cold molt. aire, and atthe fame 

time, have much heate inwardly paits, according to Hippocrates, ate 
drinke. Jathe temperate Spring all things muft-be moderate 5 but in Autumnc, by a 
little and little, we muft pafle from our Summer, to our Winter diet, a 

A 

4 

} 

| 


CHarAd. 


noble parts. Neither is it firprefently, after meate, to runne into exercife, left the 
crude humors and meats nor well concocted be carried inte rhe veines. The meafure 
and bounds of exercife mult be, whenthe body appeares more full, the face luokes 
red, fweat beginnes to breake forth, we breathe more ftrongly and quicke, and begin 
to grow weary ; ifany continue exercife longer, itifnefle, and wearineffe affayles his 
joints, and the body flowing with fweate fuffersa loffe of the {piricnous and humid 
fubftance which is not cafily repaired by whichit becomes more cold, and leance- 

The qualitie of exercife which we requite,ts in the midft of exercife,{o that the exe The guilitis 
ercif: muft be nether too flow and idle, neither too firong, nor too weake,ncither too 
hafty nor:emifle but which may-move all the members alike Such exercite is very fic 
for {ound bodies. Burif they bediftemperedithat fort oftexercife is to be made choife 

_ of, which by the qualitic of its exccfie may qaumiect the diftemper of the body,and re- 
it to a ccrtaine medioctitic.. men as are ftuffed with cold, 
grofle,and vifcous humors, fhall hold that kinde of exercife moft fic for them,whict) rong exer- 
is more laborious, vehement, ftrong, andlonger continued. Yet fo, that they doc 
hot enter into it before che firft and fecond concoion, which they may know by ; 
‘the yellowneffe of their urine. Butler fuch 4s abound withthione and cho!cricke hu- 
* morschufe gentle exercifes, and fuch as are free from centention, not expecting the 
..,  finifhing of the fecond concoG&ion, for the more acride hearé of the folic parts de- 
lights ialuch halfe concodéted juices, which otherwife it would fo burne up, all the 
glutinous fubftance thereof being wafted, that they could not be adjoyned, or fafte- 
nedtothe parts. For the repeating, or renewing of exercife, the body fhould bee 
fo often exerciled, as there is adefireto eate. For exercife flirres up and revives the 


Way to ( birurgery. | 


undes- heate which lies-butied and hid inthe body: For digeftion cannot be well performed 
ying at by a fluggith heate ; neither have we any benefit by the meate we eate, unlefle wee 
s kinde, ufe exercife before. 
ogether The laft part ofexercife begun and performed accord ing to reafon, ismamed * the * Ame 
reduced ordering of the bedy, which is performed by an indifferent rubbing, and drying of the ~~ 
10l¢ bo- members ; that fo the {weat breaking forth, the filch of the body and fuch excrements 
¢ bythe lying under the skinne, may be allured and drawne out ; and alfothat the members 
loth < it may be freed from ftifnefic and wearinefle. At this time itis commonly ufed by 
ften and {uch as play at tennis. 
ec any o- But, as many and great commodities arife from exercife conveniently begunne what difcom- 
d by the heaped up in the body commonly produce cruditics, obitru@ions, ftones both nef, 
es, and in the reinecs and bladder, the Goute, Apoplexie, and a thoufand other di- 
it doth feafes. 
emeane 
ot to be C Hap. ie 
etter di- Of Sleepe and Watching. 


e excre- 

| the. bo- AOS, Hat this our fpeech of Sleepeand Watching, which we now intend, may 
reipiraa- Za ayy be more plaine,we will bricfely declare, what commoditie or difcommo- 
es of the ditie they bring, what time and what houre is convenient for both, what 
sto pafie 3S" the manner of lying mutt bee, and the choife thereof; what the 


ople are  dfcames in fleeping, and what paines or heavineffe and cheerefulncfle after fleepe 

| may portend, 
portunity Sleepe is nothing elfe than the reft of the whole body, and the ceflation of the What sleepeis. 
 himfelfe Animall facultie from fenfe and motion. Sleepe is caufed, when the fubftance of 
the braine is pofleffed, andafter fome fort overcome and dulled by a certaine va- 


tite may 


porous, fweete and delightfome humidity; or when the fpirits almoft exhault by 

acuated, performance of {ome labour, cannot any longer fuftainethe weight of rhe body, but 

ontained _ caufereft by a neceflary confequence, by which meanes nature may produce other 
and other fropa the meate by concoétion turned into bloud. 


noble Sleepe 


39 
ody. 
e the | 
ate is | 
re old 
s, by 
Cd, as 
mode- 
eople 
rcfore 
ule in 
c fame 
ate 
{othe 
imuch | 
bac, by 
| 
| 


Fit time for 
ficepe and the 
nature of the 


night, 


Sleepe on the 
day=stime, 


There ought 
to bea mode- 
ration of our 


nights {icepe, 


How to bs 
knoyne. 


What the 
forme and fite 
of our body 
to be 
while we fleep 


Theharme of 
lying onour 
hackes. 


Vpon our bel- 
lies 


The confide« 
ration of 


dreames, 


eA n Introduttion, or Compendious 


Sleepe fitly taken much helpes the digeftion of the parts, becaufe in the time of refi, 
the heat, being the worker of all concoction, Is carryed backe to them, together 
with the {pirits. Neither doth fleepe only give cafe tothe wearyed members, but alfo 
leffens our cares and makes us to forget our labours, 
The night is a fit tame to fleepe and totake our reft in, as inviting lleepe by its mOi- 
fture,filence and darkuefle. For the Heat and Spirits in the thick obfcurity of nighr, 
are driven inand retained in the center of the body ; as on the contrary by the 
daily and as it were friendly and familiar light of the Sun, they are allured & drawne 
forth into the fuperficies, and outward partof the body ; from whence they Icave 
fleeping and beginto wake, Befides alfo,which makes not alitic, to that opportuni- 
ty and benefit which wee looke for from fleepe, the night feafon fuffices for the 
worke of jut and perfect concoction. Which is one reafon amengft many that fleep 
on the day time may be hurtfull, For wee are wakencd from our fleepe by the heat 
and fpirits ‘called forth to the skinne either by the light, or noife on the day ume, 
before that the concoction which was begunbe finithed. But that fleepe cannot bur 
belight which comes without necefhity of fleeping. Wherefore the concoction 
being attempted,bur not perfected, the ftomacke is filled with crudities, diftended 
with acide or foure belchings, and the braine troubled with grofle vapours and ex- 
crementitious humidities. From: whence preceeds paine and heavines of the head, 
and ftore of cold difeafes. But although fleepe on the night time be whelfome, yet 
it is fie, thatit be reftrained within the limits of an indifferent time. For that which 
exceeds hinders the evacuation of excrements both upwards and downewards: but 
in the meane time the heate which is neuer idle, drawes from them fome portion 
or vapour into the veines, principall parts and habite of the body,tobecome mat- 
ter for fome difeafe. VVemvft meafure thistime, not by the {pace of houres, bur 
by the finifhing the worke of concodion,whichis performed in fome, fooner than 
inetherfome. Yetthat which is longeft is perfe&ted and done in feaven, or eight 
houres. The ventricle fulbfiding and falling into its {elfe and its proper coats, and 


the urine tinGtured yeallow, gives perfe& judgment thercof. For on the contrary the 


extenfion of the ftomacke, acide belching, paine of the head, and heavines of the 
whole body, {hew that the concodtionis unperfea, 

In fleeping we muft have {peciall care of our lying downe, for firft we muft lye on 
our right fide, that fo the meat may fallinto the bortome of our ftomacke, which 
being fefhy and leffe membranous, is the hotter, and more powerfull to affimulate. 
Thena litle after we muftturne upon our left fide, that & the Liver with its Lobes. 
as with hands may on every fide embrace the ventricle, and as fire put vnder a Kettle, 
haftenthe concoCtion, Laftly,towards morning it will not be unprofitable to turne 
againe upon our right fide, that by this {cituation the mouth of the ftomacke being 
opened,the vapoures which arife from the elixation of the Chy/ws may have free: 
paflage. Lying uponthe backeis wholy to be avoided. for from hence rhe Reines 
are inflamed, the Stone is bred, Palfies,;Convulfien,and al! difeafes which have their 
originall from the defluxion into the fpinall marrow, and to the Nerves taking be- 
ginning from thence. To lye upon the belly is not unprofitable for fuch as have 
ufed to lye fo, if they be nottroubled with defluxions into the eyes; for fothe hu- 
mor will more éafily flow into the partaffeéted. But thus the worke of concoction 
is not a litle furthered,becaufe by that forme of lying, not onely the inward heate is 
contained and gathered together about the ventricle, but the encompailing warme- 
nefleof the foft feathers of the bed, aides and affiftsir. 

Neither are the Dreames which we have in our fleepetobe negleged, for by chic 
diligent confideration of thefe, the affeftions and fuperfluous humors which havc 
cherfe power in the body are marvailoufiyknowne, For thofe who have ragine 
Cheler running upand downe their bodyes while they fleepe, all things to them 
appceare bright, fhining, fiery, burning, full of noyfe and contention, Thofe who 
abound with Phlegme dreame of floods, fnowes, fhowers and inundations and {a!- 
ling from high places. Thofe who are Melancholy drcame of capingsand gulfes in 
the earth, thicke and obfcure darkneffe, {mokes, caves, and ail blacke and difmal! 
things. Butthofe whofe bodyes abound in blood dreame of mariages, dances, cm- 


bracings 


- 
4 
The ule o 
cepe, 
i” 
i 
|| 
q 
7 
| 
| 
; 
| 
ei 
4 


ercuni- 
for the 
at {leep 
he heat 
my time, 
not but 
coction 
{tended 
and ex- 
c head, 
me, yet 
ne which 
rds: but 
portion 
ne Mate 
res, but 
yner than 
or eight 
oats, and 
trary the 
s of the 


uft lye on 
e, which 
limulate, 
ts Lobes, 
a Kettle, 
eto turne 
ke being 
ave treer 
ie Reimes 
have their 
aking 
as have 
fothe hu- 
oncocticn 
d heatc is 
Warme- 


for by the 
hich have 
ve raging 
sto them 
hofe who 
s and fal- 
Bd oulfes in 
d difmall 
ances, em- 
bracings 


bracings of women, feafls, jefts, laughter,of orchards and gardens;and to conclude, of 
all rhings pleafant and {plendent. 


Alfo we muft obferve how the Patient doth after fleepe, whether more lively and 
cheerefull,or morc heavy, for by the epinion of Hippocrates, 


Cum labor &[ommo eff , lethalemcollice morbum : 


Aphor.1,2&, 
Sin profit formnus, mibil hinc lethaletimendum eff. 2, 


Paine fleepe enfuing, an ill difeafe doth fhow : 
But if ileepe profit bring, no harme from thence will flow. 


And as fleepe fo watching, if it exceede meafure, is hurtfull; for it hurts the tem- 
perature of the braine, weakens the fenfes, waltes the {pirits, breeds crudities ,hea- 
vinefle of the head, falling away of the flefh, and leanenefle over all the body, 
and toconclude, it makes ulcers more dry, and fo confequently rebellious , dith- 
cult to heale, and maligne. There are many other things may be fpoken of fleepe 
and watching, but thefe may futhce a Chirurgion. 


HA Pe X V I, 
Of Repletion, and Inanition, or Emptinegc. 


Here are, to bee fhort, two forts of or of all exceffe one is The kinds of 


= } of a fimple qualitie, without any defluxion, or focictie of any hu- meme: 
==, mor, as appeares in diftempers without matter: the other is of quan. Exceiles 


Sa titie and mafle, thebedy being diftended with too much meate, ortoo 

orcat quantitie of humors ; from whence proceed an infinite number of difeafes. 

They callthe Repletion of meates, fatictie or fulncfle, and it is of two kinds: the 

one which is called * Repletionor Fulnefle to the veflels; the other * Repletion «ze. 

tothe firengrh, ples 
Wee judge of fatietie to the veficls,, by the diftention and {welling of the ™ a 


veines and intrailes, as the ftomacke. Wee call fatietie to the firength, when the 


body is loaded with more meates, than itcan well beare. But alfo there is a double 
Repletion of humors. For either itis of fome one humor, or of al! the humors , 
they calithis by a-peculiar name Plethora.Por Galen defines Plethera an equall exce fle 
of all thehumors. For if at any time he define a P/ethora to be anexcefle of bloud “?* 
onely, then verily by the name of bloud, he underftands ancquallcomprelienfionof 
the foure humors; asit istaughtin Phyficke {chooles. 

The Repietion which is caufed by fome one humor, is termed by Gales What cacoz 
in the place before mentioned, Cacochymsia, (that is,an evill juyce ) whether the “2 
Repletion proceede of a Cholericke, Melancholicke, Phlegmaticke, or ferous 
humor, | 

Now Inanition, or cvacuation is no other thiag than the expulfion, oreffufion, Th minds 
of humors which are troublefome, either in quantitie, or qualitie. Ofe- 
vacuations, fome are univerfall, which expell fuperfluous humors from the whole 
body; fuch are purging, vomiting, tran{piration, {weats, phlebotomie. Some par- 
ticular which are performed onely to evacuate fome part, as the braine by the nofe, 
palate, eyes, earcs; the lungs by the weazon; the ftomacke by vomite and ftoole, 
the guts by ftoole, the liver and the fpleene by urine andordure. The{e evacuations 
are fometimes performed by nature, freeing it felfe of that which is oublefome to 


“It; otherwhiles by the Art of the Phytirion ia imitation of nature. 


__ And againe,one of thefe is good and requifite, when onely the humor which 
is hurefull, either in quantitie of qualitie, is evacuated; The other not requilite, or 
E immoderate 


a reit > 
sether 
put alfo 
| 
night, 
Dy the 
irawne 
y le ave 
>» 
A= 
A 
i 
| 
| 
| 
4 q 


eA n Introduétion, or Compendious Cuar.y7. 


The commo- 
dities of mo- 

cerate (crat- 

ching. 


The forceot 


Salivation, 


The whole 
body is alfo 
purged by 
urines, 


gu 


We muft ob< 
ferve three 
things in ever 
ry cyacuation, 


_ atonetime, but by little and little, and at feverall times, otherwife not a little quai 


immoderate, when the profitable humors together with the unprofitable , are 

ed. 
Trani evacuations foever thefe be, they are performed and done, cither bv the 
fcratching and rubbing of the skinne, as whena cholericke, falt, or ferous humor, 
or fome windinefle lying betweene the skinne and the fiefh, caufe itching. For by 
{cratching the skinne, it gets paflage out, which is manifeft by the effluxe of a {fe- 
rous mattcr burning, or cauling {cabbs aud ulcers, if the humor be fomewhat grofle, 
but infenfible and not fo maniteft, ifit be windinefle, the skinne by that rubbing be- 
ing rarefied, and the groffe flatulency atecnuated. VVhercfore they doe ill who hin- 
der their Patients from fcratching, unleffe they fcratch fo cruelly and hard, thar 
there may bee danger, (by reafon of the great heate and paine thereby caufed) of 
fome defluxion or falling downe of humors into the part. 

Or thefe evacuations are performed by much matter evacuated frow an opened 
Bile, orrunning ulcer, a Fiftula, or fuch like fores, Or by {weats which are very 
eood and healthful), efpecially in fharpe difgafes, if they proceede from the whole 
body, and happen on the criticall dayes. By vomit, which often violently drawes 
thefe humors from the whole body, even fromthe utmoft joints, which purging 
medicins could not evacuate, as wee may fee inthe Palfie, and Sciatica, or Hip- 
eoute, By fpitting, as in all who are fuppurated either in the fides or lungs. By Sali- 
vation, or 2 Flegmaticke fluxe by the mouth, as inthofe who are troubled with the 
French Pockes, By {necfing and blowing thenofe; for by thefethe braine oppreft 
with moifture, disburdeneth its felfe, whether it be done without, or with the helpe 
of fiernutatorics and errhines; wherefore children, and fuch as have fomewhat 
moift braines purge themfelves often this way. By hicket and belching; for by 
thefe the windineffe contained in the ftomacke, is often expelled. By urine, for by 
this not oncly Feavers, but which is more to bee admired, the French-Pockes 
hath often beene terminated and cured. 

For there have beene fome troubled with the Pockes, in whoma fluxe of the 
vicious and venenate humor could not by undions of quickfilver be procured, ei- 
ther from the mouth, or belly ; yet have beene wonderfully freed by aboundance of 
urine, both from danger of death and their difeafe.By bleeding ; for nature hath often 
found a way for grievous difcafes, efpecially in young bodies, by bleeding at the 
nofe, and by their courfes in women. By a fluxe, or laske, purgation, {weats, infen- 
fible evacuation and tranfpiration; for fo tumors, the matter being brought to 
{uppuration, doe fometimes vanifh away andare diflolyed , both of their owne 
accord, asalfo by diffolving, or difcufling medicins, We doe the fame by exercife, 
diet, hot-houfes, long tleepe, waking, and fhedding of teares, By fucking, as 
with cupping glafics and horfe-leaches in wounds made by venemous bi- 
tings. 

_ In all fuch kinds of evacuations, wee muft confider three things, the quantity, 
quality,and manner of evacuation. As for an example, when an Empycma is opened, 
the matter which runnes out, ought to bee an{werable in proportion to the purulent 
matter, which was contained inthe capacity of the breafts ; otherwife, unleffe al! 
the matter bee emptied, there may happenarelap{e ; the matrer fhould be white, 
foft, equall, and nothing ftinkiag: Laftly, you muft let it forth not altogether, and 


titie of the {pirits and heate doth flow out together, with the unprofitablemaatter, 


bul, 
th 
Vi 
i. 
fi 
dc 
a 
if 
fu 
a ¢ 
is 
* 
| 
| 
ther 
Feay 
| 
why 
ew. 


le, are 


bv the 
umor, 
For by 
f a fe- 
erOfle, 
ing be- 
ho hin- 
‘d, that 
ed) of 


opened 
re very 
e whole 
drawes 
purging 
or Hip- 
By Sali- 
with the 
oppreft 
Bhe helpe 
mmewhat 
for by 
e, for by 
-Pockes 


e of the 
ured, Cl- 
dance of 
sath often 
ing at the 
ts, infen-~ 
ought to 
ir owne 
exercile, 
king, as 
mous bi- 


quantity, 
sepened, 
purulent 

nleffe all 
be white, 
ther, and 
ttle quan- 
ple matter, 


and f{pirits flowing thither, and the nourifhing dew or moifture, watcring and 


Way to Chirurgery. 39 


Cuar. XVIII. 


of the Perturbations, or Pasfions of the minde, 


and lively colour. For it is likely, that the facultic it felfe is ftirred by the objet, by 


whofe powerthe heart it felfe is moved. 
For itis firft neceflary, before wee be moved by any Paffions, that the {enfes in From whenss 
their proper feates, in which they ate feldome deceivcd, apprehend the objets, 
prop y » apprene J > their force, 

and ftraitas meflengers carrie them to the common fenfe, which fends their concei- 

ved formesto all the faculties. And then, that cach facultie, as a Iudge may a frefh 

examine the whole matter, how it is, and conccive inthe prefented objeGs feme 

fhew of good, or ill, to bee defired, or fhunned. For what man that was well in his 

wits, did ever fall into a laughter, unlefle he formerly knew, or faw fomewhat {aid or 


done 2 which might yecld occafion of laughtct > Therefore Joy proceeds from the The rafon 
heart, for the thing caufing mirth or joy, being conceived, the facultie moves the ° loy, 
heart, which thaken and moved by the faculty which hath dominion over it, is di- 
Jated and opened, as ready to embrace the exhilarating obje@. But inthe meane 
time by the force of that dilatation, it fends forth much heate, and {pirits together 
with the blond into allthe body. A great part of which comminy te the face, di 
lates it, the forehead is fmooth and plainc, the eyes looke bright, the checkes 
become red, as died with Vermilion, the lips and mouth are drawen together, and 
made plaine and fmozh; fomehave their checkes dented with two little pits 
(which from the effets are called laughing checkes )*becaufe of the contraction 
or curling, which the mufcles {after by reafon of their fulneffe of bloud and {pirirs, 
all which to be briefe is nothing but to laugh. 

Joy recreates and quickens all the faculties, ftirres up the {pirits, helpes con- 
coction, makes the body to bee better likeing, and fattens it, the heate, bloud, 


The effets ef 
loy. 


refrefhing allthe members; from whence itis, that of allthe Paflions of the.minde, 
this onely is profitable, fo that itexceed not micafure ; for immoderate and unac- 
cuftomed joy, carries fo violently the bioud and fpirits, from the heart, intothe habic 
of the body, that fodaine and unlookt for death enfues, by a f{peedy decay of the 
firength, the lafting fountaine of the vitall humour being exhaulted. Which 
thing principally happens te thofc who are lefle heartie, as women and olc- 
mich. 

Anger caufeth the fame effafion ef heate ia us, but farre {peedicr than joy ; 4 
therefore the {pirits and humors are fo inflamed by it, that it often caufes putrid “"**” 
Feavers, efpecially if the body abound with any illbumor. 
Sorrow, or griefe dries the body bya way quite contrary tothat of anger, be- sorrow, 
caule by thisthe heart is fo ftraitened, the heate being almott extinct, that tle accu- 
itomed generation of fpirits cannot be performed ; and if any be generated, hey 
cannot freely pafle intothe members withthe bloud; wherefore the vitall facultic 
1s weakened, the lively colour of the face withers and decaies, and the body waftes 


‘away witha lingering confumption. 


Feare in like fort drawes in and calls backe the {pirits, and not by little andlittle Beare: 


asin forrow, but fedainely and violently; hereuponthe fae growes fodainely = 


| 
| “Tae He Perturbations, are commonly called the accidents of the mindes | 
iT By becaufe, as bodily accidents from the body, fo may thefe be prefent and aon 
oe Re abfent from the minde, wirhout the corruption of the fubje@. The know- miade, are 
ledge of thefe muft not be lightly pafled over by the Chirurgion ; for 
they ftir up great troubles inthe bodics, and yeeld occafion of many & great difeafess Their force. 
of which things, loy, Hope and Love, may give a apparent teftimony. For by thefe , 
motions the heate and {pirits are fometimes gently, fometimes violently diffuled o- 
ver all the bedy, for the enjoying of the prefent, or hoped for good, For then the 
heart isdilated, as toembrace the thing beloved, and the face is died witha rof 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


eA n Introdutiion, or Compendious Cuapugs 


Shame. 


Shamefaft - 
nefic, 


the extreame parts cold, allthe body trembles or fhakes, the beily in fome is lco- 
fed, the voice as it were Maies in the jawes, the heart beate with a violent pulfation, 
becaufe it isalmoft oppreft by.the heare, ftrangled by the plentic of bloud, and {pi- 
ritsabondantly rufbing thither; The haire alfo ftands upright, becaufe the heate 
and bloud are retired to the inner parts, and the urmoft parts are more cold and 
drie than ftone ; by reafon whereof the utmoft skiane and the pores, in which the 
rootes of the haires are faftencd, are drawne together. 

Shame is a certaineafiection mixed, as it were, of Anger and Feare; there- 
fore if, in that conflict of, as it were, contending pafhions,Feare prevaile over Anger, 
the face waxeth pale, ( the bloud flying backe to the heart;)and thefe or thefe Symp- 
tomes rife, according to the vehemency of the contracied and abated heat. But if 
on the contrary, Anger get the dominion over Feare, the bloudrunnes violently to the 
face, the eyes looke ved, and fometimesthey even fome at the mouth, 

There is another kindeof fhame, which the Latines call Verecandia ( wee Shame- 
fa(tnefle) in which there is a certaine fluxe, and refluxe of the heate, and 
bloud firft recoiling to the hearr, then prefently rebounding from thence againe. 
But that motion isfogentle, rhat the heart thereby fuffers no oppreffion, nor defe& 
of {pirits; wherefore no accidents worthy tobe fpoken of, arife from hence : this 
affeét is familiar to young maid es and boves; who if they blufh for a fault commit- 
ted unawares, or through carele {neffe, it is thoughtan argument of a vertuous and 
good difpolition. 

But anagony, which isa mixt paifion of a ftrong feare, and vehement anger, in- 
volves the heart in the danger of both motions , wherefore by this paffion, the vi- 
tall faculrie is brought into very great danger. To thefe fixe Paflions of the minde, 
allother may be revoked, as Hatred and Difcordto Anger: Mirth and Boalting, to 
loy; Terrors ,Frights and Swoundings, to Feare ; Envy, Defpaire and Mourning, to 
Sorrow. 

By thefe it is evident ,how much the paflions of the minde can prevaile, to alter 
and overthow the ftate of the body; and that by no other meanes, than that by 
the comprefiion and dilatation of the heart, they diffufe and contract thef pirits 
“ett, and heate; from whence happens the diffipation, or oppreflions of thefe 

pirits. 


Why thefirftt The fignes of thefe Symptomes quickly thew themfelves in the faces the heart, 


fignes of pal= 


fions of the 


by reafon of the thinneffe of the skinne in that part,as it were painting forth the notes 


mindeappeare Of its affeCtions. And certainely the face isa part fo fit to difclofe all the affeGions 


tn the face, 


Theule of 


paflions of the 


minde, 


of the inward parts, that by it you may manifeftly know an old man froma young, 
a woman from a man, a temperate perfon from an untemperate, an Ethiopian from 
an Indian, a Frenchman frem a Spaniard, 2 fad man from a merry, a found trem 
a ficke, aliving fromadead. Wherefore many afirme that the manners, and tho{c 
things which we keepe fecret and hid in our hearts, may be underftood by the face 
and countcnance. 

Now wee have declared what commoditie and difcommoditie may redoundto 
nan from thefe forementicned paflions, and have fhewed that anger is profitable to 
none, unleffe by chance to fome dull by reafon of idlenefle, oroppre& with fome 
cold, clammy and phlegmaticke humor ; and feare convenient for none, unleffe 
peradventure for fuch as are brought into manifeft and extreme danger of their life 
by fome extraordinary {weat, immoderate bleeding, or the like unbridled evacua- 
tion, Wherefore it behoves a wife Chirurgion to have a care, left he inconfiderately 
pu any Patient committed to his charge into any of thefe paffions, unlefle there 

ee fome neceffitie thereof, by reafon of any of the forementioned occafions. 


C ware 


Hippocrat lib, 

| 

| 

| 

+ 

An agonic, 

gu 
Cii 

tal! 
ded 
not 
| the 
the 
COn 
cele 
lea 
lice 
| 
en 
Di 
pr OQ 
is fou 
Cold 
and 
equal! 
: 


is loo- 
fation, 
nd {pi- 
e heate 
old and 

ich the 


there- 
Anger, 
Symp- 

But if 
ly tothe 


Shame- 
e, and 
-againe. 
yr defe& 
ce : this 
ommit- 


ous and 


, toalter 
that by 
e{ pirits 
of thefe 


e heart, 
he netes 
fections 


young, 


trem 
d thoie 
the face 


joundto 
mitable to 
h fomic 
unlefie 

their life 
evacua- 
mderatcly 
{ie there 
ONS. 


* 


an from 


Way 


XIX, 


Of things againft Nature, and firft of the Caufe of a Difeafe, 


Yaa Aving intreated of things naturall, and not naturall, now it remaines wee Whar things 
fpeake of things ( which are called) againft nature, becaufe that they are 
as arcaptto weaken andcorrupt the of our body. And they bee 
three in number; The caufe ofa difcafe, a Difeafe, and aSymptome. The what. and 
caufe of a difeafe is an affe& againft nature, which caufes the difeafe. Which is di- how many 
vided into Internall and Externall. The Externall, originall or primitive comes ditcatesbe. 
from fomeother place, and outwardly intothe body, fuch be meatesof ill nourifh- Pheer 
ment, and {uch weapons and hoftilely wound the body. geri 
The Internall have their eflence and feate in the body, and are fubdivided inte *rerr2*™ 
antecedent and conjunG, Thatis called an antecedent caufe, which as yet doth not 
actually make a difeafe, but goes neare to caufe one ; fo humors copioutly fiowing, 
or ready to flow into any part, are theantecedent caufes of difeafes ; The conjunG Internal cons 
caufe is that which adtually caufesthe difeafe,and is fo immediately joined in affinitie ™"* 
m Ls difeafe, that the difeafe being prefent, it is prefent, and being abfent, it is 
abfent: 
Againe, of all fuch caufes, fome are borne together with us,as the over-great 
guanritie,and maligne qualitie of both the feedes ,and the meaftruous bloud, from 
a Parents are caufes of many difeafes, and {pecially of thole which are called 
ereditary. 
Orher aves to us after wee bee borne, by our diet and manner of life, a firoke, - 
fall, or fuch other like. Thofe which bee bred with us, cannot be wholy avoi- 
ded or amended , but fome of the other may be avoided, as a ftroke and fall; fome 
not, as thofe which neceflarily enter into our body, as Aire, Meate, Drinke, and 
the like, 

But if any will reckon up amongft the internali, inherent, and inevitable caufes, Thecongenir, 
the daily, hay hourely diffipation of the radicall moifture, which the naturall heate 
continually preyes upon; Edoenot gainefay it, no mofe than that divifion of caufes : 
celebrated and received of Philofophers, divided inte Materiall, Formal], Efficient, 
and Finall; forfuch a curious contemplation belongs not to a Chirurgion, whom 


I onely intend plainely to inftru@. Wherefore that wee have written may fuf, 
fice him. 


— 


C nar. XX, 
Of 4 Difeaf?. 


Difeafe is an affe& again{t nature, principally and by ic felfe, hurting 
YING and depraving the aGtion of the part in whichit refides, The divilion of yarious, 
2 Difeafe is threefold; Diftemperature, ill Conformation, andthe Solu. * 
tion of Continuity, 

Diftemperature is adifeafe of the fimular parts diffenting, andchanged from their 4 piemps: 
Proper and native temper. That digreffion from the native temper, happens two sature, 
Wayes ; either by a fimple diftemperature from the excefle of one qualitie; and this 
1s fourefold; Hor, Cold, Moift, and Drie; or by a compound diftemperature, by 
the exceffe of two qualities, which alfo is fourefold, Hotand Moift; Hot and Drie, 

Cold and Moift; Coldand Drie. Againe, every diftemper is the fault of one fimple 
and fingle qualitie, as an inflammation; or hath fome vicious humors joyned with it, 
asa Phlegmon; Againe,a Diftemperature is either equall; as in a Sphace/e ; of unc- 


equall, as ina Phlegmon, beginning, orincreafing. 


Il Conformity is a fault of the organicall parts , whofe compofure pattieite 


E 3 is 


ie 
| 
pe A in 
the vi- 
inde 
ting. fo 
* 
rine. tO 
‘ 
C 
HA Pe 
‘ 
Pt 


Solution of 4 
Continuitie g difeafe common, both to the fimular and organicall parts, acquiring di- 


What aSymp- 


tome 


Three kindes 
thereof, ishurt,; I fay hurt, becaufe it is either abolifhed, weakened, or depraved; fo bliad- 


is thereby depraved. This hath foure kindes ; the firlt is when the igure of the part 
is faultic, either by nature or accident, or fome cavitieabolifhed, asifa pare, 
which nature would have hollow for fome certaine ulc, doe grow or clofe up ; er 
laftly,ifthey be rough, or fmooth otherwife than they fhould, as ifthat part which 
fhould be rough, be {moork, or the contrary. Another isin the magnitude of the 
part increafed, or diminilhed conrrarie to nature, The third is ia the number of the 

arts, increafed, or diminifhed ; as if a hand have but foure or elfe fixe fingers. The 
fourth is inthe fice and mutuall connexion of the parts, as if the parts which fhould be 
naturally united and continued bec pluckt afunder, as happens tn luxations; Orthe 
contrary. The third general] kinde of difeafe, is the folution of continuitie, 


verlitie of names, acccording to the varietie of the parts in which it re- 
fides, 


CHAP. XXI. 


Of 4 Symptome. 


ie F doc not inthis place take the word Symptome in the moft gencrall accep- 
% “s tation, for every change or accident which happens to man befides his 

SeAVee owne nature; but more refervedly and {pecially, onely for that change 
which the difeafe brings, and which followes the difcafe, as a fhadow doth 


the body. 
There be three kindes of a Sy mptome propeily taken, The Crft is, when the aGion 


peffe is adeprivation, or abolifhing of the action of feeing ; dulnc fle of fight, is a dimi- 
nution, or weakening thereef; and a fuffufion, fuch as happens at the beginning of 
a Cararaét, when they thinke flies, haires, and {uch like bodies flie too and fro be- 
fore their eyes,isa depravation of the fight. 

The fecond is a fimaple afie@ of the body, and a full fault of the habite thereofbeing 
changed, happening by the mutation of fome qualities, fuch is the changing of the 
native colour into a red by a Phlegmon,and into a livide and blacke by a Gangrene; 
{uch is the filthy ftench the nofe affeed with a Pol/ypus fends forth ; the bitter tafte, 
in fuch as have the Iaundife ; and the roughand rugged skinne in them which are 
Leprous. 

‘The third is the fault of the overmuch retention of excrements which thould 
be expelled, and expulfion of {uch as fhould be retained ; for the evacuation of an 
humor profitable both in quantitie and qualitie, isegainft nature, as bleeding in a 
body not full of ill humors, nor Plethoricke; and alfo the retention of things hurt- 
full in fubfance, quantitie and qualitic, as the Courfesin women, the urine , and the 


ftone inthe bladder. 
Crap, XXII. 
Of Indications. 
ee Fic knowledge and exercife of Indications befits that Chirurgion, whom 
no blinde rathneffe of fortune, but reafon ; no chance, but counfell direés 
Boa, inthe undertaking and performing the workesef his Art. Fer an Indica- 


tion is a certaine fafe and {hort way, which leades the Phyfition, as by thehand, to 
“x attainement of his purpofed end, of preferving the found, or curing the 
cke. 
erg en For Galew doth define an Indication to be a certaine infinuation of whatisto bedone, 


iron or 2 quick & judicious apprehen‘ion of that which may profit or hurt. And as Faulco- 
ners, 


rare 
in { 
nity 
fron 
part 
ent 
app) 
prec 
ther 
ratul 
be n 
wave 
ditlo} 
thins 


canng 
apr, 


thar 


deepal 


they a 
elves 
difeaf 
tunic! 
cruel 
curab 


Bea: ( 

a 

j 

j 

J 

3 
| 
ear 

’ 

4 
‘ 
ff 

$ ‘ 

| 
4 4 | 


ne part 
apart, 
Up 5 or 
which 
of the 
of the 
s. The 
auld be 
Orthe 
inuitie, 
ne di- 


accep- 
les his 


change 
doth 


) bliad- 
a dimi- 
ning of 
tro be- 


t being 
the 
talte, 
ich are 


fhould 
of an 
gina 
rs hurt 


ind the 


whom 
directs 
Indica- 
and, to 
ng the 


e done, 
‘guico- 
ners, 


C HAP.22. 


Way to hirurgery. 42 


ners, Mariners, Plow men, Soldiers, & ail manner of Artizans, have their peculiar termes 
and words, which areneither knowne, nor ufed by the vulgar ; fo this word Indicari- 

on is proper and peculiarto Phifitions and Chirurgeons, as a Terme of Arte not 
vulgar;by confideration of which, 2s by fomte figne, of fecret token, they are admo- 

nifhed what is to be done to reftore health, or repel! an imminent danger. 

There are three prime and principal! kinds of Indications,every of which isfubdi- The kinds ot 
vided into many other. The firft is from thingsnaturall. The fecond from thefe things meee 
which are termed not naturall. The third from thofe things which are contrary to n2- 
ture. Things natural! thew they mutt be preferved by their like, and in the compaffe 
of thefe are contained all the Indications which are drawne from thenature of the 
Patient, that is, from his ftrengrh, temper, age, fexe,habir, cuftome, dict. 

Things nor naturall may be doubted as uncertaine, for one while tacy indicate 
the fame things with things naturall,that is,they coindicate withthe ftrenech temper 
and the reft ; otherwhiles they confene with things againft nature thar is.they coindi- 48, 9 
cate with the difeafe. Wherfore Galen when he faith chat Indications are drawn from 4-9. 
three things; The difeafe; The nature af the Patient, and the encompaffing aire,by ° 
propofing the familiar example of theaire, hee would have us to underftand the o-« 
ther things nor naturall; becaufe wee may fhun, or emDdrace them more or Ieflz as 
we will our felves, but we muft, whether we will or no, endure the prefent fate of 
theaire. Therefore the aire indicates fomething tous, or rather coindicates ; for ifit 
nowrith thedifeate, as confpiring wich ic, ic will indicate the fame thac the difeafe, 
that is,that it muft be preferved in the fame ftate. 

Things contrary to nature indicate they muft be taken away by their contraries ; [posers 
thereforethat we may moreaccurately and fully handle all che Indications drawame things natural, 
from things naturall, we muft note, that fome of thicfe are conceraing the [trength of 
the Patient, by care to preferve which,we are otren compelled for a time to forfake 
the cure ofthe proper difeafe:for foa great fhaking happening at the beginning ofan 
or teaver, we are often forced to give fuftenance to the Patiear, to ftrengthen 
the powers fhaken by the vehemency of the thaking, which thing notwithftanding 
lengthens both the general! and particular fitts ofthe ague. Odxher pertaine tothe 
remper, other refpe& the habite,if the Patient be flender, if fat, ifwellflefhr, ifef a 
rarc, or denfe conftitution of body. Ortherrefp=c& the condition of the oart affe ted 
in fubftance, con{iftence, foftneffe, hardnefle, quicke or dull fenfe, forme, figure ,mag- 
nitude, fite, connexion, principallity, fervice, function and ufe, From ail thefe, as 
from nores the skilfull Chirurgion will draw Indications according tothe time and 
part affected: for the fame things are not fit for fore eyes, which were conveni- 
ent for the cares, neither dotha Phlegmon in the jawes and throat admit the fame 
formeof cure, as it doth in other parts ofthebody. Fornonecan thercoutwarcly 
apply repercuffives, without prefent danger of fuffocation, Sothere is no ule of re- 
precuffives in defluxioas of thofe parts which in fite are neere the principall. Nei- parts affected 
ther muft thou cure awounded Nerve and Mulcle, after one manner. The rempe— °° eset 
rature of a partjas Moifture, alwayes indicates its prefervation, although the difeafe 
be moift and give Indication of drying, asanulcer, The principallity of a part al- 
wayes infinuates an Indication of aftringent things, although the difeale require 
diflolving, as an Ob{truction of the Liver; for otherwife unleffe you mixe aftringent 
things withdiffolving,you will fo diffolve the ftrength of the part, that hereatter ir 
cannot fuffice for fanguification. Ifthe texture ofa part be rare, it fhewes 1t is leffe 
apt, or prone to obfiruction; if denfe,it is more abnexious tothat difeafe; hence it 1s 
that the Liveris oftencr obftru&ted than the Spleene, Ifthe part be f{ciruate more 
deepe, or remote, it indicates the medicines muft be more vigorous and liquid, char 
they may fendtheir force fo farre. The fenfibleneffe, or quicke-fenfe of the part, 
gives Ludication of milder medicines, than paradventur the tignes, or notes of a great 
difeafe require. Forthe Phifition which applies things equally tharp: to the Horny 
tunicle of the eye being ulcerated,and to rhe Legge, muft needs be accounted CiREr yaications 
crueli,orignorant. Each fexe and Age hath its Indications, for fome difeatcs are fromthe ages, 
curable in youth, which we muft not hope to cure ia old age; for hoariencfle and 


gteat diftillations in very old men,admit no digeftion,as Hippocrates {2ith ; 


\ 
f 
\ 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
\4 
| 
* 


Aphor.6¢ 


Fromour 


Diet, 


Hatred arifing 


frem fecret 


propestics, 


Indications 
taken trom 
things againit 
natures 


CHAP.22, 


eA n Introduétion, or Compendious 


Nunquam decrepitus Branchum coguit, atque Cory zat. 


The teeble Sire, for age that hardly goes, 
Ne're well digefts the hurtfull Rheume or pofe, 


Morcover according to his decree the difeafes of the Reines, and whatfoever 
aines moleft the bladder.are diflicultly healed in old MCN ; and alfo reafon per- 
{wades that a Quartaine admits no cure in Winter, and {carfe a Quotidian, and 
ulcersin like manner are more hard toheale in Winter; that hence we may under- 
ftand certaine Indications to be drawne from time ;and to imcreafe the credit of the 
variety and certainty of Indications, fome certaine ume, and feafons inthofe times 
command us to make choife of Medicines ; for as Hépocrates teftifes ; 


Ad Canis ardorem facilis purgatio non ¢ft. 
In Dogdayes heat it is not good, 
By purging tor to clenfethe blood. 


Neither fhale thou fo well prefcribe a flender dict in Winter, asin the Spring, for 
the aire hath its indications. For experience teaches us, that wounds of the head 
are farre more Gifficultly and hardly curéd, at Rome, Naples,and Rochell in Xan- 
toigne. Butthetimes of difeafes yceld the principall Indications, for fome Medi- 
Cines are oncly to be ufed at the beginning and end of difeafes,others at the encreafe 
and vigour of the difcafe, We muft not contemnae thofe Indications which are drawn 
from the vocation of life,and manner of Diet;- for you muft otherwife deale with 
the painfull Husbandman (whenhe is your Patient ) which leades his life {paringly 
and hardly, than with the Citizen who lives daintily and idlely. To this manner 
of life and Diet may be referred a certaine fecrt and occult property, by which many 
are not onely ready to vomite at cating of fome meats, but tremble over all their 
bodyes when they heare them but {fpokenof. I knew a prime Nobleman of the 
French Nobility, who was fo perplext at the ferving inof an Eele to the Table, 
at the middit of dianer & amoneft his friends,that he fell into a {wound,all his powers 
failing him. Galen in hisbooke de Confuetudine tells that Arius the Peripateticke died 
fodainly, becaufe compelled by the advife of thofe Phyfitions he ufed, he dranke a 
great draught of cold water in the intollerable heat ofa Feaver. For no other reafon 
faith Galen, than thar, becaufe he knowing he had naturally a cold ftomacke from his 
childhood, perpetually abftained from cold water. 

For as much as belongs to Indications taken from things againft nature; the Length 
and depth ofa wound or ulcer indicates one way; the figure cornered, round, equall 
and {mooth, unequall and rough, with a hollowneffe ftraighr or winding ,indicate o- 
therwife; the fite right left, upper, lower in another manner, and otherwife the force 
and violence of antecedent and conjun@ caufes. For oftentimes the condition of 
‘the caule indicates contrary to the difcafe, as when abundance of cold and groffe 
humors caufeand nourifha Feaver. Soalfoa Symprome often indicates contrary 
to the difeafe, in which contradiction, that Indication muft be moft efteemed,which 
doth moft urge; as for example fake, if {wounding happen ina Feaver, the feaverifh 
burning fhall not hinder us from giving wine to the Patient. 

Wherefore thefe Indications arethe Principalleft and moft nobie which leade us, 
as by the hand, to doe thefe things which pertaine to the cure, prevention and miti- 
gating of difeafes.Butifany objedt, that fo curiousa {earch of fo many Indications 


Wedo netals 1 tO. Mo purpofe, becaufe there are many Chirurgions, which fetting oncly one be- 


wayestfollow for the; 
fore their eyes, which js drawne fromt 


which is from 
she difeale, 


| Effence of the difeafe, have the report and 
famee of skillfull Chirurgions,in the opinion of the vulgar ; but let him know thar it 
doth not therefore follow,that, this indication is fufficient for the cure of all difea- 
{es; for we doe not alwayes follow that which the Effence of the difeafe doth indi- 
cate tobedone. Butchiefly then, where none of the fore-recited Indications doth 
refift or gainefay ; you may underftand this by the example of a Péethora,which by 
the Indication drawne from the Effence of the thing requires Phicborom y; yet who 


iS 


derra 
and! 


ulin: 
mea 
will 
Leac 
Cau 


circu 


nor {i 


4 
i 
* 

vu 

Tr 
sa 
~ — 
Ap tor. hot 
ft ca | 
5 

| 
| 
4 
q 
| C 
q 

fe: 

2 
| = 
4 


ing, for 
i¢ head 
mn Xan- 
Medi- 
ncreafe 
drawn 
le with 
aringly 
manner 

all their 
m of the 
Table, 
powers 
ke died 
anke a 
reafon 
om his 


Length 
,equall 
cate 
force 
‘ion of 
crofle 
ntrary 
which 
verifh 


ade us, 
miti- 
ations 
ne be- 
and 
tharie 
difeae 
h indi- 
s doth 
ch by 
who 
is 


dertake the cutting of the cure the ulcer which remaines according to Arte, 


nor ftand, nor fit,but lye quietly, having his Leg orderly and decently rowled up. Buc 


C HAP.22: Way to (hirurgery. 


is it, that willdraw blood from a child of three monethes old ? Befides, fuch an Indi. 
cation isnot artificiall but common to the Chirergion with the common people, 
For who is irthatis ignorant, that contraries arethe remedies of contraries ? and that 
broken bones muf be united by joyning them together ? but how it mutt be perfor. 
med and done, this is of Arte and peculiar toa Chirurgion, and not knowne to the 
vulgar. Which the Indications drawn from thofe fountaines we pointed at before, 
aboundantly teaches,which, as by certainc limits of circumftances, encompaffe the 
Indication which is taken from the Eflence of the difeafe, left any fhould thinke,we 
muftrrufttothat onely. Forthereis fome greatand principall matter init,but not 
all. For fo the meaneft of the common people is notignoranr, that the folution of 
continuity isto be cured by repairing that which is loft.But in what parts we may, 
hope for reftitution of the lof fubftance, and in which nor, is the part ofa skilfull wicaiee 
Chirurgion to know and pronounce. Wherefore hee wil! nor vainly beftow his nope fy 
labour to cure the Nervous part of the Diaphragms, or Midrific being wounded, or lation of cons 
the Heart, fmall Gurrs, Lungs, Liver,Stomacke, braineor bladder; aad that, I 
fpeake in a word, Emperickes are not much more skilful! than the common people, 
although they do fo much extoll themfelves above others by the name of experience, 
For although experience be another inflrument to find out things with reafon, yet Exherience 
without realon,itwill never teach, what the fub{tance of the part in which the difcafe without reas 
lyes,may be , or what theadtion, ufe, fite,connexion,from whence fpeciall and proper 
Indications are drawne ; With which the Chirurgion being provided and inftructed w#houta 
fhall not oncly know by what meanes to finde out aremedye, but alfo, left he may 
feeme to mocke any with vaine promifes,he thall difcerne what difeafes are uncure- 
able.and therefore not to be medled withall. 

Butimplicite, or intricate difeafes require each tobe cured in their feverall order, Indications in 
except {ome one ofthem be defperatc,or {9 urge and prefle that the Phyfition think {7PVs* 
it neceflary after a prepofterous order,to begin with it,although often he be forcedto 
make fome one of thefe difeafes incureable,or give occation of caufing fome new one, 
into which ftraits we are neceflarily compelled to fall,when, (for example ) we dcter- 
mine to pull,or take away fone extrancous body; forthe performance whereof we are 
compeliedtoenlarge the wound. So we are forced by neceffitie to open the necke 
of the bladder, (that fo we may draw forth the {tone therein contained)with a wound 
which often degenerates into an uncurable Fiftula. Forthat difeafe which threatens 
danger of prefent death is of fuch moment,that to fhun that, it may be counted a {mal 
matter, and commoedious for the ficke to bringin other difeafes, though uncureable. 
For if aconvultion happen by pricking a Nerve which we cannotheale by any re- 
medies,thenby cutting the Nerve afunder wee end the convulfion, but deprive t he 
part into which that Nervedid gee, of the ule of fome voluntary motion, So if in 
any great joyat there happena Luxation with a wound, becaufe there is danger of 
convulfion by trying to reftore and fet right the Luxated part, wee are forcte for 
fhunning thereof, to attend the wound onely, and inthe meane time co let alone the 
Luxation. Ocherwife inimplicitedifeafes if there be nothing which may urge,or call 
us from the ordinary cure, we muft obferve this order, that beginning with that af- 
feét, which hinders the cure of the principall difeale, we profecute the reft inthe {ame 
and their proper order, untill al! the difeates being overcome we fhall reftore the part 
affe&ted toitsintegrity. Therefore let us take for an example, an ulcerin the Leg, a an example of 
Parix( ot big {wollen veine ) and a Phlegmonous tumor round about it ;and laftly,a Indications ia; 

body wholy plethoricke and filled with ill humors; order and reafon require this that gieates. 
ufing the advife of fome learned Phy fition we prefcribe a convenient dict,and by what 
meanes we may, bring hic to an equality by purging and blood-letting and then we 
will {carifie in divers places the part where it is moft {wollen, then prefeatly appy 
Leaches that fowe may free it from the burden of the conjunc matter ; thenufc 
Cauteryesto helpethe corruption of the bone, and in the meane time change the 
circular figure of the ulcer into an ovall, or triangular ; then at the Jength we will un- 


and foat thelength cicatrize it. In all this whole time the Patient fhal] neither walke, 


if 


4 * 
he 
. 
| 
a 
‘ 
‘ 
' 
* 
7 
{ 4 


CHA P.22. 


— 


eA n Introdustion, or Compendious 


if (as it often happens ) the temper of the burt part, be different from the temper of 


Whatwemutt the whole body, the manner of curing muft be fo tempered, that weincreate the 


do when the 

temper of the 
part is difte= 
rent from the 
temper of the 


wok body. 


An artificiall 
con Is 
of much force 
in Indications, 


Indication 
from Gmilis 
sade, 


Indieation of a 
device, 


A Phviition 
fheuld be of a 


quicke appre- 
heafion, 


indicationsin- 
dicative, 


Coindicative, 


Kepayoant, 


Dofis of hot or Cold medicines, according to the ratable proportion of the Indica- 
tions requiring this,or that. Therefore imagine the part ulcerated tobe fuch, as that 
it istwo degrees dryer than the jufttemper; butthe whole body to exceed the fame 
temper in one degree ofhumidity: reafon and Arte will require, that the medicine 
applyed tothe ulcer be dryer by one degreethanthat which the part would other- 
wife require if it were temperate ; but oa the contrary Ict us fuppofe thus. The whole 
body robe one degree more meift than the temper requires, & the ulcerated parttobe 
one degree dryer, truly in this cafe the medicine that is applyed to the ulcer by reafon 
of the part it felfe fhall not be encreafed indryneffe, but wholy compofed and tempe- 
red tothe Indication of the ulcer ,becaufe the force of the moifture exceeding in the 
like degree, doth counterpoife the fuperfluous degree of drynefle, But itis more eatie 
by-an artificial! conje&ure to determine of all {uch things, than by any rules or 
recepts. 
‘ Tothefe fo many and various Ladications,I thinke good to add two other; the One 
from fimilitude -the Other of a certaine crafty device, and as the latter Phyfitions 
terme it, ofa certaine fubtile flratageme. We draw Indication from fimilitude, in 
difeafes which newly {pring up and arife,as which cannot be cured by Indications 
drawne fromthcir contrarics, as long astheir Effence is unknowne and hid ; wherfore 
they thinke it neceflary to cure them by a way and Arte like thofe difeafes, with 
which they feeme to have an agreeing fimilitude of Sympromesand Accidents;Our 
Anceftors did the fame in curing the French Pockes, at the firft beginning thereof, as 
long as they afi mulated the cure tothat ofthe Leprofic, by reafon of that afhnity, 
which both thie difeafes feeme to have. But we follow crafty devices and {ubtile couns 
fells.when the Effence of the difeale wee meet withis wholy fecret and hid, either 
becaufe itis altogether of a hidden and fecret nature, and which cannot be unfolded 
by manifeft qualities,or elfe refidesin a fubje& which isnot fufficicntly knowne to 
us ,nor of a Phylicall contemplation, asthe Minde, For then we being deflitute of 
Indications taken from the nature of the thing, are compelled toturne our cogitatiens 
to impoftures and crafty counfells ; and they fay this Arte and Craft is of cheife ufe in 
Melancholy affects and fictions, which are often more monftreus and deformed than 
the Chimera fo much meationed inthe fables of the Ancients; to which purpofe, I 
will not thinke much to recite two Examples.A certaine man troubled with a Melan- 
cholike difea(e,I know not by what errour of opinion, had ftrongly perfwaded himfelf 
that he was withoutahead ; the Phyfitions omitted nothing, by which they might 
hope to take this madd opinion out of his minde. But when they had in vaine tryed 
all medicines, at lengththey devifed this crafty, but profitable device, they fattened 
and put upon his head a moft heavy helmet,that fo by the paine and trouble of his head 
nodding and drawne downe by that weight ,he might be admonifled of his error. 
Ttisreported,another molefted by the ob{curity and darkreffe of the fame difeafe, 
did verily beleeve,that he had hornes upen his head; neither could he be drawne or 
diverted from that abfurd and monftrous opinion, untill that binding up his eyes,they 
miferablely bruifed and feratched his forehead with the bony roughneffe of the lower 
parts of an exes hornes, that fo he begun to beleeve by the painfull drawieg ef the 
blood that ran downc his face,that thofe bloody hornes,were ferciblely plucked from 
him.Ingenious Chirargions in imitation of thefe examples may irlike cafes doe the 
like. For that cafe requires a man of a quicke apprehenfion and advice, who may 
give manifeit proofe of his diligence and skill by medicinal {tratagems,as who forth- 
with can politikly device ftratagems of divers forts. 

But,now comming to the end of this our tract of Indications, we muf cheifly aad 
principallyoblerve; That of Indications feme are Indicative - which abfolutely 
and ef themfelves command this te be done; other coindicative, which indicate 
the fame with the Indicative, and joyntly fhew it to be done, but in fome fort fecune 
darily andnet primitively ;fome are repugnant,which of themfelves and their owne 
nature per{wade quite contrary to that the indicative primitively did; or which dif- 
fwadeus from doing that,to performe which the indicative did perfwade us; other 


correpugnant, 


4 
t! 
W 
‘A 
Om 
i ¥ 
| ramples. 
| 


mpcr ef 
‘cafe the 
> Indica- 
as that 
the fame 
Bnedicine 

1 other- 
whole 
varttobe 


tempe- 
P in the 
ore ealie 
rules or 


the One 
ry fitions 
tude, in 
lications 
yherfore 
s, with 
‘ats;Our 
-reof, as 
affinity, 
le cOUfe 
i, either 
nfolded 
owne to 
of 
itatiens 
te ule in 
ed than 
rpofe, I 
Melan- 
himfelf 
y might 
e tryed 
attened 
iis head 
or. 

difeafe, 
wne OL 
mes,they 
e lower 
ef the 
d from 
dee the 
ho may 
o forth- 


Hy and 
olutely 
ndicate 
{ecutte 
rowne 
ch dif- 
other 
gnant, 


by reafon. 


— 


correpugnant, which give their voyce after the fame forme and manner with the re- Correpugnant 
pugnant againit the indicative, as the coindicative confent to and maintaine them, 
Let this ferve for an example of them all. : 
A Plethora or plenitude of humors of its owne nature, requires and indicates blood- 
letting , the Spring-time per{wades and coindicates the fame, butto this counfell is 
quite oppofite and repugnant, a weake faculty, and chi!dhoad is correpugnane. 
Wherefore thefe foure muft be diligently waighed and confidered when we deli- 
berate what is to be done, and we mutt rather follow that which the indicative, or - 
repugnant fhew and declare, as what the difeafe and ftrength of the Patient require, 
than that which the coindicative,or correpugnant fhall perf{wade, becauiethey have 2 
weakerand but fecundary power of indicating, and not cffentiall and primitive. Buc 
becaufe the kinds of Indications are {o many and divers, therfore that the knowledge 


of them may be more perfpicuous and leffe confufed,I have thought good todefcribe 
and diftinguifh them by this following {cheme. 


4 
‘ 
! 
| 
‘ 
¥ 
* 
| 
3 
| ‘ 


Ax Indication 
us Certaine 
plaine and 
compendious 
way whic 
leades the 
Chirurgton to 
certaine,de- 
terminate and 
propo/ed end 
for the cure of 
the prefent 
difea/es of 
which there 


Gre 3.kinds, 


C HAP:22. 


The fecond is drawue from things 
not naturall, which one while in- 
dicate thety pre (ervation by ticir 


A Table of Indications. 


The firft is drawne from 
things natural witch tn- 
dicate their pre/ervation 
| by their like;of this kind 
| are many other which are 

drawne» 


| 
eitver 


F or whofe prefervation oftentimes the proper cure 
of the difeafe muff be negletled 5 for where 
faile,it is impofible the Chinurgien fhouid per- 
forme what he defires and 
rt Sancuine, Of prefervatty of which the Chi- 
Cheteric he, rurgion muf? have care, andif 


| they fwarve from equallitie, to 
Paticat fhalt be-- )Plegmaticke € them to that which for- 


Melancholtc ke merly they naturally were. 
Dainty and delicate, 
Slender and weake. 
Low of /fature. 
Rare,or el/e denfe and compalie. 


The (ubftance therof.as for as much as it is frmular 
we confider whether it be bor, cold, moi/?,dry, or o 
it is organicall.and then wether it be principall 
From tie nattve and part or a fubordinate and ignoble part. 
condstion of the Or the fenfe whether yuicke,or dull, by reafon 
purt or affected wherof the eye cannot endure {uch fharpe Gacride 
part,in which | fimple flesh can. 


From the ffrength 
and faculties of 
the patient. 


Frem the habite 
of tne body ,as tne 
patient shalt be 


we cifider,either pire forme, figure magnitude number, fite ,cos- 
xton,attion,u/e. 
From the Age for each age yeelds his peculiar Indications, hence you 


may obferve moff difeafes 10 be incureable mold men, witch are 
eafily cured in yong , others which inycuth admit of no cure, un- 


| | leffe by the change of age and th'en/uimg tem perament. 


From Sexe,for medicines work upon weomen farre more cafily than 


upon men. 
| from the time of the yeare, for fome mcats and medicines are fit in 
W tater, (ome ia Summer. 


places, (oal/otc-ere are motions of humors,and manners of dtfeafes: 


— 


‘| hence it is that wounds on the bead at Paris,@’ fore fhinus at Avig- 


nion are more difhcult to be cured. 

From the times of difeafes, for (ome things in toe beginings, others is 
the eacreafe, flate and declining of the difea/e,are more conve- 
nient, 

From the manner of diet, for the, asthe proper temper, muff be pre- 
ferved. Wherefore fuch mujt be fed etoerwt/e who live daintily, 
than thofe who leade their lives /partngly and hardly. Hereunte 
adde certaine peculiar natures, whicn by @ certaine hidden pro- 

perty are offended at tois, or that kinde of meate. Fortvere are 
fome which net onely , cannot concott Ptifane, Apples, Soles, 

Pertrige, Water and {uch like, but can (car behold them witnout 
Nau/cou/faes. 


If the Aire, have as it were con{pired with the difea/e by a 
certaine fimilitude of qualities to tie de(fruttien of the 
Patient, it mufé be correéted by its contraries according to 
Arte. 


like, another while ther change But if 
ur thed | 
by their contraries; for /6 if by the dt fagreement of qualities it refij? the di/eafe, it 


T hethird from 
things contra- 
ry 0 mature 
whicn 
be 
taken away 

by the w/e of 
their contre¢- 


TICS, a 


the 


Sym- 
\ tomes 


usuft be kept in ae fame temper. 


F rom that 7 Bitterne 
wich is | Of psinere 
| ee moft urgent } | defuxion 
22 impli- part, 
Thegreat- cite, or From the @ Vatrix, 
The difeafe, | neffe | mixed di- | cause or bizze 
| the indica- | Thecom- | feafes we | fach | f wollen 
| tion being plication may draw and are | veinesa 
drawne or Com- Indicati- | From thap, diffempe- 
from the/e mixtion ons from without | rature if 
withotbers the the rey be 
fe | heades, difeafe can ‘| joyned 
not be ta- with a di- 
| hem away feafe. 


oN, which rmo oft? indicate & require medicines contrary to the di/ea/e. 


C uar- 


From tne Regton,for as there are diverfities of fituarions and habits of 


con: 


main! 
ly fe! 
ly.cu: 

are 
fay 
Sacre: 
ro re 
long 
dum) 
In 
was 
chat i! 
his to: 
hee ib 
the Ki: 


| 
» y 
hav< 
Rho 
Sum 
bit: 
| falls 
| his |: 
and 
of d: 
of, h: 
danc 
2 
i iwe: 
han 
had 
4 | | 
‘ 
Probes: 
| Which 
place, am 
both he 
J Quin 
4 to Ar: 
| 


proper cure 
where thefe 


fhould per- 


ich the Chi- 
are, andif 
uallitie, 
which for- 
were. 


is 

or 
principale 

ble part. 

l, by reafon 

acride 


eT, fite ,con- 


> bence you 
which ere 
cure, un- 


cafily than 
5 are fit in 


nd habits of 


fdifeafes 
at Avig« 


others ia 
Ore conver 


su be pre- 
daintily, 

Hereunte 
yidden pro- 
Or fvere are 
es, Soles, 
cm 


‘ifeale by 
ftien dhe 
‘cording 


difeafes 


Bitrerneffe 
of paines,d 
d e uxton 
a4 park, 
Varix, 

r bigge 

wollen 
veine, @ 
lifFempe- 
rature if 
trey be 
joyned 
with 
feafe. 


he difeafe- 


HA Pe 


* 
. 
¥ 


Way to Chirurgery. 


X XILE 
Of certaine wonderfull and extravagant wayes of Curing difeafes: 


S Monfters fometimes happen in nature, foalfo in difeafes, and in the events Mon*rous 
and eures of difcafes.] underftand by monfters certaine marvellous: {uccefics 
A, in difcafes, or certaine wayes of curing them,which fwarve from Arte, and 
happeo befides reafon,nature, and com von.ufe, 
Alexatider ab Alexandro,and Peter Gsliws tell, that in Apuliaa part. of Italy, they The wonders 
have acertaine kind of Spider very frequent, the natives call it Teremtula, Petrua 
Rhodiws it Phalangium The lobabitanis finde thefe Spiders inthe firft heare of taine Spider, 
Summer fo venenate and deadly, that whomfoever they touch with cheir virulent 
biting, he prefently, withour he have {peedy remedy deprived of ail fenfe and motion 
falls downe,or certaincly if he efcape the danger of death, he leades the remnant of 
his life in madacfie, Experience hath found 4 remedy by Muficke for this fo {peedy Mufcketh 
and deadly a difeafe ; Wherefore as foone as they can they fetch Fidlers and Pipers 
of divers kinds,who by playingand piping may make Muticke, at the Nearing where- 
of,he which was fallen downe by reafon of the venemous bite, rifes cheerfully and 
dances fe long totheir meafures and tunes, untill by the painfull & continued fhaking 
= agitation ef the whole body, ali the malignicy is diffipated by tranfpiration and 
wWcCates. 
Alexander adds that it happened once in his fght,that the Mufitions their winde & 
hands failing them ceafed playing, and thenthe Danfer prefently fell downe asif hee 
had beene dead; Butby and by the Mu‘icke beginning anew, he rife up againe and 
continued his danting till the perfect difhpation of the venome, And that it hath hap- 
vened befides,that one not fo perfetly heal: d,certaine reliques ot the difcafe yer re- 
maining, when a long time after he heard by chance a noile of Mulitions,he prefent- 


Ty fella leaping and danfing neither could he be made to leave before he was perfeds 


ly cured. | 
Some affirme according to the opinion of Caclepzades, that fuch as are Eranticke Muficke gives 
lped witha d Muficall h beop!: d ing 
ate much helped witha iweet and Muficall harmony. Theephrafiws and Aulus Gellius 
fay that the paine of the Goute and Sciatica are taken away by Muficke. And the 
Sacred Scripture tefifes, that Davéd was wont by the {weet toundof the Harpe 
to refrelh and eafe King Saeé/ when he was milerablely tor:nented by his evili{piric, 
Herodotus in Clio tcils, that Cre(us the King of Lydia had a Sonne, which of a 
Jong time could not fpeake, and when hee came to mans eftate was accounted 
dumbe:but when an En. mie with his drawne {word inva‘cd his father ( overcome 
In a great fight,and the City being take in which hee was) not knowitny, that hee 
was the King, the yourg man opened his mouth endeavoring to cry our, and with jurbatis. of 


that ftriving and forcing of the Spirit hee broke the bonds and hinderances of the inde 


. . Ip b 
his tongue, and {poke piainely and Articulately, crying out to the Enemie that vic’ thefpie 


hee fhould aot kill King Crefas. Soboth the Enemie withheld his fword , and * 

the King had his life, and his Sonne had his {peech alwayes after. P/wtarch in his 

booke,Of the benefit to be received from our Enemies, tells that a Theffalian called 

Proteus, had acertaine inveterate and incurable ulcer in acertaine part of his body, 

which could aot be healed, before hee received a wound in a conflict in rhe fame 

oe and by that meanes the cure being begun afrefh, the wouod aad ulcer were 

ealed, 
Outntus Fabius Maximus, as Livye writes, was long and very ficke of a quartaine —— 

Ague, neither could have wifhed fuccefle from medicines admuiniftred according Arte, 

to Arce, untill skirmifhing with the Allobreges hee fhaked off his o'd feaverith heare, 

by a new heate and ardent defice of fighting. It was.ercdiblely reported to me 

of late by 2 Gentleman of the Lord of Lex/ackes Chamber, that there was 4 


Freach Gentleman in Polonia who was greivoufly tormented with a quartaine 
Feaver, 


a 
® 
| \ 
~ 
A 
f 
* 
| 
2 
4 


Cay Lib, 


decur.rate 


(alen by a 
dreame 


the 


Compendious 


Cuap.23: 


on atime walking upon the banke of the River Wixell to take away 
of his in jeaft into the River by a friend of his 
that met himby chance, by which (although hee could {wim , as hee alfo knew 
that thruft him in ) hee conceived fogreat feare,that the Quartaine never troubled 
him after. King Henry the fecond commanded me to goc from the Campe at 
Amiens to the City Dorlan, that I might cure thofe that were bure in the con- 
fli& with the Spaniards, the Captaine S. 4rbin although at that time he had a 
fic of a quartaine ague, yet would hee be prefent at the fight, in which being 
fhote through the fide of his necke with a Bullet, hee was ftrucken with fuch a 
terror of death, that the heate of the Feaver was affwaged bythe coldfeare, and 
he afterwards lived freed from his Ague. | 
Francifus Valleriola the famous Phyfition of Arles, tells that /obe Berlam his 
fellow Citizen troubled with a Palfey of one fide of his body for many yeares, his 
houfe taking fire, and the flame comming neere the bed in which he lay, he ftrucken 
with 2 great feare, fuddenly raifed himfelfe with all the force hee had, and pre- 
fently recovering the ftrength of his body, leapes out atthe window from the top 
of the houfe, and was prefently cured of his difeafe,fenfe and motion being re- 


ftored to the part, fo chat afterward hee went upright without any fenfe of 


paine, who lay unmoveable for many yeares before. Hee tells rhe like in the 
{ame place of his cofen Job Sobiratius; hee was a long time lame at Auignion, 
by reafon that the nerves of bis hams were fhrunke and drawne up fo thar hee 
could not goe; being moved with a vehement and fuddaine paffion of anger 
againft one of his fervants whom hee endevored to beate, hee fo ftirred his 
body that forthwith the Nerves of his hams being diftended , and his knees 
made plyant hee began to goe and ftand upright without any fenfe of painc, 
when hee had beene crooked about the fpace of fix yeares before, and all his life 
after he remained found. 

Galen tells hee was once fetched to ftanch the bleeding; for one who had 
an Artery cut nere his ancle, and that by his meanes hee was cured without 
any danger of an Ameuri/ma(i) arclaxation of a veinous veficll; and befides by 
that accidental! wound hee was freed from moft greivous paine of his hippe, 
with which he was tormented for foure yeares before : but although this eafing 
of the paine of the Sciatica happened according to reafon by the evacuation of the 
conjunct matter, by the arecry of the anckle of the fame fide being opened; yet 
becaufe it was not cut for this purpofe, but happened onely by chance, I judged 
it was not much diflenting from this argument. 

Pliny writes that there was one named Phalerews, which cafting up blood at his 
mouth,and atthe length medicines nothing availing, being weary of his life,went unar- 
med in the front of the battell again{t the enemy,and there receiving a wound in 
his breaft, fhed a great quantity of blood, which gave an end to his {pitting of 
blood, the wound being healed, and the veine which could not containe the blood 
being condenfate. 

At Paris Anno 1572. in lay acertaine Gentleman being of a mode and courte- 
ous cariage fell into a continuall Feaver, and by that meanes became Franticke, 
moved with the violence of which hee caft himfelfe headlong out of a window 
two ftoryes hiyh, and fell firft upon the fhoulder of Vaterra the Duke of Alenzons 
Phyfition, and thea upon the pavement ; with which fall hee cruelly bruized his 
ridbs and hippe, but was reftored to his former judgment and reafon. There 


were prefent with the Patient befides Walterra, witnefles of this accident thele 


Phyfitions, Alexis, Magnus, Duretus, and Martinus, The fame hapened in the like 


difeafe, and by the like chance to a certaine Gafcoyne lying at the houfe of Agripps 
in the Paved ftreete. 


Othemasnus Door of Phyficke of Mompelier and the Kings profeffor,told 
me that a certaine Carpenter at Broquer a village in Switzerland, being franticke 
caft himfelfe headlong outof an high window into a river, and being taken out of 
the water was prefently reftored to his underftanding, 


But if we may convert cafualties inte counfell and Arte, I would not caft the 
Patient 


8D 


/bidto 
~place at 


Ob fer Be 

| 'sb,2, 

le] 
rn 
a 
p 
p 
« | 
i an | 
| inai 
t 
all 
| 
i 
ana 
b 
ie 
| whic 
5 
thin: 
cred 
the 
t¢rm! 
Out 
ents 
hand 
{carfe 
all ens 
» satin dr 


AP.233 


take away 
and of his 

alfo knew 
r troubled 
ampe at 
the con- 
he had a 
ich being 
th fuch a 
eare, and 


Berlam his 
cares, his 
ftrucken 
and pre- 
m the top 
being re« 
y fenfe of 
ike in the 
Auignion, 
that hee 
of anger 
Rtirred his 
his knees 
lof paine, 
m all his life 


who had 
d without 
fides by 
is hippe, 
nis eating 
tion of the 
ened; yet 
, | judged 


went Unar- 
wound in 
Bpitting of 
the blood 


d courte- 
Franticke, 
window 
Alenzons 


vized his 


— 


Way to Chirurgery. 


Patient headlong out of a window. But would rather caft them fodaincly 

thinking of no fuch thing into a great cefterne filled with cold water, with their 
heads foremoft,neither would I take them out untill they had drunkea good quanti- 
tie of water, that by that fodaine fall and firong feare, the matter caufing the 
Frenzy might be carryed from above downewards, from the noble parts to the igno- 
noble;the poffibility of which is manifeft by the forerecited examples,as alio by the 


the laft zecited 


Cures, 


od at his 3 


example of fuch as bitby amad Dogge, fearing the water are often ducked into it 


to cure them. 


CHAP, XXIII I, 
Of Certainejugling and deceiptfull wayes of Curing. 


Ere I determine to treat of thofe impoftors, who taking upon them the 
perfon of a Chirurgion,doc by any meanics either right or wrong put 


gs themfelves upon the workesof the Arte; but they principally boaft them- 


lelves among {t the jgnorant common fort, of fetting bones which are our of joynt 
and broken, affirming as falfly as imapudently that they have the knowledge of ict heredit 


thofe things from their Anceftors; as by a certaine hereditary right; which is 


not hereditary 


a moft ridiculons ficion ;for ourmindes when weare borane, is as a {moth table, 
upon which rothing is painted. Otherwife what need wee take fuch labour and 


man. 


paines to acquire and exercife {ciences ? God hath endued all brute beafts with 
an inbred knowledge of certaine things neceflary for to preferve their life, more thaa 


But on the contrary hee hath enriched him with a wit furnifhed with incredi- 
ble celerity and judgment, by whofe diligent and laborious agitation he fubje&s 
all things to his knowledge. For it is no more likely, that any man fhould have 
skill in Chirurgery becaufe his father was a Chicurgeon, than that one who 
never endured {weat, duft nor Sunne in the field, fhould know how to ride 


and governe a great horfe, and know how to carry away the credite in tilting, 
enely becaufe hee was begot by a Gentleman and onc famous in the Arte of 


There is another fort of Impoftors farre more pernitious and lefle fufferable, A mot impu- 


boldly and infolently promifing to reftore to their proper unity and featc,bones 
which are broken and out of joynt, by the onely murmuring of fome conceited 
scharmes, fo that they may but have the Patients name and his girdle. In which 


Abing I cannot fufficiently admire the idleneffe of our Councry-men fo cafil 


y 
verediting fo great and pernitious an error; not obferving the inviolable law of 


the ancient Phyfitions, and principally of Divine Héppocrates,by which it is de. 
termined, that three things are neceflary to the fetting of bones diflocated and 
out of joynt; to draw the bones afunder ; to hold the bone receiving, firmely 
immoveable with a ftrong and fteddy hand; to put the bone to be received 
into the cavity of the receiving. For which purpofe the diligence of the Anct- 
ents hath invented fo many engines, Gloffocomies and bands, left that the 
hand fhould not be fufficient for that laborious worke; What therefore is the 


-madneffe of fuch Impoftures to undertake to doe that by words, which. can 


dent forroef 
Impofors, 


Three things 
ne ¢eflary fox 
the cure of 2 
Luxation, 


. There {carfe be done by the ftrong hands of fo many Servants, and by many artifici- 
Hent thefe . all engines? | | 
the like Of late yeares another kindof Impofture hath fprung up in Germany,they beare 
of Agripps anto fine powdera ftoné within there mother tongue they call Bembruch, and give 
atin drinke, ro. any who have a bone broken, or diflocated, and affirme that it is fuffici- 
eflor,told - ent to cure them. Through the fame Germanic there wander ether Impoftors w ho 
er ‘bidro bring tethem the Weapons with which any is hurt;they lay it up ina fecret 
en out 


place and free from noife,and put andapply medicines to it, as if they had the patienc 
todreficjand in the meane time they fffer himtogeabout his bufines, & 
A F 2 a rms 


caft the 


Paxuent 


P 
} 
Warre. 
J 
| 


eAn Introduttion, or Compendious 


CHa P.24, 


affirme that the wound heales by litle and litle by reafon of the medicine epplyed to 

But it is not fikely that a thing inanimate which is deftitute of all manner of 
fence, fhould fecle the effect of any medicine ; and leiic probable by much, that 
the wounded party fhould receive any benefit from thence. Neither if any 
fhould ler mee fee che truth of fuch jugdling by the events themfelves and 
my owne eyes, would I therefore beleeve chat it were done naturally and by rea- 
foa, but rather by charmesand Magicke. 

Inthe laft affaule of the Caftle of Hifdin the Lord of Alartignes the elder 
was fhot through the breaft with a Musket bullet. 1 had him in cure together 
with the Phyfitions, and Chirurgions of the Emperoure Charles the fitt and 
Emanuel Philibert the Duke of Savoy, who becaufe hee entirely loved the 
wounded prifoner, caufed an aflembly of Phyfitions and Chirurgions to confulc 
of the beft meanes for his cure. They all were of one opinion, that the wound 
was deadly and incureable, becaufe it paffed through the midft of his lungs,and 
befides had caft forth a great quantity of knotted blood into the hollowneffe 
of his breft. | 

There was found at that time a certaine Spaniard, 2 notable Knave, and one 
of thofe Impeftcrs who would pawne his life, that hee would make him found; 
wherefore this Honorable Perfonage being in this defperare cafe was commit. 
ted to his care, Firft of all hee bid they fhould give him the Patients fhirte, 
which hee tore into fhreds and peeces, which prefently framing into a Crofle, 
hee laid upon the wounds whilpering fome conceived or coined words, with a 
Jow murmure. For all other things hee wifhed the Patient to reft content, and 
to ufe what dict hee pleafed, for hee would doe that for him, which truely, he 
did. For hee eate nothing but a few Prunes, and drunke nothing but {mall 
beere, yet for all this the wounded Prince died within two dayes ; the Spani- 
ard flipt away, and fo f{caped hanging. Aud whileft I opened the body in the 
fight of the Phyfitions and Chirurgions to embalme bim, the fignes and acci- 
dents of the wound did evidently and plainly appeare to be as we had pronoun- 
ced before. 

And there be alfo other Iugling companions ef this tribe, who promife to 


What wounds cure all wounds with linte, or Tents either dry, or macerated in oyle, or water 
may be cured > ? 


onely bylint, And bound to the wound, having murmured over fome charme or other, who 
orbyrenteand have had fometimes, good fuccefie, as 1 can witneffe. But the wounds 


upon which triall was made were fimple ones, which onely required union, or 
clofing for to perfe& the cure. So verily the bones of beafts when they be 
broke, grow together by the oncly benefit of Nature. But when rhe affect 
fhall be compound by diverfity of Symptomes, as a wound with an ulcer, in- 
flammation, contufion and fraéture of a bone, you muft hope for no other from 
Tents or Liots,nor charmes than death. Therefore the common fort whocom- 
mit themfelves to thefe Inpoftors to be cured, doe not oncly injure them- 
feives, but alfo hurt the Common-wealth, and the common profit of the 
Citizens; for whofe good and juftice fake a prudent Magiftiate ought ro 
deprive impoftors of all freedome in a free and Chriftian common-weale. 
Witches, Conjurers, Diviners, Soothfayers, Magitians and fuch like, boaft of 
curing many difeafes; but if they doc or performe any thing in this kind, they 
doc itall by flights, fubtilcies and forbidden Arts,as Charmes,conjurations, W itche- 
ries, CharaGters, Knots, Magical! Ligatures, Rings, Images, Poyfons, laces tyed a- 
croffe, and other damnable trickes,with which they pollute, pervert and defame the 
prime and facred Arte of Phyfick & that with the danger of menslives. Who certainly 
are to be banifhed by the lawes of our country, e{pecially fecing it is decreed in 


Denteron,38. Mofés Law. Let be found among you that ufeth witcherafi, or a tegarder of 


times, or a marker of the flying of Fowles, or a Sorcerer or a Charmer, 
or that counfellethwith Spirits, or a Soothfayer, or thataskethcounfell atthe dead; 
for all that doe fuch things, are abomination tothe Lord, and becaufe of thefe abo- 
minations the Lord thy God doth caft them out before thee, But the Miracles of 


our 


r 
d 
fix 
| rc 
\ 
A 
| 
i 
\ 
' 


he elder 
together 
fite and 
oved the 
confulc 
e wound 
ungs,and 
lownefie 


, and one 
im found; 
commit. 
ts fhirte, 
Crofle, 
s, with a 
rent, and 
mtrucly, he 
but {mall 
he Spani- 
in the 
and acci- 
pronoun— 


omife to 
Or water, 
1er, who 
wounds 
nion, ofr 
they be 
rhe affect 
lcer, 
from 
whocom- 
re them- 
ic of the 
ought to 
ale. 
boaft of 
ind, they 
s, Witche- 
es tyed a- 
efame the 
certainly 
lecreed in 


Charmer, 
the dead; 
thefe abo- 


our 


sgarder of 


Airacles of 


Way 


eur Lord lefus Chrift the Sonne of God, and 


difeafes beyond nature and all Arte, are of another kind, which we ought to beleeve fo 
firmely and conftantly that it fhould be counted an impiety for a Chriftian to doubt of 
them. All holy writings are full of thefe,as to pive fightto the blinde, hearing to the 
deafe, power to gocto thoferficke ofthe Palfey, to drive forth Devills,to cure the 
Leprofy, to give fruitfullneffe to weemen,to raife the Dead,and performe by the 
holy Ghoft other Miracles which exceed the condition and law of Nature; whom 


here we carneftly intreat to free and protect us from uncleane Divels and the fpirits 
of diabolical deceit,and to give usthe minde that we may wiil and be able alwayes 
— Heaven and faftenthe hope,fafety and anchor ef all our fortunes in God 
alone. Amen, 4 | 


of his Saints and Apofiles in curin 


The End of the firf 
Booke, 


« 


P.24, 
ly 

p yed to 

anner of 

ch, thar 

r if any | 

lves and 

d by rea- 

| 

| 

Bq THE 

| 

| | 


THE 


SECOND BOOKE 


LIVING CREATVRES, 
AND 


THE EXCELLENCY 
Man. 


Efore I come to {peake of the Anatomic of mass body ; The ditfe> 

| I have thought fit to fay alittle of the nature of brute Beafts, tet 
There is betweene beaftsa great deale of difference by na- 

ture ; for of thefe, fome are hardy and bold, others fearefull; 

fome wilde and favage,others tame; {ome walking in heards, 

others wandring alone; fome covered and defended with 

thels and fcales, as the Crocodile, the Tortois and many 

SS) kinds of ffh,others have flings and prickles. 

The Horfe hath his hard and ftrong hoofes, his creft (as being a generous bealt) ; 
befet with a thickeand harfamane, The defence of the magnanimous Lion, are his | 
teeth, his crooked pawes and taile; Bulls are formidable by their hornes ; the Boare | 
by histuskes ftandiag out, asit were natural! hunting {peares. The Hare being a ti- | 
merous creature, is naked and unarmed, but in recompence thereof nature hath , 
made her nimble and fwift of foot. For what the more noble and couragious beatts 
have in armes, is fupplied in the fearefullby nimblenefle and celerity. Infinite are the 
other endowments of brure beafts, and {uch as can hardly be imagined, or defcribed. 

For if wee diligently fearch into their nature, wee fhall obferve the impreflions and 5... madow 
fhadowes of many vertues, as of magnanimitie, prudence, fortitude, clemency,and of vertue in 
docillitie: for they entirely love one another, follow thefe things that are good, 
thunacthofe that are hurtfull, and gather and lay up in {tore thofe things that arene- 

ceflary for life and food. Laftly,they give undoubted prefages of the weather, and 

Aire. They have taught men many things, andare of a moft exquifire and quicke 

fence; of rare: Art invocall muficke, prdent and carefull for their young, and 
faithfull lovers of rhcir native foile. They are religioufly obfervant of the rights of 
friendthip and chaftitie. They have their weapons whereby they are prepared, both 

to invade, and to defend themfelves being invaded; they {ubmit themf{elvesto the 
difcipline of man, pra@ife and imicate his fpeech, and mutually prattle and 


chant one toanether. They havea kind of weale-puklicke among ft and 
now 


— 
113.2. $§ 


— 


56 Of Living Creatures, ane Lis:2. 
know how to preferve their prelent welfare, and to depell thecontrary, being in this 
their owne Counfellors,and not tutored by man. Yea man is beholden to them for 
the knowledge of many wholefome things, The confideration of which bred fo 
reata doubt among ft the ancient Philofophers, that it was a queftion amongfithem, 
whether beafts had ufe of reafon, or no? Therefore alfo the wile Salomon fends us for 
examples of parfimonic and diligence untothe Ant or Pifmire ; and Efaias 1 eX pto- 
bration ofthe people of Iftael for their ingratitude and rebellion againft God, fends 
them to the Oxeand Affe; for they doe not oncly know, but reverence they 
Matfters- 
Lib.tcapz7. But from whence is the knowledge of thefe medicines, wherewith the Art of 
Phyficke is fo richly adorned, but from brute beafis, as aftrmeth, The infalli- 
ble vertuc of the herbe in drawing daxts out of the ficih, wastaught usby 
the Hart, who wounded with the Hunt{mans darts or arrowes, by meanes hereof 
drawes out the weapons which remaines flicking inher. VVhich is likewile praQi- 
fed by the Goates of Candic,as Ariffetle writcth, The wonderfull efic& which Ce/an- 
dive hath uponthe fight,was learnt by thc practife of Swallowes, who have bin obfér- 
ved with it to have be{meared,and fo ftrengthened the eyes of their young. Serpents 
rubbe their eyelids with fennell, and are thought by that meanes to quicken and re- 
fiorethe decaying fight oftheir eyes. The Tortois doth defend & ftrengthen her felfe 
apainft the biting of Vipers, by cating of favoric. Bearesby eating of Pifmires, ex- 
pell chat poifon that they have contra@ed by their ufe of Mandrakes. And for cor- 
rection of that drowzineffe and floth which growes uponthem by their long {leepe 
in their dens, they eate the hetbe 4vo» (1) Cuckopint. But the Artthey ule inthe 
entifing and catching of Pifmires is very pretty, They goe foftly ro the holes cr hilles 
of the Pifmires, and there lay themfelves all their length upon the ground, as if they 
were dead, hanging outtheir tongue wet with their foame, whichthey draw fot a- 
gaine into their mouth, before they feele them full of Pifmires, which are intifed by 
the {weetnefle of thefoame: And having taken this as a purging medicine, they 
expcll by the guts, thofc ill humors wherewith they were cfiended. Weefee that 
Dogges give themfelves a vomit, by eating of akinde of grafle, which is from thence 
called Dogge-grafie. Swine, when they finde themfelves ficke, will hunt after fmale 
or rivet lobfters. Stockdoves, Blackbirds, and Partridges, purge themfelves by bay 
leaves. Pigeons, Turtels,and all fort of Pullen, disburden themfelves of groffe hu- 
Thebirdtbis Mors, by taking of Pellitory of the wall. The bird Ibis (being not much unlike the 
thefirtinvens Storke ) taught us the ufe of Clifters. For when he finds himf{elfe oppreffed with a 
Chie, burden of hurtfull humors, he fills his bill with faltwater, and fo purgeth himfelfe by 
Theinvention tat part, by which the belly is beft difcharged. The invention of the way of remoe 
ofremoving ving the Catara&t of the eye, wee muft yecld unto the Geate, who by flriking by 
eCaarat. chance againft the thorny buthes,pulls off the Cataract which hinders the fight, and 
Theinvention COvers the balloftheeye, and fo recovershis fight. The benefit of Phicbotomie, we 
oe. owe unto the Hippotamus or River-horfe, being a kinde of Horfe, and the inhabi- 
tant of the river Nilus; who being 2 great devourer, when hee finds himfelfe. fur- 
charged with a great deale of bloud, doth by rubbing his thigh againft the fharpe 
fands on the bankefide, open a veine, whereby the fuperfluous bloud is difcharged, 
which he ftoppeth likewife when itis fit, by rowling himfelfe inthe thicke mudde. 
The Tortois having chanced to eate any of the fleth of a Serpent, doth maké origs- 
#um and marjerom her Antidote. The ancients found helpe from brute beafts, even 
A prefervarive againft the dreadfull and none-{paring force of lightning; for they were of opinion 
- - tnatthe wings of an Eagle were never flrucke with lightning, and therefore they put 
about their heads little wreathes of thefe feathers. They were per{waded the fame 
thing of the Seale, or Sea-calfe, and therefore were wont to encompafle their bodies 
wich his skinne,as amoft certaine fafegard againft lightning. It were a thing too long, 
and laborious ,to fpeake of all thofe other muniments of life and health/obferved here 
and there by Ariffoté and Plinie) which we have learnt of brute beafts. I will there- 
fore end this Chapter, after that I have firft added this; That we are beholding to 
beaftsnot oncly for the skill of curing difeafes, and of prefervation of health, but for 
our foode, our raiment,and the ornament and beautifying the bodies. , 


— 


The crafti- 
nefie of Beares, 


fo 
Lz 
<4) 
w! 
his 
[to 
rh! 
rai 
he 
\ 
id. 
po 
An 
thr: 
the 
Wir 
4 
tne! 
| ma 
| tha 
| on 1 
b. 
we: 
wit! 
WOT 
pi 
N | 
the | 
ho 
and 
an 
i 
4 
4 


BBS 2. 


in this 
hem for 
bred fo 
fithem, 
is us for 
ex pro- 
» fends 
¢ their 


Ait of 

infalli- 
ht usby 
5 hereof 
Cc clan- 
obfers 
erpents 
and re- 


es, CX- 
OL COr-. 
{leepe 
ieinthe 
or hilles 
if they 
w hot a- 
tifed by 
e, tacy 
{ee that 
nthence 
rer fimale 
by bay 
offe hu- 
like the 

with a 
felfe by 
remoe 
iking by 
and 
mie, We 
inhabi- 
efharpe 
harged, 
mudde. 
origa- 
S$, even 
opinion 
hey put 
he fame 
r bodies 
long, 
edhere 
ll chere- 
ding to 
but for 


of 


felfe 


| Of the Excell ency of Man. 


Of the Faculty of brute Beafts in Prefaging. 


T He firft knowledge and skill of Prognoftication, and obfervation of weather by 
the Aire, was firft delivered unto us from beafis of the land and water, and from 
fowle, For we fee in daily ubfervation, that it is a figne of change of weather, when What the buts 
Lambes and Rammes doe butt atone another with their hornes, and playing wan- rahe 
tonly doe kicke, and keepe up their hecles. The fame is thought to bee prefaged 
when the Oxe lickes himfelfe apainft the haire, and onthe fodaine fills the Aire with 
his lowing, and {mells to the ground,and when he feedes more greedily than he ufed 
todoe. But ifthe Pifmiresin great multitudes fetch their prey fo haftily, that they preages of 
runne and tumble one upon another in their narrow pathes, it is thought a figne of zaiae. 
raine ; Asis alfo the bufte working of Moales, and the Cats rubbing and ftroaking of 
her head and necke, and above her cates, with the bottome of herfeete. Alfo when 
Fithes play and leape a little above the water, it istaken for a figne of raine. Bur if 
the Dolphins doe the fame in the fea, and in great companies, it is thought to pre- The figne at 
fave a fodaine ftorme and tempeft. Whereby the Marriners forewarned, ufe all care 4 '4*o™* 
poffible for the fafetic of themfelves and their fhippes, and if they can, caft Anchor, 
And itis fufficiently knowne what the louder croaking of Frogges than ordinary 

rtends, 
~— the facultie of birds in this kinde of prefaging is wonderfull. If Cranes flie 
through the aire without noife, it is a figne of faire weather, and of the contrary, if 
they make a great noife and flie ftragglingly. Asalfoif Sea-fowle fliefarre from the 
fea, and light on the land. The crie or {crit ching of Owles portendsa change of 
the prefent weather, whether foule or faire. Péwtarch faith, that the loude cawing of 
the Crow betokens windes and fhowres, as alfo when he flappes his fide with his 
wings. Geefe, and Duckes, when they dive much, and order, and prune, and picke 
their feathers with their beakes, and crie to one another, foretell raine s and in like 
manner Swallowes when they flie fo low about the water, that they wet themfelves, 
and their winges. Andthe Wren, when he is obferved to fing more {weetly than 
ufuall, andtohop up and downe. And the Cocke when he chants, or rather crowes 
prefently after theferting of the Sunne. And Goats, and Fleas, whenthey bite more 
than ordinary. If the Herne foare aloft into the aire, it berokeneth faire weather, if 
on the contrary he flie clofe by the water, raine. If Pidgeons come late home tothe 
Dové-houfe, it isafigne of raine. If Bats flie in the evening, they forethew wet 
weather. And laftly the Crocodile layes his egges in that place, which muft be the +,. ..,..- 
bounds of the overflowing of the river Nilus; And therefore he that firft meetes dile by laying 
withthefe egges,tels the reft of the countrie people, and fhewes them how high the 7%" °8s*_ 
floud willrife, and what inundation it will make upon their grounds. A thing moft bonnds of che 
worthy of admiration, that inthis monfter, there fhould be that ftrong facultie of Hot" 5. , 


prefaging. lus, 
Of the Induftry of Fifhes. 


Any fea-Fithes, whenthey feele a tempeft comming, doe gravell or balaft How F ise: 
themfelves, tothe end they may not be toffed upand downe at the pleafure of 
the waves. Others when the fury of the fea is at the hight, hide themfelves in che againtt a 
holes of rockes, But in that they {wie againft the ftreame, they doe it, for this caufe *°"™" 
and reafon, that the force of the ftreame, and the floud may not take from them, prow shey 
and ftrike off their fcales, and that their gills may not fill with water which would (wimme a- 


hinder their {wimming , and intercept their refpiratioa, As by the fame advile 


Cranes flic the winde, whereas they downe the winde, 


feathers would be difplaced and broken, and they would not be able ro Sie. 


| 
| 
i 
i 
J 


Of what 
things birds 
build their 
neafs. 


In what fhape, 


With what 
fare Spare 
rowés breed 
their young. 


How the 
Spiders weave 


How they 
eatch their 


prey. 


Of the indufiry of Birds in the building of their neafis, 


T He induftrie of Birds in the building of their neafts, is fuch, thatit doth farre 
exceede the art and skill of all Mafons, aud Archite&s. From whenceit is be- 
comeaProverbe, That men know, and cam doe all things but make Birds aeafts. They ate 
built within with wooll, and feathers, and fuch kinde of foftthings, whichare asa 
kinde of a pallet for the young ones. Swallowes build their neafts ina round forme, 
that they may be the more firme, and lefle fubject to be hurt by any ching that fhall 
ftrike againft them; and likewife more capacious. They chufe their matter out of 
dirt and chaffe (interlacing it with many firawes ) as it were their plafter, or lime. 
Thofe that build in trees, doe make choife of the foundeft boughes, as if they meant 
to have themasa fure foundation for the building which they should erect thereon. 
The Cocke and the Henne doe by turnes fit over their ¢gges, and likewife fetch 
their meate, interchanging each others labour, neither doe they ever forfake their 
young, before they are able to get their owne living. I had at my houfe a greatnum- 
ber of Sparrowes neafts in earthen pots, And when the young ones begun to waxe 
pretty bigge, and ro be covered with feathers,! made the whole neaft be takendewn, 
and fet upon the ground, that Iand my friends might delight our felves in beholding 
the care of the old ones in the feeding of their young; forthey feede them every one 
in ordcr, skipping none, neither will they ( to the wreng of the reft) give one two 
parts, although he gape, and be importunate for it. ; dividing moft juftly to every 
onc his owne fhare, according tothe cxactrule of diftribution. And often times for 
experiment, I would make triall witha ftrange Spatrow of the fame age, laid neere, 
or put among the reft of the young ones, whether the old ones would feede the ftran- 
eer, asifit were legitimate. But this asa ftranger and a baftard they would fuffer to 
ftarve, skipping it when it gaped after the meate, And in like manner Lambes and 
young Kiddcs doe in the fields, inthe midft of a great flocke, runne every one to his 
owne damme,who being moft certainely able to diftinguifh betweene the legitimate 
anda baftard, will not fuffer her felfe tobe fuckt but by herowne young. 


Of the induftry of Spiders. 


He Spider {pinnes her web with wonderfull artifice, hanging and fafteningit to 

every tacke or flay that isnigh, drawing of his thread, and running upwards, 
and downewards, and every way. And although the diligence of the chambet maid 
beates downc, and marres this pendulous and new begunne worke, yet her feate and 
her hold, the Spider keepes {till, neither is fhe, or will fhe defift from the worke fhee 
hath begunne, but ina vcry fhorttime, weaves a great deale more unto the ruines of 
her former worke, than can bee uaweaved againe with much labour. So that from 
hence all cloth and linnen W cavers, all imbroiderers, and workers with the needle, 
(you will cafily thinke) have learnt their Arts, if cither you obferve the exactneffe of 
the weaving, the finenefle of the thred, or the continuation and indiffoluble knitting 
together of the whole web; for being abrupt and troubled withno ends of threds at 
all, itrefembles a thinne membrane, annointed with akinde of glew, wherewith 
when the prey is entangled, the Spidet runnes prefently in, and as it were drawesher 
nets, and infolds, and takes the captive efterthe manner of hunt{men. If this were 
not daily feene with our eyes, it would be thought fabulous. 


Of Bees. 


| cannot patie in filence the great induftry of Bees, For having eftablifhed a kinde 

‘of Weale-publique, they make ele@ionof a King, who is fucha one, as in proceri- 
tic of body , and excellencie of feature, exceedeth all the reft. He is remakeable by 
his fhort wings, his {traight legees,his grave gate, and ia ftead of a Diadem or regall 
Crowne, either he hath no fing, or elfe doth not ufe it, whichisthe Artillery of the 
reft. He never gocth unattended out of the hive,but alwaies invironed witha princely 


retiic, 


| 
4 
bi 
dr 
Ww! 
ch 
COl 
hic 
rhe 
ral 
pe 
chi 
{uc 
rh 
pa? 
~ iv 
on 
COU 
| 
rer 
alC 
and 
Fou 
hict 
ii 
ror< 
pun 
[WoO 
= 
ALT, 
& 
| 
‘ 
bied 
A 
totl 
Bees shofe 
themi{elycs a 
King, 
| 
Not 


doth farre 
eicis be- 
They are 
chare asa 
id forme, 
that fhall 
tcr out of 
or lime. 
ey meant 
thereon. 
ife fetch 
fake their 
reatnum- 
to Wwaxe 
kendewn, 
bcholding 
very one 

one two 

toevery 
times for 
aid neere, 
the {tran- 
d fuffer to 
T bes and 
ne to his 
egitimate 


hing it to 
upwards, 
abet maid 
feate and 
orke fhee 
ruines of 
hat from 
e needle, 
€tnefle of 
knitting 
threds at 
herewith 
awesher 
his were 


a kinde 
procert- 

ccableby 
or regall 
ry of the 
princely 


Lt B.2. Of the Excellency of <M an. 


him;and laftly,having wich folemnity performed all the funeral! rites and obfequies, 
they chufethemfelves another King, fer without a King they cannot live. He then ing: 


Their juftice, 


hives. 


Of the care of Bees, 


T Hey manage and order their affaires in this manner, in the day time they ap- 
- point before their gates a ftation of watchmen, and guarders, In the night, they Theis warch. 
reft from their labours, fo long, till that one who ts appointed to this charge ) by 
one or two hummes , as by a found of a Trumper, rowlfeth all the reff, Then ++.:. a:,-,. 
come they together to obferve what is the ftate of the weather, which if they imployments, 
foref{ee will bee faire , then abroad goe they into the fields, and pafures. Some 
therefore bring into the hive little fafcicles of flowers ontheir thighes, ethers wa- 
ter intheir mouth, and others a dewey moifture gathered on their bodies, Thefe 
are met by others, who receive their burdens, which they difpofe in their due 
and proper places. Thofe that are fent out inte the fields for foode , are the 
youngeft and the fmalleft. Aad therefore if the winde chance to rife any thing 
high, they expe& untill it ceafe, and that the force and violence thereof bee 
over. But if ie continue violent , then doe they ballaft themfelves with a little 
ftonc flying clofe by the ground, to prevent their being driven too and fro by the 
force of the winde. They are ¢xceeding diligent in all their bufineffe, and doe 
punith the fleth of the lozie oftentimes with death, Some of them are the buil- 
ders, others polifh the building, and thereft bring in their materials. . 
The building in their arched hives is with wonderfull artifice, being made with 
two doores,one to come in,and the other to goe our at. They hayeall things alike, 
Jeaft that the inequalitic, either of their food or labour, fhould give occafion of 
diffentica. Their care is, thattheir houfes may fhew both ftate and handfomeneffe. 
Idle droanes, borne for nothing but tocate,and confume the fruits of their labours, They panit 
they chafe from their hives. Thofe that chance to lofe their ftings, are utterly difa- 
bled, and in a (hort time their guts come out that way, andthey die. They bringto 
their owners wonderfull increafe of wax and honey. 
Arifiomachus the Philofopher doth boaft, that for fiftie eight yeares together, hee Arifemachws 
had with great care beene a nourifher of Bees, onely that he might che better attaine -4iss:te or 
tothe knowledge of their ftate and condition. 


Of Pifmires, and Ants. 


Nite: truly is the induftry, diligence, and experience of the Pifmire leffe 
worthy of admiration, than that of the Bees. Infomuch as that Salomon bids the 
fluggard to cake an example of diligence from the Pifmire. Truly if experience did 
nor witnefle it, it would feeme incredible, that fo fall a creature fhould be able re 


ftore np fuch aboundance of corne, to difpofe and manage her affaires in thar good 
order 


retinue, che rett of his traine following after, neither 248) he at any time abroad 
but upon urgent affaires which concernes the whote ftate. His progrefle is forewar- 
ned by the voice and found of trumpets, and as it were with finging, and they all | 
draw nigh. Everyone gets as neere to nis perfon ashecan, and when he is weary 
with flying, they all beare him up with thir ownc bodies. 
On what place foever he alighteth, there they forthwith pitch their tents. If hee Their citehe \ 
chance to die,they goc not abroad to icede, Dut ftand all mourning round about the ing theirtents. 
corps; then carrie him out of the hive, and (as it were) follow his hearfe and bury Their obf- 
taketh care of all things, having his eye every where, while(t that the reft intend rhe 
performance of the worke. And fuperviling all, giveth them incouragement, and 
| chaftifeth negligence. For their time of going forth for foode, they chufe acleare | 
and faire day; for they have a natural facultie of Prelaging of the weather, They are oe 
fuch obfervers of iuftice andequitic, that never, either with their fting, or DY any | 
ther way, doc they moleft any creature, meither doe they exercife and pre- 
pare their {peares acainft any, buc for the fafegard of themfelyes and their 
| 


60. Of Living Creatures, and 


Libtt.@'s0 orderthat we fee fhe doth, Pisase faith,that they have among them the forme of a wel] 
, governed and well ordered common weale, For how pretty a fightit isto fee them, 
when they feize upona graine which they have a minde to carrie away, how they fer 
Wonderall to it, and lift it with head and fhoulders, And how leaft the corne which they Carric 
_ to their ftore-hovfe, thould put forth and grow, they bite itat oneend. If itbe fo 
bigge that they cannot carry it into their little hole, they divide it in the middle, If 
it be dampith, they lay it out todrie in the Sunne and (iw aire. When the Moone is 
at the full, they follow their worke in the night, when fhee doth not fhine, they take 
their reft, whereby they fhew themfelves to have fome knowledge of heavenly 
things P/inie aflirmeth that they havetheir {etFaires and Markets,whither they come 
in great companies, and where they ufetoeftablifh leagues of amitie and friendfhip 
one with another. And whenonc markes them well, would hee not thinke that they 
were incepference one with another, and that they did difcourfe among themfelves 
of their bufinefle ? Doe wee not fee that the often trampling of their little feete 
doth weare a path evenupon hard flint fiones ? | 
Thereisnos> From whence wee may note, what in all kinde of things is the effe& of affidui- 
thingbut may i. They {ay alforhat they performe the rites of buriall one unto another, after the 
be attained by ‘ y tay yP 
diligence. manner of men. VVhat words fhall I ule (faith Platarch ) to exprefie fufhiciently the 
diligence and induftry of the Pifmires, There is not among all the great things in 
nature, a ‘ight of greater wonder than thefe. For in the Pifmires are feene the 
markes of all vertue. Their great meetings argue that they maintaine a kinde of 
friend{hip. 
Theformesct  Theit alacritie in the undergoing of their laboures, feemesto fhew their forti- 
elivertuesex- tude and magnanimity ; and laftly, they are cminent examples of temperance, pro- 
pref in Pus vidence, and juftice. Their mutuall charitie appeareth in this, that if one of them 
that is not loaden meets another ( inone of their marrow paths ) that is, hee will 
give him the way, that hee may the better goe on in his intended journey. 
They fay that the firft entrance into their hole, is not ftraighr, but full of many 
' diverticles and crooked paths, which all end, which will bring you to three lit- 
tle ceils ; in one of which they have their conventicles , inthe other they lay up 
their provifions, and in the third they bury the carkafles of their dead. This doth 
Plutarch {peake concerning Pilmires. 


Of Silke-Worsmes. 


V Ith the induftry of thefe creatures, I fhall not unfitly joyne that of the 
| Silkewormes, of whofe paines and care, both in the making of their neafts, 
. and the {pinning of their threed and bottomes ( wherewith Kings are fo magni- 

ficently adorned) Philofophers have written very ftrange things. 
Diligeneethe _ ‘48d who can chufebut wonder at thofe great endowments of skill and know: 
ty ledge, and that exceeding induftry, (the mother of fo much wealth) in the little 
of {0 finallacreature ? The providence therefore of God, doth not onely 
appeate in this, that hee hath adorned each creature with a peculiar and proper 
endowment, butin this efpecially, that on the leaft creatures of all, hee hath be- 


owed the greater portion of skill, induftry, and ingenuity to {upply their defeat 
of bodily ftrengzh, | 


Of the love of Beafts one towards another and 
to their young. 


The induttry Plutarch writeth; That all kinde of creatures beare a fingular Jove, and have 4 
Arenas — Kinde of care of thofe thatt are generated of them, and the induftry of the 
their youog, Parttidges, this way is much commended; for during the time that their young 

ones are weake andunable to flie,they teach them to lie upor their backes, and to 
hide them{elves among the cloddes on the ground, that fo being almoft of the fame 


colour,they may not be difcerned by the Faulkoner. But if notwithitanding, they {ec 
any 


prey. 
Ones 
them, 
taken b 


ces nee! 


He 
of | 
will civ 


PB. 
| an 
{7 
W 
the 
of 
| 
be 
the 
hi 
the 
tha 
for 
j 
pri 
His 
Vid 
Dais. 
é 
| 
| 


1B. 2. 


ofa well] 
ce them, 
fee 
ey 


f irbe fo 


Moone is 
‘hey take 
heavenly 
cy come 
tendthip 
hat they 
colelves 
tle feete 


affidui- 
atrer the 
ntly the 
things in 
ene the 
‘inde of 


cir forti- 
ce, pro= 
of them 
hee will 
journey. 
f many 
bree lit- 
Jay up 
is doth 


of the 


rneatts, 
magnt- 


knowe 
e lirtle 
onely 
proper 
ath be- 
defe@ 


Ihave 4 


young 
and to 


e fame 
ey {ee 


iddle, If. 


L 18.2. of the Excellency of Man. 


any body comming, and thathee isnecre them, they doe witha hundred dodges 
and Roopings of themlelves, as if they were wearie with flying, entife him away 
from their young to follow after them, and when they have their purpofe, they 
then, as if they. had recovered fome freth ftrength, fly quite away ; who can but 
wonder at this boch affection and {ubtilty ¢ 

Neither are thofe things lefle wonderfull that are reported of Hares, for When poy pares 
they would goe to their feate, they iever their young, and commicthemto the truft provide for 
of divers places, it may be two acres afunder one from another, leaft peradventure, Spelt" 
2 Hunt{man, a dogge, or any man {hould chance to come that way, and they might 
be in danger tobe loft at once. And then after they have traced up and downe, hi- 
therand thither, and every way thatthe dogges may not trace them, nor the Hunrf 
man pricke them, they take a leape or two, and leape into their formes. 

Nor inferior to this is the craft of the Hedghogge, for whenthe Foxe purfueth 
him, and is now at his heeles, hee rowles himfelfe up in his prickles like achefnut in 
the outward fhell, fo that every part being ronnded and encompaffed with chefe 
fharpe and dangerous prickes, hee cannot be hurt.And fo faves himfelfe by this tricke; 
for his young he provides inthis manner. . | 

Jn the time of Vintage he goes to the vines, and there with his feete hee ftrikes off 
the boughs and the grapes, and then rowling his body makes them fticke upon his Kage Rog 
prickles, and fo doth as it were take his burthen upon his backe, andthen rcturnes to hoggeto pra 


his hole ; you would thinke that the grapes did move of themfelves ; the prey hee des 
vides betweene himfelfe and his young. 
In Florida part of the Weft Indies they have a beaft, which for the variety and dee 
formitic of it I cannot pafie over in filence ; The natives callit Succarath, the Cani- 
Dals, Su, It keepes for the moft part about the rivers, and the fea-fhore, and lives by 


young, for 
feare of 
ters. 


prey. When hee perceiveth that hee is purfued by the Huntfman, hee gets his young Tem.2.ué.22 
ones Upon his backe, and with his taile, which is very long and broad, he covereth “*™ 
them, and fo flying, provideth beth far his owne, and their fafetie ; ncither canhe be 

taken by any other way but by pits, which thofe Savage men ule to digge in the pla- 

cesneere which he is to runne, into whichat unawares hee tumbles headlong. This 

Picture of him here, 1 drew out of Thevers Cofmographic. 


Ofthe affection of Birds, and of Dogges, towards their Adafters. 


“Ts young Storke provides for the old which ‘is difabled by age, and ifany one The pictie of 
om of their equails come to any mifchance, that hee is not able to flie, they “*%.: 
Will give him their affitance, and beare him on their backes and wings. And = Ce 

£3 ore 


6 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
UY 
INS A ////////) EN ssh 
AS Ys 
- . 
4 


Living Creatures, and 


The fidelity 
of Dog gs, 


Doveées free 
from adultery 


Turtles never 
couple cwile, 


Lsh.3 


The religion 
ef the Ele- 
phane, 


Plimy 96.8, 
Ss 


forethis affection and piety towards the old ones, and as it were brotherly love 
towards their equalls, is commended inthe Storke. 

The Henne inany kinde of danger gathers her chickins under her wings, and 
as it were with that guard, defendsthem as well as thee can. For their fake 
fhee expofeth her felte to the crueltie of the fierceft beafts, and will flie in 
the eyes of a dogge, a Wolfeor aBeare , that by chance offersto meddle with 
her chickins. 

But who is therethatdoth not admire the fidelitie and love of dogges towards 
their Matters, whereby they recompence them for their keeping? A dogge will 
never forfake his Mafter, no,ifhe be never fo hardly ufed. For there is no man can 
finde a fticke hard enough to drive that dogge cleane away from him which hath 
once takenaloveto him. There is no kinde of creature that doth more certaine- 
ly and readily remember his matter, hee will know the voice of all the houfe- 
hold, and of thofe which frequent the houfe. There cannot bee a truftier keeper 
(as Crcero himfelfe faith ) than a Dogge is; 1 {peake not of their faculty of {mel- 
ling, whereby they follow their Matters by the foote, and finde them, neither 
doe I {peake of thofe infinite examples of the fidelity of Dogges, which were too 
long to rehearle. 

Pidgeons , as well the Cocke asthe Henne, although they are all very venereous, 
yetthey know no adultery, yea andthe Henne-will beare with the frowardneffe of the 
Cocke, neither will fhe ever leave him ,butreconciling him unto her by her officious 
diligence, bring him to his woared dalliance and kifles, neither is the love of either 
of them leffe towards their young. 

There is the like mutuallbond of love betweenc Turtles, forifone of them die, 
the furviver never folicites Hymen more, neither will he ever chufe other feate than 
a dry withered bough. 
= Of the flrength, piety, docilitie, clemency, chaftity, 


. and gratitude of Elephants, 


Mong the beafts of the field there is none more vafle, more firong, 

or more to bee feared, than the Elephant. His ftrengthis fuihciently fhowne 
by thofe towered Caftles of armed men, which hee carries, and fiercely rufheth 
with into the battell. The Romane fouldiers being otherwife of undaunted {pi- 
rit, yet in that battell which they fought againft Antiochus being terrified with 
the vaftneffe and immanity of thefe bodies which they had never before feene, 
prefently rurned their backes and fied, which notwithftanding, it isa wonderfull 
thing what flories naturall Philofophers tell of the vertues of the Elephant. 

Pline wiiteth, that an Elephant commeth very necre to the underftanding that 
men have, and thathee hath arudekinde of knowledge of language ; that his faci- 
liticand obfequioufneffe is wonderfull, thathis memory in the performance of 
hiswonrcd duties, is no Iefle wonderfull. And for Religion (P/starch {aith ) that 
they pray untothe pods, and {princkle and purge themfelves with falt water, and that 
with great reverence, they worfhip the Sunne at his rifine, lifting their trunkes up 
towards heaven, for want of hands, P4aie addeth, that they doe with the like reve- 
rence worlhip the Moone and the Searres. For itis relaced in the Hiftories of the 
Arabians,that ata new Moone the Elephants goe by troupes downe unto the rivers, 
and there wafh themfélves with water, and being thus purged, kneele downe and 
worfhip the Moone, and then returneto the woodes, the cldcft going firft, and the 
other following after according to their age. 

Plutarch reporteth, that it happened once, that among the Elephants which were 
taught at Rome again{t the Panegyricke fhewes, there was one that was fomething 
dull, and not fo docile as the reft, which made him be defpifed by his fellowes, and 
often beaten by his mafter. But that this Elephant, that he might fupply by diligence 
what he wanted in wit, was oftentimes obf{érved in the night, bythe light of rhe 
Moone, to be practifing and conning what he had learnt of his Maifter inthe day 
time. For they were wont to bee taught to make letters, and alfo to eu 

garlands 


4 
or 
ter 
ir 


erly love 


ings, and 
neir fake 
ill fie in 
ddle with 


s towards 
gge will 
man can 

hath 
certaine- 

ne houfe- 
ier keeper 
of {mel- 

, neither 

were too 


enereous, 
effe of the 
r ofhicieus 
¢ of either 


them die, 
feare than 


firong, 
fhowne 
ly rufheth 
unted {pi- 
ified with 
re feene, 
yonderfull 


nding that 
at his faci- 
‘mance of 
aith ) thac 
r, and that 
runkes up 
like reye- 
riesof the 
the rivers, 
lowne and 
ft, and the 


hich were 
fomething 
lowes, an 
y diligence 
of rhe 
inthe day 
to prefent 
garlands 


L of the Excellency ot Man, 
garlands to the (peGtators - and oth 
brought to goc “ boord a thi et fuch like trickes, But they can never bee 


land, unleffe their Mafler give thon “tied over 


sive them his word to aflur 


| 


\\ \\ \\\ 4 \AY 


i, 


SQA 


returne 


a 
fe 
j 
4 
Up == 
AN 
bb 
© 
| 


L LB.2, 


Living Creatures, and 


om.2 Je 


— 


returne againc to their owne native foile. They never hurt any one that doth net firft 
provoke them. They never gender but in private out of fight, anargument of their 


modettie. 


Of the Lamprey. 


Eaft that the heat of affection may feeme to lie quenched under the waters, 
Li: us by one example, (it were an infinite thing to {peake of all ) fee in what 
kinde of mutuall love the creatures of the water come fhort of thofe of tlic 
land. The Lamprey of all the creatures of this kinde doth wosthily beare the 
praife for its pietie towards thofe of whom it was generated, its affeClion to- 
wards thofe that are generated of her ; for firftfhe breeds epges within her, which in 
a fhort time after are fpauned. But fhee doth not as focne as her young ones are 
formed and precreated, bring them ftraight way forth into the light after the man- 
nerofother fifhes, thatbring forth their young alive, but nourifheth twe within her, 
as if fhee brought forth twice, and had afecond broode. The{e fhe doth nor pur 
forth before they are of fome bignefle, then {he teacheth them to fwimme and to 
play inthe water, but fuffers them not to goe farre from her, and anon gapes and re- 
ceives them by her mouth into her bowells againe, fuffering them to inhabite there, 
and to fecde in herbelly {0 long as fhee thinkes fit. 


That Savage, or brute beafls may 
bee made tame. 


‘A tee reporteth, that the Emperour of the Turkes hath at Caire (it was once cal- 
led Memphis) and at Conftantinople, many favage beafts kept for his delighr, 
as Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Antilopes, Camels, Elephants, Porcupines, and many 
otherof this kinde. Thefe they ufe to.leade about the citie to fhew. The mafters of 
them are girt with a girdle, hung about with little bells, that by noife of thefe bells 
the people may be forewarned to keepe themfelves from being hurt by thefe beafts. 
But in hope of reward and of gifts, they fhew them to Embafladours of range nati- 
ons, before whom they make thefe beafts doe a thoufand very delighrfull trickes, 
and inthe interim, they play their conntrey tunesand muficke upon their pipes, and 
other inftruments, and make many {portsin hope of gaine. 


That Fifbes alfo may be tamed. 


By: it is far more wonderfull that the creatures of the water fhould be madetame, 
and be taught by che Art of man. Amotg which, the chiefeft are heldto be the 
Eele. The fame things alfo are reported of the Lamprey. For wee have it recorded, 
that Marcus Craf/us had a Lamprey in his Fith- poole, that was forame, and fo well 
taught, that he could command her at his pleafure. Therefore as a demefticall and 
tame beaft he gave her a name, by which when he called her, fhe would come. Ard 
when this Lamprey died, hee mourned for her in blacke, asif fhee had beene his 
daughter. Which when his Collegue,Cvexs Domitius obje&ed to iim, by way of 
reproach, he replying, told him, thathe had buried three wives, and had mourned fv: 
None ofall them three. 


° 
That men were taught by beafts to polio, and to whet their 
weapons, and to lie in ambufh. 


Gon are carefull to keepe their weapons frem ru ft, and therefore they carti¢ 
them to the Armorers to be polifhed. Butin ths care, many beafts are nothing 0° 
ferior unto them ; for Boares whet their tuskes againft they fight. And the Elephant 
knowing that one of his tecth is doubled with digging at the rootes of trees to g¢* 


meate, keepeth the other tharpe, and touches nothing withir, preferving a 


his 


8 
7 
Eile 
‘ 
‘ 
Apk, 
| 
| 
| 
t 
4 | 


{B.2. 


nnet 
if of their 


© Walters, 
cin what 
fe of the 
beare the 
to- 
, which ia 
P ones are 
the man- 
ithin her, 
not put 
me andto 
bes and re- 
vite there, 


$ once cal- 
is delighr, 
and many 
afters of 
thefe bells 
efe beafts, 
ange nati- 
ull trickes, 
Yipes, and 


adetame, 
to bethke 
recorded, 
d fo well 
fticall and 
yme. Ard 
beene his 
y way of 
puracd fo: 


hey carrie 
othing in- 
Elephant 
ees to get 
ving it for 


his 


of the Excellency of Man 65 


hiscombare with the Ribmocerot his enem 
very remarkeable, that being in continual! 


we but the craft of the Khinocerot is 
enmity withthe Elephant, atthe time 


2 
= 
7 
Whi 
7 
~ 


(4 
j 
/ > ‘ 


> 
© CE 


i i | 
| 


LU 
‘ 


“= 


G 3 when 


I 
3 
\ 
| 
‘ 
Z YW? 
=< Zar’ | 
if Wie 
: 
AS: 
AS) q 
Se by My 4} | Hi} 2 Ti / ia liji fen, 


Of Living Creatures, and | L 18.2; 


Tke craftof hee ee ares for the battell, he whets bis horne againft a rocke, as if it were 
nor (if he can chufe) will he firike any other part of the Elephant 
evieh the Miles thar hie belly, becaufe he knoweés that part of the Elephant is fo tender, that it may 
pants beeafily pierced. This beaft is in length equall to the Elephant, but in height hee is 


inferior unto him, by reafon of the fhortneffe of his feere; he is of a palifh yellow co- 
Jour, and full of many {pots. 


Of the Lion, the Ichneumon, and thefe other beafts 
which are not eafily terrified. 


The previ- He Lion when hee goes, hath his clawes alwayes clutched, andas it were put 

dence of the upin their fheathes, not onely becaufe hee would leave no marke of his feete, 

whereby hee may bee traced and fo taken, but becaufe by continuall walking, hee 
{ould weare off, and bluntthe points of his clawes. Bulls when they fight charge 
one another with theirhornes, and like valiant fouldiers, provoke, and animate one 
another to the battell. 

The Ichneumon feemes to imitate the moft valiant fou'dier in his preparation, 
and acceffe tobattell, for hee bedawbes himfelfe with mudde, and doth as it were 
buckle and make tite his armour; e{pecially when hee is to encounter with the Cro- 
codile ; who although hee be a vatte beaft, is put to flight by this little creature. 

Thecreatet And this truly hath beene obferved to bee by the fingular providence of na- 
areterrified tyre, that the moft vafte creatures are terrified by the leaft things, and fuch from 
by thelsalte whence there can arife no danger ; fo they fay the Elephant doth ftartle at the 
grunting of an hogge, and the Lion, atthe crowing of a Cocke; although itbe 
reported of the Lion that no feare can make him turne his face. Thefe kinde of 
feares, terrors, and affrightments, arifing upon light, and moft ridiculous oc- 
calions , wee finde as well in the ancient as moderne Hiftories of our times, to 
have difperfed and put to flight mightie legions of fouldicrs, and moft potent 


armics, 
Of Cockes. 
Cockes are Ca kingly birds, and therefore nature hath adorned them with a combe, 
as with a princely Diadem, and wherefoever they come, their magnanimity 


martiall birds, 


and coutage makes them Kings. They fight with their beakes and their {purres : 


‘and withtheir martiall voice they fright the Lion who is otherwife the King of 
beafis. 


Of Conies. 
oiled Onies have taught us the Art of undermining the carth, whereby the moft 
taughtusunz; “loftie Cities, and ftru@ures reaching the very skies, are by taking away their 
dermining. foundation levelied with the ground. 

Afarcus Varrowrites, thatin Spaine there wasa towne, and that no meane one, 
which ftanding on a fandy ground was fo undermined by a company of Conies, 
that all the houfes tumbling and falling downe to the ground, the inhabitants were 
faine to depart and feeke new dwellings, 


Of Wolfes. 


The deceits 


and ambu thes 
of Wolfes, 


En have learnt the arts of waging warre from the Woulfes, for they 
‘come out by troupes, and lie in ambufh neere the townes which they have 
appointed, and then one of them runnes unto therowne ard provokes the dogges. 
And making as if hee runne away incites the dogges to follow him, untill he 
hath gotten them unto the place where their ambuth lieth, which ona fodaine ap- 


pearcth, and rufheth out upon them. And fo they kill and cate all, or as many of the 
dogges as they are ableto catch. 


fac 
\ 
rit) 
| 
thr 
pr 
Wada 
cra 
10‘ 
thiol 
eve 
tro: 
Wii 
S 
mut 
up 
Cul 
or 
Way 
lode 
nicn 
calit 
"| 
| | wacc 
Nene 
3 


vere put 
is feete, 
ng, hee 
Charge 
late one 


aration, 
sit were 
ic Cro- 
rcature. 
> of na- 
h from 
-at the 
itbe 
inde of 
OUS OC- 
mes, tO 
potent 


ombe, 
nimity 
UTTes 


Kine of 


moft 
y their 


ic one, 
Jones, 
s were 


‘They bave their Serjants to take care of their rankes, and keepe their nightly 


Of the Fox, 


N fubrilty and craftthe Fox exceedeth allother beafts; when in the chafe the Thecratt of 
| ow are at his heeles, he berayes and bepiffes his taile, and {wings ic in the “**°** 
face and eyes of the Dogges that follow him, and fo blinding them, in che meane 
time getts ground of them, To fetch the Hens downe trom their pearch he hath this 
devile, hee fhakes and {wings his taile upwards and downewards, as if hee meant to 
throw it at them; which they fearing tumble down, & he takes up one of them for his 
prey. His warinelie when he paffeth over a River that is frozen is wonderfull, for he 
goes foftly to the banck, and layes his eare to liften, if he can heare the noyfe of the 
water running under the ice. For if he can,back he goes, and will not venter to pafle 
over, The knowledge of which thing he could never meerely by his fubtiley and 4. 
craft atraine unto, but that of necefliry hee muft have fome faculty of reafoning. fecmes to seas 
ioyned with it,which by difcourfe aad by proving onething by another arrives at {or 
this Conclufion: WVhatfoever isliquid and maketha noyfe isin motion, whatlo- ~ 
ever liquid is in motion is notconcrete and frozen, that which is not concrete and 
frozen is liquid, whatfoever is liquid will not beare aheavier bedy, whatfoever 
will not beare aheavier body, cannot with fafety be adventured on; And therefore 
backe againe mutt I goe, and not patie over this River. 


His Serites 


Of Swine. 


Wine, if in the woods, they heare any one of the fame Heard with them crying 
out, they ftraight make a (tand, and marthalling their forces hafte all, as if they 
had beene warned by the found of a maruall trumpet, to the ailifiance of their 


tellowes. 
Of the fifhes Scarus and Anthia. 


plaacs reportsof the Scarz,that when one of them chancesto {wallow a hooke 
and be taken, the reft of the fame kind come intohis reskue,and fhearing the The tove of 
Line withtheir teeth fet him at liberry, But the readines of the Asthie to the Pubesonece 
mutuall affiftance of one another,is yet more manifeft, for by cafling rhe Line 
upon which the hooke hangeth,ontheir backe, with the fharpneffe of their fins they 
cut it afunder,and {0 fet free themfelves and their captived fellowes. 


Of the Pilot Fil. 


Hereis great kindnefle betweene the Pélot Fifh and the Whale.For aithough im 
bulke of body the Whale fo farr exceed him, yet he leadesthe Whale and goes 
alwayes before him as his Pilot, to keepe him from running himfelfe into any ftraight 
or muddy place, whence he might not eafily get out. And therefore the VV hale al- 
wayes followes him ,and very willingly faffers himfelfe to be led by him, it being for 
hisowne good. And in like manner he getts into the Whalesmouth, and there 
lodging himifelfe fleepes when he fleepes, and leaves bimnot either by day, or 
nighr. 


The Whales 
pilot or 


O/ Cranes, 


oe when they are totake along journey into fome Countrey croffe the feas, 

. Cranes order 
put their company info good order, that no Capraine can put his foldicrsin rheméetves ia 
better. For before they ftir oucof any place,they have as it were their trumpets to kt 
call them together, and-encouragethemtofly. They come together and then fly 
up’on high, thatthey may fee afar off, choofing a Captaine whom tlicy are to follow. 


The fentinell 


watchesbyturnes, P/utarch tells us that the Crane, which is appointed to ftand 


Sentinel] for all the reft,hoids a ftone inher foote,totheend that if the chance to 
pive 


ephant 
rit may 
llow co- 
! 
they 
have 
SCS. 
rill he 
ne ap- 
ofthe 


Living Creatures, and 

bi nature and fleepe, fhe may be waked by the noife of the talling ftone. 
Ieader lifting up his and out his long necke, lookes about hina 
farre and wide, and gives warning to the reft, of any danger, that may befall tiem. 
The firongeft leade the way , that they may the betrer with the Happing of their 
wings breake the force of the aire, and this they dee by turnes. And that they may 
the cafilier prevaile againft the force and oppofition of the winds,they difpofe their 
company into a wedge in the forme of the Grecke letter 4 or a triangle; and being 
skilfullinthe ftarres they forefee whentempefts are comming, and fly downe to the 
ground to keepe themfelves from the injury of the approaching ftorme, 


Of Geefe. 


T He Geele of Sicilic doe with great warineffe take care that by their ceeking and 
their noy{e, they doe not expofe themfelves to the rapacity of Birds of prey: 
The care of (for Plutarch fayth ) that when they are to fly over the hill Taurus, for feare of the 
the Geefethat Eagles that are there, they hold ftones in their mouthes to keepe themf{€lves from 
their sapling, oaooling, untill that they come unto a place where they may be fecure. 

harme, 


Lis. y 


Of Dragons, 


a Either are the Dragons leffe crafty ; for thus doe they overcome thofe vafte 
Dragons and otherwife invincible beafts the E/ephants, They lye inambuth and fuddaialy 
Let upon the Elephants where they feare no fuch matter, and involve their leggs with 
phant, the twines oftheir taile,in fuch fort, that they are notable togoe forward; and ftop 
their nofthrils with their heads fo that they cannot fetch their breath, they pull out 
their eyes, and wherefoever they find the skin moft tender, there they bite and fucke 
| _ the blood untill they make them fall downe dead, P/ny fayth, that there are Dragons 
ie foundin Athiopia of ten Cubits long, but that in India there ate Dragons of an 


100.foot long, that flv fohigh, that they fetch Birds and take their prey even from 
the midft ofthe cloudes. 


Of the Fifi called, the Fifherman, 


Theerafe of His Fifhis called the Fifherman, becaufe he hunts and takes other Fifhes,which 
mere he doth almoft by the fame cunning which the Catredl ufes; for he hath hanging 
takingher at his throat a certainebagge like the Wattells of a Turckycocke. This when hee 
prey. lifteth he cafteth out,and layeth before the little fifhes for a baite, and then by litle 
and litle drawes it up againe untill he catch for food the litle fithes feazing upon itas 
aprey. 
Of the Cuttell Fifh. 


The craft of Onderfull is the craft of the Cuttell Fithes, for they carry a bladder at their 
fullofa blacke juice or Inke, which they as foone as 

_____ they feele themfelyes taken ; that fo they may blinde the eyes of the Fifhermen, as 
aaa Plutarch faiths and as Ariftot#e witnefleth, they with their long fangs doe not onely 
37s hunt and take little Fifhes,but oftentimes alfo Mullets. 


Of the Armes or weapons of brute beafhs. 


oe beafts are naturally {6 furnifhed with armes, that they have no needeto get, 
make or borrow inany other place. } i 

And fome of them nevertheleffe are fo furnifhed with fach armes that they capti- 

vate thofe which hold them prifoners ; an example of this is the 7 orpedo,which dotl 

_ hotonely hurtby touch, butalfoby the net being betweene, he breathes fuch a qua- 

lity from him, as ftupifies the hands of the Fifhermen, fo that they are forced to let 

lofese.Tom, BOCtheirnets, and folet him goe; moreover ifit touch a fhip it makes it ftay. Thevet 

io, ow“ Writes, that the Perfiambay towards Arabia nourithes a Fith equall in length and 


thicknefle 


| 
‘ af 
24 
| 
" 
2? 
* 
% 
| 
y 
| 
= 
a 
‘ 
Vial 
>» 
A 


ftone. 
ut Ring 
them, 
their 
cy nay 
fetheir 
1 being 

-tothe 


ng and 
prey: 
of the 
as from 


vafte 
idainly 
with 
nd {top 
wll our 
dfucke 
yragons 
s of an 
‘n from 


t their 
one as 
as 

onely 


to get, 


capti- 
h doth 
ia qua- 
i to let 
Thevet 
h and 
knefle 


B. 2. 


thickneffe toa Carpe, on every fide encompafled with tharpe and {trong pricks, 
like ovr Porcupine, with which hee fights againft all kinds of fith. If a man 
chance butto be lightly hurt either with theie or his teeth, he will dye within 


24.houres. 


Ee faith moreover, that as he was carryed by force of tempeft through the 

Atlanticke Ocean, he {aw this hth having as it were a Saw inhis forehead of 
three foot long, and foure fingers bread, armed on each fide with fharpe {pikes; 
They call it /se/f in their Country {peech. 


Of the fifh 


ay Siete is another fithto be feene in the Arabian Gulfe, which the Arabians 
call Cafpilly, its two foot long and as many broad, it hath a skin nor much 
unlike a Dogfith, but armed with {pikes, one whereof he carryes in his forehead 
a foot and’ halfe broad, in fharpencfle and force of cutting not much fhort of a 
graver or chiffell s with this weapon when fhe is oppreft with hunger fhe affailes 
the firft fith thee meets, neither doth the give over before the carry her as a prey, 


4 


whither fhe pleafe,as Thevet faith he hath {eene. | ap 2s 


Of Crabs, 


Rabs and Lobfiers though in the quantity of their body they be but fmall, yet 
they ufe their forked clawes before, not onely in feeding bur alfo in defending 
themfelves and affailing others. 


Of the Docility of Beafts,and firft of the Dog. 


Eafts are aptto learne thofethings which men defire, whereby they fhew them- 
felvesact wholy void of reafon.For Degges, Apes and Horfes learne to creepe 
thorough the Iugiers hoopes, and rif¢ on their hinder feet as though they would 
dance, Plutarch tells, that a lugler had a Dog which would reprefent many things 


The wondere 


upon the ftage befitting the occafion and argument of the play; amongft rhe *!! docilliey 


reft, hee exceeded all admiration in that, that takinga foporificke medicine hee 
excellently feigned himfelfe dead; for firft as taken with a giddinefle in his 
head he begun totremole,thenprefently fell down,and lying on the ground, as ic 
were contraded his dying members, and lafly as if trucly dead he waxt itiffe; 
and moreover fuffered himfelfe diver{ly to be fitted according to divers parts of the 
Theater, the fable fo requiring .But when he,by thofe things that were faid and done 


of Dogs 


A (pedtacle 


Knew it wastimerorife, he firft begun to move his legs by litle and litle, as if hee had full ofadmires 


been wakened froma found fleepe; then prefencly with his heada litle litted up hee 
looked this way and that way to the great admiration of all the beholders, and finally 
rife up and went familiarly and cheerfully eo him he fhould ; the which fight the Em- 
perour (who was then prefent in Marcefws his Theater) never faw any 
which more delighted him. 

Of tie Ape. 


N Ape ts a ridiculous Creature,and which makes mea much {port, in imitating 
4 Atheir aGtions, There hath beene {een an Ape which would pipe and fing, and be- 
‘ides dance and write,and endeavour to performe many other things properto men. 
remember I faw in the Duke of Somes houfea great and curft Ape, who becaufe he 
much troubled many,had his hands cut off,who fuffering him{elfto be cured, when the 
wound was cicatrized, he grew more mild and docile. Wherefore cloathed ina grecne 
coate,and girt over his loiaes witha girdle,he carried hanging therat a cafe of! pecta- 
cles,a paire of knives & achilds handkercheite,He was commated tothe charge of the 


Mafter Cooke to teach, becaufe he had taken up his lodging iathe Chimney cor 


tien and mirth 


69 
| 
| 
| 
| 
which 
nging | 
en hee | 
y litle 
yn itas 
| 


Of Living and Lis. 2, 


The diligence 
of F aulconers 
in training up 


their Hawkes. 


The fight of 
the Merncaad 
B aulcon, 


Camel beth 
tame and 


The eafieand 
mot charceable 
keeping of 
Camels, 


Camels know 
when they 
have afuffiici- 
ent loaae. 


Camels both 

Carry Dur- 

dens andto 
rid¢upon, 


hee was taught many pretty tricks and feates, If atany time hee fwarved from his 
doGrine and precepts, ina trice the whip was upon his back loines, and much was 
abated of his daily allowance, for as Per fius faith, The belly is the mafter of Arts and 
fharpener of wit. By thefe means be profited fo,in a fhort time,that he muchexceeded 
all che Apes of his time in the glory of his wit;& there was none counted more skilful) 
in leaping and dancing to the pipe, running upa pole and nimbly leaping through his 
Mafters legs. Toconclude,he performed all the actions of a {trong Ape,and very re- 
verently carried up difhes with the waiters & fervingmen, and made cleane the difhes 
and platters by licking,and did much other drudgery,fo that he was commonly called 
- MafterZobn Do-sll, Ac dinner and fupper fitting in a chaire he {aid grace, and ¢aft his 
eyes up towards heaven,and rouled them this way and that way, and {mote his breaft 
with the ftumpes ofhis hands with much lamentation, and imitated prayer by the 
enafhing,or beating together of his tecth. He would turne up his taile to any that of- 
fended him (for his ceate fcarfe covered halfe his buttocks left he fhould have filed it)he 
made much other paftime, alwayes going upright by reafon of the cutting away of © 
his hands,unleffe at any timethrough wearinefle he were forced to fit on his buttocks. 


Of Ravenous birds. 


Vt let us take a veiw of Faulconers teaching ravenous birds how with {wift winzs 

carried aloft into the Aire,they may feaze upon other Birds and caft them downe 
deau to the !ground ; in performance whereof, they oftentoo freely foare up to the 
clouds fo that they carry themfelves out of the Faulconers fight, with a defire to fun 
them{clves, neglecting in the meane time their defigned prey. 

The Herne when the fees her felfe kept under and below the Fa/cen carried up by 
his {trong wings with a merveileus {wiftnefle, with her beake,which is long 8 fharpe, 
hid under her wingsand turned upwards,fhe receives the Falcon blinded with the 
heat of fight and detire of prey,carelefly fying downe and rufhing upon him ;fo that 
he often firikes him through the gorge, fo that ofttimes they both fall downe dead to 
the ground. Bur itthe Fa/cow without harme efcape the deceits by Arte & the happy 
turning of his body ,and the Herne be not caft downe,the Faulconer calling her backe 
with never foloud a voyce, yet by fetting up her Feathers fhe dares herto the pre- 
tended fight, | 

Of the Camels. 
He Cameill is a very domefticall and gentle beaft, and which is eafily tamed 
and taught all kind of obedience and fervice ; although forme of them are cruel] 
wilde and troublefome by biting and ftriking fuch as they meet, no leffe than vnea- 
med horfes. There isno neede to houfethem inthe night, for they may be lettin the 
plaine fields in the open and free aire,feeding upon the graffe and trees and cropping 
the tops of the thiftles, neither inthe morning doethey any whitthe worfe under- 
goeor carry their burdens. They are not put to carry burdens before they be foure 
yeare old. The Arabians geld them young, that they may enjoy their labour the 
longer, neither being gelt doe they rage tor love or defire of venery.At the put- 
ting in ofthe Spring they endure hunger and thirft for eight dayes; they are fo 
ducifull,chat at the becke of the Turkifh flaves, or but touched on the necke with a 
twigge, they prefently kneele on the ground to take up their burden, neither doe 
they lift themfelves up before that they finde they havea fufficient load layd upon 
them. Thofe which havebut one bunch on their backe are of Africke ; but {uch 
as have two bunches are of Afia, or Scythia. Thofe kinde of Camels that are 
the bigger are ufed to carry packes, but the leffer are ufed to ride upon, as ourhorfes 
are. ‘They love nothing fo well as beanes, and yet they live content with foure 
handfulls of beanes for aday. Thegreateft wealth ofthe Arabians confifts in Camels, 
and (o they eftimate their riches, not by the quantity of filver, or gold, but by the 
—pumber of Came/s. The Turkith Emperour ( Thevet being the reporter) made a 
_ Captaine over the heards of his Camels, giving hima great troope,of African and 
Chriftian flaves, that they might be the better looked unto. J have heard it 
reported ( faith Thevet ) by certaine Arabian, African and lewifh Merchants 
who were prefemt, at that time when Sw/tap Selim the firtt of thar name, 
befeiged 


a 
| 
‘ 
‘ 
| | 
7 
‘ 
4 
\ 
| 
| 
q 
‘ 


1B. 2, 


from his 
uch was 
rts and 
sceeded 
skilful} 
ough his 
very re- 
e difhes 
y called 
calt his 
S breafh 
r by the 
that of. 
it)he 


ittocks, 


t wines 
mdowne 
tothe 
to {un 


up by 
harpe, 
ith the 
fo that 
icad to 
happy 
backe 
pre- 


‘amed 
cruel] 
vnta- 

mn the 
Pping 
nder- 
foure 
r the 
> 
{o 
ith a 
doe 
Ipon 
are 
rfes 
ure 
nels, 
the 
and 
d it 
nts 


ne, 
ced 


way of ° 


L 13.2. 


| of the E 


cellency of SM an. 


Mew, his thar there 
7 Caire j ABzypt ( which in former times was called Memphis ) 
befeiged Caire in 


© 


troop 
of Canuels, 


71 
| 
| 
| 
\ | 

\) Om) 2p 
OTF 
SE ONS 
| 
| \\ J 
| = f, \\ 
i} /f | \ \\ \\ 
| | alll 
| SS ZR — 
| 
wae 
| 


Tofing like 4 
Nightingale 


The voice to 
beafts is of the 
fame ule, as 
{peech isto 


men, 


We areas ill 
as deafe, when 
vre heare an 
unknowne 
lenguage. 


Parrots aré 
wonderfull 


imitaters of 
mans YeIce, 


A talking Pie, 


Lié.2 


Living Creatures, and 


els, | befides a mighty 


was then ia that Emperours army fixtie thoufand Camm 
company of Mules, 


That Birds have taucht ws muficall tunes. 


eS He Nightingales are fweet and excellent fingers, tuning rheir notes with infinite 
quaverings, and diverfities of founds, fo pretily and {weetly, that humane in- 
duftry can {carfe equall the {weetaefle thereof, by fo many muficall inftruments ; fo 
that wee fay hee fings like a Nightingale, who varies his voice with much varictic. 
In which thing Birds much excell men, becaufe they have that admirall fweetnefle 
of finging from nature it felfe without any labouref learning , which men can {carfe 
attaine to in any {choole of muficke, by having their caresa thoufand times pluckt 
by the hand ofa curft mafter. 


That Beafts know one anothers voice. 


oe know one another by their voice, fo that they may feeme to talke and 
to laugh together, whileft flattering with their cares, they plucke in their nofes, 
with a pleafant afpe@ of their eyes; and as fpeech is given tomen, fo Birds have 
their natural! voice which is of the fame ufe to them, as f{peech isto us, For all 
birds of the fame {pecies, as men of the fame countrey, chantand chirpe to one ano- 
ther, when men underftand not the {peech of other men, unlefle of the fame nation. 
Wherefote the Scythian tongue is no more profitable to one Jiving inEgypt, thanif 
hee were dumbe ; nor the Egyptians underftand it no more than if they were deafe. 
Wherefore an Egyptian is dumbe and deafe toa Scythian. This thofe which travell 
well underftand how many dangers, how many troubles they undergee, becaufe 
they cannotexprefie their mindes, and require things neceflary for life. WWherefore 
to the affiftance of this unprofitable tongue, we are compelled to call the reft of the 
members, and to abufe the geftures of the head, eyes, hands, and feete. Truly the 
condition of brute beatts is not fo miferable, feeing thatallof the fame kinde where- 
foever they bee, may anfwer each other with a knowne voice. Truly if any fhould 
heare a Germane, Briton, Spaniard, Englifhman, Polonian, and Greeke, {peaking a- 
moneft themfelves in their native roagues, not underfianding any ef them, he could 


re difcerne, and certainely judge, whether hee heard the voice of menor of 
ea{ts. 


That Birds counterfeit Mans voice. 


| Pm Larkes ,Pies, Rookes, Dawes, ‘Crowes, Stares, and other fuch like Birds. 
{peake, fing, whiftle, and imitate the voices of men, and other creatures. In this 
Parrots exceli all other, being wondrous skilfull imitaters of mens voices, and very 
merry, but {pecially whea they have drunkea little wine. 

Pistarke reports that there was a Barber at Rome, who kepta Pic in his fhop, 
which {poke exceeding well, and that of her owne accord, none teaching her, when 
fhe firft heard men talking together ; fhee imitated the voice or cric of all beats fhee 
heard, as alfothe found of Drums, and the noife of Pipes, and Trumpets ; to con- 
clude, there wasnothing which thee did not endevour to imitate. There have beene 
Crowes that have fpokenand articulately fung fongs, and Pfaimes, and that of fome 
length. To which purpofe the Hiftorie of Atacrebins is notable; for hee tels thar 
there was onc amongft thofe, who went forth for lucke fake to meete with Asguftws 
Cafar, returning from the warre againft Antenins, who carried a Crow, which hee 
had taught plainely to pronounce this falutation ; Sa/ve €4far Imperator auguftisfime, 
that is, God fave shee, Omoft facred Emperor Cafar. Cafar taken with the noveltic 
of this {pecacle, bought this obfequious Bird with 2 thoufand peeces of filver- 
Pliny and Valerius havereckoned up amongft prodigies, Oxen and Affes that have 
{poken, Tomit infinite otherthings recorded by the ancients, Plato, Ariftotle Pliny, 
Plutarch, and other Philofophers of great credite, of the docilitic of beafts, and their 


admirable 


ada: 
nis¢ 
ther 
feare 
Ratt 
— and 
calm 
his f 
froma 
betwee 
dryes 
as itt 
prefe: 
and fa 
ercen 
| witne 
and 
whicl 
away 
that 
taine 
fant 
| ly hat 
food 
they t 
wing | 
Hauk 
th 
wayes 
Chick 
runs.ai 
The If 
death 
anothe 
the D 
with 
youcat 
cane: 
De han 
oraife | 


1B. 2, 


mighty 


| infinite 
1aN¢ in- 
ots; fo 
arietie. 
ectnefle 
an icarfe 
s pluckt 


alke and 
r nofes, 
ds have 
For all 
ano- 
nation. 


than if 


e deafe: 
travell 
becaufe 
Berefore 
tof the 
uly the 
where- 

fhould 
mking a- 
could? 
yor of 


Birds , 
n this 
dyery 


{hop, 
when 
ts fhee 
con- 
beene 
iome 
s thar 
hee 
veltie 

Iver. 
shave 
y 
their 
rable 


admirable felicity of underftanding .W hich things,if untruc,thefe learned would 
never have recorded in writing; leftfo they might brand with vanity chen which 
nothing is more bafe,) the reli of their Writings to pofterity in all enfuing ages, 


Of the S hy and Ant ipathy of Living creatures 


Aving briefly defcribed the underftanding ‘of brute, beafts, ie fecmes not 
pertinent. to fet downe fome things more worthy of knowledge, happe- 

ning unto them by reafon of Sympathy and antipathy; chat is, mutuall agree- 

ment and difagreement, which happens not oncly to them living, butalfo dead, 

a certaine fecret.and hidden propertic, through occafion whereof fome defire,o- 

ther fhun,and others profequute one another even to death. Inreftimony wher~ Therion 
of; The Lyon the king of beafts ore all other in courage and magnanimitic, faresa cocke, 
feares the Cocke, for he is not oniely terrified by his preferice,but al by his crowing 

being abfent. So anElephant feares a Hogge; but hee is {0 affraid of Mice and 

Ratts, that he will not touch the meat thatis given him, ifhee {mellrhat it hath 

beene defiled with fuch creatures.» There is deadly hatred betweene the Elephant 

and Rhinocerot ; yet when the Elephant isfurious amd angry, hee becoms quiet and 

calmeat the fightofa Ram. Ahorfe is fo afraid ofa Camel, that hecannmot endure ayn. face, 
his fight. The Dog hates the Wolfe, the Hart fiyesthe Dogge. The Smake flyes acamjl 


from and feares a naked man, and followes himbeing clothed. There is deadly hatred 


between the Afpis and Ichneumon, for he when he hath rowled him(eife in the clay, 
dryeshim{clfein the Sunne, and fo being covered over ( by doing thus diver{e times) 

as icwere with fhells, or armour, heenters into Combat, ftretching out his taile and 
prefenting his backe, untill he get opportunity to choake his adverfary, by leaping 

and fattening on her jawes, by which ftratageme he alfo kills the Crocodile. The 

ercen Lizard isa capitall enemy tothe Serpent, but moft friendly to man as Era/meus 
witneffcth by many hiftoryes concerning that matter, in his dialogueof Sympathy 

and Antipathy. There is a great deale of hatred betweene a man anda Wolfe, 

which is moft: manife& by thisjthat ifthe Wolues firft fee a man, his yoyce is taken 

away, and his intended cry hindred. If the Wealell intend to fet upon the Afpis 

that venemous Serpent; fheearmes her felfe by eating Rue, as a moft cer- 

taine Antidote. The Ape feares the Torpedo,as Erafmss manifetts by a plea- 

fant hiftory in the fore mentioned Dialogue; where alfo he pretily fhewes the dead- Water fouie 
ly hatred betweene the Serpentcalled Areus andthe Toad. The like hate is between 
the Owle and Crowes, fo that the Owle dares not go out, fly abroad, or {eeke her 

food unlefle by night. The wateror River fowle are ‘afraid of the Falcon ; that if 

they but heare her bells,they had rather be killd with ftaves and ftones, than take 

wing tofly into the aire. Sothe Larke yeclds her felfeto be taken bya man, leaft 

the fall intothe tallentsofthe Hobby. The Caftrill,or Merlin is naturally aterrour to 

Haukes, fothat they both fhun his voyce and prefence, 

The Kites are all at perpervall enmity withthe Crowes,whercfore the Crow al- Theenmity 
wayes gets away the Kites provifion, Allkind of Pullen feare the Foxe. The cee 
Chicken feares acithera Horfe,nor an Elephant, but f{carfe hacched,it prefently Crowes 
runs away at the voyce or fight of a Kite, and hides it felfe under the hens wings. 

The Lambeand Kid flye from the Wolfe when they firft fee him, nether doth The aitcore 
death give an end to that hatred, buc it fuperviues their funerall, An Experiment bowen‘ 
whereof (they fay) is, that if one drum be headed with Wolves skinnes and Wolfeisace 
another with Sheepes,andbeaten up together, you fhall {carfe heare the found of “#4 ¢* 
the Drum covered with fheepes skins. And befides, if you firing one Harpe 

with firings made of theepes gutts, and another with ftrings of Wolucs gutts, 

you cannot bring it to paffe, by any Arte,to make them agree and goe in one 

tune. Itis reported fromthe experiments of many men, that if a Wolwes head 

be hanged up onhigh in the place where Sheepé are,that they will not touch the 

gtafle how good and freth foever it be, nor reft quiet in any place, bur cumultuoutly 

runne up and downe, untill all fich kinde of terrour be taken away; hate 

etwixet 


/ 
* 
4 
f 
| 
| 
* 


Li 1352; 


Living Creatures, and 


Howto make Lael Mice and Weatells. appeares by this, that if you mixe never fo little of the 


cheefe that 
Mice will noe 
gnaw, 


‘nes ofa Weafcllin the rennct,with which you crudle you Cheefe, the Mice will 
eciiiees rouch that cheefe. The Linnet doth fo hare the bird Florus, that both 
their bloods put ynto one yeflell cannot be mixed together.A WVolues head hung up 
in a dovehoufe, drives away Poll.Cats.and Weafells. The Panther and Hyzna burne 
with fo great’hatred, that if both their skins be laid one againft the other, the Pan= 
thers will fhed the haire, the haires of the Hyxna remaining entire artd not moved; 
which ching, they fay, happensto the feathers of other birds if any onechancetotye 
themup in a bundle with the Eagles. Let thefe fufhfe for fome few examples of many, 
ofthe Antipathy amongft beafts. But of the Sympathy,and confeat of beafts among {ft 
themfelves,I thinke needleffe to write any thing, being it is fufficiently knowne toall, 


that one lay affociates another,and the cruell Beares agtee amonpft themfelves ;and 


Man hath giz 


beafts ofthe fame fpecies doe wonderfully confent one with another, 
Thas Man excells all beafis 


Now thinke it fit to aflay to write of that excellency of man over beafts, 

which I have fo long intended. Neither would I that Epicures and other too 
much naturall and materiate Philofophers, fo take thofe things I hane written of 
the endowments of beafts,as though we fhould thinke, there were no difference be- 
tweene man andbeaft. Ihadno {uch meaning, no fuch intention ; but onely thar 
man fhould not become too fately,or too ingratein lefle acknowledging God to be 
the Author of fo many benefits with which he abounds. For whatfoever we have 
largely {poken of beafts, yet thereis no comparifon betweene beafts and man, for 
there is too great a difference becweenethem. For mans minde is adorned with reli- 
gion, juftice, prudence, magnanimitic, faith, piety, modefty, clemency, fortitude 
and other vertues as lights, which fhine much morebright in man than in beafts. For 
they are fomerimes allinfome one man,each whereet are thought great in beafts. 
For {eeing that man is madeto the Image of God, it cannot be,how much foever he 
defile himfelfe with the pollution of vices that he cap fo ob{cure thatinbred lighr, 
but that alwayes fome beame of the divine wifedome wil! be inherent and fhine in 
him. But although by collation to fome beafts, hee may feeme a defedtive and 
weake Creature ;yet no fortitude nor firength of beafts can be fo great as to equal! 
the fortitude of man, For God hath emgraven in man the charaéter of his divine 
virtue, by the afliftance whercof,he might have all beafts under and obedient to him. 
And though by that we have formerly faid, beafts may feeme to have a certaine 
ihadow of reafon,yct that {mall lightis not fic for many and diverfe ufes, but there 
is oncly given them fo much providence, as fhould be {ufficient for them and the 
prefervation of theit bodyes, But mcn have reafon given them to crop or gather the 
fruits of erernall life,(as Ladfamtins faith)whereby it comes to pafle, that man onely,a- 
mongft fo many creatures, hath fenfe and underftanding of divine things. Which 
Cicero thought to be knowne by that, becaufe man onely hada certaine knowledge 
of Godin his mind. Wherfore he was enriched by Ged with reafon,{peech and hands 
as helps for the performance of all his a&tions;morcover by his fingular and almoft di- 


may 


he h 
bein 
bods 
ces. 
fhou 
inall 
tily 


the o 
{pee 
nan 
have 
lity a 
ftead 
Arts: 
clude. 
armes 
Can 
cannot 
of 
hands 
Lyon, 
fhed 
what ¥ 
tode fe 
oncly 
he ma. 
cafts in 
all thin 
he rule 
£oe,or 
any wh 


Od 


neice 


vine wit he eatily excells all brute beafts, For firft, reafon being his guide, he invented fecing t 


things neceflary for life, fitly impofed nameson the things invented befitting their thatthe) 


ven names 


things, 


hatures, framed letters and Characters, invented all liberall Artsand handy-crafts, | 
: and found meanes to meafure the Land and Sea. Hee hath obferved and drawne ol being 
: into an Artethe {paces of the Celeftiall Globe, the diftin&tions of the Starres,the heli. 


changes and orders of dayes and nights, of times and feafons,the rifings and fettings 
of Starres, and their power and effe&s over thefe lower bodyes. Laftly,he records ia 
writing Co perpetuall memory that which concernes his owne nature,or the nature of 
other things, the precepts and ordinances of life and manners, by which fiagular 


gift, we cannow conferre with Socrates, Plate, Ariftotie, and other Philofophers of 
ancient times, asifthey wereliving. - 


teined in 
in the nx 
whole wa 


| j 4. 
ie 
f 
| Man beares 
~ 
Gods image; 
te 
4 
t 
a 
*. 
bs 
= 


beafts, 
ther too 


itten of 
ence be- 
ely that 
edtobe 
have 
DENS for 
ith reli- 
Bortitude 
afis. For 
beafis. 
mever he 
d light, 
ine in 
ive and 
o equall 
s diviae 
to him. 
ertaine 
uc there 
and the 
ther the 
pnely,a- 
Which 
yledge 
hands 
noft di- 
vented 
g their 
-crafts, 
jrawne 
res, the 
lettings 
ordsio 
ature of 
ipgular 


_ f{eeing chat God would have them to live and have their being, onely for mans fake, 


ners Of 


the Excellency Man. 


what benefit man hath by realin of his native 
nhkedneffe and ignorance, 


Vt as Mans body is by nature naked and unarmed, fo is his minde likea {moth 
B cable in which nothing is painted nothing graven ; but for helpe of his nakedneffe 
he hath hands,and for fupply of his ignorance,reafon and {peech. And “by thefethree 
being as it were the minifters of infinite varietic of things,he clothes and defends his 
body with all things needful:& inriches his minde with the knowledge of Arts & {cien- 
ces. Now ifhe had certaine weapons borne with him, he fhould ufe them only ; if he 
fhould be borne skilfull in any Arte,he would meddle with none elf. Therefore be- 
caufe it was more expedient to ufc all forts of weapons with the hand, and be skilfull 
inall Arts; therefore he muft be borne wanting and ignorant of all. Ariffot/e very wit- 
tily called the hand the inftrument of inftruments : inimitation of which fpeech, one 
may rightly affirme, That Reafon is the Arte of Arts: for as the hand in worth exceeds 
the other infiruments,becaufe it can make, handle and fit them for ufe ; fo reafon and 
fpeech, thongh names of no Arte, yet comprehend and encfeafe all Arts. Theretore 
man feeing he hath his minde inftru&ed by Arte, that is by reafon; it is the fhould 
have his body defended with a weapon,or inftrument, that is,the hand ,which in agil- 
lity.and excellency fhould excell all other inffruments. For fo Man hath his hands in 


Gab cap. 4. sb. 
1.de fe parts- 


Asthe band is 
therm Arument 
of inftruments 
fo Reafonts 
the Arce of 
Arts, 


ftead ofall weapons , which he may ufe in warre and peace as the inftrumenis of all | 


Arts:he wants not the Bulls hornes,the Boares tuskes, the horfes hoves, nor to con- 
clude,any armes of any other beaft, For by the benefitof his bands he can handle other 
armes farre more profitable and fafe,asa Lance,Sword ,Spedre, halberd; but manalio 
can ufe at fome diftance the bew, fling and handgun, when the horne aid the hoofe 
cannot be ufed but neer at hand.But fome may fay ; A Lion exceeds a manin {wiftnes 
of foot ; what then? is man therefore infcriour to him ?no for by the meanes of his 
hands and the guidance of his reafon he bridling and riding upon a horfe, out runs the 
Lyon,and being victor followes him to and againe as he himfelfe pleafes, or vanqui- 
fhed flyes away, and from the horfes backe as from a tower wounds the Lyon with 
what weapons he pleafes. Toconclude,man is aboyndantly provided with meanes, 
to defend himfelfe from the violence of all other beafts, For this purpofe he doth nor 
oncly harneffe himfelfe as with brafen walles, but alfo makes ditches and Bulwarkes; 
he makes by the miniftery of his hands all kind of weapons weaves himfelt gramients, 
cafts into the water and drawes forth nets to catch fith; and to conclude, he performes 
all things to his owne contentment,and having that priuiledge granted him by God 


Man under 


>» God isthe 


he rules over all the earth ; allthings which lye hid inthe bowelis of the earth, which ‘iagand Em- 


goc,or creepe vpon the earth which {wim in the fea, and fly through the aire,or are fy, 
any where fhutup in the compaffe of the skie, are in mans dominions | 


How wonderfull God hath fhewed him(elfe in making man. 


eur ofthe 


Ods Deity and providence hath principally fhewed it felfinthe crcation of man; denis theend 
neither his {0 admired light hath fo fhone in the production of other creatures ,. ft nse 


thatthey might ferve him. Therefore man is,ifwe diligently confider all his endow- 
ments,a certaine patterne and rule of the divine majefty &(if If I may fo fay) Artifice, 


hing’. 


For being made to Gods image,he is as it were his coine exceeding the capacity of all Mana litle 


humane underftanding. Which feemed a juft reafon to the ancient Philofophers, that 
he fhould be called Mecrocofimos,or alitle world,becaufe the particles of all things world, 


teined inthe compafie of heaven and carth,are contained in his minde and body, that 


in the meane time I may in filence paffe ver his foule more great and noble than che 
whole Id. 


why 


1Bi2: 
L I Bede 7 >) 
of the | 
lice will 
hung up 
ja burne 
he Pan= 
moved; 
yf many, 
ne toall, | 
eS and i’ 


*“obnoxiousto 


* 


Of Living and L 13.2, 


Why Nature bath not given Man the facultic of perfaging. 


T His feemes the reafon, that men by the inftiné of nature doe not forefce the 
Manta not future icafons and difpotitions of the heaven and aire ; becaufe, fecing they have 
the Aweand received certaiwe fparks of prudence from God, by whofe care and guidance they 
mam are led to the knowlege of things by no deceiptfull but certaine judgment,being not 
obnoxious to the conditions and changes Of times and feafons.as bealts are. Where- 
fore knowing all the{e airy changes to be placed under them,that isto fay their minds, 
according as occafion ferves, and their minds defire, they give themfelves to mirth 
when the Aire is wer, ftormy and darke,and on the contrary ina cleare and faire fea- 
fon to a fincere and grave meditation of things fublime & full of doubt, But beatts ac- 
commodating them{elves to that difpofition of the aire which is prefent & at hand, 
are lively,or fad,not from any jadgment as men,but according to the temper and co- 
plexion of their badies following the inclinations of the aire, and of the humors one 
while ditfafed another while contraéted. Neither ought we to blame man,becaufe he 
One man will Can imitate the voyce of beatts, but rather much commend him, that he can infinite- 
LY Wreftand vary one thing,that ishis voyce;for mencan barke like Foxes and doggs, 
infimtevarie- Grunt like hogs , whet and grinde their tecth like boares;roare like Lyons;bellow like 
ot bealts» Bulls-ncigh like horfes ; knacke their eceth like Apes; houle like Wolues; bray like 
Affes; bleate like Goats and Sheepe; mourne like Beares, Pigcons and Turtles ; 
Keeke and gaggle like geefe ; hiffe like Serpents ; cry like Storkes, caw like a Crow, 
and crow like a Cocke, clocke like Hennes ; chatter as Swallowes and Pyes ; fing 
like Nightingales; ctoake like Frogs; imitate the finging of Wafpes and Hum- 
ming of Bees; Mew like Catts. The finging of Birds icarfe feemes to merit 
Thepowerof the name of Muficall, compared ro the harmony of men fitted and tuned with 
Mutckee infinite variety of voyces.For with this they poffeffe the eares of Kings and Princes. 
provoke and temper their wrath,and carry mensminds beyond themfelvcs,and trani- 
forme them into what habits they pleafe. But if thofe cruell beafts have any ho- 
maniti¢, they owe it alltoman. Fer he tames Lyons, Elephants, Beares , Tigers, 


Leapards, Panthers and fuch other like. 


Ofthe Crocodile, 


pies reports of the Crocodile ( whofe figure is here deliniated ) that being 
tamed, and taught by man, hee doth not onely heare mans voyce, and an- 
fweies to his call, but fufters himlelfe to be handled,and opening his throate, 
lets his teeth be fcratched and wiped with a towell. How {mall a part of Phy- 
ficke js that, which beafts are taught by nature ? Certaiacly nothing in com- 
patifon of man, who by the ftudy and pracife of a few ycares can learne 
‘athis fingers endes all the parts of Phyficke : and pradiife them not oncly for 
his ownce, but alfofor the common good of all men, But why cannot beats 
attaine unto the knowledge of Phyficke fo well as men? I thinke, becau{é 
4 great an Arte as Phyficke is, cannot be attained unto by the dull capacities of 

cafts, 

But for that I have written of the Religion of Elephants, if I mutt {peake 
according to the truth of che matter, wee cannot fay they worfhip God, or 


A tame 
codile, 


Inwhat inte 
we laid 


 Phamshad = have any fenfe of the divine Majefty. For how'can they have any knowledge of 


aaigien, fublime things or of God, feeing they wholy following their foode, know oot 
how to meditate on celeftiall things? Now for that they behold and turne then 

felves to the Moone by night, and to the Sunne in the morning, they doe not 

that as worfhipping, or for that they conceive any cxccllency or divinitie 19 

the Sunne; but becaufe nature {o requiring and Jesding them, they feele theit 

bodyes to rejoyce in that light, and their cntralls and humors to move and ftirre 

them 


than th: 


in their 


He 
divi 


ny 
ent 
j 
| 
| 
ia 
4 
/ 


or 
wel 


— 


them to it. Therefere when we attributed religionto 


S, we faidi 
popularly, trucly,and moxzethat we might exhort men tot rater 


e they 
AES 
alts ac- 


ing not 
here- 
1) 


have | 
Hill 

r minds, 
> mirth 1} 
fea- | 
low like 
ml urties ; 
es ; fing War 
Hum- ID! | 
o merit | 


Pd with 
Princes; 


ll 


_ 
"= 


liger 
p 


at being BS. 
and an- 
throate, 
com- 
pnely for ‘ 2 
beafts 
cities of | 


t fpeake 

d, of Bar 
rr) of than that we thought Elephants had any knowledge ofdivine worthip implanted 
ow not in their mindes. 

Bethem- That maa may attaine anto the knowledge of all voyecs 

doe not and tongnts. 


nitie 10 Hedocility of mans wit is fogreat, and the facillity of the bedy obeying that 
le theit divine gift of wit fuch, that he is not onely able co learne ro uaderftand and {peak 


them 


| 
| 
| 
3 
| 
| 
Of 
| 
| 
4 


Living Creatures, 


the rongues of diverfe nations differing in fo many peculiar languages ; and not only 
Man notone- to imitateand counterfeit the voyces of all beafts though fo much different from 
man, which many Hattering and jugling companions, followers of other mens tables, 
precerofthe will due; butalfo may be able toknow and underftand both what they preterd and 
andbieds,  fAgnifie, In confirmation of which thing they cite the Philofopher 4pofonins molt 
famous in this kind of ftudy and knowledge. He walking on a time amongft a company 
of his friends thorough the field,and {eeing a Sparrow come flying and chirping much 
to diverfe other Sparrowes fitting upon atrec,is reported to have faid to thofe which 
were with him: That bird, which came flying hither, told the other in her language ; 
that an Affe laided with corne was falien downeat the City gatc,and had fhed the 
wheat upon the ground. Wherefore Apollonius andall his friends which were with 
him went thither to {ce whether it were fo, and found that it was fo, as he had told 
them, and ob{erved that the Sparrowes moved thereto by the comming of the other, 

were cating up the graines of Corne fhed on the ground, 
But for Crowes and Pyes artificially taught to counterfeit mens voyces, it is too 
{mall a thing, that for that caufe they fhould contend with men. For they have 
quickly babled all they have learnt with longer coftand labour,tedioufly finging ftill 
the fame fong, and wharfeever they prate they doe it without fenfe, underftanding or 
any reafon for what they fay. But manalwaies contemplating fomewhat more high, 
Thenageens ftillthinkes of greater things than thefe prejent, and never refts. But burning with an 
oflearning in infinite and endlefle defire of knowledge, hee doth not onely covet to know thefe 
a things which appertaine to foodand clothing, but by cafting up his eyes towards 
heaven,and by thelight of his minde,he learnesand underftands things divine. Which 
is fo certaine an argument of the celeftiall originall of our foule, that hee which con- 
fiders thofe things can no wayes doubr, but that we have our minds feafoned, by the 
univerfall divine underftanding. Butnow it istime for us to fet upon the defcription 
of body, the habitation and fit inftrument of all the functions of that divine 

Minac, 


The ende of she fecond Beoke. 


to thoelc 
they ma 
and 
health 
formati 
three, by 
{ure of @ 
{werves 
the Phy@ 
thofe th: 
whether 
ons tem 
containe 
thing Gai 
nature a 
broken 
ing that | 
in preferj 
thereof, 

cording t 
rant of t 


a 
of 
™~, 
RICE 
4 
| a 
| 
| 
* 
A 
fom 
IN 
4 
— 
May iayt 
the body 
b od 
2 


i 


THIRD BOOKE 
TREATING THE 
Anatomy Mans body. 


Following cuftome andthe manner of fuch as before me have 
writtenof Anatomy, will firft, (chat I may make the mindes 
it of the Readers mere attentive and defirous ot thefe ftudics) 
declare how neceffary it is,and alfo how profitable, andthen 

thew the order to bee obferved in it, before lcometothe 

particular defcription of mans body. 

Furthermore, how Anatomy may bee defined, and the 
manner of the definition of the parts. For the firft, the know- 
" ledgeof Anatomy feeres in my judgement very neceflary ledge of Ana- 
to thofe that dcfire to excell, or attaine co perfe€tion of Phyficke; that is, whereby 
they may be able to preferve the prefent health of the body, and the parts thereof, 
and drive away difeafes, For how can either Phytition or Chirurgion preferve 
health by the ufe of the like things, which confifts in the temperament, con- 

. formation, and natural! union of the parts ; or expell the difeafe which hurts thofe 
a three, by the like ufe of their contraries, unlefle he fhall know rhe nature and compo- 
Pa {ure of the body, and underftand as by the rule of this knowledge, how much it 
{werves from the nature thereof ? Wherefore it is excellently faid of Hippocrates; that snitio lib, de 
the Phyfition called rocure the ficke Patient, ought diligently to contider, whether 
ue thofe things that are in him, or appeare to be in him, be likeor unlike, rhat is, 
whether the Patient be like himfelfe and his owne nature in all his parts and fun&i- 
ons,temperature, Compofure and union; that hee may prefervethofe which are yet 
contained in the bounds of narure,and reftore thofe that are gone aftray. Which 
thing Galew hath alfo confirmed, {pecially where hee faith ; hee muft well know the 
nature and ftruiure or compofure of the bones, who takes upon him co reftore them 
broken or diflocated to themf{elves and their proper feates or places. Moreover fee- 
ing that healing doth not oncly confiftin the knowledge of the difeafe, but as well 
in preferibing fit medicines and like application of them to the body and the parts 
thereof, all which by their natural diffimilitude, doe require unlike medicines, ace 
cording to Galens opinion: I prethe tell mee, who can performe this, which is igN0- 
fant of the defcription of the whole and the parts thereof, taught by Anatomie? We 4,07 44-36 
may fay the like of the Apothecarie, who ignorant of the {cituation of the parts in". 
the body, cannot apply Emplaifters, Ointments, Cataplafmes, Fomentations, Epic © ‘ihe 
themes, bagges tothe fit places, astothe fucures of the skul!, ro the men sa Ny 

tomacke, 


only | 

| 

with | 
told T E 
$too 
have 
{till 
or 
nigh, 
h an 
hefe 
ards 
hich 
con- | 
the | 
tion 
vine | | 


So 


Why when 
theliverishot, 
phe ftomacke 
is commonly 


cold. 


Theknows 
ledge of Ana- 
tomy, iscom- 
modiousfoure 
manner of 
wayes, 


There is a 
threefold 
method: 


The Authors 
wmtent, 


What Anato- 
mile is, 


Mow a defi- 
nition differs 
from ade=x 
(criptions 


the 


Stomacke, Spleene, Reines, Wombe or Bladder, For example, lct usimagine the 
Liver to be troubled withahot diftemperature, but on the contrary the ftomacke 
with acojd¢ which commonly happens, {ecing the Liver hotter than it ought tobe, 
fends up many vapours tothe head ; from whence cold humors fall into the fiomacke) 
ifhot things to be applied to the ftomacke by the Phy fitions preicription, be by the 
Apothecarie making no difference, applied both to the ftomacke and neighbouring 
Liver (-which may chanee if hee be ignorant that the fiomacke bends fomewbatto 
the left fide under the breaft-blade , but the liver fo takes up the right fide of thebody 
thatwith agreat parr thercof, it covers almoft all the ftomacke)will not he much of- 
fend by enmcreafing the hot diftemper of theliver, and norehercby giving cafe, or 
helpe to the difeafe ? Shall not by this his ignorance, the Patient be fruftrated of his 
defire, the Phyfition of his intent, and the medicine of its effect > By thefe examples 
I thinke it mof manifeft,that the Anatomicall knowledge of the parts of the body is 
exceeding neceffary to all Phyfitions, Chirurgions, and Apothecaries, who will 
practife Phyficke withany praife tothe glory of God, and the benefit and good of 
man, for whofe fake wee have writ thefe things, and illuftraced them by figures, 
{ubjecting the parts tothe eye, and fitly put themin their proper places, 

But Anatomy is cotfpmodious foure manner of wayes ; the firft is, becaufe thus 
we are ledto the knowlcdgeof Ged the Creator, as by the cfie& to the caufe; for as 
we reade in Saint Paw/, The invifible things of God are made manifeft by the vifi- 
ble. The fecond is, That by meanes hereof wee know the nature of mans body, and 
the parts thereof, whereby wee may more ¢afily and certainely judge and determine 
of fickneffe and health. The third is, that by the knowledge of the body and its parts, 
andtogether therewith its affections and difeafes, wee may prognofticate what \is to 
come, and foretell the events of difeafes. Laftly, the fourth is, that confidering the 
nature of the difcafed part, we may fitly prefcribe medicines, and apply them in their 
due places. 

Now we muf& declare in what order Anatomie may be fitly delivered ; but irfhwe 
mauft obferve there isa threefold Methode ; The firft is called of Compofition , bee 
ing very commodious forthe teaching of Arts, which drifotle hath ufed in his 
Workes of Logicke, and natural] Philolophy, the orderand beginning taken from 
the leat and moft fimple tothe more compound. The fecond of Divifion, fit for the 
inventing or finding out of {ciences, Galex hath followed this order in his Bookes of 
Anatomicall Admuiniftrations, andof the ufe of the parts. The third of Definition, 
which theweth the nature and effence of things, asappeares by Galex in his Booke 
De Arie parva, And decaufe this order doth alfo profecute the divifions, therefore 
it is commonly accuftomed te bee comprehended in the compaffe of the fecond. 
Therefore J will follow thisin my Anatomical] Treatife, deviding mans bedy into 
its parts, which I willmotenely fubje& to the eye inthe way of knowing them, but 
alfo to the minde in the faithfull underftanding them, For I will adjoyne thofe things 
that aredelivered of them by Ga/en in his Bookeof Anatom, Adminiftrations, with 
thofe which hee hath taught in his Bookes of the ufe of ihe parts. For there hee firly 
laies the parts of mans body before our eyes, tothe fenfe, But here he teaches to 
know them, net to fec them, for hee fhewes why, and for what ufe they are made. 
Having bricfely handled thefe things, wee muftdeclare what Anatomy is; that as 
Cicero faith out of Platecs Phedro, itmay be underftood of what wedifpute. And be- 
caule we attaine that by definition ( which is a fhort and plaine {peech, confifting of 
the Genas and difference of the things defined, being the effentiall parts, by which the 
hature and cfience of the thing, is briefly and plainely explained) fir ft we define Ana- 
comy, then prefently explainethe particular parts of the definition. 

Wherefore Anatomy, (if you have regard to the name ) is a perfect and abfolute 
devifion, orartificiall refolution of mans body into its parts, as well general! as par- 
ticular, as well compound asfimple. Neither may this definition feeme illegitimate, 
{pecially amongft Phyfitions and Chirurgions. For fecing they are Artizans humilia- 
ted to the fenfe, they may ule the proper and common qualities of things for their ef- 
fentiall differences and formes. As onthecontrary, Philofophers may refufe all def- 
ations as {purious, which confit not of the next Geawsand the moft proper, and ef- 

fentiall 


fentia!! 
differend 
draw in 
intend, 
matte! « 
certain 
Refoluts 
were in 
rence, 
and una 
feparat: 
prope: 
divilior 
For 
becaufe 
fealest! 
mot as it 
fickne fig 
we 
body, 
kindes 
with w! 
their p: 
head, b: 
the fim: | 
ment, 
fat, mary 
note th 
reafon. 
foiure!y 
obfcur« 
Butit® 
I willa 
2re cou 
connex 
bowels 
©xcrem 
riofteun 
its othe¢ 
preven 
there is 
ding to 
cording 
led co 
thefe 
legec,! 
And 
they ca 
are cal! 
and org 
the pre 
afiiftan 
it felte. 
the coa 
ftand, @ 
One 


3 


fentiall differences.But feeing that,through the imbecilitie of our underftanding, fuch 
differences are unknownce to us,in their places we are compelled in defiain g things, to 
draw into one many common and proper accidents,to finith that definition which we 
intend, which for that caufe wee may more truly calla defcription, becaufe for che 
matter and cflentiall forme of the thing, it prefents us onely the matter adorned with 
certaine accidents. This appeares by the former definition, in which Divéfion and 
Refoluticn {tand tor the Genus, becaule they may be parted into divers others, as it 
were into /peetes. That which is added over and befides, ftands in place of the diffe- 
rence, becaufe they feparate and make different the thing icfelfe from all other rath 
and unartificiall diffeGtions, We muftknow ap artificial] divifion, isno other thana 
feparation of one part from another, without the hurt of the other, obferving the 
proper circum{cription ofeach of them, which if they perifh or be defaced by the 
divifion, it cannot be faid to be artificiall 5 and thus much may fuffice for the parts of 
thedefhuition in general. 

For as muchas belongs to the explication of each word ; we faid of Atanz body, 
becaufe, as much as lies inus, we take care of, preferve the health, and depell the i- 
feafes thereof , by which it may appeare that mans body is the fubje@ of Phyficke, +)... “a 
not as it is mans, or confifls of matter and forme, but asit is partaker of health and of Puyticke, 
ficknefle. 

Wee underftand nothing elfe by a part, according to Galen, than fome certaine Gat 
body, which is not wholy difioyned, nor wholy united with other bodies of their we part WO. Le 
kindes; but fo that, according to his opinion, the whole being compofed therewith, <i 
with which in fome fortit isunited, and in fomekinde feparated from the fame, by 
their proper circumf{cription, Furrhermore by the parts ss generall, | underftand rhe 
head, breaft, belly, and cheir adjunéts. By the particular parts of thofe, I underftand, The — 
the fimp}e parts, asthe fimilar, which are niae in number, asa griflle, bone, liga- °*"""”* 
ment, membrane, tendon, nerve, veine, arterie, mufculous iicfh; adde fibers, 
fat, marrow, the nailes and haires ; otheromit them as excrements ; butwee muft 
note that fuch parts are called fimple, rather in the judgement of the fenfe, than of 
reafon. For if any will more diligently confider the nature, they fhall finde none ab- 
folurely fimp!e, becaufé they are nourifhed, have life and fenfe, either manifett or 
obfcure, which happens not withouta nerve, veise, and artery. 

Butif anv thallobject, chat no nerve is communicated to any bone, except thereeth, 
I willanfwer, that nevertheleffe the bones have fenfe by the nervous fibers, which feels. 
are communicated to them by the Periofiewm,as by whofe mediation the Perioffeam is 
connext to rhe bones, as we {ec it happens to thefe membranes, which involue the 
bowels. And the bones, by this benefit of the animail fenfe expell the noxious and 
excrementitious humors from themfelves into the {paces betweene them and the Pe- 
riofteum, which as indued with a more quicke fenfe , admonitheth us, according to 
its Office and dutie,of that danger which 1s ready to icaze upon the bones,unl -fle it be 
prevented. VV herefore wee will conclude according to the truth of the thing, that 
there is no part in our body fimple, but only fome ate fo named and thoughr, accor- 
ding to the fenfes; although alfo otherwife fome may be truly named fimple, as ac- 
cording to the peculiar and proper flefh ofeach of their kindes. Thofe parts arecal- Thecom- 
led compound which are made or compolcd by the mediation, or immediately Of organicall 
thefefimple, which they terme otherwife organicall or inftrumentall ; as an arme, Par 
legee hand, foore, and othets of this kinde. 

And here wee mutt obferve, that the parts are called fimple and fimilar, becanfe 
they cannot be devided into any particles but of the fame kinde; but the compound 
are called diffimular from the quite contrary reafon. They are called infrumental! 
and organical! , becauferhey can performe fuch actions of them{elves, as ferves for 
the prefervation of themfelves and the whole; as the eye of it felfe, without the 
afhiflance of any other parr, teeth, and by this faculty defends the whole body, as alfo 
it felte. Wherefore it is calledan inftrument or organe, but not any particle of it, as 
the coates, which cannor of it felfe performe that ad, Whereby wee muft undet- Foure par 
ftand, that in each inftrumentall part we muft diligently cbferve foure proper parts. ore a 


One by which the action is properly performed, as the Cry (talline humour in the apne 


the | 
cke 
D be, 
Ke) 
the 
ring 
ody 
of - 
, or 
his 
pies 
ly is 
will 
of 
| 
thus 
Tas | 
and 
arts, 
to 
the 
heir 
twe | 
Dee 
his | 
| 
the 
Ss of 
ion, 
oke 
ore | 
nd. 
| 
but 
ith 
itly 
de. 
as 
be- 
the 
Nae 
ute 
ates 
lia- 
e{- | | 
all 


> 
IB, 


the 


eye; another without which the ation cannot be performed, as thenerve & the other 
humorsoftheeye. The third, whereby the action is better and more conveniently 
done, asthe tunicles andmufcles. The fourth, by which the action is preferved, as 
the cye-lids and circle of the eye. The fame may be {aid of the hand, whichis the 


proper infirume nt of holding, for it performes this ation ; firft by the mufcle,as the 


incipall part ; Secondly, by the ligament, asapart without which fuch action can- 
Thirdly by the bones and nailes, becaufe by the benefit of thefe 
parts,the a€tion is more happily performed. Fourthly ,by the veines, arteries and skin, 
for that by their benifite and nfe, the reft, and fo confequently the action it felfeis 
refer ved. 
Boure forts ; But we mutt confider, that the inftrumentall parts have a fourefold order. Th 
ae ” as faid to be of the firft order,which are firft and immediately compofed of the fim- 
ple, are onely the authors of fome one ation, of which kindearethe mufcles and 
veficls. They are of the fecond which confift of thefe firft fimple, and others befides, 
as the fingers, They are counted of the third rancke, which are compofed of parts of 
the fecond order and fome befides, as the hand taken in generall. ‘The fourth order 
is the moft compofed, as the whole body, the organ and inftrument of the foule. But 


you muft obferve, that when we fay the mufcles and veffels are {imple parts, we refer 


you tothe fenfe and fight, and to the underftanding, comparatively tothe 


are morecompound ; but if any confider their eflence and conftitction, he fall un- 
derftand they are truly compound, as we faid before. Nowit remaines, that wee 
underftand, that in each part, whether fimple or compound, nine things are to bee 
_...  confidercd, as fubftance, quantitic or magnitude , figure, compofition, number, 
beconfidered Connexion, (by which name, we alfo underitend the orginall and infertion) tempe- 
ineachparts ~ rgture, action, and ufe ;that by the confideration of thefe things, every one may ex- 
ercife the art of Phyficke, in preferving health, curing ditcafes, or forefecing theire- 
vents and ends. | 
wine che th But alfo wee muft note, that of the erganicall parts, there be three, by whofe 
y thethree 
principal power the body is governed; which for that caufe they call regent and principal!; 
partsarcfo  becaufe they governeall the reft; they are the liver,heart, and braine. Butthey are 
called, 
called principal], not onely becaufe they are neceflary for life ( for the ftomacke, 
winde-pipe, lungs, reines, bladder, and fuch like parts perhaps are equally as necef- 
fary for life ) but becaufe from each of thefe three, fome force, power, and facultic, 
or alfo matter neceflary forthe whole body, flow over allthe body, when no fuch 
thing proceeds from the reft of the parts, For from the liver a matter fit for nou- 
rifhhment, is diftributed by the veines through all the body ; from the heart the viral 
force diffufed by the arteries, imparts life to the whole body ; from the braine by the 


nerves a power of facultic is carried through ali the parts of the body, which | 


gives them fenfe and motion, 


Galen would have the Tefticlesto be of this inde, not for the neceffitie of the ir. 
dividuall,or peculiar body, but for the prefervauion of the Species or kind. And more- 
over in his book de Semine comparing the Tefticles with the heart,he makes them the 
more noble by this reafon, that by how much itis better to live well and happily, 
than fimply and abfolutely tolive, by fo much the tefticles are more excellent than 
the heart,becanfe with them wee may live well and pleafantly,but with this fimp! 
live, as we fee by the example of Eunuches, and fuchas are gelt, by which the Tefti- 
cles feeme rightly to be accounted amongft the principall parts; for nature fecing it 
defired, that this its worke fhould be immortal, for the attaining of that immortality 
which it intends, frames thofe parts, like as prudent founders of a Citie, who-doe 
not onely procure co furnith their citie with many inhabitants, fo long as they are in 
building it, but alfo that it may remaine in the fame flate and condition for ever, orat 
Theufeand leaft for many ages. And yer notwithftanding of fo many cities built in the firft me- 
mory of man, there remaines none, whofe fame and ftate, together with the buil- 
vingforgene. OCIS name is mot decaied and perifhed, But this humane worke of nature, ftands yet 
ration, fecure for this many thoufand of yeares,. and fhall endure hereafter, becaufe it hath 

found a way by which every one may fubfticute another in his place before he depart. 
Hence it is that all creatureshave members fit for gencration, and pleafures inferted 


in 


da Arte 
4, 


ries, and | 
diflection 


Animall: 
is diftingu 
Secit 
ercilivea 
étive facu 
ficke facu 
culties ; 
faculties, 
pulfive. 
After t 
dy, at the 
call Anie 
fubalteri 


eenerall 
not 


the heac 


defireot 
confiders 
viduals. 
Hithe 
obferved 
definitior 
which 15, 
body, ho 
and touc 
defcribin 
cifed the 
ftinGiiod 
the bod y 
beginning 
nerall div 
kno 
ther An: 
guith fr 
teach to 
From wl 
{hunni 
dy, whi 
| WV hx 


jnthofe members, by which they mightbe inticed to mutual! embraces and copula. 


tions. But the mind, which hath deminion over thofe members, hath an incredible 
se of propagating the iffue, by which alfo brute beafts incited, defireto propa- 
e their kindsfor ever. Fos feeing that nature underftands all thefe her workes 
confidered particularly by themfelves, are fraile and mortall, it hath done what it 
onaee recompence that fatall neceffitie of dying, by a perpetuall fucceffion of indi- 
. Hitherto we may feeme tohave aboundantly thewed what neceffitie of know- 
ledge in Anatomy belongs to ali Artizans in Phyficke, and alfo what order is tobe 
obfervedin thefame, And laftly, how it isdefined, and the reafon of the parts ofthe: 
definition. Wherefore it remaines that wee profecute what wee have taken in hand: 
which is, that wee. fhew and declare now to know allandevery the parts of mans 
body, how many;and what they be,and to underftand wherefore they be. For al- 
though the ttue knowledge ef Anatomy may be perfeé&ted by the fight of the eye, 
and — and handling each part with the hand, yet neverthelefle the labour of 
defcribing Anatomy is notwaprofirable. For by reading, fuch ashave often excr- 
cifed themfelves in the difle&ing of mens bodies may reftefh and helpe their memo- 
ret, ane fuuch as have not, may make plaine and eafic the way to the underflanding of 
diffections. 


C uap. I, 


defi 
gat 


* 


the Divifion or partition of Mans body, 


<a, Y reafon the partition of mans body can hardly be underftood,if the diftia- 
2) Sion of the proper faculties of the foule benot underftood, for whofe 
)} caufethe body enjoyes that forme (which wee fee ) and devilion into di- 
vers inftruments; Therefore I thought good in few words to touch that di- 
ftin@ion of the faculties of the foule, forthe betrer underftanding of the partition of 
the body which wee intend. Wherefore the foule, the perfe&ion of the body, and 
beginning of all its fun&ions, is commonly diftin 


Animall is devided into the principall, fenfitive, and motive ; Againe, the principall 
is diftinguifhed into the imaginative, reafonable, and memorative. And the fenfitive 
into Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tafting and Touching. But the motive into pro- 
greflive and apprehenfive. And the vital] is devided into the dilative, and contra- 
Ctive facultie of the heart and arteries, which we kaow or underftand by the pulfi- 
ficke facultic. But the naturallis parted ioto the nutritive auctive, and generative fa- 
culties; which three performe their parts by the helpe and minifteric of five other 
faculties, which are, the AttraGtive, Retentive, Concottive, Affimulative, and Ex- 
pulfive. | 3 | 


After the felfefamemanner ,the organ or inftrument of the foule, to wit, Mans bo- Ait che parts 
dy, at the firft divifion is diftinguifhed into three parts, which from their office they ofmans body 
call Animall, vitall, and naturall. Thefe againe, according to the fubdivifion of the guid 


uifked and that in the firft and ge- 


many 


nerall divifion,into three faculties, which are the Animall, vitall, and naturall, But the faculries it is 


hed inte 


fubalternall faculties, are devided particularly inte other parts ; fo that any one ee, 


may know the organe of each facultie, by the propertie of the function. For while o- 
ther Anatomifts devide mans body into foure univerfall and chiefe parts, they diftin- 
guith fromthe three firft, chofe which they call the Extremities; neither doe they 
teach to what rancke of the three prirne parts cach extremitie fhould be reduced. 
From whence difficulties happen inreading the writings of Anaromifts ; for 
thunning whereof, we will profecute, as wee have faid, that diftin¢ction ofmans bo- 
dy, which we have touched before. 


Wherefore, as wee faid before, mans body is devided into*three principaliand What parts 


iftin= 


= 


What thefouls 
ith 


are here’ calicd 


not onely the parts pertaining to the head, which are bounded with the crowne of 
the head, the coller-bones, andthe firft Vertebre of the breaft, but alfo the extremi- 
ties; 


generall parts, Animall,Virall, and Natural. By the Animall parts, wee underfand Animal 


| Other 
| 
t! 
as 
is the 
4 
e 
ts of & | 
Un- 
| 
te | 
Cc ke 
ce{- 
tall 
4 
int. 4 
¢ 
a 
| 
its =. 
Bor 
i 
4 


~ 


What parts 
are called vi- 
tall, 


Of the natomte Lape 


ties, becaufethey are organs and inftruments of the motive facultic; Hippocrates 


Lib,6.Epidems {eeqnesto have confirmed the fame, where hee writes ; Thofe who havea thicke and 


ercat head, have alfogrear bones, nerves, and limbs, And in another place hee faitiy, 
tho fe who haveereat heads, and when they ftoope fhew a long necke, fuch have al} 
their partslarge, but chieflythe animal,Not for that Hippocrates would therefore have 
the head the beginning and caufe of che magnitude andgreatnefie ofthe bonds, and 
the reftofcthe members ; but that he might fhew the equallity, and private care or 
eovernment of nature, being moft juftand exact in the fabricke of mans body, as if 
fhe hath well ‘framed thehead, it fhould not be unlike, that thee idlely or catelefly 
negleéted the other parts-which are lefle feene. I thought goed ro dilate this paflage, 
leaftany might abufe thatauthoritie of Heppecrates, and gather fromthence,that-not 
onely thebones, membranes, ligaments, griftles, and all the other animall parts; 
but alfo the veines and arteries depend on the head as the originall.' But if any eb- 
ferve this our difin@ion of the parts, of the body, he will underftand wee have a 

By thevitall parts, we underftand onély the heart, arferics, lungs; winde-pipe; and 
other particles annexed tothefe, But by the naturall, wee would have all thoie parts 
under{tood which are contained in the whole compaffe of the Peritomeum or Rim of 
the body, and the proceffes of the Erythrozdes, the {ecend coate of the Tefticles. For 
as muchas belongs to all the other parts, which we cail containing; they muft be rec- 
koned in the cambel of the animal which notwithftanding, we muft thus devide in- 
to principall, fenfitive, and motive ; and againe, cach of thefe inthe manner follow- 
ing. For firft the principall is devided into the imaginative, which is the firft and op- 


The devifion ‘ ‘ 
oftheanimall per part of the braine, with itstwe ventricles'and: other annexed particles; intethe 
— rcafoning, which is a part of the braine, lying under the former, andas it were the 
tappe thereof with its third ventricle, Into the memorative, which is the cerebellum 
otafterbraine; with a ventricle hollowed in its fubftance. Secondly, the fenfitive 
is parted into the vifive , which is in the cyes ; the auditive, in the cares; the {melling, 
the nofe:che tafting,inthe tongue and palate; the ta@tive,or touching whichis in the 
body ,but moftexquilite inthe skinne which invefts the palmes of the hands. Thirdly, 
"v the motive; is devided tothe progreffive, which intimates the legges, and the com- 
ptehenkive, which intumates the hands. Laftly, into fimply motive, which are three 
> «parts, called bellics, forthe greateft part terminating and containing ; for the viral, 
~~ the infteument of the faculty ofthe heart, and dilatation of the arteries, are the direct 
Thedevition or ftreight fibers, but of the conftriGtive the tranfverfe ; but the three kinds of fibers 
pasts, tegether, of the pulfificke.; or if you pleafe you may devide them into parts ferving 


The cevifion 


forrefpication, as arte the Jungs,and weazon, and parts ferving for vitall motion, as 
are the heart and arteries, furnifhed with thefc fibers, which we formerly mentioned. 
The devifion of the naturall parts remaines, which is into the ncurifhing, au@ive and 


of thenaturall Generative »which againe are diftributed into attractive, univerfall, and particular; 


parts, 


* 


foe 


retentive, & expulfive, The attractive,as the 
let and upper orifice of the ventricule ; the retentive, as the Pylorws or lower paflage of 


the ftomacke; the concoftive, asthe body of the ventricle, orits inner coate the 
diftributive, as the three {mall gurs;the expulfive,as the three great guts swe may fay 
* the fame of the liver, for that drawes by the mefaraicke and gate veines, reraines by 


the narrow orifices of the-veines difperfed through the fubftance thereof; it icon- 


fongstothe particular attraétion, retention, concoétion, difiribution, affimulation of 
~* €ach part, that depends ofthe particular temper, and as they terme it,occulte proper- 


codts by its proper fieth ; diftributes by the hollow veine, expels by the fpleene, blad- 
der of the gall and kidneies. We alfo fee the parts in the tefticles devided inteas many 
functions ; for they draw by the preparing veffels retaine by the varicous cracked 
paflages ; in the fame veflels they concoct the feed by the powerof their proper fub- 
ftance and facultic ; they diftribute by the ejaculatorie, at the glandulescalled Pro- 
frata,and the horaes of the wombe, {upplying the place of proftates; Laftly, they 
ex pcll or caft forth by the proftates, hornes, and adjoyning parts. For as'muchas bes 


tic of cach familar and fimple part. Neither doe thefe particular actions differ from 
the univeriall, but shat thegenerallare performedby the affiftance of the three forts 


of 


mentio 
head. 
Crue 2p 
trunke 
we und 
tomica 
mans b 
turall, 
Natu 
more c 
body b 
from th 
its cold: 
contain 
be perf 
MHents 
of whic 
They 
the Perz 
within t 
wm, Ort 
thatis, it 
into that 
lafily, in 
of the le 
In eve 
asinthe 
below, it 
Lumbar« 
ofthe br 
dia, or fi 
or fia 
ends of t} 
if you flac 
the 
fing, tog 
lower pa 
have bee 
they defi 
places; fe 
der the le 
fice of the 
inthe rieh 


4 
4 
vil 
4 
their 
| 
t1i0om OF 
orth 
armes 
se 
may i 
‘ 
inwnhl 
whici 
[ {t O f 
* 
* 
4 
* 
* 


LL 1B.3- of Mans body. 


of fibers,but thefpeciall by the feverall occult propertic of their fleth, arifing from 
their temperature, which we may calla {pecificke propertie. Now ia the compofi- 
tion of mans 00 mature principally aimes at three things, The firft is, to create 
“parts meccflary for life, as are the heart, braine, and liver. The fecond, to bring 
forth other for the better and more commodious living, as the eyes, nofe, cares, 
armes and hands. The third is, for the propagation and renewing the /pecées or kind, 
as the privie parts, tefticles, and wombe. And this is my opinion, of the true di- 
{tinétion of mans body, furnifhed with fo many parts, for the performance of fo ma- 
ny faculties; which you, if you pleafe, may approve of and follow. If got, you 
may follow the common and vulgar, which is, into three beilies, or capacities, the . | 
upper,middie, lower(that is, the head,breaft and Jower belly) andthe limbs or joints. 
In which by the head we doc not underftand ali the Animal! parts, but onely thofe mansbody, 
which are from the crowne of the head to the firft vertebra of the necke, orto the 
firft of the backe, if according to rhe opinion of Galen Lib. de ofsibus where he makes 
mention of Exarthrofis and Arthredza , we reckon the necke amongft the parts of the 
head. By the breft, whatfoever is contained from the coller bones to the ends of the 
erueand baftard,or fhort ribbs and the midriffe.By the lower belly, the reft of the 
trunke of the body, from the ends of the ribbs tothe fhare-bones; bythe limbs, 
we underftand the armes and legges. We will follow this divifion in this our Ana- 
romicalldifcourfe, becaufe wee cannot follow the former in diffeGing the parts of ° 
mans body, by reafon the animall parts are mutually mixed with the vital! and na- 
turall, and firft of the lower belly. rent 

Nature would not have this lower belly bony, becaufe the ventricle might bee Why the belly 
more cafily dilated by meateand drinke, children might grow the better, and the #0t>ony. 
body be more flexible. It isconvenient we beginne our Anatomical] adminiftration 
from this, becaufe itis more fubje& to putrifaction than the reft, both by reafen of 
its cold and moift temperafire, as alfo by reafon of the feculent excrements therein | 
contained, Yet before we goeany further, if the Anatomicall adminiftiation mut 
be performed in publike, the body bring firft handfomely placed, and all the inftru- 
ments neceflary tor difleion made ready, the belly mult be devided into its parts, 
of which fome containe, and otherfome are contained. 

They are called containing, which make allthat capacity whichis terminatedby _. 

the Peritonaum or Rim of the belly. The vpper part whereof is bounded by Ga/en of thalormie 
within the compafie of the dire& mufcles, and by a generall mame is called Epigaffri- deliv: 
xm, orthe ypper part of the lower belly. That againe is devided into three parts, 
thatis, into that which is above the navell, and which carries the name of the whole, 
into that which is about the navell, and ts called the umbilicall or middle part; and 
laftly, into that which is bclow the navell, called the Hypogaftriam, ox the lower part 
of the lower belly. 

Inevery of which three parts there be two laterall, or fide parts to be confidered, 
asin the Epigafrinm, the rightand left Hypechondria, which are bounded above and 
below, in the compafle of the midriffe, and the fhort ribbs. In the vmbilicall the two chondria, 
Lumbares (fome call them Latera fides) which on both fides from the loweft parts 
of the breaft, are drawne to the flankes, or hanchebones;in the Aypoge/iriam, the two 
dia, or flankes bounded with the hanch and fhare-bones. Neither am lignorant, the 
lia or flankes,whichthe Greekes call Aeyé¢s fignifieall the emptie parts, from the 
ends of the ribs, even to the hanch-bones,whereupon they alfocall them Kergaves as 
if youfhould fay, empty {paces, becaufe they are not encompafied with any bone; 
YetT thought good that this do€rine of deviding the belly fhould be more di- 
ftin&, to call the parts which are on cach fide the navell Lamsbares, and thofe onthe 

lower part of the lower belly 74a, flankes, Bur we muft obferve thatthe Ancients 
ve been fo diligent in deciphering the containing parts,that as exactly.as might be, 
they defioned the bowells contained inthe belly which being diverfe lic in fandri¢ 
places ; for the greater portion of the liver lies under the right Hypechondriwns ; un 
der the left almott all the ventricle and {pleene, Vader the Epiga/trium the lower ori- 
fice of the ventricle, and the fmaller portion of the livers Inthe Lwasbares, or fides, 


inthe right and upper part the right kidney, in the part towards the 


A 
“ 
| 
5 
5 
| 4 
as i dg: 
ars? 
MWY Ob- 
| 
5 gad | 
im Of 
s. For | 
pc 
ide in- 
llo W - 4 
tothe 
b | * 
{it} 
j 
three 
Nn, as 
nlar: 
eof 
et Bde 
tee 
fe 
th 
2 
Ores 
blin | 
of 
4) = 
‘Bi 
; 


the 


t+ in the middle part thereof the collicke and emptie guts. In the upper 
part of the left fide lies the left kidney, in the middle part, the reft of-the emprtie 
andcollike guts, Vader the region of the navell, lies che girdle or upper part ofthe 


blinde gu 


kall, the collike gut thrafting it {elfe alfo through that way. Voder the Z/ia or flankes,» 


the right and Jeft, lie the gleater part of the gut Ileon, the hornes of the wombe in 
women bigge with child, and the {permaticke veffels in men and women, Vader the 
Hypogafirinm in the lower part lies the right, or ftraight gut, the bladder, wombe, 


and the reftofthe kalle- 


Amoftcers  Ifweknow, and well underftand thefe things, wee fhall more eafily difcerne the 
tainenoteof arts affect by the place ofthe paine, and cure it by fit application of remedies, with- 


the part af- 


fe&edsbyehe OUtthe hurting of any part, The diftin@tion of {uch places, and the parts in thofe 
placewhere  places.as feeming moft profitable, I have thought good to illuftrate by the placing 


the paine is, 


thefe wo following figures, in which thou haft deciphered, not onely the forefaid 


parts, containing, and contained, but alfo of the whole body, and many other 
things which may feeme toconduce to the knowledge of the mentianed parts. The 
Figures are thele. 


4 1 


\ 


we 


AN 


if 
4) 


Vif 
; 
‘ 
* 


2 
mh 

¢ 
is 


The Figure foewing the foreparts of the bedy, 


A The hairy Scalp, caldzergwr's- Z. The region of the navill, cal- 
the forchead cald Frons.uszwrer- umbilicalis, or the middle 
thetemples cald part of the lower belly. 

From btodThe compafle of the A. The navill umbilicus. The 


face. roote of rhe belly 
e The greateror inward corner of BB, The fide, Latera, zacvege. 
the eyes scald Cc interns. and in our Author Lumbi 


f The lefler or externall angle of Lumbaris regio. 


the eye,cald Canthusexteraus, C. Hypoga/frium, the water- 
* The lower eybrow whichisim- courie, 4qualiculus, the lower 

moveable, Palpebra. art of the lower beelley,i]egr. 
cheek-ball cald mala, usAe. DD. The flankes called and 

The chek-puf cald bucca, yva- xevewres. 

§@-. E, The Groine called pubes or 
iThe ridge of the nofe cald Nafus pectensxJeis xnGn. 

Externus, pir. FF, The Leske cald ingwez, 
k The nofthrils cald wares, uvx]i- where thofe tumors are cald 

Bu bones. 
i The outward eare,auris externa. G.the yard with the foreskinne, 
m Lhe mouth made of the two penis cumpreputie. 

lips, Os. H, the ftones or reiticles, with 
[he chin called mentum, thecod or /crotum. 


oThe necke, collum and Il. the thoulders bumeri, i7w- 


re uides. 
From 0.to e.the pillar of the necke, KK .the armes Brachia,Gooyove. 


truneus, and dauG-. L, the bowt of the arme, called 
pp The hollow of the necke,cailed Gibber, dxdyv. 

tuguli, M.the outfide of the lower part 
qqThe we bones, claves ofthe arme cald cubitus 
r The cheft peéfus, cxpvov. N. the wreft called Brachiale 
f The right breft. | pores. 


IT The left bref{: to this Region O. the after-wreft po/fbrachiale, 
we apply cordiall Epithemations 
moift and drie. P. the Palme called Palma or 
tt The nipples of the brefts, Pa- volo manus, 
pille Swaor. ¢ the backe of the lmnd Dor/ism 
The trench of the heart which manus, imoSévae . 
the Ancients called ygpdia. The QQ. the fore ann middle part of 
Latines {crobiculusCordis, This the thigh, where wee apply 
partis annoineed for the mouth cuppingglaffes to bring downe 
of the ftomacke. womens courles, ungdy. 
From uto E,the lower belly,j,aste. RR. the knee, genus 
x: The Epige/ftrum or upper part. SS. the leg, Tibia 


of the lower prt TT. the calfe of the leg [ira 
yy. The Hypecondria or Precor- 
diz. ‘VY, the inftep, far/us, 


* The outward Liver-remedics XX. the top of the foote Dore 
are applied co this place. (um pedis, 


YY. the inner Ankles, egved. ZZ, the outwward anckles. ag the tocsofthe feete, @ the place under the inward anckle, where 


che veune called Sapiens is opened 


The 


general], 
navell,to 
tIMC,as 
Which ar 
you 
bone, whi 


J 
At c > 
| 
N 
NWS ise, | 
SS 
DREN 
D \ 
RS 
== 
) 
Z 4 ie, 7) 1, 
> 2 
af Ss 
beg 
—- 
= 
* 
> - 
woite 
4 
as x= 
“4 


body: 


The Figure of the backe parts of a mat. 


A The forepart of the head,/paciput, Besyue- 
B. the top or crowne of the head vertex, xoeugr- 
C. the hinder-part of the head,occiput, xélis 

From D. to D. the face, Facies. arbcamy. 
the cyebrowes /apercilia, ogeu's, 

F, the upper eye-lid, 229 2207. 

* The tip of the nole cald globulus nafi. 

H. the backe part ofthe necke, cald cervix, du 
and the nA Or nape of the necke. Thereas a 
hollowneffe at the top of this cervix, where wee 
apply Seatons. 

I. the backe part of the fhoulder top, called ax- 

illa 

KK. the fhoulder blades /Capule,’ ru. 

1,253. On this place wee {et cupping glafles. 

455,6,7. the backe dor/ium, 

8,9. the ridge, /pina dorfi, 

L the arme hole ala; Ath 

* the elbow, Gibber braciz. 

M M M M. the fides, Latera. 

NN thé loiries Lumbi, or the region of the kid- 
neyes,oceves. 

OO. the place of the hips, coxeadices, where vee 
apply remedies for the Sciatica. 

P. the place of the holy-bone; or Os facrum where 
we apply remedies in the difeafes of the right gut, 

place of the Rumpe or Coccyx. 

RR. the buttocks Nares, xa@yes. 

SS. the backe parts of the thigh, Fgmen. 

TT, theham, Peples,ivves. 

VV. the calfe of the leg, fara. 

XX. the foote or paruvs nes, 

YY, the utter ancle, Malleolus externus. 

ZZ. the heele, calx or calcaneus, vléeva. 

aa the fole of the foote Planta pedis, Te med 

5 the infide of the lower part of the arme called 

Vina, waren. 

c. the oucfide of the fame, Cubitus 

dd the wreit, Carpus 

ee the backe part of the hand, dor/ism manus.g. the 
forefinger index Aenr@-. b, the thumb, pollex, 

the middle finger, medius, 

kthe rig-finger Annularis, medicus, pixie. 


Cuar. II. 


Of the containing parts of the Epigaftriu and the preparation 
10 Anatomicall administration, 


containing parts of the Epigaftrium are the Epidermis or thiane outward Thecontai- 
skinne, the true skinne, the flefliie or fatty Pannrel@pthe cight mutcles of 
the Epiga/trium with their common coate, the Rim of the belly, the five ly, 
! vertebra’s of the loines, all the holy-bone, the hanch-bone, fhare-bone, 
the white line, and midriffe. Of thefe parts fome are common tothe whole body, 
asthe three firft ;the other proper to the parts contained inthe Epigefrium taken in 
generall, Whichthat you may {éc in their order, firft you muft cut round about the 
navell,to the upper fuperficies of the mufcles, that fo wee may keepe it, till fuch 
time, asoccafion (hall offer it felf, co fhew che ympbilicall veffels lying in chat place, 
which are one veine, two arterics,& the vrachw(if it be there.) Which being done, 
you mutt draw a ftraight line from the chett over che breaft-blade, even tothe fhare- 
bone, which may divide the common containing parcs, even co the whice —* 
I 2 


B 
4 
e ip B it 
SY 
AN 
OVYEL 
ig . ~ | 
SSeS 
ij 
« 
a >». - 3 
A@V 
a ii» ‘ 
4 7 
q 
part 
i 
@ q 
(um 
: 
vne 
2.8 42 
| 
* 
= 
4 


$3 Of the matomie L 13.3. 


Then prefently it will be convenient to draw two other Jines acrofle,or overtwhart, 
of the like depth on each hand, from the circumference of the navel!, even to the 
fides, that fo oncach part wee may draw the skinne more commodiovtly from the 
parts lying vnder it; the fight of which otherwife it would hinder. Thefe things 
being done, the skinne mult bee devided from the parts lying underit from the de- 
figned circumference lefc aboutthe nave!l. Wee muft teach how the skinue is two- 
fold, the true and falfe, ard render a reafon of the name, which we will every 
where doe,as farre as*the thing will {uffer, and it fhall lie in our power. And in doing 
or examining thefe things, it will beconvenient diligently to inquire into the nine 
things mentioned in the preface. Wee wili beginne with the skinne, becaufe that 
part is ficft obvious to our fenfes, 


CHAP. 


Of the utmoft skinne or Cuticle, 


Theskione [aehSsxjHe skinne being the firlt part, and {pred over all the body, is twofold, that 
SEY T is, the true, and baftard skinne, Thetrue is called by the Greekes Derma, 
pars theskin Which may almoft every where be.pulled from the parts lying under ir, 
which it invefts except in the face, eares, the palmes of the hands, foles 


of the feete, fagers, and privities, where it ttickes fo clofe that it cannot be fepa- 
rated. 

The baftard (which fiurft of all wee will declare, becaufe it firft prefents it felfeto 
ourligat )is by che Greekes called Epider mis ; hecaufe it covers the true skinne, they 
Ieper: terme it Commonly the Cuticle. The fubftance of itis excrementitious, and as it 

were a certaine dric flouring , or production of thetrue skinne. That it drawes not 
its fubitance from tie feede is apparent by this, that asit is cafily loft, fo it is eafily 
repaired, which happens not in parts truly fpermaricall. This urmoft thinneé skinne, 
or cuticle, may two manner of wayes be made apparent by it felfe, and feparated 
from the other, as by burning with fire, or ardent beate of the Sunne (in fome de- 
licate bodies, and fiich as are not accuftomedto be converfant in Sun-fhine.) The 
Thequantitie. quantitie in thicknefle is very {mall; but the extent is moft large, becaufe itcovers 
Thefigure. all the skinne , the figure of itis rouad, and long, like thofe parts whichit iavefts. 
che compo" The compofure of itis obfcure ; yet because this Cuticle is the excrement of the true 
skinne,wee fay it hath its matrer from the excrementitious fuper fluitie of the nerves, 
veines, arteries, and fubftance ef the true skinne. 

Itis innumber one, like as the true skinne which it outwardly covers, that ie 
might be a wediam betweene the objea, and fixed facultie of touching, diffufed o- 
ie all the true skinne which every where lies under it. For the temperature, by the 
rue = COMMONConfenr of Phyfitions, ie isin the midft of all excefle; for that fLeing it is 
the medium betweene the obje& and facultie, if it fhould be hotter, colder, moifter, 
or drier, it would deceive the facultie by exhibiting all obje&s, not as they arewf 
themieives, butas it fhould be; no otherwife than as to fuch as looke through red or 
ercene {pectacles, all things appearered, or greene. Wherefore for this reafon ir 


The number, 


was convenient the cuticle fhould be void of all fenfe. It hath no action in the body, 


The uf but it hath ufe, for ir preferves and beautifies the erue skin ; for it feemes tobe given 
by the fingular indulgence of nature, to bea muniment and ornament, to the true 
skiune. This providence of nature, the induftrie of fome Artizans ( or rather Curti- 
+aus) doth imitate, who for to feeme more beautifull, doe fmooth and polifhir. By 
this you may underftand; that not all the parts of the body have 24tion, yet have 
they their ufe, becaufe, according to Arifeties opinion ; Nature hath made nothing 
in vaine. Alfo youmuft note that this thinne skinne, or cuticle being loft, iay eve- 

wes ihecas tie where be regenerated, unleffe in the piace which iscovered wish a {carre. For 

reftored in here the true skinne being deficient, both the matter and former facultic of the cuti- 


cleis wanting. 


C HAP. 


where 


fant, |: 
and o! 
lying 
ferentll 
{wer,t® 
fenfibla 
ture of 
fubfta; 
be bet 
open ta 
the vical 
The 


the pai 
put for 
of all : 
Tr 
for it is 
ilefhic a 
were 1! 
tion of 
found : 
violent 
with fem 
and nec 
lafetie a 
CCs, as 
mighe 
of the 
which j 
and 
drawing 
Out refpg 


4 
‘ 
«3 
trom 
Li 
Bi 
eares 
a 
sity 
in Vv 
oF 
« 
al 
= 
4 
a 
t 


4 P. 


Ly! Bee of Mans body, 


Cuap. 


Of tie true skinne. 


Nae He true skinne called by the Greekes Derma, is of a {permaticke fubftance, Tie tissane 
a 7 [525 wherefore being once loft, it cannot be reftored as formerly it was. For Cie 
in placethereof comes a f aire, which is nothing elfe but fleth dried be- 
yond mealure. It is of fufficient thicknefle, as appeares by the feparating 


from the fiefh. 

But for the extent thereof it encompafies the whole body, if you except the eyes, 
eares, nofe, privitics, fundamentr, mouth, the ends of the fingers where che nailes 
orow, that is, all the parts Dy which any excrements are evacuated. The houre of it Figure, 
is like the cuticleround and long, with its productions, with which it covets the 
extremities of the parts. 


[tis compofed of nerves, veines, arteries, and of a proper flefh and fubftance Compofure; 


of its kinde, which Wee have faid to bee {permaticaill, which arifeth from the 
proceffe of the fecundine, which leade the {permaticke veffzls even to the navell, 
in which place each of them into the parts appointed by nature, fend forth fuch 
veficls, as are ipread abroad and diffufed from the generation of the skinne. 
Which alfothefimilitude of them both, that is, the skinneand membrane Chorton 
do argue. Por as the Chorion is double, without ienfe, encompaffing the wholc in- 


fant, lightly faltened tothe firft coate whichis called Amsnios {othe skinne is double, 


T he skInne of 


and of it feife infenfible (for etherwife the nerves were added in vaine from the parts ic tei‘eis void 


Butit any obje¢ thatthe Cuticle is no part of the true skinne, {eeing it iswholy dif- 
ferent from it, and eafily to be feparated fromit, and wholly void of fenfe : I will an- 
{wer,thefe arguments doe not prevaile. For chat the true skinne is more craffe,tbicke, 
fenfible, vivide, and ficthic, is not of it felfe, being rather by the affiftance and admix- 
ture of the parts, which derived from the three principall it reccives into its proper 
fubfiance ; which happens not in the cuticle. Neither if it fhould happen would ie 
be better for it, but verily exceeding ill for us, becaufe to our life thould lie fic and 
open to receive a thoufand externall injuries, which encompafie us on every fide, as 
the violent and contrary accefle of the foure firft qualities. 

There is only one skin,as that which thould cover but one body,the which it every 
Where doth, except inthofe places I formerly mentioned, [t hath connexion with 
the parts lyine under it by the nerves, yeines, and arteries, with thofe fudjacent parts 
put forth into the skinne invelting them, that there may be a ccriaine communion 
of all the parts of the body amongft themfelves. 


Iris cold and drie in its proper tempering {pect Or proper tlieta and tubftance Temperature 


3 
foritisa {permaticall part. Yet if any confider the finewes, veines, arceries, and 
ilefhie threds which are mixed in its body, it will feeme temperate, and placed as it 
were in the midft of contraric qualities,as which hath growne up fromthe like por- 
tion of hote, cold, moift, and drie bodies. The vfe of theskinne is to keepe fate and 
found the continuitie of the whole body, and ali the parts thereof, from the 
violent affaule of all externall dangers, for which caufe imis every where indewed 
with fen{e, in fome parts more exact, in others more dull, according to the dignitic 
and neceflitie of the parts which it ingirts,that they might all be admonithed of thei: 
lafetieand prefervation. Laftly, itis penetrated with many pores, as breathing pla- 
ces, aswe may fee by the flowing out of {weate, rhat fo thearterics intheir dés/fole 
might draw the encompafling aire into the body, for th@tempering and nourifhing 
Of the fixed inbred heare, and in the Syftole expell.ac fuliginous excrement, 
which in Winter fuppreft by the cold aire makes the skiane blacke 


lying under it) ingirting the whole body, lightly cleaving to the flefhie Pannicle. ofl. 


Thé number, 
Connexions 


and rough, Wee have an argument aad example of Breathing through thef¢, by 


Grawing the airein by tranipiration, in, troubled with the mother, who w ith 
out refpiration live onely for fome pretty {pace by cranf p- ration. rougher 
Wineer. 


I 3 Cuars 


Skin 


/ 
Re 
~ 
_J 
Luc 
i. > 
> 
Oe 
loine 
A 
<> 
Bal 
tilele 
= . 
‘ 
i ‘ 
ae 
if 
Be 
| 
> 
you 
We 
. 4, 
By 
ning 
ror 
Curl 
} 


the eAnatomte 13.3. 


Cua V. 
Of the flefbie Panicle. 


en Frer the true skinne, followes the membrane, which Anatomifls call the 
-9/)N ees fiefhy Pannicle, whofe nature that we may more eafily profecute and de- 
Bye clare, we mult firft fhew what a membrane is, and how many wayes the 
Swe word istaken. Then wherefore it hath the nameof the flefhie Pannicle, 


A membrane therefore is a fimple part,broade and thin, yet firong and denfe, white 


Whatamem. andnervous, andthe which may cafily, without any great danger be extended 


brane, ‘ 


Why it is 


fomerimes 


ealleda coate, 


fometimes the haire of the head, in which partit is therefore called the broad mufcle, where as in o~ 
flefhie and fat- 


tie Pannicle, 


Why beaits 


have this pan= 


nicle wholy, 


and contra&ed, Sometimes it is called acoate, which is, when it covers and de- 

fends fome part. This iscalledthe ficthie Pannicle; becaufe in fome parts it degene- 

rates into fie(h, and becomes mufculous, 48"in a man from the coller bones, to the 


ther places it is a fimple membrane, here and there intangled with the fat lying under 
it, from whence it may feemeto take or borrow the name of the fatty Pannicle. But 
inbealts (whence it tooke that name, becaufe in thofe a ficfhie fubftance makctha 
great part ofthis Pannicle ) itappeares manifeftly flefhie and mufculous over all the 


Acthieor body, as you may fee in Horfes, and Oxen; thatby thar meancs being moveable, 


eulouse 


they may drive and fhake off their flies, and other troublefome things, by their fha- 
king and contraéting their backs. Thefe thirgs confidered, we fay the fiefhie Pannicle 


The fubftance jn its proper bedy,is of a nervous or membranous fubftance, asthat which hath its o- 


The magnis 
rude and As 


gare. 


Number. 
Compofures 


The tem)e- 


rarure. 


Theufe, 


The fat is ra- 
ther an excre- 
ment than a 


The us 


Ths efficient 


riginall from the coate Amnios, (vihich is next tothe infant ) dilared neare to the na- 
vell and firetched forth for the generation of this Pannicle ;in which thing I thinke 
good to note, that as the membranes Chorion and Amaios mutually interwoven 
with imall nervous fibers, encompaffe and inveft the child, as long as it ts contained 
inthe wombe; fotheskinne and flefhie Pannicle knit together by uch like bands, 
engirt the whole body. . 

Therefore the flefhie Pannicle is equall in magnitude and like in figure to the 
true skinne, but that it lies under it, and is contained init, in fome places mixt with 
the fat, in others encreafed by the fleth interwoven with it, and in other fome is one- 
ly a fimple membrane. 


Thecompofition of it is fuch, as the fight of it prefents to our eye, that is, of 


veines, arteries, nerves, and the proper fiefh, {ome whites mixed and interlaced 
with fat, and fometimes with ate ot ficfh. It isbutone, by reafon of the ufe 
wee fhall prefently fhew,; It is fituared betweene the skinne and fat, or common 
coate of the mufcles, annexed to thefé and the other parts lying under it, by the 
veines, nerves, and arteries afcending from thefe inward parts, and implanting 
themfelves into the fubflance thereof, and then into the true skinne. 

The temperature thereofis diverfe, according to the varictie of the parts inter- 
woven with it, The ufe afitis, to leade, dire@, and ftrengthen in their paflage, the 
vcflels which are difleminated into the true skinne, and the whole {uperficies of the 
body. But in beafts it hath another commoditie, that is, it gives a fhaking or 
trembling motion totheir skinne and backe, for that caufe we formerly touched. 


C Hap. Vi. 


Of the Fat. 


475 He fat comming neare the condftibn of anexcrement, rather than of a 
part (as we faid, when we treated of the fimular parts) is of an oily fub- 
fiance, bred of thvaiery and vaporous portion of the bloud, which fwea- 
ting through the ,tores ef the coates, or mouthes of the veffels, becomes 
concrcate about the membranes, and nerves, and cold bodies, and turnes into fat by 
the coldneffe of the place. Whereby we may know that cold,or a more remifle heate, 
is the efficient caufe of fat, hich is manifet* by contemplation not onely of crea- 


tures of diverfe kindes, but afo by thofe of the fame fpecies and fexe, if fobe that the 
One be colder than the other. 


part 
Mufc! 
lefic, 5 
Anato 
think« 
both 
of the 
efficie 
minan 
long fa 
rhe pam 
as heat 
may t! 
tive an@ 
time th 
fat was 
perate | 
thefe 
are mo 
which ' 
like the 
thefep 
tien, in 
motion, 
called S 
the mo! 
place. 
of 
The fat 
immod: 
hands, ; 
dentitic 
thechin: 


) 
+ 
cA 


by the q 
compailt 
cles. TI 
peculiar 


Opinion ¢ 
up andd 
this coat 
is below 
pofition 
But ifan 


. 
* 
a 
| termi! 
f 
i 
4 
i 
‘ 
| 
J 
i 
q 
¢ 
24 > 


By which we may underftand that the fat is the more or leffe in quantizy according The quantiry, 
to the different temper of the whole body ,and of its particular parts ; for its com po- 

fition, itconfilts of chat portion of the blood which we formerly mentioned, in- Thecompo- 
termixt with certaine membranes, nervous fibers, veines and arterycs. The agreatelt 

part of it lyes betweene the flefhy pannicle and the common coate of the Th %te 


Mufcles, * Orherwiieit is difuted over allthe body, in fume places more, in fome 1asprefentar 
lefle, yet it is alwaies about the nervous bodyes, to which it delights to cleave. Moft body. 


Anatomilts enquire whether tlic tat lye above or beneath the flethy pannicle. But me- — 
slat 


thinkes this queflionis both impertinent and idle ; being weoften{eethe fatto be on lower part of 
both fides, Icis of amiddle temper betweene heat and cold, being ic ariferh the lower belly 


Wasintiicks 


of the more aery portion of the blood; although it may feeme cold in refpeét of the neiie aby ve g, 


eflicient caufe, that is, ofcold by whichit concreats. For the reft,moifture is predo- hee 
© Ore - 


minant inthe fat. The ule cherofis, to moilten the parts which may become dry by tweenes and 


long falting ,vehemene exercile or immoderate heat,and belidesto pive heat,or keep} 
the parts warme. Although it doe chis!aft rather by accidentr,than ot its OwNe Nature, to remember 


as heated by exercife, or by fome iuch other chance; it heats the adjacent parts,or hoy Lire 
¢ 


may therefore be thoughtto heat them,becaufe it hinders the diffipation of the mae rarity ofthe 


rive and incernall heat; like as cold heats in wioter, whereby the Dellyes are at that allo 
Was 


time thehotter. know fome learned Phifitions of our time fiffly maintained,that the encreafed by 
fat was hor, ncither did they acknowledge any other efficient caufe thereof, than tem- tr 
perate heat and norcold. But I thinke it beft toleavethe more fubtle agitation of ome faying 
thefe queftionsto naturall Philofophers. But we muftnote, that at the joints which 
are more ulually moved,there is another fort of far, farre more folid and hard,than that thiche,which | 
which we formerly mentioned, often found mixed wich a vifcid and tough humor 
like the wintes of Eegs, that foit mightbe fufficient for alonger time to moiften excced the 
thefe parts ,fubje& to be Hurt by dryneffe, and make them flippery & fo fitter for mo- Maney rs 
tien, in imiration whereof they ufually greafe hard bodyes, which rouft be in frequent ocher om 
motion, as coach wheelesand axeltrecs. And there is another kind of fat, whicl) is 
called Sewwm, feame;in onc ching differing fromthe ordinary fat, that is much dryer; The tlides 
the moifter and fofcer portion of the fat being diffipated by the raging heat of the ——— 
place. For it is found principally about che midriffe, where there are many windings - — amy 
of arteryesand veines, ad itis alfo about the reines, Loines, and ba/is of the heart. caufe the fatis 
The fat is wafted by long fafting ; is dryed and hardened by vehement exercife and 7% 
immoderateheate. Hence iristhat itis much more compact in the palmes of the 

hands, and foles ofthe feet, aboiit the eyes and heart, fo that it refembles the fleth in 

denfitic and hardneffe; becaufe by the continual! motionand {trong heat of theie¢ parts, 


thechinner portion beiag diffipated& diffufed,the more Groffe & cerreftriall semaine. 


— 


~ 
—_ 


Cuar. VII. 
Of the common coate of the Mu/féles, 


fy Ext under the far, appeares a certaine coate, fpred over all the Mufcles, 
and called the common coate ofthe Mulcles, it isof a nervous fubftance; The 
asall other membrafitsare. The quantity and breadth thereof is bounded quantity 
by the quantity of the Mufcles which it involves, and fits it felfe to, as that which en- 
compaties the Mufcles of the Epigaftrium, is of equali largnefle with the fame Mut- 
cles. The figure of it is round: It is compofed of veines, nerves, arteryesand its The Compo- 
peculiar fleth confifting of three forts of fibers ; the beginfing of it is from thre Perio. “* 
fltwm,in that part where the bones give ligaments to the Mufcles; or accosding to the 
Opinionof others ,of the nervous and ligamentous fibers of the Mufcles, which rifing 
up and diffufed over the flefhy fuperficies thereof,are united for the generation of 
this coate, But this membrane arifing from the Persofinm (as every membrane which The Original 
is oclow the head takes its originall trom the Persofium cither primarily, by the incer- 
pofition of no Medium or fecondarily)is ftretched over the Mufcles by their tendons. 


But ifany objec, tharehis membrance pluct from the belly ofthe Mufcle,may feeme 


de 
li the | 
de. 
white 
ended 
ides 
fenec- 
o the | 
ip 
ander 
4 
. But 
ctha 
lithe 
| 
fha- | 
nicle 
(S O- 
unke 
even 
ands, 
the 
with 
one- 
AC ed a 
eufe a 
mon 
the 
tip H 
iter- | 
the 
the | 
OF 
| 
& 
ral 
| 


Theniimber, ofthe Epicaftrium is buton 


Theule, 


coendin aljgament. Iwill anfwer, thatit is the condition ofevery nervous part, fo 
to bindeor faften it felfe co another part of his owne kindeasto a flay, fo that it can 
{carfe be pluckt from thence. We fee the proofe hereof, in the Periteneum or Rim 
in the Epiza/trium or lower pattofthe lowerbelly. That which covers the Mutcles 
¢,unleffé you had rather part it in two, the right andthe 
left diftinguifhed by the interpofition of the Lines Alba, or white Line. Itisfcituate 


Theft, betwixt the fatand Mufcles ; for it ts faftened above and below to thefe parts with 


fibers,which in fmallnefle and fitneffe exceed the Spiders web. But by its veffells, ic 


of it is, to containe the Mufcles in their naturall vnion, and to keepethem as muchas 
in it lyes, from putrifaction, which may happen to them from pas or matier, which 
is oftencaft forthofthe fimular parts into theempty {paces and diftances of the 
Mufcles, Wherefore going about to feparate the fat of the Epigaffrinm (where 
thou muft begin the diffeétion of mans body ) you muft have a care, that you hurt 
itnot with your knife, but that,before you touch the Mufcles, fee you artificially take 

what the  itaway, that you may the more eafily feparate the Mutcles lying under it, diftin- 

whitelime iss guifhed by a manifeft {pace at the white Line, which is made by the mecting toge- 
ther of the proper coates ofall thofe mufcles, 


Cuap, VIII. 


what 4 Mufcle is, and Low many differences there be thereof, 


What aMal- ‘Mufcle is the inflirument of voluntary motion and fimple voluntary moti- 
cle is, fonis performed fix manner of wayes, upwards, downewards, forwards, 
Flow tin aie- backwards, to the right hand and to the left;: but the compound one 


isperfermed, W2Yy Which is circularly, the which is performed by the continual! fucceffion of 
the motion of the Mufclesingirting the part.) Sucha Motion Falconersufe when 
they ftretch forth their hand and Lure their Haukes We have {ome parts, which have 

motion without a Mufcles but that motion is not voluntary¢ fuch partsbe the heart, 

ftomacke, gutts, both the bladders (that is,thatofthe Galland that of the urine ) 

and diverfe otherwhich have the motions of attraction, expulfion and retention,by 

the meanes of the three forts of fibers 3for they draw by the right, expell by the 

Beem whence tran{verle;and retaine by the oblique.s The differences of Mufcles which are many 
of mu(cles are ANG diverfe, aretaken from their fudftance, originall, infertion intothe part which 
drawne, they move, forme or figure, holes or openings, magnitude, colour, fite,kind of fib ers, 
theit conjugation er connexion, fieads, bellyes, tendons 2? oppofition in aétion and 

Differencesof Office. * Some in fubftance are nervous, venous, arterious, becaufethey have mani- 
feft nerves, veines and arteryes,as the Midriffe,the Intercoftall and Epigaftricke 
ftance, many mote,and that for their difference from other Mofcles,into which: 
ncither nerve norveine, or Arteryes are manifeftly inferted, although fecretly they 

admit them all for fenfe and motion, life and nourifhmenty fuch are the Mulcles ofthe 

wreit,the wormy mufcles of the hands and feet} for ifthere be any nerves obferved in 

| them, they are very fmall.. Some had rather make the difference of Mufcles thus, 
Difereneesof that fome of them are flefhy, fome nervous, others membranous 4 From their Ori- 
their original. ginal], fome arife fromthe bones as thefe which move the hands,armes and Legas. 
others from griftles, as the Mufcles of the throat ; others from membranes which in- 

veft thetendons, as the wormy Mufcles of the hands and feet - orhers from ligaments 
as the Extenders of the fingers ; others from other mufcles, as the two lower Mutcles 
of the yard whichproceed fromthe Sphin@er Mufcle of the fundament, Others 
have no originall, as the membrane which wecall.the flefhy paanicle afliimes Hefla 
in cettaine places, and degenerates into a Mufcle; {uch are the Cremsa/fter ox hanging 
Mu'cles of the tefticles, the large Mufcles of the face,and if you pleafe the Midrifie, 
as that which is compofed of two ceates,the one in compaffing the ribbsand the Per- 

$en«um, hath fl-th in the midft betweene the two membranes. And moreover fome 


Muicles have their originall from one onely bone, as thefe which bend and extend 


che 


participates with the three principall parts, and is of acold and dry temper. Theufe , 


Lt 


che 
many 
{pond 
and 
favoug 
Maufc! 
the{c 
ought 
whict 
eyelid 
and 
the ska 
orhers 
may 
from | 
the ar: 
bone « 
che 
blades 
re{pir 
many 
to wit 
atend: 
erilties 
theie c 
fome 
the mc 
are not 
named 
ples © | 
a mill, 
Mice. 
beily 
Mufcit 
fafienc 
which | 
the bre 
Lozens 
reipira 
than fol 
from th 
as the 
fiourc, 
burt not 
feared 
Trapezs 
but bro 
the Epi 
keepe 
of the + 
long and 
ons, for 
lique an 
preparti 
affociat: 


oF 
a 
4 
i 
f 
‘ 
i q * 


mor 
iufcles 
andthe 

cituarte 

ts with 

ells, it 

nuch as 
, which 
of the 
where 
yu hurt 
ily take 
, diftin- 
toges 


‘y Motie 

mr wards 

ind one 
fionof - 
e when 
ich have 
heart, 
urine ) 
tion, by 
by the 
many 
which 
fibers, 
onand 
mani- 
ftricke 
which 
y they 
softhe 
rved in 
5 thus, 
r Ori- 
CSSss 
ich ine 
ments 
lufcles 
thers 
s tiefla 
inging 
driffe, 
Pers— 
fome 
-xrend 
che 


j nae 
a 
a 
* 
4 
ae 
a 
ge 


che Cubite,orhers arife of many bones as che oblique defcending, the Dorfalland 
many Mufcles of the necke, with acife together from many {pondyls and fides of 
{pondyls. There be others according to the opinion of fome men, borh from the bones 
and criftles of the Pubi at the right or direct Mutcles of the Apsgafrium, yet by their 
favour I thinke otherwife. Becaufe by the Anatomicall and received exiome, A 
Mufcleisthere thoughttotake his beginnings from whence he receives a nerve; but 
thefe Mufcles takea nervefrom the intercottall mufcies, wherefore their original 
ought ro be referred to the fides of the breft. blades, as fhall be fhewed ia duc place. 


sFrom their infertion arife thefe differences, fome areinferted intoa bone, as thofe 
which move the head, Armes and Legs; others into a griftle,asthefe of the Throtle . their antertion 


eyelids, nofe andthe obliqueafcendaat mufcles of the Epigafrinm; (omeintoa bone 
and grittle both,as che right mutcles of the Ep/zafirium and the Midriffe; fome into 
the skin, as the maufcles of the lips ; otlers into the Coates as the mufcles of the eyes; 
others into Ligaments, as the muicles of the yeard. Bur thefe differences following 
may be drawne both from their infertion and originall. For fome mutcles ariling 
from many parts, are inferted inte fome one part, as divers of thefe which move 
thearme,and the fhoulder,which arifing from many {pendiles are inferted into the 
bone of the fhoulder and the fhoulder blade. Others arife from one part, and in- 
ferrthemfelves into more, as th&fe which arife from the botrome of the fhoulder 
blades,are extended and inferted into fome eight or nine of rhe upper ribbs, to helpe 
re{piration;and the benders and extenders of the fingers and tees;Orhersarifing from 
many bones are inferted into as many, as fome of thofe which ferve for refpiration, 
to wit thofe which we calithe hinder Saw-mutcles and the Semfpinatus which {ends 
atendon into allthe ribbs, Orhers have their originall from many bones, and endin 
grifties of the {even ribbs, as thofe two which lye under the Sterven, Moreover 
thefe differences of mufcles may be drawne from the originall and inferuon, that 
fome proceed from bones and are inferted into the next bone,to-helpe and ftrengthen 
the motion thereof,as the three mufcles of the Hip,others arife from an upper bone & 
are not inferted intothe nexr, butinto fome other, asthe long mutcles. Some are 
named from the partthey move,as the temporall mufcles becaufe they move rhe tem- 
ples; others from their office,as the grinding mufcles,becauie they move the skin as 


a mill, co grinde afunder the meale, From their forme or figure, becaufefome are like pis rencesof 


Mice other like Lizards which have their Leggs cut off, for that they imitate in their 
beily body or tendon,the belly or taile of fuch creatures,& from whence the names of 
Mufculas andLacertus are derived. Such are thofe which bend the wrelt, and which are 
faftenedto the bone of the Leg ,& which extend the foot;Orhers are triangular ,as thar 
which litts up the arme,called Epomés or Deltoides,and that which drawes the arme to 
the breaft,called the Pectorall mufcle. Orhers quadrangular as the Rhormboides, or 
Lozenge mufcle of the fhoulder blade and the two hindefum-mufcles ferving for 
reipiration,and two of the wrefts which turne down the hand;Ochers conliit of more 
than foure angies,as the oblique defcending, and chat mufcle with joyaes it felfeto it 
from the fhoulder blade ; others are round and broad,as the Midriffe, others circular 
as the Sphinéter mufcle of the fundament and bladder; others are of a pycamidail 
fioure, as the feaventh mufcle of the eye, which compafles the opticke nerve in beatls 
but notin mesa. Orchershavea femicireulerforme, as that which fhuts up the cye 
feated at the lefler corner thereof, Others refemble a Monks cowle, or hood, as the 
Trapezius of the fhoulder blade. Befides others at their fir original! are narrow, 
but broad attheir infertion,as the Saw-mulcle of the fhoulder and the traniverfe of 
the Epigaflrivm. ochers ate quite cortrary, asthe three Mulcles of che Hippe;others 
keepe an equal! breadth or bignefle imall places, as the intercoftall mufcles and thefe 
of the wreftorhers arclong and flender, as the long mufcle of the thigh, others are 
long and broad, as the oblique defcending mutfcles of the Epigairiwm; others are 


— 


Where a 
muicie hath 
its OF’ ginal). 


Differences of 


rout cles trom 


mu(lclestaken 
from their 


figur Ce 


direGtly contrary, asthe Inrercoftall,whici ate very narrow, From their perforati- 


ons, for fome are perforated,as the Midriffe which hath three holes, as allo the OD- perforations, 


lique and tranfverie of the Epizafrium, that fothey may give paflage forch co the 
preparing fpermaticke veffelis,andto the ejaculatory veflells the Coate Evyshrordes 


From their 


aflociating and ftrengtheaing them others are not perforated. rom theic Magnitude 


for 


4 
B 4 : 
. 
mtit can 
4 
¢ 
: 
* 
{ 
4 
4% 
¢ 
5 } 
| 
} 
4 
| 
\ 
4 
a, 
4 
a 
= 
é 
i 
| 
a 
» 
‘ 


rom 
Coteus. 


rom 


Brom tne 


ror 
ALON 


com tren 


rem ther 


tor iome are mot large, asthe TWO muilcics of the Hipp. orhers very fmall. 
eight fmal) muicies of ie necke.and the proper muicics ef the Throtlesand the 


muicles. Orhersareof an indifiercnrmagnituds. colour, to: 


fome are whire and red-as the Temporal! muicles. which have Tendons comming 
from the of the belly ; others are invide, as the three greater muilcles of th: 
calic of the leg which colour chey have bytheadmixtion of the white, or 
nervy coate with the red ficlh, forthis coat by itsthicknefle darkning the colour 
the fieth. fo thar it cannot lhew its rednefie and trefh coleur, makes ieeme 
livide colour. From them icttuation, for iomeare luper as thote which ap- 
peare under the skin and fat gothers deepen and hid.as the imonth and foure twir 
muicies tome are out and 2s ipred over in 2 itreight and plains 
pafiage. asthe mulcles of the thigh which move tie lepoe, except the Sam-muicic. 
others oblique.as thofe of F dhe -Otheriome traniveric.as the traniverfe 
of the where vou abie alithe fibers of the muicie: 
we call them Oblique, craniverte | by cCOMparing them tothe 
muicies. as which DY theconcouric of the fibers make a fireighr or acute angie. 

Fromthe forrsof fibers forfomehave one kindeotfiber; yet the preareft par: 
enjoytwo iorzs Trunming fo upane cownc,tl cthey ertherare crofled like the letre: 

vas happens in the pegtoralland grindme muicies: or elle doe not concurre, as 1 

the Trapezij Ochers have three tortsef fiers, as the muicie of the tace. 

From their coherence and connexion, Or their texture of nervous fibers. for 
jome have fibers more diftant and:remote their original! 
thanin otherplaces.asvoumay fee in the muficiesof the buttocks ; Others in ther 
midft and belivswhich by reafonthercot miuch muicies smore Dig then 
head and flender,as happensinmoft of che mufcles of the arme anc 
ice. in which the dente mafle of eth mrerwaven with fibers, dilioyne: the tibers 
IN a diftance in otheriome the fibers are more dilfsjant inthe taile.as im the 
ereate Saw-muicle ariting trom the Dottome «of the fnoutder Diade-.im others they 
are equally — through the whole muicic, asin themuicits of the wreftand be 
tweene the rid 

their head; fori fome it isfiefhy interwoven with few fibersoas im the 


muicies of the butracks; others iris Wholy mervous, as in the mofi-broad- 
muicle common to the arme and thoulder blade, and in the three muicies of the 
thigh preceedins from the tuberofiry of the hucie Done. infome 15 Mervous and 
tiefiw as in the mrerrall anc external, muicie of the arme. es have ont 
head. orhers two,as the bender of the elbow and theexternall of the other: 
three as the Threcheadea muicie of thetiugh. But wee mut thar the Wor 
nerve or fnew 1s here taken in alarge fignification, for a anc tendon 
as Galen faith Ofsiows ) and moreover we mufiobierve. that the headeof 
muicie. ss one While above, anotiter while below. otherwhilesin the midft the 
Micdrifie,as youmay know Dy the iniertion of the Nerve, becauie tt enters thx 
Muicte by ms ead. 

From thei beliv alio, therebe fome differences of mulcies taken: tor [ome have 
the: Deliv immediately ar their 2s the muicitsof the buttecks, others at 
ther the Madriffe. Others juftarther head. es thofe which DUT torch 
tne Walfe oi the leg:imothersit  fomewhat further off,as in thole which draw backe 
thearme anc whicbbend the legoe inothersthe beliy extends cvenirom the head 
t© the taille, asin the intexcoftall: mut cles ane theic ofthe wreft-; in others ts pre- 
duced evento their miertion. 2s in thofe ef the palmes of the hands ane (oles of the 
fome havea donbie deliv. diftinguilned py anervous iupiance ; as thoie which 
open the mouth, and thofe which arife komthe ropte of the lowe: pracefic of tie 
{noulder biade 

Moreover the differences of muicels aredrawne alio from the Tendonsfor Jem: 
have none,at icaft which aremanifeft, asthe muicles of the lips and the fphinéter 
muicies, the mrercoftaliand thote-ot the wreft.others have them in part. and want 
themumpart,as the tor the Midriffe svants a Tendon at the ends of the 
forrenrivs, but hath twoat the fick Ferteore the Loinss in wich its 

Others 


INE it 
WiHIcr 


anc th 


Arnis 
tractes: 
tine 
differs: 


Loe 


ligamicn 
ws 


holute ix 
© 
Sor aim 
cending 
artery pi 


fibers 
pare 


ang 
micntous 
preter 


then)... an 


fetinar ic! 


aa culn: 


Wiapons 


| 


(Cj 
The 
jen 
ré 
crow 
4 
rurhe 
: 
- the 
- & «& 
ree 
& * * 
> 
— 
4 
| 4 
4 


l,asthe 
and the 
r, for 
mming 
of the 
ndinous 
our of 
of that 
ich ap- 
retwin 
| plaine 
ufcle; 
oiverfe 


e right 
le. 
ft part 
e letter 
asin 
for 
einall, 
n their 
id their 
e and 
> fibers 
in the 
mis they 
nd bee 


in the 
broad- 
of the 
us and 
ve one 
others 
> word 
endon, 
dofa 
in the 
rs the 


ehave 
ners at 
backe 

head 

pre- 
m of the 
vhich 
of the 


{ome 
incter 
want 
che 
ared; 
thers 


nufcles 


, as the three muicles of the Calte ofthe leg, and thofe which bend the cubit and Jep, =» 


0 | Mans body. 


Orhers have a Tendonindeede, But fome of thefe move with the bone, fome not 
as the mulcles of the eyes, and befides, fome of thefe have broad and membranous 
rendons, as the mufclesotthe eyes aad Epigafrium, except the right mufeles ; in 
others they are thicke and round,asia the benders of the fingers 5 in others they are 
leffe round, bue more broad than thicke, fuchis the Tendon ariling from the twin 
mufcles and Solews ot the legge : others have fhort Tendons, as the mufcles which _ 
curnedowne the hand; otherfome long,as thofe of the palmes of the hands and 'q 
foles of the feet ; befides others produce Tendons from the end of their belly which 
Tendonssare manifeft,orhers from the midft,as the Temporal! mufcles. 
Befides alfo others diffufe many tendons from their belly,asin the hands rhe 
benders of the fingers, and the extenders of the feet. Orherfome put forth bur one, 
which fometimes:s devided into many, as thofe which bend the third articulation 
of the foot ; otherwhile many mufcles by their meeting together make one Tendon, 


All tendons have their originall, when the nerves and ligaments difperfed through 

the flethy fubftance of a mulcle,are by litle and licle drawne and meet together, untill 

at latt carried othe joynt they arethere faftened for the fit bending and extenfion From theig 
thercof.From the contrariety of their Actions, for fome parts have contrary mufcles, 
bendersand exrenders ; Orher parts have none, for the Cods and fundament have 

onely lifeersup. Fremcheir function, for fome are made for direct morions, as thofe From theis 
which extend the fingers and toes ; others for oblique,as the Swpinators of the hand “"** 
and the Pronators ; others performe both, as the pectorall mufcle, which moves,the 

Are obliquely upward and downeward, asthe upper and lower fibers arecon- 
tracted;and alfo out right, if all the fibers be contractedtogether,which alfo happens 

to the Deltesdes and Trapezius.l havethought it good to handle particularly thefe 
differences of mufcles, becaufe that by underftanding them the prognofticke willbe 

more certaine; and alfo the application of remedies to each part , and if any occafion 


be either to make incifion, or futur¢,we may be more certaine, whether the part af- 
fected be more,or Iefle nervous. 


- 
— 


C HAP. I X. 
Of the parts of a Mufele. 


Wake) Aving declared the nature and differences of amufcle, we muft note that The com. 
(ome of the parts thereof are compound, or univerfall, others fimple or 


ls parecsefa 
@ particular. Thecompound are thehead, Belly and taile. The fimple are ode 

ligaments, a nerve,ficth, a veine, artery and coate. For the compound parts , by the 

head weunderftaad the beginning and original! of amuicle,whichis one while liga- 

mentous and nervous, otherwhilesalfo flefhy. By the belly portion which is ab. 

folutely flefhy; Bur by the raile,we underftand a Tendoa coniilling partly of anerve, 

partly ofaligamept promifcuoufly comming forth from the belly of the mufcle. 

For afmuch as belongs to the fimple, which are fixe.in number, three are called 

proper, andthree common, The proper are a Ligament frem a bone, a nerve pros 

ceeding fromthe Braine,or {pinall marrow, and fleth compact by the concretion of 

blood, The Common are,a veine trom the Liver or trunke arifing from thence; an 

artery proceeding from the Heart, a Coate produced by the nervous & ligamentous 

fibers {preading over the fuperficies ofthe mufcle, But for the fimple ufe of all 

{uch parts, the netveis as it were the principall part ofa mufcle,which givesitfesfe 

and motion, the Ligament gives ftrength, the flefhcontaines the nervous and liga- What ufeeact 

oacntous fibers of the mufcle and ftrengthens it filling up all the void {paces,and alfo 

it prelervesthe native humidity of thefe parts and cherifheth the heat implanted in mufle, 

them; and ro conclude,defends it from all externall injuries; for like a fani¢ oppo- 

feth it felfe again& theheat of the Sunne; and isas a garment againft the cold ; and 

asacufhion imall falls and bruifes, and as a buckler or defence againft wounding 

weapons. The veine nourifhes the mufcle, the arterie gives it life, the coat so yee 
- 


- 
Be 
1 
| 
t 
‘ 
% 


The natureof 


a Ligament, 


the 


— 


che harmony of allthe parts thereof, left they fhould be any wayes difioyned or cor. 
rupted by purulent abfcefles breaking into the empty or void fpaces of the mutcies, 
as we fee it happensin a Gangrene, where the corruption hath invaded this membrane 
by the breaking out of the more acride matter or filth. 


— 


C 
A more particular inqui [ition into each part of mufcle. 
wee Aving gone thus farre, it remaines, that we more particularly inquire into 


% cach part ofa mufcle,that (ifit be poffible,) nothing may be wanting to 
PIS this difcourfe. Wherefore a Ligament properly fo called,is a fimple part 


cold, white, taking its originall immediatly, or by the interpofition of fome Medium 
from the Bones, or Griftles( from whence alfo the Mufcles have their beginning > 
wherby it comes to paffe that a ligament is void of fenfe,unleffe it receive a nerve from 
fome other place ; ( For forthe Ligaments which compofe & firengthen the Tongue 


’ and yeard, are partakers of fenfeJand it inierts it felfinto the bone and griftle that fo it 


The threefold 
ufe ofa Liga- 
ments 


Whata nerve 
1S. 


What wee 
meane by the 
nervous and 


Ligamentous 
fibers. 


By what 
power the 
firnular parts 
principally 
draw,or 
attra. 
What and of 
hew many 
forts the ficih 


may bind them together,and ftrengthen and beautific the whole joynt or connexion: 
(for thefe three be the principal ufes of a Ligament) then diffufing it {elf into the mem- 
branes and mufclesto ftrengthen thefe parts, A nerve to fpeake properly, is alioa 
fimple parte of our body,bred and nourifhed by a erofic and Phiegmaticke humor, 
fuch as the braine, the originall of allrhenerves, and alfo the Spinall marrow en- 
dewed with the faculty of feeling and oftentimes alfo of moving.For there be divers 
parts of the body which have nerves, yet are deftitute of all voluntary motion, having 
the fenfe onely of fecling,as the membranes,veines, arteries puts and all the entrailes. 
A nerve is covered witha double cover from the two membranes of the braine,and 
befides alfo with athird proceeding fromthe ligaments which faften the hinder part 
ofthe head to the Pertebra’s, or el{c from the Perseraninm. Wee underftand no other 
things by the fibers ofa nerve,or of a Ligament, than long and flender threds, white, 
folid, cold, ftrong more or leffe according to the quantity ofthe fubftance, which is 
partly nervous and fenfible, partly Ligamentous and infenfible. Youmuftimagine 
the fame of the flefhy fibersin their kind ; but of thefe threds fome are ftraight for 
attraction, others oblique for retention of that which is convenient for the creature, 
and laftly fome tran{verfe for the expulfion of which is unprofitable. But when thef 


-tran{verfe threds are extended in length, they are leffened in bredth;but when they are 


dire@ly contracted, they are fhortened in length. But when they are extended all ¢o- 
gether as it were with an unanimousconfent,the whole member is wrinkled as con- 
tracted into it {elfe,as on the centrary it is extended when they arc relaxed, Some of 
thefe are beftowed upon theanimall parts, to performe voluntary motions ; others 
upon the vitall to performe the agitation of the Heartand Arteries; others upon the 
naturall for attraction,retention and expulfion. Yet we muft obferye,that the attracti- 
onof nofimular part is performed by the helpeof the forefaid fibers or thteds, but 
rather by the heat implanted in them,or by the fhunning of Emptineffe, or the fami- 
liarity of the fubftance. The flefh alfo isa fimple and foft part compofed of the purer 
portion of the blood infinuating it felfe into the {paces betweene the fibers, fo to in- 
velt them for the ufesformerly mentioned. Thisis as it were a certaine wall and Bul- 
Warke againft the injuries of heat and cold, againft all falls and bruifes, as itwere 2 
certaine foft pillow or cufhion yeelding toany violent impreflion, There bethrce 
forts of fieth ; one more ruddy, as the muf{culous fleth of perfec creatures and fuch 
as have blood; for the flefh of all tender and young things having blood, as 
Calves,and alfo of all forts of fith,is whitith, by reafon of the too much humidity 
of the blood. The fecond kinde is more pallid, even in perfect creatures having 
blood, iuch is the fiefh of the heart, ftomacke, weafond, guts, bladder , wombe. 
The third is belonging tothe entrails, or the proper fubftance of eachentrail,as that 
which remaincs of the Liver ( the veines,arteries and coate being taken away) of the 


bladder 


of mans body, next ofa boneand griftle, the moft terreftriall, dry, hard,* 


there 

Bur} 
accord 
drawes 
head b 
workin 


lower b 
Thefe 
the riche 
in force 
of one fig 
foof the 
We nel 
are of a2 
r ight m 
fcends, 
Afcendaml 
whofe {uy 
ligament 
Mant in chi 
Name of 
their figu 


96 Lis: 3. L 
blada 
whic 
A ‘4 
{peri 
A 
forts 
fome 
| inter 
{pirit 
emuls 
Bu 
29 1S Hat 
away 
that v 
fore 
the ne 
the Cc 
them. 
tion o 
of whi 
and {i 
parent 
Arme 
| 
| 
coibe | 


| 
Be Se 


Or Cor- 
ufcles, 
Smbrane 


inning 
vefrom 
Tongue 
m hat fo it 
nexion: 
mcMe 
is alloa 
humor, 
divers 
having 
itrailes. 
nine,and 
der part 
o other 
white, 
hich ts 
imagine 
for 
eature, 
n thefc 
hey are 
ail to- 
mas con- 
ome of 
-orhers 
pon the 
but 
f 
¢ purer 
to 
nd Bul- 
were 2 
me three 
id fuch 
od, as 
midity 
having 
rombe. 
as that 
of the 
ladder 


Mans 


bladder of the Gall, braine, kidneys, milts Some adde a fourth fort of fleth 


which is{pongy , and that they fay is properto thetongue alone. ony 

A veineis the veffcl, pipe or channel of the blood, or bloody matter; i¢ hatha 
fpermaticke fubftance , confifts of one coate compofed of 3 forts of fibers. 

An Artery is allo the receptac® of blood but that fpiriruous and yellowifh, con- 


What avein 


13, 


What anarte= 


fifting in like manner Of a fpermaticke fubftance ; Butit hath two coats, with three > 


fortsof fibers, the utmoit whercof is moftthin, confifting of right fibers and 
fome oblique: But the inner is five times more thicke and denfethan the utmoft, 
interwoven with traniverfe fibers; and it doth not onely contcine blood and 
fpirit, but alfo afcrous hamor, which wee may beleeve becaufe there bee two 
emulgent Arteryes, afwellas veines. 

But the inner coat of an Artery is therefore more thick, becaufeit may con- 
taine blood which is more het, fubtle and fpirituous; for the fpirit, fecing ic 
is naturally more thin and light and in perpetuall motion, would quickly flyc 
away , wnleffe it were he'dina ftronger hold.There is other reafon fora veine , as 
that which containes blood groffe, ponderous and flow of motion. Where- 
fore if it had acquired a denfe and groffe coate,it could {carfe bee diftributed ro 
the neighbouring parts; God the maker of the univerfe,forefecing this, made 


“the coats of the veflels contrary tothe confiftance of the bodyes contained ia 


them. The Avsffomefis of the veines and Arteryes, that is to fay , the applica- 
tion of the mouthes of the one to the other,is very remarkeable, by benefit 
of which they mutually communicate and draw the matters contained in them, 
and fo alfo transfufe them by inienfible paflages, although that azafomo/is is ap- 
parent in the veine and artery thatmeet together at the Ioint and bending ‘of the 


Arme, which I have fometimes fliewed in the Phyficke fchooles, at fuch timeasI 
there difle@ed Anatomyes. 


But the action or fun&ion ofa mufcle is eitherto move, or confirme the parte 
according to our will, into which it is implanted; which ic doth when it 
drawesit felfe towards its original! , that is to fay, it'shead. But wee define the 


head by the infertion of the nerve, which wee underftand by che manner of the 
working of the Mufcle. 


CHAP. X I. 


Of the Mufcles off the Epigaftrium, or lower belly, 


pOw feciag that wee haue taught, what a mufcle is, and what the dif. 
Wis, ferences thereof are, and what fimple and compound parts it hath, and what 
BUS theufe, actionand manner of ationin each partis; it remaines that wee 
come to the particular explication of each Mufcle, begining with thofe of the 
lower belly, as thofe which we firft meet withall in difle@ion., 


Why anArtee 
ry ismofe 
thicke and 
denfe thana 
veins, 


The mutuall 
Anaffome/is of 


the veines and 
arteryes, 


Where itis 
manifett, 


From whenté 
a mu(cle hath 
itsbeginnin 
or head, 


Thefeare 8 innumber, 4oblique, 2 oneach fide, two right or dire& one, on Bight 
theright, another onthe left fide,and in like manner 2 tranfverfe, All thefearealike 


in force, magnitude and ation, fo mutually compofed, that the oblique defcendant 
of one fide, isconjoined with the other oblique defcendant onthe other fide, and 
{0 of the reff. | | | 

Wemay addeto this number the 2 little Supplying or Affifting mufcles which 
are of a Pyrawsidal forme and arife from the fhare-bone, above the infertion of the 


rightmufcles; Ofthe oblique muicles of each fide the one afcends , the other de- 


friam, 


cends, whereupon it comes to pafle, that they are called the Oblique defcendant and Theeblique 
Afcendant Mufcles. Thofe oblique which wee firft meet with, arethe defcendant, éefcendanc. 


fubftance is paitly fanguine, partly {permaticke; for they are flefhy, nervous, 
and membranous. Yct the flefhy portion is predomi- Their great- 


nant in them, out of which refpec Hippocrates is wont-to exprefie the mufcles by the 


name of fichhes; their greatnes is indifferent betweene the large and the fmall mutcles; 


eir 


2 Theircompor 


their figure 3 {quare They are compofed of the fore-mentioncd parts, they are two farand dite, 
| ip 


| 
ting tc 
ple part 
hard.* 
d 
a 
4 
& 


Of the eAnatomie 


Their cons 
nexjon, 
Their 
perament, 


Their action, 


Theoblique 
a(cendant, 


Their fite and 


eonncxion, 


Their Action 


The right 


mu(cles of the 


T heir fite, 


Originall, 


innumber ; their fie is oblique taking their beginning , from the touching of the 
great {aw Mufcle and from the fixt and feaventh true ribbes, or rather fromrhe 
{paces between the fixe lower ribbes, and rather on the forepart of the mufcles than 
of the ribbes themfelues,from whence fhunning the fertebra’s of the loines the ficfhy 

atts ofthem are terminated inthe externall and wpper eminency of the Haunch- 
bane andthe Membranous end inthe lower eminency of the {hare-bone and the 


White-line. Yet Cofambys diflenting from this common defcription of the oblique 


Mufcles,thinks that they are onely terminated in the White line and not in che thare- 
bone. For (faith he)wherefore fhou!d they be inferred into the fhare-bone which is aor 
moved? But becaufe it would bee an infinite labour and trouble to fer downe at large 
the feverall opinions of all Authors of Anatomy, I haue thought it fuflicient forme 
totouch them lightly by the way. Their connexion is withthe oblique afcendant 
lying ynderthem,and with che dire@,or right. Their temperament is twofold ,the one 
hot and moift by reafon of the belly and the flefhy portion of them; the other cold & 
dry in refpe@ of their ligamentous and teadinovs portion, Their action is to draw the 
parts into which they are inferted towards their originall, or elsto unite them firme- 
ly. Yet each of thefe privately and properly drawes the hip in an oblique manner to- 
wards the Cartilago Scutiformis or breft-blade. Then follow the oblique afcendanr, 
whe have the fame fubftance, quantity, figure, compofure, number and temper the 
defcendant have. They are {Cituate between the defcendant and tran{verfe with whem 
they have connexion, efpecially by the veffels which are brought from the parts be- 
neath. All the flethy parts arife from the rackbones of the Haunch to the ends of the 
baftard ribs ,which they feeme to admit above and below,being ficfhy even to the 


fourth,and then becomming membranous they take their way to the white line, - 


with a double aponeurofis, which paffes through the right Mufcles above and be- 
low,as wee may plainely fee from the navill downewards.In their flefliy part they 
draw their originall from the {pine of the Haunch benes a little lower than the 
defcendent end intheir flefhy parte. But for their membranous parts, they arif¢ be- 
fore from the fhare bone , but behinde from the {pondiles of the Holy bone, and 
Vertebra’s of the loines obliquely alcending vpwards to the white line,into which 
they are terminared by an aponcosrofisor membranous tendon (which feemes to 
penetrate the right Mufcle vpwards and downewards, e{pecially vader the navil ) bue 
by their flefhy part at the ends of all the baftard ribbes , which they feeme to re. 
ceiveabove and below. And becaule thefe.mufclesare terminated in the white line, 
they have alfo another ufe,yet {uch as is common to all the mufcles ofthe Epigaffrium, 
that is,to preffe down the Guts. Theiraction is (ifthey performe it together) to draw 
downe the cheft,and dilate the breft ; bur iftheir actions be f{eparate, they draw the 
cheft tothe hip with an oblique motion, After thefe follow the right mufcles,fo called 
becaufe they defcend according to the length ofthe body, & becaufe they have right 
or ftreight fibers. 

Wee will fay nothing ( to fhunne prolixitie, which in all other places wee 
will avoid) of their fubftance and other conditions, which they have common withthe 
fore mentioned Mufcles. They are fcituate in the eminenteftor extuberating region of 
the belly, bounding the Epigafirium taken in gencrall, (or the {uperficiary belly, they 
are devided by the manifeft intercourfe of the white line,ever to the Navell,in which 
place they feeme to be united even tothe place of their infertion. They draw their eri- 
ginall not from the fhare bone, as fome would have it, but according to the infertion 
of their nerves from the fides of the Cartilago /cutiformis & the ends of the fixt feventh 
and cight ribbs; but they end in the fhare bone where they make a common tendon 
fufficiently firong and fhort. Sy/uins, Vefalins and Columbus thinke they arife ftom the 
{hare bone, becaufe they cannot be inferted into that bone, becaufcit is immoveable. 
You may perceive in thefe Mufcles certaine nervous & tranfver(e interfeCtions, often 
times three ianumber for the ftrength of thefe Mufcles(of which Gales makes no men- 
tion although they may be feencin Apes, )And alfo in the inner fide of thefe mufcles 
you may {ee foure veines and as many arteryes,of which fome creepe upwards, others 
run downwards, The upper called the Mamillary defcend from the Axillarie by the 


fide and lower partes of the Stermon,the flenderer portions thereof being diftributed 
by 


by th 
when: 
Th 
{elfe i 
they 
wich t 
Iliack 
lary v 
the n 
Hefh, 
ward: 
this, 
you cag 
Butth 
cated all 
the 
their 
ly, Od 
the par 
the wo 
which 
they be 
veincom™ 
the parcil 
ends of | 
ofthe {i 
tenden 
affifters 
Some 
cles to ha 
rated from 
on the 
right an 
reafon 
cles. 
They 
lonéuin,t 
Original] 
traniver| 
ribs ; com 
Vinces , 
Their; 
But al! 
mon, tha 
them dl 
and alfo { 
found Tr 
Therefd 
Midriffe , | 
wards, 
tents by 
Would pref 
Alth 


Epigattrict 
cles of the 
*xcrement 


* 
¥ 
— 
¢ 
' 
ay 
a” 


frhe 
mrhe 
than 
ficfhy 
inche 
d the 
ligue 
hare- 
is mot 
large 
rme 
indant 
oid & 
w the 
armec- 
ber to- 
idanr, 
er the 
yhem 
ts be- 
of the 
o the 


id be- 

tthey 
the 
mic be- 
, and 
vhich 
es tO 
bue 
to ree 
line, 
710%, 
draw 
w the 
called 
Bright 


s wee 
iththe 
ion of 
they 

By kich 
ir 
rtion 

venth 
endon 
m the 
eable. 
ofren 
meti- 
ufcles 
others 
by the 
buted 
by 


line, . 


Epigaftricke 


by the way,to the Mediaflinum,and about the fourth and fift rib to the Dugges, trom 
whence they take theirname. 


That which remaines breaking out by the fides of the Breft-blade inferts it 
felfe into thofe mufcles creeping along, eucn almoit to the navell; ia which place Themectin 


they are manifeftly united (that ts the veines with the yveines, and arterics copether of” 

7 ith the Epigaftricke,which afcend from the vp; odtcnines 
with the arterycs) with the Epigaftricke,which afcend from the vpper part of the and mamillary 
Iliackes on each fide under the faid mufcles untill they meet with thele 4 mamil- 


veinesand 
lary veflels. That you may finde this concourfe of the veines and arteryes about = 


the navill,you muft follow both the upper and the lower fomewhat dee pe into the 
fiefh,preffing the blood on both fides from above dowinewards, and from below ups 
ward; untill y’ u fhall finde the exofculation of thefe veflels, which will appeare by 
this, that the blood will fiow from this into that and from thatinto rhis; otherwife 
you can {carce perceiue it, by realon ofthe {mallnes of fuch vefleis which want biood. 
But that by the benefit of fuch concourtle of the veffels,the matrers may be communi- 
cated and tran{ported both from the wombe to the dugs,and againe from rhe dugs to 
the wombe, appeares in Nurfes, who want their courfes, when the milke comes into 
their dugs, and on the contrary lofe their milke when their courfes flow plentitul- 
ly, Otherwife to what purpofe fhould there be fuch concourfe betweene the vefels of 
the pappesand wombec, for there are veines and artcries diffuled to the fides of 
the wombe from the roote of the Epigaftrickes; for indeed the Epigaftickes 
which in their afcent mecte with the mamillary, goe not to tle wombe, though 
they be nextrothem, and arife from the fame truncke with the Hy poevattricke 
veine ofthe wombe. The Adtionof thefe mufcles is, romove or drawe necre roger 


the parts of the Hypogaftrium to the precordiz or Hypochondryes. Their ufe, ia Their a2iohe 


Columbus opinion is, to draw the Breft downewards fo to dilate ir, Ar the That. 
ends ofthefe Naturehath produced two other fmall Mafcles from the upper part 
ofthe fhare bone, of a triangular figure for the fafery of the thicke and common 


tenden of the sight Mufcles, whereupon they are called Swecenturiati or 
affifters . 


Some ( moved with I know rot what reafon) would haue thefe two fmall Muf- Thetyrami- 
cles to help the ereCtion of the ycard. Colwmbus thinkes they thould sot be fepa- “I: 
rated from the right, and thatthey only are the fiefhy beginnings of theright. Bue —— 
onthe contrary Fallopius manifeftly proves them different and {eparare from the 
rightand fhewes their vfe, The Tranfverfe remaine tobe fpoken of , fo called by 
— of their fibers which make right angics with the fibers of the right Muf. 7°24, 
cles. 

They haue a quadrangular figure feituate vpon the greatcft part of the Peri- —— 
tonéum,to which they flicke fo clofe that they fearfe canbe ieparated. They take their aye. 
originall from the produdtion of the loines,the Eminenacy of the Haunch-bone, the 
tran{verle productions of the vertebra’s of the loynes and the ends of che baltard 
ri0s; contrary to the opinion of many, whom the infertion of the nerve con- 
vinces , but they endin the white line, asallthereft doc, 

Their action is to preffe che guts,efpecially for the expulfion of excrements, Their A@ion: 

But all the $ recited Mufcles, befides their proper uf@, haue another com- fhe common 
mon, that is, they flandfor a defence or Bulwarke forall the parts lying under 
them, and ferve for theexpulfion both of the excrements, infant, aad vapoures, oF che 
and alfo for the ftrengthening ofthe voice, as experience thewes in thoie who 47, 
found Trumpets and Cornets. 

Therefore thefe Mufcles doe equally on every fide prefie the Belly; Buc the 
Midriffe, the intercoftall Mufcles affifting it, doth drive from above downe- 
wards, from which confpiring contention followes the excretion of the excre- 

‘ents by the fundament; but unleffe the Midriffe fhould aifite , thefe Mufeles 
would prefle the excrements no more downewards, than vpward to the mouth. 
Although to this excretion of the excrements, itis not fufficient that the 


> Midriffe and intercoftall Mufcles preffe the belly, bur the Muf- why whenthe 
cles of the throtle muft be alfo fhut. For the mouth being open — the 7pouthis open 


the excre- 


*Xcrements never goc well forth; becaufe the vapours thar pafle out of the menrsgomore 
K mouth, flowly forth, 


dal or alsifting 


The tranfverfe 
muichs of the 


j 
4 
ae 


ic 


3 + 


mouinerbich being reftrained and drivento the Midriffe,by ftretching it powerfully 
thrufts downe the cement, Wherefore Apothecaryes when they give glifters, bid 
theexeremests +e Darientto open his mouth, that the glifter may eafilyer goe up, which otherwile 


forth. would (carfely go up,the mouth being fhut ,becaule fo we fhould have no place empty 


inus,into which the glyfter might be admitted. 
The firfl Figure of the Lower belly, 


AABCD. Theupper,lowerand 

laterall parts ot the Peritonaum. 
EB. “The white Line the 
Griftle of the Breaft-bone, called 
the Breit-blade,to the Commil- 
fure or meeting of the Share- 
bones; 

FE. The Griflle of the Breaft-bone 

Cartilago enj:-formis or the 

Breait-Blade. 

G. The Navill which, all the 
Mutcles being taken away,muft 
bekepr for the demonitration 
of the Venbilicall Veffels, 

H H.The produdions of the Pe- 
cum Which contain the Se- 
minarie Vefiels on either ide. 

_ ** The hole which giveth way co 
the Seminarie Veflels of Men. 

I1.A Veine and an Arterie from 
the Epiga/Pricke, which being 

carried upward under the right 
Mufcles,doe here hang down, 
and are diftribated into the lo- 
wer part of the Abdomen. 

KK, A Veine and an Arteric 
from the internall Mammaric 
proceeding from under the 
Bone of the Breaft, are carried 
downeward thorough theright 
and are difleminated 
tae upper part of the 

domen. 

1,2. The place wherein the right 
Mujicles arife,which being here 
cut off,do hang down, that cheir 
Veficis may the better be enc. 

324+ The Anafomofis ox inoccula- 

tion of the forelaidVeilels,ma- 
king the confent of the tbdomes 
and the Nofe, & of the Wombe 
with the Breafts,as fome think. 

LL.Branehes of Veines running 
into the fides of the Peritonzey ». 

N. The place of the Haunch Bone bared, co which the Oblique and the Traniverfe Mufcies doc grow. 


Of the whiteline, and Peritonzum or Rim of the belly. 
What the The white line is nothing els, than the bound and extremities of the Mufcles 
wanelmeis ofthe Epiga/irium diftinguiibing the belly in the middcft into two parts, the right 
and left, It is called white, both of its owne colour, and alfo for that no flefhy part 
lyes vnder it, or is placed above it. Itis broader abovethe navill , butnarrower 
what there, below ,becaufe the right mufcles doe there grow intoene, Now we treat ofthe 
(Coat or membrane, Perstoneamor Rim ofthe belly; it is fo called, becaufe itis 
ftretched over all the lower belly, and particularly over all the parts conteined inthe 
Thefabftanee VEntricle,to which alfo it freely lends a cemmon coat. Ithatha{permaticke fubftance 
and quantity, as all other membranes have; the quantity of itin thicknes is very {mall, (for itis al- 
mott asthinas a fpiders web) yet differing in divers places in men, and women; for 
mien have it more thick and ftrong aboue the Navil, that foit may conteine the ex- 
tention of the ftomacke, often ftretched beyond meafure with meat and drinke, Oo 
the contrary women have it fo thick and ftrong below their navell that it feemes 
double,that fo they may more eafily endure thediftention of their wombe caufedby 
the child conteined init, But above the nivell men and women have the Peritenaum 
ofan equall ftrength, for the felfe famereafon. The longitude and latitude of it is 
knowne by the circum{cription of the belly. 


The 


i 
alrhou; 
fels de 
theta 

The 
the Nam 
cend t¢ 

Ic is 
the co 
of the} 
on the 
whoie 
to the 
reafon 
the pro 

from t! 
{eparat 

It ha 
lower | 
and vio 
pens In 
united: 
wit! 

ceeds c! 

Anot: 
and gut 
their ha 

The 
the exp 

The 
them tc 
by viol 

Lafth 
late it 

Hature. 


nefle is 
is defcri 
is doub] 
downe f 
and {ple 
Colon. 


| 
4 
| 

. 
like fi 

f branch 
no 

, 

é, 

ba 

| 
si 
f ‘ 


B | orth productions , The 
— d and fome what iong if puts. the {permaticke 
re 1s roun di and ftrengthening 
tfully ftalles, both for the ticles, and befides itthe eiaculatory 
er les of the Te > 
ike ng, mafter mule cs turall parts, The compo= | 
irs, bid fells and the Cre the refticles andall the na ine fmalle 
vere impart a ceatto the fibers, certaine {malle frien, 
ierwife -flels, as alfotoimp branous and nervous | 
+  vefiels, nder, membranous receiues for life 
concurring with them , which ic The number, | 
branches @ c adherentparts. e and equal, + 
lower and This mem haue it perforated in that p le; Dut ra- 
although in truth we muft not thinke that a hole , 
one called étion as we faid before. he C ate Peritonaum is doubled below 
chet. a produ ifts haue obferved , the Coate licall arteryes af- 
- mifts haue he veabilicall ar y 
Share e latter Anato duplications the v 
The la dthat by the {paces ofthefe redup The fite and 
rcaft-bone the Navel, ance | | d ined by connexion, 
r the he Navell. | fies them about, aad jo ; | 
te nere the naturall pang itis ioyned tothe wertebre's 
h, all the It is icitua as al 0 On tne tide Ori inall: 
onitration | rem nad on ‘ 
| oines fhare bone; a lof 
we of the it cleaves to the tha te it ftickes loclofe 
lower part Cie he fore or outer par 
of the Pe on the lo ed efts; onthe fo force, by 
: oly inv them but by 
1n the Se- hofe lower parte it w it cannot bee pluckt from them t "alle ) 
her hde. bd fverfe muicles, that it can he fibers thereof with the fiber Lib s6 Mer, 
eth way to to the tranfve d adhefion of the inion proceeds 
gS cation an brane in Ga/eas opinion p 
s of Men. reafon of the compli fe mufcles,which membra - hy. 
MUICICS, calily breake,than 
rterie from | embrane of the we may more y 
= proper m arvaile that re. 
From this Peritonzum, fo cold and dry,as all th Va, 
| ts. itis inveftand cover 3 
ng down, leparate thefe twocoa hereofis , to inve reflures 
nto the lo- Ss the firttw b veefed by comp 
Ithath many ufes , ll, leaft ic fhould be {gq han. 
men. ] omctimes p 
| Arter lower belly, {paces of dh bee very well 
Mammarie d violent attemp ‘oa unies the ips lf thruft. 
ndec the of. the Epigafrsam, y the Guts and kalfth 
acecarried Pons wounds ares a tumor about the wound les; from whence pro. 
(leminate | Perzien 
ing withoutthe ents by prefling the ventricle | 
: SENOS pen further the cafting forth of the excrem thould doe it by both 
tthe right Another vie is as the Midriffe doth above one 
bein e 
that theis and gutson the together, he parts with flatulency after 
their bande joyned tog ibitesthe repletion of the p 
a The third ufe is, it proht . by firaitening and prefling heir f at and bindes 
ellels,ma- ‘crements ic 
¢tblomen the expulfion of the exc hat iticontéines all the parts in ¢ ftheir places 
heWemba’ | h and laft is, tha fhould not flye ont o 
The fourt bone, principally that they fhould 
them to the ing and falling frem on big re that ic will eafily dic 
eritongum. by violent motions, 3 P Rim is of that ac ain{t 
a ft know, that the ith child, and in tumors ag 
grow. Lafily wee mu ‘a Dropfies.in women with chil 
late it felfe,as wee feein Dr plies, 
Mufcles nature. - | 
part C HAP, XITI. 
rrower ii 
the Ka 
of the Of the Epiploon,Omentum, or Zitbus, that 
ule itis / ined,the firft ef which is the 
Feer the conteining parts, follow CONES {wims upor all the The 
pbftance Il) fo called, becaufé it as tity ofit forthick~ magnitude, 
Eptploon,( or Ka ) aticke the quan y fit figure. 
itis al > ae fit is fatty and {perm 3 The latitude o 
ns for indi men according to their Purfe, becaule i compes 
the ex- neffe is diverfe ofthe gutts. It is in figure ne. which fliding: fare, 
leemes —isdouble. Itiscomp f the ventricle,and the flat p he top of the 
the top 
edb downe from thegibbous ke from the lower belly ¢ its cheefe con~ 
tenaum and {picen over the Gutts, faid covering the Gurts, It 


nexion 


K 3 


The 


\ 


Theconnexia With the firlt Vertebra’s of the loines , from which place in beafls jg 
on, feemes to take a coate, as in men from the hollow part of the {pleenc and 
gibbous of the ventricle aad deprefied partof the Dacacnwm, from whence doubled 
ft is terminated -in the fore and higher part of the Collicke gut. Which 

Lib. Anatom moved Galen to write that the upper part of the membrane of the Kall was 

admis — sonexed to the ventricle, but the lower, to che laxer pare of the Collicke Gur. 

From the veflells of which parts it borrowes his, as alfo the nerves, if it have any, 
The temper The temper of it in leane bodyes ts cold and dry, becaufe their Kall fs without 
wi fat ; but in fat bodyesitis cold and moiite by reafon of the fat. The ufe of it is two- 
fold, we fold: The firft isto heatand moiften the Guts, and help their concoction, although 
it doe it by accident, as that which through the denfity of the fatte hinders 
the cold aire from piercing in, and allo forbiddes the diffipation of the inter. 
nallheat, Another ufe is , thatin want of nourifhmentin times of great famine, 
for fometimes it cherifhes, and as it were by its dew preferves the innate heate 
both of the ventricle and the neighbouring parts, as it is written by Galen.More- 
Lib. dene over wee mutt obferve, that in a rupture or relaxation of the Perttomaum the 
partum. Kali falls downe into the feretam, from whence comes that rupture wee call. 
Epiplocele, But ia weomen that are {omewhat more fat ir thrufts ir felfe betweene 
the bladder and the necke of the wombe, and by its compreflion hinders, thar 
the feed comes noe with full force jnto the wombe, and fo frufirates the concep- 

P tion. Befides, when bya wound or fome other chance, any part of it be defe€ive, 
caufe of 

Fruftrating then that part of the belly which anf{wers to it, will afterwards remainecoldand 

conception, raw by reafon of the forementioned caufés. 

The fecond figure of the lower belly. 

4,A,B,B.The inner face of the Pe- 
ritomewm cul into foure parts, 

and turned backward. 

ROB. The wpper fheweththe im- 

plantation of the Pasbilicall 
Veine iatothe Liver. 

C. The Navell {eparated from the 

Peritomanm., 

From D tothe upper B. the /m- 
bilicad V eine. 

E,E.The fore part of the ftomack 
blowne up, neither covered by 
the livernor the Kall. 

F.F.A parcofthe Grbbous fide of 
the Liver. 

G. Veficls diffeminated thorow 
the Perstomeum. 

* The Breit-blade, 

H, The bottome of the Bladder 
of Vrine, 

The connexion of the Perifo- 
neum to the bottomeof the 
Bladder, 

K,K,K,K, The Kall covering the 

Guts. 

M.N. Veflels and Sinnewes em- 
bracing the bottome of the 

Stomacke. O. The meeting of the Veflels of both fides, fothat 44,NV, and O,fhew the 

feame which Arsfotle mentions 3, .and 4 de part. Avim. where he faith; that the 

Kallarifes and proceeds from the midft of the belly.?.P.Branches of veflels running 

along ft the bottom of the fiomack.Q Certain branches of the Veflels diftribu- 

ted to the ppper membrane of the Omentusm ,& compatied with Far, 4,4. Thetwo 

bitical arteries ,eoing down by the fides of rhe bladder to a branch of the great arteric. 

6, The Ligament of the Biadder which is fhewed for the P’vachus. C wap. 


is aim 
accor: 
and hi 
cordi 
to be 
drink 
t10n, 
and la 
COnco 

Th 
court 
digeft 
foone: 
mech 
digeft 
wed ft 
ace my 


& | 
oe 
A 
Mme 
~ 
the 
Oi is 
is cc 
che [ 
bran 
pag: 
une 
& 
Ang 
Orin 
FLAC 
‘ 
neig! 
Bw 
On ton 
auth 
‘ 
pron 
If 
| 
| 
4 


i B. 3. 
afils ig 
‘ene and 
Houbled 
Which 
ll was 
ac Gur. 
ive any, 
Bvithour 
is two- 
though 
hinders 
inter. 
famine, 


.More- 
ums the 
call, 
fweene 
s, thar 
oncep- 
fective, 
oldand 


m the Pe- 
parts, 

the im- 

bilicall 


om the 
he 


omack 
red by 


Bide of 


iOrow 


macder 


Perifa- 


f the 
the 


em- 
of the 
mw the 
jat the 
tribu- 
teric. 
HAP. 


heare 


Cuar. 


Of the Ventricle or Stomacke. 


——™ Ow we mult {peake of the Sromacke, the receptacle of the food acceffas 
rie for the whole body, the feate of appetite, by reafon of the netees 

idifperfed into its upper orifice, and fointcits whole fubftance. The fab- venz_ 
fiance thercof is rather {permaticke than fanguine, becaufe that for one fone 

fiefhie membrane, it hath twonervous; The quamtitie or magnitude of 1*{bMance 
the ventricle 1s diverfe, according to the various magnitude of bodies, and gluttony 
of men. The figure of itis round and fomewhat long, like a Bagpipe. The fomacke 
is compofed of two proper coates, andone common from the Peritoneum,toge- 7)... 
ther with veines, finewes, and arteries; the inmermoft of its proper coatesis mem- Tie compos 
branous woven with right fibers, forthe attraGtion of meats, it is extended and pro- ‘"* 
pagated cyen to the mouth thereof, whereby it comes te paffe that the affections of 

fone part May catily be communicated tothe other by fympathy, orconfert. This 
coate hath its original! from the membranes of the braine which accompany the +, ...- «+ 
nerves defcending from the third and fourth conjugation to the mouth thereof, the consear of 
And in likefort from other produ@tions defcending by the paflages of the head, {5 7oee 
from whence alfo another reafon may be drawae from chat, which they commonly 

bring from the nervesof the fixt conjugation 3 why in wouads ef the head, the fto- 

macke doth fo foone fuffer by coafent with the braine. The exterior, or outer is more 

ficthie aad thicke,woven with oblique fibers, to retaine and expel]. It drawes it ori- 

ginall from the Pericranium,whichas foone as it comes to the gullet,takes unto it cer- 

taine ficthie fibers. There be nerves {ent into the flomacke from the fixt conjugation 

of the braine,asit fhall be fhewed in its proper place. Veines and arteries are {pread 

into it from the Gaftrica, the Gaffrepiploides , the Coronarta and {plenicke, from the fe- 


The magnis 
tode. 


cond, third, and fourth diftribution of the vena Porta,or gate-veine ; and the thirdof 


the defceadent artery to the naturall parts, as foone as it paffes foreh efthe midriffe, 

It isone innumber. The greater part of it is ficuated on the left fide betweene the 
{pleene, the hollowneffe of the liver, and the guts, that affsfted by the heate of {uch eS 
neighbouring parts, it may more cheerefully performe the concoGion of the meate. 

Neither am | ignorant that Ge/en hath written, that a great part of the ftomacke lies £46.4.0¢ of 
onthe left fide. But infpeéion it felfe, and reafon makes me derogate from Galens 7" 
authority, for becaufe there is mote emprtie {pace on the left fide, by reafon the 

{pleene is le fle than the liver, it was fit it fhould lie more on the lefc fide. The more +). ...5¢5: 
proper connexion of itis with the gullet and guts, by itstwo orifices; with the braine oa, 

by its nerves; with the liver and fpleene by its veines ; with the heart by its arteries ; 
and with all che naturall parts by irs common membrane. | 

The temper of the ventricle ia men of good habite, is temperate, becaufeit 
is almoft compofed of the equall commixture of fanguine and {permaticke parts ; or Sire 
according to Galexs opinion, it is cold of its felfe, and by the parts compotling it; Lito, merh. 
and hot by the vicinitic of the bowels. But in fome it ishotter, in others colder, ac- 
cording to the diverfe remper and complexion of diverfe bodies. That ftomacke is 
to bee thought well tempered, that powerfully drawes downe the meate and 
drinke, and embraces and retaines them fo drawae, untill by concoction and clixa- 
tion, they fhal) be turned intoa juyce like creame (whichthe Greekes call Chy/os;) 
and laftly, which doth ftrongly fend fromit, and repell the excrements of chis firit 
concoction. 

The ftomacke is knowne to be hotter by this, that it better conco&s and digefts notes of « 
courfe and hard meates, as beefe, hard egges, and the like, than foft meates cafic Of het Romacks, 
cigetion, which it corrupts and turnes into belchings. For fo a young chickin, 1 
fooner burnt rhan well rofted at a great fire, The ftomacke which is colder, aehires 
mach meate, but is flow in concocting them, efpecially if they be cold and hard of 
digeftion, which for that caufe quickly turne fowre. The a@ion of a well conditio- i 
wed ftomacke, is twofold, one common, another proper. The common is toattenu- 


ace mixe aad digeft the meates taken in at the mouth, forche nurritionof it oe 
| an 


. 
q 
| a 
| | 
a 
4 
4 
ok 
4 é 
af 
4 
i 


a and the whole body ,after the liver hath performed its dutie,which before it be done, 


f the ventricle oncly enjoyes the {weet pleafure of the Chy/xs, and comforts its 
at {elfe againftthe heate and impuritie of the adjacent parts, wherefore it is called the 
worke-houfe of conco@tion. Its firft action is to attrac, retainc, ‘and affimulate to orca 
it felfe that which is convenient; but to expell whatfoever fhall be contrary, either lume 
in quantitic, or qualiti¢c, or in the whole fubftance. with 
Thetwe otis ft hath twoorifices, one above, which they commonly call the ftemacke and totl 
fices of the heart, the other lower, whichis called the Pylorss, or lower mouth of the ftomacke, | late 
| * The upper bends to the left fide neere the backe bone; it is farre more large and ca- chat 
ah, ~~ pacious than the lower, that fo it may more commodioufly receive meares halfe cont 
chewed, hard and groffe, which Gluttons caft downe with great greedineffe 5 it hath fathiq 
Ti an exquifite fenfe of feeling, becaufe it is the feate of the appetite, by reafon of the the (@ 
merves incompaffiing! this orifice, with their mutuall'embracings whereby it led I 
happens that the ventricle in that part is endued with a quicke fenfe, that perceiving the ge 
1 the want and emptineffe of meate, it may ftirre up the creature to feeke foode. For | 
albeit nature hath beftowed foure faculties on other parts, yet they are not fenfible 
of their wants, but are oncly nourifhed by the continual! fucking of the veines, 
as plants by juice drawne from the carth. | A. E 
The fires This orifice is feated at the fifth Yertebraof the cheft, upon which they fay ital- the i 
moft refts. Yet I had rather fay that it lies upon the twelfth Yertebra of the cheft, and mach 
the firft of the loines ; for inthis place the gullet perforates the midrifle,and makes dock 
this npper orifice. The lower orifice bends rather ro the right fide of the body, un- blac: 
ee der the cavitie of the liver. It is farre ftraiter than the upper, left any thing fhould Ds0am 
atest ting of Palle away before it bee well attenuated and concocted ; and it doth that by | top o 
the Pylerw, the helpe or afiaftance of, as it were a certaine ring, like to the fphin&ter mufcle ef the 
fundament, which fome have thought a glandule made by thetranfpofition of the oo 
inner and fiefhic membrane of the ventricle into that which is the outer of the 
guts, [know Colambus laughes at this glandulous ring, but any one that leokes more 
attentively fhall perceive that the Pylorusis glandulous. The ftemacke in its lower 
and inser fide, hath many folds and wrinckles, which ferve to holdand containe 
! the meates, untill they be perfectly concocted. In the ventricle wee obferve parts En 
gibbous and hollow ; the hollow is next to the liver and midriffe; the gibbous is ro- C= 
Tiefalling Wards the guts. Now we muft note, that the ventricle when it is much refolved or as) 
tke Joofed, may flide downe even tothe navell neare the bladder, the which wee have 
 Obferved in feme bodies diffeéted after their death: on the 
| The third and fourth Figare. fome 
The fir  figuse Bu 
fhewes the fore- ding t 
fide of the fto- the D 
macke and guller. Colic 
A. fheweth the ori- fons 51 
fice of the gullet mackeg 
cut frd the throate. died off 
B. the ftraightand di- chis ti 
rect courfe of the fingerg 
eulletfrom A.to B. the 
C. how the gullera- 1€ 
bove the firft racke pofic 
bone of the cheft, had an 
from B. toC. in- 
j clineth to the right thecal 
hand. The 
| “Be D, his inclination to but bec 
the left hand. from this en 
fecond 
dules called the Al- teined 
monds 


ry 
719 
4 
f 
| 


monds, fer clofe tothe gullet inthe end of the throate, called alfo Pariffmie, Anti. 
ades,Tonfille and Salviares glandule, FF, Another glandulous body in the midft of the 
gullet, about the fifth racke bone, from which place the gullet gives place to the 
orcat arterie, fomewhat declining to the right fide ; Vefalius, Lib. 5,Cap.3. and Com 
lumbus Cap.vit.lib.g. write, that thofe Glandules are filled with acertaine moitture 
with which the gullet is moiftened, that the meates may flide downe more eafily in- 
tothe flomacke, as through a flippery paflage. Nootherwife than the Glandala pre- 
fiata, filled with a kind of groffe and oily moifture, fmooththe paffage of the urine, 
that fo itmay dow through it, witha more free and leffe troubled cour{e,G, the 
connexion of the gullet with the ftomack,where the upper orifice of the Romack is 
fathioned, H. che lower orifice of the ftomacke called Pyéorus. 1. K. the Upper part of 
the ftomacke at I.the lower at K. LL.the forefide of the ftomacke. P. the gut cal- 
led Duodenum. TV. the right andleft nerves of the fixch paire encompaffing about 
the gullet and the uppermoftleft orifice of the ftomacke, 


~ 


The fecoma Figure fheweth the backe parts of the Ventvicle and Gullet, 


A. EE. Fr. G.H:P. FV. fhew the like parts asin the former. From C. to D. 
the inclination of the ftomacke to the lefthand. M.N.O. the backefide of the fto- 
macke, M. fhgweth the prominence of the left fide. N. of the right, O theweth the 
docke or impreflios, where it refteth upon the racke bones. Q. R.the paflage of the 
bladder of the gall into the Duodemumat R. S, a glandulous body growing under the 
Duodenum, bearing up the veflels. X.Y. ancrve onthe left fide creeping up to the 
top of the ftomacke, and fo running out to the liver. 


C Hap. 


Of the Guts. 


> 475 He Guts thc inftruments of diftribution and expulfion, are of the fame Their tubs 
AY f{ubftanceand compofure with the ftomacke, bur that the fire of the #4ace. 


= 


== coates of the ftomacke is contrarie to thofe of the guts. For that which is 
3S @" the innnermoft coate ofthe ftomacke is the ourermolt of the guts,and fo 
onthe contrary. The figure ofthe guts is round, hollow and capacicus, {ome more, Figure, 
fome lefie according so the diverfe bignefle, 

But for the quantitie of the guts, fome are {mall, fome great, more or lefle, accor- 
ding to the varictie of bodies. Butthey are fixe in number, for there be three {mall ; 
the the lejunum, or gut, and the Z/som. Three great, the Buad, the the 
Collicke, andthe Right gut. All which have had their names for the following rea- **”- 
fons ;the firft, becaufe it isextended the length of twelve fingers, like another f{to- 
macke, withoutany turning, or winding; of which greatnefle it is found in great bo- : 
died men, fuch as were more frequenly tobe met withall in Ga/ens time, than in 
this time of ours, inwhich thisgutis found no longer than feven, eight, or nine 
fingers at the moft. The caufe of this length is, that these may bea free paflage to 
the gate veine, comming out of the liver, as allo ro the artery and nerve which runne 
into it. For fecing that thisgut may fometimes rife to the top of the liver, it would 
poficfie the {pace under the bladder of the gall ¢ with which itis often tinctured) if it ' 
had any revolutions that way, which is the paflage for fuchlike veficls. Orhers 
give another reafon of this figure, whichis, that there fhould bee nothing to hinder Mf 
the cafie and fit diftribution of the conco&ed Chy/as to the liver. | 

The fecondis. called Jejazwm, or the empty gut, net becaufe it is abfolutely fo The 
but becaufe itcontaines little in,comparifon ofthe other... There is a triple caufe of 
thisemptines;. the firft the multitude of the meferaick veines and arceryes which are 
abeut it, whereupon there is a greater and quicker diftribution of the The 


Their namber 


fecond isthe vicinity orneighbourhood of the liver hrongly drawing the © bylas COM 


teined in it; the third is the flowing downe of the cholericke humor fromthe Dladde 2 
of 


One, i] 
rs its 
d the | 
ate 
ther 
> and 
acke, 
nd ca- 
halfe 
hath 
the 
by it 
iving 
kor | 
fible 
incs, 
it al- 
,and 
nakes 
hould | 
at by 
the 
the 
Df the 
more 
itaine 
parts tas 
is to- 
or 
have 
tore. 
{fto- 
ilet. 
OFi- 
| 
oate, | 
nd di- 
4 the 7 
to B. 
let a- | 
acke 
plane 


Their fite, 


ThediftinAis 


on betweene 
the collicke 
and the ftone 


in thekidnicss 


heir cons 
mnexion, 


Why vomiting 
happens in the 


the 


of the Gall into it, which ever and anon by its acrimony cleanfes away the filth and 
by continual! flowing follicites it toexpulfion, The third iscalled becaufe it 
lyes betweene the Mia or flankes, it differs nothing from the reft in fubftence and 
magnitude, butin thisonething, that there is more matter contained in it than in 
the reft, by reafon of the paucity of the veffels terminated init, thatitis no matvell 


Lip: 3. 


that there can be no demonftration made ofthem. The fourth is called Cacam 


or the Blind, becaufe it hath but one paffage to fend out and receive inthe matter, 
This gut hatha long and ftrair produ@ion, which according to the opinion of fome 
(though altogether erroneous)often falls downe into the Scrotum inthe rupture , or 
relaxation of the Rim ofthe Belly ; forthat productienin the lower belly ftrengly 
ftickes to the Peritonaum or Rim which hinders {uch falling downce. But Galen fcemes 
by fuchablind gutro haue meant this long and narrow production,and certainely fo 
thinkes the common fort of Anatomifts, but here ¥¢/a/zus juftly reprehended Galen. 
Wherefore $y/vius that he might free Galen of this fault, would haue us by the blind 
gut tounderftand the beginning of the collicke gut, The fift iscalled Colom (or col- 
licke gut) becaufe itis preater and morecapacious than the reft. The fixt and laft, 
the Right gut, by reafon of the rightnes or ftraightnes ofthe paflage . This in beats 
efpecially hath a certaine fatnefic in it to make the paflage flippery, and left the gut 
fhould be exulcerated in the paffage, by the fharpeneffe of hard and acrid excre- 
ments. 

The fite of thefe guts is thus, The Daodenum upon the backebone bendsto the 
right hand the Iciuzum poflefles agreat part of the upper umbilicall region, diffu- 
{es it felfe into both fides with windings, like to thefe of the gut Jlewm, everito the 
fiankes, The gut //eon is fituate at the lower part of the umbilicall region, guing with 
many turnings and windings, even to the hollownefles of the holy-bone above the 
bladder and fide parts of the Hypegaffrium,which they call the flankes, 

The Blind bends to the righthand, alittle below thekidney, abovethe firft 
and fourth Yertebra of the loines. The Colon or Collicke gut is crooked and bent, in 
the forme of a Scythian bow, filling all the {pace from the blind gut,below the right 
kidney even to the hollownes of the liver,and then it goes by the gibbous part of the 
ftomacke above the fmall guts, even ro the kollo wnefle of the fpleene; from whence 
fliding under the left kidney, with fome turnings, itis terminated upon the Pertebra’s 
of the loines . 

By all which turnings and windings of the collicke gut, it is cafieto diflinguith the 
paine of the ftone of the kidneies, which remaines fixtin one certaine place, fromthe 
collicke wandring through thefe crooked paflages we mentioned. The right gutrends 
with an oblique fite towards the left hand, upon the holy bone evento the very fun- 
dament.They have all one and a common connexion; for they are all mutually joined 
together by their coats, becaufe there is but one way from the gullet even to the fun- 
dament, but they ate joyned to the principall parts by their nerves, veines, and arte- 
ries, 

_ Buta more proper connexion is that, where the Ducdennm en the upper part of it, 
is joyned with the Pylorss; but onthe lower part, to the /eiwuum, and the parts lying 
under it, by the coate of the Peritoneum., The Jeinnum, or emptie gut, is ioyned to 
the Dwcdexum and leon. The ileum withthe emprie and blind guts. The blind with 
the deomand Colom, and with the right fide of the backe bone where it is tied more 
itraitly. The Co/om with the blind and right guts, and in his middle part, with the 
kidneiesand the gibbous part of the ftomacke ; whereby it comes to pafle, that be- 
ing Jiftended with wind in the collike,it overturnes and prefles the ftomacke, and fo 


Laftly, the right gut is annexed with the collicke eut and fundament. At the end 


whereof there is a mufcle fattened, of figure round and circular called the Sphincter, 


arifing fromthe lower Vertebra’s of the holy bone and rump,by the benefit of which 
as of a dore or gate, the excrements are reftrained at our will, ef¢man borne for all 
honeft a&ions, without allfhame, inevery timeand place, fhouldbe forced every 
where to eafe his belly. Forfuch as have loft the benefit ofthis mufcle by the pally, 
have their excrements goe from them againft their wills. There is abody dcame 


at 


Li 


atth 
were 
fame 
certal 
their] 

Be 
broad 
fare 
ling d 
meat. 
oppre 
gut iS 
that } 

Th 
the com 
and th 
ot ex: 
the w: 
made 
fome | 


fromthe 
of the 
ending i 
The {un 
The 
4.The b 


Naum, 


Colon. 
ReFem: 
| 
‘ 
§> 
* 

®ollicke, 
Thes pin? er 
mmuuicles of the 
‘ 
per 


3. 


ith and 
caule if 
nee and 
thanin 
snatvell 
Cacam 
Brnatter, 
fome 
marc, Or 
rongly 
fcemes 
nely fo 
Galen. 
i¢ blind 
m(orcol- 
d laff, 
1 beafts 
the gut 


sto the 
diffu- 
ito the 
with 
ove the 


he firft 
bent, in 
1¢ right 
t of the 
whence 
rtebras 


iff rhe 
om the 
atrends 
ry fun- 
joined 
e fun- 
arte- 


of it, 
lying 
led to 
with 
more 
h the 
at be- 
and fo 


107 


attheend of che right gut, ofa middle fub ftance betweene the skinne and flefh, we oe 
were arifing from the mixture of them both, like the extremities of thelippesof the 


fame ufe with the Sphincter that itis not alrogether fo powerfull.But there are alfo 
certaine veines ficuate about it called the Hemorrhoidal!,of which we wil! {peake in 


cheir place. 

Befides, there are two other mulcles that defcend tothe end of thisgut, being 
broad and membranous on each fide, onc arifing from the fide and inner partsof the 
(hare and hippe-bones which inferted above the Sphinéfer pull up the fundament fal- 
ling dewne, wherefore they ate called Levateres Anz, or the litters up of tae funda- 
ment. Wherefore when as either they are too weake, or refolved, or the fundament 
oppreffed withthe weight of flegmaticke, falt, chollericke and {harpe humors, the 
sutis {carfe reftored into its place, thatchere is neede of the helpe of the fingers for 
that purpofe. 


The guts follow the temper of the ftomacke, Their action is the diftribution of 


the chylus by the meferaicke veines ( which of dutie belongs tothe three {mall guts) 
and the receiving the excrements of the CAy/ws , and retention of them, till a fittime 
of expulfion, which belongs tothe third quarter, Befides, thefe fmall guts finifh up 
the worke of conco@ion, begun in the tiomacke, although they be not altogether 
made for chat ufe, But nature is often accuftomed to abufe the parts ef the body for 


fome better ufe. . 
The fifth figureof the lower belly. 


A. The breft blade, Cartilage Ene 
fiformis. 


BB, The Rim, with the midriffe 


‘ 


aud broken ribs bent outwards. 
CC. the gibbous part of the liver. 


im D.a ligament tying the liver tothe 
midriffe. 
part of the umbilicall veine. 
the ftomack fild full ef meate: 
mnt partof the {pleene, 

“le 1. H. the blind gut of the late wri- 
ters, for the Ancients tooke the 
toppe of the colon for it. 

I, the beginning of the great or 
thicke guts. 

I. and foto K, fheweth the paffa- 
ees of thecollicke gut from the 

right kidney to the liver. And 
fo the collicke and the fone 
on this fide are in one place and 
therefore hardly diftinguithed. 

K, to L. the fame collicke gut li- 
eth under the whole botrome 
of the ftomacke, which is the 
reafon that thofe which are 
troubled with the collicke caft 
fo much. 

L. to M. The paffage of the Coloz 


WZ 
Ma 


fromthe f{pleene to the hare bone, by the left kidney,a way, which maketh the paine 
of the fone and the Collick on the left fide very hardto diftinguifh. N. The Coles 
ending inthe right gut. O. The 
The funken or fallen fide ofthe Celesat P. and his Chambers or Cells at Q. 


guts efpecially lying underthe Navil. 4.4. The two umbilicall arteryes, 


of the right gut unro the bladder. P. Q- 


R.S.T. 


ttome of the bladder, * The connexion of the bladder and che Perste- 


Buc 


Levatert: Ani, 


The a@ionof 


the guts, 


| 
\\ 
= 
BB 
LAA YY 
Ye Vi 
Wi 
| 
} 
B. 
‘WW 
“Ty 
‘ 
ft ws = 
SS = 
AN 
ter 
pally, 
ruate 


fbers, 


Lis. 3, 


— — 


the 


~ But we muft note, that forthe compofure of the guts, they have onely tranf- 
verfe fibers, for expulfions fake,uniefie that at the beginning of the Co/on,and the end 
ofthe right gut, youmay fee certaine right fibersadded to the tran{verfe to ftreng- 
then them, !cft thefe guts fhould chance to be broken and torne by the paffage of hard 
excrements, and the laborious endevour of expulfion ({pecially in brute beafts. ) 
Howtheguts But if any aske, how they haveretention, being they want oblique fibers, he may 
becomefitto know that the feces are retained in the right gut, by the force of the Sph:méter mufcle, 
— but oft times inthe blind, by their hardnefle and abundance, whereby they fticke in 
the paffage ; butin the reft, by reafon of their conformation into many windings 
,, and turnings. The length of che guts, is {even times more than the length of the whole 


body; tothis length they have windings, lea& the nourithment fhould quickly flide 
away, and leaft men fhould bee withdrawne by gluttony from action andcon- 


Their lenge 


remplation. For fo wee {ce it comes to pafle in moft beafts, which have one Gur, 
firetched ftraight out from the ftomacke to the fundament; asin the Lynx and fuch 


other beafts of infatiable gluttony, alwayes,like planes regarding their food. 


--- 


Cuar. XVI. 


— 


Ofthe Mefentery. 


Sh 


of a {permaticke {ubfances The greatneffe of it is apparent enough, al- 
oa 24a though in fome it be bigger , and in fome leffer according to the sreat- 
nefie of the body It is of a round figure and not very thicke. It iscom- 
Compofare, Pofed ofa double coate arifing from the beginning and roote of the peritoneum. 


ber one, {cituate inthe middle of the guts, from whence ittooke its name. Yet fome 
Number, divide it into two parts, to wit, into the Mefereum, that is, the portion interwoven 
with the fmali guts, and into the 44efocolow which is joined with the Great. Ir hat! 
Thecoanexiz connexion by. its veffells with the principall parts, by its whole fubftance with the 
a oursand in fome fort with the kidnetes,from whole region it feemes totake its coats. 


Thetempers the reft ofthe parts, cold and dryc. 


The aGtion and ufe of it is,to bind and hold together the guts, each in his place, leatt 
Theation they fhould rafhly be folded together; and bythe Meferaicke veines (which thcy 


ance. terme the hands of the Liver) carry the C4y/ws to the liver. 


‘All the mefe= 


liver. 


ry,of whofe ufe we will treat hereafter. 


HAP, XV I I, 
Of the Glandules in gencralland of the Pancreas, or weet bread. 


Quantiti¢ang ot 


figure. 


tae) Ecerthe Guts followesthe Mefentery, being partly of a fatty and partly 


It is of acold and moift temper, if you have refped to his fatty fubftance; butif co 


In which you muft note, that all the Meferaicke ucines come from the liver, aswe 
raicke veins underftand by the diflection of bodyes, although fome have affirmed , that there bee 
comelromethe feme veines ferying for the nourifhment ofthe guts, no wayes appertaining to the 
Liver, but which end in certaine Glandulous bodyes,difperfed through the Mefente- 


Glanduleisafimple pat of the body, fometimes of a fpongye and 
u=: fubftance , fometimes ofa denfe andhard. Of the foft Glandulesare the 


eft themfelucs in quantity and figure,for fomc 


arc Sreater than other fome,and fome are round and others plaine,as the rhymews and 


oreate: 
lus:yct 
for the 
and dif 
atwofo 
caufe ink 
which iff 
ftrenst] 
Which j 
realon 
Coldnef} 
quantit; 
Deatts, 
man hail 
Suithed, 
bracing 
tent with 
licall veip 
alfo often 
umbilical}! 


Ali 
mcr 
pia 
rhe 
| rate 
TOU 
atti 
the j 
com 
comm 
dugs} 
vnde 
as th 
dert! 
it Al! 
the \ 
mM themidit thercoi 1t admuts nerves trom the Coftall of the fixt conjugation. 
veines from the Vena Porta or Gate veine; Arteries from thedefcendant artery, 
| over and belides a great quantity of fat and many glandulous bodyes , to prep vp ae 
the diviGon of the veffels {pred over it, as alfo to moiften their fubftance.It isin num- 
= 
| 
VV 
the pa; 
of the 
mudde 
Dut al! 
| fiutt 
ER. 
if Almonds, like in {ubftance to blanched Almonds; the Thymus, 
, Teftscles, Proftate . Butehe denfe and hard are the Parotides and 
| 4 her like, The Glandules differ amon 


1B. 3. 


ly tranf- 
d the end 
o ftreng- 
ce of hard 
) 


s,he may 
rmufcle, 
fticke in 
windings 
whole 
ckly flide 
and con- 
one Gur, 
and fuch 


nd partly 
ough, al- 
he great- 
[rt iscom- 
jugation, 
ntartery, 
prop vp 
SIA 
et {ome 
erwoven 
Ir hath 
with the 
its coats. 
butift to 


lace, leaft 
ich they 


Br, aswe 
here bee 
g to the 
efente- 


L | 


i: Others are compounded of veines, nerves, arteries, and their proper fleth, aS the Congelciéa, 


‘Almonds of the eares; the milkie glandules in the brefts and the tefticles. Others want 
nerves, at leaft which may be feenc, as the Parotides the axillarie, or thefe under the 
emeholes and others. The number of glandules is uncertaine, by reafonof the infi- 
nite multitude and variety of fporting nature. You fhall finde them alwayes in thefe 


Number, 


places, where the great divifions of veflels atemade ; asin the middle ventricule of 


che braine,in the upper part of the Cheft,in the Mcfentery and other lik places. 


Although otherfome be feated in fuch places, as nature thinkes needful] to eene- 


sate and caft forthof them aprofitable humor tothe creature; asthealmonds atthe 
roots of the tongue, the kernells in the dugs, the {permatick veffels in the ‘[{crotum and 
atthe fides ofthe wombe;, or where nature hath decreed to makeemunGtoryes for 
the principal] parts, as behind theeares, under the armeholes, and in the groines. The 
connexion of glandules is not only with the veflels of the parts concurring to their 
compofition, but alfo with thofe,whofe divifion they keep and preferve. They are of 
acold temper; wherefore Phifitions fay the bloed reernde/cere, (2)to become raw a- 
gainein the dugs, when it takes upon it the forme of milke. But of thefe fome have 
action, asthealmonds, which poure our fpattle ufefull forthe whele mouth , the 
dugs milke, the Tefticles feed, others,ufe onely as thofe which are made to preferve, 
vnderprop and fill vp the divifions of-the veffels.Befidesthis we have {poken of glan- 
dules in generall, we muft know that the Pancreas isa glanduleus and flefh-like body, 


_as that which hath every where the fhape and refemblance of fiefh, It is fituate ar the 


flat end of the liver, under the Dasdenmum with which it hath great connexion, and un- 
der the gate-veine, to ferve as a bulwarke,both to it and the divifions thereof, whilft 
it fills up the emptie {paces, betweene the veflels themfelves, and fo hinders, thar 
they be not pluckt afunder, nor hurt by any violent motion,4s a fall, or the like, 


— 


Cuar. XVIII. 
| Of the Liver: 
gone thus farre, order of diffeGion now requires, that we fhould 
Sram & treatcof the diftribution of the gate veine; but becaufe it cannot well be un- 
Hew derftood unlefle all the nature of the liver from whence it arifes, be well 
nowne, therefore putting it offtoa more fit place, we will now {peake of the Liver, 
Wherefore the liver (accerding to Galess opinion, de form. fetus) is the. firft of all 
the parts of the body, which is finifhed in conformation, itis the fheppe and Author 
of the bloud, and the originall of the veines; the fubftance of it, is like the concrete 
toudde of the bloud, the quantitie of itis diverfe, not onely in bodies of different, 
but alfo ofthe fame fpecies ; as in men amongft themfelves, of whom one will bee 
gluttonous and fearefull, angther bold, andtemperate, or fober ; forhee fhall have a 
greater liverthan this, becaufe it muft receive and concoé a greater quantitie of Chy- 
fus:yct the liver is great in all men,becaufe they have need of a great quantitic of bloud 
for the repairing of fo many fpirits & the fubftantificke moifture, which are refolved 
and diffipated in every moment by action and contemplation. But there may bee a 
a twofold reafon given, why fugh as are fearefull have a larger liver, The firit, is be- 


caufe inthofe thevitall tacultie (in which the heate of courage and anger refides) . 


which is in the heart,is weake; and therefore the defect of it muft be fupplicd by the 
ftrength ofthe naturall facultie. For thus natureis accuftomed te recompence that 
which is wanting, in one part, by the increafe and acceffion of another, The other 
rcafon is, becaufe cold men havea great appetite,for by Galens opinion Jn arte parva, 
coldneffe increafes the appetite; by which it comes to paffe that they havea greater 
quantitie of Chylus, by whichplenty the liver is nourished, and growes larger, Some 
5, as Dogges,and {wine, have the liver divided into five or more Lobes, but a 
man hath but one Lobe, or two,or three atthe moft;and thefé not fo much diftin- 
guithed, as which chearith the upper and hollowregion of the ventricle, with em+ 
bracing tohelpe ferward the worke of concoction. Therefore the liver is almoft con- 
tent with one Lobe, although itis alwa yes rent with a {mall divifion, that rhe umbi- 

veine peatcing into the rootsand {ubftance of it,may have a free paflage , bur 


alfo oftentimes there is as it were acertaine {mall.lobe of the liver, laid under ma 
acertaine The 


umbilical veine, asa cufhion. J. 


Connexion, 


Temper, 


A&ton an 
ule» 


The fubftence 


of the 


The fi te, 


What the lives 
iS, 


Its fabftanee 
and quantity, 


Why cowards 
have great li- 
Vers, 


° 
A 
a 
| 
| re 
. 
# 
g 
i 
a 
4 
‘ 
* 
gaes an 
* 
ig: 


110 the eA natomte Ls B.3. 


Thefgue, The figure of the liver is gibbous ; rifing up and {mooth towards the Midriffe ; to- 
wards the ftomackcisthe /ameus or hollow fide of it fomewhat urequall, and rough 
by reafon of the diftance of the Lobes, the ot iginall of the hollow veine, and the fite 
ofthebladderoftheGall, 
Thecompo- The compofition of theliveris of veines , nerves , arteryes , the coate and proper 
0 {ubftance thereof which we call the grofle and concreet blood ,or Parenchyma, Veines 
— and arteryes come to it from the navell;but nerves immediatly fromthefe which are 
diffufed over the ftomack accurding to Hippocrates; yet they penetrate not very deep 
into its fubftance, for ic feemes not to ftand in needcof fuch exaG fenfe, but they are 
diftributed upon the coate and furfacethereof, becaufe this part made for diftribu- 
tion over the whole body, keepes to it felfe no acrid or maligne humor, forthe per- 
ception of which it fhould needea nerve, although the coate invefting it, fends many 
nervous fibers into its fubftance,as is apparent by the taking away of the coate from 
a boiled liver ; we muft thinke the fame of the other entrals, The coate of the liver is 
from the Peritonenm, waxing {mall from the umbilicall veine, when it divides it felfe 
for the generation of the gate and ho!low veines,asis obferved by Galen,/ib.de format. 
The number Fetys, The liver is onely one, fituate in the greater part on the right fide, but with the 
and fite. sic lefler parton the left, quite contrary tothe ftomacke. Its chiefe connexion is with 
on, the ftomacke, andguts, bythe veines and membranes of the Peritoneum; bythe 
how!low veine and artery, with the heart; bythe nerve with the braine, and by the 
Thetemper. fame ligatu res with all the parts of the whole body. Itis of ahot and moift temper, 
and {uch ashave it more hor, have large veines and hot bloud; but fuch as have it cold, 
ThezQion, have {mall veines, anda difcoloured hew. The Aion of the Liver is the 
converfion of the CAy/us into bloud, the worke of the fecond concoétion. For al- 


though the Céy/us encring into the meferaicke veines, receive fome refemblance of 


bloud, yetit acquires not the forme and perfeAion of bloud, before it be elaborare, 
The ligaments aNd Fully concoa in the liver. It is bound and tied with three firong ligaments, two 

onthe fides in the micfi of the bafiard ribs, cobeare up its fides, and thethird more 

high and ftrong, defcending from the breaft-blade, to fuftaine its proper part,which 

with its weight would preffe the lower orifice of the ftomacke, and fo caufe a falling 

or drawing downe ef the fternonand coller bone. And thus much may fuffice for irs 

proper ligaments, for we before mentioned its common, the veines, arteries, nerves, 
and coate of the Peritoneum, by which it is knit to the loines,and other naturall parts, 
Bur wee mult note, that befides thefe three proper ligaments, the liver is alfo bound 
with others co the baftard ribs, os Sy/véus obfervesin his Anatemicall obfervations, 
and Hollerius in his Pradtife, Cap. de Pleuritide. 


Of the bladder of the Gall,” 
Ow wee muft come to the bladder of the Gall, which isof anervous fub- 


greatniff:, ftance, and of the bigneffe of a {mall peare; itis of figure round, with the 
—— bottome more large, but the fides and mouth more narrow and ftraite. It is 


Thecompo- Computed of a double ceate, one proper, confifting of three forts of fibers, the other 
ftom from the peritoneum, It hath a veine from the Porta or gate veine, and an artery from 
Number and that which is diftufed into the liver,and a nerve from the fixt conjugation. It is but onc 
commess™ and that hid on the right fide under the greater lobe of the liver, it is knit withthe 
touching of its own body, and of the paflagesand channels made for the performance 
of its actions with the liver, and in like manner with the Daodenum,and not feldome 
with the ftomack alfo,by another paflage;8 to conclude to all the parts by its veines, 
Merves, atteries, and common coate. It is of acold temper, as every nervous part is. 
Aion. The 2@tion of it isto feparate from the liver the cholericke humor, and that excre- 
mentitious, but yet natural! by the helpe of the right fibers, for the purifying of the 

bloud, and by rhe oblique fibers, fo long tokeepe it being drawne, untill it begin 

to become troublefome ia quantitie, qualitie, or its whole fubftance, and then by the 

tran{verfe fibers, to put it downe into the Dusdenuw to provoke the expul five facul- 

tic of the guts, I know Fallopius denies the texture of fo many fibers, to be the mi- 

nifterof {uch action to the gall. But Ve/aline feemes fufficiently to have anfwered 


even 
fend: 
men! 
elpec 
and he 
of th: 
the 
branc 
it bes 


Difie 


4. the c 
the bla 


belong 
the 


more eg 
Heth m 
from wit 
than in< 
as it wi 
and mid 
the proy 
the 
lancho! yl 
fare vej 
afterthe 
from th: 
ribs; & , 
of the ]j 
the {elfef. 
On the le 
Which de 
bous part 
both byc 
Nexion, ¢ 


Veffels. 


- 
& 
3 
im 
* 
oF 
: 
4 
4 
i 
j 
4 
} a 
« | 
ta 


f 


rough 
ache fice 


proper 
Veines 
ich are 
y deep 
ey are 
iftribu- 
ne per- 
s many 
e from 
liver is 
it {elfe 
format. 
ith the 
Bis with 
by the 
iby the 
cmper, 
it cold, 
is the 
For al- 
mance of 
m borate, 
ts, two 
ard more 
t,which 
falling 
for its 
nerves, 
nil parts. 
> bound 


vations, 


ous fub- 
ith the 
ice. Iris 
e other 
ry from 
but one 
with the 
rmance 
feldome 
veines, 
part 
texcre- 
of the 
it begin 
tn by the 
facul- 
the mi- 

nfwered 
him 


ie 
4 


L133 of Mans body. IIE 
him. The bladder of che gall hath divers cha nels, for comming with a narrow accke, 
a to the beginning of the gate vcine , it is divided cans paflages, the ene of the a 
whereof fuffering no divifion is carried into the Duedewam , vnleffe that infome it 

fend another branch intothe bottome ef the ftomack, as is obferved by Gales; which 2it.2.¢¢ tems 
merihave amiferable ana wretchedlife, being fubjeé to chelericke vomitings, *” 
efpecially wen their ftomackes are empty, with great paines of their ftomacke 

and head,as is alfoobferved by Galen Cap. 74. Artis Aded. The other comming out 

of the body of the liver devides it {elfe into two or three paffages, againe entering 

the fubitance of the liver is divided with infinite branches, accompanying fo many 

branches of the gate veine through the fubftance of the liver, that fo the blood unlefle 

it be moft elaborate and pure, may not rife into the hollow veine, all which things 

Difieétion doth manifeftly teach, 


The fixth Figure of the bladder of the Gall, 


M. The Pylorus joyned to the 
FIGII \} denum. Joy 
N. the the Pylorue 
P, fhewes the bottome of the blad- 
der of the gall. 

QQ. the holes of the bladder of 
gall difperfed through the liver, 
betwixt the rootes of the hollow. 

and gate veines.R.the roote of the 

AY sate veine in the liver.$.the root of 


yN the hollow veince in the liver. 
¢, the concourfe or meeting of the paflages of choller into one branch. 4. the necke of 


the bladder into which the paffage is inferted.¢. the paflage of the gall iatothe Due- 
denum.d.the Duodenum opened, to manifelt the infertion of the porus biliaris, €. anar- 
ccrie going to the hollow pareof the liver,and the bladder of the gall. a fmall nerve 


belonging tothe liver and the bladder of gall sfrom the tibbe branch of the fixth paire, 
gg. the cyfticke twins from the gate veine, 


Cua XX, 
Of the Spleenesr Milt. 


py. me Vt becaufe we cannot well fhew the diftribution of the sate veine, uniefic 

#71 the {pleene be firft taken away, and removed from its {cate : therefore be- 

fore we goany further, have thought good to treate of the fpleene. There- ence 
——— fore the {pleenc is of a foft,rare,and {pongieus fubftance(whereby it might 
more eafily receiveand drinke up the dreggs of the blond trom the liver) and of a 
flefh more blacke than the liver. For it refembles the colour of its muddy bloud, 
from which it is generated, It is of an indifferent greatnefle; butbigger infome, magnitude. 
than in otherfome, according to the diverfe temper and complexion of men, [t hath, ; Sed, 
as it were, a triangular figure, gibbous en that part, it ftickes to the ribbes 
and midriffe, but hollow on that part next the ftomacke. lt is compofed of a coate, 
the proper flefh, a veine, artery, and nerve. The membrane comes from the peritone- 
wm the proper ficth from the feces or dregges of bioud, orratlicr of the naturall me- 
lancholy humor, with which it is nourifhed, The fourth branch of the vena porsa,or 
gate veine, lendsit a veine; the firftbranch of the great defcendant artery prefently 
after the firft entrance without the Midriffe, lends it an arterie. But it receives amerve 
from the leftcoftall, from the fixt conjugation on the inner part,by the rootes of the 
nibs;& we may oanifeftly fee this nerve,not only difperfing it felfe through the coate 
of the liver , Dut alfo penetrating with its veffels the preper fiefla thereof, after 
the felfefame manner,as we fee it is in the heart andlungs.It isonein number, fituate Nebaber.« sd 
on the left fide,betweene the ftomacke and the baftard ribs, or ratherthe midriffe fice, 
which defcendsto theirrootes, For it oft times cleaves to the midriffeon its gib- 

bous part, bya coate from the peritenewm, as alfo on the hollow part to the ftomacke, 

both by certaine veines which fends itinto the ventricle,asalfoby the kall.[t hath con- ) 
vie either primarily, or fecundarily, withall the parts of the body, by thefe its Connexion, 


Ic 


Co mpofition, 


— 


* 
J 
é 
a 
‘ 
; * 
< 
.* 
| 


Of the eAnatomte 


tic ofa cold and drie temper ; the ation and ufc ofit is to feparate the melancho. 
lice which being and droffie, may be attenuated by the force of ma. 
ny arteries difperfed through its fubftasce.For by their continuall motion,and native 
heate, which they carrie in full force with them from the heart, that grofle bloud 
puts off its groficaefle, which the {pleene fends away by paflages fit for that purpofe, 
retaining the fubtler portion for its nourifhment. The paflages by which it purges i: 
felfe from the groffeneffe ef the melancholy bloud, are a veine afcending from it into 
the ftomacke to ftirre up the appetite by its foureneffe, and ftrengthen the fubftance 
thercof by itsaftriGion ; and alfo another veine, which fometimes from the fpleenc 
branch, fometimes from the gate veine, plaincly under its orifice, defcends to the 
fundament,there to make the Hzrrhoidall veines. 


L 13.3. 


XXII. 


Of the Vena Porta, or Gate-veine, and the diflribution ther tof. 


Zia He gate-veine, as alfo all the other veines, isofa fpermaticke fubftance, 


The fubftanee 


and figure. kaa Of a manifeft Jargenefle, of around and hollow figure, Jikeroa pipe or 
Coupefition. bron Guill, lit scompoied of its proper coate, andone common from the perito- 
Numberend (2aeCNal xeum. [tis oncly onc, and that firuateia the fimous or hollow part of the 


—_ liver, from whence it breakes forth ( or rather out of the umbilicali yeine ) into the 
midft of all the guts, with which it hath connexion, as alfo with the ftomacke, 
{pleen,fpbzncter of the tundament and Per:toseum, by the coat which it receives from 

Temperand thence. Itisofacoldanddrytemper. The Action ofit is, to fucke the Chylas out 

Adion of the ventricle and guts, and fo to take and carry it to the Liver, untill it may carry 
back the fame turned into blood for the nutriment of the ftomacke, fpleen and guts. 

Divifion — This Gate veine comming our of the fimous part of the liver, is divided into fixe 

ea akch branches, that is 4 fimple and two compound, againe divided into many other 

waar’ branches. The firft of the fimple afcends from the fore part of the truncke to the 
cy fice genelle, bladder of the Gall by the paflage of the Choller (and are marked with g.g.) with 
a like arterye for life and nourifhment, and this diftribution is knowne by the name 


ofthe Cyfica gemelle or Cyfticke twins, The fecond is called the Gefrice or ftomack 


Gafre* vine arifing in like manner from the fore part of the truncke is carried to the Pylerue 
and the fimous or backe part of the ftomacke next to it. 
Csftre pple - The third is called Gafrepiplow, the ftomacke and kall veine which comming from 
’ theright fide of the gate veine goes to the gibbous part of the ftomacke nextto the 
Pylerus and the right fide of the kall. 
iatefingla, ‘The fourth going forth from behind and enthe right hand of the gate veine,afcends 
above the roote of the Meferaicke branch, eventothe beginning of the gut Jeianuam, 
Twocoma along the gut Ducdenum, trom whence it is called /ntefinalis, or the gut-veine, And 


poaad, thefe are the toure fimple branches. Now we will f{peake of the compound. 
The firft isthe fpleenicke, which is divided after the follewing manner. For in its 
forch, ft beginning and upper part, it {ends forththe Coronels, or crowne veine of the 
1  — ftemacke, which by thebacke part of the flomacke afcends into the upper and hol- 
low part thereof ;to which place, as foone as it arrives, itis divided againe into two 
branches, the one whereof climbs up even to its higher orifice, the other defcends 
downe to the lower, fending forth by the way other branches to the fore and backe 
parts of the fteomacke. Thefe engirt and onevery fide incompafie the bedy of the 
ventricle, for which caufe they are named the crowne veines. 
T have fometime obferyed this comming-forth of the truncke, alittle above the 
,  ofifice of the {plenicke branch. But this fame {plenicke branch on its lower 
Hamorrbcidal; patt, produces the branch of the Hzmorroidall veines, which defcending 
—s to the fundament above the left fide of the loines, diffufes a good portion there- 
of into the leaft part of the collicke gut, andthe right gut, at the end whereof it is 
often —_ to be divided into five Hxzmorrhoidall veines, fometimes more, fome- 
times lefie, 


Sylvise 


may be dg 
midriffe 
ofthe art 
branche: 


pinning 
the 
tebra thi 
tercofta 
{pinall 
from th 

This 
tioned 
the inte 
The 


| 
We 912 
and 
on tl 

VV 
whic 
‘ a 
Cale 

4 5 
pe pe 
’ 
fa. 
ullp 
‘ 
| 
ic 
a 
i (Sie 4 
‘ 
3 or ot 
ine = 
y 
| 
Qe 
$ be 
Wty 
‘ 
ie 
4 
i 
4 


IB. 
Blancho. 
¢ of ma- 
d native 
ebloud 
urpofe, 
urges it 
Itinte 
bftance 
{pleene 
ls tothe 


mftance, 
| ipe or 
Be perito. 
the 
nto the 
pmacke, 
es from 
OUT 


y carry 
d guts. 
to fixe 
y other 
> to the 
with 

name 
momack 
Pylorsue 


from 
to the 


ifcends 
. And 


rin its 
Bot the 
d hol- 
two 
{cends 
backe 
of the 


ve the 
lower 
nding 
there- 
of it 1S 

fome- 


lays 


L123. 


Mans 


Sylvius writes thatthe Hemorrhoidall branchdefcends from tlie mefentericke, 
and truly we have fometimes obferved itto have beene fo, Yet it is more furable to 
reafon, that it fhould defcend from the fplenicke, noronely for that we have {cence 
with our eyes that it is f0,but alfo becaufe it is appointed by nature for the evacu ition 
of the excrementitious mclancholike humor.But this fame {plenick branch out of the i 
middle almoftof its upper part produces the third branch going to the gibbous part of Gaflvepiplois 


the fomacke, and the kall;they terme it the greater, middle and left Gaffrepip/ois. But 


= 
I 
a 


major 


on the lower part towarus the {pleene it produces the fimple Epéplois, or kall-veinc 
which it diffufes through the left fide of the kall. Moreover from its upper part 


the upper orifice of the ventricle for ftirring up the appetite. 


Epiplass 


. 3 
which touches the liver, it fends fortha fhort branch called vas breve,or veno fam ,vo 


lex, 


Vas breve fen 


Wee have oftentimes and almoft alwayes obferved, that this veinie veflel), which 


Galen calls vas breve, comes from the very body of the fplecne, and is terminated in Lib.gede wf 


the midft ofthe ftomacke onthelefet fide, but never peirces both the coates thereof, 


Wherefore it is fomewhat difficult to find, howthe melancholy juyce cam that wa 


when ithath produced out of it thofe five forementioned branches, is waited and 
difperfed into the fubftanceand body of the fpleene. - 


* Then followes another compound branch of the vena porta, called the mcfente- 


ricke, which is divided into three parts; the firft and leaft whereof goes to the blind ramus mefews 


eur, and (o the right aud middle part of the cellicke-gut divided into an infinite multi- 
tude of other branches. The fecondand middle is waftedin the //con; as the third 
and greater inthe /e/unum or empty gut. It is called Mefentericke becaufe ic is diffafed 
over allthe Mefentery; as the {plenicke is inthe fpleen. And thus much wee have to 
fay of the divifion of the gate veine,the whichifat any time thou fhalt find to be other- 
wife, than I have fetdowne, you muft not wonderat ‘it; fer you fhall fearce fincic 
it the fame in two bodies, by reafon of the infinite varictie of particulat bodies which 
(asthe Philofophers fay) havecach their owae, or peculiar gifts, Our judgement 
is the fame of other divifions of the veflels. Yet wee have fet downe that which wee 
have moft frequently obferveds 


— 


Cuarp, XXII. 


Of the oviginall ofthe Artery, and the divifion of the branch , 
defcendingto the natural parts. 


Hofe things being thus finifhed and confidered, the guts fheuld be pulled 
ZAAY aaway, bu (ecing that if we fhould do fo,we fhoulddifturbe and leofe the 
|= divifion of the artery defcending to the natural parts; therefofe I have 
S&S SS thought it berrer to handle the divifion thereof, before theguts be pluckt 
away. Therefore we mutt fuppofe,according to Ga/ens opinion, that as all the vcines 
come from the liver,fo all arteries proceede from the heart. This prefently at.che be-, 
ginning is divided into two branches, the greater whereof defcends down. wards to. 
the natural] partsupon the {pine of thebacke, taking its beginning atthe Mich ver 

tebra thereof, from whence it goes into the following arteries. The firft called the in. 

rercoftall, runaes among tt the intercoftal! mufcles, and the diftances of the 119s, and 
{pinall marrow, through the perforations of the nerves on the right and left hand 


bepowred, or fent into the capacitie ofthe ftomacke. Now the fplenicke branch, 


ter seus devided 


into three 
Parts, 


The original) 
of arteries. 
The diyifion 
of the great 
de{cendant 
arcery, isintc 
thele, 

r 


from the fifth true, evento the laftof the baftard ribs. inter 
This in going this progrefle makes 7.litle branchings, diftributed after the foremen- 


tioned manner,and going forth of the truncke of the defcendant ove: again{t each of 
the intercoftal Mufeles. 


fecond being parted into two goes on each fide to themidriffe, whence it 


may be called, or expreffed by che mame of the Diapbragmatica or Phrenica (¢) the. 
midriffe arterye, The third being ofa large proportion, arifi | 
ofthe artery prefently after it hath pafledthe midriffe, is divided into two notable 1 
branches, whereof engotste the ftomacke, fpleene, kall, to he hollow part ofthe 


from the upper part 


a 
4 
. 
* 
j 
— 
4 
| 
i 
| 
og: 
& * ; 
: 
: | 
7 
q 
a 
a 
* 
i, 
| 
i 
ia 


Of the eA natomte Ls B.2. 


liver and the gall; the other is fent forthto the mefentery and cuts after the fame 
manner, as wee {aid of the meferaicke veines, wherefore it is called the Ce“aca, or 
ftomacke arterie, But wee mult note, all their mouthes penetratecvento the in- 
nermoft coate of the guts, that by thar meanes they may the better and more eafily 
attra the Chy/ws contained in them. 

The fourth is carried to the reines, where it is named the rcinall or emulgent, be- 
caufe it fuckes fit matter from the whole mafleofbloud,. 

5. The fifth is fenr to the tefticles with the preparing {permaticke veines, whence al. 
Spermatice > jt ismamed the fpermaticke artery, which arifes onthe right fide, from the very 
erunke of the defcendant artery ;that it may aflociate the fpermaticke veine of the 
{ame fide, they runne one above another,beneathe the hollow veine, wherefore wee 
mutt have a great care whileft wee labour to lay it open, that wee doe not hurt 


and breake it. 


The feventh Figure of the lower belly. 


A.A. themidriffe turned backe with 
the ribs and the peritomenm., 

BB. the cave or hollow part of the li- 
ver, for the liver is lifted up that 

the hollow part ef it may bee 

better feenc. 

Zan C. the leaft ligament of the liver, 

the umbilical! veine. 

E. the hollowneffe in the liver, which 
giveth way tothe itomacke. 

F, the left orifice of the ftomacke, 

GG. certaine knubs, or knots, and 


the liver, 

H. the bladder of gall. 

| gate-veine,cut eff, and branches 
which goe to the bladder of gall, 

K.anerve of theliver comming from 

the ftemachicall nerve. 

L. an artery common to the liver and 
bladder of gall. 

M. a merve common alfo to them 
both, comming ‘from the right 
coftall nerve cf the ribs. 

N. che paflageof the galltothe guts 

cut off. 

. . OO. the hollow ofthe fore parts of 

the {pleene. 

¢ fpleene are implanted. Q, the trunke of the 

hollow veine.R, the trunke of the great artery.S. the Celiacall artery cut off. T, V.the 

 kidacies yet wrapped in thet membrane. X.Y. the fatty veines called veme adipo/a. 
4.6 the emulgent veines with the arteries under them.ce .dd.the ureter from either 
‘Kidney to the bladder. ¢./. the {permatical] veines to the tefticles, the right from the 
hollow veine, the left from the emulgent, g.¢. veines comming ftom the {permaticall 
to the perstonaum. 6.i, the {permaticall arteries, &. the lower mefenterical] artery. 
d.the afcending of the great arterie above the hollow veine,and the divifion of ir,and 
the hollow veine into twotrunkes. m. the arterie of the loines called /umbaris, n.the 

holy artery called /acre, o. a part ofthe right gut, the bladder of urine. * the con- 
- nexien of the bladder with the peritenaum.q.a pattof the veflels which leade the feed 
from the tefticles, is here refleGted. {the /éretum, or cod, that is, the skinne that in- 
vefisthe yard and refticles.s.ehe ficfhie pannicle or membrane which is ander the cod. 

#. the coate which is preper to the cefticles with his veflels.x.a part of the yard exco- 

riated or flayed, and hanging downe. 


~ 
oF 
¥ 


The 


impreffions in the hollow part of 


all 
fides 
buted 
ipeciall 
the nes 
buted 

The 
but licl 
difcern 
fenfef 
fed wit 
havetl 
bowels 

And 
and put 
them:b 
preicat] 
jome,at 


— 


| 
ie 
a ‘ } 
rent 
is ftil 
Z 
TH Nae, 
‘ / 
4 
£ 
4 
ts 
| 
\ 


13.3. of ans body. 


The Gixth going from the fore and upper part of this defcendant arterie, defcends «merr/ards- 
with the Hemorroidall veines tothe fundament; prefently from his beginning, fen- rdsinteror, 
ding forth certaine branches alongft the collicke gut, which by anaflomofis are uni- 
red with other branches of the Cedsacall arteries; for whofoever (hall looke more ar- 
rentively , he thall often obferve that veines are fo united amone ft themfelves, and al- 

{o arteries, and fometimes alio the veines withthearteries. Foran amaffomofis is a 
communion andcommunicating of the vefiels amongft them(elves,by the application 
of their mouthes, that fo by mucuall fupplies they may cafe each others defeats. But 

they callthisthe lower meferaicke arterie, 

The feyenth proceeding from the truncke with fo many branches as there be verte- Sanita; 
bra’s inthe loines, goes to the loines and the parts belonging to them, that is, the {pi- 
nall marrow of that part, and orher parts encompafling thele Vertebra’s whercu pon it 
is {tiled the Lwmbarz or Loine Artery. 

Theeight maketh the Iliacke arteries until {uch time as it departs from the Peritoweumi 
where the Crurall Arteryes take their originall . This Iliacke Artery fends many di- 
varications towards the Holy bone where it takes its beginning, andro the places 
lying nere the Holy bone, which becaufe they run the fame courfe as the Lliacke veins, 
for brevities fake we will let pafle further meation efthem, till wecome to treate of 
the Iiacke veines, 


— 


C HAP. XXII] I. 


Of the diflribution of the Nerves tothe waturall parts. 


~xy I remaines, that before the bowels betaken away, we fhew the nerves Theoriginall 
fent co the enteailes and naturall parts, that as wifeand provident men 

we may feemetohave omitred nothing . Fic we muft know that thefe ryed tothe 
WH nerves are of the fixt conjugation , which defcend as well to the ftomacke "Pa. 
all along ft the Gullet and the fides thereof, as thofe at the roots of the ribbes on both 

fides withia. Bue when they are paficd through the Midriffe, thofe which are diftris 

buted amengit the natural! parts follow the turnings of the veines and arteryes, but 

{pecially of the arteryes, Wherefore if you have a mind to follow this diftribution of 

the merves, you muft chiefely looke for it inthofe places, in which the artery is diftri- 

buted among{t the Guts above the loynes. 

Thefe nerves are but fmall, becaufe the parts ferving fornutrition, needednone 
but litle nerves , for the pertormance of the third duty ofthe nerves, which isin the 
difcerning and knowing of whatis troublefome tothem, For ualeffe they had this 
fenfe,there is nothing would hinder , but thefe bowelsneceflary for life.being poflef- 
fed with fome hurtfull thing, the creature fhould prefently fall downe dead; butwe 
have this benefic by this fenfe, thatas {Qoneas any thing troublesand vellicates the 
bowels,we being admonifhed rhereof may looke for helpe in time.’ 

And betdes ifthey were defticute of this fenle, they might begnawne, ulcerated 
and putrified by the raging acrimony of the excrements falling into and ftaying in 
them;but now (by meanes hereof) as foone as they find them{elues pricked,or pluckt, 
prefently by the expulfive faculty they endeavoure to expell chat which is troub!e- 
jome,and fo freethemfelves of prefent and future dangers. 


Cuarp. XXIII 
masner of taking ont the Guts. 
Henthe Guts betaken out, you the Right Gur. And 


4 You mutt divide it, bejng firft ftraitly tyed in two different places,at a jutt 
dittance about foure fingers from the end, witha tharp knite betweene the 


which 


two ligatures. Then you muft thew its proper coats, and fibers, and that common one 


4 
fame 
4, Or ‘ 
in— 
4 
afil y 
b C- | 
very | 
the | 
‘wee 
hurt 
the li- 
p that 
y bee | 
| 
5, and 
art of 
nchés 
gall, 
from 
erand 
| 
| 
them | 
rok 
right 
guts 
arts Of | 
of the ee 
ither 
| 
rtery. 
d 
t, a0 
n.the 
con- i | 


L 1B: 3. 


the 


which it hath from the Peritonenm. This being done, you muft in like manner binde 
thetruncke ofthe gate veine as neere the original! as you can; that fo all his branches 
being in like manner tryed there may be no feare of effufion of blood : you muft doc 
the like with the Caliacke Arterye at the left kidney , and inthe lower Mefentericke, 
which defcendsto the Right gut withthe Hamorrhoidall veines. This being done, 
pul away the guts even to theDwedenum,which being in like manner tyed in two places, 
which ought to be below the infertion ofthe Porns Chelageges or paflage of the Gal}, 
that you may thew the oblique infertion thereof into that gut, for the ne a of 
its infertion is worth obfervation,as that which is the caufe that the Gall cannot flow 
backe into its bladder, by the compreffion of this Gut from below upwards. Then al! 
thefe windings of the Guts maybe taken away from the body. 


— 
— 


CHar. XXV. 


The Orizinall and diftribution of the defeendent Hollow veine, 


LoenngeEcaule the ret of the naturall parts,do almof all depend upon the defcen- virgi 
PAL ED cit dent Hollow veine, therefore before we goeany further, we will thew its he 
Theoriginall JY’ originall and diftribution. We faid before that all veines proceeded from 
oftnehollow Pha the Liver,but yet in divers places.For the gate veine goes out of tke hollow oa a 
Itisdvided Part, aad the Hollow veine out of the Gibbous part of the liver,which going forth like 4 4 
inorwo =the body ofa tree, is divided into two great branches, the lefler of which goes tothe 1s 4 
me __-witalland animall parts, and the extremities of thefe parts, as we thal! thew in their 
: a place. The greater defcending from the backe part of the Liver above the Vertebra’s a 
i ofthe greater Of theloines tothe parts beneath, goes in the manner following. The firft divifion . 
i branch of = thereof is to the membranes of the reines, which come from the Pevitemsum. Yo 
the hollow there. 
veine, Wherefore there it produces the Vena adipofz, or fatty veines, fo called becaufe they 
ai neon bring forth a great quantity of fat inthofe places ; Of thefe fatty veynes, there is a ; = 
4) 


diverfe originall,for the right doth oftentimes arife f,om the right emulgent becanfe 

' itis higher ; but the lefle comes from the very truncke of the hollow veine, becaufc 
the emulgent on that fide islower, and you fhall {carfe fee it happen otherwife. 

3... The fecond veing the Kidney or Emulgent veines, go to the Keines, Which at 

Emugems —_ theit entrance, ora little before, is devided intotwo branches, like as the Artery is, 

the one higher, theother lower;and thefe againe into many other through the fub- 

{tance of the Kidneys, as you may learne better by ocular infpection,than by booke. 

They arethick and broad that the ferous humor may without impediment have freer 

paflage. Their originall is different, for the right Emulgent, often times comes 

forth of the Hollow veine fomewhat higher than the left ; that fecing their office and 


duty is to purge the maffle of blood from the chollericke and ferous humor, that if hee 
any part thereof flideby the one, it may ngt fo fcape, but fall as it were into the pgthe! 
other. Which certainly would not have happened if they had bin placed the one jutt figure | 
oppolit to the other.For the Serous or wheyith humor would have ftayed as equally pgy 
ballanced or poifed, by reafon of the contrariety of theaétion and traction, or draw- Gow 
ing therof.But we muft remember that in diffeGing of bodies, I have oft times found _ pat 
in fuch as have beene troubled withthe ftone, feven Emulgent veines and fo many 
arteries ; foure from the left fide comming from diver{e places, of whichthe laft came =.wi 
| from the Iliacke ; three from the right band likewife in diverfe places. = Pe 
Thethird divifion is called the {permatickeor feed veine, it goesto the Telticles: ser 
prmasess — the originall thereof is thus, that the right arifes on the fore part of the trunck of the ~ 7 
hollow veine;but the left moft commonly from the emulgent. Befides you fhall fome- eat 
times finde that thefe have companions with them,to the right emulgent; butte the Ces a 
left another from the hollow veine, in fome buron one fide, in ethersonboth. But chan 7 b 
alfo | have fometimes obferved the left emaulgent to proceed from the fpermaticke Kid . , 
_. Onfeedveine. | the 
4. The forth becaufe it gaes te the loynes, is called Lambaris, which in his originall 2 


and iniertion is wholy like the Artery of the loines,But there are 4. Lambares or Loine 
veines 


- — ¥ 
| 
be 
+ 
ign 
i 
often 
Ya) 
p 
i 
a 
| 
q 
J 4 
hy 
{ 
| 


yeines oncach fide, that is,one ineach ofthe 4 {paces ofthe 5 Vertebras of the loines. ‘ 
The fiftdivifion makes the Iliacx, until paffing throughthe Perstonewm, they take liace,whick 

the name of Crurail veines; Thefe are firft divided into the Mufculous, focalled, be. °°" 

caufe they gor to the oblique afcendent and tran{verfe mufcles,and to the Peritoneum. 

Sometimes they havetheir originall from the end ofthe Trunck. And thenthe fame Musculote. 

Tliace are devided intothe Sacre, orholy, which goetothe {pinall marrowofthe 2 

Holy pacer thofe holes,by which the nerves generated of this marrow, have S#r 

their paflage. 3 
Thirdly iiace axe divided into the Hypega/trice fo called , becaufe they are di- 

fiributed to all the parts of the Hypoga@rium,or lower part of the lower belly,as to the the Hamor- 

right Gut,the mufcles therof,the mufculous skin,(in which place they often make the o's?!" 

externall Hamorrhoidall,ordained for the purging of fuch blood as offends in quan- 

tity, as thofe other [ thatis, the inward Hemorrhoidall J which defcend to the sight 

Gut from the Gate veine by the {pleenicke branch, ferves for cleanfing ofthat which 

offends in qualitie ) to the bladder and the necke thereof even to the end of the 

yard,to the wombe, and even to the neckc of the wombe and utmutft parts of the 

privities; from whence it is likely the courfes breake forth in weomen with child and 

virgins.But this fame veine alfo fends a portion of it without the Epigaffrium by that 

perforation which is cemmonto the fhare and hauach bones, which ftrengthened by 

meeting of the ether internal! Crurall veine defcends even to the Hamme, but in'the 

meane time by the way it is communicated tothe mufcles of the thigh called 

ratores and other parts within, Fourthly,the producethe Epiga/frica which 

on both fides from below afcend according to the lengthofthe right mufcles, {prea- 

ding alfo by the way fomebranchestothe oblique and tranfverfe mufcles and alfo to 

the Peritonaum, Fiftly, thefe Z/iace produce the Padende or veines of the privities p.y.4), 

becaufe they goin women to their privityes,and intomen tothe Cods, where they 

encer that flefhy coat filled with veines,and goc to the skinof the yeard, they take 

there beginning under the Hypogaftrica. 


— 
— 


Cuar. XXVI. 
Of the Kidueyes or Reines. 


) Ow follow the Kidneyes , which thatthey may bee more eafily {cene, 
> (after that yeu have diligently ebferued their fcituation) you fhall dif- 
poile of there fat, ifthey have any about them, asalfo of the membrane 
they have from the Perttonenm. Firtt you fhall fhew all their conditions, 

beginning at their fubftance. Theic 
The fubftance of the Kidneyes is flefhy , denfe and folid, leaft they fhould be hurt @ance. : 
by the fharpnes of the urine; Their magnitude is large enough,as you may fee. Their Magnindes 
figure is fomewhat long and round almoft refembling afemicircle, and they are Compofition, 
lightly Hatted above andbelow. They are partly hollow and partly gibbous; the 
hollow lyes next the hollow veine, andon this fide they receive the emulgent veines 
and Arteryes, and fend forth the ureters; there gibbous part lyes towards the loines. 

They are compofed of a coate comming from the Peritonaum , their owne peculiar 
fleth,with the effufion of blood about the proper veflels (as happensalfo in other en- 
trails)generates afmall nerve,which fpringing from the Coftall of the fixt conjugati- 
onis diffufed to each Kidaey on his fide into the coat of the kidney it felfe; although 
others thinke italwayes accompanies the veine and arterye. ; 

But Fadopins that moft diligent Author of Anatomye hath obferued, thatthis 


nerve is not only oftentimes divaricated into the coat ofthe kidneyes , butalfo piers 

Ces into their fubftance. They are two in number that ifthe one ofi them fhould by Ness. 
chancebe hurt, theother might fupply thofe neceffityes of nature, for which the — 
Kidacys are made, They lye vpon the loynes at the fides of the great veffels, on Which site, 
they depend by their proper veines and arteries;and they fticke to them,as it were by 


4certaine {econd coate, left that they might be fhaken by any violent 
ore 


| 
\ 
Dinde 
ches 4 
doe 
lone, 
laces, 
Gall, 
ity of 
ow 
enall | 
{cen- 
its 
trem | 
ollow 
like 
tothe 
roueir 
ebras | 
ifi6n 
they 
-caufe 
| 
| 
h at 
ry 1S, 
| 
omes 
e and 
it 
the 
juft 
ually 
raw- 
ound 
any 
ame 
icless 
8 the 
4 
| Buc 


118 Of the eAnatomie 


fore we may fay that the Kidneyes have two coates, one proper adhering to their 
fubftance, the other as it werecomming from the Peritoneam on that part they flicke 
to it. The right Kidney is almoft alwayes the higher, for thofe reafons I pave, {peaking 
of the originall of the Emulgent veflels. Co/wmbus feemes to thinke the contra ry, but 
Connexion; furch like controverfies may be quickly decided by the Eye. They have coanexion 
with theprincipall veficls by the veines, nerves and arteries, by the coates with the 
loines and the other parts of the lower belly, but efpecially withthe bladder by 
Temper,  theureters. Theyarcof ahot and moift temper, as all fiefhy parts are. Their action 
— is to clenfe the Maffe ofthe blood from the greater part of the {crous and cholericke 
humor, I faid the greater part, becaufeit is need full that fome portion thereof {hould 
go withthe alimentary blood to the follid parts,to ferve in fteed of a vehicle left o- 
therwife it fhould be too thicke. 
Theitftrainer,  Befides you muftnote that ineach kidney there is 2 cavitye bounded by acertaine 
membrane, incompaffed by the divifion ofthe emulgent veines and arteryes,through 
which the urine is {trained partly by the expulfive facultie of the kidneies, partly by 
the attractive ofthe ureters, which run throughthe fubfance of the kidneycs on the 
hollow fide,no otherwife than the Porws eholagogus through the body of the Liver. 


The ninth and tenth fioure of the veffels of (eed and urine. 
the forefide the fecond the 
hinder- fide. 
& 4,4.4,1. The forepare of the 
@_rightkidney. 
6.b.b.2.The backe part of 
the Ieft kidney. 
fe1.the outfide, 
d.d,1.2. The inner fide. 
€.€.1.2, The two cavities 
wherioto the emulgent 
veffels are inferred, 
Thetrunke of the 
hollow veine, 
Thetrunke of the 
rereat artery, 
4.1.12. The emulgent veine 
and artery. 
The right fatty 
veine, 
/.1.The left fatty veine. 
*.1. The Cceliacall artery. 
The ureters. 
9.p.q.1.2. The right fper- 
miaticke veine which a- 
rifeth neere p. the left 


necre g. 
r.ieLhe place where the Arteryes of feedarife. Small difiributed 


fromthe {permaticall veines to the Peritoneum. #.1.2. The {piry varicous body, 
called Varscofum vas pyramidale, #.1,2, The Parafiate; or Epididymis. x.1. The 
tefticle yet covered with its coate. y.132. The place where the leading veflell called 
vas deferens doth arife ,.1.2, The defcent of the fame leading veffell.¢. 1.2. The re- 
volution of the fame leading veffell, 1.2,The pafiage of the fame vefle] refleGed 
likea recurrent nerve, ».2.The meeting of the fame leading veffells. *, 1.2. The 
bladder of urine, the firft figure fheweth it open, the fecon” fheweth the backe 
parts. 33.1. The {mal! bladder of the feed opened. y.».2« "he Glandules called 
Glandule Proftate.s.2. The {phinGer mufcle of the bladder. ,,, 2. The two bodyes 
Which make the fubgance of the yard. The veffels wh. goe untothe yard 


‘ and 


| 


thought 
And 

may be: 
are 
fidere t 
of thele 
thicknes 
the Tettif 
cles hans 
Their 
and arte: 
the grea 
like croc 
that onc 
or rathe 
Tefticles® 
which w 
veficls, 
fiributic 
which fo 
fiankes, 
they are 
from the 
tempcrag 
Tefticles 


their ner: 


holy bone 
proper, 
true skin; 
ceiving a¢ 
COats are 
the Scrotu 


éppeares 
Tcfticles ; 


and n¢ 
ae cut ope 
| 
f 
4 
\ 
f 
« 
Ag AAD 


L 13.3- of hidy. 


and necke of the bladder.’ 1.The afTage which is common to the urine and 
cut open.+,3- The implantation of the ureters into the bladder. 


feed, 


Cuar XXVII, 


Of the /permaticke Veffels. 


eres Ow we fhould have fpoken of the ureters, becaufe as wee fayd before, they 
= paflages derived from the Kidneyes tocarry the urine to the bladder. 
But becaufe they cannot be diftinguifhed and fhewed unles by the cor- 

rupting and vitiating the fire ofthe {permaticke veffcls; therefore Ihave 
thought it better to paffe to the explication ofallthe ipermatick parts, 

And firtt ofall you muft gently feparate them, (that fo the declaration of them 
may be more cafie & manytelt and that from the coat which comes from the persto~ 
yaum,and the fat which invefts them eve to the fhare-bone, having diligently con- 
fidered their fite before you feparate them . Then you fhall teach thatthe fubftance Their fib- 
of thefe veflels, is like tothat of the veines and arteryes. Their quantity is {mall in 
thicknes,but of an indifferent length, by reafon of the diftance of their original! from ” 
the Tefticles, They arelonger in men than in weomen,becaufe thefe have theirTetfti- 
cles hanging without their belly,but weomen have them lying hid within their belly, 
Their figure and compofure is wholy like the figure and compofition of the veines 5.45 ng 
and arteries, except in this one thing, that from that place where they goe forth of compofure, 
the great capacity of the Periteneum, they are turned into many intricate windings, 
like crooked {wolne veines, eventothe Tefticles. That the {permaticke matter in 
that one tracte, which yet is no other than blood, may be prepared to concoction, 
or rather be turned into feed in thefe veflells, by the irradiation of the faculty of the 
Tefticles. Thefe veffells are fixe in number, foure prepating,and two ejacularory, of 
which we will {peake hereafter. Therefore on each fide there be two preparing pwede: 
veflels, that is,a veine and an artery, arifing as we told you when we {poke of the di- 
firibution of the hollow veine. They are inferted into the Tefticles through that coate 
which fome call Epididymis,others Darton. Their fite is oblique above the loines and site, 
flankes, while they ruane downe betweene the ends of the fhareand hanch bone, 
they are knitto the parts lying under them, both by certaine fibers which they fend 
from them, as alfo by the membrane they have from the Perstonaum. They have like 
temperature as the veinesand Arteries have, Their ation is to carty bleed to the 
Tefticles, for generating of feed. 


C Hap. XXVIII. 
Of the Teflicles, or Stones. 


He Tefticles are of a Glandulous, white, feft and loofe fubftance, that 
xa} fo they may the morceafily receive the {permaticke matter: their mag- ~~ 
$4 nitude and figure equall, and refemble a fmall pullets Egge fomewhat —— 
flatted Their compofureis of veines, arteries, coats and their proper Composition, 
Cae fiefh. Their veines and arteries proceed from the {permaticke veffels, | 
their nerves from the fixth conjugation, by the roots of the ribbes and out of the 
holy bone. They are wrapped in foure coats,two whereof arecommon, and two 
proper. Thecommon are the Scrotumor skinof the Cods, proceeding from tke 
true skin; and the flefhy coate, which confifis of the flefhy Pannicle in that place re- 
ceiving a great number of veflells, through which occafion it is fecalled, The proper aay i 
coats are firft the arifing from the procefle of the Peritomenm, going 1260 
the Scrotum together withthe {permaticke veffels which it involues and covers; this 


appeares red both by reafon of the veffels as alfoof the Cremafter mulcles of the 


Tefticles ; Then the Epididymeis ox Dartos whichtakes its originall of the 


icke 
| 
but | 
1 the 
r by | 
ricke 
ould 
t o-~ 
faine 
ough 
ly by 
nthe 
weth 
ad the 
of the 
art of 
de. 
vities 
igent 
the 
mf the 
veine 
metcry. 
{per- 
cha- 
left | 
buted 
pody, 
ihe 
mailed 
e re- 
ced 
The 
acke 
alled 
dyes 
yard 


Te Cremas 
Rter mulcies. 


"Temper. 


AAio 


L iB: 3, 


— 


the eAnatomie 


ofthe {permatick preparing vefiels, The fleth of the Tefticles is as it were acertaine 
effofion of matter about the veflels , as we faid of other entrailes, But you muft ob- 
ferve that the Erythross encompafies the whole ftone,except its head, in which place it 
fticks tothe Epididymis which is continued through the whele fubftance of the Tefti.- 
cle. This Epididymis or Dartos was therefore put about the ftones, becaufe the Tcfti- 
eles of themfelves, are loofe, fpongeous, caverncus and foft,fo that they cannot fafe. 


ly be joyned tothe fpermaticke veflels whichare hard and ftrong. Wherefore Na. 


ture thar it might joyne extremes by a fit AZediamor meane,formed this coate Epids- 
dymis, This is {carfe apparent in weomen by rcafon of its {mallnefle, The two fore. 
mentioned common ceats, adhere or fticke together by their veflels not only among ft 
themi{elves, but alfo with the Erythro#, You muft befides obferve the Crematter 
mufcles arcef the faid fubftance with other mufcles, fmall and thin, of an oblique 
and broad figure, arifing from the membrane of the Persteneum, which (as wee {aid 
before)affumes flefh from the flanks, Their compotition is like that of other mufcles, 
They are two,one cach fide on. They are fituate from the endsof the fianks,even to the 
ftones. They have connexion with the procefle of the Perstonenm and Tefticles. Their 
temper is like that of other mufcles. T heir action is to hang and draw up the Tefticles 
towards the belly, whence they are called, hanging mufcles. The Tefticles are moft 
commonly two innumber, oncach fide one, fometimes there be three, fometimes 


one alene, as it happens alfo in the Kidneies ; for fome have butere Kidney. They 
lye hidinthe Scrotumat the very roots of the fhare bone, connexed to the princi- 


pall parts of their veflels,with the necke of thebladder and yard; butby their coats 
they adhere to the parts from whence they have them. They are of a cold and 


moift temper, becaufe they are glandulous ; alehough they may be hot by accident | 


by reafogg@if the multitude of the vefiels flowing thither. Thofe whofe tefticles are 
more hot are prompt to venery, and have their privities and the adjacent parts very 


hairy, and befides their tefticlesare more large andcompact. Thofe onthe con- 


trary that have them cold are flow to venery, neither doe they beget many children, 
and thofe they get are rather female than male, their priuities have litle haire upon 
them,and their tefticles are {mall, {ft and flat. 

The aétion of the tefticles is to generate feed, to corroberate all the parts of the 
body,and by a certaine manly irradiation to breed or encreafea true mafculine cou- 
tage. This you may know by Eunuchesor fuch as are Gelt, who are of a womani(h 
mature, andare oftentimes more tender and weake than weomen. As Hippocrates, 
teaches by the example ofthe Scythians,ib.de Aére,locis et aquit. 


Cuap, XXIX, 


Ofthe varicous bodyes or Paraftat’s and of the ejaculatory veffels 
andthe glandulous or Profkates. 
imeauspemtic Varicous Paraflaté are nervous and white bodyes, like as the nerves, 


T COUNd and clofe wovenamongft themfelves, they are f{tretched even from 
Ror the top to the bottome of the tefticles, from whence prefently by their de- 
parturethey produce the ejace/atoria, ox trading veflels. But unlefe 
we doc very well diftinguifhtheir names, wee fhall fcarfe fhun confufion, For that 
which call Parafate, that is, as it were the head of the tefticle, being as it were 
like another fone, is called Epididymis by Galen lib.i.de femine. But I by the exam- 
ple and authority of many Anatomifts,underftand by the Epididymis the propet 
coate of the tefticles, of which thing Ithought good by the way to admonith you 
of. Their Actien is by their crooked paffages to hinder the {eed from departing 
out of the preparing into the leading veffels, before it fhall be moft perfectly labou- 
red and conce&edin thefe veffels by the power and force of thetefticles, Forin the 
firft windings,the blood lookes pure ; but in the laft it is not fo red, but fomewhat 


whitifh. For Nature commonly deth thus delay the matter in its paflage either by 


new 


rec have from 1 
Rraitnefie,er obliquity, which it defires to make more perfeét and elaborate by any 


naturce 
vanti 
ated 
cles,fr 
Their @ 
varicom@ 
and ar 
Parsee 
ftance 
ty ising 
throug® 
by 
rats, 
Both 
them. 
But \ 
the bor: 
veffels, 
by nervy 
they fo 
intro the 
of the b 
der.ther 
runcie r 
uniting 
as oft tin 
e{pecial! 
Number. 
to: the P 
pailace. 
welicls be 
itisnot 
by reafoi 
adventur 
allimall 
appeare 
Yet certs 
that in 
feare, lea! 
inte the c 
Unlefle pe 
much dilaf 
that they | 
thar in feaml 
being fom 
inflamed. 
withthe {el 
ftraite paf™ 
Atter th 
fubfiance 
figure roun 
indifferent 


4 
7 
the Pym 
he 
4 
df 
aa 
4 
ay 
. 
Their 
Rance, 
i 
a. 
Here the Au« 
rd 
cign Galen, 
Cs 
7 
‘on 
eo 


ertaine 
uft ob- 

place it 
mc Teitj- 

e Tcfti- 
ot fafe. 
re Na. 
Epide~ 
fores 
mong 
ematter 
obli que 
ee {aid 
nufcles, 
ntothe 
Their 
“efticles 
re moft 

They 
princi- 
it coats 
Bold and 
ccident 
icles are 
Its very 
he con- 
uldren, 
re UpoR 


5 of the 
he 
manilh 
ARES, 


L 18.3. of Mans body. 


pew concoétion ; this we may learne by che foldings of the Rete mir able, the win- 


dings of the Guts, the wrinckles in the bottome of the ftomacke, the firaitnefle of 
the Pylors, the capillary veines difperfed through the body ofthe Liver ,certainly 


nature hath intended fomie fuch thing inthe making of the fpermaticke veflels. Their 


quantity 1s vifible, and figure round te nding fomewhat to fharpnefle. They are com- 

ofed of veines, nerves and arteryes (which they enjoy from the veflels of the tefti- 
cles,from the Epidédymis or the coat, from the Perstonewm and their proper fubftance. 
Theirtemper is cold and dry. They be two in number, one to each tefticle. Burthefe 


Their quantiz 
ty, figuieand 
compoflurce 


Their tamer 


vaticous bodyes ate called Paraffare, Affiters, becaufe they fuperficially affift, and number, 


and are knitto the tefticles according to their length, or long-wayes. 
parafiate proceed the 74/4 ejaculaterz4,or leading veffcls, being of the fame fub- 
ftanceas their progenitors, thatis, folid, white and as it were nervous. Their quanti- 
ty isindifferent, theit figure round , and hollow ,that the feed may havea free paflage 
through them, yet they feemenotto be perforated by any manifeft pafiage, unleffe 
by chance in fuch as have hada | Gonnorrbaa, They have like temper as the Para-~ 
fiats,betweene whichandthe Proftates they are feated, immediatly knit with them 
both ; asboth inthe coat and the other vefiels with the parts from whence they take 
them. 
But we muft note, that {uch like veffels comming out of the paraffats afcend from 
the botom of the ftones evento the top, in which place meeting with che preparing 
veffels, they rife into the belly by the fame paflages , and bind themfelves together 
by nervous fibers, evento the inner capacity of the belly;from whence turning backe, 
they forfake the preparing , that fo they may runtothe bottome of the flare-bone, 
into the midft of twoglandulous bodies which they call profats {cituate at the nec! 
of the bladder, that there meeting together they may grow inte one pallage. 

_ For thus of three paflages, that is, of the 2 leading veffels and x paflage of the blad- 
dersthere isone common one in men for thecafting forth of {eed and urine. A Ca- 
runcle rifing like a creft at the beginning of the neck of the bladder argues this 
uniting of the paflages, which receiving this fame paflage which is {ufficiently large, 
is oft times taken by fuch as arc ignorant in anatomy for an unnatural! Caruncle, then 
efpecially when itis fwelne throughany occafion. Thefe leading veflels are two in 
number, oneach fideone. Theiractionis to convey the feed made by the tefticles 
to! che Proftats and foro the necke ofthe bladder, fotobe caft forth at the common 
paflage. Butifany aske whether that common pafflage made by the two Icading 
weficls betweene the two glandulous bodyes be obvious to fenfe or no ? We anfwer 
itisnot manifeft, though reafon compellus to confeffe that that way is perforated 
by reafon of the fpermaticke, grofle and vifcous matter carryed that way. But per- 
adventure the reafon why that paflage cannot be feene is, becaufe in a dead carcafic 
allfmall paflages are clofed andhid, the heat and fpirits being gone, znd the great 
appeare much leffe, by reafon all the perforations ‘fade, and fall into themfelvcs. 
Yet ctrtainely thefe paflage muft needs be very ftraite,evenin a living map, fecing 
that in adead they willnot admit the point of a needle. Wherefore we need not 
feare, leaftin fearching, whileft wethruft the Catheter into the bladder, iepenctrate 
inte the common paflage of the leading veflels which runnes within the Caruncle, 
unlefie peradventure by fome chance, as a Gonorrhea, or fome great Phlegmen, itbe 
much dilated befidesnature. ForI have fometimes feene fuch paflages fo open, 
that they would receive the head of a Spatherne ; which thing (hould admonith us, 
that in fearching we take great care, that we doe not rafhly hurt this Caruncle, for 
being fomewhat rafhly handled witha Catheter it cats forth blood,efpecially if ir be 
inflamed. But alfo the concourfe of the {pirits flowing with great violence together 
with thefeed, much helps forward fuch ejaculation thereof performed through thefe 
ftraite paflages by the power of the imaginative faculty in the A& of gencration. 

After the leading veffels follow the Proflate, being glandulousbodyes of tlie fame 
fubftance and temper that other Glandules are, Their quantity is large enough, their 
figure round, and {omewhat long, fending forth on cach fide afoft production of an 
indifferent length. They are compofed of veines,nerves,arteries a coate (which they 
have from the Neighbouring parts) and laftly their proper which they ete 

M rom 


Out of the 74/2 ejacwla- 


forsathe 
latory or leas 
ding yelicls, 


Their anmber 
and aGion, 


This Caruns 
cle muft be ob- 
ferved aud di= 
ftinguithed 
frema A ypere 


farcofss of 


fie(ny ex- 
creicencés 


The Prefata, 
Their quanti- 
ty and figure, 


i 
4 
q 
3 | 
4 
| 
4 
é 
ro 
-ir 
xam- 
inthe 
what 
‘ 


122 Of the eAnatomie 


Namberand from their firft conformation. They are two in number, fcituate at the rootcof the 
Litt. necke of the bladder, fomewhat ftraitly bound, or tyedto the fame, to the leading 
Ananatomiz veffels, and the parts annexed tothem, Buralwaies obferve, that every part which 
callaxiome. nourifiment, life and fenfe, either firft or laft hath connexion with the prin- 
cipall parts of the body , by the intercourfe of the vellels which they receive trom 
thence. | 
shearmary: The ufeof the Proftats is, to receive in their proper body the feed laboured in 
the tefticles, andto containe it there, untillic be troublefome either in quantity or 
quality or both. Befidesthey containe acertaine oily and vifcide humor in their 
elandulous body, that continually diftilling into the paffage of the urine, it may pre- 
ferve it from the acrimony and fharpneffe thereof. But wee bave obferved alfo on 
each fide other Glandules, which Rondeletins calls Appendices glandulofe ,Glacdulous 
ase dependances to arife from thefe Proftats, in which alio their is feed referved. 


Rond mes 


The 10. figure, wherein thofe things foewed in the former figure, are more exactly 


Set forth. 
as Apastof the Midriffe 
and of the Peritenaum 
with the ribs broken. 
bbee The Convex or 
gibbous part of the 
Liver marked with 6, 
the hollow or conca- 
vous part with ec, 
de Theright and 
gaments of the Liver. 
f The trunke of the gate 
veine, 
g Thetrunke of tie hol- 
low veine. 
bi The fatty veines both 
left and right. 
The afcent of the great 
artery above the hol- 
low veine, and the dic 
vifton thereof.. 
k The Celiacal artery. 
mn Theemulgent 
{cls, 
oo pp The fat tunicles or 
coates torne from both 
the kidncys. | 
qq The ureters that goe untothe bladder. #4, The right {permaticall veine which 
arifeth neare tos. x 7. The double originall of the left {permaticall veine. x.from 
the emulgentr, y from the hollow veine. ¢ The originall of che {permaticall arterics 
@ Certaine branches from the {permaticke arteries which ruane unto the Persitomeum 
y The paflage ofthe {permaticall veffels through the productions of the Perstonewm™, 
which muft be obferved by fuch as ufe to cut for the Rupture. ? The {pirie bodden 
bodies entrance into rhetefficle, it is called Corpus varice/um pyramidale.< The Pare 
flate.¢ The ftone or tefticle covered with his inmoft coate." The defcent of the 
leading veficll called as deferens. ¥ y. The Bladder. * The right gut. = The glandules 
called proftate into which the leading veflels are inferted. ¢ The mufcle of the bladder. 
“7 Two bodies of the yard,s and his veffels.ex. The coat ofthe Tefticle.4* 
muf{cle of the Tcfticle +.his veffels 


C 


(out of 
Vreters 
ted neer 
inthey 
bladderg 
epened 
falling u 
canrot | 
come th@ 
For wil 
it bee pi 
For a2 
being 
the paiia 
Guts. 
The 
ofthe 
the blad@ 
are 
Their 
bladder. 


it were P 
It is coll 
pofed eft 
the tran{val 
The Or 


‘Nerves on 


~ For the 


is but 
Below thell 
Ecleaves 


. L iB 
| 
‘a 
4 
— 
si 
Beg 
| et 
4 
ke 
| 
| 
> 
i 


Cuar, XX Xe 
whet Of the Freters, 
© 

jOw it feemes fit to {peak of the Yreters, bladder,and parts belonging 

tothe bladder. Thereforethe Vreters are of af{permaticke , white, 
den{e and folid fubftance, of an indifferent bignes in length and thick- figure and 
n their nes. Their figure is round and hollow. They are compofed of two 
aypre- coats, one proper confifting of right and tranfverfe fibers, which 
foon |) comes fromthe emu!gent veinesand arteries; the othercommon from the Peritene- 
dulous ) — amsbefides they have veines,nerves and arteryes from the Neighbouring parts. 
i | They be two in number on cach fide one; They are fcituate between the Kidneyes Number and 

 (outof whofe hollow part they proceed) and the bladder. But the manner how the 
exactly  Vreters infert or enter themielves into the bladder, and the Porms Cholagegus into the 
Dwedenum,exceedes admiration;for the uretersare not directly but obliquely implan- 

tedneere the orifice of the bladder & penctrate into the inner {pace thereof;for with- 
lidriffe  iatheydoeas it were divide the membraneor membranous coat ofthe body of the 
bladder,and infinnate themfelves into that, as though ir were double. But this is 
@pened at the entrance of rhe urine, bur fhutatothertimes , the cover as it were 
falling uponit , fo thatthe humor which is falme into the capacity of the bladder 
of the canrot bee forced or driven backe , no not fo much as the aire blowne inro itcan 
 comethis way out, as we fee in {wines bladders blowne vpand filled with aire. 
sconca- For wee fee itis the Aire contained inthefe which fills them thus, neither canne 
icc, itbee prefled forth but with extraerdinary force, 
I left li- : For as this skinne or coat turned in bythe force ofthe humor giues way , foit 

Liver. ©" being prefled out by the bedy contcined within,. thrufts its whole bedy into 
ihe gate the pafiage as aftopple; like tothisisthe infertion ofthe Porus Cholagogws into the 


hehol- | The ureters have conhexion with the abeve mentioned parts , with the mu{cles Conntxjon; 
es both 


red in 
tity OF 


fom 
broken. 
vex of 


= 


ofthe loines, uponwhich they ruane frem the Kidaecyes tothe bladder, 

Wherefore nothing hinders , but that the ftone fliding through the uretersinto 
the bladder,may ftupity the thigh as muchas it did when it was in the Kidney. They 
egreat |  areofacoldanddry temper, 


phe hol- Theit ufeis, to ferve as paffages, of channels for carrying the urine into the a ae ang 


ery: 
ent Cuare XXXI. 


| | Of the Bladder, 


a 


bladder is of the fame fubftance that the ureters , that is, nervous, that Thefibitance 
Te fo it may bee the more eafily dilated; 

«from  tisofalarge proportion, infome bigger infome lefle,according to 
che difference ofage , and habite of body .-Itisof around figure and as Figure; 

Tt is compe'ed oftwo coats, ene preper whith is very thicke and ftrong com- Compofition, 
podden fofed efthethree forts of fibers, that the inner lide of the dire& without of 


cPare the tranfverfe;and in the midftof the oblique. 
ofthe Theother common Coat comming from the Peritemadm hath yeines and arteryes 
pndules on each fide one’, ‘from the veflels above the holy-bone , alfo it hath 
ladder. ‘Nerves On each fide from the fixt conjugation mrixt with the nerves of the hely-bonc, 

te 6 _~ For thefe nerves defcend fromthe braine even tothe end of the holy-bone. 
but one and that {ciruate in men in the lower belly upon the. right Gut and 
Selow the fharebone, burin wemen to which 
‘Releaves with tsmembranous ligaments}! as it dot to the yard by its neck , 
che 


HAPS 


— 
q 
va 
: 
| 
4 
te 
| 
4 
: 
ped 
ug 
~ 
a 
q 
: 


Their {phin- 
&er of the 
bladder- 


_ the right out by its common coate and proper veflels . Itis of a cold and dry 


temper. 
The ufe and aétion thereof is by the fibers continually to draw the urine , 


and containe it as long as neede requires, and then to expell it by the necke, 
partly by compreffion either ofitfelfe, or rather,of the mufcles of the Epsgafrium 
and Midriffe, becaufe this metion,feeing it is voluotary cannot be performed unlef{e 
by a mufcle which the bladder wants; partly alfo by the dilatation and relaxation 
of the fphinéter mufcle compofed of tran{verfe fibers, like the {phinéter of the 
fundament, afterthe fame manner to fhut up the orifice of the bladder, that the 
urine flow not out againft our will. Bur the bladder as ir fils is dilated, but as 
itis emptied, it iscontracted like a purfe. You may eafily obferve this Mufcle 
ina Sowesbladder , itis ftretched from the orifice of the bladder and beginning 
of the urinarye paflage even to the privities even in women; but in men itis 
terminated in the Perineum,as foone asithath left the right Gut. 

Befides this mufcle is thus farre ftretched forth , that the urine by its compreffion 
fhould be wholy preffed out of the bladder, which by too long {tay would by its 2- 
crimony doe fomeharme. This is the common opinion of Anatemifts concer. 
ning the Sphincter of the bladder, which never-the-lefle Fadlopins allowes not 
of, For (faith hee) if this mufcle fhould bee fcituate beneath the glandulous 
bodyes, the feed in copulation could never be caft forth without fome {mall 
quantity of urine. Wherefore he thinkes that this mufcle is {cituate above the Preffats, 
and that ir isnothing els but the beginning of the necke of the bladder, which becoms 
more flefhy whileft itis woven with tranfverfe fibers, 


The eleventh figure of the bladder and yarde, 


AB,I, 2,3,4,5,7,9 The 
two bodies whick make 
the yard. 

CC 3,3.The place where 
thefe two bodies do firtt 
arife, 

D The nut 
of the yard called e/ans 

penis. 

FE 4,5.Uhe fungons and 
redde fubftance of the 
bedies of the yard. 

F 4.5. Themutuall con- 
nexion of the bod yes 
of the yard, and che 
nervous outward {ub- 
ftance of the fame, 
compafing round 
bout the former fun- 
gous fubftance, 

The pal- 
{age of the urine, 

cOmMON pipe running 
underthe yarde al! a 
long his length. 

H.1.1.2.The firft paire of 

Mutcles of the yarde, 

which inthe firft figure doe yet growto it, but in the fecond they hang from cheit 

originall, K.L.1.2.Thefecond paire of Mufcles of the yard, inthe fir figure gro: 
wing, in the {ccond hanging from their infertion. M1.2. The {phinGer of the right 


which 


of the 
elfe, 1 
privici 


It 15 
paflage 
as alio 
lower 
into thel 

The 
commifi 
furnifhe< 
one. Th 
the nec! 

For chal 
of the y, 
fently 
Other 
Ty pallag 
mufcles ; 
forme, 

The aé 
dilate th 
Or violenl 
fo ftiffe, 

Ahe yard 


Temper,ulc o which 
of the 
4) Portic 
is figure 
rf! 
a 
uic of 
muir ! 
| whcre 
4 
[77 
4 
po 
‘ 
I 


d dry 


necke, 
iftrium 
munlefle 
xation 
of the 
hat the 
but as 
Aufcle 
inning 
en itis 


reffion 
Its 2- 
-oncer- 
Not 
nC ulous 
{mall 
rofiats, 
becoms | 


L 1B.3- of Mans body, 126 


which is over the holes of the thare bone, P 2. Arounde Ligament from the meeting 
of the fhare bones unto the head of the thgh. Q.3,7.8. The body of the bladder. 
R R,357- The Proffate into which feede when it is perfe@ly laboured, is led.SS,3,8. 
Portions ofthe wreters. T T * 3, Portions of the veficls which leade downe the feed. 
V V,7,8, The umbilical arteries. X7,8, The ligament ofthe bladder cald Prachus. 
Y,7,8- The navel or ambilicus. Z,7,%. The umbilicall veine. 447, Theveine and 
artery of the yatd, 65. The artery diftributed through the body of the yard. 


For the necke of the bladder it differs nothing in fub{tance, compofure number and ae - 

cemper from the biadder,but onely in quantity,which is neither folarge,norroundin ? 
figure but fomwhat long together with the yarde reprefenting the fhape of the letter 
S. Ic is placed ia men at theend of the right Gut and Peréneum rifling, upwards even 
tothe roots of the yarde,and with it bending it {elf downwards;in weomen itis fhort, 
broad,and ftreight,ending at the orifice of the necke of the wombe betweene the ner- 
vous bodyes of the Wymphe. 
In men it hath connexion with the bladder, the ejaculatory veffels, the right The connexis 
and yarde, but in weomerioncly with theneckeofthe wombe and privities, The 
ufe of it is inmentocaft forth feed and urine, in weomen onely urine. But wee em 
‘muft note that the fhare bones muft be divided and pulled afunder, in that part 
where they are joyned, that fo you may the more exactly obferve the {Citvation 
of thefe parts. Befides you muft note that by the Perimeum we underftand nothing 
elfe, 10 men and weomen, than that {pace which is from the fundament to the 
priviticsin which the {came is called Taurus, 


— — — — 
— — 


Cuap, XXXII, 


Of the yarde. 


ean) Ow followes the deciaration of the Privy parts of menand weomen, The fabitanee 
and firft wee will treat of mens. The yard is of a ligamentous 
iubftance becaufe it bath its originall from bones, it is of an im- yardes 
‘iifferent magnitude in all dimentions,yetin {ome bigger, in fome 

wind Icffe; the figure of it is round, but yet fome what flatred above 
=» and beneath. 
It 1s compofed of a double coat, Nerves, veines, arteryes, two ligaments, the Compolurs, 
paflage of the urine, and foure mufcles, It hath its coats both from the true skin; 
as nent the flefhy pannicle, but the veines and Arteryes from thefe of the 
lower pait of the lower belly which runne on the lower part of the Holy-bone 
into the yard, as the feminary veffels runse onthe upper part. 
_ The ligaments of the yard proceed on both fides from the fides and lower *elisamers 
commiffure of the fhare-bones; wherefore the yard is immediatly at his root 
furnifhed with a double ligament, but thefetwo prefently runne into one ipungy 
one. The paflage of the urine fcituate in the lower part of the yarde comes from 
the neck of the bladder betweene the rwoligaments. 


, 


For the foure mufcles, the twa fide ones compofeing or making a great part The mufeles. 
of the yard, proceed from the inward extuberancy of the Hip-bone, and pre- 
{ently they are dilated from their original], and then grow leffe againe, The two 
Other lower arife from the mufcles of the fundament and accompany the urina- 
TY paflage the length of the persmenm untill they eater the yard; bue thefe two 
muicles cleaye fo clofe together, that they may feeme one haveing a triangulat ‘ 
rme, 
_The a@ion of thefe foure mufcles in the a& of generation is they open and Their Aaion, i 
dilate this common paflage of urine and feed , that the feede may be forciblely a 
or vioicatly caft into the feild of nature; and befides they then keepe the yarde 
fo ftiffe, that it cannot bend co cither fide. 
The yard is in number one,and {cituate upon the lower parts of the fhare bone that . 


| 
| 
where 
do firft | 
he gut 
lans | 
and 
of the | 
ll con- 
od yes 
d the 
d f{ub- 
fame, 
nd a- 
fun- 
hepal- 
ac, OF 
pning 
alla 
aireot 
yarde, 
regro- 
pright 


r 


126 


‘The Nut. 
The Prapatis 
umor fore- 


skin. 


In what the 
{perematicke 
weficlsin weo- 
men difter 
from thofein 
mcn, 


Why they ere 
larger bur 
fherter chen 
mcns. 


In what their 
refticles differ 


from mens. 


parts 


Conexion, 


might bee more ftiffe in éredtion. It hath connexion with the (hare-bone and neigh. 
bouring parts; by the particles of which it is compofed. It is ofa cold and dry 
temper. The action of it isto caft the feed into the wombe, for prefervation of 
mankinde. | 
The head of it begins where the tendons end, this head from ehe figure thereof 
is called Glans and Balanus, that is the Nut, and the skin which covers that head is 
called Praputinm thatis,the foreskin. The ficth ofthis Glawduleisof a middle nature 
between the Glandulous fiefh and true skin. But you muft nore thatthe Ligaments 
of the yardeare fpongy contrary to the condition of orhers, and filled with groffe 
and blacke blood. But all chefe ttirred up by the delight of defired pleafure and pro- 
voked with a venereall fire,{well up and ere& the yard, 


XXXITI. 


Ofthe fpermaticke veffels and tefticles in weomen, 


~ 


<<» Ow we fhould treat of the Privy parts in weomen but becavfe they de- 
pend vpon the necke and proper body of the wombe,we will firft [peake 
of the wombe,hauine firft declared what difference there is betweene the 
{permaticke veffels and tefticles of mmenand weomen. Wherefore we 
mutt know that the fpermatick veffels in weomen do nothing differ from 
thofe in men in fubftance, figure, compofure, number, connexion, temper, originall 
and ufe,but only in magnitude and di@ribution; for wcomenhave them more large 
and fhort. 
It was fit they fhould be more large,becaufe they fhould not onely convey the mat- 
ter fic for generation of young and vuoutifhment of the tefticles, but alfo fufhcient for 
the nourifhment of the wombe and child;but fhorter becaufe they end at the tefticles 
and wombe within the belly inweomen. WVhere you muft notethat the preparing 
{permaticke veflels, a litle before they cometo the Tefticles, are divided into twe 
uncquall branches, of which the lefler bended, after the fame manner as wee faid ir: 
men, goes into the head of the tefticle, through which it fends a flender branch into 
the coats of the tefticles for lifeand nouriflament, and not onely into the coats bur 
alfo into the leading veffels. But the bigger branch defcends om cach fide by 
the upper part of the wombe betweene the proper coate and the common, from 
the Perstoneaum where itis devided into divers branches. By this difference ef the 
{permaticke veflels you may cafily underfand why weomen caft forth lefle feed thar: 
mcn. 
_ For their Tefticles, they differ litle from mens butin quantity; Forthey are leffer 
and in figure mor¢ hollow and flat, by reafon of their defeétive heat which could 
not elevate or lift them vp totheirjuft magnitude. Their compofure is more fimple, 


for they want the /crotwm or cod,the flefhy coate, and alfo according to the opinion of 
fome the Erythroides, but.in place thereof they have another from the Peritenaam 


which covers the propex coat , that is the Eptdidymeis, or Dartos Silvins writes that 
womens Tefticles wants the Erysthroides; yct it is certaine that befides their peculiar 
coat Dartos, they have another fromthe perttoneum, which isthe Erythroides, or as 


Fallopivs calls it the Elythroides,that isas muchas the vagzmalis or fheath. But I thinke 
that this error hath {prung from the mifunderftanding that placein Gal/e# where he 
writ¢s,that womens tefticles want the Epsdidymis. For we muft not underftand that to’ 


be fpoken of the coate, but of the varicous paraftats (as 1 formerly faid). They differ 


nothing in number, but in fite, for in men they hang without the belly at the 


thare bone above the Peritonaum; weomen have them lying hide in their belly, nere 


the bottome at the fides of the wombe, but yet fe asthey touch not the body ofthe 


wombe, 

But thefe tefticles are tyed to the wombe both by a coate from the Pers 
tenaum, as alloby the leading veflels defcending to the hornes of the wombe, but 
to chereft ofthe body by the veffels and the nerves arifing from the holy bone and 


Coftall 


coftali ng 
vefiels 1 
yeinie C 
may 
with im ¢ 
figure,0' 
{upply 
and won 
yricth ac 


wich the 
fertion of 
infertion| 


44. The (a 
trom the 

wombe. cf 
thereof, } 
matical] 

of the [pe 
Mens off 
Wombe. / 
necke of t 


» 
‘ 
+ 
- — 
“Lit 
* 
: 
! 
| eat 
7 
\ 
4 
bd 
. 
re 
a 
+ 
. 


coftall nerves. They are ofacolder Temper than mans. The ejaculatorie, or leading Temper. 
veffels in women differ thus fremmens, they are large at the beginning, and ofa 
veinie comfiltance, or fabftance, fo that you can fcarfe difcerne them from the coate 
peritoweum, then prefently they become nervous, and waxe fo flender, that they 

raay feeme broken or tornc, though it be nor fo; but when they come nearer to the 

horaes of the wombe, they areagaine dilated; in their other conditions, they agree 

with m ens, but that they are altogether more flender and fhort. They have around yy... 
figure, but more intricate windings than mens beleeve , that thefe windings might have more. 
fupply the defeé& of the varicous Parattats. They are feated betweene the tefticles 
and wombe, for they proceede out of the head of the tefticle, than prefently armed Their five, 
with a ceate from the Peritonenm, they are implanted into the wombe by irs hornes. 


The twelfth Ficure, of the Wombe. 


A. The bottome of the 
wompbe laid open with- 
out any membrane. 

EB. The aecke of the 

wombe turned up- 
ward, 

CD. a part of the bor- 
tome of the wombe like 
the nut of the yard fwel- 
ling intothe upper part 

of the necke of the 
wombe, inthe middle 
whercof the orifice ap- 
peareth. 

EE, amembrane knitting 
the wombe tothe Perito- 
neam, anahoalding toges 

“hes. the veflels thereof. 

F. the left tefticle. 
\ G, the {fpermaticall veine 
Q and artery. 

H. apart of the {perma- 

tical veflells reaching 
unto the bottome of the 
wombe, 

I, one part of the veffels 
comming tothetefticles 

® a veffell leading the 

feedeunto the wombe. 

j K.the coate of the tefticle 


with the implication of the veffels. L. the cavitie of the bladder opened. M, the in- 
fertion of the Vretersinto thebladder. N. the Vreters cut from the kidnetes, O. the. 
infertion of che necke of the bladder into the lap or privitic. 
The feconad Figure. 

44. The {permaticall veine andartery. 64. branches diftributed to the Peritonzum 
from the {permaricall veflels. ¢.the bettome of the wombe. @.the necke of the 
wombe.¢, certaine veffels runniag through the infide of the wambe, and the necke 
thereof. /£ veffels reaching te the bottome of the wombe produced fromthe {per- 
maticall veffell. gg. the leading veffell of feede called Tuba the irumpet. hb.a branch 
of the {permaticall veffell compaffing the trumpet. the tefticles, the lower liga- 


TALL 


ments of the wombe, which fome call the Crematfteres or hanging wufcles of the 
wombe. /, the lap or privitic into which the Cremafteres doc end. ma portion of the 
necke of the bladder, 


4 } 
| 
ip he 
dry | | 
n of | 
reof | 
ds 
ture 
acnts 
offe 
FIG.f. = } 
we | (\ 
| 
inall a | 
ar ge i] 
ate 
two | Yj, y Yj, Yd set, 
me Dut | AA 
om | 4 = / 
the | S d 
than | = (Is 
| S OG Lay, 
uld FA 
= r 
n of | — = 
at 
liar 
yr as | 
inke 
ehe ay 
iffer 
the 
ere | | 
chic 
but 
and 


Wherein the 
Privy partsin 
weomen difter 


From thofe in 
men. 


The fubftance 


and magni= 
tude of the 
wombe, 


Bigure, 


"The hornes of 
the wombe, 


Compofure. 


‘The veincs and 


Arteryces, 


The Coats, 


the midft for the due retention thereof. 


the 


The third Figare. 

sa. the {permaticall veffels. 66, a branch from thefe {permaticall veflels eo the 
tome of the wombe. cc. the body or bottome of the wombe. 4. the necke of the 
fame, e.the necke of the bladder ending into the necke ofthe wombe. ff. che refticles, 
. the leading veffels, commonly though got fo well called the ejaculatory veffels, 
bh. thele divifion of che veffels,one of them determining into the hornes atdouble 
#i.the other branch ending in the aecke, by which women with child avoid their 
feede. kk. the horncs of the wombe. 

The fourth Figure. 

AB. The bofome of the bottome of the wombe, at whofe fides are the hornes, CD, 
aline like a future or feame, a little diftinguifhing that bofome. EE. the fubftance of 
the bottome of the wombe, or thethicknefle of his inner caate, F. a protuberation or 
fwelling ofthe wombe inthe middle of the bofome. G, the orifice ofthe bottome of 


1s. 2, 


the wombe. HH. the coate or fecond cover of the bottome of the wombe, com- 


ming from the Peritonenm, JI1I.a portion of the membranes which tie the wombe, 
KK. the beginning ofthe necke of the wombe. L, the necke of the bladder inferted 
into the necke of the wombe. m, the C/tor# inthe toppe of the privity. ». the ince 
qualitie of the privitie where the Hymex is placed, o. the hole or paflage of the privi- 
tiein the cleft. p. the skinny caruncle of the privitie, all 


Crap. XX XITII. 
Of the Wombe. 


He VWombe isa part proper oncly towomen, given by nature in ftead of 
ayy the Scrotum, as the necke thereof, and the annexed parts in ftead of the 
= yard, fo that ifany more exactly confider the parts of generation in wo- 
men and men, he fhall finde that they differ not mueh in number, but one- 
ly in firuatton and ufe. For that which man hath apparent without, that women have 
hid within, both by ehe fingular providence of Nature, as alfo by the defect of heate 
in women, which could not drive and.thruft forth thofe parts as in men. The wombe 
is ofa wervous and membranus fubftance, that it may be more eafily bedilated and 
contracted, as neede fhall require. £23 

The magnitude thereof is diverfe, according to the diverfitie of age, the ufe of 
venery , the flowing of theircourfes, and the tine of conception, The wombe is but 
{mall in one of unripe age, having not ufed venery, nor which is menftruous ; there. 
fore the quantititie cannot be rightly defined. | 

The figure of the wombe is abfolutely like thatof the bladder, if you confider it 
without the produ€tions, which Herophilws called hornes, by reafon of the fimilitude 
they have with the hornes of Oxen at their firft comming forth. It.confifts of fimple 
and compound parts, The fimple are the veines, arteries, nerves, and coates. The 
veines and arteries are foure in number, two from the preparing ({permaticke veffels, 
the two other afcend chither from the Mypogaftricke, after this mannere 

Firft, thefe veficls before they afcend on each fide to the wombe, divide them:= 
{elves into two branches,from which otherfome goe to the lower part of the wombe, 
otherfome to the necke thereof, by which the menftruous bloud, if it abound from 
the conception, may be purged. 

Nerves come on both fides to the wombe, both from the fixt conjugation, defcen- 
ding by the length of the backe bone, as alfo from the holy bone, which prefently 
united and joyned together, afcend andare diftributed through the wombe, like the 
veines and arteries. 

The utmoft or commoncoate of the wombe, proceeds from the Peritencum, on 
that part it rouches the holy bone ; but the proper it hath from the firft conformation, 
which is compoted of the three forts of fibers, ofthe right on the infide for the attra- 


ction of both feedes; the tran{verfe without toexpell, ifoccafion be; the oblique in 
The 


= 


~ 


Luss 
The 
line or { 
certhe 
law of 
of is, th 
befides 
nourif he 
feemes 
rweene 
by the 
moft {tr§ 
it feem@ 
thicke if 
loines. 
By re 
ings ba 
child, 
on there 
contain« 
cuate th 
dyandn 
navell, 
than rhe 
peare in 
bur they 
unleffe \ 
bur then 
2 halfe t 
out of vil 
reckone 
caufe, a: 
bilical! val 
atterics, 
ableto r 
There 
telidones® 
the depall 
of Chori: 
This | 
wards thd 
fome cer 
vitie¢and § 
which is 
coats 
thatitc idl 
fend fort] 
in the wo 
From 
the priv 
might be 
wrelted, 
former {qf 
venery, 
comes dr 
flexible { 


4 
é 
i 
he 
| 
| 
4 


L 18.3. of “Mans body. 129 


— 


The wombe admits no divifion, ualeffe into the right and left fide, byan obfcure 
line or (came, fuch as we {ee in the Scrotum, but fcarfe fo manifeft;ncicher mult we af- 
certhe maner of the ancients , orimagine any other'celsinthe womb. For by the No celsin the 
law of nature, a woman at one birth can have no more than two. An argument here- :— 
of is, they have no more than two dugges. If any chance to bring forth more, itis 
befides nature, and fomewhat monitrous, becaufe nature hath made no provifion of 
nourifhment for them, 

Nature hath placed the wombe at the bottome of the belly, becaufe that place The fire. 
{eemes moft fit to receive feede, to carrie and bring forth the young. Itis piaced be- 
eweene the bladder and right gut, and is bound to thefe parts much more ftraitly, 
by the necke, than by the body thereof; but alfo befidesit is tied with two 
moft {trong ligaments on the fides, and upper parts of the fharcbone, on which 
it feemes to hang; but by its common coate from the Peritomenm, chicf 
thicke inthat place, it isticd tothehollow bone, andthe bones of the hanch and a 
loines. 

By reafon of this ftrait connexion, a woman with child feel ing the painefull draw- 
ings backe, and as it were conuvifions of thofe ligaments, knowes her felfe with 
child, It is ofa cold and moift temper, rather by accident, vhan of it felfe. The aQti- Thetemper - 
on thereof is to containe both the f{eedes, and to chearifh, preferve, and nourifh ir, 
contained, untill the time appointed by nature 3 and alfo befidts, to receive, andeua- 
cuate the menftruous bloud. The compound parts of the wombs are, the proper bo- 
dy and necke thereof, That body is extended in women bigge withchild, even to the 
navell, in fome higher, in fome lower. 

Inthe inner fide the Coty/edomes come into our confideration, which xe nothing el{@ The cor le- 
than the orifices and mouthes of the veines, ending in that place. They {carfe ap- 
peare in women, unleffe prefently after child-bearing, or their menftruad purgation; 
but they are apparent infheepe, Geates, and Kine, acall times like wher cornes , 
unleffe when they are with young, for then they are of the bignefie of hake]! nus: 
bur then alfo they fwell up in women, and are 3 a rude piece of fleth of a fimgy and 
a halfe thicke; which begirtall the natural! part@of the infant {hut up in the WOnbe, Columba: jus 
out of which refpect this fhapelefle flefh, according ‘to the opinion of fome, js ®t" 
reckoned amongft the number of coates invefting the infant, and called Chorsen, be 
caufe, asin beafts,the Chorion is interwoven with veines,and arteries, whence theum. a4 
bilicall veffels proceede ; fo inwomen this flefhie lumpe is woven with veines, and 
arteries, whence {uch veffels have their originall, Which thing, how trucand agree- 
able to reafon it is, ler other men judge. 

There is one thing whereof I would admonifh thee, that as the growth of the Co- 
telidones in beafts,are not called by the mame of Cortex, butare oncly faid to be 
the dependants thereof, fo in women fich {wollen Cotedidones meritnot the name 
of Chorion, but rather of the dependances thereof, 

This body ends in acertaine ftraitnefle which is met withall, in following it to- 
wards the privities, in women who have borne no children, or have remained barren 
fome certaine time ; for in fuch as are lately delivered, you can {ce nothing buta ca- 
vitie¢and no ftraitnfle at all. This ftraitnefle wee call the proper orifice of the wombe, The orifice of 
whichis moft exa@ly fhut after the conception, {pecially untill the membrane, or 
coats incompaffing the child be finifhed, and ftrong enough tocontaine the feede, rifice ot the 
thatit flow not forth, nor becorrupted by entrance of theaire; for it is opened ro Syars2."" 
fend forth the feede, and in {ome the courfes and ferous humors, which are heaped up aaly uri | 
inthe wombe in the time of their being withclild, _ ge 4 
From this orificethe necke of the wombe taking its originall, is extended even to Thenecke of 
¢ privities. It is of a mufculous fubftance, compofed of foft flefh, becaufe it 
might be extended and contracted, wrinkled, and ftretched forth, and unfolded, and 
wrefted, and fhaken atthe comming forth of the child, and after be reftored to its 

er foundneffe and integritie. In procefle of age it growes harder, both by ufe of 
venery, and alfo by reafon ofage, by which thewhole body inall partsthereof be- 
Comes drie and hard. But in growing, and young women, itis more tractable and 
flexible for the Neceflitie of nature, The 


3 
bot- 
the ‘ 
Cles. ; 
lels, 
ckk 
> 
hei 
| 
om- 
be. 
InCe 
ivi~ 
the 
mbe 
QO f 
bue | 
rit | 
ude | 
fie 
om 
n- 
tly 
he 4 
on 
a- 
e : 
| 


Ww 


Of the eAnatomte 


is The maonitude is fufficiently large in all dimenfions, though divers, by reafon of 

the of bedies. The islong, round, and hollow, The compo. 
Gtion is the fame with the wombe, but it receives not fo many veflels as the 
wombe - for it hath none but thofe which are fent from the Hypogaftricketveines, by 

' the branches afcending to the wombe. This necke on the infide is wrinckled with 

many crefts, like the upper part of adegges mouth, fo in copulation tocaufe greater 

: pleafure by that inequalitie, and alfo to fhorten thead. 

Numberand  _Itisonely one, andthat firuate betweene the necke of the bladder and theright 


fite, gut, to which it clofely fticketh, as to the wombe by the proper orifice thereof, and =” 
i to the privities by its owne orifice; but by the veficls to allthe parts from whence 

_ are fent. | 
: Tempete itis of acold and drie temper, and the way to admit the {eede into the wombe, 

to exclude the infantout ofthe wombe, as alfothe menftruall evacuation. But it is 


worth obfervation, that in all this paflage there is no {uch membrane found, as that 
NoHywen: they called Hymen, which tkey feigned to be broken at the firfi coition. Yet not- 
withftanding, Columbus, FAlopius, Wierws, and many other learned men of our time 
think otherwife,and fay,that in Virgjns a litle above the paflage of the urine, may be 
found and feene {uch an¢rvous membrane,placed overtwhart as it were inthe middle 
way ofthis neekc, andperferated for the paflage of the courfes. But you may finde 
this falfe by experience; itis likely che Ancients fell intothis-error through this occa- 
fion, becaufe that ia fome a good quantitie of bloud breakes forth of thefe places ar 

the firft copulation. 
But it is mee probable, that this happens by the violent attrition of certaine vef- 
Fromwhenee {els lying in inward fuperficies of thenecke of the wombe, not being able to en- 
yor Pre* dure withoxt breaking fo greatextention as that nerveus necke undergoes at the firft 
beeakeforth cOitien. Fora maide whichis marriageable, and hath her genitall parts proportio- 
infomevis=  nable ipquantitic and bignefie toa mans, thall finde no {uch effufioa of blond, as we 

&coition, fhal] few more at large in our Booke of Generation. 

, Tiis necke endsat the privities, where its proper orifice is, which privy parts we 
myittreate of as being the produ€tfons and appendices ot thisnecke, This Pudeadum, 
privitic, is of a middle fubftance, betweene the fleth and a nerve; the magnitude 
is{ufficiently large, the figure round, hollow, long. It iscompofed of veines, arteries, 
nerves, de{cending co the necke of the wombe, and a double coate proceeding from 
the true skinne and ficfhie pannicle ; both thefe coates are there firmely united by 


the fieth comming betweene them ; whereupon it is faid, that this part confifts of a f, the tr 
mufculous coate. It is oneinnumber, fituate above the Perinaum. It hath connexion ah | 
with the fundament, the necke of the wombe and bladder by both their peculiar uicke veri 
orifices, | _ feede 
It hath a middle temper, betweence hot, and cald, moift and drie. It hath the fame ac branc® 
ufeas a mans Prepatinm or fore-skinne, that is, that together with the Wampha it may 7 ie 4 
Ales hinder the entrance of the aire, by which the wombe may be in danger to take cold. bladd a 
The lips of the privities called by the Greekes by the Latines Ale, 
taine all that region which is invefted with haires; and becaufe we have faine into | 
mention of thefe Wympha, you muft know that they are as it were productionsof the C 
mufculous skinne, whieh defcend on both fides, from the upper part of the fhare- a 
: bone downewards,even to the orifice of the necke of the bladder, oft tinacs growing ae 
, tofo great a bigneffe, that thcy will ftand ont like a mans yard. Wherefore in fome 
they muftbe cut offia their young yeares, yet with a great deale of caution, left if 
they be cut too rafhly, fo great an effufion of bloud may follow, that itmay caufe,ei- 
: ther death to the woman, er barrennef{e of the wembe by reafon of the refrigeration see TG 
by thetoo great effufion of bloud. The latter Anatomitts, as Columbus and the thc | 
befides thefe parts, have made mention of another particle, which ftands forthinthe thoj 
upper part of the privities, and alfo of the urinary paflage, which joynes together Dune Ol 
_ thofe wings wee formerly mentioned. Co/uwsbye cals it Tent 0, Fallopiwst Cleitoris, MESES 
vestige whence proceeds that infamous word Clestorizein, (which fignifies impudently to 


handlethat part. ) But beeanfe itis an obfceng part, let thofe which defire ro know 
more ofit, reade the Authors which I cited, ote 


| 
| 
af 
\ 
ie 
= 
© 
’ 
¥, 
<= 
* 
be 
* 
4 


with 
"ater 


right 
and 
cnoce 


— 


The thirteenth Figure, fhewing the parts of women different 
from thefe in men, 


A,B,C. D. The Peritoneum refle- 
&ted or turned backward, above 
and below. 

E.F.the gibbous part of the liver E, 
the cave or hollow part F, 

G. The trunke of the gate veine. 

H. the hollow veine, 

I, che great artery. 

K. the rootes of the Celica# artery 
which accompanicth the gate 
veine, 

L.M. the fatty veine going to the 
coate of the kidncies. 

N.O, the fore-part of both the kid- 
neics, 

T.V.the emulgent veines and arte- 
ries, 

aa. the right ureter at the loweft 4, 
cut from apart which neere to 4, 
fticketh yet to the bladder, be- 
caufe the botrome of the bladder 
is drawne to the left-fide, 

¢e, the left ureter inferted into the 
bladder neeré tor, 

Zq ad, the f{permaticke veine which 

By eocth to theleft tefticle marked 
with?. 

ee. the fpermaticke veine which go- 
eth tothe left tefticle with #, alfo. 


f. the trunke of the great arterie from whence the {fpermaticall arteries doe proceed. 
2.6. the {permatica!l arteries. #. the twotefticles. ll,a branch which from the (perma- 
ticke veffels reacheth unto the bottome of the wombe. wim the leading veflel! of the 
feede which Fa/opius calleth the saba or trumpet, becaufe it is crooked and refleted. 
#.a branch of the {permaticke veflel, compafling the leading vetiell. 00.a veffell like 2 
werme which paffethto the wombe, fome call it Cremafier. p. the bottome of the 
wombecalled fusdus vteri. g. a part of the right gut. 7. f- the bottome of the 
bladder wherero is inferted the left ureter, and a veine led from the necke of 
the wombe neere unto r. ¢. the necke of the bladder. #.the fame inferced into the 
privitie or lap. x. a part of the necke of the wombe above the privity. yy. certaine 
skinnie Caruncles ofthe privities, inthe midft of which is the flit, and on both fides 
appeare little hillocks. \ 


- 


| 


As 


he Figures belonging tothe Dugges and Breafls. 


az, The veines of the Dugs which come from thofe, which defcending ftom the top 
of the fhoulder, are offered to the skinne. 6. the veines of the dugges derived _ 
from thofe which through thearme-hole are led into the hand 7. the body of the 
Dugge or Brealt. 4¢. the kernels and fat betweene them. «s. the veflels of the 


Dugges defcending fromthe lower part of the necke called vader the 


Lin of Mans body, 
Of | — 
| 
tbe? 
not- <— NY | 
: 

> 
/ 
4173, W LZ Z 
irom 
ofa 
xion 
uliar 
amc 
may 
old. 
COfie# 
inte 
frhe 
OMC 

ft it 

| 
tien 

1755. | 
LOW 


sale 


Their fubs 
Rance, mag- 
nitude, figure 
and compo- 


frre, 


Their 


Of the Coats containing the Infant inthe wembe, and of the Navell. 


of good length and bredth ,efpecially neare the time ef deliverance, they are round 
in figure like the wombe. 

Their compofition is of veines, arteries, and their proper fubftance, The veines, 
and arteries, are diftributed to them ( whether obfcurely , or manifeftly, 
more or fewer ) from the wombe by the Cotyledenes, which have the fame 
office, as long asthe child is contained in the wombe, as the nipples or pappes of 
the nurfes after itis borne. For thusthe wombe brings the Cotyl/edones, or veines, de- 
generating into them, through thecoates like certaine paps to the infant fhut up in 
them. 3 

Thefecoates are three in number according to Gales; one called the Cherion, Se. 
cundine, or afterbirth ; the other 4Mantoides the third Ammnios. find this number 
of coates in bcalis, but not in women, unleffe peradventure any will reckon up in the 
number of the coats,the Cotyledones {wollen up,and grown intoa flethie maffe, which 


many skilfull in Anatomy doe write, which opinion notwithfanding we cannot re- 


Fle thewes by 


three {everall 
geafons that 
there is no A/s 


ceive as true. I could never io any place finde the A//antoides in women with child, 
neither in the infant borne in the fixth, feventh, eight, or in the full time, being the 
ninth moncth, although I have fought itwith all poffible diligence, the Midwives 
being fer apart, which might have violated fome of the coates. 
But thus I went about this bufineffe, I devided the dead bedy of the mother crofi- 
wife upon the region of the wombe, and taking away all impediments, which mighe 
either hinder, or obfcure our diligence,with as much dexteritie as was poflible , wee 
did not onely draw away that receptacle or den of the infanr, from the inward furface 
ofthe wombe, to which it ftucke by the Coty/edones, but we alfo tooke away the firft 
membrane which we called Cherzon,trom that which lies next under it,called Amaios, 
without any rending or tearing ; for thus we powred forth no moifture, whereby it 
might be faid, that any coate, made for the containing of that humor, was rent, or 
torne. And then we diligently looked, having many witnefles and {peators pre- 
{ent, ifinany place there did appeare any diftinction of thefe two membranes, the .A/- 
lantoides, and Amnies, for the {eparating the contained humors, and for other ufes 
whichthey mention. 
But when we could perceive no fuch thing, we tooke the Amm/es filled with moi- 
fture on the upper fide, and having opened it, two fervants fo holding the apertion, 
that no moifture might flow out of it into the circumference of the Chorion or womb: 
then prcfently with {punges we crew out by little and little all the humiditie contai- 
ned in it, the infant yet contained in it, which was fit to come forth, that fo the coate 
Amuios being freed of this moifture, we might fee whether there were any other hu- 
mor contained in any other coate befides, But having done this with fingular dili- 
ses and fidelity ,we could ice no other humor, nor no other {eparation of the ment- 
ranes befides. 
_ Sothat,from thattime Ihave confidently held this opinion, thatthe infant inthe 
wombe, is onely wrapped in two coates,the Chorion and Ammnios. But yet not fatisfied 
by this experience, that I might yet be more cerraine concerning this Al/amtosdes, ba- 
ving pafled through the two former coates, I came tothe infant, and I puta quill in- 
to its bladder, and blew it upas forceably as I could, foto tric, if by that blowing I 
might force the aire into that coate which we queftioned, as fome have written, But 
neither thus could I drive any aire from hence, through the navel! into the controver- 
ted coate, but rather I found it to flie out of the bladder by the privities, VWhere- 
fore l amcertainely perfwaded that there is no Al/anteides, Morcover Icould never 
finde 


finde no 
beginni 
no fuch 
fecing 
be receill 
rence w 
and roug 
inthe ur 
admixtul 
Befid 
bold up 
wombecg 
which ba 
liquide 
ger ofd 
thar che 
The An 
beafts. ¥ 
which {4 
it oneve 
Falop@ 
the Cho 
part of 
coates a 
bers, an 
Wiiercl@ 
jeparariog 
reos, for 
from thal 
keepe 
Bur t! 
mors, W 
coate is v 
infant, w 


* 


Foot) 

{welling 
rily into 
Cven as 
wombec 
thickne {i 
that child 
legges. T 
coates, 
which aren 
Navell, pe 
two, acco® 


cariec 


132 
| TO 44 He membranes or coates containing the infant in the wembe of the mo- 
cher, are ofa fpermaticke and nervous fubftance, having their matter 
fromthe feede of the mother. But they are nervous that lo they may be 
H pe Waar the more eafily extended, as it fhall be neceflary for the child. They are 
ber, 
| 


finde nor {ee in the navell that paflage called the arachas,which they affirme to be the 
beginning and originall of the coate dllasto‘des, But if itbe granted that chere is 
no fuch coate as rhe Allantoiaes, what difcommoditie will arife hereof > {pecially 
fecing the {weate and urine of the infant may cafily and without any difcommoditie 
be received, colleGted and contained in the famgcoate, byreafon of the fall diffe. 
rencewhichis betweene them, But if any object that the urine by its tharpeneffe 
and rouching will bure che infant ;[ will anfwer, there can beno fo preat fharpenefie 
inthe urine of fo {mall an infant, and that, if thatthere be any, it is tempered by the . 
admixture of the gentle vapour of fweat. 

Befides, if you confider,or have regard to theufe of fuch anhumor ( which is to 
bold up the child, left by its weight it breakes the ties, by which it is boundto the ‘a 
wombe; ) wee fhall finde no humour more fit for this purpofe than this ferous, as wi 
which by its thickmefle is much more fit to beare up a weight, than the thinne and to 
liquide {weate.For fo we fee the fea or fale water carries greater weights without dan- 
ger of drowning, than freth rivers doc. Wherefore | conclude that there is no neede, 
thar the urine fhould be kept and contained in one coate, and the fweate in another, 
The Ancients who have writ otherwife, have written from obfervations made in 
beafts. Wherefore we make but onely two coats the Chorios and Amanios, the one of 
which feeing it containes the other ,they both fo encompafle the child, thar they 
it onevery fide. | 

FaZopins in {ome fort feemes to be of this opinion ; for he onely makes two coates; 
the Chorion and Amnios, but hee thinkes the infant makes the water intoa cerraine 
part of the Chorion, as you may perceive by reading of his Obfervations, Both thefe 
coares are tied betweene themfelves by the intercourfe of moft {lender nervous fi- 
bers, and {mall veflels penetrating from the outer Chertow to the inner Awmazies. 
Wherefore unlefle you warily handle thefe coates you may ealily teare the Amezios in 
feparating it. They are of the fame temper with other membranes. Their ufe is diffe Theis tempex | 
reus, for the Chorien is made both for the prefervation of the veficls, which it receives 
from the wombe for the gencrating of the umbilicall veines and arteries, as alfo, to 
keepe whole and fafe the parts which it invefts. 

But the Amsios isto receive and containe the ¢xcrementitious and ferous hu- 
mors, which the child {hut up in the wombe is accuftomed to evacuate. But this 
coate is very thinne and foft, but &rong and {mooth, left by its touch it might hurt the 
infant, whereupon it is called the Lamb-kinne coate. 


4 
* 
“| 


- 


Cuarp, XXXVI. 


Of the Navell, 


He Navell followes thefe coates ; It is a whiee body fomewhat refem- sie 


bling the wreathen cord, or girdle of the Franci{can Friers, but that it mavellis, 
‘i 21 hath not the knots flanding fo farre our, but onely {welling in certaine 
Na places, refembling a knot, oncly lifted up on one fide; it arifes and takes 
its Original! from afichhie mafle which we exprefled by the name of 
{welling Cotyledones ,and goes into the midft of che lower belly of the infant, yea ve- Their Navel! 


rily into che midft of the whole body, whofe roote it is therefore faid tobe. For ai 
even as a tree by the roote, fucks nourifhaient from the earth, fo che infant in the | 
wombe drawes its nourifhment by the navell. The greatneffle of it in breadth. ghd ’ 


thickneffe, equal] the bigneffe of the little finger. But it is afoore anda halfe long, fo 

that children are brought forth with it,encompaffing their middie, necke, armes, or 

legges. The figure of itis round. Itis compofed of two arteries, one veine and two rye = 
coates. It hath thefe veffels from that great multitude of capillary veinesand arterics, ear st 
which are {eene difperfed over the Chorion. Wherefore the veine entring in at the 

navell, penetrates from thence into the hollow part of the liver, where divided into 

two, according to Galews opinion, it makes the gate and hollow veines. But the arte- £#.4¢ fermar: 


ries.caried by themfelves the length of the navell,caft themfelves into 
N they 


* 
Datter 
ay be Bx 
ound 
> 
eftly 
A 
pes of 
8. | 
5 
ymber 
hich 
| 
Of re- 
hild 
uld, 
the 
crofi- 
firft 
by it 
nr. OF 
? 
CA [- 
& 
: 
ne a 
dili- 
nthe 
im ra 
an 


+ 


the 


they make, asalfo all other, that from thence the vitall {pirit may be carried by them 
over all the infant. It hath its two coates from the Chorion, 

But feeing they are mutually woven and conjoyned witheut any mediuws, and are 
of a {ufficient ftrength and thicknefle over all the navell, they may feeme tomake 
the infants external! skinne and flefkie pannicle. I know very many reckon two um- 
bilicall veines, as alfo arteries, and the srachws by, or through which the urine flowes 
into the coate Al/antoides. But becaufe this is notto be found in women, but onely ip 

Thareis ently beafts, I willingly omit it, becaufe I doe not intend to mention any parts, but fuch 

childsnavill, as belong tohumanc bedies, Yet if there be any, which can teach me, that thefe 

Fiwtes,  Patts, which I thiake proper to brute beafts, are to be found in women, I will wil. 
lingly confeffe, and that to his credit, from whom I have reaped fuch benefit. 

The other things that may be required concerning the navellas of its owmber 
fitc, connexion, temper, and ufe, may eafily appeare by that we have {poken before, 
For wehove apparently fer downe the ufe, when we /aid the navel] was made for 
that purpofe, thatthcinfant may benourifhed by it, asthe tree by the roote, by res- 
fon of the continuation of the veflels thereof, with the preparing {permaticke vefiels, 
rp by God forthat purpofe, to whom be honour and glory for ever amd ever. 

men, 


Zhe End of the third B 


ooke. 


3, 


aod 
them. 7 


into its di 


containe 


Pincous! 
edefencs 
which is 
t2 Mpirit 
than the 
all bony, 
er breath 
for left 
and grift! 
Tréture ha 


the fabri 


their co 


hath obfe, 
of the cari 


me pe 


4 
* 
1 
= 
is} 
a 
% 
> 
4 F 
. - 
3 
* 
=. 
= 
7 
4 
‘4 
> 
| 
| 
1 
q 


TREATING 


The Preface. 


|| Aviog finifhed the firft Bookeof our Anatomy, inexplana- 
tion of the naturall parts conzained inthe lower belly, now 
order requires, that we treat of the Breft ; that fo the parts in 
fome fort already explained (I meane the veines and arteries) 
may bee difpatched after the famé order and manner, with- 
|{ Out interpofition of any other mateer. 
And befides alfo that we may the more exa@ly and cheare- 
—— =} fully fhew the reft of the parts which remaine, as the head 
and limbs, knowing already the originall ofthofe veffels which are difperfed through 
them. To this purpofe, we will define what the Cheftis, and then we will divide it 
into its parts. Thirdly, in thefe we will confider which parts containe,and which are 
contained, that fo we may more happily finifh our intended difcourfe. 


Cuap.I, 


What the Thorax, or the Chef is, into what parts it may be devidea, 
and she mature of thefe parts. 


He Thorax or Cheltis the middlebelly, terminated or bounded above 
with the coller-bones, below with the midriffe before with the or 
Ser brett, behind, with the twelve Vertebra’s of the backe on both fides, 
ONS with the true and baftard ribs, and with the intercoftalland intercartila- sing parts of 
gineous mufcles. Nature kath given it this and compofition, left that being 
edefence for tke vital! parts — externall injuries, it ‘fhould hinder ref{piration; 
which is no leffe needfull for the prefervation of the native heate, diffufed by the vi- why nature 
ta iMpirits,and fhut up in the heart,as in the fountaine therof,againft internal injuries, hathmade _ 
than the other forementioned parts againft externall. For if the cheft fhould have bin eecear 
all bony,verily it had beene the ftronger, but it would have hindred our refpiration stile! 
er breathing, which is performed by the dilating, and contracting thereof, VV here- 

fore left one of thefe fhould hinder the other, nature hath franzed it, partly bony 

and griftlely, and partly ficthic. Some rendez another reafon hereof, which is, that 

meture hath framed the cheft, that it might here alfo obferve the order ufed by it in 

the fabricke of things, which is,that'ic might cenjoine the parts much difagreeing in. oe 
their compofure, as the lower belly, altogether ethic, and the head allbony, by a ch: 
partaker both of the bony and fleflic fubftance; which courfe wee iceit 


~ 
- 


- 


_ obferved inithe connexion of the fire and water,by the interpofition of the aire; } 
of the earth andaire, by the watcs placedbetweencthem. 


4 4 
1Owes | 
ly i 
4 
wil- 
efore. | 
‘ 
| 
? 


— 


136 the Vitall parts 


L | 


y The Cheft is divided into three parts, the upper, lower, and middle : the collar 


Tl ber of Gz 

she bones of the bones containethe wpper, the midriffe the lower, and the Stersea the middle. The 
ont Sternon in Galens opinion is compofed of feven bones, I beleeve by reafon of the 
. great ftature of the people that lived then. Now in our times you fhall oft finde ir 


compaét of three, foure, or five bones, although wewill not deny but that we have 
often obferved it, (e{peciallyin young bodiesjro confift of feven or eight bones, 

Wherefore thofe who have fewer bones in number intheir Sternon, have them 
| larger,that they might be fufficientto r€ceive the tibbes, This is the commoa opinion 
of the Sternom, Yet Fallopiws hath defcribed it farre otherwife, wherefore let thojc 
whodefiretoknow more hereof, looke in bis obfervations. = 
| cartilaefeutiz the lower part of the Sterwen there isa griltle, called commonly Furcwla, and 


Malam cranatum, or the Pomegranate, becaufe it refemoles that fruite ; ethers call 


it Cartilago feutiformas, that is,the breft-blade. 

It is placed there to be as it were a bulwarke or defence to the mouth of the 

fomacke, endued with moft exquifite fenfe; and alfo that itfhould doe the like to 
that part of the midritfe, which the liver beares up in that place, firuate above the 
orifice of the ventricule by the ligament comming betweene, de{cending from the 
lower part of the fame griftle into the upper part of the liuer. 
The common people thinke that this griftle fometimes fals downe. But it fo ad. 
| heares, and is united to the bones of the Sterwen, that the falling thereof may 
: feeme to be without any danger, although oft times it may bee fomoiftened with 
watety and ferous humidities, with which the orifice of the ftomacke abounds, char 
| as itwere foaked and drunke with thefe, it may be fo relaxed, that it may feeme to 
| be out of its place ; in which cafe it may be prefled and forced by the hand, into the 
| former place and feate, “as allo by applying outwardly, and taking inward! y 
aftringent and drying medicines to exhauft the fuperfuous humiditie. 

This griftle at its beginning is narrow, Dut more broad and obtufe ar its end. 
fomewhat refembling the round or blunt point of a f{word, whereupon it is aifo cal- 
led Cartilago Enfiformis or the {wordlike griftle. In fome it hath adonble, in others 2 
: fingle point. 
| In old people it degenerates intoa bone. Now becaufe we make menrion of this 

priftle, we will fhew both what a griftle is, and how many differences thereof there 
be, that henceforward as often as wee fhall have occafion to {peake of a grifile, you 
may uaderftand what itis, 
Grifle oriftle is a fimilar part of our bodies, nextto abone moft terreftriall, cold, dric, 
fr hard, weighty and without fenfe, differing from a bone in drienzfle onely, the which 
i is more in a bone. Wherefore a griftle being loft cannot be regenerated, like as a 
bone without the interpofition of a Callus, 
Theiitterenes Thedifference of thefe are almoft the fame with bones, that is from their con(i- 
thereet. fience, fubftance ,greatneffe number, fice, figure,connexion,action,and ule, Omitting 
the other for brevitie fake, [willonly handle thofe differences which arife from fire, 
ufe,and connexion. Therefore griftles,cither adhere to the bones, or of and by them- 
felves make fome part, as the griftles of the eyclids called Tar/i, of the Epig/ostis anc 
throatle, And others which adhere tobones,cither adhere by the interpofition of no 
mediums, as thofe which come betweenc the bones of the Stermon,the collar bones, the 
fhare and hanch bones and others; or by a ligament comming betweene, as thot 
which are at the ends of the baftard ribsto the Sternenby the meanes of a ligament, 
that by thofe ligaments being fofter than a griftle, che motions of the cheft, may be 
more quickly and {afely performed. The griftles which depend onbones, due not 
onely yeeld ftrength to the bones, burto themf{elves,and the parts contained in them, 
againft fuch things as may breake and bruife them. The grifiles of the Stermom, and 
at the ends of the baftard ribs are of this fore. 
Theirtwofeld By this we may gather chat the griftles have a double ufe, onc to polifhand levigate 
tt wie. the parts to which that flippery {moothneffe was neceflary for performance of 
their dutie; and for this ufe ferve the griftles which are at the joynts, ¢0 
7 make their motions the more nimble, The other ufe is to defend thole 
parts upon which they are placed , from externall injurics,, by breaking 
violen: 


Pericaras 
parts, fof 
Skins, th 
there ist 
mulcics.§ 
the mer 
Wee 
youmay 
evento: 
part of 
twharr 
the col! 
both the 
becauic 
belley. 
Yer 
from the 
from the 
comme: 
face, 


fufficient : 
Pyramida 
nervesyvc! 
betwixt 

Andthe! 
dulesand fj 
facultie of 

Wee wi! 
ofthem bef 
thofe cha 
from the ir 


on 
violen' 
things © 
grifties ! 
sug 
; 
44 
- 
FER 


violent afiaults, by fomewhat yeelding to their impreffion, no otherwife than 
ins oppofed againft cannon fhot. VVce will profecute the other differences of 

in theis place, as occafion {hall be offered and required. 


gr 


4 


* J 
HAP 
* 
7; 


: Of the containing, and contained parts of tt | 
al she Chef. } 


He containing parts of the cheftare both the skinnes, the flefhie panicle, 
Bead the fat,the breafts, che common coate of the mufcles, the mufcles of that ofthe cheft 
eteee placc, the forementioned bones, the coate invefting the ribbes and the intoits pase. 


Diaphragma or midriffe. The contained are the Mediafiinum, the 
Pericardium or purie of the heart,the heart,the lungs & theit veflels.Of the containing 

parts, fome are common to all the body, or the moft part thereof, as both the 

skins, the flefhic pannicle and fat. Of which being we have {poken in our firft Boeke, 
’ there is no neede now further to infift upon; Others are proper to the cheft,.as its 

mufcles, of which we will {peake in their place, the brefts the forementioned bones 

the membrane invefting the ribs,and the Diaphragm or midriff. | 

~ Wee will treate of all thefe in order, after we have firft fhewed you the way, how 

you may feparate the skinne from the reft of the cheft, Putting your knife downe 

evento the perfect divifion of the skinne, you muft draw a ftraite line from the upper 

part ofthelower belley, eventothe chinne ; then draw another ftraight line, over- 

ewhart at thecollar bones even to the fhoulder-blades; and in the places beneath 

the collar-bones: (if you defire to fhunne prolixitie’) youmay at once feparate 

boththe skinnes, theflefhie pannicle, the fat, and common coate of the mufcles; 

becaufe thefe parts were fhewed and {poken of in the difleGion of the lower 

belley. 
Yer you muft referve the breftsin difle@ting ofthe bodies of women; wherefore 
____ from the upper parts of the breafts, as artificially as you can, feparate onely che skin 
: from the parts lying under it, that fo you may fhew the Patinicle which there be- 
commeth flefliie and mufculous, and ts fo fpred overthe necke, and parts of the 
face, even to the rootes of the haires. ‘4 


| 
| 


— 


Crap. III. 


Of the Breafis or Dugges. | 


He Brealts, as wee {aid, when we fpoke of the nature of glandules, are 5, . 1, 

of a glandulous fubftance, white, rare, or fpongious, in maides, and fance. — 

wemen that doe not give fucke, they are more folid and not fo 

Wherefore the bignefle of the Dugges is different, although of a ie ia 

magnitude inall. Their figure isround, fomcwhetlong, andin fome fort Figure, | 

Pyramidall, Their compofareis of the skinne, the fiefhie panaicle, glandules, fat, Compofire; 

nerves, veines, and artcries, defcending tothem from the Axé//ars under the Sterwon 

betwixt the fourth and fifth, and fometimes the fixth of the true ribbes. | 

And there they are divided into infinite rivelets by the interpofition of the glan- 


~ 


dules and far, by which fit matter may be brought, to bechanged into milke by the : 
faculticofthedugges, 21180 390120 a 
Wee will fpeake no more of the nature ofglandules, or kernels, as having treated 
ofthem before ; onely we will add rhis, that fome of the glandules have nerves, as a age | 
thofe of the brefts, which they receive from the parts lying under them, thatis, neryesand it | 
from the intercoftall, by which it comes to paffe that they have moft exquilit fenfe« which have 
AUCH CORRES LO palle | N 3 Others 
| 


ollar 
the 
de it 
have 
eS, 
hem | 
nion 
hofe 
and 
call 
f the 
eto 
ethe 
the 
ade 
may | 
with 
that 
tO 
othe 
ardly 
end, 
cal- 
ers2 
this 
there 
you 
dric, 
Casa 
tring 
{itc, 
sana 
f no 
hofe 41 
nent, 
not = 
nem, 
gate 
cot 
CO 
hofe | 


L 18.4, 


~The Vitall parts 


Others wanta nerve,as thofe which ferve onely for divifion of the veffels, and which 


have no a@tion, but onely ufe. | 
They be two in number,oneach fide one, feated at the fides of the Stermon upon the 


fourth fifth and fixth true ribs. 
TheirCone | Wherefore they have connexion with the mentioned parts with their body , buc 
sexion. =» by their veffels with all other parts , butefpecially with the wombe by the reliques 
ofthe mamillary veines and arteryes, whieh cefcend downe at the fides of the brefi- 


138 


Hew the blade; in which place thefe veines infinuating themfelves through the fubftance of 
the mufcles,are a litle above the navill conjoined with the Epigafricks , whole origi- 


municate each nal] js in fome fort oppofitero the Hypegaftrickes , which fend forth branches tothe 
wahomer: wombe, By the meeting of thefe it is more likely chat this commerce fheuld arife, 
than from other and thofe almoft capillary branches, which are fometimes feenc 
_ todefcend to the wombe from the Epigaftrick. 
Theietemper. They are ofacold and moift temper, wherefore they fay: that the blood by being 
s Recrade(cere, converted into milke ® becomes raw,flegmaticke and white by the force of the pro- 
Theira&tion per flefh of rhe dugs, Their aéion is to prepare nourifhment forthe new borne 
— babe, to warme the heart from whence they have received heat, and to adorne the 
breft. 
By this you may know that fome Glandules have ation, others ufe,and fome 
both. At the top of the dugs there are certaine hillockes , or eminencies called teats 
The Nipples. or nipples, by fucking of which the child is nourifhed through certaine fmall and 
crooked paffages;which though they appeare manifeft to the fight, whileft you prefic 
out the milke by preffing the dug , yet when the milke is prefled out they doe not ap- 
peare,nor fo much as admit the point of a needle, by reafon of the crooked wayes, 
made by nature inthofe paflages, forthisufe, that the milke being perfectly made 
fhould not flow out of irs owne accord agaioft the nurfes will. For fo the {eed is re- 
tained and kept for a certaine time inthe Proftats, 


Cuarv. IIII. 


Ofthe clavicles, or Coller bones and Ribs, 


eh-exsF we fhould handle thefe parts afterthe common order, we fhouldnow 
G22 treat of the Mufcles of the Cheft which move the arme,and ferve for re- 
=) {piration,and which firft offer themfelves to our fight. 
aS Bur for thar they cannot be fitly fhewed, unlefle wee hurt the mufcles 
of the thoulder bladeand necke, therefore I thinke it better, todeferrethe explana- 
tion of thefe mufcles untill fuchtime as Ihave fhewed the reft of the contained and 
containing parts, not onely of the cheft, but alfoofthe head, that haviag finifhed 
thefe we may come to a full demonftration of all the reftof the mufcles , beginning 
with thofe of che head , which wee firft meet with, and fo profequuting the reft even 
tothe mufcles of the feet , as they fhall feeme to offer themfelyes more fitly co dif. 
fection, that fo,as much as lyes in us,we may fhunne confufion, 
Wherefore returned to our propofed taske , after the torefaid mufcles come the 
Collar bones,the fermen and ribs. 
But that thefe parts may be the more eafily underftood, wee muft firt know what 
abone is, and whence the differences thereof are drawne, 
WhatsBone — Therefore aboncisa part of our body moft terreftriall, cold, dry, hard, wanting 
all manifeft fente ifthe teethbe excepted. 
I {aid manifeft fenfe, that youmay underftand that the parts have a double 
EP of touching , the one manifeft, fuch as refides in the fleth, skin, membranes, nerves, 
and certaine other parts; the other obfcure, yet which may {office 
Gifcerne the helping and hurting taGtile qualityes , fuch fenfe the bowels and bones 
have; for very {mall fibers of the nerves arc difleminated to thefe parts by mediation 
of their coat, or membrane, I fay fo fmall , thar they canne icarce be difcerned by 
the eyes , unlefle (as Galen faith) by plucking fuch coats away from the parts. “st 


= 


A double fenfe 


name oO 
ether b 

But 
mediati 
Collar 
the jugi 
Grittle 
duéion 

Fort 
45 
and ofa 
ruption 
be asai 

The I 
feé ribs 
rothe ve 
Way and 
by griil! 
Done , ; 
wertebra 


Thed 


not be b: 
{ftomack 


_ their rex 


brokens 
fipne of | 
their bo: 


flernon,ai 


cavity 
the 


| 
Bur 
{mall 
{o 
| the bo 
| Ww 
nourilr 
The 
phy fe 
oumbe 
| demon 
viclese 
The 
| 
| 
! 
| 
ite 
of any oft 
“s p 
ait 
4% 
4 


on the 


buc 
migues 
bre{i- 
mnce of 
origi- 
to the 
arife, 
{feenc 


being 
¢ pro- 
sborne 
‘ne the 


fome 
d reats 
alland 

prefle 

ot ap- 
mvayes, 
raade 
d is 


iid now 
for re- 


ufcles 
planae 
ed and 
pifhed 
inning 
fieven 
aco dif- 


ethe 


what 
anting 


efen{e 
erves, 
fice to 
diation 
ed by 


But 


Bur it is no marvaile it mature would have thefe parts in like manner to have {uch the 
{mall veines, contrary to the lungs and moft parr of the Mufcles , onely to yeild bones have 


fo much nourifhment tothe part , as fhould be needfull ; for fecing the {ubftance of vanes 


che bones is cold, hard dente and folid,ic waftes the lefle, 

Wherefore they need not fo much bloed for their nourifhment , as the hot and 
fott parts; and befides the leficr bones have acither veines, nor artetics, but draw fit 
nourifhment,onely by the force of the atrraGtive faculty implanted in them. 


The differences of boncs aretaken from many things,as from their Apophy es, Epi- pe maese 


phyfes, griftles , necks, heads, folidity cavity minencics ,marrow,confifteace , bignes, bones may be 
number, figure, fire. Wee will profecute all thefe as they thal] offer them {elves in the 
demonfiration of the bones ; to which doctrine we will give a beginning atthe Cla- 

vicles or collar bones. 

The Clavicles are two very hard and folid bones, without any great or notable on 
cavity,fcitvate on cach fide betwixt the fide and upper part of the flernen and top of datas 
the fhoulder-blade, for the ftrength and itability of thcfe parts, whence they take the 
name of Clavicula Clavicles (from the Grecke xr<), which fignifies a key or any 
other bar or faftning of a coore.) They carry the fhape of a furgeons Levatory. 

But you muft nore that the Clavicles feemes to be faftned tothe flernon by the 
mediation of a grifticly bone, Moreover the {pace and cavity contained within the, 

Collar bones iscalled by the Latines Jaga/wm,by the French the upper farcw/:,0ecaufe 

che jugular veines pafle that way; it flicks to the upper proceffe of the fhoulderbya_. 
Griftle which Galen callsthe {mall griftle bone, although it be nothing elfe but a pro- Sao _ 
duGionofthe Osluzsl. - | 

For the flersen,which we {aid is framed of diverfe bones, as fomerimes 3, fomtimes 
Ay 5> 657, and fometimes 8, you muft note they are very fpongy and tull of pores, 
and of a farre fofrer confiftence thanthe coller bones, wherefore more fubject rocor- 
ruptionsbefides they are mutually joined by interpofitionof mufcles. Their ufe isto 
be asa (hieldte defend the vital parts. 

The Ribs are 24. in number,on each fide 12,feaven of thefe are called true or per- ***** 
fe&tribs, becaufe they make a circle at the one end joined tothe ferson , onthe other 
rothe vertebra’s;the other are called baftard or (hort ribs becaufe they fal hort in their 
way and come notto the fernom; but they are faftened onthe fore-fide to the fernon | 
by griftles and ligaments,but onthe back partto the tranfverle vertebra’s of the back- | 
bone , and co the fidesof thefaid vertebra’s. But the fhort ribs are onely knit to che 
vertebra s,wherctfore that part of the verteora’s is calied the root of the ribs, | 

The exteriour or fore -part of the Baftard or thort ribs is priftely, chat they fhould 
notbe broken, and tharthey might bethe eafter lifted up inthe diftenfiens of the Their cong. 
ftomack filled with meat.T hey are of a confiftence fufficiently hard,yet more cowards 8: 
their root, than at the fermen , where they come nearer together, and are more hardly 
broken; they are {mooth both within and withour, butin rhe midft rhey have fome 
figne of being double , or hollow to receive the veinesand arteryes which nourith 
their bony {ubdftance; they are fafhoned like a bow, their ufe is che fame with the 
flernon,and befidesto carry and ftrengthen the mu(cles ferving for refpiration. 


inthe 


C uap. V. 


The Anatomicall Adminiftration ofthe Sternon. 


) He Coate invefting the ribs,which the common Anatomifts call Pura, 
Fa] is thelaft of the containing parts of che Chelt,which becaufe ilies hid 
in the inner part cherof, it cannot be thowne unleffe by pulling afunder 


of the Sternon ; wherefore wee muft now fhew the manner of opening 

the Sternon, thathereby we may not violate the original] or inicrrion 

of any ofthe mufcles, Wherefore firft you muft underftand that he which will thew 
in their proper place rhe originall and infertion of the pe@orall mufcles, of the Ma/- 


teides, ofthe two mufcles of the bone Hysis, of the Mufcles fabelavit and intercar- 
tslagines 


B. 4. 
i 
he | 
| 


Lizz; 


Of the Vitall parts, 


sileginei, ought firft ofall to feparate all the pecorall mufcles fromthe fermon and 
the griftles from the truc ribs ; -n am the ligaments, next the bones themfelves, 
th true ribto the clavicies. 
the Afedisftinam ftretched under the frernen all the length there. 
of,he muft feperate the ffernon with his knife and bend it up to the clavicles, and there 
cut it,referving together with it the foure mufcles, thatis,thetwo Maftesdes and the 
two moving the bone Hyois,becaufe they either wholy or for the moft part arife from 
e ficrnon. 
Tatty the Clavicles being fomewhat thruft upwards, the Griftles muft om each 
fide be turned outwards towards the arme; that {othe containing parts of the chef 
may not onely lye opento veiw and be eafily fhewed , but alfo the mutfcles may bec 
contained in their place, untill they come to be fhewed in their order. 
And becaufe the Collar bones muft be lifted up veryhigh, that the recurrent 
nerves may be more eafily feene and the diftribution of the veines and arteries , the 
two {mall fubclavian mufcles one on cach fide muft bee fhowne by the way, who 
have their originall fromthe inner and fore part of the Clavicles,and an oblique def- 
cent to the fermen towards the eriftle of the firft rib. te 
For the Clavicles cannot be thus feparated, but that thefe mufcles muft be viola- 
tedand fpoiled. Alfo you may divide the #ernon in the midft,that you may thew the 
inward pectoral! mufcles whole , having feparated the mufcles which arife from the 
upper part. All whichthings being performed as they ought, we muft come to the 


Coat invefting the ribs and then to the as arifing from It. 


What the 


membrancins 


vefting the 
Ribs ts, 


Tes ariginal!. 


Whether, as 


thereisatwos 
fold pleurifie, 


foalloa 


double 


The Magni-< 


Sgure, 


Cuap, VI. 


Of thePleura, or coat invefing the Ribs, 


Tunica fabcoffalis, or coat invefting the ribs being the laft of the con- 
taining parts ofthe Cheft,is a large and abroad membrane anfwerable 
in proportion of ufe and actiontothe Peritomawm of the lower belly, Fox 
VE KE) asthe Peritoneum gencrally and particularly covers all the naturall parts, 
binding and holding them in their places, fo this coat invefts all the vitall parts in 
generall becaufe it is firetched overall the infide of the Cheft , but in particular, 
whilft it gives cach a coate from it felfe, 

It hath its originall from the Pertofcwms, (or as others will have it froma the pericrs- 
nium,) invefting the vertebra’s of the,Cheft at the roots ofthe ribs. VVherefore i: 
ftickes very fafttothe ribs , fcarce to be feparated, as alfo to all the parts bounding the 
Cheft,and contained in it. 

Vefalius reprehends Galen, becaute he {aid, that this was double on both fidés; 
yet Columbus defends Galen , and verily it is feene to be double in the inner part of 


the Cheft, under the ribs and the mufcles of the ribs, that in that {pace there may bec | 


way for the veines, arteryes and nerves. 

Some have made it two fold,and divided it into the internall and externall.as thol 
which have made two forts of pleurifyes, the true andbaftard; placing the external! 
above the Ribs and intercoftall mufcles ; but the internali underthe Ribs, mufCcles, 
Diaphragma and fernon. 

But we to thun ambiguity, intend only to profequute thofe things which are mani- 
feltto theeyes ; wherefore we fay that the ribs are lined on the infide with a double 
coate; one which immediatly and firmely ftickes tothem onevery fide called the 
Périeftiam,which is common tothemand other bones. 

The other which lyes upon that Periefivm andon the infide invefts all the ribs, 
whencc it is called the (abcoftalis tunica. The fubftance , temper and com pofure arc 
the fame, as in other membranes. The magnitude in length , as alfothe figure is the 
fame with the compafic of the inner part of the cheft; the thickneffe of it is very little. 

This coat is commonly called the Plewra from the name of the part which it covers 
or lines (for the Greekes callthe ribs ) and in like manner which happe?s 


betwixt 


nerves al 
e{pecial! 
It is 
coftall. fq 
and ther 
Pleura ha 
In that 
fufhicient 
the hart, i 
might arly 
empry, bi 
often hliel 
cuate by o 
Yetlg¢ 
humor is 
fide repreig 
other fide 
the moud 
nexion of | 
The ule 
lefc, that 
benefit of 
Andit 
not 


the lower 

It is of th 
from the J 
ference, b 
buted 
the 
baftardrib: 
of the loin 


interpofed 


(#24, 
| 14.0 Lis. 
| 
4 
| 
‘| 
per as ae 
it be ftre! 
ry, 
4 | 


con- 
erable 
For 
parts, 
Marts in 
icular, 


fore it 
ng the 


fidés: 
part of 
may bec 


s theic 
ernall 
uicles, 


mani- 
louble 
ed the 


Be ribs, 
mre arc 

is the 
jirele. 
avers 


ppens 


betwixt the Pertofiwam and this Plewra, is called either atrue orbaltard Pleurifye. 


Contained inthe a heft. a 


VII, 


Of the Medisfinum 


peake of the parts contained inthe Chef, feeing we have The (ubRance 
yhandied the containing , beginning with the Afedsaflinum as 
eing apart which in difle&ion firft prefents it felfe to our fight. The 

axe, Mediafiinnmis of the fame fubltance,thicknes scompofure, number, tem- 

per asthe Péewra, Forthe fubltance of the Medsafinwm is membranous, and though 

it be ftretched all the length of the Cheft, yer it is of a {mall thicknes, receiving veines 

nerves andarteryes from all the partsto which it is knit, like as the P/eare doth; but 

efpecially from the mamillary veffels defcending under the flernon, 

[It is in number one, but it is made of two membranes produced from the fub. 
coftall, for this afcending on each fide by the hollowneffe of the cheft tothe fernon. 
and then at right angles it is refieéted to the bodyes of the vertebra’s, whence the 
Pleura hath its originall, 

Inthar retleGtion there is fo much diftance between each membrane aS may bee 
fufficient to reccive 2 fingers, For otherwife, ecing that they cannot penctrace through 
the hart, it was fit each fide of the Péewra (hould turne to the Perscardinm, that {o they 
might arive at the appointed place without offence, Nether yet isthat{pace voidand « 
empty, Dut woven with many fmall nervous fibers; Co/wmbus adds, that, that place is 
often hiled with a certainc humor befides nature, which you may draw our, or eva- 
cuate by opening the fernon. 

Yeti would gladly learne of Columbus , by what fignes we may know that fuchan The figure. 
humor is conteined there, Forthe figure, the Medsafiinum withthe Plewra on each 
fide reprefents the figure of a Leather bottlc,whofe fhat lide is the whofe 
other fide the Pelwra; the bottome that partofthe p/ewra which is next the Midcitfe, 
the mouth the upper partofthe P/esrs at the ribs, We fhewed the ficeand con 
nexion of the Adediafiinum, when we declared its eriginall. 

The ufe thereof is to feparate the viral! parts, as it were into 2 cells, the rightand The af, 
lefc, that if peradventore it heppen that the onc be hurt, the creature may live by the 
benefit of the other. 

Aadit hath another ufe which isto prop and holdupthe Pericardinm, that it fall 
not uppon the heart with its waight, but tofled withthe motions ofthe heart and 
Chef&,it may move to this or that fide, 


Of the Diaphragma or Medriffe. 


Lthough the Midriffe may feeme to be accounted rather a part containing What che 
than contained, yet tor commodities fake we have deterred the demonttra. 


the lower part ofthe Cheft, | 

It isofthe fame fubftance, compofition and temper,asthe mufclesofthe Epigaftre tes 
4m, \Cis made of two coats the lower whereof is from the Perssenzum,and the upper eee 
from the Pleaya. Which gctting tothem flefh but not there, but intheir circum- ~ 
ference , by the benefit of the blood brought thither by the veines and arteries diftri- 
buted through it,turne into a mulcle,whofe middle is nervous and membranous, buc 
the extremityes by which itis inferted , one while flefhy as inthat partnext tothe 
baftard ribs;another while cetidonous,as where it touches the firft & fecond vertebra s 
ofthe loines, forit ends inthem by 2 tendons manifett enough. It isone inoumbcr, 


interpofed with ar oblique fice betwixt the naturall and vitall parts. 1 
At 


. 4. 
mand 4 
here. 
there 
dthe 
trom 
each 
cheft 
y bee | 
rrent 
5, the 
who 
e def-. 
viola- 
-w the 
the 
to the | 
| 
| 
— 
tionthereoftillnow. Therefore itis a mufcle round and long terminating 
| 


© onnexion, It hath connexion with the lower part of the fernon and fhort ribs, and thetwo fir, 


Quantity. 


Why the 
Diaphragma 
was called 
Phrenes, 


Of the Vitall parts, 


Lissg 


vertebra’s of the loines, but by its coats and veffels with the partsfrom whence j; 
ived them. 

"The extentthereof is equall to the compaffe of the lower part of the Cheft. The 
length of it is fromthe breft blade even to the firft and fecond vertebra of the loines, 
The thicknes is diverfe, for it is farthicker in its flefhy extremity, than in its nervoys 
original]. | ; 

The -t thereofis to helpethe expulfion ofthe Excrements by the mutu4}| 
affiftance of the Epigaffrick mutcles,but the chiefe ufe is for refpiration, of which iris 
one ofthe prime inftruments. This partitien the Ancients called Phrenes becaule the 
inflammation thereof caufed like fymptomes as the inflammation of the Brainc , by 
reafon of thelarge nerves on each {ide one which come to it direétly & primarily from 
the third fourth and fifth vertebra of the neck. This mufcle differs from other mufcles, 


{pecially in figure. It is preforated in three places, to giue way or paflage to the afcen. 


dent Hollow-veine, to the Artery 4orta,and the Gullet. 


Their fub- @ 
ftance. 
anticy, 
Lobes 
thereof, 


igure, 


Compofition. 


The flicking 
ofthe lungsto 


the Ribs, 


Their 
ment, 


C wap. IX. 
Of the Lungs. 


ing them up,by the weazon, with your mouth or a paire of bellowes. They arecom- 
pounded of a coate comming from the P/eara, whichon each fide receives fufficicnt 
umber of nerves from the fixth conjugation;and alfo of the Vena arteriefa comming 
from the right ventricle ofthe heart, andthe Arteria wenofa from the left,as fhall b« 
fhewed inthe Anatomy of the heart ; befides che ;4/pera arteria or VWVeazon com- 
ing from the throat, and .laftly its owne flefh, which is nothing elfe than che 
concretion of cholerick blood poured out like foame about the divifions of the fore- 
faid veflels,as we have {aid of other parts. 

The body of the Lungs is onc in number, unleffe you will divide it into two, by 
reafon of the varicty of its fite, becanfe the Lobes of the Lungs ftretched forth into 
the right & left fide doe almoft involve all the heart, that {o they may defend it againi 
the hardnes of the bones which are about it ; they aretyed to the heart , cheifly ar its 
bafis, butto the roots of the ribs and their vertebra’s by the coatit hath from thence; 
but by the vefiels tothefe parts from whence they proceed. But oft times prefent!y 
ftom the firft and naturall conformation they are bound to the circumference ef tlie 
ribs by certaine thin membranous produdtions which defcend from thence tothe 
Lungs,orherwaies they are tyed toethe ribs by the Plewra. 

The nourifhment of the Lungs is unliketothe nourishment ofether parts of the 
body ; foryoucknnot finda part equally rare , light and full ofaire , which may 0¢ 
aourifhed with blood equally thin and vaporous. In temper they incline more to hea 
than to cald , whether you have regard to their compolire of cholerick blood , 0 
their ufe,which is to prepare and alter the aire that it hurt not the heart by its coldn¢s. 
The Lungs is the{inftrument of voice and breathing by the Weazon or windpip¢. 
Forthe Lobcs are the inftruments of voice, ang ehe ligaments, of refpiration. But th 


uttering 
Nat 
are of t! 
the m 
fubfide 
almoft 
Anot 
Aire,atl 
And 
matter 
ftanceo 
itis coo} 
avoidin: 
motion 
depreil, 
_ perceiva 


empty it 
the Peri: 
It 
Mon con 
commin: 
douches! 
itis o 
membran 
ehe veilc! 
asevery 
The ul 
€ertaine n 
we fee co 
2nd 
and is hea 
the heart,# 
Cafesa man 
For chi 
blood thi 
humour gr 
from cheb 
thereofth 
Nature @ 


che vo! 
buté 
Hs 
tae 3 He Lungsare ofa foft fubftance and flefh, rare and like afponge, of 2 various a 
= colour pale red, their quantity is fufhciently large; for moft commonly they 
| tage are divided into 4 lobes difioined with amanifeft and vifible divifion , on 
cach fide two, whereby they may be the more eafily opened and contracted , anc —_— 
the aire may the better enter. | 
: Beflides alfo in large bodyes , who havé a very great cheft, there is found a fifth 
lobe,arifing from the fecond lobe of the right fide, asa cuthion, or bolfter to beare ux 
the hollow veine afcending from the midriffe to the heart. 
In little men who have afhoster Cheft , becaufe the Heart is fo neere as to touch Se S& 
the Diaphragm: this Lobe is not {eene, yet itisalwayes found in Dogges. | 
— The Lungs reprefent the figure or fhape of an Oxes foot, or hoof, for like it the; ea | ie 
| are thicker in their 64/s,but flenderer in their circumference, aS you may fee inblow no 
4 


2 Various 
nly they 
fion , on 
ed and 


ida fifth 
Beare up 


touch 


it they 
in blow- 
are com- 
ufticient 
sfhall be 
on 
han the 
he fore- 


wo, by 
orth inte 
t againft 
ifly at its 
thence; 
refently 
ce efthe 
e tothe 


_ perceive by the example ofa paire of Smitties bellowes. 


the 


Lavinx ot Throtle isthe chiefe inftrument of the voice,for the Weazon firlt prepares 

che voice forthe Throtle, in which it being infome meafure formed is pertected in 
the Pallate of the mouth, as inthe upper part ofalure, or fuch like inftramear, by 
the help of the Gargareor or uvula as acertaine quill to play withall, 

Butas long as one holds his breath, he cannot fpeak; for then the mufcles of the 
Laritx, Ribs, the Diaphragma and the Epigeftrick mufcles are prefled downe, whence 
proceeds a fuppreflion of the vocal! matter, which muft be feat forth, in making or 
uttering 2 voice. 

Nature would have the Lungs light for many reafons, the firft is that feeing they Whythelungs 
are ofthemfelves immoveable , they mightbe more obfequious and ready to follow **°"3"" 
the motion of the cheft, for when it is ftraitened , the Lungs are ftraitened and 
fubfide with it;and when it is dilated, they alfo are dilated, and {well {o big that they 
almoft fillup alltheupper capacity thereof, | 
Another caufe is that by this cheir rarity they might more eafily admit the entting 
Aire,at fuchtimes as they have much,orfuddaine neceffity, as in running a race. 

And laftly, chat in Pleurifies and other puruientabf{cefles of the Cheft the Pw or 
matter poured forth into the capacity of the Cheft may be fuckt in by the rare fub- 

{tance of the Lungs,and by that meanes the fooner fen forth and expetorated, 

The ufe of re{piration isto coole and temper the rageing heat of the Heart, For Then of®e- 
it is cooled in drawing in the breathby the coole aire, and in fending out thereof by Oesine 
avoiding the hot fuliginous vapour. Thereforethe Cheft performes two contrary 
motions, for whileft it isdilated ir drawes in the encompaffing aire , and whenit is 
depreiled it expels the fuliginous vapour of the Heart; which any one may calily 


Cu A Pe x . 
Ofthe Pericardium or nur/e of the Fleart. 


He Peritardéum is as it were the houfe of the Heart, which atifeing dt the whence ie 
bafis thereof (cither the ligamencs of the vertebra's fituate there or els the 5th*smarter 
sarees VClicls of the heart yeilding it matter) is ofanervous, thick and denfe {ub- 

ence without any fibers. Itretaines the figure ofthe Heart, and leaves aa 

empty {pace for the heart to performe its proper motions. Wherefore the bignes of 

the Pericardinm cxceedsthat ofthe heart. 

It confifts of a double coatc,one proper of which wee have fpoken , another com- 
mon coming from the piewra ; and allo of vcines, arteries and nerves; the vellels parc!y 
comming fromthe mamillary, partly from the Disphragma, chiefly there where it 
¢ouchesit; the nervescome on cach fide from the fixe conjugation. 

{tis onely one, placed aboutthe heart and annexed to itatthe Bafisthereof by its Number and 
membranes, totheoriginall of the Lungs,and the wertebra’s lying under them,and by “°°” 
the veficls to the parts from whence itreceivedthem, Itisof acoldand dry cempex 
asevery ‘membrancis, 

The ufethereof isto cover the heart , and preferve it inits native humidity, by a ve, 
ertaine naturall moyfture contained init, unles you had rather fay that the moifture 
we ice contained in the Pericardiu#s, is generated in it after death by the condenfarion 
and concretion of the {pirits, Although this feemes mot very likely; becaule it growes 
and is heaped up info great quantity in liveing bodyes, that it hinders the motion of 
theheart,and caufes {uch palpitation or violent beating thereof ; that it often fuffo- 
cafesa man, 

For this Palpitation happens alfo to hearty and flout men, whofe hartsare hot, but From whensa 
lood thin and waterith by reafon of fome infirmity of the ftomack or Liver,and this ne So ‘ 
mour may be generated of vapours which on every fide exhale into the perscardsams humor contci- 
from the blood boileing in the ventricules of the heart , where kept in by the denfaty pose 
thereof,they ture into yellowith moifture, as we fee it happens inan Alembcck. 
Nature would have the pericardium of adenfe and hard confiftence,that by aw The Cow? 
theree 


a 
we firft } 
NCNce jr 
| 
Cloines. | 
mutual) | 
ich itis 
aufethe | 
ily from 
paufcles, 
e af{cen- 
| 
| 
3 
softhe | 
pod,;,0 
we 
4 


thereof the heart might bee kept in better ftate ; for ifthe Pericardinm had betic 
bony, it would have madethe heart like iron by the continuall attrition ; on the 
contrary,if ithad beene foft and fungous, it would have made it fpongy and foft |i, 
the Lungs, 


XXX 


Of the Heart, 


gy rle Heart the chiefe manfion of the Soule,the organe of the vitalf faculty, 

gea-y psy the beginning of life, the fountaine of the vitall {pirits, & fo confequent!y 

ftancee Stag the contiouall nourifher of the vicall heate, the firft living and laft dying, 
1 re which becaufe it muft have a natural] motion of it felf, was made of a den{z 
folide and more compaé f{ubftance than any other part of the body. 

The three. flefh thereof is woven with three fortsoffibers, for it hath the right inthe 

forts of fibers inner part defcending from the ba/is into the point, that they might dilateit, and (o 

ofthe Heart. draw the blood from the hollow veine into the receptacles thereof , and the breath 
or aire frons the lungs by the Arteria venofa; it hath the tranfverfe without , which 
paffe through che rightat right angles, to contrac the Heart,and fo drive the vital! 
{pirits into the great Artery Aorta, and the cholericke bloodto the Lungs by the 
vena arteriofa, for their aourifhment; It hath the oblique in the midft to containe 
the Aire and blood drawne thither by the forementicned veffels uatill they be fuf- 
ficiently elaborate by the hear, 

Allthefe fibers doe their parts by contra@ting themfelues towards their original), 


What the 
heartis,and of 


that by this contraétion of the fibers the heart dilated becomes fhorter, but broader, 
no otherwife than it is made more long and narrow by the centra@ion of the tranf- 


verfe, but by the drawing of the a'stque it is leffened in that part which lookes to. 


wards the vertebra’s, which chictly appeares in the point thereof, 


Themagniuse is of an indifferent bignes , but yet in fome bigger, in fome lefle according to 


2 the diverfe eeraper of Cold or hor men, as wee noted inthe liver. 
> The hgure thereof is Pyramidall, that is,it is broader inthe ésfis, and narrower at 


hisround poiar. 
Compofition ompofced of the moft denfe ficth of all the body , by the affufion of blood at 


the divifions and foldiags of the veflels, and there concrete; as it happens alfo to the 
other Entrailes. For the blood being therea litle more dryed, than that which is con- 
crete for the miaking of the Liver,turnes into a flefhy fubftance snore denfe than the 
common fiefli,even asin hollow ulcers, when they come 02 cicatrize. 

The proper It haththe Coronall veines and arteryes, which it receives cither on the right fide 

from the hollow veioe, or on the left from the at the entrance of the Artery Aerts, 

The Nerves, YOu cannot by your Eye difcerne that the Heart bathany other Nervesthaa thole 
which come to it with the Plenra, 

Yet I have plainely enough obferved others in certaine beafts, which have great 

Hearts ,as fwine; they appeared feated under the fat which covers the veffels,and b¢/is 
of the heart, left the humid fubftance of thefe parts fhould be diffelved and diffipared 
by the burning heat ofthe Heart. WVhereby you may perceive that the beat of the 
heart is different from the Elementary heat , as that which fuffers fatto grow about 
this Entraile, where otherwife it doth not concrete unleffe by cold or a remiffe heat. 

which thing is chiefly worth admiration. 

ens The Heartis onealone, {cituate moft commonly upon the fourth Kertebra of the 
Cheft, which is in the midft of the Cheft. Yet fome thinke thatic inclines fome- 
whar to rhe left fide becaufe we there feele the motion or beating thereof; bur tha! 
happens by reafonof its left ventricle, which being it is filled with many fpirits 
and the beginning of the arteryes,it beats far more vehemently, than the right. Ie 

required that {cat by thedecreeef Nature, becaufethat Region is the moft{afe and 


as the right from the point of the heart towards the éa/is, whereby itcomes to paffe 


Lis 


armed, 
Lungs. 
Ithau 
poicing 1 
Veua 
the Arterg 
itis of 


to prepari 


for from 
ofthe lur 
she who!@ 
cween ail 
the vitall. 
there pre! 
inthe ver 
their mou 
productigg 
may be rc 
handle in 
Theref 
of three {i 
the motio: 
with orea 
trance th: 
have chat 
{tore the b 
of the heal 
only force 
that that ds 


drawesth 
the fame & 
Wohileft cha 
tracted it 


the 
in aterd 
of the hear 
of thewh@ 
caufe it wa 
on each fid® 
hollow vem 
Artery wi 
what ufeth 
itayes or p 
{o rapid 2 
fub tance 


He vq 


hollow vei 


i 
th Ao i] 
Pearcinge tl 
The sigh 
fiefh- the 
tfor th 
» 
* 


Faculty, 
quently 
dying, 
ma den{e 


mit inthe 
and fo 
» breath 
which 
he vital! 
by the 
ontaine 


be fuf- 


lower at 


®lood at 
Bo to the 
h iS COR- 


Bhan the 


ht fide 
Aerts, 
Ba thofe 


d bajis 
lipated 
tof the 
about 
tc heat. 


mepreat 


armed, and belides itis here on every fide covered asit were with the hands of the 

It hath connexion with the fore mentioned Vertebva’s, but by the parts com- Cosnezion; 

policing it, with thofe parts from whence ithath them; withthe Lungs by the 

Yens ateriofs, andthe Artersa venofa, andlaftly with all the parts of the body by 

the Arteries which it fends to them all. 


itis of ahotand moift temper, as every flefhy partis: The a@ion thereef is, firfk Temperana 


| to prepare the blood in its right ventricle, for the fit nourifhment of the Lungs, **°™ 


for from hence itisthat Galen faith; this right ventricle was made for the neceflity 

ofthe lungs. Secondly to generate the vitall {pirits in its left ventricle for the ufe of 
che whelebody. Butrhis {piric is nothing els than acertaine middle {ubftance be- wharthevi- 
ween aire and blood fit to preferve and carry thenative heat, wherefore itis named ‘llfpirisis. 
the vitall, as being the author and preferver of life. Intheinner parts ef the heart 

there prefent themfelves to our confideration the ventricles and the parts contained 

inthe vertriclesand betweenthem; fuchare the Ye/vule or valves , the veflels and 

their mouthes, their diftribution into the lungs, the wallor partition, and the two 
produétions or Eares of the heart; which becauie they aredoubrfull, whether they 

may be reckoned among{t the externall or internall partsof the heart , I will here 

handle in the firft place. 

Therefore thefe uricule er Eares are of afoftand nervous fubftance compact 
of three forts of fibers , that fo by their foftneffethey might the more cafily follow oftheheart, 
the motions ofthe heart, and fo breake the violence of the matters entring the heart 
with great force when it is dilated. For otherwife by their violent and abundant en- 
trance they might hurt the heart,and as it were overwhelme and {affocate it;bur they 
have that capacity which we fee given by nature,that fo they oaight as it were keep in 
ftore the bleod and aire, and then by litle and litle draw it forth for che ufe or necefity 
of the heart. But if any enquire, ift {ach matters may bedrawne into the heart by the 
only force of the Diaftolead fugam vacué, for avoiding of emptinefle , I will anfwere 
chat chat drawingin,or ateraction is caufed by the heat of the heart; which continual! 
drawesthefe matters to it no otherwife than a fire drawes the adjacent Aire, and 
che fame of a candle the tallow which is about the weake for nourifhments fake. 

Whileft the heart is dilated it drawesthe aire , whileft itis drawne togeather or con- 
tracted, it expells ie, This motion of the heart is ab{olurely maturall, asthe motion of 
the Lungs is animall. Some adde a third caufe of the attra@ion of the heart; to wir. 
the fimilitude of the whole fubftance. But inmy judgment, this rather takes place 
inthat attraGtion which is of bleod bythe coromales for the proper nourifhmenr 
of the heart,than in chat which is performed for attraction of matters for the benefit 
of the whole body. | | 

Thef¢ cares differ in quantity, for the right is far more capacious than the left be= magai; 
caufe it was made to receive a greater aboundance of matcer. They aretwo ia number, number, 
on each fide one, {cituate at the Bafis of the heart; The greater at the entrance of the 
hollow veine into the heart,the leffeatthe entrance of the and of the great 
Artery with which partsthey bothhave connexion. Wehave formerly declared 
what ufethey have; thatis,to break the violence of the matters , and befides to bee 
ilayes or propstothe Arterza venofa and great Atterye, which could not fuftaine 


{0 rapid and violent a motion as that of the Heart by reafon of their tenderneffc of 
fubftance, 


Of the ventricles of the Heart, 


T "He ventricles are in number two , oneach fide one , diftinguifhed with aflefhy {rset 


Partition {trong enotgh , having many holes inthe fuperficies , yet no where veateiculcs of 
pearcing through. P che Heart, 


The sight of thefe ventricles is the bigger and incompaffed with the fofter and carer Whythe righs 

ficth; the left is the leffer bur isengirt with athreefold more denfe and compact Se 

ficth;for the right ventricle was made for a place to receivethe blood brought bythe ous ro \ 

holiow veine , and for diftributing ofit, partly bythe veme arterio/a into the 
oO ts or 


° 
| » 
‘ 
| 
9 | 
* 
| 
> : 
} 
t 
| 
2 
| | 
| 
Dur 
4 
q 
f 


146 


Of the Vital part arts L te. 


Why the right 
yeatricicis. 
more cavaci- 
out and lelie 
compat, 


The aétion of 
the rigat 
Cricie, 


for their newrifhmenr, partly le by fiw eating thr ough the wal! 


partition, to yeild matter for the generation of the vira il! fpirics. 


Therefore wasnoc cedful! there fl ould be fo great. a quantity of this blood 


it was likewife ficchatthere fhould be a place proportio nable to receive that mat 


And becaule the blood which was to bee received in the night ventricle was or 


thicke, It was notlo needtull, thar the Heth tO containc it {ho uld be {o compact ; 
onthe contrary che arterious blood ana vital] {pirit have need of 219 deni 


ceptacle, for feare ¢ f wafting and left they thould vanilh into aire ; ra alt lef} 


roome that fothe heat being uni red m ight become th le {tron: oct:, and mor 


fully fet upo the elaboration cftbe blood and {pirits. 


Therefore the right ventricle of the heart isn nade for the orcparation of the ble: 


appoln nred for che now rifhme of th un: OS 5 and th tien of the  vitall {pir 
as the lungs are madc for the mitification, ‘or quallify ins of Which wor 


were necefiary, if the Phy ficali bee truc ; Th t like is nourihec 
Or 


asthe rare ar ipongious lungs with more ful stle blood - he fubftance’c 
srofie and denie with the veinous bloed as it fowe sfrom the Liver, that is groff 


And it ~ th its Cororall veines fromthe Hollowveine , that it might thenc 


“a Lie 


drawe as much as fhould be {urhcienr. 


The aStion 
the letr yen= 
tricie, 


he niesotrhe 
foure orifices 
of the bicart. 


"J he vaives 


low thcy 


bythe 


Aftion 


wits, 


Motion, 


Why there be 
onely two 
valves at the 
Artetiayenola 


But the left ventricle is for the perfeCting of the vitall 


the native he 


irit,: and tha 


Of the Ort aces ana Valves of the Heart 


cle;the greater of the two form er gives pafl age to the veine,¢ 


Here he fou re Orifices of the h eart,ewo intherighr, & as many in the left venti 


by the! ollow veine tothe heart; chelefler opens a pafia Ige tothe vena arteriofs o: 


the cholerick blood carryed in it for the ROUEHAMNCH 0 f the lunes 


/¢ 
The laro¢ rorrnetwoo other ina kes Wa ay med ({tribt uTION ofthe Artery Ao 
anc throug ob allthe | DC 5 eth e | fer eore {feond rec: 
eno fa, Or tt Ta fuligi gous V2 pours. Ank Becaufe it wasc 


venient that the matters {hould bee admitted into hei ir proper ventricies by th 


If, ventricle by the 


VW 


orifices. bv the Drafole, tov 
? 


£4 & Se 


‘reater orice. and 


* ’ 
ptf expciiea VY Che! frome tie ‘ir entric: eS D' the rore-menrioned orince:s 
heretore pature to e OF! ices hah put cle: venvaives , thatis tolayv. 
[ act iC rizice have three,and the lel (WO ‘T Lit i! 
Phefe valves differ many wayes; firft in action;for iome of them carry in matte: 
Lil¢ -ar hin: ler coat which ts Out that if Come not Dack dedi le: 
in fire. for thofe Ing } in have bran JGOKINE | 
¢ 
Whoicd carry out faye the within looking out, dnirdiyin heure, forthoiewh 
carry in,havea pyramid fal! heure , but chofe which hinderthe comming back aga 
for the moft part are fiefhy , or woven with ficthy fibers into certaine flethy ka 


ending towards t int of the heare. The latter are wholy membranous, 


diffe number, forthe rebe on y five WIC 9 1,00 
? 


VOotrici¢ at tHe ercater orifice, ari ointhne jeftat the leflerort! ce. thoie w! 
prohrbite rnc COM: Ty dane ventricle, tnree 


they diller in motion; “for the fiefhy ones are opencd in tor the brin: 
in Of biood and {pirit, and co ntrary wife are (hut ir the thatthey m 
caine eall orthe oreater part Or that they Drought The me 7) br: anOUs on the contr: 
are opened In the fiptole give paflage forth to the blood and {pirits over al! 
body , but hatin the that that which is excluded mii sht not How b: 

Into ‘the Heart. Bur you fha I obfeqve natnre hath placed ‘onely two va! 
atthe Orifice of the Arteria Penofa, becaufeir was needful] chat th | Cri 


fhould bee alwayes open, either wholy Orcertainely a third parte thereo! 


large b sie 
lying cro 

may 
branches at 
eachot the: 


into infinitc 
Thek le 
ftence, whi 
an arterye if 
cu: eto chao 
y 
ifthe wena a? 
which iS Car! 


cae ~ 
seu w/e 
i} 


foftne lea ace 
dilate ls 
mece witha: 
the left yventr: 
G Wen thin) 
verily the 
anew w 
there atteny 
to the 
in his treari; 


>» 


i >. 
4 LB ° 
he A 
nts 
~ 
? 
* 
onc 
J 
» 
walivio 
toc 
_=4 
TAR 
= 
Ale 
> 


— 


[1B Ae Contained in the (6 oft AF 


‘he Aire might continua ly be drawne into the heart by this orifice in infpiration,aad 


fennt forth by ex{piration in the contraction of the heart. Whiereby we may gather 
‘his, that thercis but one third past of that Aire we draw into the heart in breathing, 
fent forth againe in the forme Of vapour In ex{piration , becaufe nature would have 
byt one third part ofthe orifice tO ly open for its paflage out. Therefore thecr 
rjon oF breathing out, and the [yflote of the heart and arteryes , is fhorter than the in- 
(piration, fothat we may trucly fay that the inipiration, or drawing the breath in,1s 
equally {fo long as the ex{piration is together with rhe reft, which is in the middeft 
between the two motions. 


— 


C XII. 


Of the Difirioution ofthe Vena arteriofa, and the Artesia venola, 


tatgare Aving hitherto fhewed the originall of each of the veffels of the Heart, 
we mult now {pceake of their difiribution. The vena arteriofa, or thear- 
tcrious veine,and the arteréa venofa or the veinous artcrie cach procecding 
out of his proper ventricle, that is,theright and left, aredivided iatotwo The Artry 
large branches; oac of which goesto the rightand the other tothe jefthand, the one *2lve 
lying crofle wayes over the other, theveine alwaics riding overthearterye, as you veins 
may underitand better by the fightefyoureyes, than by reading of bookes, Thefe 
branches at their entrance of the lungs are divided into tyvo other large branches.and 
eachof them gocto his peculiar Lobe of thelungs; and thefé againe runne almoit 
into infinite other branches, difperfed in three places over the Lunes. 
Thefe veffels have acquired their names by reafon of that tran{mutation of cenft- 
itence, whereby the compofure of a veine degenerates intoanarterye, ancthatof , 1, 
an arterye into 2 veine,for the commodity oflife. For thisisa miracle of prudent na. reafon why 
ture to changethe coats of the veficls of the lungs; producing a veine whichinits 
body fhould imitate anarterye , andan arterye which fhould reprefenta veine: Por smaelinaes 
ifthe wena arteréofe fhould have retained its proper confiftence, thearteriousblood 
which is carried by it from the heart to nourifh the lungs , might by reafon of its fub- 
tility penetrate through,and flow away by reafon of the rarity ofthe veinous texture: 
and fo nature fhould never bave attained her conceivedend, that is,to nouriththe 
Lungs,by reafon of the continuall motion of their contraction and dilatation, 
Fornourifhment cannot be affimulatedto the part, unleffe it be put and cleave co 
it, Wherefor it was fit , that nature fhould make the body of this veine folid, ehat ir 
might be immoveable, unfhaken and {tubborne (in refpect of aveine which by its 
toftnefle would have been too obfequiousand ycilding to the agitation of the Lungs} 
that fo it might have nourifhment, which might be diffufed tnto all parts thereof, 
and which might neither bce drawne by its Diaffole, nor drivenback intothe heare 
by its fyffole. Butthe arterye hath the confiftence ofa veine , that by that veinous why thear- 
foftneffe according tothe neceffity of mature it might be the more readily contracted tery wes raade 
and dilated, to bring the Aire in and carry the vapours forth ofthe heart. Here wee 7" 
meet with a difficulty, which is,by what way the blood is carried out of che right into 
the left ventricle ofthe heart. | 
Gales thinkes that there be certaine holes ia the partition made forthat purpefe, Byfwhat way 
and verily there are fuch, but they are not perforated. Wherefore Columbus hath found 
Out anew way,which is that the blood is carried tothe lungs by the artertafs,and right into che 
there attenuated ; and carried from thence together with the aire by che Arseria. ‘Verte’; 
vewo(a tothe left ventricle of the heart ; this he writes truely very probablely, Boras 
in his treatife De Catarrbe hath found outa thirdway, to, witaveine, which he calls | 
Artcriarum nutrix, that is, The ourfe of the Arteryes , which creepes a litle Theveineca’- 
adove the Corénall to the right care of the Heart,and then goes into the left Md the narte 
care thereof, Bue yet Lam very much afraid, that this veine obferved by Roradus, is °°“ 
that veffell Obferved by ratopius,whereby the Vena arterialssis joined to the 40784, inisia 
Y Which all the vital! blood is carrycd for the forming and nourifhment of the lungs °/<r-arrerr= 


O 2 whileft 


4 A 
| 
‘ 
? 
| 
> 
& 
| 
ie 
‘ 
q 
4 
* 
& 
{ 
» 4 
* 
* 
*2 


148 the parts 


Gall liber ¢ de whileftthe infant is yetinthe wombe. Of which alfo Ga/em makes mention, but it had 
PATE AAPL laine hid from his time to this day,but that Fallipius raifed up the memory of it ap aine, 


L I 


The aiflril ution of theafcendent Hollow veine. 


: pa te Hollow veine rifeing out ofthe gibbouspart of the Liver, and re. 
34 iembling (according to Galen) the body of a tree,is divided into te no. 
table branches, but not of alike bignes. For the greater, by the hind parr 


Cal.dib.de 
of che Liver upon the back bone and by the way,receives certaine othe; 


form ej Pr ts Se 


he greater 
branch ofthe 


hollow veine. branches from the f{ubftance of the Liver which entred not into the great trunck with 
the reft, You may often fee this defcendent branch even to the backe bone upon 

which it lyes inthis its defcent, covered with the fubftance of the liver, fothat it may 

Open that branch proceeds not from that commontrunck together with the afcen. 

sper §= Gant, although indeed it alwayesdoth. But the lefler branch afcends to the uppe: 

branch ofthe parts,and is diftriduted after this manner following.For firft arifeing into the midriff 

isthelede. it beftowes two {mall veines upon it, on each fide one, which from that part are called 

Venepbrenice, PPvenica. But trom thence when tt arrivesat the right Eare ofthe Heart, it makesthe 

Corvates,  Coronales, the Coronallor Crowne veines , which compaffe the bafis of the heart in 

manner ofa Crowne. Thirdly entring fomewhat more deeply into its right Eare, in 

Vena Arteria jts greater part it produces the vena arteriofa. Fourthly lifted up above the heart, on 

the right fide it produces the veine 4zygos or fine yari(that is,without a fellow)which 

defcending tothe fourth rid, (reckoning trom above downcwards) nourifheth the 

intercoftall muicies and alfo the membranes of the 8 lower ribs, on both fides, fend- 

ing a branch into each of the muicles at the lower part of the rib, which may bee {uf 

ficicatfor their nourifhment. Befides allo oftentimes , efpecially in little men, this 

voine Azyzos nourithes all the fpaces berween all ehe ribs by the like branches, which 

it {ends inthe fame manner tothe foure upper ribs. Moreover alfo this Azyges fome- 

This 4eyro times, though but feldome,is found double,that is, on each fideone. Here you muft 

fometimestwo chicfiy obferve , that this veine after it hath nourifhed the {paces between the lower 

Flow themat- ribs, in its :emainder defcends under the Déapbragma and is joined on the left fide to 
anew peu! the Emulgent vein;by which it is manifeft how an Abfceffe may be critically evacu- 
vacnatedby ated by the urine, ina pleurifye. But this fame Azygos is more depreffed on the right 

— fide, and meets with the Vene /umbares, but efpecially with one of them, which goes 
downetothe thigh, whereby gathers that it isvery convenient inthe bes 
einnings of Pleurifycsto open the vena poplitis, the veine ofthe Ham. Fifthly above 
the dzsgos (when itis wanting there) it fends forth the branch called /ntercoftalis to 
the other {paces betweenthe upper ribs; although this is fometimes feene to come 
from the Axslares which Sy/vius calls the fabclavie, Sixtly it brings forth the 
Mamnsria. called, becaule in their greater part they run to rhe dugs between the fourth 
and fifth rids, forthe ules formerly mentioned; menand women have on cach fide one 

of thefe comming from the Sabclavie: They arefometimes found to proceed by 2 
certainecommon orifice from the hollow veine, before it be divided into the S#6- 

clavian branches, butit is rather in beafts thaninmen; thefe veines defcending by the 

fides of the fernex yeild nourifhment to the 2 inner mufcles of the cheft , to the 7 in- 

tercoftall mufcles of the true ribs,co the /fernon it (elfe and to its ligaments and griftles, 

as alloto the and the upper part of the right mufcles , and the adjacent 

Cerviest. parts. Seaventhly it produces the Cervécals which on both fides through the holes 
of the productions of the Vertebra’s of thenecke, afcends to the head, fending many 
{mall branches into the fpinall marrow through the holes by which the nerves pafle, 
and a!fo into the membranes, ligaments, griftles, bones, and neighbouring mufclcs. 
Rightly che A4#/calofa or mufculous, which alfo arifeing out of the Subclavie is deVi- 
maybeitly ded into two other branches;the one whereof geeth upon the breft to the paps, ou: 
spp vedio rithiag the foreraoft mufcles;wherefore in a baftard pleurifie Cupping glafles may 


rifie, be fitly applied in this place. 


awa 


Theuprer 


Bl): 


The 


ea 
, being gt 


L ] Be 4. ° 


The othe 
which 1s ca! 
which wee @ 
called, 
doth prete 
_Mrberia O 
by which! 
bafis ofthe 
along the 
mufcle {cic 
chroughthe 
mon Velfle!! 
Cacam (ort 
trothcholeg 


fently at h 
neck, bervg 
andother of 
fends cert2i 


The 


~ 
all » 
‘ 
4 
| LA 
if 
yvorac. 


me 
urth 
one 
a 
x 
the 
ine 
les, 


‘ent 
les 


le, 
les. 
VI- 


Bay 
rhe 


— 


Contained inthe (6 eft. 


The other branch defcendsto the upper muicies of the cheft , but {pecially to thar 


which iscalled Latésfimus , Thetenth isthe . The eleventh the Hameralis,of 
which wee will treat-in their place. The twelfth and laft is the /sewsares properly fo 
called, which istwofold, the internall and externall. The internall being the le flex 
doth prefently om both tides from this very beginning afcend by the fides of the afpera 
frteria or weazon evento the mouth and skull,ycildiag nourifhment to the parts 
by whichit pafles, asto the next membranesand nerves. Butwhen itcomesto the 
bafis of the Cranium it is divided into two branches, the greater whereof going back 
along the bafis of the Cranium to the hind part thereof, fending abranch tothe long 
mufcle {ciruate upon the afophagas, itentersthe Cvamium with the {mall Carotides 
rhroughthe hole of the nerves of the fixth canjugation, wherethey become one com- 
mon veffell. The lefler fending atlippe tothe organe of hearing by the hole calied 
cacam (or the blind) enters the and is{pent inthe thicker meminx nere 
tothe hole of the third and fourth conjugation of nerves. The external! fugular veine 


being greater and fairer, moft commonly fimple, yet fometimes double, either pre- 


fently at his beginning, or a little after, afcends fuperficially on beth fides of the 
neck, betweenthe broad muicle or flefhy pannicle, being there eafie to be difcerned, 
andother mutfcles f{citwate at thie fides of the neck, into which asaifo intothe skin it 
fends certaine branches for nourifhment. 


The Figure of the hokow Vel ne whole ana freea 4, The trunke ofthe hoi | 

from the ref) of the body. veine. the lowe: 

ASK AA, At this place of the 

iv Liver, 1s feated the left 

part ofthe veine,and di- 

ftribureth branches to 
the left fide, 

B, Sheweth how the 
trunke ef the hollow 
veine in the cheft (ro 
give way to the heart) 
is curved or bowed to 
the right hand. 

Betwix A.and B,that pare 
of the hollow veine 
whichis betwixt the otb 


andthe Midritte. 


from Which furcles doe 
ron in a manunto rhe 
purile of the heart, for 
the midriff and it dee 
srow together. 

D,T he orifice of the hol- 
low veine which grow- 
eth unto the heart, 


bous fide of rhe Liver 


C. the left midritle ycine 
called Phrenica fini(ira, 


the veine; dzyg4s or nen parill, defcending aleng 
O 3 


E,the crown-veine called 


coronaria, Which like a 
crowne compafleth the 
balis of the heart, and 
{prinkleth his fureles on 
the outiide therof as far 
asto the cone or point. 
FF, The crunke of 


the tiohe fide of the rackes 


Axclltiru, 
AT iS 
Intowhat 
Parts tuedesx 
énicrrva 
© OCS, 


@xter- 


into what 
partsthe Jugn- 
barvit externa 
gocs. 


boncs 


lag 
lid re 
Ith 
Hay 
{Cen 
=| 
“3 
Or 
hich 
hth 
| 
{ui 
this 
| hic | 
mui 
IW eT | 
act 
hi 
oh! 
BY Nevins \ 
STERN 


Of the Vitall parts Lie. 4: 


bones unto the loynes. GG, the lower intercoftall veines, to che branches of the veine 
Azygos,which go untothe diftances betwixt the ribs, & afford furcles unto the mufcles 
which lye uponthe ribs & the racke-bones, & the membranes of the cheft. the divi. 
fio of the hollow vein into two fubclavian trunks neare the Iugelum under the breft- 
bone.//, che {ubclavian branch tending on either {ide unto the arme , called by fome 
Axiharas. K,the upper intercofall veine which commonly fendeth three flips unto the 
diftances of the upper ribs,unto which the firft intercoftall veine fent no branches. 7.7, 
the de{cending mammary veine; this defcendeth under rhe brett-bone unte the right 
mu({cles of the Abdomen, & atfoordeth{urcles tothe diftances of the griftles of the truc 
ribs,tothe Mediaftinum,the mufcles that lye upon the breaft and the skin of the Abdo. 
mta.M,the coniunion of rhe mammary with the Epigaftricke vein afcending about 
the navill under the right mufcles. the veine ofthe necke called Cerwscalis aicending 
toward the Scull which alloweth furcles rothofe mufcles thar lye upon the neck.O,the 
veine called which 1s propagated with many furcles incothe muicles that oc- 
cupy the lower parts of the necke and the upper parts ofthe chett,P, Thor aeica {uperior, 
the upper chelt veine which goeth tothe mufcles lying uppon the cheft,to the skinne 
of that place and tothe dugges..2, the double Scapalerss diftributed into the hollow 
part of the fhoulderblade and the neighbour mutcles ; fo alfo betwixt 2 and R, fome- 
times {mall vernes doe reach unto the glandules thatare inthe arme-holes. R,Therac:. 
ca taferior running downward along the fides of the cheft, and efpecially diftributed 
intothe mufcle of the arme called Lats/sirwus.S,the inner lugular veine which entreth 
into the Scull after it hath beftowed fome furcles uppon the rough artery. 7, the ex- 
ternall Iugular veine. V. the divifion ofthis veine under the root of the eare.X.a branch 
ofthe external] lugular which goeth into the infide ofthe mouth, andis diverfly di- 
vided into the partstherein contained, exterior branch diftribored near the Fawces 
into the mufcles of the chops and the whole skinne ofthe head. Z.a portion of the 
branch, y ,,eaching unto the face. 4,4.the veine of the fore-head.4.a portion of it cree. 
ping through the temples «.* a propagationthat goeth unto rhe skin of the Nowle or 
Occspat.a a.the veine called Cephalica , or the externall veine of the arme which others 
call Mumeraviz, b. Mufcula fuperior, a propagation of the Cephatica veine which gocth 
untothe backward mufcles ofthe necke. Betwixt 6. and @. onthe backcfide jffueth 2 
branch from the Cephalica which paficth unto the outfide of the blade, and a portion 
thereof runneth berwixe the Heth and the skin, veine from the €ephalica which 
attaincth untothe cop of the {houlder, and is confumed inte the mufcle that elevateth 
or lifecth up the arme and into his skin, ¢, ¢. a {mall veine from the Cephalica difperfed 
through the skin and the mufcles ofthe arme. the divifion of the Cephalica into three 
parts. g.the firft branch reencth deep unto the mufcles which arife our of the exter- 
nal] Protuberation of the arme. 4,the fecond branch which geeth to make the seaiax 
veine, #. 4. the third branchrupning obliquely above the wand and the outfide of the 


acme,k.from this branch certaine circles are divided into the skin, the chiefe whereo! 


is matked withé, 4, thethird branch at the wrift which is joyned at /, with the branch 
of the Ba/i/ica marked with x. m,the Ba/iléca which onthe right hand is called Hepatica, 
on the left hand Lseweris.n.0.a branch of the Baftlica going to the heads of the mufeles 
of the cubit at #,and tothe mufclesthemfelvesate. p,anotable branch ofthe Ba/ilics 
running obliquely, and beftowing furcles upon che mufcles that iffue fromthe exter- 
nail protuberation. This branch defcendeth together with the fourth nerve. g, di- 
vilion of the Bafidrca into two branches, and that is noted with g,is ever accompanied 
with an arterye. /,abranch ofthis veine beftowed uponthe skinofthe arme. #¢,4 
branch of the Ba/ilica which together with the branch of the Cephasica marked with 
makes the mediana or middle veinc matked withs. #, abranch of the Ba/filics 
g0ing totheinnerheadofthearme. xx, abranch iffuing out of the former chat cree- 
peth along unto the wrift and coward the little finger conjoining it felfe with a branch 
ofthe Cephalica, y, Avecine running out untothe skinne atthe outfide of che cubic. 
Vpper %, A propagation iffuing out-of a branch of the Bafilics marked with /. 
Lower Abranchof the x, pocing tothe in-fide of the Arme. 4, The 
Medsan or common veine, °, The partition of the Median veine above the wrift: 


This divifion fhould fave beene made above +7. >. The External! branch 
of 


L 


of tht paru 
{mall brat 
the mide 
chumbeg 
noted 
parts {c 
ynto th 
the kidnics. 
refticies. 7. 
of che loyn 
coche mari 
10M AUT. 
cation 1s 0: 
of che - 
ap inn< 
branch 
An 
bone. tii 
the veine 4 
the neck o! 
is ioyNCd W 
the ihare b 
branch, 
branc! 
ro 
the oma 
fereth brane 
mary above 
Hing overth 
ofthe crural 
unto thes 
thigh. 
legge 
bone, 
his muicies 
ankle 
allo mu/cx. 
eles of the ¢ 
l, 
legge 
veine 
2 {urc 
by th 
skinne of th 
neth unco th 
veine intoal 
trunke 
tothe mule! 
the outfide. 


divide 
and running 
Untothe up; 


150 
/ 
* 
| 
— 
— 
and i 


he mufCles 
2 the divi. 
the brefz- 
d by fome 
the 
nches. ZZ, 
e the right 
of the true 
tthe Abdo- 
ing about 
| aicending 
ieck.O,the 
eS that oc- 
{uperior, 
the skinne 
he hollow 
1 R, fome- 
RT horaci- 
liftribured 
ch entreth 
7, the exe 
¥.abranch 
verfly di- 
the Fawces 
ion of the 
of it cree- 
Nowle or 
ich others 
lich goetrh 
ejilueth a 
a portion 
lita which 
-elevateth 
difperfed 
intothree 
the exter> 
he median 
ide ofthe 
m whereof 
he branch 
Hepatic4, 
mufoles 
le Bafslics’ 
€xter- 
9, di- 
mpanied 
me, #,2 
ked with 
¢ Bafilica 
hat cree- 
abranch 
he cubit, 
i with 
4, ihe 
he wrilft: 
branch 


eth a 


arts {cated under the liver. »» The fatty veine called Adspofs jinifira, which goeth 
yato the fatof the kidnics. Taetwo Emulgents which leade wheyey bloud unto 
the kidnics, 4 the two {permaticali veines leading the matter of the feede unto the 
tefticles. the beginning of the budden velleil called vas varicofom, =, rhe veines 
of the loynes called Lambares whici arc (eatin the kaots or knees coche rackcDones, 
roche marrow of the backe, to che mulcies that lies upon the lowes, and co the Pers- 
oc, the bifurcation of the hollow veine intothe fliacke branches, which bifur- 
cation isnot unlike Adufcula fuperior, atran{verle branch Poing wo the mufcles 
ot the Abdomen, andtothe Perstesenm. the divilton of the left lliacke veine,inte 
ap inner branch and anutter at’: media the utter propagation of the 
branch -, diftribured through the mutcles of the coxaand the skin of the buttockes. vs 
An inners propagation of the fame branch p which gocth unto the holes of the holy 
bone. ¢.the veine called Sacra, which gceth tothe upper holes of che bely bone. x ~, 
the veine Aypogaffrica ciltributed ro che bladder,co the mufeles of the fumdament,and 


the neck of che womb. « A veine ariling from the utter branch marked with which 
_isioyned with fome branches of the internail veine,neare the ho’es or perforations of 


the ihare bone. «+, A veine which when it hath pafled the fiiare bong diftribureth one 
branch intothe cup of the and to the of that place, Anorher {mall 
branch which runneth under the skione at the iolicde ofthe thigh, x, Theconerefle or 
meeting of the forefaid veine, with a branch marked with char.2, and dift: ‘buted in- 
to the legec.1, The Epigaffricke veinc,a propagation of the utter branch perforaring 
the Peritoxeam, whereto as alfoto the mutcles of the Abdomen, and the skinne it ot- 
fereth branches, the chiefe branch of this veine is joyned with the defcending mam. 
mary above thenavellat 44, 4, Padesda ad inner propagation of the branch -, run- 
ning overthwart unto the privitics. ©, Saphama or the ancle veine or the ianer branch 
ofthe crurall trunke which creepeth through the infide of the legee under che skinne 


unto the tops of the coes. a,the fir interior propagation of the Saphana offered to the - 


groine, =, The utter propagation thereof divided to the forelide or ourfide of the 
thigh, 11, The fecond propagation of the Sapbenz going to the firft muicle of the 
legge. y, Thethird propagation of the Saphena going to the skinne of the whirle- 
bone, and unto the hamme. The fourch propagation of the Saphena difperiing 
his mufcles forward and backward, ¥; Branches from this untoche foreflide of the 
inner ankle, tothe upper part ofthe foote, and toall the roes, ©, {/chsas minor called 
allo mufculs the utter branch of the cruralltrunke divided into the muf- 
cles of the coxendix,and to the skinne of that place. 1,2, And this alfo may be called 
mufculs.1, the cxterior and Ieffer which pafleth into fowe mufcles of the 
legge: 2, the interior greater and deeper unto the mufcles of che thigh. 3,4. The 
veine calied /oplites,avade of two crurall veines divided under the knee. 5, From rhis 
2{urcle isreached upward unto the skinne of the thigh. 6. But the greater part runnes 
by the bent of the knee under the skinne as farre as the heele. 7, Alfio rothe 
skinne of the outward ankle. 8, The veine called Saraéis ot calfe veine, hecaule it run- 
neth unto the mulcles that make the calfe of the legge. 9, Thediviftonot the Sural! 
veine into an exterior trunkeg, and ao interior 14010,11, Thedivifion of the eaterior 
trunke under the kace into an externall branch, which along the brace atraineth un- 
tothe aufcles of che foot 11, and in internall.12,13,12,23, Which defcending along 
the outlide of the legge tothe upper part of the. foote is cloven into divers branches, 
and in the backe of rhe foot mixeth it felfe with Popéstea, or the hamme veine 20.14, 
The interior branch of the Surall veine which:runneth «into the backlide of the leg. 
Abranch hereof defcending to the infideof the heele and the great coe, 
divided into divers furcles. 17; Uchias maior Muing oucotthe incernall crunke at 14, 
and running through the mufcles of the calfe. 18, A propagation hereof derived 
Unto the upper part of che toot affoording two furclestoevery toc. 19, the re main- 


der 
vc 


ithe veine of tht partution which goeth to the ouriide of the bead. 4, which 
{mall branch to the inticde. ‘ihe internall. branch under which toward 
the middle and the ring finger is ¢fpecially difpofed, The veine of the 
: thumbe difperfed into the mountenct or hillock which is conjoyned withthe branch 
noted with 7: the crunke of thebollow veine from which iflue branches upto the 
| 
| 
| 
| 
q 


of the insértrinke 14, behind the inner ankle, approcheth to the bottome of the 
foore and is confumed into all the toes, 20,the commixtion of the veine Pophtes with 
the furall or calfe- branch at 13. 


Wheretheex- But when it arives to the bafis of the lower part of the head, it is divided into 
More branches, one wherof is carricd to the mufcles of the bone Hyois,the Larinx, the 
fitly pened in CONGUE and the lower part of the tongue (in which place it 1s commonly opened in 
ofthe parts {Quinancies, and other inflammations of the mouth)and to the coate of the nofe. An- 
ofthemonth. Other is carried to the Dura mater, palling on both fides througha hole fituate under 
the bone wa ffordes, and befides, afeending tothe bone of the backe part of the fcull, 

it comes obliquely to the upper part of the future /embdosdes, where thefe branches 

meeting together, pafle into the reduplication of the Dara mater, deviding the fore- 

part of che braine, thar fo joinedasd united, they may make the torca/ar ; thethird 

afcendent is diftributed upon the backe part and bafis of the lower jaw, to the lippes, 

the fides of the nofe, and the mufcles thereof : and inlike manner to the greater cor- 

ner of the eves, to the forehead and other parts of the face, and at length by meeting 

rozether of many branches, it makes in the forchead the veine which ts called vene 

Venarsfs, oxvena fromtis, thatis, the forehead veine. The fourth, afcending by the glan- 
doles behind the cares, after it hath fent forth many branchestothem, is divided into 


two others, one whereof pafling before, and the other behind the care, are at length 


{pent inthe skinne of the head. The fifth and laft wandring over all the lower part of 


the head, going to the backe part thercof, makes the vema pups, which extended the 
length of the head by the fagitall furure,at the length goeth fo farre,that it mects with 
the vena front, which meeting is the caufe, thata veine opened in the forehead, is 
good in ericfes of the hinder parts of the head, and foon the contrary. But wee muft 
vena pupit, Obferve that in the of fome, the by one or more manifeft paflages 
fends {ome portion thereof tothe inner part of the head, forhatthe wena puges being 


opened may make revulfion of the matter which caufeth the internal! paines of the 
head. | 


XITII. 


The diftribution of the nerves, or finewes of the fixth coniugation. 


Ecaufe the Diftribution of the arteries cannot be well {hewed, unlefie wee 

€7\ violate thofe nerves which are carried over the Cheft, therefore before we 

bY} thew the diftribution of the arteries, we will as briefely as we can, profe- 
-cutethe diftribution of thefe nerves, 

Now the fixth conjugation brings forth three paire of nerves ; for paffing owt of 
the skull, as it: comes downe tothe Cheft, it by the way fends forth fome branches 
to certaine muicles of the necke, and to the three afeendant mufcles of the Zarisx 
on cach fide of the Sterwon and upon the clavicles, Then the remainder defcending in- 
tothe Chefk, isdivided on each fide into the{e three paire. The firft paire makes the 

Ramus Cofalis Ramus coftalis: The fecond, the Ramus recurress. The third paire , che Ramus flema- 
chicis. The Ramus coffalis, or coftall branch is fo called, becaufe defcending bythe 
toots of the ribs, even to the hely bone, and joyning themfelves to thefe which pro- 
ceede from each of the Vertebra’s of the {pine, they are carried toali the natu- 
tall parts, 

Reewrvens, Recurreusyor recarrentis alfo called becaule as it were farting up from the chef, 

it runs upwards againe, but thefe two Recurrent nerves doc not run backe from the 
fame place;butthe right from below theartery ,cailed by fome the axillarie, by others 

Subclavian, and the left from beneath the great artery ,defcending tothe natural 

parts. Bur cach of them oneach fide afcending along by the weazon,even to the L4- 
rinx.,and thea they infinuate themfelves by the wings of the Cartilago [cutsformes aii 

Thyroydes into the proper muflcles, which open and fhut the Larzax, 

By how much the nerves are nearer the originall, cowit, the braine, or fpinall 


Three paire of 
nerves of the 
fixe conjuga~ 


An anatomical 
A xtome, 


Of the Vitall parts, Lis: 4, 


fides of the 
inre the co: 
upper orif 
manners a0 
Animall ap 
or hurtful! 

al] che bod: 


Moreov: 
der of 
neceflary 
one, knit to 
of which 
lide. To w! 
thefe two {i 


lower parts 
2 2.Chapremm 
ther uncqu: 
forth no art 
the fubclav: 
Firft, i 
mufcles of t 
Second!: 
Mammiullar 
Thirdly, 
&&ions to th 
Fourthiyg 
forth the » 
tothe back« 
Fiftly, hag 
atteries, the 
blade, the « 
bous part o! 
Sixthly an 
tothe t 
veine, the refi 
The oebe: 
ribbe Of the ¢ 
fions it mak 
the right an 
nerve of thell 
pera Afteriac 
lide into 


152 
LO 
further 20! 
is the reaio 
WaiGs, 
of the 
cends to th 
| 
| 


4, 


1¢ of the 
With 


ided into 
rinx, thie 
ened In 
An- 
te under 
the {cul], 
ranches 
the fore- 
thethird 
lippes, 
ater cor- 
meeting 
vena 
he glan- 
into 
at length 


rpart of 


ided the 
ets with 
chead, is 

ec mutt 
paflages 
being 
ics of the 


effe wee 
‘fore we 
, profe- 


out of 
ranches 
Larinx 
ding in- 
the 

fiema- 
bythe 
Bch pro- 
ec 


e cheft, 
om the 
others 

aturall 
the La- 

sand 


{pinall 
arrow; 


L 13.4. 
marrow, they are Dy fo much the fofter. On the contrary, by how much they are 

further abfent from their originall, they are fo much the harder and ftronger, which 

isthe reafon, that Nature would have thefe recurrent nerves to runne backe againe 

upwards, thatio chey might be the &ronger to performe the motions of the mufcles A 
of the Lariax. But the Stomachitus or ftomacke-branch is fo called, becaufe it def- 
cends to the ftomacke or ventricle. For this branch deicending on both fides by the ***¥*s**F 
fides of the gullet, fends many branches from it into the inner {ubftance ef the lungs, maseediine 
into the coate thereof, into the Perscardinm and heart ; and chen comming into the girs. 
upper orifice of the ftomacke, it is pent in many branches, which folded afier divers 

manners and wayes, chicfely makes that mouth or ftomacke,which is the feare of the 
Animall apetite ( as they terme it ) and hunger, andthe judger of things convenient 
or hurtfull for the (komacke, Burt from thence they are diver! ely cifleminated over 
ql] che body of the ventricle. 

Moreover, the fame branch fends forth fome {mall branchesto the liver and blac 
der of the gall, giving each part by the way, fo much fenfe as fhould be fufficiently 
neceflary for it, Here you muft note, the ftomacke branch defcends on each fide 
one, knitto the gullet, and by the way they divide themfelves into two branches,cach 
of which goes tothe eppofite fide, that it may there joine it felfe to the nerve of that 
fide. To which purpofe the right is carried above the gullet the left below ir, fo that 


thefe two ftomaticke become toure, and againe thefe foure prefertly become two. 


Contained inthe 153 


Cuarp XY, 
. The divifion of the Arteries, 


8) He Artery arifing forth of the left ventricle of the heart, is prefently (rhe 

Bi? two Coronall arterics being firft fpred over the fubftance of the heart) divi- 

Seige ded into two unequal! branches, The greater whereof de{cends to the 

lower parts, being difiributed , as weformerly mentioned inthe third Booke, and yhere5 

2 2.Chaprer. The lefler alcending tothe upper parts, is againe divided into two o- breachofthe 
ther unequal] branches, the lefler of which afcending towards the left fide, fends ¢. — 


tervislefle 


forth no artery from it, untill it arive atthe firitrib of the Cheft, where it produces ther the right, 
the fubclavian artery, which is diftributed after rhe manner following. aa.” 


Firft, it produces the intercoftall, and by it imparts life ro the three intercoftal! ee 
tery.unte 


mufcles of the foure upper ribs, and to thencighbouring places. the, 
Secondly, it brings forth the Mammillary branch, which is diftributed asthe __! 


. 

Mammiillary veine is. 
Thirdly, the Cervicalis, which afcends alongthe necke by thetranfverfe produ- 2 

&ions to the Dura mater, being diftributed as the vena cervicales ss. ia 


Fourthly, paffing out of the Cheft, from the backe partof the Cheft,it fends 3. 
forth the mu/ealofa, whereby it gives life to the hinde mufcles of the necke, even 
to the backe part of the head, 

Fiftly, having wholy left the Cheft,1t fends forth the two Humeraria, or fhoulder 
arteries, the one whereof goes to the mufcles of the hollow part of the fhoulder iesnienenie 
blade, the other to the joint of the arme and the mufcles fituate there, and the gib- “*7*. 
bous part of the fhoulder blade, - 4 

Sixthly and laftly, it produces the Thoracies, which allo is twofold, forthe one a — 
goes to the fore mufcles of the Cheft, the other to the Latsfimus,as we {aidof the Thediftribus 
veine, the remnant of it makesthe Axéharés of that fide. 

The other greater branch likewife afcending by the right fide, even tg the firft vian Artery, 
tibbe ofthe Cheft, makes alfo the fubclavian of that fide, which befides thofe divi- 1 ee 


or fleepy arte« 


fions it makes on this Gde, like thofe of the left fide, hath alfo another which makes ries. ae 
the right and left Cerotides or fleepy arteries, which afcending undivided with a ¢."°"* 


nerve of the fixth conju gation and the internal jugular veine, by the fides of the Af- The diltribus 


lofa, 


ternall branch 


de into two branches, the one intcrnall, the other externall. The internall andgrea- oft Aleepy 


& 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| | 
| 
a¥tersaor windpipe, when they come to the they are divided OD Cach 


Lins 4, 


the Vitall parts, 


ter is fent to the Pharinx,Larinx and tongue; then entring intothe head by the long 
hole, and the backe part of the upper jaw, it fends many branches to the no{e, eyes, 
the infide of the remporall mufcles and tothe Craffz meninx, or Dura mater : the re- 
mainder of this branch going by the fide holes of the fame,that it might there make 
the Plexus admirabilisas we fee, And thenit is fpent upon the bafis of the braine a- 
bundantly diffufed over the tenuis meninx or Pia mater,and the membrane or Plexus 


Towhat parts Choroides. The externall or lefler branch of the fleepy arteries goes to the cheekes, 


the externall 
branch of the 
fleapy artery 

RITIVCS, 


the temples, and behind thecares; laftly, it {ends abranch into the long mufcle of 
the necke, with which the internall Iugular veine infinuates it felfe intothe Dura wa- 


ter, centring by the hole of the nerves of the fixth conjugation. 


The Figure of the Arterits. 


A. The orifice of the great Ar- 
teric,or the beginning there. 
of, where it iffucth out of the 
heart. 

B, Corewaria, fo called, becaufe 
like a crowne it compafleth 
the bafis of the heart. 

C. Thedivifion of tne great ar- 
teric inte two trunkes V 7, 

D.the left fubclavian climbing 

obliquely opward unto the ribs. 

E upper intercoftall artery, 
ora branch which beftoweth 
foure propagations unto the 
diftances of the lower rib. 

F, the aecke arterie which 
through the tranfverfe procei- 

\% {es of the srackebonesof the 
necke, attaineth to the feul!; 

beftowing furcles unto the 

marrew and his neighbons 
mufcles. 

G, the left Mammary artery 
running under the breaft- 
bone, and to the navell. 

It difributeth furcles to the 
Mediafinum, the mufcles of 
the breft,and of the Abdomen, 

H.Ms/fcale,or a branch attai- 
ning tothe backeward mufcles 
of the necke. 

I. the Scapular arteries whicl 
soe unto the hollowneffe of 
the blade, and of the mufcles 
that lic thereon, 


K, Hameraria which climbeth over the top of the flioulder. L. Téoracica faperior, 
{prinkled unto the forward mufcles of the Cheft. M. Thoracica snferier, which pafling 
along the fides of the Cheft, attaincth to the broad mufcles of the arme. N, the axilla- 
rie artery running out into the arme and affording branches unto the msuicles thereof, 
O. A branch reaching to the outfide of the cubit lying deepe. PP. Branches to the 
ioynt of the cubit with the arme. Qethe upper branch of the artery running along the 
Radias and offering {urcles tothethumbe, the fore-finger andthe middle finger. & 
A furcle creeping unto the outfide of the hand and led betwixt the firft bone 


of the thumbe and that of the after-wrift,fupporteth the fore-finger where = 


Lis.4- 


ule ro tecle 
Vilma and col 
= 
burion 0: (og 
efthe gical 
into X, 7, 
branches, ag 
thargica. 4, 
divitiod golm 
tO 
ofthe {fculi, t 
sion of thc bm 
ynderene ro 
backe brane 
the great arte 
arteries wit 
fered furcies 
Cheit. 
Superso7 , 
away, 
right and ic 
~ 


Cericaii 


rhe 
ding furcles 
lov. = Meg 


Dyfurcation 
what inwWarc 
the left Zia: 
branch. « A 
muicles whi 
propagarion 
womnb.»e. thc 
from the utt< 
rhe legce, 
and abourt! 
overthw art! 
CTH Als exter 
unto t 
withthe bra 
OA, Which 
that make 
hamme int 
confumed ip 
foote, and ip: 
of the foote 


But we mu 
fidesthat the 
heat inthe pai 
Therefore yo 
veines, 

But we unde 
it, or adheres 
(CIS appointed 


\ 
ey 
\ SS r 
A 
ASS 
We 
i \ 
\ \\ 
1 \\ 
\e 
| 


IBS 4, 


the long 
ie, eyes, 
: the re- 
remake 
raine a- 
or Plexus 
checkes, 
ufcle of 
“TA 


reat Ar. 
there- 
ut of the 


becaufe 
pafleth 


preat 
BV 2. 
limbing 
the ribs. 
lartery, 
eftoweth 
unto the 
rib. 
which 


sof the 
he {eull; 
nto the 
ighbous 


y artery 
br eait- 
ll. 


to the 


tbdomen,. 
mh attai- 
mufcles 


s which 
meffe of 
mufcles 


faperior, 
h pafling 
e axilla- 
thereof, 
sto the 
long the 
inger. & 
rit bone 
ere wee 

ufc 


e procei- 


fcles of 


~ 


— —_ 


L 13.4. Contained inthe (heft. 


ule to fecle the pulfe. S. the lower branch of the artery running along the 
yina and communicatiag furcles torhe little finger, the ring finger, and the middle 
Foeer. A little branch unto the muicles about the little finger. T. the difiri- 
bution of the upper and lower branches into the hand and the fingers V. the trrunke 
ofthe great artery aicending to the /ugwéam, and the divifion thereof in that place 
ito A, 1,2. X, the left Carotes or fleepy artery. 7, Subclavian dextra is divided into 
branches, as the right is divided, Z.Carotis dextra, calledalfo Apopleética and Li- 
thargica. 4, The divition of the left Carotis in the chops. 4, the exterior branch of chat 
divifion going into the face, the temples, aad behind the eares.¢, the inner branch 
going to the throttle, thechoppes and the tongue. d, the divifion hereof atthe batis 
ofthefcull, iatotwo Sranches which enter the of the Dare mater.e, A propiga- 
rion of the branch 6, unto the mufcles ofthe face. f the diftribution of the brauch 4. 
uaderethe roote of the care.g. the fore-brinch nercot creeping up the temples. 4, the 


backe branch runaing onthe backetide of the eare under the skinne the trunke of 


rhe great artery,defcending unto the {pondels of the backe. £44, the lower [wtercofsals 
fered furcles to the marrow, and to the avufcles that growrto thebacke and rothe 
Cheit. $, LUC artery Or Che Or Diaphragmatica. | Mefenterita 
Superior, but you mult mote that above 7%, the trunkeof the Cevtacall artery is taken 
away, icf the multitude of lerters in fo {mall a Table fhould breed obfcuritie. »,4, che 
right and left emulgents running from the Aorta or great artery unto the kidneies. 
ipermaticail arteries op either fide going to the tefticles. 2, the lower Mefen 
cericall arcery on Cue left below cipecialiy into the Coidlicke on tha 
fide.uu. the arteries called Lamdbares which runne overchware and likek 2 


ding furcles rothe mufcles that grow co rhe loynes , andtotie Perstoveam, the 
ower ; Mafculafuperior running into the fides of the abdomen and the mutcles. +7, the 
byfurcation of the great artery into two J/zacke crunkes, and at the fides, but fome- 
what inward are branches which make thofe that are called Sacre. T, che divifion of 
the left Zéscke trunke into an inner branch at andan utterate. ©, the ioner J//acke 
branch. » Mu/csl iafertor, the utter propagation of the inner branch eoins unto the 
muicles which cover the branch bone andthe Coxcsaix, Hypozaffrica, the inner 
propagation of the inner branch going to the bladder, the yard and thenecke of the 
womb.e, the umbilical! artery.s, che remainder of the branch afiuming an addit! 

fromthe utter branch neere¢, and {fo falling through the hole of the thare bone into 
the lege, +, Epspaftreca,ic afcendech upward right mufcle of the Abdomen, 
and about the navell is joyned with the Mammary artery, v, Pudenaa, It creeps 
overthwart the fhare bone. ¢, the CrarvaZ trunke without the Perstoneum, Mufculs 
cruralis exterior, 2Oing into the fore mulcles of the thigh. +, ALu/cals craralis srterior, 
soing unto the mufcles of the infide of the thigh. «. The conjun¢tion of this arteric 
withthe branches. 1. Pop4ste1, going to the mufcles on the backfide of the thigh. 
aa, which communicateth {mal! branches to the ioynt of the knee, andthe mufcles 
that make the calfe of the legge. ©,the divifion of the Crwra// attery under the 
hamme into three branches, A, Tibies extertor,it accompanicth the brace-bone, and is 
coniumed into the mufcles.= the chiefe part of the cvwra/artery.=.the upper & backer 


Tib1e4.114, the lower and backer 7#//ea running unto the upper fide of the foorc at 
%. % A propagation of the crural! artery going tothe inner and upper tide ef the 
foote, and (prigkling 3 branch unto the ankle. 2°, A propagation unto the lower par 


of the foote whicg atfordeth furcles ro each tues 


But we muft note that there be more veines in amans body, than arteries, and be- 
fidesthat the veines are farre thicker, For there isno necd for preferving the native 


heat in the parts them{elves, either of fomany, or fo large inftrumentsof that kinde, 
Therefore you may often finde veines without arteries, but never arteries without 
veines, 


But we underftand that an artery is acompaniou to a vein,not only when it touches 
it, OF adheres to it by common membranes, asufually it happens; bur a:fo when 
‘tts appointed together withthe veine for the ufe of che fame part. 


a 
; 
- 
| 
| 
| 


156 Of the Vitall parts, Lis: 4 
Crar.X VI. 
Of the Thymus, 
He 7 is a giandule of a foft, rare, and {pongeeus fubftance, of larg 
The is, Digneffe, firuate in the furtheft and higheft part of the Cheft, among tt the 
¢ divifions of the {ubclaviaa or Iugular veines and arteries, as yet contained 
The inthe Cheft, forthis ufe; thacitmight ferve thefe veffels for adefenc- 


i ne mag nis 


tudc, 


The fubftance 


Compofure, 


Why the batk 
part of the 
weazon is 
ligamentous, 


Why the fore- 
part is eriftice 


The number 
and fite. 

T he divifion 
of the weazon 
throuch the 
Lobes of the 
Lungs, 


againft the bony hardneffe of the Cheft, and befides, that as it were by this prep 0) 
fiay, the diffributions of thefe veffels might become the ftron per; for fowe {ee thar 
nature hath provided for others, efpecially fuch as are the more noble and wor- 
thy. This glandule appeares very large in beafts and young men, bat in fuchas have 
atrained to full growth itis much leffe, and {carfe to be {eene. 


Cuar. XVII. 


Of the Afpera Arteria, the rough Arterie or Weazen. 
Afpera Arteria ox \Veazon fecing it isthe inftrument of voiceand 
| {piration,is ofa griftly, ligamentous, aad wholy various fubftance. For if ir 
Base-ag had beene one rough, and continued bedy with the Larz#x or throttle, it 
[OVE could be neither dilated, nor comprefled ; opened, nor fhut, neither could 
it order the voice according to our defire. 

It is compofed of vcines from the internal] Iugular, of arteries arifing from the 
Carotides and of nerves proceeding from the Recurrent branch, ef a double mem- 
brane, of which the externall comesfrom the Peritoneum, the internall, which is 
the ftronger and woven with right fibers, fromthe inner coate of the mouth, the 
which iscommon with the inner coate of the e/ophagus or gullet. And alfo it confifts 
of round grifiles, yet not drawne intoa perfe& circle, compofed in manner ofa chan- 
nell, and mutually joined together in order, by the ligaments that proceede from 
their fidesandends. 

Thefe fame ligaments perfect the remnant of the circle of this 4/pera Arteriz, on 
that part next the gullet; which isthought to be done tothis end ; that that {oft- 
nefle of a ligament, might then give place; when wee {wallow harder and greater 
gobbetsof meate. Of the two forts of ligaments which are annexed to the griftles 
ofthe weazon, fome ticand faften together the rings or circles, which give meanes 
both to it, andthefe circles to be drawne out in length; otherfome bring thefe gri. 
files into a perfec circle, which alfo yeceldthem meanes of dilatation. Thefe liga- 
ments cover the inner {uperficies, but the griftles are placed withouwr, to refift the in 
curfion of externall injuries. But wee muftnote, that by this communion of th: 
inner coates of the weazonand gullet, wee reape this benefit in the commodioufnefi 
of the action, that one of thefe parts being deprefied, the other is lifted up, like a rope 
running in a wheele or pully. For thus whileft the gullet is depreft to {wallow any 
thing, the weazon is lifted up; and on the contrary when the ftomacke rifes up in 
vomiting, the weazon is depreft. It is onely one, and that feated betweene the Larinx 
(from which it takes its beginning ) and the lunges in which it ends; firft dividing it 
felfe into two large branches, the right and the left, and befides each of thefe entring 
into the fubftance of thic lungs, is againe divided into two othiers;to each of the Lobes 
one ; and to conclude,thefe be fubdivided into infinite others, through the fubftance 
of the Lobes. 

All thefe branches are griftlely even tothe ends. They are fituate betweene the 
ends of the Arteria venofa, and the arteriofa,that the entrance of the aire into the 
heart by the arter74 veno/a might be {peedier, as alfo the paflage our of the vapour, 
by the vewe arteriof4. Thus it hathconnexion with thefe in the ends, or utmoft parts 
thereof, but by the other parts compafling it, with the members from whence i* 

cakes 


L1n.4. 


rakesthem. 


gire to, and 


‘files rogeth 
orifiles tog 


Nerves of th 
the right ner 


R.A revolur 
gicat Actery. 


— 


In difeafes vel 
of the A/pers 
which we fee 
{carfe time to 


hand. 


\ 


| 
STG, a, 
4 od 
ty 
© 
3 4, 
7 
/ 
~ 
> 
4 
é * 
a 
* a * 
4 , 
j 
4 
~ 4 
‘ 
BAYES 


cakesthem. The tempcrament thereof is cold and drie, The aCioniscto carry the 


orifiles together. 


The Figure of the Afpera Arteria or Weazon, 
of large 


ngft the A. The orifice of the great 
ntained artery cut from the heart, 
defence a4. the coronal arteries of 
Drop or | theheart. 
fee that B.C. D. the divition of the 
nd wor- oles great artery ito two 
as have trunkes,the defcending C. 
the afcending D. 
i. the left axillarie, or {ub- 
clavian arteric. 


F. the right axillarie or 
clavian artery. 

G, the right Carotis or flees 
Die artery. 


ee 
— 
4 


rand re- H. the left Carots. 
For if it ; \rrmwer I, the trunke of the rough 
Bottle, it ( artery or weazon, 
er could : C K.L. The divifion of the 
y rough artery into two 
ora the ‘ branches, of which the 
le mem- right goes into the right, 
Shich is Bes and the left into the left 
uth, the <*4@ | fide of the lungs ; which 
con{ifts \} branches are againe fub- 
a chan- 5 \@ divided into many other. 
¢ from M. The head of the Rough 
/ Artery called the Larinx 
or Throttle, 
N.N. Certaine Glandules 
preater or Kernel!s atthe root of 
it. 
— OO. The right and lefe 
efe gri- | Nerves of the fixch and feventh conjugation. P. A Revolution of {mall branches of 
fe liga- the right nerve, to the right Axcllary Artery. QQ, The right Recurrent Nerve. 
the in- R.A revolution of fall branchesof the left netve unto the defcending trunke of the 
of the great Artery. SS.The left Recurrent Nerve. 
a rope 
ow any Cuar. XVIII. 
sup in 
Larinx : Of the Gullet. 
ich i ffage of the meat and drinke 
ntring He OF ophagus, or Guillet which is the pafiage of the FINKC, The fubftance 


is of a middle fubftance beeweene the fich and finewes, becaufe it 
confifls of one nervous membrane and another ficihy.The nervous is 
placed the innermoft,and is continued to the inncr Coate of the mouth 
4 even tothe Lipps ( whereby it comes to paife, )rhat the Lippstrembic 
in difeafes whichare ready to be judged by acriticall vomiting and to the inner part Accrenive™ 
of the 4/pera Arteria it confifts of right Fibers for the attraction of the meat, forceshereoé 


» Lobes 
bftance 


mene the 
nto che 


A garts which we {ee is fometimes fo quicke and forcible in hungry people, that they have 
ence it __ fearfe time to chaw it, before they find it, to be pluckt downe, as it were with a : 
takes | hand. The fiefhy Coate placed without is woven with tran{verfe fibers, to 
P ihe" 


, 
Be 15? 
| 
| | 
NY. 
| 


Lie; 4, 


The magni- 
tude. 
The figare, 
>ite, 


Temper and 
aétion, 


Why we can- 
not {up and 
blew at one 
tmne, 


the going ofthe meatintothe ftomacke, and for expulfion in vomiting and brea. 
kiag of winde. Thefetwo coats are continued with the two ceats of the ftomacke, 
and have the like fire. Befides,the Gullert hath thefe parts compofing it, asa veine 
from the Gate and Hollow afcendent veine,a nerve from the fixe conjugation, ap 
Artery from that which creepes alongft the bottome of the ftomacke with the ven 
Gaftrica, or elfe fromthe Arteryesafcending the hollow part therof ; but alfo befides 
all thefe veffels it may havea third coat fromthe membrane invefting ehe Ribs , o; 
Pleura. The magnitude of the Gullet is large enough, yet fome be bigger,fome Iefe 
according to the variety of bodyes. The figure of it is round, that fo it might be 
more lareeto {wallow meat,and Iefle fubje& to offence. Itis placed betweene the 
backe bone and the weazon from the roots of the tongue evento the ftomacke. Bur 
as it difcends alongfithe backe bone, when it comcsto the fourth Verteora of the 
Cheft,it turnestothe right fide,to give way to the great Artery Aorta and the de. 
{cendent Artery, then ic turnesco the lefe fide to the fiomacke,or mouthof the ven- 
tricle. Nature hath faftened it to the Disphragwa with {trong membranous tyes, 
left that, ific had laine uponthe Artery it fhould have hindred the paflage of the 
vitail {piritto the lower parts. It isonely one and that tyed to the forementioned 
parts, both by its veficis and membranes. It is of temper rather cold than hot, as al! 
thofe parts, which are more nervous than ficfhy, are. The A Gion thereof is to draw 
and carry downe the meat, and to caft forth {uch things by vomit as trouble the 
fiomacke, Here you muft note, that whileft we {wallow downe,the Gullet is drawne 
downewards,and the weazon upwards, whichis the caufe that wee cannot fup and 
blow, {wallow and breathe together at the fame inftant; which wee mutt thinke to 
happen by Gods fingular providence; to whofe name be glory for everlafting, 
Auten, 


The End of the fourth Booke. 


THE 


fountaine infini 
body, thatthe 
cerate the who 
By the head we 
tothe firft versal 
The beft houll 
thing to the fo! 
the goodnefle o 
Minate and (ham 
tace,forchead 
By the face 
the lower part c 
the Coronal! fu 
ot the eye even 
from the top of 
on cach fide tor 
a certai 
fyciently know; 
by the future 
Otalithefe 


— 
w 
( 
(7A 
(e 
4 
eT 
~ 
— 
* 
tsa 
PRS 
“~~ 
| 
| 
~ 


id brea. 
omacke 
a YCineé 
ion, an 
he Utha 
belides 
ibs > Or 

ce lefe 
ight be 
‘ene the 
ke. Bur 
of the 
the des 
ven~ 
US tyes, 
m: of the 
tioned 
t, as all} 
to draw 
ble the 
drawne 
up and 
to 


platting, 


FIF BOOKE 
THE ANIMALL 


parts contained the Head. 


Cuap, I. 


AGenerall defcription of the Head. 


Aving hitherto declared two general parts of mans bedy, 
that isthe Narurailand vitall,it is now fit to betake our {elves 
to the laft,that is,che Animall, beginning with the head. 

Whrefore we will firft define the head, then divide it into 
1i its parts;thirdly defcribe each of thefe parts; fourthly demon- 
- ftrate them after the order they offer them{clves to our fight 
in difleétion. 

The head rherefore is the feat of the fenfes, the Pallace and 
habitation of reafonand wifedome, from whenceas from a aa tne had 
fountaine infinite actions and commodities arife. It is feared above the reit of che in 
body, thatthe Animal! {piric from thence, as from atower,may governe and mo- 
derate the whole body,and performe all a@ions according to the preicript of nature. piace, 

By the head we underftand all that which is contained from the Crowne of the head 
to the firft vertebra of che neck. 

The beft figure of the head is round, lightly Hatted on each fide, extuberating fome= The goure, 
thing co the fore and hinde part thereof. For from hence is taken an argument of 
the goodnefle of the fenfes; on the contrary,thofe which are exactly round, or acu- 
minate ,and {harp towards the top, are notthought good. The head is devided into the 
face,forehead temples, the forepart,the crowne and hinde pare. 

By the face we underftand, whatfoever is contained between the Eye-browes and 
the lower part of the chin. By the forehcad,all the {pace from the eye-browes cven to 
the Coronall future. By thetemples, whatfoever is hollowed from the feifer Corner 
ofthe eye evenrotheeares. By the forepart of che head, whratf{oever runnes in length 
from the top of the forehead ,or the Coronall future,even tothe future Jembdosdes, anc 
oncach fide to the O/f4 petrofa,the ftony bones, or {caly futures. By the Crowne we 
Ugnific a certaine pointexquifitely in the midft of the Sagittal! future , whichis fat- 
fyciently knowne, By the Occiput or hindepart of the head, thar which ss cerminate 
dy the future dambdeides, and the firft vertebra of the neck. 


Ofallthefe partsthere be fome fimple, fomecompound , befides fume are con- 
taining 


The divilion 
ther cot. 


taining fome contained, Ofthe containing fome are common toall the parts of the | fobust it, anc 
ofthe © Head,astheskinne, the flefhy pannicle and pericramium; others ate proper to cert, ine | fpread througi 
head  -parts,as the Alefhy panicle tothe neck, face, forehead, and skincovering the Craninn with 
the common coat of the mufcles to the fat and face; Theskull and boththe Meninges | We mufth 
the braine. NS notable inthe { 


Thevarrs parts contained are the fubftance of the braine, the foure ventricules, and the 
conteined.  bOdyescontained in them, the aerves,the mamillary procefics; the Plexus Choroides Or 
Reve Admirabile the Glandula Baftlarissand others of which we will {peak hereafter. 
Wee mult now {peak of the containing parts beginning with the skinne; for thp 
order of teaching requires that we take our Exordiwm fromthe more fimple, but frp 
we will fay fome thing of the haires, 
What rhe The haire is nothing els than an excrement generated and formed of the mor: 
pairels —_ grofle and terrene portion of the fuperfluities of the third concoction, which could no: 


Theutetheree bewafted by infenfibletran{piration. The benefite ofit is, that con{uming the grofe 
Of, and fuliginous or footy excrements of the braine it becomes a cover and ernaamen 
for the head. 
This haire of the head and eyeebrowes have their eriginall from the firft confor. 
mation of the infant in the wombc, the reft ofthe haires of the body arife and grow The fecend : 
forihas the body growes and becomes more dry , of which fort are the haires which che crowne dev 
cover the Chin,armcholes, groines and other parts of our bodyes. length of ittro: 
Butthis third 
II, but as for the gr 
future, otherion 
Of the mufculous skinne of the Head, (commonly called the hairy ly the falfe & ff 
fealpe) and of the Pericranium. ; And oft time 
indeed the 
What the He skinne which covers the Scull, and iscovered withthe haire ; is farre Cornelius Celfes 
more flefhy ,thick,hard and dry than any other part of the body, efpecially chance, for that 
* Our Author Which wants haire. The skinne hath almoft the likecondition of quality TORCH 
as thofe parts have, which it doth fimply cover,butis as it were loft in them, ftaied asata Ci 
vs contoundes OF growAcinto one withthem , asin the lips and forehead with the ficthy pannicle, The other evs 
the pericramiz wherefore it isthere called mufculous; in other places it adheres to the griftles, as on bya fealy con). 
and pers- e Burt ran 
cfivm: bat the fides of the nofethrilles and corners of the Eyes, whereupon itis there called 


Vefalius oviftlely, ftronger: I 


andBars 


ghedinasdis. Athath connexion with the Pericraniam becaufe joined to it, it receives nerves from 
the firft and fecond vertebra of thenecke,and from the third conjugation of the brainc 
Whichare diffeminated through all its fubftance, whereby it comes to paffe , thar the po vol 
che prev contufions, and impoftumes that happen in or upon thisskinne,are not to be byehe “ or 
fiummok negieted. es. 
The * Pertcraniam (but lfappofeit flhould be the Perviofliwm ) isa moft thin mem: 
moft exquifite brane, which next and immediately covers all the bonesof the body, and this on the ey ~ a a 
Why the . ead iscalled by a peculiar name the Pericraninm by reafon of the excellency of the aa hich | 
woundstheree Or skull}, in other bones it is tearmed the Pertofiium: And as the Pericraninm 
te takes its originall fromthe Cra//a meninx propagating it felfe by certaine ftrings of ; P 
friends pee threds fent forth bythe futuresand holesofthe skull, foallother membranes of the renee 
efiwmoftne OOdy have their originall either from this Pericranium, or the meninx, fending 
fame nature. forth their productions, as well by the holes or paffages ofthe head, as by thefe ofthe fafe th Ne 
themem= ‘Pinal marrow or back bone it felfe, even tothe Holy bone. Whereby oe 
b nes pro- mee - y | 
cond. Of which this is an argument , for in what part foever of the body a membrane is tothat which ree 


Why when hurt, prefently the hurt or fenfe thereof comes tothe Craffameninx. For fo thole 


who have burt their litle Toe hurt whenthey {neefe, or cough,perccive an increafe of 


ishurtinany their paine,by the paffageehercofto the brainc. 


turcs,or el{e bec: 
ble fuch fra@ur 


isaffestedby full, by the powerof the quick fenfe which itisendued withall , andthe Perio” kinde of fraQure 


— ar doth the like inother bones. Befides it fuftaines and faftens by the futures the Craffs 
Pericraninm, tering co the skull; leaft it fhould fall by reafon of its weight uponthe Pia 
q 0 


Of them, leatt 


| ‘ 
| 
KS) 
| 
| 
| 
| 


IB. $, 
Its Of the 
certa ine 
Cratinns 
ninges fo 


2nd the 
Or bides or 

fafter. 

for the 

bur 


the more 
could nor 
he grofle 


Bit confor- 
nd grow 
which 


, 1s farre 
{pecially 
f quality 
inthem, 
pannicle, 
les, asen 
recalled 


ves from 
brainc 
that the 
orto be 


min 
son the 
cy of the 
SCT 
mirings of 
‘sof the 
{ending 
‘fe of the 


brane is 
fo thofe 
reafc of 


Contained inthe Head. 


fohurt it, and hinder the pullationof the braine and arteryes that are plenteoufly 
fread through both the Ademmges. Wherefore the Pericrariam hath mot firait 
connexion with the Cra//2 mensnx,becaule it takes the original) thence. 

We mutt thinke the fame of che other membranes of the body,which thing is very 
notable inthe folution of the continuity ofthe membranes. 


— 


Cuap. III, 


Of the Sutures; 


He Sutures do few or faften together the bonesofthe skull; thefebe That ue die 
5in number. Three are truce and legitimate, two falfeand {purious, "umber. 

%| fhe Coronal,the firlt of che cruc futures,is feated inthe forepart of the 
Nt head, defcending downewards overtwhare the forepart of the heal to 


{che midft of thecemples,ic is fo called, becaule Corol//e,that is, wreaths, 
crownes or garlands,are fet upon that place. 

The fecond is called the Sagztsats, or right future, as that which running through 
che crowne devides the head into two equall parts, as witha fraigth Jine,runniag rie 
length of ittrom the Coronallto the Lambdotdes or hinde future, 

Burthis third future Lambdozdes,is {o called becauleit represents this Capitall ereek 
letter Lambda, A. You mufi underftand this defcription of the futures, ncras 
but as for the greater part to be thus, For there be fome skulls that wane the foremost 
future, ‘otherfome the hind.& fomtimes fuch as have none of the true tutures,bui on- 
ly the falfe & {purious, But alfo you thal fomtimes find the Sagittai rorun to the pete, 

And ofttimesthere be three or foure futures in the backe partoftheheaa, iochat 
indeed the number of the futures is motcertaine. VVhich alfo we find obferved by 
Cornelius Celfes , where he writes , that Hippocrates was deceived by the fuceres by 
chance, for thar he conjetured thatthe bonesof the backe part of the head, were 
broken, becaufe his Probe thruft to the roughnes of the fecond future Lambdozdes, 
ftaied as at a Cleft made in the bone by a firoake. 

The other twoare called the falfe, Rony and {caly futures, by reafon they are made 
bya {caly conjun&ion of the bones, but nor by a toothed faw or combe-like con- 
nexion. But if any aske,why the head confifts not of one bone, that fo it might be the 


‘ftrongers I anfwere it is, that fo it might be the fafer both from internal! and external 


injuries. Forthe fcull being as it were the tunnel of the chymney of this humane fa- 
brick,to which all the {moky vapours of the whole body alcend, if it had beene com- 
pofed of one bone, thefe vapours fhouid have had no pafiage fourth, 

Wherefore the grofler vapours pafle away by the faturcs , bur the more fubrile 

by the pores ofthe fcull; fome have their futures very open, Out others on the con- 
trary very clofe. 
_ Therefore nature hath otherwife compendioufly provided for fuch as want futures; 
For ithath made one or twoholes, fometwo fingers bredth from the Lambaaides , 
through which the Vene pups enters into the skull, and they are of that largenes the: 
yOu may put a points tagge into them,that fo the vapours may have free paflage forth, 
otherwife there would be danger of death; thus nature hath beene careful to vrovide 
tor man againft internall injuries;and in like manner againft externall,for ic hath made 
the head to confift ofdiverfe bones, that when one bone is broken the other may be 
lafe.the violence of the ftroak being ftayed in the divifion of the bones. 

Whereby you may know, thatifthe skull chance tobe broken io the Oppoflite fide 
tothet which received the blow , that ithappenseither by reafon of the defect of Su- 
turcs,or elfe becaufe they are unperfed,and firmely clofed;otherwile it is 
ble fuch fraGtures fhould happen by reafon of the feparation of the bones, which 
breakes the violence of the blow thatit can goe nofurther. 

_ And certainely as itis rare to find askull without Sutures, {0 it israre to find fuch 
kinde of fraQures. Therfore Chirurgions muft diligently obferve the Sutures and fice 
of them , leaft they bee deceived and take them for fractures , or unawares apply a 


Sorre (culls 
want Su ures, 


Why the (call 
confifts of ai 
vers bones, 


'n whatbodies 
and by what 
meanes the 
yeaa 
fometimes ena 
ters Inte the 
part, within 
thefeuyil, 


In what ment 
one partek 
the head being 
ftrikea,tng 
oppofite is 
breken, 


{ LO! 
OG 
ieee ) 
| 
| 
| 
4 
| 
igs hure | 
Craffs 
10 


162 


Why wemutt Trepante them,whence by breaking the veines,arteryesand nervous fibers by which, 

te the the internal! parts communicate with the externall,there may enfue increafe of paine 

Sutures, a violent defi uxion of blood upon the Craffa meninn ; and the falling thereof upey 
the braine , (the fibers being broken by which it ftuck to the Perisraninm) and fo con, 
fequently a deadly interception of the pulfation of the Braine. 


— 


Crap. IITI, 


Of the Cranium, or Skull, 


He Cranium, or Skull covering the braine like an Helmet, is compofed and 


Whatthe 


T confifts of feaven bones , of which fome are more denfe, thick and hard 
than other fome, The Firft is the Os oecspstus, ox Nowle bone feated in the 
Why the Sa" back part of the head ,more hard and thicke than the reft, becaufe we want 


nowle bone 


is harder than hands and eyes bekind,whereby we may keep or fave our felves from falling. 


the hor , his bone is circumfcribed , or bounded by the future Lambdeides , andthe * 0, 
meanesby the 4/ilave, ‘The eminencies and asit were heads of thisbone are received into the firf 


~ — vertebra; for uponthis the head is turned forwards and backwards , by the force of 
thispiac 


wedge bone: foureteene and {trong ligaments,which firmely tye thefe heads of the 
bu ome bonein the cavityes of this firit vertebra, 
The Second bone of the skullisinthe forepart,and is called the Os corenale or 


makeita Sy 


trontis the forchead bone, it hath the fecond place in ftrength and thicknefle. is 


Thetore-head bounded by the Coronal future,and the ends of the wedgebone-in this forehead bone 
mone, next € there is often found a great cavity under the upper part of the eye-browes, filled with 
bone isharder aglucinous, grofle, vifcide and white matter or {ubftance, which is thought to helpe 


ean the relts claborate the aire for the fenfe of fmelling, 


beobteryed in © Chirurgions mutt take {peciall notice of this cavity,becaufe when the head chances 
sae forehead to be broken in that place,it may happen,that the fra@ure exceeds not the firft table. 


wherefore they being ignorant of this cavity,and moved with a falfe perfwafion tha 
they fee the braine, they may thinke the bone wholy broken, and to prefle the 
ninges, whereupon they will dilate the wound, apply a Trepan and other inftrumente 
to liftup the fecond table ofthe bone, without any need at all,and with the manife 
danger of the life of the patient. 


Offs parietala 


anderama te third place of denfity and thicknes; although this denfity and thicknes be different 


indiverfe places ofthem. Foron the upper part of the head, or crowne, (where that 
{ubftance turnes not toa bone inchildren untill they have all their teeth, {0 thatit 
feeles {oft in touching, andthrough it you may feele the beating of the braine) thefe 
bones are very tender, fothat ofttimes , they are no thicker thanonesnaile, that 
the moift and vapourous excrements of the braine, fhutup where the greater portion 
of the braine refides,may havea freer paflage by the Braines Diaffole and Sy/tele. Theis 
two {quarebones arc bounded above with the Sagittal {urure, below with che fcaly. 
on the forepart with the coronall, and on the hinde part with the Lambdozdes. 
Offs petrofajor ~The fifth and fixth bone of the skull are the rwo Offa petrofe ftony or {caly bones 
muc(caly bones which are next to theformer in firength.They are bounded with the fal{e or baftard 
Suture,and with part of the Lambdozdes and wedgebone. 
os spbencides, feaventh is the Os /phemosdes, bafilare or Cunesforme that is,the wedgebone . It 
or the wedges 35 called Bafilare, becaufe itis as it were the Bafis of the head. To this the reft of rhe 


pane bones of the head are fitly faftened in their places, This bone is bounded en each fide 
with the bones of the forehead, the fony bones, and bones of the Nowle and palate. 
The figure reprefents a Batte, and its procefles her wines. 

Oo: Ethmeides “There is Defidesthefc another bone at the Bafis of the forchead bone, into whic! 


the mamillary procefles end, the Greekes call it iSuoedts, the Latines Cribrofwm anc 
Spongiofam, the Spongy bone, becaufe it hath many holes in it not perforated in a di- 

rect paflage, aSina five, but winding and anfractuous , that the aire thould not by 

the torce of attraction prefently leap or afcend into the braine , and affect it wich its 

quality¢s, 


The third and fourth bones of the Skull are the Offa parsetatia, or Bregmatu, having 


qualityes , b 
(xe other litth 
oneach fide th 
Stapes OF 
chefewe willc 
Buralfoin 
fragments to 
sheir proper 
in the ule 
Verily he m 
che skull, for t! 
becaule the 
fent forthin fu 
in children mc 
age. Alfo the 
South have th 
Therefore 
Symptomes it 
by how much | 
forating Trepa 
nature,made c! 
caufes ; the fir 


bunches, or kn 
inJength, but 
there can be nc 
becauleas aro 
whatefoeever 
But wnthe cont 
only fuperficia 


A nother cau 


And the Chiru 
the D.tploe is3w! 
raine iiefhynciig 
have within it | 
paflage out for 


The upper 


it is the {lender 


veines and ard 
infide thereof) 
the cyes. VV h: 
worthy tobe 

For in great 
of the great cot 
happens a flux 
the Chirurgion 
he comes to 
leaning too kar 
whence convu! 
dy, by the hap 
Aandcling the w 


| 
| 

| 
| 


fed and 
hard 
‘din the 
Bev Want 


he * 
the firft 
force of 
Nowle 


le or Os 
¢. Itis 
mad bone 
Bled with 

to helpe 


chances 
ftrab le. 
that 
he Me. 
rumMents 
sanife ft 


haviag 


ifferent 
ere thac 
mo that it 
) thefe 
that fo 
Thele 
¢ {caly, 


bones 
baftard 


ne. It 
of the 
ch fide 


allate. 


which 
mand 
nadi- 
ot by 
vith its 
lityess 


Contained in the Head. I 63 
qualicyes , before it be elaborated by its lingring inthe way. There are befides 
xe other little bones lying hid in the ftony bones, atthe hole, or Auditory paflage; bones ot the 
oneach fide three, that isto fay, the or Anvill, the MaYeolws or H he (age. 
Stapes OF ftirrop, becanfe in their figure they reprefent thefe three things, the ufe of 
rhefewe willdeclare hercafter. : 

Butalfo in fome skuls there are found fome divifions of bones, as itwere collected 
fragments to the bignefie almoft of ones thumbe , furnifhed and diftinguifhed by 
cheir proper commiffures,or futures, which thing is very fit tobe knownto a Chyrur- 

ion in the ufe of a Trepan. 

Verily he may give a conjecture hercof, whileft he feparates the Pericratsiums from what 
the skull, for the perécramswm is with greater difficulty pluckt away fromthe futures 
pecaufe the Craffa meninx hath ftraiter connexion therewith by his nervotis fibers con, edt use, 
fent forthin {uch places. The Skuls in womenare fofterand thinner thanin men. and... 
in children more than in wemen, and in young men morcthen in men ofam iddle 
age. Alfo the Achiopians or Blackamoores,as alfoall the people inhabiting co the of vic 
South, have their {culles more hard and compofed with fewer futures. The(culisof 

Therefore as it iswrittenby Hppocrates,fuch ashave their Skulls the fofter. the cone 
Symptomes in fractures are more dangerous andto be feared inthem. But the sku 
by how much the fofter it is, by fo much it more eafily and readily yeilds to the per. and dente, 
forating Trepan. Morcover infome skuls, there bee bunches ftanding out befides \YoY" °™* 


tac exive 


nature, made cither round, or cornered, which the Chirurgion mutt obferye for cwo berancies be- 
caufes; the firftis forthe better confideration of a blow or fracture. For in thefe 
bunches, or knots, the folution of the continuity cannot be, if icfeeme to be frerched ‘ome tcu'ls. 
inJength, but that the wound muff penetrate to the inner parts. Forinaround body 

there can be no long wound; butit muft be deepe, by the weapon forced the deepe re 

becaufe as around body touches a plaine but oncly z#pando ina prick or point , fo 
whatefoeever falls only lightly or fuperficially upon it, onely touches a point thereof. 

But onthe contrary along wound muft be upon a plaine furface , which maybe but 

only fuperficiall, 

A nother caufe is, becaufe fuch bunches change the figure and fite of the Sutures, The fite and 
And the Chirurgion muft note that the skuls hath two tables, in the midft whereof preg 
the D.iploe isswhich is a {pongy fubftanceinto which many veinesandarteryes&acer- 
raine idefhyneffe are inferted, that the skull fhould not be fo heavy, and that it might 
have within it felfe provifion forthe lifethereof; and laftly that there might be freer 
paflage out for the fuliginous vapours of the braine. 

The upper table is thicker,denfer,ftronger and {moother than the lower. For this as 
itisthe flenderer, {0 itisthe more unequall’, that itmay give place torhe internal! 

veines and arteryes (which make a manifeft impreffion into the fecond table onthe 
infide thereof) from which branches enter into the skull by the holes which conraine 
theeyes. Which thing faftens the Craffe meninx tothe skull, and istherefore very 
worthy tobe obferved. 
Forin great contufions when no fracture or fiflure appeares in the skull by réafor There may bs 
of the great concuffion or fhaking of the braine,thefe veficls are often broken whence * 


ture of th 


happens a flux ofblood between the skull and membranes, and laftly death, Bur it is fit yettells of the 


the Chirurgion take good heed to the tender and foft {ubftance of the Dip/ee,that when rine with 


he comes to it,having pafled the firft rable, he may carefully ufc bis Trepan, leaft by aure of the 
icaning too kard, it run in too violently, and hurt the membranes lying underneath it, CY 
whence convulfion and death would follow. To which danger | have tound a reme- had in theute 


dy, by the happy invention ofa Trepan, as I willhercafter more at large declare in of tae 2 repan 
Aandcling the wounds of the head. 


Cuwa 


* de 
¥ Which 
pf Paine 
~ 
of upen 
lo 
| 
| 
| 


Why the bone 
Ethmosdes is 
perforated, 


The conf- 
ftence ofthe 
Cralla mcninx 


The ult 


Whar che 
Torcular is. 


One part of 
the braine be- 
ing hurt the 
other keepes 
the creature 
alive. 


"The con{ie 
ftence ot che 
Piamater, | 


The fenle of 
the 


Of the Animall parts 


C wap. V, 


Of the Meninges, that is the two membranes called 
Dura Mater ava Pia Mater. 


ial He Craffa meninx is onc of the firft and principall membranes of the body. 
: 

fo, itgocs forth by the futures and the holes ef the nerves that proceed our 

Oftheskull ; andit paffes forth by the bone Ethmesdes perforated for thar 

gees purpelc, to carry {mels tothe Braine, and purge it of excrementitious hu. 
mors. This fame meninx invetts the inncr coatc of the Nofe;alfo it pafles forth 
ofthe great hole through which the {pinall marrow paiies, vefted with this Crafa me- 
winx, withallthe nervesand membranes. For which caufe , if any membrane in the 
whole body be hurt ;by reafon of that continuation which it hath with the Mesinges, 
it ftraight communicates the hurtto the headby confent. 

The Craffa meninx isthicker and harder than all other membranes inthe body: 
whereupon it hath gorthe name of the Dura mater,befides allo it begirts, produces, 
and defends the other membranes. , 

The ufe of it is to involue all the braine, and to keepe it when it is dilated, that 
it be not hurt by the hardnefle of the Scull. For thecourfe of nature is {uch, that it 
alwayes places fome third thing of a middle nature, betwixttwo contraryes. Allo 
the Cra//4 meninx, yeelds another commodity, which is, that it carryes the veines 
and arteryesentring the Scullfora long fpace. Forthcy infinuatethemfelves into 
that part,where the duplicated or folded Afeminges {eparate the braine from the Cere- 
beliwm, and fo from thence they are led by the fides of the Cerebellum, untill they 
come, as it were,to the teppe thereof; where being united they infinuate them- 
{elves into that other part of the Craf/a meninx, where in like manner being dupii- 
cated and doubled, it partsthe braine at the top into theright and left; Thefe unired 
veines run in a direc paflage even to the fore-head, after the manner of the Sacit- 
tall future; They have called this paflage of the mutually infolded veines,the Torcw- 
lar or Prefie ,becaufe the blood which nourifhes the braine is prefled and drops 
from thence by the infinite mouthes of thefe {mall veines. Therefore alfo here 
is another ufe of the Cra//a meninx,to diftisguifh the braine by its duplication,being 
it thrufts it felfe deepe into its body, intotwo parts, the fore and hind, and prefent- 
ly to feparate the fame into the right and left ;that one part being hurt, the other 
may remaince fafe and found, performing its duty to the creature, as we [ee in fome 
thathave the Palfey. Co/wwbus obferved that this A4eninx was double, and verily | 
have found ictrue by my ownce fight, 

Theother Adesinx or membrane of the braine, called Pia mater, ismoft flende: 
interchafed with divers veines and arteryes, for its owne and the braines nourifh- 
ment andlife. This doth not onely involve the Braine, as the Cra//4 meninx doth, 
butalfomore deeply penctrates into. the anfrauous paflages thereof, that it may 
every wherejoyne and bind itto it felfe, not cafily to be drawne from thence, by 
many {mallfiberswhereby it defcends even to the cavities of the ventricles there- 
of. Wherefore you muft fee it abfolutely in the ficeaswee have mentioned, and 
not plucke it away ualefie with the fubftance of the Braine. 

Thefe membranes when they are hurt or affli€ted,caufe greivous and moft bitter 
torment and paine; wherefore I dare fay that thefe membranes are rather the 4u- 
thors of fenfe than the braine it felfe, becaufein difeafes ofthe Braine, asin che Le- 
thargie,the party affected is troubled with litle or ne fenfe of paine. 


C 


Ow 
NS the in 
Anin 
ther Crcature, 
the Braine cou 
coldand moift 
integrity and | 
fleepe and wa! 
ons, from wh: 
moved. 

The fi 
The 


braine. 
of the vellels ou 
branches of thefll 


164. IB. | 1 BeS> 
j 
A 
q 
y 
ie, 
a 
r 
4 
a 
d 
WA 
~ 
— 
‘tod 
A 
od! ’ 
= 
\\ 
> 
Wy @ 
SAY 
- 
= 
> 
DoS 
4 % “fy 4 
AX 
t 
iy 
‘| 


ody; 
ed out 
that 
mus bu. 
forth 


inthe 


body; 
uces, 


, that 
athat it 
Alfe 
veines 
e Cere- 
ll they 
them- 
dupli- 
united 
Sacit- 
OV 
drops 
o here 
,being 
mr cient- 
other 
{ome 
crily I 


lender 
UT ifh- 

doth, 
t may 
ce, 
therc- 
i, and 


bitter 


ie Le- 


HAP. 


Contained inthe Head. 


~ 


HA Pe V 
Of the Braine. 


g Ow followeth the Braine,the beginning of the nerves and voluntary motion, 
the inftrument of the firftand principal faculty of the Soule, that is, the 
Animalland Rationall, Man hath this partin greater plenty then any o- 
ther Creature, for it almoft fills the whole Scull. But it it fhould have filled it all, 
the Braine could not be moved, that is,dilated and contracted inthe Scull. Icis of a 
coldand moift Temperature. The laudibletemper of the braine is knowne by the 
integrity and perfection of the internall and external! fenfes, the indifferency of 
fleepe and waking, the Maturity or ripeneffe of judgment, and conftancy of opini- 
ons, from which, unleffe ic meet with better and more probable. it is not eafie to be 
moved. 
The firft fucure of the bead, as it appeares when the fcull istaken away. 
The fecond figure fhewing the Braine the feull and Dura matet being taken off. 


A The Dara meninx 
or thicke membrane. 

ccc. The third Sinus of 
thismembdranec. 

DD. The courfe of the 
veines as they runne 
through the membrane, 
orthe fecond veine of 
the braine. 

EE. The firft veine of the 

FFF.Certaine {mal veisies 


which perforate the 
fcull and reach to the 


perscraninm ot Scull- 
skin. 

GGG. Fibres of the Das 
meniax pafling through 
the Coronall Suture, 
which fibres make the 

HH. fibres pafling through 
the fagittall Suture. 

11.C vers paffing through 
the Lambdall Suture, 

K. A knub which ufeth to 
crow to the Sinus of the 
Scull. 

L.A cavitie in the fore- 
head bone. 

M.The Scull. 

N. The Pericratiam of 
Scull-skinne. 
 Fig,3, | 

AAA.A part of the Crafe 

menins dividing the 

braine. B2.the third Sinus of the fame Craf/e membrane opened, Cc, the beginning 
of the veflelsout of the third Simue into the Pia mater. DDD. the propagation of 


Wh at the 


braine is. 


The quantity 


Temper, 


‘ 
SFP NEB ll MH WAS 
| | 
| q 
| 
ie 
j 
tanches of thefe yeffels. EEE.the Psa mater or thin meninx immediately 
hg 
= 7 


166 the Animall parts 
fing the braine. 1 FFF. Certaine veflels running through the convolutions or branches bafis of che Pillat 
ofthe braine. GGG, Certaine branches of veines running through the fides of the orcleere partitit 
dura meninx. FHH.Thethicke membrane rclected downeward. This Septum 


the braine indi 


You fhall know the braine is more hott, by the quickneffe of the fenfes and animall {pirits c 

motions of the body, by fhortnefle of fleepe, the fuddaine conceiving of opinions and nicated, and yet 

change of them, by the flippery and failing memory, and laftly by cafily receiving Wherefore it 
hurt from hot things, asthe Sunneand Fire. Such as have acold braine, are flow may pafle ro che 
to learning, and to conceive other things, but they do not eafily put away their once admiration of ch 

conceived opinions. They have flow motion to ation, and are fleepy. ‘Thofe who [ have found the 


Th A&ion, 


Nutaber. 


have a dry braine,are alfo flow to learne ; for you fhall not eafily imprint any thine 
in dry bodyes, but they are moft conftant reteiners of thofe things they have once 
learned ; alfo the motions of their bodyes are quickeandnimble, Thofe who have 
a moift braine doc eafilylearne, but have an ill memory, fer with like facility as 
they admit the {pecies of things andimpriotthem in their minds, doe they fuffer 
them ro flide and flip our of it againe. So Clay doth eafily admit what Character or 
imprefhion foever you will, but the parts of this Clay which eafily gave way to this 
irapreffion, going together againe, mixes, obliterates and confoundsthe fame. There- 
fore the fenfes proceeding from a cold braine are dull, the motions flow, the fleepe 
profound. 

The AGion of the braine is to elaborate the Animall Spirit and neceffary fen{c 
ferving the whole boty, and to fubje@ ir felfe as aninftrument to the principall fa- 
culties, as to reafon. The braine istwofold, the fore and hinde-The hinde by reafon 
ofits {mallnefte is called the Cerebellum, (the litle or After-braine ), But the fore by 
reafon of its magnitude hathretained the abfolute name of the braine. Againe this 
fore-braine is two-fold,the right and left, parted by that depreflion, which wee 
formerly mentioned, of the Meinges into the body of the braine. But thisdivifion 
is not ro be here fo abfolutely taken, as choughthe Braine were exactly divided and 
feparated into fo many parts, bot in the fenfe,as we fay the Liver and Lungsare divi- 
ded apretry way, whereas at their Ba/is they have one continued body. The outward 
furface of the Braince is {eft, butrhe inward hard, callous and very fmooth:when on 
the contrary , the outward appeares indented and unequal! with many windings,and 
crefted as it were with many wormelike foldings. 


C uar. VII. 


according to 
wholy empry af 
any other eccalt 
alwaies to be fat 
Animall {piricst 
braine goc inros 
{pirit iniltructed 
from theformer 
and in like mar 
into the picuicars 


The Thir 


the fpinal!l marrc 
Ofthe ventricles and mamillary preceffes of the Braine. cle. 2K, The an: 
the wormy proc 
Or; the eafie dem onftration of the ventricles of the braine, it is convenient 
you cut away alarge portien thereof, and in your cutting obferve the 
sa blood {weating out of the pores of it. But befidesvitis fir you confider che 
blood, {pongy fub{tance by which the excrements of the braineare heaped up, 
The foure tobe prefently firained out,and {ent away by the hollow paffage. In the fubftance of 
the braine you muft obferve 4 ventricles, mutually conjoined by certaine paflages, by 
which the fpirits endued with the /pecies of things fenfible,may goc from one into 
Themarni, The firft and two greater, one on each fide are placed inthe upper braine. 
magni 
tudeoftne Lhe third is under them inthe middle-part of the braine. The fourth and laft at the 
upperveatris fore fide of the Cerebellum, towardsthe beginning of the {pinall marrow. The two 


Thefubhtance 
ofthe brainets 
porous and 


This Plexus 
folded with the c 
Nec. Thele vefi< 
Houri(hment to ti 
the Animall {piri 
this fame 
into the braine by 
Common waies fc 
€xcrements from 


formoftare extended the length way of the braine in the forme of a femicircle whol For thus 
hornes looke or bend outwards, They are {pacious and large, becaufe it was meet the oo Can penetra 
Spirits contained there together wich their excrements,fhould be there purified and ‘" ongly moving 
clenfed; but in other ventricles, the pure and already elaborate fpirits are onely re- exerements 


Part, fome are of a 
Sutures of the sky 


ceived, Thefe ventricles are white and fmooth in their inner fuperficies; but that 
each fide they have ao extuberancy at the midft of the femicircle , {cituate at os 
bafis 


4 
j 
- 
% 
4 
=a 


Contained in the Head, 


bafis ofthe Pillar of the middle ventricle towards the nofe under the Septum lucidum 
orcicere partition, fevering or parting in funder thefe two veatricles, 

This Septum /ucidum, or cleare or thin partition, is noching elfe than a portionof 1h: 
the braine indifferently folide, but very cleere, that fo through this partition the 
animall {pirits contained in thefe two ventricles may mutually paffe and bee commu- 
nicated, and yet no other grofler fubf{tance may peirce the thin denfity thereof. 

Wherefore it is not to be feared, that the water contained in one of the ventricles Why the 
may pafle tothe other through this partitio ,as Lhave oft times obferved to thegreat one 
admiration of the {petacors in the dead bodyes offuch as dyed of the Palf y,i which prefen:ly come 
{ have found the ventricle of that fide which was taken with the palfy much dilated, 7ungsss'* 
according to the quantity of the water contained therein, the other being cither ’ 
wholy empty and withour any;or certainly no fuller than in any other, dead through 
any other eccation,For fome affirme that there 1s a certaine kind of waterifh moifture 
alwaies to be found in the ventricles, which may be made by the condenfation of the 
Animall f{pirics by the force ofthe deadly cold. But thefe two firft ventricles of the 
braine goc into one common paflage, as both the bellowes of a fornace, whereby the 
{pirit inftructed with the fpecies of things gees into the under, or middle ventricle 
from theformer.[n thele fame firft ventricles the Plexus Choroides is to be conlidered, 
and in like manner the paflage by which the groficr excrements are driven or fent 


into the pituitary Glandule. 


The Third Figure reprefents the Cercbellum with tke 
wormy procefjes feparatea from it. 


ivifion 
and 
edivi- 
tward 
en On 
sand 


AB, The right and iefe 
part of the A fter-braine, 

CD, Theaaterior and po- 
feerior regions of the 
middle part ofthe After 
-braine. 

E, The wormy 
procefle. 

F, The poferier wormy 
proceile. 

GG, In thisplace the Af- 

ter-braine did grow to 
the fpinall marrow. The cavity inthe fpinall marrow maketh the forth ventri- 

cle. The anterior and poferior proceffes of the braine, called vermi-formes ox 
the wormy procefles. 


enient 
ve the This Plexus Chercides is nothing elfe, but a produdtion of the mater diverfly 
Bicr the folded with the mutuall implication of veincs and arterys woven in the formeofa 
ed up, Net. Theleveffels are of magnitude and capacity fuflicient, both to yeild life and 
nceof Houri{hment to that particleto which they are faftened , as alfo for the generation of | 
bes by Animall fpirits as which take fit matter from the veines firetched fourth into 
into this fame Plexus,the hinde artery and veine Torcular, and from the aireentring proce fi 
raine. intothe braine by the mammillary proceffes. Butthe mamillary procefics are certaiae 
at the common waies for conveyance of the aire and {mells into the braine,and carrying of 


erwo ©xcrements from the brainc. 

Ewhofe For thus in them who have the Catarrhe and €oréza or pofe,ncither theaire , nor 
et the mels can penetrate into the braine ; whence frequent {neefings enfue, the braine id 

md and ftrongly moving it felfeto the expulfion of that whichis troublefome to it. But of : 

rly re- _ the exerements of the braine , Whether bred there , or proceeding from fome other 

mhaton Patt, fome are of a fumide and vaporous nature which breathe infenfibly through the 

at the Sutures of the skull ; Others are grofle and vifcide,of which a great part is expelled 


bafis by 


169 
oches | 
the 
$ and : 
Sand 
‘ving 
flow 
once 
ewho 
thine 
orce 
» have 
lity as | 
{uffer 
‘ter or 
this 
[ here- 
fleepe 
ieni{e 
reaion 
xreby 
ne this 
wee 
i 
| 
| 
| 


by both thefe productions,or through each of them. Forthusin the Pofe you may | 


168 


fome who have one oftheir nofthrils ftopt, the other running, and fome who have > anddraw them 
both obftructed. The moft proper benefit of the two firft ventricles of the braine is tions have not 
| seam to entertaine the Phantafic as in 2 convenient {cat and habitation , feeing the minde have written, th: 
ventriclesof there eftimates and difpofes in order the fpecies of things brought in from the cx. Brgine, which 
the Braines ternal! {enfes, that fo it may reccive a true judgement of them from reafon which re. follow this oping 
fides in the middle ventricle. Girions. 
The feat of The third ventricle is feated betweene the hindermoft extremityes of the former The Mammi! 
ventricles , and the laft ventricle of the CerebeAwm . In this fixe parts prefent them. fame fubftan 
——— felvesto our confideration, rhat is the P/aMerdes or Arch, the Conartun, or pine Glan. hornes of the ur 
be confidered AUie,the Buttockes, wormelike productions, the Bafonand paflage which is from sy bones of thx 
init, this middle into the laft and hindemoft ventricle. The P/adosdes or arch is nothing els, carry chem intoll 
but the cover of the middle ventricle, refembling a roofe borne up with three ftayes counted nerves. 
or pillars,the one whereof is extended to che nofe under the Septams lactaam , the two 
Archis,and other on each fide one,looke towards the backe pare of the braine. This isthe reafon The Foi 
the ule therofe this fiz ure which is outwardly convexe and inwardly concave, to wit,that there 
might be free {pace for that motion which the Animall {pirit inwardly produces, and 
befides that it might more eafily fuftaine che burden of the braine lying upon it. Fo; 
an arched figure is the moft convenient of ail other to fuftaine a waight. 
What the The Conarium ox Pine glandule,is-a {mall Glandule of the fame fubftance with 
aes tat sr the braine, round and fomewhat long, like a pine Apple, from whence it bath the 
u. name; this Glandule is {cated over againfta {mall hole which defcends to the loweti 
ventricle, Ithath this ufe, ro ftrengrben the divifion of the veflells led chither with 
the production of the Pra mater for the generation of the animal] {pirits, and the life 
ani nourifhment of the braine. 
What the 


Natesor Buttocks are fubje@ed or placed nader Glandule, that is, bodies 

Of a folid and white {ubftance drawne outin length likea childs buttocks,efpecially 
in beafts, and cheifly in a fheepe. Thefe buttocks have fuch a folid fubftance, that 
fothey may kecpe open and free the paffage, or chaanell that runnes downe from 
the middletothe lower ventricle, by meanes of which the Braine participates with 
the Cerebellum, 

What the The worme isa produdtion of the Cerebellum or Afterebraine, to wit a por. 

wormeis. = tionof the fame being in the top or beginning and as it were in the entrance thereof, 
being like magy litlecircles or wheeles mutually knit together by flender mem- 
branes; and it isfo called becaule it refembles thefe thicke white wormes which are 
found inrottcnwood. Itdothas it were performe the cffice of a porter to the 
formerly mentioned paflage, that it may give way andentrance into the Cercbe//um 
to aneceflary quantity of {pirits, when need requires ; left thar, if they fhould ruth 
with a fuddaine violence intotheCerebedum, they might confound the imprinted 

_ notions of things tobe remembred. 

—— The Pe/vés or Balonis a paffage appointed forthe carrying away ofthe grofle ex 

is confounded crements by the palate, and is fo called becaufe irhath the fimilitude and ufe of 2 

Tunnel bafon or Tunnell:it defcends from the third ventricle into the Glandule which ‘is 
{feated berweenethe procefles of the wedge-bone called the faddle thereof,as you 
may perceive by putting ina fpatherne. Now there remaines the laft of the fixe 
parts propofed toour confideration inthe third ventricle, that is,the Channel! of 
ae runoing from this third ventricle into the fourth, for the ufe formerly mca 
tioned. 

The Channdi This Chanaell defcending in its originall from the Bafon,goes from thence unde! 

te ee the buttocksinto the laft ventricle, the A¢eninges being perforated ; which that you 

ventricle, may fhew,itis fit you put the end of a fpatherne through it. The benefit of the third 
ventricle ts ; that it may be as a Tribunall or judgment feate tothe Reafoning facul- 


ty, when the mindewil!l draw conclufions from things fecue. P, Other veines 


The fourth The fourth ventricle is {eatedin the place we formerly mentioned ; it is leffe cha «the Pis mater, 2. 
ventricle of the reft, but more folide ; leffe as that which was not to receive the {pirit before R S,Canales or 
was purified, and clenfed from all impurities; but more folid that it might con the phieg me is leg 


tainc it the fafer. The ufe therofis,tobe as a Treafury and flore-houfe of the opinio®, 


é 
ry 
in * 
J 
pre 
& 
\ 
a. 
4 
BY 
7 
ar 
. 
| 
a 
. a 
Aly 
| 
a0 
of 
* 


B. 
ay 
oO have 
aine is 
inde 
ihe ex. 

ch re. 


ermer 
them- 
Glan. 
s from 
ng els, 
itayes 
he two 
reafon 
t there 
es, and 
For 


with 
ith the 
lowe(t 
r with 


the life 


bodies 
pecially 
2, that 
» from 
with 


a por- 
hereof, 
mem- 
ich are 
co the 
chellum 
iid ruth 


yrinted 


ex: 
fe of 2 
hich is 
mas you 
he fixe 
nell of 
y 


under 
ar you 
e third 
facul- 


ffe chan 
fore it 
ht 
pinion, 


Contained inthe: Head. 


and judgments which reafon (hall decree, chat when neede requires, wee may ferch 
and draw them from thence aslaid wp in ftore. know Galen, and the Greeke Phy- 
fitions have not fo diftinguifhed in places the three fore-mentioned facultyes - but 
have written, that they all are allover confufed through the whole fubftance of the 

-gine, which opinion alfo Fernelius in his Pathologia hath renewed. Yet I had rather 
follow this Opinion, as commonly received and celebrated by the Arabian Phy- 

The Mammillary proceffes are the inkruments and paflages of fmelling. being of Theufe of the 

‘he fame fubftance withthe braine, and like nerves, whichrunne out from the hinde ne 
hornes of the upper or foremott ventricles of the braine to the Ethmozdes and {ven- ‘dibipesie 
sy bones of the nole, that hence chey may receive the divers kinds of {mells, and 
carry them into the Braine, But although they be like nerves, yet they are not ac- 
counted nerves becaufe they go not out of the fcull. 


The Fourth and figures of the Braine. 


Fieure §. 
RRR, The lower [uper ficies of the 
callous body refie@ed. 
STV,Thetréangalar {urfaceof the 
Fornix or Arch, 
X X, The lower part of the partition 
ofthe ventricles contin uated with 
the Arch, 
YY, The upper part of the partiti- 
on continued with the callous 


body. 
Figure 6, 
AAA, The lower furface of the 
Arch. 


BC, Two corners of the Arch, by 
which it 1s continuated with the 
ventricles. 

DE, The right and left ventricles. 

F G, Arteriesclimbing up from the 
{leepy arteries through the lower 
fide ofthe ventricles for the for- 
ming of that complication of vel- 
fels which is called Plexus cho- 
voiaes, 

H, A veffell iffuing out of the fourth 
Sinws under the Arch, and pafling 
into the third venticle, 

IKL, The divifion, of this veflell,a 
part whereof goeth to the right 
venticle at X,and another to the 
leftat Z. 

WIN, The Plexus choroides made of 
the artery F G,and the veffell H, 

00,Small veines paffing thorough 
the ventricles of the brainc, pro- 

duced from the veffels XK and L. 

P, Other veines arifing from the fame, difperfed without the ventricles 1f0 

the Pismater, Q. A paflage from the third ventricle unto the Ba/ow or 7: wane, 

R S,Canales or Sinus graven or furrowed inthe fubftance of the ventricles, in which 

the phieg me is led along to the orifice of the forcfaid paffage marked with 2- 


The 
QO 


| 
>= 
FIG .V. 
| ¥e Uf, D) AL NSF 
4 
ane 


Of the Animall parts, 


The Sixth fioure of the Braine, 


Figure 106 

4 A, Partsof the fpinal) 
marrow cut from the 
braine. 

Be, The places where this 
marrow did grow un. 
to the braine. 

DE, The Tefticles. Fe 
The buttocks, 77. the 
pine-2landule, 

From/to K, Apart of 
the third ventricle go. 
ing to the fourth, under 
the Tcflicles. 

KLMWN, Apart of the 

fourth ventricle which 

_ @ngravenin the mar. 

row. O, Thetop of the fourth venticle. P, The place where the fpinall marroy 

gocth out of the skull. Figeve 11. 4B, Parts of the opticke nerves. C D, The fleepy 
arterics- E, The Bafon or Tunnel! hanging downe, F, A holeor perforation of the 


dura meninx, through which the Tunnell reacheth unto the glandule. GG,Parts of 


the fecond conjugation of finnewes, Figure 12. 4, The Glandule, 8, The Baton 
or Tunnell called or Infumdibulum, C D E F,The foure holes thorough which 
the phlegmaticke excrement iffueth. 


— — — 


Crap, VIII. 


Of the 7. conjugatious of the Nerves of the Braiue fo called becaufe they alwayes 
fhew the Nerves conjugated and doubled, that,is on cach fiae one. 


~ 


What a Nerve 


or Sinewin He nerves are the waies and inftruments of the animall {pirit and faculcyes 


’ SY of which thofe fpirits arethe vehicles, aslong as they are contained in 
Sy the braine; they confift of the only and fimp!e marrowey fubftance of 
Itsfubftance. the braine; or fpinall marrow. But paffing forth of the braine, they 
Whetherthe have another membranous fubftance which involvesthem joined with them from 
third meme thetwo membranes of the braines and according ¢o the opinion of fome Anato- 
“yearns 9 mifts, they have alfoathird from the ligaments drawen as well from divers others, 
the Vertebra’s. aS from thefe by which they are tyed to the Vertebra’s, Yet this opinion feemes ab{urd 
tome,fecing fuch 2 membrane, as that which is infenfible,wholy repugnes the con 
dition ofa nerve ,- which is to give fenfe tothe partsto which it is inferted, 
eiaiite:. The magnitude of the nervesis different, according to the divers neceffity of fent¢ 
tude. incident to the parts into which they areinferted. Their figure is round, and long 
Theirfigute, Jike to aconduit pipe tocarry water in; the membranes of thebraine, with which 
the nerves are covered, being dilated and ftretched over them, after the fame mannei 
that the proceffes of the Peritonawm involves the fpermatick veflels, with which they 
goe downe tothe Tefticles,and take life and nourifhment by the capillary veines ane 
Theirufe, atteryes, which defcend to them with the membranes, They are made for this ule, 
that they may impart fenfe tothe fenfitive parts, and motion to thefe that are {itt 
be moved. All the nerves defcend from the brairie either mediatly, or immediate!’ 
Theirnumber their Number is {caven and thirty paire, or conjugations, whereof feaven have thei! 
originall immediately from the braine, the other thirty from the {pinall marrow. 
Thefirtcon- The firft conjugation of the nerves of the braine is thicker than all the reft,an 


goestotheecyes, cocarry the vifive {pirittothem. Thefe arifeing from diverfe par 
© 0 


Lip; | 


| 


L 13-5 
ef rhe braine, 
wife like the lo! 
commoa 
by thofe two 
rogether fo thar 
Anargumecnt Wic 
ef their eics, 
ted into ome | 
when if 
which containe! ¢ 
The fecond com 
in the bottom< 
ing the cyes. 


mutcles. 2, tal 
vine. S2,abran:! 
T 2, another of ric 
lower lip, 2, 


* 
o 
* 4 
Py 
att 
A 
~ A, 
‘Ail 
“ 
‘ 
: 
BIG. ] 
> 
AF 
‘wt > 
i 
\ 
af 
WS 
Be 


narrow 
 fleepy 
mn Of the 
of 
Bafon 
which 


mves 


mcultyes 
ined in 


lance of 


they 
n from 
Anato- 
mothers, 
Babfurd 


mf fenfe 
dlong 
which 
nannes 
h they 
es and 
Lis ufe, 
e fittc 
jiately; 
cheir 


OW. 
{tana 
e parts 


of 


Contained inthe Head. 


— 


of rhe braine,in the middle way before they goz ont of the skull meet together crofle. 
wife like the Iron of a Mill (which is faftened in the upper ftone ) going into one 
common paflage with their cavityes not vifible to the eye; that fo the {pirirs brought 
by chofe two nerves may becommunicated, and they are mutually joyned and meet 
rogether fo , that being driven back from onecye they may flie backe into the other. 
Anergument wherof may be drawn from fuch as aime at any thing, who fhutting one 
of their cies, fee more accurately; becaufe the force of the neighbouring f pirits uni- 
ted into one eye, is more ftrong than when it is difperfed into both. This conjugation 
when it comes into theglaffie humour, is {pent inthe ftrudture of the net-like coate 
which containes this humor on the backe part, 

The fecond conjugation e0es into many parts, at its pafling forth of the skull, and 
in * bottome of the circle of the eye it is diftributed into the feaven mutcles moye- 
jag the cyes. 


The Seventh figure fhewing the eight conjugations of 
she Nerves of the braine, 


A A,2.Tirc braiae. 

BB 1,2. The Aftcersbraine. 

CC 1,2, the {welling of the braiac 
which fome call the mammillary 
procelics, 

D 1,the beginning of the {pinall mare 
row out of the Balis of the braine. 

E1,2,apart of the fpinall marrow 
when itis ready to iffue out ofthe 
skull. 

FF 1,2, tke mammillary proceffes 
which ferve for the fence of Smel- 
ling. 

GG 1 ,2,the opticke nerves, 

H1, the coitien or union of the op- 


J71,2, thecoate of the eye where- 


into the optick nerves is extended, 

K K1,2, the fecond paire of the {i- 
news, ordained for the motien of 
the eyes. 

LL 1,2, the third paire of finewes, 
oraccording to the moft Anato- 
mifts,the leffér roore of the third 
paire, 

J4M 1,2,the fourth paire of finewes, 
or the greater roote of the third 
paire. 

N2.a branch of the third conjugati- 
on derived to the mufculous skin 


FIG.IL 


of rhe forehead. 
Rw @ 2,a branch of the fame to the upper 
«saw. 
P P 2, another inte the coate of the 
no{ethrils. 


Q 2, another into the temporal 


mutcles. R2,abranch of the fourth conjugation crumpled like the tendall of a 
vine. § 2,abranch of the fame reaching unto the upper teeth and the gumm@€s. 
T 2, another ofthe fame tothe lower jaw. 2, a Surcle of the branch T,to the 
lower lip, XX 2, another furcle from the branch T, to the rootesof the lower teeth, 


Q 2 TY 2, 


The fecond 
COD Ugation, 


4 
its i 


, 
P 


. 
the 
this 
JW Un- 
Ss. FG 
’ 
Dart 
under 
the 
' 
| 
é 
fA a y | 
wwe 
| 
~" 
T RAS 
| 


O f the Animall parts 


— — 


L | 
~~ 
YY 2, the affumption of the nerves .of the fourth conjugation unto the coate of ¢p, 
rongue.Z 1,2,the fourth paire are vulgarly fo called which are fpent into the coars ¢¢ 
the pallat.¢ 1,2.the fift paire of finewes which belong to the hearing.®,the Auditor, 


nerve {pred abroad into the cavity of the ftony bone. °,a hard part of the fift conjuya, 


tion above,the * which may be counted for adiflinct nerve. 6 1,2,afmall branch qe, | 


rived from this harder part of tke firft paire . ¢ 1, 2, alower branch from the fame o. 
riginall.d1,2,thisnerveis commonly alcribed to the fift paire,but indecd isa difting 
conjugation which we will call the Eight, becaule we would not interrupt the orde, 
of other mens accounts.e 1,2,the fixt paire of finewes, f2, abranch from them 
ved to the neck and the mufcles couched therewpon. g 2,another branch to the mulcle 
of the Larinx or throttle, b 1,2, the feventh paire ef finewes. #1, the union of the 

-feventh paire with thefixt, /2,a propagation of the feventh paire to thote mulcles 
which arife from the Appendix called Sty/osdes, m 2,Surcles from the feveath conju. 
gation to the mufcles of the ronguc,the bone Hyoss and the Larinx.op 4 1,three holes, 
through the hole o the phlegme yflueth ourofthe third venericle of the braineto the 
Tunnell, andat pg, isthe paflage of the Soperary arteries to the ventricles of the 
Braine. 


The third The third istwo-fold, inthe paffage out of theskull it is like-wife divided into 

conjugation» “many branches,of which fome arc carryed tothe temporall mufeles, into the 144/. 
feteres or Grinding mufcles, into the skinne of the face, forehead and anole; Ortier. 
fome are fent into the upper part of the check, and the parts belonging toir, as into 
the teeth,gummes and the mofcles of the upper lippe;and thofe which are called the 
round which incompaffe the mouth on the infide ; the laft are wafted in the ceate of 
the congue, to beftow upon itthe fenfe of tafting. 

The fourth The fourth conjugation is much {maller, and is almoft wholy watted upon the 

conjugations cogte of the Pallate of the mouth, to enduc it alfe with the fenfe of rafting. 

The ffecone The fift at its originall and having not as yet pafied forth of the skull, is divided 

fugation, into two, and fends the greater portion thereof to the hole of the eare, or paffacge of 
hearing, tha: it may fupport the auditory faculty; and it fends forth the other lefler 
portion thereof to the temporall mufcles by the paflage next toit; by which the fe. 
cond conjugation pafles forth. 

Thefixtcone The fixt being the greateft next tothe firft,pafling entire forth of the skull,imparts 

jugationn me {mall branches to certaine mufcles of the neck and throttle, and then de{cendin 
intothecheft, itmakes the recurrent nerves, and dilperfed overall che parts of the 
two lowerbellyes , it pafles even to the bladder and tefticles , as wee fhewed in the 
former booke. 

Thefeventh = The {eventh is inferted and {pent upon the mufcles of the bone Hyos , the tongue 

and fome of the throrle,to give them motion;it pafles forth of the skull by the hole of 
thenowle bone at the extuberancics thereof, 


— 


C Hap. 


Of the Rete Mirabile,. or wonderfull Net, 
and of the Wedze bone, 


Theexittence tic Aaimall fpirie is made of the vitall fent fromthe heart by the iaternall 

fleepy Arteryes tothe braine. For it was requifite thatic fhould be the 

ESS ( ere) more elaborate ,becaufe the action of the Animall is more excellent than 

Mrbicis, == that of the vitall;nature hath framed a texture of Arteryes in many places 

running croffe one another, inthe forme of a Net diverfe times doubled ; (where- 

upon it had the natne of the wonderfull Net) that fo the {pirit by longer delay in 

thefe Labyrinthean or maze-like turnings,might be more perfe@ly concoed and 
elaborare,and attaine to a greater fitneffe to performe the Animall funéions. 

en This wonderfull! Net {cttuate at the fides of the Apophy/es climoides or preductions 

' Of the wedgebone, is twofold ; that is, divided by the pituitary Glandule which i 


{cituate 


L 18-5. 


{cituate berw cen | 


them, next to cheal 
which lye bones 
purged bythe me 


fuch as have a mi 


M, Another branc® 
ding from tke bran 
the temporal! 
ands. 2, Aagerve 
R, A nerve creeping; 
Offered ro the lewe: 
teeth, A branc 
fourth paire offiney 
which are the 
nerve gocth.bé,tw' 
themerve P. dythe 
face. ce, the fixe pai 
cles Of the neck, 2, | 
cation of the aerv. 
and ftrengthning th 
of the wtter branch ¢ 
coller-bones. dm, b 


gral. 
. 
And 
> 
= 
RX 
4 
77774 
| 
“yp ZZ 
| 
(( JE 
, | 
1A 
N 
\ 
i/ 
| 


1 CODju- 
holes; 
ecto the 
s ofthe 


ed into 
Orher. 
4s Into 
the 

pate of 


pon the 


livided 
age of 
t leffer 
the 


mpatts 
‘nding 
the 
in the 


ongue 
ole of 


L 


Contained inthe Head. 


173 


{citwate betweene the {aid Apophyfes Clinoides , having the wedgebone lying 


them, nextto the Meninx, bcing perforated on the right and left fide. next to 
which lye bonesas rare as a {pongeeven to the Pallate, by which the Phiegme is 
purged bythe meuth and nofe ;and therehence, I thinke, that {pattle Howes, which 
fuch as have a moift braine, continually {pit out of their mouth. df 


The Eight figure of the braine. 


4, The Braine: 

B, The Cerebellum or after: 
braine, 

C,A procefle of the brain; 

bucnot. that which is ca]. 

led Mammillaris. 

DD,The marrow ofthe 
backe asit is yet withe 
in the skul. 

E, The Mammillary pro- 
ceife or inftrument of 
{melling. 

F, The opticke nerve. 

G,The coate of the eye in. 

ii to which the opticke 
_nerve is {pread. 

Theocrve chat moveth 

— the eye or the fecond 


payre.. 
7, The third conjugation; 
or the harder and leffer 
, branch ofthenervesof 
the third conjugation 
brought forward. 

K, The fourthconjugati- 
on or the preater and 
thicker nerve of the 
third -payre bending 

downward, 

Z,A bsanch of the nerve 
marked with J, which 
eoethto the fore-head. 


M,A nother branch of the nerve /,reaching tothe upper jaw, WN, A nerve procee- 


ding from the branch J, iatexed or woven withthe coat of thenofe, O, The nerve of 
the temporal! mufcle iffuing fromthe branché. P, A nerve contorted of the nerves 
and 4, Ancrve preceeding from the brane) X,tothic fockets of the upperteeth, 
k, A nerve creeping from the nerve X, to the lower jaw. S. A furcie of thebranch &, 
offered to the lower lip. 77’, Other furcles from the branch R, attaining to the lower 
teeth, YY, A branch of thenerve X, diffufed into the coate of the tongue . X X, The 
fourth paire of finews which gee into the cuat of the pallat.7, The fifth paire of knews 
Which are the nervesof hearing. 4, the membrane of the care, unto which that ffth 
herve goeth.4¢,two {mall branches of the fifth conjugation uniting themfelves with 
thenerve P. a, the eight conjugation ora nerve of the fifth paire attaining unto the 
lace. ee, the fixe paire of nerves. f, A branch from the nerve ¢, reaching to the mul- 
cles ofthe neck, z, Small branches derived untothe throttle or /arywx. 0, the by furs 
cation of the acrve inte two branches. #i/,An inner branch hanging to the rackbones, 
and ftrengthning the éstercoffall nctves, and is therfore called kk, Surcles 
of the utter branch going to the heads of the mufcles, to the breaft-bone and to the 
coller-bones. /m,bragches of the right nerve /, makingthe right Recurrent nerves: 


Q3 


under 


— 


cof the ba 
On} Upa. 
de. 
lame o. 
| 
deri. FIG, 
wicle KS) SY 
if VX 
NALS 
| 
NSS 
VA 
h WHS 
AWA 
VIAN 
| / \\ | 
> the | 
than 
| 


Of the Animall parts L 


What the 


mn,the infertion of the recurrent finews into the mufcles of the /arimx. op, branches 
of the left nerve making the left recurrent finew p. qq, branches from the fixt conju. 
gation going tothe coate of the lungs. 7, {mall nerves of the heart and of the purfe 
thereof called the Perscardinm , as allo fome approaching to the coats of the lungs, 


finerves on either fide feat to mie ftomack.¢,the right ftomacke nerve going to che lef 


orifice of the ftomack.# #,the left ftomack nerve going to the right orilice of che fto- 
mack.x,anerve from the branch #,paffing into the hollowaes of the liver.y, the nerve 
belonging to the right fide of the kell. z, the nerve belonging to the collick gut, ,, 
nerve creeping to the gut called duedenwm and the beginning of the #saswm orempty 
put. c,anerve implanted in the rightJide of the bottome of the ftomacke.4,ancrve 
belonging to the liver and bladder of gall, ,,aacrve reaching unto the rightkidacy, 
¢,a branch reaching the A/¢/emterinm and the guts. 7, a branch f{prinkled to the right 
partof thebladder. ,,abranch going throughthe left partof the kel. furcles deri- 
ved tothe collick gut and the kel.,,fmall branches inferted into the {pleen. aa,a nerve 
approaching to the left fide ofthe bottome of the ftomack. »., a branch belonging to 
the left fide of the Me/entery andthe guts. »,a branch which attaineth to the left kid- 
ney.£; finall nerves creeping through the left fide of the bladder. «. the feven paire 
of finewes.+, a branch derived from the fixt conivgationto the mufcles which arife 
from the proceffe called Sty/oides. abranch of the {eaventh coniugation which 
eth tothe mufcles of the tongue, ofthe bone Ayes , and of thethrotle or A 


coniunGion or coiticn of the 6. and 7. paire into one nerve, 


Thefe Capephyyes clinoides ate certaine productions of the Osbsfilare or wedge: 


Aporbyfes Clee bone, (called the Saddle thercof,) between which, as I faid,the pituitary glandulc 


meidces ares 


with part of rhe wonderfull net . There is agreat controverfie among ft Anatomitts 
concerning this part; for ”¢/a/#ws demies that it is in man, Colwmmbwe admits it, yet hee 


Whetherche feemesto confound it withthe Cherosdes, Truely Ihave obferved it alwaves 


Retc mir able 


difter fromthe 


againlt It remaines, that we recite tlic 


afterthe manner, as Sy/wius alledges 


Piexws choret» Derforations of theskull , becaufe the knowledge of thefe much conduces tothe uns 


derftanding of the infertionsof the veines,arterycs and ncrves, 


an 


— 


— — — 


Cuar.X. 
Of the holes of the inner Balis of the Scull. 


yeas the firft place are reckoned the holes of the bone Eshmsordes; then thofe 
oy of the optick nerves; thirdly of the nerves moving the cycs. Fourthly of 
ye that portion , of thenerves, of the fourth conjugation which goe to the 
dary temporall mufcles, Fifthly are reckoned,thefe holes {carfe vifible, fciruate 
under the pituitary glandule, by which the fpettle is evacuated. Sixthly that hole 
which is inthe wedge bone made for the entrance of the internall {leepy Arteries, 
compoling the wonderfull Net, and then pafling into the braine by a great flir, That 
perforation which we reckon in the feventh place is commonly double, made forthic 
entrance of ene of the branches of the internall lugular veine, The eight hole is fome- 
what long, of an ovall figure,by which, part of the third conjugationand all the fourt! 
conjugation pafies forth. The ninth are the auditory paffages. The tenth are very fmal 
holes.and give way to the veine and artery going to the auditory paflage, above the 
forameneacum, In the eleaventh place are reckoned the perforations which yeild pa‘ 
lage forth to the fixth paire of nerves, to partof the fleepy Arteries, and ef che inter- 
nail jugular.In the twelvth thofe which yeild a way out tothe feventh conjugation; 
The great hole of the Nowle bone through which the {pinall marrow paffes is rec- 
koned the thirteenth. The fourtenth is that , which moft commonly is behinde tha 
great hole,by which the Cervicall veines and arteries enter in, 


Cua? 


4 


9 


fro‘, 
oftentimes theh 
thereofother\ 
of the greater co 
gation deiccnc; 
The thitd is 
nerves of the 
upper jaw. Lhoef, 
ing teeth, throu 
Inthe fifth ord » 
defcendfrom 
rancked the ho =: 
the braime by tlic 
the Orbe of the « 
gationto the 
there ismored ar< 
iudgement of chi: 
the fame proce! 
Torcudar Burl 
much Varicty inti 


{pit d 
This iin 
the head 
aswe {hal! here 
red with the tw» 
piace agin the b a 
hard and denfe.\"! 
of the bed y foreiv; 
like Symptomes, 


‘allthe parts lyin: 


bone, be moved 
Marrrow; butrx 
fharpe and bitte 

vertebra, that ir \ 
But by thele far 
Marce@w for toc 
alithélower 


L Be 5 


thofe 
ily of 
othe 
ruate 
hole 
ries, 
[hat 
Arche 
ymc- 
burch 
mall 

the 
10; 
rec- 
chat 


Contained inthe Head. 


Cuar. XI. 


Of the perforations of the externall Balis of the Br aine. 


EA Pye Herc isa hole on each fide at the Ey e-browes,by which pafles a {mall nerve 
“fey from the third conjugation comming out of the cavity ofthe Orbe 

| se of the eye, and going by the forehead bone to the eye-browes, that it may 
27253) give motion to the two mufcles of the upper eye-brow and forehead, Yet 
oftentimes the hole is but tebee {eeneon one fide, oft timesthere is a cleft inftead 
thereof, otherwhiles it 1s not perforated nor cleft at all. The fecond, is the perforation 
of the greater corner of the eye, by which a portion of the nerves of the third coniue 
eation defcends to the coate of the nofe;in this hole the Glamdula Lachrymalis is feated. 
The third is feated under the eye, that it may give way to the other portion of the 
nerves of the third comiugation going to the parts of the face, andthe tcethof the 
upper jaw. The fourth isat the beginning ofthe pallate, amongft the cutting or fhear- 
ing teeth, through whichaveine , an artery and the coate of the pallate pafles out. 
Inthe fifth order are reckoned the perforations of the pallate, by which the nerves 
defcead from the fourth coniugation, to give, or caufe the tafte. In the fixt order are 
rancked the holes of the pailate ferving for refpiration, and the flegme falling from 
the braine by the nolethrils. And theroisacleft under the yoake bone afcending into 
the Orbe of the eye,by which there is a way,as wel for the nerves of the third coniu- 
gationtothe Temporall mufcles, asalfo tor certaine veines andartcryes. Butalfo 
there is noted another hole atrhe mammillary procefle, whichis not perforated in the 
iudgement of the fenfe. Befides there is thought ro be another at the hinde roote of 
the fame procefle, by which acertaine {mall veine pafles fromthe Lugular to the 
Torcular , But Lhave onely noted thefe three paflages by the way, becaule there is fo 
much variety in them ,that nothing canbe certainely {aid of them. 


* 


Cuar XII, 


Of the Spinall Marrow, or Pith of the Backe. 


‘3 x the head, {preading its branches as from the body of atree. Thefe branches, 


paves He {pinall Marrow islike a River running from the fountaine of the braiac. \hatthe 


This fendsnerves for fenfe and motion to all the neighbouring partsunder , 


OW 


aswe {hall hereafter fhew, are on each fide thirty, This fame fpinall marrow is cave. The 


red with the two membranes invefting the braine, diftinguifhed by ao diftance of 
place,as inthe braine, But alfo it hath another membrane added to thefe, being very 
hard and denfe,which keeps it from being broken and violated by the violent bending 


the {pinall 
TRAITOVY « 


of the body forewards and about. The difcafes of this marrow doe almoft caufe the 


of the 


like Symptomes, as the difeafes of the braine; For they hurt the fenfe and motion of ting 


allthe parts lying beneath them,as forexample; Ifany ofthe vertebra’s of the back ‘Pinall ars 


bone, be moved out of their place,there followes a diftortion or wretting atide of the 
Marrrow; butthen efpecially if it happen that one of the vertebras be ftrained, fo 
tharpe and bitter a compreffion urgesthe marrow by reafonof the bony body of the 
vertebra, that it will either rend it, or certainely hinder the paflage of the {pirat by it. 
But by thefe fame holes of the vertebra’s the veines and arteryes zoe to the {pinall 
marrow for to give life and nourifhment to it, as the nerves by them pafle forth into 
all the lower parts ofthe body. 


Figure 


1c! 
Purfe 
| 
y | 
| 
rione 
i 
| 
Kr iti« 
“4.734% 
7 
| 
h POs | 
» A 
Pr 
iC 
t 
thee 
tethe 
4 
arte 


176 the eAnimall parts 
Figure 1, faeweth the forme of the fpinall marrow properly fo called , with sts membranes. 


aud the nerves procecding from tt. | 
a. Il marrow waked and bare,tagetber with its werves, as part of 


Anatomifts bave defcribed tt. 
rhe tenth figure of the [oinall marrow. 


A, The beginning of the {pinall mar: 
row where it fals out of the £7 F 
B, The thicknefle thereof in th- 
\ {fpondels or rack-bones of the 
loynes. | 
C, The divifion thereof into ftrings. 
or hairy threds, 
D, the feven nerves of the necke; 
From DtoE orfrom 7, to19, thew 


the nerves of the backe, 

From E to £, the nerves of the 
loynes. 

From F to G, thenerves of the os 
or holy bones fe 

H, the end of the marrow. 


IK L,do fhew how the nerves doe 
iffue from the marrow in ftrings, 

M MM, the knots ofthe finewes made 
of the conjunGion of thol 
ftrings. 

WO ,the membranes that invef th: 
marrow. 

Figure 2. 

4, The beginning of the fpinall mar. 
row inthe {eull, 

35455,6,7, Lhefe Characters thew 
(according to We/alius opinion ) 
how the conjugations ofthe nerves 
ofthe braine dee take their erigi. 
nallfrom the marrow remainng SRS) 


— 


yet within the Skull. Mulcles jtherefp 

B, Theegreffe of thef{pinall marrow tion of tile 

out ofthe skull, wit.the eves 

C, Thecords or ftrings whereintoit of which is 

D7, The marrow of the necke and feven paire of finewes.E 19, twelve paires or cea; tothe Chin. Inwh 
jugations of nerves proceeding from the marrow ofthe Cheft. F 24, The war. multitude of men 
tow of the loynes and 5.paire of finewes. G 30.the marrow ofthe holy-bone and ¢, by fome inlikene( 
paire of finewes. H,the extremity of end ofthe {pinal] Mmarrew. beauty, that Many | 


fame facé albeir jr! 
by the fwidainech 


2nd deliort pofles 
The End of the ifth Rooke. neither, "Wherefor 
tomical cefcriptior 


will begin with the 
of the Mu 


L 
(eg 
(AF 
d 
Ay 
Ag > 
FA XS \ 
i 2 
= 
| SS 
ag 
T 
a \ Gis | \ be 
6 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


1B: 5. 


wes, 


nall 
the skull. 
f in the 
es of the 


to ftrings; 


moeccke; 
19, fhew 


mes of the 


tthe os 


nerves dec 
in ftrings. 
ewes made 
of thofe 


inveft the 


(pinall 


acters fhew 
opinion ) 
ifthe nerves 
their erigi- 
remainng 


all marrow 
whereinto if 
aires OF C@N- 


The 
bone and 6; 


TREATING 


the and the other 
Extreme parts of the Body. 


The Preface. 


@ Eradventure fome may wonder,thatI have ended my fifth booke 
peve \wie Of Anatomic, before I have fully defcribed all the parts of the 

weg jee head, the which feemed as it were onely appointed for that 

purpofe, Therefore! mult yeeld a reafon of this my intenti- 
freee 00.1 haveadefire inone Treatifeand asit were at one breath, 
profequute the Anatomy of the Mufcles. Wherefore becaule 
ae the parts of the head not yet defcribed, principally confift of the 
_ Mutcles, therefore! defired to comprehend them together with this fame delcrip- The dotcripti¢ 
tion of the extreme parts of the body sbeginning at the upper part of the face, to fess beng 
wit,the eyes:but having firft defcribed the bones of the face without the knowledge usknowne 
of whichit is impoffible to thew the originall and infertion of the Mufcles. Wehave sily fellow 
formerly noted that by the face is meant whatfoever lyes fromthe Eye-broweseven ‘st theori- 
tothe Chin. Inwhich there isfuch admirable induftry of nature, that of the infinite = 
. ? 

multitude of men youcannot finde two fo like, buc that they may be diftinguifhed Sette |. 
by fome unlik -alfoi 

y fome unlikenefle in their faces; alfo it hath adorned this part with fuch exquifite 
beauty, that many have dyed by longing to enjoy the beauty defired by them. This Theesdow- 
fame face albeit it little exceeds halfe a foote, yet it indicatesand plainely intimates men*sof™* 
by the fuddaine changes thereof, what affections and paffions of hope,feare,forrow aa 


| and delight poffefle our minds; and what ftate our bodyes are in, found, ficke or mea ee 


neither. Wherefore fecing the face is of fo much moment, let us returne to the Ana- bewrayerof 


comical defcription thereof, which that wee may eafily and plainely performe wee Pint 
will begin with the bones thereof, whereby, as we formerly fayd, the original! and 
infertion of the Mufcles may be more certaine and manifeft to vs. 


C war, 


| 
| 
¥ 7 


the 


and Bones, 


C I. 
Ofthe bones of the Face. 


5] He bones of the faceare 16,0 17, inpumber, And firft ,there berec. 


Bones in cach 
= ofthe koned 6 about the Orbs of the cyes, that is 3tocachorbe, of which 

one is the bigger, another lefler, and the third between both , each of 
What che thefe touch the forehead bone in their upper part. Befides,the greater 
Zypome is and is joyned with a future to the procefle of the ftony bone, and {o makes 


 theZygoma, thatis,the Os Jugaleor yoake bone, framed by nature for prefervation of 


The Egylope yin a hole perforated to the nofe,and in this is the glandule in which the Aigylops 
Thetwe 


bones ofthe jr were of a membranous thinneffe : then follow the two bones of the nofe which are 
Thetwoins joyned to the forchead bone bya future, buton the ferefide between them felves by 


a om harmony. But on the backe orhinde part with two other bones , oncach fide onc, 
which defcending from the bone of the forehead (to which alfo they are joyned by a 
fixture) receive all the teeth. Thefe two in Galens opinion are feldome found fepara- 
ted. Butthefe are the thickeft of ail the bones of the face hitherto mentioned, knit 
by a future with the greatef{ bone of the Orbe, onthe backe part with the wedge- 
bone , onthe inner fide with the two little inner bones of the pallate , which on the 
infide make the extremity thereof, whereby it comes to pafle, that we may call thefe 
bones the hinder,or inner bones of the pallate. They reckon one of thefe bones the 
eleventh and the other the twelfth bone ef the head; thefe two little bones on their 
fides next to the winged preductions of the wedge-bone, receive on each fide one of 
the nerves of the fourth conjugation, which in the former booke , we {aid were {pent 
upon the membrane of the pallate. 


The two And in Ga/ens opinionthere be other two in the lower Iaw, joined at the middle of 


thechin; althoughfome thinke it butone bonc,becaufe by the judgement of fenic 
there appearcs nodivifion or feparation therein. But you may fee in children how 

Twoproe truc this their fuppofition is, forinmenot perfe& growth it appeares but one bone; 

an gg thefe two are reckoned for the thirteenth and fourreenth bones. Now thefe two bones 

ofthelower making the lower law, have in their back part en each fide two productions , as they 

eae lye to the upper law, the one of which reprefentsthe point of a {werd ,and is called 
the Ceroue ; theother is obtufeand round,which is inferted into the cavity feated at 
the root of the proceffe ofthe ftony bone, nere to the paflage of the eare. 

TheLuxation  Lhis may be ftrained to the forepart by violent gaping, by retractionof the 


efthlower  clesarifing from the wing-like procefics,and ending at the lower angles of the broader 
part of the {ame law. 

The lower This Iaw is hollow asalfothe upper, efpecially in the back-part, being filled wita 

a white and glutinous humor, conducing tothe growthof the teeth. This humor 

sowy humor,’ hath its matter from the blood brought thither by the veflels, veines, Arteryes 20d 

nerves from thethird coniugation entring in here by 2 paflage large enough. VV here- 

by iecomes topafle, that this part isnot only nourifhed and lives, but alfo the reeth 

receive fence by the benefit of the nerves entring thither with the veine and artery, 

by fimall holesto be feene at the lower roots of the teeth; and themce it is that a beat: 

Why thereth 128 Paine may be perceived in the tooth-ach, becaufe the defluxion may be by the 

haveabeating atteryes;or rather becaufe the humor flowing tothe roots of the teeth may preflé the 

= artery in that place; befide allo you may fee fome apparance of anervous {ubflance 
in the root of a cooth newly pluckt out, 

Thenerves of But alfoyou muftconfider, that this law from its inner capacity produces at th 

we fides of the chin two nerves of a fufficient magnitude, over again{t the lower dog: 

eblerred,  ceeth and the firft of the fmaller grinding teeth, as I have noted in the defcription © 

the nerves of the third coniugation.I have theught good to put thee in minde of the'¢ 

that whenthou fhalt have occafion to make incifion ia thefe places, thou maich w2t!') 


and difcreetly handle the matter, that thefe parts receive no harme., Ther? 
cre 


There rema 1 
partition of the 
know. Now thi 
the face, I will! 

There are fi: 
may callthe N 
andtwelfch are 
bones of the lo\ 
Now it rem: 


Eye-browes, ti 
of the facc. 


meat, and the’ 
each lide of thefl 
they are fharp 
farre longer tha 
2 lov 


WwW, ti 


icoci 
ee ro 
‘roots 
Mat itca 
leated, 
‘feats: T! 
steeth bre. 
j,broad and 
“icy could nor 
alunder more ¢ 
Wherefore ¢! 
be, by pickinet 
fis that is.as 3 
here fo firmely 
together with 
Cfrufion of bic 
ttrengthened 
Merve and vefk 
they chaw the, 
as lone 2s 
Would be worp 


reft, becau ir 
the third conju; 
2 tooth newly p 

P 
fenfe,that with 
: hey may be fj 


CNeir Upper ore 


7® Ln. 6 /1B.6 
| 
temporali muicie. Lhe leller is teared ar the oreatcr commer of tae even which 
4 
af Vachs 
| 
5, 
Ai2VE loft me o} 


be rec. 
which 
‘ach of 
mctcater 
) makes 
ition of 
) which 
sgylops 
icr & as 
hich are 
‘Ives by 
ide one, 
edbya 
fepara- 
ed, knit 
wedge- 
h onthe 
call rhefe 
ones the 
on their 
¢ one of 
ere {pent 


Biddle of 
tof fenic 
dren how 
ne bone; 
wo Dones 
, as they 
dis called 
{eated at 


the mul- 
e broader 


lled with 
his humor 
eryes and 
Where- 
ythe reeth 
nd artcrys 
iat a beat- 
be by the 
prefle the 
fubftance 


at the 
ower 

ription 
of thei, 
sieht wart!) 


There 


L 18.6. aud other extreme parts of the Body. 


There remaines another bone feated above the pallate , from whichthe orifttely Thebone of 


the nofe above 


partition ofthe nofearifes, being omitted of al] the Anatomifts;  forasmuchasI thepalate,or 
know. Now therefore that you may the better remember the number of the bones of ottheantint ; 
the face,I will here makea repetition of them. 

There are fixe of the orbs of the eyes, ateachthree. The feventhand eight wee 
may call che Nafail, or no{c bones. The ninth and tenth the Iaw-bones. The eleventh 
and twelfth are called the inner bones of the pallate. The thirteenth and fourteenththe 
bones of the lower law. The partition of the nefe may be reckoned the fifteenth. 

Now itremaines having {poken of thefe bones, that weetreate oftheteeth, the 
Eye-browes, the skinnc, the fiefhy pannicle, the Mufcles, and laftly the other parts 
ofthe face. 


~ 


Cuap. ff, 
Of the Teeth, 


Sa) He Teeth are of the number of the bones, and thofe which have the molt Pie cert, are 
Ve, have thirty two, that is,fixeteene above,and fo many belowe; of which im bones. 


gia the forepart of the mouth there are foure above and as many beneath 


which are called cutting or fhearing teeth, to cutin funder the tem.” 


meat, and they have but oneroet, To thefe are ioyned two in each law, thatis,on 
each fide of the other one, which are called Canin: dentes, Dogges-teeth ,. becaufe 
they are {harp and firong like dogges tecth; thefe alfo have but one roote; but that is 
farre longer than the other have. 
~~ fallow the Molares or Grinders, on each fide five, that is,tenne above and as The Grinding 
w, that they may grinde, chaw and breake the meat, that fo it may bethe teeth 
-octed in the ftomack; for fo they vulgarly thinke,. that meat wellchawed 
icocted;t hofe grinders which are faftened in the upper jaw,have moft com- 
e roots,and oft times foure. But thefe which are faftened in the lower,have Whytheupper 
roots, and fometimes three, becaufe this lower jawisharder than the up~ grinding teeth 
nat itcannot be fo eafily hollowed, or elfe becaufe thefe teeth being fixed and reotes, 
y {eated,needed not fo many ftayes as the upper, which as it were hang ont of 
‘feats: The fhearing teeth cutthe meat becaufe they are broadand fharp; the Theufe ofshg 
teeth break it becaufe they are fharp pointed and firme; but the grinders being ***™ 
j,broad and fharp,chaw and grind it afunder. But if the grinders had beene fmooth, 
vey could not fitly have performed their duty ,for all chings are chawed and broken 
alunder more eafily by that which isrough and unequall. 
Wherefore they fharpen their Milftones when they are fmoother than they fhould oe 
be,by picking them witha tharp Iron. The teeth are faftened in the jawes by Gompho- tawesby 
fis that isjas a ftake or naile,fo are they fixed into the holes of their jawes;for they ad- 
here {0 firmely thereto in fome, that when they are pluckt out , part thereof followes 
together with the rooth; which [have often obferved tohave beene alfo with great 
citulion of blood. This adhefion of the tecth faftened in their jawes is befides The fageniag 
itrengthened with a ligament, which applyes it felfeto their rootstogether with the of chs teeth 
nerve and veffels. The teeth differ from other bones;becaufe they have ation whileft isto be obfer- 
they chaw themeat; becanfe being loftthey maybe regenerated , and for thatthey «4 
Stow as long asthe party lives , for otherwife by the continual! ufe of chawing they 
Would be worne and wafted away by one another. You may perecivethis by any that 
have loft one of their teeth, for that which is oppofitcto itbecomes longer than the 
relt, becaufe it is not worne by its oppofite. Belides alfo they are more hard and folide 
than the reftofthe bones, and indued witha quick fen{e by reafon of the nerves of Wherein che 
the third conjugation which infertthemfelves into their roots;for if you rub,or grind fctegieer, 
2 tooth newly pluckt out,you may fee the remainesof the nerve; they have fuch quick bones, 
‘enfe, that with the tongue they might judge of taftes. But how feele the teeth, feciNg Fer what wf 
‘hey may be filed without paine ¢ Fallopius anfweres, that the teeth feclenotin pic‘e'" 
‘cit Upper or exterior part, but only by a membrane which they have within. And 


ihe 


The Dogteeth 


* 
| 
~ 
é 
i 


Of theMu/cles and Bones, 


180 


The forestenh “CE teeth have another ufe, efpecially the fore-teeth, which is,they ferve for ditting 
helpe'forthe and articulate pronuntiation; for thofe that want chem faulter in {peaking, as aly, 
Seanentt *f fuch as have them too fhort,or too long, or ill rancked. Befides,children { peak not qj, 
 ftin&tly before they have their foreteeth, And you muft note that the infant as yer 
fhut up in its mothers womb hath folide and bony teeth; which you may perceive by 
difie Ging it prefently after itis borne. 
But evenas there arctwo large cavities, in the forehead bone at the eye -browe; 
filled with avifcous humor, ferving for the tmeiling; and in like manner , the sine 
fhut up inthe mamillary proceffes is for heaving; fo in the jawes there be ewo cavities 

furnifhed with a vifcide humor for the nourifhment of the teeth. 


C wap. TTT. 
Of the Broade Mufcle. 


pe Ow we fhould profecute the containing parts of the face, to wit the skin, 
the fiefhy pannicle and fat; but becaufethey have beene {poken of futhic. 
ENE ently before, I wiil onely defcribe the flefhy pannicle , before I come te 
RS the diflection of theeye,that wee may the more eafily underftand, all the 

motions performed by it,wherher inthe face or forehead. 

Firft chat you may more eafily {ee it, you mult curioufly feparate the skin in fome 
partof the face. tor unlefle youtake good heed, you will pluck away the fefhy pan. 
nicle together with theskione , as alfothis broad mufcle to which it immediarly ad. 
heres, andin fome p!aces {fo clofly and firmely,as inthe lips,eye-lidsandr’ “ols 
forehead, that it cannot be feparated fromit. Nature hath given motior 
ing force to this broad mufele, that whileft icextends , or contracts it 
ferve to fhut and open the eye.[t will be convenient to feparate the mt 
from the skin, beginning from the forepart of the clavicies even toth 
ing in aright line, and then turning backe as far as you can; forchus | 
how it mixes it felfe with the skinne and the mufcles of the lips. 

Thereareno ¥Vhenrhou fhalt comerothe Eyes.thou fhale teach how the eye is fhe 
particular = hy chisone mufcle, becaufe it is compofed of the three fortsof fibers; 

pointedee the opinion of all who have hitherto written of Anatomy , thofe ations . 
theese for. performed by the power of two mufcles appointed for that purpose; one 
thatisthe isat thegreater corner onthe upper part, the other refembling a femicircle 


mui, , from whence extending it felfe tothe midle of the griftle 


onely. mects with the former ending there,but they are in part extended over all the eye. 
whereby it commeth co-pafle that it alfo in {ome fort becometh moveable. Buta 
pote, though in publike diflections thefe two mufcles are commonly wont to be folemn|; 


fhewed, after the manner I haverelated ;»yet I thinke , that thofe which fhew chem 
know no more of them,than I doe. I have grounded my opinion from this, that chere 
appeares no other mu{culous flefh in thefe places, to thofe which feparate the fethy 
pannicle,or broad mufcle,than that which is of the panicle it {elfe, whether you dra¥ 
your incifion knife from the ferehead downewards, or from the cheeke upwards. 
Why you Befides when there is occafion to make incifionon the cye-browes , we are forbid: 
mufttake  dento doe ittran{verfe, leaftthis broad mufcle falling upon the eye, make the up- 
‘ane Per Eye-lid unmoveable:but if fuch a cutbe received accidentally , we are comma 
aes rage. ded prefently to ftitch it up ; which is a great argument that the motion of the uppet 
brows, | C¢y-lidisnot performed by its proper mufcles, but wholy depencs and ts perform: 
ed by the bread mufcle. Now if thefe fame proper mufcles which we have decribed 
fhould be in the upper eye-lid,it fhould be meet, (becaufe when one of the mufcles ® 


in aGion,the other whichis its oppofite or Antagonilt,refts orkeeps holieday,) ts 


of when that which is faid to open the eye is imployed, the oppofice thereof refting ths 
upper eye-lid fhould be drawne towards its originall, as we fee it happens in conv! 
fions; becaufe the operation of a'mufcle is thecolletion of the pare which it mov 


towards its originall. 
Therefor 


Lin.¢. 


L, I 


“therefore {c 


I¢hinke it th 
this broad ™ 
The 
vicles,the th¢ 
ferted into a! 
diverfe fibers 
nifold 
a vizard) by 
bers ofthis o 
nine condio 
caufe I may 
cles of the Ep: 
in the deicripi 
the defignati 


nature. Ther: 


circular form 


lefler corner t! 


again{t the 


But the Eyq 
than as it we! 
when need 
mufculous sk 
eycs when th 
{fuchlike . Th 
of the griftly | 
thick , for fi 
encompafled 
vs. Iewas 
downewards 
follow entire! 
cially the upp 
upper hath a: 
hature fhouldi 


looke the reft 
damage the bo 
ina moment, 


excellent fenfi 


aa” 
ots. 
> 


Lin.6. 


fordilting 
asal{y 
peak not dj. 
infantas 
perceive by 


rye -browes, 
r, the aire 
(WO Cavities 


witthe skin, 
en of fuflici- 
re come to 
ftand, ali the 


kin in fome 
Refhy pan- 
mediarly ad- 


iar’ ‘ole 


iS 
ne 
circle 
Tar 
Bi the eye, 
le. Buta 
be folemnly 
{hew then: 
s,that there 
the Hefhy 
or you draw 
upwards, 
are forbid- 
ake the up- 
ecommian- 
the upper 
is perferm: 
defcribed 
‘mufcles 15 
eday,) that 
refting, the 
convu!- 
ch it moves 


Therefore 


and other extreme the Body. 


“rherefore fecing fuch a motion or collection appears not any where in the eye-lid, 
tchinke it therefore manifeft that all the motion of this upper eye-lid depends upom 
hig broad mufcle, and that it alone is the author of the motion thereof. 

The originall of this broad mufcle is from the upper partot the Stermon, the cla- 
vicles,the fhoulder blades, and all the {pines of the vertebra’s of the neck: but it is in- 
forted into all thefe parts of the head which wanthaire, andthe whole face, having 
diverfe fibers from {fo various an originall, by benifit of which it performes fuch ma- 
sifold motions in the face (for it fo {preads it felfe over the face, that it covers it like 
, yizard) by teafon of the variety of the originall and the produ@ion of the divers fi- 
bers ofthis mufcle. But I have notin the defcription of this mufcle profecuted thofe 
nine conditions, which in the firft booke of my anatomy I required in every part, be. 
-qufe 1 may feeme to have fufficiently declared them in the defcription of the muf- 
clesof the Epigaftriam. VVherfore hence forward you muft expe nothing from me 
the defcription of mufcles befides their orig inall, infertton,a@ion,compofition,and 
the defignation of their veflels. | 


Cuare. 


Of the Eye-lids and Eye-browes. 


Ecaufe wee have fallne into mentionof the Eye-lids and Eye-browes, and 
becaufe the order of difleGion alfo requiresit , we muft tell you what they 
are , of what they confift, and how and for what ufe they were framed by 

nature, Therefore the Eye-browes are nothing cls than a ranck of haires fet ina femi- 

circular forme upon the upper part of the erbeof che Eye, from the greater tothe 
lefler corner thereof , to ferve for an ornament of the body and a defence of the eyes 
againft rhe acrimony of the {weat falling from the forchead. 

But the Eye-lids on each fidetwo , one above and another below,are nothing els 
than as it were certaine fhuttings appointed and made to clofe and open the eyes 
when need requires, and tocontaine them in theirorbes. Their compofure is of a 
mufculous skin, a griftle and haires fet like a pale at the fides of them to preferve the 
eycs when they are open, chiefly againft the injuries of {mall bodyes, as motes 
fuch like . Thefe haires are alwaies of equall and like bignefi¢,implanted at the edges 
of the griftly part, that they might alwaies ftand ftraightand ftiffeout. They are not 
thick , for fothey fhould darkentheeye. The griftle in which they are fattened is 
encompafled with the pericraninm ftretched fo far before it produce the Comsund#- 
vs. Itwas placedthere, that when any part thereof fhould be drawne upwards or 
downewards by the force of the broad mufcle or of the two proper mufeles, it might 
follow entirely and wholy by reafon of itshardnes. They call this fame griftle,efpe- 
cially the upper, Tar/ws, The upper and lower eye-lid differ in nothing, butthat the 
upper hath a more manifeft motion , and the lowera more obfcure; for otherwife 
nature fhould have in vaine encompafled it with a mufculous fubftance. 


— 


Cuar. V. 
Of the Eyes. 
Hc Eyes are the inftruments of the faculty of feeing, broughtthither by 


aa the vifive {pirit of the opticke nerves, as in anaqua-ducte. They are ofa 
fofefubftance, ofa large quantity, being bigger or leffer according to the 


SRit bignefie of the body. They are feated inthe head, that they might overe 


looke the reft of the body,to perceiveand fhun fuch things as might endanger, or cn- 
damage the body; for the aétion of the eyes is moft quick, as chat which is performed 
iNa moment, which is granted to none of the other feafes, Wherefore this isthe moft 
excellent fenfe of them all, For by this wee behold the fabricke and beauty of the 


R heavens 


The eriginall 
of the broal 
mufcle, 

tafettion 
and reafon 
why weex- 
preflefo many 
metions Wirth, 


the face, 


What the 
browes are, 


What the eyes 
lids are, 


Their compo~ 
{ure and 


What the 
Tarits is, 


What the eyes 
are. 


Theis fite, 


The quicknes, 
and excellency 
of their action 


| 
| 
1 
he Ir ule 
I 
|| 
: 
q 


182 Of theMufcles and Bones, L 13.6: 


heavens and earth, diftinguith the infinite varietyes of colours,we perccive and know 
the magnitude, figure, number, proportion, fite, motion and reft of all bodycs. The 
eyes have a pyramidall figure whoie bafis is without, but the Cone or point within 
Figure. atthe opticke nerves. Nature would have them contained in a hollow circle, that {o 
by the profundity and folidity of the placethey might be free from the incurfions 
of bruifing and hurtfull things. ; 

_. ~ Theyare compofed of fix mufcles, five coats, three humors, and a moft brigh, 
Compofition. fpirit , ( of which there is a perpetual afflux from the brainc) two nervesya double 
Glande veine, and one artery, befides much fat, and laftly a Glandule feared at the greater 
Lachrymalit. anole thereof, upponthat large hole which on both fides goes tothe nofe , andthar, 

le(t that the humours falling from the braine fhould flow by the nofe into the eyes, 

as we {ce it fares with thofe whole cyes perpetually weep, or water, by reafon of the 
rifulate- cating away ofthis glandule, whence that affect is called, the Fiftulalachrymalis, ox 
weeping Fiftula, 
Why fat is But there is much fat put between the mufcles of the eye , partly thar the motion 


Aang ofthe eyes might be more quick, in that flipperines of the fat, as alfo chat the temper 


and complexion of the eyes, and chiefly of their nervous parts,might be more con. 
ftant and lafting , which otherwife by their continuall and perpetual! motion would 
be fubje& to exceffive dryneffe, Fornature, forthe fame reafon hath placed Glan- 
dules flowing with a certaine moifture , neere thofe parts which have perpetual! 


agitation, 


Cc HAPs V I, 
Of the Mulcles, Coats and humors of the Eye, 


are fixe mufcles inthe eye , of which foure performe the foure direct 


fite and a&tion aT fees motions of the eye:they arife from the botteme of the orbe,and end in the 

Of the muleles. se: lex] midft of the eye encompaffing the opticke nerve. When they are all 

(VDI! moved with’onc endevour , they draw the eye inwards. But ifthe upper 

only ufe its action, it drawes the eye upwards; if the lower, downewards; ifthe right, 
to the right fide; if he left,to the left fide. 

Thetwo other mufcles turneithe eye about , the firft of which being the longer 
and flenderer,arifes almoft from the fame place, from which, that mu{cle arifes which 
drawesthe eyeto the right fideto the greater corner. But when it comes to the ut- 
moft part of the innerangle, where theGlendule lachrymalis is {cared,it endsin a {lender 
Tendon, there peircing through the middle membrane which is there, as through a 
ring; from whence it prefently going backe is {pent in a right angle towards the up- 
per part of the eye, betwixt the infertions of thofe a mufcles, of the which one draws 
the eye upwards, the other diretly to the outward corner,as itis obferved by FaLlopins 
or rather which I remember I have alwaics obferved,they turne betweenthe muielcs 
which move the eye upwards, and to the inner corner. 

This fifth mufcle when it is drawne intowards itsbeginning , fo drawes the eye 
with its circular tendon, that it carries itto the greater corner, 

The fixt mufcle is contrary to that ; for ithath its original! from the lower part of 
the orbe ata {mall hole, by which a nerve of the third conjugation paffesforth; and 
being that it is mof flender, whileft it afcends tranfyerfely to the outward corner, it 

involves the eye fo alfo,thar itis inferted in it by a {mall Tendon, fo that the Tendons 

ofthem both are oftentimes taken but for one. That thou maictt truely and accurately 
obferve this anatomicall defcription of the eye; the eye muft not be pluct out of its 
orbe , but rather the orbe it felfe muft be broken and feparated. 

Fer thus thou fhalt certaiglie and plainelic {ee the forementioned originall of the 
The ¢ coats mufcles. For the fivecoats, che firft which is firft met within difle&ion, comes from 
eftkecye. the pericranium, and is extended over all the white of the eye, even tothe sre oF 

Rain-bow.The duty of itis to ftrengthen,bind and containe the eye in its Orbe, where- 
fore ithadthe name Cominnéiive , others call it Admate,or Epipephyces. 


The 


poli! 


L I B.6- 


fecor 
fiftences this 


is cle: 


Chriftalime 
aflage to eb: 
forth from t' 
The third 
the colour © 
except the pa 
nycoate byt 
ment. But wa 
thecy¢e, an 
moft firmely 
Albugincou 
were dycdol 
raine-bow,@ 
The frft i 
appeared oft 
glafle. 
Sunne and fe 
Thirdly it 
the prefervati 
fight, fo then 
remote 
Chriftalliae 
objected to it 
Chriftalliae . § 
and as it 
firengthened. 
ven with mam 
the wombe, 
Now follo 
coate, becaufe 
a net with vel 
and nouri(he 
on the back p 
Chriftalline h 
Or furnifhed w 
the Chriftalli 
cOate, leaft che 
lingular order 
nother unleffe 
humors , but] 
the harder ca; 
then thefe rwa 
treme to extre 
The fifth an 
{piders web . 
exceeds the or 
like coate ened 
it might defer 
any time bee 
Cry ftalline hy 
adfolutely like 
The firtt hy 


OF water; itis 


4 
ae 
g 
4 
4 
4 
* 
ae 
4 


eand know 
odyes. The 
oint within 
rcle, that {g 
¢ incurfions 


moft bright 
double 
the greater 
andthar, 
to the eyes, 
of the 
Or 


the motion 
the temper 
> more con. 
tion would 
laced Glan- 
perpetual] 


oure direct 
dend inthe 
hey are all 
if the upper 
ifthe right, 


the longer 
rifes which 
s to the ut- 
in a flender 
sthrougha 
‘ds the up- 
} one draws 
ry Pallopivus 
he muicles 


es the eye 


ver part of 
forth; and 
corner, it 
Tendons 
accurately 
t out of its 


nall of che 
from 
the Jr# oF 
,where- 


The 


— 


and other extreme parts the Body. 


‘The fecondiscalled the Cornea , becaufe it ref{embles a hornein colopr and con- 
Gftence; this coat differs and varyes from it felfe, for intheforepart, as far asthe irs 
oges,it is clear and perfpicuous,but thick & ob{cure in the hinde part, by reafon of the 
diver(e polifhing. On the fore-part it is denfe that it may preferve and containe the 
Chriftalline and waterifh humor,but withall tranfparent fo to give the object a freer 
paflage to the Chryftalline. It hath its originall from the Cra meninx, proceeding 
forth from the inner holes ofthe erbe of the eye, for it compafles the eye on every fide. 

The third is called the ves or Grapy coat, becaufe in the exterior part it reprefents 
the colour of a black grape; it arifes from the Psa mater, and encompafies all the eye, 
except the papi or apple of the eye, for here being perforated, it adheres to the hor- 
nycoate by the veines and arteries which it communicates to it for life and nourith- 
ment. But when it arives at the /r#s, then forfaking the Cornea, it defcends deep into 
theeye, and in fome fort is turned about the Chriftalline humour, to which alfo ic 
moft firmely adheres, bounding the watenth humor,and alfo prohibicing that the 
Albugincous humor doe not overwhelme the Chriftalline. This grapy coate is as it 
were dyed on the infide with divers colours, as black, browne, blew, or green like a 
raine-bow, and that for thefe enfuing benitits, | 

The firft is, ifthat it had beene tinétured with one colour, all objects would have 
appeared ofthe famecolour, as it comes to patle when we looke through green or 
redglafle. But it muft be coleured, that fo it may collect the {pirits diffipated by the 
Sunne and {ecing, 

Thirdly it was convenient it fhould be painted with infinite variety of colours for 
the prefervation of the fight, For as the extreame colours corruptand weaken the 
fight,{o the middle refrefh and preferve it, more or leffe as they are neerer, or further 
remote fromthe extremes. It was fitit fhould be foft, that foit might not hurt the 
Chriftalline humor uppon whofe circumference it ends; and perforated in the part 
objetedtoit, leatt byitsob{curity ict fhould hinder the paflage of the obje@s to the 
Chriftalline , but rather that it might collect by its blacknes asa contrary,the great 
and as it were diffufed varietye of colours, no otherwife than wee fee the heat is 
ftrengthened by the oppofition of cold;fome call this coat Chersides, becaufe it is wo- 
ven with many veines and arteries, like the coat Cherion which involves the infant in 
the wombe, 

Now followes the fourth coate called Ampibliflroides or Retiformis, the Net-like 
coate, becaufe proceeding from the opticke nerve dilated into acoate, itis woven like 
a net with veines and artcries which it receives from the grapy coate, both for the life 
and nourifhment both of its felfe, as alfo of the glaffie humor which it encompafies 
onthe back part. The principall commodity of this coate is, to perceive when the 
Chriftalline humor fhall be changed by obie ts, & to leade the vifive {pirit inftructed 
or furnifhed with the faculty of feeing, by the mediation of the glaffie humor, evento 
the Chriftalline being the principal! inftrument of {ecing. Itis fofter than any other 
coate, leaft the rauch of it fhould offend that humor. VWVhereinchou wiltadmire the 
lingular order of nature, which as in other things it paffes not from one extreme to a- 
nother unleffe by a Adedium, fo here it hath not fitted the hard horny coate to the foft 
humors , but by iaterpofition of divers media of a middle contiftence. For thus after 
the harder coats Admata and Corneait hath placed the Grapy coate, by fo much fofter 
then thefe two, as the Net-like coat is fofter then it, that thus it might pafle from ex- 
treme to extremeas it were by thele degrees of hardnes and foftnes. 

The fifth and Jaft coate is called Arachnoides, becaufe itis of the confiftence of a 
‘pidersweb . And wee may well refemble this coate, to that skin of an union which 
exceeds the other in clearnefle, whitenefle andthinnefle, This Araneo/s or Cobweb- 
like Coate encompafles the Chriftalline humor on the fore fide, peradventure that fo 
itmight defend it, asthe chiefe inftrument of feeing, ifthe other humors fhould at 
“By Umebeehurt. Ichathits otiginall fromthe excrementitious humidity of the 
Cry falline humor , hardened into that coate by the coldnes of tlie adjacent parts; 
ad{olutely like the thin skin which encompafles the white of an Egge. 

The firft humer of the eye is called the queus or waterith, fiom the fimilitude 
of water; itis feated betweene the tranfparent part ofthe Horny coate,the portion 


R 2 of 


or the 
Horny coate. 


V veajor the 
grapy¢ coate, 


Why the 
py coate re- 
fembles diverz 
colours, 


4. 
Ampbsh li 
des or Retsfor: 
mis, Netz like 
Coate, 


An anatomis 
call Axiome, 


Ar he dei, 


five 


the Co webs 
coa 


‘ 
¢ 


| 
| | 
| 
The 2 humers 


Of | the Mujcles and Bones, 


of the Chriftalline humor lying towards the apple of the eye, and that refleion of 
the Grapy coate which comes fromthe Jr tothe circumference of the Chry. 


ftalline humor, that filling the empty {pace it may diftend the Cornea, and {0 hinder 


L 12.4: 


184. 


the falling thereof upon the Chryftalline which would fpoyle the fight; as alfo thar 


by its moifture it might binder the drying of the Chry ttalline humor.Peradventtire 
— itis made of the whayifh humor {weating out of the vefiells of the coats, hayiy 
their orifices forthe moft part in that place, where this waterifh humor retides. The 
fecond humor and middle moft in fcituation is called the Chryftalline becaufe j; 
2 Cryftalline, imitats Cryftallin the brightneffe and colour ; if fo be that we may attribute any 
-olourto it. For indeed it was fit that none of the three humors fhould be tinétureg 
with any colour, as thofe which fhould be the inftruments of fight, left they mighe 
beguile us in feeing as Red and greene {peQacles doe; for that is true which 
APhilefophi- wee have read written by the Philofopher; That the Subject or matter ap. 
oointed forthe reception of any forme fhould wantallimpreffion thereof. Hence 
Nature hath created a formeleffe matter, the humers of the cyes without colours, 
waxe without any figure,the minde without any particularknowledge of ang thing 
that fe they might be able to receiveall manuer of formes. The figure of the Cryftai. 
line humor is round, yet fomwhat flatted on the forefide,but yet more flatted behinds 
that fo the’ objects might be the better retained in that, as it were, plane figure , and 
that they might not fly backe as from a Globe, or round body, in which they could 
make but fhort ftay ; left ir might be eafily moved from its place, by the force of any 
thing falling or hitting ageinft it, becaufe that body which is exa@ly round 
touches nota plane body bur onely in a pointor pricke. Halfe this humor {wins 
inthe Glaffy humor,that fo it may be nourifhed from it by tranfpofition of matter, 
or rather ( {ecing itis encompafied on every fide with the fiftcoate, that the matter 
cannot eafily be fent from the one into the other ) by the benefit of the veffels pro- 


duced even unto it as well by the Net-lik@coate,as by the Grapye ; but it is filled 


witha bright {pirit on the forepart,which lyes next to the waterilh humor, and the 
{pace of the Apple of the eye. | 


Gal.Cap.§ Lib. 


Of which thing this is an argument, that as long asa man remaines alive, wee {ec | 


Lewden/uparte the eye every way full, and {wollne, but Janke and wrinkled when he is dead; befides 


alfo one of the eyes being fhur, the Pups//a of the other is dilated by the {pirit com- 
pelledto fly thither. And alfo forthe {ame caufe the horny coate is wrinkled in very 
old men, and the Papil/ais {traitned by the wrinkles fubfiding into themfelves which 
is the caufe that they fee litle, or not at all;for by age and fucceife of time the humor 
is conlumed by litle and litle, the implanted (pirit vanifhes away, and fmaller quanti- 
tic of {pirits How from the braine, as froma fountaine which is alfo exhaufted. The 
Horny coate at his originall, that is, in the parts next the /ré, feemethto be very 
nigh the Cryftallise Humor, becaufe all the coates in thatplace mutually cohere as 
touching one another, but as itrunnes further out co the Pupils, foit is further di- 
ftant from the Criftalline. Which you may eafily perceive by Anatomical! 
on, and the operation of touching ortaking away a Catarrha@ : for whereas a 
tarrhatis feated betweene the horny coate,and Cry ftalline humor,the needle thrutt 
in, is carriedabout upwards,downewards,and on every fide through a large and free 
{pace,neither touching the horny coate nor Cryftalline humor, by reafon thefe 
bodics are fevered by a good diftance filled with {pirit andathin humor, The ufe of 
ivis, that it may be like a looking-glaffe to the tacultie of {eeing carried thither 
with the vifive {pirit. 

Vierses fou The third and laft humor is the Vitrews the glaffie, or rather Albugineous humor, 
Albuginers, Alled fo, becaufe itis like molten glaffe, or the white of an Egge. Itis feated in the 


that isGlaifie, hind part of the Cryftalline humor that fo it may in fome fortbreake the violence 


In what place 
Catarrbacte 
or (uftufion 
breeds, 


of the fpirit lowing from the braine into the Cryftalline humour, no otherwile 

Egce. than the watry humor is placed onthe forefide ot the Cryftalline to hinder rhe vio- 
lence of the light and colours entering that way. This glaffie humor is nourifhed by 

The veines ef the net—like coate. | 

the eye, We have formerly {poken fufficiently of the nerves of the eye: Wherefore it re- 


maines that we {peake of the veines. Some of thefeare internal! carried thither with 
the 


L 


Table 3. 
manner of 4 
Fizare 2. fhe 
Figure 3. foew 
Figure 4. foew 
Figure 5 ¢ 
Figare 6.T: be 
Figure 7s The 
Figure 8, The 
Figure 9. The 
Pigare 10. 
Figure U. The 
Figure 14. Th 
Figuret5, 
F ef 6,7 he WA 
Fig.17.Theh 
Fig.1 8, The foi 
Fig.1g-The pl 
Pig. 20.The 21 


2,4, 8, The O; 


| | 
The figu 
FIG.I,. 
| 
fff 
4 \\ 
\ z x 
| 
“SS 
— 
my 
\ 
din 
a 
a 
4 
VIIE 
Lf 
iv? 
4 ty 4 < 
Ss . one 
=. 
4 ~ 
o 
XX. 
- 


Liss: 
che&ion of 
fthe Chry. 
nd fo hinder 


eradventtire 
macs, havin 
elides. The 
becaufe ir 
‘cribute any 
e tinétured 
they might 
true which 
matter ap- 
Hence 
ut colours, 
ang thing, 
the Cryftal- 
behinde 
,and 
they could 
force of any 
actly round 
Imor {wims 
Nn of matter; 
mt the matte: 
vefiels pro- 
t it is filled 
nor, and the 


ive, wee fec 

ead; befides 

{pirit com- 

kledin very 
elves, which 
Be che humor 
aller quanti- 
ufted. The 
to be very 
y cohere as 
further di- 
call diffe 
reas a Ca- 
eedle thruft 
rgeand free 
cafon thefe 
The ufeof 
ied thither 


ous humor, 
ated in the 
violence 

otherwilc 
ler rhe Vio- 


burifhed by 


mfore itre- 
hither with 
the 


as allo thar 


Contained inthe Head. 


Table 3- figure t.fheweth the Membranes ana humsers of the eye by lines drawne the 


manner of eye. 
Fizare 2. lheweth the horny coste with a portion of the Opticke Nerve. 


Figure 3. fheweth the fame divided by atranfuerfe fection. 
riowe 4. foeweth the Vvea or Grapy coate with a portion of the Opticke Nerve. 


a 


Figure 51: he Grapy coate of 2 mams eye, 
Figure 6. The Horny, Grapy and the Choroides, 
Figure The interior fuperficies of the Grapy conte. (fromthe Eye. 
Figure 8, The Pofterior part of the horny coate together with the faid Wet coate feparased 
Figure 9. The coate of the ustreess or humor called Hyaleides. 
Figure 10. Three humors joyned together. 
rigure The forward part of the Chriftalline. 

joure 12, The Chriftalline humor covered yet with hie coate. 
Figure 14. The Chri ftalline of mams eye. 
Figure\5, Coste. 
Fig.t 6,The watery humor difpofed upon the Chrifialline round About, (glaffy humor. 
rig,17-The hairy proceffes beamingly (princkled through the forcfide of the coate of the 
8, The forefide of the glaffy humor. 
Fig. 19.The place of the watery humor. 
Pig. 20.The glal/y humor comtaineing or ccmprehending the Chry talline. 


The figure of ibe eye. The explication of the firft 
Fioure by it feife. 
é 4, The Chriftalline humor. 

6, The Glaffie humor. 

¢,ithewatery humor. 

a, The utmott coate called 

Adnata, 

y ¢, The darke part of the 
horny Tunicle whichis 
nottran{paraat. 

f, The Grapy coatecalled 

g, The Net-like coate cal- 

Jed Retiformes. 

‘) 4, The coate of the glafly 

humor cald Hysloides. 

My i, The coate of the Chri- 
ftalline. 

kk, The hairy proceties 
cald Proce/fis ciliares. 

/, The impreffion of the 
Grapy coate where it 

departeth from the 
thick coate. 

m, tbe horny coate,a part 
of the thick coate. 

nw, The fae betwixt the 
Mutfcles. 

0, The optick Nerve, 

p, The Durs meninx, 

q, The Pie Mater or thie 
Meninx, 

rr, The Mulcles. 

The explication of the other 
19 fiewres together. 
¢2,4,8,The Optick Nerve. 6 2,4, The thin Meninx cloathing the Nerve.¢ 3,3, 

R 3 thicke 


| 
4 
j 
| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
4 


— 


Of the ujcles and Bones, 


What veines 
may be opened 
mn What 
fla mations 
of the eyes, 


Thets rifles 
ofthe anole. 


The 


thereot, 


thick cloathing the nerve. @ 8,the pofterior part of the horny ceate. ¢ 8.1 he 
coate called Retina gathered together on an heape. f2 3. The rainebuw of the eye. 
£ 2,3, Lhe leffer circle of the eye or the papilla. b 2,3 . Veflels difperfed through the 
Dura Memnx. i 3,6, The grapy. coate,but #,inthe 3.Fig.fheweth how the veficis doc 
joyne the hard membrane withthe grapy coatc, & 6. The horny or hard menibiane 
turnedover. 43.4, Certaine fibres end firings of veilels,w hereby the grapy coate 
is tyed to the horny.” ™ 4, 5. The impreffion of the grapy coate where it recedeth of 
departeth from the horny coate.# 5657, | he pupzla or apple of the cye.e 4,7, ihe 
Ciliar or haitie proces. p 7, The. beginning of the Grapic coate made ofa thine 
membrane dilated, but in the 17. fgurefheweth the ciliar procefles {princkied 
threveh the fore-part of the glaffie humor. 79, The bofome or deprethion of the 
plaifie humor receiveing the Chriftalline. (12-15. Thebredth of the coat of the 
Chriftalline, #12, 13, 14,16, The poffersor part of the Chriftalline humor whuch is 
{phericall or round. #11,14, 20, The fore-part of the fame Chriftalline deprefled 
x 10,20. The amplitude of the glaffic humor.y 10;16,19. The amplitude ef the watry 
humor. %,19, The place wherethe glaffie humor is diftinguifhed from the warry by 
the interpofition of the Myalezdes ox coate of theglafie humor. «10,16, The place 
where the grapie coat {wimmeth in the watrie humor. ¢ 18. The cavitic or depreflion 
of the glaffic hemor which remaineth when the Chriftallinc is exempted or takes 
from it. 19.the cavitie or depreffion of the watrie humor made by the fame meancs: 


the coats of the vefiels of the braine; other fome external! firetched overthe exter. 
nal! paitsef the eye, asthe Mufcles, and coat Admata,and by thefe vines inflamma. 
tions and reddnefic often happen in the external] parts of the cye: for which the 
Vena pupis mutt be opened, andcupping glafies and herncs mult be applied co the 
nape of the necke and fhoulders ;as in the internal! inflammations of the eye the ce- 
phalike veine muft be opened to avert and evacuate the morbificke humor. 


Cuap, VII. 


Of the Nofe. 


He is called in Greeke Rss, becaufethe excrements of the Braine flow 


forth by this paflage , thou maieft underftand icbath a divers fubftance by 
as 
Compofiiion. Thequantry, figureand fireare fufhiciently knowneto ail. 

Butit 1s compofed of the skinne and mufcles, bones, griftles, a membrane or coat: 


nerves, veines and arteryes, Theskinand bonesboth contained and containing, 
have formerly beene explained,as alfo the nerves,veines and arteries, The griftles of 
the Nofe are fixe in number; the firft is double feperating both the nofe-thrils in the 
top of the nofe extended eventothe bone Ethmoides. The fecond lyes under the for 
mer, The third and fourth are continued to the two outward bones of the nofe. The 
fifth & fixth being very flender and defcending on both fides of the nofe,make th: 
wings Or moveable parts thereof. Therefore the ufe of thefe griftles is, that the no! 
moveable about theend thereof, fhould be leffe obnoxious to external! in juryes as 
fractures S brufes,and befides more fit for drawing the aire in & expelling ic forth in 
breathing . For wature for this purpofe hath beftowed foure mu(cles upen the not, 
on cach fide two, one within, and anether without. 

The Externall taketh its originall from the cheeke,and defcending obliquely from 
thence aud after {ome fort annexed to that which opens theupperlip, is terminated 
into Lie wing of the nefe, which it dilates, 

Tac intetnall going onthe inner fide from the jaw bone, ends at the beginning of 
the griffles that make the wings, that fo it may contra them. The coate which in 
wardly iovefts the nefe-thrils and their paflages is produced by the five-like benes 
from the Craffa menior, asthe igner coate of the Palate, throtle, weazon, Gullet and 
inner ventricle, that it isn mervaile,ifthe affeets of fuch parts be quickly comma: 
cated withthe braine, This fame coate on each fide receives a portion ofanerve {rom 


che 


of thee; 
Tne nofe } 
Sc thercof 15 
from thence t 
But becaute | 
double, & fo 
alio dill 
when the onc 
gencration at 
cend upward 
cold Or 
pallag¢s as W 
re{piration an 
ment of the 


longer , and 
mouthtothe 
shut the mout 
of the cheeke 
on defcendst 
of the famet 
and it opens | 
drawing the 

The farft c 
which is 
‘ener part o! 
Mafeter, (0! 
ends in thew 

The othe: 
lownes theredl 
out by its ine 
{peake in a 
mouth, of w 
draw itawry 
their funStior 
Which 
right or ftrais 
ly, as when w 
the Skin, thatt 
ita mufculou: 
hands and {! 
MOved at all. 


| 
4 
& 
4 
36 L 1B. 6 
d con 
: the third co! 
| 
| 
} 
| 
| 
i 


IB. 4, 


8.The 
of the eye. 
wough the 
vefiels doe 
mcmbrane 
m apy Coate 
ecedeth or 
00,7, dhe 
ofa thinne 
iprinckled 
(ion of the 
oatc ofthe 
mor which is 
deprefled 
ithe Watry 
watry by 
The place 
deprefiion 
or taken 
MCcancsa 


the. exter. 
inflamma- 
the 
lied to the 

myc the ce. 
Ie 


sraine How 
bftance by 
Bwncto all. 
ne or c@atc 
ontainiog, 
griftles of 
brils in the 
ler the for. 
nofe. The 
smake the 
Bat the nofc 
injuryes,as 
it forthin 
the nofe, 


juely from 
erminated 


ginning of 
>» Which in 
like benes 
Gullet and 
compapni- 
nerve {rom 

the 


eal 
~ 


the third conjugation, through the hole which defcends to the nole by the recat cor- 
ner of the eye. 

Tne nofe in all the parts thereofis of acold and dry temper. The A@ion and pro- 
thercof is tocarry the aire and oft times {mellsto.the mammillary proce ile sand 
from thence tothe foure ventricles of the braine, forthe reafons formerly thewed, 
Butbecavfe the mammillary proceffes being the paflages of the aire and (mells are 
double, & forthat one of thefe may be obftructed without the other,therfare nature 
hath alio diftinguifhe d the paflage of the nofe with a griftly partitié put between,thac 
when the one isobfirucied , they aire by che other may enter into the braiae for the 
generation and prefervation of the animal! {pirit.. Thetwo holes of che nofe firft af 
cend upwards; and then downewards intothe mouth, by acrookedpaflage, left che 
cold aire, or duft fhould be carryed into the lungs . But the nofe was parted into two 
pallagesas we fee,not onely for the forememioned caufe , bur alfo for helping the 


re{piration and vindicating che {mell from externall injuryes, and laftly for the orga. 
ment of the face, 


Cuarp. VITI. 
Of the mufcles of the face. 


1ggOw we muft defcribe the mufcles of the face pertaining as well ro the 
lips as tothe lower jaw. Thefe are18.innumber, oncach fide nine, 
DN chat is,foure of the lips,two of the upper, and as many of the lower. Bur 
there belong fivero thelower jaw . The firlt of the upper lip being the 
longer , and narrower,arifeing from the yoake-bone defcends by the corner of the 


mouthtothe lowerlip, that fo itmay bring it tothe upper lip, and by thar meanes | 


shucthe mouths The other being skkorter and broader, pafling forth of the hollownes 
ofthe cheeke,or upper jaw (by whicha portion of the nerves of the third conjugaci- 
on defcendsto theferwo mufcles, and ether parts of the face) ends in the upperpart 
of the fame upper lip, which ir compofes together with the fleshy pannicle and skin, 
and it epens it by turning up the exteriour fibers towards the nole , and shutsit by 
drawing the inrernall inwards towards the tecth. 

The firft of the lower lip being the longer and {lenderer, cntring out of that region 
which is between the externall perforation of the upperjaw (through which on the 
isner part of the fame , anerve paffeth forthtothe fame muicles) and the mufcle 
Mifeter, (of which hereaftér) then afceading upwards by the corner of the mouth, it 
cads in the upper lip, chat fo it may draw it to the lower. 

The other broader and fhorter begins at the lower part of the Chin and the hol- 
lownes thereof,aad ends atthe lower fip which it makes,opening it within and with- 
out by its internall and external! fibers, as we aliofaid of its oppofite. And that I may 
{peakein a word, Nature hath framed three forts ef Mufcies forthe motion of the 
mouth, of whichfome openthe mouth, others shut it, and otherfome wrett it and 
draw it awry;but you muft note that when che mufcles of one kiadjoyatly pertorme 
their funétions (as the 2 upper which we defcribed in the firft place, on each fide one 
which draw the lower lip to the upper, and the mufCles oppofite to them) they make a 
right or ftraighe motion;but when cither of them moves feverally, it moves oblique- 
ly,as when we draw our mouth afide . Butthefe mufcles are fo faftened and fixed to 
the skin,thatt hey cannot be feperated; fo that iris no great matter whether you call 
ita mufculous skin, @raskinny mufele (Which alfo takes place in the palmes of che 
rd 4g foles of the feet) but chefe mufcles movethe lips, che upper jaw being sot 
at all. 


R 4 CHAP. 


The te mper, 
attionand ule, 


Why the rofz 
Wasparied ip 


There nyme 


4 i 
— 
ber 
¢i 
ye 
— P 
‘ 
j 
j 


ee 


183 


- 


Cuar. IX, 
ofthe Mufcles of the lower law. 


WGN E have faid thefe mufcles are five in number , that is, foure vvitich fhyt 
| it, and one which opens it , and thefe are alike onboth fides. The 


ad makes both thetemples. Itis more {ubje&to deadly wounds than the reft by 


7 mperall reafon of the multitude of nerves difperfed over the fubftance thereof which becau(e 
cle arc 


deadly. they are nere their originall,that isthe brainc, they inferre danger of fuddaine death 


it caufesa fever, the Phrenzy and Coma. 


The Figure of the chieje mufcles A. The mufcle of the forehead ana he 

of the Face. right fabers thereof. 

B. The Temporall mufcle. 

bis femicircalar original, 

D. The mufcle of the upper lip, 

G. The yoake-bone under which the 
temporall mufcles pajfe, 

I, The Ma(feter, or Grinding Mafcle, 

K. The upper griftle of the nofe. 

M. A wmufcle forming the cheekes. 

N., The mufele of the lower lip. 

> O. A part of the Fifth mufcle of the 

(rN lower law called Digaftricus, shat 

RAS double belied, 
QO. KR. The mufcle of the bone 


Hyoides growing wnte the rough 
7. 
S. The fecond muftle of the bone Hy oides vader the Chin. 


T. The third mujcle of the bone Hyoides fretched to the law, 
T.K. the feveneth mufcle ofthe bead and his infertion at T. 
V-V. The two venters ofthe fourth mufcle of the bone Hyoides. 


». The place where the veffells paffe which go to the head and the nerves which are [emt to th: 
Arme. 


Therefore that it fhould be leffe fubje@ or obvious to external! injuryes , Nature 
hath, as it were,made ita retiring place inthe bone, and fortified ir witha wall of 
| bone raifed fomewhat higher aboutit. ‘The other Mufcle almoft equall to the 
Mafiter, former in bignes , being called the AMa/eter , or grinding mufcle,makes the € heeke, 
mufcle, it defcends from the loweft part of the greateft bone ofthe orbe (which bendsit felfe 

as itwere back, that it may make part of the yoake bone) and inferts it {elfe into the 
lower law, from the corner thereof to theend of the root of the procefle Cerome,that 
fo it nay draw this law forwardand backward,and move it like a hand-mil!. 
Wherefore naturc hath compofed it of two forts of fibers,of the which fome from 
the neeke (the cheek in that place under the eyes ftanding fomewhat out like an apic 
arifing fromthe concourfe ofthe greater bones of the orbe and upper jaw) defcend 


obliquely to the corner and hinder partof the lower jaw , that it may move it for- 


wards. Orherfome arife from the lower part of the fame yoak-bene and defcending 


Obliquely interfect the former fibers after the fimilitude of the letter X, and infert 
 themfelves 


chemfelves I 
may draw } 
cle was calle 

The chirc 
and is infert: 
with the coz 
the outlide 
draw che 
fed over all 

The four 
the wingcd | 
the lower La 
mufclerhro 

The 
bone, afcen 
this Saw,to 
mufcle is tle 
is fiefhy att! 
ture and ing 
biting afund 
the tongue 
chougat goce 


an 
and lewels,: 
framed by « 
as they com: 
that fo théy: 
founds and 
This me: 
the fitth con 
crooked wit 
hearing. 
Guns and B 


Their number 
TheTem- and greater of thefe foure mulcles vviich thut the 1s callea 
porall Mufele. Pepeass or Temporall mufcle. it arifes from the fides of the forehead and Bregme 
bones,and adhering to the fame and the {tony bone,it defcends under the yoak-bone, 
from vvhence it inferts it felfe tothe proceffe of the lovver Iavv vvhich the Grecks 
call Coromethat it may dravy it directly te the upper, foto shut the mouth. 
But you mutt nore that this mufcle is tendinous evento his belly,and ehatit fils 
Dy aconvulfion which ulually feilows the affects of this muiclesbut allo 16 ike 
| 


| rvhich 
. Thefirt 
Cc rotophrte 
and Breema 
yoak-bone, 
the Grecks 
ith. 
i chat it fils 
the reft by 
ich becaule 
Jaine death 
mike Manner 


the 


inal 
‘lip, 


which the 
ing Mufcle, 


nofe. 
‘beekes. 
hip. 

of the 
tricus, shat 


of the bone 
the rough 


cnt to the 


» Nature 
1a wall of 
all to the 
Cheeke, 
ids it {elfe 
intothe 
rowe,that 


from 
ean aple 
defcend 
it for- 
icending 
nd infert 


emfelvcs 


Contained inthe Head, 


‘hem felves into the fame lower jaw atthe roots of the proceffe Cerone , that fo they 
may draw itback. Truely by reafon ot thefe contrary motions it is likely this muf- 
cle was called the Maffeter or grinder. 

Thethird, whichis the round Mufcle,arifes from all the Gams of the upper jaw, The reund 
into all the gummes of the lower, invefting the fides ofall the mouth” 
with the coate, with which it iscovered onthe infide, being otherwife covered on 
-he outfide with more fatthan any other mufcle. The acionthercofis, not onely to 
draw the lower law tothe upper, but alfo as with a Shovell to bring the meat difper- 
fed over all the mouth under the teeth, no otherwife then the tongue drawesitin: a) 

The fourth being fhorter and leffe than the reft arifing from allthe hollownes of mutcleoftke 
the winged procefic of the Wedge-bone , is inferted within into the broadeft part of wet !2w- 
the lower Law,that fo in like manner it may draw the fametotheupper. This isthe 
mufele through whole oceafion, we faid this lower is fometimes diflocated. 

The fifth and laft mufcle of the lower jaw from the procefle Byloides of the {tony 
bone, afcends ro the forepart of the Chin,nere te the connexion of the two bones of 
this law,to draw this Iaw downewards from the upper in opening the mouth. This 
mufcle is {lender and Tendinous in the midft, that fo it might be the ftronger,but it 
is fiefhy at the ends. Allthefe Mufcles were made by the fingular providence of na- Theuleof 
tureand ingrafted into this part for the performance of many ules and adtions,as ne sitions, 
biting afunder, chawing, grinding and feveriag the meat into {mall particles, which 
the tongue by a various and harmeleffe motion puts under the teeth. Thus much | 
thought good to fay of the parts of the face, as well contataing as contained, 


The and 
laft mu(cle, 


A. hole in the forehead 
bone in the brimme of the 
feate of the eye, fending « 
frall nerve of the third 
paireto the mufcles of the 
fore-head and the supper 
eye- brow. 

B. The Temporal wen fcle. 


\ 
* 


C uap. 


Of the Eaves and Parotides or kernels of the Eares. 


Passaees He Eares are the Organs of the Senfe of hearing. They are compofed The nature 


tion of the 


| be bended or folded in without harme, becanfebeing grifticly , they eares 
Sy) eafily yeildand give way;but they would nor doe fo, if they {hould be 
bony, but would rather break , That lap at which chey hang pendants 
and lewels,is by the ancients called Fibra; but the upper part They have beene are, 
ttamed by the providence of nature into twining paffages like a Snailes thel!, which 
as they come neerer to the foranses cecum blind hole, arc the more ftrairened , 
that fo they might the better gather the aire into them, S& conceive the differences of (an thereof, 
‘ounds and voices,and by little and little leade them to the membrane. 

This membrane which is indifferently hard hath growne up from the nerves of 
the fitth conjugation, which they cal! the auditory. But they were made thus inro 
crooked windings, leaft the founds rufhiag in too violently fhould hurt che {enfe of 
hearing. Yet tor all this we oft findit troubled and hurt by the noife of thunder, 
Guns and Bels. Other wife alfo left that the aire too fodainely entring in fhould by 


Ofthe skin,a little ficth,a griftle,veines,arteries and nerves, They may 


Li B.G: + 
© 
é 
A 
WE 
= 
1 


its qualitys,as cold,caufe fome harme ; and alfo that little creeping things and other 
extraneous bodys as fleas & the like, fhould be ftaied in thefe windings and turnings of 
the waics,the glutinous thicknes of the cholerick excrementor eare-waxe hereunto 
Ber what ufe alfoconduccing, which the braine purges and fends forth into this part, that is, the 
erves, auditory pafiage framed into thefe intricate Mxanders, 


The Figure of the eares and bones 
of the auaitory paffage. 


T4b,10 fheweth the cares and the 
divers internal parts thereof. 
fheweth the whole external 
care, witha part of the Temple 

bone, 

Fig.2fbeweth the left Lowe of the 
Temple divided 1” the witdae/t 
by the inflrument of hearine. 
whereabout on ether fide there 
are certazne paffages heere par. 

ticularly def{cribed, 

Fig. 3,4nd 4. fheweth the three 
Little Bones. 

Fig.5. fheweth a portion of the 
bone of the temples which is feen 

neere the hole of Hearing divi. 
ded through the mtddef} where- 
by the Nerves,Bones and 
branes may appeare as Vefalius 
of them conce:veth. 

Fiz.6.fhewethibe 
branes, Bones and holes of the 
Organ of hearing, as Platerus 
hath defcribed them, 

Fig, 7, and8. fheweth the littl. 
bones of the bearing of a man 
andofaCalfe, beth zoyned and 
Separated. 

Fig.9. foeweth the founa 
ous by Aquapencens. 

For the particular declaration 
{ee D.Crookes Anatomic pa, 


577° 


rorwhat uf ,Dutthat we may underftand how the hearing is made,we muft know theftru@ure ’ 
the membrane OLthe organ or inftrument hereof. Themembrane which we formerly mentianed 
toconfift ofthe auditory nerve, is fretchedinthe infide over the auditory paflage 
rypadage like asthe head of a Drum. For itis ftretched and extended with the Aire,or auditory 
{pirit implanted there, & fhut up inthe cavity of the maramillary proceiic and fors- 
men caecum, that {mitten upon by the touch of the external] aire entring in,it may re- 
Whatfound ceive the objet, that is the found, which is nothing elfe then acertaine quality a- 
™ rifing from the aire beaten or moved by the collifion , and conflict of one or more 
bodyes. 
Such a collifion is {pred over the aire, asthe water which by thegliding touch of 
a {tone produces many circles and tings one as it were rifling from another. So in 
rivelets running in anarrow channel the water ftrucken and asit were, beaten back in 
its courfe againtt bruken,crage y and ficep rocks, wheels about into many turnings: 
this collifion of the beaten aire flying back diverfe waics from arched and hollow 


roofed 


roofed places 
4 double foun 
rhus made Dy 
interpall. 
The exter! 
yp inthe cavit 
and fole aire, 
noife or beat! 
of {pirits, wh 
doe thefe 
alfo made the 
leolws oF ham 
q Geeman fiir 
of the Greek« 
They arep 
by the force « 
wichin under 
moved 
moved morc 
clude,accore: 
The 
which are 
placed asit « 
law, the m 
luch colda! 
(slandules 
Therefore t 
lent and mal: 
arteries {pr 
to moyi{ten t 
their continua 
firft booke 


is, the Throat 
bones jeyned 
This bone is 
the intercour {i 
bous op the f& 
containe t 
which is calle 
{trength ortw 
this bafis it fer: 
‘OmMeM are cy. 
then it is in bi 
of ligaments 
With the forer. 
‘Cmper as orh< 


“ ¢ 
| 
\ | AWN 
NY 
MQ, 
Za ON 
C \ 
ye EN 
ws 
cy 
/ NY, 
TX 
RELA 
| 
> 
| 


I B. 6. 
Bs and other 
turnings of 
e hereunto 
hat is, the 


res and the 

ts thereof, 
mic ¢xternal 

the Ti emple 


Lone of the 
the midde/t 
of hearing, 
my jide there 
me par- 


the three 


tion of the 
bich ws feen 
ring aivi- 
eft ,where- 
aud Mcm- 
as Vefalius 


Mewm- 
les of the 


Platerus 


h the little 
ofa mAn 


oyned and 
ufcle founda 


‘claration 


ftructure 
bentianed 
y patlage 
auditory 
-and fora- 
it may re- 
quality a- 
or more 


r couch of 
r. Soin 
*n back in 
mtnroings: 
d hollow 
roofed 


* 


-oofed places,as Dens,Cifterns, Wells, thick Woodsandthe like,yeildsand produces Ths 
, double found , and this reduplication 1s calledan Echo. Wherefore the hearing is 
ehus made by theaire, asa medium, burthisaire is twofold , that is,externall aad 
-aterpall- 
The exteriour is that which encompaffes vs,but the interiour is chat which is fhut The 3 bones 
yp inthe cavity of che mammullary procefie and foramen cacuws, which truly is not pure — 
and fole aire, but tempered and mixed with the auditory {pirit. Thence proceeds the 
noife or beating of the Eares, when vapours are there mixed with the aire infteed 
of {pirits, where by their motion or agitation is perturbed and confuled, Burneither 
doe thefe fuffice for hearing, for nature for the more exact diftin ion of founds hath 
alfo made the little bones, of which one is called the J#cas or anvill, another the Aéa/- 
/eolws ox the thirdthe Stapes or ftirrop, becaufe the thape thereof refembles 
aGeeman flirrop . Alfo it may be called Deltoides, becaufe it is made in the fhape 
ofthe Greeke letter 4. | 
They are placed behind the membrane; wherefore the anvill and hammer moved Theiru®. 
by the force of the entrance ef the externall aire, and beating thereof againft thar 
membrane,they more diftin@ly expreffe the difference of founds, as ftrings ftretched 
within under the head of a Drum; asfor example, thefe bones being more gently 
moved ceprefent a low found to they common fenfe & faculty of hearing, burbeing 
moved more vehemently and violently they prefent a quick and great found ; to cone F 
clude,according to their diverfe agication , they produce diverfe and different founds, Sees of 
The Glandules should followthe Earesia the order of Anatomy , as well thofe 24>. 
whichare called the emunctoryes of the braine, that isthe Parotides ( Which are 
placed as it were at the lower part of the cares) asthefe which lye under the lower 
law, the mufcles of the bone Hyoides & the tongue,in which the Scrophule and other 
fuch cold ab{ceffes breed. It fhall here fuffice to fet dovvne the ufe of all fuch like 
Glandules. 
Therefore the Paretides are’ framed in that place by nature, to receive thcvitu- 
lent and maligne matter fent forth by the ftrength of the braine, by the veines and 
arteries {pred over that place. The reft ferve to ftrengthen the divifion of the veflels, 
to moyften the ligaments and membranes of the law, left they shoud be dryed by 
their continuall motion. Their other conditions and ufes are formerly handled in our 
firftbooke of Anatomy. 


a 


Cuar. XI. 


Of the bone Hyoides,and the mufeles thereof. 


~ 


BS He Subftance of the Bone Ayoiaes isthe fame with that ef other bones, 
Z The figure thercof imitates the greek letter v from whence it took the the name, 
name, (as alfo the mame and fromthe letter *itis inlike 
Ss fort called « by feme it is ftiled Os Gutturss andes Lingue, that fition. 
is, the Throat bone and Tongue bone, The compofition thercoiconfifts of many 
bones joyned into one by the interpofition of griftlcs. 
This bone is bigger in beafts and compofed of more bones, and that not only by 
the intercourfe ot griftles but alfo of ligaments, It is feated with its bafis (being ee. 
bouson the forepart for conitancy , and arched on the infide that it might receiue 
and containe the root of the tongue) upoathe upper part of that priftle of the chrotle 
which iscalled /eutéformeis or Sheild-like, ( for thes feemes to prop it up by the 
ftreneth of two proceffes rifing at the bafis thereof)andthe root of the tongue, From 
this bafis it fends forth two hornes to the fides of the songs on cach fide one, which 
iomen are tyed tothe Appendix /fy/oédes by ligaments {ent from it felfe . 
then it isin beafts ,who have it of many bones united as we faid , by the intercouric 
of ligaments even ro the root of the filoides Wherefore this bonehath comncxi0N Thetempes 


With the forementiened parts, and other hereafter to be mentioned. [rt hath the fame ule 


‘emperasother bones have. Theufe of it is, co minifter ligaments to certaine mut- 


cles 


Contained inthe Head. 


a 
é 
A | 
* 
* 
i 


0 he ufcles and Bones, 


Lin. 6 


The mufcles 
ofthe bone 
Hyoes, 


cles ofthe tongue, and infertionas well to the two toremoft and upper mulcles of 


the throtle,as to irs owne,of which we will now treat. | : 
The mutcles ofthe bone Hyozdes , according tothe opinion of fome are cight, on 


each fide foure; of which there betwo, one of which Gaka refersto the cormoy 


mufcles of the Zevinx orthrotle; and the otherto thofe which move the Shouldey. 
blade upwards. Howfoever it be , the firlt of the foure before mentioned ari{es 
fromthe Appendix Stylides, and pafling over the Nervous fubftance of the 
opening the lower law, is inferted into the hornes of the bone Hysides, This mutcl. 
is very thin, yet fomewhat broad, the which in that refpeG& may ealily becut, un- 
leffe you have a care in feparating the mufcle which opens the lower Chap. © The 
fecond afcends obliquely from the upper partof the fhoulder-blade nerethe pro. 
duGtionthereof called Coraceides, tothe beginnings of the hornes of the {aid bone 
Hyoiaes, This is rouad and nervous inthe midft that fo it might be the ftronger, as 
that is which we formerly faid opens the lower law, and itis referd by Gaéen a. 
mong ft thofe which move the fhoulder-blade upwards. The third arifes from the up. 
per part of the ferwow,and isinferted at the roote and bafis of the bone Hyesdes yer 
Galen refers it to the common mulfcles of the Lartax ; whofe opinientakes place ra. 
ther in beafts, than in man, f{ceing in man this mufcle cannet be found either to pro. 
ceed, or be inferted intothethrotle, as itis in beafts, The fourth and laft deféend; 


The aétion of within from the chin to the roor ofthe bone Myosdes. The firft of thefe mutcles 


thefe matcles, 


What kinde 
ef Aeth the 
tongac hath, 


The quantity, 
The figure. 


ompolure 


The nerves, 


The mufcles 
ofthe tonguc. 


with its companion or partner moves the bone Hyeides upwards ; the fecond downe- 
wards; The third backwards; and the fourth forewards, I would declare whence 
thefe mufcleshave their vefiells, had I not abundantly {atisfied that thing, when! 
treated of the diftribution of the nerves,veines and arteries. 


CHAP. 


Of the Tongue, 


<4 Of a different kind from the reft of the fleth,as chiefly appeares when you 


re? 


lyprieteen CUt it from the firft originall of the mufcles thereof; which thing bath | 


: 
ry vir 


moved fome, that they have made a fourthkind of flefh proper te che 
tongue and different from the reft, viz. the Fibrous, mufculous, and that of rhe 
bowells. The quantity thereof is fuch that it may be conteined in the mouth, ani 
cafily moved to each part thereof. The figure of it is triangular,which it rather cx. 
prefies in the bafis, which isatthe root ofthe bone Hyesdes, than in its point, of 
forepart, where from atriangle itbecomes more dilated. It is compofed of a men- 
brane ( which it hath from that which lines all the infide of the mouth) mufcles 4, 
nerves two on each fide, thcone whereof is fent from the third conjugation, into 
the coatethereof; the other from the feaventh is fent into the mufculous fubftance 
eventothe end thereof for motions fake ; fo that thofe fenfificke nerves from the 
third conjugation onely give te judge oftaftes,compofe the coate, andtouch of 
enter not the ficth. Befides it is compofed of veines and arterieson cach fic 
one, which itreceives fromthe external] lugular and Carorides, running manifeltly 
to che ead thereof on the lower fide, that fo they might be eafily opened in the di: 
feafes of the mouth and throtle, they commonly terme thefe the Veme nigré 
or blacke veines. 

The mufcles of the tongue areabfolutly ten, on each fide five. The firft narrow 
at the beginning, and broader at the end,defcends intothe upper fide of the ronzuc 
from the Appendix S#yleides, and together with its copartaer drawes it upwards. 
The tecondhath its original! within from the lower jaw about the region of the 
Grindinge teeth, and isinferted into the lower fide of the tongue, the which with 
its partner drawes it downeward. The third proceeds from the inner parcof che 
Chin and goes to the root of the tongue, that when need requires it may put if 
forchofthe mouth, The fourth the greateft and broadeft of them all, compo! 

o! 


HE tongucis ofa fiefhy,rare,loofe and foft fubftance ; it enjoyes ich | 


4 


been withour 


teper & mitica: 
the or ql 
that it may be d 
ticulate, & by ch 


away sOr Catcn 


Bebe 


ofall forts of i 
lower part ol 

The fited laf 

and goestothe 
fides of the mx 
action & com 

made fungous 
the tafts conjo 
ftinguish che vi 
ofthe mouth,” 
itis likea {coo 
hath {caped gr 
toperforme it 
thirft,or abut 
roots therof, 

braine & orhe: 
miake more 

throate and jam 


ter perfo 
handled,as the 
from the nofe, 
the Pharinx 
ofthe mouth): 
gums upper 
rough with div 
Palate mighth 
would finde th 
him feparate 
fhal find them: 
the palate, & at 
hoie,& region 
paflages arc op 
1S not well, the 
by the mouth.’ 
might judge of J 
fofe & hard. Fo: 


Y 
bon< 


the ec: 
the violence of 


hich ufe is nc 


© 
« 
« 
| 
| 
ee 
=! 
4 


Lis. 6 


r mulcles of 


re cight, on 
thecommonp 
1¢ Shoulder. 
ioned ariles 
apf chemuf{cle 
This mufele 
be cut, un- 
hap. The 
the pro. 

faid bone 
ftronger, as 
Galen a. 
from the up. 
yer 
‘es place ra- 
ther to pro- 
aft defcends 
hefe muicles 
downe- 
lare whence 
ing, whenI 


enjoyes fleth 
es when you 
bh thing hath 
roper to the 
that of the 
mouth, and 
t rather ¢x- 
$ point, of 
lof a mem- 

mufcles 4, 
Isation, into 
fubf{tance 
es from the 
sndtouch of 
n each fide 
manifeltly 
the di- 
Vena nigra 


firft narrow 
f the congue 


ic upwards. 


gion of the 
which with 
parcof the 
t may put i 


, compofed 
of 


L Bebo 


ofall forts of fibers ,paties forth froma the bafis of the bone Hyeides, and endsat the 


lower part of the tongue, which with ics companion plucks it backe intothe mouth. 
The lat moft ufually arifes fromthe upper part of thehornes of the bone 
andgocsto the roots of the tongue berweene the two firft, that it may move it to the 
Gdes of the mouth. The temper thereof, as of all other fleth,is hot and moift. The firtt 
aétion & commodity therof is,to bethe organ of the fenfe cf tafting,wherfore it was 


The temper, 
action, and 
Manifold ule 


and other extreme parts of the Body. 192 


made fungous & {pongy,that by reafon of the rarity of it, ic might more eafily admit ©! the congue, 


ehe tafts conjoyned with the {pettle, as avehicle, Another to be an inftrument to di- 
ftinguifh the voice by articulate {peech, for which it was made movable into each part 
of the mouth, The third is to be a helpe to chaw & fwallow-the meat.For which caufe 
itis likea fcoopeor difh with which wee throw backe the corne intothe mill, which 
hath feaped grinding. And becaufe,whenthe tongucis dry, it is leffe nimble & quicke 
toperforme its motions, as appeares by thofe which can {carfe {peake by reaion of 


chirft,or aburning feaver: therefore nature hath placed very fpongy glandulesat the Tie uleof ei: 


glandules 


roots therof, oneach fide one, which likefponges fucke and receive, both from the 


ced atthe root: 


braine & other places a waterifh and {pettlelyhumor, with which they humect and of the tongue, 


make more glib,not onely the rongue, butalfo the other parts of the mouth, asthe 
throare and jawes;thefe glandules are called the Ton/ille,or Almonds ofthe throate, 
Cuarp. XIII, 
Of the Moutb. 
BSAvA8 He mouth is that capacity which bounded with the cheekes & lips containes 
within its precinétsthe tecth,tonguc,and the beginnings of the throttle and 
Culler. Therfore the ufeof the mouth is to contcine the tongue, & ferve it in 


the fitter performance ofits aétions;& although many parts hereof have bin formerly 


— 


Ofthe Gargareon, or Pvuls. 


apple, hanging direatly down at the further end of the palate & bafas of the 
AZ, by boncEshmoides where the two holes of the palate come from the nole,above 
==" the entrace of the throttle. This little body is {cituate inthis place,to breake 

the violence of the aire drawne in by. breathing, & that by delay it might in fome fort 
‘cper & mitigate it by the warméneffe of the mouth. Befides, that it might be as it were 
thePeeliriz, or quil ofthevoice,fo to diffufe the fuliginous vapour fent forthin breathing 
that itmay be difperfed over althe mouth, that refounding from thence it may be at- 
ticulate, & by the motion of the tongue diftinguithed & formed, into acertaine voice. 
hich ufe is not fmall, when we {ee by experience that fuch as have this particle cut 


What itr, 
The ule, 


What kindeef 


coate the paz 
lathath, 


OF 


Thefite and 
man:fold 
thereof, 


the Garedreon we under ftand a flefhy & Spongy body,in thape like a PIN What thecars 


—_ 


The difcoms 
modities chat 


eWay ,or caten or corrupted by any accident,have not onely their voyce vitiated and enfacthelotte 


deprave 


4 ofthe V vuiz, 


handled,asthe pafiages of the palate comming 
from the nofe,yet it remaines,that we declare,what the palate,theGargareon,or Vvula 
the Pharinx fauces ot Chops are. The palate/or as it is commonly called,the Roofe 
fF ofthe mouth)is nothing elfe but the upper part of the mouth bounded with the teeth tatu, | 
sums &upper law. In which place the coate commonto the whole mouth,1s made 
| rough with divers wrincles,that the meats put up & down between the tongue & the 
Palate might be broken& chawed more Cainy Dy that and rouglne any The nerves 
| would finde the nerves, which defcend into the palat from the fourth conjugation, let reer, 
| fF —- him feparate that coat & caf ic from the fore to the hind part of the mouth ; for fo he 
{hal find them at the fides & hinde parts ofthe bones of the Palate,which incompafic | 
: the palate, S ag the beginning of the inner holes of the mouth,which defcend from the 
| : hole,& region of the productions of the wedgbone called the Saddle. Thefe holes or wy the he: 
| pafiages arc open, that we may breaththe better when we fleep,8& that when the nole ofthe palace 
| is not well,the excrements which feeke their paflage by it,may De cafilierdrawnaway 
by the mouth. This fame coate is woven with nervous fibers, that, like the tonguc,it 
might judge of tafts.thefe fibers copofea coat that hath amiddle confiftence betwixt 
loft & hard, For if it fhould have beene any harder, like a bone or griftle, it would have ee 
been without fenfe,but if fofter hard, acride and fharpe meats wouldhave hurcit. 
Cuap. XIILI. 


Of theMufcles and Bones, L1B.6; 


94. 
depraved, but fpeake ill favouredly,and as they lay through the nofe ;and belides, jp 
procefie of time they fallinto a confumption by reafon of the cold aire paffiag downg 
before it be qualified. This famte particle,is allo a meanesto hinder the duft trom fly. 

- Whatthe ing downe through the weazon inro the Lungs-By the Pharinx and fauces is ment the 
faucesare,  ioner & backe part of the mouth, or placed beforethe entrance of the Thrott!e 
Gullet;being fo called, becaufe that place is narrow & ftraite,that as it were by thele 
ftrairs,the airedrawn in by the mouth might be forced downe by the Throtle,and the 


meat intothe Gullet. 


C HAP, X V. 
Of the Larinx or Throttle. 


we muft fhew what is ment by the Zaréax or throttle,then profequute the 
other coditionsofit afterour accuf’omed maner, Therfore by the Lariax we 
2 Ree underftand nothing els in this place,than the head & extremity of the rough 
Artery ,or weazon which comesnecrerto Griftlely fubftance,then to any other.T he 

quantity therof is fufficiently large,yet divers according to the diverfity of bodies. 
iy refembles in fhape the head of a Germane pipe. The compofure of itconfifts of +8 
acedcompos mufcles,on each fide nine, which as they are like in quantity,{o in ftrength & acti. 
bute. on; of threegriftles,veines, arterics and nerves,as we fhewed, when we {poke of the 
diftribution of the veflels ; as allo of a double coate,the one externall,the other inter- 

The deferipti- Nall,as we fhewed when we {poke of the weazon.Thefe three Griftles are joyned to- 
onofthe gether by certaine Ligaments & mufcles;the formott griftle, which alfo is the greater 
is called by the Greckes Latine commonly Scutiforme,that is theild-like,be. 
caufeitrefembles@ fheild. The fecond being the hinder and middle in magnitude, 

wants a name,wherfore its called the ssnominata Or pamecles griftle. The laft & leat 

which notwith{tanding may be parted into two, fo lyes upon the edgesof the ether, 

that it relembles the mouth of an oyle pot,ora pitcher,wherupor the Greekes cai it 

Whencethe Arytemoides, Thele grifties thus fitted among ft themfelves utter a diftiné voice, bythe 


nitty DeNifit of the Epigloité,or After tongue, & alfo of the mufeles opening & fhutting.di. 


Whatis ment 
by the Larisx, 


eced, lating oc cOprefling them,whence procced infinite varicties of voyces, For thus when 
they are opened and dilated they yeeld a heavy,or dull found ; when they are fhu: ot 
drawn together,a quick,or iharpe found,and to conclude,they make it infinite wayes 
different according to the infinite varicty of the dilatation, or conftriction thereof. 
Themufeles 1 herfore becaufe it was fit thefe griftles f{hould be moveable,efpecially the Arytensi- 
aes,& Thyroides,nature hath put to them on each fide 9 mulcles, of which three are 
: common and 6 proper, The firft of the common lying hid under the third mufcle of 
them that move the bone /yoides,arifes from the root of the {ame bone, & by an ob- 
lique defcent inferts it {clfe at the bafis of the fhield-like griftle,to dilate it upwards & 
#sownwards, The fecond afcends obliquely from the ianer part of the flermon accor- 
ding to the length of the weazon(whence it is called Browchius)tothe bottem & fides 
of the fame fhield-like griftle,that it may open and dilate it withits wings. This mut 
cle is feen from the firft original! therof,evena great part of the way Araitly to cohere 
with the third mufcle of the bone Hysides;therfore under each of the mufcles there isz 
gladulous body {pred about the fore & upper part of the weazon,on that place wher 
Anotable @ppliesit felf'to the thrortle;this body although it refemble a flethy fubftaace,yerit 
hiftory. isaglandule, which being pluckt away by acertaiae Emperike taking upon him to 
cure the kings evil,cauled a defect of voice on one fide,becaufe be pulled away.the re- 
current ncrve lying upon that glandule as it goes to the throttle, as reports, 
at locés affectis. The third & arifes from rhe part of the Pertebra’s of the neck jying 
traniverfly upon the fides of the gullet, & ends at the wings & fides of the thield_Jike 
griftle,that it may tyc ir more ftraitly to the fecond Griftle.But thefe three are calle 
comon muicles,becaufe they take their original from fome other place than § throttle 
that fo they may be inferted into fome part therof,for they are called the proper mul- 
cles which arife from the Throttle it felf, which we have {aid tabe 6.0n each fide, Tic 
firftof which arifing from the fore part of the fecond oriltle makes a circle under the 
bafis of the fheld-like griftle,whileft afcending obliquely tothe therof it is after- 


wards inferted in apart of it, {9 to firengthen and dilate it. The fecond in like manne 


tee 


L 
arifiag from 
obliquely crof 
the bafis there: 
the fecond gril 
with the iccon 
fecond griftle, 
chat with che 
midle of the {! 
on of the four 
The fixt anc 
fame, to preii 
upWwards,recc! 
fhue the griitle 
may catily be 
of difficulty to 
by reafon of 
ning the fub{ta 
you may have 
of the fimpie 
fhould aske of 
and moilt, be: 
reckons up all 
body whicha: 
for motion, th 
thofe things \ 
hard cann 
that ir 
principall init: 
were {traite. 
throttle bur {p 
bred hunuditie 
the {peach is tz 
the mouthtot 
cover it may o} 
it iwallowing 
prefle and reg: 
thut the orificc 
runnes downe 
wile Eciesms s 
litle body is pa 
fome there arc 
teat fhut it.on 
bone Hy) es 
of this body, th 
thofe creatures 
thereof. Truly 
have diligently 
beafts, There 
hot upon the o; 
Oi fuch thingsa 
Cinuall breathin 
be contidered.t 
hollowed in the 
any of the meat 
X reteined. Be 
ken by thefe cl: 
the heart throu: 


4 
4 


— 


belides, in 
downe 
ft trom fly. 
isment the 
hrottle 3, 
re Dy thele 
tle,and the 


iequute the 
| Larinxwe 
the rough 
other. The 
Dodies. Ir 
of 
eth & 
poke ofthe 
ther inter- 
joyned to- 


the greater: 


iid. like,be- 
magnitude, 
lait & leaf 
the other, 
cekes call it 
oice, bythe 
hutting,di- 
‘thus when 
are fhut or 
nite wayes 
on thereof, 
ic Arytens- 
h three are 
mufcle of 

by an eb- 
upwards & 
m & fides 

This 
y tocohere 
acs there isa 
lace where 
ance,yetit 
900 him to 
vay-the re- 
ports, 
neck lying 
fhield-like 

me are called 
in § chrottic 
soper mul- 
h fide, The 
> under the 
sit is after- 
ke manncr 
arilfing 


L 18.6. and other extreme parts of the Body. 


grifing from the fecond griitle,from that place where it adheres to the firlt, it runnes 
obliquely crofling the farit to the inner and forepart of the eriftle 7 byroides neerc to 
the bafis thereof,that itmay joyne ittathe fecond. The third trom the hinde bafis of 
che fecond orifticaicends directly eo the bafis of the chird gt iltle Arptenecdes, that 
with the iecond m ufcle it may open & f{hurit. The fourth afcends from rhe fides of the 
fecond griltle ncere the original! of the fecond mufcle,to the fides of the Arytencide., 
‘har with the fecond mutcle itmay openandithutit. The arifes from the inner 
midle of the fheild-griftle, andends in the fore part of the 4r¢texoides at the inferti- 
on of the fourth mutcle,that fo it may prefle down the faid griiile, 

he fixt and laft afcends by the hinde bafis of the Arytexcides to the fore bafis of the 
{am¢, to prefle it downe. But you muft note,thar all fuch mufcles,as arifg fram below 
uptwardssreceive branches from the recurrent, but efpecially thofe who open and 
fhut the griftle Arytenozdes. Butthe fite, temper,connection, aud ufe ofthe throtle 
may calily beknowne by that we have faid before: Although itbe athing very full 
of difficulty to fearch out and demonitrate all the conditionsofthe organicall parts, 
by reafon of the diveriitic of their compofition. Wherefore hence forward conccra 
ning the fubftance, temper, and other circumftances of {uch parts as we fhall omir; 
you may have recouric to thofe things which we have written inthe Demonftration 


of the {imple and fimular parts,of which thefe organicall are compofed ; as if any 
fhould aske of what temper the Larznx is, you fhall anfwere,ot acolde,dry,and dor, 
and moilt, becaufe it confifts bothofagrifilely and flefhly fabftance, Nee which 
reckons up all the parts of the mouth, muft not omit that eriftlely and membranous 
body whicharifes trom the roots ofthe rongue, which that it might be more quicke 
for motion, that is,whereby it might be more calily creed and depreiied( for 
thofe things which are more foft dee continually flideaway,but thofe which are too 
hard cannot be bended) it was convenient it fhould be neither too hard nox too foft, 
that ir might be erected whileft we breath, but depreficd when wee {wailow, Itis a 
ptincipall inflrument of the voyce, for it cannot be well articulated unleffe the way 
were ftraite. Therefore it ftraitensthat way, and the patlage of the griftles of the 
throttle, bur {pecially the Arytemoides ; it isalwaycs by a certaine native,and in- 
bred humiditie, wherforc if it happen to be dried by a fever,or any other like accident 
the {peach istaken away. Itisboundonbothflidesby the common membrane of 
the mouth to the fides of the Arytemoides eventothe backe part thereof, chat folikea 
cover it may openand {hut the orifice of thie throtle, that none of the meat and drinke 
it {wallowing may fallinto che weazon, in fuch aboundance as may hinder the e- 
prefle and regrefle of the aire. For we muft not thinkethat this body doth fo clofely 
ihutthe orificeofthethrottle, butthat fome fmall quantitie of moufture alwayes 
tunnes downe by the inner fides, as the walles thereof, to moittenthe lungs; other- 
wile Ecleama's fhonld be ofno ufein the difeafes of the Cheft. And becaufe that chis 
litle body is partaker of voluntarie motion, therefore according to the opinion of 
fome there are fonre mufcles beftowed upon ir, ewo which may open it and two 
that {hut iron each fideone. The opening muicles defcend fromtheroore of the 
bone Hyeides and intheir infertion growing into one tlcy are termisated in the roote 
of this body, that is the Epreloti in the backe part thereef. The fhutting mufeles (in 
thofe creatures where they are found)arife on the infide betweene the coate & griftle 
thereof. Truly [could never obferve and finde thefe foure mu(clesina man,though I 
have diligently and earneftly fought for them,but Ihave alwayes obferved them in 
beafts. Therefore fome have boldly affirmed that this litle body in {wallowing lyes 
ot upon the orifice ofthe Throttle, unleffe when it is pretled downe by the heavines 
Oi fuch things as are to be fwallowed;but thar at allother times by reafon of the con- 
Linuall breathing it ftands upright,the Throttle being open: Fhere remaine as yet to 
be contidered.two {mall bofomes, orcavities, orrather fiflures which nature hath 
hollowed in the very throttle under the Epsglottis, on cach fide one,that ifby chance 
“ny of the meat or drink fhould fal,or flip alide in the Larémx,ic might be there ftayed 
« reteined.Befide that, the Aire toa violently entring, fhould be in fome fort bro- 
°0 by thefe clifts, or chinkes, no otherwife than the blood and fpirir entring into 


the heart through the Asricaleor Eares thereof. 
S 3 CuaP, 


Whercee the 
muieles of the 
Throztlehave 


| 
Lie 


Cf notable 

things tomes 
what abwayes 
falls upon the 


The mulcles 


The ul of che 
cavities or 
Gifures ot ths 
‘Throttle, 


‘ 
q 
3 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
¢ 
= 
4 
3 


L | 


Of theMuJcles and Bones, 


C HAPs xX V 

Of the Necke and the parts thereof. 
2 Irft we will dc&ne what the neck is,then profequute the parts therof afwe} 
proper as common,efpecially thofe of which we have not as 0 treated, 

& For it were fuperfluous ro {peake any more of the skin,the flefhy pannicle 
the veines arteries nerves,gullet,weazon & mufcles afcending & defcen. 
ding tothe parts into which they are inferted along{t the necke; wherefore you muft 

norexpedt that we fhould fay any thing of the neck more than to defcribethePerichr, 

or rack-bones, being the proper parts therof,& the ligaments aiwell thofe proper co 

the neck,as thofe which it hath in common with the head;%& laftly the muicles ,a{ve| 

What the = thofe it hath incommon with the head & chefi,as thofe of its owa. Therfore the neck 
is nothing then a part of the head, which is conteined between the nowle bone & 
the fir vertebra of the back. Firft in the neck the Vertebra’s mutt be confidered we 

mutt thew what they have proper & peculiar,& what common amongft themfelves, 

that we may the more eafily (hew the originall and infertion of the mutfcles growing 

Whatto be Out ofthem & ending in them.The neck confifts of feven Vertebvaor Rack- bones, in 
confideredin which you muft contider their proper body; and than the holes by which the {pinal! 
marrow pafles ; thirdly the or procefles of the Vertebre; fourthly the holes 
through which the nerves are diffeminated into ¢ther parts from the {pinal marrow, % 


befides the perforations of the traniverfe produdtions by which the veincs,& arteries 


which we cal Cervicales afcend alongft the necke,& laftly the connexion of chee fame 


vertebreot Rack-bones, For the firft,by the body of the vertebre,we underftand the 
forepart therofuponwhich the gullet lyes. For the hole,thatis not alwaies the largest 


in thofe vertebre which are niglieft the head ; but it is alwayes encompaffed with the 
body of the vertebr4,8& befides with three forts of proceffes,except in the firf Rack. 
bone,that is righr,tranf{verfe & oblique. By right we underftand thefe extuberancies 


Which be the 
right procefics 


of ihevertes in the Rackesbones of the necke which are hollowed direétly in the upper part of 


bra. them & rife up crefted oneach fide to {ufteine and receive the bafis ofthe Rack-bone 


Which the whichis fet it.Bythe oblique procefits, wee underftand the bunchings our by 
obluaues which thefe Rack-bones are mutually knit together by Ging/ymos;thefe are {eated be. 

tween the right & tranfverfe procefles, By the tranfverfe we underftaad the prorube. 
Whichthe rations nextthe body, which devide the Vertcbra or Rackbone ina ftraight line. 


tranfverle.  proceffesare perforated that they may give way tothe before defcribed veines & arte: 


ries, which centring the Spinail marrow by tke holes of the nerves nourifh the Racke- 
bones & parts belonging to them. Befides you muft note chat the perferations of the 
RLack- bones of the neck by which the nerves proceed from the {pinall marrow to the 
ourward parts are under the tranfverfe procefie that is growing or made by the upper 
& lower vertebra, contrary to all the other whichare in the reft of the Rackebones. 
The eonnexie Por the connexio of tlie Rack-bones,you muft knew that all the Kerscbre of the {pine 
sebraofthe have fix connexions,two in their own bodies,and 4in their oblique procefies By the 
—_ two firft connexions they are fo mutually articulated in their owne beadies that cach 
are joyned with other both above and below. But by the 4 other,by their oblique af- 
cendent & defcendent'procefles,on each fide 2, they are {o mutually inarticulate that 
as the fourth Rack-bonc ef the neck by its oblique afcendent procefles,is received of 
thedefcendent proceffés of the third Racke-bone;fo it receives the oblique afcendent 
procefies of the firft, by its oblique defcendents, for alwayes the oblique afcendent: 
are received, and the defcendents receive. Yet wee mult except the firlt Rack-bone of 
the meck which is conteined with 4. connexions by his lower oblique procefies, & by 
its upper by which it receives the oblique procefi¢s both of the nowle bone, & of the 
fecond Rack-bone. The fecond Vertebra or Rack-bone muftalfo be excepted which is 
holden by 5 connexions,that isto fay ,foure by its oblique proceffes, & the fifth by its 
own body, by which it is knit cothe body of the third we mutt thi" 
wheras nature hath not givena Spine to the firft Rack-bone, yet it hath givenit a cer- 
taine bunch or extuberancy inftead therof;in like manner, feing it makes no common 
paflage with the fecond Vertebra for the paflage forth of the nerve, itis perforated at 


Theproate the fides of its body, anditis made very thin onthe fore fide, asifit were without 


en body, that it might receive the fore progetis Fated ip the upper body of the fecond 


Racke-bone; 


RR, Agriftly L 
4,2,3,4, Tne h 
B,2,3, Lhecav 
Acavity 
D,2,A promin 
EP,2,3« The Sz 
the nowle-b 
GG ,2,3,4.the 
H,1,Theholeo 
1,3- The Sinus, 
maxctha co: 
X,354,A rough 
“L,4,Two cavi 
marked with 
The 
0,7, The appenk 
Over with aerift 
lame, abour wil 
cavity ofthe firf 
roots itlue of th 
tooth.x,3, Ana 


4 
9 | Be 
Racke- bone, W 
he head is! 
| of ths 
the APP"). 
gable 20. 
Fiowre 2 Shen 4 
| 
| 
Ic 
a icy 
| 
— 
\ 
6; 
> 
$= 


therofafwe} 
yettreated 
thy Pannicle 
& defeen. 
te 
the Perichy. 
proper [oO 
uicles 
ore the neck 
»wle boné & 
dered Wwe 
themfelves, 
“les prowine 
‘k-bones, in 
the {pina!! 
bly the holes 
marrow, 
,& arteries 
tchele fame 
derftand the 
largeft 
ffed with the 
1¢ fir Rack. 
tuberancies 
Iipper part of 
> Rack-bone 
bipes ourh 
rc (cated 
the prorube- 
nt line. Thefe 
ines & artes 
the Racke- 
tions of the 
Brrow to rhe 
y the upper 
ackebones. 
of the {pine 
efies. By the 
€s thateach 
oblique af- 
ticulare that 
ircceived of 
he afcendent 
alcendents 
ack-bone of 
efies, & by 
1c, & of the 
ed which is 
 tifth by its 
aore, that 
Wenita cer- 
ocommon 
forated at 
fe without 
the fecond 
acke-bone; 


LI B.6 ° and other extreme apres of the Body. 197 


Racke-bone, which Hippocrates calles the tooth, to which the principal! Ligament 
of the head is taftened ,which deicends within from the hinde part of the head under 
he Apophy [es climotaesor procefles of the wedge-bone, 


gable 20. Figure 1, Sheweth all the racke-bone of the backe k mit together. 
pigure 2.Sheweth the fore and mpper face of the mecke, See D .Crooke,pag.398. 
FIG.I From, 4,to #, the feven 
vertebres of thenecke, 
ym =Fromc,toD,The twelve 
vertebres of the chet. 

Ie E,toF, The five 

=< sack-bones of the 
Eoynes. 

From G,toH, The Os 
{atram or Holy-bone 
confifting 
of 6.vertebra. 

From /,toK, The bone 
Coccyx or the rump- 
bone according to the 
late writets. 

LL, The bodies of the 
vertebra. 

M, The tranfverfe pro- 
cefles of the vertebra: 

WN, The defcendent pro- 
cetles. 

OO, The alcendent proe 
cefies; 

PP, The backwasd 
ceffes. 

0.2, The holes thatare 
inthe fides of the ver- 
tebrethrough which 

the nerves are trant- 
mitted. 


RR, Agriftly Ligament betwixt the vertebra. 

A,2,3,4, The hole whereoutcthe marrow ofthebacke iflueth:; 

B,2,3, The cavity which admiteeth the root of the fecond rack-bone. 

C,3,4, Acavity or Sinus in the fame place crufted over with a griftle. 

D,2,A prominence in theoutward region of this 

EF, 2,3. The Sinus or cavity of the firft racke-bone which admitteth the 2. heads of 
the nowle-bone. 

6G ,2,3,4.the tran{verfe procefle of the 1.¥ertebrs. 

4,1, The hole of this tranfverfe proceffe. | 

1,3-The Sinus, which together with the cavity of the nowle-bone marked with &, 
maxctha common pa(lage prepared for the nerves. 

X,3.4,A rough place where the {pine of the firft racke is wanting. 

LL.4, Two cavities of the firft racke receiving the 2, ‘bunches of the fecond racke 
matked with 44 N, 

“X56 The 2. bunches of the fecond racke which fall into the cavities of the firit: 

0,7, The appendix or tooth of the fecond racke.P,5, A knub of this appendix crufted 

Over withagriftle. 2,6, The backfide of the tooth. 2,6, the or cavity of the 

‘ame, about which atran{verfe Ligament is rowled containing the faid tooth im the | 

cavity ofthe firft racke, ST 6.Certaine cavities at the fides of the tooth whence the 

roots iflue of the fore-branch of the fecond paire of finews, 7,5, the point of the 

‘ooth.X,3, An afperity or roughneffe where is a hole but not thrilled through. 

S 3 | 


= 
| 


Of theMujcles andB ones, 


Lit B.A. 


cavity of the fecond racke which together with the cavity marked with Z, maketh » 
hole through which the nerves doe iffue.Z,4,the Sinus of the firft racke.4,5,6,7, the 
double {pine of the {econd racke.6,5§ 56575 the tran{ver{e proccfie of rhe fecond rack, 
¢,7,the hole of the faid traniverfe proccfle. 4,6,7,the defcending procefie of the fe. 
cond rack whofe cavity is matked with 4, in the 6.figure.e,6,7, the place whete the 
body ofthe fecond rack defcendeth dowaward.f gg, 8,the lower fide of the body of 
the third rack at f, the. wo eminent parts of the fame at ¢¢.62,8, the aicending pro- 
cefles./ m, $, the two defcending procefles #op q,8,cthe tranfverfe proceffes.7,5,,9 
{pine or backward proceffe. /#,8, the cwo toppesof the fpine.#,9, the delcending 
proceffe of the third rack.x,9,the afcending proceffe,y, the tranf verfe proceffe of the 
third rack. ¢,8,9, the hole of this tran{verie proceffe, °,9, the upper hollowed pare of 
the body of the third rack.4,9, the Sinus or cavity which maketh the lower part of 
hole through which the conjugations of the nerves are led, *,7, the upper partof the 


fame hole. 
_ And by this articulationthe head is bended forewards and backewards, as itis 
By what atti’ moved tothe fides by the articulation of the firft Racke-bone with the fecond, Thar 


head isbended procefie is bound by two Ligaments,the firft of which being the greater and broader 

ras 18 ¢xteroall, comprehending in the compaffe thereof all the upper articulation, afcer. 
ding from the Rackeé. bonesto the head,or rather defcending trom the head to them, 
as any other Ligament going from onebonetoanother; The otheris the ftronger 
and alfo encompaffes the articulation mixing its felfe with the griftle, which by its 
interpofition binds together allthe Kacke-bones, the firft excepted, as you may {ce 
in pulling afunder the Racke-bones of a Swine ; and the whole Spine or Backe- bons 
is tyedrogether and compofed throughout with fuch Ligaments. 

The Holy bone is compofed of 4. Vertebre[ or rather of five,or fixe,as in the figure 
following } Belides the Rumpe-bone, it receives, and holds faft the Off déwm, or 
bone. Hanch-bones, and is as aBafisto all the Racke-bones placed above it, whereby it 

comes to paffe thatthe Racke-bones from the head to the Hely-bone grow {til! 
thicker, becaufe that which fupports ought to be bigger than that which is fuppor. 
ted. There is a certaine moy fture, tough and fatty pur between the Rack-bones,asa(2 
in other joints, to make them gliband flippery thatfo they may the better moy: 

Whileft thismotion is made,the Racke-bones part one from another. 
3 The commodities or ufes of the Spine are faid tobefoure. The firftis, tha iris, 
The maniiold as it were the feat and foundation of the compofure and conftiuction of rhe who: 
backebone, body,asthe Carkafleisina thip, The f{econd, that itisa way or paffage for the mar- 
row. The third is,becaufe it containes and preferves the fame. The fourth is, chat it 
ferves fora wall or bulwarke tothe entrailes which lye and reft upon it on che infide, 
And becaufe we have falicn into mention of Ligaments, it will not be amifleto infert 
in this place, that which ought ro be knewneofthem. Firft therefore we will declare 
whata Ligament is, then explaine the divers acceptions thereof, and profecute 
their differences, 
What Ligas Therefore a Ligament is nothing elfe thana fimple part of mans body, next to 2 
ments. bone ard Griftle the moft terreftriall, and which moft ufually arifes from the one o! 
other of them cither mediatly or immediatly, and in the Jike manner ends in the 
* one of them, or in a Mufcle, or in fome other part; whereby it comes to paife that 
Wy it og, + Ligament is without blood, dry, hard, and cold and without fenfe, like the parts 
ftom whence itarifes, although itrefemble a Nervein whiteneffe and confiltesce, 

but that it is fomewhat harder. 

A Ligamentis taken cither generally, or more particularly ; in general], for every 
Wiens of the body, which tyes one part toanother,in which fenfe the skin may be 
igamentsina called a Ligament, becau(e in containes all theinner partsin one unioa. Se che 
Comprehending all the natural! parts,and binding them to the backe-bone: 

fothe membrane j ini 
ane inuefting the Ribbs, (that is the Plewra ) containing all the vital! 
parts ; thus the membranes of the braine,the nerves, veines, arteryes, mufclcs,mem- 


branes, and Jafily all {uch parts of the body, which bind together and conteine other, 


may becalled Ligaments, becaufe they binde one part to another; as the nerves 
annexe 


18.6. 


annexe the 
yeines to the 
raken ,fignific 
The diftere® 
thers broad, 
little ; fome w 
griftle, accor 
ther in quickm 
of Ligaments 


and deciific 

motion move 

Necke. 

The fi 
tt 


P, The uppers 


| 
* 
. 
| 
ya 
fee 
4 | ~~ 
je 
4a > 
* 
| | 


maketh a 
536,57, the 
cond rack. 
Bc of the {e. 

where the 
me body of 
pro- 
.753,9,the 
cicending 
cefle of the 
red parc of 

rpartof 
partof the 


ds, aSitis 
ond. That 
nd broadcr 
ton, alcene 
ad to them, 
he ftronger 
hich by its 
ou may {ce 
sacke- bone 


nthe figure 
or 
whereby it 
‘grow {til! 


his {uppor- 


asalfo 
‘tter move. 


that itis, 
the whole 
mor the mar- 
h ts, that ic 

the infide. 
lleto infert 
vill declare 
y profecute 


, next 2 
the one of 
nds in the 
paffe that 
e the parts 
onfilteace, 


,forevery 
in be 
o the Pers- 
icke-bone: 
| che vital! 
chis,mem- 
‘ine other, 
the nerves 

annexe 


annexe the whole body torhe braine , the Arteries faften it to the heart : and the 
yeines to the liver. But roconclude, the name of a Ligament more particularly 
raken fignifies that part of the body, which we have defcribed a little before. 

The differences of Ligaments are many, for fume are membranous and thia; o- Th diffe 
thers broad, otherfome thicke and round, fome hard, fome foft, fomegreat, fome mente 
little ;fome wholy griftlely, others of a middle confiftence betweene a bone and a © “alled. 
griftle, according tothe nature of the motion of the parts, which they binde tege- 
therin quicknefle, vehemency and flowneffe. We will thew the other differences 


of Ligaments, as they thal! prefent themf{elves in difleQion. 


Crar. XVII. 


_ 


Of the Mufcles of the Necke. 


Mufcles of the necke as well proper as common, are in Their numbes 
ber twenty, or elfe twenty two, that is, ten, or cleven en each 
fide; of which feven only movethe head,er the firft vertebra with the 
head the other 3 or 4, the necke it {elf.Of the 7 which move the head, 
Ke & with the head the firft Vertebra,fome extend & it,others bend 
d declitic it, others move it obliquely, butallof them together in a fucceffive 
motion move it circularly; andthe like judgement maybe of the Mufcles of the 
Necke. 

The fourth Ficure of the Mufeles. This Figure fheweth the cavities of 

the middle and lower bellies, the bowels being taken out , but moft 

part of the bomesand waufcles remaining, 


AB,The firlt mufclebending 
the necke called Loews, 

C ©, The fecond bender of 
the necke called Scalemne, 
DDD D, The outward 

tercoftall mufcles. 
EEEE, The inner snterco- 


mutcles, 
F F F, The fecond mufcle 


of che cheft called ferratus 


rains minor {eparated from 
his originall. 

H, The firft mufele of the 
arme called Pedforalis, fe 
parated from his origioall, 

2, The fecond mufcle of the 
arme called Destozaes, 

K, The bone of the arme 
without ficfh. 

Ly The firft mufcle of the 
cubite called Biceps. 

M, The fecond mu(cle of 
the cubit called Brach:eus. 

N, The clavicle or coller- 

bone bent backward. 

©, The firft mujcle of the 
cheft called 


P, The upper proceffe of the fhoulder-blade. 2, The firft mufcle ofthe head called 
| 4 obliques 


| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
gy | hal 
| 
= 
r 
\ 
\\ 
~ 
| 


the and Bones, 


obliques inferior. R, The {econd mutcle of the head called Complexus. S, The fourth 
muicle ofthe fhoulder blade called Lewator, 7 ¥, The two bellies of the fourth mufcic 
of the bone Hyois. XX, 44, The fift mufcle of the backe whofe original! is at «. 
YY, 66,¢¢, The fixt mufcle of the thigh called P/ee, whofe originall is at ¢¢,and ten. 
donatéé. The feaventh mufcle of the thigh. d,theholybone. tlic 
holes ofthe holy bone out of which the nerves doc iffue. ¢, A portion of the fife 
mufcle of the thigh arifing from the fhare-bone, /, the fhare-bone bared. F, the 
ninth mufcle of the thigh or the firft circumacior, 


The fifih Figure of the mufeles in which fome mu(cles of the bead, chef, 
arme, and fbonlder-blade are deferibea. 


J, The proceffe of the fhoulder.blade, 
led the top of the fhoulder. 

Oo, The fourth mufcie of the arme or tic 
greater roana mufele,to which Fallopses bis 
right mufcle is adjoyned, which fom: 
call the /e/fer round mufele. 

Q Q. The fixt mufcle of the armeor ths 
upper blade mader. 

X, The fecond mufcle of the fhoulder- 

blade or the Levator or heaver. | 

Z the fecond mufcle of the cheft or thic | 
greater Saw 

r the fifth mufcle of the cheft or mufcle cal- 
led Sacrolumbus. 

«@, His place wherein he cleaveth faft ¢o 
the longeft mufcle of the backe. 

yv» the Tendons of the mufcle obliquely 
inferted inte the ribs, 

aa, the firft paire of the mufcles of rhe 
head or the Splinters. 

C4,8.9, their length whofe beginning a: $ 
and infertion at 

10, 1x. the fides of this mufcle, 

12, that diftance where they depart one 

from the other. 

13, the two mufcles called Comphexineare 
their infertion. 

», the fecond mufcle of the backe or the 

Longe# mutcle. 

o, the fourth mufcle of the backe or che 


Hj 


aly 


\\ 
he 


| 


Semé- [pinstus. | 

part of the tranfverfe mu{cleof clic 

‘Abdomen, 

th 

But before I caa come to the defcription of theiroriginall and infertion,! thoulder-blad 
muftadmonith thee, that the 2 Mufcles of the fhoulder-blade mutt firft be taken clin 
away by diffection ; that is, the Trapezins, Or Table-mufcle, and the Rhomboides, bi es, for chi 
or fquare-mufcle; whofe originall and infertion that we may the better demon- declin® the o 
ftrate, (or rather the a@ion by which wee feeke that originall and infertion, )clicy ines of b 


muft be pulled up, beginning attheir infertion, which isat the (houlder-blade (as ftom th 
Shall be thewed in the proper place) turning them up towards their original, 
thatis,to the Spine. Befides the lefle xhomboides,zhe hinder, and upper (called alfo par 
the Dentatwa or toothed-mufcle ) muft be raifed from its originall, which is at che 


threelower Rack«bonesof the Neckeand the firft of the backe,and turned uprolts 
infertion 


| 
| 
snfertion, wht 
g if d 
chyis ral 
| 
| 
= a\ pe. 
WAL) AANA: 
NG 4 (\ SS \\ 
‘ => Ay 
. 


The fourth 
urth mufcle 
all is at « a. 
¢¢,and ten- 


608, the 
n of the fift 
ared. k,the 


heft 


blade, Cale 


arme. or the 
Fallopsss his 


rhich fome 
rmeor the 


fhoulder- 
er. 
heft or the 


mufcle cal- 


vcth faft to 
* 


obliquely 
icles of the 


inning at 


depart one 
plexi Neare 
icke or the 


cke or the 
micleof the 


nfértion, i 
t be taken 
homboides, 
r demon- 
ion, thcy 
lade (as 
originall, 
alled alfo 
isatrhe 
dup to its 
infertion 


ontained inthe Head. 


snfertion,which isat three {paces of thelower ribbs nigh tothe hinde, and upper 
angle of the fhoulder-blade, as fhall be fhewed ia fit place hereafter. Thefe mufcles 
hus raifed up, the 4 mufcles which erect and extend the head muft be taken away, 
end then thofe two which niove it obliquely, and laftly one which bends, or de- 


The fixth Pigure of the mufeles ,fhewing fome of the mufcles of the 
Bead, Backe,Cheft Sboulder-blade and Arme, 


A D, the fecond paire of the 
mufcles of the head, of 
the two Complexz, the firft 
Part isat 4 D, 

BC. the {econd part. E F,the 
third pare rifing up under G 
and inferted ae F. 

G,thefourth part of this mufcle 

or the right mufcle of the 
head according to Fallopiuc, 
which Wefélixs made the 4. 
part of the 2. 

ASG G, (Betwixt the ribs) the ex- 

ternal] /ntercofta2 mulcles. 

L, the originall of the 2.mufcle 
of the backe. 

44, Histendons at the racke- 
bone of the necke. 

The upper O the fourth mu(fcle 
of the arme or the greater 
cund mufcle, 


the cheft,or the Sacrolembse 
hanging from his original. 
Q, the faxt mufcle of the arme 
Or the upper Bladerider in- 
verted. 
¥, the third ligament of the 
joynt of the arme: 
X,the fourth mufcle of the 
fhouldereblade or the beaver. 
Z, the fecond muicle of the 


- 


mufile. 

v, the 3.mufcle of the necke called Tran/uer/alis. rm, the 4. mufcle of the necke called 
Spinatws. =, the fir mufcle of the backe'or the Square mufele., the 2.mufcle 
ofthe backe or the Louge#,whofe original! is at Zand his tendons at the Vertebre at 
M MM. o, the fourth mufcle of the backe called Spimates. 5, the backe of che 
thoulder-blade flaied. 


clines, for thus anatomical! order requires. Yet if you thinke good, you may, not 
hurting the other, firft of all cutaway thatwhich is called the Ma/leides, which 


declines or bendsthe head. For thefe 4, which lift up and extend the head, the tThesp/eniee, 


tirft from the figure of the Spleeneis called the Spleniue, it afcends from the s. 
upper {pines of the backe and the 4 lower of the necke,and is obliquely inferred at 
the backe part of the head and the mammillary proceffe, whence you may rail 
t towards its originalle The fecond by reafon of its compofure is called Com- 
Plexus schis paffing from the third,fourth and fift tranfverfe procefle of the Backe 
and often from the firft of the Necke, afcends direétly to the backe partof the 


head 


Cheft or the greater Saw- 


00, the lower, the 6 mufcle of 


The Compleg- 


4 
4 
3 
4 
| 
. 
Ex 
is; 
M4 
/ 
\ 
, WAX 
/ 
he 
WM 
|! \ Vs \ a 
WY? : ~ 
SS =S SS = 
~ > —= > = 
= 
SS LES =. \ 
| | 
| 
‘ 
| 


‘ 
| 


a 


Of the M ufeles and Bones, Line, 


head, incompafiing the lower and fide part of the necke, you may cafily take it Ups if 
you begin at the {pine, and {o goe forwards to the rranfyerf{e procefies and mammil. 
lary procefics of the nowle bone, This Complexus may be divided into two or thier 
mufcles, butthat with fome difficulty, by reafon of its folded texture. The third anq 
fourth, which be two of the eight little mufcles, being foure on each fide, doe afceng 


fomewhat obliquely, the firtt trucly from the whole fide of the fecond Vertebra, The 
fecond from the whole fide of the procefle of the firt Vertebra, which it hath jp 


Z he Reéti.or 
e right mus ftead of afpine ; they afcend to the backe part of the head juft againfi the {pine: thef 


cles, two mufcles by the confent ef all Anatomifts are called right, or dire mufcles,one. 


ly mioveing the head : thefe truely muft not be pluckt from the places of their origi. 
nall, nor infertion, but onely bound by a ftring put under them, that fo they may be 
the more eafily fhewed, On cach fide follow two oblique mutcles, one whereof 


The feventh Ficure of the mufcles : fhewing fome mufiles of the head ana 
Chef, the Trapezius or Table. mufcle being takem away: as 
alfo of the blade and arme. 


4, The prominent part of 
the fourth mufcle of the 
cheft called Serrates po- 

fiicus fuperior. 

A, the firft mufcle of the 
head called /plemiss. 

EE, the infertion of the 
fecond mutcle of the 
head called Complexu. 

J, the coller bone bared. 

M, the backpart of the ic- 
cond mofcle of the arme 
called Deltos: 

ri, His backward origi- 
nall. 

8, His implantation into 
the arme. 

NWN, the fourth mufcle of 
the armecal led Lari/s:- 

s vu, His originall from the 
{pines of the rack-bones 
and fromthe holy bone 

«a, the connexiou of this 
mufcle with the hanch- 

bone, which is led inthe 
infide from ,, to «. 

ey the place where it lieth 
upen the lower angle o! 
the Batis of the fhoulder- 

SESS blade, 

O,the 4. mufcle of rhe 
arme called Rotwadwe maior. ¢, fome mufcles of the backe doc here offerthem({elves. 
P, the fift mufcle of the arme called Superfcapylaris Inferior. Q, the fixe mufcle of the 
arme called Saper(capularss Superior, S, the beginning of the third mufele of the 
arme called Latisfimws Y, the third mufcle of the blade called Rhomboides. X,Hiso- 
riginall from the [pines of the rackebones, +e, His infertion intothe bafis of the 


fhoulder-blade.,,, the fourth mufcle of the blade called Z "Ap. the ob- 
dique defeendent mufcle of the dbdomen, 


oncly 


infertion of t 
fome thing pt 
{pine of the {ec 
ginall ofthe p 
hike manner 
rhat fo you m 
ig contrary tO 
fertion fhew. 


Thee: 


bafis of the 
QO, the fixt m: 
the blade 
ereacer Saw-n 
Called Sacrols 
mufcle of the 
mutcle of the 
me, 


gecident the h 
| rom the tran 
} 
} 
| 
>> 
\4 
| 
~ 
= 
= 
> 
‘4 
| 
| 


(ake itups if 
id mammil. 
wO OF three 
1¢ third and 
; doe afcend 
rtebra, The 
ithath in 
pines thefe 
(cles,one. 
Origi. 
ney may be 
ne whereof 


1 ana 


lent part of 
(cle of the 


alee po- 


(cle of the 


ion of the 
lec of the 


ted 
ne bared. 
rt ofthe 
f the arme 


ara origi- 


ation into 


»:mufcle of 


ed Latifsi- 


ii fromthe 
ickebones 
holy bone 
Ou of this 
he hanch- 
led inthe 
O a. 

re it lieth 
er angle of 
 fhoulder- 


le of the 
emfelves. 
icleof the 
cle of the 
X, His o- 
of the 
of the ob- 


oncly 


| Contatned inthe Head. 


onely moves the head ; the other primarily the fir Vertebra, but fecondarily, and by 
accident the head 1 felfe. For the firlt, contrary to the opinion of fome, it arifes 
fom the tranfverfe procefie of the firft rack-bone, and then isinferted, above the 
infertion of the firft right mutcle, the which in like manner you mutt lift up, by 
fome thing put underneath ic, but not feparate it. The other entring forth of the 
(pine of the fecond Vertebra,is inferted at the procefle of the firft, contrary to the ori- 
giuall ofthe precedent, although fome thiake otherwife. It will be convenient in 
jike manner onely, to lift up this with a ftring, and not plucke him from his place, 


that fo you may fee how all thefe make a perfe& trianele. The actionof this mufcle 
is contrary tothe action of the precedent, as the contrariety of irs original! and in4 


fertion fhew. 


The cight Figure ofthe mufcles; efpecially of thofe af the Chef, Ulead, and 
Shoulder blade, the Trapezius, Latiffimus, and 
Rhomboides being takenm away, 


4, The fourth mufcle of the 
cheft, or the upper and bindes 

Saw-mufcle, | 

“B,the 5 mufcle of the cheft, or 
the lower and hinder Saw- 
mufcle, 

4,6, A membranous beginning 
of the mufcle of the Abdomen, 
defcending obliquely downe 
from thie {pine of the backe. 

C, the firft mufcle extending the 
Cubit atc,his originall is from 
the necke of the arme,and from 
the lower bafis of the blade 
ata. 

E, the original! of the fourth 
mufcle of the bone yas from 
the blade, 

GG, the outward ineercofial! 
muf{cles. 

1, the Clayicle or coller-bone 
bared. 

27, the upper, the fecond muicle 
of thearme called De/tow, char. 
4,5, the beginning of this 
mufcle, 

N, the third mufcle of the arme 
orthe broad mufcle feparated. 

O, the fourth mufcle of the arme 

or the lower Super-Scavularis 
or bladerider, 
1,2,3. Char. His originall at the 


bafis of the faoulder-blade at 12, and hisinfertienintothe joyat of the armeat 3. 
Os the fixt mufcle of the arme oz the upper S#per- Seapalaris. X, the fourth mufcle of 
the blade called Levator or the heaver. Z,the fecond muicle of the Chett or the 
greater Saw-mufcle. 7,7, Char.thesibs, r, the fixt mufcle ofthe cheft, or the mufcle 
called Sacrolumbus, a, the firk mulcle of the head orthe {plinter. E B, the fecona 


mufcle of the head or the infertion of the mufcles called complexti. %, the fecond 


mulcle of the backe or the longeft mufcle. o, the fourth mufcle of the backe called 


Wherefore 


‘ 
TGA 
\ 
wit j j 
~ 
\ 
\ Of 4 . } 
| dl AN — 4S 
SSS 4, 
| 
>. 


Of the SMufcles and Bones, L13.6, 


Wherefore when the firft oblique ‘moves the head obliquely forwards, the 
cond puls it packe by the firft Versebra,this with his affociate of the other fide, may 


Which may be 
truly called 


roo he be truly termed the proper mufcles of the neck, becaufe they belong to no other parr, 


The twomo- tO Galens opinion ) hathtwo motions, one dire@ly forwards and backwards, as ap. 
tis ws of the 
head 


whereas itis contrary in other mufcles, But we muft note, that the head/accordinp 


peares in beckning it forwards,and cafting it backwards ; the other circular. 
The firft in Galews opinion is performed by the firlt Yertebra moved upon the 
fecond; the fecond by the head moved upon the firlt Wertebra; fox which he js 
reproved by the latter Anaromifts, who teach thatthe head cannot be turned round 
orcircularly uponthe firlt Vertebra without putting it out of joynt. 

For the laft, which bends the head, it afcends frem the upper and fide par, 
of the Sternow, and the next part of me clavicle, obliquely to the Apophy/j; 


4a The ninth Figure of the mufcles, fhewing the mufles 
of the Head and Necke. 


A B, the third paire of the Mufcles 
ofthe head called Rei Maiores, 

C, the Mammuillary proceffe. 

D, the tranfverfe procefle of the firft 
ra¢kebone. 

E, the procefle of the 2 rackebone of 

the necke. 

F G, the fourth paire of oulcles of 
the head called Rec#i Adinores, 

H J, the fift paire of mufcles of the 
head called Ob/iqui Superiores. 

K Z, the fixt paire of mufcles of the 
head called Obliqui Inferiores. 

X, the fourth paire of mufcles of the 
{houlder-blade. 

A, the fecond mufcle of the necke 
called Scalenus, which Falopius 
keth the eight mufcle of the chett. 

nm, the fourth mufcle of the necke 
called /pinatus. 

s, the firft mufcle of the backe cal. 
led Owadratus, 

*, the fecond mufcle of the backe 
Called Longifsimus. 

athe finws or bofome of this muicle, 

whereby it giveth way unto che 
third mufcle of the backe, called 
Sacer, 

WN 6, His Originall. 

v, thethird mufcle of the backe ¢al- 
led Sacer. .,, His Originall. », His end. 9, the fourth mufcle of the backe called 

Semifpinatws, His upper end ander the fourth mufcle of the necke. 


al 


\ 


NS 


Mafloides or mammillary proceffe of the hinde part of the head > whence it is called 
the Maftoidews. YYoumay divide this by reafon ofits manifold originall rather into 
two, than intothree mufcles. But it hadbeene better that the head might have 
beene moved every way, equally backwards andto the right and left fides; but 
thus it would often have beene ftrained to ourreat dammage and danger of life; 
neither could there have beene fich facility of motion without a loofenffe of th 
joynt. Therefore nature had rather beftow upon the head an harmelefte facultic 
of fewer motions, thanone furnifhed with more variety, but with agreat deale 


more uncertainty and danger, WVherefore ic hath made this junéture not laxe of 
loofe, but ftiffe and ftrong. After 


Lt Bebe 


~ after the the 
ofwhich numo 
lafemoves fide 
abour, we 
its originall fro 
bhacke,or rather 
cond Vertebrs 
wer[arius; that i: 
firft co feparate ! 
unleffe you had 
where their ori; 
Marvell nor, 
nifeft, for itis 
comes to pafle, 
jaft of che necke 
confounded wi: 
from the body « 
ginall, {pecially 
the nowle-bon 
chat it helpes:no 
oblique fibers p 
tranf{verfe proce 
oppofite to it, tc 
gullet, arad it is < 
the neckc to on 
hinder and 
verfe proce {les « 
hath {ufficient!y 
of the necke 
tothe arme mak 
arteries pertaini; 
of the diftributi 
nerves from the 


Aecke, but thar 
they leffer inholf 
in two, as the ra 

felf, on eac! 
hath Paflage fro 
the Verirebre of | 
ther of two of 

cerning ch 

Or oblique, they 
but that the tran{ 
ultaine the rib! 
2nd common sb 
and all thofe of 
fom the tenne § 


* 
4 
» 
did 
| 
_ 
- — } 
- 
_* 
> 
| pir 
i 
~ 
The 


ards, the 


er fide, may 


o other Part; 

d(according 
ards as ap. 
ular. 

ed the 
which he 1S 

urned round 


nd fide Parr 
Apephyfis 


the Mufcles 
Maiores. 
effe, 


¢ ofthe firt 


ackebone of 


mulcles of 


mores, 
micles of the 


LOVES 


{cles of the 


{cles of the 


the necke 

‘alopius M2- 
the chett. 

m the necke 


backe cal. 
the backe 


ismutcle, 
vy unto the 
cke, called 


backe eal- 
acke called 


itis called 
rather into 
ight have 
Bdess; but 
fer of life ; 
mie of the 
¢ facultic 
eat deale 
ot laxe oF 


After 


4 


‘ney leffer inholes, neither theyhave their tran{verfe procefles pertorated,or parted 


other extreme parts the Body. 


afer the (hewing of thefe mufcles, we muft come to three or fonre of the necke, 
ofwhich number two (which fome reduce to one) extends, another bends, and the 
} i,#moves fide wayes, and all of them with a motion fucceeding each other turne it 
about, as we faid of the mufcles of the head. The firft of thefe which extend, taking 
tsoriginall from the fixe tranfver{e procefles of the fixe upper racke-bones of the 
F backe,or rather from the root of the oblique, afcends diredtly tothe {pine of the fe- 
cond Vertebra of the necke, and the oblique proceffe thereof ; fome call it the Tran/- 

| verfarius;that ts, the tran{verfe-mufcle, This, if youdefire to take it away, it is beft 

| filtro feparate it from the fpine, then te turne it upwards to the tran{ver{e procefles: 

 ypleffe you had rather draw italittle-from its partner and companion in that place 

| where their originals are diftin@, {eeing itis the laft aad next to the bones. 


Marvell net, ifyou finde not this diftinétion of their originall, fo plaine and ma- 


| nifeft, for itis commonly obfcure. For the mufcle Spinates, as it mof commonly 
 comesto pafle, arifing from the roots of the feven upper {pines of the backe, and the 
| jaftof che necke, is inferted into other {pines of the necke, fo that it mig 
confounded with the former by Galen, The thirdbends the necke, and arifing within 
fromthe body of the five upper Vertebre of the back(though with a very obicure ori- 


be 


ginall, {pecially in leane bodies) it afcends under the gullet along {ft the necke, even to 


the nowle-bone, into whofe inner part it is obf{curely inferted. Wherefore it is likely 
that ithelpesnot onely to bend the necke, buralfothe head. This mufcle is made of 


oblique fibers proceeding from the body of the vertebra, all the way it paffes to the 
tran{verfe proceffles of the other Vertebra. But it feemes with its copartner which is 
oppolite to it, to'make a certaine hollew path upon the bodies of the Vertebra, tothe 
gullet, atid it is called the long mufcle, The fourth and laft, which we faid moves 
thenecke to one fide, iscalled Scademus fromthe figure thereof; it afcendsfiom the 
hinder and upper part of the firft rib of the Chef, inferting its felfe into all the tranf- 


verle procefles ofthe necke by its fibers, which as it were for the fame purpofe, it 
hath {ufficiently long, that it may faftenit felfe fromthe furtheft or loweft proceffe 
| ofthe necke into the firft orhigheft thereof. The paffage of tle nerves through this 


tothe arme makes this mufcle feeme double or divided into two. For the veines and 


_-duteries pertaining to the mecke, they have beene declared in the proper Chapters 


of the diftributions of the veffels ; it remaines that you note, all thefe mufCles receive 


nerves from the Vertebre whence they arife. 


C u ap. XVITI. 


Of the Mufcles of the Cheft and Loynés« 


ASAD E mutt now fpeake of the Mufcles both of the Cheft which ferve for re- 
{piration, asalfo of the Loines. But firft wemuft know that the hinde 
3) part of the Cheft called the Metaphrenum, or backe, confifts of twelve 

ertebre, the loines of five, all which differ not from the Vertebre of the 
Recke, but that they are thicker in their bodiesthan thefe of the mecke; neither are 


in two, as the racke-bones of the necke have.Befides each of thefe racke bones alone 
Vit elf, on each fide in the lower part thereof makes a hole,through which anerve 
th paffage from the fpinall marrow to the adjacent parts, when onthe contrary 18 


| the Fertrebye of che necke, fuch holes or paffages are not made, but by meeting toge. 
oftwo of them. 


oncerning the procefies of the Rackbones of the Cheft, whether tranfver{e,righe 


Be oblique,they differnothing from thefe of the aecke ¢ 1 meanc even to the renrh) 


utthat the tran{verfe feeing they are not perforated, as we faid before, doas it were 


The Tra 
Ver{arim, 


The 


The Longus; 


The 


in whatthe 
Vertebra of the 
necke and 
loines agree 


and dilagtee, 


ultaine the ribbes , being ftraitly bound to them with ftrong ligaments both proper 


id common ; but after the tenth Vertebra of the backe, the two other of the backe, 


_ %*dall thofe ofthe Joines are different, not onely from thofe of the necke, but alfo 


‘Oni the tenne firft of the backe, by reafon of their oblique procefles, becauic “the 
| 3 


- 


# 

| 

| 

€ 

ay 

7 


Of the Mufeles and Bones, 


Vertebra of 


the backe, may 
befaidtobe ethatrhis ma 


the middle of 
the pine. 


The number 
of the mufcles 


ofthe MU 


The mufles which they call 


dilating the 
Cheft. 


conrracting 
rhe Chef. 
The S#bcla= 


vinsisthe =Subclavine, for 


firft of the 
mulcles dila- 


ting the cheft. 


Serratns 
ter. 


Serratus poffes 
rier and /wpe- 


rior. 


the cleave nth (which is received, as well by that which is above it, 2s by that unde, 
it, for the freneth ofthe whole backe, and the eafier bending thereof without fz... 
of fraGture ordiflocation ) the above mentioned procefles of the lower rack-bone | 
which were wont to receive, arereccived; as onthe contrary they receive | 
were wont to bereceived, They differ befides from all: the forementioneg | 
by reafon of their {pines,becaufe from the eleaventh they beginne by little and |ir), 
to looke upwards, contrary tothe former, 
Howthetenth Butif any aske, how the tenthVertebra of the backe may be termed the midft ¢: 
the fpine, being the whole {pine confifts of twentic foure Vertebre? He may know | 
y be true, as thus ; if the fixe bones of the hely-bone, and the fourth ¢ 
e Rumpe (being more griftlely than bony be numbred amongft the bones of thy | 
Spine ; forthen from the ferting on of the head tothe eleaventh racke bone of ¢} 
backe, are feaventeene in number, and fo many from thence downewards, 
But let us rerurne to the mufcles of the Cheft ferving for refpuation. Firlt, yo, 
know rhat thefe Mufcles are fourefcore and nine, that 1s, on each fide forty 
foure, alike in ftrength, thickneffe, fice, and action ; and one befides in the midi 
the Disphragma or Midriffe. Of thefe fortie foure, there are 2), | 
which dilare the cheft in drawing in the breath ; that is, the Subc/awins, the Dentatys | 
Or Serratus major in the opinion of fome, both the Rhemboides,or Serrati poftici- hs | 
oblique afcendent of the lower belly, the eleaven Jntercoitales, and the fixe Jate. | 
cartilagimei exterm!. On the contrary , asmany contraé the breaft in expiration ty 
The mutcles wit, the Sacrolembus, the oblique defcendent, the Right and tran{verfe of the lowe; 
belly, the inner Trangular, the fixe /wtercartilagéne, and the cleaven inner Jaterco/.. | 
les. Of thefe twentic two dilating the Cheft, the firft, from the fire is called the | 
it defcends obliquely from the inner and forepart of the Clavicu/s 
Coller-bone, into the griftle of the firft ribbe, evento the Sterson, and dilates it. The | 
fecond isthe Serratws major, the greater Saw-mufcle arifing according to the opini. | 
on of fome from the whole befits of the fhoulder-blade on the infide, and it is trar/. 
verfely inferted into the nine upper ribbes, producing cettaine toothed or faw-lilc | 
proceffes running further to the bones of che rib,than to the {paces betweenthem,« | 
Intercoftal! mufcles, whereupon it hath the name of the faw-mufcle, yet fome hav: | 
referred this mufcle to them of the fhoulder-blade. The third defcends from | 
three lower {pines of the neck,and the firlt of the backe, by means of a membranous | 
and moft thinne ligament, into the three or foure upper ribbs, running furtlier into 
their {paces or Intercoftail mufcles, thaninto the ribbs themfelves, wherupon itis | 
called Serratus posterior, fupertor that is,the hinder and upper faw-mufele. The 
fourth in like manner afcends by means of a membranous and thin ligament from th: | 
three upper {pines of the loines, and the two aft of the cheft, or backe, into three « 
foure of the lower, or laft of che baftard ribbs, fent forth furcher into them or chew 
bones ,than intothe Intercoftall mufcles poffefing the fpaces betweéne thes, 
wherefore it is called Serratus pofterior ¢> 
muicle, Moreover thefe two Jaftmufcles have been called by a common name from 


inferior , the hinder and lower {av 


Theoblique their igure the Rhomboides, thatis, the {quare mufcles. The fife whieh we 


afcendent of 


the lower 


ly. 

The eleaven 
Juterce fates 
extern. 


6. Intercarts~ 


The Sacro« 
lumbus, the 
firk of chofle 


which cons 


tract the chef. 


was the afcendent of the Eoigrafriam,hath already beenc fufficiently defcribed in his 
place. The eleaven Jatercestales extermi, or externall Intercoftall mufcles deicent 
obliquely from the backe part of the lower fide of the upper ribbe, into che fore 
part of che upper fide of the ribbe lying next under it, after a quite contrary mann 
to the fixe Jstercartilaginez, who having like originall and infertion among{t 0° 
otiftles, as the Intercoftall among ft the ribbes, defcend obliquely from the forep2" 
backwads. Andthus auch ofthe mufclesdilating the Cheftinin{piration. 

But the firft, ofthe other mufcles, being as many in number, which contrat 
Cheft in expiration, arifing from the holy-bone, and the oblique proceffes of 
loines, afcends (firmely and confufedly adhering with the azu/cwlus facer, or holy: 
muf{cle, which we fhall deferibe hereafter ) to the roots of the twelve ribbes, imp" 
ting inthe afcent a {mall tendonto each of them, by which it drawes thefe ribs 
wards the tran{verfe proceflessand by reafon of its Originall ir is called Sacrolwmt™, 
that is, the Holy-loine-mufcle. | 


The 


LL 


~The fecond, 
and crantveric © 
But by the w 
expiration rath: 
he towares 
parts v 
we called the 7? 
which proccec 
of the truce ribbi 
though it be noc 
in my judgeme: 
obliquely from 
next under It ; ic 
Intercar tilagine! 
Intercoftall proc 
asthe /stercar ts. 
Jetter X. Lkoov 
or /atercartalac: 
backwards. 

But if this 
their taileand © 
nor above it. 

The lafimu 
{cribed before. 
Thefe are fixe :: 
tion; One the: 
of the fig@re 

a preat pagt of th 
Loines, amd the 
fhore, long, and 
cefles, The firft « 
of its bodyit rah 
with its oblique 
well of the Loin 
takes its Ofivi: 
oblique fibers 
the Gheft. 


blad. 
Nolloweds wher. 
one above, anor! 
line which i: 
under the 
the end there. 
2nd the fhorr 
Befides in rh: 
We underftand ¢! 


206 
ASA 
J 
» 
. 


that unde, 


without fear. 
eT rack-bones 
| eccive which 
mentioned, 
ittle and lirt]. 


d the midft of 
He may know 
the fourth of 
bones of the 
¢ bone of rh- 
on. Firft YOu 
ach fide forty 
inthe 
there are 23. 
the Dent at ies, 
‘abi pofttct the 
he 
XPIration to 
‘of the lower 
Jatercoff.. 
iS called the 
Clavicula or 
lilates it, The 
to the opini- 
ind it is eranf, 
aor {aw-like 
weenthem,or 


yet fomehave 


‘nds from che 
membranous 
2 further into 
herupos it is 
mufcle. The 
sent from the 
into three of 
hem or 
veene them, 
d lower {aw- 
n from 
we {aid 
Ficribed in his 
cles defcend 
into the fore: 
trary 
amoneft the 
ithe forepat 
tion. & 
contract the 
cefles of rhe 
cer, or holy- 
mbbes, 
efe ribbs 
Sscrolunth; 


The 


and otber extreme par oS of the Body. 207 
~The fecond, third, and forrth, which we faid ware the oblique defcendent,tight, Fo ew 
and rrantverfe of the Epzgra/tiam,have beene formerly defcribed in their place, shd end 

But by the way you muft note that thefe three mufcles of the Epigafrismhelpe 


expiration rather by accident, than of themf{clves, to wit, by driving backe the mid- «=, 


“fre cowards the lungs by the entrailes, which alfo they foree upwards, by drawing 

she parts into which they are inferted towards their Originall, The fifth whicti 

we called the Triangu/us, or Triangular, may be called the Comprefir of the griftles, 
which proceeding from the inner fides of the Stermen, gocsto all the griftles imujcwier, 
of the true ribbes ; this ts more apparent under the Sternon inbeatts, thanio men, 

though it be not very obfcure inthem neither, For the internal intercoltall mufcles, setercefales 
in my judgement, they arife from the lower fides of the upper ribbe, and defcending «””"* 
obliquely from the fore part backwards, are inferted into the upper fide of thetibbe 

extunder it;fothatthey may follow the production of the fibers of the external! 

Intercar tilaginel sas the fixe internall follow the fite of the external] 
[atercoftall proceeding from behinde forwards; wherefore as well the Incercoftal], 
as the every where interfe& other, after the fimilitude of the 

letter X. I know fome have written thar the intermall mufeles (whether inrercoftall 

or Jatercartalagines ) afcend from the upper fides of the lower ribbe forwards, ox 
backwards, 

But if this were true, it would follow that thefe mufcles admitted their neryes in Mufcles als 
their taile and not in their head, {eeing the nerve alwayes gocs under the ribbe, and 
norabove it. in their heads. 

The laft mufcle of the Chef ,that is, the Dizphragea or Midriffc,is fufiiciently de- 
{cribed before; wherefore it remaincs wee defcribe the muicles of the Loines. 
Thefe are fixe in number, on cach fide three, equallin thicknefle, tirength aod firua- Thensutcies 
tion; one of thefe bends, and the other two extend the Loines; it is called by reafon — 
ofthe figure the Triameu/ws, or Triangular which bends the Loines, it afcends from 
apreat part of the hinde fide of the Hanch-bone iato the tran{verfe proceffes of the “"“™"""* | 
Loines, and the Jaft of the Cheft onthe infide, for which caufe itis made of fibers 
hort, long, and indifferent, anfwering tothe nearenefle or diftance of the faid pro.~ 
cefles, The firft of the extenders is called the Semifpinatws Oecaufe even to the middie 
of its body it rakes the originall from the {pines of the holy-bones and Loines, this 
with its oblique fibers afcends from all the faid {pines tothe tran{verfe proceffes as 
well of the Loinesas Cheft. The other is called Sacer, the Holy-mutcle, becaufe it *“*"s 
takes its originall from the Holy-bone, or the fides thereof; it afcends with its 


odlique fibers co the {pines of the Loines, and of the eleaven lower Rack-bones of 
the Gheft, 


The midriffe ; 


C HAP. XIX. 
Of the Mufeles of she § heulder-blade. 


4 
i 


hol! 


owed ; wherefore on the other fide it fomewhat buncles out. It bath two ribbs, pro" 


2nd the thorr ribbs. 


; Befides in this fhoulder-blade we obferve the bafis, head and {pine, By the bafis The bafiscs 
*eunderitand the broader part of the fhoulder-blade, which lookes 
backe- 


| 


wwe muftdeicribe the mufcles of the extreme Darts, and the 
i ta Our iron} or riic Widti' it 
N hrit, that we bay the bettet vUnder{tand (i¢ Ipt lon, we muit OD. 
the nature and condition of the fhoulder-blade. Therefore the 
another Dy the upper is ment nothing elie than a Dorder or right 
le, Which look Ings towards tile temples is extended from the exterior angle thereof 
“Gerthe collar-bone,even to the Procefle Coracoides which this ribbe produces in 
le end thereof : By rhe low he underfide which lies ards che lower belly 
7 


205 


the thouldere 
blade. 


The fpine of 
the blade, 
The procefies 
Actemion and 
oraceides, 


he mn‘ cles 
of the fhouls 
cer-blade, 


The head of VaCke-bone. By the head we underftand the narrower part thereof, inwhich itr. 


ceives the head ofthe Arme ina cavity, indifferently hollow, which it produces bop} 
by itfelfe, asalfo by certaine griftles, which there faftened encompafle that Cavity, 
This kinde of cavity is called Glene, 

This receives and containes the bone of the arme,by a certaine ftrong ligament en. 
compatling & ftrengthening the joynt, which kind of ligament is commen to all othe, 
joints ; this ligament arifes trom the bottome of the cavity of the fhoulder-blade, ang 
circularly encompafles the whole joynt , faftening it felfe to the head of the aime. 
there are alfo other ligaments befides this, which cncompafie & ftrengthen this arti. 
culation. By the {pine is ment a proceffe, which rifing by little and little upon the gid. 
bous part of the blade, from the ba/is thereof where it was low and depreft,become, 
hicher untill it ends in the Acromion, or upper part thereof, Nature hath made two 
produdtions in this bone (that is to fay,the Acremson from the {pine, and the Cor ace, 
des from the upper fide) for the ftrengthening of the artieulation of the arme and 
fhoulder-blade, that is, left the arme fhould be eafily {trained upward er forwards. 
befides, it is fattened to the clavicle,by the procefle Acromion. | 

The mufcles which move the fhoulder-blade are fixe innumber, of which foy; 
are proper, and twocommon, The firft of the foure proper feated in the forepar 
afcends fromthe bones of five or fixe of the upper ribbs, to the Coraceides, which i: 
drawes forwards, and is called Serratus minor, that is, the Leffler faw-mufcle; whic) 


C 
be 


‘that you may plainely thew, it is fit you pullthe pectoral! muicle from the collar. 


Rhomboides. 
Levater. 


Traperini. 


Lat 


Peder alis. 


bone, almoft to the middle of the Sternon, The other firft oppofite againtt ir, is p!a. 
ced onthe fore fide and drawes its originall from the three lower {pines of the nccke, 


fort tothe upperribbe. This mufcle hath a threefold action, by reafon ofits 0: w 


Originall. The firft isto draw the fhoulder-blade towards its original], that is, to 
nowle,and {pine of the necke;the other is to draw it towards the backe,becaufe of the 
contraction of the middle or tranfver{e fibers which leade it dire@ly thither, andthe 
other is to draw it downewards by reafon ofthe originall it hath from che fifth, {.x1), 


feventh, and eight {pine of the Vertebre ofthe Cheft. 

But we mutt nore that thefe diverfe actions are not performed by chis mufcle, by 
the affiftance of one onely nerve, but by more, which come into it by the {pin«! 
marrow, by the holes of the Vertebre, as well of the necke as the cheft, from whence 


~ 


it takes theoriginall. For the two other which are the common mutcles of the b!ace 


Aw) 


and arme, or thoulder , we willdefcribe them With the mufcles of the fhoulder 0! 
armse : for one of thefe which is called the Lati/simus, that is, the broadeft, afcends 


- from the holy-boneto the fhoulder- blade and arme. 


The other named the Peéforalis coms from the Sternen and collar-bore ro th 
fhoulder-bladeand arme, 


C Hap. X Xe 


The Defeription of the Hand taken in General, 


OW itbefitsustoto defcribe in order the mufcles of the arme; but 
we muft know, what it is that we call the arme. But feeing that cannot 
fitly be underftood ,unleffe 1. we know what the hand is,{ecin 


arme is@ part of the hand ; therefore firft we mu define what a hand's, 


that che 


chat is, gener: 
The 
the arme Co ! 
fignifies ON ly 
the beginning 
Therefore 
up and hold a 
Cubite, anc : 
articular 1s 2 
the Metacarp 
({eeing cach o 
are compofec 
skinnes, che 
both commv! 
in their order 
But firft 
the fire therec 
rernall, checx 

By the for< 
fhoulder: by 
finger lookes | 
part which lic: 
by the outlic< 
the very nam: 

The hand | 
take Op badik 
the Jeafis bod 

Nature hat 
each moving | 
fie, that the | 
lifting of 
isa {tay tothe 
hard b dy 4 
rend, pitch, : 
forhey might 

Yetotherc 
figure is roun 
reafon they 2 

Nature hat! 
more ftraicly, 
ther, we canh 
quall, that wh 
heure ; for f 
round, 

[t remainc 
which rupne 
whereby weer 
thereof, 


and ches acs 
ae and the three upper ofthe Cheit, from whence it extends tt felfe, and ends in 
coe riftls ba fis OF the imouide reblade, it backwards is Calicd the / 
te:des. The third from its action, is called the Lewator , or the heaver, or lifte 
feare ainthe upper part, iC deicc nds trom the traniverte proce the fou! 
Vertebre ot the necke intothe upper angie and {pine of the blade. The fourth 
Trapezius, ot the Table-muicle,is feated inthe backe part,and ismembranous 2 
6) iginail, but prefently Decoms Heihy it aries trem almoft ali tne backe-part 
head, from all the pines the necxe, and the eseht Upper erteora the chet: 
then is inferted by his nervous part, almoft into the whole d4//s of the blade, ey 
ding it felfe above the muicles thercof, even tothe midftof its {pine, where bein: 


which it re, 
oduces both 
that Cavity, 


ligament en- 
toall other 
r-blade. and 
of the arme. 
en this arti. 
the gib. 
eft, becomes 
th made two 
the Coracej. 
mic and 
forwards 


which foure 

the foreparr, 

des, Which it 

uicle; which 

mthe collar. 

inft it, is pla- 

of the necke, 

gcnods into al! 

ed the Rhom- 

, or lifter up, 

1¢ foure 

sourth called 

anous atthe 

c-partofthe 

the cheft,and «ff 

lade, exren- 

where being 
and in fome 

n of its triple 

hat is, to the 

ecaufe Of the 

ther; and the 

e iifth fixrh, 


smufcle, by 

the {pinall 
om whence 
of the blade, 
{houlder of 
eft, afcends 


bone to the 


and then devide it into its parts. Therefore the hand istaken two manner of wayes, 
chat is, generally and {pecially. 

The hand generally cakea fignifics all that which is contained from the joyning Of Wher ismeans 
the arme tO the fhoulder- blade, evea to the ends of the fingers, Bur in particular it °y Ssed. 
fignifies oncly that which is comprehended from the furtheft bones of the cubir, or J 
the beginning of the wreft, to the very fingers cnds. | 

Therefore the hang in generall is an inf@rument of infruments made for to take 
up and hold any thing. Itis compofed of three great parts, that is, of the Arme, 

Cubite, and Hand, vulgarly, and properly fo called; bur the hand taken thus ia 

articular is againe devided in three other parts, the Carpus or Brachiale, the WV reft, 
the Metacarpram, or Poftorachiale, the afterwreft, and the fingers; all thefe parts 
({eeing cach of them are not only organicall parts, but alfo parts of organical! parts) 
gre compofed of all,or certainely of the moft of the fimular parts,that is.of both the 
skinnes the ficfhy pannicle, the fat vaines, arteries, nerves, mu(cles or fleth, coats 
both common aud proper, bones, griftles and ligaments, all which we wil! difcribe 
in their order. 

But firft Ithinkegood to admonith you of the differences of the hand taken from The differens 
the firethereof; and thefe differences are fixe in number, the fore, the hinde, the in- mer : the : 
ternall, cheexternall, the upper and lower fide or part thereof, 

By thefore we meane that part which lookes dire@ly from the thumbe tothe 
fhoulver: by the hinde, we underftand the part oppofite to it, which from the little 
finger lookes towards the bafis of the fhoulder-blade. By the infide we fignifie chat 
part which lies next to the fides of the body, when the band retaines its nacurall fire; 
by the outfide, the part oppofite to it. The upper and lower fide you may know by 
the very naming thereof. 

The hand properly fo called is devided into five fingers, that foit may holdand 
take up bodies of all figures, as round, triangular, {quare and the like, and gather up vn 
the leafts bodies with the fingers ends, as needles, pins, and {uch like. fo many fiae 

Nature hath beftowed two hands upon us, that fe they may helpe each other, 8" 
each moving to each fide. Bur for thetaking up and holding of {mall bodies it was wi, the 
fit, that the fingers of their owne nature foft, fhould be armed with nailes, that con- nailesaread- 
fifting of fof fichh and an hard naile, they might fetve for all actions ; for the naile 9°." 
isa ftay tothe foft ficfh, which otherwife would turne away in meeting with an fagers. 
hard body; the ufe of the nailes is to {cratch, fhave, and pull offthe skinne, to 
rend, pinch, and plucke afunder fmall bodies, They have not bony hardnefle, that 
fothey might not breake, but bend. 

Yetother creatures have hard nailes, to ferve them in ftead of weapons. Their whythe netfee 
figure is round, becaufe fucha figure is lefle obnoxious to externall injuries ; and by srorwcontina: 
reafon they are {ubje@ to wearing, they grow continually. pie 

Nature hath placed flefth on the inner and fide part of the fingers, fo to prefie 
more ftraitly, the things they once take hold of, fo that by holding them clofe toge- 
ther, we can hold water that it may not runne out. The length of the fingers is une- 
quall, that when they are opened and ftretched forth, they make as it were a circular 
neure 5 for fo it comes to paffe, that the hand can holdall bodies, but cf{pecially 
round, 

[tremaines that we profecute the diftribution of the veines, arteries, and finewes, 
which rupne over all the parts of the hand taken in generall and particular, 


a wee may more commodioufly hereafter handle all the proper parts 
thereof, 


T 3 CnaP 
e;butfirit 
that cannot 
ino rhacrhe) 
ing thacthe 
atahandis, § 
and 


"The Cc epha- 
licke yaine, 


The mecian 
veine, 


Howby ope= 
ning the me- 
dian veine, you 
may draw 
smoreorlefic 
bloud from 
the head or 
liver, 


Of the ufcles and Bones, 


Cuap, X XI. 


the Difribution of the Subclavian veine , ana firft 
of the Cephalica,or Humeraria, 


Wo large veines defcend from the Subclavian,the one from the Jowe, 


%| thefe proceede from the fame common orifice, as in men of alow 
| {tatnre in the arme. The one of thefe is called the Axzlarss , the other 
the Hameraria, or Cephalicke; therefore this Cephalicke fafling 
forth ot the Subclavian runnes fuperficially along the forefide betweene the mufcle 
Deltoides and the Tendon of the pe@orall mufcle,and defcends in the midét bet=v 
the common ceate of the mufcles and the ficthy pannicle, even tothe bending 
the cubite, where in leane bodies it is plainely to befeene, whereas in fat bodies jr;s 
hardly to be perceived, being as it were buried iuabundance of fat. This veine he. 
ving in its defcent, fent forth fome {mall branches, both to the skinne, as allo to cer. 
taine mufcles over which it runs, is devided into two, a littie above the outwar:l pro. 
tubesation of the arme. One of the branches into which it is devided defcending ob. 
liquely to the fore part of the cubite, a little below the bending of thecubire, :: 
mects,and is united with the like branch in the fame place,as fhall be fhowne here. 
after. 


That which arifes from this concourfe, is called the median yeine,becaule # arifes 
from two branches, and is {cated betweene them. They ufually open thismedian 
veine in the difeafes of the head and liver, which require Phlebotomy ; but if it thal! 
not be fufficiently manifeft, wlien you judge it muft be opened, for a general] ev. 
cuation ofthe whole body; you may cut one of thefe branches, by whofe coneour/c 
itis made, which you fhall think the fitter; and becaufe each branch drawes from the 
next parts,according to the ftraightneffe of the fibers, rather than from the oppolite 
fide ; if yon would evacuate the head, and liver equally, by opening either of thefe 
branches ; it is convenient that opening that branch (for example) which comes 
from the Cephalicke, youprefently lay your thumbe upon it, untill you fuppofe, 
you havedrawne a juft quantity of bloud from the liver, by the Baftéica, or ‘liver 
veine ; which done, you may take off yourthumbe, and fuffer the bloud to follow 
freely,by the open branch ofthe Cephalicke, untill you have drawne as much bloud 
as you fhall judge requifite; otherwife you will drawit but from one part,to wir, he 
head. So you fhall evacuate it oncly from the liver, if you open the branch which 
comes from the Bz/i/ica, and concurs to the gencration of the median, | 

Moreover, when thereisneedeto open the Ba/ilica, and it fhall be no where 
{picvous, the Cephalicke or mediati being eafieto be difcerned at the fame time, 
you may in ftead thereof openthe median,or ifit be not to be found.the Cephalicke, 
prefling but the trunke thercof with your thumbe, as we faid before. Jeft the hicad 
fhould be evacuated in ftead of the liver. You may doe the fame in the Be/ilice, if 
when there thall be neccflitie to open the Cephalicke, it {hall notappeare. Mott of 
thofe which at this day open a veine, in ftead of the median, open that branch ofthe 
Bafilica which afcends, together with the Cephalicke to make the median. Bur you 
muft underftand thatthe median defcends betweene the two bones of the cudit, 
¢ven to the end thereof, and then devided into many branches, it is at length {pent 
on the backe of the hand behinde the thumbe, the fore and middle fingers, or th 
afterwreft. Sometimes it runs backe into the following branch,and then at the wre! 
it departs from it, to be beftowed uponthe forementioned parts. The other brarc!! 
aithe Cephalicke, which we may calithe fore and outward Cephalicke, def{cendinz 
dire&tly downe ro the midft ofthe wand thence wanders overthwart into the hime 
part of the arme, where encreafed with a branch from the Bafiti¢a, it is diftribs- 
ted over allthe backe of the hand, which with the median it nourifhes. Bur che 


branches of thefe veinesdoc forun through the ferenamed parts. that b ay 
they yeeld them neceflary provifion, Parts, thatby the wy; 


C H Ps 


fide, the other from the higher. Yct fometimes, and mott ulually, bork 


ofthe third « 
arme, it goes 
cheartery an 
branches, of 
ner fide of th 
thers on the! 
fides of the{ 
cubite, fends 
pocs on tnc 
niuicle, 

But you 0 
thefe devifia 
which they 
rifh, 

Andthus 
Axillary (wh 
bove the inw: 
the one wher 
Cephalike br; 
menrionced, 

The other 
thickneffe, a 
{cending alo: 
length fpene 
ded alongft 
right hand, bye 
the left, in the 

But always 
wee have dc] 
cially in the 
of, 


the cub 
Out, from the 


| 
3 
| 
| 
! 
| 
f 


the lower 
ally, both 
not a low 
the other 
ke pafling 
he mufcle 
betweene 
ending of 
OCIES jt is 
veine ha- 
fo to cer- 
ward Dro-. 
nding ob. 
-cubite, 
whe here- 
fe it arifes 
hismed:ian 
if ie thal! 
nerall eva. 
concourfe 
s fromthe 
i¢ oppolite 
er of thefe 
ick Comes 
fuppoie, 
4, or liver 
ito follow 
uch bloud 
to wir, the 
nch whicu 


vhere con- 
lame time, 
‘ephalicke, 
{t the head 
Bafslica, if 
¢. Moft of 
anch of rhe 
Buryou 
the cubit, 
neth {pent 
TS, Or th 
tthe wreit 
er branch 
lefcending 
the hinde 


and other extreme parts of the Body, 


XX II. 


The Deftription of the Axillary veine, 


i higher, afeer it hath produced thetwo Thoracice it is devided under the 
tendon of that naufcle into two faire branches, that isto fay, into the in- 
passes ner deepe Axillary, and the skinne or outward axillary. The deepe or 
inner having {tiilior his companion in his defcent, the axillary artery,and the nerves 
ofthe third conjugation, after it hath produced the {mall external! mufculous of the 
arme, it goes into the bending of the elbow, where running fomewhat deepe with 
cheattery and nerve intothe mufcles of the cubite, it is devided into three ether 
branches, of whichome defcending with the wand, {lides under the ring, into the in- 
net fide of the hand, and hath bettowed two {mall branches en the thumbe, two o- 
thers on the fore, and one uponthe middle finger, {0 that all of them afcend by the 
fides of thefe fingers,the other defcending with the artery, asthe former alongtt the 
cubite, fends branches to the reft of the fingers, like as the former. The third 


> 


goes on the forelide betweene the two bones even tothewrelt, and the fuare 
niuicie. 

But you muft note that the veines of which we now treate, doe not onely make 
thefe devifiens mentioned by us, but infinite others befides, as well in the parts 
which they goe to, as alfo in the inner mufcles of the hand which they nou~ 
yiiil, 


And thus much ofthe internall and deepe axillary veine. For the external! or skin 


Axillary (which firft appeares under the skinne, efpecially in leane bodies, a little a- 


vove the Inward production of the arme Jit is devided in that place intotwo branches, 
tie one whercof defcending to the bending of the arme mects, and is united with the 
Cephalike branch, fooner or later, that fo it may produce the median,as we formerly 
mentioned, 


The other branch ‘having fent forth many fhoots of a different length and 


thickneffe, as well into the skinne, as into the other neighbouring parts, de- 
{cending alongft the lower fide of the bone of the cubite, properly focalled, is at 
length {pent upon the fore and outward Cephalicke branch, which we faid defcene 
ded alongft the wand; and thus united, they runne over all the hand, where in the 
right hand, berweene the middle and fore finger, they make the Sa/vatella; but in 
the left, in the fame place, they produce the Splenitica, 

But alwayes remember, (if in diflection you finde auy thing otherwife chan 
wee have delivered it) that the diftribution of the veffels is fo various (efpe- 


— in the hands ) that there can no certaine rule be delivered there- 
of, 


C HAPs. XXITI, 


The Difivibution ofthe Axillary Artery. 


eevee Axillary artery from the firft originall, which is prefcntly after the 
oa They (wo Thoracice, defcending betweene the mufcle called Biceps, or the two 
Headed mufcle, andthe Brachiews, with thedeepe axillary veine, diftri- 


extend the cubite,and is {pent in the externall mufcles of the fame, whitch arife with- 
Out, {rom the produGtions of the arme. dois 
ne 


Axillary arifing at the infertion of the pectoral! mufcle, ora little 


rhe axulary 
G¢yide d in-« 
to 


The detpe 
axillary, and 


7 


TheSe vstelle 
and 


=! bures a large branch amongft the outward mufclesofthe arme, which 


| 6 PTY 
4 
| 
? 
| 
\ 
- 
| 
' 
| 
* 
4 


Andthisis called the Ramus Mufeulus, or Mufcalous branch, as alfo the veine thar 
dcompanyes this Arterye. Then this Arterye when it comes to the bending of the 
cubite,thrufting it felfe into the muicles bending the fingers, communicates certaing 
branches to the parts pertaining tothe dearticulation of the cubit with the fhoulder, 
and other parts there ficuate as it did in the upper parts, by which it defcended hither, 

Verily it may it may be agencrallrule chatevery vefleil fends or beftowes ccrtaine 
by th ll che parts by which icpaffes, But if you 
callAxiome, Portions thereof by the way toa parts Dy pail 
aske why I have not profecuted thefe productions;} would anfwer; I never intended, 
to handle other than large and faire branches of veflels, by rafh incifion of which, 
there may happen danger of death ora difeafe. For it would be both an infinit and 
needles bufinesto handle all the {mall divarications of the veines arteryes and nerves, 
Therfore this Artery funke into thefe mufcles, when it comes almofiro the midft of 
the Cubirt,prefently ora little after it is divided into two large branches, the one of 
which along ft the wand,& rhe other alongft the Cubite is carryed into the hand on.) 
infide under the Ring. For boththele branches are diftributed and {pent upon the 
hand after the {ame manner as the branches of the internall Axillary veine, thar is, 
having fent by the way fome little thoetsinto the partsby which they pafie, atthe 
length the branch which defcends by the Wand of the remainder eherot ,beftowes two 
{prigs upon the Thumbe, on each fideone, & rwo in like manneronthe fore finger, 
and one on the midle ; the other which runs alongft the Ell,performes the like office 
tothe litle andthe midle or ring finger, as you may fee by diflection. 


Crap. XXITII. 


Of the Nerves of the Necke ,Backe, and Arme. 


a] Ow we fhould handle the finewes of the Arme, but becaufe thefe pro. 


ceed fromthe Nerves of the Necke and Backe, I thiake it fit there: 
necke, fore tofpeake fomething of them in the firft place. 

The fick Therefore from the Necke there proceed {even paire of Nerves, 
paire. the firftot which proceeds from the nowle bone, and the firft verte. 


braottne neckes as alfo the firft paire of the Backe from the laft Pertebra of the 
Necke and the firftof the Cheit. Butallrhefe Nerves are divided into two or 
more branches of the fir{t paire ( thatis to fay,on each fide ) goe,the one to the {mal! 
right mufcle, alceading from the firft racke-bone of the necke to the nowle bene the 
other to the long muf{cle on the forefide of the necke. | 
Thefecond = "The branches of the {econd paire are diftributed, fome with a portion which they 
oe receive from the third paire over all the skin of the head; the two others go as well to 
the mufcles, which are from the fecond Pertebra tothe backe part of the head, and 
fromthe fame tothe firft Vertebra,as alforo thelong mufcle before mentioned. 
The third One of the third paire of Sinewes is communicated to the head,as we {aid before, 
paire. butorhers to the Mufcles which extend,or ere é& the head and the Neckethere is 210 
one of thele diftributed intothe neighbouring fide mufcle and part of the long. 
Thefourh The nerves ofthe fourth paire go,one to che mufclesa{wel of the neck asthe head, 
paire. to the broad mufcle;the other after it hath {ent {ome portid therofinto the long mu 
cle & the fice mufcles of the necke, it defcends with a portion of the fift and fixe paire 
The fife paire, to the Midriffe.One of the branches of the fift paire is beftowed on the hinde mutes 
of the necke and head, the other upon the longe mufcle and Midriffe;the third jscam: 
municated tothe Levatores, or Heaving mulcles of the Arme«adfhoulder. 
Thefiztpaire Onecof the Nerves ofthe fixt paire goesto the hinde mufcles of the Necke and 
head, another to the Midriffe, the third witha portion of the feventh paireof the 
necke, and of the firft and fecond of the Cheft goetothe Armes and heaving mulcics 
of che fhoulder-blade, | 
Thefeyenth  Oneofthe branches of the feventh paire runs to the broad muf{cle and to th¢ 
paice, neighbouring muicles both of the necke and head ; another encreafed with a portion 
of the fiftand fixt paire of the necke,and athird joyacd to the fecond and third pair’ 


of 


of the Cheft 
Byt you 
whether fro: 
from rhe 
they come ny 
There pai 
The firft« 
che firft ol 
into twOor 
conjugation 
as well thefc 
The branc 
of the firft w 
But the br 
cated, fome 
Sternom,anc 
ftail Nerves 
branches by 
{aid Nerves 
fame Mujlcle 
have either 
Having thu 
that we fhe 
Their pur 
of the necke. 
any other {1 
skin whichc 
The other 
their firft or 
convolution 
The 
fometimes 
and then un 
ly itis comn 
of it is divid 
votill ar laft 
the hand. 
The thirc 
thep firaigh 
lyes under it 
fide.it is 
The four 
derthe Bicer 
Outward an: 
extending 
the Cubit 
joynt of th 
one whero! 
other affoci 
Wed upont! 
middle fing, 
The &ft b 
and extendif™ 
Cubite ¢ in 
municated t: 
one of whic 
the litle fing 


4 4 
2 
— 
j 
=v 


L 18.6. 


© veine thar 
ding of the 
(CS CCrtaine 
mc fhoulder, 
mded hither, 
eS CCitaine 
you fhould 
er intcnded, 
of which, 
}infinit and 
and nerves. 
he midft of 
the ene of 
hand onthe 
nt upon the 
ine, that is, 
Spafie, atthe 
cftowestwo 
fore finger, 
like office 


fe thefe pro. 
it fit there- 


c of Nerves, 
firft Werte- 
tebra of rhe 
moto two or 
to the {mall 
vile bone,the 


»which they 
79 as weil to 
2 head, and 
ntioned. 
{aid before, 
a-chere is alio 
long. 
the head,& 
1¢ long mul- 
nd fixe paire 
nde mufcics 
bird iscam: 


=f 

: Necke and 
vaireof the 
ing mufcics 


and to the 
th aportion 
thied pair’ 
of 


: 


13.6- 


inthe 


of the Cheft defcending intothe Armegoetothe hand, 

Bytyou muft note that the Mufcles which take their originall from many Vertebre. 
gghether from above downwards, or from below upwards, admit Nerves not oncly 
from the Vertebra,from whence they take their originall,but alfo from them which 
+hey come neere in their defcent,or afcent. 

There pafle twelue conjugations of Nerves from the Rack-bonesoftheCheft, The 

The firftentring forth from betweene the laft Racke-bonme of the necke and ae 
the firft of the Cheft,is divided (thatis,oneach fide, each Nerve from his fide } The S:f paire 
into twoor more portions, as alfo allthereft. Therefore the branches of this firit 
conjugation goc fome ofthemtothe Armes,as we faid before, others tothe mufcles 
as well thefe of the Cheft, as others arifing there,or running that way, 

The branches ofthe fecond conjugation are dittributed to the fame parts,that thefe The Gcond 
of the firft were. paire. 

But the branches of all che other conjugations eventothe twelfth, are communi- The othe: 
cated, fometo the inrercoftall mufcles running within under the true ribs even to the °°“ 
Sternon,and under the baftard ribs evento the right and long mufcles; and the Co- 
ftall Nerves of the fixt conjugation are augmented by meeting thefe intercoftal! 
branches by the way asthey defcend by the roots of the Ribs.Orher particlesot the 
faid Nerves are communicated to the mufcles as well of the Cheft, asfpine, asthe 
fame Mulcles pafle forth,or runne alongtt by the Vertebre, from whencethefe nerves 
have either their originall,or paflage forth. 

Having thus therefore fhewed the originall of the Sinewresof the Arme,it remaines The Nerves 
that we fhew their number and diftribution. which ate, 

Their number is five or fixe;proceeding from the hfth, Gixth, and feventh Vertebra —_ 
of che necke, and rhe firft and fecondofthe Cheft. The frft of which nor mixed with 
any other fromthe fifth vertebra ofthe necke,goes to the Matcle Delsosaes and the 
skin which covers it, 

The other 4 or 5 when they have mutually embraced each other,not onely from 
their firft originall but evento the fhoulder, where they free themfelves from this 
convolution, are diftributed after the following manner. 

The firft and fecond defcending to the Muf{cle mentioned a litle before,and theace 
fometimes evento the hand, isby the way communicated tothe Mufcle Biceps, . 
and then underthe faid Mufcle it meets and isjoyned with the third Nerve. Thirds 
ly itis communicated with the Longeft mufcle of the Cubite, iathe bending where- 
of it is divided into two branches defcending alongft the two bones of the Cubir, 
untill at laft borne up by the ficfhy pannicle it is {pent upon the skin and inaer fide of 
the hand. 

The third lower than this, is firft united with the fecond, under the Mufcle Biceps, 
then ftraight way feparated fromit, it fends 2 portion thercofro the Arme which 
lyes under it,and tothe skin thereof; laftly atthe bending of the Cubit on che fore 
‘ide,it is taingled with the fift paire. 

The fourth, the largeft ofallthe reft,comming downe below the third branch un- 
der the Biceps with the internall Axillary veine and Artery, is turned towards the 
outward and backe part ofthe Arme, there ro communicate it felfe to the Mufcles 
extending the Cubit, and alfo to the inner skin of the Arme and the exteriour of 
the Cubit ; the remainder of this branch when in its defcent it hath arrived at the 
joynt of the Cubit,below the bending thereof itis divided into two branches, the 
one wherof defcending alongft the Cubit is {pention the ourfide of the Wreft; the 
other affociating the Wand is on the outfide in like manner in two branches befto- 
wed uponthe Thumbe, and jn as many upon the fore finger, and by afift upon the 
middle finger though more obfcurely. 

The fift branch being alfo lower than the reft, fliding between the mufcles bending 
and extending the Cubite, when itcomes behinde the inner protuberation of the 
Cubite (in which place we faid before the third branch meets with this ) it is com- 
municated to the internall mufcles of the fame, and then divided into three portions 
one of which on the outfide alongft the middle of the Cubite goes in two {prigsto 
the litlefinger,& fo many tothe middle finger,and one tothe Ring finger;the other 


| - 
a 
* 
4 
@ 
* 
4 
es 


Of the ufeles and Bones, Dip. 6. 


two, the one without andthe other within the Ring, gee tothehand, where afte, 
each ofthem hath beftowed what wasrequifite on the mufcles of the hand,they.a:- 
; < watted into other five {mall portions, of which thefe which are from that portion 
which defcends without the Ring, fend twofprigs te the litle,two tothe fore and 
co the middle finger ; but thefe whiclt come from that which pafles under the Ring, 
; by fuch adiftribution communicates it felfe to other fingers, as two {prigs to the 
f thumbe,twe to the fore and one to the middle finger. The fixtthe loweft and |, 
} runs betweene tlic skin and flefhy Pannicle, by the inner protuberation ofthe Arne, 
and then is {pent upon the skin of the Cubit. 


C HAP. xX 


ere 


The defcription of the bone of the Arme,and the 
Mafcles which move it. 


Ecaufe we cannot perfealy demontftrate the original! of the mufCles of the 
(ATED ct Arme,(efpecially of the two Arme mufcles)not knowing the defcription 
SI LDS, ofthis bone ; firft therefore we will defcribe it,then rerurne to the 
Thegreats nall of the mutcles arifing from thence. The bone of the arme is the grea- 
meficand a . 
figure. teft of allthe bonesin the body, exceptthe Thigh-bone; it isround, hollow and 
tne Appendix filled with marrow, with a great Appendix or hcad on the top thereof, having aa in- 
Theprocetes different necke, to which it isknit by Sympbhy/is, for appendices are no otherwife uni- 
othe Arme, ted totheirbones. Inthe lower part thercofit hath two procefles,or protuberations, 
: one onthe fore fide,anether on the hinde,betweene which {wellings there isa cavity 
° like to halfe the compaffe of a wheele,about which the Cubit is moved. The extremi- 
tyes ofthis cavity ends in two holes, of which one is the more external], the other 
| more internall: the{e cavityes receive the heads of the Cubite, that is,th® fore, or in- 
ternal] receives the fore procefie when the arme is bended inwards, but the external! : : 
or hinder the extcriour,as itis extended, 
For the head of the arme it hath a double connexion,the one with its owne necke 
» by Symphyfis,chat 1s,a naturall union ofthe bones without any motion; the other 
with thelightly ingraven cavity of the fhoulder-blade, which we call Glene,by that 
kinde of Dearticulation which is called Arthrodia ; this connexion is made firme and 
ftable by the muicles defcending into the arme from the fhoulder-blade, as al{o by 
the proper Ligaments de{cending from the circle and brow of the cavity of the | 
| Acromion and Coracoides torhis head of thearme ; this fame headofthearmeis,a; | 
it were more cleft and open en the ianer fide, than on the fore fide that fo it may 
give way to one of the Ligaments comming from the fhoulder-blade to rhe mn (cle 
Biceps, For afmuchas belongs to the lower end of theboneof the arme ( which we 


hath two procefles )we may fay that itis faftened to the bones ofthe Cubit bv 
two forts of articulation,that is,by Géxg/ymos withthe Ell or proper bone of the 
Cubit, and by Arthrodia with the Radius or Wand, whichina lightly engraven cavity ae 
receives the fore proceffe of the arme,and isturned about it for the motion of the 
hand.The hinder proceffeis chiefly added for the fafety and prefervation of tlic 
veines,arterics and nerves, ‘ail 
TheGgure ef Thete thiags thus fhowne, itis worth our labour to know the figure of thearme it Th 
 felfe,asitlyes betweenethe forementioned appendices and procefies that in the cafe * Th 
of a fracture, we may know how conveniently toreftore it; therfore we mutt un- Th 
derftand,that this bone isfomwhat bended and hollowed on the infide under the This a 
cleft of the head thereof, but bunching out on rhe out and fore fide, Ct. iy a8 
Wherefore feeing it muft be moveable forwards and backewards, upwards and 
downewards, nature for the performance of fo many motions hath furnithed it with b.Th h ck : 
eight mufcles, which atc fixe proper and ewo common withthe fhoulder-blade. Of 
which number two move it forwards,two backwards ,two upwards and downewatds d £ 
Which muft not be underftood f0,as that thefe two Mufclesfhould move it ve The 
forwards inclining either upwards nor downewards ;and the othertwo fhouldmove 


it § 


= 
4 
Table 
Nerves of 
| 
® 
| 
a 


Cles of the 
cicription 
the Origi- 
5 the grea- 
allow and 
ving an in- 
wife uni- 
erations, 
iS a Cavity 
-extremi- 
the other 
re, OF in- 
externall 


vne necke 
the other 
e.by that 
Shrme and 
is alfo by 
ity of the 
rme is, as 
fo if may 
i¢ muf{cle 
vhichwe 
Cubit by 
ie of the 
en cavity 
n of the 
1 of the 


2arme it 
nthe cafe 
muft un- 
nder the 


ards and 
dit with 
lade. OF 
mnewards 
direGtly 
iid move 

it 


LL 


Contained in the Head. 


OE 


Table 14.foewerh the Brasne together with the After-braine, the fpinal marrow amd the 
Nerves of the whole body, 


4 That part of ch: is xe 
the noferhrils, 


B, That part which is at the fide of the 
ventricles, 
C, The back part of the braine. 
D,The Cerebellumor After-braine. 
E en Mamillary procefie in the right 
ide. 


F , The originall of the opticke nerve. 


>> 
AY 
ve 


G, Their conjunctions. 
H, The coate iato which the opiticke 
nerve isextended. 
J, The fecond paire of the finewes of 
the braine. 
K The leffer roore of the third conjue 
gation, 
L, The thicke roote of the {ame conju- 
gation according to the common 
opinion, 


M, The fourth conjugatid of thefinews 

N The leffer roore of the fift paire. 

O, The bigger rootc of the fame paire- 

P,The {mall membrane of the care 
which they call the Tympany. 

2,The lower branch of the bigger 

roore of the fift conjugation, 

S,The fixt paire of finewes. 

T, The feventh paire. 

The beginning of the {pinall marrow 
out of the middle of the bafis ofthe 
braine. 

gh right finew of the midriffe cut 
off, 

Y, A branch from the fift paire cree- 
ping to the top of the fhoulder. 


Z, The firft nerveof the arme from whence there gocth a branch to the skia. 
A, The fecogd nerve of the arme,and a branch there from intothe fir mulcle of the 
Cubite, 
3, The third nerve ofthe arme aud a branch going to theskin on the outfide. 
C,Abranch ftom the 3. nerve ta the 2.mufcle of the Cubite. 

D, The congreffe or meeting of the {ccond nerve with the third. 

E,A {mall branch from the 3.nerveto the 2.mufcle of the Raaiws, 

P The diftribution of the fecond nerve into two branches. 

* The leffer branch of this divifion lengthened out to the skin as far as the thumbe, 

4, Theplace of the {pinall marrow where it iflueth out of the braine.1, 2, 3, &c. 
Thirty paires ofnerves arifing from the {pinall marrow are here noted by their 
Char. thatis to fay,7.ofthe necke,12, of the Cheft,5. of the loynes and 6,0f the 
holy-bone, 

6, The thicker branch of the 2,nerve divided into 2,parts, 


| Branches efthe 3,nerve {prinkled here and there. 


4,Nerves from the third paire to the thumb, the forefinger and the middle finger. 
e, The 4,nerve of the arme.f, The paflage hereof through the infide of the fhoulder. 


£,A uipartition of this branch where it toucheth the Cubit.b4 ,A branch "= 


POrtion 
rthe Rino 
| 
| and la? ey 
We : 
| 
/ 
Wii 
if, 
| AAS), 
\ 
/ 
(NA, 
¢ 
\ 
A hy 
| 
| 


216 


Ly BLO, 


the and Bones, 


terve to the outward skin of the Cubite.z, the upper branch of the dj. 
4. nerve. branch of #,reaching to the outfideof the hand.//, the 
lower branchof the divifionofthe 4. nerve paffing through the backfide of =h. 
Cubite.m,the 5.nerve of the arme,#,Branches of thisnerve difperfed here and there, 
oo, Abranchofthe 5. nerve reaching tothe infide of the hand and the fingers. p. 4 
furcle of the branch », derived to the ontfide of the hand and the fingers. 9q, the 6. 
nerve of the armearid the courfe thereofunder the skin, rr, the intercoltall nerves 
there cut off where they are together with the ribs reflected forward./f, branche: on 
each fide running backward.tt, Nerves attaining untothe Cheft.s#, the commixtion 
of the nerves +r, with the defcending branch ef the 6.conjugation of the braine.x,.. 
Nerves {rom the loynes led unto this place.y,A branch going to the tefticle here cy 
off. z,A nerve reaching to the 1.mulcle of the thigh. the 1. nerve of the leg.«/, 4 
furcle of the former nerve derived to the skin at .,and inferted into the 
at y, the a. nerve nerve from the former,allowed unto the 
23 low as to the foot, and paffing along the infide of the leg.s, abranch of the 2. nerve 
running unto the mutcles. z, the 3 nerve of the leg.»,a furcle thereof unto the skin, 
6 another furcle unto the mufcles. «+ the 4. nerve of the leg.” the anterior propaza. 
tions of thenerves proceeding fromthe holybone., the end of the fpinall marrow. 
uz, abranch from the gnerve inferted into the mufcies arifing from the Coxesdix 
hip bone.y, another branch going to the skin of the thigh onthe backfide.¢ ,a propa. 
pation derived to the 4. mufcle of the leg and ro theskin of the knee.oo, nerves at- 
taining tothe heads of the mufcles of the foote. a, the divifion of the 4: cruzall 
nerve into two trunks. ¢, a branch fromthe trunke~, difperfed into the outward 
skin of the leg.7,a furcle of the trunke =, derived tothe mufcles.»,another furcle te 
the skin of theleg onthe forefide. ,a branch of the truncke ,, tothe skinof the 


_infide of the lee and of the foot.x,afurcle of the trunker,to the hindmoft skin of 


The originall 
and infertion 

: of the pecte- 

mufcie. 


The Dettosdes 


the leg.¥,a branch of the whole trunker,ledalong to the forward part of the lee 
andthe foot: ., the defcent of the trunke f, into the foot. | 


itfo upwards, as it fhould incline neither foreward,nor backwards ; but thus, that i¢ 
cannot be moved neither to this nor that part unleffe by the helpe and proper aétivn 
ofthis, orthat mufcle. Thus therefore if the Pe@orall with his affociate performe 


their duty er action, the arme is alwayes moved forwards,as it is lifted up by the adi. 


on of the De/teides and his companien,and fo of the reft. 

But to come to the original! and infertion of thefe mufcles; theone of thefe two 
which move the arme forwards called by reafon of his originall,the PeCtorall,arifiag 
from more than halfe of the Collar bone,and almoft all the Ster men and the 6,7. 204 
Rib, goes up and faftens it {elfe to the Coracoides, by amembrane ora membranovs 
tendon fuficiently ftrong(for which cau{e it is faid tobe common to the fhoulder & 
arme)and it goes intothearme betweene the mufcles Deltoides and Biceps with. 
firong tendon compofed of fibers croffing cach other, of which fome defcend from 
the Collar-bone andthe upper part of the Stermon,others afcend from the lower ori: 
ginall hereof ,that is, from the 6,7,and 8,Ribs:and although the aGtion of this mu(clc 
be diverfe,by reafon of the diverfity of its fibersarifing from divers places, yetal- 
wayes it drawes the arme forwards whether it be moved Upwards, downwards, or tc 
the Breft;the other which is his companion defcends from the whole lip orbrow of 
the fimous or hollow part of the Blade,which it fills in the forepart ofthe arme neere 
the head thereof.For the two Levatores,or the Lifters up of the arme, the firft named 
Dettoides defcends ftom almoft halfe the Clavicle, the proceffe Acromionand all the 
{pine of the fhoulder-blade into the forefide of thearme the bredth of foure fingers 
below the joynt. It hath divers a@tions according to the diverfity of the fibers,as allo 
every tufcle hath ; yethowfoever itis contracted, whether by the fibers from the 
clavicle alone,or bythe {pinall alone, or by both at once, 
thearme upwards, The other which is his aflociate defcends from the eibbous part 


of the Shoulder-blade conteined becweene the upper rib therof & the {pine between 


the procefles Acromion and Coracoides,tothe neck of the arme;and this we will call the 


Eporwis ot Scapasaris,that is,the fhoulder Mufele. But the firft and larger ofthe 
mufcles, 


it alwayes lifts and heaves” 


fes or Appendix 


| 


Wards by the C 
this wandis ho! 


and thicker atc! 


Upper which ali 


of unequal bisn¢ 


¢xternall bodies 


fitter Original! a; 
by Ell juttagain 


1 
mufcles, w 
lip of the gz! 
ing upon they 
of. The othe 
the upper 20: 
were in fom: 
jt goes into t! 
without eve! 
‘downwards, 
ro the lower | 
or broadcft,a 
che nine lowe 
‘js interted by 
ynto the neck 
mu(cle of the 
arme cannot 


Frer 
theirm 
frit 


But verily lefi 

it hath 2 three! 
lies between tt 
the upper part: 
Other wiie than 
truly we ufe th 
compoted oftv 
Focile ot the Arf 
together at they 
middie parts o! 
lower ends, for § 
inner fide,to th 


& hollowed or 
arme,bound to 
the arme,as the 
This connexio; 


bones of the wr 


{welling our,wh 


holding any thir 


ly lo called hath 


for the exte 
Ut that it turnes 


“ | 
’ 
* 
j 
* 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Epomts, 
Or 
4 


= — 


h of the dj. 
ind./ i the 
kfide Of the 
cand there, 
2». A 
99, the 6, 
ttall nerves 
branches on 
OmMMiIxtion 
braine.x.x., 
cle here cur 
leg.28 A 
the mulcles 
mnco the skin 
he 2. nerve 
o the skip, 
r propaga. 
ull marrow. 
Or 
propa. 
, at- 
4. crurall 
e outward 
furcle te 
kin of fhe 
oft skin of 
of the leg 


hus, that it 
per action 
performe 
yy the acti- 


thefe two 
all,arifing 
¢ 6,7. and 
mbranous 
wulder & 
ps witha 

end from 
mower 
muf{cic 
s, yetal- 
or to 
rbrow of 
meneere 
rftnamed 
nd all the 
e fingers 
rs,as alfo 

| from the 
dheaves 
bous part 
> berween 
call che 
frhe two 
mufcles, 


muicles, which draw the arme backwards, arifes fromthe greateft part of the utter 
lip of the gibbous part of the fhoulder- blade, which is under the fpine therof,& ly- 
ing upon the bladeit felf,ic goes into the hind part of the arme above the neck there- 
of, The other which is cotiguous to it& his partner in working,but leffer,paffes from 
the upperand exteriour part of the lower rib ofthe fhouldereblade, and thence as it 
were in fome fort extending it {elfupon the gibbous part therof neere unto that rib, 
it goes into the arme. This mufcle feemes to be the fame withthe former, being tlefhy 
without even above the top ofthe fhoulder.One & thelefler of thefe two which draw 


-downwards,enters out from the ftreight line of the lower Rib of the blade ,& goes in- 


eothe lower part of the arme about the neck therof. The other called the Lati/simws 
or broadelt,afcends from the {pines of the holy-bonc,of the Loynes,& often alfo from 
che nine lower ofthe Cheft,by the lower corner of the fhoulder-blade into which it 


‘jsinferted by aamembranous tendon,asalfo it is into the inner part of the arme neere 


ynto the necke by another ftrong tendon ;wherupon thismufcle is calleda commen 
mufcle of the fhoulder and arme.But when this mufcle happens to be wounded, the 
arme cannot eafily be ftretched forth, or lifted up. 


Cuarp. XXVI. 


The Defcription of she bones of the Cubit and the 
mafcles moving them, 


w180 Frer thefe muicles follow thofe which bend & extend the cubir, but becaule 
. 1S their infertion cannot be fitly demonftrated,unlk: fle the bones of the cubir be 

firit defcribed ; therefore firft of all we will deliniate the bones themfelves, sie’ 
But verily left this doubtful word cubit fhould caufe obfcurity,firft we muft nore, that 
ithath a threefold fignificatid, for ofttimes itis ufed for alrhat part of the hand which 3 
lies between the arme & wreft oft tames for the lower bone of this part,fomtimes for 

the upper part of this bone whichis turned within the Orbe orCavity of the arme(no | 
otherwife thana cord inthe wheele of a Pulley) and this iscalled the O/ecranen.Here What the 
truly we ufe chis word Cubit inthe firft fignification. Wherfore we fay the cubite is Fyre 
compofed oftwo bones,the one of which we call the Rediws.or WVand, or the leffer the Cubiz, 
Focile of the Armeythe other we properly call the Cubit or Ell. Thefe two bones fticke 3 
together at their ends being firmely bound together by ftrong Ligaments ; but the 

middle parts of them are a prety way diftant from each other, & chietly towards their 

lower ends, for the better {cituation and paffage of the mufcles and veffells from the 


inner fide,tothe exteriour,as {hall be {hewed in fit place. The wand hath two Epsphy- The two 


fes or Appendices the one atthe upper end,the other at the lower. The upper is round of cas 


& hollowed on the furface like a bafon it reccives the fore procefie of the bone of the 


arme,bound to rhe fame by itrong ligaments,de{cending as wel from that proceffe of 
the arme,as the Olecranen into the circum)acent parts of this appendix of the V Vand, 
This connexion is made for this ufe,that we may turne our hand upwards and down- 
Wards by the Cubit turned and rwined about this procefle. But the lower appendix of 


“us wand is hollowed on the infide that fo it might more commodioully receive the 


bones of the wreft,but gibbous without, that it might be fafer;now this wand is fofter 
and thicker at the lower end,but lefler and harder above,where on the infide it hatha wande. 
‘welling out,wherby to receive the mufcle Biceps befides on the outfide of the middle 
therofitisfomewhat 9 ibbous and round ,fo to become more {afe from the injuries of 
“xternall bodies;bur it is hollowed, or bended on the infide for the better taking or 
ling any thing in che hand, But that fide which lyes nextro the Ell is flatted for the 


utter Originall and feat of the mu‘cles;laftly it is feared upon the bone of the Cubir, 


or Ell juitagaing the thum6.But the Ell,or bone of the cubit properly & particular- 


| 
10 called, bath in like maner two appendices, theone above,the other beneath, The 


"pper which alfo is the greater, is firted to the Orbe of the arme,in which it goes to bone of the 
4gain for the extenfio& bending of thearme,no otherwife than a rope runs in a pulley 


Uthat itturnes not abfolutly & perfe@ly round,which is caufed by the procefics 


of unequal bignefle,the which are therfore ftaied in thc holes or cavities of the bone of 


V. the 


of the Body. 217 


q | 
| 
| 
é 


right,thatthe arme might be the better & more cafily moved; becaufe the motion by 
which the arme is extéded & béded is according to a right line,but that by which the 


infide of the hard is turned upwards & downwards, is performed obliquely & circu. 


larly. Wherfore it was expedient that the wand fhould be oblique, & the cubic ftreight 
for the cubit-bone is appointed for to extend & bend the arme, but the wand to px. 
forme the wheeling & turning about therof,& this is the caufe chat it was fitting ther 
fhould be a different connexion of thefe bones withthe arme. Thefethings were fi. 
ting to be {poken concerning the nature of thefe bones, that in the cure of fractures we 
may worke the more fafely & happily,taking indication fromthat which is agreeable 
— to nature: wherfore now it remaines that wecome to the defcription of the muicles | 
Which are feated in the arme.the cubit-bone,or Ell. Thefe are 4,innumber,two exten. 
ee ding it,8 two bending it. The firft of the Benders is called Biceps, by reafon of its two | 
cle. heads;the one wherotde!cends from the Coracotdes, that other from the lipof theca 
vity of the fhonider.blade by the fiflure or cliftot the head of the bone of the arme. 
Thefe two heads under the necke of this arme becoming fiefhy,are firmely united x 
the belly & midftof the arme, & thus united are at length implanted by a firong 
TheBoarbi- don to the inner protuberation of the wand ,The other iscalled the Brachiangs, by rea 
fon of the ftraire coherence therof with the bone of the arme; this faftened under the 
Biceps defcends obliquely on the backe and upper part of the bone of the arme into 
the top of the wand and the inner fide ofthe Ell. Butthe firft ofthe extenders is called 
The Lewges, the fomgus or Long mutcle, this defcends fromthe lower Rib of the fhoulder, and 
cleaving to the bone of the Arme goes thither ¢ faftened and as it were alwayes mo! 
ftraitly joyned with his fellow mufcle, {pecially mere the Cubite ) where you (ha! 
prefently heare. The other termed the Brevg or {hort Mufcle,being the companion 
"* the long,defcends onthe hinde part of the necke ofthe bone of the Arme,as it wert 
growing to and .ying underthe former long mufcle, fothat making one commo 
broad Tendon outwardly ffefhy,inwardly nervous, they are inferted intothe o/s 
num, fo by mutuall affiftance to extend the Cubite. 


— 


Cuarp XXVIT. 
The Defcription of the Bones of the Wreft, Afterwreft and fingers. 


E before that the Hand taken more particularly and properly, is 


ded intothe Wrelt,afterwreft & fingers ,8cthat the hand in this 
ly fo called iss tion is bounded by the ends of the bones of the cubit and fingers.Al 


parts of the wreft,which it hath comon with the afterwreft, have bins: 
ready alfo plentifully explaned,this only remaines to be noted, that the skin alwe) 
the hands as of the feete, is of amiddle nature betweene pure fle(h and pure ski0,” - 
otherwife than that which covers the forehead, but that this which covers‘ 
palmes of the hands & foles of the feet is unmoveable;But it is moft thicke, e{peci?’! 
onthe feere, left it thould beeafily offerded by continnall going. Befides 
common parts,the wreft iscompofed of cight.(mall bones mutually knit togethe!” 


am 


they have not to 


Li 


a certaiae Orde 
andamongft he 
afwellcomme: 
from the uppe: 
hefides they 2! 
and comlinefic 
going inte the ! 
containes onc! 
or placed,that 
ther the E!land 
three of the fiy 
are knit tothe 
ned to the bon 
to which allo 
infide againft t 
Appendix Sty, 
of its griftlely 
from one of th 
This Ring is p 
ries pafliag unc 
hurt by compr 
the finger,whi 
deform the ha: 
foever is made 
Now follow 
arefoure in ov 
hence is the pa! 
the fingers are | 
teroffes caight 
may perceive i 
the wrett or A! 
fay that in the 
it icated unde: 
the reftin nece 
After the{e 
hollow and fi: 
as in the arme 
flat for the ficrell 
to the upper 
tt hath produc 
firong Ligame 
ly clofe the I 
cline to either | 
hold any thine 
together with { 
atterwreft are 1 
bones of the w; 
ave written, {c 
Of the afterwr. 
Of bones of the 
cond by 
receive each ot! 
afterwreft.and 
the fecond. An 
{maller toward 
(as we faid forn 


218 Of the Mujcles and Bones, Ling | 
the arme,the greater proceffe which we called Olecranomis letted by the exterior hol, — 
chat fothe exrenfion of the arme can beno further,but the lefier procefie bythe inne, | 
hole makes the bending therof the lefle perfec. The Compofure of thefe bones is hy | 
Ginglym0s,& it is ftrengthened not onely by common Ligaments comming fromthe: | 
muicles,which move the bones themfelves,but alfo by proper Ligaments defcending | 
from the proceffes of the arme & the lips of the holes and cavities ftanding about the: | 
Appendix of the Cubit. The other lower and lefier appendix is in fome fort hollow 
on the infide for rhe fitter receiving the bones of the wreft,but the outfide is round 2 

Thefigursof ends in a point,whence itis called by the Greeks Styloides.But now this Ell (contrary 
ae inthis to the wand)is thicker towards the arme,but flenderer towards the wreft. An; 
befides in the thicker part therof it is hollowed or bended towards the infide, & in th 
fame place is gibbous or bunching forth onthe out fide;but it is round & ftraighr, un. 
leffe on that fice which lyes next the wand, for the reft, itis hollow & fall of mar, 
like the wand, The fire of the Radius or wand is oblique, but thar of the Cuditor E 


L1B.6: 


‘terior hole 
apy the inner 
ng fromthe 
defcending 
me about the 
fort hollow 
>isround & 
(contrary. 
wreft. And 
de, & in the 
straight, un. 
of marrow 
or Ell is 
= motion by 
my which the 
ely & circu- 
ubit ftreight 
vand to 
s fitting ther 
ngs were fit- 
fractures we 
is agreeable 
the muifcles 
Br two ex{cn. 
on of its two 
up of the ca- 
tthe arme. 
“ly united at 
a {trong ten- 
bias, by rea- 
med under the 
Bc arme into 
Bders is called 
houlder, and 
lwayes moft 
ere you {hall 
ompanion of 
it 
1 «common 
mrothe 


div! 


this fignifica- | 


gers.All che 
have bin 


Bh covers the 
e, efpecially 
Befides he 


skin afwell of 
pure gki0 ; n0 


it together 


and other extreme parts of the Body. 


L 


a certaine order, and by Dearthrofis with the two bones of the Cubite, but mutually 
andamongttthemfelves by Sywarthrofis by interpofition of Griftles and Ligaments 
a(wellcommon, thatis,comming from the mutcles, as proper,defcending alwayes 
f-omthe upper to thelower, Butthefe fame bones are fome leffe than otherfome, 
befides they are hard and without marrow, gibbous on the outfide for the fecurity 
and comlineffe of the hand,but hollow on the infide for to give way to the tendons 
going into the fingers. Thefebones are difpofedin two rankes. The firft Ranke 
containes oncly three,but the fecond five, The three of the firft Ranke ar thus arayed, 
or placed,that one of them may receive the Appendix Styloides of the Cubite ; the o- 
therthe Elland the Wand together, and the third may be received by the Wand. But 
three of the five bones ofthe fecond order fufteine the foure bones of the afterwreft & 
areknittothefameby Synarthrofis, after which manner of connexionthey are joy- 
ned to the bones of the firft ranke;the fourth fuftaines the firt bone ofthe Thumbe 
to which alfo it is coarticulate by Sywarthrofis; the fiftandlaft is feated on the 
infide againft the Ell, cheifly above that bone ofthe firft order, which receives the 
Appendix Styloides of the Cubite,this is the leaft and weakeft of them all by reafon 
of its griftlely {ubitance,which makesthe Ring with cettaine Ligaments runniog 
from one of theinner fides of the wreft tothe other. 

This Ring is placed there as well for the prefervation of the finewes ,veines & Arte- 
rics pafliag under it(leaft when we leane upon our hand, or wreft,thefe parts fhould be 
hurt by compreffion)asalfo for the commodity of the Aion of the mufcles bending 
the finger, which in the performance of theirattion & the cotraAing thélelyes mighe 
deform the hand by their paffing forthof the Cavity of the wreft.For what attraction 
foever is made by firings, if it be free and not hindered,ts according to a {treight line, 

Now follow the bones of the fecond part of the hand,or of rhe afterwreft, Thefe 
are foure in number, gibbous without, but arched wizhin,ct hollow in the middle; for 
hence is the palme of the hand,orcertainly the greater part thereof; their ends next 
the fingers are fomewhat remote from each other,that in thefe clifts the Mufcles Zn- 
teroffes might finde a place and feate.But thefe ends have each an Appendix, as you 
may perceive inthe Sceleton ofa childe. But you muft note that by the firft bone of 
the wreft or Afterwreft, we meane that which is inthe forefide of the hand,that is to 
fay that in the wreft which lies under the Thumbe, and that in the Afterwreft which 


it feared under the forefinger,as thefe which keepe in order the fingers which exceed 
the reftin necefiity and dignity. 


After thefe follow the fiftcene bones of the fingers,that is,three in each, which are Thebone: of 


What the 
Aanules ot 
it, 


The bores of 
theAlterwreS 


hollow and fiftulous fullofathin and liquid marrow, and not of groffe and thicke **"8*: 


as inthearmeandthigh. They are outwardly gibbous, but inwardly hollow and 
fiat for the fitrer feate of the Tendons afcending along ft the fingers onthe infideeven 
tothe upperjoynt. The which that nature mightthe better firengthen and preferve, 
ithath produced fromthe lips ofthe inner Cavities of thefe bones amembranous & 
firong Ligament, which running overtwhart from one fide to the other doth fo ftraic- 
ly clofe the Tendonsto their bones,that they cannot goe forth of their places,or ih- 
cline to either fide. They are connexed on the outfide,that they might be more fit ro 
hold any thing. But forthe firft bones of the 4 fingers and Thumbe.foure are joyned 
together with fo many bones of the afterwreftby Symarthrofis, for the bones of the 
aiterwreft are moved by no manifeft motion; thefift is knit to the fecond ranke of the 
bones of the wreft, therefore that bone cannot be attributed to the afterwreft,asfome 


V2 


- % 


| Have written, feeing it hath manifeft motion and is knit by Déartbrofis, but the bones 

ofthe afterwreft are one! y fattened by Syzarthrefis. For the fecond and third ranke 

: | of bones of the fingers, they are knit the fecond tothe firft, and the third to the f{e- 

| | Cond by dsarthrofisand Arthrodia,becaufe befides the manifeft motion they have,they 

| ‘eceive each other by a fuperficary cavity, as thofe of the firft ranke, the bones of the 
| atterwreit,and thofe of the fecond ranke them ofthe firft;thofe of the thirdthem of 

a the fecond. And all the bones of the fingers are larger and thicker at their bafis, buc ° nas 

{maller towards the ends;and they are bound by Ligaments efpecially proper, which | 

| (Swe faid formerly)defcend from the firft to the fecond ; fo that the laft bones feeing 4 

they have aot to whom to communicate their nerve,make & producenailes thereof: 


Of the VAufcles and Bones, 


Wherefore the nailes are generated by the fibers ofthe Ligaments, and the ex. 


nailetare 


nerated.  Crementof thetendons which are terminated at the bottome of thenailes, Now je. 


maine the Sefamoidea,or feed-bones:the feare 19,1n number in the inner joynts 


or Seed-bones. ach of the hands,and as many in each foote, wz.two in the firft joyntof the four. 


fingers and inthe fecond of the thumbe,and onein each of the reft, For the inner 


of the joynts,you may for themoft part obferveone ineachof them ; yer inthe fe. 
cond joynt of the thumbe there be two, above thetwo tendons, which are 
riftlely. 

- They are made for this ufe, that they firme and ftrengthen the joyars, fo that th. 
bones of the fingers may not beturned awry, ot chruft forth of their places by {tro 
and violent motions,as it fometimes happens inthe whirle-bone of the knee, They 
are called S¢/amoidea from the refemblance they have tothe feed of Se/amam which is 
{omewhat long and fiat, 


Theirule, 


The Figure of the bones of the Hand. The 1. fhewes the infide of the right hand and th, 
2efhewes the backe fide of the fame, 


The Chara@.1, 2,3,.4,5,¢, 

738.fhew the eight bones 
of the wreft, 

, 4,1,2, The firft bone of 

the Afterwreft lying 

under the thumbe, 

The 4. other 

bones of the Afterwref 
annexed to the fingers. 

B,C. The two bones of the 

thumbe. 

D,E,F.1,;2-The 3 bonesof 

_ the forefinger, which are 
the fame in the orher 
fingers. 

M,1,2.A litle bone fome 
times faltened outward: 


BIG. UG 


ly at the joynt of the eight bone of the wreft. é 
N,1.A proceffe of the eight bone of the wreft ,fwelling out into the ball of the hand. 
O,1.A procefle of the fift bone of the wreft, from which a Ligament proceeds. 
P, 2.An Appendixof the bones of the wreft,by which they are articulated to the a 
terwrelt. 
,2. Another appendix which with its head entreth into the Cavity of the finger. 
R,1,2.The {pace berweene the bones of the afterwreft. 
S,1,2.Two litle feed-bones fet on the infide and outfide of the firlt joyne: 
T,1. Two feed-bones inthe firft of the 4 fingers. 
v.¥,1.One feed-bone inthe fecond and third joynt of the fingers. 


Cuarp. XXVIII. 


Of the mufcles which feated in the Cubite move she Wand 
and with itthe Hand. 


‘Ow muft we deftribe the mufcles of the formerly deferibed parts, thats, 
thofe which are feated inthe Cubit, which are carryed to the infide of (h¢ 
: hand, and thofe which are called the‘Zwsereffes: Now the mufcles of th¢ 


are 14, 7 external! and 7 Incernall ; two ofthe féven external! doc primaril 
| | cw! 


Cubit 


L 13-6. 


ewine or curng 
hand upward 
rwoextend 
ders;t wo the 
coclude,the | 
cwo 
ofthe Arme 
into the lowe 
rocefle of th 
rendon 
wWrelt,deice: 
is inferted by 
fufteine the fc 
The other& 
is inferted int 
Thefe muicl 
wreft-bender 
lyfocalled,T 
arifing from 
thetwo bones 
dons, whic! 
common liga 
fingers adher 

The other 
liquely tne 
which is infer 
flenderer cont 
Thumbe. 

The tevent 
hand,that is,t¢ 
verily we have 
one portion ¢: 
the other in ! 
Thumbe. 

And for al! 
Mufclebecau 
Wards;fonie bh, 
mon origina)! 
ftributed,as is 
ting, asic oft: 
produGtions o: 
we faid hath 7 
be fent throysc! 
24 mu{cle of ir 
and Wand. A 
you May con); 
(ake away one 
iNeight, if yor 
Or Obliquator 

Now muft 
Paffes the skin 
cond and third 
Wand, and co 
upon they are cll 
The 4.and 5 
ate named Car; 
Dend the firft, 


2? 
Whenee the 
~* 
© 
eli 
DS 


and the ex. 
Now re. 
ler joynts of 
f the foure 
1¢ INNer fide 
c inthe fe. 
¢ fomewhar 


the 
by {tre 

nee. Thes 
m Which is 


snd and she 


293 556; 
eight bones 


rft bone of 
reft lying 
1umbe, 

he 4. other 
Afterwrett 
he fingers. 
onesot the 


e 3 bonesof 
r, which are 
the other 


bone fome 
d outward- 


»f the hand. 
eds. 
dto the 


1¢ finger. 


L 1B 


rwine orturne upthe Wand, and fecondarily or by accident turne the Palme of the 


hand upward s,wherupon they have called them /#pimatores or turners up of the hand; 
-woextend the wrelt,wherupon they atenamed Carpitenfores or the Wreft-exten- 
derstwo the fingers,whence they are ftiled Digitumtenfores or finger -ftretchers; to 
coclude,the feventh & laftis termed Abduéter or Obkquator externus. The firft of the 
cwo /upinatores is called the Long,or Longeft, becaufe it defcends from the ovtfide 
ofthe Arme above the procefles therof,and is inferted bya round and firong tendon 
into the lower Appendix. The other defcends obliquely from the outward and upper 

rocefle of the arme,and is inferted at the third part of the Wand bya membranous & 
b ethy rendon before and on the infide thereof, The upper of the two Extenders of the 
Wrelt,deicending above the wand fromthe externall and upper procefle of the arme 
is inferted by two Tendons intothe firft and fecond bone ofthe After-wreft, which 
fufteine the fore and middle fingers. 

The other& lower,defcending from the fame place as the former, above the Cubir 
is inferted into the fourth bone of the Afterwreft which beares up the litle finger, 
Thefe mufcles whileft they move alone, that is,each with his Antagonift, to witthe 
wreft-benders,they move obliquely upwards or downwards the whole hand proper- 
lyfocalled, The firft and greater of the Extenders ofthe fingers, or finger-ftretchers 
arifing from the Olecranum,or boneofthe Cubit, defcends fuperficiarilie betweene 
che two bones of the Cubite even to the wreft,in which place it isdivided into 4 ten- 
dons, which pafing under the Ring feated there, end (each diftinguifhed by a 
common ligament above the bone of the Afterwre(t) in the laft joynts of the foure 
fingers,adhering neverthelefie firmely to the bones,which are above thefe joyats. 

The other which is the leffer arifing almoft in the middle of the Wand, goes ob- 
liquely to the Thumbe into which it is inferted by two Tendons; the one thicker 
which is inferted into the root therof,and drawes it from the other fingers;che other 
flenderer continued even tothe upper joynetherof, and by its a&ion extending the 
Thumbe. 

The feventh whichis the Abdacfor or Obliquater,is {eated at the hinde partof the 
hand,that is,towards the litle finger; we have often found this divided in two, yea 
verily we have found it trifide,or divided into 3.this yeare in three or 4 dead bodyes, 
one portion therof went to the lower fide of the Ring-fnger withtwo Tendons, 
— other in like manner to the middle and fore-fingers, and the third to the 
Thumbe, 

And for all that itis thus divided, yet fome have taken and accounted it for one 
Mufcle,becaufe it hath one originallandaction, which is to draw the fingers back- 
wards;fome have added to this the extender of the Thumbe by reafon of their com- 
mon originall:and thus of 4.mufcles they have made one divided into 7.tendons,di- 
ftributed,as is formerly fhewed. But whenthe 06/:quator of the Ring-finger is wan- 
ting, asic often happens, the extender of the finger fupplyes that defect by certaine 
productions oftendinous ftrings.But fomealfo have written, that this mufcle which 
we faid hath 7.tendons,is oncly a produétion of the deepe fore mufcle, which fhoukt 
be fent through the {pace betweene the bones of the Cubir; yet I had rather make it 
amu(cle of it felfe, by reafon of its ftrait adhefion with the bones of the Arme 
and Wand. And let thus much fuffice for the external! mufcles of the Cubic, which 
you may comprehend in the number of feaven, as we have done; or infixe,if you 
‘ake away one of the 4. or in nine, if you had rather.refolve it into 4, with Ga/en; or 
ineight, if you divide this mufcle oncly into three. For in very deed the Abducor 
Or Obliquator of the Ring-finger is not often found in men. ~ 

Now muft wee cometo the iftner mufcles of the Cubit, the firft of which com- 
pafles the skinot the palme ofthe hand, whence it is called the /4/mar%. The fe- 
cond andthird joyned by the communica of thetr action turne downe or prone the 

Vand, and confequently the hand, fo that the palme lookes towards the feer,where- 
upon they are called Prowatores. 


The 
fore!, 

J he C4rpe« 
tenfores, 
The pitame 
senfores, 
The Otheua« 
termes. 
The firftof 
the pina- 
fores, | 
The fecon4, 
Theupper cf 
the Carpiséne 


pres, 


The lower: 


The greater 
of the Digi- 


The 


TheObliguas 
fer, or Abs 
doctor extere 
Wide 


The mulclea 
ef the innec 
part ofthe 
Cubist. 


* The4.and 5. joyned alfo in affinity of aétion bend the Wreft, wherefore they | 


arenamed Carpiflexores, VVreltbenders. The fixth and feaventh are appointed to 
Dend thefirtt, (econd, and third joynts of the fingers, wherefore they are cearmed 


| 
| 
| 
rts, that iS, 
Gideof che 
cles of the : 
primarily 2 J 
ewin® 


222 Of the Mufcles and Bones, L1n.6- 


—_ 


The Dip their originall; the Palmaris the leaft & uppermoft 
of them all ,defcends flefhy from the hinde proceffe of the inner arme, 8&2 litle after 
ending in along and flender Tendon tt 1s {pent inthe skin of the Palme of the hang 
even to the roots ofthe fingers. For it was neceflary thatthis skin fhould ftraitly co. 
here with the fubjacent parts,not onely for the fitter taking er comprehenfion of any 
thing,leftthat skin in holding fhould be wrinckled & drawne away from the palme 
and fingers, and fo be an impediment;but befides that the hand might havea more 
exaét fenfeto diftinguith of hot,cold, moift, dry, fmoth, equall, rough, foft, hard 

ThePrens- oreat,litie,and fuch other qualityes. Then follow the two Prenatores, of which one 

sammie called the round,comes obliquely fromthe inner fide of the hinde procefie of the 
arme almoft tothe middle of the Wand,to which it adheres by a mébranous & fle(h. 
ly tendon, eventothe place appointed for infertion. The other {quare three or foure 
fingers broad, yet fomwhat flender,{eated within under all the mufckes which defcend 
onthe infide tothe wreft or fingers, upon the ends of the bones of the Cubir, afcends 
tranfverfe from below the Ell, unto the top of the V Vande where it ends in a mem. 

The Carpitiex: branous tendon. Both the Carpiflexores,or VVre f-benders arife from the hinde, byr 

o98%. inner procefie,and defcende obliquely (the one more,or leffe than the other) the one 
along{t the Ell,but the other along{t the wande; and that which defcends alongft the 
Ell, is inferted intothe eight bone of the wreft, whichwe faid made part of the 
Ring,the other which followes the VVande is inferted withhis greater part into the 
bone of the wreft, and with the reft into the firft bone of the After-wreft which 

The Digitwm the fore-finger. 

flexorts, Now remaine the Digitamflexores, or Fingerbenders, which becanfe they lye upon 

Thesoblimi,s another,the upper is called the Jublimis but the lower the Profundus. The Sublimis 

Digitemflexer. or upper, arifing from the inner part of the hinde proceffe of the arme,and from the 
upper parts of the Ell and VVand defcends betweene thefe two bones of the Cubit 
evento the wreft and Rings divided into 4. tendons it is inferted into the {e. 
cond dearticulation of the foure fingers which it bendsby the force of this his pro- 
perinfertion;as alfo the firft,as well by the power of the common ligament, as by cer. 
caine fibers cOming from it, which it fends thither by the way in its paflage But thele 
4 tendons nere unto this their infe:tion are divided into two, fo to give paflage and ad 
firength tothe tendons of the Deep mufcles defcending into the third and lait joint of 

Theprofu- the fingers. 

But this fame Profumdus or Deepe mufcle arifing from the upper and inner parts 

of the Ell and Wand, defcends betweence theie two bones under the un- 

divided even to the wreft,where it is divided into§5. Tendons which it brings forth 
under the commen Ligament,and the divifions ofthe Tendons of the SubLimis even 
to the laft joynt of the fingers, which they bend, by this their proper infertion,as allo 
the bones of the firft and {econd joynts of the fingers by the meanes of the common 

Ligament and fibrous produ ions which they befiow upon them by the way.Belides 

thefe forementioned there is feene alfo acertaine membranous Ligament which co 

girts the tendons in the compafie of the fingers, 


Cuap. XX IX, 
Of the Mufeles of the infide of the band. 


p He mufcles of the infide of the hand are 7 in number;the firft is called rhensr 
becaufe it makes the greater part of the Palme ;the fecond from the {ite is 
called the Hypothenar;the third the externall sédedFor of the Thumbe, The 
4.other are called by reafon of their figure the Lwmbrici or wormy mufcles, or the 
The Thcwar. Adductores sor Drawers of the foure fingers to the thumbe.Now the firft called T/¢- 
war, thicker than the reft,arifes from all the bones of the Afterw reft, taking its begi®- 


The number 
of the ma(cles 


ef the infide of 


Vitallline even to the end therof at the firft bone of the Afrer-wreft {ufteining the 
fore finger, & it is at length interted into she Jaft joyne of the Thumbe by the long! 
«bers 


ning from that bone which beares up the Ring finger, whence afcending along{tthe — 


fibers, but by 
bones of two | 
and from the @ 
Some dev: 
firft to arife 
finger ; but th 
midd!e finge! 
che fore finge 
the former 
the doctrine 
Fhe Hypot 
the wreft wh: 
fecond joynt : 
cafion, as 
the onc of th 
thumbe. 

The third ¢ 
afterwreft, 
vided it into t 
arife fromar 
flexores,or fin 
{mail tendon, 

Now the 
in each of che 
which rhe Int 
the afterwreft, 
binde togethe: 
thruft our finge 
helpes alfoch 

alfoby obliqu 
joynts of the | 
manner of the 
away of the fi 
Here conc); 
rall,you fhall o 
arme; foure {er 
aud as many o 
hand ; feven o: 
this number, 
the inlide of th 


Fter 
awa 
COMMOS to al! 
God willing, WW 
Now this w: 
nerally and fp: 
and fimply {o, 
the knee and th 
taken ine 
the hipps, co ci 


* 


— 
4 
~ 
i 
é 
| 
* 
> 


PPcrmoft 
litle after 


the hand 
| raitly co. 
on of aby 
he Palme 
vea more 
oft, hard, 
which one 
fie of the 
s & flefh. 
¢ or foure 
h defcend 
it, afcends 
na mem. 
inde, bur 
r) the one 
Jongft the 
art ofthe 
t into the 
eft which 


y lye upon 
e Sublimis 
from the 
Cubit 
to the {e- 
is his pre- 
sas by cer- 

» Butthele 
age and ad 
matt joint of 


nner parts 
is,alfo un- 
‘ings forth 
limes even 
ion, as allo 
‘common 

y .Befides 
which 


ed Thenar 
the fite 1s 
ibe, The 
Ss, of the 
alled The- 
its begin- 
long ft che 
ejning the 
he 

fibers 


Contained in the Head. 


Gbers, but bythe middle and horteft fibers almoft into alltheinner part ofthefirk 
bones oftwo joynts, aad by reafon of this,the thumbe is drawne to the other fingers, 
and from them againe by his lower originall. 

Some devide this muicle into three, by reafon of his diverfe a€tions, making the 
frit co arife from the roote of the bone of the afterwreft which beares up the ring 
Ginger ; but the other from that middle bone of the afterwreft which fuftaines the 
middle finger ; but of the third, from the upper end of that bone which underprops 
the fore finger, and that the infertion of them all, is, as we formerly mentioned. But 
che former opinion likesme better, both for fhunning confufion, and adbreviating 
che doctrine of the number of mufcles, 

The Hypotbenar arifes fromthe fourthbone of the afterwreft, and that bone of Tie Hypoths- 
the wreft which fuffaines it, and then with its longeft fibers, it isinferted into the "4" 
fecond joynt of the ring-finger, and by the fhorteft into the firft, through which oc- 
cafion, as alfo in refpect of its twofold a&tion , fome have devided it into two, that 
the onc of them might leade it from the reft, andthe other might draw it ro the 
thumbe. 

The third the external! Abdudor of the thumbe,defcends from the firft bone of the The externatl 
afterwreft, into the firft and fecond joynt of the thumbe ; wherefore fome have de- 4°4#4"" of 
vided itinto two. The Lembricz, or foure externall Abdudores of the foure fingers TheLumérics, 
arife froma membrane, invefting and binding together the tendons of the Digstam- 
flexores,or fingerbenders, and atlengthon the fides towards the thumbe even by a 
{mall tendon, running even to the fecond joynt of the foure fingers. 

Now the Jatero/fes of the afterwreft, remaine tobe fpoken of ; thefe are fixe, two The Zoreref?, 

in each of the fpaces betweene the fingers, one Internall, the other Externall, of 
which the Internall defcending with oblique fibers from the fide of the firft bone of 
the afterwreft, goes alfo into the fides of the fingers, that foit may the more clofely 
binde togetlier the bones of the afterwreft, whofe action is manifefted when wee 
throft our firgers intoa firait glove, or when we bend our hand. Some thinke that ig 
helpes al fo the drawing of the fingers towards the thumbe. The Externall afcends 
alfo by oblique fibers fromthe fides of the fecond bone of the afterwreft, tothe.firft 
joynts of thé fingers, interfecting the internall which we now defcribed after the 
manner of the letter X, for to extend the palme of the hand, and helpe the drawing 
away of the fingers from the thumbe. 


Here concluding the defcription ofthe mufcles of the whole hand taken in gence Jhenumbe: 
rall,you fhall nore that they are 39. innumber, thatis, eight appointed to move the of the whole 
arme; foure {er to move the cubit in generall;feven feated on the outfide of the cubir, *<<5'"8" 
aud as many onthe infide inthe fame cubite, moving the wand, and with it the 
hand ; {even onthe infide of the hand :and faftly, the fixe Jmteroffes. Some encreafe 


this number, faying, there are nincon the externall part of the cubite, and cleven on 
the inlide of the hand, 


C uap. 4 X 


A Defcription of the Legge taken in generall, 


Fter the hand followes the defcription of the legge. Wherefore to take a- 
ANS away all doubtfulneffe, we will firft define the legge ; then devide it into 
» the parts more and leffe compound ; thirdly we will profecute all things 
omron to all thefe parts; fourthly, thofe which are peculiar to cach, and then, 
od willing, we wil! give an end to our Anatomy. 3 
Now this word Cras, or Legge, is ufed two manner of wayes, that is, either ge- Thedivert : 
Nerally and fpecially, and {pecially againe after two forts, that is, either abfolutely the leege: 
and fimply fo, or with anadjund, Iris fimply taken for all that which is betweene par 
the knee and the foote, But withan adjun& for the greater bone thereof. But the 
pene taken in generall,is the inftrument of going, containing all whatfoever is from 
‘Me hipps, to the very ends of the toes, It is devided into three great parts, that isto 


fay, 


3 
q 
! 
q 
+ 
+ 
7 
j 
- 
am 


224. 
The thigh. 
‘The legge or 


Thetoote, 


The divifion 
of the foote. 


‘The Inkep, 


Thetop of 
the foote 


The toes, 


The bevins 
ning ef the 


Crurallveines 


The two 
branches 
thereof, 


By what 
veincs, the 
mattercaufing 
tho!¢ tumors 
called Babones 
floyys downe, 


Where andin 
what difeafes, 
the Saphesa 
muit be ope= 
ned. 


To what plas 
ces, and by 
bow manifold 
devifiens the 
internal] 


O; the eH ufeles and ‘Bones, L 1B.6, 


fay,the Thigh, the Legge, or Shanke, and the Foote, By the thigh we meane thay 
which lics betwcene the hippe and the knee. By the legge, properly fo called, o- 
fhanke, that which is contained betweene the knee and the foote, By the foote aij 
from thence to the ends of the toes, 

Againe, they devide the foote into three parts, that is, the Tarfae or Inftep, the 
Pedion or top of the foote, and the Digsti pedwm, or tocs, We underftand by the in- 
ftep, that which is contained inthe firft feven bones, which an{wers in proporii. 
ontothe wreft ofthe hand.By the top of the foot,that which is comprehended inthe 
five following bones, which is anfwerable to the afterwrefit_ That which remaines, 
we call the toes. But becaufe all thefé parts have other common and proper parts, we 
will onely follow the diftribution ofthe veines,arteries, and nerves ; feeing we have 
fufficiently explained the reft,whén we defcribed the containing parts of the body in 
generall, 


XXXI. 
A Defeription ofthe Crurall veine. 


Sa He Crurall veine begins then, when the hollow veine paffing forth of the 
Peritouenm, and ftretched to the hanch bone, andthe fides of the in 
thegroine, is firft divided into twolarge branches; the one of which 

def{cends onthe infide alongft the bones of the whole legge,together with 
the artery andaerve; the other runnes downe outwardly and fuperficially 
Jongeft the legge, betweene the fat lying under the skinne, and the muicles even to 
the foote, andis fpent inthe skinne thereof, This becaufe itis alwayes apparent 
and manifef, is called properly bythe Greekes Sapheia, burcommonly Sapbena. 

This veine by the way prefently at its originallis devided into two branches, the 
one internal, the other external] ; of which the internallis fpent uponthe Babones, 
and other glandules of that place and the skinne, and by this branch come the de- 


fluxionscalled Babowes ; the other branch is waifted inthe fore and utter skinne of 


the upper part of the thigh ; then a little lower, that is, about the bredth of three or 
foure fingers, it is gathered againe intoone branch made of many little ones, which 
is {pent in the fore and hinde skinne of this thigh. Thirdly, alictle below the middle 
of the thigh it is againe devided intotwo other branches, of which the one goes ints 
the skinne on the fore fide, and the other on the hinde fide, Fourthly it is diftributed 
by two otherfmall {priggs into the skinne, on the fore andjhinde part ofthe knee; 
which oftentimes arc not found, efpecially when the Poplitea or ham yeine, is {ome- 
what larger than ordinary. Fiftly, alittle below the knee, it produces two othe: 
branches, lying upon each other intheir paflage out into the fore and hinde skinne 
ofthat place. You muft note,that branch which runnes inte the skinne of the hind: 
part, is carried by a certainc other f{prigge, which it produces,into a braach of the 
Poplitea pafling forth of the two twin mufcles, Sixthly, in the bigger part of che 
calfe of the legge, it is divided into two other branches, whichin like manncr are 
diftributed intothe skinne , as well in the fore fide as the backe fide of the legge. 
Atlength after many other divifions, which for brevitie fake, I omit, when it ar- 
rives at the fore and inner fide of the ankle (where it is commonly opened in the di- 
feafes of the parts below the midriffe which require bloud-letting) it is parted into 
two other branches, the lefler of which defcends to the heele ; the other in many 
{prigsis {pent upon the skinae of all the upper and lower part of the foote and coes. 
The fecond branch of this Crurall veine, which wee faid defcends within toge- 
ther with the artery and nerve, even into the foote, is devided ; firft peircing fome- 
what decpe in, it produces foure divarications; one internal! defcending below 


branch ofthe the Originall of the Saphezainto the mufcle called Obtwrator extermusand into certain’ 
other external! mufcles. The three other runne outwardly, the firft towards the 
ycbiadica ve~ Huckle bone, by which the //chias is made, the two other into the fore mufcles of the 


thigh, acither are thefe {prigs far remote from one another. Secondly,all char branch 
iS) 


L13.6- 


is devided in 
wayes accor 
mufcles of the 
ny branches | 
it produces th 
proceeding fr 
bending of ch 
other while u: 
goes Of the o1 
{ometimes on 
Thirdly, a! 
the knec, ic b: 
or calte of the 
continued fon 
Fourthly, 
duces between 
of the legge, is 
Fiftly, and | 
Vided intotwo 
nal! defcendin 
the muicles of | 
which it is wa! 
the leffer defce: 
the heele, yer 
the toes, but al 
toc. 


Muicles therof 
thecommon ho 

Secondly, w! 
legge, it fends 
Thirdly, a lice 
muicles of the Je: 

CO two branches 
external] the in: 
it pales, but {pec 
betwecne 
If 1S divaricated ; 
the N€xt, and one 
fole of the toote. 

May ipread by th. 

tothe muicle, the 

femainder is dev} 


 *@thelittle toe, a: 


837) e He 
| 
- 


roporti. 
-d inthe 
maines, 
parts, we 
e have 
body in 


h of the 
Pubs in 
»f which 
ler with 
ially a- 
even to 
pparent 
bana. 
aes, the 
Bubones , 
the de- 
inne of 
hree or 
, which 
middie 
moes 
ributed 
e knee; 
fome- 
o other 
skinne 
e hinde 
of the 
tof che 
mncr are 
legge. 
nm it ar- 
the di- 
ed into 
many 
toes. 
mn toge- 
> fome- 
below 
erraine 
ds the 
s ofthe 
branch 
iS, 


* 


L 


Contained in the Head. 


ic devided into two other branches, theone above, the other below, an artery al 


wayes accompanying it ; the lower of which is fpent upon many of the hinder aiuéale Gens. 
eels of the thigh, ending nighthe ham. The upper, befides, that it beftowes ma- , 
ny branches uppon the fore and inner mufcles ofthe thigh, defcending to the ham, 
it produces the Poplitea or ham veine, made fometimes of two bra es, the onc 
proceeding from above, and the other from below. This pep/ites defcending by the pepiitss Gena. 
bending of the ham, is {pent one while upon the skinne of the calfe of the legge, an- 
other while upon the knee, otherwhiles encreafed with branches of the Sapheia, it 
goes On the euttide ofthe anckle tothe skinne, on the upper fide of the foete, and 
{ometimes on the lower. 

Thirdly, a little below the original! of che ham veine, and under the bending of 
the knee, it brings forth the Swraés, which is beftowed upon the mufcleofthe Sara, , 
or calte of the lepge, and upon the skinne of the inner fide thtreof, and of the foote aN 
continued {4metimes even to the inner part of the great toe. 

Fourthly, under the head of the hinder appendix of the bones of the legge, it pro- 
duces betweene thefc two bones, another veine, which nourithing the fore mufcle 
of the legge, is confumed upon the foore. 

Fiftly, and lafily, it brings forth the J/chiadsca maser or greater Achias which is de- iftisdica mes 
vided into two branches of an unequal! bigneffe ; the larger whereof, from his origi- #. 
nall defcending alongft the imner partofthe legge bone, infiauates ir felfe under 
the muicles of the calfe, betweene this and the heele , into the fole of the foote, upon 
which it is walted, devided intoten {mall {prigs, two foreach toe; the other being 
the leffer defcending alongft the Peroxe, or fhin-bone, is confumed betweene it and 
the heele, yet fometimes it is produced, not onely even to the mufcle the dbductor of 


the toes, but: alfo by five furcles, even to the fourth toe, and the fides of the middle 
toc. 


CHAP. XXXII, 


The Diftribution of the Crurall Artery. 


fa He crurall artery arifing fromthe fame place whence the crurall veine 
"T = preceeded, and defcending with the internall crurall veine is diftributed 
as folioweth. 

Firlt, intothe mufcle of the thigh, which fpreadiug it felfe through the 
of meets with the utmott bypogaffrica,defcending with the veine through 
the comeon hole of the huckle and fhare bone, and is joyned with it. 


secondly, when it arrives at the ham, berweene the Condylos or proceffes of the 
legge, it fends two branches into the knee. 

Thirdly, a little after it produces another branch, which it fends to the exteriour 
mufclesof the legge, and when it arrives atthe middle of the legge, it is devided in- 
to two branches, betweene the twin mulclesand Soleus, the one internall, the other 
external] ; the4nternall, fome furcles communicated by the way tothe parts by which 
itpafles, but foecially to the joynt of the anckle, ftretches it {elfe over the fole of the 
toote, betweene the lower extremity thereof and heele, whither, when it arrives 
itis divaricated into five furcles, of which it beftowes two on the great toc, two on 
the next, andene on the middle toe. The externall defcending in like manner to the 
lole ofthe foore, betweene the féw/a and the heele, befides other {prigs, which ix 
may {pread by the way, it produces one without on the joynt of the anckle, another 
inthe muicle, the Abdudter of the toes, tothe wreft and backe of the foote, Butrhe 


‘emainder is devided into five portions, of which two are fentto the forth, and two 
‘othe little tor, and one to the middle, 


Arter 


HA?. 


thar 
alled, or 
oote all] \ 
y the in- 


ff 


226 Of the <M ufcles andBones, L 


Cc HAP. X XXIII. 
Of the Nerves of the Loynes , Holy-bone and Thigh: 


Here arife five conjugations of nerves from the loines, devided into ex. 
ternal! & internal branches;the externallare diffeminated into the Rachite 
(5 or chin mufcles, the mufcles Semz{pimatus and Sacer and the skinne lying 
overthem., Theinternall arefent into the oblique afcendent aad tran{~ 
verfe mufcle of the lower belly,into the Peritenaum, into the loine and cheft mufCles 
arifing there, but after a different manner; for fome are abfolutely carried thither, 
as the nerves of the firft conjugation of the loines, and oftentimes alfo of the fecond, 
Wherethe but that fometiines they fend a {mall fprigge to the tefticles, when the Coftall have 
theme’ fentnone thither ; but fome lower are partly diftributed there, and partly fent fome 
other way ; for the greater portions firft united amongft themfelves, then prefently 
with the portions of thefe of the holy-bone, goe intothethigh, as we fhall thew in 
the diftribution of the nerves of the holy-bone, 
Theconjugae _ Now fromthe holy bone, proceede fixe conjugations of nerves, reckoning tha: 
tions of the for the firft which proceeds from the laft Yertebra of the loines, and firft of the holy. 
ding through DONE ; andthat the fixte which proceeds from the loweft part of the holy-bone, and 
theholybone. the firft of the rumpe ; thefe conjugations of nerves are devided into externall and in- 
ternall branches. | 
The leffer externall pafling forth by the externall and hinder holes of the holy- 
bone, are diftributed into the parts properly belonging thereto, to wit, the mufcles 
An Anztomis and skinne thercof; for every nerve by the law of nature firft and alwayes yeelds to 
calexiome ee ncighbouring parts, that which is ncedefull, then prefently to others as much as 
it can, 
Wherefore if thou wouldf know whence each part hath his veffels at the next 
hand, that is, the veines, arteries and nerves, thou muft remember the fite ef each 
part and the courfe of the vellels, and to confider this, thatthe veines and artcries 
as {peedily and conveniently as they can, infinuate themfelves into the parts, fome- 
times at the head or beginning, fomewhiles by the middle, or extremesthereof, as 
there is occafion. 

But a nerve principally enters a mufcle at the head thereof, or at leaft not farre 
from thence, but never by the taile, whereby it may eafily be underftood by what 
branch of each veine, artery, and nerve, each part may have nourifhment, lift, and 
fenis. The other internall branches of the forefaid conjugations goe, efpecially che 
foure uppermott united from their originall with the three lowermoft of the loines, 
into all che legge,as you fhall prefently heare. But the twolower are confumed up- 
onthe mufcles called Lewateres Ani,the Sphincter mutcle of the fame place ; befides, 
uponthe mufcies of the yard, and necke of the bladder in men, but in women upon 
the necke of the wombe and bladdcr. 

Forthefe parts admit another in their bottome from the coftall nerve, being of 
the fixth conjugation of the braine ; thefethus confidered, let us come to the nerves 
of the thigh,which(as we faid )from their firft original, as it werec6paéted and com- 
pofed of the greater portion of thethree inner and lower branches of the loines, 204 
the foureupper of the hely-bone, are devided in the thighinto foure branches, of 
which the firft and higher defcending from above the Peritonaum, tothe little Tr: 
chanter, is wafted upon the inward and fuperficiary mufcles of the thigh, and the skin 
which covers them a little above the thigh. 

_ The fecond, defcending with the crurall veive andartery by the groine, is devided 
into two branches like as the veine,the one internall,the other external, of which th¢ 
internall defcending with the veine and artery is fent intothe inner and deep? 

mufcles of the thigh ending above the knee. But the externall defending fuperfici- 
ally with the Saphesa, even intothe foote, gives branches by the way to the skinne 
which covers it, ° 

The third feated ondes thefe the hole the 

ancils 


The five 
ons 

of 

the loines, 


L 18.6. 


hanch-bone, fen 
ves, to the Trice 
midft of rhe thig @ 
The fourth, w' 
defcending whx 
wardly berw cen 
rothethigh, bei 


from the protur! 
fome tothe skir 


ned mufcles. 

A little after, 
ding of the kne« 
the legge; yct {ic 
thereot de{cend: 
of the foote,wh 
running to cach: 
mainder of its p 
its felfe with ch 
devided intotwc 
to the fides of 
r1ons of the vefi 
whicd the know 


Avins 
matt 


the T! 
{traric 


defeription of th: 
theretore we jud 

tion ef thefe of ri 
per part of the hc 
monly called the 

is the upper, anc 
manner the 
hanch bone, and | 
paffe thereof, 
whofe upper part 
Sémmphy fis w 
in, after the : 
firaight line we naam 
the one inrernall. 
fold, the one wit! 
called the midal: 
from the narrow: 
thigh is received 

Cis ended by the 
and in fome fort 
buckle-bone, and 
the hinde and lou 
to the fhare bon 
pcares very rough 
whofe extremity 


| 
J 
— 
| 
} 


* 

B:6 


nto ex. 
athite 
¢ lying 
tran{~ 
ufcles 
hither, 
cCond > 
mail have 
t fome 
efently 
in 


ng thar 
holy- 
ne, and 
and in- 


holy- 
ufcles 
elds ta 
much as 


next 
ef each 
rreries 
fome- 
eof, as 


ot farre 
y what 
ift, and 
ally che 
loines, 
ed upe 
befides, 


Upon 


cing of 
ncrves 
Bd com- 
es, and 
nes, of 
le Tr0- 
he skin 


levided 
ich the 
deepe 
perfici- 
skinne 


are and 
hanch- 


Contained in the Head. 


Li B.O- 


— 


hanch-bone, fend s certaine branches to the groincs, to the mufcles called Obturato- 
res, tO - T: oe and fometimes to the mufcles of the yard, and it ends at the 
idft of rhe tniga. | 

< he fourth, which is the th ickeft, folideftand hardeft of all the nervesin the body, 
defcending wholely from the produ étions of the holy-bone, and defcending out- 
wardly betw cene the lower part of the fame bone, andthe Os z/‘um, or Hanch-bone 
rothethigh, beftowes certaine {prigges to the hinde mufcles thereof proceeding 
from the proturberation of the J/chéwm or huckle-bone, and in like fort it gives other- 
fome tothe skinne of the buttocks, and alfo to the skinne covering the forementic- 
ned mulcles. | | 

A little after, it 1s parted intotwo branches defcending undevided evento theben- 
ding of the knee, they borh are communicated by diverfe fureles of the mufcles of 
the legge; yet {oas the leffer produces another branch from the reft of the portion 
thereot de{cending on the fore part of the legge, along(t the fhin-bone untothe top 
of the foote,where it is devided into tenne furcles {carfe apparent to the fight, two 
running to cach ofthe toes, Thecther greater defcending in Jike manner ia the re- 
mainder of its portion by the hinde part of the legge into the fole of the foote, cafts 
its felte with the veines and arteries betweene theheele and legge bone; where firtt 
devided intotwo branches, each of which prefently parted into five, fend two [prigs 
to the fides of the toes, And thefe are the moft notable and neceffary diftribu- 


tions of the veflels and nerves ; we purpofely omit others which are infinite, and of 
whico the knowledge is impertinent. 


Cuan XXXITITI: 


Of the proper parts of the Thigh. 


taker ry Aving explaned the common parts of the legge in generall; now wee 


BILSIFS, muft come to the proper, beginning at the Thigh. ‘Ihe proper parts of 


PIS the Thigh, are mufcles, bones, andiigaments But becaufe the demon- 


—SSere {tration of the mufcles is fomewhat difficult, if we bee ignorant of the 
defcription of the bones from whence they arife, and into which they are inferted ; 
theretore we judge it worth our labour, firftto thew the bones, and the dearticula- 
tionef thefe of the Thigh; beginning with thefe bones which are knit with the up- 
per partof the holy-bone. And they are two in number, on each fide onc, com- 


‘monly called the Offa each of thefe is compofed of three bones, ef which one of hoy 


isthe upper, aotherthe lower and anteriour, and the third the middle, and aftcr a bonesthe of 

manner the pofteriour. The upper by a particular name is called the Os iiwm, the 

hanch bone, and itis the largeft and biggeft, having a griftlely appendix inthe com- “ a 

paffe thereof, even to the connexion it hath with che other neighbouring bones, ~~" 

whofe upper part we terme the right line thereof ; bat the é4fs, which is adjoyned co 

itby Semphyfis we call the lippe or brow therof,becaufe it lands both fomewhat out 

and in, after the manner of the brow, But that which lics berweene the ba/ss and wraetheline, 

ltraightline we name the ribbe; this {ame upper bone hath two hollow fuperficies, lippe, brow, 

the one internal}, the other extcrnall. Theconnexion thereof by Sympbhy/is, is two- ade | 

fold, the one withthe upper part of the holy-bone; the other withthat bone wee 

called the middle, and after fome fort the pofteriour ; which taking its beginning 

from thenarrower part of che Os Z/ium, makes that cavity in which the head of the The os 1/6 

thigh is received ; thiscavity the Greekes call Coty/e, the Latines Acetabulam, and #7.or™“i- 

itis Cnded by the fide of the hole common to it, and the fhare-bone ; this middle, 

and in fome fort pofteriour bone is called properly and particularly the Os Yeby, or 
Uckle-bone, and containes nothing elfe but the forementioned cavitie, but that oa 

the hinde and lower part thereof, itbrings forth a proceffe, which adjoynes it felfe 

to the fhare bone at the lower part of the common hole, in which place it ap- 

pcateés very rough and unequall, and it is called the tuberofitie of the huckle-bone, at 

whofe extremity alfo it brings forth a little head fomewhat refembling the ~~ 

“id 


— 
@ j 
| 
J 
| 
| 
a 
| ] 
| 
< 
* 
a = — 
| 
‘ 
= 
‘ 


228 


or th 


€ lower jaw called Corome. The third bone named Os pabs or the fhare-bone, 
firetchesit felfe even to the higheft part of the pectew, where meeting with the like 
bone of the other fide, it is united to it by Symphy/fis, after which manner al fo, all 
thefe three bones are united ; itis reported, that thisbone opens in women in thei; 
travcil, yet hitherto I can finde no certainety thereof. 


The Figure of the Thigh-bone. 


mm 


+.) 


41,2, The head of the 
thigh going intothe cup of 
the hip-bone. 


the thigh, into which is in- 
ferted a round Ligament. 


the appendix of the thigh 
with the bone it felfe. 

D 1, 2, 3, the necke of the 
thigh. 


thethigh. 
G, 1,2, The conjunction of 
the lower appendix. 


H,1,12,A finus betwixt the 
two heads of the thigh. 

K 2, A part of the lower 
head of the thigh, from 
whence the firft maufelc of 
the foote doth proccede, 

Another part from 


firft mufcles arife. 

M 2, Another part to which 
the Tendon of the fit 
mufcle of the thigh is in- 
fixede 

N 1,2, A finus of the our- 
ward fide of the head for 
the fourth mufcle of the 
legse, 

02,A finus of the infide 

through which the tendons doe pafle. P 2, A protuberation at which the faid ren- 

dons are reflected. .Q 2. the upper proceffe of the thigh, and betwixt Q and D isthe 
finus. 1, 2, the union ofthe proceffe with the thigh. S 2, a rough line from the 
impreffion of the external] procefles, 71, the antezior impreffion of the internal! 
proceiles. 2, betwixt Tand another impreflion higher than the former. 1,2,thc 
fourth impreffion in the toppe of the procefle. X 3, Foure xX, fhew the foure apper- 
dices of thethigh. 7 3, Three r,fhew the three heads of the thigh. ZZ 3, Twopro- 
ceficsofthe thigh. 41, the interior proceile of the thigh. 41, the conjunction of 
the proceffe with the thigh, ¢¢ 2, aline defcending obliquely from the inner pro- 
cefle, dd 2, aline running through the length of the thigh. ¢2, the largenefle of 
the thigh in this part./1, a roughneffe trom which the eight mufcle iffieth. ¢,4 5,4 
knub of the Whirle-bone going into the finus marked with I,which is berwixt the 

heads of the thigh. 25, a finus fitted for the inner head of the thigh. &5,afinus 2 

grecing with the externall head of the thich. 75, the lower af perity or roughnedie 

ms 4, the forelide of the pattell or whirle-bone rough and unequall, 


CAAA 
Me, 


you 


B,2, Afinus in -the head of : 


C1,2, The conjunGion of | 


E,F, the two lower heads of | 


whence the fecond and 


a 


You may pe: -@ 
child ; for if} 
thefecouucxtons 

Now follow€s 
and fo bended, 
might be the fate: 
low or fimous, I: 
commedious oris 

That fimous pa: 
whereof goes £0 t 
pendix of the fam 
fibers of the vafte: 

Befides, this bul 
a childs thigh ; thal 
(as every other aj 
hanch-bone by & 
| of whichthe one: 
bove, about then 
| membranous and 
defcending abowt 
and round, ceicer 
ded, eventothe ex 

Befides, under 
the other littic and 

The greater feat 
hiruate in che inner 

But you muft no 
of, which lookés to 
fome, into whieh t 
are implanted swe 
necke, betweené 
veflcls, that is, th 
felfe, whence th 
on that part whic! 
rifhed, 

The other Apps 
tiling, as it were v 
perficiariec and on 
knee; the other « 
griftlely and as ; 
| which is feene be 
| OF the legoe, wh 


: extend it 
move it | 
cele inwards , as wl 


: lit the Triceps, o1 
| 4p pens inthe a& 


= 
FIG. ] : if 
aire 
ZING = 
| ij Mat | 
i] S ii \ 
if 
| 
— — 
> 4 = my 
| 
* 
> 
aye: 


zament. 

ction of 
he thigh 
ire 


of the 
1eads of 


tion of 
vixt the 
igh. 

e lower 
, from 
Bulcle of 
cede. 


nd and 


» which 
the fitt 


h In- 


he our- 
ead for 
of the 


infide 
ten- 
isthe 
om the 
mrernall 
r,2,the 
pro- 
ion of 
pro- 
effe of 
d 
xt the 
10US 2- 
hnefic- 


you 


t from. 


* 


heel 


it the Triceps, or threeheaded mufcle, Sixe {fread it abroad, and dilate it, as 


¥ 


and other extreme parts of the Body. 


You may perceive amanifeft {eparation of thefe three bones inthe Sceleton of a . 
child ; for in thofewhoare of more yeares, the griftles whichrunne betweene _ 
rhefecouuesiors turne into bones. 

Now followes the thigh-bone, the biggeft ofall the bones of the body ; itis rourid, Thedefariog 
and fo bended, that it isgibbous on the exteriour and fore part thereof, that foit bone. on 
might be the fafer from externall injuries ; but onthe hinde and inner part, it is hol- 
low or fimous, ltke to the backe of an Affe, whereby the mufcles might have a more 
commodious originall and infertion. 

That fimous part alittle below the midft thereof, is devided into two lines the one 
whereof goes to the internal! tuberofitie, the other ro the externall of the lower. ap- 3 
pendix of the fame thigh. Thefe are chiefely to be obferved, becaufe the oblique 
fbers of the vafte mufcles thewce take their originall. 

Befides, this bone two appendices in the ends thereof, aseafily appeares in tye rwoap- 
achilds thigh ; the upper appendix, makes the round head of the thigh it felfe, which 
(as every other appendix) feated upon a long necke, is received in the cavitie of the 
hanch-bone by Enarthrofis; itis ftaied and faftened there by two forts of ligaments; 
of whichthe one iscommon, proceeding from the mufcles, which defcend from a. 
bove, about the necke thereof; the other is proper, whichistwofold, that is, one 
membranous and broad, proceeding from the whole cavity of theorbe, or cuppe, 
defcending abont all che head of the thigh, above the necke thereof; the other thicke 
and round, cefcending from the fecond cavity ofthe Coyle it felfe, which is exten: 
ded, eventothe common hole at the top of the head thereof. : 

Befides, under this head, that bone hath ewo proceffes, the one great and thicke, 
the other little and fhort. 

The greater feated in the hinde part, is called the great Trochanter ; 
firuate in the inner part, is named the little Trochanter. 

But you muft note, that chegreat Trochanter, onthe higher and hinde part there- 
of, which lookes towardsthe head of this bone, makes a certaine {mall fists or bo- 
fome, into which the twin mufclesand others, whereof we fhallhereafter {peake, 
ate implanted; we muft alfo confider the multitude of holes encompaffing this 
necke, beeweene the head and the two Trocbanters, which yeeld apatlage to the Whencethe 
veflels, that is, the veines, arteries, andnerves, into the marrow of the bone ie ™tow 
felfe, whence the marrow it felfe becomes partaker of fenfe, efpecially 
" that part which is covered with a coate, and the bone lives and is now- 
rithed, 

The other Appendixof the thigh, that is, the lower, is che greateft and thickeft, 
rifing, as it were with two heads, whichare devided by two cavities, the one fu- 
perficiarie and om the fore fide, whereby it receives the whirle-bone of the 
knee; the other deepe, and on the backe part, by which it receives the 
griftlely and as it were bony ligaments, proceeding from the eminencie 
which is feene betweene the twocavities of the upprer; appendix of the bone 


legge, which Hippocrates , lib. de fraciuris, calls in his tomgue Die- 
pas fis. 


pendices of 
the thigh- 
bone, 


Thetwopres 
cefles of the 
thigh-bone 


the leffer makethe ewe . | 
Troshanters, 


comes parta- 
keroffenfe, 


C HA Pe X X X Vv. 
Of the mufcles moving the thigh. 


mufcles of the thigh are jnft foureteene in aumber, that is, two Theienamber 


a9 extend it, whereupon they are called Temfores, extenders; three 
“= move it inwards, driving the knee outwards, and drawing the 
c inwards , as when wee crofle our legges ; yet fome make thefe three one, and 


» 


Boore 


| 
| LIB 229 
re-bone, 
the like a 
ralfo. all 
a) 0, | 
nin their # 
» 
Of the 
1¢ Cup ot 
headof 
ich is in- 
| 
&§ eS end it, whereupon they are called the Flexeres, or benders; three 


Of the Mufcles and‘Bones, L 


The two 
flexores, 


The three 
T emfortt 


ycnics, 


The movers 
of rhe but- 
tocks, 


Thetwo 


Foure of thefe are called Gemini or Twins, by reafon of the fimilitude of the), 
thickneffe, originall inferrion and action ; the two other are called Obturatores, be. 
caufe they ftop the hole which is common to the fhare and backe bones, 

Now oneofthetwo Flexores, being round, defcends on the infide with fibers of », 
unequal! length from all the tranfverfe procefies of the loines, above the hinde com. 
miffure of the kanch and fhare-bones, and is inferted into the little 7: rochanter. 
the other broader and larger from the originall pafles forth of the whole lippe, ang 
inner brow of the hanch-bone, and filling the inner cavity thereof, is inferted above 
che fore part of the head of the thigh, into the little Trechanter by athicke tendon, 
which it with the fellow mufcle lately defcribed, produces, even from the fle(hy 
part thereof, wherefore you neede to take no great painesin drawing, or plucking 
them away. 

The three Ten/fores or extenders, make the buttocks , of which the firf being 
the thicker, larger, and externall, arifing from the rumpe, the holy-bone, and mo; 
than halfe of the exteriour and hinder lippe of the hanch-bone, is inferted by ob. 
lique fibers, fome foure fingers breadth from the great Trochanter at the right line 
which we faid, refembled an Affes backe. ; 

The fecond, which is the middle in bigneffe and fire ,defcends from the reft of th. 
lippe, and from the fore and ourward ribbe of the hanch-bone, and above the mii 
of the bone, is inferted into the upper part of the great Trochanter by a triangulsr 
infertion above the upper and exteriour part thereof, 

The third being Jeffer, fhorter and thinner, lying hidde under thefe former, pro. 
ceeds from the middie of the externall {urface of the hanch-bone, and then is in&:. 
ted into the greater part of the right line of the great Yrochanter. 

Thefe three mufcles have a great andlarge originall, but a narrow infertion, asi 
were by oblique fibers, | 

Then follow thofe three mufcles which move the thighes inwards, ftraiten and 
crofle then, fo that the knee ftands forwards or outwards, but the heele is drawac in. 
wards, as you may underftand by their infertion, although fomethinke otherwi! 
But thefe three mufcles by their originall, partly flefhy,and partly membranous, zrif: 
from the upper and fore part of the circumference of the thare-bonc and thence are in 
ferted into the hinde linc of the huckle-bone, foie higher than otherfome ; forth: 
lefier and fhorter ftayes atthe roots of the little Trochanter, the middle defcends ait- 
tle deeper ; the 3. withthe longeft of his fibers, defcends evento the midft of the line. 

This if it be fo, that is, thefe mufcles proceeding from the fore and upper part, 0 
be inferted into the hinder line of the huckle-bone, whileft they alone perform 
their action, and draw the thighs together, they will turne them outwards, jutt {0% 
when we purthem acroffe, but they will not draw one hecle ro another, and put the 
heele outwards, for fuch like motion is performed by the inner Vafte mulcle of the 
thigh, moving the legge. Now follow the fixe which move the buttocks. 

The firft, and higher of the Quadrigemins, or the foure twin mutcles,paffes forth 
of the commiflure of the holy-bone, with the bone of the rumpe, or rather fromth 
lowelt extreme of the holy-bone, and thence it is inferted into the cavity of th 
ereat Trochanter by atenden of a fufficient largeneffe. 

The fecond proceeding from the hollow part or fiffure,which is betweene the ¢* 
treouity of the huckle-bone, and the tuberofitie, or {welling out of the fame, is inicr 
ted in like manner into the cavity of the great Trochanter. 

_ The third, afcends from the inner part of the {welling out of the huckle.bone; ! 
little above, betweene the two Trechanters, intothe cavity of the greater ofthem. ~ 

The fourth, and laft, the loweft and broadeft of them all proceeds from alll" 
exteriour protuberancie of the huckle-bone , and thence is inferted into the gt 
Trochanter, and thefe foure mufcles lie hid under the thicke and more emincot part 
of the burcocks ; wherefore that you may the better fhewthem, they muft be curnc? 
up towards their original]. 

The two Obturatores remaine to be {poken of, that is, the internal! and & 
ternall, both which arife from the circuite and circumference of the 0" 


which they floppe, which as wee faid is commen to the fhare and — 


iharper defeen 


‘fCated, as 
&Ppendixes hollow 
Upper of cthefe is 
Ppendix of the |: 


L I B.O>» 


re) but the inte 
peddle fiffure bet 
the {pine whichk 
But the extern: 
rweene the tuber 
lower part inte 
mini. | 
If you would p 
ginning of the thref 
it, andcurne it u 
away. 


that fo it may be | 
our cavity of th< 
legge. 

The ufe thereo 
athis due extenc, 
wards. 

The bones of th 
per name, the Os 7 
or Fibula, butcom 
bone.) The thiekc 
having two proce! 

The bigger fear« 
makes two fuper!: 
fore this bone is 
vities thereof it rec 
thigh- bone, bur 
protuberances the 

This joynt is ft: 
ding there, but a! 
€xternall, anorher 
Out Of Hippocrate. 
The other proceii: 
Part thereof, mak« 
Pafterne bone sbu: 
betweene thefear 
Croffe-bow, as o! 


leg-bone, being ti 


{econd refides@n! 
ly obferved, and c 
Chirurgion inth 


? 

- ICTIDE 

knee, 

d middl 

ang 

: 

| 
| 


B.6- 
f their 


C$, be. 


S of an 
© 


above 
nd on, 


ucking 


being 
more 
by ob. 
it line, 
of the 

mii 
ingular 


pre- 
§ intere 


asit 


wne In. 
erwife, 
us, arife 
‘are in- 
forthe 
mis a lit- 
he line, 
part, to 
rforme 
fo as 
the 
of che 


s forth 


om the 
of the 


the ex- 
sinici- 


one, 4 
hem. 

rallche 
7 grcat 
‘ot part 
curned 


nnd ex- 
1¢ hole 
buckle- 


bor’, 


and 


tenand 


L 


— 


hone, but the internall afcends to the exteriour roete of the great Trochanter by the 
middle fiflure betweenethe upper part of the proruberancy of the hucklebone, and 
the {pine which ftands up in the hinder bafis of the hanch-bone. 
put the external! proceedes from the exteriour cavity, and the middle {pac 
rveene the tuberofity ofthe huckle-bone and cavity thereof, and isinferted in the 
lower part into the cavity of the great Trechanter , together with the Quadrige- 
ini. 
2 If you would plainely fee the exteriour Obturator, you muft either cur off the be- 
inning of the three-headed mufcle, or handfomely pluck it away, and then extend 
it, andturne it up; The internall is eafily difcerned when the bladder is taken 
away. 


Cuarp XXXVI. 


Of the bones of the Legge, or Shanke. ° 


aaa Hole which would defcribe the mufcles of the legge, ought firlt ro de- 
(cribe the bones thereof, beginning atthe Rotwla, or whitle-bone of the 

This bone isgrifticly on the outfide, and round in compaffe,but on the 
inner and middle part after fome fort gibbous, but fomewhat flatted at the fides, 
that fo it may be fitlier applied to the joynt of the knee, and fitted within the anteri- 
our cavity of the two appendices of the thigh, and the upper and foremof of the 

The ufe thereof isto firengthen the joynt of the knee, and te hold the legge 
athis due extent, fo that it may not be bended fo farre forwards, asit is backe- 
wards. 

The bones of the legge are two, the ene thicker, called by the particular and pro- 
pername, the Os Tibiz or legge-bone; the other which is lefler, istermed Perone, 
or Fibula, butcommonly the lefler fecile, ( and in Englifh it may be termed the fhin- 
bone.) The thicker being hollow and marrowie,is feated in the inner part of theleg, 
having two procefies, the one bigger, the other lefic. 

The bigger feated on the upper part of the bone,and conjoyned to it by Symphy fis, 
makes two fuperficiall and fide cavities difioyned by an indifferent rifing; where- 
fore this bone is connext to the bone of the thigh by Gémg/ymos. For in theca- 
vities thereofit receives the lower and hinder protuberances of the Appendix of the 
thigh-bone, but the middle eminencie thereof, is received by it betweene the two 
protuberances thereof. 

This joynt is ftrengthened, not oncly by the force of the tendons, or mulcles cu- 
ding there, but alfo of three ftrong ligaments, of which one proceeds from all the 
external], another from all the internall part of that connxeion ; the third which we, 


Out of Hippocrates, called Diaphyfis, from the difiance er {pace betweene them, wre Diaphys 


and other extreme parts of the Body. 231 


— 


ebe. 


What the Pas 
tella,or whirl¢ 
bone of the 


knee Ags 


The ufe theres 
of, 


What, 

elegge 

ek, 


The legge 


The other procefie of the legge-bone, which we called the leffe, feated in the lower (is. 


part thereof, makes as it were adoublecavitie,whereby itreceives the Afragalwsor 
Pafterne bone; but on the infide it makes the anckle, as the Perowe makes it without: 
betweenc thefe ancles the Aftragalus isreceived on the fides,and turned as the nutina 
Crofle-bow, as eftenas there is neede to bend or extend the feote.Be fides, this {fame 
leg-bone, being triangular hath three eminencies made in the fhape of an Afles back; 


harper defcends along ft the fore part, called by the Greekes Anticmemion ; the 


{econd refides onthe inner part, and the third on the ourer;all thefe muft be diligent- 
ly obferved, and chiefely, that on the fore part; becaufe it is as aguide and rule to 


Chirurgion in the well fetting of a broken legge. The Perone, or thinne-bone, The perone 
(Cated, as it wer e, onthe ourfide, and as behinde the legee-bone ; it hath alfo two fale,ce thins 
‘ppendixes hollow on the infide, but gibbous on the out, This bone by the *** 


Upper of thefe is faftened and inferted under the inner, and in fome fort the hinder 
Ppendix of the legge-bone, fo that it is ina fort articulated withthe chigh 2. but 


a 
| 
| 
¢ 


the Mufcles and Bones, 


ferves onely in ftcad ofa leaning ftocke. But by the lower, this fame bone is not ong. 
ly received inthe loweft part of the legge, or anckle, or pafterne bone, butalfo re, 
ceives part thereof, whichis joined on the fame fide with the heele, efpecially they 
when we bend our foote outwards. 

This bone is faftened to the forementioned bones by Sy#arthrofis, but bound by 
ftrong ligaments proceeding from the fame bones, and mutually fent from ONe to 
another, or if you had rather, fromthe upper into the lower, as we {aid in the arnie, 
But this fame fala or fhia-bone ts alfo ttiangular, having three lines, of which one 
fiands outwards,another on the forefide, and the third behinde, 


HA Pe XXXVI. 
Of the Mufeles of the Legges. 


Brana L[the motions ofthe legge are performed by eleven mufcles, of which 
2 ay) there be fixe on the forelide, and five on thehinde, But of thefe, fome 
JANANS move the legge onely, asthofe which take their originall from the bone 
=== ofthe thigh; others truly move thelegge, but with the thigh, as thofe 

which arife above th: high, that is, from the hanch, huckle, and fhare-bones. 
TheLonges. The firft ofthefeon che forefide, called the Long,but commonly the (or 
Tailor-mutcle by reafon of its action) it arifes from the lower and fore extremity 


of the {pine or appendix of the hanch-bone, and defcending obliquely above the o. 


ther mufcles, is inferted by a large and membranous tendon, into the fore and inner | 
part of the legge under the knee ; the action thereof is to croffe the legges, bur being 


firft bended by the mofcles prefently to be treated of , ithelpesalfo the three headed 


mufcle in the performance of the forementioned ation. 
The 


The fecond of thefe fore mufcles is termed the membranofus, or membranous, : 
becaufe it is wholy fuch, unleffe at the originall where it defcends flefhy from the 


roore and bafis of the above mentioned fpine of the hanchebone, and that obliquely | 
with its membranous and bread tendon ( mixed with the common coat of the 
mufcles) into the outward part of the legge, which it moves outwards, as alfo the | 
, thigh with the fouretwin mufcles; for aswe have in another place obferved, of 
two oblique motions, concurring inone, is made a right motion; and befides, al. 
moft all the motions of the body, are thus performed; the mufcles which performe 


{uch motions are placed and oppofed in an oblique fire, as may be perceived by the 


motions and {ite of the mufcles of the hand taken in eencrall. 


The third, calledthe Rec#ws, or right (becaufe it defcends above the Crurem, 


following , but by accident it may helpethe bending of the thigh. 


bers from the root of the little Trochanter, but by its oblique from the inner de{cer- 
dent line of thethigh. The external! paffes forth by its right fibers from the root 
of the great Trocbanter, but by the oblique from the external] defcendent line of the 
{fame bone, But all thefe fibers are in certaine places fo mixed with the Crureus that 
they cannot be feparared unleffe you violate the one of them;they goe into the lege” 
(each on his fide ) above the whirle-bone of the knee aloneft the fides of the 


right mufcle, with which it makes an unfeparable tendon, as you thal! prefent!y, | 


The Cravens, heare, The fixt and laft of thefe fore mufcles called the Crwrew, or Thigh-mutcle, 
“by 


longft the right fore. line of the thigh, betweene the two Vafte mufcles) comes forth | 
betweene the extremity of the appendix of the hanch-bone and cavity thereof, with | 
avery ftrong ligament, and then isinferted into the fore part of the legge, palling | 
over the midft of the whirle-bone of the knee sit extends the legge, withthe chree | 


fourth and fifthare called Vafté or huge mufcles, by reafon of their 

Valls. latgenefle; the onc of thefe is internall, the other externall: they both arife 
with right fibers, from their originall, but with oblique at their infertion, by rea-_ 
{on whereof they both feemeto have a compound aétion from a right and oblique 
motion ; the right helping for the extenfion of the legge,but the eblique todraw ont _ 
knee to another, or to defioyne both the knees; the internall comes by its right fi- | 


L | 


by rcafon of ti 
is by fo: 
defcends under | 
even tothe wit 
make a comm 
whirle-bone, 2 
red without teal 
for a ligament ; 
legge. The five 
uberofitie of th 
of the cali: 
Of the internal, 
even into the m 
tendon, afterth: 
The other be: 
is inferted with 
which with ttse 
thing it perforno 
The third, be 
bone, with a br: 
the inner part o 
The fourth ca 
laft mentioned ¢: 
into the externa 
The fifth and 
nall condyle ox 
joynming thereof 
manner inwards 


is, the bones of 1 
or backe of the 
the inftep, ther« 
ly following th 
bone, This hath 
part with the bo 
hinde part, by w 
heele, the third 
culare or S caphoia 
extended and b« 
tft connexions: 
firong and broad 
alfo they are ftres 
foote, above and 
Ned to the bone ¢ 
bigger (which Gi 
Wards the fore pa 
Middlemott is at 


“ 
| 
AC 
= 
| bones of the fox 


pONC is NOt one. 
¢, butalfo re, 


ef; pecially then 


but bound by 
mnt from one to 
id in the arme. 
s,0f which one 


icles, of which 
of thefe, {ome 
fromthe bone 
thigh, as thofe 
-bones. 

he Sutorius (or 
fore extremity 
ly above the 
¢ fore and inner 
secs, but being 
ihe three headed 


membranous, 
fiefhy from the 
d that obliquely 
on coat of the 
tds, aS the 
ice obferved, of 
ind befides, al- 
m@hich performe 
rceived by the 


the Cruress, a- 
es) comes forth 
y thereof, with 
e legge, pafling 
, with the chree 


‘eafon of their 
icy both arife 
ertion, by rea- 
feet and oblique 
ue to draw one 
by its right fi- 
e innerdef{cen- 
5 from the root 
Hent line of rhe 
le Crarcas that 
mc into the Jegee 
¢ fides of the 


Thigh-mufcle, 
( by 


thal! prefently , 


L and other extreme parts of the ‘Body. 233 


(by reafon of the ftraite and firme adhefion, which ithath with the thigh-bone, 
which is by fome called Cras ) from the {pace betweene the two Trochaneers 
defcends under the right mufcle,and two vafte mufcles into the fore part of the thigh, 
eyen tothe oftheknee, But we mutt note that thefe foure laft mufcles 
make a common thicke and broad tendon with which they couer the Pateds, of 
whirle-bone, and all the fore dearticulation of the knee, thatthey cannot be fepara- 
red without tearing; wherefore we muft thinke that this tendon, ferves the knee 
for a ligament ; now allthefe mufcles performing their action together, extend the 
legge. The five hinde mutcles follow to be {poken of; of which threearife from the 
euberofitic of the huckle-bone, going into the inner part ; the fourth from the middle 
of the Pubss,called Béceps, that is, thetwo headed mufcle into the outfide of the legge, 
Ofthe internall,one pafling fro the forementioned tuberofitie,defcends ligamentous 
even into the midft of the thigh, and then becomming ficthy, is inferted by its 
tendon, afterthe manner we former ly mentioned. 

The other being {lender, pafling forth alfo from the fame place, with its tendon; 
is inferted with the tendon ofthe long mulcle,and ends in the inner part of the legge, 
which with itscompanion, it drawes inwardly, and brings to the other, which {fame 
thing it performes in thethigh, by the helpe of the three headed mufcle, 

The third; being the inner, or hinder, deicends from the middle part of the thare- 
bone, with a broad and {lender ligament, and is inferred with a round tendon, into 
the inner part of the legge after the manner of the fore-mentionede 

|The fourth called Bsceps takes one of the two heads, of which it confifts,from the 
laft mentioned tuberofities the other from the onter Jine of the thigh, but is inferted The o 
into the externall part of the legge, as we formerly faid. — 

The fifth and laf called the Poplitens de{cends obliquely flefhy from the exter- = 
nall condyle or knotof the thigh, into the inner and hinder part of the legge, atthe ape. = 
joyning thereof tothe fhinne-bene ; the ation thereof is, to draw the legse, after q mifle, 
manner inwards. 


The three Ine 
nternall, 


CHAP. XXXVIIT. 


Of the Bones of the Foote. 


252! wherefore it firft behoves us, to fet forth their defcription. Therefore the 
bones of the foote are fixe and ewenty in number, diftinguifhed into three ranks, that 
is, the bones of the Tar/ws or Inftep, are feven; thefe of the Pedinm, the afterwrelt, Ticirnumber 
or backe of the foote, five, and thefe of the toes foureteenc, Of the feven bones of Te gy 
the inftep, thereare 4. named, and 3. unnamed, The firft of the named immediate- " 

ly following the bones of the legge, is called Aftragalus, the pafterne, or ankle- | 
bone, This hath three connexions , one, as we {aid before, in the upper and broader hay Aprtge- 
part with the bones of the legge, of which it is received ; the other in thelower and connexiens, 
hinde part, by which it receives the upper and inner procefle of the bene of the 24theirule, 
heele; the third on the forefide by which it is received im the cavitie of the Os avis 

culare or Scapboides, that is, the boate-like-bone. By the firftconnexion the foote is 

extended and bended, by the fecond it is moved with the heele to rhe fides:the two 

firft connexions are by the laft by Sywarthrofis. But it is trengthened by 

{trong and broade ligmrents,defcending , and afcending from one bone into another; 

alfo they are ftrengthened by membranes, mufcles and tendons, deicending to the 

foote, above and under thefe joints, But thisbone hath 3.proceffes, as 3.feetc fafte- 

ned to the bone of the heele ; of which the firft.and leat isunder the outer anckle; the ian’ 
Digger (which Gales faith, makes a round head, faftened ona long necke ) lookes to- 

wards the fore part of the foote, over againft the great toc,and the next toc to it; the 
Middlemoft is at the heele, behinde the Iegge-bone. bi Sid 


S44 difpofition and condition of the bones of the foote, not being firft known, 


: ae He Order of Anatomy requires, that we now profecute the mufcles mo- 

ving the foote: but becauie we fhould ia vaine deliver their infertion , the 
| 
| 


Of the MuJcles and Bones, 


L1n.6: 


I paffe over in filence many other things, 2s the fmeothneffe and afperity or rough. 
nefit ofthe bone, which I had rather you fhould learne by ocular infpeGion,than by 
Thedefrip- booke, The fecond bone lying under thisis called the Caleamenm,or hecle-bone, being 
eed or the biggeft of all the bones of the foote, upon which all the body relies when WC 80, 
Cale. Ithath two upper procefles, the one great, the other little. The great is received in 

the hinde and outer procefle of the 4ifragalus ; the lefler is received on the infide jn 
the 3.procefle ofthe fame bone, which we faid had a round head faftened toa long 
neck,Befides, it is reund on the hinde part, and much difioyned from the Iegge-bone, 
but onthe fore and longer part, it is knit by Syrarthrefis to the Die-bone,whole lower 
and inner part, itfeemes to receive; the fuperficies thereof is wholy unequall, and 
rifing up with many {wellings, On the inner fide it makes as it were a channell, fo to 
give way, as Well rothe vefitls as tendons going to the fole of the foote and toes, 
why afra- Laftly,we muft confider the holes by which the veffels pafle into that bone to give i 
Gureofthe nourifhment; by reafon of which veffels the fracture of this heele-bone, is very 
heeleis focan* of the pre {ling and contufion of the veflels,as Hippocrates {hewcs, 
gereus. _ 
Higpcrater, For the ligaments of this hecle, or heele-bone they are fuch, asthefe of the Asfraca. 
owe | hae Wit, tendons, membranes and ligaments properly fo called , comming from 


one bone to another. The third bone of the foote is named Scapbeides or boate. 


The O:8can 
phoides,or like, fromthe refemblance it hath to a boate, for on that part which lookes towards 
poate-likes the pofterne bone, it is hollow ; but on that part which is next the three Jumominata, 


or nameleffe bones (which it fuftaines, and of which itis received, as itin the cavity 

thereof receives the head of the 4fraze/ws ) it is gibbous like the bottome of a boate, 

The connexions thereof are by Sywarthrofis, and they are ftrengthened by the fore- 

mentioned ligaments ; this fame bone is arched on the upper part, bur fomewhat 

hollowed or flatted below : the inner part ends in a point, like the prow of a fhip,but 

the outer obtufe like the fterneofatkippe. The fourth bone of thefe which have 

The 0: Cabos MamMes, iscalled the Cxbordes, from the refembiance of a Die; although that fimili- 
dsorDies tudebeveryobf{cure. Onthe fore part it {uftaines the toes; which by a certaine pro- 
se portion to the fingers of the hand, may be called the Ring and little coes, but itis fu. 
{tained on the binde part, with the backe part of the heele; on the inner fide it is joy- 

ned with the boat-like-bone, and that namelefic bone which fuftaines the middle toc. 

on the outfide, it produces a rifing like the backe ofan Affe, which on the lower part 

is extended tranf{verfly all the length thereof; attherwo fides of this eminency or t- 

fing, there are two {mall cavities, inthe forme ofachannell. The firft and the ercater 

The Ofthe zanominata, or namelefie bones, fuftaines the great tee; the leffer and 
ama, cond, the next toeehereto ; the third and middle in bignefle, the middle toe. Thef: 
bones. three bones are arched on their upper part, but fomewhat hollowed below. They are 
knit tothe three forementioned bones by Sp#arthrofis, of which they are received, 

but on the hinde part with the boate-like bone which they receive. Now we tnul 

Thebonee  cometo the bones of the fecond ranke, that is,of the Pediam, or backe of the foote: 
ofthefoore thefe are fiveinnumber, bearing up the five bone of thetoes, They are fomew het 
or Peewee oibbous on their upper part, but hollow below ; each of them hathtwo procetics at 
the end thereof, by the lower and firft of which they receive the three namelefic ani 
Dic-bone, bur by the upper made into a round head, they are received of the fir! 

bones of the toes. Fheir connexions, whether with the toes, or bones of the initey, 

ate by Sywartbrofis. The ligaments as well proper ag common are fuch, as we [aid of 

Thebonesoe eformer. The bones of the third order now remaine to be {pokenot, whic! wee 
the tors. faid, make thetoes, and they are fouretcene, two of the great toc, butthree of 
ofthe other toes. The firft is fomewhat longifh, but the reft are very fhort, ex- 

cept that of the great toe, all of them on the upper fide are round and convexe, bur 02 

the lewer fomewhat hollow, and plaine long wife, that the tendens which ben 

them, may patie more ftraightly and fafely without inclining to either fide, even 0 

their furtheft joynrs; although fuch paflages are much heiped by the membranous 

and common ligament, which rifing from the fides of thefe bones, involves che. 

tendons, as we mentioned in the fingers. To conclude,each of thefe bones the laft ex: 

cepted, havea double connexion by Déartbrofis, they are all unequal! in their bignes, 

that is, thicke at their beginning ( where they receive the heads of the precedent 

bones, 


bones, upon wh 
cowards the ene 
ends they rife i1 
them,through va 


The Figure of them 
Figure 2, 
Fig 6. 
Fig. 
Fig. 10,404 11. /! 
Fig. 12 13,/ 


© 3,455,6. the | 
P 7,3,93 the heac 

der the o 
Q.4-alarge finw: 
RF.8,9. 2 finus 

4,the lower nay 
TT 4,9 fharpe fi 
XY Z 2 the plac 
Y22,Y8,Z 


£) EG i 
\ 
“> 
jan” 
>" 
yA 
» 
4 ict 
A 
~ wf 
rr 
a 
"4 
6 
D 
~) Fi j/ 
* 
a 
— 
| 
| 
A 
| 
} | 
| | 


Lin.6: 


rity Or rough. 
Gion,than by 
le-bone, being 
when we £0. 
is received in 
the infide jn 
‘ned toa lon 
legge-bone, 
¢,whofe lower 
unequall, and 
hannell, fo to 
oote and toes, 
Sone tO give ir 
pone, 1S very, 
crates (hewes. 
ithe Astraca. 
ommuing from 
Or boate. 
okes towards 
ce lnnominat, 
itin the cavity 
yme of a boate, 
ed by the fore- 
but fomewhat 
w of a fhip,bur 
fe which have 
chat fimili- 
certaine pro- 


es, Duticis fue 


t lide it is joy- 
he middle toc, 
lower part 
minency or 
and the ereater 
leffer and ic- 
dle toe, 
clow. They are 
y are received, 
Now we iui 
ke of the foote ; 
are fomewpet 
wo proceties at 
namclefic and 

ved of the frit 
of the initep, 
h, as we [aid oi 
of which wee 
tthree of cacil 
ery fhort, ¢x- 
onvexe, but 
is which bend 
Br fide, evento 
membranous 
involves cheic 
lait ex- 
in their bignes, 
“the precedeat 
bones, 


in the Head. 235 : 


bones,upon which they ntove,as a dcore upon the hinges ) and fo they grow findller 
cowards the ends, bur by their ends, they are received of the follow ing bones: at their 
ends they rife into two eminencies on their fides ;diftinguifhed by acavity betweene 
them,through which occafion they are farre thicker at their ends,than in their midle. 


The Ficure of the bones of the Foote properly fo calied, 


Figure 2,fbew the bones of the right foote faftenea together their upper face and their 


Fig.304, 6,foem the upper lower,inner and outer fides of the Talus or pafterne, 
Fig.7,8,9 foeweth the fame ‘fides of the Heele, 
Fig,10,4and 11. fheweth the forward and backward fide of the boate Lone, 

Fig. 12 4nd 13,foew the fore and back part of the wreft made of foure bones, 


ABCD 3,5,6. The protu- 

Beration of the Talus 

joyned tothe appendix 

of theleg-bone, and of 

this protuberation foure 
fides. 

EE, 3,A fiaws infculped in 
the pristuberation of the 
Talis, 

FF 3, twa bunching parts 
of the 

G 3, the inner fide of the 
protuberation of the 
Tales crufied over with 
agriftie. joyned to the 

Ianer arzkle, 

H6,The outward finws of 
the protwberation of the 
Talus covered over with 
agrifile, and receiving 
the inner 2ukle, 

I5.A rough of the 
Talus receiving a griftly 
ligament from the inner 
ankle, 

K 6,a fies of the Talus re- 
ceiving agriftly liga- 
ment from the outward 
ankle, 

LM>5,6, two fiaw in the 
hinder part of the 

Tales. 

N 3:4,5,¢, the necke of 

the Talws or paftern bone, 


© 354,5,6. the head of the Talus poing under the finws of the boate bone. — 
P 7.8.9; the head of the bone of the heele crufted over with a griftle,and going un- 
der the finws of the Ta/as or the pafterne bone. 
Q.4-alarge finws of the Talus receiving the head of the hele, 
K ‘sae a finus of the heele whereto the lower part of the head of the Tals: is 
joyned, | 
4sthe lower part of the head of the 7a/ws going into the finus of the hele. 
T'4.,a tharpe fimus of the hecle receiving a grifily ligament from the pafterne bone. 
XY Z 2,the place of theheele. wy 
42,Y8,Z 9. rocefle of the heele made for the produ@ion of mutcles. 
| xX 4 


eb 7. 


~ 


2 


| ontainec 
Tit 
\ 7 
{ 
\ > 
VIIT 
Ky 
b xX 


236 


Of the Mufeles and Bones, Line. 


The Seed- 
bones of the 
footc. 


Thetwofold 
ft of the fecte, 


9, mato bthe diftance of the upper part of the heele. ¢ $,9.the hinder part 
srieteie d 2,8,the inner fide of the ce e8, the place where the tendonsthat 
runtothe botrome of thefoote are refle@ed. £7 8,the utter fide of the hecle. ¢g 1,7, 
g, here the tendons of the 7 and 8 mufcles of the foote are ftretched out. 47. the 
ferepart of the heele which is joyned to the pafterne bone. #7,that partof the heel. 
which is joyned to the Cube-bone.é r1,the fiaus of the Boat-bone receiving the heag 
of the Talus.dmx 10,three furfaces of the Boat-bone lightly prominent, which are ar. 
ticulated to the bones of the wreft. op 1, the upper part of the Boat-bone regarding tire 
top of the foot. g7 10,and q 11, his lower part. 710, 1, A finus through which the 
fixt mufcle of the foote is led./¢ # 13.the plain furfaces of the three inner bones of the 
wreft whereby they are articulated to the Boat-bone. 13, athallow fimms of the 
Cube-bone whereby it is articulated to the heele, #4 12,the place of the Cube bone 
to which that bone of the Afterwreftis joyned which fupporteth the laft Toe {ave 
one. Y 12, 13,the place of the Cube bone where the third bone of the wreft is ar- 
ticulated./ 12,13.that part of the Cube bone which refpecteth the outfide of the 
foote. 12,13-the furface ofthe Cube-bone inthe upper part of the foots.¢ 2,12, 
that part of the Cube bone which regardeth the earth." 2, a finus of the Cubebone 
at which the tendonof the feventh mufcle ofthe foot is retle&ed.B 13,a proceffe of 
the third bone of the wreft whereinro the fift mufcle of the foot is inferted,‘: 12, the 
place of the inner bone of the wreft to which that bone of the Afterwrelt which 
fuftaineth the great Toe is coupled. * 12,theplace of the fecond bone of the wreft 
whereto the bone of the Afterwreft that {upporteth the fore Toe is articulated.’ 12 
the place of the third bone of the wreft whereto that bone of the Afterwreft which 
fupporteth the middle rocis articulated.“ 1,2,a {mall bone whereby that bone of 
the A fterwreft which fuftaineth the little toe is joyned unto the Cubcbone.” 1,2 the 
diftances betwixt the bonesof the Afterwreft.25,1,2, the heads ofthe bones of the 
Afterwreft which enterintothe befomes of the toes.* 2,a procefi¢ of the bone 
of the afterwreft wherein the tendon of the feventh mutcle of the foote is 
implanted.e 2,aproceffe of the Bone of the Afterwreft, which fuftaineth the litls 
toe, which procefle receiveth the tendon of the eight; mufcle of the foote. §,7,”, 1,2, 
thethree bonesof the foretoe, J,°,2,two feede bones placed under that bone of 
the afterwreft which {fuftaineth the great toe,” 2 under X.a feede bone fet to tie {e- 
fecond joynt of thegreat Toe. T, 1,2, the Tales or pafterne. 4,1,2, the Heele. ©,1, 
2, the Boat-bone. 4, =,1,2, the bones of the toes. *, 1,2, two bones of theercat 
toe LIL, 1. the five bones of the afterwreft. 
The Ligaments by which their copnexions are faftened, are fuch as the former, 
The Offa fefamoidea or Seed-bones of the feet are like in number and fite to thee 
ofthe hands. But this is to be noted, that thofe Seed-bones which are inthe frit 
articulation are fomewhat bigger than thereft, and they are round and longifh on 
the out fide, but {mooth and hollow on the infide, feated betweene two cavities,cn- 
compaffed by three rifings, of which two are on the fidesjand the thirdin the midi 
of the extremity of the far{t bone of the Pedsum, which chiefly beares up the great 
toc. To conclude,before we come to {peake ofthe mufcles, we muftobferve chat 
the foote was made for two commodities. The firtis ro ftay and beare the whole 
bedy when we ftand, for whichcaufe nature fet not the great toe contrary to the o- 
ther,as it placed the Thumbe onthe hand, The other is for apprchenfion,or taking 
hold of ,wherefore nature framed and madethe foote and thefe moveable and joyn- 
ted in the toes, as inthe fingers ofthe hand. Befides alfo for that we muft goe upon 
our feet, Nature hath made them in fome places hollow on the lower fide, & in other 
fome plaine ina triangular figure,that fo our feet may carry us over every foile,plaine 
paountanous,¢quall and unequall,throvgh all parts of the world, 


C x a? 


fOOtc, 
drawes it to his 
its flenderer and 
fufteines the lirle 
Thefirftis ca 
the Tibianus antic 
shird from its 
the Peromens Witt 
the Perone ot (hi 
fame bone from 
betweene the fo 
and hinder appe 
tendons, which | 
the thicker uncles 
Pediumwhich 
bone,& the laft & 
aflender portion 
and drawing it { 
ding from the of 
face of the fame | 
heres, asalfo fo 
tendon, which 
ofthe nameles t 
mott, but befides 
Done ofthe FPedis 
foote,Andthis m 
their parts at onet 
third which is che 
ginall from che to 
der thering, car 
to allthe joynrg, 
fufteines the 
Of the foote. 7 
what fattened che 
Toe. Butyoum 
Hlethy fibers {0 ‘ef 
function, as if the 
therelt which hay 
is The fixe hinde 
by reafon 
on. The third js 
9s the Palmaris my 
Dulcle by reafog 
Tivians polticus or 


bone. 7 he fixth an: 


muicle of the han 
which producesth: 


the Tibieus the 


Now for the 
“Aternall paflegfor: 


He Du 
he for 
| 
| 


e hinder part 
tendonsthat 
heele. £ 157, 
out. 47. the 
tof the heele 
ving the head 
which are ar. 
regarding thy. 
rh which the 
r bones of the 
WwW finns of the 
e Cube bone 
Toe {ave 
> wrelt is or... 
tide of the 
foote.¢ 2,1 2, 
e Cubebone 
,a proceffe of 
rted.‘) 12,the 
rwreft which 
eofthe wreft 
iculated.” 12 
rwrett which 
that bone of 
one.” 152 the 
bones of the 
of the bone 
f the feote is 
ineth the litle 
1,2, 
hat bone of 
fet tothe {e- 
Heele. 
sof the great 


the formers 
fiteto thefe 
ire inthe 
id longifh on 
9 
din the midtt 
up the great 
obferve that 
re the whole 

ary to the o- 
taking 
ble and joyn- 
ult goe upon 
e, & in other 
y foile,plaine 


Cuar 


C wap. XX XIX. 
Of the Mufcles moving the foote. 


He mufcles of the Legge the foore arc abfolutely nine, three in def 
lie the fore part and fixe in che hinde. Two ofthe three fure mufcles bend the Theis nz-xe 
NS foote, when they joyntly performe their ation, but when feverally, each ** 
drawes it to his fide; the third chiefly extends the Toes, for other whiles it feemes by 

its flenderer and longer Tendon ( which execeds not that bene of the Pediwm which 

fufteines the litle Toe ) to helpe alfo to bend the foote. 

Thefirfhis called Peroneus,becaufe it defcends along {tthe bone Perene ; the other 

the Tibiaus anticus, for that it defcends along the Os Tibze,or bone of the Legge. The Mufes!ns Fs 
third from its action is called the Digitwmten/for, or Toe-ftretcher.For their origina 
the Peroneas Whichf{eemcsto have two heads, defcends from the upper appendix of 
the Perone or {hin-bone by its firfthead, burby theether from the middle ofthe 

fame bone from the fore fide into the hiade, as the fupesficies fhewes which pallies 
betweene the fore and outward line of the {aid bone; but after it arives at che lower 

and hinder appendix of the fame bone, behind the outer Anckle it produces two 

tendons, which by the guidance ofthe Ligaments as well proper,as common,goe; 

the thicker under the fole ofthe foore, ending in the Die-bone and that boae of the 

Pedivm which fafteinesthe great Toe; the lefler soes on the outlide tothe 

bone ,& the faft & leaft bone of the Pedium which beares up the litle Toe, fometimes 

aflender portion thereof is produced even tothe fide of the lide Toe,exrending it 
and drawing it fromehe reft. The or Fore legge mufcle procee- 4a 
dingfrom the upper and outer appendix of the Leg-bone defcends above the far- a 

act of the fame bone, which is betweene the fore and outer line to which it ad- 

heres, asalfo to that furface evento the midft, from which place it produces one 

tendon, which defcending on the fore and loweft part, ends onthe ourfide into two 

ofthe nameles bones,thatis,into the firft which isthe thicker,and into the middle- 

moit, but befides by a {lender portion thereof it is extended into the firft and greater 

bone ofthe Fediwm,foto extend thegreat Toe, drawing it inwards tothe other 
foote,Andthis mufcle with the precedentbends the foote,if they both performe 
their parts atonce ; but iffeverally,each drawes the foote towards his fide. Th 
third which is the Digitumtenfor, or Toe-ftretcher,is two fold; the one takes its ori. 
ginall from the top of the Legge,and running alone ft the fhin-bone and paffiog un- 

der the ring, carriesit {elfe into the foote, inwhich it ends by five tendens going 


to allthe joyntsof the Toes, and by a fixth at that bone of the Pediwm which The Toeftret« 


fufteines the litle Toe,whereby (as wee formerly {aid) it helpes the bending fu": 

of the foote. Theother defcends into the mid‘ of the fhin-bone, aad fome- 

what fattened thereto by one tendon paffing under the Ring ic goes to the great 

Toe, But you mutt more thatall thefe, Tendons have nervous, ligamentous and 

flethy bers fo feparated from each other, that they can equally alone performe their 

function, as ifthey were more diftiné mufcles. Andweemutt thinke the fame of 

therelt which have diftiné Tendons prefently from their Aethy part. ? 
The fixe hinde mufcles follow, of which the two firftare called the Gemelli or 12662“ 
wins by reafon of the fimilitude of their thicknefie, Original], infertionand acti- 

Thethird js called the P/sstaris, becaufe it is fpent wponthe fole of the foor, 

4s the Palmayis upon the palme ofthe hand. The fourth is termed the So/ess or {ole 

‘utcle by reafon of the refemblance it hath to the fifhofthatname. The fift the 


1} se 


a pofticus or hindlegge Mutcle which defcends alongft thebacke part of the leg- 


one. The ixth and laft the Digitumflexor or Toc-bender, equivalent to the Deepe gee 
uicleotthe hand, fomemakebut one mufcle of this and the Tibéeus ox 
ich produces three tendous others hadrather make three, as thus,thar onc {hould 


© Tebiaus the other the bender of foure Toes, the thirdthe bender of the great 


Fens for the two Gemelii or Twins, the one is internall, the other externail: the 
- nail pafles forth from the roote ofthe inner Condyle of the Thigh ; bur the 


externa!) 


| 
+ 
& 
° 


238 


the and Bones, 


L1B.6, 


externall from the external] Condyle;and from this their original! prefently becom. 
ming flefhy,efpecially onthe out fide,they meet togethera litle after in their flefhy 
rts,and with the /o/ew they make the thicke and great Tendon at the mM of the 
egge, which from thence is inferted inta the backe part of che heele;in this very 


what place Tendon breed painfull kibes. The action thereof is, tohelpe our going by putting 
thekibesbreed forch the foote, whileft it drawes the Heeletowards its originall, | 


The Péantaris the leaft and flendereft ofthem all,pafics forth flethy from the citte 


The Plastaris ward head of the legge-bone, and from thence the fpace of fome foure fingers bredth 


The Solens. 


The 


The 
xertywoe- 
fold, 


Their number, 


The Abds for 
of the Toes,or 
Pedio[as,/ 


he F lex oF 


The mufele 
equivalent to 


the Thenar, 


itendsina ftrong and flender Tendon, whichit fends betweene the Twin and {ole 


mufclesto the fole of the foot,there to produce a membrane which covers the fole of, 


the foces,anda mufcle equivalentto the upper bender of the Hand. 


The Soleus ,or fole mufcle the thickeft of them all, and feated under the Twig , 


mufcles defcends from the commiflure of the legge and fhin- bones, and about the 
midit of thelegoe, after it hath mixed his tendon with that ofthe Twin mufcles, ig 
runs into the forefaid place that it may extend the foote forthe forefaid ule, 

The Tibieus poj?icus de{cends trom the hinder appendix of the legge and fhinbones, 
and adbering,to them almoftas fare as they goe,by a {trong Tendon, being as it were 
bony at the end thereof, itis inferted into the Boat-like bone and the two firft name. 
les bones fo to helpe the oblique extenfion of the foote. 


The laft being the Déeitumflexor or Toe-bender is twofold, for one arifes from the 


legse-bone,in that place where the Popliteas ends,and inferted into that fame bone ig 


goes evento the back{ide ofthe inner ankle & from thence into the joynts of foure of 
the toes. The other drawes his originall from almoft the middle of the fhin-bone, 
and fomewhat inferted into it,it goes by the heele and pafterne bone to the great toe, 
mixed with the precedent; their aGtionis to bend the firft joynt of the Toes, rather 
bythe forceof the common Ligament, than by the fimall portion of the Tendon 
which ends there. But it istheir aGtion to bend the laft dearticulation of the Toes by 
their proper infertion, 


XL. 
Of the Mufcles moving the Toes of the feete. 


| Ow follow the mufcles moving the Toes; thefe are cight in number, 
fs} One on the upper,and feven onthe lower fide, The firft proceeds 
id from the Patterne,hecleand Die bones below the externall Anckle, 
by or the Ligament of thefe bones with the Legge-bone, and obliquely 
ftretched tothe top of the foote is parted into five fmall tendons 
the fides of the five toes, fotodraw them outwards towards its originall, whereup= 
oniris called the Abdwéer of the Toes, and alfo Pedie/us, becaufe itis ftretched 
over the Pedzwm,or backe ofthe foote. 

The firft of the {even of the lower fidecalled the flexor faperior or upper bender, 
arifes from the heele and firetched alongft the foote under the ftrong membrane, 
(which from the heele is ftraitly faftened to the extremity of the bones of the Peasam 
to firengthen the parts conteined under it) isinferted by foure Tendons,at the fecond 
joints of che foure Toes which it bendes. Here you muft note that neer the infertion 
thereof, this mufcle divides it {elfe, like that mufcle of the hand which is called /wi- 
mis that fo it may give way tothe Deepe,which (as we faid) defcends alongit the 
fingers, to which a certaine common membranous Ligament adjeynes it felfe, which 
involucs and faftens it to the boneall along{t the lower part of the fingers, even 0 
the laft dearticulation. | 

The fecond equivalentto that mufcle of the hand which is called Thenar, {cated 
on the inner fide of the foote,arifes from the inner and hollow partof the heele and 


paiterne bones and ends in the fide,and inner part of the great Toe, whichitdrawes | 
from the reft,inwards, This may be divided into two or three mufcles,as the 


of the hand,todraw the great Toeto the reft,as much as need requires, juft as we {aid 
ofthe Hand. The thirdanfwerable rothat ofthe hand which is named the Hy? 
shezar pafles from the outer part of rheheeleand afcending by the fides of the foor* 
it is in like manner inferted into the fide of the litle Toe, fo to draw ix from the elk, 


1B-6- 


cowhichfame ac 
which is retched 
foure Lemobrice 01 
Deep Toe-bendes 
chem inwards,by 

interofjes OF bone- 
Len of: Thefe are ¢ 
originall, infertior 
with the pediofas 
beares up the lit! 

outward & forep 
fore and outer pa 
each of the reft in 
lowing bone,fo Vi 
as the outwards ,¢ 


of 


This firft fheweth 


. - 
| - 
- 
= 
> 
q 
q 
~ 
* 
~ 
7 
- 
3 ‘ 
~ 
CW 
4 
ad a 
* 
i 
] 
~ } 
~ 
~ 
q 
q 
- 
~ 
a 
= 
~ 
a - 
‘ 
/ 
* 
* 
= 
- 
a 
aa 
- 
: 
=. 
- 
4 
| 
= 
i 
~ 
- 
° 
> 
- 
- 
1? 
° 
~ 
* 
2 
a 
. 
“4 
* 
. 


L 13.6, 


ntly becom. 
their flethy 
midit of the 
in this very 


by putting 


‘om the 
agers bredth 
vin and {ole 
‘s the fole of 


the Twin 
d about the 
» mulcles, it 
ife, 

fhinbones, 
dg as Were 
o firft name. 


(es from the 
ame bone ir 
s of foure of 
fhin-bone, 
1e great toe, 
Toes, rather 
the Tendon 
the Toes by 


in number, 
ft proceeds 
nall Anckle, 
id obliquely 
lrendons to 
1, whereup« 
is {tretched 


yper bender, 
membrane, 
frhe Peasam 
it the fecond 
the infertios 
called 
along the 
t felfe,which 
2ers, £0 


benar, {eared 
1¢ heele and 
ich it drawes 
1s the Thener 
tas we faid 
the Hypé- 
of the 


-omm the refts 


‘owhich {ame ation accrtaine fiefh contained under the fole of the feete may ferve, 


Contained mans Body. 


— 


which isftretched even to thefe Toes, char alfo it may ferve to hollow the foote. The 3 
foure Lumbricé or wormy mutcles follow next, which from the membrane of the The 4 iaevs 
Deep Toe-bender are inferted into the inner & fide part of the foure Toes, fo to draw "| 
‘hem inwards,by a motion contrary to that which is performed by the Pedsofas. The 3 
imereffes or bone-bound mutcles of the Pedéwm or back of the foor,remaine to be {po- The dejetipnts 
of: Thefe are eight in number, foure above, andas many below, different in their per lowes 
originall, infertion and action;for the upper becaufethey draw the foote outwards “ref 
with the pediofas arife from the fore and inner part of that bone of the pedium, which 3 
beares up the litle Toc({and foalfe the reft each in its order)and are inferted into the 

outward & forepart of the following bone, The lower on the contrary pafle from the 

fore and outer part of that bone of the pedtwm which beares up the Great Toe (and fo 

each of the reft in tts order,) but are inferted into the inner and upper part of the fol- 

lowing bone,fo with the wormy mufclesto draw it inwards, orto hollow the foote 

asthe outwards,or to flat the foote,as we {aid of the Jateroffes of the hand. 


Cuar. XLI. 
An Epitome or brieferecitall of the bones in a mans body. 


#4 He whole head which hath the leaft con fifts of 60.bones,but that which hath 3 
moft of 63,that is,14.0f the Cramiun or {cull, 14.0r 17.0f the face,and 32 phehonesof 
y cceth,Ofthe bones of the icull there be 8 conteining and fixe coateine ds the she Seali,i<, 


This firft fheweth the forepart of the Scelctow of 4man.cc. 


The Declaration of thefe three 
fizures put inte one. 
A 3. The Coronall Suture 
Called in Grecke 
B 2 3. The future like the let- 
ter A-called 

C2, The fagietall Suture 
called 

D 2,3. The {cale-like Con- 
junction called as Tid 

2,3, Verticé or 
tis, the boneof the Syncé- 
patcalled Os 

1,3. The ferchead-bone, 


that 1S, 
The bone of rhe 
Nowle or i Fis, 
in S$, 2,3. The bones of the 
temples Or xpéJapay. 


= OX 

r 
«, appendix in the 

 temple-bone like a Bod- 
kin, 

@ 3,2,3. A procefle inthe 
temple-bone like the teate 
of adugge, called there- 

E,2,3. the wedge-bone, 
gonyoesd€s, 

n, 3,the fiomy part of the 
Scull. 

6, 3.a procefie of the wedge- 
bone much like the wing 
ofa Bat, and therefore 


called tise 


* 


1 


| 
| 
é 
if 
of 
4 
SS 
4 
4 SS, 
7) 
| v 
) 
‘ 
| 
¥ 
| N =") 
3 
airs = 
S14 BE A 
~ 4 
> | 
| 
~ 
f 
> 
| 
| 
Y, AN. 
» 


24.0 Of the Mujcles and Bones, 


The 24nd 3 Figures fheweth the backfide of the Sceleton, : oon te 
andthe lateral part of the Sceleton, &§ titt or and {malle 
rocefie ofthe Le 
che brace of the o 
che bone called th 
the bone called Os 3 
fifting of foure bo 
led by 
bb, I, 2,3,the atterv 
the rocs of the foot: 


td 


This fieure fheweth t/ 
bones are in propor 
are marked with 


F,1,2,3.the yoke-bone Zusiiue, G 1,3. the lower jaw. I,K,L, M,N,1, 2,3. the backe or the 
{pine, jxyi From Ito K, the Necke, zpe'0@- From KtoL, the Rackebones of the Chef, 
From Lrto M,the rackebones of the Loynes. FromM to N, the Holy-bone, icp». N, the 
Rumpe bone, 3. the breft-bone, sésvoy. P,1,3.the Sword-like griftle of the brett, 
Char. 152,32, as farreasto 12, in allthree Tables, fhew the twelve ribs of the Chet | 
wAsupd OQ, the clavicles orcoller bones, R515253 the fhouldereblade- 
2,3,the upper proceffe of the fhoulder-blade, or the top of the fhoulder, called i 

3, The lower proceffe of the fhoulder-blade:called S512, the bone of the arme, 
called Humerus and Praxiav- TV, 1,2,3,the Cubit X, 1,2; 3:the wand or the upper bone 
of the Cubit,called xepxi:. Y,1,2,3,the ellor lower bone of the Cubit, called ixus. » 3,the 
procefie of the Cubit, 3,the proceffe like a bodkinor probe, called ZZ: 
1,2,3,the wreft rr, 1,3, the after-wreft udaxdency. aaa.1,the fingers @,1,2,3,the 
bones joyned to the fides of the Holy bone, on eachfide, diftinguithed as it were inte three 
Parts, ¢,1,2,3, the firftpart called the Hanch-bone, Os 7,1,2,3,the fecond 
part the bone of the Coxenaix icy iov. f, 1,2 935 the third part the fhare-bone, Os pubis, nBrss 
betweenc the conjun@ion ef the fhare-bones. a, I, 2,3, the thigh, 


K, A great and large 
Holy-bone, L, The 
_ Of the birth. M, the 
aoreater difta 
thicker than me 


= 
= 
K 
| 4 
A 
7 4 
# 
NE 


acke or tlic 
the Chetit, 
N, the 
f the brett, 
=f the Cheft 


Bs I, 
the arme, 

upper bone 
y 3, the 
ZL: 
9,1,2,3,the 
inte three 
the fecond 
$ pubs, 
the bigs 

1,3,3, 05 
3 


leffer and inner procefle. =, 1,2,3,the whirlebone of thekncee, Patella 
1,2,3,the inner & greater bone of the leg 1,253, 
sheutter and {mallerbone of the leg, called tie Brace-bowe, Fibuls, 91,23, the 


procefle ofche Leg orthe inner anckle called internus. X,1,2sthe proceffe of 
the brace Of the out-ward ankle, both of them are called in ereeke, 0, 2,25 
the bone called the cockal, Talus bali(ta,Os Hecle Cals 1.3, 
she bone called Os 1,2, 3,the wrett of the foot called ar{us,con- 
of foure bones, 1,2, 3 three inner bones of the wreft of the foot, cal- 
led by fom® 3,the utter bone of the wreftof the foorlike a Dye 
ofthe foote called Pedium, by fome pemmpcO. #4, 1, 2, 4, 


therocs of the foote, k,1,2,3, the feed bones of the foote, called ofcicule fefamina, 


figure faeweth the Sceleton ofthe bones cy griftles of woman,that it wsay appeare all ber 
bones are in proportion le(jer than the bones of 4 man.But in this figure onely thofe parts 
cre marked with letters wherein a woman differesh from a man in her bones and griftles. 


A, The fagictali future defcending 
into the nofe, & dividing the fore 
head bone, which is fometimes 

. found in women, very rarely 
in men, but alwayes in Infants, 

BB,the Cheft fomewhat deprefled 

. before,becaufe of the Paps. 

CC, thecoller bones not fo much 
crooked as in men, nor intorted 
fo much upward. 

 D,the breft-bone perforated fome- 
times witha hole much like the 
forme ofa heart, through which 
veines do run outward,from the 
mammary veines unto che paps. 

E, the griftles ofthe ribs, whichia 
women are {omewhat bony, be- 
caufe of the weight of the Dugs. 

F,a part ofthe backe reflected, ot 
bent backward above the loynes, 

~ CG, the compaffe of the hanch- 
bones running more outward, 
for the wombe co reft upon, 
whena woman is with child, 

HH, the lower procefles of the 

fharc-bones, bearing outward chat 
the cavity marked with K,might 
be the larger. 

I, the anterior commiflute or con- 
junction of the thare-bones fil- 
led up with a thicke griftle, that 
inthe birth they might better 
yeeld fomewhat for Natures 
neccfhry. 

K, A great and large cavity circum{cribed by the bones of the coxendix and the 
Holy+bone, L, The Rumpe or Coccyx,curved backewardto give way in the time 
of the birth. M, the thigh bones by reafon of the largeneffe of the forefaid cavity, 

ve agreater diftance betwixt them above,whence alfo itis that womens thighes 
are thicker than mens, 


‘ VT ‘ 


Y conteinine 


+ 
/ 
J 
~ 
‘ 
L 
| | | | 
j 
| 
A 
. 
M4 j 
t 
+4 
\ 
| 
| 


Of the Mufeles and Bones, L 18.6" 


— 


The bonesof 
thefacers, 


The teeth 32, 


The bone 
Hyttdes 


Thebones of 
the {pine 34. 


+ Collers 


benes. 

The Ribs 24. 
The bones of 
the Sterson 3, 


The banes of 
the whole 


arme 62. 


"The bones of 
the wholc leg. 
66. 


WV hat the 
Secletos is, 


The bones ar: 
Sompoicd two 
manner of 
wayes. 


Sorts of 
ticulation. 
What Diar- 
thofss and 
syntrthre ss 
arc. 

3 .Sortsof Diz 
arthropes. 
What 


contcining are, the Os fronts, OF Forehead bene, the Now le-bone, the two bones 
of the Syweiput, the two ftony bones ,the Wedgebone, and the Sive-like or fpongy. 
bone. But the conteined are fixe fhut up inthe cavity of the Eares, the Anvile 
Hammer and ftirrop. 

For thebones of the face, there are fix withinor about the Orbe of the Eye, tha 
is,on each fide three two bones of the Nofe, two leiler [aw bones, and two bigger, 
which are alwayes in beafts {eene diftinguifhed by a manifeft difference, but itis fo 
rare in men, that I have not founditas yet; therefore thefe onely are diftinguifheg 
by manifeft difference,two which conteineall the upper teeth, the two inner of the 
palate, thetwo of the lower Iawin children; And laftofall the Os Crifle, whence 
the middle griftle or partition of the nofe arife, 

‘The two and thirty tecth are equally diftributed in the upper and lower lawes; ang 
of thefe there be eight fhearers,foure fanges,or Dog-tecth,and twenty Grinders, 

And there is another bone at the roote of the tongue called Os Hyoides, alwayes 
compofed of three bones, fometimes of foure, 

Now follow the bones of the Spine, or Back-bone, which are juft foure and thirty, 
that is, feven of the necke,twelve of the Cheft, five of the loines, fix of the holy-bone; 
and foure of the rumpe. Befides there are two bones of the throate,er Collar bones, ¢ 

The Ribbes are twenty foure,that is,fourteene truc andten baftard ribs, The bones 
of the Sternon or Brealt-bone moft frequently three other whiles feven,as fometimes 
in young bodyes, 

Hence comming to the Armes there are reckoned 62, beginning withthe fhoulder. 
blade;as there are two fhoulder-blades;two Arme bones; foure bones of the Cubite. 
that is,two Ell-bones and two Wands; fixteene of the Wrelt eight ofthe Afterwreft, 
and thirty ofthe fingers:into this number allio come the Se/amoidea, or feedbonces, of 
which fome are internal], & thefe alwayes twelve at the leaft,alchough fomtimes there 
may be more found, agreat part of which rather merite the mame of Griftles, than 
bones; there are others externall if we beleeve Sy/uius. 

Now remaine the bones of the Leg which (if we reckon the O//4 Jlium on cach {ide 
three,as in yong bodies, it is fit they fhould)they are fixty fix, befides the feed-bones, 
that is to fay ,two Haunch-bones, two fhare bones, two Huckle-bones, two thigh- 
bones,two Whirlbones of the knees,foure of the leg, that is twa leg-bones, and two 
{hin-bones. Fourteen of the Inftep,as twojheele,two pafterne,two boatelike,two Die, 
& fix namelefle bones. Ten of the Pedéwm or back ofthe foote, that is, five in each foot; 
& twenty eight of the Toes:& as many feed-bones inthe feet,asthe hands enjoy, Bur 
Ihave thought good to adde thefe figures for the better underftanding of what hath 
beene {poken hereof. 


Cuap, XLII. 
An Epitome of the names and kinds of compofure of the bones. 


SRD) ote {ec it is as nececeffary for a Chirurgion to know the manner of fetting & 

‘9 tepairing broken bones,as to put them in their places when they are difloca. 
ted, or out of joynt;but feeing neither of them can be underftood when the 
naturall connexion of the bones isnot knowne, I have thought it a worke worth my 
labour, breifly to fet downe, by what and how many meanes the bones are mutu- 
ally knit and faftened together. The univerfall compofure and ftructure of all the 
bones in a mans body is called, by the Greckes; Sce/etos. Butall thefe bones ate com- 
poled after two forts,that is,by Arthron, an Articulation or joynt,and by Sympby/is4 
naturall uniting or joyning together. There are many other kinds of both thefe forts. 
Porthere are two kinds of Articulation,that is Déerthrofis or Dearticulation,and 5)- 
narthre/ts,or Coarticulation; which differ as thus, Dearticulation is acompofition 0! 
the bones with a manifeft and vifible motion ; Coarticulation hath a motion of the 
bones, yet not fo manifeft but more obfcure. But thefe two do again admit a fabdiv!- 
Goninto other kinds. For Disrthrofis conteines under it Exarthrofis, Arthrodia & Gi? 


glymos. Now Enarthrofis or Inarticulation is akind ef Dearticulation,in which ~ deep 
avity 


L B.0- 


Cavity receives a chi 
with the Huckle-bot 
Arthrodiais whee 
aconnexion is that © 
with the fecond. Th 
of Cavities and head 
Head abfolutely ; bu 
Capitulum, a Litle-he 
one Glene. The this 
and are received one 
ceives the head of rhe 
he received inthe © 
and knee , that is in t 
And thus much 
or Coarticulation, at 
de Offibus to wit, § 
Suture is acompo 
ther, example wher 
hone is faitened tna 
reeth are faltened in 
are compofed by tl 
bones of the nofe ancl 
Hitherto we have 
and the kinds therec 
Sympbyfis, or Gr 
naturall union offh: 
either by interpofitio 
bones of the lower | 
feftly diftingvithed- 
three manncr of Wa 
Griftle, which kinde 
the Share-bones gre 
condly of a Ligame 
Nerve being taken it 
whiles for a Ligame 
theauthor of fenfea 
fis,or interpofition of 
Thirdly, the bones 
Syufarcefis the 


able. Butif fomeb 
in which it feemesite 
which I was firft adn 
you well obferve its is 


L 1B.6' 


he two bones 
KC OF 
che Aavile, 


fe Eye, thag 
two Digger, 
"5 but it is {g 
iftinguifheg 
inner of the 
ift Whence 


er lawes; and 
rinders, 
alwayes 


re andthirty, 
holy-bone; 
pllar bones, @ 
bs. The bones 
as fometimes 


the fhoulder. 
fthe Cubite: 
e Afterwreft, 
feedboncs, of 
mtirmes there 
msriftles, than 


mon cach fide 
{eed-bones, 
, two thigh- 
and two 
ike,two Die, 
-incach foot; 
senjoy, But 


of what hath 


offetting & 
are difloca- 
od when the 
ke worth my 
es are mutu- 
ure of all che 
nes ate com- 
y Sympby/is a 
h theie forts. 
tion,and 
mpofition 

otion of the 
uta fubdiv!- 
bwodia & 
yhich a deep 
Cavity 


Contained in a mans Body. 


Cavity receives athicke and long head, fuch a compofition hath the Thigh-bone 
with the Huckle-bone. 

Artlrodiais whenalightly engraven civity admitsa fmal! and fhort head, fuch 4rtires 
, connexion is that of the Arme-bone withthe fhoulder-blade ; of the Kertebra 
with the fecond. The Greekes have diftinguithed by proper names thefe twokinds 
of Cavities and heads; For they call the thicke and long head Cephale,thatis, a What cesbe!s 
Head abfolutely ; but the lefler they terme Corone Corenon which the Latines call 
Capitulum, a Litle-head. Burtheycall a deepe Cavity Cotyle, anda {uperficiary iv. eal 
one Gene. Thethird fore called Gimglymos, is when the bones mutually receive 
andare received one of another ;as when there is a cavity in one bone, which re- What Gies!y« 
ceives the head of the oppofite bone,and alfo the fame bone hath a head which may ”** 
bereceived inthe Cavity of theoppofite bone ; fuch a compofire is in the Cubite 
and knee , that is in the connexion of the Thigh-bonc. 

And thus much of Dearticulation and the three kinds thereof. Sysarthrofis 3 Kindsos 
ot Coarticulation, another kinde of junfture ,hath alfo three kinds thereof * 
de Offibus to wit, Sutura, Gomphofis and Harmonia, 

Suture is acompofition of the bones after the manner of fowing things toges Whata Suture 
ther, example whereof appeares in.the bones ofthe Scull. Gomphojis is when ONC Wine Gee. 
bone is faftened in another as apin is faftened ina hole, after which manner the 
reeth are faftenedin their focketsin both the lawes, Harmony is whenthe bones Whar sa: 
are compofed by the interpofition of a fimple line, after which manner many “’"*™ 
bones of the nofe and face are joyned together, 

Hitherto we have {poken of the firft conftru@ion of the bones by articulation 
and the kinds thereof; now it followes we treat of Symphy fis, 

Symphyfis, or Growing together as we formerly faid, is nothing elfe, than ¥is. 
naturall union cf the bones; fuch union is made two manner of wayes, that is, 
either by interpofition of no other thing ; after which fortin fuccefle of time the 
bones of the lower law grow together, which formerly in children were mani- 
feltly diftinguifhed; or by themediation of fome Mediam, but that happens 
three manner Of wayes, by interpofition of three feverall Medss,as fir of a Srbomdvasis, 
Griftle, which kinde of union the Greeks call Syxchondrofis, after which manner 
the Share-bones grow together and alfo fome Appendices in young bodyes; fe- 
condly of a Ligament,and it is namedby the Grecians Syaearofts, the name of a 
Nerve being taken inthe largeft fenfe,for fometimes it isufed for atendon, other- 
whiles for a Ligament, otherwhiles for a Nerve properly fo called and which is 37x, 
the author of fenfeand motion.But this Symphyfis or union hath place by Syneuro- | 
fis,or interpofition of a Nerve ia certaine bones of the Stermea and Haunch. ee 

Thirdly,the bones grow into one by interpofition of flefh, calledin Greeke word Nerve 
Syufarcefis thus the fleth of the Gums faftens the tceth and makes them immove- Synferee/me 
able. | Butif fome be leffe pleafed with this divifion,by reafon of the obi curitics, 
in which it feemes to be involved, this following expreffion comes into my minde 
which I was firft admonithed of by Germin CortinDottor of Phyficke, which if 


you well obferve it, is both blameleffc and more cafic for your underftanding. 


ae 
| 
| 
q 
a 
i 
ae 
q 
iy 
é 
7 
4 
&, 
~ 


(Vai urually by Symphyfis or union;by whichthey are fo conjoyned th 

heterogeneous body,at leaft which may be difce.. T he Thratie re 

| | ned,interpofed between them.Such union appeares inthe two bones of the |o. which fixe . “e t 

wer Iaw atthe Chin, in the bones of the Sternom,the Hanch with the Huck |e. above, two 
bones, and the Share-bones betweene themfelves; of this union thereare no thefe | 

more kinds,for by this itccometh to pafle,thatthe bones,which were more ang great foure foote 

diftin@ meet together by interpofition of one Mediwm,to wit,a Griltle, which The 

now indeed is no Griftle,but is turned into a Bone. foro be inferted in 

Enarthrofis,whenthe headofabonej; |= the 7 hyreides. 

( either more loofly | wholy received inthecavity of another, | — Bur in che bac 
as by Diarthrofis, | &hidthercin,as the Thigh-boneis joy. | for to MOVE the he 

\ thatis a kind of | ned with the Huckle-bone. motion of the hea 

| Articulation not | Arthrodia,wheninalightly engravens, | is to fay, the two 

| very Mraitc, as by | not much depreffed cavity, the head of | _ which are very { 

| | whichic might | another bone is not wholy hid, buton. | vertebra. 

| have opportunity | ly receivedin pare therof;'fothatunle( | The Necke h 

to preforme di- nature had otherwife provided a fuffici. | before upon the 
orConjoyned | verfe motions: of | ent receptacle forthe head of this bone | che two wi 
Thebones, by that which | this compofure or (as by the ligaméts of the neighbouring | |) 


which as they call 4r-| Articulation of | Mufcles) itwouldotherwife have binig | - ' 
pillars Ar- | bones there are | perpetuall danger of diflocation. Thus the hinde, others 


ficinethe ticulation,as | three kinds,as the Arme-bone is faftened tothe 
fabricke of J when they fo der-biade. muicles which pre 


thewhole concur &are | Gyngiymos, when the bones mutually | 
body,areei- | bound toge- receiveeach other, fuch likecompofii- | e 
ther | ther,thatfome | | on hath the Cubit and Arme-bone. elides there ar 
Heterogene- | mufcles , twenty ft 
| ous fubftance Gomphyfisas when one bene foreceives | 


may be noted | or more ftraitly,as | anotheras a Pin is faftened in the hole 
betwixtthem, | byfjmarthrofts,whe | maceby peircer, thus the ceeth are 
1 but the bones | the bonesare more | faftened inthe lawes, wil! h oni 
| thus cOpofed ; ftraitly knit fothat | Stara, likea Saw,or teeth ofa combe, | 
areknittwo they can performe | asthe bonesof the {cul are mutually kor Wherefore of 
manner of no motions inthe together, or as {cales, or tiles are laid,al- | 
| wayes,that is, body. Of this Arti- ter which manner the ftony bones arc 
culationthereare | ftened tothefe ofthe Syncipat.Harmonis, | 
-(alfo 3,kinds,that is which isby interpofition ofa fimple lint, | 
| which parts bones abutting one | = which are As nid 
(another, as the bones of the Nole. = of the backe. whidl 


being without an 
to wit,S1. But aif 


which two are def 
adde the two Affi 
it pleafe youto lep 


An Epitome or briefe recitall of ak the Mufcles of mans body, By: 

As I have reckoned up the bones, fo here I to recite the mufcleso! 
mans body. Wherefore ia the face we firft meet with the bread or skin mufele,arifing from | Where pee 
the tifhy pannicle,& covering the wholenecke & almoftall the face.Then follow 4,perteining | yes. 
tothe upper eye-lids, Inthe Orbs of the eyes lye 14, that is 7, ineachOrbe, of which 42° others arti: 
called right, two oblique and one pyramidal]. Thenfucceed4 of the  eregin A 
on each fide one, and twointernall, thefe drawit together and the other openit. After thee | the 
come theten mutcles of the lower Iaw,of which two are calledthe Crotaphite or Temporaly | UP of the fund andi 
two Ada/feteres or Grinders;two round(which {eeme to me rather to perteine tothe lips, | quure the 
to this law; ) two litle ones hid in the mouth, arifing from the winged proceffe of the wedg | > mention oncly the? 
bone; two openers of the mouth being nervous or tendinous in their midft, Then follow te? | > are double y th ofe 
muicles of the lips, that is,4. of the upper and as many of the lower, fhutting and | ether, 
mouth. The tongue with his ten mufcles ishid as it were inthe denofthe mouth.Wherfore(s | sy herefore theen 
miufcles of the whole face are 51, In the fore partof the neckare found the mufcles of the bo" | atthe leat. are 
Hysides & throtle;now $ mufcles hold the bone Hyoides as equally ballanced;of which there 2 | or Particularly 
2 upper arifing from the Chins2 onthe fides from the procefle Sty/oides perforated in th’ | cles of the Cubire th 
midft,through which the 2 openers ofthe mouth in that partnervousdo pafles2 arifefrom' | the inner part of the ¢ 
Sterno, laftly 2 from the upper rib of the fhonlder-blade to the Coracoides,whichalfo inti“ atereckoned thirteen 


midft arengrvous,ia which place the two Mafloides lye upon them. The 


* 
| 
| 
} 
| 


onyOyned tha, 
nay be difcer. 
nes of the lo. 
h the Huckle. 
thereare no 
ere more and 

Griftle which 


1d of a bone jg 
ty of another, 
h- bone is joy- 


ly cngraven 
the head of 
) hid, but on. 
fo thatunleffe 
ided a fufficj- 
dof this bone 
ncighbouring 
ife have bin in 
cation. Thus 
tothe fhoul. 


nes mutually 
ike compofiti- 
rme-bone. 


fo réceives 
ed in the hole 
tthe reeth are 


h of a combe, 
mutually kot 
es are laid, af- 
y bones arc fa- 
bat. armors, 
fa fimple line, 
ng one upon 
Nole. 


he mufcles of 
ariling from 
4,perteining 
f which 4 are 
two externall 
rt. After rhete 
Temporal; 
the lips, chan 
of the wedge- 
n follow the § 
opening the 
Wherfore thes 
es of the bone 

hich there af 
Brated in che! 
arife from the 


halfo in thet 
The 


parts, will we come to the privitics. 


Up of the fundament, and one Sphéwc?er or fhutting Mufcle, Now letus profe. 
 Geute the Mufcles of the Extremities, or Limbs, But it will be fufficient to 
/ cation oncly the Mufcles of one fide, becaufe fecing thefe parts of the body 


= double, thofe things which are faid of the one may be applyed to the 
Other. 


“The Throtle compoled of three griftles hath eighteene or twenty muicles, of The: erry 


which fixe or eight are common,and twelue proper ; Of the common there are two 
_pove,two below, and two at thefides of the firft griftle, to which wee may aide 
ryefe two Which ferve for the opening of the Kpzg/ortis, which are alwayes found in 
ercat foure footed beafisforto prefiedowne the Epiglettis, 
The proper are twelue which almoft allof them come from the fecond griftle, 
fatobe inferted into the firft and third, of which fome are before, others behinde 
the Thyreides, Belides thefe, there are the AZa/fordes which bend the head. The heeds 
pur in the backe part of the Necke there are ewelue mufcles alfo appointed by 
for to move the head, fo that in all there are fourteene mufcles ferving forthe 
sotion of the head, the two fore and thetwelue hinde Mufcles, chac 
is to fay, the two Spleny, two Complexi, foure Right, and fo many oblique 
which are very fhort, fo that they pafle not beyond the fir and fecond 
vertebra. | Bad The Bfufcies 
The Necke hath eight Mufcles, of which two.are called the long, lying ofthenecks. 
before upon the bodyes of the Vértebra, the two Scaleni which are at the fides: 
the two Spémati which runne alongft the Spine; the two tanf{verfe which goe 
co the tran{verle proceffes of the Cheft. The Mulcies 
The Cheft hath8: Mufcles, of which fome are on the fore part, fome on “tho shela8, 
the hinde, others onthe fides; they are all combined or coupled together ex. 
cept the Midriffe, Now of thefe there arethe two Subclavy sthe two great Savw- 
mufcles which proceed from the bafis of the fhoulder-blade; the foure litle 
Rhombeides ox {quare mufcles,that is,two above and two below; the two Sacro- 
lamb: ; the two binders of the Griftles withinthe Cheft. 
Befides there are twenty and two external] and as many interhall Intercoftall 
mulcles,; twenty foure thatis, twelue external] andas many in- 
ternal!.fo that the Intercoftall, and Jatercartilaginez are 68, which with the twelue 
before mentioned make thenumber of 80 Mufcles. Adde to thefe the Midriffe 


being without an aflociate, and you fhall have the number formerly mentioned, 


to wit,81. But alfo if youwill addeto thefe the Mufcles of the lower belly, I 


willnot much gainfay it, becaufe by accident they helpe infpiration and ex{pi- 


ration. The 8. muftles 


lowe 
Wherefore of the eight mnfcles of the Epigefrium, there are foure Oblique, of “ao tang 


which two are defcendent andfo many afcendent;,two right, to which you may. 

adde the two Affifting or Pyramidall muicles which come from the fhare-bone, if 

it pleale youto feparate them from the head of the right mufcles! 
There are fixe or cight Mufcles of the Loynes, of whichtwo bend the loines “~~” 

which are the triangular; the two Semifpinat: ; two Saer#; two are in the midft 

of the backe, which for that caufe we may call the Rachite or Chine»mulcles. Now, 


that hereafter we may feverally anddiftinly fet downe the mufcles of the extreme 
maiters of the 


Where for the ufe of the Tefticles there are two Mulcles called the Cremajfe. Sicles, 


_ %s, or Hanging Mufcles. At the rcore of the yard, or Perimaum,there are foure 
others, partly for the commodious pafling of the urine and feed, and partly for 
| eine the yarde. The Spbéudter Mulcle is feated at the Necke of the Bladder. 


Ar The three of 
the end of the right Gutare three Mufcles, two Levatores Anz, or Lifters Thethree o! é 


Whereforethe mufcles of the Arme,beginning with thefe of the fhoulder-blade, Ts mates 


a the leaft, are 42, for there are 4 of the fhoulder-blade of the Arme properly generall 32. 
Particularly fo called, feven or cight;and there are three,foure,or five proper - 
ss of the Cubite,thatis, appointed for the performance of the motions thereo!; in 


‘Qe inner part of the Cubite are feven,and as maay inthe outer ; butthofe ofthe hanc 


“re reckoned thirteene at the Icaft. 


y 3 The 


Lise. 
| 
| 
| 
‘ 
4 
| 4 
| 
| 
| 
a 
tae. 


24.6 


The mufcles 
of the legge in 
gencrallso, 


Of the MuJcles and Bones, 


The fourth of the fhoulder-blade are the TrapeXius refembling a Monkes Cow), 
which thoves it upwards and downewards,and drawes it backwards ; the fecond 
the Levator, or Lifter-up thirdthe great Rbemboides lying under the Trapez;. 
4s. The fourth, the leffer faw muicle whichis inferted into the Coracezdes, The arm 
ismoved forwards, backwards ,upwards,downewards and circularly. 

The Pe@toral! mufcle arifing from the Clavicle, Breaft-bone and nacighbourj,, 
ribs,drawes it forwards ; the Hwmilis or low-mulcle comming fromthe lewer rib of 
the fhoulder-blade drawes it backwards ;the Dedtoides upwards ; and the Latifjimy, 
downewards, and {omewhat backe-wards. But the three featcd about the fhoulde;. 
blade move itabout, or circularly. 

The Epemésor Scapularis upwards ; the Super(capularis, which may feeme two, 
backwards and downewards; the Swbfeapelaris which is in the Cavitie of ¢), 
fhoulder blade, forewards, fothat by acertaine viciflitude and fucceffion of aGion 
they move itcircularly, Twomutcles bendthe Cubite, the one named Biceps or 
Two-headed, andthe cther Brachiews orthe Arme-mufcle; but onc, two, or three 
mufcles extend it; for if youhave refpe& to the originall,this mufcle hath two o; 
three heads, but one onely infertion. 

Inthe infide of the Cub:te are feven mufcles, one two wrcft-benders. 
two prenatores, one iquare, another in fome fort round ; two finger-benders, and one 
Abauttor or Drawer alide. Thefe fourteene internall and externall mufeles of the 
Cubite, doe not indeed move the Cubite, but onely feated there move the 
wande and withit the hand. Thefe are the chirteene Mufeles of the hand; the 7heay 
which may net only be divided into two, but into fixe, not only bythe diverfe 24j. 
ons itperformes, but alfoby the branches divided by a manifeft {pace between 
themsthefecondis called the Hypethenar, which lyes under the litle finger, as th: 
Thenar doth under the Thumbe; the third isthe Abductor ofthe Thumbe; then fol. 
low the foure Lembrici and fixe Jnteroffes, although cight may be obferved. 

The whole Legge hath at the leaft 50. Mufcles, for weereckon there are fourteene 
mu(clesin the thigh; there arecleven made for the ufe of the Legge there are nine 
{cated inthe Legge, three before and fixe behinde which ferve for the ule of the foot 
and toes; inthe foore are feated fixteene. Therefore of the foureteene muteles 
ferving the thigh twobend it, one called the Lumbaris, the other arifing from the 
cavity of the Hanch-bone ; bur the three which make the Buttocks and the Tricep: 
or Three-headed mufcle,(which if yoa pleafe,you may divide into three ) extcad 


Befides thefe the 4, twin mufcles, and two Obturators, of which the onc is internal! 
the other externall, turnethe Thigh about. The Leggc hath eleven, that is, the 
Long, the Membranous, the foure Poffsce or Hinde mutcies ( three of which come 
from the Huckle-bene, burthe other trom the commifiure ofthe Share.bone ) the 
Right, the two Vatte,the Cruress or Legge-mulcle, and the Poplitens, or Ham-mu! 
cle. Thefe feated inthe leg forthe ufe of the foote and toes are three fore and {ixe 
hinde mufcles : two of the fore bend the foote,one of which is called che Tibse# 


antiens, the other Peroneus,which you may divide into two, The third the bendtt | 


of the tocs,although italfo pastly bend the foote, towhichalfo the bender of thx 
Thumbs may be revoked. One of the hinde is the Toe-bender, others extend th 
foote, aud are in this order; Two twins, one Péamtaris, one Soleus, one Tibiss 
poftieus and the great bender of the Toes,to which may be revoked the bender 0: 
the Thumbc. » Of the fixteene feated in the foote,one is above, feated on the 
backe of the foote, which wee call the Abdador of the Toess;*another in the 
fole of the foote, to wit, the litle bender of the Toes,which goes to the {econd 
joynteof the Toes alongft the infide of the foote; the other lends his help: 
to the great Toe, which you may call the sbdwédfor of the Thumbe; another '' 
feated on the outfide for the ufe of the litle Toe. To thefe are added the four 


Lumbricé, belides the eight Jnteroffes; or if youhad rather,ten. And thus much 
fuftice for the enumeration of the mufcles. 


Th 


The Fieure o 
flefhry 


Nervous part of | 
thereof, trom the 
the arme, (the 
the greater {aw 
iique defcendenr n 
taken away, 7,the 
the fore mu(fcle 
the mufcle exte: 
the mufele prod 
The curn: 
{cond of the arm: 
muicle, whereof « 
wy the flefhle 
to the follow 
Of is inferted imo th 
urtt mufcle of the ti 
end of rhe fecond o 
the fixt mulcle 
4, the ninth mufele 
4nd feventh of the 


‘ge 
] 
ia 
ESS 
SS 
| 
' 
Bali 
| 
| 
| | 
7 « 


L [B.6: 
ynkes Cowle, 
ne fecond js 
the Trapez;. 
es, Thearme 


icighbouring 
lower rib of 
ne Latifjimy, 
the fhoulder. 


» feeme two, 
avitie of the 
ion Of aGtion 
ned Biceps or 
OF three 
e hath two or 


rcft-benders: 
\ders,and one 
ufcles of the 
move the 
id Themar 
 diverfe adi. 
ace betweene 
hinger, as the 
be; then fol. 
ed, 
are fourteene 
here are nine 
ule of the foot 
mene moulicles 
ling from the 
id the Triceps 
mec ) extend it. 
eis internal, 
n, that is, the 
(which come 
ire. bone ) the 
or Ham-mul!s 
fore and {ixe 
ledcthe 
rdthe benat 
bender of the 
ers extend the 
he bender of 
feated on che 
other in the 
to the fecond 
ds his help* 
another 1 
ed the 
us much may 


Th 


ghe Figure ofthe Mujfcles when the skin with itsveines, the fat, and all the 
 flefhy membrane are taken away, that part of the flefhy membrane > 
excepted , which takes upon tt the nature of amufele, 
as being conjoyned with the mujcles, 


4,the mu(cle of the fore- 
head. 

6, the temporal! mufcle. 

¢,the mutcle fhutting the 
eye-lid. 

d,the mufcle opening the 
wings of thenofes 

é, the fore part of the 

_yoake-bone. 

the mufele of the up- 
per lip tending tothe 
nofe, 

g, the beginning of the 
mafleter or grinding 
mujcle. 

b,the broad mufcle 
iifting ofa Aefhy mem- 
brane, 

é,k,the beginning therof 

which rifes immediatly 
from the coller-bone 
& the top of the fhoul- 
der, 

/, that part therof which 

bends forwards to /. 

m, the mufcle which 

lifts up che arme. 

g,the pectoral! 

the membranous 

part of this miutcle 

which is joynedto the 
nervous part of the fi:ft mufcle of the Abdomen or belly. q,g, the fiethy portion 
thereof, from the 6.and 7. ribs,anduhe infertion thereof. v che muicle drawing down 
ticarme, oblique defcending mufcle of thelower belly. ¢,¢, the iafertion of 
the greater faw maufcle. uu. the or white line, at which the two ob- 
defcendent mui{cles meer,covering the whole belly.x,the yard, the skinne being 
taken away, the veiiels of feed. the tefticles wrapped inthe fielhy membrane. 
thefore mufcle bending the cubite. 4,.,the hinde mufcle bending the cubire. 

é, the mufcle extending the cubite.e, the two-headed mufcle extending the wreft. 

¢» the mufele producing the broad tendon on the backe of the hand. ¢, histendon, 

the mMufcle curning up the VV and. 9, the upper mufcle flatting the Wand. ,, the. 

cond of the arme-benders, whofe beginning is x, andtendon ,. o, a portion of rhe 

mutcle, whereof one part yeelds tendons tothe wreft, the other tothe thumbe, 

the flefhleffe articulation of thethumbe. ,, amofcle inferred into the wreft, lying 

Heereto the following mufcle. -, a mufcle devided into two tendons, the one where- 

Of is inferted imothe frit joint of the thumbe, the other into the following. ;, the 

urft mufcle of the thigh whofe headigat ys andtendon at », and infertion at 

end of the fecond mutcle of the thigh, , the end of the third mufcle of the thigh. 

1, the fixt mufcle of the legge ; his beginning at 2, almoft wholy membranous at 3. 

4, the ainth mufele of the legge, 5, the eight of the legge. 6, a portion of the fixth 

and {eventh of the thigh. 7, the Glandules of the groines, 8, the eight of ce 

9,the 


4 
* 
tained thamans bed 7 
| 
| 4 
| 


Of the Mufeles and Bones, 
13, the innermoft of the anckle, 12,the fixth mufcle of 
end 15 feventh of the foote. 16,the tendon of 
the muicle lifting up the great toe. 17, the mufcles extending the foure ether toes. 
18. the abductor of the great toc. 19, 4 tranfverfe ligament. 20,atendonof the | 
ninth mufcleef the foote. 21, the firft mufcle. 22, the feurth mufcle of the foote, 
23, the rendon of the third mufcle. 24. amufcle bending the third bone of the 


foure lefier toes. 


which it refides,'c 
The difference 

 qQuantitic, matter 
pofleffe ; and latth 
fanding of them, 


_ 


{from 
| quant 
by re 
whe 
re ca 


trom 
accids 


The diffe. | 
rences Of from 
|) martes 
are drawne J which 
Principally | 
areca 


that | which 
is |) Which 
either 


From 
the Op! 
ronychi 

Frem 
are faid 


othe 


1Be Je 
248 
ONE ; 
"4 GY, 
AS 
() 
Pi. 
PY = 
m 
| 
= (= i 
SES 
>) ; 
a 
| 
\A) 
) 
= 
I 
| 


~ 


ad 
7 


C HAP, I. 


hat 4 Tumonr againft{ Nature, vulgar ly called an Impoftume, is, 
and uhat be the differences thereof, 


N Impoftume, commonly fo ealled, is an affea againft nature: 


compoied and madeof three kinds of difeafes, Diftemperatere, il] 


CAI VGA Conformation, and Solution of Continuitie, concurring to the 

hindering or hurting ofthe AQion, Anhumor, or aay other mat- 
ter, an{wering in proportion toa humor, abolifhing,weakening, 
a or depraving of the office or function of that part or body in 
which it refides,'caufeth it. | 


The differences of Impoflumes are commonly drawne from five things; 
quantitic , matter, accidents, the nature of the part, which they affe& or 
pofleffe ; and laftly, their efficient caufes. I have thought good for the better under - 
Handing of them, co defcribe them in this following Scheme. 


4 


| Quantity, | 


A Table of the differences of Tamors. 
( from their { Great, which are comprehended under the genefall name ef 
Phlegmons, which happen in the flefhy parts, by Galen, Lib de tx- 
mor contra naanram, & lib.r,ad Glauconem, 
Indifferent, or of the middle fort, as Fellons. 
Small, as thofe which Avice calls Bothores, i.Pufhesand Pu- 


by reafon 
whereof 
Imapoftumos 


ftules, all Kinde of Scabs and Leprofics, and laftly, all {mall 


breakings out. 


Colour, from whence Impoftumes are named white, red, pale, 


| from their ycllow, blew, or blacke,and fo ofany other colour. 


| accidents, Ypaine, hardneffe, foftnefle, and {uch like, from wheneethey are 


deities. faid to be painefull not painefull, hard, foft,and fo of the reft. 
| Hor,and that Sanguine, from whence a true Phlegmon- 
Naturall cither, Cholerick,from whence a true Eryfspelas. 
4 Cold &that Phlegmatiek,frd whence a true Ocdema, 
trom the or either < Melacolick fro whécea perfect Scyrrhus, 
matter, of | | fofafanguine Carbunckles, Gangrenes eating 

humor ulcers, Sphaceles are cauie d. 
which they | Not naturall which ) OF the erofler a cating Her- 
are cauted < hath. caneniel the ofacholetick! pes, of the fubtiler the Herpes mi- 


and made or | ligrisis made. 
which is > | limits ofits natural humor, Watery and Aatulent Impoftumes, 
 eithe || goodnefle, from | of a phlegma- | the Kings-evill,knots & all phleg- 
w hencevillegitimate tick humor, matick & 
tumors,therefore | The exquifite or perfek Scyrrius, 
of amebicho- hardnefies and all forts of cance- 

- lick humor,  rous Tumors. 


) | From the condition and nature ofthe parts which they poflefle, from whence 


| 
. 
> 


(the other cOmonly cold,asit fhal more manifeltly appeare by the following chapter. 


the Ophthalmia, isaPhlegmon of the eyes, Parots a tumor neere the eares. Ps- 
ronychia or a whitlow at the roots of the nailes; and fo of the reft. 

Frem the efijcient caufes,or rather the manner of doing. For fome impoftames 
are faidto be made by defluxions,others by congeftion,thofe are commonly hot, & 


HA?. 


What an [m- 
poftume yul- 
gar'y fo called 
is. 

T he material] 
caules of Im= 
poftumes, or 
unnatural] tu. 


| 
| B L | B Je 
:6, | 249 A, 
don of the 
one of the Tweet 
| 
The diffe. | 
rences of 
ate drawne d 
inc ip ally | 
| 
THE | 


Cuar. Il, 
Of the generallcaufes of Tumors. 


Here are two general! caufes of Impoftumes, Fluxion, and Congeftion, 


After what 

manner Defluxi ons are occafioned, either by the part fending, or receiving; the par, 

nature are eek (ending difcharges it felfe of the humors,becaufe the expulfive facultie pe. 

chiefely made, fidencin that part is provoked to expell them,moved thereto, either by the 
troublefomeneffe of their quantity or quality. The part receiving drawes, and rece}. 
ves occafion of heat, paine, weakenefle (whether naturall,or accidental!) opennef: 
of the paffages,and lower fituation. 

Threeeauts  Thecaufesofheat,inwhatpart foeveritbe, are commonly three, as all immode. 

ot heat. rate motion (under which friGtions are alfo contained, ) externall heat, either from 
fire, or fun, and the ufe of acride meates and medicines. 

Fourecaufes The canfes of paine are foure, the firft, isa fodaine and violent invafion of fome 

ofpaine, —_untemperate thing, by meanes of the foure firft qualities ; the fecond is olution of 
continuitic, by a wound, luxation, fra@ure, contufion or diftention; the third, js 
the exquifit {enfe of the part, for you fecleno paine incutting a bone, or expofing 
itto cold or heate; the fourth is, the attention, as it were of the antmall faculty, fo; 
the minde diverted from the actuall caufe of paine, is lee troubled, or fentible 
of it. | 

Twocauleof APpartis weake, either by its nature, or by fome accident ; by its mature as the 

weaknefle. Glandules and the Emund@ories of the principal! parts; by accident, asiffome di- 
ftemper, bitter paine, or great defluxion have feazed upon it, and wearied it, for fo 
the firength is weakened, and the paflages dilated. And the lownefle of fite yeelds 

Twoem(e, CPPortunity forthe failing downe of humors. 

of congeftion. The caules of congeftion are two principally, as the weakeneffe of the concodtive 


facultie, which refides inthe part, ( by which the affimulation into the fubfance of 


the part of the nourifhment flowing toit is fruftrated ) andthe weakeneffe of the 
expulfive faculty ; for whileft the part cannot expell fuperfluities, their quantity 
conticually encreafes, 

And thus oftentimes cold impoftumes have their original! from agroffe and 
tough humor, and fo are more dithcult to cure, 

Laftly, all the caufes of Impoftumes may be reduced to three, that is, the primi- 
tive, or externall; the antecedent, or internal]; and the conjunce, or containing, 
as we will hereafter treat more at large, 


C uap. III. 
The fignes of Impoflumes or Tumors in generall. 


The principall MARONK Efore wee undertake the cure of Tumors, itis expedient to know theif 


kindesand differences, which knowledge muft be drawne from their pro- 
drawnefrom pci fignes, the f{ameway, as in other difeafes. But becaufe the proper and 
pony of AFGHAN principall fignes of tumors are drawne from the effence of the part they 


poffe fic, we muft firft know the parts, and then confider what their eflence and com: 
pofition are. 

We are taught both, by skillin Anatomy, and the obfervation of the deprived fur» 
ion, efpecially when theaffected part is one of thofe which lie hid in the body; ‘or 
we know whether or no,the externall parts are affe€ted with a tumor againft nature, 
by comparing that with his naturall which iscontrary. For comparing the found 
part with the difeafed, wee thall eafily judge whether it be {wollen, or no. 


But becaufe it is not fufficient for a Chirurgien onely te know thefe general! fi gnes 
(which 


~ 
4 


which are knowne 


acre. 
mors of which thet 
For this Galen reas 
dition of the matte 
knowne by fuch ac 
gine, tenfion, refi 
VV herefore painc 
neffe, foftnefle, and 
of the part, and 2 prigj 
biting paine withou 
And befides 
rure and motion of 
motion and fits itv 
as in the Spring, {01 
the middeft of the di 
Winter, foon the 
Hippocrates and Gate 
proportion of the c 
yeare, is alfo in the 
Impoftumes whit 
and declination, an 
times. We know the 
the {welling,painc, 


*felyes; the {tate, whe 


caufe at their height 
the tumor degenerat: 
nation, when the fw: 
the Chirurgion may 
commonly terminate 
mors caufing them b 
flow backeintothe 
Therefore firftt 
condly, by fuppurat 
ration when it degen 
folved;the fourth,wh 
which is, when overd 
mor, orboth, it con 
[tis beft to termia 
ration and induratio 
lignes by which the¢ 
by refolving, are the 
heat,and all other act 
and hot Impoftumes 
lily refolved, by reaf 
Signes of fuppura 
ation, andthe teaver 
ter when the matter is 
The Chirurgion m 
made ; for the purules 
the thicknefle of the p; 
he fignes of an In 
Hution of the 
NOt going away with 
Coughnetie of the hunt 
Tefolving things | 


diffalved sthe reft oft! 


- 
a 
| 
é 
> 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
« 
* 
* 
4 


-ongeftion. 
log; the part 

facultie re. 
ther by the 
and rece}. 
1) opennefie 


ll immode. 
either from 


on of fome 
folution of 
third, is 
or expofing 
faculty, for 
or fenfible 


ature as the 
is if fome di- 
ied it, for fo 
fire yeelds 


 concoctive 
ubfance of 
Hefie of the 
quantity 


and 


the primi- 
containing, 


now theif 
their pro- 
proper and 
part chey 
and come 


prived fun 
body; for 
nft nature, 
the found 


srall fignes 
(which 


| 


nich are knowne even to the vu lgar) he muft attentively obferve fuch asare more 
prope 


rand nere. And thefe are drawne from the difference of the matterand hu- 
mors of which the tumors coniift. | | 

For this Galem reaches, that all differences of tumorsarife from the nature and con- nih out 
dition of the matter which flowes downe and generates the rumor; alfo they are Glance. tr 13. 
Lnowne by fuch accidents as happento them, as colour, heat, hardnefle, fofinefle, 
paine, tention, refiftance. : | 3 

VV herefore painc, heate, rednefie, and tenfion indicate a fanguine humor; cold- The prcper 
nefle, foftnefle, and no great paine, phlegme ; tenfion, hardneffe, the livide colour mney 
of the part, and a pricking paine by fits, melancholy ; and yellowith and pale colour, of a pleg:na- 
biting paine without hardoeffe of the part, choler. melanchélick, 

And befides ,[mpoftumes have their periods and exacerbations following the na- ofa chol¢rick, 
ryre and motion of the humors of which they are gencrated. Wherefore by the Theknow- 
motion and firs it willbe no difficult matter to know the kinde ofthe humor, for ledge of :us 
as in the Spring, fo inthe morning the bloud is in motion; as in the Summer, f0 in mood 4" 
the middeft of the day, choler; as in Autumne, foin theevening, melancholy; as in ‘*#serbation, 
Winter, foon the night the exacerbations of phlegme are moftpredominante,For 
Hippocrates and Galen teach, that the yeare hath circuits of difeafes, fothatthe fame 
proportion of the excefle and motion of humors which is in the foure feafons of the : 
yeare, isalfo in the foure quarters of each day. . 

Impoftumes which are curable have foure times, theirs beginning, increafe, flare, 

and declination, and we mutt alter our medicines, according to the varictie of thefe 
times, We know the beginning by che firft {welling, of the part ; The increafe when 


the {welling,paine, and other accidents do manifeftly encreafe, and enlarge them- The begii- 


‘felyes; the ftate, when the forefaid fymproms increaleno more, but each of them, be- ing ot anim- 


cuufe at their height, remaine in their ftate immoveable, ualefie the very matter of "The encreate, 


thetumor degenerate, and change it felfeinto another kinde of humor; The decli- The Stats, 
nation, when the {welling, paine, feaver, reftlefneffe are leffened. And from hence 7 
the Chirurgion may prefage what the end of thetumor may be; for tumorsare 
commonly terminated foure manner of wayes, if fobethatthe motion of the hu- 
morscaufing them be not intercepted, or they without fome manifelt caufe, doe 

flow backe into the body, 

Therefore firft they are terminated by infenfible tranfpiration, or refolution; fe- 
condly, by {uppuration when the matter is digefted and ripened ; thirdly, by indu- 
ration when it degenerates into a Scyrrhus, the thinner part of the humor being dif- 
folved;the fourth, which is the worft of all,by a corruption and Gangrene of the parr, 
which is, when overcome withthe violence, or the abundance or quality of the hu. 
mor, orboth, it comes to that diftemper, that it loofes its proper action. 

itis beft ro terminate a tumor by refolution ; and the worft by corruption; fuppu- 
ration and induration are betweene both, although that is far better than this, The 7 
ugnes by which the Chirurgions may prefage that anImpoftume may be terminated _ 
by refolving, are the remiffion, or flacking of the {welling, paine, pulfation, tenfion, , pace a 
heat,and all other accidents and the unaccuftomed livelineffe and itching of the parr; ones 
and hot Impoftumes are commonly thus terminated, becaufe the hot humor isea- 7“ — 
lily refolved, by reafon ofits fubtilty. 

Signes of {uppuration are the intenfion or encreafe of paine, heat, fwelling, pul- of 
lation, and the feaver ; for according to Hippocrates, paine and the feaver ate gtea fappuration, 
‘erwhen the matter is fuppurating, chen whan it is {uppurated. : 

The Chirurgion mutt be very attentive to know and obferve when fuppuration is 
made ; for the purulent matter oft times lies hid ( as Hippocrates {aith) by reafon of 
the thicknefle of the part lying above, Or over it. | | 

Thefignes ofan Impoftume degenerating into a Scyrrhus hardnefle,are the dimi- The tenes - 
Auton of the tumor,and hardnefle remaining in the part. The caufes of the hardnefle a eumor ter. 
going away with the {welling, are the weakenelle of nature, the grofneffe and 
‘Oughneffe ofthe humor, and unskilfulneffe of the Chirurgion, who by too long u- 

8 tefolving things hath occafioned, that the more fubtile part of the humor being 


lolved, the reft of the groffer nature like earthy dreggs remaines concrete inthe 
| par. 


in.7; Of Lumors aganjt ature 51 
> 4) 
are 
4 
4 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
a 
4 


Of Tumors avainft N ature. 


gion may occafion a Scyrrhous hardneffe by another meanes,as by condenf{ating the 
skinne, and incraffating the humors by too much ufe ofrepercuffives. But you th», 
The fenes of perceive an | mpoftume to degenerate into a Gangrene thus if the accidents of hear 
aGangrene at rednefic, pulfation and tenfion fhall be more inten{e, than they are wont to be in (yy, 
— puration; if che paine prefently ceafe without any manifeft caule, if the part waxe): 
vide or blacke;and laftly, ifitftinke. | 
But we thall treate of this more at large when we come to treate of the Gangrep, 
Of difappes- and Sphacelus. A {odaine diminution of the tumor, and that without manifeft caufe, 
matals a 168 fizne of the matter fallenbacke, and turned into the body againe, which may 
Ggnes thereof. OCCafioned by the immoderate ufe of refrigerating thinge. And fometiine 
much flatwlencie mixed with the matter, although there be no fault in thofe things 
which were applied. 
Feavers and many other maligne Symptomes, as fwoundings and convul ion, by 
tran{lation of the matter tothe noble parts, follow this flowing backe of the humo; 
into the body. 


Crap, ILII. 


Of the Prognofticks in Impoftumes. 


Vmorsariling froma melancholy, phlegmaticke,groffe, tough, or vifcoy; 


require a lon- re 
ger cure, 


choler, Andthey are more difhcultly cured which are of humors no 

L725} narurall, than thofe which are of humors yet contained in the bounds o 
nature. 

Tamorsmade For thofe humors which are rebellious, offend rather iu qualitie, than in quantitic, 


ofmatternot and undergoe the divers formes of things diffenting from nature, which are joyned 


naturall,are 


more difiicule: UY NO fimilitude or affnitie with things naturall, as fuer, poultis, hony, the dregs oi 


ly cured, oile, and wine ; yea, and of folid bodies, as ftone, fand, coale, {trawes, and {ome. 


times Of living things, as WWormes, Serpents, and the like montfters. 

The tumors which poffeffe the inner parts,and noble entrailes,are more dang crow: 
and deadly, as alfo thofe which are in thejoints, or neere to them. And thefe tumors 
which feaze upon great veflels,as veines, arteries, and nerves, for feare of great cfu: 


{ion of bloud, wafting of the {piritsand convulfion. Soimpoftumes of a monstrous : 


bigneffe are often deadly , by reafon of the great refolution of the {pirits caufed by 
their opening: Thofe which degenerate into a Scyrrbws are of long continuance ad 
hard tocure, as alfo thofe which are in hydropicke, leprous, {cabby and corrupt bo- 
dies, for they often turne into maligne and ill conditioned vulcers, 


Hsppo. Aph 8. 
fed.o, 


Of the gencrall cure of Tumors azainf? Nature. 


undertaking 
the effence, that is,from the greatnefle or {mallneffe of the tumor, varies the mano! 
of curing, for the medicines muft be increafed or diminifhed according to the grea: 

nefle ofthetumor. ‘The fecond, taken from the nature of the humor alfo chang* 
our counfell, for a Phiéegmenw muft be otherwife cured than‘an Eryfypelas and 2 
Oedema than a Seyrrhus,anda fimple tumor, otherwife thana compound. And alfo 
you muft cureafter another manner a tumor comming of 2n humor not naturall, 
thapthat which isofa naturall humor, and otherwife that which is made by ©o" 
gettio, 


Here be threethings to be obferved in cure of impoftumes, The firft is the 
What muft be 
confidered in 


part. For fo potters veffels dried in the Sunnegrow hard, But the unskilfull Ch itur. 


efitnce thereot;the fecond the quality of the humor caufing the impoftums; 
the third che temper of the part affected. The firft indication drawne {10 | 


humor, aske a longer time for their cure,than thofe which are of bloud or 


. 

; 

1Be 


Seltion, that w 


the part in which ti 
cemperature ,confo 

The temperature 
as thofe which are 
apply fome things t¢ 

cts which by reafc 

rts which by their 

But we have 
with the great veflel: 
{uppurated. 

Galen by the nam 
manifold imdicatior 
and Liver; forthei: 
rerjes, and veines. 

Others truly are 
them,as the Stomac 
membranes, nerves. 
medicines. Having c 
by thefe chree follow 
which is ready to fi 
the correction of ac 
urgent and of the cau 
dent matter, ftrong o 
ting fixe conditions o 
thefecond, if it bea 
parts : the fourth, if ¢! 
cet lies farre in, thati 
it lics inthe Gandule 
ging; and Phicboton 
mors arcamended b¥ 
on a defluxion, it mu! 

If the part be infer 
receiving,as much as 
we muft aflwage it by 
mor caufe defluxion§ 
matter conteined in t 
rclolving things, as @ 
Cvacuation, as by {car 
Impoftume. Lafty, 
they muft be mitiga 
fhall fhew more at . 


Ofthe foure 


‘He princip 
Fate arc fos 
Others maj 
tO the vari 


Ore Phycethlum, Phy 


laftl y all forts ofhot 
cating 


J 
* 
4 
4 
4 
| 
* 
4 | 


L IB, 7: 
full 
denfating the 
But you May 
i¢nts Of hea; 
to be in fup. 
Dart waxe ji. 


he Gangrene 
anifeft Caufe 
vhich may ‘+ 
fometimes 
thofe thing; 


nvul lion, by 
of the humor 


Or vifcous 
Of bloud or, 
humors not 
mc bounds of 


in quantitic, 
b are joyned 
the dregs of 
fome- 


e dangerous 
befe tumors 
of great effu- 
montirous 

s caufed by 

inuance and 

corrupt bo- 


iS the 
mpoftums; 
awne from 
che manner 
o the great- 
lfochang°s 
elas and an 
4. And alfo 
t natural’, 
nde by con- 
geftion, 


seltion, ehan that which is made by defluxion. The third Indication istaken fro 


— 


m 

the part in which the tumor refides; bythe nature of the part wee underftand its anderand by 

remperature conformation, fite, facuity, and function, : the nazure of 


The temperature indicates that fome medicines are convenient forthe ficfhy parts, 


as thofe which are more moift; others for the nervous, as more drie; for youmutt 
apply fome things to the eyes and others to the throate; one, fort of things to thefe 
which by reafon of their raritie are calily fubject co defluxion, another te thofe 
arts which by their denfity are not obnoxious to it. 
But we mult have good regard to the fite of the part, as if it have any connexion 
with thegreat veffels, and if it be fit topowre forth the matter and humor whenit is 
{uppurated. 
Galen by the name of faculty nnderftands the ufe and fenfe of the part, This hath a What ve mutt 
manifold indication incuring ; for fome parts are principal, asthe Braine, Heart, of 
and Liuer ; fortheir vertue is communicated tothe whole body, by the nerves, ar- the per: 
rerjes, and veines. 
Others truly are not principall, but yet fo neceflary that none can live withour 
them,as the Stomacke, Some are endued with a molt quicke fence,as the eyc, the 
membranes, nerves, and tendons ; wherefore they cannor endure acrid and biting 
medicines. Having called to minde thefe indications, the indication will be perfeGted war ws mut 
by thefethree following intentions, as if weconfiderthe humor flowing downe, or centiderin 
which is ready to flow ; the conjuné matter, that is, the humor impact inthe part; Pfeere”® 
the correGtion of accidents ; yet fo that we alwayes have care of that which is moft 
urgentand of the caufe. Therefore firft repercuflives muft be applied for the antece- 
dent matter, ftrong or weake, having regardto the tumor as it is then, onely excep- 
ting fixe conditions of Tumors ; the firftis, if the mattcrofthe Tumorbevenenate: . 
thefecond, if it bea critical! ab{ceffe: thethird, ifthe defluxionbe neare the noble diawadcus 
parts :the fourth, if the matter be groffe,tough, and vifcide: the fifth, when the mat— from fing res 
rer lies farre in, thatis, Howes by the veines which lies more deepe : the fixth, when 
itlics inthe Gandules. But if the whole body be plethoricke, a convenient diet, pur- 
gine-and Phlebotomie muft be appointed, frictionsand bathes muft be ufed. Ill hu- 
mors areamended by dict and purging.If the weakenefie of the part receiving draw 
on adefluxion, it muft be ftrengthened. 
If the part be inferiour inits fite, let the patient be fo leated, or layed,thae the pare 
receiving,as much as may be, may be the higher. Ifpaine be the caufe of defluxion, 
we muft aflwage it by things mitigating it. Ifthe thinneffe, or lightnefle of the hu- 
mor caufe defluxion, it muft be infpifface by meats and medicines. Burfor the 
matter contcined in the part, becault it is againft mature, it requires to be evacuate by 
rclolving things, as Catapla{mes, ointments, fomentations, cupping glatles; or by 
evacuation, as by {carifying, or by fuppurating things,as by ripening and opening the 
impoftume. Lafty, forthe conjun& accidents, as the Feaver,paine and tuch like, 
they muft be mitigated by aflwaging,mollifying and malaxing medicines, as [ 


fhall fhew more at large hereatter. 


Crap. VI: 


Ofthe foure principall and genevall Tamors, aud of other Impoftumes 
which may be reduced tothem, 


He principall and cheife Tumors which the abundanee of humors genes 
| T rate are foure,A Phleemon, Eryfipelas, Ocdemaand Sey rrbus : innumerable | 
was, others may be reduced to thefe,diftinguifhed by divers names according Whattumie: 


AS may be recus 


to the various condition of theefficient caufe and parts receiving. WC 


of 
* 


fore Phygethlum, Phyma,Fclion, Carbuncle,inflammation of the eyes,Squincy, Babe, mon, 
laftly all forts ofhot and moift rumors may be reduced to a Phlegmon. The Herpes which to as 


wiltaris the cating Herpes, Ringwormes and Tctters and all impoftames 


F 
q 
| 
q * 
i 
Re a 
4 * 
* 2. 
= 
# 
J 
i 
q 


254. 


Which to an 
Oidend. 


Which toa 
Soprrbss, 


Whatatme 
Phlegmon its 


A Phiegmon, 
one thing, and 
a Phiegmo- 
nous tumor 
smother. 


Tumors againft Nature in General. L 15,4, 


mon. 


C Hap. VII. 


Of 4 Phlegmon, 


Phlegmon is 2 generallname forall Impoftumes, which the abundance of 
inflamed bloud produces, That is called a true Phlegmon,which is mace of 
laudable bloud, cffending enely in quantity. But a baitard Phlegmon, or, 
Phlepmonous [mpoftume hath fome other, and proper name; as a Carbuncle, Fe}. 
lon, Gangrene, Sphacel,and the like maligne Puftules. So whenehere is a conflux: 
of diverfe humors into one tumor, divers kinds of phlegmonous Impoftumes called | 
by diverfe names, according to the more abundant humor, arife ; as if a fmall por. | 
tion of phlegme fhall be mixed with agreater quantity of bloud, it fhall be calleday 


Oedematons Phlegmon ; but ifonthecontrary,the quantity of phlegme be the greater, | 


it shall be named a phlegmonous Ofdema , and fo of the reft; alwayes naming the ty. 


mor, from that which is moft predominant in it, 


Therefore we muft ob{ervethatall differences of fuch tumors arife from thar, ci. 


ther becanfethe bioud caufing it offends onely in quantity ; whichif it doe, it caus 
that tumor which isproperly calleda Phlegmon, if in quality, it makes a Phlegmo. 


nous tumor, becaufe the matter thereof is much departed from the goodnefié o} 


bloud. 


But bloud is faid to offend in quantity,either by admixture of fome other matter, | 
as Phlegme, Choler, or melancholy, from whence proceedes Ofdermatous, Ery/ipeliw | 
and Scyrrheus Phlegmons ; or. by corruption of its proper fubftance from whence | 


Carbuncles, and all kindes of Gangrens ; or by concretion, and when nature js di 


appointed of its atrempted and hoped for fuppuration, either by default of the aire, | 
or patient, or by theciror of the phyfition ; and hence ofttimes happen Atherome's, | 
Steatoma’s , and Melicerides, Although thefe things be fet downe by the ancients, 0! | 


the fimple and fimular snatter of the true Phlegmon;yet you muft know,that in truth | 
there is no impoftume, whofe matter exquifitely fhewes the nature of one, and that | 
{imple humor without all admixture of any other matter; forall humors are mixcd | 


together withthe bloud, yct fromthe plenty of bloud prodominating , they are cal 
led Sanguine, as if they were of bloud alone. 

Wherefore itany Tumors refemble the nature of one fimple humor, trucly «lity 
arenot ofany natural! humor, but from fome humor which is corrupe , vitiate! 


. and offending in quality ;, for fo bloud by aduftion degenerates into choler 204 


Gal lit.de tu- 
moribus, @& 3. 
aa G 


Hippoc, lsh. 
de : 


cap.Gal. libde 
bummer .prater 


BAL 


melancholy. 
Therefore a true Phlegmon is defined by Galex ; A tumor againft nature, of lauds 
ble bloud flowing into any part in too great a quantity. 


_ This tumorthough moft commenly it be in the feth, yet fometimes it happem! 
in the bones, as Hippocrates and Galen witnefle. 


A phlegmon is made and gencrated thus,when bloud flowes into any part, in £00 


greata quantity ;firft the greater veines and arteries of the affe@ed part are filled, & 
then the middle, & lafily,the {malleft and capillary ; fo from thofe thus diftended,t0* | 

bloud fweats out of the pores and {mal paflages like dew;and with this the void {pace* | 
which are betweenthe fimular parts are firft fled, &then with the fame bloudall the | 


‘adjacent parts are 
defluxions, by real 
rendons, membrép 
mult neceflarify fo! 
nature; and from he 
the fame time, both 
And there 1s a ma 
canfe the veines, ar 
heated within by 
by the adjacent part 
caufe they are too in 
rpetuall motion 
other inflained part 
Hereunto adde, th 
greater NEece LO 
torethey asoi 
are {wollen and pain 
is defined by Ga/em, 3 
himfelfe; for ot 
tion of theartcrics. 
Wherefore thefc 
worthy to be obfeérv: 
veflels and artcries( 
tion, that is, totheir 
faid arteries, by feaic 
occafion the parts ati 
arteries are in paine. 
Hence they comm 
asitwere the fenfe o: 
fides this pul {ation off 
from the humors w 
and agitation of Vapo 
The caufe of heate 
fully into the partyis 
whence neceffarily 
bloud, by reaionof«! 
of the bloud coatair 
through the skione, 


tecedenit, an: 
MOdcrate la» 

Raying or labouring if 
bloud. The anteeeder' 
ing 'n the veines, Thec 

many part. ar 

The lignes OF 


ndance of blowd is 
Anda little Phiegrig 


PUration sand fometiin 


adjacent 


forth by choler, are contained under an Eryfipelas., Atheromata, Steatomata, Melics. 
rides, the Teffudo, or Talps, Ganglion, Knots, Kings-evill, WWens, watcry RKuptures, 
the (cites and Lewcophlegnsatza may be reduced to an Oedema, as alfo all flatulen 
tumors, which the abundance of corrupt Phlegme produces. : 
ee In the kindred of the Scyrrhws are reckoned a Caneer, Leprofie, Warts, Corns 
a Thymus,2Varix, Adorpbew,dlack and white, and other Impoftumesarifing from 
melancholy humer. | 
Now wee will treate of thefe Tumors in particular beginning with a Phieo. 


| L 18,7; 


M tlice. 


y Ruptures. 
all flatulens 


y arts, Corns 
ifing from a 


th a Phiep. 


bundance of 
b 1s Made of 
or a 
ouncle, Fe}. 
is a confluxe 
umes called 
a {mall por- 
be called an 
the greater, 
ming the tu- 


rom thar, ci- 
o¢, it caufes 


oodnefie of 


ther matter, 
Ery fipelous 
om whence 
ature is dil- 
of the aire, 
Atkeromss, 
ancients, of 
hat in truth 


mic, aod that 


bare mixed 
hey are Cale 


trucly 
vitiated 
choler and 


e, of lauda- 
happens 


art, in C00 
are filled, 
ended,the 
roid {paces 
loud all che 


aPhlegmo- 


adjacent 


— 


adjacent parts are filled, but efpecially ths flefh, as that which is moft fitto receive 
defluxions, by reafon of the {pongious rarity of its fubftance ; but then the nerves, 
cendons ; membrancs, and ligaments, are likewife fuffed full ; whereupon a Tamor 
mult neceflarify follow, by reafon of the repletion which exceeds the bounds of 
nature; and from hence alfo are tenfion and refiftance ; and paine alfo happens at 
the fame time, both by reafon of the renfion and preternaturall heate. 

And there is a manifeft pulfation in the part, {pecially whileft it duppurates, be- 
caufe the veines, arteries, and nerves, are much pained, being they are not onely beating ane 
heated within by the infiuxe of the fervide humor, but prefled without 
by the adjacent parts. Therefore {ceing the paine comes toall the forefaid parts be- 
caufe they aretoo immoderately heated and preffed, the arteries which are inthe ’ 
perpetual motion of their Sy/tole whileft they are dilated, {trike upon thie 
other inflamed parts, whereupon proceeds that beating paine. 

Hereuntoadde, the Arteries then filled with more copious and hot bloud, have 
ercater neede to {ecke refrigerationby drawing in the encompaffing Aire ; where- 
torethey mutt, as of neceflitie, have a confli& with the neighbouring parts which 
are {wollenand pained. Therefore from hence is that pulfationin a Phlegmon which 
isdefined by Ga/ew, an agitation of the arteries, paincfull, and fenfible to rhe Patient 
himfelfe; for otherwife as long as we are in health, we doe not perceive the pulfa- 
tion of the arteries. 

Wherefore thefe two caufes of pulfation, or a pulfificke paine in a phlegmon are 
worthy to be obferved, that is, che heate and aboundance of bloud, contained in the 
veflels and arteries( which more frequently than their wont incite the arteries co moe 
tion, that is, totheir Sy/fole and Déa/fele) and the compreffion and fireightning of the 
faid arteries, by reafon of the repletion and diftention of the adjacent parts,by whofe 
occafionthe partsafilitted and beaten by the trembling and frequent pulfation of 
arteries are im paine. | 3 

Hence they commonly fay, that in the part afiected with a Phlegmon, they feele . 
asitwere the fenfe or ftroke of a Mallet or Hammer fmiting upon it. But alfo bes 
fides this pulfation of the arteries, there is, as it were another pulfation with itching of Puldtion — 
from the humors whilft they putrefie and fuppurate, by thepermixtion, motion, “#P>*87°™ 
and agitation of vapours thereupon 2riling. 

The caufe of heate ina Phlegmonis bloud, which whileft it flowes more plenti- 
fully into the part, is as it were troden or thruft downe, and caufes obftru@ion, from 
Whence neceffarily followes alprohibition of tranfpiration, and a putrifaGion of the 
bloud, by reafon of the preternaturall heate, But the Phlegmon lookes red by reafon 
of the bloud contained in it, becaufe the humor predominant in the part fhines 
through the skiane, 


Comm. ad 


: 


Crap. VIIL 


Of the causes and fignes of a Phlegmon. 


caufes of a Plegmon are of three kindes; for fome ate primitive, fOMEAN- caufes of a 
tecedent,and fome conjun&« Primitive are falls, contufions, ftratnes, 1m- Piegmen. 
Sem, Moderate labour, frictions, application of acrid ointments, burnings, long 

Raying or labouring in the hot Sun, a diet unconfiderate, and which breeds much The Antece- 
bloud. The antecedent caufes are, the greatabundance of bloud, too plentifully fiow- 
N61 the veines. The conjun@, the collection or gathering together of bloud impact The figne: of 


inany Part, a Phiegmcn, 


The fignes of a Pleamon are {welling, tenfion, refiftance, feaverith heate, paine, 
ulation, (efpecially while itfuppurates) rednefle , and others, by which the a- 
ndanee of bloud is fignified. 
Anda little Phlegmon is often terminated by refolution ; but a great one by fup- 


sand fometimes it ends in a Scyrrhus, or a Tumior likea Scyrrhus; but 


Z 2 otherwhile 


Of Tumors agatnft ature in Generall. | 355. 


* 
‘on 
4 . 
| 
| 
| 
| | | 
| 
a 

q ‘ é j 


lie 


apainft ature in General. 


otherwhiles ina Gangren, that is, when the facultie, and native ftrength of rh, 
part affeGted, is overwhelmed by the greatneffe of the defixion, as itis reported hy 
Gel. Tom, Galen, The Chirurgion ought to confider all thefe things, that he may apply and ya, 
fixch medicines as are convenient for the nature of the Patient, and for thetime ang 


condition of the partafieceds 


— 


CHAP. I X. 


Of the cure of a true Phlegmon. 


Whatkinde 


He Chirurgion in the cure ofatrue Phlegmon muft propefe to himfelf. | 


~ 


chem and rm. 


ufe this liatmacat, 
mph. 
fiat linimcntar 
ro it, 2S 1n like mar 
alfo Popaleon may 
ing downe, and of 
Therefore repercu™ 
fothat theymay ca 

por ip to, Con 
Abfinth 
liquide. Another, 


pre(cribed ina foureintentions. The firft of Dict; This, becaufe the Plegmon is a jn Agua COMM NI, 
and caufesa feaver,muft be ordained of refrigerative and hume@ing anferis 
7 BIBI things, with the convenient afe of the fixe thingsnot naturall, chat is, aire Bur in the fiate t 
meat, and drinke , motion and reft, fleepe and waking, repletion, and inanition | or mitigating med 
and laftly, the paffions of the minde. Therefore let him make choife of that aire | m.ij, coguantur fab ¢ 
which is pure andcleere, not too moift,for feare of defiuxion, but fomewhat coole. metiloti an, ok 
let him command meates which are moderately coole and moift, fhunning fucha R, mice pais triit 
enerate bloud roo plentifully ; fuch will be brothes not to fat, feafoned with a little | olei aneth. ¢x mellis' 
orage, Lettuce, Sorrell, and Succory, lethimbe forbidden the ufe of all {pices, | atisliquida: whic 
and alfo of Garlicke, and Onions, and all things which heate the bloud, as are | | But when the vi 
fatry and (weet things, as thofe which eafily take fire. Let the Patient drinke {ial _ the plegmon is cof 
wine,and much alaied with water: or if the feaver be vehement, the water of the full and ftrong difér 
decoGtion of Licoris, Barly, and {weet almonds, or water and {ugar ; alwayc; | fubtiler pare of che 
having regard tothe ftrength, age, and cuftome of the Patienr. erow hard, as Fey 
For if he be of that age, or have foled his life, that he cannot want the ufeof wine, | ol, cham, mc 
fet him ufeit, but altogether moderately, Reft mult be commanded ; for all bodies | 471.33), foram chame 
waxe hot by motion,but let him chiefely have a care that hee doe not exercife the | lint dy famucy ec. aB 
part pofieffed by the plegmon for feare of anew defluxion, Let his fleepe be mote. | this plaifter follows 
rate, neither,ifhe have a full body, let him fleepe by day, {pecially prefently ate: | Ri, Diachyl. mag. 
meate. Let him have his belly foluble, ifnotby nature, then by art, as by the fre. them al] together ai 
quent of glifters and fuppofitories. Let him avoid all vehement perturbation an.3ij. Empl. Disc 
of minde, as hate, anger, brawling ; let him wholly abftaine from venery. ! thereof afoft empl 
How todivers vis manner of dict thus preferibed, wee mufi come to the fecond {cope, this, | The fourth feop 


which accom pany 


thedefluxion the diverfion of the defluxion, which is performed by taking away its caufe, that's, | 
Wherefore the 


ofbumors. — the fulneffe and illneffe of the humors. Both which we may amend by purging 2% | 


bloud-letting, if the ftrength and age of the patient permit. | weakens the flrengt 
The paine But if the part receiving be weake, it muft be ftrengthened with thofe things ons by dr awing the 
mutt beafwa~ Which by their aftrition amend the openneffe of the paflages, the violence of the | According to th 
gee. humor being drawne away by cupping glafles, frictions, ligatures. Bur if pain pais albi in latte sop 
trouble the part, which is often the occafion of defluxion, it muft be mitigated by plafs ma. Or R, flors 
medicines allwaging paine. 5). fiat cabaplaf 
The third {cope is to overcome the conjunct caufe, That we may attaine to this, vofar. anmeth, ar 

muft enter into the confideration ofthe tumor, according to its times, that is, fatis molle 
beginning, encreafe, ftate, and declination. For trom hence the indications of vat Bucif the paine re 
Whenwemut Cty of medicines muft be drawne. For in the beginning we ufe repercuffives to driv’ making ufe of nareo 


werepercals away the matter of the Phlegmon flowing downe, as the white ef an Egge, Oxicrat; Pattsas Re, fol. hyofey 
the juices or waters of Houfeleeke,Plantaine,Rofes; Caraplafmes of Henbane, Pom Ob. 
grapate, Pills, Balaufties, Bolearmenicke, Terra figshata, oile of Rofes, Quince, fa , pifler 
Of thefe fimples, variety of compound medicines arifes. This may bethe forms 
of a Cataplafme. Re, far, hordeé Zij. fempervevi, plantage pole 
malicori , balaupiorum rofar. am, Bij ol. mirtill, rofar, an, %j, fiat | 
ma, Another, R, Plantag. folani, byofcyam. anwm.ij. camda equin. tapfi barb. cinsinos | 


an, coquantur perfede iw oxicrato, piltentur, traiiciantar , addends 


veris cupre/sh vef.rub. 4%, farin, fab, 33), ole 5” 
mix? | 


4 
| 
| 
| 


I Be Je 
4 


fothat theymay carry the chicfe {way as abfinth.plintag. an. m.iijcoguan- What toca 
Meaicines Wwe 


Abfinth an, 3i, ol, rofar. chamam 3}, fiat cataplafwa od pultis fatis eacreaie. 


liquide. Another. Ry, farina bord, 3iij. farine fom. lini fenugraci,an. coquantur 


fe to himfelfe 
is 2 hor 


nd hume@i anferis olet rofaram an.%), mifce, fiat cataplafma. 
1, that is, aire, Bur in the {tate the repercuflives ,& difcuffives oughe to be alik: with fome anodine, Whatin the 
nd inanition ; or mitigating m2dicines, ifit be paincfull, as, vad. Althee malve, parietar.an, 
jfe of that aire mij, coguantur fab cimeribus,aadendo farin. fabarum & lentinm an pulveris chamam. 


ewhat coole- 


unning fuchas R, mice tritices aqua calida macerati Ib, pulveris rofarrub, abfinth.ana. 
edwithalitle olei aneth. mellis com. an. mifee omnia firiul cy fat catapls(ma ad formam pultis 
all f{pices, fatisiiquide; whichisot chiefe ufe when there is paine. 
ud, as areal] But when the violence of paine and other fymptomes are aflwaged, itis likely that yy 
tdrinkefmall the plegmoniscome todetermination. Wherefore we ufe more power- declinations 
ewaterofthe  fulland {trong difcuffives, and onely then beginning withthe more gentle, Icfthe 
gar ; alwayes fubtiler part of the humor being diffolved, the grofler, remaining in the part, thould 
crow hard, as wal. addendo farina hordes ,melis com. 3), 
eufeofwine, cy melslot.an 3h, frat cataplafa, OrR, radicuim Brion. Cucumer, agreft; 
for all bodies floram chamam.¢ meliot.ana,m jij. coquantur in hydromelite addende farinafem, 
t exercife the lini ¢y fanugraec. an, 2ij,0l.ancth, axangia Anfer. Anat, an. 3}. fiat Cataplifma. And 
sepebe mode. this plaifter following may here finde place. 
prefently ater Ry, Diachyl. mag. Empl, de melilot. 3), aneth, chamamelan, 58: diflolve 
as by the fre- them ail together and makca medicine for your ufe. Or ,Empi.de ch oxyere. 
perturbations ff Empl, Diachyl. Irest. =}, ole Kliorum chamemel, quantum fatis eff, and make 
ry. thereofafoft cmplaifter. | 
[cope, thats, § The fourth {cope of curing a Phiegmon confifts in correction ofthe accidents The confi. 
caufe, thatis, which accompany it 3 of which paine is the principal}. dents, 
purging and Wherefore the Chirurgion moft be diligent to affwage it, for befides, that it 
weakens the firength,and debilitates and depraves the fun it alfo caules defluxi- 
thofe things ons by drawing the blond and fpirits to the pare affected. | 
slence of the & According to the varierie of paine there muft be varicty of medicines, as 8,94 The aitzom- 
But if paine panis albi in lade tepido macerati ot, vofAar. 51}, eroct DS, frat cata- of 
mitigated by plafma. Or R, florum chamem, melil. an, p, faring fem lini. fenugrac, 68. syedicines 
| cabaptaf ma pultis fatis liquide. Ox mucagin, rad, althea oy fanugract An, 
th aneth, an, =}, farin. fem. lint, quantum fatis, at iwde formetur cataplafma 
+ hes of varie i Butif the paine remaine, and yeeld not to thefe remedies, we muft flicto ftronger, 
ivestodrive making ufe of narcoticks, or flupifa@ives,but with care left we benum, or dead the 
Oxicrates Pattsas Ry, fol. byofcyant er papauer. fab. cimertbus cociovum an. 3 (willa, ol. 
bane, 0c Di), frat cabaplafoma: or, Ry, fol. cicuta folans farioft. am. coquantur 
fes, Quinces, Cineribus , piflentur, trayciautnr addendo.unguent, popul, ol. rofar. an 5}, 


tn, fenugrac, quantum fatis crit, wt inde formetur cataplsfina ad formam pultes 
betheforme> 
im siij. ps 
rat Cabaplaf- 
b. cintinoate 


Z.3 Crar 


iB, 7; Of Lumors againjt N ature tn General. 45% 
rength of the qixe tnem and make a cataplaima tothe forme of 2 liquid pultis, Aad you may ti 
iSreportedby this liniment, by dipping linnen clothesin it, andapplying tothe part; Ry, 
apply and Vary 49. rof, folant ‘on planta?.an. 31), Sil}, albumin. OUOr UM ant 
rthetime and linimestam, Allo ung. rofatum ung. Album, camphor, Rafis are good toapply 
asin like manner, Emp. Diacalcitheos diflolved in vinegar, and oile of Rofes, and 
aifo Popaleon May be ufed. Inthe increafe you mufthave care of the humor flow- 7 
a no downe, and of that which already impacted in the part, did formerly fall down, 
herefore repercufiives mult be tempered & mixed with difcuffing medicines, but 
| 
| rk 


erall, 


> H AP. » 
The cure ofan ulcerated Phlegmon, 


it often happens, thac the humor is fo impact in the parr. 

ofa Phiegmon (& [t) a) that it cannot be reprefied , and fo groile 9 that it cannor be 

difcufled, which we may know by the greacnefle of the heat and {we', 

HY ling, by the bitternefle of the pricking paine, the feaver, and pulfation, 
and heavinefle. 

Wherefore laying afideall hope of difevffing, wee muft come to fuppuratives; 
For which purpofe Galen foments the {wollen part with water, or beinp 
Glaw:-Cap7. warme, or with both ot them; and then applies this following cata. 

lafme. 

Ri, farina tric. vel mica panis, Ziiij. ol. com. Siij, aqua com, quantum fafficit, fa; 
Suppurative cataplafma; or R, rad. lilsor.alb. ey althee,an, 311), fol. malve, parictar, & fenecionig 
ana. mj. coguantur in hydromelite, piffentur, trajecis adde farin, fem, 

fwille, ol, liliorwm an, 3%, fiat cataplafma: Or R, malve, bifmalv. violar, an, 

m.j. caricarum ping. pafful. 3i), coquantur 1m 4q. com, tufts, treiectiz, adde 

n.ellis com, uno. bafilicon. cy butyri recent, fist cataplafma, You May pro- 

fitably ufe tor the {ame purpofe Empl. Diachylon magnum, or Bafilicon, Or B, Empl, 

Dyachil, mag. 3iij. ung. bafilicon, =i, ol. liliorum Of thefe mixed together make a 


The fignes 


a medicine for the forefaid ufe. : 


When the heat, paine, feaver, and other accidents fhall remit,‘ when the tu. 
mor hath a fharpe head , when by the preffing of your finger you finde the 
humor to flow asit were toand fro, then you may know that it isripe. 


The figne: of 
pws OF matter. 


Wherefore without any further delay the rumor muft be opened, left the matter 
too long fhut up, corrode the adjacent parts, and the ulcer become finuous and fiftu. 
lous. 

For this ufually happens,efpecially then, when the matter is venenate or maligne, 
or when the {welling is nearea joint, or at the fundament, or fuch like hot and 
moift places. 


Hig Jib. de For by the decree of Hippocrates wee fhould anticipate the maturation of {uch tu- 
mors by opening. 


They may be opened with an incifion knife or caufticke,and that, either a@tvallor - 


potentia!]. For if the patient fhall be hartleffe and lefle confident, forhat he either 
cannot, or willnot endure any inftrument, you muft make way for the matter by 3 
potential! cautery. You may alfo doe the bufineffe by another flighr, as thus. 
Thruft the point of a fharpe knife or lancet, throughabrafle counter that it may | 
fiand faft inthe mid{t thereof ; then cover it diligently with fome Emplaifter or 
Cataplafme, that neither the Patient nor ftanders by perceive the deceit : then lay- 
ing onthe plaifter as that you would makea paflage for the matter by that meancs, | 
but when you have fitted the point to the part, where itis fitto openthe tumor, !0 | 


eguidethe Counter with your fingers, that you may prefently make animprefiion | | 


into the Tumor, fufficient for excluding the ‘matter. I have here exprel 
fed three deliniations of fuch Inftruments, that you may ufe thefe, either bigg*t, 
leffer or indifferent, as occafion fhall ferve. 


Counters with the points of Knives or Lances put 
B through them, 


A. fhewes the Counter or peece of Silver. 
B. fhewes the point of the Lancet. 


Bat there are {fe 
of Impoftumes. Th 
is the {ofter and ye 
head, or point. Thi 
1s the loweft, that! 
inthe paflage. 
skin,and the right fi 
that you turac yout 
fifth is, thatthe ma 
in great Abiccfles, 
tted together with 
handled as gently ; 
ter is evacuated, th 
and cicatrized.But 
mor remaincs, all t 
May perceive that tl 
‘ure thereof muf 
ulcer cannot be heal 
puratives formerly 
Or three dayes with 
Re Pitellam oniw 
YOu mutt feeke to ck 


| f 
4 
| 
= 
<= 
\ Mz > 
| 
tt | \\\ \ 
rh 
| | 


Lin.7. 


Other Inflruments for opening 


o the Part, 
if cannot be 
beat and {we'. Rengsin which litle knives lye bid, 


id fulfation, fit for to open Abfcejes, 


fuppuratives, 


r oile being The Delzwiation of « Trunke or 
cata. Inftrument going 
[pring 
fectt, 
& fenecioni A. Shewes the thicker pipe. 


lint 
violar, an, 
adde 
‘Ou may Dro- 
Or Empl, 
ther make a 


B. Shewes another which en- 
ters andis faftenedin the o 
ther bv a fcrue. 

C. The point of the Infrrument, 

looking out. 

D. The {pring which forces the 
Inftrument, 


ers 


/ 


—_ 
* 3 


then the tu. 
@u finde the 

‘{t the matter 

ous and fiftu- 


or maligne, 
like hot and 


n ot {uch tu- 


ier aCtwall or 
moat he either 
=mMatter by 
5 thus. 

thatit may 
mplaifter or 
ic : then lay- 
hat meanes, 
he tumor, {o 


Bat there are feven things which muft be diligently confidered in opening a}l forts 
ot Impoftumes. The firtt is,that you put your knife to tha part of the Abicefle which 
isthe {ofter,and yeeldsto the impreffion of your fingers, and where it rifesinto a 
head, or point. The fecond is that you make choife of that place for difle&ion which 
is the loweft, that fo the conteined impurity may the more readily flow out, and not 
tay inthe paflage. Thethird is, that it be made according to the wrincles of the 


ae pa rol skin,and the right fibers of the Mufcles lying next under che skin, The fourth is, 
we bige ra that you turae your knife from the larger veffels and Nerves worth {peaking of. The 


fitth is, thatthe matter conteined in them be not evacuated 00 abundantly at once | 
in great Abfceffes, left thereby the ftrength be dejected, the {pirits being much wa- 
ttedtogether with the unprofitable humor. The fixth is, that the affected part be 
handled as sentlyas youcan. The feventh is,that after the opening when the mats 
ter is evacuated, the Ab{ceffe be clenfed, filled with fleth, and laftly confolidated — ae 
and cicatrized.But feeing that commonly after fuch fections fome part of the Tu~ putt be aiter 
mor remaines, all the conteincd humor being not wholy fuppurated,the Chiurgion 
May perceivethat this is an implicite affect, thatisa,Tumor and Vicer. But the 

. | Cure thereof muft be fo, that you take away the Tumor before the ulcer; for che 

Uicer cannot be healed before the part be reftored to its nature. Therefore the lup- 
Puratives formerly prefcribed muft be ufed, andthe ulcer muft be drefled for two 
or three dayes with this following Medicine. | Deterfive 
Vitellum eviterebinth Wencta, ol. Rofar.an, 3%, fiat medicaments. Then medicines, 


youmutt feeke to clenfe irby this following Medicine. 


— 
q 
4 
om - 
* 
= : 
| 
= i 
4 ~ 
= 
>» 
> 
r=. 
‘ 
= 
4 
q 
* 
4 


Of Tumors again(t Nature in General Li 


The Beavet of 
a Phlegmen. 
What a Feaver 


What an) 
Epbemera,ot 


Diaryc us, 


The cau(es 
ghercof, 


6.4. 


The Genesofa 
Diaric. 


Why ina Dia- 
rye the vrines 
like to ithefe in 
health, 


Re Mellis ro Syrupi rofar.c tereb. Venet.an.5)h, far hordes fiat medicamen. 
tum adulam. Forthis very purpofe there isa fingular Deterfive made of Appiarm oy 
Smallage of which this is the defcription. 

Succi plantag. beton, an. 3), Mellis commun, terebint. Venet. Siig, farin, 
Hor dei & Orobian. ij, pulveris Aloes, rad. lreos florent. myrrbe, 4n 3}. Coguatur me! 
cums fuccis,guibus confumptis addantur farina cr pulveres, mifccantur omnia ad for. 
mam ancuent?-But if you wouldclenfe it sore powerfully, youmay ule Vagaentum 
Apoftelorum; ox Vngucnium Auream and «yptiacum mixed according, to the fcope you 
conceive in your minds, when the ulcer fhallfeeme fufficiently clenfed, it fhal] be fi). 
led with ficfh and cicatrized after the manner we fhall declare in the proper treati{e 
of the cure of Vicers. j 


CuaP, X I, 


O/ feavers, and the cures of thefe feavers which 
accompany Plegmons, 


Mongft the Symptoms which moft ufually accompany Phiegmons, & affiid 

all the body of the patient, Feavers are the cheife;that is hot,and dry diftem. 
PSS perskindled in che heart,and thence by the Artery is fent over all the body. 
yet thefe which ufually followthis kinde of Tumors are Epbemere that is, Diary, un. 
putrid Sy#ochz or putrid Sy#0chz,Of whofe nature and order of cure I will here briefly 
relate what I have learnt from my Matters, that is, DoGors of Phyficke, as I have 
beene converfant with them in‘the practifeof my Arte. 

The Ephemera, or Diary [ thatisofone day ] is,a hete and dry diftemperature 
kindled in the vitall {pirits, It hath chat name, becanfe by its owme nature it tarryes 
notabove the {pace of one day or twenty foure houres, by reafon it is kindled in 2 
{ubtie ealily diffipable matter, 

The efficient caufes of this Feaver are wearineffe, hunger drunkennefle anger, fury, 
forrow, watching, great and peircing cold, Aduftion, Bathes, and manner of living 
inclining more to heat than ordinary, applying, ufing or drinking of acride medi- 
cines as Poyfons, or of hot meats, and drinkes; toconclude,al] the efficient caufes 
common to all Peavers, putrifaction onely excepted which properly appertaines (0 
putride feavers. 

For a Bebo alfo,which isa Polegmaon of the Glandules,caufes a Diary,as Hippocrates 
fhewes, Allfeavers proceeding fromthe Tumors of the Glandules areevill, the 
Diary excepted. Which 4p/orifme caultbe underfood warily and with char diftin Gi: 
on which Gas gives inhis commentary, where he faith ; It is only to be under{tood 
of Tumorsrifenin the Glandales without occafion,that is,without any evident and 
manifeft caufe ; for otherwile Feavers that thence take their originall, though not 
Diary, yet are not allevill, as we learne by Buboes in Children, and the venercous 
Buboes, which happen without inflammation, or corruption of the liver,for {uct 
commonly have no maligne Feaver accompanying them, which thingis worthy 
Chirurgions obfervation, 

The common fignes of a Diary are, a moderate and vaporous heate feeling gentle 
to the hand, a pulfe {wift and frequent, fomctimes great and firong, as when the 
Diary iscaufed by anger; fometimes litle, ifthe Feaver proceede from forrow,hun- 
ger, cold, crudity ; for other refpe&s equall and ordinary. 

The mofi cerraine fignesare, ifthe Feaver come upon one not by litle and litle bu! 
fodainly and that from {ome external] and evident caufe, no loathing of meat,1° 
cau{elefle wearinefle,no deepe fleepe, yawning, great paine, reftle{nefle, fhaking n° 
cold going before, and laftly no other troublefome fymptrome preceeding. Wee he!’ 
make no mention of the urine, becaufe moft frequently they refemble the vrines 
found bodyes; for in fo thort a timeas Diaryesendure, there cannot fo great a pe” 
turbation be raifed in the blood that there may be fignes thereof found in the v1ine 
A Diary is ended inone fit, which by the proper nature of this Feayer laits but 09° 

es 


day, alchough fo 
chen it eafily dege 
or thofe which att 
rightly ficced. 
This Feaver ts 
of the skin, or by 
may referre the u! 
beyond meafure. 
of the blood imm 
appeares hery, th 
habite of the body 
fufionof the vapo 
of Synochus may b 
alfoall fanguine b 
mera or Diary ist 
in any other thine 
fore whatfoever w 
Synechus bloodict: 
Now the Cure 
rall,contrary toth 
water are very pro 
excrements, nor o! 
caufed and augme 
therefore in thisc 
whichthings nortw 
Cially when they h 
ora Bubo. Let chi: 
ceeded, you oppof 
to anger and forro: 
pleafant good will ; 
Wine moderate! 
tient; is good and 
head, or that the F; 
cafe efpecially, th 
comerto the ftare, 
fants andthen 
ficke, thar fo by his 
Rood to pur the Inf 
fently atrer the bar 
Butifa Phlegmon | 
[cated neare any 
PUtrid matter or cx! 
cernaturall heare by 
if the blood by co: 
mixture of the fou 
acerbations, or ren 
fpace of twenty fou 
or by lithe and litle 
or Agues ; 
*<ommonly haope 
abound 
™ors. It commonly 
PutrifaGion degene 
ther kinde of feaver. 
Che cure of this F 
Uftsin Bloodletting. 
ObftruGion istaken ; 


| 
V 
dc Appit, 
| 
F 
| 
| 
j 


mMedicamen. 
Appin or 


farin. 
coquatur me) 
munis 2a for. 
CV BOUCHE Um 
he {cope you 
t {hall be 4}. 
oper treatife 


ns, & afflig 
| dry diftem- 
ll the body, 
» Diary, un. 
here briefly 
C, as I have 


emperature 
¢ it tarryes 


cindled in a 


anger, fury, 
er of living 
cride medi- 
lent caufes 
ercaines tO 


Hippocrates 
sevill, che 
at diftinGi- 
underftood 
Vident and 
hough not 
venereous 
er,for fuclt 
s worthya 


‘ling centile 
1s when the 
Drrow,hun- 


nd litle but 
»f meat, no 
aking not 
Wee here. 
evrines Oo! 
reat a pete 
ithe vrine: 
fis but one 


days 


| Be Of Tumor 5 azainft Nature in G 


day, although fometimes, otherwife it is extended to three, or, foure dayes {pace;and 
chen it eafily degenerates into a Putride,ef pecially any error of the Patient ,Phificion, 
of pee tore attend him concurring therewith, or iftheexternall things bee nog 
es Feaver is terminated cither by infenfible tran{piration, or by the moifture 
of the skin, or by a {weare naturall, gentle, and not ill {mielling ; cothis Diary wee 
may referrethe unputride Symochws,generated of blood not putrid, butonely heated?” 
beyond meafure. For ufually there arifesagreatheate over all the body, by meanes 
of the blood immoderatly heated ; whence the veines become more tumide,the face 
appeares hery, the Eyes redand burning, the breath hor; and toconclude,the whole 
habite ofthe body more full,by reafon of that Ebullitionof the blcod,and the dif- 
fufionof the vapours thence arifing over all che body : Whencc it is, that this kinde 
of Synochus may be called; a vapourous Feaver. Tothis Children are incident as 
alfo all fanguine bodyes, which haveno i!l humors. Thecure ofthis and the Epbe- 
mera ot Diary isthe fame, becaufe it may {carfe feeme different from the Ephemera 
in any other thing, chanthat ic may be prolonged forthree or foure dayes. Where- 
fore whatfoever we fhall fay for the cure of the Ephemera, may be all applyed to the 
synochus bloodletting excepted ,which in an unputrid Sysochus is very neceffary. : 
Now the Cure of a Diary Feaver confifts in the decent ufe of things not natu. 5re“wrecte. - 
rall.contrary tothe caufe of the difeafe; wherefore bathces of warme and naturall 
water are very profitable ;fothat the Patient be not Plethoricke, nor ftuffe with 
excrements, nor obnoxious tocatatrhes and defluxions, becaufe a catarrhe is eafily 
caufed and augmented by the humors diffufed and diffolved by the heate of 2 bath; 
therefore in this cafe we muft efchew frictions, and annointing ‘with warme gile, 
whichthings notwithftanding are thought very ufefull inthefe kind of Feavers,e{pe- 
cially when they have their originall from extreme labour, by aftriction of the skin 
ora Babo. Letthis bea generall rule, thatto cvery caufe, whence this Feaver pro- 
ceeded, you oppofe the contrary for aremedy; as to labour, reft ;to watching, flecp, 
toanger and forrow, the gratefull fociety of friends,and all things replenifhed with 
pleafant good will; and to a Baba, the proper cure thereof. 
Wine moderately tempered with water according to the cuflome of the fitke pa- Theuteor . 
tient, is good and profitable in all caufesof thisFeaver, except he be pained in his 
head, or that the Feaver drewits originall from anger, ora Babs ; for in this laf 
cafe e{pecially, the patient muft abftaine wholy from winc, untill the inflammation 
cometo the ftate, and beginsto decline, This kinde of Feaver often troubles ia- 
fants; andthen you muft prefcribefuch medicines to their Nurfes,as if they were 
ficke, that fo by this meanes their milke may become medicinable. Alfo it will be 
to pucthe Infant himfelfe into abath of natural! and warme water, and pre- 
tently atter the bath to anoint the ridge of the backe and breft withoilc of Violets. 
Butita Phlegmon poflefle any inward part, or otherwife by its nature be great, of 
Icated neare any principal! Bowell, fo that it may continually fend from it cither a 
putrid matter or exhalation to the heare, and not oncly affeé it by a quality or pres 
‘ernaturall heare by the continuity of the parts thence willarife the Putride Symochas,., 
if the blood by contagion putrifying inthe greater veffells, confifls of on cquall ride syacches 
mixture of thefoure humors. This Feaver is cheifly thus knowne, it hath no ex. sd. 
acerbations, or remiffions, but much lefle intermiffions ; itis extended beyond the 
pace of twenty foure houres, neither doth it then erd in vomite, fweat, moifture, 
orby litkeand title by infenfible tran(piration, after the manner of intermitting 
Feavers, or Agues; but remaines conftanr, untillit leavesthe Patient for alrogether; 
‘tcommonty happens not unlefle ro thefe ofa good temper and complexion, which 
abound with much blood,and that cempered by an equall mixture ofthe foure hu- 
“nors. It commonly endures not long, becaufe the blood by power of fome peculiar 
Puttifaction degenerating into cheler or Melancholy will prefently bring forth ano- 
ther kinde of feaver, to wit a Tertian or continued Quartaine. 
The cure of this Feaver ( as I have heard of moft learned Phyfitions ) cheifly cOn- pijeboromy 
uftsin Bloodletting For by letting of blood the fullneffé is diminifhed, & therfore the a 
istaken away laftly the putrefaétion, And fecing that in this of 
caver 


Me... 
| 
| 
* 
| 
é 
| 
) 
| 
4 * ‘ 
| 


262 


What benekt 
we may reape 
by drawing 
blood even to 
fainting, 


Why we 
give a clyfter 
prefently after 


bloudsletting. 


Feaver there is not onely a fault of the matter, bythe putrefaGion of the blood, 
but of the Temper by excefle of heat; certainely Phlebotomy helps aotonly, 
we faid, the putrefaction, but alfo the hore diftemper. For the blood in which a)] th. 
heate of che creature is conteined, whilefticis taken way,the acrid and filigingy, 
excrements exhale and vanifh away with it, which kept in, encreafed the Feve;;(, 
heate, Morcover, the veines,to fhunemptinefic, which nature abhors, are filleg 
with much cold aire in fiead of the hor blood which was drawne away, which fo). 
lowes 2 cooling of the habite of the whole body ; yea and many by meanes of Phe. 
botomy have their bellyesloofed, and {weate, both which are much to be defired jp 
this kinde of Feaver. | | 

This moved the ancient Phyfitions,to write, that we mult draw blood in this dif, 
eafe, evento the fainting of the Patient. | 

Yet becaufe thus, not afew have poured out their livestogether with their blood, 
it will be better and /afer to divide the evacuations,and draw fo much blood at feye. 
rall times, as the greatnefle of the difeafe thall require,and the ftrength of the Patiene 
may beare. 

When you have drawne blood, forthwith inject an emollient and refrigerative 
clyfter; left that the veines emptied by Phlebotomy may draw into them 
the impurity of the Gurs; but thefe clyfters which coole too much, rather 
bindethe belly, than loofe it. The following day the Morbificke matter mutt be 


partly evacuated by a gentle purge, as a boleof or Catholicos; then mutt you 


Why a fender 
Diet muft be 
ufed afrer Ict- 
tng much 
blood’ 


When drins 
king of water 
is to be per= 
mittedin a 
putride Sy#oz 


thus, 


Thedefinition 
an Ery/ipe~ 


Gal,Cap,2 lid, 
Meth med, 
Glas, 


appoint Syrupes which have notonely a refrigerative qualiry, butalfoto refift pu. 
trefation, {uch as the Syrupe of Lemmons, Berberries, of the Iujce of Citrons, of 
Pomgranats, Sorrell and Vineger ; let his dict be abfolutely cooling and humecting 
and alfo {lender ; forthe native heate much debilitated by drawing of a great quanti. 
ty of blood cannot equall a full diet. Thereforeit fhall fuffice to feed the Patient with 
chicken and veale brothes made with cooling herbes,as Sorrell, Lettuce and Purflaine, 
Let his drinke be Barly water,Syrup of Violets mixed with fome pretry quantity of 
boiled water, Aicxandrinum,e{pecially ifhe be troubled with {couring, or 
laske. Bur the Phyfition muft cheifly have regard to the fourth day ,for ifthen there ap. 
peare any fignes of concoGion inthe excrements,the Créfis mutt be expected on the 
feventh day and that either by aloofenefle of the belly, oran aboundance of urine, 
by vomits, fweats,or bleeding. Therefore we muft then doe nothing, but commit 
the whole bufinefle to nature. | 

But for drinking cold water, which is fomuch commended by Galen in this kinde 
of Feaver,it is notto be fuffered beforethere appeare fignes of concoction ; more- 
over inthe declining of the difeafe the ule of wine will aot be unprofitable to helpe 
forwards {weats. 


— 


Of an Eryfipelas, or 


we pAving declared the cure ofa Phlegmon, caufed by laudable blood, wee 


= 


SS7gSax% betweene Choler and Blood. Therefore the tumors cauffed by naturall 
Choler, arecalled Ery/ipe/ata, or Inflammations;thefe conteine agreat heate in them, 
whichcheifly poffeffes the skin, as alfo oftentimes fome portion of the flefh lying 
under it. For they are madeby moft thin and {ubtle bleod ( which upen any occation 
of inflammation eafily becomes cholericke) or by blood and choler, hotter than ' 
requifit, and fometimes of choler mixed with an acride ferous humor. 

That which is made by fincere and pure choler, is called by Gaéen,a true and 
fect Eryfipe/as. Butthere arife threedifferences of Ery/ipelaes by the admixturc of 
choler with the threeother kinds of humors, For if it’ being predominant 
des; if with phicg™ 


mixed with blood, it fhall be termed Eryfipelas Phlegmone 


Eryfipelas adematodes ;if with Melancholy, Ery/ipelas Seérrbedes, So that the 


the other ulcerate 


| ofthe rarity of the: 


wuft now treate of thefetumors which acknowledge Choler the mareri- | 
all caufe of their generation, by reafonof that affinity which interceeds 


god fubftantive we 
chat which is infe 
will be thereupos 

Galen acknowle 


blood, running by 
ned by che gentle 
of the skin, and m 
many other kinds o 
ly all forts of tum: 
Eryfipelaes cheitiy 
their quicke flidin; 
caufe of which is ¢! 
whereupon by fom 
ber of che Sympto 
than that ofa Phie: 
is not fo great,as 
which may caufe c 

For Choler caf 
doth it fuffer it fe!f 
neither doth an Er; 
For that of an Ery; 
primitive, 
an Eryfipelas may | 


flying upwards, | 
though it may come 
obfiruction by the 
erofion in the parts 
Itisgood when a 
OUt it retires inwar 
like manner if it {pr 
branes of the braine 


ROrche 
tion an 
Sie 
ina Ph 
ing don 
moderatly refolvin 
torementioned end: 
the ufe of the fixe rl 
moiften as much as 
ina Philegmon ; the 
and by medicines pi 
© 2portion of the 
and if it be fpread m 
But if it (hall inv 
tomy will not be 
ing taken away, 
plethoricke, it w 
oft times the caufe 


Rating and humectin; 


| 
* 
P rofitable in 
hi 
this calc. 
} 
| 
| 
: 


Ds 

which 
d fulizinoys 
the Feverjq, 
Ors, are filleg 
which fo}. 
anes of 
oe defir Cdin 


in this dif. 


their blood, 
at feyc. 
Patiene 


efrigerative 
y into them 
puch, rather 
tter mutt be 
en you 
to relift pu- 
Citrons, of 
humecting 
mrcat quanti. 

Patjent with 
d Purflaine, 
quantity of 
couring, or 
enthere ap- 
ced onthe 
¢ of urine, 
mut commit 


this kinde 
ion ; more- 
le to helpe 


blood, wee 
athe mareri- 
interceeds 
by naturall 
ein them, 
ficth lying 
yy occation 

er than is 


e and per- 
nixture of 
ainanet be 
he former 
a 


of the blood, 


Lt B.7- Of Tumors azainft Nature General. 
fubftantive word fhewes the humor bearing dominion, but the latter or adjetive 
chat which is inferieur in mixture, But if they concurre ia equall quantigy, there 
will be thereupoa made Ervfipelas Phlegmone ; Eryfipelas oedema ; Ery/ipelas (cirrbus. 
Galen acknowledges two kinds of Eryftpelaes, one fimple and without an ulcer, Twokindsof 
che other ulcerated. For Cholerdrawne and fevered fromthe watmnefle of the areas 
blood, running by its fubtlery and acrimony vnto the skin, ulcerates it; but reftrai- 
ned bythe gentle heat ofthe blood, asa bridle, it is hindred from peircing to the top 
ofthe skin, and makes atumor without an ulcer. But ofunnaturall choler are caufed 
many other kinds of cholericke tumors, asthe Herpes exedens, and Muliaris, and laft- 
ly all forts Of tumors which come betweene the Herpes and Camcer.You may know 
Eryfipelaes cheifly by three fignes, as by their colour, whichis a yellowi(h red; by 
their quicke fliding backe into the body at the ledft compreflion of the skin (the 
caufe of which is the fubtlety of the humor.and the outward fite of it under the skin, 
whereupon by fome an Ery/ipe/as is called a Difeale of the skin) Laitly by the num- 
ber of che Symptoms,as hear, pulfation, paine. The heat ofan Ery/fipelas is far greater 
than thatofa Phlegmon, but the pulfation is much leffe ,for as the heat of the blood 
is not fo great,as that of choler, fo it farre exceeds choler in quantity and thickneffe, 
which may caufe compreffion and obftruation of the adjacent mufcle. 
For Choler eafily diffipable by reafon of its fubtlety quickly vanilhes, neither 
doth it foffer it felfe to belong conteined in the empty {paces betweene the mutfcles; 
neither doth an Ery/ipe/as agree witha Phlegmon in the propriety of the paine, 
For that of an Eryfipeles is pricking and biting without tenfion,or heavineffe, yet the a 
primitive, antecedent and conjuné caufes are alikcof boththetumers. Alchough Apis, 29 
an Eryfipelas may be incident to all parts,yet principally it affailesthe face,by reafon searsapb. 
of the rarity of the skin of that place, and the lightnefle of the cholericke humor +43 +5*4.2+ 
fiying upwards. Icisill whenan Eryfipelzs comes upona wound, or ulcer, and al. 
though it may come to {uppuration, yet itis not good; for it fhewes thatthere is 
obftruction by the admixture of a grofle humor, whence there is fome danger of 
erofionin the partsnext under theskin. 
Itisgood when an Ery/ipelas comes from within outwards; but ill when from with- 
Out it retiresinward, Butifan Ery/ipelas pofictle the wombeit is deadly, and in 
like manner ifit fpread too far over the face,by rcafon of the fympathy ofthemem- 
branes of the braine. 


Cuarp. XIII, 


Of the cure of an Erylipelas. 


Orthe cure of an Ery/ipe/as we mult procure two things, to wit, evacud- 

tionand Refrigeration. But becaufethere is more need of cooling, than 
ina Phlegmon, the cheefe {cope multbe for refrigeration, Which be- 5). 
SSMS ing donc, the conteined matter mufl be taken away and evacuated with sseshod, 
moderatly refolving medicines. Wemuft doe foure things to attaine unto thefe 
‘orementioned ends, Firftofall we muftappoint a convenient manner of Dict,in .-ryinestobs 
the ufe of the fixe things not naturall; that is,we muft incraflate, refrigerate and performed 
moiften as much asthe nature of the difeafe and patient will fuffer, much more than Eryfpaly 
ina Phiegmon sthen we willevacuate the Antecedent matter, by opening a veine, 
by medicines purging choler.And thatby cutting the Cephalicke veine,if there 


aportion of the blood mixed with Choler,ifthe Ery/pelas poffeffe the face, what 


and if it be fpread much over it. mat to 
But if it (hall invade another part, although it fall proceed of pure choler, Phle- lesbos» 
omy will not be fo neceflary, becaufe the blood which isasa bridle to the choler 
“ing taken away, there may be danger, left it become more fierce ; yet if the body 
Plethoricke, it willbe expedient to let blood, becaufe this, as teacheth, is 


_ Ol times the caufe of an Eryfipelas.Ic will be expedient to give a clyfter of tefrige- 


rating and humedting things before you open a veine ; but it belongs to a pen 
prudent 


a 
@ 
a 
| 
4 
a 


— 


dent Phyfition to prefcribe medicines, purging choler, 
Whattopicke Thethird care mutt be taken for Topick,or locall medicines, which in the beginnip 
and encreafe muft becoldand moift,without any either drynes or aftri@iion, becay(; 
the beginning the more acride matter by ufeof aftringent things being ‘driven in, Would ulcera,, 
ofan fret the adjacent particle. 

Galen and Aviten much commend this kinde of remedy ; Take faire water 2vj, o¢ 
the fharpeft Vinegar 3j,make an Oxycrate,in which you may wet linnen clothes ang 
apply to the afteéted part and the circum jacent places,& renew them often. Or x, Succ; 

fobani, plantag. fempervivi, an. 38, Aucaginis fens. Pfyltj fucet byofcyan; 
3j, Mifce.But ifthe Eryfipedes be upon the face,you muft ufe the medicine follow. 
ing. 

Vucuent. Rof » plantagin. fempervivi, an. 5 je brochife. de Camp borg 
38 acetiparum letthem be mixed together and make a liniment. But if the heate 
and paine be intolerable,we muft come to narcoticke medicines. As, hyofcy. 
ami, folami, cicuta,an.3}. album.ovorums aceti 38, Camphor. 4 cree 
38, Macacinis fem. pfill.cy fenigr. extratte in aq.rof. plantag, , ol, de papau, 
fist linimentum, addendo ung, refrigerantis Gal, camphor q. fats fit. Yet we toutt nor 
ufe fach like medicines too long, left they caufe an extinGion of thenative heats and 
mortification ofthe part. 
wyharcausion . WWherefore fuch Narcoticke medicines muft be ufed with regard of place, 
maltbe hed in time and other circumftances, ‘Therefore we may three manner of way cs un 
the ufe of nar? derftand when to defilt from ufing Narcoticke or ftupefaGtive medicines. The 
om is when the Patient in the affe&ted part feels not fo much heat, pricking and paine, 

as before ; The fecond is when the part feeles more gentle to the touch than before, 
The third when the fiery and paflide colour begins by litle and litle to waxe livid and 
blacke ; forthen muft we abftaine from Narcoticke,and ufe refolving and ftrengthe. 
pens ree ning things, whereby the part may be revived and ftrengthened by recalling 
medicines. the Native heate; As Farina bordei ¢y Orobi,aw.3ij farina (em, lini coquas- 
tur in Hydromelite vel oxycrato, addendo pulv.refarum chamamal, an, ol anetly 
chamam, an. fiat cataplafma. Or you may ule this following fomentation 
Red, Althes %ij, fol.malve, bifinal, pariet. ab finthij, falvia, anm, flor, chamam, mi. 
liloti, rofar.rub.an. 4. coquantur in equis partibus vini aqua,c fiat fotus cam 
fpongia. After the fomentation you may apply an Emplaifter of Déschylon Jreatum, 
or Dispala diffolved in oile of chamomille and Melilote, and fuch other like. 
The fourth Intention whichis of the correction of accidents, we will performe 


by thefe meancs which we mentioned in curing a Phlegmon,by varying the medica: 


m, ments, according to the judgement of him which undertakes the cure. 


Cuap, XIIII. 


of the Herpes ; that is Teaters, or Ringwormes or fach like. 


What a Herpes & 


the kindsthers “x 


Clautonem. 


fubftance, that isnot very thicke, caufe this tumor, then the fimp! 


What theHer Herpes is gencrated, obtcining the name of the Geaws ; but if the humor be not lo 
chin,but compounded with fome fmall mixture of Phlegme, it will raife litle blilters | 
dens, overthe skin like to the feeds of Millet, whence it was that the Ancients called t's 
Tumor the Herpes Méleris.Butifit have any admixture of Melancholy, if will be 29 | 
Herpes exedens,tertible by reafon of the erofion or eating into the skin and mutcles 


lying under it. 


Three intenti- There are abfolutely three intentions of curing ; The firft is to appoiate a Diet jul 
here 8 like that we mentioned inthe cuse of an Eryfipelas ; The fecond is to evacuate th¢ 
antecedent caufe, by medicines purging the peccant humor, for which purpo!¢ 7 


Herpe, 


DP Erpes is atumor caufed by pure choler feparated from the reft of tle | 
humors, thatis carryed by its naturall lightnefleand tenuitye evento! | 
outer or {carfe skin, and is diffufed over the furface thereof. Cs | 
makes three fortsofthis tumor. For if perfe& choler of an indifferest | 


thebody,an hor and: 


mOrming,a great pric 


“Untill the approacho: 
that £e & narureds 
lity swheras in Quotic 
Phlegmatick humor, 
| houres although at fo: 
fits,andhy {ually is nor 
"40n,Patient,or fuch 


times clylters will 
the urine flow aec« 
carryed into thep) 
medicines ordaip 
have regardro 
the ulcer, forever 
the {welling De 
the Tumor, which 
fhall lay this kinde 
4dipis 
£47. Or Ry. Farim, 
balauft. plantag. abe 
uncentur 
Ry. pulv. gallarum,t 
gia anfer.cr ole My 
found molt certa 
puftules, and partly 
neither yeelds, bug. 
edges and lipps 
or fuch like, for by 
which feemed altog 


— 


Of 
S Feaver 
Aves; (avour of 
{ccing it 
have their fit everyt! 
every otherday. 
The Primitive ea 
the ufe ofheating a 
with great labour, 


= 


=\ 


ly:the conjuné caufe 
ty without the greate 
The fignes,a fhakir 


ver all our bodies, by 
& violently over all: 
Cginning of the fit; 
@ Grein dry 
With,ted and thin. Th 
Ctaeffe & toffing rhe! 
ted by great {weats,'l 
ummer; after the fir 
ter the fit there folloy, 


Wherefore the bee 


| 4 
— 
a 
| 
| 
4 2 
3 
| 
3 
| 
= 
4 - 
} 
| 
@ 
Be 
‘ 
4 
4 
a 
i 4 


beginnin 
ion, becaufe 
buld ulcerate 


clothes and 
Re 
cet byofcyam; 
ine follow. 


de Carmpbor 
tif the heate 
[uc hyofcy- 
4 Croc 
de papanu, SI). 
mult nor 
heate and 


d of place, 
f way cs uns 
s. The firft 
paine, 
than before; 
xe livid and 
d ftrengthe. 
recalling 
coquan- 
=f. olaneths 
omentation 
bamam, mt- 
fotus cam 
lon Jreatum, 
ther like. 
| performe 
e mcdica- 


reft of the 
evento the 
of. 
indifferent 
the fimp!e 
be not {0 
itle blifters 
called this 


ater of 


‘mes clyfters will fuffice, e{pecially if the patient be fomewhat eafie by nature, andif 
the urine flow according to your defire; for by this a great part of the humor may be 
catryed into the bladder; The third thall be to take away the conjun& caufe by locall fa 
medicines ordained for the {welling and ulcer; Therefore the Chirurgion fhall 
have regard to twothings, that is, the refolving ofthe rumor,and the drying up of conjoined 

che ulcer, for every ulcer requires drying, which can never be attained unto, unieffe VW?" 
che {welling be taken away. Therefore becaufe the chiefe ft care muft be to take away 

the Tumor, which unlefle it be performed there can be no hope to heale the ulcer,he 

fhall lay this kinde of medicine to diflolve and dry,as Bx. Cerufe cy tuthie prapar. an, 

4aipis eapon.an 51), corsics pins cera quantum Satis, fiat unguens 

ium. Or R. Farin, hordet lentan.3ij, coquanter in decocte cortici# mali granati, 

plantag. addendo palveris rofar.ru>.abfinth. an. 36 olei Atyrtillor. melis coms, 

4n.3Vj,fiat ungentum, ut artisef. Bucforan Herpes Mitaristhefe muft chiefly be ufed, 

Ry. pulv. gallarum, malicory balauft boltarmeni an, acer 

gia anfer.cr terebinth, fiat unguentum ad ufum, 1 have often force of 
found moft certaine helpe in enulatum cum Mercurio, for it kills the com 
puitules, and partly waftsthe humor conteinedinthem. Yet ifthe ulcer, mot yer Sereerit. 
neither yeelds, burevery day diffufes it felfe further and further, you fhalltouch the for x. ftraining 
edges andlipps thereof with fome acride medicine as 4que fortes, oyle of Vitriole, 

or fuch like, for by this kinde ofremedy, Ihave oft times healed fretting ulcers, ulcers, 
which feemed altogether incurcable. 


— 


X V. 
Of Peavers which happen Eryfipelous Tumors. | 


Bay S Feavers fometimes happen upon Ioflammations, and Eryfipelaes,which , 
{favour of the humor whereof they proceed, thatis, Choler. Therefore fcriptronofan 
{ecing itis peculiar to Choler, to move every third day,it is no marvaile 

if great Inflammations bring with them Tertian Feavers,or Agues,which’ 

have their fit every third day ; for itis called an Intermitting Tertian which comes 

every otherday. 

The Primitive caufes in generall are firong exercifes, efpecially inthe hot Sunse, Th entices 
the ufe ofheating, and drying either meats or medicines, great abftinence joyned 
with great labour, care, forrow ; the antecedent caufes are the plenty of choler in 
the body,an hot and dry diftemperature cither of the whole body, or of the liver one- 
ly:the conjunét caufe isthe putrefaction of the Cholericke humor lying in fome plen- 
ty without the greater veifells,in the habit of the body. 

The fignes,a fhaking or fhivering like as when we have made water in a cold winter The lignesof 
morning,a great pricking, {iretching,or ftitfneffe as ifthere were pins thruft into us o- ting Tartan, 
ver all our bodies, by realo of the acrimony of the cholerick humor driven uacertainly 
violently over all the body, & the fenfible membranous & Nervouspatticles atthe 
beginning of the fit; then prefently the heate becomes act ide the Feavcr kindled like 
a Grein dry {traw;the pulfe is preat quicke and equall;the tongue dry;the uriae yello- 
Wifh,cted and thin. The Symptomes are watchings,thirlt talking idlely anger, diiqui- 
ctoefle & toffing the body at the leaft noife or whifpering-Thefe Feavers are cermina- : 
ted by great {weats. They are incident to cholericke young men, fuch as are leane,& in 

ummers after the fit oft times follow cholericke vomiting & yellowifh ftoeles, Af- 
ter the fit there followes an abfolute intermiffion reteining no reliques of the Feaver, 


Why Tertians 


untill the approaeh of the following fit,becaufe all the cholericke matter by the force [eV "hsion 


luce ceflation 


of that £t & nature is eafily caft out of the body, by reafon of its natural levity & facil- ofthe feaver 
lity ;wheras in Quotidians there is no fuch thing,as which after the fit alwaies leave in 
the body a fenfe & feeling ofacertaine inequality by reafon ofthe ftubbornefie of the 


at the end of 
each fit, 


‘egmatick humor,& dulneffe to motion, The fit commonly ules to endure 4,5,0r 6 
cures although at fometime it may be extended to 8 or 10, This Feaver is endedat 7 
‘s,and/ufually isnot dangerous,unleffe there be fome error committed by the Phy- 
Won, Patient,or fuch as attend him. Tertians in fummer are fhorter,in winter longer. 
Wherefore the begianing of the fit isaccompanied with ftiffenefle, or 

A a 


| 
| 
| 
willbe aa | 
nd mufcles 
sa Diet jut | 
acuare 
es 


266 


The Dietof 
fuch as have 
a Tertian. 


The time of 
feeding the 


When to purge 
the patient, 


What kinds of 
evacuations are 
moft iit im a 
Totian, on of Smallageand Dill; Certainely {weare is very laudable in every 


Of Tumors againft Nature in Generalt. 


the ftate with {weate, whereupon ifthe ‘nofe, lips or mouth breake forth into Pimples 
or {cabbes, it is a figne of the end of the Feaver, and of the power of nature Which 
is able to drive the conjunc caufe of the difeafe from the center tothe habire of 


the body ; yer thefe pimples appeare not inthe declining of ail Tertians, but one}, 


then, when the Cholericke humor caufing the Feavcr fhall refide in the fomaci.- 
or is driven thither from fome other part of the frit region of the Liver. For hene, 
the fubrler portion therof carryed by the continuation of the inner coate to the moyr}, 
and nofe,by its acrimony cafily caufes pimples inthefe places. The cure is performe, 
by Diet,and Pharmacy. | 

Therefore let the Diet be fo ordered for the fixe things not natural!, that it May 
incline to refrigeration and humection,as much as the digeftive faculty will perm, 


as Lettuce,Sorrell, Gourds, Cowcumbers, Mallowes, Barly Creames, Wine myc) 


When fuchas alaid with water, thinne,fmall,and that fparingly and not before fignes of conco. 


havea tertian 
may ule wine, 


_Gtion fhall appeare in the urine ; tor at the beginning he may not ufe wine,nor in the 
“declining with thefeconditions, which we have prefcribed. 

Burt for the time of feeding the patient, on that day the fit is expected, 
hee muft eate nothing for three houres before the fit, left the aguith hea 
lighting on fuch meats as yet crudeymay corrupt and putrehe them, whence 
the matter of the Feaver may be increafed ( becaufe it is as proper to thar heat 
to corrupt all things, as tothe native to preferve and vindicate from putre. 
faGion), the fit lengthened,and naturecalled away fromthe conco@ionand excre. 
tion of the Morbificke humor ; yet wee may temper the feverity of this law by ha 
ving regard to the firength of the patient ; tor it will be convenient to feed a weake 


patient not onely before the fir, buralfo inthe fir it felfe but that onely {paring]y. lef 


the firength fhould be too much impaired. 


Now for Pharmacy ;It muft be confidered, whether the ftrength of the Patien 
be fufficient, ifthe humors abound ; for ther you may prefcribe Disprunum fim | 
plex, Cafsia newly extracted, the decoétion of Violets, of Citrine Myrobalanes; 
Syrupes of Violets, Rofes, of Pomegranats and Vineger. But if the powers of 
the Patient languifh,hee muft not oncly not be purged, but alfo muft nor draw f 
blood too plenteoufly, becaufe Cholericke men foone faint, by reafon of the facil: § 
and eafic diffipation ofthe fubrle humors and f{pirits; befides, as are fabjed 
to tertian Feavers doe not commonly abound with blood,unlefle it be wich Chole. | 
ticke blood, which muft rather be renued, or amended by cooling and hume cing 
things, than evacuated, Yea verily, when it is both commodious and necellay 
to evacuate the body, it may be attempted with far more fafery by fuch ching | 
as worke by infenfible tran{piration, which provoke {weats, vomite or urine by | 
reafon of the fubtlety of the Cholericke humor, than by any other. Al/othe | 
frequent fe of emollient glyfters made with a docoction of Prunes, jujubes, 
Violets, branne and Barly, will profit much ; Ifthe patient fall into a Delirtum 
talke idlely by reafon of the heate and drynes of the head,with a particular cx 
cefle of the Cholericke humor, the head muft be cooled by applying torhe Tem: | 
ples and forehead and putting into the nofe oyle of Violets, Rofes, or womat' | 
milke. Let the feete and legs be bathed in faire and warme water, and the {oles | 


the feet be anoynted withoyle of Violes and fuch like. 


In the declining,a Bath made of the branches of Vines, theleaves of Willows: 


Lettuce and other refrigerating things boyled in fairewater, may be profitable!) 
uled threehoures after meat eaten fparingly. 


Whenebe time But I would have you fotounderftand the Declination or declining not of 00° | 
ishitto uita 


particular fic, butof the diftafe in generall, that che humors already conco‘ted,*" | 


lured tothe skin by the warmneffe ofthe bath, may more eafily and readily bres! | 
forth:he which otherwife ordaines a bath at the beginning of the difeafe,will caul 
conitipation in the skin and habit of the body, by drawing thither the humors pe‘ 
venture tough and grotic,no evacuation going before. | 
Alfo it will be good after generall purgations to caufe fweate by drinking | 
White wine thinne and well tempered with water; but urine by a decoat 


whenceall flatulenta 
Of Dropfies. 


: The caufes of al! 


Feaver, becaufe ic 
Tertian, by reafen 
fubtilry is eafily re 
is fit it be upon a crigl 
able to the time an 
flowly are forward 
things taken inwar 
floned, grafic roots 
plyed, as fpunges d 
yander, Marjerome 
of the backe. 

‘You may for the 
cogtion, or elfe fton 
thighes. Then let cl 
cold ,that is, when th 

But by the confeng 
fently atthe 
of Galen ; for fecing 
fiay untill the third f 
pecratesforbide us to 
coding the difeafc,b 


Itherto 


mt be for alle 
oes forts of 
fueceed¢ 
fignification, toa mq 
kinde of Tumor. 
Wherefore an 
ofa flegmaticke hun 
The Ancients mz 
firft they termed atr 
unnatural] Phlegme 
of Tumors to arife, 
monodes ,and{o of th 
Befides, when the: 
orto flow witha w: 
waterifh ; but alfo w! 
Plaifter-like fubftanc 
Whichthey exprefledil 
toma, and {ometime | 
3s caufed by putride a 
fometimes is natural! 
ceeds; otherwhiles it 
©0 of a ftrange fubi: 
nds of Oedema’s no 
00 of its proper {ub‘ 
cretion, whence kern¢ 


* 
| 
atient 
é 
| 
B 
* 
{ 


Into Pimples 
ature which 
ne habite of 
s, bur one}; 
ftomack- 
For hence 
9 the mourh 
is performed 


, that it May 
will permir, 
Wine much 
s of CONnco- 
¢,NOF in the 


Is expected, 
uth heate 
whence 
thar heate 
Tom putre. 
Nand excre. 
s law by ha- 
ced a weake 
paring ly. lef 


f the Patient 
prunum 
l yrobalanes ; 
powers of 
ft not draw 
of che facile 
are fabjea 
with Chole. 
1 humectiog 
nd necellary 
fuch chings 
Cr urine by 

Allo the 
Cs, jujubes, 
Delirium ol 
ircticular ¢x- 
tothe Tem- 
or womans 
the {oles 


Willowes, 
profitablely 


not of one 
cofted, al- 
ily breathe 
will cauic 4 
1ors perac 


y drinking 
a decodt- 
TY yrride 

Reaver, 


L1B.7e Of Tumors agatn/t NK ature in Generall, 


Feaver, becaufe.it evacuates the conjuné& matter of the difeafe,but chiefly in a 
Tertian, by reafon that choler by its inbred levity cafily takes that way,and by its 
fybtilty is eafily refolved into {weat. But that the fweate may be laudable, ic 
isfitit be upon acriticall day, and be forefhhewed by fignes of concoétion agrees 
able to the time and manner of the difeafe, Sweats when as they flow more Swdorificks’ 
lowly are forwarded by things taken inwardly and applyed outwardly ; by 

things taken inwardly,as with white wine, with a decodion of Figes, Raifons 

foned, grafle roots and the like opening things; but by things outwardly ap. 

plyed,as {punges dipped in a decoction of hot herbes(as Rofmary, Time, La- 

yander, 2 game and the like) applyed to the Greines, Armeholes, and ridge 

of the backe. | 

You may for the fame purpofe, fill two Swines bladders with the fame de- 
codtion, orelfe ftone bottles,and putthem tothe feere, fides,and berweene the 
thighes. Then let this be the bound of fweating,when the patient begins to 
cold ,that is, when the fweate feeles mo more hote,but cold. - 

But bythe confent ofall, bleod muft not be Ietten after the third fir, but pree When bioed 
fently atthe beginning of the Feaver, according to the opinion and prefcription ™*"*** 
of Galen ; for feeing this Feaver for the moft part is terminated at feven fics, if you 
fiay untill the third fit be paft, the Feaver willnow be comne to its {tate ; but Hip- 405r-23¢ 
pocratesforoide us to move any thing in theftate, leaft nature then bufied in con- Tarn 
cocting the difeafe,be called from its begun enterprife. , 


— 


CHAP, XVI. 


of an Ocdema or cold Phleematicke Tumor: 


424) Itherto wee have treated of hote Tumors, nowwee mult fpeake of 
cold; Cold Tumors are onely two, an Ocdema,anda Scirrhws;And oy) 
ma for allthat Méppocratesand the Ancientsufed the word Ocderma for all *me,prasze 
forts of Tumors in generall; yet by Gaés and thefe Phyfitions which 
fucceeded him, it hath beene drawne from that large and generall 
fignification, toamore ftraiteand f{peciall, onely to defignea certaine /pecies, or 
Wherefore an Ocdews is a foft, laxe and painlefle Tumor,caufed by celle@ion ws an 
ofa fiegmaticke humor, 
The Ancients made eight differences of Tumors proceeding of Phlegme. The toe i 
they termed atrue and lawfull Oedema proceeding from naturall Phlegme;from 
unnaturall Phlegmeby admixtion of another humor they would have three forts 
of Tumors to arife, as that by mixture of blood,fhouidbe made an O¢dema Phieg- 
monodes and{o of the reft. ee | 
Befides, when they perceived unaaturall Phlegme either puffed up by flatulency, 
orto flow witha waterifh moifture,they called fome Oedemaes flatulent, others 
waterith s but alfo when they {aw thisfame Phlegme often to turne into a certaine 
Plaifter-like fubftance, they thought that hence proceeded another kinde of Ocdema, 
which they exprefled one whilebythe same of Atheroma,another while, by Stea- 
tema, and {fometime by Melicerides,as laftly they called that kind of O¢dems which 
caufed by putride and corrupt flegme, Ser ophule.For we muft obferve that Phlegme gy pow many 
fometimes is naturall, and ofiends enely in quantity, whence the true pro-~ waiesPhlegme 
ceeds; otherwhiles it is not naturall ; and it becomes not naturall, cither by admixti- noe ag 
©0 of a ftrange fubftance, as blood, Choler or Melancholy, whence arife the three | 
kinds of Oedemsa’s noted formerly by the way ; or by the putredneffe and corrupti- 
00 of its proper fubftance, whence the Struma and Scrophule proceed; or by con- 
“icon, whence kernells and all kinds of WWens,Gese/sa and knots; or by refolution,. 
flatulentand waterith Tumors,as the Hydrocele,Pmeymatocele and all kinds 
. The caufes of all Oedeme’s are the defluxion of a Phlegmaticke or — tone 
| 4 a Pd umor 


| 
+ 
4 
| 
# 
al 
| 
| 
| 
| 


265 Of Tumors agatnft Nature in Generall. Lin.y, 


humor intoany part, or the congeftion of the fame made by litle & litle in any pa, 
by reafonofthe imbecillity thereof in conco@ing the nourifhment, and 
the excrement. . 

The fignesare a colour whitifh and like unto the skinne, a foft Tumor, 12,, 
and laxe by reafon ofthe plentiful! moifture with which it abopnds, and with, 
our paine, by reafon this humor inferres no fenfe of heate nor manifelt colq. 
when you preffe it with your finger the print thereof remaines, becaufe of t}, 
The progno= groflenefle of the hamer and flowneffe to motion. Oedema’s breed rather in wip. 
ms cer than in che fummer, becaufe winter is fitter to heape up Phiegme ;they chiefly 
poffeffe the Nervous and Glandulous parts, becaufe rhey are bloodleffe, 
cold and more fitby reafon of their loofenefle to receive a defluxion ; for the fam. 


caufe bodyes full of ill humors, ancient,and not exercifed, are cheifly troubled wir), 


this kinde of Tumor. 


— termiz {el omer by fuppuration, by reafon of the {mall quantity of heate in that humor. 


A Symptonmnaticall Oedema, as that which followes upon a Droptie or Confump. 


tion admits no cure unleffe the difeafe be firft taken away. 


The generall cure is placed intwo things, that is, in evacuation of the cop. 
The intenti- Junct matter, prohibiting the generation ofthe antecedent. Wee attaincro both | 


cheifly by foure meanes. 


The dict The firft truely by ordaining a fic manner of living and prefcribing moder. 


on_in the ule of the fixe things not naturall.Wherefore we muft make choyle of 
{uch aire as ishotc,dry and fubtle; wee muft prefcribe wine of a middle na fF 


ture for his drinke; let the bread be well baked; let meates be appointed 
which may generate good blood, and thefe rather rofted than boyled. Let al! 
fruites be forbidden, as alfo brothes and milke-meates; Jet him eate {uch filhas 
are taken in fiony rivers; the Patient thall obferve mediocrity in feeding, by 
principally fobriety in drinking, for feare of crudities; After meat let him ufe di. 


peftive powders, or common drige pouder ; if his belly be not naturally loofe eri 
be made fo by arte. 


Rrercife, Let the Patient ufe exercife before meate, fo by litle and litle to fpend this | 


humor, and reftore thenative heate. Let him fleepe litle, becaufe much fleepe 
breedeth cold humors ; let himavoyde griefe and fadnefle, And if he be of 2 
weake body, let him abftcine from venery, left by another weakening by th 
ufe of venery added to his prefent infirmity, he fall into an uncureable cold: 
Whattobe nefie, from whence agreater meafure of crudity will arife.Otherwife, if the body 


Sfeofvenery. OC {trong and lufty, by fuch exercifesand the moderate ufe of venery it will be «he 


7 more dryed and heated. 


aone Foro that fearence of Hippocrates is to be underftood; That venery isa curt | 


for Phliegmaticke difeafes, as Galen in his commentaryes tells us. The Phyiiti- 


on may performe the fecond intention by turning his counfellto that part,from | . 
whence the {pring of this Phlegmaticke humour flowes. For if the infirmity 
atife from the ftomacke, or from any other part, the part from whence it comes | 
muft be flrengthened; if from the whole habite ofthe body, let attenuating,p- 


hetrating and opening medicines be prefcribed. Wee performe the third intes- 
tion by evacuating the humor impaé in the part with locall medicines varycd 
according tothe foure times of the Tumor. 


Lit. Galen in the beginning and encreafe prefcribeth a fomentation of Oxycrs- 


A rovy 


an. “$, aceti 3ij. mixe all together and make a deco@ion, whercin wet 
{punges and foment the place. Alfo you may ufe the following Cataplafme, 
Re, farina horded Zitij. coguantur in Lixivie communi, addende palverss null 
cupre/si, corticum granatorum, balanfti. am, 3). Myrrba, Alves, alum. 
38, eles Myrtill. 3ij, fiat Cateplafma, In the ftate and declination you 


An Oedema is terminated fometimes by refolution, but oftner by concretion, 


‘um led witha {punge. But iffo bethat the Oedema be upon the Arme or Leg, | 
a repelling rowler is very good, that is, fuch an one as is brought from be- | 
low upwards, So thefe medicines following are very fit for the fame purpolt, | 
Re. Lixivy ex cineribus farmentorum, caulinm, an, Ziiij, Tartar Alaminis | 


drying and refo 


plantas. cade, 


.gpply this followin 


prefled returnes | 


halawfit , 48, 


pom, 


meliloti, P 
tur, aadendo pubvers 

Laftly, you may 
ments, firft heating 
dry ; otherwile ec! 
coldnefle of the par 
ment, or toexpell 
made with white w@ 
Melilote flowers, 
with a litle, Vinege 
on, and apply them 
will breathe forth wi 
faculty. But youma 
filled halfe full with 
made with hot linnet 
{virits is recalled cc 
arerclolved, whereb 


Formerly 
comprehenc 


times under the skin 
pericranium, whcrevt 
parts which are enc 
the ftomacke and ¢ 
pany. 
They in this difieg 

oger upon themran 
thereof ,becaufe they 


Withwinde, 

The caufe of 
ealily to refolve and 
{o the morning Sun 
folvethe mifts dipe: 
Almoft after the fam 
could nor difloluc 
oft times although 
mor lyeth 
the 
Creafed by litleand li! 
_ The fignes of 
by prefling itwith yt 


ye? 
| LIBe7- 
gcaled Phi 
ot windy Tumors 
| 
| | 


Lins, 


end 


-OMOr, rare 
and with. 
inifelt cold . 
caufe of the 
ather in wip. 
they chiefly 
leffe, and {9 
for the fame 
oubled with 


concretion, 
at humor. 
r Confump. 


f the copn- 
ine CO both 


moderati. 
e choyle of 
middle na. 
> appointed 
d. Let all 
{uch fithas 
eding, but 
him ufe di. 
‘loofe let it 


{pend this 
nuch fleepe 
he be of 4 
ng by the 
meable cold- 
ifthe body 
will be the 


vy isa cure 
be Phyfiti- 
part, from 

infirmity 
> it comes 
uating ,pc- 
ird mten- 
les varycd 


f Oxycrs- 
e or Leg, 
from be- 
pur pole, 

Alaminis 
rein wet 
taplafme, 
certs 


you mult 
ufe 


L Be Je 


ying and refolving medicines, as cupre/si, grasat. fumach, 
| Salvia, origan, calament, Hyfsopi, meliffe am. in. j. abjinthy, 


panes ‘ 


apply 


Of Tumors againjt Nature in Generall, 


cande, eqn. tapfi. barb. cemtined. an. m. alumi: tartar. & falis 
Bj. coguamter cum lixivio foment it with a {pung, then. prefeatly 
this following Cataplafine. Ry, Red, Brionie abfinth. plantage, centin. 
meliloti, puleg. an, m. coquantar in bydromelite, piftentur, traycian- 
ur, addendo pubveris rof. rub. chamam,melil, an. 3}. fiat Catapla/me. 

Laftly, you may here with good fuccefle ufe refolving emplaifters and oint- 
ments, firft heating or chafing the part by friction or fomentations afwell moift as seetiettesies 
dry; otherwife emplaifters will fcarfly doe their duty, by reafon ofthe great to be kad in 
coldnefle of the part, being not fufficient of it felfe to affimulate the nourith- — 
ment,or to expell the fupertiaous and unprofitable humor. Let a fomentationbe 
made with white wine,in which Sage, Rofmary, Time, Lavander,Chamomile and 
Melilote flowers, red Rofes, Orris roots, Stechés and {uch like have beene boyled, 
with a litle Vineger added thereunto. Quench hot brickes in the fame doco@i. 
on, and apply them wrapped inlinnen clothes tothe affected part, forfo a vapour 
will breathe forth which hath an attenuating, pearcing, refolving and ftrengthening 
faculty. But youmay in ftead ofthe bricks fitly apply Hoges or Oxe bladders, 
filied halfe full with the fore{aid decoction, and that het. The friGions mutt be 
made with hot linnen clothes, for fo the native heate together with the blood and 
{virits is recalled to the part, and fuliginous humors conteined under the ‘skinne 
arerclolved, whereby the ftrength of the part is in fome fort recovered. 


Cuar. X VII. | ; 


Of the cure of flatulest and waterith Tumors, 


“¢ Formerly declared that not onely. flatulent and waterifh Tumors were 
comprehended under this word fuch asare bred of con- 
gealed Phlegme, as Atheromata, Steatemata and Melicerides. Flatuleme west pieces 
ot Windy Tumors are caufed by vapour and winde kept in or conteined fome- may be gathes 
umes under the skinne, fomewhiles under the membranes, as the Pertofiiaw and 
pertcranium, whereupon en{ues cruell torment by reafon of the diftention of thefe 
parts which are endued with moft exquifite fenfe. Sometimes the Entrailes,as 
the ftemacke and Guts are {wollen and ftretched out with winde,as in a Tym- 
pany, 
ihey in this differ from atrue and legitimate Ocdema, that when you lay your Tawhat flares 


upon them and take itoffagaine, there remaines no figneof the prefture gig: froma 
thereof ,becaufe they are diftent by vapour and not by humor, for the vapour bea truededema, 


10g prefled returnes fpeedily againe,as you may perceive by balles or bladders filled 


Withwinde, 
The caufe of fuch Tumors is the weakenefic of the native heate, not being able The coulafet 
calily to refolye and wate the Phlegme by which the windy Tumors are railed,for mors, 
Othe morning Sunne ( which in fome fort refembles our native heate ) cannot re- 
lolvethe mifts diperfed in the aire ; which at noone it eafily refolves into pure aire, 
Almoft afterthe fame manner our weaker heate ftirs up vapours from that flegme 
could nor diflolue,which vapours arethe matter ofinflations, ot {wellings. Bur 
Oft times although the native heate be fufficiently powerfull, yet becaule the hu- 
Mor lyeth deepe,or iskept in by the thickneffe of fome membrane, tendon os Li- 
the ftirred up vapour cannot exhale, whereby it comes co pafie, that cr- 
“tealed by litle and litle it caufes a Tumor. 
b The fignes of fuch a Tumor are a certaine renitency or refiftance perceived foley na 
Y Prefling ie with your finger, and fometimes anoife as if youfmit upon 2 drum, 
| Aa z elpecially 


1 oA, 
= 3 
> 
| 
| 
| 
| 


270 


ring the coats of the Guts. : 


CHAP. XVITTI. | 


of the care of a fletulent and waterifh Tamor. 


mxeyee E thallchiefly and principally cure flatulest and waterifh rumors by three 
ANG)/A meanes. Firft by the fame diet which wee prefcribed in an Oedeme ; then 
AN/S) by firengthening the parts appointed forconcoction, as the fromacke 
= Liver,chiefly by the temperate ufe of Aromaticke things as Dzacuminum, 
Diacalamentha sAromaticum caryopbyllatum, Aromaticum Rofatum, and the like, tobe 
ref{cribed according to good liking of the Phyfition which overfees the cure ; lattly 
y taking away of the conjun@ matter by hot, drying and attenuating medicines 


Medicineseva- Which they call Carminative, thatfothe part being rarified the humor and fiatulency 

therein conteined may be difcuffed and diflipated, But remedies of this nature muf 
be varied according to the variety of the parts ; for fome things are fit to be applyed 
tothe ftomacke, others to the Guts, others tothe joynts, and others to the ff 
parts; for the Collicke you muft inje& carminative glifters, let re. 


cuating the 
conjun& 
ter. 


fiethy 


folving Saccu/i or Baggs be applyed, and cy 
if an outward part be affected, 


ding a litle vineger for a fomentation to be ufed with fpunges. 


Galens fomen- 
tation, 


together and make a liniment, with which anoint the part after the fomentatioa, 
Ri. Farina fabar, orobi,an.ziij, coquanturin decocto pulegy, origani, calamenth, falvis, 


Glafles faftencdtothe Navel, 
we ufe fomengeions, liniments, cheitly if pain 
torment ;as allo Cataplafmes and Emplaifters, as Re Flerum chamam, melil. rori{. | 


wiarini, rofar rub. an. abfinth. by/ffopz, an. m. ¥. let them be boiled in Lye, ad. 


Gasenfoments the part with Rofe-vinegar and a litle fale putthereto, and would 


have a fpunge dipped therein to lye fomewhat long upon the part. 4%. Ode chs. 
mam ancth rut. liliorum,an. 30, cere alba 3vj; aq. vite \etthem all be mixed 


efpecially if much winde be conteined therein, fuchas is often gathered together j, — 
the hollowneffe of the belly, and in the {paces berweene the larger mufcles, Tp, 
Tumor is neither red nor hot, but rather cold and white as in an Oedema,It often por. 
feflech the joints,and efpecially the knees,and itis very difficult to be refolved. If fix, 
flatulency be gathered togetherin the Guts, it caufeth the winde Collicke, in whicy 
fometimes the diftention is fo great that death enfues by reafon of the renting or tea. 


addite p ulverum chamam. mselilot 43, m fs. furfur arina or obs, 47. | 


quantur cum lixrvie communi, addendo terebinth. olcor. aneth.c> rut. an. 
make an emplaifter for the forefaid ufe. 


The emplaifter of Yigo with Mercury, and without is very good for the fame | 
purpofe. Butyou muftnote, that fuch medicines muft be appliedto the partactue | 
ally hot,and the fame heat mutt be conteined and renewed by putting about it linnen 


clothes, bricks, bottles and fuch like hot things. 


Humorandflatulency which werekepe fhut up in the part being refolvec,: 


ting medicines the pare mult be ftrengthened, left now and then it receive or generate the like | 


fomentation and cataplafne, | 
cupre/fi, corticum granat. famach, berberis, balanft, an, 3}, caudeequin. armoglofi. | 


matter; That may be done by the followi 


barb, abfinth, falvia, rorifm, lavendal,an.m. flor. chamam, melil. rofar. anthos, 
p- alum, falis com, an. bulliant omnia in equis. partibus aqua fabrorum 
auficri, make bagges tor a fomentation,or ufe the decoétion forthe fame purpo!< 
witha {punge. Farina fab, hordes Cy lupin. an. terebinth. com, 
dicis ireos, maftic. an, 36,mellis com. 3ij8,0f the forcfaid decoion as nauch as 


Lupia, which as is | 


Bur alfo in thefe forth 
forts farre dite ne fr 


‘Therefore the 
medicines, the wa 
as we mentioned if 
ceflarily ufed, not 
lace to the refolv 

sagge, the chicka 
cher fuffers it to pe 
ence ina maid of 74 
at length I was for 
matter, butalfoch 
the roote, would 

led me to this 


Lrhoug 


yet it oft times is fou 
like unto the clawes 
ina Steatome at 
from the common n 
to pappe, with whi 
fembling honey in 
any Inflemmation 
is harderthan theor 
it once yeelds, itd 
the matter is ¢ 
longith figure. The 4 
as it iseafily difpofe 
mor, It differs ffom 
and of a fubtiler and 
1s more obfequions 
alloperation of the 
quence of what fort 
there isone fimple m 
ned humor, asalic: 
Tumors, fometime: 
mooved this way am 
here with the adjac:' 
for feare of 3 oreat 
other kinds of Tam 


‘naticke humor)fo 


fuffice, foto makea cataplafmeto the forme of a poultice liquid enough, let it b¢ 
applyed hottothe affected part having ufed the fomentation before. 


Coales, fnailes, 


The fignes of . The fignes of a waterifh tumor are the fame as ofa flatulent 5 but over and befides : Trongious,grifiles b> 
‘Jumor h it fines, and at the prefling with your fingers,there is hard a noyfe or 45 of ofw 


a bladder halfe fill with water. Make ys mauclfo acm 


Therefore 


Diet. 
Things 
ftrengthning 
the parts, i 
with Or! 
=t: = 
name fignifierhgis |i! 
] 


d together in 


ufcles, 
It often 
bived. If luch 
ke, in Which 
ating OF tea. 


ors by three 
edema then 
fromacke 
1¢ like, tobe 
cure ; laftly 
medicines 
id flatulency 
Nature muft 

be applyed 
Ts to the 
rrs, let re- 

>the Navel; 
Btiy if paine 
melil. rorif 


n Lye, ad. 


and would 
. chs. 
mbe mixed 
mentation, 
nth, falvie, 
Ul. 42, 


r the fame 
part actu- 
ut it linnen 


refolvec,* 
te the like 
Nacum 


‘Therefore the waterifh tumor if it fhall not yeeld cothe forementioned refolving Why 

medicines, the way muft be opened.with an incifion knife, after the fame manner, mutt be opes 

3swe mentioned in a Phlegmon. For often times this kind of remedy mutt be ne- oo 

-effarily ufed, not onely by reafon of the contumacie of the humor which gives no ; 
lace to the refolving medicines, but alfo becaufe ic is fhut up in its proper cyft or 

bagge, the thicknefie of which fruftrates the force of the refolying medicines, nei- 

cher {uffers it to penetrate iatothe humor. AsI fome yeares agoe found by experi- 4 

ence ina maid of 7. yeares old;which troubled with a Hydrocele or waterith rupture, 

ro whom when I had ralhly applyedto diffolve it refolving medicines of all forts, 

at length I was forct toopen it with my knife; not onely to evacuate the contained 

matter, butalfothat I might pluckeout the bagge, which unleffe it were cut up by 

the roote, would bea meanetocaufe arelapfe, Altine doctor of Phyficke ca!- 

led me to this bufinefie. James the Kings Chirurgion overfaw the cure. 


— 


H AP. XIX, 
Of an A theroma,Stestoms, and Meliceris, 


Lrhough thefe Tumors may bethought comprehended under one germ 
Wess with other Ocdematous tumors, yet they differ aschus;rhat is,their matcer is 
fhut upin its bladder or bagge, asit wereina peculiarce!l. But their, 
difference amongft themfelvesis thns the mateer of the Steatemaas the 
fignifieth,is like nnto Tallow [ tor in Grecke fignifieth Tallow,or feame = 
yet it oft times is found ftuffed with other divers hard bodies, ftony, bony or callous fer, 
likeuntothe clawesofanhen. Bor Philoxenus reports that he fometimes faw flyes 
ina Steatoma at the opening thereof, and fuch other like things wholy diffenting 
fromthe common matter of Tumors, The matter contained inan Atheroma is like 
topappe, withwhichthey feeds little Children. A Adelicerés containes matter 
fembling honey in colour and confiftence ; thefe Tumors appeare and rife without 
any Inflemmation going beforethem.Thus you fhall knew thefe Tumors;a Steatome 
is harderthan the othertwo, neither yeelds it tothe preffure of your finger,but when 
itonce yeelds, it deth not {peedily and eafily returus to its formerfigure, becaufs 
the matter is more groffe:Itis of the fame colour as the skin, without paine, andof 2 
longifh figure. The Adeliceris yeeds to the touch,as being a loofe and foft body, and 
as ut iseafily difpofed and diffufed, fo it quickly rerurnes to its former place and Tu- 
mor, It differs from the Atheroma in figureand fubftance. For it is more globous 
and of a fubtiler and more fhining matter, befidesalfo it takes upa large fpace, and . aad 

is More obfequious tothe touch, and for the reft, without paine. As for the manu- ry ro be uled 
alloperation of the Chirurgion in their cure, itrfeemesto bee of nogreatconfe- to Te 
quence of what fort the matteris, whether refembling tallow, honey,or pappe,for 
there is one fimple manner of operation, whichis, that you plucke away the contei- 
ned humor, asalfothe receptacle in which it is conteined. Yet you muft note fuck 
Tumors, fometimes as it were hanging in the furface of theskin, are eafily to bee 
mooved this way andthat way; but other fome againe deeper faftned firmely coe 

ere with the adjacent bodies, and thefe require an exquifite hand and alfo induftry 

Or feare of a ereat flux of blood and convulfion by cuttinga veine. There are many 
other kinds of Tumors, asthe Mole,the Glandala, Nodus, Botiem, 
Lupia, Which as in matter (for they are all ofa thicke,clammy and vifcous Phleg- 
maticke humor) fo alfo in kinde they agree with an Atheroma,Steatoma and Melicerss. 

utalfo in thefe for the moft part, when they are opened, youmay fee bodies of all) 
lorts farre different from the common matter of Tumors, as ftones, chalke, fande, may be,thar 


coales, foailes, ftrawes, or awnes of Corne, hey,horne, haizes, fiefh both hard and Gade 
Pongious,griftles,bones,w hole creatures as well living as dead. thele Tumors, 


The generation of which things(by the corruption & alteration of humors )fhal not 
make us much to admire it,it we confider,that as nature of all the feedes & elements 
of 


| 
lols. 
tings, 
vine 
¢ purpole 
| 
§& 
jeticbe 
d befides 
as 
herefore 


| 272 Of Tumors azaing Nature in Generall. Lin, 


tumor cannot be tht 
the Efchar istemov 
like, the ulcer mutt! 

Sometimes Wen 


of the wholegreat world,hath made man the Microcofme or litls world, that he migh, 
be, as it were, the lively Image of that greater world;fo in him, it being never idle jn 
us, would have all the kindes ofall motions and ations to thew themfelves, as 

as matter for gencration is not wanting.But becaufe there is little, or rather no men. 


tion of theferumors amongft the anicents, we willbricfely fhew the opinions of the ‘hed remedies 
later Writers concerning them, if fo 
What there: Now they fay, the T¢/ude is a tumor contrary to nature, foft, diffufed, or vaulted, | fio 
jaria is, Of atchedlikea Tortois, fometimes it arifes in the head in forme of a Mole, and then | re veines at 
WhattheNss The Nata isa great and flefhly tumor, not in fhape unlike a Melon, or rather the boar to the bladder 
ia is, fiefh ofa mans buttockes, whence it may feeme to have had the name, unlefle wee round 2 
had rather fay it had it, becaufe it more ufually breeds upon the buttocks, than upon a ab hie Betwy orn 
any other part of the body. fo the skinne may 
WhataGans The Glandula takes its denomination from an Acorne, called Glams in Latine, the P ther incifion ove 
; whichit fomewhat refembles inthe compaffe and forme of the tumor; or el{c be. rw efently draw 
caufe'it moft commonly breeds inthe Glandules, or Emun@ories of mans body, the’ roote 
What Nodes. Lhe Nodws or knot, is a round tumor, hard and immoveable, named froma rope with Racor; 
ti¢d ona knot, Bur you mutt ob{c 


Guide Cauliacenfis affirmes knots commonly to grow in nervous bodies ; but zt 


this time they more ufually arife on the bones of fuch as have the French difeafe, Deg sonic 


encreafe of the Wen 
morrhagié or fluxe of | 
| heads and roots, or! 
whipcord,or withan 

Cuar. XX, fall away ofits owne 
tumor, but al{o ir wil 


The caufes, 


Of the cure of Lupiz, that is, Wens, or Ganglions. 


‘Wen or Gangliex is atumor fometimes hard, fometimes foft, yet alwayes 
> round, ufing to breed in dry, hard, and nervous parts, And fecing thet 
STSS fome of the rumors mentioned beforein the former Chapter, fticke im- 

moyeableto the partto which they grow, becaufe they are contained in nocyite, o: 
bag; otherfome are moved up and down by the touch of yourfingers becaufe they are 


contained ina bag or bladder,it commonly comes to paflethat Wens have their blad- _ 


der wherein to containe them, and therefore we thinke fit, the rather more freely, 
and particularly ro treate of their cure, becaufethey aremore difficultly cured,e{pe- 
cially where they are inveterate and of long ftanding. 

The primitiue caufes of thefe are dull blowes, fallings from high places, ftraines, 
and other fuch like occaftons. But the antecedent and conjun@ caules are the fame 


was covered, and one 
@ needie and threed 
tents be put intotheb 
the curebe workem: 
The Chirurgion c 
laniws the Kings 
Burbon; it hangedat | 
which madcit{o trou 
it bound up inatowe 
Verily if thefe kind 
{traitly tied and fo cut 
away fuch YWVens as a: 
der the armeholes, in 


with thofe of an Atheroma, Meliceris and Steatomas deadly force of {uch fj 
The defcription formerly fet downe, will furnifh you with the fignes by whic! Cettainely fay what 
you may know when they are prefent ; certainely from very {mall beginnings they know of what fort it i: 
grow by little and little toa great bignefle, in the fpace of fixe or feaven yeares, (ome are very hard and doc 
ofthem yeeld much to the touch, and almoft all of them are without paire. cenfiftence may be re! 
You may hinder firch as are beginnivg and firlt growing, fromencreafe by fome- Ibeing ona time 
Theircure ae Whata flrong and frequent rubbing with your fingers, For fo their bagge or bladder, breaftsabod y which r 
the beginning. together with the skinne waxe thin, and the contained humor growes hot, isattcnu- ikea rough peble ; irs 


to be a Cancer, 


out gently preffed: 
alfo fome few » 


ated and refolved. But if fo you nothing prevaile, you muft lic upon them with yout 
whole hand, or a flatted peece of wood as heavy as youcan,untill fuch time ast’ 
cyfte or bagse be broken by your impreffion; Then apply and ftronglybinde unto 


latesoflead 
rubbed wich ita a plate of lead, rubbed over with Quick-filver ; for [have many times found >y — was troubled wi 
experience, that it hatha wonderfull force to refolve and wafte the fubjeét humor affirming 


But ifthe Wen be in {uch a place in which you can make no ftrong impreffion, 25.9 | . abite of the part was 


the face, cheft, belly, and throat, let there be applied an Emplaifter which hatha Hot fwollen, neither 

Arefolying folving force, fuch as this following hath; Rx, gammi ammon, bdely woman had her 

plautcr, liquefiant in aceto trayciantur per feraceum, addendo olei lilierum lauri, wh colour in § 
vite parum, pulvert, irtes, falis amsmen, furphur.vivi, vitrioliromasi,an 3h “0 you prefled dow 


13 =) Aotarcall. her 
beall incorporated together, and makean Emplaifter according to Art. But if fat ail no other evi! 
makean ace rumot th in body and mind 


> 
j | | 
| 
| 
4 
| 
| 


at he mighe 
hever idle in 
es, long 
ler no men. 
n10Ns of the 


or vaulted, 
C, and then 


r rather the 
uniefle wee 


than upon 


.atine, the 
or elf{e be. 
ans body, 
oma rope 


ies ; but at 
ifeafe, 


ct alwayes 
fecing that 

{ticke im- 
ocyite, or 
e they are 
their blad- 
re freely, 
red,e{pe- 


{traines, 
e the fame 


by which 
ings they 
ares, fome 


by fome- 
bladder, 
isattcnue 
with your 
ime asthe 
inde 
found by 
humot- 
fon, 25 in 
hath a 
4%. 
=) , 
let them 
Hout if the 
rumot 


Of Tumors againft ‘Nature in G enerall, 


‘yor cannot be thus rcfolved, it muft be opened with a knife or cautery. And after 


TEingsto 
the Efchar 1s removed, and the bagge waifted by fEgyptiacum, Mercury, and the wast or con- 


like, the ulcer mult be cleanfed, replenifhed with fleth, and cicatrized. mocheing, 

Sometimes Wens grow to fo great a mafle, that they cannot be cured by the 

jefcribed remedies, wherefore they muft be taken away by the roote, by your hand 
and inftrument, if fo be thatthere be no danger by reafon of their greatneffe, and fo 
chat they adhere not too clofely to the adjacent parts, dnd ifthey be not too nighto 
the greater veines and arteries; for it will be better in {uch a caufe to let themalone. 
This fhal be your way tocut thé off,or take them away. A fmal incifion muft be made >, anne: 
evento the bladder,or bag,Sy which thruft in a probe of a fingers thicknes, hollowed totake away 
ia the midft, round at the end, and aslong asneede fhall require ; then draw it many 
rimes about betweene the skinne and the bagge, evento the roote of the Wen, that 
fo the skinne may be devided long wayes, then it will be requifite to make 
anether incifion overthwarte, fo that they may iaterfe& each otherlike acroffe ; 
chen prefently draw the skinne from the bladder, from the corners of the Wen, 
cowards the roote, and that with your finger covered wich a fine linnen cloath, or 
elfe with a Razor if neede require, | 

But you maft obferve that in a Wen there are alwayes certaine veffels, which are 
{mall inthe beginning, but muck encreafed in procefle of time, according to the 
encreafe of the Wen, whereof they areas ie were the rootes ; wherefore if any He- 
morrhazit or fluxe of bloud happen, let it be {topped by binding the veffels at their 
heads and roots, or make a ftrait ligature atthe roots of the Wen, witha peece of 
whipcord,or with a manytimes doubled thred, and let the ends hang forth untill ic 
fall away ofitsowne accord, Neither will itbe futhcient to have cutaway all this 
tumor, but alfo it will be hit to cut away portion of theskinne, wherewith the rumor 
was covered, and onely to leave fo much as fhall fufhice to cover the part, then with. 
ancedie and threed draw together the lips of the incifion, butin the interim let 
tents be put intothe bottome of the ulcer untill it be perfectly clenfed, and the reft of 
the curebe workemanlike performed, even to the cicatrizing thereof. 

The Chirurgion ane ufing this method, in the prefence of Maftcr Dy. 
lenins the Kings Phyfition, tooke away a Wen from Martiall Co/ard, the Major of 
Burbon; it hanged at his necke, as bigge as a mans head, and it weighed eight pounds; 
which madeit{o troublefome and burdenfome to him, that he was forced to carry 
it bound up ina towell, as ina crip. 

Verily if thefe kiade of tumors have a flender roote and broade top, they mut be whae wens 
traitly tied and focutoff. But itis very difficult and of dangerous chance to take tebe cured by 
away {uch YWens as ate feated in the necke, nearcunte the lugular veines, thefe un- Which dange- 
derthearmeholes, in the groines, and fuchas are under the ham; by reafon of the ts socsre, 
deadly force of {uch fymptomes, as may thence arife, We can oncly conjecture, noe | 
ceitainely fay what kind of matter may be contained int them. We can onely 
know of what fort itis, when by incifion it is prefented to our fight, Yet in fuchas 
are very hard and doe much refiftthe touch, there are often found matters, which ia 
confiftence may be refembled ro little ftones, or pebles. 

_ Lbeing ona time called to open the body ofa great Lady, found in one of her 2Hifny; 
breatts abody which might equall the bigneffe of an Hens egee, hard, and compact : 
ikea tough peble ; it was held, whilft fhe lived, both by the Phyfitions and Chirur- the matter of 
S'ons to be aCancer, becaufe this hardnefle was very paineful! to her, when it was 

But alfo fome few yeares agon, I being called to the cure of a very honeft woman, <7. is 
which was troubled with rhe fame difeafe, ftrongly withftood the Phyfitions and 

rurgions affirming it to be a Cancer, for the rumor:had taken no deepe roote,the 

Aite of the part was not changed from the native colour, the veines about it were 
Mot fwollen, neither was there any other convincing figne of a Cancer. For this 7 
ame woman had her courfes at their due and nfuall time, and was well liking, ‘and You may 

da good colour in her face and body, was free from all fort of paine, unlefle from a Canary 
when you prefled downe the part affe@ted. Befides thenceforward the tumor grew 


— 


A Hifery, 


beigtall; ne other evill accident befell her, yea verily thelives merrily, and we'l 


thin body and minde. Cuar. 


} 
4 
* 
q 
j 
| 
4 
| 
® 
i 


Cuar. XXI. 
Of a Ganglion more particularly fo ca hed 


What isa 
may not be 
cured with 
iron I nftru- 
quents, 

Sometimes there are Ganglia (eene hanging by a {mall roote, as it were a ftring; 
wherefore they muft be tied with a {tring at the roote, and every day twitched har- 
der and harder, till fuch time as they fall off. The reft of the cure may beeafily per- 
formed by the common rules of Art. 

HAP. X X I 
Of the Struma or Scrophulz, that is, the Kings-Evill, 
What the Lhe Scropbule are cedematous tumors arfling inthe glandulous parts, 
Scrop or 


the breafts, armeholes, groines,but chiefely in the glandules of the nec. 


Kin ~Evall is. > . 
“ Bt They appeare either one or many, according to the quantity of that m* 


rer from whence they proceede, commonly contained in their prop*t | 


cyte, or bagge,as Atheromacs,Steatomacs, and Melicerides atc. 


Their materis 
allcauie. 


How they dife Mixture of malancholy. They differ from other glandulous tumors ; firft in number, 

fer boom other for moft ufually there appeare many of them united together, {pringing from fome- 

glandulous tu- 

mors, whata deeper roote than glandulous tumors doe ; fome of them are moveable, °- 
therfome woven with the neighbousing nerves, remaining unremoveable, 


Ganglieappeare fewer in number, and are without paine; but Scrophule oftentim 


are painefull, efpecially when they waxe hot by putrefaction; fo that fomerims 


they degenerate into cancerous ulcers, not to be touched by inftruments, nor acrid 
medicines, 


Philegmaticke, Melancholike, and glutronous perfons, and fuch as are accullto 


med to feede oncold and moift nourifhments, as fifh and cold water, and leade a !* 


act, 


diet, for fo the native heate by want of nourifhment turned upon the materiall 2 
of fuch like tumors, walts it. 


pavAS Here are alfocertaine {mall tumors of the kinde of Lupi¢or Wens, wh ich 
ahve? crow on diverfe parts of the body, but chiefely on the wrefts of the hands, 
“RESIS and anckles of the feere, being called by a more particular name Ganpli,, 


They are made ofa grofle, cold, vifcide, and phlegmaticke matter with fome a¢- | 


Theis eareby Centarie and idle life,are fubje&ro the Scrophule. They are cured by a moft {len | 


- 
al 
* 


Ls. /- 
And they are cur, 
of emollient refolvi 0 
oer. R, Mucagines a 
pingucdines anferu 
a), 
ip aceto aiffolutorum a 
modum asachyl: magn 
The ointment for 
are excellent for thi 
come to Salivation, 
the scrophule which 
alb.ce mag. ceroti 
arum, fiat emplafirar 
folved, but as it oft 
tives, as 74a. 4/th, 
fis adde capitum all, 
anat. farina fe 
Here we muft adn 
that all the contained 
wife the refidue of ¢ 
brought to maturatig 
and alfo fometimes in 
as foone as any portig 
cureand haftcn the ag 
reft fooner to turne it 
which begin tO 
refidoe quickly begor 
efiicient caule of 
weakened by rcafom: 
mor, will caufe the re 
hardly, and with nue 


nature, to corruptior 


maligne, or critical, 

There is alfo ano: 
hand. For fuch as at 
through the skin, are 
tangicd. But inthe 
Not violate or hurt 
Currentnerves. If at 
they areplucked fror 
aneediec and thred,ar 
fail off by themf{e! ves 
cure may De perform: 


OF 
A vine fhe 
we briefc! 
CO happen 
by whic 
‘Hitting Quotidians. | 
Continues Fhe 
‘Ntermiffien , | 

The primitive 


274 
What 4 
The caul, they appeare on the top of the skinne, neither aoe they ever lie cepe. Ccaule of 
themis cither the imbecilitic of a Nerve or Tendon got by wrefting, extenfion, ; 
blow, labour, or other fuch like caufe, Through which occafion the alimentary 
juyce which flowed to thefe parts, {ecing it can neither be concoted, nor affimy|;. | 
tedintothe proper fubftance, is converted into an humor ofthe like nature cold, and _| 
grote which in continuance of time heaping it felfe up by little and little about the | 
bers, and the very fubftance of the tendon, concretes into a tumor. | 
fo 


ens, which 

f the hands, 
Gan bia. 
he caule of 
xtenfion, 2 
alimentary 
or affimul3. 
re cold, and 


: about the 


ke tendons 
rand Aqus 
autur (uper 
pulvers/ati, 
‘ywould be 


preffed, 
have divers 
thereuntea 
remainder 


rea ftring; 
itched har- 
safily per- 


parts, as 
pf the neck: 
that mat- 
eix propct 


1 fome ad- 
n number, 
om fome- 
cable, o- 


ofrentimes 
fomerimes 
nor acride 


e accufto- 
leade a [e- 
oft flendet 


sriall caule 


4 
= 
~ 
= 
q 


“Of Tumors againft Nature in Generall. 


ere they are cured by purging of the fuperfluous humors, and alfo by application 


of emollient refolying, and fuppuratine topicke medicines, after this following man- 


pet. Mucaginis alth, fenugr. pi 
anferts 


atachyli magne. 


axungie porct 38, Terebinth, Ven, , ammoniaci, galbani 
ig gctto diffolutorum 4M, 5), cere move quantum fates, fiat cerotum fecundum artem ad 


mg. oles Cy chamam, an, Exollient avd 


rcloiving 
cicines, 


The ointment for the French difeafe, and the Emplaifter of vigo with Mercury, 
sreexcclient for this purpofe, efpecially if we continue long, untill the Patient 
come to Salivation, for fo Nature willdisburden it felfe of the humor, generating 
the Serophule which I have fometimes tried with happy fucceffe. Ry, Emplaflri diachyd, 


mag. cerote afops defcriptionis Philagrg, ana. Terebith, clara >}, olet liliorum 
param, fiat emplafiram fatis molle. But if the Scropbele cannot by this meanes be re- 


folved, but as it oft times happens, tend to fuppuration, you muft ufe fuppura- 
tives, as ath, liliorum,an, 531i}, coquantur in ages communi, piftentur, traje. 
fis adde capitum alliorum [ub cimeribus coctoram olei (:liorum, ping. anferis & 
anit. an. >, farina feminis lini quantum fatis , formetuy cataplafma. 

Here we muftadmonifh the Chirurgion, chat he open notthe Scrophula before 
thar all the contained humor be fully and perfectly turned into pas or matter ; other- 
wife the refidue of the humor will remaine crude, and will {carfe in along time be 


brought to maturation; which precept muft be principa!ly obferved in the Screphale, 


and alfo fometimes in other ab{cefles, which come to fuppuration. For we muft not 
as foone as any portion of the contained humors appeares converted into pws, pro- 
cureand haften the apertion. For that portion of the fippurared humor, caufes the 
rcft ooner toturne into pus, which you may obferve in inanimate bodies, For fruits 
which begin to perifh and rot, unlefie we prefently cut away the purrifying part, che 
refidoe quickly becomes rotten ; there is alfo another reafon; The native heate isthe 
eficient caufe of fuppuration ; it therefore (the fore being opencd) diminifhed and 
weakened by reafon of the difhipation of the {pirits, evacuated together with the hu- 
mor, Will caufe the remaining portion of the humor, not tofuppurate, or that very 
hardly, and with much difficulty. Yet if the tumified part be {ubjedt, by its owne 

|’ nature, to corruption and putrefa@ion, as the fundament ;if the contained matter be 
maligne, or criticall, it will be farre better to hatten. the apertion, 

There is alfo anorher way of curing the Scrophale, which is performed by the 
hand. For fuch as are’ in the necke, and have no deepe roots, by making incifion 
through the skin, are pulled and cut away from thefe parts with which they were en- 
tangled. But in the performance of this worke, wee take {peciall care, thar we doe 
hot violate or hurt with our inftrumeat, the jugular veines, the fleepy arteries, or re- 
currentnerves, If at any time there be danger of any great effiuxe ofbloud, after 
they are plucked fromthe skp, they muf be tied at their roots, by thrufting through 
aneedic and thred,and then binding the thred {trait on both fides, that fo bound they 
fall off by themfelves by little and little without any danger. The remainder of the 
cure may de performed according to the common rules of Art. 


Of the Feaver which bappens upon an edematous Tumor. 


all we bricfely treate of the Synaptomatical feaver,which is fometimes {eenc 


‘termiffien. 


The primitive cavfes of this feaver are, the coldneffe and humitity of the aire en- 
compaffing 


A note to be 
oblerved in e= 
pening Scros 


N atgrali heate 
the caufe of 
{wpparation, 


The 
@icall manger 
ot curing -Strez 


phuta, 


| 
| 
A ving fhewed all the differences of cedematous tumors, it remaines that How aa inter= 
happen upon them, This therefore retaining the motion of the humor ademas 
) = by which it ismade, is commonly of their kinde, which they name Ioter- 
| = Quotidians, Now the firofa Quotidian comes every day, and in thatrepe- Thecauft oF 
continues the {pace of cightcene houres;the refidue of the day it hath manifeft, 


276 


compafiing us, the long ufe of cold meates and drinkes, and of all fuch things as... 
cafily corrupted, as Summer fruites, crude fifhes, and lattly, the omiffion of oy; 2. 
cuftomed exercife. 

The antecedent caufes are a great repletion of tumors, and thefe eff pecially Phileg, 


The Signest 


How children 
come to be 
fubjseét to 
Quotidian 
feavers, 


How phleg- 
maticke hu= 
mors happen 
to be genera- 
ted by hot and 
dry meats, 


The Symp- 
tomes of qups 
tidians, 


The manner 
ofthe puilfe 
and heate ina 
Quotidiaa, 


Critical! 
{veats. 


The grinc. 


Why Quodis 
oft 
timeslong. 

In to what dix 
fealtsa quar. 
taine ulually 


changes, 


maticke, The conjun& caufe, is phlegme putrefying in the habite of thebody 
firft region thereof without the greater veines. — 

The fignes ofthis feaver are drawne from three things; as firft natural! ; for 
Feaver or Aguc chiefely feazes upon thefe which which are ofa cold and moift tem. 
per, as Old-men, Women, Children, Eunuches, becaufe they have abundance o 
phlegme ; and it invades Old-menby its owne nature, becaule their native heate bo. 
ing weake, they cannot convert their meates, then taken in a {mall quantity, into lay. 
dable bloud, and the fubftance ofthe parts. But it takes children by aecident, nog of 
its {clfe, and the owne nature, for children are hot and moift; but by reafon of thei; 
voracitie, or greedinefle, and their violent, inordinate, and continual! motion afte. 
their plentifull feeding, they heape up a great quantity of crude humors fit matter fo, 
this feaver ; whereby it comes to pafle, that fat children are chiefely troubled wit) 
this kinde of feaver, becaule they have the paflages of their bodies flraite and ffop. 
ped ; or becaufe they are fubje& to Wormes, they are troubled with paine, by co;. 
ruption of their meate ; whence arifeth ahot diftemper by putrefacion, and the ele. 
vation of putride vapours, by which the heart being molefted, is cafily taken by this 
kinde of feaver. i 

From things not natural!, the fignes of this feaver are thus drawne. It chief. 
ly takes onein Winter, and the Spring, in acold and meift Region, ina {edenta 
and idle life, by the ufe of meates, mot onely cold and moift, but alfo hot and dry, if 
they be devoured in plenty, that they overwhelme the native'heate. 

Forthus wine, although it be by faculty and nature, hot and dry, yet taken 
too immoderatcly, it accumulates phlegmaticke humors, and caufes cold difcafes, 
Therefore drunkenneffe, gluttony, crudity, bathes, and exercifes prefently after 
mecate,being they draw the meats as yet crude intothe body and veines, and to con. 
clude, all things caufing much phlegme in us, may beget a Quotidianfeaver. Bu 
by things contrary to nature, becaufe this feaver ufually followes cold difeafes, the 
Center, Circumference, and Habit of the body being refrigerated, 

The tymptomes of this feaver are, the paine of the mouth of the flomacke, be: 
caufe that phlegme is commonly heaped up in this place, whence followes a vomi: 
ting, or cafting up of phlegme ; the face lookes pale, aud the mouth is moift without 
any thirlt, often times in the fit itfelfes becaufe the ftomacke towing with phlegme, 
the watery and thinner portion thereof continually flowes up into the mouth and 
tongue, by the continuitic of the inner coate of the ventricle common to the gul- 
let and mouth. 

It cakes one withcoldaeffe of the extreame parts,a {mall and deepe pulfe, whic! 
norwithftaading in the vigour of the fit,becomes more ftrong, great, full and quicke. 
luft after the fame manner, as the heate of this feaver at the firft touch appeares 
mild, gentle, moift, and vaporous ; but at the length it is felt more acride, no other 
wife than fire kindled ia greene wood, which is {mall, weake ,and {mokie at the fir: 
burat the length whenthe moifture being overcome,doth no more hinder its ation, 
it burnes and flames freely. 

The Patients are freed from their fits wirh finall {wears , which at the firft fits 
breake forth very fparingly, but more plentifully when the Crifis is at hand;the urine 
atthe firftis pale and thicke, and fometimes thione, that is, when there is ob {tv 
ction, But when the matter is conco@, asin the ftate, itis red:if at the beginning of 
the fitthey caftup any quantity of phlegme by vomite, and that fit be terminated 
a plentiful {weate, it fhewes the feaver will not long laft; for it argues the 
of nature, the yeelding and tennitie ofthe matter flying up, and the excretion of th¢ 
conjunct caufe of the feaver, 

A Quotidian feaver iscommonly long, becaufe the phlegmaticke humor beis3 
cold, and moift by nature, is heavie and unapt for motion ; neither is it without {c2"¢ 
ofa greater difeafe becaufe oft times it changes intoa burning, or quartaine feav«", 


efpecially 


and 


~ 
- 


Apecially ifit be bred of 


gecover O 
they mutt not be nourifhe 


pafie 


Of 


fore by aduftion it | 
if falt Phiegme | 


a quotidian 


In a quotidian the whok 
that this Feavet oft § 
-yed, and take a double C1 
asa quotidiandeth, Ve: 
‘Linde of the humor, and 
‘ridians commonly take ot 
“our bodies are refrigerate 
Synac. Wherefore ther 
ditlebefore by the prefen 
“ertians take onc about no 
eifull fweat breaking forti 
cidian {hort andfatutary. 
The Cure is performe 
be flender and attenuating 
éry ; let his meats be brea 
boiled the roots of Parfly 
Neither at fometimes v 
ted,be unprofitable, efpec: 
Let him eate Chickins,\ 
liveinftony waters fryed 
good forhim, Raifons, {ft 
imal! white wine mixcd 
frictions of the whole bod: 
king, fo that the time of {lee 
much ; forcatling the heat 
heat inwardly in the bowe! 
For the paffions of the 
hooe fhortly to recover his 
ofthe fic to putthe feet an 
lote,Marjerome, Sage, and 
The Medicines fhall be fi 
rupe of VWormewood, Mi 
of Chamomill, Calaminr, 
The Purgatives fhall be Dé 
Turbith; of which you thal! 
Sage, Fennell, Endive orth 
fometiracs be given inform 
thall thinke moft Stand 
About the ftate of the dif 
ofthe mouth thereof,as bein 
CO anoyntit every other day 
as alfo to unlade it by taking 
Witathe decogtion of the fe: 
rineger will be very good, ef 
umiors begin to move ; for 
other remedy, nothing is tho 
taken with Sugar in forme ¢ 


‘ 
-~ 
4 
ag 
~ 
j 
* 
* 
q 
bi 
© 
| 
q 
«a 
~ 
EEE 


“specially ifit be bred of {alt Phlegme; for ltneffe hath affinity with bittemmeffe; 


ture in Generall, 


all things aS are 


He Omiflion of our 2.. 


cfc @fpecially Phleo. 
vite Of the body, 


irft all; for thie 
cold and moift term. 
have abundance os 
heate be. 
Qhantity, into 
ay accident, nog of 
ut By reafon of the;, 
motion afte 
jurmors fit matter fo, 
ic f€ly troubled with 
firaiteand fhop. 
with paine, by Cor. 
tation, and the ele. 
cilily taken by this 


dtawne. It chief. 
in a{edentary 
a {© hot and dry, if 
“hgate. 

aig dry, yet taken 
sufles cold difeafes, 
1% prefently after 
and to con. 
ti@anfeaver. But 
Old difeales, the 


tie ftomacke, be- 
fSlowes a vomi- 

moift without 
ingwich phiegme, 
n1@the mouth and 
nMon to the gul- 


leepe pulfe, which 
fll and quicke: 
touch appeares 
> acride, no othe! 
(raokie at the firlt; 
lhiinder its aG@ion, 


hich at the firft fits 
at hand;the uriac 
enthere is obitru- 
tche beginning © 
it be terminaced 
rowes the ftrengt 
e excretion of che 


k¢ humor beisg 
is without 
qvaftaine 

efpecially 


wherefore by aduftion it eafily degenerates intoit, fothar, itaeede not feeme very 
frange, iffalt Phlegme by aduftionturne into choler,or Melancholy. Thofe whe 
ver of a quotidian Feaver, have their digecftive faculty very weake;whercfore 
mnftnot be nourifhed with ftore of meats, nor with fuch as are hard to digeft. 
n aquotidian the whole body is filled with crude humors, whereby it comes to 
fe that this Feavet oft times lafts fixtydaycs. But havea care, yeu be nor decei- How to dia 
yed, and take adouble tertian fora quotidian, becaufe it takes the patient every day quondun 
gs a quotidian doth; Verily it willbe very calie to diftinguith thefe Feavers by the fromadsubis 
Lindeof the humor,and the propriety of the Symptomes and accidents ; befide, que- ~ 
ridians commonly take one in the evening, or the midft of the night, as then when 
our bodies are refrigerated by thecoldnefle ofthe aire caufed by the abfence of the 
Synne, Wherefore then the cold humors are moved in us, which were bridled 
firlebefore by the prefenceand heate ofthe Sunne, But on the contrary, doubls 
rertianstake oncaboutnoone, The fhortneffe and gentleneffe ofthe fir; che plenti- 
‘ifull fweat breaking forth, the matter being concoéted, caufes us to thinke the quo: 
tidian {hort and fatutary. 
The Cure is performed by two meanes ; to wit Diet and Pharmacy. Let the Diez pie: 
be flender and attenuating, let the patient breathe ina cleere aire moderately hot and 
dry: let his meats be bread well baked, cocke or chicken brothes in which have big 


boiled the roots of Parfly, Sorrell and the like. : 


‘ 


Neither at fome times will the ufeof hot meats, as thofe which are {piced and fal When theute 
ted,be unprofitable, efpecially to fuch as have their ftomacke & liver much cooled: faltodunge 
Let him eate Chickins, Mutton, Partridge and {mall Birds, river fifhesand fuch as ***" 
liveinftony waters fryed or broiled, reare Egges ard fuchlike, Thefe fruits are alfo 
forliim, Raifons, ftewed Prunes, Almonds and Dates. Let his drinke be 
{mall white wine mixed with boyled water. Mederate exercifes will be g00d, as alfo 
frictions of the whole body: fleepe taken ata fitting time, and proportioned to wa- | 
kine fo that the time of {leepe fall not upon the time of the fit; forthea it hurts very oe ° 
much ; forcalling the heattothe inner parts, it doubles the raging of the feaverilh 
heat inwardly in the bowells. 

For the paffions of the minde, the patient muft be merry, and comforted witha 
hope fhortly torecoverhis health, It feemes not amiflero fome, at the comming 
ofthe fit to putthe feet and Legs into hot water, in which Chamomill, Dill,Meli- 
lote,Marjerome, Sage, and Rofemary have beene boyled. 

The Medicines fhall befuch Syrupesasare called digeftive and aperitive, as Sy- Mederes 

tupe of WVormewood, Mints, of the five epening rootes, Oxymel with a decoction 
of Chamomill, Calaminr, Melilot, Dill andthe like, or with common decottions. 
The Purgatives hall be Diacarthami, Hiera picrs, Agaricke; 
Turbith; of which you fhall make potions withthe waterot Mints,Balme,Hyflope, 
Sage, Fennell, Endive orthe like, Pila/e auree are alfo good, Thefe purgatives thal] 
lometitacs be given in forme ofa bole with Sugar, asthe Phyfition being prefent 
thall thinke moft St and agreeable to the nature of the Patient, 


About the ftate of the difeafe,you mutt have a care of the ftomake and principally er corey 
ofthe mouth thereof,as being the chiefe feate of Phlegme ; wherfore it willbe good ftomacke, 
(0 anoynt it every other day with oyle of Chamomill mixed with a litle white wine, vomits, 
’sal{o to unlade it by taking a vomit of the juice of Raddifh, and much Oxymel, or 
With thedecoétion of the feeds and roots of Afarumand Chamomill; and Syrupe of 
lneget will be very good, efpecially at the beginning of the fit, when nature and the 


umors begin to move ; for ah inveterate quotidian, though you cancure it by nO pyeus of 


‘remedy, nothing is thought to conduce fo much as one dram of old Treacle Treacle ia an . 
en with Sugar in forme of a Bole, or to drinke it diffolved in Aqua vite. snare 


Bb Cuars 


R 
| 
| 
| 


> 


laid 


CHAP. XX ITTY. 


Of a Scirrhus,or az bard Tumor proceeding of Melanchely, 


Lgenxep Aving fhewed the nature of Tumors caufed by blood, choler ang 
Gf ts 4 Phlegme,it remaines we {peake of thefe,which are bred of a Melancho. 
Whit a true like humor; Ofthefe there are faid tobe foure differences. The firft jg 
of atrueand legitimate Scirrhas, that is,ofan hard Tumor endued wirh 
fenfe,and fo commonly without paine, generated ofa natural! Me. 
What an illegi- lancholike humor. The fecond is, of an illegitimate Scirrbus,that is,of an hard Tuo, 
cimate infenfible, and without paine,ofa Melancholike humor concrete by too tmauch re{ol. 
ving and refrigerating. The third is of a cancrous Sctrrhws bred by the corruption 
andaduftion of the Melanchiolike humor. The fourth ofa 
Ocdematous Scirrbas caufed by Melancholy mixed with fome other humor. The 
caufe of allthefe kinds of Tumors is a grofie, tough and tenacious humor concrete, 
in any part. But the gencration of fuchan humor in the body happens either of ani 
and irregular,dict,or of the unnaturall affects ofthe liver or {pleene, as obftruction, 
or by fuppreffion of the Hemerrhoides or Courfes. 
The fignes. The fignes are hardnefit, renitency ,a blackith colour,and a dilatation of the veines 
of the affected part with blackifhnefle, by reafon of the aboundance of the grofle 
Prognofticks, humor. The illegitimate orbaftard Scérrbws which is wholy without paine and (c fe, 
and alfo the cancerous,admit no cure,and thetrue legitimate {carfe yceld toany. Thof 
which are brought to {uppuration,eafily turne into cancers and filtulaes;thefe tumors 
though inthe beginning they appeare litle, yet ia proceffle of time they growto1 
great bignes, 


Crap. 


Of the Cure of 4 Scirrhus. 


WHe Cure of a Sirrbus cheefly confifts of three heads. Firft,the Phifition thal 
“ 

preicride aconvenient dict,that is, fober and moderate in feeding, 

ui ding to humidity, and indifferent heate ; for his manner of life, !et it be 
quiet and free from all perturbation of anger, greife and fadnefle, as aio 
abhorting theufe ofvenery, The fecondis placed inthe evacuation of the antec: 
dent matter, as by Phlebotomy, if need require,and by purging, by procuring tec 


Dict’ 


hemorrboids in men and the courfes in womens let purgations be prefcribed Di 
catholicon, Hyera, diafenna, polipody, Epythywum according tothe minde of tlic lea!’ 
ned Phytition, Thethird confifts in the convenient ule of Topicke medicines, the! 
is emollient at the beginning, and then prefently refolving,or rather fuch as are mixed 
both of refolving & emollient faculties,as Gelen teaches;tor by the ufe of only emo- 
*  lient things there is danger of putrefaCtion and a Cencer,and only of refolving there 

feare of concretion the fubtiler part being refolved,and the grofler fubfiding. 
The emollient thall be thus:R. Rad.alth, lib. rad, liliorwm %iij. coquantar in 44% 
Emollignts, 699%. piflentur, trayciantur per fetaceum, addendo olei chamem, lilior. an. 34. 
bumide 3%. emplaftri diacbyl,alb, cum oleo liliorum diffoluti cera alba quanti 
Sit fats, frat cerctum. Or gummi ammoniaci,galb, bdelly flyracis tiquida in aceto 
folutorum, 4%.3}. dischyl, mag.3j%, oles liliorum, axungia anferis, 
dcfcriptione Philagr. 3ij. liquefiamt omnia fimul, cere quantum fit fatis, ut 
frat cerotum fatis moll. When you have fufficiently ufed emollient ching 


fume the Tumour with ftrong Vinegar and Aqua vite poured vp 


LI 


4 peice ota 


be rarified, att 
and then agati 
not be perfore 
his fonne. Go 
of Viga with: 
mollifies, rel¢ 


after alitrlet 
provoked by 
ger,according 
paine, with aci 
ferring a fenic 
hathofrtimes i® 
{pred about it 
a roughneffe o! 
clawes of the C 


Crabb, that fo 


i 
» ‘ » 4 
\\ 
‘ 
4 q 
q 
~~ 
ie 


ly, 


lood, choler ang 
red of a Melancho. 
ences. The firft js 
umor endued with 
ed ofa natural! Me. 
s.of an hard Tumor 
mby too much re{o}. 
iby the corruption 
onous,Eryfipelous of 
ther humor. The 
us humor concrete, 
pens either of anil] 
ne, as ObitruGion; 


itation of the veines 
ance of the grofle 
ut paine and lenfe, 
yceld toany. Thofe 
tulaes;thefe tumors 
e thev growro a 


the Phifition thalk 
e in feecing, 
ner of life, let it be 
d fadneffe, as aifo 
Bion of the antecs- 
by procuring the 
referibed of 
minde of tlic 
kemedicines; that 
fuch as are mixed 
ufe of only emol- 
frefolving there! 
fubfiding. 
Loguantar in 
lilter. an. 34. 
ere alba quante™ 
fiquida in 
5, 
fit fatis, a 
emollient hing® 
poured 


Of Tumors againjt Nature in General, 


4 peice ofa Milftone, flint or bricke heated very hor; for fo the mollified humor will 


pe rarified, attenuated, and refolved ; then fome while after renew your emollicnts, 
andthen againe apply your refolversto wafte that which remaines, which could 
not be performed rogether and at once; for thus Galew healed’a Scirrhus in Cercilins 
his fonne- Goats dung 1s very g00d to difcufle Scirrhous tumors ; but the Emplafter 
ofvige with a double quantity of Mercury is effeétuall above the reftjasthat which theBmpict 


L? Vigo with 
mollifies, refolves and watts all tumors of this kinde, Mercury. 


Cuapr,XXVI, 


Of 4 Cancer already venerated, 


Cancer is an hard Tumos, rough and unequall,round,immoveable,of an 
ath or livide colour, horrid by reafon of the veines on every fide, {wollen is., 
with blacke blood, and {pred abroad to the fimilitude of the ftretched 
| out legs and clawes ofa Crabb. Itisatumor hard tobe knowne at the 
firft, as that which fcarfe equalls the bigneffe of a Chicke, or Cicer, 
after alittle rime. it will come tothe greatnefle ofa Halell Nut, unleile peradventure 
provoked by fomewhat too acride medicines it fodainly encreaie;being growne bi o 
ger,accoraing to the mea{ure of the encreafe tt corments the patient with prick: nz 
paine, with acride heat, the grofle blood refiding in the veines growing hot, and in- 
ferring a fenfe like the pricking of Needles, from which notwith{tanding the Patient 
hathofrtimesfome reft. But becaufe this kinde of Tumor by the veincs extended & The nature o: 
fred about it like clawes and feet,being ofa livide and ath colour, aflociated with 
aroughneffe of the skin and tenacity of the humor,reprefents, as it were,the toothed aoe — of 
clawes of the Crab, therefore I thought it not amiffe heretoinfert theFigureof the 


Crabb, that fo the reafon both of the name and thing might be more per{picuous, 


The fozure of the Crabb called Cancer in Latine. 


Uff, 


Cuap, XX VII. 
Of the caufes kinds and prognofticks ofa Cancer, 


we acknowledge twocaufes of a Cancer, the antecedent,and conjunt. cimer, 
et ¢ antecedent canfe depends upon the default of irregular diet,genera- 

=a Ung and heaping up grofleand feculent blood ; by the morbilicke affection 
Bb 2 of 


7 
| 
th SS SS i \] xt | 4 
°°, ti. 
> ; 
vy 
] 


@ 


280 Of ‘Tumors againft Nature in Generall. 


of the Liver difpofed to the generation ot that bloud; by the infirmity or weake. 
nefle of the fpleene in attracting and purging the bloud ; by the fupprefhion of ¢). 
Courfes or Hemorrhoids, or any fuck accuftomed evacuation. The conjuné cap 
isthat grofie and melancholicke humor fticking and fhut up in the affeéted pare, 2¢ 
Thecaufesof ima ftraite, That malancholicke bloud which is more milde, and lctle maligne,onely 
enotulcerated oncreafed by adegree of more fervide heat, breeds anot ulcerated Camcer, bur the 
more maligne and acride caufes,an ulcerated, For fo the humor which eenerated 
Carbuncles, when it hath acquired great heat, acrimony, and malign itie, COrrodes. 
and ulceratesthe part upon whichit alights, A Cancer is made more fierce and ragine 
by meates inflaming the bloud, by perturbations of the minde; anger ,heatc, and me. 
dicines too acride, oiely, and emplaifticke, unfitly applied, both for time ang 

place. 
Thefortsand Amongft the forts or kindes of Cancers, there betwo chicfely eminent, that is, the 
Sean ulcerated or manifeft Cancer, and the not ulcerated, or occult, But of Cancers { ame 
‘  poffeffe the internall parts, as the Guts, Wombe, Fundement ; others the externa’) 
as the Breafts ; alfothere is arecent, or late bred Cancer, and alfo an inveterate one, 
There is one fimalJ, another great; one raging and maligne, another more milde, 
Every Cancer is held almoftincurable, or very difficultto be cured, for itis adifeale 
altogether maligne,to wit, a particular Leprofie, Therefore faith 4etins,a Cencer 
noteafily ftaied untill ic hach eaten evento the innermoft of the part which it pef, 
Theputs  {efles. It invades women more frequently than men, and thofe parts which are laxe, 
moft(ubjeé& rare, fangous,and glandulous, and therefore opportune toreceive a detluxion of a 
grofie humor,fuch arcthe Breafts and all che emunctories of the noble parts, 
it poffeffes the Breatts, it often caufes inflammation to the armeholes,and fends the 
{welling ever to the glandules thereof; whereupon the Patients doe complainethz: 
2 pricking paine even peirces totheir hearts, But this fame paine alforuns ro thec!z. 
vicles,and even to the inncr fidenf the fhouiderbladesand fhoulders, When it isee- 
creafed, and covers the noble parts, itadmits no cure but by the hand ; but in decaied 
bodies, whofe ftrength faile,efpecially if the Camcers be inveterate, we muft not2- 
tempt the cure, neither with inftrument, nor with fire, neither by tooacride 
Whas Cancers © eS aS porentiall Cauteries ; but we mult onely feeke to keepe them from growing 
onemuftnot more violent, and from {[preading further, by gentle medicines,and a palliative cure. 
. For thus many troubled with a Camcer, have attained even toold age. Therefor: 
Hippocrates admonithes us, that it is better not to cure occult, or hidden Cancers ; for 
the Patients cured (faith he) doe quickly die, but fuch as are not cured live Jon: 


Metis lb 


XXVIII. 
Of the Cure of a Cancer beginning, and not yet ulcerated, 


| Cancer beginning is oft hindred from encreafing, before it faften its root’, 

¢ but when it hath once encreafed, it admits no cure but by iron, as‘ 

which contemnes, by reafon of the malignity & contumacy,the force of 2. 
Medicines, Galen afirmes, he cured a Cancer not.ulcerated. 

Now chat cure is performed by medicines,purging melancholy, by Phlebotomy, 
when the ftrength and age of the Patient may wellendure it, by fhunning all ching’; 
which may breed ill and feculentbleud. Thediftemper of the Liver muft fir!t > 
corrected, the Spleene ftrengthened,as alfo the part affected; in men the Hemorr!o" 
des, in women their Courfes muft be procured. 

Dies, Threfore thicke and muddy wines, vinegar, browne bread, cold hearbes 
old cheefe, old and falted flefh, Beefe , Venifon, goate, hare, garlick, 
onions and muftard, and laftly all acride, acide and other fale thing’; 


which may by any meanes incraffate the blood, and inflame the humors,¥" 


L 18-7 
be efchewed. 
alfo watching 
prifans, and ! 
Hog 
Mutton, Vea 
vers, reare 
The part 
by over hard 
gentle and mi! 
rhings as 
ding fit to afi 
only be taken 
thereof a fo 


pa 
CO 
turned out, an 
thy, and cario 
otherwhiles v 
Gable,as that 
and firong; th 
the powers ar 
laftly death. 
being firft pi 
willbe conver 
COmupt, Cven 
bind. The amy 
to flow out in 
{wollne wich | 
taken a {ufficic 
For thar wil] § 
ftay the defluy 
away otthe 
to the cure of 
Way, and all ch 
Cer, when thar 
Pomeganate, | 
cure of anulcc 
mildly perforn 
icarfe any defo: 
Tied, or write 
¥Cares old, Dy 
lames Cus heme 
uke of Guif 
| The Way ist 
and below wir! 
your left | 
“ape the inft; 
May cur it off 
Patt Of the lippx 


| 
4 
4 
* 
| 
{ 
| 


i iB. 


hrmity or weake. 
{upprefhon of the 
The conjunc canfp 
he affected pare, ac 
cle maligne, oncly 
ed Cancer, but the 
t which generated 
lignitie, Corrodes. 
¢ herce and raging 
cer heate, and mc. 
both for time and 


ninent, that is, the 
put of Cancers {ome 
hers the external], 
an inveterate one, 
other more milde, 
d, for itis adifeafe 
) Activsa Cancer js 
> part which it pof- 
ints Which are laxe, 
ve adefluxion of a 
noble parts, When 
wles,and fends the 
doe complaine that 
alloruns to the cla- 
When it isea- 
ind ; but indecaied 
te, we muft notat- 
y tooacride medi- 
from growing 
a palliative cure. 
ld age. Therefore 
idden Cancers + for 
ot cured live lon- 


‘4. 


> it faften its roots, 
ut by iron, as that 
cy,the force of all 


by Phlebotomy; 
wnning, all ching’, 
iver muft firft be 
the 


d, cold hearbes > 
hare . garlicke, 


ther fale rhiogs, 


the humors, 


peefchewed A cooling & humeGing diet mutt be prefcribed fafting efchewed, a2 
aifo watchings, immodera ¢ labours , forrow, cares, and mournings ; let him ufe 

rifans, and in his brothes tboile Mallowes, Spinach, Lettuce, Sorrell, Pur flaine, 
Succory, Flops, Violets, Bortadge, and the foure cold feeds, But lee him feede on 
Mutton, Veale, Kid, Capon, Pullet, young Hares, Partridges, Pithes of Rony ri- 
yers, reare Egges ; and ufe white wine,but moderately for his drinke, 

The part affected with the Cancer mutt be gently handled , and not overburdened Peeters 
by over hard; or heavy things, Or by folide, Of fat emplailters on the conrrary fare, oreu: 
gentle and mitigating medicines muft be ufed ; applying alfo at certaine times fuch | | 
things as refift venome or poyfon, as Treacleand Mithridate. Affcs milke is excec-- Aneidotes. 
ding fit to aflwage the acrimony of the cancorous humor. Therefore it mult not oT 
only be taken inwardly, butal{o applied outwardly tothe cancrous ulcer, making 
thereof a fomentation, 


Of the cure of an ulcerated Cancer. 


N Vicerated Cancer hath many fignes common with that which is not ry, 
ulcerated, as the roundneffe of he tumor, the inequality, roughnefle, aad 


scad paine; to the judgement of the eye, the tumour feemes foft, but it is hard 
tothe touch ; the Vicer is filthy, with lips thicke, fwolne, hard, knotty, 

turned out, and {tanding op, having a horrid afpe&,and cafting forth ichorous, fil- 

thy, and carionlike filth, fometimes blacke, fometimes mixed with rotten filth, and 
otherwhiles with muchbloud, This kinde of ulcer is maligne, rebellious, and untra- 

Gable,as that which contemnes milde remedies,and becomes more fierce, by acride 

andftrong; the paine, feaver, and al] the fymptomes being encreafed,:frem whence 

thepowers are dejected, the wafting and coniumption of the body followes, and 

laftly death. Yetif ic be fmall, and ina parte which may fuffer amputation, the body 
being firft purged, and bloud drawne, the ftrenethof the Patient not diflwading, it where a Cae: 
willbe convenicnt to ufe the hand, andto take hold of, and cutaway whatfoever is ethno be 
cortupt, even to the quicke, that no feare of contagion may remaine, or be left be- Whar to be 
hind. The amputation finifhed,the bloud muft notbe prefétly topped but permitred o> erves 
to flow out in fome meafure, yea verily preffed forth all about ic, thatfothe veines acamer. ” 
{wollne wich blacke and melancholicke bloud may be disburdened. When you have therenesr ot 
taken a {uficient quantity of bloud, the place mutt be feared with an aCtuall cautery. applying a 
For that will ftrengthen the part affe@ed, draw forth the venenate quality, and pee x sea of 
ltay the defluxion. Then mutt you apply mitigating medicines, & procure the falling te Cancer, 
away ofthe E(char.To conclude,that whichremaines, muft be performed according 

to the cure ef other ulcers. Now we know and underftand that all the Cameer is cut a- Signe: thats 
way, and all the malignity thereofextinét, when the ulcer cafts forth laudable mat~ Cancer is well 
ter, when that good flefh begins to grow by little and little, lke to the graines of a °°" 
Pomeganate, the pricking paine, and all the fyasptomes being allwaged. Yer the 

cure of anulcerated Cancer, which fhall poffefle the lips may be more happily and 

Mildly performed, no caufticke medicine being applied after fection, fo alfo that 

caifeany deformity will be left,when itis cicatrized. Which new and never formerly 

tied, or written of way, as farre as I know, | found and performed in a man of fifty 
old, Jobn Altine,a moft learned Phyfition bemg calledto Counfell, 

Guilemeaw, and Matter Ewfachius,the Kings Chirurgions,and Jobn Le leune the 

‘¢ of Guife his mott worthy Chirurgion being prefent. 

‘he way is this ; The Cascer muft be thruft through the lips on both fides, above 4 new and 
Delow with a needle and threed that foyou may rule and governethe Cancer 
your left hand', bythe benefit of the threed (leaft any portion thereof fhould sway a cancer 
“ape the inftrument in cutting ) and then with your Sizers in the right hand, you *romshelippe. 
May cur it off all at once, yetit mult be fodone, that fome fubftance of the inner 
Patt of the lippe, which is next tothe teeth, may remaine, (if fo bethatthe Cascer be 


Bb 3 nok 


] 
4 
~ w a 


Repelling me- 


dicines, 


Theodoricks 
Eesplaftcr, 


© 
Leaches. 


hare-lips; of which we fhall treate hereafter. 


XX. 


Of the Topicke medicines to be applied to an unlcerased, 
And net ulcerated Cancer. 


4 Nightthade, Plantaine, Henbane, Lettuce, Sorrell, Houfelecke, Wate, 
Lenrill or Duckes-meate, Knotgrafle, Pomegranates, and the like. Alf 
rofirum omphacinum, the powders of Sumach,Berberies, Litkarge, 
Cerufe, Burnt-lead, Twtie, Quickfilver, and the like. Of which you may compofe 
Fomentations, Liniments, Ointments, Cataplafmes,Emplaifters. Esplaftrum Dis. 
calcithees diffolved with juice of Nightfhade, and eile of Rofes is very ft for nor ul. 
cerated Cancers, Pompholix, or Tutia, wathed in juice of Nightfhade, or Plantaine, js 
very good for ulcerated Cancersa Befides this following medicine is very comendable, 
Ri Lytharg.ch in mortario plumbcum oleo rofar.domecreancantur ad 
confiftentiam liniment: vel and there may be ule of arefolving and repercuf- 
five ointment, as Rx, plumb: lotz, pomphol. thurts jan, ,abfinth. pontic. 38, re. 
farnm ceradv), folant, quantum fufficit ad unguenticrafsitudinem, They very 
much commend Theedorickes Emplaifter to aflwage the paine of ulcerated Cancers. 

Ry, rof.cera alb.an3ij\%, fuccé granat.¢y folani an. ,cerufe lote 3},plumb: uff2, loti, 
tuthia prapar. an. 30, thuris, maflich.an, 3ij, fiat empi.molle, This following oint- 
ment [ have often wfed with good f{uccefle. : 

Re, Thercéac.veter. 3), fucct cancrorum fucce lactuce olti an. 3 if, vite, 
ovorum cinerib. cock,ij, camphor, 38, piftentur ommia in mortario plumb, & fiat un- 
LACH 

Ry, fpum, argent. axangie porcs recentis, cera alb, anlib&, oles bons zviij vitel. ovorum 
a/fat,ilij, fiat ungaent, fervetur And when you willvfe it, mixe it with a little 
ointment of Rofes. I have alfo niitigated great paine by applying Leaches to anun- 
ulcerated Cancer, in that part where the torment was moft vehement, by disburde- 


Theapplicae Ding the part of fome portion of the maligne humor; which fame thing I have done 


tion ot whelps, 
chickins,& 


21. 


The eftare of 
Er} 


by application of young Whelpes, or Kitlings, or Pidgions, or Chickins cut !ong 
wayes, and prefently applied tothe ulcer, andnow and then changed, as foone as 
their heat feemes diffolved; and others applied for the naturall heatin an anodyneor 
mitigating medicine, Baptrfia Theodofius in his Epiftles, writes, that acatapla{me 
of the herbe Ery/iman, or Cadlocke, being beaten, is very good to be applied to 2 
Cancer not ulcerated ; but if the Camcer be ulcerated, heboiles this fame herbe in 


Thefignesop 4romel, and fo by injections and lotionsclenfes theulcer, and mitigates the paine. If 


the Cancer in 


the wombe, 


the Cancer affect the wombe,the patient feeles the pricking of thepaine in the groines 
above the peéfen,and in the Kidneyes, & is often troubled with a difficulty of making 
waters but when itis ulceratedit pouresforth filth or matter exceeding ftinking & 
carion-like,and that in great plenty ;the filthy vapour of which carryed upto the 
heart and braine,caufes often {wounding. Now to mitigate the paines of fuch like 
places,the following medicines are of good ufe. 
Re, Mucag. femin, lini, fenugr, extract. in aqua rofar: plantaginis quod fatis 
Of this being warme make afomentation. 
Re, Rad, Athee,tbi. coguaturin bydromelite,pifletur, trasictatur, addendo clei 


parum, fiat Catapla{ma. Alfo you fhail make divers peflaries according tothe different 
kinds of paine; alfo make injections of the juice of Plantaine, Knorgraffe, Lettuct, 
Parflaine, mixed together, and agitated or laboured in a leaden mortar witha lit! 


oile 


Of Tumors again(t Nai ture in Generall. 


not grewne quite through) which may fetve as it were for afoundation togencrate 
ficfh to fillup the hollowneffe againe. Then when it hath bled fufficiently ,the fides g- 
brinkesof the wound muftbe {carified oa the rightand lift fides, within, and with. - 
out, with fomewhata deepe fcarification, that fo ( when we would draw together - 
the fides and lips of the wound, by that manner of ftitching, which is ufed inan hare. 
lippe) we may have the fiefh more pliant and tractable to the necdle andthreed 
The refidue ofthe cure muft be performed jult after the fame manner as we ufe jy 


at the beginning ufe repercuflive medicines, fuchas are the juyces of - 


oyle of Rofes ; 


yicerated Cancé 
by me. R.S 
lac. 
and diftilled in 
ren injection 1 
nicers be wath 
newed ever an 
cunded, and thi 
powder mixed 
cancerous ulce! 
Ic will be ver 
ftrument made 
fafe paflage fo. 
forth, There: 
and about the 
holes whereby 
fome two fing: 
holdthat end of 
firings,or laces 
with which che 
you may in| 


A. Shewes 
B. The Lowe 
C, That part 
letter TD. 
EE, The ftrii 


Neither is the 
4 plate of lead bell 
£090d medicine 
Of ancient credit 
Co luch ma} igne 
Otes.to watte at 
When ir Was pref 
apply it to 
Toubled with a 
AOE tr ucly thro 


‘ 
ack 
| 
da 
| 
— 
* 
q 
‘ 
j q ove 
| hh 
| re 
‘ 
i 
* 
Wu’ 
| 
| AYO 
= 
— 
* 
; 
- 
7 


ation to generate 
iently ,the fides &- 
within, and with- 
ld draw together 


s ufed in an hare. 
ecdle and threed. 
anner as we ufe in 


are the juyces of 
Biiclecke, Water 
andthe like. Alfo 
beries, Litkharge, 
umay Compofe 
Emplafirum Dia- 
ery fit for not ul. 
, ot Plantaine, is 
ery comendable, 
mnecreaucantur ad 
ing and repercuf- 
pontic. re. 
nem, ‘They very 
rated Cancers. 
plumb: uftz, loti, 
following oint- 


4%. 316, 


lamb, fiatun- 


lij,vetel, ovorum 
eit with a littic 
caches to anun- 
by disburdee 
ing I have done 
hickins cut long 
ed, as foone as 
1 an anodyneor 
hat acataplaime 
be applied to 2 
me herbe in 
res the paine. If 
ne inthegroines 
culty of making 
ding ftinking & 
ryed upto the 
ines of {uch like 


is quod fatis ef 


ddendo olei 
Borafle, Lettucts 
yrtar with a ist 

oile 


when it wa ; 
$prefcribed by 


tr 


of Rofess tor thiskinde of medicine is commended by Galen, in every kinde of 
terated cancer. Al\fo this following water is very profitable, and often approved 
me, Re. bubuli berba Roberts, planzaz, fempervivi, hyefcyami, ports. 
4B CABCTOS fluniatiles, \etthembe all beaten together 
ond diftilied in a leaden Alembicke, keepe the liquor for ufe and with it make of- 
ren injection into the pare; or if the fite of the part will permit, let the cancerous 
nicers DE wafhed eherewith,and pledgets of lint fteeped therein be applyed and re- 
newed ever and anon ; fer fo the acrimony and force of the inHammation is re- 
naded, and the paincallwaged, Gaves beats into powder river Crabs burnt;the 


Simms! 


powder mixed with oyntment of Rofes is moft profitably applyed upoa lint to anol fore 


cancerous ulcers. sts 

Ir will be very convenient to put into the accke of the wombe the following in- 
fryment made of Golde, or Silver, whereby the cancerous filth may have free and 
fife paflage forth, and the filthy and putredinous vapours may more eafily breathe 
forth, ‘Therefore let it be hollow quite through; fome five or fixe fingers long, 
and about the bignes of ones Thumbes,atthe upperend, perforated with many 
holes whereby the filth may have paflage forth. Let the outer or lower end be 
fometwo fingersthicke in the circumferencemake it with aneat {pringe,that may 
holdrhat end open more,or leffe according to the Phy fitions minde; let there be two 
firings,or laces put unto it; By which being tyed before and behinde tothe rowler, 


with which the woman {hail girt her loynes,the Device may be kept from falling,as 
youmay {ee in the following figure, 


A Vent made like a Peary for the wombe affected 
with 4 Cancerous ulcer. 


AE 


] 


Y/ 


A. Shewes the upper end perforated with five or fixe holes, 
B. The Lower end. 


That part of the end which is opened by the /pringe, which is marked with the 
étier TD. 


EE, The ffrings, or laces. 


Neither is that re medy for not ulcerated cancers to be conremned, which confifts of 


Ot€s,to wafte and overcome their malignity and evill nature. This kinde of remedy ; 


pply itto the Lady of Afentigni maide of Honorte the Queene mother, 
CUDed with a Cancer in her left breft, which equalled the bignes ofa Wallaut, did 
“ucly throughly heale it, yet motwithftanding kept it from further growth, 

Wherefore 


plate of lead befmeared with quickefilver; for Galen himfelfe teftifies that lead is a 

Medicine for maligne and inveterate ulcers. But Gusdo Cauliacenfis isa witnefle Plaresof Lead 
a “ncient credit and learning,that {uch plates of lead rubbed over with quick-filver, 
°tUch maligne ulcers ascontemme the force of other medicines,are as it were Anti- 


that moftexcellent Phyfition Hollerius, who commanded A Hiftory. 


4 
bes Of Tumors againjt Nature in General, 283 

| 

= 

ne 


Of Tumors againft Nature in Generall, Lin.y. 


Why a quar- 
taine happens 


upon [cirrhous 


tumors, 


Th fignes 


Why they are 
frequent 19 
Autumnae, 


Wherefore at the length growing weary of it, when thee had committed her {¢! f 
to acertaine Plryfitian boldly promifing her quicke helpe, the tryed with loffe o¢ 
her Jife, how dangerous, and difadvantagious chat cure of aCamcer was, which}. 
undertaken according to the manner of healing other ulcers ; for this Phyfition, whe. 
he had caft away this our medicine, and had begun the cure with mollifying, hea. 
ting and attractive thing, the paine, inflammation and all the other Symptoms ep, 
creafing,the Tumor grew to that bignes; that being the humor drawne thithe 
could not be conteined inthe part it felfe, it ftretched the breft forthio much, thy, 
it broke it inthe middle, juft as a Pomegranate cleaves when it comes to its ful mo, 
turity ; whereuponan immoderate fluxe ofblood following,for ftaying whereos 
hee was foréte to firew caufticke pouders thereon ; but by this meanes the inflam. 
mation and paine becomming more raging ,and {woundings comming upon her, {hie 
poore Soule in {teed of her promifed health, yeelded up her ghoft inthe Phyfition, 
bofome. 


CH APe 9.97 


Of the Feaver which happencth in Scirrbows Tumors. 


V ch a Feaver is a Quartaine, or certainly comming neare unto the 
(Re ay nature of a Quartaine, by reafon of thenature of the Melancholike 
9 humor of which itis bred. Forthis fhut up ina certaine feat in which 


kinde. 


The antecedent caufes are aheaped up plenty of Melancholicke humors abour- 
ding over allthe body. Butthe conjunét caufes are Melancholike humors putrily- 
ing without the greater veffels,in the {mall veines and habite of the body. 

We may gather the fignes ot a Quartaine feaver from things which they cal] natu: 
rall, notnaturall, and againft nature; from things natural, foracold and dry 
temper, oldeage, cold and tat men, having their veines {mall,and lying hidde,thei 
{picene {\wolne and weak, are ufually troubled with quartaine Feavers. 

Ofthings not naturall; this Feaver, or Ague is frequent in Autumne, not onely 
becaule, for that it is cold and dry,it is fit to heape vp Melancholike hamors ; but 
cheifly by reafon thatthe humors by the heate of the preceding Summer are ¢2/i'y 
convertedinto aduft Melancholy, whence far worfer and more dangerous que: 
taines avife, than of the fimple Melancholike humor ; to conclude,through any cold 
ordry feafon in a region coldand dry, menthat have the like Temper cafily fall into 
quartaines ; if to thefe a painefull kinde of life full of danger and forrow doth accrew. 
_ Ofthings eontrary to nature ; becaufe the fitts take one with paineful! {haking, 
inferring as it were the fence of breaking or fhaking the bones ; further it raketh one 
every fourth day with an itching over the whole body and oft times with a thins 
skurfe and puftles efpecially on the legges; the pulfe atthe beginning is litle, flow, 
and decpe, and the urine alfois then white and waterifh, inclining to {omewbat 
darke colour. 

Inthe declination when the matter is concocted the urine becomes blacke, not 
occafioned by any maligne Symptome or prerernaturall exceffe of hear, (for 
fhould be deadly ) but by excretion of the conjuné matter. The fit of the Qu 
taine continues 24 houres, butthe intermiffionis 48houres, It often cakes‘ 

origina) 


sfrhe courfes 
Quartaines 
long, efpecial 
any dileafe oF 
asare bredo 
without the 
Phyficion in 
long difeafes,a 


A Quartant 
yeare, for othe 
cording to the 
ended in the | 
eholer or Sali 
from an aduft 
owne natur¢, < 
aduftion ( the 
borne, grofic, 
that is,by Die! 
caufe of the I: 
power. Whe 
nous mé¢ats, ic 
The ufe of wh: 
the grofle hum 
hit a draught 
that by this on 
portunity to pa 
prefently afte: 
being humec 
Onfollowesan 
Cholericke hi 
which the mo 
copious afflyx 
difturbes all th 
good before m 
this Feaver tak 
leafting, Mufi: 
ning the patien 
very {trong mc 
For this humo 
nothing, is aga 
of acride med 
taken away by 
tion, tharif ir a 
if more thin ar 
Matter of rhis 
of Ep tthymum.4 
Hopps, Buglo 
Cured Very mai 
{ome two ounc 
folued in Musk 

Cclination of 
pared, and the 0 
¢difcufled un 
MFC itis not 2 


she Melancno! 
fd: it makes the tumor, by communication of putride vapours hears 
heartabovemea{ure, and enflamesthe humors conteined 
whence arifes a Feaver. Now therefore a quartaine is a Feaver comming eyvey & 
fourthday, and having twodayesintermiflion. 
The primitive caufes thereof hefe things which encreafe Melanch: : 
1¢ primitive caufes thereofare, thefe things which encreafe Melanc _ 
humors inthe body, fuch as the long éating of pulfe, ofcourfe and burnt bread 
of falee Hefhand faith, of groffe meates as Beefe, Goate, Venifon, olde Hares, olde J 
Cheeie, Cabbage, thicke and muddy wines and other iuch things of the fame 


18.7; 


committed her fe]. 


tryed with loffe of 
cer Was, which is 
his Phyfition, when 
th mollifying, hea. 
her Symptoms ep. 
ior drawne thither 
forthio much, thas 
to its full ma, 
of ftaying whereo¢ 
meanes the inflam. 
ming her, thee 
it inthe Phyfitions 


ng neare unto the 
the Melancholike 
rtaine feat in which 
le vapours heats the 
onteined therein, 
r comming every 


afe Melancholicke 
and burnt bread, 
olde Hares, olde 
things of the fame 


¢ humors -aboun- 
e humors putrify- 
he body. 

uch they call natu- 
foracold and dry . 
lying hidde,theit 
rs. 

tumne, not onely 
like hamors ; but 
Summer are calily 
dangerous quat- 
sthrough any cold 
er cafily fall into 
row doth accrew. 
aineful!l fhaking, 
irther it taketh one 
mes with a thinne 
ning is litle, flow, 
> to fomewhbat 4 


omes blacke, 9° 
of hear, (for foi 
fit of the Quat- 


It often takes 
original! 


gall from an obftruction, paine, and Scirrbus of the Spleene,and the fuppreffion 
courfes and Hzmorroides, 


Of Tumors again ft Nature in Generall. 


Quartaines taken in the Summer arc forthe moft part fhort, but in the Autumne Prognoftict 
; ong, efpecially fuch as continue till Winter. Thofe which come by fucceffion of 
any jifeafe of the Liver,Spieene or any other precedent difeafe, are worfe than {uch 
bred of themfclves,and commonly end in a Dropfie. But thofe which happen 
without the faulrof any bowells,and to {uch a patient, as will be governed by the diteane. « 
phyfitionin his Dict, infer no greater hatme, but free him from more grievous and quartain frees 
long difeafes,as Melancholy, the Falling licknefle, Convulfions,Madnefle, becaufe 
she Melancholy humor, the author of fuch difeafes, is expelled every fourth day by 
‘heforce of the fitof the Quartaine. | 
A Quartane Feaver, if there be a0 error committed,commonly excecds not a 
ere, for otherwife fome Quartanes have beene foundto laf to the twelfth yeare ac- 
cording to the opinion of Awscem : the Quartane beginning in Autumne is ofttimes 
ended in the following {pring ; the Quartane which is cauled by aduft blood or 
eholet or Salt flegme is more eafily and fooner cured, than that which proceeds 
froman aduft Melancholy humor ; becaufethe Melancholy humor, terreftriall ofits 
owne nature, and harder to be difcuffed than any other humor, is againe made by 
aduttion (the fubtiller parts being diffolved and the groffer fubfid ing) more ftub-— 
borne, grofle, maligneand acride, Thecure is wholy abfolved by two meancs, | 
that is,by Diet and medicines. The Diet ought to be prefcribed, contrary to the Pie. 
caufe of the Feaver in the ufe of the fixe things not naturall,as muchas lyesin our | 
power. Wherfore the Patient fhall efichew Swines fleth, flatulent, vifcide and gluti- 
nous meats, feany fowles, falt meats and Venifon, and all things of hard digettion. 
The ufe of white wine indifferent hot and thin isconvenient to attenuate and incide 
the erofle humor,and t@ moveurine and {weat; yea verily atthe beginning of the 
fit adraught of fuch wine will caufe vomiting, which is athing of fogreat moment, piow-anet 
that by this one remedy many havebeencured. Yet ifwe may take occafion and op- vomitring pre. 
portunity to provoke yomit,there is no time thought fitter for chat purpofe than Wittocet* 
prefentlyafter meate ; for thenitis the fooner provoked, the fibers of the Stomach 
being humeéted & relaxed,and the ftomachis fooner turned to vomiting, whereup- 
onfollowesa more plenrifull happy and cafie evacuation of the Flegmatique and 
Cholericke humor, and leffe troublefome to nature: andof allthe crudities with 
which the mouth of the ventricle aboundsin a Quartaine, by reafon of the more 
copious afflux ofthe Melancholike humor,which by his qualities cold and dry, 
difturbes all the a@tions and naturall faculries. Moreouer exercifes and frictions are 
g00d before meat; fuch paffions of the minde as are contrary to the caule from which 
thisFeaver takes his originall,are fittobe cherifhed by the patient; as Laughter, 
leafting, Mufique,and all fuch like things full of pleafure aod mirth. At the begin- 
hing the patient mutt be gently handled and delt witha ,and we muft abftaine from all 
very {trong medicines untill {uch time,as the difeafe hath beenc of {ome continuance. 
For this humor, contumacious at the beginning when as yet nature hath attempted 
hothing, isagaine made more ftubborne, terrctiriall and dry,by the almoft fiery heat 
of actide medicines. Ifthe body abound with bloud,fome part thereof mult be 
taken away by opening the Median or Bafilick veine of the left arme, with this cau- 
tion, thatif it appeare maore grofie and blacke, we fuffer itto flow more plentifully 
if more thin, and tiaGured with 2 laudable red Colour, that we prefently ftay it. The 
matter of this Feaver muft be ripened, concocted and diminifhed with the Syrrupes 
Ot Epsthymum, of Scolopendrium, of Maydenhayre, Agtimony, with the waters of 
“pps, Buglofle, Borage and thelike. I fincerely proteft, next unto God, I have yy03;-:ne, 
cured Very many quartaines by giving a potion of a little Treakle diffolved in about 
on two ounces of Aqua vite; alfo fometimes by two or three graines of muske dii- 
Olued in Muskadine,siven at the beginning ofa particular fitt towards the generall 


> 


clination of the difeafe,afrer generall purgations the humor and body being pre- 
ogi the powers ftrong ; And certainly an inveterate Quartaine can fcarce cver 
v cufled unleffe the body be much heated with meates and medicines. There- 


(tis not altogether tobe difproved which many fay, that they have driven a- 
way 


ore 


> 
| 
4 
* 
q 
| 
| 4 
4 
¢ 
4 
> 


Of Tumors againft Nature in Generall. 13.7 


256 


way a quartaine by taking adraught of wine every day as feone as they came forth >¢ 
their bed, in which fome leaves of Sage had bin infufed all the nighteAlfo it is 90.4 

a little before the fit to anoint allthe {pine ofthe backe with oyles heating alj tj, 

nervous parts, fuchasaretheoyle of Rue, Wallnuts, of the Peppers, mixing ther: 

witha little Aqua vite. but for this purpole the oyle of Caferewm which hath beer, 
boyledinanapple of Coloquintida, the Kernells taken out, uppon hotcolesto tlie 
confumption of the halfe part, mixing therewith fome little quantity of the powde;s 

of Pepper,Pelitory of Spaine and Ewpherbiums, isexcellent. Certainly fuch like Ig. 

unctions are good not onely to mitigate the vehemency ofthe terrible fhaking, by 

alfo to provoke {weats; for becaufe by theis humid heat they difcufle this humo; 

being dull and rebellious tothe expulfive facultic,for the Melancholy is as it were 

‘ the droffe and mudde of the bloud. Therefore ifon the contrary the Quartaine feaye: 

ra vat be thall be caufed by aduft choler,we muft hope for and expe@ a cure by refrigerating 
— and hume€tive medicines, fuch as are Sorrell, Lettuce, Purflane, brothes of the de: 
things. coction of Cowcumbers,Gourds,Mellonsand Pompions, For in this cafe if any uf 
hot medicines he fhall make this humor moft obftinate by the refolying of the {ud: 

tiller parts, Thus Tradanes boaits that hee hath cured thefe kinds of Quartane Feayer 

by the oncly ufe of refrigerating Epithemaes being often repeated alittle before the 


Whatbattera DCginning ofthe fit. And this isthe fumme of the Cure of truc and legitimate inter. 


aguesareand mitting Feavers. That is,ofthofe which are caufed by one {imple humor,whercby the 
uf Cureot thofe which they call baftard intermitting Feavers, may be cafily gathered 
and underftood:as which are bred by a humor impure and not of one kinde,but mixt 
orcompofedby admixture of fome other matter; for example, according to the 
mixture of diverfe humors Flegmatique and cholericke,the medicines mutt al{o be | 
uotidian and teriian;it mutt be 


how they m 
be cured, 


mixt,asifitwere a confufed kinde of Feaver of a 
cured by amedicine compofed of things evacuating tfleeme and choler, 


C HAPs XX XTi. 


Of an Ancurilma,that 2s, the dilatation, or [pringing of an 
Artery, veine, or Sinuew. 


What it if, 


Galencalls an an opening made ofthe Anafomafis of an Arte- 
ry: Alfean Amesri/ma is made, when an Artery that is wounded clofeth too flowy, 
the fubRance which isaboveit being inthe meane time agglutinated, filled with 
fleth and cicatrized ,which doth not {eldome happen in opening of Arteries unski!ful- 

Bawhespens ly performed and negligently cured;therefore Ameurifmaes are abfolutely made by 

they chiehy the Amaflomafis, {pringing, breaking, Erofien, and wounding of the Arteries. Thel¢ 

happen in all parts of the bedy,but more frequently in the throat, efpecially in wo 
men after a painfull travaile. Forwhenas they more ftrongly ftrive to hold thei! 
breath,for the more powerfull expulfion of the birth, it happens that the Artery 3 
di ated and broken,whence followes an effufion of bleud and {pirits under the ski? 
The fignes are,afwelling one while great, another fmall, with a pulfation and ° 
colour not varying from the native conftitution ef the skinne, Iisa foft tumor,an¢ 
{0 ycelding to the impreffion of the fingers that if it peradventure be {mal} it whol 
vanitheth,the Arterious bloud and fpirits flying backe into the body of the Artcty; 
but prelently affoone as you take your fingers away, they returne againe with 
celerity. Some Aneurifmaes doenot onely when they are prefled,but alfoof 
felves makea fen{ible hiffing,if you lay your care neare to them, by reafon of the ™ 
yar of the vitall fpirit rufhing with great violence .through the ftraitnes of 
pailage, 


Wherefort 


PS N Anenrifma is a tumor yeelding to the touch,made by the bloud 

and fpirit powred forth under the flefhand Mufcles, by the dilatation 
or relaxation ofan Artery. Yerthe author of the definitions feemes to 
\} call any dilatation of any venous veffell by the name ofan Ancuri/me & 


~ Wherefore 
noy feismot hea 
rifmaes under 
large yeflells,a 
followes Uppol 
obferved afew 
M.Joba 
an 7426 
d him hee {he 
danger of his! 
thereof with d 


with new and 


rum contra rap 
would lay upot 
let might ferve 
fwathe, and in 
flame the blooc 
his voyce. Alth 
matter but that 
fing the rumer | 
Cautticke cauli: 
blood flowed f 
plores all poflib 
ding, and he r« 
called, but when 
Wherefore I di! 
Anturifmas un 
but rather ler hi: 
over it untill rhe 
clesabout it, the 
then cut it off a 
the orifices of t 
performed afte: 
the internal] pai 
ten had theund 
being fo attenuz 
Clesofthe Arre: 
have obferved i: 
terious veine {u 
cing broken: 
forth intothe Cl 
that largenc {fe | 
Whichcauf 
holders inthe Phy 
he lived {aid he fi 
Pulfation of alll + 
Syluius the Kj ne 
40d wifhed him: 
IS Mate, and to 
Part. At night h 
Sed now and the 
affia alone, 
caufe Of fuch a b 
and fervid blood 
happens, it cher 
loofed 
This matter \ 


* 
a 7 i j 
© ~ 
: 
| 
q 
q 4 j 
7 
pike ; 
ia 
wai 
; 
1 
i 
j a 


all. L I B.7 


as they came forth of 


nighteAlfo it is good 
yles heating all the 
pers, mixing there, 
which hath beene 
pon horcolesto the 
tity Of the powders 
tainly fuch like Ip. 
errible fhaking, bur 
difcufle this humo, 
choly 1s asit were 
he Quartaine feayer 
ire by refrigeratin 
», brothes of the de. 
this cafeif any ufe 
folying of the fub. 
of Quartane Feayer 
d alittle before the 
nd legitimate inter. 
jumor, whereby the 
y be cafily gathered 
one kinde,but mixt 
>, according to the 
icincs alfo be 
id tertian;it mutt be 
ler. 


made by the bloud 
, by the dilatation 
finitions feemes to 
ofan Apeuri/ms. 
fomafis of an Arte- 
lofeth too flowly, 
ated, filled with 
Arteries unskilful- 
(olutely made by 
e Arteries. 
, ef{pecially in wo 
rive to hold theif 
that the Artery '§ 
s under the 
a pulfation and 4 
sa foft tumor,an 
be fmall,it wholy 
dy of the Artcry, 
againe with like 
but alfoof chem- 
reafon of the m0” 
ftrairnes of 


Wherefore 


wherefore in Aneurifmaes in which there is agreat rupture of the Artery fich a 
n0y 


~ Tumors againfl Nature inGenerall. 287 


— 


(«isnot heard, becaufethe fpirit is cartyed througha larger pallage. Great Anca- 


ifmaes under the Armepits, inthe Groines and in other parts wherein there are © 
: -yelfells,admit no cure, becaufe fo great an eruption of blood and fpirit often 


followes Uppon fuch an incifion, that death prevents both art and Cure. Which I a Hikory. 


aplerved afew yeares agoc in a certaine preift of Saint Audrewes of the Arches, 


Mashet dwelling with the chiefe Prefident Chriffopher de Thou. Who having 
Ancewrifme at the feteing on of the fhoulder about the bignes of a Wall-nur,t char- 


4him.hee fhould not let it be opened, for ifit did,it would bring him into manifeft mut not rah- 
danger of his life, and that it would be more fafeforhim, to breake the violence 


’ thereof with double clothes fteeped in the juyce of Night-fhade and Houfelike, 
withnew and whayey cheefe mixt therewith : Or with Yngmentum de Boloor Empla- 


rum contra rapteram and {uch other refrigerating and aftringent medicines, if hee 
wouldlay upon ita thin plate of Lead,and would ufe fhorter breeches that his donb. 
let might ferveto hold it too, to which hee might faften his breeches inftead of 2 
fwathe, and inthe meane time he fhould efchew al} things which attenuate and in- 
flame the blood, but efpecially he fhould keepe himfelfe from all great {training of 
his voyce. Although he had ufed this Dict fora yeare,yet he could not fo handle the 
matter but that che tumor increafed,which he obferving goes toa Barber, who fuppo- 
fing the wmer to be of the kinde of vulgar inpoftumes, applies to it in the Evening a 
Caufticke caufing an Efchar fo to openit, In the Morning fuch an abundance of 
blood flowed forth from thetumor being opened, that hetherewith aftonifhed, im- 
plores all pofible ayde,and bidds that I thould be calledto ftay this his great blee- 
ding, and he repented that he had notfollowed my direQions, Wherefore I am 
called but when I was{carce overthethrefhould, he gave uphisghoft with hisblood. 
Wherefore I diligently admonifh the young Chirurgion that hee do not rafhly open How‘ they 
Anturifmas unletle they be {mall inanignoble part,and not indued with large veflel|s, ™* ured. 
but rather let him performe the care after this manner. Cutthe skinne which lyes 
overit untill the Artery appeare, and then feparate it with your knife from the parti- 
clesabout it, then thruft a blunt and crooked needle witha thred in ie under it binde ir, 
then cut it off and fo expect the falling off,of the thred of it felfe whiles nature covers 
the orilices of the cut Artery with new fiefh then the refidue of the cure may be 
performed afterthe manner of fimple wounds. The Azeurifmaes which happen in Thele ofthe 
theintcrnall parts are uacurable. Such as frequently happenro thofe who have of- ae ay 
tenhad theun@ion and {weat for the cure of the French difeafe, becaufe the bleod, 
being fo attenuated and heated therewith that it cannot becontayned in the recept2- 
Cles of the Artery, it diftends it to chat largenefle asto hold a mans fift; Which I 
have obfervedinthe dead body ofa certaine Taylor,who by an 4zcurifma of the Ar- A Hittory, 
cerious veine fuddenly whileft hee was playing at Tennis fell downe dead,the veffell 

cing broken: his body being opened | found a great quantity of blood powred 
forth intothe Capacity of the Cheft, but the body of the Artery was dilated to 
that largenc {fe I formerly mentioned, and the inner Coate thereof was bony, 

ot Whichcaufe within a while after I fhewed it tothe great admiration of the be- 
holders inthe Phyfitions Schole whileft 1 publiquely difleéted a body theresthe whilft 

‘lived faid he felea beating and a great heate over all his body by the force of the 
PUlfation of all the Arteryes, by occafion whereof hee often fwounded. Doéor 
Sylaius the Kings profeflor of Phy ficke at that time forbad him the ufe of Wine, 
4nd wifhed him to yfe boyled water for his drinke,and Crudds and new Cheelfes for 

andto apply them in forme of Cataplaimes uponthe grieved and {wolne 
Part. Atnight heufed a otifan of Barley meale and Poppy-feedes,and was pur- 
S°¢ now and then with a Clyfter of refrigerating and emollient things, or with 
Caffia ‘lone, by which medicines hee faid hee found himfelfe much berter. The 
caule of {uch 4 bony conftitution of the Arteries by 4acuri/maes is, for that the hor 
“ac fervid blood firft dilates the Coates of an Artery,then breakesthem,which when 
1. /PPens, it chen borrowes from the neighbouring bodiesa fic matterto reftore the 
loofed continuity thereof. 

This matter whileft by litle and litle it is dried and hardened, ic a — 


on 


a 
2 
4 
é 
4 
A 


Tumors again(t Nature in Generall. 1B. 


Griftely orelfea bony fubftance, jultby the force of the fame material and efficjen, 
caufes, by which ftones are generated inthe reinesand bladder. For the more te:y¢. 
ftriall portion of the blood isdriedand condenfed by the power of the unnatur,y 
heat contayned in the part affected with an Aneurifmae ; whereby it comes to pif, 
that the fubftance added to thedilated and broken Artery is turned into a 
ofa bony confiftence. In which the fingular providence of nature,the handmaide o¢ 
God is fhewed,as that which, asit were by making and oppofing a new wal! o 
bancke,would hinder and breakethe violence of the blood {welling with 
abundance of the vitall {pirits;unlefle any had rather to refer the caufe of that harg. 
neffe ro the continuall application of refrigerating and aftringent medicines. Which 
have power tocondenfate and harden,as may not eb{curely be gathered by the wri. 
Lit.g.Capwlt. tings of Galen, But beware yoube not deceived by the forementioned fignes ; I'g, 
=" fometimes in large Ameurt/maes you can perceive no pulfation,ncither can you fore, 

the blood into the Artery by the preffure of your fingers either becaufe the quantity 
A Cantionin of fuch blood is greater than which can be contayned in the ancient receptacles of the 
Artery,or becaufe itiscondenfate and concrete into Clods, whereupon wanting th: 
benefit of ventilation from the heart, it prefently putrifies; Thence entue great paine, 
a Gangren,and mortification of the part, and laftly the death of the Creature. 


, 
~ 


elle onely fom«< 
Letthe Ay arsce 
ii the whele head. 


THE 


fia! 
Or Artery, and 2 

comming whay; 

an inward caufe. 

and heat 

Mufculous Skinn¢ 
and the sk 

: Dura mater sand « 

J er aninm, are a 


— 
Abi 
i) 
44 
4 
4 


materiall and efficien, 
For the more terre. 
er of the 
by it comes to 
is turned into a bod y 
re,the hand maide of 
nog @ new wal] Or 
od {welling with the 
caufe of that harg_ 
medicines. Which 
athered by the 
rioncd fignes; Fe, 
Bither can you force 
becaufe the quantiry 
Nt receptacles of the 
TeupoOn Wanting the 
e entuc great Paine, 
the Creature. 


THE 


ll. 


TVMORS AGAINST 


Tue Eicur Booxe! 


The Pre 


=]| Ecaufe the Cure of difeafes muft be varied according to 
|| the variety of the temper,not oncly of the body in generall , 
but alfo of cach part thereof ;the f{treneth, figure,forme, fire, 
and fence thereofbeing taken into confideration : I thinke it 
worth my paines, having already fpoken of Tumors in Gene-, 
rall,if I fhall create of them in particular which affe@ each 
part of the body, beginning with thofe which affayle rhe 
head. Therefore the Tumor either affeéts the whole head,or 
elfe onely fome particle thereof, asthe Eyes, Eares, Nofe, Gumms and the like, 
Letthe Hydracephalos, and P4yfecephalos be examples of thofe tumors which pofleffe 
the whole head. 


= 


Cuap. I. 


Of an Hydrocephalos or watry tamer which commonty : 
affects the beads of Infants. . 
He Greekes call this difeafe Hyarecepbalos,as it werea Dropfie of the Whatitis. 
ty Head, by a waterifh humor; being a difeafe almoft peculiar to Infants 
newly borne. Ithath for an external! caufe the violent compreffion "The caules, 


of the head by the hand of the Midwife or otherwife at the birth, or by 


2 fall contufionand the like. For hence comes a breaking of a veine | 
or Artery, and an effufion of the blocd under the skinne.. Which by corruption be- | 
comming whayifh, laftly, degenerateth into a certen waterifh humor, It hath alfo 
“n inward caufe, which isthe abundance of ferous and acride blood, which by its 


oe and heat {weats through the Pores of the veffells, fometimes betweene the 
ulculousskinne of the head and the Pericranium, fometimes betweene the Pericra- Difterenceaby 
“and the skull, and fometimes betweene the skull and the membrane called 


reafon “tf place 


Theater and otherwhilesinthe ventriclesofthebraine,. 
Ae fignes of it, contained in the {pace betweene the Mufculous skinne and the ‘so 


P 
‘TKratinm,ace a manifelt tamor without paine, foft,and much yecelding to the 


L | Be bd 2 Sy 
4, 
| 
3 


y g? 


A Hiftory. 


Lib.6.Cap,3, 


Thediferens 
ces thereof, 


preflure of 


weepes by reafon ofthe ferous humor {weating out of the brainc. 

Vefalins writes that hee faw a girle of two yeares old whofe head was thicker tha 
any mans head by this kinde of Tumor, and the Scull not bonie, but membranous, 
as itufeth to be inabortive birthes, and that there was nine pound of water ray 
out of it. 

Aoucrafis tells that he faw a child whofe head grewevery day bigger by rez. 
fon of the watery moiitare conteined therein, till at length the tumor became { 
great, that his necke could not beare it neither ftanding nor fitting, fo that hee died 
ina fhort time, I have obferved and hadincure foure children troubled with this 
difeaic, one of which being diffeGted after it died, had a braine no bigger than; 
Tennis Ball. But of a Tamorand humor conteined within under the Cranisns, or 
Scull, have feene none recover ; but they are eafily healed of an external! Tumor, 

Therefore whether the humor lye under the Pericraniam, or under the mul: 
lous skin of the head, it muft firft be affailed with refolving medicines, but if it 
not be thus overcome, you muft makean incifion, taking heede of the Temporal! 
Mutcle, and thence preffe out all the humor,whether it refemble the wathing of Act 
newly killed,or blackith blood, or congealed or knotted blood , as whenthe rumor 


bath beene caufed by contufion; then the wound muft be filled with dry lint,andco- 


vered with double boulfters, and laftly bound with a fitting ligature. 


Cy AP, I I. 
Of 4 Polypus, being an eating difeale inthe Nofe. 


Polypas is a Tumor of the Nofe againft nature, commonlyarifing from 
the Os Eshmwides or {pungye bone. It is focalled, becaule it refemblestie 
meatal fect of a Sea Pe/ppus in figure, and the ficth thereof in confiftence, This ¥ 
Tumor fiops the Nofe, intercepting and hindering the liberty of {peakin3 
and blowing the Nofe.Celfw faith the Po/ypus is a caruncle or Excrefcence one whi’ 
white,another while reddith, which adheres to the bone of the Nofe, and fomerim*s 
fills the Nofthrils hanging towards the lipps, fometimesit defcends backe throug? 
that hole, by which the {pirit defcends from the Nofe to the throtle; it erow¢s fo that 
it may he feene behindethe Yew/«,and often firangles a man by ftopping his breath. § 


a~ 


There are five kinds thereof, the fir is,a foft membrane, long and thin like the relaxed 
and deprefled 


which obfiructing the nofthrils intercepts the refpitation made by that pat’ 
The chird, is fle 


{pring 


ging from the middle griftle of the nofe, being filled witha § 
Phiegmaticke and vifcide humor. This in ex{piration bangs out of the Nofe, but * | 
drawne in and hid by infpiration;it makes one {naffle in their {peech and fnort inthe’ & 
dcepe. Thefecond, hath hard fleth,bred of Melancholy blood 


hanging from the Griftle, ronnd, and foft, being the Mor in the rem; 


LA 


{pring of Pile 
istouchec y 


verfe {urface o 
Of all thefe 
fend forth aif 
refifting, ane \ 
hand, becal 2 
eneratc; 
may ufe tht f 
lowing. 
Olt dev 
folant 
ina leaden mo 
which are icfe 
way with ami 
putin through 
teries,as 
hath a faculte 
facultie, for th 
mayne it will 
to the noftril’s 
gent medicines 
hinder the 
tam, whites O 
nature. 


of the difeak 
Others Syanpt 
Or quality ruffi 
‘Ofammation 
is more vitiated 
Paine, by 
as alfo by rego 
28 alfo of the ¢ 
Patient is trout! 


Hany times this 
4UMor. 


©cure muft > 


fingers. The Signes, when it remayneth betweene the Pericran;. 
: wm and the skull, are for the moft part like the forenamed, unleffe it be thar ep, 
Tumoris a little harder, and not fo yeelding tothe finger, by reafon ofthe par, dryed, Dein: 
betweene it andthe finger; And alfo there is fomewhat more fence of paine. 2, FF The fitch is 
when it is in the {pace betrweene the skull and Dwra mater,or in the ventric), & 
: of the Braine orthe whole fubftance thereof, there is a dullnefle of the fences ;. 
| of the fight and hearing; the tumor doth mot yeeld to the touch, unleffe yo, 
: ufe ftrong impreffion, for then it fincketh fomewhat downe, efpecially in infay; Ff 
: newly borne; who have their fculls almoft as foft as waxe, and the junctures o¢ 
: their Sutures laxe, both by mature, as alfo by accident,by reafon of the humo, 
conteined therein moiftening and relaxing all the adjacent parts;the humor cop. 
| teined here lifts up the Scull fomewhat more high, efpecially at the meetings ff 
| of the Sutures,which you may thus know,becaufe the Tumor being preffed th, 
| humor flyes backe into the fecret paflages of the braine. 
To conclude, the paine is more vehement, the whole head more {wollen,th, 
forchead ftands fomewhat further out, the eye is fixt andimmoveable, andalj, f 
Of b 
The reafon of 
thename, 
This difeag. 
monly brings 2 
ally when its 
Crifis, 


nleffe it be thar the 
reafon of the Parts 
fence of Paine. Bur 
or in the 
ie of the fences 
touch, unleffe yo, 
efpecially in 
d the junctures of 
afen of the humor 
bumor cop. 
lly at the meetings 
being prefled the 


more {wollen,the 
moveable, and alf, 
f ~ 
ad was thicker thay 
, but membranous, 
pound of water ran 


day bigger by rea. 
e tumor became {9 
ng, fo that hee died 
troubled with this 
no bigger thana 
er the Craninm, or 
n external! Tumor, 


icines, but if it can- 

of the Temporall 
the wafhing of fieth 
as whenthe tumor 
ith dry lint,and co- 
re. 


onlyarifing from 
ufe it refembles the 
confiftence, This 
liberty of {peaking 
refcence one while 
ofe, and fomerimes 
nds backe throug” 
e; it growes fo that 
opping his breath. 
hin like therelax¢d 
being filled with a 
fthe Nofe, but © 
hand fhost inthe! 
witheut aduftion, 
nade 
t, being tic 
» being (orig 


the Pericran; 


br under the muicu, 


{pring of Phiegmaticke blood. The fourth is an hard Tumor, like fleth, which when 
jstouched yeeldsa found likea ftone; it is generated of Melancholike blood 
drved, being fomewhat of thenature of a S¢irrhus confirmed and without paine. 
The fifthis as it were compofed of many cancrous ulcers fpred over the tranf- 
verfefurface of the griftle, 
Of all chefe forts of Polyp?, {ome are not ulcerated; others ulcerated, which 
fend fortha ftinking and {trong {melling filth. Such of chemas are painefull, hard, Which ofthess 
refitting, and which have a livide, or leaden colour,muft not be touched with the 
hand, becaufe they favour ofthe Nature ofa Camcer, as into which they oftde- o- 
generate; yet by reafon of the paine which oppreffes more violently, you 
may ule the Anodyne medicines formerly defcribed in a Cancer, fuch as this fol- 
owiDg. 
de vitel. ovorum Lytharg, anri, Tuthie prep, an. faccé plant. An Anodyne. 
folant Lapid. hbamatit. them be wrought a long time 
ina leaden mortar, and fo make a medicine to be put into the nofethrills, Thole 
which are foft, loofe and without paine,are fomctimes curable, being plucked a- 
way with an inftrument made for that purpofe, or elfe wafted by actuall cauteries 
putin through a pipe, fo that they touch not the found part; or by potential] cau- 
teries,as Agyptiacum compofed of equali parts of all the fimples with vitriol! which 
hath a facuitie to watte fuch like tleth, Aquafortis and oyle of vitrioll have the fame 
facultie, for the{e take away a Polypus by the rootes ; for if any part thereof re- Why it muft 
mayne it willbreede againe. But Cauteries and acride medicines muft be put in. be taken cleace 
to thenoftrills with this Caution, that inthe meane time cold repelling and aftrin- “"*” 
gent medicines be appliedto the nofe and parts about it to affwage the paine, and 
hinder the inflammation. Such as are Vaguestum de bolo, and uneuentum nutri- 


tum, whites of Egges beare with Rofe leaves, and many other things of the like 
nature, 


CHAP. III, 


Ofthe Parotides that is;Certaine fweHings about the Bares, 


Parotis is a Tumor againft nature, affecting the Glandules and thofe what ic is, 
he T A Parts feated behindeand about the Eares, which are called the Emun- 

Ctories of thebraine; for the{e becaufe they are loofe and fpungy, are fic 

toreceive the excrements thereof, Ofthefe fome arecriticall,the matter 

of the difeafe fomewhat difgefted being fent thither by the force of nature, The ditteren- 
Others Symptomaticall, the excrements of the braine increafed in quantity Their fignes 
or quality rufhing thither of their owne accord. Such abfceffes often have great 
‘ammation joyned with them, becaufe the byting humer which flowes thither 

's More vitiated in quality thanin quantity. Befides alfo they often cavfe great 

Paine, by reafon of the diftention of the parts indued with moft exquifit fence, 

@alfo by reafon of a Nerve of the fifth Conjugation fpread over theie parts; 

’alfo of the neighbouring membranes of the braine,by which meanes the 

Paticnt istroubled with the Head-ach and all his face becomes f{wolne. Yer 


bo tunes this kinde of Tumor ufeth tobe rayfed by a tough, vifcous,and groffe 
or. 


This difeafe doth more stievoufly affli& young men than olde; it com> Prognotticke: 
brings 2 Feaver and watching, Ir is dithcult to be cured e{peci- 
the sane it is caufed by a groffe, tough, and vifcide humor,feat chicher by 
rifts, 
muft be performed by diet,which muft be cotrary to the quality of the 
or inthe temper & confiftence ofthe meates.Ifthe intiamation & rednelfe be great, cars. 
Cc3 whic 


mon] 


| | 
q 
a 
4 
4 
q 


29% 


7 


Of Particular umors againft ature. 


Lib.2 decomp, 
med.fec. Locos, 
Hip. aph.21 
61. 


Gentle refol= 


‘oyntmentto be applyed with moitt and greatie wooll to mitigate the paine, 


Stronger re- 
folvers, 


A Ripening 
medicine, 


What it is, 


The Symps 
tonics, 


The Chirurs 
sicall cure, 


which indicate abundance of bloud,Phicbotomie will be profitable, yea very neces. 
fary. But here we muft nor ufe the like judgement in application of focall meg;- 
cinesas weedoe in otherstumors,as Gaéew admonifheth us ; that is,wee muft nor yf 
repercuffives at the beginning, cfpecially if the ab{ceffe be criticall;for fo, we thoul¢ 


infringe or foreflow the indeavors of nature forcibly freeing it felfe fromthe morbj. 
fique matter. But wee muft much lefle repellor drive it backe if the matter whic): 
hath flowed thirherbe venenate, forfo the reflow thereof to the noble parts wou|c 


provemortall, Wherefore the Chirurgion fhall rather affitt nature in attraQing ang 


drawing forth that humor, Yet if the defluxion fhall be foviolent, if the paine { 
fierce that thence there may be feare of watchings anda Feaver, which may dejea 
the powers, Galen thinks it willbe expedient with many refolving medicines 
mix fome repelling, Wherefore at the beginning let fuch a Caraplafme be appl yed. 

Re. Far. bord. ¢y lin. ana. coquantur cum mulfa aut decocio cham, addendo by, 
vecen.cy olei cham.ana >) fiat Cataplafma, And the following oyntment wilalfo be good, 

Ry, Bat. recen, ij,oles cham. lilior, an.3}. unguen.de Althea cera param:make ap 


fomewhat more {trong difcuffing and refolving medicins will be profitable, as 

R. Rad. althee bryon, an. 31}. fol. rate, puleg. orig. an.m,)j, flo. chamam melil.an.p 
coquantur in hydremelite, piftentur, tragciantur, addendo farin, fanagrec 
Ireos, cham, melilot. an. olez ancth.rutac, an. 3). fiat cataplafma. But if you deter. 
mine to refolveit any more, you may ule Emplafirum Oxycrocenm Melilot- P lai 


the humor doth there concrete and grow hard,you muft betake you to the medicines 
which were preferibed inthe Chapter of the Seérréus;but ifit tend to fuppuration, 


you fhall apply the following medicine. 
Rad. lilierum ceparum [ub cineribus an, Vitell, over. num.g, axung./uile 


cy umgucnt.bafilicon, am. 3). far. fem. lini fiat Cataplafma. But it the matterdoc 


{fo require, let the tumor be opened as we have formerly prefcribeds 


Of the Epulis,er overgroming of the fichh of the Gums. 


4) Oy litle and litle oft times encreafed to the bignes of an Egee,fo that it both 
hinders the {peach and cating ; it cafts forth falivous and ttincking filch,aod 
~CoS=3) net {-ldome degenerates into a Cancer, which you may underftand by the 
propriety of thecolour, paine and other accidents ; for then you muft by no meanes 
touch it with your hand. But that which doth not torment the Patient with paine, may 
be pluckt away;and lec this be the manner thereof. 

Letit be tyed with a double thred which mutt be fraiter twitched untill fuch rime 
as it falloff; whenit fhall fall away, the place muft be burat with a cautery po’ 
throughatrunke or pipe, or with Agua fortis, or oyle of Vétriel, but with great care 
that the found parts adjoyning thereto be not hurt, for if fo be that it be nor burnt, i 
ufvally returnes, 

i have often by this meanes taken away luch large tumors of this kinde, that they 
hung out of the mouth iano {mall bignes,to the great diffiguring of the face, which 
when asno Chirurgion durftrouch, becaufe the flefh looked livide, I yenrured 
becaufe they were free from paine ; and by taking them away and cauterizing th 
place,l perfe@ly healed them;not truly fodainly and at once;for although I burnt the 
p lace after diflection; yct nevertheleffe they {prung op againe,becaufe a certaine por 
tion of the bone and fockets in whichthe Teeth ftand faitened, were become rot(ch 
i have olten obferved fuch like flefh by continuance of timeto have turned into 4 
come & bony fubftance. Wherfore the cure muft be begunas fpeedily as may be 
or being but litle, and having faftened no deepe roots, itis more eafily caken aw2y; 


being thea on ly Gilled with a vifcide humor,which in fucceffe of time is hardened,a0 
makes the taking away thereof more difficulc, 
Cx APs 


tle Epalw is a fichhy excrefcence of the Gums betweene the teeth, whichis. 


colour and cc 
Citrine or 
That you m 
acautery or h: 
manner of Op: 
ted iron plate 
mouth,you tha 
Thenthere yor 
mouth which 
thumbe under 
you may open 
matter conteéin 
hony,and Suga 


\\\ 


\\ 


{Peaking,as alfo 
left by con 
Confumed by 

rit moiften the: 


i} 
L 
~ ®. 
vifcideand 
| 
| 
+ ~ 
{ 
muit not be | 
4 Rreat Uanrity 
q Ntity 
| 
° 


L 


ycavery aecef. 
of locall med;- 


»wee muft not yf 
for fo, we thould 
e fromthe morbj. 
the matter which 
noble parts would 
cin attraQling and 
r, if the paine {% 
which may dejeg 
102 mcdicines to 
lafme be applyed, 
bam, addendo byt. 
t wilalfobe good, 
era parum:make an 
rc the paine, alfo 
ofitable, as 

amam 
But if you deter- 
Melilot-Plaifter 
yu to the Medicines 
mind to {uppuration, 


num.y. axungfuille 


if che matterdoc 
ds 


the eceth, whichis 
that it both 
itiacking filch,and 
underftand by rhe 
nul by no meanes 
nt with paine, may 


ed untill fuch time 
lth a cautery pu 
ut with greatcare 
t it be nor burnt, 


kinde, that they 
of the face, which 
, | ventured upon 
d cauterizing the 
hough I barat the 
ufe a certaine por 
re become 
ave turned into 4 
edily as may be; 
ralily raken 


1¢ is hardened,and 
Cuare 


*8teat q 


72.8. Of Particular Tumors againft Nature. 


Carp. V. 
Of the Ranula, 


sores Here is oft times a tumor under the tongue, which takes away the liber- 
ty of pronuntiation, or {peech ; wherefore the Greckscall it Batrachi- 


the Latines becaufe fuchas have this difeafe of the tongue, 


Me feemcto exprefie their minds by croaking rather than by {peaking. 

ees Tr is cauled by the falling downe of a cold, moifte,grofle, tough 
vifcideand Phlegmaticke matter,from the braine uponthe tongue, which matter in 
colour and confiftence refembles the white of an egge, yer fometimesit lookes of 2 
Citrine or yellowith colour. 

That you may fafely performe the cure, you muft open the Tumor rather with 
scautery or hort Iron, than witha Knife, for otherwife it will reeurne againe. The 
manner of Opening of it muftbethus. You fhali get a bended hollow and perfora- 
red iron plate with a hole inthe midft, and making the patient to hold open his 
mouth,you fhall fo firic, that the hole may be upon the part which muft be opened. 
Thenthere you muft open it with an hor Lron, for fo you fhall hurt no patt of the 
mouth whichiswhole ; but whenyouare ready to burne it, by thrufting your 
thumbe under the Patients Chin, you may fomewhar elevate the Tumor, whereb 
youmay open it with more certainty; whenit is opencd you muft thruft our the 
matter conteined therein, and then wath the patients mouth with fome barly water, 
hony,aad Sugar of Rofes;for fo the ulcer will be fafely and quickly healed, 


The deliniation of the Irom plate and crooked actual Cautery. 


gor?" Nee 
: 


, 


\ 


5 * 
eq 8 


~ 


VA 


Cuarp. VI. 
Of the fvelling of the Glandules, or Almonds of the Thro ate. 


A y ceive the {pittle falling downe from the braine, both leaft that the too 
SSO Violent falling downe of the humor fhould hinder the tongue in 


Peaking,as alfo that the tongue might alwayes have moifture, as it were laid up in 


mea by continual! {peaking it fhould grow dry and faile.For thus this {pittle be- 


fumed by feaverith heats, the patients are {carfe able to {peake, unlefle they 
moiften their tongue by much wafhing of their mouth. 


"The Reafon 
why itisfo 
called. 


The Caufe, 


‘The Cura 


ANG aye Ature at the jawes nearethe roots of the Tongue, hath placed two why the 
Glandules oppofite to one another ; in figure and magnitude like to 
itd Almonds, whence alfothey have their name, Their office is to re- Almonds, 


Theirule, 


ele Glandules becaufe they arc feated in an hot and moift place, are very fub- The Caufe of 


to infla 


uantity of crude, phlegmaticke and vifcous humors, whence arifes a tumor; 
| C which 


mmations; for there flowes into thefe oft times together with the blood, their umor, 


yee 

© 


Of Particular Tumors agatnft Nature. 


: which isnot feldome occafioned by drinking much and that vaporous wine, by top 


much Gluttony,and ftaying abroad inthe openaire, 

Symptomes. Swallowing is painfulland troublefome tothe Patient, and commonly hee hath , 
Feaver, Ofttimesthe neighbouring Mutcles of the Throtle and necke are {0 {wo}. 
together withthefe Glandules, that (as it ufually happens in the Sqwinzye)the paflace 
of the breath and aire is ftopped, and the Patient {tr@ngled. 

Cure; We refift this imminent danger by purging and blood-letting, by applying Cup. 
ping-Glaffes tothe Neckeand fhoulders, by frictions and ligatures of the extreme 
parts,and by wafhiog and gargling the mouth and throte with aftringent gargarir. 
mes. But ifthey come to fyppuration,you muft with your incifion Knife make wz 
for the evacuation of the Pas, or Matter; but if en the contrary, thefe things perfo,, 
med according to art, defluxion be encreafed,and there is prefent danger of death by 
{topping and intercepting thebreath,for the fhunning fo great and imminent danger. 

Extremedis the top orupper part of the A/pera arteria or VWVeazon mult be opened, in that place 

fealesmuk where it ufes to ftand moft out; & ic may be done fo much the fafer, becatife the joy. 

remedies, lar yeines,and arteryes are furthelt diftant from this place,and for that this place har} 
commonly litle flefh upon it. And that the incifion may be the fitlyer made, the pati. 
ent muft be wifhed to bend his head backe,thatfothe Artery may be the more cajily 

i. comceto by the inftrument;then you fhal makean incifton overtwhart with a crooked 

mafvcpenthe Knife betweene two rings (aot hurting nor touching the Griftlely fubftance )chat is to 

Weazon- fay the membrane which tyes together the Griftlely rings being onely cut ; you tha! 
then judge that you have made the incifion large enough, when you fhall perceive the 
breath to breake out by the wound ; the wound mutt be kept open fo long, until! the 
danger of fuffocation be paft ; and then it muft be fowed up not touching the Grifle, 
But ifthe lipps of the wound fhall be hard and callous, they muft be lightly {Caritied, 
that fothey may become bloody for their eafier agglutination and union, as we (hal 
fhew more at large in the cure of Hare lips. have had manyin cure, who have reco- 
vered,that have had their Weazon together with the Griftlely rings thereof cut with 
a great wound, as we (hall note when wee fhali cometetreate of the cure of the 
woundsofthat part. 


— 


Cuap. VII. 


Of the inflammationand relaxation of the Vvula,or Columella. 


He a litle body , fpongy and fomewhat fharpened to the forme of 2 


7 pinc applic, hanging even downe from the upper and inner part of the 
Palat,fo to breake the force of the Aire drawn in, in breathing and carryed 
The Caufe of § tothe Lungs, andto be asa quill to forme and tune the voyce, [rt often 


grawes above meafure by receiving moyftare fal!ing downe from the braine ,becom- 
fharpe by litle and litle from a broader and more {wolne Bafis. Which ching 

Symptoms. cafes many Symptomes; for by the continual irritation of the diftilling humor th¢ 
Cough iscaufed, whichalfohinders the fleepe, and intercepts the liberty of {pec 
bur alfo by hindring refpiration the patients cannot {leepe unleffe with open mouth: 
they are exercifed with a vaine endeavoring to {wallow (having as it were a moricl 
fticking in their jawes ) and are in danger of being ftrangled, 

TheCuree This difeafe muft be refifted and affailed by purging, bleeding, Cupping, taking of 
chyfters,ufing aftringent Gargles,and a convenient diet; but if it cannot thus be ove! 
come,thecure muft be tryed by a caufticke ef qua fortis, which I have divers times 
done with geod fuccefle, But if itcannot be fodone, it will be better to pur ro you! 

Chieeen’ hand,than through idleneffe to fuffer the patient to remaine in imminent and dea¢!y 
danger of ftrangling,yet in this there muft very great caution be ufed ; for che Chiu" 
geon fhall not judge the Ywu/e fitto be touched with an inftrument or cauttick, whicit 
is f{wolne with much enflamed,or blacke blood after the manner of a Cancer; but hee 
fhall beldly put to his hand ifit be longifh, grow fimall by litle and litle into a fharpe, 


loofe & foft point;if it be neither exceeding red neither {wolne with roo nauch: 


LIB. 


but whitith 2 
cut away, tha 
light place, an 

our fizcrs, 
wife you thall 
this inftrumen 
min, the Kin 
mother; Whig 
Wombe. 


Thi 


* 
| 
| 
¥ 
# | 
j # 
| 
ih 
why 
1 
’ “AY 
| 
4 
q 
an car 
if | 


ous wine, by tog 


nonly hee hath 
cke are {0 {wolne 


inzye)the paflace 


oy applying Cup. 
s of the extreme 
tringent garparif- 
Knife make wa 
fe things perfor. 
anger of death by 
immunent danger, 
ied, in that place 
becaufe the jugy- 
vat this place hath 
er made, the pati- 
e the more eafily 
irt with a crooked 
ibf{tance Jrhat is to 
mncly cut ;you thal! 
{hall perceive the 
{o long, untill the 
ching the Griftle; 
¢ lightly fcarified, 
union, as we fhall 
who have reco- 
rs thereof cut with 
f the cure of the 


mella. 


lrothe formeol a 
ner part of the 
thing and carryed 
voyce, 
he braine ,becom- 
Which ching 
tilling humer the 
liberty of {fpeech, 
vith open mouth: 
it were a moricll 


upping taking of 
a thus be over 
1ave divers times 
ter fo pur ro your 
xinent and deadly 
for che Chirut 
or cauftick, whic 

a Cancers ; hee 
litle into a {harps 
roo 


[is.8. Of Particular Tumors againft Nature, 295 

but whitifh and without paine. Therefore that you may more cafily and fafely 
cut away, that which redounds and is fuperfluous, defire the patient to fitin a 
fioht place, and hold his mouth open ; then take hold of the top of the Yuu/s with 
our fizers, and cut away as much thereof as {hall be thought unprofitable.Other- 
wife you fhall binde it with theinftrument here under deftribed ; the invention of 
his inftrument 1s to be afcribed tO Homoratus Taftellanus that diligent and learned 
min, the Kings Phy fition inordinary, andthe chiefe Phyficion of the Queene 
mother; Whichallo may be ufed in binding of Po/yps and warts inthe necke of the 


Wombe. 


The Deliniation of conftridtory rings ft to twitch or binde the 
Coluimella, with 4 twiffed thred, 


A, Shewes the ring whofe upper part is fome- 
what hollow, 

B.A double waxed thred, which is couched in + 
the hollownefle of the ring, and hath arun- 
ning,or loofe knot upon it. 

C. An ironrod,into the eye whereof the fore- 

mentioned double thred is put, and itis to 

twitch the ColameAa when as couch thereof 
istaken hold of, asis unprofitable, and fore 
take itaway without any fluxe of blood. 

When you would fraitea thethred, draw 

it againe through this iron rod, and {lo 

firaine it as much as you fhall thinke 
good, letting the end of the thred, hang 
out of the mouth. But every day it muft 
be twitched harder than other , untill it 
fall away by meanes thereof, and fo the 

part and patient be refkored to health. I 

have deliniated three of thefe inftruments, 

thatyou may ufe which youwill, as occa- 
fion {hall be offered. 


A Figure of the Speculum oris, by whith the mouth is held and kept sper, 
whileft she Chirurgion is bufiedsn the cwtsing 
away or bindingthe Vvula. 


‘ 


it 


i * 
i 
| | 


But ifan cating ulcer fhall affeciate this relaxation of the together 
iuxe 


- 
i 

aN 
AVE é 
| | 
4 
7 
jiic “a 

| 

| : 

4 

| 
q a” y 

A <. | 4 

| SS 


-_ 


Whaticis, 


The differens 
ces, 
The Sirk kind, 


‘The Sym< 


The fecond 
kinde. 


The third,’ 


The Caufest 


therewith. 


A bellow Trunke with bolein the fide, with the hot 
iron inferted, or put therein, ’ 


} 


C HAPs V I I 
Of the Angina, or Squinzy. 


} 


ar ae entring oftheambient aire into the weazon, andthe vapours and {picit 
from paffage forth, and tke meate alfo from being f{wallowed, There are 
(HAKD| three differences thereof. The firft torments the patient with great 
paine, nofwelling being outwardly apparent,by reafon the morbificke humor lyes 
hid behindethe almonds or Glandules at the Vertebre of the necke, fo that it cannot 
be perceived, unleffe you hold downe the tongue with a fpatula or the Speculum 
oris, for fo youmay fee therednefic and tumor there lying hid. The patient can- 
not draw his breath, nor fwallow downe meate, nor drinke ; his tongue, 
Gray-hounds after acourfe ,) hangs out of his mouth, and he holds his moath ope" 
that fo hee may the more eafily draw his breath ; to conclude, his voyce ts as ic wers 
drownd in his jawes and nofe; he cannot lye upon his backe, but lying is forcea © 
fit, fo to breathe more freely: and becaule the paflage is ftopt,the drinke fiyes out « 
his nofe; theeyes are fiery and {wollen, and ftanding out of their orbe, Tho 
which are thus affe&ted are often fuddainely luffocated,afoame rifing about the! 
mouthes. 

Thefecond difference is faid tobe that, inwhich the tumor appeares inwardly, 
but litle or {carfe any thing atall outwardly, the tongue, Glandules, and jasves 4)- 
pearing fomewhat {wollen. 

The third being leaft dangerousof them all,caufes a great {welling outwardly, >“ 
litle inwardly. 

The Caufes are either internall, orexternall. The externall are a ftroake, {pli 
ter orthe like things fticking in the Throat, or the exceffe of extreme cold, or hc. 
‘The internal! caufes are a more plentiful! defluxion of the humors 
from the whole body or the braine, which participate of the nature eithet 
of blood, choler or fiegme, but feldome of Melancholy. The fignes by which "° 
kinde and commixture may be knowne, have beene declared in the generall treat 
oftumors. The Squincy ismore dangerous,by how much the humor is lefic ap)* 


rent within and without, That isleffe dangerous which fhewes it felfe outward: 


mec Squinancy,or Squinzy, is afwelling ofthe jawes, which hinders che 


Lin.8, 


fluxe of blood, then it muft be burnt and {eared with an hot iron, fo thruft into a 
Trunke, or Pipe with an hole in it, that no found part of the mouth may be offended 


Pus letthe patien 


£47 Alfo the 


LA 


dayes ; bucif th 
kindof difeafe 1s 
into (ome noble 

rincipall parts 
otherwile by {u | 

The way of 4 
fmall, and that 
and the patient 
deadly by reato 
which the pafla; 
with Capons, a 
feeds. 

If the Parties’ 
Creames,the Ba 
meates of this k: 
melita, and Hya 
Sugar as alfo ¢ 
others of this ki 
fition mult be c 
delayes. Wher. 
the greater; the 
juné matter, Ice 
plyed, fometime 
and let frictions 
humor impact i: 
Whileft the ma 
{tringent gargar 
falling downe it 
gence notwith{ta 
crate, Or {uch a | 
berber. 3ij. ler the 
tion of the halte 
moron let ith 
there may be 
Verjuice, lulep o 
Phlegmaticke, 
lafelyadded. 
but rather Lenit 
fo the way be Op 
You thall know : 
he (wallow, {pea | 
tO De Much afwae 
‘D8 tefolving me 
the matter feem 
Of March. Malloy 
Water, The like 
Y Ovle of fweer 

PUration and 
the necke amd thr 
Lillyes, When th 


with a Crooked an 
With clenfing par, 


icer being clen{e 
Othe former par 


296 

intwelue houres others intwo,foure or feyen daies, Thofe({aith Hippecr 

Which {cape the Squincy, the difeafe paflesto the lungs, and they dye within, 


1B. 


may be offended 


hinders che 
ypours and {pirit 
lowed. Thereare 
tient with great 
ificke humer lyes 
, fo chat it cannot 
orthe Specwlwm 
The patient can- 
his tongue,(likea 
s his moath open 
Byoyce ts a3 ic were 
ying is forced to 
rinke fiyes out at 
eir orbe. Thole 
ifing about their 


peares inwardly, 
and jawes ap- 


g outwardly, but 


ea ftroake, fpli- 
e cold, or heat 
humors either 
nature either 
nes by which the 
general treatile 
mor is lefle app* 
felfe outwardly, 
Some dye of 4 
dye within 


; 


Bede 


Of Particular Tumors againft Nature 


gayes ; butif they {cape thefe dayes 
Lindo difeafe 1s terminated by rsh ier but alfo often times this 
‘ 
wiolati Lungs (whence the reflux ofthe humor 
ra violating brings inevitable death roce¢eds)and into other 
rmall, and that fubrle,¢f onis the more to be defired ; ith 
mall, and th tleefpecially if the Phy fici rou Bappeas when the m 
4 the patient ufe fi the Phy tition fhall draw bloc rte 
le i of Gargarifmes. A Criticall Sc lood by opening a veine 
egdly by seafon of the reat falli quincy divers ti , 
which the paffage of the downe of the humor proves 
"ih Capons, and Veal isfodainely fhutup. Broth poo the throtle, by 
pons, eale, feafoncd with Lettuce, Purflai ufed made 
| ne, Sorrel! andthe cold 
Creames,the Barly being firft b te weake,let him have potched Ege 
ates of this kinde, Let him b ed with Kaifons in water and and Barly pics 
welits, and Hydrofashara wine, in ftead whereo 
Sugar as alfo the Syrupes of dr 4 made of water and H ule Hyaro- 
Rofes ,of Vi ~ ONY, OF wate 
others of this kinde.Let him 550 Violets, Sorrel] d Li fcr and 
muftbe carefull of all be ide too much fleepe.But in the m and Limons, and 
ime atrer the fa e thetumor is Cure, 
the tongue be ~ G O the con- 
ch {carification, fometi ping-Glaffes b 
andiet fri@tions and pat lon, fometimes withour,t ge 
and painefull Ligaturesb stothe necke and fhould 
bomor impaétin the part b gatures be ufed tothe ext emertatg. 
drawne reme parts, But ! 
Whileft the matter is ind away by glifters and t let the 
ftringent gargarifmes t uxion, ler the mouth without dela pe {uppofitories, 
o hinder the defluxionof th wafhed with a- 
Paticnt,as it often happens by its fuddaine 
nding. Thereforelet the mouth yfitionscare and dili. 
a garparifine: Re Pomerum filuef be frequently wafhed with Oxy Gargarilee 
On Or the hele, adding thescunto the wi erco the conti 
= of the wine of OLUMp- 
Verjuice, lule of R argarifmes made of the waters of ners to arte. And: 
Phlepmaticke. ofes andthe like. Butif the matter of taine, Night-fhade, 
added, pill, Cypreffe nuts fhall be 
but rather L e contrary repercuffives :nuft tle Vinegar may be 
whe be © 
fo the wa cnitives whereby the external! pa utwardly applyed 
y be openeither fi parts maybe relaxed and rarifie 
You thall kn rt forthe diffufingor refolving th 1 and rarified, aud 
he {wallow ow the humor to begin to berefolvcd, 1 + “ portion of the humor. 
ing tefolving . Therefore thennatures endeavor mutt sand the painebegia 
the matter medicines, or elfe by uting fu eavor mult be helped apply- 
eeme to turne! {uppuratives inwardly and 
of March. re into Therefore let outwardly, if 
Water, Figgs, Iujubes, damafke be made of the roots Ripening 
Puratio nds, or Violets wa Uke with Sugar 
llyes. ate,and the parts be wrapped wi applyed outwardly to 
fition {halt ooll moiftened with of 
witha Ral rary mouth be opened with the Specu/uns mor is perfe@tly turned into 
withclenfir andlone incifion knife, then let the ~~ the abicefle opened 
Sw fic. fiat gar- Detergent 
? ine,and Hony will be fit for this Gargarifines, 


Ulcer bej 
og clenf 
tothe f ed by thefe means,let ir be cicatrized witha litle roch- Alume added 


or 
Mer gargarilmes. 


297 Be 


The 


thruftinto a 
uly 


Of Particular ‘Tumors againft Nature. L 13.3. 


— 


chen the point 
: into the part 
The Figure of an incifion knife opened out of the bafte,which 


forves for a fheath sherete. {gmewhat ho 
bound by the 
thought g0ed 


Cuarp. IX, 


of the Bronchoccle, or Rupture of the throate, 


The tesvon of Mat which the French call Goetra,that the Greeks call Bronchocele,.the 
thename, = Bee REO tines Guttaris Hernia,that is, the Rupture of thethreate. For it isa round 


f tumor ofthe throate,the matter wherof comming from within outwards, 
eaves is contcined betweene the skia and weazon;it proceeds in weomen from 
the fame cgufe as an Aucurif{ma. 


The differens But thisgencrall name of Bromchocele undergoes many differences,for fometings § But if the pa 
it retaines the natureof Medicemides,other whiles of Steatom’ as, Atheroma’s or Ancuri. forate the ribs 
ma's,in fome there is found a fiefhy fubftance having fome {mall paine; fomeof or matter muti 
* thefe are {mall, others fo great, that they feeme almoft to cover all the throat; § the Cheft clen! 
fome have a Cyfte, or bagge, others bave no fuch thing; allhow many fo ever they Barly water,an 
_ be, and whatend they fhall have, may be knowne by their proper fignes; thel cure of wound 
The Gar. which fhall be cureable, may be opened with an a@uall or potentiall cautery,or with 
anincitien knife. Hence if it be pofhble,let the matter be prefently evacuated, 
but if it cannot be done at once, Ict it be performeed at diverfe times,and difcufled 2y 
ft remedies, and laftly let the ulcer be confolidated and cicatrized, 
Cuarp. X. 
Of the Pleurifie. 
Wants. He Pleurific is an inflammation of the membrane, invefing the ribbe:, 
caufed by fubtile and cholericke bloud, {pringing upwards with gic: moift 
i pees violence fromthe hollow veine into the 4zygos, and thence intot!* IS called 
intercoftall veines, &is at length powred forch intro the emptic fiche veft 
of the intercoftall mufcles,and the mentioned membrane. Being cor The 
OfePleurige bined there, ifit tend to fuppuration, it commonly infers a pricking paine winde, founds |; 
commingto 2nd difliculty of breathing. This fuppuraged bloud is purged and evacuated one whl Ody is diftend, 


fuppuration. by the mouth;the Lungs fucking it, and fo cafting it into the Weazon, and {0 in" 
the mouth, orherwhiles by urine,and fornetimes by ftoole. 

-Butifnature being too weake cannot expedtorate the purulent blood poured fort 
© fthe change tO the capacity of the Cheft the difeafe is turned into an Empyema, whereforeti« J 
thereaf intoan Chirurgion mutt then be called, who beginning to reckon from below upwards, 4) UP, whereby 
a vemt betweene the third and fourth true and legitimate ribs ; & that the yit 

on cone either with anaétuall or potential] cautery, or witha fharpe knife drawne 
in anEvypyems Wardstowards the backe, butnot downwards, left the veffells fhould be violated 
\ which are difleminated under the rib. This apertion may be fafely and eafily pet 


E formed by this actuall caurtry; it isperforated with foure holes, through one whe! 


of there is 2 pin put higher or lower according to the depth & mannerof your ins! fo 
i 


| 
| 
| 
‘ > wih ‘ 
Hill 
4 
if 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
} 
| 
| 
| 
teh, 
al 


“hen the point thereof is thruft through a plate afiron perforated alfo in the mid. 
a the me defigned by the Phyfition, left the wavering hand might peradventure 
quchand fo hurt the other parts not to be medled withall. This fame plate muft be 

fomewhat hollowed,that fo it might be more eafily fitted to the gibbous fide, and 
boundby the corners on the contrary fide with foure ftrings, Wherefore I have 
thought goed hére toexprefic the figures thereof. 


L 12.8: 


The Figure of an aciwall cautery with its plate fit to be 
in aplenrifie. 


| la 4, 
| 
\\\ \\\ \ \\ Van atl 


gnchocelethe La- 
\, 


For it isa round 
vithin outwards, 
weomen from 


J 


But ifthe patient fhall havea large body, Cheft and ribs, you may divide and pers : 
forate the ribs themfelves with a Trepan ; howfoever the apertion be made, the pws ' 
or matter muft be evacuated by little and litle at feveralltimes; and the capacity of + 
the Cheft clenfed from the purulent matter by a detergent injeGtion of vj eunces of | 


Barly water,and 31) hony of Rofes,and other the like things mentioned at large in eur 
cure of wounds. 


's,for fometimes 
oma’s or Anecurif- 
paine; fomeot 
all the throate; 
ny fo ever they 
per fipnes; thele 
| cautery,or with 
ntly evacuated, 


and difcufied by 


Xt. 


Of the Dropfe. 


He, Dropfie isa Tumor againft nature by the aboundance of a wate- What the 
rith humor,of flatulencies, or Phlegme, gathered one while inall the 
%| habite ofthe body,otherwhiles in {ome part,and that efpecially in the 

Bey] capacity of the belly beeweene the Peritoneum and entrailes,From this 

“Gino the ribbes, diftinion of placesand matters there arife divers kinds of Dropfies, 

ring CAC het nat Firft that Dropfie which fils that {pace of the belly, is either moift or dry; The Thedifferen 
wards wit he moilt is called the by reafon ofthe fimilitude it hath with aleather bottle, 
fp aces the waterifh humor is contained inthat capacity, as it were in 

. | 

rane. oer 4 at The dry is called the Tympanites,or Timpany, by reafon the belly {welne with 
 paine,a hile Winde, founds like a ( Tympanam ) that is,a Drum. But when the whole habit of the 

uated one diftended witha Phlegmaticke humor, it iscalled Anafarca ot Leacopblege rie 
Inthis laft kindé of Dropfie the lower parts firft fwell, as which by reafom tome. 


Oftheir fite are more fubjed to rcceive defluxions, and more remote from the foun- 


of the native heate; wherefore if 
Heer will re 


Fh 
uld be violate Places 
andeatily pe 
one where 


che 


a they all atife from the fame caufe - that isthe weakneffe or defect = 
the 


299 
| 
= 
| 
| 
sured 
od foreti | you prefic them downe, the printof your 
Wier e patientsface will become pale and puffed 
be Whcreby it may bediftinguifhed from ehe rwo other kinds of Dropfie. For in 
— at wet firft the belly, then by a certaine confequence the thighes and feet doe fweil. 
are befides alfo particular Dropfies contained in the {trait bounds of certaine 
{uch are the Hydrocephalos inthe head ; the Brenchochelein the throat ; the 


“30 Of Particular T umors again{t Nature. Lip 


the altering or Concecting faculties,e{pecially of the liver, which hath beene caufeg 
by a Scyrrbus,or any kinde of great diftemper, cheifly cold, whether it happen prj. 
marily, or fecondarily by reafon of fome hore diftemper difiipating the native ang 
indred heate, fucha Dropficis uncureable ; or elfe it comes by confent of fome g. 
ther higher or lower part; for ifin the Lungs,Midriffc, or (eines there be an, 
diftemper,or difeafe bred, it 1s eafily communicated to the gibbous patt of tiie 
Liver bythe branches of the hollow veine,which runnethither, But if the mi 
chiefe proceed from the Spleene, Stomacke,Metentery ,Guts,e! pecially the 


How divers ileum, it creeps into the hollow fide of the Liver by the meferaicke veines, ang 


difeafes turneé 


into Dropfies. grher branchesof the Vesa porta or Gate-veine. For thus fuch as are troubled wi) 


the Asthma, ptificke, Spleene, Laundife, and alforhe Phrenfic, fall into 
Dropfie, 

Laftly,all as have the menftruall o»hemorrhoidall bloud fuppretfed or too im. 
moderatly flowing contrary to their cuftome,cither overwhelmes, diminifh eth or 
extinguifheth the native heate ;no otherwife than fire, which is fuffocated by tog 
ereata quantity of wood; or dieth and is extinguifhed for want thereof. We 
looke for the fame fromthe excrements ofthe belly or bladder, caft forth cithe, 
too fparingly or too immoderatly: Or by too large quantity of meates too cold, 
andra(hly devoured withoutany order ; Toconclude by every default of extcrna|| 
caufes, through which occafion, error may happen, in diet or exercife. 

Thefignsof The Afcitesisdi@inguifhed fromthe two other kinds of Dropfies, both by th: 
an Afesie ~~ maenitude ot the efficient caufe, as alfoby the violence of the Symptomes, as the 
deje&ed appetite, thirft, and {welling of the Abdomen. Andalfo when the body js 
moved or turned upon either fide,you may heare a found as of the jogging of water 
The Symp- in a veffell halfe full. Laftly the humor is diverfely driven upwards or downewards, 
roms. Ss according to the turning of the body and compreffion of the Abdomen ; It allo cauleth 
various Symptomes by preffure of the partsto which it ftoweth. For it cau(eth 
difficultie of breathing and thecough by prefling the Midriffe ; by {weating throug) 
into the capacity of the Chef it caufeth like Symptomes as the Empyema. Belides 
alfo the Patients often feeme, as it were, by the ebbing and flowing of the waterifl 


humor, one while to becarryedto theskies, and another whiles to be drowned 


the water;which I havelearnt net by reading of any author, but by the report of 


the patients themfelves.But if thefe waterifh humors be fallen downe to the lower 
parts,they fuppreffethe excrements of theGutts and bladder by preffing & ftraitning - 
the paflages. When the patient lies on his backe the tumor feemes leff{e, becaufe it 
is fpread onboth fides ; On the contrary when hee ftands or {its,it feemes greater, 
for that allthehumor is forced or driven into the lower belly, whence hee fecles 3. 
heavines inthe Peden or fhare. The upper parts ofthe body fall away by defect - 


the bloud fit for nourifhment in quality and confaftence ; but the lower parts ‘we: 
bythe flowing downe of the Scrous and watrifh humor tothem. The pulfe isitt!’, 


quicke,and hard with tention, 


Prognoftickes, ‘This difeafe is of the kinde of Chronicall or long difeafes; wherefore it is {cafc*s. 
or never cured, e{pecially in thofe who have it from their mothers wombe, who 
have the Action of their Stomacke depraved,andthofe who are 


laftly all fiich as have the naturall facultie languifhing and faultie. 


On the contrary young and {trong men,efpecially ifthey have no Feaver, aod 


finally all who can endure labour and thofe exercifes which are fit for curing ts 


difeaie,eafily recover,principally if they ufe a Phyfition before the water which 


pathered together doe putrifie and infe& the bowells by its contagion. 


C 


Paracentefis; but 


urine. Hsppocrates 
alts ={5 
grainesin white 
dome beene fecn: 
will be availeabic 
dicines which 
Let bagges be mix 
or for want of th 
The more ctic 
Nature or Art, th 
which, ifRuc, M 
the like beadded, 
of the oyles of Ru 
of Spaine, or 
Myrthe, Turpior 
Pigeons,Goats, | 
difeafe continue, 
and velicatory n 
paine, thatforhie 
exhaulted, and th 
Galen writes, 
try into the city 1: 
fione juggs fild w 
fture through th: 
When certaine pI 
force to draw out 
heape of whear, 
But if the 
quilitely chiefe 
theancient Phy fir 
Thofe therefo: 
fons. The firftis, | 
diffipate and refoly 
another o 
Was Dorn 
eth downewards: 
culty of breathing 
is nery 
pricked o 
tique and 
Par acentefis a5 dea, 
*N8 teafons, viz. | 
Cawe of the Dropi 
Owels, Whereby if 
B2ine fall into the 
Owels, all whi 


vated by the abfen 
Ved Aviten and G, 


— 
| 7. 4 | 
| 
| 
| 


th beene caufed 
happen pri. 
» the native and 
ent of 
nes there be an 
ous part Of thie 
but if the mif. 
ally the 
ucke veines, and 
etroubled wich’ 
fall into 9 


of tooim. 
diminifheth or 
affocated by tog 
We mutt 
forth Cither 
1eates COO Cold 
ult of external] 
ic. 
both by the 
ppromes, as the 
hen the body 1S 
ogging of water 
or downewards, 
- Iraliocauleth 
For it caufeth 
cating through 
pyema, Belides 
_ of the waterith 
be drowned in 
yy the report of 
me to the lower 
ing & ftraitning 
leffe , becaufe it 
feemes greater, 
‘nce hee fecles 4 
ay by defectot 
parts {well 
pulfe is little, 


fore it is {carces 
rs wombe, who 


no Feaver, and 
it for curing tis 
water which 
n. 


Cust 


[1 Bede 


Of Particular Tumors aganft Nature. : 301 


XII. 
Of the snre of the Dropfie. 


He beginning of the cure muft be wit | 
TE ther muft we come to a Paraceate/is, medicines ; nci- 
it fhall be the part of the Phyfition | 
drying diet, and {uch medicines as c 
prince. Fsppocrates ordaines this powder for H and 
alts =f, Comburentur in {urne, fiat palvis ; of which ablatis 
graincsin white wine ,for nature helped by this, and the like rem die 
dome beene feeneto have cured the dropfie, But that we m he hath not fel- 
will beavaileable to ftirreup the native heate of the partbya Sag the cure, it 
dicines which havea difcuffing force : as bagges baths 
Let bagges be made of drie and harfh Bran Oates, Salt, Sul 
or for want of es Sander, or Afhes often heated » Sulphure, Deing made hor, 
The more effeétual] baths are falc, nitrous 
Naturcor Art, that is, prepared by the difflutionot Sal 
which, if Rue, Marjarom, the leaves of Fennell, and to £0 
of the oyles of Rue, Dill, Baies, and Squills,in which fome Euphorbi lg aegis 
of Spaine, or Pepper have beene boy Pellitory 
Pigeons,Goats,Horfes, and the like which b 
difeale continue, we mutt come to Syapé OF 
| , we O Synapifmes and Phanigmes, that is,to rubrif 
gaine, that {othe water may by little and little flow fo lon - ill lI 
and the patient reftored to health. 
Galenwrites, the Husbandmeni 
fione juggs fild with water in the middeft of the 
fture through the juggs into it felfe, and increafe both 
pragmaticall Phyfitions had read this, 
to draw out the wate eT 
the Phyfition fhall pr 
theancient Phyfitions have beene divers, we will Opinions of 
Thote therefore which difallow Paracentefis 4 them. Cente jss,08 
ons The firftis, hecaufe by powring out th ¢ it dangerous for three rea- the 
difipate and refolye the {pirits, an water, together with it,yOU Reafonsae 
culties another liters the natur all, vitall, and a nimall fa-~ 
twas borne up ; thence forward han i 
downewards the Midriffe and he whole Chef 
of } ugn, anda 
ane the fubftance of the Peritescam, as 
whichis pricked or cz be eal pricked or cut without danger, neither can thar 
or cut be eafily agglutinated and united, by reafon of the f 
and bloudleffe nature thereof, Erafiftratus d by the 
scentefis as deadly : alfo he erfwad d th condemned 
ing tealons. vi, becaafe che ed that it was unprofitable for thele follow. is, 
caule Of the 1) . water powred forth, doth not take away with it the 
owels. wher rt and the diftemper and hardneffe of the Liver, and ef the other 
wels, all which were mitigated by chof 
ated by the ablence thereat a y the touch of the included water, are aggra- 
Ved Avices and Gorde creor, bCing, powred forth : which thiog feemeth to have mo- 
nius that he faid none; the other faid very few lived after the 


Bagges, 


Paracente fic. 
“Téentefis; but the refutation ofall {uch reafonsis very eafie. 


Dd For, 


i 
| 

| 


at 


Reafons for it, 


Lib.3 .Cap.2%. 


Zid wor &, 
Ch, capt 
EHydrope. 


| I 
For, for the ficft Ga/en inferres, that harmefull diffipation of {pirits, and refolvip 

the faculties happens, when the Paracentefis is not diligently, and artificially perfo, 
med, As in which the water is prefently powred forth ; truly if that reafon have any 
validity,Phlebotomy mutt feeme to be removed farre from the number of whole. 
{ome remedies, as whereby the bloudis powred forth, which hath farre more pyr 
and fubrile fpirits, than thofe which are faid to be diffufed and mixed with the Drop, 
fie-waters. 

But that danger which the fecond reafon threatens fhall eafily be ayoj. 
ded; the patient being defired to lie upon his backe in his bed , for fo the Liver wij 
not hang downe. Bur forthe third reafon, the feare of pricking the Peritoneum, i; 
childifh : for thofe evils which follow upon wounds of the nervous parts, happes 
by reafon of the exquifite fence of the part, which in the Perstomawm ill affected anj 
altered by the contained water, is either none or very {mall. Buc reafon and exper: 
enceteach,many nervous parts, alfothe very membranes themf{elves being farre re. 
moved from a flefhie fubfance, being wounded, admit cure ; certainely much mors 
the Peritoneam, as that which adheres fo ftraitly to the mufcles of the Abdomen, 
that the diffeGor cannot feparate it from the flefh, bur with much labour. Bur the 
reafon which feemesto argue the unprofitableneffe of the Paracensefis is rcfelled by 
the authority of celfus. I, faith he, am norignorant that Ereftfratus did not like 72. 
vacestefis ; for hethrought the Dropfie to be a difeafe of the Liver, and fothat it mug 
be cured, and that the water was in vaine let forth, which the Liver being vitiared, 
might grow againe. Bur firftthis is not t'fefaule of this bowell alone, and then «. 
though the water had his originall from the Liver, yeeunlefle the water which 
there contrary to naturebeing evacuated, it hurreth both the Liver, and the reft of 
the inner parts, whileft it either emcreafeth their hardneffe, or at the leaft keepe:) 
it hard, and yee notwithftanding it is firthe body be cured, And although the onx 
letting forth of the humor profit nothing, yet it make way for medicines, which 
while it was there contained, it hindered, Butthis ferous, falt, and corrupt humor, is 
fo farre from being able to mitigatea Feaver and thirft, that on the contrary, it 
encreafeth them. And alfoitaugmenteth the cold diftemper, whileft by its abu. 
dance it overwhelmes and extinguitheth the native heate.Butthe authority of Cem 
Aurelsanus that moft noble Phifition, though a Methodicke, may fatisfie Avscen and 
Gordonius, They, faith he,which dare avouch thar all as have the water let out dy 
opening their belly have died, doc lie; for we have feene many recover by this kind 
ofremedy : but ifany died, it happened either by the default of the flow or negligent 
adminittration of the Paracentefis. 1 willadde this one thing which may take away 


o 
all error of controverfies: we unwifely doubt of the remedy when the patient i 


— 


- brought to that necefhity,that we can onely helpe him by that meanes. Now muftwe 


‘The places of 
the apertion 
rouft be divers, 
according to 
the parts 
cbicfely 
Red, 


The manner 
making 
apertion, 


thew how thebelly ought to be opened. If the Dropfie happen by fault of the Liver, 
the fection muft be made on the left fide ; butifof the Splene, inthe right : for ifthe 
patient fhould lie upon the fide which is opencd, the paineof the wound would cot. 


tinwally trouble him,and the water running into that part where the fection is,woud F 


continually droppe, whence would follow a diffolution of the faculties. The Se¢tio 


muft be made three fingers bredth below the Navel], to wie, atthe fide of the right 
mufcle, but not upon that which they cal! the Linea Alba ; neither upon rhe verves 


parts of the reft of the mufcles of the Epigaffrinm ; that {o we may prevent paine 24 


ditheulty of healing. Therefore wee muft have a care that the patient lie upon 
tight fide, if the incifion be made in the left, or on the left, ifonthe right. Then 
Chirurgion both with hisowne hand, as alfo with the hand of his fervant afillig 
him, muft take up the skinne of the belly, withthe flefhie pannicle lying under’ 
and feparare them from the reft;then let him divide them {0 feparated with a Sean? 
even to the flefh lying underthem, which being done, let him force as muchas §* 
can thedevided skinne upwards towards the ftomacke, that when the wouk fi 
which muft prefently be made in the fieth lying there under, fhall be confolidat 
may ferve for that purpofe then therefore let) 
Perstenaum with {mall wound, not hurting ut 


The 


the skinne by its falling therein, 
divide the mulculous fieth and 
Kall or Guts, 


quatiiry of 


Part it felfe will ret 
Will be foft :nd alg 


BeBe 
Then put iNorh 
nefle of a Goctes- 
which goes 19 oth 
forated with two 
about the t 
a fpunge be pec int 
taken out When yc 
gether, but litt! 
che faculties, 'vhic 
tient of che d feafe 
‘oyce at the 
difeafe, but cled 
could by no rieang 
not be fufficiznr t 
bur alfo the ¢ <tert 
cloathes, anda ftr 
we mote tha 
water fhall be iffu 
itcannot eafiiy be 
wound, beccnfet 
of rhe fiefh or mu 
gent care of 
to be debilitated, 
at the length 
thatthe Chiurgs 


The igs 


{fo clofely con¢re, 
Sometimes fuch 3 
lufually cur: afte 
make a 


ud 


lometines by 


Preflureof yo 


= 
| 
| 
| > 
- 
Exon 
| 


reafon have any 
umber of whole. 
farre more Pure 
with the Diop, 


eafily be avoi. 
o the Liver wij 
Péritonaum, is 
S parts, happen 
m ill affeGed and 
afon and experi. 
s being farre re. 
inely much more 
of the Abdomes, 
:labour. Butthe 
efis is rcfelled by 
4 did not like ?4- 
nd fothat it muk 
r being vitiated, 
one, and then a). 
which ftaieth 
r, and the reft of 
he leaft keepeth 
ithough the once 

edicines, which 
orrupt humor, is 
the contrary, it 
ileft by its abun- 
thority of 
tisfie Avicem and 
water let out by 
wer by this kind 
low or negligent 
h may take away 
en the patient is 
3. Now muft we 
aule of the Liver, 
¢ right : for if the 
vand would 
fe&ion is, would 
ties. The Section 
fide of the right 
upon the pervous 
revent paine aod 
ient lie upon his 
e right. Then the 
sfervant affilting 
le lying under! 
od with a Secti08 
e as muchas He 
then the 
be confolidated, 
therefore lee 
not hurting 


Thea 


[1 


“Then put into che woundatrunke, or golden, or filver crooked pipe, of che thicke 
nelle of a Goofes-quill, and of the length of fome halfea finger, Let that part of ic 
| gbich goes into the capacity of the belly have fomething a broad head, and that per- 


Of Particular Tumors againft N(ature. 303 


forated with two {mall holes, by whicha ftring being faftened, it may be bound fo 

about the body, that it cannot be moved, unleffe at the Chirurgions pleafurc. Let 

4 (ounge be put into the pipe,which may receive the dropping humor : and let it be 

taken out When you would evacuate the water : but let it not be powred out all to- 

gether, but by little and little, tor feare of diffipation of the {pirits, and refolution of 

“he faculties, which I once faw happento one ficke of the Dropfie. He being impa- » Higory. 
iene of the difeafeand cure thereof, thruft a Bodkin into his belly, and did much re- 

oyee at the powring forth of the warer,as if he had bin freed from the humor and the 

4i(eafe, but died within a few houres, becaufe the force of the water, running forth, 

could by no meanes be fiaied, forthe incifion was not artificially made. But it will 

not be fufficient to have made way for the humor by the meanes aforementioned, 

bur alfo the externall orifice of the pipe muft be ftopped and ftrengthened by double 

eloathes, and 2 ftrong ligature, leaft any of the water flow forth again{t our wills. But Caution for 
we rautt note thatthe pipe is not to be drawne out of the wound, before as much *kingoutehe 
water fhall be iffued forth as we defire,& the tumor requireth: for once drawne forth, 
tcannot eafily be put in againe, and without force & paine be fitted to the lips of the 

wound, becaufethe skin and flefhy pannicle cover it by their falling into the wound 

ofthe fiefh or mufcle. But whileft che water is in evacuation, we muft have a dill- 

gent care of feeding the Patient, as alfo of his ftrength, for ifthat faile, and he feeme 

tobe debilitated, the effafion of the water muft be fiaied for fome day es; which 

athe length performed according to our defire, che wound mutt be fo confolidated 

that the Chirurgion beware it degenerate not into a Fiftula, 


The Figure of s Pipe is forme of a Quill,to evacuate the water in Dropfies. 


Others performe this bufineffe after another Ancther maxs 
manner; for making an incifion, they thruft 
through the lipps of the wound witha needle and after theapere 
threed: but they rake up much of the fiefhie fub- *°™ 
ftance with the needle, leaft that which is taken 
up fhould be rent and torre by the forcible draw- 
ing of the lippes together. Then the threed it 
felfeis wrapped up and downe over both ends of 
the needle,fo thruft through, as is ufually done in a 
hare-lippe, thatfothe lippes of the wound may 
loclofely cohere, that not a drop of water may get out againft che Chirurgions will. 

Sometimes fuch as are cured and healed of the Dropfie, fall intothe laundife,whom 
lufually cure after this manner. Rv, flere. anfer.3ij, diflolve it in alb coletar. medicinefos 
make a Potion and let it be given two houres before meate. the Laundigs, 


C XIII. 


Of the tumor and relaxation of the Navell, 


He Exomphalos or {welling of the Navell, iscaufed by the Perstomaum, ci- Thediuers - 


bal | Ee, ther relaxedor broken : for by this occafion oft-tmes the Guts, and oft- 
ticacs the Kall, fall into the feat of the Navell, and fometimes fuperfluous 


: ‘ . 
= fleth is there generateds otherwife this tumor is as an Anearifma by too 


a quantity of bloud powred forth in that place : otherwife by aflaculent matter, signes hereof 

‘lometimes bya waterith humor. If the humor be occafioned by the Kall, the —- by 

part i: felfe will retaine his proper colour, that is, the colour of the skinne; the tumor 3 
Will be foftand almoft without paine, and which will refide without noife, either by 
preflure of your fingers, or of it felfe when the Patient lieth on his backe; the 
Dd 2 umor 


L I 

and relolving 

tificiall Derfor. 

| 


304. Of Particular Tumors again(t Nature. 


tumor caufed by the cuts, is more unequall, and when it is forced in by the preffiz, 


By the guts. 
a ae your fingers, there is {ucha noife heard, as inthe Emserocele ; but if the tumor p:o, 
By fle, ceede of fuperfluous fleth, it will be harder and more ftubborne, not eafily retir,, 
into the body, although the Paticnt lic upon his backe, and you prefic it with yoy, 
fingers, 
Dy winds The tumor is fofter which proceeds of winde, but which will not retire into}},. 


body, and founds under your nailelike ataber. If the {welling be caufed by a ware. 
By awateris rifh humor, it hath all things common with the flatuous tumor, except that itis yo, 


fo vifible, and without noife. If it be from eftufion of bloud, it is of a livid COlour, 
blood. but ifthe effufed bloud fhall be arceriall, then there are the figncs of an Aneuri/in, 


Mime Wherefore when the tumor is caufed by the Guts, Kall, Winde, or a waterifh hy. 
turgery,which mour, it is cured by Chirurgery : but not if it proceede from a fietbie excrefcence o; 
mee futfufion of bloud. The rumor of the Navell proceeding from the Kall, and Gur: 
the Patient muft lic upen his backeto becured, and then the Kall, and Guts, my 
cabeoen with your fingers be forced into their due place: then the skinne with which they. 
 moriscircumf{cribed muft be raken up with your fingers, and thruft through with 
needle, drawing after ita double twined and ftrong threed; then it muft be {carifeg 
about the fides, that fo ir may be the eafier agelutinated. Then mutt ict be thrus 
through with a needle, three or foure times, according to the manner and condition 
of thediftention and tumor. And fotwitch it ftrongly with athreed, that the skian: 
which is fo bound may at length fall off together with the ligatures. But alfo yoy 
may cut off the skinne {0 diftended evento the ligature, and then cicatrize it, as {iil 
be fit. A flatulent tumor of the Navell fhall be cured with the fame remedies, as we 
fhall hereafter mention inthe cure of a windy rupture, but the watery may be powred 
forth by making a {mall incifion. And the wound fhall be kept open, fo long, until 
all che water be drained forth. 


Cuap, XIIII. 


Ofthe Tumors of the Groines and Codds, called Herniz , that #,Ruptures, 


Theréare 
onely 3.forts 
of Raptures, 


He ancient Phifitions have made many kindes of Ruptures, yet indeed: 
there are oncly three to be called by that name, that is, the date 
| thatofthe guts, the Zéréals, or that of the kall, and that which is mixed 


eos Of them both. The other kindes of Ruptures have come iato this ord, 
rather by fimulitude, than any truth of the thing: for in them the Gut, or Kall co 
not forfake their places, | 
The Greckcs have given toallthefe feverall names, both from the feat of the 
mor, as allo from their matter. For thus they have called an unperfeét rupture whi 
Bwboxwele. defcends not beyond the Groines, nor falls downe into the Codds, Bubenece!s ; but 
the compleate which penetrates into the Codde, if it be by falling downe of the Gu, 
Epiplecele, E*terocele:if fromthe Kall, Epipéocele ; if fromthem both together, they name it 
Hydrecele, : Out ifthetumor proceede from a watcrifh humor, they terme it 
Phyfocele,  Arocele ; if from winde, Phy/focele, if from both, Hydrophydocelesif a tlefhie excreicen® 
serceele,  fhall grow about thetefticle,orin the fubftance thereof,it is named Sarcocele. If she 
veines interwoven, and divaricated diverfe wayes thall be {wollen in the Codde and 
Cirfwele,  Tefticles, the tumor cbtaines the name of a Cirfoce/e. But if the humors 
fhut up, er fent thither, the name is impofed upon the tumor, from the predomita 
The Cauls. humor, as we have noted in the beginning of our Traétare of tumors. The caules 
many, as all too violent motions, a ftroake, a fall froma high place, yomiting,? 
cough, leaping, riding upona trotting hotfe, the foundiag of trumpets, or fackbuts, 
the carrying, or lifting vp ofa heavy burden, racking, alfo the toe immoderatc ufo 
vifcide and flatulenc meates ; for all fuchthings may cither relaxe orbreake the /#”* 
tonenm, as that whichisa thione and extended membrane. The fignes of a Bxbon'* 
area round tumor inthe Groine, which preffed, is eafily forced in. The fignes° 


an Enteroce/e, arc a hard tumor inthe Codde, which forced, returneth backe 204 a 
| part 


Win: 
arreth with a c 
is laxe and fee 
chat which proc 
fubftance of the 

mutually fuccee 
eachother, fo 
without paine, 

that againft natu 
and almoft wit! 
is broker 
for when the Pe 
(y confequently 
renewed by rhe 
being broken : 

mor is renucd v 
of the figaes fha! 
Kall,do fofirme 
back into their p 
the vifcide mat 
Chirurgion, in 

long ftay of the 
fiontofuch adhe 
of the Peritonen 
you muft note, | 
codde,to the bi 

theexcrements, 
rupture, {0 alfo 


ik) or v2 
Is, cont 
ay We 
the Gut which: 
that his head 
with his hands | 
foment the Gro: 
Of the wombe. 
fi uf ficit, far hoy 
34, Bolt Armeni 
Art. For the fam 
Of the cure confi: 
the reftored eure 
child feated jn hi 
trom crying tho 
apply it made int 
Jayes adhefion v 
Paper} 
(Ne falling 
remedies 
| 
Childrens teftick 
crafty cozenage 
Odde, is uncara 
falfe, if fo be rhe 
t Periton eum is 


| 
| 
| 
| 
“| 

| 
} 
| 


in by the preffiyr, 
cif the tumor pro. 
, not eafily retirjy 

prefic it with you; 


fot retire into th. 
caufed by a wate. 
xcept that itis nor 
ofa livid COlour 
sof an Ancurifms, 
, of awaterifh 
bie excrefcence or 
1e Kall, and Guts, 
and Guts, mutt 
with which the tu. 
uit through with a 
mufibe {carified 
n mutt it bethruft 
Boer and condition 
ed, that the skione 
ures. But alfo you 
icatrize it, as fhall 
eremedies, as we 
ry may be powred 
ben, fo long, untill 


sKuptures, 


tures, yet indeede 
the date flinals, 
at which is mixed 
Rie into this order, 

Gut, or Kall doc 


the feat of rhe tu- 
rupture which 
ls, Bubenocele : but 
owne of the Gut, 
they name it 
they terme it Hy- 
efhieexcreicence 
d Sarcocede. If the 
fin the Codde and 
ehumors fhrall be 
the predomunant 
ors. The caufes are 
“ lace, vom a 
pets, or fackbuts, 
mmoderate ufc of 

Or breake the Perk 


parteth with a certaine murmour and paine ; butthe tumor proceeding of the Kall, 
is laxe and feeles foft like Wooll, and which is more dithicultly forced in, than 

shat which proceeds from the Guts, but yet without murmuring and paine: for the 

@bttance of the Guts, fecing itisone, and continued to it felfe, they doe not onely 

putually fucceede each other, buc by acertaine confequence doe, as in adance draw 

eachother, fo to avoide difteation, which in their membranous body cannot be 

without paine, by reafon of their change of place from chat which is naturall, into 

that againft mature : none of all which can befall the Kall, {ceing it is a ftupide body, 

and almoft without fence, heavy, dull, andimmoveable, The fignes thatthe Peré- 

soneam is broken,are the fudden increafe of the tumor, and a fharpe and cutting paine; 

for when the Perstonaum ts oncly relaxed, the rumor groweth by little and little, and 
(yconfequently with {mall paine; yet fuch paine returnes fo often, as the tumor is 

renewed by the falling downe of the Gur,or Kall, which happens nor the Peritoncum 

being broken: forthe way being once open, and paffable to the falling body, the tu- 

moris renued without any diftention, and fo without any paine to {peake of. The reft 

ofthe figaes fhall be handled in their places. Sometimes it happens that the Guts,and 

Kall,do f{ofirmely adhere tothe proceffe of the Peritomeum,that they cannot be driven 

back into their proper feate. This ftubborne adhefion happens by the intervention of 

the vifcide matter, or bymeanes of fome excoriation caufed by the rudehand of a 
Chirurgion, in too violently forcing ofthe Gut,or Kall, into their place. But alfo,tco 

long ftay of the gut in the codde, and the negle& of wearing a Trufie,may give occa- 

fonto fuch adhefion. A perfec and inveterate rupture by the breaking ofthe procefle 

of the Peritonanm in men of full growth, never,or very feldomes admits ofcure. But What rupture 
you muft note, that by great ruptures of the Perstonewm, the Guts may fall into the # 4nsurable 
codde,to the bigneffe of a mans head ,wwithout much paine and daager of life ,becauie 
theexcrements, as they may eafily enter, by reafon of the largenefie of the place and 

rupture, {0 alfa they may eafily returne, 


— 


Cu A P, xX V. 
Of the cure of Ruptures. 


Scaufe children are very fubject to Ruptures, but thofe truely not flefhy 

) or varicous, but watry, windy, and efpecially of the Guts, by reafon of are tubjea. 

is, continual! and painefull crying and coughing : Therefore inthe firtt place 

DA we will create oftheir cure. Wherefore the Chirurgion, calledto reftore 

the Gut which is fallen downe, fhall place the child, either onatable, or ina bed, {0 

that his head fhall be low, but his buttocks, and thighes higher; then fhall he force 

With his hands by litele and little, and gently, the Gut into its proper place ; and {hail 

foment the Groine with the aftringent fomentation, defcribed inthe falling downe 

ofthewombe. Then let him apply this remedy, Rx, Prafeript. decoctionts quantum An afringens 

jaf farina hor dei fabarum, j,pulver, Aloes, Maftiches, Myrtyll.¢x Sarcoce. ar, 

35, Bole Armenizij. Letthem be incorporated and made a cataplafme according ta 

Art. For the fame purpofe he may apply Emplaftrum contra Ruptoram : but che chiefe 

of the cure confifts in folded clothes, and Truffes, and ligatures artificially made,that 

the reftored gurmay be contained in its place, for which purpofe he fhallkeepe the 

child {eated in his cradle for 30.0r 40, dayes,as we mentioned before; and keepe him 

crying fhouting,and coughing. Aetins bids fteepe paper 3. dayes in water, and 

apply itmade into a ball to the eroine,the gut being firft put up;for thatremedy by 3, 

Jayes adhefion wil keep it from falling down. But it wil be, as I fuppofe more effeGu- 

ifthe paper be fteeped not incommon, but inthe aftringent water, defcribed in 

the falling downe of thewombe. Truely Lhave healed many by thehelpeof fuch 

and have delivered them from the hands of Gelders, which are greedy Of phe erafe and 
ludrens tefticles, by reafon of the great gaine they receive from thence. They by z av 

crafty cozenage, perfwade the Parents, that the falling downe of the Gucinrothe 
Odde, is uncarable which thing*norwithftanding, experience convinceth to be 

*, if fo be the cure be performed acccording to the forementioned manser, when 
“feritonaunsis onely relaxed, and not broken : for the proceffé thereof by which 


Dd 3 the 


L I 
| 
| 
res of a Bu 
in. The fignes 
eth backe and 
pa” 


Anctherway the Gut doth fall asina fteepe way, in progrefic of time and age is {traitned and knit 
eocurtRup= together, whileft alfo in the meane time the guts grow thicker. 

— A certaine Chirurgion who deferveth credit,bath told me that he hath cured many 
children as thus : He beatesaloadftone inte fine powder, and gives it in pappe, any 
then hee annointes with hony the Groine, by which the gut came out, and the, 
firewed it over with fine flings ofiron. He adminiftred this kinde of remedy forte, 
or twelve dayes: The part, for other things, being bound up with a ligature ap, 
trufleas was fitting. The efficacie of this remedy {cemeth to confift in this ; th», 

The reafonof the loadefione by a naturall defire of drawing the iron which is {trewed upon th. 

Groine, joynes to itthe fiefhy and fatty particles interpofed betweene them, by 
certaine violent impetuofity which on every fide prefling and bending the loofene(, 
of the Perstonaum,yca verily adjoyning themfelves to it, in proceffe of time by » 
firme adhefion intercept the paflageand falling downe of the Gut or Kall; whici, 
may feeme no moreabhorring from reafon, than that we behold the loadfione ;; 
felfe chrough the thicknefle of a table, to draw iron after itany way. The fame Cj. 
rurgion affirmed, that he frequently and happily ufed the following medicine, He. 

Anotherme: burnt into alhes inan Oven red Snailes,fhuc up in an earthen pot,and gave the powde; 

ane, of themto little children in pappe, burto thofe which were bigger, ia broath. 

But we muft de{paire of nothing in this difeafe, for the cure may happily proceed, 
in men of full growth, as of fortie yeare old, who have filled the three demenfions of 
the body , as this following relation teftifies. 

There wasa certaine Prieft in the Parifh of Saint Andrewes, called Moret 


whofe office it was to fing an Epiftle with a loud voice as often as the folemnitic of 
the day, and thething required. Wherefore fecing he was troubled with the Exe. 
rocele, he came to me, requiring helpe, faying he was troubled witha grievous paine, 
efpecially then, when he f{tretched his voice in the Epiftle. 


The Figure of aman broken on one 
fide, wearing 4 Truffe whoft 
bolfer bave three 
rofities, two om the upper, and 
one onthe lower part ana 
muft be a hollawnelfe betreent 
them inthe middest, that they 
may not too firaztly pre(je the 
fharebone , ond fo caufe paint. 
The manntr of [uch 
found out net long aeoe, 
feemed better and fafer thas tie 
reft for to hinder the falling 
aowue of the Gut and Kall, - 


‘ 
SBN 


A. Stewes the fhouiderbana which 
before and behinac te sist 
pirdle of the Traffe. 

B. The Truffe. 

C. The Cavitig left inthe miap 
of tae Taberofitits. 


fh 


When | had (cene tue bigaeile of the Esterocele, I perf{waded him to get anorhct 
[0 


1B.3- 


ro ferve in his piace 
Divinity, he coma 
commanded him bh 
ons. When | met h 
(wered very well, 

merly troubled; 
ehat hee had told 
But fome fixe mong 
where hee died, a 
ther nature had don 
I cal! God to witne 
the Peritomaum adi 
place,that could {c 
And this was the {p 
admiration, that | 
thought incurable. 

inits place, afte 


\ 


h: ich ay either re}. 
ave alread 


ane tim 
wh ime 


Pla{mes t 
#8. Ler them be b 


- 
| 
| 
7 
€ 
| 
S 
— 
ser, 4) 
> 
SS 
So 
Bx : 3 
A ¢ j > 
‘ \ AS J 
‘ 4 j ' 
\ 
ce 


raitned and 


sath cured many 
it in pappe, and 
ne out, and then 
remecy forte 
) aligature and 
{tin this ; thar 
ewed Upon the 
ne them, by 
2 the loofeneffe 
(fe of time by 2 
or Kall; 
he loadftone jr 
The fame Chi- 
medicine, Hee 
rave the powder 
broath. 


Ippily proceede 
‘demenfions of 


ed lohan Moret, 
e folemnitie of 

with the Ente. 
grievous paine, 


an broken on one 
Trajfe , whofe 
ve three 
the upper, ana 
part. and there 
wne Lerrrecne 
ideft, that they 
vactly prefe the 
fo caufe paint. 
(uch a Truffe,! 
72 ana it 
pd fafer than the 
fer the fallung 
t and Kall, 


bana whic 
behind tothe 
le. 


inthe mid 


ro get 
to 


Qthem Ip this 


keptin his bed 
owing 


1 Beds 


ae o lace; fo having gotten leave of M. Curso Clearke, and Deacon of 


Divinity, be committed himfelfe unto me; I handled him according unto Art, and 
commanded him he fhould never goe withouta Truffle; and he followed my directi- 
ons. When i met him fome five or fixe yeares after, I asked him how he did, he ane 
pyered very well, for he was wholy freed from the difeale with which he was for- 
merly woubled; whicbI could not per{wade my felfe of, before that I had found 
‘hat hee had told mee the truth, by the diligent obfervation of his genitals. 
put (ome fixemoneths after, he dying of a Pleurilie, I came to Cwrz0's houfe 
where heedied, and defired leave to open his body, that Imight obferve whe- 
‘her nature had done any thing at all inthe patlage through which the gut fell down, 


1 cal! God to witnefle, that I found a certaine fatty fubftance about the procefle of 


she Peritonaum about the bigneffe of alittle egge, and it did fticke fo hard tothat 

igce,that I could fcarce pull it away without the rending of the neighbouring parts, 
‘And this was the {peedy caufeofhis cure. But it is moft worthy of obfervation,and 
,dmiration, that Nature but a little helped by Art, healeth difcafes which are 
ought incurable. The chiefe of the cure confifts in this, that we firmerly ftay the 
cyt inits place, after che fame manner as thef{e two Figures thew, 


Another Figure of 4 wan having 
4 Rupture ow both fides, fhewing 


Tru(je, and what fhoulder-band 
he muit be bound on gach groine, 


A. Sheweth the fhanlder-band dé- 
vided in the middeft for the put - 
ting through of the bead. 

B. The Truffe, with two boliters, 
bet weene which ts a hole for 
ting through the yard, The forme 
of both bolfiers ought to be tbe 

fame with the former. 


P 


Inthe meane time we muft not omit diet. We mutt forbidde the ufe of all things, 


vuich may either relaxe, dilate, or breake the proceffe of the Perstonewm, of which 
treared fufficiently. Sometimes, but efpecially in old men,the guts can- 
th 


Ctettored into their place by reafon of the quantity of the excrements hardened 
c fe they muft not be too violently forced, but the Patient muft be 


, and lying with hishead low, and his knees higher up ; lec che fol- 
Cataplafmes be applied. 


Bie: ath, isl ana. 51). feminis lint. fenug. an. 38, fol. malva,viol. A 
Let them be boiled in faire water, afterwards beaten, and drawnc excrenense 


fearie 


We mult neves 
de{paire in dis 
fealesiffo be 
nature be 
aflociated by 


by wnat meanes, what kinde of 


* 
*Us 3 
Art. 
n 
A 
me SSS 
q 2 = Sete, 
~ AL 
‘ — = > 
. 
> SS = 
~ 
xz 
Y 
q 
4 
— 
q 
| 


03 Of Particular Tumors againft Nature. 


= 


fearfe, adding thereto of mew Butter without falt, and oyle of Lillies, as much 
thal! fuftice. Makea Cataplafme in the formeof aliquid pultis, Letit be appjic, 
hot tothe Codde, and bottome of the belly; by the helpe of this remedy whep ;, 
hadbeenc applied all night,the guts have not feldome beene feene of themfelye. 
without the hand of a Chirurgion, to have returned into their proper plac,, 


The windinefle being refolved, which hindered the going backe of the exere. 
ments into another gut, whereby they might be evacuated and expelled. Burif th. 
excrements will not goe backe thus, the flatulencies, yer refifling and undilcuffeg 
an emollient and carminative Clyfter iste be admitted with a little Chymical] oy|: 
of Turpentine,Dill, luniper or Fennill. Clyfiers of Mufcacine, oyle of Wallouts ang 
Agus vite, anda {mall quantitieof any the aforefaid oyles,are good for the fam. 
purpofe. 

It often happens that the guts cannot yet be reftored, becaufe the procefice of th; 
Peritonaum is not wide enough. For when the excrements are fallen copy 
with the gut intothecodde ; they grow hard by little and little, and encreafe by thy 
accefle of flatulencies caufed by refolution, which caufe fuch a tumor as cannor by 
put up through that hole, by which alittle before it fell downe : whereby it happens 
that by putrifa@ion of che matter there contained, come inflammations, and anew 
acceffe of paine; and lafily, a vomitting and evacuation of the excrements by the 
mouth being hindered from the other paflage of the fundament. They vulgar!y cal 
this affc& Adiferere mei, That you may helpe this fymptome, you rather aflyy 
extreame remedies, than fuffer the Patient to die by fo filthy and loathfome a death, 
And we mufteure it by Chirurgery after this manner following. Ye will binde the 
Patient lying on his backe, upon a Table or Bench ; then prefently make an incifion 
in the upper pard of the codde, not touching the fubftance of the guts ; then we mul 
have a filver Cane or Pipe, of the thickneffe of a Goofe quill, round, and gibbous in 
one part thereof, but Somewhat hollowed inthe other, as is fhewed by this follos. 


ing Figure, 


The Figure of the Pipe or Cane: 


We muft put it into the place of the incifion, and put it under the production 0 
the Peritonaum being cut together with the codde, all the length of the producto’, 
that fo with a fharpe knife we may divide the procefle of the Perstomaum, accordiny 
to that cavity feparated from the guts there contained, by the benehrof the Cane 
a right line not hurting the guts. When you have made an indifferent incifion, th 
guts muft gently be put up into the belly with your fingers, and then{fo much of the 
cut Peritoneum mutt be fowedup,as thall feeme fufficient, that by that paflage ma 
more ftraight, nothing may fall into the Codde, after it is cicatrized, 

But if there be fuch abundance of excrements hardned, either by the fy 
or heate of inflammation, that that incifion is not fufficient to force the excremen 
into their place, the incifion muft be made longer, your Cane being theult 
wards the belly : fothat it may be fufficient for the free regreffe of the guts intot's 
belly. Then fow it upas isfit, and the way will be fhut up againft che fallin, 
downe ofthe guts or kal] ; the proceffe of the Peritoneam being made more ‘traig" 
by reafon of the future ; forthe reft, the wound (hall be cured according to Art. >¥ 
before you undertake this worke, confider diligenly whether the firength of 
Patient be fuificient, neither attempt any thing before you have foretold, and ee 

red the danger to the Patients friends, 


‘ 


shat which they 
For which put 
ploied, He {hall® 
Probe like to th 
proceiic of the / 
brous, and ocr 
matique veflels, 
done, he fhall cir 
much thereof, 2 
and fhall with a 
canto the {perm 
drawne againe 1 
lipps of the wou 
of muft belefr ai 
threed will of ic 
be drawne out b 
rhe ligature, 
And lafily, ler 
lous hardnefle m 
There are fom: 
othe manner, T 
commonly is, 
adour it, being 
much as may {ur 
veflels at liberty 
mullets, and cur¢ 
turne injleaht wit 
ving the golden\ 
they keepe the P 
thing higher, and 
Many are heal: 
fon of the illrwif 
There is alfo 
fate, even for tha: 
fore they wrappe 
the proceflé of th, 
HOt t00 loofely 
too ftraitly leafta 
Hourifhment, Th 
this contratioa of 
Bently drawne 
the Chirurg: 
te tion, for 
Cincorh 
£rowth , bur 


ng May make a 
¢ labours by repe 


{eth the Paine, and 


JiB.> 
} 
ore 
~ 
oyla, 
y 
WS 
| 


4S Much o¢ 
Letit be applieg 
remedy when j; 
of themfelves. 
if proper Place, 
ke of the excre. 
clled. Butif the 
and undilcuffed, 
‘Chymicall 
of Wallouts ard 
mod for the fame 


procefie of the 
re fallen downe 
1 encreafe by the 
or as cannot be 
ereby it happens 
and anew 
crements by the 
hey vulgarly cal! 
muft rather affay 
path{ome a death, 
Ve will binde the 
make an incifion 
tssthen we mutt 
and gibbous in 
Dy this follow. 


e production of 
f che production, 
weum, accerding 
tof the Cane ia 
‘rent incifion,the 
nfo much of the 
hat paflage made 


ther by the flay 
e the excremen's 
ing theuft up tO" 
f the guts into chie 
ainft the falling 
e more ftraight, 
ling to Art. But 


Li Bede 


Of Particular Tumors againft Nat ure. 


XVI, 
Of the golden Ligature, or the Pun&tus Aureus,as they callit, 


,@r-9F the Rupture will mot be cured by ali thefe meanes, by reafon of the Ths Chinw- 
excat {olution of the continuity of the relaxt, or broken Peeitomewm, and 
@ the Patient by the confentof his friends there prefent, is ready ro an- Tye. 
ie dergoe the danger in hope of recovery ; the cure thail be attempred by 
that which they call the Punc?us Aureus, or Golden tie. 
For which purpofe a Chirurgion which hath a skilfulland fure hand, is to be im- 
oied. He fhall make an incifion about the fhare bone, into which he thal! thrutt a 
Probe like to the Cane,a little before defcribed ; and thruft it long wayes under the 
procefic of the Perstoneum, and by lifting itup, feparate it fromthe the ad joining fi- 
brous, and nervous bodies, towhich it adheres ; then prefently draw afide thef per- 
matique veflels, with the Créme/ler,or hanging mufcle of the tefticle ; which being 
done, he fhall draw afide the proceffe it {elfe, alone by it felfe; And he fhall take as 
much thereof, as is too lax, with {malland gentle mullets, perforated in the middett, 
and fhall with a needle, having five or fixe threeds, thruft ic through as neere as hee 
can tothe {fpermaticke vetlels and cremafter mufcles. But the needle alfo be 
drawneagaine into the middeft of the remnant of the procefle,taking up with it the 
lipps of the wound ; thenthe threed mutt betied on a ftraic knot,and fo much chere- 
of mutt beleft after the feQion, as may be fufhicient to hang out of che wound, This 
threed will or it {elfe be diffolved by little and little by putrefaction: neither mutt ic 
be drawne out before that nature fhall regenerat¢ and reftore flefh into the place of 
the ligature, otherwife all our labour fhall be {pent in vaine. 
And laftly, let the wound be clenfed, filled with fiefh, and cicatrized, whofe cal- 
lous hardnefle may withfiand the falling of the gut, or kall. 


There are fome Chirurgians who would performe this golden Ligature after ano-. 
othe manner. They cut the skinne above the fhare-bone where the falling downe Another mans 
commonly is, even to the procefle of rhe Peritoncwm, and they wrap once or twice ™*™**% 
adout it, being uncovered, a {mall golden wyre, and onely ftraiten the paflage as 


much as may fuffice,toamend the loofencfie of this pr oceile jlcaving the {per Mat 


vellelsat liberty. Then they twift theends of the'wyre twice or thrice with fmall 
mullets, and cutoff the remnant thereof; that which remainesaiter the cutting, they 
turne in,leaft withthe fharpneffe it fhould prick the flefh growing uponit. Then lea- 
ving the golden wyre there, they cure the weund like to other fimple wonnds, and 
they keepe the Patient {ome fifteene or twenty day in his bed, with his knees {ome 
thing higher, and his head fome thing lower. 

Many arc healed by this meanes ; others have fallen againe inro the difeafe by rea- 
fon of the ill rwifting of the wire. 

There is alfo another manner of this golden tic, which I judge more quicke and The ehird 
fate, even for chat there is no exteraa!} body left in that part after the cure, Where- os 
fore they lead in fteade of the colden, which comes butonceabour 

y wrappe a leaden wyrc in fteade of the golden, wnich comes but | 
the procefic of the Peritosaam, thenthey twine it as much as neede requires, thar is, 
hot loofely, leat it fhould leaveway for the falling downe’ of the bedy, neither 
too ftraitly, leafta Gangrenefhould come by hindring the paflage of the {pirits and 
hourifhment, The ends thercof are fuffered tohang out; when in proce fie of time, 
this contra&tion of the Peritonaum feemes callous, then the wyre is untwifted and 
drawne our, And the reft of the cure performed according to Art, Bur lec 
thruft upon his worke rafhly, without the advice Of 4 shing ro bs 
yiition, for it diverfe times ¢omes to paflé, that the tefticles are not as yet noted, 
€0 downe into the Codde by the rag great fluggifhnefie of nature, in forme of 2 pret- 
Stowth but remaines leng in He Broines, caufing a tumor with paine, which 
pug may make a good Chirurgion Beleeve that iris an Enterocele. Therefore whillt 
labours by repelling medicines and truffesto force backe this tumor, be encrca~ 


feth the paine, and hinders the falling downe of the tefticles into the — I at 
erve 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
» firength 
etold, and 


AHifery. ferved this not long agoc in a Boy. which an unskilfull Chirurgion had long, ang 
tieyoufly troubled as if he had had arupture:for when I had obferved that there wa. 

= one ftone in the Codde, and knew the Boy was never gelt, I bid them caft away 

the platters, and truffes, and witht his Parents that they fhould fuffer him to rur and 
Jeape,thar fo theidleing ftone might bedrawne intothe Codde, which thing by litre. 

and lirtle, and without paince, had the event, as I foretold, That the reafon of this af- 

feét may be underftcod, we mult know a man differs from a woman, onely in effica. 

cie of heat; bur itisthe nature of ftrong heat todrive forth, as of cold to keepe ip, 

Hence it is that the flones in men hang forth in the codde, but in women they lic hid 

inthe lower belly. Therefore ic happens that in fome males more cold by nature. 

the tefticles are {hut up fome certaine time, untill at length they are forc ft down 

into the codde by yourhfull heat. But that we may seturne ¢o our former treatife of 

the codde, although that way of cuting ruptures wants not paine and danger, yet itis 

fafer than that which is pertormed by gelding, which by the cruelty thereof expofes 

rhe Patient romanifelt danger of death. For the Gelders whilft they feare leaft when 

the cure is finfhed,the relaxation may remaine, pull with violence the procefle of the 
Pevitoneam from the partsto which it adheres, and together with it a nerve of the 

iixth conjugation which runnes to the {tones they offer the {ame violence to the 
fpermaticke veflels; by which things enfue great paine, convulfion, efluxe of bloud, 
intlammation, putrefaction, and laftly death, as 1 have obferved inmany whom| 

have diflected, having died a few daycsafrertheir gelding. Although fome efcape 

thefe dangers,yetthew are deprived of the faculty of generation for all chetr life after, 

for performance whereof nature hath beftowed the tefticles, as parts principally ne. 

Est for the confervation of mankinde. Through which occafion hath not 
“feared to preferre them before the hearts becaufe the heart is the beginning of life 
bur the tefticles of a better life ; for itis farre more noble to live well, than fimply and 

fem abfolutely to live ; therefore Eunuches degenerate into a womanifh nature, for, they 


A. Shéwes a croked needle, havin; 
aneye wok farre from the point, 
through which you put sht 
golden wyre. 


B,B. The golden wyre put through 
the eye of the needle, 


C, The mullets or Pincers, to cat & 


way the waft or fisperflucus nas 
of the wyre. 


D.The fpringe of the mullets. 


the wyre together, 


E. The mullets to the ends f | 


rr 


L 18-3. 


emaine without 
ryrne cowards ; an 
be miferable. VV 

lefle a Sarcece/eor | 
aareus May 
by which this ope 


T Heodoricke an 
They put bac! 
ent being fo 
they draw afide 
alfo the {j at 
lying acauiticke 
fle, per 
they pull off che ¢! 
other caufticke in: 
falling of this Efch 
ulcer which rema 
keeps upthe Guts: 
way of reftoring th 
sion muft not atten 
of the Persteneum, 
from the guts fo b: 
and too much dilat 
great tumor by 
nocele, a kinde of En 
Patients be not con 
their excrements wil 


Hyaroceleis aw. 
“tweene the mer 
throides.it may be c: 
chiefely from the 
Without much paint 
by holding a « 
“OWes downe, and | 
efcat 4 quantity it 
“ed OF put op into 
Cyfte, or bagec, it 
thereof. ‘The cure 
repeated often befe 
Often tried and wir! 

Fi 
‘con tale. The he 
at quantity 


\ 
\ 
2 
Wf 2 ON ae) it is ne 
Z ly comes 
H 
WIE 
| 
\\ / | 
\ 
om, SS / 
WRT | 
| 


had long, ang 

ithat there wae 

hem caft away 

him torur and 

h thing by little 
mcaion of this af- 

oOncly in effica. 
keepe in. 

1en they lic hid 
cold by nature. 
:forc downe 
mer treatife of 
anger, YCtitis 
thereot expofes 
feare leaft when 
of the 
itanerve of the 
violence to the 
fluxe of blond, 
nmany whom! 
ugh fome efcape 
cheir life after, 
principally 
Galen hath not 
mccinning of life, 
@ than fimply and 
mature, for they 


ca needle, having 
Bre from the point, 


put through 
cedle, 


Br Pincers, to cat 


fuper fiuous cnas 


the mallets. 


o theends of 


se miaine 


Of Particular Tumors againjl Nature. 21 


remaine without beards, their voice is weake their courage tailes chem, and they 
-yrne cOwaEAS 5 and {eeing they are unfit for all humane ations, their life cannot but 
be piferable. Wherefore Twill never {ub{cribe to the cutting out of the ftones,un- 
iefle a Sarcoce/eor Gangrene invade them, But thaz the way of performing the Pun- 
ys aarews may be better kaowne, | have thought good here to fet the inftruments, 
by which this operation ts performed, before your view. 


Another more cafse and fafe way toreftore the Cut ana Kall. 


Heodoricke and Gaido have invented another way of performing this operation, £1.3 ,¢49.33. 

They put backe into their places the Gut and Kall being fallen downe, the Pati- 
ontbeing fo placed, that his chighs are high and hishead is fomewhat low ; then 
hey draw afide the lower portion of the produdtion of the Peritomaum, 2nd 
(9 the fpermaticke veffels, and cremafter mafcle to the I/chiwm., thenby ap- 
plying aca {ticke fitted to the age and difeafe, they burne the other partofthe pro- 
sefle, directly perpendicular to the fhare-bone, where the Gut did fall downe. Then 
chey pull off che efchar thus made with a knife even to the quicke, then they apply an- 
other caufticke in the fame place, which may go even tothe bone, then procure the 
falling of this Efchar made onthe forefaid procefle, And afterwards they heale the 
acer which remaines, which prefently contraGting fomewhat athicke Callus, fo 
keeps up the Guts and Kall that it bindes them from falling down into the Cod. This 
way of reftoring the Gut and Kall, though it be fafer and more facile; yet the Chirur- 
sion muft not attempt it,if the Guts or Kall fticke fo faft,agelutinated to the proceffe 
of the Perstenaum, that they cannot be fevered, nor put backe into their places (for 
from the guts fo burnt and violated, greater mifchiefe would enfue) if by the broken 
andtoo much dilated proceffe, the bodies thereby reftrained, make an exceeding 
preat tumor by their falling downe; if the tefticle yet lying in the groine as in a Bude- 
acele, akinde of Enterocele, being not yet defcended into the Scrotum or Codde:if the 
Patients benot come to fuch age asthey can keepe themfelves from ftirring, or hold 
their excrements whilesthe operation is performed. 


XVII, 


Of the cure of otber kinds of Ruptures. 


RAS Piplecele is the falling downe of the Kall into the Groine, or Codde, ic 


-4 bath the fame caufes as an Enterocele, The fignes have beenc explained. 

B It is not fo dangerous, nor infers a confequence of fo many evill fymp- 

A tomes, as the Enteroce/e doth, yer thecure isthe fame with che other. 
Hyaroceleis a waterifh tumor inthe Codde, which is gathered by little and little what an yares 

betweene the membranes encompafiing the tefticles, efpecially the Dartos and Ery- “*™ 

toreides;it taay be calleda particular dropfic,for it proceeds from the fame caules, but 

chiefely from the defeé of native heate. The fignes are atumorencrea(ing flowly -,,. Genes: « 

Without much paine, heavy , and almoft ofa glaffie clearenefle, which you may per- 

ceive by Holding a candle on the other fide, by prefling the Codde above, the water 

downe, and by prefling it below, it rifes upwards, unleffe peradventure in too 

ae 4 quantity it fills up the whole capacity of the Codde, yet it can never be for- 

~ Of put up into the belly as the Kall or Guts may, for oft times it is contained ina 

or bagge it is diftinguifhed from aSarcocele, by the {moothnefle and equality 

firft be tried with re folving, drying, and difcufiing CINCS) 

on efore, and in the Chapter of the Drepfie ; this which followes I have 

tied and with good fucceffe, 

Pe deficcat, rub.an.5ij, malaxentur frmul and make amedicinc A medicine 

eo r . The water by this kinde of remedy is digefted and refolved, or ral prendre 

¢Ipecially ifit be net in too great quantity. Bue if the fwelling, by reafon oF 


~~ Stat quantity of water will not yeeld rothofe remedies, there is neede of Chis 
rorgery 


: > 
AP» + 


rurgery ; the Cod and membrancs wherein the water is contained mutt be thrya 
through witha Seton, that is,with a large threefquarcpointed needle, thred wir}, , 
skeane of filke; you muft thruft your needle prefently through the holes of the my). 
lets made for that purpofe, not touching the fubftance of the Tefticles, The skean o¢ 
thred muft be left there, or removed twile or thrifea day, that the humor may qd), 
downe, and be evacuated by little and little. But if the paine be more vehemen; by 
reafon of the Seton, and inflammation come upon it, it muft be taken away and heg- 
lecting the proper cure of the difeafe, we muft refift the fymptomes. | 
Some Practitioners ufe not a Seton, but with a Razor,or incifion knife,they ope, 
the lower part of the Cod, making an incifion fome halfe fingers breadth long, De. 
netrating even to the contained water ;alwayes leaving untouched the fubttance of 
the Tefticles and veffels,and they keepe the wound open, untill all the water {come 
evacuated ; truly by this onely way the cure of a watery rupture whofe matter js 
contained ina Cyfte, is fafe, and to be expected ; as wee have faid in our Treati{e os 
Tumors in generall. 
The Pxewmatocele,isa flatulent tumor in the Codde, generated by the imbecilicy of 
What a Puews 
eatce'eis, heate refiding in the part. 
TheCure, It isknowne by the roundneffe,lenity ,renitencie and fhining. It is cured by pre. 
{cribing a convenient dict, by the application of medicines which refolve and dif 
cuffe flatulencies, as the feeds of Annis, Fennell, Fanugrecke, Agnus Caflus, Rye, 
Origanum,other things fet downe by 4vécen in his Treatife of Ruptures, I have ofteg 
ufed with good {ucceffe for this purpofe, Emplaflram Vigonts cum mercurio ; and Em. 
plaftrum Diacalcitheos, diffolved in fome good wine, as Mufcadine, with oyle of 
Bayes. 
Whatasarce-  ASarcocele is atumor again qature, which isgencrated about the fkones by 
cele is. ichyrrhusflefh. Groffe and vifcide humors breed fuch kind of flefh, which the par 
could not overcome and affimulate to it {elfe ; whence this over-abundance of fielh 
procecds, likeas Warts doe. Varices, or {wollen veines often aflociate this tumor; 
Fhe Sane and it increafes with paine. It isknowne by the hardneffe, afperitie, inequality, and 
Prognefticks, roughneffe. It cannot becured but by amputation orcutting itaway; but you mut 
diligently obferve, that the flefh be net growne too high, and have already {cazed 
upon the Groine, for fo nothing can be attempted without the danger of life. 

But if any may thinke, that he in fuch a cafe may fomewhat eafe the patient by tix 
cutting away of fome portion of this fame foftflefh, he is deceived. For a Fungu 
willgrow, if the leaft portion thereof be but left, being an evill fure worfe than the 
former ; but if the tumor be either {mall or indifferent, the Chirurgion taking the 
whole tumor, thatis, the tefticle, tumefied through the whole fubftance, with tht 
proceffe encompafling it , and adhering thereto onevery fide, and make an incifion 
inthe Codde, eventothe tumors; then feparate all the rumid body , that is, th 
tefticle from the Codde: then let him thruft a needle witha ftrong threed in it, 
through the middeft of the proceffe above the region of the {wolne tefticle ; and the 
prefently let him thruft it the fecond time through the {ame part of the procetle ; :ha 
fhall both the ends ofthe threed be tied on a knot, the other middle portion of th 
PeritoneumDeing comprehended in the fame knot. This being done, he mut! cut* 

way the whole proceffe with the tefticlecomprehended therein. But the ends 

thrced, with which the upper part of the proceffe was bound, muft be fuffered 
to hang fome length out of the wound, or incifion of the Codde. Then a repercuti® 
medicine fhall be applied to the wound, and the neighbouring parts with? 
corer: ligature, And the care muft.be performed as we have formely m°™ 
tioned, 
what acire _ UheCérfoceleisatumor of veines dilated, and woven with a various and mutual 
fuelein igoplicationabout the tefticle and codde, and fwelling with a groffe and melanchol) 
a The caufes are the fame as thofe of the V4rices. But the fignes ate © 
nifeft, 

To heale this tumor, you muft make an incifion in the codde, the bredthof *¥° 

fingers to the Varix: Then you muft put under the varicous veine, a needle having 


double threedin it, as high as you can, that yon may binde the rootes thereof: oe 


he cure. 


ed 


— \ 
jer che needle beag 
yeine,leaving the 


che 


ehreadof this 
moft after the fam 
rhis ercfic blood 
che Cure of the v 
afrer the manner o 
fall away of | 
er part therco: 
bloud ca 
Hernia Bumora! 
‘athe Cod or bers 
rfubftance of th 
While the cure ts! 
cefticles are to Ge 


weight, fothac 
Fundament, are! 
occafion to thisefi 
rhoides, which 
as in thofe which 
a ftroake or fall up: 
bone to the Muic 
in the bladder. 
That chis difea 
tOo Often cating of 
Part multbe tome 
NEtts, galls, myrti 
common boy} 
annointed with oy |! 
little into its place | 
hisbreath. When 
the gut fall dowac 
Powder preferibed 
farre as youcan: 1 
deft whereof behin 
along the Perinewm 
Place,a {punge dipt 
4ve Care of 
P&eces of woud bei 
the Sut together wi 
ftrayning thruft for 
Ut if the gut 
bids tha 
ingwill 
Ctundamer 


- 
| 
| 
aru 


Lt Se Of Particular Tumors again Nature. 


Terthe needle beagaine put after the fame manner about the Jower part of the fame 
oer eaving the {pace of two fingers betweene the Ligatures.But before you bince 
he rhreadof this loweft Ligature, the Varix mutt bee opened in the middeft, al- 
ott after the fame manneras you open 4 veine inthe armetolet bloud: 
rhis grofie blood cauling a tumor in the Cod, may be evacuated as is ufually done in 
‘he Cure of the varices. The wound chat remaines thall be cured by the rules of Are 
afer the manner of other wounds: Leaving thethreads init, which will prefently 
allaway ofthemfelves. To conclude thea,it being growne callous efpecially ia the 
upper past thereof, where the veine was bound, it muft be Cicatrized, for fo after. 
ards the bloudcaanot be ftrained or run that way. 
Hernia Aumoratisis a tumor generated by the confuled mixture,of many humors 
‘nthe Cod or berweene the tunicles which involue the tefticles, often alfo in the bro- — 
fubftance of the refticles, It hath likecaufes, fignes and cure as other rumors, 
While che cure is inhand, reft, truffles, and fic rowlers to fuftaine and beare up the 
efticles are to Ge ufed, af 


d out be thrug 
ile, thred with 
oles of the my). 
es. The Skean of 
UmMOr May dr 
re vehemen: by 
mm away .and heg- 


knife they op 
readth long, 
the fubftance of 
he water {eemes 
whofe matter jc 
our Treatife of 


the imbecility of 


is cured by pre- 
) refolve and dif. 
onus Cafins, Rye, 
ures. have often 
ercurio sand Em.- 

e, with oyle of 


the flones by 2 
ah, which the part 
undance of fieth 


XVIIL 
Of the falling downe ofthe Fundament. 


Hen the mufcle called the Sphincter which ingirts the Fundament is 

Neat iff velaxed, then itcomesto pafle that it cannot fuftaine the righe gue. 
This dilate is very frequent to Children by reafon of the too much Tig 
/¥Y humidity of the belly; which falling downe upon that mufcle molli- 

ficth and relaxcthit or prefleth it downe by an unaccuftomed 


ciate this tumor: weight, fothae the muft cles called Levatores Ani or the lifters up of tha 
» inequality, and Fundament, are not fuffictent to beare up anv longer. A great bloudy flux gives 
ny; butyoumut occafionto thisefie&.. A ftrong endevourto expcell bard excrements, the Hamer« 
already feazed which fupprefied doe over-loade the right gut, bur flowing relaxe it: Cold 
er of life. asin thofe which goe without breeches in winter,or fitalong tiinc upon a cold Rone, 
he patient by the aftroake or fallupon the Holy-bone: a paifis ofnerves which goe from the Holy- 
ed. For a Fungus done to the Muicles the lifters up of the fundament: the weigit of the ftone being 
me worfe than the inthe bladder, 


That this difeae may be healed, we forbid the Patient too much drincking, 


b too olten cating of broth, and from feeding oncold fruits, Forlocall medicines the: 


ftance, with the 


make an incifion part mutt be fomented with an aftringent decoction made of the riads of Pomegra-: 
ody , that is, the netts, galls, myrtles,knotgrafle, fheapheards purfe, Cypreffe nutts, Alume, and: 
ong threed in if, common (alt boyled in fauichs water or red wine, After the fomentation, the gut be: 
efticle ; and then amnowwted with oyle of Rofes or myrtles, and then let ic bee gently put by little and | 


little into its place, charging the childe ifhe can underftand your meaning, to hold: 
hisbreath. When the gut fhall be reftored the part muft bee diligently wiped leaft : 
the gut fall downe againe by reafon ofthe flipperinefleof the unction, Then letthe : 

powder prefcribed tor the falling downe of the wombe be put into the fundament as 


he proccile ; then 
lle portion of the 
e, he mutt 
Mut the ends of the 


muft be fuffered He asyoucan: Then you mutt ftraitly biade the loynes with a {wathe,to che mid. - 
Whereof dchinde let another be faftned which may be tied at the Pubes comming 

arts with 4 | the Perinewm, to holdup tothe fundament, the better to containe it in its 
formely mct- Ptce,a {punge dipt in the aftringentdecotion. The Patient ifhe be of fufficient ageto 


“ve care of himfelfe, fhall be wifhed when hee goes to ftoole thathe fit upon two © 
ot woud beiag fer fomeincha funder, leaft by his ftrayning heethruft forth 
4 a Sut together with the excrement; but if he can doe it ftanding, he tha!ll never by © 
thruft forth the gut. 
| Bip “tif the gut cannot bythe prefcribed meanes bee reftoredro its place, 


ous and mutual 
and melancholy 
fignes ate 


¢ bredthof 
needle having 


es thereof : 


- 


“Pecrates bids that the Patient hanging by the heeles be fhaken, for fotheguteby 
will returne to his place: butthefame Asppocrates wifheth tOatQ~ Hippecrares bia 
the fundament,becanfe that remedie having a drying faculty, hath alfo power 
Ee 


= 
| 
] 
| 
] 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
] 
| 
| 
| 
] 
| 
| 
al 
| 
= q 
+4 
a 


gorefolve the flatuleiat humors without any acrimony, by reafon of which the 
was the lefic able to be contained in his place. ; 


C XIX, 


Of the Paromchia. 


He Paronychia or isatumor in theends of the fingers. 
Bigat intlammation,comming of a maligne and vencmous 
7.%\ which from the bones by the Periefium is communicated to the ten, 
dons and nerves of that part which it affefteth, whereof cruel] 
tomes doe follow, as pulfifique paine,a feaver,reftleflenelle, {6 

the affected through impaticncie of the paine are varioufly agitated like thofe to,. 

mented with Carbuncles:for which caufe Guide and Johannes de Vigo judge this dj. 

{eafe to be mortall; wherefore you muft provideaskilfull Phyfitian for the cup. 

of this difeafe, which may appoint convenient diet,purging and Blood letting. |, 

the meanc time the Surgeon, fhall make way for the virulent andvenenate matter.) 

7 making incifion inthe inner part of the finger,even to the bone alongft the firft jcyp 
Tea thercof; for Yégo faith there is not a prefenter remedy, if fo be that it be quickly dong 
= and before the maturation of the matter;for it vindicates the finger from the corryp. 
tion of the bone and nerves,and affwages paine, which I have often and happily 
immediatly at the beginning, betore the perfeé impreffionof the virvlep. 

ci¢. 

But the wound being made you mutt fuffer it te bleede well,then prefently let hin 
dip his finger in {trong and warme vinegar, in whichfometreakle being diffolved 
may draw forth the viculencie, But toappeafe the Paine,the fame remedies mvt bx 
applyed tothe atkeAed part asare ufedin Carbuncles, asthe leaves of Sorrell, 
Henbane, Hemlocke, Mandrake roafted under the Embers and beatenin a Morter 
with new Vinguentuns Populeon,or oyle of Rofesor new butter without fale : for {uch 
like medicinesal{o helpe forward fupppuration, whileft by their coldnefle, they re. 
prefle the extraneous heat affeting the part; andfo firengthen the native heate 
being the author of fuppuration: which reafon moved the ancient 
toufefuch medicinesin a Carbuncle: but ifby reafon of the fearefulnetie of 
the patient, or unskilfulneffe of the Surgion, no incifion being made,a Gargres 
and Sphacel fhall poffeffe the part, it remaines that you cut off with -you 
cutting muzletts as much ofthe part as fhallbe corrupt, and performe the mito! 
thecureaccording to Art. Yeritdoth not feldome happen that there may dee 
ho neede to cut off fuch a finger, becaufe it being corrupted together with 
the bonedoth by little and little diffelve into a purulent or rather fanious and 
much ftincking filth, But in this affe@ there is often caufed an Efchar by the adultr 
on of putredinous heat,and fuperfluous fleth indued with moft exquifit fence grow- 
eth underneath it, which mutt in like manner be cutoff with the Mulletts chet tht 


pesteny receive comfort, thepainebeing afwaged by the copious effuliv of 
OO 


HAP. X X. 
Of the {we lling of the knees. 


longand dangerous difeafes there oftentimes arife Tumors in the 


labours and exercife, This kinde of difeafe is frequent becaufe the hu- 


= mor cafily falles into the part which hath beene heated by Labour. -_ 


fuch fol 


4 thebonesfrom the 


knees, and alfoin plethoricke bodies and {uch as have evil! juyce afte! 


[1 


therefore ne 
bhecaufe the hum 
ny involve the pa 
maligne quality w 
fuchas wee finde il 
cures. | 
Forthe cure, 
diet be appointed 
tocall medicines 
po aflwage the pai 
which wee have 
mon. 

And becaufe th 
mor,yet mult we | 
accidents. 

This kinde of tu 
the Chirurgion 
of flowing of th 
fingers, asif there 
toopen the tumc 
evill {ymptomcs 
ble. 
Bor if watrifh hi 
medicines purg 
and very drying lo 

Of which wee h 
mor, divers times 
feth it that it cannc 
part and defe& of | 


In which caule 


force ofthe medic 
ded, 


* 


BW 
Calied 
fly han 
writrer 
here asa firme four 
For firkt for 
Of thofehayres w! 
than the Dracunca!: 
men bei 
hefic, 
Therefore lecing I | 
clfe Never faw ther 
Binall por cilence, 


| 

| 

Gal. comm, 
ad (end fe er 
lib, 
6 Gai, 


he fi NP Cts With 
nemeus humo; 


icated to the tep_ 


reofctruell {ym 

ed like thofe toy. 
go judge this di. 
iam for the cure 
Blood letting. In 
cnate matter by 
eft the fir ft jOynt 
be quickly done 
irom the corrup. 
nd happily tried 
Hof the Virulep- 


prefently let him 
being diffolved 
=medies mult be 
wes of Sorrell, 
Baten in a Morter 
ut fale : for fuch 
idnefle, they re- 
he native heate 
ient Phyfitians 
fearefulnefiec of 
pade,a Gangren 
off with your 
me the reftot 
there may bee 
together with 
her fanious and 
by the adult 
fit fence grow- 
fulletts that the 
ous effufiono 


Tumors io the 
Mevill juyce after 
becaufe the hu- 


{ych 


fych tumers follow long dileaive, they arc dangerous and difficule to cure 


Labour, But if 


— 


Particular 


Tumors 


3 
therefore not to bee neglected, for bitter paine accompanicth them, 


pecaufe the humor falling thither diftends the Membranes, which being ma- 
"jigne quality whether it be cold or hot, when it hath {etled into thofe parts, being 
jychas wee finde in the paines of the joynts, and in the bitings of venemous crea- 


ures. 
{ For che cure, if the tumor bee cauled by blood, ler 9 leader and refrigerating: 


‘avolve the part; befides that this humor picticipateth of acertaine virulent and 


— 


The curs, 


jiet be appointed and phicbotomy for the revulfion of the antecedent caule;diverte. 
iocall medicines fhall be ufed according tothe varicty of the foure times. But for. 
the paine, Ameayne or mitigating medicines (hall be appointed: of all 
which wee have fufhiciently treatedin the Chapter of the cure of a Phiee- : 


mon. 


And becaufe thefe parts are of exact fence, if there be neceflity to open thetue ; 


mor,yet muft we not doe itrafhly or uncontiderately, for feare of paine andevill 


occidentSe 


This kinde of tumor is oft times raifed by winde contained there; inwhich cafe | 
the Chirurgion mutt bee very provident, that hee bee aot deceived with the fhew 
of fowing of thehumor, which hee feemesto perceive by the preflure of his | 
fingers, asif there were matter and humor contained therein, and fobee brovehe — 
roopenthe tumor, For the winde breaking forthin ftead of the humor, caufeth - 
eyill fymptomcs by reafon of the fe@ion ralhly madein apart fo fenfi- 


ble, 

Bet if watrifh humors fhall cumifie the part, the body fhall firftbe purged with 
medicines purging fiegme: Andthen inciding, attenuating, sarifying, difcufhi ng 
and very drying locall medicines fhall be ufed. 

Of which wee have abundantly {poken in the Chapeer of the Oedemsa, Yet this hu- 
mor, diverstimes lyes deepe betweene the whirle boneand the joyne, which cau- 
fethit that it cannot be difcufledand refolved by reafon ofthe weakenefle of the 
partanddefe@t of heate, fo that the adventitious humor often moves and excludes 


thebonestrom their feate. As Ihave obferved it to have happened to many. 


in which caufe Irrigations of red wine falling fomething high, whereby the 


force ofthe medicine may enter and morecafily penetrate, are much commen: 
ded, 


Cuarp, X XI. 


Ofthe Dracunculus. 


Dy? —¢Cannot chufe, but explaine inthis place thofe things which may bee 
| {poken of that kinde of tumor again{t mature, which by the ancients is 
BY | Called Dracuncalms, The matter and reafon of thefe hath beene variou- 


wo ‘ly handled by diverfe Authours, fo that hitherto wee have nothing 
Written of them to which wee may by right and with good reafon ad- 


here asa firme foundation of their effence. 


For fir for Galens opinion, Lib. 6. de Loc. affect cap. 3. The generation, faith he, 


; thofehayres whichare evacuated bythe Vrineis worthy no Iefle admiration 
an the Dracuncal:, which as they fay, in acertaine placeot Arabia breede in the 


men beingof anervous mature and like wormes in colour and thicke- 


hefje, 


Therefore lecing I have heard many who have fayd they have feenethem,bue I my 


gor I cannotconjeCture any thing exa@ly nether of cheir origi 


Paulus 


Ee 2 


Tt rs mot as 
Neficiently ™ 
knawne what 
Dréconcels 
aré, 


315 
of which the 
| 
ve 44. \ 


Of Particular Tumors again? Lt 


ult, Paulas Agineta writes that the Dracuncali xe Ored in India and the hich. 
parts of eZ¢ype, like wormes in the mufculous parts of mans body ,that is,the at Ele, 


thighes and legges,and alfocreepe by che intercoftall mufcles in children wi» 


> 2 
manifcft motion. 


But whether they be creatures indeede, oroncly havethe fhape of creaty-e. 
they muftbeecured withahot fomentation, by which the Dracwneulus 
 ajufttumor, may put feife, and be pluckt away peece meale with the fing). 

fuppurating Caraplalmes may be applyed,compofed of water, honcy, 

and barly meale. 
Avicen being various, having no certainty whercon toreft, inclineth one wt}, 
to this, and another while tothat opinion: for now he fpeaketh of the Dracuncy}; 

of creatures, then prefently of a matter and humor fhut upin accrtaine place. 
the reft he rightly delivers the cure and effence of this difeafe, aswe thall afterwrg, 


The cure out 


fhew. 
Lib. qutap, Actius faith, the Dracumcalé are like wormes, andthat they are found fometize 
om preat, fometimes {mall, and that cheir generation is not unlike tothat of tlat worme 


which are bred in the guttes, forthey move under the skinne without any troy, 
ble, but in procefle of time, the place becomes fuppurate about the end of 
the Dracuncalws. The skinne openeth, and the head thereof is 
forth, 
But ifthe Dracuncalus bee pulled,it caufeth great greefe ; efpecially if it bee bro. 
ken by too violent pulling. For that which is left caufeth molt vehement pring 
Thecureour Where forethat the creature may not runne backe, the arme muft bee bound with, 
of Actus. {trong threed, and this muft bee done every day, thatthe Dracunculus goine for. 
ward by littleand little, may bee intercepted by this binding, bur not broke 
off. 
Theplace muft bee bathed with Agua Malfaand oyle in which wormewood 
fouthernewood hath beene boylec,or fome other of thofe medicines which are ore. 
{cribed for the wormes of the belly. | 
Bucifthe Dracanculas going forward of itsowne accord, may be eafily drawne 
forth, we muft doe nothing ; but if it bee turned to fuppuration wee mutt no’ 
leave oft the Cataplafmes, the Mul/aand anointing withoyle It was uli 
all with him after the taking away of the Cataplafmes, to apply Emplaflrum E Bsccis 
Laer? : but when it is come to fuppuration the skinne muft bee opened long wayes, 
and the Dracunculzs {o layd open muft be takenaway, butthe skinne mut tbe filled 
with lint, and thereft of the fuppurative cure ufed, fo that the creature be 
ing fuppurated and drawne forth, the wound may bee incarnated and cicatti 


fed. 
Tradst.> Rhafis writeth, that when the part is liftedup into a blifter, and the vein 
_—ihafinethits egrefic, itis good forthe patient co drinke the firft day halfe adrama 


Aéoies the next day awhole dramme, the third day two drammes; and 


manner the place afieted mutt bee fomented with Aloes for fo that which ives hid 
will breake forth; that which fhall come forth muft be rolledina pipe of lead, whi 
may equall the weight of a dramme fo that it may hang downe, for the veine diawi 
by the weight will come more forth;and when that which thal! come forth is gr0¥™ 
much and long, it muftbe cut off, but not by the roote, but fothat a portion thee 
may remaine and hang torth,to which the leaden pipe may be faftned,for other*" 
it would withdraw it {elf into its skinne and its lurking hole, and fo caufe a puttid 
and maligne ulcer, 
Therefore wee muft gently meete with this difeafe,and the veine muft be dra" 
by little and little our of the body untill it be all come forth that no worfe thing hap 
pen: but if by chance it fhall happen that as much of the veine as thal! bee come fo" 
thall be cut off by the rootes,then the ulcer muft be opened long wayes with 20 
cifion knife,and that fo that whatfoever remaines thereof may bee wholy take? “ 
way. Then for fome dayes the part muft be annointed with butter until! whatiocv™ 
of fuch a fubftance adheres,being confumed with putrifaion thall flow away: Th 


che ulcer muft be cured with farcoticke things: Thett 


L 15.8. 


Therefore Rbs/ 
and armed with ! 
encowoter with | 

Soranus the P 
,as Paulas 
che Dracuncalas 
nerve, which ice 
che skinne. 

Wherefore $ 
yet not fe, ast 
{hall demoattra 

Manar aes Wit 
grofle, hot, and 

Gerrans a mot 
any of our Phyficl 
feafe fo unfrequ 
éice. 

The Author « 
culus to be a dife: 
by lictle,and lieth 
manner, and by 
thing chiefely fe 
Yaricesinhis Tre 
with the fame re: 

But feeing thai 
writers, yet 
and Guido, 
na: by Albucrafs. 
called it Vena Crs 
repugnant not o 
how little certain 
untous: Towh 
written any thing 
lam inevery pat 
the French Surg 
plier teftimony o 
tings of the Anci: 
the better roaflur 

But my mode! 
the cenfure of bei 
quettion of the D 
the prefent, Iv 

wengthen by cer 
Cale, 

For firft,that D 
N€ration as the fla 
difprove both by 
worme which hee 
ofthe inner cynic 
dy. 

Butno manev 
caufes of ¢ 
Clofed, or from th 
Much leffe from t 
“aules Of their or: 

oreover, ad 
other living creat 


- 


L | 
4 and the higher. 
that is,the arme. 
in children wich 


pe of creatures 
cunculus raifed to 
mc withthe fingers. 
tr, honey, wheare 


clineth one whi}. 
tthe Dracuncy|; a3 
rraine place. fo, 
thall afterward: 


found fometime; 
sat of flat wormes 
vithout any troy. 
beut the end of 
hereof is thryf 


tally if it bee bro. 
i vehement paine, 
bee bound witha 
nculws going for- 
not broken 


h wormewood or 
nes which are pre- 


be eafily drawne 
tionwee mutt not 
vle : It wasulu- 
mplafivum E Baccs 
ened long wayes, 
Bone muftbe filled 
the creature be- 
ated and Cicatti- 


er, and the veine 
y halfe adramme 
nmes; and in like 
at which lyes hid 
ipe of lead, which 
r the veine drawne 
ne forth is growne 

a portion 
ined, for otherwile 

fo caufe aputrid 


1¢ muft be drawn 
worfe thing hap: 
all bee come fort 

wayes with an 

ec wholy taken 

untill whatfoev“ 

| flow away: Thee 


There 


L 15.8 


therefore Xbafis thus inthe fame cext expreflech the fame thing by diverfenames, 
and armed with Tronand Lead, heecomes to the cure thereof, as if hee mcact to 
eqcowater with fome fierce beaft, 

soranus the P hy{:tian,who lived in the times of Galen, was of a quite contrary opi- 
nion,as Paulus Agéneta in the place being before cited relates of him; as who denies 
che Dracumce/ns to be a living creature, but oncly acondenfation of acertaine fall 
nerve, which feemes both tothe Phy fitions and Patients to have fome motion under 

e skinne. 

z Wherefore Soranus feemes to have come neerer the truth than the reft, but 
ver not {@, as throughly to underftand, and know the effence ef this difeafe ,as we 
(hall demonftrate hereafter. 

Manardus writes,that the Dracuncali are generated of evilland unlaudable blood, 
grofle, hot, and melanckolicke, or ofaduft phlegme very mauch dryed. 

Gerrans a moft learned Phyfition of our time, Léb, de Definitionib, medic. denies 
any of our Phyfitions to be able to fay anything of the Dracunculi becaufe itisadi- 
feafe fo unfrequent in thefe our regions, that itis {carce ever met wijthall ic pra- 
dice. 

The Author of the Introdu@ion, and Medicinall definitions,defines the Dracus- 
cules to be a difeafe very like the Yarices; then caufing great paine, when increafing 
by little,and litle it beginsto bee moved: Therefore to bee cured after the fame 
manner, and by thef{ame method of Se@ion and incifion,asthe werices are. Which 
thing chiefely feemes to have moved Gwrdo to referre this kinde of difeafe to the 
yarcesinhis Tractare of Impoftumes, becaufe it hath the fame cauft,and is healed 
with the fame remedy as the warices, 

But {eeing that diverfe names have beene impofed upon this difeafe by {everall 
writers, yet they all have exprefledit by the name ofa veine: for itis called by .- 
vices and Guido, Vena Medem, becaufe itis adifeafe frequent in the Citty Ades. 
ws: by Aibucrafis, venacivilis, Haliabbas hath called it famofa; others have 
called it Craris or the legge veine, Truely the contrariety of fo many opiniens 
repugnant not onely amongft themfelves,but alfowith chemfelves,eafily argueth 
how little certainty they had of the effence of this difeafe, who have written of it 
untous: To which alfothis may be added , that none of the latter Phy fitions have 
written any things thereof. For although Jacobus Dalechamphius a man moft conver- 
lam inevery part of Phyficke, hath written much ofthis matter in his booke of 
the French Surgery which he fet forth fome yeares agoe: Yet he bath left us no am- 
plier teftimony of his induftry,than that hee was very diligent in colleGing the wri- 
ings of the Ancients concerning this thing, interpofing no judgement of his owne, 
the better to affureusof a ching fo controverted, 

But my modefty cannot fo containe me, but that I fhallchufe rather to undergoe 
the cenfure of being thought too daring, than (as much as inmelyeth,) to faffer this 
que‘tion of the Dracunculs to remaine longer ambiguous and undecided. Therefore 
‘or the prefent, I will thus order it, that refuting the opinions of the Ancients I may 
mengthen by certaine reafons, my opinion of the effence andcureof this dif- 

ale, 

For firlt,that Dracumcuéé are no living things,not like unto wormes, norof likege- 
ieration asthe flat wormes of the belly, which was the opinion of eins, is eafieto 
Gilprove both b y his writings, as alfo by reafon it felfe. For he writes that the broad 
Worme which hee calls Tens4,is as it wereacertaine Metamorphofis or tranfmutation 
‘y ‘Ne inner cunicle of the {mall guttes, into a quicke living and meveable bo- 

Butao manever fayd, neither will he confeffe that the Dracumcass have the ma- 

‘ctall caufes of their beginning from the tuni¢le of the veine, in which they are 
“lofed, or from the fibers of a nervous body, to which often they are adjoyned; but 
Much leffe from the skinne under which they lie, may they draw their materiall 
“aules of their original, 

Moreover, meither can there bee any generation of worms, nor of any 


“ther living creatures whatlocver, who have their original! som putritaction, 
Ee 3 


His opiuioa 
ofthem, 


Sor his 
opini 


opinion 
confuted, 


| 
| 
| 


4, Meteereleg. 


WNefurall Me- 
lancholicke 
humor is moft 
unapt te pu- 
trine. 


Stinke anun- 
feparable 
companion to 
putrifaQion, 


What things 
efually breed 
worms, 


Gabe, 


unleffe by the Corruption of fome matter, of whofe better and more benigne pay, 
nature by the force of the vitall heat, produceth fome animate body, as drj/foy/, 
teacheth, Wherefore to produce this cffed, itis fit the matter fhould have {uch , 
difpofition to putrefaGion as is required for the generation of a creature as 
would make the Drecuncalus tobe: Icis fitthe helping caufes fhould concyrye as 
affiftantsto the principallsinthea@ion, And itis meete the place fhould be oppor. 
tune or fit. 

But there may be many caufes found which may give life to the Dracunculi, for b, 
the common confent of all thofe whohave written of them, their generation Drs 
ceedes from anhumor melancholicke, terreftriall and grofie, which by its quajj, 
ties both by the firlt coldneffe and drineffe, as alfo by rhe fecond, thatis Aciditic jg 
hot onely thought moft unfit of allothers for putrefaction, but aliois judoe, 
to refift putrefaGion, asthat which is canfed by heate and fuperfiuous heate hy 
midity. Befides,if the materiall caufe of this difeafe fhould be from an humor pur; 
fying and turning by putrefaction into fome living creature, it was fit there (hoy); 
be ftenchalfo,as being an unfeparable accident of putrefaction, for thus the excre. 
ments in the guts of whichthe wormes are generated, doc {niellor ftinke. 

Therefore that which exhales fromtheir bodies which are troubled with th 
Dracancul: {hould be ftincking,as it happensto thofe ficke of the Prhiriafis or Loy. 


fie-evill, But none of thofe who have delivered the accidents or fymptomes of th 


Drecencals are found tohave made mention hereof, But for the efficient cauf 
whereby fo great heat may be rayfed inthe places next under theskin, by the cf. 
cacy whereof fach acreature may be formed of a matter melancholicke and mof 
unapt to putrific,as they make the Drzcamcu/ws to be who faine our bodies co be fruit. 
full moniters; efpecially fecing the furface of the body is continually ventilated by 
the {mall Arteries fpread under the skinne,as alfo by the benefit of infenfible traalp, 
tation,and breathed with the coolenes of the Aire incompafiing us. But now the mz 
teria!] and efficient caufes being defective, or certainely very weake, for the genera. 
tion of laborious an ctleat; what coadjutory caufe:can yeeld affiftance ? Can the 
lumidity of meates? for thofe bodies which are fed with warme and moytk meates, 
as milke,Cheefe, Summer fruits, ufually breed wormes,as we are caught by experi- 
ence in Children. 
- Buron the Contrary, dvicenin the place before cited writeth, thar meats of: 
hotand dric temper chicfely breedithiskinde of difeafe, and that it is not {0 fie. 
quent romoylt bodics and asare accuftomed tothe Bath, moyft meats and 
wine moderatly taken, But whether may the condition of the Aire of thofe regions in 
which itis as it were, an Endemiall difeafe, conferre any thing roche generation of 
fuch creatures ? Cerctainely for this purpofe a cloudy warme and thicke ayre, {iich 
as ufeth tobe at the beginning of the Spring when all places refound with frogs, 
toades and the like creatures bred of putrifaQion, 3 
Bur onthe Contrary Zacobus Dalechawspsus by the opinion of all the Phificions chat 
have written of the Dracumcal:, writes chat thisdifeafe breedes inthe drie and S& 
burnt regions of and Arabia; butif atthe leaftchat part of our body whiciis 
next under the skiane fhould hayeany opportunity to engender and nourith 
creatures, they may be judged to have written that the Dracanwcalws isa living crc? 
cure with fome probability, Butifthere beenoopportunity for generation inc" 
piace,nor capacity for the nourifisment of fuch like creaturesasin the guts,if tliat & 
gion ofthe body be breathed upon with no warmeneffe and {mothering heat, ‘ft 
be defiled with none of the grofie excrements, as the gutts ufually are, but onely > 
the {ubtiller exhalation,which have an eafie and infenfible tranipiration by the poles 
of the skin, which may feemeto bea juft caufe of fo monftrous and prodigious 2a 
effec :but we fhall little profit with thefe engines of reafon unlefle we caft down * 
oaccallthe Bulwarkes, with whichthis old opinion of the Dracuncw/s may ftand 3% 
be defended. 
For firlt they fay, why have the ancients expreffed this kind of difeafe by the a 
of a living thing,thatis,of a Dracumcalys or listle Serpent Lanfwere, becaufe in Ply: 
ficke names are often impofedupon difeafes rather by Gmilituds than from the a 


L138 


of che ching; for ch 
fice, that of che Ca 
guy Crabb, Poly 
feafes,but becaulc 
and clawes ota C 
ftance; and the th 
rough, and borrid 
-his dileafe of wh 
name Dracunculys 
on into length an 
hey fay (if bc w 
the humor the cau 
she pare whence it 
doe they put their 
have beene very 
ned, fome nervous} 
fight,which by the 
ping ofa Serpent, 
fenceand life, but 
be breken,thered 
not follow and iso 
provident Surgeo! 
branous body two 
great paine that pa 
that the Dracanca: 
whichitis, There! 
and generation of 
mor and ab{ceile b 
ven by the expulfiv 
limits, thatis the A 
from the joynt of | 
the Anckles with t 
mor is {ome whilc 
tumors which 
ving their limbes { 
aSerpent. Lhavet 
owne country. 
For thecure, it 
for heere alfo in lik 
times of the difeal 
lerved which is bet 
The mention of 
altogether as rare. 
hayres:it chicfly (rc 
& downe being no 
are fcarce of a pins 
Of water more that 
of honey and whea 
drawne forth; and 
I imagine this kind: 


— 


benigne par, 
8S Arif; 
Id have 


reat ure as they 


Id Concurre 
sould be oppor. 


for 
cneration pr 
ich by its ey 
at is Aciditic., is 
alfo IS judged 
mOUS heate bu. 
humor 
there {hould 
hus the excre. 
inke, 
ubled with the 
hiriafis or Low- 
ptromes of the 
¢ficient caufe 
iD, by the 
licke and moft 
co be fruit. 
m ventilated by 
‘nfible traalp. 
it now the ma- 
for the genera. 
? Can the 
fk meates, 


phe by experi- 


at meats ofa 
Bc is not{o fre- 
ft meats and 
regions in 
generation of 
ke ayre, fuch 

with frogees, 


hificions that 
drie and Sua 
8 ody which iS 
nourith fuch 
sa living crea- 
*ration in chat 
uts,if chat 
ing heat, if tt 
but onely by 
by the pores 
prodigious af 
caft downe 


by rhe name 
caufe in Phy- 


the crwth 
of 


L [Be 8. 

that of che Cancer,Polypus, and Elephas. For thef{e have thofe names not becaufe 
fea 


Of Particular Tumors agatnft Nature. 


319 


ching; for the confi rmation whereof, the examples of three difeates may fuf- 


Crabb, Polypus, or living Elephant may breede inthe Body by fuch like di- 
(es,but becaufe this by its propagation into the adjacent parts reprefents the feere 
aad clawes ofa Crabbe: the other reprefents the fleth of the Sca-Polypus inits fub- 
agnce; and the third becaufe fuch as have the Leprofie have their skinne wrinckled, 
rough, and borrid with fcales and knots,as the skinne ofaliving Elephant. Sotrucly 
pis dileafe of which wee now enquire feemes by good rightto have deferved the 
ngme Dracuncwlws,becaufe in its whole conformation,colour, quality and produtti- 
on into length and thicknefle it expreffeth the image ofa Serpent. But whence will 
they fay (ifit be without life) As that maniteft motion inthe matter? We reply that 
he humor the caufe of this difeafe is fubtill and hot,and (0 runnes with violence into 
ihe part whence it may feemetomove. Bur when the Dracuncuéi are {eparated, why 
doc they put their heads as ic were out of their holesewe anfwer, inthis che ancients 
havebeene very much deceived, becaute after the fuppuration the ulcer being ope- 
aed,fome nervous body being laydebare, thruft forth and fubjeAed it felfe tothe 
fight,which by the convulfive and fhaking motion might expreffe the crooked cree- 
ping, ofaSerpent, But they willfay, paine happens not unlefle ro things induced with 
fenceand life, but this Dacawca/as when heis drawnetoo viclently efpecially if hee 
be broken,thereby will caufe extreame paine' we doe anfwer,chat the conclufion doth 


not follow and isofno confequence,forthefe paines happen nor unlefle when the un- 


provident Surgeon drawes or pulls infteed of the Dracuncw/us {ome nervous or mem- 
branous body {wolne and repleate with an aduft humor, whence there cannot bur be 
great paine that part being pulld which is the author offence. Bue itis childifhto fay 
that the Dracanculus fecles, for that itcaufeth fharpe paines co the living body in 
whichit is. Therefore that at laft we may determine fomething of the nature,eflence 


Why they are 
called 


and generation of thefe Dracumcals, dare boldly affirme itisnothing elfe buratu- 


morand ab{ceffe bred from the heat of the bloud in a venenate kinde. Such bloud dri- 


ven by the expul five facultie through the veines tothe Externall parts, efpecially the | 
limits,that is the Armes and Legges, caufethatumor round and long often ftretched - 


from the joynt of the fhoulder even to the wrift, or fromthe groine even to one of | 


the Anckles with tenfion, heat, renitency, pricking paine, anda feaver, But this tu- 
mor isfomewhiles ftretched forth ftraight, otherwhiles into oblique and crooked 
tumors, which hath beene the caufe that many taken with this kind of difeafe,and ha- 
ving their limbes fo infolded as with the twinings of a Serpent would fay they had 
aSerpeat. [havethus muchto fay ofthe Dracancul, efpecially of thofe ef our 
country. 


For thecure, it isnot unlike tothe cure of a Phiegmon arifing from a defluxion, +., Cure: 


for alfo inlike manner theremedies muft bee varied according to the foure 
umes of the difeafe, and the fame rule of diet, phlebotomy and purging muft be ob- 
lerved which is before prefcribed in the cure of a Plegmon. 


The mention of the Dracuncali callstomy memorie another kindeof Abfceffe, 


pilare in Ari-~ 


altogether asrare, This our French men name Cridones, | chinke 4 ferlecap*1. 
hayressit chicfly troubles children and prickes their backes like thornes. Theytoffe up ae 


% downe being not ableto take any rett. This difeafe arifeth from fmall baires which 

are fearce of pins length, but thofe thicke and ftrong. Itis cured with a fomentation 

of water more than warme,after which you mutt prefently apply an oyntment made 

of honey and wheaten flower; for fo thefe haires lying under the skin are allured and 

drawne forth; and being thus drawne, they muftbe plucked out with {mal] muliets. 
‘magine this kinde of difeafe was Dot knowne tothe ancient Phifitions. 


The End of the Eighth Booke. 


B 
| 
‘ | 
* 


KX VWs Ko N 


VVOUNDS 
GENERALL. 


Tue Nintruw Booke. 


Cuap. I, 


What 4 wound is, what the kindes and differemces thereof are, and from 
whence they may be drawne, or derived, 


= Wound is afolution of Continuity, caufed by a firoake, fall, or ates 
— bite, newly done, bloody, and with putrifaion, and filth. They Wound pro= 
alfo call it anew fimple ulcer; for the (olution of continuity hap- 
“>\ pens to all partsof the body; butaccording tothe diverfity ofthe; 

parts, it bath divers namesamongftthe Greekes, For in the fleth 

ic is called He/cos,in the bone Catagaa, inthe nerve Spafma,inthe 
ligament Thlafma, in the velielles Apo/pa/ma, in the Mu‘cles Regma: and that folue lations of 
tion of continuity, which happensin the veflells, their mouths being open,istermed 9 weld 
Avsflomafis, chat which happens by erolion, Asaurofis ; that whichis generated by varieties ofthe 


{weating out and tran{colation, Déapedefts. That thetic may bee the more eafily un. 
der{iood,I have thought good todefcribe them in the following table. 
A Table of the differences of Wounds. | 
Glandules, 
( Either foftdFlefh, Fat, 
( Esther fi- J asthe Marrow. 
( From the nature of the milar and ) A Bone 
ch th | Or bard as 
parts im which t thefe, A Griftle. 
are made or happen. Or ofa mid -Membranes, 
| But the/e parts are dle confie Ligaments, 
| fience,as SF ibers, Veffells 
| the Nerves Vines, 
The differences Arteriés. 
Wounds are Principall ( Braine, 
n fame ad the wom 
and Tefticles. 
| and Or ferving Lunes oullet, 
| val, | Stomacke, Gutts, 
The Eares, 
Feete,Hands,4 
| other of the fame 
| Or weither binde. 
from 


| 32 
| An ee Chore 
| 


34% 


Divers denos 
eninations 
from their 
caulcs, 


A eaution for 


making res 
portsof 
Wourds, 


A lugling 


cheating Chi- 


Of Wounds in General. 


B.9, 


‘| they are called, 


Evom their proper ef- | Simple wounds 


| fence, from whence 1 


they are called, 


according to which 


From their frowveac- 


cording to which they 


‘| 4re named, 


. 


From their quantity Iu 


Little, Super ficiarie, 


Or compa 


different 


Straight, 
Oblique, 


Cornerea: 


(When there is a complication, 
und, 2 Some one or moredifeafes 


hen there is no complice tien 


of any other difesfe or {ymp:om, 
befi 


J, 


anlelfe they be taken AWA). wee 
| not hope forto cwre thy 
wound, 


Long Broad, 


Detpe. 


C wap, II. 


Of the caufes of Wounds. 


LL things which may outwardly affaylethe body with force and violence, 
may be counted the caufes of wounds; whichare called greene , and pro. 

oS perly bloody. Thefe thingsare cither animate, or inanimate, The ani. 
mate, as the bitings, and prickings of beafts. The Inanimate,as the ftroake of an 
arrow, {word, clubb, gunne, ftone, a dagger, and all fuch like thiogs- 

From the variety of fuch like caules, they have divers names: for thofe which 
are made by fharpe and pricking things are called pun@tures thofe caufed by cit- 
ting things, are called wounds er gafhes : and thefe which are made by heavy aid 
obtufe things are named Contufions, or wounds with Contufions, 


Cuap. III, 


Of the fignes of wounds. 


therefore iecke all meanes forthe quicke recovery of the patient; Ieft that W uc 
was of its owne nature {mall, may by his negligence become oreat. Therciot 
itis expedient, he fhould know what wounds are tobe accounted great. 


tea Ounds are firft knowne by fight, and by the fignes drawne from thene* 
‘The Chirurgion ought firft and chiefely,to confider what wounds are cur: 
ROOus able, and what not;what wounds will {carce admit of cure, and what J 
be eafily cured; for it is not the part of aprudent Chirurgion, to promife cure: 
deadly or dangerousand difhcult wound; Leait he may feeme to have killed h:0, 
whom not the unfufliciencie of the Art, but the greatneffe of the wound hach {laine 

But when the wound is dangerous , but yet without defpaire of recovery, it 
longs to him to admonith the Patientsfriends which are by, of the prefent danytt, 
and doubrfull itate ofthe wound; thatif Art thallbe overcome by the preattell 
thereof, hee {hall not be thought ignorant of the Art, neither to have deceived 


Butasthisis the partand duty of a good and prudent Chirurgion, {0 it isthe 
tricke of a cheatingand jugling knave, to enlarge {mall wounds, that fo he may 
to have done a greatcure, when it is nothing fo. 

But it is agreeable to reafon, thatthe Chirurgion profefling the difeafe eafic © be 
cured, willthinke himfelfe in credit boundby {uch promifes and his duty, # 


hich 


This 


I - 

This (as Galen! 
and principallity 
of the greater 
the ereatnefic of ci 

reat, 10 which m: 
rhe part be one of 
through which oc@ 
the moft part, the 


OB Hole W 


the othe 


powers 
pitts, groines, leske 
the head Or taile of 
onely the flefhy fut 
der, Braine, Heart. 
ftle, Nerve or porty 
reftored. Contufe 
from a fimple folut 
you mult fuppurat« 
which are round an 
by an angle, thatis, 
round weunds, bec 
wounds are by fo 
are the further dif-je 
cornered wounds 
healed. 

Wounds may be 1 
Nature more vigo! 
which the loffe of th 
llowlier done in ano 
dry, and rhe ftrengt! 

Wounds receivec 
taken in Winter or | 
(tisill fora convulfic 
body is hurr; the bra 
Of the Nerves.‘A Tu 
Orce of nature is abl: 
Part. The organical! 
Patt once fevered and 
influence from 
continuit 
the 
fir at IS, by 
Ntion takes | 
Patts in 
bed ich the loft 
that whic which 
2 Calas loft for 
Whene lel¢ origin: 

the bones hav 


— wr 
| 
| 
— 
Ske 
| 
4 
| 


L iz.o, 


OMPLiCAtion 
or fymptome 


ac omplication of 
reasfeafes whi ch 
taken away, Wee 

forte cure the 


and violence, 

ene , and pro. 
nate, The ani- 
ftroake of an 


thofe which 
caufed by cut- 
= by heavy and 


e from thence. 

yunds are cure- 
and what may 
omife curein4 
ave killed him, 
od hath flaine. 
ecovery, it be- 
yrefent 
the 
have deccive 


on, {o it js the 
he may 


feafe eafic to be 
| hisduty, 4 
left chat which 
sat, Therefor 


at. 


This 


and ptincipallicy of the pare affeteds for thusthe wounds ofthe Braine, Heart, and «40,1. 

of the greater velleils, though {mall of them{elves, yetare thought great. Then from 

the greatnefle of the folution of contiouity; for which caufe wounds may be judged i psy 
eat, in which much of the fub{tance ofthe part is loft in every dimenfion, though out ef chree 
rhe part be one of thefe which are accounted fervile. Then from the maligniue; “?*™ 
through which Oceafion the wounds of the joynts are accounted great, becaufe for 


the moft part, they are ill condition ed. 


TTI. 


Of Prognoftickes to be made in VVounds. 


™ Hofe Wounds are thought dangerous, wherein any large Nerve, Veine, whatwounds 
or Arteryarehurt. From the firft there is feare of convulfion, but from 
a= he other large effufion efthe veinous, or arterious blood, whence the 
Pee’ powers are debilitated;alfe thefe are judgedevill which are upoa the arme 
pitts, groines, leskes, joynts and betweene the fingers; and likewile thofe which hurt 
the head or taile of a Mufcle. They are leaft dangerous of all other which wound 
onely the flefhy fubftance. Butthey aredeadly which are inflif&ted uponthe Blad- 
der, Braine, Heart, Liver,Lungs, Stomacke and {mall guts. Butifany Bone, Gri- leafs 
file, Nerve or portion of the cheeke or prepuce, fhall be cutaway, they cannot bee Tage 
reftored, Contufed wounds are more difficult to cure, than thofe which are onely 
from a fimple folution of continuity; for before you muft thinke to heale them up, “* 
you mult {uppurate and clenfe them; which cannot be done in a (horetime. Wounds 
which are round and circular are fo much the worfe, for there canbe no unity unlefle 
byan angle, thatis, a meeting together of two lines, which canhave no place in y, 
round wounds, becaufe a‘circular figure confifts of one oblique line. Befides, wounds are 
wounds are by fo much thought the greater, by how awuch their extremes and lipps fiSiculte 
are the further dif-joyned, which happenstoreund VVounds. Contrary tothefeare 
cornered wounds or fuch asare naade alongft the fibers, as fuch as may bee eafily 
healed, 
Wounds may be more eafily healedin young men, than in old, becaufe in them 
hature i$ more vigorous,and there isa greater plenty of fruitefull,or good blood, by 
Which the lofle of the Heth may be the better and more readily reftored, which is 
lewlier done in anoldbody, by reafon their blood is fmaller in quantity and more 
aty, and the ftrength of nature more languide. | 
Wounds received in the Spring, are not altogether fo difficult to heale as thofe ge 
taken in Winter or Summer, For all exccfle of heate and cold is hurtfull co them; 66.li6,5. 
tisill fora convulfion to happen upon a Wound, for it is a figne that fome Nervous 
body is hur; the braine fuffering together therewith, as that which 1s the originall 
otthe Nerves.‘A Tumorcomming upon great Wounds is good; for it fhewes the 
ofce Of nature is able to expell that which is harmefull, andto cafe the wounded 
Part, The organicall parts wholly cut offcannot againe be united : becaufe a vicall 
Patt once fevered and plucked from the trunke ofthe body cannot any more re- 
“Weinfluence from the heart as from aroote without which there can bee no life. 
; he loofed continuity of the Nerves, Veines, Arteries, and alfothe bones,is!omes 
*tsteftored, not trucly, and as they fay, according tothe firft intention, but by 
ff ‘ccond, that is, by repofition of thelike, butnot of rhe fame fubftance. The 
intention takes place in the flethie parts by converting the Alimentary bloud 
othe proper fubftance of the wounded part. Butthe fecond, in the {permatique 
atts in which the loft fubftance may be repaired by interpofition of fome hetcroge- 
d0dy, which nature, diligent for its owne prefervation sfubftitutes in place of What Cafes 


is and whence 


rm re is loft : for thus the bod y, which reftores and agglurinats, is io bone but ic procesdes, 


hefe original! matter is from an humor fomewhat eroffer than thar, from 
“Ace the bones have their originall and beginning. | 


This 


(as Galen {aich) ts chree wayesto be knowne; The firft is by the magnitude 745.4 


* 
4 ~ - 
> 
* 
| 
| 
. 
| 
J 


This humor, when it fhall come tothe place of the fracture, épgiutinateth the 
ends of the bones together, which otherwife could never bee fo knit by reafon of 

their hardneffe. The bones of children are more eafily and {peedily united by reafon 

Smalland of the pliantneffe of their foft and tender fubftance. Laftly wee mutt here admepip, 
Wou an the Chirurgion, that {mall Wounds and fuchasno Arrifan will judge deadly , do. 
provemortall divers timeskil! by reafon of acertaine occult and ill difpofition of the woundeg 


and incompaffing bodies;for which caufe we reade itobferved by Hippocrates tha 
Aphor.3 it isnot {uficient for the Phyfition to performe his duty, but alfo externa) things 


muft be rightly prepared,and fitted. 


« 


C V. 


Of the Cure of Wounds in generall, 


The General poseenst He Chirurgion ought for the right cure of wounds to propofe unto hin. 
Wounds. SES" felfethe common and gencrall indication: that is,the umiming of the dj. 
vided parts, which indication in fuch a cafe is thought upon and knows. 
even by the vulgar ¢ for that which is dif-joyned defires to bee United, 
becaufe union is contrary todivifion, Butby what meanes fuch union may be pro. 
cured, isonely knowne tothe skilfull Artifao. Therefore we attaine this chiet 
and principal Indication by the benefitof matureasit were the chiefe Agent, ang 
the work of theChirurgion as the fervant ofnature. And unleffe nature thall be firog 
ca), the Chirurgion fhall never attaine to his conceived, and wifhed for end : therefore 
that he may attaine hereto, he muft performe five things; the firft is, that if there he 
uniting ftrange bodies, 2s peeces of Wood, Iron Bones, bruifed flefh, congealed blood, 
wounds or the like, whether they have come from without, or from within the body, ani 
fhall be by accident faftened or ftucke in the wound,he mult take them away, foro. 
therwife there is no union to be expected: 

Another is,that he joyne together the lippes of the Wound;for they cannot other 
wife be agglutinaced and united. Thethird is, that he keepeclofe together tic joy. 
ned lippes, ‘The fourth, that he preferve the temper of the wounded part, for the 
diftemper remaining, it is impoffible ro reftore it ro itsunity. The fitthis, thath 
correé the accidents, if any fhall happen, becaufe thefe urging, the Phy {ition is oft 
forced to change the order of the cure. 

All firange and external! bodies muft bee taken away, as {peedily as is poflibi. 
becaufe they hinder the action of nature intending unity, efpecially if they preticor 


pricke any Nervous body, or Tendon,whence paine or an Abj{cefie may breedein 


any principall part, or other ferving the principall, 


Yetifby the quickeand too hatty taking forth of fuch like bodies there 
feare of cruel! paine or great effufion of bloud, it will bee farre better to comm & 
the whole worketo nature thanto exafperate the Wound by too violent balit 
For nature by licele and little will exclude, as contrary to it, or elfe togerhe! will 
the Pus, what {traage body foever fhall be contayned in the wounded part. but! § 
there {hall be danger in delay, it will bee fic the Chirurgion fall to worke quick 
fately ,andas mildely asthe thing will futfer: for effufion of blood, {woonig,” 
vuli:on and other horrid fymptomes, follaw upon the too rough and boy ttre 
handling of Wounds.whereby the patient fhall be brought into greater danger f 


ning. 


by the wound it felfe. 


Theretore he may pull out the ftrange bodies, either with his fingers, or with it : 
{truments, fitfor that purpofe: but they are fometimes more eafily and Lom 
times more hardly pulled forth, according as the body infixed is either hard of @” 
to be found or pulled out. Whichthing happens according to the variety of OE 


figure of {uch like bodies; according to the condition of the part it {cll¢, “ 
hard, or deepe,in which thefe bodies are faftencd more firaily or more a” 


Lis.9- 


and then for feare 
bur how weemay 
ments neceflary fo 
made by Gun. fhor, | 

But the Surgeo 
rwo and the fame t 
before hee ule, hee 
fent,for he fhall {tor 
chance it fhall be p 
the fuperfluous qua 
the lippes of the we 
and ligatures : Not 
magnitude,as alfob 
pable of both the re1 
ly in neede of the Li 
or Legges ; bur chat 
Suture and Ligarur 
each other, and as it 
joyned, 

If any portion of ; 
it muftnecetiarily be 
and large Wounds « 
mit a Ligature, by r 
Eares, Nofe, Hairy 

There are three {o 
commonly call the fi 
third Retentive. Th 
bloody wounds. Th 
On the contrary part 
going downewards 
Dut let the Ligature | 
hor coo loofe, leaft irl 

The Expulfive Lig 
contained inthem, 71 
the beginning of bind 
thereof sand chere ir: 
higher, you muftrer 
Thar lo (as we have {: 

The Retentiye Lig 
are the Throar, Belly 
Paine, abhorrerh bing 
Performed with 3 Ror 
heads, thefe Rox 
Old neither roo ¢ 

P@rtsto which they 
from their mac: 
factates of Fractures 
Chirurgion thal 
“ing the temper ¢ 


Prefctipe ofa Ph 


dee fj ay be fafe and fre 


fed (paring! 
and a] fof 


t 
he thall ufe the 


| 

thaij. imlelfe qu 

halj 4VOyde Venery: 


B.9, 


glutinateth th, 
c by reafon of 
nited by Teafon 
here admenifh 


ge deadly, dog 
the wounded 


Lippocrates that 
xternall things 


pofe unto him. 
ming of the di- 
on and knowne 
o bee united, 
mm may be pro- 
waro this chiete 
efe Agent, and 
e fhall be ftrong 
end : therefore 
hat if there bee 
ngealed blood, 
the body, and 
away, foro- 


y cannot orher- 
sgether tlic joy- 
dpart, for the 
fitthis, that he 
Shy fition is oftea 


y asis pofible, 


f they preficor 
may breedein 


dies there bee 
tier tO commit 
violent halite 


fent, for he {hall ftoppe if it be too violent ; but provoake ir. it reo flow, (unlefle by wounds, 
| chance it {hall be powred out into any capacity or belly) that fothe part freed from 


Sat may be 
bee fed 

| and alfo fro 
¢ ot Wine he {hall 
‘hall kee 
thal ay 


Of Wounds in Generall. 


and then for feare of inferring any worfe harme, as the breaking of fome Veftell ; = 


B® burhow weemay performe this firft intention, and alfo the expreffion ef the inftru- 


ments neceflary forthis purpofe, fhall be fhownein the particular treaties of wounds 
made by Gun-fhot,Arrowes and the like, 
But the Surgeon {hall attaineto the fecond and third {cope of curing wounds b Ligatures a 


Y Sutures for ro 
rwo and the fame meanes, that is, by ligatures and futures: which norwithftanding ‘joven 


before hee ule, hee muft well ebferve whether there be any great fluxe of blood 


the fuperfluous quantity of blood may be lefle fubje& to inflammation. Therefore 
the lippes of the wounds fhall be put together, and fhall bee kept fo joyned by future 
and ligatures : Not truly of all, but onely of thofe which both by their nature, and 
magnitude,as alfo by the condition of the parts in which they are,are worthy and ca- 
pable of both the remedies. For a fimple and {mall folution of continuiry, {ands on- 
ly in neede of the Ligature which we call incarnative, e{pecially, if ir be inthe Armes 
or Legges ; bur that which divides the Mufcles tranfverfly, ftands in necd of both 
Sunre and Ligarure; that fo the Lippeswhich are fomewhat farre diftant from 


each other, and as it were drawne towards their beginnings, and ends, may bee con- 


oyned. 

at any portion of a flefhy fubftance by reafon of fome great cut {hall hang downe, 
it muftnecetiarily be adjoyned and keprin the place by {atures The more notable 
and large Wounds of all the parts, ftand in need of Suture, which doe not cafily ad- 
mit a Ligature, by reafon of the figure and {ite of the part in which they are, as the 
Eares, Nofe, Hairy-icalpe, Eie-liddes, Lippes, Beily and Throat. 

There are three forts of Ligatures, by the joynt confent of all rhe Ancients. The Fy forts of 
commonly call the firft, a Glutinative or Incarnative ; the fecond Expulfive, the oT, 
third Retentivee The Glutinative or Incarnative is fit for fimple, greene ,and yer 
bloody wounds. This confifts of two ends, and muft fobe drawne, that beginning tweis, 
on the contrary part of the wound, wee may fo poe upwards, partly croffing it,and 
going downewards againe, we may clofely joyne together the lippesefthe Wound, 
but letthe Ligature be neither too ftrait, leaft it may caufe inflammaation or paine; 
nor too loofe, leaft it be of no ufe, and may not well containc it. 

The Expulfive Ligature is fit for faniousand fiftulous ulcers, co preffe out the filth What anexs 
contained inthem, This is performed with one Rowler, having one fim; le head; * sai 
the beginning of binding muft bee taken from the bottome ofthe Sémus, or bofome 
thereof ; and hereit muft be bound more firaightly, and fo by little and little goin 
higher, you muft remit fomething of that rigour, eventothe mouth ofthe Vicer, 


That {o (as we have faid ) the fanious matter may be prefled forth, 


The Retentive Ligature is fit for {uch partsas cannot fuffer ftraight binding, fuch Whats" 


uethe Throar, Belly, as alfo all parts epprefled with paine ; For the part vexed with 


Paine, abhorreth binding. Theufethereof, istohold tolocall Medicines, It is 
performed with a Rowler, which confifts fome whiles of one, fome whiles of more 
neads, All thefe Rowlers oughtrobe of lisnen, and fuch asisneither too new, nor row 
‘00d neither roo courfe, ner too fine, Their breadth muft be proportionable to madeof. 
“epattsto which they fhall bee applyed, the indication of their largenefie being 
“ rom their magnitude, figure and fite, Aswee fhall thew more at large in our 

‘actates of FraGtures and Diflocationse Why and how 
he Chirurgion fhall performe the firtt {cope of curing Wounds, which is of theremper ot 
he ree the temper of the Wounded part,by appointing a good order of Diet by Se rrounsse 


art mit h 
| cript efa Phyfition , by ufing univerfall and local! Medicines. A {lender, 


40d moy Dier muft be obferved, untill that time be paffed, wherein the pati- 


fafe and free from accidents which are ufvally feared. Therefore ler him 
(paringly, efpecially if he be plethorick;he thall abftaine from fale and fpiced 
m wine ; If he hall be of a Cholerick or Sanguine nature: In {teed 

all ufe the decoétion of Barly or Liquerice, or Water and Sugar. He 
Pe himfelfe quiet ; for reft is (in Ces/ae opinion) the very beft Medicine.Hee 
oyde Venery, Contentions, Brawles, Anger, and other perturbations of = 
Ff minde 


| 
| | 
fe together wit 
edpart. but 
worke quickely, 
,fwoomng, 
and boy 
rer danger 
rers, or with! 
ily and fom 
hard oF 
variety 
it felte, 
more 


Ta what 
wounds bleod 
lating is not 
acccilary. 


What medici« 
mes areto be 
judged aggluz 
clnative, 


ftand in no 
need of afuture 


"The man- 
ner of (uture. 


The forme of 
your necdile, 


The forme of 
the pipe,with a 
window in it, 


What wounds 


‘mind, When hee fhall to bee paft danger, it will beetime to fall by litt]. and below the knot, it ma 


little to his accuftomed maner of diet and life. Voivertall remedies are Phiebotomi. paced from them wit 
and purging,which have force to divert and hinder defluxion,wherby the temper. muft be thruft 
the parr might be in danger of change. that {pace which is | 

For Phlebotomy it isnot alwayes neceffary ,as in {wall wounds andjbodies, ch made your ftitches, 
are neither troubled with ill humours, nor plethoricke : But it 1s oncly required ;, (pace mult be left ope 
great wounds, where there is feare ofdefluxion, paine, Delirium, Raving and ™ andthe inflammation 
guictneffe; and laftly in a body that is Plethoricke, and when the joynts, tendons, o, joyned cogether with¢ 
nervesare wounded, Gentle purgations muftbee appointed, becaufe the humo, cer thall come to fupp 
are moved and inraged by ftronger; whence there is danger of defluxion and inf, J be broken by the ftitn 
mation: wherefore nothing isto be attempted in this cafe, without the advice of , nor oo little fleth wwict 
Phy fition, paine and infla amatic 

The Topick and particular Medicines are Agglutinative, which ought to be jng, J wounds, fuch as are tha 
ed with a drying and aftri@ive quality, whereby they may holdrogether the rhruft home, ehac fo it 
the wound, and drive away defluxion, having alwayes regardto the nature of :}y drawne away by the wa 
part and the greatneffe of the difeafe. The Simple Medicines are O/sbanum, Aiy, oft times wounds are {ff 
Sarcocolla, Bole-Armenick, Terra figillata, Samgus Dracons,Common and Venice Ty. fhould have acrooked 
pentine, Gumme E/emmni, Plantane, Horfe-tayle,the greater Comtery , Farina cording tu his defire, 
silis, and many other things of this kind, which wee fhall fpeake of hereatter ingy JR that you may ufe cithe 
Antidotary. | 

The fifth {cope of healing wounds, is the Corre Aion of thofe Sympromes or Ac TZ 


cidents which are accuftomed to follow wounds, which thing verily makes the Ch. & 

rurgionhave much to doe; For he is often forced toomit the proper cure of the di. J ~ 
cafe, {o co refift the accidents and fymptomes, as bleeding, paine, inflammation, 
feaver, convuliioa, palfic, talking idly ,or diftraction, and the like, Of which we & 
fhall treat briefly and particularly, after we have firft fpoken of Sutures as muchs 


we fhall] thinke ficing for this place. 


HAP. V I. 
Of Sutures. 


Usa @ Hen VVounds are made alongft the thighes,Legs, and armes they 

calily want Sutures, becaufe the folution of continuity is eafily reltord 

VAs by Ligatures, but when they are made overthwart,they requireass & 

ture, becaufe the fieth and all fuch like parts, being cut are + 

WS YS wards the found parts; whereby it comes co pafle that they part fet he fecond Suture i 

further each from other ; wherefore that they may be joyned and fo kepr, they mu' cis OF < errs. And the 
atany time wounded) 


be {ow if th bed k {h with need 
e fowed, and if the wound be deepe, you muft take up much fiefh with your Tedeneee.. 


for if you onely take hold of the upper part, the wound is onely fuperficially healet 
but the matter fhutup, and gathered together in the bottome of the wound, ¥ meine ra wound, ¢! 
canfe ab{cefies and hollow Vicers : Wherefore now wee muft treate of making? caps as 
The firft, called leaves the diftance of a fingers breadth,and theriot you her, 
is fit for the greene wounds of the Hlefhy parts, which cannot becured with a Ligh unitin oh kind of ‘ 
ture, and in which no heterogencous or ftrange body remaines ; It is performed topether 
C 


terthismanner. Youmulthave a {mooth needle witha threed in it, having 2 chee? 


due place. 
_ fquare point, that fo it may the better enter the skin, with the head of it fome™ | The fifth kind ; 
followed, that thechreed may lie thercin ; for fo the needle will the betters face wh: NG is cal] 
which alfo we wil 


through. Youmuftal{o have alittle pipe withahole or window inthe en4, wit 
you muft hold and thruft againft the lip of the wound, thatit bee not moves 
one fide.or other, whileft you thruft thorough theneedles And that wee 
thorough that window when the needlcis thruftthorough, and alfo draw it (og¢™ 
with che threed, and withall! hold the lip of the wound in more firmly,thatit! allot ei 
not at the drawing forth of the needle and threed. Having thus pierced the ae 
the wound, tie a knor, necre to whichcut offthe threed ; leaft that if any of it rer 


* 
: 
\ 
: 


fall by little ang 
& Phiebotomiec 
by the temper of 


ndibodies, which 
cly required jg 
m Kaving and Un- 

Nts, tendons, Or 
ufe che humour, 

add inflam. 
m the advice of » 


ught to be indy. 
gether the lips of 
the nature of the 
Olibanum, Aloes. 
and Venice Tyr. 
cry , Farina Vols. 

hereatter in our 


mptemes or Ac. 
y makes the Chi- 
¢ cure of the dif. 
inflammation, a 
Of which wee 
mtures as muchas 


armes they may 
Bis eafily reftored 


t are drawne 
hat they part the 
kept, they mul 
vith your needle; 
erficially healed: 
f che wound, W! 
ate of making of 


deh and therfor* 
red witha my 
is 
it, having 2 thie’ 
of it 


| Selow the knot, it may lo ftick tothe Emplafters that it cannot be plucked and fepa- 
raced from them without paine, when they are rakenoff. But you note,the 
E aicch mult be thruft chrough the midft of the wound, and then the fecond mutt be in 
that {pace which 1s betweene the midft and oneof the ends ; but when you have 
F made your fticches, the lips of the wound mutt not be too clofely joyned, but a little 
| (yce molt be left open betweenethem, that che matter may have free paffage forth, 
inflammation and paine may beavoyded otherwite if they thall be clofely 
} ioyned cogether without any diftance betweene, a tumor after arifing when the mat- 
| cer (hall come to fuppuration,the lips will be fo much diftended that they may cafily 
E bebroken by the ftitneffe of the threed, Bur you muft neither take hold oftoo much 
por toolittle Acth with your needle,for too little will nor hold, and too much cauferh 


Bicyrequircasl 


iting the great Mutcles of the Epsgeftrium, or lower belly, cut witha great wound 


{ome py 


| “ce, which alfo we will defcribe inits Dropetr place, 


Wounds in Gencrall. 327 


sing and inflammation. And befides leaves an ill favoured fcarre. Yer in deepe 


| wounds, fuch as are thofe which are made in the thicker M ulcles, the necdle muft be 
rhrult home, thac fo it may comprehend more of the fic thy fubflance ; leaft the thred 
| drawae away dy the weight of che flefh not taken hold of, may bee broken, But 
oft times wounds ere feene made inluch places as it will be needfull,the Chirurgion 
hhould have a crooked needle and pipe, otherwife the Suture will not fucceede ac- 


cording to hs defire. Wheretore [havethought good to fet forth both their figures, 
iat you may ufe either as occafion fhall! ferve. a 7 


The Figure of Pipes with fereftels in them,and 
Needles ft for Sutures, 


The fecond Suture is made juft after the fame manner asthe Skinners fowe thicir Th:2. manes 
iclsorferrs, And the guts muft be fowed with this kind of Suture, (if they fhall be °* °*™** 
atany time wounded) that the excrements come not forthby the wound. i 

The third Suture is made by one er more needles having threed in theia, thruft The chies 
trough the wound, the threed being wrapped to and againe at the head and the a oes 
point of the needle, as boyes ufe to faften their necdle,for feareoflofingit, intheir * 

“aps, or clothes, This kind of Suture is fitin the curing and healing of Hare-lips, as 


We thal fhew you hereafter exprefled by a Figure. 


The fourthkind of Suture is tearmed Gaftroraphia, invented for the reftoring and The we of 
~uturs te 

Gafrerarbra, 
“her with the Peritonaum lying under chem, The manner whereot we will thew 


A 
place, 


. Tbe fifth kind is called the Dry Suture, which we uf onely in the wounds ofthe The s-Einy 


Fé 2 


4 
| 
Ui aie 
| 
ot moved fe 
draw it ‘iow 
anyofitbe” 
belo" 


Of Woundsin General, 


C HAP, VII. 


Of the Flux of blood, which w{ually happens in wounds, 


The fgnes of ABEND Ft times great bleeding followes upon wounds, by reafon of fome vet 


owing 


from anattery fell cut,broken, or torne, which there isneede to heale and helpe dij. 


gently, becaufe the blood isthe treafure of nature, without which 


waycs of ftenching blood. 


coolin 


paine. 


ermanner Butifthe blood cannotbe ftayed by this meanes, when you have taken offal 
The 2. tayea by 
ef danching t-covercth it, you fhall prefle the wound and the orifice of the Veffell with yoy 

thumbe, fo long untill the blood fhall bee concrete aboutit, into fo thick a clots 


may flop the paflage, 


The3.wayby But if it cannot be thus ftaied, then the Suture (if any be) muft be opened,ands: 
binding oft mouth of the Veflelltowards the originall or roore, muft beetaken hold of, «i § 
bound with your needle and threed, with as great a portion of the Alefh as the ccs 
dition of the part will permit. Forthus I have ftaid great bleedings, even 
putation of members, as I {hall thew in fit place. To pertorme this worke, wees § 
often forced to divide the skin which covereththe wounded Veflcll.For if the lin § 
lar veine,or Artery be cut, it will contraa and withdraw it felfe upwards and 
wards. Then the skinne it felfe mutt bee laid opea under which it lieth, and thn’ 


yeflels. 


Anadmonitis ancedie and threed under ir, it be bound as I have often done. Bur del 


you loofe the knot, it is fit the Heth be growne up, that it may flop the of 


Veffell, leat ic fhould then bleed, 


Theg. But ifthe condition of the part thall be fuch as may forbid this compreheo' f 
and binding ofthe Veffell, we muft come to Efcharoticks, {uch as are the 
burnt /7trsol, the powder of Mercury, with a fmal] quantity of burnt Allume ; | 
Cawhlticks which caufe an Efcar. The falling away of which muft be leftto Nat & 
and not procured by art, leaft it fhould fallaway before that the orifice of the Ye 


fel {hall be ftopt with the flefh,or clotted blood, 


The s.wayby — But fome times it happens that the Chirurgion is forced wholly to cut off che rt 


tutting off the 


yells, felliciclfe,chat thus the ends of the cut veflell withdrawing them{elves, and {hris* 
ing upwards and downewards, being hidden by the quantity of the adjacent and” 
compafling parts, the fluxe of blood, which was before not to bee ftaid, may 
RLopped with leffe labour, this is anextreame remedy and not bee ufed, 


lefle you have in vaine attempted the former. 


~~ knowne. Itis more {ubtile, it runs forthas it were leaping, by teafy 
ofthe vitall {pisit contained together with itin the Arteries, Onthe contrary, § 
which floweth from a Veine is more grofle, blacke,and flow. Now there are my 


Thefirtway The firftand moft ufuall is that, by which the lips of the wound are clofed, ~ ft 
unieffe itbe fomewhat deepe, are contained by Medicines which have an altringets 

, drying, and glutinous faculty ; As terre figel, Boli thy) 
Myr ha, Aloes, ans. 3.1}. Farina volat. molend.5.}. Fiat qui ahumy, 
ovi excipiatar. "Or Thuris Aloes, ana, partes equales. Letthem bee mixt with 
white of an Egge, and the downe of a hare, and let the pledgets dee dipped in the: 
Medicines, aswell hole which are put unto the wound asthofe which arc applix; | 
about it, Then let the wound be bound up withadoubdle clup and fit Ligature, 2 
the part bee fo feated as may fceme the leaft troublelome and moft free fing 


He paines 


caule noth 
fluxion,of 
ture rcady 
humours than z 
paffe that the defluxie 
both. 

Therefore to takea 
applyed to the part as 
dy Refarum,ana 5. 1j.€ 
%,vj. Melethe Wax 
Art, make a Medicine 
Ole. Rofar.c> aceti ame 
meationed ule, Irrigz 
or awhole adde 
mation;Rowlersandd 
forthe fame purpofe 
when they are dryed, 
muft come to narcotic 
Cataplafme of Henba: 
of which we {poke for: 

Laftly, we muft giv 
humour that flowesd 
the variety of thefe thi 
willbe alwaged by apy 
contrary: if Nature iar 
{uppurating Medicines 


moveable at 
Spinal! Mar 
(Citche Cony 
Is not loft in a€ 
fometimes the 
(ercof. yo | 

ral], 
_ The firft js called byt! 
ea ~~ that it canno: 

© lecond is 

Called 
Thethirg is termed / 
rooked forwards. Apa 
Bue, 4nd the like Parts w 
pletion oy [nanition, 
of humours capfe 


linking and omiffien o 


} 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


offome vel. 
nd helpedil. 
which lite 
cery , is thus 
by tcafon 
cComtrary thar 


an alt ringent, 
94.3.1, thuris 
qui albumine 
mixtwith the 
ipped in thefe 
h are applied 
Ligature, and 
oft free from 


en off all that 
ell with your 


pened and the 


‘fh as the 
yen inthe am: 
rorke, wecate 
‘or if the lugu 

rds and down: 
Sth, and thrut- 
e. Bur betore 
of the 


mpreheniie?, 
the powder 0) 
; and 
eftto Naturt; 
ce of the Ver 


and fhrinck 
> Ne 
and! 
aid, may 


bee ufed, 


are many 


re clofed, and | 


hicka clota 


hold of , and | 


ut off che | 


Of Wounds in Generall. 


C Har, VIII. 


Of the paine which happens upon wounds, 


¢=ha He paines which followes upon wounds ought to be quickly afwaged, be- 
caule nothing {0 quickly dejedts the powers ; and it alwayes caufes a de- 
fluxion,of how good foever a habite and temper the body be of; for Na- 
eeel cureready to yeeld afhftance to the wounded part, alwayes fends more 
humours o it, than are needfull for the nourifhment thereof, whereby it comes to 
pa(fe chat the defluxion is cafily encreafed, either by the quantity, or quality, or by 
th. 

"Teed to take away this paine the author of defluxion, let fuch Medicines bee 
applyed to the part as have a repelling and mitigating faculty ; as R. Olei Adyrsini, 
(y 5.1).Cera Farina bordes,z.&, Boli armeni,cy terra freillat. axa, 
z,vj. Melethe Waxe in the Oyles, then incorporate all the reft, and according tw 
Art, make a Medicine to be applyed about the part, or Ry, Emplaft. Diacalcith. =. iv, 
Ole, Rofar. co aceti ana liquefiant fimal, and leta Medicine be made for the fore 
mentionedufe, Irrigations of oyle of Rofesand Mirtiles, with the white of an Eoge, 
or awhole Egge added thereto, may ferve for lenitives,iftherebe no great inflam- 
mation; Xowlersand double cloathes moiftened in Oxycrate, will be alfa convenient 
forthe fame purpofe. But the force of fuch Medicines mutt be often renewed, for 
wheathey are dryed, they augment the paine. But ifthe paine yeld not to thefe, we 
mult come to narcoticke Medicines, {uch as are the Oyle of Poppy, of Mandrake, a 
Cataplafme of Henbane and Sorrell, adding thereto Mallowes and Marfh-mallows, 
ofwhich we {poke formerly in treating of a Phiegmon. 

Laftly, we muft give heed to the caufe of the paine, to the kind and nature of the 
humour that flowes down, and to the way which Natureaffedts ; for according to 
the variety of thefe things, the Medicines muft be varied, as ifheat caufe paine , it 
will be alwaged by application of cooling things ; and the like reafon obferved in the 


conmary: if Nature intend {uppuration,y ou mutt helpe forwards its endeavours with 
luppurating Medicines. 


MAP, Xe 
Of Convulfion by reafon of « wound. 


2:65} Convulfion is an unvoluntary contraction of the Mufctes (as of parts 
moveable at our pleafure, towards their originall, that is, the Braine and 
equa] Spinall Marrow, for by this the Convulfed member or the wholle body 
“<5 (ifthe Convulfion be univerf{all) cannot be moved at our pleafure. Yet 
isnot loft ina Convulfionasitisina Palfie, burit isonely depraved and 

caule fometimes the Convulfion poffefleth the whole body , otherwhiles fome 


Panthercof, you muft note thar there are three kinds of Convulfions in Gene- 


| The f called bythe Greekes, Tetames, whenas the whole body growes ftiffe 
flake that it cannot be moved any way. 


lecond is called Opé/tbotamos, which is when as the whole body is drawn back- 


' The third is termed Emprofthotenes, which is whenthe whole body is bended or 
fooked forwards, A particular Convulfion is, when asthe Mufcle of the Eye, Ton- 


Re and the like parts which is furnifhed with a Nerve, is takes with a Convulfion- 
tion or Inanition, Sympathy or confent of 
ace of humours caufe Repletion , dulling the 


using, and omiffion of exercife, ot any accuftomed evacuation, as fuppreflion ~ 
Ft 3 


Paines wreas 

kensthe body, 
and caulés de. 
fi 


Divers Ano- 
dinesor medi -« 
cinceto afl wage 
paine. 


Whata Cone 
vulfion is, 


Three kinds 
of an usiverfal 
C onvulfion. 


aine caufé a Convulfion, AbUn- Tiree cute, 
body by imsmoderate eating and of acenyulfou 


Caules of Kee 
pletion. 


é 4 
ot 
; 


Caufes of Inaz 


26.fe¢,2. 


Canfes of cons 
vulfion by coa- 
ent of paine, 


Signes of 2 
cekyul(jon. 


Thecaule 
Convulfion by 
Repletion. 


Wounds 


the Hemorrhoids and Courfes: for hence are fuch like excrementious humours 
drawne intothe Nerves, with which they being replete and filled, are dilated mor. 
than is fic, whence neceffarily becoming more fhort, they fuffer Convulfion, Ey. 
amples whercofappearein Leather and Lute or Viol-ftrings, which {wolne wie, 
moyfture in a wet feafonare broken by repletion. 

Immoderate vomitings, fluxes, bleedings, caufe Inanition or Emptineffe, where. 
fore a Convulfion caufed by a wound, is deadly : as alfo by burning feavers, For by 
thefeand the like caufes , the inbred and primigeneoushumidity of the Nerves 
wafted, fothat they are contracted like leather which is fhrunke up, by being helq 
too neere the fire, or as fidle ftrings which dryed with Summers heat, are brokep 
withviolence; fuch aConvulfionis incurable; For it is better a Feaver follow ; 
Convulfion, than a Convulfiona Feaver; as we aretaught by Hippocrates, {0 thz 
fucha Feaverbee proportional! to the ftrengthof the convullifique caufe, and the 
Convulfion proceede from Repletion ; for che abundant and groflc humour caufing 
the Convulfion is digefted and wafted by the feaverifh heat. 

The caufes of a Conyulfion by reafon of paine, are either the puncture ofa Nerve, 
whether it be by a thing animalil, as by the biting of a vencmous beaft ; or bya thing 
inanimate, as by the prick of ancedle,thorne, or pen-knife or great and pisrcing 
cold, which is hurtfull to the wounds, principally of the nervous parts; whereby ¢ 
comes to paffe, that by caufing great and bitter paine in the nerves they are contr. 
Cied towards their originall, that is, the Braine, as if they would crave fuccour from 
their parents in their diftreffed eftate. Befides alfo,an ill vapour carried to the braige 
from {ome putrefaGion fo vellicatethit , that contracting it felfe, it alfo contracer) 
together withit allthe Neruesand Mufcles , as wefce ithappeneth in thofe which 
have the falling ficknefle. By whichitappearesthatnot onely the braine itlelfe 
{uffereth together with the Nerves, but alfo the Nerves withthe Braine, The fignes 
ofa Convulfion aredifficulr, painefull and depraved motions, either of fome part 
or Of the whole body, turning afide of the Eyes and whole Face, a Contractionof 
the Lippes,a drawing in of the Cheekes as it one laughed, and an Vniverfall {wes 


Lis, o, 


X; 


The cure of a Convulfion. 


me Fic cute ofa Convulfion , istobee varied according to the variety ofthe 
Tay Convulfive caufe,for that which proceeds from Repletion mutt be othe 
wife cured,than that which is caufed by Inanition,aad that which proceed 
/of paine, otherwife than eyther of them. For that whichis caulcd 

by Repletion is cured by difcuffing and evacuating Medicines : as by die 
conveniently appointed, by purging, bleeding, digeftive locall Medicines, exer, 
frictions, fulpburious Baths and other things appointed by the prefcription of [ome 


A 


learned Phy fition which fhall overfee the cure, which may confume the fupertivows 


and excrementitious humours that pofleffe the fubftance of the Nerves, and habital 
the body. The local! remedies are Oyles, Vaguents and Liniments, wich whi: hehe 
Neck, Back-bone and all the contracted parts fthall be annointed, The Oyles are, the 
Oyle of Foxes, Bayes, Camomill, Wormes, Turpentine, of Coffus, of Caitorcum: 
The Oyntments are Arragon, Acrippa,de Althas,Martiatam, 0% 


Makea Liniment for your ufe,or Lumbric.de Spica de Caftoreo 
bums 2).Sulpburis vivi 5.8.Cera quanti fuf fieit.Make a Liniment,or 4 


ts Martiaticy de Salvia,z Aqua vita 


fiat limimentum. Butthis difeafe is cured by flender diet,and {weating with 
Decoctions of Guiacum , becaufe by thefe remedies the groffe, tough, and vifcids 
excrements, which are in fault are digefted, 
A Convulfion proceeding of Inanition isto be cured by the ufe of thole = 
“ 


be the forme of a Liniment;Rx.O/ei Chamam. Laurin.anac.ij, 


LB. 


which doc wholefomly 
g dict confifting of meat 
ns, Pigeons, Veaic,a 
ferves muft be ordained 
the habit of the body, fu 
ret Lillies. The follow 
j.quatuor ferminum fr: 
Chicken,and let hime 
lowing Iulep willbeg 
[ulep, utatar in fitz. 
Clyfters thall bee appo 
lowes, Marfh Mallowes 
like faculty ; or that the 
ftersbe of Oyle and Mil 
bethe example ofa Lin 
Axung 
tam, with which let the 
the forme of an emollie 
M.yj.Seminis Lint & fw 
th.viij, Makea Bath: J 
fhall come forth of the E 
avoyding {weat. Burift 
ordaine a Bath of Milk, 


Cation of | 
bite. the 


fo the ven 
alieMedicines which ar 
faculty (hall be powred 
date, diffolved in Agus 
ble Antidore. Alfo cu Op 
on of ail dolorifique ca 
dies,as if paine by reafo 
mutt prefently be refit 
with Agus vite, 
of the Nerves. If the p: 
the Braine, the S pinall : 
as thatofa Hot-ho 
muft be annoynced wit! 
tcrythan fuddenly to ex; 

ot fire or warme Bath. 
that as fone as the ligne 
fhew themfelves, 
aft locked by the pertir 
bit oftheir tongues, fo: 
Speculum Oris, which m 
canes ofa crew 


and fomewhat twined | 


weg, 
> 
| 
| 
| 
nition, 
Ofth 
| 
* 


LB. 9, 


humours 
ated more 
lfion, Ey. 


volne with 


le, where. 
rs. For by 

Nervesis 
being held 
are broken 
er follow a 
cs, 10 thar 
nie, and the 
our caufing 


Nerve, 
by a thing 
d piercing 
whereby ir 
are contra. 
iccour from 
» the braine 
ontracteth 
which 
raine itfelfe 
The fignes 
f {ome part 
traction of 
rfall {weat, 


riety of the 
it be orher- 
h proceeds 
ris caufed 
- as by diet 
-s, exercile, 
ion of fome 
Bfupertivous 


Bind habit of 


whichethe 
yles are, the 
Castorenm: 
T his may 
fof ict 

= 
yrith che 


and vilcice 


Bhofe things 
winch 


: hich doc wholefomly and moderately nowrifh. And therefore you muft prefcribe 


Of Wounds in General. 


, dict confifting of meats fullof good nourifhment , as broaths and cullices of Ca- 
Pigeons, Veale,and Mutton, boyling therein Violet and Mallow leaves. Con- 
ferves muft be ordained, which may trengthen the debilitated powers, and hume& 
‘he habit of the bod y,fuch as are,the Conferves of Buglofic, Violets, Borage and wa- 
ret Lillies. The following broath will be proficable, Lac?uce portul.ana, 
‘feminum Barberss,3 .j.Letthemal be boiled with 
Chicken,and Ice him take the broath every morning. Itthirft opprefle him,the fol- 
lowing Iulep willbe good. dquerofar.5.iv. Aqua viol ibe Saccars aibi/simi 3. vj, 
Julep, wtatar 1” fisz. lf the patient be bound in his body emollient and humecting 
Clyfters thall bee appointed, made of the decoGion of a fheeps head and tect, Male 
lowes, Marth Mallowes,Pellitory of the wall, Violet leaves, and other things of the 
like faculty ; or that the remedy may be more ready and quickly made : let the Cly- 
tersbe of Oyle and Milke. Topick remedies fhall be Liniments and Bathes, Let this 
betheexample ofa Liniment, R.Olei Viol. Amygdal, dulc.ana.z ij. Olei Lilior. & 
Axungia porcé recentis,> i\j.Cera nove quantum fafficst, fiat Linimen- 
tom with which let the whole {pine and part aflected be annointed : This {hall bee 
theforme of an emollient and hume@ing Bath.R:. Malve,Bis Malve,Partct ana, 
Seminis Lint fenmug.anath £.Coquantur in Aqua commun: addende Olet Lillior, 
Make a Bath: Into which let the patient enter when it is warme. Whenhe 
hall come forth of the Bath, let him be dried with warme Clothes, or reit in his bed 
syoyding {weat, Butifthe patient be able to undergoe the charge, it will be good to 
ordaine a Bath of Milk,or Oyle alonie,or of them equally cogerher. 


Cuar. XL 
Of the cure of and paine. 


Se ~Convulfion which is caufed both by confent,of paincand Communi- 
Xy NG \ cation of the affeét,is cured by remedies which are contrary to the do- 
(orifique caufe. For thus ifit praceede from a punture or venenieus 
We Mi) bite, the wound muftbe dilated and inlarged by cutting the skin, chat 

, {o che venenate matter may flow forthmore freely,for which purpofe, 
alloMedicines which are of a thin and liquid confiftence,but of a drying and digeftive 
faculty (hall be powred in,to call forth & diffulve the virulency,as Treacle & Mithri- 
date, diffolved in Aqua vite,with a littic of fome Mercuriall powder: for this is a no- 
ble Antidote. Alfo cupping glaffes and fearrifications will be good. Laflly the conditi- 
on ot ail dolorifique caufes, {hall bee oppugned by the oppofition of contrary reme- 
dies,as if paine by reafon of a pricked Nerve or Tendon, fhall caufe a Convulfion, it 
mutt prefently be refifted by proper remedics,as Oyle of Turpentine of Esphorbinm, 
mixt with Agus vite, andalfo with other remedies appropriated to punctures 
of the Nerves. If the paine proceede from exceffe of cold, becanfe cold is hurtful! ro 
the Braine, the Spinall marrow,and Nerves;the patient fhall bec placed in a hot aire, 
luch as thatefa Hot-houfe or Sroave,all the Spine of his back and Convulfed parts, 
muft be annoynted with the her Liniments above mentioned : For thar is much bet- 
ter,than fuddenly to expofe him from the conceaved convulcifique, caufe to a moft 

‘fire or warme Bath. Inthe meane time the Chirurgion muft take diligent heede, 


thatas foone as the fignes of the Convulfion to come, or already prefent,or at hand, 


0¢ fhew themfelves, that he put a fticke berweene the patients tecth, leaft they bee 

locked by the pertinacious contraction of the Iawes : for many in fucha cafe have 
“ off their tongues, for which purpofe he fhall bee provided of an inftrument called 

Péc4lam Oris, which may be dilated and contracted according to your mind by the 
‘Bcanes of fcrew,as the fi sures underneath demonftrate, the one prefentiag it open 
‘nd fomewhat twined up,and the other as it is fhur. 


The 


eeure ofa 
Convulfion. 
caufed by inas 
nition, 


An E molient 
Liniment tor 
any Convulli 
on. 


AnEmolient 
and hume&ing 
Bath. 


The cure of « 
Conyulfion by 
a pundgture, oF 
bite, 


A worthy A- 
or Astidete: 


You muft bins 
der che locking 
of che tecth. 


| 
| 
q 
| 
é 


What a Palfie 

The differen- 
chereof, 


Wow it difs 
ferstrom a 


Convulfion, 


The ¢aufes, 


The Figure of a Speculum Oris, to open the teeth 
wher they ave locked or held faft tagether. 


Cuap. Xx Lf. 


Of the Palfie. 


ES 474 He Palfie is the refolving or mollification of the Nerves, with privation 


Z of fenfe and motion,nor truly ef the whole body, but of the one par 


= therof,as of the right or left fide. And {uch is properly named the Paljie 


for otherwifeand lefle properly the refolution of fome one member 
alfa called the Pallie ; For when the whole body is refolved, it is an Apoplexy. Ther. 


fore the Palfie fometimes takcs halfe the body, otherwhiles the uper parts which at 


betweene the navelland the head , otherwhilesthe lower which ase from the navel 


to the feer;fomtimes the tonguc,guller,bladder,yard,eyes andlaftly any of the pari- 
cles of the body. 


Ic differs from a Convulfion in its whole nature. For ina Convulfion, thers is: 
contention and contraction of the part,but in tkis a refolving andrelaxation therco!: 
befides it commonly happencth thatthe fenfe is either abolithed or very dull, which 
ufually remaines perfe& ina Convulfion. There are fome which have a pricking, 
and as it were great paine in the part. 

The caufes are internall or external], the internal] are humors obftructing one of 
the ventricles of the braine, or one fide of the {pinall marrow, fo that the Animal 
faculty, the worker of fenfe and motion, casnot by the Nerves ceme to the part ‘0 
performe its action. The external caufes arc a fall,blow,and the like in juries, by which 
ofc times the joynts are diflocated, the {pinall marrow wrefted afide,and conftrid 
ons and compreffiens of the Vertebre arife, which are caufes that the Animal {pitt 
cannot come to the Organes in its whole {ubftance.But it is eafy by skillin Anatomy 
perfectly to underftand by the refolved part the feat of the morbifique caule, fof 
when there isa Palfie properly fo called, that is when the right, or left fide is wholly 
{eized upon, then you may know that the obftrué@tion is inthe braine, or {pinall mat 
row; butifthe parts ofthe head being yntoucht, either of the fides being wholly 

efolved,the fault remaines in the Originall of the {pinall marrow ; if the armes be? 
taken with this difeafe, we may certainly think that the matter of the difeafe lics hid 
inthe 5.6. and 7. Vertebra ofthe neck. But if the lower members languith, we ™" 
judge the Paralitick caufe to be contained inthe Yertebra of the loynes and holy 
Which thing the Chirurgion muft diligently obferve that he may alwaies have '“ 
courle to the originall of the difeafe, The Palfie which proceedes from a Nerve 


— 


— 


~exceedin gly bruille: 
fhuc again& che Ania 

native heat 1s 

humors, neither do 
chat which fucceeds ar. 
teaver COMIC upomaf 
xing humor, to be hoy 
watted,and the oppolit 
cisill: For this is a fis: 
gersit felfe to be detraiic 
or oppolite fide. 


— 


eanoegN the cure of th 
(8 (ed general te 
ned and prudéng 
purpolc,tor it procure; 
which relaxeth the nerve 
to put about the 
2 decoétion of Wine, 
Swines bladders, halfe fi 
refufcitateth & ftrengahc 
very languid ; Thenith: | 
red over jult as weliaye 
vapour of the followir: | 
Angelica Rube ana 
abar. 
them be ail put in che V 
patient thall keepe 
leave,then let hina be ou 
driedand reft. Then ke h 
Leonellus Faventinas 
Nardin petroles ana 5 
Graner.lunip. be a: 
cum Oless Vino: 
fine, adde Galbani, Bais 
Make an viatinert if 
you thall ufe che follow i: 
Spicemivat Sanguimes ara 
Ar bic 
3.) Terebinthine vemete,s 
buntur cum 4quavite > 
tuay be diftilled in Banee 
be anointed withtheiq 
of this following 
mal .Cinain Cary oph: 
faturciapulec 
(lechad.ana, P. }-Comes 4 o7 


fundansar, Ander chem 


Parts be moiftened 
{poone full ro drigke inth 


Aeated, and much phic 
fumed, 


3 
= 
Ler = 
| 
/ 
| = =f = 
4 
| 
— 


privation 
he one part 
i the Palite: 
memberis 
exy. Ther. 
which are 
1 rhe navell 
f the parti- 


», there isa 
yn thercol: 
Holl, which 
2 pricking, 


ing one of 
Animal 
the part 
which 
mconftriati- 
mall {pirit 
Anatomy 
auic, 
is wholly 
inall mat- 
wholl¥ 
irmes bee 
{e hid 
,we mutt 
oly bone. 
have 


erye cul, 


Of Wounds in General. 335 


~exceedin gly bruiled, is incurable ,becaufe the way to the part by that meanes is 
again che Animal {pirit. Old menicarce orne ver recover of the pallic, becaufe 
‘eit native heat is languid, andthey are opprefled with abundance of excrementiti- 
ous numors,neither doth an inveterat palfte which hath long poffeft the part; neither 


which fucceeds an Apoplexy, yeeldus any better hope ofcure. [tis goud fora 


feqyer ro. come Upon a Palfic, for it makes the diffipation of the refoluving and rela- pen upona 
ving humor, tO behopedfor. Whenrhe member affected with the paliie,is much 
walted, and he oppolite onthe contrary, encreafed inquantity,heat and colour, 

For this is a ligne of the extreame weakeneile of the afflicted part,which 
sorsit felfe to be detrauded of itsnourifhment, all the provifion flowing to the found 


— 


Cuarp, XITI. 


Of the cure of the Paijit. 


xoeaN the cure of the Palfie we muft not attempt any thing, unlefle we have firtt 
(312% uled penerall remedics,dietand purging; ail which care lyeth upon the lear- 
ned and prudeng Phyfition, The Decection of Guasacum is very fit for this 
puspole,for it procures iweat amd attcnuates, digefts and dricth up all the humidiry god fora 
which relaxeth the nerves: but when {weat doth not flow it fhall not be unprofitable — 
‘o put about the retolved members, bricks heated red hot in the fire and quenchedin 
adecoction of Wine, Vineger,and refolving herbs, or alfo ftone bottles, or Oxe and 
Swines bladders, halfe filled withthe fame deco@ion:; for fuch hear which is a€iuall Things 
re{ulcitateth & ttrengtheneth the hearofthe part,which in this difeule is commenly #7 
yery languid; Then the Patient fhall go into a Bathing-tub, which is vailed or cove- plied to para- 
red over jult as wehave defcribed in our Treatife of Bathes,that fo he may receave the 
vapour of thetollowing Decoction.R.. Fol, 
Angelich Rute aaa. Ms. PlorumChamam, Melil Anethi,Anthef ana, P.ij.Baccar. Laur. 
them beailputin che Veficl! mentioned inthe Treatife lately defcribed for ufe, The 
patient {hail keepe himafelfe in that Bathing-tud, as longas his ftrength will give him 
leave,thenlet hina be put into hisbed well covered,where he (hall {weat againe, bee 
driedand reft. Then let him be pretentlyanointed with the following ointment,which 
Leonelus Faventinus muchcommends, Laurin: ce de Terebinth.ana 3 Lei Leon. Faventis 
cy petvoles,ana >.) Vins Aqua vita, 
Cramer lump. Gummi bcdera,anacara. Terantar mtf{ceantur omnia 
cum Olehs Vino : in vali auplics ufque ad Vine con/umptionem, facia forts expref- 
fone, adae Galbani, ur fi, 
Makcan vintment in forme of a liniment,adding a little wax if need fhall require.Or 
you thall ufe che following remedy approved by many Phyfitions.R: Myrrhe c aloes, AP sPProved 
Sanguenes draconts thurts. epopanacis. , the Palfic- 
Witt avabici, caftoret, ana Mofcbi,d j.aque vite, 
venete,ad pondus omniumpalverabuntur pulverifamda eliqua- 
aque vite cy acetitantille, And letthemalibe putin fitveiicls that they 
way be diltilled in Balseo Adaria,and ict rhe {pine of the back , and paralytick limbes 
be enhouned withthe liquor which comes from thence. Lhave often tricd the force 
i). Salviemajor. late arthritica,Lavena, 200d to 
tchad arta, P.).Comet{a omnia contundantur,¢y 12 Aqua vit.<y Vint malvat.an. 
And ler them be diftilled in Balneo Afarze,like the former, ler the atffe ed 
parts be moiftened with the diftilled liquer,of which alfo you may give the patient a 
Poone todriake inthe morning with {ome Sugar. Fer thus the ftomach will be 


fumed and much phlegme contained therein as the fuell of this difeafe will be con- 
¢ 


> 


~ 
-~ 


You 


a 
4 = 
q 
i 
4 


Of Wounds in Generall. Ling. 
You mutt alfo appoint exercifes of the affected parts and trequent and hard ftidi. 


frigiow. Ons, with hotlinnen clothes,that the native heat may be recalled and the exctemen,, 
contained in the parts digefted: You may alfo ufc the Chymicall oyles of Roferm Ary 


Sioa Tyme,Lavander,Cloves ,Nutmegs,andlaftly of all {pices, the maner of extrac, ing 
whereof we thall hereafter declare ina peculiar Treatife. 
C HAP. X I Vv. 
Of Sowning. 


x Gt: Owning isa (uddains and pertinacious defect of all the powers, but elec, 
What Sowne ally the Vitall ; In chisthe Paticnts lic without motion and fente, that th: 
ing is, SMTA Ancients thought that it differed from death onely in continuance of time 
The caule of fowning, whichhappens tothole that are wounded, is bleedin 
which caufeth a diflipation of the fpirits : or feare which caufeth Z 
fuddaine and joint retirementof the fpirits to the heart. Whence followes x 
intermiflon of the proper duty as alfo of the reft of the faculties, whileti they bein, 
thustroubled are ata ftand. Alfo Sowning happens by a putrid and venenate vapow,, 
carried to the heart by the Arteries,and to the Braine by the Nerves ; by which you 
may gather chat all fowning happens by three caufese The firft is, by diTipation 
the {pirits and native heat,as in great bleeding. And thea by the oppreffion of the} 
{pirits by obftrudtion ,or compreifion as in a feareor tumult; For thus the {pirits 
back haftily from the furface and habit of the body ,unto the heart and center. [.2\., 
ly, by corruption,as in bodics filled with ill humors,andin poyfonous wounds. Th 
fignes of Sowning are Palenes, adewy and fudden {weat arifing, the failing ofthe 
pulfe,a fudden falling of the body upon the ground without fenfe & motion, a col. 
n¢efle poficiling the whole body, fo that the Patient may feeme rather dead, than. 
live. F or many of thele who fall into a fowne dycunletic they have prefent helpe, 
Thecure of | Therefore you fhall helpe them, if when they are ready to fall,you fprinckle much 
fed by dilipas COld water in their face, if that the fowning happen by diflipation of the fpirits, or: 
tionoffpiits. they fhall be fer with their faces upwards, upon abedor onthe ground , as gently: 
may be; and if you give them bread dipt in wine to hold and chew in their moutty, 
Bur if it be caufed by a putrid vapour and poyfonous aire, you fhail give them alitt! 
fedbyavene- Mithvidat or Treacle in Aqua vite with a {poonc, wfually dotothofe which hae 
‘He plague,or any part affected with a Gangreene,or {phaceil. But if the 


"The cue of 
Sowning can~ NOt be railed out of their fownes, by reafon of the pertinatious oppreffion and com: 
preftionof thefpiritsabourthe heart, you give them all fuch things as 
Graction, power to diffufe,callforch and refufcitac the {pirits {uch as are,ftrong wines to 
{weet perfumes to {mell: You muft call them by their owne name,lowd in their <2", 
and you muft pluckthem fomewhat hard by the haires of the Temples,and nec... A’: 
fo rub the temples, noftrils, wrefts and palmes ofthe Hands with aqua vite, wit 


Cloves, Nutmegs,aad Ginger have becne fteeped. 


Three caules 
of (owning. 


Cuar. XV: 


Of Delirium (i.) Raving, Talking idly or Dotinz. 


§Oring,or talking idly, here is ufed fora fymptome which commonly happ* 
4 § neth in feavcrs caufed by a wound, and inflammation sand it is a perturbs 
Con of the phantafic,and funétion of the mind, not long induring. Whe" 
thereof, fore uch adoting ha ppens upon weunds,by reafon of vehement painc, and a feavets 
as Rervous parts as the joynts,ftomach,and middriffe fhall be violated. 
fufferswith “Ancients did therefore call the Middriffe Phrese,becaufe when this is)" 
the 4S ifthe mind it {elfe were hurt, a certaine phrenfie enfucs that is , a perrurbatio® 
ofthe Animiall faculty, which isimployed in ratiocination ; by reafon of the co™ 

munity which the Disphragea hath with the Braine,by the nerves, fent from the 


Conjug™ 


hata Symp= 
tomatic¢all 


Lis. 9- 


Conjugation, which 
much bleeding, 
the motions and thoug 
bled much in the Am 
yénemous beatt,or fro 
or Sphacel, from a ver 
rycoult and feare. Laftls 
and debilitate the min¢ 
cholerick,by diffipatio 
proceede from the 
after purging and bloo 
fhaved or cut off,the he 
of Diacalcitheos diflol ve 
(hall be procured with® 
boyled,with broaths 
Sorrell and fuch like. Cf 
py gently bearen witht. 
{fant Companions that 
and may cafe and free 
himielfe againe. Butt 
from thefe things whic 


~ 
~ 
| 
j | 


but efpecj. 
, a that the 
ice Of ume. 
vleeding 
? 
caufeth 
lowes an 
| they being 
ate Vapou; 
which you 
Tipation of 
10N Of thefe 
{pirits fly 
Nter. Lafi. 
sunds. The 
ling ofthe 
10n, a cold. 
ad, thana- 
helpe. 
nckle much 
ipirits, or if 
as gcnily as 
eir mouths, 
Shem alittle 
which have 
patients 
nand com- 
ngs as have 
esto drink, 
their care, 
d neck. Al- 
ite, wacrn 


nly happee 
a pert urba- 
Where 
ada feavels 
lated. 
this is 
rrurbation 
of the com: 
m the 
Conjug® 


Conjugation, whichare carried te the ftomach. Therefore doting happens by too 
much bleeding, which caufeth a dif_ipation of the mee: whereby it happens that 
the motions and thoughts of the mind erre, .as we fee it happersto thofe who have 
bled much in the Amputationof amember. And it happens by the pun@ure ofa 
vfhemous beatft,or from feed retained or corrupted in the womb,or from aGangreen 
or Sphacel,from a venenate and putrid aire carried up to the braine,or from a fudden 
feare, Laftly what things foever with any diftemper efpecially hot,do hurt 
and debilitate the minde, Thefe may caufe doting by the afflux of humors, {pecially 
cholerick,by diffipation,eppreiion orcorruption of the {pirits. Therefore if it fhall 
proceede from the inflammation of the braine,and Meminges er Membranes therof; 
after purgiag and blood letting by the prefcription of a Phyfition, the haire being 
fhaved or cut off,the head fhall be fomented with rofe vinegcr,and chen an Emplafter 
of Diacalcitheos diflolved in eyle and vineger of Rofes, fhall be laid thereupon, Sleep 
(hall be procured with Barley creames wherein the feeds of whic Poppy have been 
boyled,with broaths made of the Decoctien of the cold feedes of Lettuce, Purflzine, 
Sorrell and fuch like.Cold thiags (hall beapplyed to his noftrils, asthe feeds of Pop- 
py gently bearen with Role-water and a little vineger,Let him have merry and plea- 
fant Companions that may divert his mind from all cogitation of forrowfull things, 
and may cafe and free him of cares,and with their {weet intreaties may bring him to 
himielfe againe. Burifichappenby default of the {pirits, you muft fecke remedy 
from thefe things which have beene fet downe in the Chapter of Sowaing. 


T be End of the Ninth Booke. 


The Cure. 


Lip Wit 
9 “ 2 2 5 
inp 
\ 
3 
42°35 


| 


THE GREENE 


AND BLOODY VVOVNDS 
EACH PART. 


Tue Tentu Booke. 


— 


C I, 


Of the kinds or differences of a broken Scull, 


AIS 


The differen- 
ces of a broke 


head, 


The kinds of 
a broken Scul 


: our ot 
2.4 contufion or collifion,the 3, is termed Effrecura, the 4. isnamed Sedes,or aleats eraser, 


the 5. (if you pleafe to addeit) you may call a Counterfiffure,or as the interpreter of 
Paulus cals ita Refomitws. As whenthe boneis cleft on the contrary fide,to that which 
‘eceaved the {troake, There are many differences of thefe 5.kindsofa broken Scull, _ 
or fome fractures are ereat, fome {mall and others indifferent; fome runn¢ out toa oe 
scaler leneth or breadth; others are more contracted; fome refide only in the fuper- quantity. 
cies; others defcendto the Diploe, orelfe pierce thoroughboth the Tablesofthe 
cull; fome runin a right line others inan oblique and circular; fomeare complica- from their 
cdamongft themfelves, as a fiffure is neceffarily and al wayes accompanied witha fg»re. 
Ollifion or Contufion; and othersare aflociated with diverf{e accidents, as paine , 
“at {welling bleeding and the like. Sometimes the Scull is {o broken,that the mem- 
om lying under it, is prefled withthivers of the bone, as with pricking needles, 
*mewhiles none of the bones fals off. All which differences are diligently to be ob- 
— Decale they force us to vary the cure, and therefore for the helpe of memo- 
)>{have thoughe good tode{cribe them in the following Table. 


L1B.10- 337 if 
eX: 
A 
Boe ee Ow that we have briefly treated of wounds ingenerall,that is, of their 
differences ,fignes,caufes,prognofticks and cure,and alfo fhéwed the 
reafon of theaccidents and fymptomes which ufually follow and ae- | 
Me sy company them;it remaines that we treateof them as treyare incident 
| to cach part, becaufe the cure of wounds mutt be diverfly performed 
, according to the diverfity of the parts, Now we will begin with the a 
wounds of the head. Therefore the head hath the hayry {calpe lightly bruifed with- — 
 outany wound, otherwhiles it is wounded without a Contufion, and lometimes itis 
 bothcontufed and wounded: butafra@ure made in the Scull, is fometimes fuperfici- 
aty,fometimes it defcends evento the Déploc, fometimes it penctrats through the 2. : 
|  Tables,and the Meninges into the very fubftance of the Braine ; befides,the braine is : 
olttimes moved and fhaken with breaking of the internall veines ,and diverfe fymp- 
| tomes happen whenchere appeares nowoundat all in the head:ofall,andevery of ; 
Which we will {peak in orderjand adde their cure,e{pecially according co the opinion : 
of the divine Hippocrates. He in his Booke of the wounds of the head, {eemes to have ee 
G A Table 


— 
338 the Greene and Bloody 


if Either mani-CTo our fight, 
Soft, & appa-sTe your feeling, 
rent shat is COr iniirument. 


| 
| | exdmple When th, 


On the fide. fay 
- | fide of the 
(Inthe fame | head is 
Reepe their the left is cleft, 
natural fr- | Or ob/eure 
| eureand | 4ndnotma- | *erofwaies\ Or from above y 
if Conta lion, ching each | Hot the the fir T able 
collifien of | whencepro- | receive | | cleft, but | 
| the blowis | thas which és poo 
| bard,beany | the Scall but thecen- arts arc drawne 
and oltufe, | whichis | trary ther- | Indivers Fremthe right 
which [bald | called a fif- to:and that \ bonestowit | fideto tive Left, end 


fall or bee | ure, which | Fappensei. | i” [uch men | fo on the contrary, 
[mitten a-\ is ther, as want fu- | as when the right 


< gainft the 


A fracture, 
or falution 
of comtinus- 


| tures, or | Bregma és frut, 
| have them andthe left cleft. 


the head 


or difpofed | From before 


otherwayes | bind and thecm: 


| bead,er 4.2 
ty ix she gainft 
knocked. fa then is fat, | trary, aswhenth 
| the and this ope | forebeadis/mit- 
brokes pofstion 5, | bem sthenmici 
| bones are | | eather left. 
divided | 
| ° | Or betweene both that is, the obfcure manift}, 
as that which 1s termed a Capsllary 


ay He canfcs of 
(Cos withany kit 
Beafts,aid 
of the ararc 
er by the lenfe,as 


| manifefted by [mearing i8 over with oyle, 
| writing inke. 


fo that rhe particles ofthe broken boner 
| | ved from their feat, andfadling down, 
membranen hence proceeds that kina of 


| Or loofe which reteines akind of attrition , when wih The Rational! fig nes th 
that fite, | bone firucke upon is broken as it were into me) it besane of 

| and that J fragments fhivers and feailes,either apparcst," Patienr thall fall down wit 
| either hid inthe found bone, fo that it  prefied chon lome hard thin gulf fe 

| Or in forme fort;as when the broken bone [ome hearingsif he tha 


put his hand tothe 


| part feparated but in others adberes to thé wh 


| bone, whence another kind of effraciure rite avy, obrufeypric kin 

may callit Arched, when as the bone fo fwel the troake wis gi 

shat st leawes am empty [pace below. hee il, he au 

of th Mcd and 

| Parpe,or Succifion, shew she bone is fo cut, that infomepartit ded came to 
cutting heresto the found bone. nok ether he was erpubi 


| thing but Retciffion,w hen she fragment fals down wholly broker of jis thofe eyes, 
that incifi- \ Or Seate, whem the marke of the weapon remaines impr” their biain 

on is made, | the wound that the wound is of #0 mere lenoth por breadth! «fame w 

citherby | _thespeapon fell upon. Ano" ‘@ppens alfo wher the 


L 


L | B, 10. 
Another T: 
| The 
‘ore 
| 
| 
, he 
bez 
be 
0 
| ‘A 
| 
| 
| 
| 


ccceéVedthe 
cleft, but 
bich 


be right 

he left, and 
¢ contrary, 
m the right 
na és firuck, 


left cleft. 
efore to bt- 


na the coms 

as when the 

[mit- 
mowle ts 


lame ha 


L 1B, 10. 


Wounds 


Another Table of the differences of a fractured Scull. 


, 
dabfetom, bey are found folitary andby 


[ Thesr mature,ac- Adutually with them/elves, asa 
cording to whith \ C ompound colli fion 

fraciures arecala, and that 4 fiffure with an effracture. 

with other fymptomes, as felling, 

paine heat, bleeding, comvulfion 

amd the like, 

Their Ouamtity whence they are called, great, indifferent and /mall, 

according tothe triple dimenfion of length, breadth and profun- 

The differences of ; atic. 


sures common 


to thefe of allother | (Right, 

parts | Their fioure, from | Oblique, 

from whence they are 
called. 


| Their fite,whence they are termed on the fore or backe, or the vicbs or 
| left or the upper or lower partor fuperficiaryand profound, 

| The part whence tt called a Fracture of the Forehead, Nowle, Breg- 

ma, ad Stony bones, and hence it jwdzed, what may bee deadly, 

| or bopefull of recovery , eafic or difficult tocure, 


Cuap, II. 
Of the causes and fignes of « broken Scull. 


He canfes ofa broken Scull are externall , asa fall, a blow or ftroake 
‘Tad 


with any kind of weapon,fharpe,obrufe, heavy, hard, the bitings of ae 


Beafts,asd many other things of the like kind. But the fignes by which 


or 8 “i wecome to know that the Scull isbroken, are oftwo kinds ; for fome 
AREF of them arc found out by the reafoning and difcourfe of the mind, o- 
ther by the fenfe,as thofe which lay open the wound co the eye and hand. eau 
The Rational] fignes thew by thefethings which have happened upon the thing it <r e 
clleywhether it be,and of what fort itis. For you may know the Scull is broken,if the 
Paticor fhall fall down with the ftroake,or ifhe (hall fall headlong from a high place 
‘Pon fome hard thing. It for {ome time after the flroake,he fhal lie without {peaking , 
light and hearing ,if he fhall have telrand feele much paine, fo that he is often forced 
‘0 put his hand to the wound. Butalfo the weapon is to be con fidered, that is, whether 
Khe heavy obrufe,pricking or fharpc.Alfo we muft confider with what & how great 
‘sagcth the ftroake was given,and with how great anger and from what diftance the 
pee fell, Alfo he mutt confider whether the patient receaved the blow with his 
’d unarmed and naked;whether he fell into a fowne prefently after the blow; whe- 
when he came to himfelfe,he was in his right fenfes; whether his cies were blin- 
a pwnether he was troubled wich a giddines or dizines,and whether he bled ac che 
~Mouth,eares oreyes,and laftly whether he vomited.For Hippocrates writes,that 
ole who have their braine cut, muft neceflarily have a feaver and vomiting of cho- ~ 
‘@€aiuethereupon, which Ga/es confirmingin his Commentary faith, that the 
>pens alfo when the wound comes to the Membranes of the braine. 
G 22 Alfo 


»When the 
dt of the 
be fore- 
trucker 
c left. 
swhennop 
T able | 
| 
amass 
bone 
preffe she 
sto 
pparcut, 
Ca 
to the 
[wees 
re it yeh 
Anothe 


34-0 Of the Greene ana Bloody 


betweenc his foreteeti, one end of a lute ftring or thread, and the Chirurgion ho} 


gers; for in the very inftane ofthe found or flroke, the patient willbee Certainely ad, 
monifhed or perfealy perceive the part of the feullthat isbroken, and as orecom: 
and forcht by this fence of paine, willby lifting uphis hand make demonftratiog 
thereof. AsyetIhave not beeneable to finde the truth hereof by experience, q). 
though I have madetriallof itinmany. Whercfore I cannot fay any thing certaine. 
ly of this figne, as neither ofthat whichis mentioned by Hsppocrates in Coais Pref 


Hippocrates 
d Guidoe 
canietnattl In fuchas you doubt, whether the bones ofthefcull be broken, ornot, you mus 


fignes of a 


brokenfcull, judge by givingthem the ftalke of Afphodill, to chaw onboth fides of their jawes, 


but fo that you bid them withall obferve, whether they perceive any bone to crackle, 
or makeanoyfe intheir heades, for thefe which are broken feeme to make ; 


noyle. 
But paffing over thefe things, now let us come to thefe fignes, which may be ob. 
vious to our fenfes. 


— 


Crap. III, 


Of the fienes of a broken skull, which are manifeft to our fenfe. 


=) Hefe fignesare here fayd to be manifeft to fenfe, which when the box 
is bared,manifeft the wound to our eyes, fingersand probe, But 


SenGblefignes 


of a broken IZ 
feull betore haires ftand uponone end inthe wound, you may know the bones § 
Hew (* broke, becaufethe haire which yeelds to the violence of the blof, 


* cannot be fo cut, the bone which refifts the ftroake being not violated, 

Libde-vulver, 2S it isobferved by Hippocrates ; whererefore we may by the fight of this one hing, 

cape before any infpe@ion of the wound it felfe, fafpectby a probable conjecture, thi! 
the Scull is broken, and perfwade the bcholdersor ftanders by fo much. 


Morcover we may, before we have cut the skinne acroffe, or baid lare the bor, 


givea guefie by our feeling, whether the feullbe broken, or no, if wee by prefling 


downe our fingers neerc the wound fhall perceive the bone either to ftand up, ot 


prefied downe otherwife than it fhould naturally be. 
Whata probe 


in {carching 


fer a fracture, 


that which is {moorh and fiippery, it is a figne that it is whole. 


But on the contrary, if you finde it any thing rough, pecially where theres not 
ture, it fhewesthe bonc is broken. But let the Chirurgion centider,that che fracture 


are not feldome upon the futures, and that the futures have not alwayes one and! 


naturall fite; as alfo it often comesto paffe that the broken clefte, or cut bonect 
your fight, nor inftrument; wherefore if you thinke there 


neither be perceived by | 
any fuch thing, by the rational! fignes above mentioned, annointe the plac¢ 
writing Incke, and oyle,and fo you fhall find the cracke or clift, by the means 


When you arecertaine of the fraQure, then you mufi diligently confider the¢? 


Alfoa dull found as from abroken veflell comming from the skull, (the hairy 
{calpe and Pericrawium being taken off) and icbeing lightly {mitten upon with g 
Iron probe, is fayd to be a figne of a fracture thereof, as itis recorded by Pyyjq, 
eZginets, Trucly all theiefignes make a great conjecture or rather affuredneg, 
thattheskull is weunded, andthe braine burt,as which cannot happen unle‘le ;},. 
bone be broken, as Cel/ws hath written. Yet many have bad their f{eulles broken,yh, 
had no fuch figne immediatly after the blow,but this is very feldome. But I doe po, 
thinkefit amongft fo many fignes, hereto omit that whichis fet downe by Gyiz, 
If any (faith he) will knew in what place the feullis broke, let the patient hold {2 


the other in his hand; then let him lightly touch or play upon the {tring with his £), 


The skinne being cut croffewife and the bone laid bare, ifthe fraQure be Not ob 
muftbeufed vious tothe eye, you muft trye with your probe, which muft neither be too thinx 
nor tofharpe, leaftby falling into fome naturall cranyes, it may caufe us to lp 
without any caufe that the bone is broken. neither let it beteo thick, left the little clit 
may deceive you. ]f when your probe comes rothe bone, it meetes with nothing > 


fhall thew you hereatter. 
e 


L 18.10. 


nelle of the difeafe, an 
co light upon any furu: 
ry orcat, becaufe 

fore Hippocrates {aith 
che differences and figr 
thereof, with a Fiffurc§ 


J haire, and c 
the Pericranium lying 
tionable bigneffe, alwa 
ples; neither mutt he fe 
: the bone by cutting the 
- remaine unknowne, by 

cured without any 

For it is much more « 
fecurely though aot {pe 
and greater inconvenie: 
knife, and if there bean 
incilions be made agrec 


- Now therefore the M 
vided and cut with a thas 
then mutt it be fo plucke 
ane upon the bone: 
caufevehement feayers wil 
of the lines crof 

you fee here expre 


A Chiff 
TOP 
‘ ff 
be Hay if It come te 
Cd bh 


‘hrutt thorougiy 4 
ide thruft the née 

threg and Dut fome lip: 


the hairy {calpe 


| 4 sb, 4 ‘ 
| 
| 
| 
j | 
| | 
. 


— 


pelle of the difeafe, and apply medicines fpeedily. Verily when a chances 
ro light upon any furure, the difeafe is hard tobe knowne, upleffethe frafure be ve. 
ry great, becaufe che turures by their clifts and roughnefle refemble fra Qures:where- 
fore Hippocrates {aith that he wasdeceived by the —— a> 


rhe differences and fignes of a broken {cull istime ro come to the feverall kindes ceived by tha 


IB.] ©, 


(the hairy 
Mm With an 
by 
fluredneff, 
unlefie the 


Lib.§, 
Atetonemut of 


m. Now having briefely delivered 


roken,who 
t Idoe hor 
by 
nt hold 
reion hold 
With his fn, 
| tainely ad- 
mS Olecome 
nonftration 
rience, al. 
Certaine. 
Coaw 
YOU muft 
Meir jawes, 
to crackle, 
to make a 


ay be ob- 


a the bone 
Burt ifthe 
he bone is 
the blow, 
mot violated, 
s one ching, 
ture, that 


e the 
by pretiing 
Fai or be 


be not ob- 
roo thine 
Bs to fufpet 
e little clifts 
nothing but 


ere is no 
fradl ures 


“ted and th 


thereof, with a Fiffure. fucures, 


Cuap. 


Of Fifure, being the firft kinde of a broken 


F the Chirurgion by the forementioned fienes fhall know thar the fcullis Vpon what 
broken, or crackt, and if the Wound made inthe mufculous skin fhall 


eS not be thought futhcient for ordering thefiffure,then mutt he fhave offthe muftbe cute 


haire, and cut with a razour, or incifion knife, the maufculous skinne with 
the Perscrameum lying under it, ina triangular or quadrangular figure to a propor- 
tionadle dignefie, alwayes fhunning, as muchasinhim lies, the fucures and tem- 
ples neither mutt he feare any harme to enfue hereof; for itis farre better to bare @él/ws 
the bone by cutting the skinne, then to fuffer the kinde and nature of the fracture to 
remaine unknowne, by atoo religious prefervation of the skinne; forthe skinne is 
cured without any great adoe, though pluckt off ro no purpofe. 

For it is much more expedient (in Hippocrates opinion) cocure difeafes fafely and 
fccurely though not{peedily; thanto doe it ina thorter time with feare of relapfe 
and greater inconveniencics. Let this difle@ion bee made with a fazour, or fharpe 


knife, and if there be any Wound made inthe skinne by the weapon, let one of your 
ncitions be made agrecable thereto. 


A Razour, or Incifion knife, 


Now therefore the Mufculous skinne together with the Pericrasiam mult be di- 
vided and cur with a fharpe razour preffed and guided with a ftrong and fteddy hand; The manner 
then mutt it be fo plucke from the bone, or {cull lying under it, that none thereof re~ the kaicletenp 
Haine upon the bones for ifitthouldberentor torne with the Trepane, it would the bre- 
SuieVehement feavers with inflammation. You mutt beginne to pullitbacke atthe 
corners of the ith rich Chiffell whof 
Tsektnelines croffing cack other with riche angies, with this Chiffell whofe 
you {ce here exprefied, 


4 Chiffell or infirament to pull backe or [eparate the 
Pericranivm from the Seull, 


Tt] iit 


| 


you fill all the wound with boulfters of fine foft linte, that fo the lippes 
blon : Rie: further a funder. But you thall apply upon it esedicines fir to ftanch 
flava It come lo to pafle that violently, that itcan 

Pirfh th y meanes, the veflel! it fel fe mult be bound, after this manner 
thorough the mufculous skinne onthe outfide withaneedie and 
Den thruft the needle backe againe; thentyethe thred ona knot onthe our- 
put fome lint rolled up tothe bignefle of aGoofe quill berweene the in caleof 
© hairy {Calpe on both fides thercof, leaft the ftrait twitching of the 


bleeding, 
G g 2 thred 


8.10. Wounds of each Part. 341 
; 
| 
| : 
| 
Baye: 
wy, 
cane 
bone 
place qyit! 
SZ 


the Greene Bloody 
thred which may ferve to ftay the bleeding, may cut and teare the skiane, or cay(, 
paine : then muft you raife his head fomewhat higher. 

A Hikery, i have lately tried, and per formed this upon a ccrraine Coach-man 5 who throwne 
fromthe Coach upon his head on a pavement of freeftone,exceedingly bruifed the 
hind part ofthe Bregwsa, for which caufe it was firtoopenthe Mufculous skinne, 
with acroffe incifion, boththat the congealed blood might bee prefled Our, as alfy 
rhatthe frafture(ifthere were any might be obferved.But an Artery being ut in per. 
formance hercof, whenasthe Chirurgion who was there prefent could not fta y the 
blood leaping out with violence; andthe Coachman already had loft fo grearg 
guantity thereof, that his ftrength was fo much decayed, that hee could nor {lire 
himfelfe in his bed, or {carce {peake: I being called, fhewed them by experience, 
that whereas afiringent medicines were ufed before tonopurpole, it was better to 
ftay the bleeding by binding the veffell,than to let che patient die for a childith feare 
of pricking him. 

But that we may scturne to our former matter, the Chirurgion fhall the next day 
confider with what kiade of fraQure the bone is hurt; and if no fignes of hurt ap. 
peare ro the eyes, nor be perceived with your fingers and probe, yet iome of the ra- 

Awayto tionall ignes may caufe one to haveaconycQure that there isa fracture: Then you 

fndeafras — muft annoint as wetold you before, the bared bone with writing Joke, and a little 

Coull,whenit oyle of Rofes; that the cleft or cracke may be dyed or coloured therewith, if that 

| it there be any there. Thenthe nextdrefling you drie the bone with alinnen cloth, 

viewatthe and {crape offche Inke,and oyle, with {craping inftruments made tor the purpoie : if 
anh, any part thereof, fhall be funcke into the bone; forif there be any cracke, it wil! bee 
black; Wherfore you muft continue {craping untill no figne of the fiflure remaine,or 
clfe untill you come evento the Dara Mazer. But that he may be more certaine whe. 
ther the fifure pierce thorough both the Tables of the {cull,he muft bid the Patient, 
that {topping his nofe & mouth, he ftrive to breathe witha great endevour.For then 

Afignethat bloody matter or famies will {weatthorough the fiffure For the breath driven forth 

+ wei Pl of the cheft, and prohibited paflage forth, {wells and lifts up the fubfiance of the 

braime, and the that frothy humidity and Samées {weats forth, 
Therefore then the bone muft be cut eventothe Dura Mater, with Radale and other 

‘craping Inftruments, fit for that purpofe, yet fo. as you hurt not the membrane; but 

if the fiffure fhall be fomewhat long, it will not bee convenient to follow it all the 

extent thereof: for nature willrepaire andreftore the reaonant of the fiffure by 

gencrating a Callus,belides alfo the Chirurgion according to Celfas opinion muft rake 

away as little of the bone as he can, becaule there is nothing fo fit to cover the braine, 

as the {cull. Therefore it fhall fuffice to make a paflage, whereby the blood and Samies 

may pafic and be drawne forth, leaft that matter being fupprefled may corrupt the 

bone, and caufe an inflammation in the braine. But the broken bone muft bee caken 

forth within three dayes ifit be poffible,e{pecially in Sommer for feare of infamm:2- 

= oy tion. Yet I have oftentimes taken forth with a Trepan and with Scrapers the bones 
afrerthecenth Of the {cul,after the feaventeenth day both in Winter & Sommer;and that with hap- 
py fucceffe, Which I have the rather noted, leaft any fhould, at any time, faffer the 
wounded to be left deftitute ofremedie: for it is betterto trie a doubtfull remedi¢ 
thannone: Yetthe By-ftanders fhall be admonilhed and told of the danger, for m4 
ny more die whohave notthe breken bones of the feul! taken out, than thofe cha! 

ave, 

Buc the Infisuments, with which the wounded or cleft bones may be cur owt 4° 
called Scaipri or Radwle,of which I have caufed diverfe forts tobe here decyphere!; 
that every one mighttake his choice, according tohis minde, andas fhall bee be" 


fer his purpofe, But all ofthem may be {crued into one handle, the figure wherco! 
I have here exhibited. 


LB. fo, 


Radulz 


Toconcludey 
Chirurgion mu 
fhalidivide ri: 
though he hay: 
Dles. Bur ifir | 
yOu come to! 
brokea,and 
uling allo a 
you hereafte;, 


the (cull, itis p 
cuated and emt 
Cicines, (wii.- © 
movitthings a ¢ 

Such like Ccnt 
by the fotenefic, 
[have opened 


we 
; 
| 
| 
» 
‘ 
4 


ne, Or Caule 


ho throwne 
bruifed the 
ious skinne, 
OUL,as 
Cut in 
Bor ftay the 
Mt {0 great 
id not ftirre 
experience, 
as better to 


hildith teare 


he next day 
of hurt ap. 
i¢ of the ra. 
Then you 
and a little 
nth, if that 
nen cloth, 
purpole : if 
*, it will bee 
remaine,or 
rtaine whe. 
the Patient, 
ur. Por then 
iriven forth 
ance of the 
veats forth, 
‘2 and other 
branes but 
pw it allthe 
nc hiflure by 
mufttrake 
the braine, 
dand Samies 
corrupt the 
it bee raken 
t inflamma- 
‘s the bones 
i¢ with hap- 
>, {after the 
Bull remedic 
er, for ma- 
ithofe that 


cut out 
ecy phere 
ali bee betft 
re whereof 


Radulz 


ds of e ach Part. 


Woun 


Radulx or Scalpri (i) Shavers or Scrapers. 


Radulz of another forme, for the better eutting 
of the greater bones. 


Toconclude,when the {cull fhall be wounded or broken with a fimplesfi flure, the i ner a 
Chirurgion muft chinke he hath done fufficient to the patient; and in his drt, if hee fure co dilate 
thalltdivide the boneand dilate the fiffure orcleft with che defcribed Inftrumeats, 
though he have ufedno Trepan, although the fiflure pierce thorough both the Tae and nc to 
bles. Bur ifit dorh norexceed the firft Table, you mutt ftay your {crapersasfoone as 
you come to the econd,according to the opinion of Paw/us : bucif the bone fhall be 
oroken and fhivered many peeces,they fhall be taken forth wich fit [nitrumenrs, 


uling alfoa Trepan if neede thall require, after the fame manner as we fhall thew 
you hereafter, 


Crap. V. 
Of Contafion which ws the fecond fort of frackare. 
What an 


N Ecchymofis, that is,an eflufion of blood, prefently concreating under the ebyme/i iv. 
mu{culous skinne, without any wound, is oft caufed by a violent Contu- 
§ ion. This Contufion ifit thall begrear, fochae the skinne be devided from 


the (cull, itis expedient, that you make an iacifion ,whereby the blood may bee eva- 


How ocen- 


cuated and emptied, Forinthis cafe you mult wholy defift from»{uppurative ot ehe 
Cicines, (which otherwife would be of good ufe in a flefhy part) by reafon cthatall (cull mutt be 
mov ft things are hurttull to the bones, as thall be fhowne hereafter. 
Such like Contufions more frequently happen in children, being eafily perceived 
by the foftneffe,and inundation of the contufed part : forth of which oft times w hen 


[have opened them with my incifion knife,fereus, clotted and blackith blood > 
iflue 


cured, 


~*~ 
~ 
7 = | <3 
= ~ ¢ W > 
A 
+ 
de 
4 
| 
aR 45 
5 
s Ay ‘ 
\3 


Of the Greene and Bloody ; 1B. Jo, 


iflued. The refidue ofthe cure is perfeied by moderate comprefiion of the parr, 

Different = and drying medicines. Moreover the {cull ofa child, may bee prefied dowre, bya 

prefied feull, great contufion, even as wee fee it happens in thin veficls of brafle, lead, or pew ter, 

for oft times bythe preflure of yourfinger, they are fo dentedain, that the prip, 

thereof remaines; yet fometimesthey fly backe of themfelves, and againe ACQuite 

their former piainefle and equabilitic,which alfo happens, inthe bones of children, 

women, and fuch asare foft,humide and phiegmaticke, Bur if the bones doe nop 

{pring backe of themfelves, you muft apply a cupping glaffe with a great flame. with. 

all commaund the patient, to force his breath up as powerfully asheican, keeping hj, 

mouth and nofé clofe fhur; for thus there will be hope,to reftorethe deprefled bon, 

toits place, by the fpirits forftupwards tothe braine and fcull, by the power{,)) 

attraction of the cupping glafle. Butiffo beethatthe bone cannot by this micanes 

be reftored, then you muft makean incifionin the skinne, and faflen fuch a Trepan, 

as you fee heere deliniated, intothe depreft, or fetled parr 

> aay» of the bene, and {o pull itdireAly upwards, juft as wee {ee 
Coopers raife the ftaves of their caske, when they are 

funke too much in, 

3 Burifthe bone fhall betoo ftrong, thicke, and denfe, 
fo that this Inftrument will not ferveto plucke it forh, 
g then you mutt perforate the fcull, in the very center of the 
depreffions and with this threefold Inftrument, or Leva. 
Z tory put into the hole, lift up and reftore the bone toits na- 
turall fires for this fame In{ftrument isot {trength fufhci- 

ent for that purpofe. Iris made with,threc feete, that (o jt 


thew. 


But if at any 
but oncly on on 
ing ovt of the fi 
exprefled, for ti 
without compr 
brane with tue! 


A three footed Levaterit. 


But if by 
A the contufion 

| away of the Bo: 
fufficienc ro efc! 


34-4 L 18.10. 
<= 
\\ 
= | \ 
may be applyed to any partof the head which isround, | i} 
but divers heads may be fitredtothe endthereof according 
FF as the bufinefic {hall require, as the figure here placed doth : 
= 
= 
= 
= 
| 
= 
V WN 
Z 
SS 
wnt | 
Za 
; 
OF ig af 


1B.J0, 

of the Parr 
cjowne, by: 
» OF PCWrer, 
t the print 
aiN€ acquire 
ol Childrep 
nes doe no; 
lame; with. 
, keeping his 
bone 
powerful} 
this canes 
ha Trepan, 
fetled pare 
mt as wee {ee 
mcn they are 


and denfe, 
ke it forth; 
snter of the 
, or Leva- 
ne toits na- 
eth fufici- 
e, that foir 
4s round; 
f according 
placed doth 


We ounds of each Part. 


‘ 


A decliniation of other Levatories, 


A A. Shewes the point or tongue of the Levatory,which 
be fomewhat dull, that may bee the more 
gently and cafily put betweene the Dura Mater and 
the fcull,and this part thereof may be lifted up fo much 
by the head or handle taken cn your bandas the nece/- 
fity of she prefewt operatson fhall require, 

B. Jatimates the body of the Levatory, which muft bee 
foure [quare, left the peimt or tongue pat thereon 
fhowld not fland faft, but the end of this Body muft 
refi spon the found bouc, as on 4 fure foundation, 

The afe thereof ts, thus.put the point or tongue un- 
der the brokener depreffed bone, shenlzft the handle 
up with your hand, thas foshe acpre(jed bone may bee 
elevated. 

C. Shewesthe firft Arme of the ether Levatory,whofe 
Tore: end muft bee cently put under the deprefjed 

one. 

D. Shewes the other Arme, which muft reft on the found 
bone, that by the firme flanding thereof, it may life 
up the depreffed bone. 


But if at any time it comes to paffe, that the bene is not totally broken ordepref:, 
butoncly on one fide; it will be fit, fo to lift ic up, as alfoto make a vent for the iff. 
ing ovt of the filth, to devide the feull with litele fawes likethefe, which ye {ee here 
expreffed, for thus fo much of the bone, as fhall be thought needeful!, may be cut o¥ 
without compreffion, neither will there be any danger of hurting the braine or mens- 


brane with tue broken bone. 7 


The Figuyes of Sawes fit to divide the fcwll, 


Ss 


a 


But if by fuch fignes as are prefent, and fhall appeare, wee perceive or judge that 
the contufion goes but ro the fecond Table, or {carfe fo farre; the baring or cakiog 
away ofthe bone, muft go no furtherthan the contufion reaches, for that will bez 


lufficient to efchew and divert Inflammation and divers other fymptomes, 
this 


* 
L I 134-5 
| | 
— 
SCS 
a 
| 
i | 
\ 
\ \ 
| 
: 
7 
i 3 
+ 
\ 
il 
| 
\ 
a 
‘ \ 
\ 
| j 
4 
Ad 
. 
WT 
iH i 
| ‘4 
| 
AAA A AA 


the Greene and 


this fhall be done with a (caling or De{quamatory ‘Trepan (as they terme it) with 
which, you may eafily take up as much of the bone, as you fhall chigke expedieg: , 
And [ have here given youthe figure thereof. 


A Defquamatorie or Scaling Trepan. 


HA Pe VI. 
Of an Effrature, deprefiion of the bone, being the third kinde of Fraciure, 


Efore I come to {fpeake of an Effra@ture, I thinke it not amiffe to craye 
3, pardon of the courteous and underftanding Reader, for this reafonef. 
wien pecially, chat asin che former Chapter, when I had determined and ap. 
Phe pointed to {peake of aContufion; Linferted many things of a Depref. 
fion; fo alfointhischapterof aa Effra@ture, [intend co intermixe fomething of; 


What seontu- Contufion; wee doe northis through any ignorance of thething it felfes for wee Moreover I bas 

en know that it is called a contufion, when the bone is depreft and crufht, but falles no and Pincers, toget 
downe, But an EffraCture is when the bone falls downe and is broken by amoft vio- very neceflary to! 

Whatan Ef= lent blow. But it can {carfe come foto paffe, but thatthe things chemfelves mutt be gad (meoth thofe 


faGuris confounded and mixt, both as they are done; andalfo when they are {poken of: 

that you fhall! icarfe fee a Contufion without an Effraéture, orthis without the. 

Therefore the bones are often broken off and driven downe with great and forcible 
The cauesef blowes, with clubbes whether round or {quare, or by falling from a high place di- 
Réradore. rectly downe, more or lefle according to the force of the blow, kinde of weapon, and 
condition of the pare receiving the fame: Wherefore you muft bee provided with 
diverfity of remedies and lnftruments to eacounter therewith. Wherefore admit 
the bone is preffed downe, aad thivered icto many peeces , now for chat thefe {plin- 
ters neede not be taken ovt with a Trepan: you may dothebufineffe with Leyato- 
ries made and neatly fafhioned for that purpofe ; fuch as thele, which are here ex- 


preft, 


The cure, 


A Levatorvie, 


But we mutt have fpeciall care, leaft that in pulling and taking out of thefe {cales 
and {plintersjwe hurt che membranes, Thele fcales are fomtimes very rough & prick 
ly fothatchey cannot touch the Memzmges without offence;but fomewhiles the buft- 
nefle ig f@ intricate, that chey.canhotbe taken our unleffe by enlarging the fracture 
Wherefore inthis cafe, ifchere be a {pace fo large, as that the ends of thefe mullets 
may enter you may eafily fheare off fo much of the bone,asfhall be neceflary and t¢- 
quifite for the taking away of thefe fcales, without any afliftance of the Trepa, 
which I have done very often and with good fuccefle; for the operation performed 
by thefe mullets is far more fpeedy and fafe,than that with the Trepan;and in the pe" 
a ofevery operation, the chiefe commendation is given to fafenefic aid ce 
Critie.. 


Cushing 


read it written Dy 
Vidence replenit 
bloody matter, tl 
ofthe bone. 
The truth her 
Effracture on th 
Muleswhich whe 
red fection in th 
following, the 
endevoured top) 
fearefull produc 


der my hand; for 


: L 1B, 10- 
M 
Catting 
€ 
~¥ 
\) 
7) 
[ | 
= 
| 
= 
| 
> 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
4 


ifie CO crave 
Dis rafon ef. 
ned and ap. 
of a Depref. 

ethine ofa 
fes tor wee 
mut falles not 
amoii 

lves mutt be 
woken of: 
ithout thar, 
and forcible 
igh place di- 
weapon, and 
movided with 
cfore admit 
thefe fplin- 
ith Leyato- 
are here ex- 


hefe {cales 
oh & prick- 
*s the bufi- 
ne fracture. 
fe mullets 
lary and re- 
e Trepan, 
performed 

in the per- 


Cwhting 


Wounds each Part. 


10 
| Be 


] 
Catting Mulcts, commonly called ,Roftra Plittacijer Parrots-beakes, 


DW 


YUM +. 


| 
~ 


MONO 


Moreover I have thought good here to give you the figures of chiffells, fcrapers, 
and Pincers, together with aleaden mallet, becaufe {uch Inftruments are not onely 


very neceflary cotake forth the fcales of bones which are broken, but alfo to plaine, 
aad (meoth thofe which remaine whole. 


The Figures of Scrapers,Pincers a Leaden Mallet 


Buthere you muft note,that a Trepan nor Leva- 

| toric mufi never bee applyed toabone quite bre- 

_ken, left the membranes lying under it bee hurt by 

the compreffion thereof. Therefore you muft ap- 
ply them to a found bone, but as neare as you can 
tothe fracture, fo that youtake away aslittle of 
the {cull as is poilible, leaft the braine defpoiled ef 
its bonie cover,take fome harme thereby, Neither 
Effraa@ures, nor yet fiffuresif they bee of fome 
Jengch,muft be followed to their ends, but thinke 
your felfe well, if you have made a paflage for 
the iffuing forthofthe Sanéesor filth, and have 
drawne forththat bone, which pricked the mem- 

branes. For nature is accuftomed by generating a 

Cahus to fouder, or unite the bones of the fcull, as 

italfodoth thefe ofthe other parts; as wee have 

tead it written by Hippocrates and Galen; for which purpofe it hath by fingular pro- 
vidence replenifhed both the Tables of the fcull, with a certaihe alimentarie and 
bloody matter, that with this, as with marrow it might repaire the lofle and defe& 
ofthe bone. 

The truth hereof was lately manifefted inthe fervant of Mafter Gro/e, who had an 
Effracture on the coronall bone, by a greevous blow, given him with the foote ofa 
Mule;which when I underftood,fdevided the mufculous skinne witha three corne- 
red {ection in that place, with an intentto apply a Trepan there;wherefore the day 


following, the bone being bored, and when I thought to draw it forth, yea verily 
endevoured to plucke it forth, being already divided with the Trepan; 1 perceived 2— 
fearefull produGion of an Effta@ture; by the moveablenefleof the bone (haking 


der my hand;for it reached from the midft of the forehead to the leffer corner of the © 


expeg 
—_ 
» = 
Hip, sb, de 
Sula cap, 
Gal Lid, Ge 
meth, cap, 
A Hiftory. 
ffe and ce- 


Of the Greene and Bloody 
eye. Wherefore omitting berh my determination and endeavour to pull it forth 


thought I fhould doe fafficiently for the patieat : if fhould only raife wp the bo, 
which was depreft; for {o it did not trouble the Cra// meninx by preffing it, and the 
matter, and filth, were let forth by a paffage made with afaw. Se that in concly¢. 
on, hos¢covered perfeatly , but that he loft one of hiseyes which was adjoyning,, 


the fra@ure. 


— — — 


10. 


VIL 


Of a Seate, being the fourth kinde of a broken Scull 


What a feate 


ESTAR Ippecrates calls a featethat kinde of FraCtureof the fcull, when the | 


{0 falls upon the fcull, chat the fracture reteining the print thereof, js | 
eher ftretched forth any furtuer, nor contraéed to any lefle {pace. 
And fecing there bemany formes hereof,chey all whether they thal! be. | 
fuperficiary,or fhall pierce even to the Dip/oe, or elfe paffe through both the Tables, | 
whether it be with any loffe ofthe bonie fubftance, whether it ruane long wayes, of 
elfe be but fhort;or otherwile are dilated to fome breadth, or elfe bee but natrow, 
whether they fhall be done witha cut,or witha pricke with a dagger, ftelletto, lance 
or other kind of weapon,whether they fhallhave thisorthat accident joyned with 
them, I fay all of them,how many and various foever they be ought and mutt be cy. 
red by fome of the formerlydefcribed Inftuments and meanes. Yet this mutt be noted, 
which as yet wee have not remembred,that if ithappen bya violent ftroake ,and pret 
wound, thata portionof the bone is wholy fo cut off, tharit iscleane fevered ftom 
the reft of the {cull and hang only by the Pericraminws and mufculous skinne:yer you 
muft not plucke it from the Pericranium, and caft itaway as unprofitable, but reftore 
it to its proper feate and plage, fo by the force of nature, to be glewed by a Callus, a 
Celfas hath obferved. 
[havetryed the truth of this experiment, in captaine Aydrow not very long agor, 
He had the middle part of the Os Coronale,ofthe bredth, andlength of three Iota 
fo cut with a fharpe fword, that it ftucke not to the reft ofthe bone; but {carfe adhea. 
ring to the Pericransum and muuf{culous skinne, but lay turned downe over his face, 
fo that the Dwra Mater was plainely feene; wherefore I prepared to plucke it from 
the skinne, and caft it away, but thatI remembred Hippocrates precept, where kee 
bids , that the Braine fhould not be robbed of itscover and left bare. WVherefure 
firft of all I wiped away the blood which was fallenupon the Dara Mater, whicl: 
motion you might plainely fee,then I reftored the portion of the bone, to its place, 
and fafined it onthe upper fide with a future confifting of three ftitches: and 
refidue of the matter might have pafige forth, I filled the places betweene cach ftitch 
withlinte; by this meanes, he by the mercy of God, recovered, though at the fame 
time he received many other large wounds in his bedie; which isa certaine expeti- 
ment, that we muft caft away no part of the full, nor of the Pericraxium, no notol 


the mufculous skinne, unlefle neceffity urge; therefore much leffe to leave the braitc 
naked and defpoiled of its coverings. 


The cure. 


Lib, 8 


“AHiftory, 


— 


Of 4Refonitus, or Counter-fifure, being the fifth kinde of Fraure. 


Ometimes the fracture is made inthe partoppofite to that which recéi- 
mins vedthe blow; as ifthe right fide be ftrucke, the left is cloven; this kinde 

a Of fraGure is very dangerous, becaule wee cannot finde it out by aay 
certaine figne, as it is written by Happocrates Lib.de vala.Capitis, 
fore af at any time the patient dye of fucha fratture, the Chirurgion muft be pardo 


ned, 
And 


And althoug 


cannot happe® 
plaffe bottles, y 


Neither 1s ch@ 
the head o 
fide, fhould be 
ashave exprefie 
in {uch as either 
chem very clofe 
ny; This fhall{ 

A fervaat of 


| right Breg™4, 


Wherefore tha 
harme, and alfo 
Jated, the skinn 
skillfull workea 
hiscure. Whe 
was much to b 
with the blow, 
that he ong 


fearch how hec 


fite to the blow 
Craffa meninx, 
two {caly ones 
authority of 
received on the 
fuch as have eit 
apparent. 
Neither is it 2 
the {ame bone 
their {culls wel! 
this both was a 
underftood, we 
two manner of 
bone, as if that 
future be {mittc 
ly, when as not 
which lyes und: 
Horfnian of 
Caftle of Hifdin 
on his head; the 
culous skinne, nil 
died apople&ick 
But I being v 
ding his fcull,ob 
ters, wherewith 
the firftand upp 
ple to Capellanus 
dition of Roane, 
Bue Liippecrate 
he thinks itca 
the moft part 
of fuch a frau 
Ved away the ha 
the powder of & 
thail appeare mo 
cleft in that place 


< 
- 
- 
~ 
~ 
1 
7 
| 
q 
| 
* 
a 
a * 
* 
4 
a 


1en the Weg 
thereof, js 
{pace, 
they fhal! bee 
oth the Tables, 
One Way Cs, or 
e but narrow. 
{te lletro, lance 
joyned with 
od muft be cy. 
muft be noted, 
oake sand Preat 
fevered from 
KINNe;yet you 
le, but reftore 
Dy a Callus, as 


ty long agoe, 
three fingers, 
{carfe adhea- 
over his face, 
blucke it from 
t, where hee 
Wherefore 
fater, whofe 

tO its place, 
aod tharche 
ne cach ftitch 
h at che fame 
taine experi- 
m, no not of 
ve the braine 


which recei- 
1; this kinde 
out by any 
ite, VVhere- 
{tbe pardo- 


And 


‘Lys. 10. 


Wounds each Part. 
Andalthough Paulus Aginets laugh atthis kinde of fracture and thinkes chat it 
cannot happea to a mans head, as that which is hard and full, asithappensiacmpty 
Jaffe bottles, yet I have fomerimes {eene and obferved it, bs 

Neither istheir rcafon of any validity, whothinke nature therefore to have fra- 


med the head of many bones knit together by futures, left the fra&ture of the one m valine this 
fide, fhould be ftretched to theother. For peradventure this may take place, in {uch takephee 


| take phice in 
ashave exprefle futures, feated and framed according to nature. But it takes no place diverie bones 


in fuchas either want them, or have them not feated according to nature, or have “2° “ll 
them very clofe and fo defaced that it may {ceme one bone growne together of ma- 

ny; This fhallbe made manifeft by recital of the following Hiftorie. 

Afervant of AMaffus the Pofte-mafter had a greevous blow with aftone, upon the A Hiftory, 


right Bregma, whichmade buta{mall wound, yetagrcat contufion and Tumor: 


Wherefore that it might more plainely appeare, whether the bone had received any 
harme, and alfo that the congealed blood might be preffed forth, the wound was di- 
Jated, the skinne being opened by Theodore Berens the Chirurgion, whoas hee wasa 
skillfull workeman and anhoneft man,omitted nothing which Art might doe for 
hiscure. When he had divided the skinne, the bone was found whole, although it 
was much to bee feared, that it was broken, becaufe he fellprefently to the ground 
with the blow, vomited and fhewed other fignes ofa fra&tured fcull; fo ithappened 
that he ded ontheone & twentieth day of his ficknes.But I being called to learne,& 


fearch how hecame by his death,deviding the {cul with a faw, found in the part oppo- 


fire tothe blow, agreat quantity of Sauies or bloody matter, and an Abfceffe in the 
Crafja meninx, and al{ointhe fubftance of the very braine, but no futures, but the 
two fcalyones, Therefore that is certaine which is now confirmed by the 
authority of Hippocrates; as alfoby reafon and experience, thatablow may bee 
received on the one fide,and the bone may be fraQured onthe oppofite,efpecially in 
fuch as have either no {itures, or elfe fo firmely united and clofed,that they are {carfe 


apparent. 
Neither is it abfurde, that the part, oppofite to that which received the ftroake, of The Re/anitus 


the {ame bone and not ofdiverfe bones may becloven, andinthofe men who have fan - - 
their (Culls well made, and naturally diftinguifhed and compofed with futures; and the <ul, ~ 
this both wasand is, the true meaning of Hippocrates. That this may beethe better 
underftood, we mutt note that the oppofice part of the fame bone may be urderftood 
two manner of wayes. Firft, when the fracture is in the fame {urface of the {mitten 
bone, as if that part of one of the bones of the Bregawa which is next to the Lambdall 
future be {mitten, and the other part next tothe Coronall future be cloven, Second- 
ly, when as not the fame {uperficies andtable which receives the blow, but that 
which lyes under it is cleft,which kind of fra@ture I obferved,inacertaine Gentleman AHiftory; | 
@ Horfaian of Captaine Stempans troope;He in defending the breach of the wall of the 
Cattle of Hifdin was ftrucke witha Musket bullet upon the Bregema,but had his helmet 
on his head; the bullet dented in the Helmet butdid not breakeit, nonor the muf- 
culous skinne, nor {cull , for as much a could be difcerned, yet. motwithitanding hee 
died apople&icke upon the fixe day after. 
But I being very defirouste know, what might be the true caufe of his death, divi- 
ding his {cull ,obferved that the fecond table was broken,and caft off {cales and {pline 
ters, wherewith as with nedles the fubftance of the braine was continually pricked, 
the firftand upper table being whole, for all this: l afterwards fhewed the like exam- 
and C4/tellamwe the King and Queeneschiefe Phifitions in the expe- 
Of Roane, 
But Hippocrates pre{cribes no method of curing this fifth kind of fracture by reafon way 
he thinks itcannot be found out by any circumftance,whence it happens that itis for ne way cocure 
the moft part deadly. Yet muft we endeavour to have {ome knowledg & conjecture * Re {eaten 
of fuch a fracture;if it fhall at any time happen. Wherefore having firft diligently fha- 
ved away the haire, we mutt apply an Emplaifter of Pitch, Tarre, Waxe, Turpentine, : 
the powder of Jris,or floure deluce rootes, and mattich; riew if any place ofthe head {Sy — 
ll appeare more moyft, foftand fwollne, it is fomewhat likely that che bone iS Guredbya 


cleft in that place, fothat the patient,though thinking of ne fuch thing,is now Re/onitns. 
orc 


The manger 


pul] it forth 

aife wp the bone 

38 tt, and th. 

Conclus. 

as adjoyning o 

| | 

| 


Com, 
ad Aph§8, 


[eth7. 


Lib.s .Epsdens, 


The veffzls of 
the braine 
broken by the 
eommetion 
thereof, 


fignes. 
Col (us, 


The caufe of 
vyemuiting 
whea the head 
is wounded, 


the Greene and Bloody 


— 


formerly mentioned, let him call acounfellof learned Phyfitions; and foretel! th. 


danger to the Patients friends which are there prefent,that there may no occafion of 


calumnie remaine, then let bim boldely perforate the fcull; for that is far better, eho, 
forlake the patient ready to yeelde to the greatneffe of the hidden difeafe, and fo con. 
fequently te dye within a thort whileafter. There are foure forts, er conditions of 
fraGtures, by which the Chirurgion may be fo deceived,that when the {cull is brokey 
indeed, yet he may thinkethereisno fracture. The firftis when the bone is fe de. 
preffed, that it prefently rifes up intoits true place, and native equability. The. 


cond is when the fiffure is onely capillary, The third is when the bone is thaken oq 
the infide, the utter furface neverthelefle remaining whole, forafmuchas can be de. 
difcerned. The fourth is, when the bone is ftricken on the one fide and cleft on the 


other. 


C uap, 


Of the moving or Concufsion of the Braine. 


there is another kinde of affe& befidesnature,which al fo affailes it by the 
O&O hy} violent incurfion of a caufe,in like manner, externall; they call itthe Com- 
———— motion or fhaking ofthe braine, whence Symptoms like thofe of a broken 
{cull enfue. Falling from aloft upon a folide and hard body, dull and heavie blowcs, 
as with ftones, clubbes, {taves, the report of a peece of Ordinance, or cracke of Thun- 
der, and alfo ablow with ones hand. . 

Thus as Hippocrates tells, that beautifull damofell the daughter of Neriws, when, 


fhe was twenty yeeres old,was {mitten bya woman,a friend of hers,playingwithher, 


with her flathand upon the fore part of the head,and then fhe was taken witha pide 


nes,and lay without breathing ,& when fhe came home, he fell prefently intoa grea 
Feaver, her head aked, and her face grewred. The feaventh day afterthere came 


forth fome two or three Ounces of ftincking and bloody matter about her rightcare, je 


and fhee feemed fome what better and to be at fomewhat more eafe. The feaver en- 
creafed againe, and fhe fell into aheavie fleepineffe, and loft her {peech , andthe 
right fide of her face,was drawne up, and fhe breathed with difficulty, fhe had alfo a 
convulfion andtrembling; bothher tongue failedher, andher eyes grew dull, on 
theninth day fhedyed. But you maftnote, that though the head be armed with 
a helmet, yet by the violence of ablow, the Veines, and Arteries may be 
broken, noconelythefe which paffe through the futures, bur alfo thefe which 
are dilperfed berweene thetwo tablesinthe Diploe, both that they might binde 
the Craf/z Meninx co thefcull, that fe the braine might move more freely, asal{o 
that they mightcarry the alimentary juicetothe braine wanting marrow, that is, 
blood to nourith it, as we have formerly fhewedinour Anatomic. 

But from hence proceeds the cfluxeof blood running betweene the fcull, and 
membraines, or betweene the memDraines and braine, the blood congealing 
there,caufeth vehement paine, and the eyes become blinde, vomitting is caufed, the 
mouth of the ftomacke fuffering together with the braine; by reafon of the Nerves 
ofthe fixt conjugation, whichrunne fromthe braine thither, and from thence ar? 
ipread over all the capacitie of the ventricle; whence becomming a partaker of the 
offence it contraéts it felfe, andis prefently asit were overturned; whence Silt, 
thefe things that are conteined therein are expelled, and then fuchas may 
or come thither from the acighbouring and communne parts, asthe Liver and Gal; 
from all which choler, by reafon of its naturalllevity and velocity, is firft expelled 
and that in greateft plenty; and thisis the true reafon of that vomiting, which is 2!” 
fed and ufually followes upon fra@tures of the {cull and concuffions of the Braine. 

Within a thert while after inflammation feizes uponthe membranes and brain¢ 
felfe, which is caufed by corrupt and putrid blood proceeding from the veffels rw 


forcf to put his hand to that part of the fcull. Confirmed with thefe and other fignes 


Spay Efides the mentioned kindes of fraftures by which the braine alfo fuffers, 


Lt 


ken by by the 
Such infamm 
of the parts, ¢ 
whichif 
ocr ates, 
tO thefe evills 
difficulty of & 
from the brat 
ftruments off 
A great pa 
before he dye 
ric with the ne 
and (ifter, Wit 
ia the Tilt-yat 
with she viol¢ 
the broken 
fore-head wa 
fame 
being not rou 
theeleaventh 
great dcealc 
part oppolite 
the head; a 
the fubftance 
thumbe. VV 
the woundin; 


others, who | 


The hiftor 
time 
KemLancc , 
entring intot 
into the head 
thie Kings Phy 
VWVhat fhal 
Duke of 
witha Lance 
necke betwe: 
by the violer 
or plucked fi 
lence of the | 
tearing and! 
rous Prince! 
By which 
ereat, yeav 
primarily tc 
darily tethes 
motiog orc 
TeMaiNeEs pet 
forth fome > 
may caufe gr 
can be four: 
looke palc J if 
thatwerelly 


of the 


4 
q 
@ & 
| 
wa 
é 
* 4 
Gal 2 ds 
J 
4 
a 
* 
* 
J 
* 4 
} 
a 
e 
4 
¥ q 


— 


ba B, 10. Wounds of each ‘Part. 


other fipnes ken by b y the violence of the blow, and fo {pread over the {ubtiance of the braine. i 
foretell the Such inflammation communicated tothe heart, and whole body by the continuation ‘4 
oCcafion of ef the parts, caufes a feaver.Buta feaver,byaltering the braine caufes Doting; to | 
better thar whichif ftupidity fucceed; the Patient isin veryill cafe, according tothat of Hyp- 
fo con. raves, Stupidity, and doting, are illin a wound, orblowupon the head. Bur if 
Bonditions of thefe evills, a {phacell, and corruption of the braine enfuc,’ together with a great 
ull is broken dificulty of breathiag, by reafon ofthe difturbance ofthe Animaill facultie, which 


f-om the braine imparts the power of moving tothe mufcles ofthe Cheft, the in- 
fruments of refpiration,then death muft'neceflarily follow. 
A great part of thefe accidents appeared in King Heary of happy memory,a little A Hifory, 
before he dyed. He having fet in erder the affaires of France, and entred into ami- 
rie with the neighbouring Princes, defirous to honour the marriages of his daughter, 


he 1S fede. 
cy. The fe. 
: fhaken on 
Can be de. 
cleft on the 


and fifter, with the famous and noble exercife of Tilting, and hee himfelfe running 
iathe Tilt-yard, with a bluntlance received fo great a ftroake uponhis breft, that 
with the violence of the blow,the vifour of his helmet flew up, and the trunchion of 
the broken Lance, hit himabove the lefteye-brow, and the mufculous skinne of the 
fore-head was torne even to the lefler corner of the lefteye, many fplincers of the 
fame trunchion being ftrucke into the fubftance of the fore mentioned eye,the bones 
being nor touched or broken; butthe braine was fo moved and thaken, that he dyed what wasthe 


alfo fuffers. theeleaventh day afterthe hurt. His {cull being opened after his death, there was a 
les it by the great deale of bleod found betweene the Dura, and Pia Mater, poured forth in the Kien eue 

mcthe Com- part oppofiteto the blow, at the middle of the future of the hinde parc of ‘helecosdot 
of a broken the head; and there appeared fignes bythe native colour turned yellow, that 


vie blowes, 
ke of Thun. 


into a great 
there came 


teaver en- 
ch, andthe 
ehad alfoa 


hefe which 
right binde 
ely, asalfo 
ow, that is, 


fcull, and 


trighteare, 


the fubftance of thebraine was corrupted, as muchas one might cover with ones 
thumbe. Which things caufed the death, of the meft Chriftian King, and aot onely 
the wounding of the eye, asmany have falfly thought. For wee have feen¢e many 


riws, when, _ others, who have not dyed of farre more greevous wounds in the eye. A Hiltery; 
ing with her, The hiftory of the Lord Saint Johns is of late memory:he in the Tilt-yarde, made 
ith 2 pitti Methat time before the Duke of Guifes houfe, was wounded with a {plinrer of a bro- 


kemLance, of a fingers length and thickneffe, through the vifour of his Helmer, ir 
entring intothe Orbe under theeye, and peircing fome three fingers bredth deepe 


Intothe head; by my helpe and Gods faveuz hee recovered, and Durctms 


tlie Kings Phyfitions and James the Kings Chirurgien affifting me. 
What fhall I fay of that great and very memorable wound of Francis of Lorainethe “*"°"” 


Duke of Guife? He in the fight of the Citry of Bologne had his head fo thruft thorough 
witha Lance, that the point entring under his right eye by his nofe, came out at his 


tw dul I, on 
armed with necke betweene hiseare and the vertebra, the head or Iron being broken and left in 
s maybe by the violence of the ftroke, which ftuck there fo firmely,that it could not be drawn 


or plucked forth,without a paire of Smiths pincers.Buc although the firengeh & vio- 
lence of the blow was fo great, that it could not be without a fracture of the bones , a 
tearing and breaking of che Nerves, Veines, Arteries and other parts; yet the gene- 
Tous Prince by the favour of God recovered. 

By which yeu may learne, that many die of {mall wounds ; and other recever of Why forme dit 


great, yeavery large and defperate ones. The caufe of which events is chiefly and — . 


congealing primarily to be attributed to God ,the author and preferver of mankinde; but fecon- Ten recover of 
caufed, the darily tothe variety and condition of temperaments. Andthus muchof thecom- great, 
the Nerves motion or concuffion of the braine; whereby it happens that although all the bone 
theace are remaines perfe@ly whole, yet fome veines broken within by the firoake, may catt 
ker of che forth fome bloud upen the membranes of the braine, which being there concreate 
hence firft, may caufe great paine, by reafon whercof it blindes the eyes ; if fo be that the place 
ms may flow, Can be found againft which the paine is, and when the skione is opened, the bone 


looke pale, it muft prefently be cut out, as Ce//as hath written. Now it remaines, 
— tell youhowto make your prognoftickes, in all the forementioned fra¢tures 


Hh 2 


Curry 


| 
| 
| 
er an@ Gail; 
(t expelled 
which is call- 
and brane 
veffels bro: 
ken 


jo 


Of the Greene and Bloody 


Of Prognoftickes to be made, im fracinres of te fenll 


w@ EE muft not negleé& any wounds in the head, no not thefe which cut 
ot bruife but onely the hairy {calpe; bur certainely much lefle the(e 
which are accompanied by a fracture in the {fcull; for oft times g)} 
horride fymptomes follow upon them,and confequently death it felfe. 
e{pecially in bodies full ofilihumors, or ofanill habite, iuchas are 
thefe which are affected with the Lwes vemerea, leprofie, dropfie,Prhificke and cop. 
fumption; for inthefe, fimple wounds are hardly ornever cured; for union is the 
cure of wounds, but this is not performed, unletle by ftrength of nature , and {uffici. 
ent ftore of laudible biood: but thofe which are ficke of heCticke feavers and con. 
fumptions want ftore of blood:and thofe bedies which are repleate with ill humors, 
and of anillhabite have no affluxe or plenty of laudible blood: bur all of them 
want the ftreagth of nature; thereafon is almoft the fame in thofealfo which are 
lately recevered of fome difeate. 

Thole wounds which are brufedare more difficult to cure,than thole which are cur, 
When the fcul is broken,than the continuity of the flefh lying over it muft neceflarily 
be hurt & broken, unleffe it be in a Refonitus. The bones of children are more foft, thin 
children, orold and replenifhed with a fanguine humidity, than thofe of old men, and therefore mare 
 fubjeét to putréfaction; Wherefore the wounds which happen tothe bones of chil- 

dren, though of themfelves, and their owne naturerhey may be more eafilyhealed, 
(becaufe they are more fott, whereby it comes to pafle, that they may bee more ca 
fily agglutinated, neither is there fit matter wanting for their agglutination by rea- 
fon of the plenty of blood laudible both tm confiftence and quality) than inold men, 
whofebonesare drycr and harder, and fo refiftunion,whichcomes by mixture,and 
their bloud 1s ferous, and confequently a more unfit bond of unitie and agg}utination; 
yctoft times through occafionof the fymptomes which follow upon them, thatis 
putrefaction and corruption, which fooner arife inahot and moyftbedy, and are 
more {peedily encreafed ina foftand tender, they ufually are more fuipeded and 
difficulr to heale. 

The Patient lives longer of a deadly frature in the feull, in Winter than in Sum- 
mer, for that the native heat is more vigorousin that time than in this; befides, alfo 
the humors potrifie fooner in Summer, becavfe unraturall heat is then eafily enfia- 
med and more predominant, as many have odlerved out of Héppocrates, 

Aph The Wounds of the braineand of the Ateninges or membranes thereof are mof 
commonly deadly, becaufethe aGion of the mufcles of the cheft, and orhers ferving 
fer re{piration,is divers timesdifturbed % intercepted whence death infues. If a {wel- 
ling happening upon a wound of the head prefently vanith away, it isan ill figne, 
unlefie there be fome good reafon therefore, as blood-letting, purging, or the ule of 

locall medicines, as may be gathered by Héppocrates in his Aphoriimes, Ifa 

feaver enfve prefently after the beginning of a wound of thehead, thar is, upon the 

fourth or feaventh day which ulually happens, you muft judge itto bee occafioned 
by the generating of Pus or Matter, as it is recited by Hsppocrates. Neither is fucha 
feaverfo much tobe feared, as that which bappens after the feaventh day, in which 
time it ought to be dererminated; but if it happen upon the tenth or foureteenth day 
with cold or thaking, it is dangerous, becau{e it makes us conje@ure thatthere is pu- 
trefaction in the braine, the Ademinges, or {cull, through which occafion it may aril¢, 
chiefely if other fignes (hall alfo concurre, which may fhew any putrifadtion, as if the 


a {hall be vallide and ofa faint ycllowifk colour, as flefh lookes after it is wa- 
ed. 


Hy 


Wounds which 


are dry rough, For, as itis in Hippocrates Aphorif.2. fete It is anill figne if the fleth leokelivide, 


when the bone is affected; for that colour portends the extinétion of the heate, 
through which occation, thelively, or indifferently red colour of the part, faints 
and dyes, and the flefh thereabouts is diflolved into a vifcide Ps or filth. 


are evill, 


Com- 


L | B.1O- 


Commonly 
withered and 
whence you I 
whereas it Wa 
ryorion inva 
matter witha 
fignes that th 
yer be occatic 
rerribles But 
& confluxe Of 
with coldnes ; 
either convert 
asalfo all che 
shathe can {c# 
and pricking 
an Eryfipelous 
and that fort: 
The farft is 
caufe of the r: 
The cure of 
and cooling v: 
induced to 
itbe an 
that fide, wh: 
thefe generall 
are the juice 
Lentill,or Dy 
in faire water 
fome vsguen: 
like remedies 
fhed. Bur we 
they may cal 
folving medic 
the contrary : 
Authorityof 
fhallbreake o 
by the holes o 
tome appeare 
that is, Apole 
thebone, bur 
ceedes fo farr 
have not onc! 
therfome wit! 
which have d 
Who have not 
“peared whe 


4 
| 4 
| 
* 
4 
Ar 
| &. 4 
OD 
Of Mpre 
tom: 
a 


Which cut 


h lefle thefe 
DEC times al} 
cath it felfe, 

iuchas are 
‘ke and con. 
UNLON is the 
and {ufhici. 
CTs and con. 
ill humors, 
jall of them 
» which are 


hich are cur. 
t necellarily 
re foft, thin 
refore mere 
Of chil- 
afily healed, 
ec MOre Cae 
tion by rea- 
inold men, 
nixture,and 
elutination; 
hem, that is 
ly, andare 
ipeéted and 


an in Sum- 
clides, alfo 
afily enfia- 


ofare moft 
iers ferving 
‘s. If aiwel- 
an ill ligne, 
the ule of 
riimes. Ifa 
is, upon the 
occafioned 
“ris fucha 
y,in which 
reenth day 
here is pu- 
may arile, 
on, as if che 
itis Wa- 


okelivide, 
the heate, 
art, faints 


Com- 


Pommonly another worleaffe& followes hereon, whereinthe wound becommin 


Lt she. | We ounds of each Part. 353 


nd dry,lookes like falted fleth,fends forth no matter, is livide and blacke, 

whence you ge jecture,that the bone is corrupted,efpecially ifit become rough, 

whereas it Was ormerly {mooth and plaine; for it is made rough when Car‘es or core 

ryorion invades ir;but as the Caries encreates, it becomes livide and blacke,fanious 

matter withall {weating out ofthe Diple, as I have obferved in many:all which are 

fignes that the native heat is decayed, and therefore death at hand; but if fuch a fea- 

ver be occationed from an Eryfipeloswhich is either prefent er at hand, it is ufuallylefle 

rettibles But you ihall know by thefe fignes,ehae the feaver iscaufed by an Ery/ipetas The Ggnes of 

confuxe of cholericke matter; ifit keepethe forme ofaTertian, ifthe fit take them $y an 

with coldnes and end ina {wear;if it b¢ not terminated before the cholerike matter is ‘. 

either converted intoPas or clfe refolved;if the lips of the wound be fomwhat {wollne, 

allthe face; ifthe eyes bered and fiery; if thenecke and chappes bee fo ftiffe, 

shat he can {carfe bend the one, oropenthe other; if there be great excefle of biting 

and pricking paine, and heate, and that farre greater than in a Ph/egmon. For fuch 

snEryfipelows difpofition generated of thinne and hot blood, chiefely aflailes the face, 

and that for two caufes, : 
The firlt is, by reafon of the naturall levity of the cholericke humor; the other be. Why an &7y- 

caufe of the rarity of the skinne of thefe parts. aun the 
The cure of fuch an affect muft be performed bytwo meanes, that is, evacuation, te 

and cooling with humectation,- Ifcholer alone caufe this tumor, we eafily bee 

induced to let blood,but we muft purge him with medicines evacuating choler. [f onthetact., 

itbe an Eri fspelas phlegmonodes, youmuft draw blood fromrhe Cephalicke veine of 

that fide, whichis moft affected, alwayes ufing advife of aphifition. Having ufed 

thefe generall meanes, you muft apply refrigerating and humeting things, fuchas 

are the juice of Night-fhade, Houtleeke, Purflaine, Lettuce, Navell wore, Water 

Lentil], or Ducks-meate,Gourdes;a liniment made of two handfulls of Sorrel boiled 

in faire water, then beaten and drawne throvgha {carfe, with ointment of Rofes, or 

fome vaguent. Populeen added thereto, willbee very commodious, Such and the 

like remedies mouft be often and fo long renued untill the unnatural heat be extingui- 

fhed, But we be carefull to abftaine from all un@uous and oyly thing, becaufe 

they may cafily be enflamed, and fo increafe the difeafe, Next we muft cometorce not benfed is 

folvingmedicines; but it is good when any thing comies from within,towithout;bur on an Eerie 

the contrary itisill, whenit returnes from without inwards, as experience and the 

Authority of Hippocrates teltifie: Ifwhenthebone fhall become purulent, pultles 444.26. 

fhall breake out on the tongue, by the dropping downe of the acride filth or matter 

by the holes of the pallate uponthe tongue, which lyes under. Now when this fymp- 

tome appeares,few efcape. Alfo it isdeadly when one becomes dumbe and ftupid, 

thatis, Apoleéticke by a ftroake or wound en the head: for it is a fignethat not onely 

thebone, butalfo the braine ie felfe is burt, But oft times the hurt of the Braine pro- Deadly fignes 

ceedes fo farre, that from corruption itturnes to a Sphacell, in which cafe, they all 

have not oncly puftles on their tongues, but fome of them dye ftupide and mute, o- 

therfome with a convulfion of the oppofite parts neither as yet have Lobferved any 

which have dyed with either of thefe fympromes,by reafon ofa wound inthe head, 

who have nothad the fubftance of their braine tainted witha Sphaccll, as it hath 


“ppeared when their feulls haue beene opened after their death. 


Cuar. xX I; 


Why when the braine is burt by a wonnd of the head there may follow A 
Convulfion of the oppofite part. 


Spe Any have tothis day enquired, butas yetasfarre as I know ithathnot 4 convtion 
SY MB bin fufticiently explained, why a convulfion in wounds of the head feazes is<aufed by 
exes OD the part oppofiteto the blow. Therefore I have thought good to _—- 
oF ‘ #end that controverfie inthis place. My reafon is this, chat kinde 
yMptome happens in the found part by reafon of emptinefle and 
Hh 3 | drynefle 


IB. 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| : f 
| 
4 
| 


Opinion of 


Champhiy, (tion, Thar,(faith he) the truth of this propofition may ftand firme and ratified, we 


Liz.to 


Of the Greene and Bloody 
aryneffe; buc there isa twofold caule, and that wholy inthe wounded parc, of this 
emptinefic and drynefle of the found or oppofite parr;to wit, paine and the concour{e 
wilfifieke the fpirits and humors thither by the occafion of the wound, and by reafon of the 
— paines drawing and natures violently fending helpe to the attlicted part. 
The found part exbaulted by chis meanes both of the {pirits and humors, eafily falls 
into a Convulfion. 

Forthus Galen writes, God the creatour of nature, hath fo knit together, the trip|e 
Lb, 4.4¢ #f@ Fpirituous fubftance of cur bodies, with that tye,and league of concord ,by the pro. 
parm duétions of the paflages;to wit of Nerves, Veines,and Arteries, that if one of thefe 
forfake any part, the reft prefently neglect it, whereby it languitheth, and by littie, 
and littledyes, through defe@ of novrifhment, Burifany objeat that nature hath 
made the body double, for this purpofe, that when one partis hurr, the other re. 
maining fafe and found, might fuffice tor life and neceflity: bue I fay, this axiome 
hath notruth in the veffells and paflages of the body. For it hath not every where 
doubled the veflels, for there is but one oncly veine, appointed for the nourifhmenr 
of the braine, and themembcanes thereof, whichis that they cail the Toreular, 
which when the left part is weunded,ic may exhauft che nourifhment of the right ang 
found part,andthough that occafion caufe it to have acoavulfion,by too much dry- 
nefle, Verily it is true, that when inthe oppofite parts, che mufcles of one kinde are 
equall in magnitude, ftrength, and number, the refolution of one part,makes the con 
vulfion of the other by accident; but it isnot fo inthe braine, 

For the twoparts of the braine, theright andleft, cach by its felfe per. 
formes that which belongs thereto, without the confent, con{piratiou, or commerce 
of the oppofite parts for otherwife itfhouldfollow, that the Palfie properly 
called, that is of halfe the body, which happens by refolution,caufed either by mol. 
lification or obftruGtion refiding in either part of the braine, fhould inferre together 
with it a Convulfion of the oppolite part. VVhich notwithftanding day ly experience 
convinces asfalfe. Wherefore wee muft certainely thinke, that m wounds of the 
head wherein the braine is hurt, that inanition and want of nourifhment are the cau- 
fes, that the found and oppofite part fuff:rs a comvuifion. 

Francis Dalecbampins in his French Chirurgiry readers another reafon ef this que- 


mult fuppofe,that the convulfion of the oppolite part mentioned by Hippocrates doth 
then onely happen, when by reafon of the grearneffe of the inflammation in the hurt 
pate of thebraine,which hathalready inferred corruption; and a Gangrene co the 

raine and membranes thereof, and withina fhort time is ready to caufea {phacell in 
the fcull, fothae the difeafe muft be rerminated by death; for inthis defined {tate of 
the difeafe, and thefe conditions, the fenfe andmotion mutt neceflarily perith in the 
affected part, aswe {ee it happens in other Gangrenes, through the extinction of the 
nativcheate. Befides, che paflages of the animall {pirit muft neceffarily bee {o0b- 
ftrufed by the greatneffe of fuch an inflammation or phlegmon, that it cannot flow 
fromthence tothe parts of hefame fide lying there under, and cothe neighbouring 
patts of thebraine;andif it fhould flowthither, it will be unprofitable to carry 
the ftrength and facultie of fenfe and motion, as that whichis infeGed and changed 
by admixture of putred and Gangrenous vapours, Whereby it cometh to paile, that 
the wounded part deftitute of fenfe, isnot ftirred up to expel! chat which would b¢ 
troublefome to it, if it had fenfe; wherefore neither are the Nerves thence arifing 
feafed upon, or contracted by a Convulfion, 

Itfurthermore comes to paffe, that becaufe thefe fame nerves are deprived of the 
prefence and comfort of the anioall {pirit, and inlike manner the parts of the fam* 
lide,drawing from thence their fenfeand motion are pofleffedwith a palfie,for a 
is Caufed either by the cutting or obftruétion of a Nerve,or the madefaGion, or mo!” 
lication thercot by a thinne and watry humor, or fo affected by fome vehement dl 
ftemuper, that it cannot receive the Animall {pirit. 

Bur for the oppolite part and the conyulfionthereof, it is knowne and granted by 
all, thataconvulfionis caufed cither by repletion which (hortens the Nerves>Y 
diffending chem into bredth, orby inanition, when as the native and primitive 

heate 


[).1B-10- 


of the Ne 


led up aud contry 
fome Vapour 
have knowne th 
toate to che brat 
Nerves, when 
being clofed,bu 
convulfion byt 
But verily 10 
yulfion; thats 
Gangrenate pe 
{weatiog into 
mitic of which 
fignes of WOU 
fractures he bat 
gefled. There! 


quifite and per! 


and fanious mat 


expulfion of th 
wed (as weice 
yaine, death 
lecbampins raul 
AViEB, 

But he addes 
obferve that 
conVullion; ot! 
and the found | 
fomewhiles the 
affe&s; the cat 
champsus. 


tongue, whe! 
himfctfe head 
&@.continn val! 
ischopr, anc 
growes dry,a 
was formerly 
and orher ex 
often {ownin 
times appear: 
fore when as 
fure, of thec 
toremention 
peare till marci 
reafonef an 
of the blood 
Butwemu 
fleth iseafily 
Of the forehe 


| 
we 
hy 
» | 
| 
| 
| 
Ow tt 
Ih the 
| 
| 


nature hath 
he other re. 
this 2xlOme 
very where 
ourifhment 
Torcular, by 
ne right and 
p much 
kinde are 
the cog 


its felfe per. 
commerce 

properly fo 
ther by mol. 
tre togethicr 
ly €xperience 
unds of the 
are the cau- 


pn of this que- 

ratified, we 
ppocrates doth 
nin the hurt 
grene co the 
m2 {phacell in 
‘fined {tare of 
peri(hin the 
inction of the 
y bee foob- 
t cannot flow 
cig hbouriog 
table ro carry 

and changed 
to pafle, that 
would be 
hence arifing 


rived of che 
of the fame 
ie.for a palfic 
tion, or mol- 
vehement di- 


d granted by 
he Nervesby 
and prin (rive 

heate 


vapour, 


(10-10. Wounds of each Part. 


— eof the Nerves being wafted, chcir proper fubitance becomming dry is wrinck- 
and contracted; or itpreceedes from che vellication, and acrimoniec of 
or fanious and biting humor, or from vehemencic of paine. Sowee 
heve knowne che falling ficknefle caused by a venenate-exhalation carried from the 
retothe braine. Alio wee know that a convullion,is caufed inthe puncture of the 
Nerves, when as any acride and fanious humor is fhut up therein, the orifice thereof 
peing clofed,but in wounds of the Nerves when any Nerveis halfe cut,therc happens 
convulfion bythe bittcracfie of the paine, 
But verily in che oppolite part, there are manifefily two of thefe caufes of a con- 
yylfion; thats to fay,a putride and carionlike vapour, exhaliog from the hurt, and 
Gangrenate part of the braine; and alfoa virulent acride and biting Sauées, or filth, 
(weatiog into the oppofite found part,from the affected and Gangrenous;the malig- 
of which Samses, Hippocrates defirous to decipher, inreckoning upthe deadly 
fones of a wounded head, hath expreffed it by the word Jchor; and in his booke of 
faétures be bath called chis humor Dacryedes ct nom Pyon, [that sweeping and not di- 
oefltde ] Therefore it isno mervaile if the oppofite and found part endewed with ex- 
quifite and perfect fen fe, and offended by the flowing thercto ofboth the vaporours 
and {anious matter,ufing its ownaforce, contend and labour as much as it can, for the 
expulfion of thet whicly ts trouble fomethereto. This labouring or concufhian is follo- 
wed (as we the falling ficknefle)by a convulfion,as that whichis undertaken in 
yaine, death being now at hand;and nature over-ruled by the difeafe. Thus (faith Da 
eebampins we in my judgeioent determine of that propofition of Hipporrates and 
But he addes further, in wounds of the head, which arenot deadly, praétitioners 
obferve that fometimes the hurt part is taken withthe palfic, and the found with a 
convullion; otherwhiles on the contrary,the wounded part is feazed by a Convulfion 
and the found by a Palfie; otherwhiles both ofthemby a convulfien or Palfie; and 
fomewhilesthe one of them by a convulfion or Palfie,the other being free from both 
afleats, the caufes ofall which belong notro this place to explaine. Thus mach Da/e- 


> 


foot 


C HA Pe XII. 


A Conelu fiom of the deadly fignes in the Wounds of the beas; 


that we may returne to our former difconrfe;you may certainely forete]] The Ggnes of 
I’ che patient will dye; when his reafon and judgement being perverted, hee 65°47. 
(hall calke idly, whes bis memory failes him ; when he cannot geverne his the depraved 
tongue, when his fight growes darke and dimme,his cares deafe, whea he would caft wy word 
himfcife headlong frombis bed,or elfelyestherein without any motion;wheake hath 
a.continnuall feaver with a delirium, when the tongue brcakes out in puilles, when it 
ischopt, andbecome blacke, by reafonoftoomuch dryncfle; when the wound ofthe body. 
growes dry,and cafts forth little or no matter,when as the colour of the wound which 
was formerly frefh,is now become like falted flefh yellow and pale; when the Vrine, 
and other excrements are fuppreftswhen che Pa'fie,convulfion,apoplexie; and laftly 
of (cn {owning, with afmail and unequall pulfe, invade him. All fach fignes fome- 
times appeare prefently after the wound, otherwhiles fomefew daycs aleer; there- fignes appears, 
fore whemas the braine is hurt and wounded by the violence of rhe incifion, or fif- 
lure, of checontufion, compreffion,puntere, concuffion or any other fra@ture, the 
forementioned fignes appeare prefently inthe firftdayes; but whenthey doe not ap- 
peare till many dayes atrerthe blow, you may know that they rifeand appeare, by 
realonefan inflammation and phlegmon in the braine,occaftoned by the putrefaation 
of the blood poured forth upon it, Mid TOY Colfer 
3 But wemutt obferye this by the way, which alfobelongs tothe prognoftickes,that v4, 
aSCalily regenerated, andrcfored inallparts ofthe head, except inthat part 
of the forehead, whichis a little abovethat which lyes berweene the ecauiem fo 

at 


arc, Of this 
COnCourfe 
3 cafily falls 
r,the triple 
sby the pro. 
one of thefe : 
d by littic, 
| 
| A 


356 the Greene 


— 


that ir will be ulceratedever after, and muft be covered with a plaifter. ] beleey. 
that, in that placethere is an internall cavity inthe bone, full of ayre which go¢. », 
the five-like bones of the nofe,by which the growth of fleth may be hind eredsor ¢|(, 
chat the bone is very denfe or compact in that place,fo that there can {carfe fufficien, 
juice {weat forth, which may fuffife for the regeneration of flefh; adde hereuntg , 
great confluxe of cxcrements flowing to this ulcer, which fhould otberwile bee ey, 
cuated by the eyes and nofe, which hinder by that meanes the drynefie of the ulcer. 
andconfequently the healingthereof. 

Hence certaincly it comes to pafle, thatif you defirethe patient thus affccted 1, 
breathe, fhutting his mouth andnofe, the ayre or breath will come forth of the ulce; 
with fach force, as it will eafily blow forth a lighted candle of an indifferent bigne({: 
heldthereto. ‘Which thingI proteft, I obferved in acertaine man, whom I was 
forced to trepan in that place,by reafon the bone of the forehead was broken and de. 
preficd, 


— 


Cuar, XIII. 


Of [alutarie fignes in wounds of the bead. 


WHIM Vt on thie contrary thefe are falutary fignes, when the patient hath no fea. 
ED) ver, is ia his right minde, is wellat the application or taking of any thing, 
De, fleepes weil, hath his belly toluble, the wound lookes witha frefhand 


lively colour,cafts forth digefted and laudible matter, the Cra//a Meninx 
hath ss motion free and no way hindered, 


Whenthe pas. Yet wemultnote, whichalloisobferved bythe Ancients and confirmed by cx- 

tients are out perjence; thar we muft thinkenone paftdanger, and free from all chance, . untill the 

— he day be paft. Wherefore the Phyiitian ought fo long to have a care of his 
patient, that is, to confider how he behaves and govern¢s himfelfe in meate, drinke, 
flecpe;- vencric and other things. | 

Thepstient But letthe Patient diligently avoyd and fhunne cold, for many when they have 

ap beene cured of wounds of the head, by carelefic raking cold have beene brought in- 


to danger of theirlives. Alfo youmuft know that the Calws whereby the bones of 
the fcull are knit together,requires almoft the {pace of fortic or fifty dayes to its per- 
fect coagmentatiou and concretion. Though in very deed one canmot {et downea 
certaine numberof dayes, by reafon ofthe varicty of bodies,er tempers. For itis 
fooner finifhed is young men,and more flowly in old; And thus much may ferve for 
prognottickes. Now will we teat as brecfely and perfpicuoully as wecamot the 
cure both in gencrall and particular; wherefore beginning with the geaerall we will 
~ firft ptefcribe a convenient dict by the moderate ule of the fixe thiags aot naturall. 


iW 
ds, 
r Of the ceyerall cure of abroken feall, and of the S ymptomes wfaally 
Howsheavee firk cure muftbee, to keepe the patient’ in atemperate aire; andif 
eughttob:. ay fo bec, thatic bee. not fuch of it felfe and its owne prope 


2 nature, icmuftbe corre&ted by Art, Asin winter he muft have a cleare 
S&S 2@ fire made in his chamber, left the {moake caufe fheefing and other acci- 
dents; and the windowes and doores mutt be kept fhut to hinder the approach of the 
eoldayre and winde. All thetime ‘the woundis kept open to bee dreft, fome 

body. ftanding by fhall holdachafendifh fullof coales or aheated Iron barre 

over the wound, atiuchadiftance, that amoderate heate may paffe thence 

. the wound ; and the frigidity of the ecncompaffing ayre may be corredted by che 
—— breathing ofthe diffufed heate, For cold according to the opinion of H/?: 
pocrates, isan enemic tothe Brainc, Bones, Nerves, and {pinal] marrow: 

it is alfohurtfull to ulcers, by fuppreffing their excrements, which fuppref 


ifthe ayre chat 
by {prinkling, : 
Willowes anc 
fo you take he 


maligne 


For 2 too 
mptomes. 4 
drinke, 
fyrupe of V 10! 
fteeped , water 
and fuch like a: 
{uch drinkes, 
fouretcene da} 
His meat i! 
ro fillthe head 
Currance, fea! 
rocomforr 
Veale, Kid, L' 
Thruthes, Lat 
flaine, forrcll, 
nienrinthis ca 
dippiag them 


cranets,fomet 


liry. Itany he 
Pikes and the | 
thallefchew a 
will be conve! 
{eed or Coria! 
the orihice of 
from thence. 
Children 
which arc ela 
neede of mor 
full nourifhm 
When the 
may arinkew 
ipectively to 
in hia lyes, 
braine or Me 
eipecially fro 
loed is pred 
{o vulgarly k 
is carrycd int 


called into th 
the force of th 


the habite of 


L | Be 
| fore Galen! igh 
of Trepanine® 
befall the fract 
put if the brain 
at the 
things, take 
many who 
chan by the st 
But 
| 
| 


Liny 0. 
ter. | belee, 
which 
indered:or 
icarfe lufficien, 
de hereunty 9 
twile bee 


of the ulcer 


th Of the ulce, 
lerent bignefi- 

whom I wae 
roken and de. 


~ 


Of any thing, 
itha freth and 
Mening 


irmed by 
until the 
a Care of his 
Cate, drinke, 


icn they have 
brought in- 
the bones of 
VCS to its per- 
{ct downe a 
ers. Foritis 
aay ferve for 
Camot the 
jerall we will 
of natural. 


— 


> aire; and if 
wne proper 
Mave acieare 
other acci- 
roach of the 
dreft, fome 
Iron barre 
ffe rhence to 
&ed by the 
on of Hip: 
marrow; 


ich fupprett 
des 


Liz 10. ounds each Part. 


“ee qotencly hinder fuppu ration, but alfo by corrofion makes them finuous. There- 
fore Galen tightly admonitheth us, te keep cold from the braine,not only in the time 
of Trepaning, but alfo afterwards. For there can no greater nor more certaine harme 
befall the fracture d fcull, than by admitting the aite, by fuch as are unskilfull, For 
‘¢che ayre {hould be hotter than the braine, then it could not thence be refrigerated; 
nut if the braine fhould be layd opento the ayre, in the midft of Summer, when it is 
at the hottelt, yet would it be refrigerated, and unleife it were releeved withhbot 
things, take harme: this is the opiniou of Galew, whereby you may underftand that 
many who have their {culls broken,dye more through defaulcof skillin the curing, 

‘han by the greatneffe of the fra dure, 

But (when the wound is bound up with the pledgets,clothes, and rowlers as is fit) 
ifthe ayre chance to be more hot, than the patient can well endure, |let it be amended 
by {prinkling, and (trawine the chamber with cold water, oxycrate, the branchesof 
Willowes and Vine. Neitheris itlufhcient to fhunne the too cold ayre, unleffe al- 
foyou take heed of the over tight, chicfely untill fuchtime as the moft feared and 
maligne fymptomes are paft. 

For a too great light difhpates the fpirits,eacreafes paine,ftrengthens the feaver and 
fymptomes. Hrppecrates wholy forbids wine, therefore the patient ia {teed thereof 
muftdrinke, Barly water, faire water boyled andtempered with Iulepof Rofes, 
fyrupe of Violets, vinegar and the likes water wherein bread crummes have beene 
fteeped , water and fugar with a little juyce of Lemons,or pomecitron added thereto, 
and fuch like as the abilirye and rafte of the patient thallrequire. Let him continue 
{uch drinkes, untill he be free from maligne fymptomes which ufually happea within 
fouretcene dayes. 

His meat {hall be pappe, prifan, fhunning Almond milkes; (for Almonds are fayd 
ro fillthe head with vapoursandcaule paine) ftued damaske Pruncs, Raifonsand 
Currance, feafoned with fugar, and a little cinamon (which hath a wonderful power 
tocomforr the ftomack, and revive and exhilarate the {pirits) Chickens, Pidgeons, 
Veale, Kid, Leverets, birds of the fields,P heafons, blacke-birds , Turtles, Partridges, 
Thruthes, Larkes and fuch like meates of good digeftion, boiled with lettuce, pur- 
flaine,forrell, borage,bugloffe,fuccory, endiveand thelike, are thought very conve- 
nient inthis cafe. If he defire at any time te feed on thefe meates roafted,he may, only 
dippiag them in verjuice, inthe acide juices of Oranges, Citrons,_Lemons,or Pome- 
cranets, fometimes in one, and fometimes in another, according to his tafte and abi- 
lity. Itany havea defire to eate fith, he muft makechoyce of Troutes, Gudgions, 
Pikesand the like, which live in running and cleare waters, and not in muddy; hee 
fhall ef{chew all cold fallers and pulfe, becaufe they flye up and trouble the head: ir 

vill be convenientafter meate to ulecommon drige pawder; er Anifeed, Fennell. 
feed or Coriander comfits,alfo conferve of Rofes,or Marmilate of Quinces to {hut up 
the orifice of the Ventricle, left the head fhould bee offended with vapoures arifing 
from thence. 

Children muft eate often, but {paringly, for children cannot faft {o long asthofe 
which arcelder, becaufetheir naturall heate is more {trong, wherefore they ftandin 
heede of more nourifhment; fo alfo in winter all forts of people require more plenti- 
lull nourith ment, for thatthen their ftemackes are more hot than in Summer. 

When the foureteenth day is paft, if neither a feaver, nor any thing elfe forbid, hee 
may drinke wine moderately, and by littleand little, encreafehis dyet, but thatre- 
ipectively to each ones nature, ftrength and cuftome. He fhall fhunne, as much as 
inhia lyes, fleepe on the day time, uniefle it happen that a Phlegmon (eaze upon the 
braine or Meninges, For in this cafe it will bee expedient to fleepe on the day time, 
cl pecially from morning tillnoone, for inthis feafon of the day, as alfo in the {pring 
blood is predominant in the body, according tothe opinion of Hippocrates. For it is 
lovulgarly knowne, that it need not be fpoken, that the blood when wee are awake 
‘Ss carryed intothe habire and furface of the body ; but onthe contrary by fleepe it is 
called into the noble parts, the Heart and Liver. Wherefore if that the blood by 
the force of the Sunne calting his bcames upon the earth, at hisrifing iscarryed into 


the habite of the body, fhould againe bee more and more diffufed a) -~ 
renet 


357 


Lib.2 ; de ule 
Part £4.>, 


The Aire 
though in fum- 
mer is colder 
than the braine, 


Thedifcom- 
moditics ef too 
ight. 


Whar ais drink 
muift be, 


Almonds er- 
crealc the 


of thejicad, 


What &th he 
may ¢ate, 


Aphor 13. 
fert.t, 


Aphor § ,fect.2 


Why tieepe up> 
on the day-time 
isgoodtor the 
braine being 
enflamed, 


| 
A 
NUS 
. iw At ir 
| 
| 
j | 


» 


258 Of the Greene and Bloody 1B: Jo. 
{trenerh and motion of watching , the inflammation in the braine and Meninge; 
wouldbe much encreafed. Whereforcitwillbee better, efpecially thea toftay by 

nid fleepe the violence of the blood running into the habire of the body, when it {haji 

is rae {eeme to rage and more violently to affect that way. Watching mutt in like Manner 

ing immodes be moderates for too muchdepraves the temper of the braine and of the habit of th. 

race Watehingy whole body; itcaufes crudities, painesand heavinefle of the head, and makes th. 
wounds dry and maligne. 

But ifthe patient cannot fleepe by reafon of the vehemencic of the inflammation of 

Cal Methy;, the braine and AMeninges, Galen wilhes, to wafh, belmeare and annoint the head, nole, 

temples and cares with refrigerating and humecting things, for thefe ftupific , ang 

make drowfic the Braine and membranes thereof, being more hor than they ouch, 

| tobes Wherefore for this purpofe let the remples bee anointed with Vgmentum vo. 

flee, pudeon, Or Pnzacnium Rofatum withalittle rofe vinegar, or oxycrates Leta fpunge 

_ ”” ‘goiftened in the decoétion of white or blacke poppie feed, of the rinds of the rootes 
of Mandrages, of the feedes of Henbane, lettuce, purflaine, plantaine, night-thad: 
and thelike. He may alfo have abroathor barly creame, into which you may pyr 
an emulfion made of the feedesof white poppye, or let him havea potion made 
with 3}.or of the fyrupe of poppie,with 3 1j. of lettuce water; Let the patient 
thefe things 4 houres after meate, to procure tleepe.For Ueepe doth much helpe con. 
coction it repaires the cffluxe of the triple fubflance cauled by watching, alwagerh 
paine, refrefheth che weary, mitigates anger and forrow, reftores the depraved reg. 
fon, fo that for thefe refpeas it is ablolutely neceflary chat the patient take his natu. 
rail reft, 

f the patient fhall bee plethoricke, let the plenitude be leflened by blood-letting, 
purging anda {lender dier, according tothe difcretion of the Phifition who thal! 
everfee the cure. 

But we muft take heed of {trong purgations, in thefe kindes of wounds, efpecially 
at the beginning, left the feaver, inflammation, paine,and other {uch like fymptomes 
be increafed by ftirring up the humors. 

Phicboromie according to Gaéens opinion, muft not onely be made ref{pectively to 
the plenty of blood, but alfo agreeabletothe greatnetle of the prefent difeale, o: 
that which is tocome, to divert, and draw backethathumer which flowes downe. 
by a way contrary to that whichis impaét in the part; and which muft be there eva. 
culated, ordrawne to the next. WVherefore fer example, ifthe right fide of the 
head be wounded, the Cephalicke veine of the right armefhall be opened, ualefie z 
Sreat Plethora or plenitude caufe us toopen the Bafilics, or Median, yet ifneicher of 
them can be fitly opened, the Bafilica may bee opened, although the body is noc ple 
thoricke. 

Thelikecourfe muft be obferved in wounds of the left fide of the head ; for that 
is farre better by reafon of the ftraightnefleof the fibers, thanto draw blood onthe 
oppolite fide; in performance whereof you muft have diligent care of the ftrengti 
ofthe patient, ftill fecling his pulfe, unleffea P hyfition be prefent, to whofe judge- 
ment you muft then commit all that bufineffe. For the pulfeis, in Ga/ess opinion, 
ribdecurger. “He certaineft fhewer of the ftrength. Wherefore we muft cenfider the changes ant 
inequalitiesthereof, for as foone as we finde it to become !efler and more flow, when 

the fore-head beginnes to f{weatea little, when he feeles a puine at his heare, when 
he istaken with a defire to vomit, or goe to ftoole, or with yawning, and when lice 
thall change his colour and his lips looke pale, then you muft ftop the blood as {pee- 
dily as you can; otherwife there will be danger left hee poure forth his life togethe! 
with his blood. Then he muft bee refrefhed with bread {teeped in winc, and put into 
his mouth, and by rubbing histemples and nofethrilles with {trong vinegar, and by 
lying upon his backe, 

Butthe part thall bee eafed and freed fromfome _portionof the impact andcon- 
yin humor by gently {carifying the lippes ofthe wound, or applying of Leachics. 
Butit fhall bee diverted, by opening thefe veines which are nigheft co the 


Thecommos 
dities of fleepe. 


wounded part, as the Fems Pupps, orthat inthe middeft ofthe faschead, or 0! 
| the temples,er thefe which are under the tongue; befides alfo cupping-glaffes fhal s¢ 


apply¢ed 


Bur it fhall! 
werfull blood 
membrancs th 
Saint 
the houfe 
gne of the ho: 
of Brien. 
ment, when 
and being he ' 
cooke him on 
monous 
head and nec! 
bignefle, thai 
could he {pea 
obferving, al 
he had foure 
che fame fubi 
patient, | th 
faucers at tha 

feaver, nor a 
ged, forths 
ty; the day f 
ned, I durft n 
as | defired. 
Violene, wt 
ftreneth of 
tionand tug 
my Lancct 
had already 
be fo, and tl 
our enterpr! 
maine, that 
i being glad 
was Treacy 
wherefore | 
manto hiseg 
{pace of fou: 
left him abx 
alwaged in 
ulceratedca 
tora 
firene: 
remedy If is 
Now (0! 
fullin fa@u 
is preient, b 
teined in a! 
ence there! 
divers time: 
Nave beene: 


| L I 
applied tO the 
mult (trong, 
excepted, 
ory 
vapours 
| 1, 
bod) that 
much increaic 


po- 
Leta {punge 
bf the rootes 

night-fhade 
yOu May pur 
POUIOD made 
patient ufe 
h helpe Con. 
alwageth 
¢piaved rea. 
ake his natu. 


ood-letting, 
bn who tha]! 


is, efpecially 
lymptomes 


mipectively to 
dileafe, ox 
wes downe, 
e there eva- 
lide of the 
d, unlefie a 
if neicher of 
ly 1s nor ple- 


ad; for that 
lood onthe 
the ftrength 
hofe judge- 
Bs Opinion, 
kanges and 
flow, when 
ieare, when 
d when hee 
bod as {pee- 
ife rogether 
and put into 
par, and by 


andcon- 
of Leaches. 
eft co the 
or of 
affes fhal be 


Woun ds of each Part. 


lied to the fhoulders fometimes, with fcarification, fometimes without; neither 
apt and long fri@ions with courfeclothes, ofallthe whole body, the head Braue, 


mult (trong, and 
excepted, be omitred during the whole time of the cure, fer thefe will be available, 


hough but for this, that 1s;to draw backe and diffipate by infenfible tranfpiration the 
vapours which otherwife would afcend intothehead, whichmatters certainly ina 
body that lycs ftill and wants both the ufe and benefit of accuftomed exercife, are 


much increafed. 


Bur it bee made manifeft by this following and notable example, how po- A Hitozy, 


werfull blood -letting is,to leffenand mitigate the inflammation of the Braine,or the 
membranes thereof in wounds of the head. I was lately called into the fuburbs of 
Saint German, there to vilitea young man twenty eight yeeres old, who lodged there 
the houfe of Zohn Martial, at che figne of Saint Michae#. This young man, was 
one of the houfhold fervants of Mafter Doacador, the fteward of the Lady Admiral 
of Brion, He fell downe headlong upon the left Bregma, upon amarble pave- 
ment, whence he received acontufed wound, without any fracture of the {cull, 
snd being he was of a fanguine temperature, by occafion of this wound, a feaver 
rooke him on the feaventh day with a continuall de/érium and inflammation of phieg - 
monous tumor ofthe wounded Pericranium. This fame tumor poffeffing his whole 
head and necke by continuation and fympathy of the parts, was growné@to fuch a 
bigneffe, that his vifage was fo muchaltred, that his friends knew him not ; acither 
could he {peake, heare, or {wallow any thing but what was very liquide. WhichI 
obferving, although I knew, that the day pait, which was the cight day of his difeafe, 
he had foure faucers of blood taken from him by Germaine Agace Barber-furgion of 
the fame fuburbs; yet confidering the integrity and conftancie of the ftrength of the 
patient, 1 thought good ro bleed him againe; wherefore I drew frem him foureteene 
faucers at that onetime; when I came to him the day after, and faw that neitherthe 
feaver, nor any of the fore mentioned fymptomes were any whit remitted, or afwa- 
eed, forthwith tooke from him foure faucers more, which inall made two & twene 
ty; the day following when I had ebferved, that the fymptomes were no whit lefie- 
ned, I durft not prefume by my owne oncly advice, to let him the fourth time blood 
asl defired. -Wherefore [brought unto him, that moft famous Phy fition Do@or 
Violene, who as foone as he felt his pulfe, knowing by the vehemencie thereof, the 
firength of the Patient, and moreover confideringthe greatnefle of the inflamma- 
tionand tumor which offered its felfe tohis fight, hee bid mee prefently take out 
my Lancet and open aveine. But I lingred on fet purpofe, and teld him, that hee 
had already twenty two faucers of blood taken from him: Then faydhe, Grant it 
be fo, and though more have beene drawne, yet muft we not therefore defift from 
ourenterprife, efpecially fecing the twochiefe Indicationsof blood-letting yet re- 
maine, that is, the greatne {fe of the difeafe, and the conftant ftrength of the Patient. 
[being glad of this, rooke three faucers more of blood, hee (tanding by, and 


Gant Rreneth ofthe patient, and thatit might appeare how f{peedy and certaine a 
remedy it is in inflammations of the head and braine. 


fullin faQuresand wounds of the head,as venery; not onely at that time the difeafe 
's preient, but alfo long after the curethereof, For great plenty of fpirits are con- 


vers times obferved death to enfue in {mall wounds of the head, yea when they 
ave agolutinated and united. 


wasteady totake more butthathewithed mec to differ ie untill the after noone; 
wherefore returning after dinner I filled two faucers more, fo that inall,this young 
manto his great benefit, loft twenty feaven faucers of blood at five times, within the 
{pace of foure dayes. Nowrtheenfuing night was very pleafingto him, the feaver 
lefthim about noone, the tumor grew much leffe the heat of the inflammation was 
afwaged in all parts, except in hiseyelids, and the lappes of his eares, which being 
uicerated caft forth a ereat quantitie of Pus or matter. I have recited chis hiftory pur- 
polely, torake away the childifh feare which mary havetodraw blood in the con- 


Now toreturne from whence we digrefled you muft note that nothing is {o hurt- 


teined in afmall quantity of feed,& the greateft part thereof flewes from the brainc; 
“ice therefore all the faculties, bue chiefly the Animall, are refolved,whence I have 


All 


The tvro 
chiefs Indiea- 
tions inbloed 
letting. 


The ddcoms 
moditis-sf ye- 
nery 19 
of 
the head, 


—— 
to ltay by 
hen it fhali 
habit of the 
Matien of 
upifie » and 
| 


How, hurtful] 
noyle is to the 
fraGeurcs of 
the (cull. 


A Hiftory. 


Of a fimple 
yyound of che 


fiefhandthe 


skinne, 


A degeftive 
medicrc. 


A farcoticke 
Medicine. 


An Epuboticke. 


A H ift Ory 


What things 
ve mult ob- 
ferve in lowe - 
ing. 


360 


Of the Greene and Bloody 


Liz; yo, 


All paflions of the minde muft in like fort be avoided, becaufe they by contrac... 
and diffipation of the fpirits caufe great trouble inthe body and minde. Ler ap}... 
be chofen forthe Patient as farre from noife as can be, as from the ringing Of bells 
beatings and knockings of Smithes, Coopers,and Carpenters, and from high-waye. 
through which they ufeto drive Coaches; for noy{e encreafes paine, caules a fe. 
ver,and brings many otherfymptomes, | 
I remember when I was at Hi/din at the time that it was befeiged by the forces of 
Charles the fifth, that when the wall beaten with the Canaon,the noife of the Ord), 
nance caufed grievous torment to all thofe which were ficke,but efpecially thofe th, 
were wounded on their heads, fo thatehey would fay, that they thought at rh. 
difcharging ofevery Cannon that they were cruelly ftrucken with ftaves on that pare 
which was woundeds and verily their wounds were fo angred herewith, that they 
bledde much, and by their paine and feavers encrealed were forced with much fiph. 
ing to breathe their laft. 
Thus much may ferve to be {fpoken of the cure in generall, now we will out of th» 
monuments of the ancients,treate of the particular, 


C wap, XV. 


Of the particular cure of Wounds of the bead, and of the 
mi{culous skinne, 


~ 
% 


AING yet us beginne with a imple wound, for whofe cure the Chirurgion muft 


NeW) propofe one onely 1cope, to wit, Vnion; forunleffe the wound pierce to 

the {cull, it is cured like other wounds of the flefhy parts of our bodies, 

RS" But if ic be compound, as many Wayes as itis complicate, fo many indica. 

tions fhew themfelves» Inthefe the chiefeft care muft bechad of themore urgent 
Order and caufe. 

Therefore if the wound fhall be fimple and fuperficiary the haire muft firft bee 
fhavenaway,then aplaifter applied made of the white of an egce,bole Armenicke and 
Aloes. The following day you muft apply Emplafrum de lanua, or de gratis Déi, 
untillthe wound beperfeGlyhealed, But if it be deeper and penetrate even to the 
Pericraninm, the Chirurgion thal] not doeamiffe, ifatthe fecond dreffing he apply a 
digeftive medicine (as they callit) which may be made of Venice Turpentine, the 
yolkcs of egges, oyleof Rofes and a little faffron,and that fhall be ufed fu long, untill 
the wound come to maturation; forthen you muftadde honey of Rofes and Barly 
floure te the digeftive. Hence muft weipaffe to thefe medicines, into whofe com- 
poft:ionno oyly, or unétious bodies enters, fuch as this; Terebinth. veneta /jrwpé 
3}, pul. aloes, Myrrhe,ey mafich an3%,Let them allbe incorporated and made 10: 
to an unguent, which iball be perfectly regenerated, then itmuftbee cicatrifed with 
thisfollowing powder. Aluminis combu/ti, corticis granatorum combufl. an. 3). 

Mifceantur fimul fiat pulais: but if the wound be fo large that it require a future, it 
{hall have fo many ftitches witha needle,as need thall feeme to require. 

Whileft I was at Hé/dsx, acertaine foldier,by falling of the earth whileft he under- 
mincd, had the Hairy {calpe fo prefled downe even tothe Pericranium,and fo whe- 
ly feparated from the beginning of the hinde partof his head,even tohis forehead, 
chat it hung over his face. I went about the cure in this manner; I firft wafhe all the 
wound with wine, alittle warmed, that fo I might walh away the congealed blood 
mixed with the earth; then I dryed it with a foft linnen cloth, and laid upon it Venice 
Turpentine mixed with alittle Aqua Vite wherein I had diffolved fome Sangus Dré- 
conis, Maftich and Alocs; then I reftored the banging skinne to its former place, and 
there ftayed it with fome ftitches being neither too ftrait, ‘ nor too clofe together, 
for feare of paineand inflammation, ( which two chiefely happen whileft she wound 
comesto fuppuration) but onely as much as fhould ferveto flay iton every 
fide, and to keepe forth the ayre which by its entrance doth much harme to — 
che 


rhe lower fides o} 
matrer might ha 
the head. far 
aa for 
and infiainmatso 
{did not let hi: 
which were brok 
‘na {hore time. 
Butif the wo' 
afrer another ma 
onaume {tood | 
paris {Or the del 
that onc of che tei 
mongtit the com! 
yecres old ,and ta 
skinnc in many pm 
of the® 
eed to the cure 0! 
che fame time; 10 
ver, her head, fb 
nailes,were 
erifh, acride, 
{-arfe endure the 
oreat 
That all wout 
{omewhat partic 
had of che venenz 
fore things 
Ifcartifyed the |} 
out the venenat: 
Of 
Re. Mithrid, 3 
ben. Let che we 
and Mithridate 
the wound; and: 
inthe water of ! 
Heart and vindi 
For which pu 
heart. 
borum rwbror 
dial, 
ply it tothe hea 
the dreft after elif 
Mation and alit 
vered but ling 
reftored 
that fimple Wo 
4 ny touch of px 
But now tha 
contufed witha 
(that lo the afle 
More effec) the 
cine applyed, fu 
mucum 
porated, and 
ply the Cataplais 
But 


‘ 
a 
4 
%, 
j 
q 
= 


2 place 
bg of bells, 
bigh-wayes 
caules a feo 


the forces 
of the 
thofe thar 
lought at the 
on thar Part 
1, that the 
1much lich. 


il] Out of the 


urgion muft 
nd pierce to 
our bodies. 
nany indica. 
nore urgent 


nuft fir bee 
mcnicke and 
¢ gratia De, 
even to the 
oheapplya 
mcntine, the 
long, untill 
5 and Barly 
hofecom- 
od made in- 
atrifed with 
bufl. an, 3). 
a future, it 


ft he under- 
od fowhe- 
s forehead, 
fhe all the 
raled blood 
yn it Venice 
ang nts Dra- 
place, and 
together, 
che wound 
iton every 
o wounds: 
che 


L BeLOs 


ee lower fides of the wound, I filled with fomewhat long and broad teats, that the 
izht have paflage forth. Then I applyed this following cataplafme to all 


Wounds of each Part. 


361 


and imfiain 


n ort rime. 

y dat the wound bee made by the biting of a wilde beaft, it muft bee handled 
feranother manner, as fhall appeare by this following hiftory. As many people 
on atime {tood looking upon the Kings Lyons, who were keptin the Tilt-yard at 
paris tor the delight of King Heary the fecond, and athischarges: it happened 
hat onc of che feirceit of them broke the chings wherein he was tyed, and leaping ax 
mongit tlic company, he with his pawes threw to the ground aGirle of fome twelve 
yeeres old and taking her head in his mouth, with his tceth wounded the mufculous 
many places, yet hurt not the feull. She fcarle at length delivered by the 
Matter of the Lyons fromthe jawes of Death andthe Lyon, was commit- 
red to the cure Of Rowland Claret Chirurgion; who was there prefent by chance at 
rhe ametime; {ome tew dayes after, I was wascalied to vifite her; fhe wagin a fege 
ver, hey head, fhoulders, breftand all the places where the Lyon had fet his teeth, or 
nailes,were {wolne, all he edges of the woundswere livice, and did flow with a wa- 
rih, acride, virulent, cadaverous, darke greene and (tinking matter, fo that I could 
(carfe endurethe {mell thereof; fhe was alfooppreft with pricking, biting and ve- 
ry great paine; which Lobferving, that old faying came into my minde whichis 
That all wounds made by the bitings of beafis, or of men allo, doe 
fomewhat participate of poy fon. Wherefore there mult principally great care bee 
hadofthe venenateimpreifion left inthe wounds by the nailes and teeth, and there- 
forefuch things mutt bee applyed, as have power toorecome poifon. Wherefore 
I{cartifyed the lipsofthe woundsin divers places, and applyed Leaches to fi'cke 
out the venenate blood,and eafe the inflammation of the parts,then I made a Lotion 
of A gyptcacum, Treacle and Mithridate after the following manner. 

R. Mithrid, theriac, 31). egyptiac 3h diffolvantur smnia cumagna vite, Cy Cardui 
ben. Lee che wounds be fomented and wathed with it warme; befides alfo Treacle 
and Mithtidate were put in allthe medicines which were either applycd or put intro 
the wound: and alfo of the fame withthe conferves of Rofes and Buglolic difloived 
inthe water of Sorrell and Carduus benediéiws,potions were madeto ftrengthen the 
Heart and vindicate it from maligne vapours, 

For which purpofe alfo this following Epithema was applyed to the region of her 
heart. squarofar. cr a%, acets cillitice =), corallorum, fantalorum 
rubrorum vofar rub. pulversts [pody.an. <j, Mithbridaty, thertace, an, flo.cor- 
dial, pulverifatorums p.gcroct3 ,j.diflolvethem altogether an Epitheme and ap- 
ply it tothe heart with a {carler clothor fpunge, and let it bee oftenrenued. Verily 
the dreft after ghig manner, and the former remedics but once ufed, paine, inflam- 
Mation and all the maligne {ymptomes were much leffened ; to conclude thee reco- 
vered but lingred and was leane fome two yeares after, yet at lengh fhe was per- 
fectly reftored to her health and former nature. By which youmay underftand, 
that limple wounds muft be handled after another manner, than thefe whichhave 
OY touch of poifen. | 

But now that we may profecute the other affe@s of the hairy {calpe; fay that itis 
contuled witha blow witheut a wound, that which muft bee firft and alway done, 
(that fo the affe@ may better appeare, and the remedies which ate applyed may take 
‘Nore effect) the haire muft be fhaven away, and atthe firft drefling a repelling medi - 
“ine applyed, fuchas is this following i1).album evorum ni, |}. 

mucum cypre/si, balanft.alumin.rocha, rofar,rub.an. 3}. Lecthem beall incor- 
em and makea medicine for the former ufe, or in {teed thereof, you may ap- 
Ply the cataplafime prefcribed before confifting of Farina bordet, fabarum, aceto 


“ereficco, But fach medicines muft be often reaued, When the paine aud detiuxion 
li ate 


When We 
mutt noe les 
blood 2” 
wounds 


A Hifory, 


The bétings of 
man ana 

afts are ye~ 


Theridtall tga 
picke Medi« 
cines: 


A Cordiall Ea 
puhemea, 


The cure of 
the fairy 
{calpe when 
it is contuleg, 


A repelling 
medicine, 


‘ 


’ 
4 
| ng head. farina bora. fa HIN aN 40064 frest , sat 
formam pultis, thishatha faculty. to dry, coole, repell mitigate paine 
pation,and bleeding. 
[did no: let himebood, caule hee had bled much, ei cially at cCrraine arteries 
| hich were broken neere his temples: he being dreli d after this manner orew well 
| 
| 
| : 
| 


? 

J 


362 Of the Greene and Bloody L 1B.10- 
areappeafed, wee muft ufe difcuffing medicines for theditfipation of that hum 
A difaing Which remainesimpacted inthe part ; Re Emplafirs de woncilagin, 31).oxicroces, omy, ding 
de meliloto, ole: cbamam. cy ancthi, an, 3. malaxentur Cy fiat emplafr ay, ad pidgio® 
difium, Such a fomentation will alfo be goed. vant rub, 4b. iil}. cop firewe 
Leb. ij, muees cupre[si contuf. nw. x, pul. myrtillorum 3}. rofar rb, abfinth, fol. Salvia, nis 


Mini. 


Dererfive or 
clenfing mes 
cicines, 


Why the Fe« 

hath fuch 
quifirefen(e. 


Gal, 6, Meth, 


The bonesare 
offended with 
the applicati- 
on of humide 
things. 


Bal Meth, 


majorane fachades florum chamam.melil, an. M.%, alaminis roche, radicis cyper; 
wnt aromatics an, =.bulliant omnia fimal, and make a decoGion to foment the 
part. After fomewhataleng fementing it, whereby it may the better difcuffe, 
and exhauft the concrete humorsthe head muft be'dryed &more difcufhng things 3), 
plyed fuch as the Cerate defcribed by Vige called de minio, which hath an emo)iicy, 
and digeftive faculty inthis forme. chamam, I:lior. am, oles i). Pin. 


omnia fimul bacule agitande, primum quidem lento tgne, mox 
colorem migrums (ubmigrum contrahat; adde in fine cocinre Terebinth, lib. 
vertsmafiich. gum. clemi,3}. cera quantum fufficit, bullsant rurfus una eballitione 
fiat empl.mole. Bucif tachumor be net thus difcuffed, but oncly grow foft, the, 
the camor muft be quickely opened, for when the fieth is inflamed and putrifye: 
through occafion of the conteined humor, thebone under it putrifies alfoby th. 
contagi@n of the inflammation and the acrimonyof the matter falling upon the hen, 
When you have opened it,wath away the filth of the ulcer with his following deter. 
five medicine, R. /yrupé abfinth. an, 3} terebinth, pal. reas, aloes ma /hichii 
myrrhe, farina hordes an.3%- in fteed hereof if there be great putrifaction «4 
cither by it felfejor mixt wich an equall quantity of Vngweatum apoftolorwm may be put 


inte the ulcer. VWhen the ulcer is clenfed it will be time to ufe {carcotike and cicaty. 
zing medicines. 


Cuar. XVI; 


Ofthe particular cure ofa fractured or broken 


F the fcull be be broken, fo that it be needefull to trepan it, or to elevate 
4y and lift it up, er fcrape itaway, the mufculous skinne being cutas wee 
formerly noted, the Pericranium thall be plucked from the {cul), as wee 

fayd before; which becaufe it can hardly bee done without great paint, 
by reafon of its exquifite fenfe and cennexion with the membranesu! 
the braine, we muf Jabour to mittigate the paine fer feare of inflammation ando- 
ther accidents. Therefore the firft dreffing ended and the corners of the wound drawn 
each from other; acthe fecond drefling put to the wound, a digeftive (as they term 
it) made of the yolke of anegge, andoyleet Rofes, but you mutt apply no humid 
thing to the bone, becaufe we defire to keepe it found and whole. For Ga/ens opinion 
is, that bared bones muft sot be touched with un@uous things. but rather on the col- 
trary all dry things muft bee applyed tothem, which may confume the fupertiuous 
humidity, Therefore we muft lay fome linte and the cephalicke powders whicti w° 
{hall hereafter defcribe upon the bone we intend to preferye, and muft have diligent 
carethat it be not offended cither by the the ayre, ortouchofhumide mediciit 
You mutt in Trepaning havea {peciall care of the Aeninx, Fer | have 
oblerved a great quantity of blood to have flowed from fome broken ve fell whic 
adhered to the fecond Table-neither muft we prefently and forthwith ftay fuch biet 
ding, but fuffer itto flow according to the plenitude and ftrength of the patient;{o! 
thus the feaver, and together therewith the reft of the {ymptomes are dimini{lied. 

For in the opinion of Hippocrates, in every greene wound it is good tocaule oft¢ 
bleeding, except in the bellies; for thus the vehemencie of paine., inflammation 
otheraccidents will beelefle troublefome; alfo itis not amiffe too for old ulcers © 
bleed much, for fo they are freede from the burden of the impa& humers. Wh* 


you thinkeit kath bled fufficiently, i¢ may be ftanched with this following medici® 


gegar, oF for 
VN hic 
paine. 

Vigoes Cerate 
Gc for fractur 
moderately , 
ftrengthens the 
which entcr i 

Oli ref. 
gafirate Sips. £0 
tico, eliquetat 
=ijij. cera alba 
the neckc, 
hath force of 
this. 

Re Ruta, WA 
tur omnia t 
Iiliorum, de te 
pojtes colentur 
ficét frst 

Butwhenr 
left they mak 
parts,and. con 
be preterved 
fore all humic 
venture there 
ration, 

For accord 
rhe difeafe, 
to foment the 
i dimes interp: 
be ted, tartan 
therwife all 
and cooles, 
fcull, e[peci 
there is feard 

Wherefor 
dicines in we 
tigation of pal 
catap matick cil 
they arecoav 
their drync 
ture inthe fey 
ders ufually 

Draconis malt 
ds have adr 
ufe thefe thidg 
then, when th 


| 

| 
Alves thuris, mafiches am albumina & 
agit 


of that humo, 
OSES, Ch 
laftr am, ad 
J. Com 
tb. fol. falrvig 
nt the gricyeg 
difcuffe, dry 
hing things ap. 
han CMoOlliens 
wiaflich, i). pin. 
bullians 
tere, 
mth. lib Pul. 
4 chullitione 
tow (oft, then 
and putrifyed 
es alfo by the 
pen the bene 
Niowing deter. 
aloes 
ON 
wm nay be pur 
tke and cicatri. 


t, or to elevate 
ing cutas wee 
¢ {cul], as wee 
Ut great paine, 
membranes of 
mation ando- 
wound drawn 
(as they terme 
ply no bumide 
Galens Opinion 
her onthe con- 
he {uperfiuous 
ders which we 
have diligent 
de medicines. 
ar I have often 
nveffell which 
1 ftay fuch blee- 
‘the patient;{or 
diminifhed. 

drocaufe oftes 
ammation 4 

or old ulcers 0 


umers. 
ywing medicine 


BH. 


Wounds of each Part. 


1B+10 


ala piles leporinis minutim incifis, fiat medicamentum. VV henthe blees 


ttn 
is ftayed,you fhall fer the afwaging of paine, droppe upon the AZeninx fome 


pidgions blood, yer warme by opening aVeine under the wing, then ic fhall bee 
frewed over with this following powaer, Aloes, thuris, myrrba, fanguimis dracy- 
Mifoe, fiat pulvis fubtilis, Alfo you may makean irrigation with Rofe Vi- 
gegar, of fome repelling medicine; fuch as isacataplaime ex farinis, 
hich may bee applyeduntill the fourth day to afwage and mittigate 
| 

gees Cerate will be of good ufe inthis cafe, asthat which in my opinion is mok 
c for fractures of the {cull , becaufe it drawes powerfully, refolves and dries 
moderately, and by reafon of .the {mell refrelhes the animal! {pirits, and 
frengthens the braine and membranes thereof,as you may cafily perceive by things 
which enter into the compolition thereof. 

Omph.refine pini.guimmi Elem:. an3\\, Maftiches pimenedinis vervecis 
paffrate folzor ump beten, caprifol, autos 42. M,j. ammoniact 3%. cranorum 
ym 3X. liquata pingmedine teycnha terantur, ammoniacum fimul cum-aceto {cilé- 
rico, eliquetur deinde bulhant omnia fimul ij. vini boni,lente iene afque ad 
Vint, Atinde exprimentur comexprefsione addantar tercointh, Ven, 
<ijij.cere alba quantum [uffictt, frat cerotum molle ad pradiiiam, 
rhe necke,. andall thefpineof the backe bee annointed with aliniment, which, 
hath force of mollifing the Nerves, left they fhould fuficr convulfion; fuch is 
this. 

R Rute, faluie, herb, paralyf, vad. dreos, cype- 
rj baccarum lauri, an. florum chamea, melil.byperics, an. M., j. piflentur maceren- 
tur omnia in vino alboper nottem, deinae coguantur invafe duplics cum oles 
liliorum, de terebinthina, axungia,anferis bum, an, ad confumptionem Vini, 
polcscolentur imcolatura adde 3i\}, aqua Vite 3%. cre quantum 
/ujficét fist um fecumdum artem. 

Bur when the paine is afwaged,we muftabftaine from allfuch unfiuous things, 
lefithey make the wound become fordide and maligne, and putrific the adjacent 
parts,and:confequently the Craffs Menszx and {cull; for the integrity of all parts may 
be preferved by their like, and fuch are dry things ina fracture of ther fcull, Where- 
fore all humide and oyely things mult be thunnedin the cure thereof,ual eile perad- 
venture there fhall bec fome neede to mitigate paine and bring the humor to {uppu- 
ration, 

For according to Galen, wee are oft forcht fora time to omit the proper cure of 
the difeafe, foro refift the fymptomes; furthermore Hippocrates would have us not 
to foment the {cull, no not with wine, but if we doe, to let it be but with very little. 
iaius interprersthat littletobe, whenthere is feare of inflammation; for wine if it 
be ted, tart and afiringent, hatha repreffing refrigerating and drying facultie: for o- 
therwife all wine although it heates and drics by its faculty,yet it actually humects 
and cooles, both which are very hurtfuil in wounds of the head,or a fractured 
cull, efpecially when thebone is bare ; for from too much cooling of the braine 
there is feare of a convulfion,.or fome other evill fymptome. 

Wherefore Jet this be ratified, that is, We muft nor ufe humide and unctuous me- 
dicinesin wounds of the head, except for curing of an inflammation, or the mi- 
tigation ofpaine caufedthereby. Therefore let the bared {cull bee firewed with 
catapmaticke and cephalicke powders, (being fo called by the ancients, for that 
they areconvemient and good in fractures of the fcull & the reft of the bones )for by 
their drynefle they confume the fuperfluous bumiditie, and by that meaaes helpe na- 
‘ure tp the feparating of the broken bones, aad the regenerating of Acth, Such pou. 
Cers uiually confift of fuch things as thefe enfuing. 

Thws, radix lridas florent. farina Hordei, Ervi, pulvis Alees Hepasica, fanguis 
Draconis ,maftiche, generally all fuch fimples 
aS have a drying and an abftergent faculty without biting; but you mult noc 
ufe thefe things before the paine,inflammation and apoftumation bee paft; thatis 


‘hen, when the membranes mutt be clenfed, the benes {caled,and the fleth a 
li2 


Vices Cerate 
good tora 
broken {cull, 


A lininsene 
good agsinft 


GaAlAs Adeth, 


How farre 

bumide zhings 
are gooc tora 
radtured (culls 


Why Cepha- 
licke o£ Ca~ 
tagmatweke 
pou der¢ are 
good. 


When te uled, 


| 
| 
| ‘ 
| 
| 
a 


| Of the Greene and Bloody 


How to be 
mixed when 
trey aretobee 
applyed to the 
Meninges, 


Why a repel- 
ling 
cannot 
ufedin fraz 
Gtures of the 
Scull, 


How the pas 
tient muk be 
placed when 
you Trepan 


L IB.J Oo. 


For the fcull by how much it is the dryer, by fo much it requires and more eaji|, 
endures more powerfull and dryer medicines, thanthe Dura Materor Pericraniyg, 
as that which ia quickneffe of fenfe comes farre thort of thefe two, Wherefore whe, 
you would apply the forementioned cephalicke pouders to the Adeninges , they myf 
be affociated and mixed with honey, fyrupe of rofes or of wormewood and {uch 
ther like,that fo their too violently drying faculty may be alayed and tempered. 


Cuarp.X VII. 


— 


why we ufe Trepaning , in the Fradiures of the fcnll, 


Here are foure canfes of thisremedy, The firftis, to raife up the de. 
pre{t bones, and take forth theirfragments, which preffe upon the ay. 
ninges, ot alfo upon the fubftance of the braine. The fecend is, th: 

Mors} the Samies or matter may bee evacuated, clenfed, wafted, and dryeg 
Kase up, which bythe breaking of any veffellis poured forth upon the 
Membraines, whereby theyare, and notthey onely, but the Braine alf 
is in great danger of corruption. The third is, forthe fitter application of medi- 
cines, convenient forthe woundand fracture. The fourthis, that fo we may have 
fomething whereby we may fupply the defect of a Repelling Ligature, and {uch ap 
one as may hinder defluxions; for {uch a Ligature cannot take place here as it ma 
in the other parts of the body, by reafon of the Sphericall or Round figure of the 
head,which doth not eafily admit binding; andthen the denfity and hardneffe of 
the interpofed fcull isa meanes thatthe veffells lying under it (by which ufually the 
defluxion comes) cannot ¢afily be bound with a rowler fufhiciently to repell the run. 
ning blood. And the externall veffélls, (to whom the force of the Ligature 
may come) cannot bee bound withont great paine, and danger of Inflamm. 
tion, 

For by fuch a comprefiion the pulfation ofthe Arteries would be intercepted ,and 
the effluxe of the fuliginous excrements which uleth to paffe through the futures 
ofthe {cull, would be fuppreft, dy reafon ofthe conftriion of thefe futures. 

Befides alfo the blood would thus bee forced frem the wounded part without,to 
within into the Membranes and Braine; whence paine, Inflammation, a Feaver, 
Abfcefle, Convulfion, Palfie, Apoplexie, and laftly death it felfe would 
enlue. 

And thefe are thechicfecaules, that Trepaning is neceflary in fractures of the 
{cull, and not fo in the fraGtures of orher bones. 

But before you apply or putte your Trepan, the Patient muft bee fitly placed 
or feated,and a double cloth muft be many times wrapped about his head, and chen 
bis head muft be fo laid, or prefled upon a Cufhionor pillow,that when yon come 
“ _ operation, it may not liske downe any further, but remaine firme and 

eddy. 

Then you muft ftoppe the patients cares with Cotton-wooll, that fo hee may no 
heare the noife made by the Trepan, or any other Inftrument. 


Bur before you put to your Trepan the bone muft be pierced with aa Inftrument, 


. 


. having athrec {quare point, that fo it may bee the more {peedily and certainely per- 


forated The point thereof muft be no bigger then the pin of the Trepan, that fo 
the Trepan which is forthwith to bee applyed may ftandthe more firmer, and A0t 
play to and againe in too wide a hole, 

Thethape of this Inftrument isnot much different from aGimblet, but thatthe 


point is three-{quare, and not twined like a icrew; as you may perceive, by this fol- 
lowing figure, 


A 


forth the pin 
Meninx. 
Wherek 
about untill 
cappe, or {or 
more of the | 
They mu: 
gently; for t! 
of the operag 
comeé too he 
hot; but the 
after it is cut 
Now you 
alway es cait 
Upon it pou 
When the b 
hath a facule 
ent to its king 
Pulver: 
ing by this m 
Pomegranat 
Neither th; 
worke to na 
underthem. 


364 [1B-10- 
= 
PE: 
q : 
B. The 
fe 
i 
Whatre be 
done before | 
the applicat 
on of the 
Trepan, 
| 
uP 
| 


Cup the de. 
pon the 
“ond is, thar 
dryed 
th the 
Braine alfo 
nof medi- 
may have 
Nd fuch an 
re as it may 
igure of the 
hardnefle of 
ufually the 

the run. 

Ligature 

Inflamma.- 


cepted ,and 
the furures 
ures, 

without,to 
» a Feaver, 
Ife would 


ures of the 


tly placed 
, and chen 
yon come 
firme and 


may not 
ftrumenr, 
inely per- 
n, that{fo 
, and not 


that che 
y this fol- 


4 


Wounds of each 


Part. 


A Ginsblet or peircer to perforate the fcutl, before the fetting 
boo of the Trepan, 


A. shewes the bandle. 
B. The points which may be ferewed and fitted into the handle, 


Cuar. XVIII. 
A defiriptionof Trepans. 


erm Repans are round fawes,which cut the bone circularly more or leffe 

according to their greatnefle; muft have a pinne fanding in the 
middle a little further our than their teeth,fo co ftay and hold falt che 

Trepan that it ftirreneichertothis fidenor thar, untill ic bee entred 
mee and you have cut through the firft rableat the leaft:then you mutt take 
forth the pinne, left going quite through the bene, it may pricke or hurt the Cra/a 
Meninx, 

Wherefore when you have taken forth the pinne, you may fafely turne it 
about untill you have cut through both the tables; Your Trepans muft alfo havea 
cappe, or fomewhatto engirtor encompafle them, left no way hindred they cut 
more of the bone than we would, and in conclufion runne into the Mewanx. , 

They mutt alfo be anointed with oyle, that fo they may cut the more readily and 
gently, for thus Carpenters ufe to greafe their fawes, But you muit,during the time 
of the operation, often dippethem incold water, left the bone by attrition be- 
come too hor: forall hard folide bodies by quicke and often turning about, become 
hot; but the bone made more hotand dry, isalteredand changeth its nature, fo that 
after it is cut,more of it {cailes and falls away. 

Now you muft know thatthe bone which is touched with the Trepan,or the Aire; 
alwayes cafts off {cailes, for the fpeedier helping forwards:whereof, you mutt ftrew 
Uponit pouders made of Rocket, Briony,wilde Coucumber and eFriitolochia roots. 
When the bone is fufficiently fealed let this following powder be put upon ic, which 
hatha faculty to cover the bone with fefth, and toharden it with drynefie conveni- 
ent to its kinde, | 
_ RePalverstreos illyrice, Alocs, Manna thuris, Myrrha, ariftolochia ax 3}. Fieth be- 
ing by this meanes generated, let itbe cicattized by ftrewing uponit the rindes of 
Pomegranats anc Alome burnr. | | 

Neither thal the Chirurgion forcibly take away thefe {cales, but commit that whole 
Worke to nature, which uferh not to caft them off before that it hath generated fleth 
underthem, For otherwifeifhe doe any thing rafhly, hee bringsnew corruption to 


The harme the 
bone receives 
by being heae 
ted with che 
Trepan. 


What chiags 
haftcathe(cai- 
liag of the 

bone. 


The bone 
mult not be 
forcibly fcai- 
led, 


* 
* 
fi] = 
eres. 
et they m 
Mufi 
fy eh — 
Bi 
\ i} \ 
> | 
—— 
j 
| 
j 
a 
| 


. A fateand 
| convenient 
Trepamy 


The Trepanfurnifhed with its pinne, The Three fquare poirt. 


the Greene and Bloody 


the bone; as we more at large declare, when wee come to treate of the Car;e; 
Rottennefle of bones. vs 

He which ufeth the Trepan, muft confider this, thatthe head is of around ficure. 
and alfo the Trepan cutscircularly, and therefore it is unpeflible te cut the bene {9 «. 
qually on every fide, as ifit were performed upona plane body. Furthermore 
thicknefle of the {cullis not alike in all places; wherefore you muft looke, and 
whether the Trepan goe not more deepe on one fide than on the other, which yoy 
may doe by meafuring it now and then with a pinne or necdies and if yce finde th, 
itiscut deeper on one fide,thanonthe ether, youmuft prefle downe the Trep.p 
more powerfully upon the oppolite part. 

But feeing there are many forts of Trepans invented andexpreffed by many me o, 
yet if you weigh and rightly confiderthem all, you thall finde none more fate, thag 
that I invented, and have here delineated. For it cannot peirce one jot further into 
the fcull, than he pleafes that ufethit, andtherefore itcannot hurt either the Me. 
ningesorthe Braine. Anlron heador cover flayes itasa barre, that itcan pene. 
trate no further than you fhall thinke it requifite. 

This head or Cover istobe drawne upand downe, and fet higher and lower, as 
he which ufes it fhall thinke good ,and fo it will ftay the Trepan thatit fhall not go¢ 
a haires bredth beyond your intended depth. So that henceforwards there {hall be 
no Chirurgion, howfoever ignorant inthe performance of his Art, which by the be. 
nefit of {uch a Trepan may not performe this operation without any danger or feare 
Of danger of touching the Dara Adter;che hurting whercof puts the life in jeopardic. 


The figure of our Trepan opencd avd The figure of the [ame Trepan fitted and 
taken in peeces, put together. 


A. showes the whole handle or Brace of the 


A. Shewes the Brace and Trepan fitted 


Trepan. every point, | 
B. The place inte which the Trepam 

B. The Cover or Cap ofthe Trepan, ana fatted. 
C.C.C. The wpper end of the Trepan whic? 

C The ferale, to be fitted and put intothe Braise. 
D. The Trepas with its cower or cap upon 


D.D. The ferew pins which bold and flay the E. Theferule. — 
ferwle and Trepan. F, Afcrew pin bythe twining whereof 
Trepan is faftened in the Brace, 


E. The Trepan without hus pinne. G. Another {crew pin which fafines tha feral 


clofer to she Trepan, 


But if by 
icraper, you 
that fo it m 
mulets take 
part of the 
the bared 6 
then inthell 
prefent cal< 
applyed tot 
tollowing @ 

Butthe 
May De joy 
light upon; 
tach lude. h 
Nous fibers 
the {cull, a 


~*~ 
4 
[n 
ne 
| orth by M 
A cautionin fortil 
DALE 
: = B = = = 
> = 
: 
‘ 
{ 
+ 
| 
a 
| 


the Caries “Tn fteadof the other Trepan fet forth by the Author ,I haverhought fic to give yeu 
he figure of that Trepan that is here moft in ufe, and the fittefi therefore, as it is fer 
round figure fort by Doctor Crooke, 
he bene {o 
hermore rh, 
marke Allthele particulars of che Trepan 
» Which yoy , taken in funder,you may {ee united and 
my finde tha; fitted together in the other figure. Buc 


¢ the Trepap when you cannot bring outthe bone 
which you have cut off with your Tre- 
pan; then yeu maytake it forth wirh 
the Terebellum or Gimblet here expreft, 
that is, {crewing the point thereof into 


the hole made by the threefquare pin; 


y Many meg, 
re late, than 
t further into 
her the Mz. 


iC Cap Pene- 


ATerebellum or Gimsblet confiftivng fervein fteed of a Levatoric, 
of three branches, When withthe Gimblet you have 
drawne or taken forth that part of the 
{cull which was cut away by the Tre- 
. pan; ifthere {hall bee any fharpe fplin- 
ters in the fecond table, which may hurt 
and pricke the Adeninx, when it is heae 
vedup by the motion of the braine, 
they mu(tbe fhaved away and planed 
with this Lentill fathioned feraper, be- 
ing fo called, becaufe it hath the head 
thereof fafhioned and {meoth likea 
Lentill, left being fharpe it fhould hurt 
» and pricke the membrane in the {moo- 
thing thercof. 


nd lower 

fhal] not 
here fuall be 
ch by the be. 
Dger or feare 
ID jCopardie. 


pan futed and 


A Lentill- like cutting Scraper. 


WTA Pook 


But if by reafon of the thicknefle, the fcull cannot bee cut with this Lentill-like 
icraper, you may ufe the cutting {crapers anda mallet. The mallet muft be of leade, 
that fo it may fhake the braine as little as may be, But you muft diligently with your 
mullets take forth rhe fharpe fplinters, and peeces ofthebone. Bur if the fractured 
part of the feullbee fuch, that it will not admit that fetion which is requifite for 
the bared bone, as when the fraéture is upon the temporal! mufcle, or at the futures, 
then inthe fteed of one Trepan, two orthrée muft be ap plyed, ifthe mecefficy of the 
Prefent cafe fo require and that within a very {mall compaiffe ;but they muft not bee 
applyed tothe fraétured part, but nigh thereto, as we fhall fhew more atlarge in the 
follow Ing chapter. 

Butthe Trepans thal! be applyed fo neere to each other,that the ring of the fecond 
May de joyned with the ring ef the frft and third. But if'a fracture fhall happento 
light upon a future, then you muft not apply a Trepan to it, but ule two hereto on 
tach fide; he that thall doe orberwifé, {hall reare in funder the nervous and membra- 
Qous fibers, and alfo the veines and arterics by whichthe Dara Mater is faftned to 


the foul, and yeelds matter tothe Pericrasium, He which fhall apply one Tr 
that 


the handle of ehis Inftrument may alio 


These 
Leaden Mal- 
let. 


Why a/Tre- 

an ouft not 

applyed to 
the (ucures, 


Why twe 
Trepansate 
to be uledtos 
fra@ured fuc 
ture, 


| 
Wounds each Part. 367 
| 
3 
> 
7 
iif | 
1) 
pan fitted sm 
cpam which 
cap upon | 
s theferwle 
lo 


Of the Greene and Bloody Lie.to. L 


that is,but upon one fideof the future, he fhall notbeeableto getforth allthe Sey;-, yer 
which is fallen downe on both fides by reafonof the partition of the Menj,, 
which lyes berweene,and rifes up by the futures of the fcull. 
To conclude,whea for what caufe feever we cannot make ule ofa Txepan, we may 
imploy this inftrument, if fo bec as much of thebone bee bared as is neeafull. is 
made in forme of a paire of Compafies, andby meanesof afcrewmay bee operie| 
more or leffe as you pleafe. You asneed fhali require may change the points, anq 


put other in theit places, for they may bee fitted to one fide of the compatle wir) , 
{crew. 


Apaire of cutting Compalfes to cut forth the fenll. 


A. Shewes thz one legge of the cutting com. 
paffes, which as youcarry it about cuts the 
foul, 

B. The ferew which faflens the point tothe 
legge of the compafses. 

C.C. Two different points which may bee 
Servewed to the legge of the Compafes , a; 
neede fhall require. 

D. Agreat [crew which faftens gpon an Iron 
firing along ft which the one of the lee ges of 
the Compaffe running, may bee widened 
and firaitned as you pleafe. 


Secondly, 
tioned in the 

Thirdly, 
for rhefe 
under tie fir! 
white and ¢¢ 


@z Moreover it is fitthat the one legge of 
iuch cutting compaffes fheuld ftand firme 
G and fteddy, whileft the other is drawne 
circularly tocut, Wherefore it is fit you 
haveandron plate made full of little holes, 
whereinyoumay firmely ftay that legge 


lat there by nat 
of thecompaffe, leaft it waver againft your unlefle rhe 
will; itis requifite that this plate be croo pofing this « 
ked, (becaufe the head isround) that {0 4 Roorthiv. 
it may be ficted to any part thereof. the Braine,b 
pao. 
Piithiy 
A crooked Iron Plate fit to fuftaine and hold ficddy one legge of acqu 
the upon the head, 


athware it! 
then the op 
(Ais An is 
Contrary dil 
face aredraf 
log refol ved 
For as oft 
{trength on 
other. 
Neither 
but alfo anc 
motion, wh 
befides alfe 
But by 


* 
j 
; oF. 
7 
* 
.* 
~~ 
444 ve 
‘ 
-. 7 
= 
= 
=> 
> 
=| 
- 
= 
= 
~) 
= 
3 26 
> 
‘ 
‘ 
AL 
var 
4 
| \) - 
W 
\\ 9 
« 
9 
o @ 
af = 
4 we 
é q 
id 


B.10. 


all the Sante, 


M x 


and 
ppalie a 


Cutt ing Com. 
About cuts the 


pornt tothe 


hich may beer 
ompafies , 4s 


Irom 


the legges of 
bee wsdened 


one legac of 
i ftand firme 
r is drawne 
cit is fit you 
f lictleholes, 
ny that legge 
apainft your 
late be croo- 
nd) that fo 
reof, 


L1B.10s Wounds of each Part. | 36 9 


Another paire of Commpafes of the like nature and ule which may Le wide. 
ned ana firaightucd by 4 fcrew. 


i 
j 
peered 


‘ 


CHAP. xX 


Of the places of the {cull whereto you may not apply a Trepan. 


owe Irft of all,you thal not apply a Trepan,to abone that is fo broken that it is 4 bonealmolt 
Wes? wholy,orin the greater part thereof divided fromthe {cull bythevio- rhefcull mat 
lence of che ftroake,leaft by your weight and prefling of the Tzepan,you 
fOIce It downe upon Membrane. 
Secondly, you muft not apply one tothe fra&ured Sutures, for the reafons men- 
tioned in the former chapter. 

Thirdly, nor to that part of the forehead whichis a little above the eye-browes, A notable ct- 
for thefe reafons we gave you before in the twelfth chapter. For there isin that place 
under the firt table of the {cull it felfe, alarge cavitie replenifhed with acertaine bone. 
white and tough humor, as alfo witha certaine fpirituous and ayrie fub{tance, placed 
there by natuse, to prepare the aire which afcends to the braine by the Nofe-ehrills : 
vnleflethe Chirurgion ebferve and be mindfullhereof, he may bee deceived, fup- 
poling this cavity to be an Etfra@ure of the bone and adepreffion thereof. 

Fourthly, neither in the loweft parts of the fcull, leftthe marrowy fubfance of 
the Braine, by reafon ofits weight, fhould flidethrough the hole made by the Tre- 
pan. 

Fifthly, neither to the Bregma bones of Children, ‘asthofe whichas yet have not 
acquired jutt foliditie, ro endure the impreffion of a Trepan. 

Sixtly,nor to the tereples by reafon of the Temporall moufcle,the cutting whercof 

in the opinion of Hippocrates cautes convulfion of the oppofite part. For being cut Lited Gal cx. 
athwart it Icofes its proper action, thatis, to move and lift up the lower law; but 
then the oppofite Temporall mufcle being whole and perfect, ufing its trength, 
(his Antagoniftefuffering it, and not refitting or labouring any thing atall tothe 
contrary) itdrawes the fame Jaw to it, whereupon the mouth and all the parts of the 
face are drawne awry , and fuffer a Convulfion towards the found part,the other be- 
lng telolved according to Hippocrates his rule. 

Foras often asthe mufcles of one kinde are equall in number, mapnitude and A ruleout of 
firength oneach fide, the refolution of the one part, caufes the Convulfion of the 77" 


Other, What di 
Neither doth this danger alone arife from the cutting of the Temporall mutcle, modicie are 
rom cutti 


but alfo another, which is, that this mufcle when we eate and ipcake, is in perpetuall ‘e samen 
motion, whereby it comes to paffe,that being once cut,it is {carfe ever united again, mufcle, 
befides alfo the commiffure or joyning together of the {tonic bones lye under it. 


But by the fecond caution we are forbid to Trepan upon the futures; 
a 


We m. ly 
~ 
‘ 
@\ 
} | 
- 
| 
| 
| 
ta 
7 
*« a 4 
1 
ik 
| 


the Greene and Bloody 


A hiftory ‘ 


A hiftery. 


alfo many Veines, Arteries and Nerves are {pred over the fubftance thereof, 
by cutting ofthem, thereis danger of many and maligac fymptomes, as paing, jp. 
flammation, a feaver,aconvulfion not onely of the part it {elfe, but alio of the wig). 
body, whence laftly death enfues. 

Wherefore lec no Chirurgion be fo foole hardy, asto attempt the cutting of p});. 

mufele; foto Trepaa the bone which lyes under it; rather let him apply 
Trepan above it, or onthe lide thereof, oras necre to the aflected part ashe can, a. 
I did in a Gentleman caled Monficur ae Brete/che. 

He in the triumphant entrance of King Henry the fecond, intothe Citty of Px,;, 
was fo hurt witha {tone, thatthe Os Petrofam or {caly bone, was broken wit}; ;}, 
violence.ef the blow, andthe remporall mufcle was vehemently contuled, yer 
out any wound. I being called the next day (viewing the mannerof the hurr, ang 
the condition of the wounded part)thought good to bring fome Phy fations ,and Chi) 
rurgions with metoconfult hereof, of whom whenfome thought tt expedient pre. 
fently to dividethe Temporall mulele, thac baring the bone we might apply a Tre- 
pan, and {0 take forth the broken bones: I onthe contrary begun earnefily to with. 
ftand that opinion, citing that faying of Hzppecrates, ex libro de vulneribus Capitis 
wherein Chirurgions are forbidden to cut {uch mufcles, forfeare of the torcmen 
tioned fymptomes; alfo I cited experience, how that | had often obferved all thof 
which had this mufcle cut witha convuliion ; but chat it (honld be farre better 
that neere above the fracture the bone fhould be Trepaned, not rouching the Tem 
poral] mufcle at allifhecould, When allof them atthe laft had inclined to myo. 
oinion, I prefently divided the mufculous skinne which was over the upper part of 
the fraGture with a three cornered {eCtion: theday following which was the third 
of his difeafe I Trepaned him,and after I had done, fome few dayes after ,I tooke out 
fome foure {plinters ofthe broken bone ;and I put ina plaine leaden pipe,by whic) 
(I withing the patient ever when I dreft him to hold downe his head, to ftoppe his 
mouth andhis nofe, and then firive asmuch asin him lay to put forth his breath) 
much fanious matter came forth, which was gathered betweene the {cull and cra/s 
Afeninx, Other filth which ftucke more faft, I wafbed out witha detergent deco&i- 
op, injected with fuch a f{yring as is heere expreft; And I did fo much,God ble fling 
my endeavours, that at length herecavered. 


Plane leadew pipe for te carry forth A fyring fit to make injections 


the Sanics gathered under withall, 


The like chance and fortune befell Monficur de Piesne at the {cige of Atets, For he 
as hee fought at thebreachof the wall, hadthe bone ofhis Temples broken wit! 
a ftone ftrucke out of the adjacca: wall, by a peece of Ordinance thor from th: 
Empcrours campe; he prefently fell downe with the blew, and caft blood our ot his 
mouth, nofe and cares with much vomiting and remained dumbe & as it were {enl-- 
lefle almoft foureteene dayes, fo that he knew nonc of the by-flanders. He had often 
palpitations, and convulfiue twitchings, and his face was {wollne. His forehead bone 
was I repanedat the fide of the Temporal! mufcle by the hand of Peter Aubert tlic 
Kings Chirurgion : andalthoughonthe 25. day, foft flefh, endued with exqui- 
fite fenfe grew out of the hole made with the Trepan, whofegrowth could not bec 
hindred by Cathzreticke pouders, yet at the length he recovered. 

_ The Ancients called this kinde of growing fleth a [é. a Mufhrome) for thar 
it is {oft,and growes witha {inall roote and broad top like amufhrome:but it encrea 


fes and decreafes,according to the plenty of the flowing matter, and induftry of the 
Chirurgion hindring by art the growth thereof. 


This tieth ftinkes exceedingly, they commonly call it Ficws Santi: Piserg che 


- 
L Be 19. 


Figs° of 
gs 10 che bod: 
rofic and yi 


eleand little 


ftence, Iprins 


fent fomeums® 


whereupon 


ot che narurcy 


of the nature 


you mult apf 


fych are tae! 
lowes. 
R Sabine 5 


com 


fiefh come | 
icmuft 
(hall tall a 
| 
catharetick 


by the raf! 
and {o unc 
pcr, as we 
in the Zwés 
Dy (iohe th 
ly alfo by | 
ry, but fec 
trates with 
this lait {1s 
which 
Trepan w: 
foft and fi 
aryes it, 
more cert 
loot and 
rUDLION O 
of Aloe 
(mbes ls, 
forth wi 
the corru; 
found bo: 
Would be 
little gent 
eafily 
the bone \ 
fortiec or { 


* 
i 
| 
q 
, | 
i 
| 
| 
4 
te 
! 
4 


cutting of 
im apply his 


witty of Paris: 
KER with the 
cu, Yet with. 
the hurr, and 
ons and Chi. 
xpedicnt pre. 
apply a Tre- 
eftly to with. 
ribus Capitis 
the foremen. 
rved allthofe 
farre better, 
ing the Tem. 
ined to my o- 
Ipper part of 
vas the third 
rooke out 
ipe,by which 
to ftoppe his 
his breath) 
ll and Craff« 
ment decocti- 
,God ble fling 


Mets. For he 
broken with 
hot from the 
od our ot his 
it were fen{e- 
He had often 
bone 
y Aabert clic 
with exqui- 
‘ould not bec 


me} for thar 
Dut it encrea- 
duftry of the 


L | B+ 


of the narure and Cot 
of the nature of maligne warts, of excrefcences. But for to take away fuch Fangs, 


you mutt apply m 
fych are thele which ftrongly dry, and gently wafte and cate, fuchas this which fol- 


Wounds of each Part. 


Fiacrye. bis difeafe commonly hath its originall after this manner.Even 
from the excrements of nouri{hment,a certaine halfe putrid The gencratis 


Trees 


rofieand viicous humor {weats through the barke, and gathered rogether by a 


itrle growes 1000 a Muthrom,o blood melancholly both in temper and conit- 
ings from the broken veflells ofthe fcull and Craffs Mominx, which alfo is 


fent fometumes by nature for the neceflary repairing of the flefh in chefe parts, 


ertaine fungus brcedes, whichin Gslens opinion, favors of ‘partakes 
dcondition of the parts to which it growes; though in gene rall ic bee 


medicines which have a (pecifick faculty to wafte {uperfluous fieth, 


lowes. ee 
Sabine j.pulvert/entur fimul,a(pergatur care excrefcens.or clfe.R Hermoda- 


combustorum =.make a pouder for the fame ufe. But if fo be that chis fungous 


of, come to fuch growth, (as it often happens, as to equal] the bignefle ofan egge, 


it muft be tyed and ftraste cwitched, clofe to the roote with a filken thred; and when 
(hall tall away by reafon of this binding, the place muft be ftrewed with rhe fore- 
mentioned powders, for fo it willbe more certainely cured, thao with more acrid¢ 


catharetickes. 


ofthe corruption and Caries or of she bones of the Hea. 


and fo undergoing an unnaturall change of their proper complexion and native tem- 


per, as we fhall fhew more at large when we fhall treate of the reafon of the Carses 


inthe Lwes veserea. We fhall know this unnaturall change and corruption, partly 
by fight,that is,when from white theybecome to be yellowith,livide and black;part- 
ly alfo by putting downe a probe, whenasit meetswith nothing fmooth and flippe- 
ry, but fecles rough in many places, and befides alfo whenit enters and eafily pene- 
trates witha fmallthrufting downe into their fubftance, asif ix were fungous. Yet 
this laft figne may often deceive you,for [have diverfe times obferved rotten bones, 
which being bare had long foffered the injury of the ayre,to become fo hard thata 
Trepan would {carfe peirce them for it 1s putride humidity which makes the bones 
foft andfungous ; but the ayre by drying them exhaufts this humidiue and laftly 
dryes it, whence followes fich contumacious hardnefle. This ligne will bee farre 
more certaine, if the flefh whichis growne upen the bone be more {oft than is fir, 
loofe and have little or no fenfe or tecling. Youmay corre& and amendthis cor- 
ruption of the bone with cauteries afwell afiuall, as potential! or with the powders 


of Aloes,Gentian Aréfelochia,centaury, cortex pimijas, pre 
Re rads. Ireos Flor. av iftolochia an, 3}, centawr. 51). corticis 2%. Mifce frat 
vis ofss im[pergenaus. But if itbe much coruptev, it mult bee {craped 
forth with your Sca/pra. And you mutt expe the falling or {cailing of 
the corrupt bone from the found, and not forciblely precure it; for otherwife the 
found bone, which lyes under it, being as yet covered with 00 ficth growing over it, 
would be corrupted by the appulfe, or reuch ofthe ayre. Yet you fhal! by little and 
little gently move and fhake rotten bones with your probe, that fo they may more 
cafily {caile and with leffe trouble te nature. But note by the way that the {cailing of 


the bone which hath environed the Trepan,is commonly performed inthe fpaceot 


fortic or fifty dayes. So long alfo willthat cauled by the unufuall appulic or 


Here fometimes followes a corruptien and Sphacell of che fraGtured wiy wien 
the {cull is 


bones of the {cull upon wounds ef the bead.which happens either 

4) caufe they are touched by the ayre, which they are not fenfible of ; OF bones fome- 
thatthe Sanies putrifying and detained under them, hath infected 

them with like putrifaétions or by the cure unskillfully handled, they tea. 


by the raf application of fyppurating andoyly medicines becoming more Moy ft, 


The fignes of 
foulenefie of 


the bone. 


Cerrurt 
benes are 
fometim« 


hard, 


271 
4/ 
L, 210. 
ereor, ‘OtNar 
4 
45 Painc. In 
| le and | 
aS NE Can. whereupon a 
— 
| 
| 
y the 
ness 


L I 0, 


Of the Greene and Bloody 


The benefit 
of a valnerary 
petion, 


A Hiftory, 


A great falling 
away ofacors 


bone, 


Aph.4§ Sed .6 


The coverous 
crate of 
tors. 


of the aire, or application of a Cautery, or the afperfion of Cephalicke pouders. 


befides alfo inthe fame number of dayes broken bones may be united and joyn,; 
togcther by aC which is to them asa {carre.yet fometimes fooner, fomew hiles 
latter according to the variety of the ages, tempers and habits of divers men. 

But ifthe Carzes or Rottenaes can neither by thele fore mentioned remedies be oro» 
comeand amended, neither the loofed continuity agglutinated nor united, 
mutt give the patient a vulnerary potion, for hence Ihave found happy fucce( 
in many. Butfometimes not oncly acertaine portion of the bone, istaken 
Caries, but alfothe whole is often feazed upon with {phacell, and ail falls our. 
in Hippocrates opinion ,Lib.de vulweribus capitis, the bone of the feull being broker 
falls trom the found more or leffe, according to the violence ef theblew ; whic, 
allo is confirmed by experience. 

For which purpofe I thinke good in this place to recite a Hiftory, whereof I y 9, 


aneye witneffe whilft I ferved as Chirurgionin Psemont under the Marfhal de Moy.” 


tejan(who was the Kings Leiftenantthcre, It happened that a Lackey of Monficur 4, 
Goulaimes came tome to be cured; he had the Bregma bone of the left lide brojen 
witha {word, neither yet didthe fracture come tothe fecond Table, a few aye: 
after his recovery the bone being agglutinated and united, it came to paffe thay 2 
company of Ga/cosne fouldiers his countreimen came to 7arza,with whom one mor. 
ning he eate plentifully Tripe fryed with Onions and {pices ,& drunke a great quan. 
titic of ftrone wine. Whereupon he prefently fell into a conrinuall Feaver, and lof 


bis {peech and underitanding; hishead {welled, his eyes looked red and fery and 
as though they would have ftarted out of his head, Whichthings being confidered. 
I let him blood, having firft (by the Phyfigons advice) given hima Glitter, and ap. 
plyed to his head fuch things as were fit, afd alfo I laboured with FriGions and |). 
gaturcs of the extreamce parts to draw the humors downewards ; yet for all this the 
part of the head which was formerly affe@ed begun toimpoftumate ; which being 
opened,there came forth a great quantity of matter, and at the length the mu(cu. 
lous skinne and Pericraminm fincking downe, both the Tables of the {cull became 
putrified and rotten, as you might know by their blackneffle and flench. Now to 
take away this coruption, I applyed at certaine times actual] cauteries, both 
to amend the corruption and feparate that which was altered: but marke, after 
fome months {pace, agreat number of wormescame forth by the holes of the rot: 
ten bones from underneath the putrified fcull; which moved me to haften the (e- 
parauion and falling away of the putridbones, Whichbeing done, upon the very 
Cra(/a Mentax, which is more ftrange, in that place which nature had covered with 
fleth,I obferved three cavities of the largenefle ef ones thumbe filled with wormes 
adeut the bignefle of a points tagge, with blacke heads, diverfly wrapped amongtt 
themfelves, The bone which nature feparated was of the bigneffe of the palme of 
ones hand, fo that it was ftrange that fo large a portion of the fcull fhould bee cat 
off by nature, and yet the patient not dye thereof; for he recovered yet beyendal! 
mens expectation, but after the agelutination of the wound the {carre remained ve« 
ry hollow accordiug tothe decree of Hippocrates, For ficth doth not eafily grow 
opona Calws, becaufe itis a thing ftrange and fuppofititious by nature. betides,as 
afeatre 1s a thing more denfe than the skinne, fo is aCa/ws than the bone, {0 that 
through the more compaé fubftance thereof,the blood can neither freely, nor plex 
tifully {weat through for matter to regenerate fleth. Hence it is, that wherefocver 
any portion of the feull is wanting, you may there by putting too of your hand 
perceiveand fecle the beating of the Braine, wherefore the fcul! mult needes bee 
touch weaker in thatplace. Now to helpethis infirmity, withed this Lackey to 
weare a Cap made of thicke leather, fo more eafily to withftand external] injusics, 
and verily thereby he grew much better. | 

Now I thinke good in this place to lay openthe deceite and craft of fome Impo- 
ftorsfalily ftiling themfelves Chirurgions, who when they arecalled to cure wounds 
of the head,wherein any part of the {cull is loft sperfwade the patientand his fricncs, 
that they muft put a plate of gold inthe place of the {cull which is wanting. WWhere- 
fore they hammer it,tm the prefence of the patient, and turne it divers wayes 30d 


apply 


apply irto rhe 


cheir purfes, al 
ile coput che 
colt? defend th 
rf. For this! 
much as an fiat 
zed; neither 
for many yee! 
rine 
fed fi 
hy nature 
ruption of ira 
the | 


| 4 
\! 
| 


mint, which 
this followin\ 
R ‘aloph 
an. mifce 
thered ana 
of a ragge tw 
wormewoo: 
Winx left 
be hurtby tl 
bone lately | 
Bucas oft as 
untillalfches 
the followin 
breath, (topp 
This Inftum 
round polifl 


A fit 


And iett® 
tioned pow: 
gromaticke 

Ry, Feb. fal 
fixchad wtri 
bulljamt o 
comtey ned 
Purpote rod 
of its {elfe 


> . 
| 
| 
] 
4 
a 
+ - 
| 
' 
j 
a 
ij 
} 
OF 


r all this the 
hich Dcing 
the mufcy. 
ull became 
Now to 
eri¢s, both 
1arke, after 
S of the rot, 
nfien the {e- 
nthe very 
vered with 
th wormes 
d amongft 
le palme of 
Id bee caft 
tbeyondall 
mained vce 
afily grow 
belides,as 
ne, fo that 
» nor pien- 
herefoever 
your hand 
needes bee 
s Lackey to 
ul injuries, 


bme Impo- 
re wounds 
lis friends, 
ie. VV here- 
wayes’ and 

apply 


10. Wounds of each Part. 
ittott 
apply 
their 
much as 
zed; nent 
fot many yeeres without any harme to the Dalientl; for although lead havea cere 


othe part,the betrerto fic it; but prefently after they flicly convey it into 
es, and fo leave the patient thus cofened. Orhers bragge that they are 
le co put the dryedrinde of agourd into the place of the loft bone, and faften it 
nd the part; and thus they groflely abufe thofe which are ignorantin the 
*, For this ts fofarre from being done that nature will not fuffer nor endure fo 
an haire, or any other {mall body to be fhut up in a wound when it Is cicatti- 
her is the reafon alike of alcaden bullet which fhot into the body lyes there 


«familiarity with mans body, yet is ie at length (unleffe che denlity of the oppo- 
fed Acth, ligament, tendon, or fome other luch like fub{tance hinder) thruft forth 
by nature impatient of all ftrange bodies. And thus much of the rottenneffe and cor- 


ryption of fractured bones; now muft we {peake of the difcommodities which befall 


the Meninges by wounds whereby the feullis broken. 


— 


C HAPs xX X 
ofthe difcommodities which happen tashe Crafla Meninx by fractures of the feall. 


difcommodities chiefely happento the Cra//a Meninx by afracure 
of the {cull and raf Trepaning thereof; for it formetimes chances tv bee 
cat andtorne. Agelutination is aremedy for this difeafe, which Avppe- 
crates wifhes to be procured with the juice of Nepera (that is , of that cala- 
mint, which fells like Penny-aoyallj mixed with barly floure. In ftecd whereof 
this following powder haying the like faculty may take place. 

Colophon. Biij. Myrrha, aloes, maftiches , fanguinis Dracon, an. 3). croci, farcocohe 
an. 58. mifce cy fat fabtils. Buc to purge the blood and matter which is ga- 
thered and lyes berweene the Craffe Adeninx and {cull, you fhall putin a Tent made 
ofa ragve twined up fome foure or five double, and fteeped in fyrupe of Rofes or 
wormewood and alittle aqua vite; for thus you fhall prefle downe both the Cra// 
Meninx , \eft lifted up by the accuftomed and native pulfation of the braine, it fhould 
be hurt by the edges of the {cull yet rough by reafonof the fharpe {plinters of the 
bone lately Trepaned, and give treer paflage forth for the matter there contained. 
Butas oft as you thall dreflethe patient, you thall renue the foremenrioned Tent, 
untill allthe matter be purged forth, And fo often alfo you fhall preffe downe with 
the following inftrument the Dura Mater,and bid the paticat to ftrive to put forth his 
oreath, topping his mouth and aofe,that fo che matter may more ecafily be evacuated. 
This Inftument wherewith you fhall hold downe the Dera Mater, mult bavethe end 


round polifht and {mooth as it is here exprelt. 


Afit Inftrument te pre[i and bold dewne the Dura Mater,fa to make way for the 
pafface forth of the Saniesor Master. 


| 


And letthere be layd upon the Dara Adater ftrewed over with the formerly meo- 


Remedies fos 
the lacerased 


tioned powder, a fpunge moyftened and wrung forth of a drying decoction made of 


aromaticke and ccphali¢ke things, fuch as this which followes. 


Ri, Fol. fal vie, majoran, betonica, rofar, rub. abfinth, Myrtil. florwm chamam. melil. 
frechad Mriafque an, Adi}. 8. rad.cypert,calam. Aromat. 2100s angclice am. 


bulliamt omnia fecundum artem eum agua fabroram vine rubro, fiat ad 
asium. And in ftead hereof you may ule claret with alittle sgaa vita, that fo the 
conteyned matter may bee evacuated and dryedup, A {punge is fitter for this 
Purpote to draw than a linnen ragge orany other thing, both becaufe it is good 


A (gunge fic 
ca fosaent 


of its elfe to draw forth the humidity, asalfo for that by its foftneffe it withell, 
K k yeclds 


I B.Jo, 323 
pouders . 
ri 
OMCWhiles 
men, 
“dies be ores 
nited, you 
PY 
ken with ? 
20Uf. Fo, 
Ws Which 
ac 
ide brok; n 
f Cw aY es 
thar | 
mor. 
Quan- 
r, and loft 
confidered. 
and ap. 
AS and Li. 
| 


4 


the Greene and Bloody 


yeclds to the pulfation of the Braine. Then apply tothe wound and all the aa 


LikdeGuln. of Rofes, that fo the plafter may be the more cold and foft, For in Aippocrates Opi. 
Cape pion, nothing which is any thing heavie or hard muft be‘applyed to wounds of the 
head, neither mult it be bound with too ftraite,or hard a ligature for feare of Paine 
and in#fammation. 
Libs se falc For Galentel!s (ashehadit from Mantis) that a certaine man loft his by 
inflamination aad impoftumation arifing, for that an Apothecarie had ufed ;o, 
Thedifeom- ftraite a ligatureto his head and face; for this ftraite ligature fo prefled the future. 
meditiesofcoo tharthe fuliginous vapoures, which ufed to paffe through them and the pores o; 
the (cull, were {topped from paffing that way; befides, the beating of the Artezje: 
was intercepted and hindred; by which meanesthe paine and inflammation ep. 
creafed, thathis eyes were rent and broke in funder and fell forth of their orbe. 
Wherefore Hippocrates rightly commends an indifferent ligature, al{o hee fitly 
What eloathes qwifheth us to letthe emplaifters bee foft which areapplyed to the head, as alio 
we ul the cloathes wherewith it is bound up,to bee of foft and thinne linnen, or of Cor. 
ton, orwooll, VWhenthe patient is indreffing, ifthere come much matter ovr 
Howthepa- Of the wound, you fhall with himif hee can,to lye upon the wound, atid now and 
tienemultlye then by fits to ftrive to breathe, flopping hismouth andnofe, that fo the brains 
is hisbed.  tifted and fwollne upwards, the matter may bee the more readily caft forth; 
otherwife fuffer him to lye fo inhis bed,as he fhall beft like of ,and thal be leaf troy. 
blefome to him. 
You may with good fuccefle put upon the Crajfe Meninx oyle of Turpentine 
with 2 {mall quantity of aqua usta and alittle Aloes and Saffron finely powdred, to 
clenfeor draw furth the Sawées,ormatter, Or elfe, 
Re. Adehis ro/ar. farine bord. pulwer. alocs, Maftich. Ireos Florent, an. 36. 
vit é parum;\ct chem be incorporated together and make a deterfive medicine 
for the forefayd ufc. 
Pankas lib.6, Crafa Meninxis inflamed after Trepaning, and {wolne by a 
149.9% Phicgmen, that impatient of its place, it rifes out of the hole made by the Trepan, 
and lifts its felfe muck higher than the fcull, whence greevous fymptomes follow, 
Whercfore to prevent death, of which then wee ought tobee aftaid, wee mult 
inlarge the former hole with ourcutting mullets, thatthe matter contained under 
the fcull, by reafon of whofe quantity the membraine fwells, may the more free- 
ly breathe and paffe forth;and then we muft'goe about by the prefcript of the Phis 
fition to let him bleed againe, to purge and dict him. The infammatien thal! bee 
refifted by the application of contrary remedies, as this following foment 
tion, 
Remediesfor bint, altha, fen. pfilly, rof, rub, an.>j. folani, plantag. an. M,}, bullians in 
theinfamma- 4942 communi, ex qua fiat fotus. Anodyne and repelling medicines thal] bec 
dropped into his eares; whenit isexcecdingly fwolne, thatthe tumor may {ud 
sens. fide, you fhall caft upon it the meale or floure of lentils, or vine leaves beaten with 
Goole greafe. With all which remedies if the tumor doe not vanifh, and withal! 
Howwemat YOUCopjecturethat there is Pas or matter contained therein, then you mutt openthe 
open the Craf- Dara Mater with your incifion knife,sholding the point upwards and ourwards, for {0 
the matter will bé poured torthrand the fubftance of the braine not hurt nor touched. 
pottumare = Many other Chirurgions, and I my felfe have done this in many patients with vari: 
ous iucceffe. 
_ Por itis better in defperate caufes to try adoubrfull remedy than none at all, allo 
it oft times happens whither by the violence of the contufion and blew, or concie- 
Pe clotting of the blood whichis fhed, or the appulie of thecold ayre, or the 
ues application of medicines aprecing neither in tempe or complexion with che 
and remedies grecing neither intemper nor complexion wi 
of theblackes Craffa Meninx, oc alfoby the putritaction of the proper fubftance, that the 


it felfe becomes blacke. Ofwhich fymptome the Chirurgion muft havea 


great and {peciall care, 
Remedidifor mayft take away theblacknefle, canfed by the vehemenci¢ 
contufion, Of the contufion, you ,fhall putupon itoyleof egges with alittle 
an 


LI B. 


and 2 (mal! qu 
2 foment 
and 
come from co 
medic. | 
R Aqu« 
Melis 
fandater , 
‘ofthe ayre, 
Tereb. ve 
(hall be ulec t 
fine colour. 
Burt if this: 
applicatron of 
moylt and Gy! 
ders,burcthe h 
of senric thin 
part lo. bila 
ning ane hare 
john deViz0 co 

R aqua vit 
itwillaot yc 
ent, 

R 4q vite 
ad arét ur 
fare 
omnia 
be fo ftuvbor: 
tiacum( made 
the powder o 
ther we 
the Dura Mat: 
dclights in 
have no Phies 
dies, fuch 
dicines; the 
prelerve and 

Burif the a 
Braine, bur a 
motft vehem 
will endure 

But if by th 

fed fo much. 
able, lacke 
rowle p an 
dents BE DOr 
of the corrn 
heate, 


\ 
a 
| 
| 
p | 
q 
thd 


WIDE, OF 
PP olrates Opi. 
ounds of fh. 
care of Paine 


ft his cyes by 
had ufed tog 
the futures 
the pores of 
f the Arterjes 
nation {6 ep. 
cir orbe, 
alfo hee itly 
as alfo 
orof Car. 
Matter our 
atid LOW and 
lo the braine 
y caft forth; 
pe leatt trop. 


Turpentine 
powdred, to 


rent, an, 
ve medicine 


[wolne by a 
the Trepan, 
omes follow, 
1, wee mult 
ained under 
le more free- 

ofthe 
ion fhall bec 
g fomenta- 


j. bulliawt in 
nes {hal} bee 
or may fub- 
beaten with 
and withall 
openthe 
wards, for fo 
nor touched. 
ts with Vari- 


eatall; alfo 
Or CcoNncic- 
ayre, or the 
ion with che 
at the Dwré 
muft havea 


vehemenci¢ 
¢ Agua Piste, 
and 


Gall the aq. 


~~ 


375 
end a forall quantity of Saffron and Orris roots in fine powder; you fhall alfo | 
make 2 fomentation of difcufiing and aromaticke things boiled in water and wine; 
and Viger Cerat formerly defcrided fhall bee applyed, But if the harme 
come from congealed blood, you fhall withftand it with this following re- 
Re Aque the 5). tintiorum pulvercrs tritorum erect, Tongeas 
Melis refat farcocol. Biij, Leviter fimwl bulliant omnia, de colatura 
fyndatur , wigrities fuertt obliterata. if this come by the couch 
‘ofthe ayre, irihallbee helped with this following remedie. 
Tered. WER Mellis Vitellam Ovi unum, farin, hordet il. For the hare 
Vila 3 iJ. bultiant paululum, hits remcuy the 
hall be uled untill the blackuefle be taken away, and the membraile t¢cover its 
fine colour. 
But if this affeet proceedes from the rafh ufe of medicines, it muft bee helped by eecieints 
application of chings contrary. For thus the offcnce cauted by the toolong uic 


— 


: 


i 


eines the 
moyit and oyly medicines,maybe amended by ufing catagmati¢ke & cephalick POW= 
ders,burthe heate and biting of acride medicines, fla] be mitigated by the conuary ufe Diack 
of gentle things ; for both humide and acride things fomewhat long ufed make the 
part looke blacke, that trucly by generating and heaping up filth, bur this by the bur- 
ning and hardening heate, Bot when fuch blacknefle proccedes from putrifaction, 
ichn deVigo cororoends the following remedie. 
aqua Vila meliss rofat. $f, But if the affeat be srowne fo contumacious that Medicines a2 


a‘ 


twillaut yeclu to this gentle remedy, then this following will bee convenr- 


cutretact on _ 
ent Oi the 


R Aq vite mellis pulver, Mercur.3j. unica ebulitsone bulliant fimul 
siact 3\\8. farcecol. myrrba, aloes, am, 3j.vins albs bont oasriferi, 3). balliant leviter 
omnia jimul, colentur ad ufum dicium, But if the torce of the pucrefacion 
be fo ftuvborne, that it will net yeeld to thefe remedies, it will be helped with eg 
tiacwm(made with plantaine water in fteed of Vinegar )ufed alone by its felfe, er witla 
the powder of Mercury alone by it felfe,or mixt with the powder of Alome. Nei- 
thermuft we bee afraid toufefuch remedies efpecially in this extreame dileale of 
the Dura Mater for in Gadews opinion the Craf/a Adeninx the fculiis Trepaned 
dclights in medicines that ate acride, that is, trongand very drying,<{pecially if it (, Jemns cas 
have no Phlegwiow, and this for two reafons; the firftis, for that hard and dry bo. fily en=_ 
dies, fuch as membranous bodies are, be notcafily affeGed unlefle by flrong me- 
dicines; the other is. which muftbe the chiefe and primecare of the Phyiition,to 
preferve and reftore the native. temper of the part by thingsof like temperto it, 
Butif the auditory paflage not onely reaching to the hard membranes of the 
Braine, but alfo touching the Nerve which defecnds inroitfrom the braine, foffer 
moft vehement medicines, though it be placed {0 necre; cestaincly the Cra//a Mentnx 
wilendure them farre more eafily and without harme, | 
But if by thefe meanes the putrifaction be not reftrained, andthe tumor 5ceencrea- 
fed fo much , that the Dwra AZater rifing farre above the {cull, remaines unmove- 
able, blacke and dry, and the patients eyes locke fiery, ftand forth of his head and 
rowle np and downe with unguietnefie andaphrenfie, and thele fo many Signesof 
dents be aot iugitive, but con{tant ; then know chat death is at hand, both by reafon deathathand, 


corrmpticn of the gangrene of 2 noble part, as alfo by extinction of the matiue 
heate, 


Kk a CAHP. 


4 


a 

| 
| 
| 
| | 

t 


" 


The opening 


ef the Vena 
Puppase 


A aif cuTing 
fomentatior, 


the Greene and Blood: 


Of the care of the Braine being fo aken, or moved, 


MVE Ec havetormerly declared the caufes, fignes and fymptomes of tig 
NGAG)/é concuffion,or fhaking of the Braine, without any wound of the mu(culoy; 
A\/S) skinne, or fracturcof the bene; wherefore for the prefent I will treare 

Therefore in this cafe, forthat there is feare that fome veffellis broken 
under the fcull, it is fit prefently to open the cephalicke veine. And let bloud bee 
pientifully taken according tothe ftrength of the patient, asalfo relpectively to 
the difeafe both which is prefent , and like to enfue, taking the advice of 

Then when you have fhaven away the haire, you fhall apply to the whole head 

and often renue the forementioned cataplafme, Ex farémss, feo vofacce, 
and other likecold and moyft repelling medicines. But you mutt efchew cry, and 
too aftringent medicines muft bee fhunned, fuch as are Pagwentum de bole and the 
like; for chey obftruc too vehemently,and hinder the paflage forth of the vapouis 
both by the futures and the hidden pores of the fcull, WVherelorethey doe no: 
onely not hinder the inflammation, but fetch itwhenit is abfent, or encreafe it, 
whenprefent. Thebelly fhall beeloofed with a glifter,and the acride vapours 
drawuefrom the head; fer which purpofe alfoit willbee good, to make friGions 
fromabove downewards, to make ftraight ligatures on the extreame parts, to 
faftcn large cupping-glafles with much flame tothe fhoulders and the originall of 
the {pinall marrow, that fo the revulfion of the blood running violently upwarcs to 
the braine, and ready to caufea phlegmon,may bethegreater, The following day 
it willbe convenient to openthe Vena Pappis, whichis feated uponthe Lambda! {u. 
ture, by reafon of the community it hath with the veines of the braine, and fhutting 
the mouth and nofe to ftrive powerfully to breathe. For thusthe membranes {well 
up, and the blood gathered betweene them and thefcull is thruft forth; bur not thar 
whichis fhut up in the braine and membranes, of whichifthere be any great quanti- 
ty, thecafe isalmoft defperate, unleflenature affifted with ftronger force, caltit 
forth turned into Pas. Butalfo aftera few daycsthe vena fronts or forehead veine 
may be epencd, as alfothe Temporall Arteries and Veinesunder the tonguc, that 
theconjunc matter may bee drawne forth by fo many open paflages, 

In the meane {pare the Patient muft keepe a {pare diet, and abftaine from winc,¢!- 
peciaily untill che fourteeuth day, for that untill that time the fearefull {ympromes 
commonly reigne. But repelling medicines muft be ufed untill the fourteenth day be 
paft,thenwe muft come to difcuffing medicines, beginning with the more milde, 
as is this following deco tion. 

R.rdd, Alth,3vj. ireos, cyperi, calamsi arom, an. 3ij. fol, falvia, Majoran, betonic. 
. chamam, melsl.rof. rub. flachad.an, M6, falis com, bulliant omnia final 
canaum artem cum vinorub, Cr agua fabrorum, fiat deceétio, Letthe head bee wafhed 


== 


Acationin therewith twife aday witha fpunge, Butvet when you doe this, fee that the head 


Raneneing *€ bee notto much heated by fucha fomentation, or any fuch like thing, for fearc of 


paine and inflammation. 


Then you fkall apply the cerateof Vige which hath power to difcuffe indifferent 
ly, todry, and draw forththe humors whichare under the fcull, and by its 2roms- 
“74 force and power toconfirme and ftrengthen the braine; it is thus defcri- 

Ry. Farfarisbene trituratiziij. farin, lentium rof, myrtiller. foliorum 
moran 5}. clam, chamamel. melilan, M,&. nuces cupre/s 
mum}, oles rofacci, cy chamam.an. Ziij. cera albe tharis, maffichis, an. 
myrrbe 3ij, pul verem qua redics debent redacits, liquefactis oleis cum 674, 


Lt Bs 10. 


mt 


vig? faith, 
co his av eo 
Marble, he lay 
and eares, anu 
ewenty 
broths with ili 
chall his! 
which have th 
dumbe; 
motion. Tina 
which could h 
seafon of the : 
Yer rbere 
any impoliun 
they deny tha 
buc the author 
of the reafons 
thofe which h 
from their 
But Galen, 
its felfe by thx 
like happen 
was told | 
certaine youn 
ence hanging 
full upon the 
and was befic 
with other h 
appeared no | 
{weate with o 
Pus flowed 
tomes, and 
Now for til 
vered of a g 
any of the ve 
But Guide 
of the 
In the yea 
at Turin 
weund wich 
of the bone, t 
Which obs 
which was p 
tion of the b; 
prefence of 
with reaton - 
there 
hot and fubr 
dy they doe 
inthe diffe 
iat will (win 
water prefe 
Lafily , f 
layd upon a 
Of leather; 
our,thae my 


f 
ph 4 
; 
What ehe 
co >cuffion of 
the braine is, 
q 
A defcription 
Cerate, 
4 
4 
q 
>» 


IB: Jo. 


MCs Of the 
will treare 


1] 1S broken 
t bloud bee 
pect ively to 
advice of 


whole head 
oxy mete. 
cw cr ang 
bele and the 
the vapours 
Cty doe noz 
encreafe ir, 
ide vapours 
ake triGtions 
C parts, to 
Originall of 
Upwards to 
plowing day 
ambdall fu. 
and fhutting 
tbranes {well 
Out not thar 
quanti- 
bree, caltir 
ehead veine 
onguc, that 


{ympromes 
enth day be 


am, betomic. 
nia fimenl [e- 
bee wafhed 
bat the head 
for feare of 


indifferenl* 
iis aroma- 
thus de{crie 


mcr 
es cupre/ss 
$s, Bil). 


om wine,cl- 


LB; 10. We ounds of each Part. 379 


ti fceantur fimul, Gr frat mixtura, guecrit inter formam emplaftri & ceroti, 


faith, that one of the Duke of rbins Gentlemen found the virtue hereof AHiftory, 
eo his great good. Hee fell froma his horfe with hishead downewards upon hard 
Marble,he lay as it hee had beene dead, the blood eulht out of his nole, mouth 
and cares, and all his face was {wollenane of alivide colour; hee remained dumbe 
ewenty dayes, taking no meat but diflolved gellics, and Chicken, aad Capon 
broths with {ugar; yethe recovered, but loft bis memorie, and faultered in his 

chall his liteafter. To which purpofe is that Aphorifme of Hippocrates ; Thole 44.63 gas 

whichhave their Braine fhaken by what caufe foever, mutt ofneceflity become 
dumbe; yeaallo, as Gales obferves in his commentary, Joofe both their fenfe and 

otion, That Cerat isnot of fanall efhicacie, but of marvellous and admirable force, 
which could hinder the gencrating of an abicefie, which was incident to the braine by 
seafon of the fall, 

Yet there be many men fo farre from yeelding to reafon, that they ftifly denie.chae 
any impoltumation can be in the braine and ave menting this errour with another; Thatthers 
they deny that anywho have a portion ot the braine cut off can recover,or rii¢againe; 
butthe authority ofancient writers and experience doe abundantly refel! the vanitie biame. 
ofthe reafons whereon they relye.Now for the firft inthe opinion of Azppocrates; If 


thofe which have great paine in their heads have either pws, water or blood Howing Ayh,10,[e8 Gs 


from their Nofe, mouth or eares,it helpes their difeale, Gat 
But Galem,Rbafes and Avicen afhrime that Samies generated in the braine disburdens «was. 

its {elfe by the nofeymouth or caresjand I my felte have obferved many whohad the 6°” * 
like happen to chem. Avicen 
exit, fem,3 


Iwastold by Prethaws Cowles Chirurgion to Monficur de Langey, thathe fawa 
certaine young man in the towne of Mans, who often ufed to ring agreat bell, hee A Hifory. 
ence hanging in {pert upon the rope, was {natch up therewith and {ell with hishead 
full upon the pavement: he lay mute, was deprived of hisfenfes and underftanding, 
and was befides hard bound in his belly. Wherefore prefently a feaver and delirium 
with other horrid fymptomes affayled him, for he was not Trepaned becaufe there 
appeared no figne of fracture in rhe fcull: onthe feaventh day hee fellinto a great 
{weate with oftea{necfing, bythe violence whereof a great quantity of matter and 
Pu flowed forth of his eares, mouth and nofc, then hee was caied of all his fymp- 
tomes, and recovered his health. 

Now for the fecond, Ga/es athrmes that he faw a Boy in Smiraa of Sonia that recoe 
vered of a great woundof the braine, but yet fuch an oneas didnot penctrateta 4”. aft 
any of the venrricles. “ad 

But Guido of Cauliac faith, he faw one whic) lived and recovered after a great por. 
tion of the braine fell out by reafon ofa wound received onthe hind part of his head. 

In the yeare of our Lord 1528, while | was Chirurgion tothe Marthall of 
sejan at Turiw, Lhad one of his Pages in cure, who playing at quoites recciveda 
Wound with a ftone upon the right Bregma with a fracture,and fo great an efiractute 
of the bone, the quantity of halfea hafell Nut ofthe braine came forth thereat. 

Which] obferving, prefently pronounced the wound to bee deadly ; a Phyfition 

which was prefent contradi&ed my pinion, aflirming thatfubftance was no por- 

tion of the braine, but a certaine fatty body. Buri with reafon and expericnce im 

Prefence of agreat company of Gentlemen, convinced the pertinacie of the Mans 

with teafon ; for that fat cannot begenerated under the feull, for although the pares Why far can 
there contained be cold, yet becaufethey are heated by the abundance of the 
hot and fubrle animal fpirits,and the heate of vapours rifing thither fromall the bo- gun, 

dy, they doe not fuffer tat to concreate about them. Bur with experience, for that 
inthe diffe Qing of dead bodies, there was never any fatobférved there ; befides alfo 
‘at will {wimme on the top ef water;but this fubftance as marrowie, calt into the 
Water Drefently funke to the bottome. 

Lafily , fat putto the fire becomes liquide and melts ; but this fubftance being 
layd upon a hor Iron, became dry, fhrunke up and contracted it felfe like a peece 
Of leather; but diffolved not at all, Wherefore all thofe which were prefent cryed 
Our,that my judgement was right of that fubftance that came forth ofthe fcul!), Yet 

Kk 3 though 


Signesof a 
fatay fubs 
fiance, 


| 
milde,fuch 
| 


in particular 


ef wounds of 


the face. 


378 ces Of theGreene and Bloody 


30 


though itwas cut away,Page recovered perfectly, but that he continued deafe all his 
life after. 


Cuwar. XXITI, 


Of the wounds of the face. 


A ving treated ofthe wonnds ofthe head by their eaufes,fignes and cure, 

it followes that we now {pcake of the wounds of the face, if bur for this 
that when they are careleffely handled, they leave deformed {carres jn 
J the meft fpeciousand beautifull part of the body. The caufes are the 
_ fame which are incident to the fcull, thacis,externall. Butthis may bee 
added to the kindes and differences of the wounds,that the life may be our of danger 
though any one whole part of the face, (as the care, eye, nofe, lippe) may bee cur 2. 
way by awound, butnot fointhe head orfevll, Wherefore beginning at the 
wounds of theeye browes, weewill profecute inorder the wounds of the other 
parts of the face. 


Athingtobe  Thisischiefelyto bee obferved in wounds of the eye-browes, that they are of; 


oblerved in 
wounds otthe 


eyesbrows. 


times cut foovertwhart, that the mufcles, and flefhy pannicle which meove and |if 
them up, are wholy rent and torne. In which cafe the eye idces cannot be opened 
andthe eyes remaine covered, and asit were thutupinthe cafes of their lids; 
that even-afrer the agglutination of the wound, if the patient would looke upon any 
thing, he is forc’d to hold up the eye-lids with his hand; with which infirmity I have 
feene many tioubled, yet oft times aot fo much by the violence of the wound, as 
by the unskilfulaefle of the Chirurgion who cured them ; thatis, by the negligenr 
application of beulfters, an unfit ligature and more unfit future. In thiscafe the skils 
full Chirurgion which is called to the patient fhall cut off as much ofthe skinne and 
ficfhy pannicle as {hall fervethe eyelids, that fothey may by their owne ftrength 
holdeand keepe open, without the helpe of the hand:then he fhall fow the wound as 
is fit,withfuch a ftitch asthe Furriers,and Glovers ufe,and then he fhall poure thereon 
fome of the balfome of my defcription, and fhall lay fuch a medicine to theneigh- 
bouring parts. 

R rofar album. over nu. ij. boli armens, fanguinis Dracon. Maftich an 3}, 
tentur fimul, fist medicamentum, Then let the part be bound with a htting ligature. 
Afterwards you (hall ule Emplaft. de gratia Dei, Empl, ae Betomica, Diacalcitheos, 
fome other like, untill the wound be cicatrized. But fuch like and all other wounds ¢! 
the face may be eafily healed, unlefle they either bee aflociated with fome maligne 
{ympromes, or the patient body be repleate with ill humors. 


There {ometimes happens a quite coatraryaccident in wounds of the eye-browes, 


quitecon 
trary to the 
falling downe 


of checye- 


that is, when the cye-lids ftand fo up chat the patient 1s forc’dto fleepe with his eyes 
open, wherefore thofe which are fo afie&ed are called by the Greeks 
Thecaufe of this atfe@ is often internall,asacarbuncle or other kinde of ab{ceile, as 
a blow or ftroake. It thall be cured by acrooked ot femicircular incifion made above 
the eye: liddes, but fo that the cxtreames of the femicircle bend downewards, that 
they may be preffled downe and ioyned as much as is needctull to amend the fil 
neffeof the eye-lidde. But you muft not violate the griftle with your Inftrumen’, 
for ~ they could no more be lifted up; the refidue of the cure mult bee performes 
a$ fit, 


CAHP. 


N 
va! 


head of che cur 
che eyes, let it 
with the end o 
put three or foi 
feedes are thot 
are not falined 
thiscafe, you 
lidsthe further 
by cently pret 
dy; chis is the 


The dckin: 
lid: 


All firange 
of a dozen 
fo put into th 
ing parts. 
coms Je | 
may trequen 
the whire otf 
more powcr 
femin. port ul.) 
\ 

But note, t 
better penetr 
hurtful! toch 
ipirits, For 
wine of med 

ihave on 
fuch like mex 
Apple Of the 
Mour ran fo; 

The milke 
Bates paine ag 
pote alfo the 
Into the eyek 


pa 


— 
1B, 
¢ 
a 
é -_— 
4 
q 
ij 
met. 
| a 
4 
4 
nf 
4 
‘ 
| 
% | 
if 
' 
4 


es and cure, 
but for this, 
{carres in 
iufes are the 
his may bee 

COf danger 
jy bec CUT 2. 
noing at the 
f the other 


they are oft 
and lift 
tbe opened, 
heir lids; fa 
KC UPON any 
rmity | have 
> wound, as 
he negligent 
cafe the skile 
e skinne and 
w ne ftrength 
he wound as 
oure thereon 
to therneigh- 


ich 3}, 
ing ligature. 
alcitheos, Or 
cr wounds ef 


ome maligne 


eye-browes, 
wich his eyes 
Agophtbalmi. 
t ab{cefle, as 
made above 
ewards, that 
end the 
Inftrument, 
performed 


CAHP. 


Wounds each Part. 


‘ 


yy 


Cap. XXIII, 
Of the wounds of the eyes. 


er Ounds of the eyes are madeby the violence of things prickings cutting, 
Ui ruifing,or orherwife loofing the continuity. But the cure muft alwayes 

WVevaoc varied according to the variety of the caufes and differences, The firft 
head of the cure is, that ifany ftrange and heterogeneous body fhall be fallen into 
theeyes, let it be taken forth as foone as you can, lifting and turning upthe eyelid 
with the end of a fpatule. Butif youcannot difcerne this moate or little body, then 

rthree or foure feedes of Clary, or Oculus Chriffé into the pained cye. For thele 
feedes are thought to have a faculty to clenfe the eyes and take out the moats, which 
are not faftned deepe in, nor doe too ftubbornely adhere tothe membranes, For in 
thiscafe, you fhall ufe this following inftrument, for hecrewith wee open the eye- 
lidsthe further, putting it betweene them and the eye, and alfo keepe the eye fteddy 
by cently prefling it, that fo withour mullets wee may pull out the extraneous bo. 
dy; thisis the figure of fuch an Inftrument, 


The dcliniation of a Speculum oculi, fit to dilateaud bold funder the eye- 
lids ana kcepe the eye fleddy ; 18 [a made,that st may be dilated and 
contracied according to the of the eyes. 


All firange bodies taken out, let this medicine be put into the eye. Take the ftraines 4 repercuttive 
of a dozen egges, let them be beaten in a lead Mortar with a little Rofe water, and bepatine 
foputinto the eyes but let this repercoffive be layd upon the eye andthe neighbou- ©” 
ing parts. Rv, albumin ovor.wu.iiij. pulver.alumins roche combufti (imgwings Dra- 
conis 3}, 1que agitentur fimul, makea repercuflive, which 
may trequently ufe, Or elle apply cheefe curds well wrung ,mixed with Rofewater, 2pp!sed ro she 
the white of an Egge, and as much acacia as thall fuffice. This which followeth doth 

More powerfully {tay the flowing humor, arab tragac, pfils) cydon. 
[emin. fiat mucag.cum aqua plantag (olan. 
celyri#m, of which you may drop fome both withia and about the eye. 
But note, that all {uch remedies muft beapplyed warme, both thacthey may the Things 
ter penetrate by their moderate heare, asalfo for that all a@uall cold things are 
hurtfull coche eyesandfight, becaufethey dull che fight by incruftating the vifive the eves, 
ipirits, For 1 have knowne many whohave become dull of fight by the frequent 
bung of medicines actually cold tothe eyes. 
Thaveon the contrary {eene net a few, who haverecovered with the fir ufe of 
fachlike medicines, who have had any partoftheir cye (fo it were not che pupils or 
Apple of the eye) fo pricked with a needle orbodkin, that muchof the watrifh hu- 
Mour ran forth thereat. 
The milkeof a woman which fuckles a girle (forthat is reputed the cooler) miti- Anodyneme 
Bates paine and clenfes. if it bee milked out of the Dug intotheeye ; to which pur- {ces'* 
pote alfo the blood of f urtles, Pidgeons or Chickens muchcenduces, beingdropt 
into the eye by opening a veine under their wings. Alfothis following cataplafine 
allwagcth paine and inflammation, and hinders defluxion, being applyed te the eye 
an 


* 
— 
IB. Io 10. 375 
cafe all hi 
| 

a 

| 3 

| 
4 

J 

‘ 


4 


380 


— 


the Greene and Bloody 


andthe adjacent parts, Re Carmi pomorum (ub cimere calsdo decociorwm vitellos 
rum num, rij, cafsie fifule recenter extrata , mucaginis pfild, althee cy cydon, an. 
farin. hordes parum,:ncorporentur omnia fimul,fiat cataplafma. 

Alfo fheepes lungs boyled in milkeand applyed warme, and changed as they 

erowcold, are goodtoaiwage paine. Butitthetoo violent heateand paine {hal} 
Narcotickes’ not yeeld tofuch medicines but require more vehement,then Fe/sorum Hy 
fib cineribus coquatar ,atque im mortario cums mucagine femtnis piily donior extract 
aqusisfolani & plantag.piftctarsthen let this medicine be wrapped in a linnen cloath and 
applyed tothe eyes and temples, The mucilages of Pféwm, or Flea-wort, ang 
Quince fecdes extracted in a decoGion of Poppy heads and mixed with a little Op,, 
am and Rofe water, are ufed forthe fame purpofe, But when there is necde of deter. 
and farcoticke medicines, then R /yrap.rofar. famic. rute i, 
medicines. 4/005 Lote, olsbans an. them for the forefayd ule. The galls of Scates, Hares ang 
Pawridges diffolved in eye-bright and fennell water, are fit for clenfing {ich 

wounds; as alfo this following Colyrium., 

Aqua bor dei 3}. mellis defpumati 3 ii}, aloes ter loteis aqua plamtagin® and facchay; 
cand. an 3). fist colyrinm. Allo this enfuiog medicine is very farcoticke. 

A farcoti-ke R macagin. gummi olibani, arabici, tragacanth, farcocol. imag. bordes an, 
aloes ter lote ag. v0/aram 3), cernf, site lete, batia prapar. an. fiat COMYY tute, 
Bur here you muft note, that the coate Admata often iwells lo much by reason 
of awuundor fome other injurie, and ftands foforthbythe falling downc of hy- 
mores, accciic and mixture of flaculencies, that it hidesthe whole Pupsile, and hangs 
forth of the eye-iids, like as if it were an unnaturall flefly excrefcence, and it looses 
the native colour, and lookes very red; fo that the eye can neither bee fhut nor ope. 

ned. | 

Wherewith a young Chirurgion being deceived, determined to cut away this pro: 
cubcrancie Of the Adsata, asthough it had beene fome fuperflueus flefh, and chen 
to walte ir with cathereticke powders, had I not forbidden him,telling him of the 
certaine danger of blindneffe which would thereupen befall the patient. Wherefore 
i pre{crided a fomentation/of chamomile, melilote, leaves, wormewood, rue, 
fennel], and anifeedes boyled in milke with the rootes of Orris and marigolds. Then 
I prefently added this following fomentation, beingmore powerfull and dry- 
ing. 

Adryingfoe ~ K Nuces euprefst, gallar. balawft. an.3j.plantag. abfinthbippuris, fle. chamem:rof. rub 
menvations 4m, 11,13, ullzant fimulcum aqua fabrorum,cy fiat decodium pro fotu cam Ipongia, 

Befi.ies alfa you onay apply a cataplafme made of barly and beane flowre, the pow- 
ders of Malticke, Mirrhe, and Aloes,and fome of the laft defcribed decoGion. The 
tumor begining to decline; I droprthe flowing liquor intothe eye, which hatls 
very aftringent, drying and ftrengthening faculty. 

Roait a new layd egge in Embers untill it be hard, then pill off the thell, rake forth 
the yolke ,and in place thereof put a {cruple of Roman Vitrioll in fine pewder,:b« 
put ition alinacncloath and wring ithard forth into fome cleane thing, and droppe 
thereof for {ome dayes into the eye, with alittle fmithes water wherein Sumach 20 
Rofc leaves have beene boyled. I have feund by experience the certaine force of this 
remedy; but if notwithftanding there be a true flethy excrefcence vpon the cvate 
sata, it may be taken away by this following powder. 

A medicineto R Ofsis fepia. te fia evorum Calcinate an. fiat pulvis. Calcined Vitriole,burttt 
confumea f= Alome andthe like may bee commodicufly ufed to this purpofe. Yer you mult wa- 


thyexcre{cence 


ting. no harme enfue thereof, 

For diverfe times acride humors fa!] downe into the eye with {uch violence, 2 
they breake the Horny coate,whereupon the humors of the eye are poured out. Ke 
member alfo, that in difealesof the eyes, the Patient lye with his head fomewhat 
high,and that he keepe fhut not only the pained, but alfo the found eye, becavie ref 
is al wayes acceflary for the grieved part. But one eye cannot bee moved without 
{ome motion of the other by reafon of theconnexion they have by their opticke 20 
moving uerves, both the Meminges,the Perscranium, Veines, and Arterics;which - 

che 


L ry. 1O- 


rhe caule thai 


Butif we Cht 
the defluzior, 
remedy agai" 
ence, that ms) 
ehat they. 
dour and (hia: | 
ton. 

The truth) 
Auftine Fric 
rurgins 
began by litt) 
was CVacUatcc 
wearic of th: 
forth rherect 
cuation being 
he wasin dan; | 
Seton in his n 
fight, he yet \ 

[ alfoonce | 
Phyfition Hel 
neffe, who be! 
feafe being by 

Wherefor 
downe in wri 
youre practic: 

cad, that for 
fingers plucke 
hereof as you 
of aconvulfio: 
in the pincers, 
inthe midfot 
rhe leflecome 
ewharting. tha; 
the cauteryor 
that {0 ir may: 
able, let him 
three of foure 
white ot en eg 
the fame 
me 

lowing the ne 
the former 
moilten the S; 
wntill che ulce 
with this folle 


Pulvers Incas, 


fiat medican 


“icer. For ith 


ott, 


| 
withom bis Make ule Of all iuch things, and alwayes lay repercuffives abour the eve, thst 


_ 


IB, 10. 


vitellos 
an. js 


eed as they 

Paine {hal} 
Cy je 
0 Cloath and 
WOrt, and 
1 2 little Opin 
ede of deter. 
Yule i, 
Hares and 
enting fuch 


and facchar: 


AT. an. 
fiat ture, 
ich by reafon 
liownc of hu- 
la, and hangs 
and it looles 
hut nor Ope- 


way this pro- 
efh, and then 
hin of the 
» Wherefore 
1ewOod, ruc, 
igolds. Then 
full and dry- 


‘re, the pow- 
oGion. The 
which hatha 


ll, rake forth 
sewder, then 

and droppe 
Sumach and 
force of this 
he cvate 44- 


itriole burtit 
Bou mult wa- 
iccye, that 


ylence, that 
red out, Ke 

d fomewhat 

becaule ref 
ved without 
r opticke and 
iesswhicb 15 
che 


Lrs, 10. Wounds of each Part. 


the cafe that when the one fuffers,the other in fome fore partakes therewith, 
Burif we cannot prevaile by all thefe formerly prefcribed medicines fit toftay ASetons 
the defluzion, thea it remaines,that wee apply a Seton tothe necke; for it is afingular 
remedy againft invercrate defluxions intothe eyes. For we know by dayly experi- ceratedefuxis 
ence, that many who have had their fight dulled by a long and great detiuxion, {0 — 
that they. were almoft blinde, have by little and little recovered their former fplen- © ~ 
dour and fharpencfic of fight, when matter once beguntobee evacuated by the Ses 
truth hercofappeared in the Italian Goldfmith, who dwelt neere the A 
Avftine Friers. For he having ufed many medicines of diveife Phyfitions and Chi- 
rurgions in Vaine, when he was almoft blinde,he applying a Seton by mine advice, 
began by little and little te {ee better according to the quantity of ihe matrer which 
was cvacuated, untill at length he perfedily recovered his fight. But at laft growing 
wearie of the Seton which he bad werne forayecre (although matter came dayly 
forth thereof) yet he would have it taken forth, and healed up; but this way of eva. 
cuation being {hut up, and the humor againe beginning to flow into his eyes, fo that 
he wasin danger to become blinde, hee called me and made me againe to apply the 
Seroninhismecke. VVhereby recovering his former foundnefle and pertedtion of 
fight, he yet weares the Seton. } 
[alfo once freed by this kinde of remedy, by the appointment of the moft Icarned A Seton sood 
Phyfition HeMeriue,a certaine young man of twenty yeeres old, fromthe falling licke- fickea 
neffe, who betore had many fits thereof; the Ichorous humors the feeders of this di- ™*"* 
fealc being by this mcanes, as it is moft probable, drawne away and evacuated. 
Wheretore fecing aSeton is of thisufe, Ihaye thought good in this place to fer Themannerof 
downe in writing and by figure, the manner of making thercof, for the behoofe of — " 
oung practitioners. With the patient to fit on a low ftoole,and to bend downce his 
ad, that {o the skinne and ficfhy pannicle may be relaxed; then muft you with your 
fingers plucke up and fever the skinne from the miufcles, and take hold of as much 
hereof'as you can with your pincers, not touching the mufCles of the necke for feare 
of aconvulfion and other fymptomes; you fhall then twitch the skione whichis held 
inthe pincers; moft hard, when you fhall thraft. the hot Iron through the holes made 
inthe midft of them;that alfo rhe nerves being f@ twitched ,the dolerificke fenfe may 
the leflecome to the part. The wound muft be made or burnt in long wayes and ner 
twharting,that fo the matters may be the better evacuated by the ftraight fibers. But 
the cauteryor hot [ron muft have a threc or elfe a foure-fquare point and that fharpe, 
that {0 ir may che more eafily and {peedily enter. Then keeping the pincers immove- 
able, let him draw through the paflage made by the cautery aneedle thred witha 
three or foure doubled threed of Corton [or rather a skeane of filke] moiftned in rhe 
whiteof an egge and oyle of Rofes;then after you have applyed pledgets dipped in 
the fame medicine, binde upthe part with a convenient ligature. The day fol- 
lowing the necke muftbe anaointed with oyle of Rofes, and the pledgets dipped in. 
the former medicine applyed for fome dayes after. But it will bee convenient to 
moiftenthe Seten with a digeftive made of the yolke of an Eggeand oyle of Rofes, 
untill che ulcer caft forth much’ matter ; then you fhallannoint the Corton thred 
with this following remedic. terebinthina ven, 3iiij. fyrapt rofat.¢y ab finthy an. 3%. 
Irces, diacrydy, Agaric Rhei, an, 3. incorporentur ompia 
© fist medicamentum. Which you fhalinfe folong, as you intendto keepe open the 


rash For it hatha facultic to draw the humors from the face andclenfe without bi- 
ing 
5° 


381 


* 
4 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


4 


the Greene and Bloody 


A figure of the Pinctrs,acinall Cautery and Needle ufed in making 4 Seton 


Ihave found not long fince by experience, thatthe apertion made with 2 long 
thicke Triangular needle ofa good length liketoa large Pack-needle, is leffe paine. 
tull,than that which is performed with the a@tua!! cautery which I formerly menti- 
oned. Wherefore 1 would advife the young Chirurgion, that hee no ulc tie 
forefayd actuall cauterie. Ihave here given youthe figure of the Needle. 


The Figure of 4 Triangular Needle, 


, 
5 


* 
“ 


CHAP. 


Of Wounds of the Cheeke. 


Theuleof a Ecing a wound of the cheeke feemes torequire a future, it muft havea 


seal BE = dry future (as they termeit) leaft that the fcarre fhould become de: 

formed. For that deformity is very greeyous to many, asto women 

eS ye ac) who are highly pleafed with their beautics. Therefore you fhal! {préad 

two peeces of new cloath ef aa indifferent finenefle, and proportionable bignefle 
with this medicine. 

Re polveris maftichini, fanguinis Draconis, thuris, farina volatilis , tragacantha conts- 
picts, farcocolka an. 31}. picis nigra albumina ovorum qua fufficiant, fis 
adryfature. medscamentum, Apply thepeices of cloath fpread with this on cach fide of the 

wound one, fome fingers breadth afunder,and let it alone till it be bard dryed to the 
skinne. Then you fhall fe draw them together with your needle and thred, zhat che 
fleth by their fticking may alfotollow, andbee mutually adjoyned,asyou may ce 
it here expreft. The wound fhall be agglutinated by this meanes, together wit! the 
ufe of fit medicines, pledgets, ligatures. Bur allthe ligaturesand ftayes which fall 
be ufed for that purpofe mult be taftened to the patients night-lappe. 
ASuturefit “Dut when the wound is great and deep,and thelips thereotare much diftant the on 
forbare-lipss from the other, there cap be no ufe of fuchadry future. Wherefore you mutt ules 
eee! three or foure {quare necdle (char fo it may the more readily and ealily enter into 
the fieth) being thred witha waxedthred; and with this you mutt thruft shroug! 
the lips of the wound,and leave the needle fticking inthe wound , and then wrappe 
the thred to 2nd againe over the ends thereof cight or ten times, jult after chat ma0- 
ner which women ufe to faftena necdle with thred in it, upon their fleeves,or Tailors 
to their hatts or capps,that they may not lofethem. 


The 


The needle 
wound; this ki 
{o we Commort 
by the error of 
nation, if ther@ 
you fhall cur a: 
union, Orher & 
thenecefiity o! 
would cut the 
dies mention 
thewes, 


The fizure of 
abou 


o~ 
* 
~ 
| 
‘ 
’ 
>» 
— 
q 
~ q 
‘ \ 4 ‘ 
q 
j 
4 
} 

a 


A 
i 


\ 


= 


with along 
lefle paine- 
menti- 
more ufe the 


The needle thus faftened,fhall bee there until! the perfec sgglutination OF the tere 
wound; this kind of future is ufed inthe wounds of the lips, as alfo in hare-lips, for lips ae 
(0 wecommonly call lips which are cleft from the conformation in the wombe 
bythe error of the forming faculty. But ‘fuch a future will helpe nothing to aggluti- 
nation, if there lye or remaine any skin betweene the lips of the wound;Wherefore 
| youlhall cur away whatfoever thereof fhal! be there, other-wife you mult expe 50 
tmufthavea union, Other kinde of futures are of no great ufc in wounds of thefe parts, for out of 
become de« theneceflity ofeating and {peaking, they are in perpetuall motion; wherefore a thrid 
asto women would cut the fleth; for whichreafon you fhall take up muchfleth with {uch Nee- 


ufhali{préad dies mentioned in this laft defcribed kinde of Suture, as this following figare 
ible bigneffe thewes, 


anthe conts- The fig of the ut fat cloven or Hare lips, as alfa the dilsmeation of the Needse 
bfficiant, fist out whofe emas the thrid is wrapped ever and under, toana againe, 


h fide of the 
dryed to the 
red, that the 
you may {ee 
ther with the 
which fhall 


liftant the on 
u muft 
ly enter into 
‘rut chrovgh 
then wrapp© 
rer that man- 


es,or Tailors 


The 


To 


IB: Jo. 0. Wounads of each Part. 
07; 
= 
3 Z 
| 
SS 
SX 
Yf 
Uj Y 
/ 
| 
| 
ae = wees & 
: 
\ S “fi 
| 
1 


L is; 10. 


Of the Greene and Bloody 


To this purpofe 1 will recite a hiftory,tothe end, that if any fuch thing happey 
tocome to your hands. you may docthe like. Acertaine Gafcoine in the barre}; 
at Saint Lawrence had his upper jaw cut overthwart even to his mouth, to the gre» 
disfiguring of his face. The wound had many wormes in it, and ftanke exceedijig! y 
becaufe he could get no Chirurgion untill three dayes after hewas hurt. Where. 
Adacottien fore wathed it witha decoGion of wormewood, Aloes and alittle 


good co watt ce kill che wormes,and to fetch away allrhe putride matter; | difcuffed the ry. 
—_ mor with a diffolving fomentation and cataplafime, I joyned together the lippes of 
the wound with che laft defcribed future, Butl applyed this following medicine to 
the whole part. 
boli armenifan.drac. Maftickes 
rhe,aloes fimul fist medicamentum. The wound was 
AGwal cele ted withina few dayes, but that there remained a certaine little whole at the jovn; 


anced of the lower jaw with the upper, wherein you could {carfe pur the head of a pinne. 


great wounds. whercof uevertheleffe much ferous and thinne moy {ture flowed,e/pecially when 
heeither cate or fpake ; which I have alfo obferved in many others. But for (tay. 
ing of thiswatrifh humidity Idropped qua fortis into the bottome of thc ulcer, 
and div ers times put therein a little of the powder of burnt vitriole, Thus by Gods 
grace he recovered and became whole. 


C HAPs X XY I; 
of the wounds of the Nofe. 


| He Nofe many wayes fuffers folution of continuity;as by a weund, fr. 
Gure and contufion, and itis fometimes batteredand broken onthe 


Plow many 
vrayes the nofe 
may be burt, 


Thecure 
broken nofa 


The ufe of 


pipes in bros 
en noles 


Bur ifthe Nofe bee focut, that asyetitadheres to muchof the adjacest 
ficth, from whence it may receive life andneurifhment, then tow it up. For tiie 
lower part of the nofe it may be fhaken, depreft andwreftedafide, feeing iris gt 
ly; but it cannot be broken asthe other which is of a ony nature. 


| 
A privsiio 
fidewayes, If Is 
the living Dod 
acarefull, ferval 
the tongue, lea 
ita 
lechim cur c 
mizht bee tan 
or rending of 
almond milke 
often bold in | 
lides theirnou 
Medicine. 

i have le 
fers whom I h 
beene fuch as 
Mariony or 
urbsof S ine 

But MMO. al 
Monlier Coues 
che end of his 1 
{mall fiber of 
which thine a] 
Dy confider; n 
ON Cnive. and 
things as excc 
though 
ipuncie, neit!y 
fore after 
dowacw- 


| upperpart; which when it happens, you fhal! reftore the depref 
bones totheir native feat and figure, with the endof a /patwls or fit 
icke wrapped about with towe, cottonora linnen ragee. Then wiih 
pledgets dipped in an aftringent medicine compofed ex albumine evi gmaflich, bolo 
meno, fanguine drac. Cr Alumine uflo, andapplyed tothe fide of the nofe, bee thal! 
labour to ftrengthen che reftored bones, and thenbindethem with aconvenient|i 
pature, which may not prefle them too much, left the nofe fhould become flar, 3s i 
} happens to many throughthe unskilfulnefleof Chirurgions. Then mutt you put 
little pipes intothe nofe-thrills,and thefe not exactly round, but fome what flat and de- 
preft ,ryed to the night-cappe on each fidewith athred, leaftthey fhould fal! ou 
By the helpe of thefe pipes the bones of thenofe will be kept intheir placejanditere 
willbe paflage forth for the matter,and forinfpirationand ex{piration. Burif 2 
the nofe, or fome portion thereof thal] bee wholy cut off, wee mufi not hope to tt: : 
flore it. 


iB; To. 


ng hap 

0 the 
tceedingly. 
Where. 


EL 
fled the tu- 
he | ippes of 
! edicine to 


iffiches mgr. 

S apelutina- 
the joyning 
of a pinne; 
eccially when 
guc for flay- 
of the ulcer, 


us by Gods 


wound, fra- 
broken onthe 
c the depreft 
/patula or fit 
c. Thenwith 
aflich, bolo ar- 
pfe, bee fhall 
onvenicnt li- 
bee flat, as it 
muft you put 
at flat and de- 
ould fall out. 
lace and chere 
pn. Burif ail 
ot hope to 


the adjacent 


up. For rie 
ing itis grilt- 


The 


_ 


of eachPart. 


ihe 


" he Figure of pipes to be putinte the Nofe.thrills 


Cuare XXVII, 


Of the Woands of the tongue. 
Hetongue may bee fowounded, that either it may bee wholcly cut off 
and deprived of fome portion of the fubftance,or onely flit long wayes wayethe con 
oratwhart. The loife of the fabttaacecannorbee rapaired, becaule 


every part {eparated.and pluckt fromshe living body, from whene¢ looisd, 


Ka SY, it had life, {piricand blood, prefently dyes. For asthe Philofophers 
iy, 4 privatione ad habitum noneft-regreffm. Butwhen itis cutor flit loagwayes or 
idewayes, it is eafily reftored by future, iffobeecthat checloven part yet adhere to 
‘heliving body from whence it may,draw both matter and formeof life. Therefore cicveatoneue, 
acarefull. fervantfhall ftraitly hold witha fofc and cleanelignen cloth the body of 
thetongue, leaft it fhould flip away. by reafon of its flipperineffe, whilft the Chirur. 
gion ftitch it avove and below; whenhethinkes hee hath fufhciently fowed it, 
iethim cur offthe threed as neere tothe knot as hecan, leaft being left too long it 
mizht bee tangled withthe teethas hee cates, and fo caufea hurttulllaceration 
or rending of the fowed parts. In the meane timelet the patient cate barly creames, 
almond milkes,Gelleyes,culliffes and broathes, andthe yolkes ofegges; and let him 
often hold in his mouth Sugar of Rofes and{yrupe of Quinces; for fuch rhings be- 
theitnourifhing faculty, performe the partof an agglutrinating and detergent 
medicine, 

L have learned thefe thingsI have here fet downe, either from my Ma2- 
‘ters whom L have heard with attention, nor by reading ofbookes, but they have 
deene fuch as L have trycd with happy fuccefle in many; as in the fonne of Monfieur: 
Marieny prefident of the Inquilition, in John Piet a Carpenter dwelling in the 
WOSOtSsint German. 3 

But moit apparently inachild of three yeeresold, the forine of the great Lawyer: A Hitery. 
Moniier Coust, who fell with his chin upon aftone , and fo cut off a Jarge peece of 
‘Oe end of his tongue, which chanced to be betweene his teeth, it hung bur ata very: 
imall fiber of fefh, forhat I had very little ornohope to agglutinate and unite it , 
which thing almoft made meto plucke it quit away;yer I changed that determination: 
Sy confidering the loffe of the moft noble action of fpeaking, which would thereup.: 
of enfuc, and weighing che providence of nature often working wonders and fuch: 
‘igs as exceed the expectation of the phyfition in cucing difeafes. 
lalfo thought chus wich my {elfe,the fleth of the tongueasfole, loofe, fungous and: 
‘Pangie, neither is isaltogetherobyvious to theexternall injuries.of theayre; where Nature oft 
‘oreafter that Thad onceor twife thruft .tarough the needle andthred upwards chingsincee 


‘ad downewards, and for the reff ordered the childobe. wfed and diceedyafter the cures of 
L | man- 


| 
Os. 
[1B 100. 355 
| 
| 
= 
= } | | 1) 
= 
a 
= 
> ve 
| 
| 
| 


Of the Greene and Bloody Lies. To. 
manact latcly mentioned,hegrewwell within a fhort time,and yet rengainces 
king well anddiftinaly. 

Of the wounds of the Bares. 
He eares are fomctimes wholly cut off, fometimes but in part otherwhilcs 
they arc onelyalit, fothat the rent portion as yet adhearing to the reft.is 


tyotesres oyned with in Communion of life, dn this laft cafe iris tit co ufe 
may be viola- 


' <> ture; but yetfothat you touch not the griftle with your needle. fo; 
How to fowa ghenee there would be jin danger of a pangrazne which happens to many by foolit, 


curing; therefore you fhall fake up and comprehend with your n¢edic only the Skin, 


and that little ficfh which encompafles the griftle, | 

You thall performe thereftofthe cure with pledgets and ligatures artificial!y 
red, andthalircfift inflammation and other fympromes with ht medicines, By 
you muft take {peciall carethatno fuperfiueustichh grow inthe auditory paflage, 
which may hinder the hearing; wherefore you fhail keepe that patlage tree by 
flopping it with a peece of fpunge, But you fliall procure agglutinaiion and con{o)). 
dation of the griftly part(and therefore next to.a bone dry dry medicircs, 
Butthofe whe have their eares quite cut off, can doc nothing but hide the dc jorg. 
ty of their mifle-hap with acap, ftuffed with Corton on that fide. 


— - 


Of the Wounds ofthe necke and throate. 
ONES He Wounds of the necke andthroate are {comewhiles fimple, as thofe 


T $4 which oncly ufe the continuity2ot the mufcles; otker whiles compound, 
ot re 4 SK fuch as thofe which have conjoyned withthem a fra@ture of the bones.as 
a roaté, 


the Vertebra, or burt of the internalland external! jugular Veires, 

or fleepy Arteries; fometimesthe Trachea Arieria,or Weazon , and the 
_ or gullet are wounded; fometimes wholy cut off, whence prefent death cnlues. 
Wherefore let not the Chirurgion meddle with {uch wounds unlefle he firtt foretell 
the danger of death, or the lofic of fome motion to thofe that are prefent, For itef- 
ten happens that fome notable nerve ot tenconis violated by a wound inthe necke, 


Theale fol. Whence a pallic eniues, and that abfolutely incureable, it the wound thal! penetrate 


owesupon ro the fpinall marrow, alfo hurt therewith. Wounds of the gullet and Weazcnare 


neskes dificultly cured becaufe they are in perpetuall motion; and chiefely of the latrer by 


Signerthae *C@fON itis grifly and without blood. The wounds of the gullet are knowne, by {pi 
the gullet ting of blood, by the breaking forth of meate and drinke by the wound; bur ifthe 
is Woun . 


gullet be quite cur afunder, the patient cannot {wallow at all, For the cut parts are 
both contracicd in themfelves, the one upwards, and the other downewards, Bu 


we know the weazonishurt,by cafling up blood atthe mouth with a continvall 

cough, andby thecomming torth of the breath or winde bythe Wound, Tbe 
Wounds ofthe jugular Veinesand fleepy Arteryes, if they be great,are ufvally desd- 
veinesand flees ly, becaufethey canrot.bee ftraitely bound up; for youcannor binde the throat 


py Arte aes are hard without danger of choaking or {trangling the paticnt. But tor deteét ot a {trait 


devdly byacs 4. 
cident, in thiscafe the fuxe of blood prooves ly. Ifthe recu stent Nerve of 
sit takes away che ule of 


By hurting ther fide be cut, it makesthe voyce hoarfe;if cut on beth fides 


{peech, by hurting thefe inftrumears which impart motion to the mutcles of the 2” 
ervet 


voyce shure. For the cure if the wound be fmail,& not aflociated with the hure of any norabit 
Veficil,norofthe Weazon and gu'let,it is {peedily and eafily cured and if chere {hal 
be neede you thall ufea future then you hall put therein a {ufficient quantity of V¢- 

Bice Turpentine mixed with bole-Armenicke; or elie fome of my Balfame of 
Thedifempri= this is the receipr. Re, Terebsnth, venera th gam. elews iii}, cles bypericone 
on of the Aus heli > ly 
Ballame. 0444 47 fang. araccnts 4. 5). Vika tiqucfians fimal lento tne 10 
Balfamum ut arits ef addende palverss Florent, aloes, Ataftiches, 


have done wonders with this Balfeme in the egeiutination of {imple wouncs, 
Swhercinno firange body hath beene. 


Now 


L 15 #- 


Ww when 
le of Roles 
of humors, and 
Gratis, be 
But if 
have 1cw 
wounded, the 
fhall not endea 
lyes and 


omnia fi 


ith which 
will mittigate 
make him brea 
any thing unat 
by fome exam 

Acertaine 1¢ 
inthe throat 
his Weazoa. 
ned, untill fuc 
if the medion 
wound and {pa 
which he had 
felfe, che great 
nature un 
& jugular vein 
the gullet pert 
nued to the cam 
ther with a rev 
pulley; furth 
tempering th 
of the apper 
he had loft, w 
fent, that deat 
by divine fav 

Equally ad 
the Citty of 
lying in wait 
wore, fer 
moneftthe \ 
dagger curth 

This mur 
adoetoacert 
prefentanda 
ted to my cum 

Tat the firit 
funder,and 
ofthe gullet 
wound 
to {peake, an 
taken and fat 
life, tor the] 
hurr. 


The like 


- 
* 
‘ 
4 
= 
{ 
| 
2 | 
| 
| 
| ood. 
} 
’ 
1 
3 
q 
4 
| 
| 4 
Vas 
q 
: 
’ 
q 


1 aNd 
Medicires, 
the 


le, as thofe 
S cCm pound, 
the bones. as 
ouler Veines, 
the ag ws 
Ceath 
¢ hrft foretell 
ent, For it of- 
inthe necke, 
ial] penetrate 
Weazcnare 
pf the Jatrer by 
whe, by 
nd; bur ifthe 
cut parts are 
ewards, But 
a continvall 
Vound, The 
ufvally dead- 
e the throate 
e@ of a itramte 
t Nerve of ci- 
‘ay the ufc of 
les of the Z4 
any norabie 
there fhall 
antiry of Ve- 

mc of which 
Sil}. 

lento 

pic wounds, 


Nor 


Lib 
Now when you have put it in, lay upon ita plaifter of Déscalcithees diflolved 


- 


Wounds of each Part. 28° 7 


inoyle of Rofzs and vinegar,as that which hath power to repreffe the flowing downe 1}, faculty of 
of bumors, and hinder intlammiation, or in Reede thereof you may apply Emp, ae 
Gratis, DEZ,OF Emp.de lanua. 

gut if the jugular veines and fleepy Arteries bee cut, let the bleediag bee ftayed,as 
we have fhewed in achapter, treating thereof. VWhenthe Weazon or Gullet are 
wounded,the Chirurgion (hall fow themupas aeatly as heecan; and the paticnet The cureof 
fhall not endeavour to {wallow any hard thing, butbe content to bee fed with gcl- 7 tae 


lyes and brothes. When a gargari{ine is needfull, this following is Very guller, 


R. bordci AZ. J: florum rofar. paffal. mand an. >i), glycyrhiza 3}. bul. A gargarifme® 
lant omnia firmul, addendo meltis rof. Inlep. rof. an, ij. fiat gargarifima, wh artis 


With which being warme the Patient flall moy fenhis mouth, and throate,for it 0c 13 
will mitigate the har(hneffe of the pare, afwage paine,cleanfe and agglutinate, and ute thereet, 
make him breathe more freely. But that che Chirurgion may not defpaire of,or Icaye 
any thing unattempted in fuch like wounds, I have shought goodto demonftrate 
by fome examples, how wonderfull the workesof nature are, if they be aflitted by 
Alt. 
Acertaine fervant of Monfieur de Champaiene, agentieman of Anjow,was wounded 4 Hiftery. 
inthe throat with a {word, whereby one of the jugular veincs was cuttogetherwith: 
his Weazon. Hee bled much andcould not fpeake, and thefe fymptomes remai~- 
ned, untill fuch time as the wound was {owed up, and covered with medicines, But 
ifthemediwcines atanytime were moreliquid, hee as it were fucked them by the 
wound and {paces betweene the ftitches, and prefently put forth at his mouth thar 
which he had fuckec or drawne in. VYVherefore more exadlly confidering with my 
felfe, che greatnefle of the Wound, the {permaticke, and therefore dry and blood- 
lefle nature unapt to agglutination, of the affected part, but cheefely of the Weazon 
&jugular veine;as alfo for that the rough Arteryis obnoxious ro thele motions which 
the gullet performes in fwallowing, by reafon of the inner coate, which is conti- 
nued to the coate of the gullet,by which meanes thefe parts mutually ferve each o- 
ther with a reciprocal] motion, even asthe ropes which runne to the wheele of a 
pulley; furthermore weighing that the Artery was neceffary for the mien an 
tempering the heate ot the heart, asthe jugular veines ferved for the nourifhment 
ofthe ipperpatts; andlaftly weighing withmy felfethe great quantity of blood 
he had loft, which is as it were thetreafure of nature, Itoldthofe which were pre- 
fent, that death was neere and certainely at band. And yet beyond expectation,rather 
by divine favour than our Art, he recovered his health. Pe 
Equally admirable is this hiftory following. Two Engliflimen walked outof 4 grace Fis 
the Citty of Pars fortheir recreation tothe woodof Vimcenne; but oncof them tery, 
lying in waiteterobthe other of his money and amaffie chaine of gold which hee 
wore,fetupon him at unawares, cut histhroate gnd robbed him ,and fo left hima- 
mongft the Vines which were in the way,{uppofing he had kill'd him having with his 
This murderer came backe ro the citty; the other halfe dead, crawled with much 
adoctoa certaine Peafants houle, and being drefled with fuch medicines as were 
prefent andat hand,he was brought tothe Citty, and by his acquaintance commit. 
ted t0 my cureto be cured. ‘. | 
lat the firft, as diligently as Icould, fowed up the Weafon which was cut quite a- 
funder,and put the lips of the wound as clofe together as I could;! could nor get hold 
ofthe cullet becaufe it was fallen downe iatothe ftomacke, then I bound up the 
Wound with medicines, pledgets and fit ligatures. After he was thus dreft he begua 
to {peake, and tell the name of the villaine the author of thisfa@, fo that hee was 
taken and faftened to the wheele, and having his limbes broken lofthis wretched 
— for the life of the innocent wounded man whodyed the fourth day after he was 
Another Hi« 


The like hurt befell acertaine Germane, who layeat the houfe of one Perot: ftory, 
the 


Otherwhiles 
Co the rett is 
fO ule 
| needle; fo, 
bY by foolith 
poly the skin, 
rtificially fir. 
‘Crcines. Bur | 
Pallage. 
‘age free 


= Of the Greene and Bloody Lis; qo, 


the fireete of Nurts;he being franticke in the night cut his throate with a {word:] Deine 
called inthe morning by his friends who went to fee him, dreft him juft aftey yp. 
fame manner as I drefledthe Englifhman. Wherefore he prefently recovering his 
fpeech, which before could not utter one fillable, freed from fufpition of the crim. 
and prifon the fervant, who lying inthe fame chamber with him,was upon {uf ition 
committed to prifon, and conteiling the thing as it was done, lived foure dayes after 
the wound,being nourifhed with broathes put inco his fundament like clyfters, an, 


with the. gtatefull vapour of comfortablethings, as bread newly drawne our of the 


(3 = 
Tho diff-ren- 


ofthe Chek. 


Ovenand foked io {trong wine. 


Having thus by the Art of Chirurgery made the dumbe fpeake for the {pace of 
foure dayes. . 


C Hap. XXX. 


Of the Wounds of the Chef. 


ef Ome wounds of the Cheft are onthe fore fide,fome bebinde, fome per; 


cevof wounds &% trate more deepe, others enternot into the capacity therect , othe; 


Signes that 
the locart fs 


A} liftory. 


Sicnes that 
the Lunes are 
wourded, 


omepeirce eventotheparts contained thercin,asthe Medsa/tinum, 

aad Lungs, heart, midriffe, hollow veine, and afcendent artery; Othe 

pali¢ quite through the body; whereby it happens that fome are deadly, 
noc. 

-You.fhall thus know that rhe wound penetrates into the capacity of the Chef, jj 
that when the patients mouth and nofe be fhut, the breath or winde breakesthiovgh 
the wound with noyfe, fo that itmay diffipate, or blow our a lightedcandJe being 
held neere it. 1f the patient can {carfe either draw,or put ferth his breath which al{o;s 
a figne thar there is fome, blood fallen downe upon the Diaphragma, 

By thefefignes you may know thatthe heart is wounded: Ifa great quantity of 
blood gufhout, ifatrembling poffeffe allthe members of the body; if the pulle 
bec little and faint, if the colour become pale, if acold fweate and frequent fowniog 
aflayle him,ard the extreame partsbecome cold, then death’s at hand, 

yet when | was at Tria {awacertaine Gentleman whe fighting a Duel] with 
another, received a wound under his left breft which pierced into the fubftarceof 
his heart, yet for all ehathe ftrucke fome blowes afterwards, and followed hisfy. 
ing Encmic, fome two hundred paces ‘untill hee fell downe dead vponthe 
ground ; having opened his body, ifound awound inthe fybftance of the 
heart, {0 }arge as would containe ones finger 5 there was onely much blood poured 
upon the midrifie. 

the fignesthat the Lungsare wounded, forthe blood comes  foamie 
or frothy outofthe wounds the patientis troubled with acough, hee is al{o trou" 
bicd with 2 great difculty of breathing and a paine in his fide, which hee former!) 
had not,he lyes moft at cafe when he lyes upon the wound, and fometimes it comes 


{0 to paile, that lying fo he fpeakesmore frecly and eafily, but turned on the cov 
trary fide, he prefently cannot {peake. 


<=> 
-, 


Sicnesthat the  ¥When the Diphragma or midriffe is wounded, the party affected is troubled with 


midriffeis Weightor heavinefle inchat place, hee is taken with a De/iriam. 


wou nuded, 


A Hifery. 


or raving by realon 
of che fympathy of the Nerves of the fixth conjugation which are fpread-over (i 


midrifle; difficulty of breathing,a coughand fharpe paine trouble the patient, the 


Guts are drawne vpwards, fo that itfomctimes happens by the vehemency of brea 


thing, thatthe fLomacke and gutts are drawne through the wound into the capacl- 
ty of the Cheft; whichthing I obferved intwo. 


The one of thefewas a Mafon,who was thruft thoughthe midft of the midriffe, where 
it is Nervous, and dyed the third day following. 1 opening his lower belly, and 00% 
finding his fomacke , thought ita monftrous thing; butat length fearcking dill 
gently , 1 found ic was drawne into the Cheft, though the wound which was {Carce 

: an 


— 


LL {0- 
af inca broa< 
it 


ll 


Theother w 
roche wis {ho 
fword-like 
rhe {pace 
che out fide, 
ona paine of 
and onthe nig 
eighth 
was accuito 
thereot 
ced no kinde 0! 
much wind 4 
fo that 
from whence 

We undert 
by the 
of the breath 
happen 
ynto the belly 
which if 2! 

But alio, i) 
vomitc, 2! 
che vitall faci 
reaforn of the 
quality of 3 
heart. 

Itisa fione 
daine lofle of 
of rhe Vrine 
Patient. 

When the 
{hort time, 
rits, which 
foraced. 


Way and bee 
be long kept 
they mutt b 
city of the | 
he, whenc« 
Pecrouicious 

The firkt 
tle or no | 
takes plac 


* 
we 
4 
1 
7 
g 
| 
¥ 
q 
4 
4 


le, fome pene 
other 
M 
Other 
deadly, 


the Chef, if 


Cakesthiough 
dcandJe bein 
1, Which alfo js 


“at quantity of 


y; af the pulfe 
jYent fowning 


Duell with 


lowed his fly- 
dead upon the 
bftance of the 
lood poured 


mes foamie 
is alf{o trou- 
hee formerly 
Imes it Comes 
don the con- 


oubled witha 
ing by reaton 
ead over the 
epatienr, the 
rency of brea- 
o the capact- 


idriffe,where 
de lly, and not 
arching dili- 
ich was {carce 
| an 


f{ubftance of 


Li Wounds of each Part. 
inch broade. But the ftomacke was fall of winde, buc little buaidicy in 
if 


The other was called captaine Francis a Native of Xsntoiene, who before Hiz 
pochell (hor with amusker bullet, entriag by the brealt-bone necre tothe 
(yord-like Griftle and palling througt the flethy part of che midriffe, went out at 
rhe {pace betweenc the fitch and fixth baftard ribbes. The wound was bealed up on 
‘he out fide, yer for all that there remained a weakenelle of the ftomacke whereup- 
gnapaine of the guttes like to the colicke tooke him efpecially inthe Evening, 
andonrthe night; for which caufe he durft noc fup but very (paringly, But on the 
eighth monch after, the paine raging more violently in his belly than it 
was accuitomed, hee dyed; though for the mitigating of the vehemency 
thereof Simon Malmedy and Anthony da Val both learned Phyfitions omit- 
red no kinde of remedy. Thebody ot the difeafed was opened by the skilful! Chi- 
rurgion, James Guillemeau,who founda great portion of rhe collicke gut fwelled with 
much wind gocten into the Chef, through the wound of the Déaphragawa,for allic was 
fy {mall that you could fcarfe put your lictle fingerin thereat, But sow lerus returne 
from whence we digrefled. Signes chat 
We underftand that there is blood poured ferth into the capacity of the Cheft 
by the difficulty of breathing, the vehemency of the encreafing feayer, the ftinking fo mary of 
of the breath,the cafting up of blood at the mouth,and other fymptomes which ufu- gooey 
ally happen to thefe who have putrified and clotted blood poured out of the veflells 
into the belly, inteGting with the filthy vapour ofthe corrupt fubftance, the partsto 
which it fhall come, 
Butalio, unlefie the patient cannot lye upon his backe, he is troubled with a defire 
to vomte, and covets now and then torife,whence hee often falls into a fwond, 
the vitall faculty which fufteines the body being broken and debilitated both by 
teafon of the wound, and concreste or clotted blood; for fo putting onthe 
quality of poyfon, it greatly diffipates and diflolves the ftrength of the 
heart. Signes that 
Itis afigne the fpinall marrow is hurt,when a convulfion or Palfic, chat is,e fud- Oe Ne 
daine lofle of fenfe and motion in the parts thereunder, an unvoluntary excretion 
of the Vrine and other excrements, or a totall fuppreflion of them, {Cazes, upon the 
Patient. | 
When the hollow veine and great Artery are wounded, the patient will dyeina 
{hort time, by reafon of the fuddaine and aboundant effufion of the bloed and {pi- 
rits, Which intercepts the motion of the luags and heart, whensethe party dyes {uf- 
toraced. 


Cuar. XXX. 
Of the cure of the Wounds of, the Cheft. 


ANS SS E have read in John de Vigo, that it isdilputed among Chirurgions rigotrad.de 
) fe concerning the confolidation of wounds of the Cheft. For fome thinke oe 
that fuch wounds muft beeclofed up, andcicatrized with al! poffiole 
(peed, leaft the cold ayrecome totheheart, and the vitall {pirits flye 
Way and bee diffipared. Orhers on the contrary thinke that fuch wounds ought to 
be long kept open; and alfo' ifthey be not fufficiently large of themafcives ,thac rhea 
they mutt be enlarged by Chirurgery,that fo the blood powred forth intothe capa- 
city of the Cheft may have paffage forth, which otherwife by delay would purre- 
he, whence wound enfue an increafe of the feaver, afiftulous ulcer, and other 
Peruicious accidents, 
The firft opinion is grounded upon reafon and truth, if fobee that there isiir- 
cor no blood poured forth intothe capacity of the Cheft, Bur the Larter 
takes place where thereis much more bleod contained in the capty {paces 


Ll 3 of 


- 


IB. 0. 
attes the 
Of the crime 
dayes after 
yiters, ang 
| 
| 


x= 


290 Of the Greene and Bloody Lav to, 


ofthe Cheft, Which leaft I may feeme rafhly ro determine, ] thinke it not amiffe 
to ratifie each opinion with a hiftery thereto agreeable, | 
AHitory, Whileftiwas at Twrin, Chirurgion to the Marfhall of Montejan,the King of Franc. 
his Generall, I had in cureafouldier of Paris, who{e name was Z eve/que, hic ferved 
under captaine Resowart. He hadthree wounds,but one more greevousthan the 
wentuader the right breft, fomewhat deepe intothe capacity ofthe Cheft, whence 
much blood was poured forth upon the midriffe, whichcaufed fuch difficulty o5 
breathing, that it eventooke away the liberty ofhisfpeech; befides though this o¢. 
cafionhe had a vehement feaver coughed up bleod, and a fharpe paine on the woya. 
ded fide. The Chirurgion which firft dreft him, had fo bound up the wound with, 
ftraite and thicke {uture, that nething could flow outthereat. But 1 being called th. 
day aftcr,aud weighing the prefent fymptomes which threatned {peedy death, 
judged ehat che fowing of the wound muft ftraight be loofed;which being done, there 
infiantly appeared a clot of blood at the orificethereof; which made mee tocayfe 
the parsent to lye halfe out of hisbed , with hishead downewards, anc to flay his 
hands on a fettle which was lower than the bed, and keeping himf{elfe in this 
pofture, cto fhuthis mouth and nofe that fohislungs fhould {well; the micriffe he 
tirerchedtorth, and the intercoftall mufclesand thofe of the Abacmen thould be 
comprefled chat the bleod powred into the Cheft might be evacuated by the wound; 
thacchis exerefcion might fucceede more happily, I thruft my hnger fone. 
what decpe into the wound that fo | might open the Orifice thereot being tiopped up 
with the congealed bleod; and certainely I drew out fome feaven or erght ounces of 
pucrified and ftinking blood by this meanes. When he was layd in his bed, | cauled 
frequent injections co be made into the wound of adecoétien of Barly with honey 
of Kofesand red Sugar, which being inje&ted I wiflit hia to turne firit on the one, 
and thea on the other fide and then,againe to lye out of hisbed as Oefore; for chus 
le evacuated {mall, but very many clots of blood, together with the liquor lately 
injeGed;which being done,the fymptomes were mittigated,and left him by little and 
Whybiwer little. The next day | made another more detergent inje@ion,adding thereto worme 
erat wood, centaury, and Aloes; but fuch a bitterneffe did rife up to his mouth together 
cocyeChelt. with adefire tocaft, chat he couldnot longer endure it. Then it came into my mind 
that formerly | had obferved the like effet ot the like remedy in the Hofpitall of 
Paris in one who had a fiftulous ulcer in his Cheft. Therefore when I had cenfidered 
with my felfe chat fuchbitter things may-eafily pafle into the Lungs, and {o may 
from thence rife into the Weazon and mouth, I determined that thence forwards! 
would never ule {uch bitter things to my patients, forthe ufe of them is much more 
troublefome than any way good and advantagious. But at the length this paticntby 
Readethe Chis and che like meanes recovered his health beyond my expedation, 
 Butonthe contrary] wascalledonatimetoa certaine Germaine gentleman who 
Galen,ub-7,4e Was runRE with a {word intothe capacity of his Cheft; the neighbouring Chirurgion 
Hadputagrear centinto the wound atthefirft dreffing, which Imade to bee rake 
torch, for that I certainly underftood there was no blood powred forth inte the ¢a- 
pacity of the Cheft becaufe the patient had no feaver, no weight upon the d:sphreg- 
wa, nor {pitted forth any blood. Wherefore I cured him in few dayes by one!¥ drop- 
What harme ping in fonse of my bal fame and laying a plafter of uponthe weund. 


The like cure I have happily performed in many others. To conclude, this I dare 
rentt, onan wounds of the Cheft by the too long ufe of tents degenerate int? 
iftula’s, 


_ Wherefore if you at any time fhall undertake the cure of wounds} which peactrat¢ 

inthe tocapacity of the heft, you thal! nor prefently fhutthem up ar che firlt diel: 

ling , but keep them open for two or three dayes;but when you thal finde that zh¢ p2- 

tient ts troubled with no or very little paine,and that the midriffe is preffed dowse 

ities | with no weight,and that he breathes freely, then let the tent be taken forth, and the 
mutb- ued Wound healed up as fpeedily as you can by covering itonely with lin: 
in weundsof ped in {Ome balfame which hath a glutinative faculty, and layd fomewhat broadet 
the wound; neverapply linimentsto wounds of this kinde, left the pati-nt by 
breathing draw them into the capacity of the Cheft, Wherefore alfo you mut have 

| 


— 


L d 1. 
a care that tn 
and alfo have 
capacity of t 
Let 
the contra’ y 
fallen into 
larger 
enerated,') 
doth, that > 
rates intoa/ 
Cheit, are 
rhe mufcles: 
contrary in! 
without blo: 
may be com 
wound maj 
But rnc 
fo great 
che fountain 
affected, 
andabounda 
and (pirits, © 
nual! mouon 
Such like blo 
whence it is! 
matter or! 
rated partis 
on than can | 
heale rhe Fs 
according to 
tinde deicrit 
you (hall m: 
with it /prs; 
ptcat,teare | 
Der and 
all come ford 
ofremaine 
ted withthe @ 


The 


After the 
into the filty 
forth at chen 
ofthe Cheft 

A prcat {p 
the end or o: 
ulcer, as 


ill 
4 
be 
»* 


a te ftay his 
mifclfe in this 
midriffe be 
en {hould he 
y the wound; 
hnger lome. 
1g, fiopped up 
nt ounces of 
bed I caufed 
with honey 
ton the one, 
re; for chus 
liquor lately 
1 by Little and 
‘Teto 
uth together 
my mind 
Hofpitall of 
d cenfidered 
and {o may 
forwards 
much more 
his paticntby 


tleman who 
Chirurgion 
co bee taken 
inte the ca- 
the diaphrag- 
onely erop- 
wound, 
e,this Idare 
encrate inte 


ch penetrate 
he frit dref- 

that rhe pa- 
‘(led dowae 
rth, and che 
h lint dips 

broader 
e patient by 
bu muft have 


5 care that therent put into thofe kindes of wounds may be faftened tothe Pledgets, 


L al, 10. 


Wounds of each Part. 361 


it 


sndalfo have fomewhat a large head, left they thould be drawne as we fayd iato the 
capacity Of the Cheit, for if they fall in,they will caufe putrifa@ion and death, 

Let Empla/ft. Diacaleztheos or fome {uch like bee applyed tothe wound. Butif,oa 
thecontrary, you know by proper, and certaine lignes, that there is much blood 
fallen into the {paces of the Chet, then let the orifice of the wound bee kept open 
with larger tents, untill all the Samses or bloody matter, wherein the blood hath de. 

egerated, {hall bee exhaufted.Bur if it happeo at any ume,asafluredly ic fometimes 
doth, that norwithftandingthe Artand careof the Phyfition, the wound degene- 
ratesintoa Féffala, chenche former evill is become much worle. Por F//fw/a’s of the weundsos 
Chet, are {carle cured atany time, andthat for diverscaufes. The firftis, for that the Dhettca- 
the mufcles of the Cheft are in perpetuall motion; Another is, becaufe they onthe dy TT 
contrary infide are covered onely with the membrane inycfting the ribbes, which is 
without blood. The third is, for thatthe wound hath no ftay,by meanes whereof ic 
may be comprefled, fowed, and bound, whereby the lips being joyned together, the 
wound may at length be replenifhed with fleth,and cicatrized. 

But rhe reafon why wounds of the Cheft doe every day heape up and poure forth slo ae 
fo great a quantity of marter, feemesto be their viciaity to the heart, which being plency of wars 
the fountaine of blood, there is aperpetuall ef fluxe thereof trem thence tothe part 
affected, For this is naturcs care inpreferving the afleAed parts, that continually the - 
andaboundantly without m¢afure or meane it fends all its fupplyes, that is, blood 
and (pirits, to theayde. Ad hereto, thatthe affe@ed parts by paine, heate and conti- 
quali mocion of the Lungs and midriffe,draw and allure much blood to themtclves, 

Such like blood defiled by the malignity and filchof the wound,is {peedily corrupted; 

whence it is that from the perpetuall affluxe of blood, there is a continual! eftlaxc of 

matter or filth, which atthe laft brings a man toaconfumption; becaule the ulce- 

rated partlike a ravenous wolfe confumes more blood by the paine, heate and mou- 

onthan can be miniftred thereto bythe heart. Yet ifthere bee any hope to cure and 

heale the Fs/tw/a, it fhall bee perfarmed, (after the ufe of diet, phiebetomie, and 

according tothe prefeript of the Phyfition) by a vulnerary potion, which you fhall 

finde deicribed when we treate of the Caries or rottenneffe of the bones, Wherefore the care of 
you (hall make frequent injeGions therewith into the Fifw/s, adding and mixing —- 
with it /prupue ae rofis ficcts and mel refarsm, Neither doc I, ifthe putrefactien bee 


/ 


gteat, fearero mixe therewith e£gypriacum, But you mult have acare TCMCM- When 
Der and abferve the quantity of the inje@ed liquor, that youmay know whether it 
all come forth againe after ithath performed its detergent office, For ifaay there- iniéions, 
Oftemaine behindein rhe corners and crooked paflages,it hurts che part, as corrup- 


ted with the contagion thereof. 


The forme of Syring fit to make injectiew, when a great quantity of liquor 
is te be injected into any part. 


be 
| 


| After the injeAed liquor iscome forth, a pipe ofgold, filver or lead, fhall bee puc 
into the fiftulous ulcer; and it mutt have many holesin it, chat fo che filch may paffle 
forth at them; it mutt be faft tryed with frings, that it may aot fallinto the capacity 
Ofthe Cheft. 

A great fpunge fteeped in «qua vite and wrung forth againe, fhall bee layd horto 
the end or orifice thereof, bothto hinder the entrance ef theayre intothe Fiftulous 


ulcer, as alfo todiaw forth the filth thereof by its geatle heatc, the which thi — 
paticn 


Jo, 
— 
Of Franc. 
he ferved 
nan the 
| 
it whe nce 
dificulry ef 
veh this oc. 
nthe woup. 
ound with 
ig Called 
ine 
eedy death, 
done, there 
| 
| 
| 
| 
a | 
aN 


392 Of the Greene and Bloody Ltn: yo, 


ann 


— 


| | hn further itoften timesboth dayandnight hee hold his 
his and nofe, and lying upon the difeafed lide, that fo the Sanies vy 
bee themorc forcibly evacuated ; neither muft wee leave putting in the Pipe before 
that this fiftulous ulcer fhalibee almoft dry, that is, whole, as when it ycelds lic le, 
erno matter atall; thenit muftbe cieatrized, But if the orifice of this bftulous ulcer 
being in theupp¢r part hinderthe healing thereof, then by a chirurgicall SeGion a 
paflage {hall be made in the bottome, as we fayd before in an Empyema, 


The delincation of the pipes with thezr frrings and fpunges, 


The reader muft note that the pipes which are fit for this ufe, metde nok bave fo many 
holes as thefebere expreft, but onely twoor three in their ends: for the fielh growing and 
gesting into the rejt, make them that they cannot be plucked forth Without much paive. 


What wounds A wound madein the Lungsadmits cure, unleffeit bee very large; ifit bec 
ofthe Lungs without inflammation if itbee on the skirts of the Lungs, and 
“their upper parts; if the patient conteine himfelfe trom coughing much, and con 
tentious {peaking and great breathing: for the wound is enlarged by coughing , and 
thence al{o arifes inflammation; the Pws and Samies whcrcof, whilftthe lungs againe 
The harme enceavour to expell by couching, by which meanes they are onely able co expel 
thes enfiess Ups that which is hurtfull and rroublelome to them, the vulcer is dilated, tbe inflamma: 
inwoundsof ton augmented, the Patient wattes away, and the difeale becomes incureabie. 
che Lung, ‘There have beene many Eclegma’s defcribed by Phy litions for to clenf che ulcer; 
How Eclegs Which when the patient ufeth, he fhall lyeon hisbacke, to keepe them Jong in his 
ae ee mouth, lo to relaxethe mufcles of the Larinx, for thus the medicine will fa! by 
little and litle alongft the coates of the Weazon, for if it Should fall downe in great 
quantity ,it would bein danger to caufe coughing. Cowes, Afics, or Goates milke 
with a little honey, leaft they fhould corrupt inthe ftomacke, are very fir remedi*s 
forthispurpefe ; bur womans milke exceedes the rcft. 
| But Sugar of Rofes is to be preferred before all other medicines ,in the opinionof 
Avicea tor that it hath adetergent, and alfo anaftrictive and ftrengthening faculty, 
inulcerated than which nothingis more to bee defiredin curing of ulcers. When you {hell 
- “7s thinke it time toagglurinate the clenfed ulcer, you muft command the patient to ule 
emplafticke, auftere, and aftringent medicines, fuch as are Terra figillara, bolus 
nis bypecy fin plantaine,knot-grafle,Swmach acacia and the like,which the patient 
ule in hisbrothes and Eclegma’s, mixing therewith honey of rofes, which ferving fol 
vehicle to the reft, May Carry away the impaded filth which hinders agglutination. 
But {eeing an he@ticke feaver eafily follows upon thele kindes of wounds, and alfo 
upon the affe&s of the Cheft and lungs, it will net be amiffe to fet downe fomewh! 
concerning the cure thereof, that {othe Chirurgion may know to adminifter fome 
helpeto his patient,whilft a Phyfition is fent for,to overcome thisdifeafe witli more 
powerfull and certaine remedies, 


CHAP. 


There are t! 
&icke heate c 
upon the fle! | 
parts them{e! 
moyfture of 
what ftore of 
{elfe, buc con 

Wherefore 
cured, cipeci: 
to the heart a! 
a Diary teave 
greet or a! 
hath perform( 
ofthe Lungs 
of the liver, { 
and Colom .an 
Lienterta or 
heCcticke 
confumed. 

This kind: 
cure; the pull 
a folide part 
fubftance of 
{tem per and 
caulc a great 
fea. 

But for the 
mcate the pu 
overalithe p 
diftributed o 
fort temperc 
fes no othery 
led and moy 
times there j 
rity, freque! 
thinke himf{e 
Paine, which 

The caufc 
ofthe body, 
of the folide 
the heate mo 
tyed by theo 
inthefe kin 
withan ineq 
fimple, but c 
heate doth n 
teaver of its! 


a 
| 
Va 
~ 
} 
= / NS 4) 
\ 
| 
* 


ree; ifit bee 
and noton 
ich, and cone 
oug hing , and 
lungs againe 
able ro expell 
be intlamma- 
‘ureable. 
nf{e cheulcer; 
n Jong his 
e will fall by 
owne 1p 
Goates milke 
fir remedics 


he opinionof 
ening faculty, 
len you (ball 
patient Co ule 
4, bolus arme- 
patient {hall 
h ferving iora 
agglutination. 
lnds, and alio 
‘ne fomewhat 
ninifter jome 
afe with more 


CHAP. 


Wounds each Part. 


Cuar XXXIIQ 


Of the differences, caufes, fignes ana cure of am feaver. 


| eure and loofe, as things which have contra@ed a habite ; for Hex in 


Habitus doth fignifie. 


| Hecticke feaver is focalled; either for thatit is ftubborne and hard to | 


Grecke fgnifiesahabite; or elfe tor that it feazes upon the folide parts 
¥ of our bodiescalled by the Greekes Hexe#s;both which the Larine word 


The reafon of 


There are three kindes, or rather degreees of thisfeaver. The firft is when the he- The diterens 


Aicke beate confumes the humidity of the folide parts: The fecond is, when it teeds 
upon the flefhy {udftance, The third and uncureable is, when it deftroyes the folide 
parts them{elves. For thus the flame of a lampe firft waftes the oyle,then the proper 
moyfture of the weeke, Which being done there isno hope ot lighting it againe 
what ftore of oyle foever you poure upon it. This feaver very feldome breeds of its 
felfe, buc commonly followes after fome other, 

Wherefore the caufes of a he@icke teaver are, fharpe and burning feavers not well 
cured, efpecially iftheir heate were notrcprefled with cooling epithemes applyed 
to the heart and Hypochoudrza.\f cold water was not fitly drucke.It may alfofucccede 
a Diary teaver which hath bin caufed and begun by fome long, great and vehement 
preef or anger, orfometoo y olentlatour,which any of a flender and dry body 
hath performed tnthe hot funne. it ts alfo ofttimescauled by an ulcer or inflammation 
ofthe Lungs, an empyema of the Cheft, by any great and long continuing Phiegmon 
ofthe liver, ftomacke, mefentery, wombe, kidneyes, Bladder, of the guts /ejanum 
and Colom ,and allo of the other Guts, of if the Ph/egmon {ucceed fome long Diarrhea, 
Lienterta ot bloody flix; whencea confumptionof the wholebody, and arlafta 
hedticke feaver, the heate becomming more acride, the moy {ture of the body being 
confumed. wi, 

This kinde of feaver as it is moft eafely to bee knowne, foisitmoft difficult to 
cure; the pulfe in this feaver is hard, by reafon ofthe drymeffe ofthe Artery which is 
afolide parts; and it is weake by realonof the debility of the vitall faculty, the 
fubftance ofthe heart being aflaulted. Burit is little and frequent becauife of the di- 
ftemper and heate of the heart, which for that it cannot by reafon of its weakeneffe 
agreat pulfetocoole its ftlfe, itlabours by the oftennefleto fupply that de- 

ect. 

But forthe pulfe, itisa proper figne of thisfeaver, that one or two houres after 
meate the pulfe feeles ftronger than ufuall; and then alfo there is a more acride heate 
overalithe patients body, The heate of this flame hafts until! the nourishment bee 
diftributed over all the patients body ;io which time the dryneffe of the heart infome 
fort tempered and recreated by the appulfe of moy nourifhment,the heate increa- 
{cs no otherwife than lime which a little before feemed cold to the rouch,but {prink- 
led and moy ftned with water growes fo hot,as it fmoakes end boyles up. Acorher 
times there is a perpetuall equallityof heate and pulfe in {malinefic, faintnefle;ob{cu- 
rity, frequency, and hardneffe,withour any excerbation, fo thattlic patient cannot 
thinke himfelfe to have a feaver,yea hee cannorcomplaine of any thing, hee tecles no 
Paine, which is another proper figne of an hecticke feaver. 

The caufe that the heate doth not fhew its felfe is, it doth not poficfle the furface 
ofthe body,thatis,the fpirits and humors, but lyes as buried in the earthy groffeneffe 
of the folide parts. Yer if you hold your hand fomewhatlong.y ou fhal! at !aft perceive 
the heate more acride and biting, the way being opened thereto by the skinne rari- 
tyed by the gentle touch of the warme and temperate hand. Wherefore if at anytime 
inthefe kinde of feavers the Patient feele any paine,and perceive himfelfe troubled 
withan inequality and excefle of heate, itisafigne that the heéticke feaver is not 
imple, but con joyned with aputridefeaver, which caufeth fuch inequality, as the 

cate doth moreor lefle feaze upon matter fubject to putrefaétion; for a hecticke 
teaver of its {elfe is void of all equality unleficit proceede fiom fome external caufe, 

as 


eestheroof, 


The canfets 


The Signes, 


Why in he- 
&ickcsthe 
heate is mor¢ 
acride after 
micate. 


The fienes of 
a he&icke 

ioyned with a 
putride fcayer, 


may 
Ulee, 
ive fo 
growing and 
b 
| 


Bon, 


the Greene and Bloody Li 10. 


~ 


394 


The cure, 


cicall 


as from meate; Certainely if an Hippocratique face may be found in any difcafe, ig 
may in this, by reafon of the colliquation, or wafting away the triple fubftance, 
In the cure of this difeafe, you mutt diligently obferve with what afieAs it is entan. 
eled, and whence it wascaufed. Wherefore firt you muft kaow whether this fea. 
ver bea difeafe; or elfeafymprtome. For if it be fymptomaticall it cannot be cured, 
4 Gmpromaz 28 long as the difeafe the caufe thereof, remaines uncured; as if an ulcer of the ours 
occafioned by a bloody flixe fhall have caufed it, or elfea fiftulous ulcer inthe Chef 
cauled by fome wound received on that part, it will never admit of cure, unleffe 
firft the fiftulous or dyfenterick ulcer thall be cured; becaufe the dileafe feedes the 
_ fymptomes, as the caufe the effe&, Bur if ibe a fimple and efientiall hecticke feayer 
eerste for that ithath its effence confifting in an hot and dry diftemper, which is not fixed 
inthe humors, but in the folide parts, all the counfell of the Phy fition mutt be tore. 
aucthe body, but notto purge it; for onely the humors require purging, andnot 
the defaults ef the folide parts. Therefore the folide parts muft bee retrigerated 
and humected; which wee may doc by medicines taken inwardly and apply ed our- 

wardly, | 
Thingsto bee Thethings which may with goed fucceffe bee taken inwardly into the body fry 
— inware this purpofe, are medicinall nourifhments. For hence we thall finde more certaine 
and manifeft good, than from altering medicines, that 1s, wheily refrigerating and 

humedting without any manner of nourifhment, 

For by reafon ofthat portion &t fer nutriment which is therewith mixed they are 
be ete 5 drawne and carried more powerfully to the parts,and alfo converted into their {ub. 
nourithments, {tance ;: whereby itcomesto pafle that they doe not humeé and coole them lightly 

and fuperficially, like the medicines which have onely power to alter and change the 
body, but they carry their qualities more threughly even into the innermott 
ftance. 

Of thefe things fome arc herbes,as violets, purflaine,buglofle, endive,duck mea, 
or water lentil! ,;mallowes,e{pecially when the belly fhall be bound, Someare fruits, 
as gourds, cowcumbers, apples, prunes, raifons, fweete almonds, and trefh or new 

_ pine-apple kernells. Inthe number of {eedesare the foure greater and lefler cold 
{eedes, and thefe new, for their native humidity, the feedes of poppyes, berberries, 
quinces. The floures of bugloffle, violets, water lillies, are alfo convenient; of al! 
thefe things let broth be made with achicken, to bee taken in the morning for cight 
or nine dayes, after the firft concection. 
For meates; in thc beginning ef the difeafe, when the faculties are not too much 
debilitated, hee hall ufe fuch as nourifh much and long, though of hard digeftion; 
{uch as the extreame parts of beafts, asthe feete of Calves, Hoggs feete not falted, 
the fiefh ofa Tortois, which hath lived fo longina garden, as may fuffice co digelt 
the excrementitious humidity; the fle(h of white Snailes, and {uch as have beent 
gathered ina vineyard, of frogs river Crabs, Ecles taken in cleere waters and,welcov- 
ked,hard egges eaten with the juice of Sorrell without {pices; Whitings and {tockfih. 
For al {uch things becaufe theyhavea tough and glutinous juice,arecatily put & glut: 
nated to the parts of our body, neither arethey fo cafily diffipated by the feaverifh 
heat. But when the patient languifheth of along he@ick,he mutt feede upon meats of 
eafiy digeftion, and thefe boyled rather than roafted:for boyled meats hume& more, 
and reafted more eafily turne into choler. Wherefore hee may ufe toeate Veale, Kid, 
Capon, Pullet, boyled with refrigerating and, humeéting hearbes; bee may allo ul 
Barly creames, Almond milkes, asalfo bread crummedand moyftened with role 
watcr and boyled in a decoction of the foure cold feedes with fugar of rofes; for {uch 
— cooles the liver,and the habite of the whole body, and nourifheth with- 
all. 
The Tefticles, wings, and livers of young cockes, as alfo figges and raifons. But if 
the patient at length begin to loathe and grow weary of boyled meates,then let him 
ufe roaft, but forhat he cut away the burnt and dryed partthereof,and feed onely 09 
the inner partehereof,and that moy fined in rofe water, the juice of Citrons, Ora 
ges or Pomegranats, Let him abftainefrom falrand dry fifhes, and chufe fach hihes 


The choycee 
of meatcs. 


aslive inftopy waters,for the exercife they are forc’d to undergoe in fhuaning =m 


10. 
rocks beate 
(alr, fugar, hor 
or wo.n205 | 
is muchconm 
more {weet an 
and habite of D 
picers of the L 
Ac be fed wi 
with che fluxe 
boyling is, aud 
cures cannot 
acrid belchiag 
of the he 
euce, purfliine 
ftens verymuc 
{glide fubftan 
things to beta 
Thefe thing 
elyfters.taun: 
rorhey are ap 
geatthings , a: 
and aot let the 
acride, by fupy 
lagesof Gun 
fome {mall 
the contrary 
aad relaxing 
for cold is hu 
of the mufcles 
be made of oy 
mixing witht 
may have by: 
covetoufacie 
Oiles, for fo i 
oyle acquire 
well wafhed i 
hume& and c 
Morning, chi 
Now for B: 
water where: 
beene boyled 
afairer and { 
fheepes head 
the bath fatt: 
maybe drais 
tor ocherwi(< 
Micke emprt 
the bath, 
the body, be 
49 emollient 
dryneffe.eh- 
and let Aim off 
Ze(tion te hi: 
barly cream 
tOlvsin fee 
Which i hay 
dryed and 


Me 
¥ 
7 q 
j 
* 
t 
q 
> 1 
thy 
j 


IB? Jo, 


y difcafe. it 
lubftance, 
it 1S 
this fea. 
bt be cured, 
of the PUts 
nthe Cheft 
cure, unleffe 
¢ feedes the 
ticke feaver, 
iS not fixed 
ult betore. 
andnot 
refrigerated 
ePplyed our- 


he body for 
ore Certaine 
iperating and 


xed they are 
Mtotheir fub. 
them lightly 
d change the 
bocrmott fub- 


duck {-mear, 
me are fruits, 
trefh or new 
mid Iefler cold 
s, berberries, 

venient; of all 
ning for cight 


nottoo much 
ard digeftion ; 
ete not falted, 
flice co digeft 
have beene 
s and; welcov- 
s and{teckfith, 
ly puc&X luti- 
feaverith 
pon meats of 
more, 
te Veale,Kid, 
may allo ule 
ed with role 
efes; for 
trifheth with- 


aifons. But if 
lec him 
teed onely on 


ufe fuch hihes 
fhuaning the 
rockes 


10. Wounds of each Part. 255 


beate. by che waves,Affes milke newlymilked and feafoned witha litrle 

hoacy,or ennell, chatitmry nor corrupt, mor grow fowre in theftomacke; milke mutt be 

oc wo.naos milke fucked from the dug by the patient, coche quantity of halfea pint in 

«mach commended; verily womans milke isthe more wholfome, as that which is 

sore {weet and familiar to our fubftancs, if fo be that the nurfe be of a good temper 3 
shabiteof body. For fo it is very good againft the gnawings of the ftomacke,and milk 

an 5 morewhols 

vicers of the Lungs, fromwhence a Con{umption often proceeds, Let your milch forme chan 

Alc be fed with barly, oates, oakeleaves; but if the patient chance tobee troubled *“* 

with the fluxe of the belly, you fhall make the milke fomewhar aftriagent, by gently 

boyling is, aud quenching therein pebble ftones heated red hot. Bur for that all na- 

rurescannot away with A(ics milke, fuch fhallabitaine fromit, as it makes to have 

acrid belchings difficulty of breathing, a heate and rumbling inthe Hypochomdria and 

paine of the head. Lecthe patienttemper his wine with a litcle of the waters of Ler. 

euce, purfliine and warer-lillies, buc with much bugloffe water,both for that it moy- 

fens very much;as alfo for that it hath a {pecificke power to recseate rhe heart, whofe 

(lide fubftance in this kindeof difeafe is greivoufly affliated, And chus ouch of 

things to be taken inwardly, 


Thefe things waich are to be outwardly applyed are inunQious, bathes epithemes, Thingsto be 
clyfters.Laun tions are divers,according to the various indication ot the parts where. ae 
rothey are applyed. For Ga/em annointsall the {pine with cooling & moderate aftrine 
geatthings, as which may {ufficero ftrengthen the parts, and binder their wafting, 
and not letthe tran{piration; for if it fhould bee lected, the heate would become mure 
acride, by fuppreffiag the vapours, Oyle of rofes, water lillies, Quinces, the muci- 
lagesof Gumme_ tragacanthand arabicke extracted in water of nitghfhade, with 
fome {mall quantity of camphire, andalittle waxeif neede require; bat on 
the contrary, the parts of thei breaft muft be annoynted with refrigerating 
aad relaxing things; by retrigerating Imeane thingswhich moderately coole, 
forcold is hurtful! tothe breaft, But aftringent things would hinder the motioa 
ofthe mufcles of the cheft, and caufea difficulty of breathing. Such inun@ions may 
be made of oyle of Violets, willowes, of the feeds of lettuce, poppyes,water-lillyes, 
mixing with them the oyle of fweetealmonds to temperthe altriction which they 
may have by their coldacfe., But you muft have great care thatthe Apothecari¢e for A ower i 
covetoulneffe in teed of thefe oiles newly made give you not old,rancide and falred Oyles. cud 
oiles, for fu in fteed of refrigerating, you (hall heateche part; for wine, honcy and 
oyleacquire more heate by age ; in defect of convenient oyles, we may ule burter 
well waihed in violet and nightfhade water, Theufe of fuchinun¢tions, is to cools, 
hume& and comfort the parts whereto they arcufed; they muftbeufed evening and 
morning, chicfcly after a bath. 

Now for Bathes we prefcribe them either onely to moyften,and then plaine warine Thedifterences 
water wherein the flowres of Violets and water liilyes, willow leaves and barly have ofbaches 
deene boyled, will be fufficient;or elfe not onely to moyften,but alfo to acquire them 
afairer and fuller habite, and chen you may addeto your bath the decoction of a 
heepes head and Gather, with fomebutter, Buc the patient fhall not enter into a 
the bath fafting but after the firft concoction of the ftomack ,that fo che aourif{hment ee 
maybe drawne by the warmenefle of the bath intothe whole habite of the body, ee 
tor otherwife he which is ficke of a confumption and fhall enter the bath with his fto- 
macke empty, fhall fuffer a greater diffipation ef the tripic fubitaace, by the heare of 
‘me bath, than his ftrength is able roendure, YWherefore it is fic thus co prepare 
Me body, before you put itinto the bath. The day before in the morning let him take How to pres 
smollient cly fier, to evacuate the excrements bakedin the guts by rhehecticke 
dryneffe.then ler bim cate co his dinner fome folide meats about nine of the clocke; 
and let him 2bout foure of the clocke eare fomewhat [paringly, mates of eafie di- 

te his fupper.. A little after midnight let him fup of fome chicken broth or 
barlycteams, orelfetwo reare egges tempered with fome rofe warer and fugar of 
fol-sin feed of falr. Some 4.0f s,hours after,lec him enrer intorhe bath,thele chings 
Which i have fer downe,being obferved, When he cones out of the him be 
dryedand gently rubbed, wich foftlinnencloathes, and aanointed asi former- 


ly 


| | 
| 
| ] 4 


- 


— 


1 


Sienesthatthe hel], 
bis belly with more cafe , and content. 


{malier cats 


arewoundeds Hreak ouriatthe wound;the or flankes | welland become 


. 


proteribed; then lett him fleepe it he cen for ‘two or thice houses in his beg. 
when hewakes Ict him fome Prifan, or fomefoch like thing, and then 
batlvafterthe forefayd mannér. He thall ufethis bath thrice in ten dayes; Bur jf 
the paticarbe fubject to erudities of the ftoinacke, fothat hee cannot fitin the bah 
without feare of fowntng and fymptomes, his ftomacke mult be firengthene, 


Thiogs 
ficencthening 

with oyle of Quinces, Wormewood and Maftich, orelfe withacruft of breag 
-» tofted, and fecped in muskedine,and ftrewed over with the powders of Roles San. 


"Gers, and folzydto the ftomacke, or behinde neare tothe thirteenth vertebract the 


Epithemes, backesunderwhich place, Anatomieteaches, that the mouthof the ftomacie 


lyes. Epictiemesthall be applyed tothe liver and heart, totemper the too acide 
heate ottheie parts, and corre é& the immoderate dryneffe by their moderate big). 
dity. 

Now they fhall be made of refrigerating and humecting things, but chie*cly hy 


mecting; Tor teo great coldnefle would hinder the penetration the humidity 

the part lyingwithin. The waters of Bug!ofle, and Violets,of each a quarterne with 
alittlewhite wine is convenient forthis purpofe. But that whichis made of French 
barly, the feecces ot gourds, pompions, or Cowcumbers of cach thiee drams inthe 

mixed with much temperirg with cyle of Violets, or of {wecete al. 
tmends,is moft excellent of allother, Let clothes be dipped and fteeped in fuch epi. 
themes,and layd upon the partand réenued as oft as they become hot by the beare of 

the part. And becaufe in hecticke bodies, by reafonof the weakencfle of the dige. 

faculuc,many excrements arevfually heaped up, and dryedin the outs, it will 

be convenicut, all the rime of the difeafe to ufe frequently glifters made of the decos 
Cionof cooling and hame@ting hearbes, flowres, and {cedes wherein you {hall dif. 
loive Ca/sea with {ugarand oyle of Violets, or water-lillies. Bure becaufe there often 

What Happenvery dangerous faxes in a confirmed heétickefeaver, which thew the decay 


happening in Of of the body, and wafting of the corporacll fubftance,you fhallre. 
ahe&ickefea- - 


verindicates, {ft them with refuugerating and afifting medicines; and meates of orofler nourish. 
ment,as Kice,and Ciccrs;andapplication ofaftringent and ftrengthening remedies; 
How children ana udingthe cecoction of Oates or parched barly for drinke. Let the patient be kept 


cured, quiet and-fleeping as muchas may be,efpecially ifhe bea child. 
Forthus teaver frequently invades children by anger, great and long feare, orth 
~ too hormuike of the nurfe, overheating in the Sunne, the ufe of wine and other {uch 
like caufes;they fhall be kept ina hot and moyftayre, bave ancther Nurfe, and bec 
anoyotcd with oy le of vielets; to conclude, you fhal! apply medicines which are cons 

trary to che morbificke caufe. 
Cuar. XXXITI. 
Of the wounds ofthe Epigaftrium and of the whole lower belly, 

ae Hey He wounds of the lowerbelly are fometimes before, fomctimes behind, 
fome onely touch the furface thereof, others enter in: {ome pafle quite 
<4) through the body, fothat they often leave the weapon therein, {ome 
| happen without hurting the conteined parts; others pri¢voufly oficad 
Signes of a thete pares, the liver, {pleene, Romacke, cuts, kidneyes, wombe, blad- 
der urecersyand great veffells, fothat oft times a ereat pertion of the Kal] falis forth. 


We knew the Liver is wounded, when a ereat quantity of blood comes forth of the 
“wound, whena pricking paine reaches eventothe f{wordlike griftle, to which che 
Liveradheares, Ofttimes morecholeris caf up by vomit, and the patient 00 


Th, 
Whenthe ftomacke or any of the {mall puts are wounded, the meate and drink 


hard the hicker troubles 


she belly, and hee is taken with cold fweares , and his extreme parts waxe..cold. | 
bany ofthe greater gutts thall bee hurt,the excrements come forth at the woucd: 


When 


whofe remes are 
dretched bis 
The Bladder « 
fion of the 
bloodyy 
is wounded,t he | 
thofe of the Bla 
The wounds 
where fore 
or Hollow, ve! 
|yybut alia outw 
Butthe bloo 
whence fallowe 
writes,tbat the | 
of death. -Al& 
the arc 
itis of a Very 1 
humour from 
neyes, Vreters, 
that the ations 
gurbloodandt 
body,and lie in 
micdicines. Fu 
ly, are judged 
for the encomp 
them,as never 
whichmuch 
away accordin: 
tunes turme inc 
collection ot 
and tavour hav! 
I can by ing a 
cured at Melw: 
great quantity 
yet he recover®l 
Not long 
the body with & 
divers dayes td 
healed intwen 
by reafon of tk 


* 
J 
' 
| 
7 A ui Te 
| 
4 


sip: To. 


S In his bed: 
repeare 
Bur if 
in the barh 
rengthened 
of bread 
Roles. San. 
richracs the 
ic {tomac! 
(00 aciide 


d¢crate bumi. 


chiefely hy. 
into 
arteme with 
de of French 
Grams inthe 
fweeere 
fuch 


y the heare of 


le of the dige- 

PULS, it will 
ot the deco. 
you fhall dif 
¢ there often 
ew the decay 
thall re. 
offer nourifh- 
De remedics: 
atient be kept 


 feare, orthe 
nd other fuch 
‘urfe, and bee 

yluchére cons 


imes behind, 
1¢ pafle quite 
icrein, some 
vOuily ofiod 
vombe, blad- 
mi!) falls forth. 
s forth of the 
to which che 
sticnt lyes on 


e and drinke 
ckerrroubles 
Paine wrings 
vaxe cold. . 
it the woucd: 

When 


Spleeneis wound¢d,thert fowes ourthickeand blacke blood, the pacicac 
oppreffed with thirft, and chereare alfo the other fignes, which wee fayd 
accompany the wounded Livers | A ditiiculty of making water troudies che paticor 
chofereines are wounded, blood aspified forth with the Vrine, and he hatha paine 
dretched to his groines and the regions of the Bladder and Lefticles, ate hurts 
The Bladder or Veeicrs being wounded ,the flankes are pained,and thereyis a signstharthe 
fon ot the Petter or fbare,bloodis wade in fteadofvrinc, or the vring is very 
bloodys waich alfodivers times comes forth at the wound. When the wombe i 
wounded,the bleed breakes forth by the, privities, and the Symptomes are like 
thofe of the Bladder. | a Wounded, 
The wounds of tl: liver are dcadlyjfor this pargis the werke houfe of the blood, Frognosticks, 
wherefore neceflarie for lite; befides by wounds of theliver the branches of the Gate 
or Hollow, veines are cut, whenceen{ues a great flux of blood not cnely-inward-. 
ly,but alto outwardly, and confequenrly a diflipation ot the {pirits aod ftrength, 
Butthe blood whichis {hed iawardly, amongit the bowels pucreacs and corrupts, 
whence fallowes laftly death. Yet Paulus elipgmeta Lib.6.cap. 82, 
writes.that the lobe of the Liver may be cut away without necefl ry c nfequence 
of death. Alforthe wounds of the Ventricle and ofche {mall Guts, but chici¢ly of 
the Jejamum are deadly ; for many veffells runne tothe og empty Get,and 
itis ota very. nervous and flenderfubftaace, and belides 1¢ receives the cholericke 
humour from the bladder of the Gall. Soalfothe wounds of the Spleene; Kid- 
neyes, Veeters,Bladder, VWVomb and Gall, are commionly deadly, but alwayes ill, for 
that the a@tions of {uch parts are neceflary forlite ; befides,divers of thele are with- 
gut blood and nervous others of them receive the moift excrements of the whole 
body,andlic in the inuermoft part of the bedy, fothatthey docnoceafily admit of 
medicines. Furthermore,all wounds which penetrate toto the capacitie of the bel- 
ly, are judged very dangerous, though they doc nortouch the conteined bowells; 
for the encompeffing and new ayre entring in amongft the bowells, greatly harts 
them,as never Ufed to the feeling thereot ; addeé herero the diffipatioa of the {pirits 
Whichmuch weakens the firength. Neither canthe filth of wounds be watied 
away according to the minde of the Chirurgion, whereby it bappens, they divers 
timesturné into Fiftula’s,as we faide of woundsof the Cheft, and fo at length by 
colledtion of matrer.caule death. Yer I have drefied many who by Gods ailittance 
and favour have recovered of wounds paffing quite throughtheu bodies, 
Icanbringas a witnefle the fieward of the Portingall Embafladour, whom I 1itoris. 
cured at Melaz,of a wound made with afword fo ruoning through bis body, hata 
great quantity of excremeuts came torth of the wounded Guts,as he was a.drefiing, 
yet he recovered.. mt | 
Not long agone Giles Je Mai/fre a Gentleman of Pars was rupne quite through Another Hie 
thebody with a Rapier, fothathe veyded much blood at his mouth aad fundarpvat *°™* 
diversdayes topether whereby youknow the Guts were wounded; and yet he was 
healed intwenty dayes.. Inlike fortthe wounds of the greater veflells are mortal], 
by rcafon of the arcat effafion of bload and {spirits which enfues thercupon, 


Sig nes that 


ats XXXII; 


The cure of wounds of the lewer belly. 

w7aa@ He firft cogitation in curing of thefe wounds ought co be whether tkey 
Wes\ pierce into the capacitie of rhe Belly; for thofe which pafle no further 
than tothe (hall be cured like imple wounds which oncly 
 tequre union, But thefe which enter into the capacity muftbe cured 
alier anothermanners Fos oft times the Kallor Guts,or both fallforch 


sutwhich is wounded muft be fowed up with fuck a feanie a5Furriers or Glo- The 


a wroundgd’ 


pouder goade,of Gur, 


 mattich, 


“ES ule,as we formerly told you;aadthen you muft put upon ata 
M m Siliw 4 it 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
— 


Of the Greene and Bloody 


Mattich,Myrrbe, Aloes and Bole. Being fowed up, it muft not bee pur UP 


roufly together and at once into its place, but by little and Jittle, the Patient \ying ,, 


the fide'oppofiteto the wound. forexample,the right fide of the Guts 


wounded and falling out by the wound, the Patient fhall lye on his left fide, 


the Guts being wounded flide through the wound, then the Patient fhall lye 
~~ his head low downe,and his buttocks raifed up by putting a pillow under them. jf 


more cafy reftoring of the fallne downe Gut,and foon the contrary. Ifthe lower 


che upper part be burr, then muft he lye quite contrary the Guts falling down. 
wards by fucha fite,may give way tothele which are fallneouc through the young 


But often in this cafe,the Guts having taken cold by the encompaffing sire, fwe' yp 


re are diftended with winde,the which you meft difenfie before you put them int the;, 


place with a fomentation of the decoion of camomill ,melilote,anifeeds and 
applyed with a {punge.or conteined ina bladder; or clic with chickens, or wrelpe. 
cut alive inthe midft and layd upon the {welling;for thus they dee not onely cifcyf. 
the flatulency but alfo comfort the affli@ed part. But if the inflation cannot thus }. 


\difcuffed,the wound thall be dilated, that fothe Guts may returne the more freely 


The cure 
when the Kall 
talls out. 


fed? 6, 


their place. 

- Itthe Kall thall fall out,it muft be fpeedily reftored to its place, for it is very {ub. 
jet to putrifie;tor the far,whereof for the moft part it confifts, being expofed to th 
aire, éafily loofes its native heate, which is fmal] and weake, whence a mortification 
enfues. Hence is that of Hippocrates the Kall fall out,ic neceflarily putrifics. The 
Chirurgion fhal] know whether it putrifie, or not, by the blackmeffe and the cold. 
nefle you may perceive by touching it;neither muft you when it putrifies prefently 
reftore it to its place for fothe contagion of the purrifaion would {pread to rie 
of the parts : but what foever thereof is putrefied thal] be twitched and bound hard 
with a ftring and fo cut off,and the reft reftored to his proper place:but its gocd after 
cutting of it away to leave the firing ftill hanging thereat ,that {o you may plucke and 
draw forth whatfoever thereof may by being teo ftraight bound fall away into the 
capaciry ofthe belly. Somethinke be berteg to ler the Kall thus bound to hang 
forth nntill chat portion thereof whichis putrified fall away of it {elfe, and no: to cu: 
it off Burthey are much deceived for it hanging thus would not cover the gurs. whic! 
is the proper place. T he Guts and Kall being put up, if rhe wound be great and worth 
{peaking of, it muft be fowed with that furure which is termed Gafroraphis ; by 
this kind of future isthus made. The needle atthe firft putting in muft onely take 


holdof the per stoneum,8then on the oppofite fide onely of the fiefh letting per: 


Meth. 


tonzum alone and {0 goc along putting the needle from without inwards,anj trom 
withinoutwards, but fo that you onely take the mufculous fleth and skinne over *, 
and then oncly the peritoneum, untill you have fowed up all the wound. Hee which 
doth orherwifc fhall'undergoe this danger, that whereas the eoate peritonanm js 0! 
it felfe without blood,it being devided,or wounded cannot of it felfe be nnited 0 
felfe, therefore it requires 2n intercourfe of fieth : otherwife unlefle it be thus ual 
ted by the benefhie of the flefh intermixed therewith,there would remaine anvunce- 
rable Tumour after the wound is cicatrized on the outfide. But that which wee 
jayd before according to Galews minde, that allthe wounds mutt be fowed, it isnot 
fo to be taken as if that the wound muft be fowed up tothe very end:for in the lowe! 
part of the wound there muft be left a cerraine fmall vent by which the quitrure m2) 
pafic forth, which being whclly clenied and exhaufted,the wound muft be quite hee 
Jed up.But the wounds which fhall penetrateinto the fubftance of the liver,{pleene 
ventiicles, and other bowells, the Chirurgion thal! not fuffer them to be withou: 
medicines as if they were defperate, but here fhall fpare neither labour nor care 
crefle them diligently. For doubrfvl! hope is betrer than certaine defpaire. T hic blad- 


der, wombe, and righrgur being wounded, detergent and agg}utinative Chiok> 


fhall be put up by their proper paflages. 1 have read nothing as yet inany au:hor o 
the wounds of the Fat, for all of them-referre the cure thereof to the wounds 0! 


< Mutcles. Yet I will fay this by the way, that wounds of the fat how deepe foever they 


be, if they be onely fimple, may De drefied Without putting in ofany Tenr,bu one) 
cropping infome of my balfame, and then laying vpon ita plaifter of Gratis DY,“ 
fome fuch like,forfo they willfeale ina timc. 


for parts 
onc blow. But 
peceflary intr ull 
iadividualls 
to be very dili; 
chance at any t 
vered,the med 
pearing and hi 
handle ail chins 


cure. Yerthe 


~-yerbe is true. 


the legge on tl 
of the part, ti 
fcefle,trom w! 
ent falls into af 
quire a careful 
ry for the corr 
beene fo buid 
joynts, when t 
feare of paine, 
large Tendon 
mufcles, and; 
{word ,that thi 
laft they have| 
deavoured to 
like wounds |: 
his hurt leg b 
that the paric 


Zoe with 


a necdle, bod 
thing as of a: 
Picr, Or of 
Hence there 
20d the comp 


L 
29 
ecrw 
A pb, m (6 
& 
Bate Sor a 
UNO! 
The cure | 
the woun 
fat. 


annot thus be 
more freely to 


itis very ful. 
expoled to the 
mortification 
putrifies. The 

and the cold. 
ihes prefently 
read tothe reg 
nd bound hard 
it ts Pood after 
pay plucke and 
away into the 
bound to hang 
, and not to cut 
the guts which 
reatand worth 
froraphia ; bur 
mult onely take 
letting the pers- 
ards,and trom 
skinne ever it, 
nd. Hee which 
shonanm js 0! 
be nnited 
t be thus uni 
Naine anuncu- 
at which wee 
owed, ifisnot 
or in the lower 
Quitrure may 
ft be quite hea 
¢ liver,{plecne, 
to be withou- 
our nor care 
yaire. The blaé- 


ative 


nany author o! 
‘wounds of the 
epe foever they 
Tenr,burt onc’) 
of Gratia 


nat 


L15-1Q- Woundsof each Part. 


— 


Cuar. XXXY. 
Of the wands of the Groines,Yard and Tepicles: 


2 Henthe Groinesand neighbouring parts are wounded, we muft firft confi. 

der whether they pierce to within: andif they doe penetrate,ro what 
inward parts the come, whethertothebladder, the wombe, or right gut: 
for hele parts are Luch neare nerghbours that oft times they are all wounded with 
oncblow. But for the wounds of the Tefticles, and genital} parts, becaufe they are 
secellary infiruments for the preferving the /pectes by generation, or a fucceflion of 
individualls andto keepe all things quiet athome, therefore the Chirurgion ought 
tobe very diligent and carefull for their prefervation, Wherefore if they thould 
chance at any time to be wounded, they fhall be drefied as we have formerly deli- 
yered,the medicines being varyed according tothe ftate of the wound,and the ap- 
pearing and happening {yroptomes; for ic would be athing of immenic labour to 
handle all chings in particular. 


Crap. XXXVI. 
Of the Wounds of the Thighcs and Legees. 


Ge Ounds which have beene received on the infide of the Thighes, have of- 
pe cen caufed fuddaine death,itthey have come to the veine Saphema, or the 
great Artery, orcthe Nerves the aff sciates of chefe veffelis. Buc when 
they are (imple,there is nothing which may alter the ufuall manner of 
cure, Yetthe patient muft be carefull ro lye in his bed: for the vulgar Italian 
verbeistrue. L4 mano al petio/a gamba al lette, (chat is, chehand ow che orealt, and 
thelegee onthe bed.] But whcnthcy penetrate more deepcly into the fubftance 
of the part, they bring horrid and fearcfull {ymptomes, as an inflammation, anab- 
fecfle,trom whence oft timcsiuch aboundance of matter ifflues forth, that the Pati» 
ent falls into an Atrophia and con{umption. Wherefore fuch wounds and uicers re- 
quire a carefull and indvftrious Chirurgion, who,mey fitly make incifions neceffa- 
ry for the corrupt parts and callotiry of the fiftuicus ulcer, Some Chirurgions have 
beene fo bold as to fowe together theend af the Tendons of the Ham, and of other 
joynts,when they have becne quite curaiunder, But I durft never attempt 1t for 
feare of paine,convul fiuns.and the like horrid fymptomes, For the wounds of that 
large Tendon which js cc rapofed in the cailfe of the Legge by the concourfe of three 
mu(cles, andgves tothe heele, Ihave obferved that when it hath beene cut witha 
{word that the wounds have beene long aod hard to cure; and befides when at the 
laft they have beene healed, as foone as the Patient hath got out of his bed, and en- 
ccavoured to poe,they have growne ill and broke open apainc. Wherefore in fuch 
like wounds let the Patient have a care that he begin not te goe,or t00 boldly to ule 
bis hurt leg before it be perfe&ly cicatrized and the growne hard. Therefore 
that the patient may be in more fafery I judge it alcogether neceflary, that he ule to 
goc with Crutches for a good while after the sound is perfetly healed up. 


— 


Cuap. XXXVII. 
Of the wounds of the Nerves,ana nervous parts, 


the violent in- 

curfion of externall things;as by things which contufe, batter 2 
(under,as by the blow of a ftone,cudgel!,hammer,lance oullet ¢ 4 
by thebiting of greater teeth;or rhe pricking of lore iharpe vaing 
teedle, bodkin, penknife, arrow, fplinter; or the puncture of vencmous 
thing ,as of a Sea Dragon; or the edge of fome cutting thing asaiworc or RKa- 


PICT; or of ftretching things which violently reare afunder the nervous 6 dies. 
thercforeitis, that of fuch wounds {ome are fimple, others compvbns, 
the COMpounRd, {ome more compound than other, For of theic {ome are iu- 


Mm 2 perficiary 


“pat. He contiouity of the nervous parts is divers wayes loofed Dy th lent it 
cr and grinde in 


& 


rara YUN 
Nw 


Why wounds 
of the infide of 
the Thigh are 
off times 
deadiy, 


T helarge 

T enceon of the 
heele bard to 
conieudare, 


D itrerences 
drawne tror 


things 


ut UP boy 
Guars bein 
fide, lor he 
‘ne lowe, Part 
Malllyewi, | 
der them. 
alling dewne. 
h the woung 
up 
beminto the), 
and fennel} 
ns,or Whe! pes 
onely difcuffe | 
| 


Of the Greene and Bloody 


4.60 


Their 


Lim 
10, 


perficiary and fhort,others deepe and Jong ; fome runne along{t the ACT VOUs body 
othersrunne broadwayes; fome cut the part quite afunder, others onely a perj., 


thereof, The fympromes which follow upon {uch wounds are, vehement Paine. ang 
defluxion,inflammation,abicciie, feaver, de/zrium, fowniog, convullion, 
fohaceli:whence often death enfues by reafon of thatfympathy, which al! the ney. 


Whya puex yous partshave with the braine. Amongft all the wounds of the nervous pares, thers 
Gure ofa none more to be feared than a puncture, orpricke, nor any which caufeth mop. 


is deacly. 


A wound of 
rhenervou: 


partsindicates 


contrary to 
the genciall 
cure of 
wounds. 


Hifloric, 


M edecines ft 
for wounds 
of the nerycs. 


cruel] and dangerous {ymptomes. For by reafon of the ftraitnefle of the woung 

medicines can neyther be put in, northe fanious marter pafle forth:now the fanious 
matter by long fiay acquires virulencie, whereby the nervous parts are tainted ap; 
{wollne,iuffer paine,inflammation,convultions and infinite other fymptomes the/. 
the wounds are moft dangerous, by whichthe nervous and membranous bodies 
but halfe cut afundersForthe portion whereof which remaines whole,by its drawins 
and contracting its felfc cowards the originall ,caufeth great paine and convul(ion by 
{ympathy-T he truth hereof is evident in wounds of the head,as when the pericraniuy 
is halfe cur, or whenitiscutto apply a Trepan, Forthe cutting thereof infers farre 
preater paine,than when it is cut quite alunder. Whereforc it is fafer,to have the ne. 
vous body cut quite off, for foit hathno cOmuniry, nor confent with the upper parts 


neither doth it labour,ar ftrive to refit the contraction ot its felfe; now this contrari. 


ety,and as it were fight, is the caufe of painesyet there arifes another mifery from {uch 
a wouad,for the part whereinto thenerve which is thus cut infunder pafles thence 
wards loofeth its action, 


Cuarv. 
Ofthe cure of wounds of the nervous parts. 


es isthe ancient doGrine of the ancient Phifitions thatthe wounds of thentt- 
VOUS Parts {hould not prefently he ag elurinated(which norwithftandine the 


general! and indication ufuially taken from the folution ot continuity 
Guires)but rather chiefely if they be tob ftraite,that the pun@uies fhould be dilated 
by cutting the parts which are above them, and let them be kept long epen thatth 
filch may pafle freely forth and the medi¢itte enter well in. Yet J in many curcs have 
not followed this counfell,but rather that which the common indication requires. 

That cure is in frefh memory which I performed Monficur & Coca, a 
ofthe fpiritual! court,who dwelt in our Ladies fircete: he path¢ering and binding yj 
fome loofe papers,run a penknife which was hid amoneft them, through his band. Al: 
io one of bis neighbours who went to {pita piece of becfe thruft the {pie through th 
midft of his hand; Bur] prefently agelurinared both their wounds, without any da 
ger,dropping prefently in atthe firft dreffing a little of my ba]fame warme,& utting 


about ira repelling & altringent medicine, & Dy this meanes they were both of them 


healed ina short time,no fymptome thereupon happening. Yet I would mot have the 
young Chirurgion to run this hazard, for firft he muft be wel! practifed and acculio- 
med to know the tempersand ha'sits of men; for this manner of curing would 10 
doe well in a plethoricke body,or in a body replete with jl! humours,or enducd with 
exquitire fente. Therefore in fuch a cafe it will be fafer to follow the courfe here ft 
downe. For wounds of the nerves doe not onely differ from other wounds, butallo 
among themielves in manner ofcuring. For although all medicines which draw from 
farre,and wafte /anious humors, may b¢ reputed good fer the wounds of the nerves 
yet thofe which muft be applyed ro pun@ures and to thofe nerves which ai¢ 10 
wholly laid open, ought to be far more powerfull, fharpe and drying, yer fo that they 
be not Witheut biting that fo penetrating more deepe they may draw forth the mat 
ter,or con{wme and difcuffe that which eycher lics about the nerves, or 
their iubftance, Onthe contrary whea the finewes are bared from flefh and th 
acjoyning parucles, they ftand in neede bur of medicines, which may onely ory: 
Here you may furnifh your felves with fufficient ftore of medicins good for 
nerves howloever pricked.As Ri. Ter ebiath ven. olei veteris vite param 
Or Roles Terebinth. 5) wits .eaphorb, 38. Or BR.radices Dracontz £, 


lersana, gentiana exficcatas, pulverem redacias, cute J 


Lillyes of che 
vinegar 
paive 
praparat 
(yface be aropy 
very powerful 
cera quod 
another of che 
according to 
wounded bod 
with che intac 
‘weating forth§ 
into it {calding 
wound but ta 
foatula. For 
like as if they 
moft grievous 
{topping chem 
taine calc, 
and fo conicq 
and {preading 
by applying a 
made fomev! 
ready for this 
{ertcthe follow 
ry of the moti 
Charles the 
Caftelan his P 
whereof, th 
when as he by 
he felt a migh 


— 


be loofed,ozh 


aboutir,behc 
put it fi 


ped in oxycra 
at the 
ane 
Was neceflar\ 
tomcs whic! 
coy Op! 
into the 
Andthenall: 
\ inegar and 
We reneriy 
the botrome. 
Which fwear: 
by its atual! 
the humour 


| 
> 


IB. 


TVOUS Dody 
ly a Portion 
pane aad 
rene 
all the 
S Parts, there 
Caufeth more 
‘the Wound 
the fanious 
tainted and 
omes;of thefe 
bus bodies are 
its drawine 
onvulfion by 
Per icraninm 
of infers farre 
) Nave the Ncr- 
Upper parts, 
this contrari- 
ery from fuch 
cs thence for. 


nds of rhe ner- 
ithftanding the 
continuity re- 
wuld be dilated, 
open thatthe 
any curcs have 
On requires, 
ocq, a Procter 
nd binding up 
h his band. Al- 
sit chrough the 
thout any dan- 
rme,&purting 
‘both of them 
ld mot have the 
dand accailo- 
og would not 
endued with 
ourfe here fet 
unds, butallo 
ich draw from 
of the nerves; 
vhich are not 
et fo that they 
forth the mat- 
moiltens 
flefh and che 
iay onely dry: 
good for che 
wits param 
Brionis 


cote 
Ant 


10. 


Wounds of each Part. 


gut 0lto, aub weteri ; drop hereof warme iste the wound as muchas fhall 
coe, Orclicputfome Hogges,Geofe, Capons, or Beares greafe, oldoile, oile of 
Lillyes or the like, to Gaibanum, pure Rozin, opopanax dillelved in aqua viteand 
frong vinegar. Or bypericonis, fambuct, cy de euphorbio an. <j. fulpburis vivi 
palvertf{ese 38 gummi ammoniaci ij.aceti boni vernsiam terre 


rapar st 5) omnia fimalad comfumptionem aceti, Let as much hereot as {hall . | 


(yface be dropped into the wound;thea apply this following cerate, which drawes 
very powerfully. Roles Supra (cripte serebinth albi cum gummi, 
AMMOBIAC bdelly in acete diffolutoram an.3\i.refia pini,gum.clemi, pices mavalts an.3V; 
cere quod fufftcct, fist ceratum [abis molle. ec cautt ufe fomewhiles one, fomewhiles 


gnother of hele medicines in punctures of the Nerves with choife and judgement, | 


according to their conditions,manner,depth, and the temperaments and habit of che 
wounded bodies. Butif thepaine yeeld not to fuch remedies, but rather increafe, 


what wounds 


ot ‘he Nerves 


with che inflammation of the affeGed part,a {welling of the lips of the wound, and wut be burns, 
‘eating forth of a ferous, thinne and virulent matter or filth, then you fhall poure / 


into it {Calding oyle, and fhall couch three or foure times not onely che f{urface of the 
wound but the bottome thereof with a ragge dipped therein and tyed tothe end ofa 
fostula. For this wil! take away the fenfe from the Nerve, Tendon, or Membrane, 


likeasif they were burnt withacautery, and fo the painewill beeafed. So in the / certain: 
nedyneia 


molt grievous paines of rotten teeth,the thruftiag of an hot iron into their roots,or paine of the 
topping chem with cotten dipped in oyle of Vitrioll, or aque vite,gives moft cer- 


tainc cafe; for by burning the Nerve which is inferted into their roots, the fenfe 


and fo confequently the paine is taken away. So alfo in malignant, gnawing, cating, Why 5(charo- 


and {preading ulcers which are alwayes affociated with much paine, the paine ceafes 


ucks be 


- 


uled to (preaz 


by applying an Eicharoticke,asthe pouder of Alume, or Mercury, O© agyphiacum ding ulcers. 


made fomewhat more {trong than ufuall. That the yong Chirurgion may be more 
ready for this practife and the ufe of the former remedies, have thought good to in- 
(ercthe following Hiftory both forthe lateneffe of the thing and the pleafing meme- 
tyof the moft jaudible Prince. 

Charles che ninth the French King being ficke of a feaver,Monfieur Chape/am and 
Caftelan his Phifitions thoughric fit hee fheuld be let blood ; for the performance 
whereof, there was called a Chirurgion wondrous famous for that bufinefle ; but 
whenas he by chance had pricked a nerve in ftead ofa veine,the King cryed our,that 
he felta mighty paine in that place. Then I bid,that the ligature fhould ftraightwayes 
be loofed othe: wife the arme would prefently be much {welled. But he going floewly 
aboutit,behol dthe arme begun to {well with fuch contraGtion,that he could aot bend 
it,nor put it forth,and cruel! paine molefted not enely the pricked particle, burallrhe 
whole member befids.1 forthwith laid upon the wound a plailter of Bafilicd,co hinder 
the agolutigation thereof,& then 1 wrapped all the arme in a double linnen cloth dip- 
pec in Oxycrate, putting upon it an expul five ligature,which beginning at the wriit & 
ending at che top of the fhoulder might keepe the bleod and {pirits from feare of de- 
fluxion and inflammation. This being thus performed ,we went afide to contult whar 
Was neceflary to be done,both toafiwage the painc,as alfo to divert the other fymp- 
tomes which ufually happen upén of the nerves.1 being defired,thus deli- 
opinion,that in my minde,there were nothing berter,than prefently co drop 
intothe wouad fome oyle of Turpentine warmedand mixed witha littie agua vite. 
And then all the arme fhould be covered witha plaifter of Diacalcitheas diflolved in 
vinegar and oyle of Rofes,bound over and befides with the expullive ligature, which 
formerly mentioned.For the oyle and agua vitehave a faculty to penetrate imto 
the bottome of the wound, & to exhauft and dry up,the ferous and virulent humour, 
Which fweats from the {ubftance of the pricked nerve; and alio to mitigate the paine 
by its actual! heate. Furthermore the emplafter Déacalcstheos hath afaculty todifloive 
the humour which hath already fallen downe into the arme, and to hinder 
the entrance and defluxion of any new matter, And the ligarureisfuch as by iis 
Mederate aftriction would ferve to firengthen the mujfcles, aad to prefie our ane 
‘epell the humours which were fallen downe istothe upper part, and to prohi- 


bite that which is ready to fall downe,Mine advice being approved of the Phyfitions 
M m 3 both 


A famous his 


Rorie, 


[ 


Of the Greene and Bloody Be To. 


— 


A difenfsing 
and drying ca: 
ta, lalme, 


A Hitorie, 


A nanodyne 
avd Sareotick 
Baliame. 


A general! 
rule for all 
svounde of 
all Neryous 
parts, 


both in word and deede,the paine was mitigated. Burt che humour ftayed in the ¢ at 
for the diflolving and drying whercof,this following remedy was uled. . 

Ry far hordei or obi an.3i}. flor. chamem, cr melslot.an.p.i) butyr, recentis fine 

ih.lixivy barbstonforis quod fufficst fiat catapla/ma ad formam thefe 
dies the King at che laft after three months {pace was perfectly healeG, fo thet ther. 
remained no figne of the depraved action inthepart. Butif at any time there (},,» 
be fo great contumacie,that it will not yeeld tothefe meanes, but that there is inp, ’ 
nent danger ofa convuifion ; it will bee better tocut it in funder whether Nery. 
‘Tendonor Membrane, than to expofe the patient to the danger of a deadly conyy)’ 
fion; for thus indeede the peculiar a@tion of that pafr will be loft, butthe who}. 
body preferved hereby ; for fo we had determined by common confent, thar if rh. 
paine which afflicted the King would not yceld to the preicribed remedics, eythe, 
to poure infcalding oyle, or elfero cur rhe finew quite afunder, 

For the late and {ad memory of Miftris Courtin dwelling in the fireete of the ho. 
ly-Croffe was inour mindes, who ofa veinenot well opened in her arme fe] into 
a Gangrene and torall mortification of that whole part, of which fhee died becaufe 
fhee was not drefled with the formerly mentioned medicines. Yet wee muft 2b. 
fteine from thefe too powerfull remedies, when the pricked nerve lye bare, 
elfe the paine would be ercreafed, and more grievous fymptomes follow. Where. 
fore as 1 have formerly withed,more milde medicines mult be applyed, which ma 
dry up the ferous humour without biting or acrimonye,as R.serebiath. venct. 
vof lotaxij.bolt armen, fabtiliter fimal. Our Baliame ali 
is excellent in this cafe,and this of Figoes which followes. 

omphacint oles de tercbisth fucct plantag. femin bypericonis 
quantaly contrits, prapar.3 1), decies Lota cum Agua plamtagin.3 i} antime- 
ni Bi. bircint,e> 3v.verminm terrefrinm cum vino lotorum $13. balsant 
omnia fimul dempta tutiaincyatho decotiiont hordei, ax comfumptionem vini, 
admoveantur, aadende tutiam, Cr fiat limirmentum cum cera clos. 
This linimentaf{wages paines,and covers the bared nerves with fich, 
This cure of punctured nerves, may with choife and judgement and obfe-ving the 
proportion of the parts be transferred to the pricked Tendons and membranes, Bur 


take this as a generalland common rule,that all neryous bodies howfoever burt 
to bee comforted by anointing them with hot oyles, fuch as the oiles of Bayes, 
Lillies, of Wormes, Sage, orfome other fuch like remedy being applyed to thei 
originalls and more notable paffages ; astothe originall of the fpinall marrow, the 
armepits and groines. Neither doe I thinke it fitin this place to omit anafe’ 
which fometimes happens to the large Tendon of the heele, of which we former- 
ly made mention, For itoft times isrent or torne by a fimall occafion without any 
figne of injury or folution of continuity apparent on the ourfide as by a little jumpe, 
the flipping afide of che foore,the roo nimble getting on horfeback,or the flipping of 
the foote out of the ftirrop in mounting into the fadide. Whenthis chance happeosit 
will give acracke like a Coachmans whip;above the heele, where the tendo is bro- 
ken,the deprefled cavity may be fele with your finger, there is great paine in the pa". 
& the parry is not able to goe. This mifchance may be amended by long ly ing and: 


iting in bed, and repelling medicines applied to the part affected in the beginning 
the difeafe, tor feare of more grievous fymptomes;& then applying the Blacke pis" 
fter,or Dsacalesthees or fome other fuch,as neede thal! require ; neither mutt we her 
upon promife to our felvesorthe patient certaine or abfolure health. Bur ont 
contrary at the beginning of the difeafe we mutt ferere!! that it wil never be fo cure’ 
but thar fome reliques may remaine,as the depreffion of the part affe Ged and dep! 
vation of the a€tion and going ; for the ends of this broken or relaxed bY 


ore of thickenefleand contumacic cannot cafily be adjoyned, nor being 
ned,united. 


and membranc 
the Nerves ar 
like parts will « 
jarernall,or as: 
rhe bending O: 
rable Veines, A 
brings 2 great 
we mult re{ilt 
ftaying bleed: 
parts (hall 
the quittul’ 
ftrewed upon 
fubssles. And t 
compofed of 
floure. Ifiti 
thicke, left 
egge,oyle | 
more {hort an 
may pafic aw 
relaxing moli 
fharpenefie o 
ficcant med: 
Ri fur {ur 
binth.3 ii} 
sums 
wine, W heat 
tine and (uch 
thereby affw 
INCCICINC IS 4 
Ru, Tere: 

And a! 
much poude 
you defore t 
ulcers but ¢ 
wounds tn t! 
Summer. 
and hinders 
Cold aguifh 
Of wounds 
and 
of that hum 
for his DOUT! 
flowes out o 
their radical 
bones. No 
z€a flowing 


caufes paine 


‘ 
attie 
» 


ete of the ho. 
Ime fell ines 
died becaufe 
wee muft ab. 
lye bare, for 
Ow, Where. 
5 which may 
Ballfame alio 


al;- 
14.31). antime- 
balliant 
Vint, 
cera aloa. 
es with ficth. 
obferving the 
mbranes. Bur 
hurr.are 
iles of Bayes, 
Plyed co their 
imarrew, the 
Omit an affea 
ch we former- 
without any 
a little jumpe, 
the flipping of 
ince happens i 
tendon is bro- 
ine in che part, 
lying andre- 
beginning of 
he Blacke pia'- 
muft we here- 
1. Bur onthe 
ver be fo cured 
ed and depré- 
Tendon by 
being adjey- 


Wounds of each Part. 


L 13.10. 
Cx APs XXX IX, 
Of the wounds of the joynts, 


ae Ecaufe the wounds of the joynts have fomething proper and peculiar to 
z© fore | intend totreat of themin particular. Indeede they are alwayes very 
dangerous, and for the moft part deadly; by reafon of the nervous productions 
and membranous Tenadons wherewith they are bound and engirt, and into which 
the Nerves are inferted : whereby it comes to paffe,that the exquifite fenfe of {uch 
likeparts willeafily bring maligne lymptomes, efpecially if the wound poffeffe an 
gternall,oras they terme ita domeftique pare of them; as for example,the armepits, 
rhe bending of the arme,the inner part of the wrift, and ham, by reafon of the no- 
rable Veines, Arteries and Nerves of thefe parts, the loofed continuity of all which 
brings a great flux of blood, fharpe paineand other malignant {ymptomes, all which 
we mult refift according to their nature and condition, as a flux of blood wich things 


themfelves, befides the commonmnature of wounds of the Nerves, there- tvynts 


Vrhy vwrounds 


acc malignens, 


faying bleeding;paine with anodynes, If the wound be large and wide,the fevered Thess. 


parts {hall be joyned with a future, leaving an orifice in the lower part, by which 
the quitture may pafle forth, This following pouder of Yigees deicription mufi be 
frewed upon the future, 

boli armen. terre ficil,an, 3ij, aloes, maftich, an.3j.fist pulvis 
fubtila. And thenthe joynt muft bce wrapped about with a repercuffive medicine 
compofed of the whites ofegges, a littleoyleof Rofes, Bole, Maftich, and barly 
floure. Ifit beneedefulltoufea Tent, let it be fhore and according to the wound 
thicke, Iefticcaule paine: and moreover letit beeannointed with the yolke of an 
egee,oyle of Rofes, wafhed turpenetine and a little faffron, But if the wound bee 
more (hort and narrow, it fhalibe dilated, ifthere be eccation, that fothe humour 
may pafleaway more freely. You muftreft the part, and beware of uling cold, 
relaxing mollitying , hume@ing, andun@uous medicines, unlefie peradventure the 
fharpenefle of the paine muft be mitigated, For onthe contrary, altringent and de- 
ficcant medicines are good, as this following cataplafme. 

macs, farin bordei fabarum an cham 
binth.3iij mellis comrnnnss myrtins =) oxymelstis, vel com.quan- 
tums fuffictt, fiat cataplalma ad formam pultis.Or you may compofe one of the Lees of 
wine, Wheate branne,the pouder of Oaken barke, cyprefle nuts, galls and Turpen- 
tineand fuch like, haveanaftringent, ftrengthning anddrying qualitie, and 
thereby affwaging paine,and hindering the defluxion of humours. This following 
medicine isaftringentand agglutinative, 


param, pulveris maflich. aloes,myvrbaboli armen. an, 


dij. And alfo our balfame will be good in this cafe,1f fo be chat, you adde hereto fo 


much pouder which dryes without acrimonic as occafion fhall ferve. ladmonifhed 


you before tégake heede of cold,and now againe;for it is hurtfullto all wounds and 
ulcers, but efpecially to thefe of the nervous parts;hence it is that many dye of {mall 
wounds in the winter, who might recover et thefame wounds though greater in the 
Summer, For cold according to Hippocrates is nipping to ulcers, hardens the skin, 
ind hinders them frem fuppuration,excinguilheth paturall heate,caufes blackenefle, 
cold aguith fits,convulfions anddiftentions. Now divers excrements are caft forth 
of wounds ofthe joyats,butchicfely albugineous,that is,refembling the white ofan 
Cege,and mucous,and formetime a very thinne water, all which fayour of the mature 
of that humour which nourifheth thefe parts. For toevery part there isappropriate 
for his nourifhment and confervation, a peculiar Balfame, which by the wound 
flowesout of theifame part.as out of che branchesof the Vine.when they are pruned, 
their radicall moifture or juice flowes, whence alfo a Calas procecdsin broken 
bones, Now thisfame mucous aad albugincous Lumour, flow and as it were fro- 
zea flowing from the wounded joynts,thewesthe cold diftemper of the parts, whick 


caufes paine, motto bc orecome by medicines onely potentially hot, Wherefore tg 
correé 


- 


An adtringent 
and drying 
catapla(oe. 


Apher, 


What matter 
ufually Howes 
from wvounds 
of the soya, 


r 
410 The pap, 
fine ale 
that there 
there {hats 
| cre Is 
3 
ut the whol. 
that if the 
CaiCS, eythe, 


ki 


a 


O f the Greene and Bloody 


Why thines 
aGtually hore 
be apply= 
edto the 
wounded 

joy nts. 

Of the fite 


and poture of 


wounded 
10ynts, 


Ligaments 


more dry than 


Nerves,and 


withoutfenfe. eit 


L IB. TO 


correct that.we muft apply things aQually hor, as beafts and {wines bladdersha)e, 


full of a difeufling decoétion,or hot bricks quenched in wine. Such actuall heate help. 
nature to concoét and difcuffe the fuperfluous humour impact in the joynrs, and 
ftrengthens them ; both whichare very neceflary becaufe the maturall heate of jh. 
joynts is foinfirme that it can f{carfe actuate the medicine unlefie it be helped wit 
medicines actually hor. Neither muft the Chirurgion have the icaft care of thes 

ure and pofture ofthe part, for a vicious pofture increafes ill fymptomes, ufes ty 
to the very part though the wound be cured, diftortion cop, 
traGtion: which fault leaft he fhould runne into, let him obferve what I thal! no 
fay ; If the forepart of the fhoulder be wounded,a great boulfter mutt be und=r;}, 
armepit,and you muft carry your arme ina icarfe, {0 that it may beare up the iowe, 
part ofthe arme, that forhe top of the fhoulder may be clevated fomewhat hisher 
and that fo it may be thereby more fpeedilyand happily agglutinated and coafo)j. 
dated. Ifthe lower part be wounded, when flefh begins to be generated and th: 
lips of the wound to meere, you muft bid the patient to moove and ftirre bis armes 
divers wayes ever andanon, forifthat be omitted or negligently done, whea irjs 
cicatrized thea it wil be more ftiffe and leffle pliable to every motionyand yet there |: 
a further danger leaft the arme fhould totally loofe its motion, If the wound be upor 
the joynt of the elbow, the arme fhall be placed and fwathed ina middle pofturs thy 
is, which neither too ftrairly bowes it, nor holds it too ftiffly our;for orherwile wher 
it is cicatrized,there will be an impediment either in the contra@ien or exteafion, 
When the wound 1s inthe wrift,or joynts of the fingers either externally or interna). 
ly the hand be kept halfe fhur,continually mooving a ball therein. For if th 
fingers be held ftratglat ftrerched forth, after it is cicatrized,they will be unaptto take 
up or bold any thing,which is their proper faculty. But if after it is healed, it rernaine 
halte fhutno great inconvenience will follow thereon; forfohee may ule his hand 
divers wayces to his {word,pike bridle and inany thingelfe, Ifthe joynts of the Hip 
be wounded, you muft {0 place the patient rhat the thigh bone may be kepr in the Ci. 
vity of the hucklebone,&may not part ahaires breadth therefrom,which fhal bz don: 
with linnen bouliters and ligatures applyed as is fitting, and lying full upon his dacke, 
When the wound fhal begin to cicatrize,the patient fhall ufe to moove his thigheve- 
ry way, leaftthe headof the Thigh-bone fticke in the cavity of the huck!e-bone 
without motion. Ina woundoftheknee, thelegge mutt be placed ftraight our, if 
the patient defire nor tobe Jame. WVhen the joynts of the feere and toes are wou. 
ded, thefe parts fhall neither be bended in nor out, for otherwife hewill not be able 
to 


Toconclude, the fite of the foote and legge, is quitecontrary to that of che arm: 
aad hand, 


Of the wounds of the Ligaments, 


He wounds of tke Ligaments, be fides the common manner of curing the! 
of the Nerves, have nothing pecyliar,but that they require more poweriul! 
for their agelurination,deficcation and confolidating.bozh be- 
caulc the Ligamentall parts are harder, and dryer, and alfo for that they are voyd of 
fence. Therefore the forefaid cure of Nervesand joynts may be ufed for thefe 
wounds for the medicines in both are of the fame kin de, but here they oughtto be 
ftrongerand more powerfully drying. The Theorie and cure of all the {ympwme 
which fhall happen thereupon have beenc expreffed in the Chapter of curing t° 
wounds of the nervous parts,fo that heere we fhall neede to {peake nothing of them, 
for there you may finde as much as you will. Wherefore here let us make an cad of 
wounds,and givethankes to God the author and giver of al! good for che happy pice 
ceffe of ourlabours, and Jet us pray that,thac which remaines may be browelit (04 


happy ead,and fecure for the health and fafety of good people, 
The cmd of the tenth Booke, 


Polydore Vu) 
ventor of rhis 
calion. He 
apouder (WwW! 
Gunpouder. 
thereot by ac 
hre,caftsthe 
at the noveity 
knowne facul: 
ofinaimall | 
muinde. VV hei 
of his cng 
Cledia.in thi 
vention muft 
on{us the 
hebefeiged t 
fhot as ir wer 
the Chronic! 
Toledo, chat 
King of Sawai 
Of certaine hi 
than our Gu: 
they now hav 


nae 
| a= 
> | 
ONT ww 
| 
\ 
lid 
Ry 
\ ne 
| ow | 
i 
4 
HAP. Lue 
- 


= 
ry é 


tated and the 
rre his 
it 
id yet there is 
Und be Upon 
pofture thar 
lerwile 
OF €xtenfion. 
OF internal. 
Nn. For ifthe 
uNapt to take 
d, it rernaine 


MADE GVNSHOT, 
OTHER FIERIE 
SORTS 


Tut Ereventu Booke. 


T he Preface. 


—— Have thought geod here to premife my opinion of the ori- 


ule his hand einall, encreafe, and hurt of hery Engines, for that, lhope 
its of the Hip it will bean ornament and grace to this my whole creatife: 
ept in the as alfoto intice my Reader,as it were with thefe juackers,to. 
h {hal be done our following Banquet fo much favouring of Gunpouder, 
on his backe, For thus it fhall bee knowne to all whence Guns had their 
his thigh eve- originall,and how many habits and {hapes they have acqui- 


huckle-bone 
aight our, if 
bes are wouL- 
lnot be able 


red from poore and obfcure beginnings;and laftly how hurt- 
full to mankind the ufe of themis. 

Polydore Virgillwrites thata Germane of ob{cure birth amd condition was the in- ise 
ventor of this new engine which wetcrme a Gun, being induced thereto by thisoc~ "reer" 
cafion, He kept in a mortar covered witha tyle, or flate,tor fome orher certaine ules 
apouder (which fince that time for its chicfe and new knowne faculty, is named 
Gunpouder.) Now it chanced as hee ftrucke fire witha fteeleand flint, a {parke: 
thereof by accident fell into the mortar, whereupon the pouder fuddainly catching 
nrejcaftsthe ftone or tyle which covered the mortar, ap on high; he flood amazed: 
atthe hoveity and {trange effec of the thing, aad withall obferved the formerly UD-: 
knowne faculry of the pouder; fothat hethought good to make experiment there-. 
of ina {mall Iron trunke framed for that purpefe according to the intention of his. 
nuinde. When all things were correfpondent to his expectation, he firft {hewed the : 
ule of his engine to the Venetians,when they warred with the Genoveles about Foffe : 

Cledia,in the yeare ot our Lord 1380. Yet inthe opinion of Peter Adefzas, their in- rap8.pios, 
vention muft have beene of greater antiquity ; for it isread in the Chronicles of Gardew, 
Aiphon{us the cleaventh King of Cafsle, who fubdued the liles Argezsres, that when 
he befeiged the cheefe Towne in the yeare of our Lord 1343. the befeiged Moores 
{hot as it were thunder againft the affailants, out ¢f lron mortars. But we bave read io 
the Chronicles written by Peter Bifhop of Leons, of that Alpbon/ws whe conquered 
Toledo, chat in acertaine fea fight fought by the King of Tuas, againtt the Moorifh 
King of whofe part King A/phen{us favoured, the Twaetans lightning out 
© ofttaine hollow Engines or Trunkes with much noife, Which could be no other, 
an our Guzs, though mot attained te that pertection of art and execution which 


hey now have. 


of the arme 


curing thefe 
re powerful! 
ing: both be- 
are voyd of 
led for thefe 
ought to be 
fymptomes 
f curing che 
ing of them, 
tke an end of 


happy pro» 
brenght ro a 


~ 
1B. 4.05 
Half. 
I fhali HOw 
Ye under the : 
confol, 
| 
| 
| 


4.06 Of wounds made by Gunfhot, 


| ] thinke the devifer of this deadly Engine hath this for his recompenc. 

that his name fhould be hidden by the Ae tonefl- of perpetual! ignorance, as bo» 

mcriting for this his mofk pernicious invention, any mention from potteriry, Ye, 

Andrew Thevet in his Colmography publifhed fome few yeares agone, wher hes 
comes to treate of the Swevi,the inhabitants of Germany,brings upon the autho,;, 

& credite of a.certaine old Manufcript,that the Germane the inventer of this war|ij. 
Engine was by profefiona monke and Philofopher or Alchymift, borne at Frsburg, 

and named Com/taztine Ancizen. Howfoever it was,this kind of Engine was 

Bombarda(i)a Gun, fromthatnoife it makes, which the Greekes and Latings 

Tho reafon of ding to the found call Bowsbm then in the followingages,time, art apd mans malic), 
ee ou{nefle added much to thisrude and wnpolifht invention, For firft-tor the marte, 

Brafle and Gopper, mettalls farre morc etactable, fufible and leffe fabje co ry’ 

€ame as {upplies to Iron, Thea forthe forme, that rude and undigefted 
mostat-like mafle hath undergone. many formes and fafhions, even.fo farre as jr ic 

gotten upon whecles, that fo it might run not onely from the higher ground, bur alf, 

with more rapide violence to the ruine of mankiade ; when as the firft and rug, 

mortars {cemed not to bee fonimbly traverfed, nor fufficiently cruel! for ourde. 

ftruction by the onely cafting torth of Iron& fire. Hence fprung thef¢ horrible mop, 

fiers of Canons,double Canons. Baftards, Mufquits, feild peices; thefe 

and furious bealts,Culveriaes, Serpentines, Bafilif{ques,Sackers, Falcons Falconets, 

and divers other names not onely drawne from their figure and making, bur alf 

the effets oftheir crucity. Wherefore certainly I cannot fuficiently admire 
the wifedome of our Anccftors, who have fo rightly accommodated therm with 
names agreeable rotheir natures; as thefe who have not onely taken them fromthe 
{wilte{t birds of prey,as Falcons; but alfefrom things moft harmefull and hateful! 
to mankinde,fuch as Serpents,Snakes,and Bafilisks, That {fo wee mightclearely di. 
{cerne,that thefe engines were made for noother purpofe, nor with other intear, bur 

oncly to be imployed forthe {peedy and cruell flaughter ofmen; and that by onely 

hearing them named we might deteft and abhorrethem, as pernicious enemies of 

ourlives. [let pafie other engines of this ofspring, being for their quantitic {mall, 

but fo much the more pernicious aad harmefull,for that they nearer affaile our lives, 

and may trayteroufly and forthwith feazeupon usnot thinking nor fearing any {uch 

— thing; fothat we can fcarfe have any meanes of efcape; fuch are Piftolls anc othet 

of Piftels, {mali hand-guns, which for fhortnef{e you may carry in your pocket, and fo privily 
and {uddainly taking them forth oppreffe the carelefle and fecure. Fowling >cict: 

which menufually carry upontheir fhoulders,are of the middle ranke of theicco- 

gines, asalfo Muskets and Caleevers,which youcannot well difcharge unlefle ly:0g 
uponaReft, which therefore may be called Breaft-guas for that they are not laid 

torhe checke,but againft the Breaft by reafon of their weight and fhortneffe; Al 

which have beene invented for the commodity ef footemen, and light howemet. 
This middie fort of engine we call in Latine by a generall name Se/opms, in imitation 
of the found, and the Italians who terme it Sclopetere ; the French call ic Harguchu/ 
a word likewile borrowed from the Italians, by reafon of the touch-hole by whic! 
you give fire to the peice,for the Italians calla hole tearmed, 
Bow, for that at this prefent itholds the fame place in martiall affaires, as ce bow 
did of old ; and as the Archers formerly, foat this day the Mufquetiers are plictd 
infront, From the fame wretched fhoppe and magazine of cruelty, are al! forts of 
Mines, Countermines pots of fire,traines, fiery Arrowes,Lances, 
rells.bails of fire.burning faggots, Granats,aod all fuch fiery engines and Inventio0s, 
whichclofely itutted with fewell and matter for fireand caft by the defendants 
the bodies and Tents of the affailants,eafily take fire by the violence of their moto 
Certainelya moft miferable and peraicious kinde of invention, whereby we of 
{ee a theufand of heedeleffe men blowne up with a mine by the force of gunpoude’ 
orherwhiles inthe very heate of the conflict you may {ce the ftoureft (ouldicers 
zed upon with fome of thefe fiery Engines,to burne in their barpeffe ae waters 06195 
fufficieotly powerfull toreftraine and quench the raging and watting violence 0! {uct 


fire cruelly {preading over the body and bowells, Se it was net fufficicnt 6° 
gi 


4rmes, tren 


fpeedy 
gwne perditio 
preffe man, fot 
by God. Ver! 
which the ancy 
bowes, Slings 
Rammes,Ho 
childith fport 
invent te 
which can bec 
their operatio 
thunder and 
cruelty ofthe 
both their 
with thunder 
eoucht theres 
Nature be 
ftrength : Fo 
with it,doth 
than they doe 
come,whith¢ 
but more are 
by the ancien 
trate deeper 
the deeper C 
not crouch rhe 
ry both 16 an: 
teroner of G 


thoughralls 


alwayes cart 
that this kine 
he madé hi 
ofall chefe 
that is faincdl 
the Seale or 
lence of the 
Lattly,this: 
thunder ma 
founding of 
fuch greac 
is caufcd Be 
tO morere 
Oppolition,# 
aifo there a: 
heard. Thi 
that in Wis 
fty andcold 
Ceives wh 
der. Atid 
halations off 
as the inve: 
peftilenee i: 
with : 
Groke abd 
hon atone 
fallsby@had 


ae v 
al 
} 
j 
“4 ‘ 
4 
‘ 
| 
a 
i 
i 
4 
3 
i 
a 
4 
/ 
4 } a 
| 


ees ren and fire to deftru& ion ,unleffe alfo thatthe ftroake might be more 


and, bur 
irft and Sude 
Il for ourde. 
Orrible Mon. 
thele crye} 
IS Falconets, 
ng, bur alfy 
ently admire 
d them with 
hem from the 
Land hateful] 
nt clearely di» 
der Intent, bur 
hat by onely 
US enemies of 
lancitie fmall, 
aile our lives, 
ing any {uch 
olls and other 
and {fo privily 
wiing peices 
cof thele en- 
unleffe ly mg 
cy are not laid 
ormeffe; All 
bt hosfemen. 
s, In imitation 
t Harquebufe, 
by which 
d, Arcus(t) & 
5, as the Bow 
ers are placed 
re all fortsot 
icbowes,at- 
id Inventions, 
endants upea 
their motiod. 
>by we oftes 
gunpouder; 


fouldiers 
warers being 
olence of {uch 
cient co have 

gi mcs. 


foeedy we had furnilhed them, as it were with wings, fo ro fly more haftily toour 
gene perdition,furnifhing fiche- bearing death wich wings fe mere {peedily to op- 
preffe man, for whofe prefervation, all things conteined inthe world were created __ 

God. Vetily when lconfider with my felfe all che forrs of warlike Engines, , - 
which the aticients fed whether in thefield in fet battells,as Bowes, Darts |Croffe- of dhe 
powes, Slings or inthe affault of Citties,and fhaking or overturning their walls, as 
Rammes, Horfes, wooddan towres flingsand fuch like; theyfeeme to mecestaine 
childith fports and games made onely in imitation of the former. For thefe mo- 
deroc inventions are fuch as eafily exceede all the beft appointed and cruel! Engines 
which can bee mentioned orthought upon,in the fhape,cruelry and appearance of 
their operations: For what in the world is thought more horrid or fearetull chan 
thunder and lightning ? and yet the hurtfulnefle of thunder is almoft nothing ro the 
cruelty of thefe infernal! Engines which may eafily appeare by comparingtogeraer 
both their cffeetss Manalone of all creatures is not-alwayes killed by being touched 
with thunder; but it immediatly killeth all other things which are {ubjecé tobee —— 
roucht therewith, | 

Nature beftowing this honour upon him, {eeing fo many creatures exceede him in 

ftrength: For all things ly contrary toman; and man, unlefle hee bee overthrowne 
with it,doth not dye thereof But thefe firee{pitting Engines doe no more {pare man, 
than they doe other creatures,and kill without diflerence frem whence foever they 
come,whither {ocver they are carried,and howfoever they touch, Therearemany, 
but more are faid to be the remedies againft thunder ; for befide the charmes where- pig: cié.2. 
by the ancient Romans did fuppofe they might be drivenaway, they never pene- #55. 
trate deeper into ground than five foote, therefore fuch as were tearcfull chought - 
the deeper Caves moft fafe. Ofthofe things which grow outof theearththey doe - 
not touch the Bay tree, and that was the caufe that it was counted afigne of vidto- 
ry both in ancient and modernetimes, Wherefore Tiberius Cafer otherwile acon- Seeres.in 
temner of God and religion, as hee who indued. with the Marhematicall fciences 


thoughtallchings governed by fate, yet becaufe hee exceedingly feared thunder,hee 


alwayes carried a Lawre!! wreath about his necke when the aire was troubled, for - 

thar this kind of leate is reported notto be touched by thunder. Some repert chat ; 

he madé him tents of Seales skinne$,becaufe it toucheth mot this kinde of creature 

ofall thefe things thatlive in the Sea, as neither the Eagle among ft birds, which for 

that is fained to be Jeves Quire. But on the contrary,charmes, the victorious Bay, 

the Sealeor Sea-calte, the Eagle or any fuch thing profits aothing againit the vio- The wons 
lence of thefe fiery Engines : nonot a wall oftenne foote thicke will advantage, crousforcs of 
Laitly,this argues the immenfe violence of brafen Cannons above thunder,for thac ante. 
thunder may be difperfed and driven away with the noyfe aad ringing of Bells, the 
founding of Trumpets, the tinkling of brafen kettles, yea alfoby the thooting of - 

fuch great Ordinances co wit, the clouds,by whofe collifion and fight the Thunder _ 

is caufed being difperfed by this vielent agitation ofthe ayre, orelfe driven furcher - 

tO moreremote parts eftheskies, But their fury once provoked, is flayed by no 
Oppolition,appeafed by noremedy. Asthereare certaine feafons of the yeare, fo 

ai{o there are certaine Regions of the earth, wherein Thunderis feldome orneyer 

heard, Thunders are rare in Winter and Summer ,and that for contrary caufes ; for 

chat in Winter the denfe aire is thickned with a thicker coate of clouds, and the fro- 

ty andcold exhalation of the earth extinguifheth what fiery vapours foever “Ie- 

ceives ; which thing keepes Scythia and the cold countries about it free from Thon- a. 
der, And onthe contrary too much heate prefetves Egypt. For hot and dry ex+ ".5* » 
halations ofthe earth are condented into very thinae, and weakeclouds. But 
as the invention,fo alfo the harme and tempeft of great Ordirance, like a contagious 
peftilence is {pread and rages over all rhe earth,and the skies at all times found againe 
with their reports. The Thunder and Lightning commonly gives but one blow, or 
iroke,and that commonly ftrikes bur one man ofa multitude, But one great 

non atone fhot may fpoyle and killanbundredmen, Thunder, as a thing natural: 


fallsby chante, one while upon af high oake another while upon the top of a moun: 
taine 


Pance, a$ no» 
Mterity, 
C, When he. 
the authority 
fchiswarl,. 
1 at 
WaS called 
accor. 
Mans malic). 
the mart; 
to 
Darrell, 
tarre as itie 
| | 


awe Of svounds made by Gunfhot 490 Lie ft. 
taine,aud fomewhiles onfome lotty cowre,but feldome man, But this with. Bur forthg 
Eagine tempered by the malice and guidance of man, aflailes man onely and takes caufe kiew thag 
humdorhisenely marke, and directs his bullets againft him, The Thunder Dying sine; 
noyleasa meflenger fent before,foretells the ftorme at hand; but which is the chic te gions, 
this inte tnall Engine roures as ititrikes,and firikes as it reares, fending wounds. obfeg 
Ofte ang thefaine time the deadly bullet imto-the-brealt and the horrible noy inte vigo prciyribes; 
theeare, Wherefore weall of us rightfully carfe the author of fo pernicious ap fhor with Tents 
theconrrary praife thofe to the skies, whoendeavourby words and pj, encouraged met 

. ous exhortations to debort Kings fromtheir ufe,or elle labour by writing anc Ce. ona time, thatb 

ration to app'y ht medicines to wounds made by thefe Engines. Which hath ing. becaufe ficre w 

ved me,chat ] have written hereof almoft withthe firft ofthe French, But wantnering,a 


fhall dor this, feemeth notamiffe, fo co facilicate the way.to the treatife intang 
to write of wountis made by Gunfhot, te premile two Dilcourfes, by which | ray 
copfute aud takeaway certaine erronious opinions which have poflefled the mingc, 
of divers; for chat unlefie thefebe taken away, thecileace and nature of the whol 
difeafe cannot a fiaing remedy applyed by which is igao, 


the yolke ofane 
for | was croubi@ 
unfic) troubled 
orat the »oint off 
with che |caldingg 


‘ 


rant of the difea(e. Ay) and beycund ex 
Thearges Ehefth Dricourfe which is dedicated to the Reader, refells and condemnes by from vchemencm™ 
reafonsand examples the method ofcuring pre/cribed by whercby he inflamed, nor tug 
dulceuries, cauterizes the wounds made by-Gunthot,{uppofing them venenare; and on the cop. {calding wyle we 


wounds | were 
thought thusm 
ded with Gun-t! 
farre fame 
by Gua 
his favow: and kc 
dicine was, 
fo highly efteen 
I not obmune it. 
Kings Le trenan 
furgion and t 
and Mecnas ot 
rurne to 47%, a 
dyrome, whe i] 
no delay out pr 
wormes, 2 pou 
OUNCE Of 
he had fislt kille 
wherewi h they 
long, till heyb 
Itthroue? aro 
laftly the 
With to cire wo 
ient mea vaya 
4 great fecret,ar 
Wheni cam 
Well knowne by 
lo [ might dine 
Method ¢f curi 
powder. Then§ 
Poyfon, th 
Which re: {on 
And thge *Xper 
waded, raat chy 
Were wowlded, 


trary proves that order of curing with is performed by fuppuratives,to be {0 faluizry 
and gentle,as rhac prefcribed by tulloferrour apdcruclty, 


uy.  Thefecond dedicated tothe King teaches that the fame wounds, are of themf{lyes 
voydofall poifon, and therefore that all their malignity depends wpon the fauleof 
_ theaire,and il] hymours precominant inthe bodies of the patients, 


THE FIRST 
GVNSHOT, ARE FREED FROM BEING 
BYRNT, OR CAVTERIZEDACCOR-. 
ding toVigees Mcthodce 


N 


N theyeare of our Lord 1536.Framcisthe French King, 
acts in warre and peace {tiled the Great, fent a puillanr Ar- 

my beyond the Alpes, under the governement and leadiag 

2 ot 4unas ot Mommorancie high Conftable of France, bo:) 

that he might releeve T with vitwalls, fouldiers, anc all 

things acedefull, as alfo.to recover the Citries of that 

»vince taken by the Marquis of Gwaft General! of the Emy'- 

Fours forces, I was in the, Kings Army the Chirurgion »* 

Monticurot Momzejae Generall of the foore, The Imperialitis had taken the 

of Swze, the Cattle of and all the other paflages; fotbat the Kings2'%y 

was notable to drivetbem from their fortifications Sut by fight. Jachis com 

there were many wounded on both fides with all forts of weapons, but cheefely ws" 

bullets, Iwill tell the truth, was mot ycry expert at that time In matters of 

Libt. deGule “argery; meither was] wled to drefic woods madeby Gunihot. Now had read 
debade Voge that Wounds made by Gunfhot were yenenate or poifoned, and 
by reaton of the Guapouder; Wherefore for their cure, it wasexpedienrto barne 

éauterize them with oyle of Elders {calding hor, with alittle Treacle mixed tit 


_t 
‘ 
| 
E 


this: bellih 


by its 
IS Chic fe 
fending 


hoy le intg 


2 and ope. 
b hath moe. 
ut before ] 
file intend 
the mindes 
m the whole 
h as igno. 


ndemnes by 
hercby he 
on the con. 
te falutary 


them{clyes 


the fault of 


h King, for 
puillame 
and leadiag 
ance, beth 
ers, and all 
that Pro- 
the Empe- 
irurgion of 

the {traits 
Kings army 


his 


eefely with 
Bers of Chi- 
Lhad read 
. and chat 
mco barnc 


ixed therce- 


with. 


'y takes 


an kin. 


and other ery Engines,andall forts of Weapons, 


Bur forthat gave no great credite neither totheauthor, nor remedy, be- 
que 1 knew that cau ftickcs could not be powred inco wounds, without exc: five 
1,betore would ruone a hazard, determined tolee whetherthe Chirur- 
ions, Who with me inthe army, apy other manner of dreffing to chefe 
sounds. 1 obferved and faw that all of them that Method ofdreifiag which 
Vigo prcicribes; and thac they filled as full as they could, the wounds made by Gun- 
qorwith Tents and pledgets dipped inthis {calding Oyle,at the firft drefh igs;which 
encouraged me to doethe liketothofe, who cameto be drefledofme. It chanced 
pga time, that by reafon of the multitude that were bert, 1 wanted this Oyle, Now 
becaufe there were fome few leftta be drefled, I was torced, that I might feeme to 
want nothing and that [ might not leave them undreft to apply a digeitive made of 
the yolke ofan egge,oyle of Rofes, and Turpentine, I cou!d not fleepe al! that night, 
for | was troubled in minde, and the drefling of the precedent day} (which I judecd 
ynfic)troubled my thoughts; and I feared tbat the next day J fhould finde them dead, 
orat thepoint of death by the poyfon of the wound, whom [had not dreffed 
with che icalding oyle. Therefore ro{e carly inthe morning, I vifited my paticots , 
and beyound expectation, found fuch as Lhad dreffed witha digeftiveonely, free 
fom vehemencie of paine to have had gooodreft, and thactheir wounds wese not 
infamed,nor tumifyed; but onthe contrary the others chatwere burnt with the 
(calding oyle were feaverifh, tormented with much paine,and the parts about their 
wounds were f{wolne. When] had times tryedthis in divers others, | 
thought thusmuch, thatneither J norany other thouldever cauterize any woun- 
ded with Gun-fhor. When wee firft came to Turia, there was there a Chirurgion 
farce more famous than all the reftin artificially and happily curing wounds made 
by Gua fhot; wherefore I laboured withall diligence fortwo yeeres time to gaine 
his favour and love, that foac the length, I might learne of him, what kinde of Me- 
dicine that was, which he honoured with the glorious tittle of Bailame, which was 
fohighly efteemed by him, and io happy and fuccesfull to his patiencs; yet could 
[not obtaineit.. Ie fell out a {mall while after that the Marthall of Moantejan the 
Kings Leiftenant ,Generall there in Piemont dyed, wherefore I weot unto my Chi- 
rurgion, and told him that I could take no pleafure in living there, the favourer 
and Mecenas of my Rudies being taken away; and that linrended forthwith tore- 
turne to Pars, and thacit would neither hinder, nor difcredit him to teach his remé- 
dyto me, who fhoald be fo farre remote from him. When he heard this, he made 
vo delay but prefently wifhed meeto provide two Whelpes, 1 pound of earth- 
wormes, 2 pounds of oyte of Lillyes, fixe ounces of Venice Turpentine, and one 
ounce of agua vite, In my prefence he boyled the Whelpes put alive inro that ayle, 
untill the came fromthe bones, then prefently he put inthe Wormes, which 
he had firft killed in white wine,thatcthey might fo be cleafed from the earthy droffe 
wherewith they are ufually repleate, and thenhee boyled them inthe fame oyle fo 
long, till they became dry,and had {pentall their juyce th¢rein : then hee {trayned 
itthrough a rowell without much prefling; and added the Turpentine toit,and 
lafily che ‘qua vite. Calling Godto witneffe,that he had no other Balfame, where- 
with co cure wounds made with Gunfhor, and bring themto fuppuration. Thus he 
ent me away as rewarded with a moft pretious gift, requefting meto keepe it as 
agreat fecret and notto reveale itto any. 

WhenI came to wentto vilite Silvius the Kings profeflor of Phyficke 
well knowne by name to all {chollers for his greatlearning ; he kept me long that 
(0 [ might dine with him, and diligently enquires of me, it Thad obferved any new 
Method of curing wounds made by thor, and combuttions eccafioned by Gun~ 
Powder. Then] affirmed to him that Gun-pouder did not participate any thing of 
Poyion, for thar none of thefe things, whereof it is compounded are poyfonous; 
Watch reafon ought tofree the whole compofition frem lufpicion of poyfon. 

Nd that experience confirmed this reafon, fort had feene many foidiers, who 
WOUid drinkea great quantity ofthis powder withwine, becaufe they were per- 
waded, that chisdrinke would free them from maligne {ympromes when they 


Vere wounded yet I give no credit to this perfwafion;and Jaftly for thae many withe 
N n 


409 


W het chane, 
may doein 
finding out of 
Feme-iics. 


The defi cripti 
on of ayleof 


Wh 


Gun: pouder 
not poilonous, 


} 
rds and pj 
| 
‘ 
f 
wy ix 
| 
{ 
| 
| 
| 
| 
“4 


4 


~ 


Bullets for 
out of aGun 
doe not burne, 


A Hifkeme: 


A medicine 
hinderivg 
ftring in 
burnes,or 
(calds. 


A Hiftorie, 


Wounds made 
by Gunthort 
mult be dref& 
fed with 
pwratiyes. 


out any harme,ftrew this pouder upon rebellious ulcers, Forthe Bullets,| affirm. 
that they cannot conceive fuch heate,as to become cautticke, For if you fhoo; them 
out of a Gun againft a hatdftene, yet you may prefently take them up withoy; any 
harme in your hands, though by firikiog upon the ftone, they fhould become 
more hot. For the combuftions caufed by Gunpouder, I obierved no ipecia| 
nor peculiar remedy, which might make their cure different from other -.,. 
buftions. To which purpofe I related this enfuing hiftory. 

Onc of the Marshall of Asentejan his Kitchin boyes, fell by chance into 4 Cal. 
dron of Oyle being even almoft boyling hot; I being called to drefle him, w 
tothe next Apothecaries to fetch refrigerating medicines commonly ufed jg ¢);, 
cafe: there was prefent by chance a certaine old countrey woman, who he :;, 
that I defired medicines for a burne, perf{waded mee at the firft drefling. «1 
I fhould lay to raw Onions beaten with a little fale; for fo I thould hinde; the 
breaking out ot blifters or puftules,as fhee had found by certaine and frequen: -y. 
perience, Vherefore I thought good to try the force of her Medicine upon 
this greafy fcullion. I the next day found chofe places of bis body wherete th. 
Onions Jay, to bee free from blifters, but the other parts which they had nor:o, 
ched,to be allbliftered. 

Ir fell outa while after that a German of Afontejan bis guard had his flafquc fy) 
of Gunpouder fet on fire, whereby his hands and face were grievoufly burrr; | 
being called, laid the Onions beaten as I formerly teld you,to the middle of his 
face, and tothe reft I laid medicines ufually applyed to burnes, At the {ccong 
dreffing Iebierved the part drefled with the Onions quite free from blilters ang 
excoriation, theother being troubled with both; whereby I gave credit torhe 
Medicine. Befidesalfo,Ilaftly told him this, that 1 had obferved, that that wa; 
the readicft to draw forth bullets fhot into the body, which {ets the patier:s ip 
the fame pofture and fite, ashee waswhen hee received his hurt, WVhich things 
whenI had toldhim, together with many other handled at large in this worke, 
the good old man requefted mee to publifh in print my Opinions concerning éhefe 
things, thatio the erronious and hurtfull opinion of Yige might beeaken 
mens minds, To whofe earneft entreaty when I hadaflented, I farft of all céuied 
tobe drawne and carved many Inftruments fic to draw forth Bullets and other 
ftrange bodics; thena fhore while after 1 firft publiflied this worke in the veare 
of our Lord 1545. which when I found to bee well liked and approved by saay, 
{thought good to fet it forth the fecond time fomewhat amended in the years 
1552. And che third time augmented in many particulars inthe yeare 15é4. forl 
having followed many warres, and deteined as Chirurgion in befeiged Citsics, 
Mets and Hefaim, had obferved many things under five Kings, whom | ‘<rved 
with diligence and content. I had learnt many ehings from molt expert Chirurg. 
ons, but more fromall learned Phyfitions, whofe familiarity and favour for thst 
purpofe I alwayes laboured to acquire with all diligence and honeft Arts ; chat {0 
1 might become more learned and skillfull by their familiarity and di(courfe, il 
there was any thing efpecially in this matter and kind of wounds,which was hid 
from me, or whereot wasnot wellafflured. Of which number [ have knowne 
very few, who any thing feene in this kind of operation eyther by ftudy, o% 
experience in Warres, who have not thought that wounds made by Gunthot ough 
to be drefled at the firft with {uppurative medicines,and not with {calding and Cat 
fticke Oyle, 

For this I afarme,which then alfo! teftified to this g00d man,that | have found 
very many wounds made in the ftlefhy parts by Gunfhot, as eafily cured a5 & 


cht 


Thecaufes of ther wounds, which bee made by contufing things. Buc in the parts of the 


Gifticultic in 
this cure. 


body where the bullet meets with bones and nervous particles, both becaul¢ « 
teares and rends into {mall peeces thofe things whiich refift, not oncly whet 
it touches, but further alfo, through the violence of the blow, therciort 
caufech many and greevous fymptomes, whichare ftubborne and difficul:, 
oft times impoflible to cure, efpecially in bodies replete with ill humors, 
ill conftitutionof the heaven and ayre, fuch as is hot, moyft and foggy om 


Lislil- 


ther, which cht 
cold | 
with Bulk 
nervous part ic! 
difficulty of cu 
combuttion ©. 
the mac 
Scottiin Noo: 
appomnrmecnt ¢ 
a piftoil,the 
he was periect 
which came 
Phylickc,as 
Chirure2ion, | 
acride medic 
that the Reaac 
cure wounds 
dicing, 
fed any mals 
lar and ordin 


following cu 


requtlite mt " 
Which I dere 
tisfie the 
they have of 
me by 
had confirm 
Upontheir ov 


J 
“4 
4 
i 
| 
it 
|, 
| — | 
4 


frequent cx. 


Sully burnt: 
Hiddle of his 
the fecond 
1 blifters and 
credit tothe 
that that was 
Patients in 
V hich things 
n this worke, 
cerning chefe 
ecaken out of 
tofall caufed 
ets and other 
in the yeare 
ved by many, 
in the yeare 

1964. Forl 
ed Citties, as 
hom I ferved 
ert Chirurgl- 
vour for that 
Arts; that fo 

| difcourfe, if 
mvbich was hid 
bave knowne 
bY {tudy, or 
sunthor ought 


ding and Cate 


y cured as O- 
parts of che 
oth becaule it 

onely where 
, therefore it 
difficulc, and 
umors, in an 
d foggy wet 
ther, 


had not COue 


is Aafque 


t [have found 


Lip{ie other hery Engines,andall Sorts of eapons, 4. 


her, Which therefore ts {abject to putrifaction ; and in like manner a freezing and 

cold fealon, which ufes to mortifie the wounded parts not onely of thofe that are 

hurt with Bullets, but in like {ore with any other weapon; nor onely in bony and 

gervous particles, but alfo in mufculous. Whereby you may underttand,that the 

dificuity of curing procteds not from the venenate quality of the wounds, nor the 
combuttion made by the Gunpouder, but the fouleneffe of the patients bodies and 
the unleafonablenefle of the aire. 

¢ For proofe whercof,1 will fet downe, that which I not long agone obferved ina A vitorie, 
Scottiin Nobleman the of Gordon, Lord of Achindon, whom curedat the 
appointment Of the Queene Mother. He was thot through both his thighes with 

a Piftoil,the bone being net hurt nortouched ; and yerthe 32. day after the wound 

he was perfectly healed, io that hee had neither feaver nor any other fymprome 

which came upon the wound. Wacereofrhere are worthy witneffes, che Archbi- 

fhop of Glafo, theScoruih Embatladour, Francis Brigart and lobn Altine, Doctors of 
Phyficke,as allo James Guillemeaw the Kings Chirurgion, and Géles Buzet a 
Chirurgion, who ail of them wordred that this Gentleman was fo foone healed,no 

acride medicine being applyed, This I have thought good to recite and fer downe, 

that the Readers may underttand, that 1 for 30. yeares agoe had found the way to 

cure wounds made by Guathot without {calding oyle or any other,more acrid me- 

dicine; upletie by accident the iinelle of the patients bodies and of the aice cau- What makes 
fed any maligne fympromes,which might require {uch remedies belides the regu. 
larand ordinary way of curing, which fhall bee more amply treated of in the 


bed 
diicourfe. wounds made 
OF Gun fhor, 


ANOTHER DISCOVRSE 


THESE THINGS, WHICH 
KING THE NIN TH, RE- 


turning from the exwedition and taking of 


‘Rovén,cnquired of me concerning wounds 
made by Gunfhor,. 


Or that it pleafed your Majeftie one day, together with the The occation 
Queene Mother,the Prince of the Rocke upon Toa, and many orig | 
other Noble-men and Gentlemen,to enquire of mee, what 
| was the caufe that the farre greater part ofthe Gentlemen 

and common Souldicrs which were wounded with Guns, 

i] and other warlike Engines, all remedies ufed in vaine, either 

| dyed,or fearfeand that with much difhcultic recovered of 

their hurts, though in appearance they were not very grear, 

* and though the Chirurgions diligently performed alithings 

tequifite in their Art- I have made bold to premife this Difcourfe to that Tractate 

Which I determine to publith concerning wounds made by Gunfhor; both to fa- 

Uisfie the defiresof the Princes and of many Gentlemen, as alfo the expectation 

they have of mee, as being the Kings chiefe Chirurgton (which place being gi- 

Yea me by Newry the {econd,Charies theninth, a fonne mot worthy offuchafather, 


d confirmed) neither make I any queftion, but that many who too much infift 


“Pon their owne judgement, and not through 
Nn 2 


ly confider the things themfelves,wail 
marvaile, 


{hoor them 
ould becomes 
d x 
0 
a Ca! 
him, Wenr 
uled IQ thie 
ra lt, 
reliing 
hinder , 
Cdicine Upon 
whcreto 
| 
| 


Lis. lI, 


ofrois dilx 
courte, 


Cunpouder 1s 
not poyfos 
nous, 


Of whatie 
ssmade. 


Of wounds made by Cunfbot, 


marvaile, andthinke it farce from reafon; that from the fkeps ofp. 


Thearsument anddiffenting wholly fromthe formerly received opinions, am farra 


from their Tenents, who lay the caufe of the malignitie of wounds made by Gur. 
fhot,upon the poyfon brought into the body by the Ganpouder, or mixed with the 
Bu'lers whilft they are tempered orcaft. Yet tor all this,tf they will courteou{] and 
patiently weigh my reafons, they fhall eyther thinkeas Idoe, or at thal) jug... 
this my endeavour and paines taken for the publike good, not to be condemned p,, 
contemned. 

For I (hall make it evident by moft firong reafons drawne out of the Writings 
ofthe Ancient both Philofophers and Phytitiens , and alfo by certaine eXperj. 
ments of mineowas, and other Chirurgions, that the maligaitic and contums. 
cie which we frequently meete withall in curing wounds made by Gunthor, js 9. 
tobe attributed eyther tothe poyfon carryed into the body by the Gunpouder », 
Bullet, nor to burning imprinted in the wounded part by the Gunpouder. VW hers. 
foretocome to our purpofe, that opiuion muft tirft bee cunfuted, which accufe:h 
wounds made by Gunfhot of poyfon ; and wee muli teach, that there is ng). 
ther any venenate fubfiance, nor qualitie im Guopouder, ncyrher if ther 
fhould bee any, cou'd it empoy {onthe bodies of fuch ds are wounded, Which 
that wee may the more cafily performe, wee muft examine che compofition 
of fuch pouder, and make a particular enquiry of each of the fimples, whereof 
this compoition contifts, what efleace they have, what firength and ficul- 
ties, and laftiy what effe@&s they may produce. For thus by knowing the fim- 
ples, the whole aacure of the compofitionconfifting ofthem, will bee apparcar'y 
manifeft. 

The fimples which enter the compofition of Gunpouder are onely three, Char- 
coales of Saliow or Willow,or of Hempe ftalkes, Brimftone,and fale Peter, and 
fometimes a little agua vite. You fhall finde each of thefe, if confidered in particu. 
lar, voide of all poyfon and venenate quality. For firftin the Char-coale you thal 
obferve nothing but dryneffe,and a certaine fubelety of fubftance, by meanes wheie- 
ofit fires fofaddainly, evenas Tinder. Swlphar ar Brimftone is hot and dry, bur 
Hot inthe highett degree, itis ofamoyly and vifcide fubftance, yet fo thar itderth 
not fo {peedily catcb fire as the coale,though it reteine it longer being once kindled, 
either may it be fo {peedily extinguifhed. Salt Peter is fuch, that many ufe 
Salt, whereby it is evidently apparent that the nature of {uch fimples is abfolutcly 


kib.; Cax.73, free from all poyfon; but chiefly the Brimftone, (which norwithftanding is more 


36. 


Bullets cannot 


be poyfened. 


lufpeé&ed than there{t.) For Drefcorsdes gives Brimflone to be drunke, or {upped 
out of a rearc Egoe to fuch as are Afthmaticke,troubled with the Cough, ({pit up 
purulent matter,and aretroubled with che yellow Laundife.) But Galew applic: it 
ourwardly to {uch as are bitten by vencmous Beafts, to icabs, teaters, and leproly«s. 
For the equa vite, it is of fo tenuious a fubfiance that it prefently yanitheth into ail’, 
andallo very many drinke it, and itis without any harmeuled in fri@ions of 0 
exteriour parts of the body. WVhence you may gather,that this poudes is free fo 
all manner of poyfon, feeing thefe things whereof it confifts and 1s composed, wa 
all fufpition thereof. 

Therefore the Germane horfemen, when they are wounded with fhor, feare 0% 
to drinke off cheerefully halfean ounce of Gunponder diflelvedin wine ; hen 
perfwading themf{elves freed from fuch maligne fympromes as ulually happ¢a 
upon fuch wounds; wherein whether they doe right or wrong I doe not he 
determine; the fame thing many French Souldiers forced by no neceffity, Du 
onely to thew themfelves more couragious, alfo doe without any hare; 
but divers withgood fuccefle ufé to ftrew it upon ulcers, fo to dry them. New 
to come tothefe, -whothinke that the venenate quality of wounds made by Gv 
thot, {priogs not from the pouder, but from the Bullet whcrewith fome poy!" 
hath beene commixtor joyned, or which hath beene tempered or fteeped info 
poy fonous ‘iquor. 

This may fufficiently ferve for a reply; thatthe fire is aboundantly powe! ful 
to diflipate all the ftrength of the Poyfon, if any fhould bee poured upoe 

Q 


4 


or added cot 
knowes 5 
men in the tc 
Towne thous 
be 
talily fufpect 
vedall rhe Cha 
Rovén,to be! 
the magoitud™ 
curing. Even 
peftilent,w)! 
wounds mad 
more refra “tc 
any poyfono! 
ens of the p2 
drinkes. Fo 
ding ro mea! 
non which 
yerthrow thal 
Firft it cacg 
can attaine t 
me iting, 
che whole be 
if you {heot¢ 
hand witho! 
their heate b 
any. 
Further 
it all on fire 
fo, For if at 
gine that it 
lifion theres 
{parkes of 
like opinior 
which is fh 
and che like 
another th 
of Waxe,a 
gaintt an in 
Bullets can 
hoes (may { 
but itis no} 
ofthe cont 
Now th 
enters the 
will give 
Not prefent: 
falls upon 
parc, wie 
may follows 
Butfort 
terwards, 
flefly contu 
ptefenily 
and the 
But for a! 
from all {ia 


A. 
‘ 
q 
4 * 
4 


mcd accuferh 
there 1S Nel. 
if there 
Which 
compolition 


es whereof 


i and ftacy)- 
ing the fia- 
appatcatly 


three, Char- 
lt Peter, and 
ed in particu. 
ale you thal! 
mrcanes where- 
t and dry, bur 
o that itdoth 
once kindled, 
many ufe it for 
mis abfolutcly 
miding is more 
ke, or {upped 
ugh, (f{pit up 
slew applies it 
nd leprofyes. 
vech into aire, 
iGtions of the 
‘ris free from 
mpofed, want 


mor, feare not 
wine; hence 
ually happeo 
doe not here 
eceffity » but 
any harme ; 
them. Now 
ade by Gun- 
fome poylon 
eped infome 


tly powerfull 


poured 
of 


and otber fiery Enginessand all forts of capons. 


413 


or add 
Lnowes 3 The Bullets which the Kings fouldiers ufed to fhoore again{t che Townfea 


men in the feige of Rouéa,were free from all poyfon,and yer for all that they of the 
Towne thought that they were all poyfoned,when they found the wounds made by 
rhem,to be uncurable and deadly. New onthe other fide the Townfemen were 
talily {ufpected guilty of the fame crime by the Kings Army, whemas they percei- 
ved all the Chirurgions labour incuring the wounds madeby the Bullets {hot from 
Rovén,to be fruftrated by theircontumacy and maligne nature ; each fide judging of 
rhe magnitude and malignitiec of the caufe from the unhappy fuccefle of the effet in 
curing. Even as among {i Phyfitions according to Hippocrates difeafes are termed 

eftilent, which artfing from wharfoever common cavfe,kil! saany people; foalfo 
wounds made by Gunihot may in fome refpect be called peftilent, for that they arc 
more refractory,and difficule tcocurethan others, and not becaufe they partake of 
any poyfonous qualitic, but by default of fome common caule, as the ill complexi- 
onsofthe patients, the infection of the aire, and the corruption of meats and 
drinkes. Forby-thefe caufes wounds acquire anevill nature and become yeele 
dine to medicines. Now we haye bythefe reafons convinced of errour that opis 
sion which held wounds made by Gunthot for poifonous Ietus now come (0 o- 
verthrow that which is held concerning their combuttion. 

Firft it can fearce be underftood how bullers which are commonly made of Lead, 
can attaine to {uch heate, but thatthey muft be melted; and yet they are fo far from 
melting, that being {hot out of a Musket they will peirce through anarmour and 
the whole body befides,yet remaine whole, or bura little diminifhr. Befides alfo 
if you fheote them againita ftone wall, you may prefently take them up in your 
hand without any harme, and alfo without any manifeft fence of heate ; though 
their heate by the ftriking upon the ftone should bee rather encreafed, if they bad 
any. 
pseeainds a Bullet fhotinto a barrell of Gunpouder, would prefently fet 
itallonfire, if the Bullet fhould acquire fuchheate by the fhooting, but it is nor 
fo, For if at any time the pouder be fired by fuchan accident, wee muft not ima- 
gine that it isdone by the bullet bringing fire with it, but by the ftriking and col- 
lifion thereof again{t {ome Iron, or ftone that oppoics or meets therewith, whence 
{parkes of fire proceeding as froma flint, the pouder isfired inamoment. The 
like opinion wee have of thatched houfes, for they are not fiered by the bullec 
Which is fher, but rather by fome other thing as linaca ragges, browne paper, 
and the like, which rogues and wicked perfons faften to their Bullets. There is 
another thing which more confirmes mee inthis opwion, which is; take abuller 
of Waxe,and keepe it fromthe fire, for orherwife ir would melt, and thoote ita- 
gainft aninch board,and it willgoe throughit; whereby you may under‘tand that 
Bullets cannot become fo hot by fheoting, 10 burne like a cautery. But the Ori- 
fices (may fome fay) of fuch wounds are alwayes blacke- This indeede is (ruc, 
but itis not from the effeét of heate brought chither by the Bullet, but the torce 


ofthe contufion. 
Now the contufion isexcteding great; both becaufe the Bullet is round, and 


ed coche Bullet. This much confirmes mine opinion, which every one 


As Galen 
notes 44 fem’. 
21./¢4, 
3 


Wognds made 
by Gunfhot 
are not burnt 


‘The reafon 
why wounds 
made by Guns 
fhet looke 
blaske. 


sntets the body with incredible violencee Of which thofe that are wounded 


will give you fufficient teftimony, forthere is none of them, which rhinkes 
Not prefently upon theblow, that as it werefome poft,or thing of the like weighr, 
falls upon the affected member, whence great paine and ftupiditie poflctic the 
parc, whereby the native heate and fpitits are fo much diffipated,that 4 Ganyreen 
may follow, | | 

But forthe E(char which they affirme is made bythe blow, and falls away af- 
terwards, they are much miftaken, For certaine particles of the membranes and 
fic contufed and torne by the violence of the Bullet beguiles them ; which 
prefenily putrifying are fevered from the found parts by the. power of nature 
and the {cparating heate, which thing ufually happens in all greac Contufions. 
Bur for all that thefe fo many and weighty reafoms mav free. the Pouder 
from all fufpition of Poifon, and the Bullet from all thought of wre 

ys 


farre 
de by Gun_ 
fhall judo. 
der 
the Writings 
¢Xperj. 
id Contuma. 
thor, iS not 
UHpoucer or 
Cr. Vi here 
| 
| 
| 


Of wounds made by Gunfhot, Lis. 1, 


whereof itis ; which matter taking fire {ends forth fo lothfome and odious 2 (me! 
that the very wilde-beafts cannot endure it;but leave their Dennes, if they chancs 
to be touched with fucha lightening. Befides alfo,we have read in the northerp: 
hiltory of Olas Magnus,that in fome places after a Lightning, you fhall finde ; 
whole plaine fpred over with Brim(tone which Brimftone notwithitanding is extip: 
unprofitable & of no efficacie. But grant thefe things be thus, yet mutt we no; 
therefore conclude, that the Bullets of the great Ordimance carry poyfon and firc 
with them intothe wounds. Forthough there be many things like in Lightning an¢ 
difcharging great Ordinance, yet they have no fimilitude either in matter or (ib: 
france, but oncly in effe&s whereby they fhake,breake infunder and difperfe the ko: 


Lis 


yet there are many who infifting upon Philofophicall arguments, raife Dew ftirrs: 
For (fay they) the difcharging a peice of Ordinance 1s abfolutely like Thunder ang ries of nw 
Lightning, which the rentand torne clouds caft fromthe middle region, upon th, “ 
earth; wherefore the Iron bullet which is fhot out of the Cannon muft necds yay forhar ch 
rive reafors of 2 WeNCnate and burning faculry. Jam hot ignorant that Lightings of 
our adverfa= grofle and vifcous exhalation, breaking the cloud wherewith it 1S ENCOMpalled rarefa 

Hever falls upon the earth, butbrings fire with it, one while more fubrilc, anothe: gyre 

while more grcfle, according to the various condition of the matter whence py, the earth int 

Quefinat. exhalation hath arifen. For Semeca writes that there are three {everall kinds of Light. dics see 

ing differing in burning,conditionand plenty. One of them penetrates or rarhe- priacipall 

perforates by the tenuity of the matter oftheobje@s which it touches. The orhe- 

witha violent impetuofity breakes infunder and diffipates the objeé&s,by reafog 

bath a more den{e, compact and forcible matter, like as Whirlewinds have, Tp, 

third, for thatitconfifts of a moreterreftriall matter, burnes what it touches, lea: 

ligne ving behind it the impreflion of the burning, Alfo know that Lightning is of 

ning, (tilent and ftinking nature,occafioned by the groflenefle and vifcidity of the matre: caft whole an 


caule the wa 
forcibly brez 
rarifaction, 
filmes, Or sk 
{fame manne! 
according to 
of earth, th 
aire are mad: 
of the peice, 
pallage with 
prefently va’ 


dies which withftand them ; For Lightning and Thunder doe it by meanes o: 


‘ire, and oft times of a ftone generated in them, which is therefore tearmed. - object, whic 


Thunderbolt ; Bur Ordinance by the bullet carried bythe force of the aire.mor: ie mal 
violently driving and forcing it forwards; Neither ifany fhould by more powerful: with the om 
arguments force me to yeeld that the matter of Lightning and fhooting of Ordi: hurt on , od 
nance arc like, yer willl northerefore be forced to confeffe that wounds made by 

Gunfhotarecombuft, For according to P/imy, thereare fome Lightnings whic: ver 
conlifting of amoft dry matter, doc fhatter in funder al! that withftands them. bu: sathe yea 


, 


doe not burne at ails others which are of fomewhat a more humid nature, burne ne 
houfes and! 
off; and t 
dead, 
torne afltind 


| the onely a: 
ican grant, that thefe Lightnings which breake in funder, melte and diff are, and ter the { Ara 

- pertorme ether effets fo full of admiration,are like in fubRance tothe thor of great: vents. For 
Ordinance; but not chefe which carry with them fire and fame | 


and raging \ 
tremble ; 
OF Carries it 
ly moft fam 
earthquak« 
theearrh, 


A Hiftonie: in prooie whereof there comes into my ininde the hiftoric of a certaine Souldic: 


very report & winde of a Cannon bullet, fliding clefe by their eares,fallne downe fo! 
dead, fo thattheir members becomming livid & black,they bave dyed by a Gangrent 


enluing thereupon. Thefe and fuch are like the cfeAs of Lightnings whic" 
| wee lately mentioned, and yet they beare no figne nor marke of poyfon. From mifed ler 1 
whence I dare now boldly conclude, that wounds made by>*Gunfhot are acithe! 
poyfoned,nor burnt.But fleeing the danger of {uch wounds in thefe Jaft civil] warres aire; 
2 wounds made Math Deene fo great, univerGall and deadly to fo many worthy perfonages and vali: ther we {le: 
by antmen,whatthen may have beene the cau{e thereof, ifit were neither combultio®, tout. Throl 
yearesagone MOF the venenate qualitie of the wound 2 This mutt wee therefore now init Upon - this munda 
cre fe deads and fomewhat hardily explaine. 


Thole 


| wonder 
tglanatereo! 
fame 
Out Of w lole thigh § remember | drew fortha Bullet wrapped in the taffery of hi 
oreeches which had not any figne of tearing or burning. Befides,lhave fcene mac 
whonot wounded, norfomuchastouched, yer notwithendine have wit 


q 


ftirrs 
uunder and 
; UPON the 
necds have 
icTated Ofa 
palied. 
4nother 
vhence the 
Of Lighr. 
J OT rather 

he Other 
Y Teafon ir 
have, The 
aches, Jea_ 
£isof a Des 
the Matter 
lOUS a {me} 
they chance 

northerne 


Is extin- 

mult WCE not 
Bion and fire 
ghining and 
rer Or f{ub- 
rie the bo. 
/mcanes of 
tearmed, a 
aire,more 
re powerfu!! 
Of Ordie 
ds made by 
ings which 
$ them, bur 
mc. burne no 
aitly other- 
) wee 
d filver,not 
ce, not bur- 
hich decree 
iflipate, and 
hot of great 


ine Souldicr, 
ffety of his 
{cene mapy 
re with the 
downe for 
a Gangrene 
ings which 
Bon. From 
are acither 
ivil] warres 
tes and vali- 
embultion, 
infift upon 


Thole ° 


finde a 


Thofe who have fpe nt all their rime in the learning and fearching out the myfte- 

ries of Naturall Philofophie, Would have all men thinke and beleeve, that the foure 

Elements have fuch mutuwall fympathy, that they may bee changed each into other; 

fothat they nor onely undergoe the aleerations of the firft qualities which are heate, 

coldneffe ,drynefic and moifture, butalfo the mutation of their proper fubftances by 

rarefaction and condenfation, For thusthe fire is frequently changed into ayre,the 

gyr¢ iato water the water into airc,and the water intoearth; and onthe comrrary, 

che carth into water,the water into aire,the aire into fire; becaufe rhefe 4. firlt bo- ee 

dies have in their Common matter enjoyed the contrary and fighting, yer firftand the tranfmns 

priacipall qualities of all, tation of the 
Whereof we have anexample in the * Ball-bellowes brought out of Germany,w% * Thefe bel. 

gre made Of brafle hollow and-round;and have a very {mall hole inthem, whereby 

the water is put in,and foputcothefire; the water bythe a@ion thereof is rarified the Author, ; 

intoaire, and fothey fend forth winde with a great noyfe, and blow ftrongly as ees made 
(gone as they grow throughly hor. You may try the fame with Chefnuts, which forme ofa 
cat whole and undivided into the fire, prefently fly afunder with a great cracke; be- 


veryimall hols 


caule che watry and innate humidity rurned into winde by the force of the fi re, intheirleflse 
forcibly breakes his paflage forth. For the aireor winde raifed from the water by mest? en 
rarifaction, requires a larger place, neithercan it now bee conteined inthe narrow themwich 
filmes, or skinnes of the Chefnut, wherein it was formerly kept. Iuft after the nan toe 
fame manner Guapouder being fered,turnes into a farre greater proportion of ayre, them very her, 
according to the truth of that Philofophicall propofition, which faith, Of one part ani tt 
of earth, thereare made ten of water; of one of water, ten ofaire; and of one of tincdin them 
aireare made ten of fire. Now this fire not poffible to be pent inthe narrow {pace 
ofthe peice, wherein the pouder was formerly conteined, endeavours to force its ¢¢, whiemby 
pallage with violence, and fo cafts forth the Bullet lying in the way, yee focthat it 
prefently vanifhes into aire, and doth not accompany the Bullet to the marke, or Water willbe 
object, which itbatters, fpoiles and breakes afunder. Yet the Bullet may drive the much, andfo 
obvious aire with fuch violence, that men are often fooner touched therewith than will draw in 
with the bullet, and dyeby having their bones fhattered aad broken without any tothe” 
hurt onthe flefh which covers them ; which as wee formerly noted, ic hath com. Pcs, ne derwr 


monwith Lightning, We finde the likein Mines, when the pouder once facred, purthem into 
it remeoves and fhakes even mountaines of earth. 
lathe yeare of our Lord 1562 a quantity of this pouder which was not very ing tie wates 

eret,taking fire by accident inthe Arcenall of Paris, caufed fuch a tempeft, that the wil 
whois Citty thokeeherewith, but it quite overturned divers of the neighbouring yeeidez trong 
houfes,and fhooke off the tyles and broke the windowes of thofe which were further (ontnues and 
off; and toconclude,like a torme of Lightning itlaid many here and there tor Thecaute of 
dead, fome loft their &ght, others their hearing, and otherfome had their limbes ee and 
torne afunder,as if they had beene rent with wilde horfes; and all this was donc by Cannon, 
the onely agitation of the aire into which the fired Guapouder was turned; Luft at = wr a 
ter the fame manner as windes pent up in hollow places of the earth which waat an Barchs 
vents, For in feeking paflage forth, they vehemently fhake the fides of the Earch, quake. 

and raging with a great noife about the cavities,they make all the furface thereof to 

tremble ; fo that by the various agitation one while up,amother downe, tt overcurnes 

oF carries it to another place. For thus we have read that Adegara and «eine ancient- 

ly moft famous Cittics of Greece, were fwallowed up and quire overturned by an 
earthquake . I omit the great blufterings of the windes ftriving in the cavities of 
theearth, which reprefent to fuch as heare them at {ome diftance, the ferce affai- 

iing of Citties, the bellowing of Bulles, the horrid roarings of Lions, neither are 

they much unlike to the roaring reports of Cannons. Thefe chings being thus pres 

miied let us come tothe thing we have in hand. 

Among{t things neceffary for life,there is none caufes greater changes in us than the 

aire; whichis continually drawae into the Bowells appointed by nature, and whe- 

ther we fleepe, wake,or what elfe foever we doe,we continually draw in, and breath 

tout. Through which occafion Héppecrates caljs it Divine. fur breathing througi 


this mundane Orbe, it embraces, nourifhes,. defends and keepes in quiet Poe ail 
things 


| 
4 
| 
q 
~~ 
~ 


416 Of wounds made by Gun/hot, Lis 
- things contained therein, friendly con{piring with the ftarres from whom a divi, che rainy Sour 
vertucis infufed therein. For the aire diverfly changed and affeted by the ares L « 
doth in like manner produce various changes in the{e lower mundane bodies, Ani fubftanc 
henceiristhat Philofophers and Phyfitions doe fo feriovfly with us to behu lq and as have 
confider the cu]ture and habite of places, and conftitution of the aire, whenth.. | cure of prefen’ 
treate of preferving of health,or curing difeafes. Forinthefe the great powe; and bodies could c 
dominion of the aire is very apparent,as you may gather by the foure {cafons of 1}, whenceit is 2 
yeare; for in fummer the aire being hot and dry, heats and dries our bodies. buy; Whenceit fel 
in winter it produccth in us the effects of winters qualities, thatis, of cold and moj. be {carfe hea! 
fture ; yet by {uch orderand providence ef nature,that although according tothey,g the wounds | 
rieties of feafons our bodies may be varioutly alrered, yet fhail they receive no de. blood is mo: 
Hew triment thereby, if fo be thatthe fealons retcine their {cafonablenetfe;from whence corrupt,and |. 
full, if they happen te digrefle, they raife and ftirre up great perturbations both in oy; Cachecticke, 
bodies and mindes; whofe malice we can {carfe fhunne, becauie they encompafe ff which is hur 
us on every hand, and by the law ofnature entertogether with the aire into the {e. cured. 
cret cabinets of our bodies both by occult and manifeft paflages. For who is tie tha: Therefore 
dothnot by experience finde both for the commodity and difcommodity of his | ved humors 
health, the various effects of winds, (wherewith the aire iscommixt) according a;: petlicr the 
they blow from this or that Region, or Quarter of the world. Wherefore feeing : vill wartes, ¢! 
that the South winde is hotand moift; the North wind cold and dry;the Eaft wing : the wounde: 
cleare and frefh ; the Weft winde cloudy; it isnodoubt but that the aire which wwe : laftly death 
draw in byinfpiration carries together therewith into the bowells the qualities of with putre!: 
17+ winde which is then prevalent. When wee reade in Hippocrates, chat changes body and h: 
ftimes.whether they happen by different windes, orviciflitude eficalans, chiciy Now ther 
bring difeafes; For northerly winds doc condenfe, and ftrengthen our bodies, and - thefe woun: 
makes them active well coloured and daring, by refufcitating and vigorating then § neither cou! 
tiveheate, But foutherne windes refolve and moiltcn our bodies, make us heavy rurgion ; | 
; headed, dullthe hearing, caufe piddineffe, and make the eyes and body lefle agile, common So 
as the Inhabitants of Narbon finde cotheir great harme, who are otherwife ranked dreft for o: 
among the moft active people of France. But if wee would make a comparifon of : perfons,th 
the feaions and conttitutions of a yeare, by Hippocrates decree Droughts aremoie thermal 
wholefome and lefle deadly than Raines; I judge for that too much humidicicis police tothe 
eutrifiein the mother of putrifaction,as you learneby thefe countries which areblewne upon ff in the left ar 
maritime plas by a winde from Sea. For inthefeficth which iskept forfoode, putrefics inthe § of Navarre, 
= ‘ {pace ofanhoure ; and fuchulcers as in other places are eafily and quickly healed, had nature { 
| doe there by the conflux and collection of matter become inveterate and contumici- not part th: 
ous, Therefore as whenthe feafons of the yeare fucceflively fall out agreeable to poled of it 2 
their nature, and when each featon is lealonable, then either we are not ficke at obferved 
or afluredly with lefic danger, So onthecontrary the perfe& conftitmionandhealii ¥ hence it wa: 
of our bodies becomes werfe and decaies, when the feafons of the yeare aie depi-- troubled wit 
ved and perverted in time and temper. luted, and { 
Now feeing that thefe many yeares the foure feafons of the yeare have wanted of fitting nc 
their feafonableneffe, the fummer wantiag his ufuall heate,and the winter irscold, thize wath 
and all things by moifture and the dominion of the foutherne windes have becne —g ifany thine 


rurgion wa 
Aire, wher 
ding to the 
woundsto 


humid and languide, I thinke there is none fo ignorant io natural! Philofophic snd 
Altrologie,who will not thinke that che causes of the malignitie and contumaci¢ 
thofe defeafes which have fo long afflied all France,are not tobee attributed tothe 
' aircand Heavens, For otherwile, whence have fo many peftilent and contagious 


dilea{es tirannized over fomany people of every age, fex and condition ? whence fach medic: 
| have fo many catarrhes,coughs of the head, fo many pleurilics, ly be angry 
| mois, {mall poxes, meazells, and Irches not admitting of digeftion and renicdies 
prefcribed by Arc 2 Whence have we had fo many venemous creatures, as Toades, 
Grathoppers, Caterpillers, Spiders, Wafpes, Hornets, Beetles, Snailes, Vipers, dong tu 
Snakes,Lizards Scorpions and Efts or Nutes, unleffe from exceffive putretaction 
which the humidity ofthe aire, our native heate being Jiquid and dull, bath cauled 


in us,and the whole kingdome of France? Hence a!fo procecdes the infirmity of our 
hative heare, and che corruption of the blood and humors whereof we confift,which 


che 


We betake 


-~ 


} 
y 


~IB, 


na divine 
ihe ftarres 
dics, An 
ochuld and 
when they 
POWCr and 
OOS Of the 
ies ; bur 
d and Moi. 
to the va. 
cive no de. 
Whence 
Oth in our 
Dcompatie 
into the fe. 
© ishe thar 
diy of his 
‘Carding as 
fore fecing 
Eaft wind 
which we 
lualities of 
Changes 
NS, Chiefly 
odies, and 
ing the 
cus heav y* 
leffe agile; 
vile ranked 
mn parifon of 
are more 
\UMIditi¢ Is 
m°owne upon 
efies in the 
kly healed, 
contumaci- 
erecable to 
licke at all, 
aud healch 
¢ are depre- 


ave wanted 
er irs cold, 
have beene 
mlophic and 
ntumacie of 
buted to the 
| contagious 
n ? whence 
‘urifies, tu- 
renicdies 
as Toades, 
es, Vipers, 
mutreta ction 
bath caufed 
mity of our 


nGit,which 


che 


Lis 4nd other fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons, 


che rainy Southwind hath caufed with its fultry heate, Wherefore in thefe 
eares | have drawne little blood, which hath not prefently fhewed the corruption 
ofits fubftance by the blacke or greenifhcolour, as I have diligently obferved in all 
fach as 1 have bled, by the dire Gion of Phy fitiens,either for prevention of future,or 
cure of prefent difeafes. Whence it comesto paflethat the fiefhy {ubftanceof our 
bodies could not but be faulty both in temper and confiftence ; fecing thatthe blood 
whence it isgeneratcd had drawane the feeds of corruption from the defiled aire. 
Whence it fell out, that the wounds which happened with loffe of fubftance, could 
be {carfehealed or united, becaufe of the depraved nature ofthe blood. For fo 
the wounds and ulcers of thefe which are troubled with the Dropfic, whofe fy 
blood is more cold or wholly waterifh; foof Leprous perfons, whofe blood is ape roe ih 
corrupt,and laftly of all {och as have their bodies replete withill juice, or elfe are meer M44 
Cachecticke, will not cafily admit of cure. Yea affuredly if but the very part cured. = 
which is hurt {werve from its mative temper, the wound will not eafily bee 
cured. 
Therefare feeing all thefe things, both the putrefaction of the Aire, and depra- 

ved humors of the body, and alfo the diftemper of the affected parts conf{piced ro- 

ether co the deftruction of the wounded,. what marvaile was it, if in thefe lateci- ' 
vill warres, the wounds which were for their quantity {mail, for the condition of 
the wounded parts bur little, have caufed io many and grievous accidents and : 
laftly death it felfe ? Efpeciallyfeeing thatthe Aire which encompafleth us,tainted 


with putrefa@tion corrupts and defiles the wounds by infpirationand expiration, the i 
body and humours being already difpofed,or inclined to putrefaction, 
Now there came fuch a ftincke,which is a moft affired figne of putrefaCiion, from 


thefe wounds when they were dreffed, that fuch as ftood by could {carfe endure it, 
neither could this ftinke bee attributed to the want of dreffing, or fault of the Chi- 
turgion ; for the wourds of the Princes and Nobility flunke as illas thefe of the p00 ene 
common Souldiers. And the corruption was fuch, that if any chanced to bee une of great pati 
dreft for one day,which fometimes happened amongft {uch a multitude of wounded (or! “* 
perfons,the next day the wound would be full ef wormes. Befides alfo, which fur- 
thermore argues a great putrifaGion of humors, many had Abfcefies in parts op» 
pofice to their wounds,as in the left knee, when as the right fhoulder was wounded ; 
in the left arme,when as the right Leg was hure, Which I remember befell! the King 
of Navarre, the Duke of Nevers, the Lord Rezdew and divers others. For all men 
had nature fo overcharged with abundance of vicious humors, that if it expelled 
not part thereof by impoftumes to the habice of the body, it certainly orherwifedil- 
poled of it amongft the inner parts of the body; for in diffecting dead bedies,wee  - 
obferved thatthe Spleene, Liver, Lungs, and other Bowells were purulent, and - 
heftce it was that the patients by reafon of vapours {ent fromthem to the heart were 
troubled with continuall feavers. Burthe Liver and all the veinous parts being pol- 
luted and fo the peneration of the Jaud:ble biood hindred, they languifhed for wan¢ 
of fitting nourifhment. Butwhen the Braine by vapours was drawne in to fympa- 
thize with the reft, they were molefted with Ravings and Convulfions. Wherefore 
if any thing fucceeded unprofperoufly in fo great malignancie of wounds, the Chi. 
rurgion was not tobeblamed, for that it were acrime tofight againit God and the 
Aite, wherein the hidden {Courges of the divine jultice lye hid.T herefore, if accor- 
ding tothe minde of the great Hippocrates, who commands to bring all contuicd 
wounds to fuppuration, that fo they may be healed, wee endeavoured to cure with 
fuch medicines wounds made with Gunfbot,andthersefore contufed ; whocamright- 
ly beangry withus,if we performed it not fo well, by reafon of thele putrifa@ions, Allconraled 

gingreens and mortifications which proceeded from the corrupt Aire, forall that 2. cughero 
We ufed nor onely fuppuratives, but were oft times forced to ufe other medicines, pp ration. 
{0 long turning afide from the cure of thedifeafe, untill we had orecome the fymp- 
tomes which much endanger the patientand cuftomarily happenupon fuch wounds, 
432110 upon thefe which are made with a {word or any other kind of wea)on 5 As 

| plainly appeare in the following treatife,to which it now feemes hig h tiane thac 


We betake 
our felves, CHAD. 


1 


| 
e 
q 


418 Of wounds made by Cun/fhot, 


— 


Cuar. I, 
A divifion of wounds drawne from the variety of the wounded parts and 
the Bullets which wouna, 


LI wounds which are made in mans body by Gunfhot, whether fimple or 
AdivMonof compound,are accompanied with contulion, dilaceration, diftemper and 


(welling. | fayjall thefe poffefle eyther the noble parts, or ignodle, the 


she wounded fichhy,nervous or bony,fome whilcs with rending and tearing alunder the larger | 


parts. vellells, {umetimes without harming them, Now thefe wounds are oncly fupertic. 
ary, or elfe peirce deepe and pafle quite through the body. But there is alfo ano. 

ther divifion of thefe wounds taken trom the variety of the Bullets wherewith they 

Fromthe dife are made, For fome bullets are bigger,fome leflc, iome betweene boch , they are 
rence of ufually made of Lead, yerfometimes of Steele, lron, Brafle, Tinne, {Caric any of 
Silver, much lefleof Gold. There arifesno difierence from their figure ; 


pvounes mace kinds of wounds ofthis natureare round, From thefe differences, the Chiryy. 


by Wunofhet 


arewualy pion mult rake his Indications whatto dee, and what medicinestoapply. The tirf 
saa care mult be, that he thinke not thefe horrid and maligne fymptomes, which ufually » 
happen upon thelc kinds of wounds, to arife from combuftion, or poyton carried | 


with the Bullet into the wounded part, and that for thefe reafons we have former. 
ly handled at laree. Burracher let him judge they proceede trom the vehemencie 
ofthe ceniution, dilaceration and fraQure, caufed by the Bullets too violent entry 
inco the nervous and bony bodies. For if at any time the bullet fhal! onely ligh up- 
onthe flethy parts ,the wounds will beas eafily cured, as any other wound ufually js, 
which is made witha contufing and round kind of weapon, as I have often found by 
frequent experience, whileft | have followed the warres, and performed the par: 
ofa Chirurgiontomany Noble-mea and common Souldiers, according to the 


countell of {uch Phyfitions as were thereoverfeers of the cure, 


C nap. il 


Of the fignes of wounds made by Gun(bei. 


aaa SN Ounds made by Gunfhot are knowne by their figure, which is ufually 
wounds from > Myx rounds; by their colour,as when the native colour of the part decayes, anc 
their figure. in Read thercofa livid, greenifh, violet or other colour fucceeds; by the 
ae tecling or ferfe of the ftroke,when inthe very inftant of the receiving thereot, hee 
From the fee. feeles a heavy fenfe as if fome great fione, or peiceof Timber, or fome fuch other 
>" weightything had falne uponit; by the {mall quantity of blood which iffues out 
oe thereat, for when the parts are contufed, within fome {mall while after the ftroake 
* they iwell up, fo that ehey will fearfe admit a Tent, whence it is that the blood is 
04 ftopped, which otherwife would flow forth of the orifice of the wound ; by heate, 
wound, which happens eyther by the violentnefle of the motion, or the vehement impu!lion 
ofthe aire,or the attrition of the contufed parts,as the flefh and nerves. 
Alfo you may conjecture that the wounds have beene made by Gunfhor, if the 
bones {hall be broken and the {plinters thereof by pricking the neighbouring bo- 
wales vs dics caufe defluxion and inflammation. But thecaufe that the Bullet makes {0 grea! 
wounds arefo 2 COMMON Is, for that it enters the body not with any points or corners, bu! 
rics with its round and {phericall body, which cannot penetrate buc with might) 
force; whence it commeth to paffethat the wound lookes blacke, and the a 
jacent partslivid, Hence alfo proceede fo many grievous fymptomes, as pain’, 
Defluxion, Inflammation, Apoftumation, Convulfion, Phrenic, Palfie, Gangree 
and mortification, whence laftly death enfues. Nowthe wounds doe often c! 
forth virulent and very much ftincking filth, by reafon of rhe preat conrulioa, 


and the rending and tearing of the acighbouring particles, A great aboundance 
ol 


Lin. 


a 


of humors fic 
the mative he 
heate Leazcs | 
humours, ch 
neither 4 
or make {o ia 
which goog 


29 
as 
Armovur, 
which muft 
prefently att 
preat,as thie \ 
formance of 
atthe recci\ 
Mutcles will 
You ihaliii 
the more 
what deepc 
put the pari 
Bullet. As 
wounded In 
entred into 
fame mann< 
where the | 
and the ref 
neffe of che 
ninth {pon 
cilion in th« 
{hall well o! 
your probe. 


Hpure and | 
that he may 
fohtrument 


iy q 
* 
| 
3 o 
> 
~ 
4 
S 
| 
? ? 
% 


Lis.u. and other fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons. 
of humors flow from the whole body, and fall downe upon the affe@ed parts, which 
the native heate thereof being diminifhed forfakes, and prefeotly an unnatural] 
heate feazesuponit. Hither alfo rend an univerfall or particular repletion of il! 
nd tymours, chiefely if the wounds poffi fle thenervous parts as the joynts. Verily 
a Stagge with his horne,nor-2 flint out of a fling can give fo greatablow, 
ormake fo largea wound, asa Leaden or Iron Bullet {hot out_of a Gun, as thar 


fimple or which going with mighty violenee,peirces the body likea Fhunderbolc. 
“Mper and | > 
Me larger Cuap. III. 
tuperficj- 


How thefe wounds muft be ordered at the firft dreffing, 


allo ano- 


| He wound muft forthwith be enlarged, unleffe the condition of the part strangebo-: 
refift,that fo there may be free paflage forth both forthe Sas/es,or matter, 


for almoft asallo for fuch things as are farced, or otherwife contained therein; fuch fork, 
the Chirur. as are pcices of their cloathes, bombaft, linnen, paper, peices of Maile or bat or 
The firtt Armour, Bullets, Haile-fhot, fplinters of bones, bruifed fleth and the like, ail 
bich ufually which muft be olucked forth with as muit celerity and gentleneffe as may bee. For 
lon Carried prefently afcer the receiving of the wound the paine and inflammation are not fo 


preat,as they will be withina fherttime after. This is thesprincipall thing per- 
formance of this worke, that you place the patient juft infucha pofture as he was in 
attherecciving ofthe wound 3 for otherwite the various motioa and turning of the themforth; 
Mufcles will eyther hinder or: ftraiten the paflage forth of the conteined bedies, 
You fhallif it be poflible,fearch for thefe bodies with your finger, that fo you may 

the more certainly and exaGly perceive them, Yetifthe Bullet bee entred fome- a 
what deepe in, then you fhall fearch for ic witha roundand blunt probe, left you ; 
putthe patientto paine, yet oftentimes you fhall {carce byshis meanes finde the 

Bullet, As it happened to the Marfhall of Briffac inthe (cige of Parpignas, who was 
wounded in his right fhoulder with a Bullet, which the Chirurgions thought to have ; 
entred intothe capacitie ofhis body. But 1, wifhing the patieat to ftand juft inthe 
: fame manner as hee did when heereceived the wound, found at length theplace 
where the Bullet lay, by gently preffing with my fingers,the parts nearethe wound, 
and the reft which I fufpe@ed; asalfo by the fwelling, bardnefle, paincand black- 
nefle of the part, which was in the lower part of the fhoulder neare unto the eight ox 
ninth {pondill of thebacke, Wherefore the bullet being taken forth by making ta- 


ive former. 
vehemencie 
lolent entry 
ly lig hit up- 
ulually is, 
cn found by 
ed the parr 


ding to the 


ul pee / cifion in the place,the wound was quickly healed and the Gentleman recovered. You 
lecayes, and fhall well obferve this, and rather beleeve the judgement of your fagers, than of 
ds; by che : your probe. 

hereof, hee 

iffues out 

the ftroake Cuap. 


he bloed 1s 
4 Dy heate¢, 
timpultion 


A defcription of fit Inflruments to draw forth Bullets and other firange badies. 


’ Oth the magnitude and figure of Inftruments fic for drawing forth of Bul. 


122 letsand other ftrange bodies,are various according to the diverfity of the 
incident occafions. For fomeare toothed, others fmooth, others ef another 


vs) 


gure and bignes:of all which forts the Chirurgion muft have divers inareadinefie, 


that he may fit thena to the bodies and wound, and not the wounds and bodies to his 
lohruments. 


ifhor, if the 
pouring 
ikes {0 great 
roers, but \ 
ich mighty 
nd the ad- 
BS, as paine, 
Gangreen 
often cait 
conrulion, 


sboundance 
of 


The Deliniation of fach like Infiraments, 


A toothed Crowes-Bik. 


j ly 


7 
~alic an 
| 
{ 
» 
WIS 
q . 
4 add 
4 
4 \ 
5 
* 


Of wounds made by Gun phot, 


The Crance- bill, with teeth 4 


fit for drawing forth haileefhot , pieces 
ofarmonr, {plimters of bones,and futh 
things as lye deepe within, 


The frraight Cranes-bill being alfo toothed 


The Ducks: bill. 


This Ducks bill hath +z 
large round and toothed 
caustie inthe end, for 
fo it more tsfily taketh 
hold of the Bullet when 
les amone much 


Flefh. 


Another infirument fit for drawing 
forth of Bullets, which may be termed, 


4 Catcb- bullet, 


A. Shewes tit 
Tranke. 

B, Shewes the rea, 

or tring, which 


opens & fhuts tbe 


| 


we 


A. Shewes fre joe 


C. whichis 


The Swannes 


But if thefe fi 
wound, they o 
Gimblets. Th 
their {crewed | 
der mettall. ang 


q 
4 ‘ j Ane: 
4 
| 
Ftp,” 
4 
«<-> \ 
q 
) 
7 
| 
NS 
— 
4 
= 
pom 
+= = 
= 
- 
= | 
—_ 
>> 
j > 
| Ae, 
| > 
> 
; j 


bath 
toothed 
he end. for 
aftly taketh 
Bullet when 


a7 ft 


hemes the 

esthe rod, 
which 


i> fhuts tbe 


eynt. 


inet her 


and other frery Engines,and all ortsof Weapons, 


 Anetber Catch-bullet called a Lizard{ -nofe,made for drawing out of bullet smbich 
are fomewhas flatted, by firiking upen a bene. 


> 


The Parvrots-beake ts made for drawing forth peices of maile thruft inte the fico, 
ficlh, or bones; aud this is the figure thereof. 


A,Shewestve jcrew pia. B The hollowed part which receives, the round part noted With, 
which isopened and (but by the fcrew. D.D, falls, or fiayes, which governe the 


rannine branch, 


The Swannes billopens with a fcrew: yeu may with this dilate the wounds, asd fo put 
6 fireiobt Crane{-bill,as pincers to plucke forth range bodyes. 
The figure of both are beere expreft. 


But if thefe ftrange bodyes,¢ (pecially bullets and hailefhot,bc not teo deepe in the 
wound, they may be taken forth with your Levatorie, or elfe by the helpe of thefe 

imblets, Thefe Gimblets are {crewed into their pipes, or canes, andenter with 
cir ictewed points into the Bullets, ifthat they be of Lead or Tin, ‘and of no har- 
Sct mettall, and fo being fastened in them,bring them out with them. 


Oo The 


e \ | 
| 
i | 
° 
apy 
| - 
‘= 
| 
= = = 
v * 
= | tas 


422 Of wounds made by Gunfhot, 
The figure of the Gimbles with bis pipe,or cane. 
Befides the Swanf-bill whichwee larely mentioned, thereare alfo other 
va ments fit to dilate and open the wounds; therefore called Dilaters, by whofe he}, 
: the wougd may be held open, that fothe hiddenbodycs may be {eene for whe, 
you prefletogether the two ends of this Iaftrument, the orhertwo open and 
themfelves, You maylfo ule them 1m dilating divers other parts of the 
Nofe-thrils, fundamept,and fuch like, 
Dilaters, 
Wate The Inftruments which follow are called Scton needles,or Probes; whol uf is, 
ae. to draw through a fiamula, fo to keepe the wound open,that you may the bettertake 
a forth any fttange body. Befides alfoweufe the fame needles, to fearch, or as: 
were to found the deepenefle of wounds, and to finde out the Bullets. For they 
Mot put enero much painebecanfethey have {fmooth and round ends. So allo: 
i Probes wherewith we iearch for Bullets, muft have fomewhat large, fmooth an 
: ine What probes round ends, For feciag that the verges of the wound meete together preient]y alter 
Hurt, if the Probes be too fmall or flender, they will fticke inthe inequality 0! 
ANE the fleth ncither willthey be able ro come to the Buller, But if they bee (harpe and 
. pointed they will caufe and renew the paine by pricking the fiefhthey mele withal, 
and {fo hinder your intention of finding the Bullet; Now you mutt bee fuirnithed 
with thefe Inftruments of a different length, according to the various thicknell 
Ae of the partssfor you cannot put any through the thigh but fuchas are of good lengt’. 
Probes for to put flamulacs through a woana wishall, 


MIS 


the wound 
chan 
fore in Wo 
than oy'¢. 
fity of NiO 
bids the 
for that t 
{ymptom 
in this kin 
leaft it be 
Efchar ts 
longer it 
WV herefo 
firft plac: 
min.vecd. 
omn 
of the he 
humors. 
lent and | 
the vene 
folved i: 
The tent 
that by 
etherw) 
powcr 
dition o 
COO 
loba-w 
ftilen: 
of E2yp 
Way eo! 
than w3 
R. O 
de 
hath a 
the fal! 
lini; 
a futhc 
erto af 
fuppur 


i 
phat are] 
vie (= | 
- f 
> 
Pharmac! 
d 
tal 
| the WOUnS 
mult 48 
and that 
‘ 
| 
| 
| 
] 
| 
i 
| 
| 
q 
| 
| 
| 
i 
{ 
4 
4 


> alfo other Inftry. 
rs, by whofe hele 
efeene for When 
'O Open and dilare 
the Dady.as the 


obes; whole ufe is, 
may the bertertake 
fearch, or asit 
ets. Forthey can- 
lends. So alloall 
arge, {mooth and 
ther prefently after 
the inequality of 
hey bee (harpe and 
they mele withall, 
uft bee furnifhed 
vatious thicknefle 
re of good length. 


and other fiery Engines andall Sorts of W. eapons, 


IX. 


hat arefsing firft be after the firange bodies are placktor drawn ont of the wound. 


» wet Hen the ftrange bodyes are drawne or pluckt out ofthe wound, by thefe 
TAA 2 meanes we have formerly recited, the chiefe of the cure muft be to heale 

Ne rhe conrufion,and amend the diftemper of the aire ifit bee hot aad moyft, 
that is fubject to purrefaGion. This thal be den by medicins tal en inward- 
ly,applicd outwardly aad put into thewound.T i ings to be inwardly ufed in dyet and 
Pharmacie I leave to the judgement of learned Phy fitions; forthe particular and to~ 

cke medicines, (unlefle from the prefent copftitution of theayre, the condition of 
che wounded part, from iome other caufe there be danger of a Gangreen) yeu 
mutt ufe fuppuratives, as you ulually doc in contufions; {uch as arcoyle of Wiieipes A Caution in 
and that which we calladigeftive; you mutt chictely forbeare fuppuranvis, when as 
rhe wounded part is of a nervous aature.For al nervous parts requre drver medicines 
chan flefhy, as we have formerly delivered ipcaking uf wounds of the joyats, where- 
fore in wounds of the joy ots and nervous parts you thall ule more venice Turpentine 
thanoyle. Lawrentiws Jobertus the Kings Phytition and Chancellour ofthe Vaiver- whyEfctaroe 
fity of Mompelier.in a treatiie which fee writ of wounds made with Gunfhor, for- be 
bidsthe ufe of Richarotickes Dorh actuall and potentiail, ia thele wounds, if imple; shefe kinds, if 
for that they induce paine, inflammation, a feaver, Gang:ne and orber deadly 
{ympromes. Befides alfo an efchar will hiader iuppuration. whichiste bee defired 
inthis kinde of woundes, that {o rhe contufed fleth may be fevered from the found, 
leaft it be drawne to puircfaction by contagion, Which ealily happens when an sow 
Efchar is drawne, as a barre over it, forthen the excrementitious humor remaaines ¢har may caule 
longer ia the part,and the putridinous vapeurs hindred from pafling forth, are en- peteuniann, 
creafed,and carryed fromthe lefler veffells tothe bigger, and fo over all the body. 
Wherefore, when you fufve& putrefaction, letting alone fuppuratives, ufein the 
firft place {uch things as 1¢ purrcfaétiwn,as this following oyntment.R. puluer. The seferipti- 
minveche viridisar Vitrioli rormané benz quantum on ofan 
lisut omnia fimul [ecundurn artim,¢y fiat medicamentum aa formar mells. his by reafon 
of the heate and iubtlery of the iubftance, hath a facuity to induce and atteauate the 
humors; as alfoto call forth the native heate drawne inand diffipated by the vie- 
lent and forcible entrance of the Bullet inrothe bedy; furchermore alfo ircorreéts 
the venemauis contagion of the virulent humor. Now this medicine fhall be ufed dif 
lolved in Venegar or aqua vita, and be put into the wound with tenis, or pledgets, 
The tents which ihall bee ufed at the firlt dreffiag muft be fomew hat long and thicke, 
that by dilating the wound, they may make way for apply cation of other remedies; 
etherwife you maymake injection with afyring, thatio it may penetratethe more 
powerfully, Bue this deleribed Egyptsacwm thall be tempered according tothecon-., 
dition of the affe ded parts, for the nervous parts will bee offended with it as being shales rem 
too acride; but it may be qualified by admixture of oyle of Turpentine and Saint ae this Ee yps 
lobn-wort. Alfe we may well be without this Egyptsacwm when there is no fuch pe- Gin 
ftilent conftitution of rhe ayre, as was feene inthe late Civill warres. After the afe 
Of Eoyptiacum you fhall with emollient and lenitive medicines procurethe falling a- 
Way efthe Efchar, aad {uch a medicine is this following oyle,being fomewhat more 
than warme, 

violati Lib.iii}. im quibue coquantur catells due nuper nati, ufque ad di{folutionems 

ofsium add endo vermium terrefirinm, ut accet praparater um tb, }. coquantur lente 
tent, deinde frat exprefsieaa furm,addende tercbinth.venet, aqua vita oyle geftive, anos 
hath a wonderful force to aflwage paine,te bring the wound to {uppuration,& capfe 
the falling away ofthe Efchar, This enfuing oyle ismade more catily. Ky, ofet procure the 
bini an. ti). fimal cy fiat medicamentwm, out of this Eichar, 
a lufficent qualiryinto the wound; for this being applyed indifferent hot,hath pow- 
erto aflwage pain,tofoften and hume& the orifice of the wound, and help forwards 
{uppuration ,whichis the true manner of curing thefe kinde of wounds,according to 
Oo 23 the 


* & 
— — 
4 
¥ 
7 
q 
* 
= 
4 
q 
» 
a 
4 
| 


Of wounds made by Gunfbot, Lin, 


Libdewker, tHe rule of Hippocrates, which withes every contufed wound to bee Prefengy, 
brought to fuppuration,for fo it will be leffe fubje& toa Phlegmon; and befide: al 
the rent and bruifed flefh muft putrifie, diffolve and turne to quitturc, that now and 
good ficth may be generated in {teed thereof, 
Leurentius loubertus much commends this following medicine of whole 
asyet,l have made notriall. pulver.mercur, bis calcsmats, 3},adipss porci recent, ve! 
butyri vecentis, 3viij. Camphora in aqua vite diffolute , ommia fimui, 
Thefacutties tantillam ole iliorum,ant lini. Experience tanght him, and realen alfo thevwes, tha 
ehis kinde of remedy is very commendable; for the powder of Mercury, 
ereury, 

with a groffe aad hume ding matter, doth in a fhort {pace turne the bruifed fie(h 
pus, withourcavfing any great paine, For the Camphire whether itbe hot o: COld jn 
ecmper, itmuch conduces tothat purpofe, by reafon of the fubrlety of the parts 

of it confifts. For by meanes of this quality the medicines enter with more facilis 
into the bodyes, and performe their parts; befidesalfo Camphive retifis py. 
trifaction. Some droppe into the wound aqua vite, wherein they have di:{o|yeq 
Theforeeof fomecalcined Vitrioll. Which kind of remedy is not fuppurative, but yet much re. 
calcined Vitti fifts putrefaction {fo that we may ule it with good fuccefle, when the weather is hor, 
How wounds MOYtt,and foggie, But when the wound is made very necre at hand, it cannot burbe 
madeby Gen- burnt by the flame ofthe powder; ia which remedies ufed for burnes will de 
not omitting fuch as are fic forcontufions. But for thefe parts which lye nex: th. 
wound, you tfhall nor, unleffe at the firft drefling apply refrigerating and altringer, 
things, but rather emollient and fuppurative, For thofe things which have a refrige. 
rating faculty, weaken the part,and hinder fuppuration.For aftringentsconttipace the 
skin, which is the caufe,that the putride vapours fhut up and hindted from tranfpiry, 
tion and paffage forth a gangrene and mortificationeafily feaze upon the part. bur if 
the contufion be great and diffufe it felfe more largely over the flefh;the part mettb- 
much {carified; that fothe contufed and concreat blood,and therefore {ubjeé to pu. 
trefa@ion, may be evacuated. But for thefe parts, which fomewhat further ditanr 
fromthe wound encompaffe the contufed flefh, they require refrigerating: and 
{trengthening medicines, fo to hinder the falling downe and fetling of the bumer in 
that part; fuchis this enfuing medicine. Myrrbe. 
an.>) (acct folan. alonm iilj. ovorum, oxyrhodin. quentzm 
dicine. fuffictt; fiat lintmen:um, ut decet. Youmay ule this, andtke like untill the fulpedzd 
{fymptome,be paft feare. Neither muft you have leffe care,of binding up and rolliig 
me the part, than of your medicines; for it doth nota little conduce to the cure, to bind? 
3 it fo fitly up as it may be without paine. The wound at the beginning of the cure; 
How ofetbe be drefled but once in 24. houres,that is untill the wound come to fuppuration; 
anaes but when the quitture begins to flow from it,and confequently the paine and feavet 


day, are encreafed,it fhall be dreft twife a day,that is every twelve houres. And when the 


Scarification, 


troublefome tothe Patient, it willbe requifite to dreffe ir every 8 houres;, thatis 
thrifea day. Now whenas this aboundant effluxe is fomewhat flaked, and begins 


and confequently cafts forth but lietle matter, it will ferve to drefle it once a day, * 
you did at the firft, 


‘Ch VE 
How you fhall order it at the fecond drefsinz. 


T the fecond and following dreflings, unlefle you fufpe& putrifaction, an 
Gangrene, you fhall onely putintothe wound fome of the oyles formes!) 
> defcribed, adding to them the yolkes of fome egges and a little fatfron; am 


Why wouuds 
made by Guns 


ule this medicine,untill the wound come to perfed fuppuration, Here you mult 


longbefore this that thefe kindes of woundsare longer before they come to fuppuration thao 
+ mae a ther wounds made by any other fort of weapon;beth for that che bullet, as alfo the 
ayre which it violently catries before it, by much bruifing the ficth, onevery {id°, 
diflipates the native heate, and exhanfts the fpirits of the part, Which caings 


hiadet 


quittere flowes more abundantly than ufuall, fothat the colle@ion thereof is very 


to decreafe, it willfufhee to drefie ietwife a day.Bucrwhen the ulcer is filled with feth, 


you hind 
caufe p2i 
keepe ep 
carry the 
wound. 
that mean 
nefic by 1: 
ad 
cum. 
you 
the {pong 
asyou tha 
ounce of « 
fully cont 
itonly wo 
powder o 
ry power 
paine int 
which arif 
quantity 
thing I co 
Onin thefi 
ration of 
In Hippocr 
chang: th 
Maligne { 
could wit 
be put int 
of thewo! 
and the q 
hole fitre 
thay app! 


| Ls 
| hinder 
fymptom 
| py little 
| {ome Turf 
good 
cines 19 W 
inet BA” 
make aS 
(sr. bora. 
of 
44 | 
| witi rents 
| tion of tA 
erolion. 
O; 
afiected, 
wound n¢ 


ODS and befig 
that noy 


Cs Will be 
hich lye nex: 
ANd altrinoer, 
ich haye a refrige. 
“Nts conttipare 
d from tran{piro. 
on the part. Bur je 
isthe part mutt De 
re {ubje@ to pu. 
at further diftant 
efrigerating and 
Of the humor in 
Dracon. Myrrhe, 
yr hodin. quantum 
ull the fulpe@ed 
FS up and rolling 
he cure, to binde 
ing of the cure, 
tofuppuration; 
and feaver 
Aad when the 
thereof is very 
houres; chat is 
aked, and begins 
Billed with fleth, 
tt Once a day, as 


rifaction, anda 
oyles formerly 
tle faffron; and 
you mutt nore 
ration than o- 
ller, as alfo the 
Onevery fide, 
hich things 

hiader 


P 


and otber fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons. 


hinder dig 


eftion, and often caufe the matter to ftinke, as alfo many other pernitious 
s, Yetmoft ufually pws or quitture appeares within three or foure ° 
dayes, fooner and later according to the various complexion, and temperament of 
the patients bodyes,and the condition of the ambient ayrein heate and cold. Then 

fittle andlitcle you muft cometo deterfives, addingto the former medicine 
fome Turpentine wathed in Rofe, Barly, or fome other fuch like water, Which may WhyTurpens 
wath away the biting thereof. If the encompaffing ayre be very cold, Pas may to mo wg 
good purpele adde lome aqua'vite; for by Galens pre{cript, we mult ule hot medi- 
“ines in winter,and leffe hot in fummer. Then inthe next place ufe deterfives, as mers. 
prague decocd somes hor dei quantum fofficit, fucci plantaginis, appi,agrimon, centaurei A 
minors,An. =), bullsant omnia Siraul; in fine decoclionis adde terebinthine vencte medicine, 
10/48. 31). far hor dei, Silj. Dj. Letthem be ail well mixed together and 
make a Mundificative ofan indifferent confiftence, Or Ri. /uccé clymemi, plantag. 
abfimth. appy, 4%. sereb. venet 54. fyrup.abfinth. mellis rof. an. %ij-bulliant omnia 
nundum artem, poftescolentur, in colatura adaepulwer, alocs, ma ffiches, ircos Florent, 


mprome 


herd. fiat Mundi ficatinum ad ufum dictum, Or cl{e Rey terebinih. venet. lote 


rof.5v.olet rof. 3). melis myrrba, aloes, maflich. ariftolech, rotunde, an, 

3.5, far: bord, 3iij.mufce. Makea Mundificative, which you may pucinto the wound why tenes 
withtents, bucfuchas are neither too long,aor thicke, left they hinder the evacuze mut beneie 
tion of tae quitture and vapours, whence the wounded part willbee troubled with 
erofion, paine.defluxion, inflammation, abicefle, putrefaction; all which feverally 
ofthemfelves, as alfo by infe ing the noble parts, are troublefome both tothe pare 

afiected, asalfotothe whole body befides, Wherefore you fhall put into the 

wound notents, unleffe {mall ones, and of an indifferent confiftence; left (as i fayd) 

youhinder the paflang forth of the matter, or by their bard preffing of the part, 

ciufe paine, and fo draw on maligne fympromes. But feeing tentsare ufed bothto 

keepe epen a wound fo long, uotillall che ftrange bodyes betaken forth, as alfo to 

carry the medicines wherewithall rhey are annointed: evento the bortome of the 

wound, Now ifthe wound be finuous anddeepe, that fo the medicine cannot by 

that meanes arrive at the botcome and all the parts thereof, you muft doe you bufi= 
nefic by injeAions mate of the following decoGion, Ri. 4g. bord. lib. 4, agrimon, 
abfinth, rad ariftoloch rotund, 36. fiat A nlInjeRion, 
ad Lib.) colacura asffolve aloes hepatica bulliamt mods- 

Inject forme of this decoAion,three or foure times intothe wound, as often as 

you drefle the patient ; andif this fhall notbe fufficient co clenfe the filth, and wafte 

the {pongious, »urrideand dead fiefh, you diflolvethereia as much 
asyouthallchinxe ft forthe prefent neceflity;butcommonly you fhall diffolve an 

Once Of ina pintofthe decoction, Verily «“gyptiacwm doth power- The quantity 
fully confume che proud flefh which lyes in thecapacity of the wound; befidesalfo 
tonly workes upon fuch kind of flefh.For this purpofe,[ have alfo made triall of the aninjesion, 
powder of Mercury, and burnt Alome equally mixed together, and found chem ve- 

ry Powerfull even almoftas fublimate, or Arfenicke, (butthatthefe caufe not fuch 

Paine in their operation.) Icertainely much wonder at the largenefle of the Efchar 

Whicharifes bythe af perfio of thefe powders.Many Pra@titioncrs would havea great Of the 


quantity of the injection to be left in the cavityes of finuous ulcers,or wounds; which oo 
t 


thing I could never allow of. For this contained humor caufeth aa unnaturall renfie ois" 
Snin thefe parts, and taints them with {uperfluous moyfture, whereby the regene- | 
Fation of flethis hindered; forthat every ulcer as it is anulcer, requires to be dryed, 

‘0 Hippocrates opinion, Many alfo offend in the too frequent ufe of Tents; for as they 

change thé every houre,they couchthe fides of the wound, caufe pain, & renew other 
Maligne fymptomes;wherefore {uch ulcers as caft forth more abundance of matter, Mollow tents 
Could with rather to be drefled with hollow tents,Jike thofe I formerly defcribed to “PP 
beput into wounds of the Cheft. You fhall preflea linoen boulftcr to the botrome 

of ‘hewound, that {o the parts themfelvesmay be mutually condenfed by that preflure by a 
and the quitture thruft forth:neither will itbe amiffe to let this boulfter have alarge thewoued. 
hole fitted to the orifice of the wound:& end of the hollow tent and pipe,that fo you 


Day apply a {punge forto receive the quitture,for forthe matter wilbe more {peedily 


iad to bee 
» i] 
and 
of whofe CHicac;, 
Pore; Ve/ 
2 
firmul, 
allo (hewes, thar 
ercury, if Mixed 
¢ bruifed iNtg 
itbe hot oy Cold jn 
of the Parts wher, 
With more facility 
amphiie reti Pu. 
cy have diflol veg | 
, bur yet much re. 
Weather jc Nor, 
d, itcannor Durh 
| 
| 
| 
J 0 3 


Of wounds made by Gunfhot, Lr 
evacuated and {pent, efpecially if it be bound up with aa expullive ligature 
ning at the botrome of the ulcer and fo wrapping itupto thetoppe, All the 
fters and rowlers, which thall be applyed to thefe kindes of wounds, fhall be dippeg u{cis, the 
in Oxycrate, or red wine, {oro ftrengthen the part, and binder defuxion, But braine ar 
mult have a {peciall care, that you doe not binde the woundtoo hard, for henc. will > yt the heat 
arife paine, hindring the paflage forth of the putredinous vapours and EXT Emer. 4 makest 
which the contuted flefh cafts forth; and alfo feare of an Atropbia, or want of now. 
rifament,the alimentary juyces being hindred from comming to the part. deadly in 
vapour dif pt 
Crap. VII ferve in 
indication 
py what meanes flrange bodyes Jefe ia at the firf dré/sing may be drawne forth, rhe mu 
ner. 
‘T divers times happens, that certaine {plinters of bones, broken and medics;for 
thar make | red afunder by the violence of the ftroake, cannot be puiled forth a, he rothe ligam 
Arlt drefling, for that they eitherdoe nor yeeld or fall away, or elfecange, fun@ivn 
kenforth, be tound by the formerly defcribed inftruments, For which purpofe this is ago, che braine, © 
proved medicine to draw forth that which 1s left behind, 


isthe chietedt 
of all other, 


. Heaceicis thatadyet confifting onely of Pamada’s is more ft for Italians, than ! 


R:. radic.lreos Florent, panac, ¢3 cappar, ar. 31 ij. ariftoloch. rotund. manne. thyris, 
5 pollinem redacka incorporestur cum melle vofar.cy serebinth.venet.an. Or Ry, 
jin. pini combufts Cy extiniis in vino albo, radic. Ireos, ar sft olochie an, 
38. thuris3)./quame aris,3\}, im pollinetm redrzantur, incorporentur cum mele vofate, fas 
medicament umn. 


Cuarp. VIII. 


Of Indications to be obferved in this kinde of wounds, 


en He ulcer being clenfed ahd purged, and all {trange bodyes taken forth; 12. 
tures endeavours to regenerate flefh, andcicatrize it, muft behelpe 

dea, WatGs With convenient remedies, both taken inwardly, and applyed cx 
ward!y. To which things we may be cafily and fafely carryed by indications drawne, 
firft from the effence of the difeafe, then from the caufe; ifas jer prefenc it nourith 
the difeate. For that which Galen fayes, Lib. 3. Ateth. that no indication may dee 
taken from the primitive caufe and time; muft bee underftood of the time aft, and 
the caufe which isabfent, And then from the principall times of the difeafe.the be. 
ginning, cncreale, ftate, and declination, foreach of thefefoure reauire theitte: 
medics. Orhers are takcn from the temperament of the patient, {0 thatno 
gion neede doubt, that fome medicines are fit for cholericke , otherfome for phics- 
maticke bodyes. Hither referre the indication taken fromthe age of the patient; 
alfo it is drawa,from his dyet, for no man muft preicribe any flender diet to one who 
is alwayes feeding, as to him who is accuftomedto eate bur once, ortwile 32y. 


if 


dby much labour, 
But ofall other, have diligent regard of tharincic?- 


performed without maniit 


which istaken from the feafon of the yeere 


Hence it is we readcin Gwédo,that wounds of the head arecu"e“ 


they are 
and general! 
rmes from 
cefle of the < 
ro the heart, 
ventricle, in 
upona joyn! 
muft you 
the comme! 

Galen bimmie 

foremention 
difeafes:tor 

fo muftthe 

obl{erved to 


ether a 

Cture of abo 
aiymptorn: 

thefe three. 

ficially haric 
ted and coir 
the caufe of 

Which cour 
tracts the E 
{cribedina { 
hee can { 
{ymptomes 

when the di 
as 2 fhadow 

that perverti 
place.as tho 
mentioned | 
its native 
lity; for whi 
nor 


4 
Te 
Bilis uch Men; TOF We mult give lomecwhat to cuftome, which is as it were ano 
TP Bi ture, Vocations and dayly exercifes, are referred to dyct, for other things bet J 
husbandmen and laboures, wh 
The Indicari- than idle and delicate pe rions, 
is tion whichis drawne from the ftrength of che patient: 
OCiNg Neglected )fuccour the fainting or decaying {tren 
i ofthepatienre [0 Cut Off amember that is putrifed, the Operation mt 
of the patient be fo dejected, that hee cannot have it 
danger of bis life, A lfo indication may be drawne from the encompaffing 
han gion, the ftateofthe ayreand foyle, and the particularcondition of the pretence 
lately by-paft time. 


Lip, ay. 


ive ligature, begin, 
ppe. All the boul. 
nds, fhall be dippeg 
defluxion, Bur you 
hard, for hence will 
and excremen, 
4, OF Want ofnoy. 
the part. 


drawne forth, 


broken and fhatre. 
puiled forth ar the 
way, Or elf{ecannor 
rpote this is an ap. 


d. manne, thuris an, 
“Cb a8. 51}, OF re. 
£05, arsflolechie an, 
‘um mehervofate, fas 


s taken forth; na. 
uft be helped for- 
and applyed out- 
ndications drawne, 
prefenc it nourith 
dication may bee 
hetime paft, and 
the difeafe,the be. 
require theirre. 
{fo thatno Chirur- 
erfome for phleg- 
age of the pauent; 
lcr diet to one who 
e, ortwife a day. 
STcalians, than for 
t were another na- 
ther things beftt 
{by much labour, 
ard of that incica- 
prefently (all clic 
breif itbe needful 
red'if the firength 
without manite!t 
paffing ayre, 
n of the yeere,t* 
of rhe prefent and 


he head arecurec 
with 


and other fie? ry Engines and all Sorts of Weopons, 


427 


ofthe head at 


with more difficulty at Pars, than at Avipnion,; where notwith{tanding onthe Why wounds 


caule 


pur the heate of rhe ambient ayre at Avignon, attenuates and diflolves the humors, 


{makes them flow from above downewards, Butif any objet thar experience 
“omnradict chis opinion of Guéde, & fay, that woundsof the head are more frequeni« 


ly deadly in hot countries; let him underftand that this muft norbe attributed coche 


manifelt & gaturall heate of the ayre,but to acertaine maligne & veuenate humor,or 


vapour difperfed throvgh the ayre, and rayfed out of the Seas;as you may eafily ob- 


frvein thofe places of France & Italy which border upon the Mediterranean Sea. An 
indication may allo be drawne from the peculiar temper of the wounded parts, for 


he mafculous parts muft be drefled after one,and the bony parts after another man- 
ver, The different fenfe of the parts, indicates and requires the like varicty of rc. Aindication 


ary the wounds of the legges are cured with moretrouble, than at Paris; The saris, and of 


is, the ayre is cold and moy{t at Paris ;which conftitution feeing it is hurttull ro 


praincand head, it cannot, but mult be offenfive to the wounds of thefe parts. hard co be 
cured, 


ty be 


fo muft the indication be various of a compound and complicate difeafe, But there is 
ob{erved to be a triple compofition,or complication of affects befides nature; for 
ther a difeaie is compounded with a difeafe, as a wound, ora phlegmon with a fra- 
cure of abont;or a difeafe with a caufe,as an ulcer with a defluxionsor a difeafe with 
alymptorne, as a wound with paine, or bleeding. It fometimes comes to paffe, thar 


| medics;for you fhall not apply fo acride medicines to the Nervesand Tendons, as the 
rothe ligamepts which are deftirute of The like reafonalfo, forthe d ienity and and 


duiliente of 


of the parts needefull for the prefervation of life; for oft times wounds Of the wounded 
the braine, or of tome cther of the natural] ana vital! parts, for this very reafon that P*" 

they are defixed in thefe parts divert the whole manocr of the cure, which is ufuall 

| and generally performed in wounds, Neitlicr that without good caufe, for oft 
jmes from the condition of the parts, we may certaine!y pronounce the whole fuc- 
ocfle of the difeafe; for wounds which penetrate into the ventricles of the braine. in- 
othe heart, the large vefiells, the cheft,the nervous part of the midriffe, the Liver, 
ventricle, {mall guts, bladder ,if fomewhat large are deadly;as alfo thefe which light 
uponajoynt ina body repleate with ill humors, as we have fotmerly noted. Neither 
muft you neglect that indicat:on which is drawne from the fituation ofthe part, and 
the commerce it hath with the adjacent parts, or fromthe figure thereof;feeing that 
Gales bimfelte would not have it negle&ed. But wee muft confiderin taking thefe 
forementioned Indications, whether there bee acompofition, or complication of the Gisace 
difcafes;tor as there isone and thara {imple indication,of one & that a fimple difeafe, 


Gal. 
Meth.¢i 2.44 


thefe three, che difeate, caufe,and fymprome, concurre in one cafe or affect. In arti- Gal lib-7, 
icially handling of which, we mutt follow Ga/ens counfell, who withes in complica- M«/- 
ted and compounded aff-As, that werefift the more urgent; then let us withftand | 


the caule of the cifeafe,and laftly that affe@, without which the reft cannot be cured. 
Which covafell muft well be obferved; for inthis compofure of affects, which di- 
ltradts the Empericke; But on the contrary the rational! Phyfition hath away pre- 
(ctibed ina few and thefe excellent words, which if hee follow in his order of cure, 
hee can fcarfe mifle to heale the patient. Symptomes trucly as they are 
{ymptomes, yceld no indication of curing, neither change the order of the cure; for 


when the difeafe is healed sthe fymptome vanifhes,as that which followes the difeafe, 


as. a fhadow followes the body, But fymptomes dee oftentimes fo urge and pref, 
‘Mat perverting the whole order of the cure, we aré forced to tefift themib eRe firft 


i thofe which would otherwife encreafe the difeafe. Now all che formerly 
lone 


‘0 its nat 


my. lor when thofe two are prefent, there ismothing which may hinder the repleti- 
union of wounds or Vicers. 


‘Cuar, 


How and 
when we 
muft cake ine 
dication of 


‘d indications may be drawne to two heads; the firftis, toreftore the part curine trom s 
ivetemper ; the other is that the blood offend not either in quantity or qua- Y™Pr™> = * 


i 
a 
ea 
4 
a 
aa 
* 
Cie 
é 


= 


Of wounds made by Gunfhot, 


Why fuch as 
are wounded 
muft keepc a 
fien der Diet, 


Why we matt 
open a veine 
fuch as are 
wounded by 
Gunlhot, 


Gal. Lib. 
Aleth cap. 6. 


Gal.Lib.t de 
Med, fex 


cand, 


Au Anodyne 
and ripeaing 
dtaplaime 


what remaines for the Chirurgion to doe in this kinde of woands, 


He Chirurgion mutt firtt ofall be skilfulland labour to aflwage paige 

=4 der defluxions, prefcribe a dyet in thefe fixe things we call Not naty;,) 

forbidding the ufe of hotand acrid things, as allo of wines for fich a. 
nuate the humors and make them more apt tor defluxion, Therefore .. 
the firft ler his dyet be lender, that fo thecourfe of the humors may bee 
from the affected part; for the ftomacke being empty and not well filled, drawes 
from the parts about it, whereby it confequently followes , that the utmoft any 
moteft parts are at the Jength evacuated ; which is thecaufe, that tuch asare woy, 
ded, mufi keepe fo {pare a dyet for the next dayes following. Venery is Very perniy, 
ous, for chat itinflames the {pirits and humors farre beyond other motions; whereby 
it happens chat the humors waxing hot,are too plentifully carryea to the wounde, 
and overheated part, The bleeding mult notbee ftanchea prefently upon the re. 
ceiving of the wound, for by the more plentiful effluxe thereof the part is tyeg 
from danger ot inflammation and fulneffe. Wherefore if the wound Dbleede po, 
liufticiently at the firft, you fhall the next day open aveine, and take blood accor, 
ding torhe ftrengthand plenitude of the paticnt; for thereutually flowes no ores, 
ftore ef blood from wounds of this nature; forthat by the greatneffe of the cop. 
tufion and vehemencie of the mooved ayre, the fpirits are forced in, as alfo Thay, 
obferved inthofe who have one of their limbes taken away with a Cannon bulle, 
For inthe time whentke wound is received, there flowcs no great quantity of 
blood,alihough there be large veines and arteries torne in funder thereby . But onthe 
4,5.6.0r fome more dayes after, the blood flowes in greater abuadance, and with 
more violence,the native heate and {pirits returning into the part. The belly mu 
be fo qualified,that he may have at the leaft ene floule a day either by nature,or Ar, 
and ifoy Arcythen rather with a glifter than purging medicines taken by the mouth, 
forrhat the agiration of humors, chiefely in che firft dayes of the difeafe,is to be 
[peed we increafe the defluxion falling downe uponthe wounded part, Yu 
Galen writes that boththe evacuations are heere neccefull, that is,blood-letting and 
purging, thoughthe Patient bee neither phethoricke, nor repleate with hu 
mors. But the care hereof muft be committed to the judgement of the learned Phy. 
lition.Paineif ioyned with inflammation fhallbe mitigated, by anointing the par’ 
neere unto the wound with Vagaent.sutritum,compoledwith the juyce of Plantain’, 
Houflecke, Nightfhade and the like, Vagwentum Diacalcitheos deicribed by Osi 
diffolved with vinegar, oyleof Poppyes and Rofesis of no leffe efficacy ; norm 
gsent .de bolo,nor divers other things of the fame faculty, though properly no 
dynes,as thole wach are not hot and moyftin the firft degree, but racher cold, du 
yetnot asto have any narcoticke faculty. Nowthefe forementioned things 
{wage paine for chat they corre¢? the hot diflemper, and ftay the acride and cho. 
lericke defluxions, whofe violencc is more than cold. After the ule of repercullivs 
it will be good to apply this following cataplafme. Re paris imfufa in 
cine ib. jf, bulitant parure addendo olei violaces, rofar. an, witellos evorum 


pulver, rofar. rub. flor chamam. meliloti, an Zij.farin, fabar.g bor dci,an, 


artem. Alioio this cafe youmay eafily make a medicine,“ 
bread crummes boyled in Oxycrate and oyle of Roles, The cure of Tumors,'t 2) 
affociate the wound,may be found in their proper place. Natures motion, wht 
to fuppuration or any fuch thing,mutt ftill be obferved,and helped by the P hyfition 
and Chirurgion, asthe minifiers or fervantsthercof. 


Ate 


and their prop 
fome lower 
by the hands 
miliatity wih 
trifies its 
cicatrizing Cid 
cher nature, f¢ 
for Iron wil g 
maligne fyn p 
or pars 


hecorre@ the 


batis. OF ATOR 
Other like. Ay 
and Liver, 
caryopbill. cor’: 
pulver. 
Si I. Mi} ce fra 
You fhall 
noite, to fire 
Caryopbylloy up 
alinnen rage 
Purpofe he | 
rub viola 
Sj. 
44 con, prehen: 
Florent.» 
thi.oy 1.4. flat 


~ 
| 
4 a 
7 >» 
| 
TT 
4 
ry 
* 
j 
4 | 
« # 
fs 
¥ | 
3 y 4 % 
= 
* 


Paine hin. 
Not Natural), 
‘OF fuch atte. 
Therefore ar 
bec diverteg 
led, Crawes 
tmolt and re. 
as are Woun. 
Very pcrniti. 
iONSs whereby 
the wounded 
y UPON the re. 
part is treed 
nd bleede nor 
blood accor. 
AO Crear 
i¢ ofthe Con. 
as alio | have 
annon buller. 
it Quantity of 
But onthe 
nce, and with 
he belly 
nature,or Art. 

by the mouth, 
{e,is to be 

| ded part, Yet 
od-letting and 
withall hue 
¢ learned Phy- 
noting the parts 
e of Plantaine, 
ribed by Gales 
cacy ; NOL 
erly nO 
ther cold, but 
ned things al- 
ucride and cho- 
repercuflives, 
ufa im lacie 
BH. Lit) 
a medicine, 
Fumors,if aoy 
tion, whether 
the Phyfition 


and otber fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons. 


Vi 


~ 


HAP. 
Of Bullets which remasne inthe body, for a long time afier the 
wound is healed wp. | 
Age pe Eaden Ballets lye in fome parts ofthe body fome whiles feaven, eight or 
bea 1 (4 More yearcs, fo that they neither hinder the agglutination of rhe wound, 
neither doth any other {ymptome happen thereupon, as I have diverfe 
MAF times obferved. untill at length by the ftrength ofnmature forcing them, thebody to 


and their proper weightines bearingthem downewards, they thew theméelves in 
(ome lower part, by their {welling or bunching forth, and fe mult be eaken forth 
by the hand of the Chirurgion. For they fay Lead hatha certaine {ympathy and fa. 
miliatity with mans body, chiefely the flefhy parts thereof. Wherefore it neither Olle 
trifies its felfe, nor cauleth the ficth to putrifie; befides it hath an excellent faculry in 
cicatrizing old ulcers, But bullets of ftone, Iron and ofany other mettall, are of ano- 
ther nature, forthey cannot remaine any Jong time in the body withour hurt: 
for Iron will grow rufty ,and {fo corrode the neighbouring bodyes, and bring other 
maligne fymptomes, Yeta Leaden bullet cannot remaine any long time in nervous, 
oraoble parts without danger. 


How tecorrect the comftitutien of the ayre, fo that the noble parts may be flrengtle- 
ned ama the Whele body befiaes. 


Spy beeaufe as we have formerly cold you,there are fome times wherein even 
r Os (mall wounds made by Gunthor prove deadly snot by their owne faule, bue 
Sorc, the fault of the ayre; therefore alfo the Chirurgion muft have this care,that 
hecorre@ the ayre withal! diligence, and reduce itto acertaine quality and modera- 
tion of fubftance,and ftrengthen the noble parts and whole budy befides,which may 
be performed, by the followimg medicines, whicl are to be taken inwardly and ap- 
plyed outwardly. In che morning three houres beforemeate let the Patient take 
lome certaine quaiiti' yas the Phyfition thal! thinke fit of the eleGtuary Déarbodom Ab- 
batis, or Avomaticum rofatum, triafantalon, biamofcium latificans Galeni, or fome fuch 
Other like. And you fhall apply fome fuch Epitheme as is heere de fcribed tothe heart 
and Liver, aque agua bugloffe,aceti boni, an. 31). coriamars praparati 
caryopbill. cortic.citrt,am fant, rub. 3%. 38. camphora 5}. crocs OL, 
Pulver, diarhod, Abbated i; theriace  Adithridaty an. pul flo. chamem mel, an, 
mifce. fiat epithersa.Let it be applyed warme by dipping a fcarlet cloath therein, 
You frequently put odorifferousand rctrigerating things tO the patients 
hole, to frengthen the animall faculty, aguerofar. acetiboni, an. 
‘aryepbyllorum, mucis mofchat, congua/fatorum Theriaca Galeni,aw.3}. Lec 
Alinnen dipped herein, be now and then putto the paticntsmofe; for the fame 
urpofe he fhall carry aPomander about hina, and often{melithercto, 
ref, rub violar.an. baccarum myrti, junipers, fantal. rub. figracis calamts. 
tum {atts eff:liquefiat fimul cum cere aloa fist ceratum 
ad ‘omprehendendes (upradicies pulvers cum pij:tho caliao ducatur in vomum.Or 
gra. fiat p CUM CUMME tragacanth.quod ficit .Ore Re. dad ams 3}. Ben- 
Ay racis Calamit Flor car calame 4romat, 
do fat pomum adaita mofchi Allo youmay corroborate the ifacu 
¥>y application of frontalis,as alfo procure fleepe, and eafe the paine of the hcac 


a>, 


Dan. yecres 
Withoutd ling 
any Lal 


Cordiallsto 
ftrengchen the 
noble paits, 


A cordial! B. 
pitncm. 


P oman 


Brontall<to 
ler 
firengthenthe 


a@nimeli tas 


Cult’. 


j j 
} 

q 

a 

é 

q 


as, Rr. aq- rof papav. an-5ifs acett bont, j frochif de camphor, 3%, fiat Srens 
sale, Linnen ragges cipped herein may be applyed to the temples of the forchesg’ 
and often renew cd;otherwife by their heate,dryneffe, and hardnefle, they wi! cauufe 
watching in ftced of fleepe. Neither muft you in the meane time binde the head tog 
hard, left by intercepting and hindring the pulfation of the temporall Arter » You 
encreafe the paine of the head. You fhall make a fire,in the patients chamber 
derifferous woods,as Iuniper, Bay-tree, the prunings or cuttings of Vines,Rofems, 
ry,and Orris rootes. For the fame purpofe,you may fprinkle the floore with fiveces 
was Water, ifthe patient be able co undergoe {uch colt. As, PL, majorane, 
ter, pert, eslami aromat. falure, la vendule, fanicul, thymt Stachad, flor. chamam, 
melilot, faturcia, baccarum lauri, junipers, an, M. ij. palv, car gophy/, 
Mofchat. aquarofar, cr vite , an. lib. ij, vini albs odorifict. tb. x, bullsans 
omnia inbalnco Maria ad dicium, Youmay alfo make perfumes to burne jp hj. 
chamber, as thus, Re. carbons (alicts 3 viij, ladans part 31), tharis mafculs, ligni & baccs. 
yarn Inmiperi, 4%. xyloaloes, benjoini, fiyraces calamit, an, >. Nuces mofchate [antal 
citrin. an. 311}. carzopbzll fiyraces liquide, an, Bij, 2edoaria Aromat, an. 
tragacanth, aqua vofar. folut:, quod fit fats, Make hereof perfumes in what fathien you 


pleafe. Fer the retcennefic and corruption of bones we willtreate thereof hereafter 
in its due place, 


Crap. 
Certaine memorable Hiftories. 


Ere [ thinke good for the beneht of young practitioners, to illustrate by 

n@ exompies the formerly prefcribed Methode of curing wounds made 

by Gunthot, The famous aad molt valiant Count of Mansfelc, Gover. 

nour of the Dutchy of Lexembourge Knight of the order of Burgundy, 

comming to the ayde of the French King was at the battell of Moncon. 

tour, where in che confli@,he received fo great a wound at the joynt of the left arme 

The maligne With a Pitto!l buller,that the bones were fhivered and broken info many peeces, asif 

aes», they had bin layd upon an Anvill and ftruck with an hammer: hence proceeded many 

happrsupon Maligne fymptomes,as cruel & tormenting paine,inflammation,a feaver,an cedemas 

9h gm tous and Hatulenc tumor of the whole arme even to the fingers end, and a certaincim 

Clipationtoa Gangrene:which to refift, Nicolas Lambert, & Richard Hubert the Kings 

Chirurgions had made many and deepc {carifications, But when I came to vifite and 

drefic him, by the Kingsappointment,and had obferved the great finch,and 

ction, | wifhed that they would ufe lotions of e£gyptiacum made fomewhat ftronger 

_. than ordinary ,& diflolved in vemegar & aqua vite,and do other things more larg¢!y 

., fpoken ofinthe chapter of a Gangreene. For the patient had alfo a Diarrhea or fuxe, 

sees whereby he evacuated the purulent,and ftinking filth which flowed from his wound. 

fowfromths Which how it might cometo pafle wee will fhow at large when we come to 

wounced che of the fupprefflicn of the Vrine. For this feemed very abfiurd to many, becaufe that 

belly, this purulent humor flowed out of the arme into the belly,it muft needs flow back« 

into the veines,bee mixed with the blood, and by its pernitious and contagious paly 

fage through che heart and liver, caufe exceeding illfymptomes,and laftly death.!0 

deed he often {wounded by the afcent of the filthy vapours raifed from the ulcers (9 

thenoble parts; which to refift,1 wifhed him to take a fpoonefull of aqua vite with 

fome Treacle diflolved endeavoured to reprefle the oedematous and 

lent Tumor poffeffing all the arme with ftoups dipped in oxycrate to which was pus 

a little falt and véte,chefe ftoups I ftayed held tothe part with double clotii«s, 

fowed as firait as I could. Such a compreffion held the broken bones in th¢!! 

places, prefied their Semies fromthe ulcers, and forced backe the humors flowi0g 

to the part into the center ofthe body. If at any time I omitted this 

__ the tumor was fo encreafed , that I was in a great deale of feare , leaft the 

9 Mative heate of the part fhould bee fuffecared. Neither could J other! 

_ binde up the arme by reafon of the exceffive paine which molefted the p#* 

ent upon the leaft flirrine of the Arme. There were alfo many ae 


spout bis elbow 
cer I was forcce 
cured him 
che potrifaction 
snto the uiccrs,' 
Alome,dryingi 
and profeffc, th 
of bones, and 
finger; you 
covld not put f 
Not lorg 2it 
of Auret, the 
kept his bed {ca 
three fingers at 
fymptomes, 1m 
ation of the 
with much th 
to vornit,and 2 
his mouth wit 
the vapours 
wayes and fide 
and others re! 
which reacne 
tnee. Alltne 
and flatulent | 
tinct. All wh 
that [repente 
his firength,2 
good 
bout tlie bone 
and drévw out 
acum diflolve 
mend the put 
tous and 
heate almof 
icarfely affia 
the afte Ged 
flowres andr 
ding thereto 
tenuate and¢ 
ioto tl 
skinne, mor 
he fhou!ld af 
above down 
withall: Fo 
{ wifhed chat 
thigh, & {oa 
wine and wit 
moift heat,c 
by little and 
Sage, Reofm 
were apply: 
that he did 
that if they 
linnen bow! 
Or mig. 
the orifices 


- 
4 
¥ q 
¥ 
* 
4 
' 
q 
7 
4 q 
| 
i 
. 
= 
a 
% 
+ 
a 


rare by 
unds made 
Sfelt, Gover. 
f Bur gundy, 
Of Moncon- 
the left arme 
peeces, as if 
“ceded many 
cedemas 
Certaine ins 
the Kings 
>to vilite and 
1,and putrifas 
hat ftronger 
more largely 
hed Or fluxe, 
his wound. 
me cto treate 
becaule thar if 
s flow backe 
Ntagious 
ly death, 
the ulcers to 
qua vite with 
us and flatu- 
hich was put 
clorhes, 
Ones in their 
mors flowing 
com preflion, 
¢, leaft the 
I otherwiie 
ed the patie 
any Abfceii- 
about 


Lxs.18. and other fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons, 431 
spout bis elbow and over all hisarmebeffdes. For the letting t orth of whofe mart= 


cyred him with nfing a vulnerary potion,and by cleanfing the ulcers, and corre cing 


—@ 


cer I was forced, to make new incifions; which he ¢ndured very ftoutly. At length I 
the patrifaction with sptiacum diffo lvedin wine or honey of rofes,and fo poured. bretterecis 
into the ulcers, and repretiiog the growth of proud flefh, with the pouder of burnt manner of 
Alome,drying itafter the deterfion with liniments. Now chis I canrrucly affirme “%"™ 
and profeffc, that during the rinte of the cure, I tooke our above threc{core fplinters 
ofbones, and thofe neceflarily, amongft which there was one of the length of ones 
finger; yet by Gods afliftance at length he became found in all things, but that hee 
could not put forth,or draw it his arme. | 

Not long efter by the Kings command I went to fee Charles Philip of Croy Lord 
of Auret,the Duke of Afchos brother not farre from Mounts a City of Henalr. He 
kept his bed feaven monthes byreafon of a wound made by a Bullet the {pace of 
three fingers above his knee. YWWhenI came tohim, hee was afflicted with thefe 
paine, a continuall feaver, cold {weats, watchings, excoti- Horride 
ation of the hippes by reafon of hislong lyingupon them, his apperite dejected {y~ptomes 
with much thirft, He oft funke downe as it he had the falling ficknelle, hada defire 
to vomit,and a continuall trembing or fhaking fo that he could not put one handto ™#dbyGuns 
his mouth without the ailiftance of che other she fwounded frequently by reafon of conn 
the vapours afcending to thenoble parts, For the thigbbone was broken long 
wayes and fidewayes with many {plinters of bones whereof fome were plucked out 
and others remained fticking faitin. Me befides alfohad an ulcerin his groine 
which reached to the mid of his thigh, and many other finuous ulcers about his 
knee. Allthe mufcles of his thigh and legge were {wolne witha flegmaticke, cold 
and flatulent humor, fo that almoft all thenative heate of thofe pasts {cemed ex. 
tinct, All whichthings being confidersd, [had {carleany hopeto recover him, fo 
that [repentedmy comming thither. Yet atlength putting fome confidence in 
his (trength,and prime of youth,1 beganto have better hopes, Therefore with his Iacifions 
good liking, firft of all I make ewo incifions, fo to let forth the matrer,whichlying a- Yosr"°"* 
bout the bone did hume& the fubftance of the mufcles. This had happy fucceile, 
and dréw out a great quantity of matter;then I with a fyring injeted much eZgypri- 
«cum diffolved in wine,anda little aque vite into thefe incifions, fo to reftraine and a- 
mend the putrifaction, repreffe the {pongie, loofe and foft flefh,rcfolve the oedema- 
tous and flatulent tumor, affwage the paine, and ftirre up and flrengthem the native 
heate almoft oppreft by the aboundance of excrementitious humors, {0 that it could 
icarfely affimulate any nourifhment and adjoyne ittothe parts. Then Tfomented yw 
the affe ed part with Sage, Rofe-mary, Time,Lavander, Chamomile and Melilot ufed tomentas 
fowres and red-rofe leaves boyled in white wine, and lye made of Oake-athes, ad- “"* 
ding thereto as much {alt and vineger as I judged requifite, This fomentation did ate 
tenuate and draw forth the morbificke humour. Now we ufedthem long and often, 
{oto wafte the humour more by drying up and breathing thorew the paflages ofthe yy303 op 
skinne, more thereof than fell into the part. Forthis fame purpofe, we ordajned that roundtrictis 
he thould ufe friGions with hor linnen clothes, and chat thefe fhould be made from wed 
above downwards, from below upwards, and fo onevery fide,and fomewhat long 
Withall: For a {hort friGion drawes more humour into the part than it can refolve; 
{ withed thateach other day they fhould lay bricks heated hot inthe fire about his leg, 
thigh, & foale of his foot-but they were tobefomewhat quenched, fprinkeld with 
wine and vineger, with a {mall quantity of aqve vite. Much watrifh moifiure by this 
inoift heat did {weat out of thefe parts the tumour was leflened, and the native heat A medicated 
by little and little reftored. Then {houpesdipped in lye made of Oake-athes,whercin 
Sage, Refmaric Lavender, falt, and cloaves, were boyled, fome aque vite added, 
were applyed thereto;but the rowlers were fo gently,and artificially wrapped abour, 
that he did eafily endure them without any paine, and that with fuch happy {uccciic, 
that if they were omitted but for one day, the rumor became very great. Butchicke 
linnen boulfters were layd upon the lower cavitiesof the ulcers; that fo the /anses 
Or filth might be moreeafily preffed forth. But alwayesa {peciall care that 


the orifices of the ulcers should be kept open with hollow Tents or pipespucthereio: 


and 


IB: II, 
>, fiat 
‘forchesg’ 
Will cause 
head [09 
ery, you 
Of 
ith {Weete 
adic.cy, 
thaman, 
hy lI, Bucy 
bullsang 
in his 
bacca. 
*, 
5 ht 
fathien you 
Of 
| 


Of wounds made by Gunfhot, Lis, 


A difeaTing 


Cataplalme, 


The otcafion 


of writing 


this A pologte, 


"The chiefe 
heads of our 
adveriaries 


reatile, 


All wounds 
made by:Gun- 
fhot ase cons 
tu(ed, 


and jometimes this follewing cataplafme was applyed to tefolye the tumor. 
hord. fabar. orobi, aw 3x}. mellis com,c> =i}. flo.chamam.mel il, rof-ruf, 
an, 28. pulvirad, trees, Flor cyper.Maft, an 531i). oxymsel. fimp, quantum fias cary 
plafma ad formam pulte ‘fates liquide. AndE mplaftrum ae Vigo without mercur Was 
applyed thereto, whereby the paine was much aflwaged, and the tumor |e‘leneg. 
yet weicthey not applyed before the parts were throughly heated by the fomenta;;. 
on, friétions; and evaporations; forotherwayesthis Emplaffer could never have 
beenc a@ivated, by reafon of the exceffive coldnefle of the atieGed parts, Neithe; 
did we omit catagmaticke powders, fit for the taking, and drawing forth of broke 
bones, Heufedavulnerary potion for 15, dayes, Alfo befidesthe particular friqj. 
ons of the affected parts, appointed other generall fri@ions of the whole body 
which was become very leane; forbythele, blood together with the fpirir wa. 
drawne to the parts, and the acride, and fuliginous vapours were breathed forth. 
To'conclude, his feaver and painesbeing aflwaged, tis appetite reftored, by fee. 
ding plentitully apon good meates according to bis ftrength, he ina fhorttime be. 
came more lufty; and laftly by the fingular mercy of God, recovered his health: per- 
tectly, but that he could not very well bend his knee. [thought good c recite thef: 
things not to glory or bragge of the happy fucceffe of thole patients, which have 
recovered by my meanes,and the tavour of God; burthat thus I may more fully 


and perfectly by familar examplesinftrua@ young practitioners inthe operations 
of Chirurgery. 


Craps XIII. 


2 


An Apolo concer ming Wounds made by Gunfhot, 


2m Here lately came to my hands a booke written by acertaine Phyfition, 
whereby he endeavourste difproove and overthrow, that which | 
have hitherto writ, ofthe cure of wounds made by Gunfhor. Afi 
redly if there were no other harme, but the lofie of my creditentuing 
thereon.) would willingly hold my peace, and ftoppe his mouth by 
modeftiilence. But fecing the fatety of fomany men, lyes upodthe judgement of 
this point, | have thought good to withftand this error, leaft it, to the great deftru- 
ction of mankind , {pread and diffule it felfe amy further. The ule (faith he) of 
purative medicines, have killed many whohave beene but lightly wounded with 
~Guathot, butacride medicines, as efe9ptiacum have killed more. Neither isthe 
countell of Aippocratesto be obferved in curing this fort of wounds, who bids that 
every contuicd wound be brought to fuppuration, For fecing this isa new kindeot 
wound, it requircs new and not anciently ufed medicines. Nowthe temper of the 
ayre changed from the naturall con(titution ought not roindicate change of medi- 
-cinessbut much leffe muft rhunder and lightening bee compared to the fhooting o! 
Great Ordinance, Thefe are the chicfe heads of this his booke, which becaufe they 
diflent from the truth. 8ethefe things I have formerly delivered, I have thoughr good 
hecre tocontute. Firftfeeing Leaden bullets which are ufually thot out of Guns ar 
round, obtule and weighty,they cannot weund the bedy without conculion andat- 
trition ; Now no contufioncan be cured without fuppuration, not onely acco: ding 
co the opinion of Hippocrates, but alfoof Galen andall others who have written 0! 
Phyficke, Neither muft we invent new remedies, for thefe new kindes of wounds: 
for the lawes of the facred and divine Art of Phyficke are nor obnoxious to change, 
nor fubject co the humor of men ortimes, asthe decrees of Kings and Emperours 
are. For theleare ftablifhed with immutable neceflitie, which conftancie acithts 
con{uming time, nor age, nor tyranny can pervert. Wherefore acither thefe who 
with ercat prayle are Phyfitions to Kings and Princes, I meane Jombert and Bet aim, 
think it lawfull fer them to depart from the ruleof Hippocrates. And this they 
ly doe and follow in curing and doing the workes of Art but much and highly com: 
iend,confirmeagd propound tobe diligently obferved by all,in their bookes which 


thicy 


ntagonift hach ieq 
med thus cure thel 
if 
likes fo 
chey prefently appli 
his neighbour De 
orher than a {up| 
pentine and alittle 
Inthe yeare 15 
Marthall of Mom: 
rurgion wondrous™ 
bur the oyle of 
much inctrea 
imagined, but p 
ate their paine , 
aimoft all Chiru 
firft publithed th 
But in contemn 
ker ; feeing rher< 
fullto hinder puts 
often degenerate 
forth a ttiacking 
withfand them 
vedby the forme™ 
unguent is 
wounded by 
tion of this oyn 
thereof, hee tha 
fon, that on. 
putrifaction wh 
wound, 

Ic is moft 
the (eafons of th 
the {imple and 
mixture of putri 
above, make no 
are at otherlome 

For the ayre 
tran{piration, gc 
Nor, when deh}. 
Great batrailes, 
bodies a0d woul 
Inthe year 
France, at 
a Well, 
from hen 
dyed all over 
them, the per 
ought to thinke 
windes may be 
like the feeds of 
humors and we 
of Wounds, bur 

Fhercfore 
UP thefe thing 


Phyfitions 4 
dd 
4 
hy 
a 


Lip 
Or. By, Far 


leflened 
fomentari, 
have 
Neithe; 
of broken 
ular friGi. 
ole body, 
{pirir Was 
d forth. 
d, by fec. 
ort time be. 
healch per. 
recite 
‘hich have 
ore fully 
operations 


Phyfition, 
mat which | 
10t. Afiin 
diten{uing 
mouth by 
gement of 
‘at deltru- 
ic) of 
nded with 
ther is the 
io bids that 
bw kinde of 
per of the 
eof medi- 
hooting of 
they 
bughr good 
bf Guns are 
according 
written of 
fwounds;. 
to.change; 
perours 
ie neither 
thefe who 
nd 
ey not on- 
ichly com- 
which 
they 


of, rub, 
frat 


‘and otber fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons, 43 


ey have publifhed concerning the cure of thefe kinds of wounds, And yet 
eke Phyfitions are fuch, as daily converfant in Armies and Kings houfes 


have healed and daily cure as many wounded by Gunithot as this Phyfition our 
sconift hath feene in all his life, Neither onely doe thefe whom I have na- 
thus curethefe wounds, but almoit all that dreffe fuch kind ef wounds doe the 


Le, fo that if there bee nothing which may hinder, or indicate to the contraric 


prefently apply fuppurativess And I wonder thathee hath not obferved how 


neighbour Doubles the Empericke cures defperate wounds ot this mature, With A (uppurative 


jg other than afuppurative medicine compofed of Lard,the yolke ofan Egge, Tur- 
rentine and alittle Saftron. 


tryca 
Inthe yeare 1538. There was at Turin whileft I was Chirurgion there tothe 


Marthall of Monsjam the Kings Leifetenant General! in Péemont, acertaine Chi- 
| surgion wondrous famous for curing thefe wounds, and yet hee ufed nothing elfe — 
F byrthe oyle of Whelpes, (the defcription whereof I at length obtained of iim 
F with much intreaty and expence) and hee ufed it not fealding hot, 2$ fome have 
| imagined, but powred ic fcarfe warme into their wounds, and fo did miti- 


we their paine, and happily bring chem to fuppuration. WVhich afterwards 


: Jmoft all Chirurgions, after they had got the defcription heereof,; when I 
firft publithed this Worke, have ufed aad daily doe ufe with happy fucceffe. 


Butin contemming and condemning e£gyptiacum, I thinke hee hath no parta- 


ker ; {eeing there as yet hath beene found no medicine more!{peedy and power- araint purres 


fullto hinder puteifaction, if beginning ; or correct itif prefernt. Now thefe wounds 
often degenerate into virulent, eating, {preading, and maligne ulcers, which caft 
forth a ftincking and carion-like filth, whence the part Gangrenates, unlefle you 
withfand thean with Ase yptsacwum and other acrid medicines, being greatly appro 
ved by the formerly named Phyf&tions and all Chirurgions. But (faithhee) this 
unguent is poyfonous, and therefore hath beene the death of many who have beene 
wounded by Gupfhor, Verily if any diligently enquire into the compofi- 
tion of this oyntment, and confider the nature of all and every the ingredients 
hereof, hee thatl underftand that this kind of Voguent is fo farre from poy - 
fon, that on. the coatrary it dire@ly oppofes and refifts al! poyfon and 
which may happen co a fiefhy part, through occafion of any 
wound, : 
itis moft falfe and diffonant from the doctrine of Hippocrates to affirmic, that phe fore of 
the (eafons of the yeare fwerving fromthe Law of nature, and the aire, not truly 
the imple and elementary, buc which is defiled aud polluted by the various 
mixture of putrid and peftilent vapours, eyther raifed from the earth, or fent from diestes. 
above, make net wounds more maligne and hard to cure at fometimes thanthey 
arcat otherfome, 
For the ayre eyther very hot, or cold, drawne into the body by infpiration or 
tran{piration, generates a condition in us like its qualities, Therefore why may it 
Not, when defiled with che putredinous vapours of bodies lying unburied aftcr 
pteat battailes, and fhipwracks of great Armadoes, infe& with the tike qualitie our 
bodies and wounds? 
_ Inthe yeare 1562, when the civill warres concerning Religion firit begun “'#*7 
France, at Pemea Caftle lying upon the River Let,many {laine bodies were caft 
moa Well, fome hundred Cubits deepe, fo inking and peftilene a yapour 
aole from hence fome two monerteh after, that many thoufand of people 
“yed all over the Provence of Agenois, as if the Plague had beene amongit 
“em, the pernitious contagion being {pred twenty miles in compale;which none 
ought to thinke Rrange, efpecially feeing the putride exhalations by the force of rhe 
Wiades may be driven and carried into divers and moft remote rcpions, difperfed 
like the feeds of the Peftilence; whence proceeds a deadly corruption of the {pirirs, 
~ors and wounds, net to be attributed to the proper malignitic, or perverfe cure 
of Wounds, bur tebe the fault of the aire. 
: Therefore Francis Dalefchampe in his French Chirurgery, in reckoning 
P thefe things which hinder the healing of Vicers, hath nor omhiteed 
rp that 


‘ 
| 
CICUry w 
4 
4 
a 
4 


ounds made by Gunjfhot, Lin. 1), 


that common caufe which proceedstrom the ayre defiled or tainted with the feedes 


of the peftilence. For he had learnt from his Mafter Hippocrates that the mutation. 


of times chiefely bring difeafes,and he had read in Guide, chat this was the chiefe Oc. 
cafion, that wounds ofthehead at Paris; and of the legges at Avignion, were 
difficultly healed. Laftlyeven Barbers and fuch as have leaft skill in Chirurg. 
know, that wounds eafily turnc into a Gangreene in hot and moyft conftiturions ¢ 
theayre, 

_ Wherefore when the winde is fourherly, the Butchers will kill nomcre Q.y, 
In our fceond thanto ferve themfor one day. Ihave formerly declared che malignity of th, 
cife-urle, wounds occafioned by the ayre in the feige of Resem,which {pared mone, no not the 
Princes ofthe blood, whohad all things which were requifite for their hea), 
Which caufed me, made at length more skilfullby experience, toufe 
efcyptiacnm and medicines of the like faculty in fteed of fuppuratives, to wounds 
during al] hat feafon, that fol might withftand the putrefaction and Gangreens 
The pewer of Which fo commonly aflayledthem. Butifthe various motion of the flarres, cap py 
theftarresup> their influxe fend a Plague into the aire why then may it not by depravation of the: 
on the  qualityesinfea@, and as by poyfoning corrupt both wounds and wounded bodies ob. 
dics, noxiousto their changes and that of the ayre? WVee learnt long fince by expey), 

ence,that all paises but principally of wounds, grow worle in a rainy and mojf 
feafon, {pecially becaufe in chat foutherly conftitution the aire replete with thicl. 
and fogey vapours, caufes the humors to abound in the body, which forthwir, 
eafily fall upon the affeted parts, and caufe encreafeofpaine. But (/aith oy 
Adverfary) inthe batrell at Dreax and at S. Dennis which were fought in winte, 
there dyed a grcatnumber of men who were wounded by Gunthot:This | con. 
fefle is true; but yer I deny, that it was occafioned by applying fuppuratives, 
or corrofives,but rather by the vehemencic and largenefle of their wounds, and ihe 
{rouile the Bullet made in their members, but above ali by reafon of the ccid, 
is moft hurtfullto wounds and ulcers (as Héppocrates te(tifes) it hardens 
Ee the skinne and caufes a Gangreene, If this my Gentleman had beene with mee 
inthe feige of Metz, he might have feene rhe Legges of many {ouldiers to bay: 
rotted, and prefently taken with a Gangreene to have fallne away, by che cncly 
extremitic ofcold ; If he will not beleeve me,let him make tryal] himfelfe; and go: 
in winter to the Chappell at Mount Sexw one of the Alpine hills, where the bo. 
dies of fuch as were frozen to death in pafling that way are buried, and hee (ha. 
learne and feele how true I {peake, In the meane time I thinke it fic to confure ili 
laft point of his reprehenfion, 

Thefimiliude Hecavills for that l compared Thunder and Lightning with the difcharging pe. 
ang Of Ordinance. Frithe cannot denieburt that they are alike in effects. Foriti 
great Ordis certaine that the flame arifing from Gunpouder fet on fire, refembles Lightning 
ined, AN this alfo that you may fee it before you heate the cracke or reporr. | judge 
for that the eye almoftin a moment perceives its obje&s butthe care cannot dv 
in fome certaine {pace of time, and by diftin® gradations. But the rumbin 
noife islike inboth, and certainly the report of great Ordinance may bee hear 
fometimes at forty milesdiftance, whilftthey make any great battry in the 
ing ot Citties. 

Befides al{o, Iron Bullets caft forth with incredible celerity by the fered Gu 
peuder, throw downeall things withahorrid force, and that more (peedily 
violently by how much they refift the more powerfully by their hardnelie. 10°) 
report that Lightning melts the moncy not hurting the purfe; Now many ‘J 
the onely violence of the aire agitated and vehemently mooved by ‘hoot 
a peice cf Ordinance, as rouehed with Lightning, have dyed in a momen, 
their bones beeing fhivered and broken, no figne of hurt appearing 19 | ° 
skinne. 

The fmell of Gunpouder when it is fiered, is burtfull,firy and fp’ 
sous, juft like that which exhales or comes from bodies killed with Lig” 
ning. Formendoe not onely fhunnethis fmell, but allo wilde Beafts leave!" 


Dennes if touched with Lightnings. Nowthe crucley of great Ordinance mais 


j 1 Be if. @i 


no lef {poy le an 
Lig doe, 
fee, burcven tol 
Malignss. Thefe 
a great fimilicuce 
would not have ai 
but oncly 10 che 
Now lerusice 
our adverfaric ful 
plyed yer fuch 
conhftence. but h 
Abfcefies, 
hecaule a contul 
{uppuratives, 
Nowro aniw 
the nature of 
had of the cautec 
would I 
not Drineic 
can, 1 will be ju: 
thefe things are. 
commedious ch 
Gunfhor, if fo 
doe not hinder. 
their bleeding, 
ed confilling o 
But I leaye it to 
ftay bleeding if 
For Vinegar {¢ 
that it will cauic 
To which pu 
remedic.a medi 
an attendant of 
Bologne by an E: 
hing and cryins 
him againe, aii 
dicine upon the 
And then ab 
of Waxe, and 
Is equal} in Ope 
hath a tacultic 
thens the parts 
AOt io well hea 
Verily itis rid 
lame manner 
oofed continui 
Therefore p 
Gunthor, leeir 
itbe Procured 
be Put into wo 
Deir filth, Y« 
Chymifts wh: 
Wounded foul 
uffcient mean 
Matthefe Ball 
hin 
‘ender Tent 


* 
4 
¥ 
. 
4 
‘ 


IB. 11. 


| the lecdes 
Mutations 
e chiefe Oc. 
were More 
Chiturgery 


of 


mcre flef} 
enity of the 
nS not the 
cir health. 
Vngueniam 
CO Wounds 
Can by 
ot their 
bodies ob. 
by exper. 
hy and moift 
with thicke 
ach forthwith 
(faith our 
ht in wiater 
mt: con- 
juppuratives, 
unds, and the 
of the cold. 
s) it hardens 
ane with mee 
jiers to have 
m by che cncly 
(elfe; and goe 
rhere the bo- 
and hec (iva! 
to confute the 


charging pei- 
‘tg, Foritis 
‘S Lightning ; 
judge 
re cannot but 
the rumbling 
aay bee hearc 
in the beieig- 


e hered Gur 
‘{peedily and 
dnefle. They 
many by 
by fhoeting 
qa moment, 
aring in 


and fulphu- 
4 with Light- 
afts leave chelt 


dinance 
n0 


435 


' and other fier ‘y Engines,and all forts of W tapons. 


no lefle {poyle amongft buildings, nor {laughter amongft men and beafts, than 
Lightairgs doe, as wee have formerly fhowne by examples, not onely horrid to 

fee, bur even tO heare reported, asot Mines, the Arcenall of Pars, the Cittie of 

T hefe may {feeme futhciene to reach that Thunder and Lightning have 

ggrcat fimilicude withthe {hooting of grear Ordinance, which notwithftanding | 

wouldnot have alike in all things. For they neither agree in fubftance, nor matter, 

put onely in che manner of violent breaking afunder the objets. 

Now lecusice and examine what manner of cure of wounds made by Gunfhot Ouradver(s- 
adverfarie fubfticures for ouzs. For hee would have {uppuratives ufed and ape 
plyed , yet fuch as fhould not be kot and moft in qualitie, or of an Emplafticke cure, repro» 
-gnittence, buthot anddry things, For (faith hee) here isnot the fame reafon as 

‘3 Ab{cefles, where the Phyfition intends nothing but fuppuration, But heere 
pecaufe a contufion is prcfene with the wound, this requires to bee ripened with 
(yppuratives,but the wound to be dryed. 

Nowro aalwer this odjcCtion, I will referre him to Galen, whowill teachhim 
the nature of fuppuratives;trom whom alfo hec may learne that great regard is tv be /mpl.10.Me> 
badof the caufe and more urgent order in the cure of compound dileafes; then “”” 
would I willingly learne of him, whether he can heale a wound made by Gunthor, 
not Arft bringing that which iscontufed to perfect maturitie. Ithee afirme hee 
can, 1 will be judged by whatloever Practitioners hee will,to judge how obfcure 
ihefethingsare. Whereby you may the better underftand there is nothing more 
commedious than our Bgfilscop and oyle of Whelpes to ripen wounds made by 
Guafhot, if fo bee that purrifa@ion, corruption, a Gangreen or fome orher thing 
doenothinder. Then would hee have Oxycrate pouredinto thefe wounds to ftay 
their bleeding, which if itcannoz fo bee ftayed, hee would havea medicine apply- 
ed confifling of the white ofan Egge, Bole Armenicke, oile of Rofes and fale, 

But I leave it to other mens judgement, whether thefe medicines have power to 
flay bleedingif put into the wound ; certainly they will make it bleede the more. Vinegarput _ 
For Vinegar feeing itis of a tenuijous fubftance and biting, it is no doubt but goch norte 


that it will cauie paine,defluxion and inflammation. but caufes 


To which purpofe I remember I put to ftanch bleeding, for want of another ren 
remedi¢,a medicine wherein was fome Vinegar, into a wound received by a Moore, 
an attendant of the Earle of Ro#/7y, hurt with a Lance, run through his arme before 
Bologne by au Englith horfeman, But he comes againe tomec a little after, complai- 
hing and crying out that all his arme burnt like fire; whereforel was gladto dretie 
him againe, and put another medicine into his wound, and layd an aftringent imne- 
dicine upon the wound,but poured it not therein. 
And then above all other remedies hee extolls his Balfame compofed of Oyle 
of Waxe, and Myrrhe beaten together with the white of an Egge; which hee faith 
is equall in operation to the naturall Balfame of Peru, For hee aflirmes that this 
hath a tacultie to confume the excrementitious humidity of wounds, and fo ftreag- 
thens theparts thatno fymptome afterwards 
hor fo well heale and agglutinare thefe wounds, as it doth others whichare cut. ¢ohealeGmple 
Verily itis ridiculous to thinke that contufed wounds can bee healed after the a not conti 
lame manner asfimple wounds may, which onely require the uniting of the “*°""" 
‘oofed continuitie, 
Therefore neither can thefe Balfames be firremedies to heale wounds made by 
Gunthor, {eeing by reafon of their dryneffe they hiader (uppuration, which uulefic 
tbe procured the patient cannot be healed. Wherefore fuck things ought not to 
put into wounds of this nature ,betore they be ripened, waflied and clenicd from 
‘eit filth, Yet can I {carfe conceive, where we fhall be able ro finde ourio many 
Chymifts which may furnifh us with thefe things fuificiently to drefle fo many 
Wounded fouldiers as ufually arein an Army, or whence the fouldicrs fhall have 
uficient meanes to beare theeharge thereof. Alfo that which he faithisabfurd, 
hatthefe Balfames mutt bee put into the wounds without Tents ; and prefently 
“tgetting himfelfe, hee faith , Ic will not bee amiffe, if there bee a little and 
“nder Tent pur into the wound, which may onely ferve to hinder the agglu- 
Pp 2 TINALLON 


q 
‘ 
i 
4 
| 


tinationthereof. But how can thefe Balfames come to the bottomes 
without Tents, whenas itistheir chiefe propertie to carry medicines even tothe 

innermoft parts ofthe wounds, and alwayes keepe open a free paffage for the ey 
cuation of the quitture?But itis note worthy, that after hee hath rejeAed y,» ey 
tum e£gypriacum, hee nevertheleffe bids to apply it, from the beginning 
ile the contufioncome to perfe& maturation, diffolving it in a deco@ion of thet ; 
Lyptiacum Obs 
howfowver Of wormewood,S. Jobe wwrt,the leffer Centory and Plantaine, and {0 
— acien- into the wound. Befidesalfo a little after hee gives another way of ufing it, wh; “ 
parative, 18, tobeyleaquantity of Hony of Rofes in plantaine water, carefully {Ciming 
wntill itbee boiledto the confiftence of Hony, and thento adde as much 4... 
tiacwm thereto, and{o tomake an eyntment moft fit to bring thefe wounds to 
puration. But I leave it for any skilfull in Chirurgery to judge, whethe; fuck 
medicines can bee fappuratives, or whether they bee not rather deterfives, Lf 
of all hee writes, that thefe wounds muftbee dreft but every fourth day, Aad js 
there bee a fracture of the bone joyned with the wound, then to mooye po 
thing after the firft dreffing until] the eighth day after; then prefently in anorhe. 
place hee faith, it will bee good, and expedient, te drop ten or twelve droppes of 

the formerly deferibed Balfame every day into the wound. Verily fuch doarin: 

which neyther agrees with its felfe nor the truth, cannot but much puile q Ny. 


vice and young PraQitioner in Chirurgery,who is not yet verfed inthe Are, of; 
operations thereof, 


Cuap, XIII. 


Another Apologie againft thofe whe have laboured with new reasons to proove, 
that wounds made by Gunfhot are poy foned. 


Ome few monthes agone, I vifited a patient together with {ome lex. 
ned Phyfitions and skillfull Chirurgions. Now they, as it oft time 
happens, in way of difcourfe, begun to argue of the condition and 
quality ef wounds made by Gunfhot, and endeavoured to prose 
~’ that they might be poyfoned, by fivereafons. Nor truly chrovghtke 
occafion of the Gunpouder, for they all confeffed thar it was free from poylon, 
whether you have regard toits eflence,or toitscompofition; but by the Bullet, inc 

Thereafons which the poyfon may bee transfufed and incorporated, The firft reafon is, the 
(aries thatthe Lead feeing it is of a rare and {pongious nature, which the cafinefle of melting a 
ee, foftnefic argues, is very fit todrinke and foake in what liquors foever yuu pleat. 
(et downeand But me thinkes this conclufion is very weake; for inall mixtures made by Arr, {uch 
as this is whereof wee fpeake, there are ewo things to be confidered ; thiae isto 
the matter of the things which enter intothe mixture, and the forme:for the mit- 

ter, fuch bodies muft be eyther liquid,or foft or friable; and laftly fuch as may0¢ 
broken and divided into fmall particles, that fo they may eafily in all parts cow 
curreand beeconjoynedandunited. But for their forme, there ought to be att 
taineathoitic, confentand fimpathy, You may perceive this by water andoy'; 
for each of them though of a liquid fubftance, and fuch as may eafily bee mx 
ed with divers other things, yet cannot they bee mixed the one with theotht! 
by reafon of their antipathy of formes. For thus gold and filver are fo agreeing 
with Lead, that as oft as they are molten, Lead is mixed with them. 5u! 
Braffe fhuns Lead as muchas gald and filver fly Tinne and whire Lead. [f cherefore 
Brafle and Lead being melted cannot bee mixed together, though conteined ¥% 
der the fame Genus, and common nature of Mettalls ; how then can it be comm 
with another thing diftin€ in the whole kinde, much more in /pecies , and form, 
to wit, poyfon? Their fecond reafon is this;Iron,fay they,which is more denle, fol 
and lef[e¢ porous,may receive fome venenate fubftance and quality, 3% the 
Arrowes of the Ancients which were dipped in poyfon,re ftifie:theretore mult ar 


The cceafion 
of this Apo- 


logic, 


much more be C 
but not the inns 
isofunion, but 
The third re 
felfe from the 
commix,0r {oa 
moft folid lron. 
it or quenching 
Srecle admits 11 
wherewith 
and more cali! 
jato plates,or © 
in they fay, tha 
of Muncks-hoo 
whole fubftanc§ 
not but be poy! 
But I on the 
not oncly Dep 
ter, or any Ot 
folid and firm 
more certaine 
melted Lead t 
weigh each of 
weight they 
Lead hath m1 
their fubftanc 
Their fifth 
srowes not fo 
yourhand. ji 
Bullet can be 
objection is ¢: 
by poyfon p< 
would bee di! 
we doe not m 
of the Peice, 
with che vene 
upon the ven 
fome {pace of 
kentheir ftret 
it there bea 
reade 
raat of thing: 
they {aid ic \ 
tidotes amons 
Ving the facu 
and ridiculou 
proofe ) whi 
Mettalls. 
Thefe are 
judgement, 
by Gunthord 


- 
‘ 
B 
4 
¥ 
¥ j 

4 
ty 

7 

4 q 

q 

q 

ay 
‘4 
be 


no. 
ly in anothe, 


doGrin- 
pufle a No. 
Are, Or the 


proove, 


th fome lear. 
IS oft times 
Ondition and 
to proave 
y through the 
rOm poylon, 
1¢ Bullet, inro 
eafon is, chat 
| melting and 
er you pleafe. 
by Arr, fuch 

that isto fay, 
e:for the mat- 
much as may be 
all parts con- 
t to be acct- 
ter and oyle; 
fily bee mix- 
ith theother 
e fo agreeing 
them. But 
Jf therefore 
be commixt 
and forme, 
re denfe, folid, 
ality, as the 
ore mult Lead 
mu 


¢ droppes of 


and other fiery Engin 


es,and all forts of Weapons, 


much more be capable thereof. I anfwer,thar the furface of Iron may be poyfoned, 
burnot the inner part or fubftance by mixture therewith. But heere the queftion 
isofunion, but not of annointing or inun¢ction. 

The chitd reafon is thus framed ; Though (fay they) Lead cafts off and purges it 
felfe from the drofie and umpure parts, yet that is M0 argument, chat it will nor 
commix,or foake its felfe in {ome ftrange liquor or body ; for thus Sreele, being che 
mott folid Iron,receives the temper which hardens it by the artificiall pouring upon 
it or quenching it in liquors contrary thereto in their whole kind. I anfwer,that 
Srecle admits into it by that quenching and tempering, none of the juices or liquors 
wherewithitis watred or quenched, Forif that wereneceflary, itraight be better 
and more ¢afily performed, when the mettall is firftcaft, than when it is beaten 
joto plates,or barres ; which anfwer fhall ferveto confute their fourth reafon;where- 
in they fay, that bullets may be made io poyfonous by the commixture of the juices 
of Muncks-hood Oleander, Crowe-foote, and other fuch like things which in their 
whole {ubftance are contrary to Ours, that the wound which is made withthem can: 
not but be poy foned. 

But on the contrary affrme, that mixture is onely of thefe things, which may 
not oncly be put, butalfo iticke thereto,and be mutually united ; but how can wa- 
ter, or any other liquid juice fo much as onely fficke to Lead, as that whichis a 
folid and firme body, it is fo farre from being united therewith? You may give 
more certaine judgement hereof by expericnce, than by reafon; wherefore let 
melted Lead be put into the forefaid juices or the hike; then wheo che lead is cold, 
weigh each of them feverally, and you fhall finde, that both of them reteinethe fame 
weight they formerly had. Which isa moft certaine argument that neither the 
Lead hath mixed or united it felfe with the juices, nor the juices loft any part of 
their fubftance, 

Their fifth reafon is thus; A Bullet fhot out of a Gun againft fome hard ftone, 
prowes notfo hor, but that you may prefently without any harme take it up io 
yourhand. Therefore it is falfe, that the poyion commiuxt and united with the 
Bulletcan bee diffipated by the fire and fath of Gunpouder. The anfwer to this 
obje@ioniseafily. For when wee fay, that although the Bullet may bee infe&ed 
by poyfon perfe&ly commixt with the Lead, yet all the force of the poyfon 
would bee diflipated by the fire; wee would have you thus to underftand us, 
we doe not meane this of that fire which is made by the pouder at the difcharging 
ofthe Peice, butof that by force whereof the molten head is mixed and conjoyned 
withthe venenate juice, {oto make one ef many. For this fire exercifing its torce 
upon the venenate juices hindred by the intercourfe Of no Medium, and that for 
fome fpaceof time, andnotforaninftant, it may ,ifnotconfume, yet much wea- 
kea their ftrength, 

Ifthere beany, who will not bee fatisfied by thefereafons, lechim eorfult, and 
teade Afatthiolus. There are (faith hee) fome of thefe latter times wholly igno- 
tant of things, who (if wee may fay the truth) have beene fo madly foolith, chat 
they {aid ic was firand requifite to put Treacle and Mithidate and fuch like An- 
tidotes amongft Gold and Silver that was melted to make Cuppes, that fo recci- 
Ving the faculties of the Antidote they might refift poyfon. But how ablurd 
and ridiculous their opinion is, let them judge (for it meeds Do clearer IC 
mee who have but a little knowledge in naturali things, but chicfely in 

ettalls, 
_ Thefe are my reafons, thefe the authorities of men excclling in learning and 
iUdgement, that confirme me in my antient and former opinion, that wounds made 


by Gunthordocnot partakeof any vencnate qualitice 


* 


6, DsAlcor. 


5 Of wound: 
CVen to the 
for the Cva. 
yey 
n of the tops 
INjeGing it 
NB it, which | 
{ciming it, 
buNds te lup. 
vhether fuch 
lives, Jon 
day. Apd if 
Pp 3 


4.38 wounds made Gunfhot, Lis 
H X V. 
How weunds made by Arrowes differ from [uch as are made by Gunfhor. 

Wounds made madeby Arrowes and Bolts fhot out ef Croffe-bowes and fuch 
with Arrows like things, differ chiefly intwo things, from thefe which are made by 

things,are of Gunfhot. Tie firft is,for that they are oft times withoutcontufion, whic, 
rhegtherneverarc, The other is, for thatthey oft times are poyfoned. Inboh appeare, 
| contalio”. “wis Artto be {cana 
| Butare ofte thefe refpedéts,their cure is differentfrom the other. Butthe cure of thefe wound aaa Ae 
| umespoy!oe made by Arrowes is differcnt init felfe, byreafon of the variety and divers {oy fing from rt, 
ned. et achal itabl« 


of Darts or Arrowes. 
dy,than 2 


Crap. XVI, 


Of the diver [ities of Arrowes and Darts. 


SS Rrowes and Darts are different amongft themfelves both in matter and ji 

The dist jf forme or figure,in oumber,making facultie or ttrength ; In matter, for tha 

: rowes. ex {ome of them are of wood, fome of Reeds, fome are blunt headed others 

have piles or heads of Iron, Brafie, Lead, Tinne, Horne, Glafle Bone. In figure for 

: that fome are round, o:hers cornered, fomeare tharpe pointed, fome barbed, wir) 

the barbs ftanding cither tothe point, or fhafts, or elfe acrofle,or both wayes; by; 

fome are broad aad cutlike a Chiffell. For their bignefle, ome are three 

innumber, long, fomelefle, For their number, they differ inthat, becaufe fome have one 


inmaking- head, othersmore, But they varie in making, for that fomic of them have the 


The diferens 


extraction,or § 
ftrange bodice 
the Patient in 
mult alfo hav: 
4 and toothca \ 


fhaft putintothe head, othersthe head into the fhaft; fome have their heads ff wie formerly | 

ledto the fhaft, othersnor, but have their heads fo-loofely fet on, that by gen- Raed Dut 

tle plucking the fhaft,they leavetheit heads behind them,whence dangerous wounds up the ale ¢ 

In foree, pooennts But ‘they differ inforce, for that fome hurt by their Iron onely, others seth ie both | 

vefides that, by poyfon, wherewith they are infeed. You may {ee the other vall- the thaft be n 

ous thapes here reprefeneed to you in the follewing Figure, for this purp: 

gether of thc 
. , The Figures of divers forts of Arrowes. ehere will be 


feele itupan 
and there is 


te 


A acelin 


4 


— 
D 

= | C | 
: : | 
4 | — | 

4 . | | 
3 3 3 | | 3 
4 A \ 
AAR 


ter and in 
ter, for ther 
ided others 
figure for 
thed, with 
wayes; buc 
three foote 
ne have one 
m have the 
heads nai. 
hat by gen- 
ous wounds 
nely, others 
¢ other vati- 


CHAP: 


Lip I and other fery En gines and all Sorts of Weapons, 


Cuap, XVII, 
Of the difference of the weunded parts. 


He Wounded partsare eyther flefhy or bony; fome are neare the joy ats,o- 
thers{cated the very joyats; fome are principall, others fervethem: 
{ome arecxternall, orhers internal]. Now in wounds where deadly fiones 
appeare, its fit you give an abfolure judgement to that effe@; leat you make the 
Artto be f{candalled by the ignorant. Butitisaninhumane part, and much digref-. 
fing from Art, to leave the ironinthke wound;it is fometimes ditficulr to take it cut, 
yetacharitable and artificiall worke. Forit is much better to try a doubriull rense- wees vn 
dy,than mone at all, 


Cuarp. XVIII, 


Of drawing forth Arrowes, 


Ou muft in drawing forth Arrowes fhun incifions and dilacerations of 
Veinesand Artcries, Nerves and Tendons. For ir is a thamefulland eta owns 
os bungling part to doe more harme with your hand, thanthe Ircnhath ©) 

6 Sk) done. Now Arrowcs are drawne forth two wayes, that is, either by pons 
extradtion,or impulfion, Now you muft prefeatly atthe firft dreffing pull forth ail 

ftrange bodies which that you may more 2fily and happily perforaicyyou {hall fer 

the Patient in the fame potture, as hee ftood when he received his wound; and hee 

mult alfo have his inftruments in a readineffe, chicfely that which hath a thie pipe 

and toothed without, into which there is put a fharpe iron ftyle, like ike Gimbiers 
weformerly mentioned for the taking forth of Bullets, but that ic hath no {crue at 

the end, but is larger and thicker,fo to widen the pipe, that fo widened it may fill 

up the hole ofthe Arrowes head whereinto the fhate was put, and {fo bring it forth 

with it,both out of the flefhy as alfo out of the bony paris, if fo bee that rhe end of 

the fhaft be not btoken,and left inthe hole of the head. Thar alfo isa fic Inftrument 

for this purpofe, which opens the other end toothed on the outfide,by preffing to- 

gether of the handle. You fhall finde the Iron or head that lies hid by thefe fignes, 

there willbe a certaine roughnefle and inequalitie obiervable onthat part if you 


feele it up and downe with your hand- the flefh there will be bruifed, livid,or blacke, 
and there is heavinefle and paine fele by the patient both there and in the wound, 


A dcliniasion of Iuftruments fit to draw forth the beads of Arrowes awa Darts, 
which are left in the wound without their fhafis, 


ee 


- 


| 


r 


> 
te 


I. 
and fuch 
Made by 
On, Which : 
| - In both 
| 


Of wounds made by Gunfbot, Li BS 


». 
When todraw 
forth the wea- 


ponon the 


A hooked Inftrumeat fit for to draw forth ftrange bodies, as peices ot Maile, ang 
fuch other things as it can catch hold of, which may alfo bee ufed in wounds mag. 


by Gunfhot, 


But if by chatce either Ay. 
rowes, Darts or Lances,or any 
winged head of any other wea. 
pon, bee run through and lef 
{ticking in any part of the bo. 
qy,as the figh, witha port- 
on of the thatt or ftatte flivered 
ih peices.or broken off; theni 
is fit the Chirurgion with his 
cutting mullcts fhould cutc# 
the end of the ftaffe or thaf, 
and then with his other mil. 
lets plucke forth the bead, as 

| you may fee by this Figure, 


Cuarp. XIX. 
How Arrowes broken in a wonnd may be drawne forth, 


itchance that the weapon is fo broken in the wound, that it can 
not bee taken holdonby the formerly mentioned Mullets, then mutt 
you draw,or pluckeit out with your Crane,or Crowes bill and other 
WE formerly detcribed Inftruments. Burt if the fhaft be broken ncare the 

head, fo that you cannot take hold thereof with your Cranes bil], chen 
you fhall draw it forth with your Gimblet which we defcribed before to draw forth 


sousrary fide, bullers. for if a Gimbletcan be fattened in Bullets, it may farre better take hold 


When by the 
fame way it 
went in, 


of wood. Butif the head be barbed, as ufually, the Englitharrowes are, chenifit 
may be conveniently done Jit will be very fitting to thruft them chrough the parts. For 
ifthey fhould be drawne out the fame way they went in, there would beeno {mal 
danger of breaking ortearing the Veffelisand Nerves by thefe hooked barbe:. 
Wherefore itis better to make a fe&ion onthe other fide whither the head tended, 
and fo give it paflage forth if it may bee eafily doue; for forthe wound will bee the 
more calily clenfed andconfolidated, Buton the the contrary, if rhe peint tend (0 
any bone,or bave many mutcles or thicke flefh againft the head thereof, as ic happ*"s 
fometlmes inthe Thighes , Legges and Armes; then you mutt nor chruft che bead 
thorough, but rather draw it out the fame way itcame in, dilating the wound with 
fit Inftruments, and byskill in Anatomic fhunning the larger Nerves and Vefle!'s: 
Therefore for this purpofe puta hollow Dilarer into the wound, and therewith 
take hold of both the barbes or wings of the head; and then take faft hold of 
head with your Cranes-bill,and fo draw them forth all three together. 


4 


it ent! 
very ! 
leave fome frag 
or fome orher ft’ 
{utter it to bleec 
and nature of th 
ilinefle of hum« 
{ymptomes wh 
the wound one: 
pound then acct 
tes; Certain! 
paine. Toconc 
thod preferibex 
ly delivered co! 


and prick 
{ues in wound: 
know it by th 
vid, with fom 
ligne fy mpto: 
inthe comme 
ed forth the ft 
tions,apply ve 
drawne forth 
whofe mouth 
which he fuc} 
it mult be dra 
by ointment: 


j 
4. 
Lhe 
j 
q 
| | af / 
é 
> j 
- 
* 
| 
y 
j 
: 
| ~ 45 


[1 Be 11. and other fiery Engines,and all forts of Weapons, 441 


Dilaser hollowed onthe infide with Cranes-bill to take hold 
6f the barbed bead, 


either Ar. 
an Cuap. XX, 
O 
‘ What tobe done,when an Arrow is left faftned or fticking ina bone. 
{ bo- Vt if the weapon be fo depa& and faftned ina bone that you cannot drive 
fe 1 eee it forth onthe other fide, neither get itforth by any other way than that 
off. “ti ed "3 fy} it eatredin by; you muft firft gently moove it upand downe, ifit fticke 4 Caytion. 
n t very faftin, buthavea fpeciall care that you doe not breake it,and fo 
uid fe leavefome fragment thereofinthe bone; thentake it forth with your Crowes bill, 
or fome orker fit Inftrument formerly defcribed. Thenprefle forth the blood, and Thebenefic 
| _fuffer itto bleed fomewhat largely, yet according to the ftrength of the Patient 
he be andnature of the wounded part. For thusthe part fhall be eafed of the fulneffe and 
F; ad, as illnefle of humors, and leffe molefted with inflammation, putrefaction and other 
fymptomes which are cuftomarily feared. When the weapon is drawne forth, and 
|  thewound oneedreffied, handle it, if fimple, as you doe fimple wounds ; if com- 
pound then accerding to the condition and manner of the complication of the ef- 
feds; Certainly the Oyle of Whelpes formerly defcribed is very good toaflwage 
paine. Toconclude, you {hall cure the reft of the Symptomes according to the me- 
thod prefcribed in our Treatife of wounds in generall, and to that wee have former- 
2 ly delivered concerning wounds made by Gunfhot. 
Crap. 
im). and other F thefe wounds at any time proove poyfoned, they have it from their pri- a oe 
N Aeare the mitive caufe, to wit,the empoifoned Arrowes, or Darts of their enemics. peyfoned 
sill, chen You may finde it out both by the propertie of the paine; fais soe 
draw forth prcat and pricking, asif continually ftung with Bees, for {uch paine ufually en- 
Bi take hold luesin wounds poyfoned with hot poyfon, asArrowes ufually are ; Alfo you fhall 
» thenifit kaow it by the condition of the wounded fleth ; for it will become pale and grow li- 


¢ parts. For ; vid, with fome fignesof mortification. To conclude,there happen many and ma- 
eeno {mall ligne fymptomes upon wounds which are empoyfoned, being {uch ashappen nor 
ed barbes. ‘thecommon nature of ufuall wounds. Therefere prefently after you have ol uck- 
ad tended, forth the ftrange bodies, encompaffe the wound with many and deepe fearrificas p ix 


ill bee che ; tions,apply ventofes with much flame,that {o the poyfon may bee more powerfully poyloned 
pint tend £0 ) drawne forth; to which purpofe the fucking of the wound, performed by one 
bic happens ; whofe mouth hath vo foarenefletherein, but is filled with oyle, that fo the poyfon 

{tthe head Which he fucks may not fticke, nor adhere to the part, will muchconducc. Lafily, 
‘ound with |  *meftbedrawne forth byrubefying, veficatory and cauftick medicines,and affailed 
d Veffells. by ointments scataplafmes,emplaftcrs,and all forts of locall medicines. 


therewith 


oid ofthe | The end of the Eleventh Booke. 


> Il, 
Maile 
AGS Made 
| 
ft PES 
( 
a...© 


4 


Tue Tywveretu Booke. 


Cuap. I, 


Contufion, according to Galen,is a {olution of Continuity in 
| the flefh or bone,caufed by the ftroake of fome heavy and «res comflswt. 
obtufe thiog,or afall from anhigh, The fymptome of this 

difeafe is by Hippocrates called Peliofis, and Melafma, that 
is to fay, blackneffe & blewnefle, the Latins tearme it Sugsl- 

| latum, There are divers forts of thefe Sugillations or black- 

nefles, according as the blood is poured forth into the more 
La] inward or outward partof the body, The blood is poured 

che bocy, whenany (for example) fails from an high,or hathany heavy 
weicht talls upon him, as it often happens to {uch as worke in Mines, or arcex- S+Billations 
treamely racked or tortured; and fometimes by too loud and forcible exclamation, 

Belides alfo by a Bullet thor through the bedy, blood is poured ferth into the bel- 

lies,and {o eften evacuated by the paflages of the Gutsand bladder. The fame may 

Lappen by the more violent and obtufe blowes of a hard Trunchion, Club, Stone, 

and all things which may bruife and preffe the blood out of the veflells either by ex- 

‘cadingor breakingthem. For which caufes alforheexteriour parts are contufed, 

or bruifed fometimes with a wound, fometimes withour, fo that the skinnebe- 

ing whole, andas farre as one can difcerne, untoucht, the blood poures it felfe 

forth into the empty fpaces of the mufcles, and betweene the skinne and mufcles ; 
whichaffe€tthe Ancients have tearmed Ecchymofis ; Hippocrates calls 1 bya pecu- rey 
liar name Navfiefis, tor that inthis affect the {wollne veines feeme as au WCIC LOVOs 
mit,and verily doe vomitor caft forth the fuperfluous blood which is conteined in 

them. Fromthefe differences of Contufions are drawne the indications of curing, 


as {hall appeare by the enfuing difcourfe. 


— 


Cuap. LI. 


Of the gencrall cureof great and enor mor Coomtufiens. 


APSE andnot vifible cvacuation. The vifible evacuation may be performed 
iT by {carification, horefelceches 


cae He blood poured forth into the body ,muft bee evacuated by vifible 


and fit purgative medicines; if fo bec the paticat have nota trong 
and continuall feaver; The not vilible evacuation is 
reiol- 


| 
[1B 
CON VSIONS 
ANW> 
| 
| 
. 


Of Contufions and Gangreenes. Lipa, 


~~ 


refolving and {udorificke potions, bath a flender diet. Concerning Blood-leu; 
44 fentont 62, Galens opinion is plaine, where he bids, in a fall from an high place, and Pen 


bib de 


Yally for bruifes upon what part foeverthey be,toopena veine, though the Patties 
affected are not of a full conftitution ; forthat unleffe you draw blood by Open " 
aveine, there may inflammations arife from the concreate blood, from wh... 
without doubt evill accidents may enfue, After you have drawne bloog bin 
him foure ounces of Oxycrate to drinke; for that by the refiuity of jts fubftan., 
hinders the coagulation of the blood inthe belly, or in ftead thereof you may of 

te this following potion. Rr. rad.Geatiana 3iij, bakiant im Oxycrato.sm colatura 

evacuite clot- eledti 3} fiat potic. Thele Medicines diflolve, and caft forth by {petting and yo 

mite the congealed blood, if any thereof be conteined in the ventricle or lungs. 

Ahotthep, be expcdientto wrap the patient prefently ina fheepes skinac, being hot and 

skinne. ly caken from the theepe,and fprinkled over with a little myrrhe, creffes andy), 
and {o to puit him prefently inhis bed, and then covet him fo that he may {we,. 

plentifully, The next day take away the fheeps-skinne,and annointthe body with 
the following anodyne and rejolving wnguent. Riwmgwent.de althaa ole: Lamby;, 
chamam, ancthian3\\ terebinth farina fanagre,rofar. rub, palver:/it, 
tiller wm, au 2}, fiat litus wt dicium eff. Thengive this potion which is fudorifc,. 

A fudorificke And diflolves the congealed blood. Ligns gwatacé5viij. radicis enula camp. confali4 

Florent. polypod. qutrni,feminis coriandyi , anifi, an 36. ghegrbiz. 

ledblood. ben, verbéna,anm./, aqua fortanalib.xij, Letthembec 
beaten and infufed for che {pace of twelve houres, then let them boyle over a Sen. 
tle fire untillthe onehalfe bee confumed ; let the patient driake fome halfe pings 
af this drinke in the morning, and then {weate fome houre uponit in his bed, ang 

doe this forfeaven or eight dayes. Ifany pooreman light upon fucha milchanc 
who for want of meanescannot bee at fuchcoft, it will be good, having wrapoed 
in a fheete, co bory him upto the chinin Dung mixed with fome hay or 
and thereto keepehim, untill he have {weat {ufficiently,'I have done thus to many 
with very good lucceffe. You fhallalfo give the patient potions made with fyrups 
which have powerto hinder the coagulation and putrefaction of the blood ; {uchas 

Surups hinds- fyrupe Of Vinegar, or Lemons, of the juice of Citrons and fuch others tothe 

vingputri- Quantitic of an ounce diflolved infcabious, or Cardumwatcr. You may pre 


A difailsiag 
vy nimcnt. 


and 


congealing of {ently after the fallgive this drinke, which hath power to hinder the coagulation 
blood. the blood,and {trengthen the bowells. 
Adrinkefor Wi. Rbeé in pul.redacti3), aquarubia majeris, plantagin. an. =). therisce ds, 
Lamepure fyrmps de vofis ficew,36, fiat pots, Lechimtake it in the morning for foure oriive 
daycs. Ip fteed hereot you may make a potion of one dramme of Spermes dil: 
folved in buglotic orfome other of the waters formerly mentioned, and halfe 20 
ounce of fyrupe of Maiden-haire; if the difeafe yeeld not at all to thefe former!y pre 
fcribed medicines, it will be good to give the patient for nine dayes, three or foure 
A pouderfor houres before meate fome of the following powder. rhei torrefacti, rad. rab. ms 
thelams. rotunda ax.=6,give 3j-heercof with{y rupe of Venegat 
The diftelied and Carduws water. They fay that the water of greene Walnuts, diftilled by an Alem 


ovtene Wale bicke,is good to diffolve congealed and knotted blood. Alfe you may fe bathes 
made ef the decoctionof the rootes or Orris, Elecampane, Sorrell Fennell, Mat! 


mallowes, Water-ferne,or Ofmund the waterman, the greater Comfery;the {ec 
of Fenugreeke; the leaves of Sage, Marjeromes the floures of Camxmile, Mciilot 
and the like. For a warme bath bath power to rarifie the skin,to diffolved the clot 
blood, by cutting the tough & mitigating the acride humors, b calling them forth 
inte the furface of the body, and relaxing the paflages thereof, to that the rebe!!100% 
qualities being orecome, there enfues an eafieevacuation of the matter by you's, 
expectoration, if it flote inthe ftemacke,or be conteined in the cheft;but by ftoole& 
Vrine, ifitlye in ebe lower parts; by {weates and tranf piration if it lye next under 
the skin. Wherefore bathes are good for thofe who have a Peripuewmonia or infla™- 
c#,3.de Marion of their Lunges ,or a Pleurifie, according to the minde of Hsppocrases, if 
yom Sane that they be ufed, whenthe feaver begins tobe affwaged; for fo they mitigace paint, 

helpe forwards fuppuration,and haften the {pitting up of the purulent marter. But ¥¢ 


would 


would not hav C 
medics, as vloc 
leaft che humo! 

arts affected, 
like remedy, he 


— 


How 


Be Y 
bot! 
the 

wound afjociat 
ment made of | 
with the poud 
adigeftive ma 

fowingCatapla 
vad lili 
sur per fetacen 
fiat catap 
you do nottoe 
wounds piegm 
{yppuration m 

tufed ficih thall 
mult becut 
things perform 
pether, as wacg 
eafily intlamcdy 
or fief, or tea 


= 


the s 
whicl 


af 


untilithe mal! 
Wherfore int! 
revultion. -Ti 
youapply cup 
festhe tumor a 
the Part, leaft i 
gentle purging 
which mu lyc 
be as it wete 
Parcitfelfe maz 
bumsina 
58. Aucum éupre 
p4rum, fist mie 
and difcuffine 


444 

j é 

4 
. 4 


Confolid, 
Ze 
them bee aj] 

Over a 

halfe Pinte 
us bed, and 
A mifchance, 
Wrapped 
ay or firaw, 
hus to many 
with fyrups 

ood ; fiuchas 
others to rhe 
ay alfo pres 
Dazulation of 


theriaca 36, 
foure or five 
ma ecti dil- 
and halfe sa 
ormerly pree 
hree or foure 
Yaa. ma- 
be of Venegat 
by an Aleme 
y tfe bathes 
nnell, Marth- 
ery; the feeds 
aile, Mclilote 
the clotted 
p them forth 
he rebellious 
by vomite, 
tby ftoole& 
e next under 
4 Or inflam- 
Brazes, if 
tigate pane, 
atter. But we 
would 


Of Contufions and Gangreens. 4 4 


would not have the patiententer into the bath, unlefle he have firft ufed ecnerall 
medics, as blood-letting and purging; for etherwife there will beno (inal! danger, 
leaft che humors diffuled by the heateofthe bath, caufeanew defluxion inso the 

arts affected, Wherefore doe not thou by any mesnes attempt, to ufe this or the 
like remedy, having not firft had the advice ofa Phyfition, 


CHAP, III, 


How we maf handle Contufions, when they are joyned with a wound, 


sp Very great Contufion forthwith requires blood-letting, or purging, or 


- 


Doth; and thele either for evacuation, at revolfion, For thus Hippocrates 

6} in acontufion of the Heele,gives a vomitory potion,the fame dayor elle 
St 5S the next day after the heele is broken. Andthenifthe Contufion havea 

wound afiociating it, the defluxion muft be ftayed at the beginaing, with 2a oynt« 

ment made of Bele Ai menicke, the whites of cgges, and oyle of rofes, and ,myrtics, 

with the pouders of red roies, Allomeand maftich. At the fecond drefiing app ly 

adigeftive made of the yoalke of aneggc,oyie of violets ana T urpentine. Thistole 

towing Cataplafme fhal be appyledto the neare parts to lic!p forwards fuppuration.Ry, A foppurerive 

rad {] coguantur complete,c> paffen. 

tur per fetaceum,addendo butyrirecentss cy oli viel faring volatiles quant. [af hcit; 

fiat catap lafma aa formam pultis liquide. Yethave acare id ufing of Cataplafmes,that A caation te | 

you donottoo much exccede; for too frequent and igamoderate ufe of them makes 

wounds piegmonous, fordide and putride, Wherefore the woand after it is come to 

{yppuration muftbe cleanfed, filled with fleth and cicatrized; umlefle haply the con- 

tufed ficih fhaillbe very muchrorne, fothatthe native heate forfake it, tor themit prow contes 

mult becut away+ But if there be any hope to agelutinate it,let it be fowed,and other 

things performed according to Art; but the ftitches muft not be made fo clofe to- “"°"* 

gether, as when the wound is fimple, and without contufion; for {uch wounds are 

eaily inflamed and {well up, which wouldeccafion cither the breaking of the thred 

or flefh or tearing of the skinne. -/ 


Cuar. IV, 


Of thee Contufions which are withont a wound, 
len 


which lyesunder it be contufed, and the blood poured forth under the skin 

an Ecchymofis, then the patient muftbe governed according to Art Phlebotomis. 
uatuiche maligne fymptomes, which commonly happen, be no more to be feared 

Whertore in the beginning draw blood on theleppofite fide,borh tor evacuation and 
revulfion, Thecontufed part {hall be {carified with equall fcarifications; thea {hal 
yowapply cuppingsglaf{es or hornes, both for evacuation of the blood whichcau~ ts. 

festhe tumor and Tenfion in the parts as alfo ro ventilate and refrigerate the heace of 

the part, leaft itrurne into an Abfeefle. Neither muft we inthe meane while omit 
gentle purging’ of thebelly. Thefirfttopicke medicines ought tobee aftrictives pow in 
which mut lye fome {hort while upon the part, that fo the Veines, and Arterics may Goatufions, 
beas it were firaitned and clofed up, and fo the defluxion hindred; as alfo that the 

partitfelfe may be ftrengthened. This may be the forme of fucharemedy, R. A , “ann 
bursing everam nw. ii}, alei myrtint rofacei, an. boli armeni fanguin dracon, 6B. Bivescouh 
55. gallarum, pul.aluminss wfti,an, 31}, smcorperentur addendo acess 
Parum, fist medisamentam, Then you {hall refolve it with a fomentation,Cataplaime, 

and difcuffing emplaifters, 


f ee the skinne being wholeand not hurt,as farre as can be difcerned, the flefa 


4 
I Byt2. | 
lood-letr ip 
and Bene 
thc Patties 
By Opcniny 
rom When 
lungs; it wi 
ot and new. 
fles and fale, 
may {wea: 
body with 
Lumby 
bverifat. 
fudorifick, 
| 29 


4 Of Contujions and Grangreens. L 


CHAP. V. 


By what meanes the comtafed part may be ‘freed from thefeare and imminent 


danger of a Gangreent. of tat fir 
Sect.2 lib. Reat Contufions are dangerous even for this caufe, for thata Ganereene fi 
and mortification fometimes followes them, which Hippocrates teacherh TES 
| to happen, when as the affected part isgrowne very hard and liquide 


Theeaut of tema, Wherefore ‘when the part growes livide and blacke,and the mttive co. 
a Gangreenés thereof,by reafon of the affluxe of theconcreate blood ,ts almott extin &;chiete. 

ly,to eafe the part of that burden, cupping glaffes and hornes fhall be applyed to the 
part it felfe being firft fcarified with a Lancet, or elfethe following Inftrumere er. 
Thenfeofa meda Scarificator which hath18 little wheeles tharpe and cutting likea razour which 
Searfeater. may be ftraitened and flacked by the pins noted by D. and P. This inftrument isto 

be commended for that it performes the operation quickly and gently, for it makes 


18 incifionesin the {pace that you make one with a Lancet or knife. 


nitencie, OF any 
wiadinefle 
print of your fr 
vifion againit 
parting from th 
foules and corr 
fed. and ftraig.h 
when as the affe 
part a plailfer 
alfo difcuniing | 
The caufe of 
weake that it c 
leaves fomethi: 
coate of tic ey 
were outot th 
are bleardeyet 
eyes 1s becom: 
the aboundanc 
whichare aga! 
matique hum 
humor, the tu 


A Searificator. 


4 


- 


A, Shewes the cover, B. The Boxe,or Cafe. 


Then fhall yon fomentthe part with ftrong Venegar wherein the roootes of ri. 
A fomentation or of Dragons, Cuckow-pint, Sa/omons Scale, Auripiementam and the like have 
to difeafleand beene boyled ; for fuck acride things doc powerfully heat, refolve and draw the 


‘Lama Concreate blood from the inner part of the body unto the skinne, which by its {c- 
ling ia the part atteGed, prohibits the entrance of the vitall fpirits, the prefervers of 
its integrity; yea alfoextinguitheth the native heateof the fame parte Now wee 
: not ufe thele things but with great diferetion, leaft fo we draw not onciytht 
blood which is poured forth of the veficlls, byt alfo the other which is contained ia PraQitioners. 
_the veffels. Moreover alfo we muft not ufethem, unlefie when the defluxions learned Phy fit 
flayed, For {mall contutions (which Gale judgeth by the foftneffe of the contuled that Which is 
frat, part)itwillbee fufhcient toapply to difcufle them, Virgins waxe diffolvedand in this kinde 
mixed with Cummim fecdes, Cloves, the roote of blacke Briony, (which hatha f nature and e({; 
WOnderfull faculty to difcuffe all blackenefles and fugillations)forthe {fame purpo!’, | CCrtaine prop: 
: you may alfo apply wormewood brufedand fe warmed inadifh and fprinkled ove | lave, I haveth 
1 with a little white wine. Alfo fry wormewood with oyle of cammomill, brano’, Who prefcribe 
j the powder of Cloves, and Nutmegs, adding thereto a little agus vita, then putt Caries thar fe}! 
_ .allinalinnen cloth and apply ithot tothe part. The following emplafter doth PM, and Avice 
A difeuting powerfully difcuffe congealed blood. Picis nigra Gam. Elemts 51+ Pinions, 


lof ther 
‘latin fuch 
Avice 
P; 
C wa? foame 


Plater, Liquide terebinth, com. an. 26. pal, fulphuris vivi-2}. Ligaefant fimeul, pat 
plafirwm; and let be {pred upon leather and fo spplyed. mh 


SA 

7 4 - 
| 
iy | 
ij 


iB, 


angreene 
steacherh 
d liquide. 
itive co- 
1A: chiete- 
ycd to the 
umacnt ter. 
our which 
ment isto 
it makes 


ootes of ra- 
the like have 
gad draw the 
Bh by its 
prefervers of 
Nowwee 
t oncly that 
contained 10 
defluxion is 
the contuled 
diffolved and 
which hatha 
ame purpole, 
prinkled over 
mill, branoe, 
then 
plafter doth 

frat 


C ua? 


— 
Be 2, 


Of ( ontufions and Gan greenes. \ ALT 


Cwar. VI. 
of shat firange kinde of/ymptome which happens upon comtnfions of the ribbes. 


He fiefhcontufed fometimes by great violence becomes mucous and felt 2. lib 
{wolne, or puticd up like Veale, which the butchers blow up, the skinne feat, 


remaining whole. Thisis feene and happens chiefely inthat fleth which 


Keynes, is about the ribs; for ebis being bruifed either by ablow, or fall, or re= 

nitenci¢e, or any other {uch like caules if you prefle it with your hand, a certaine 

wiadinefle goeth out thereof witha {mall whyzzing,which may be heard, and the 
jntofyour finges willremaine as in@dema’s. Valeile you quickely make ft pro- 

vision againtt thisfymptome, there is gathered in that {pace which the flefh de- 

parting from the bones, leaves empty, a certaine purulent /aases, which divers times 

foyles and corrupts the ribs, it will be cured, if the mucous tumor be prefently pref- 

fed. and ftraightly bound with ligatures, yet fo thatyou hinder not the breathing, 

when as the affect happens upon the ribs and parts of the Cheft. Then apply tothe Remedies for 
part a plaifter of Oxycrocemm or diachylon Ireatum with the emplaifter de melileto ; 
difcuiling fomentaions {hall be ufed. mor ofthe 
The caufe of fuchatumors isacertaine mucous flegme; feeing that nature is fo The cant, 
weakethat it cannot well digeftthenourifhment, and aflimulate it tothe pare : but 

leaves fomething as it were halfe concocted, No otrherwife than the conjunctive 

coate ofthe eye is fometime fo lifted up and {wolne by aftroake , that it ftartes as it 

were outofthe orbe of the eye, leaving fuch filth or matreras wee feethofe which 

are bleard eye to be troubled withall; becaufe the force and naturall ftrength of the 

eyes is become more weake, either by the faultof the proper diftemperature, ox 
theaboundance of moyfture which fowes thither, as it happens in thofe tumors 
whichare againft nature, For flatulencies are cafily rayfed from awatrifh aad fleg- 

matique humors wrought apon by weake heate, which mixed with the reft of the 


humor, the tumor becomes higher. 


— 


HAP. V I I, 
A difcour fe of Mumia, or Mummie. 


Ao<¢ Eradventure it may feeme ftrange what may be the caufe, why in this 
Treatife of curing contufions,or bruifes,I have madeno mention of gi« 
3 <q ving Mummice either in bole,or potion te fach as have falne from high 


places, or have beene otherwife bruifed, efpecially feeing it is jyummic a 
mon and ufuall, yea the very firft and laft medicine of almoft all our frequentand 
bractitioners at this day infucha cafe, But fecing I underftood,and had learnt from “gare 
carned Phy fitions,that in nfing remedies, the indication muft alwaies be taken from 
that which is contrary to the difeafe,how could I?how caa any other give Mummic iii 
inthis kinde of difeafe.feeing we cannotas yet know what Mummic is,or what is the she Aw- 
nature and effence thereof ? So thar it cannot certainely be judged whether it Nave a thor maxcsne 
Certaine property contrary to tie nature and effects of contufions. This how it may 
ve, have thought good to relate fomewhat at large ; neither doe the Phy&tions mongh hie 
Who prefcribe Mummie, nor the Authours that have written of it, nor the Apothe- 
Caries that fell it,know any certainty thereof. For if you reade the more ancient, Sera- 
and avicenor the moderne and Thevet,y ou thall finde quite different 
“pinions, Askethe Merchants who bring itrous, askethe Apothecaries who 
itofthem, to fellitto us, and you fhajl heare them {peake diverily heereof, The opinion 
that infuch ya riery of opinions, thereis nothing certaineand manifeft. Serapio 
‘na Avicen have judged Mummie to bee nothing elfe bur Pi//e/phalshum, now ic. cor 
isacertaine froth or foame rifing trom the Sea, or Sea waters, this 
‘iC foame as lengas itfwimmes upon thewater is foft and infome fore 


Qg liquide 


— 
| 
| 
a 
| 


Of (ontufions and Gangreenes. 


liquid; but being driven upon the fhore by force of tempeft, and wort;, 
of the fea, and {ticking in the cavityes of the rockes; it concreates ;,, . 
fomewhat a harder fubftance than dryed pitch, as Diofcorides faith, Belomin 
faith, chat Mummiie isonely knowneto ABgypt and Greece. Others write thar), i 
Mans flefh,taken from the carcafes of fuchas aredead, and covered over jp 
Another opi- {andes in the delartes of Arabiasin which Countrey they fay the lands are fome. 
nion of Mum- times carried and ray{ed up with fuch force and violence of the windes, thar rh. 
overthrow and {uffocate {uch paffingers as theymecte withal!;the fleth of thefe 
by the fand and winde they athrme tobe Mummy, 

Mathiolus following the more ufuall and common opinion, writes that Mump;. 

is nothing elfe than a liquor flowing from the Aromaticke embalments of dead bo. 
Anothere dyes, which becomes dry and hard. For underftanding whereof you mutt knoy 
from all manner of antiquity,that the Egyptians have beene moft ftudious in byry. 
_iog and embalming their dead; not for thatend that they fhould become medicine 
for {uch as live, forthey did not fo much as refpect or imagine fo horride a wicked. 
neffe. Butcither for that they held an opinion of the general! refurreCtion, or thy. 
in thefemonuments they might have fomething, whereby they might keepe thei; 
dead triends in perpetuall remembrance, 

Thevet not much diffenting from hisowne opinion, writes that the true Mug). 
mie istaken from the monuments and ftony tombes of the anciently dead in Eoypy, 
the chinkes of which tombes were clofed, andcimented with fuch diligence. by: 
the enclofed bodyes embalmed with precious {pices with {uch art for eternity thy 
the linnen veftures which were wrapt about thé prefently after their death, may be 
feene whole even tothis day; butthe bediesthemfelves, are fofreth that you would 
judge them {carce to have been three dayes buryed. And yet in thofe Sepulchers ang 
Vauiltesfrom whence thele bodyes are taken,therc have beene fome corpes of ti 
thoufand yeeres old, The fame,or their broken members are brought to Venice from 
Syria and Eg ypt,and thence difperft over all Chriftendom.But according te the dif. 
ferent condition of men, the matter of their embalments were divers;for the bodyes 
of the Nobility of Gentry areembalmed with Myrrhe, Aloes, Saffron , and other 
precious {pices, and Drugs; but the bodyes of the common fort whole poverty 
ang want of meanes could not undergoe fuch colt, were embalmed with s/pha/tum 
Or piffa/phaltum. 

ei Now Mathzolws faith that all the Mummie which is brought into thefe parts is 

Mummie ufaz Of this laft kinde andcondition. Forthe Noble menand cheefs of the province {0 

ally is, religiouily addicted tothe monuments of their anceftors,would never fuffer the bo: 
dyes of their friends, and kindred to be tran{ported hither for filthy gaine , and 
detefted ufe,as we fhall fhew more at large at the end of this worke. 

Which thing fometimes mooved certaine of our French Apothecaries, mea 
wonderous audacious, and covetous, to fteale by night the bodyes of fuchss 
were hanged, aad embalming them with falt and Drugges they dryed them ina 
Oven, fo to fell them thus adulterated in fteed of true Mummie. Wherefore we 
are thuscompelled both foolithly and cruelly to devoure the mangied and putrid 
particles of the carcafles of the bafeft people of Egypt, or of fuch as are hanged, % 
though there were no other way te helpeor recover one bruifed with a fal! trom 
a high place,thantobury man by an horrid infertien in their, that is, in mans guts 
Now ifthis Drugge were any way powerfull for that they require, rhey might ps 
haps have ome pretence, for this their more than barbarous iobumanity. 

a But the cafe flands thus, that this wicked kinde of Drugge, doth nothing b¢:p° 
the difeafed, in that cafe, whereforeand wherein it is adminiftred. as] have 
contufions, an hundred times, and as Thevet witnefes, he rryed in himfelfe, when as fice rooke 
{ome thereof by the advice ofacertaine lewith Phyfition in Egypt, from whenct" 
is brought; but ir alfoinferres many troublefome fy mptomes, as the paine 0! the 
heart or ftomacke, vomiting and ftinke of the mouth. 
ew Iperf{waded by thefe reafons, doe not onely my felfe preferibe any her 
of to my patients, but alfo in confultations , endeavour what I may, tha 


bee not prefcribed by others, It is farre better according to Galens opinion 


Lis-i2- 


ehereof. Man’ 


¢herecan be 


jn Method me 
ing bleod, 


f{iory of Mum 


gealed blood, 
gions infert 
buftions, or B 


= 


this impre 

p burne: * 
rifes into pul 
in, itis coyere 
into that cru! 
falls, leaves a! 
whence pain 
adjacent anc 
moyiture, 
condentated 
which we fe« 
cy of medic 
the fire (as 
therfomear« 
tocien le,gen 
Way the CTY 
which they e 
and humors, 
Contrary faci 
the pores, re 
mater to ch: 

things, are c 
the juyces of 
Mandrake a’ 

med juyces| 
Venegar; ro 
Writing inke 
alfo Populeon 
ly at the firfl 
applyed war 
and coniequ 
to the parc, ¢ 
flammation 


ill 
a 
a “the 
+% 
# q 
4 a" * 
JA 
at wer F 
i 
. 
4 
| 
| 
4 
j 
a 
- 


terniry that 
th, may be 
Cyou would 
pulchers and 

rpes of two 
BY Cnice from 
is to the dif. 
ar the bodyes 
and other 
Ole poverty 
ith a/phaltum 


hefe parts ts 
Province {0 
uffer the bo. 
e, andiuch 


caries, men 
es of fuchas 
them inan 
erefore wee 
and putride 
shanged , as 
h a fall trom 
mans guts. 
y might per 
ity. 
othing helpe 
have tryed 
Las hee rooke 
fom whence it 
paine of the 


ibe any here- 
ay, that i 


alens opimsen 


Lis Of Contufions and Gangreens. 44.9 


in Method. med. to drinke (ome oxycrate, which by its frigidity reftraines the fow- 
ing blood, and by its tenuity of fubftance diffolves and difcuffes the congealed clotts The «fects. 
thereof. Many reafons ot learned Phyfitions (from whom I havelearned thishi- 
fory of Muramic)drawne from Philofophy, whereby they make it apparanr, thar : 
¢herecan be no nfe of this or that Mummie in contufions, or again fowing or con. 

gcaled blood, I willingly omit,tor that I thinkeit not much beneficial! to Chirur- 

gjons to intert them heere. Wherefore I judge it better to beginne to ucate of Com- 

bultions, or Burnes. 


C VIII. 


Of Combuftions and their differences, 


LL Combutftions whether occafioned by Gun-pewder, or by {calding 

| oyle, water, {ome mettall or what things focver elfe, differ onely in andfyptomes 
| magnitude, Thete firft caufe painc in the part, and imprint inican un. Combai: 
¥ nacurall heate. Which favouring of the fire, leaves that impreifion, 

which the Greekes cali There are more or lefle lignes of 
thisimpreffion, according toche efhicacie of the thing burning, the condition of the 

part burned, and itay upon the fame. Ifthe Combuttion be fuperficiary, the skin 

rifes inco puftles and blifters, wnlefic it be {peedily prevented. It it below or deepe 

in, itis coyered with an E/char or cruft, the burnt fleth by the force of the fire turning 

into that crafty hardneffe. The burning force of the fire, upon whatfoever parc ic Sc 
falls, leaves ahot diftemper therein, condenfates, contracts, and thickens the skinne, Listers 
whence paine proceedes; from paine there comes an attra@ion of humors, fromthe — upon 
adjacent and remote parts, Thefehumors prefently turned into watrith orferous 
moyfture, whileft they feeke to paffe forth, andare hindred thereot by the skinne 
condenfated by the aétion of the fire, chey litt icup bigher, and rayfe the blilters 

which we fee, Hence diverfe Indicatiunsare drawnc, whence proceedes the varies 

ty of medicines for burnes, For fometake away the Empyrewma, that is,the heate of 

the fire (as we terme it) and aflwage the paine; other hinder the rifing of blifters; o- 
therfomeare fit,to cure theulcer, firft to procure the falling away of the E/char, then 

toclenfe, senerate flefhand cicatrize it. Remedyes fit to aflwage paine, and take a~ Variety ofme- 
Way thehery heate, are oftwokindes; for fome doe itby a cooling faculcy, by 
which they extinguith the preternaturall heate,and reprefle or keepe backe the blood and adwage 
and humors, which flow intothe parts by reafon of heat & paine.Ochers endued with 
contrary faculties,are hot and ateradtive; as which by relaxing the skin, and opening 

the pores, refolve and diffipatethe ferous humors, which yecld both beginning, and 

matter tothe puftles, and {o by accident aflwage the paiue and hear. Refrigerating 

things,are cold water, the water of Plantaine, Night-fhade, Henbane, Hemlocke; 

the juyces of cooling hearbes,as Purfelaine, Lettuce,Plantaine, Houtlecke, Poppye, 

Mandrake and the like. Of thefe fome may be compounded,as tome of che fore-na- 

med juyces beaten with the white of an egge, Clay beaten and diflolved in {trong 

Venegar; toch Alome diffolved in water, with the whites of eggcs beaten therein s 

Writing inke mixed with Venegar and alittle Camphire, Vaguentam nutrstum, and 

alfo Populeen mewly made. Thefe and the like fhall be now and then rene wed chicfe- 

ly at the firft, untillche heate and paine be gone, Bur thele fame remedyes mult be 

applyed warmie, for if they fhould be layd, or putto cold, they would caule paine, 

and confequently defluxions befides alfo their ftrength could not paffe, or enter in. 

to the part, or be brought into ation; but fo applyed they aflwage paine, hinder in- 

flammation and the rifing of blifters. 


Qq 3 CHAP. 


> 
B.y2, 
d Workin. 
| 
cc thar It js 
are lOme. 
S, thar they 
thefe ¢ «ryed 
dead bg. 
muit know : 
Ous in Dury. 
MCdicines 
> AWicked. 
iOn, tha: 
KCepe their 
true Mum- : 
din Egypr 
Oy 
| 


How fire may 
aflwage the 
paine of bur - 
ning, 


Beaten Onions 
geod tor burns 
and how, 


Cuap. IX; 


Of hot and attractive medicines tobe applyed to burnes, 


Mong ft the hor and attractive thiaeswhich by rarifying drawing OUt,and 
diflolving,aflwage the paine and heate of combuftions, the fire challen. 
ges the firft place, efpecially when the burning is butimall. For che ve. 
-SIGgEZ Ty common people know and finde by dayly experience, that the he». 
of the lightly burnt part vanifhes away, and the paine is aflwaged, if they hold th. 
part whichis burnt fome prety while tothe heate of a lighted candle, or burnin. 
coales;for the fimilitude caufeth attraction, Thus the externall whilett it dray.. 
forth the fire which isinternall and inuft into the part, is a remedy againft rhe 
eafe it caufed and bred, It isalfo aneafily madeand approved remedie, if they pre. 
fently after the burne apply tothe grievedpart raw Onions beaten with {ome (| 


fale, 
Now you muft note, thatthis medicine takes no place, if it be once gone inty ap 
ulcer, for it would increafe the paineand inflammation ; but if it bee applycd whe, 


the skinne is yet wholeand not excoriated, it doth no fuchthing, but hinc crs the 
rifing of puftlesand blifters. Hippocrates for this caufe alfo ules thiskind of remed 
in procuring the fall of the E/char, Itany endevourto gainciay the ufeot thisre. 
medy by that principle in Phyficke, which fayes, that contraries are cured by cop, 
trarics,and therefore affirme that Onions according to the authority of Galen. being 
horinthe fourth degree, are not good for combuftiens; let him know that Onion. 
arc indeed potentially hot, and actually moyft, thereforethey rarifie by their ho. 
Quality , and foften the skinne by their a@uall moyfture, whereby it comes to 
that they attract, draw forth, and difhpate theimprintedheate, and fo hinder the 
breaking forth of puftles; To conclude, the fireas we formerly noted, isa remedy 
againftthe fire. Butneither are dileates alwayes healed by their contraryes 
Galen) but fometimes by their like; although all healing proceede from the contr. 
ry, this word contrary, being more largely and ftricktly taken; for fo alfo a Phice. 
mon is often cured by refolving medicines, which healeth it by diflipating the mit. 
terthereof, Therefore Onionsarevery profitable forthe burnt parts, which ex: 
not yet exuicerated or excoriated. But there are alfo many other medicines oced 
hinder the ring of blifters; {uch is new herfe-dung fryed inoyle of wall-nvrsc: 
Roles,and applied tothe parts,In like manner the leaves of Elder or Dane-wort boy. 
ledin oyle of nurs, and beaten with alittle falt. Alfo quiached lime poudered and 
mixed with Rofatum. Or the leaves of Cuckow-pint and Sage 
ten cogerher witha little fale. Alfo Carpenters Glue diffolved in water and anoyr- 


_ ted upon the part with a feather,is good for the fame purpofe. Alfothicke Vemnilh 


How often in 
aday thete 
mult be dref= 
fed. 


Medicines for 
an Efchar. 


Ade cription 
of 


which pollithers or{wordcutlersufe, Butifthe paine be more vehement. theic me 
aicines mult be renewed 3 or 4 times ina dayand a night, fo to mittigare the bitter: 
ofthis paine. Butif fo be we cannot by thefe remedyes hinder the rifing of blitlers, 
then we muft prefently cut them as foone as they rife, for that the humor contavaed 
in them, not having paflage forth, acquires fuchacrimonie that it eares the Ac 
which lyeth under it,& {o caufeth hollow ulcers:So by the multitude of caufes & 
creafe of matter the inflamation groweth greater,not on! y for nine daies(as the com: 
mon people prattle) but for farre longer time ; alfo fome whiles for leffe rinse! 1° 
body be neither repleat with ill humors, nor plethoricke, and you have {pecdily 1 
iifted the paine and heate by fit remedyes, VVhenthe combuftion thal! be 
as to caufe an E/char, the falling away muftbe procured by rhe ufe of emollient 20 
humective medicias,as of butter, with alittle bafi/icow,or the following 
oyntment. 

Re, Atucagin. pfilly. cy don. an. eummi, brag. extrabantur cum agua pari 
taria, olet nove q.f. flatunguentum mole. For ulcersand 
tions you fhall apply fit remedies, which are thofe that are without acrimony, {uci 
AS aloum chmphoratum Acficcativum rubrum, ungucntum ature, made 


without Vencgar #atritum com poted after this manner ky, /ithargyré aur 


—" 


Lis.12. 
ol. 
mor 
Alfo unquenc: 
fre(h butrer 
ul accel 
lemto jgne,pofte 
cera alba 
ing medicines 
of the uicer 
paine,as thie n 
quinces extra 
phire; aad ica 
fixe yoalkeso 
and quinces © 
atread 
gaiaftburnc 
irrain: d thro! 
or fome 
egec, ang | 
ofwounds,t 
hurt them, b 
may five 
when the ey 
ding of the «1 
without t 
would grow 
cinp the pai 
thar dec pe co 
fuchas are | 
ple of fuch 
pre fen! y 
combuition 
the { nile, iC} 
when we tre 
Efthars th. | 
tothe 
and emoa)lic: 
the Efchar 
detergent ar 
ders, whene 
fay in whar 
Variety whic 
rough, unc 
plaguc how 
I muft no 
trate into rh 
throughly f. 
GUE thence | 
tion nor ver 
wife than 
Wards be ta! 


q 
i 


Lis. (2. Of Contufions and CGrangreens. 


gl. rofat. ol. de papaver, 516. une. populesn, Ziiij, camphore 3). fiat ungucnium in 
mortarto plumbeo fecunaum artem, Or oyleof Egges temperedin a Leaden morrar 
Alfo unquenched lime many times w afhed and mixed with wagueninm rofatuw or 
freth butcer without falt, and fome yolkes ofegges hard roafted. Or. R. Butyri Tee 
cent. fine [ale aftulats, CF colati zy}, vitell. ovorsiit |-ceruf. lobe in agua plantag. vel rofar, 
frrmileter lote, 311}. plumbi loti, Mifceantur omnia fimul, fiat lini- | 


Ag OUt,and 
Cchallep. menium ut decet, Ocelle, R.cort. fambuc. viridts,& olei rofat, an. lib, j- balliane fimul | 
OF the ye, lento igne, poftes colentur , adde ovorum pul. cerul]. tuthie prepar. an. 
t ri heate cera aloe fafficic, frat unoucnt.molle artems, But the quantity o fdry- 
Y Hold the ing medicines may alwayes be encreafed or dimiaifhed according as the condicion 
or burnin ofthe ulcer fhall feeme rorequire. The following remedies, are fitto allwage 
it it drawec paine,as the mucilages of Line teedes, of the icedes of P/ilimm, or Ficaswort, and 


nft the dif. 
they pre- 
1iome fale. 
into an 
P'ycd when 
INC CTS the 
of remedy 
Of this re. 
ed by Con. 
alen, being 
Bhat Onions 
¥ their hor 
tO palle 
hinder the 
isaremedy 
Aryes (faith 
the contra. 
fo 2 Phicg. 
ng the mat- 
s, which are 
ines (0 
wall-nuts or 
¢-wort boy- 
udered and 
Sage bea- 
anoyn- 
cke Vernith 
nt the{e me- 
the bitternes 
of blitters, 
contayned 
tes the ficth 
caufes & in- 
(asthe com: 
etinse,ifche 
{peedily rea 
ll be fogreat 
mollient and 
he following 


Agua parse 
and excoria- 
imony, fuch 
(ature, made 
pyr Sill}. 
ol, 


juinces extra@edin rofewater, or faire water, with the addition of a little came 
phire; and leaft thar it dry too {peedily,adde thereto fome oyleof Roles. Allo fiveor 
fixe yoalkes of egges mixed withthe mucilages of Line feede, the feede of P/ilmm, 
and quinces often renewed ,are very powerfull to allwage paine, The women whici 
attead upoa the people inthe Holpicall in Pers, doe tappily ule this medicine a- 
ainftburnes. Ry. Lard. conferfilébram unam; lecritbe diffolved in Rofewater, chen 
ftrained through a linnen cloath, then wafh it foure times with the water of hen-bane 
or {ome other of chat kinde, then let it be incorporated with eight yolkes of new layd 
If the {mart be great,as ufvally itis in thefe kindes 
ofwounds, the ulcer ox fores thal] be covered over with a peice of Tiffany leatt you 
hurt them, by wiping them with fomewhata courte cloath, and toalto the mawer 
may eafily come ferth, and the medicines eafily enter in, Alio you muft haveacace 
when the eyelids, lippes, fides of the fingers, necke, the armepits, hammes, and ben. 
ding of the elbow areburnt,that you fuffernot the parts totouch onethe other, 
without the interpofition of fome thing; otherwife in continuance of time they 
would grow and fticke togethers Therefore you fhall provide for this, by fic pla- 
cing the parts, and putting fott linnen raggesbetweenerhem, But you mnftnote, 
thardeepe combuttions,and {uch as caufea thicker E/evar, are letfe painefull, than 
luchas are butonely {uperficiary, The truth hereof you may perceive by the cxam- 
pleoffuch as have their limbes cut of, and feared or cauterited with an hoc iren;for 
prefently after the cauterifing is performed they feele little paine. For this ereat 
combuftion rakes away the fenfe, the vehemencic of the fenfory or thing afte cling 
the lenfe,depriving the fenfitive parts of cheir fenfe; As wee have formerly noted 
when we treated of wounds and paines of the Nerves. The falling away of fuch 
Efchars fhail bc procured by fomewhat a deepe {carification which may pierce even 
tothe quicke,that fo the humors which lye underit may enjoy freer per{piration, 
and emollient medicines.may the freclier enter in, fo to foake, moyften and loftcn 
the E/char that it may atlength fallaway, The reft ofthecure thall be performed by 
detergent and farcoticke medicines,adding to the former oyntments metralline pou- 
ders, when the prefent neceffitie fhall ‘feeme foto requre. But wee cannot juftly 
fay in what proportion and quantity cach of thefe may be mixed, by reafon of that 
variety which is inthe temper and confiftence of bodyes, and the ftubbornei'e and 
Sentleneffe of difeafes. Afteraburne the fcatre which remaineth ts commonly 
Tough, unequall,and ill favoured: therefore wee will tell you inour treatile of the 
plague how it mutt be moothed, and made even. 

I muft not here omit to tell you,thar Gunpowder {et oD fre doth often fo pene- 
trate into the fleflanor ulcerating nor taking offthe skinnc, and {fo infinyate and 
faften it inte the fleth by its tenuity that itcangot be taken or drawne 
Gut thence by any remcedyes, no not by Phamzgmes not Velicatotyes, nox {carifica- 
Uon,nor ventofes nor hornes fo that the prints thereof alwayes remaine, no other- 
Wife than the markes which the Barbarians burne in their flaves which cannotafter- 


Wards be taken away or deftroyed by any Art. 
C HAPs 


A remedy for 
urnes Com= 
mon! yulec 
th, Hoi, 


Pas 


Why detse 
coinbuftions 
are lefie p2aine= 
full than fupers 


Markesor 
ipots made in 
the tace by 
curncsor 
Gunpor der 
cannot be tas 
ken away. 


* 
j 
q 

a@ 

a 

a 


ad 
Glaucomem, 


The cencrall 
canfcota 
Gangteene, 


Cuar. X, 
Of Gancreene and Mortification. 


a Ertainely the maligne fymptomes which happen upon wounds, and the 
| folutions of Continuity are many, caufed eitherby the ignorance, 
negligence of the Chirurgion; or bythe Patient, orfuch asare aboy, 
him; or by the malignity and violence of the difeafe:but there can hap. 
* pen no greater than a Gangreenc,as that which may caufe the 
tienand death of the part, and oft times of the whole body; wherefore | }),,, 
thought good in this place to treate of a Gangreene, firft giving you the defini:iop 

then thewing you the caufes.fignes,prognoftickes,& laftly the manner of cure. Now 
a Gangreene is a certaine difpofition,and way to the mortification of the part, which 
it {eafeth upon, dying by little and little. For when thereis a perfect mortificatios 

itis calledby the Greekes Sphacelos, by the Latines Syderatio, our Country nen 
termcitthe fire of Saint Asthowy or Saint ALarcellys. 


CHAP. 


Of the cenerall and particular cafes of a Ganoreene, 


hog He moft generall caufe of a Gangreene is, when by the diffolution of the 
ge harmony and joynt temper of the foure firft qualities, the part is made 
Boa unapt toreceive the faculties, the Naturall, Vitall,and Animal! IDirits, 
Dy Which it is nourifhed, lives, fecles,andmooves. For apart deprived 
by any chance of thefe, as of the light, languifhes and prefently dyes. Now the Date 
ticular caufes are many and thefe either primitive, or antecedent, The primitive o; 


Theprsticular externall arc combuttions, caufed by things either actually or potentially burning; 


caules, 


Cold caufeth 
a Gangreene, 


How defuxis 
onscauica 
Gangwene. 


Anuntureable 
Gangeenc, 


actually as by fire, fcalding oyle or water, gunpowder fired and the like. Bur po. 
tentially by acride medicines;as Sublimate,vitrioll, potentiall cauterics and othe; 
thingsofthefame nature: forallthefe canfea great inflmmation inthe parr. Bur 
the ambient ayre may caufe great refrigcrations, and alfo a Gangreene which cauled 
Hippocrates lib. de Aer. tocall greatrefrigerations of the braine Sphacehfme. There: 
fore the unadvifed and unfit application of cold and narcoticke things, a fracture, 
luxation and great contulion, too firait' bandages, the biting of beafts, efpecially 
offuch asare vencmous; a puncture of the Nerves and Tendons, the wounds of 
the nervous parts and joynts, efpecially inbodyes which are plethorike and repleate 
with ill humors, great wounds whereby the veflels which carry life are much cut, 
whence an 4ucari/ma,and laftly many other caufes,which perturbe that harmony ot 
the foure prime qualitics which weformerly mentioned, and fo inferre a Gav 
preeac, 


_ 


— — — 


C wap, XII: 


Of the Amtecedent caufes of a Gangrcene. 


native heate of the partis fuffocated and extin@ for want of tranfpiration. For 
Arteries are hereby fo fhutorpentupinaftrait, that they cannot performe the! 
motions of contraction and dilatation, by which their native heate is preferved 2" 
tempered. But then the Gangreene is chiefely uncureable when the infuxco! 


Lin, i2. 


I Ds | 2 
mours firft tab 
For inthe opi. 
aifo incident | 
corrennelle arg 
for thus you m 
ro have cheir s 
{tanding are com 
flance. This o 
can {car{e exp! 
alfo there ts 
oldulcer, wit 
andat length: 
yeares contin 
hollow. 
Whither . 
laying bare o 
{fomewhiles |! 
twenty houre 
cold, as wee | 
no paine, tum 
before. For 
woder his cur: 
[remembD 
ly and withoi 
Ganegrceene { 
withoue infia 
livid, blacke 
yetthe fence 
thruft your la 
A Counce 
tlefh lying ur 
came forth a 
medy as alfo 
lour commin 
tothe Reade 
Proceede fro 
ter is not pcg 
For ofttin 
moderate uf) 
way life fro 
may learne 
congealed ,ar 
and the {piri 
ture tO ayde 
were tre 7eN 
Part.can they 
frameand 
Qualities det 
Whereb y ite 
the partdefl 
A certain 
himfelfe up 
UDON One of 
nor goe. 
the fre-bury 
Paine, fom 
halfe his les 


Ow he ant d ty G: roreene.are 

cue coureccaent or internal! an Corporcali cauies OF a 

picntifull and abundant defluxionsof humors hot or cold,falling 

5 any part, Forfecing the faculty of the part is unapt and unab!¢ 

{uftaine andcoverne fuch plenty of humors. it comes ty paffe chat 


IB, 12 


' ds,and the 
Horance or 
Safe abour 
can hap. 
ore I have 
definition 

cure, Now 
Parlwhich 
tification, 
ountry Men 


tiOn Of the 
art 18 made 
mall {pirits, 
deprived 
pw the pare 
STAMICLve or 
ly burning; 
C. But po- 
> and other 
part. Bur 
vyhich cauled 
me. Thete- 
a fracture, 
efpecially 
wounds of 
and repleate 
e much cut, 
harmony of 
erre a Gan- 


falling 
d unable to 
affe that the 
yp. For the 
forme their 
referved and 


nfuxcof hu- 
mors 


Of ( ontufions and Gangreenes, 4s 7 


moursfirft takes hold of the bones,and inflammation hath its beginning from them, 
For inthe opinion of Gales; all chefe kind of affects which may befall the Acth,are Sena 
incident tothe bones, Neyther onely a Phlegmonor inflammation, but alfo preermatar. 
a orrennelle and corruption doth oft times firftinvade and beginne at the bones 
for thus you may fee many who are troubled with the Leprofic and French difeafe 
‘o have their skinne and fiefh whole and faire to looke on, whofe bones notwith. 
ftanding are corrupt and rotten,and oft times are much decayed in their proper {ub. 
flance. This mifchiefe is caufed by a venemous matter, whofe occule qualit®@wee 
can {earfe exprefle by any other name than poyfon inwardly generated. Oft times 
there is a certaine acrid and ftinking filth generated in flefh with a maligne and 
oldulcer, with which if the bones chance to bee moyftned they become foule 
andat length mortified: of which this faying of Héppecrates is extant, Vicers of a 
yeares continuance or lopger,muft neceflarily foule the bone, and make the fearres 
hollow. 

Whither alfo belongs this saying of the fame party; Ao Ery/ipe/as isill in the 
laying bare of a bone. But this flowing venenate and gangrenous matter is 
fomewhiles hor, as in peftilent Carbuncles, which in the {pace of foure and 
twenty houres by caull ng an e(charre, bring the part to mortification : orherwhiles 
cold, as wee {ce it divers times happens in parts which are poffe(t with a Gangreenc, 4 Gancrecne 
no paine,tumor, blacknefle, nor any other precedent ligne of a Gangreene going by efx ot a 
before. For de faith, that happenedtoacertaine gentlewoman vf Genoa 
yoder his cure. 

[remember the fame happened toa certaine man iu Paris, who {upping merri- * nerble He 
ly and withoutany fenfe of paine, went tobed, and fuddainly on the nighttime 2 
Gangreene feazed on both his legges , caufed a mortification without tumor, 
without inflammation; onely his legges were in fome places {pred over with 
livid, blacke and greene {pors, the reft of the {ubftance retaining his native colour; 
yet the fence of thefe parts was quite dead, they felt cold tothe touch, and if you 
thruft your lancet into the skinne no blood came forth. 

A Councell of Phy fitions being called, they thoughtgood to cut the skinne, and 
flefh lying under it, with many deepe {carifications; which when! haddone, there 
came forth a little blacke, thicke and as it were congealed blood; wherefore this re- 
medy as alfo diverfe other, prooved to no purpofe, for in concluffon a blackifh co- 
lour comming into his face, and the reft of his body, he dyed franticke, [leave it 
tothe Readers judgement, whether fo fpeedy, and {uddainly cruell a mifchiefe could 
proceede from any other than a venenate matter; yet the hurt of this yenenate mat- 
teris not peculiar, or by its felfe. . 

For ofttimes the force of cold, whether of the encompafling ayre, or the too im- Sieaple cols 
moderate uft of Narcoticke medicines,is fo great, that in afew houres it takes ae Gohcrecne. 
way life from fome of the members, and diverfetimes fromthe whole body, as we 
may learne by theirexample, whotravellin great {nowes, and over mountaines 
congealed and horrd with froft&yce. Hence alfo is the extinction of the mative heare 
and the {pirits refiding in the part, and the fhutting, forth of chat which is fent by na- 
ture to aydeor defend it. For whenas the part is bound with rigide cold , and as it 
were frozen, they cannot get nor enter therein. Neither ifthey fhould enter into che 
Part,canthey ftay long there becaufe they can there finde no fit habitation,the whole 
frame and government of nature being {poyled,and the harmony of rhe foure prime 
qualities deftroyed, by the offenfive dominion of predominant cold their enimy. 
Whereby itcommeth to paffe that flying back from whence theyfrft came,theyleave 
the part defitute and deprived of the benefit of nourifhment,lite,fenfe and motion. 

A certaine Briton an Hofiler in Parés , having drunke foundly afrer fupper, catt 
himfelfe upon abed; the coldayre comming in at a window left open, fo tooke hold 
Upon One of bis legees that when he waked torth ofhis fleepe,he could neither ftand 
nor soe. Wherefore thinking onely that kis leg was numbe,they made bim {tand to 
the fire;but putting it very nigh,he burnt the tole ofhis foore wirhout aay fenfe of 
Paine, fome fingers thicknefle, fora mortification had already poffefled more than 


halfe his legee, Wherefore after he was carried tothe Hofpirall, the 
Woo 


A Hiftory. 


4 
q 
4 


: 


who belonged thercto,endeavoured by cutting away of the mortified legge to delj. 
ver the reft of the body from imminent death; but it proved in vaine; forthemo, pot y¢ he 
tification taking hold vponthe upper parts,he dyed within three dayes with thoub|e. 
feme belching and hicketting, raving, cold fweate,and often fwounding. Verily.) ir js ill tc 
that fame winter, thecold was fo vehement that many in the Hof pitall of Pargsinn = ee; a 
the wings or fides oftheir nofe-thrills,feazed upon by a mortification withour ap y - 
putrefaction. ro fin 

What parts But you muft nore, that the Gangreene which is caufed by cold, doth firfhang 

arewfuallytae principally {eaze upon the parts moft diftant fromthe hearr, the fountaine of here 


2 cowit,the feere and legges;as alfo fuchas are cold by nature,as griltly parts, (uch 


oned by cold. as the nofeand eares. Ae Avin 


10 
dyc,: 
mor tific: (100 : 

rermed a) Efthn 
eatcs gnawes an 

whele bcdy. 
nulla eft opor ts 
fore icistecprete 
rhe living wil « 
acold (wear flo 


Of the frenes of a Gangrecne. 


He fignes of a Gangreene which ioflammation ora phlegmon hay} 
wit. zdibde 


caufed,are paine and pullation without manifeft caufe, the fudden watchings, be 
fraliers 1 changing of the fyery and red colour intoa livid or blacke,as Hipp». them, byirealo 
crates hewes where hee {peakes of the Gangreene ofa broken heel, on ofthe 

Whata puls would have you hereto underftand the pulfificke paine not onclyto Veines, Nerve 


fificke paine be that whichis caufed by the quicker motion of the Arteries,but that heavy and 

= pricking which the contention of the unaturall heate doth produce by raifngs =f 
thicke cloud of vapours from thefe humours which the Gangreene fets upon, The yk 
fignes of a Gangreenecauied by cold, are, if fuddenly a fharpe pricking and burning 

Scnesofa paineaflaileth che part;for pemetrabsle frigus adurit (4) peircing cold doth burne:i!s 

thining redneffe as if you had handled {fnow,prefently turne into a livid colour, if ip 

cold, {tead of the accidentall heate which wasin the part, prefently cold and nurmbenelle 
{hall pofleffe it, as if it were fhooke with a quartain feaver, Such cold if ir (hall =f 
proceedefo farre asto extinguifh the nativehcate,bringetha mortification upon =o 

; the Gangreene; alfo oft times convullions and violent fhaking of the whole body, 
conte wondrous troublefome to the braine and the fountainesof life. But you thal! know 
proceeding Gangreenes caufedby too ftreight bandages, by fraGture,luxation,and cone ion, 


the trie! ds oO 


by the hardnefle which the attractionand flowing downe of thehumors hathcw- J far & 

igatures,&cc. fed; little pimples or blifters {preading or rifing upon the skinne by reafon of the for ? vy ri 
great heate,as ina combuttion ; by the weight of the part occafioned through the : a PA He) f fe 
defc& of the {pirits not now fuftaining the burden of the member; and !ailly hunef 
from this, the prefling of your finger upon the part,it will leave rhe print thereof as 
in an @dema;and allo from this, that the skinn¢commeth fromthe fleth withouray the flethy ad 
maniieft caule, cunyé 


Or more olid 
wombe,:nd t 
fore we mutt 
cheefely occ. 
decent ard hf 
of ill Ors 
afcena. ,Up 
With Treicle 
conferve: of | 
ding to A 
Heart. 
rabror 1m, 


| Now you fthall know Gangreencs arifing from a bite, puncture, 
aman mé, ot woond ia plethoricke and ijl bodies, and in a part induced with molt 


eccationed by exquilite fence, almoft by the fame fignes as that which was caufed by inflammss 
Gure&ce, 40D, | 
i For by thefe and the like caufes, there is a farre greater defluxion and attract: 
on of the humors than is fit, when the perfpiration being intercepted and 
the paflages ftopr, the native heate is opprefied and fuffocated. But this | 
would admoniih the young Chirurgion, that when by hee forementioned 
fignes hee fhall &nde the Gangreene prefent, that hee doe nor defert 
the amputation forthat hee findes fome fenfe, or {mall motion yer refiding 
the part, 
For oft times the affeéted parts are in this cafe mooved not by 


motion 


| 
| 
: | 
: 


Of Contufions and Gangreens. 


Lis.12- 
© to deli. motion of the whole mufcle, burt oncly by meanes, that the headofthemufcle ig 
‘the mon sot yet taken with the Gangreene:with mooving it felfc by its owne firengrh, alfo 
 theuble.. mooves its proper and capt tendon and taile though deadalread y; wherefore 
Verily al ic js ill to make any delay in fuch canfes, 
Cuap. XIIII, 
firhang 
Of heate, Of the Prognoftickes in Gangrcenes, 
fuck 
ews are Aving given you the fignes and caufes to know a Gangrcene; it is fit wee 
5 Lge) [2s allo give you the prognofticke. The fearceneffe and malignity thereof is 
fo great,that unlefic it be moft {peedily withftood the parc it felfe will 
3G oSere dyc,andalfo take hold of the neighbouring parts by the contagion of its 
mortification: which hath beenethe caufe that a Gangreene by maoy hath beene 
rermed an Efthtomenos. For fuch corruption creepes out like poyfou, and like fire WhyaGans 
cates gnawes and deftroyes all the neighbouring parts untill irhath {pred over the 
whele body. For as Hzppocrates writes, Lib, de valner, capitis ; Mortut viventis 
nulla eft proportso (4) There is no proportion betweene the dead aad living. Where- 
fore ix is fit prefencly to feparate the dead from the living; for unleffe that be done, 
the living will dye, by the contagion of the dead.[n fuch as are at che point of death ppp ouicks 
hath they with raving iupatient o 
: acold{weat flowes over all their bodyes: they are troubled with ravings, and impatierr of 
ne fudden watchings, belchings, and hieketing moleftthem; and often {woundiogs invade — 
CoS £1/pP0- them, by reafon of the vapours abundantly and continually rayfed from the corrupri- 
Ken heele, on ofthe humorsand ficth,and fo carryedto the bowells and principal! parts by the 
t oncly to Veines, Nerves, and Arteries. Wherefore when you have foretoldtheie things to 


ncavy and 


the friends of the patient; then make hafte to fall toyour worke, 


ry raifing a 
upon, The — 
id burning 
pburne:if a 
Jour: if in 
lumbeneffe 
if it fhall 
ation 
hole body, 
ihall know 
conrufion, 
hath cau- 
tion of the 
rough the 
and lafily 
t thereof as 
vithourany 


~ 


Of the generall cure of 4 Gangreene, 


e He Indications of curing Gangreenes are to be drawne from their dif- Various Indis 
ferences, forthe cure mult bee diverfely inftituted according to the 
4A {lence and magnicude. For fome Gangreenes poffefle the whole meme greene. 
i ber; others onely fome portion thereof, fome are deepe; otherlome 
REESE fyperficiallonely. Alfo you muft have regard tothe temper ofthe 
body, For foft and delicate bodyes,as of children, women, Eunuches,and idle per: 
fons, require much milder medicines, than thole who by nature and cuftome,or vO- 
cation of life are mote {trong and hardy, fuch as husbandmen, labourers, marriners, 
hunt{men, porters, and men of the like nature who live fparingly and hardlye Nei- 
ther muft you have re{pe@ to the body in generall, bur alfe tothe parts afiected; for 
the icthy and mufcuious parts,are different from the folide.as the Nerves and joynts, 
Or more {glide,as the Vertebra. Now the hot and moyft parts,as the Privities,mouth , hold of bya 
wombe,and fundament,are eafilyer and fooner taken hold of by putrifaction;where- Gangreeae, 
fore we mutt ufe more {peedy meanes to helpe them. Wherefore if the Gangreenc ve 
cheefely occafioned from an internallcaufe muft have a dyet pre{cribed forthe 
Cecent and fitting ufe of the fixe things not naturall. If the body be plethoricke,or full 
of il! humors; you muft purge, or let blood by the advice of a Phytition. Againg the 
alcend ing vp of vapours tothe neble parts, the heart muft cheefely be ftrengthened 


ancari/- 
with mott 


id atrractt- 
cepted and 


Saeed With Treacle diffolved in Sorrell, or Cardus water; with a bole of Mithridate, the 

ror. deferre conferves of Rofes & Bugloffe;and with Opiates made forthe preient purpofc 

refiding in ding to Art;this following Apozeme fhall be outwardly applyed to the region ofthe A cord ill Es 
It. R.aque [eillstics 3} .coralloram antalorum pithema, 

bot by che rabrorum, rofar. rub. inpulver, radectarum [pody, an- 5). mithria, & 


m ot0n 


* 
= 

i 
| 


Of Contufions and Gangreens. Lin. p 


Theare ofa 


Gangrcene 
made by 193 
fammation, 


The deferipti- 
on ofan Egyp- 


Aftrigents 
that may be 
wied cure 
ofa Gans 
greene, 


5 trochifcorum deCaphura,3ij, flor. cordial. inpollin, redactarum, r0i 3), 
omnibus im pollinem redactes , fiat epithema, Which may be applyed upon the 
of the heart witha {carlet clotor fpunge. Thefe are ulually fuch as happen in the 
cure of every Gangreene. 


_ 


XV I, 


Of the particular cure of a Gangrene, 


Hecureofa Gangreene, caufed by the plentifull and violent deflyy;. 
Sy) Bee, on of humors futiocating the native heate, by realon of great Pleomons 
ates is performed by evacuating and drying up the humors, which putrific by 
and colle@ion in the part. For this purpoic {carifications and ip. 
cittons, great, indifferent, {mall, deepe and fuperficiary according to the condi: 
on of the Gangreene,are much commended; that fo the burdened part may enjoy 
the benefitof perfpiratien, and rhe contained humors,of difflation, or evacuation gf 
their footy excrements. Let incilions be made when the affect is grear, decpe ip, 
and nceere ro mortification. But {carifications maybe ufed when the part firlt be. 
ginsto putrefic; forthe greatncfic ofthe remedy mutt anfwere tn Proportion to 
that ofthe difeate. Wherefore if it penetrate to the bones, it will bee Nit, to cut the 
skin andfleth with many and deepe incifions, withan incifion knite made for thy, 
purpo(e: yettake heede of cutting the larger nerves and veflels, unleffe they be who, 
ly putrified, for ifthey be not yet purrified, you (hall make your incifions inthe (pa. 
ces betweene them;:if the Gangreene be lefie, we mult reft fatisfied with onely 
rifyingit. When the {carifications and incifionsare made,we mutt fufter much blood 
to How forth, that fo the conjimet matter may bce evacuated. Then muti we apply 
and put upon it fuch medicines as may by heating, drying, refolving, clenfing and 
openiag, amend and corre& the putrefaction, and by peircing to the bottome may 
have power to overcome the virulencic already impact in the part. For this purpofe 
Lotions made of the lye of the Afhes of fig-tree or Oake wherein Lupines bave bin 
throughly boyledare good. Or you may with lefle trouble make a medicine with 
falc water, wherein you may diflolve Aloes and e£gypsiacam, adding in the conclu 
lion alittle Agua vite; for.aqua wite and calcined vitrioll ace ficgular medicines tor 2 
Gangreene, Or, Re. opimi th.j.mel-rof. Ziti}. fyrap. acetofs coms. bullunt 
Simul, adde aq.viteth (/ Let the part be frequently wathed with this medicine, for 
ithath much forceto reprefle Gangreenes. Afcteryour Lotion, lay 
for 2 Liniment and put it intothe incifions; for there is no medicine,more powerfull 
againtt putretaction, for by caufing an E/char, itfeparates the putride from 
the found, But we muft notin thiskinde of affect expe& that the putride fle(h may 
olitfelte fall fromthe found, but rather cutoff with your incifien knife or filles, 
whativever thereof you can, & then put to it Eeyptiacum as oftas neede thal! requires 
The knowledge hereof may be acquired from the colour, fell, and fenfiblenetle of 
the fleth its felfe. The defcription of the Egyptiacum, whofe wondrous effeéis | have 
oftentryed in thefe caufes,is this. Re floras arts,aluminis rochsmellis com.an.ziij aseli 
com.=\. vitriel rom 6.fublimati put. 31} bulliant omaza fimul ad jonem. [uk 
wncwent it the force of the putrefaction in the part be not fo great,a weaker 
cum may ferve.VVhen you have put in the e£gyptsacum then prefently lay che tollow- 
ing Cataplaime thereupon.For it hinders & dry¢s¥p 
the virulent /amies, and by the dry fubrlety of the Parts penetrates into the 
ftrengthens ir,and affwagesthe paine.R. /arin. fabar hor dei orobi lent lapirs.an 3. 
vofat.an, 3111}. facci abfinth, marrub, an, aloes 
fimpl. quantum fufficit, fiat Cataplafma molle fecunduws 
Somewhat higberthanehe part affected,apply this following aftringenr, or defcali 
tive,to hinder the flowing down of the humors into the part,and the rifing wo of 1° 
vapours from the purride part into the whole body, Ry. oleérofati, c» myrtsll, a0 54 


fuccé plontag, folani, femspervivi,an. album ovorum 5. bolt arment, terra figtt 


baba [wo palvert/ atoram, an, oxycratt quantum fufficit, mifcead dictum. 
3 : But 


= 


egt 
not yeeld 
reries, after Ww 
beaten and 
ing faculty, 2% 
with Cancerics 
ration of the | 
extreame reaic 
on of. the pari 
Therefore 1! 


perfec and a5! 


your finger it 
skinne come fi 
cially inan ulc 
fanious moilt: 
tute of fenic a 
cut off, Here 
concerning th 

For I know 
fay they felt 
proceeds rath 
nedinthe par 
and manifeft a 
ofthe membe 
away. 

Verily 1S 
credired , un: 
the patients v 
ly compiainc 
fore have a f 
yetabiolurc! 
body, by 
periect mort 
over all theb 
eth: That Si 

requir 


oe 
=> 
f 
q 
| 
: 


Portion to 
COCUt the 
de for thar 
cy be who. 
$10 the {pa. 
lonely 
uch blood 
iwe apply 
enling and 
may 
huis purpole 
es bave bin 
dicine with 
the conclu- 
icines for 2 
bullsant 
€dicine, for 
Lyptiacam 
e powerfull 
ficth from 
le flefh may 
fe or fillers, 
all require. 
liblenefie of 
ffeéis have 
Nj acer- 
fist 
er 
the follow- 
& dry¢sup 
(fal. 
Aqua 
Artem, 
or defenii- 
ig UP of the 
yrith, 54. 
terra fi gst : 
aici 


But 


Of Contufons and Gangreens. AST 


pot thele medicines muft be often renewed. If the grecte be fo Rubborne thar it 
wil not yeeld ro thie defcribed remedies, wee mutt comceto 
reTLeS, after whof: application, Galen bidsro put uponit che juice of a Lee ke With Gad.2:ad 
ait beaten anddiflolved therewith, forrbatcthis medicige hath a peitging and dry, Glawconem. 
ing faculty, and conicquently to hinder putrifaction, Bur if you prevaile nothing 
with Canterics, then mutt youcome to the laft remedy and rciiige that is, the ain- 

sation of the patt; bor according ro Hippocrates, toextreame difcafes exquilltly 
ex(reame remcdicsare beit to be applyed, ¥ et, firft be certaine of the mortificati- 
on of the parts for it isnoliceleor imallmateer to cut. off a member wirhout a 
cquile. 

Therefore [have thought it ht co fet downe the fignes, whereby you may knowia 
perfee aod mortification. 


Cuar. XVII, 


Tie fignes of a perfect Necrafis or Mortification, 


Outhallcertainly know that a Gangreene is turned into a Sphacell, or 
mortification, and thatthe pare is wholly aad throughly dead, jf it 
looke of a blacke colour, and bee colder than fione te your touch; the 
caufe of which coldnelic isnotoccafioned by the frigidicie of the aire: 
-——=-= ==" if there bee a great foftnefle of the part, fothacif you preffe it with 
your finger it rifles mot again¢e, but retaines the print of the impreffion. If the 
skinne come from the fieth lying under it; if fo great and {trong a fmell exhale(efpe- 
cially inan ulcerared Sphacell) that the ftanders by cannot endure or fuffer it; if a 
fanious moilture,vilcide , greene or blackifh flow from thence; if it bee quite de{tis 
tuteof fenfe and motion, whether it be pulled, beaten, crufhed, pricked, burnt, or 
cutoff, Here I muft admonifh the young. Chirurgion, thathee be not deceived 
concerning the lofle or privation of the fenfe of the part. | 

For I know very many deceived asthus; the patients pricked on that part would 

. A note cons 
fay they felt much painethere. But that feeling is oft deceiptfull, as that which cerning the 
proceeds rather from the {trong apprehenfion of great paine whieh formerly reig- unfen{iblenes 
nedinthe part, from any facultie of feeling as yet remaining. A moft cleare 
and manifeft argument of this falfeand decci:ful fenfe appeares after the amputation 
oftiemember; fora long while after they will complaine of the part which is cat 
away, 

Verily it isa thing wondrous ftrange and prodigious, and which will fcarfe be A wondeous 
eredited, unleffe by fuch ashave {eene with their eyes, and heard with their eares °F" 
the patients who have many moneths after the cutting away of the Legge, grievout, 
ly complained that they yet feltexceeding great paine ofthat Leg fo cut of. Where. 
tore have a fpeciall care leaf this hinder your intended amputation,a thing pittitull, 
yetabiolurely neceflary for topreferve the life of the paticut and all the rett of his 
body, by cutting away of chat member which harhall the fignes of a Sphacell and 
perte& mortification; for otherwife the neglected fire willin a moment ipread 
over all the body, and takeaway allhope of remedy; for thus Azppecrates wilh: Lib. 6, 
eth : That Sections, Vitions, and Terebrations muft bee performed as foone as 
requires, 


Cuap. XVIII. 


Where Amputatson mujh be made, 


T isnot fiffcientto know that Amputationisneceflaty; buralioyoumule 

learne in what placeof the dead part, it mult bee done, and hercin the verty decided. 

wifedome and judgement of the Chirurgion is moft apparent. Art bids 


Rr 


7 * 
Cx j 
the rep; 
| DCN in the 
4 
and in. 
acuation of 
ry 
lecpe in, 
rt firlt be. 


> 
12, 


, 
totake hold of the quicke,and to cut off the member in the found) fiefhs but che (ay, 
atrwifhethus, to preferve wholethat which is found, asmuch asin us lies, 
thew thee by a familiar example how thou maift carry thy felfe in thefe diffculy 


Let us {uppofe,thac the foote is mortified even to the anckle; here you mutt xtc, 


tively marke in what place yourmuft curt it off. For unlefle you take hold 0; he 
quicke flefh inthe amputation, or if you leave any putrefaction, you profit Nothing 
by amputation, for it will creepe and {pread over the reft of the body. [t befirs pp.” 
ficke ordained for the prefervation of mankind, to defend from thc iron or ing ru. 
mentand all manner of injurie, that which enjoyes life and health. Wherefore you 
fhall cut off as littleof that which is found as youpoffibly can yet fothat yous. 
ther cet away that which is quicke,than leave behind any thing chat is perifhed, a6. 


Lib.7 cording tothe advice of Celfm, Yctofttrimes the commodity of the action of 


reftofthe part, qnd as it were a certaine ornament thercof,changes this coun{:|) 
For if you take thefe two things into your confideration they will induce you jn ¢hj. 
propounded cafe and cxample, to cut off tac Legge fome five fingers breadth unde, 
the knee. Forfothe patient may more fitly ufe the reft of kis Legge and with le 
trouble, that is,he may the better goe ona woodden Legge; tor otherwile, if x, 
cording to the commonrules of Art, youcutit off clofe ro that whicii is perifhe, 
the patient will be forced with trouble to ule three Leyees in ftead of two. 


An obfervas For Ifo knew Captaine Francs Clerke, whenas his toore was itracken off with a» 


The Li 


of the part. 


_ Sle bullet thot forth of a man ofwarre and afterwards recovered and healed Up, hee 


was much troubled and wearied with the heavy and unprofitable burden of the ref 
of his Legge, whereforethough whole and found he caufed the reft thereof to be. 
cut off, fome five fingers breadth below his knee; and verily hee ufeth it wich much 
morc cafe and facility than before in performance of any motion. WVee muft doe 
otherwife ifany fuch thing happen in the Arme ; that is, you mutt cut off as jigs 
of the found part as youican. Forthe actions of the Legges much differ from thels 


ofthe armes, and this thatthe body reftsnor, neither is carried uponthe 
arm2s,asit is upon thy and Legges. 


— 


Cuarp. XIX. 


How tbe fection or amputation neuf? be ver formed. 


He firft care mutt be ofthe patients ftrength , wherefore let him be nour» 
511 edwith meats of good nutriment, eafie digeftion, and fuch as generate 
Sc, many {pirits; as with the yolkes of Egges, and breadtofted and cippedin 
Sacke or Muskedine, Then let him bee placed, as is ft, and drawing the muics 
up wards toward the found parts, letthembe tyed witha firaite ligature a litues 
bove that place of the member which is tobe cut off, with a ftrong and broad fillet 

gaturo likethat which women ulually bindup their haire withall ; This ligature hath 4 
threefold ufe ; the firft is,chat it hold the mufcles drawne up together with che sxis, 

fo that retiring backe prefently after the performance of the worke, they may cov! 
the ends of the cutbones, and ferve them in ftead of boulfters or pillowes wie" 
they are healed up,and fo fuffer with lefle paine the compreffion in futteining the ! 
ofthe body; befides allo by this meanesthe wounds are the fooner healed and ci 
catrized ; for by how much more flefh or skinne is left upon theends of the DOnKs, 
by fo muchthey are the fooner healedand cicatrized. The fecond is, for chat it pt 
hibites the fluxe of blood by preffing and fhutting up the veines and arteries. The 
third is,for that it much dulls the fenfe of the part by fLupefying it, the animal! 
rits by the ftraite compreffion being hindred from pafling in by the Net“. 
Wherefore when you have made your ligature,cut the flefh evento the bone wit" 


fharpe and well cutting inci“9n knife, or with a crooked knife, {uch as is here © 
prefied, y 


Now you mul 


divided by 
rhercoft ; 
TI f 

‘7 
wholly 
form ‘ 

Ane 

Cali: that 
V\ ici iy 
oO! 

The ends of 


initrument fe 
drew themf 


‘7 


* 
pew 
| 
» be 
i 
a 
- 


— 


Of € ontuftons and Grangreenes. 
A crooked knife fit for difmem by in: or 4 difmembring knife. 


Now you muft note, that there ufually lyes betweene the bones, a portion of 

-aine mufcles; which you cannot eafily cut witha large incifion or difmembring 4 cautionts 
.gife, wherefore you muft carefully divide it and feparateit wholly from the bone, b* oblerve4 
ith an inftrument made neatcly like a crooked incifion knife, I thought good to 
dyertifethee hereof; for if thou fhouldeft leave any thing befides the bone ro bee 


CCl 


Badthunder Jivided by the faw, you would putthe patient to exceffive paine in the performance 
with ler -hereof ; for foft things as fiefh tendons and membranes,cannot be eafily cut with a 
wife, if low, Therefore when you fhall come tothe bared bone,all the othe rparts being 
is perithes f = wholly cutalunder and divided, you fhall nimbly divide ie with a little faw about 
= fome foote and three inches leng, and that as neare tothe found fiefh as youcan. 


And then you muft fmooth the front of the bone which the faw hath made rough. 


Off wirh an 
aled up, hee 

of the rep The Figure of, fach SAw. 
Tceof to bee 
With much 
Ce mult doe 
Off as Jirtle 
from thefe 
ed upon the 


Cuap. XX. 


How to flanch the bleeding when the member us taken off. 


be nourith. : SST] Hen you have cut offand taken away the meraber, let it bleed a little ac- 
as generate cording to the ftrength of the patient, that fo the rett of the part may at- 
id dipped in terwards be lefic obnoxious to infammation and other lymptoumies ; Then 
r che mujcles let the Veines and Arteries be bound up as ipeedily anu treightly as You 
re a littlea- can; that fothe courfe of the flowing blood may bee ftopped and wholly ttayed, 

Which may be done by taking hold of the veflells with your Crowes beake, wheres 


broad fillet 


Of this is the figure. 


ature hath a ¢ 
ith the skin, The Crowes beake fit for to draw the ve(fells forth of the flefh woerein they Lie 
-y may cover hid that fothey may be tyed or bound faft. 


lowes when 
ning the reft 
ealed and ci- 
t the bones, 
or chat it pro- 
teries. The 

animal] {pi 
the Nerves. 


witha 
as is her The ends of the veffells lying hid in the flefh mutt be taken hold of & drawn with this How todraty 
d inftrument forth of the mufcles whereinto they prefently after the amputat ion 
drew themfelves,as all parts are ftill ufed to withdraw themfelves towards (heir them, 


q ginalls. In performance of this worke, you neede take no great cal ¢,if you togethe: 
Kr 2 


B. 12, 
fame 
| 
Mig arr YL}; 
Ji ru. 
(cfore | 
= {) 
YOU ra. 
aCe 
ae 
Jn of [Die 
| 
| 
| 


4.60 Of Contuftons and Gangrene’. 


Lin. 


with the veflells comprehend fome portion of the neighbouring parts,as of the Aan 


for hereof willenfuc no harme; butthe veffells will fo bee confolidated wir} 

more eafe, than if they being bloodlefle parts fhould grow together by themfely.. 
To conclude,when you have fodrawne them forth,binde them with a trong dou}, 
thred, 


Cuap. X XI, 


How after the blood is fianched, you muft dveffe the wounded member, 


How the lips FES Hen youhave tyed the Veffeils, loofe you Ligatere which you » 


: 


ofthe difmem- @ g above the place of amputation; then draw together the lippes of . 
2) wound with foure ftitches made acroffe, having taken good hold of +s. 
tegether. ficth; for thus you fhall draw over the bones that part of the skinne 

| 


cut mufcles drawne upwards before the amputation, and cover them as 


can, that fo the ayre may the lefle come atthem, and that fo the wound may bee sh. 


more {peedily agglutinated. But when wee fay, draw together the lippes of th, 


wound with foure fticches, you muft not fo underfland it, asthat you m 


vour, to draw them fo clofe as to rouch eachother, for that is impoflible: fo he 
fticches would fooner breake out,and fo rhe part would lye bare. Whaeretore 
be fufficient to draw them indifferent clofetogether,that fo you may fuffer the skin: 
end fieth thereunder to enjoy its former liberty which it pofleft before the drawings 
up, and fo in fine by natures afliftance, the wound may be the more eafily ago! iting 
ted. 


Cuap, XXII; 


How you mufh floppe the bleeding, if any of the bound up veffels chance 
to get loofe. 


~ 


Hc bulinc fic hitherto being performed as we faid, if peradventure it hap: 
T ee, that any bandage ofany of the veflels be unloofed, then mutt yc 
againe binde the member with that kinde of Ligature which you 
eee beforethe amputation thereof. Or elfe which is better,more calily and 
lefle painefull, let your fervant taking hold of the member with both his bands, pre 
ling bis fingers ftrair, ftoppethe paflage of the loofed veffell, for fo hee may ftanch 
the bleeding. Then Jet the worke-mafter take a needle fome foure fingers lone 


{ 


iquare, and having fharpe edges, drawing after itathree or foure doubled {tron 
tured. With this lechim binde the vefleli after the foilowing manner. Let hia 
thruithis needle onthe outfide into the fief, fome halfe fingers breadth from the 
loofed veflell until! he come to the end thereof, then let him pur it about it,and bring 
it backe againe, but fothat there be no more than the {pace of a fingers bredth bes 
tweene the going in, and comming forth of the needle, Inthis {pace let him puta 
linnen ragge three or foure times doubled, and thereupon bind fome what {iraite 
two ends of the thred together.For fo he (hall hinder the knot from hurting the fe! 
TheHeamor, ich lyes under it inthe bindings,and alfo adde ftrenech thereto, For fo che bound 
rhagicotimall! UP Orifice of the veflell will in fhort {pace be agglutinated tothe adjoyning 
that {0 firmely,that there hath never beene leene,any one drop of blood to have 
ed from a veffel] {0 bound up. But if the blood which flowes torth proceede {rom 
imall veflell,you muft not ufethis {urure and ligature,nor make any fuch great matter 
thereof; for it will quickly be ftanched by theonly application of Aftringents pie 
{eatly to be meationed.. 


lowing repercu! 
Album ov 
bu Po 
ftoopes dipped 
ber,but allo be 
iscurof, it m 
foure hogers 
alfo firengther 
and hiadring 11 
bandages in O 
a pillew 
It mot bx 
dayesin wint< 
vefielis are bo 
mouthes of tt 
you caulea n 
refrigerating 
powacr. 

Ry. arr. 
over for thre 
veffells be po 
further doub 
{tive be appl 
you fhall give 
medicines: Ag 

fercbin 
, 
jerantur abign 
D 

But feein 
yet entire, 
that.thecut n 
paine like to 
Thatcontra¢ 
tenfion is no 
femedy to ci 
backe and al 
powerfull a 
nervous bod 

Re falvie 
melilot. 


| 
Fiou 
SAS? Ow 
picts 
herewith let th: 
| 
| 


you Made 
PEs Of the 
hold OF the 
skinne and 
as yoy 
nay bee the 
PPCS Ofthe 
nutt endes. 
es for the 
crore it 
r the skinne 
the dra Wing 
ag oluting- 


WEL 


jt hap» 
you 
mich yeu did 
reealily and 
hands, pref- 
may ftanch 
ogers long, 
bled ftrong 
Let bim 
th from the 
it,and bring 
bredth bee 
et him puta 
at ftraite rhe 
ing the fleth 
o the bound 
ng fiet h,and 
o have fiow- 
de from any 
Preat matter 
ingents 


CHAP. 


OFC ontufions and Gan greenes, 


di 
« 

t Bs 12. 


XXIII. 


How to perforwe the refidue of the cure of rhe amputsied member. 


FS Ow mult we thew what medicines are fitting to be applyed after the am- 
Bibs PUtation of amember; which are Emplafticks, as thefe which excee. 
dingly conduce to greene woundse As R.,beli arm. 3iiij farin. vol. 
picis, pulverifentur omnia firmul mixtis firt palvis. 
herewith ler the wound bee ftrewed, and lay thereupon dry Lint; but let the fol. 
lowing repercuffive or defenfitive be applyed to the member. 

Ry. Album ovor um V} boli arms.fang drac.gypfi,serra figil. aloes, moaftiches eallar. teparcubive. 
polinem reaigant ur omnia, oy bene Agttentur adadendo ole: rofarum 
fist defenfitivam ad formams mel, This ointment muft bee applyed upon 
ftoopes dipped in Oxycrate, and that fo that it may not onely cover the cut mem= 
ber, but allo be {pread further and cover the neighbouring parts; as when the Legge 
iscuroff, it muft bee laid upon the joynt, and fpread higher than the knee, fome 
foure fogers upon the thigh; for it hath not onely a repercuffive facultic, bucit 
alfo firengthens the part, hinders defluxion by tempering the blood afwaging paine, 
and hiadring inflammation, It will alfobe good to moiften your double clothes and 
bandagesin Oxycrate ; then muft you place the member in an indifferent pofture 

How to place 

upon a pillew ftufted with oaten huskes or chaffe, Stagges haire, or wheatc bratine, she member 

It mult not be ftirred after the firft dreffing (unleffe great neceffity urge) for foure 494 bow oftes 
dayesin winter, but fomewhat fooner infummer. For the ligatures wherewith the °° “*“"*™ 
veffells are bound, they muft not be loefed, or otherwife taken away, before the 
mouthes of the veffells are covered withtheir glue or fleth, leit by too much hatte 
you caufea new flux of blood. This agglutination will be performed by applying 
refrigerating, aftringent, and emplafticke medicines, fuch as this following 
powder. | 

Ry. boli an Alocs, mucum an. 2}. Av 
incorporentur omnia fimul, fiat palvis fubtilis: herewith let the whole ulcer be ftrewed pouder. 
over for three er foure dayes {pace; which being ended, Ict onely the feates of the 
veflells be poudred therewith, and that for eight or ten dayes, fo that wee necde no 
further doubt ofthe agglutination of the veffélls. In the meane {pace let the dige- 
ftive be applyed tothe refi of the Vicer untill itbee come to fuppuration; for then 
youfhall give aver your digeftive, and betake you to deterfive and mundificative 
medicines: As 

Ri. terebinth. ven, lote in aqua vita mellis rofl. faccé plantag. Apsj, Detarlives. 
centaur, balliant omnia fimul ufque ad com[umptiomem /uccor um, 
ferantur abigue addendo farina fab.c> myrrhe, criftoloch, 
fiat munaificativum, 

But {eeing che cafe ftands fo that the Patients imagine they have their members yo 
yet entire, and yetdoe complainethereof (which I imagine to come to pafle, for difmembring 
that.thecut nerves retire themfel ves towards their originall, and thereby caufe a 
Paine like to convulfions; for as Gales writes in his booke, De motu mufculorums , painc asifthe 
That contraGion is thetrue and proper a@ion of a nerve and mulcle : and againe, ex- 
tenfion is not fo much an action asamotion:) now wee muft indeavour to give | 
femedy to chis fymptome. Which may be done by annointing the fpine of the 
backe and all the affected part with the following Liniment, which is very 
Powerfull againft Convulfions, the Palfie, numnefic,and all cold affeéts ofthe 
Nervous bodies, 

Ri [alvie flor chamamel. An oicement 
aneth hyper ici baccarum Cy junipers an. ij.radicgs pyret bri 

Rr 3 Limth, of the 


es, 


& 4 4 
2% a 4 4 4 
¢ = 
; 
| 4 
| 
4 


462 Of Contufions and Gangreens. 

binth. ii}. axung. bnm. %ij.croct adorifert cera quantum fofficis by 
contundenda contundantur pulverifands pulverifentur ,deinde mactrentyur omnia ix ing fers nor of an 
per nociem,poftca coquantur cum axungia praasctis in duplici, frat Linimentyp h awe read in Gale 

How topre: {¢cundum artem,in fime adde aqua vite 5111), Befides,in dreffing thefe wounds. the bi. bind the veile 
eurethefalling rurgion muftule diligence to procure the falling away ofthe ends or {calls of the and Heatt. 
away ofth bones, which the faw and theappulfe of the aire never before comming hereto have This precept 
bones, tainted ; which may be dencby applying to their ends adtuallcauterices, thar wounds, when; 
irons, in ufing of which you muft have a {peciall care that you touch net the fengiy). sutation of me 
arts with fire. neither muft the bones themfelves bee forcibly pluckt off, bur eng. pra ile thereof 
ly mooved by little and little, fo that you fhall thinke you and the patient have ¢ y. thing happened 
ceedingly well performed your parts if they fall away at the thirtyeth day after cour from thea! 
Caheretick, “Mputation. Allthefe things being performed, you fhall hinder the of 9falmof an 
" proud fleth with the cathereticks, fuch as are burnt vitrioll, the pouder of Mercu;;, cauteries whic! 
and other things,among{t which is Alome burnt and poudered, which is exceljen, rurgions doe th 
in thefe kind of wounds whether by its felfe or mixed with others. You tha}! ufe by Art,ought n 
thefe and fuch like, even unto the perfec agglutination and cicatrization of th. oft times have 1 
wound, and you may of your felfe devife other things, fuch as thefe,as occafion have alway don 
offer its felfe, 
Cuap. 
What juft occafion moved the Author to devife this new forme of remedy, to /anch The pra 
the blood after the amputation of a memberana to forfake tie com- 
mon way ufed almoft vy all Chirurgioms which ,by 
application of aciuall camtcries. 
S52 Erily I confefle,I formerly have ufed co ftanch the bleeding of member: : ™ 
after amputation, after another manner than that I havea little before men M. 
» tioned. Whereoflam alhamed, and agreived; But what fhould | doc? 
i had obferved my maifters whofe method I entended to follow, alwaies to dacthe dons being mi 
Hot rows like; whothought theinfelves fingularly well appoiated ro ftanch a flux of blood, Gangreen,&a 


not to be ufed. 


when they were furnifhed with various ftore of ket Irons and caufticke medicines, 
which they would ufe to the difmembred part, now one, then another, as they 
themfelves thought meete. Whichthing cannotbe fpoken, or but thoughrupon 
without great horror, muchleflea@ed. Forthis kinde of remedy could nor but 
bring great and tormenting paine to the patient, feeing fuch frefh. wounds made in 
the quicke and found flefh are endewed with exquifite fenfe. Neither can any cau- 
fticke be applyed to nervous bodies, but that this horridimpreflion of the fire wil 
be prefently communicated tothe inward parts, whence horrid fymptomes eniue, 
and oft times deathitfelfe. And verily of fuch as were burnr,the third part {caric 
ever recovered, and that witk much adoe, for that combuft wounds dilficultly 
come to cicatrization; for by chis burning are caufed cruell paines, whence a Fea- 


on feazed upe 
pofitionto a ¢ 
roufly troubl, 
{woundings 
it fell our, tha 
wretched per! 
Cation by its | 
the ligature, 
with an incifi 
ther, becaufe 
this feftion 


ver, Convulfion, and ofttimes other accidents worfe than thefe. Adde hereunto, much comm 
that whenthe efchar fell away,ofetimesa new hemorthagye enfued, for ftanching feared there: 
whereof they were forced to ufe other caufticke and burning Inftruments. Neithe: montendons 
did thefe good men know any othercourfe; fo by this repetition there was gree" Could not hin 
loffe and wafte made of the flefhy and nervous fubftance of the part. Throwg) velfels that r 
which occafion the bones were laid bare, whence many were out of hepe of cicatriz2 burden the p 
tion, being forced for the remainder of their wretched life tocarry about an ulcer up: Mation and 2 
on that part which was difmembred ; which alfo tocke away-the eporcunitc o! yeti knew p 
fitting or putting too ofan artificiall legge or arme in ftead of that which was cak¢e of the brawn 
off, | fhunning and 
Wherefore I muft earneftly entreate all Chirvigions, that leaving this old, and ie ls Pay N 
Ortne 1 


too roo crucll way ofhealing they would embrace this new, which I chinke a 


4 


— 
Ge 


fi “fficie 
in Ving 
yp, 
the Chi. 
'S OF the 
tO have 
at is hor 
Pent. 
have ex. 
after the 
of 
[crcurie, 
CxXcellenr 
thal! uf 
on of the 


2. Of Contufions and Gangreens. 


taught mec by the {peciall favour ofthe facred Deitie , for I learnt it not of my mai- 
fers, or of any other, neither have I at any time found it uled by any. Onely I 
have read in Galen, that there was no {pecdier remedy for ftanching of blood, than 
to bind the veflels through which it flowed towards their rootes, to wit, the Liver 
and Heart. 

This precept of Galen, of binding and fowing the Veinesand Arteriesinthe new 
wounds, when as I thought it might be drawne to thefe which are made by the ame 
putatien ofmembers, lattempted itinmany,; yet fothat ae inmy budding 
practife thereof, I alwayes had my cauteries and hot Irons in a readincfle,that if any 
thing happened otherwife then l expeéed inthis my new worke, I might fetch fuc- 
cour from the ancient practice, untll at length confirmed by the happy experience 
ofalmof an infinite number of particulars, I bid eternally adieu,ro all hot Irons and 
cauteries which were commonly uled inthis worke. AndI thinke icfic that Chi- 
rurgions doe the like. For antiquity and cuftomein fuch things as are performed 
by Art,ought not to have any fway, authority or place contrary to reafon, as they 
oft rimes have ia civill affaires; wherefore let no man fay untous, that the Ancients 


Likes Meth. 


thon {hal} 


CPP 


flanch 


members 
cfore men. 
I doc? 
ste deecthe 
x of bleod, 
medicines, 
ier,as they 
ugkrupon 
ud not but 
ds made in 
an any cau- 
he fire will 
mes eniuc, 
d part icarfe 
s difhcultly 
rence a Fea- 
ic hereunto, 
yw ftanching 
ts. Neither 
e was great 
Throug? 
ofcicatriza- 
an ulcer up- 
reunite of 
h was takeo 


have alway done thus, 


Cuap. XXY., 


The practice of the former precepts ts declared, together with 4 memorable 
biftory of a certatne foldier, whofe arme was taken 


off at the Elbow. 


sy Thinke it fit to confirme by an example the preferibed method of cu- 
ring a Gangreene and Mortification, Whileft Iwas Chirurgiente the 
Marthallof Azentejan at Turin, a certaine common fouldier received a 

AEA Wound on his wreft with a musket bulict, by which the Bones and ten. 
dons being much broken, and the nervous bodyes cruelly-toruc, there followed a 
Gangreen,&at length a mortification evento the Elbow;sbefides al fo an infiammati- 
on feazed upon the middle part of his Cheft,and there was as it were a certaine dil- 
pofitionto a Gangreene, whereby it followed that he was painefully and danges 
roufly troubled with belchings, hickettings,watchings, unquiccnefie and frequent 
{woundings which occafioned many Chirurgions to leave him as defperare. Bucit fo 
itfell out, that I orecome by his friends intreaty, undertooke the cure oi thus 
wretched perfon, deftitute ofall humanehelpe. WVherefore knowing the mortitt- 
cation by its fignes, I cut off the arme by the elbow as {peedily as I could, making firtt 
the ligature, where of [made mention; I fay Lrooke it off not with alaw, but oncly 
with an incifion knife, cutting in funder the ligamerts which held the bonestoge- 
ther, becaufe the {fphacell was not paffed the joynt of the Elbow, Neither ought 
this fetiontobe accounted firange, whichis made inajoynt; for Hippocrates 
much commends it, and faith that it is eafily healed, and that there 1s nothing to bc 
feared therein befides fwounding,by rcafon of the paine caufed by cutringthe com- 
montendons andligatments. Butfuch incifion being made, the former Ligature 
could not hinder, but much blood muft flow fromthence, by reafon of the large 


vefels that run that way. Wherefore I letthe blood to flow plentifully fo to dif 
burden the part, and fo afterwards to free it from the danger and feare of inflam- 


mation and a Gangreene; then prefently I ftanched the blood with an hot fron,for as 


yeti knew noother courfe. Thengently loofing the Ligature [ {carifie that pare 
of the brawn ofthe Arme which was Gangreenated with maay and deepe iaeificas, 
thunning and not touching the inuer parr, by reafon of the multicude of the large 
veflcls and Nerves which runne that way, then! prefently applyedacautery to 


fome of the incifions, both to ftarichthe bleeding and draw ferth the viruleat / 
Whoice 


A Hikery: 


Dilmembring 
at ajoynt. 


de Arte 


3 
| 
| 
i 
| 
+ 
| 
G 
his O1¢ an 
hinke was 
poht 
a 
* 


Of Contujions and Gangreenes. 


Burying in 


which remained in the part. And then I affailed and overcame the ipreading Dutre. 


faction by putting and applying the formerly prefcribed medicines; ufed 

of the inflammation of the Cheft; lalfo applyed Epi 
thema’s tothe region of the heart,and gave him cerdiall potions and boles, ne ither 
did I defift from ufing them untill fuch time as his belching, hickettmg and {woyp. 
dings had left him. Whilcft I mere attentively intended thele things, anoth.. 
wiicheife aflailes my patient, to wit, Convulfions, and that not through any faule 
ofhimor me, but bythenaughtinefle of the place wherein hee lay, which w., 
in a Barne every where full of chinkes and open onevery fide, and then alo it wa. 
inthe midft of winter raging with froft and faow and all fortsof cold; neyther ha, 
he any fire or other thing neceflary for prefervation of life,te leffen thete injuries os 
the Aireand place ; Now his joints were contraéted, his teeth fet, and his mou), 
and face were drawne awry, whenas I pittying his cafe made him to bee carrieg 
into the neighbouring Stable which fmoaked withmuch hor{fe dung, and bringig 

in fire intwochafendifhes, I prefently anointed his necke and all the {pine of )); 
backe, fhunaing the parts of the Cheft, with liniments formerly defcribed for cop. 
vulfions; then ftraight way I wrapped him in a warme linnen cloth, and buri-, 


hot hozfe dung him evento the necke inhot dung, puctinga little frefh ftraw abouthim ; when he. 


helpes Conz 


vulfions, 


had ftayed there fome three dayes , having at length a gentle {cowring or fyy 
of his belly , and plentifull fweate, hee begun by little and little to open his 
mouth and teeth which before were fet and clofe fhut. Having got by this 
meanes fome opportunitie better to doe my bufinefie, [ opened his mou) 
as much as I pleafed, by putting this following Inftrument Dbetweene his 
Teeth. 


A Dilater made for to opens the month and Teeth by the meanes of 
Screw inthe end thereof. 


Now drawing out the Inftrument { kept his mouth open by putting 14 
willow fticke on each fide thereof, that fo I might the more eafily feede him 
with meats foone made, as with Cowes milke and reare egges, untill hee had 
recovered power to cate, the convulfion having left him. Hee by this mean‘ 
freed from the Convulfion, Ithen againe begunthe cure of hisarme, and - 
an actuallcautery fearethe end of the bone, fo to dry up the perpetuall afflux¢ 0 
corrupt matter. 

It is not altogether unworthy of your knowledge, that hee {aid, how that he¢ 
was wondroufly delighted by the application of fuch aQuall cauteries, a cc! tall 
tickling running the whole length of the arme by reafon of the gentle diffition 
of the heate by applying the caufticke,; which fame ching I have obferved r 
many others; efpecially in fuch as lay upon the like occafion in the Holpyt 
of Paré. After this cauterizing there fell away many and large {calles of * 


bone, the freer appulfe of the aire than was ft making much thereto, — 


when there w: 
Wormewood, 
forted the part 
away the virul¢ 
Lafily, it cé 
carefull 

nif 


| 
| 
. 
tar 
“fey 
<a </- 
<7 
“Yon, 
= See 
ANS 
P 


I 


‘DE Putre. 
d al] forts 
eyed Epj. 
Neither 
{Woun. 
mS, 
any faule 
which Was 
it Was 
yther hag 
INjUTies of 
his mourh 
Ce Catried 
| bringin 
Of his 
| d for COn- 
and buried 
when hee 
Or flux 
> Open his 
by this 
his mouth 
weene his 


utting if a 
feede him 
Bill hee had 

his meancs 

, and with 


ow that hee 
a certaine 


all affluxe of 


when there was place for fomentation, with the deco¢tion of red Refe leaves, “Semel 
Wormewood,Sage,Bay leaves, flowers of Chamomile, Melilote, Dill; [focom- tages” 
forted the part that I alfo at the fame time by the fame mreanes drew and tooke 

away the virulent Samées, which firmely adhered to the flefh aad bones. 
Laftly, it came to pafle ,that by Gods affiftance, thefe meanes I ufed,and my 

carcfull diligence, heatlength recovered. Wherefore I would admo- 
nifh the young Chirurgion, that hee never account any 
{o defperate, as to give him for loft, content to 


have let him goe with prognofticks; for as 


an ancient Doctor writes; That as in aieamiiet 
_ Nature, fo in difeafes there miracles in 
are alfo Monfters. difeates, 


The end of the Twelfth Booke. 


tle diffufion 
obferved 18 
e Hofpital! 
alles of the 
to. befides 
whee 


FIST VLAS, AND 


Tue THIRTEENTH BOOKE. 


CHAP. 


Of the nature,canfes and differences of Vicers. 


eS] Aving already handled and treated of tae nature, diticrences, 


The diverfe_ caufes, {ignes and cure of frefh and blood wounds, reafon & 
A order feeme to require that we now {peake of Viccrs;taking 
our beginning from the ambiguity of the name. For accor- 


Semt.24.fec?. | 


2 de fra, Th 


| ding to Hippocrates, the name of Vicer moft generally taken 
may fignifie all or any folution of Continuity;[n which fenfe 
it is read,that all paine is an Vicer. Generally, fora wound 
| and V Icer properly focalled; as appeares by his Booke,a 
Viceribes, Properly,as whenhee faith, it isa figne of death 
when an Vicer is dryed up through an 4:rephia, or defect of nourifbment. \Vee 

have here determined toipeake of an Vicer inthis Jaft and proper lignification, And 

Wharanvi- according thereto wee define an Vicer to bee the folution of Continuity ina for 
cer properlyis. part, and that not bloody, butfordide and unpure, flowing with quitrure, Samies 01 
any fuch likecorruption, afloctated with one or more affects again{t mature, which 

hinder the healing and agglutinationthereof; or that we may give you it in fewe 

Lib. de confit. WOIdS according to Gaéens Opinion; Anulcer isa {olution of Continuity,cauled 
Etofion, The caufes of Vicers are either internall or externall. The internal! 
caules, through the default of humors peccant in quality rather than in quantity, or clic" 
both and fo making crofion in the skinne and fofter parts by their acrimonic¢ and 

lignitie; Now thefe things happen eyther by naughty and irregular diet, or by the 

ill difpofition of the entrailes, fending forth and emptying into the habitc ol che 

The externali DOdy this their ill difpefure. The externall caufesare, the excefle of cold {eazing 
caules. upon any part, eipecially more remote from the founraine of heate, whence to» 
lowespaine, whereunto fucceeds an attraGion of humors and fpirits into che pat, 

and the corruption of thefe fo drawne thither by reafon of the debility or extin’ 

on of the native heate in that part, whence laftly ulceration proceeds. Ja this num- 

ber of externall caufes may be ranged, a flroake, contufion, the application of tharpe 

and acrid medicines,as caufticks, burnes; as alfo impure contagion,as appcarcs by the 

virulent vicers acquired by the filthy copulation or too familiar conver{ation of luc! 

as have the French difeafé. How many and what the differences of Vicersate,y 

may fee here defcribed éa this following Scheme, 


— 


| 


is \ 


an cm pure 


frlution of | 


Y 


matter or 
sther 
whertof 
there are 


two chiefe 
aiffercces, 
fir one 


| 


‘ 


466 Ltn. 12, 

| 
( isfy 
| 
COM, 
of 4 
aff 
| 
inalofe 
part fw. 
ise wit J 
| filth 4na 
| 
+ 
4 
é 


Terences, 
real nN 
mCrs;taking 
Por accor- 
rally taken 
Bich fen{e 
ra wound 
Bookc,ae 
re of death 
ene, Vee 
ation, And 
mry ina 
C, Sanses Or 
re, which 
ic in fewer 
cauled by 
nternail are 
orelicin 
and 
or bythe 
abite of the 
mold f{eazing 
vyhence fol- 
ro the part, 
yr extinal- 
this pnum- 
yn of fharpe 
cares by the 
ron of {uch 
arc, you 


Vi Fi ifiula 5 Hemurrboides, 


| 


| is fimp le 
| ana 
complication 
i of any other 
affect 4- 
gaint na- 
bares ana this 
Varies tn 
differences, 
AnVicer is | 
an impure 
of | 
continuity 
ina loft | 
pas 
ing with 
filth ana 
matter or |. 
sther cor- | 
rapison, 
whereof | 
there are 
two chsefe | 
differces, | 
fir one | 
| 
| 
1s compound 
| 4nd many 
and various 
| com- 


= 


| émeguality, 


Or common 


‘its, 


Round or circular. 
ome Right or oblique, 
| called Cornercé, AS treamoular | 
| ( Length, whence an Vicer is lene, | Nort, 
| which are | 
sfually Quantity. } Breadth. whence amVicer ws broad, narrow 
that eyther indiffercst. 
from three | according to Py ofunaity, whence an V leer decpe,faper- 
shings.to | | ficcary indifferent. 
wit . ( In thofe differences of dimenfions wherc« 


Equalitie or | of we laft treated, fay in ‘emeth breadth 
and profundsty, wherein y are ettber 
alike or of the fame manner, or e/fc anlske 


4nd fo of a MABICT 


( From their time; whencean Vicer is tear™ 
| wed new,0d, of [bert or lone cure ana 

ation. 

From their appearance; whemee one 13 called 

4% apparent Vicer another a bidden and 
occult Fleer. 

From theiy manner of generation; as if it 

be made by aheawy brujine ,cutting,prick- 

ing ov corroding thing whence acus , torne 

and msxtVicer. 

| From sheir fite ; whence an Vicer befare, 

behind, above, 19 the bead, taile.or 

| belly of Mufile. | 

| From that part ét feazes upon, mhence an 

| ulcer in the ficfh awd skin, or feeding upon 


which con- 


ana acciden- 


| theersftles or bones ,fuch as ‘thee of shenofe, 
| the palate of the mowth,and cares, 

|| From other common accidents, whenee 4 
| TelephianVicer shat is, an Vicer as 
Telephushad. A Chironian, which weeds 
| thebandand art of Chiron, A’ Canckrous 
which refembles a Cancer. 


| thecanfe whence Ts Cacochymic ke, C atarrbotcke or venenate, that 
| 


| an Vicer 


wish the 


from 


witha Cachochy mia or Kepletion of si humors, « 
| (atarrhe or po? :(on chersfhes or feeds. 


Hor. 
Diftemper whether fmple oF compound, \ 
Dry. 
whence an Vicer 
Mixt, 
Ery fipelous, 
Swelling or Tumor whence aZ Ocdematous. >V'cer. 
Canc7 ous. 


1 Solution of continnitie, or any other difcommoditic, 
whence arongh,callous fiftulous, cavernous, finnons 
Leer» with laxatsen fali ure. Oc. 


pith the Symprome whence, A corroding eating, painefull, fordsd and Virtte 


With the caufe and difeafe, 

With thecanfe ana Symptome, 

With the dijeafe and Symptome, 


| ent Vicer. 


Examples whereof may be taken from 


that We have formmert paelsyered. 
CH AP, 


> 13, 467 | 
© 
: 


Of Vicers,Fifiulas and Hamorrbides. Lis, 


? 1 


= 


Of the fignues of Vleers. 


Here are various fignes of Vicers according to their differences, Fo; ;, 
the figne of a putride Vicer, if itexhale a noyfome, pri¢vous,ftinkino 
carion-like vapour, together with filehy matter, An eating Vicer is 
by the eating in, hollownefle and wearing away of the part wherein it refides, 
ther with the adjeyning parts. A fordide Vicer may be knowne by the protlenes, 
and vifcidity of the excrements it fends forth,and by the loofe and {pongy (ofineg. 

or the crufted inequality of the fiefh which growesover it. A cavernous Vice, 

by the ftreghtneffe of the orifice, and largencfle and deepencfle of the Windings 
within. A fiftulous Viccr, if to the laft mentioned fignes there accrew a caljoy, 
hardneffe of che lips or fides*of the Vicer, A cancrous Vicer is horrible to behol, 

with the lips turned backe, hard and {wollne, flowing with virvlent and ftinckip 
corruption, and fometimes alfo with bloody matter, together with the {wwellj,> 

and lifting up of the adjacent yeines. An untemperate, oras they terme it,a differ, 

., pered Vicer,is fuchasisnourifhed by feme great diftemper whether hot or cold, 

moift erdry, orcompounded of thefe. An ill* natured or maligne 
k Views knowne bythe difficulty of curing and rebellious cogtumacy to remedies 2». 
ee pointed according toartandreafon. Wee know acatarrhous Vicer, if the mae 
which feeds it flow co it from fome varices thereunto adjoyning, or dilated. fwollge 
and broken veines, or fram fomeentraile,or from the whole body being if! atieGeg 
An Apoftumatous Viceris perceived by the prefence of any tumor againtt nature 
whofe kind may be found our by fightand handling, Telephzen V!cets, are 
atlected Telephus,and Chirauian (in whofe cure Chsrom excelled) are Vicers which 
may bc knowne by their magnitude not much putride, and confequently not £p. 
ding forthany ill {mell, not cating, not tormenting with paine, but having thei; 
lips {wollne and hard,andthereforeillto bee healed. For although they may bee 
fometimes cicatrized, yet it being but {lender may eafily bee broken, and the Vicer 
renewed, They are almoft likean ulcerated Camcer, but chat they ate accompanied 
with {welling in the adjacent parts; they are alfo worfe than thefe which are termed 
Cacoctbe,that is, il natured or maligne; whence it is that Fernelius thoucht they 
had a hidden caufeof malignitie, befides thecommon default of the humour, ard 
that {ach ascan {carce bee driven away; fuch.commonly are left after che plague. 


Thefignes of 


a putrid Viccrs 


nd 
Woe 
Ope. 


fom.4da Apher. 


22-fed.§, 
Wherefore Galen thinkes fuch to bee maligneas will not fuppurate or yeeld ay} 
quitture. 

Of tise proguofticks of Vices, 

26.45 6. 

Hip. prog nm. 
AAD. 
Aph.65 fed. 


: - nutriment to the partulcerated. Bur the livid or palecolour is not oncly an ab’ 


m 


che native heates 
Hons; neither arc 
with an Vicer,arg 


gtofthe overay 


ious humors. Bi 
without applicatig 
cheir backs Dave « 
moft wholly ner 
franticke, or ha\ 
che rumors be re 
with many and | 
flated ,is prefent 
Softand loote 
nefic of rhe hum 
fome mealure rc 
they thew that cl 
der the roots of 
skin, whenceit 
Lues venerea, 
A livid fleth 
lying under the 
bone, whence 
Thele Vicers 
cured; asaliot 
which a preien 
andfuchas arc 
happens to V |c 
they caufea Ph 
full of ill hum: 
weakencfie ar: 
Vicers are 
bleod,ina bla 
the blood; ¢l 
by reafon of t 
and carionlik: 
nali frem a 
which are icf 
oithe lips of 
On as miniltc 
when ti 
An Vicert! 
Cally healed 
folid parts. 
yecids any 2 
of the humo 
Of parts; an 
lour, as Ga. 
of blood {ud 
the creat in 
fion of bloo 
breaking o 
furious by 5 
breakes its 
the defe& o 
forts of exc 
bur the mo 
@nd the P¢ 


* 
«3 
= 4 
* 
3 


For it jc 
lOking and 
ts known 
ides, 
y fofine (i, 
Ous Vicer. 
Windin 
‘W Calloys 
eto bchold 
ftinckin 
He {wellino 
ita diftem. 
OC or cold, 
ne Vicer jc 
Medies 
f the matte; 
ted. .fwollee 
ll atteGed. 
hature, 
are fuch 4S 
icers which 
mtiy not fen 
laving their 
cy may bee 
id the Vicer 
ccompanied 
termed 
ioucht they 
uimour, and 
the plague, 
yeeld any 


maligne Vi- 
edicines fitly 
| aftluxe, and 
compolure 
cars be- 
or jome 
thercof, 1° 


or before di- 
drinefle 
Jaccuftemed 
Bacly an arge- 


Of Vicers,Fiflula'sand Hemorrboides. 


at of the overabundance of choler and melancholy, but alfo of the extinctionot 


che native heates Io Vice ts where tumors appeare, the patients fuffer no convul- 
ons, neither are franticke; for the tumor being in the habite of the body pofleffed 


with an Wicer argues that the nervous parts and their originallare free from the nox- 
‘gushumors. But thele tumors fuddenly vanifhing and without maniteftcaufe, as 
without application of a difcufng medicine, or bleeding, thofe who have them on 
heir backshave convultions and diftenfions, for that the {pine of the backe is al- 
oft wholly nervous ; butfuchas have them on their fore parts, become eyther 
franticke, or havea fharpe paine of their fide, or pleurifie, or elfe a dyfentery if 
che tumors be reddifh; for the forepartof the body is replenifhed and overfpread 
with many and large veficl!s,into whofe paflages the morbificke matter being tran- 
(lated is prefently carryedto thefe parts which are the feats of {uch difeafs. 

Softand loofe tumors in Vicers are good, forthey fhewa mildneffe and gentle-_,., 

ncfieof thehumots, but ctude and hard {wellings are naught; for all digeftion in s. 
fome meafure refembles elixation. Vicers which are {mooth and fhining are ill ,for 
they thew that there refides an humour maligne by its acrimony, which frets afun- 
der the roots of the haires, and depraves the naturall conftruction of the pores of the 
skin; whenceit is that {uch as are troubled with Quartaine agues, the Leprofie or +ph.4 e2.¢. 
Lues venerea,have their haire fall off, 
A livid ficth is ill in Vicers which canfe a rottennefle er corruption of the bones 

lying under the flefti; for it isan argument of the dying heate and corruption of the 
bone, whence the flcfh hath its originail and integrity. 

Thele Vicers which happen by occafionofany difeafe,asa Dropfy, are hard to be de vic. 
cured; asalfothole whereinto a varix or {wollne veffell continually cafts in matter, G2!-cap.2. 
whicha prefent diftempsr tomeats; which have fwollne, hard and callous lips; 
and{uchas are circular or round, An Hyperfarcofis, or fleby excrefcence ufually 
happensto Vicers nor diligently runditied; and if they poffefle the armes or Legs 
they caufea Phlegmon or fome other tumor in the groines, chicfly if-the body bee 
full of ill humors,as 4vices nath nored. For thefe partsby reafon of their rarity and 
weakeneffe are fit and fubje@t te defluxions, Albucrafis writes that for nine caufes 
Vicers are difficultly replemfhed with ficth and cicatrized, The firft for want of po. what 
blood,ina bloodieffe body . the f[ecoud by reafon of ill humors and the impurity of caules Vicers 
theblood ; the chird by the unfit application of unconvenient medicines; the fourth — 
by reafon of the fordidnefle of the Vicer ; the fifth by the putrifaétion of the foft 
and carionlike flefh encompafiing the Vicer; the fixth when they take their origi- 
nall from a common caule which every where rages with fury, fuch as are thofc 
which are left by the pettilence ; the feaventh by reafon of the callous hardnefle 
ofthe lips ofthe Vicer, The eighth when the heavens and aire are of {uch conditi- 
on as minifters fuell ro the continuance of the Vicer, as at Srrogoza in Aragon ; the 
niath when the bones which lye under it are wailted by rotrennefle, 

An Vicer that cafts forth white, fmooth,equall quitrure, and Jittle or no ftinking, 1s 
Cafily healed; forit arguesthe victory of the native heate, and the integrity of the 
folidparts. Weterme that fmooth quitruse which is abfolurely concected neither What pasoz 
yecids any afperity torhe touch, whereby we night fufpedt that as yet any portion Seemehcadieall 
of the humor remaines crude s we call that equall wherein you can note noe diver{ity andwinte. 
of parts; and white not that which is perfectly fo, but that whichis of an afhco- if 
lour, as Galen oblerves. But irisill,ifwhenthe cure is indifferently forward,a fuxe 
of blood fuddainly breake forth in thofe Vicers which beate ffrongly by realon of 
the great inflammation adjoyned therewith, Foras Hippocrates obierves, an cifu- 
fion of blood happening upona firong pulfation in Vicers is evill; for the blocd 7- 
breaking outofan Artery cannot be ftayed but by force ; and allo this blood is fo 
furious by reafon of the heate and inflammation the nourifhers ofthis Vicer, chat it 
breakes its receptacles,and hence enfues the extinction ofthe nativeheatc, whence , ae 
the defe& of fuppurationanda Gangrecne enfues, Nowfor that there flowes two cxcrements 
lorts of excrem. ats from maligne Vicers,the more thinne is tearmed /chor or fanies, 
burthe more groffe is named fordes: that is virulent and flowes trom prickednerves, 
8nd the Perioftia when theyare evillatletted; butthe orher ufually dawes the 

Sf ‘Icers 


| 
nagnituce ol 


Of cers, Fifiulas and Hemorr bides. Lin, 
ea Vicersof the joynts, and it isthe worler if it be blacke, reddith, ath-coloured jy 
muddy or unaquall like wine Lees, if it ftinke, Samses is like the water wher,, 
fieth hath beene wafhed,it arguesthe precernaturall heate of the part, but whe, , 


is pale coloured ,it isfaid to thew the extinction of the heate. 


C 


Of the gencrall cure of Vlcers . 


N Vicer is eyther fimple or compound, A fimple Vicer, as aa Vicer har} 
IN<4 onc and thara fimple indication,that is,exficcation; and that more than ine 
wound,by how much an Viceris moifter than a wound. There are many jp. 
dications propofed forthe cure of a compound Vicer, in relpec of w” Galex would 
Gal.7.Meth, hayeusto keepe this order, that wee have the firft regard of the moft urgent, then 
of thecaufe then of thar,which unlefie it be taken away,the Vicer cannot be healed, 
By giving you an example you may cafily underftand the meaning hereof. Imaging 
on the infide of the Lega little above the ancle,aa Vicer very painetull, hollow, py. 
tride,aflociaced with the rottennefie of the bong, circular, having hard and {wolne 
Lips, and engirt with the inflammation and varices of the neighbouring parts, If 
you take this to cure before youdoe any thing about the Vicer, ualefle you be 
called upon by that which urges, as by vebemency of paine, you mutt firkt ufe gC, 
on ae nerall meanes by calling and advifing with a Phyfition ; For in Gaéens opinion, if the 
yer whole body require apreparation, then muftthat be done in the firft place ; for in 
{ome Vicers purgation onely will bee futhcient ; in fome bloodletting ; otisers are 
better by ufing both meanes,which is as the caufe of the Vicer proceedes from are- 
pletion or illnefle of humors. Now by thefe meanes having taken away the caule of 
the Vicer, you muft come othe particular cure thereof, beginning with that which 
is moft urgent. WVVherefore you muft firft aflwage the paine by application of 
things contrary to the caufethercof, asif it proceede trom a Phlegmonous diltem- 
per, which hath long pofleft,diftended and hardned the part, it muft bee cafedby 
evacuation, Firft, bathing it with warme water, to mollifie and relaxe the skione, 
that fo youmaythe more eafily cvacuate the contained humors; then {hall you 
draw away portion of the matter caufing the {welling and paineby {carrification, if 
the patient {sal be of fufficient courage, or elfe by application of hofesleaches if hee 
be more faint hearted; and then you thall temper the heate there of by applying /’*- 

gucntum refriccrans Galeni, 

To conclude, you fhall attempt all things which wee have formerly delivered (1° 
our treatile of Tumors) to take away the {welling thereof. When you have brought 
this to that paffe you defire,y ou fhalicome to thofe which are fuch, that it cannot 
be taken away or healed withourthem, which fhail be done by orderly helping the 
defects apainit nature which were conjoyoed with the Vicer, to wit ,the rottennele 
of the bone, which you thal! helpe by adiuall cauteries; and in the meane whil¢ you 
thall draw che Vicer into another forme, to wit,cornered,and you fhall cutaway the 
callous hardneflz,and helpe the rottennefle. Then muft you procure the falling 4¥2y 
of the Efchar, and then provide for che fcailing ef the bone by the meanes formet!y 
prelcribed, laftly the mundified Vicer maft be filled with fie th, 


The curing of 
a fimple Vicer 
confifts ia ex- 
ficcatien. 


The things For generating of fleth caufes muft concurre, the efficient and material); The 
concucing te 


heoenmnie eflicient is, the good temper both of the whole bedy,as alfo of the Viccrated patl: 
of Ath. For this prevailing, there will be an attraGtion, digeftion, appofitionand 


of the laudible juice to the part affeted; verily the laudible temper is preferved >Y 
like things, but the vicious isamended by contrari¢s. The matter to bee {pent up 
ficth, is laudible blood, which offends neither in quality, nor quantity, Ia this eg 
neration of the flefh there appeare two kinds of excrements, the one more chinn¢ 


and humide called Sasses, the other more grofle termed Serdes, Both of hele. 


for that they are contrary to mature, doe therefore hinder the regeneration 0 
ficth,and therefore muft be taken away by applying their contrarycs, as by pes 
ryin 


former fiethy WO 
burnt Lead, Pom 


red with quickily 
more certaine ane 


Efore 
ciont 
You 
{ig ‘ir, 
moifture; alto It! 
thisdiftemper 
ding to Galens O 
you muft firit pi 
if the body be p! 
it can beare. 
locke red axe 
fur ther,yvou W) 
Jabour isin va! 
Rcremoris 
in mortario cy 
You (hall kn 
mentitious hua 
ncile and grow! 
luch asthele ar 
the humour,th 
ned. Amongft: 
clenfes and cor 
applyed ro 
cupre/ 
Then ler 
experience tha 
efteGuall in rh: 
rednetle, ory 
pricty of the 
Ung .Rofatum 
water, Night-: 
tification or L 
fo the chafed | 
Part its felfe 1: 
We know 
rurgion and 
You fhall cor 
Part, orelic 
pi 


of the 

-eferved by the 

Vicer replete Wi 

in ftead of roc (rue 

"Jere having 
poudershavind 
| and einmco } 
| 

hal 


‘Icer hath 
Cthan ing 
Many in. 
lem Would 
BOC, th 
be healed. 
magine 
llow, pu. 
d {wolne 
Parts. If 
you bee 
tht ule 
if the 
¢; for in 
thers are 
trom a re- 
mc Caufe of 
lat which 
Cation of 


diltem- 


cafed by 
he skione, 
fhall you 
cation, if 
hes if hee 
plying 


ivered (in 
fe brought 
it cannot 
‘Iping the 
while you 
taway the 
yng away 
formerly 


jall; The 
ated part. 
simulation 
lerved by 
pent upon 
this rege- 
re chinne 
of thefe. 
‘ration of 
by things 
drying 


[1B 13. Vieers, Fiftula'sand Hemorrhoides, 


jrying in the firt degiee,and more ftrongly or weakely detergent according to the 
complexion ofthe part andthe whole body, and the plenty and quality of theex- 
entitious humor, and the uncleanneffe of the Vicer, For the part muft bee 
-eferved by the ufe of the like, but theulcer orecome by application of things con» 
erary thereto. Afcer that by natures endeavour and the Chirurgivns helpe the Wher 
Vicer is replete with ficth sit mutt De cicatrized, that is,cavered with a callous skin is, te 
-n ftead of the true and native skin. It may be cicatrized by ftrewing of yery drying 
ouders having very or noactimony. Thus Alume and vitriol! being burnt 
and into poyder thinly {trewed upon the part doe quickly cicatrize the 
former fiefhy worke. To this purpof aifo ferve, the roote of Ariftolocbia, Aloes, Thingscaus 
burnt Lead, Pomegranat pills burnt, alfo plates of Lead befinea- Sng 
ved with quickfllver, whofe efficacy for this purpofe Chirurgions fometimes finde 
more certaine and powerfull than any other remedies. 


(earre 


Cuap. V. 
Of 4 diflempered Ficer. 


Efore we {fpeake of adiftempered Vicer, itis meete, leaft thar the Chirur- Signe: of 
sion take one diftemper for another, briefly co relate the fignes of each, 
You may kaow thatan Vicer is aflociated with a dry diftemper by your 
fight, asif the Vicer be as it were wrinckled, if it fend forth littleor no 
muifture; allo itis knowne by touch, if ic feclerough and hard. You fhall correct Remedies for 
thisdiftemper by hume ing medicines, as fomenting it with warme water accor. 2 “ry ower 
dingto Ga/ens opinion, or clfe with Hydreleam (2,)Otleand water miat, but alwayes 
you mutt firft purze,if the body fhall abound with ill humors, or ufe Phiebotomie 
ifthe body be plethoricke; other wile you thal] draw more humors into the part thas 
it can beare, Now you fhall fo long foment it untill the fiefh which is about it begin to 
looke red, waxe foft and moift and the part it felfe be alittle fwollne. If you procecde 
further,vou willrefolveallthe humor which you have drawne thither, and fo your 
labour isin yaine. After the fomentation apply fucha remedy to the ulcerated part, 
Reeremoris hordes fol. malva im porci mifte 
in mortario cy flat | 
You know a moift diftemper affociates the Vicer by the plenty of the excre- 
mentitious humer, which the Vicer fends forth; by the {pongieand fungous foft- Vicer. 
nelle and growrh of the flefh aboutic. You thall amend this by drying remedics, 
luchasthele are,which we terme farcoticks having alwayes regard tothe plenty of 
the humour,the proper temper of the part,andother indications formerly mentio- 
hed. Amongft other remedies Galew much commends Alume water, for it dries, 
clenfes and corroborates the affected part. Alfo this enfaing fomentation may be 
applyed ro good purpote. rofar.reb abfinth, beron, tapfi barbati,aw, m.}. um, 
alaminu roche fiat decoctio in vine inflituatur fotus; 
Then ler Empl.de ceruffa or De miniobe applyedto the Vicer. Alfo I have found by 
experience thatthe pouder of burnt alome lightly ftrewed upon the Vicer is very 
efieGuall in this caic. You fhall know that an hot diftemper affociatesthe Vicer by Signes of 
rednefle, or ycllownefle thereof, bythe heate manifeft to your touch, and the pro- eg Vicer. 
pticty ofthe paine. Then muft you have recourfe to refrigerating things, fuch as 
Rofatum AMef.Refrigerans Gal,Popaleon ; ftoopes and cloathed dipped in plantaine 
water, Night-{hade water,or Oxycrate. I have oftfound by experience that f{car- 
tification or Leaches being applyed,did more conducethan any ocherremedy. For 
lo the chafed blood, which by that meanes is apt to corrupt,is drawne away ,and the | 
Part its ielfe is alfo freed of that burden. | 
We Know acold diftemper by thewhitifh or pale colour,by the touch of rhe Chi- ao oil wei 
‘urgion,and {peach of the patient complaining of the coldneffe of the ulcerated part. pered VIcen 
You thall corre& this by applying and putting bottles filled with water about the 
part, or elfe Swines bladders halfe filled with the followirg decoction. 


{2 


hor difkempez 


» 
oured 4 
| 
Whep: 
| 
| 


Of Vicers, Fiftuld's,and Hemorrboides. Lin. 


fist decoitie in vino generofi, addendo aqua vite quod the Vicq 
may conveniently bee fomented with {punges dipped in the fame decoction, and 
let there be applyed thereto Ewpl.Oxycroceum; emp.ae meliloto; de Vigo cum Mercuri, 
and fine mercurto. Butitamixtand compound diftemper be joyned to the Vicer. 
the medicines mutt in like manner be mixt & compoled. The refidue of the Cc}, irae. 
gions care and paines mutt be {pent upon the proper and peculiar cure of rh¢ Vicer 
asitisan Vicer; which we faid inthe former Chapter was conteined in det 


regencrating fleih and cicatrizationcthercof, 


rion, 


Crap. VI, 
Of an Vicer wit paine. 


Here oft times fo great paine accompanieth Vicers,that it calls thereto the 


counfell of rhe Phyfision, Wherefore if it proceede from any Giitempy 
it {hail be rcaken away by remedies proper againft thar difiemper, fuck 
we nicuuoned inthe former Chapter. Butif it doe nor fo ceale, wee muti eve g 
to Narcoticks, Such are cataplaimes of the leaves of Mandrakes water lillies. Heo, 
bane, Nightihade,Hemlccke, the feeds of Poppy and O yies of the fame, to which 
Themattet  alio may be added Opium, Populeon, and other things of like faculties. Bury: my, 
cacaplaimes. acrimonic and virulency of an humour corroding and cating the ine yp, 
cer it and the lips about it,caufeand make the paine, you fhail neither afi waog ; by 
Catherwticks 4NOdynes,nor Narcoticks;for by application of gentle medicins it wil become 
have power to an i worle, Wherefore youmuft betake youto Cathereticks; For {trong medj. 
cines are for ftrong difeates, Wherefore let a pledget dipped in firong and 
more than ordiaarily powerfull e£gyptsacwm,or in alittle oyle of Vitrioll, be apply- 
edtothe Vicer; for thefe have power to tame this raging paine, and virulent hu. 
mors. Inthe mceane feafon let refrigerating things be put about the Vicer, lealithe 
vehemency of acrid medicines caule adefluxion. 


VIL 
Of Vicers with overgrowing or prondneffe of flefh. 


Thingswaz Leershave oft times prondor overgrowing ficth in them, either by the 
fting iuper= V #3) negligence of the Chirurgion, or fault of the patient, Againtt this 
drying and gently cating or confuming medicines muft be applyed; {uch 
as ate Galls, cortex thuris, Alocs, Tatia, Antimony, Pompholix, \ ivr, 

Lead,all of them burnt and wafht ifncede require. Of thefe ponders you may allo 

make ointments with a little oyle and waxe; but if the proud fleth, as thar whichis 

hard and denfe yecld not to theferemedies, we muft come to caufticks, or clle 0 

Lib.2.Metp, ON, fo cocut it off. For in Galens Opinion, the taking away of proud ficfh is no 
CAPO. worke of nature, (as the generating, reftoring and agelutinating of the ficth is) but 
it is performed by medicines which dry vehemently ,or elf by the hand of the Chi- 

rurgion; wherefore amongit the remedies fit for this operation, the pouder 

mercury with fome {mail quantity of burnt Alume, or burnt Virrioll alone.{eem 

Forthecals very ¢fieGuall to me, Now for the hard and callous lips of the Vicer, they muftbec 


lips of 


moliyfied with medicines which have fuch a feculty,as with Calves .Gocfe, Capon 
or Ducks greafe, the oiles of Lillies, {weet Almonds, Wormes, Whelpes ,0«/ip™; 
tue mucilages of Marfh-mallowes, Linefeede,fenugrecke feede, Gum A 
Geloanam Bdellium ot which being mixed may be made Emplaiflers, unguens,é id 
liniments, or you ufe Empl. Diachylen,or de Macagipibus, De cum 
To conclude, after we have for fome few dayes ufed like remedies, you m2) 
ply tothe Vicer aplate of Lead rubbed over with Quickfilversfor this ts very «tice! 
to {mooth an Vicer and depreffe the lips,ifyou thall prevaile nothing by this 
you mutt cometo the cautticks, by which if you ftill prevaile nocling, for that 
lips ofthe Vicer are fo callous that the cauftickes cannot peirce into them, you 
cleave them witha gentle fcarification,or elfe cut them to the quicke,(oro make 
0 


Lis. 


ther in the 


operation we ice 


mentitious hun 
happens to che 
finuous and 
ulcers mult hay 
ride ulcer 
meanes,the 
be drawne awe 
ulcer with the: 
rake forth ail t! 
nacioufly adh 
much force an 
Ry. abfinth.c 
aloes 
cine and let p: 
nicylous of fu. 
thereof. 
Archigene: 
$8. 
faétion be tuc 
mu{t come co 
you 
RY, 
cer calc“ 
fimuladdendo 
Or you muit | 
potition ther 
refrigerating; 


the cure wit! 

Ry. Lixivs 
NY Col 
uicthefo}lo 
Serebinth, =) 
Tae Chiru 


- 
| 
4.72 
2 | 
» 
| 
i } 
| 
WIA 
# 
‘ 


| hereto the 


Der 

luch as 
Li On 
ils 


ray W 


un. 
by 
OMe Worfe 
medi. 
firong and 

be apply- 

irulenc hu. 
ar, lealt the 


her by the 
micainit this 
Dlyed ; fuch 
1X, Vitrioll, 
ait may allo 
hat which is 

or clife to 
| fiefh is no 
ficth is) but 
of the Chi- 
poud¢ r of 
lone, feeme 
KY muft bee 
ote, Capons 
Des Pe, 
Aguents,@0d 


yom weer 
you may ape 
ery eticctual 
this mesnes, 
for thar rbe 
vou mu 


> 


o make ways 
of 


L10.13. Of Vkeers, Fiftula's, and Hemorrhoides. 4.72 


or as it were open a window forthe medicine to enter In, according to Ge/em, Nei- a | 

ther in the interim mutt youomir Heppocrates his advice, which is,that by thefame «4.2. 

operation we reduce the ulcer ifround,into another figure, to wit,long or trian ular. 


- 


C uap. VIII, 
Of anVlcer putride and breeding Wormes, 


Pr Ormes are divers times bred in ulcers, wkence they arecalled wormie ul- 
cers; the caufe hereof istheroo ereat excrementitious humidits prepa~ The caute of 


worms be 


redto putrefie Dy unnatural! and immoderate heate. Which happens, ding ip Vices. 


* 


meee cither for thatthe ulcer is neglected, orelfe by reafan of the diftemper 
and depraved humors of all the body, or the afle@ted part ; or elic for that che excre- 
mentitious humor collected in the ulcer, hath not open and free pafflage forth; as it 
happens to theulcers of the cares, nofe,fundament, necke of the wombe, and laftly to 
ajifinuous and cuniculous ulcers, Yet itdoth not necetiarily follow that all putrid 
ulcers mult have worms in them; as you may perecive by the definition of a pu- 
tride ulcer which we you before, Far the cure of {uch ulcers after general] 
meanes the wormes mult firft be taken forth, then the excremeatitious humor 
be drawne away, whence they takecheir originall. Therefore you ihall toment the 
ulcer with the eniusng decoion, which is ef force ro kill them; forif any labour to 
take forth ail that are quicke he will be much deceived; tor rhey oft times dee fore. 

nacioully adhere to the ulcerated part, that youcannot plucke them away without 
much force and paine 

Ry. abfinth. centaur. marrnbij, az, M. frat accottio ad tb. $8 
aloes unguent: agyptracz 3}. Let the ulcer be fomented and wathed with rhis medi- 
cine and let pled.cts dipped hereinbe put into the ulcer + or eifeif the wicer be cu- “™ 
nicylous or full of windings, make injection therewith which may goe into al! parts 
thereof. 

Archigenes muchcommendsthis following medicine, R.Ceru/e, pols} montani.an. 
38. pices navalis igquideguantum fufficit, mifce in mortario pro linimente, thepurre- 
faction be {uch that thefe medicines will! not {uffice for the amendment thereot, vou 
muft come to more powerfull, orto cauterics alfo, or hot Irons, or to feétion; yer 
you mutt {till beginne with the more gentle, fuch as this of Gales de{cription. 

Re, cere, 5}, rof- 51}. falus amnon, fanam. aris thur. alum, arue.ma- 

calcis vive, an-3}, fiat emplafirum, Or. terevinth. late cera albe liaucflant 
frrmuladdendo [ublimats,3& [alts torrefacht,c> vitriolj mundi ficativum, 
Or you muft ufe our e4 @yptzacum alone,whicb hath Sublimate ent ring, intorhe com- 
pofitionthereof; butin the iaterim the circyit of the Vicer muft be defended with 
tefrigerating,and defen{arive things for feare ef painc. 


HAP, 
Of 4 fordide Vicer. 


=> Sordide Vicer after the cure of the body in generall,fhall be healed witis 
SP) detergent medicines; the indication being drawne from the groffe and 
4 tough excrement, which with the excrementious Saazes, as it were be- 

| fieging and blocking up the ulcerated parts, weakens andas it were dulls 
the force of medicines though powerfull, which caulcthusto deginne 
the cure with fomentations and lotions as thus. | 

R. Lixivy com. tb.}. abjinth, marrny, appi. utrin{ que, bypericonss, an. A. 

fufficiat,adde rofate nnguntt fiat forms, Thon 
uiethe following deterfive medicine ; fucci apps, plantag. an, melts cor. 5). 
Ferebinth, = if, pul.dreos Florent, aloes.an. 33. flat medicamentum. 
Tae Chirurgion mutt wel confider,at how many drethogs he fhall be able to wath 
3 AW ay 


FP. 
AB. 1) 
‘OF 
MEY 
| 
eV), 
4 
| 


concerning the 


13, 


away the grofle fordes or filth fticking clofe tothe Vicer, and dry up the €xcremen, 
titious famies. For ofttimesthefe things maybe done at one drefling ; but in other, 
who have more quickefenfe or fecling, net fo foone, But when the VIcer is free, 
offuch grofle Sordes or filth, you mutt forbeare to ufe more acride things for 
of paine,defluxion, inflammation, and erofion, whereby the Vicer would becom, 
more hollow. Vherefore then we fhall bee contentto apply remedies whic dry 
Detergent mes and cleanf{e without acrimony, that wee may fo helpe natures endeaveurs in 
accimony, ting fleth. Such remedies are the pouders of Alocs, Matiich, Myrrhe, Orris, 
tharge, Antimony,roots of Gentian, Barly flower, and the like, which being firey. 
ed upoathe Vicer, you fhall cover ie with Lint, and put over chat a plate of Legg 
rabded over with quickiilver, and you (hall put onthefe deterfives and deficcatives 
A caution vez more Or lefle ftrong, as you fhall finde it requifite and neceflary. For the too plep. 
uifull ufe of drying and deterfive things, doth intime hollow the Vlcers, whereby 
gentthings. itcomes to palle rhacin fhorttime inlike fort, agreater quantity of Sanies 
from the Vicer, the proper fubftance of the ficth being diflolved by the force o, 
acrimony of the deterfive medicine, as alfothe proper alimentary humor, which 
flowed tothepart, being inlikefort, agreater quantity of Samies flowed trom the 
Vicer, the proper iubitance of the fleth being diflolved by the force or actimony 
of the deterlive medicine, as alfothe proper alimentary humor, which flowed ry 
the part, being inlike fort defiled: which thing beguiles the unskiifull Chirurg ion, 
Forby how mucbhe fees the Vicer flow more plentifully with (anies, he ender 
vours by fo muchthe more to exhauft and dry up with more acrid medicines the: 
humidities as if they wereexcrementitiouss But Galen hath long agoe admonifhe: 
us to take heede hercof, {ctring fortha Hiftory of a certaine Empericke who dre’. 
fing a fordide Vicer with agreene, acrid and eatingmedicine, diffolved the fe!) 
aed lo confequently madethe Vicer merehollow, and caufed more paine and de- 
fuxion ; whereby ithappened chat continually adding more acrid medicines, hee 
A itinGion COBtInually by his ignorance and unskilfulnefle increafed the colliquation of the 
tobe obferved fcfh, the largenetie of the ulcer and excrementitious humidity. Wherefore wee 
{peciall care, whether the fordide Vicer grow each day worfe, by Its pro- 
ulcers, p¢r fault and the impurity ofthe whole body befides, or elfeby the colliquation of 
the fleth and corruption of the benigne and alimentary humor fent thither forthe 
nutrition of the part, bythe too frequent and unskilfu!! ufe of teo acrid a meti- 
noes Fad cine. You may conjcéure this by the increafe of the paine without reafon, and by 
bad of the pas Che heate and rednefle of the lips of the Vicer. Therefore you mutt principally have 
ros regardtothis, that yeugive each of your patients his fit meafure, that is, aconve 
Ctedparts. hient and agreeable medicine to cach of their (trengths, taking indication from the 
firength diliemper, and conliftence of the whole body andaffe@ed parr; forthereis 
a great deale of difference whether you apply amedicine to a plowman or labourer, 
or to an Eunuch and womanor whether to the Legge,or eyes. Forthefe medicines 
whichtoa denfe and hard bedy and part are onely detergent and drying, the lame 
areto delicate and tender bodies and parts cathereticke and eating, by coliguatt- 
on of the flefh,and corruption of the nourifhment, making an increafe of Sores ot 
filth ; on the contrary thofe things which doe faudibly and fufliciently cleafe the 
ficth in a foft body and dryup the fanies thefe {ame things applyed to a hard body 
creale the fordes and famies by fuffering them to breed, neitherare they of {ufficica’ 
power to wath away the tenacious impurity of a denfe body. Wherefore rhe 
skilfull Chirurgion will fee when he betake himfelfe from too ftrongly clean: 

fing and cating medicines ,to thefe which are more miide. 


Cowan. X. 


Of 4a virulent cating ey maligne Vlcer which is termed Cacoéthes,c& ofa Chironian 


tulenc andeating Vicers differ not unleflein magis and minns,for we 
a virulent Vicer which fends forth a virulent fanies, which is properly 
called Virus. This OF virulency, when it becomes more malig™s 

onaw¢s 
2 


How virulent 
anc eating ul- 
cers 


onawes and feeds 
and makes fn cat 
dirhcultly bec 
either for 
of, ms 
articular adc 
blood How og tl 
healeup. ic! 
thefe wh 
For tie ure : 
more Maile ne 2 
divers miccicin< 
chereot ; 
mcedicin? 
dicine det{iribc« 
Ri. 
aff 
muft iay dete 
that rbe fellow 
rate Vic Ss. 
and G 
Re fere's 


» 
om fers VE. 


4n 4G 


and to 
words | 
fomen the \ 
for umctic t 
thing yotwit! 
ped ay ay th 
thofe who a 
repro ved 
remeaber, 
neighoouris 
though the 
uume ‘hey b: 
the quality « 
tolloves the 
poin ¢d te! 
We ceghttc 
IS 
W. ever 
therdfore it 
ded mrea. 
ly ky Ownec. 
hear?,whic! 
are biolur 


4 
| 
oN 
4 
| 
VANS 
| 
3 
’ 
4 
| 
* 


I 6,13, 


Which d; 
» Orris, Lj. 
ID firey. 
te of Lead 
ieliccatives 
[CO plen. 
> whereby 
flowes 
N¢ force 
Which 
d from the 
“crimony 
flowed ta 
-hirurgion, 
he Cndeas 
icines thefe 
dmonifhed 
Who drefz 
the 
une and de- 
dicines, hee 
ition of the 
= refore wee 
3 by its pro- 
uguation of 
uther forthe 
Bcrid a medi- 
gafon, and by 
icipally have 
aconve- 
1on from the 
; forthere is 
) or labourer, 
fe medicines 
12, the fame 
yy coliiquati- 
Of Soraes or 
ly cleafe the 
ard body en- 
of iufficient 
‘herefore the 
ongly clean- 


hiromian s 


for we tearme 
h is properly 
nore maligne, 


©<CTemen. 
CIN Other. 


id Become 


oqawes and feeds upon the parts which lye under, and are adjoyning to the Vicer ~ 

and makes an eating Vicer, Such Vicers are by Galen called Dy/epulotica, that ig, Salhi. 4 de 

diicultty to be ; for, 1aith Oe, it happens thatthe Vcer is Dyfepuloticke, serers. 

either for that the part affeted may be vitiated either in the habir or temper there- 

of, forthatit may corrupt the humor which flowes thither; fuch an Vicer is bya 

ticular name tearmed Caceethes ; or for that by reafon of the evil quality of che 

plood flowing thither and cating the part, the partaffected being too moili cannot 

healeup. He further addes that a Chironian Vicer is farre more maligne than ‘ersfroman 

thefe Vicers which are tearmed Cacoerhe, cating, fee bee 

Forthecure; by reafoa thatall thefe Vicers have a large extent, for fome are ram 
more maligne andili to De cicatrized than Other{omes itis alfo neecflary to have 
divers MecdiciNes ready and at hand diftingt in their faculties and che degrees 
thereof; fo chat itis no marvaile ifthey oft faile of their purpofe,who with the Jame 
medicin: drefle and thinke they {hall heale ali maligne Vicers, This following 
dicine deteribed by Afclepzades ts much commended by Gaéen. 

R. 1S, An ceralb. fine que liquari poffunt Gal 4, fee, 
sridss effundancwr, and makean emplaifter to bee laid onely upon the Vicer;tor you" 
muft jay 4 defenfative about the Vicerfor feare of intlamwmation., But Galen faith 

chat rhe rollowing Epuloticke of Prémzon excells che reft, as chat which to detpe- 
rate Viccrs, (which many have raken in hand ang left as uncarabic, was of certaine 
aad approoved ufe, 
R farcos 314) aluminis calcis Vine,an <1}. thurs, gallaram, an. Cera, Gal de 


Ch fevs olei Veterss quantum {uff fiat cmpia fet, 
> 


Cuap. XI, 


Anadvertifement tothe young Chirurgion touching the dsfiance of times 
wherein maligne VIcers are to be dreffed. 


O thew the ule of A/clepiadeshis medicine defcribed in the former Chap- «,<e 
3: ter,and convince the errour of thefe Chirurgions, who thinke they doe rah as 

welifortheir pacients, if they twife or thrice on a day drefle maligue* 
Vicers, have heerethought good to digreffe a little from my purpole 

and to interpole Gales authority. Rightly (faith Galen) hath d/ckepiades added thele 

words to the formerly defcribed medicine : And leofe this atter three dayes, and 

foment the Vicer, and faften the fame cmplaifter being wathed,and apply it againes 

for unlefle the medicine adhere long to the skin, ic will doe nogood, Which 

thing notwithftanding many Phyfitions have beene ignorant of, thinking if they wi- 

Ped away the Sawzes trom the Vicer thrice ona day, they fhouid doe better than 

thofe who did the fawe buttwiceaday. Burthofe who dic (le it but once a cay, are 

reprooved by the patients as negligent. But they are much miftaker ; for you mult 

remember, as we have delivered inmoft of our writings, thac the qualitics ot all 

neighbouring bodies do mutuall a&tuare and affeét each other in tome degree, al- 

though the one thereof bee much more powerfull; for by this reafonin {pace o8 

time they become fomewhat alike, though they otherwifé differ much; Buc when 

che quality of the medicine fhall bee like in /pecées to the body to bee cured, there 

followes the berter {uccefic-  Wheretore he which moved by thefe reafons firtk ap- 

pointed to ufe the emplafter formerly applyed, is worthy of conmendations ; and 

We oeghtrofollow him much the rather, {eeing chat which he found out by rcalon, 

‘Sapprooved by experience. Neither did he unadvifedly com mand to foment the 

Wound every third day ,that is,at every drefling; for {eeing itis a powertull medicine, 

‘acrefore it ftands in neede of mitigation. Thus much Gales, whole Opinion 

ded ea reafon, he can againe confirmc with another reafon. Icisalready fufhciene- fur the explai- 

ly knowne, thar medicines can doe nothing in us uniefle by the force of the native | 

heate which ftirres up the faculty of the medicine co operation, but in Vicerswhich 


“re abiolurcly maligne, the native heate of che affected partis very “— being 
rORCR 


a 

fan, 

| 


4.76 


Of Vicers, Fifiula's and Hamorrbides. IB, R 


Medicines are 
onely in 


haculty. 


Thebeginning 
of your bin- 

ding muft oe 
AtchueVicere 


Hip alc, 


evulfroninto 
contrary 
parts, 


4. Metheii, 


brokenand debilitated by the prefence of the preternaturall heate; fo thar ir Ran \ 
ia need ofa great {pace of time to actuate the vertucand faculty ofthe medicin, 
Wherefore, ifinthartime, when as the native heatehath much moved and ftir, 
up the faculty ofthe medicine,the ulcer be loofed or opened,and that emplaitte, cal 
away which was layd upon the part, and a frefh one layd in fteede thereof; the 
implanted in the pare is either diilipated by the contact of theayre, ox js Weakned 
and drivenin; and that endeavour which was made by the cmplaifter was to», 
purpofe, being as it were ftoppedin the midft of the courfe, Buta new emplaifie, 
being layd on, the heare of the part muft undergoe anew labour, foto ftirre UP the 
facutty to bring irtoad. 

For all medicines are, what they are, in faculty. Equall tothisis their erroy, 
Who bytoo oft renewing their emplaifters onthe fame day, doctoo powerfully 
clenfe; for fo they doc not onely take away the excrementitious humors, both Sarde, 
and Savies, but alfothcalimentary juice; to wit the Rod, Cambinm, and Gluzen, which 
are the next matter for procreating of laudible Heth. Wherefore itis not good to 
dreffe Vicers fo often in one day, and to loofe them toapply new 
prievous fymprome(as paine Jforce usto doe it,which requires to be allwaged 
and muittigated by the often changing and renewing of Anodyne medicines, 


Cine. 


Cuwap. XII, 


How tobinde up Vicers. 


274 Or the binding up of Vicers, you muft alwayes beginne your bandage x 
Nets, the Vicer. Now the Rowler muft be fo large that it may not oncly co. 


that ic may only preffe out the excrementitious humors. For fethe ulcer wil become 
dry,and confequently more acere to healing, asit is obferved by Hippocrates. Let this 
be che meaiure of your binding, that it be neither too ftraite for hence would enfic 
paine and defluxion; nor too laxe,for fuch is ofno ule. You may moylten your bou!- 
{ters and Kowlers in oxycrate orin red and aftringent wine, e{pecially in Summer; 
when you have bound it up the part mutt be Kept quiet. For according to Hzppocre- 
tes, thole who have an ulcer in the legge, ought neither to ftand, nor fit, but co lye 
on a bed, Wherefore when the egges are ulcerated the armes muft be exerciled, 
by handling, litting upandcatting downe of divers things. But onthe contrary ii 
the armcs be ulcerated the legees mult be exercifed with walking or friétions from 
above downeward:, if the patient cannotendure to walke.Sothe humors and 
which with more violeace and greater plenty runne downe to the part affe@cd,may 
be drawne backe and diverted. 


C Hap. 


Of the cure of particular uleersvand firft of thofe of the eyes. 


O1 that (in Galens opinion)the diverle indication in curing difeafes is draws" 
it mize from the condition of the part, to wit, the temper, complexion fice, figures 


+ 


ufe, dull or quicke fenfe; Therefore having breefcly handled the geacral 
cure beth of fimple and compound and implicice ulcers, I thinke it fir to treate ol 
them now as they are diftinguifhed by the parts beginning with thefe of the cys. 
Thefe according to Cz//fus, are fometimes caufed by puftules, or a fharpe defuxion 
which frets or eares in funder the coates thereof, orclfe by a ftroake, 


Lib ictsdowne thefedifterences of the uloers of the eyes; If (faith he) afimall, 
little aac hoilow ulcer be upon the horny coate,it isby the Greekes termed Botryor 
Calome, but it it be broader aad lefle dec pe, itus termed Caloma; about the circle of the rw ot 


Raine- 


L158 | 


Rainedow sc 
Thefe in | 
carpate' drysd au 

here! re Vin 
lfofrom b 


wine fhe} t 
ply ro the forhe 
Collyrium 
eve. ca 
folvatur Bu in 
cyc co any 
chercto, it Will 
of Plantaine; 12: 
gumsnc aa 
difyed, the 
Rv. farcocota 
An. 2B. 
mutt nore chat 
When the 
with the 
bani.am 
gine [isi collie 
ch {ts hava 
leatt chey METOC 
lowine remedy 
> 
But it che 
aleé, 
rhe {carrebe 
the fight wtlb 
oblerve, that t 
red, becaufeth 


mammulia‘y 
neither b 
head drye | an 
Mors, noricne 
The Vicermu 
granats boy le 
white Hel cbr 
reade in 

Galen ort O 
mior, Orciatt 
blowne with 


a 
ver andcomprenendthe Vice allainme nart: of 
Ji 
ACT) 
= 


{tirre UP the 


erroy, 
Powerfully 
Doth Sarde, 
iluten, Which 

£00d to 
iltcrs,unlefe 
allWaged 


LILO, 


ir bandage at 
oncly co- 
the adjacent 
moderation 
wil become 
ates. Let this 
vould enfue 
n your boul- 
in Summer; 
FIP 
it, burro lye 
exerciicd, 
contrary if 
(tions trom 
§ and 
iced, may 


fesis drawnt 
fice figures 
rhe pencral 
rto treate ol 
yf che eyes. 
pe dcefuxi0a 


he) afmall, 
Botryor; 
ot che Jrw ef 
Raine- 


Of Vicers, Fiflulas, and Hemorrhotdes . 


L153 

Rainedow, 1S called Argenon. Ifit be crufty and fordid, itis termed Epscauma, 
anima, 


Thefe in nerail require the fame cure as the former, thatis,co bee mundihed, The cure, 
and cicatrizedsbut the part affeéted indicates morc gen' le medicines- 
Wherefore having purged the patient and taken fome blood both from his arme, 
45 alfofrom his veines and temporal Arteries, and bathed him ifit be needfull; to 
divert ciie defiuxion you (hall to his fhoulders apply cupping glafles with {carrificati- 
on; or clic bread newly ds awne out of the oven,and (prinkled with aqua vite or fome 

nod wine hall be applyed to the originall ofthe fpinall marrow, But you fhallap= 
ply t0 the forehead and temples aa aftringent emplarfter made of emplafiram contra 
Comitiffe, ana Reficcatevum rubram mixed together, But this enfuing 

bed by Ce//us and approved by Holerius, fhalibe dropped into the 

ers ufte lote,an, 3}. ex aqus finzatur collyrium fign ore ovi dif. 
lvarar. Buc inthe meane ime you moult diligently obferve whether you put the A 
wyetoany great paine. Wherefore now and thenby putting anodyne medicines Viedrsef the 
it willbe good to comforcit. Alfoyou may collyria of the decogion eyes, 
of Plantaine, f2nugrecke, wormewood, with alittle quanuty of Sugar Candy tate, 
myrrhe ane vitriol! diffelved thereine VVhen the ulcer i, mua- 
‘ifyed,the iollowing farcoticke will be of good ufte 

gacamil) 40. 20, mucilacins fanugract quant ut inde fiat colbyrtam., But you 
muft nore chat for moyit Vicers, powders are more convenientthan Colyrza. 

Whenthe ulcer is playned or filled withits proper fiefh, it may bee cicatrized 
withthe following collyrimms, Re. dmsie wt decet praparata, ctrufe antimony, | 
bani an farcocolla, fanguints Draconis, aloes ,opij, an. DS. cum aqua planta 
ginis fist collyramm, Or the powder onely may bs conveniently ftrewed thereon. 

Celfws hach noted chat the cicatrizing of rhe eyes is incident to two dangers, that is, £#7:°4-5 
leaft they he too hollow, or too thick. too hollow,they mutt be filled bythe fol- 
lowing remedy, R. Papaverié lachrime, 36, fagapent, opopanacn, an. 3%. arugins 3}, 
cummins piperis Bij. love Cy cerufejan, 318, cum aqua pluvials fiat collirimmm, Ccaxxes. 

Bur if che {cars be thicke or groffe, the following remedy will extenuate chem, Ky cz- 

cadmbe clot, Croce, papauerts lachryma,gum. avabici am, 
5) piverisalbi, burt, a2, aris combuft, 351i). cum aqua pluvialt fist colyrinm, Dut 
it che {carre be upon the ce7mes OF horny coate, fothat it cover the pupils or fight, are whiteand 


the fizht will be intercepted by the denfencfle ofthe membrane. Here you muti alfo 
obferve, that the {carres that ave on the Cornea are W 


hite,ourthefe on the Adsata arc 
red, becaufe this is {pred over with more little veines than that. 


XIII. 


Of the Ozxna ana Vleers of the Nofé. 
Oxenais a decpe and ftinking Vicer in che infide of the nofe, fending 
iorth many crufty and ftinking excrements, Ce(fus faith that fuch ulcers 
Ae 


C20 {carfely be healed. Itis cauled (as Galen faith) by the diftillauion OF comp, mcd. 
acride and putride humors fromthe head into che nofethrills about the 


mammillary procefles. For the cure, the paticat muft eate fparingly, and his meate Thecure, 

mu(t neither be fharpe nor frong; the humor being prepared muft ve purged; the 

head dryed and ftrengthened, that fo it may meither admit the excrementicious hu- 

mors, nor fend chem downe; then muft we coiic Co the part affected with the Vicer. 

The Vicer muft be dryed with a repelling medicine, fuchas 15 the juice of Pome- 

granats boyled to the halte inabrafle veflell; the powder of Creffes, 

white Hellebore, the juyce of Crefles with Alume and other things waich You may 

reade in Celfus. | 
Galenour of Archigenes wilhes, to draw up ‘tothe nofethrilisthe juyce OF 

Mint, orthatthe Calamint it {elfe being dryed, and made powder may pee 

blowne with aquilliacothe nole, Othersuic this following powder. 79. 


IB 
A299 #2 
‘ 
Bh 4 
* | 
~ 
Wa 
nD, rw » 4 
{ 
“a 


mint er.i ij. the will be 


Lib, to. jofiat pulvis fubtili/simus. Manar dus writes that the Vrine of an Afe,though a nay frhe to 2th w 
medicine, is an excellent remedy inthis affe@. But if the inveterate and contuma. = jpg taken away ,( 

cious evi!l doe not yeeld to thefe remedies,then you muft have recourfe to Coprofe oof he tongue 
Verdigreece,{a/ ammeniacum,and Alume with Vinegar. It divers times hap er thofe whicn | 


PMs tha y 
the Vicer {preading on, comes to take hold of the Offa ethmoides or five-like whether of che 
Aninjetion im which cafe you mvft not forcibly plucke them our; but referre the whole che Vicer 10 that } 
when sme, neffe to naturc,and expect when they fhall come away of themfelves, making in th. a file. 
cometothe meane while injections into the nofethrils of aqua vite, wherein Cephalicke poudere 
have becne fleeped for the greater drying. 
Ata. 
HAPs X , 
| ers 
Of the Vleers of the mouth Le 
F chis tribeare the Aphthe, Vicers familliar to little children according Sy 
4 me a , 3 to Hippocrates. They oft times beginne at the gums, and by the palate of 


cap,' le 


the mouthereepe intothe svala, throtle,and over all the Mouth, as 

Cel/us faith. Galen makestwo kinds of Aphtha’s,che one of eafie cure, luch 

as (iat which ufually troubles children by reafon of the acrimony of the nur{es milke. 

the other is maligne by reafon cf an affiuxe ofanevillhymor (that is, venenate aod 
maligne) into the mouth, 

The cure. For the cure,it hall be good to abfaine from allacride things,and if it be a fucking 
child, it will not be amifle totemper the nurfes milke with refrigerating meares. 
bathing the whole body, and fomenting the dugges with warme water; for all the 
members in children are moit tender, and as it were mucous, and their mouths are 
unaccuftomed to meates and drinkes, For topicke medicines, you muft make choile 
of {uch which may quickely and readily worke the effet, for heerethe consition of 
the affected part is fuch that they cannot long remaine and adheere thereto. There. 
forcif the Vicer be maligne, it muft be lightly touched with aqma fortis which hath 
beene uled in feparating mettalls and which befides is tempered with fixe parts of 
common water. You may forthe fame purpole ufe the oylesof Vitrioll, Sulphur, 
Antimony, Mercury water andthe like. 


Aetins wilhes you to couch ane correét {uch Vicers with alocke of wool! di 


* 


fe 


pped 
in icalding oyle, and fo fattened to theendofa probe, untill they waxe white and 
become imooth or plaine, For fv their eating and {preading force will at length be 
bridled,and laudible ficth grow up in place of that which is eaten. After fuch bur- 
ning it will be good to wath the mouth with the following gargarifme, which alo 

A gargarifine Of its felfe alone will ferve eo cure Aphtha’s,which are not maligae. 
the. bor detintecré p.}. plantag. ceterach, pilofelle,agrimonis, an, M. j. frat decactio aa 
th. qua diffolve mellis rofatt 3}, diamoron, . fiat gargarifma. You may allo make 
4b. 6.meth,’ Other gargles, of Pomegranate pills, Balaufties, Sumach, Berberies, red rofes being 
boyledyand diffolving in the ftrayned liquor Diamores and Diawucum with alittle 
Mase Alume. For Galen writes, that fimple Vicers of the mouth are healed with things 
which dry with modcration; now 20d Dianscum are fiich. But otuers 
be peo A ftand in neede of {trong medicines, with fuch like, If the palare be feazed upon, we 
dried, ulethe more diligence and care; for thereis danger, leaft being the partis hot 
and moyft, the bone which lycs under which is rare and humide, may bee corrupted 
way, and the voyceor fpecch be fpoyled. ifthe Vicerbe 


by the contagion and falia 
pockic,omitting the common temedyes of Vicers, you {pcedily betake your 
»tO Wit, Quick-filver. 


felfe tothe proper artidote of that difeate 
Fiftulous Vicers often take hold on the Gummes, whence the roote of the ncx’ 


Paes tooth becomes rotten, and fo farre that the acrimonie of the Sanies oft times makes 
WO, Ce 


rs its ielfe 2 paflage forth on the outfide under the chinnes which thing puts many 10 
atalleconceite of the fcrophuleor Kings evill, and confequently of an uncurable dl 
642.136 ) 


feale. Infuchacafe Aétims, and Ce//ws countfellis, to take out the rotren tooth for 
rhe 


braine Goth chat 
For the cure, tf 
the Vicer,and it 
This is the form«< 
(7 car 
an Errhine. /we 
naribus 
a5 Galen lets down 
er of The wi! 
eachday more fil: 
nius diflolved in 
abrament, 
ommnsa 
he hath healed 
of Iron made in:o 
comfiftence of He 
dropped in warm 
flow. Alfo the {c 
and ftrewed upon 
the matter conrait 
drawne out with a 
whereof this is ti 


| 


| according 
palate of 
nouth, as 

cure, luch 
rics milke, 
nenate and 


fucking 
meates, 
for all the 
nouths are 
rake choile 
mndition of 
to. There. 
thich hath 
xe parts of 
|, Sulphur, 


oll dipped 
white and 
length be 
bur- 
vhich alfo 


accoctio ad 
allo make 
oles being 
vith a little 
ith things 
But orbers 
mci upon, we 
‘partis hot 
corrupted 
he Vicerbe 
perake your 


»f the next 
mes makes 
s many 1nto 
Bicurable di- 

ooth ,for to 
| the 


0 


[ 18.1} Of Vicers, Fiftula's, and Hemorrboides. 479 
she Fiftwle will betaken away ,the Gum preffing and thrufting its felfe into the place 
she ro ath which was taken forth; and fothe caufe nourihhing the putretaction be- 
weaken away,( that is the tooth) the reft of the cure will be more eafy. The Vicers 
(rhe congue may be cured by the fame remedies by which the reft of the mouth ;. 
shoe which breede on the fide thereof endure very long,and you mult looke 
eetber or no there be not fome tharpe rooth over againitit, which will not futter 
rhe Vicer 10 that place to heale; which ifthere be, then muft you take it away with 


file. 


Crar. XVI 


Of the Wleers of the Eaves, 


Leers are bred in the auditory paflage both by ap external! caufe, as a 
ftroake ,or fall, asalfo by an internall,as an abf{ceffe there generated. They Their caulee 

. S 4 oft times flow with much matter, notthere generated, tor fuch Vicers 
oS) are ufually but {mall and befides in a {permaticke pare, but for that the 
braine GOth chat way disburden irs {elfe. 

For the cure, the cheefe regard mutt be had of the antecedent caufe, which feedes Thecure, 

the Vicer,and it muft be diverted by purging medicines, Matticatorics and Errhines. 
This is the forme ofa Mafticatory. 3). faphs/agr. pyreth.an. Dj. cimam. Amatticatory 
Mafticatorta, utatar mane cx ve/peri. Buc this isthe torme of 
ap Errhine. 4% /wect betomic. mercurtal mel:[[x,an =f. vini albi 3j,mifce frequenter An 
naribus stirabatar. For topicke medicines we muft {hunne all fatty and oyly things, 
35 Galen \ets downe im Method. medend:, wherc he findes fault witha certaine follow- 
crof Theffalws who by ufing Tetrapharmacam, made the Vicer in the care grow 
eachday more filthy than other, which Gaéem healed withthe Trochifces of #adre- 
difolved in Vinegar, whofe compofure is asfolloweth. balauft.3ij, alumin, The compos - 
Sjatrament, futor.3ij, arifiolech. gallarum,an-3)}, falis dtmmon.3) ot 
omnia melicrato cr fiant trochi/ci. Galew in the fame place witnefleth, that chitces. 
ie hath healed invererare Vicers and of two yeares old of this kind, withthe fcailes 
oflron made powder, and then boyled in fharpe Vinegar untill it acquired the 
comliftence of Honey: Moreover an Oxes gall aiffolved in firong Vinegar, and 
dropped in warme, amendsand dryesup the patrefa&tion wherewith thefe Vicers 
low. Alfo the {cailes of Iron made into powder boyled in fharpe Vinegar , dryed 
and ftrewed uponthem. But if the ftraimnefle of the paflages fhould aot give leave to 
‘he matter contained in the windings of the eares to pafie forth, then muft it bee 


Of the Pyss!- 
awncoutwithan Inftrument thereupon called a Pyew/cos, or matter-drawery ¢o, Boles 
The figure of Pyoulcos, or matter. drawer. 
CHAP. 


i Bt im 
ugha nafty 
cOntuma. 
~-Oprofe 
tha, 
AKC bon: 
CS. 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Ham 


orrboides. Ly 


Cuar, X VIL: 
Of the Vicers of the windpipe, weafon, flomacke ana Gutts. 


Hefe parts are ulcerated either by an excernallcaufe as an acride medi. 
TheCanfes, cine, or poyfon {wallowed downe; or by aninrernall caufe, as a Maligne 
| fretting humor which may equall the force of poyfon generated in th. 

body, and reftrained in thefe parts. Ifthe paine be encreafed by {wa), 
Signes. lowing or breathing, it is the figac ofan Vicer inthe weazon, or windepipe joynigs 
thereto; But the paine is moft fenfibly felt when asthat which is{wallowed js ¢, 
ther foure or acride, or the ayre breathed in,is more hot or cold than ordinary, By, 

ifthe cayfe of painc lye faftened inthe ftomacke, more greevous fympromes urge, 

for fornetimes they {wouod,have a naufeous difpofitionand vomiting, convulfiogs 
egnawings, and painealmoft intollerable,and the coldnefle of the extreame parts, ql 

which when prefent at once, few {cape unlefle fuchas are young, and have very 

{trong bodyes, The fame affe@ may befall the whole ftomacke, but becaufe both fo; 

the bitterneffe of paine, and greatneffe of danger, that Vcer is farre more greevoys 

i which takes hold of the mouth of the Ventricle, honoured by the Ancients with) tie 
name of the heart; therefore Phy fitions doe not makefo great areckoning of tha 
cap.S which happens in the lower part of the ftomacke, Now we know that the Guts are 
ulceratedif Pws, or much purulent matter come forth by ftoole; if blood come thar 

way with much griping; for by the Pas ftaying and as it were gathered together jy 

that place,there isas it were acertaine continuall Tenefmus,or delireto goc to Loole, 
Now all fuch Vicers are cured by meates and drinkes, rather than by medicines, ac. 

Libeacte ss cording to Galen, Therefore you muft make choyfe of allfuch meates and drinkes 
Methods are gentie,and have a lenitive faculty, fhunning acride things; for Tatia, Lytharge, 
Ceruic, Verdigreece and the like, haveno placc heere, as they have in other Vicers, 

But when as the Vicer {hall be in the Gullet or Weazon, you muft have a care that 
fuch things may have fome vifcidity or toughneffe, and be {wallowed by little, and 
little, and at diverfetimes, otherwife they will not much availe, becaufe they cannot 
make any ftay, in thefe commune wayes of breath and meat; therefore they prefent- 
Howto take ly flip Gowne and flow away; wherefore all {uch things fhall be ufed in forme of an 
Vicersofthe Egéegma,to de taken lying onthe backe, and {wallowed downe by little and litle, 
tuoatee = Opening the mufcles of the throate, leaft the medicine pailine downe fodainely and 
in great quantity,caufea cough,a thing exceeding hurtfull to thefe kinds of VIccrs. 

When they muft be clenfed, you fhall have crude honey, which hath a fingular fs: 

culty, aboveall other detergent things, inthefe kind of Vicers. But when they can 
conveniently {wallow,you fhall mixe Gumme Tragacanth diflolved in fome 
Whyacrive gentdecotion. In Vicers of the ftomacke all actidethings (as I have formerly 

fruondin Wifed) muftbe fhunned, as thofe which may canfe paine inflammation and yomutt, 
and belides hinder thedigeftion of the meate, Therefore letthem frequently ule 
ptifan, and fugered gellyes wherein Gumme Tragacanth,and bole Armenicke have 

beene put, the decoétion of Prunes, Dates, Figges, Raifons, Honey, Cowes milk: 

boyled with the yoalkes of egges, anda littlecommonhoney. When they acl 

be agglutinated, it will be convenient to make ufe of auftere, aftringent, and age! 

tinative things which want all acrimony, and ungratefull tafte, fuch as are Hypoee/'*, 
Pomegranate flowresand pills, serra figillata, (umach, acacia, a decoction of quince; 
the Lentiske wood,the tops of Vines, of brambles, myrtles,made in altringent wi"; 

unleffe there be feare ofinflammation. Their dtinke fhatfbe Hydrome/ water 

How powers Sugar, fyrupe of Violets and Jujubes. Honey mixed with other medicines is 2 
swcatetees fitting remedy for Wicers of the gutsand other partsmore remote from the {to 
kind of Vieers macke; for if you fhall ule aftringeat medicines alone of themfelves, they will fick 
to the ftomacke; neither will they carry their ftrength any further; but honcy 1%“ 
withthem, defides that itdiftribures them tothe reft of the body, and helpes te” 
forwards to the affe&ed parts; alfo clenfesthe Vicers themfelves, Here alfo 


The cure. 


milke may with good fuccefle be ufedin &ead of Goates or Cowes milke. The e 


@ 


of avulnerary poy 
hearbes and imple 
Burthe Vice 
the greater guts be 
fharpe to 
water, or wine wr 
sather healed by 
thefe things which 
a(cend ro the ima! 
yoleffe with the lo 


arc 
meates, 
acride hu 
otiome veffell, or 
comes to patie, 1 
cers of the Reines 
throughly mixed 
Neitberdoth the 
forth of the bladu 
membranous part 
fromthe Kidncy: 
Vrinall, it arleng 
when it is firft ma 
flowes from the b 
pafle that the Pus, 
taine caruncles, or 
in athicke Vrine 
therewith, they c 
Certaine bran-lik¢ 
ortroubled wich: 
For the cure; i 
the ule of mal 
the humors by w! 
made more fordidm 
mors being move 
fall downe upont 
mundifie thofe ki 
Re. Hordei int. 
SV}, flat decoctio 
Morning the qua 
lowing Trochife: 
marve, dortul, cya 
Piftach, 
47 fang, dra 
fingul; po 
arly Watcror G@ 
made 
sand are as 
bladder are eirhc 
[f they be ioth 
then prickes and 
Vlcer which is is 
Btther with the \ 
Thof 


= 
- 
‘ 

4 

| 

. 
2 

7 | 

= 

* 


ride medj. 
Maligne 
rated in the 
¢d by {wal. 
IPE jOydine 
Wed is 
Mary. Bur 
urge. 
Onvulfion: 
parts, all 
j have Ver 
bufe both for 
rc Lreevous 
Nts with) the 
ing of thar 
the Guts are 
bd come thar 
roecther jn 
o¢ to oole, 
dicines, ace 
and drinkes 
4, Lytharge, 
Vicers, 
eacare that 
y little, and 
e they cannot 
they prefent- 
forme of an 
le and little, 
odainely and 
ds of -VIcers. 
a fingular fa- 
em they can 
1fome aftrin- 
formerly ad- 
and vomute, 
queatly ule a 
nenicke have 
Cowes milke 
*nthey are to 
nt, and agglu- 
are Hypoct/is, 
Of Quinccs, 
tringent wine, 
of water with 
icines 1s a 
from the 
hey will ftic ke 
thoncy 
dhelpes them 
icre al{o Alles 


tilke. The 


0 f Ulers, Fiftula’s, and Hamorrboides. 48 


of gvulnerary petion is alfo commendadle, iffobee that it bee made of {uch 

bear bes and fimples, as by a certaine tacite familiarity have re{peé& to the parts affe- 

ae, Burthe Vicers of the Guts have this difference amongft themfelves, that if 

che greater guts be affe&ed, you may heale them with a Glyfter and inje Gtions,made 
«Jo harpe to correct the putrefaction; fuch as are thofe which are made of Barly pied ferdhs | 
garer,or wine wrh Butifthe {mall guts beulcerated, they muft bee 
eather healed by potions and other thingstaken at the mourh,forthat(as Galen faith) Lit.s.merbs 
chefe things which are put up inte the body by the Fundament, doe not commonly 

s{(cend to the {mall or flender guts, but fuch as are takenatthe mouth cannot come 

yoleffe with the lofie of their faculty, fo farreas the great guts. 


CuarpX VILLI. 
Of the Vicers of the Kedneyes ana Bladder. 


cers are cauledin the Kidnyes and Bladder, either by the ufe of acride 
Ny f meates, drinkes, or medicines,as Cantharzaes, or elle by the collection of an 


Caufes. 


oy, actide humor dred in that place, fent or talne thither; or elfe by the rupture 
ot ome or anabiceffe broken and degenerated into an Vicer,as ic fometimes 
comestopaffe, They are difcerned by their fite,for the paine and heavineile of V1- 
cers of the Reinescomes tothe Loynes,and the Pus or matter is evacuated well and 
throughly mixed with the Vrine. 

Neitherdoth the Pw which flowes from the reines ftinke fo ill,as that whichis caft i Ajor.9x 
forth of the blader;the reafon is, for that the bladder being a bloodleffe, flethiefle & 
membranous part,hath not fuch power to refift putrefation, That pas which flowes KA 6. 
fromthe Kidneyes never flowes without water; and although by long keeping in an Pape 

Vrinall, it ae length fublides or falls to the bottome, and may be feene feparated;yer 
when it is firft made,you may {ce it perfectly mixed with the Vrine; but that Pas wed (4 4) 
flowes from the: bladder is oft times made alone withoutVrine;& ulually it comes to 
paflethat the Pas, or matter which flowes from the ulcerated Kidnyes, hath in it cer- 
raine caruncles, or as it were haires, according tothe rule of Hippocrates: Thofewho 
inathicke Vrine have littlecaruncles, and as it werehaires come forth together 
therewith, they come from their Kidnyes; but onthe contraric thofe who have 
certaine bran-like {cailes come fromthem in athicke Vrine, their bladder is {cabby 
ortroubled witha feabby Vicer. 

For the cures itis expedient that the belly be foluble either by nature or Art,and The cure. 
heule of mallifying Glyfters. And it is good to vomit fometimes,{o to draw backe 

the humors by whole confluxe intothe affected part the Vicer might bee fed and 
made more fordide and filthy. You muft beware of ftrong purgations, leaftthe hu- wry wemus 
mors being moved and too muchagitated, the matter fittonouriththe Vicer may *unne fron; 
fill downe upon the Kidnyesor bladder. The cnfuing potion is very effectual to 
mundifie thofe kind of Vicers, 

_ Hordei integri, AA. ij. contu/. 3%. rad. acetofe cr petrofel. 4%. Thingsto 
fat decoctio ad tb. j. incolatura diffolve mellis difpwm.3ij, Let him take every 
Morning the quantity of foure Ounces, Gordonius exceedingly commends the fol- 
lowing Trochifces. Rv. quator frig. maj, mundatorum, fem. papaverts alot, (em, 3 
malve, portul, cydon. baccarum myrti,trazacanib, gum, arab, nucam pincarum muna, 
Pifhach, sheyrrhixe mund: mucaginis fem .pfilg, amyga. dulc, hordei mana, an, 1}. bod. the Kidnyes 
“meni, (ang, myrrhe an. 38.cxcipiantur bydromelite, cy fingantnr backer 
brechifc} finguli ponderis 3ij. Lethimtake one thereof inthe morning diflolved in 

‘ly water or Goates milke. Galen bidsto mixe honcy and diureticke things with 4. Merhed, 
medicines made for the Vicers of the Reines and bladder, for that they gently move 
’ ‘ine, and are as vehicles to carry the medicinesto the part afleted, Vicers of the 

ladder are either in the bottome thereof, or atthe necke and urinary paflage, 

they be inthe bostome, the paineis almoft continuall, if in the necke, the paine signesco 
en prickes and is moft terrible when they make water and prefently after. The 
Vicer which isis the botrome fends forth certaine fcaly Or skinny excrements Co- is 
Bether With the Vrine; but that which is in the necke, caufes almoft a continual] v'cerated. 
Thofe whichare inthe bottome are for the moft part incurable, both 


Signess 


> 
* 
Pt 

% 

4 
- 
* 


Of Vicers, Fifhula sand Hamorrbides. Lis, 
lees; 


Why uleersin. reafon of the bloodlefle and nervous nature of theparr, as alfoforthat the y 


atdly 


bie, remaine inthe botrome of the biadder, which could not therefore paffe forth ta, 


ther withthe reft ofthe Vrine,for that for the paffing forth of the Vrine,the blade 


ladder 
are healed with the {2me medicines asthofe of the reines are; but thefe nor One| 


taken by the mouth but alfo injected by the urinary paflage. Thefe injeGions 
be of Gordonsas his Trochifces formerly prefcribed, being diflolved jp 
convenient liquor; but becaufe Vicers of the bladder caule greater and more tharpe 
paine shan thole of the Kidnyes, therefore the Chirurgion muft bee more ¢ licens 
in ufing Anodynes. For this purpote, [ have often by experience found, that the 
ovic of hen-bane made by expr<fhon gives certaine helpe. Hee thall doe the fame 
with Cataplafmes and liniments applyed to the parts about the Ped#ex and ql the 
lower belly and pernanm, asalfo by cafting in of Glifters, If that they ftinke, jr wil] 
not be amiffero make injection of a little dillolved in wine, plaintaine 
or tneuicer 


ctchebladder. Or rote water. For I have often ufed this remedy in fucha cafe with VCTY profperoye 
fucccfie. 


— 


or 
Of the ¥ lcers of the wombe, 


$Leers are bred in thewombe cither by the confluxe of an acride. o 
biting humor, fretting the coates thereof, orby a tumor 202inf 
coy nature Cegencrating into an Abfefie, or by a difficult and hard labour. 

3) they are knowne by paine at the perineum, and the effluxe of 

aud Sanies by the privity Allofthem inthe opinion of Avicen are either 
trad.zycap.5, Putride,whenasthe Sames breaking forth is of a ftinking {mell,and in colour refem- 
Signes, bles the water wherein fiefh hath beene wafhed; orelf{e fordide, when as they flow 
with many virulentand crude humors;or elfe are eating or fpreading Vlcers, when 

as they caft forth blacke Sasées, and have pulfation joyned with much paine. Belides 
they differ among {t themfclves in fite, for either they pofleffe the necke and are 
knewn by the fight, by putting ina /pecu/wmm;or elfe are in the bottome,and are mani- 
fefted by the condition ofthe more liquid and ferousexcrements, and the fite of rhe 
paine. They are cured with the fame remedies wherewith the ulcers of the mouth 
towit, with aqua fortis, the oyle of Vitrioll and antimony, and other things made 
{omewhat more milde, and corrected with that madcration, that the ulcerated parts 
; of the wombe may bee fafely touched with them ; it is requifice that the remedits 
which are applyed to the Vicerse@f the wombe, doe in'amoment that which iscx- 

pected of them, for they cannot long adhere or fticke in the wombe, as ncither ‘0 

wim the mouth, Ga/ex faith ehat very drying medicines are exceeding fit for the Vicers 
dryingthings Of the wombe,that fo the putretaction may lve hindred or reftrained, whereto this 


are good for 


Viele! Soe being hot and moyft is very fubject.befides that the whole body unto this part 
ss as unto a linke fends downe its excrements, Ifanulcer take holdof the bottome of 
the wonpbe, it {hall becleanfed and the part alfo ftrengthened by making this follow- 
a> injection. Re hordes integri p.ij.euajacs, Ireos.38.abfinth. plant. cemtanr, 
ufque,an.M.} fiat decott in aqua fabrorum ad tb. ij. in guibus diffolve mellis yofsti, © 
theborrome of de abfinthio, an.311). fiat imjed#io, For amending the ftinking fmell I have oftes 
ewombe, had certaine experience of this enfuing remedy. vini rub. th. j. amguent, acyptiscs 
Aninjetion paran. Thus the putrifaGion may be correéted and the pa inefil! malici- 
Ouinetic of he humor abated. Vicers when they are clenfed muft prefently be cica- 
trized;that may be done with Alume water, the water of plantaine wherein 4 litle 
vitrioll or Alume have beene diffolved. Laftly ,if remedies nothing availing,the V ‘ct 
Into aCancer it mult be drefled with anodynes and remedies proper for 
¢er, which y ou may finde fet downe inthe propertreatife of Cancers. The cure 0! 
Vicers of the fundament was to bee joyned to the cure of thefe of rhe wombe; 
i have thoughr eood toreferre it tothe treatife of Fiftala’s, as 1 doe the cure of 

of the vrinary pailage to the Treatife of the Lwes weneres, 
| 4 C nArs 


The caufes, 


The cure. 


Cer is 


Varix 
branc! 


= Led at 
Many | 


onott! 


a 
% 


principally the thig! 


tor arvices often pro 
grofle meates, OF 
child, are common!) 
{upprefied menitrua 
of the bocly, leaping 
heavy burden, torts 
the largenctic 

Irisbeftnottom 
istobe feared archt 
may be imminent 
cion. 

When as many 
with congeaicd and ¢ 
compreffion. Suchi 
ect,and thenthe blo 
and downewards 
patients, whom | ha 
mediciues. A 
which place comm<é 
tercept aVarix dow 
wakesthe cure fara 
lets, all which rhe € 

A Varix istherto 
humors mixcd toge 
that bythe too grea 
ocealioned by a hz 
cutting it. Letthe 
turcupon the lesge 
Wherein the excifio 
fight,and befides 
your fingers cut ith 
Veine frem the adj: 
you pricke the veit 
letit be opened wit 
veine, aad draw as 
the lower part of tl 
Veineas is conveni 
themfelves into th 
asthey fall away of 
Medicine be apply 
ftirre the wounda: 
asare fitto be don 


thebortomeoF anally chafed and troubled by the acrimony ofthe Vrine, fo that it can _ 
he cicatrized, For even atter m2kine of water fome reliques of the Vrine 2) 


Lt leers Fiftula s,and Ham 


the Vice, : 

forth top. Of the Varices and their cure by cating, 

the | 

the bladder Verix isthe dilatation ofa Veine, fome whiles of one and that a fimple 

© Not oncly hy branch, othertwhiles of many, Every Varéx is either fteaight or croo- What2 Kari 
eCions may k LNA ked, and as it were infolded inte certaine windings within its felfe, rhe differences 
‘ed in fume Many patts of the bedy are fubjectto Yarices, as the cemples,the regi- 


MOre Iharpe 
diligen 
4, that the 
the fame 
and all the 
inke, it wil] 
plaintaine 
Profperoye 


acride, or 
ag 
lard labour; 

etliuxe ot 
are either 
lour refem- 
isthey flow 
icers, when 
aine. Belides 
Cke and are 
nd are mani- 
he fice of the 
f the mouth 
hiags made 
‘erated parts 
he remedics 
which is ex- 
is neither to 
mr the Vicers 

wherero this 
Minto this part 
botrome of 
this follow- 
cenmtanr, ubri- 
igs gofati 
I have often 
ent, aoyptiacs 
nefull malict- 
ntly be cica- 
ercin a Jittic 
ing,the Vicer 
per for a 
The cure of 
-wombe; Dut 
cure of rheie 


=~ onofthe belly under the Navill, thetefticles, wombe, fundament, but 

incipally the thighes and legges. The matter of them is uiually melancholy blood, 
for Varices often grow ih men of amalancholy temper, and which ufually feed on 
ofle meates, or fuch as breed grofieand melancholy humors. Alfo women with 
child, are commonly troubled with them, by reafon of the heaping together of their 
fypprefied menitruall evacuation. The precedent caules arcavehement concufion 
ofthe body, leaping running, a painefull journey en footc, a fall,the carrying of a 
heavy burden, torture or Racking, This kind of difeafe gives manifeft fignes there- 
the largeneffe thickneffe, {welling and colour of the Veines, 

Iris belt not to meddle with fych as are inveterate;for of fuch being cured there 
istobe feared a reAluxe of the melancholy blood tothe noble parts, whence there _ 
may beiimmuinent danger of maligne Vicers, a Cancer, Madneffe or {uffoca- 
tion. 

When as many Varzeces and diverfly implicite are in the legges, they efteniwell 
with congealed and dryed blood, and caufe paine whictiis increafed by 'coingand 
comprefion. Such like Varices are to be opened by dividing the veine with a Lan- 
cct,and then the blood muft be prefled our, and evacuated by prefling it upwards 
anddownewards ; which I have oft times done, and that with happy fuccefie tothe 
patients, whom I have made ro reft for fome few dayes,and have applyed convenient 
mediciues. A arix is often cut inthe infide of the legge alittle below the knee, in 
which place commonly the originall thereof is feene. He which goes about toin- 
tercept aVarix downewards from the firft originalland as it were fountaine chereof, 
wakesthe cure far more difhcult. For hence it is divided as it were into many rive- 
lets, all which the Chirurgion is forced to follow. 

A Varix istherfore cut or taken away fotointercept the pafflage of the blood and gor what in” 
humors mixed together therewith, flowing to an Vicer feated beneath; orelfe ac 
that by the too great quanuti¢ of blood, the veffell fhould be broken, and death bee cur, 
occalioned by a hamorrhagie proceeding from thence. Now this is the manner of 
curting it, Let the patient lye wpon his backe ona beneh or table, then make aliga- ,,,,,, espn 
tureupon the legge in two places the diftance offome foure fingers each from other, 82.id.6. 
Wherein the excifton mav be made, for fo the Veine will iwellup and come more in oe aa * 
ught,and befides you may alfo marke it withinke, then taking the skin up betweene 
Jour hngers cut it longwayes according as you have marked it, thenfreethe bared 
veine frem the adjacent bodies; and put thereunder abluar pointed needle (Icaft 
you pricke the veine) thred witha {trong double thred, and fo binde it falt ; and then 
letit be opened with a Lancet, inthe middle under the Ligature juftas you opena 
veine, aad draw as muchtherehence as fhall be fir, Then ftraight make a Ligature in 
te lower part of the forementioned Veine, and then cut away as much of the fayd 

“int as isconvenient betweene the Ligatures, and {0 let the ends thereof withdraw 
themfelves into the ficfh above and below; let thefe ligatures alone uatill fuch time 
asthey fall away of themfelves. The operation being performed, Ict an aftringenc 
Medicine be applyed tothe wound and the neighbouring parts; neither mut you 

the wound any more for the fpace of threedayes: Then doe al! other things 
sate hitto be done to other fuch afieds. 


he matter, 


Signes, 


T hecutting 
of 


Tt a Cr ar: 


* 

| 4 

Be 

( | 
| 
| | 


“Ba 


Fiflus 


WhataCals 


The diff-ren. 
cos Of Filtusz 


The fignes. 


[cers Fiftula's and Hamorrbides. Lin, 


Cuarp. X XI, 
Of Fiftula's. 


Ky Fiftula isa finuous, white, narrow, callousand not feldome unpereg;, 
vable Vicer, It tooke its denomination trom the fimilitude of a reegeg 
(Fiftula) that isa pipe, like whofe hollownesit ise A Fiflula is breg in 
fandry parts of the body, and commonly followes upon Abtceffes 
Vicers nor well cured. 

A callous isa certaine fiefhy fub fiance. white, folid, or denfe and hard , dry ang 
without paine,generated by heaping up of dryed exerementitious plilegmme, or eff, 
aduft melancholy,cncompaffing the cirevite ofthe Vicer,and fubftiruting its felfe ip. 
to the place of Javdible fleth. 1 be Sims or cavity of a Filtula is fometimes dry, ang 
otherwhile drops with continuall moitture: lomenmes the dropping of the Matter 
fodainly ceafes,and the orifice thereof is fhut up, that fo it may deceive both the 
Chirurgion and the Patient witha falfe fhew of an abfolute cure ; for within awhile 
after it wi'l open againe and run as formerly it did, Some Filtula’s are bred by the 
corruption of abone, others of ancrye, others of membranes, and others of other 
parts of the body. Some run ftraight ia, others and that the greater part, have typ 
nings and wind 1ogs : {ome have one, others have more orifices and Windings . 
fome are at the Joynts, others penetrate into fome capacity of the body, as into 
the cheft,belly guts,womab, bladder ; fome are eafily, others dithcultly cured, ang 
fome wholly uncurable, Thereare divers lignes of Fiftula’s according to the varie. 
ty of the parts they pofleffe ; for if that which you rouch with the end of your probe 
make refiftance,and refound, then you may know that it is come to the bone: and 


or more orifi 
fearch or fine 
ome one oft: 
may learne 
king 
cifions wich 
ries for pai! 
or generate 
cogether, uni 
body on it 
the blood out 
ring of the ag 
Fiftula,you 
worke the 
rhe cumor Of 
Then you mu 
fed like oche! 
of a Fiitula, 
whole forth 
Which I ob! 
tiacum 
prefently by 
Fiftula’s whi 
medied with 
corrupt 
or deeper 


| then ifthe end of the probe flip up and downe as ona {mooth aad polite {uperticies, Clary mey 
; it isa igne that the bone is yet found; but if it ftop and {tay in any place as ina even CO the | 
1 rough way, then know that the bone is eaten, rough and perifhed ; {omer mes the way with 27 
I The fignethat hone lies bare,and then you neede not vie the probe, Befides alfo it is a figne thar wholly take! 
a bare fromthe the bone is affe@ted, if there bea purulent efflux of an un@uous or oily matter, aor of the Cubi 
ae much uplike that marrow wherewith the bone is nourifhed. For every excrement Fiuckle bon 
whichis ca {hewesthe condition of the neurifhment of the parr whence it is fent; ina Fifula mortified, 
i” forth: which penetrates to a Nerve, the patient is troubled with a pricking paine,c{pecially you fhall chit 
i when you come to fearch it with aprobe, efpecially if the matter which flowes if you leave 
| ee downe be moreacrid, Ofttimesifit becold,the member is fiupified the motion even to the | 
beiag weakned ; befides alfothe matter which tiowes from thence is more Nerves, w 
if tle, and fomewhat like untothat which flowes from the bones, yernot oily nor mouch,than t 
i fat, but fanious and vifcous refembling the condition of the alimentary humor of uled,when b 
the Nerves. The fame ulually appeares and happens in Fittula’s which penetrate on ifthe dif 
: tothe Tendons and thofe membranes which involve the mufcles. Ifthe Fiflulabee not fer upon 
within the flefh,the matter flowing thence is more thicke and plenriful], {mooth, mMcanes poli: 
white and ¢quall, Ifit defcend into the Veines or Arteries, the fame happen asin done if he p! 
thofe ofthe Nerves; but that there is no fuch great paine in fearching withyour artificiall dic 
probe, nor no offence or impediment in the ufe ef any member: yet if the matter ot Nerated int 
the Fiftulous Vicer be fo acrid,as that it corrodethe veflells, blood will flowferh; § Certaine tim 
and thatmere thicke if itbe from a veine,but moge fubtle and with {ome murmuring meane f pac 
Old Fiftula’s if from an Artery.Old Fiftula’s and fuch as have run for many yeares, if {uddainly ‘s hitting int 
if cloles prove doe it with< 


tome fhut up,cauic death,efpecially inan ancient and weake body, 


Cuap. XXII, 
Of the cure of Fiftula’s, 


How to finde 

iene 3 y Or the cure;in the firft place it wil be expedient to {earch the Fiftula;& that 
Vite Fin Rees cither with awaxe fize,a probe of lead, gold or filver,to find out the dept 
i, and windings or corners thereof, Butif the Fiftula be hollowed with 


- 
4 : 
4 ; 
4 
lous us. 
| las. 
. 
= 
> 


Of Ukers, Fiftula's, and Hemorrhoides. 485 
or more orifices, and thofecuniculous, fo that you cannot poffibly and certainly 

fearch or finde chem all out with your probe; then mutt you caft an injeétion into 

one oftkefe holes, and fo obferve the places where it comes forth, for fv you 

may learne how many sand how deepe or fuperficiary cavities there be ; chen by ma. 

king incifions you mutt lay openand cut awaythecallous parts. You mutt make ine 

with an incifion kniteorrazour, or elfeapply auall or potential caute- 

ries ; for ature cannot unlefle the Callous fubftance bee firft taken away, reftore 

or generate fieth or agglutinate the diftant bodies. For hard things cannot grow 

rogether, uniefle by the interpofition of glue, fuch as is laudible blood; bura callous 

body on all fides pofie fling the furtace of the ulcerated fleth, hinders the fowingef - 

the blood out of the capillary veines forthe reftoring of the loft fubftance and uni- wi 
ting of the disjoyned parts. If you at any time make caufticke injections into the ina 


Lin, 


dome 
ude ofa r 
riftula Is bred in 
Or 


od hard, dry and 
or el{e 


its felfein. Fiftulayou muft prefently ftep the orificethereof, chat fo they may have time to 
metimes dry, and worke the effect,for which they are istenged. Which thing we may conjecture by 
ing of the matter rhetumor of the part, the digefture of the flowing matter, and its lefler quantity, 
leceive both th. Then you mutt haften the falling away of the Eichar,and then the Vicer muti be dref- 


fed lie other Vicers. Butoft tamesthe Callows which pofleffes the finuous cavity 
of a Fiftula,overcome by the power of acrid and efcharoticke medicines comes Collars ; 
whole forth, and falls out likea pipe, and fo leaves a pure Vicerunderneathit, © 
Which I obferved in a certaine Gentleman, when I had wafhed with flronge“#gyp- 
siacum divers times a Fiftulous Vicer io his thigh fhot through with a bullet; thea 


or Within awhile 
S are bred by the 
d others of other 
cr Part, have ture 
Ss and windings 


body, as intg prefently by putting inmy Balfame formerly defcribed, be grew well ina thort time. 
Fiftula’s which are neare great vellelis, Nerves or principall intrailes, mult not bee 
ding tothe varie, medied with,unleffe with great caution. When a Fiftula proceeds by the fauleof a Fifu'a 


corrupt bone, itis tobe canfidered whether that fault in your bone be {uperficiary, ceding trom 
or deeper in,or whether it is wholly rotten and perifhed.For ifthe default befuperfi- bone, | 
ciary itmay eafily be takenaway with adefquammatory Trepan ; bu if it penctrate 
even tothe marrow, it muft be taken forth withcutting mullets, firft having made 
waywith aTerebeliam, But if thebonebe quite rotten and perifhed, it muft bee 
wholly taken away ,which may be fitly done, inthe joyntsefthe fingers, the radius 
of the Cubite and Legge ; but nofuch thing may be attempted in the focket of the 
Huckle bone, the head ofthe Thigh bone,or any of the Rack bones when they are 
mortified, neither in thofe Fiftula’s, which are of their owne nature uncurable ; but 
you hall thinke yeu have difcharged your duty and dore fufficiently for the Patient, 
if you leave it with a prognofticke. Of this nature are Fiftula's which penetrate Tpscureof 
evento the bowells, which come into the parts orefpread with large vellelis or 14's cay be 
Nerves, which bappea to effeminate and tender perfons, who had rather aye by 
much,than to fuffer che paine andtormentof the operation, Like caution multbce nor, ’ 
uled, when by the cutting ofa Fiftula there is feare of greater danger, as of convulfi- 
on ifthe difeafe be ina nervous part. In thefe andthe like cafes the Chirurgion thall 4 , .ttiative 
hot {er uponthe perfe& care of the difeafe,but fhall thinke it betterto preventby all mothe Bis 
mcanes poflible that the difeafe by freth fupplies become no worfe, which may bee 
done if he prevent the falling downe of any new dcfluxion into the part; ifby an 
attificialldiet hee havea care that excrementitious humors be not too plentifully ge- 
nerated inthe body ; or fo order it,that being generated they may be evacuated at 
certaine times, or elfe diverted from the more noble to the bafe parts, But inthe 
Meane {pace it fhall be requifite to waift the faulty ficth which growes up more than 
‘Shitting in the Vicer,and toclenfethe fordes or filth, with medicines,which may 

withour biting oracrimony and putrefaction. 


Cuarv XXII, , 
Of the Piftula’s in the Fundament. 


Iftula’s in the Fundament are bredof the fame caufesas otber kinds of Thecants, 
Fiftula’s are; to wit,ofa wound or ab{ceffe not well cured, or of a hamor- 
thoide which is {uppurated.Such as are occult, may we knowne by signes. 


SS ping downe of the /amiows and purulent humor by the Fundament aa 


‘ad of your probe 
to the bone; and 
luperticies, 
any place as ina 
; fomet:mes the 
it iS @ figne that 
matter, aor 
very excrement 
Bient; ina Fiftula 
Paine, clpeciailly 
r which Howes 
ified the motion 
nce is more 

yernot oily nor 
hentary humor of 
which penetrate 
If the Fiftula bee 
enrifull, {moorh, 
ume happen asin 
rching with your 
t if the matter of 
d will flow ferth; 
murnouring 
res, if fuddainly 


be Fiftula;& that 
Bind out the depth 


lowed with two 
of 


al 
| 
. 
= 
- 
> 
Ww 
ill 


Symptomes. 


The art of 
binding aad 
cutting a Bie 
ftula et the 
S aurdainent, 


the paine of theadjacentparts. But fuchasare manifeft by the helpe of your Probe 
you may finde whither they goe and how farreithey reach, For this Purpofe the 
Chirurgion fhall puthis fingerinto the Fundament of the patient, and then pyr, 


Leaden probe into the orifice ofthe Fiftula, whichif it come tothe finger wit! 
interpolition of any mediam, it isa figne it penetrats into the capacity of the G 
Belides alfe then there flowes not onely by the fundament but allo by the oy 
whichthe maligne humor hath opened by its acrimony, much matter, {omewh; 


andrvaning into many turnings and windings, if the probe doc not {enter farre jp 
and yetnotwithftanding more matter lowes thercheace than realon requires {hoy}, 
proceedc from fofmall an Vicer, 


You may inthe orifices of all Fiftula’s,perceive a certaine callous wart, whicl ph. 


common Chirurgionstcarme a Hens arfe. Many fymptomes accompany Fifty!, 


Wirt} 
Ould 


which are in the Fundament,as a Tene/mus, flrangury & falling downe of the Funds, 


ment. Ifthe Fuftula muft becured by manuall operation, let the patient lye yp. 
oa his backe,that lifting up hislegges, his thighs may prefi¢ his belly , then ler the 
Chirurgion,having his naile pared, put his finger befmeared with fome oyntmen: 
intothe patients Fundament;then let him thruft in at the orifice of the Fiftula a thick 
Leaden needle drawing after ita thread confifting of thread and horie haires woyey 
together, andchen with his finger taking hold thereof and fomewhat crovking jt 
draw it forth acthe Fundament,together withthe end of the thread. Then let him 
knit the wo ends of the thread with a draw or loofe knot, that fo hee may ftrairey 
them at his pleafure. But before you bind them you thai} draw the thread fome. 
what roughly towards you as though you meant to faw the fleth therein conteined. 
that you may by this meanescutthe Fiftula without any feare of an Hemorrhagye. 
or flux of blood. 

{rt fometimes happens tlrat fuch Filtula’s penetiate net into the Gut ; {0 chat the 
finger by incerpofition of fome callous body cannot meete withthe needle or probe, 
then itis convenient to putin a hollow iron or filver probe fo through the cayi- 
ty thereof to thruft a fharp pointed needle,and that by pricking and cutting may de- 
ftroy the cafous;which thing you cannot performe with the formerly defcribed \ca. 
dep probe,which hath a blunt point, unleffe with great paine. 


7 he defcription of a hollow Silver probe to be ufed with a needs 
as alfoa Leaden probe, 


. 


= 


A. Shewes the Needle. 
B. bellow probe. 
C. The ncedle with the probe. 


D. The Leaden needle drawing athread after it. 

The Callus being waifted the Fiftula be bound as wee formerly mentioned 
That whichis fuper ficiary needs no binding ,oncly it muft be cur witha croked /-4 
pram, and the Callus being confumed, the reft of the cure muftbee performed ait 

the 


Of Vicers,Fiftula's,and Hremorrbades. 


lout 
ur. 
lee 


les 


fanious, and ofrtimes alfo breeding Wormes. Fiftulas may be judged cunicu 


blood to orca 
fych as do no! 
tioners are wil 
and ferous hu 
ced DY the al 
eife they exp 
dingfrom 
whence they | 
tion astle ™ 
This affe& 
extinguilheet 
the ftrength 
moneth, fom 
{cefle which ¢ 
dies, doe oft 
morrhoides t 
nor to be fta\ 
melancholy, | 
caule, they t 
the veflelis cl 
the native he. 
they flow imi 
wherefore w 
of hares doy 
Cons, an 
they are {tree 
Onion roalt 
lwolne place 
lene for inter 
lcaches, or a 
tleor Arkear 
congealed b! 
fundament a 
Crucily affli¢ 
ter app! rot 
3}. Lishere. 
™yrrhecroct 
dendo vitellu 
ding to the p 


. 
* 
ner 
tu dy remaine 
ill cauicare: 
4 
contracts a 
5 
Miia)... 
So 
iy 
24 


this PUrpofe the 
and then pura 
Withow 
icity Of the Gu, 
lo by the Orifice 
fomewhije. 
iged 
pt coter farre in, 
‘requires 


Wall, Which che 
mMpany 
ne of the Funda. 
lye fo yp. 
then let the 
lome OyNtmenr 
i¢ Piltula a thict. 
lc haires Woven 
Vhat crooking jr 
then Jet him 
ice may ftrairep 
ue thread fome. 
eTein Conteip< 
Ham otrhagye. 


Gut 5 {0 that the 
needle or probe, 
rough the cayj- 
cutting may de- 
y deferibed Ica. 


le 


erly mentioned 
ba croked /ca* 
per formed afte’ 
the 


OF Ulcers, Fiftula's, and Hemorrboides. 
pe annie? ofother Vicers. But you muft nore, that if any parcell of the Callous 
cemaine untoucht by the medicine or inftrument, the Filtula reviving againe 
gillcanfea relapie. 


Cuap. XXIII, 


Of Hamorrbeides. 


eat Amorrhoides.as the word is ufually taken, are eumors at the extremities 


NS) ¢ of the veines encompaffing the Fundament, caufed by the defluxion of an are, : 


humor commonly melancholicke,and reprefenting acertaine kind of Parz- 
ws, Some of thefe run at an hole being opened, which tometimesin {pace of time Theirditte. 
contracts a Callus ; othersoncly {well, and forth nomoifture; fome are ences, 
manifelt; others lye onely hidde within. Thole which rune, com- 
monly caft forth blood mixed with yellowith ferous mvifture, which ftimulatesthe 
blood to breake forth, and by its acrimony opens the mouthes of the veines. But 
fychasdo not run,are cyther like blitcrs, fuch as happen in burnes, and by practi« 
rioners are ufually called veficales, and are cawfed by the deAluxion of a palegmaticke 
end{erous humor ; orelf{e reprefent a Grape,whence they are called /vales, genera- 
ted by the afflux of blood laudible in qualitie, but overaboundant in quantiry; of 
efethey exprefle the manner of a difeafe, whence they are termed morales, procee- 
dingfrom the fuppreffion of melancholicke blood; orelierhey reprefent warts, 
whence they are ftiled Verrucales, enjoying the fame materiall caufe of the genera- 
tion asthe morales doe, 
This affect iscaufe of many accidents in men; forthe perpetuall effluxe ofblood sympromes, 

extinguifherh the vivide and lively colour of the face, callsona dropiiz,overthrowes 
the ftrength of the whole body. The fluxe of Hemorrhoides iscommonly every 
moneth, fometimes onely foure times in a yeare.Great paine, inflammation,an Ab- 
{cefle which may at length end ina Fiftula, uplefle it be refifted by convenient reme- 
dies, doe oft times forerunne the evacuation ofthe Hemorrhoides, Butif the He- 
morthoides ow ina moderate quantity, if the patients brooke it well, they ovght 
nor to be ftayed, for that they free the patients from the feare of imminent evills,as 

mclancholy, leprofic, ftrangury and the like. Befides,ifthey bee flopped without a 42, 
caufe, they by their refluxe into the Lungs caufe their inflammation,or elle breake ©,«psa, 
the veflelis thereof, and by flowing to the Livercaufe a dropfic by the faffocation of 
the native heate; they caufea dropfie and univerfall leanenefle on the contrary, if 
they flow immoderately, by refrigerating the Liver by loffeof too much blood, 

wherefore whenas they flow too immoderately, they mutt be Rayed witha pledge 

of hares downe dipped in the enfuing medicine. R.pul.aloes hurts balauft.fane.dra- » remedy fos 
conus, an 58. incorporentur fimul cum ovi albumine, fiat medicamentum ad When 
they are ftretched out and {wollne without bleeding, itis convenient to beate an ofthe Hea-: 
Onion roafted in the embers with an Oxes gall, and apply this medicine to the ™orhoides, 
lwolne Places, and renew it every five houres. This kind of remedy 1s very preva~ 
lene for internall Hx morrhoides; but fuch as are manifeft may be opened with hor{- Heamorrhois 

‘aches, ora Lancet. The juyce or mafle of the hearbe called commonly Dead-net- Cate 
Ue or Arkeangell.applyed to the fwolne Hemorrhoides opens them, and makes the 
congealed blood flow there hence. The Furgus and Thymus being difeales about the 

vadament are cured by the fame remedy. If acrimony heate and paine dee too 
cruclly affli& the patient,you muft make him enter into a bath, and prefently af. 
cr apply to the ulcers (if any fuch be) this following remedy. kx. rof 1iij .ccrafa 

3). Litharg.28 cera OPY Dj. fiat unguent. fecundum artem, Or elie, Re «baru, 
™)rrhe crack an. j.0pi/ Dj.fiat ungwentum cum oleo rofarum Cy mucagine , ade 
4ndo vitellam unius You may eafily profequute the refiduc of the cure accor 

ding to the penerall rules of Art. 


The end of the Thirteenth Booke. 


5 
of OUr Drak. 
af 
| 
| 
Ci 
<a 
Qa 
\, 
| 


LIGATURES. 


TuHeE FourRTEENTH Boox. 


Cuare. I. 
Of the differences of Bandages, 
Andages, wherewith we ufe to binde, doe much differ amongft 


themfelves. Butthcir differences(in Galens opinion )are chief- 146. 
| drawne from fixe things ; to wit, their matter, figure, length, 
Mil breadth, making, and parts whereof they confift. Now the 
441 matter of Bandages is threefold ; Membranous or of skinnes, 
Abst which is accommodated peculiarly to the fraGured grifles of 
ga) che Nofe; of Woollen, proper to inflamed parts, as thofe 
which have neede of no altriction, of Linnen, as whenanie 
thing is to be faft bound: and of Linnen cloathes, fome are made of flaxe, other- 
fome of hempe, as Hippocrates obferves. But Bandages doe thus differ amongft sea. 3.de chr 
themfelves in ftru@ture, torthat fome thereof confit of that matter which is fuffici- 
ently clofe and {trong of it felfe, fucharethe membranous ; others are woven, as 
the linnen ones. But that Linnen is to bee made choice of for this ufe, and judged Whatcloth beft 
thebeft, not which is new and never formerly ufed, but that which hath alreadie for rowlers. 
beene worne and ferved for other ufes, that fo the Bandages made thereof may be 
the more foft and pliable : yet muft they bee of fuch ftrength, that they may nor 
Dreake with ftretching, and that they may ftraitly containe and repell the humour 
readie to flow downe, and fo hinder it from entring the part. Thefe,befides, muft 
Not bee heinmed nor ftitched, muft have no lace nor feame ; for hemsand feames. 
by their hardneffe prefle into,and hurt the ficfh that lyes under them. Lace,whether 
the midft or edges of the rowler, makes the Ligatureunequall. For the Mem- 
ber whereit is touched with the Lace,as that which will not yeeld, is prefled more 
hard; but with the cloth in the middle more gently, asthat which is more laxe. 
Furthermore, thefe Ligatures muft bee of cleanecloth, that if occafion bee, they 
nay bee moyftened or fteeped in liquour appropriate to the dileafe, and that they 
May Notcorrupt, or make worfe that liquour by their moiftening therein. Now the 
Bandages which are made of Linnen cloathes muft be cut long-waies, and not a- 
thwart, for fo they fhall keepe more firme and ftrong that whichthey binde, and 
chides, they will be alwaies alike, and not broader in one place than in another. 
It they thus differ in Goure, forthat fome of them are rowledup, to which no- 
thing muftbe fowed, for tharthey ought to be of a duc length to binde up the mem- 
der: others are cut ordivided, which truly confift of one piece, but that divided 


‘Othe end (fuch are ufually taken to bind up the breafts) or elfe in the midft ; others 
are lowed together, which confiftof many branches fowed together, and ending 
Giversheads, and reprefenting divers figures, fach are the Bandages 
Aaa 


* 
L 14. 554 

~ | 


554 


Concerning Bandages, Ligatures. 


~ cannot certainly define nor {et downe neither the length, nor breadth of 


Com ad feti.r2. 
de offic. 
chiv. 


t.crz.fet. 
lib. de frac 


Wemuft al- 


Lis 14, 
tothe head. But they thus differ in length, for that fome of them are fhorter, othe, 


oth 
longer : fo in like fore for breadth ; for {ome are broader, others narrower, er, 


Yet Wee 


Row! 
for that they muft be various, according to the different length and thickneffe o; 


the members on parts, Generally they ought both in length and breadth to §; t 
parts,whereunto they are ufed.For thefe parts require a binding different each from 
other, the head,the necke,fhoulders, armes, breafts,groines, tefticles, fundamen; 
hips, thighes, legs, feet and tocs. For the parts of Bandages, wee terme one are 
their bodie, another their heads.By the bodie we mean their due length & breadth 
butthcir ends, whether they run long-waies or a-croflz, wee accordingto Galen 
terme them their heads. 3 


Sheweth the indications and general precepts of fitting of 
Bandages and Ligatares. 


Here are,inHippocrates opinion,two indications of fitting Bandages or 
X7\ TSX Ligatures ; the one whercof is taken fromthe part affected ; the othe, 
Bs 2 from the affect it felfe. From the partaffeed : fothe legge, if you at 
horny any time bindeitup, muft bee bound long-waies , for if you binde it 
overthwart, the binding will loofen as foone as the patient beginnesto goc,and put 
forth his legge, for then the mufcles take upon them another figure. On the contra. 
rie the Arme or Elbow mutt be bound up, bending in and turned tothe breaft, for 
otherwife at the firft bending, if it bee bound when it is ftretched forth, the Liga. 
ture will be flacked, for that (as we formerly faid) the figure of the mufclesis per. 
verted. Now for this indication, let each one perf{wade himfelfe thus much, That 
the part muft be bound up in that figure, wherein wee would have it remaine. 

Now forthat indication which is drawne from the difeafe, if there be a hollow 


waies begin our ulcer, finuous and cuniculous, cafting forth great ftore of Sanies, then mutt you be- 


ligatures at the 


bottome ot 2 
fits. 


gin the ligature and binding fromthe bottome of the fiaws,and end at the orifice of 
the ulcer; andthis precept muft you alwayes obferve, whether the fimws be {ealed 
inthe top,bottome, middle, or fidesof the ulcer. For thus the filth therein con- 
tained fhall bee emptied and caft forth, and the lippes of the ulcer too farre fepara- 
ted, fhall bee joyned together; otherwife the contained filth will cate into all 
that lyes neareit, increafe the ulcer, and make it uncarable by rotting the bones 


Lipp. feat. which lye under it withthis acride /amies or filth. But fome Ligatures are remedics 


*79 


2. 0) fice 


Initio 


of themfelves, as thofe which performe their dutiesof themfelves, and whereto 
the cure is committed, as are thefe which reftore to their native unitie, thofe parts 
which are dif-joyned : others are notufed for their owne fakes, but only to ferveto 
hold faft fuch medicines ashave a curative facultie. This kinde of Ligature is eyther 
yet a doing, and istermed by Hippoc. Delizatio operans ; or elfe done and finifhed, 
and is called, Deligatio operata forthe firft, that the Ligature may be well made, it 
is fitthat it be clofe rowled together, and befides, thatthe Surgeon hold it ftiffe and 
{trait inhis hand,and not carelefly, for fo he fhall binde up the member the better. 
Alfo he mutt in che binding obferve, that theends of the Rowler,and con fequently 
their faftning may notfallto bee onthe affected or grieved part for it 
that they come above or below, or elfe on the fide : befides alfo, he muft havea!pe- 
ciall care that there be no knot tyed upon the fame place, or u pon the region of the 
backe,buttocks, fides, joynts, or backe part of the head,or to conclude in any other 
part upon which the Patient ufes to leane, reftor lye. Alfo on that part where wee 
intend to fow or fatten the Rowlers, you muft double in their ends, that (o the falt- 
ning of future may be the ftronger,otherwife how clofe foever they be 
ped or rowled about the member, yet will they not remaine firme, efpecially if they 
be of agreat breadth.For the fecond kinde of Ligature,to wit,that which is already 
done and finifhed; the Surgeon,the performer thereof, muft confider to what end 


Lis 14 
‘rwas donc 


legantly ,t0 
skilfuil V 
which may 
In fractur 
contufions, 
about upon t 
fo the fet bo! 
be alreadie 
hinder and p 
But in fractu 
and 1s prefic 
rorne, whic 
but afterwar 
forth under 
mentioned, 
ted part ; he 
into the aff: 
the blood wa 
carried as it ' 
upwards. 
and bowels, 
pable of fo 
burden,whi 
rall accident 
bodie, it is 
the faculties 


Epide(mi 
UC More co; 
Wrapped the: 
obferve the f 
his binding. 
Whereto the 
may be force 
herefore jf 
you beginne 
trarie, if the ! 
the Oppofite 
to be 4 
More exquili 
this firi 
*“Neyther is 
With 
Teltored thar 
aid thar on th 
Muft be dray 
MOreloofe 2 


* 
7 
i 
ee. 
| 
a 
| 
q 


rent each from 
s, f Undamenr 
terme one part 
pth & breadth, 
cing to Galen, 


Bandages or 
ted ; the other 
if YOu at 
if you binde it 
tO gor,and put 
On the contra 
the breaft, for 
orth, the Liga- 
mutcles is per. 
us much, That 
it remaine. 
re be ahollow 
n muft you be- 
t the orifice of 
inus be fealed 
h therein con- 
0 farre fepara- 
il cate into all 
tring the bones 
>s are remedics 
and whereto 
ie, thofe parts 
ynly to ferve to 
vature iseyther 
eand fioifhed, 
well made, it 
old it ftiffe and 
ber the better. 
confequently 
or it is betcer 
have alpe- 
‘region of the 
de in any other 
part where wee 
hat (o the fait- 
fhall be wrap- 
Dp ecially if they 
hich is already 


erto what end 


Lip 14. Concerning ‘Bandages, or Ligatures. 555 


twas! done, and whether he hath performed it wéll and fitly, as alio neatly and mut 
legantly tO the farisfaction both of himfelfe andthe beholders. For it is the part of nor bee only _ 
» skilfull Workeman everte where handfomely and rightly to performe that a tarry 
which may fo be done. 
In fractures and luxations & al! diflocations of bones, as alfo’in wounds and 
contufions you muft beginne your bandage withtwo or three windings or wraps 
spout upon the place, andthat (if youcan) more ftraitly than in other places, that 
fo the fet bones may be the better kept in their places, and that the humors, if anie 
be alreadie fallen thither , may by this ftrait compreffion be preffed forth,as alfoto 
hinder and prevent the entrance in of any other which may bee readic to fall down. 
Rut in fractures (as thofe which never happen without contufion) the blood lowes, 
and is preffed forth of its préper veifels, asthofe which are violently battered and 
rorne, which caules fugillation in the neighbouring flefh, which firft lookes red, 
byt afterwards black and blue by reafon of the corruption of the blood poured 
forthunder the skinne. Wherefore afterthefe firft windings, which | formerly 
mentioned, you muft continue your rowling a great way fromthe broken or luxa- 
ted part ; he which does otherwife, will more and more draw the bloodand humors 
into the affected part, andcaufe Impoftumes, and other maligne accidents. Now | 
theblood which flowes, goes but one way downwards, but that which is prefled is 01cm ad fox. 
carried as it were intwo pathes, to wit, from above downwards, and from belowe fall pat 
upwards. Yet you muft have acare that you rather drive it backe into the body 
and bowels, than towards the extremitiesthereof, as being parts which are unca~ 
pableof fo much matter, and not furnifhed with futhcient ftrength to fuffer that 
burden, which threatens to fall upon it,without danger and the increafe of prenatu- 
rall accidents. But when this maffe and burden of humors is thruft backe intothe 


bodie, it isthen ruled and kept from doing harme by the ftrength and benefit of 
the faculties remaining in the bowels and the native heat. 


— 


Cuar. Iii. 
Of the three kindes of Bandages neceffariein fractures. 


#3 Vo forts of Ligatures are principally neceflarie for the Surgeon, accor- 
ding to Hippocrates, by which the bones afwell broken as diflocated ei». 
may be held firme when they are reftored totheir naturall place. off 
Of thefefome are called Hypode(mides,that is, Under-binders: others, Hypodefmides: 
Eyide(mi is,Over-binders. There are fometimes but two under-binders ufed, 
utmore commonly three. The firft muft firftof all bee caft over the fra@ture, and 
Wrapped there fome three or foure times about, thenthe Surgeon muft marke and 
oblerve the figure of the fracture; for as chat fhall be, fo muft he vary the manner of 
his binding. For the ligaturemuft be drawne ftrait upon the fide oppofite to that 
Whereto the luxation or fra@ture moft inclines, that fo the bone which ftands forth 
may be forced into its feat,and {o forced may bethe more firmely there contained. 
herefore if the right fidebe the more prominent or ftanding forth, thence muft 
y ou beginne your ligation, and fo draw your ligature tothe left fide. Onthecon- 
‘rarie, if the left fide be more prominent, beginning there, you fhallgoe towards 
“Oppofite fide in binding and rowling it. Here therefore would I require a Sur- 
6°00 to be Ambidexter ,(.i.) having both his hands at command,that{o he may the 
More exquifitly performe {uch variety of ligations. But let him in rowling,bend or 
Move this firft ligature upwards, that is, towards the bodic,for the former reafons. 
*neyther is this manner of ligation peculiar to fractures, but commonto them 
“A luxations : for,into what part foever the luxated bone flew, then when it is 
““Ored, that fide muft be bound the more loofely and gently whence it departed, 
that on the contrary more hard unto which itwent. Therefore the ligature 
utde drawne from the fide whereunto the bone went ; fothat on this fide it bee 
‘cloofe and foft, and not ftraitly preffed with boulfters or rowlers, that fo it 
Aaa 2 may 


L 
“ 
fhorter, Others 
wer, Yer Wee 
d thickneffe of 
adth to fit th 
| 
‘ 
| 
| | 
— | 
= 


in 


* 


Concerning Bandages, or Ligatures. L 


may be more inclined to the fide oppofite tothe luxation. Ifthe ligation be Other. 

wife performed, it fucceeds not well, for the part is relaxed,and moved out of its 

naturall feat : wherefore there will be no {mall danger, left the bone bee forced our 

againe, and removed fromits place, whereinto it was reftored by art and the hang 

Which thing Hippocrates fo much feared, that on the contrarie he willed that the 

fet bone fhould be drawne fomewhat more untethe part contrary to that where. 

unto it was driven by force, than the naturall and proper fite thereof fhould require 

But to returne to our former difcourfe of thethree Ligatures : The firft under. 

binder being put on, wee then take the fecond, with which wee in like fort begin 

the fraGture, but having wrapped it once ortwice about there,for that,as we former. 

ly faid, wee muft not torcebacke, and prefle fo much blood towards the extrem. 

ties, as wee muft doe towards the body and bowels. Wherefore this Ligature (ha| 

be drawne from above downe-wards, gently {training it to prefle forth the bloog 

contained in the wounded part: When by rowling you fhall come to the endos 

that part, then you fhall carry back againe that which remaines thereof, to wit, up. 

Whenthe third Wards; But otherwife you may take the thirdunder-binder, wherewith you may 
a beginneto rowle, whereas you left with the fecond, and you may Carry it thus, 
Ep. rowling it from belowupwards. Thefe under-bindingsthus finifhed, apply your 
boulfters, after them your over or upper-bindings, which are oft times two, bur 
fometinesthree. The firft hathtwo heads, and is wrapped both from the tight 

handand the lett, for the prefervation of the firftunder-binder and the boulfters, 

and reftoring the mufclesto their native figure. The two other which remaine, 

confiftof one head,& the one of them muft be rowled from below upwards, the o- 

ther from above downwards, after {uch a manner, that they may bee dire¢ly con- 

trary tothe under-binders; asif they were rowled from the right hand, thenthef 

muft be from the left, Now this is the manner of Hippocrates his Ligation which, 

for that itis now growne outof ule, we muft here fet downe that which is in com- 

Themanner of MONufe. They doenotat this time ufeany over-binders, butthat which wetcr- 
binding now medthe third ander-binder ferves our Surgeons in ftead of thethree forementio. 
in ule. ned over-binders. Whereforethey carry thisthird under-binder, wrapped from 
below upwards (as we formerly faid)contrary to the firft aad fecond under-binder; 

as if thefe begunne on the right fide,this fhallbe rowled fromthe left, and (hall 

end whereas the firft under-binderended. And you muft not only draw it indiffe- 
rently hard, butalfo make the {pires and windings more rare. This third rowleris 

of this ufe in this manner of Ligation, that is, it reftores the mufcles to their native 

figure, from whence they were f{omewhat altered by the drawing and rowling of 

What meaneto the two former Ligatures. But you muft alwaies have regard, that you obferve that 
veto meafure in wrapping your Ligatures, which reafon, with the fenfe of the patient, 
Ligatures,  andcafein fuffering,prefcribes,; having regard thatthe tumor become not infla- 
med. Alfothe habit of the body ought to prefcribe a meafure in Ligation : fot 

tender bodies cannot away with fo hard binding as hard, Verily, in fractures and 

luxations, the humors by too ftrait biading are prefled into the extreme parts of the 

body ; whence grievous and oft times enormous Oedema’'s proceede : for healing 

whereof the Ligature muft bee loofedjand then thetumified parts preffed by 2n¢w 

rowling, which muft bee performed from below upwards, and fo,by forcing the 

matter of the Tumor thither, it may be helped ; for there isno other hope or WY 

to drive the humor backe againe. He which doth this, forfakes the proper cure © 

the difeafe foto refiftthe fymptome, whichthe Surgeon never refufeto 40°; 

Why Hippoc. 4S Often as any neceffarie caufe fhall require it. For this caufe Hippocrates bids, that 
loofe the Bandages bee loofed everie three dayes, and then to foment the part with hore 
ca third dey. water, that fothe humors, which(drawne thither by the vehemency of paine) hav¢ 
- fettledin the part, may be diffolved and difperfed ,and itching and other fuch like 
{ymptomes prevented. The feare of all accidents being paft, let the Ligation bee 


fooner or later loofed,and more {lacked than it formerly was accuftomed ; that !° 


the blood and laudible matter, wherofa Calms may enfue, may flow more freely °° 
the affected part. god! | | 


binding whic 
fecing the Wo 
ftirred, and 
caufe paine, ; 
by reft. The 
about the wo 
cloth, made 1 
can, that it m 
fons; which | 
wound runne 
wound, thar! 
filth prefied: 

and {plints : 

rulent matter 


is there, that 
mult be don 
toconclude, 
fome manife 
patient, whe 
he isunable 
ned. bor, 
fphacell or 
the parts in 
{trait nor tox 
Cauied by th 
the part be h 
hath prefled 
trait bindin 
Btlevous {yn 
another jadi 
as long as tol 
Caufle, you 
the Patient b 
him of amo 
Nt loofed. 


- 
| 
q 
| 
| 
i q 
("pyri at 
q 4 
{ 
4 
| 
4 | 
| 
| 
| 


Li B.A, 


tion be other. 
ved Out of its 
bec forced oy; 
and the hand. 
willed that the 
mo that Where. 
fhould require. 
he firft under. 
ke fort begin a 
We former. 
sthe extrem). 
s Ligature thal} 
forth the blood 
cto the endof 
of, to wit, up- 
with you may 
y Carry it thus, 
ied, apply your 
umes two, bur 
from the right 


1B. 


Concerning ‘Bandages, or Ligatures. 


CHA rp. 


of the binding up of Fractures affociated with awonnd. 


6% 
iS 4 cidents, by reafon of thetoo plentifull affluxe of humors from the 
gysctss ncighbouring parts. But itis not firtoendeavour to ufe thatkinde of 
binding which is performed with manie circumvolutions or wrappings about. For, 
fecing the wound mutt bee drefied everie day, the part muft each day neceflarily be 
tirred, and the Ligature,confifting of fo many windings;loofed ; which thing will 
cuufe paine, and confequently hinder the knitting and uniting which is performed 
byreft, Therefore this kinde of binding may be performed by one onely rowling 
shout the wound,and that with a rowler which confifts of atwice or thrice doubled 
cloth, made in manner of a boulfter, and fewed with as much conveniencie as you 
can, that it may be fo large as to encompaffe and cover all the wound, for thefe rea- 
fons; which fhall bee delivered atlarge in our Treatife of Fratures, But if the 
wound runne long- wayes, let the boulfters and {plints be applyed to the fidesof the 


fometimes happens,that a FraQure is affociated by a wound, and yet 

. How to bindé 

for allthis itis ficto binde the part with a Ligature, otherwife there up a Fracture 
will beno {mall danger of {welling, infammation,and other ill ac+ wound 


d the boulfters, wound, tharfo the lipps of the wound may bee prefled together, and the contained 

vhich remaine, filth prelled forth. Burt if ic be made over-thwart, we mutt abftaine from boulfters | 
upwards,the o- and fplints : for that,in Galens opinion, they would dilate the wound,and the pu- 
¢ dire&ly con- rulent matter would be prefled out,and caft back into the wound. i 

and, thenthefe 


thich is in com- 
which weter- 
ee foremcentio- 
wrapped from 
under-binder; 
left, and fhall 
draw it indiffe- 
s third rowler Is 
s rorheir native 
and rowling of 
you obferve that 
-of the patient, 
ome not infla- 
Ligation : for 
in fractures and 
eme parts of the 
de: for healing 
prefled by ancw 
o, by forcing the 
hope or way 
¢propercure © 
rer refufe to doe, 
crates bids, that 
1¢ part with hore 
y of paine) have 
d other fuch like 


he Ligne bee 


omed ; that {o 


vy more freely °° 


Cwat 


CHap. V. 


Certaine Common precepts of the binding up of Frackures and Luxations3 


N everic Fracture and Luxation, the deprefled,hollow andextenui- 
Sie) ted parts,{uch as are neere unto the joynts,ought to be filled up with 

Saij Ooulfters, or cloaths put about them, fo to make the part equall, 
Bey thar forhey may beequally and on every fide prefled by thefplints, 
i] and the bones more firmely contained in their featess So when 
i the knee is bound up, you mutt fillthe ham orthat cavity which 
is there, that fothe ligation may be the better and {peedilier performed. The {ame 
mult be done under the armepits, abovethe hecle, inthearme neer the wreft; and, 
toconclude, inall other parts which have a conf{picuous inequalitie by reafon of 
lome manifeft cavitie. When you have finifhed your binding, then enquire of the 


patient, whether the member feeme notto bebound too ftrait. For if he fay, that oP sk o 


fialt, 


he isunable to endure it fo hard bound, then mutt the binding be fomewhat flack- 
ned, For, too ftrait binding caufes paine, heate, defluxion,agangrene,and laftly, a 
iphacell or mortification: but too loofe is unprofitable, for that it doth not contain 


the Partsin that ftatewe defire. Irisa figne of a juftligation that is neythertoo The fgntsof 
ltrait nor too loofe,if the en{uing day the part be fwolne with an oedematous tumor, ayes and 
Cauledby theblood preffed forth of the broken place ; but of too ftrait ligation, if up. -_ 


~ 


the part be hard{wolnes and of tooloofe, if itbeeno whit {wolne, asthat which 

th prefled no blood out of the affected part. Now ifa hardtumor, caufed by too 

‘ait binding, troublethe patient, it muft prefently bee loofed, for feare of more 
sucVous {ymptomes, andthe part muft be fomented with warme Hydrelewm, and 
‘Nother indifferent, yea verily, more loofe ligature muft be made in ftead thereof, 
’S long as the paine and inflammation fhall continue ; in which time and for which 
Caule, you thall lay nothing upon the part which is any thing burdenfome, When 


Paticnt beginnes ro recover,for three or foure dayes {pace,efpecially if you find 


Mof amore compact habit and a ftrong man, the ligature muft be kept firme and 
AX loofed, Ifon thethird day, and fountillthcfeventh, the {pires or 


* 
* 


be found more loofe, and the part affected more flender; then wee mutt judge i 

to be for the better. For hence you may gather, that there is an expreffion ara di 

geftion of the humors, caufing thetumor made by force of the ligation. 

Why we mut broken bones fitly bound up, are better fet, and more firmely agglutinated 

make more — isthe caufe, why in the place of the fracture the ligation muft bee made the ftraire, 

onthe broken in other placesmore loofely. If the fractured bone ftand forth in any parr, je mu 

part. there be more ftraitly prefled with boulfters and {plints. Toconclude, the feventh 

day being paft, we muft bindethe part more ftraitly than before: for that then jg. 

flammation, paine, andthe like accidents, are not to bee feared. But thefe thin 

which we have hitherto {poken of the three kindes of Ligatures, cannot take Place 

in each fractured part of the body, as in the chaps, collar- bones, head, nofe, rh. 

For, feeing fuch parts are not roundand long, a Ligatore cannot be Wrapped - 

bout them, asit may onthearmes, thighes, and legges, but only bee put onthe;- 
outfides. 


Veri ly, 
Which 


Cuar. VI. 
The ufes for which Ligatures ferve. 


Y that which wee have formerly delivered, you may underftand tha 

Ligatures are of ufe to reftore thofe things which are feparated and 

moved forth of their places, and joyne together thofe which gape , ag 

in fractures,wounds, contufions, finewous ulcers, and other like affects 

PRLS aoainft nature, in which the folution of continuitie ftandsin neede of 

Thefecond thehelpe of Bandages, for the reparation thereof. Befidesalfo, by the helpe of 

Bandages thefe things are keptafunder or feparated, which otherwife would grow 

together, againft nature ;as in Burns, wherein the fingers and the hams would mutu- 

ally grow together ; asalfothe arme-pits to the chefts, thcechinto the breaft, un- 

The chica.  Lefle they be hindered by due Ligation, Bandages doe alfo conduceto refrefh ema- 

ciated parts : wherefore if the right legge wafte for want of nourifhment, the left 

legge,beginning at the foote, may bee conveniently rowled up even to the groine. 

If theright armeconfume, binde the left with a {trait Ligature, beginning at the 

hand, and ending atthe arme-pit. For thusa great portion of blood from the bound- 

up partis fent back intothe vena cava, from whence it regurgitates into the almoft 

emptie veffels of the emaciated part. But I would have the found part to bee {o 

bound, that thereby it become not painefull ; for a dolorifick ligation caufes a grea 

ter attractation of blood and {pirits, as alfoexercife: wherefore I would haveit 

during that time to beeat reft, andkeepholy-day. Ligatures alfo conduceto the 

{topping of bleedings: which you may perceive by this, that when you open 4 

veine with your launcet,the blood is prefently ftayed, laying on 2 boulfter and ma- 

The ith  kingaligature. Alfo Ligatures are ufefull for women pre(fently after their delivery; 

for their womb being bound about with Ligatures, the blood wherewith theif 

womb was too much moiftened,is expelled, the ftrength of the expulfive facultie 

being by this means ftirred up to the expulfion thereof: and it alfo binders the emp- 

ty wombe from being {wolne up with winde, which otherwife would prefent!y 

Thefixh,  ¢nterthereinto. This fame Ligatureis a helpe to {uch as are with childe, for the 

more cafie carrying of their burden ; efpecially thofe whofe Childe lyes {0 fart¢ 

down-wards, that lying as it were inthe den of the hi ppes, it hangs betweene the 

_ thighes, and fo hinders the free going of the mother. Therefore the woman With 

childe is not only eafed by thisbinding of her wombe with this Ligature, which 

is commonly termed, the navill Ligature ; but alfo, her childe being held up highet 

Thefeventh. inherwombe,(he hath freeer and more liberty to walke. Ligatures are in like {ort 
, good for revulfionand derivation: as alfo for holding of medicines which are !2y 

Thecighth,the ¢ a part, asthe necke, breaftorbelly. Laftly, there isatriple ufe of Ligatures!® 

gatures in the @Mputation Of members, asarmes and legges. The firft to draw and holdup: 

wards the skinne and muicles lying under it, thatthe operation being perfor 


L 18-14. 


b 
cacy may, 
fo by that m 
is healed up 
aifo ro perfec 
lous flefh ly 
ether the vt 
- paflage 


wh 
cav 
gro 
legges 
thele parts 
nefleto the 

The 
lers or Unde 
the fra@ture 
felves, for t! 
athwart b 

You may 
paine ana tr 
ferve for thé 
more Or 
muft be ap 


Whereto thé 
[0 farre ast 
es, an 

thar they b 
On the bro! 
ftir no way 
Places. Th 

Hor over m 
Prefle the | 
@bour wich 


- 
al 
i 
| 
nie 
of cheic¢ 
4 
PAY) 
| 
* 
ne le y et 
becon 
©come tre 
moder, ic 
allo their 
1elr fis 
j 7 = 
4 
é 


| I 
¢cmuft Judge ie 
reflion and dj. 
Verily 
rinated, Which 
bade the {traite, 

part, it mug 
ide, the leventh 
or thar then in- 
sur thefe things 
inot take Dlace 
1ead, nole, ribs. 
Wrapped a. 
bec put on their 


inderftand thar 
leparated and 
which gape , as 
ther like affeds 
neede of 
the helpe of 
ife would grow 
ns would mutu- 
the breaft, un- 
torefrefh ema- 
hment, the lefe 
ntothe groine. 
eginning at the 
rom the bound- 
into the almoft 
part to bee fo 
n caufes a grea- 
I would have it 
>conduce to the 
hen you open 4 
youlfter and ma- 
r their delivery; 
therewith their 
xpulfive facultic 
binders the emp- 
ould prefently 
childe, for the 
Ide lyes fo farre 
os betweene the 
he woman with 
igature, which 
held up higher 
es arc in like fort 
's which are layd 
> of Ligatures 18 
and hold up- 


in rformeds 
chey 


sey may; by their falling downeagaine, cover the ends of the cut-off bones , and 
fo by that meanes helpe forwards the agglutination and cicatrization and when it 
‘; healed up, caufe the lame memberto move more freely, and with lefle paine ; and 
sifo to performe the former actions, this, as it were, cufhion or boul{ter of mufcu- 
ious fefh lying thereunder. The fecond is, they hinder the bleeding by prefling to- 
ther the Veines and arteries. The third is, they by ftrait binding intercep: the 
free paflage of the animall f{pirits, and fo deprive the part which lyes thereunder 


of the fenfe of feeling, by makingit, asit were, ftupid or num. 


Cu ap. VII. 
Of Boulfters or Compreffes. 


Oulfters have adouble ufe ; the firft is to fill up the cavities and thofe parts The firft uf of 
which 4re not of an equall thickneffeto their ends. Wee have examples of 
cavities in the Arme-pits, Clavicles, Hams & Groines ; and of parts which 
grow {mall towards theirends, in the armes towardsthe wrelts, in the 
legges towards the feet, in the thighestowardsthe knees. Therefore you mutt fill 
thele parts with boulfters and linnen cloathes, that fothey may beall of one big- 
nefleto their ends. 
Thefecond ufe of boulfters,is to defend and preferve the firfttw6 or three Row- thefecond ut 
lersor Under-binders, the which we fayd before muft be applyed immediately to of them. 
the fractured part. Boulfters, according tothistwofold ufe, differ amongft them- 
felves, for that when they are ufed in the firft mentioned kind,they muft be applied 
athwart , but when inthe latter, long-wayes or down-right. 
You may alfoufe Boulfters, left the too ftrait binding of the Ligatures caufe Thethird u& 
paineand troubleto the new fet bones. Athree or foure times doubled cloth wili * ™- 
ferve forthethickneffe of your Boulfters, but the length and breadth muft bee 
more Or leffe, according to thecondition of the partsand difeafe for which they 


muft be applyed. 


Cuapr. VIII, 
Of the ufe of Splints, Funks,and Cafes. 
Aving delivered the ufes of Ligaturesand Boulfters, it remaines that 


OS 4 ) wee fay fomewhat of the other things, which ferve to hold the bones 

in their places ; as Splints, Junks,Cafes, and fuch other like. Splints tye marerof 

i are madeand compoled ot paft-bord, of thin {plinters of wood, of Splints. 
SY Ieather, fuch as fhoo-foales are made with ; of the rindes of trees, or 

plates of Latin,or lead,and fuch other like, which have a gentle and yeclding {ftiffe- 

nefle ; yet would I havethemmade as light as may bee, left they by their weight 
come troublefome to the affected part. Butfor their length, breadth, and 

number, let them be fitted agreeable to the part whereto they muft bec ufed. Let 

allo their figure be ftraight orcrooked according tothecondition of the member 

Wheretothey muftbeapplyed. You muft have afpeciall care, that they runne not 

(0 farce as tthe f wellings out, oreminencies of the bones ; asthe ancles, knees, el- 
OWes, and the like, left they hurt them by their preflure: alfo you mutt havea care, 

that they befmaller at their end s, and thicker in their middles, whereas they lye up- 

onthe broken bone, The ufe of f{plintsis, to hold faft and firme, that they may 
i'no way the broken and luxated bones, after they bee fetand reftoredto their 

Places. That they performe this ufe, it is fic there be no thicke boulfters under them, 

Dor over many rowlers ; for fo through fo thicka {pace, they would not fo ttraitly 

Preffe the part. Junkes are made of ftickes the bigneffe of ones finger, wrapped Junie 


out with ruthes,and then with linnen cloth : they are principally ufed in — are. 


* 

— 

A 


Concerning Bandages or Ligatures. 


of thethighes and legges. Cafes are made of plates of Latin,or elfe of fome light 
Thematerand wood; their ufe is, to containe the bones in their due figure, when the patient js to 
wicot Cale he carried out of one bed or chamber into another, or elfe hath neede to goe to 
ftoole: laftly,if wee muft reft fomewhat more ftrongly upon the broken or lux. 
ted members, thefe Cafes willhinder the bones from ftirring or flying out on th. 
right fide or left,above or below,we fleeping or waking, being willing of uowillip 


and in like fort left being not as yet well knit,or more loofely bound up for feare of 


paine, inflammatfon, ora gangrene, they hang downe, fall, or fly in funder by rea. * 


fon of the inequalitiesof thebed. Such Cafes, Junkes,and the like, which ferye 
for reftoring and faft holding of broken and luxated bones, we may, accordingto 
Glofocomivm', Hippocrates his minde, call themin generall Glo/focoma, All which things, the 
yong Surgeon, which is not as yet exercifed in the workes of Art, can {carce tel! 
what they are. Butinthe meane time, whileft thathee may come to bee exercifed 
therein, or fee others performe thefeoperations, I, as plainely as poffibly I could, 
have in words given him their portraiture or fhape. 


a Fracture. As 
and perfect, z 
oblique ; one 
{cales, whic! 
dies of the n 
is not broken 
peeces overt! 
a Raddifh. 

A Fra&u 
{mall peeces 
mallet upon ; 
re{emblance 
bullets, fhor « 
Cures 
aboord or p 
fraGtures are 
Capillarie, | 
put inke upo 
1s only pref 
Were vaulte 
fragments, a 
fomtimes {n 
rough with | 
bone, fetchi 
but only cle: 
otherfome 

Furthern 
acCompanic 
inflamn 


Si 
| 
~/ 
Lhe end of the fourteenth Booke. 
| 
\\ 
A 
| 
| 
| At | 


Patient 1S to 
“ede to Poe to 
or lux. 
Out on the 
unwilling. 
up for feare of 
‘under by rea. 
*, which ferve 
According ty 
ichthings, the 
can {carce tel} 
bee exercifed 


libly I could 


FRACTURES. 


THe FirrTeEENTH Booke. 


Cuap. I. 


What a Fracture s,and what the differences thereof are, 


Fracture, in Galens opinion, is the folution of continuitie in a rib.s.mehiet 
bone, which by the Greeks is called Catagma, There are many 
< forts of hurting or offending the bones : asthe drawing them a- 
a funder, luxation, or putting them out of joynt ; their unnaturall 
growing together, their cutting or dividing a-funder ; contufion, 
ab{cefie, putrefaction, rottenneffe, laying bare the perzo/tiwm 
being violated or loft ; and laftly, that whereof we now treate, 
a Fracture. Again,the varieties of Fractures are almoft infinite. For one iscomplete 
and perfect, another imperfe@ ; one runnes long-wife, another tran{verfe, another 
oblique ; one while it is broken into great peeces,another while inco little and {mall 
fcales, which have eyther a blunt, or elfe a fharpe end, and pricke the adjacert bo- 
dies of the mufcles, nerves, veines orarterics. It fomtimes happens, thatthe bone 
is not broken into {plinters, that is, long-wayes, but together, and at once into two a 
peeces overthwart, which Fracture iscalled Raphamedon, thatis, after the maner of [hat itis fr 3 
aRaddith. ken Raphanedor:. 
A FraQure is made Caryedon, or likeanut, when as the bone flyes into many wy. capedan, 
{mall peeces, fevered each from other, as when a Nut is broken with a hammer of or Alphitidon. 
mallet upon an Anvile : Which fracture is alfo termed A/phitidon, by reafon of the 
tefemblance it hath to meale or floure ; and fuch is often {eene in fractures made by 
bullets, fhot out of gunsand fuch fiery engines. Contrary to thefe are thofe fra- 
Cures whichare called Schidacidox, astentintofplinters, or after the manner Of What Schidati: 
aboord or peece of timber, that is, right-downe,and alongft the bone : and thefe “* 
fraGures are eyther apparent tothe eye, or elfenot apparent, andtherefore called 
Capillarie, being fo {mall, asthat they cannot be perceived by the eye, unlefle you 
put inke upon them, and then fhave them with your Scrapers, Sometimes the bone 
18 only preffed downe by the ftroke, fometimes on the contrarie it flyes up, as if it 
Were vaulted. They call it attrition, when the bone is broken into many {mall 
fragments, and as it were {cales or chips. The fragments of fractured bones are 
. fomtimes {mooth and polifhed, othe: whiles unequall, and as it were fharpe and 
| | Tough with little reeth, or prickes. Some fractures rouchonely the furface of the 
Ne, fetching off only a fcale, otherfome change not the fite of fractured bones, 
but only cleavesthem length-waies, without the plucking away of any fragment; 
otherfome penetrate even to theit marrow. 
Furthermore fome Fractures are fimpleand alone by themfelves , otherfome are 
’ccompanied with a troop of other affects and fymptomes, as a wound shamorrha- 


8Y¢, inflammation, gangrene,and the like. Hereunto you may alfo adde the soto 
re 


* 


* 
| a 
| 
01 Ome liohs 
* 
= | 


562 Concerning Fratlures. 


rences drawne from theparts which the Fractures poficfie ; as from the head, rib, 
limbs, joynts, and other members of the bodie. Addealfothefe which are takes 
from the habit of bodies, aged, young, full of ill humors, well tempered salmog 
Theeawesof allwhich have their proper and peculiar indications for curing. Now the 
oof Fraétures, arethe too violent affaults or ftroaks of all external] things, wh; 
may cut, bruife, breake, or fhake : in this number of caufes may alfobe reckoned 


fals from high places, and infinite other things, which would be long and tedions 
to reckon up. 


Cuar.ll, 
Of the fignes of a Fracture. 
E may know by evident fignes that a bone is broken : the 
of a broken te 1 whereof, and moft certaine, is, when by handling the part which 
bone. we fufpectto be broken, wee teele peeces of the bone fevered 2. 
funder,and hearea certaine crackling of thefe peeces under oy, 
hands, caufed by the attrition of the fhattered bones. Anothe; 
Another. sez} ligne is taken from the imporencie of the part, which chiefly be. 


wrayes its felfe,when both the bones, the legge,and brace-bones 
theell and wand are broken, For if onely the brace-bone or wand be broken the 
Parient may goe on his legge, and ftirre his arme : for the brace-bone ferves for the 
A third. fuftaining of the mufcles,and not of the bodie, asthe legge bone doth. Thethird 
figne is drawne from the figure of the part changed befides nature: for it is there 
hollow, from whence thebone is flowne orgone, but gibbous or bunching out 
whither it is runne. Great paine in theintcrim torments the patient by reafonof 
the wronged perioflium, andthat membrane which involves the marrow and the 
fympathie of theadjacent parts which are comprefled or pricked, 


Of Proznofticks to be made in Fractures. 


Ee muft prognofticate in FraGtures, whether they are to end in the de- 
| {truction or welfare of the patient; or whether their cure fhall be long 
or fhort, eafie, or elfe difficult and dangerous ; and laftly, whatacci- 
dents and fym»ptomes may happen thereupon. Mee fhall eafily atraine 
tothe knowledge of allthete things, who is not onely well feene inthe 
anatomicail defcription of the bones, bural fo in the temper, compofition and com: 
Why bones are plexion of the whole bodice. Wherefore in the firft place, I thinke good to admo- 
morebiitlein Olh the Surgeon of this, that in winter when all is {tiffe with cold, by a little fall,or 
troftic weather. fome fuch fleight occafion,the bones may be quickly and readily broken. Forthen 
the bones, being dryed by the drineffe of the ayre cncompafling us, become mort 
brittle; which everie one of the Vulgar ufually obferve to happen borh in waxca 
and tallow candles: but whenthe feafonis moift, thebones arealfo more moilt, 
and therefore more flexible and yeelding to the violence of the obvious and offen- 
Why the fol. ding bodice. Whcereforealfo you may gather thisto the framing of your Progn 

ionof conti ticks, That bones by reafon of their natural! drinefle are not fo eafily agglutinate 
and confolidated as fiefh ; though in Children, according to Galen, by realon of 
repaired. theabundance of their humiditic, the loft fubftance may bee repaired,according (4 
Galmarepar they terme it) to the firftintention, that is, by reftoring of the fame kinde of {ub- 
ftance or matter. But in others, about the Fractures a certaine hard fabftance #!U- 
ally concreats, of that nourifhment of the broken bone which abounds, which 
glues together the fragments thereof, being fitly put together. This fubftance * 
then termed a Cal/ws, and itis fo hardened in time, thatthe bone pee in = 

10 


certainely fet 
happens later, 
the conf{titutio 
ner of Ligatio 
and thin, in th 
ftrong powers 
cous matter 
ufed,and med! 
as we fhall dec: 
motion afterw 
ftiruted, be fon 
and force of t 
not only bee Ic 
inflammation, 
rendinous bod 
broken, are n 
Forthey are ha 
remaines whol 
there is longer 
one. Againe t 
ther by the int 
lus fooner 
be fo happily ; 
ty or unequal! j 
ted. Wherfor: 
not ftand our t 
which is fimp!] 
iplinters burt 
fragments, bec 
oftium, Somiet 
place: they alf 
Which when it 
one part andtl 
alfothe memb: 
pofite fide is, 
Originall, Wh 
fed, prefently 
One as forcib! 
COntraed, wi 
Proper feat an 
for afterwards 
Tous to draw 
Poitume, convt 
YOUto defer ff 
4nserous, wh 
*re filled with 


gfuall 
A ring of broket 
eheit perfect 

and laydibic it 

a Callas, thattl 

orcertainly 

moiture, chat 
gatrifh and ¢: 


roken : the firft 
g the part which 

bone fevered a. 
€ces under our 
pones. Anothe; 
hich chiefly be. 
end brace-bones, 
d be broken the 
ne ferves for the 
doth. Thethird 
for it is there 

r bunching out 
ent by reafonof 
Marrow andthe 


o end in the de- 
re fhall be long 
ftly, whatacci- 
Bll eafily atraine 
ell feene in the 
{ition and com- 
good to admo- 
by a little fall,or 
oken. Forthen 
5, become more 
both in waxen 
Ifo more moitt, 
jous and often- 
your Progno- 
ly agglutinated 
n, by reafon of 
d according (as 
-kinde of {ub- 
ifubftance wlu- 
is fubftance 3s 
:ereafter in the 
broken 


Concerning Fratlures. $63 


L 


-oken partis feene to be more firme and hard than it is in any other: thereforethat 

suall faying 19 Phyficke is not without reafon That reft is neceflarie for the uni- 

ring of broken bones. For the Callus is cafily diffolved, if they bee moved before 

perfec and folid agglutination, The matter of a Cains ought to be indifferent 

od J2udible in quantitie and qualitie, even as blood which flowes for the regenera- 

jon of the loft feth in wounds. Iris fit, thatthere may be fafficient matter for fuch 

Callus, that the part have alaudible temper ,otherwife there either wil be no Callus, 

or certainly 1¢ wil grow more flowly, Fractures are far more eafily repaired in yong Why bones oo- 

bodies than 10 old : for in thefe there is plentic of the primigenious and radical] wo onagg YORE 

moifture, that 1s laudably holding and glutinous ; and intheotherthereis ftoreof 

watrith and excrementitious, By this youmay eafily conjeCture, that you cannot 

cenainely fet downe a time neceflarie for the generating aCallws forinfomeit 

happens later, in fome fooner: thecaufe of which varietie is alfo to be referred to 

the conftitution of the yeare and region, the temper and diet of the Patient,and ma- 

nerof Ligation. For, thofe Patients whofe powers are weake, and blood watrith 

and thin, in thefe the generation of a Callus ufesto be more flow:On the contraric, Meace of ori 

trong powers haften to agglutinate the bones, if there be plentie of groffe and vif- and mugh nou 

cous matter ; whereby it comesto pafle, that meats of grofler nutriment are to bee ( 

ufedjand medicines applyed which may helpe forwards the endeavour of nature, nererighel a 

aswe fhall declare hereafter. When the bones are broken neare unto the joynts,the “““" 

motionafterwards ufes to be more difficult, efpecially if the Cals, which is{ub- 

ftiruted, be fomewhat thicke and bunching forth. Bur if, together with the violence Fragtores at 

and force of the Fracture, thejoynts fhall bee broken and bruifed, the morion wil] joe's «a 

not only bee loft, but the life broughtin danger, by reafon of the greatnefle of the 

inflammation, which afually happensin fuch affects, and the exceffe of painein a 

rendinous body. Thefe fractures wherein both the bones of the arme or legge are 

broken, are more difficult to cure, than thofe which happen but to one of them. 

Forthey are handled & kept in their places with more difficulty becaufe that which ip jects. & 

emaines Whole, ferves the other for a reftor {tay to which it may leane. Moreover, /,. ay 

there islonger time required to fubfticute a Ca//us to a great bone, than to alittle 

one. Againe thefe bones which are more rare and {pongie, arefooner glued toge- 

ther by the interpofition of a Ca#us, than thefe which are denfe and folid. A Caé- 

‘ys fooner growes in fanguine, than in cholerick bodies. But broken bones cannot 

be fohappily agglutinated, nor reftored in any body, but that alwaies fome alperi- 

ty or unequal! protuberancie may bee feene on that part where the Caius is genera- 

ted. Wherfore the Surgeon ought to make artificial! Ligations, that the Ca/ws may Ligations 

not ftand out too far, nor finke downe toolow. That Fraéture is leaft troublefome 

Wichis fimple ; on thecontrarie, thatis more troublefome which is made into apne ‘" 

iplinters bur that is moft troublefome and worft of all which is in fmalland fharp 

rigments, becaufe there is danger of convulfion by pricking a nerve, or the pers- 

um. Sometimes the fragments of a broken bone keepthemfelves in their due 

place: they alfo oft times fy forth thereof, fo that one of them gets aboveanother; 

Which when it happens, you may perceive aninequality by the depreffion of the 

one part and the bunching forth of the other, asalfo paine by the pricking : befides 

alfothe member is made fhorterthan it was, and than the found member on the op- 

polite fideis, and more fwolne by the contraction of the mufcles towards their 

Originall. Wherefore when abone is broken, if you perceive anic thing fo depref- Extention mult 

‘d; prefently putting your hand on both fides above and below, ftretch forth the aacag bgt 
o madc att | 

bone as forcibly as you can ; for otherwife, the mufcles and nerves, ftretched and kone is vrok=u. 

“ontraed, will never of their owne accord {uffer the bones to be reftored to their 

Proper feat and themfelves. This extenfion muft bee performedin the firft dayes, 

for atterwards there will happen inflammation: which being prefent, it is dange- 

‘0uS to draw the nerves and rendons too violently ; for hence would en{fuc an im- 

Poitume, convulfion, gangrene and mortification. Therefore Hippocrates forbids 36 

YOutO defer fuchextenfion untill the third, or fourthday. Fractures are thought #/* 

cangerous, whofe fragmentsare great, and fly out, efpecially inthefe bones which 


*efilled with marrow on the infide. When broken or diflocated bones can ho 5 
reitoree 


Which are taken 
salmog 
Which 
be reckoned 
long and teg ions 


Concerning Fraélures. 


reftoredtothemfelves and their naturall place, the part wafts for want of noutifh 
ment ; both for thatthe naturall fite of the veines, arteries and nerves is per oss my 
as alfo becaufe the part it felfe lyes immoveable, or {carce moveable : where, . 
commethto pafle, that the {pirits doe not freely flow thereto, as neyther the nu. 
tive juice commeth thither in fufhcient plentie. When the diflocated o; ee 
in inflammat- member is troubled with any great inflammation, itis doubrfull whether 
rages wre convulfion will happen, if wee attemprto reftore it, or the parts thereof to thes 
muitnot becat- feat : therefore itisbetter, if itmay bee done,to deferre the reducing thereos 
rempteds Jong, untill the bumor which poffeffes the part be diffelved,the tumor abated tad 


the bitternefle of paine mitigated. 


CuarlVv. 
The zenerall cure of broken and diflocated bones. 


O curea broken and diflocated bone, isto reftore it to its former flour. 

SY and fite. For the performance whereof,the Surgeon mutt propofetliree 

co be performed ies) things to himfelfe: The-firftis, to reftore the bone toits place : The fe. 

condis, that he containe or tay it being foreftored : T he third is, that 

tedbones.  hehindertheincreafeof maligne fymptomesand accidents ; orelfe if they dog 

happen, that then hetemper and correcttheir prefent malignitie. Such accidents 

are paine, inflammation,a feaver, ab{cefle,gangrene and {phacell. For the firftin. 

tention, you may eafily reftorea broken or diflocated bone, if prefently, as {oon 

asthe mifchanceisgot, or elfe the fame day, you endeavour to reftore it: for the 

bitterneffe of paine or inflammation,which may trouble the patient, is not as yer 

veric great, neyther isthe contraction of the mufcles upwards as yet very much 

Howro put th or ftubborne, Therefore firft of all, the Patient with his whole bodic , but 

places. efpecially with the broken or diflocated part, as alfo the Surgeon, mutt bee in 

fome place which hath good and fufficient light. Then let trufty and skilfull atten. 

dants be there, good ligatures, and alfo,if need fo require, good engines, His friends 

which are prefent, letthem fee and hold their peace,neyther fay, nor do any thing 

which may hinderthe Worke of the Surgeon. Then putting one hand above,tha 

is, towards thecenter of the body, and the other below, asneare as hee canto the 

part affected, lethim ftretch forth the member : for if you lay your hand any di- 

{tance from the part affected,you wil hurt the found part by too much compretlion, 

: neyther will you much avayle your felfe by ftretching it at fucha diftance. But if 

Pipp-om 6o-£% you only endeavour below with your hand or ligature, affifting to make extenfio 
mee" thereof, it will be dangerousif there bee nothing above which may with{tand © 

hold, left that you draw the whole bodieto you. This being done, according 4s! 

have delivered, it is fit the Surgeon makea right or fbraighe extenfion of the pat 

ailected : for when the bone is cyther broken or out of joynt, there is a contraction 

of the mufcles towards their originall, and confequently of the bones by them,%s 

Adjent.x fox, is Obferved by Galen. Wherefore it is impoflible to reftore the bones totielt 

— former feat, without the extenfion of the mafcles, Butthe part being thus exte™ 

ded, the broken bones will fooncr and morceafily be reftored totheir former {e2t¢. 

Which being reftored, you fhall prefent]y with your hand prefie it downe, if there 

be any thing that bunches orftandsour. And laftly you fhall binde it up,by apply- 

ing boulfters and {plintsas fhall bee fit. Butif the bone bee diflocated or forth! 

joynt, then prefently after the extenfion thereof, it will be requifite to bend it fom 

When inftru- what about, and fo to draw itin. The Surgeon is fometimes forced to ule engines 
ea ne for this worke, eff pecially if the luxation be inveterate, if the broken or luxe 

fary. bones be great ;and that in ftrong and ruftick bodies, and fuch as have large joy" 

foy that then there js need of greater ftrength, than is in the hand of the Surg’ 

alone. For, by howmuchthe mufcles of the Patient are the ftronger, by fo mvc" 

will they bee contracted more powerfully upwards towards their originals. 1“ 

havea carethat you extend them not too violently, left by rending and breaking 


funder the mulcles and nerves,youcaufe the forementioned fym 


{hree chines 


L! 


yulfion, 2 pati 
rhan to childr 
chat they are: 
and much hur 
liquor, are eail 
peing leile cra 
che Surgeon 
be molt agree 
che ferting pe 
mufcles, and 
which the bor 
your feeling t 
member rema 
ber compares 
ancles aniwet 
muft not fufh 
For it may ha 
Patients unco! 
ing of the me 
contracting th 
out, and it Wi 
pricking the a 
its place: and 
Callus 
be fo much th 
fhall happen 
the Surgeons 
that he ftirre n 
gent care necc 
bound Up, do 
The fecon 
in their ftate a 
other things, 
per and fit me 
and the like re 
fhal! require, 
Crate for this | 
wine, orthe! 
fracture ; and 
is {trengthene 
are hindred. \ 
tomesare paf 
bour by thef 
duces the ref 
health, that { 
expedient 
thar are 
gure is thoueg 
In their lite, 
Out labour Or 
Whether rhe 
venture a lit 
{traitly boun 
fame firtt } 
dayes {pace, 
the fame bind 
'ymptome mi 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


want Of nourifh. 
Perverted 
le Whereby j, 
Yther the 
mcated or broken 
whether or NO 2 
thereof to their 
icing thercot 
mor abated, and 


mts former figure 
sult propofe three 
ts place : The fe. 

I hethird is, that 
‘clfe if they doc 
Such accidenres 
For the firft in. 
rcfently, as foon 
{tore it: for the 
Nt, iS not as yer 

B yct very much 
ole bodie , but 
mon, mult bee in 
nd skilfull atten- 
>ines, His friends 
nor doany thing 
hand above, that 
as hee canto the 
four hand any di- 
ich comprefiion, 
diftance. But if 
9 make extention 
vay Withftand or 
according as | 
nfion of the part 
eisa contraction 
ones by them,as 
he bones totheit 
eing thus exten- 
eir former feate. 
it downe, if there 
lc it up,by apply: 
ated or forth ot 
eto bend it fom- 
d confe engines 
roken or luxatce 
ve large joynt: 
of the 
per, by fo 
ir originals. 
p and breaking 2° 


Concerning Fractures. 


— 


L 


555 


palfieand gangrene : all which fooncr happen to ftrong and aged bodies, 
han ro children, cunuches, women, youthes, and generally all moyft bodies, for ac Luce 
hat they are leffe hurt by violent extenfion and pulling, by reafon of their native >y violent ex. 
ond much humiditie and {oftnefie. Forthus skins of leather, moyftened with any “"™ 
jiquor, are ealily retched and drawn out as one pleafeth:but fuch as are dry & hard, 
peing lefle cractable, will fooner rend and tcarc, than {tretch further our. Therefore 
she Surgeon fhill ufea meane in extending and drawing forth of members, as {hall 
be molt agreeable to the habits of the boaics. You may know the bone is fer, and siznesof 
che ferting performedas is fir, if the paine be aflwaged , to wit, the fibres of the boac well 2; 
qu{cles, and the other parts being reftored to their former fite,and all compreffion, 
which the bones moved out of their places have made, being takenaway ; if, to 
our feeling there bee nothing bunching out, nor rugged, but the furface of the 
member remaine {moothandequall; and laftly, if the broken or diflocated mem- 
ber compares with its oppofite inthe compofure of the joynts, asthe knees and 
ancles anfwer juftly and equally in length and thicknefle. For which purpofe ir 
mult not fuffice the Surgeon to view it once, but evenas often as he thal! dreffe ir. 
for it may happen, that the bone which is well fet, may by fome chance, as by the _a 
Patients unconfiderate turning himfelfe in his bed, oras it were aconvulfive twitch- fines of the rez 
ing of the members Or joynts whileft he feepes, the mufcles of their owne accord as aici 
contracting themfelves towards their originals, thatthe member may againe fall 
out, and it will give manifeft fignes thereof by renewing the paine, by preffing or 
pricking the adjacent bodies : which paine will not ceafe, before it bee reftored to 
its place: and hereof the Surgeon ought to have diligentcare. For if, whileftrhe 
Callus isin growing, one bone ride over another, the bone it felfe will afterwards 
be fo much the fhorter, and confequently the whole member ; {o that if this errour 
fhallhappen in a broken legge, the Patient will halt ever after,to his great griefe,and 
the Surgeons fhame. Wherefore the Patient fhall take heedjas much as in him lyes, 
that he ftirrenot the broken member, before that the Callus be hardened. Such dili- 
gent careneedes not bee had in‘diflocations. For thefe once fet, and artificially 
boundup, doe not afterwards foeafily fall forth as broken bones. 
The fecond {copc is, that the bones which fhall be reftored may bee firmely kept 
in their tate and place, That fhall be done by Bandages ; as Jigatures, boulfters,and 
other things, whereof hereafter we fhal! make particular mention.Hithertend pro- 
perand fit medicines, to wit, applying of oyle of Rofes with the whites of Eages, 
andthe like repelling things ; and then refolving medicines, as the prefent neceflity 
thall require, It will be convenient, to moyften your rowlers and boulfters in oxy- 
crate for this purpofe,; or elfein Rofe vinegar, if the FraGture befimple, or withred 
wine, or the like liquor warme (in Galens Opinion) if a wound bee joynedto the o a 
fracture ; and it will be fit to moyften fraCtures oftner in Summer: For fo the part © 32 
isftrengthened, the defluxion being repelled, whereby the inflammation and paine 
ae hindred. You muft defift from hume@ting and watering the part when the fymp- 
tomesare left you retard the generating of a Callus ; for which you mutt la- 
bour by thefe meanes which wee fhall hereafter declare. To this purpofealfo con- 
duces the reft and lying of the part in its proper figure and fite accuftomed in 
health, that fo it may the longer remaine in the fame place unftirred. Befides alfo, 
tisexpedientthen only to dreffe the part, when it is needfull, & with thofe things 
thatare requifite, fhunning, as much as may be, inflammation and paine. That fi- whar the mi¢- 
gureis thoughtthe beft, which is the middle, that is, which containes the mufcles > = 
intheir fite, which is without paine; fothatthe Patient may long endure it with-"’ 
Cutlabour or trouble. Allthefe thing being performed, the Patient mutt be asked, 
Whether the member be bound up tooftrait ¢ If hee anfwer, No,(unlefle perad- 
Yenture a little upon the fracture or luxation, for there itis fit it ihould bee more 
(traitly bound) then may you know that the binding is moderate. And this 5. cimefor 
Ne firk ligation is to bee kept in fractures without loofing for three or foure loofing of Liga- 
dayes {pace, unleffe peradventure paine urge youro the contrary. Indiflocations y arpa dik 
the fame binding may bee keprfor feven or cight daies, unlefle by chance {OME Jocations. 
yMptome may happen, which may force us to open it before that time : ne 
Bbb the 


~ 


f 
omes 
. 


566 Concerning Fractures. 


= 
= 


the Surgeon mutt with all nis art have a careto prohibite the happening of evil 
accidentsand fymptomes, which, how he may bring to pafle, thall bee dec}p,.. 


req 
in the following Chapter. . 


VG 


By what meanes you may performe the third intention in curing fradlaves and J, . 
cations, which is, the hindring and correction of accidents and (ymptomes, 


Hat we may attaineuntothis third fcope, it is requifite we handle as 

itt tly and without paine,as we may,the broken or diflocated mem)o., 

we drive away the defluxion ready to fall downe upon the parr by me. 

' dicines, repelling the humour, and ftrengthning the part; wee, by ap. 

pointing a good diet, hinder the begetting of excrementsin the bedie, and diver, 

them by purging and phlebotomie, Butif thefe accidents be already prefent, we 

muft cure them according to the kinde and nature of each of them: for they are 

rhecaufesang Watious. Amongft which is reckoned itching, which in the beginning torments 

differencesof the Patient : this arifeth froma collection and fuppreflion of fubacride vapours 

itching. arifing from the blood, and other humors under the skin. Whence a light biting. 

which caufeth afimple itch, or elfe amore grievousand acride one, from whence 

Adfints.@, (in Galens opinion)proceeds a painefullitching. Wherefore fuch matter, as the 

fiat. caufe, being evacuated, all itching ceafeth. Butthis cannot eafily and freely be eva. 

cuated and breathed out,becaufe the pores of the part are {hut up, and as it were 

oppreffed with the burden of the emplaifters, boulfters, and ligatures, which are 

put aboutthe part. Hereunto may be added, that the part its felfe doth not fo per- 

fectly performe and enjoy its wonted faculties and actions : by which it commeth 

to paffe, that the heat thereof is more languide than may fuffice to difcufle the full. 

Remediesa- inous matter there collected. Wherefore it willbe convenientto loofe the liga. 

‘hewch tures everie third day, that, asby loofing their tyes; their faniousand fuliginous 

excrements, fhut upunderthe skinne, may freely pafle forth, left in continuance 

they fhould fret and ulcerateit ; asithappens to moft of thofe who provide not 

for it by loofing their ligatures. Befides alfo, the part muft bee long fomented 

with hote wateralone, or elfe witha decoGionof fage, chamomile, rofes, and 

melilote made in wine and water : for long fomenting attenuates and evacuates, 

but fhorter filsand mollifies, as it is delivered by Hippocrates. Alfo gentle fri- 

Ctions, performed with your hand, or awarme linnen cloathupwards, to che right 

fide and left, and circularly to everie fide, are good.But if the skinne be already 1- 

fen into blifters,they muft be cut, left the matter contained thereunder may corrode 

and ulcerate the skinne : then muft theskinne be annointed with fome cooling and 

drying medicine ; as, “ng. album Camphoratum Rhafis, Deficcativum rubrum, - 

Suentum rofatum fine aceto ;adding thereto the pouder of a rotten pofte,or prepared 

Seitz.defratt, 7 #44, or the like. Other accidents more grievous than thefe, doe often happen, but 

we will treat of them hereafter. But if the {cales of the bone underneath bee quit 

fevered from the whele, then muft they be prefently taken forth,efpecially if chey 

prick the mufcles: But ifthe bone be broken into {plinters, and fo prominent out 

of the wounded flefh as that it cannot be reftored inroits feat,itmuft be cut off witht 

your cutting mallets, or parrats beake,as occafion fhall offer its felfe.In the interim, 

you mutt have a care that the part enjoy perfpiration, and by changcof place and 

rifing, now and then it may be asit were ventilated : alfo you mutt {ee that it be no 

over-burdened, neyther too ftrait bound, otherwife it will be apt to inflammatio" 

Thus much concerning fractures and diflecations in generall:now we mu! defcena 
to particulars, beginning with a fracture of the Nofe. 


Foure choice 
meanes to hin- 


der accidents. 


bone being 
the nofe ; W! 
fheeps lungs. 
Nojethat th 
be in fome {¢ 
rion of the b 
have oft tame 
them with a 
kept the bone 
thing hindre 
Nofe with t 
left they bec 
any the frac 
The fr 
and repreflet 
dry upand w 
edto the N 
thar, 
refine pint. al 
buminum ov 
Neither fh: 
being fra@tur¢ 
there happe 
ther name n 
deft of all tl 
unleffe fom: 


the bones lye 
Parts, upwas 


fu 
there willbe 
shat bone wh 
preft, mutt b 
wrapped 
hall hold th 
A 
Which happe 
“2d preffin 
| 


ppening 
bec declares 


(lures and dill, 
lomes 


handle as 
cated member 
the parr by me. 
wee, by 
die, and diverr 
ady prefent, we 
n for they aré 
torments 
acride vapours, 
Cc a light biting, 
from whence 
pmatter, as the 
id freely be eva. 
» and as it were 
ures, Which are 
doth not fo per- 
uch it commeth 
difcuffe the fuli- 
loofe the liga. 
and fuliginous 
In comtinuance 
ho provide nor 
long fomented 
lile, rofes, and 
and evacuates, 
Alfo gentle fri- 
ds, to the right 
e be already ri- 
ermay corrode 
me cooling and 
m rubrum, 
or prepared 
ten happen, but 
eath bee quite 
{pecially if they 
) prominent out 
tbe cut off with 
Inthe interim, 
eof place and 
ee thar it be not 
inflammation. 
‘emuft defcene 


CuaPe 


Concerning Fraures. 567 


Of the Fracture of the Nofé. 


He Nofe ts griftly in its lower part,but bonyin the upper.Wherfore it prin fp, 4¢ 
fuffers no fracture in the griftly part(unlefs peradventure a Sedes)but only /t.2.aeart, 
a depreflion,diftortion or contufion, But a fra@ure often happens to the 
8 bony part,& fo great a deprefhion to the in nerfide, that unleffe it be pro- 
vided for by diligent re{toring it, the nofe will become flat,or wrefted afide, whence 
chere will be difficulty cf breathing. That this kinde of fracture may be reftored, How to reduce 
shat bone which ftands too farre out muft be preffed downe ; but that which is de- a 
reft, muft be liftedup witha {patherne, or little fticke handfomely fathioned and figure. 
wrapped about with cotten or a linnen ragge, foto avoyd paine. Thereforeyou 
hall hold the fi patherne in one hand, and reduce and order it with the other. The 
bone being reftored, directories or tents of aconvenient bignefe fhall be put into 
the nofe ; which tents fhall bee made of {ponge, or flaxe, or a peece of abeafts or 
fheepslungs. For thefe things are foft, and doe not onely hinder the bones of the 
Nofethat they fall no more, but alfo lift them up higher. And then the Nofe fhall 
be in fome fort ftayed with boulfters on each fide,even untill the perfe& agg lorina- 
rionof the bones, left the figure and ftraitnefle fhould be vitiated and {poyled. I 
have oft times put golden, filver and leaden pipcs into fractured nofes, and faftned 
them with a thred to the Patients night cap, which, by one andthe fame means, 
keptthe bones from being again depreft,gave the matter free paflage forth,and no- 
thing hindred the breathing.In the mean time we mutt fee,that we do not preffe the 
Nofe with too ftrait binding, unleffe peradventure fome other thing perfwade ; 
left they become cyther too wide, tooflat, or crooked. If any wound accom- 
any the frature, that fhall bee cured after the fame manner, asthe wounds of the 
head. The fracture reftored,the following medicine, which hath a facultie to repell 
andreprefle the defluxion, to ftrengthen and keep the part in its duc pofture, andto 
dry upand wafte the matter which hath alreadie fallen downe, fhall bee apply- 
edto the Nofe, and all the other dry parts. 

theris, maftiches, boli armenia, fanguinis dracon. 38. alusinis roche, aftringent 
refine pini. an. 5 ij. pulverifentur fubtilifsime: Orelfe, farina volatilis 36, al- = 
buminum ovorum quantum fufficit, incorporentur fimul, cx fiat medicamentum, 

Neither fhall you ufe any other art to cure the cartilagineous part of the nofe 
being fractured. Wherefore Hippocrates termes that folution of continaitie that so 
there happens, A fracture, as if it were inabone; becaufe hee could finde no o- &71.<> Gat, 
ther name more fitly to expreffe it : for a griftle, next to a bone, is the har- “°” 
deft of all the parts of our bodie. A Callus ufes to grow in fractured nofes, 


unleffe fomething hinder withir the {pace of twelve or fifteene dayes. 


Cuap. VIL. 
Of the Fracture of the lower Jaw. 


He lower Jaw runnes into two, asit were,horns or tops: the one Where- 4 


> 


of ends fharpe,and receives a tendon from the temporall mufcle 5 the of che lower 
otherends blunt and round under the mammillaric proceffe, and it 1s Jaw. 
4 there implanted in a {mall cavitie ; it is joyned together in the mid- 


dleof the chin by Symphyfs, andis marrowie within. The Fracture, The anode - 


Which happensthereto, is re(tored by putting your fingers intothe Patients mouth, 
and prefling them onthe infideand outfide,that fo the fractured bones put toge- 
ther may be {moothed andunited. But if theybe broken wholly athwart, fo that 
bones lye over each other, extenfion mutt be made on both fides on contrary 
Parts, upwagds and downwards, whereby the bones may be compofed and pet 
Bbb 2 


* 
Py 
= 
A 
~- 
q 
\ 
. 
. 


568 Concerning Frattures. Ly B.S 


ned more eafily toone another. The teeth inthe meane while, if they be eyther 
fhaken or removed out of their fockets, mutt be reftored to their former places and 
tyed with agold or filver wyar, or elfe an ordinary threed, to the next firme tecth 
until! fuch timeas they fhall be faftened, and the bones perfectly knit by a cuy,,” 
To which purpofe the ordered fragments of the fractured bone fhall bee ftayed 
by putting a fplint on the outfide, made of fuch leather as thoe foales are made’ 
the midft thereof being divided at the Chin, and of fuch length and breadth ‘. 
Thedefeription may ferve the Jaw: then you (hall make ligation with a ligature two fingers broad 
of a fit ligature and of fuch length as fhall be fufficient, divided at both the ends, and cut long. 
 waiesinthe midft thereof that fo it may engirtthe chin on both fides. Then ther. 
will be foure heads of fuch a ligature fo divided at theends ; thetwo lower where. 
of being brought tothe crown of the head, fhall bee there fattened and lowed to 
the Patients night-cap. The two upper drawne athwart fhall likewife be fowed as 
artificially as may bee, tothecap in the nappe of thenecke. It isa moft certaine 
figne, that the Jaw is reftored and well fet, if the teeth faftened therein ftand in 
their due ranke and order. The patient fhall not lye downe upon his broken jaw, 
leftthe fragments of the bones fhould againe fall out, and caufea greater defluxion, 
Unleffe inflammation, or fome other grievous fymptome, fhall happen, ir js 
ftrengthned with aCal/us within twenti¢e dayes; forthat it is {pongious, hollow, 
In what time it and full of marrow, efpecially in the midft thereof : yet fometimes, it heales more 
may behealed owly, according as thetemper of the patient is, which takes alfo place in other 
fractured bones. Theagglutinating and repelling medicine,defcribed in the for. 
mer chapter, fhall be ufed ; asalfo others, as occafion fhall offer it felfe. The P2. 
tient muft be fed with liquid meats, which ftand not in need of chewing,untill fuch 
time asthe Cal/ws fhall grow hard, left the {carce or ill-joyned fragments fhould 
fiy infunder withthe labour of chewing. Therefore fhall hee bee nourifhed with 
water-grewell, ponadoes, cullaffes, barley creames, gellies, brothes,reare egges,te- 
ftaurative liquors, and other things of the like nature. 


Cuapr.Viil. 
Of the Fracture of the Clavicle or Collar -bone. 


S the nature andkindeof the fractured Clavicle hall bee, fo mutt the 
cure and reftoring thereof bee performed. But howfoever this bone 
{hall be broken,alwaies the end faftenedto the fhoulder and fhoulder- 
blade, is lower than that which is joyned to the cheft ; forthat the arme 
drawes it downe-wards. Thecollar-bone, if broken athwart, ismore 
eafily reftored and healed, than if it be cloven long-wayes. For,everie bone bro- 
ken athwart doth more eafily returne into its former ftate or feat, whiles you liftit 
up onthis orthat fide with your fingers. But that which is broken /chidacidon, ot 
into {plinters , or long-waies, is more difficultly joyned and united tothe ends 
and fragments: for thofe peeces, which were fet, will be plucked afunder, even by 
the leaft motion of the armes; and that which was kpit with the thoulder, will fall 
downce to the lower part of the breaft. The reafon of whichis, the Collar-bone 

How to reftore is not moved of its felfe, but confents in motion with thearme, Inreftoring this or 
the frattures any other fracture, you muft have acare that the bones ride not one over another, 
Thefirtt way, Neyther be drawn nor depart too far in funder : therfore it will be here convenient, 
that one fervant draw the arme backwards, and another pull the fhoulder towards 

him the contrarie way ; for fo there will be made,as I may foterme it, a counter 
extenfion, While which is in doing, the Surgeon with his fingers fhall reftore the 
fracture, preffing downe that which ftood up too high, and lifting up that which's 

The fecond prefled downe too low. Some, thatthey may more eafily reftorethis kind¢° 
way. fracture, put aclew of yarne underthe Patients arme-pit ; foto fill upthecav!" 
thereof: then they forcibly preffe the elbow to the ribs, and then force the bone 


The third woy. into its former feat, But if it happen, that the ends of the broken bones oe a “ 
eprent 


Hipp. fent.63 felt. | 


1.deart, 


L 1B.15- 


deprett,chat 
che Patient 
(tuffed, 
fuch 
ders with hi 
out and 
che fracturec 
ftored, and 

of breathio 

ment lift up 
alideadly ac 
ments, they 
wheat floure 
powder, anc 
foft worne | 
three boulft 
the third and 
For thus the 
they (hould, 
venient thick 
below that b 
head caft crc 
or lefs, acco 
draw his ar 

with boulftct 
eafily fuffer om 
hisarme bac 
ufe to doc, t 
in curing thi 
fome defo 

collar-bone, 
bone, within 


Prefentsa pri 
Called Acrom 
blade) it rece 
POCrates ast 

hollowed ro 
the faid Blade 
this truely is 

receiving of t 
Called Coraco 
keeps the fhor 
fhoulder-bla 


Which runnes 
Vertebre of 


- 
* 
| = 
{ 
{ 
a 
; 
4 
Peel j 
our Anatomi 
With th 
j 
im 


s. Then there 
lower where. 
and lowed to 
© be fowed as 
moft ctrtaine 
rerein ftand in 
is broken jay, 
miter defluxion. 
happen, it is 
lous, hollow, 
itheales more 
in other 
bed in the for. 
elfe. The 
ing,untill 
yments fhould 
ourifhed with 
reare cepes.ic- 


e, fo mutt the 
ever this bone 
and {houlder-. 
that the arme 
wart, ismore 
rie bone bro- 
Biles you liftit 
thidacidom, OF 
d totheends 
nder, even by 
ilder, will fall 

Collar-bone 
{toring this or 
over another, 
Fe convenient, 
Ider cowards 
ir, a counter 
all reftore the 
chat whichis 


-this kinde of 


lupthecavity 
rcethe bone 
es {hall bee fo 

depreft, 


L 1B. 15. Concerning Fratlures. 569 


jpreft,that they cannot be drawn upwards by the forementioned means:then muft 
che Patient be layd with his backe,juft betweene the fhoulders, upon 2 pillow hard 
Guffed, or a tray turned with the bottome upwards, and covered with a rugge or 
fe {uch thing. Then the fervant hall {o long prefle downe the Patients rout. 
ders with his hands, untill the ends of the bones, lying hid and prefled downe, fly 

out and fhew them felves. Which being done,the Surgeon may eafily reftore or fet 

he fractured bone. But if the bone be broken {0 into {plinters that it cannot bee re- 

fored,and any of the {plinters pricke and wound the flefh, and fo caufe difficultie 

of breathing, youthen mutt cut the skinne even againft them,and with your inftru- 

ment lift up all the depreffed {plinters, and cutoff their tharp points ; foto prevent 

lideadly accidents, which thereupon may bee feared. If there be many frag- 

ments, they, after they are fet, fhallbe covered with aknitting medicine made of 

wheat floure, frankincenfe;bole armenicke, /anguis draconis, refina pini, made into 

wder,and mixed withthe whites of cgges, putting upon it f plints, covered with How tobinde 

foft worne linnen raggs; covered over likewife with the fame medicine, and then "P *h< ‘aGured 
chree boulfters dipped in the fame ; two whereof fhall be layd uponthe fides, but ~*~“ 

the third and thickeft upon the prominent fracture, fotorepreffe it and hold it in. 

For thus the fragments fhall not beable co ftirre or lift themfelves up further than 

they fhould, eyther to the rightfide or left. Now thefe Boulfters muft be ofacon- 

venient thickneffe and breadth, futhcientto fillup the cavities which are above and 

below thatbone. Then fhall you make fit ligation with arowler, havinga double 

head caft croffe-wile, of a handsbreadth, and fometwo ells and a halfe long more 

orlefs, according to the Patients bodie. Now hee fhall be fo rowled up, as it may 


f draw his arme fomewhat backwards, and inthe interim his arme- pits fhall be filled 


with boulfters, efpecially that next thebroken bone ; for fo the Patient may more 

ealily fuffer che binding. Alfo you fhall wifh the Patient, that he of himfelfe bend 

hisarme backewards, and fet his hand upon his hip, as the Countrey Clownes 

ule to doe, when they play at leap-frogge. But how great diligence foever you ufe Itisa difficele 
in curing this fort of fracture, yet can it {carce befo performed, butthat there will wnat canpag 
fome deformity remaine in the part : for that a ligature cannot be rowled about the fraéued cla- 
collar-bone, as it may about a legge oranarme. A Callus ofttimes growes on this 


bone, within the {pace of twenty daies, becaufe it is rare and {pongions. 


- 


Crap. IX. 
Of the fracture of the (houlder-blade. 


He Greeks call that Omoplata, which the Latines terme Scapula, or Scapu- anatomical 

patella, thatis, the fhoulder-blade. It is faftened onthe backeto the defcription of 
W@e ribs, nowle, the Yertebre of the cheft and necke; but not by articulation, eo 

~78 butonly bythe interpofition of mufcles, of which wee have {poken in 

our Anatomie. But on the forepart it is articulated after the manner of other bones 

with the collar- bone, the fhoulder, or arme-bone : for with its procefle, which re- 

Prelentsa pricke or thorne, and by fome, for that it is more long and prominent, is 

called Acromion, (that is, asyou would fay, thetop or {pire of the faid fhoulder- 

blade) it receives the Collar-bone. Therefore fome Anatomitts,according to Hip- 

Pocrates as they fuppofe, call all this articulation of the Collar-bone with the 

hollowed proceffe of the fhoulder-blade,_4cromion. There is another procefle of 

the faid Bladeebone, called Cervix omeplate, or the necke of the Shoulder-blade : 
Struely is very (hort, but ending in abroad and finuated head, provided for the 

‘ceiving of the Shoulder or arme-bone. Not farre from this proceffe is another, 

Called Coracoides, for that theend thereof is crooked like a Crowes beake. This 

rei the fhoulder bone in its place,and conducesto the ftrength of that part. The hays 

ulder- blade may be fra@tured in any part thereof, thatis, eyther onthe ridge, 

nich tunnes like a hill, alongft the midftthereof, for its fafety, as wee fee in the der-blademay | 
hebre of thebacke. So alfo in the broader part thereof it may bee thruft io and >¢ broken, 


L IR AS 

hey JC CYther 
ier Places ang | 
ut by a Cal,’ 
bee {tayed 
- 3 
Nd breadth 
ingers broad. 
4nd cut long. 


Concerning Fractures. Linas 


depreft andalfo in that articulation, whereby the top of the fhoulder is knit 


According to this variety of the{c fractured parts,the happening accidents are 
grievous or gentle. 

Wee know the {pine or ridge of the Shoulder-blade to be broken, when a dojo. 
rificke inequalitie is perceived by touching or feeling it. But you may know, thar 
the broader or thinner part thereof is depreffed, if you feele a cavity, and 3 Prick. 
ing paine moleft che part, and if a nnmnefle trouble the arme, being ltretched 

thecwe. forth. The fragments, if they yet fticketo their bone,and doe not pricke the fle} 
muft be reftoredto their ftateand place, andthere kept with agglutinative medi. 
cines, and {uchas generate a Cals, as alfo with boulfters and rowlers fitted to the 
place. But if they doe not adhere tothe bone,or pricke the fleth lying under ther, 
then muft you make incifion in the ficth over againft them, that fo you may tak, 
them out with your Crowes beake, But although they ftirre up and downe, yeri¢ 
they ftill adhere to the perio/tium and ligaments, (if fo be that they trouble nor th. 
mulcles by prickingthem) then muftthey not bee taken forth : for I have oftne, 
than once obferved, that they have within fome fhort time after growne to the ad. 
jacent bones, Butif they, being wholly feparated, doe not fomuch as adhere to 
the perioftium, then muft they neceflarily be plucked away ; otherwife within {ome 
fhort {pace after, they will be driven forth by the ftrength of nature, for that they 
participate not any more inlife withthe whole. For that which isquicke, {ajith 
Lib.de cult. — Hippocrates, ufesto expell that which is dead farre from it, Thetruth whereof was 
 manifefted in the Marques of Villars, whoat the battell of Dreux was wounded 
in his thoulder with a piftoll bullet, certaine fplinters of the broken bone were 
plucked forth with the peeces of his harnefle, and of the leaden bullet; and within 
fome fhort {pace after, the wound was cicatrized, and fully and perfectly healed. 
But more than feven yearcsafter, a defluxion and inflammation arifing in that place 
Nemureotite © BY Feafon of his jabourin armes, and the heavinefle of his armour at the battell of 
owne accord Mont-contour,the wound broke open againe; fothat many fhivers of the bone, 
makes iriete with the refidue of the leaden bullet, came forth of themfelves.But if the fradure 
way to cal . 
forth firange {hall happen in the necke of the fhoulderblade or dearticulation of the fhoulder, 
bodicsand there is {carce any hope of recovery; as I have obfervedin Anthony of Burbon, 
Why afragure King of Navarre; Francis of Lorraine, Duke of Guife; the Count Rhingrave Phi. 
inthe joynt of Jibert,and many otherin thele late civill warrs. Forthere are many large veflels2- 
bout this dearticulation, to wit, the axillary veineand arteric, the nerves arifing 
! from the Vertebre of the necke, which are thence difleminated into all che mulcles 
of the arme. Befides, alfo inflammation and putrefaQion arifing there are calily 
communicated by reafon of their neighbour-hood to the heart and other princi- 
pall parts, whence grievous fymptomces, and ofttimes death it felfe, enfucs. 


CuHuapr. X. 


Of the fracture and deprefsion of the Sternon, or Breaft-bone. 


Signes that the 
1S bro- 
ken. 


He Sternum is {ometimes broken, otherwiles onely thruft in without 
fratture. The inequality perceivable by your feeling, fhewsa fracture, 
2s alfo the going in witha thruft with your finger,and the found or noile 
Sjoneethat Of thebones crackling under your fingers.But a manifeft cavity inthe 
isdeprett. «Part, acough, {pitting of blood, and ditlicultie of breathing by compreffion of the 
membrane invefting the ribs and the lungs, arguethe depreflion thereof. For the 
Thecus, —_geftoring of this bone, whether broken or depreft, the patient muft be layd on fs 
backe, with acuthion ftuffed with tow or hay under the vertebre of the backe, %® 
we ferdowone in the fetting of the Collar-bone. Thena fervant fhall lye ftrongly 
with borh his hands on his fhoulders, asif he would prefle them downe, whilltt 
Surgeon, in the meane time prefling the ribs on each fide, fhall reftore and fet ° 
bone with his hand; and then the formerly defcribed medicines fhall bee app!¥° 
forto hinder inflammation, and affwage paine ; boulfters thall bee fitted on" 


But oft 
fplinters, and 
times not exct 
through it 
which invefts 
when the frac! 
brane, and la 
fore Hippocra 
ly with meat 
prop or ftay | 
chiefly takes | 
ufually fecle t 
of the ftomac 
Now that fra 
1S inwardly : I 
tion, which 
ly to be hank 
it cannot be 
performed in 
as todraw it 
dayes, if not! 
feeling the 
the inequalit 
quite broke 
Prievous 
the Coftall 
{pitting of 
lence of the 
by a dry co 
Some, to pu! 
and that is il] 
paine by the 
Wherefore H 
ftoreit after 
there be lay 
Pitch, wheat 
Whenit hat 
from below 
Plucked and 


left it hin 
of Anthony 
Order, WhO ha 
of 4 Field-| 
blow 
this he lives 
| 
a =\ Bu 
bec 
wai 
Ledin. 
‘ 


yOu may take 
lowne, yctif 
Not the 
have oftner 
vne to the ad. 
ias adhere to 
‘within {ome 

for that they 
quicke, {aith 
Whercof was 
Wounded 
en bone were 
¢; and within 
fectly healed. 
in that place 
the battell of 
of the bone, 
if the fraGure 
the fhoulder, 
y of Burbon, 
hingrave Phi- 
large veilelsa. 
nerves arifing 
ill che mutcles 
cre are calily 
| other princi: 
niucs. 


ft in without 
wsa fracture, 
found or noile 
tcavity inthe 
preftiion of tie 
reof. For the 
be layd on his 
t the backe, 25 
Il lye ftrongly 
yne, whilltt he 
and {et che 
li bec apply¢ 


Arred chereto: 
and 


1B. 18. Concerning Frattures. 571 


(hall bee made crofle-wayes above the fhoulders, bur that not too 
Grait, belt tt hinder the Patients breathing. I by thefe meancs, atthe appointment Ahiltoric, 
of Anthoay of Burbon King of Navarre, cured Anthony Benand a Knightofthe 

Order, who had his breaft-plate bended and driven in, with an iron bullet fhot out 

of a Field-Peece, 2s alfo his flernum together therewith, and he fell down as dead 

with the blow ; he did {pit blood tor threemonths after I had fet the bone: yer for 

ji thishe lives at this day in perfect health. 


and 4 lig arure 


Cuapr. XI. 
Of the fracture of tke ribs. 


amaseHe true ribs, for that they are bonie, may be broken in any part of them. 
Butthe baftard ribs cannot be truly broken unlefle at the backe bone, 
becaufe they are onely bonic in that part, but griftly on the forefide may be broken. 
wards the breaft-bone,wherefore there they can only be folded or croo- 
tedin. Thefe which are fubject to fractures, may be broken inwards and outwards. 
Rut oft times it comes to pafle,  thatthey are not abfolutely broken. but clefr into 
fplinters, and that fometimes inwards, but not ourwaras. Thus the fiflure doth oft- 
times norexceedethe middle fubftance of the rib, but fometimes it fo breakes 
through it all, thatthe fragments and fplinters do prick and wound the membrane, 
which invefts and linesthem on the infide, and thenthere is great danger. But 
when the fraQure is fimple withouta wound, compreflion, punaure of the mem- 
brane, and laftly, without any other fymptome; then the danger isleffe. There- 
foreHippocrates wifheth, that thefe, whoare thus affected, fill chem{elves more free- 
lywith meat ; for that moderate repletion of the belly, is (asit were) a certaine 
propor ftay forthe ribs, keeping them wellintheir place and {tate : which rule 
chiefly takes place in fra@tures of the baftard ribs. For fuch as have them broken, 
ufually fecle themfelves better after, than before meat. For emptinefle of meat, or 
of the ftomack, mak«s a {ufpenfion of the ribs,as not underpropped by the meat. 
Now that fracture which is outwardly, is farre more eafie to heale,than that which why aninter-_ 
isinwardly ; for that this pricketh the membrane or Plewra,and canferh infamma- "asus 
tion, which may eafily end in an Empyema. Adde hereunto, thar this is not fe eafl- deadly. 

ly to be handled or dealt wirhall, as rhe other: whereby it commeth to paffe, that 

it cannot be fo eafily reftored; for thatrhefe things cannot bee fo fully and freely 

performed in this kinde of fracture, which are neceflary to the {etting of the bone, 

astodraw itout, holdit andjoyneittogether. Itis therefore healed within twenty 

dayes, if nothing elfe hinder. The fignes of fractured ribs are not obfcure ; for by Thefignes. 
feeling the grieved part with your fingers, you mey eafily perceive the fracture by 

the inequalitie of. the bones, and their noyfe or crackling, efpecially, uf they bee 

quite broke afunder. Butif arib be broken on the infide,a pricking paine,tas more 

grievous than ina Pleurifie, troubles the Patient ; becaufe the fharp {plinters pricke 

the Coftall membrane : whence great difficulty in breathing , a congh and 

{pitting of blood enfue. For blood, flowing from the veilels broken by the or 
lence of the thing cauting the fracture, is (as it were) fucked up by the lungs, and fo {pitting blood 
by a dry cough carried into the weazond, andatlength {pit out of the mouth. 1 20 meray 
Some, to pull up the bone that is quite broken and depreit, apply a cupping glaife, : 
and that is ill done : for there is caufed greater attraction of humors, and exccfle of 

Paine by the preflureand contraGtion of the adjacent parts, by the cupping-glafie; 

Wherefore Hippocrates alfo forbidsit. Therefore itis better toendeavour to re- 
loreit after this following manner. Letthe Patient lye upon his found fide,and let deans 
‘here be layd upon the fractured fide an emplaifter made of Turpentine,rofin,black 
Pitch, wheat fourc, maftick and aloes, and {pread upon a firong and new cloath. cae 
Whenit hath Qucke there {ome time, then plucke it {uddenly with great violence 7s 
from below upwards : for fo the rib will follow together therewith, and bce 


Plucked and drawne upwards, It isnot fuflicientto have done this once, but you 
muit 


| 
~ 
‘ 
id en: 
if 
ad, 
Mor 
. 
A 
y "4 
oie 
and 
ric fi. 
iretched 
~ 
ee 
Med 
tted recy eh, 
under Cm 
| 
] 


* 


oncerning Fratlures. 


Afimplefrac- wounds. Now Diet, Phlebotomie and Purgation, which (as Hippocrates faith) 
cure may becue gre not very needfull in a fimple fracture, 


red oncly by 
Surgeric. 


The caulee 


Thefignes. . 


Theeure. 


muft doe it often, untill fuch timeas the Patient fhall finde himfelfe bet; 
to breathe more eafily. There willbe much more hope of reftitution, if 


breath. Orherwife, if neceffitic urge, as if fharpe {plinters with mott bitrer; 
ting paine prickethe Coftall membrane over{pred with many nerves, veines, 3, 


arteries, which run under the ribs,whence difficultie of breathing {pitting Of bloog 
2 cough and fever enfue ; then the only way to deliver the Patient from danger of 
imminent death, is, to make incifion on the part, where the rib is broken, thay fo 
laying it bare, youmay difcernethe pricking fragments, and take them oyt With 


by NCifion, 


your inftrument, or elfe cut them off. And if you make a great wound 
then fhall you few it up, and cure # according to the common rules of cyrin 


ting the occafion, fhall be applyed to the grieved part : no other ligatures can be yp. 
fed, than fuchas are fit to hold faft and ftay the locall medicines. Thete is no 9. 


ther rule of fiteand lying, than fuch as is taken from the will and content of 


the Patient. 


Of certaine preternaturall affects which enfae upon brokenribs. 


Any fymptomesenfue upon fraGured and contufed ribs : but 
; 2 the reft, there are two which arenot common, whereof we wil! treate 


ay : V2 inthis place. The firftis, the inflation, or rifing up of the contufed 


NS’) 72) SE flefh, which alfo enfues upon light affects of the bone, which have bin 
neglected atthe beginning.. But the fiefh is not meerly puffed up of its 
felfe, but alfo with a certaine phlegmatick, glutinous and vifcous humour gathering 
thereinto. The caufehercof is, the weaknefle of the digeftive facultie of the part, 
occafioned by the ftroake and diftemper ; which therefore cannot affimulate the 
nourifhment flowing more plentifully than it was wont, cyther drawne thither by 
means of the pain, or fent thither by ablinde violence of nature, ftirred thereto by 
a defire of its own prefervation. Wherfore this halfe crude humor remaining there, 
raifeth much flatuling from its felfe, orelfe wrought upon by the weaker heat, it is 
refolved into cloudy vapours ; whence it commeth to paffe,that the fleth is {wolne 
up in that place, and the skinne on thecontrary growes foft, as if it were blowne 
up with a quill, Therefore laying your hand thereon, you may heare the noyfe of 
the winde going ferththereof,and feea cavity left in the part, as it is ufually {ene 
in cedematous tumors. Unlefle you remedie this inflation, there will enfue an in- 
flammation, fever, ab{ceffe, difficulty of breathing ; and laftly that fecond kinde of 
affect, whereof we have determined to treat in this Chapter, to wit,the putrefacti- 
on, corruption, or blafting of theribs. An abfceffe, and the feparation of the fleth 
from the bone, is the caufe hereof: for hence it commeth to paffe, that the bone, 
defpoyled of its naturall and flefhly cloathing wherewith it was cherifhed, is ealily 
offended by the touch of the entring avre, which it never formerly felt, and fo 2 
length it becommeth(as it were) blafted : which when it happens,they {pit up filth, 
and fo fall into a confumption, and at length dye. To withftandall thefe inconve- 
niencies, you muft, as {peedily as you can, reftorethe fratured bones by the for- 
merly delivered meanes. Andthen this mucous tumor muft be refolved by proper 
heating and difcuffing medicines, and kept downe by boulfters and rowlers; that 
fo the fiefh may touch the bone, and cover it asitufually did. But the ligature fhall 
not be made fo ftrait, asto hinder the ribs from their wonted motion in expiration 


and infpjration. If che tumor degenerate into an Abf{ceffe,it thalbe {pecdily _— 
¢ 


— 
L I 


and 
Whi 
the Sargeon doc this diligently, the Patient forbeare coughing, 2nd hold 


Ormen. 


for that there are no fymptomes, which 
may require fuch remedies; yet, they, by reafon of the complicated fympromes 
as aconvulfion, feaver, Empyema, and the like, muft here be prefcribed,by the a4. 
vice of the Phyfician which over-feesthe cure. A Cerate, and other remedies fy. 


whethe b¢ 
mongtt thefe 
legges, fandam 
facultie of fentt 
ainft pes 
happen (Lait 
final mar 
incifion, fotot 
prefle the {pinal 
you fhallappty 
and then the br¢ 
by thofe mean 
the {pine. Bat: 
fhall be put in ti 
if they bee fev@ 
the wound as i: 
broken, if,in th 
fey, you, laying 
ment, fhaking 2 
and depreffion 
his backe, hee 
feete. For in 
and extended 
whence procee 
ding ftraight 
ly leffe mole(tal 
bre eafily heal 
tome which m 
wee formerly { 
Callus within < 


572 | Lis. 
\ 
OF 
int 


or rules of Curin 
POCrates {air} ) 
PtoMes, which 
cared fympromes 

cr bed,by the ad. 
r Cmedies fir. 
ligatures can be u- 
hete is no o.- 
end conten: of 


envibs. 


ibs : but among ft 
we will treate 
the contufed 
» Which have bin 
ly puffed up of its 
urnour gathering 
ul ic of the part, 
ot ailimulate the 
rawne thither by 
itred thereto by 
reiaining there, 
Weiker heat, it is 
he fieth ts {wolne 
were blowne 
ar> the noyfe of 
it s feene 
W |] enfuean in- 
t {cond kinde of 
it the putrefacti- 
at on of the fieth 
le,charthe bone, 
¢ is eafily 
y elt, and fo at 
hey {pit up filch, 
ll inconve- 
Oues by the for- 
© ved by proper 
crowlers; that 
the ligature fhall 
107 imexpiration 
{p:edily opened, 

left 


Concerning Fraétures. 


Lis I. 


ichithe matter, kept intoo long, corrupt the bone which lyesunder it, by the con. 

‘on of its putrefaction. The Ulcer being opened, the matter fhall bee evacuated 
by putting 4 pipe into the ulcer ; che end whereof fhalbe bound about witha thred, 
je(t it fall into the capacity ofthe cheft, and that it may bee drawne forth at your 


pleafure. 


— 


Cua pe.XIII. 


of the fracture of the Vertebra, or Rack. bones of the backe; 
and of their procejfes. 


Vertebre are fome-whiles broken, otherwhiles bruifed, or ftrained The affetts 
mX on the infide, wherby ic commeth to pafle,that the membranes which the verteve. 
ee inveftthe{pinall marrow, as alfo the {pinall marrow its felfe,are com- 


bythofe meanes which we fhall mention. when we come to treat of the luxation of 

the (pine. Bat if that the proceffes onely of the vertebra be broken, the fragments Thecure of the 
fall be put in their places, unleffe they bee quite fevered from their persoftinm, But Procetics. 

if they bee fevered, you fhall open the skinne and take them forth, and then drefle 

the wound as is fit. Weeunderftand, that onely the procefles of the vertebra are. a on. 
broken, if,in the abfenceof the toreementioned fymptomes of numnes and the pal- ly the procefles 
fey, you, laying your finger upon the grieved part, fecle fomething, asa bony frag. *¢ fractured 
ment, fhaking and moving thereunder, with a certaine crackling noyfe, and cavitie, 

and depreffion; and then, if when the Patient holds downce his head, and bends 

his backe, hee feele farre more paine, than when heeftands up ftraight on his 

fete. For in ftooping, the skinne of the backe is fomewhat ftretched forth, 

and extended , and alfo forced upon the fharpe Splinters of the fragments, 

whence proceedes a dolorificke folution of continuitic,and a pricking : in ftan- 

ding ftraight up, on thecontrary, the ftretched skinne is relaxed, and confequent- 

ly leffe molefted by the fharpe fragments, The fractured procefles of the verte- 

bre eafily heale, unleffe they bee aflociated with fome other more grievous fymp- 

tome which may hinder; fuch as is a certaine great contufion, and the like. For,as 

wee formerly fayd out of Hippocrates, All rare and fpongie bones areknicby a 


Calus within a few dayes. 


973 
im ¢lfe betre, and | 
turion, if whileg 
np, and hold hie 
not bitter COrmen 
Of blong 
isbroken, thar, 
Lk them Out With 
15, 
Sy WY prefled and ftraitened, which caufe many maligne accidents ; which, 
whether they be curable or not, may be certainly foretold by their magnitude. A- 
aongitthefe fymptomes, are the ftupidity,or numnefle and palfie of the armes, 
legges, fundament and bladder, which diminifh, or elfetake away from them the 
| facultie of fenfe and motion; fo that their urine and excrements come from them a- 
gainft their wils and knowledge, orel{e are wholly fuppreft. Which when they 
happen({aith Hippocrates) you may fore-tell that death is at hand, by reafon that 
the {pinall marrow ishurt. Having made {uch a prognofticke, you may make an 
incifion, foro take forth the {plinters of the broken verteora, which, driven in, fraured Ver. 
prefle the fpinall marrow, and the nerves thereof, If youcannotdoe this, at leaft 
you fhallapply fuch medicines as may aflwage paine, and hinder inflammation ; 
and then the broken bones {hall be reftored to their places, and contained therein 
CHAP. 


Concerning Fraélures. 


Cuarv. 


Of the fracture of the holy-boune, 
feature the Holy-bone in acertaine part thereof, which may be 
led, may by the blow of bruifing things, as by a 
ae out of a musket, as I have obferved in many, But if the fracture Violate 
together with the vertebre thereof, the f{pinall marrow Contained 
therein, then the Patient can f{carcefcape death, forthe reafons fhewed jn the 

former Chapter. 


bone curable 
and whatnot. 


Cuar.XV. 
Of the fracture of the Rumpe. 


The defcripti- 


He Rumpe iscompofed of foure bones: the firft whereof hath a cayirj- 
on ofthe rump. 


io! wherein itreceives the loweft vertebra of the Holy-bone : the othe; 
wey ¥ three are joyned together by Symphy fis or Coalition ; at the end of thef 
The cure. "hangs a certaine {mall griftle. The fra@ture of thefe bones {hall be cy. 
red by putting your finger into the Patients fundament, and fo thrafting it even to 
the fractured place, For, thus you may thruft the fragment forth, and fit and re. 
{tore itto the reft of the bones by yourother hand lying upon the backe. Burtthar 
it may be the fooner healed, it is ficthe Patient keep his bed, during all thetimeof 
thecure. But if there be a neceffitie to rife, hee thall fo fit ina perforated feat, that 
there may bee nothing which may prefle the broken part; and fitting remedies for 
healing fra&ures fhall be applyed, as occafion fhall offer its felfe. 


— 


Cuar. XVI. 
Of the fracture of the Hip, or Os Uium. 


The cure. 


Ly 


nea. 


ther extero 
che arme 
have beene 
have gone 

confuied th 
would have 
that a Surg¢ 
che fracture 
bone fhalll 
the arme fh 
he may not 
worke ; and 
upon the P 
would have 
bone it felfe 
putitinto a 
wife extend 
be changed 
arme in 
that in fertit 
it looke do 
rowling yo 
For, inthe 
flefhlefle, a 
danger of 
herve but 
isbended: 
fore, after 
angle and¢t 
ftirre, fpoy] 
mutt be ker 
Callus, whi 
conttitutio 


aa | of a pulley 
Thedefription He Hip confifts of three bones : The firftis named Os Z/ivm the Haunch- 
bone; theother,0s I/chrom,the Huckle bone ; thethird, Os pubs, the 
Share-bone. Thefe three b f full 
e-bone. 1 hefe three bones in men of full growth, are fo faftknit 
3A) and joyned together, that they can by no meanesbe feparated ; butin 
children they may be feparated without much adoe. This bone may be brokenin 
| any part thereof, either by aftroake, or bya fall from high upon any hard bodie. 
Thefigne. You {hall know the fra@ure by the fame kinde of fignes,as you know others, to wit, 
paine, pricking, a depreffed cavitie, and inequalitie,and alfo a numneffe of the legge 
Mmm = oof the fame fide. The{plinters of the bones (if quite broke off/muft by making in- 
cifion be taken away atthe firftdrefling: in performance of which operation,you 
| muft have acare, that you hurt not with your inftruamentthe heads of the muicles, 
norany vefiels, efpecially which are great ; nor laftly,that largenerve whichis {ent 
into the mutcles of thethigh and legge. On the contrary, fuch fragments as are not : 
broken or fevered from their perioftium, fhall bee {moothed and fet in order with 
your fingers, as is fitting. Other things fhall be done according as art and necelflity 
te 
CHa! 
forme any 
Not fo 


nay be eafily hea. 
> OY a bullet thor 
\¢ fracture Violate 
arrow Contained 
nS fhewed in the 


COf hath acavitie 

> 
one : the other 
at the end of thefe 
ones fhall be cy. 
rafting it even to 
ny and fit and re. 
¢ backe. Bur thar 
ing all the time of 
forated feat, that 
iting remedies for 


lium the Haunch- 
td, Os pubis, the 
th, are faft knit 
feparated ; butin 
may be brokenin 
any hard bodie. 
Others, to wit, 
neffe of the legge 
uft by making in- 
Bch operation,you 
Mis of che muicles, 
Serve whichis {ent 
Pments asare not 
fet in order with 
Bartand neceflity 


Concerning Fratlures. 575 
Cuarv. XVII. 

Of a fratiure of the Shoulder, or Arme-bone. 
Arme-bone is round, hollow, full of marrow, rifing up with an indif- The detripui. 
ferentnecke,and ending on the upper part into fomewhat a thick head. 
Onthe lower part it hathtwo procefles, the one before, the other be- bone. 
a 78 hinde: between which there is (as it were) an halfe circle, or the cavity 


of apulley, each end whereof leads into its cavitie, of whichone is interior, ano- 
rherexterior ; that by thefe (as it were) hollow ftops, the bending and extenfion of 
yhearmemight bee limited : leftthatthe bone of the cubite, if the circle fhould 
have beene perfect, fliding equally this way and that way, might, by its turning, 
have gone quite round, as a rope runnes ina pulley ; which thing would much have | 
confuled the motion of the Cubite. For fo theextenfion, or bending it backe, 
would have beene equall tothe neceflarie bending it inwards, It is very expedient | 
hata Surgeon know thefe things, that fo hee may the better know howto reftore 

he fractures and luxations of this part. If one of the fragments of this broken qye cure. 

bone fhalllye much over the other, and the patient have agood ftrong bodie,then 

the arme fhall be much extended, the Patient being fo fet upona lowe feat, that 

he may not rife, when the fracture fhall bee a-fetting, and fohinder the begunne 

worke; and alfo, that fothe Surgeon may the more cafily performe his operation 

uponthe Patientfeatedunder him : yet Hippocrates, regarding another thing, 

wouldhave the Patient to fithigher. But you muft have acare, that the fhoulder- 

bone it felfe be drawne dire&ly down- wards, and the cubit fobended as when you 

putitinto afcarfe. For if any one fet this bone, lifting the arme upwards,orother- 

wileextending it, then muft it be kept inthat pofture : for otherwife, if the figure 

bechanged, the fetting will quickly bee fpoyled, when as youcometo puc the 

ame in afcarfe. Wherefore the Surgeon muft diligently and carefully obferve, How thearme 

that in ferting abroken arme, hee put itin fuchapofture, that refting on the breaft, Paces 

it looke downe towards the girdle. You muft havea care in laying the {plints,and is (er. 

rowling your ligatures, thatthey hurt not, nor preffe toohard upon the joynts. 

for, inthe opinion of Hippocrates, bythe preflure of parts whicharenervous, mes WA 

fethleffe, and confequently endued with exquifite fenfe, by the {plints there is 

danger of moft crievous paine, inflammation, denudation both of the bone and 

nerve; but chiefly, if fuch comprefiion hurt the inner part, towards which the arme 

isbended ; wherefore the {plints made for this place muft bee the fhorter. There- 

fore, after the Arme-bone is fet, the arme thall bee layd upon the breaftina right 

angle, and there bound up ina {carfe, left chat the Patient, when he hathnecde to oe 

ltirre, fpoyle and undoe the fetting,and figure of the broken bone. But the arme wwe z 

Mult be kept in quict,untill fuch time as the fragments fhall bee confirmed with a 

Callus, which ufually is in fortie dayes, fooner or later, according to the different 

conftitutions of bodies. 


Cuar. XVIII. 
of the fracture of the Cubit, or the Ell and Wand. 


fomerimes happeneth,that the Cubiteand Wand are broken to- 
Areal ecther and at once, and otherwhiles that but the one of them is 
LS fraGtured. Now they are broken eyther in their midft or ends; their 
ends (I fay) which are eyther towardsthe clbow, or elic towards 

the wreft. That fracture is worft of all, whercin both the bones 
f are broken, for then the member ts made wholly impotent to per- 
any fort of action, and thecoreis alfo more difficult ; forthe member can- 


eafily be contained inits {tate : for that bone which remaines whole, {fe 
or 


* 
4 
— 
a 
~ 


— 


Concerning Fratlures. 


The cure 


de fratt, 


Com. inlib. 
de Ail. 


Lis 
AG, 
foraftay tothe arme, and hindersthe mufcles from being drawn backe, which y. 
fually draw backeand fhrinke upthemielves, when foever both bones are broken 

Hence it is,that that fracture is judged the worft, wherein the Cubirt or Ell bone ;. 
broken. Burthatis eafieft of all, wherein onely the Wand is broken, fo, for be 
fraGtured part is fuftained by the Ell-bone: When both the bonesare broken, ; “er 
mult bee made a ftronger extenfion, for thatthe mufcles are the more Contragted 

Therefore, whenfoever eyther of them remaines whole, it doth more fervice;, 
fuftaining the other, than any eyther ligatures or {plints, for that ir keeps the muf 
cles right in their places. Wherefore, after the bones fhal be fet and rowled up wirh 
ligatures and fplincs, the arme muft bee fo carried up in a fcarfe put about the neche 

that the hand may not be much higherthanthe elbow, left the blood and orhe, 
humors may fall downe thereinto. But the hand fhall be fet in that pofture which j. 
betweene prone and fupine, for fothe Wand fhall lye direétly under the Ej), 35 We 
have read it obferved by Hippocrates. The reafonis, for thatby a fupine figyr. 
or fituation,both the bone and mufcles are perverted: for firft,for the bone. the Abo 
phyfis, ftyloides and Olecranum of the Cubit, ought to be in an cquall plaine, anq 
to be feated cachagainft other ; which is not fo ina fupine figure, as whereinthe 
Proce(jus ftyloides of the Cubitis fet againft the inner procefic of the arme bone. 
But in mufcles, for that, likeas theinfertion and fite of the head of a mufcle jx 

fuch alfo isthe fite of the belly thereof, and laftly, fuch the infertion ot thetayle 
thereof; but by a fupine figure, the mufcles arifing from the inner procefie of the 
arme-bone and bending thecubit, fhall have their tayle placed in anhigherang 
more exteriour fite. Inthe/#terims, youmuft notomit, butthat the Patients arm 
may, with as little paincas poflibly you can,be bended and extended now and then, 
left by the too long reft of the tyedup part, and the intermiffion of its proper fun. 
ction, the bones of the joynt may be fowdred together by the interpofition, and as 
it were glue of the defluxion which fals abundantly into the joynt of the Ell-bow. 
and neighbouring parts, whence theftiffenefle and unmoveablenefle thereof, asif 
there were a Callus growne there : from whence it may happen, that the arme 
thereafter may neither be bended, nor extended, which I have obferved to have 
happenedto many. Whereof alfo Galen makes mention, and cals this kindeof 
vitiated conformation Ancyle and Ancylofis. If awoundalfo aflociate a fraQure of 
the arme, then fee, that you put about it plates of Latin,or Paft-bord, and makea 
convenient Ligature, andthat the fragments of the bones be kept in the fame ftate 
wherein they were fetand reftored. Moreover, let him lay hisarme upona {oft pil. 
Jow or cufhion, as the following Figure fhewes you. | 


The figure of a frattured Arme, with awound bound np, and feated, as #5 fit. 


Wii, 


ol 


CHa? 


ture, arcin 
being done 
for thus th: 
the fingers 
nor quite | 
deprave or 
The cafe & 
and eveno 


the 

his legge ft 
extend the 
imploy rw. 
fitted and 
Was nor {uff 
this isthe 


579 L 1B 
q 
{ 
LAIR 
ftored, the 
_£ 
hand of th 
| 
q 4 
AGS 
= 


n backe, which 


DONES are broken 
broken, for the 


Contrageg 
th more fervice jp 
tit keeps the 
nd rowled up with 
ut about the Necke 
¢ blood and other 
t pofture which js 
oder the Ell, as We 
by a fupine figure 
rthe bone,the A po- 
cquall plaine, and 
re, as whereinthe 
the arme bone. 
‘ad of amufcle is, 
ertuion of the tayle 
ner procefi¢ of the 
in anhigherand 
t the Patients arme 
ded now and then, 
of its proper fun- 
terpofition, and as 
@ nt ofthe Ell-bow, 
nefle thereof, as if 
, that the arme 
¢ obferved to have 
cals this kinde of 
ociate a fraGture of 
-bord, and makea 
pt in the fame ftate 
ne upona {oft pil. 


ated, as fit. 


C rat: 


Li 


‘sare broken, there 


Concerning 


Cuar. XIX. 
the fracture of «Hand; 


bones of the Wreft, and After-wreft, may bee broken : but, 
<x in Hippocrates opinion, chiefly by thatkind of fra@ture which is cal. “”“* 
led a Sedes;now if they thal happen to be broken, this thal be the maner 
“Asody of reftoring them. Let the Patient lay forth his hand upon fome even Thecure. 
and fmooth rable, then let your fervant ftretch forth the broken bones,& the work- 
matter reftore them thus extended; and put them in their proper feats. But being re- 
fored, they muft be kept in their places by fuch remedies as are ufed in other fra- 
Ayres ; tO. wit, cerates, comprefies, linnen clothes, and {plints. Now the fractu- 
red fingers fhall be tyed or bound to their neighbours, that fo they may the more 
eafily,as bound toa ftake, be kept in thar ftate wherein they have been put by the 
hand of the Workeman. But thefe bones, feeing they are of a rare and {pongie na- 
wre, arcina fhort timeand eafily ftrengthened, orknit bya Callus. Thefe things To what pur. 
being done; the hollowneffe or palme of the hand hall be filled witha Tennis ball, — — 
forthusthe broken bones fhall not only be more eafily kept in their places,but alfo (3.0) 
the fingers themfelves fhall be kept ina middle pofture, that is, not wholly open, hand {erves 
nor quite fhut. If they be kept in any other figure, the enfuing Callus will either 
deprave or quite abolith that aGtion of the hand, wherby we take hold of any thing. 
The cafe ftands orherwife with the fractured Toes, for they fhall bee kept ftraighr 
and even out, left they fhould hinder our going or ftanding. 


Cuarp.X X. 
Of the fracture of aThigh, 


\\ 


-—- 
EDC28 T isa hard thing to bring the fragments of the broken thigh together 
tobe fet, by reafon of the large and ftrong mufcles of thar part;which 
| €tl ey whileft they are drawne backe towards their originall, by amotion 
Kev» me both naturall and convulfive, they carry together with them the frag- 
S2osse? mentof the bone, whereinrorhey are inferted. Therefore, when as why thebore 
the fracture of this bone fhall be reftored, the Patient muft lye upon his back with °& vem 
m 
his legge ftretched torth, atid the Surgeon muft ftrongly and with great force 
extend thethigh but if he alone thall not be able fufficiently to extend it,he fhall 
imploy two other {trong atrendants, by whofe joynt-helpe the fragments may be 
fitted and fer eachagainft other. For this purpofe,when as the ftrength of the hand 
 Wasnor fufficient, the Ancients ufedan Inftrument, called a Glofocominm, whereok 
thisis the figure, 


: they W! 
| . = tl 
| 
may pre 


Concerning 


made c 
| draw ba 
Sen.b7.6g. In ftead of this Gle/focomiam, youmay make ufe of my pulley ; for Hippocrates drawne 
fetta frat. inthis bone whenit is broken, doth approve of extenfion fo great, that although apply tl 
by thegreatneffe of the extenfion the ends of the fragments be fomewhat diftant a. and that 
funder, an emptie {pace being left betweene ; yct notwithftanding would hee have each fide 
ligature made. For itis not here as it isintheextenfions of other bones, whereas chat it 
the cafting about of Ligatures keeps the mufcles unmoveabie: but here, inthe ex. ton. Th 
tended thighes, the deligation is not of {uch force, as that it may ftay and kecpe the pound t¢ 
bones and mufcles in that ftate, wherein the Surgeon hath placed them. For, {ecing {mooth, 


Thenararall muft be fet in its native figure. Otherwife, if anie, unmindefull of this confidera- 

and _tion, would have it ftraight, he fhall make his Patient hale all his life after: where- becaufe 

mutt be prefer. fore this inner and native hollownefle muft be filled up and preferved by putting in re of t 
Other ha 


The figure of 2 Gloflocomium, or Extender, 


e**e* 


| 
VOY 


‘ 


' 
. 
‘ 

if 


LAN SAAS from rhe 
ference. 

are twin 

h | 

cH of the b 


thatthe mufcles of thethigh arelarge and ftrong, they overcome the ligation, and 
are not kept under by it. The Surgeon, in fetting it, fhall alfoconfider, thatthe 
thigh-boneis hollowed on the inner fide, but gibbous on the outfide s thereforcit 


ved in fecting a comprefie or boulfter, {pread over with wnzuentum rofatum, or the like glutinous 


the bone. 


thing that it may not fall off : forthusalfo the ligation fhall the more faithfully 


Our 
wherco 
onely ft 
binde it 
ons, Or 
thicke, 


for that 
Patient ¢ 
Way feck 
whicho 


Hippocr 
forthe 


The partto bee keep the fragments of the bone in their places.Moreover,compreffes hall be appli 
be made plaine €4 to the more {lender and leffe protuberating parts of the thigh, as thofe which are 
eitherbyna- next the ham and knee, that fo the whole ligation may be alike, and con{tquent!y 
smcor are the more firme. Now ligatures, as we formerly noted, are ordained for three things. 
The firft is, chat the bones may bee kept in that ftate wherein they were et, untill 
they be ftrengthened by a Callus. The fecond is, to hinder defluxion, which eafily 
fals into the broken and luxated parts, both by reafon of paine, as alfo by weak- 
nefle. The third is, to ftay and hold faftthe {plintsand medicines which are app! 
ed. Inflammation is hindred by repreffingand hindring the blood and ocher bu: 
mours, ready to flow downe, from entring intothe part, and by prefling thote 
humors,which are preternaturally contained in the part, into the neighbouring 
tts aboveand below. Whercfore there muft no {mall care behad of preparing 
igatures, to wit, that they bee made of choyce and well wovencloth, yet 9% 
courfe or rough ; and let them be of fuch lengthand breadth, as the Surgeon,per’ 
{waded by anartificiall conjecture, fhal judge to be fit for the thickneffe and lengt" 
of the member, and greatneffe of the fra@ture : for ligatures oughtto be of breadth 
to involve and cover all the fractured part, and a great part of that which ® 
The manner of {Ound. But feeing that in my Booke of Bandages, I have feemed chiefly © 
bindingufedby fet downe and approve the manner of binding ufed by Hippocrates, 1°# 
thinke good here: in this place to defcribe that which is in common ule among 
our Surgeons. pa 


xion of 
defluxio 
for if the 
from th 


7 
4 
| 
Ae 
moni 
| day the 
| Ped; ye 
Mor f 
| él { 
i 4 
Ser refo} 
n 
1 fo th 
at w¢ 
| | that Wee 
| | 


for Hippocrates 
it, that alrhough 
ewhar diftant a. 
would hee have 
bones, whereas 
there, inthe ex- 
ayand kecpe the 
them. For, fecing 
the ligation, and 
onfider, thatthe 
fide, therefore it 
f this confidera- 
ife after: where- 
ved by putting in 
he like glutinous 
more faithfully 
(Tes fhall be appli- 
s thofe which are 
Bind confequently 
for three things. 
ey were fer, untill 
ion, which eafily 
alfo by weak- 
Swhich areappli- 
od and other bu- 
by prefling thole 
the neighbouring 
had of preparing 
ncloth, yet 
the Surgeon,per’ 
kneffe and leng' 
tro be of breadth 
of that which 
eemed chiefly 
pocrates, now 4 
mon ufe among 


Our 


L Concerning Frattures. 


~ Out Surgeons therefore at this day require three Ligatures for fractures, the firft 
whereof they prefently caftupon the hurt part, whether broken or diflocated, or 
onely ftrained, making the firft wrappings upon it, fo that they moft and ftraitlieft 
pinde it there, but lefle and more loofely on both fides thereof. Such circumvoluti- 
ons, or Wrappings, are drawne upwards,and there ended. They mutt bee rowled why the win: 
thicke, andnot wide ; forfoif they prefently follow, and lye oneupon another, dings ot theups 
they will hold the bones more firmely, and more farre and wide preffe forth and re- P°7 = al 
efle the fuperfluous blood from the found part, They prefently in like fort caft andftrairer 
the (econd ligature upon the verie fracture, giving it two wraps,then eoing down. S*8the lower, 
wards ; yet fo,as that they are opener or wider,and farther diftant each from other, 
and not fo clofe together, asthe circumvolutions of the firft ligature ; that fo they 
may prefle the humors the leffe to the extremities of the part, as thofe which can- 
not receive and beare, without inflammation and danger of a gangrene, fuch abua- 
dance of humors, for that they are not fufficiently {patious, as alfo more remote 
from the fountaine of native heat, whichis greater in the center than in the circum- 
ference. Atthe lower end of the hurt part the circumvolutions either end, or elfe 
aretwined thence backeagaine. They caft on the third ligature in that lower end WAY the third 
of the hurt part, androwle it {moothly and gently upwards, the windin gs being bee can 
made contrarieto the windings of the firft and fecond ligatures; that they may fo “™Y.tothe 
draw backe into their naturall ftate the mufcles, which peradventure have beene “?"* 
drawne afide by the force of the former wrappings. Thefeligations finithed, they 
apply three {plints of paft-bord, or fome fuch matter; the firft below the fracture, 
and that truly more broad, and of futhcient length and thentwo others, oneon 
each fide, diftant each from other fome fingers breadth,to the end to keepthe bone 
chat it doe not ftirretothis fide or that, being wrapped about with Tow or Cor- 
ton. Then they thinke of placing or laying the part, to which purpofe they pro- The surgeon 
pound to themfelves three fcopes. The firft is,that the part may lye foft;the fecond, mutt de minde 
{mooth, or even ; the third, fomewhat high. The hurt part ought truely to lye fofe, 
for that hard lying preffes it, and caufes paine and inflammation ; which whiles the cing the mem: 
Patient cannot patiently endure, he is forced to change his place, whiift he everie °** 
Way feeks eafe for his paine : and thus he now and then moves the fractured parr, 
which ought tobe kept quiet without any motion. Icmuft lye {mooth or even, 
becaufe an unequall or uneven fite diftorts or draws awry the part, whilftonepor- 
tionof the hurt part is borne up, and fuftained by that which lyes under it, but the 
other hanging downe hath nothing thereunder, whereupon it may reft. Therefore 
Hippocrates bids us diligently to take heed, thatthe heele doe not hang downe, Seéf.2.de 
forthe foot remaine without a pillow, for hence paine and a troublefome deflu- 
xion of humors is to be feared. But the part oughttolye fomewhat high, that the 
defluxion may bee hindred,which is eafily ftirred up by a prone and declining fite : 
for if the foote fhall be placed in a lower figure, the blood which flowes thither 
from the legge,will caufe inflammation, But on the contrarie, if it bee higher, no- 
thing can how downe thereinto. Therefore abfolutely not only thefoote, butalfo 
the thighand legge,are to be placed higher than the reft of the bodie: yet, keep- 
ing fuch ameane, that the part may not be too muchdiftended, as Hippocrates ad- Sem.33.& 56: 
monifheth us, In the meanetime, this hurt legge or fide, ought to bee¥of equal 
length with the found, and forthat purpofe it muft bee ftayedon both fides with 
Junks, as we fhall fhew you hereafter, when we come to {peak of a broken legge. 
The bandage being performed as we have faid, the following night, and the next 
y the Patient feelsthe member more ftraitly bound, than when it was firft wrap- 
Ped; yea, verily the knee is lifted up into afofttumorby the expreffion of the hu- 
Mor from the wounded part : butonthe contrarie, the enfuing day the ligation is 
ckned and relaxed, foine portion of the humor contained in the part being dige- 
d. Alfothenext day all things are perceived more loofe, there being made a /ar- 
relolution of the humor. Then therefore the Bandages mutt be loofed, and that 


Hotonly, left thatthe fragments of the bones fhould fall forth of their place but al- tooled. 


lothat we may gratifie the Patient by that alteration or change of place, and befides 


Wee may avoyde itching, = ufually happens to parts too long bound ri 
2 


L 
, 
A 
tri 


"580 


Concerning Fraitures. 


Sent.r§ 


fle offic. 


titious humors, wherewith the partis moiftened, and the alimentarie humors in , 
part which is idle and at quiet, by reafon the difflation and tran{piration are hin. 
dred by want of exercife,and the 
the ligatures : fo that by the fuppreffion thercof, many havenot only an itching 

but alfo, the skinne being broke by the acrimonie of thefe, as well vapours as hy. 
mors, which are kept fhut and pentup, haveulcers breake forth, Therefore When 
fuch accidents fhall be feared, the part fhall fo long be fomented with warme wate, 
and oyle, as you thall thiake fit : for,fuch fomenting affwagcth paine,relaxeth thy 
which was too much ftraitened by the binding, and amends the refrigeration of 
the part, caufed bythe repercuffion and expreflion of the blood and fpirits, the na, 
tive and internall heat being by this meanes revived. If, together with the tumor 

there be acontufion and fugillation, it muft bee the longer fomented, that the ¢x. 
crementitious humor refiding inthe part may be digefted. But if this quantitie of 
time fhall not fuffice, then muft you ufe ftrongerdigeftives : yet have a care yoy 
ufe them nottoolong ; for fo you fhould hinder the generation of aCa//us. There- 
fore that faying of Hippocrates muft here be remembred, which faith, T hata wea, 
fomentation, and the fhort time of ufing one doth attrac, but not difcufle ; burt g 
longer and ftronger waftesthe flefh. Befides alfo,you mutt have regard to the tem- 
per and habit of the Patient; for fomentations, ufed to plethorick bodies, draw {y. 
erfluous humors tothe part. The Ancients bid, that the ligatures be loofed everie 
third day, ontill their feventh day ; butafterthe feventh, on everie feventh day; 
buthereof nothing canbecertainly and perpetually decreed, For, according to 
the accidents the Patients muft be drefled fooncr or later, more often or feldome, 
renuing the ligatures, andthe reft of the drefling. Therefore, if nofymptome urge, 
I would have none of thefe things,which ate done tothe Patient at the firft drefling, 
to be moved, unleffe as {lowly and feldome as you may.For you hinder the knitting 
of thebone, if you never fo little move the ends of the fragments thereof : for, as 
you fee wood is joyned together by gluce,and pewter with fowder; fo the fragments 
of bones are, by the providence of nature, glued and fowdred togethier by a 


Rei necelfary Callus, Wherefore broken bones have very much need of reft, to the generating of 


for the knitti 


fet bones, Callus otherwife,the matter thereof flowing downe, quickly flowes away, and 


nothing is done. You may much helpe forwards the generation of a Ca//w, which 
is begunne about thethirteenthor fifteenth day, by applying an emplaifter made 
with the white of an egge, having the powder of red rofe leaves, and wheat floure 
mixed therewith, and other Catagmatick plaifters, which fhall hereafter be 
bed in {peaking of the fracture of a legge. 


CuHuar. XXI. 


Qf the fracture of the Thigh nigh to the joynt, or the wpper or lower 
head of the bout. 


PRY WER FraQurefometimes happens at the joyntof the hip in the«eck of the 
post thigh-bone, as I once obferved ia anhoncit matron. I being calledto 
ao) her, when I had obferved the hurt Thigh to be fhorter than the whole, 
with the outward prominencie of the Z/chium, which at the firlt fight! 
duppofed to proceede from the head of the thigh bone, I prefeatly 
{waded my felfcit wasa diflocation and no fracture; Ithen therefore extended the 
bone, and forced (as I thought)thehead thereof into itscavitie. The equaliti¢ 


} both the legges in bigneffe which followed upon this extenfion, encreafed my per 
{wafion that it was a diflocation. Thenext day I vifited her the fecond time, 


found her in great paine, her hurt leggethe fhorter, and her foor wrefted inwards. 


T hea 


Li 


by reafon of the fuppreffion of acride and fuliginous excrements, which ufe tO be 
gathered in great quantitie in a partat reft and bound up, both fromthe excremen. 


pores of the skinne fbut up by the abundance of 


— 
L 
Then I loc 
ly. Waere 
did. Buta 
chat there 

rfwadec 
fuch kiad 
from its p 
times dec 
feparation 
a 
fer the bo 
prefies, m 
andthe b« 
clothes m 
che midit « 
lifting up 
tions of ti 
they may 
lift 
{piration, 
comprefic 
heat and 
{uch torm 
and want ¢ 
muchthet 
for there 1 
more diffi 
the multit 
maligne 
ure, and 
which eafy 
that thet! 
loofed, a 
and them 
compofe 
muftlyeu 
red to its 
have read 
thigh, tha 
hee move 
fer down 
but (2s 
of. But 
ftand or 9 
Parta long 
all, in the 


- 
* 
1 
4 
| 4 
. 
a 
i é 
| 


oraric humors in 
{piration are hin. 
the abundance of 

only an itching 
ell vapours as hu. 
. Therefore when 
with Warme Water 
aine,relaxeth thar 
¢ refrigeration of 

god fpirits, the na. 

er with the tumor 
nted, that the ex. 
{ this quantitie of 
t have a care you 
of a Callus. There- 
faith, That a weak 
t difcuffe but a 
regard tothe tem- 

| bodies, draw {iy. 
Bs be loofed everie 
rie feventh day : 
mor, according to 
Often or f{eldome, 
olymptome urge, 

it the firft dreffing, 
hinder the knitting 
ts thereof : for, as 
; fo the fragments 
red together by a 
D the generating of 
flowes away, and 
of a Callus, which 

1 emplaifter made 
m, and wheat floure 
rercafter be cefcri- 


or lower 


in themeck of the 
I being, called to 
er than the whole, 
atthe firtt fight 
e,I prefeatly per 
fore the 
T he equ 
encreafed my pct 
fecond time, and 


inwards: 
wrefted 


Then Ioofed all her ligatures, and perceived fuch a prominencie as I did tormer- 


L Concerning Fractures. 


iy, Wherefore I endeavoured againe to force in the head of the bone, as I formerly 
aid. ButasI was bufied therein, I heard a little crackling,and alfo I confidered, 
shat there Wasnocavitie nor depreffion in the joynt, by which fignes I certainly 
(waded my felfe, thatthe bone was broken,and not diflocated. Neyther only 

fuch kiade of Fractures, butalfothe feparation of the appendix or head of this bone 
from its place, may induce onetothinke ita diflocation ; which thing bath fome- 
rimes deceived fome heedlefle Surgeons, who have not dreamt of the divulfion or Another fia. 
feparation of the appendix fromthe top of the Thigh-bone, bur have judged it hich = 
only adiflocation. Then therefore (that I may returne to my former narration) | bling a luxe. 
fer the bone, and joyned the fragments together, layd thereupon {plints with com- °°" 

refles, made ligations witha rowler, havingtwo heads wrapped about the joynr, 
sndthe bodiecrofle-wife, and I defended her foote witha Cafe, that none of the 
clothes might preffeir. I faftened aropetoa pofte, and foletit come downc into 
che midft of the bed, and tyed many knotsthereon, for the better taking holdand 
lifting up her felfe; the which thing you muft alwaies doe in fra@tures and difloca- 
tions of the thigh and legge, that fo your Patients may have fome ftay, whereby 
they may fuccour themfelves with their hands, as oft as they defire to rife, or 
lift rhemfelvesup in their beds, or goe to ftoole ; as alfo, that they may give per- 
{piration, and as it were ventilation to the loynes, buttocks, rumpe,and other parts, 
comprefied and wearied with long lying, for want wherof they are molefted with 
heat and paine, whencewlecersarife, which oft-times torment the Patient with 
fuch tormenting heate and paine, that he is even confumed by a fever, watchings, 
and want of reft. T his opportunitie of raifing the bodice out of the bed, is by fo, 
much the more nced full ia this place,by how much the fracture is nearer the joynt: pa alead 
forthere it is more dangerous than inthe midftofthethigh, and confequently nearea joyne 
more difficult to dreffe and heale, for thgg the part is bloodleffe, and by reafon of *™°* “"8™ 
themultitude of the nerves, tendons and ligaments, which are obnoxious to many 
maligne fymptomes. But the Surgeon muft have diligent care in thiskinde of fra- 

ure, and muft looke often that the bone, which is fet, doe not fall forth againe, 
which eafily happens here by any light ftirring of the bodice, & the like occafion, for 
that the thigh hath but one onely bone. Therefore, as oft asthe Bandages thal be 
loofed, andthe fracture dreffed, hee fhall attentively view the figure of the bone, 
and the magnitude of theaffected part,comparing it with the found ; for the fet and 

compofed fragments of the broken bone, can {carce fall afunder, but thatthe one 
muftlyeuponthe other. Butbefore it be knit, the part muft be extended and refto- 
tedtoits ftate, that fo the Patient may not halt during the refidue of his life. ForI _ 

have read it written in Avicen, that {carce any doe fo well recover a fractured 
thigh,thatthey doe not halt thereof: therefore the Patient mutt be carefull, that 

heemove himfelfe, or his bodie,as little as hee can. Many of the Ancients have 
fet downe the time of the confolidation of this bone to bee fiftie dayes : 
but (2s I formerly fayd) there can bee no certaine or determinate time here- 
of. But in what time foever this bone fhall bee knit, the Patient muft not tn whar pace 
ftand or goe thereon prefently upon it , for that there remaines a weakenefle in the me hag 
Partalongtime after, fothatthe Patients are forced to ufe Crutches to goe with. 
all, in the meane {pace while they recover more ftrength. 


Cec 3 C 


L | Bus. 
Which ufeto pe 


Concerning Fratlures. 


i C H A . xX 


of the Fracture of the Patella, or whirle-bone of she Knee, 


He Whirle-bone of the knec is oft times contufed, but notfo frequen); 

broken yet when that happens, it goes into two Or three peeces fome. 
times long-wife, fometimes athwart. Sometimes it is broken inthe 
midft, and fome-whiles fhivered into many {plinters, and all thef¢ cys 


The differen- 
ces, 


4 
—_ 


or without a wound. The fignes are, impotencie in going, a hollowneif. 
inthat place, and a fenfible feparation of thefragments of the hurt part, and th. 
Cure: crackling of thefe partsunder your hand. Itis fet after this manner; With the py 


tient to {tretch forth his legge, yea, hee muft keepe st extended all the while, until} 
it be knit . and therefore left hee fhould bend it unawares, the hollowneffe of the 
Ham fhall be filled withaboulfter: for by bending of the knee, the fet fragmene, 
of the whirle-bone would againe fly in funder. This being done, the fragmenys 
fhali by the hand of the Surgeon be fet asis fitting, and be kept fo fet by the appli. 
cation of conveniegt remedies, making ligatures,and applying Junks, as wee aid 
muft be done ina fracture of the Thigh-bone. And laftly, you mutt obferye ang 
doe ir this, asin the fratureof a legge. For the Prognoftick, this I afirme, Thy 
I have feene none of thofe who have had this bone fractured, who have nor bal. 
Why thofe hale ted during the reft of their lives. The caufe hereof is, the knitting by the concre. 
| who havehad tion of aCal/ws hinders the free bending of the knee ; going, efpecially on eyen 
| ground is more eafic tothe Patient, butan afcent is farremore difficult, and abjo. 
lutely painfull. The Patientmaft neceffarily for this kinde of fracture lye or keep 
Hi his bed, at the leaft for forty dayes. 


Of a broken Legge, 
His kinde of FraQure is cured after the fame manner as that of thearme 
frathe or cubit. Hippocrates admonifheth us, that the T7474, or Leg-bone is 


3] more dangerous tobe broken, and more difficult and flow to be healed 
thanthe Fidsla, or Shin-bone ; becaufe thatisthe thicker, and asit were 
| the upholder of the whole bulke of the bodice: but this other is but as it were a cer 
taine additament or affiftant, provided for the ftaying or bearing up of the mul- 
cles of thelegge, by which the foot is moved, The legge bone being only broken, 
the fignes thereof are perceived oncely in the inner part of the legge; for that the 
Shin-bone being whole, fuffers ic not tothrow or caft forth its felfe. On the con 
trarie, when the Shin-bone onely is broken, the fignes thereof appeare only in the 


| not fuffer itto caftin its felfe,and with its fragments to turne inwards. But wocn 
agree AE bora the bones are broken, the fignes of the fracture may equally appeare both 
arctroken.  hereandthere. But when only oneof thefe bones are broken, the fracture is {arte 
more eafie to dreffle and heale, becaufe that- which remaines whole, is a much more 

firme ftay tothat whichis hurt, than any {plints can bec. But that I may the bet. 

ter inftruct and make readie the Surgeon for the reftoring of this fracture, | will fi 

Ahittoric.  luftratethe matter by an example from my felfe. John Neftor, Do@or of Phy {ic 
as Richard Hubert, and1, wenttogether to vifit a Patient atrhe Place of the Pt 
Tit Minorites, Wherefore, intending to pafle over the Seine within fight of the p'3°% 
Tendeavouredto make my horfetake boat, and therefore fwitched him ove! che 
buttocks. The Jade, madded herewith, fo firucke at me with his heels, that he 
both the bonesof my left legge, {ome foure fingers breadth above my ankle. The" 
I,fearing fome worfe mifchiefe,and left the Jade fhould double his blow, few backs 


andas I fied backe, the broken bones flew in funder; and breaking through “~ “ 
ac 


externall part of the legge ; becaufe the legge bone, being oppofed thereto, doth 


Lisl 


{rocking at 

ble am in 
chat fol m 
of the 
che fharpe 

rhem. Bein; 
encreafed 

downe, fo 

and allthe 
what freed 
which ran 
asthe time 
Aoure, [001 
Hubert, th 
love of 
would {tret 
chat hee 
ferthe bro 
judgement 
thefplinte: 
fore to be 
the clods o 
wound; tn 
thought b: 
whereof hi 
tion atthe 
fingers bre: 
whereby ¢ 
ends, and 

fillers, lik: 
binding mi 
the ham,ar 
thar he wo 
flickes, an 
bound ove 
perverted 

anindiffer, 
nall injurie: 
Or laying of 
mitted, it \ 
the Callus. 
ing forth. 

Cavities at: 
be mucha 
fion, whic 
thereto, W 
Now and 
andthe {pis 
To conely 


defcribed. 


- 
@ 
] 
a4 
| 
i 
: 
. 
7 
' 
q 
4 
> 
4 
4 


nee, 


it notfo frequen,} 
Aree peeces.fome. 
it iS broken in the 
, andall thefe cys 
a bollowneff 
hurt part, and the 
ner; With the Pe 
lithe while, ungift 
iollownefle of the 
the fet fragments 
one, the fragments 
lo fet by the appli. 
Junks, as wee {aid 
mult obferye and 
Tafirme, Thar 
who have not hal. 
ng by the concre. 
ipecially on even 
ficult, and abfo- 
racture lye or keep 


as that of thearme 
a, Or Leg-bone is 
flow to be healed 
ker,andasit were 
put as it were 2 cer- 
up of the mul- 
eing only broken, 
egge;forthat rhe 
elfe. On the 
ypeare only in the 


ed thereto, doth - 


wards. Burt when 
ally appeare bork 
he fracture is farre 
le, is amuch more 


hat I may the bet-. 


fracture, Twill 
Yoctor of Phy fick 
Place of the Friet 
fightof the place, 
shed him over the 
eels, that he brake 
ve my ankle. Thea 
is blow, few backs 


chrough the fieth, 
ftocking 


— 


Lis Concerning Fratlures. 


jocking and boote, fhewed themfelves, whereby I felt as much paine,as itis credi- 
ble amin was able to endure, Wherefore I was prefently carried intothe boate, 
shit fo I might be carried to the other fide of the water to be drefled : but the ftir- 
jog of the boatas they rowed, almoft killed me with bitternefle of paine, for thae 
che fharpe fragments of the. bones were rubbed againft'the flefh which lay next 
chem. Being ferried over as I was conyeyed into the next hepfes,my pain was much 
encrealed, whileft lifted by the hands of civers perfons, one while up, another 
downe, fometimes tathe lefe fide, otherwhilestothe right with my whole bodice, 
and allthe parts there@f, When atthe length, was layd upon abed, I was fome- 
what freed from the bitrernefle of my paine,. ad time to wipe off the {wear, 
which ranne downe over allmy bodie. Then was I dreffed with {uch a medicine, 
asthe time and place weuld affoord; we compoled it of thé White of an egee,wheat 


Aoure, foote of a chimney,and melted butter. For the reft, I intreated Richard 4one mace 


Hubert, thathe would handle me, as if he knew mee not, neither that, moved for 


loveof mee, he fhould remit any thing of the feveritie of art, but chicfly, that hee What to doe .. 


would ftretch my foot ftraightout, and if the wound were not fufficiently wide, 
that hee would enlarge it with his incifion knife, that {o hee mightthe more eafily 
fetthe broken bones in their due place; thathee would with his fingers (whole 
judgement is farre morecertaine than the beft made inftruments) fearch, whether 
the{plinters which were inthe wound were quite fevered from the bone, and ther- 
fore to be takenforth; that he would with his hand prefie forth the blood, and 
theclods of blood which were in a great quantitie concrete at the mouthot the 
wound; that he wouldbind up and place my leggein thar fite and manner, as he 
thought beft: which is, that he fhould have three rowlers inareadincfic ; the firft 
whereof he fhould caft dire@ly upon the wound, fo that he fhould beginne his liga- 
tion atthe wound : alfo he fhould put {plints about it ; fome three, but others two 
fingers breadth, of the length of halfe a foote, Somewhat depretled and hollowed, 
whereby they might be the moteeafily put about the legge, more ftraitly at their 
ends, and a fingers diftance each from other, which atthe laft he fhould binde with 
fillets, like thofe wherewith Women ule to bindeup their haire ; yet fo, that the 
binding might be more {trait upon the wound : and chat he would fill the cavitie of 
the ham,and of the ancles,with boulfters made of flaxe wrapped in linnen clothes: 
thar he would fortifiethe fides of my legge with Junkes made of bents or little 
fickes, and lined with linnen cloth, ftretched from my heeleto my groine, and 
bound over in foure places ; fo that the ftrait figure of the legge might fcarcely bee 
perverted by any force: that he would gently, and fmoothly lift up my legge to 
anindifferent height : and laftly, that he fhould arme it from the violence of exter- 
nallinjuries, by putting it ina boxe or cafe. But you muftnote, thatthe fit placing 
Or laying of the legge is a matter of fuch moment, thatif any errour be herecom- 
mitted, it will caufe no leflethan lameneffe. For if it be liftedup higher than is fir, 
the Callus will be hollow onthe forefide;if lower,then it will be gibbous or bunch- 
ing forth. Neither alfo doethey commit afmall errour, who doe not fill up the 
cavities at the ancles after the forementioned manner : for, hereupon the heele will 
be much afflicted, whileft it is forced to (uftaine a tedious and painefull compref. 
fion, which at length brings a hot diftemper, becaufe the fpirits cannot freely flow 
theretos which I, finding by experience,not knowing the caufe, wifhedthem ever 
Now and then to lift up my heele,wherby it might enjoy the benefit of perfpiration, 
andthe fpirits have free entrance thereinto, & the contained vapours pafling forth. 
ie aa my hurt legge was layd upon a cufhien after the manner you fee here 
ecribed, 


The 


wren the 
is broken. 


| 
| 


Concerning Fratlures. 


The figure of a Legze fractured with a wound, and bound up. 


/f 


+ 


al? 


XXIV. 


Of fome things to be obferved in Ligation, when a fracture is 
afjociated with a wound, 


PRIARB His, taken out of the doGrine of the Ancients, ought to bee kept firme 


Tharthe liga- (6) ep andratified, That Ligation muft bee madeupon the wound ; otherwife 
moft{traitupon is Ny the wounded part will prefently lift itfelfe upinto a great tumor, re. 
thewound. § ceivingthe humors preffed thither by the force of the Ligation made 


on this and that fide, above and bolow, whence enfue many maligne {ymptomes, 
Whatfymp- YOu may make triall hereof upon a found fefhie part; for if you binde it above and 
romes enfuethe below, nottouching that which is in the midft, it will be lifted up into a greattu. 
mor, and change the flourifhing and nativecolour iatoa livide or blackifh hue, by 
dedpart.  reafon of the flowing and abundance of the humors preffed forth on everie fide 
from the neighbouring parts. Therefore fuch things will happen much the rather 
in a wounded or ulcerated part.But for this caufe, the ulcer will remaine un{uppu- 
rated and weeping, crude and liquid owing there-hence, like unto that which 
ufually flowes from inflamed eycs, Such fanies, if it fall upon the bones, and make 
any ftay there, it, withthetouchtherof, burnesand corruptsthem, and fo much 
Signes ofthe the more, if they be rare and {oft. Thefe will bee the fignes of fuch corruption of 
‘hebene,. the bones; if agreaterquantitic, and that more filthie fasies, how from the ulcer, 
than was accuftomed, or the nature of afimple ulcer requires ; if the lippesof the 
ulcer be inverted ; if the fiefh be more foft and flaccid about them ; if a forrowful! 
fenfe of abeating, and alfo deepe paine torment the Patient by fitts; if, by fearch- 
ing with your Probe, you perceivethe bone to be fpoyled of its pertoffiwm ; and 
laftly, if you finde it {caily and rough, oralfo if your Probe bee purdowne {ome- 
what hard,it runne isto the fubftance of the bone. But we have treated {utficient- 
ly hereof in our particular Treatife of the rottenneffe of the bones. But certaincly 
fuch rottenneffe will never happen to the bone, if the hurt part be bound up, 4515 
fit,and accordingtoart. Wherefore judge it not amiffe, againe to admonifh the 
Surgeon of this, Thatas farre asthe thing (hall fuffer, hee make his rowlings upon 
muttbeorir. the wound ; unleffe by chance there be fuch exceffive paine and great inflammation, 
tedinligation. that, through occafion of fuch fymptomesand accidents, he be diverted fromthis 
properand legitimate cure of the difeafe. Therefore then, becaufe nothiag mor 
can be done, ct him only doethis, which may be done without offence; that is, !ct 
him fupply the defect of ligation and rowlers, with a linnen cloth, nottoo weak, 
nor too much worne, being twice or thrice doubled, and which may ferve tocom- 
pafle the wound and neighbouring parts once about : let him few the edges there 
of atthe fides of the wound, left he be forced to ftirre the fragments of the boats 
(which once fet ought to be kept unmoved) as often asthe wound comes to be drel- 
fed. For,broken bones doe not require fach frequent drefling,as wounds and ulcers 


doe. By this it appeares,that as want of binding, and too much loofenefle 


Li B,I§, 


repelling t 
repelling, 2 
yofaces pau 
dipped the 
and aftring 
; wh 
Gares efpes 
feemed to 
for, by the 
the part fo 
many fure 
ly aftringe! 
by Hippoc 
things, the 
nous excre 
andatleng 
Whereby 
uled above 
prefently 
nine dzies 
bread, and 
pofition. 
Ry, face. 
Otherwhi 
vine drink 
face. albif. 
purged w 
Pofitories 
due evacu 
though exe 
the ¢ 
{Ceffe, lon 
tion of th 


binding, 


tot 
Now ! 
whatwe 
| 
| 
“a 
| 
od! 
ai 
te 


(is Concerning Fratlures, 585 
cece of paineanda Phlegmon, fo allo rvo ftrair ligation, when paiae is pref{ent, 


rings a Phiegmonand Abfcefletothe wound. Therefore let all things here, ac- 
-egung to the forementioned rules and circumftances, be indifterent. I have for 
‘his purpofechought good toreiteratethefethings, becaufe you fhall as yet finde 
gany, who follow the practice of Paulus, and make many circumvolutions here 
sadthere, above and below the wound, which prefently they carric croffe-wile. 


is 


to bee kept firme 
ound; otherwife 
great tumor, re. 
¢ Ligation made 
'igne fymptomes, 
inde itabove and 
| into a ereattu. 
lackifh hue, by 
th on everie fide 
} much the rather 
remaine un{uppu- 
euntrothat which 
‘bones, and make 
em, and fomuch 
uch corruption of 
W from the ulcer, 
the lippes of the 
1; if aforrowfull 
tts; if, by fearch- 
ts perioftium and 
purdowne fome- 
treated {uthicient- 
‘Ss. But certainely 
bound up, as is 
toadmonifh the 
is rowlings upon 
catinflammation, 
liverted fromthis 
ufenothisg more 
Fence; tharis, et 
1, not too weake, 
aay ferve to com- 
‘the edges there: 
“nts of the bones 
comes to be dre 
wounds and ulcers 


loofeneffe in ab- 
fence 


But thiscroffe or lattice-like kinde of ligation is wholly to be difliked, and that Lattice fixe 
onely robeuled which we havedefcribed, according tothe minde of Hippocra- oe 


es, Now it istime, that I returne tothe former hiftoric of my mifhap, and declare 
what was done to me after that firft drefling, which I have formerly mentioned, 


— 


H APXXY. 


What was ufed to the Authors Legze afier the firf? drefsing. 


Being brought home to mine owne houfe in Paris inthe afters 
noone, they tooke from me, out of the Bafilica of the left arme, 
fome fixe ounces of blood. Andthenat the {econd dreffing the 
lippes or edges of the wound and placesthereabout were an- 


repelling the humors farre from the wounded part : foritiscold, aflringent and 
repelling, as the compofition thereof fhewes ; for it is made ex o/¢o omphacino, aqua 
rofacea, pauco aceto ceraalba. Therefore I ufedthis oynement for fixe dayes, 
dipped the comprefles and rowlers fomewhilesin oxycrate, otherwhiles in thick 


andaftringentred wine, for the ftrengthning of the part, and reprefling the hue you mut have 
a care, thatthe 


comprefles and 
rowlers grow 


feemed to dry, [now andthen moyttened them with the oxycrate, or role vineger: not hard by 
for, by their too much drinefle, paine and inflammation happen ; and if they binde crinctlo, 


mors; which two things wee muft have acare of in Hippocrates opinion, in fra- 
Gares e{pecially with a wound. Wherfore if at any time the comprefles or rowlers 


the part fomewhat more ftrait, they hurtit alfo bytheirhardneffe. You thall fee 
many {urgcons, who in this kinde of affect, from the beginning tothe end, ule on- 
ly aftringent and emplaftick raedicines, wholly contrary tothe methode fer dowa 
by Hippocrates, and commended by Galen, For, by the continued ufe of fach 
things, the pores and breathing places of theskinneare fhutup; whence the fuligi- 
nous excrement being fuppreft, the external] heat is increafed, and itching caulcd, 
andat lengthan ulcer by the fretting of the acride and ferous humor long fuppreft, 
Whereby you may learne, that aftringent and emplaftick medicines muft not bee 
uled above fixe daics. In ftead hereof you fhall afe the emplaifters, which I thall 
prefently defcribe. Inthe beginning of my dileale I ufed fo fparea diet, that for 
nine dzies, I ate nothing each day,burtwelve ftewed prunes, and fixe morfels of 
~ and dranke a Paris pinte of fugred water, of which water this was the com. 
Polition. 

kk, face.albif.§ xii. aqua font, xii. cinam, iii. | 
Otherwhiles I ufed fyrup of maydens hair with boyled water: Otnerwhiles,the ci- 
Vine drinke (asthey terme it) whereof this isthe compofition. Ke aque coche !®.vt. 


acc albif. iti. fuce- lim. agitentur & tranfvafentur fepius iavafis vitres. 
purged when necde required witha bole of Ca/ssa with Rubarbe, IT ufed alfo firp-... 


Politories of Cattle foape to make me goeto ftoole. for, if at any time! wanted 
¢ evacuation,a preternaturall heat prefently feized upon my kidneyes. With this, 


though exquifite manner of dict, Icouldnot prevaile, butthata fever tooke mec. 


&pon the eleventh day of my difcafe, anda defluxion, whichturned iatoan Ab- 
{ceffe, long flowing with much matter. I thinke the occafion hereof was fome por- 
lon of the humor fuppreft in the bottome of the wound , as alfo by too loofe 


unding, by reafon that Icouldnotendure juft or more ftrait binding ; and a 


nointed with aaguentum rofatum, which, bya joynt confent Of ror 


the Ancients, is much commended in the beginnings of fra- emeniie 
vod 1n fra. 


Gures: for it willaffwage paine, and hinder inflammation, by 3". 


bubiant fimul fecundum artem: The defeription 
of a fugred 


watcr, 


4 


The catifes of 2 
fever and ab- 
{cctle, enfuing 
upon afraétur¢; 


L 
ia Ut 
AAS 

| 

if = = 

— 
| 


586 Concerning Fractures. L 13,15 Lis ts 
fcales or fhivers of bones quite broke off, and therefore unapt to be agclutinared hereof, an 
for thefetherefore putrefying, drew by confent the proper nourifhment of thy bare het by the 
into putrefaGtion, and by the putredinous heat thence arifing, did Plentifully 2q- dasit we 
minifter the materiall and efhcient caufe to the defluxion and inflammation. lw eee are da 
moved to thinke they were {cales, fevered from their bone, by the thin and oid hich is pr 

Signes of feales famses flowing from the wound, the much fwolne fides of the wound, and cannot 
more loofe and {pongie fiefh thereabouts. Tothefe caufes, this alfo did with my {el 
onc night amongft the reft, as I flept,the mufcles fo contracted themfelves by avio. how dange 
lent motion, that they drew my whole Legge upwards ; fothat the bones by the che bed ; 
vchemency of theconvulfion, were difplaced, and prefledthe fides of the woung 
neyther could they be perfe@ly compofed or fer, unleffe by a new extenfion and tated. Mor 
impulfion, which was much more painefullto mee than the former, My middle, 
when it had lafted with me feven dayes, at length enjoyed aCri/is and end, partly they might 
by the eruption of matter, and paitly by {weat, flowing from me ina plenteoys oft-times 3} 
manner. ging of the 
by anie Jun 
CHuarv.XXVI. pleaiure. 
| 
What may be the caufe of the convulfive twitching of broken members, rr 
falling dow 
above, of t 
Why theexe following 
treme partsare | 
coldwhcn wef 
fleepe. 
XXVIII. 
Certaine Documents concerning the parts, whereon the Patient mujt mece(jaril) 
| reft, whileft helyes in his bed. 
| 2c2®pi Hofe who have their Legge orthe like bone broken, becaufe they are hio- 
= dered by the bitternefie of paine, and alfo with for their OF 
| inthepartsby folidation, are forced to keep themfelves without ftirring, and upon thes! 
backes in their beds for along time together. In the meane {pace, the 
ned by aétion. parts Whereupon they mut neceflarily lye,asthe heele, backe, holy- bone, rumps, 
| the mu(cles of the broken thigh or legge remaine ftretched forth and unmoveabl:, 
| fet at libertie from their ufuall fun@ions. Whereby it comesto paffe, that all theif 
| ftrength decayes, and growes dull by littleand little. Moreover alfo, by the fup- 
) preffion of the fuliginous and acride excrements, and want of perfpiration, they 
How, andwhac preternaturally hote; whence defluxion, an ab{cefle and ulcer, happen © 
| ulcers happen them, but principally to the holy-bone,the rumpe and heele: to the former, for tha! 
cat de they are defended with {mall ftore of feth ; tothe latter, for that it is of more &® 
legge, to the quifite fenfe. Now the ulcers of thefe parts are difficultly healed, yea, and oft- 
heele. they caufe a gangrene inthe flefh, and arotternefle and mortification in the 
bones there-under, and for the moft part acontinued fever, delirium, convullio”, Nowit 
and (by that fympathie which generally accompanies fuch affects) a hickering. For happened 
the hecle and ftomacke age two very Nervous parts, the latter in the oer aon compofed 


4 
* é 
4 
; 


ac 


hat the bones. 5 
fides of the 


members. 


ip, ufually ha ns 
ke the caufe 
we ficepe, into the 
le, chat the extreme 
d providence, fends 
eceived of the part 
r, and fuddenly,ac. 
ne, the muicles fol. 
ey arcin{erted, are 
jaine difplaced, and 
$s contraction of the 


mult necefjarily 


caufe they are hin- 
pr cheir cure or con- 
ing, and upon their 
¢ meane {pace, the 
holy- bone, rumpe, 
hand unmoveable, 
paife, chat all cheif 
ralfo, by the fup- 
perfpiration, they 
d ulcer, happen co 
the former, for that 
at itis of more ¢% 
led, yea, and oft- 
in the 
irimm, convullion, 
ts) ahickering. For 
in the whole b 
thereof, 


an 
which a 


Concerning Fratlures. 


<ereof,and by a large portion of the nerves of the fixth conjugation ; but the o- 
rby the great tendon pafling under it, the which is produced by the meeting, 
4 as it were growing together of thethree mufcles of the calfe of thelegge. All 
re deadly, both by diflipation of the native heat by the feverifb, and that 
which 1s preternaturall ; as alfo by the infeétion of the noble parts, whofe ufe the 
fitecannot want, by carrion-like vapours. When as I confidered all thefe things 
with my felfe, and(become more skilfull by the example of others) underftood 


how dangerous ti 
the bed ; and taking hold of the rope which hung over my head, I heaved up my 


hey were, I wifhed them now and then to lift my heele up out of Remediesfs? 
the prevention 


of the forefaid 


e, that fothe parts, prefled with continuall lying, might tranfvire,and be venti- ulcers, 


4. Moreover alfo I refted thefe parts upon around cufhion, ~-ing open in the 
middle, and ftuffed with foft feathers, and layd under my rumpe and heele, that 
they might be refrefhed by the benefit and gentle breathing of the ayre: and I did 
of-times apply linnen clothes, {pred over with wnguentumrofatum, forthe allwa- 


ing of the paine and heat. Befides alfo, I devifeda Caffe of Lattin, wherein the The ule ofa 


broken legge being layd, is kept in its place; farre more furely and certainely than 
by anie Junks; and morcover alfo, it may all be moved to and againe atthe Patients 
sleafare. This Caffe will alfo hinder the heele trom lying withallits bodie and 
weight uponthe bed, putting a foft and thicke boulfter under the calfe, in that 

lace where the Caffe is hollow : befides alfo, irarmes and defends it againft the 
falling downe and weight of the bed-clothes, having a little arch made over and 
above, of the fame matter. All which fhall bee made manifeft unto yOu by the 


following ffgure. 


The figureof a Caffe. 


AA. Shewthe bottome or belly of she Caffe. | 
BB. The wings or fides to be opened and [hut at pleafure: 
C. The end of the wings, whereto the fole or arch fitted. 


DD. The Arch. 


EE, The Sole. | 
Anopen fpace, whereat the beele hangs forth of the Caffes 


Now it remaities, that I tell you what remedies Iapplyed to the Abfceffe which 


happened upon my wound. When therefore I perceived an Abfceffe to breed, I 
tine, 


and 


Compofed a fuppurative medicine of the yoalks of egges,common oyle,turpen 


Lattin C afié, 


A fuppuraavé 
| 


m 


Li 
a be 428 lutinareg 
+e fhment of the Parr 
did Plentifully 2ad- 
nflammation. I was 
the thin and Crude 
he wound, the 
is alfo did Micrew, 
nemfelves by 
Af 
€xtenhon and 
former. My fever. 
fis and partly 
1 MC plenteoys 
fi = SSS =H = 
= += = 
| == 
ps B= = 
= Fe 3 & 
| Wii ~ 4 
= 
| 
= > — | 


Concerning Frattures. 


andalittic wheat Lufed ituntillic wasopened : then to cleanf{e jr I 
this following remedie. | 
jyrupr rofatt rerebinth. venta, 5 Yadicis florentie, aloes 
mafliches, farina hordet, an.2 incorporentur omnia fiat Cat 
but [ hadacare, thatthe place, whereat I conjectured the quite fevered {cales of the 
boncs muft breake forth, fhould be filled with tents made of {ponge or Hlaxe, tha, 
Canematick fo, by thismeanes,I might keepthe ulcer open at my pleafure. Bue I put into the 
powders havé bortome of theulcer catagmatick and cephalicke powders, witha little burp: A. 
cares lum tO procure the egreffe of the formerly mentioned fcales. Thefeat 
ofbones. forth, Icicatrized thealcer with burnt Alum. For, this having a drying and aftrin, 
gent factiltie,co irmes and hardens the flefh, which is and { pongie,and flow. 
ing with liquid /awzes,and helps forwards natures endeavour in CICatriZation, For 
the fragments of the bones, they, by reafon of their naturall drinefle and hardnefs 
cannot be joyned and knit together by themfelves without a medium: but they need 
The cafes acertaine fubftance, which, thickning and concreting at their ends, doth ar length 
both efficient olue them together, and (as it were) faftenthem with foder. This fubftance har) 
ats matter of the proper fubftance and marrow of the bones  butthe forme trom 
the nitive heat, and emplaftick medicines, which moderately heat, For, onthe cop. 
trarie, thefe medicines, which, by theirtoo much heat,doe difcufle and attenuate, 
. doe (as it were) melt and diflolve the matter of the Ca#us, and fo hinder the kpj:. 
ting. Wherefore for this purpofe, I would with youto make ufe of the following 
emplafters, of whofe efficacie Ihave had experience: for, hence they are called 
knitting or confolidating plaifters. rs 
Re, myrtill. rofarum omphac, an. tb rad.althee tb. ii. rad. fraxini, fal, 
ducing tothe majoris fol. ejufdem, fol. falicis an.m.i. fiat decoctio in 
generation quantitate vini nigri, cr aqua fabrorum,ad medictatis confumptionem,adde in (0. 
latura pulveris be thuris an.5%. adipis hirct 16.8, terebinth, lote iiij. mifti. 
ches 3 iii. Lithargyri auri cy arzenti an.5 ii. boli armenia, terrae fizillata, 
minit > vi.ctra albe quantum fufficit, fiat emplafirum, ut artis eff. 1a ftead hereof you 
may ufethe blacke emplaifter, whereof this is the defcription. 
Theblack Re. lithareyri anri olei aceti coquantur firenul lento iene donec nigrum ¢y 
plaiftcr. fplendens reddatur emplaftrum,¢y non adheareat digitis. Or elfe, 


onof a Spare. rubie tindtorum, an. 3ii.fevi arietini cere alba fiat emplastrum: into which 


whileft it is hote)dip a warme linnen cloth, for the forementioned 
ecre-ciom. 


1, b caufe they are ufed andapplyed without judgment: which 
felvesgnoc ood p 


by event more fofr,hard, flender,crooked, or laftly concretes more {lowly by the great ¢110!, 


{fenfe of ace 
from the 
[fomewhat 
entring to the 
of the blood 
thought goo: 
blood, and { 
and griftly p 
Sheepe, Kid 
fomewhiles 
fed upon fru 
red, thicke a 
courfe,[ are 
cularize my 
gile, as beefs 
Cahus) as 
fore Galen p 
ther fragile n 
and alfo vifci 
are {ent into 
and the hollc 
Veines difpe 
thefe veines 
ones is mart 
tionable ther 
fromthe gro 
bones by lar 
Pores and fj 
Paflages, by 
me waies ' 
brane which iff 
With moftt ex 
ny beleeve, tt 
ing hurt ca 


209 | List. 
aS 
4 io drefling 2 
are drawne a 
L ten, which art 
fiefhie fubfta 
wit, by the 
| wound, whi 
AY ANZULBIS AV AC. Dil verifatorum An. 5.1’. emplaftri 
diachalciteos 3 ii. quefaciant fimul,c> fiat emplafirum fecundum artem, Indefet of 
thefe, you may ufea Cere-cloth, or te/a Gualteri, whereof thisis the de(cription. 
(acdicitpios, by the common content the ncrents, 1S much commendedtior 
fractures: but itmuft undergoe different preparations, according to the condition 
of thetime , for infummer it muft be diflolved in the juice of plantaine and night- 
fhade, left it fhould heat more than is fit. It isconvenient, in the ‘vterim,tohaver- 
gard to the temper of the affected bodies - for neyther are the bodies of children 
to be fo much driedasthefe of old men: otherwife,if fuch drying medicines fhould | 
be applyed to yong bodies as to old, the matter of the Caus would be diffolved,i 
would be fo faire from concreting ; wherefore the Surgeon muft take preat heede 
inthe choyce of his medicines. For, often times remedics, 200d of themfelves, ate 
afd to the great ihame of the Surgeon. 
of 
power 
d 
ut throught 
Cidents whic 


florentis 
fat mundi ficativyr, | 
tevered Icales of 
onge Or flaxe, thas 
But purinry the 
/itha little burnt A 
Thefeat length cal 
2a drying aNd aftrin. 
f pongic,and flow. 
N CiCatrization, 
inefle and hardnefe 
dium: but they need 
ends,doth at length 
his fubftance hath 
but the forme from 
‘at. For, onthe cop. 
cufle and attenuate 
1 fo hinder the knit. 
ic of the following 


ce they are called 


rad. fraxini, dy fol, 
hat decoctie in fuffi- 
iptionem,adde in 
b. lote 3 iiii. mfti. 
figillata, an.3i.&, 
In ftead hereof you 


ne donec nigrum 
Olet rafat, cy myr- 
um an, 3.4, emplaftrs 
irtem, In defect of 
sthe defcription. 
ui, mucum cupre[si, 
which 
ed ufe.Emplaflrum 
ch commended for 
to thecondition 
antaine and night- 
interim ,to have re- 
odies of children 
» medicines fhould 
uld be diffolved,it 
(t take great heede 
of themfelves, are 
t judgment: which 
he Callus becomes 
by the great error, 


aloes 


Concerning 


Crarp.XXVIII. 
By what meanes we may know the Cahus is abreeding. 


en 0g Hen I knew that my legee begunne to knit, when as leffe matter than was Whenthe cal- 
ufuall came from the ulcer, when the paine flackened and laftly, when 
4B asthe convulfive twitchings ceafed ; which caufed me to judge it fit to be feldome 
drefle it feldomer than I was ufed to doe. For,by the frequent deterfion 
in dreffing an ulcer, whilft a Callus is breeding, the matters whereof it isto be made; 
are drawne away and {pent, which are (as they terme them) Ros ,Cambium, and G/s- 
sm, which are the proper and genuine nourifhments both of the bony, as al fo of the 
gethie fubftance. I by other fignes alfo conjectured the breeding of the Cal/ws, td 
wit, by the {weating of a certaine dewie blood out of the edges and pores of the 
wound, which gently dyed and bedewed the boulfters and ligatures, proceeding 
from the effluxe of the fubtler and gentler portion of thar matter,which plenteouf- 
ly fowed downe for the breeding of aCalius. Asalfo, by a tickling and pleafing 
fenfe of a certgine vapour, continually creeping, with amoderate and gentle heate, 
from the upper —_ eventcthe placeof the wound. Wherfore thence forwards Hipp. v0.43: 
fomewhat loofened the ligation, left,by keeping it too ftrair, I fhould hinder from frat 


entring to the fragments of the bones, the matter of the Cai/zs, which isa pottion 
of the blood, temperatein qualitie, and moderate in quantie, Then therefore I 
thought good,to ufenourifhments fitto generate more groffe, thicke and tenacious 


blood, 


and fufficientfor generating a Callus fuch as arethe extremities, tendinous mes fe 
and griftly parts of beafts, as theheads, feete, leggesand eares of Hoggs, Oxen, generating @ 
Sheepe, Kids; all which I boyled with Rice, French Barley; andthe like, ufing — 
fomewhiles one,fomwhiles another,to pleafe my ftomack & palate.I alfo fomtimes 

fed upon frumity,or wheat fodden in Capon broth withthe yoalks of egges; I drank 

red, thicke and aftringent wine, indifferently tempered with water. For my fecond 

courle, [ are chefnuts and medlars: neyther doe I without fome reafon, thus parti- 

cularize my diet : for thar groffe nourifhments,efpecially if they be friable and fra- 

gile,as beefe is, arealike hurtfull (for as much as pertaines tothe generating of a 

Cals) as light meats are. For that makes the Cal/xs too dry,thefe too tender. Wher- 

fore Galen pronounces thefe meats only fit for generating a Callas, which are ney- Lib.s.methicapy 
ther fragile nor friable, neither ferousand thin, nortoo dry ; but indifferent groffe, 

andalfo vifcide, far andtough. Thefe meats, digefted*by the ftomacke into Chi/us, 

are fent into the guts, and from hence, by the mefaraick veines, into the Gate-veine, 

andthe hollow part of the Liver, thence into the Hollow-veinc, and fo intothe 

Veines difperfed over allthe bodie andthe partsthereof. There are alfo fome af 

thefeveines which carrie blood into the bones ; but inthe large cavities of the 

ones is marrow contained, as in the {mail a certaine marrowic {ubftance,propor- 

tionable thereto, being their proper nourifhment. Thegeneration of marrow is 

fromthe groffer portion of the blood, which flowes into the greater cavities of the 

by larger veines and arteries, but intothe leffe by leffer, whichendintheif 

pores and fimall paffages. For,in largebones youmay obfervelargeand apparent 
Paflages, by which the veines and arteries enter forthe forementioned ufe. By the 
¢ waies the nerves alfoinfinuate themfelves, from whence proceedes a mem- 
ane which involves the marrow of the bones, the which by that means is endued 
with moft exquifite fenfe,as experience teacheth; which isthe cavfe that makes ma- Why mat, 
by beleeve, that the marrow hath fenfe of feeling, becaufe the membranes thereof to have {ent of 
ng hurt caufe moft bitter paine. Therefore out of the marrow and the proper ‘ling: 
lubftance of the bone, there fweats a certaine groffe and terreftriall hard tic 

bythe power of theaffimilating facultie, which ferves infteadoftheformative,2 
Caius Crowes andknits, Sim ple fractures of the are ufually knit in fiftic dates; tn 
Cidents whichbefellmee, it was three whole months before the fragments of the | 
bones were perfectly knit, month, before I could 


to cleanfe jr] ufed 
3 


_ 


$90 Concerning Fractures. L 


my legge without the helpe of a Crutch. Going was painefull to me for fome fey 
daics, becaufe the Callus had taken up fome place of the mufcles : for, before m 
former freedome of motion could returne againe to the broken and knit parr, jr Was 


neceflarie, that the Tendons and Membranes fhould feparate themfelves by little f 
and little from the fcarre. Inthe performance of all thefe things, I had the dj igent ‘ounder 
and faithful affiftance amongft the Surgeons, to omit Phyfitians, of Anthog). cines tha 
Portall, the Kings Surgeon. 
| df 
Cuarv. XXIX. from tne 
jrunrouc 
of thofe things which may hinder the generation of a Callus, and how te and fore’ 
correct the faults thereof, of it be ill formed, formerly 
&ted part 
) srexs* Aving already {poken of the fignes of a Callus beginning toconcrete bly mad 
>| (ais os of itsgencration and the manner thereof : it now remaines, that wee and {wel 
! ae © treat of thofe things which hinder the generation thereof ; and what folve tha! 
2 sale on the contrarie helpe forwardsthe conformation and concretion frictions 
ar #5 thereof. Now thefethings which either wholly hinder, or elfe retard tinuance 
Difeulsing 274 the gencration of aCallws, have aftrong and powerfull difcuffive and attenuating cuftomar 
cines hinder facultic; or elfe they are un@uous, oyly and moift. For, by fuch the juice, wherof 
pple wo the Callus ought to be, is eyther melted and confumed, or elfe growes foft, and js ay 
~ gelaxed. But oa the contrarie, thofe things which helpe forwards a Calls mutt bee 
bates ae drying, incraffating,thickening, hardening andemplaflicke, moderately hor and 
neration aftringent. But formoift and relaxing medicincs,they ought to have no place here, 
thereof. when it happens that the Callus is ill formed, that is, too thicke, or crooked, 
@& otherwife ill fhapen, whereby it may be wafted and broken, foto bee reftored a. 
egaine after a better manner. Yet notwithftanding, fuch things are not to be attemp 
ted, unlefle when the Callus is yet greene, and fo depraved,that the fault therof doth 
; very much pervert the native conformation of the part, and exceedingly offendthe 
action. Then therefore in fuch acafe, the place muft be fomented with adeco@ion 
of a flieeps head and guts, wherein fhall be boyledthe roots of Marfh mallowes,of folution,t 
Brionie, the feeds of Line, of Fenugrecke, Pigeons dung, Bay-bertics,and the mentaric 
like. You fhallalfoufe this following oyntment and plaifter. that whic 
| unguenti de Althea 3 itii.olei lilioram, cy axunzia anferis anJi, Aqua Vite ph through « 
rum, liquefiant fimul, fiat lintmgntum quo liniatur pars. Then apply this following hot fome 
emplaifter. contained 
K, emplaft,deVizo cum mercurio, cerati wfypati defcriptione Philagrii,an, iil. oles part 
ancthini liliorum liquefiant omnia fimul, fiat emplaitrum , bee {pred {wolne : | 
upon leather for the forefaid ufe. When by thismeanes the Callus fhall feemetobe nefle whi 
fufficiently mollified,it fhal be broken,and the bones reftored to their natural! {tate, fubfide. 
wharcalu  a@adthecureof thefractureto be followed as.at the beginning, If the be be Forifitb 
muftnorbe cometoo hard throughage, it is betternot to break it, butrolet iralone, Ieftione  & of fuperfl 
broken, though waorfe accident befall the Patient. For it may fo fall out, that by your labouring © and fuccu 
diftorte, or ‘ J yy , 4, f th 
otherwife  breakeit, the bone may breake in fome other part, before itbreakinthatwhichs §& Of the fe 
ill conformed. knit by the Callus. Therefore the difcreet Patient had rather livelame, than for d- Ot 
chewing it,to undergoe the hazzard of his life. If the Ca//us be too groffe, it fhalbe 
diminithed (ifit be as yet frefh) with emollient, refolving, and powerfully aft 
medicines, which have forceto diflolve,dry and cxhauft. It will alfo bee g 
ftrongly to rubb the Cal/ws with oyle of Bayes, wherein Salt-peter, or fome othet 
_kinde of Salt hath been diflolved,then wrapped about witha Rowler, to binde it 
ry ftraitly, putting 2 leaden plate thereon, whereby the flowing downe of the nok 
rifhing humor intothe part, may be forbidden; thatthus by littleand litle the Cale 
The caufesof dus may decay anddiminifh, If on thecontraric,it any waies happen,that the © allws as 
_be more rhin and flender,or grows more flowly, for that itis too ftraitly bound, of ke 
<becaufe the idle partis longer kept in quiet than isfit, withoutexercifing of its 


per function (which caufe is to be reckoned amongtt the chicfe caufes of the yor? 


i 
1B.) 
' 
Her) 
| | 
q | 
| 
4 


L B.15, 


ome for {ome fey, 
: for, before m 


ind knit parr, jr Was 
hemfelves by 


I hadthe diligent 


mons, of Anthonie 


and how te 


nning to concrete, 
remaines, that wee 
hereof; and whar 
Nn ang concretion 
der, orelfe retarde 
ive and attenuating 
h the juice, wherof 
rowes foft, and is 
ds a Callzs mutt bee 
ioderately hor and 
bave no place here, 
thicke, or crooked, 
oto bee reftored a- 
¢nottobe attemp. 
he fault therof doth 
ecdingly offendthe 
1 with adeco@ion 
Marfi mallowes,of 
ay-berrics,and the 


an.> i. Aqua Vita pa- 


this following 


lagrii,an, ill. olet 
vm. lerit bee {pred 
lus {hall feemeto be 
their naturall ftate, 
Lf the Calas be ber 
ir alone, left fome 

your labouring to 

eak in that whichis 
lame, than for ef- 

too grofle, it (halbe 
powerfully aftrin- 
t will alfo bee good 
eter, or fome orhet 
wier, to binde it Ve 
downe of the not 
leand little the C4 
ppen,that the 
ftraitly bound, oF 
ercifing of its pro- 
caufes of rhe leane- 
aciie 


4G oncerning Fraétlures. 


L 1B.1§. 
nels, even forthis reafon, for that exercife ftirres up the native heatofthe part,the 
worker of digeftion and nutrition)or elfe for that they feed upon {uch nouri{liments 
offend in quality, or quantity,or both, or forthat the ligature ufed to the part is 
,oo often loofed , or becaufe the part its felfe istoo haftily and before the time put 

;oundergoe folid offices and motions. According. tothe variety of caufes,medi- 

cines thallbee applyed. For if the ligature of the part bee too ftrait, it fhall bec loo- Reyes. 

fed, yea verily the fractured place, the ligature being taken away, {hall be quite therefore, 

ceed from ligation, and a new kind of ligature muft bee made, which mutt be row- 

led downe from the roote ofthe veffels, that is, from the ar mepitts,tfthearme, or . 

from the groine, if the legge be broken, to the fracture: yet fo,as that you may leave 

‘eyntouched or taken in,for thus the blood is preffed from the fountain and {pring, 

and forced into the affected part,by a way quite contrary to that, whereby we have 

formerly taught in feare of inflammation, to hinder it from entrance into theafie- 

Sed part. Alfo gentle frictions and fomentations with warme water may be profita- 

bly made, from which you muft then difift whenthe part thall begin to grow hot 

and {well. Ifany too long continue thefe frictions and fomentations, hee fhallre- When we mut 

folve that which he hath drawne thither. For this we have oftentimes obferved,thar “em 
frictions & fomentations have contrary effets, according tothe fhortnefs and con- frien. ss 

tinuance of time. Pications wil alfo conduce to this purpofe,and other things which 

cuftomarily are ufed to members troubled with an atrophia,or want of nourifhment. 


Of fomentations which be ufed to broken bones. 


Cae [vers fomentations areufed to broken bones for feverall caufes. When Warme water. 
~iitya\ Wa we ufe warme water for a fomentation, wee meane that, which is juft 

M@ between hot and cold, thatis, which feeles luke warme to the hand 

“) ofthe Phyfitian and Patient. A fomentation of fuch water ufed for 7.6.2. 
fome {hort {pace doth moderately heat, attenuate and prepare for re- thereof. 
folution,the humor which is in the furface of the bodice, it drawes blood and an ali- 

mentaric humor to the part labouring of an Atrophia; it aflwages paine, relaxes 

that which is too much extended, and moderately heats the member refrigerated 

through occafion of roo ftrait binding,orby any other means. Onthe contrarie,too 

hot fomenting cools by accident, digefting and difcufling the hot humor which was 

contained inthe member. Wemeane a fhort time is {pent in fomenting, when the Notes of thor: 
part begins to grow red and {well ; ajuft {pace, when the part is manifeftly red and J)2"4 © 
{wolne : but we conjeéture,that much ortoo much time is {pent thereon,if thered- 
nefle,which formerly appeared,goe away, and the tumor,which lifted up the part, 

fubfide. Alfoin fomenting, you muft have regard tothe bodie wherero it is ufed. 

Forifit be plethorick, an indifferent fomentation will diftend the part with plenty Fementation: 
of fuperfluous humors; but if it be leane and {pare,it will make the part more flethie a 


onhies. 
7 lucculent. Now it remaines, that we fay f{omewhat of the fracture of the bones 
0 the feet, 


— 


Of the fracture of the bones of the feet. 
28s He bones of the Inftep,back and toes of the feet, may bee fraGured as the wry chefiadu. 
St oe bones of the hands may. Wherefore thefe fhall bee cured like them, but re bones of 
thatthe bones of the Toes muft not be kept ina crooked pofture, as the 


bekeptin a 
For as weufe our leggesto walk, fowe ufe our feet to ftand- Befides alfo the Patient 


bones of the fingers mutt, left their action fhould perifh or bee depraved. ttraic poiwe 


thal} keep his bed untill they be knit. 


Theeud of the fifteenth Booke, 
Ddd 2 OF 


* 
\ 
r= 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i 
| 
| 


THe SixTEENTH Booxkeg, 


* 


ot 
, 


Of the kinds and manners of Brefigcations. 


Diflocation is the departure or of the head of a what atuxs 
bone from its proper cavitie,into an unaccultomed place tion prop 
befides nature, hindring voluntarie motion: There is ano- 
ther kinde of Luxation, which is caufed by a violent diften- tion nor 
tion, and as it were a certaine divarication, and dilatation, P"'° 
or extenfion into length and breadth of the ligaments, and 
all the nervousbodies, which containe, ftrengthen, and 
binde together the joynts. Thus thofe who have beene tor- 
mented and racked, have that thick ligament which isin the 
inner cavitie of the huckle bone too violently extended : Thofe who have fuftered 
the Strrappado, have the ligaments,encompafling the articulation of rhe Arme-bone, 
with the fhoulder-blade, forcibly and violently diftended. Such alfois their affect | 
whofe footis {trained by flipping. There is a third kinde of Luxation, when as 
thofe bones which are joyned contiguous,and one (as it were) bound tothe fides af " ~ 
another, gape orflyeafunder: asinthe Arme, when theell parts from the wand , 
in the legge, when the one focile flyes from the other : yet this may be referred to 
the fecond fort of diflocations,becaufe it happens not without dilatation,or elfe the 
breaking of the ligaments. There is alfo a fourth added tothele, as when the Thefourch. 
phy/es and heads of bonesare plucked from the bone whereon they were placed 
or faftened : which unproperly called kinde of Luxation, hath place chiefly in the 
bones of yong people, and it isknowne by the impotencie of the parr, and bythe 
noife and grating together of the crackling bones whenthcy are handled. Now the 
bones of yong folks are alfo incidentto another cafualtie : for asthe bones of old 
people are broken by violence by reafon of their drineffe and hardneffe, thus the 
: Nes of children are bended or crooked in by reafon of their naturall foftneffe and 

Uniditie, 


Ddd3 Cua 


592 
Cuap. 


50 Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


— 


Li 


ie C HA P. II. 
Of the differences of Difiocatens, 


What Luxate 
ons are fimple 


Ome Diflocations are fimple, others compound. We terme them fijp. 
ple which have no other preternaturall affe@ joyned withthem ; and 


What com- fuchcompound, as are complicated with one or more prevernaturall 
pound: 5) affects; as when a diflocation is affociated with a wound, fraQure, ore. 
paine, inflammation, and an abf{ceffe. For, through occafion of the( 
we are often compelled fo longto let alone the luxation, untillthefe bee remitreg 
Whatacom. of themfelves, or by our art. Some Diflocations are complete and perfect,as when 
piece Luxati- che bone wholly fals out of its cavitie: otherfome are unperfect, as when itis op. 
pat ly lightly moved,and not wholly fallen out ; wherfore we only call them fubluxa. 
What afa tjons orftrains. Differences of Luxations are alfo drawne from the place : fo; 
| — {ometimes the bone is wrefted forwards, otherwhiles backwards, upwards, down. 
raine. wards; fomewhiles it may be weefted, according to all thefe differences of firs, 
and otherwhiles onely according to fome of them. Differences are alfo taken from, 
the condition of the diflocated Joynt in greatneffe andlittleneffe, from the fuuper. 
ficiarie or deepe excavation of thie meen or hollowneffe ; and laftly from the time, 
,asif it be lately done, orof fome long continuance. I have judged it fit to fe 
| downe all thefe, for that there are feverall indications of curing, according to the 
| varietie of each of thefe, as we fhall teach hereafter. motion; P 
| CHAP. IT}. ring of the 
Of the caufes of Diflocations, 
Baran Here are three generall caufes of Luxations, internall, external!, and he- ea, 
Incernalteau- 4&9) \ reditaric. The internall areexcrementitious humors and fiatulencies, & Now we 
es of difloca- which, fettling into the joynts with greatforceand plentie,doefomake tions. are ¢ 
: Care (lipperie,fotten & relaxe the ligaments which binde together the bones, be eafily 
that they eafily fall outof their cavities; orelfe they fo fill and diftend thele lige thrutting 
ments,and make them fo fhore,that being contracted, they alfo contract the appendi- allwere 
ces of the bones from whence they arife, and fo pluck them from the bone where- 
on they are placed, or elfe draw the headsof the bones out of their cavities,chiet- 
ly if the violence of a noxious humor doth alfo concurre, which poffefling and fil 
ling up the cavities of the joyats, puts them from their feats, as it oft times happens 
to the joynt of thehip by Sciaticaes, and to the Vertebra of the {pine, by whol 
Exccnall — Luxation people become gibbous, or otherwifecrooked, But externall caufes of 
ger Diflocations are, fals from high, bruifing and heavie blowes, the Rack, Strappado, 
flipping in going, andall fuch like things, which may force rhe heads of the bones 
to fly out of their feats, or cavities, which alfo happens fomtimes to infants in thett 
birth, when asthey are toocarelefly and violently drawne forth by the Midwite, 
fothateyther their armes or leggesare put out of joynt.Hereditarie caufesarefuch 
| as the Parents transfufe into their off-fpring : hence itis, that crooked not hath cauf 
rily, but often times are generated by crooked, and lame by lame. Thetruh & ther Joy 
whereof is evident by daily experience. Befidesalfo Hippocrates him{elfe avers, may they 
that infants in the very wombe may have their Joynts diflocated bya fall,blow leffe moy 
dewt. and compreflion,& by thetoo much humidity and loofenes of the Joynts:whene much the 
» _ alfo we fee many crooke legg’d and footed from their nativitie ; fo that none n¢ Alfo an i 
marvell or makeany doubt hereof. We have read it obferved by Galen In | sort eafie orb 
de Artic. that children may have impoftumes in their motherswombs, which ™Y bethe m 
Qumes in their forth quitture, theulcers being opened of their own accord, and be cicatriz¢ ftored. 
mothers by the only benefit of nature. It alfo happens to many from their firft conforma’ chance t 
tl Te on, that the cavities of their Joynts are leffe depreft chan they thould bee, andthat is ftraitly 


— 
peadsof th 
che ligame 
| whet her in | 
| 


‘eterme them 
with them ; and 
ore 
ind, fraQure, Preat 
occafion of thefe 
m hele bee remitted 
perfect,as when 
as when itis on. 
mcallthem fubluxa. 
m the place ; fo, 
Ss, upwards, down. 
lifferences of lite 
ire alfo taken from 
¢, fromthe {uper- 
{tly from the time 
judged it fit to fet 
4CCOrding to the 


external!, and he- 
S and flatulencies, 
entie, doe {fo make 
ogether the bones, 
diftend thefe liga- 
ntract the appenar- 

the bone where- 
heir cavities,chiet- 
poflefling and fil 
t ofttimes happens 
1¢ {pine, by whofe 
xternall caufes of 
Rack, Strappado, 
eads of the bones 
8 to infants in their 
Bh bythe Midwife, 
arie caufesare {uch 
poked not necetia- 
lame. 
s himifelfe averres, 
ited by a fall, blow 
e Joynts: whence 
fothat none need 
y Galen 
ombs, which may 
,and be cicatrized 
r firft conformat!- 


bee, andrhat 
eheir 


— 


Lis 16, Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 595 


yneir verges are more dilated than they ought tobe , whereby it happens that the 
neads of the bones can the leffe enter into them. It tals out, that otherfome have 
she ligaments,appointed by nature for faftening together the bonesof the joynr, 
whether inferted or place@about, fo weake, that from their firft originall they are 
got of futhcient ftrength, or elfe abound with much phlegme,eyther bred together 
with them,or flowing from fome other place;fo that by their too much flipperineffe 
they lefle faithfully containethe knittings or articulations of the bones.In all thefe, 
5 the bones are cafily diflocated, fothey may prefently be eafily reftored without 
the aflitance of a Surgeon, as I have fometimes obferved in fome. 


Cu ap.I 
The fignes of dsflocations. 


oe Ome of thefignes whereby we cometo the knowledge of aluxated rhe common 
bone, arecommon toall diflacations; others are proper only to fe- Senco! all 
verall Luxations. It isa common figne,that there isalwaiesatumor 


| ei in that part whereto the bone runngs, and ahollownefle on thar 


— 


| fide from whence it is howne. Now the proper fignes fhall be fhew- 

ed, when as we come to treat of the particular kindes of Luxations, 

Weknow a perfect Diflocation by the loft action of the part, chat is to fay,the lof 

motion; painealfo breedsa fufpicion of a diflocation: for the head of the bone, 

which (moved out of its place) is forced into another, prefles the ficth, and di- 

fends the nerves alfo moved outof their place. Hereto alfo conduces the compa- 

ring of the found joynt with that which is hurt, in which collation, it is fit the 

found part, which is compared with the hurt,be no waies, neyther by nature nor 

any accident,wronged,nor deformed; nor withered or decayed, nor {wolne above 

meafure, otherwife it may cozen and deceive you, if youbee lefle warie, Labour Stenes of an 
and difficultie of action in moving, isa figne ofan uncomplete Luxation,or ftrain, unperfet 
Now we thus know, that theligaments, ferving to the connexion of the articula- hocation. 
tions, are extended and relaxed, if the head of the bone, prefled with your fingers, 

beeafily driven unto the contrary part, and fuddenly flye thence backe againe ; if 

thruting your finger into the joynt, it eafily enter, nothing refifting it, as though 

allwere empty within ; if the motion be difficult,or none at all. 


an 


— — 


Cuap. V. 
of Prognofticks tobe made upon luxations. 


L1 Joynts may bee perverted or luxated, but ajl of them cannot in like 
re{tored. For the head may be diflocated, but therupon pre- 
Kem fent death enfues, by reafon of the compreflion of the whole f pinall able. 


® marrow prefently at the originall thereof; fuch alfo is the diflocation 


of avertebra of the {pine, and of the Jaw-bone, which, fl: 
ct. 


hath caufed infammation,and a greattumor before that it 
ther Joynts, asthey are more or leffe diflocated, and moved out of their feats, fo 


May they bee more eafily or difficultly reftored. For, by how much they are the Why thofe 
lefle moved out of their places, by fo much they areche more quickly, and by how ones which 
much they are the further, by fo much they are the more flowly and difficultly fer. 
Alfo an indication, taken fromthe figure of the luxated bone, givesa figneof the ja: ro bee 
eafic or hard reftoring of the diflocation, asinthe Arme, by how much the bones 

bethe moreeafily diflocated, by fomuch once luxated they are the more eafily re- 

ftored. Bones doe not eafily fall out of joynt in fiefhie bodies ; bur when chey 

chance to be put out, they are not eafily got in againe. For in fuch,the articulation 


is {traitly on everie fideheld in by the thicknefle of the mufcles, andshie 


‘ 
| 
r 
W 
j 


* 


iflocations, or Luxations. Linas 


5 96 oncerning Dp 


the fat lying thereabouts. On the contrarie, {uch as are leane, efpecially tho who 

formerly have beene more fat, have their joynts more laxe, whereby it Comes to 

paffe, that their bones may eafily be put forth of joynt : befides alfo, through the 

default of the digeftive facultie, they have their joyntseplete with MUCOUS hy. 

mors; whence it is,thatthe heads of the bones, as ftanding ina flipperie Place, are 

sete deanic, thelefle fable, as it isrecorded by Hippocrates. But {lender bodies, which are Na. 
fent.29. turally dry, compact and denfe, have their mufcles and ligaments more {trong ang 
dry ; wherefore their bones arethe more difficultly difplaced , and difplaced, the 

more difficultly fet. Some bones, joyned amongtt themnfelves, doe fometimes five 
oar.  afunder, as when the fhoulder blade flyes from the collar-bone at the an 
| inthe Armethe Ell fromthe Wand, and inthe Legge the one focile from the 0. 
ther, and the Heele-bone fromthe Ancle. Bones thus feparated will never be joy. 

ned together againe, willnever recover their former comely figure, never thei 

ftrength of a&ion. For, then it moft ufuaily happens, that the ligaments are ithe, 

broke afunder, or elfe refolved and become laxe. Thofe whofe bones are dir 

located by an externall caufe, they, after they be fer, may eafily fall out againe, fo, 

chat the ligaments, moyftened and bedewed with anexcrementitious humor, cap. 

not firmely holdthem: ofttimesthe ligaments are not wholly broken, but onely 

in fome portionthereof ; and hence the action of the part either perifhes, or is de. 

bilitaced. Alfochat diflocationis uncureable, when as the ligaments, fteeped and 

{wolne up with an excrementitious humiditie, are {0 much fhortened and conry;. 

éted in their length,as they have acquired in their breadth and thus they drayy 

we spn ‘ way and plucke off the appendices of the bones from whence they arife,and by re. 
from a onthe boneand the appendix docenter and receive eachother by manie cavities 
bone isuncure- and prominencies, therefore they cannot, by how skilfull hand foever they be han. 
= dled,be againe fitly placed and put together. Old and inveterate diflocations, wher. 
in atovgh humor poflefling the cavitie isconcrete in ftead of the head of the bone, 

arenotro be reftored; asneither whenthe heads of the luxated bones have by con. 

tiguall accritton made themfelves anew cavitie in the neighbouring bone: neither 

if they be reftored, is the refticution firme and of continuance; becaufethe natural! 

cavities poliefled by another matter, and the new made neare thereto cannot well 

and faithfully containethe received head of the bone. Thofe who have their {houl- 

der diflocated, may ufe their hand for many actions, as wellasthe oppofire found 

hand ; forthe weight of the bodic is not fuftained by the hands, as it is by the legs. 

And by how much the hand isthe more exercifed,by fo much the arme becomsthe 

nore corpulent. Contrarily,if thethigh-bone bee diflocated, efpecially if it bee 

wrefted inwards, the whole legge quickly decayes by an atrophia, becaule the part 

Hiyp-uss. Goth abfolutely lofe all motion : for bythe opinion of Hippocrates, the perior- 
mance of the proper action encreafes ftrength, and makes the part in better plight; 
but idlenefle debilitates.and makes itleane. If agreat wound and fracture bec joy- 

ned witha luxation, there isdanger, Ieft while wee ufe extenfion for reftoring the 

part, we draw the nervestoo violently, and fo break the nerves,veines and arterics, 

whence would enfue feare of inflammation, convulfion, and other maligne lymp- 

Sent.to es. tomes. Wherefore Hippocrates judges it better infucha concourfe and complica: 
OF preternaturall affects, abfolutely notto meddle at all with the fetting of the 
diflocated bone : for, by attempting the reftitution,certaine death ;but by omitting 

Youmuttnor it only lameneffe is to be feared. Everie diflocation muft be reftcred before inflan- 
mation come; butif it de already prefent, you mutt prefently be carefull to take 1 
joyne. away. For otherthings, let the Patient reft, left if the affeé be irritated, the increale 
and excefle of painecaufea convulfion, gangrene, and laftly death, as 1 remembe! 

I have fomrimes obferved. Therfore when inflammation,and other maligne {yup 

tomes fhall be mitigated and correéted, then may you endeavour to reftore the lux 

tion, efpecially if the habit of the bodice and member afte&ed may admit it. For if 

the bodie be flender, delicate andtender, then the reftitution will bee more {pee¢y 


and facile. But on the contrarie, more difficult, if it be grofle and compact ; And It 
thus much {uffice for prognofticks in Luxations. 


in your hance 
thereof, left 
continuance 
follow him 
reftore it, 1S 
tending, is, 
by which d 
tie. Bur the 
according t 
the bones t¢ 
by the hanc 
mentsande 
may not do 
brought 
mutt he haft 
ved and ge 
forceit noc 
fhould turn 
the thigh,w 
ding the mi 
this, chebo 
done in fre 
by the noy 
dies, being 
and confen 
found, and 


| 
performe 
| The third, 
= The fifth, Oo! 
| The firft fc 
dy, orelfe 
{trong emb 
tebra@, Or che 
elbow, hana 
| 
a 
convenient 
kept in icsc 
fhall be car 
| they (hall 
| hath fet the 
: and clothe 
d 
| Mere willt 
“2tion, un! 


d will never be ee 
figure, never their 
areeither 
hofe bones are dir 
tall out agai 
rai tor 
"cious humor, can. 
broken, but one} 
't perifhes, or is de. 
iments, lteeped and 
tened and 
thus they draw a. 
ey arile,and by rea. 
by manie cavities 
oever they be han. 
diflocations, wher. 
-head of the bone, 
bones have by con. 
ring bone: neither 
ecaufethe natural 
hereto cannot well 
10 have their fhoul- 
the oppofire found 
as itis bythe legs. 
me arme becomsthe 
cipecially if it bee 
14, becaufe the part 
rates, the perior- 
tin better plight; 
d fracture bec joy- 
n forreftoring the 
eines and arterics, 
her maligne tymp- 
urfe and compiica- 
h the fetting of the 
h but by omitting 
red before inflam- 
‘carefull to take it 
itated, the increale 
th, as ] remembet 
Sher maligne iymp- 
to reftore the luxa- 
y admirit. For if 
bee more {peedy 
compact ; And Iet 


Cua? 


597 


Crap. VI. 
Of the general cure of Diflocations. 


: Or allthat I have heretofore delivered the generall methode of curing Five ‘tenons 
FraCtures and diflocations, yet it fhall not bee unprofitable to repeat 

4 here in this place, thofethings which may be accommodated to this 

LA Ka 2) Treatife of curing Luxations. Now he that will cure Diflocati- 

Ys peck ons, muft have regard to five intentions, which it will be fitting to 

forme inorder. The firft is,of Holding ; The fecond,of Drawing or Extending; 


ne third, of Forcingin; Thefourth, of Placing in convenient figure and {ite , 


Thefifth, of Correcting the concomitant, or following fymptomes. 


The firlt cope, which we {aid was of Holding, is meant eyther of the whole bo- The benefit of 


| gy, orelfe of fome part thereof only. The whole bodie mutt bee holden by the hols Ss 


member in 


M rong embracement of your fervant or attendant, when as the fhoulder, the ver- jocations. 
= »jre,orthe thigh: bones are diflocated. But inthe diflocation of the Collar-bone, 
 dbow, hand, knee, or foote and legge, it is fufficient onely to holdthe part ftraitly 


inyour hands. There is neceflitie of holding eyther the bodie, or elfe fome part 

thereof, left, while the diflocated bone is extended, the whole bodice follow by 

continuance of parts, if there be nothing which may hinder: for if the bodie fhould 

follow him that drawes or extends, all the work- mafters labour and endeavour to 

reftorc it, istono purpofe, Theufe of the fecond {cope, that is, of Drawing or Ex- Theufeof ex 

tending, is, that there may bea free {pace and diftance betweenc the luxated bones, vention 

by which diftance the diflocated bone may the more freely be forced into its cavi- 

tie. Burthe manner of drawing or extending is different in quantity and manner, 

according to the various ftrength of the mufcles and ligaments, and diflocation of 

the bonesto this or that part. Therefore this worke isalmoft alwaies performed 

by thehands ; which when they cannot fuffice, we muft ufe the affiftance of inftra- 

mentsandengins, whofe figures you fhall fee hereafter delineated. Bat that you 

may not doe amiffe, you may fo farre ufe extenfion, untill the head of the bone be 

brought juft againft its cavitic. When the Surgeon hath brought it to this paffe,then ; ; 

mutt he haften tothe third intention, which is, to put the head of the bone firft mo- ina er nog , 

vedand gently bended, into its cavitie. For hee muft have a {peciall care, that hee purcing it into 

forceit no other way than into its proper cavity : for it would be dangerous, left he " P!#<* 

fhould turne it from one extreme into another, and the bone, for examples fake, of 

thethigh,which was diflocated intothe forepart by too violent forcing,by excce- 

ding themiddle cavitie, may be driven and diflocatec into the hinder part.To fhun 

tis, thebone fhall be put backe the fame way that it fell out, which may bee eafily 

donein frefhand late happening diflocations. We underftand that the bone is signcs chat the 

by the noyfe, oras it werea popp, or found like that, which folid and founding bo- bone is ‘ee. 

dies, being fully and forcibly thruft into their cavities,do make ; by the fimilitude 

andcon(ent in figure, magnitude and all conformation of the affected part with the 

lound, and laftly, by the mitigation of the paine. The fourth (cope, which isof the + 0) 6. o¢ 

convenient fite of tle part, muft bee fo fulfilled, that the bone after it is fet may bee fic placing the 
in itscavity, and not flye forth againe. Wherefore if the arme be diflocated, it MK MDCT. 

thallbe carried bound up in a fcarfe: ifthe thigh, knee,legge,or foote be luxated, 

they fhall be fitly laydinabed ; but inthe é#terimthe Surgeon, prefently after hee 

hath fet them, fhall have a care, that the affe@ed joynt be wrapped about with ftoups 

and clothes, or comprefies fteeped in rofe vinegar, and {pred with convenient me- 

Cicines then let it be bound with anartificiall deligation,rowling the ligatures un- 

Part contrary to thar whereto the diflocated bone flew. Forthe which pur- the manner 
Pofethicker boulfters hal! be there applied whence the bone came out, otherwife — — 
there willbe fome danger, leftit fhould be againe difplaced: when thefe things are ” 
done, he thal for foure or five dayes fpace meddle with nothing about the Diflo- 


Willcall us from that ceffacion and reft, whichis, to correét the fymptomes and rca 


complicate 


ipecially thofe Who | 
creby it Comes to 
allo, through the 
With mucoys hu- 
Place, are 
dies, which are Na- 
Its more ltronp and | 
and dilplaced the 
Coe fometimes tive 
if 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. Ling 


complicate affections, as paine,inflammation,a wound, fracture,and others y ‘a 
of wee have fpoken abundantly in our Treatife of Fractures. Before wee attemn, 
to fet inveterate diflocations, wee muft endevour to humect the ligaments,teng.' 
and mufclesby fomentations, cataplafmes,emplailters, liniments, and othe; 
| dies, that fo thefe parts may be more obedient to the Surgeons hand: then mug 
diflocated bones be moved, withagentle motion up and down, to and avaine 
that by this meanesthe excrementitious humor, which by continuance o; em . 
hath flowed downe,may waxce hor, be attenuated, refolved or made flipperie ang 
alfo the fibres of the mufcles, ligaments,and nervous bodies, placed about the joy 
for the defence thereof, may be loofed, that fo they may prefently be more {rex}, 
: extended. But if a great {welling, paine and inflammation urge, we mutt firg thin 
of affwaging and curing them, then of the reftoring the Ditlocation. 


CHA 


The defcriptionof certaine engines, ferving for the reftoring 
of Diflocations. 


zen EforeI come tothe particular kinds of Diflocations, I thinke it no, 

)) 2% amifle to defcribe three forts of Bandages, and give you their figures, 
reno 

ligation, but 


as thofe which are moft firto hold and extend Diflocations. The fxg 
extenfion, 


Ligature, defigned by this letter 4, ismade for holding themembe, 
SHS The fecond, marked withthe letter B, is fit for drawing or extenfion, Some P 


and confifts of one knot. The third, whereto the letter C is put, confifting of two aes 
knots, is to hold or binde more ftraitly. of is 

| dle lyes a 

he { 

The delineation of the three Lizatures. 


fercing the 


ty 
hy 

‘le 


I have thought good alfo to delineate the folowing Engine, made for to 
and extend more powerfully, when the hand willnot ferve. It is made like a Pulley, 
marked with thefe letters DD. Within this there lye hid three wheeles, through 
whole furrowesrunnes the rope which is to be drawue, marked with this letter H, 

Attheendsof the Pulley are hooks faftened, the one of whichis to faftenthe * 
ley toa Pofte, the other isto draw the ligature faftened tothe part. The Box“ % 
| Cafes wherein the Pulley iskept, is maked with 23. Their coversare m4‘! 
} with 4.4. A{crew pin which may be ewined, and fo faftened to a Potte, that 


one of the ends of the Pulley may be hooked thereto, isfigned with C. A wa 


4 | att 1 
| 
Jet (marke 
St. 
| 
| 
c* 
| 

| 
| 

| 5 
; 
Havin 
ri 
ge 


Mpe 
doris 
the 
| wo, to and 22 dine 

Continuance Of time 
made flipperie, and 
aced about the joyne 
ently be more freely 
we mutt firft thin} 
ation. 


eftori 


ons, I thinke it nor 
ve you their figures, 
{locations. The firft 
olding the member. 
rawing or extention, 
t, confifting of two 


made for to draw 
made like a Pulleys 
e wheeles, through 
d with this letter 
‘s to faftenthe Pul- 
mart. The Boxes of 
coversare marked 
dro 2Pofte, that io 
j with c. A Gin 


let 


oncerning ‘L s/locations; or Laxations. 


399 


,(narked by F.}to make a hole ina Pofte, foto let in the {crew pin. You may ; 
ro ali thefe things expreft in this following figure. 


A Pulley, 


B 


‘ 


Some Practitioners in ftead of this Pulley make ufe of the hereafter defcribed — 


oftrument, which they terme Manubrium ver[atile, or a Hand-vice. The end ther- 
of is fathioned likea Gimblet, and is to be rwined into a Pofte. Within thathan- . 
dle lyes afcrew with a hooked end,whereto the {tring or ligature muft be faftened. 
Now the {crew-rod or male-fcrew runnes into the female by the twining about 
of the handle: and thus the ligature is drawne as much as will fuffice, for the 


fetting the diflocated bone. 


eManubrinm verfatile, or, A Hand-vice: 


- 


-~ 


‘ 
* 
*. 
4 
4 ‘ ‘ 


_ Having delivered thefe things thus ingenerall, now I come to treate of the 
Luxations of each part, from the Jaw-bone eventothe tocs of the fect. 


- 
= \ 
Vibe 


\ 


\ 


\\ W 


~ 


é 


¥ ** 
* 


, 


I BIG 
C,an whe, 
= 
= 
= 
— 
mw E, 
| 
| 
>. 


Cc HAP. VI I I. 
Of the Diflocation of the Jaw-bone, 


The canles ie) Bie Jaw-bone is diflocated by many occafions, and not feldome by 
, F| [SX yawning, and other more ftrong openings of the mouth, It js 

©! [Za frequently luxated into the fore,than into the hinde part, by reafon of 

the mammillarie additaments, which hinder it from falling backe 

= ad —e e wards. T he diflocation is fometimes but on one fide, otherwhiles on both. |f the 


dflocated. One fide only be luxated, it (together with the chin) is drawne awrie unto the con. 
trarie fide which is not diflocated ; the place is hollow from whence itis flown. 
but fwolne whither itis gone , the Patient cannot fhut his mouth, but is forc’r ¢, 
gape, fo that he cannot eate; the Jaw, together with the reeththerein, hangs fome. 
what forwards; neyther doethe teeth anfwer fitlyto one another, burtthe Dogor. 
Signesthat’ teeth are under the fhearers. Butif both fides be diflocated, allthe Jaw and Chin 
hang forwards and towards the breaft ; befides alfo, the temporal! mufcles appeare 
diftended, {pittle runnes out of the Patients mouth againft his will, the lower teeth 
ftand further forth than che upper, which is the occafion that the mouth cannot. 
fhut, neither the tongue have free volubilitie to fpeake, the Patient ftammering ip 
Prognofticks. his fpeech. When itis diflocated on both fides, itis more difficulely reftored, an 
all the fymptomes are more vehement ; wherefore it muft bee fet with all {peed, o. 
therwife the Patient will prefently have grievous paine about his throat, inflamma. 
Why deh  On,a fever, whereupon oft times death en{fues within ten dayes, by reafon of the 
quickely enfues five branches of nerves, which, arifing from the fecond and fitth conjugation of the 
——— a braine, are diftributed into the moving mufcles thereof, which,too violently ex. 
fides of the jaw. tended , bring the forementioned fymptomes. Practitioners afirme, that the Jaw, 
twelve dayes after it is fet, is free from the danger of relapfe. If it have beene dif. 
located fome few daies,before you goe aboutto reftore it, you muft ufe foftening 
and relaxing medicines to it: bur when it is put in the joynt, apply a medicine made 
of the whites of egges, and oyle ct rofes, to aflwage paine, and apply clothes dip- 
ped in oxycrate. Atthe fecond drefling you fhallapply fuch thin@s as have power 
to agelutinate and ftrengthen the ligaments and other relaxed parts,and alfo to keep 

it being reftored in its place. This thall be the forme of fuch a medicine. 
Ro altringent Palv. boli armeni, fanz, draconis, farina volat. maftich. picts, refina, an. 3.6, 
medicine. = 4lbuminis ovorum q.f. fiat medicamentum : afterwards you may ule Emplaf. Dis- 


— diflolved in oyle ot Rofes and Vinegar, and other things, as occalion 
allbee. 


Cuap. IX. 
How to fet the Faw diflocated forwards on both fides. 


Irft of allthe Patient muft bee placed upontheground, or fome low {cat 
with his face upwards, and his head mutt be firmely held by your fervant, 
that foit may be the more immoveable : then the Surgeon hal! put both 
his chumbs, wrapped in clothes (left hee hurt them by rubbing them 

the Patientsteeth, as alforo keep them from flipping Jintothe Paticnts mouth,an 

prefle with them the larger teeth of the luxated Jaw, but put his other fingers W ith- 
out oder his chin,& fo liftup the whole Jaw-wich them. But if the operation cannot 
be thus done, forthat the month on the infideis fo fut and'clofed that the thumbs 
cannot bee putthereinto, then mutt you thruftin woodden wedges made of foft 
wood, as hazleor firre, being cut {quare,and of fome fingersthicknefle. Thele thall 
bee wedged in oneach fide above the grinders ; then caft a ligature under hischi®, 
wholeends your fervant fhall hold in bis hands, and fetting his knees upon the “ 
cients fhoulders, fhall pull chem upwards ; then atthe fame time the 


The Frit maner 
of fetting a 
jaw-bone. 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


gape {fo wi 
be reftorec 
as hee can, 
{hut his te 
grinding 
be diflocat 
the Paticni 
ther in, an 
head mutt 
both his tia 
the parties 
it to itspl 
Teafily per 
the forme 
can it not 
little thruf™ 
eafily be r¢ 


foby con 
Wherefor 
gotill his 
7 
| tadoes, Js 
geon, putt 
ly drawing 
asmucha 
mouth as 
below upt 
Chiefly wh 
Another. | Wereunde 
and fide.w 
yet pener 
,pward 
puty 


nd not feldome 
mouth, It js 
de part, by reafon of 
trom falling backe. 
iles on both. If the 
awric unto the con. 
hence itis flowne 
buth, but is forc’r to 
rein, hangs fome. 
er, burthe Dogoe. 
ithe Jaw and Chin 
all mufcles appeare 
ill, the lower teeth 
1¢ Mouth cannot be 
ient ftammering in 
cultly reftored, and 
twith all {peed, o. 
s throat, inflamma. 
s, by reafon of the 
conjugation of the 
violently ex. 
ime, that the Jaw, 
f ithave beene dif- 
muft yfe foftening 
ly amedicine made 
apply clothes dip- 
in@s as have power 
rts,and alfoto keep 
medicine. 
cis, refine, an.3.b, 
ule Emplaft. Dis- 
hings, as occafion 


, orfome low feat 
ld by your fervant, 
on fhall put both 
bbing them upon 
atients mouth,an 
fingers with- 
operatian cannot 
ithat the thumbs 
uges made of {fo 
nefle. Thefe thall 
nre under his chi, 
nees upon the Pa- 


(hall 
the veffle 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 
refle downwards the woodden wedges, The Jaw-bones thus reftored, thalbe kept 

foby convenient ligation, and drefled with medicines,as it is fitting ; and in the 

meane {pa:¢ you muft forbid the Patient to {peake,or needlefly to open his mouth. 

qvherefore he muft abftaine from hard meats, and fuch as require much chewing, Diz 

gotill his paine be quite pafled, and ufe only {poone-meats, as Barley-creames, po- 

aadocs, jellies, cullaffes,brothes, and the like, 


Cu ar.X. 
Of reftoring the Faw diflocated forwards but on one fi de. 


agate He Patient mutt be placed ona lowe feate, fo that hee may be under the wai the sox 

[ig Surgeon ,then yoor fervant, ftanding at hisback, fhall hold his head geon. 
Pye firme and fteddie, that it may not follow the Surgeon drawing, exten- 

ding, and doing other things neceflarie for reftoring it. Thenthe Sur- 

gcon, putting his thumb between the grinders,thall preffe down the Jaw,and gent- 

ly drawing itafide, ‘force it into its cavitie: inthe meane while, allo the Patient, whac che pari: 

asmuch as in him lyes, fhall helpe forwards the Surgeons endevour, in opening his s*ovght todo. 

mouth as little as he can, left the mufcles fhould bee extended ; and hee fhall only 

cape fo wide as to admit the Surgeons thumbe, for fothe temporal! mufcles hall 

be reftored to their place,and tavour the reftirution. If hee open his mouth as wide 

ashee can, they will be extended after aconvulfive manner ; if on the contrarie he 

fhut histeeth too clofe, there will be no paffage for the Surgeons Thumbe unto his 

grinding teeth. Somethere bee which affirme, that the Jaw-bone may fometimes signeschar thé 

bedillocated towards the hinde part, and rhat then the mouth is fo clofe fhut, that Jawis difloca-. 

the Patientcannot open it nor gape, and that the lower ranke of reeth ftands fur- ““ ern 

ther in,and nearer thethroat thanthe upper. Now for reftoring it; the Patients TheCurt 

head muft be ftraitly holden behinde, whilft the Surgeon, the meane while putting 2 

both his thumbs into the Patients mouth, holding his other fingers without under 

theparties chin, hee fhall, by thakng it, draw it to him, or forwards, and fo reftore 

it to itsplace. For my own part, I conteffe I never fawthis kinde of Luxation,and 

leafily perfwade my felfe, that itcan {carce ever happen, forthe reafon] gave in 

theformer Chapter. But nevertheleffe, if ie by any meanes chance to ha ppen yet 

can it not bea perfe& Luxation, but an imperteé one ; the Jaw being oncly but a 

little thruftbacke to the throat tothofe mammillarie additaments. And then it may 

eafily be reftored by lifting or drawing forth the Jaw, and fuddenly forcing it from 

below upwards. 


CuHuap. XJ. 
Of the Luxation of the Collar-bone. 


the Collar-bones may be broken, wrefted and crooked, fo alfo they 
may be diflocated. Now they are diflacated, either againft the fernum, 
or againft the fhoulder-blade, or «cvomion thereof : yet both thefe Colla-bones 

kinds of diflocations are very rare, byreafon of the ftrait and firme 

, connexion which the Collar-bone hath with the forefaid parts ; but 

chiefly where it is joyned tothe frernum, it can {carce be depreft, for that it is as it 

Were underpropt with the firft rib. But it may be diflocated inwardly, outwardly, TheCae 
and lide-wife, and according to this varietie there mutt be divers waies to reftore it; 

Yet generally the Collar-bone is putintoits place by moving or extending the 

time. Bat if need require, the Patient fhall be layd upon the ground with his face 

opwards.a Tray withthe bottome upwards, hard {taffed Cufhion,or the like rhing 


being put under his shoulders ; for thusit wil fo come to paffe, that the fhoulder and 
Eee cheft 


| 
| 
| 
| 
1 


Conce ng Diflocations Luxations L 


cheft will ftand fo forth, that prefently by lifting up, by preffing downe,or drawing 


; 
forth the arme forwards or backwards, asthe bone fhalbe flowne out to this 0; thar which m 
parr, you may reftore it ; for thus the prominencie may bee forced into its CAVitie compo! 


But it will be requifite to binde itup, and lay boulfters thereon, and to give itreg 
as if ic were fractured. Galen writes, that when hee was five and thirtie yeares old 
whilft he cxercifed himfelfe in the place of Exercife, his Collar-bone was fo 
feparated from the Zcromion, that there was the {pace of threc fingers betweene 
them. And that this Luxation was reftored in fortic dayes {pace, by fo ftrai: and 
ftrong a Ligation, that he perceived the motion of the beating arterics under the 

bone. But you fhall finde verie few, who will fuffer ftraic ligation Jon 
though it be never fo neceflarie. Verily,this kinde of Luxation is hard to be know 
but farre more difficult to be healed. Ihave known many Surgeons deceived, wh, 
have taken the Luxation of the Collar-bone for the diflocation of the top of the 


fhoulder. Forthen the Epomis or coppe of the fhoulder{wels, and the place from lowed int 
whence the Collar-bone is Aowne, is depreffed with a manifelt cavity, with vehe. and caule 

ment paine, inflammation, andimpotenci- of lifticg up, or otherwife moving the hard comt 
arme, performing other aGtions which are donc by the hel pe of the thoulder, Patient ca 
Certaitily, if this bone, when itis diflocated, be not {ct, the Patient fhall be lame this kinde 
during his life, fothat hee fhall notbee able, neyther co put his hand to his head of the dife 


nor mouth. 


Of the Luxaticn of the Spine, or Back-bone. 


. He Backebohe confifts of many bony vertebra, like rowles or wheeles 


mutually joynted or knirtogether, by their fmoothnefle and circular 
forme con{piring to an aptaefle of moving or bending forwards. Forif 
~*~" it thould confift of one bone,we fhould ftand continually with the trunk together th 
of our bodies immoveable, asthruft thorough witha ftake. The vertebra have a commeth t 
hole paffing through the midft of them, whereby the marrow, pafling this way out reft of the 
fromthe braine as bya pipe, may ferve for the generation of the fenfitive and mo {quinfic, an 
tive nerves, and their diftribution intoall parts beneath thehead. For whichpur § plete Luxa 
pofe it is perforated with many holes on the fides, through each whereof certaine of their fe. 
conjugations of rthenerves paffe forth into the reft of the body, and veines and at- afide, the f 
: teries pafle in for the propagationof nourifhment and life. The whole exteriour Such, whet 
Feutenee tn face of the Spine isrough, and as it werearmed with foure forts of apophy/és ot alowe (eat 
theSpine.  procefies, whereof fome ftandup, others downe; fome direé, others tran{verle ders ; and 
Wherefore from thefe thornieand fharpe procefles, the whole hath acquired the & betwixt his 
name ofthe Spina. The vertebre the further fromthe neck they are, the grearer they tored ro its 
grow, fo that rhofe which are the loweft, arethe largeft : for it is agreeable torte before griey 
_ fon, that that which beares, fhould be bigger than that whichis borne. Hence We & head & nec 
peers som fee, that the Holy-bone is placed underthe reft as a foundation. The fide procefies Oppoliteto 
of the Rack- bones of the Cheft, befides the benefit of defending the {pinallmar the fhou! 
row fhut up therein from externall injaries, havealfo another, which is, they fmt § Weazon an 
and faften the bones of the ribbs by aftrong tye. There lyesagriftle, anda cough, fe: 
and (as it were) albuminous humor betweene the vertebr2, which makes them, ® 7 
alfo all the other joynts of the bodie, flipperie, and fit for motion : the Spine 
flexible with notable agilitic forwards onely, but not backewards, for that{o there 
would be continuall danger of breaking the Hollow afcendent veine, andthe gc® 
defcending arterie running thereunder. Therefore the dearticulations of 
tebre, mutually ftrengthned with ftrong ligaments, doc looke more backewards. 
I have thought goodto premife thefe thingsof the nature of the Spine, before” Ra 
| come to the Diflocations happening thereto : I willingly omit divers bunch. 
things which aremoft copioufly delivered by Galen, content only co Fas they oblic 


602 
4 
~ : 
SAP 
A 
4 
AS! 
‘ 
4 
4 
| 
” 
j 


L 


downe,or drawin 
cout to this or thar 
ced INtO its cavitie 
and to give itrep 
dthirtie yeares old 
-bone was fo farre 
fingers betweene 
ce, by fo ftrait ang 
arterics under the 
ic ligation fy long, 
shardto be known 
sons deceived, who 
of the cop of the 
and the place from 
cavity, With yche. 
erwile moving the 
of the fhoulder, 
atient fhall be lame 
shand to his head 


e rowles or wheeles 
hnefle and circular 
ing forwards. For if 
ually with che trunk 
he vertebra have a 
paffing this way out 
fenfitive and mo- 
ad. For which pur- 
+h whereof certaine 
, and veines and ar- 
he whole exteriour 
forts of apophyfes or 
&, others traniverle. 
¢ hath acquired the 
are, the grearer they 
is agreeable toreae 
is borne. Hence we 
The fide procefles 
ing the {pinall mar- 
which is, they firme 
eriftle, and a cough, 
ich wakes them, as 
tion : the Spine I 
rds, for that{o there 
veine, and che great 
ulations of the * 
e more backewards. 
t the Spine, before 
omit divers other 


»chus 
nronly ro 
Y much; 


[1 B.16. x Concerning Difh 


auch ; That there is nothing tobee found 
which moreclearly manifefts the induftrie 
compofure of the Spine and the vertebra th 


Patient can neyther drinke nor {peake 
this kinde of Luxation,nor through a 
of the difeafe, refufing all cure. 


eee thereof, by the interpofition of two procefles which arife from the ba/is 


Ad O64 thereof, nearethe hole through which the marrow of the braine pafles 

downe intothe backe bone, and 
lowed in this firit vertebra. Thefe procefles 
znd caufe a diflocation behinde, 


hard comprefled, bruifed and e 


ocations, or Luxations. 


603 


ereof,. 


CuHapr. XIII. 
Of the Diflocation of the Head. 


inthe whole ftrogure of Mans bones, 
of Gods great workmanfhip, than this 


Of the Diflocation of the vertebrx, or Racke-bones of the necke. 


; Diflocation veril 
| for, by this me 


ying thereunder 


aide, the face lookes blacke, and there is 


Such, whether diflocation or {traine, 
alowe (eat, and then one mutt leane 

cers; and the meane while the Surge 
betwixt his hands,and fo fhake and 


flored 


dslore grievoufly a 


head & 
oppofir 


of the thoy] 
Weazon an 


CHare.Xly. 


He other vertebre of the necke may bee both diflocated and ftrained. 
y, unleffe it befpeedily helped, brings fudden death: 
anes the fpinall marrow is prefently oppreft at the 
" verte originall thercof, and the nerves, there- 


together therewirh, and principally thofe which ferve for 
commeth to pafie, 


reftof the bodie 
iquinfic, and a difficultie, or 

plete Luxation brings not the 
of their feats, are turned a little tothe hind 


hence arifing, fuffer alfo 
re{piration ; whereby it 
thatthe ammal {pirit cannot comeand difperfe its felfe into the 
hence proceede fudden inflammation, the 


rather a defect of breathing. But aftraine or incom- 
like calamitie: 


He head ftands upon the necke knit by dearticulation to the firtt vertebra exion 
Or head 
with the firft 
Kack-bone of 


they are received by fit cavities, hol. 
fometimes fall out of their cavities, 
whereby the fpinall marrow istoo violently and 
xtended, the chinis faftened to the breaft.and the 
wherefore death {peedily followes upon 
ny fault of the Surgeon, but by the greatnefs 


Prognoiticks. 


The danger 
hereof. 


Signes2n 


by this the vertebr2, alittle moved out ‘yr 
eor forepart, then the necke is wrefted | 
difficultie of {peaking and breathing. 

is thus reftored. The Patient imuft be fet upon tTheCure 
and lye with his whole weight upon his fhoul- 

on muft takethe Patients head,about his cares, 

move itto everie part, untill the vertebra bere. 


oits place. We may know it is fet by the fudden ceafing of the pain, which signes of their 


Cua p.XV. 
Of the Diflocated Vercebrxe of the Back, 


- 


fflicted the Patient, and by the free turning and moving his ‘tution. 
neck everie way. After the reftoring it,the head muft be inclined to the part 
eto the Luxation, and the neck muft bee bound up abour the dearticulation 
der; butyet fo, that the ligature bee nor too ftrait, left by preffing the 
¢ gullet, it ftraiten the paflages of breathing and fwallowing. 


Te He Rack bones of the backe may bee diflocated inwards, outwards, to the Differences 
right fide, andtotheleft. Weknow they are diflocated inwards, when as 


bunch 


obliquely bun 


they leaveade 


Eee 2 


preffed cavitic inthe {pine ; outwardly, when they make a 
Othe backe ; aod wee know they are luxated to the right or left fide,when 
ch forth to this or that fide. The vertebra are difhocated by 2 


caule 


* 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
— — — 
| TRE 
| 
AS 
™ 


Concerning Difloc ations, or Luxations. 


caufe eyther interaall, or externall, as iscommonto all other Lu xations; the inter. 
nall is eytherthe defluxion of humors from the whole bodie, or any part tothe 
and their ligaments; or elfe a congeftion proceeding from the proper and Native 
weakenefle of thefe parts; or an attraction arifing trom paine and heat. The eXter. 
nallisa fall from high upon fome hard bodie, aheavie and bruifing blow, myc}, 
and often ftooping, asin Dreffers and Lookers to Vineyards,and Paviers,decrepite 
old men; and alfofuch, asthrough an incureable diflocation of the T high. bone 
are forced in walking co {toope downe, and hold their hand upontheirthigh, py. 
The dangerof vertebra cannot be forced or thruft inwards, unleffe by a great deale of violence. 
and if icatany time happen, it isnot but with the breaking of the tyes and liga. 
ments, for they will breake rather than fuffer fo great exrenfion. Sucha diflocation 

is deadly, for that the {pinall marrowis exceedingly violated by too ftrait com pref. 

fion, whence proceeds dulneffe,and loffe of fenfe in the members lying thereunde;. 

raiyp-eat.st- Neyther isreftitution tobee hoped for, becaufe wee cannot through the belly 
Forceir into its place: theurine isthen fuppreft, as alfo the excrements of the bei. 
ree ly; fometimes on thecontrarie, both of them breake forth againft the Patiens 
minde, the kneesand legges grow cold, their fenfeand motion being loft. Such 
things happen more frequently, when the {pine is luxated inwards, than when itis 
diflocared ourwards, for thatthe nerves, thence arifing, runne and are carried more 
inwardly intothebodic. Befides, theprefled Spinall marrow becomes inflamed, 
and that being inflamed, the parts of the famekinde, and fuch as are joyned thereto 
are alfo inflamed by confent, whence ithappeneth, that the bladder cannot cag 
forth the urine. Now wherethe finewesare prefled, they can no more receivethe 
irradiation of the animal facultie. Hence followesthe deprivation of the fenfe ang 
motion in the parts wheretothey are carried, therefore the contained excrements 
doe nomore provoke to expulfion by their troublefome fenfe, neither are prefled 
to keep them in ; thence proceeds their fuppreffion, and hence their breaking forth 
againft their wils, But the {pine outwardly diflocated, {carce caufes any compref- 


fion of the marrow or nerves. 


How tovestorethe Spine outwardly diflocated, 


The cure. 


you lye with your hands upon the extuberancie, and force in the prominent ve" 
bye, But if it cannot be thus reftored, then will it bee convenient to wrap two piece: 
of wood, of foure fingers long,and one thick,more or leffe,in linnea clothes,and! 
to apply one oneach fide of the diflocated vertebre,and fo with your hand sto pref 
them againft the bunching forth vertebra, untill you forcethem backe into 


fcats,juft after the manner you {ec it here delineated. 


Inthe 
in ther 
tebreare 
have ref 
for that 
celles of 
Patient | 
the werte 


é 
Beets 
He vertebre outwardly diflocated, when as they ftand bunching Re 
forth, then itis ficcolay and ftretch forththe Patient upon at 
KA | with nis face downe-wards, and{traitly to binde him abourwith & branes 
cowels under the arm-pits,& aboutthe fanksandthighes.Andtha is cove 
| to draw and extend, as muchas we can, upwards and downe-was,  & {pine isd; 
yet withoutviolence : for unlefle fuch extenfion be made,reftituon & tifes from, 
& is notto be hoped for, by reafon of the procefles and hollowed cavities of the 1 Now tha: 
tebre, wherby, for che falter knitting, they mutually receiveeachother.Thenmus & knit and 
| Motion of 
Confufed 
| Which do 
dif} ended 
while 
Mherwhile 
Giflocated 
Thofe 
q 


ations; the inte;. 
any parttothem 
roper and native 
dheat. The exter. 
ifing blow, much 
Paviers,decrepire 
tthe Thigh.bone 
yn their thigh. But 
deale of violence. 
f thetyesand liga. 


Such a diflocation 
too {trait compref- 
lying thereundey, 
through the belly 
ements of the bel- 
againtt the Patients 
being loft. Such 
ds, than when it is 
nd are carried more 
yecomes infiained 
are joyned thereto, 
bladder cannot caft 
no morc reccivethe 
ion of the fen{e and 
ntained excrements 
, neither are prefled 
their breaking forth 
caufes any comprel- 


hey ftand bunching 
atient upon 2 table, 
inde him about with 
ndthighes.And thea 
1s and downe-wards, 
n be made, refticution 
-d cavities of the 
ach other. Then mu 
the promincnt 
it to Wrap two piece 
linen clothes,and !0 
1 your hands to preile 
hem backe inte cheit 


Io 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxauons. 


60$ 


UZ 


= 


Inthe meane while have a care, that you touch not the procefles which ftand up 
in the ridge of the Spine, forthey areeafily broken. You may know that the ver- 
rebreare reftored by the equall {moothneffe of the whole S$ pine. Ieis fit,after you 
have reftored it, to binde up the part, and lay {plints or plates of Lead neatly made 
forthat purpofe ape it; but fo, thatthey may not prefle the crifts or middle pro- 
celles of the verteora, which I formerly mentioned, buronly the fides: thenthe 


Patient {hail be layd upon his backe in his bed, and the {plints longkept on, left 
the vertebre {hould fall out againe. 


— 


Cuarp. XVII: 


A more particular inquirie of the D:flocation of the Vertebre, pie- 
cecding fromaninternall cane, 


rn mae HC vertebra are in like fort luxated by the antecedent caufe, as wee have 
i formerly faid, which is caufed by the natural] imbecillitie of the parts; 
Z Mi principally of the nervous ligament, by which all the vertebra are 
~tede\ bound each to other , this ligament comes not to the {pinall marrow, 
but onely bindes together the vertebre on their outfides. For,befides the two mem- 
branes proceeding from the two Meninges of the Braine; wherewith the marrow 
ScOvered, there is athird {trong and nervouscoate pur upon it, Ieft, whileftthe 
ipine isdiverily bended the bended marrow fhould bee broken: This third coate a- 
tiles from rhe pericranium, as{ooncasitarrives at the firft vertebra of the necke: 
Now that Ligament, wherewith we faidthe joynts of the vertebre were mutually 
nut and faftened, is encompaffed with atough and glutinoushumor for the freeet 
Motion Of the vertebra. Sometimes another cold,crude; grofle and vifcide humor, 
confufed and mixed herewith by great defluxions and catarrhes, begets atumor; 
which doth not only diftendthe nerves proceeding forth of the holes of the verte- 
"4, but alfo diftends the ligaments wherewith they are bound together : which fo 

ittended, and (as it were) drawnc alide,do draw together with them the vertebra: 
One while towards the tight fide, another while tothe left, fomewhiles inwards, 0- 
therwhiles outwards, and thus move them out of their fears, and diflocate them. A 


“Ocated vertebra, ftanding torth and making a bunch, is termed in Greeke Cy pho. 


Howto keep 
the rc orec 
vertebrein ther 


places. 


thus affe@ted we may call,bunch backt.) But whenit is depteffed, it is na- 


ond Lor dofis »(Suchwe may terme, Sadd/le.backt.) But when the fame is luxated to 
“right or left fide, it maketh a Scoliofis (or Crookedne(fe,) which wrelting the fpine, 


Loi 
Sc 04 Off 


soon itinto the fimilitude of this letter S. Galen addesa fourth defaule of the comad (ema) 
‘Pra, which is, when their joynts are moved by reafon of the logfeneffe of their 73-4 # #F 


Eee 3 ligaments, 


f 
\ 
- 
TS 
, 
= ima \ \ 
| | \ . \ 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


ligaments, the vertebrae yet remaining intheir places, and he cals itasec/is (or 
king). They alfo note another defeat peculiar to the Spinall marrow, which is, whe, 
The ——— asic (the vertebra being not moved whereto it adheres)is plucked and fevered trom 
wr 6s Hm them : this difeafe is occafioned by a fall from on high, by a great {troake, and h 
theencompa® gf] gccafions which may much fhake,and confequently deprefic the {pinal] marroys 
fiug vevsebre. by any other meanes remove, or put it forth of its place. Scarce any recovers of 
this difeafe, for many reafons, which any exercifed in the art, may cafily thinke yp. 
on: Butletusreturne tothe internallcaufe of Luxations, Fluid and foft bodie: 
{uch as Childrens, ufually are very fubject to generate this internal! caufe of de. 
fluxion. If externall occafions fhallconcurre with thefe internall caufes, the o¢,;. 
The error of $y will fooner be diflocated. Thus Nurfzs, whilft they too ftraitly lace the brea(, 
Nurfes in bin- der,caufe the breaft-bone to caft ; 
dngand lacing aNd fides of girles, tomake them flennder,c Call its felfe jn 
*f Children. forwards or backwards, or elfethe one fhoulder to bee bigger or fuller, the other 
more {pare and leane- Thefameerror is committed, if they lay children more fre. 
quently and longupon their fides, than upon their backs ; Or if, taking them, 
when they wake, they takethem only by the feete or legges, and Never puttheir o. 
ther hand under their backs, never fo much as thinking that children grow mop 


towards their heads. 


a 


Cuarv. XVIII. 
Prognofticks of the Diflocated Vertebrax of the backe. 


| F in Infancie it happen that the verrebra of the backe hall bee 
xg mop) a, diflocated, the ribbs will grow little or nothing in breadth, bur 


rall latitude, and ftands out with a fharpe point. Hence they 


IA b become afthmaticke, the lungs and mufcles which ferve for 
breathing, being preffed together and ftraitened ; andthatthey 
— = may the eaflier breathe,they are forcedto holdup their heads, 
whencealfo they feeme to have greatthroats. Now becaufe the weazon being 
thus prefled, the breath is carried through a {trait paflage ; therefore they whealeas 
they breath, and {nore in their fleepe, for that their lungs, which receive and {end 
forth the breath or ayre, be of leffe bignefle: befides alfo,they are {ubje@ to great 
diftillations upon their lungs, whereby it commeth to paffe, that they are fhorter 
lived. But fuchas are bunch-backed below the midriffe, are incident to difeafesot 
the kidneyes and bladder, and have {maller and flenderer thighes and legges, an 
they more flowly and {paringly caft forth haire and have beards; to conclude, 
they are lefle fruitfull, and more fubje@to barrennefle,than fuch as have their cr00- 
kednefle above their midriffe. The Bunches which proceede from external caults 
are oft timescureable; but fuchas havetheir originall from an inward caule a¢ 
abfolutely uncureable,unleffe they be withftood atthe firft with ereat care & indu- 
ftrie. Wherefore fuch as have it by kinde, never are helped. Such as, whileft they 
are yet Children, before their bodies bee come to perfect growth, have their Spiae 
crooked and bunching out, their bodies ufenot to grow atthe Spine, butthe 
Why when the leggesand armes come to their perfect and full growth; yet the parts belonging 
fpincisluxated, their breafts and backe, become more flender, Neither isit any wonder, for feewg 
me = the veines, arteries, and nerves are not in their places, the {pirits doe neither frecly; 
chelt arcnoue Nor the alimentarie juices plenteoufly flow by thefe ftraitned paflages, whence 
nefle muft needs enfue: but the limbs fhall thence have no wrong, for chat not" 
whole bodie, but the neighbouring parts onely are infected withthe contagio® ° 
Why che Lune thisevill. When divers vertebra, following each other in order, arc rogether 4 
ae one time diflocated, the diflocation islefle dangerous, than if one alone 
dangerousthan luxated. For, when one only vertebra is diflocated, it carriesthe Spinal! mat! 
of many away with it, chat ie forces iralmoft into a fharpe angle; wherefore being 


ftraitly preffed, itmuft neceflarily bee eyther broken or hurt, which is 


moles } runne outwards before : therefore the cheft lofeth its natu- 
ipp.[cnt 6. 
felt.3.de art. 


4 
e 


“he 


Hi ppocr. 
rous than 


at the far 
ly it mut 
place. N 
all which 
low feat, 


place. 


‘ . 

“ 
~ 


tefle, thar 
in they a 
one fide, 
bunching 
fed caviri 
vers lym 


tu 
| deadly, 
ed irc C3 
ra {farily ¢ 
in aholl 
] thruft yo 
in a fract, 
| 
Of thech 
4 Paine ¢ 
about the 
BE Of We for 
diflocatic 
4 helped, 
high doo 
led down 
lower fide 
Wards, 
fallinwar 
2ve 


(or tha. 


» Which is, whe 
and fevered 
t{troake, and} 
narrow, 
any recovers of 
calily thinke Up. 
and {oft bodies 
nall caufe of de. 
aufes, the verte. 
ly lace the breafts 
to caft its felfe in 
fuller, the other 
hildren more fre. 
taking them up 
Never puttheir o- 
ildren grow moft 


he backe fhall bee 
ing in breadch, but 
ft loferh its natu- 
oint. Hence they 
s which ferve for 
ned ; andthat they 
pid up their heads, 
he weazon being 
fore they whealeas 
h receive and fend 
are {ubjet co great 
Bhat they are fhorter 
ident to difeafes of 
esand legges, and 
ards; to conclude, 
as have their croo- 
om externall caufes 
yn inward caule are 
1great care & indu- 
chas, whileft they 
have their Spine 
e Spine, 
parts belonging °° 
wonder, for fee'S 
doe neither freely, 
(Tages, whence 
ong, for chat not! 
ththecontagio® ° 
are rogether 4 
if one alone Were 


he Spinall marrow 


Concerning Diflocations or Luxations. 


627 


jeadly, for that it is the braines fubftiture. But when divers vertebra are diflucated 
st once, it muft of neceflity be forced only into an obtufe angle, or rathera f{emi- 
circle; by which com preffion it certainly fuffers, but not fo; as that death mutt ne- 
ceffarily enfue thereof, Hereto may feeme to belong that which is pronounced by 


Hippocrates ; A circular moving of the vertebrz outof their places isleffe danges 
cous than an angular. 


Sent.$1 
lib, de art, 


Cn a p.XIX. 
Of the Diflocation of the Rumpe, 


one He Rumpe oft times is after a fort diflocated inwards by aviolent fail 

< (@\ upon the buttocks, or agreat blow; in this affe@ the Patient cannot = 
(A ae bring his heeleto his buttockes, neither, unleffe with much force,bend 734 
his knee. Going to ftoole is painefulltohim, neyther can he fit unleffe 

in ahollowchaire. That this (asitwere) diflocation may bee reftored, you mutt Th: 
thruft your finger in bythe Fundament, even tothe place affected, as we have faid 

in afracture : then muft you ftrongly raife upthe bone, and with your other hand 

at the fame time joyne it rightly onthe outfide with the neighbouring parts ; laft- 

ly ix muft be ftrengthened with the formerly mentioned remedies, and kept in its 
place. Now it will bee recovered about the twentieth day after it is fer. During 
allwhich time the Patient muft not goe to ftoole, unleffe fitting upon a hol- 


(cat, left the bone, as yet fcarce well recovered, fhould fall againe out of its 
piace. 


Curd) 


CHap. XX. 
Of the Luxation of the Ribs, 


Ribs may byacgreat and bruifing ftroake bee diflocated, and fall 

be, Si from the vertebre whereto they are articulated, and they may bee dri- 

ven inwards, or fide-waies. Of which kinde of Luxation, though 

secede there be no particular mention made by the Ancients, yet they con- 

telle, that all the bones may fall, or be removed from their feats or cavities,wher- 

in they are received and articulated. The figne of a Rib diflocated and flipped on signee 

one fide, is,a manifeft inequality; which here makesa hollowneffe, and therea 

bunching forth, but it is afignethat it is driven in, whenasthereis only adepref- 

ledcavitie where it isknitand faftened to the vertebra. Such diflocations caufe di- 

vers {ymptomes, asdifficulty of breathing,the hurt rib hindring the free moving 

of thecheft; a painfulneffein bowing downe,or lifting up the bodie, occafioned by 

4paine counterfeiting a pleurifie , the rifing or puffing up of the mufculous flefh 
ttherib,by a mucous and flatulent humor there generated:the reafonswhere- 

of We formerly mentioned in our Treatife of Fractures. To withftand all thefe,the curs 

diflocation muft bee forthwith teftored; then the puffing up of the fieth muft bee 

helped. Wherefore, if the diflocated Rib fhall fallupon the upper fide of the ver- 

‘cbra, the Patient fhall be fet upright, hanging by his armesupon the toppe of fome 

high doore or window : then the head ofthe rib, where it ftands forth, fhalbe pref- 

led downe, untill it be put into itscavity.s Agdine, if the rib fhall fall outupon the 

Wer fide of the vertebra, it will be requifite, that the Patient bend his face downe- 

Wards, fetting his hands upon his knees, then thediflocation may be reftored by 

Prefling or thrufting in the knot or bunch which ftands forth. Buc if the luxated rib 

fall inwards, it can no more be reftored or drawn forth by the hand ofthe Surgeon, (hit 

whichis diflocated towards the infide, for the reafons formerly deat, 


: 


Cuare 


| 
erefore icely 
which is 
deadly: 


Concerning Diflocations,or Luxations. 


L 


CHarpXXI. 
Of a Diflocated fhonlder. 


Why thereis 

no internall 

ligamer:t from 

the arme-bone 

to the fhoulder 

blade. 

Differences of a fj 

luxated thoul- 

der. 

Sent.1.feci. 

lib.de ait. the hand Cd 
forementiog’ 
bicke, and 
the elbow 
ftened to t! 
quire. Lat 

Signes of the necke,and 

dilloe down-wards into the Arme-pit, adeprefled cavitie may bee perceived intheup. tion, thall, 

cared downe- per partof the joynt; the acromron of the Blade fhewes more fharpe and ftanding up the 

forth than ordinarie, for thatthe head of the fhoulder-bone is flipt downe, and hid fet the 
under the arme-pit, caufing a {welling forth in that place; the Elbow alfocaftsit | asyoumay 


felfe (as it were) outwards, and ftands further off from the ribs ; and though you 
force it, yctcan you not make it totouch them ; the Patient cannot [ift uphis 
hand to hiscareon that fide, neytherto hismeuth, nor fhoulder. Which figne is 
not peculiar tothe luxated fhoulder, butcommontoit, affeted with a contulion, 
fracture, inflammation, wound, abfcefle, (cirrus, or any defluxion upon the nerves, 
arifing out of the vertebre of the neck, and fent into the arme:alfo this arme is lon- 
erthanthe other. Laftly (whichalfo is commonto each difference of a luxaed 
oulder) the Patientcan move his arme by nokinde of motion without fenfe of 
paioc, by reafon of the extendedand prefled mufcles, fome alfo of their fibresbe- 
Thewaiesto ing broken. There are fixe wayesto reftore the {houlder luxated down-wards into 
reftoreits thearme-pit. The firft is, when itis performed with ones filt, or a towell. The!e- 
cond, with aclew of yarne, which put underthe arme-pit, fhail be chraft up with 
ones heele. The third, with ones fhoulder put under the Arme-hole, which manet, 
together with the firft,is moft fic for new and eafily tobe reftored |uxations, 251 
thofe who have loofe fieth, and effeminate perfons,as children,eunuches, and Wo 
men, The fourth, with a ball put under the Arme-pit,and then the Arme caft over4 
piece of wood held upontwo mens fhoulders, or two ftanding pofts. The fifths 
witha Ladder, Thefixth, with an Inftrument, calledan 4mbi, Wee will defcribe 
thefe fixe waies,and prefent them to-your view. : 


Then 
batils, bq 


He fhoulderiseafily diflocated, becaule the ligaments of jr: de 
articulation are foftand loofe; as alfo for that the cavitic of S) FRAN 
{fhoulder-blade is not very deepe; and befides, ir is every where 
| fmooth and polite, no otherwifethanthat of the fhoulder-bone pent 
| 
| 


aMents Of its de 
the cavitic Of the 
isevery Where 
fhoulder-bone 
hat there is no in. 
ftrengthen tha, 
hercin NOtwirh. 
Gods providence 
tion and bendip 
aSthat which 
cach difference of 
i¢, may be diflocg. 
he Arme- pit, for. 
- For, feeing thar 
gc arm-bone which 
at can but imagin 
en this pare jt 
befides alfothe 
pcake-like proceffe, 
Hippocrates faith, 
to wit, that which 
uall and frequent, 
pulder is diflocated 
rceived in the up. 
darpe and ftanding 
ipt downe, and hid 
Elbow alfo cafts it 
; andcthough you 
cannot lift up his 
mer. Which figne is 
dwith acontufion, 
bn upon the nerves, 
fo this arme is lon- 
erence of a luxated 
n without fen{e of 
of their fibres be- 
down-wards into 
bra towell. The {e- 
Bilbechraft up with 
ole, which maner, 
ed luxations, asia 
eunuches, and wo- 
ihe Arme caft overa 
S pofts. The fifth, 
Wee will defcribe 


Cya?. 


L1B 16. Concerning Diflocations or Luxations. 


Cuar.XXII. 
of the firft manner of fetting a Shoulder which is with ones fift. 


Irft, let one of fufhcient ftrength, placed on the oppofite fide, firm- 
ly hold the Patient upon the joynt of the Shoulder, left he move 
up and downe with his whole bodie, at the neceflarie extenfion, 


25)| working and puttingitin: then lect another, taking hold of his 
armeabovethe elbow, fo draw and extend it downe-wards, that 
the head thereof may be fet juft againft its cavitic, hollowed in 
— the blade-bone. Then at laft let the Surgeon lift and force up © 
with his fift the head of the bone into its cavitie, Here this is chiefly to be obfervea, ~~ 
hatin freth luxations, efpecially in a bodie foft, effeminate, moift, and not ove 
corpulent, that it fometimes comes to paffe, thar by the only meanes of juft cxren- 
fon, the head of the bone, freed from the mutcles and other particles wherewiti it 
was, as it Were, intangied, wall betake it felfe into its proper cavitie; the m {cles 
being by this meanes reftored totheir place and figure, and drawing the bone wit! 
them,as they draw themlelves towards their heads, as it were with a fudden gird o1 
‘witch : wherefore in many, whileft we thought no fuch thing, it fufficed tor re- 4 pevies 
Hirution only to have extended the arme. But if the Luxation bee inveterate, and 
shehand cannot ferve, then muft the Patients fhoulder be faftnedtoa Pofte with the eee: 
forementioned Ligature, orclfe committed to ones charge, who may ftand at his 
bicke, and hold him faft. Thenthe arme thall prefently be tyed about,a little above 
the elbow, with a fillet, whereto a cord fhall be faftened ; which, being put or fa- 
fenedto the Pulley, fhall be drawne or ftretched forth, as much as need {hall re- 
quire. Laftly the Surgeon, witha towell, or fuch like Ligature, faftened about his 
necke,and hanging down,and {o put under the Patients arme-pit neare to the Luxa. 
tion, fhall, raifing himfelfeupon his feete with the whole ftrength of hisnecke, lift 
up the fhoulder, and alfo atthe fame time bringing his arme to the Patients breaft, 
thall fet the head of the fhoulder-bone, forced with both his hands into its cavitie, 


as you may fee by this enfuing figure. 


An exprefsion of the firft manner of putting a Shoulder 
into foynt. 


‘ 


* ~~ 
~ 
~ 
* 
all 
i 
reel ii = 
~ 
' 
il 
- 


amedicinemade ¢x farina vo- 
powder,and mixed 


Then muft you cover allthe adjacent parts with 
with 


batts, bolo ar memo myrtillss , pice, refine alumine, beaten into 


* 
he 
1.6. 609 
— — 
Ee 
be 
— 
| = | \ j if / ~ ¥ 
| avin. \ 
| 
‘ 


Concerning Diflocations or Luxations. 


with the white of anegge. Then muft the hollownefle under the arm be filled wis 
aclew of Woollen or Cotton yarne, ora linnen cloth {pred over with a lity...) 
of Rofes or Myrtles,alitrle vinegar,and uagnentxm rofatum, orinfrizidan: 
left it fticke tothe haires, if there be any there. The partmutt afterwards be boy. | 
up with a ligature, confifting of two heads, of fome five fingers breadth, ang a 
ells long, more or lefle,according as the bodice fhall require. The midf thereos 
be put immediately under the arme- pit, and then croiled over the lame thouldey 
and fo crofling it as muchas fhalbe fir, it {hall be wrapped under the oppofite ai), 
And laftly,the arme {hall be layd upon the breaft, and put ina icarteinamidd 
gure almoft to rightangles, fo that by lifting up the hand hee may almost touch p. 
found fhoulder, leit the bone, newly fet, may fall out againe; seyther thall the g.9 
dreffing be ftirred, untill foure or five daies be paft, unleffe the greatnetle of {oy 


happening fymprome divert us from thisour purpole. 


Cuaprv. XXIII. 


Of the fecond manner of reftoring 4 Shoulder, that is,with the beele when as 
the Patient by reafon of paine can neither fit nor [tand. 


Patient mutt be layd with his backe on the ground upon a Cover-|i¢ 
ide art. _ or Mat, anda clew of yarne or leathern-ball, ftuffed with tow or cotton, 

of {uch bigncfleas may ferveto fillupthe cavitic, mutt be put under his 
ars arm-pit, that fo the bone may ftraight-wayes the more eafily be forced 
by the heele into its cavitie. Then let the Surgeon fit befide him;even over again 
the luxated fhoulder ; and if his right fhoulder be luxated, he fhall put his right heele 
tothe ball, which filled up thearme- pit; but if the left, chen the left hecle : then ler 
him torthwith draw towards him the Patients arme, taking hold thereof with both 
his hands, and at the fame inftant of time ftrongly preflethe arme- pit with his heele, 
Whilft this is in doing, one fhall ftand at the Patients backe, who fhiall lift up his 
fhoulder witha towell, or fome fuch thing fitted for that purpofe, ard allo with 
his heele preffe downe the top of the fhoulder-blade : another al fo hall f1t on the o- 
ther fide of the Patient, who, holding him, fhall hinder him from ftirring this way 


Bi or that way, at theneceflary extenfion in fetting it, as you may fee it expreft by the 
following figure. 


Theexprefsion of the fecond manner of reftoring a Shoulder. 


/ 


Ht (( 

= Le, a = 
~ 


/ 


© 


> 
| 
. 
Jay his wel 
: moved and 
by rn/¢e Neh) 
| 


Gale 


ay almeoft rouct, hi 
*yther the 
fcatnelle of 


heele when as 
ind, 


upon a Cover-jid 
vith tOW or cotton 
mult be put unde; his 
re eafily be forced 
OVEr againg 
put his right heele 
left hecle : then Jer 
i thereof with both 
-pit with hisheele. 
ho fhall lift up his 
ofe, ard alfo with 
(0 fhall fir on the o- 
n ftirring this way 
itexpreft by the 


Concerning ‘Lsflocations, or Luxations. 


L! B.10. 


Cuar.XXlv. 
Of thethird manner of reftoring a Shoulder. 


—~Omeone who is of acompetent height and ftrength (hall put the fharpe 
9 part of the toppe of his fhoulder under the Patients arme-pit,and alfo 
sy atthe fame time fhall fomewhat violently draw his arme towards his 


<7,5" owne breaft, fo rhatthe Patients whole bodie may (as it were) hang 


thereby. Inthe mearetime another, for the greater impretlion, {hall 
ly hisweight on che luxated fhoulder, fhaking it with his whole bodie. Thusthe 
{youlder,drawne downe-wards by the one which ftands under thearme-hole, aad 
moved and fhaken by the other, who hangs upon it, may bee reftoréd into its leat, 
by the helpe of the Surgeon concurring therewith, and with his hand governing 


chefe violent motions, as the following figure fhews, 


The figure of the third manwer of putsing a Shoulder into Joynt. 


CHuap. XXV. 
Of the fourth manner of reftoring adiflocated Shoulder. 


OY muft take a perch, or piecceof Wood (fomewhat refembling that 
which the of Paris ufe to put on their fhoulders) 
two inches broad, and fome fixe foote long midft hereof let 


cach fide of the ball, each alike diftantthere-from, with which, as with ftayes, the 


Oulderm 
Rron “y 


thoy] 


here the bali 
tplace where Rands 


Cr Wwuirk a ‘vl? 
‘Dfeadth 
‘midk therenca. 
the lam: thoulde 
OP polite arm, 
$ 
2S 
~ 
é ‘a | 4 
v= iti -betwo pins putin, one oR 
kept in, and upon the ball, tharit flip notaway from it. Let twe 
taller thanthe Patient,eyther by nature or art, putthis perch uj on their 
Cwat. : ders; then let the Patient put his arme-pit upon tha 


ftands up ;the Surgeon mutt be ready to pull his hanging arme downe-wards, Th 
the Patient fhall (as it were) hang on the perch with his fhoulder, and fo the h 
of the bone fhall bee forced into its cavitie, as this enfuing Figure declares ; Wher 
in you may feethe perch or yoake, with thetwo woodden pins and bal] faftenes 
in the mid{t, delineated by irs felfe. 


The figure of the fourth manner of reftoring the Sheulder. 


HA XV I. 


Of the fifth manner of putting the Shoulder into joynt, whichis 
performed by 4 Ladder. 


'¢ +; Ou may alforeftore a Shoulder diflocated into the Arme-pit, by th¢ 
i Wi ) helpe of a Ladder, after the following manner. Let fome roundbo- 
dy, asaball, orclew of yarne, which(as we formerly faid) may ferve 
to fill the Arme-pit, be faftened upon one of the upper fteps of 4 
IT der ; atthe foot of the Ladder fer a low ftoole, whereupon let the 
Patient mount,then binde both his legees,and alfo his found arme behind his back, 
left, when you areabout your operation, he hinder and fpoyle all you doe, by !2)- 
ing his hand, or fetting his footeupon the Ladder. Then let his Arme be prefent- 
ly put over the ftep of the Ladder,and his Arme-pir put upon the there fattenedb 
the Patientin the meane while being wifhedto come with his whole body as n¢4° 
untothe fteps of the Ladderas he is able ; for otherwife, befides that there 15 20> 
ther hope of reftoring the Luxation, there would bee no finall danger of breatils 
the fhoulder-bone. Alfo let him take heede, that he put not his head 
fteps. Then his Arme, bound above the Elbow with fillertmg, or fome other ligae 
‘ture fit for that purpofe, thallbe drawne downe by the hand of fome that afli!t y™ 
and atthe fame timelettheftoolebe plucked from under his feet, fo that hee a 
hang uponthe Ladder. Thus by this meanes the head of the Shouider will bee’ 


ftored by its felfe, the endeavour of the Surgeon affifting, and prefling a 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


I have 
Duke of @ 
his Shou] 
and his wi 
the forem 
lower end 
Elbow 
and gota 
inftant mz 
the bone 


Lire. 
AD j Ider-bl 
ih that he ma 
[ha 
| 
learne this ¢ 
| 
= 
4, > ~~ : 
| = Sond CA : 
2 3 | ( | 
7 
| & 
{ 
th 
- 


Ly 


OWn¢e-Wards. 
tr, and fo the 


Where. 
ns and ball faftenes 


re declares 


Lder. 


whichis 


ic Arme.pit, by the 
Let fome round bo- 
erly faid) may ferve 
ppper {teps ofa Lad- 
whereupon let the 
behind his back, 
all you doe, by !ay- 
is Arme be prefent- 
e there fattened bal, 
whole body as neare 
*s tbat there 1s 20 
danger of breaking 
Bs head berweene the 

or fome other lig?” 
{ome that aflift yOu» 
eet, fo that hee may 
ouider will 
downe 

pre fling Shou! der- 


fhoulder- blade, and moving it to and againe. The bone being fet,the ftoole, which 
, little before was plucked fromunder the Patients feet, thall be put there againe, 
shat he may, with the moreeafe and leffe paine,pull backe his Arme from the 
of the Ladder. Forif he thould lift ithigh up to draw it over,there would be dan. 
get left being newly fet,and not well ftayed, the head of the bone might fall out a- 
gaine. I have thought good to have all thefe things here exprefled, that you may 
jearne this operation,asif you fee it done before you. Y 


The delineation of the fifth manner of restoring a Shoulder: 


> = 


“7 SW 


i} 


= 
to NG 
7 
YU | 
7 


I have not thought firinthis placeto omit the induftrie of Nicholas Picart, tlic 
Duke of Guife his Surgeon ; who being called to a certaine Countrey-man to ft 
his Shoulder being out of joynt,and finding none in the place befides the Patient 
and his wife, who might affift himin this worke, hee putthe Patient, bound after 
the forementioned manner,toa Ladder; then immediately hee tyed a ftaffe at the 
lower end of the Ligature, which was faftened about the Patients arme above his 
Elbow ; then putit foryed under onc of the fteps of the Ladder, as low as he could, 
and got aftride thereupon, and fate thereon with his whole weight, and at the fame 
inftant made his wife to plucke the ftoolefrom under his feet: which being done, 
the bone prefently came into its place, as you may fee by the following figure, 


4 

7 


| 
4 
Ay 
A ; 
| 
te al 4 
A. AA + 
SN 
4 
| by av, YY | 
BZ D>" \ 
LY z ve 
| BLY A 


614. Concerning Diflocations Luxations L Lu. 6: 
re(sine the fourth manner Another figure to the lame fe 
of thearme 
ftes or a 
befo 
way; and th 
way,and th 
a height ch 
| reftoring 2 
ladder, do 
FS heard Herr 
= planner of 
—| > fuccefle , u 
growne int 
NS in the plac 
x red, orelfe 
lowed 
| admonifh y 
NG onfer, that 
| on, but th 
ut 
nerof Hipp 
fpatula.B. 
If you have nevera Ladder, you may ufea peece of Wood, layd a-crofle upon 
two Pofts. Alfo you may ufeadoore, as the other figure fhewes, wherein you 
muft obfervea flat piece of Wood or fpatala with ftrings thereat, whole ule {hal 
be fhowne in the following Chapter. 
Cuap. XXVII. 
The fixth manner of veftoring 4 Showlder, luxated intothe Arme-pit, 
¥4\|ppocrates writes, that this is the beft way of all to reftorea diflocated 
lib.. de | Shoulder. You mutft take a woodden /patw/a of fome foure or five fin- 
wtic,fent.t9. gers breadth, and fome two fingers thicknefle or leffe,but {ome yard 
or thereupon long; the one end thereof muft bee narrow and thin, 
== with around head ftanding up and lightly hollowed, chat put under 
the Arme- pit, it may receive part of the head of the fhoulder-bone, the which for 
that purpofe muft not bend towards the ribs, but tothe top of the Shoulder. This 
The delcripti- 


UPPet part of the /patela mutt bee wrapped about with alinnen or woollen 


termed 


~* 


purpolc ; but principally you muft haveacareof this, that the upper pan of eS 
pare 


a 
4 
q 
me OC lothruftunder the Arme-pit, that it may throughly penetrate inrothe innerpat me fhoulde 
betweene the ribs,and the head of the Shoulder-bone. There mutt, belidesin clfe up wh 
{patula, be two holes in three feverall places,each alike diftantfrom other, throug? “core 
_ which let foft ftrings be put, whereby it may be tyed tothe arme, ftretchedall unto th 
length thereof even tothe fingers, in one placea little below the head of the {hou bc 
der-bane, inanothera little above the elbow, and the third at the wreft, thal? Of the 
they may hold it firme. Therefore let the diftances of theholesbeefitedrothis ult diliger 
ARP 


16. Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 
we pofe, reaching beyond the head of the arme, enter even tothe innermoft Cavit 


hearme-pit then, acroflepin or piece ef wood be made faft thro 

oe or a frame,& well faftened thereto, and therupon the Arme with the veers 

uit be fo put over, that the pin may be under thearme-pit, the bod y weighing one 

gay, and the arme another : which being done ,the arme muft be drawn down one 

way,and the body another aboutthe pin. Now this croffe pin mutt bce puton fuch 

sheight chat the patient may ftand on tipp-tocs. Now this isthe very beft way of 

eftoring a fhoulder. In ftead of two pofts or a frame, you may make fhift witha 

ladder, doore, beds poftes, and fuch like thingsgs thall bee there prefent. I have 

heard Henry Arvet,a very good furgeon of Or/eans fay that he never attempted this 

manner of putting into joint a fhoulder diflocated intothe arme-pit without cood 

fyccefle, unlefleby chance (which alfo isnoted by Hippocrates) that the deth ig Stitt deat 

crowne into the cavity, and the head of the bone hath made it felfe another cavity paees 

inthe place whereinto it is fallen ; for in this cafe the bone will either not bee refto. 

red, or elfenot remaine inits place, but fall backe notwithftanding into the new hol- 

lowed cavity, which ferves it in ftead of its naturall focket or cavity.But I muft here 

sdmonith young Surgeons, that if the bone be not reftored at the firft endeavourand 

onfet, that they doe not defpaireand prefently defift from their entended operati- 

on, but they muft windeabout, and gently move the joint : for{o at the length 

twillbeemore eafily moved, andenterintothe naturall cavity. Whenit isin, ir 

muftbee boundup with comprefles and rowlers afterthe forementioned man ner. | 
Totheformer figures I have thoughygood toadde this, whichexprefferh the 

maner of reftoring a fhoulder luxated into the arme-pit with a/patw/a, after the man- rip 

ner of Hippocrates. T his /patula taftened with an iron pinto the {tanding frame may 


beturned, liftedup, and preffed downe at your pleafure. A. fhewes the wooden 
futwla.B. The frame or ftanding poftes, 


4 


ABE'S 
- 


— 


Hippocrates his Gloffocomium termed Ambi. 


layda-crofle upon 


wes, wherein you g 
cat, whofe ufe fhal 
Arm: pit. e 
rcfto:ca diflocated 
ne foure or five f0- 
lefle,but {ome yard 


‘narrow and thin, 
ved, that put under 
one, :lie which for 
heShoulder. This 
1 or Woollen rages, 
Teg and then ic mutt 
into :he inner pare 


For the more certaine ufeof this inftrument thepatient muftficuponafedte 

which matt be fomewhat lower thanthe ftanding frame, that fo the /pat#/a which is the 

tultinto the arme: pit may be the more forcibly depreft, foto force in the head 
‘thoulder-bone; the patients feete muftalfo be tyed, that hee may not raife him~ 


uft, befidesin chis felfe up Whileft the Surgeon endevours to reftore it. Now he fhall then endevour to 
omether, through reltore it, when he {hall have bound the ftretched forth arme of the diflocated thoul- 


1¢, ftrerched al! che untothe /patwla,8 thrutt the one end therofunder the flipped forth head of the 


¢ head of the fhoul- | oulder bone, as wee have formerly fhewed ; for then by preffing downe the other 
the wreft, chat ‘id ofthe /patula which goesto the hand, theboneis forced intoits cavity. You 
les bee titted ro this ul diligently abferve the wooden /patu/s, which therefore I have cav fed to be ex- 


pret- 


- ypper part of tie 


i 
| 
| 
| 
ZY 
lace 
| | 
| A 
| Ca 
| \ 
AL 
~ — 
| 
| 
| 


616 Concerning Diflocations or Luxations. Lina 


imagens d by it felfe which Hippocrates calleth 467, whofe headisa little hollowed 
ars it wh this letter B. The whole /patulais marked with thislette; 


ging thereat, provided for the binding of the arme, that ix ud 


with three ftrings han : 
be kept fteddy, as you may perceive by the enfuing figure. 


The figure of an Ambi fitted to adiflocated fhoulder. 


= 


{houlder, tt 
minum and! 
{trong mu! 
Icfler Afia, 
Galen, I p 


weary of t 

weight of 

This kinde 

gure of the 

There are other additions to this 4a, whofe figureI now exhibitedtoyor FF = the pa 
view, by the invention of Nicholas Picart the Duke of Lorrain’s Surgion,the ule and 

knowledge whereof, beftowed upon mee by the inventor himf{elfe, I would nota. oy 
you mutt e 

viethe ftudious reader.  arme-pit 

Another figure of an Ambi with the additaments, forced upy 


But in this 
the deartic 


AHN 


her part, 

you mutt 
and broad 
of twoco 


S muft you cil 
the interi 
be done bc 
h 
S SSR cad anot! 
from thee; 


Cles forcib 
riginals, fol 
thereto, 


WU 


a. 
Lp. 16 
: 
j 
che fhoul 
| 
DD.Ser« 
per atio 
We EE. T he | 
| Q 
| 
SSS RSS © 
* 
t ig : a 
= 


sa little hollowed 
with thisletter A. 
¢ arme,that it may 


pw exhibited to your 
s Surgion,the ufe and 


I would notcn- 


Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


6179 


| AA. Shew the two cares, asit were, ftops madeto hold and keep inthe top of 


che fhoulder, left it fhould flippe our when it is put intothe frame or fupporter. 
BB. The frame or fupporter whereon the A4m// refts. 


CC. The pin or axeltree which faftens the Ambi tothe fupporter. 
DD.Secrew-pinnes to fatten the foote of the fupporter that it Rirre not in the o- 
eration. 
EE. The holes in the foote of the fupporter, whereby you may faften the {crew- 
pinst0 the floore. 


How to reftore a fhoulder d:/located forewards, 


isfeldomethat the fhoulder is luxated towards the forefide 
yet thereis nothing fo ftable and firme in our bodies which may 
[pee notbe violated bya violent affaule; fo that thofe bones doe ale 


‘Jews, | (0fall out of joint, whofe articulations are ftrengthened forthe 
firmer connexion with flefhly, nervous, griftly and bony ftayes 
e AW5i¢ or barres. This you may perceive by this kindeof diflocated 


fhoulder, (trengthened as it were with a {trong wall onevery hand ; to wit, the Acro- 
miumandtheend ofthe collarbone, feeming tohinderit, as alfothe great and 


ftrong mufcles, Epomis and Biceps. Hippocrates {hut up within the ftrait bounds of the ras de 


ieffer Afi4,never fawthis kinde of diflocation, which was obferved fivetimes by cuiis 
Galen. profefle I have feene it butonce, and that wasina certaine Nun, whieh 
weary of the Nunnery, caft her felfe downe out ofa window, and bore the falland 
weight of her body upon her elbow, fothat her fhoulder was diflocated forewards. 
Thiskinde of diflocation is knowne by the depravation of the conformation or fi- signs, 
gureofthemember, by the head of the fhoulder wrefted outtowardsthe breaft, as 
alfothe patient cannot bend his elbow. Itis reftored by thie fame meanesas other Cure: 
luxations of other parts, to wit,by ftrait holding, extending, and forcing in. There- 
forethe patient muft bee placed upon the ground with his face upwards, and then 
youmuft extend the fhoulder otherwife than you doe when itis luxated into the 
arme-pit. For when it fallethintothe arme-hole, it is firft drawne forewards, then 
forced upwards, untill it bee brought juft againft the cavity whercinto it muft enter. 
Butinthis kinde of luxation, becaufe the toppe of the fhoulder is in the fore parts of 
the dearticulation fhut up with mufcles, opened both tothe outer,as alfo to the in- 
ner part, you muft worketo the contrary ; to wit, tothe hinde part. But firft of all 
you mutt place a fervant atthe backe of the patient, who may draw backea ftronge 
and broade Bandage caft about the arme- pit (fuch as is the Carchefins, which confilts ge ar. 
of twocontrary and continued ftrings) left that whenthe arme fhallbeextended, 
the fhoulder follow : alfo you muft put a clew of yarne to fiflup thearmepit. Thien 
muft youextend the arme, cafting another ligaturea little abovethe elbow, and in 
the interim havea carethat the head thereof fall not into the arme-pit, which may 
be done both by putting the forementioned clew under the arme, and drawing the 
head another way ; then muft you permit,by flacking your extenfion,the joint freed 
from the encompaffing mufcles,to be drawne and forced into its cavity by the muf- 
cles forcible recoiling, as with an unanimous confent, intothemfelves and their o- 
riginals, forthus it will eafily bee reftored, and fuch extenfion oncly is {ufficient 

etd, 


Sent.23 


. "ity 
£ 
| 
| 
| 
ry 
4 
“ 
| 
* 
4 
- 
q * 
f CHAPS 
= 
— 
' A 


The cure. 


What ro bee 
done to holdin 
che fhoulder 
after it is refto~ 


Concerning Diflocations or Luxations, 
Cu ap.XXIX. 


Of the [houlder luxated outwardly, 


rwOOd He diflocation alfo of the fhoulder to the outward parts fcldom ha Ppens. 
ns G43 but yet, if itmay at any time happen, the extenfion of the arme wij] bee 


very difficult, but yet more dithcult cowards the outward part thane, 

wts/ wards the inward; thereisadeprefled cavity perceived towards the 
~— cheft ; but externally a bunching forth, to wit,in that parc from whence 
the head of the fhoulder-bone is fled. For the reftoring hereof, the patient mutt bee 
laid faton his belly,and the elbow muft be forcibly drawne contrary to thar where. 
to it is fled,to wit, inwardly to the dreft;and alfo the ftanding forth head of the 

bone, muft bee forced intoits cavity, for thusitfhall bee eafily reftored. Bur 
what part foeverthe fhoulder-bone is diflocated, the arme muft be extended ay ; 
drawne directly downewards. Afterthe reftitution fitting medicines thal] puta. 
bout the joint. Leethere bee fomewhat put into the arme-pit which may fil! up 
and let compreffes or boulftersbee applyedtothat part to which the luxated bone 
fell; then all thefe things fhall be ftrengthened and held faft witha ftrong and broad 
two headed ligature put under the armepit,and fo brought acroffe upon the joint of 
the fhoulder, and thence carried unto the oppofite arme-pit by fo many wiudinos x 
fhall be judged requifite. Then the arme mutt be put and carried ina {carfe to rioh 
angles, which figure muft be obferved not onely in every luxation of the thoulder 
but in each fracture of the armealfo, forthat it is leffe painefull, and confequently, 


{uch as the arme may ftand the longeft therein without moving, 


—- 23S 


— 


Cua p.XXX. 
Of the [honlder diflocated upwards. 


ge head of the fhoulder alfo may fometimes bee luxated into the Upper 
part. Whichwhen ithappens, it fhewes ir felfe by bunching forth 
LB Ge at theend of the Collar bone, thehollownes of the arme-pitis found 
larger than ufuall,the elbow flyes further from the ribs than whenittelf 
downewards, nowthe armeis wholly unable to performe the ufual! actions. Itis 
fit for the reftitution of fucha luxation, that the Surgeon ftoope downe, and puthis 
fhoulder under the patients arme, and then ftand up as high as he ean u pon his fete, 
and therewithall preffe downe the head of the fhoulder-bone into che c2 vity,orclic 
make fome other to doe it. Otherwife itis fitto lay the Patient upon his backe on 
the ground, and whileft fome one extends the affected arme by drawing it downr. 
wards, the Surgeon with his owne hand may force downe the head of the bone 
to itscavity. The operation performed, the fame things fhall bee done as in otlet 
luxations, comprefies being applyedto that part whercto the bone few, and itbe- 
ing alfe bound up with ligatures. Now you may underftand in thefe foure foremee. 
tioned kindesof diflocations, thatthe bone which was luxatedis reftored, bythe 
found which fhall bee heard as you force itin, by the reftitution of the accuftomes 
actions, which are perceived by the bending, extending, and lifting it up, oY the 
mitigation of the paine, and laftly by thecollation and comparing of thie affected 
arme with the found, and by its fimilitude and equality therewith. 


B16 


4s Hi pocr 
doe rece! 
Ginglymu 
before in 
procelfies 
folute tur 
ly than cl 
nus the ha 
proceffe 
flyesand 
on is fart 
tremitie 
the lower 
their cub 
whichis 
tended, 
which is 
fed by tl 
forthar t 
diflocat« 
fhortert 
other m 
thereof 
dedtow 
manner 
on fhall 
well unt 
into iui 
diflocat 
pleat an 
{mall oc 
pens, 
ally if ¢l 
tution 


ai? VA 
bei Cee 
the cart 
ch 
| fe 
cultls ct, 
red. 
| Ul€e 
| 
| 


= {cldom hap 


COWwards t} 


ne patient bee 
trary to that where. 
Of the arme. 
re{tored. By: into 
ft be extended and 
micincs thal] be put a- 
vhich may fill ir y 


chthe luxated bone 


{trong and broad 


lle upon the joint of 
omany Wiudings as 


d ina {carfe toricht 
ion of the fhoulder, 
l, and conlequently 


xated into the apper 

by bunching forth 
the arme- pit is found 
nibs than whenitfelf 
ufuall actions. Itis 
¢ downe, and put his 
upon his fete, 
che cavity, or celle 
nt upon his backe on 
y drawing it downe. 
head of the bone in- 
bee done as in other 
bone flew, and it be- 
thefe foure foremen- 
edis reftored, bythe 
n of the accuftomed 
i lifting it up, by the 
paring of the aftected 
vith. 


CHAP. 


Lite. 16 


arme will bee 
ward partthan to. 


part from whence 


CHarp.XXXI. 
Of the diflocation of the Elbow. 


He Elbow may alfo be foure manner of wayes diflocated,to wit,inward- The 
iz ly, outwardly, upwards and downewards. By the part which is inwards, “ems notto 


gree with Hipp. 


| BF I meanethat which lookes towards the center of thebody, when as the Sen), set. 


and fupine; I make the outward part, that which iscontrary thereto. By the upper ion che kinds 
part [ meanethat which is towards the heaven, and by the lower that which is next of aditlocared 
othe earth: and by how much the joint of the elbow confifts of more heads and ca~ Yow. 
vities, thanthat of the thoulder, by fo much when it is luxated it isthe more diffi- 
cyltly fet, and itis alfo more fubjectto inflammation, and to grow hard thereupon, 
4s Hippocrates faith. Now the joint of theelbowis more difficultly diflocated than 
shat of the fhoulder, and more hardly fet, forthat the bones of the cubit and arme 
doe receive andenter each other by that manner of articulation which is termed 
Ginglymus , as wee have formerly more at large treated in our Anatomy, anda little 
before in our treatife of fractures. The Elbow is therefore diflocated, forthatthe 

-ocefles thereof are not turned about the fhoulder-bone in a full orbe,and by an ab- 
folure turning. Wherefore if at any time the cubit be bended more f{traitly and clofe- 
ly than that the inner procefle can retaine its place and {tation in the bottom of its /- 
gus,the hinde procefie falleth out and is diflocated backwards. But when asthe fore 
proceffe is extended more violently,and forced againft the bottom of its cavity, it 
flyesand departs out of its place as beaten or forced thence, and this kinde of luxati- 
onis farre more difficultly reftored than the former:adde hereunto that the utter ex- 
eremitie of the cubite, which is called O/ecranam,is the higher, but the other inner is phe Author 
the lower: whence it is that every one can betterand more eafily bend than extend doth nee agree 
their cubits. Therfore {uch a diflocation is caufed by a more violent force,than that sp atv 
whichis made to the inner fide. T he figne of this luxation is,the arme remaines eX- ting downethe 
tended neither can it be bended, for the inner procefie ftayes in the externall cavity, at er 
which is hollowed in the bottom of the fhoulder-bone, which formerly was poflef- shoe notes 
fed by the inner part of the Olecranum ; which thing makes the reftitution difficult, 
forthat this proceffe is kept, as it were, imprifonedthere. But when it falleth out curward and 
diflocated tothe fore part, the armeis crooked, neither is it extended, and it isalfo inward uxaci. 
fhorterthan the other. But if the elbow bee fallen out of its place according tothe pryncso"' 
other manner of diflocations, to wit,upwards or downewards, the naturall figure an elbow diflo. 
thereofis perverted, for the arme is ftretched forth, butlitele notwithftanding ben- Orerowards 
ded towards that part from whence the bone went , that is,figured after a middle our pare; and 
manner betweene bending and extending thereof. What kinde foever of diflocati- thofe which are 
on thall befall it, the action of the Elbow will either not bee atall, or certainely not ,.;, a 
well untill that it be reftored to its former place; there is a {welling in the part wher- dillocated up- 
into init owne, and a cavity there from whence it is fled, which alfo happensinthe 1 
diflocations of all other parts. Furthermore, one diflocation of the Elbow is come ce//is hath at- 


pleatand perfect, another imperfect. The latter as it eafily happens, and through a tiburedso 2 
fall occafion,fo iris eafily reftored ; but onthe contrary a perfect,as it hardly ha the out and im 
pens, and not unleffe with great violence,fo it is not fo eafily reftored againe,c{peci- ae | 

ally if that you doe not prevent inflammation, for being inflamed it makes the refti- ) 7" cond 
tution either difficult,or w 


holly impoffible,principally that which falleth outwards. tion, 


Cuar. XXXII. 
How to reftore the Elbow, diflocatea outwardly. 


t the elbow is diflocated outwardly, ifatahy time you signs. 
rme to be diftended,and not ableto be bended. Where- 
dertake the reftitution thereof, for feare of de- 
which the bitterneffe of pain ufually caafeth, 


There is one manner of reftoring it, Cure 
which 


Ou may know tha 
(halliobferve thea 
fore you muft forthwith un 

fluxion and inflammation, 


armeis piacea if a Naturall lite,to wit,in a middic ficure betweene prone frac. and Cel/us 
| 
| Spon what part foever the luxation happen. 


A Caution. 


Concerning Diflocations or Luxations. L 
whichis, youmuft caufe oneto hold hardand fteddy the patients arme a Jit 
der the joint of the fhoulder, and in the meane while let the Surgeon draw the arme 
taking hold thereof with his hand, and alfo force the fhoulder-bone outwards, ang 
the eminency of the cubit inwards, but let him by little and little draw ang extend 
thearme, wrefting it gently this way and that way, that he may bring back the bone 
which fell out into its cavity. Ihave thusexpreflely delivered this, thatthe Young 
Surgeon may underftand, thatthe arme muft not be bended forthe reftoring of this 
kinde of diflocation ; for reftitution cannot fo be hoped for, becaufe by this king of 
luxation the inner proceffe of the cubit poflefleth the place of the exteriour Proceffe 
in thecavity of the fhoulder-bone. Wherefore, whileft the arme is bended or Croo. 
ked, the cubit is onely lifted up, and not drawne into itsfeat. But if wee canno; ot. 
taine to the reftitution thereof with our handsalone, you muftcaufe the diflocateg 
arme lightly bended to embracea pofte, then muft the end of the cubit called Ole. 
cranumbetyed or bound about with a ftrong ligature or line, and then wrefted Into 
its cavity by putting a battoon or ftaffe intothe ligature, as is demonftrated by this 


enfuing figure. 


tle up. 


| A figure which fhewes the way how to reftore A figure which fhewes how te reflore 
the Elbow, by putting it het a pofte, the elbow by only cefting aline 
with abattoone. about it, 


There is alfo another more exquifite way of reftoring it, which is exprefled by the 
latter figure, wherein a line of fome inch breadth is caft about the O/ecranum of the 
arme, embracing a pofte or pillar,and it is drawn fo long, untill the diflocated boat 
be brought into its feat. Now weeknow that the bone is returned intoits place, an 
rcftored, when the paine ccafeth, and the figureand whole natural! conformation 
is reftored to the arme, andthe bending and extending thereof is cafie, and 19 
painefull. 

HAP: 


in any ov 
that by re 
ced natut 
by painc 
obfervec 
fore, that 
oftner t 
bee gent 
thefe refi 
ning acc 
{ometi 
mutt bee 
the up 
fhoulde 


4 
Fa 
ty. 
fily reftore 
Let 
draw tow 
che bone ¥ 
ry : after 
binde it uf 
{carfe put} 
| = IN | unctions 
inh Ye =; Dr | 
G@ 
Pe you for 
~ 


arme alittle yp 

on draw the 
ne outwa 


¢ reftoring of th; 
ule by this kind of 


exteriour proceffe 


tif wee Cannot ar. 
aufethe diflocateg 
ecubit called Ole. 
then wrefted into 
monftrated by this 


how te reflore 
fling aline 


Li 


is exprefled by the 
ec Olecrannm of the 
he diflocated bone 

into its place, and 
all conformation 
fis eafic, and not 


16. Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


621 


Cuar.XXXIIbL 


of the diflocation of the Elbow to the infide,and of 4 compleat and uncom- 
pleat luxation, 


~ 


the Elbow be diflocated to the inner part,the arme muftbeftrongly 
1238) and powerfully extended, then bended quickly and with fi ndden wie. The cure. 


| 
lence, fothat his hand may {mite upon his thoulder. So: 
round thing into the bought of the Elbow, and upon 
antE force the Elbow to the fhoulder,as we have formerly faid. Ifthe Cubit 
hone be onely lightly moved out ofits place into the upper or lower place, it is ea- 
fily ceftored by drawing and forcing it INtO its cavity, after this following manner. 
Lettwoextendthe arme, taking holde thereof atthe fhoulder and wreft, and cach 
towards himfelfe andalfo the Surgeon (who fhall there be force 
the bone which is diflocated from that part whereunto it is bended stinto the contra- 
. after he fhall thus have reftored it, he fhall lay thearmein a ftraight anele. and fo 
binde it up, and apply fit medicines formerly mentioned, and fo let him carry itina 
fcarfe put about his necke,as wee faid in the diflocation of the fhouider. Hippocrates 3.2? 
bids, that the patient, after itis fet, fhall often endeavour to bend his hand upwards ae 
anddownewards, and alfo extend and bend his arme, yea,and al { to attem prro lift 
up fome heavie thing with his hand ; for fo it will come to paffé, that the ligaments 
of this joyat may become more fofte,ready, and able to performe their accuftomed 


fundions, and alfo the bones of thecubite and fhoulder fhall bee freed from the af. 


Ancylofis, whereto they are incident by the luxations of this part. Now Why the elbow 


Ancylofis is a.certaine preternaturallagelutination, co-agmentation, and as it were to 


union of fandry and feverall bones in the fame joynt, which afterwards hinders the 
bending and extenfion thereof. Now, a Cafus is generated in the Elbow fooner than 
inany other articulation, whether it remaineth out, or be put into joynt, by reafon 
that by reft and ceflation from theaccuftomed actions,a vifcide humor which is pla- 
ced naturally in the joynts,as alfo another which is preternaturall, drawne thither 
by paine, floweth downe,and is hardned, and gleweth the bones together, as I have 
obferved in many, by reafon of the Idleneffe and toolong reft of this part. Where- 
fore, that we may withftand this affect the whole ligation mutft be loofedfooner and 
ofiner than otherwife, that is to fay every third day,and then the patients arme muft 
bee gently moved every way. Within the {paceof twenty, or twenty five dayes, 
thefe reftored bones recover their ftrength, fooner or later, according to the happe- 
ning accidents. Itis neceffary alfo that the Surgeon know chat the Radivs or Wand 
{ometimes falleth out when the cubite or Ellis wholly diflocated ; wherefore hee 
mutt bee mindfull in fetting the cubit, that hee alfo reftore the Wand toits place ; in 
the upper part it hath around proceffe lightly hollowed, wherein it recciveth the 
fhoulder-bone: it hathalfo an eminencie which admitteththe two-headed mufcle: 


Cuarp. XXXIV. 
Of the diflocation of the Styliformis or bodkinelike proce(fe of the cubit or ell. 


proceffe of the Ell called Styloides, being articulated tothe wreft by 
NI) Diathrofis,by which it is received in a {mall cavity, is diflocated,and fal- ana causes. 
6) (aw Ieth out fometimes inwards, fomewhiles outwards. The caufe ufually is 

the falling of the body from high upon the hands. It is reftored, if thac 
thereto very aftringem & drying 
ly performe all things which may bee 
fhall bee 
which 
thing 


&® 
| 
| 
d — 
rine +t | 
ing ACK the bone 
thatthe vo), 
OT Croc 
SSS 
\ 
= 
WW 
it 
“oN 
| 
SOA 
\ | 
- — 
| 
| 
| 


622 Concerning Diflocations ,or Luxationss. 
thing we have read, obferved by Hippocrates ; when (faith he) the _— bone. ., 
rey wit the Ell, is removed from the other, that is the wand, itis not cafily reftored 1, its 
 owne nature againe ; for that, {eeing that neither any other COMMON Connexion of 
two bones, whichthey call Symphyfis or union, when itis drawnealunder ang de. 

ftroyed, may bee reduced into its former nature, by reafon thefe ligaments Where. 
with they were formerly contained, andasit were continued, aretoo violently gj. 
fended and rclaxed, whence it happens , that I haveinthefe cafes often Obferyeg 


that the diligence and care of the Surgeon hath nothing availed. 


— 


Cc HAP.XX X Y. 
Of the diflocation of the Wreft. 


Ec underftand by the wreft, acertaine bony body, confitting o , 
| compofure of eight bones knit tothe wholecubit by Diarthrajis 


“Here, asbefore | For the wreft confidered wholly in its felfe, is knit and articyl 
chap. 3150. AY 251 with the Ell & wand : with that,againft the little finger. with thi. 
againft the thumb: for thus aS it were by two connexions,the joint 
and Hippocrates | *Agpersvmtseees is made more firme. Yet may it be diflocated inwardly outwardly, 
mexpreiiing 
the names and &¢ towards the fi 


des. We fay it is luxated inwardly when the hand ftands y pwards 
fignesofthele pyr outwardly,when it is crookt in & cannot be extended. Butif it chance tg be dif. 
dulecations. gcared fidewayes, it ftands awry either towards the little finger, or elfe towards the 
thumbe, as the luxation befalsto this or that fide. The caufe hereof may {eem to de. 
pend upon the different dearticulation of the Elland wand with the hand or wre@. 
Forthe wand, which isarticulatedon the lower part with the wreft at the thumbe, 
by its upper part, whileft itreceives the outward {welling or condyle of the Ell in its 
cavity,performs the circular motions of the hands,But the cubit or ell ,whichin like 
fort isconnected onthe lower part by Déarthrofis at the little finger with the wreft 
being articulated onthe upper part with the fhoulder-bone bends and extends, or 
ftretches forth the hand. There is one way toreftore the formerly mentioned diflo. 
cations. The arm on one fide and the hand on another mutt be extended upona hard 
refifting and fmooth place, fo that it may lye flat . and you muft havea carethatthe 
rt whence the diflocated bone fell bee the lower in its fite and place, and the part 
whether it is gone,the higher. T hento conclude,the prominencies of the bones mut 
be preffed down by the hand of the Surgeon,untill by the force of compreffion and 

fitethe luxated bones be thruft and forced intotheir places and cavities. 


Cua rp.XXXVI. 
Of the diflocated bones of the Wreft. 


22m He wrelt confifts of eight bones, which cannot unleffe by extraordinary 

RX violence bee put or fall out of their places. Yet ifthey fhall ac any time 

fall out,they will thew it by chetumor of the part whertothey are gone, 

hesemade 20d by the depreffion of that wherefromthey are fled. They may bec 

reftored , if the difeafed hand bee extended upona table ; and if the bones 

fhall be diflocated inwards, the hand thall bee placed with the palme upwards, then 

sare? —stthee Surgeon hall, with the palme of his hand, preffe downe the eminencies of the 

| bones, and force each bone into its place. Butif the luxation bee outwards, hic (hall 
lay the palme nextto the table,and preffe it after the fame manner. To conclude, 

the luxation fhall be toward either fide,the luxatedbones fhall be thruft cowards th¢ 

contrary, and the reftored bones fhall be prefently conteined in their places W ith it 

remedics, binding, rowling, and carrying the hand in a {carfe. 


Signe 


C uate 


joints are ti 
vertheir ft 


wrelt. 


trary to w! 
Of is, fort! 
fockets wl 
hereunto 7 
I cannot ci 
cavity, ani 
their place 
cncompaf i 
an interna 
Cannot dr; 
ofthe 
longer and 
outwardly 
Clude, the 
man; 
found, for 
to Wit, in t 
ands fort 
the focker, 
Ppens tc 


J, - 
that where 
che middie | 
| 
outwardly. 
~y i! 
tive 
OF 
RA 
hy 
4 


greater bone. 
Balily reftored to 
Mon CONNEXIon of 
ne alunder and de. 
ligaments Where. 
€too violently 


es often oblerved, 


- 


bdy, confitting of 2 
| bit by Diarthyg les. 
mit and articulated 
le finger; with this 
nNexions,the joint 
wardly outwardly, 
nd ftands upwards, 
it chance to be dif. 
,or elfe towards the 
of may {eem to de- 
ithe hand or wreft, 
reft at the thumbe, 
yle of the Ell in its 
or ell which in like 
ger with the wreft, 
ds and extends, or 
y mentioned ditlo- 
tended upona hard 
have a care that the 
place, and the part 
of the bones mutt 
sof compreffion and 
avities. 


by extraordinary 
ey {hall at any time 
ertothey are gone, 
They may bec 
and if the bones 
Ime upwards, then 
eminencies of the 
outwards, he fhall 
r. To conclude, if 
chruft cowards che 
their places with fit 


C uate 


* 
— 


Concerning ‘Di/locations, or Luxations, 


Cuar.XXXVII, 
Of the diflocated bones of the After-wreft. 


Here are fourc bones inthe Palme or After-wreft, the two middlemoft cous 
whereof cannot be diflocated fidewayes, becavfe they are hindred and “-°: 

fel) FS cpt from falling afide by the oppofition of the parts, asit were refi- 
iting them. Neithercanthat which anfwereth tothe little finger, nor 

shat whereon the forefinger refts, bee diflocated towards that fide which is next 

she middle bones, whereof wee now {pake, but onely on the other fide, freed from 

the neighbour-hood of the bones : but all of them may be diflocated inwardly and 
outwardly. 1 hey may be reftored as thofe of the Wreft. 


CHArPXXXVIII. 


Of the diflocated Fingers. 


vs ee Lio the bones of the fingers may bee foure feverall waics diflocated, in Why, the cit 
wardly, outwardly, and towards each fide. To reftore them, they muft 
bec laid traight upon atable, and fo put into joint againe, For thus they seftored, 
may bee eafily reftored, by reafon their fockets are not deepe,and their 

joints are (horter, and ligaments lefle ftronge. In twelve dayes {pace they will reco« 
vertheirftrength, asalfothofe diflocations that happentothe Wrelt and After. 


wrelt. 


Cuar.XXXIX. 
Of adiflocated T high or Hipp. 


ere 


Aaetneg He Thigh or Hipp may be diflocated, and fall forth towards allthe foure rape 
arb, 
/E3\ (p\ parts. But moft frequently inwards, next to that outwards, but very fel- 
(8 dom cither forwards or backwards. A fubluxation cannot happen in this 
joint, as neither in the fhoulder, efpecially from an externall caufe, con- 
trary to which it ufually happens in the elbow,hand,knee,and foor. The canfe here- 
ofis, forthatthe heads of thethigh and fhoulder-boneare exactly round, andthe 
fockets which receive them have certaine borders and edges encompafling them: Gal ad fs 
hereunto may be added, that {trong mufcles encompaffe each dearticulation, fo that 4- dears 
itcannot cometo paffe that part of the heads of {uch bones may bec conteined inthe 
cavity, and other parts ftand or fall forth, but thatthey will quickly bee reftored to 
their places bythe motionand wheeling about ofthe joint, and the trengthof the A fiblueation 
cacompafling mufcles. But a fubluxation may feeme to happen inthefe parts from Thyeh from 
an internall caufe. For then the ligaments and tyes being fottened and relaxed , internall cau, 
cannot draw and carry back the head of the bone ftanding forth fo far astheed- 
g¢softhe focket. Ifthe Hip be diflocated towards the inner part, that leg becomes 
onger and larger than the other, but the kneeappeares fomewhat lower, and looks 
outwardly with the whole foote, neither canthe patient ftand upon his leg. Tocon- 
Clude, the head of the Thigh-bonebewrayes it felfe lying inthe groia, with a fwel- 
ing manifeft both to the eye andhand ; nowtheleggeis longer than that which is 
ound, for that the head of the thigh is out of its focket or cavity, and fituated lower, 
CO Wit, inthe groin, therefore the leg is made by fo much the larger. Nowtheknee 
ds forth, becaufe neceffarily the lower head of the thigh.bone ftandscontrary to 
¢focket. For this is common to all diflocated bones, that when as the diflocation 


fives out tothe contrary; 
towards the one fide, the other ead of the bone < 


| 

4 

| I 

— 

i 

| 
a 


. 


lly, 


Concerning Diflocations,or 


Luxations. L 16 


Whence it is.that if theupperhead of the Thigh-bone fhall fall inwards, then th, 


ther head, whichis at the knee, muft neceffarily looke outwards. The like happen 


other diflocations. The leg cannot be bended towards thegroine, for 


4 boneholdsthe extending mufcles of the fame part fo ftiffely ftre 
yeeld, or apply themfelves to the benders. For flexion 
ought to precede extenfion, and extenfion flexion. : 


Cuar. XL. 
Prognofticks belonging to a diflocated Hipp. 


Here is this danger in thediflocations of the Hipp,thateither 
eee a cannot bee put into the place againe, at leaft unleffe with ae 


Why the thigh- 
Sou trouble, or cl{e being put in, that it may prefently fall our Again, Foy 


bone difloca- 
tedis difficultly 
reftored, or rc. 
ftored ealily 


ifthe tendons of the mufcles, the ligaments, and otlier neryoy: 
fallsoutagainc. Parts 


BS 4} of the member be hard and ftrong, they by reafon of their contuma 
cy and (tiffenefle will hardly fuffer the bone to returne to its place. If thatthey ve 
foft, loofe, effeminate and weake, they will not containe the reftored bone in its 

place. Neither will it beany better contained, if that fhort, butyet ftrong and round 

licament, which faftensthe head of the Thigh-bone on the infide in the Socket, 

Cavity of the huckle bone, bee broken or relaxed. Now it may be broken by fome 

Thebreaking Violentfhocke or accident, itmay bee relaxed by the congeftion and long ftay of 
andrelaxation {gomeexcrementitious, tough, and vifcous humour lying about the joint, through 
rr which meanesit waxeth foft. But if itbe broken, how often foever the bone be re. 
——— ftored, it will prefently fall out againe. If it bee relaxed, there is onely this hopeto 
containe the reftored bone, that is, to confumeand draw away the hea ped up humi. 
dity by application of medicines and Cauteries of both kindes, for which Purpofe 

thofe are more effectuall which doe a@tually burne, for that they dry and ftrengthen 
Galcom.ad ent. More powerfully. Leanenefle of the body, and the want of Aponeuro/és, that is, of 
42 (0é.4.deait- broad tendont and externall ligaments, wherof many encompaffe the knee, encrev. 
{es the difficulty of containing it in theplace. But the parts adjoyning to the diflocs- 
ted & not fer bone fall away by little & little, and confume with an Atrophia or want 
of nourifhment ; both becaufe the part it felf is forced to defift from the accuftomed 
actionsand fun@tions, as alfo for that theveines, arteries, and nerves being more 
{traitned and put out of their places, hinder the f pirits and nourifhment from flows 
ing fo freely as they ought, to the part : whence it comes to paffe,that the part it {elf 

made more weak, the native heat being debilitated through idleneffe, it can neither 

attract the alimentary juice,neither can it digeft & affinulate that little therof which 
flowesand falleth thereto. Verily the Thigh-bone, as long as’ it is forth of the 

cavity, growes nomore, after the manner as the other bones of the body doe, and 
therefore in fome {pace of time you may perceiveitto bee fhorter than the found 

bone. Notwithftanding the bones of theleggeand foote are not hindered of their 
srowth, for that they are not out oftheir proper places. Now for that the whole leg 
appears more flender, you muft think that happens only by the extenuation & lean- 
neffe of the proper mufcles thereof. The fame thing happens tothe whole hand, in 
the largeft acception, when as the fhoulder is out of joint, unleffe thar the calam*y 
and loffe hereof isthe leffe. For the fhoulder being forth of joint you may do fom: 
thing with your hand, whereby it willcometo pafle that no {mall portion of nol- 
rifhment may fow downeinto thefe parts. But the Thigh-bone being diflocated, 
pecially inwards in achild unborn, or an infant, much !effe alimenrary nourifhmet 
flowes to that part, becaufe it can much leffe ufe the foor and legge by reafon of the 
diflocation of the Hipp, than it can doethe hand by a luxation of the fhoulder. but 

Migpocratesex. OW Weemuftthus underftand that which is faid by Hippocrates , That diflocat¢ 
bones and not reftored doedecreafe or arehindred from their juft growth, cob 


eae onely in thofe who have not yet attained to their fulland naturally appoint 


Sam 


Lis. 1¢ 


rowth ing 


{tored,bec 
delivered 


run more! 
therefore 
thigh-bon 
bone thus 
legge abo 
while ch¢ 
ormoverh 
in aright! 
wards tbe 
ftay 
Furthe 
fo rhat itc 
the cauie 
and goe uy 
are forcec 
thigh ate 
whole we 
Or head of 
may 
more def 
and lame 
body, in 
But on the 
put intor 
the bone 
he may be 
bendedto 
his toes, 
thefe thin: 
ternall lio 
contrary 
then the } 
Place hight 
their orig 
whole leo 
their heeld 
Cannot be 
muft dilig 
thefe Wor 
CO bee reg 


©Zternall. 


- 
- 
of 
F 
e 
inwards, 
1 
i 
a 


inwards, then 
be The like 
Dine, for thar thed:. 
iffely ftretched ong 
r flexion or bending 


 thateither the bone 
lefle with very much 
y fall out againe, Fo, 
‘other Nervous parts 
on of their contumg. 
lace. Ifthat they bee 
reftored bone inits 
et {trong and round 
nfide in the Socket or 
y be broken by fome 
tion and long ftay of 
ut the joint, through 
oever the bone be re. 
is onely this hopeto 
the heaped up humi- 
s, for which purpofe 
y dry and ftrengthen 
poneurofes, that is, of 
afle the knee, encrea- 
oyning to the difloca- 
han Atrophia or want 
from the accuftomed 
dnerves being more 
urifhment from flows 
ffe,that the part it {elf 
leneffe, it can neither 
at little therof which 
g as it is forthof the 
of the body doe, and 
yorter than the found 
not hindered of thet 
for thatthe whole leg 
eextenuation & lean- 
tothe whole hand, in 
leffe thar the calamity 
nt you may do fome- 
(mal! portion of 
being diflocated,¢!- 
mencary nourifhment 
legge by reafon of the 
of the fhoulder. But 
ates, That diflocated 


naturally appoia 


ir juftgrowth, cobee 


growth 


[is.16. Concerning Di/locations, or Luxations. 625 


every demenfion. For inmen of full growth,the bones which are not re- 


a -ed.become more flender,but yet no fhorter, as appeares by that whichhec hath 


delivered of the (houlder. 


— 


CuarpXLi. 
of the fignes of the Hipp, diflecated outwardly or inwardly, 


essaay He thigh-bone or Hipp when it is diflocated outwardly, and not reftored, 
atter time the paine 1s aflwaged, and flefh growes about it, the head 
i of the bone weares it felfe a new cavity in the adjoy ning Hipp,whereinto 
it betakes it felte, forhat at the length the patients may go without a ftaffe, 
acither fo deformed a Icanneffe will waftetheir legge. But if the luxation happen 
inwards, agreater leannefle will befall them, by reafon that the veffels naturally 4d 
sya more inwardly,as Galen obferves in the diflocation of the Vertebre tothe intide; 
therefore it comesto paflethat they are more grievoufly opprefled : befides the 
thigh-bone cannot wagge or once ftirre again{t the fhare-bone: wherefore if the 
bone thus diflocated bee not reftored to its joynt againe, then they muft caft their 
legge about as they walke, juftas wee feeoxendoe. Wherefore the found legge 
whileftchey go, takes much leffe {pace than the lame, becaufe this ,whilcft it ftirrech 
ormoveth,muft neceffarily fetch a compafle abour, but that performeth its motion 
jnaright line. Befides,whileftthe patients ftand upon their lame legge to put tor- 
wards the found, they are forced to ftand crocked, whereupon they are forced to 
ftay themfelves with a ftaffe that they fall not. | 
Furthermore thofe who have this bone diflocated either backwards or outwards, Signe of the 
forhat it cannot bee reftored, have the part it felfe grow ftiffe and hard , which is jP*°ors, * 
the caufe why the ham may bee bended without great paine, and they may ftand, wards. 
and goe upon the tops of theirtoes ; befidesalfo,when they defire ro goe fafter,they 
are forced to {toope, and ftrengchen themfelves by laying their hand on their lame 
thigh at every {tep, both for that their lame legge is thefhorter, as alfo becaufe the 
whole weight of the body fhould not lye wholly or perpendicularly upon the joynt 
or head of thethigh-bone. Yet in continuance of time,when they are ufed to ir,they 
may goc without any ftaffe in their hands. Yet inthe ioterim,the found leg becomes 
more deformed in the compofure & figure, becaufe whileft it fuccours the oppofite 
and lame Jeg by the firme ftanding on the ground, it beares the weight of the whole 
body, in performance wherereof the ham mutt neceflarily now and then bend. 
But on the contrary, whenas the head of the thigh being diflocated inwards is not 
put intothe joyat, if the patient be arrived at his full growth, after that the head of 
the bone hath made it {elfe acavity inthe neighbouring bone wherein it may reft, 
hemay bee able to walke without a ftaffe, becaufe the diflocated leg cannot eafily be 
bended towards the groine or ham, and he will fooner reft upon his heele than upon 
histoes. This kinde of diflocation ifit bee inveterate, can never be reftored. And 
thefe thingshappen, when as the thigh- bone is diflocated inwards, or when the in- 
teroall lizament which faftens the dearticulation fhall be broken or relaxed. But the 
contrary fhall plainely appeare if the diflocation fhall happen to bee oucwards ; for 
then the lame legge becomes the fhorter, becaufethe head of the thigh flyesintoa 
place higher than its cavity,aud the mufcles of that part are contracted towards 
their originall, and convulfively draw the bone upwards together withthem. The 
Whole leg, together with the knee and foot lookethiawards, they cannot goe upon 
their heels,but upon the fetting on of thetoes, The legge may bee bended, which it 
cannot beeina diflocation of the thigh inwards, as Pau/ws fhewes. Therefore wee pari 
mutt diligently obferve that fentence of Hippocrates which is read with anegative,in 
thele words. Sed neque confiectere quemadmodum fanum crus poffent,that they ought 
C0 bee read with an affirmative after this manner. Sed comflectere Gc. quem crus ip- 
But gow the lame legge will better fuftaine the weight of che body io aa 


~ 
= 
* 


time it hall by wearing have made it ielfea cavity in the neighbouring bone. hich 


cation nevertheleffe the patient fhall beable to goe without a ftaffe, for that the, 

fenfe of paine will trouble him ; whence it followes, thatthe whole leg al{o wi) i 
come lefie leane,for that going 1s leffe painfull neither are the veffels fo much pref. 
as in that diflocation which is made inwardly. ed 


Cuar. XLII. 
Of thethigh-bone diflecated forewards. 


feldome happeneth that thethigh is diflocated forwards. yet 
when asit fhall happen, it is knowne by thefe fignes. The head 
5) 


ofthe thigh lyeth towards the fhare ; whence the groines 
Hrs fp up, and the butrocke on the contrary is wrinkled and extenugte; 
YAS | by reafon of the contraGion of the mufcles ; the patient canno, 
extend his leg without paine,no verily, not fo much as bend jr ¢o. 
wards the groine, for that the fore mufcle which arileth 
haunch-bone,is fo prefled by the head of the thigh, that it cannot be diftended ; nei. 
ther canthe ham be bended without very much paine. But the lame legge is equal 
at the heel with the other leg, yet the patient cannot ftand upon the fetting on of thy 
toes; therefore when he is forced to goe,hee toucheth the ground with his heel op. 
ly,yea,verily the fole of his foot is lefle inclined to the fore fide, neither doth it{el. 
ota dome happen, that the urine, by this accident, is fuppreft ; becaufe the head of the 
tOpping of Us 
vine by eeafon thigh oppreffes the greater nerves from whence thofe arife which are carryed tothe 
efaninternall bladder, which through the occafion of this compreffion is pained and inflamed by 
confent : now when inflammation fhall feaze upon the Sphind? mufcle, the urine 
can {carcely flow out,for that it is hindred by the fwelling. 


Cuar.XLill. 
Of the thigh-bone diflocated backwards. 


alfoisthethigh- bone diflocated backwards, becaufe the hind 


ole part of the cavity of the huckle-bone is deeper and more deprefled that 
ethe fore ; whence it is that the diflocation of thethigh to the inner pat 
6%, is more frequent than the reft. The patient can neither excend nor bend 
hislegge by reafon of the much compreflion and tenfion of the muicles 
which encompaffe the head of the thigh by this kind of luxation. But the pain is ¢h 
creafed when he would his ham, for thatthenthe mufcles arethe more 
extended. The lame leg is fhorterthan the found : when the|Buttocks are prefled,the 
a head of the thigh is perceiued hid amongft the mufcles of that part;but the oppolite 
groincislaxe, foft, and depreft with a manifeft cavity. The heele couches northe 
round, for that the head of the thigh is plucked backe againe by the mufcles of th 
ttocks amongft which it lyeth hid, but principally by that whichis the larger,and 
which is faid to make as it were the pillow or cufhion of the buttocks ; for tis! 
much more prefled in this kinde of diflocation than the reft: whence it is, that the 
pavernen bend his knee, becaufethe extenfion of the nervous production 
rgetendon which covers the knee is fo great. But if the patient will ftand up 
the foot of his luxated legge without a ftaffe, he thall fall down backwards,tor that 
the body is inclined to that part, the head of thethigh being not directly undemne 
for the propping or bearing up of the body ; wherefore he is forced to fultaine 
{elfe upon acrutch on his lame fide. Having premifed thefe things of the differed 


ces, fignes,fymptomes and prognofticks,it now remaineth, that we briefly del“ 


a 


pendicularly fubjea to the whole weight ofthe body, Therefore when in{ Ucceffe of 


in time will beconfirmed, fo that there will remaine no hope of reftoring the g ile. | 


[18.16 


che differen 
chet it iS fall 
of with his! 
he 
he bone 1S 
thigh-bone 
proveling 
fiych like, Ww! 
reat exten 
fuffice, ora 
with comp 
taking hold 
che cavity 
chat in rhiru: 
cavity forc' 
juft extentit 
is, to exten 
rhe breakin; 
writes, whet 
be that you 
fyfficeto ms 
ley. faftene 
as {hall fufh 
patients fricm 
refolate, anc 
entnor his 
young 
of reftorins 
beginning \ 


extenfion 
may not fo 
as much as 
thigh.Fort 
and befide 
concurrin 
the whole 
heedfull yo 
diflocated 
bove the ja 
knee by an 
ftrong & 1; 
hands of a 
it, for fo it 
to foure ki 
Cavity, 


all 
- 
j 
| 
| 
| 
i 
| 
| 
| 

f* 

> 
‘ 
| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
| ‘ 
q 
nae 
Bi 
\ 


Ly 


ouring bone, hich 


reftoring the 


ole leg al{o wi!) 
iels fo much pre 


cated forwards. yet 


{efignes. The head 
ce the groines {wel} 
kled and extenuated 
; the patient cannoe 
b much as bend it to. 
uch arifeth from the 
at be diftended ; 
Plame legge is equall 
the fetting on of the 
nd with his heel on. 
» neither doth it fel. 
maule the head of the 
h are carryedtothe 
ned and inflamed by 
#mulcle, the urine 


s, becaufe the hind 
more deprefled than 
igh to the inner part 
her extend nor bend 
nfion of the mulcles 
n. Burthe pain is en 
rethe more ftrongly 
tocks are prefled,the 

art;but the oppolite 
Bicele couches northe 
»y the mufcles of the 
hich is the larger,and 
uttocks ; for chisis 
thence it is, that che 
crvous production of 
cient will ftand 
n backwards, for that 

dire@tly underneath 
brced to goer 
hings of che difiereB- 
bricfly deict 


when inf UCCeffe of 


thigh-boae 
sroveling > 


113.16. Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 


ne diferent wayes of reftoring them, according to the difference of the parts whi- 


4 with his face upwards, orupon one fide, laying fome foft quilt or coverlid under ““~ 


g p,that he may lyc the eafier. Now you muft placehim fo,that the partunto which 


. pone is hown, may be the higher, but from whence it is fled,the lower. Forif the 


| aft extenfion,there can be no reftitution hoped for, it is farre better in that part,that 
. co extend it fome what more than is neceflary, yet fo, that you doe not endanger 
nebreaking of any mu{cles, tendon or other nervousbody. For, 1s H ippocrates Selt.r.lib. de 


CuarXLiV. 
Ofreftoring the Thigh-bene diflocated inwards. 
e224 T is fitto place the patient afterthe forefaidmanner, upon atable or 


& 


nie ) bench, in the midft wherof thall ftand faftned a woodden pin of a foots 

ra 1 ‘x3 length, and as thick as the handle of a {pade ufeth to be; but it muft be 

wrapped about with fome foft cloth, left the hardneffe hurt the but- | 
C22E<2 rocks, betwixt which it muft ftand,as we read that Hippocrates did in the S¢.2 lib ae 
extenfion ofa broken leg. The woodden pin hath this ufe, to hold the body that it” 

may not follow him that draweth or extendeth it; & thatthe extenfion being made 

as much as is requifie,it may go between the perivanm & the head of the diflocated 

thigh. For thus there is no greatneed of counter-extenfion towards the upper parts ; 

and befides it helpeth to force back the bone into its cavity,the help of the Surgeon 


concurring, who twining fomewhiles tothis, & otherwhiles to that fide,doth direct 


the whole work. But when the extenfion hath need of counter-extenfion, then itis How tomake 
exteniionan 


deedfull you have fuch ligatures at hand,as we have mentioned in the reftoring ofa enema 
diflocated fhoulder, to be drawn above the fhoulder.One of thefe fhall be faftned a- fon in this king 


bove the joynt of the hip,& extended by a {trong man; another fhalbe caft abovethe # {acu 


knee by another with thelike force. Butif you cannot have 2 wooden pin, another 
trong & likeligature fhalbe put upon the joynt direCtly atthe hip, & held ftiffe by the 
hands ofa {trong man, yet fo that it may not rouch the head of the thigh by prefling 
it,for {0 it would hinder the reftoring thereof. This manner of extenfion is common 
0 foure kinds of luxation of the thigh-bone. But the maner of forcing the bone inte 
“Scavity, muft be varied in each, according to the different coadition of the parts 
Geez where. 


iris fallen. Firft, you mutt place the patient upon a bench or table, groveling, Thegenerall 


if inwardly, upon his backe; if forwards, then wu ca fide. Then 
yt extention and impulfion be made towards the cavity, that (5 it may bee forced 
pereinto but if the diflocation be freth, & in a foft body, asa woman,childe, and 
like, whofe joynts are more laxe, it fhall not bee any waies needefull to make 
extenfion with ftrong ligatures for the reftoring it the Surgeons hand hall 
oF a Lift or towell caft about it. Intheinterimthebone bee kept faft 
«ith comprefles applyed about the joynt: then the Surgeon fhall extend the thigh, 
xing hold thereof abovethe knee, ina ftraight line, and fo feeit dirc@ly againtt 
 pecavity,and then prefently thruft it thereinto. For thus (hall he reftorc it, if fo bee 
‘natin tnruttingit, hee lift up che head thereof fomewhat higher, le(t the lips of the 
| ny forceit backe, and hinder it from entring. Now becaufe unleffe there bee 
writes, when as the mutcies are trong and large, you may {afely extend them, it fo!” 
yethat you difplace nothing by the forceof theextenfion. It your hand will not 
fficetomake juft extenfion, you muft ufethe helpe of an Engine, as is our Pul- 
| Joy faftened to two poltes,fo much of the rope being let forth,and drawn up again, 
| a {hall fuffice for the bufineffein hand ; in the performance whereot,ir is fit that tlhe 
me patients friends abfent themfelves from this fad {pectacle, and that the Surgeon bee 
! refolate,and not deterred from his bufineffeby no lamentation, neither of the pati- 
+ ooenor his friends. But for that we write thefethings chiefely for the benefit of 
| young practicioners, it feemeth meet, that having delivered thefe things in general, 
| of reftoring the thigh-bone, that we rua over thefe generalities in each particular, 
beginning with thar diflocation which is made inwardly. 


628 Concerning Diflocations or Luxations. Litas 


whereunto the head inclineth ; to wit, it muft be forced outwards if it bee fallenin 
wards, and contrary inthe reft, asthe kind of the diflocation fhall bee. Some ro, 
clownifh and ignorant knot-kaitters faften the lower ligature Selow the ankle, ang 
thus the joynts of the foot and knee are more extended than that of the bi PP or hue. 
ae kle-bone,for that they are neercr to the ligature,& confequently to the active force. 
but they ought to doe otherwile stherefore in a diflocared fhoulder, you thall norg, 
By ftenthe ligatures to the hand or wreft, butaboverthe elbow. But if the hands tha) 
iy) a notbe fuficient for this worke, then muft you make ufe of engines. Wherefore the, 
Here muftbefaite- ghe patient being placed as is fit,and the affected part firmcly held,fome round thing 
ne a nore thall be put into the groine, and the patients knee, together with his whole leg thal] 
iene cended. be drawne violently inwards, cowards the other leg. And in the meane while, the 
head of thethigh bee trong) forced towards the cavity Of the huckle-bone. 


and fo at length reftored,as the following figure fhewcs. 
A figure which manifefteth the way of reftoring the thigh.bone difjocated inwards, 


; A generall When the head of the thigh by juft extenfion is freed from the mufcles where- 
Hid: ee with it was infolded, andthe mufcles alfo extended that they may give way and This kind 
BE ‘ yeeld themfelves more pliant, then muft the rope be fomewhat flaked, and then you thigh or hip 
he muft alfo defift from extending ,otherwife the reftitution cannotbee performed,for FR drawne bac 
that the ftronger extenfion of the engine wil the hand of the Surgeon, thrutting themfelvest 
aie and forcing it into the cavity. This precept muft bee obferved in the reftoring of without.whi 
wiry this & other diflocations. You fhall know thatthe thigh is reftored by rhe equality other circum 
Pe ae of the legs,by the free & paineleffe extenfion & inflection of the lame leg. Laftly,by 
theapplication of agglutinative medicines (whereof we have formerly {poken) the 
EP reftored bone thal be confirmed in its place; to which purpofe ligation {hal be made, 
A the ligature being firft caft gee the place whereinto the head of the thigh fell,and 
if thence brought to the oppofite or found fide by the belly and loynes. In the meane 
H. while the cavity of the groine muft bee filled with fomewhat a thicke bolfter which n) 
pak | : may keepthe head of thebone in the cavity. Neithermuft you omit junks ftretclied —— 


down even tothe ankles,as we have obferved in the fracture of the thigh. Then mult 
both thethighs bebound together, wherby the diflocated member may be unmové- 


ie able,and more & more ftrengthned. Neither muft this dreffing be loofed, until foure ‘ 
or fivedayes be paffed, unleffe peradventurethe fudden happening of fome othet We 
ig more grievous fymptome fhall perfwade otherwife. To conclude,the patient mult ORS 
bee kept in his bed for the {pace ofa moneth, that the relaxed mufcles, nerves andi: it with his k 
gaments may have {paceito recover their former ftrength,otherwife,there is danget oned to‘co 
left the bone may againe fall out by the too forward and {peedy walking upon. 
fratl, For the fite of the thigh it muft be placed and kept in amiddle figure,yer this middie 


figure confilts in the extenfion,not in the flexion, as it is demonftrated by :ppoe™ 
ses, tor that juch a figureis familiar and accuftomable to the legge. 
CHAP, 


O 
| forthis purpe 
; 
| 
| 
a i 


BAG. 


ds it bce fallen jn 
bali bee. Some toe 
clon the ankle and 
ofthe hipp or hy. 
tothe active force. 
ier, YOu fhall nor 
sutif the hands (hai 
vos. Wherefore then 
round thin 
his Whole leg thai} 
while, the 
of the huckle-bone. 


inwards, 


th» mufcles where- 
may give way and 
flaked, and then you 
performed, for 
Sire con,thrufting 
dit che reftoring of 
red by che equality 
larac leg. Laftly,by 
ornmerly {poken) the 
gat.on be made, 
of the chigh fell,and 
bynes. Inthe meane 
hicke bolfter which 
omit junks ftrerched 
Bhe thigh. Then mutt 
et nay be unmove- 

loof{ed,until foure 
Ding of fome other 
de ithe patient mult 
ulc es, nerves and li- 
wile there is danget 
dy walking upon it. 
yorthis middle 
ftrited by 


Sc. 
CuarP- 


< 


L1B.16. Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations, 629 


> 


CrarXLy. 
Ofrefloring theT high diflocated outwardly. 


pox HE patient muft bee placed groveling upon a table in this kinde of 
fe; diflocation alfo,and ligatures as before,caft pon the hip and lower part 
y hee of the thigh,then extenfion muft be made downewards,and counter-ex- 
tenfion upwards ; then prefently the head of the bone mult bee forced 
by the hand of the Surgeon into its place. If the hand bee not fufficient 
for this purpofe,our pulley muft be ufed,as the following figure fheweth. 


A figwre which expreffeth the manuer of reftering the Thigh 


luxated outwards. 


This kind of diflocation isthe eafilyeft reftored of all thefe which happen in the When icisthae 
thigh or hip, fothat J have divers tmes obferved the head of the thighto have been p<? “rmen 
drawne backe into its cavity bythe oncly regreffe of the extended mufcles into mallets 
themfelves towards their originals, fomewhiles with a noyfe or pop, otherwhiles “igh. 
without,which being done, laying a compreffe uponthe joynt,you fhall perform all 
other circumftances as before in an internal] diflocation. 


Cr ay. XLVI. 
Of reftoring the T hich diflocated forewards, 3 | 


Sonal Hen the thigh is luxated forewards, the patient muft bee laidupon: 
his found fide, andtyed as wee have formerly delivered. ‘Then 
85/91 the Surgeon fhall lay a Boulfter upon the prominent head of the 
\W bone,and havea care that his fervant firmely hold it: chen imme- 
MAMeS|| diately jult extenfion being made, he hall with his hand forcethe 
bone into the cavity;but if his hand will not ferve,he thal! actempe. 
itwith 


his knee. Thento conclude he fhall ufe the reft of the things formerly menti- 
oned tocontaine the reftored bone. 


Gee 3 


i 
— 

| 

| | 

| | 


430 Concerning Diflocations or Luxations, 


Cwar. XLVII. 
of veftoring the Thigh dsflacated backwards, 


on 00 ient fhall be placed groveling upon atable or bench, and the men. 
ae in the reft, one ligature ftretched from the 
eon fhall endeavour to force back with 


BW cher fromthe knee; then the Surgeon 

ei eS his hand that which ftands up, and alfoto draw away thekace from the 

ae found legge. The bone thus placed and reftored, the cure requires nothing elfe, than 
ve ie to be bound up and kept long in bed, left that the thigh, ifit fhouldbe moved the 

et moréloofe, might againe fall our, Forthe thigh is in great dan. 

for thatthe cavity of the Huckle-bone is oncly depreft, as farre ast 

burden of the hanging or adjoyning Thigh is heavie. 


nerves being y 
ger of relapfe, 
goes in, andthe 


Crar. XLVIII. 
Ofthediflocatson of the Whirle.bone of the knee. 


thehand wi 
engine, as y 


The differen. 


| ccs. 
| The cure. 


Cuar. X LIX. 
Of the diflocated Knee, 


sei He knee alfo may be diflocated three manner of waies, that is, into thein- 
y.% ner, outer, and hinde part, but very feldom towards the forefide and that 
“o? | not without fome grievous and forcible violence ; forthe Whirle-bone 
lyinguponit, hinders it from flipping out, andholdsit in. Theochr 
wayesare eafic, becaule the cavity of the leg-bone is fuperficiary and very {mooth, 
a bur the cavity of the lower end of the thigh-bone is made in the maner of a {pout of 
gutter,& befids the head therof is very {mooth and flippery; bur the whole joint is 
muchmore laxe than thejoiat of the Elbow : fo that asit may be the morceafily di- 
flocated, fomay it the better be reftoreds and as it may be the more eafily, fo may * 
be the more fafely diflocated, for that inflammation is lefle to bee feared here, 
isobferved by Hippocrates. Falls from high, leaping, andtoo violent mnning are the 
caufes ofthis diflocation. T he figne thereof is the difability of bending or litcing up 
Howtore  theleggetothe chigh, fo that the patient cannot touch his buttocke with his heele- 
ame The diflocation of the knee which is inwardly and outwardly is reftored withia- 
. backwards, different extenfion and torcing of the bones into their feats from thofe parts where- 
| unto they have fallen. But to reftore a diflocation made backwards, the patient 


a | be placed upon a bench of an indifferent height, fo that the Surgeon may bebe 


hind 
him 


| 
16. 
him 
petwixt his 
jew of ye 
am nlet anot 
Cc 
<5 
| Whirle-bone of the knee may fall forth into the inner, outter, upper 
is 
Je 
a 
t 
4 
Tt 
You tha 
dj . Vx 


the mem. 
groine, ano. 
(0 force back with 
y he knce from 
Snot hing e] fe, than 
otlld be moved, the 
igh is in great 
. preit, as farre as jr 
avie. 


outter, Upper 
the bones which it 
wit ftand with his 
Surgeon muft force 
ermaturally flidden, 
up with boliters, fo 
anger ot the falling 
n the fide efpecially 
whirl-bone its {elf. 
at it may notftirrea 
that the patient try 
th hee fhall find chat 


thatis, into thein- 
1e torefide and that 
the Whirle- bone 
lis it in. The ocher 
and very fmooth, 
iganer of a {pout oF 
ur the whole joint is 
ethémorceafily di- 
eafily, fo may 
bee feared here, 2! 
minning 
bending or litung¥ 
O-ke with his heele- 
is reftored 
hofe parts where- 
TCS, patient thal 


be behio 
econ may hin 


him who 


icv 
ne he lame legge that the heele thereof may couch his buttocks. 


may bend with both his hands & bring to his buttocks the patients leg put 
wixt hisowne legges. But if the reftitution doe not thus fucceed, you muft make 
jew of yearn, and faftenit upon the midft of a ftaffe, let one put this into the cavi- 

of his ham, upon the place whereas the bone (tands our,and fo force it forwards 5 
jer another cafta ligature of fome three fingers breadth upon his knee, and 
wards with his hands,then prefently and at once they all fhall fobendand 


Cuar.L, 
Of 4 knee d:flocated forewards, 
 werceut if the knee bee diflocated forwards (which feldome happens) the pa- 


and. another clo‘ebeneath theknee. Thenthe Surgeon fhall fo long 
ex, prefle downe with both his handsthe bone which ts out of j ant, unell 
* itfhall returnetoits place againe To which purpofe it the itrength of 


thehand wiil not ferve tomake juftextenfion each way, youmay make ule ot ous 


engine, as you may perceiveby this following figure, 


A figure fhewing the mauner of refering a knee diflocased foriwards. 


—~ 


= — 
| 
ill 
"LMM 


You fhall know that the boneis r:ftored by the freeand painele ff extenfion of 
the legoe then will cheir bee place for medicines, boul ters and ftrengrhening ligr- 
tures, In the meane fpace the patient fhall forbeare going, fo longas the part thall 
feemeto require. 


Cu ar.Ll. 
Of the feparation of the greater and leffir Focile. 


BS ankle. But it may bee pluckt or drawne afide three manner ot waies, that 
8 is,forwards,and toeach fide: this chance happens when in going we take 
lure footing, fo thar wee flip with our feete this way and that way asin a flippery 


Place, and fo wreftit inwards or outwards ; for then the weight of our body lying 


open 


tient fhall be placed upon a table and acvavenient lization made above, Thecure: 


He Fibuldorlefler Focile is fattened and adherestothe Tibia, leg-bone, thejoyning of 
or greater Focile without any cavity, above at the knceand below at che theleasnd 


631 
: 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
a 
4 
SSS 
| A LAM 
SSS SS 
BS 
| 
= 


Differences 
and fignes. 


632 Concerning Diflocations or Luxaticns. 


Li B16 


— 


upon it, drawes the legge as it were, infunder, fo chat the one Focile is diflc ated 
Eanes from the other. The fame may happen bya fall from an high place, ~ 
fome grievous and bruifing blow : befidesalfo, their appendices are fomtimes f 


Thecure. rated fromehem. Forthe reftoring of allrhefe into their proper places, ir is fir they 


bee drawne and forced by the hand of the Surgeon into theirfeats : then hall th 

be firaitly bound up, putting comprefies to that part unto which the Fiba/ flew: be. 
ginning alfo your ligation at the very luxation, tortheforementioned reafons, F he 
patient fhall reft forty daics, to wit, as long as fhall bee futhcient for the ftrengthe. 


ning of the ligaments. 


— 


CHAP. 


ofthe Leg-bone or greater Focile diflocated and divided 
from the Pafterne bone. 


UINCE Lfothe Leg-bone is fometimes diflocated,and divided from the pafterne 
Vie bone, as wellinwardly, as outwardly, which may bee knowne by the 


<@ fwelling out of che bone to this or that part ; if it be onely a fubluxition 
@® or ftraine,it may bee cafily reftored, by gently forcing it into the place 
againc. After the bone fhall be reftored,it fhall be kept fo by compreffesand fir de. 
ligation, by croffeand contrary binding to the fide oppofite to that towards which 
the bone fell, that foalfoin fome meafure itmay bee more and more forced into irs 
place. Jn the mean time you muft havea care that you doe not too ftraitly prefle rhe 

reat and largetendon which isattheheele. Thiskinde of diflocation is reftored ig 
Poety dayes, unlefie fome accident happen which may hinderic. 


C H A P.. L III. 
Ofthe diflocasion ef the Heele, 


Ss Hofoever leaping from an high place have fallen very heavie upon 
JAY ff} their heele, have their heelediflocated and divided from thepa- 
\WIRIAL fternebone. This diflocation happens more frequently inwardly 
than outwardly, becaufe the prominency of the leffer Focileem- 
=) 9 braces the pafterne bone ; whence ir is, that there it is more {trait- 
ly and firmely knit. Itis reftored by extenfion and forcing it in, 
_ which will beno very difficult matter, unlefle fome great defluxi- 
Thecuré = on or inflammation hinder it. Forthe binding up, it muft bee ftraiteft in the part af- 
fected, thatfo the bloud may be prefled from thence into the neighbouring parts; 

yet ufing fuch a moderation, that it may not bee painefull, nor preffe more (traitly 

than is fit, the nerves and groffe tendon which runnes tothe heele. This diftocation 

is not confirmed before the fortieth day though nothing happen which may hinder 

it. Yet ufually ithappeneth that maay fymptomes éenfue by the vehemency of the 

contufion. Wherefore it will not be amiffero handle them in a particular chapter. 


Caulesand 
differences. 


Cuapre.Lly. 
Of the Symptomes which follow upon the contufion of the Heel. 

hy blond-let- T happeneth by the vehemency of this contufion, that the veines 
and arteries do as. it were vomit up bloud both through the fecret 
inthe fracture [ASI Ex) pafiages of their coates,asalfo by their ends or orifices, whence an 
ofa | Ecchymofis or blackneffe over all the heel, paine, {welling,and 
Cher the like enfue,which implore remedics,& the Surgeons helpe, 

Prip. (ef2.3.de Wit,convenicnt diet, and drawing of bloud by opening aveine 


(of which though H:ppocrates makes no mention, yet it is here 


quilite by reafon of the feaverand inflimmation) andif need require purgation, 
prints 


is as it were 
much viole 
contrary p 
of medicin 
that bone 
burden, an 


on of local 
otherwife u 
| {o chat dive | 
med before 
convullio 
reafon the 
aver with 
ing upon 
Therefore 
forme the 
mortificatt¢ 
getlic rwit 
forthe cor} 
| by the ner 
mufcles of 
| ed and 
ou 
| 
ACs 
| firdupon 
wie is hand 
| tOcither fic 
| 


bcile is diflocateg Or 


tded 


d from the pafte, 
bee knowne by the 
onely a fubluxation 
ng it into the place 
mpreflesand fit de. 
that towards which 
more forced into irs 
00 ftraitly preffe the 
cation is reftored in 


n very heavie upon 
ivided from the pa- 
requently inwardly 
he lefler Focile em- 
ere itis more ftrait- 
on and forcing it in, 
fome great defluxi- 
aiteftin the part af- 
eighbouring parts ; 
prefle more {traitly 
le. This diffocation 

which may hinder 
e vehemency of the 
particular chapter. 


eHeel, 


ion, that the veines 
; through the fecret 
orifices, whence an 
ne, fwelling,and o- 
he Surgeons he!pe, 
by opening 4 veine 
on, yerit is here re- 
require purgation, 

princi- 


a 
a 


(1B. 16. Concerning Diflocations, or Luxations. 
—cipally fuch as may divert the matter by caufing vomit, and laftly the applicati- . 
of locall medicines, chiefly {uch as may foften and rarifie the skin undet the heel, 

-rwife ufually hard and thick (fuch as are fomentations of warme water & oile) 
shat divers times wee are forced to {carificit with alancer, the quicke 
a¢fh. For (oat length ehe blood poured forth into the part, andehere | up, is 
nore calily attenuated and at length refolved. But thefe things muft all bee perfor- 
med before the inflammation {caze upon the part, otherwife there will be danger of 
,convulfion. For the bloud, wien it falls out of thevelicls, readily putrefics, by whytheheele 
-egfon the denfity of this part hinders it from ventilation and dif perfing tothe adja- is {abject to in. 
vent parts. Hereto may be added that the large and great ‘Tendon which coversthe "™™m 
heele, isendued with exquifite fenfe, and alfo the part it {eife ison every fide f pred 
aver with many nerves. Befides alfo there is further danger of inflammation by ly- 
ing upon the backe and heele, as we before admonithed you in the Fracture of a leg. 
Therefore I tvould have the Surgeon to bee here moft attentive and diligent to per- 
forme thefe things which we have mentioned, left by inflamationa Gangrene and 
mortification (for here the fanious ficfh-prefently fails upon che bone) happen to- 

ether with a continued and fharp feaver, with trembling, hicketting and raveing. 
For the corruption of this part firft by contagion affailes the next, andthence a fea- 
yer aflailes the heart by the arteryes prefled and growing hot by the outride heat, & 
by the nerves and that great and notable tendon made by the concourfe of thethree Gal. ad ix» » 
muicles of the calfe of the legge, the mufcles, braine and ftomach are evilly affect- ‘alt es 
-danddrawne into confent, and fo caufe convulfions, raving and a deadly hicket-- 


ting. | 


— 


Cuar. LY. 
Of the diflocated pafterne or Ancle-bone. 


~ 


bie Astragalus or Pafterne bone may bee diflocated and fallout of its 

to every fide. Wherefore when it falls out cowards the inner 
Bey Part, the fole of the foot is turned outwards, when it flyes out to the 
Jp) contrary, the fign isalfo contrary : if it be diflocated tothe forefide, 
oF Ai on the hinde fide the broad Tendon comming vader the heel is har- 

dened and diftended , but if it be luxated backwards,che whole heel 

isasit were hidinthefoot : neither doth this kinde of diflocation happen without 
much violence. It is reftored by extending it withthe hands, and forcing it into the Cure, 
contrary partto that from whence it fell. Being reftored it is kept fo by application 
ofmedicines and fit ligation. The patient mutt keepe his bed long in this cafe, ich 
that bone which fuftcines and bears up the whole body, may agaiae finke under the 
burden, and breake out, the finewes being not well knit and ftrengthened. 


> 


| 


‘ 


a 


Crar. LVI. 
Of the diflocation of the Inftep and backe of the fost. 


af22. 6B He bones aifo of the Inftep and backe of the foot may be iuxated end that 

y Re either upwards or downwards, or to one fide, though feldome fidewife, 

~) (@e forthe reafon formerly rendred, {peaking of the diflocation of thelike __ 

bones of the hand. Ifthat they ftand upwards,then patient tread 

we upon fome plaine or evenplace, andthen the Surgeon by preffing them with 
fl hand fhall force them into their places ; on the contrary, if they ftand our of rhe 

the foote, then muft you preflethem thence upwards, and reftore eacli bone 
‘its place. They may bee reftored afterthe fame manner if they bee flowne out 


‘Ocither fide, But you muft note that although the ligatures confift but of onc ucad | 
in 


| 
Place, Or 
5 are fomtimes fepa. 
places, itis fir they 
acs then thal! they | 
the Fibsla flew. 
; be. 
loned reafons. The | 
nt for the ftrengthe. 
| 
| 


634. Concerning Di(locations, or Luxations. 


in other diflocatious, yet here Hippocrates would have {uch ufed as havetwo heade 
for thatthe diflocation happens more frequently from below upwards, or f; wes. 
bove downewards, than fidewife. 


Sent.14. (e442, 
defiath. 


Of the diflocation of the Toes. 


FOw the Toes may bee foure waies diflocated, even asthe fingers of 
the hand ; and they may bereftored juft after the fame manner, th, 
lis, extend them dire@ly forth, and then force each joint into its place 

‘Aviand laftly bind them up as is fitting. The reftitution of all of them jc 
cafie, for that they cannot farretran{greffe their bounds. To conclude 

the feet are diflocated and reftored by the fame meanes as thofe of the 
hands, but that when as any thingis diflocated in the foote, the patient mutt keepe 
his bed, but when any thing is amiffe in the hand, he muft carry it ina {carfe. The pa. 
tient muft reft twenty dayes, that is,untill he can firmely ftand upon his feet. | 


— — 


Cuarv. LVIIL. 


Of the [ymptomes, and other accidents which may befall a broken or 
diflocated member. 


SQ_bf Any things may befall broken or diflocated members by the meanes of 
NS tAoA the fracture, or diflocation; fuch as are bruifes, great paine, inflam. 
A mation, a fever, impoftume, gangrene, mortification, ulcer, fi/fw/s, and 
ANAS B atrop/ia, all whichrequirea skilfull and diligent Surgeon fortheir 
Remedict fora cure. Acontufion happens by the fallof fome heavie thing uponthe 
contuion. part, or bya fall fromhigh, whence followes the effufion of bloud poured out un- 
der the skinne : which if it be poured forth in great plenty, miuft be [peedily evacus- 
ted by fcarification, and the part eafed of that burden, left it thould thence ganegre. 
nate. And by how much the bloutd fhall appear more thick and the skin more denfe, 
by fomuch the {carification fhall bemade more deepe. You may alfo forthefame 
purpofe apply leaches. 
sar Pt Concerning paine wee formerly faid, that itufually happens by reafon thatthe 
pen’y PANS: bones are moved out of their places, whience it happeneth that they become trou- 
blefome tothe mufcles and nerves by pricking and preffing them. Hence enfucin- 
fiammations, as alfo impoftumation and a feaver, ofttimes a gangrenc, and in con: 
clufion a mortification corrupting and rotting the bones ; otherwhiles a finuousul- 
cer Butan Atrophia and leanenefle arifeth by the floth and idleneffe of the 
member decaying all the ftrength therof, and by too {trait ligation intercepting the 
paflages of the bloud otherwife ready to falland flow thither, 
Remediesfor . Nowtheleannefle whichis occafioned by too ftrait ligation receives cure by the 
pre flackening of the ligatures wherewith the member was bound, That which pro- 


- oe ceeds froin idleneffe ishelped by moderate exercife, by extending, bending, wie 
upand deprefling the member, if fo bee that he can away withexercife. Orherwite 
he fhall ufe friGions and fomentations with warme water. The frictions mutt be mo- 
derate in hardeneffe and gentleneffe, in length and fhortneffe. The fame moderatl- 
wwe one on fhall be obferved in the warmne(s of the water,and in the time of fomenting. Fot 
menting.  toOlong fomenting refolves the blood that is drawne. But that which is too little 0° 
fhort a{pace drawes little or nothing atall: after the fomentation, hot and emp!*- 
ftick medicines made of pitch, turpentine, euphorbium, pellitory of Spzine, falphur, 
and the like, fhall beeapplyed. They hall bce renuedevery day morc often of (cl. 
dome, asthe thing it felfefhall feeme to require. Thek 


L 18.16 
Thefeme 
piaci odeltt 
i, nxib 
Art 
found parts 
of nourithm 
continuing 
che le ft fhall 
rrion of t 
being diften 
moft empty 
may draw t 
fre(h the we 
Some wil 
thus, fay th 
opening a vi 
{omewhat 
bloud is dra 
na and falva 
grow hot, r¢ 
trary happe 
Furtherm 
diflocations 
fomentatio 
lowes, brio 
ved in {trons 
liquida, and 
you mult w 
thatit beno 
nuated, and 
perform it 
weake and | 
of his life t 
none at all, ¢ 
and laftly, if 
times happ 


= 
— — — 
¥ 
J 
‘ 
ur 
4 
4 
i 
+ 

* 

Bowe 


as havetwo head< 


Thefe medicines are termed Drepaces ; whofe formeisthus. K picis nigre,ammo. 
wards, or from 2. 


Odell, gummi clemi in aquavita di fJolutorum an. olet laurini 31. palveris pr- 


ai, Ting sberts, granorum parads fi, baccarum lauri ch An, Sik. frat emplajtrum 
artem, extendatmr fuper alutam. It is alfo goodto binde about the oppolite Binding ofthe 
part with a ligature,yet without pain; as iftheright arme thal! decay for want 


police tothe 


ofnourifhment, the left thall bee bound, beginning \ our ligation at the hand, and emaciated. 


A d-opax. 


aS the fingers of 
ame manner, 
JOIDCINtO Its place, 
mn OF all of them ic 


ods. To conclude some with alfoto bind up the deeaying member with moderate ligation , for Eee 
anes as thofe of the ‘hus, fay they, the bloud is drawne thither ; for when as wee intend to let blood by apc 
patient muft keepe opening a veine witha lancet, we bind the arme. Alfo it is good to dip it into water P**- 
Bina {carfe. The pa. (omewhat more than warme, andhold it there untill it grow red and {well ; for thus 
onhisfeet, bloud isdrawne into the veines, as they find, which ufe to draw blood of the /aphe- 
rand falvatella. Now if,when as thefe things andthe like bee done, the lame part 
x -- grow hot, red and {wollen,then know that health is to be hoped for ; but it the con- 
rary happen, the cafe is defperate, wherefore you need attempt nothing further. 
Furthermore, thereis fometimes hardneffe left inthe joints, after fraQuresand 

broken or diflocations are reftored. Ic is fit to foften this,by refolving the conteined humor by — 
fomentations, liniments, cataplafmes, emplafters made of the roots of Mar{h-mal- 
lowes, briony, lillies, line feed, fenugreek feed, and the like, and alfo of gums diffol- 
rs by the meanes of vedin {trong vineger,as ,labdanum facapenum, (lyrax 


reat paine, inflam. 
n, ulcer, fiftwls, and 
Surgeon fortheir 
vie thing uponthe 


sarinuing itto the Arme-pit. Ifthis mifchance fhall {eaze vpon the right leg, then 
rr left (hall be {wathed up from the fole of the fooretothe in For thane ereat 

«jon of the bloud is forced back into the veracava,or hollow veine,and trom this 
yeing diftended and over full, into the part affected and gaping with the vellels al- 
mot empty 3 befides alfo itisconvenientto keepe the found part in reft, that fo it 
may draw the leffe nourifhment, and by that meanesthere will bee more ftore to re- 
Gelhthe weake part. 


liquide, and Adeps anferinus, gallinaceus, humanus, olenm liliorum, and the like. Alfo 
youmuft wifhthe patientto movethe part ever now andthen, every day, yet fo, 
thatit benot painefull to him, that fo the pent up humour may grow hot, bee atte- 
nuated, and at length difcufled, and laftly the part it felfe reftored as farre as artcan 


ft perform it ; for oft times it cannot be helped any thing atall. For ifthe member be 
ae > . weg weake and lame by reafon that the fracture happened neere the joint, for the refidue 
muld thence ganegre- of his life the motion thereof ufeth to bee painefull and difficult, and oft times 
1e skin more denf{e none at all, efpecially if the Callus which grows there be fomewhat thick and grear; 
ry alfo forthe fam and lattly, ifthe it felfe fhall bee contufed and broken by the ftroake, as it oft 
times happens in wounds made by Gun-fhot. 
B by reafon thatthe 


hey become trou- 
n- Hence enfuc in- 
erenc,and in con- 
vhiles a finuousul- 
ind idlenefle of the 
on intercepting the 


beceives cure by the 

. That which pro- 
ihe, bending, liftiag 
ercife. Orherwite 
ictions mult be mo- 
he fame moderati- 
of fomenting. For 

hich is roo little 
Bon, hot and empla- 
of Spzine, falphur, 
more often oF 


Thele 


The End of the fixteenth Booke: 


® 
i 
j % 
P| 
f 


PRETERNATURALL AF- 
FECTS, 


COMMONLY PERFORMED 
BY SURGERY. 


THe S&VENTEENTH Booxe. 


— 


Crats 
of an Alopecia, 9* the falling asvay of the haires of the head. 


=Abopeciais the falling away of thehaire of the head, and 
WW fometimes alfo of the eye-browes,chin and other parts the 
ACH NAYS || French commonly call itthe Pelade. Phificians terme it the 
Alopecia,for that old Foxes fubje&,by reafon of their age,to 
bavecthe {cab,are troubled oft times with this difeafe. This 
| affectis caufed cither through dete& of nourifhment firto 

Dy\i} nourifhthe haires,as in oldage through want of the radicall 
|} humidity, or by che corruption of the alimentary matter of 
the fame,as after long fevers,in the Lwes vénerea leprofie,the 
corruption of the whole hody and ali the humours, whence followeth a corruption 
ofthe vapoursand fuliginous excrements ; or elfe by the vitious conftitution of the 
pores inthe skin in rarity, and conftri@ion or denfity, as by the too much ufe of hot 
oyntments made for colouring the hair,or fuch as are ufed to take off haire,therefore 
Called Depilatoria, or by the burning of the skin, or loffe thereof, having a {carre in 
ead thereof, by reafon of whofe denfity the baire cannot {pring out,as by too much 
tity the fuliginous matter of the baire ftaycs not, but prefenly vanifheth away. 
The Alopecia which comes by old age,a con{umption, burne, baldnefie,leprofie and 
aicald headyis uncurable: that which admits of cure, the caufe being taken away, is 
iped. Wherefore, it it proceed from the corruption of humonrs,let a Phifician bee 
called, whoas hee {hall thinke ir fit, hall appoint dict, purging and phlebotomie. 
T nthe Surgeon fhall fhave off thar haire which isremaining, and {hall firftufe re- 
olving fomentations,apply Leaches and Horns to digeftthe vicious humour which 
Sunder the skin,then thall he wath the head to take away the filth with a lye where- 
Ntkeroots of Orris and Aloes havebeen boyled. Laftly, hee thall ufe borh artra- 
ve fomentations and medicines for to draw forth the humour which is become 
laudable in the whole body by the benefit of diet fitly appointed. Bur ifthe d/ope- 
“«thall happen through defe@ of nourifhment, the part thai) bee rubbed fo iong 


Galc.2.lib 
COMP. 
locos, 


Thecaufe 


What Alopecia 
uncurable. 
Whar curable, 
ala how. 


Hhh with 


: 
Lis. 17: 627 


Of divers preternaturall Affe 


de comp. 


Thecure. 


For a{caly 
(call. 


An oynrmentr 
for 3 {called 
head. 


The cureota 
erulty {call. 


A poultis of 
Crelics. 


witha courfelinnencloth, ora figge leafe,or onions,untill it waxe red by fides alfo 
the skin fhall bee prickedin many places witha needle,and then ointments applied 
made of Labdanwm, pigeons dung, ftavifager,oile of bayes, turpentine and waxe to 
draw the bloud and matter of the haires. Ifthe haire be loft by the Lues venere, the 
patient fhall be annointed with quickfilver to fufficient f{alivation. To conclude 25 
the caufes of this difeafe thall be, fo muft the remdies be fitted which are ufed. ” 


Crar.lIl. 
Of the Tinea, or {calde Head. 


Tinea (let me fotermeit in Latine, whilft a fitter word may be found) 
ora {cald nead,is a difeafe poflefling the mufculous skin of the head 9, 
the hairy [calpe, and eating thereinto likeamoth. [here are three diffe. 
rencesthereot,the firttis called by Galen fcaly or branlike, for that whilp 
it is {cratched itcafts many branlike {cales : fome Practitioners terine it a dry {cal 
becaufe of the great aduftion of the humour caufing it. Another is called ficofa,a ig. 
like (call,becaufe when it is difpoyled of the cruft or {cab which is yellow, thereap. 
peare graincs of quick and red ficth, like tothe inner feeds or graines of figges, and 
cafting out a bloudy matter. Gal:w names the third Achor, and it is alfo vulgarly ter. 
med the corrofive or v'cerous ical], for that the many ulcers wherewith it abounds 
are open with many {mall holes flowing with liquid fauies like the wafhing of fchh, 
ftinking, corruptand carrion. like, fomewhiles livid, fomewhiles ycllowilh. Thefe 
holes,fthey be fomewhat larger, make another difference which is called Cerion og 
Favofa (thatis,like ahony co-nbe)becaule as Galen thinks,the matter which floweth 
from thefe,refembleth hony in colour and confiftence. They all proceed of an hu- 
mour whichis more or leffe vicious, for alefle corrupt humour caufetha {caly, a 
more corrupt, the fig-like, but the moft corrupt produceth the ulcerous. It it {hail 
happen to an infant by reafon of the fault and coatagion of the nurfe, orelfe 
pretencly after it is borne, it {carce admits of cure ; neither mult we attempr thar be. 
fore the child cometothat age,that he may be able to endure the cure & medicines. 
But you may in the meane while apply the leaves of Colworts or bects befineared 
with freth butrer,or other gentle medicine having a faculty to mollific and open the 
paflage forthe fhurup matter. Thofe who are of fufficient age to away with medi- 
cines, may bleed,purge,bathe,according to art by the advice of a Phifician. Forlo- 
call medicines in afcaly f{call,foftning and difcufling tomentations fhall bee appoit 
ted,made of the roots of marfh-Mallowes, Lillies. Docks, Sorrell boyled in lye with 
a little vineger added thereto. The head fhall bee twice ina day fomented with 
fuch a decoction, and onthe fixth day the haire being (haven off, it {hall bee ca 
rified, and then leaches and hornes put to it fo {carificd. Then it fhall be forthwith 
annoynted with oyle of ftavifager mixed with blacke fope, bothto draw & reprefle 
the malignity of the humour impact in the part. You may alfo ufe the following 
medicine even tothe perfeet cure of the difeafe, as that which is much commended 
in this kind of difeale by 7#¢0,Gordonius,and Gu:do «itis thus made, elleb 
2.912 .ativament auripigments, lithay viva, vitriol alum, zalla. fulig ct 
ner facts vint uftt,an 3%. argentivivs aruginis arts fiat pulvw 
corporetur cum {acco boraginw, [-ab:ole, fumarta, oxylapathi 
que lib.i. bulliant ufque ad confumpt [uccorum, in fine decoction cineres ponantur 
do picts liquide 8. cera quanium fafficit, fiat unguentum: Thefe authorsteflilic that 
this will heale any kind of {cail. Certainely none can diflallow of it who well confi 
dereththe engredicots and compolure thereof. 
A crufty alfo or fig-like {call thali bee fo long fomented with the prefcribes 1 
mentation, untill the crufts or {cabs fall off, yet there is‘hothing fo good and: the 
all as Crefles beaten or tryed with hogs fuct, For it will make it fall off inche 
of foure and twenty hourcs, befides,ifit be continued it will heale them through!» 


as [nave knowne by experience, and reafon alfo ftands therewith ; for according A 
G 


aie 
maine on fo 
the haire, th 
way therew 
For the tl 
cation 1s to 
mercurio 
ul fiat 
any paine O 
Aion of ton 
Scalls have 
yoch.vt trios 
Ci, 
lyech rottin 
ced places ,é 
not be cures 
troubledina 
with an oin 
fame may 
ry warme c 
cure was fir 
acertaine y 
dicines. A 
virulent an 
ficultly. Fe 
of the impr 
corrupts th 
pecia behing 
judge it bef 


Galen, Cre 
uf 

ny with a ilt 

what more 
hairy fcalpe 
more readil 
de with th 

@ , 

#¢g felfe bej 
Cen, live 


red bi fides alfo 
Oumments applied 
encime and Waxe to 
ne Lwes venerea the 
Toconclude r. 


y hich are ufed. 


vord may be found) 
Skin of the head 
here are three diffe. 
like, for that whilf 
terme it a dry {cal}, 
Scalled ficofa,s fig. 
i$ ycllo there ap. 

unes of hgges, and 

iSalfo vulgarly ter. 
lerewith it abounds 
hie wafhing of Acth, 
esycllowifh. Thefe 
h is called Cerionor 
patter Which foweth 
|! proceed of an hu- 
r caufetha {caly,a 
uleerous. If it fhail 
yf the nurfe, orelfe 
we attempt chat be- 
e cure & medicines. 
orbects befineared 
iollific and open the 
roaway with medi- 
Ba Phifician. Forlo- 
fhali bee appoit- 
boy led in lye with 
day fomented with 
off, it {hall bee ica- 
it be forthwith 
hco draw & reprefle 
ule the following 
simuch commended 
bade, elleb 
alum, calla, fulig ct 
Dj ig pulves 
quart, anti 
suthors teftifie that 
>t it who well coal 


the prefcribes 
good and« 
t tall off inthe {pace 
throughly» 


ch according 


Lis. 17- whofe Cure ss performed by Surgery. = 


geéted {hall bee annoynted with the formerly prefcribed oint 
“witha little oyle of vitrioll, and fometimes alfo with 
mi at more ftrong than ordinary. But if the root of the ha 
fhall bee plucked out one by one ; yet if fuch putrefaction thall pofleffethe whole 
piiry fealpe, and trouble all the roots ofthe haire, that you may plucke chemur the 
morereadily, & with leffe paine, you may befmeare a corten. cloth on the rougher 
with this following mediciae. K, picts migra 5vi. pics ref, pul. viridis Aplaifterro 
vitriol roman, 5i.vel 5 6. falpbur. viv.58. coguantur fimulin aceti acérim, 
[uffictente,fiat medicamentum ad ufum: let it beapplyed tothe head: 


d 3 
“aine on for two dayes ;then let it bee quickly and forcibly plucked awa sand re 


she haire, that fo the haires {ticking to the plaifter may by thas meanes be 


therewith : you fhall ufethis medicine fo long as need fhall em to reau; 
the third kind of fcall which istéermed a Corrofive or thie firftindi. Thecuze ctan 
cation is tO cleanfe the ulcers with this following ointment. Ke wngwenss enulati cam ieall. 
mercury to duplicate ya 14C 10l,albi pulver edact perent uy fi- 
ul fiat ad #fum;allo you may ufe the formerly defcribed ointment. Burif 
aine or other accident fall out,you muft withftand it by che affitance and dire. 
gion of fome good Phifitian; verily thefe following medicines againft all kinds of 
Scalls have been found out by reafon, and aepeeres by ufe, kk, Campbur. 5%, alum 
rch vitriol UIT Arts, fulph.vivi,fuli 2. forn.an amy7d, dulciwm axwnzie por- 
ci, an. frmulin mortario, fiat unguentum. Some take the dung which 
lyeth rotting in a theep-fold ; they ufe that which is liquid, & rub it upon the ulcera- 
red places & lay adouble cloth dipped in that liquorupon it. Bur if the patient can- 
notbe cuted with allthefe medicines, & that you find his body in fome parts therof 
troubled in like fort with crafty ulcers,I would wifh that his head might beahointed 
withan ointment made of Axwagia,argentum vivum,& alittle Sulphur ,8& then fitfonn 
emplastrum V igonis cum mercurzo into the fafhion ofa cap; alfofome plaifters of the 4 
fame may be applyed tothe fhoulders,thighs and legs, and fo let him be kept in ave- ares em 


‘ be cured as we 
ry warme chamber, and all chings done asif he had the Lues venerea. This kinde of curethe Lag 


cure was firft (that I know of) attempted by Simon Blanch the Kings Surgeon, upon 
acertaine young man, when as he in vaine had diligently tryed all other ufuall tne- 
dicines. A fcalled head oft-times appeareth very loathfome to the eye,cafting forth 
vitulent and ftinking ames ; atthe firft it is hardly cured,but being old, far more dif- 
fcultly. For divers times it breaketh out afrefh, when you thinke it kild, by reafon 
ofthe impreffion of the maligne putrefaction remaining in the part, which wholly 
corrupts thetemper daereof. Moreover, oft-times being healed, it hath left an Aio- 
peciabehind it,a great fhame to the Surgeons. Which is the reafon, that moft of them 
judge it beft to leave the cure thereof \to Empericks and women. 


iement.T have cured ma- 
Mevptiacum made fome- 
ifes appeare rotten, they 


Cua 
the 


RH E Vertizo is a fudden darkening of the eyes and fight by a vapo- she 
BY rous & hot {pirit which afcendeth tothe head by the fleepy arte- — es 
ryes,and fils the braine, difturbing the humours and fpirits which 
are conteyned there, & tofling roem unequally,as if one ran round, 
or had drunk too much wine. This hor {pirit oft-times rifeth from 
-@e, the heart upwards by the internall fleepy arteryesto the Rete mi- 
rable, or wonderfull net otherwhiles it is generated in the brain, 
its {elf being more hot chan is fitting ; alfo it oft.times arifeth from the ftomack,. 
pleen, liver and other entrals being too hot. The figne ot this difeafe is the fudden .,. Gees 
ng of the fight,and the clofing upas it were ofthe eyes,the body being light- 
ly turned about, or by looking upon wheeles running round, or whirle pits wa 
e Hhbhh2 ters. 


> 
| 


Of divers preternaturall Affctts, Li 


A criticall Var- 


The differen. 
ces. 


ters, or by looking downe any deepe or fteep places. It the orizinall of the 
proceed fromthe braine, the patients are troubled with the head-ach, heavinesfe of 


the head, and noyfe inthe eares, andoft-times they lofetheirfmell. Paslus Bering. 


ta forthe cure bids us to open the arteries of the temples. But if the matter o¢ the 


difeafe arife from fome other place, as from fome of the lower entrals, fuch One. 


ning of an artery little availeth. Wherefore then fome skilful! Phifician muft be Con. 


fulted with,who may give direGions for phleboromie, if the original of the difeafe 


proceed from the heat of the entrals ; by purging, if occafioned by the foulene(j, of 
the ftomack. Butiffucha Vertige bea criticall fymptome of fome acute difcafe a; 
feGing the Crifis by vomit or bleeding,then the whole butinefle of freeing the Pati. 
ent thereof muft be committed to nature. 


Of the Hemicrania,or Megrim. 


wemesié HE Meprim is properly a difeale affecting the one fide of the head 
vnp\ right, orleft. It fometimes paffeth no higher than the temporal! my. 
icles, otherwhiles it reacheth tothe toppe of the crowne. The cayic 
4 ot {uch paine proceedeth eyther from the veynes and externall arte. 
ryes, or from the meninges, ot fromthe very fubftance of the braine, 
or from the perscranium, or the hairy {calpe covering the perscranium, or lafty, from 
putride vapours arifing to the head from the ventricle, wombe, or other inferiour 
member. Yet an externall caufe may bring this affe@, to wit, the too hot orcold 
conftitution of the encompafling ayre, drunkennefle, glutrany, the ufe of hoe and 
vaporous meates,fome noyfome vapour or {moake, as of Antimony, quick-filver, 
orthe like, drawne up by the nofe, which is thereafon that Gold{mythes, and {uch 
as gilde mettals are commonly troubled with this difeafe. But whence foeverthe 
caufe of the evill proceedeth, it is either afimple diftemper, or with matter ; with 
matter, I fay, which againe is either fimple or compound, Now, this affectis either 
alone, or accompanied with other affects, as inflammation andtentfion. The hea. 
vineffe of head argues plenty of humour; pricking, beating and tenfion fhewesthat 
there is plenty of vapours mixed withthe humours, and thut up in the nervous, at- 
terious,or membranous body of che head. Ifthe paine proceed from the inflamed 
meninges,atever followeth thereon, efpecially, ifthe humour caufing paine doe 
trefic. If the paine be fuperficiary, itis feated inthe pericranium. If profound, deep 
and piercing to the botome of the cyes, itis an argument that the meninges arcafic. 
&ed,and afeaver enfucs, if there be inflammation, and the matter putrefic; and then 
oft-times the tormenting paine is fo great and grievous, that the patient is affraid (0 
have his head touched, if it be but with your finger, neither can hee away with any 
noife, or {mall murmuring, nor light, nor fmcls however {weet, no nor the fumeot 


Inwhatkind of Wine, The paine is fometimes continuall,otherwhiles by fits. If the caufe of the pai 
Megrimtheoe proceed from hot, thin & vaporousbloud, which will yeeldtono medicines, 2 Very 


neceflary, profitable & {peedy remedy may be had by opening an artery i the 
ples, whether rhe difeafe proceed from the internall or externall veffels. For, hence 
alwayes enfueth an evacuation of the conjunct matter, bloud and fpirits. | have 

A huftory- rimented this in many,but efpecially inthe Prince de Roche. fwr-you, His Phy- 


itians, when hee was troubled with this gricvous Megrim, were C haplaine, che 
Kings, and Caitellane, the Qucenes chiefe Phifitians, and Lewes Duret, whoo 
withftanding couldhelpe him nothing by bloud-letting, cupping, bathes, f:1cti0™ 
diet orany other kind of remedy either taken inwardly or applyed outward! y.] be- 
ing called, faid,that there was oncly hope one way to recover his health,which¥* 
to open the artery of the temple in the fame fide that the paine was ; for ! thought!" 
obable,thar the caufe of his pain was not contained in the veins,burin the artes 


4n which cafe by che teftimony of che ancients, there was nothing better shar 4 
ope 


the artery, 
artery from 
divi it,as 
on of men \ 
experience 
doe in open 
fomewhat 
bloud will! 
fouredayes 


offending 
dering the 
laftly, oth: 
ment. No 
parts of the 
other fome 
G laucoma, 
by reafont 
‘ye, the gr 
Proceeds 2 & 
Other, bec 
‘roublefo 
lar palfieo 
Owne of 
that thofe vim 
fanke, by 
thus a 
UMour we 
fome tothe 
haires, fo 
1S fit, bef 
thereof iy 
More than 
“inde of ag 
ted, takea 
“aking hold 


great good. 
uF hetake MY 
was both che 
| pected bym 
| | Garrize the p 
| | 
| 
Noy 


7. 
zinall of the dif cafe 
-ach, heavinetfe 
nell. Paulus Ezine. 
if the matter of thy. 
rentrals, fuch Ope. 
hifitian mutt be con. 
iginal of the 
by the fouleneffe of 
me acute difcafe as 
Of freeing the pati. 


fide of the head, 
nthe temporal! mu- 
crowne. The caule 
and externallarte- 
ance of the braine, 
anium, Or lafty, from 
Or other infcriour 
, the too hot orcold 
, the ufe of hot and 
imony, quick-filver, 
yid{mythes, and fuch 
t whence foever the 
br with matter with 
w, this affect is either 
dtenfion. The hea- 
d tenfion fhewes that 
up in the nervous, ar- 
d from the inflamed 
caufing paine doe pu- 
y. If profound, deepe 
the meninges arcafic- 
ter putrefic; and chen 
he patient is affraid to 
n hee away with any 
et, no nor the fumeo 
the caufe of the pain 
no medicines, a Very 
an artery ithe cea 
ali veficls. For, hence 
nd fpirits. have 
His Phy- 
were Chaplaine, 
ewes Duret, Who 
ping, bathes, fictions 
plyed ourwardly be- 
his health, which 
ewas for I thought 
‘ins, butin the 


erthant 
othing bert opt: 


ltis fit, be 
thereof 


thanisrequifice, the eye-lid fhould remaine turned up, and fo caufe another 
Of which the ancients have called E@ropion, Tneathe eye being cove- 


— 


or bleeding of an artery, whereof had made tryallupon my felfeto m 
Whenas the Phyfitians had approved of this my peckently 
Setae my felfe to the work, and choofe out the artery in the pained temple; which 
was poth the more {wolne and beat more vehemently than the reft. I openthis, as 
wee ule to. doe 10 the bleeding of a veine, with one incifion, and take morethantwo 
cers of blood flying out with great violence, and leaping ; the paine prefently 
sealed, neither did it ever moleft him againe. Yet this opening of an Artery is fuf- 
bymany, for that it is troublefome to ftay the guthing forth bloud, and ct- 
qrizethe place, by reafon of the denfity, hardneffe, and continual! pulfationof 
sheartery, and laft ly,for chat when it is cicatrized theremay be d anger of an Anew- 
rj(i4. Wherefore they thinke it better firft ro divide the skin, thento feparate the 
ry from all the adjacent particles, and then to binde it in two places, and laftly 
jivide it,as we have formerly told you muft bedone in Varices. But this isthe opini- | 
on of men who fearall things where there isno caufe ; for have learnt by frequent No 
experience thatthe apertion ofan artery, which isperformed with 2 Lancet, as wee — as 
joc in opening aveine, isnot at all dangerous ; and the confolidation or healing is 
comewhat flower than in aveine, but yet will bee done at length, but that no flux of 


ploud will happen, iffo bee chat the ligation be fitly performed, and remaine fo for 
foyredayes with fitting pledgets. 


— 


Cuapr. V. 


f certaine affects of the eyes, and firft of, faving up the upper 
eye-lidde when it 1s t00 laxe, 


Be F the difeafes which befall the cies; fome poffefs the whole fubftance 

thereof, asthe Ophthatmia,a Phlegmon therof : others are proper and 

\\s peculiar to {ome parts thereof, as that which js termed Gutta ferenato 

the opticke nerve. Whence Galen made athreefold difference of the Differences. 

difeaics of the eyes, aschatfome happened tothe eye by hurting or 

offending the chiefe organ thereof, thatis, the cryftalline humour; others by hin- 

dering the animall facul Ph the chiefe caufer of fight, fromentring intothem. and 

laftly, other fome by offending the parts fubfervient to the prime organ or inftru- 

ment. Now ofall thefe difeafes, the eye hath {ome of them common withthe other 

parts ofthe body, fuchas are an ulcer, wound, phl/egmon, contufion and the like : 

otherfome are peculiar and proper to theeye, fuchas arethe Aizilops, CataraGa, 
Glaucoma, and divers others ofthis kinde. Some have their upper sie-lid falldown, 

reafon that the upper skin thereof is relaxed more than is {ufficientto cover the 

‘ye, the griftle in the meane while not relaxing it felfetogether therewith. Hence 
proceeds a double trouble ; the firft, for that the eye cannot bec eafily openeds the 
other, becaufe the haires of the relaxed eye-lid run in towards the eye, and become 
‘roublefome thereto by pricking it. The caufe of {uch relaxation is either a Particu- Thecaxle. 
lar palfie of thar part, whichis frequentin old people, orthe defluxion or falling 

owne of a watrifh humour, and that notacride or biting, which appeares by this, 
thofe who are thus affe@ted havea ranke of haires growing under the natural) 


ranke, by reafon of the aboundance of heaped up humour, as it is moft probable. For 
‘lus a Wetand marifh ground haththe greateft plenty of graffe. Now ifthis fame 


umour were acride, it would caufe an itching, and confequently become trouble- 
ometo the patient,and it would alfo fret infunder and deftroy the roots of the other 
» fo farre it is fram yeelding matter forthe preternaturall generation of new. 7 
fore you doe any thing for the cure, that you marke with inketheportion 
which is {uperfuous, and therefore to becutaway, left if you thould cut off 


»takeand lift up with your fingers the middle part ofthe skin of the eye-lid, nok, 
8 hold of the griftle beneath it,and it athwart,taking away jaft{o mucli 
as 


17. whofe cure 18 performed by y Si urgery: 
| 
Bis 


Of divers prevernaturall Affetls, 


| BLY, 


Paulas 
6.Cap. is. 


The cure. 


E or 
the turning u 


ex outof che 


Eyelid. 


P sud C20. 56. 


as thall be neceffary to make it as it were naturall ; laftly, joine the lips ot the Wound 
cogether with afimple future ot three orfoure ftiches, that foit may bee 
zed ; forthe cicatrization reftraines the eie-lid from falling downe {0 loofly, arleag 
fome partthereof being taken away. There ought to be fome meafure, and heed ta. 
ken in the amputation, otherwife you muft neceffarily run into the one or other jp. 
convenience, as if too much be cutaway, then the eye will not bee covered, if tag 
little,then you have done nothing, and the patient is troubled to nopurpofe. If there 
fhall bee many haires growne preternaturally, you fhall plucke them away with ap 
inftrument made for the fame purpofe; then their roots fhall be burned witha gen. 
clecautery, the eye being left untouchr, for a {car prefently arifing will hinder them 


from growing againe. 


Cuar. VI. 
of Lagophthalmus, or the Hare eye. 


that they cannot be covered by the too fhort skin of the cyeslids: 


the Greckes terme this affe@, Lagophthalmos, Thecaule is cither 
internall or externall: internall,asby a Carbuncle, Impoftum 
f&)| or Ulcer : externall, as by a wound made by a {word, burn, fall. & 

the like. Ifthis mifhap proceed by reafon of a cicatrization, iris 
cureabie, it {o that the fhort eye-lid be of an indifferent thicknefle, But if it have big 
from the firft conformation, or by fome other meanes, whereby much of the {ub. 
ftanceis loft, asthat which happens by burning and a carbuncle, then iris uacy. 
reable. Forthe cure, you fhallufe relaxing and emollient fomentations, then the 
skinne fhall be divided above the whole [carre, in figure of an halfe moon, with the 
hornes looking downewards. Then the edges of the incifion fhall bee opened, and 
lint pucinto the middle therof, chat fo it may hinder the lips from joyning together 
againe. Then fhall you apply a plafter upon the lint, and fo bind upthe part witha 
fitting ligature that may fomewhat prefle upon the whole eye, left it fhould lifcie 
felfe fomewhat upwards againc, and foreturne into its ancient, but not natural (i- 
gure. But in cutting the skinne, you mufttake care ehat your incifion harme not the 
gri(tle ; for ifit be cut, the eie-lid falls downe, neithercan it be afterwards lifted up. 
But now for the lower eye-lid : it isfubjecto fundry difeafes, amongft which there 
isone which anfwereth in proportionto that, which we late mentioned, whichis, 
whenas itis lifted upwards littleor nothing, but hangsand gapes, and cannotbee 
joyned with the upper, and therefore it doth not cover the eye, which affect is fami. 
liarto old peoples itis called Ectropion, and it may be helped by the means former: 
ly delivered. 


as have their cie-lids too fhort, fleep wich their eyes Open, for 


VII. 


Of, the Chalazion ,or Hat le. fF one, and the Hordeolum er Barly-corne 
of the eye-lids. 


GOR2ASP He Chalazion isaround and cleere pimple which growes upon the upp*t 
EP [Wy cie-lid, it is alfo moveable and may be ftirred this way and that way with 
your fingers : the Latines call it Grando, for thatit refembles a Hail-{ton® 
pSxS Another pimple not much unlike this growes fomtimes upon the vers 
of theeye-lids above the place of thehaires. It is termed Hordeolwm, by realono 
the fimilitude it hath with a barly corne. The matter of thefe is contained in its pf! 
per cift orskin, and therefore is hardly broughtto fuppuration. Ac the firft begia- 
ning it may be refolved and difcuffed. But when as it is once growne and concrete 


into a plafteror ftone-like hardnefft, it is fcarce cureable. Wherefore it is 
perform 


red, and flo 
cure is 
bouring pa 
out (uniefs 
frrenagthen 

dred trom 


an Egse dill 


With their 
perforated 
fe& fomtin 
Mation,as 
fo opening 
otherwife 
Underthe 

dividethe 
Theince 
into theey 
he often ty 
may bee at 
the nighee 
infome yj 
cye-lids fr 
the cie.lidg 
they may | 
2Pple ofr 
(carre wht 


632 
performet 
prefled fore 
dleand thre 
ends thereo 
bead, if icb 
shus atleng 
| 
 & thar, as if d 
hath as it w 
| | 
oe : 
|  bythedefa 
Rbecure. 
| 
Re 


Ly 


lips of the wound 

may bee cicatrj. 
¢loloofly, arleag 
mature, and heed 
ne One Or other in. 
bee covered, iftag 
opurpote. If there 
nem away with ap 
burned with a Pen. 


g willhinder them 


their eyes open. for 
kin of the cyc-lids : 
Thecaule is cither 
uncle, Impoftume, 
{word,burn, fall & 
cicatrization, it is 
e. Bucifit have bin 
by much of the {ub- 
cle, then itis uncu- 
entations, then the 
Ife moon, withthe 
all bee opened, and 
bia joyning together 
dupthe part with a 
, left it fhould lift ic 
, but not naturall fi- 
cifion harme not the 
frerwards lifted up. 
mmonegft which there 
hentioned, whichis, 
pes, and cannorbee 
which affect is fami- 
py the means former: 


Barly-corne 


owes upon the upper 
ay and that way wich 
fembles a Hail-ftone- 
imes upon the verge 
rdevinm, by reafono 
contained in its 
on. Arthe firft begi®- 


Bowne and concrete 


forc it is beftto 
Vhere a forme 


forme the cure by opening them, that fo the contained matrer may flow, or bee 
forth. Ifthe pimple or {welling bee fmall, chen thruft it chrough wich anee- 
dle 


and thread, and leave the thread therein of fuch length that you may faftenthe 
egdsthereof with alittle ofthe emplafter called Grat:a Dei like glew to the fore- 
bead, if it be on the upper eye-lid ; or to the cheeks, it on the lower. Youmuft draw 
hrough a freth one every fecond day, as is ufually donein chirurgicall ferons. For 


chus at lengththe {welling willbe deftroyed and made plaine. 


Cuar. VIII. 
of she Hydatis or Fatne(fe of the Eye lids 


dren, who are of a more humid nature : whereforeit is a and loofe 
tumour making the wholecye-lid, which it poffeffeth, cedematous fo 
that, as if depreffed with a weight, it cannot be lifted up. Ithathits name, for chat it 
hath as it werea bladder diftended with a whayifh humour, which kinde of fault is 
obferved by Galew inthe liver. Thofe, who are thus affeGed, have their eyes looke 
red,and flow with teares, neithercan they behold the {ua, or endure the light. The 


BHe Hydatis isa certaine fatty fubftance like a peece of fat feated and ly- Wha 
ing underthe skinne of the upper eye-lid, It isa difeafe incideatto chil. “* 


Com. ad apbor. 
55.(ec2. 7. 


cue is performed by cutting off the fuperfluous fubftance, not hurting the neigh. 


bouring parts, andthen prefently put some {alt into the place whence it wastaken 
out (unlefsthe vehemency of paine hinder) that fo the place may bee dryed and 
firengthened, and the reft of the matter (if any {uch be) may be confumed, and hin- 
dred from growing againe. Laftly, you hall coverthe whole eye with the white of 
an diflolved in rofe-water, or fome other repercutlive. 


— — 


Cuapr.] X. 
Of the Eyelids faftened or glewed tocesher. 


We ©'as Ometimes it commeth to paffe thatthe upper eye-lid is glewed or fafte- 
Noe ned to the under, fo that the eye cannot be opened, or fo that the onc of 


bythe default of the forming faculry in the wombe (for thus many infants are born 
With their fingers faftened together, with their fundaments, privities and cares un- 
perforated) the eye in all other refpedts being well compofed, The caufe of this af- 
fect fomtimes proceeds from a wound, otherwhiles from a burn, {cald or impoftu- 
mation,as the breaking of the fmall pox. It is cured by putting in a fic inftrument, & 
(oopening them ; but with fach moderation, that youtouch not the horny coat, for 


them may fticke or bee faftened tothe white coat of the eye, orto the Pawescap. 2%, 
e%) horny. This fault is fometimes drawne from the firft originall, that is, 


Thecanfé, 


otherwife it would fall out. Therefore you muft put the end or point of your probe asda 


under the eye-lids,and fo lifting them up (that you hurt notthe fubftance of the cie) 
divide them with acrooked incifion knife. 
_ Theincifion made, let the white of anegge beaten with iome rofe-water be put 
into theeye ; lerthe eye-lidsbe kept open, yea let the patient himfelf be carefull hac 
often turneit upwards, and lifrit up with his fingers,not onely that the medicine 
may bee applyed to the ulcer, but alforhatthey may notgrow together againe. In 
the nighttime leta little pledget dipped in water, and that either fimple, or where- 
infomevitrioll hath bin diffolved, bee laidthereon. For thus you fhall hinder the 
‘y¢-lids from joyning together againe. Then on the third day the parts or edges of 
the cie-lids thal be couched with waters drying without biting or acrimony, that fo 
may be cicatrized. But ifthe eye-lid adhere to the horny coate at the pupii/s or 
pple ofthe eye, the patient will either bee quite blind,or very ill of fight. For the 


humour 


icarre whichen{ues will hinder the fhapes of things from emtring to the cryftalline. 


— 
A 
4 
y 
ed 
\ 
| 
| 


4 


644 Of divers preternatural Affects, 


a name h vifive {pirits from paffing forth to the objects. 
A difeafe fub- tot Celfas that this cure is fubject toa rclapfe, m 
you may Jearne out of that ay bee 
jecttorclapic. neither by diligence nor induftry, butthat che eye-lid will alwayes her 
and cleave tothe eye. 


Cuar. X. 
of the itching of the Eye-lids, 


, MF Any have their Eye-lids itch vehemently by reafon of fale phleome 
which often times excoriating and exulcerating the parts them(- ines 
| yeelds a/amies, which joynes together the eye-lids in thenighe 
1) if they wereglewed together,and maks them watry and bleared, This 
affeét doth fo torment the patients,that it oft times makes them require 
the Phyfitians helpe. Wherefore general! medicines being premifed, the Ulcers 
fhall be wathed withthe following Col/yrium. Re. aque mellis in balneo marie 
te Shit. facchars candi, 3i. aloes lote in pokinem ae frat collyrtum Which 
if it doe no good, you may ufe this which followes. kk. Ung Kzyptiac. 3}, At/lolve in 
plantaginus quantitate fief ficeents. Let the ulcerated cie-lids betouchd with» (oft 

linnen rag dipped therin,but with care that none therof fall upon the eye. Bur whey 

the patient goes to bed, let him cau fethem to be anointed with the following oiny. 
ment, very effe@tuall in this cafe. K. axungie pores et butyri recentis, an, 38, twth. pre 
par. 58, amtimon, in aque euphrafia preparatt, Dil. camphor et in morty 

rio plumbeo ancamtur per tres horas, conflatum inde unzucntum, fervetur in pyxtde plum. 

bca. Some commend and ufe certaine waters firto cleanfe, dry, binde, ftrengthen 
and abfolutely free theeye-lids from itching and redneffe ; of which this is one. | 

Re, aqua eupbraz. faniculi,chelidon.an 38, farcocal, wstrsol, rom, 3}, mil 

ceantur fimul bulliant unica ebullitione ; poftes coletwr liquor, fervetur ad 

dium. Or elfe. Reaquarof. vini alb. bont an. suth. prepar. an. flor. ani 

Dii. camphor. gra.ii. Letthembee boyled accordingto art, and kept in aeglafle to 

wath the eye-lids. Orelfe, Re. falss com. 5i, let them be put into acleanc 

barbars bafonand covered, and kept there five or fix dayes, and bee ftirred oncez 

day, and letthe eye-lids bee touched with this liquor. Some with that the patients 

urine be kept all night in a barbers bafon, and fothe patients eie-lids be wathed ther- 

— — with: Verily in this affect we nautt not feare the ufe of acride medicines, for I once 
ciewed {awawomanof fifty yeares of age, who wathed her eye-lids when they itched with 
cines inthe ie ghe fharpeft vinegar fhe could get, and afirmed that fhe found better fuccefle of this 
than of any other medicine. prefcribes a water whole efficacy above other me- 
Libz.cap.4- inthis affect, hee faith, hath bin proved; and thatit isto bee efteemed mort 
worth than gold, the defcription thereof is thus. K.4q. vini albi edoriferi medio. 
cris vinofit atis andiiii. myrobalan,citrins trit. Sil, thurs bulliant ompia 
ad confamptienem tertia partis acinde immediate addantur ‘floris aris U. 

Let the liquor be kept in a glaffe well ftopped for the forefaid ufe. 


Cuarv.XI. 
Of Lippitudo, or Bleare-eyes. 


Hereare many whofe eyesareneverdry, but alwaies flow witha thino¢, 


‘ acrid and hot humour, which caufeth roughnefle, and upon {mall occall- 
ons inflammations,blear or blood-fhot eies,and at length alfo Stravi/m™ 
or {qinting. Lippitudo is nothing clfe but acertaine white filth flowing 
fromthe eyes, which oft times agglutinates or joynes together the eye-lids. T's 


difeafe often troubles all the lifetime, and is to be cured by no remedy : in lome : 


There are 
bone, tha 
medicines, 


diflolved th 


rough thins 
fluxion fall 
for from b] 
from the fa: 
poilefs the : 
trouble the 
per of the 7 
difeafethe | 
from wheo 
which may 
the inflamn 
divers. 
cycs. Fort 
Cuation of 1 
remedies, 
With Vapo 
Of the vent 
fhallbee £, 
from aero 
ter flowin: 
the arm, cu 
by friGion 
after unive 
Of the yej 
Cveilels 
vehement 
For the 
¢d,accord; 
in the 
Loin the ¢ 


| with acrl 
| is much 
or 
j 
and aS We 
madecowa 
<X 
ed “SRA ES 2 
a 
4 
I 
4, 


lon of fale phleome 
parts themfel yes. 
thenight time as 
y and bleared. This 
s makes them require 
remiled, the Ulcers 
balneo marie deft: Has 
atcollyrtum. \W hich 


gypttac. ds /lolve ip 
be touchd with a {of 


on the eye. Bur when 
the following oint. 
ntis, an, 36, tuth pra 
lil. mor fee, et in mortae 
Vetur in pyxtde plum. 
ay, binde, ftrengthen, 
which this is one, 
vitriol, rom, mil, 
fervetur ad ufum dj. 
aloes ani. flor, ani 
nd kept in a glafle ro 
Bn be put into acleanc 
nd bee ftirred once 
vith that che patients 
-lids be wafhed ther- 
edicines, for I once 
hen they itched with 
better fuccefie of this 
acy above other me- 
o beeeftcemed more 
albi odors feri medio- 
fant omnia fienul 
il. camph. oF. 
ule. 


es flow witha thine, 
d upon {mall occafi- 
ength alfo Strabi/m™ 
e white filth flowing 
er the eye-lids. This 


} 


whofe Care is performed by Suxgery. 


Such as have this difeafe from their infancy,are not tobe cured, for 
4 emaines with them till their dying day. For large heads, and fuch as are repleate 
chacride OF much excrementitious phlegme, {carce yceld to medicines. There 
auch difference whetherthe phlegme flow downe by the incernall veflels under 

(cull, or by the external] which are betweene the skull and che skin, or by both. 
Forif the internall veines caft forth this matter, it will be dificulily cured. ifit bee 
~yredatall. Bur ifthe externall veffels caft it forth, that cure is notunprofitable, 
rhich having ufed medicines re{pe@ing the whole body, applyes aftringent medi- 
-ines tothe fhaved crown,as Empl.contra rupturam,which may {treightenthe veines, 

as ic were fufpend thephlegme, ufeth cupping,and commands friGionsto bee 
nade rowards the hindepart of the head, and laftly, maketh a Seton in the necke, 
There are (ome who cauterize the toppe of the crowne with a horiron, evento the 
bone, (othatit may caft a {caile, thusto divert and ftay tiiedefluxion, For local] A Col/jrivmof 
aedicines, a Collyriwm made with a good quantity of rofewater, with a little vitriol 


the dctluxions 
jiflolved therein, may ferve forall. of the eyes. 


Crap. XII. 
ofthe Ophthalmia, or inflammation of the Eyes. 


Ophthalmiais an inflammation of the coate sonfequently 
\= of the wholeeye, being troublefome by the heate, redneffe, beating, mia is,andthe 
way renitency, and laftly paine. Ic bath its oriyinalleither by fome primi- 
HOVe) 24 tive caufe or occafion, asa fall, ftroake, duft, or {mall fand flying into 

meee the eyes. Forthe eye isafmooth part, fothat it is eafily offended by 
rough things, as faith Hvppoerases, lib, de carnibus,Or by anantecedent caufe,as a de- 
fuxion falling upon the eyes. The fignes follow thenatureof the materiall caufe, 
for fom blood efpecially cholerike and thin, it is full of heat, redneffe and paine ; 
from the (ameallayed with phlegme all of them are more remifle. But ifa heavinefle 
poile(s the whole head, the originalof the difcafe proceeds therfrom.But ifa hot pain 
trouble the forehead, the difeafe may be thought to proceed from fome hot diftem- 
perofthe Dura mater, or the pericranium ; but if inthe very time of the raging of rhe 
difeafe che patient vomit, the matter of the difeafe proceeds fromthe ftomacke. But 
from whence foever it commeth thereis{carce that paine of any part of the body, 
which may be compared tothe paine of the infamedeyes. Verily the greatneffcof 
the inflammation hath forced the eyes out of their orbe, and broken them afunder in 
divers. Thereforethere isno part of Phyficke more blazed abroad than for fore 
eyes. For the cure,che Surgeon fhall confider and intend chree things, dict, the eva- Theeure, 
cuation of the antecedent and conjunét caufe, andthe overcomminy it by topicke 
temedies. The diet fhall bee moderate, efchewing all thinzs that may fillthe head 
with vapours ; andthofethings ufed that by aftriction may ftrengthen the orifice 
oftheventricle, and prohibite the vapours from flying up to the head; the patient 
hhallbee forbidden the ufe of wine, unleffe peradventure the difeafe may proceed 
ftoma erofle and vifcide humour, as Galen delivers it. The evacuation of the mat- 
ter lowing into the eye, fhall bee performed by purging medicines, phlebotomy in eniete 
the arm, cu pping the fhoulders and neck with {carification,and without : and laftly, 
yfri@ions, asthe Phyfitian that hath undertaken the cure fhall thinke it fic. Galen 3. meth. 
atter univerfall remedies for old inflammations of the eyes,commendsthe opening “? mes 
of the veinesand arteryesin the forehead and temples, becaule for the moft part 

¢veflels therabouts diftended with acride, hor and vaporous blood, caule great & 
vehement paines in the eye. 7 

For the impugning of the conjan& caufe, divers topick medicines fhall be apply- 

’@ccording to the four fundry times or feafons that every phlegmon ulually hath. 

orin the beginning when as the acride matter flowes downe with much violence, 
'epercuffives doe muchconduce : andtempred with refolving medicines, arc good 


Oimthe encreafe, k. aq. rof. ¢t plantag. mucagin, gum, T ragacanth. 


Signes, 


For PrOgnofticke. 
ral 

Will alWayes adhere 

| 


: 64.6 Of devers preternaturall Affeits, L 1B, 


A repercufh 
medicine. 


Aftringent em 
plaitcrs. 


ve bumevi quod fufficst, fiat collyrium, \ctit bee dropped warme intothe eye, ang 
double cloth dipped in the fame collyrium bee put upon it. Or, K, ac fers. 
fiat collyrium.ufe this likethe former. The veins of the templesmay be 
tened by the following medicine. bol.arm.fang. drac.c> maft.an. 31.6. 

acet.an.3i. tered olcidon.an.3i.8. fiat defenfivum. You may alfoufe 
de Bolo,empl.diacal, or contra rupturam diffoived in oyle of myrtles, anda litcle Vine. 
ger. But ifthe bitterneffe of the paine be intolerable,the following cataplafme thal 


lawt. an.5.aq. folan. lactis mulsebris,an. 


An anodmecs. De applyed. Ke. pomor. fub.ciner iii bactss muliebris 38, \er bes 


taplaimc 


The efficacy of 
Bathe) in pains 


ot the cycs. 
Ad apr 


Dercrgent Col- 


Thecaufe. 


The care 


The Aireplua 
ot the eye. 


The fs 
the cot. 
Lid. 3.649.212. 


plycd tothe eye,the formerly prefcribed colyrivm being firlt dropped in.Or, 
pfil. cidonan panis albi in lacte rof.38.fiat 
The bloud of aturtle Dove, Pigeon or Hen drawne by opening a yeine Unde; the 
wings, dropped intothe cye,aflwageth paine. Baths are not onely anodine by al{o 


ftay the defluxion by diverting the matter thereof by fweats; therefore Ga/ey much 
commends them in {uch defluxions of the eyes as come by fits. Inthe ftate whens 
the paine is either quite taken away or aflwaged, you may ufe the tollowing meq. 
cines. Kc. farcocol.m lacte mulebri nutrita, alces lotatn 4q.rofar. sroch, fall 
rha.s8.facchar cand.d\i.aque fiat collyrium. Or, kk. fem. feniculs, 
Sii.fle. chama. melil.an. ©. coquantur in aq. coms. ad Colatura adde 
prap farcoc.nutrita in lacke mulsebrs, ai -91. facchari cand. fiat collyrinm ys 
eft. In the declination thecye thall be fomented with a carminative decoction, ang 
then this collyriwm dropped thereinto. farcoc.mutrite & myrrh.an 49 


exphrag.an.rii. fas collyriumyet artis eft, 


— 


Cuarp. XIII. 


Of the Proptofis, that is,the falling or farting forth of the eye,aud of tic 
Phehifis, snd Chemofis of the fame. | 


He Greekes call that affect Proptofis, the Latines procidestia or wy 
wg? /i, when asthecye ftands, and is caft out of the orbe by the occation of 

matter filling and lifting up the cye intoa greater bignefle, and largeneic 
* of fubftance. The caule of this difeafeis fometimes external] , as by too 
violent ftrayning to vomit, by hard labour in child-birth, by exceffive and won: 
drous violent fhouting, or crying out. Itfometimes happencth thata great and cri 
el] paine of the head, or the too ftrait binding of the forchead and temples forthe 
eafing thereof, or the palfic of the mufcles of the eye, give beginning to this diftale 
Certainely fometimes the eye is fo much diftended by the dcfluxion of humors,tha 
it breakes infunder, and rhe humoursthereof are fhed, and blindenefle en{ues there 
of,as1 remember befell the fifter of Lewis de Billy merchant,dwelling at Paris neat 
S. Michael's bridg. The cure fhall be dives fified according tothe caufes. Therefore 
univerfall medicines being premifed.cupping glaffes fhalbe applyed to the original! 
of the {pinall marrow,and the fhoulders ; as alfo cauteries, or Setons: the eye fhal! 
be prefled or held downe with clothesdoubled and fteeped in an aftringent decot:- 
on made of the juice of 4 cacia, red rofes, the leaves of poppy, henbane, roles and 
pomegranate pills : of whichthings poultifles may bee made by addition of barly 
meale andthe like. 

There is fometimesto bee feene in the eye an affe@ contrary to this, and it is tl 
med Atrophia. By this the whole fubftance of the eye growes lanke and decayes,and 
the apple it felfe becomes much Icfle. But if the contumption and emaciation take 
hold of the pupill onely, the Greekes,by a peculiar name and different trom the 2° 
nerall, terme ita Phth: fis, as Paulus teacheth.Contrary caules {hall bee oppolec 
each affect ; hot and attractive fomentations fhall be applyed {hall be ule 
in the neighbouring parts, and laftly all things thall be apply ed with may without 
danger be uled to attract the bloud and {piritsinto the parts. 

There is another affect of the eye,of affinity tothe Proptofis which by the - 


fometimes a 
corners of rh 
fverall colo 
whiles white 
the like ; or 
which is 
doth dithcul 
he! ped by a 
vereth tne 
the {car whi 
liné humour 
companicd 
and livelling 
muft ufc 
Opening ave 
this excrefce 
theeye colly: 
Nothing by 
following 
You fhall 
and be fo he 
cye, putting 
of this part, 
the poinr tu 
tedita little 
‘4, then taki 
with the ne 
tfrom the 
With acroo 
DO Part of ri 


uD by agt eat 
nis wont,loo 
caufes,as a W 
(es,and the 
medics fhall! 
be 
aa 
K€ 
| 
‘ 


the CYC, and |e, 
RK. mac 


Sera. 


AB, le 
tesmay be ftreipt,. 
31,1, 
may al{o ule 
20d a little Vine. 
Catapla{me fhal) 
rts 5S. lerit be ap 
ppped IN.Or, Ky 
. fiat g 
a veine unde; the 
ly anOdine, but ali, 
erctore Galey muth 
Inthe ftate when as 
he following medj. 
ar. brochif, 4alb. 
miculs, fanug. an 
Colatura adde tuthie 
fias Collyrium ut ary, 
uve decoction, and 
SO 


Cyt aud of the 


by the occation of 2 
neffe, and largenefic 
externall, as by too 
exceflive and won- 
that a great and cru- 

and temples for the 
ning to this difeale. 
xion of hurmors,that 
enefle enfues there- 
welling at Paris near 
se caufes. Therefore 
lyed tothe original! 
Serons: the eye fhall 
n aftringent decoct- 
, henbane, roles and 
ry addition of barly 


to this, and it is t¢f- 
nke and decayes,and 
and emaciation take 
lifferent from the 
(hall bee oppofec (0 
tri@ions fhall be uled 


may without 


which by the co 


by agreat inflammation, fothat they can {carce cover the eycs, and the white of 


1s lifted moch higher up than the blacke, Sometimes the Adnata changing 
red ; belides alfo, this affect may take its originall from exrernall 


whofe Cure is performed by Surgery. 


wound, contufion and the like. But according to the variety of the cau- 


is<,and the condition of the prefent affect fixed and remaining in the part, divers re- 


fhall be appointed. 


— 


Cuap. XlVy. 


Of the Wel. 


H E ungula, Prerycion or Webis the growth of acertaine fibrous 


22%' and membranous flefhupon the upper coate of the eye called 
4.7 } sata, ariling more frequently in the bigger, but fometimes inthe 


-notonely the Adnata, but alfo fome portion of the Cornea, and 
A.icomming tothe pupill ic felfe hurts the fight thereof.Sucha Web 


ff 


fometimes adheres not atalltothe 4dvata, but is onely ftretched over it from the 


oeners of the eye, fo chat you may chruft a probe betweene it andthe is of 
colours fomewhiles red, fomewhiles yellow, fomewhiles duskith,& other- 
«hileswhite. Ichath tts originall either from externall caufes, as a blow, fall, and 
helike ; or from internall, as the defluxion of humours into the eyes. The “ngu/a What Web cu 


which is inveterate,and chat hath acquired much thicknefleand breadth,and befides 
adhere tothe Aduata, is difficuitly takenaway, neither may it bee 
heiped by medicines whercby fcarsin the eyes are extenuated. But that which co- 
vereth ta¢ whole pupill muft not beetouched by the Surgeon, for being cut away, 
‘he {car which is lefe by its denfiry hindereth the entrance of objects to the criftal- 
linchumour, and the egreffe of the animall {pirit tothem. But oftentimes it is ac- 
companied with an inflammation of the cyes, a burning itching, weeping defluxion, 
indlivelling of the eye-lids. Thatthe cure may rightly and happily proceed, hee 
mutt fir ulea {pare diet,purging medicines fhall be given, and bloud taken away by 
opening aveine, efpecially, it tnere be great inflammation. For particular remedies, 
thisexcrefcence fhall be eaten away, or at leaft kept from growth by dropping into 
theeye collyriwme of vitrioll defcribed in wounds ofthe cyes. But if that wee profit 
nothine by this meanes, it remaineth, that wee take it away wath the handafter the 
‘ollowing manner. 


lefler cornertowards tiie temples. Whenit is neglected, it covers. 


ed Chemofis.N ow this is nothing elfe than when both the eye-lids are turned The Cxemafis. 


rable, and wha® 


uncurable, 


Thecure, 


You fhall fetthe patient upon a forme or ftoole, and make him leane much backe, The cutting of 


und be fo held firmely,that he may not fall nor ftirre, then mult you open his fore 
cye,putting therein the “peer oculi tormerly defcribed in treating of the wounds 
ofthis partand then muft you lift up the Web it felfe with a {harpe little hook, with 
the point turned a little injand put under the midft of the Web ; when you have lif- 
‘edita litle up,thrafta needle threaded with a fmoth threed between it & the Adna- 
4,then taking hold of che hooke, and the two ends of the threed drawne through 
with theneedle, and lifting up the Web by them, you fhall gently begin to feparate 
‘from the fubftance of the eye lying there-under, beginning atthe original! thereof 
witha crooked incifion knife, and fo profecute it even to the end, yet foas you hurt 
part ofthe Advata,nor Corned. 


The 


the V/eb, 


« 
: 
‘ 
* 
4 
| 


— 


648 


The figures of little hookes,ancedle, and crooked incifion knife, 
Little Hookes. Ancedie.  Acrookedincifion knife. 


Z 
3 
A 


Then mutt it bee cut off with a paire fiffers,and the white of an egge beaten with 
fome Rofe-water laid thereon, and often renewed. Afterwards the eye mutt ey. 
day be opened, left comming to cicatrization, the eye- lids thall be glewed together 
in that part whereas the Web is taken away,which alfo thall bee hindred by Putting 
of common {alte,fage and cunminfeeds into the eye, being firft champed and chaw. 
ed inthe mouth. There are fome who in ftead of the crooked knife {eparare th 
Web fromthe Adwate with a horfes haire, others do it with a goofe quill nade req. 
dy forthe fame purpofe, taking heed that they hurt not the caruncle at the corner 
by the nofe, for it will follow if that you draw the Web away too violently ; and if 
it be cut,there wil remain a hole,through which during the reft of the life a weeping 
humour will continually flow, a difeafe by the Greckes termed RAyas. It after the 
cutting, there befear of inflammation, linnen rags moyftned in repelling medicines, 
formerly prefcribed in wounds of the eye, fhall bee layd thereupon, 


XV. 
Of the Agilops,fiftula lachrimola, or weeping Fistula of the eye. 


The ufeofthe 
elandule at the 


Carnes T the greater corner of the eyethereisa glandule, made for the receie 
EVAN ving and contayning the moyfture which ferveth for the lubricating 


greater corncl UY 
of the cye. ? and humecting the eye, leaft it fhould dry by continual! motion. This 
The difieren- ’ Glandule fometimes by afanguine or pituitous defluxion falling violent- 


cess ly from the brain, fwels,impoftumates & ulcerates with an ulcer,not feldome dege- 
nerating into a fiftula, fo that in fuccefle of time it rotteth the bone that ly ct! under 

it: of fuch fiftulaes, fome are open outwardly, and thefe afually have their origi- 

nall from 2 phlegmon; other fome are inwardly, and thofe are fuch as ar firlt [wel- 

led by the defluxion or congeftion of a phlegmaticke matter, fothat there appeareth 

no hole outwardly, but onely atumor of the bigneffe of a peale, this tumor being 

prefled, foweth witha fanious, ferous and red,or otherwife witha whiteand vilcide 

Peviedicalland Matter, and that either by the corner of the cye, or by theinfide of thenofe. Some 
Typicallbi- havethis matter flowing continually, others have it onely monethly, which is pro 
Culacs. per alfo to fome fiftulaes. Such weeping fiftulaes if they become old, caufe an 41" 
of the cye,& fometimes blindneflc,& a ftinking breath. Therefore wee mult dis 

ligently and {peedily by phificall and chirurgicall meanes refift the breeding difeale. 
Wherefore, having ufed generall medicines, we muft come to particulars. Theretore 


if the ulcer be not fufficiently wide, it fhall bee inlarged by putting tents of {punge 
thereid, 


1B. 17. a 


sherein. The! 
opting thercit 
oyle ¢ 
by chele meang 
chen ule ana 
jeat than a po 
opinion it ma 
eficacy it hat! 
religioufly 
which hatha 
of earth bear¢ 
through iron 
at the end, th 
jacent parts bt 
‘qones hands 
cheoperation® 
of the greater 
be perforatec 


and fo may 


After the 
beaten in pl 
eye and all ti 
head fomew 
thal! perceis 
hointing it 
led with 


| 
= 
j => ] 
= | 
A = 
| 
¢ ‘ 
¢ 
A 7 
| 
>. 
] if; i 
a 
bec ulcerat: 
hit  *htoughthe 
| “T Part of cl 
then the fw, 
4 7. 


an egge beaten with 
the eye every 
de glewed topether 
hindred by Putting 
champed and chaw. 
ed knife {eparare the 
oofe quill nade rea- 
uncle at the corner 
00 violently ; and if 
of the life a weeping 
d Rhyas. It after the 
repelling medicines, 
pon, 


of the eye. 


made for the recei- 
for the lubricating 
inuall motion. This 
@xion falling violent- 
‘r,not feldome dege- 
mone that lyech under 
ally have their origi- 
{uch as at firft {wel- 
that there appeareth 
le. this tumor being 
ha whiteand vilcide 
eofthenofe. Some 
ethly, which is pro- 
me old, caufean 474 
herefore wee mutt dis 
che breeding dilcale. 
articulars. Therefore 


utting tents of ipunge 
thereia, 


d by Thecure, 
aytting therein the cathereticke pouders of Mercury, calcined vitrioll,or fome agus 

eng or oyle of vitrioll,and laftly, by a potential cautery. If you cannot prevaile 

sychefe meanes, and that the bone begins to rot, atid the patient bee ftout hearted, 

seo ule an actual cautery whofe ufe is tar more effedtuall,ready, certaine and excel- Tie efficacy of 
jeqt than a potentiall cautery, as I have tryed in many with happy fucceffe. In my 29 24uall cau- 
woiaion it makes No matter, whether the cautery be of gold, filver or iron ; for the ““” 
cacy ithath, proceedeth not from the matter, but from the fire. Yer if wee mutt 
cligioufly obferve and make choife of mettals, I had rather have it of Iron, as that 
which hatha far more drying and aftringent faculty than gold, forthat the element 

of earth beareth the chiefe {way therercin, as appeareth by the waters which flow 
hrough iron mines. Wherefore you hall caufe to be made a triangular Iron, fharpe 

the end, that it may the morefpeedily penetrate. And then the found eyeand ad. 

jacent parts being well covered and defended, and the patients head firmely holden 
‘nones hands, left the patient being frighted, ftirre himfelfe in the very inftant of 
hheoperation. But a plate of iron fomewhat depreffed inthe midft, for the cavity 
ofthe greater corner, fhall be applyed and fitted tothe pained eye. This plate thall 

b¢ perforated that the hot Iron may paffe thereby tothe fiftulalying thereunder, 

and fo may onely touch that which isto be cauterized. 


The figure of acautcry, and a plate with a hole therein. 


MY; 


Ny 


After the bone is burnt with the cautery,a ¢o¥yrswms made of the whites of egges Things tobe 
beaten in plantaine and nightfhade waters mutt be poured into the hole it felfe, the 
‘yeand all the neighbouring parts; but the patient fhall bee laydin bed, with his ™ 
iead fomewhat high, and the colyrium (hall be renued as often and as foone a3 you 
‘ball perceive it to grow dry. Thenthe fall of the Efchar thall be procured by an. 
iointing it with freth butter ; when it is fallen away ,tne ulcer fhall be cleanf{ed, fil- 
ied with ficth, and laftly cicatrized. 


CHarp XVI. 
of the Staphiloma, er grape-like fwellsng. 


T aphiloma is the {welling of the horney and grape-like coat, bred What a: 
through the oc 


cafion of an humor flowing downewpon the eye, 
>) or by anulcer, the horney coatbeing relaxed, or thruft forth by 
| che violence ofthe puftule generated beneath. It in thape rcfem- 
bletha grape, whencethe Greekes ftile ic Staphyloma. This tumor 
is fometines blackith, otherwhiles whitifh, For ifthe horney coat 
beculcerated and fretted in funder, fo that the grapie coat fhew it felfe, and fall 
oughthe ulcer, then the Staphylome willlooke blacke like a ripe grape, for the ut- 
ter part of the #veaisblackith, But ifthe Cermes bee onely relaxed and not broken, 

then the {welling appeares of a whitifh colour like an unripe grape. T he Ancients Pasand 


Rvemade many kindes or differences thereof. For if it bee buta {mall hole of the ““” 
brokea 


knife, 
ifton knife. 
= WN 
| 


— 


— 


fe 


med it Myocephaton, chat is, like the head of a fly. But if the hole were large. an, al 


callous,they called it Claus, or anaile ; If it were yet larger, then they termed | 


Staplily. Butin what fhape or figure foever this difeafe thall happen jr br 

mzinters incu- peth difcommodities,the one of blindneffe, the other of deformity.Wwh 

rable blindnefs. Crefor, 
here is no place for furgery to reftore the fight, which is already loft, bur ONely to 
mend the deformity of theeie ; which is by cutting off that whichis prominen: p_ 
you muft take heed that you cut away no morethan is fit,for fothere would be dan 
ger of peuring out the humors of the eye. ns 


Of the Hy popyon, that u, the fuppurate or putrefied eye. 


as <r #S, or Quitture is fometimes gat hered between the horny and rapy 
| 2% coate from an internall, or externall caufe, From an internall, by 
4 |eee@> great defluxion, and ott times after an inflammation,but externally 
a {troake, through which occafion a veine being opened hath poured 
~~” forth blood thither, which may prefently be turned into Quitture, fo, 
the cure, univerfall remedies being premifed, cupping-glaffes thall bee applied wis), 
fcarification, and friGiions ufed. Anodine and digeftive col/yri thall be poured from 
Lib.rg.meiing. ADOVE downewards. Galen writes thathe hath fometimes evacuated this Matter,the 
cay. ult. Cornea being opened at the in which place all the coats meet, concurre and are 
terminated. [ have done the like,and that with good fuccefle, Fames Guillemeau the 
the Kings Surgeon being prefent, the Quitture being exprefled and evacuated afte 


oa apertion. The Ulcer fhall beclenfed with Hydronel,or fome other {uch like me- 
icine. 


The 


Cuar. XVIII. 
Of the Mydriafis, or dilatation of the papill of the eye. 


Ydriafis is the dilatation of the pupill of the eye ; and this happenethei- 
ther by natureorchance ; the former proceedeth from the defaulto! 
\¢ the firft conformation, neitheris it curable; but the other is of two forts; 
MS for it is cither from an internall caufe, the off-{priny of an humour fow- 
ing downe from the braine, wherefore Phificall meanes mutt beeuled 
Thecure. for thecure thereof. Now that which commeth by any externall occafion,asa blow, 
fall or contufion upon the eye, muft bee cured by prefently applying repercuflive 
and anodyne medicines ; the defluxion muft be hindred by dict skilfully appointed, 
phicbotomie,cupping, {carification, fri@ions, and other remedics which may 
convenient. Then mutt youcometo refolving medicines ; as the bloud of a Turtle 
Dove,Pigeon,or Chicken reeking hot out of the veine, being poured upon theey' 
and the ncighbouring parts. Thea this following cataplafme fhall be applyed there 
Casplaiine. cum/fapa fiatcatapla(ma. You may alfo ufe the following fomentation. 
rofar. Make a decodion of themall for a fomentation to be ufed 
witha {ponge. | 


Cua’ 


broken Cornea by which the Zves fheweth or chrufteth forth its felfe, a hey then ; . 


halfe thereo 
ry che fight: 
vilive fpirit 
defluxion of 
on, as {tro 
fome to the 
elfethe acri 
keth its Ori; 
from vapor 
by the coldig 
length nto ¢ 
from that w 
femblethac 
colour, acc 
white,anot! 
times refen 
Arche 
flyingup an 
and down b 
leflethan th 
by the denfill 
itisthae th 
inthe morn 
isdifperfed 
halfe the pt 
covered an 
they had h 
onely the 
and the like 


: 
| 
(’ Wa 
on SS \\ 
| 
\ 
4 
~ 
- 
| in the bod: 
itat 
on) 


{elfe, they then 
ange, and alfo 


diz 
cformity.Wh Crefor, 
y loft, bur Onely to. 


ich is Prominent Bur 
there would be dan. 


ed eye. 


the horny and grapy 
an imternall, a> bya 
on,but externally by 

opened hath poured 
dinto Quitture, Bo, 

Il bee applied with 
thall be poured from 
‘uated this matter,the 
eet, Concurre andare 
James Guillemeau the 
d and evacuated after 


other {uch like me- 


und this happeneth ci- 
Bh from the default of 
other is of two forts; 
» of an humout flow- 
meanes mutt bee ufed 
Bill occafion,asa blow, 
applying repercuflive 
tskiltully appointed, 
ics which may feeime 
the bloud of a Turtle 
poured upon the eye 
all be applyed chere- 
31.8, pul.sreos 
otation. ar 
aufteri 
omentation to be ule 


Caat 


7, whofe Cure is performed by 


Crape. XIX. 
Of 4 Catarad, 


eth its originall from grofleand fumid vapours fent from acrude ftomacke, or 
{om vaporous meats or drinks,upto the braine,and fo it falleth intorhe ey es, where 
by the coldneffe, ftrairnefle and tarrying in the place,they tarn into moyfture,and at 


lcogth into that concretion or filme which wee fee: The figns may be cafily drawne, sicnes: 


from that we have already delivered. For when the cataract is formed and ripevit re- 
fembletha certain thin membrane {pred overthe pupill and appeareth of a different 


colour, according tothe variety of the humour whereof it confifteth, one while 


white,another while blacke, blew, afh-coloured, livid, citrine, greene. Ir fome- 
times refembleth quickfilver, which is very trembling and fugitive, more than the 
ret. Atche firft when it beginneth to breed they feeme to fee many things, as flyes 
dyingup and downe, haires, mets, andthe like, asifthey were carelefly toffed up 
and down betore their eyes: fometimes every thing appeareth two,and fomewhiles 
lethanthey are; becaufethe vifive f{pirit ishindered from paffing tothe objects 
by thedenficy of theskin, like asa cloud thadowing thelight ofthe Sun. Whence 
itisthat the Patients are duller fighted about noone, and furerand quicker fighted 
inthe morning and evening, for thatthe little vifive {pirit diffufed through the aire, 
isdifperfed by the greater light,but contracted by theleffle. Now if this filme cover 
halfe the pupill,then all things fhew butby halfess but it the midftchereot bce 
covered and as it werethe center of the Chriftalline humour, then they feeme as if 
they had holes or windowes: but if it cover itall,then can hee fee nothing at all but 
onely the fhadowes of vifible bodies,and of the Sun, Moone, Srars, lighted candles, 
and the like luminous things, and that but confufedly and as by conjecture. 


CHaP. XX. 
T he phyficall cure of a bezinni ng Cataraci. 


Becinning Cataract is hindred from growing and concretion by 
dietconveniently and artificially preicribed, by the abftinence 
from wine, efpecially more frong and vaporous, atid torbearing 
the ufe of meates, which yeeld a flegmaticke juice and vaporous, 
as peale; beanes, turneps, chefnuts, andlaftly all fach chings as 
SSSR have the faculty of ftirring up the humours, and caufing defiuxion 
inthe body, fuch as areall {ale & fpiced meats, as alfo garlike, onions ,muftard. The 
immoderate ufe of venery hurts morc than all the reft, for that ic more violently ex* 


agitates the whole body, weakens the braine aad head, and begets crade wags 
2 ef 


Diee for fuch 
as are tr ubdled 
witha Cata: 
ract, 


Cataract is Called alfo by the Greeks Hypochyma,by the Latines, A 
| Howfoever you terme it, itis nothing elfe but the con- 
G oh AS cretion of an humour into a certaine thin skin under the hor- 
ny coat, jult againft the apple or pupill,and as it were iwimming 
upon the watery humour; and wheréas the place oughtto bee 
empty, oppofing it {elfe tothe internall faculry of (eeino, where- 
(Se by it differeth from {pots and {cars growing upon the Thedifferen 
Adnata, It fometimes covereth the whole pupill, otherwhiles but the one ces 
a halfe thereof, and fomwhiles but a {mali portion thereof. According to this varie- 
wthe fight is either quite loft, weake, or fomewhat depraved ; becaufe the animal! 
yiive{pirit cannot in its entire fubftance pafle through the denfity thereof. The 
™ = écfuxion of che humour whence it proceeds, is either caufed by an external occaG. Care 
on,asa ftroake, fall, orby the heat ot coldnetle of the encompailing ayrestrouble. 
‘ometo the head and eyes ; or elfe itis by an iaternall meanes, as the multitude. or 
fethe acride hot and thin quality of the humours. This dileafe alfoformetimes ta. 


Of divers preternaturall Affects, Lis, 13, 


Bread feafoned Let his bread be feafoned with fome fennell feeds, for it is thought to havea facui. with your th 

wichfcnaell of helping the fight,and clearing the eyes, and diffipating the mifty vapours ip the «irs by this CO 

feeds. ftomacke before they can afcendto the braine. Wherefore by the fame reafon js hele follow! 
is good to ufe marmelade of quinces,conferve of rofes,and common drige Powder che eye: lid is 
or any fuch like compofed of things good to break wind, or corroborate the Ventr). broader byt 

-cle.Phicbotomie and purging, if they be requifite, be fitly appointed Vento. the Optic 

fes fhall be applyed tothe fhonlders and necke ; the phlegmaticke matter thall be di ched, yet Wil 
verted and evacuated by the mouth with ufing mafticatories in the morning, There cgraract, whic 
be {ome which believe that a beginning cataract may be diflipated and difcuffed } s yncurable 
often rubbing the eye- lids with the fingers, and in like fort by the often and eamneh sydcruell pail 


* beholding of the Starres, and the Moone when it is at the full, looking-glaffes, qi. 
How bright hie monds, and all other fuch like bright fhining things. Ibeleeve that by beames plen. 
. hangs tifully and fuddenly brought and diffufed over the eye, directly oppofite a ain 
fome bright fhining thing, it may feemeto have a penetrating, dividing, ving 
ra@. asalfo aconfuming and drying faculty. Befides, alfo the hor breath of him who 
holdeth in his mouth,and chaweth fennell: feeds,anifeeds, coriander- feeds nutm 
cinamon,cloves,and the like,hath a great faculty, the eyes being firft gently rubbed 
with the finger, it being breathed in,neareat hand and often received,to heat,atteny 
ate, refolve, digeft, and diffufe the humour which is ready to concrete. Moreover 
this colyrinm ot John Vigo is thought very powerfull to cleare the eyes, ftrengthen 
the fight, hinder fuffufions , and difcuffe them if at any time they concrete and 
A dit. Beginne to gather. Re, fant Or recentis ib. M. calami aromatic; 
fipacing abcgin. an. 3%. fucci ruta, aqua chelidonia,faniculs sverbenia euphofiaan. Piper 
ning longi , nncis mo(chate, caryophyllorum an. Si. croct Di. floris rori{marini aliguantum 
contritim. 8, farcocella, aloes hepatica an. Siii. fells rasa, leporis perdicis, an, 


reen, black 
rie contrary 
fome little w 


oN, \G: Fre 
bi 
nc 
ne 
labour in vai 
make choice 


rantur omnia, triti{que adde [acchari albi 3ii. melies rofats Svi.conjictantur ix alembicum when the aire 
wvitreum Cy diftillentur in balnco Maria ; Let this diftilled liquor bee often dropped notin Aries, 
into the eyes.Butif you prevaile nothing by allthefe medicines, and that the cloy. confulra Ph 
dy and heaped up humour doth daily encreafe and thicken, then muft you abftaine foro refift p 
from remedies, and expeé untill it bee no more heaped up, but thickned, yea until Twodayesa 
it feeme to be growne fomewhat hard. For fo at length it may bee couched witha petent lighr, 
needle ; otherwife if this fame skin fhal] not beripe, but more tender than is fitting, light may ne 
when you fhall cometo the operation, it will be broken and thruft through with the fhall bee cure 
needle,and not couched. On the contrary, if it bee too hard, it will refiftthe needle, other : The 
ACaar& neither willit fuffer it elfe to bee eafily couched. Wherefore itis requifite that the upon a feat fe 
muftnorbe — Surgeon know whenit is ripe,and he muft diligently obfervethe fignes whereby he girdle, he fh: 
usle’s difcerne a ripe Cataract from an unripe; andthat which is cureable, from tha Patients bac 
which is uncurable. Forthat only which is ripe and curable ts to be couched ; that tle ftirting 
which is unripe,that is, fuch an one as is more tender, and as it were crude, and that dy your nee 


as it were 


whichis more hard and denfe, and laftly, that which is uncureable muft not bec a- 


tempted atall, hand with 
and not of 9 
— ~ may the 
old of 3 anc 
CuHuape. XXI, put intoa h: 
By what fignes ripe and curable cataracts may bee difcerned ‘from 
unripe anduncurable ones. 


eee EE che found eye being thut, the pupill of the fore or fuffufed eye,afterit 
ae Shallbe rubbed with your thumbe, bee prefently dilated and diffuled, 

and with the like celerity returne into the place, figure,colour and {tatty 
it is thought by fometo fhew a ripe and confirmed catara@. Butao 

uaripeand notto bee couched, if the pupil! remaine dilated and difiv- 
fed fora long while after. But it isa common figneof a ripe, as alfo more dente aod 
confequently uncurable fuffufion, to beeable to fee nor diftioguith no vifible thing 
befide light and brightnefle; forro difcerne other objects fheweth that it is not ye 


ripe. Therefore the found eye being fhutand preffed, the pupill of the other rubbe! 


ou 
ae ‘ 
a 
> 
a” 
abe; 3 
ae 
| 
= 
i 4 
q 
a 


ht to havea 


ufty vapours in 
the fame 


matter fhall be di 


he morning, T 
d and difcuffeds 
ne often and earnch 
oking-glaffes. dia- 
at by beames Plen. 
ly oppofite a ainft 
ividing, diffo vin 
t breath of him who 
nder- feeds, nutm 
gently rubbed 
ived,to heat, atreny. 
ncrete. Moreover 
the eyes, ftrengthen 
they concrete and 
calami aromatic; 
phofia,an iii Piperie 
rifmarini aliquantum 
perdicss, 4M. 3i. te. 
ciantur alembicune 
r bee often dr Op 
s, and that the clou- 
n muft you abftaine 
thickned, yea untill 
bee couched witha 
nder than is fitting, 
uft through with the 
will refift the needle, 
tis requifite that the 
¢ fignes whereby he 
Bcurcable, from that 
to be couched ; that 
ere crude, and that 
ble muft not bee al- 


ned from 


fuffufed eye, after it 
dilated and diflufed, 
ure,colour and tate, 
ed cataract. Bataa 
ine dilated and difiu- 
alfo more dente a0 


Buith no vilible ching 


Bech chat it is nor yet 


lof the other rubbed 
with 


sith your thumbe,is dilated, enlarged, {welleth and is more diftuled; the vifive {pi- 

irs by this compreffion being asit were forced from the found into the fore eye, But 

following cataracts are judged uncurable,that is,fuch as are great,fuchas when 

eyelid isrubbed are nothing dilated or diffufed, whole pupill becommeth no 

,roader by this rubbing: for hence you may gather thatthe ftopping orobftruction 
.sinthe opticke nerve, fo that how cunningly and wellfoever the catara@ beecous 
hed, yet Will the Patient continue blind; you thall do nomore good ia couching a! UnarsieCe 
which is in aneye confumed and wafted with a cataract 

<yncurable which is occafioned by amoft grievous difeafe, towit, by moft bitter’ 

nd cruell paines of the head, orbya violent blow. Such.as are of a plaifter-like, 

een, blacke, livid, citrine and quickfilver-like colour,areufually uncurables On Curable Ca- 

contrary ,fuch as are of a Chetnut colour, or of a skye or fea-watet colour, with 


(ome little whitneffe,yeeld great hope of ahappy and fucceffefullcure. 


Cuar. XXIb. 
Of the couching «Cataract, 


Fter you fhal know by the forementioned fignes,that the Catara&t is wren cocouct: 
ty ble,it remains that you attempt the couching thereof, but fo, that there be a 
p Nothing which may hinder. For if the paine of the head,cough,naufeouf- 9 
* nes or vomiting at thattimetroublethe patient, you fhal then beftow your 
labour in vaine : Wherefore you muft exped untill thefe fymptomes be gone. I hen 
makechoice of a feafon fitting for that purpofe,that is, inthe decreafe ofthe moon, — 
when the aire ts not troubled with thunder nor lightening, and whenas the Suane is 
notin Aries,becaufethat figne hath dominion over the head. Then let che Surgeon’ 
confulca Phyfitian whether purging or bloud-letting be convenient for tne Patient, ' 
fororefift plethoricke fymptomtes, otherwaies ready to yecld matter for 
Two dayes after you mutt make choice of a place furnifhed with indifferent or com- ‘The place 
petent licht,and the Patient being fafting fhall be placedina ftrait chaire, fo that tae 
light may not fall with the beames dire¢tly upon him, but fidewife, Theeye which 
hallbee cured bee made more fteddy, by laying and binding wooll upon the: 
other: Thenthe Surgeon (hall feate and place himielfe dire@ly againft the Patient. 
upon a feat fomewhat higher, and biddingthe Patient put his bands downe to his: 
girdle, he fhall hold the patients legges betweene hisknees. One fhall ftand at che 
Patientsbacke who (hall hold his head and-keepe it from @irring ; for by a lit- 
tle tirting hee may lofe his fight forever, Tnen muft you prepare aad make rea- Theneedke: 
dy your needle, and thruft it often into fome ftrong thicke cloth, that it may bee 
a it were {moothe by this motion, and for the performance of the worke in: 
hand with the leffe paine fomewhat warmed. It muft bee made of ironorftccle, 
and not of gold or filver, it mutt be alfo fatted on the fides,and tharpe pointed, thar: 
foit may the beter: pierce into the eye,and wholly couch the Cataractonce taken 
hold of ; and left ie fhould flip in the Surgeons hand, and beleficfteddy, itfhalibee’ 
put intoa handle,as you may fee by the following figure. 


A needle inferted in 4 handle for the Couching ofCataras. 


ov 


All 


1692 
powd 
oborate the ee 
Qh 
| 
4d 
lii 3 = 


Of dvvers preternat 


Ved ina 


the 
mid fof the 


middle {pace 


Cab Cataract, yet fo,asthat you hurt no vein of the Adwata,& then by flicring itas icwe;. 


partinm.cap.s. 


Thefigne ofa 
Carara& well 
couched. 


nen fled. The Surgeon fhall try whether it firmely remaine there or no, bidding the 


diverfly antill it come to the midft of the pupill and fuffufion. When ir is Come 
thither the a¢edic muft bee inclined from above downewards to the fuffufion, and 
untill by littleand littleitcouch or bring downe the Cy. 
taractas whole as may be beneath the compafle of the pupill ; let him ftill follow je 
though couched with his needle, and fomewhat violently depreffe,and keep it down 
for fomie fhort fpace, that fo it may reft and ftay in that lower place whether itis de, 


patient prefently to move his eye; For if irremaine conftantly fo, and doe notre. 
curneagaine, the cure is perfe&. Then muft the needle be lifted up by little and littl. 
neither muft it prefently be taken forth, that if the Cataract fhould beare up, orrife 
againe, that it might againe, and fo often (whilft the worke is yet hot, andall thin 

in a readinefic) be couchedtowards the leffer corner, untill it be fully and furely hid, 
Then muft you draw backe the needle gently, and after the {ame manner as youpor 
itin; left if youufe not moderation, you bring backethe Cataract, from whence 


you.couched ir; orgrievoully offendthe cryftalline humour, the prime inftrument 


-oly> itighe serves. After allthings are thus performed, the 


i of fight, orthe pupill wich danger of dilating thereof. Some as foone as the worke 


is done, give the patieat fomething in his hand to looke upon : but Paulus approves 
nosthexcof, for hee feares left ftriving to fee, may draw back 
the Cataract. Wherefore it is more wifedome and better, prefently afterthe draw. 
ing forth af the needle,to put on a foftragge the white of an egge beaten in rofe-wa. 
ter witha little choice alume, and {fo apply it tothe eye and neighbouring parts for 
to binde-and binder the inflammation ; chen alfo you muft together therew ith bind 
upthe fouad eye, left by ftirring to fee, it might together therewith draw and move 
the fore eye, by reafon of the fympathy. and confent they mutually have by the op. 
patient fhall bee laid in afoft 
bed, fo.placed,that his head may lye fomwhar high;let him be laid far from noite, 
let hum not fprake, norcate any hard thiog that may trouble his jawes, where‘ore 
let bim.feed upon liquid meats, as ponado. barly cream, culliffes, gellyes, reare egs, 
and others meates of che like nature. At the end of eight dayes the ligature that binds 
up hiscyes fall be loofed; and his eyes wafhed with rofe water, and putting on {pe- 
Gacles, or fome taffacy, the patient thall by little and little accuftome himlclfe 
to the Jight,; left hee fhould bee offended by the fudden mecting with light. 


Butif the faffufion, after fome fhort while after, lift it felfe up againe, it mut 


time may beidiffolved by the force of the native heat. There are alfo fome Cat 


te picces. 


beecouched againe,butthrougha new hole, for the eye is pained and tender in the 
former place: It fometimes happens by the touch of the needle that the Cataraés 
net couched whole, butis broken into many peeces ; then therefore cach of them 
muft be followed, and couched feverally : if there be any very fimall particle which 
{eapes thencedie, it muft bee let alone, for there is mo doubt but that in proceffeot 


racts which at the firft rouchof the needle are diffufed & turne into a fubftance like 
to milke or troubled water, forthatthey arenot throughly ripe, yer thefe putusia 
good hope of recovery, and it bee but forthis,that they can never afterwards co 
crete into one body as before. Wheretore at the length they arealio difcufled by 
_theftrength of thenative heat, and thenthe eye recovers its former {plendor.|f that 


any other fymptomes comeunlooked for, they fhall be helped by new countels and 
their appropriate remedies. | 


then mutt y 
deep into ti 
forced fort! 
oyle of alm 
pery ; for it 
cibly feeki 
noftrils bei: 
that we cut 
the putting 
of little cre 
thal 

hereis a « 
cares the F 
the carejm 


by laying | 


Ali things being thus in arcadinefle,you muft bid the patient 
ire _ AD things being thus in arcaainene,y patiebttoturne the tightoy 
his eye sowards his nofe,and the needle be boldly thruft (for ic is 
placetharis voyde, and onely filled with {pirits) dire@ly by the coat 4: 
between the lefler corner & the horny coat, juft againft the 
partendued 
it [00 rough 
Sometim 
| maketh a ftc 
Lib.6.c4p.r1. Now folid: 
What to be hement pail 
donc after are drawne 
couch sng of a 
Comat | cers and in 
| 


t him ftill follow ; 
sand keepit 
ice whether it is de. 
OT NO, bidding the 
fo, and doe not re. 
p by little and lite}, 
ld beare up, orrife 
c hot,and all things 
fully and furely hid. 
manner as you 
rract, from 
¢ prime inftrument 
S foone as the worke 
but Paulus approves 
» May draw backe 
otly afterthe draw. 
beaten in rofe-wa. 
ehbouring parts for 
thertherew ith bind 
ith draw and move 
ally have by the op. 
all bee laid in a foft 
laid far from noite, 
mis jawes, wherefore 
$, gellyes, reare egs, 
ligature that binds 
, and putting on {pe- 
accuftome himfelfe 
mecting with light. 
up againe, it muft 
d and tender in the 
that the Cataracts 
refore cach of them 
mali particle which 
that in proceffe of 
are alfo fome Cata- 
into a fubftance like 
, yeethefe purusin 
ever afterwards con- 
realio difcufled by 
met fplendor.If that 
by new counicls2 


whofe Cure 13 performed Surgery. 


Of the hopping of the paffaze sheeares, and the faking 
of things thereinte. 


———=—,, | T_ fometimes happeneth that children ate born without any holes _. 
KS) incheireares, acertaine fefhy or membranous {ub ftance erow- Tiecaufe 
tng in their bottome or ficlt entrance, The, fame may alfo hap-— 
em) pen afterwards by accident,they being ulcerated by {ome impo- 
Z | ftameor wound, and the eare fhut up by fome fethy excrefcence 
(Pru or fcar. Whenas the ftopping isin the bottome of thecavity,the 
———————— cure is more difficule chan if it were inthe firft entrance. But there Thecurs. 
sadouble way of cure; for chis fubftance, whatfoever it be, muft either becue out, 
orelfe eaten away and confumed by acrid and catheriticke medicines; in perfor- 
manceof whichthereis need of great moderation of the mind and hand. For itis a 
endued with moft exquifite fence and neare the braine, wherefore by handling 
too roughly,there is feare of diftenfion of the nerves,and confequently of death. 
Sometimes alfothe preternaturall falling of ftrange bodies into this paflage, 
maketh a topping of the eares, fuch as are fragments of ftones,gold,filver, iron and 
the like mettals, pearles, cherry-ftones, or kernels, peafe and other {uch like pul (e. 
Now folidand bonie bodies {till retaine the fame magnitude ; but peate, feeds and 
kernels,by drawing che moifture there implanted intothem, {well up,and caufe ve- 
hement pain by the diftenfion of the neighbouring parts, wherefore the fooner they 
aedrawne forth, the better it is forthe patient. This thali be done with {mall pin- 
cersand inftruments made in the fhape of earepicks. But if you profit nothing thus, 
then mutt you ufe fuch gymblets as are made for the drawing torth of bullets thot 
deep into the body: Little ftones and bodies of the like ftony hardnefle fhall bee py corturtive 
forced forth by the brain, provoked to concuflion by fneefing,& by dropping fome force ot ince. 
oyleofalmonds firft into the paflage of the eare; that the way may be the more flip. “"® 
pery ; forit willcometo pafle by chis {neefing, or violence of the internall aire for- 
cibly feeking paflage out, thatatlengththey may bee caft forth, the mouth and 
noftrils being {topped with the hand. But it wee cannot rhus prevaile, it remaines, 
that we cut open the paflage with an incifion knife, fo much as hall be fafficient for 
the putting in and ufing of an inftrument for to extract them. If any creeping things 
of little creatures,as fleas,ticks, pifmires, gnats andthe like, which fometimes hap- 
a get therein,you may kill them by dropping in a little oyle and vineger. 
hereis a certaine little creeping thing, which for piercing and getting into the 
eares,the French call Perjé-oreille (wee an Eare-wigge). This, ifitchancetoget into 
the care,may be killed by the forefaid meanes,you may alfocatch it,or draw it forth 
by laying halfe an apple to your eare,as a bait for it. | 


Cua XXIV. 


of zetting of little bones and fuch like things out of the james 
and throate. 


Ometimes little bones and fuch like things in cating gteedily ule 
Bu) fticke or as it were faften themfelves inthe jawes or throate. Such bo- reneaccording 
825 : dies if you can come tothe fight of chem fhall bee taken out with long, at - 
{lender andcroked mallets made like aCranes beake. If they do notap- fiicke. 

Ze pear, aor there be nomeans to take them forth,they fhalbe caft forth by 
‘Caufing vomit, or with {wallowing a craft of bread, or adry fig gently chawed, and 
fofwallowed ; or elfe they fhall be thruft downe into the ftomacke,or plucked back 
With a leeke,or fome other fuch like long and ftiffe crooked body annoynted with 


ileand thruft downe the throate. Ifany fuch like thing fhall get into the Weazon 


you 


Oricis pectin’ of 
55 
he 4,10 the 555 

the 

Whe, aS it Were 

the firffafion, and 

ring downe he | 


“ 
gait 


a 

4 


‘ 
i 

| 
* 
4 
+. 

J 
: 


Of deverss precernaturall 


656 


Cc HA rp. XXV. 
of the Toothache. 
2—, F all paines, there isnone which more cruelly tormenteth the Dati. 
entsthanthe Tooth-ache. For wee feethem oft-times after the map. 
ner of other bones to fuffer inflammation, which will quickly fuppy. 
yy rate,and they become rotten,and at length fall away piecemeale, fo, 


fanaa pricking paine,as if needles were thruft into them, a great pulfation in the roote 

of che pained tooth andthe temples,and fome cafe by the ufe of cold things. Now 

the fignes of acold defluxion are a great heavineffe of the head, much and fre. 

quent {pitting, fome mitigation by the ufe of hot remedies. In the bitternefle of 

paine we muft not prefently run to Tooth-drawers, or caufe them prefently to goe 

in hand to pluckethem out. Firft confult a Phyfician,who may prefcribe remedies 

according tothe variety of the caufes. Now here are three intenfions of cureing, 

Three feopes The firftisconcerning diet; the other for the evacuation of the defluxian or atte 

etcuring-  — cedent cawfe; the third for the application of proper remedies forthe aflwaging of 

pine. The two former fcopes, to'wit,of diet, and diverting the defluxion by pur- 

ging: phiebotomie, application of cupping glaffes to thenecke and fhoulders, and 

catification, doe abfolutely belong to the Phifitian. Now for proper andtopicke 

A cold & reper. Medicines they fhall bechofen contrary tothe caufe. Wherefore in a hot caule, its 

good wathing the mouth withthe juice of Pomgranats, plantaine water, a littievi- 

fegor wherein rofes,ba/auitie and fumach have beene boyled. But fuch things as {hall 

be appl yed for the mitigating of the paine of the tecth, ought to bee things of very 

fubtle parts, for that theteeth are parts of denfe confiftence. Therefore the ancients 

haveal waies mixed vineger in fuch kind of remedies. ®.rofar.rub.fumach hordes As. 

m. 8 feminis byofcyami conquaffati fantalorum an.3j. fummsitatum 

budiant omniain aqua libitii. pawce aceto ad horde: crepais- 

yam. Wath the mouth with fuch adeco“tion being warme. You may alfo make Ito 

Trochices for Chifces for the fame purpofe after this manner. fem.hyofcyami, fandarache, cor 

thor defiuxion. an.3. terantur Cr cum acete incor porentur, formenturque trochi {es apponenas 

dentibus dolensibus, Or elfe, fewsinss portulace, byofcyam: , coriandri , bentinm, 

corticis fantali citrini,vofar. rub. pyrethri, camphora, an. 38, Let them all bee beaten 

together with {trong vineger,and made intotrochifces, with which being diffolved 

incofe water, let the gums and’ whole mouth bee wathed when need requireth. But 

Nareoicks, if the bee notaffwaged with thefe, you thall come to natcoticks, which may 

| ftupefie thenerve;as, fe-minis hyofcyami albiopsi camphora,papaveris albi,an.quar- 

sum fufficst, coquantur cum fapa,et denti epplicentur. Belides, you mutt alfo pur chis 

following medicine into the eare of the pained fide. opis.ce caftares,an. mi 

antur cum oleorofate : It hath fometimes availed in {wolne and diftended gums, > 

ing firft lightly fcarified,to have applied leaches, for the evacuation of the conjuat 
marter,as alfoto have opened the veines under the tongue,or the{e which are behi 


the cares. For Iremember that I, by thefe chrec kindes of remedies, allwage¢ af A 
P 


"you mutt caufe coughing by taking fharpe things , or elfe {neefing, fo tocatt torch 


through a f 
dipped ther 
affirm that t 
medicine 1 
teeth, by ap 
er jaw is arti 
buted to the 
athinne liq 
difeafe. But 
there is no 
qua fortis, 
fenfe. et {all 
with Ol:b 
to fallawa 
tumour, the 
theftrenoth 
But of what 
intercépt th 
ftick, anda 


in the UPPS* | 
a)... 
the/andarach 
\\eex) | paine in chi 
wee ice them by daily experience to be caten and hollowed, andr, Jhefamere 
Thecufe breed wortnes, fome portion ofthem putrefying. The caufe of fuch painc is cithe; Moreover, | 
Ret eae hereof. internal], or externalland primitive. The internall is ahotor cold defluxion of hy. drop into the 
mours upon them, filling their fockets, &thence confequently driving out the teeth, Iris good al 
which is the reafon that they ftand fometimes fo farre forth, thatthe patient neithe, ct ru! 
ital Oe dares norcan make ufe of them to chaw for feare of paine ; forthatthey areloofein the reeth.So 
their fockets by the relaxation of the gums,caufed by the falling downeofthede.  muttard, anc 
—— Hi fluxion. When as they are rotten and perforated even tothe roots, if any portion | = pell, Other 
ofthe liquor in drinking, fallinto them, they are pained as if you thruft in pin o; nut megs, C! 
4 Signesofthie bodkin,the bitrerneffe of the paine is fuch. The fignes of a hot defluxion are (harp the end of 
RE 
teethgron 
| ¢ 


ormentcth the pati. 
times after the map. 
y piecemeale, for 
t {uch paine either 
old defluxion of hu. 
iriving out theteeth. 
at the patient neither 
hat they are loofe in 
ng downe of the de- 
oots, if any portion 
ou thruft in q pin Or 
defluxion are tharpe 
puHatton in the roote 
cold things. Now 
aid, much and fre. 
In the bitternefle of 
cul prefently to goc 
y prefcribe remedies 
tenfions of cureing. 
e defluxian or ante- 
forthe aflwaging of 
be defluxion by pur- 
e and {houlders, and 
proper andtopicke 
bre in a hot caufe, itis 
ine water, a litthevi- 
fach things as {hall 
to bee things of very 
herefore the ancients 
fumach hordes an. 
fumsitatum rubs, 
cetoad horde: crepats- 
ymay alfo make Tro- 
mi, fandaracha, 
we trochifes apponends 
coriandri , lentiam, 
tthem all bee beaten 
hich being diffolved 
need requireth. But 
veoticks, may 
spaveris albi,an.qua™ 
mut alfo put chis 
caftores an. Di. wii 
diftendedgumss 
ation of che conju! 
whichare behind 


whofe Cure ws performed by Surgery. 


657 


the teeth. Yet therebce fome who in thisaffe@ open not thefe veines 


behind theeares, but thofe which are confpicuous in the hole of the eare 
thereof. 


buted to the roots of the teeth, lye thereunder. Wherfore the blifters being opened, 
athinne liquor runnes out, which doth not onely caufe, but alfo nourifh or teed the 
difeafe. But ifthe tooth be hollowed, and that the patient will not have it puld our, 


qua fortis, andalfoa hotiron, forthus thenerveis burnt infunder, and lofeth its 
lenfe. Y et fome affirm thatthe milky juice that flowes from Spurge made into a pafte 
with Ol:banuns and amylam,and put into thehollowedtoorh, will make it prefently 
tofallaway inpeeces. Whenthe Gums and Cheekesare (wollen with a manifeft 
tumour, then the patient begins to be fomewhat better and more at eafe. For {fo by 
theftrength ofnature, the tumor caufing the paine is carryed froim within outwards, 
Butof what nature foever the matter which caufeth the paine be, itisconvenient to 
intercépt the courfe thereof with Emp/. contra rapturam, made with pitch and ma- 
tick, and applyed to the temple on that fide where the tooth aketh. 


— 


7 


Cuar. X XVI. 
Of other affects of the teeth. 


Hetecth are alfo troubled with other preternaturall affects. For fome- 
times they fhake by relaxation of the gums, or become corrupt and 
(Ayo rotten, or have wormes in them, or elfeare fet on edge. Forthe firft, rhe 
wr gummes are relaxed either by an externall or primitive caufe, asa fall or 


lumours from the braine, or through want of nourifhment in old bodies. If the 
‘seth grow loofe by the meanes of rhe decaying gums, the difeafe is then incurable: 
‘you may withftand the other caufes by the ufe of fuch thingsas faft-n che teeth, 
unning onthe contrary fuch as may loofenthem. Therefore the patient muft not 


blow : or elfe by an internall or antecedent, as by the defluxion of acrid or waterifh teeth 


—— 


there is no {peedier remedy, thao to putin cauftick medicines, as oile of vitrioll, 4- Caulticks, 


Caufes 
neffe of the 


Raketoo carneftly, neither chaw hard things. Ifthey become loofe by a fallor 


blow 


Ly 
Ing, 10 tocafttor, paines of 
which are 
: in the UP 
of che teeth arifing from acold caufé and defluxion,may be helped by thefe 
emedies ; boyle rofemary, lage, and pellitory of Spaine in wine and vinegar, and 
therto a little aqua vite, inthis liquor diffolvea little treacle, and wath your 
eechtherewith. Ochersmingle Gum smmeniacum diflolved in aqua vite with a lit- 
fandar ache and myrrhe,and lay it to the pained tooth, after Vzgees counfaile, Ae fne 
Be ainkes chat beaten garlicke carryed in the right or left hand, aflwages the paine, as 
actecthakeupon the right orleft fide. Buti beingonce troubled with grievous 
ine inthis kinde, followed the counfaile of 2certaine old woman, and laid gar- 
tc rofted under the embers to my pained rooth, and the paine forthwith ceafed, 
Me Thefameremedy ufedto others troubled withthe like affe@, had like fucceffe. 
Moreover, fome thinke itavaileable if it bee put into the auditory paffage Others 
Hop into the eares oile of cafforeum, or of cloves,or fome fuch other chymicall vile, 
lrisgood alfo to wath theteeth with the following decoction. rad. pyrethri 38. 
ruta 4n.p.1. bulliant in aceto, and with this deco@ion b “Ing Warmic, wath 
he teeth.Some like fumes better,& they make them of the feeds ot Coloquinteda and Het fumes 
nuttard, and other like; they takethe {moake by holding their mouths over a fun- 
: nell, Other fome boile pellitory of Spaine, ginger, cinamon, alume,common falr, 
putmegs, cipreffe nuts, anifeand muftard {ceds, and exphorbzum in oxycratc, and in 
Me the endof the deco@ion adde alittle aqua vita, and receive the vapour thereof 
through a funnell : as alfo they wath their teeth with the decoction, and put cotton 
We dipped therein into the eare, firft dropping ina little thereof. Somethere are which 
aficm that to wath the teeth with a deco@ion of Spurge is a very good and anodyne 
medicine inthe tooth-ach. I have oft times affwaged intolerable paines ot the 
teeth, by applying veficatories under the eare,to wit,in that cavity whereas the low- Veficarories 
erjaw is articulated with theupper : for the veine, artery and finew which are diftri- 


4 


Of divers precernatur all Affects, Li 


The caules of 
hollow teeth. 


The cure. 


Caules of 
wormes inthe 


eeeth. 


Caules of fer- 
ting the teeth 
en cdge. 


_ufe 
-cines and thunning thofe things that cherith the difeafe; the recth bee often w2 fhe 


blow, they muft nor bee taken forth, burreitored and taftened to the next ha 
maine firme, for in time they will be confirmed in their fockets, as I tryed in Anh, 
ny dela Rueatailour, who had his jaw broken withthe pommell ofa dagoe, and 
three of his teeth loofened and almott fhaken out of their fockets he jaw Deine be 
ftored, the teeth werealfo putin their places, andboundtothe reftwith a doub 
waxed thread ; for the reft, I fed the patient with broths, gellyes, andthe like an 
made aftringent gargarifmes of cyprefle nuts,myrtle berries,and a littlealum boyld 
in oxycrate,and I wifhed him to hold ita good while in his mouth : by thefe Means 
I brought it fo ro paffe, that hee within a while after could chaw as eafily upon thofe 
teeth, as upon the other. I heard it reported by a credible perfon, that he faw ag 
ofthe prime nobility, who inftead of arotten tooth the drew, made a found 
drawne trom one of her waiting maids at the fame time, tobe fubftituted and inf, 
ted, which tooth in proceffe of time, as it were taking roote, grew fo firme, as tha 
fhe could chaw upon itas wellasupon any ofthe reft. Buc as | formerly faid, | hay. 
this but by heare-fay. 

Now theteeth are corroded oreaten in by an acride and thinne humour pene. 
trating by a plenteous and frequent defluxion even to their roots, and being thers 
conteined, it putrefies,and becomming more acride, it doth not only draw thetee) 
into the contagion of its purrefaction, but alfo perforats and corrodes them. 

_ The putretaction may bee corrected, it after generall medicines, you putoileof 
vitrioll or aqua fortes intothe hole of the eaten tooth: or elfe, if you burne the toorh 
it {elfe ro the roote with a {mall iron wyar being red hot : you fhall thruft this hor}. 
ron through a pipe or cane made for the fame purpofe, left ic fhould harm any found 
part by the couch therof,and thus the putrefaction, the caufe of the arrofion, may be 


ftayed. But ifthe hole bee onthe one fide between twoteeth, then fhall you file. 


way fo much of the foundtooth asthat you may have fufficient liberty tothruttin 
your wiar without doing any harme. 


The formes of Files wade for filing the teeth. 


Wormes breeding by putrefa@ion in the roots of the teeth, {hall be killed by the 
ufe of caulticks, by gargles or lotions made of vinegar wherein, either pellitory of 
Spain hath bin fteeped,or Treacle diffolved alfo ; Aloes and Garlike are good to 

ufed for this pu: pofe. 
Setting the teeth on edge happens to them by the immoderate eating of acride ot 
tartthings; or by the continual! afcent of yapoursendued withrhe fame quality; 
from the orifice of the ventricle to the mouth, or by a cold defluxion,efpecially of 
falling from thebraineupon thetecth, or elfe by the rooexcelit 
cold or ftupifing liquors. This affe@t is takenaway, if after general! medi- 


with «qua vita, Or good wine wherein fage, rofemary, cloves, nutmicgs and orhet 
things of the like nature have bin boyled. 


deration 
roo violent 
fhaken wit 
they mult f 
with your 
faftin, an¢ 
the piece t¢ 
eafily cob 
the fign of 
had their 
{carce gap 
ther wich | 
der your / 
remaini,te. 
uled, and 
for oft-tin 
hood is eq 
tooth 
low fear, | 
drawer tha 
inftrument 
thegums,i 
pointed le 
at all, chen 
ked witht 
lite thall {@ 
ule of fuct 
them, he 
times leay 


4 
7 
18. 
2a 
ftrongly 
| eflicy,t! 
nec y> 
a 
1 
| 
| 
| 
ram 
* 
ai 


edto the next thar re. 
s, asl tryed in Anthp. 
nell ofa dapeer and 
ts: thejaw re. 
reft with double 
es, andthe likejand I 
nd alittlealum boyld 
: by thefe Means 
1 as cafily upon thofe 
n, that he fawa Lad 
, Made a found tooth 
(ubftituted and infer. 
grew fo firme, asthar 
formerly faid, have 


thinne humour pene. 
oots, and being there 
x only draw thereeth 
orrodes them. 

icines, you put oile of 
f you burne the tooth 
{hall thruft this hot j. 
10uld harm any found 
‘the arrofion, may be 
, then fhall you filea- 
nt liberty tothruft in 


b. 


, thall be killed by the 
in, either pellicory © 
jarlike are good to be 


ate eating of acride of 
with che fame quality 
luxion,efpecially of 
ie by the roo excellive 
after general! 
bee often wathed 
es, nutmicgsand other 


Cuak 


Cc HAP. X XVII. 
Of drawing of teeth, 


24 Ecth arc drawne, either for that they caufe intolerable paines,which will 
(3) (ees) not yecld to medicines, or elfe for that they are rotten and hollowed, 

{othat they caufe the breath tofmellsorclfe for that they infeét the 
fn a) Ws-4(ound and whole teeth, and draw them into the like corruption, or be- 

“= caufe they ftand out of order. Befides, when they are too deep and 

srongly rooted, fo that they cannot be pluckd out,they mutt oft times be broken of 
neceflity that fo you may drop fome cauftick thing into their roots, which may take 
way the fenfe,and confequently thepaine. The handmuftbeufedwich muchmo- 
jeration in the drawing out of atooth; for the Jaw is fometimes diflocated by the “siren ¢ 
oo violent drawing out of thelower teeth, Bucche temples, eyes and braine arc 
huken with greater danger by the too rude drawing of the upper teeth. Wherefore 
hey mutt firft be cut about, that the gums may be loofed from them,then thake them 
with your fingers, and doe this untill they begin to be loofe ; forarooch which is 
Gin, and isplucked out with one pull,oft-times breaks the jaw,and brings torch 
the piece together therewith whence follow a feaver anda great fluxe of bloud nor ~ 
eiily to be ftayed (for bloud or pus owing out in great plenty is,in Ce//us opinion, 
the fign of a broken bone)& many other maligne and deadly fymptoms:foime have 
had their mouthés drawne {9 awry, during the reft of their lives, fo that they could 
(carce gape. Befides, ifthe cooth be mucheaten, the hole thereof mutt be filled ci- 
ther wich Lint,or.a.corke, or.a piece of lead well fitted thereto, left it be broken un- 
der your forceps,when itis twitched more ftraightly to be plucked out, andthe root 
remain,teady ina hort time to caufe more grievous paine. But judgement routt be 
wed, and you mult take {peciall care left youtake a found tooth fora pained one ; 
foroft-times the patient cannot tell, for chat the birterneffe of paine by neighbour- 
hood is equally diffufedover allthe jaw. Therefore forthe better —e OUt a The maner of 
tooth, obferving thefethings which I have mentioned, the patient fhall be placedin a 
lowfeat, bending back his head between the Tooth-drawers legs ; chen the Tooth- 
drawer (hall deeply {carifie about the tooth,feparating the gums cherfrom with the 
intruments marked with thisletrer A. andthen if {poyled as it were of the wall of 
thegums,it grow loofe,it muft be fhaken and thruft out by forcing it with the three- 
pointed levatory noted with this letter B. but if it {ticke in too faft, and will nor ftirre 
itall, chen muft the tooth be taken hold of with fome of chefe toothed for cipes mar- 
ked with thefelettersC. D.E. now one, then another, as the greatnefle, figure, and 
itethall (eemetorequire. would havea tooth-drawer expert and diligent inthe 
ule of fuch toothed mul ets; for unlefle one know readily and cunningly how to ute 
them,hecan {earce fo carry himfelf,butthat he will force out three teeth at once,oft: 
umes leaving that untoucht which caufed the paine. 


| 
| 
| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
| | 
| 

| 

Infiruments 


652 Of drvers preternaturall Affects, Lis. iy 
The effigies of Forcipesor mullets Inftraments for {craping the teeth, filth pr 
for the drawing of tecth. and a three-pointea levatory, be pre 
he any rae 
ide wainl 


Dentifria 
Alume ; 4 
hardto be 
4 bony con 
rothe reeth 
tle bones, | 
namon,wh 
conrent W! 
rowhiten 


\ \ 


ne 

[3 


=@7 VAY 


\ 


YY’ 


WM 


The forme of another Infirument for drawing of teeth. 


ternaturall 
tonguc. 
ly leaving 
proceed tr 
the tonguc 
veines and 
hamorrhag 
oxycrate, a 
the midft « 
Whenthe t 
Whatto be After the tooth is drawn, let the blood flow freely, that fo the part may be freed +a ty 1 , 
from pain,and the matter of the tumor difcharged. Then let the tooth-drawer prefle 
sooth is pluc tinick & {1 
our. the flefh of the gums on both fides with his fingers whereas hee tooke out the tooth, cor it wit! 
that fo the focket that was too much dilated and oft times torne by the violenceo! Th 2 vg 
the plucke, may be clofed again. Laftly, che mouth hall be wathed with oxycrae, ts ha 
and if the weather bee cold, the patient hall take heed of going much inthe open em ; 4 
aire, leftit caufe a new defluxion upon histeeth. wad 


Cwar. XXVIII. 
Of cleaning the Teeth, 


<A¥Eices of meat in eating fometimes fticke between the teeth, and becom 
Caufes of foulc ming corrupt by long ftaying there, doe alfo hurt the reeth rhemiciv*, 
erruftytecth.  andipoilethe {weetnefle of the breath. Hee that would efchew ths 

y. NERY ought prefently after meate to wath his mouth with wine mixed Wi" 


_ Water, Or oxycrate, and wellto clenfe his teeth that no flimy matte 
here tothem. Many folkesteeth by their owne default gather an earthy filth o!4 
yellowifhcollour, which cates inte them by little and litde, as ruft cates into 110° 


This rufty filthinefle,or as it were mouldinefs of the teeth, doth alfo ofttimes a 


4 
; 
‘ ~ = 
* 
4 > ; >, 
| 
4 
bak, 
? 


Lis. | 17 whofe Cure 18 performed y Surgery. 
yy che omitting of their proper duty, thatis, of chawing. Whence foever this The cae 
By sping the teeth, ay alth procceds,wee muft get Dentifrices to fetch it off withall, and chen the reeth 


inte levatory, mutt be prefently rubbed with aqua forts and aqua vite mixed together, that if there 


seany thing that hath {caped the Dentifrices, it may bee all fetched off: yet fuch a- 


? 


de wathings are hurtfull tothe found teeth, forthatth A caution in 
and waite the ficth of the gums. 
pentifrices {hall be made ofthe roote of marth mallowesboiledinwhitewine&X 
Alame ; and as when the teeth are loofe wee muft abftaine from {uch things as are 
»rdto be eaten and chawed, burt much more from breaking of fuch things as are of 
spony confittence, alfo here we muft fhunne all things that by their toughneffe ftick 
ithe teeth. Many for the cleanfing of the teeth, commend a powder made of {cur- 
Jebones, purpic fhells, pumice ftone, burnt alume, and harts horne, and alittle ci- 
~zmon,which is a fingular remedy for the teeth howfoever afte&ed.Many other are 
-ontent with bread only tofted & beaten, but this following watcris very cftectuall 
-owhiten thereeth. fal. ammon. zemmei, an.3i. alum. roch. 3%. aque rof. quod waterto 
(afficit, deftellentur. Andlet the teeth be cleanfed witk this diftilled liquor. 


Of the impediment and contraction of the Tongue. 


PR OL 
~ 

| 


times thisdifeafehappens after they are borne by fome accident or pre- 
rernaturallaffeét, as by too harda fcarre leftby the healing of anulcerunder the 

rongue. The patient at his beginning to {peake, 1s too flow in{pgaking, but prefent- 

ly leaving his flowneffe hee becomest6o quicke, fo that he ftammers. Ifthe difeafe Thecure. 
proceed trom the aftrition and fhortneffe of the ligamentall membrane lying under 

the tongue, then the in incifion fhall bce made broadwife, having great care that the 
veinesand arteries which are there, be not violated, for feare left they fhould caufea 
lemorrhagy noteafily to be ftayed : Then the mouth fhall be prefently wafhed with 
oxycrate, and fome lint dipped in fyrupe of dryed rofes, or honey of rofes put into 

themidtt of the incifion, left the part of the ligament, efpecially onthe nighttime 

when the tongue is filent and at reft, fhould grow tothe reft of the ligament. Forthe 

‘ame purpofe the finger fhall be often thruft this way, and the tongue more violent- 

yrowld up and down, & thruft out of the mouth. Yet fomrimes this ligament is fo 

thick & (hort,and therfore holds down the tongue fo clofe,that you cannot come to 

cut it with a knife or lancet without great and manifeft danger of death by bleeding. 
Therefore in {uch acafea needle and thread fhall bee thruft through it, and fothe Another way 
thread thall bee tyed ftraiter and ftraiter every day, untill by little and little this liga- reer s 
mentall tye of the tongue, which by its immoderate fhortnefle intercepts the liber- 


ty ofthe motion (hall be confumed and broken. 


» the part may be freed 
he tooth-drawer prefic 
tooke our the cooth, 
orne by the violence of 
walhed with oxycrate 
ing much inthe open 


Crap. XXX. 
Of fuperfiuous Fingers, and fuch as fticke together. 


[S\ese5yAch hand hath naturally five fingers onely ; whatfoever is more or leffe The difterem 
Dax is againftnature : and ifthere be fewer, it isa fault notto be helped by 


nthe teeth, and becom- 
— art. Butif there be more, that for the moft part may be helped by art : 


rt the reerh hemicives, 
hat would efchew this, 
with wine mixed Wil 
that no flimy matter 


‘4 
os ps fuperfluous fingers ufually grow by the thumbe, orthe little finger,but 


one {eldomeo therwife, Thefe areeither wholly fiefhy, or have bones of 


yather an earthy filch of # theirkind and nailes upon them. Thofe which are of a bony natare doe either arife 
¢, as ruft cates into 110" ‘Tom the joints of the naturall fingers, and are joynted likethem,and {0 are oft times 


| 
tongue is fometimes tyed and fhort from the nativity ; aswhenthe the caule os 
liberty of the tongue is reftrained bythe fubject and neighbouring as ensue 
well membraines as mufcles, being either too fhort or too hard. Some- 
teeth. 
ay 
| 
doth alio oft umes & — 


Of divers precernaturall Affetts, 


17 


L I BAI, 


moveabit, or-clfefrom fome middle {pace ofa joint, and thefe have not Powers " of che Prep 
ftirre or move. Nowtliey are fometimes equall in magnitude to the natural fip cover 
1 4 : to which they grow, yet more frequently they are fhorter. Thofe which are ong feft rhey the 
ficthy, are cafily amputated and made even with arazour ; but fuch as areal(o che prepuce 
ny cannot be cut off,unleffe with the cutting mullets herafter defcribed, and this rothe Jewen 
difeafe of the fingers in number. There is alfo another difeafe in figure, for they fo. nefle fake, 
times fticketogether, and otherwhiles they are very little feparated. This fay) cheir cut O 


happens either from the firft originall by the error of the formative faculty Or elf 

| it happens afterwards by accident, as by a wound or burne ill cured. For neighboy. 

wa ring fingers being ulcerated doeafily grow together, unleflethey be kept afunder |, 

alinnen ragge. And ifthey by chance fhall growtogether by alittle and thin skinn. 
and fleth, they fhall forthwith be divided witha fharp razour; burif they be joyne, 
by the interpofition of a more groffe anddenfe fubftance, to wit, the nerves, tep. 
dons,and veiels, being knittogether;on each fide, it will be beft notto meddle 
with thedividingthem, 


Cutting Mullets neatly made for the cutting off fuperfluows Fingers. 


istermed F 
of the farft 
hath grow 
ned by the 
berweene t 
prepuce c 

cured as 
tagion brit 
butifa {car 
aconveniec 
be ftretche 
the inner { 

and lerthe 
wart {hall 
the fame r 
ken of. Bul 
Cure is not 


Thecureof Neither muft wee omit, chat many havethceir nailes run with fuch bony fliarpe. 

into the fieth of their fingers lying under them, that they caufe moft cruell pti; 

thefingers, either commonly do you availe any thing by paring them ; for growing up wit 

in a while after, they prefle downewards againe with the more violence. Thereior 

the Surgeon isoften forced to cut away all the fleth whereinto the fharpenelle of tix 

| naile runs. Which I have done in many with happy fuccefs. Many have corns groW- 
| How totake off ing upon their fingers in divers fafhions : They are taken off by paring away by lit 
cecornesos tle and littlethe callous hardnefle, and then laying a head of garlicke beaten there. 

me” on. Yetthe cure ismore quick and certaine which is performed by cauftickes, a 


| fortss,or oile of vitrioll. 


Cuarp. XXXI. 


Of the too fhort a Prepuce, and of {uch as havebincircumcifea. 


Henasthe Prepuce or foreskin is too fhort, it cannot cover the 
This happens either by nature, to wit, by the firft conformation, 
terwards by fome accident, as to thofe whom religion and the 
of their nation bids to be circumcifed. The cureis thus. The Prep" 
turned up,and then the inner membrane thereof is cut round,and 
care is had, that the veine and artery which are there betweene the two membra™ 


662 
YA bed 
‘4 
4 4 
é ‘ 
/ > 7 == - G2 
—. 
4 
4 
\ 7 * = 3 J Y 
M4 WA a 
= 
a ) 
| 
‘ 
‘ 4 tl 
Othe wo 
Duce iStak 
extremity 


have nor pow: 
the natural! finger, 
ofe which are one! 
it fuch as are alf, 
‘{cribed, and is 
figure, for they fom. 
eparated. This taulr 
tive faculty ; oy elfe 
pred. For neighboy. 
y be kept afunder by 
ittle and thin skinne 
but if they be joyneq 
vit, the nerves, ten. 
it notto meddle 


5 Fingers. 


ith fuch bony fharpe- 
-aufe moft cruel! 
tor growing up with- 
e violence. Therefore 
the fharpenefle of the 
any have corns grow- 
by paring away by lit- 
garlicke beaten there- 
ed by cauftickes, as + 


rcumcifed. 


annot cover the 
conformation, of at- 
ligion and the cuftome 
is thus. The Prepuce © 
is cut round,and gre#* 


ne thetwo membran’ 


17. whofe Cure us performed Surgery. 683 


Praepuce, be not cut infunder. Hence it is drawn downward by extenfion, un- 


rlliit cover the ¢/ams,a deficcative emplafter being firft put between it and the g/ans 

jet they fhould grow together. Then a pipe being firft put into the urinary pellet: 
the prepuce fhall be there bound untill the incifion be cicatrized. This cure is ufed 
«othe Jewes,when having abjured their religion full of fuperftitions, for handfom- 
gefle fake, they would cover the nutof their yard with a prepuce, and fo recover 
cheir cut off skinne. 


Cuar. XXXII. 


of Phymofis asd Paraphymofis, that i, fo great aconftriction of 
the prepuce about the Glans or Nut, that st cannethe 
bared or uncovered at Pleafure. 


* 


fe He prepuce is ftraitened about the G/ans two waiessfor it either co- 
| ‘ f: vers the whole nut, & fo ftraitly encompaffes the end therof, chat 

| it cannot be drawne upwards, and confequently the nut cannot be 
| uncovered ; orelfe it leaves the G/aws bare under it, being faftened 
ot fo ftiffely to the roots thereof, that it cannotbee turned up, nor 

& 6.) drawn down, or over the Glaus, The firft manner of conftriGion 

istermed Phymofts, the latter Paraphymofts. The Phymofis happens cither by the faule 
of the firft conformation, or elfe by afcarre, through which occafion the prepuce 
hath growne lefler,as by the growing of warts. Now Paraphymofis is otten occafio- 
ned by the inflammation of the yard, by impure copulation ; for henceulcers breed 
berweene the prepuce and Glaus, with {welling, and fo great inflammation, that the 
prepuce cannot bee turned backe. Whence it is that they cannot bee handled and 
cured as you would, and a gangrene of the part may follow, which may by thecon- 4),.....- 
tagion bring death to all the body,unlefs itbe hindred & prevented by amputation: 
butifa {car be the caufe of the conftriction of the prepuce,the patient being plac’d in 
aconvenientfite, let the prepuce be drawne forth and extended and as muchas may 
beftretched and enlarged,then let the f{carre be gently cut in three or foure places on 
theinner fide with a crooked knife, butfo, that the gafhes come not to the outfide, 
and lec them be an equall diftance each fromother. But if a flefhy excrefcence or a 
wart {hall be the occafion of this ftraitnefle and conftricion, it fhall be confumed by 
the fame remedies, by which the warts of the wombe and yard are confumed or ta- 
kca off. Buc when as the prepuce doth clofely adhere tothe G/ans on every fide,the 


cure is notto be hoped for, much lefle to be attempted. 


Cuar. XXXIII. 


of thofe whofe Glans is not rightly perforated, and of the too hort 
or ftrait ligament, bridle, or Cord of the yard. 


3.0 me at their birth, by evill conformation, have not their G/ans perfora- | 
red in the middle,but have only a {mall hole underncath,toward the bri- Thecaufe 
dle & ligament ofthe yard, called the cord.Which is the caufe,thatthey 
246) do not make water in a ftrait line,unleffe they turn up their yard toward 
their belly, neither by the fame reafon can they beget children, becaule 
through this fault of conformation, the feed is hindred trom being caft direGly in- 
tothe wombe. Thecure is wholly chirurgicall, and is thus performed. The pra- Thecure. 
Puce istaken hold ofand extended withthe left hand, but withthe right hand, the 
extremity thereof, with thy end of the G/ens, is cut evento that hole which is under- 
Qeath. But fuch as have the bridle or ligament of the yard too fhort, fo that the yard 
Cannot ftand ftraight, but crooked, and as it were turned downewards ; in thefe alfo 


the generation of children is hindred, becaufe the feed cannot be caft directly and 
Kkk 2 plenti- 


I 
« 
- 
4 
4, 
| 
| 
4 


Ly 
plentifully zatothe wombe. Therefore this with much de Xte. 
rity, and the wound cured afterthe manner of other wounds, having regard tothe 
part. tha 

Such as are Childrenalfo are fometimes borne into the world with their fundaments yp, er 

domewithout forated, for a skinne preternatutally covering the part, hinders the paffage tort}, of 

a belein wood the excrements ; thofe muft havea paflage made by art with an inftrument, for 

notlonglived- at length the excrements will come forth: yet I have found by experience thar 
children are not naturally long lived, neither tolive many dayes after {ach ¢ ection 


CuarpX XXIV. 
if the cafes of the ftone. 


HE ftones which are in the bladder have for the moft part had thie), 
tro firft originall in the reines or kidneys,to wit, falling down from thenc. 
the ftone in the ‘ by the ureters into the bladder. The caufe of thefe is twofold, thar} 
material! and efficient. Groffe, tough, and vifcide humours, whic), 
crudities produce by the diftempers of the bowels and immoderate exerc;(e: 
chiefly immediately after meat, yeeld matter for the ftone ; whence itis that chil. 
Thecaue.  Arenare more fubjec to this difeafe than thofe of other ages. But the efficient 
js either the immoderate heate of the kidneys, by meanes whereof the {ubtler art 
of the humors is refolved,but the groffer and more earthy fubfades, and is hardened 
as we fee bricks hardened by the fun and fire ; or the more remiffe heat of the blad- 
der, fufficient to bake into a ftone the faces or dregges of the urine gathered in grear 
plenty inthe capacity of the bladder. The ftraightneffe of the ureters atdurenaiy 
paflage may be accounted as an afiftantcaufe. For by this meanesthe thinner por? 
tion ofthe urine floweth forth, but that whichis more feculent and muddy being 
ftayed behind, groweth as by fcaile upon {caile, by addition and collection of new 
matter into a ftony mafle, And as a weeke often-times dipped by the Chandler into 
melted tallow,by the copious adhefion of thetallowy fubftance prefently becom: 
a large candle; thus the more grofle and vifcide faces of the urine ftay as it were x 
the barres of the gathered gravell, and by their continual! appulfe are at lenge 
wrought and fafhioned intoa true ftone. 


Why children 


arelub jot to 


— 


ad 


Cuar.XXXV. 
Of the fignes of the floue of the Kidneys and bladder, 


7 HE HE fignes of the ftone in the reines, are the fubfiding of ed" 


Why thethigh yellow fand in the urine, acertaine ob{cure itching at the kidne)s 
is numme in the Bon and the fenfe of a weight or heavineffe atthe loynes, 2 {harp 1" 
ftong of the s pricking paine in moving or bending the body, a numnetle of" 


reines. 


thigh of the fame fide, by reafon of the compieffion caufed bythe 
{tone,of the nerves dilcending out of the vertebra of the loynes 
Signes of the the thigh. But when the ftone is inthe bladder, the fundament ave 
ftone inthe whole perineum is preficd as it were witha heavie weight, ef pecially if the {tone be 
of any bigneffe,a troublefome & pricking pain runs to the very end of the yard, 29° 
there is acontinuall itching of that part,with a defire to {cratch it: hence allo by (° 

paine and heat there is atenfion of the yarde, and a frequent and needlefle delire to 

make water, and fometimes their urine commeth fromthem d rop by drop. A mot 

prievous paine torments the patient in making water, which he is forced to {he by 

Whyfuch as f{tamping with his feet, bending of his whole body, and the grating of histecth. 
barca isofttimes forormented with exceffe of paine, that the Sphinéfer being relsx°¢ 
troubled with the right gut falleth downe, accompanied with the {welling heate and paine of ' 
the falling hoid Veines of that place. The canfe of torment is, the frequent ftrivin 


whitcs of eg 


by reafon of 
gine; yet 


00 ing, le 
Th 
nointed wit 
cheurine, 
rothat capac 
on his backe® 
drawn to his 
che ftone, as 
ro the bladd@ 
obvious, ha 
ferve for evé 
low. Whe 
ted) they co 
bladder, but 

with the rig 
and crookec 
womenbyr 
fir your Cat: 
_afilver wiar 
or the like, 
preffed urit 
theter isco 
theurinem 
ceivethe fh 


| 
Alibi  ¢ynpathy 
a 
habe 
‘ ; 
4 
| 
‘ 
5 
Beal 
‘ 


Lips 


avineg regard toth,. 


tundaments yp er. 
athe paflage forth of 
inftrument, for 
xperience thar luch 
safter fach fection. 


moft part had 
down from thence 
is twofold, that is, 
humours, whic), 
oderate exerciles, 
Hence it is that chil- 
ut the efficient canfe 
reof the (ubtler part 
des, and is hardened 
piffe heat of the blad- 
ine gathered in grear 
ureters atdurenary 
anes the thinner 
wt and muddy being 
nd collection of new 
by the Chandler into 
¢ prefently becomes 
roe ftay as ic were at 
ippulfe are at length 


der, 


efubfiding of redor 
ching atthe kidneys, 
eloynes, a fharp and 
numnetiec of he 
weffion caufed by the 
tebre of the loynes oO: 
r, the fundament and 
ecially if the ftone be 
rend of the yard, ane 
it: hence alto by rae 
nd needlefle 
rop by drop. A mol 
e forced fhew by 
Bating of histecth. He 
inéler being relaxed, 
eate and paine of the 


, the frequent 
0 


17, 


— 


17. whofe Cure ts performed by Surgery. 


665 


ofthe bladder to expell the ftone wholly contrary tothe nature thereof,whereto by 
(ympathy the expulfive faculty of the gnts and all their parts of the belly come asit 
were for fupply.The fediment of the urine is erofle & vifcid, and oft-times like the 
whites ofegs, which argueththe weaknefle of the native heate not attenuating the 
wices. The paticnt lookethofa paleand ycllowith complexion and hollow eyed, 
py reafon of the almoft continual! watching which is caufed by the bitternefle of 
sine; yet May it more certaincly be knowne by putting in, or fearching withaca- [ 


fonder. Thenthe Catheter being bigger or leffer as the body thall require, and a- 
goiated withoyle or butter, fhall beethruft with a skilfull hand into the paff: age of 
cheurine, and {0 into the capacity of the bladder. But if the Catheter cannot come 
-othat capacity ,the patient fhall be placed in {ucha pofture,then hall he be layd up- 
on his backe on abench, or the feetofabed, with his knees bended, and his hecles 
drawn to his buttocks, after which manner he muft almoftlic when he is to be cut for 
he tone, as fhall be thewen hereafter. For thus the Catheter is more eafily thruftin- 
rothe bladder, and fhewes there is a {tone by the meeting and obfcure found of the 
obvious, hard and refifting body. Youmuft have fundry Catheters, thatthey may 
ferve for every body bigger and leffer, and thefe muft be crooked, {moothand hoi- 
low. When being thruft intothe urenary paflage (which before unawares I omit- 
ted) they cometothe necke of the bladder, they muft not be thrutt ftreight into the 
bladder, but taking hold of the yard with the lefthand, they muft bee gently thruft 
withthe right directly intothe bladder, efpecially in men, by reafon of the length 
and crookedneffe of the way,which trends in the forme of this letter S.It is not fo in 


afilver wiar or ftring,that may hinder the groffe and vifcide humour, clotted blood, 

orthe like, from {topping the further end ofthe Catheter, through which the {iup- 
prefled urine ought to paffe & be made. But now afloon as we perceive that the Ca- 
sheteriscome into the capacity ofthe bladder,the wiar muft be drawn forth, that fo 
theurine may the freelier flow out by the hollowneffe of the Cathater. You may per- 
ceivethe fhapes of thefe inftruments by this following figure. 


The figureof Cathzters, and of 4 filver firing or wiar: 


~, 


\ 


Kkk 3 


ow ro te. 
rthe ftoncin 


-jarer. Whichto doe,the patient fhall bee withed to ftand with his body fomewhat thebladder 
pooping, leaning again{t fomewhat with his backe, and holding hisknees fome foor 


The figure of 
the necke of the 


women by reafon of the fhortneffe and ftraitneffe of the neckeof the bladder. It is biadder is 
ft your Catheters bee hollow or fiftulous in manner ofa pipe, that they may reccive Yetin™™ 


and women. 


} 
\ 
i. 
| 4 ey | 


CHare.XXXVI. 


Prognoftickes in the ftone. 


Hen the ftone ts caft forth of the kidney (whereas it bred by lity, 
and little) and is fo driveninto one of theurcters, that it 
7+) {top it,yet thereupon there followeth no fuppreffion of the urine. 
for feeing nature hath made divers parts of our body double jj 
‘n/>KS || the urine foweth into the other ureter. But if they thall bee bos} 
{topped with ftones, there is no doubt but the urine will bee who}. 
Howdeath fuppreit, and death enfue by the fuffocation and extinction of the native 
mayenfie by the urine flowing back by the rivelits ofthe veines over all the whole body. sy) 
the ‘uppreffion have a {mall ftone caft forth of their reines into the cavity of the ureters,thelc, 
till this tone be fallen into the bladder, have cruell paine with gripings, with 
defire to go to ftoole and make water, but oft-timesdoneither. For {uch oft-times 
have their bellies diftended with flatulencies:an argument hereof is their continya|! 
belching,or breaking of wind. But by fneefing & coughing, or any other concuffion 
of the whole body, a pricking paine is forthwith felt, whereas the ttone ftops, efpe. 
cially if it be cither rough, or have tharpe points like hornes. This paine is commy. 
| nicatedtothchip and thigh by fympathie, and fome have the {tones drawne up 
| it were with great violence. To thefe may bee added the Colicke, cholericke yori. 
ti ea ting,and almoft agenerall fweat.. The ftone in the kidnies is moft commonly bred 
in {uch as are ancient, by reafon of the weakneffe of the expulfive faculty, Butthe 
it sf ftone in the bladder happeneth to fuch as are mere young,becaufe the native hear is 
4 more vigorous in fuch, and ftrong and inordinate motions increafe the ftrength of 
the expulfive facultie. When the ftone isin the bladder, and che urine appeareth 
bloody, it is the figne of a finall, as alfoa prickly and rough ftone, for thus it more 
cafily entreth into the neck of the bladder, and exulcerateth it being fiefhy, whence 
the blood commeth away with theurine, and moft cruell paine as of needlesthru!l 
intorhe fieth, efpecially after labour and much exercife : on the contrary, a larger 
and more {mooth ftone will not caufe fuch tormenting paine,and it caufeth a milkic 
py 2 water. The fhapes of ftones bred in the kidnies are various, according tothe vane. 
| “Why ftontso ty of the {trainers through which they paffe whilft they are bred. Verily I have {een 
d watered {tones which reprefented the figure of grayhounds, hogs and other creatures,and 
P| Qrapes. | things wholly contrary tomansnature, by the production of their pricklcs and ast 
were branches. Some are foure {quare, others longifhand like a finger, other {ome 
HI of around figure with many protuberancies like a pine-apple kernell ; neither istic 
variety lefle in magnitude, number and colour : for fomeate yellowifh, others wh 
tith, red,afh-coloured or fome other like, according to the various temper of thes: 
4 fected bodies. The ftoncs of cholerick and leane men ufually concrete by pretense 
turall heat and drinefle ; butthofe of phlegmaticke or tat bodies, of a certain s" 
were congelation and obftruction of the paflages. A {tone falling fometimes fo" 
the bortome of the bladder into the paflage ofthe urine quite ftops it up, and then 
followeth atotall fuppreffion of the urine. Therefore then the patient thall be) 
it ced upon his backe and his legs being lifted up on high, he fhall be fhaken and tolled 
Te up and downe, juft as one would fhake upa facketo fillit ; for thus it is forced bit 
The into the bladder from whence it came, fromthe paflage of the urine wherein” 
| was got, yetit may alfo bee forced backe by thrufting in a Cathaier. The pal 
| whichafilicteth fuch as have the ftone is fome whiles continuall, yer more freque"” 
4 lyitcommeth by fits and returnes,fometimes monethly, otherwhiles yea rely. Suc! 
| Whymenare as have the ftone in the kidnies make for the moft part waterifh urine. Women 
more)" not fo fubje€ to the ftone as men, for they have the neck of their bladder more!" 
chanwomen. and broad,as alfo more ftraight ; wherefore the matter of the ftonc by reafon 0!" 
fhortneffe of the paffage is evacuated in gravell, before it can be gathered and 3°" 
into a {tone of ajuft magnitude ; yet ftones breed in fome women and thole 4 ually 


as big as in men, and therefore they are to be cured by fection andthe like ne y 


I 


fem friz ‘d 
de a 


when rhe ite 
the tearin 
warer,curab| 
once 
sangrene oft 
sitient runs ¢ 
ment, or if itt 
aCath2zter): 
fiftened into 
ing about £0 | 
ments. Yet 

der than tho! 
yereth. Por 
long whileto 
eafily and co 
which happe 
places, fympt 
part which is 


cakes and 2 
meats.Alfo; 
the bloud 
crete by the 
wines, beare 
1s to be fhun 
labour becay 
carefully be 
be plethoric 
which is ac 
Performance 
ficians are n 
thefe follow 
ule of diur- 
flammation 
ted parts is 

Wheref 
With Div. o 
Medicines { 
MAlOY an. 
mellss alb; = 
“pozeme 
pallial 


‘WO houres 


* 
‘ { 
| 
d 
. 
q 
Fd 
a 
Sh 


BAZ 


mreas it bred by Jity. 
mters, tharir wholly 
reffion of the urine. 
bur body double. aj] 
they thal bee both 
rine will bee Whol. 
native heat,by 
whole body. Such 
he ureters, thefe, yn. 
Bripings, with Often 
. For fuch oft-times 
of is their continual] 
any other concuffion 
he ftops, 
his paine is commu- 
{tones drawne Up as 
ke, cholericke vomi- 
oft commonly bred 
lfive faculty. Butthe 
maufe the native heat is 
reafe the ftrength of 
the urine appeareth 
one, for thus it more 
being fiefhy, whence 
eas of needles thrutt 
he contrary, a larger 
nd it caufeth a milkic 
cording tothe varic- 
-d. Verily I have {een 
d other creatures,and 
heir prickles and as it 
afinger, otherfome 
ernell ; neither isthe 
Scllowifh, others whi- 
ious temper of the af- 
concrete by preteraa- 
ics, of acertaine asit 
lling fometimes from 
tops it up, and thence 
patient {hall be 
be fhaken and toiled 
thus itis forced back 
he urine whereinto it 
Cathaier. The pare 
nll, yer more frequen™ 
rwhiles yearely- Such 
th urine. Women are 
eir bladder more fhort 
ftone by reafon of 
be gathered and grow 
ymen and thofe ¥ 
n and the like 


17. whofe Cars is performed by Surgery. 


when the ftone exceedeth the bigneffe of an egge,itcan fcarce be takin away with+ 
wot the tearing of the bladder, whence happeneth an unvoluntary fhiedding of the 
yarer,curable by no art,becaufe the bladder, fecing it is nervous and Without bloud, 
yeing oace torneadmitteth no confolidation, adde hereto that in@rmmation anda Whar ftones 


singrene often following the rending of the bladder bring inevicable death. The canner 
satient runs the fame hazzard, ifalong ftone be pulled out fidewile with your inftru- blade: wich 
mentor if it be inclofed in a membrain(which kind of ftone can fcace be found with orkilling the 
Catheter) and fo bee faftened to the bladder,or otherwife if the fone it felfe 
aftened into the fubftance of the bladder, or laftly itby any chance the Surgeon be- 

ing about to plucke out the ftone fhall hurt the body of the bladder'with his inftru- 

meats. Yet ftones of an indifferent bignefs are more fafly extracted our of the blad- 

gerthan thofe which are leffe, andthe patient more frequently and happily reco- 

yereth. For they doe not {cape from the iaftrument, and the patient being ufeda 

jong whileto endure pain, as that which hath been along time agrowing doth more 

afily and conftantly away with the inflammation, paine and other fymptomes, 

which happen afcer cutting,yea in cutting. Having thus fpoken of the caufes,figns, 
slaces,{ymptomes and prognofticks,we muft come to the cure, beginning with that 


part Which is termed Prophylactice, that is, the preventing part. 


CHarXXXVIL 
What cure # tobe ufed when we feare the ftone. 


let mutt firft bee appointed, which by theconvenient ufe of the fixe 
things nor narurall (as they terme them) may heape up {mall {tore of ult aca fear 


stole, toughand vilcide humours in our bodies. Therefore cold and 
cloudy aire is tobe fhunned. They muft abftaine from fith,beefe, porke, 


water-foule, pulfe, cheefe, milke meates, fryed and hard egges,rice, 


cakes and all pafiry, unleavened bread and faftly all manner of obftructing 
meats.Alfo garlike, onions, lecks muftard,{pices ,& laftly all things which overheat 
thebload and humors mutt be fhuned, efpecially if you feare that the ftone is con- 
crete by the heat of the reines. Standing and muddy waters, thicke and troubled 
wines, beare,and fuch kind of liquors muft be efchewed. Sacicty in meats and drinks 
isto be fhunned, as that which breeds crudities. Alfo long watching and contisuall 
labour becaufe they inflame the bloud, caufe crudities, and preternaturail heat muft 
caretully be efchewed, as alfo all more vchement paffions of the minde. If the body 
be plethoricke, then it maft bee evacuated by phicbotomic, purging and vomiting, 
which is accounted for a fingular remedy forthe prevention uf tints dileafe. Por the 
performance of all which things a Phyfician fhall be confultcd. Bur becaufe Phy- 
licians are notin every place and alwaies at hand, I havethought good to fet downe 
thefe following medicines ; yet we mutt firft remember this couniell of Galew The 
ule of diurcticks, and ftrong purging medicines is hurttull, as often asthere is in- 
fammation in the reines and bladder, for fo the confluxe of rhe humors to the affe- 
ed parts is the ereater,whence the inflammation and paine are increafed. 

Wherefore firft ufing relaxing medicines,as fixe drams of Ca/sza newly drawne, 
With iv. of Rubarbe inpowder mixed therewith , then lenitive and refrigerating 
Medicines (hall bee inwardly and outwardly ufed, fuch as isthis following fyrupe. 

: [omm:tatum malv bifmal. violar.an.m. 8. rad. alsh. 3i.elycyr.58.4. fem, frigid. and 
Malor.an.di.fiat decottio, tb.8.in colatura diffolve 
melts albi fiat (yrupus fecund. artem: \et the patient ufe this often. This following 
4pozeme is alfo very efic@tual for the fame purpofe. A diurerick 
(ul mund.an.3. beton’cherniar agrimon.omninm capil. cy pimpinell an.m. 6.4. 
fem. friz ‘d major (ems folror.feo,5 vi.fiat decott.ad 16.8, incolatura di[jolve 
de Althea de berniar.an.3\8. Makeacleare apozeme and let it be aromati- 
2ed With alittle cinamon, fortwodofes ; ler him take the firft dofisin the morning 


‘WO houres before meat,and the other at foure of the clock in the afternoone. More- 
over 


7 

| 
‘ 


663 


Of divers prevernaturall Lis, iy, 
over this following broth hath an excellent and certain power to prevent thie Rone 

icnitivebroth. atum malva.cy 
agua fluviatsli cum gallo gallimaceo crurc vituline the broth bee 
ove kept,and let the Patient take thereof fixe ounces for foure daics; in the Morning two 
°°") ures before meat, with.an ounce ofthe juice of Citrons gently warmed with th 
dues fame brothatthe time of the taking thereof ; forthus,much urine will be made in ' 
fhort while after, full of afandy {ediment anda grofle vifcide humour. 

you may.certainly gather that this kind of broth is very effeCtuall to cleanfethe vat 

fages of the urine, neither in the interim, doth it any harme to the ftomacke and o. 

ther parts by.which it paffeth : fo that it may be rightly efteemed a medicinal} no, 

A@weick  xifhment, Youmay alfo profitably this following powder. nucieorum, 
lorum diamarg frig. fem. mind. glycyrhix rafe, 3; 

fem faxifrag. Si. mili folis, genift. pimptnel. brufci & afparag, an. Di. (om. althey 

348, facch 3vi. fiat pulvss; let him take a {poon full in the morning three houres 

rhelyemale before meat, Alfo fome thinke that lye made of the ftalkes and huskes of beanes jg 

athealesof a good prefervative againtt this difeafe.Befides the ufe of this following gly fter 

beane ftalkes a to many. RK. nenuph,an.p.i fiat 


Anodine gli. decodtio.ad lib.i.in colatura diffolve cafsia fiftula 51. melles viel.cy facch. rub. an, 
fersin he fiat clyter. This which followeth is the fitter to aflwage the paine, k, 

aneth. berul. an. p.ii. fiat decoctio in latte vaccino in colatyy, 


diffolve cafiia fiftul. facchar.alb. an.3i,vitellos ovorum num. ii. anethini,e> 

mam. an sii. fiat clyster. Inthe interim letthe kidneys bee annointed on the outfide 

with uneuentum rofatum, refrigerans Galen, and populeom ufed feverally or mixedto. 

gether, laying thereupon a double linnen cloth dipped in oxycrate. But ifthe con. 

cretion of the ftone be of acold caufe, the remedies muft bec varied, as follows ; l, 

nomediesa. terebinth .venet Si.cort.citri coc. ii. frat potio, Orelfe, recent.ex- 
zaintt thettone Svi, benedich. lax. aq. fanicul. ii. 3i. fiat potio; let him takeit 
"three houres before dinner : this following apozeme isalfo good. Krad. cyper.bar. 
acoldeane. gram.an Sitibifmal, cum toto, beton. an.m.5 fem. mili: folis, bardan.urtic.an iii. 
fem.melon.glycyrhiX ish. num. fist decochad Quart. ill. in expre(fa colaty. 

fyrup.de capban. oxymilitis ferllstics 31. facchar albif. Sli. fiat apore. 

pro sribus dofibus,clarificetur Cy aromsatiz cum. 1. 8, fant. citrin. let hin 

take foure ounces three houres before dinner. Or elfe, . rad petrofel. farnicnl. ani. 
faxtfrag.pimp.gram.cy bardan.anm. quatuor feminum frig. major. mundat, mili. 

folis an. ii. fiat decoctio, cape de colatura tb, in qua diffolve facch. rub. & [jrup.capill. 
ven.ani.&. Letit betakenatthree dofes,two houres before meat. The following 

powderis very cffectuallto diffolve the matter of the ftone. Kk, petrofel. rai. 

mundat.an colcitrapam vocant,3i. let them be dryed 

oven or {tone witha gentle fire,afterwards let them be beaten feverally and make @ 

powder, whereof letthe patient take 5i,8,or two f{cruples with white wine,or chick- 

_en broth fafting inthe morning by the {pace of three daies. Or, Ke. covrand. pray. 
alkakengi,milst folss,an O11. cinam.an. turvit! 

electi 5i.cart g alang mofchat.c lapid.judiact an.Di.fol.fenna mund.ad duplum 
omnium,diacrydts .mifce, fiat pulvis : the dofis isabout 5i. with white wine three 

houres before meate. Againft the flatulencies which much diftend the guts io this 

Carminatwe kind of difeafe, elifters fhall be thus made malv.bifmal pariet.origanicalamen| 
glitters. flo.chamam.famitat .anethian.m. §. anifi,carvi.camini fonic, an.38. baccar Laur. 
femsin rutadii fiat decodtie,in colatura,diffolve bened, lax. vel bas. 

Lauri Siti. aneth.chamam.G rutar.an.3i, fiat cly fer. Or, ole: 

cum vini fist clyfter; ler it be kept long, that fo it may have 


themore powerto difcyffe the winde. 


CHa 


Therefore the 
ficketh, whic 
cles and yard, 
itbehooveth 
indeavours. 
Therefore! 
him the {pace 
let him run up 
for the {tone b 
fhall be given 
cultie, as oyle 
withthe wat 
body be mad A 
flame be apply 
belly,a little b 
cord,or by th 
of water and 
ftone,by reafc 
vour laftly, 
ent muft bee 
coction. Re, m 
iii. fe 
femcult, & er 
inclufa face 
patient tarry | 
the powers re 
Maine as lon: 
ded parts rel 
defeendeth in 
outofthe pla 
ther before th 
der did anyt 
Patient is eo 
venture there 
the bladder, 
cafily sthe par 
of f Weetalmc 
thefe things a 


thought Pood 


What 
q 
A 
4 
4 
i 
é 
: 
Bt 
‘ 
tae j 
+ ¥ | 


Lip. 


revent the ftone 
he 4fem frin, 
welar.ay 
tet the broth bee 
the morning ty 
warmed with?) 
it 
will be madein 2 
mour, W hereby 
to Cleanic the paf: 
ftomacke and o. 
a medicinal] noy. 
nuclcorum melbi. 
vale, 3). 
Ji. (cm. altheg 
prning thiec houres 
luskes of beanies js 
owing glyfter hath 
nenuph,an.» fiat 
mch.rub. an, 
agethe paine. lx, 
/aCCiNO colaturg 
let anethini, cha. 
nted on the outfide 
tally,or mixed to. 
te. But ifthe con. 
Bcd, as follows ; lv, 
IX, cafra recent. ex- 
tro; let him take it 
cyper bar. 
Ar daw. 47tic.an ij. 
expreffa colatu- 
311i. fiat apore- 
ant. citriv. let him 
rofel. fanicnl, 
mundat. CF 
ub. & fyrup.capill. 
at. The following 
be dryed in an 
erally and make 
hite wine,or chick- 
RK. pray. 
Dii. turbith. 
nemund.ad duplum 
h white wine chice 
nd the guts io this 
baccar (aur. ibe 


“miles 


Or, kK. oles nile 
that fo it may have 


| desand yard,with acontinuall defireto make water and goeto ftoole. In this cafe 


| Patient is come out of the bath, that hee may bee throughly fatisfied whether perad- 


| Qebladder,which may with-hold the urine ; for the Cathater will enter farre more 
| Calily the parts being relaxed by the warmenefie of the bath : then inje@ fomeoyle 
of (Weet almonds witha fyringe into the #rethraor paflage of the yarde whilftall 
‘hele things are in doing, let not the patient come into thecoldaire. Bur here [have 


BA7- 


Cuar.XXXVIIL 
what isto be donc, when the fhone falleth ows of the Kidney into the Ureter. 


‘Fe-times it falleth out that the reines ufing their expulfive faculty .. - 
force downe the ftone (whofe concretion and generation the Phyfi- fepping 
‘ cians by the formerly prefcribed meanes could not hinder) from inthe #rtter. 
themfelves into theureters ; but it ftayeth there either by reafon of 
the ftraightneffe of the place, or the debility of the expulfive faculty. 
Therefore then cruell paine tormenteth the patient in that place whereas the {tone 
sicketh, which alfo by confent may be communicated to the hippe, bladder, tefti- 


spehooveth the Phyfician that he fupply the defe& of nature, and affift the weake 


outofthe place, and that the fame totall fuppreffion of urine do as yet remaine, nei- 
ther before the patient entred intothe bath the putting of a Cathezer into the blad- 
dtr did any thing availe, yet norwithftanding he fhall try the fame againe after the 


‘enture there may bee any other thing in thefe firft paflages of the yard and neck of 


ght to deferibe achaire for a bath,whcreinthe patient may fitly fic. 


The 


whofe Cure ss performed by Surgery. 669 
indeavours. 
Therefore let the patient if he be able mount upon a trotting horfe, and ride upon Remedieste 
) @ imthe {pace of fome two miles, or if hee can have no opportunity to doe fo, then [ere sown he 
ichimrunupand downe a paire of ftaires untill he be weary,and even {weat again ; 
Me forthe ftone by this exercife is oft-rimes fhaken into the bladder ; then prefently 
Me hal begiven or taken by the mouth fuchthingsas have a lenitive and relaxing fa- 
syltic, as oyle of {weet almonds newly drawne and that without fire, and mixed 
Me withthe water of pellitorie of the walland white wine. Let frictions of the whole 
body be made from above downewards with hor clothes ; let Ventofes with a oreat 
lame be applyed one while tothe loynes, and another while to the botrome of the 
belly,a little below the grieved place ; and unleife the patient vomit of his owne ac- 
@ cord,or by the bitternefle of his paine, let vomiting bee procured with a draught 
of waterand oile luke warme ; for vomiting hath much force to drive downe the 
hone,by reafon of the compreffion of the parts, whichis caufed by fuch an endea- 
Me vour: laftly, ifthe ftone defcend not by the power of thefe remedies, then the pati- 
Me cumuft bee put into a Semicupium, that is, a Halfe-bath, made of the following de- 
cotton. toto beton, uafturt faxifrag. berul, parietar.Vvio- A decotion 
UL fermi. melonum,pailti folis ,alkekengi cicer.rab rad.apptl, cram, fora bath. 
2m fuffierenti quantitate aqua pro ,coquantur ifta ome. 
berein let the patient {icupto the navell: neither isis fitthat the 
Me pwticnt carry longer in fucha bath than is requifite, forthe {pirits are diffipated, and 
‘cpowers refolved by too long {tay therein. But on the contrary,if the patient re- 
maine as long as is fufficient in thefe rightly made, the paine is mitigated ,the exren- 
ied parts relaxed, and the paffages of urine opened and dilated,and thus the ftone 
defcendeth into the bladder. But it it be not moved by this meanes any thing at all 
| 
= 


An Anodine 
Carapla{ine. 


Signes of the 


{tone fallen out 
ofthe wrefer in. 


The fizwre of « chasre for 4 Semicupium. 


fi 


A. Sheweth the whole frame of the Chatre. 

B. The hole wherein the patient mui fit. 

C. TheCifterne that holds the water. 

D. A Cocke to empty the water when it zreweth cold. 
E. A Fusnell whereby to poure in warme water. 


There may alfo be another decoion made for the bath, as thus : . rad.rg, 
alth a{parag.an j.cumin.fanicul ameos 4n.3iiii. fem.lini, 
fanug.an. SVi.fol, marwb.parietar.florum chamam.melil. anethi,an.m.ii, bylliant omnis 
fecundumartem in aqua [uf ficientt, vins albi odorifert quantitate ad confump- 
tionem tertia partis pro Semicupio. Alfothe fame decoction may beeufed for glitters, 
adding theretotwo yolkes of egges,and foure ounces of oyle of lillies, withJi.of 
oile ot Juniper, which hath a certaine force to aflwage the paine of the ftone andco- 
lick. But a farre leffe quantity of the deco@ion ina glifter muft be uled in thele dit 
eafes, than ufually is appointed in other difeafes ; otherwifethere will be danger |e! 
the guts being diftended fhould more preffe upon the kidneys and ureters, trovb!¢d 
in fome {ort with inflammation, and fo increafe the paine and other fymptomes. 
This tollowing cataplafme fhall be profitably applyed to the grieved place, tow", 
the loynes or flankes and bottome of the belly, forit is very powerful! co aflwage 
paine,and help forwards the falling downe of the ftone. rad. alsh. & raphani 
cients detnde contritis,adde ole: aneth. chamam. cr pingued, cuniculi 
rincicer.quantum fufficit, fiat catapla(ma adufum pradicium. After by thefe means che 
ftone forced out ofthe wreter is falleninto the bladder, the paine prefently (ifthe 


to the bladder. be but onc ftone,tor fometimes more with much gravell do againe fall intothe »” 


ter )is mitigated, and then the patient is troubled with an itching and pricking# che 
end of his yardand fundament. Thereforethen unlefic he bee very weake, it 5 ™ 
that he ride and walk a foote,and take Siv. of /pecies Lithontriben in foure doles ¥* 
white wine, or the broth of red Cicers three houres before dinner and {upper Be 
fides, let him plentifully drink good wine, and after he hath drunke, let him hol 


allo 


> 


being 
in the enc 
co which if it 
che pallage of | 
curning or CWI 
rempted and 
Gimblets. 


{ 
= 
Ay > 
SS 
¥ 
2 
Tt 
Fi q 4 
COK 
| «ff a . 
> 


od. 


ii, bslliant omnis 
quantitate ad confump- 
y bee ufed for glitters, 
yle of lillies, with 3i.of 
ne of the {tone and co- 
ft be in thefe dif 
Bhere will be danger lett 
sand ureters, troubled 
Band other fympromes. 
prieved place, to wil, 
powerfull ro aflwage 
ad. alth. raphaxi 
omnibus in aqua 
yowed, cuniculi yam. 
trer by thefe means the 
aine prefently (if chere 
neaine fall intothe #”* 
ing and pricking at che 
pee very weake, it is fi 
jbonin foure doles with 
dinner and fupper. Be- 


__ yrineas long as he can ; that fo it being gathered in greater plenty, it may prefent- 
te 

iy 


pay 


rf 


whofe Cure perfarmed 


tcc ftone out of the bladder with the more force : for which purpofe you 


\{o inject che following liquor into the bladder. [yrupi capil, ven, 31. aqua 
Letit bee inje&ed into the bladder witha fyringe. 


—_ 


Cuar. XXXIX. 


What mast be done the ftone being fallen into the necke of the bladder, 
or pa(fage of the yard, 


ogee Freer the ftonc is fallen out of the capacity of the bladder, and ftops in 
vee the necke thercof,or paflage of the yard,the Surgeon hall have a {peciall 
+ (Xe care that he do not force or thruft backe the ftone from whence it came, 
but rather that he prefs it gently with his fingers tothe end of the yard,the 
being firtt made flippery by injecting fome oyle of {weet almonds. But if it 
the end of the Glans, it muft bec plucked out with fome crooked inftrument 
ro which if it will not yeeld, a Giaiblet witha pipe or cafe thereto, {hall be put into 
ye pallage of the yard, and fo it fhall be gotten our, or elfe broken to pieces by the 
urning or twining abour of rhe Gimblet, which I remember [ have divers times at- 


eempted and done ; for fuch Gimblets are made with fharpe {crewes, like ordinary 
Gimblets. 


The delincation of 4 Gimblet made to breake the flones in the pafaze of the 
yard, together with its pipe,or cafe. 


Sian 


The cffizies of another leffer Gimblet. 


Verily what Gimblets foever are 
made for this bufinefic, their body nor 
point muft bee no thicker than a imall 
probe ; left whilft they are forced or 
thruftinco the wreshra, or urinary paf- 
fage,they mighr hurt the bodicsnextun- 
tothem by their violent entrance. 


Cuape. XL. 


Woat courle must be taken, if the ftone fiickimg inthe Urethra or urinary paffage, 
cannot be corten out by the fore-mentioned arts. 


SLES SUT ifthe ftone be more thicke, hard, rough and remote from the end 
*))*2 of the yard,than that it may be gotren out by the meanes formerly men- 


*)} tioned in the precedent chapter,and if that the urine be wholly {uppreft when the yard 
<A therewith , then muft you cut the yard upon the fide with a ftreight pesy belately 
2 Wound: for you muft not make incifionon the upper part for feare of 


“fixe of blood, fora large veine and artery lyech thereunder; nor io che lower part, 
or 


, 
47%. 51111. fem. bini, 
= 
‘ ~ 
5) 
« 
We 
| 
Jrunke, lec him Hole” 


— 


O72 Of divers preternaturall Affetts, Ly B. 19 
for fo it would {Carce ever heale againe, for chat it isa bloodleffe part, andj. apduceth 
fides, the continuall and acride falling of the urine would hinder the lutine: sofhis | 
on :‘wherefore the incifion muft be made on the fide,on that part whereas the 
moft refifts and fwels out. For that part is the more flethic ; yet firftthe eng rs por checon 
skin of the prepuce muft be mach drawn upfotocover the Glass which being coat rather 
the “rethra (hall be tyed with a threed a little above the ftone, that fo the tone One, ne Cet 
be ftayed there,and may not fallback againe. Therefore then, incifion bein the 0 
the ftone muft be taken forth,and the skin which was drawne more Violently to ‘y of un d by the 
ver the Glans isto be let goe backe againe ; for fo it will come to paffe thar 2 whet 
part of the skin may cover the cut yard, and foit may be the more {peedily if wit 
and the urine may naturally flow out. Ihave by this meanes oft-times taken en ee - hall ch 
the flone with che inftruments here delineated. 
Instruments fit to take the fone forth of the opened Urcthra,or wre. wl 
mary P affage of the J ard. commet 
the urine by t 
caulcin this te 
theincifion be 
| expreffed. 
| Then for the agglutination, if need require, it will be requifite to few up the lips 
Anageluinae Of the wound,and apply this agglutinative medicine following. K.tereh wenet 
tivemedicine. gum. clemt, 3i.fang.dracon, cy maftic.an. 5%. fiat medicamentum ut : chenths 
; whole yard mutt be covered over witha repercuflive medicine made ot the whites 
of egges,with the pouder of bole armenick, aloes, farina volatily, and oyle of rofes. 
Laftly,if need {o require,a waxe candle, or leaden ftring annoynted with Venice tur. 
Howtohaften pentine fhall be thruft into the 4reshrato haften the agglutination, and retaine the 
theagslutina- maturall {moothnefle and ftreightnefle of the urenary patlage left peradventure aca 
runcle grow therein. 
beebound to 
Cuap. XLI. othe panticy 
What manner of [ection to be made when a ftone is in a boyes bladder. 
Itherto we have fhewed, by what means it is convenient to draw {mall 
{tones out of the ureter, bladder and paflage of the urine; now will we 
zs = 1.) briefly thew the mannet of taking of greater ftoncs out of the blad 
ali Whytheboy der, which is performed by incifion and iron inftruments, and Iwi! 
muftbe thaken deliver the practice thercof firft in children, then in men,and !aftly 
Pefore cutting women. Firft therefore let the Surgeon take the boy (upon whom itis determi 
bP Bs. ned the worke fhall be performed) uncer the arme holes,and fo give him five or fix 


fhakes,that fo the ftone may defcend the more downewards tothe neck of the blaé 
Howto place der. Then mutt you caufea {trong man fitting upon a high feat to lay the child 
the ~~ his backe with his face from himward, having his hips lying upon his knees. The 
fore Child mutt lye fomewhat high that he may breathe the freelier,& let not the nervo" 
parts be too much ftretched, but let all parts be loofe and free for the drawing for" 
ofthe ftone. Furthermore, it is fit that this ftrong man, the childs legges being 
ded backe, with the child, that purring his legs to his hams, that he draw them up* 


much as he can,& let the other be fure he keep them {o;for this fite of the child —" 


a 
| 
Oreto 
edund 


Lip, | 7, 
Bpodiefie art, and. 

linder the 
mart whereas the 

yeti the end of the 
Which being dear 
that fothe {tone ma 
Lincifion being med 
more violently tg Co. 
eto pafle that whole 
more {peedily UNited 
 Oft-times taken forth 


cthra, or wre- 


muifite to few up the lips 
ig. Ke tereh.wemet 
ut : chenthe 
ine made ot the whites 
til, and oyle of rofes. 
synted with Venice tur- 
ation, andretainethe 


left peradventure aca. 


boyes bladder. 


nvenient to draw {mall 
the urine; now willwe 
toncs out of the blad- 
oftruments, and I will 
ren in men,and laftly 
yn whom itis determr 
i fo give him five or fixe 
tothe neck of the blad- 
Matto lay the child upon 
g upon his knees. The 
let not the nervous 
e for the drawing forth 
hilds legges being 
that he draw them up 4 


‘ait whofe Cure is 


is fite of the child much 


- 


P erform ed by Surgery. 


to well performing of the worke. Then let thé Surgeon thruft wo of the 

vers of his left hand as tarre into the childs fundamentas hee is able ; but let him 

<inhisother hand prefle the lower belly, fr it wrapping acloth about his hand, 

{0 checomprefiton muy bethe leffe troublefome, ‘arid léft inflammation fhould 
ppen rather by this meanes than by theincifion. Now the com preffion hath this 

eto caufe the ftdne defcend out of the bottome of the bladder into the neck there- 

funder the os pubes, whither after it is arrived, it muft be there kept, & as it were go- 

ned by the command of your hand, left it thould flide from that place whereto 

ogg have brought if. Thefe things thus done, nothing now remaineth, butthat the 

with und fome two fingers breadth diftant from the fundament. cut 

rough all the flef even tq che ftone on the left fide of the perinanm. But in the in. Where mdivide 

him beware thathe hure not the inte/tinum rehum toric may, and ufually 

oh happen, that whileft the ftone is brought out ofithe bortome of the bladderto 

thereof, this gut is doubled in : now ifit bee cut with your incifion knife ir 

commeth to pafle mat the excrements may fometimescome out at che wound onal 

»curine by the fandament,. which thing hath in hindred the agelutination 

od confolidation of the wound; yet in fome others it hath done little harme. be. Nature very 

| this tender{age many things happen, which may feemeto exceed nature ; Powetfullin 

the wey being T the ftone muft bee plucked forth with the inftrument here 

exprefie | 


| 


- 


eokes to pull forth of childrens bladders. 


é 


é é 
\\ } 
* 


‘ 


i. 


| ? 

dy 


4 
ALLS 


4 


The tone being drawne out, a {mall pipe thall be put into the wound, and there 
for Lome {pace after, for reafons hereafter to bee delivered ; then his knees fhall 
yebound together, for thus the wound will the fooner clofe and bee agglutinated. General) rules 
Nierelidue of the cure fhall be performed by reducing the generall cure of wounds, mutt be redu. 


“ithe particular cemper of the childs age,and the peculiar nature of the childin cure. a, 


_ 


How to cut men for the taking ous of the ftone in thebladder. 


A@ysEing wee cannot otherwife helpe fuch men as have ftones in their bladders, 
we muft come to the extreme remedy,to wit, cutting. But the patient mutt 
firftbe purged, andifthe cafe require, draw fomebloud ; yer muft you not diffeaion. 
‘Umediately after this,or the day following haften tothe work, forthe patient can- 
‘ot but be weakened by purging & bleeding. Alfo itis expedicnt for fome daies be- 

eto foment the privities with fuch things as relaxe and foften, that by their yecl- 

ftone may the more eafily be extra@ed: Now the cure isthus tobe perfor-'’ 
‘Neds The patient (hall be plated apona firm table or bench with a cloth many times jay the 
under his buttock$,and a pillow under his loynes & back, fo that he may lie patient. 
‘te upright with his thighs lifted up,:and -histegs aad back to his but- 
Then fhall his feet be bound with'a lipature of three fingers breadth caft about 

“ankles, and with the heads thereof being: drawn upwards to his neck,and a 2~ 
Lil ut 


i 


\ 
& 
— 
\ 
| 
“ed 
— 


O74. Of divers preteraatur ail 4f ects, Lis, ju B, 
boutit, and fo brought downewards, bath his hands fhall bee bound to his knees Qopped by 
4 che following figure fheweth, bladder. 
gers ro 
ta | The patient thus bound, it is fit you have foure ftrong men at hand; that's tot, 
na hold hisarmes, and other two who may fo firmely and ftraightly hold the knee 
with one hand,and the foot with the other,that he may neither move his limmes,no: 
ftirre his buttocks, but be forced to keepin the fame pofture with his whole body, a 
Why the probe Then the Surgeon fhallthruft into the urenary paflage evento the bladder,a filver or 
iron and hollow probe,annoynted with oyle, and opened or fliton the outfideshat 
' the point of the knife may enter thereinto, and that itmay guide the handofthe 

| | workman, and keep the knife from piercing any farther into the bodies lying there: 

| under. The figure ofthis probe is here expreft. 

Now thq 
Probes with flits in their ends, anddowne 
if fuch Guid 
Then mutt 

the Surgeo: 
| -dersinto th 
asmuch aS | 
put into the 
withthis or 
 famewich 
Why chefoame thall gently wreftthe probe, being fo thruft in, cowards the left fide, and ali 
gab en he who ftandeth on the patients right hand, fhall with his left hand gently liftup x 
nm Cods,that fo in the free andopen {pace of the left fide of the perineum, the Surge® 
may have the more liberty to make the incifion upon the probe which is thru 
and turned that way. But in making this incifion, the Surgeon muft be careful! " 
he hurc not the.feame of the and fundament. For if that feame bee 
will pot be cafily confolidated, tor that itis callous and bloudleffe, therefore 
i Bd rine would continually drop forth this way. But if the wound be made too ncaie" 
fundament,there is danger, left by forcible plucking forth of the ftone he bs 
fome of the hamorrhoide veins, whence a bleeding may enfue, which is 


| 
= 
| 
¢ 
- 


nat hand; that is two to 
traightly hold the knec 
er move hislimmes,nor 
e with his whole body. 
o the bladder, filver or 
flicon the out fide,that 
guide the handof the 
» the bodies lying there- 


ds the left fide, and allo 
fe hand gently liftup hs 
perinaum, the 


the ftone he 


whichis 


obe | 


jopped by any meanes, orthat hee may rend the /phincfer mufcle, or body of the 

bladder, fo that it can never be repaired, Dherefore it muft be made the {pace of two Wh 

gagers from the fundament, according tothe ftraightneffe of the fibres, that foit the wound 

may bethe more eafily reftored afterwards. Neither muft the incifion thus made, ‘k¢forth the 

exceed the bigneffe of ones thambe, for that it is afterwards enlarged by putting in og 

he Crowes beake and thedilater,but more by the ftone asiris plucked forth. But 

which is cut,ts neither {peedily nor eafily healed up, as that which is torne. Ther which 

Then prefently put into the wound fome one of thefe filver inftruments delineated ani om 

nere below,and called by the name of Guiders, for that they ferve as guides to the o- healed than 

‘her inftruments which are to be put into the bladder, thefe are made with around & 
ominent head, whereby it may bee put into the defcribed cavity of the probe, and 

hey are noted by thefe letters A.A. then there are others marked with the letters B. 

and called by the like fame;and are to be put under the former,being made forked 


675 


athe end,tharfo-it may ,as it were,embrace the end of the former. 
«The figures of Guiders of two forts. 


Now the probe is to bedrawne forth, and the Guidersto be thruftand turned up 
anddowne in the bladder,and at length tobeftayedthere by putting in an ;yet 
Guiders as wanta pin are fitter forthe hand, and are by fome called (bathe, 
Then mutt they be held betwixt the Surgeons fingers. It will be alfo neceflary for 
the Surgeon to put another inftrument called the Ducks bill between the two Gui- 
ders into the capacity of the bladder; hee muft thruft it in fomewhat violently, and 
dilate it fo-cheuft in with both his hands, turning itevery way to enlarge the wound 
asmuctias thall be fulficient forthe admitting the other in{truments which are to be 
putinto the bladder; yet, it is farre berter-forthe patient, if that the wound may 
_,Withthis one inftrument be fufficiently difated,and che ftone pulled forth with the 

fame without the help of any other. : 


— 
bound to his kn- 
CS, as 
fone. 
| 
=) @ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
> 
| 
if that feame bee 4 ‘ 
udileffe, thereforethe 
| 
sd be made too 
break 


| 


The effigses of ansnfrument calleds Ducks bil. 


_Which if you have not ina readineffe,and the largenefs of the ftone requ; 
dilatation, then muft you put in this Dilater, for being put into the bladder andth 
handle preffed together, it will dilate the incifion as muchas youdefire, | 


The figure of a Dilater fhut and opened. 


, 


» 


The wound by the helpe of this inftrument being dilated asmuch asis fufficie®” 
then putinthe ftreight Ducks-bill betore defcribed, or the crooked here exprct 


creak 


The ftone 
hold on,the 
fer that to fli 
fuddenly pl 
forth. Yet 
left you fhou 
once taken h 
bove the fto 
ceth much t 
this compre 
ment,fo tha 


' 
4 ear { 
“es 
‘ <—> “> 
4 
4 ~ f 
QS 
LP d 4, 4 
Ao 
i ~ = Yj — 4 
> j 
7," ome —- — 
y \\\\' ! | 
4 
® 
> 
| 


the ftone require more 
to the bladder,and the 
you defire, 


asmuch asis fufficien” 
rooked here exprctt- 


Crooked Forcipes like a Ducks. bift, 


The ftone may be fought & taken hold of with thefe inftruments,and being taken 
hold on,the branches of the inftrument fhall bee tyed together, left they fhould fuf- 
ferthat to flide away which they have once taken hold of. Neither fhall rhe ftone be 
(uddenly plucked out, but eafily fhaken too & again, andat the length gently drawn 
forth. Yet you muft beware that you doe not prefle ictoo {traightly in the forceps, 
ict youfhould breake it in pieces : Some, left it fhould flip away, when they have 
oncetaken hold thereof, put their two fingers intothe fundament, and putthem a- 
bove the ftone that it may not fall out, nor flip backe againe, which I thinke condu- 
eth much to the eafie extraGtion of the ftone. There are others who ftrengrhen 
thiscomprehenfion by putting in on each fide above and below thefe winged inftru- 
nent,fo that the ftone can flip forth on no fide. 


Winzed initruments to hold the [tone with the Ducks-beake. 


eae i \ \\ \ 
t 
— 


Lil3 The 


Lipay 677 
a. 
ry A! 
ING 
OEE OM 
| 
| 
1 
Creve! 


| ~ 


adi 


. 
| The figure of another winged initrument, the end of whofe handle is fakined by « 
(crew, as alfoa bendedsron plate which ss marked with the letter A, 
for she firmer holding shereof 

ite ¥ 


WIM 
| 
Mpg 


S3 
< 


—= \ 


This 


fo whicht 

| leth bet 
} be taken 
| that in tit 
| | After the ftone is by thefe meanes drawne forth,obferve diligently whether it be with othe 
| worne on any fide, and as it were levigated , for that happeneth by the wearing ot ftone of 
| *" rubbing of one or more ftonesupon it ; yet there is no furer way to know this, (lua 


by fearching with a Catheter. The oncend of the following inftrument may !upp') 
the want of a Cathater or probe,and the other may ferve for a {coop or Cleanier. 


A cleanfer or (coop whereby you may [earch whether there be any more flones belind, 
] cleanfeor purge the bladder from gravell, clots of bloud,and other [uch bodses, 4 
4 ufe so remaine bebind after the drawing forth of the ftene. 


4 


Patient wil 
PUt throu@ 


Of divers preternaturall Afets, — 
ih Tbe fignre of another, 
YY Wy 
te 
j 
| iit Laity Al | \ j 
| 
it 


the letter A, 


liligently whether it be 


neth by the wearing Of 


way to know this, thin 
in{trument may tupply 
{coop or Cleanter. 


pore fonesbebind, as alfe 
Bother fuch bodses , 45 
be ft | 


[ 1B. 17- whofe Cure 1s performed by Surgery. 679 

~ For if other ftones remaine behinde, they thall bee drawne forth asthe former, How cleanft | 
ghichbeing done, the end of the in(trument,which is crooked and hollowed likea 


coop or {poone, fhall bee thruft by the wound into the bladder, and therewith you 
hall gather together and take out what gravell foever, clotted bloud, and the like _ 
sefufeas fhall be there, for that they may yeeld matter for another ftone. Butif you 


énd that the ftone which isin the bladder be too great,fo that ir may notbe plucked — 


orth without great and fearfull rending of the bladder, it will be norbe taken 
with this Crowes bill and fo break itto peeces. out whole and 


at once. 


The effigies of 4 toothed Crowes-bill made neatly to breake greater flonés 
with a {crew to force st together, : 


% 


S 


+ 


Sh Sh 


’ 

f 


This Crowes bill hathonely three teeth, andthofe fharpe ones on the infide, of 
which two are placed above,and one below,which is the middle-moft,fothar.ic fal- 
lech between thetwo upper. When the ftone is broken, all the peeces thereof muft 
betaken forth;and we muft havea fpeciall care, left any piece thereof lye hid ; for 
that intime, increafed by theaccefle of atoughand vifcous matter, or conjoyned 
with other fragments by the interpofition of the like matter as glew, may rifetoa 
tone ofa large bigneffe. 


— 


— 


Cuar.XLIli. 
What cure wuft be ufed to the wound,when the flone ss taken forth. 


ABBVHE ftone being drawne out, if the greatnefle of the wound fo require, it OF fewing the 
fhall have one or two ftitches with ancedle and threed, leaving oncly fo wound when 
5) (AZ mauch {pace as fhall be fufficient to put ina pipe for the ufe we thall here- oe 
2 after thew ; yourthreed muft be of crimfon filke waxed, and let itnot be 
too {mall, left it by binding fhould cut afunder the fiefhy lips of the wound,or rot in 
athort time, either by the moyfture of the urine, or matter flowing from the ulcer. 
Therefore you fhall take up much fieth with the skin in fewing ir, left the lips of rhe 
Wound being torne,your labour prove in vaine,and {fo you are forced to croubdle the 
Patient with making anew ones Things being thus performed, a filver pipe fhallbe 
Put through the wound intothe bladder,wherof I have here given you diversforms, 


that you may take your choice, and {o fit them to the wounds, and not the ner 


| 
2? 
~S 
aS: 
K 
4 
SS 
_ 
4" 
> 
| 


esate: 


‘tothear, whichoft-times in want of inftruments the Surgeonsare forced to doe, t9 
the great harme of the patient. or 
Silver pipes to be put into the bladder when the flone is drawne out. 
Thefe muft have novholes in thei, 
fides (as thofe here exprefled) bux only 
in their ends, that ail the naatter ofr}, 
WOUND, andthe filth gathered and cop. 
crete in the bladder may flow and 
cartyed forth this way. Whencleers 
urine fhall beginne to flow out of th. 
wound,there benomore need of 
, apipe ; therefore if you continue ir. g 
keepe it longer in the wound, there i 
fome danger left nature accuftom:, 
to that way may afterwards neglect to 
fend the water through the Arethra, o, 
urcnary paflage. Neithermuft you forgetto defend the parts neare tothe wound 
with the following repercuffive medicine, to hinder the deflaxion and inflamma. 
on,which are incident by reafon of the paine. album. ovorum.nu.iii.pul.boli arme. 
dracon, an. Siii. oles rof. 3i. pilorum leporinorum quantum fufficit, make: 


medicine of the confiftence of honey. 


| Cuar.X Liv. 


How to lay the patient after the ftome is taken away. 


Remedies for may bee changed as neede fhall require. Sometimes after the drawing 

the Cod, left it forth ofthe ftone, the bloud in great quantity falleth into the Cod, which unletle 

you be carefullto provide again(ft, with difcuffing drying,and confuming medicines 
it is to be feared, that itmay gangrenate. Wheretore if any accidents happen in cu- 
ring thefe kindeof wounds, you muft diligently withftand them. After fome tew 
daies a warme injection fhall be caft into the bladder by the wound,confifting of t' 
waters of plantain,night-fhade & rofes,with a little fyrupe of dried rofes. It wil hcp 
to temper the heat of the bladder caufed both by the wound and contufion, as allo 
by the violent thrufting in ofthe inftruments. Alfo it fometimes happens, thatst- 
ter the drawing forth of the ftone, clots of bloud and other impurity may fall i! 
the urenary paflage, and fo ftop the urine that ic cannot flow forth. Therefore y™ 
muttin like fort puta hollow probe tor fome daies into the srethra, that keeping 
paflage open,all the groffer filth may flow out together with the urine. 


CHuar.XLy. 
How to cure the wound made by the incifion. 


Whaethings Ou mutt cure this wound after che manner of other' bloody wou 
wit,by agglutination and cicatrization,the filth,or fuch things 
) EG hinder,being taken away by detergent medicines, The patient {hall * 

ften the agglutination if hee lye crofle-legged, and keep a flender die! 

“untill che feventh or ninth day be patt. Hee muft wholly abitaine 
Wits) 


tyed up,an¢ 
be perforat 
fhall be thr 
it: theng 
Elemi, fang 
dies fhall b 
wound al 


A, 


Ifa Retin 
ter this fo] 
each fide« 
them, taki 
thread up 
the wound 
Were onel 


corifh, or 
bes and the 4! 
+ Ay /, 
| 
WF L L ay hj h h d b f. f ] 
| : KPO NES things which we have recited being faithfully and diligently pcr- 
formed, the patient (hall be placedin 
| formed,the patient thall be placedin his bed, layingunderhimasit wae 
pillow filled with bran, or oate chaffe, to drinkeuprtheurinewhich 
floweth fromhim. You muft have divers of thefe pillowes, thatthy 
oe 
| 


ane forced to doe. to 
YAWHE Oui. 


ave NOholes in their 
cexprefied ou! y 
the matter of the 

Ith gathered and con. 
icr may flow and bee 
way. Whencleere 
¢ to flow our of the 
Ibe no More need of 
if you continue it, & 
in the wound, there js 
Nature accuftomed 
afterwards negieg to 
rough the Arethra, 
ncare cothe wound 
xion and inflammari- 
boli arme. 


antum fufficit, make a 


vay. 


lly and diligently pcr- 
e under him asit were 
ke up the urine which 
fe pillowes, thatthey 

es afrerthe drawing 
¢ Cod, which unleffe 

onfuming medicines, 
ccidents happen in cu- 
hem. After fome few 
ound, confifting of the 
dried rofes. It wilhelp 
and contufion, as allo 
mes happens, thatat- 
mpurity may fall into 
forth, Therefore you 
ethra, that keeping the 
he urine. 


sther bloody wounds, 
or {uch things a5 
The patient {hall 
Bnd keep 3 (lender diet 
t wholly abftaine from 
wink, 


gine, unleffe it bee very weak ; in ftead thereof let him ufea deco@ion of barly and 
jcorith, OF mead, or water and fugar, of boyled water mixed with fyrups of dryed 
vofes, maidenhaire, and the like. Let his meat bee ponado, raifons, ftewed prunes, 
sickens boiled, withthe cold feeds, lettuce, purflaine, forrell, borage, {pinage 

snd the like. If he be bound in his belly, a Phyfitian fhall becalled,who may helpe 
bY appointing either Ca/sia,a glifter, or fome other kind of medicine, as he thall 


68: 


4 
* sa 
AF 


What Ulcers, when asthe urine flowes through them,’ 
 bengafter the flone dravine 


Any after the tone is drawneout, cannot have the ulcer confolidated 

therefore the urine flowes out this way continually by little and litele, 
g and again{t the paricnts will during the reftof his life, unleffe the Sur- 

'& geon helpe it. Therefore the callons lippes of the wound muft be am- 


eS" putated,fo to make a green wound ofan old ulcer ; then muft they bee stan 


be perforated with three holes, an{wering to three other on the other fide, needles 
fhall be theuft through thefe holes, taking bald of much fleth, and thall be knit about 
it then gutisative medicines fhall be applyed, fitch as are Venice Turpentine,pum 


Ekmi, [angus Dracons, bole armenick, and the like, after five or fixe dayes the nee- 


dies (hall bee taken out, andalfothe ftay taken away. For thenyou fhall finde the 
woundalmoft glewed, and there willnothing remaine but oncly to cicatrize it. 


The figare of Ketinaculam or Stay. 


R 


LESS 


< 
N 
N 
S 
S 
N 


A. fhewes the greater. B.thele(fer, that you may know that you muff afe divers ac- 
cording tothe different bigne(fe of the wound. 


ryed up,and bound withthe inftrument wee terme Retinacwlum or ftay this muft oldulces. 


Ifa Retinaculums or ftay be wanting,you may conjoyne the lippes of the wound af- Whatto doe in 


ter this following manner. Puttwo quilles fomwhat longer than the wound, on eerie 


each fide one, and then prefently thruftthem through with needles having thread in 
them, taking hold of the fleth between, as often as need fhall require, then tying the 
thread upon them. For thus the wound fhall be agglutinated, and the flefhy lips of 
the wound kept from being torne, which would be in danger if the needle & thread 
Were onely ufed. 


a 
| 
| | 
| 
7% 
. 
| ‘ 
| alt 
| 
A 
Yo 
| ere 
oO QO 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
= 


Plowtofearch 


tor the {tone in 
women. 


der,and thea drawn -forth by the forementioned meahes. Yet if the riper yearesof 
the patient permit it! to bee done without violence, the whole worke thal] be mor 
performed, ‘by putting the fingers intothenecke of the wombe 


XLVI. 


take flones ont of womens bladders, 


know by the famefignes that the ftone isin a 
mus We doin amamis, yet itisfar more cafily fearched by acy) 
for that the necke of the bladder in the fhorter, broader, ang.’ 
4 more ftreight. Wherfore it may not onely be found by a Cétherr 
put intothe bladder, butalfo by the fingers thrutt into the 
of the womb, ttirning them up towards the inner fide of the 9, 
bss, and placing the ficke woman in the fame pofture as we mens: 
svonedinthe cure of men. Yetyou muft obferve thar maides 


ger than feven yeares old; are troubled with the ftone, cannoy hee 


fearched by the neck of thewombe, without great violence. Therefore the (top, 


muft be drawne fromthem by the fame meanes as from boyes »to wit, by thrutting 
the fiogers inro the! fundament; ’forthus theftone being found ont, and the lowe, 
belly alfo prefled withthe other hand, ‘i muft be brought tothe necke of the bia. 


eafily and happily 
for that the bladder is nearerthe neck of the womb,than it is to the right out, Whe. 
-forethefingets thusthruft in, ‘a Catheter fhall bee prefently put into the necke 
thebladder. Tihiscutherer muft’bee hollow, or flit on the outfide like thofe befor. 
but-nior crooked, but fereight, as you may perceive by the following 


A Catheter upon which, being put into the Bladder, the wecke thereof may 
be cut; tedraw out 4 flone from «woman. 


Upon this inftrument the neck of the bladder may be cut, and then with the Di- 
later made for the fame purpofe, the incifion fhall bee dilated as much as ncedre. 
quires yet with this caution, that feeing the necke of a womans bladder is the fhor- 
ter, itadmits not fo great dilatation as amans, for otherwife there is danger that 
may come to the body of the bladder, whence an unvoluntary fhedding of the w2- 
termay en{ue and continue thereafter. The incifion being dilated, the Surgeon 
putting one or two of his fingers intothenecke of the wombe, fhall preffe the bot- 
tome of the bladder, andthenthrutt his crooked inftruments or forcépes in by the 
wound, and withthefc he fhalleafily pluck outthe ftone, which he fhali keepe with 
his fingers from flipping backeagaine. Yet Lawrence Collo the Kings Surgeon, and 
both his funnes (than whom I doe not know whether everthere were better cutters 
forthe ftone) doe otherwife performe this operation; for they dog not thruft thet 
fingers into the fundament or necke of the wombe, but conrenting themfclves with 
putting in onely the Guiders(whereof we formerly made mention) into the pallag¢ 
of the urine,they prefently thereupon make a ftreight incifion dire@ly at the mou 
of the neck of the bladder, and not on the fide,as is ufually done in men. Then the) 
gently by the fame way thruft the forcipes hollowed on the outfide formerly deine: 
ated,and fo dilatethe wound by tearing itas much as fhall be fufficient for the d1a"- 
ing of the ftone forth of thebladder. The refidue of the cure is the fame withth# 
formerly mentioned in men: yet this isto be added, that if an ulcer grow inthe neck 
of the bladder by reafon of the rending it, you may by putting in the /pecu/wa mai”! 


cs, dilatethe neck of the womb, that fitting remedies may be applyed with r3 mor 
cafe. 


the paflage 
the water { 
fure,the p 
ded that t 
expulfive 
toalfo pai 
feazeth up 
Miftrefic, 
had his uri 
by nomea 
bottom o 
fothat he; 
putting in 
with made 
with{tand 
rine. Fort 
Was heaft< 


| leome, 
ine is fo 
| urine 
yes DY 
im flammatioc 
| | fuppretiest 
4 
| nication o 
times 
attractive 
4 
 fauleotche 
4 
4 ; 4 j 
tet 
4 
| 
4 
4 
| 
if 
bie quired; 


IB. 


» 


J, 


is 02 Womans blad 
mfe:tchedbya Cathate, 

rtct, broad CT, and the 
inner fide of the o, 
e 0ofture as we Menti. 
fe vethar Maides yon. 
e ftone, cannor be 
¢. Therefore the ftone 
¢s,towit, by thrutting 
mind Ont, andthe lower 
mp tke necke of the blad- 
et ifthe ri 
ble worke fhall be more 
enccke of the wombe 
to the right eut.Wher. 
ly put into the necke of 
tfide like thofe before 
tive by the following 


thereof may 


andthen with the D:- 
das much as nced re. 
ins bladder is the fhor- 
there is danger that it 
y th-dding of the wa- 
dilared, the Surgeon 
pe, fl.all preffe the bot- 
msor forcipesinby the 
ichl.c fhall keepe with 

ic Kings Surgeon, and 
ere were better cutters 
y dvenor thruft het 
tiny themf{elves with 
tion) into the paflage 
directly ac che mouth 
ne in men. Then they 
mtfidt formerly deline- 
ufficicnt for the draW- 
eisthe fame withthat 
gulce: grow inthe neck 


pply cd with the mor 


the necke 


yeares of 


‘anding by gods affiftancehe recovered, and remaines whole and found ; we obfer- 


whofe us performed by Surgery. 


CHaprP. XLVII I. 
Of the fapprefsion of the Urine by internall caufes. 


vag Efides the formentioned caufes of fuppreffed urine, or difficulty of ma- 
be king of water, there are many other, left any may thinke that the urine 
is ftopt onely by the ftone or gravell, asS 


nall and internall caufes. The internal! caufesare clotted bloud, tough 


| | 
a is fonactimes fup becaufe the matter thereof, to wit, the ferous or whay- 
dnpart of the blood, is either confumed by the feavourifh heat, orcarryed other 
wayes by {weats or a {couring ; fomtimes alfothe Alatulencie there conteined, or in- 
¢ammation arifing in the parts made forthe urine and the neighbouring members, 
fuppreflesthe urine. Forthe right gut ifit be inflamed, intercepts the paflag: ot the 
sine, either by a tumour whereby it preffethupon the bladder, or by the commu- 
sication of the inflammation. Thus by the default of an ill affected liver, the urine 
is oft times <n in fuchas have the dropfie ; or elfe by dulnefle or decay ofthe 
atradiive, or feparative faculty of thereines by fome great diftemper, or by the de- 
fuultof che animal! faculty, as in fach as are in a phrentie, lethargy, convulfiop,apo- 
plexic. Befides alfo atough and vifcide humour falling from the whole body into 
the paflages of the urine, obftructs and fhuts up the paflage. Alfotoo long holding 
the water fomtimes caufes this affect. For when the bladder is diftended above mea- 
fure,the paflage thereof is drawn together and made more ftrait : hereto may be ad- 
ded that the too great diftenfion of the bladder is a hinderance that it cannot ufethe 
expulfive faculty, and ftraiten it felfe about the urine tothe exclufion thereof ; here- 
toalfo paine fucceeds, which prefently dejecs allthe faculties of the part which it 
feazethupon. Thus of late a certaine young man, riding on horfebacke before his 
Miftreffc, and therfore not daring to make water,when he had great need {0 to doe, 
had his urine fo fuppreft chat returning from his journy home intothe city, he could 
bynomeanes poffible make water. Inthe meane time he had grievous paine in the 
bottom of his belly andthe perineum, with gripings and a {weatall over his body, 
fothat he almoft fowned. I being called, when I had procured him to make water by 
putting ina hollow Catbeter,and prefling the bottom of his belly, whereof he forth- 


muftnor pre- 
fently fly to 


eome, Warts, caruncles bred in the paffages of the urine, ftones, and gravell ; the diurcticks. 


Why the too 
long holding 


Ito urgeonsthinke, who inthis 
cafe prefently ufe diuretickes. Therefore the urine is fuppreft by exter- aisohews 


che urine cau- 


feth the fup- 
preflion 


A hiftory. 


with made two pints; I told them that it was not occafioned by the ftone,which not- 


withftanding the ftanders by imagined to bee the occafion of that {uppreffion of u- 
tine. For thence forward there appeared no fignes of the ftone in the youth, neither 
was heaftcrwards troubled withthe ftopping of his urine. 


— 


— 


CuaP. X LIX. 


A digre(sion concerning the purzing of fuchthings as are unprofitable 
oe inthe whole body by the urine. 


==) Think it not amiffe to teftific by the following hiftories,the pro- 

nb) GEN vidence of nature in expelling by urine fuch things as are unpro- 
fitable in the whole body. Mounfieur Sarret the Kings fecretary 
tS} was wounded inthe right arme with a piftoll bullet ; many and 
maligne fymptomes happened thereupon, but principally great 


Ahiftorye 


inflammations,flowing with much and pws or quitture : it 


~ fomtimes happened that without any reafon this purulent and fa- 
dious ¢ffluxe of matrer was ftayd in the inflammation ; wherof while we folicitoufly 
“Aquired into the caufe,wee found both his ftooles and water commixed with much 
lent filth, and this through the whole courfe of the difeafe, whereot notwith- 


ved 


| 
_ 
— 


684, 


Lis. 17-9 


nate quality 


ved thar as long as his arme flowed with this filthy matter, fo long were his excre. 


ments of the belly and bladder free fromthe {anious and purulent matter: a5 lone blood and 
onthe contrary asthe ulcers of the arme were dry, fo long were the excremens, by of 
the guts and bladderfanious and purulent. The. fame accident befell a Gentlem; eae 
Abilory: calied Mounfieur da la Creix, who received a deadly wound with a {word on th. ef 3 nerwife it 
arme, though German Chavall, and Raffemolt expert Surgeons, and ot}y-,, the abot 
| the pws cannot runne fo long a way in the body, neither if it were-fo, could tho, bee arter : or cl 
done without, the infeétion and corruption of che whole maffe of blood, while sion. 


fAlowesthrough the veines ; therefore to be more probable that this quantity of {,) 
mixed ‘with excrements and urine, flowed by reafon of the default of the liver, 
other bowel, rather than fromthe wounded arme :/L was of a contrary opin) 
| my flowftom on forthefe following reafons. Firft forthat which was apparently {een in the pa. 
tient ; For aslong as the excrement andurine were free from this purulent matte; (, 
urneandex- Jong hisarme plentifully flowe therewith; this onthe contrary being dry, much 
cements: hurulent matter was voided both by ftooleandurine.Another was, that as our who}, 
body is perfpirable, fo it is alfo (if 1 may fo terme it)confluxible, The third was ay 

exampletaken from the glaffes which the French terme Monte-vins (that is, Moun. 

wines) for if aglaffe that is full of wine be fet under artother that is fill’d with water, 

you may fee the wine raife it felfe out of the lower veffellto the upper through the 
midft of the water, & fo the water defcend through the midft of the wine, yet {o,tha 
they do not mixe themfelves,butthe one take. & pofflefs the place of the other. If this 
may be done by art,by things only naturall,&to be difcernd by our eyes, what may 
| be done in our bodies,in which by reafon of the prefence of amore noble foule, || 
| the works of nature arefar more perfe@t?W hat is it which we may defpair to be done 
inthe like cafe ¢ Fordoth not the laudible blood flow to the guts, kidneyes, {plecn, 


of bloodgath 
dicall evacuat 
bladder; the 
thereof by ca 
oreat blow,th 
immoderate 


bladder of thegall, by the impulfe of naturetogether withthe excrements, which ob ae 
-prefently the parts themfelves feparate from theirnutriment? Dothnot milke from frequent ufe 
i the breafts flow fometimes forth of the wombes of women lately delivered ¢ Yet whole nature 
: that cannot bee carryed downe thither, unlefle by the paffages of the mamil- are oft times 
rib, dele. lary veines andarteryes, which meete with the mouthcs of the veflels of the womde pottume bein 
inthe middleofthe ftreit mufcles of the Epigafrium, Therefore no marvaile (o preat varie 
coiding to Galen. the pus unmixt with the bloud flowing from the whole bodyby this (yraptom 
the veines andarteryes intothe kidneyes andbladder, bee caft forth together with «flor 
| the urine. Thefe and the like things are done by nature,not taught by any countell or or with pas. Fi 
1 rcafon, but oncly affifted by the ftrength of the fegregating and expuliive faculty; © diflocated y 
and certaincly we prefently diffecting the dead body, obferved that itall,asalfoal tog. ofthe 
the bowels thereof, were free from inflammation and ulceration, neither wastheie other 
| any figne or impreffion of any purulent matter in any part thereof. by the plenty 
(Cuan by the u 
| at purulent: 
| By what externall caufes thé urine ts [uppreft and prognoftickes theliver, or an 
concerning the fappre{sion thereof. | 
| MEM Here are alfo many externall caufes, through whofe occafion the urice ra Surgeons 
we, may be fuppreft. Such are bathing and {wimming in cold water sthe ficeone yton: 
long continued application of Narcoticke medicines upon the Reines,pe the caufe rem; 
* rinaum and fhare; theufe of cold meats and drinkes,and fuch other lik by aftrii 
Moreover, thediflocation of fome Vertebra of theloines tothe infide, for that ‘lunder, by {a 
canonot a 


 prefleththe nerves diffeminated thence intothe bladder thercfore it cauieth 
joius may coufe pidity or numneffe of the bladder. Whenceit is, that it cannot perceive * i ; 
* to bee vellicated by the acrimony of the urine, and confequently it 1s not ftirre 
tothe expulfion thereof.But from whatfoever caufe the fuppreffion, of the 
proceeds, ifit perfevere for fome dayes, death is to bee feared, unlefle either 4 
Wer,Which may confume the matter of the urine, or a {couring or fluxe, which my 


deadly. divert it, thall happenthereupon, For thus by ftay it acquireth,an acride and vens 


‘ 
a 
q 
are 
( 
q fim: 
t.. 
q 


LAB. whofe Cure 18 performed by Surgery. 


are quality , which flowing by the veines readily infeéteth the maffe of 
blood, and carryed to the braine much molefts it by reafon of that fimilitude and 
(ympathy of condition which the bladder hath withthe Mesinzes, But nature, if op 
prevalent, eafily freethit felfe from this danger by a manifeft evacuation by ftoole, helpsthefup-- 
otherwife it mutt neceffarily call as it were toitsaide, a feavourith heat, which may preflion of ux 
tend the abounding matter of this ferous humidity out through the Skinne, either wre 


Ly B 


lon2 his excre. 
len Matter: as 

re he eXcremenr: of 
befella Gentleman 
Bh < !word on the jeg, 


ur, CONS, and Others, 


Feafon fenfible evacuation as by fweat ; becaufe fweate and urine have one common 
thar be, matter : or elfe dilperfe and breath it outby tranfpiration, which is an infenfible ex. 


blgod, Whileg ; ion. 

ently feen in Cuap. LI. 
isoutulent matter 
at being dry, mu ~ Of bloody Urine, 
that as out who}. 
le Thethird wasap 
v.0S(that is,Mount. 
at is with water, 
he. pper through the 
tke wine, yet fo,that 
eof theother. If this 
y cureyes, what may 
acre noble foule, al! 
ay dcf{pair to be done 
uts, kidneyes, {pleen, 
excrements, which 
milke from 
ately delivered? Yet 
ages of the mamil- 
ef'cls of the wombe 
preno marvaile if ac- 
mm tic whole body by 
forth together with 
by any couniell or 
d:xpulfive faculty; 
A that it all, asalfoall 
pn, neither was there 
of, 


pile pure blood, others mixt, and that either with urine, & then The differences 
ee ree that which is expelled refembles the wafhing of fleth newly killed; or 
wis Lael with pus, or matter, andthateither alone or mixed withthe vrinc. 
There may be divers caufes of this fymptome,as the too great quantity Cauts. 
ofbloodgathered in the body, which bythe fuppreflion of the accuftomed & perio- 
dicallevacuation,by the courfes or hemorrhoids, now turns its courfe to the reins & 
bladder ; the fretcing afunderof fome veffell by anacride humour, or the breakin 
thereof by carrying or lifting of fome heavic burden,by leaping, falling from high,a 
oreat blow, the falling of fome waituponthe loins,riding poft too violently the too 
immoderate ufe of venery, & laftly, from any kind of painful & more violent exer- 
cile, by arough & fharp ftone in the kidneys,by the weaknefle of the retentive facul- 
tyof the kidneys, by a wound of fome of the parts belonging tothe urine,by the too 
trequent ufe of diureticke and hot meats and medicines, or elfe of things in their 
whole nature contrary to the urenary parts; for by thefe and the like caufes,the reins 
ucoft times fo enflamed, that they neceffarily impoftumate, and at lengththe im- 
poltume being broken it turnesinto an ulcer, cafting forth quitture by the urine. In 
logreat variety of the caufes of bloody urine, we may gather whence the caufes of —— 
iis (yraprome may arife, by the depraved action of this, or that part,by the condi- procced. 
tion ofthe lowing blood, to wit, pure or mixt, and that either with the urine alone, 
or with pws, For example, if this bloody matter flow from the lungs, liver, kidneies, 
cillocated Vertebre, the {treight gut, or other the like part : you may difcerne it by 
‘ae feat of the paine and fymptomes, as a feaver ; and the propriety of the paine, and 
other things which have preceded, or are yet prefent. And we may gather the {ame 
oy the plenty and quality, for if, for example, the pus flow from an ulcer of thearm, 
‘iepurulent matter will @ow by turnes, one while by the urine, fo thar littleis caft 
orth by the ulcers then prefently onthe contrary the urine becomes more clecre. 
lat purulene matter which flows from the lungs by reafon of an E mpyema,or from 
Brnifickes ‘ieliver, or any other bowell placed abovethe midriffe, the pys which is caft forth 

““itheurine,isboth in greater plenty and more exa@tly mixed with the urine,than: 
“atwhich from the kidneyes and bladder.It neither belongs to our pur pofe,! 
ta Surgeons office, either toundertake, or deliver the cure of this affe@. It fhall fuf- 
Sonely tonotethat the cure of this fymptome is not to bee hoped for fo long as 
cauferemaines, Andifthis blood flow by the opening ofa veffell, it hall bee 
| by aftringent medicines ; if broken,by agglutinative , if corroded or fretted 

Mander, by farcoticke. 


fe occafion the urine 

Niold water ;the 100 
supon the Reines,pe 
uch other like. 
the infide, forthat" 
re‘ore it cauferha ftu- 
Mor perceive it felte 
tly jt isnot ftirred UP 
of, the 
either 3 

yene- 
thaaacridean 


4 
i 
| 
J 
Mmm CHAP. 
| 


636 


C HAP. LII. 
Of the fignes of ulcerated Kidneyes. 


ZZ) Had not determined to follow or particularly handle the caus 
¥(9M of bloody urines, yet becaufe that which is occafioned by the n 
| cerated reines or bladder more frequently happens, therefore) 
have thought good briefly to {peake thereof in this place. Th 
fignes of anulcer ofthe rcines are, pain in the loines, matter how. 
foever mixt with the urine,never evacuated by it felfe bur alWaies 


with theurine, and refiding inthe botome of the chamberpor, wis) 


Why the mat- flowing forth : 
aeons tows a fanious and redde fediment, flefhy and as it were bloody fibres {wimming up and 


fiomthekid- gdownein the urine, the fmellofthe filthis not fo great as that which flowes fron, 
the ulcerated bladder, forthat the kidneyes,feeing they are of a flefhy lubftance do, 
farre better ripen and digeft the purulent matter than the bladder which isneryoy: 


that which 
and bloodlefie. 


= 


flowesfrom 
the bladder. 


— 


Cuap. LITI. 
Of the fignes of the ulcerated Bladder. | 


Lcers areinthe bottome of the bladder and the necke thereof, Thy 
fignes ofan ulcer inthe bladderare, adeepe paine at the fharebones; 
the great ftinch of the matter owing therefrom ; white and thin skins 
{wimming vp and downein the water. But when the ulcer pofleffeti 
® the necke of the bladder, the paine is more gentle, neither dothittrou- 
ble before the patient come to make water, but in the very making thereof, anda. 


tle while after, 
Bur itis common both tothe oneand the other, thatthe yard is extended 


king of water, to wit, by reafon of the paine caufed by the urine fretting of theulce. 
rated part inthe paflage by: neither is the matter feen mixed with the urine, asisv: 
fuallin an ulcer of the upper parts, becaufe itis powred forth not together withthe 


urine, butafter it. 


Difterences. 


CuHuap. LIV. 


Prognofticks of the ulcerated Reines and Bladder. 


the bladder ; for ficthy parts more {peedily heale and knit, than 


cured with 
der, 


more dithculcy, lefle and nervous parts. Ulcers which are in the bottom of the bled 


«re uncurable, or certainely moft difficult to heale, for befides thatth*) 

are inabloodleffe part, they are daily vellicated and exaf{perated by the contin, 
affluxe of the contained urine; for all the urine is never evacuated :, now that whit! 
rcmaines after making water, becomes more acride by the diftemper and heat of tht 
part, forthat the bladder is alwaies gathered about it, & dilated & ftraitaed ac 
ding tothe quantity of the conteined urine : therfore in the //churia,that is,th¢ up 
preflion or difficulty of making water, you may fomtimes fee a quart of wate! sa 
at once. Thofe which have their legs fall away, having an ulce: in their bladder.# 
near their deaths. Ulcers arifing in thefe parts,unleffe they be confolidated in 4 
time, remaine uncureable. 


Whyulcersof @P ik Lo ens ofthe kidneies arc morc cafily and readily healed than thofes! 


Cus! 


Mecolata 1n 
Vilreum, peft 
Me, Lutetur 


(hott 


preffion prov 
derate 
tharides, byl 
urenary pare 
gangrene 
viccofaPh 
haveplace 1 
or agrofie at 
of Narcotic 
made ule of 
as hereafter 
a 
4 
bris Agua Au 
fugar candy 
Thirty or fo 
two houres| 
made into fi 
deco@ion a! 
the rootes 0 
fome three al 
ing water is 
of, from wt 
bifmal cram 
steko albo 4c 
bral, an, il, 
infunde 


4 Of divers prevernavura ifec S; fw. 174 
| doe. For he 
| 
| 
ding tothec 
fore meat. A 
| dill, with 
artticially 
| bed diy retic 
rth of the | 
Ckidneye 
a of > 4. With 
ded In this 2 
and 
P4pa 


y handletheca 

ccafioned by the 
appens, therefore} 
pofin this place, Th. 


y it felfe, but alwaie. 
chamberpot, with 
cs [wimming up and 
at which flowes from 
fiethy fubftance, doe 
der which isneryoys 


eneckethereof. The 
neat the fharebones ; 
; white and thin skias 
en the ulcer poffeffeth 
, neither doth it trou- 
king thereof, anda lit. 


ard is extended in ma- 
e fretting of theulce- 
with the urine, as isu- 
not together with the 


der. 


y healed than thofe of 
Sand knit, than blood- 
Bottom of the bladder, 
, for befides that they 
B ated by the continual 
ted now that whic 
emper and heat of the 
red & ftraitned acco’ 
[churiaghat is, the: 
a quart of water m* 
in their bladder.ar 


CHA? 


Matter how- 


confolidatedinafho* ang 
With 
Ne 


— 


whofe Cure 18 performed by Surgery. 687 A 


Cnuar. Lv. 
What cure muff be ufed in the fupprefsion of the Urine. 


S24 N curing the fuppreffion of the urine,the indication muft be taken from 
fee the nature of the difeafe, and caufe thereof, if it bee yet prefent or not. 
But the diverfity of the parts, by which being hurt, the J/churia hap- 
Ag, Pens, intimates the variety of medicines, neither muft we prefently run 
EZ2S<es to diuretickes, andthings breakingtheftone, which many Empcricks 
gor. For hence grievous and maligne fymptomes often arife, ef pecially if this fup- 

refhion proceed from an acride humour, or blood preffed out by a bruife, immo. a arfupe 
derate vencry, and all more vehement exercife, a hot and acride potion as of Can. urine diarcticks 
hurides, by too long abftaining from making water, by a Phlegmon, or ulcer ot che 
yrenary parts.For thus the paine and inflammation are encreafed,whence followcs a 
pangrene,&¢ at length death, Wherfore attempt nothing in this cale without thead- 
vice of a Phyfitian,no notwhen you muft cometo Surgery.For diureticks can {carce 
haveplace in another cafe,than when the urenary paflages are obftructed by graveii, Towhich and 
oragrofie and vifcidehumour, orelfe in fome cold countrey, or inthe application Ry 
of Narcoticks tothe loines, although we mutt nor here ufe thefe before we have firtt 
madeule of generall medicines : now Diuretickes may be adminiftred fundry waics 
as hereafter {hall appeare. 

Re, agrimon,urtic. parietar, furculos rubros babentis, an.m. i.rad. afparaz. mundat, 
gr a7. alkekengs XX. fem. malva 3%, rad. acor.3i. bulliant omnia firmul fex li. 
bis aqua dulcis ad tertias, deindecoletwr. Letthe patient take 5 iiii. hereof with 3i.of 


Scopes of cu- 


| the kidneyes and bladder. Syrupe of maiden-haire, ofrofes, taken in the quantity To cleanfe the 
of Si. with hydromel, or barly water Afles or Goats milke are alfo much commen. Ulcers of the 


kidneyes and 


ded in this affe@, becaufe they cleanfe the ulcers by their ferous or whayith portion, jj, 4¢er 


\ enna by theircheefelike. They muft bee taken warme from the dugge, 
ney of rofes ora little falt, leftthey corrupt inthe ftomacke ; and thatto 


quantity of foure ounces, drinking or eating nothing prefently upon it. The fol- aie 

Trochifces are alfo good for the fame purpofe. Ke. quatwor (em. frigid. major. 
"minis papaveris albi,portulac.plantag. cyden, myrtil,gum, tragacapth. cb of 
Mmm 2 glyeyrh. 


Lis. | [ IB. 17]. 
i 
fygarcandy, and drinke it warme fafting inamorning ,three houres before meat. 
Mm Thirty or forty Ivie berries beaten in white wine,and given the patient to drink fome 
two houres before meate, are good forthe fame purpofe, Alfo3i. of nettle feeds 
We = madeinto fine pouder and drunke in chicken broth,is good for the fame purpofe. A 
dco@ionalfo of Grummell,Goats faxifrage, pellitory of the wall, white faxitrage, 
the rootes of parfley, «/paragus, acorus, brafcus, and orris drunke inthe quantity of 
fome three or foure ounces, is profitable alfo for the fame purpofe. Yet this follow- 
ine water is commended above the reft to provoke urine,& open the paflages there- 
of, ftom what caufe foever the ftoppagetherof proceed. K.radic.ofmund.recal.cyp. A diurericne 
bifmal cram. petrofel. taleol Siiii.macerentur per in Water. 
| «eho albo acerrime,bulliant poftea in aqua finvialis Ib. x, 
fummitat. malve, bifmal, an.  berul. cicer. rub. an. fem. melon, ct- 
an, 3 ii 8, alkekengi, cra. xx. glycyrhiz, 31. bulliant omnia fimul ad tertias:in cola. 
4 infunde per nociem fol fen. oriental, ib, 5, frat tterum parva ebull:tio, in exprelsio 
colata infunde cinam, elec. vi.colentur ; iterumcolatura injiciatur in alembicum 
poftea tereb. venet. lucta. fb ij. aq. vite svi. agitentur omnia fimul dilizentifii- 
Lutetur alembicum lutofapientia, fiat deftillatiolento in balnco marie. Ulc it 
‘cr the following manner. K. aq. ficHatitia prefcripta aut vi. Accor- 
cing to the operation which it fhall performe,let the patient take it foure houres be- 
‘oremeat. Alfo raddith water deftilledin balnco mariais given inthe quantity of 
m >. with fugar, and that with good fuccefle. Bathesand femsicupia, or halfe bathes 
*ticially made, relaxe, foften, dilate, and open all the body ; therefore the prefcri- 
@® ddiuretickes mixed with halfeadram of Treacle may be fitly givenat the going diurerickesis 
forhofthe bath. Thefe medicines following are judged firrocleanfe the ulcersof afte 


4 


The caufes. 


are watrith. 


Thecure- 


Narcoticke 
things tobe 
applyedto the 
loincss 


Whar the 
Strangury is- 


The caufes. 


clycyrrhi. mund. horde: mund. macag. pfilst amy dal. dulciwm, an. i. boli 
dracon. {podit, rofar. maftich. berra figilmyrrba, an. 5 
‘ur fecundum artem trochifci. Let the patient take 5 8. diflolved in whay, ptifan,)... 
ly water, and the like; they may alfo be profitably diffolved in plantaine water an, 
injected intothe bladder. Let the patient abftaine from wine, and inftead thereof 
Uemkcin ead 14+ him ufe barly water, or bydremel, or aptifan made of an ounce of raifins of the 
{toned and boyledin five pints of faire water, in an earthen pipkin well leade, 
or ina glafle, untill one pinte be confumed, adding thereto of liquorice fcraped sn, 
beaten 3i. of the cold feeds likewile beaten two drams. Letit, after it hath boyled 
alittle more, be ftrayned through an hypocras bagge, with a quarterne of fugar, ang 
two dramsof choice cinamon added thereto, and fo let it be kept for ufuall drink. 


Cuapr. LV I. 
_Of the Diabete, or inabilty to hold the Urine. 


> 


vem a Diatete isa difeafe, wherein prefently after one hath drunke, they. 

NY rine is prefently made in great plenty, bythe diffolution of the retep. 
faculty of the reines, and the depravation of immoderation of the 
atcraG@ive faculty. T he externall caufes are the unfeafonable and immo. 
derate ufe of hot and diureticke things, and all more violent and vety. 


ment exercifes. The internall caufes are the inflammation of the liver, lungs, {pleen, 
but efpecially of the kidneyes and bladder, This affect muft be diligently diftingy 
fhed from the excretion of morbifick caufes by urine. The loines in this difeafe are 
molefted with a pricking and biting pain,and there is a continuall & unquenchable 
thirft:and although this difeafe proceed from a hot diftemper, yet the urine is not co- 
Why thenrines Lloured, red, troubled, or thick, but thin, and white or waterifh, by reafon the mater 
thereof makes very {mall ftay in the ftomacke, liver, and hollow veine, being pre. 
fently drawn away by the heat ofthe kidneyes or bladder. If the affect long endure, 
the patient for want ofnourifhment fallethaway, whence certaine death enlues. 
For the cure of fo greata difcafe, the matter muft be purged, which caules or feedes 
the inflammation or phlegmon, and confequently blood muft be let. We muft abitain 
fromthe foure cold icedes, toralthough they may profit by their firft quality, yer 
will they hurt by their diuretick faculty Refrigerating and aftringent nourifhments 
muft beenfed, and fuch as generate grofle humours, as Rice, thicke and aftringent 
Wine mixed with much water. Exceeding cold, yea Narcotick things {hall be apply- 
edrothe loins, for otherwife by reafon of the thicknefs of the mufcles of thofe parts 
the force, unlefs of exceeding refrigerating things, will not be able to arrive atthe 
reins: of thiskind are oile of white poppy, henbain, opis», purflain,and letcuce (eed, 
mandrage vinegar,andthe like : of which,cataplafmes, plaifters,and ointments, 


be made, fit to corroberate the parts, and correct the heat. 


Cuap. LVII. 
Of the Strangmry. 


cr.2gne@H » Strangury is an affect having fome affinity with the Dsabese, 45% 
wherin the water is unvoluntarily made,but nottogether at once, but 
233 drops, continually and with paine. The externall caufes of a {range 


& all diftemper caufeth this affe@, 


of the urine, as clotted blood, thick phlegme, gravell, and the like. And becaule, * 


cording to Ga/ens opinion, all forts of diftemper may caufethis difeale, 


divers 


which is 
fore Avicen 


crements are 
the caufes of 
nelle, ortous 


hindred fron 
ofacride and 
molt the {am 
to wit, the ul 
as are of 
(ie fame me: 
on, and at le 
kindof Cho! 
elpecially w 
mMacke and tl 
Ments there 
Which is cau§ 
the reines pai 
crs. Therct@ 
the nervesyw 
of the {tones 
mMulcles of 
elfe but certa 
telticles may 
Maticke, and 
lurceale befc 
“NOW vomici 
ity and neigh 
Forthe ftom 
Nothing elfe 
‘ure endeavo 
the guts, 
2nd vomitin; 


| a cold 
i pofes, 97454” 
| | atcer jet the 
| | and pure wit 
a ind cold hun 
ther witha 
sdvice, heal 
away by diur 
fruding. W 
cqufetherem 
ES 
\\\ ANSP, 
A \ 
| 
Cae rai b d d kt Ry J if iy if} av 
| are,the too abundant drinking of cold water,& ail too iong 
lace. Theinternall caufes are,the defluxion of cold humours into the urcoalyp"" & 
P 
in for hence they are refolved by a certain palfie, and the /phincter of the bladact >” 
ei laxed, io that he cannot hold his water according to his defire : inflammavo’ 
and wharfoever in fome pao 


L117. whofe Cure is performed by Surgery. 


scines (hall be appointed according to the difference of the diftemper. Therfore a- 


> ¥ bol: 


jintt a cold diftemper fomentations fhall be provided of adecodtion of mallows, 
whay, ptifan, “gies, origanum,calamint, and the like,& {o applied tothe privitics:then prefently 


lantaine water. 
und inftead 
of raifins of th. 
§ ipkin well leaded 
worice fcraped ang 


er letthem be anointed with oile of bayes,and of Caforewm.and the like. Stron 
i pure wine fhall be prefcribed for his drinke, and that not onely in this caufe, but 
jowhen the Strangury happens by the occafion of obftruction, caufed by a groffe 
ind cold humor,if fo be that the body be not plethoricke. But if in@ammation toge- 
her with a Plethora or fulneffe hath caufed this affe, wee may, according to Gales 


tter it hath boyled 
teroc of fugar, ang 
for ufuall drinke. 


— 


hath drunke, they. 
lution of the reten. 
moderation of the 


fonable and immo. {mall guts, the affect is termed Yolvulus, Ileos, & wsifirere mei, but 
¢ violent and vehe. ificbe in the greater guts, itis called the Cholick, trom the partat- 
Biiver, lungs, {pleen, fected, whichis the Colo, that is, the continuity of the grea- hi hac lis, ot 
iligently diftingui. ter guts ; but efpecially that portion of the greater guts, Whe 
aes in this difeafe are which is properly and efpecially named Ce/om, or the cholicke Gut. There- pa6morthe 
gall &c unquenchable ‘ore Avicen rightly defines the Cholicke, A paine of the Guts wherein the ex- ~ che. r 
ttheurineisnotco- crementsare difficulely evacuated by thefundament. Pawlus Aegineta reduceth all 3.<-43. 
y reafon thematter HR ihecaules of the Colicke how various foeverto foure heads, to wit, to the crofie- 
wveine, being pre. | nelle, ortoughneffe of the humours impact inthe coates of the guts : flatulencies 
: affect long endure, hindred from paflage forth : the inflammation of the guts; and laftly; the colleétion 
caine death enfues. ofacride and biting humors. Now we will creat of each of thefein particular. Al- 
ich caufes or feedes noft the fame caufes produce the groffeneffe of humors, and flatulencies in the guts, 
ler. We muftabftain wowit, the ule of fatulent, and phlegmaticke, tough, and vifcide meats, yea al{o of 
eir firft quality, yer wchas are of good nourithment, if fundry thereof, and of fundry kinds be caten at 
ingent nourifhments = iclame meale,and in greater quantity than is fit. For hence crudity and obftru@i- 
Bhickeand aftringent on andat length the collection of flatulencies, whereon atenfive paincen{ues, This 
lings fhallbeapply- kindot Cholick is alfo caufed by the ufe of crude fruits,and too cold drink,drunken 
(cles of thofe parts, pecially whenas any is toohot by exercile, or any other way: for thus the fto- 
able to arrive atthe nacke and the guts continued thereto, are refrigerated, andthe humours and excre- | 
ain,and lettuce feed, nents therein conteined are congealed, and, as it were, bound up. The Cholicke 
cand ointments, mey which is caufed by the inflammation of the kidneyes,; happens by the Sympathy Of tick. | 


1 the Diabete, as that 
ether at once, but by 
caufes of a ftrangu'y 
o long ftay in ace 


heale it by blood-letting. But if obftru@ion bec in fault, 
sway by diu retickes either hot or cold, according to the condition of the matter ob- 


juding. We here omitto fpeake of the Dyfwria,or difficulty of making water, be- 
-sy(e the remedies are in generall the fame with thofe which are ufed inthe Ifchuria, 


or {upprefion of urine. 


— 


LVIIL 


Of the Cholike. 


Henfoever the Guts being obftru@ed, or otherwife afteéted, the 
¢xcrements are hindred from paffing forth, & if the fault bee in the 


— 


‘ereines pained or troubled with the ftonc or gravell conteined in tliem or the ure- 
crs. Thereforethen alfo paine troubles the patient athis bips and loynes, becaufle 


Both nerves,which arifing from the vertebra of the loins,are opprefied by the weight 


ofthe ftones and gravell, abourthe jointof the hippe arediffeminated into the 
Mulcles of the loines and thigh. Alfothe ureters are pained (for they feeme nothing 
lle but certaine hollow nerves) and alfo the cremafter mulcles, fo that the patients 
telticles may feemeto be drawnc upwards with much violence. Hence great, phicg- 
Maticke, and cholericke vomiting, and fweat of the whole body, all which doe nor 
lurceafe before that the ftone, or gravell thall bee forced downe into the bladder. 


- Now vomiting happens in this affect, for that the ventricle by reafon of its continu- 
“Yand neighbourhood which it hath with the guts, {uffers by confent or fympathy. 


that fhall be take sdaphor, 48. 


fees, 7° 


ro the urenary ee orthe ftomacke is of the fame kind or matter asthe guts are, fo that the guts feeme 
r of the bladder Lothing elfe butacertaine production of the ftomacke. Therefore if at any time na- 
: inflam ‘Ure endeavour to expell any thing that is troublefome in the kidneyes, ureters, coats 
obftructs the 7" Wn Of the guts, mefentery, pancreas, and hypochondryes, it caufeth a Colicke with pain fech che 
<i — nmewee and vomiting.A hotand dry diftemperalfo caufeth the Colicke,producing a pric k- Cholicke. 
is 


diciacs 


Mmm 3 ng 


—— 
| 
| ~ 
Pd | 


13, 
ing aad biting paine by drying che excrements fhuc up in the guts, as alfo by waitin 
as it were the radical humours of that place provided for the lubricating of the gu: 

Acride, vifcide, and tough phlegme caufeth the fame. ‘There isalfo anothe; Cay 
hentai * of the Collicke which is not fo common,to wit,the twining of the guts, that iS, When 
cauleofthe they arefotwined, folded, and doubled, that the excrements, as it Were, boy, . 
— their knots, cannot be expelled, asit manifeftly happens in the rupture called Emp 

rocele, by the falling of the guts into the cod.Likewife alfo wormes generated in the 


Collicke Gut, whileft that they mutually fold or twine themfelves up, dog alfo | 


twine the Colom itfelfe and foldit withthem. Alfo the too long ftay of the, 
ments in the guts, whether it fhall happen by the peculiar default of the too hot and 
dry body of the patient, or by his diet, that is, the ule of toodry meats, of exe,.: 
fes and painestaken in the heateofthefunne, or by the greatnefie of bufineffe, 1, 
minde being carryed away, caufeth the Collicke, with headache, and Plenty of ys 
pours flying upwards. 

A hiftery. I remember I once difleéted the body of a boy of fome twelve yeares old, 
had his guts folded with many as it were tyes or knots,of the reftrained, too hard & 
dry excrements, the which he caft out by his moutha little before his death, Which 
brought himro hisend, being not helped in time by fitting medicines. Now thes, 


XCre, 


ave the caufes of the Collick, according tothe opinion of the ancient and moderne 


Signs whereby Phyficians,of whofe fignes I judge it not amiffe here to treat in particular. You thal} 
weknowthat know the patient is troubled with the ftone collick by the paine which is fixed ang x 
it were kept in one place,to wit,of the kidnies, by his former manner of if, 
orchatcaufe. patient hath formerly voyded {tones or gravell together with his urine; by the pain. 
of the hips and tefticles for the formerly mentioned caules,& laftly by thatthe par, 
ent cafts forth by ftoole or urine, for that the great & laborious endeavour of natu, 
to caft forth the ftone which is in the kidnies,is propagated by a certaine fympathy 
& like (tudy of the neighbouring parts ftirring up the expaliive faculties each to hi 
work. The fignes of a fatulent collick are ,atenfive pain,fuch as if the guts were rent 
or torne in pieces, together with a noife orrumbling inthe belly. The force of the 
fhut up wind is fometimes fo great,that it rendeth or teareth the guts in funder,no o- 
therwile thana {wines bladdertoo hard blown up.Which when it happens, the pati. 
ent dyes with much vomiting, becaufe the ftomack oppreft with wind,can conteine 
nor imbraceno meat. The collick which is occafioned by the too long keeping inof 
the excrements,isaccompanied with the weight and pain of the belly, the tenfion of 
the guts,headach,apparent hardnefs of the belly ,& the complaint of the patientthat 
he hath not gone to ftoolein a long time. That which proceeds from a cholerick is. 
flammation,yeeldsa fenfc of great heat & pulfation inthe midft of the belly, by rea. 
fon of the veins and artcries which are in the pawcreas and coats of the guts, and there 
are the other fignes ofa Phlegmon, although alfochis as it were inflammation may: 
rife alfo from falt,acride & vifcous phlegme,which nature can neither expel upwards 
by vomit,nor downewards by ftool , this fundry times is aflociated with a dithculty 
of making water, for that when asthe right gut is inflamed the bladder is prefled by 
reafon of their fociety or neighbourhood.The collick which proceeds from thecot 
torfion of the guts thews it felfe by the exceflive cruelty of the painc, arifing for that 
the guts are not in their due fiteand place, and becaufe the excrements by cheirto0 
long detenfion acquirea preternaturall heat; & this is the caufe of the death of many 
fuch as have Ruptures, for that the gut falling down from the naturall place into th 
Cod, being a preternatural place, is redoubled & kept there as it were bound, wher: 
by the excrements being baked becomming more acridly hot caufe inflammatio”, 
and by raifing up flatulencies encreafe the diftenfion through all the guts, until! a 
length a deadly Z/ees or collickarifing, they come forth at the mouth. For prog 
{ticks ; itis better to have the paine in the collick to wander up and down, than co 
spiv.t04- fixedsit is good alfo that the excrements are not wholly fuppreft. But the evill ign‘ 
that here appeare pronounce the affe@tcitherdifficult or deadly. Now thele 
that it is deadly, intolerable tormenting paine,continual! vomiting,cold fweat,co! 
nefle of the extreme parts, hickiting by reafon of the fympathy the ftomack hath w" 


the guts, a Phrenfie by the confent of the braine with the ftomacke, and oft. _ , 


michimice ext 
Roles rut 
te 
fryed with a lt 
dankes,and re 
bladders halfe 
lavander,bay- 
mol .an.0.1.077 
hydromele ad 
cy chamem an 
{tretched out ¢ 
glyfter is muc 
junipert,cy rut 
ent can endure 
wind collick: 
made ot hyfog 
upon meats Oo 
fronhot heri 
nade with 
dinetfe is gene 
plaffe fhall be 
ihali be boun¢ 
the matter of 
admonifhing 
But ifthe part 
by an occult 
Pouder iS PiVve 
lerick inflam: 
rating diet ; 
fo cooling gl 
trary tothe m 
pils of H yerat 
May be uled. 
Mallowes vic 
Correct the a 
yMptome ar 
thick and tou 
and ar length 
the prefcri 
by the fu 


na 
reads ina Di 
ies, for the 
canfed by 29 
which is 
if wormecse But 
| and ftomack, | 
wardly as take 
of chat which 
“he painc. (ect 
ourpule (hall y 
lowes, violet le 
Aowers of ca 
attenuate, and 
hor. Alfo the 
anesh. butyr.re 
| 


or 


, as alfo by wali, 
icating of the pure 
salfo another 
‘guts, that is, wher 
Sit were, boun 


d 
rupture called 


and 
ry Meats, or CXercj. 


efle of bufineffe, 
ie, and plenty Of va. 


veyeares old. 
ftrained, too 
mre his death, which 
dicines. Now thefe 
ncient and moderne 
particular. Y oy 
is fixed and 
eoner of fe,as. if the 
UrINe; Dy the pain 
{tly by thatthe pati 
endeavour of nature 
certaine fympathy 
faculties each to his 
if che guts were rent 
y+ The force of the 
guts in funder,no o- 
it happens, the pati- 
Wind,can conteine 
0 long keeping in of 
belly, the tenfion of 
tof the patient that 
mrom a cholerick in- 
of the belly, by rea- 
tthe guts, and there 
flammation may a- 
ither expel upwards 
ted with a difliculty 
ladder is prefied by 
ceeds from the con- 
inc, arifing tor that 
sements by their too 
Df the death of many 
turall place inro the 
vere bound, where- 
aufe inflammation, 
ithe guts, untill ac 
outh. For progno- 
nd down,than to be 
t. But the evill fignes 
y. Now thefe thew 
ng,cold fweat,cold 
ftemack hath wit 


cke, and oft-cimes4 
cone 


17. whofe Cure w performed by Surgery. 


pavulfion by drawing the matter into the nerves. But fuch as have griping and pain 
»youttheir navil and loines,which can neither be helped by medicine nor otherwife, 
readsina Droplie. The cure mutt be diverfified according to the variety of the cau- Theeuse. 
zs, for the {tone collick is cured by medicines proper tothe ftone that which is 

by an Enterocele, is cured by the onely reftoring the gut to its place ; that 

which is occaftoned by wormes, requires medicines fitto kill and caft forththe 
yormes. But chat which proceeds from the weaknefle and refrigeration of the guts 

nd ftomack, is cured by heating and ftrengthening medicines afwell applyed out- 

wardly as taken in inwardly by the mouth,or otherwaies. The beginning of the cure 

sfchat which is occaftoned by tough flegine and flatulencies,isby the mitigation of 

paine, (eeing there is nothing which more dejects the powers than paine.To this gachs and ano. 
surpule thall you provide bathes,S emsscup:a, fomentations of mallowes, mar(h-mal. dinetomenta- 
owes violet leaves,penyroyall,fennell, Orszanum,the leeds of time and fenugreek, 
jowers of camomill, meliloge,and other fuch like, which save power to hear, dry 

seenuate, aad rarifiethe skin, foto diffipate the wind. Burall {uch mutt be actually 

yor. Alfo the belly may be anointed with this tollowing oincment, ofes chamsem, An oyntmens. 
butyr recent <n. fem. apit, petrol. galauz.an, 58, Aq. Vita, ol. falviaaut thy. 

wichimice extract. q.f. The following liniment is much commended by Heolerins. 

oles cum aq. vit dt ffolust fimul adde 2.be- 
little bags made with miller, oatesand {ale 

eyed with a lictle white wine in a frying pan, fhall be applyed hot upon the belly & 

junkes,and renewed beforethey grow cold. You may,in ftead of thefe bags, ufe oxe Why 
bladders halfe filled with a decoétion of refolving things ; as falt, rofemary, thime, imthecollick 
lwander,bay-berriesand the like:then inje& a glyfter being thus made. K.quatwor re- 
anm.§ in sity. 
hydromele ad lib qua diffolve bened. laxat .mellis anthofati ancth. 

¢ chamem.an.3i\8. Letaglyfter be made to bee injected at twice ; for the guts being 

etched out cannot conreine the accuftomed dofis of a glyfter : alfo this following 

is much approved. Kk. vini malvat. & olei nucum, an, aqua vite, oles 

wniperi,cy rut.per quintam Let this be injeed as horas rhe pati- 

eat can endure.I have oft-times as by miracle helped intolerable paine caufed by the 

wind collick and phlegme with this glyfter. Avscen prefcribes a carminative gly fter 

mde ot and Englith galengall.Let the patient feed 

upon meats of good juice & eafie digeftion,as broths made with che yolks of egs, faf- 
ron,hotherbes and a nutmeg; [et him drink good wioe,as Miuskedine,or Hypocras 

inde with good wine foto heat the ftomack & guts. For in Ga/ens opinion, all win- 

dinetfe is generated by a remiffe heat. But if che pain fhall continue,a large Cupping- 

elalle thall bee applyed to the navill to draw and diffipate the windineife ; the belly 

‘hall be bound with ftrong and broad ligatures, to ftrengthen the guts, and difcufle 

tematrer of flatulencies. The patients taught by nature,ufe this remedy,whilftnone 
dimonifhing them, they preffethe belly with their hands in the bitterneffe of paine. 

butif the paine cannot be thus appeafed, we muft come to fuch medicines as worke Specifick medi- 
by an occult propertie, asthe dryed gut of a Wolfe, for adram thereof made into “"*- 
pouder is given in wine with good fuccefle. That collick which is caufed by a cho- _ “a : 
‘tick inflammation requires contrary medicines, to wit, bloodletting anda refrige- aes. 
rating diet ; potions made of Déacatholicon and Cafsia diffolved in barley water, al- 

C cooling gly {ters. Avicen prefcribes narcoticks, for that being cold, they are con- 

trary tothe morbifick caufe which is hot and dry ; fuch are pils of Ph:loninm. Allo 

Pils of Hyer picra inthe quantity of Div. with opswm and fatfion, of each one graire, 

May beuled. Alfo baths are appointed, made of water wherein mallowes, marfh- 

Dallowes violet leaves,Aowers of white lillies, lettuce, purflaine, have bin boyled,to 

Correct the acrimonie of the cholericke and hot humours, whence the difeafe and 
Ymptome arifech. That collick which is like to this,and proceeds from falr,acride, 

‘hick and tough phlegme, is cured, the humour being firft attenuated and diffu ed, 

nd ar length evacuated by nedicines taken by the mouth and otherwile according 

‘Othe prefcription ofthe learned Phifirian. But 4vscen cures that which is occafio- 


dy the fuppreffion of the hardened excrements, and twining of them by meates 
which 


mig, 
MS | 
icives up, doe 
itay of the CXCre 
lr of rh | 


— 


— 


Of divers precernaturall Affetts, 


Ly 


The foice of 

uickGlver ia 
ie unfolding 
of the guts. 
A hiltory. 


What Phlebo- 


to. nit Is. 


Theufle. 


Rep! tion 


rw 


Th: fignes. 


Five icopes in 
letting blood. 


which have anemollient faculty, fuch as hume@ing broths, as that which is 
an oldcock tired with running,& threfhed to death, & fo boyled with dill, Poly po, 
dy and alitcle falt,untill the Acth fall from the bones; alfo he ufeth detergent gly tters 
fuch as this which followes. beta, m.i.furfursw, p.i. fiews, m.i fies 
coltio ad th. i. ingua diffolve mitri Cr muria am. Sii.facch.rub. fefamini,3ii, Bur i 
the ob{truétion be more contumacious, you muft ufe more powerfull ones mag, ex 
cyclamin.centanrio,cy hiera dsacolocinth.ad sii, But if the obftruGion do Notwithftan 
ding remaine, fo thatthe excrements come forth at the mouth, Sandy, 
wifheth (by thecounfell of many who have fo freed themfelves from this deagi 
fymptome)to drink three pounds of quickfilver with water onely. For the double, 
andasit were twined up gut is unfolded by the weight of the quickfilver, ang the 
excrements are depreft and thruft forth,and the wormes are killed which gaye occa. 
fionto this affet. John of S. Germaines that moft worthy Apothecary hath told me 
that hee faw a Gentleman who when as hee could not bee freed from the paig, 
of the collick by any means prefcribed by learned Phy fitians,at length by the coyp. 
fell of acertaine Germance his friend, drank three ounces of oile of {wect almong 
drawne without fire,and mixed with fome white wine and pellitory water, and {wal 
lowed a leaden bullet be{meared with quickfilver,and that bullet comming prefeny. 
ly out by his fundament,he was wholly freed from his collick. 


™ 


Of Phlebotomie, or BRod-letting. 


<£&*&Hlebotomie is the opening of a veine, evacuating the blood withthe 
py a eft ofthe humours ; thus Arteriotomie, is the opening of an Artery, 
The firft {cope of Phlebotomie is the evacuation of the bloud offen. 
>< ding in quantity, although oft-times, the Phyficians intention isto 
draw forth the blood which offends in quality,or either way by ope. 
ning a veine. Repletion which is caufed by the quantity is two-fold, the one 44%». 
res, that is,co the ftrength, the veines being otherwife not very much {welled ; this 
makes men infirme and weake, nature not ableto beare this humour, of what kinde 
foever it be. The other is termed ad vale that is, to the veflels,the which is {0 called 
comparatively to the plenty of bloud, although the ftrength may very well away 
therewith, The veffels are oft-times broke by this kind of repletion, fo that the pa. 
tient cafts and {pits up blood,or elfe evacuats it by the nofe, wombe, hemorrhoids, 
or varices. Therepletion which is 44 vires is knowne by the heavineffe and wear 
fomneffe of the whole body ;but that which is 4dvafa is perceived by their diftenti. 
on and fulneffe, both of them ftand in neede of evacuation. But bloud is onely (0 
bee let by opening aveinc, for five refpedts : the firftis to leffen the abundance of 
bloud, as in Phlethorick bodics, and thofe who are troubled with inflammation 
withoutany plenitude. The fecond is for divertion, or revulfion, as when a vein 
of the right arme is opened to ftay the bleeding of the left nofthrile. The thirdis 
to allure or draw downe, as when the /aphena iis opened in the ankle to draw down 
the courfes in women, The fourth is for alteration or introduétion of another qual 
ty, as when in fharpe feavers we open a veine to breathe out that bloud which is he 
ted in the veflels, and cooling the refidue which remaines behind. The fift is to pt 
ventimminent difeafes,as when in the Spring and Autumne we draw bloud by op 
ning avcine in fuch as are fubjeé to {pitting of bloud, the {quinancie, pleurifit, fal 
ling ficknefle,apoplexie, madneffe, gout, or in {uch as are wounded, for ra-preve™ 
the inflammation which isto be feared. Before bloud- letting, if there bee aay ° 
excrements inthe guts, they fhall bee evacuated by a gentle glyfter, or fuppolit") 


F omwhomwe leftthe mefaraicke veines fhould thence draw unto them any impuritic. Bloud mult 


muft nor draw 


blood. 


not be drawne from ancient people unleffe fome prefent neceffity require it, left “ 
native heat which is but languid in them fhould be brought to extreme debility” 
their fubftance decay ; neither muft any in like fort be taken from children, for fear 


their 
fre10 
habit. T 


dif 
of bloud, 


Jisburdens chen 


ength of the par 


ened is 2 
wari 
into the yeines 10 
congue matt be oF 
offtrangling. P 
preathing, or tak 
aroake, or fall 
the ftrength be nog 
be let in the heig! 
remore from the @ 
may bediverted, @ 
che more drawn 
this opinion of t 


of the affeéte d pa 
inthe Megrim ; \ 
with thee 
caufets of the he. 
the arteries of thi 


ture alittle abov 
blond upwardst 
hefhallrake hol 
prefling the veit 
you meane to o 
by forcing up th 
to be opened, 
skin may be rel 
bethe lefle pai 
ther too neer,n 
patients arme,t 

he open the vei 
different thick 
artery which lial 
Which lyes 
Outdanger. A 
the Phyfician, 

With a ligature 

Neither too {tra 

arme wheref 

Bently bended 


* 
Ff | @ 
C H A P L l X . 
| 7 ‘ ty 
d 
» 
{ 
i 
4 
he 


Lip 


twhich is 


Made of 


pn do notwithftar, 
‘(Martanus § 


S from this dead 

For the doubic, 
uickfilver, and the 
which gave OCca. 
ecary hath told me 
ecd from the Paine 
ength by the coun. 
Of {weet almond: 
Water, and {wal. 
comming prefene. 


the blood with th 
“hing of an Arcery. 
mof the bloud offen. 
intention isto 
ither way by ope. 
fold, the 
nuch {welled ; this 
our, of what kinde 
e which is fo called 
ay very well away 
#100, fothat the pa- 
be, hemorrhoids, 
avineffe and weari- 
d by cheir diftenfi- 
t bloud is onely to 
the abundance of 
with inflammation 
n,as whena veine 
thrile. Thethirdis 
Nkle to draw downe 
bn of another quali- 
bloud which is hea- 
. The fift is to pre- 
raw bloud by 
ncie, pleurifie, tal- 
ded, tor ta-prevent 
gif chere bee aay 
Biter, or fuppolitory, 
puritic. Bloud 
y require it, left the 
xtreme debility,4® 
n children, for feare 


whofe Cures performed by Surgery. 


693 
their powers by reafon of the tenderneffe of their fubftance,& rarenefs 
frheit habit. The quantity of bloud which is to be let, muft bee confidered by the 
.engthofthepatient, and greatnefle of the difeafe : therefore if the patient bee 
geaxe,and the difeafe require large evacuation, it will bee convenient to part the let- 
iog of bloud, yea by the interpofition of fome dayes. The veine of the forehead When snd fos 
ing opened is good for the paine of the hind part of the head ; yet firft we foment a 
ae part with warme water, thatfo the skin may be the fofter,and the bloud drawne 
aco the veines in greater plenty. In the {quinancie the veines which are under the 
ongue muft be opened aflant, without putting any ligatures about the neck for feare 
trangling. Phiebotomie is neceflary in all difeafes which ftop or hinder rhe 
yeathing, or take away the voice of fpeech, as likewile in all contufions by aheavie 
sroake, or fall from high, in an apoplexie, {quinancie, and burning feaver,though 
ye trength be not great, nor the bloud faulty in quantity or quality,bloud muft nor 
elet in the height ofafever. Moft judgeit fit todraw bloud from the veines moft 
emote from the affected and inflamed part, for thatthus the courfe of the humours 
my be diverted, the next veines on the contrary being opened the humours may be 
® xc more drawne into the affected part, and fo increafe the burden and paine, But 
@ isopinion of theirs is very erroneous, for an opened veine alwaies evacuates and 
sburdens che next part. For have fundry times opened the veines and arteries 
the affected part, as of the hands & feet in the Gout of thefe parts ; of thetemples 
‘athe Megrim ; whereupon the paine alwayes was fomewhat aflwaged, for that to- 
secher with the evacpated blaud, ‘the maligniti¢ of the Gout,and the hot fpirits(the 
of the head. ach or Megrim)were evacuated. For thus Galen wifheth to open 13.mth.cap. ms. 
inearteries of the temples in a preat and contamacious defluxion falling upon the 
yes for inthe Megrim orhead-ache 


3 


Elem to open a veine and dram blend from thence, 
HF firftthing is, to feat or place the patient in as good a pofture Howto place 
| a5 you can,to wit,in his bed 1f He be weak; butin a chaire if ftrong, 
yet fo, thatthe light may fall dire@ly upon the veine which you 
intend to open. Then the Surgeon fhall rub the arme With his Rubbing the 
hand, or a warme linnen cloth, that thebloud may flow the more *™* 
3 plenitfully into the vein. Then he fhall bind the veine with a liga- Binding ic be. 


| 


urealittle above the place appointed to be opened, and hee fhall draw back the re ae 


' | | yane 
lord upwards towards the ligature from the lower part ; andif it be the right arme, 


helhallrake hold thereof with his Icft hand; but if the left.then with his right hand, 

breling the veinein the meane time with his thumbea little below the place where 

yeumeane to open it, left it fhould flip away ; and chat it may bee the more {wolne 

»y forcing up the bloud. Then with his naile hee thall marke or defigne the place 

be opened, and fhall annoint it being fo marked with butter or oy!e whereby the 

xin may be relaxed,and the lancet enter more eafily, and therefore the fection may 

dethe lefle painefull, He ‘hal hold his lancet between his thumb and fore finger,nei- 

ther too neer,nor too far from the point;he (hall reft his other three fi ngers upon the 

patients arme,that fo his hand may be the more fteddy & lefletrembling. Then fhall 

heopen the vein with an incilion agreeable to the magnitude ofthe veffell, the in- 

different thicknefle of the conteined bloud fomewharaflant, diligently avoiding the 

ttery which lies under the ba/i/ica,& the nerve,ortendon of the two=headed mufcle, why the bafiica 
Which lyes under the Median veine. But for the Cephalicke it may be opened with- ** wcsantice | 
outdanger, As much bloud as is fufficient being drawne, according tothe minde of ¢, fafely asthe 
the Phyfician, he fhall loofethe ligature, and laying a little boulfter under, hee {hall cephalick. 
With a ligature bind up the wounded part to ftay the bleeding ; the ligation thall be The bindingup 
Neither too ftrait, nor loofe, but fo chat the patient may freely bend and extend his 5 - 
ame . wherefore whileft that is in doing he muft not hold his arme ftreight our, bur 


gently bended, otherwife he cannot freely bend it. The 


x. alth. 1. fat de 
c(amint , sii. Bur if 
rfull Ones mac : 


694. Of divers preternaturall Affect 


Sy Lip. 


The figure of « Lancet to let bloud witha, 


\ 


\ 


| | CHAP. L XI. 
Of Cupping-gla (Fes er ventofes. 


=. Upping-glaflesare applyed efpecially when the matter conjung a3 
The ufe of cup. / \; impact in any part isto be evacuated,and then chiefly there is plac for 
pingglaiics. {carification after the cupping-glafles : yet they arealfo applyed fo, 


-revulfion and divertion; for when an humour continually flowesdoy, 
into the eyes, they may be applyedto the fhoulders witha great 
for fo they draw more ftrongly and effeQually. They are alfo applyed underwo, & 

mens breatts, for to {top the courfes flowing too immoderartely, but to their thighes 

for to provokethem. They are alfo applyed to {uch as are bit by venemous beafts 

as alfo to parts poffeffed by a peftiferous B#4e or Carbuncle, foto draw the poyfon 

Ps from within outwards. For (as Ce//us faith) a Cupping-glaffe where it is fafined on, 
he skin be firlt {carified drawes forth bloud, but if it bee whole, then it draws| 
rit. Alfothey areapplyedto the belly, when any grofle or thick windinefle, fhutup 

in the guts,or membraines of the mufcles of the Epigasérium,or lower belly caufing 

the Collick, isto bee difcufled. Alfo they are faftned to the Hy pocondry’s, whenss 

flatulency in the liver, or fpleene {wels up the entraile lying thereunder, or in too 

areata bleeding atthenofe. Alfo they are fecagainft the Reines in the bottomeof 
the belly, whereas the ureters run downe to draw downe the ftone into the bladder, 
when as it tops inthe middle or entranceoftheureter. You fhall make choiceo! 
greater and lefler Cupping-glaffes according to the condition of the part, andthe 
conteined matter. But to thofe parts whereto thefe cannot by reafon of their gre: 
neffe be applyed, you may fit hornes for the fame purpofe. 


Tht 


} 
a 


whofe Cure is performed by Surgery. 695 


Cupping-elalfes of different bigneffe with little holes in their bottomes, 
all waxe when yon apply them to the part but opened 
when you would take them off, that [0 the aire may 
enter in withthe more cafe. 


matter conjunG and 
fly there is place fo; 
are alfo applyed fo; 
inually fowesdown 
rswithagreatflane 
applyed underwo. 4 

but co their thighes 
by venemous beafts, 
p to draw the poyfon 
here it is faftned on, 
ple, then it draws {pi- 
k windinefle, fhut up 
lower belly caufing 
pocondry’s, when as 
ereunder, or in too 
es inthe bottome of 
pne into the bladder, 
wall make choice ot 
of the part, andthe 


eafon of their great: 
\\ \ \ 
The 


IB. | 7 
ob ; 
N 
N 
N 
S 
MAAS 
— 
J (3 
| A ta SS 
| 
| = 
N 
A 
“ ~ = 
— 
- | 


Pheufe of 
’ a 
Leaches. 


How to apply 
them. 


How to caufe 
them to fall off. 


Hornes which without fire, by onely fucking at the wpper hele. dy 
from she part lying ander them, 


— — 


Cuar. LXII. 
Of Leacbes,end their wie. 


SLES N thofe parts of the body whereto Cupping-glafies and hornes cannot 

be applyed,tothofe Leaches may for the moft part be pur,as to the fun. 

damentrto open the coat of the hemorrhoide veines, to the mouthof 
222°, the wombe, the gums, lips,nofe, fingers. After the Leach being filled 


with bloud thal fal off,if the difeafe require a large evacuation of bloud, 
and the part affe@ed may endure it, Cupping-glaffes, or hornes, or other Leaches 
fhall be {ubftituted. Ifthe Leaches bee handled with the bare hand,they are angred, 
and become io itomackfullas that they will not bite;wherefore you fhal! hold them 
ina white & clean linnen cloath, & apply them tothe skin, being firft lightly {carit- 
ed,or be{meared with the bloud of fome other creature,for thus they will rake hold 
of the ficth, together withthe skin more greedily& fully. To caufe them fall off you 
(hall put fome powder of Aloes, falt or afhes upon their heads. If any delire t0 
know how much bload they have drawne, lethim {prinkle them with falt mace:0- 
to powder, as foone as they are come off, for thus they will vomit up what bloud {o- 
ever they have fucked. If you defire they fhould fucke more bloud than they 
bleto containe, cut oftheir tailes as they fuck, for thus they will makeno endo! 
fucking, for that ieruns out as they fuck it, The Leaches by fucking draw the blous 
not onely from the affected part whereto they are applyed, but alfo fromthe adj 
cent and diftant parts. Alfofometimes the part bleeds a good while after the Lea 
ches be fallen away, whichhappens not by fcarification after the application0 

Cupping. glafles or hornes. If you cannot ftop the bleeding after the falling away of 
ihe Leaches,then preffethe halfe ofa beane upon the wound,untill it ftick of it {ell, 
for thus it will ftay ; alfoa burnt rag may be fitly applyed with a little boullte! and 


fit ligature. 


ve commetht 
“8ppens in bic 


joints of the b 
gra, forthattl 
Trachelagra,tc 
backe bone is ¢ 
the fhoulders 
the joints of rt 
inthe Elbow, & 
called Chirag) 
thatthe Hand, 
and Pous. WW! 
leads a fedenta 
bled with the 


{eth 


Bel 
4 ~ = 
LE 
\ 
i it dif Ss Uj i) * 
| i | 
= 
U4 
| | OU! Wes by 
| VCI 
: 
h 
J 
q 
| 
beadd 
‘Rey fall dow 
cer, do they Ce 
| Cancer, Befide 
| 
q 


and hornes cannot 
putas co the fun- 
es, torhe mouthof 
Be Leach being filled 
Evacuation of bloud, 
$, or other Leaches 
d,they are angred, 
you fhall hold them 
firft lightly {carift- 
they willtake hold 
fe them fall off you 
Ifany defire to 
With fale mace in- 
up what bloud fo- 
md chan they area- 
will make no end of 
Bing draw the blouc 
alfo from the adja- 
thile after the Lea- 
the application 0° 
the falling away of 
till it ftick of it felf, 
a little boulfter an¢ 


THe Ericureenru Booke. 


— 


Cuapr. 
The defcription of the Goute, 


A hy, Goute isa difeafe occupying and harming the fubftance of the Joints Wh 

by the falling downe and colle@tiion of avirulent matter accom panied a 
by thefoure humors. This word _/rthrits or Goute, is generall for e- 

very joint fo affected ; yetitenjoyes divers particular names in fundry 


joints of the body:as that which falleth upon the joint of the Jaw,is termed Siazona- 


ers, for thatthe Greckes call the Jaw Siazen , that which affeéts the necke is termed gouts. 
Trachelagra,tor that the neck is in Greek termed Trachelos : that which troubles the 
backe bone is called Rhachifagra,for the {pine is termed Rhachis ; that which molefts 
the fhoulders Omagra, for the joint of the thoulder is ftiled : that which affeéts 
the joints of the Collar- bones Cler/azra,for that the Greeks call this bone C/es: that 
inthe Elbow, Pcchyagra, for Pechs fignifieththe elbow: the gourein the hand is 
called Chrragra, inthe Hippe [/chias, inthe knee Gonagra, inthe feet Podagra, for 


| thatthe Hand, Hippe, Knee, and Foote are in Greeke termed Cheir, I/chion, Gony, 


ind Pows. When as there is great abundance of humours in abody, andthe patient 


| leadsa ledentary life, not fomeone, burall the joints of the body are at once trou- 


vied with the Goute. 


— 


Cuap. II. 


Of theocculs caufes of the Goute. 


EM Lic humor caufing the Goute isnot of amore knowne, or eafily expreit 
aturethan that which caufeth the plague, Lves venerea, or falling ticke.. 
efile. For itis of akindand nature cleane different from that which caw- 
™ (eth a Phiecmon, edema, eryfipelas,or Scirrhus ; for, as Aetius faith, it ne- 
"ecommeth to fuppucation like other humours, not forchat, as I thinke, becaufe it 

Ppens in bloodles parts, but through the occafion of fome occlut malignity.Here- 


. may be added that che humours which caufe the forementioned tumors, when ae 


‘acy fall downe upon any part,notthen truly when they are turned into pas or mat- 
“t, dothey caufe fo fharpe paines as that which caufeth the Goute, forthe paine 
“eteof is farre more fharpe, than of that humour which breedeth an ulceratea 
“acer. Befidesthefe humours, when they falluponthe joints through any other 
‘callon, never turne into knots, onely that which caufeth the Goure 10 che 

Non 


| 
- | 
' 
or 


Concerning the (Gout. 2 


after ithath fallen thither, isatlength hardened intoa certaine knotty anja. 


Therefem- were plaifter-like fubftance to bee amended by no remedies. But feing it Offends nos 


the parts by which it flowes downe, ‘no more than the matter which Creeping 
Epilepic. wards fromthelower partsto the braine, caufeththe Eprlep/re) as foone ag j, bile | 


into the {paces’of the Joints it caufethcruell painc, one while with heate, 2,,, 

while with cold. For you may fee fometroubled withthe Goute, who 
that their pained. Joints are burnt, there are others to whom they feeme cof... : li 
any ice, fothat they cannot bee fufhiciently heated to their hearts defire y 
may fometimes fee in the fame body troubled with the Goute,that the Joins, +m 
right fide will as it were burne with heat, but on the left fide will be ftiffe wir), a 
or which is more, theknec inthe famefideto be tormented witha hot diftem 


andthe ancle troubled withacold. Laftly, there fometimes happens a fucceffion oy 


z prone paine ina fucceffion of dayes, a5 the fame joints will be this day troubled With 2 bot 


to morrow witha cold diftemper, fothat wee need not marvaile to Phy fitians 


prefcribe one while hot, another while cold medicines againft the fame difeate of 


the fame partand body. Alfo it fometimes happens thatthe malignity of th; ba 
mour doth not onely not yieldto medicines, but is rather made worfe, {0 
paticnts afirmethatthey are far better when they have none, than when they have 
any remedyes applyed. For all things being rightly done, and according to seafop 
yet the difeafe will come againeat certain feafons by fits : and hereupon it is {ay by 


Horace; 
Dui cupit, aut metust,juvat fic domus aut res, 
Ut lippum pitta tabula, fomenta podazram. 
sae... Riches the covetous, and fearefull fo doe pleafe, 
v1 -y, . As pictures fore eyes, Bathes the Goute doe cafe. 


wh Certainely fuch ashave this difeafe hereditarily, can no more bee helped and 
throughly freed therefrom, than thofein whom the matter of the difeate is becom: 
knotty ,whercof Ovid thus {peaketh: 


V2 g 
nodofam nefcit medicina podagram. 


’ -Phyficke cannot the knotty Goute to heale. 

Thefe reafons have induced many to believe that the eflence of this difealeisun 
knowne, for there is acertaine occult and inexplicable virulency, the author of !0 
Lib. Rteatmalignity and contumacy. Which Avécen feemesto acknowledge, when hee 
tratt2.cap.3- Writesthat there is acertaine kinde of Goute whofe matter is foacure and maligne, 
that if itat any time bee augmented by the force of anger, it may fufficc to kill 
Lib.dethy. party by fuddaine death. Therefore Galen himfelfe writesthat Treacle mutt bec” 
ad Pifoneme.1s. fed in all Arthriticall and gouty affects, andas think, for no other reafon, thantor 
that it dries, waftes and weakens the malignity thereof. Gordonius is of the lameo 
pinion, but addeth withall, that rhe body mutt be prepared and purged before We 
ule Treacle. Therefore the matter of the gout is a thin and virulent humour.y<t"™ 
contagious , offending in quality rather than quantity , caufing extreme 

the gout par- 
cakesofoceule @0d therfore inftigating the humours together with the caliginous and flatuleatip” 
malignity» prepared or ready for defiuxion upon the affected parts. Therefore as the bitiay 
of Afpes,and ftingings of Wafpes caufe cruell pain with fudden {welling and biit 
ring, whichis by the heat of the humours whichthe poyfon hath tainted, and 
the {imple folution of continuity, feeing that we daily {ee Shoo-makers and Tayios 
pricking their flefh with aules and needles without having any fuch fymptome. Tos 


the virulencie of the gout caufeth intolerable tormenting paine, not by thea” 


dance, becaufe it happens to many who have the gout, no figne of defluxion 2p)’ 
ring in thejoints,but onely by a maligne and inexplicable quality ,by reafon 


of thefe paines doe not ceafe unleffe abated by the helpe of medicines, or natu 


both. The recitall of the following hiftories will give much light co that une 


L pS. 


cable and vi 
rie aiach, 
and Cafehant 
tambert and 
exceedingly 
pignefle ota 
menting fits 
and vio 
»e{tures abov 
laid h 
jelfed ofthe I 
“ime I heedfu 
accuttomed, 
reration as fat 
more loudly 
body ranne 
members, tha 
ao fufpicion o 
fe€tly make u! 
Neither did th 
difeafe by the 
wizzards and « 
exceeded by 
our confultaci 
tiall Cautery 
fall of the Efc 
man of her pa 
caufe of fogre 
plicable qualit 
tery, all paine 
the wife of th 
and me,earne 
by fits, that ch 
caft her lelfeh 
guard put upo 
like weapon, n 
lucceffe as the 
cafloned by th 
nuall.and alw 
no fuch thing 
ceeds from av 


forethis difeat 


ihe 
4 
; 
| 
d 
q 
= 
\ 
a 
q 
3 
, 
“4 
} \ 
5 a 
loalfo of the 
Conjunct:r 
4 Or ic r 
Be 
| 


Lip. ig 


* 


ine knotty and as ir 


tfeing it offend. Not 
‘which Creeping » 
as foone aS it failets 
with heate, anothe 
mute, Who com Plaine 
'y feeme colde, than 
TS defire 4 verily you 
thar the Joints of the 
be ftiffe with cold. 
vitha hot diftem Der. 
ppens a fucceffion of 
troubled With a hor 
aile to (ee Phyfitians 
ft the fame difea(e of 


malignity of this ho. 


mde worle, fo thatthe 
than when they have 
according to teafon, | 


\ercupon it is fayd by 


C. 


more bee helped and 


ce of chis difeafe is un- 
Bency, the author of {0 
knowledge, when hee 

foacute and maligne, 
may fufficcto kill me 


at Treacle muft becur | 


ther reafon, than for 
onins is of the lameo- 
id purged before we 
ulent humour,y¢ct 


Bifing extreme 


inous and flatul 
herefore asthe bitings 
Ben {welling and blifte- 


ath tainted, and not by 
ylors 


Thus 
abune | 


of defluxion 


re 
ality, by reafon wit 
ext 


bo- makers and Ta 
fuchfymptome: 
aine, not by the 


medicines, or nat 
+h light ro that 


fthe difeafeisbecome 


Concerning the 


699 
1alignity of the matter caufing th t. While? K; ifteri 
esble and virulent malignity o cauling the gout. Whileft King Charles A hitteric. 
peninth, of happy memory, was at Burdeaux, there was brought to Chappellaine 

nd cafedan the Kings Phyficians, and Tite a Phyfician of Burdeaux, Nicholas 
~bertand my felfe Surgeons, a certaine Gentlewoman fome forty yeares old, 
xceedingly troubled formany yeares by reafon of a tumor fcarce equalling the 

ignefle of a peale, on the outfide of the joyne of the leftHippe : one of her tor- 

genting fits tooke ber in my prefence ; thee prefently beganne to cry and roare,and A teniblefic. 
afhly and violently to throw her body this way and that way, with motionsand 

veftures above a Womans, yeaa mans natare, For thruft her head between her 

woes, laid her feete upon her fhoulders, you would have {aid thee had beene pof- 

(fed of the Divell. This fic held her fome quarter ofan houre, ; during all which 

_me Lheedfully obferved whetherthe grieved part {welled any bigger than it was 
.-cultomed, Whether there happened any new inflammation ; but there was noal- 

eration 2s farre as | could gather by fightorfeeling, but onely that thee cryed out 

nore loudly when as [touched it. The fit pafled, a great heate tooke her, all her 

body ranne dovae with {weat, with fo great wearinefle and weakencffe of all her 

members, that thee could not fo much as ftirre her little finger. There could bee How anEpal 
40 (ulpicion of an Epileptick fit, for this woman all thetime of her agony did per. tickftdifers 
“ly make ufe of all her fenfes, did {peake, difcourfe, and had noconvulfion, 
Neither did thee {pare any coft or diligence, whereby thee might bee cured of her 

difeafe by the helpe of Phyficians,or famous Surgeons ; the confulted alfo witches, 

wizzards and charmers, fothat thee had left nothing unattcempted, but all art was 

exceeded by the greatneffe of the difeafe, When I had thewed all thefe things at 
sarconfaltacion, wee all with one confent were of this opinion, to apply a poren- 

riall Cautery to the grieved part, or che tumour. I my felfe applyed it : after the 

fallofthe Efchar very blacke and virulent fanies flowed out, which freed the wo- 

manofher paine and difeafe for ever after. Whence you may gather, that the 

cule of fo great evill was acertaine venenate malignity, hurting rather by an unex- 
plicablequality than quantity ; which being overcome and evacuated by the Cau- 

tery, all paine abfolutely ceafed. Upon the like occafion, but on the right arme, 

thewife of the Queenes Coach-man at Amboife confulted Chappellaine, Castella 
andme,earneftly craving eafe of her paince, for thee was fo grievoufly tormented 

by fits, that chrough impatiency, being careleffe of her felfe, thee endeavoured to 

cather lelfe headlong out of her chamber window, for feare whereof thee hada 

guard putupon her. Wee judged that the like monfter was to be aflaulted with the 

ike weapon, neither were we deceived, for uling a potentiall caucery, this had like 

lucceffe asthe former. Wherefore the bitterneffe of the paine of the gout is not oc- 

calioned by the onely weakenefle of the joints ; for chus the paine fhould be conti- 


walland alwaies like it felf; neither is it from the diftemper of a {imple humour,tor 


| dofuch thing happens in other tumours of what kinde foever they be of ; but it pro- 


ceeds from a venenate,maligne,occultand inexplicable quality of the matter: wher- 
‘orethis difeafe feands in need of a diligent Phyfician and a painfull Surgeon. 


Cuar. IIL. 
Of the manifest canes of the Gout. 


Lthough chefe things may be true which we have delivered of the occult-phe pri 
‘J X® caufe of the gout, yet there be and are vulgarly affigned others, of which svecaule of 


SGN a probable reafon may bee rendred, wherein this malignity whereof wee ““°"" 
““"r®D have {poken lies hid and is feated. Therefore as of many other difeafes, 

of the gout there are affigned three caufes ; that ts, the primitive, antecedent 
oajunésthe primitive is twofold,one drawn from their firft originall and their 

Tothers wombe, which happens tofachas are generated of gouty parents,chiefly =» 

Whileft they were conceived,this gouty matter did actually abound and fall upon em ate 

the joynts. Forthe feed falls from all the parts of the body,as faith Hippocrates, and cap 
Noao2 Aristotle 


- 
Fa 
: 
| 
f 
| 
re 
i 
| 
| i 
7 
on 


lib. de gener. animal. Yet thiscaufes not an inevitable necefir, 
having thegout,for as many begot of found and healchfull parents are taken * ‘ 


eby their proper & primary defaule; fo many live free from this di(eas, 
troubled therewith. probable that they 


fathers notwithftanding 
this benefit and priviledge by the goodneffe of their mothers feed, and the |.) di) 
temper of the womb, wherof the onc by the mixture & the other by the gent}. te 
_ may amend and correé& the faults of the paternall feed ; for otherwife che dife c 
would become hereditary,and gouty perfons would neceflarily generate Bouty.to, 
the feed followeth the temper and complexion of the party generating,as jr js there. 
by Avicen. Another primitive caule is from unordinate diet, elpecially in 
tle of meat, drink,exercife and Venerie. Laftly by unprofitable humours which». 
generated and heaped up in the body, which in procefle of time acquire Virulent 
chegous forthefe fill the head with vapours raifed up from them, Whence the 
membranes, nerves and tendons, and confequently the joynts become more |;,. 
and-weake. They offend in feeding who cat much meat, andthat of fundry king, 
at the fame meale, who drink ftrong wine withoutany mixture, who fleep prefer. 
. _ ly after meat, and which ufe not moderate exercifes; for hence a plenitude, gp ob. 
ftrution of the veffels,crudities, and the encreafe of excrements,e{pecially {eroy. 
Which if they fow downe unto the joynts, without doubt they caufe this difegie. 
for the joints are weake either by nature or accident in comparifon of the other pyr 
of the body : by nature,asifthey be loofe and foft from their firft original. by ac. 
cident, as by a blow, fall,hard travelling, running in the fun by day, inthe cojg by 
nicht,racking,too frequent venery,efpecially fuddenly after meat; for thus the he 
_isdiffolved by reafon of the diffipation of the {pirits canfed in the effufion of {ee 
whence many crude humours,which by an unfeafonable motion are fent into the 
1 news & joints. Through this occafion old men,becaule their native heat is the more 
| weak, are.commonly troubled with the gout. Befides alfothe fuppreffion of excre. 
mentsaccuftomed to be avoidedat certaine times,as the courfes, hemorrbwides,yo. 
Sete. voit, fcowring,caufeth this difeafe. Hence it is, that inthe opinion of Hippocrasey, 
A womanis not troubled with the gout,unleffe her courfes faile her. They areioth & 
fame cafe whohave old and running ulcers fuddenly healed, or varices cutandhe fonofthe 
led, unlefleby2 ftri@ courfe of dietthey hinder the generation and increafeotace J natural fa 
cuftomed excrements. Alfo thofe which recover of great and long difeafes, unlefl aud acride bela 
, they be fully and perfe@ly purged, either by nature orart, thefe humours fallingin. & 
to the joynts,which are the relicks of the difeafe,make them to become goutie: and 
Th: anrecedent thus much for the primitive caufe. The internall or antecedent caufe is, the abur- 
caufeotthe dance of humours, the largeneffe of the veflels and paflages which run to the joyats, 
ai the {trength of the amandating bowels, the loofencffe, foftneffe and imbecility of 
Theeonjuné. the receiving joints. The conjunétcaufe isthe humour it felfe impact and fhutup 
in the eapacities and cavities of the joynts. Now the unprofitable humour, on 
ry fide fent downeby the ftrength of the expulfive faculty, fooner lingers abouttie 
joynts,for thatthey areofa aed natureand denfe,fo that once impaé in that plact, 
Kivecaufesof cannot be eafily digeftedand refolved. This humour then caufeth paine by 
thepaine of fon of diftenfion or {olution of continnity,diftemper, and befides the virulency #4 


of the joints, 2% 
fuled by the gr 
cure of the fou 
accompanied \ 
maner of the g¢ 


tion; as when 
ces fent to then 


de 
thegout. = malignicy whichit acquires. But it favours of the nature fomtimes of one, fom gout alfo whic 
| times of more humors ; whence the gout is either phlegmonous,or ery fipilatous,” ticipate of the 
+ dematous,or mixt. The concourfe of flatulencies, together with the flowing dow" the f, amemaffe 
j humours, andas itwere tumult by the hinderance of tranfpiration, encreafeth!* relembles the 
oh dolorificke diftenfion in the membranes, tendons, ligaments and other boas reafon of the t 
wherein the joint confifts. | Withftandin 
¥ Vag: | Profitable bric 
§0Utstobed 


Cua? 


wey 
q 
4 
of 
‘ 
2 
| 
‘ 
A 
4. 
| 
eee? 


Liz. 1S. 
wot aken by the 
this difeafe wh.) 
ble thar they ha 
ve 
the laudj})),. 
m OY the pe 
herwife 
Cale 
goury.to, 
rating as it is they. 
ty cipecially in the 
humours which ar. 
€ acquire a viruleny 
them, whence the 
become more Jaye 
lat of jundry kindes 
, Who fleep prefent. 
plenitude, an ob. 
ts,e{pecially feroys. 
y caufe this difeafe. 
on ofthe other parts 
r{t original! - by ac. 
day, inthecold by 
cat; forthusthe hear 
the effufion of feed, 
are fent into the 
tive heat isthe more 
fuppreffion of excre- 
shemorrbwides,vo- 
inion of Hippocrates, 
her. They are in the 
varices cut and hea- 
bn and increafe of ac- 
long difeafes, unlefle 
e humours falling in- 
become goutic and 
Bnt caufe is, the abun- 
ich run to the joynts, 
{fe and imbecility of 
¢ impact and fhutup 
ble humour, on 
ner lingers about the 
impaG in that place, 
caufeth paine by rea- 
des the virvlency and 
times of one, fome- 
Ms,or cry fipilarous,&- 
ith the flowing down 
ation, encreafeth the 
ts and other bodies 


| ticipate of the nature of an adema, like that which proceeds from the braine. Asif 


Crap. ly. 


Ont of what part the matter of the Gout may flow downe apon the joints, 


om oe HE matter of the gout commeth for the moft part from the liver, Whatand h 

FOX or brain ; that which defcends from the braine is phlegmatick,fe- che matter of 

i, vous, thin and cleare,fuch as ufually drops out of the nofe,enducd ‘he goutcomes 


witha maligne and venenatequality. Now it paficth out by the 


9% mufculous skin and through that large hole by 
Which the fpinall marrow, the braines fubftitute,is propagated in- 


7 


| to the {pine, by the coats and tendons of the nerves into the {paces 

ofthe joints, and iciscommonly cold. That which proceeds from the liver is dif- 

iyled by the great veine and arteries filled and puffed up, and Participates of the na- 

wre of the foure humours,of which the maffe of the bloud confifts,more frequently 
«companied with a hot diftemper, together with a gouty malignity. Befides this Goa by cen- 
naner of the gout which is caufed by defluxion, there is another which is by conge- sen. 
tion;as when the too weak digeftive faculty of the joints cannot affimulate the jui- 

ces fent to them. 


Crap. V. 


The fignes of the arthritick humour flowing from the braine. 


xt9@om@Hen the defluxion is at hand,there is a heavinefle of the head, a defire to 


reft, anda dulnetle with the paine ofthe outer parts, then chiefly per- 
2 ceptible, when the hairs areturned up,or backwards ;moreover,the muf- 
culous skin of the head is puffed up as {wolne with a certain cedematous 
tumour,the patierits,feem to be much different from themfelves by rea- 
fonof the functions of the minde hurt by the malignity of the humour, from whence 
thenaturall faculties are not free ; asthe crudities of the ftomack, and the frequent 
uidacride belchings may teftific. 


The fignes of 4 gouty humour proceeding from the liver. | 
right Hypocondrie is hot in fuch gouty perfons, yea the inner parts gout 


BX are much heated by the bowell ; bloud and choler carry the fway, the gon che de. 
mae, veins are large and {woln,a defluxion fuddenly falls down, efpecially if faule ot che ti- 
there be a greater quantity of choler than of other humours inthe maffe 


the nature of 


ofthe bloud. But if, as it often falls out, the whole bloud, by meanes of crudities an edema. 


degenerate into phlegmeand a wheyitfh humour ; then will it come to pale, thatthe 
gout alfo,which proceeds from the liver, may be pituitous or phlegmatick,and par- 


the fame mafle of bloud decline towards melancholy, the gout which thence arifeth 


telembles the nature of a fcirrhas , yet that can {carce happen,that melancholy by ccedstrom me- 
reafon of the thickne {fe and flowneffe to motion may fall upon the joynts. Yet 
withttanding, becaufe we {peake of that which may bee of thefe, it will not bee un- 

Profitable briefly to diftinguifh the fignes ofeach humour, and the differences of 


s0uts to be deduced froma thence. 


Nan 3 Cuar. 


HAP. 
« ag” 
* 


402 Ling 
Cwar. VIL 
By what fignes we may underitand this or that humour to accome 
pany the gouty malignity. 


The gout fre- 
quent the 
Spring & Fall. 


What gout un. 


curable. 


AVWS Ou may givea guefle hereat by the patients age, temper, feafon Of the 

IWS yeare,condition of the country where hc lives, his dict and condition of 
51=<| D4 life, the encreafe of the paine in the morning, noone, cvening orpioly 
GaSe @ by the propriety of the beating, pricking, tharpe or dull paine ; by nym 
nefs, asina melancholy gout or itching ; as in that which is caufed by to h 
phiegme,by the fenfible appearance of the part ia thape and colour (as for cXample 
fake ina phicgmaticke gout, the colour of the affected part is very little changed 
from its felfe,and the neighbouring well parts, in a {anguine gout it lookes red, ing 
choleriekitis fiery or pale, ina melancholy livid or blackith) by the heat and big. 
nefle which is greater in afanguine and phlegmatick than in the reft, by the change 
and laftly by things helping and hurting. And there bee fome,who for the know. 
ledge of thefe differences with us to view the patients urine,and fecle their pulfeand 
contider thefe excrements which in each particular nature are accuftomedtg. 
bound or flow,and are now fuddenly and unaccuftomarily fuppreft. For hence May 
be taken the fignes of the dominion of this or that humour. But a more ample know. 
ledge of thefe things may be drawne from the humours predominant in each per. 
fon, and the fignes of tumours formerly delivered. Onely this is to be noted by the 
way that the gout which is caufed by melancholy is rare to be found. 


Crap. VIII. 
Prognoiticks in the Gout. 


AO. 


Ey mongft the moft grievous and acute;fo that through vehemency of pain 
\2) many are almoft mad,and wifh themfelves dead. They have certain pe 
tieds and fits according to the matter and condition of the humeut 
2°59 wherein this maligne and inexplicable gouty virulency refides. Yet 
they more frequently invade in the Spring and Autumne ; fuch as have it heredita- 
ricare {carceever throughly free therefrom, as neither fuch as have it knotty : {o: 
in the former it was borne with them, aad implanted,and as it were fixed inthe or'- 


ginalloflife : butinthe otherthe matter is become plaifter-like, fo thatitcan ne 


WASEBE SY the writings of Phyfitians the paines of the goutare accounted: 


lL I 8,1 S, 
chic thigh eve 
over rhe mu! 
out of place 
refled, the nc 
whence proce 
chigh being an 
ly jmplanced if 
chefe parts, ang 
and idlenefle, 
crete,and {fo in 
joint foever ith 
olaifter like na 
veththe 
freight and {1 
humours, if 1% 
wholly 
cay of che join 
anda hectick 
adventitious 
paines ofthe g 
ericvous and 
downe into th 
ifit ay in the 
fting the ribs, 
the Collick o 
according rot 
dry that have 
which former 
the nerves,anc 
thoughthem 
isinferted. O] 
mafle of their 
homore beer 
coldcaufe, inv 
tangs ; thar 
uleofcold th: 
and fall, yer it 
celle of cold, a 
fame being di 
ifthofe whoa 


{ ther be refolved norripened: that which proceeds from acold and pituitous matte, 
caufeth not fuch cruell tormenting pain, as that which is of a hor, fanguine or chole totheir ownc 
rick caufe, neither is it fo {peedily healed, forthat the bor and thin matter is more perceive chan 
| readily diffolved ; therefore commonly it ceafeth not untill fourty dayes bee pall: they come. 
belides alfo,by how much the fubftance of the affeéted part is more denfe, and iumidities,a 
expulfive facultie more weake, by fomuchthe paine is more tedious. Hence it Jefluxions uy 
that thofegouty paines which moleft the knee, heele and huckle bone,are more com Without blou 
The gout which proccedsof a hot matter, refts not before the fourtectt! cultomed to 
OF twentieth day. That which is occafioned by acride choler, by the bitternefl¢ 0 Many of thefq 
the inflammation and pain-cgufeth a difficulty of breathing,raving,and fundry pane, becaut 
| ~ agangrencofthe affected part, and laftly death; and healed, it often leaves 4 palit oe into {piri 
Why the Seia- behinde it. allche gouty paines, the Sciatica challengeth the prime plact, the 
the greatneffe ofthe paine and multitude ‘of fymptomes; it brings the 
' and watching,a feaver, diflocation, perpetuall lameneffe & the decay of t e whol? ur,mach 
| legge,yeaand often times ofthe whole body. Now lameneffe,and leannefle o! ae. ¥ hurtful ro 
| \ cay of the part are thus occafioned, for thatthe decurrent humour forceth the inca — heate, 
of the thigh-bone out of the cavityofth@huckle-bone ; this being forced out as 
Tlotou 


feth the mufcles,vcines,arteries,and that notable and large nerve which runs alent . 


# 


* 

} 

| 
a 

+ { 

? 

1 

* ‘ 
3 


per, feafon of the 
and condition of 
cvening OrNnighr 
ull paine ; by num. 
cauled by tough 
ur (as for cxample 
‘ery little change 
titlookes red, ina 
y the heat and bio. 
mcf{t, by the change, 
mw ho for the know- 
‘cle their pulfe,and 
e accuftomed to 
For hence may 
more ample know. 
uinant in each per.. 
to be noted by the 
und. 


tare accounted a- 
vehemency of pain 
ey have certain pe- 
tion of the humcut 
ilency refides. Yet 
as have it heredita- 
Mhave it knotty : for 
ere fixed in the ori- 
e, fothatitcan nel 
id pituitous matter, 
anguine or chole- 
thin matter is more 
Baity dayes bec 
Byore denfe, and the 
‘dious. Henice it's, 
bone,are more con 
fore the fourteenth 
by the bitternefle 0 
o.and fundry times 
often Leaves 2 pallic 
eth the prime place; 
brings 
decay of t ¢ whole 
cand leanneile of de- 
ur forceth the hea 
Being forced out 


e which runs along! 
che 


‘Yhurtfulltofuchasare troubled with the gout,becaufe it diffipates the fpirits and 
“iveheate, and encreafeth the unnatural! heat ; whereby it commeth to paffethat 
‘Ne Nervous partsare weakened, andthe paineexafperated. Rich men, thatis, fuch 


Lie 13. Concern 


ing the Gout. 
yethigh even tothe furtheft joynts of the toes, and by the way is diverfly difperfe 
che mufcles of the wholeleg. Therefore becaufe the of the 
sgt of its place, the patient ts forced to halt ; becaufe the veffels and nerves areo 
reffed, the nourifhment and {pirits doe not freely flow into the parts thereunder, 
hence proceeds their decay, Yerit fundrytimes happens, that the head of the 
igh being not difplaced, many halt becaufe the vifcide humour,which is natural- 
ly implanted in that place and continually flowes thither, both for the nutrition of 
inefe parts, and the lubrication of the joynt for quicker motion, is hardened by heat 
indidlenefle,and the other unprofitable humours which flow downe dothere con- 
-yete,and fo intercept the liberty ofmotion. A groffe and vifcide humour into what 
joint foever it falleth and ftayeth,doththe fame. For by concretion it turnes intoa 
plaifter like nature at or neare the joynt, poffefling the cavities thereof, and it depra- 
yeththe figure of the part, making it crooked and knotted, which formerly was 
grcightand {mooth. Furchermoreevery diftemperature caufed by the defluxion of 
wmours, if itfhall lye long upon any part, depraves all the aGtions, and oft-times 
wholly abolifheth them ; fothat there may beethree caufes of the leaneneffe or de- Threecautesf 
cay of the joint by thegout,the obftruGion or compreffion of the veflels, idleneffe ‘hs !amatic 
sada hectick diftemper: but two of lameneffe, diflocation and the concretion of an ofan 


.dyentitious humour impact in the joynt. If contraryto cuftome and reafon the 


piines ofthe gout doe not goe away or returne at their accuftomed periods, moft 

orievous and dangerous dileafes thereon follow ; forthe matter accuftomed to flow 

downe into the joints, if it feaze upon the fubftance of the liver, caufesa Phlegmon , 

ifitftay in the larger veines, acontinuall feaver . if it Aow into the membrane inve- 

ting the ribs, a Pleurifie ; ifit betake it {elfe to the guts and adhere to their coats, 

the Collick or Jdtaca pajsco sand to conclude, it produceth divers other fympromes, 

sccording to the diverfity of the parts whereto it owes and abides. For thus fiin- How the gous 
dry that have beene troubled with the gout, become paralitick, becaufe the matter (3:0 - 
which formerly flowed downe into the joints, ftayes in the fubftance and pores of. 
henerves,and fo hinders the {pirit that it cannot freely in its whole fubftance pafle - 
thoughthem : hence therfore comes the refolution of the part, whercinto the nerve 
sinferted. Old men can never be quite or abfolutely cured of the gout,for thatthe 
mafleof their bloudis fo departed from its primary & native goodneffe, that it can 


nomore bee reftored,than dead orfowred wine. The gout which proceeds from a 


culdcaufe,invadeth {lowly and by little and little, and is helped by the ufe of hor 


‘ings chat which is from a hot matter, quickly thewes it felfe,and is helped by the 

wleofcold things. Now,alrhough the gout more frequently returnes in the {pring why die gour 
ind fall, yet it comes in the midft of winter, the nerves being weakened by the ex- "kes | 
celleof cold, and the humours preffed out , otherwhiles in the midft of fummer, the pisaotfim 
ume being diffufed and diflipated.Laftly,it comes at any time or {eafon of the year, mer. 


me ithofe who are fubj.@rochis dilcafe feed plenteoufly, and do all things according 
| totheir owne mindes and defire. Thofe who are troubled with the gout, fcele and 
pctceive change of wearher, ftormes, raincs, fnowes, windes and fuch like, beferc 
| theycome. A foutherly conftirution of the aire, for example, filsthe body with 


uumidities,and ftirs up the humours that lye quiet inthe body, and therefore caufe 
veluxions upon the weaker parts, fuch as the joints, both by nature, as being 
without bloud and fleth, as alfo by accident, for that they a long time have been ac- 


cultomedto bee fo tormented ; therefore their paines are increafed ina wet feafon. 


Many of thefe that are troubled with the gout, defire venery inthe bitternefs of their why fuch as 


| Paine, becaufe the internall heat wherewith they then are inflamed doth not diffi- havethe sour 


. upon them,doc 
Pate into {pirits and aire,as the feaverith heat doth, but diffolves,and as it were melts ohesimes defire 


downe the feminall humour, which diflolved, flowes to the genitalls, filleth and Vener: 
diftendsthem. The fame thing befalls carryage and running horfes, for in thefe by 
r,mach heat fends flatulencies tothe bottome of the belly. Yet venery is ve- Veneryhurt'wi 


*sfeed riotoufly on variety of daintics,and in the meane fpace live idlely and lazily 
are 


a 

] 
| 
% 
| 


704 Concerning the Gowns. Ly B18 


are more frequently and cruelly tormented with the gout than p poore people, wi, 
live{paringly and hardly : Wherefore there have been feene not a few of fuch tich 
and riotous perfons, who having {pent their eftates, have therewith changed thes 


health,together with their fortune and diet, and fo have been wholly freed from the 
gout. 


Cuapr. IX, 
The generall method of preventing and curing the Gout. 


fees) Hole who defireto prevent the gout, muft not glutthemfelves with mex 
M4 882) mutt be quick to labour, and abftaine from wine and Venery,or Certainly 
<9 Fri mutt not ufe them,unleffe fortheir healths fake, muft vomit and purge x 
~ Certainetimes, H ippocrates writes,that boyes are not troubled with the 
cout before the ufe of venery. Yet atthis day many Eunuches are feene to hayethe 
eout,but efpecially thofe whoabourd with idleneffe and pleafure, yet the fe we hgye 
heretofore mentioned are very effectuall, not onely forthe prevention, butalfo fo, 
the cure of the prefentdifeafe. Yet wee diligently diftinguith the caufes, wha 
they be,& whence they may proceed,& oppofe thereto remedies contrary in quan. 
tiry and quality. There areabfolutely three diftin@ caufes of the gout ; A tainture 
from the parents ; acorruption of the humours by diet and aire ; a native, or advep. 
Twozenerall titious weakenefle of the joints. Againft thefe there is atwofold indication the fit 
sovesotcuring is the evacuation and alteration of the peccant humours,the other the ftrengthening 
ofthe weake joints. Thefetwo thall be performed by diet conveniently appointed, 
purging, blood-letting, provocation of the hemorrhoids, courfes, vomit, {weat,u- 
rine,and fit application of locall medicines. Therefore, when the time fhallcome, 
whercin the gout accuftometh to returne by courfe, the patient fhall have a care of 
himfelfe by a diligent manner of diet, hee fhallleflenthe matter of the difeale by 
barre rg, phicbotomie (if thatthe gout fhallarife fromthe blood) from the oppofite part, 
thegout.  thatby thefame meanes revulfion and evacuation may bee made; as if theupper 
parts bee inflamed, blood fhall bee drawne fromthe lower ; if onthe contrary the 
lower, out of the upper, alwayes obferving the ftreightneffe of the fibres. Thus 
the right arme being troubled witha gouty inflammation, the Saphesa of the right 
legge fhall bee opened, andfoonthecontrary ;, but if this generall blood. letting 
being premifed, the paine fhall notceafe, ic willbe requifite to open the veine next 
tothe paine,which I have often performed with happy fuccefle. 
What gouty Yet phicboromie hath not the like effet in all, for it is not availeable to {uch as 
—S no are continually and uncertainly troubled with gouty paines, or whole bodiesat 
weake andcold,wherein phiegme onely is predominant. Wee may fay the fameot 
purging, forthough it bee oft-times neceflary, yct too frequently re-iterated, " 
proves hurtfull ; furthermore, acither of thefe remedies is ufually very profitableto 
fuck as obferve no order in meate and drinke,which ufe Venery too incemperatey, 
who abound with crude and contumacious humours ; whofe joynts by tong ve 
ation of the difeafe, have contracted ahedtick diftemper and weakeneffe, fo thit 
they are departed from their naturall conftitution, and fuffered a great change° 
tawhar eoucdi. “eit proper fubftance, Wherefore as often as thefe greater remedies fhall be uled, 
-r proves more 4 Phyfician fhall be called, who according to his judgement may determune thereat. 
— than For oft-times diet proveth more availeablethan medicines: therefore the 
ee (if the matter of the gout bee hor) fhall either drinke no wine at all, or elfe very 
much allayed, thatis, as muchas his cuftome andthe conftitution of his {tomack¢ 
canendure. A fittime for purging and bleeding isthe Spring and Autumar, be 
Caufe, according to the opinion of Hyppocrates, gouts reigne chiefely io thefe ic 
fons ; in Autumne, for that the heate of the precedent Summer debilitaceth the 
geftive faculty , the native heate being diffipated: as alfo the cating of Summ 
fruits hath heaped up plenty of crude humours in the body , which ealily 1 
downe into the paflages of the joynts opened and dilated by the Summers a 


aculcy there 


confide 
for inthis ca 
titious humo: 
and motion, 
withanold c 
Certainly it 
cannot, unle! 
humours ime 
king a veine c 
fted, and lon 
Iremember 
grievoully m 
hisleft arme 
hiscure. For 
cam and Chi 
divers other 
by him that 
to feed more 
with fundry 
were overch 
fo it would | 
meats & 
{carce alterca™ 
fily and of it 
better fucces 
Ora feather if 
fame meane 
the like the 
Fes The fec 
fhould 
part with aq 
cloves Profi 
all this, anda 
hofe who 
Water where 
their ftomac 


a mon 


gdde cr 
rts 
nervous 
wis forced 
 rerto 
avery fmallo 
| gentle and ea 
SHS ( 
| 
oy? 
If 
Cx 
which being: 
| 
1 4 


Doore people w 
2 few of fuch 
ith changed their 
pily freed from the 


“ut. 


{elves With meat 
enery,Or certain ly 
vomit and purge ar 

troubled with the 
mre feene to have the 
thefe we have 
ention, butalfo for 
th the caufes, what 
Contrary in quan- 
¢ gout ; A tainture 
a native, or adven- 
ndication ; the ficlt 
t theftrengthening 
niently appointed, 
mcs, vomit, {weat,u- 
he time fhall come, 
fhall havea care of 
tr of the difeafe by 

the oppofite part, 
de; asif the upper 
nthe contrary the 
f the fibres. Thus 
Sapbeia of the right 
erall blood. letting 
mopen the veine next 


bvailcable to fuch as 
or whole bodies are 
may fay the fameot 
ntly re-iterated, 1¢ 
ly very profitable to 
roo incemperatcly, 
joynts by long vex 
weakenefle, fo chat 
med a great change © 
medies fhall be ufed, 
deternune thereof. 
herefore the Paricdt 
at all, or elle very 
Brion of his ttomacke 
and Autumac, 
chiefely in thefe 


r debilitaceth che di- 
ing of Sumaict 


Lis. 18. 


Concerning the Gout. 


.dde hereunto that the inequality or variableneffe of Autumne weakenethal! the 
servous parts, and confequently the joynts. But in the Spring, for thar the hu- 
ours forced inwards by the coldneffe of the winter,are drawn forth from the cen- 
rerto che circumference of the body, and being attenuated, fall into the joints upon 
very fall occafion. Therefore there is great both neceflity and o portunity for 
~ygcuation, Which if it fhall not avert the accuftomed fir, yet it will make it more 
seatie and eafie. 


_ — 


— — 


CuHap. X. 
Of Vomiting. 


Omiting is by all the Ancients exceedingly commended, not on ely for To whargour 


floweth fromthe braine and ftomacke ; forthe phlegmatick, ferous and 
y cholericke humours, which ufually flow from the joints, are excluded 
anddiverted by vomit, and alfothere is attenuation of that phlegme, 


\@j the prevention, but alfo for the cure, efpecially when asthe matter eee to 
culied. 


which being more thicke and vifcide, adhereth tothe roots of the ftomack : yer you Whar ame the 


muftconfider and fee that the patient bee not of too weake a f{tomacke and braine, 
forinthis cafe vomuting is to bee fulpe&ed. Forthe time, fuch as have excremen- 
titious hamours Aowing downe tothe ftomack through any occafion, as by exercife 
and motion, muft vomit before they eate ; onthe contrary, fuch asare overcharged 
withaaold congeftion of humours, muft vomitatter they have eaten fomething. 
Certainly it is {afer vomiting after meat, then it is before. For the dry ftomacke 
cannot, unleffe with great contention and ftraining, free it felfe from the vifcide 
humours impa@ in the coats thereof ; and hence there is no fmall danger of brea- 
king a vveine or artery in the Cheft or Lungs, efpecially if the patient bee {trair che- 
fed, and long necked, the {eafon cold, and hee unaccuftomed to fuch evacuation, 
Iremember that with this kind of remedy I cured a certaine Gentleman of Geneva, 
grievoufly molefted with acruell pain in his fhoulder, andthercby impotent to ufe 


hisleft arme; the Phyficians and Surgeons of Lions feemed to omit nothing el{e for 


uuscure. For they had ufed purging, phleboromie, hunger, a Dict drinke of Guaia- 
um and China (alchough his difeafe was not occafioned by the Lwes Venerea) and 


divers other topick medicines, neither yet didthey any thing availe. Now learning 


by him that hee was not aptto vomit, but that it was difhcult to him, 1 wifhed him 
to feed more plentifully,& that of many & furdry mears,as fat meat,onions ,lecks ; 


With fundry drinks,as beare, ptifan, {weet and fharpe wine, and that hee fhou!d as ic 


were overcharge his (tomack at this meal,and prefently atter pet him to his bed , for 
foit would happen, that nature not enduring fo great confu 

meats & drinks, wherof fome were corrupted already in the ftomack, & otheriome 
icarce altered at all,nature not enduring this confufton and perturbarion, would ca- 
ily and of itsowne accord provoke the ftomack to vomic ; which that ic mughr the 
better fucceed, he fhould helpe , 
orafeather into his throat, that fo the thick and tenacious phlegme might by the 
fame meanes be evacuated : and not contentto doe thus once, I wifhed him to doe 
thelike the fecond & third day following, for fo it verifieth that faying of 4:ppocra- 


ts : The fecondand third day exclude the reliques of the firft : afterwards, chat hee 
hould vomit twice a moneth : chaw mattick fafting : rub hismecke and tlic pained 
partwith aqua vite, ftengthened by infufing therein lavender, rofemary, and 
cloves grofly beaten : confirme hisarme by indifferentexercife : hee performed 


allthis, andfobecame free trom his paine, and recovered the ule of his arme. 


hofe who do not like fach plentifull feeding, fhall drink a great quantity ct warm 
Water wherein radith roots have been boiled,and they fhall havea care left by ufing 
their tomacks tothis excretion by vomit they weaken the digeftive and retentive 
‘aculty thereof, Wherefore fuchas can naturally, fhall thinke it fufhicient ro vomit 


‘Wice a moneth.| 


ion & perturbation of 


forward natures endeavour, by thrufting his finger 


CHAP. 


thertore. 


A hifto: 


How to make; 
onc vonut 
cally. 


Lid.de: vitle. 


, which 
re: 
the Summers 
adde 


: 
706 Concerning the 
CuHap, XI. | 
The other general remcdses for the Gowt, 
He defluxion of ferous humours is very fitly' diverted from the JOints 
cs aregood | the urine by che ufe of diureticke medicines, Therefore t}y. TOOts of 
ort gout. 


Sorrell, parily, 7u/cus, a/paragus,and grafle,and the like,thal! bee } 
~ LE © 
Nets din broth, and given to fuchas have the gout : for when the urine go, 
eth much and thick, the paine is leflened. Many have found by 
iflues ; forthe Arthritick malignity flowes forth of thefe,as by rivelets : experien: 
fhewes it in fuch as aretroubled withthe Lwes Venerea, for in thofethat you cap 
overcome the malignity by the proper antidote, that is, Quickfilver, they foc), ni 
oreatcr cafe of the pain,than by application of Caufticks,ané making of iffues. T), 
Wheretobe {hall bee made in fundry places according to the difference of the pained join, 
_ to wit, in the beginning of the neck, if the defluxion proceed from the braine, 4n3 
fall into the joints of the Collar-bones or fhoulder;if into the Elbow or hand,unde; 
the mufcle Epomis; if inte the hip,knees,and feete, fome three fingers breadth unde, 
the knee, on theinfide : forthus there will follow more plentiful! evacuation, by 
seat reafon that the Sapheia runneth downe that way. Yet if the patient bee trouble 
cautery. with much bufineffe, and muft travell much on horfe- back, then fhall they be mag. 
onthe outlide of the legge,betweene thetwo bones thereof, that fothey may troy. 
ble him the leflt in riding. Ifany had rather ufe an aétuall cautery, let him take {ach 
an one as is triangular and tharpe, that fo hee may with more {peed and lefle paing 
performe that which hee intends,and let him thruft it through a plate of iron which 
hack a hole therein, and let the place bee marked left hee fhould erre; the ulcer {ha\ 
be kept open by putting in a pill of gold, filver, lint, ofthe root of orris, hermoda. 
ctiles, gentian, waxe, wherewith fome pouder of vitrioll, mercuric or allum {hall be 
incorporated, left it fhould fillup with flefh foonerthan the Phyfician thal thinke 
fir. Inthe meane {pace, the head, oft-times the originall of the evill, fhall be evaci- 
ated by caking inthe winter the pills cochse, and de Affajereth but in 
quibus, or Impertales, betore the Fullofthe Moone. |x, pul. hyera fimp.°i.agar.ve. 
cent. troch, rbei an. Sii. myroball. chebul, 58, tamarind. Dii, cwm infufione (ene, fu 
de qua formentur pill, vi. pro drachma ; \ct the patient take two before {upper 
every eighth day ; theday after he fhall drinke fome broth of the decoétion of Ci. 
cers and the Diureticke roots. Alfothefe following pills will bee good to purgethe 
phlegmaticke and ferous humour. pidular. fated. de hermodactil. an. 9%. fu. 
mentur cam fucco vel [yrup.rofar.folut. Or elfe, aloés, agarics trochif. 
an. 1, pilularthrit. de hermodatt. an. Jit. diacrid. D1. cum melle rofate fia 
caprat powdus, i. as the Phyfician fhall chinke fit, by whofe advice thete {hall 
be ufed and changed as occafion shall offer it {elf, and the nature of the humour ca 
fing the dilcafe. The day after the purging,the patient fhall take three houres belore 
Common pills ;neathalfa dram of Treacle,to ftrengthen the cntrailes: pils are preferred before! 
winencade’- Guid medicines,for thatby theirlong (tay in the ftomack they eafily actract the rox: 
ny. ous from the brain, & the other more diftant parts.] have known forme Pay 
Freie how wiio mixing with ordinary pils a good quantity of {camony,as 7.01 
utefulliathe With a litele ginger,left it should burt the ftomack,have purged by ftool a great 
zout. tity of {crous humours ; the day following they gave barly creaine to correct th 
harme which the fcamonie may have done to the ftomacke. Others forthe !am 
parpofe givetreacle, which doth not onely ftrengthen the entrailes, but al.o we 
Cephalicktue kens the virulencie of the gouty malignity ; the orifice of the ventricle mult beth 
migation- after meare, chat fo the vapours afcending to the braine may bee reftrained : for" 
purpofe common Drige powder, Marmelate, or conferve of roles are good. !"" 
wert fealon ufe Cephalicke perfumes thus made. x. thuris, vermicis, 
junipert, baccarum laurijan. 3%, ligns aloes odorata hem 
bee grofly beaten ; let the fume be received in tow or carded Cotton,and fo apply< 
cothehead. Alfo the excrementitious humours fhall bee dried up by the follow 
ing powder ftrowed on the patients ‘head for fifteene dayes. Re. fol. rof. 1’ jem 


flachad. an, milis , Siiii. furfuris loti in vino albo, 3 iii. lorwm 


NOE 


Pilis. 


I B I 


meltl. 
ina 
nead fhall 
mouth in the 
on. X. cubel 
fraphi[agr 
eyed upina 
downe chem 
hands, and f 
cheexcreme 
irnot onely 

unprofitable 


the default o 
seftion, 
as they fhall : 
milk-meats, { 
citrons. Thi 
they be fully & 
digeftion of 
ous humors. 
juice, and are 
have difalloy 
to bee troub! 
heapeup exc: 
relaxe it by 
that it breeds 
the meane cis 
hence mutt n 
afanguine an 
much wafting 
ger fharpens ¢ 
beefed wit! 
thor of 
Ther 
{akino thines 
fall downe i 
lettuce, purfl 
On of the fou 
5°rous heate 
Not be fed, n 
Cute mutt 
fapted for th 
Makes the m 4mm 
fo of any otham 
floats in 


Ptoceed crudi 


al 
| 
| 
| 
i] 
q 
i 
| 
‘ 
& 


Ly B.S. 


from the joints 
eretore the of 
thal! bee boyled 
urine how. 
e found bene fit by 
velets : CXPcricnce 
ofethat you cannos 
lilver, they fecle no 
king of flues. They 
F the pained joints 
rom the braine, and 
DOW or hand,unde; 
megcrs breadthunder 
mifull evacuation, 
prient bee troubled 
fhall they be made 
ac forhey may troy. 
y, let him take {uch 
peed and lefle paine 
plate of iron which 
erre; the ulcer {hal| 
of orris, hermoda. 
orallum fhall be 
hy fician thal! thinke 
vill, fhall be evaci- 
but in fummer fixe 
imp. agar.re 
minfufione (ena, fiat 
two betore {upper 
Bhe decoction of 
good to purge the 
Bodaciil.an. 21. for- 
Barics trochif. 
cum melle rofate fist 
Bie advice thefe {hall 
of che humour cau- 
three hourcs betore 
preferred before 
lily actract the 
mc known fome Phy- 
Eny,as 7.01 3. grains, 
ay ftool a great 
caine to correct the 
Others forthe fame 
railcs, but ablio sve? 
sntricle mutt be 
e reftrained : for 
roles are good, 
picis, maflich. a 
orate 


ptton,and fo apply* d 


d up by the follow” 
fol. rof. pow 


chame™ 
ii. 


Lis, 15. ncerning the Gout. 707 


falis com. fiat omninm pulvis. Levit be put into linnen CePhalicke 
which, being warmed at the fire in a frying-pan, and kept wich ftirring, pages 

eye head thall bee rubbed. Let the following medicine bee chawed, and kept in the 

outh in the forme of a mafticatory, in the time of the fallin 2 downe of the defluxi- 

on. ewbelarum, wuces mofchat.elycyrrbix. anif. an. 3i. pyrethri, it. maftich.rad. A matticagory. 
faphifagr eryngit, an. Sii. Let them all be made into pouder, and mixed together, & ; 
yedupina littletaffaty to the bigneffe of a hafell nut,and letthem be rowledu pand 

gowne the mouth with the tonguecto caufe {pitting or falivation, W orking withthe 

nands,and frictions of thearmes, efpecially inthe morning after the evacuation of 
rheexcrements, are good for fuchas aretroubled with the Gout in the feet, for fo, 


not onely caufeth revulfion from the feet, but alfo the refolution of that which js 
unprofitable. 


XII. 


What Diet is convenient for [uch as have the Goute. 


ONE r eR the body is once fed, they muft not returne to meat before that 

tof the concoction be perfected in the ftomacke, left the liver be forced to 

sge| draw by the mefaraicke veines that whichis yet crude and ill digefted, 

“and as it were forced thence. Whencethe depravation of the nutri- 
mentofche whole body ; for the following deco@ions doe not amend ¢ 
thedefault of the firft. Letthem make choice of meate of good juice and eafie di. the fir con. 
eeltion, rolted for fuch as are phlegmaticke, butboiled for {uch as are cholericke - ew Tagg 
aschey {hall fhun much variety at one meale, fo muftthey efchew the ufe of pulfcs, 
milk-meats, fallads, and fharpe things, as verjuice, vinegar, the juice of oranges, and 
citrons. They fhall not eat unleffe they be hungry, and thall defift therefrom before 
they be fully fatisfied, ifit be but for this, that whileft the native heat is bufied inthe 
digeltion of meat plenteoutly caten, it is diverted from the concostion of the noxi- 
oushymors. The flefh of great fowle,as {wans, cranes, peacockes are not of laudible 
juice, and are with-more difficulty digefted inthe ftomacke. Some of the antients 
havedifallowed ofthe eating of Capons, and the like birds, becaufe they are fubjed ¢, pons fubjett 
tobee troubled with the Goute inthe feete. Fifhes are to be fhunned, for that they to the Gout. 
heapeup excrementitious humours, and are cafily corrupted in the ftomacke, yea & 
relaxeit by continuallufe. Ot che fiefh of beafts veale is moft to be commended, for 
thatit breeds temperate blood, and laudible juice, and is eafily digefted. Neither in 
themeanetimeis mutton tobee found fault withall. Butthe like hunger or abfti- 
nence muft not be appointed toall mea troubled with the Goute, for fuch asare of 


| afanguineand. cholericke complexion, becaufe they areendued with mnch, and cChotericce per- 


much wafting heate, are to be refrefhed with more plentifull nourifhment; for hun. ®» anne 
get fharpens choler, and fo augments their paines ; neither inthe interim mult they fafting. 
¢fed with too moift meates, for too much moifture, befides thatitistheau. 
thor of putrefa@ion, willcaufe defluxions, and draw downe the matter tothe 
joints. Therefore the Cholericke humor mutt bec incraffated and refrigerated by 
taking things inwardly, and applying things outwardly, left by its tenuity it {hould 
iildowne intothe grieved parts. Tothis purpofe conduce brothes altered with 
“ttuce, purflaine, forrell,and the like herbs,and barly creames made witha deco@i- 


| ofthe foure cold feeds. Phlegmaticke bodies,by reafonthat they have not f0 Vi- phicgma.icke 
80rous heate doe as it were carry their provant about them, wherefore they muft Dodiesinfoting 


feed upon 
Notbe fed, neither with many aor with moift meats. Allchatare troubled withthe oan. 


cute muft fhun thofe things which are hard of digeftion, and which are foone cor- 


‘Upted, for they all have a certain remifs feaver which diminifheth the native heat, & 


es themeates apt to putrefie. Too plentifull drinking not onely of wine, oural- 
any other liquor isto be avoided. For by too great a quantity of moifture the 


floats in the ftomacke, and thenative heat is infome fortextinguifhed, whence 


ceed crudities. Some phyfitians commend the ufe of white wine,for that it = 
voke 


a 
* 
= 


~ 


y bee fie 


White wine not 
good tor the Cemperg. 
gout. Othe 
Claret may be 
drunke. 
ven 
Hydromd molt 
lately. 
A hyd, 
cempered by 
remedies are 
Neither may 


and other joi 
rhings 
cannot abfol 
by foure (cop 


| XIII. arctermed n 
matter, boti 


How to flrencthen the Joints. cinesaccord 
The fourth, 
T isa matter of much confequence forthe preventionofthise: chele affects 
| vill, to ftrengten the joints whereby they may be abl¢torefiftthe viacible mal 
| humors preternaturally falling downe upon them. Wherefor times futhicic 
9] it is good morning and evening to rubbethem with O/wmon. & brings a vari 
phacinum,that is,oile made of olives not cometo their perfedm phyfitian to 
turitie; or with oile of rofes mixed with common falt nel pou. «deceived anc 
——dered. It may alfobee mixed with common oile, adding thereto matter ifthe 
__ the powder ofharts horne, asthat which hathan aftringent and drying faculy, J may induce 
Alfo itis good to bath them in this following Lye. K, Cort. granat. cupri forNarcotic 
che joints.  @allarum, fumach.vortic. an. falis com. alumin, roch. an. falvia, rori(mar, but becaufe 
lavendul,lauri, iva arthretic. rofar.rab. bulliant ormniain fex material] cx 


crafsi aftringentis lixivio parateex aqua chalibeata cinere quern. Then fo- it becoms be 
Seiicor . ment the part with {pongesor cotton elothes; after this fomentation {hall be care- that which 
hawes with oxy. fully wiped & dryed with hot linnenclothes,taking heed of cold. The juice of un. by the like. 
crate. ripe Hawes tempered with oxycrate isa fingular thing forthis purpofe. Butifyou coatrariety | 
defire to ftrengthen the joints weakened by acold caufe, then, rori/m.' and diffiparit 
mi, lavendul. laur. abfinth. an.m.i.caryophyl .Zinzib. pipers, conqualfatoram an. from thatwifl 
fundantur in agua vita cy vini rabri aftringentis, an. te, balliant lemiter in large quanti 
maria. With this liquor foment the joints morning and evening. Somethioke" reafon of th 
good to ftrengthen the joynts,totread grapes in vintage time, which if they be 1% tor a vehicle 
ableto doe, then let them wabh their feete inthe Mufteor new prefled Wine. Allo Patient becc 
Bagues. bagges may bethus made forthe fame purpofe. Be. falis coms, alwamroch. cort. gram thefe parts, 
fumach berberis nucum Deleeve that 
be all pur in linnen bags and boyled in Lye,and fo make a decoétion for to fom one fimple 
the joynts. | | ‘OWifh colo 


Cast 


“ 


ol 
rning 
if 
leane linnen clodth 
‘ 
© ha 
i; 
ight {eafon 


ily if the tempers. 
wn tntothe join: 

Py hich 
me joints, and it 
more 
ydromel made after 
| bere de “. 
aut Car yophy lloras, 
agua font 
CLHAMOMIL 3. ii. 
tifan, Whereiy, at 
cl{efome [yrupe of 
as foone as it comes 


1aN Hippocras bag 


prevention of thise. 
y be abletorefift the 
nthem. Wherefore 
micm with O/ewm Om- 
meto their perfed ma- 


oile, adding thereto 
and drying faculty. 
granat. cupre/. 
falvia,vori{mar, 
omnia in fex vini 
re querno. Then fo- 
ntation fhall be care- 
Did. The juice of un- 
purpofe. But if you 
falvta, rorifm. thy. 
an. 5 
leniter in baines 
Boing. Some 
which if they be not 
preffed Wine. Allo 
cort, grande 
them 
for co foment 


Concerning the Gout. 


amon falt finely 


—_ 


Crap. 
Of the Patiassce Cure of the Goute and the material caufes thereof. 
Ear alfo we confider the’caufes wheice this difeafe proceeds,the The {copes of 
| tem 


| Ea FE temper of the difeafed body, the parts affe&ted,& thofe from whence curing 
ic proceeds. For as thefe are not alwayes alike, fo neither can one and 
EY the like remedy be ufefullin every Goute. For firft thofe which pro- 
ceed ofa cold caufe require other remedies, than thofe which arife 
trons a hot, and which proceeds from any one fim ple humour, than thac which 
srifeth fromdivers mixed together. For Choler alone caufeth crucll paines, but 
cempered by the admixture of Phlegme, it becomes more gentle.Furthermore fome 
semedies are good in the beginning, fome inthe encreafe, and fome at other times. 
Neither may we ufe repercuffives in the Sciatica, as we may in the Goute of the feet 
and other joints ; unteffe peradventure the part be fearefully enflamed. Taking thefe 
nings to confideration we muft obferve that the Palliative cure of that Gout, which 
cganot abfolutely be helped,as that which is hereditary and inveterate, is performed inthe fiance. 
by foure (copes. The firft is,by appointing a convenient dietin the fixe things which 
aretermed not naturall. The fecond by evacuating and diverting the antecedent by 
matter, both by purging and phlebotomy. The third, by applying topicke medi- 
cines according to the condition of themorbificke humour and nature ofthe part. 
The fourth, by correcting the fymptomes, but efpecially the paine, whereof in W 
thelcatlects there is oft times fo great exceffe by reafon of the unexplicable and in- 
vincible malignity of the virulent quality affociating the humour, that ic alonc is oft 
times fuflicient to kill the patient. And becaufe the variety of morbificke caufes, 
brings a variccy of remedies, fitted rothefe foure intentions,therefore it behoves a 
phyfitian tobe moft atcentivein the diftinGion of the caufes.For he may be eafily 
deceived and miftake one for another ; for arthritick pains proceeding from acold 
matter,if they be mitigated by the application of Narcoticke aad cold medicines, it os ae 
may induce us to beleeve that the material! canfeis hot, though really it bee not fo ; 
forNarcotickes affwage paine, not for that they are contrary tothe caufe thereof, mo ipo 
bat becaufe they take away the fenfe by inducing anumneffes on the contrary, the hocalwaics 
materiall caufe may fometimes feeme cold, which norwithftanding is hot, for that certain. 
it becoms betzer by application of hot medicines, that is,by taking an argument from 
chat which hel os, becaule contraries are cured by contraries,and the like prefetved helped by 
yy thelike, But herein confifts the crror, for that hot medicines profit not by their so\anébor 
coatrariety but by rhe atrenuation of the groffe matter,by the rarefaction of the skin cines. 
and diffipating them into aire. Whence youmay gatherthat an argument drawne firtt 
rom thatwhich helpes and hurts, is very deceitfull : moreover it may happen that a 
{age quantity of cold matter flowing down from the brain,may caufe great pain by cian. 
teafon ofthe virulency,& a {mall quantity of choler mixed therwith, which ferves 
‘ora vehicle tocarry down the tough and flow phlegme into the joints, whence che 
Patient becomes thirfty and feavourifh by reafon of the heate and inflammation of 
thefe parts, whereby {uch as are leffe cautelous and heedy will eafily be inducedto 
lceve that fome hot matter isthe occafion of thisGout. Now whenasnotfome fhe fconi 
onc imple humour, but different by reafon of mixture, caufeth the Gout, the ycl- 
with colourof the part may deceive one, as, iftheevill matter fhould proceed 
om choler onely, which by the cenuity ofits fulsftance leaving the center, eafily 
Poilefleth the circumference of the body or part : & setwithftanding much phlegm 
“108 as it were enraged by the admixtion of a little choler, may be the chiefe caufe 
ofthe difeafe, and may peradventure be difcovered by the encreafe of paine in the 
t{eafon. A feaver arifing by meanes of paine and watching may encreafe the 
“ONceived opinion of choler,which attenuating and diffufing the humours, drives 
‘M into the joynts, and cauieth fiery urines, tincured with much cholicr, 
dicke pulfe. Yer notwithttanding the Phyfitian fhall be in erronr, if deceived with 
for appearances, he attempt the cure of this Gout, as arifing from a hot, and not 
a 


coldcaufe : yet Iam not ignorant that the cure of the pgoper difeafe mutt be 
> Cas ‘ Ooo negleaed 


Ther 


7 
j 
a 


i 
>. 


—— 


Liang 


neglected for the cure of the fymptomes. Befides alfo it may come to pale, thatch 
ler raay be the caufe ofthe Gout,andnotwithftanding no lignes therof may ADD ear 
in the skin, and furface ofthe affected part; becaule the coldnets of theamb 
and the force of applyed Nascoticks may have deftroyed the colour of the juice. %, 
_ing therander,and as it were imprinted 2 certain blacknefle.Italfo happens th» de 
body being overcharged witha ae quantity of grofle and vifcide humours, the 
expulfive faculty may difcharge iome portion thereofunto thejoints, bur leave ti, 
reftirapact inthe cavity of encraile, where caufing obftruction and purrefsa 

on may prefently caufe a feaver,and that intermucting, if 1¢ be fmail,& objtma only 

the leffer veins, & thefé of the habit, of the body. Wherefore then itis not 

that the Phyfician employ himfelfein the cure of the Gout,but it behoves Dim much 

more to attend the cure of the feaver, which if it bee continuall, it difcredites the 

phyfitian, and endangers the patient ; if it bee intermitting, 1 eafily becomes con, 

nuall, unleffe it be with{tood with fit remedies, thar is,unleffe you let blood the bel. 

ly being firft gently purged,and nature be prefently freed by a tronger purge of the 

Wiygone  ttoublefome burden ofthe humours. Now itis convenient the purge be fomewhs 
purgesmutt bee ftrongerthan ordinary, for if it fhould bee too weake, it will ftir up the humors, bu 
gvento'uch notcarry them away, & they thus agitated will fall into the pained and weak joints, 


‘a and caufe the Gout roencreafe. By thisit appeares how deceitful that conjedure is 


The Gxt. 


which rclyes & is grounded on one figne,as often as we mutt pronounce judgemen: 
of morbificke caufes. Wherefore to conclude wee muftthinke that opinion moj 
These certaine concerning the matter of the difeafe, which is ftrengthened with multip|, 
judge. 


Taarjicess city offignes, asthofe which are drawne from the colour of the part, the heate o 
cain which rets Coldneffe manifeft to the touch, thofe things that helpe and hurt, the patients fam. 
upon muleipl fiar and ufuall dier, temper, age, region, feafon of the yeare, propriety of paine, the 
ty of figues. c ? 

exacerbation or excefs thereof,in what daies,& in what houres of the day the 
of thefe fits, the urine and other excrements comming from the patients body. Bu 
___. far that nora few are in that herefie, chatthey chinkethat we muft neither purge nox 
Whywemut et blood in che Gout, we moft here convince that opinion. For feing that Piylicke 
ond eRe .. isthe addition of that which wants,and the taking away of thofe things that arc{u. 
thegou. ptrfluous,and the Gout is a difeafe which hath its eflence from the plenty of aboun. 
_ ding humours, certainely without the evacuation of them by purging and bleeding, 
wee cannot hope to cure, cither it, orthe paine which accompanies it. Metrias,in 
his Treatifeof the Gout writes, that it muft be cured by purging, ufed not onely i 
rx Por wrery the declination, butalfo in the height of the difeafe, which wee have found trucby 
m.  €Xperience ; anditis confonant to this faying of Hsppocrates in panes wee mutt 
purge by the ftoole. Befides alfo, Galen profeifeth that in great inflammations, 
VOCS, 20d paines, he knew nogreater nor furer remedy thant. ict blood, even tothe 
‘ong. miliinaem. Fainting of the patient, Ifthofe which are in this cafe fhall not become better by pur 
ging and phlebotomy Conveniently prefctibed, then it happens by meanes of 
kenneffe, gluttony, and the like diftemper. For hence abundance of crude bunts 
are heaped up, which by their contumacy yeeldthemfelves lefle obedient to me" 

ciaes. Therefore fuchgouty perfons asarcintemperatcand given to gluttony" 


vencry, may hope for no health by ufe of medicines. 


which way be ufedto acold Gout. 


d from excrementitious humours , 


juic isin 


icke medicines availe, unleffe the body ofthe 


tuleacy ofthe humours may be driven into 

place of local! médicines which 
mect for a phiegmatick is 


aifocholeric® 
the part, 
doethe famc® 
res, 
ficit ,fias 
{welleth up, 
fromthe cen 
for in like fo 
ginto fwell. § 
After repe 
mour by eva 
any part reg 
mour doth nt 
which is-chic 
andnervous. 
beat. (Maria 
do farin, hor 
det lupin. 
miyrrha an. >! 
bont, a4, Silii 
mem. cr 
fhes with ho 
(iis vaccini tb 
lis horum oha 
butyri recente: 
Dlafme may | 
any gour,. 
and it mutt bi 
dnnoy ted o 
pole make a: 
the forme of 
4qua vit. di} 
fuf fi 
wlltant in Li x 
cere 
panacis 
binth. venet. 
“. Or elfe,B 
“bur per feta 
cupre 
tS an 
fimul, 
‘erebinth 
4%, de 


4 
Bis 4 
nid dane- wort, 
| 
| 
@ 
} 


eco paffe, thatch, 


p 
oftheambicn 


en itis not fufic; 
t bchoves him Pre 
Ul, it difcredites the 
becomes conti. 
ou let blood, the bel. 
(rronger purge of the 
‘pur be fomewhat 
up the humors, byt 
ined and weak joints 
ullthat conjeGure is, 
ronounce judgement 
¢ that opinion mof 
hened with multipli. 
he part, the heate of 
rt, the patients fami- 
opricty of paine, the 
of the day,the length 
e patients body. Bur 
uft neither purge nor 
r feing that Phyficke 
ofe things that are {u- 
the plenty of aboun- 
rging and bleeding, 
anies it. M ctr ims 
ye, ufed not onely in 
e have found true by 
in panes wee mutt 
t inflammations, fea. 
et blood, even to the 
ecome better by pur- 
by meanes of crune 
nce of crude humors 
le obedient to 
iven to gluttony and 


Liang. 


gringent rhings which have afaculty to binde or ftrengthen the joints, and to dry 

ond wafteche excrementitious hamour. As, Ke, fol. fabina m. 8, nucum Aa avtcingen: 

rach. — tragacanthe & cydon, quantams fufjicit, fiat Cataplatiue. 

Or, flercorts recentis'®.}, mellis rof: Sitti. oles aceti an. 

pullsant parum, frat cataplafma. Orelfe, ole#rofar, myrtill. an. pul- 

aloes 31. acacia tacorporentur cums aqua callarum coctaram, 

Somme boyle {age, camomile and melilote flowers, wormewood and A difeuffingte. 

jane-wort, of each a handfull in a fufficient quantity of vinegar, then they put the "°°" 

grieved gartinto this decoction being warme ; & by frequent ufing this medicine, it 

nath beene found torepell and confume the noxious humour, not onely cold, but 

j(ocholericke; and alfo to ftrengthen the part. Thetreth faces of Olives layd 

iy the part, aflwage paine: dryed Oranges boiled in-vinegar, beaten and applyed 

joethe fame. Or, Ke. medis corticts ulmi lb 8. caude equin. flechad, confolid. majo- One parily 

ris, roch, thuris an, iii. farin. hordei lixivit com. quantum and 

ac formarmpultis fatis liquide. Commonly then wheaas the part 

fwelleth up, thepaine is leffened, for that the expulfive faculty dtiverhthe humour 

the center intothe citcamference of the part, thatis,from within outwards ; 

for in like fuch as have the tooth achhave lefle pate when their checkes be- 
intofiwell, 

After repercullives, wee muft cometo thofe which evacuate the conteyned hu- 

mourby evacuating or refolving it. For every deflaxion of humours femaining in 

any part requircs evacuations Neither muft we marvaile thereat, if the digefted bu- 

mour doth ntsr'vanith at thefir® time ; for we muft have regard tothe cold phlegme 

which isthickand vifcide, «5 alfo ofthe part which is ligamentous, membranous 
sndncrvous, and confequently more denfe than flefhy parts. Ik. rad. Bryon. fizi li Why the gauty 
beat, Marie anSiv. buliant tn lixivio, poftes terantur,cy colenttr per fetaceum,addew- humour doth 
do farin, hordes aburnm an.3i, olei chamem. fiat cataplafma. farin, hor 
dei lupin. an. Silt. fulpburis vivi Cy falis com. an, 3i. mellis com pul. aloes cy 
myrrha an, vit. 31.cum lixivio fiat catapla{ma, ficci caulium rub, aceti cutlivis. 
bat, an, Siiii. farin. bordet pul. Hermodactyl. 538. -vitelos ovorwm nu. iii. cha- 
mem. sii, croc: Dii. {ome burne the roots and ftalkes of colwor?s, and mixe the a- 


ficit, fiat emplaftram molle. Or, rad. bryon. firill. beat. M arie,an. 


fimul, in th. ji, 8. vini oderifert,e unkaguaevit. ad confumptionem [uccorum 
catellorum diffolutionem, fortiter exprimantur ,exprefsioni adde 
Siii.cer.quantum fufficst. fiat emplaftrum molle.A\fo, Emp. de vigo.Oxicroce- 
™, de mucilacinibus, demelileto and the like mixed together, and foftened with a 


Qoo 2 little 


Atthe beginning in every cout, the wee muft ufea- 
“wart, JUICES 
ifo happens that the 
icide humours, the 
oints, butdeaye 
and purrefa gi, 
all, & Obftma op 
leswith hogs greace and the powder of Orris, and fo make’a pultis. 
dis vaccini th ii. merce panies quantum fuffictt, bullians fimul addendo pulveris fabtt good. any 
meliloti an, m. croce Di. vitellos ovoramnn. ol. rofars 
outyri recentis s\.terebinth. sii, fiat cataplafma ad formam pultis fatis liquide. This Cata- 
may be applyed with good fuccefle,not only to phicgmatick & cold, butalfo 
| Wany gour,at any time to mitigate the extremity of the p2in in men of any temper, 
and it mutt bee changedtwice or thrice aday. A'fo‘Treacle diffolved ta wine,aod 
ted on the part, iS fayd ro affwage this paine. You may forthe fame pur- 
pole make and apply emplafters, unguents, cerats and lintments : This may bec 
the forme ofan em olafter, le, ammoniaci, bdelii, cum aceto em 
WML cere nov. quantum fofficit, frat emplastrum wolle. Or, 
| galbani, an diffolvantur in aceto, poftes colentur, adde olei lilrorum, tere- 
| wenet. ani. pices navalis, cer. nov. quantum fiat emplafiram mol- 
Or elfe, Be. fucci rad. enul, camp. cr ebult AB. sii. rad. b. COq Ke | 
| der fetaceum, florum cham. melit. fambuci, rori{mar. hyperici an. 
hebody of che gony wpre(si, nu. iiii.ol. cham. anceth. hyper. liliorwm,ge [pica am. pimzucdinis Ana- 
humours -hefides anferis an. 3%. ranas virides vivas DU. Vi. cateHos duos muper nates bulliant 
cheentrailes, 
o many, 
which acethoug 
an chat which is fro" 
a hot 
4 


J 
1 
€ 


Concerning the 


Omtments. 


> 
‘a wf @ 


vf) 


Dilculfing for. 


mentations, | 


little oyle the like 
Let this bethe forme of an ointment, anferem pinguem,c> imple catell 
Me 


faculry, and good forthe fame purpofe, 


de quibus deme cutem, vi(cens, caput Or pedes item accipe ranas nu. x. 
Ga cutein frufta diffectes au. iv. mitbriaat. theriac. an. 38. fol. falvia, 
mi, rube, baccarum lauri,cy juniperi conqualfas.an. pulveris m, 
sh, caryepbyl. piper.an.i. de co quod fiillabat fist unguentum vel 
cum cera Cr terebinth, ventts, pauca aqua vita addita this marveloully 
paine ofthe gout arifing froma cold caufe. Another, Gummi pins, lee 
3iv gummi elcmi naval, an. 38, serebinth. venet. clara 3vi.chameme/ 
vint rab, i. 8, 4q.vit.@ falv. an, 3vi. diffolvastur omnia 
igne, baculofemper agitando,deinde adde pul. treos flor. baccarum lawri, hermadg , 
and mastiches myrrha cy olibani an. 3ii. farina fabar. InCOrporentur omy: 
mul, fiat unguentum melle, Or clic, Re. macag. feminis fanagr. in aceto extrag | 
tum veluerss,cut mellis quantum letthem be boyled rogether anti 
acquire theconfiftence ofan oyntment. Thefethings hall be changed, as often 
need fhall feemeto require. Alfo anodine and difcuffing fomentations are good ~ 
refolve ; as this, x. fol. rute, falv.rorifmar.an.m. i. bulliant cum acete 
fomake a decoction for a fomentation, which you may ufe not only inacoldo 
but alfo ina hot, becaufe it refolveth and ftrengtheneth the part by aftriGion, ang 


Remedies mutt freeth it from ine deAluxion : you muft havea care that the medicines which 


be often chan- 


ged in the gout. 


to paines of thegout be changed now and then. For in thiskinde of difeafe that; 
medy which did good alittle before,and now availeth, will in a fhort time become 


—hurtfull. 


A Preat 
culicr. 


Ananodine. 


_Butif the contumacy and excefle of the pain be fo great, that it will not yeeld tothe 
defcribed medicines, then it is’ fic, becaufe the difeafe is extreme, to ufe (according 
to Hypocrates counfell) extreme remedies, fuch as are thofe which follow. %. axyp. 
gia gallina, olet laurini maflic. eupherb.an. Sipulver .euphorb.cr pyreth. an. fatli. 
tus; herewith letthe part bee rubbed every day,for it is a very effectuall medicine 
For eaphorbium and pellitory by their heat attenuate and refolve, the capons ereale 
and oile of bayes, relaxe,the oyle of maftich ftrengtheneth the part and hindereth; 
new defluxion. Alfo there is madea very anodine ointment of oy le of foxes where. 
in earth-wormes,the roots of elecampaneand bryonic have beene boiled, with ait. 
tle turpentine and waxe ; this foftens, attenuatesand refolves the cold humour in: 
pact in the joints. Or elfe, Ke. /emsinis Poni aceto acerrimo ai 
mellis anacardini 3ii.aqua Vite fale com.>ii. Letthem bee all mixed together, and 
applyed-to the pained part.Or, Kx. pscis nigra, iii. terebinthveneta fulphuris vi 
fubtiliter pulverifati 3iii.olei quant.fifficit liquefiant fimal, fiat emplaiirum ; Let itbee 
{pread upon leather,and laid upon the part tor two orthree dayes {pace, if the pai 
ent perceive any eafe thereby sif otherwife, let it be changed as we {aid before.Som 
forthe fame purpofeapply nettles thereto, and prefently after wath the pastin{t 
or falt water. Others foment the part with vineger wherein pidgeons dung hath 


A eee beenc boiled. A. veficatory made of very fower leaven, cantharides,and alitl« 
the O© qua vite,is very powerfull toevacuatethe coajun& matter.For thus the maligneand 


tumacy of che 
conjyund miat- 
ter. 


virulent /erum,or whayith humour is let out, whence followes fome cafe of the pai? 
Now thereare fome gouty paines,which cannot bee leffened or affwaged unletle by 
remedies more powerfull than the diftemper, therefore veficatorics ought not 0 
rejected, oon that the Ancients in this affect have alfo made ufe of actuall cautt 
ries, as we fhew hereafter. Chriftopher Andreas inhis booke termed 
(that is, Domeftick phyficke]] much commends Oxe dung wrapped in cabbag¢ 
vine leaves, and roafted in the embers, and fo applyed hot to the grieved part. 


CHa 


enerall me 
Sli. pore 
of barly, ler 
catapla{me 
balust 
um 
or hinder 
plafme ex 
acete. O 
ex agua 
quanto 
4, VV. Cart: 
pomgrahatc 
cooling,the 
flow downc 
Ace 
guento popule 
Warme unto 
recond 
oles de juni pe 
trullina mo 
volar, fola 
albumine nu. 
omphacini 
horde Siii. 
sul, oles 
mucag, 
Pliny repor 
Overlooked 
feer, where! 
taled his fe 
It is note w< 
by fuch like 
Wherefore | 
Opening th 
Paine was p 
fives, left 
ved, as whe 
Medicines am 
Caffe the hy 
lowing Che 


i. > rf. 
i 4 : ‘ 
| 
a 
4 
| q 
al 
ria. 
wena 
~ 


L 19.19 Concerning the Gout. 
—-- 


Li B18, 


ame 
le catell ss duchy, 
nu. X. Colubro det, 


Ar, ¢ 


Cc HAPRXVI,. 


Of lecali medicines tobe applied to « bot or fanguine Gout. 


ty 
loufly aff Wageth 
‘on lodan;. an 
Omnia fimul 
Porenine omnia fi. 
Guan. 


together antili t 
schanged, as often 2s 
are pood to 
m acete and 
tonly inacold 
rt by aftri@ion, ang 
icines which are ufed 

de of difeafe that re. 


1a fhort time become 


re here 


Anexccllent 
aitringent ca- 
taplaime, 


will not yeeld to the 
e, to ule (according 
ich follow. axun- 
pyreth. an. fiat li- 
y effeQuall medicine. 
¢, the capons ereafe 
part and hinderetha 
oy le of foxes, where- 
ene boiled, with alit- 
the cold humour im- 
acerrimo di ffoluts, 3iii. 
mixed together,and 
sii. fulphuris 
plaitrum ; Let itbee 
yes (pace, if the patt- 
we faid before.Some 
wath the partin {ea 
pidgeons dung hath 
harides,and a little 4- 
thus the maligne and 
fome cafe of the 
Bor aflwaged unlefie by 
torics ought not to be 
ufe of auall caute- 
Boke termed Oecostarie 


taled, his feet being wonderfully dryed;and he afterwards ufed this kind of remedy. 
ltisnote worthy, which often happeneth, that the paine cannot bee alrogether eafed 
by fuch like remedies, by reafon of the abundance of bloud impac inthe "ons poe Las 
Wherefore it mult bee evacuated: which I have done in many with good fuccefle, con jun& mac- 
| Opening the veine which was moft {welled and nigh to the afteted part ; forthe —— awe 
paine was prefently aflwaged. Neither muft wee too long make ufe of repercuf- = 
lives; left the matter become fo hardened, that it can fcarce bee afterwards refol- 
ved, aswhen it thall bee concrete inro knots and p!aifterlike {tones : refolving 


Medicines are to bee mixed with repercuflives conveniently applied , fo to dif- 


rapped in cabbage oF Celle the humour remaining as yetinthe part, whereof fhall bee {pokeninthe fol- 
he grieved part. lowing Chanter. g p 
Cus” O00 3 (Cray. 


44 hy fives, fuch as arecold Whar 
| repercuflives, ar 
and dry, thact cy may iGive.f adde {trength tothe parr. 
itics;alfo letthem bee aftriGtive,foto 
their qualities;alfo h mutt firft prem! 
that you 
But would have you alwaies falani rofar. 
2 1RUM NU. IV. le 
edicines. IX, albu um, Otherstake the mea 
sii, ancorporentur fimul, cy rtles, and with a little vineger they 
harly lentils, acatta, oile of 4n 5% Acatia, corticum grant. 
IX, fumach, myrtillorum, boli arm. an. dei ce lenti- 
ag pla stag. Cy volar. an. ol .rofats f and effedtuall to ftay 
t cataplafma, This is very exce C 
1917 169972 {atts crit, fia Alfo ou may makea 
nd ery{ipelatous tumours. MO YOU 
hader phlegmonous at 4 vofarum extraita , cafis fiftula, refate, 
ex, in aqus li. terantar balliant in oxycrate 
malt granate 31%, fi wine and the 
at. uch c ended, forithath e 5 -eding 
THIS iS Muca comm juices are exceedins 
Ree both are very great aftrictives ; and the jui wre. 
POMgIAGALE Pit, DOE dt! ickens the {anguine humours thatare 
iNGers and thicker > kk 
caic allo lingers an Another. kx. fol. hy 
ooling,the meaic fiftence. An 
and make the medicine of a good cinevibe Coquantur, mox cam 
acetofa involvantur papyro, oS hen lay this Catapla{me thus made 
uleon, aut rofat. ami ii. pomantur in p 
pop her, florum hy ofcyam i bus diffolve 
art. Another, ix. | dine ii. in quibus 
warme unto the p truerint, accipe ex putre C; 
fimo equine donec pu he puloe of a Gourd or Ci- 
reconde 1m fim s beat the pulp 
les de juntpero 36.fiat linimentum ad rasa fem. cyton.extract in aqua 
fo apply it.Another,X.mucag. 3i.vitellos overum cum 
trullina mortar,and { ni, iil. Vins cranatorum 
rifar, cr folani fiat linimentum. Orclfe, IK. of 
camphor a [ime fucct plantaz. folani, an 3\. faring 
imphacini album, ovorum cuin vitellts farina fabarum hordei an. 
l, fiat catapla(ma, 4. Another, 
: tur fimu alm 
hordei Siii. imcorporentu 2 antur fimul, fiat catap 
$e antum [ufficit, coqu TT 0Ci i. mifce. 
rofatt, quant aceti 51.vitellos ovorum, mu. Mi. crocé 
tus Pomponit ine ofthe cout i 
Pliny reporteth that Sex ken by the pa 
ne, was ta . d fo was 
overlooked the winowing of his a ith the Wheat above his knees, and fo y 
covered himfelfe with the 
feet, wherefore hee cov 


owes 


Whacicpeseul 


fivesarc here 
requiced. 


A cerate with 


The water of 
snailes. 


A hiftor:. 


A particular 


CHar. XVI. 
Of local medicines for acholericke gout, 


He repercuflives that muft firft be ufed in this kinde of gout oughr 
69] [SP cold and moifte,that fo they may refift both the qualities of choler. uc 
arethe leaves of night-fbade , purflaine, houfe-leeke, henban 


{ 
plantaine, poppy, cold water,and the like, whereof may bee nee 


vers compolitions. As, fucct hyofciami, fempervivs lactuc an. farin, hoy dy 
olei rofatt, Siiagitawdo fimul fiat medicamentum ; let it bee applyed and often chs» 
ged, tor fo at length it will affwage the inflammation. Some thinke the braine 
hogge mixed with white ftarch, orbarly meale and oile of rofes, an excellent me. 
dicine.. The leaves of mallowes boyled in water,and beaten with a peftell ang >», 
plyed,aflwage pain. extract.in aq. folant,vel rofaruwm (arin. 
det q. fiat linimentam.Or elfe, 
melonum fimul pre litw.Al{oa {punge dipped in Oxy. 
cratc,and preffed out again and applied thereto doth the fame.Or elle, 
ii. coquantur in oxycrato Cy terantur :adde ovorumvitelos tres, ole: 
farina horde: quantum fufficit fingatur cataplafma : you may take the cryde 
juice of cole-worts, dane-weede, and rofes beaten and prefled out, and of the( 
incorporated with oyle of rofes andbarly meale make a cataplafme. In winte, 
time, when as thefe things cannot bee had greene, you may ule wnguentum infrix. 
dams Galeni & populeon. Orelfe, K. cera alba croci Di. opis oles rofats quay. 
tumafufficit marcerentur opium Cr crocus in actte, deinde terantur incorporentur cum 
cera cy oleo, fiat ceratum; {pread itupon a cloth,& lay it upon the part,and all aboutir, 
and let it bee often renewed, Some cut Frogges open and apply them co the grieved 
past. it is confirmed by fundry mens experience, that the paine of the fciatiz, 
when it would yeeld to no other remedy, to have beenc aflwaged by annoynting 
the part affe@ed with the mucous water or gelly of Snailes, being ufed forth: 
{pace of feven or eight dayes ; thetruth whereof was aflured mee by the worthy 
Gentieman the Lord of Longemcau,a man of great honefty and credit, who him. 
felte was troubled for fixe moneths {pace with the fciatica. This water is thus 
made, Take fifty or fixty red Snailes,put them in a copper pot or kettle,and {pris: 
kle chem over with common falt,and keep them fo for the {pace of a day then pre" 
them in a courfe or haire cloth ; in the expreffed liquor dip linnen ragges, and app! 
them fo dipped tothe part affedted, and renewtheim often. But if there bee gree! 
inflammation, the Snailes {hall bee boyled in Vineger and R ofe-water. They !2) 
that Citrons or Oranges boyled in Visegcr, and beaten ina mortar,and incor” 
rated with a little barly or beane flower, are good againft thele paincs. Oicll\,’s 
cocorum in lacte lib. i, busyri3i. vitellos ovorum,nu. ii, aceti si. fiat 
ma. herve arefome who take cheefe crud newly made, and mixe it in a mors! 
with oyle of Rofes and barly meale, and foapply it ; it repreffcth the intur 
mation and aflwageth paine. Others mixe Ca/sia newly extra@ed forth of te 
Cane, withthe juice of Gourds or Melons. Ochers apply to the part the leaves 
at Cole. wosts, and Dane-weede or {mallage, or all three mixed together an 
ten-with alittle Vineger.. Others macerate or fteepe an ounce of linfeed in Wo" 
make the mucilage extracted therefrom into a Cataplafme with fome 0)" 
of Roies and barly meale. Some put oyle of poppyes to the pulpe of Citul!s 
Gourds being beaten, and fo incorporate them together,and apply it. 

This following medicine hath its credit from a certainGafcoine of Bafas tliat ¥ 
throughly cured therwith,when as he had bin vexed Jong & much with gouty pa" 
above the common cuftome of fuch as are troubled with that difeafe. Thus it is;1* 
a great ridge tile thick & trong, and heat itred hot in the fire, then put ir into 
another tile ofthe {ame bignefle, but cold, left it fhould burne the bed-clothes,th¢ 
forthwith fill the hot one with fo many Dane-wurt leaves, that the patieat may fate 
ly lay the affeted past thereinjwithout any danger of burning it. Then letthe io" 


Concer ning the G ont, L 1 B18 | 


fat. sii. farii 


Lis. 
ent endure 
of, forthe 
come 
the houre 
dry linnen 
chat in rhe 
oyarment. 
a {trait mo 
frft mixed 
of renne or 
coin the cum 
ewice or th 
Wwurt boyl 
mically «x 
But if cl 
and becom 
then muft w 
kened by th 
lefle inconv 
have apow 
paine, and 
ricke humor 
abitat: 
fecalin: 
mar 
applyed, an 


lant in oxy. 


lamaccutto 
ver,cold wa 
petactive,as 
teth paine . 
of che Gour 
theparr, M 
the leaves o 
It any defir 
led, 

But the 
harcotickes. 
otherwife th 
being deftr. 


herefore 


4 
t 
q 
Mentations, 
mole. 
J 
Wall: nu 
| Mut ulemo 
Bdifcufte 
| in ufi; 
duce 


gout ought ry bee 
ties Of choler; ch 
henbane, 
t may bee made dj_ 
farin. hordes 3) 
yedand often chan. 
inke the braine of, 
| PCS, an excellent me- 
ith a peftell,and ap. 
unge dipped in oxy. 
Dr fol. 
ps tres, olet rofats 
may take the crude 
ed out, and of thefe 
taplafme. In winter 
ungucnium infrize. 
rofati quan- 
cy incorporentur cum 
part,and all abourtir, 
them co the grieved 
yaine of the fetatica, 
ged by anaoynting 

, being uled forthe 

mee by the worthy 
nd credit, who him- 

This water ts thus 
Bt or kettle,and {prin- 
of a day; then prefte 
enragges, and apply 
But if there bee great 
fe-water. They fay 
nortar,and incorpo 

paines, Orel, 
_aceti si. fiat cataplaf- 
mixe it in a mortal 
me preficth the inflam 

traded forth of the 
othe part the Jeaves 
Red together amc det 

of linfeed in 
(me with fome oy! 
pulpe of Citrulls o! 
ly it. 
ch with gouty pale 
ifeafe. T hus it is; Ta4¢ 
putit jnro ive 


the 
snrendure the heate that comes therefrom, 
of, tor the fpace of an houre, fubftituting fr 


come too dry, as alfo another hot tile, if the former thall row toocol 

rhe houre bee ended. This being done, let the part bee dryed with sodas 
dry linnen clothes. Ufe this particular ftove for the {pace of fifteene dayes, and 
that in the morning fafting ; afterwards annoynt the part with this following 
oyarment. Ke facci ebult olez com.'b i.msifceantur (imal,and let them be put into 

sftrait mouthed glafic, and well luted up ; then let it boyle in ba/neo Maria, being An cinment ef 
Grft mixed with {ome wine, untill the halfe thereof bee confumed. for the {pace the juice ot 

of tenne or twelve houres, then let it coole, and fo keepe it for ufe, adding there- — 
toin the time of annoynting, fome few drops of aqua vite. Itmay bee annoynted 

rwice or thrice in a day, long after meate. Moreover the reots and leaves of Dane- 

wurt boyled in water, beaten and applyed affwage paine ; the oyle thereof chi- 

mically extracted performes the fame. 

But if the contumacious paine cannot bee mitigated by the defcribed remedies 

ind becomming intolerably hot and raging, make the patient to fwoune, 

then muft wee fly to marcoticks. For although the temper of the part may bee wea. 

kened by thefe, the native heate diminifhed or rather exftinguifhed yet chis is a far When uf 
iefle inconvenience than to let the whole body bee wafted by paine 3» Thefe things cea 
have apowerfull refrigerating and drying faculty , taking away the fenfe of the 

paine, and furthermore, incrailate, thin, acride and biting humours, fuch as chole- 

ricke humours are. Wherefore if the matter which caufeth the paine be thick, wee 
mnuftabitaine from narcoticks, or certaincly ufe them with great cation. Re mice 

pais parum cocks in lace nu. ii. opti Si. fuccorum folani,hy. caraplafine 
manadrager a, portulace, fémspervivi,an.3i. Let them bee mixed togetherand 
applyed, and often changed. Or elfe, Ik. fol. hyofciami cicute, acetof. bwl- 
hant in oxycrate contundantur, cumgque vitellis ovorum crudorum wu. ii. olei ro- 
fat, sii. farina hordes quod fit fate, incorporentar, fiat catapla(ma ; with the ufethercof 
lamaccuftomed to atiwage great pains.Or elfe, kk. 5 iti. camphor 5%.olei nenuph. 
incorporent ur fimulin mortario,applicentar.Moreo- 
ver,cold water applyed & dropped upon the part drop by drop, is narcotick and ftu- 
petactive,as Azppocrates afirmeth, 4phor.29.Sec?.5 .for a moderate numnefle mitiga~ 
ethpaine; there is alto another reafon why it may bee profitably ufed in all paines 
ofthe Gout, forthac by repelling the humours, it hindereth their defluxion into 
ihepart, Mandrage apples boyledin milke, and beaten, doc the famething ; alfo 
ticleaves of henbane, hemlock,lettuce, purflaine, being fo boiled, doe the fame. 


aa defire to ule thefe more cold, hee muft apply them crude, and not boy- 
ed, 


and by fweate receive the fruicthere- 
efh Dane-wurt leaves, ifthe former be- 


| Water, wherein cooling herbes have been boiled, ufed three houres after mcar,con- 


the bed-clothes,the® duce 


. Bathes afiwag: 

cthe paticat may the paine of the 
it. Then let the pa gour. 

ent ed 


| But the excel? of paine being mitigated, wee muftdefift fromthe ufe of fuch 
 larcouckes, and they mutt rather bee ftrengthened with hor and digerating things; 
Oherwife there will bee danger left it bee too much weakened, the temper thercof 
deftroyed, and fo afterwards it may bee {ubje& to every kinde of defluxion. 
| Wherefore it thall bee ftrenethened with the formerly defcribed difcuffing £O- by narcorick 
in aceto, paljentur per fetaceum, addendo ftyracis liquid. cy farin. fanug, 
3). pul sreos olei chamem. 3ii. pulverss pyrethri Sii. cum cera fiat emsplastram 
mile. Or elfe, rad. emule, ebuli althee an th. 8. fem. lini, fanugr. av. ii. ficn- 
ping. NU. xXx. coquantur complete trajictantur per fetaceum,adden do pul.euphord, 
“ele: chamam, ancth, rutacei, an.diii. medulla cervi Siv.fiat cataplafma, Yetyou 
“Mutufe moderation in difcufling, leftthe fubtler part of the impact humour be- meane wo be 
| 28 difcuffed,the groffer part may turne intoa ftony confifteace,which alfo is to bee 
‘cated in ufing repercuffives. 
I alfo omitted, that. according to the opinion of the Ancients, bathes of freth 
much to the aflwacing of pain ;for fouled, they are more convenient in cho- 


= . 


HO Concerning the G ont, 


diffipated by the entle warmenetle of the bath. Afte; th 
bath,the body muft be annoynted with bydraeleum,or oyle and water tem pered 
gether, left the native heate exhale,andthe body become more weake. Meates of 


Howmeatsof more groffe juice are more convenient, as becfe,{heeps-feet,and the like, if fo be thar 


gre thepatient can digeft them, for the fe in{piffate the cholerick bloud,and make jt More 
pro 


unfit for defluxion. 


XVIII. 


What. vemedics muft be ufedin paines of the joynts proceeding of 
” 4 diflemper onely, without matter. 


23 
though rare, yet becaufe happened onceto feele them,] have though, 
| (2 200d to fhew what remedies Lufed againft them. once carnefily jy. 
fied in ftudy, and therefore not fenfible of fuch externall injuries. 
‘ might befall mec; alittle winde comming fecretly in by the crannies 
of my ftudic, fellupon my left Hippe ; at length wearied ‘vith ftudy, as foone as] 
rofe upto goemy way, I couldnot ftandupon my feetc, I felt fuch bitter paing 
without any {welling or humour which might bee difcerned. Therefore I was toy. 
to goe to bed, and calling tominde, that cold, which was abfolutely hurtful 
ie - tothe nerves, had bred mee that paine, I attempted to drive it away by the frequen 
Jvestens application of very hot clothes; which, though they fcorched and bliftered the 
aifoctroma {ound parts adjoyning thereto, yet didthey {carce make any impreflionuponthe 
cold aiftmper part where the paine was fettled, the diftemper.was fo great, and fo firmely fixed 
therein. layed thereto bagges filled with fryed oates and millet, and dip. 
ped in hot red wine ; as alfo oxe bladders halfe filled with a decoction of hot herbs. 
And lafly,a woodden dith almoft filled with hot athes, covered over with fage, 
rofmaric, aad rue lightly bruifed, and fo covered with a cloth, which, {prink- 
led over with «qua vita, {ent torth a vapour which affwaged the paine. Allo 
browne bread newly drawne out of the oven, and fprinkled over with Role.w- 
cer,andapplyed,didvery muchgood. And that I might more fully expell this 
hurtfull cold, I put ftone bottles filled with hot water, tothe foales of my teete, 
that the braine might bce heated by the ftreightnefic and continuity of the nerves, 
Aclength, bythe helpe of thefe remedies, pre very well freed from this con. 
tumacious diftemper, when ithad held mec for the fpace of toure and twentic 
houres. 
Afolicinons isanother kind of gouty pain fometimes caufed by a certain excrementil! 
vapour fome- OUS matter, but fo thin and fubtle that ic cannot bee difcerned by the eyes. | 
tunes the caule jg a certaine fuliginous or footie vapour, like to that which pafleth from bur- 
mmegeu ‘ning candles or lampes, which adhers and concreets to any thing that is oppo! 
thereto ; which being infected by the mixture of a virulent ferous humour whithtt 
foever it runneth,caufeth extreme paine, fomewhiles in thefe,and otherwhiles 
ther joynts, unleffe you make a way therefore, when as it fecketh paflage fo! 
muft be done by hornes, cupping-glaffes, veficatories ,cauteries, or other! 
ike art, 


-Aincsalfo happenin the joynts by diftemper without any Matter, which 


he 


withftand: 
after; for 
ing moytt 
or beareth 
ftand. W 
humour m: 
drying and 
tation, enct 
tity of /«/p 
K maf. C773 
laram, 47 
omnia fime! 
{pread upo 
Draw 
skinne ; 
therein, ani 
the native 
the feete. 


Je 
Gs 
SA 
| digeft and 
aCertaine 
burning he 
difperfed, 
cuffiy Cord 
| the f orme: 
latter » the 
ain | The 
ly heating, 
0Ction of 


Ly B18, 


bath. After rp. 
ater tempered to. 
weake. Meates of 
he like, if fo be tha 
make it more 


eedinz of 


tany matter which 
vem, have thought 
once carnefily by. 
externall injuries as 
y in by thecrannies 
ftudy, asfooncas] 
Itfuch bitter paine 

herefore I was tor. 
abfolutely hurtful] 

ay by the frequent 
ed and bliftered the 
impreflionupon the 
Band fo firmely fixed 
and millet, and dip- 
oction of hot herbs. 
ered over with fage, 
oth, which, {prink- 
Bed the paine. Allo 
over with Rofe.wa- 
re fully expell this 
Be foales of my feere, 
tinuity of the nerves, 
freed from this con- 
»f foure and tweoue 


certain excrementit!- 
rned by the eyes. It 
h pafleth from bur- 
thing that is oppoled 
ous humour whithet- 
and otherwhiles in 
Becketh paflage forth, 
-guteries, or other the 


Concerning the Cont. 


Crap. XIX. 


What ss to be done after the fit of the gous is over. 


thereto a like quan- 
bee applyed thereto. 
wlv. rof. rub. nucam cupre(]. cal. 
caryophyl. an.3i, malaxentur 


ogge-skinne ftocking preferveth The benifit of 


the native heate of the part, and for that it bindeth , hindreth the defluxion into — 


CuHuar. XX, 


0 r the Vophi, or knots which grow at the joynts of [uch as 
are troubled with the Gout. 


Omethatare troubled with the gout, have knotty bunches growing in whence che to. 
their joynts, which by the Ancients were called Toph:. Thefe are phiarezenc- 
generated by the congeftion of groffe, vifcide and crude phlegme, “* 

*y with a little admixtion of an acride and cholericke humour. Thefe 

7 matrers remaine fettled in the part, for that it being too weake cannot 

digeft and deprefle them , wherefore being there impact,they cafily concrete into 

icertaine plafter-like or chalke-like fubftance, whileft by the adventitious and | 
burning heate caufed by paine, and the outy malignity, their more fubtle part is — apr 


difperfed, but the groffer fubfides. Yet fometimes the unfit application of reper five & re percul- 
cuflive or difcuffive medicines is a caufe of the generation ef thefe Tophi. For by “ve een 
the former, the impact matter is incraflated and gathered together ; but by the 
ter, the fubtle part being difcuffed , the remnant that fubfides concretes into 
Tobi. Thofe medicines which are made to mollifie, ought to have a moderate- re 
ly heating, and humedting faculty, that they may diffufe, and as it were diffolve """"” 
impact matter; fuch is warme water,the decoction of emollient herbes,the de- 
Coction of Calves or Sheepes entrailes, heads and feete: after thefeor the like 
entations, you fhall ufe the following medicine. X. axungie, human. anfiru 
$line, medal, cervin. an. tered. ven. 4g. Vit. parum, cera quantum [uficit, 
~ unguentum molle. Then this which followeth will bee good. K. rad. a/th. 
horum, bryon. lapath, acuti, an. 3iiii, coquantwr complete Cr trajiciantur fetace- 
cum. ammon, bail. calb. opepanacis in acese diffeluterwm 3i, medul. 
i, 6, 


a5 © T is convenient when the paine is affw ed, that you ftrengthen the How to ftreng- 
joints. Now, to ftrengthen them is to binde ‘hen the joinrs 
wholly toamend the weakeneffe left in the part by the difeafe, thar 
waif iS, tO difcuffe the humour, if any fuperfluity thereof remaine ; bur 
if so to humect the part, ifthe moyfture bee exhaufted and dryed up. But Remedies fo: 
a fych as aretroubled with the gout, after they are freed from their paine, have not. the weakneffc 
| withftanding fuch impotency of their joynts that they cannot goe of along time ee _ 
after; forthatthe nerves and tendons which arein great number inthe feete, be- om" 
| ing moyftened with much phlegme, are fo relaxed, that they can no more fuftaine 
 orbearethemfelves upon their feete, than paper when ‘it is wet can bee made to 
ftand. Wherefore , that they may recover the ufe of their feere, the impacted 
| humour muft by all meanes be difcuffed, and {pent with fomentations,cataplafmes, 
| dryingand aftringent emplafters. You may ufethe formerly defcribed fomen- 
tation, encreafing the quantity of alume and falr, 
m tity of felphur vivum: then the following em 
OR, maf. emplast, contra rupturam 3iiii. tereh, 
laram, gran myrtil. c> fol. ejufdem, thuris, mattich, 
manibus inunttis oleo myrtino mastichino, hat emplastrum. Let it bee 
| fpread upon leather toa juft bigneffe, andapplyed to the top and fole of the foote. 
| Draw overthe plafter, and the whole legge a ftocking made of a tanned dogges 
skinne ; this emplafter ftrengtheneth the nerves, draweth forth the humour impa@ 
| | therein, and intercepts the defluxion. But the 
| 
CHa? 


 Derpamycumt? Tis coque.: addendo [ub finem, radsce bryonia, Lapath. acut. an. 3 aXup 

trail, 2.Cap.21- Lie tauri, | cervin, putrefacto fiat empl, molle ad This lant 67714 
which followes is alfo moft effeGuall. cafes acres cr putrefacti, pul. felph vir ya fabaran 
enphorb. & pyres? an. iil, decoction Veter perna porcellornm quod (ufficit ad incr, highly appr 

poraxdum ,ducantur in mortario, fiat empl. adufum, Or elle, KK, (pume nitri,3 fail. 3iv. 
5 ii, olez veters, lixivit, quo lane pi leorum lavantur quantum ‘Orelle, x. 

i fiat molle, After the ule of emollicats,a fumigation fhall be made in this an. ii. 

manner. Hgata cogle-ftone, milftone or bricke, red hot in the fire, take it forth,and farin. fabar 

caft upon fufficient quantity of very fharp vinegar,& qua vite, the rifing Vapour ftoupes dip 

{hall be difigently received by the affected member, forthis hath a faculty to atteny, boyled wor 

i ate and cut grofle, vifcide, and plafter-like matter, yea alfo,and to break the skin, vet chereto fom 
i that is broken oft time of its own accord, without the help of either medicine or jp. endure it ; 

{trument. To conclude,thefe medicins which are good to mollifie {cirrhous tumors, reftored to t 

i the fame arealfogoodto foften the gouty knots and tophz. But wee mutt noteths andthe cut 

i thefe knotty bunches are fomtimes fuppurated,not truly by the impa@ & plafterlie wetting linn 
matter, but by anew defluxion comming ona fodain,& then it is neceflary to make thedup. 
way for the conteined matter,which being done, firft there commeth fortha humo: the proper cul 


| caufe fo great diftention, thatthey drive the heads of the bones tort moft violent 
Siznesot flacu- = oftheir places. You may partly underftand it is fo, if acenfive pune high. bon: 
— affia the patient with any fenfe of heavincfle ; if when you preffe che tumour wit! Which cauferll 
your fingers, the place retaineno marke or impreifion thercof, as happens 1.40% OWN into el 
bur on the contrary,a flaculent {pirit liftsicu p as it were by renicency ,as Fone chronical| di 
: fhould thruft a pair of bellows which are filld with wind, hence the part cannot pet ter,become t 
forme its duty, forthat the {paces of the joints are poflefied with aboundance of! the paine nor 
tulencies, forhatthe liberty of motion Itsintercepted, andthe member is kept as" les ofthe buy 
Howtawal Were hound up. Maty no very skillfull Surgeons putting their fingersto the!e tvexeth the 


1B. incor porent ur fimal, applicentur. Orelfe, oles Lltorum, amsyed. dul, 


dus Buy 


mucag.[em, lini yalth. 3 i. cera quantum [ufficrt hat ce 


ratum, Orelfe K. empl, de vizo mercurio, 
popan. galb. bdel. diffolutorum in aceto, il. panno linco colates, adde pale. fx 


an. 3. fhyraces, lig. 
quantam fuffi 


In what younts 


fiarulencies are 
eviefly genera. 


ciesmay make 


cerat. de efipo humida defcript, Phy). 
rii, ait. 3.1i. malaxentur final cumoleo hlsor.fiat maf. Or cle, cum. 


EX OME hur. 4H, si. ref. psui, tereb. Ven, an > 
cit, fiat ceratummolle. This which foliewes isthought moft 


like milk, then a plafter-like matter, then it leaves behinde it an ulcer to be curedby 


applying thereto mpl. gratia dei,and others asthe Surgeon fhallthink fir. 


— 


oy 


Of flatulenctes conteined in the joints, and counterfeiting true Gouts, 
and of the remedres to beufed thereto. 


F r-times there is {mall quantity of humour, which moves the pain 

oithe gout; but much flatulencie mixed therwith, efpecially in gre 

joints,as in the huckle or hippe-bone, and the knees ; they fometias 


_oftumours, fo that littingupthe onethcy preffe down the other, when as they Pp" 


thereispsor ceive the flatalency,as it were, rifing berweene their fingers, fuppofing it ro 
mitter. 


motion of pusjor matter already generated and flowing up and downe, as Is ufuall if 
impoftumes, they haye openedit by incifion;but when as nothing flowed forth 


part, and an@ 
other anody 


peared how much they were deceived, yet inthe interim,by this their rafhnelle they 

have caufed many dangerous {ym ptomes,as encreale of pain,defluxion of humow> 

aie by force whercot the bones have beenie diflocated,and brought to the patient a0" 

| 1 Op curable lameneffe. But thefe fatulent gouts are feldome without fome phicgma™ 

| hardto pgarter, whichis neither toocrude, nor vilcide. Such like flatulencies are 
ly difcufféd, nor at the firft ehdeavour, by reafon of acold diftemper which! 


refolving, ¢ 
fennell, anil 
| horehouad 
| moa falc. 
the 
tthe wind oni 
bee raferre 
the loi 
fo difper 
Anatomy 
Nerve 
hich rifeine 
in 


Concerning the Gone. 


sjculation is knitand faftened, ‘fo char {tarce any-part of that which isthere 
can breath forth of fuch ftrait pafages. Therefore the cure muttbe 
-efolvings difcufling, and drying fomentations 3 as for example,with a decodtion of 
fenneli,anifeeds, rue, chamomill, melilote, fage, rofemary, origanum, Calamints 
horenound, and thelike, boyled in wine with alittle Lye, rofe vinegar; and com. 
mon fait. Tais following ointment hall bee ufed after the fomentation. oles 
hamam.aneth, rat 148.5 cera alba, fiat linimentwm addendo Aq. Vite pa. 
rym, Afteryou have anointed it, apply thererochis following cataplafme. kk, 
ham. melil. palv.anvni. fol. malv.cy abfisth.an. m furfur, vai. bul. 
cum vinorubro, deinde piftesturcum medulla pans, fari- 
gs fabaram, quantum fuffictt, fiat catzpla(ma, addende ol. > MmyrtiBan. Some 
highly approve of this tollowing medicine for the waiting of flatulencies. K. axup. 
futl. iv. calcss vive, 518, terantur genter in mortario, Porat a apolicestur. 
Orelfe, flercor. caprar.cocti cum vino & accto, an. tb. 8, tereb. venet. com. 
3 ii. aq. Vite, 39. pul. rad. ireos florent. Cy fabin. an.3 iij. ole: rut. cy aneth, an. i. 
farin. fabarum quantum fufficit. Makea cataplafme to the forme ofa pultis. Alfo 
foupes dipped in oxycrate,and wrung our, {hall be applyed:in this oxycrate fhall be 
boyled wormewood, orizanum, chamomill, melilote, rue, common falt, adding 
theretofome aqua vite, Thenthe part fhall be bound up as ftraitas the patient can 
endureit ; in conclufion, that the native ftrength may by littleand little bee 


[puma Vi, te. 
quantum 
{hall be made in this 
mirc, take it forth,and 
the rifing vapoy; 
1a faculty to atteny. 
to break the skin, yer 
ther medicine or in- 


Hic {cirrhous tumors, reftored to the parr, it fhall be fomented with Lye made of theathes of Oake-wood 

wee mutt note thar andthe cuttings ot vines, whercin fhall be boyled, fale, falpbur, choife alome, and 

impa@ & plafterlike wetting linnen cloaths,or ftoups therein, and applying chem, it fhall be ftraitly {wa- 

isneceflary tomake thedup. Yccif great paia’thallmore cruelly vexe the part, then neglecting for a time 

meth fortha humor the propercure of thedifeafe, youthallwithftand the fymptome by rubbing the 

ulcer to becuredby part, and anointing it with fome difcuffing oile, laying thereon fame moift wooll & 


other anodyne things, 


— 


C yap. Gtr 


rue Gouts, the lichias, ip-gout, or Sciatica. 


Lich moves the paine 
Bly, efpecially in great 
they 
ds of the bones forth 


that the hip-gout in the greatneifle of the canfes, bitcerneffe of pain, 
| and vehemency of other fymptomes, eafily exceeds theotherkindesof 
Gout, therefore. I have thought good totreate thereof in particular. 
The pain ofthe Sciatica is therefore the moft bitter, and che fymptomes voustymp- 
motvioleat, forthatthe dearticulation of the hucklebone, wich the head of the 
fo, ifarenfive paine Thigh.bone, is more deepe than thereft; becaufe alfoche phlegmaticke humour 
effe che rumour with which cauferh it, is commonly more plenreous, cold, grofle, and vifcid, that howes 
f, ashappens inane- | down into this joint, and laftly becaufe the Sciatica commonly f ucceeds fome other 
by renicency,asil one Cwonicall difeafe,by reafon of the tranflationand falling down thither of the mac- 
e the part cannot pet | trbecome maligne and corrupt by the long continuance ofthe former difeafe. But 3 
th aboundance of epaine not onely troubles the hippe, but entering deepe, is extended to the muf- 
me member is kept as * cles ofthe buttackes, the groines, knees, and very ends of thetoes, yea often times ding o: che 
fingersto theie kind | Yvexeth the patient with a fenfe of painc inthe very vertebra of the loines, fothat paine. 
ver, when astheypet “Makes the patients, and alfo ofttimes the very Phyfitians and Surgeons to thinke 
fuppofing it co bee thie “the wind or tone Collicke. The caufe of fuch wandering and dilperfcd paincis 
downe,as is ufualls | referred tothe manifold diftribution of the nerves which come to that jojot 
ing flowed forth 


tom the loines and holy-bone, forthey are fentinto the mufcles of the buttockes, 


their rafhnefle they And fo difperfed over the whole legge to the very ends of the toes, as it is fhewed in 
defluxion of humow cur Anatomy. Therefore the paineds largely extended, thatis,to what partfoever 
tto the patient an runs which comes from the affected Hippe,Often times there isno {welling, 
Bout fome phiegmatick | diftemper manifeft co the eye,by:reafon thatthe veines arc very few 
Batulencies are not ¢ ich tifeineo the furface and skinneof this part,’ and the humour lyes, as it were, 


iftemper which Wish its which ische caufethav divers times the exctementitious humours mixed 
nents by which ches 


ciculatio® 


tutencie; ranne fo viokently cavityofichis joint; chat relaxing che 


gaments 


\ 
Lt Bug 
amy7d. dul. 
nium fuffictt fiat c6e 
midd Aefeript. 
Ky, ZUM. AMIMon 
dde fulph, wit. 
,tereb. ven. 
ought moft cffeay. 
nu. Lill. Ueteren, 
scut. an. 
ad ufum, Th. 
iii. pul fulph vir, 
(uf ficit ad incor. 


* 


73 
Bone & 


ments,as 


y 
“leg, 
On. 
ed. They. 
tt, and with 


hin der the 


Cuar. XXIIL 
Bex: | The cure of the Sciatica. 


Hough the Sciatica bee commonly occafioned by tough phlegme, yer 
the patient be ftrong and abound with blood, and all things elie confen, 
it fhall bee good to draw blood by opening a veine ; for phlebotomy. 
qually evacuatesall humors ; therefore the falling downe of the humoy 
into the part affected, isthereby hindered, or retarded. Verily I have knowneno 
{peedicr remedy to aflwage the paine of inflammation, than blood-letting, being 
firft made onthe Bafilica of the grieved fide for revulfions fake;and then forevacuati 
When the Of the conjun@ matteron the vena i{chiadica,which is at the outfide of the 
ifthiadica nd if rhe paine of the Sciatiea be more on the outfide ; elfe on the Sapheia,which ison 
the infide of the ankle, if the inner parts bee more pained. The quantity of blood 
(aatica. which is to be drawne mutt be left to the judgement of the phyfitian without whot 
advife I wouldattempt nothing inthis cafe. Alfo acride glyfters are good, if tire 
_ be nothing which may hinder, asulcers of the guts, or hemorrhoids. 1X, rad. ac 
3 ii. centaur. rut. falv.rorifm.calam. orizan. puleg. an,m §, ftechad. arabic. 
melil, ancth, an. pi. fem. ani. faenic. an. 3%. frat decoctio ad th, i. in colatura 
diaphen. an. 3%. mellit anthof, facch, rub.an.3i. olei liliorum iii. fiat lye. 
Strong purgations are alfo here ufefull, as of p/Mul. fetid. arthritis. 
Hermodactilw,and others ufed in phlegmaticke caufes. Electuarium Diacart bam 
atica. purgeth choller and phlegme. Often vomitings doe not onely evacuate theli- 
mors, but alfo make revulfion, as wee have formerly delivered. Bathes and {weatss 
profit nootherwifethan a decoétion of guajacum or farfaparilla, Lf hea: 
part, then foment it with oile of rofes and vinegar, efpecially ifthe painebe 
in, for vinegar by its tenuity pierceth tothe bottome, and makes way forthe 0M" 

which of itsowne nature isanodyne. After the ufe of generall medicines you 
_apply attra@ive and refolving things ; emplafters of pitch and fulphwr, or of 4m 
Terebinthinay Propolu,Galbanum, Bdelinum, Opopanax, 
humour from within to the futface orskinne. As in like fort alfo the pee 


Way we muft 
open 2 veine in 
the 


oile of fage, rofemary, pellitory of Spaine, and fuch other like doe the fame, 


by realon of thetenuity of their fubftance, and their feparation from earthy 
ty, have farre more powerfull and expedite faculties to penctrate and 
multyouufe none of all thefe without very good judgment and deliberation,9"" 
wile there will be danger ofinflammation., 
“There may alfo bemade fomentationsof difcuffing andrefolving 
rootes and leaves of dane-weeds, orris, Bay and Juniper berries, the feeds 0117" 
grecke, anife,fennellithe leaves of fage, rofemary, chamomile, melilot¢, 
the like, boyledin wine and oyle : the following plafter is much comm 
the antients to digeft,or refolve pe the paine, with this which draw 


ended?! 


Aippocrate 


elder, 


fort? 


ciemte, frat 
di ffoluts, 5 ii. 
Laur. & ae [pe 
rut. rorifmar 
wormcs {hal 
being ftraine 
{hall be appl 
il. 
cy hordet an 
at catapla(ma 
Or elfe, 
diffoluti, ii. 
upon feather 
of the (eratice 
aad applyed 
(que fiant fim 
17 fi 
femin, naftar 
falita anckts , ¢ 
mult we co 
ed with muc 
fraphifagr. 3i 
rium. Allo t 
the wait of 
carethat the 
& be kept op 
may bee dra 


4S Croubled 
legconfumes 
Approved by 
cafes, to caull 
and then not 
them o Pen b 
Waxe melred] 
theretickes 
Meanes man 
rons fhall be 
fome flagers 
that by heatit 
ate, and draw 
Bether with t 
CiCatrization 
bly corrobe 


APR 720 Concerning the Lip 
proper 2s common,the head of the thigh-bone is eafily VEN oy 
‘sated From hence, fo thatitmay never be reftored again, if it remain fo for any {pace 
timesfor that in thistime the humor falling downinto thts cavity,by delay 
as it were into a ftony body, and the head of the Thigh-bone Weares it felfe aNothe: 
cavicy inthe neighbouring bone, but the lips of the true cavity, which are gritty. 
| come more ftreit and depreft, and laftly all the ligamentous bodies moiftened yi, 
thisexcremenwtious humour become more loofe and weake, whence 
and mott grievous fymptoms,as lameneffe, the decay not only Ofther 
but at length of the whole body, and laftly a flow and heGick teaver, w 
i! tinuance of time will confume the patient for the caufes formerly ment: 
fore let Phyfitians and Surgeons havea care that they refift it atthe fir 
- | fuch powertull remédies as are mentioned inthe following chapter, 
| {pringing up and growth of the formerly mentioned fymptomes. 
| 
== 


pac 
sby delay 
resit felfe anot 
hich are Briftly be. 
dies moiftened wi, b 
heuce fucceed Many 
y Of the thigh & lep 
caver, Which incon, 
Hy mentioned. T her. 
at the firft, and with 


chapter, hinderth- 
CS. 


tough phlegme, yet if 
allthings elie confent, 
for phlebotomy. 
downe of the humors 
rily Ihave knowne no 
blood- letting, being 
then forevacuati- 
She outfide of the ankle, 
he Sapheia,which ison 
The quantity of blood 
ry fitian without whole 
yiters are good, if there 
rad. acor. 
chad. arabic. fle. cham. 
th. i. colatura diffolve 
iliorums 5 iii. fiat cly/ler. 
thrisic. A fsaiereth. de 
etuarium Diacart bam 
nely evacuate che hue 
ed. Bathes and {weatts 
Ma. Ufhea: moleftthe 
lly ifthe paine be 
makes way forthe oile, 
rall medicines you (hal! 
nd fulphwr, or of 
Opopanax, 
ort alfo the chymice® 
‘ke doe the fame, WH" 
‘on from earthy 
and 1° 


| acres, 3%. pul. hermodad. 3 ii, melliscom. tered. iv. olei 


gormes fhallbe boy ied apart with the white wine,and herbes cut in pic 

being ftra ined our, the reft of the things fhall bee added according 
(hall beapplyed to the Hippe. Orelfe, Be. rad. emul. camp. figil. falom. bryon. bifrnal 

coquantur complete er terantwr, trajictantur per fetaceum,addendo farin, 
an. >i. ole crchamam. an. 3 iii. tereb.3 iv. cere quantum fufficst, 

refolves, affwageth pain,and calleth forth the humours tothe skin 

relle, Kr ad. fizil. beat Maria,s viempl. diachyl.. albi,3 iv. croci in aqua Vite 
terebsmth. 5 i. ol.de {pica nardi quantum fufficst fiat empl. Let itbeipread 

Myon leather and applyed warme. Ihave oftentimes fuddenly allwaged the paine 

ofthe by putting to the pained Hip the root of black Bryony cut into flices. 

iad applyed, when the matter was cold. Orelfe,R. cera citrin,c tereb.abiet ij. 

fimsul in vale duplics, ubi refrixerint, adde polr. Hermoda. 38. flor 

mem. irid. flor. an. iti. pice nards, flor. thymi, an. ii. interioris cisamom: ey 

nafturt. an, Sii.croct, Div. malaxantur fimul manibus POrct veterenon 

fiat mafaempl. But ifthe painebe not by this meanes affwaged, then 

wutwecometo more powerfull medicines, as toufegreat Cupping Glafls apply- 

ed with much flam to veficatories.As, K.cantharid.qeibws detrache fant ale,3ii. 

fapbifagr. 9 til. finapi, 3 fermenti actrrimi 5%. incorporentur fimul, fiat veficato. 

blifters may be raifed by applying the inner rinde of Travailers JOY £0 The inners; 

Mm tiewaitof fome two drammes, alittle beneath the grieved part : you mutt havea ot r ae” 

 carethatthe ulcers that remaine afterthe skinne ofthe blifters is taken off, doe run, 1°¥* "i" 


<ockepropen for fometimeatter,that fo more ofthe humor contcined inthe part 
may bee drawne away. Butif wee cannot availe by thefe means, we mutt accordin g 
'04ippocrates his counfaile, cometothe laft and extremeft temedy. Such (faith he) 4,5.) 
| troubled with along paine of the have their Hippe fall out of joint, their 
egconfumes,& they become lame unleffe they 
approved by Ced/ws. It isthe laft (faith he)and moft effeG@uall medicine in longer dif. 
m “lcs, cocauterize with hot irons the skinne of the Hippe inthree or foure places Lib. 4-¢ap. 22. 
and then notto heale up thefe ulcers or fontenelsas foone as may be, bur to keepe 
them open by putting thereinto bullets of gold, or filver, or pills of Gentian, or 
m = “xcmelted and wrought up with the powder of vitrioll,mercuric, and the like ca- 
) Haretickes untill the affe@ againft which weufe this remedy be helped, for by this 
neanes many have binhelped. Therefore three or foure actuall cauteries, or hot i- 
fons thall be fothruft in about the joint of the Hip, that they may enter into the fieth 
‘ome fingers breadth, yet fo that youfhun the nerves, Cauteryes here doe good, for The ule ot 
that by heating'the part, they heate and diffolve the cold humours, they cur, attenu- iatien 
draw forththe groffe and vifcide, fo that they out by theulceis, co- 
ether with the quitture. Over and befides, 
cicatcization,and their loofenefle helped , Seby this meanes the whole part is nota- 


Concerning the Gout. 


15. 


rad, ar iftoloch. rotund. colocynth.terebinth. venet.an.d x. fanug. pipers loner 
bg fam. thur. myrr ia, adi pss cap. pris, an. V.ce7a, ib, 3 
fecundums artem praparatss cum olei vini generof; Guantitat 


fiat Let itbe applyed to the Hippe. Or, K. imap: acerrimo acete 


igure de (pica, 47.3 fe 318, terra formicarum cum ovis, 10 j, fol. laur. fale 
rit. yori Vermium serreft -prapar. The earth withthe egges an 4 


Blacke bryon 


rory. 


be burnt: we have alfo read the fame 


caureriesinthe 


che ligaments are ffrengthened by their 


bly corroberated. 


deliberarion,oth™ 


CHAP. 


irefolving hherbes; 
ries, thet s obit 
Enile, melilore,¢) 


fis much comm 


Ppp 


922 Concerning the Gout. Liege 

Caap. XXIIII. 
of the fatulent convulfion, or comvulfive coutraction, which 1 common. 
ly called by the French, Goute Grampe, and by the 

Englifh,ebe Crampe. 

ew. Hat whichthe French call Goute grampe, wee heare intend to trea of in 

What the @s\duced thereto rather by theaffinity of thename, thanof thethj,, 

Cromp is. for ifone {peaketruly,itisa certaine kinde of convulfion generareg) 

aflatulent matter, by the violence.of whofe running downe or moro, 

oft-times the necke,armes, and legs are cither extended, or contrage, 

themfelves with great paine, but that for afhort time. The caufe thereof is, 

ccau. 


thereof. erofie and tough vapor, infinuating it felfe intothe branchesofthenerves, ang the 
membranes of the mufcles. Ittakesone onthe night, ratherthan onthe day, fo, 
that then the heat and [piritsufually retire themfelves into the entrailes and cente, 
ofthe body; whence itis that flatulencies may bee generated, which wij) ¢) 
up, diftend and pullthe part whereintothey runne, juft as wee lec lute-ftringsare . 
Who fudjee tended. This affect often takes fuch as {wimme in cold water, & caufeth many tobe 
certo. drowned, thoughexccllent {wimmers,their members by this means being fo ftrai 
ly contracted,that they cannot by any meanes be extended.For the skin by the cold 
nefle of the water is contracted and condenfed, and the pores therof fhut,{o thatt). 
engendered flatulencies have no paflage forth. Such as give themfelves to drunkep. 
neffe and gluttony, or floth and idleneffe,are ufually more frequently troubled with 
Thecure, this difeate, by reafon of their heaping up of crudities. Therefore it is cured by mo. 
derate diet, and ordering of the body, andexercife of each parttherof, for thusthey 
gather ftrength, andthe generation of the flatulent matter is hindered. lathe very 
time when it takes one, the patient fhall bee cured by longrubbing with warme 
clothes, andagua vite,wherein the leaves of fage,rofemary, time, favory, lavander, 
cloves, ginger,and the like difcuffing and refolving things, have beene infufed. The 
extenfion and flexion of the members or joints,and walking, arealfo good. 


eo 


The End the 


nall from ul. 
of rhe head. 
Parts with cr 
and other pa 
and to 
hort harts bu 
tothe condic 
es, and th. 
One of their 
locke very 
lofetheir hea 
rated witht 


4 
| 
| 
4 
V 
| 
| terwith | 
N Pretiion o 
. “4 4 the y 
ie “ES; lo 
3 


hich u 
by the 


intend to treat of ; 
¢, thanof the thing 
nvulfion generated by 
ing downc or motioy, 
tended, or contraged 
m ihe caufe thereof is 4 
of thenerves, andthe 
rthan onthe day, fo; 
he entrailes and cente, 
rated, which wil] 
lec lute-ftringsare ex. 
, & caufeth many to be 
means being {o ftrait. 
or the skin by the cold. 
therof fhut, fo thatthe 
bemf{elves to drunken. 
quently troubled with 
tore it is cured by mo- 
rttherof, for thusthey 
s hindered. Inthe very 
prubbing with warme 
ime, favory, lavander, 
ve beenc infufed. The 
ure alfo good. 


- 
- 
il 


AND THOSE 


‘ppreffioa of the urine, or by 2 Gangrene arifing in thefe parts,unleffe you fuccour 
Sem by the am putation oftheir yards. Others become lame of their armes,and 


* 
a 


3 


THE LUES 


SYMPTOMES WHICH 
HAPPEN MEANES 


THEREOF. i 
Tue NInereenru Books. 
I, 


A defcription of the Lues Venerea. 


Oe He Frenchcallthe Lues Venerea, the Neapolitane difeafe, the I- whacthe 
taliansand Germans [as alfo the Englith J terme it the French 
difeafe, the Latines cali it Padendagra, others name it otherwife. 
Bur it makes no great matter how it bee called, ifthe thing it felfe 
vecunderftood. Thereforethe Venere isa difeafe gotten or 
S& taken by touch, bur chiefly that which isin uncleane copulation; 
and itpartakes ofan occult quality, commonly taking its origi- 


| allfromulcers of the privic parts, and then further manifefting its felfe by puftles 

F of rhehead,and other externall parts; and laftly, infecting the entrailes and inner 

parts with crucl! and nocturnal! tormenting paine of the head, fhoulders, joynts, 

endother parts. In proceffe of time,it caufeth knots and hard Toph: and laftly cor- whathuric 
taptsand foulesthe bones, diffolving them, the flefh about them being oft-times ee 
hot harts but ic corrupteth and weakeneth the fubftance of other parts, according 

| the condition ofeach ofthem, the diftemper and evill habit of the affected bo- 


dies, and the inveteration or continuance of the morbificke caufe. For fome lofe 


one of their eyes, others both, fome lofe agreat portion of the eye-lids, otherfome — 


looke very ghaftly, and not like themfelves, and fome become {quint-eyed. Some 


| oftheir hearing, others have their nofes fall flat, the pallat ef their mouthes perfo- 
lated with the lofle of the bone Ethmoides, fo thatin ftead of free and perfect utte- 
‘ance, they faulter and fumble in their fpeech. Some have cheir mouthes drawne 
| Sry, others their yards cut off, and women a great part of their privitics tainted 


withcorruption. There bee fome who have the #rethra or paflage of the yard ob- 
by budding caruncles, or inflamed puftles, fothar they cannot make wa- 
t Without the helpe of a Catheter, ready to die within a fhort time, either by the 


| “etfome of their legges, and 2 third fort grow ftiffe by the contraction of all theig 
embers, fo that they have nothing left them found but their voice, which we ? 


| 
* 
| 
| 
7 
~ 
“ 


Concerning the Lues V enerea, Ling Lisag 
‘for no other purpofe but to bewaile their miferies,for which it is {cantly ether wi 
Wherefore fhould I rouble you with mention of thofe, that can {cantly draw my | 2 childré 
breath by reafon of an Afthma, or thofe whofe bodies wafte with ahecticke bod 
and flow confumption ¢ Ic fares farre woife with thefe, who’have all their bode ic frequent 
| TheLepfic geforméd by.a Leprofie arifing therehence, and all their throttles and This fo 
i Wf punzofthe caren with putride and cancrous ulcers ; their haire falling off from their hess. Citizen of 
their hands and feet cleft with cetters and {caly chinkes : neither is their caf m condition 
better, whe, having their braines tainted with this difeafe, have their whole {hee thoulc 
fhaken by fits of the falling ficknefle ; whotroubled witha filthy and curfeg rian hap, then 
continually caft forth ftinking and bloudy filth. Laftly, there are th 
ki of dif€afes,no (darts of this difcafeis nor complicate his childre 
never tobcfaken away,unlefl€che virulencic of chis murrain be whollytakenay, that maligt 
and impugned by its proper Antidore,that is, argentum vivum. ther when @ 
‘ {cabs and pa 
lentulcers 
Of the caufes of the Lues Venerea. | —wasthree, ¢ 
 Iroldthem 
ore aretwo efficient caufes of the Lues venerea ; the firltis, acertain {pring by 
TEX occule and {pccifickequality which cannot be demontftrated ; yer iting, helpe heale 
wea the (conrgs be referred to God, as by whofe commandthis hath aMailed inankigd nurfe was {c 
25a {courge or punifhmentto reftraine the too wanton andlafciviog: the ftreets of 
ju(ts of unpure whoremongers. The other is an impure touch or contagion, an the unfortu 
principally, that which happeneth in copulation. Whether the manor wona & 
have their privities troubled with virulear ulcers, or bee molefted with avizulen 
| ftrangury (which difeafe crafty Whores colour by the name of the whites) thems 
| lignity catcheth hold of the other ; thus a woman taketh this difeafe by amancy 
ftingitintoherhot, openand moift wombe ; but aman taketh ittromawoma, 
; ~ ee which, foréexample fake, hath fome {mall while before received the virulent {eed 
of a whore-mafter poiluted with this difeafe, the mucous fanics whereof 
| in the wrinckles of the womans wombe, may be drawne in by the pores ofthelu- & , 
| ding and open yard, whence fuccecde maligne ulceis, and avirulent thanguy, + 
This virulencie, like atorch or candle fet on fire, will by little and little bee props this begin : 
inns 


gated and {ent by the veines, arterics and ncrves tothe noble parts; whole my 


nity a ftrong liver not enduring, by the ftrength of the naturall expulfive fcuie t later infe 


will fend irinto the groines, whereon follow Abjfccfies, therefore called veren! 
venereal Bu- Bubo’s. Thefe, ifthey returnein againe, and caft not forth matter by being’. a F 
no'sreurning Oed,they will, by their talling back iaco the veins and arteries infect the mafic of 
in lsloud by the like tainture,& thence willenfue the Lwes vemerea. this 
be got by amore occult manner of touch, as by breathing only. Por nig 
rether befides reafon and experience, thata woman longtroubled with Om 
5 > ° bodies by r 
by imnportunate and often kiffing, tran{tufe maligaity intoachild; & b 
derand foft fubftance of alittle childe may bee altered, infe&ted, and hee 
i} little corrupted by receiving of filthy, andin their wholckindc malign diy a 
it is khowne,and now vulgarly believed, that mid-wives by receiv.ng hardneffe 


ofa woman idfeéted with this difeafe, tohave gorthis affeét, che malignity 
taken and drawne into their bodies through the pores of their hands by the 
ges of the veines afid atteries. Neither dorh pare any condition, nor 


ing opene 
Matter, ore 
ped ny exc 
may bee taken by this virulencie ; yea verily, if they onely lye in che fheets oF tly 
tings which fetaine his (wéat,or the virulencie caft forth by an ulcer. The Cver- 
ger may affailé thofe Who. fhall drinke in the fame veffell after fuch as ate 10" caute (wear: 
with this difeafe. For by the impure touch of their lips, they leave virwle 1 it Were hot 
tow martes fpittle bpon the edges. ofthe cup, which is no leffe contagious ints kinact acum 
may in e& ch'l- the virulencie of leprous perfons,or, the fome of madde dogs. Wherclor difeate 
drenandtiey vellj an nels deaw in ch >the 
maivell if children ourfed y an infcted nurfe, draw in the feeds of this | 


them nories. 


4: 
at 
\ 
a 
a 
| 
> 


Ly B.19. 


it icantly fufficie,, 
an {cantly draw the;, 
vith ahecticke feaye, 
have all their bodi.. 
throttles and throate. 
off from their head. 
ther is their cafe much 
ve their whole bodies 
ithy and curfed Auy of 
Laftly thereare No 
aleis not complicare 
be wholly taken away, 


the firft is, a certaine 
rmonftrated ; yet itmay 
hath affailed mankind, 
> wanton and lafcivious 
ouch or contagion, and 
Bict the man or woman 
Bolefted with avirulent 
> of the whites) the ma- 
pis difeafe by amanca- 
aketh it trom a woman, 
mccived the virulent iced 
ics whereof rc maining 
by the pores of the ftan- 
avirulenc itrangary. 
tle and lirtle bee propa 
lc parts; whofe malig- 
Burall expulfive 
erefore called 
th matter by being ops 
sin feet the mathe of tie 
this 
only. For itis 
oubled with 


e tete 


feted, and by likes 
kinde malign 
macs by receiving the chi. 
fect, the malig nity being 
their hands by the pall.- 
yndition, fexe, norage® 


(Concerning the Lues Venerea, 


725 


echer with the milk,which is only bloud whitened inthe breafts : or infeéted fick - 
children by their hot and ulcerated mouthes, may tranf.fufe this malignity 
ro the body of the nurfe, by the rare, loofe and poreus fubftance of the dugs which 
i: frequently fucketh. 


This following hiftory is very memorable to this purpofe. A certaine very good 4 bifsrie. 


Citizen of this Citie of Paris granted to his wife being avery chafe wo 

conditionally thee fhould nurfe her owne child of which thee. was lately delivered, 
(hee fhould have a nurfein thehoufe to eafe herof fome part of the labour : by ill 
hap, thenurfethey tooke was troubled with this difeafe . wherefore thee prefencly 
infected the childe, the child the mother, the mother her husband, and hee two of 
his children who frequently accompanied him at bed and board, being ignorant of 
that malignity wherewith hee was inwardly tainted. In the meane while the mo- 
ther when (hee obferved that her nurfe childe came not forward » butcryed almoft 
perpetually, fhee asked my counfell to tell her the caufe of the difeafe ; which was 
not hard co bee done, for the whole body thereof was replenifhed with vencreall 
(cabs and puftles, the hired nurfes and the mothers Nipples were eaten in with viru- 
ientulcers ; alfo che fathers, andthe two other childrens bodies, whereof the one 
was three, the other foure yeares old, were troubled with the like puftles and fcabs. 
[told them chat they had all the Lwes venerea, which tooke its originall and firtt off. 


(pring by maligne contagion from the hired nurfe. I had them in cure,and by Gods 


helpe healed them all, except the fucking child, which died inthe cure. Butthe hired 


nurfe was foundly lafhed in the prifon,and thould have beene whipped through all 


the ftreets of the Citie, but chacthe magiftrate had acareto preferve the credite of 
the unfortunate family. 


Crap. 


In what humour the malicnity of the Lues venerea refides. 


? Hough in the opinion of many the antecedent caule of this difeafe be the 
1% mafic of bloud conteining the foure humours, yet I had rather place the 
matter, and primary,and chief featthereof in groffe and vifcide phlegme 
‘98 infeed with the maligne quality of the venereous yvenome, and from 


| ‘tlisbeginning and foundation, I thinke by a certaine contagious growth it fooner 
Mm rlaterinfeéts the other humours, as cach of them is difpofed or aptto fuffer. Of 
@ = “hich my opinion there are many arguments, bur this chiefely, Thar by the evacua- 
von ofa phlegmaticke humour, whether by the mouth and falivation, ox by ftoole, 
ucne, or {weate in men of what temper foever,whether cholerick, fauguine or me- 


ancholy, the difeafe is helped or cured. Secondly, for that the exceffe of paine is yyy che palne 


bodies by the acrimony of its maligniry. Thirdly, becaufe the patients are hurt 


ff by the ufe of cold things, but ufually finde bencht by hot medicines, whither they 


oyntments, plafters, fumigations, or whatfoever elfe, inwardly taken, or out- 


Wardly applyed. Fourthly, for that in venereous puftles, there is found a certaine 


tdneffe at the roore, thouzh outwardly they make fhew of choler or bloud. For 
opened, you thall finde them ftuffed with a certaine plafter-like and rophous 


matter, Orelfe withrough phlegme, or vifcous pws ; whence arife thefe hard sophz, 
or bony excreffences upon the bones, if not from phlegmaticke humours there hea- 


; More by night than by day, becaufe then the phlegme bearing {way, fevers the peri- is worl upon 


‘/''#m from the bone, or elfe offends it and the reft of the membranousand nervous an 


as onely lye Rdupandconcrete Fifthly, for that the {permaticke and cold parts doc prima- 
lycin the iheet ‘meds: i tly and principally feele the harme of this difeafe. Sixtly,forthatthe ulcers which | 
yanulcer. The eoupicd ‘ver-fpread the body by meanes of this difeafe, admit ofnocure, unleffe you firft 
after sot (anit | Silefweats. Therefore if the matter of the difeafe, and fuch ulcers as accompany 
rey leave.a kin “Were hotand dry, it would grow worfe, and be rather increafed by a decoction of 
nragions in its roots of China, Ot farfaparila, Seventhly , becaufe oft. times this hid in the 
dogs. the feede thereof being taken or drawne into the body, fo lyeth hid for rhe 


| 
4 
| 


ing bbe Lues Venerea.) 


Lis, Lo, 


{pace of ayeare, that it fhewes no figne thereof, which happens not in difeafes 
ceeding from an hot matter, which caufethquick and violent motions, By is 
appeareth that the and foundation ofthe Lwes venerce is placed or feated 
phlegmatick humour ; yet may I not deny, but that other humours confufeg the i 
with may bealfo in fault,and defiled with the like contagion. For thereare 
ny tumours which proceed froma fim ple humour,: and that of one kinde by, 
tumours, {fo here the deriomination is to be taken from that humour which carry 


the chiefe fway. 


Cuar. 
Of the fignes of the Lues Venerea. 


“3 Hen the Lwes venerea is lately taken, maligne ulcers appeare in the Dt 
vities, fwellings in the groines, a virulent ftrangury runneth oft-tine 
with filthy fanies, which proceeds citherfrom the prostat4, or the ylcer 
5 of the wretbra, the patient is troubled with paines in hisjoynts 
| and fhoulders, and as it were breakings of his armes, legges and ali hi 
members, they are weary without a caufe, fo that neither the foot nor hand can ¢ 
fily performe his duty ; their mouths are inflamed, a {welling troubles their throge 
which takes away their freedom of {peaking & {wallowing,yea of their very (pittle 
puttles rife over all their bodies, but chiefly certaine ae them engirt thei 
remples and heads ; the fhedding or lofic of the haire, cifgraceth the head and chip: 
and leanenefle deformeth the reft of the body ; yet all of thefe ufe norto appear i 
Yhemottcer- all bodies; butfome ofthem in fome. But the moft certaine fignes of this difeate 
rer: fanesof are, a callous ulcerin the privities, hard and ill conditioned, and this fame is judged 
eOSSE ey have the fame force in a prognofticke, if after it be cicatrized, it retaine the fame 
callous hardneffe ; the Bubo’s, or {wellings in the groines to returne backe intothe 
body without comming to fuppuration, or other manifeft caufe: thefe two fignes, 
if they concurre in the fame patient, you may judge or foretell that the Lwes venere 
is cither prefett, or athand ; yet this difeafe happeneth to many without the con- 
courfe of thefe two fignes, which alfo bewrayeth it felfe by other manifeft fignes, 
as ulcers and puftles in the reft of the body, rebellious againft medicines though 
powerfull, and difcreetely applyed, unlefle the whole body bee annoynted with 
Arcentum vivem. But when as the difeafe becommeth inveterate, many become 
impotent to venery, and the malignity and number of the fymptomes encreale,thei 
paines remaine fixedand ftable, very hard and knotted soph; grow upon the bones; 
and oft-times they become rotten and foule, as alfo the hands and feete bythe cor- 
ruption of falt phlegme are troubled with chops or clefts, and their heads are ce 
zedupon by an ophiafis and alopecia; whitifh tumours with roots deepe fattatd 
arife in fundry parts of thebody, filled with a matter like the meate of achelaut, 
orlike atendon ; ifthey beopenedthey degenerate into divers ulcers, as puttice) 
eating, and other fuch, according to the nature and condition of the affected bo 
Two other cau. dies. But why the paines are more grievous on the night feafon : thismay becad 
dedtothe true reafon wee rendred inthe precedent Chapter ; firft for that 
imthenight. Mereous virulencie lying as it were afleepe is ftirredup and enraged by the warm 
neffe of the bed and coverings thereof ; Secondly, by reafon of the patict! 

thoughts which on the night feafon are wholly turnedand fixed upon the on- 


ly ob- 
ject of paine. 


Caar 


* 


by Empyrt 
approved | 
virulency 
many evils 
and heétick 
you muft | 
your progr 
recovered 
eafess Yo 
“this difeafe 
all who aré 
alike affect 
venerea, ar 
farre differ 
torment b 
like them{ 
like matter 
the bones, 
reous ulcer 
thall remai 
body. 
Genera! 
tobee cured 
defides, Ca 
hereofto b 
cafe, in fy 
POWer and 
afterfome 
Af Aer a, | 
Romans In 
Who fucce 
cians had 
ferre It tor 


th 


— 
. 
Lnots andr 
ray and Ww 
W y 
4 
mis 
4 
& 
} 
Ur 


Lis. 


notin difeafes 
mouons. By this 
jaced or feated jn a 
urs confufed there. 
or thereare fcarce 
yne kinde 5 but asin 
pour Which carryerh 


rs appeare in the pri. 
iry runneth oft-times 
prostat a,or the ulcers 
cs in his joynts, head, 
nes, legges and allhis 
foot nor hand can e2- 
troubles their throats. 
ca of their very {pittle, 
Is of them engirt their 
th the head and chia: 
ge ufe notto appeare in 
fignes of this difeate 
nd this fame is judged 
ed, it retaine the fame 
returne backe into the 
ufe: thefe two lignes, 
Ilchae the Lwes vereres 
hany without the con- 
other manifeft fignes, 
inft medicines though 
By bee annoynted with 
eterate, many become 
Ipromes encreafe,their 
erow upon the bones; 
sand feete bythe cor- 
nd their heads are {ea- 
roots deepe faftned Ir, 
1c meate of achefaut, 
rers ulcers, as puttide, 
n of the affected bo- 
afon : thismay bee ae 
r; firft for that che 
nraged by che warms” 
Mreafon of the patie 
edupon the anely 


19. Concerning the Lues Venerea. 
Cua 
Of Preenosticks, 


\j contrary, that which is inveterate and enraged by the fcllowthip 

of many and-maligne fymptomes, as a fixed paine of the head, 
gots and roteenneffe of the bones, ill natured ulcersina body very much fallen a- 
wayand weake, and whereof the cure hath beene already fundry times undertaken 
yy Empyricks, bur in vaine; or elfe by learned Phyficians, but to whofe remedies. 
»oproved by reafon and experience,the malignity of the difeafe and the rebellious 


7 F the difeafe be lately taken, affociated by afew fympromes, as 
with fome {mall number of pattles,and little & wandring paines 
and the body befides bee young and in good cafe, and the confti. “e# 
tution of the feafon bee good and favourable, as the {pring, then 

the cure is eafie, and may bee happily performed. But on the 


fignes of a 
ble Lwes 


hath refuled to yeeld, isto be thought uncurable, efpecially, if rothele fo Théflenescfen 
nany evils, this bee added, that the patient bee almoft wafted with a confitmption uncurable one. 


ndhe@ick leanenefie, by reafon of the decay ofthe native moifture. Wherefore 
you muft oncly attempt fuch by a palliative cure ; yet bee wary herein making 
your prognotticke: for many have beene accounted in a defperate cafe, who have 
covered ; for by the benefit of Godand nature, wonders oft-times happen in dif- 
ales. Young men who are of a rare or laxe habit of body are more fubje& to 
this difeafe, than fuch as are of a contrary habit and complexion. For as not 
i| whoare converfant with fuch as have the Plague, or live ina peftilent aire, are 
likeafleted: fo neither all who lye or accompany with fuch as have the Zyes 


vneres, are alike infected or tainted. The paines of fuch as have this difeafe, are prow che 
fare different from the paines of the Gour. For thofe of the Gout returne and painsdiffer 


orment by certaine periods and fits,butthe other are continuall and almoft alwaies 
lke themfelves ; Gouty paines poffefle the joynts, and in thefe condenfe a plafter- 


likematter into knots; but thofe of the Pocks are rather faftened in the middeft of 


hebones, and at length diffolve them by rortenneffe and putrefaction. Vene- 
reous ulcers which are upon the yarde are hard to cure, but if being healed, they 


lullremaine hard and callous, they are fignes of the difeafe lying hidde in the 
| 


froni thole cf 
rhe gout. 


Generally, the Lwes veneree which now reigneth is farre more mildeand eafie pie 
‘0dee cured chanthat which was in former times, wher as it firft began amoneft us : rez beomes 


xlides,cach day it feemeth to bee milder than other. Aftrologers think the caufe 
itteofto bee this, for that the cceleftiall influences which firft brought in this dif- 
tale, in fuceceffe of time by the contrary revolutions of the Starres , lofe their 
power and become weake; fothat ic may feeme fomewhat likely, that ac lengrh 
terfome few yeares it may wholly ceafe ; no otherwife than the difcafe termed 
Nestaera, which was very like this in many fymptomes, and troubled many ofthe 
Komansin the raigne of Tiberine; and the Lichen, which inthe time of Clawdine 
fucceeded Tiberius) venednot onely butall Kerepebelides. Yet Phy- 
icians had rather take to themfelves the glory of this lefle raging difeafe, and to re- 
“tte it tothe many and wholfome meanes, which have beenc invented, uled aad 


| ppofed thereto by the moft happy labours of noble wits 


more gentle 
than formerly 
it was. 


L 
| 
| 
-* 
| 
"74 
— (+) hh 
a 
* 


7238 Concerning the Lucs enerea. Lis) 
Crear. WI. 
Hew many, whet ments there are te the 
Any forts of remedies have beene found out many 
overcome this difeale. Yet at this day there are nely foure whi. 
| = principally ufed. The is by a decoction of G the 
| by unction ; the third by emp. laters, aod the fourth by fumiezrio, » 
of them by ‘Hydra cyrem, the firit excepted. 
ly firong and powerfull ; for experience hath taughr,tha the on of 
not foficient ftreagth to exringuith the venome of the venereous viruleacy. by 
nely togive it eafefor atime; for becanfe ir heates, provokes fj 
srinc, waftes the excrementitious humours by dryiog them, it feemezh -- 
the dileale, for that thereupon, for fome time, the paine and al! “other fy stems aT ee 
feeme more remiffe ; but thefe endeavours are weake and deceitful, 2s wher, 
that only which ts more fubtle in the humours in fault, is exhaufted and 
Bot acertaine higher power, conreines therein all the pow. 
of G much more exceliemt 2nd efhicacious ; for befices thar it hese 
tenuares curs, refolvesand dryes, it provekes (weat and urine, and befides i: ere 
noxious humours upwards and downewards, by the mouth and ftools, By 
evace. uations nor onely the more fubtle, but alfocthe more groffe and faculenr 
crements, wherein the feat of this difeafe is properly fixed, are difperied 
evited by which the Phyfician may bee bold to affure him(elfe 
ever the difcale. Bur the ufeof the decoction of 
snot arife by the reliques of the more erofle and vifcous homours heft in the co. Meg: 
ties of theentrailes ; but leaves no reliques behind ix. 
| 
Flew ts make chuice of the Guzjacum. 
is preferred before the reff, which is of a great loge, of 2 
lour, gammy, wich a freih Grong gimell, an acride and fomewhs: 
The the Darke cleaving very clofe co the wood. It hath faculys: 
incat, rariie, attenuate, attrac, rocaufe iweat, aad move uria ae, and bei 
by 2 fpecifick pro perty Weaken (he virulency of ¢ be Lees Pemeres. There are 
fabitances taken source of in thts wood: the Aritis che barke, the orber sa 
wood whichis mexcto the barke, thechird isthe heart ofthe wood, 
Tichrrand m3, Diac and more dusky part rhereof, The Darke isthe more , whereior ned 
ery tacelty of you thalluie it whens you would dry more powerfully ; the den: 
more moilt, is more facculent and fat . that which 
is of amide temper. Wherefore the two lait tare more convenient for de the 
tures and rare bodies,which require lefle drying. Farthermore,the barks muit ave 
vente denice and itromg aztures,tharby the more force thereof, she ped, the 
De mace and the patiages the more pafizole. But wont confuxe 
here bre underftood to meane fach barke asismot 
erbiich fanleixis very for chat long before bee byour poopk, twob-.. 
wood lyeth in heapes upon the thore in the open aire, untill they can 
men for it ; which, whea it isbr ough: abosid, itis towed inthe 
| of the thip, where beneath by the fea through thechinkes of the borcs, icity 


boug and fold by weight, wherfore that mzy keep rhe weight,the Mdvenen: 
it pp in vaults and cellars under ground, where che furface thereof beaewee 
much mouture can icarce efcape mouldinefieand rotrennefie, Wherefore thabe 
like to give the decoction either of the barke or wood which is pext chereto +” 


peop.c. 


“4 


. | 
| 
4 


Aifease. 


any tooppugne and 
ely foure Which are 


4 the fecond 
by fumigation . aj) 
that is not fufficienr. 
coGion of GC Uajacum 
ereous Virulency 
provokes {wear 
m, it feemeth to cure 
other lymptomes 
ceitfull, as whereb 
fred and difperfed by 
mchercin all the power 
fides that it heats, a. 
and befides it expels 
nd ftoole. By which 
fle and fceculent ex. 
re difperfed and eva. 
fe of certaine viGory 
ews, freth paines and 


nc left in the Cavi- 
d it. 


logge, of a dusky co- 
ide and fomewhat bi- 
d. Ithath a faculty co 
Bove urine, and befides 
Mnerca. There are three 
other isa whitith 
wood, that is, the in- 
more dry, wherefore 
he middle fubftance 
lyeth betweene both 
nient for delicate 
the barke mutt be 
thereof, the humours 
paflable. But I wou id 
und rotren with 
ed by our pit, 
chap: 
in the hold or bortome 
f the bords, and abovs 
‘ought hither ro 
ight,the Druggtts ay 
hereof bedewed 
Wherefore 1 doc 0% 
is next thereto to 


the Lues 


Vencrea. 729 


CHap. VITI. 


Of the preparation of the decoltion of Guajacum. 


you mult have your Gasjacum fhaved into {mall pieces, and toeve 

pound of the fhavings, adde of faire water cight, ten, ortwelve pints, Theprove 
more or leffeas the natuce of the party, and condition of the 

(hall feeme torequite, accordin2 tothe rule ofthe formerly mentioned 

indications. Lect the water be hot or warme,cf{pecially if it be in winter, 

rat fo it may the more eafily & throughly enter ittto the body of the wood,% d aw 

‘ato it felfe the faculties thereof in the {paceof twenty foure houres, whicrein i: is eee 
jacerated then boy le it 1 balueo,to avoyd empyrenma,or talte of fire, which it will mr she 
-oatract by boyling it over a hot fire. Yet fome nothing regard this, but thinke the perfor 
{ufficiencly ferved, if they make a decodion inan earthen pot well glaf4, o- 
veca gentle fire, fo that no part of the liquor may 1unne over the mouch of the vef- 

(el, for that thus fo much of the ftrength of the decotion might vanith away. Tow- 

(ever it be made,let it be boyled to the confumption of half,a third,or fourth parr, 

«sthenature of the patient, & difeafe fhall feem to require. There be fome who mixe 

jiveis implestherwith, which havean occultand proper fimpatl y wahel ar pare 

ofthe body which ts principally hart by the difeafe, which at rhe leaft may fervein- 
hadotavehicle to carry the faculties of the deco@ion thither where thedifeafe 
Others adde thereto purging medicines, whole judgement cannor she 
spprove of, for that Ichinke it is not forthe patients good to attempt two evacuati- 
nasat once, that is,to expell the humors by {wear by the habirof the body, and by gest deco- 
purging by the belly forthatas muchurine, fo alfo much fweat thewes lucleevie 
by ftoole. For thefe two motions are contrary, which narure cannot brooke 

once. For purging drawes from the circumferenc, co the Center, but (weat runs Hiv. aph, alt. 
quite contrary courfe,and this is the opinion of m2 y & great phyfiuins.This firtt 
jecotion being boyled out, & ftrained the like quantity of water fha!l be put cro the 

tufle,or mafle,that {o being boyled again without any further infufion, & trained, 

with che addition of a little cinamon for the ftrengchening of the ftomacke, the pa- 

‘ent may ufe itat his meales, and betweene his meales, if he be dry, for his ordina- 

ydrinke. The quantity of che firft decoction to be taken at once, ought to be fome 

weor fixe ounces, and it fhall be drunke warm, that fo it may be the fooner brought |, ; 
moacion. and left the a€tuall coldacfle fhould offend the ftomacke and then the 
patient being well covered, fhall keep him {elf in bed, and there expe@ fwear, which thi decogtion 
ititcome flowly on, it fhall bee helped forwards wich ftone borcles filled full of hoc 
water, and put tothe foles of the feet. [f any parts in the interim (hall bee much pai- ‘ : 
ned, they fhall bee comforted by applying of {wines bladders halfe filled with the -2"°°69'" 
lime decoétion heated. Neither willit bee unprofitable before the decoction bee ey 
dtunke,rorubbe over all the body with warme linnen clothes, that by this meanes 

he humours may be attenuated, and the pores of the skinne opened, When he thal 

have {weat fome two houres,the parts oppofite tothe grieved places, fhall fist be wi- 

ped, then prefently, but more gently, the gricved parts themielves, left agreater 

confluxe of humours flow thereto. Thefe things being done,he fhall keep himiclf 

inbed. thunning the cold aire untill he be cooled and come to himfelfe againe,fome 

(Wo houres after, hee (hall fo dine, asthe Cifeafe and his former cultome (hall feeme 

‘require fixe houres after, betaking himfelfe to his bed, hee hall drinke the like 

qwantity of the decoction, and order himfelfe as before. Burit he be cither weake, 

u Weary of his bed, it (hall bee fufficientto keepe the houfe without lying downe, 

for although he fhall not{weate, yet there will be a great difipation of the vapours, 

Nd venenate {pitits, by infenfible cranfpiration ; forthe Laces venerea by the oncly 
‘ommunication of thefe, often times catcheth hold, and propagates it felfe in lying 

With a bedfellow tainted therewith. Bat asit is requifire to have let blood , and pur- 


std the body by the advife of a phyfitiat, ‘before the taking of the cecoction of 


. {> whileft bee doth take it, it much conduceth to keeperhe belly foluble 


(which 


Concerning the Lues Venerea. Lis, to, 


— 


(which is much bound by the heat & drineffe of fuch a drink)andto preferve the py 
rity of the firft veines by a glyfter,or laxative medicine taken every fifth,or fix, rg 
But for the ufc of it, we muft warily obferve, taking indication not one] Y trom i 
decottion mut Malignity, and contumacy of the difeafe, butalfo from the particular nature o§ ne 
beufed. patient ; for fuch as have their body wafted by heat and leaneneffe, and their Skinne 
dry and fcaily (whence you may gather agreat aduftion ofthe humours, and, as i 
were, acertaine incineration of the habit of the body) muft more {paringly make 
ufe of thefe things, but rather temper the bodyby humecting things taken inwardly 
and applyed outwardly, asbathes, ointments without quickfilver, and othe, fuch 
likethings. Andthen avery weake decoction of Guajacum fhall bee uled fora fey, 
dayes before yourunétion with Quicke-filver. A more plentiful dict, as it draives 
The manner of forth the difeafe, which of its owne nature is long, fo a more {paring and {lende, di. 
et makes the ulcers more rebellious and contumacious, by a hecticke drineffe, 
Therefore a middle courfe mutt be kept, and meats made choice of which are ¢; 
and naturally engendergood and laudible juice in the body. For it is not only oreat 
ignorance, but much more cruelty, to goe about to conteinc all patients withoy 
ny difference, within the ftraic allowance of four ounces of Ship-bisket, andtwe'y. 
damaske prunes: for I judge it farrebetter to diet the patient with Lambe, Veale, 
Kid, Pullets, fat Larkes, and Blackerbirds, as thofe which havea farre greater fa. 
miliarity with our bodies, than Prunes and the like Junkets. Let his breac bee ma: 
of white wheat, wellleavened, neither too new, or tough, neither too old or hard. 
Let his drinke be made of the maffe, or ftrainings of the firft deco@ion of Gwajseny, 
boiled with more water, as was formerly mentioned ; yetif there arife any ores 
weakeneffe of the faculties, you may permit the ufe of fome little Wine, drinking ef 
To whom,and pecially before each mealea cup of the laft mentioned decoction. Let him avoyd 
prefently aftermeat, for fo the head is filled with groffe vapoures. Paffions 
low. gt perturbations of the mind muft alfo be avoyded, for that by thefe the spirits are 
inflamed and diffipated ; all delights of honeft pleafure are to be defired, but vencry 
wholly avoyded, asthat which weakens allthe nervous parts. Many in fteadofa 
decofion of Guajacum,ufea decoction of China. Now this Chinais the roote ofa 
Corcain rath, knotty,rare,8& heavie,when it is frefh, but light when it is waxed old, itis 
alf> without fmell, whence many judge it voyd of any effectuall quality ,ir is broughe 
inco ufe out of India, itis thus prepared, it is cut into thin rourd flices,boy!d in four- 
caine or river water,and is given to patients to drink morning and evening after this 
The prepriati- manner. K.rad, chin. in taleol ii. aque font Wxii. infundantur per hor. 
gusntur ad con{unsption.tertia partis, Let him take 5 vi.inthe morning,and fo 
night ; let himexpect a {wear inhis bed: afecond decoction may be made of th: 
mafic remaining of the fir, but witha leffe quantity of water put thereto,which allo 
by longer boyling may draw forth the ftrength remaining inthe mafic, & be ufedat 
meals for ordinary drink. There are fome who make a third deco@tion therof,utha 


is wholy unprofitable and unafefull. Sar/aparilla is prepared alfo jult after the {ame 
oO manner. 


How long this 


CuHap. IX. 


Of the fecond macuer of curing the Lues venerea, which ss performed 
by friction, or unction. 


He cure ofthe Lues vencrea which is performed by unction and fricuons 
More. certaine, yetnot inevery kinde, condition and {ealon thereof For 
if the difcafe bee inveterate from an humour, tough, groffe, vilc ous, 
more tenacioufly fixed in the folid parts, as you may gather by the kno! 
belore unction. tumours ofthe bones; forthen weare fo farre from doing any good witha fridti0 
ufedat the firft, that onthe contrary wee bring the patient in danger of bis life, 38 
leffe we thal! have firft prepared the humour to expulfion, by emollient & digeftins 


W henthebo- 
dy mutt de, pre- 


things firftufed. Burif it be lately taken with moveable paines, puftles,and ulcers . 


he jawes,¢ 


ratives, el pe 
ir felfe, and 
rerwards CO 


rie infide. qT 
melilote, anc 
ments and p! 
sround in ai 
thatby this a 
which purpe 
after. tis 
pentine, nuts 
with the Lue. 
things {hal} t 
fhall be done 
if the patient 
make choice 
replenithed \ 
then (ballem 
ments may h 
or {ixe yolke 
led Vigoes. 

rac. liquid, 5 
oderif. by 
ade lythargyt 
vive, iv. 
“i Mentum ad 
8. 
let ter: bint |, 
ef, 
dered, then { 
piciencly af; 
Ins and mix 


_ 
ww, 
paflech thro 
| 
| 
7 
; 
| the for; 
them ai] be b 
ae q J ax 
a whichth 
we very frer 
j > itu = 


Lin. Ip, 


| 
preferve the pu. 
ry fifth or fixr day 
onely from the 
cular mature of th. 
ife,and their Skinne 
and, as jr 
ore {paringly make 
ipstaken inwardly 
ver, and other fuch 
ufed fora fey 
I dict, as it drawes 
ring and {lender dj. 
icke drinefle. 
pice Of which are fit, 
it is not only Prear 
| patients without a. 
mp-bisket, and twelve 
with Lambe, Veale. 
ive a farre greater fa. 
this bread bee made 
ther too old or hard, 
‘coGion of G acum 
there arife any great 
tle wine, drinking ef- 
tion. Let him avoyd 
fe vapoures. Paffions 
rthefe the spirits are 
pe defired, but vencry 
ss Many in ftead of a 
‘hinais the roore ofa 
itis waxed old, itis 
| quality,it is brought 
flices,boyld in foun- 
id evening after this 
per hor. xii. 
ming,and fo much ac 
may be made of the 
at thereto,which 
he mafic, & be ufedat 
oion therof,buthat 
fo after the fame 


Pr, performed 


Aion and friduos § 
d {cafon thereof: 
erofie, vifcous, 

y gather by the knotty 


round in a mortar, that itmay bee broken andfe 


y good witha friction 
danger of bis life, up 
emollient X 
puftles,and ulcer he 


iawes,throate, and privie parts, then may it beveafily cured without fach 
an efpecially if the humour be fufficiently obedient, and as it were prepined of 


-¢lfe,anditsowne nature. Therefore firft ufing genetall medicines, you 
route the uncion with 1 may af- 


CuHap. X, 


Of the choice, preparation and mixing of Hydratgyrum. 


drarcum which iscleere, thinne, white and fluide, isthe bef: onthe 
Ba contrary, that whichis livid, and nor fo fluide, isthought to be adulte- 
{AA fp raced by the admixture of fomelead. Thatie may be the purer, ftraine it 
through fome fheepes leather, for by preffing it, when itis bound up, ic 


| affzth through by its fubtlety, and leaves the filth and leaden droflebehinde it on 


je infide. Then it may be boyled in vinegar with fage,rofemary, timé, chamomile, 


| melilote, and ftrained againe, thatfo many waies cleanfed, it may enter into oint- 


nents and plaifters. Tokillit more furcly, it thall bee long wroughr, and as it were 


‘hacby this meanes it may notbee ableto gather it felfe into the former body: ‘to 
which purpofe you may allo adde fome fu/phur, or {ublimate, as we fhall thew here- 
fer. Iris moft ufually mixed with hogs greafe, adding thereto fome oyle of tur- 


entine, nutmegs, Cloves, fage, and Galens treacle. Ifa Lewcophlecmatiatogether 
withthe Lues venerca affect the body, then hor, attenuating, cutting, and dryin 


rx: How to kill ap.’ 
parated into moft {mall particles, 


things fhall be added to the medicine, which fhall be provided far unétion; the fame What tomixe 
hall bedone when as we would have it to enter into the fubftance of the bones. Bur“ 


ifthe patient be of acholericke temper, and his blood eafie to be inflamed, you fhall 
make choice of leffe hot, attraCtive and difcuffing things. As when the body fhall be 


eplenifhed with knotty and {cirrhous tumours, or {qualide by exceffive dryneffe, 


then hall emollient and humecting things bee mixed therewith. But that fuch oint- 
mentsmay have a better confiftence, | ufe to adde to each pound thereof,four,five, 
orfixeyolkes of hardegges. Therefore this fhall be the forme of the ointment cal- 


kd V KX, axing. porct, 1b j, chamam. anethi maltich, & laurint, an An unttion 
ut, liquid,5 x. rad. enula, camp. parum trite, ebuli, an. Siti. pul. euphorb.3 


| bulliant omnia firul ufque ad conf{umpitonem vint, deinde calentar.colaturea 


dic lythargyraauri, Vi.thuris, maflich.an. 5 vi.ref.pini, 8. tereb. venet. 3 i. areca. 
alba, 5 i8. liquefactss oles, cum ceraincorporcntur omnia fimul, fiat Li- 
mentum ad ufum, Or elfe, argenti vivi preparati, vi. [ablimiti, 5 6. fulpbaris 


axung. porce, falisexpertes, 1b j.vitellos ovorum cineribus coctorwws, nw. iii. 


tercbinth. lawrint, an. 3 ii. theriac. vet. methridat. 5. fiat linimentums ut ar- 


Youthall compofe it thus, firft the /ablimatum and fulpbur thall be finely pou. 


cred, then fome part of the /rzentum vivem and hogs greafe putto them, then 


me ciently after, fome of the hard yolkes of egges, continually and diligently ftir- 


‘iNgandmixing them allrogether. Allthefe being well incorporate, adde fomte 
arzewtum vioum, hogges greafe, and yolks of egges, ‘and incorporatethem 
with the former ; at the laft adde the oiles, then Treacle, and Mithridate, and fo let 
‘tem all be beaten together for a whole daies {pace,and thus you fball make an oint- 


neat ofa good confiftence, which Ihave often ufed with good fucceffé. Yet the Howto prepare 
eee greafe fhall be firft boyled with the hot herbs good for the finewes, as fage, thehoggreafe 


‘olemary, time, marjerome, lavander, and others which the feafon affoords. For fo. 
the akwagiaacquires amore attenuating faculty, and confolidating of thofe parts 
ch the Lwes vemerca afflicts.Befides, when unguenrts are made for this purpofe,thar wth. 
h vitulency may be drawne from within outwards, by {weats and tranfpiration 
“oughthe poresoftheskinne, no man need doubt, but that they oughtto be fur- 


with relaxing, rarifying,and attractive faculties. But 4xunzia,befides that it is 


fitto kill the argemtum italforelaxeth and mollifieth. Now O/ewm 
de (pica; rutacenm, rarific, digeft, andaffwage paine. Turpentine alfo 
guifhet 


cefore you mixe 
the argentum 
vivumthere 


4 

7 

/ 

| 
| 
| 
| 
4 


— 


732 Concerning the Lues Venerea. Lis, to, 


guifheth, and bridleth the 47g entumvivum, moderately heates, rclolves and 
theas the nervous parts. Butargextem isthe proper antidote of the / we; 
verea,asthat which cures it howfoever ufed, drying by the fubtlety of the parts,ang 
provoking fiveat. Verily Treacle and Methiridate fomewhat conduce to retung 
virulency of this difeafe, butunleffe argewtom vivem aflift asa ferretto hunt, and... 
slexiteriam toimpugne the difeafe, they can doe no great matter. 


Cuar. XI. 


How toufethe kuction. 


He body and humours aptto caufe or nourith a plethora or inflammation 


Ma. being prepared by digeftive fyrupes, and evacuated by purging and ble. 
ent ding as is fitting, according to the direction of fome Phy fitian, the parien, 


GEES (1,011 be fhut up in a parlour or chamber,hot cither by nature or art, & {¢¢ 
from cold blafts of wind. For cold is moft pernitiousin this dileafe, both for thar}: 
eT cach hurts the nervous parts,already ill affected by reafon of the difeafe, as alfo for that} 


hul full To Cuch 
esareroubled Jeflens theefficac 


y of medicines. Wherefore many doe ill in this, who, whether in 


the inter or fummer,anoint their patients in a large room,expoled onevcry fideto the 
winds. They deale fomewhat more wifely, who puta cloath faftened like halfe, 
tent prefently behinde the patient, though anointed by the fire fide, foto keepaway 
the coldaire from him. Yerit is fafeft to fet, and anoint the patient either in alinie 
roome, or elfe in fome corner of a large roome, feparated from the reft of the room 
by fome hangings, and building a ftove, or making fome fire therein, for fo he may 
ftand or fit as he beft likes, the longer, and with the lefle offence, and be equally hea. 
tedonevery fide, whereas fuchas are anointed in a chimney by a fires fide cannor 


but be heated unequally, being ready to burneon the one fide, whileft the otheris _ 


cold, which motions are contrary and hurtfull tothat we require : befides, if the pz. 
tienc {hall bee weake, hee cannot ftandand endure the heat of the fire. Or if hee bee 
fhamefac’r, he will bec unwilling to fhew all his body at once naked to the Surgeos, 
but he may without any harme, and with modefty, lying ona bed in alittle roome, 
wherein a ftove is made, have all his limmes anointed about the joiats,2nd prefeat'y 


bound up, either with ftoupes, or carded cotton, or browne paper. 


= 


CHape. 


What cautions tobe obferved in rabbing or anointing the patient. 


E (hall be anointed or rubbed over with the ointmér in the morning, tit 


& diftribution of the meat being perteded, which funtt 
~ ONS otherwife would not be well performed,the powers of nature De- 
venicnely done, gy) ing diftracted into feverall operations. Yet if the patient fhall be wees 
mutt beancin- youmay fome houre before the un@ion,give him fomegelly, 


ted faftine. 
~ ofan egge, or fome broath made of meate, boiled to pieces, but very {paring!y,!* 


nature, intencupon the concoGion of folid meats, or in great quantity, bee 


drawne away from that which we intend. Atfift let oacly the joints of mc limes 


{nwhat plaees be anointed, as about the wretts, elbowes, knees, anckles, fhoulders.Buraftcrwat 
thebodymut ifthe patient fhallbe more ftrong, anda greater commotion of the humours and 


dy feem neccffary theemunctories of the principall parts may alfo be anointed 
the whole {pine of the backe ; yet having much care, and alwaics fhunning the we 


cipall and noble parts, left we fhould doe as thofe butcherly Emperickes doc, # 
equally, andin like mannerdaube and rubbe over allthe body, from the 
of the feete, to the crowne of the head: moreover, diligent regard mutt bee ha 
thofe parts, which are feazed upon by the fymptomes of this difeafe, that they 


dol 


may 
bec more anointed, and that it may belmore throughly rubbed in. Yet you = . 


[.1B.19 
waics begt 
rhe humou 
tle fricatio 
ones th 
Woaeretore 
fom che {ti 
There is al! 
as chat, wht 
tient, orm 
unctions, 2 
which ts of 
of, much tr¢ 
conjectural 
your by mec 
we may atta 
knowledge 
fixe, more o 
isa thing bi 
cording tot 
affected bod 
lent humour 
{weat or infec 
drying up o 
fomMes prope 
bireotrhe 
ricace that ir 
ning, fixe h 
fingie fritiog§ 
celle, rubye 
one ortwod 
of their {pir 
morbitick IT} 
When as the 
Ous humors 2 
m 
When asthe dim 
Mttour blog 
Hull obferye 
Mouth, tool. 
"Ce ina dave 
thus M 
bei 
puted ina d 
“cted by him| 


‘ 
| | 
“Ween for 
OY the In 
| times. 
ved and Weak 
Nor 
skind 
Ue. 
vir 
ir the 
Ciene 
| tandin 
Wearin 
ture 88 in his 


Lis, 10, 


refolvesand ftreng 
dote of the 
lety of the parts ang 
nduce to retund th. 
erretto bunt, and <p 


ora Or inflammation, 

by purging and blee. 

gP hy fician, the patient 
y nature or art, & free 
ifeafe, both for thar it 
{cale, as alfofor that jt 
this, who, whether in 
ed onevcry fide to the 
h faftened like halfeg 
¢ fide, foro keepaway 
Moatient cither in alittle 
im the reft of the room 
therein, for fo he may 
ce, and be equally hea- 
By by a fires fide cannot 
de, whileft the other is 
: befides, if the pa- 
t the fire. Or if hee dee 
naked to the Surgeon, 
a bed in alittle roome, 
joints,and prefently 


pa per. 


the patient. 


the morning, the 
rtc@ted, which funeti- 
Bc powers of natures 
patient fhall be was 
mfomegelly, he ye 
ut very {parin ely, 
at quantity, frouid 
he joints of limme 


y alfo be anointed,a® 


aics fhunning the we 
foles 
hadof 


Em perickes doc, 
the 


‘Nthiskiade of difeafe nature doth nor of it felte endeavour any Crifis, or ¢xcre- Natureis not 
it requires the auxiliary forces of medicines, by whofcafliftance it may expel] able 
Milignity. Phefe are fignes of fuch a Crifis, either at hand, or already prelent, 
Piticue be {9 reftleff, fo loath all things, that hee cannot remaine in one place dignes tha we 


anit or lying,he can neither eat nor drinke, if he beop 
Wea 


in his belly affli@t him wich bloody & vifcous dejections, untill at length na- 
iro 


ytthe humours and f 


ore 


Coneertiing she Lues Venerea. 
aiics begin your anointing or rubding at thofe parts which are leffe offended, kc ft nee 
sae humours {hould be drawne in greater meafure tothe grieved part. And as gen- 
je frications do not fafhiciently open the pores of the skin, fo more ftrong and hard 
snes (hat them up, caufe paine, and more plentifully attra@& the marbificke matter. 

waerefore it will be more convenient to ufe moderate friGions, taking indication 

Gon che ftrengea of the patient,as that whereto we maft ftill have the chiefe regard. 

There is alfo another ching wherto che phyfitian & Surgeon muft diligently attend, 

ssthat, which if it be not carefuily prevented, will either haften the death of the pa- 

ent, or make him fabje@ toa relapfe; thatis, the quantitie of che remedies and 

saaions, and che numer of che frictions. Which confideration, together with that 

which is ot che degrees of the temperaments of the whole body,andeach part there- 

of, much troubles and exercifeththe mindes of good Phyfitians, and makech the art Wherts tech 
conjectural, 1s fo farre from being attainedto by Empericks. Yet we muft endea-. thie 
your by method and reafon,that by the rule of indications fo trequenrly mentioned, & byft-k con- 
wemay attaine tothe knowledge thereof, as neare as may bee. For to nave perfect 
inowledge hereof,and to fay that thofe need only foure, others five, ind other (ome 

jxe, more or fewer friGions at the beginning, which Emperu kes commonly doe, 

sa thingboth impoffidle and vaine. Allthcfe mutt bee chanzed and ordered ac- 

cording tothe malignity andcontinuance ofthe difeafe, andthe condition ofthe 
ffedted bodies. Verily wee muft fo long ufe frictions and un¢tions ,untll the viru- 

int humours bee perfectly evacuated by {pitting and falivacion, by ftoole, urine, 

(eat or infenfible tranfpiration. Which you may under{tand by the falling away & 

drying up of the puftles and ulcers, and the ceafing of the paines and other iy mp- 

tomes proper to this difeafe. In many, by reafon of the nore denie and com» act ha- Who mutt be 
bite ot the body, nature is more flow in excretion. Yet I have learnt by long expe. “2d over. 
ricncethat it is beft to anoint and chafe fuch twice in a day,to wir, inorning andeve- 
ning, fixe houres after meate. For foyou fhall profit more.in oae day, than by the whe bur every 
fngie friions of three dayes. But on the contrary, Ihave often, and with good fuc- 

cle, rubbed over buteach other day more rare and delicate bodies, giving them 

oe ortwo dayes reft co recolle& their ftrength, which by theroo much aiifolurion 

of their [pirits becomming too weak, were not fuffacient to expell the clicks of the 

novbifick matter.And certainly about theend ofthe appointed friction, e{pecially 

when asthe patients begin tofluxe at the mouth, the bodies, together with the noxi- 

wu hunors are made fo fluid by the means of the precedent frictions,that one fri@i- } 
m ore etficacious,than two were ar the beginning. T hereforeas Galen bids, zis, de vene 02. 
Wienasthe difeafe is great, and cheftrength ofthe paticntinfirme, that weefhould 
‘tour blood leceings,and draw a little and a little at once; foalfo here when as we 

Aullobferve nature ftirred up, and ready bento any kinde of evacuation by the 


ftoole, or other like, you ought not to ufe any unction or friction oftner than 


day, yea certainely it willbee betterto intermit for fome few dayes. For 


reports, that there was acertaine man who almoft wafted with acon- 
being continually afflicted with the moft grievous paines of this difeafe, & 
“puted ina defperate cafe by other phyfitians, was nocwirhf{tanding at length reco- 
‘sted by him, when as hee had anointed him thirty feventimes, putting {ome time 
“ctWeen for che recovery of his (trength. I my felf have obferved others, who thus, 
*) the interpofition of one or two dayes, being rubbed over fome fittcene or {even- 
“se times, have perfe@ly recovered. Wheretore you muft take this courfe in refol- 
“Cand weake bodies, yet in the interim muft you have acare, thatthe frictions bee 


. 
Weak and fo few,that the morbifick caufe may notbe touched tothe quick: 


to expell the vi- 
> rulent mattc?. 


prefled witha con. atch 
rineffe, almoit ready to fiwoune, yet have a good and equall pulfe, and 


ne or two dayes, pertion of the morbifick matter being fpent,be fomwhat 
Qqq treed 


4 
* 
4 
a | 
ma 
difeafe, that cacy 
§ AP 
et yOu | 
d 


734 Concerning the Lues Vene 


rea. L 1B, 19, 


— 


freed, arid all painesand {ymptomes fo much abated, asthe excretions have pto, 
ceeded. But whereas medicines are not fufficient in number or ftrength, there 
lowes an unperfe& Crifis,which leaves behind it fome relicks of the morbifick ve 
ter,which like leven do fo by little & little infect the whole mafs of the humors tha 
Inconvenien oft-times after ten years {pace,the difeafe rifeth as out of an ambuth,or lurking bole 


cevfollowing 454 becomes farre worle than before. But wee muftin like maner have a cr. len 


Sesieiiaa thefe medicines, that are either given inwardly, orapplyed outwardly, be nottog 


{trong : for by caufing fuch colliquation of the radical! moifture and folid parts.ma, 
ny have been brought into an incurable confumption. In others fordid and Putride 
ulcershave thence arifen in the mouth, which having eaten a great part of the pal. 
late and congue, have degenerated intoa deadly Caxcer. In others hereupon the 
if | tongue hath fo {welled up, that it hath filled the whole capacity of the mouth, fo thar 
# it could not be bended to any part ofthe mouth for chawing, whereupon they have 
q by little and little beene famifhed. In other fome there hath beene caufed {o great 
colliquation of humours,that fora whole moneth after,tough and filthy flaver 
ie continually flowed out of their mouths. Orher fome have the mutcles of thej; jawes 
relaxed ; others troubled with aconvulfion, fo that during the reft of their lives they 
canfcarce gape. Others by lofing a portion of their jaw, have loft fome of thei 
tceth. But youmuft not alwaies fo long anoint and chafe the body, untill a fuxe os 
the mouth or belly appeare. For you may finde fundry perfons, who, if you fhoulg 
anoint or rub chem to death,you cannot bring them to fluxe at the mouth ; yet thee 
will recover notwithftanding,excretion being made either by infenfible tran{piray 
on,or evacuation of urine,or fome gentle fluxe of the belly, either procured by art,or 
comming of it felfe. In which cafe I have obferved that many have received much 
good by a purging deco&ion of Guaj acum, adininiftred according to the quantity of 
For what per- the peccant humor, and given tor {ome dayes in the morning 5 adding thereto white 
| forsapurging wine, if the body abounded with tough and vilcide humours. Dy/enteryes, Or 
bloody: fluxes caufed by un@ions,may be helped by Glyfters, w herein much hogs. 
shy goud. orealc is diffolved to rotund the acrimony caufed by the medicine and humor which 
Thecureofa noyritheth the Dyfentery. Alfonew Treacle diflolved in new milke, is though 


Dyilent -ry oe- he 
‘ calion-d by too Wonderfully to mitigate this fymptome. 


ftrong iriction. 


Cuar. XIII. 


Of the shird manner of Cure, which is performed by cerates, and emplafiers, 
asthe fubflitntes of unctions. 


shy Or that fundry by reafon of the name, abhorre the ufe of frition, whic! 
se gs is performed by the forementioned ointments, therefore there is found 
our another manner of cure, by cerates and emplatters, as fubftiturcs of 


FriQions, but that ufually is {omewhar flower : for which purpo-«" 


Thecureby SSS**=™ is not ncedfull onely to ufe the things which are defcribed by 716" 
copes you may alfo devife other, which are morc or leffe 
more difcuffing, or drying according to the condition of the prefent difeale, 
, humors and patient,never omitting Hydrargyrum, the onely antidore of this ditealt 


Such emplafters mitigate paines andknots, and refolve all hardnetfe, andare ablo- 
Inwhatca  lutely very effetuall for continually flicking to the body,they continually 
they a chiefly Wherefore they are of prime ufe in relapfes of this difeafe,or when the humour . 
3 thicke and vifcous, or otherwifle lye deepe inthe body, aad very difficultto" 
is out. But forthat they worke more flowly ofttimes, fuch as ufe them are force 
3 length toufe fome friGionsto ftimulate nature,and caufe the {peedier excretio® 
in fome whofe bodies and humours have beene fluid, either by nature or aft,'™" i 
plyed emplaftershave inthree dayes {pace procured evacuation fufficient fo! 
difeafe, forharif they 


trong dete 
Which will « 
gently clea 
things. Th 
lo to hinde 


had not beene taken away, they would have cau{ed 
quation,like that which we latcly mentioned in tgo violent fri@ion. Wherelo! 


L 138.19 
‘hall ulethe 
ulet 
In ftead 
oxyer 
empla/ 
che fame pla 
Yet fome 
ven to the 
ends ofthet 
joints bee cc 
long, untill 
mours. Yct 
off fo long u 
momile, me 
fed the icchir 
any itch, ta 
keepe it from 
itching. 
fpace, as lon 
Theeffects « 
while by inf 
fometumes b 
livation. S 
gummes by 
the fides of 
mollient thi 
the humours 
{clfe may en 
There ar 
time when a 
fafe courfe. 
they ought | 
be, but one! 
and thar by 1 
ring of vilci, 
held and 
lowes 
of the wall, 
the tenaciry 


7 
uch ulcers 
of 
| ‘ 
Mout! 
a 


KCretions have pro. 1 gferhe like difcretionin taking off thefe, as you ufe in your undtions and fri@i- 

trength, there fo}. Ia ftead of deVigo,chis following may be fitly nfed.R, cmp. de melih, The detcripti- 

the morbifick mar. argents Uivsextsn. 5 laurino, Gy de (pica reducantwr adfor- 
Bs of the humors that emplafir. Thefe platters muftbe equally {pread upon leather, and layd upon 
ufh,or lurking hole she fame places ofthe joints, as were formerly mentioned inthe cure by frictions, 
aner have acare left vet fome there bee, who cover with the plafter allthearme, from the hand e- 
twardly, be nottoo ven to che fhoulder, and all the legge, from the toppe of theknee, even tothe 
and folid parts,ma. iggsofthe toes, which thing I doe nor difallow of, if fo bee thatthe places of the 
rs fordid and putride ints bee covered over witha thicker plafter. They muft bee left ticking there fo 
preat part of the pal. long, untill haute Os ftirred up and provoked to caufe excretion of the virulent hu- 
others hereupon the jours Yetifin the interim, great itching fhall arife in the parts,you may take them 
of the mouth, fo thar off fo long untill the parts fhall be fomented with a decoction of the flowres of cha- 
hereupon they have | nomile, iclilote, red rofes, and che like, madein wine, to difcuffe that which cau- 
beene caufed foprear ym ithe irching, aad then you may lay them onagaine. Some, to hinder the rifing of 


and filthy flaver hath say itch, lay notthe bare plafter tothe part, but cover it over with farcenet, foto 
mufcles of their jawes from fticking, and thus intercept the tran{piration of the part, the caufe of 
reft of their lives they xching. They bee Rronger or weaker, andlyetro the part a longer or fhorter 
Raveloft {ome of ther long as the indications, fo often formerly mentioned, fhall feem to require. 
body, untill a fuxe of Theeffects of emplatters arethe fame as of frictions, for they caule excretion, one 
Ens, who, ifyoufhould | ahile by infenfible tran{piration, otherwhiles bya Diarrhea, or fluxe of the belly, 
tthe mouth; yet thele by but moft frequently (which Crifis isalfo molt certaine) by fa- 
infenfible tran{pirati. Sordide and virulent ulcers often breed in the mouth, tongue, pallace,and Whar excreti- 


th cured byart,or sommes by falivation,by reafon of the acrimony of the virulent humors adhering to 07 inthis 
ma Be thclides of the mouth:to hinder the growth of thefe,many inject glyfters made oF 
ng to the quantity of acthe beginning of the falivation, foro draw downwards 


Me ‘chumours forcibly flying up in greater quantity than is fit, alchough the part ic 
ifemay endure them. 
There are alfo fome, whotothe fameend givea pmging medicine at the very Toavoydthe 
@ iimcwhenasthe humours are ready to move upwards, the which [ thinke is not a “ss 
Me iifccourfe. The cure of fuchulcers is farre different from the cure of others. For Tocurethem. 
they ought by no meanes tobee repercufled or repelled, how enflamed foever rhe 
but onely to bee mitigated by anodyne gargarifmes, fo onely to leflen the hear, 
by this frequent wathing of the mouth, you may hinder the {ticking or fur- 
‘ing of vilcide humours to fuch like ulcers. A decoctton of barly, cowes milk warm, 
ieldand gargled in the mouth, the mucilages of the feeds of mallowes, marfhmal- 
Owes, pilrums, lettuce, line extracted in the water of barly, mallowes, and pellitory 
othe wall, are good for this purpofe; for thus the ulcers become more milde, and 
Mm etenacity of the adherent humoursis loofed. You muft at the firft beware of 
ongdetergent medicines, foralmoftall fuch nave acrimony joyned with them, 
Kion,which | Mbich will encreafethe pain, buc chiefly in the ftate of the difeafe : tor fo, the ulcers 
Sherefore there'is found scntly cleanfed by frequent gargling, would become worfe by the ufe of acride 
laters. as fubftitures t | rae Therefore it fhall be fufficienttro make ufe of the forementioned medicines, 
p pur pole hinder the encreafe of the filth, and inflammation of the alcers, if fo bee that 
y ‘hed by but ulcers be not too exceeding maligne and burning. For if it shall happen either 
oll dy the powerfull efficacy of the applyed plafters, or by the violence of nature in its 
dif fe iymptomes; ation of the ill humours upwards, that fuch ftore of vifcous, and groffe humours 
3 *his difeale- | are carryed tothe mouth, that it wants little, but that the part itfelfe is over-ruledb 
yanti Morbificke matter, fothat bythe violence and continuance ofthe fluxe, the 
| hardnetic, ally operate: Youth and jawes become fo (welled, thata gangrene is to be feared, by hindering 
hey contine of the [pirits, and extinzuifhing of the native heat of thele parts. In this 
cafe forcedto leave the prone forto withftand the accidents, and for 
q orced st BB Purpole we ufe reftriGive & repelling things, fuch as are barly warer, plantain, “Os 
ufethem are fc “ight-fhade, knot-graffe, Purte, Be, with fyrupe of 
pre or art, the Deties, pomegranates, &c. alfo fuch are the mucilages and decoétions of the 
er by nat ficient for phe Of lettuce, p/ilium, quinces, plantaine, cucumbers, melons, whice poppy, hen- 
vacuation i colli: | Al inthe waters of rofes, plantaine, night-fhade, water-lillies, wood bine, &c. 
* itis convenient to procure {weats by ftoves, or the application of any hotand 


Qqq2 ary 


y, adding thereto white 
ours. Dylenteryes, or 
wherein much hogs- 
icine and humor which 
new milke, is thought 


ana emsplafiers 


Nt 
a. 


Concerning the Lues Venerea. 


To dry the ul- 
cers of che 


fluxing or falivation you matt diet and feed the patient with liquid meats, anq gdor asus, 4/) 

of good juice, and eafie digeftion, forthatchen he can neither chaw, {wallow refolve and 

digeft hard things. For nature wholly intent upon the excretion of the noxioys lity of the « 

peccant humours, as alfo weakened by the bitcernefle of paine, watchings, andy, manner, but 
~quietneffe, and confequently a grear, refolution of the {pirits, cannot infit power. this manne 

tully upon the worke of concoction. Therefore he fhall be fed with reare new jy, 

Manne: of cieregges, caudles of the fame, varly creames, culefles made of a decodion of knuck |e ftich, copro 

ee aan veale, andacapon, and gellyes, and with thefe in {mall quantity, but frequently chifces with 
adminiftred, alwaies gargling his mouth before hee eate. For his drinke he thal| cis mo{chat. 

_ adecoction of Guajacum aromatized with alittle cinamon,but it any defire that thy forelaid ufc 
rr drinke (hall become nourifhment, farthat the patients cannot feed on more {olig are added tc 
thing. meats, you may give them old wine, claret andthinne, mixed with fome barly w;, not be fum: 

ter. Some there are who fteep {ome crummes of pure manchet in the aforefaid wine K, cimmabarl® 
and then preffe it out,but yet fo, that there may fome part of the bread remain there. (iS, thMrss, & 
in, which may make it morenourifhing, and leffe tharpe or acride. Others ftee 
bread hot out of the oven, in wine, forthe {pace ofa night, then they diftill irallo. 
ver in balneo Ataria; the liquor which firft comes over is more {trong and hot, bur 
that which flowes out afterwards, more milde, and fuchas the patient may ufeto 
mixe with his wine without any danger,for his better nourifhment, and the recove. 
ry of his ftrength. 
For to refreth the {pirits in fear of tainting, Muskedine, Hippocras, rofe vinegir, 
and the like, putto the nofe to {mell to, will be fufhcienr, unleffe peradventure the 
patient fhould naturally abhorrefuch things, for fothey would rather dejedthe 
powers and fpirits. Inthe interim you muft have care of the belly, that you keepit 
open by gentle and emollient glyfters. 
or. gence to fut 
ON,are nor 
Of the fourth manner of curiag the Lues venerea. lien 
to make uf 
Virulency 
Keflary tha 
acrimony ¢ 
Bt 
upon. of their lives have ftinking breaths. Yea many whilethey have beene thus hanaice, ‘Oi. ter 
: have beene taken hold of by aconvulfion, and a trembling of their heads, hands, 
legges, with a deafeneffe, apoplexic,and laftly miferable death, by reafon 0 the 4 
ligne vapours of fulphurand quickfilver, whereof ciwmabaris confifts, 
by their mouth, nofe, and all the reft of the body. Wherefore I can never 4p?! a 
the ufe of fuch fumigations which are tobee received infumes by the mouth g 
for to work upon the whole body’ yet I doe not ditlike of that,which 
onsgoad.  dertaken for fome one part onely; astodry upill conditioned tilcets,which 


dry things ; forthus the humours which run forth of the veflels into al 
of the body, are diverted. But whenasthe courfeof the humours ru 
- mouth, is beginning to ftoppe,. and thecumoursand ulcers begin to lefien, thenn 
thing hinders, butthat we may ule gently detergent things, as fyr. rofarum ficcer, 
mel rofatum, Diamoron, Dianucum, and thelike. But when it istime to 
cers, they may be lightly couched with alome water, or with aqua fortis fy 
mouth. (miths have ufed forthefeparation of mettals. They may alfo frequently uleg 
ing gargari{mes made with altriction of the waters of rofes, plantaine, Night-(h» 
theepheards purfe, knot graflc,and dogges tongue, boiling therein balauftie », 
myriil.fumach. alumen. acacta, berber. gala, malicor. and the like. During the 


tothe 


dry they! 
ch as old. 


ry. 
de 


it, that they cannot bee overcomeby any other meanes, or for todifperi¢ saa 
knots, or torcfolve fixed paines,otherwife unmoveable. Thefe funigatio”s (on 


uk 
colliqu 
hole dilea 
effell fillec 
| rhe y ma y Ol 
be 
ons »aS 
| 4 rorc 
ed 
| 
Th 


the Lues Venerea, 737 
fels into allthe a of the admixture of Argentum vivwm have an attenuating, cutting, refolving, 
MOUrS running colliquating faculty. Thofe who prepare thefe fumigations for the cure of the 
egin to leffen, then dileafe and body,takethiscourfe. They putthe patient under a tent or cano- Thecoumor 


rofarum ficcarry 
Cistime to dry they) 
fortis fuch ag old. 
ilo frequently ule dr 


plantaine, nig ht-fhad. 


ercin balauftia,rof 


ke. During the time of 
quid meats, and thofe 
er chaw, lwallow, Nor 
ion of the noxioys and 
le, Watchings, and un. 
cannot infilt power. 
-d with reare new layd 
deco@ion of knuckles 


antity, but frequently 


made clofe on every fide, left any thing thould expire, and they put in unto him a manner ofuting 
filed with hot coales, whereupon they plentifully throw Cinmabars, that fo 
they may onevery fide enjoy the rifing fume, juftafter the fame manner as Farriers 
ero fmoake their horfes for the glaunders : they repeat thisevery day fo long, un- 
they begia to fluxe atthe mouth. The principall matter or 4a/is of fuch tumigari- 
ons,as we have already noted, is Cinnabar confifting of /ulphur and arzentwm VivaMe 
nixed together ; there isaddedalfo, radsx ireos thus, olibanum, myrrha,juncus 
odorata, maftiche, tercbinthina, theriaca, allwhichbaveafzcultyto 
efolve and ftrengthen the fpiries, and nature, and correct the ftench and evill qua- 
lity of the argentum vsumme. Thereare alfo other fumigations made after another 
qanner, but chat alfo when as the arzentuns vivum is extinct.and as it were fixt after 
this manner ; let fone lead bee melted, and let there be powred or put thereto fome 
vivum, then letit all be poudred, adding thereto Antimony, Alocs, Ma- 
fich, coprofe, Orpiment, and Benjamin made into pouder, and framed into Tro- Trochiftes for 
chifces with fome turpentine. Or elfe, cimmabarss,3 i. fyraces rub. calam te ny. 


his drinke he {hal} ufe cus ane iii, oini, cxcipe terebinthin, fiant trochifer ponder ss ii. torthe 
ut it any defire that the forelaid ule. The terebinthina is added to incorporate the dry things, and the gums 
not feed on more folid ae added to ycild matterto the fume. But virulent ulcers of the Lues vencrea hall 
d with fome barly wa. not be fumigated before they be cleanfed : alfo this following fumigation is good. 
tin theaforefaid wine cimmabaris, 31. fPyracis, an. 38, mafliches, ma- 
he bread remain there. vi, tharts, an. 3 terebinthina, cy fiat affumizium, 
r acride. Others fteepe 
hen they diftill ital! o. : har 
ore {trong and hot, but CHap. XV. 
the patient may ufeto | 
pment, and the recove- The cure of the fymptomes, or [ymsptomaticke affects of the Lues venerea, 
and firftof theUlcersoftheYard. ~ 
ippocras, rofe vinegar, | 
lefle peradventure the S,Allous and maligne ulcers in this difeafe may grow all over the yard;but 
Ould rather dejea the We thefe arc far more maligne which arife on the prepuce, than thofe that 
belly, that you keep it Ua J, grow on the Glans, or nut of the yard. Now they are rebellious tothe more mializne 
\CQAR common medicines of ulcers which happen other waies,& they are al. 2nthotet 
fo {ubje@ to turne intoa gangrene, fo that fundry,who have not intime 
provided for themfelves by theufe of arzentum vivum, are torced for their negli- 
gence to fuffer the loffe of their G/ans, and ofttimes of theirwhole yard. Yer Iam 
Me opinion chat I chinke we mutt begin the cure of all ulcers of the yard with the ge- 
remedies of ulcers. Forallulcersarifing in thefe parts by realon of copulati- 
ie: mm = ,2renot virulent. But whenas we fhall finde that we doe no good by this meanes, 


and that the difeafe norwithftanding growes worfe and worfe, then muft we cone 


Lwes venerea, whichis tomakeufe of fuch things as receive argentum vivum,that by thee we may refit che 


ve hereof, by reaion of Virulency which is ready to difperfe it felfe over allthe body, yer it is abfolurely ne- 
for they infedt and ellary thatall thefe things be endued with fuch faculties as may retund the maligne 
dlungs, by whom they ‘ctimony of this venome, fuck an one is this rollowing colyrium of Lan franck, Lanfrancke: 
ients during the refidue albs ibj, Cy plantag. an. quatt. il. viridis aloes, myrrha, 
vebeene thus handle¢, %. Dil. teransur fabsilifsime, fiat collyrium. Alfo thefe ulcers may bee profitably 
of their heads, hands, ‘Wched with mercury water, or aqua fortis which the Gold{miths have ufed,or elfe 
th, by reafon of rhe 


Mercury inpouder, or our eeypsiacum: but the falling away of the Efchar fhall bee 
ocured with bafilicon,or butter. Yet I think it not fitco ule thefeacrid things 
Without very great caution, for fear of a gangrene,which eafily happensto this part. 

tif fuch ulcers are fo ftubborne, that they will not yeild tothele remedies, then 


ris confifts, drawne 
ore never approy 
mes by the month 38 


like of that, which 1s 0° Wecome to the fri@tion or unction of the groines,per:neum,and ulcers, with clic 
ed ticers, which fo ts formerly prefcribed for the generall friction. Alfo fumigations may bee 

for to difperic or diget wee mentioned in the former chapter. Forthusat leagth the malignity of 
hefe furnigatiozis by virulent humour will be overcome, and the callous hardneffe mollified;and laft- 


3 ly 


| 
| 


Lents, & in Fréch 


partic ulal re- 


Concerning she Lues Venerea. 


ly theulcersthemfelves cleanfed, and being cleanled,confolidated. Sometin.... 
rer the perfe@cure of fuchulcers, there will appeare manifelt fignes of the 
veresin maay, which fhewed not themfelves before, forthat the virulency Ao ne 
~ forth of the running ulcers, and now this vent being ftopt, it lowes backe am Wed 
-body,and thewes fignes thereof in other parts;and thefemen have need of 


4 Senera|! 
unction. | 

*thiswhica by 

our Author 
here termed 
angusia b- 


Cuarv.XVI. 


How a Gonnorhoea déffereth froma virulent firangury. 


ons 


Chaudep' fle, vs 

the fame which 

by other Au- 

ihorsis ufually 

termed Gonna. to this day very many have thought that the Vir vlent ftraneury 
amt, 


valgarly fome affinity with the Gonwerhea of the Ancients, but you thal! under. 


: oe ftand by that which tollowes, thatthey are much different. For 3 ¢, 


in Englith the 
running of the 
hie’ 


| We nnorhea is anunvoluntary effufion of feed running from the whole bo. 
r. dy tothe genitals,by reafon of the refolution and palfey of the jetep. 
tive faculty of thefe parts, asit isdelivered by Galen, lib.de loc. affecd. This difeafe 
befalleth others by the collection of the bloud and feminall matter by theye(iek 
of the whole body, which not turning into fat and good fleth, takes its courfe tothe 
Whar avientere ZeMitals 5 but on the contrary, a virulent ftrangury is aruanning,or rather dropping 
fiangury is.  outofthe urenary paflage,ofa yellowifh, livide, bloudy, filthy like to ps 
uiacter not well concocted, oftentimes fretting and exulcerating the paffage wit 
the acrimony, and caufing a painefull erection of the yard, and diftenfion ofall the 
cenitall parts. For in this erection there is caufed asit were a convulfive contraction 
rhe caueofthe of thefe parts. And hence it is that the patients complaine, that they fecle as it were 
i die a ftring ftretched (tiffe inthat part, which drawes the yard as it were downewards. 
The caufe hereof isa grofle and flatulence fpirit, filling and diftending by its plenty, 
the whole channell or hollow nerve; yea, verily,the whole porons fubftance of the 
yird. Iftothefe fymptomes this be added, that the urenary paffage be exulcerated,s 


ericvous palne the patient whileft he makes water, for that the ulcers are 


cated by the fharpeurine pafling that way. Sucha virulent ftrangury or runningot | 
the reines oft-times continucth fortwo orthree yeares fpace: bur the Conserbes, 


orrunning of the feed cannot endure fo long, bur that it will bring the body toa 


extreme and deadly leaneneffe, for that the matter of the feed is of the more de- 
niene and laudible portion of the bloud, as you may perceive by thofe who have | 


Vid Auth.depinite too immodcrately ufed copulation but the {pace of one night. For fuch have theitté- 

med..cnud Galen. ces more leane and lanke, and the reft of their bodies enervated, languilheth and be- 

Whar kindof COMmeth dull. By this we have deliveres,it may-be perceived the running 

maerfloweth virulent ftrangury, 1s Hot the running of a feminall humour, fit for generation of il 

fue, buz rather ofa vifcous and acride filth, which hath acquiced a venenace mel 
~*"" nity by che corruption of the whole fubftaace. 


Cuarp. XVII. 


Phecauicofa ~ 


tionand coatagion. That which proceeds from repletion, p 


Nietionotthe ther from too great abundance of bloud; or by a painefull and 
garney in the hot fuane, or by feeding upon hot, acride, diuteticke and 


meats,caufing tenfion and heat in the urenary parts, whence proceeds the inflame 
tion of them and the genitall parts, whence it happens that not onely a fernina’ . 
alfo much other moifture may flow untothefe parts, but principally tothe 


which ase glandules fituateat the roots, or beginning of the accke of the bladde’ 


1B.19. 
in which p 
chis 
alfive fac 
of themi{cl 
matter isc 
ginous hea 
with fuch : 
broken. 4 
{ave caufes 
whence 
rer,and 
the Vaporo 
gored in 
red by the 
flure of che 
rine cannot 
which fent 
whichcom 
or with a Ww 
avirulent p 
docretulcel 
refufcitatec 
on, no oth 
fonintoth 
ding furth 
while afterm 
rupted by 
feéts the pa 
by the uret 
ed up with 
the Lwes 


Pulation.a 
{otogethe: 
the chanve 
ved in a ce 
atiength d 
his urine,a 
“og upa (ill 
Penedona 
hefent for 
uled all m 
vladder Ww 
turally 
led tO 
the 


diy: 
‘ 
; 
| 
| 
| 
hy 
q 
ai Py 
4 
Of the caufes andasfferences of tbe fcalaing or [harpemesfe es the 
heazor fcalding of tt hich is onc kinde of the virulent {ia 
an i: He heaz or {cakding of the water, which ts one kinde 
ory, ariieth from fome onc of thefe three caules, to wit, repictiod, 
cacceds 


iB. 


dated. Sometime:.; 
thignes of the 
the virulency flowed 
‘flowes backe INtOthe 


ave need of a 


irulent ftraney ha 
Sy but you 
h different. For a Go. 
g from the whole bo- 
nd palfey of the reten- 
oc. Affect. This difeate 
all matter by the veflelc 
takes its a tothe 
rather dropping 
hy fantes, like to 
rating the paffage with 
diftenfion ofall the 
convulfive contraGion 
shat they feele as it were 
pS were downewards. 
iftending by its plenty, 
porous fubftance of the 
vaffage be exulcerated,a 
thacthe ulcers are irri. 
etrangury or running of 
mee: bur the Gonnorbes, 
ill bring the body toan 
{ced is of the more be- 
ve by thofe who have 
“For fuch have theirta- 
ed, languilheth and be- 
d clrat the running of a 
fir for generation of il- 


tof the wring. 


eof the virulent ttral- 
wit, repletion, 
repletion, proceeds 
apainefull and tedious 
dibreticke and flaculent 
proceeds the infamsm* 
onely a feminall, 
n¢ipally tothe 
accke of the bladde’s 


ined avenenace melige 


a waich place the {permaticke veflels end , alfo abftinence from venery caufeth 


shis plenitude in (ome who have ufually had co doe with women, efpecially the ex. 
slave faculty of the feminall and urenary parts being weake, fo that they are not 


of nemfelves able co free chemfelves from this burden. For then the fupprefled 
atten iscorrupted, and by its acrimony contracted, by an adventitious amd putre- 
jinousheat, it caufech heate and paine in the paflageforth. The proftate (we! ling 
with fuch inflamed matter, in proceffe of time becomeulcerated, the ab{ceffe bein g 


poken. Hphe purulent fanies dropping and flowing hence alongft the urinary paf- 
qoecaufes ulcers by the acrimonie, which the urine falling upon, exafperates, 
whence fharpe paine,which alfo continaeth for fome fhort time after making of wa- 
rer,and rogether theresvith by reafon of the inflammation, the paines attraction, and 
‘je vaporous fpirits diftenfion, the yard f{tands and is contracted with paine, as wee 
jotedin the formerchapter. Burthat which happens through inanition, is acqui- 
ed by the immoderate and unfit ufe of vtnery, for hereby the oily and radical! moi- 
jure of che forementioned glandules is exhaufted, which waited and {penr, rhe u- 


ine cannot but be troublefomeand fharpe by the way tothe whole wrethra, From! 


which fenle of fharpe paine, the {calding of the urine hath its denomination, That 
which comes by contagion,is caufed by impure copulation with an unclean perfon, 


owith a woman, which fome fhort while before hath received rhe tainted feed of 


aviculent perfon, or elfe hath the whites, or her privities troubled with hidden and 
ecretulcers, or carrieth 2 virulent fpirit fhutupor hidden therc, whicli heated and 
ielulcitated by copulation, prefently infects the whole body with the like conragi- 
on,no otherwife than the fting of a Scorpion or Phalamgivm, by cafting alittle poi- 
(yaintothe skinne, prefently intects the whole body, the force of the poifon [prea- 
ding further than one would believe, fothat the partie falls downe dead in a (hort 
while after. Thus therefore the feminall humour conteined in the prostate, is cor- 
rupted by the tainture of the ill drawne thence by the yard, and rhe contagion in- 


The caulesof 
the inaniuon of 
the genicall 


arts. 


The reafonof 
a 


fedtsthe partit felfe; whence followes an abcefle,which cafting forththe viru’ ency itrangury: 


bythe urenary paflage, caufetha virulent ftrangury ; andthe maligne vapour czrry- 
edup With fome portion of the humour unto the entratles aad principall parts,caule 
the Lues Vemereas 


Cuarp. 


Prognoiticks ina virnlent flrangary. 


fx a of their urenary paflage during their lives ; oft-times to their for- 
a DY) mer mifery is added a fuppreffion of the urine, the prostate and 
eed! neck of the bladderbeing inflamed and unmeafurably fwelled.Co- 
Pulation,and the ufe of acride or flatulent meates encreale this inflammation,and sl- 
otogether therewith caule an i/churta, or ftoppage of the uvine are worfe ac 


STE E ought not tobe negligentor careleffe in curing this affect, for 4 


co:.tInucs 


 GRO77\ of it proceed pernicious accidents,as wee have formerly told you, with Mmedu 
/\}\\ and neglected, it becomes uncurable, fo chat fome have it run out ring their lives. 


thechange of the moone: Certaine death fuilowes upon fuch a ftoppage ; as obler~ hittary. 


ved ina certaine man, who troubled for ten yeares {pace witha virulent ftrangury, 
dyed by the {toppage of his water. He ufed to be taken witha ftopping of 
iSurine,as often as he ufed any violent exercife,and then he heiped himlelf by put- 
upa filver Catheter, which for thar purpofe he ftilicarryed him ; it hap- 
Pened on acertainetime,that hecould not thruft it up into his bladder, wherefore 
{ent forme, that I might helpehim to make water,for which purpofe when had 
ued all my skill, it proved invaine : when he was dead, and his body opened, his 
bladder was found full and very much diftended with urine, but the prestata preter- 
aturally fwelled, ulcerated, and full of matter refembling thar, which formerly u- 


Fromwhat pare 
the matter of a 


out of hisyard, whereby you may gather, that chis virulency flowes Frosh 


and not fromthe 
Reines 


pre (tate, which forth of the yadina virulent ftrangury, 


gury Howes. 


Lues eherea 
| 
| 
| 
j 
| | 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
| 


740 Concerning the Lues V enerea. Li 
Reines.as many have imagined.Certainely, a virulent ftrangury, if it be of any |, fone Rub: 
is to be judged a certaine particular Lwes veperes, that it by ty 
cured unleffe by friGions with Hydrargyram. But the ulcers which pofleffe the ne in rab jeniti? 
of the bladder are eafily difcerned from thefe which are inthe body or Capac co caft fort 
thercof. Forin the latter the filth comes away as the patient makes water, 954: effe perce 
found mixed with the urive,with certaine ftrings or membranous bodies commin, in tb 
forth in the urine : tothefe may be added, the farre greater ftinch of this filth which thereof _ if 
iffueth out of the capacity of the bladder. Now mutt wee treat of the eure of both make it pot 
thefe difeafes, that is, the Gowmerhesand virulent ftrangury, but firft of the forme, wine, as 1 I 
Cuap. XIX, like faculty 
which hap 
The chiefe heads of curing a Gonnorhcea. ed inthee 


Dict. 


Fora {trangury 
oceafioned by 
cepkeuion. 


arefriger ati 
ginous facu! 
the flimy fu 
hereof you 
and cleanf{t 
The general cure both of the (calding of the water, and the virulent ftrancwry. A 74,0 
Ee mutt diverfly orderthe cure of this difeafe, according to the variety you ufe the 
) of the caufesand accidents thereof. Firft, care muft be had of the dict, a care thar 
andall firch things fhunned as inflame the bloud, or caufe windinefle, quality, wh 
Dice. » of which nature are all diuretick and flatulent things, as alfo {trong an ment, it wil 
* violent exercifes. Purging and bleeding are convenient, efpecially,# OxVCrate co; 
fulneffe caufe the affe&. Womens companics muft be thunned and rhoughis of ve- lfthe 
nereous matters ; the patient ought not to lye upona foft bed, but upon a quilt! (mall time afl 
matterice, and never, if he can helpeit, upon his back ; boyled meats are better than Make water 
roatted,e{ pecially boyld with forrel, lettuce, purflain,cleanfed barly,& the fourcol¢ The paineb 
feeds beaten , for fauce,let him ufe none,unleffe the juice ofan orange, pomgranatt, 
or verjuice ; let him {hun wine, and in ftead thereof ufe a decodtion of barly and li- 
querice,a hydromelor bydrofaccharum with a little cinamon, or that which is cermed 
Potws divinus. Inthe mornihg let him fup of a barly creame whercin hath bee 
boyled 2»odulus of the foure cold feedes beaten together with the feedes of wht 
poppy ; forthus it refrigerateth, mitigateth and clean{eth ; alfo the fyrups of mat! 
ma!lowes and maiden-haire are gond. Alfo purging the belly with halfe an ou 
of Ca/sia, fometimes alone, otherwhiles with a dram or halfea dramof Kuba! bei 
pouder put thereto, is And thefe following pils arealfo convenient. Rss 
Pill. pilul. fine quibus Dirhei elect 38. capbure or.iiii. cum terebinthina formentur 


Phyfitian be called, who may give direction for purging, bleedin. 
A and diet, if the affe& proceed from 2 fulneffe and abundance of blood 
' and feminall matter ; allthings fhall bee fhunned which breedmo, 
bloud in the body, which increafe feed, and ftirre to venery, Where. 
fore he muft abftaine from wine,unleffe it be weak and aftringent ang 
mri 4 iii he muft not onely efchew familiarity with women, but their very pictures, and qi 
Beg ee things which may call them into his remembrance, efpecially if he love them dear. | =... 
ly; trong exercifes do good,as the carrying of heavieburdens even until they {wer 
Te {wimming in cold water, little fleepe, refrigerations of the loines and genital! pans FR ee oe 
by annoynting them with wngwestum rofatumrefrigerans Galeni sutritum, putting 
ite | thereupon a double cloth fteeped in oxycrate, and often renewed. But if the refolu. | ea Ay 
borthedecay tion Of weaknefle of the retentive faculty of thefe parts bee the caufe of this difeate 
: | ottheretentivecontracted by too muchufe of venery before they arrive at an age fit to performe — 


\ i, I 
y, if it be of any lea, 

fo that it cannot he 
hich pofleffe the nec, 


the body or capacit 
pt taakes water, and jc 


ous bodies comming 
ech of this filth whic), 
mat of the eure of both 

t firft of the former, 


— 


for purging, bleeding 
1 abundance of blood 
:d which breed more 
etovenery. Where- 
ak and aftringent,and 
very pictures, and al! 
if he love them dear. 
ven until they {wear. 

nes and genital! parts 
mutritum, putting 
ved. But if the refolu- 
mc caule of this difeale, 
an age fit to performe 
s muft both bee taken 
f the virulent ftrangu- 


ralemt flrangwry. 


ording to the varicty 
uft be had of the diet, 
or canfe windinelle ; 
gs, as alfoftrorg and 
venient, efpecially, i 
dand thoughts of ve- 
-d, but upon a quilt of 
{ meats are better than 
B® barly,& the four cold 
orange, pomegranate, 
odtion of barly and!- 
pr that which is terme 
e wherein hath beeae 
th the feedes 
fo the fyrups© 
mily with halfe an ounce 
-adramof Rubarbe!® 


— 


9. (Concerning the L,ues Venerea. 
fone Rubarbe in pouder, with oyle of fweet almonds new ly drawne without fire, 


orfome fyrupe of maiden-hair is a fingular medicine in this cafe,forit hath an excel- oS 


jenitive and cleanfing faculcy, asalfo to helpe forwards the expulfive facultic, 


forth the virulent matter contained in the proffate. You may by the bitrer- 

aefle perceive how it refifts putrefaction and you may gather how it performes its 

oface in the reines aodurenary parts, by the {mell it leaves in the urine after theu fe 

wpereof. Butifthere bee any who cannot take it in forme of abole, you may €afily 
makeit potable,by diffolving it ina Mortar with the yolk of anegge and fome white made porable. 
wine, as Llearned of acertaine Apothecary, who keptitasagreat fecret. If the dif- 

nfe come by inanitioa or emptinefie, it thall be helped by fatty injections, oily and 

emollient potions, and inwardly taking and applying cthéferthings which have the 

ike faculty, and fhunning thefe things which caufed the difeafe. How to cure that 


waich happens by contagion or unpure copulation, it thall bee abundantly fhew- 
ed inthe enfuing chapter. 


7 he proper oure of a virulent ftrangur). 


} 
4 


x wemuft begin with the mitigation of painc,and ftaying the 


only conduce hereto being thus injected, but alfo drunk, for it hath a retrigerating bi ae rie 
ind cleanfing faculry and by the fubrlety of the parts it quickly arrivesat the urena- a viruluc tran 
pallages. Fusthermore it will be good to anoint with cerat. refriger. Galeni addita 
‘umphora, or with ceratum fantalinum, ung.comiti (ja, or nutritum, upon the region of 
tiekidneyes, loinesand perimawm, as alfo ro anoint the Cods and Yard. But betore 
youule the forefaid ointments or the like, let them be melted over che fire, bur have 
‘care that you makethem nottoo hor, leftthey fhould lofe cheir refrigerating 
quality, which is the thing we chiefly defire in them. Having ufed the forefaid oint- prow to make 
Ment, twill be convenient to apply thereupon fome linnen clothes moiftened in without 
ex aquss plantaginis, folani, fempervivi, rofarum, and the like. 
the patient bee tormented with intollerable paine in making water, andalfo fome 
nal time after, as it commonly commeth to paffe, I would wifh him that he thould 
Make water putting his yardinto achamber-por filled with milke or water warned. 
¢paine by this meanes being aff waced, wemnftcome tothe clcanfing of the ul- 
“ets by this or the like injection. kx. hydromelitis [ymp. Siv.fyr. derofts & de ab. Detergent in. 
38, flat injectio. Burif there be need of more powerfull deterfion, you may 
Lately adde, as Fhave frequently tryed, alittle ezyptiacum. [have alfo found this 
“owing decoion to bee very good for this purpofe. kk. wins albi oderiferi, tb &, 
 Plantag. rof. an. 3 ii. auripigmeenti, 3 8. viridis aris, Di. aloes opt.3 pulveri- 
pubverifanda,c bukiant fimul, Keep the decoction for to make injeGion with- 


(ey 
‘ll. You may encreafe or diminith the quantity and force of the ingredients entring 

this compofition, as the patient and difeafe fhall feemeto require. The ulcers | 
ets cleanfed,we mutt haften to dry them, fo that we may at length cicatrize [20* <"'"" 


fedulcersmay 


- Thismay be done by drying up the fuperfluous moifture, and firengthening be deyed 
Parts that are moiftened and relaxed by the contiauall defluxion, for which pur- 


pole 


the 


to the urethra with this following decoction warme. KX. fem.pfi- 
laciuca, papav, alos, plantag. cydon, tint, byofciamss albt, an, 5 ii. fay infanune 
detrabaniny mucores tn aquis (olani cy rofar. ad quantitatem [ufficien- 
| tems, adde trochifc.alborum Rhafis camphor atorum in pollinem r.datto- 
rem, 2 mifce fimul,c> fiat imjectio frequeas.For this becaufc it hath 
refrigerating faculty, will help the inflammarion mitigate pain,and by the mucila- 
ginous faculty lenifie the roughneffe of the wrethra,and defend it by covering it with 
fubftance,againft che acrimony of the urine and virulent hbumours.in ftead 
ee crcofyou may ule cowes milk newly milked, or warmed at the fire. Milk doth nor 
convenient. 
adding che 


this followi decogtion is very profitable. Raq. fabroram, th 
balauft congualfatorum, aw. 3 i 8. (emia, fumach.G berber, 


injeéted into the srethra witha fyringe, folong as that there fhall no 


matt 
flow outthereat, for then there is certaine hope of the cure. CC Or filth 


— 


Cuay. XXIL. 


of Caruncles,or flefoy exereftesees whith fometimes happen to grow 
f in the Urethra, 69 the heat or fealding of the wrine. 


ax Sharpe humour which flowes from the Glandules termed Proftate ang 
ANE ot contiqually runs alongft the urenary paflage,in fome places by the Way 
frets, and exulcerates by the acrimony the wreshra in men, but the 
wm necke of the wombe in women. Inthefe, as alfo is ufuall in other ulcer; 

there fometimes growes up a fuperfluous flefh, which oft times hinde:: 
the cafting or comming forth of the feed & urine by their appropriateand commo, 
paflage, whence many mifchieves arife; whence it is that fuch ulcers as have caryp. 
cles growingupon them muftbe diligently cured. But frft we mutt know whethe: 


Hew caruncles Sa 
come to grow 
upon the ulcers 
of che genirall 
parts. 


iN 


Callous carun-they be new or old, For the latter are more difficultly to bee cured than the former, 


cleshardtocure.becaufe the caruncles that grow upon them become callous aad hard, being oft 
times cicatrized. Wee know that there are caruncles, if the Cathater cannot freely 
Signes. paffe alongft the paffage of the urine, but findes fo many ftops in the way,as it meeis 
with Caruncles that {top the paflage; ifthe patient can hardly make water, or ifhis 
water runne ina very {mall ftreame, ortwo ftreames, or crookedly, or onely by 
droppeand droppe, with {uch tormenting paine that he is ready to let goc his excre- 
ments, ycaand oft times doth fo, after the fame manner as fuch as are troubled with 
the {tone in the bladder. After making water, as alfo after copulation, fome portion 
of the urine and feed ftayes at the rough places of the caruncles, fo that the patieat is 
The Gmpret fOrced to preffe his yard, to preffe forth {uch reliques.Sometimes the urine is whil- 
urinccones ly ftopped, whence proceeds fuch diftention of the bladder, that ir caufeth iofan- 
prides tty *matioa, and the urine flowing backe into the body, haftens the death of the pauient. 
os Yet fometimes the urine thus fuppreft, fweats forth preternaturally in fundry places, 
asat the fundament, perimeum, cod, yard, groines. As foone as we, by any of the 
forementioned fignes, fhall fufpect that there is aC aruncle about to grow, it is¢t. 
pedient forthwith to ufe means for the cure theroft; fora caruncle from a very litt 
beginning doth inafhorttime grow fo bigge, that atthe length it becomes incurc: 
able, verily youmay eafily gheffe at the difficulry of the cure by that we have {or 
merly delivered ofthe eflence hereof, befides,mecicines can very hardly airive the 
The time at. The fittelt feafon for the undertaking thereof is the (pring, and che next therctos 
forthe cure. winter; yet if it be very troublefome,you mult delay notime. Whileft the cures!" 


wy  hand,the patient ought wholly toabftain from venery,forby the vfe thereof, the 
chewed. neycs, {permaticke veflels, proftate, and the whole yard,fwell up and waxe 


confequently draw to them from the neighbouring and upper parts, whence abou 
dance of excrements inthe affe@ed parts, much hindering the cure. You mutt b¢- 
ware of acrid and corroding things inthe ufe of detergent injections, for that hus (hs 
wrethra being endued with moft exquifite fenfe, may bee eafily offended, whhencs 
might enfue many and ill accidents. Neither muft wee be frighted if at fome!™ 
wee fee blood flow forth of fecret or hidden caruncles. For this helpesto thor 
the cure, Secaufe the difea(e is hindered from growth,by taking away portion of (it 
conjun& marter,the part alfo it felfe is eafed from the oppreffing burden, for the™ 
reriall caufe of caruncles is fuperfluous blood. Wherfore unlc fre (uch bleeding 
Tie particular pen of it felfe,it is not amiffe to procure it by thrutting Cashater fomewhat 
yet with good advife, Ifthe Caruncles be inveterate, and callous, then muft 
mollified by fomentations, ointments,cataplafmes, platters, and fumigat!o”® 
A fomentasion. may thus a make fomentation.K. rad.adsh, lilier.alb. an. 3 iv. rad. 


742 Concerning the Lues V enerea. LL B19 


rofar. de abfinth. an. 5 i, fiat decoctio, You may keepe it for an inje@ionte be Often 


An. 
cartes 
11,0 incideni 
apply it with 
cataplaime at 
pore: 
ly ater che f¢ 
lafme 1S PFO 
human. 
aque vite 31. 
ip the © aru 
msy bee div 
cruly made, 
hardact! 
{ome pieces 
the Ancients 
fre, letthem 
to fitchereco 
quall parts 0 
about him, 
pour at his F 
dicine mzy ¥ 
noted with ¢ 
part, where 
his legges, 
the doore m 
that exhales 
onevery fid 
telolve, fott 


4 * 
4.¢ 
9 
| 
Fi nf 
% } 
te 
i 
i+, 
7 


Lis. 19, 
i. Pfidiarup, 
InjeAion %e be often 
no Matter Or fils} 


* 


pin to crew 


termed Proflate.and 
ne places by the Way 
tora in men, but the 
in other 
oft times hinders 
Opriatcand common 
ulcers as have carun. 
e know whether 
ured than the former, 
sand hard, being oft 
athater cannot freely 
in the way,as it meets 
make water, or if his 
o0kedly, or onely by 
Bly to lergoc his excre- 
mh as are troubled with 
ulation, fome portion 
s,fo that the patient is 
mes the urine is whol- 
that ic caufeth ioflam- 
se death of the patient. 
rally infundry places, 
¢ aswe, by any of the 
fo grow, it Is 
incle from avery little 
eth it becomes incure- 
e by that we have for- 
ery hardly airive ther- 
and the next cherctois 
.Whileft the cure 
the vfe thereof, the kid 
up and waxe hor, an 
parts, whence aboun- 
the cure. You mutt be- 
tions, for that chus the 
afily offended, wheacs 
righted if ac fome sme 
rthis helpesto fhorte? 
ing away portion 
ing burden, for them 
le ie fuch bleeding 
Satharer jomew hat hard, 
pllous, then muff they 
s, and fumigarions 3 
3 iv. rad. 


18.19. 


Concerning the Lues Venerea. 


743 


4 


as florum chamem. cy melil. an. pi. contundantur conte den- 
incidantar,bullsant omniain agua commun: :make a fomentation, and 
iyit with fate fponges. Of the maffe ofthe ftrained- out things, you may makea 
splafme after this manner. pradiéta materialia, terantur, é trajiciantur, adde Acataplafine, 
porch, wnguents bafiliconis, an. 3 ii, fist cataplafma: \et it be applyed prefent- 
the fomentation, Youn:ay ufe following liniment whileft the cata- 
fmeis providing. Ke, umguemss alth. cy agrippaan.318 afipi hwinide, p 
gman. 4B. butyri recentis, ole: lilior. chamaem. an.3 vi. liquefiart fimul, addendo 
vite fiat Linimentum : letitbee applyed outwardly upon the part where- 


518. fal. malvar. vidlarum, parictar. mercar. an.m fem. lini, fanugr, 


ig the Caruncles are. For the fame purpofe platters thall bee applyed, which 


yee diverfified, and fitted as you fhall thinke good yer Exsplaftrum de Vigo empla- 
a made, exceedeth all the reft in a mollifying faculty, and in wie fuch cal- por” apd 
ings hardaeffe. The following fumigation isalfo good for the fame purpofe; take uncle. 
ime pieces of amille-ftone (forthis wee ufe in {tead of the pyrtes mentioned by 
Ancients) orcl{e fome Brickes of a large fize, after they are heated hot in the 
fe, letthem be put intoa pan, and fet under aclofe ftoole, then caufe the patient 
titthereon, asifhee were going toftoole, then poure upon the hot {tones e- 
quall parts of very tharpe vinegar, andvery good _/qwa vite, and cafting clothes 
outhim, that nothing may exhale invaine: lethim receive the alcending va- 

rat his Fundament, Perimeum,Scrotum, and Urethra. Moreover, that this me- 
dicine may Worke the better effe@, youmay putthe Patient naked into the Barre!! 
gored with this letter A. forhat he may fit upon a feare or borde perforated on that 
part, whereas his Genitalls are, then place the pan holding the hot ftones between 


hislegges, then prefently {prinkle the ftones with the forerentioned liquor, by 


A 


redoore marked with the letter, B. Thus the Patient fhall eafily receive the fume 


thatexhales therefrom, and none thereof bee loft, he covering and vailing humtelfe 4d Glau. Ue.» 
onevery fide. Such a fumigation,in Galens opinion, hath a faculty to penetrate, cut, “>: 


telolve, foften and digeft {cirrhous hardnefles. 


U4 Barrell fittedto receive the Fume in. 


CHapP. 


= 
— 
= 
| 
y) = 
S 
S — Bs 
> 
N 
= | 
ATS 
SSS 


Paruculiay de- 

taulrs ot the La- 
es notto 
be curedunlelle 


by the generall, 


emedy the 
‘trulency. 


arunciles 1 
callous, muft 


Grit be lotrened. 


Very Ctuall ro wafte and confume all Caruncles of the privities without 


wailte caruil- 
elcs. 


Concerning tbe Lues Venerea, bay 


Crap. XXIII. 


what other remedtes fhallbe wfed to Caruncles occafioned by 
the Lues venerea. 


FUT if you fafpect that thefe Caruncles come orare occafioned jy, 

rulenthtmour, or the malignity of the Lwes veneres, it is mec, 
patient obferve fuch a diet as ufually is prefcribedto iuch as are troabi. 
with the Lwes venerea ; lethim ufe a decoction of Cwajacum, ang let 
perinenm and thewhole yard bee anointed with ointment Made “ 
the Lues vewerea ; otherwife the Surgion will lofe his labour. In the jp, 
whileft hee fhall fweat in his bed, he fhallbee wifhedto hold bitweene hj. leg 
{tone bortle filled with hot water, orelfe a hot bricke wrapped in linnen cloak. 
moiftened in vinegar and aqua vite; for thus the heat and vapour will a(ccng ole 


genitalls, which,together with the helpe of the applyed cintinenr, will diffoly, the 


a 


matter of the Caruncles, and being thus foftened, they mufi bc confumed with cop. 


venient medicines. Wherefore firft ifthey become callous, or cicatrized (Which 
you may fulpeét ifthey caft forch no excrementitious humidity) they thal) 
perated, excoriated and torne withaleaden Cathater having a 1. buvron ory, 
end like around file. He flia!l fo long the Cathater put into the 

itup and downethe {ame way fo long and ofrenashce fhalithinke fir for 
king and tearing the Caruncles, hee fhall permit them thus torne to blecd treely. 
tocafethe affected part. You may alfo for the fame purpofe put into the Mrethra;}y 
Cathater marked with this letter B.whereinto putting a filver wiar {harp at the vppe: 
end, that bytoftenthrufting it in and out, it may wear and make plain the rcfifting ¢: 

runcles, Verily by this meanes [havehelped many much perplex d with the teare. 
full danger of this difeafe. Some better like of the Catheter marked with the late 
A. being thus ufed : itisthruft intothe Arethra with the prominent cutting fice: 
downewards, and then prefling the yard on the outfide clofe with your handtwik 
Catheter the place wherethe Caruacles are, itis drawn torth againc. 


Catheters fit to weare afunder, or teare Caruncles, 


A 


A. jheweth the Cathaeter with the infersed filver but nob 
thereat, 


fheweth the Cathacer with the inferted filver wiar hanging forth ab 


The thus torne Caruncle thall bee ftrawed over with the following poude' ae : 

paine. herb. fabin. im umbraexficeat.3 ii, ocra, antimon, tush, praparat. 


puke. (ubtslifSimeas, \et it becapplyed in the following manner. Put che 


Lis. 19-8 
che pi eored 
laft defct 
openniefic or 
ter put a fitv 
‘sthrult up, 
the cal 
actricion. Tf 
not {crape 
sflwaged, an 

mrtwlace, ple 

im mort arto pl 
hereof you 
Neither willl 
and inflam 
the Carunck 
menti, 
inter duo ar 
and dryed, a: 
ble,fo that y« 
tothe funne 
bevanifhed, 
igne tum femo 
upon the fire 
dle, or lead 
geons of Mop 
par. vi. ant 
mints ufti, an 
diapompbols 
plumbeo, A 
and wrapped 
forth the can 
out ofthe ya 
Wihitit can 
with which | 
Weeke, whof 
ed of the fol 
Whileft the c 
carefull thar | 
teliques of 

'oppe fhoul 
4Pplyed med! 
Umed by the 
freely, and i 


| 
g » 
| 
4 
% 
~ 
F 
\ 
3 5 
{ion 
23 “Pe IN day 


fioned by 


mere occafioned 
trea, itismect ths 
tt 

tofuch as are 
Gwajacum, and let the 
ith Ointment Made 
labour. In the 
d betweence his legoesa 
ped in linnen Cloathes 


othe thrutin 


ominent cutting fides 
-with your handtotie 
hagaine. 


cles, 


, but hanging fe th 


enging forth at phe 


allowing ponder, being 
Rivitics without 
h. 


wacr 1 


Y avi. 


d | 
INtcrim 


Will afcend toric 
will diflolye the 
confumed with con. 
» OF Cicatrized (which | 
dity) they 
ga button atthe 


ithinke fit forthebre.. 
orne to bleed treely fo | 
put into the &rethra the 
fharp at the upper 
ke plainthe rchftingca. 
Brpicxcd with the teare. 
marked withthe letter | 


or Catheter having holesin the fides thereof, the which is the lowermoft of 
“he defcribed. Then put the Catheterintothe urenary paflage untill the flit or 
defic of the fide come tothe Caruncle, then into the hollownefle of the Cathe- 
yr pura filver wiar, wrapped about the end with alittle linnen ragge, which as it 
thruttup, will alfo thruft up the poader therwith, untill it thall come tothe flit a- 
srinft the caruncle, then will it adhere to the caruncle, bloody by reafon of the late 
sorition- T hen fhall you draw forth the Cathaser firft ewining it about,that fo it ma 
ot (crape off the pouder againe. If intollerable paine hereupon happen, it fhall bee 
{ivaged, andthe inflammation reftrained by the following inje@ion. K. 
plantag. folant, fempervivi, an. 3%. album ovorum, nu. vi. agitentur div hinder inflam 
gmortario plumbeo ; let it be injected warme into the #rethra with a fyringe. In ftcad 
pereof youmay alfo make ufe of another inje@tion, which is formerly prefcribed. 
Neither will it be un profatableto apply repercuffives to the genitalls,to hinder pain 
diofammation. You may alfoufe other medicines, having a faculty to confume 
he Caruncle, among ft which thefe following are excellent. viridis 15 aur 1pig- ufed by 
vitriol. Rom. alumint roch. an. 3 ii. infundantur omniain acet. acerrivwo, atqme Surzcons of 
inter duo mar mora tn pollinemrediganter : chen let it be expofedtothe fummer fanne, 
nddryed, againe intufed in {harp vinegar, and then as before grownd upon a mar- 
ble,forhat you fhall finde nothing fharpe with your fingers ; laftly let it be oppofed 


How to apply 
it. 


 tothefunne untill it may bee made into moft {ubtle pouder, and all the acrimony 


bevanithed, which willbe commonly incight dayes{pace. Then, kk. o/. rofat, 5 iv. 
coguantur adignem, quow[que corérint in emplaft. filide confifienti«, ab 
fermotes, adde pulv. predict. > ii, let them bee mixed with a {patula, and put 
yponthe fire uncill it come to fo hard a confiftence, that it will fticke toa waxe can- 
ile, orlead wiar, fo that it may not come off by handling with your hands.T he Sur- 


| gconsof Montpelier, ufethis medicine: This following is another, tuthie pra- Another em- 


vi, antemmonti, 3 iii. trochifc. alborum, Rhaf. campbhorat.5 i. corticés granati, alu. 
mas ufti,an.3 if. (pongia ufte,D ii. letthem all be made into pouder: then, waz. 
dapmpholiges, alb. Rhalis, 49.3 ii. mifceantur cum pradictis pulveribus in mortario 


plumbco, agitentur : lecavery fincragge bee {pread over with this ointment, Howtoapply 


inlwrapped about a waxe candle, and fo thruftinto the 4rethra, andthen draw 


B ‘uththe candle againe by twining ita contrary way;fo let the end of the ragge hang 


mtotthe yard, fo to plucke it forth againe, when as you fhall thinkeit hath done 
Whtitean tothe Caruncle, whichis, whenit hath coveredit withthe medicine 
Wt which it was {pread. Somealfo make waxe candles with a flender, but ftiffe 
weeke, whofe end, which is to be put to weare and confume the Caruncle,is compo- 
<dofthe following medicine. emplaftri nigri,vel diachylonis treats 5 11. pul. fabs- 
‘corre, vitriol. Rom. calcin. pul. mer, an. 5 omnia lique(cant fimul ad dictum wfam. 
Whileft the cure thall bee in hand by thefe following medicines, let the patientbee , ss 
‘aefull that he fo fhake his yard after making water, that he may {hake forth all the making ware. 
icliques ofthe urine which may chanceto ftoppe atthe Caruncles, for if butone 

oppe fhould ftay there, it would be fufficient to {poile the whole operation of thie 
*lyed medicines. Afterthat the Caruncle fhall bee worne away and wholly con- | 

ned bythe defcribed medicines, which you may know by the urine flowing forth ome the 
ely, and ina full ftreame, and by thruftingup a Catheter into the bladder with- away. 
Kany oppage ; then it remaines that the ulcersbe dryed & cicatrized, for which 
tpafe the following injeétionis very powerfulland effectuall, and withourany 
<timony. aq. fabrorura lb cupre(]. callar, cort. grapat. an. 31 8, alum. rech. 
bulliant omnia fimal fecund. art. fo makeadecoGion for an injection, which you 
‘ll uf folong, untill noexcrementitious humidity diftill out of the yard. The fol- 
Og pouder dryes more powerfully, and confequently haftens forwards cicatri- 
it is alfo without acrimony.Fc. Lapidems calamin. lotum,teft.as over wm uftas, 

rubrum, corticem granat. comminut pollinem ; \et this pouder be ufed 
Othe ulcers, with a waxe candle joyned to fomesngaentum deficcativum rubrum, 
‘ome fach like thing. Alfo ftrings or rods of lead thruft into the thraasthicke 
will fufter, even tothe ulcers, beirig firft befmeared with drying caufeeh 
day and night as long as the patient can endure, are good ce be uf 


i 
NANNY 
SP) WY | q 
| 
* 
— 


74.6 Concerning the Lues V enerea, Ly 8.19 


they dry by their touch and cicatrize, they dilacethe urenary paflage withoyr Paine 
and la(tly hinder the fides of the ulcer from corrupting one another. 


~ 


Cuap. XXIIII. 


of venereall Buboes, or fwellings inthe Groines. 


96 He virulency of the Laes venerea isfometimes communicate, to 
GOS) the Liver, which if it have a powerfull expulfive faculty ir expells 


| The efficient 


pone View, itinto the groines,as the proper emunctories thereof, whence 
ceedvenereall Bubo’s. The matter of thefe for the moft Dart is 


reous Bubo's. 


bundance of cold, tough, and vifcous humours, as you may Sather 
B by the hardneffe and whitenefle of the tumour, the pravity of), 
paine, and contumacy of curing ; which alfo is anorher realon, be. 
fides thefethat wee formerly mentioned, why the virulency of this difeaic may p.. 
| thought commonly to faften it felfe in a phiegmaticke humour. Yet fometimesye. 
ncreall Bubo’s proceed from a hot, acride and cholericke hnmour, affociated with 

ereat pain and heat,and which therupon often degenerate into virulent & corroding 

WhatBube's ulcers. Some venereous Bubo’s are {uch conjeyned accidents of the Lwes venerr,. 
“chat chey foretellit ; fuch are thefe which fora {mall while fhew amanifef tumour 
ae fuddenly without any manifeft occafion hide chemfelves againe, and retyr; 


helped, if 

fyed & rot 
lay bare th 
{had rathe 
pones, as a 
be ofacon 
before the 

an incifion 
chrough br 
hee amille 
of the bon 


4 


| backe to the noble parts. Orhers are diftin@ fromthe Lwes veneres though they felt, whence 
oa have a fimilitude of effence and matter therewith, and which theretore may be he:. Befides allo 
/ led, the Lwes venerea yet remaining uncured. Such are thefe which are ufially (cen, cefleoftim: 
| and which therefore compared with the former may be termed fimple andnotim. putrefactio 
: _ plicit.For the cure,you muft not ufe difeufling medicins,left refolving the more {ub- as moift an. 
i tle part, the grofler dregs become impact and concretethere ; but much leflemut ligne, the Al 
we ufe repercuflives, for thatthe matter is virulent. Wherefore onely atrractive and lently fallin 
{uppurating medicines are here to bee ufed, agreeableto the humour predominan jedtto the fa 
} and caufing thetumour, as more hot things in e2dematous and icirrhous tumours, ding to Gale 
than in thofe which refemble the nature of a ph/egmon or eryfipelas : the indication out they bea 
| taken from the rarity and denlity of bodies infinuates the fame variety. Tlie apply: dolorificke | 
| “upp —_ ing of cupping glafles is very effectual! to draw it forth. But when as it is drawne not deny bu 
| forth, you fhall forthwith apply an emplafticke medicine, and then you {hall com arteries | 
ia Apotential to fuppuratives. Whenthe tumour is ripe it fhall be opened with a potentiall caute forethe arte 
Camery. if it proceed froma cold caufe;for by the inducing of heatthe refidue of the crue tfenfe of 
hu matter is more eafily concocted, befides when as an ulcer of this kinde is opened, the Paine, as ir, 
matter willbee more eafily evacuated, neither thall itbee fit toufe any tent, bu Onis Oft-tim 
oncly to apply pledgets. The refidue of the cure fhall bee performed by detergt™ from che nari 
medicines, and then if need require, the patient fhall be let blood, and the humour May perceiy 
evacuated by a purging medicine, but not before the perfect maturity thercol. 
For] have 
XX V. apulfe of 
Alfo the rorr, 
of the Exoftofis, bunches or knots crowing upon the bones forth ora. 
rcafon of the Lues Venerea. Fareh occa 
Ard Tumours, Exoflofes and knots have their matter from thicket and 
cough phlegme, which hediflolved, unleffe by hot °Yeeldand | 
gh phlegme, which cannot be difiolved, unielle by ac 
which haveamollifying & diffolving faculty. For which purp° anno d,fi 
fides thofe medicines which ufually are applyed to {cirrous mT uild 
2) you muftalfo make ufe of arg.viv. commonly after this cert 
wintthe extingd. fiat emplaftrum. Spread it upon leather wall Rely. 
bunching out! Cure of 
efric bones. helps 


Bus... 
* 4 
Bae 


Ly 


mafitge without paine 
or icr. 


Be: COMMUNIcated to, 
five faculty, it expe}|, 
thereof, whence Pro. 
for the moft part is a. 
AS YOu may gather 
pu, the pravity of the 
another reafon, be. 
of this difeaic may bee 
Mr. Yet fometimes ve. 
mour, afflociated with 
p virulent & corroding 
sof the Lwes veneres, 
ev amanifeft tumour, 
esagaine, and returnc 
svemerca though they 
tkeretore may be hea- 
are ufually feen, 
ned fimple and not im- 
{»lving the more {ub- 
e; but much leffe mutt 
breonely atrractive and 
humour predominant 
ani icirrhous tumours, 
pfirclas : che indication 


t maturity thereof. 


toc bones by 


from th 


which purpe 
lyid to {cirrous 


upon leather 
Bye; ;for chus hee 


evaricty. Theapply- 
when as it is drawne 
Band you fhall come 
witha porentiall caute- 
the refidue of the crude 
his kinde is opened, the 
Gi toufe any tent, but 
pe formed by detergent 
blaod, and the humours 


of the aire, chara Trepan could not,withouta ftrong endeavour, enterthem. 


icke and 


sdicines 
al-(fe by hotmecich 


outs, 


after chis 


defersph 
YOu 


19. Concerning the Lues V enerea. 


selped, if fo be that the fubftance of the bones be 


fyed & rotten, then tlie defcribed medicines are of no ufe, but you mutt of necefhry 
lay bare che bone, cither by iacifion, or elfe by an a@uall or potentiall cautery ; but 
(had ratherdoe it with an adtuall, for that it extracts the virulency impa@ in the 
yones, as alfo it haftens the abfcetfe,or falling away of the corrupted bone. It (hall 
ye of aconveniemt figure to cauterize the bone, as, round, iquare or long. I ufually 

yefore the application of fuch a Cauttick, firft divide the fleth that lyes over it with 
»n incifion knife,chat fo the paine may be the leffe, becaufe the ficth cannot be burnt 
hough but in a long time, by which the fire may come to the bone. But it will not 


yee amiffe, before wee treat of this art, firft to confider the nature of the rottenncfle 


yetunperithed. For if it be putre- 


XX VI. 


Why the bones become rotten, and by what fignes it may be perceived. 


peeeeeh Hat folution of Continuity which is in the bones, is called by Galen, Ca- 6 spnerh,c 
tagma. Vhs ufually is the caufe of rottennefles for, bones that are 
ced, bruifed, rent, perforated, broken, luxated, inflamed and dif poiled of 


ie he flcih and skin, are eafily corrupted ; for difpoyled of their coverin 7, 
wh 


they are altered by the appulfe of the aire, whichthey formerly never 
elt, whence alfo rheir bloud aad proper nourifhment is dryed upandexhaufted. 
Sefides alfo, the /amzes running downe by reafon of wounds and oldulcers, in pro- 
celleot time, taltens it telfe incocheir fubltance,and putrefics by little and little this caufe ofthe ror. 
putrefaction is encreated and cauled by the too much ufe of oily and fatty medicines, of 
ssmoiftand fuppurate things; for hence the ulcer becommethmore filthy andma- 
igne, the of the neighbouring parts groweth hor, is turned into pus ,which pre- 

lently falling upon the bone lying under ity inflames ir. Laftly, the bones are iub- ' 

thefame dileafes, asthe flcth that lyeth underthem is; befides alfo accor- 

ding to Galen, the beginning of inflammation oft-times proceeds from the bones . 
bu they beat not, becaule, according to the opinion of the ancients, pulfationisa 
dolorificke motion of the Arteries, but the bones want fenfe. Which verily I can- 

iotdeny but alfo we muft confeffe that the membrane that encompaflech them,and 

“carteties that enter into their body, are endued with moft exquifite fenic, Where- 

‘wethe arteries compreffed and waxing hot by reafon of the inflamed bone, caufe 

of painein the perioflium, fo that the patients complaine ofa dulland deepe 

pane, as it were tunke intocthefubftance of the bones. The rotrenneffe or corrupri- Signes ofthe 


The fi equent 


mats oft-times manifeft ro the eye, as when the bone is laid bare, for then it variech totennetic. 
naturall colour, and becomes livide, yellowith or blacke. Orherwif 


eyou 
Tay perceive it by touch, as by fearching it with a probe, as when you meet wih a- 


'y equality or roughnefle, or when by but gently touching it, your probe runs in- 
‘Othe fubftance of the bone, as into rotten wood, for abone is naturally hard, bur 


“las rotten, becomes foft. Yet hardnefle is not an infallible figne of a found bone. ne 
tthave feene rotten and bared bones, tohave fometimes growne fo hard, by che infallible tigne 


found bones. 
‘Othe rotrennefle of the bone is known by the condition of the filth which flowes 
“Of the ulcer, for it is not onely more thin and liquid, but alf> more Linking, 
faci ulcers have a {oft loofe and watery flefh; befides ali. they are un- 
: = rebellious to farcotick & epuloticke medicines ; to which ti + hey chance 
and be cicatrized, yet withia a fhort while after the fcarre will relent of its 
4ccord, for thar nacure,deftitute of the firm and foun! foundation of thebores, 


lotbuild up a laudible and conftant ficth. Neither is it (ufficient the Sur 


im... certainly that the bone is rotten and corrupt, it is furthermore fit he know, 


— corruption be fuperficiary, or pierce deepe into the fubftance of rhe 
Mat he may know how muchofthe bone mutt bee fvailed. For {cailing is the 


cure of that which is corrupted ; now itis {cailed by that which cry cs ex- ‘atten bone. 
Rrra 


| | 
of the DONCS. 
4 
| 
hee 
De 
[pews 
on | 
< 


743 Concerning the _ucs V enerea. 


ceedingly, and drawes forth all the humidity, aiweliche excrementitious, the ap. 
thorofrhe rotrennefle, asthe alimentary. For thus it remaines without bloud and 
nourithnent, and conicquently life alfo ; whence it malt of ueceflaty fcaile o; 
of, being deftirute of the glue or moitture which joyned itto the found parts jn yj: 
nity and communion of life, like as leaves which fall away from the trees,the hum. 
dity being exhaufted, by which, as by glue, they adhered tothe boughes. For :};, 
purpote Catagmatick powders are prepared to amend the corruption which is on¢. 
ly fuperficiary. Re. pul.aloes,crete combuste, pompholygos, an. fler. 
rot. myrrh.ceruffe, an. 34. puloiteor.combuft. 5%. terantur fublisiff: fiat pulvis; let ithe. 
applyed either alone by itfelfe, or elfe with hony anda little aqua vite. Alf 1), 
following emplafter being applyed,ftirs up nature to the exclution of the broker 
A defquamao-bones, and cieanfeth the ulcers fromthe more groffe and vifcide fantes. , cer.noy, 
ref, pint, gumammon. elemt, an.OVvi, tereb. pul. maftich, myrrh. an. 38.4ri fol roy 
flor aloes, opopan .euphorb. an. 5i,olei rofati quantum fufficit, fiat empla ft. fecundar 
artem. Exphorbsum,according to Diofcorides takes off the {cailes of bones in one day, 
Hereto alfo conduceth Emp.de betonica, Or, oles caryophyl.38. camph. Si. 
antur fimenl i mortario, wtere. But if that part of the bone which is corrupt cap. 
not thus be taken away, then muft you ufethe feailing Trepans and Scrapers defer, 
bed formerly in wounds of the head ; efpecially if any more great or folid bone bee 
foule. Furthermore the here defcribed Trepan will be good to perforate the rotten 
bone in many places whereitis corrupted, untill, as it were, a certaine bloudy moy. 
{ture iffuc forth at the holes ; for thus it more freely enjoyes the aire, and alforly 

force of the medicines admitted by thefe holes works more powerfully. 


A caragmatick 
powder. 


A Trepan with two triangular bits a pinto hold theminthe flocke 


another Trepan having foure-[quare cy fixe-[quare bits come. 
sient for to be ufedin the rottenne/fe 


of greater bones. 


But ifthe rottenneffe be more deepe,and the bone more hard, either by ee 
accident, as by the occafion of the too long admiffion of the aire, then - “* 
feailes fhall bee cut offby the inftruments defcribed in wounds of the anger 
them intothe bone with leaden mallets, left the part fhould bee too much 

Signesthat the or fhaken with the blow. The fcailes and fragments fhall bee taken ee ‘ot 
Jore the fignes that all the rotrenneffe is taken away, are the folidnefle of rhe 


taacn away. 
thereunder, and the bloudy moifture fweating outthercat. Cul 


a 


not fo 
nfethele,to 
riall Caurer: 
ling, and th: 
andinduftri 
burning tou 
Jammerions 
oure is fu gre 
mu(t be vari 
formation of 
delineate unt 
work by pric 
madetothe 


‘a 4 ko Nol} 
4 Lon en) se 
| 
7 
4 
bid 
Z 
Abed, 
Ma 
4 | ] 
Bite 
+ 


mentitious, the ay- 
without bloud and 
eflary {caile or 
found parts in vici. 
the trees.the humi- 
-boughes. For this 
ption which is one. 
fler. ariftoloch, 
fiat pulves ; let it bee 
aqua vite. Alfo the 
ufion of the broken 
fanies. cer.nov, 

rh. 
at emplaft. fecundam 
m® of boncs in one day, 
8. camph. Sit. mice. 
yhich is corrupt can- 
and Scrapers defcri- 
reat or folid bone bee 
o perforate the rotten 
ertaine bloudy moy- 
the aire, andalfothe 
owerfully. 


he flocks : a6 al/e 
bits COMR/E- 


Concerning the 


CHAR X X Vol I. 


Of aciuak potential Cauteries. 


UT if thedefcribed remedies cannot take place, by reafon of the ma. 
lignity or magnitude of the rortenneffe, then muft wee come to aduall 


=“ wherewith itis overcharged, to wit, the matter of the Caries ; which is 


not fo effeCtually performed by potentiall cauteriess Yerare Weoft-times forcedto 
ofethele,to pleafe the patients whichare terrified at and affraid of hot irons. Poten. 
jall Cautertes are aqua fortis, aqua vitrioli, {calding oyle, melted (u/ppur and boy- 
jing, and the Jike; in pouring on of which I would have the Surgeon ta bee prudent 
dinduftrious , left he thould rafhly violate the neighbouring found parts by the 
wening couch of thefe things ; which his temerity would caufe vehement paines,in- 
jammarions and other horridefymptomes. For a@uall cauteries,their variety in fi- 
ure is fv great, that it cannot bee defined, much leflefer downe in writing ; for they 
| mult be varied according to the largeneffe of the rottennefle, and the figure and con- 
igemation of the fouled bones.Such as are more ufuall I have thought good here to 
jlincate unto you, Contentonely toadmonifh you thus much, that fome of thefe 


work by pricking, {ome by cutting,fome flatwife, and other {ome with their points 
nidctoshe forme of an Oliveleafe. 


Sundry forms of actual Cawteries fit inal wecefary cafes of all parts. 


‘ 
‘ 


AQuall Canute. 
tics tO be pre- 


Wed and potentiall cauteries: But I fhould rather approve of actuall, becaufe terredbetore 
w/e by ftrengthening the part, they confume the excrementitious humours °°"! 


Potential! Cau. 
cerics. 


| 
\ 
hard, either by 
the aire, then the 
sunds of the head, ded 
| -h 
bee too much © ale | | 
e of che 
the folidnefi 


at 


Concerning the Lucs Venerea. 


Other Cautertes. 


The following figure of a Caurery is fit for virulent knots that ari 
when you defire totake away the ficfhthatcoveis the bone; forthis pur 


ife inthe {cv ul, 
pofe itis mad: 


hollow and fharpe in atriangular and quacrangular forme, divided as it Wer into 


three branches,that you may fo make nic of which you pleafe. 


rhe 


T he Cat 
lye deep in, 
ing ofthe n 
Cautery ev 
andflefhy pam 


Great d 
teries, or 
onely the « 
dicall and 
deavourin 
andto fub§ 
Cauteries @ 
Mentitiou: 
bone. Bu 
In, as tha 
yOu 
4COvecring 
Ces where 
mult help 
SUT oyle o 
purpofe, y 
lome 
derthe ror 
mon dry 


[| . \ \ \ —= 
| 
orher Cawserics for the farse purpo/. 
1, 
be 7 
é 4 
== 
A = WN \ 
4 
ty } | 
tal ds 1 in 
i \ SSS 
| 


ts that arife in the fcull, 
Btorthis purpole it is made 


B®. divided as it Were into 
afe. 


(Concerning the Lues Venerea. 


The figure of shollow and cutting Cauteric. 


The Cauteries whofe formes are hereafeer expreft take place in rotten bones that 


yedeep in, wherein you cannot make ufc uf the formerly deicribed without touch- 
ngofthe neighbouring found parts. To avoyd which danger you fhall put your 
Caurery even tothe bone through aniiwu pipe, which may keep the neighbouring 
andfiefhy parts from burning. 


AGuak Cauteries with their pipes. 


\ \ \ 


= 


Great difcommodities enfue upon too rath, that is, too frequently applyed Cau- 
tcties, or too long adhering to the bone; for by this immoderate and fiery heat nor 
onely the excrementitious humidity of the rotten bone is confumed,but alfo the ra- 
dicall and {ubftantiall moifture of the part is exhaufted, wherein alone nature, en- 
deavouring to caft offthe corrupt {cailes, and fever the found from the rotten bone, 
indto fubftiture flefh, ftands and confifts. Whereof, the meafure of applying of Mannerofap- 
Cautcries ought to be taken from the greatneffe of the rottenneffe, and theexcre- PyisotCam 
mentitious, orafter a manner foamirg humidity {weating through the pores of the 
bone. But before you prefle your cautery into the rotten bone which lies very deep 
0, as that which happens in the thigh bone, andupon other very flefhy parts, 
you mult diligently defend the neighbouring, found and ficthy ports,as it were with 
‘covering, for that the humour diffufed by the touch of the fire, burns che other pla- 
Scswhereunto it diffuferh it felte like {calding oyle. After the caurerization you 
Muthelpe forwards the falling away of the fcailes, by fometimes dropping in 
oyle of whelpes, being made {calding hor. This oyle, though very fit for this 
Purpofe, yetdoe Inot iudge it fit toufeittoo often, it muy tutfice to have dropped che caine off 
“ti fometwice or thrice. For at length it may violatethe found bone, that lyes un- 
der the rotten, by the oyly, fubtleand moift fubftance. Furthermore, a bone is the 
Mott dry part of the body, therefore unctuous and moift medicines are contrary to 


‘Stemper and confiftence. But it conduceth often and gently co move the {cailes rs 
ready 


Oile of wheIpes 


. 
IQ, 
Wf 
| 
f 
\ A\\Y WY 
WHE}. 
| 
55 | 
KOSS 
| A 
\\ | 
SSS 
~ 


Concerning the L.ues. Venerea. has 

ready beginning to feparate themfeives, and it haftensthe flackeneile of nar. 

cating them off. Yet mays you not ufe force, unleffe peradventure when as Scab 

caution’ as it were by aflenderthread otherwife if the unwary Surgeon forcibly Sant 

burnt AW2 y the {cailes beforcebat nature hath put a cover upon the found bone, Bugl 

f Dots give way toanew altgration and fouleneffe by the appulfe of the aire. Further Mou 
| afrer thecorrupt {caile is falling off by the force of nature expelling it,you Bar? 
if diligent heed that you put not eating or corroding medicines upon the bonetha MM 
underit ; for thus thau {halt confume or wafte the fleth which nature harh Tan, 
red thereupon, which compoled ofnewly concreted bloud, likein foftnes. Tops 

newly crudicd mtlke, which otherwifle in time would grow intoa more (Olid T op 

hariconfiftence. This undergrowing fleth by little aud little thrufts the rotten Sow 

Ag above it, out of its place, and is the caufe of the {cailing thereof; itis arth, fife Com 

theredtogether likethe graines of apomgranate, with a red,{mooth and equall/, 

Conhalick pou. 2nd not ftinking,and at length it cafts forth a white matter. Therefore then wee Bist 

dersofwhar  anutt rather ftraw thereon Cephalick powder compofed of fuch things as havea, 


compofed. cu Ity tO drie without biting, {uch as are Orris roots,wafhed aloes,matticke, My trhe 


barly flowre , and the like. Laftly , it muft bee cicatrized 5 it is better thy Cen 


tL cailes 


of bones fallaway of themfelves by the onely force of nature, than to be plucked. Aa 
way by the force of medicines or inftraments ; becaufe, fuch as are too violen: Bete 
Cay 


and forcibly plucked away, leave cornerslike to fiftulousulcers. Neither Ought the 


corrupted membranes whenthey areturned into pws to bee plucked away to yin Thi 
lently, orto bee touched by too acride medicines ; for paine bereupon arifing hath 4 
divers times cauled ‘inflammation, convulfion and other pernicious fymptome Spe 
Therefore it is better to commit this bufinefle co nature, which in fucceffe of tin. AS 


by making ufe of the expulfive faculty, willeafily free it felfe from this rorten 
{tance ; for that whichis quick as farre as it is able, will ftill put away that which 
dead from it. 


Of all the 
of the Phyf 
toeach WOU 
perofthe pa 
ly of the de 
are good no 
thy and diff 
clotted blo: 
Thave often 
this manne: 
card ber 
we Adde 
him drink 3 


Cuar XXVIII. 
Of a vulnerary potion. 


Litif che contumacious rottenneffe of the bone and alfo a rebellious ulcer 
fhall not yeeldto the defcribed remedies, it will bee convenient to pre- 
(crive a vulnerary potion to the patient. For nature helped by po. 

&P rion, hath to my knowledge fandry times done wondrous things, inthe 
amendment of corrupt bones,and confolidartion of ulcers. Forthefe potions though 


The ufe of vul- ceffe 

nerary they doe not purge the noxious humours rates by ftoole, yctare they wondrous 
eff-tuall to cleanfe ulcers, and freethem from the exceffe of excrementitious hu- it 
zt mours, to cleanfe the bloud, and purge it from allimpurity, to agg!urinate broken tithing fac 


bonesand knit the fiaewes. I have here thought good to {peake of them,and chict- 


| ly, for thatthey were much commended by the Ancients, but neglected by the mo- ule of thef 


i derne Phyficians and Surgeons. Butif the cure of wounds and old ulcers be pet- a, 
N formed by deterfion, and the repofition of the loft fubftance, what medicine can bed oe 

fooncr orsather doitthan thar, which by its admirable and almoft divine force !0 tof vad 

purgeth the bloud, that thereof, as from a fit and laudible matter, the flefh or any fcth 

ther loft fubftance may be fitly reftored,and the part recover its former union ¢ Bat nfe ee 


if fittulous Ulcers, Cancers, Gouts & the like difeafes be offended by the ule of alt, 
{piced, acride meates and others which are of fubtle parts, as muftard, onions *" 

garlike,or any other exceffe in meat, or drinke,; why may they not become milde 
and gentle by medicated and contrary meats and drinks, or at leaft bee reduced (0! 
more equallcemper? Therefore that Surgeons may know of what chings fuch i 
pofitions may arife,I have herethought good to reckon them up, that you may !<*" 
what they are. 


* 
ar. 
4 
4 
| 
a 
| 
4 
| 
4 
i 
' 
| a ‘ 
Te 
‘ ] 
* 
Ba | 
| & 
a (eu 2 
Of 


iB. | 9 
ackenefle of 


venture when 

urgeon forcib] 
lound bone, he. 
he aire. Furtherm.. 
jling it,you muft 
upon the bone thar 
nature hath 
» 1S likein loftne 
info a More folid 

lirults the rotten bon 
Of; itis atthe firft 
sooth and Cqual] 
Therefore ther Wee 
ich things as havea 
loes,matticke, myrthe 
it is better thar { Cailes 
thanto be plucked 

mch as are too Violent] 
tS. Neither ought the 
plucked away too vio, 
bereupon arifing hath 
Croicious fymptomes. 

ich in fucceffe of time 
ate trom this rotten 


put away that which is 


alfo arebellious ulcer 
bee convenient to pre- 
¢ helped by fucha po- 
ondrous things, in the 
rthefe potions though 
ctare they wondrous 
f excrementitious hu- 
to agglurinate broken 
ake of them,and chief- 
t by the mo- 
and old ulcers be pet- 
ce, what medicine can 
Balmoft divine force {0 
Mctcr, che fle(h orany 0- 
its former union? Bat 
nded by the ufe of falt, 
as muftard, onions 40 
1ey not become mild¢ 
nt leaft bee reduced (08 
what things fuchcom™ 
up, that you may leat" 


Scabiows 


Scabions. The capillaryes. 
Sanicle. Herbe Robert, 
Bugle. Doves foot. 

Mouf- care. Dozges tongue. 
Baroet. Avepes. 
Madder. Prunclle. 

Tanfie. 

Tops of Dempe. 

Sowes bread. Herusaria, 
Comfory the greater ana leffer. Red Colewurt or Cabbage. 
Vervine. Stor dium, 
Bistorte.  Cathes minte, 
‘Muewurte. Cinque forle, 
Periwincle. River Crabse @ 
Centaur). Mace. 

Adders tongue. Bolearmenick. 
Betonie. Petum or Tobvacce. 
Carduus benedicins. Mead.fweet. 

The cordiall flowers. Colts. foot. 
Ariftolochia, or Birth-wurts. Davndelwn. 

pecawelk. Plantaine. 
Agrimonic. St. Fobns wurte, 


Ofall thefe the Surgeon (hall make choice according to the mind and jdgement 
| ofthe Phyfician,fuchas he fhall thinke fe and proper toevery ulcer or wound, or 


wounded and ulcerated part,according to the condition of thetime,the tem- 


serofthe patient and kinde or nature of the difeafe. You may make drinkes not one 
\y ofthe decoctions of thefe, but alfo of their juices in white wine, or eaomel, which 
uegood not oncly to purifie the mafle of the bloud, to cleanfe fanious, virulent, fil- 
fayand diffenterious ulcers,but alforo drive away putrefaction, {cail bones, diffolve 
clotted bloud in bruifes, to draw, plucke out and cxtcrmunate all {trange bodies, as 
| Thaveoften obferved tomy great admiration. They are compofed ufually atrer 
thismanner. Re. an.m.8.uvar. mund, fers, hyper. 
bcard.ben.an 3i.trinm complete in aq. communt; poftea tp fi- 
madde vini alb.mel.rof. cinnam, quod fufficct at deco(t:0,coletur per mantcam. Let 
him drink Siii.in the morning 3.houres before dinner. You may alfo with goad fuc- 
 cefemake injections with the fame liquor into fiftulous and finuous ulcers,as alio to 
wahthe fordid ulcers therewith. You may alfo boile the fame fimples,as herbs,fow- 
sand (eeds in the patients broths, that fothey may acquire a medicinable and 
thing faculty. For the time ofthe affea, wherein you may with good fucceffe make 
ule of thefe,we have read in Guido, that he ufed not to prefcribe thefe potions to his 
patients when as they were newly wounded, for that they commonly are compofed 
ofthings hot and opening,which heat and attenuate the bloud,whence there would jn whactime of 
bedanger of a defluxion,uponthe affeated part. Wherefore when the matter is come the — they 
tofuppuration,when as there nothing remains,butto cleanfe the ulcer and filit with ae ” 
cth,no indammation as now remaining inthe part, I judgechefe potions may then 


euled with good fucceffe: 


Theformecf a 
vulneraty 
potion. 


Car. 


| 
a! 
| 


— 


Sizneralthe 
ne d dil- 


A water drying water which dries and is of fubtle parict.an 3i,4q .alum,3 


Concerning the LuesVenerean ||, 


Cuar.XXIX. 


Of Testers Ring. wormes or Chops occafioned by the Lucsvenetes: 


Pon the cure of the Luesvenerea,ufually Tetters and Chops ha PPenth 
a upon, which make rurrowes in the palmes of the hands & foles ¢ tthe 
They acquire their matter from falt phlegme, or aduft chole, or 
EG liques of the venereous virulency fent thither. The cure efpecia} Nery 
the diteafe is grown old, is difficult,by reafon thatthe humour hath lone a, 
to flow that way,& forthat it hath corrupted the habite of the part by the ome 
defluxion ; burthe cure is more cafte if the difcafe bee newly bred. Noy ay 
know itis newly bred by the rednefle,accompanyed by a great itching oH ‘ a 
a drinefs of the skin,bur alfo a chicknefs & denfenefs thereof. That which i RTT, 
fidescthefe fore-recited figns, have {caily & branlike hardneffes conjoined there Me 
which by fcratching & rulsbing caft off {cailes.For general medicines, the gig. 
of che liver & habit of the body mult be corrected,which by the occafion of het 
mer difcafe & remedies apt to inflame the bloud,cannot but much {werve fron, 
native temper. [his may be done by diet conveniently appointed, by purging and.) 
tering medicines, bleeding, bathing,apply ing of cupping-glafles and horns, For. 
pick or particular medicines, wath {uch as are newly or lately bred with the followin, 


virulent 4 iti. pul. fwbl.D.ii1 fiat lent ct baln.mar. This water fhall bee 


Thecure of 
old .etecrs 


The 


fc.fiat ancwent ufum.\t the Phyfician fhall think 200d, le 


mor? or lefic forcible according to the condition of the difeafe. Or, K, of 44); 3 


uic a decoction of Gasjacum, but that very weak. But old Tetters and ( hops muf ly 


powder, and incorporated with the yolke of an eggc,the juice of Citrons,and 2 lle 


aloes diflolved in exymel [cillitscam, 


CHAP. XXX. 
Of curing the Lucs Venerea in infants and little children. 


N fants oft-times conceive the feeds of this difeafe in the wombs of 


| | | 
mothers, and are bovne infeed therewithall, puftles prefently ariling 
over all the bodies, infe@ting with the like difeafe as many nurics as" 


them fuck;they {carce ever recover thereof,for thac they contractec 


difeafe from their firft conformation. But {uch as are fomewhat bigs 


ifthey chance to catch the difeafe after they are born by fucking fon infected 
or by any other occafion or kind of cantagion,often times receive cure. For frit) 
fyal caufe che nurfe to the aqua theriacals hereunder defcribed,{or the {pace 0! 
or more daies,that fo the may the better arm herfelf againft the contagion of his” 
cafe, & yeeld milk which may have the faculty both of meat and medicine ; (h 
be carefull as often as fhe gives the child fuck,to wath and dry her teat or pap,!<!*" 


yirulen® 


4 
ms exper tes! 
heder, a 
conf. rof. cnt 
An, 3 il. dilti 
combee int 
oftwelve h 
wine and 
then let the 
facultics. V 
wupin 
filled 
diftilled. € 
hamon, ang 
adrinke d¢ 
the noble 
vet, ac 
perestur Or 
whereof le 
thisto bed 
caule {wea 
coction of 
phlegmati 
coction o 
parts, and 


pearthrous! 
bat 
 fhall be «ep 
notia one ¢ 
yi 
| by thelc 
of medicin 
q 
[TOC 
ah ointments and plafters having the fame effect. Then let the refidue of the cure hen. 
| A Fuaization. formed by fumigations fuch as this which followes. pal.cimab.3ii. 
rac tart thertac.g [pant trochife: ule ar each: 
wh {ome 38.0f chem,and let only the affe@ed parts receive the {moak. Some comme 
the rebbing of rhe hands with che following medicine. Take the afhes of wine! 
ret. make thereot a lic,& ftrain i though an hy pocras bag, then putthercrolomercnne, 
Jer them be well mixedrogether ina mortar,and herewith let the hands be 
S1ii.facct Cy Letchem be incorporated & make a linimenttol 
uftdro the part. If tothis you adde fublimate fo wafhed & prepared, as womenvk 
htt for their faces,you fhall make it more effetuall. Otherstake burnt alume made 
if 
on 


é B. 


Lucs veneteg,' 


nd Chops ha 
hands & foles 
adult choler 


>» Ort 
he cure cf{pecia ne 


reat itching and p 

f. That Is old 

fics conjoined th 

medicines,the difterm,.. 

the occalion of the | 
tmuch {werve from 


lafles and horns. Fo 


bred with the followin 


cinab3ii. lad.af].odor. fi- 


ufeat cachtime 


imoak. Some commend 
ake the afhes of wine lees, 
putthercto fome rennet, 
the hands be rubbedor 
S.argent.viv, 
& make alinimentto be 
prepared, as women ve 
burnralume made isto 
¢ of Citrons,and a little 


We children. 


(cin the wombs of theit 
puftles prefently arifing 
(cas many nurfes as 
that they contracted the 
as are fomewhat bigge! 
king fom infeéted nu! fe, 
ceive cure. For firlt,yo" 
ibed,for the {j pace of 20 
the contagion of this ©! 
tand medicine ; the {hall 
ry her teat or pap,lett un 

yirulene 


ppen there. 


Of the tee, 


Te. 
ily Whenis 


oly 
be. 
Tewith | 
per | 
| heir 
inted, by purging andal. | 


rto. | 


[his water fhall bee made 
Bicaic. Or, ol tart, 3 

hink good, let the Patient 
tters and € hops muft be 
1S, aS allo with liniments. | 
efidue of the cure he pe 


| thenoble parts. Rondeletius makesan aqua thertacals afterthis manner. lk. thertac. 


poentur omniain vino albo, diftilentur in vafe vitrio : referve the water for ule; 


19, (Concerning the Lues Venerea. 755 


—jency that the child breathes out at his mouth,be impact in the little holes of the 
" ethrough which the milk fowes out. Now the puftules of little children fhall bee 
with fome ointment that receives argentam in {ome {mall quantity, 
enulatum cum mercurie,or the like. Then hall it be fwathed or bound up 
 fwathes and clothes aired with the formerly defcribed fumigations.For the reft,it 
iyi] be kept as Warm as you canin fome warm place, Thefe & the like muft be done 
in ODE continued courfe,but at feverall feafons,otherwife it isto be feared,that it 
_gald caufe ulcers to arife in the mouth, or elfe falivation. If any ulcers arife in the 
mouth and {pread therein,they hall be touched with the formerly defcribed waters, 

made fomewhat weaker, having regard to the tender age of the patient; if the in- 
gat hall get this difeate of its nurle,letthe nurfe be prefently changed, for it being o- 
aerwitc nourifhed with tainted and virulent bloud,can never be healed. Many have 
w thefemeanes recovered ; but fuch as have perifht, have nor perifht by the default 
medicines, but by the malignity and vehemency ofthe difeafe. 


A defcription of the aqua Theriacalis, or treacle water 
formerly mentioned. 


rafur. interior. ligni fancti gumuofi, tb jj. polypod. querni, vine albi dulceds- 
expertss 1b ii. aqua fontan. 1B viii. aquar. cichor. cy fumar.an. 5 iv. (em. jarip. Arccacle warer 
baccar. lauri li. caryophil. cy Macs, An, cort. citri faccharo Condit. 
anthos cichor. buglof. borag.an. 3%, conf. anule camp. thiriac, vet. mihrid. 
diftill them all in da/seo Maria after the following manner. Lec the Guaja- 
ambee infufed in equall parts of wine and the forementioned waters forthe {pace Themasss: “ 
ofewelve houres, and the refidue of thethings inthat which remainesofthe fame 
wine and waters for fixe houres {pace , beating fuch things as may require it, 
hen let them bee mixed altogether, that fo the liquor may be endued with all their 
ficulties. Which that it may be the more effectually performed,let them be boy led, 
in glafle bottles clofely ftopped for fome three or four hours {pace,in a large 
\etle filed with boiling water, then letthem be put intoa glaffe alembicke, and fo 
ditilled. Give 5 iv. of this diftilled liquor at once, being aromatized with 5i, of ci- 
uumon, and i.of Diamargariton, and 5 8. of fugar, to give ita pleafing tafte. Such 
adrinke doth not onely retunde the virulency of the Lwes venerea, but ftrengthens 


Rondel: tits his 


vt. Ibi. acetof, mili. rad, gram. 5 iii. pulee. card. ben. an.m li flor, chamam.p ii. waters 


whereof let the patient take 3 ii. with 5 iii. of forrell and bugloffe water : he wifheth 
thisto be done when he fhall enter into bed or a ftove;for fo this diftilled liquox will 
cule fweat more eafily, and mitigate paine, whether given by it felfe, or with ade- 


 codion of Grommell, or of chyna, or burre-docke roots; yet ifthe patient bee of a 


phlegmaticke conftitution, hee fhallufea decoction of Guajacnm in ftead of a de- 
cotion of chyna, forit penetrates more fpeedily, by reafon of its fubtlety, of 
parts, and alfo expells the dolorificke matter. 


The End the Booke. 


ur hath lone a 
he ry 
ne part by the oa 
ly bred. Now 


SMALLPO 


OF VVORMES AND THE 
LEPROSIE. 


THe Twenrietn Booke. 


Cuap.l. 


Of the caufes of the Small Pockes and Meazles. 


O thatthe fmall Pocksand Meazles are difeafes, which ufually 
A) STEN} RN arc forerunners and forctellers of the plague,not only by the cor- 
ruption of humoars, but ofttimes by default of the aire ; moreo- 
4} ver, forthat woimes areofttimes generated inthe plague, I have 

choughr good to write of thefethings, tore end that by this trea- 
itifethe young Surgeon may bee more amply and perfectly ia- 
{tructed in that peftilent difeafe. Alfol have thoughc good to 
setof the Leprofie as being the off-{pring of the higheft corruption of humours 
athe body. Now the fall pocks are pultles, and the meazels {pots whicharife in 


‘ctop of the skinne by reaton ofthe impurity of the corrupt blood fent thither by 
tne force of nature. Moft of the Antients have delivered that this impurity isthe Meazlesare. 
of the meaftruous blood remaining in the body of the infant, being of mater. 


Vitter from whence it drew nourifhment inthe wombe, which lyiag ftill or quiet 
ome (pace of ime, bat Mirred up at the tirit opportunicy of a hotter fummer, or 
‘ioutherly or rainy feafoa, orahidden malignity ia the aire, and boyling up, or 
Yorking withthe whole mafle of the blood, {pread or fhew themfelves upon the 
"tole turface of che body. An argument hereofis, there are few or none who have 
lot beene troubled with this difeafe, at leaft once intheir lives, which when it be- 
itfelfe, not content to fecupon fome onc, it commonly feazethupon 
‘nore : now commonly there is as much difference betweene the {mall pockes and 
Meazles, as there is between a Carbuncle and a peftilent 2440. For the {mall pocks 
“cola more grofleand vifcous matter, towit, ofa phlegmaticke humour. But 
meazles of amore fubtle and hot, that is,acholericke matter, “herefore this 
cildsno markes thereof, but certaine {mall fpots without any tumour, and thefc 
cher red, purple, orblacke. Butthefimall pockesare extuberating puftles, white 
“the midft, butred in the circumference, an of blood mixed with 

S cr 


F Z 437 
A 


Concerning the Small 


ler, yetchey arefcarce knowne at the beginning, thatis, onthe { ict oe 
they appeare ; but on the third and fourth day they bunch out and rife up eer, 


Whythe Mea- 
dot not 
itch. 


fympromes 
may. bappen 


by the 


POCkeSs 


The cure. 


wardsarifc, which favour ofthe malignity of the humour, yea and equall the harm 
of the fymptomes of the Lwes venerta. — 


Crap, II. 
Of the cureof the Small Pockes and Mea les. 


He cure of this difeafe ufeth to bee divers, according to the 
9 . } the humour free from, or partaker of the venenate quality. For i pet 
“v7 siventothe Nurleas may infringe and overcome the ftrength of the md 
lignity,as wee fhall thew more at large, when weecome rotreat of the cure 
dren which are fick of che plague ; howfoever it be,the child mutt be kept 1" 4 _ 
roome free trom winde, and muft bee wrapped and covered with {carlet clov"” 
untillthe pockes comeforth- There thall bee provided for the Nuri medica 
brothes with purflaine, lettuce, forrell, fuccory, borage, and Freach 


very little. 


peene boy 


up jna clog 
drinke a di 
medicio cs 
dicineadle 
as have the 


have lefc hig 
barly and: 


prifan m2 
the foure c 
hartf{- horn 
of violets, 
and inclin 
{leep dra WV 
ther purge 
adventure 
witha ple 
motion of 
ly wich a 
clenfion ti 
the humo 
to le 
4in may d 
otherwifc 
odferved it 
for we difl 
or crulted 
ableeding 
fhould cart 
will come 
Which ts 
Not be (Roy 
out With a 
{mallage, 
power toc 
humour 
Oftheskin 
keepe the j 
by reafon¢ 
more than 
Citron feed 
hinder ho 
tisnor fice 
Wrapped ia 
"rung fort 
Veat Ow 
of his 
thened and 
Cauled. Ty 
mad 
and Other 
from 


| remain, 
| | a dies y 
| ches pricke like either, Decaute 
azles doe neitl btle, it eafily exhales 
mour, bec an itching Ife for thacic often fnecfe from the| 
ber elle tents ing from the 
faine {o 2 nder he puri ontinu th and 
| risno cup u fon oft vith ac iginous heavineffe, 
it kept fhu by reaio re held \ da vertig iting. 3 hoarfs. 
mat arastot their 1ufeo to fleepe, roubled. For 
er parts itchi 5 inting, inclin irurine redde: ie 
A bac kes, ing or fa an rurine thence this 
ins thing, thei iter | 
in thet d ae f fown ¢ brea llen, he ma that new : 
C uen d iwo hat uality 9 Noe 4 
wit difficult a (reves ate fie smucn, dcon Tupts the bone 
prog iginall, p ‘poile the 10 © this Caton, 
- rip d tol down his {tree 
Prognofickes takes ang obfer ve ifle CO in j ] ckes tor the 
ares, W Claude d, havin thema ‘hefe eating 
other ye ohtero sold, come ders, who alot 
The da or five y uld no f the ividedthem lade. 4 
Aly} foure eco joints divide of the blade 
REE hiftorie ing lfome fo d natur the joi nd di he heado j 
Al being fo h, an and non, 2 nd the head of 
fe ablc ode co are ntothe ¢ 
He lent matter, rtoft with me, Doresau bferve in: 
roicne reat pa itne{les Jobn may O reflion { 
Ai. hyfitian, Alfoyou h fuch impreffion 
contu thing iefe poy ence. it caufet nefle. Afi. 
atti d being difea os tne iInging vertne 
| he bo of this 2S bring neth bi to do ove 
if anc,t lignity of t lI parts, idat leng feethem avingthein. 
he ma incipall p tS, andat! as yOu by leaving thes 
d DY in the prin ine the puts , railes,as arts, DY in che fle(h, 
tion in t Icerating thefe ent pa 
ex eS de p 4 
corrup fluxe ulc thefe or left thee: hemfelves andweak:. 
ma, blo raigne d noto ers, FOO Ne ating ave been ac 
| ve raged or they do nd ulcers, otion, cating uty havevers + 
|| rievous he bo y3 fthe pu facu ty M OTCE ive loft 
What us face oft arresoO a the arncle. hers hav SU 
| and pernitio ns and {c take away knec and menay, Other in che 
reffio mes they wreit, dot Guy crowing har the 
ning the fight by failing, a xc ie, then Lyng 
privedoft herfome ny reliques Of artis 
ae Ay ring, and ot es. Bucita lled by the ftreng | 
Wy and ear not expe 
the nc cof bee 
| matter ther 


Ly 8.20 
he firft or fecond 
t and rife upinto ty 
t the meagies rem aine 
by reafor of ace, 
cr, either becaufe the 
pbtle, it eafily exhale. 
mo inecle when as ther. 
Bcending from the low 
all feaver, with paines 
ginous heavineffe, ang 
nd vomiting, a hoarfe. 
“pe, aheavineffe of 21) 
dée andtroubled. Fo, 
utter whence this affea 
corrupts the bone: 
8. butralfo in divers 
ms notable example, 
hames his {treet at Peary 
he {mall pockes for the 
ity of the difeafe, there 
s, whofe eating and vi- 
d them infunder ; alfo it 
dthe head of the blade. 
phyfitian of Para, and 
con tothe Conte de Bry- 
ay obferve in many kil- 
feth fuch impreffion of 
ick, a hoarfeneffe, 
ne death, asthe puttles 
them to do over the (ur- 
yarts, by leaving the im- 
felves deepe in che fleth, 
‘ng afunder, and weake- 
er fundry have been de- 
hers have loft their hes- 
Ewing in the paflagesot 
ne, and thac the whole 
then fymptomes alter- 
‘ea and equall the harme 


Meaz les ana wormes, C. 


spina cloth. She hall fhua all falc, {piced anu buked meates, and in ftead of wine 
jinke a decoction of liquerice, raifons and forrell roots.She thallalfo take purging 
gedicines,3s if fhe were ficke of the fame difeafe that fo her milke may become me. 
jicineable. Laftly, fhall obferve thefame dict asis ufually orefcribed to fuch 
ishave the plague. You fhall give the ciiild No pappe, or if you give it any, let ic bee 
very little. But if che child be weaned, ler him abftaine from flcth, watill the feaver theca mut 
have lefthim , andthe pocks bee fully come forth :1n itcad of fleth let him feed on havene pappe- 
barly and almond creames, chicken brothes,whercin the fore-named herbes have 
peene boyled, ponadoes, gellies, culaffes, prunesand raifons. Let his diinke beea 

jfan made of French barly , graffe and forrell roots, or witha nodula containing 
‘ye foure cold feeds, the pulpe of prunes and raifons,with the fhavings of | vory and 

horne ; Betweene meales the fame decoction may be mixed wich fome f yrupe 
ofviolers,but not of rofes or any other aftringent fyrupe, left wee hinder the cuurfe 
ndinclination of the humour outwards. Let his fleepe be moderate, fortvo found 

Jeep drawes back the mater tothe center, and encreafeth the feavers you muftnei 
purgeor draw bloud the difeafe increafing or being atthe height, untefle per- barmeinthis 
sdventure there bee a great plenitude, or elfezhe difeafe complicate with other, as | 
witha pleurifie, inflammation of the eyes, or a fquinancie which require it, leit the 
| motion of nature fhould be diityrbed; but you thal think it fufficient to loofe the bel- Sdorificxes 
| jywitha gentle glyfter : but whenthe height of the difeafe is over, and in the de- 
denfion thereof, you may with Cafia or fome ftronger medicine evacuate part of 
thehumours and the reliques of the difeafe. But inthe ftate andinercafe iris better 
route fudorificks, which by attenuating the humours and r:laxing the pores of the 
Ainmay drive the caufe of the difeafe trom the center to the circumference, which 

atherwife refiding in the body miglit bee acaufe of death ; as Land Richard Hubert abistery: 
odlerved in two maides, whereof one was foure,and the other feventcericycars old 
for we difle@ing them both being dead, found their entratles covered with {cabb 
orcrulted puftles, like thofe that break forth ae the skin. We muft not think that 
ableeding at nofe at the beginning of the difeafe, or in the firtt foure or five dayes 
hould carry away the matter and orizinall of the difeafe, tox nevertheleife the pocks 
willcome forth ; but forchat this: is arrue andnaturall crsfis of this difeafe, as char 
| which iscarryedto the furface and circumterence ot the body, fuch bleeding muft 
tothe Ropped, unleffe you feare it willcaufe fowning. Phe matter fhall bee drawne ¢ 
out with a decoétion of figs,husked lentils, citron feeds, the feeds of fensell, parfly, decottion. 
{millage roots of graffe,raifons and dates. For fuch a decoGtion, certainly itic have 
power cocaufe {weat, hath alfo a faculty to fend forch unto che skin the morbificke 

lumour; the feeds of fennelland the like opening things relaxe and open the porcs 
| Otheskin fizges lenifie the acrimonie ofthe matter, and gently clean{e, the lentils 
| kepethe j wes and throate,and all the inward parts from puitles, and itinder a fluxxe 
by reafon of their moderate aftriGtiion, but having their husk¢s oa, they would bind 
| More than is required in the difeafe ; dates are thought ro comfort the ftomack, and 
| citron feeds to defend the heart trom malignity, liqucrice to fmaoth the throat,and 
| bindethoarfneffe and caufe fwear. But thefe things thall be given long after meat, for. 
| “not ficto feat prefently after meat ; fome there bee who would have the child to procure a 
Wapped in linnen clothes (teeped in this decoction being hor, and afterwards hard‘ 
| Wag forth. Yer [had rather to ufe bladders or {fpunges, or hot bricks forthe fame 
scertainly a decodtion of millet, figges and raifons,with fome fugar, caufeth 


29. 


B ‘¥at powerfully. Neither is it amiffe while(t the patient is covered in all other parts 
| Othis dody,and fweats,to fan his face, for thus the native heat is kept tn & fu ftreng- 
“ened, and tainting hindred, anda greater excretion of cxcrementitious humours 
“led. To which purpofe you may alfo put now and then to the paricnts nofe ane- 
“ made with alittle vinegar & water of rofes, camphire, the powder of jan.ers, 


other odoriferous things which havea cooling faculty, this allo willkeepe the 
dole from puftles, 


ding tothe condinor of 
te quality. if 

ilde, {uch chings 
Be the ftrength of the 
treat of the cure Of 
j mutt be kept ina wart 
dwith fcarletc¢ 


S{la Cuar- 


| 
‘les. 
the Nurfe 
arty bo 
ind Freach batly © 
. 


Concerning tbe Small Pocks, 

IIL 


What parts mufl be armed againit, and preferved fromthe Pocks, 


BF He eyes, nofe, throte,lungs,and inward parts ought to be kept freer 
the eruption of puftles tnanthe other parts ; for that their nature ang 
NG fiftence is more obnoxious to the malignity of this virulenc re 
the 
How ro defend are eafilyer corrupted and blemifhed. Therefore Icft the eyes thoy! ik 
tac eyes. burt, you inuft defend them when you firft begin to fufpect the difeafe, withthe eye 
lids, alfo moiftening them with rofe-water, verjuice or vinegar, and a little Con. 
phire. Thereare {ome alfo who for this purpofe make a decoction of Sumach, be. 
bery-feeds, pomgranate pills, aloe,sand a little faffron ; the juice of fowre Pomers, 
mares, and the water of the whites of egges dropped in with rofe-water, are 2004 
forthe fame purpofe ; alfo womans milke mixed with rofe-water and often fe 
Whentheeyes newed, and laftly, all {uch things as have a repercuflive quality. Yer if th eves 
bee much fwolne and red, you fhall not ufe repercuflives alone, but mixe there 
meaner le with difcuffers and cleanfers, {ach as are fit by a familiarity of nature to firengthen 
oucly. the fight; and lerthefe bee tempered with fome fennell or eye-bright water, Then 
the patient thall not looke upon the light or red things for feare of Daine and infin 
mation; wherefore in the fate of the difeafe when the pain and inflammation ofthy 
eyes are at their height, gently drying and difcuflive things properly Conducingto 
the eyes are moft convenient, as Wathed aloes, tuttye and Antimonic in the waterof 
Howeodefend feanelleye bright and rofes. The formerly mentioned nodulus wil! preferveriy 
nose, and linnen clothes dipped in the fore-faid aftringent decoction, put intoth 
Howrhe mouth Nofthrils and ourwardly applyed. We fhall defend the jawes, throate and throttle, 
and preferve the integrity of che voice by a gargle of oxycrate, or the juice of fowre 
pomegranates, holding aliothc grains of them in their mouths,& often rouling them 
up & down thercin,as alfo by nodulas of the feeds of p/i/iwm,quinces & the like cold 
How che lungs. & altringent things. We muft provide forthe lungs & refpiration by fyrupes of. 
jubes, violets, rofes, white poppyes, pomegranats, water-lllies,and the like. Now 
when as the pocks arethroughly come forth, chen may you permit the patient roue 
fomewhat a treer dict,and you muft wholly bufic y our felfe in ripening and evacue 
ting the matter, drying and fealing them. But for the meazels,they are cured by 
folutiononely, and not by fuppuration ; the pocks may bee ripened by annoynuing 
them with frefh butter, by fomenting them wicha decoGion of the roots of 14 
Howeo prevent Lowes, lillies, figs,line-feedsand the like. Afterthey areripe, they havether 
heads clipped off with a paire of fizzers, or elfe bee opened with a golden oriilve 
necdie, left the matter conteined in them, fhould corrode the Aeth chat lyes chereus 
der,and after the care, leave the prints or pockholes behinde it, which would caule 
fome deformity ;the pus, or matter beiag evacuated, they fhall be dryed up 
guent rofat. adding thereto ceruffe, litharge,alocs and a little faffron in powder 
thefe have not onely a faculry to dry, but alfo ca regenerate Acth , for the tame pul 
pofethe fourcof barly and lupines are diflolved or mixed with rofe-watel, 4 
the affedted parts annoynted therewith with a fine linnen ragge; fome anno 
them with the (wathe of bacon boiled in water and wine, then prefently 0# 
upon them the floure of barly or lupines, or both of them. Orhers mixe crude 
newly caken from the combe,with barly doure, and cherewithall annoine the puis 
foto dry chem ; being dryed up like a {curfe or {cab, they annoint chem with oy - 
rofes,violets, almonds, or elfe with fomecreame, that they may the 
way, the puftles being broken ; tedious itchings foJlicite the patients {cra 
whence happens excoriation and filthy ulcers, for {cratching isthe occalion © 
ter atrra@ion. Wherfore you fhall bind the fick childs hands,and fomens the 
parts with a decottion of marth mallowes, barly and lupines, with the adaitio"™ 


fome falt. Bur if it bee already excoriated, then hall you heale ir with #”: 


Remedies for bum camphor at. adding thereto a little powder of Aloes or 3 Jirtle 4 


excoriation, rubrum. Butif notwithftading all your application of repelling ™ 


| 


ed icine 
pult 


£71 B. 2 


afties nev 
all manne 
chat Signe: 
ot cheir pré 
and caufcd 
[are and thr 
garifmes 
supe of re 
jugar of 
rhe face, 
and shen a 
4 
powder, a! 
gnoynt th 
face with 
ducks and 
of lillies 
whiten the 
ufethe {w 
dowers, 
to walte an 


A Dif 


Asinth 
are winds,t 
ties, {tones 
whocand 
the guts of 
note in di 
you heard 
tained in w 
that cure w 
whole bod 
bellow, an 
ken our of 
cannot de 
men & wo 
ted figure 
tought 
and the te; 
any forme 
that all 
for fuch 
lave tran! 
things the 
Wens refe, 
‘ffinulate 
Ciphered | 

and und: 
“reature.t 
Make ite 
Molley;, 
“Orpion 


| 
é 
| 
| 
= 
& 
7 


Lis. 29. 


Bh to be kept freer from 
nature and cop. 
virulency, and the 
jeft the eyes fhould 
he difeafe,with the 
ezaf, and a little Cam- 
of Sumach, ber. 
juice of fowre pomprg. 
hrofe-water, are poo¢ 
oc¢-Water and often re. 
uility. Yer if the 
alonc, but mixe there. 
cf nature to firengrhen 
e-bright Water. Then 
arc OF paine and inflam. 
at d inflammation of the 
groperly conducingto 
In the water of 
oculus will preferve the 
decoction, put intothe 
es, throate and throttle, 
Mat. Or the juice of fowre 
hs,8¢ often rouling them 
p,quinces & the like cold 
by fyrupes of ju- 
and the like. Now 
pemit the patient to uf 
ripening and evacus 
they are cured by te- 
¢ ripened by annoyntng 
jon of the roots Of mal 
Bpe, they fhali have chest 
d with a golden or filver 
ve chat lyes thereun- 
deit, which would caule 
Inallbe dryed up withs- 
te faffron in powder ; fot 
efleth , for the fame 
ed with rofe-water, 49 
em tage; fome annoint 
le, then prefently itrow 
Others mixe crude 
|| annoint the pufties 
ano. ot them with oy 
inay the fooncr fail a- 
ice the patiants icra’ 
ng i: he occafion of 
foment the Ding 
ines, with the addition 
hes ic with 
Cinnabar is or a little 
on of repelling 


she face, if they bunch out undecently, hall be clipped away witha paire of {iz 


| toylein divers Womens bellies, if fo be you ftand neare them, that you would think 


Jiciness 
puit 


20, Mearles and Worm CC. 761 


fle break forth at the eyes,then they be diligently cured with 
,|| manner of Collyria, having acare chace he inflammation of that part grow notto 
‘hat bignes,as tO break the eies,& that which fomtimes happens to drive them forth 
of theis proper orbes. If any crufty ulcers arife in the nofthrils, they may be dryed 
ind cauledto fall away by putting up of oyntments. Such asarife in the mouth, pa- For theulcers 
iste and throat, with hoarleneffe and difficulty of {wallowing,may be he! ped by gar- ar mouth 
wrifmes made with barly water, the waters of plantaineand chervill with forne fy- 
of red rofes,or Diamoron diflolved therein ; the patient holdin his mouth 

oar of rofes or the tablets of Elec?, diatragacanth. frigid. The Pock-arres k 


ft in Toheip ch: 


sid then annointed with freth citrin. or with this liniment. amy |; 


amygdalarum excorticatarum,an. 5iS. gum.tragacanth 36. feminis melonum, 


(harum ficcarum excorticat. farina hordet, an. Let them all bee made into fine 


powder, and then incorporated with rofe-water,and fo make a liniment, wherewith 
ygoynt che face with afeather ; let it bee wiped away in the morning, wathing the 


acc with fome water and wheat bran ; hereto alfoconduceth fac wrgimale ; Goofe, 


ducks and Capons greafe are good tofmooth the roughneffe of the skin, as alfo oile 
oflillies ; hares blond of one newly killed and hot is good to fill and plaine, as alfo 
whiten the Pock-holes, ifthey bee often rubbed therewith. In ftead hereof many 


Me i(cthe {wathe of Baconrubbed warme thereon ; alfo the diftilled waters of beane 
| fowers,lilly roots,reed-roots, egge-thels,and oile of egs are thought very prevalent 


“owalte and {moothe the Pock-arres. 


ADifcourfe of certaine monftrous creatures which breed against nature inthe 
bodies of men,women,and little children, which may ferve as an 
induction to the enfuing difcourfe of worms. 


Asin the macrocofmos or bigger world, fo inthe microcofmos or lefler world there « comparifon 
fhowres, tnundations of waters, fterilities, fertili. between 
ies, tones, mountaines and fundry forts of fruits and creatures thence arife, For 77°" 
whocan deny but that there is winde conteined fhut up in flatulent ab{cefles,and in The generation 
the guts of chofe that are troubled withthe cholicke ¢ Fiatulencics make fo great a 
\ouheard a great number of frogs croaking onthe nighttime ; That wareriscon- Ofwater. 


hiaed in watery abfcefles, and the belly of fuchas havethe dropfie,is manifefted by 


utcurewhich is performed by the letting forth of the water ; in fits of Agues the 

| Whole body is no orherwife fhaken and trembles, than the earth when it is heard to : 
<llow, and feltro fhake under our feet. He which fhall fee the ftones which are ta Offtones. 
Me out of the bladder, & come from the kidnies and divers other parts of the bodie, 


cannot deny but that {tones are gencratedin our bodies, Furthermore wee fee both off uiesfrow 


0. & women who in their face,orfome other parts, fhew the impreflion,or imprin- the frft con- 
of acherry,plumb,fervice, fig,mulberry & the like fruit;the caufe hereof is 
| “oughtto bethe power of the imagination concurring withthe formative faculty, 
| Mdthetendernefle of the ycelding and waxe-like embryon, cafic tobe brought into 
| “yforme or figure by reafon of the proper and native humidity. For you thall find 
| Oatall their mothers while@ they went with chem have carneftly defired or longed 
‘ot fuch things, which,whileft they have roo carneftly agitated in their mindes,they 


have tranf-ferred the (hape untothe childe, whileft that they could not enjoy the 


‘hingsthem{clves. Now. who can deny but that buaches on the backe, and large 


¥enstefemble mountaines? Who can gainfay, but that {qualide fteriliry may bee 


| “iinulated tothe drynefs of wafted and confumed perfons? and fertility de- 


“ipnered by the body diftended with much fiefhand fat, fo that the legs can{carce 

‘Ndunder the burden of the belly 2 Butthat divers creatures are generated in one 
“eature,that is, in man,and that in fundry parts of him,the following hiftories thal 
Nake it evident, 
4ellerins tels thata certaine Italian by frequent f{melling to the herbe Bafil] had a Lib de meré. 
orpion bred in his braine, which caufed long and vehement paine, andat length °° “?" 


Sif 3 Ceath ; 


Pocks. 


—— 


death ; therefor ¢ T have here exprett the figure of that Scorpion found when sj; 
braine was opened. 


: Concerning she Small P 


The figure of 4Scorpien. 


It makes Hellerius conjeGure of the caufe and originall of this Scorpion pro 
for that Chryfippus, Dyophanes and Pliny write, that of bafill beaten stn 
ftones, and laid inthe fun,therewillcomeScorpions. 

Ferneliws writes that in a certaine fouldier, who was flat nofed, upon the too lop 
reftraint or ftoppage of scertaine filthy matter that flowed out of the nofe,thar ther 
were gencrated two hairy wormes of the bigheffe of ones finger, which at length 
mad, he had no manifeft feaver,and he died about the twentieth day sthis 
wasthcir fhape,by as much as we can gather by Fersedsws his words. 


Lid. part. 
mer bis 6ap-7. 


The effigies of the wormes mentioned by Fernelius, 


Lewes Duret a man of great learning and credit, told mee that hee had come forth 


Rahs with his urine, after a long and difficult difeafe, a quick creature,of colour red, buto 
therwife like in fhapea Millepes, that is,a Cheflope,or Hog-louce. 
The fhape of a Ailepes forth by wrime, 
a hiftorke. Count Charles of Mansfielde, laft fammer troubled witha grievous and contias 


feaver, in the duke of Gws/és 
of alive thing almoft juft inc 


hoe Shape of « shing forth by 


lacecaft forth a filthy matter at his yard, inthe fhap 
fis forme. 


Lip. 29 


{,1B.2¢ 


vion!? 
women ic 
qirally 20 
cients have 
rhat cogett 
wormes,te 
for that che 
diet. Fort 
were of ill 
crefaction 
creatu 
monech b 
Tailor, bray 
othera Gell 
of chem Ww 
onthe waa 
Dom. 149 
Ghoft,wa 
fed upont 


Levin 
gone ((aigm 
a Sailer, | 
Carry her 
fhe calls ; 
forth a d, 
ed forth 
Vitall mo 
Came fort 
tetriblee 
this mang 


4 
(yy 
(4 
‘{ @ 
8285 
Sea a | 
> AN 
ah 
= 
| | 
| 
: a” 4 
i 


Lip. 29 


pion found when as bs 


f this Scorpion prob, 
fill beaten 


mnofed, upon the too lop 
out of the nofe, thar there 
s finger, which at lenpth 
tthe twentieth day : this 
is words. 


rnelius, 


e that hee had come forth 
mature,of colour red,but o- 
p-louce. 


sme, 


2 prievous and 
Mer at his yard, inthe 


19.20. Meaxtes ana W Ormes, 


—jonftrous creatures alo of fundry formes are alfo generated in the wombes of Nicoism Flr. 


omen ; fomewiles alone, otherwhiles with a mo/a, and fometimes witha child na_ So"#b.7.6.28. 
ally and well made, as frogs, toads, ferpents, lizzards: which therefore the An- 

sents have tarmed the Lumbards brethren, for that it was ufuall with their women, 

shat rogerhet with cheir naturali and perfe@ iflue they brought into the world 
gormes,ferpents, and monftrous creatures of that kinde generated in their wom 

for that they alwaies morc re{pedted the decking of their bodies, than they did their 

diet, For it happened whileft they fed on fruits, weeds and trafh,and fuch things as 

gore of ill juice, they generated a putride matter, or cerainely very fubjectto pu- 

and corruption, and confequently opportune to generate fuch unper- Lib,erer popes. 
creatures. Fonbertus telleth chat there were two Italian women, that in one 

aonech brought forth each of them a monftrous birth ; the one that marryeda 
tailor,brought forth a thing fo little,chat is refembled a Rat without a taile; but the 

sthera Gentlewoman,brought forth a larger, for it was of the bignefle ot a Cat, both 

ofthem were black, and as foone as they cameout of the wombe, they ran uphigh 

sathe wall, and held faft thereon wich their nailes. Licofthenes writcs that in Anno 

Dom. 1494-4 Woman at Cracovia, in the ftreete which taketh name from the hol 

Chott, was delivered of a dead child, who had a ferpen faftned upon his back,which 

ed upon this dead child, as you perceive by this following figure, 


The figare of 4 fervent faftmed to «child, 


SAN 


NG FA 


Levinus Lemsnius tels a very ftrange hiftory tothis purpofe. Some few yeares a- rig de 
gone (faith he) acertaine woman of the Ifle in Flanders, which being with child by mir.cap.s. 
aSailer, her belly {welled up fo {peedily, that it feemed thee would not bec able to 
carry her burden to the terme prefcribed by nature ; her ninth moneth being ended, 
the calls a midwife, and prefencly after ftrong throwes and paines, thee firft brought 
forth a deformed lumpe of flefh, having as it weretwo handles on the fides, ftretch- 
‘dforthro the length and manner of armes,and it moved and panted with a certain 
Vitall motion, after the manner of {punges and fea-nettles ; butafterwards there 
came forth ofher wombea montfter with a crooked noice, along and round necke, 
terrible cies,a fharpetaile,and wonderfull quick of the feet,it was fhaped much after 

us manner. 


7 
1 
Whi 3 
| 
SS aN 4 
| 
, 
Mof- 


Concerning the Small 


— 


— 


The fhape of a moniter that came forth of a womans wombe, 


* 


baa 


Why fh 
ftones, “ha 
of living 2! 
(caufed by 
hold us in 
all things, 
the greater 
by he 
Wherefor 
a@ions an 
this little o 


As fooneas it came into the lightit filled the whole roome witha noife and bir 
fing running to every fide to finde our a lurking hole wherein to hide its head , bu 
the women which were prefent, with a joynt confent fell upon it, and {mothered; 
with cufhions, at length the poore woman wearied with long travell, was deliver 
of aboy,burloevilly entreated and handled by this montfter, that it dicdas foone,: 
it was chriftened. 

bibs: divin, Cornelius Gemmaa Phyfician of Lovaine, telleth thatthere were many very mon- 
naturcharadtee frous and {trange things caft forth both upwards and downewards out of the belly 
of acertaine maid of Lovasne, of the age of fifteencyeares. Amongtt the reft, 
ca(t forth at her fundament, together with herexcrements, a living creature {ome 
foot and halfe long, thicker than ones thumbe, very like an eele, but that it had aye. 
ry hairy taile ; [have here given you the figure of the monfter as it was exprefled 
by him. 


The figure of amonfter shat came forth of 4 maides belly. 


‘ 
* 
4, 4 


oufly adh 
therfore b 
terand no 
fome fref] 
elvesinel 
oft-times 
times they 
are of thre 
lender, J 
long and 
like a row 
themfelve 
red white 
the little £ 
many wo: 
ufually of 
Of colou; 
Whereof t 
qualities ; 
reaf 


A hiftarle. Matter Petey Bargue and Claude le Grand, Surgeons of Verdun, lately affirmed to 

mee that they cured the wife ofa certaine Citizen of Verdun, which our ofan 

{ceffe broken in the belly, caft forth a great number of wormes, together withthe 

quiture,and thefe were of thethicknefle of ones finger, with (harpe heads, which! 

gnawed her guts, thattheexcrements for 2 long time came forth at the ulcer, du! 

| now fhe isperfeftly recovered. 

A hiftorie Anthony Bineniws a Phyfician of Florencetelicth thatone John 

| of fourty yeares of age,troubled with continuall paines at his ftomacke,was ote 

the point of death, neither found he any helpe by the counfels of many Phy tician 

| which hee ufed. At length comming to have his advice, hee gave himavom' by 
meanes whereof hee caft up a great quantity of corrupt and putride matter, yet ™ 
i hee not thereby eafed of his paine. Therefore he gave him another vomit, by /0* 
whereof he caftup much matter like to the former,and together therewith a wor 


of foure fingers long, having a red round head, of the bignefle of a grea! peat, 
vered over the body with afoft downineffe, witha forked taile,in manne: of an alit 


law One vq 


“cae word 


+i moone,goingupon foure feet,two before,and two behind. 
if Th 


4 
A 
| 
A 
| 
7 Ne 
CAE 
- 
| | 
4 | 4 é ' 
ant hh 


e witha noife and hit 
n to hide its head, by, 
Bon it, and {mothered jr 
travell, was delivered 
, thatitdicdas foone a; 


were many very mon- 
ewards out of the belly 
Amongtt the reft, the 

}, aliving creature fome 
ele, but that it had a ve- 
Mfter as it was exprefied 


belly. 


‘erdun, lately affirmed to 
which out of an Ab- 
mes, together withthe 
h (harpe heads, which to 
¢forthatthe ulcer, but 


Jobm Menafierus, aman 
lis ftomacke,was often at 
fels of many Phyiicians 
hee gave himavomt, by 
d pucride matter, yet 
another vomit, by fore 
ther therewith a worms 
nefle of a great peale, ©” 
ile,in manner of an hale 


Th 


Rim chalke, fand, coales, ffiaile. fhels, f 
| ofliving and dead creatures ¢ For there is nothing in the genetation of thefe things 
cqufed by corruption, preceded by much alteration) whith may make us admir C,OF rurally gencra- 
joldus in fufpence, efpecially if We thall confiderthat nattire, the fruitfull parent ot 
\ichings, hath put divers portions and particles Of the univer{all matter whereof 
me thegreater world is compofed into this Microcofmos,ot little world, man ; where= 

wy he might the rather feem to be made tothe refemblance and form of the greater. 


and Wormes, (FC. 


The figwre of a worme forth by vomit. 


by fhould I mentioa the prodi ious bodies which are found in Abfceffes, as rie esc: 
i. ftrawes, hay,hornes.haires,and many kinds cafe 


of fuch tbings 
asaic preter 


Wherefore it fo defports it felfe here, that it may counterfeit and refemble ail the 


stions and motions which it ufeth to performe in the fcene of the greater world, in 
 qhislitrle one, if fo be chae matter be not wanting. 


— 


Cuar.[ITl, 
of she wormes which wfete breedin the guts. 


"Ge Groffe,vifcideand crude humour fs the materiall caufe of wormes,which How wormsace 
having gor the beginning of corruption in the ftomacke, is quickly carri. 

\@ ed into the guts,, and there it putrefies, having not acquired the forme of 

laudible Chylus inthe conco@ion. This, for that it is vilcide, tenaci- 


m oulyadherestothegucs, neitheris it eafily evacuated with the other excrements ; 
| therfore by delay it furcher putrefies, & by the efficacy of heat, it turns into che mat- 
| trand nourifhment for wormes. This alimentary humour being coafumed, unleffe 
‘ome freth fupply the want thereof, which may eafe cheir hunger, they move them. Thereafonthac 


tlvesin the guts with great violence, they caufe grievous and great paines, yea,and 


oft-times they creepup tothe ftomack, and fo come forth by the mouth, and fome- the mouth. 


imesthey afcend into the holes of the palate, and come forth at the nole. Wormes 
ae ofthree forts; for fome are round & long, others broad and long, others fhort & 
lender. The firttare called by the Ancients, Teretes, that is,round 5 torthat they are The differences 
‘ong and round. The fecond are named Tenia,for that their bodies are long & broad *"™ 


‘kea rowler orfwathe.The third are termed 4/carides,for that they commonly wrap 


| oem felves upround. Other differences of wormes are taken from their colours, as 
‘ed, white, black, ath-coloured,yellowifh.Some alfo are hairy, witha great head like 
‘elittle fith which the French call Chabot, we,a Millers-thumbe ; in fome difeafes 


Tany Wormes are generated and caft forth by the fundament, as {mall as haires, and 
of colour white,and thefe are they which are called Ajcarides. The diverfity 


° colours ia wormes proceedeth not from the like diftin@ diverfity of humours 


Whereof they are generated. For the melancholicke and cholericke humour by their 


| Walities are wholly unfit to generate wormes. But this manifold variety in colour, 


“SY reafon of the different corruption of the chylous or phlegmaticke humour 
" ‘teof they arebred. The long and broad wormes are oftentimes ftretched a- 


7 “Agt all che guts, being like to a mucous or albuminous fubftance, and verily I Abittory. 


a: one voided by a woman, which was like to a ferpent, and fome fixe foote long ; 
hich ought not to feeme ftrange, {ceing it is noted by the Ancients, that they have 


B “cwormes fo long, as the leagth of the whole guts, thatis, {even times the 


length 


— 
LL 20 Meaxles 6 
. 
Y 
4 
4 
| 
| 


36 
4 A hiltory. length of ones vody. Writes that he faw a cou otry man who voided 


cight teor aad one inch long, in head and mouth refembling a Dy a ttt 
tore Ihave thought good hereto expreffe. Ba Which (dere 


The figure of a worme, cencrated in, and caft forth ofthe Gurs. 


V aleriola afirmeththat he fawaworme above nine foote long. Nowas Wormes 
dificr in fhape, fo are their places of generation alfo different. For the rounds»; 
long wormes are commonly generated in the fmaller gurs,the reft in the greater.)y, 
efpecially the Afcarides : none breede in the ftomacke, as that which is the place os 

the firft concoction. Theretruely the matter which breedeth thefe wormes, gets th. 

wormesare ge- firft rudiment of corruption, but comesto perfeétion onely inthe guts s they breed 

nerated. in fome infants in their mothers bellies, by the praviry and corrupt nature of the hy. 

mour flowing from the mother for the nourifhment of the childe, which forthy 

| then they doe not expell it by fiege, it by delay purrefieth the more, and yeeldes 
firmatterforthe breeding of wormes, as fome obferved out of Hippocrats, 

a fem lib 4» Laftly, wormes breed in people of any age that are Belly-Gods and givento gluto. 

ny,as alfo in {uch as feed upon meats of 11] juice and apt to corrupt, as crude lummer 
fruits, cheefe, and milke-meates. Butto know in what part of the Guts the wormes 


in okfervat. 


doe lurk, you muft note, that when they are in the finall guts, the patients complain 
ofa paine in their ftomacke, with a dogge-like appetite, whereby they require many 
F and feverall things without reafpn, a great part of the nourifhment being confumed 
by the wormes lying there ; they are alfo fubject tooften fainting, by icafon ot tie 
j fympathy whichthe ftomacke, being a part of moft exquifite fenfe, hath withthe 
heart, the nofe itches, the breath ftinkes, by reafon of the exhalarions fentup fiom 
the meat corrupting inthe ftomacke ; through which occafion they are alfo givento 
fleep, but arc now and then waked therefrom by fuddaine ftartings and feares ; they 
are held with a continued and flow feaver,a dry cough,a winking with their eielids 
| and often changing of the colour of their taces. But long and broad wormes, belo} 
Signero’ cheinnates of the greater guts, fhewthemfelves by ftoolcs replenifhed withmay 
wor nesinthe 
gerguts.  floughes, here and there refembling the feedcs ofa Musk-melon or cucumber, Aft 


rides are knowne by theitching they caufe im thefundament, cauling a fenfeasilt 
, 3 were Ants running up and downe scaufing alfo atene/mns, and falling downe of he 
fundament. This isthe caufe of all thefe fymptomes , their flee; ¢ is turbulent! 
| often clamorous, when as hor, acride and fubtle vapors, raifed by the wormes trom 
the like humor aad their foode, are fent up tothe head ; but found fleep by the = 
trary, as when a mifty vapour is fentupfrom a groffe and cold matter. They yi 
they eate in the? flecpe, for that while the wormes doe more greedily confiyme ( 
chy!ous matter in the guts, they ftirre up the fenfe of the like action in the phan" 


ry cour 


mufcles ofthe temples and jawes being diftended by plenty of vapours.A ¢ rit 


le comes by the confent of the vitall parts ferving for refpiration, which the 
} to wit, the or midriffe, {mit upgn by acride vapoures, and 
thoughthere were {ome humour to bee expelled by coughing. Thele fam 


putre| 


They grate or gnath their tecth by reafon of a certaine convulfifick repl<tio” 


e acrid 


4 oncerning tbe Small Pocks, 


tor that ch: 
tothecont 
cocted & d 
crude, bur 
horthicke 
quire Ore 
ton there< 
ddtle fo 
uiemeale 
humours it 
ance of 
kidneyes 9 
leRthe Wo 
Now whe 


the quick | 


You may a 
réfur, thor 


| 
7 
ne ] 
four, ae ch 
= 
neh OT | 
endure, 
A of greater' 
| 
~ 
a 
Kl} SWor 
bitter thin 
= | br 
| and ¢ 
| ~lVe by 
— | 


an who voideda 


a Ducke, which 


b ofthe Guts. 


‘* 


Py, 


atc long. Nowas Wormes § 
erent. For the round and 
the reft inthe greater by, 
hat which isthe place of 
th thefe wormes, gets the 


ly inthe guts ; they breed 
® corrupt nature of the bu. 
childe, which for tha 
mh the more, and yeeldes 
rved out of Hippocrates, 
ods and given to glutto- 
corrupt,as crude fummer 
t of the Guts the wormes 
ts, the patients complain 
ereby they require many 
ifhment being confumed 
ainting, by 1cafon of the 
ifite fenfe, hath withthe 
xhalations fentup from 
ion they are alfo givento 
tartings and feares ; they 
inking with theit eiclids, 
nd broad wormes, being 
replenifhed with many 
Biclon or cucumber. 
Bit, caufing afenfeasifit 
Band falling downe of the 
Bir flee; ¢ is turbulent an 
fed by the wormes from 
m+ (ound fleep by the con- 
oldmarter. They «ream 
re greedily con{fume the 
adtion in the phantatt. 
nvulfifick repletion, the 
of vapours.A dry oil 
ation, which the 
apoures, and irritarc® 


hing. Theie fame 


[12.20 Meazxles and Wormes, or. 


Lis 29 


fol 


— 


the orifice of the ventricle,caufe cither a hicketting,ox elfe a fainting, 
ae ding to the condition of their confiftence, groffe or thin, thefe carryedup to 
- arts of the face caufe an itching of the nofe, a darkeneffe of the fight, and a {ud- 
4 3 -hanging of the colour in the checks. Great wormes are worfe than little ones, 

Mehat white, living than dead, many than few, variegated than thofe of one col. Whywormes 
thofe which are fignes ot agreater corruption. Such asare caft forth bloo- 


ay and (prinkled with blood, are deadly for they thew that the fubftance of the guts dangerous. 


| ceaten afunder; for oft-times they corrode and perforate the body of the out 


wherein they are conteined, andthence penetrare into divers parts of the belly, fo 

sw they have come forth fometimes atthe Navell, having caren themfelves 2 paf- 

forth, as Hollerivs affirmeth.When as children troubled with the wormes draw 

cic breath with difficulty, andwaxe moift over all their bodies, it is a figne that 

jenn is at hand, If at the beginning ot tharpe feavers, round wormes come forth a- 

itis 2 figneofa peltilent feaver, the malignity of whofe matter they could not 
afore, but were forced rocome forth. But if they be caft forth dead, they are fignes 
foreater corruption in the humours, and of amore venenate malignity. 


CHuap. V. 
What curctobecnfed forthe Wormes. 


N this dileafe there is but one indication, tharis, the exclufion or 
cafting out of the wormes, either alive or dead, forth ofthe bo- indications of 
dy, as being fuch that in their whole kinde are againft nature ; all 
*+.,"@| things mult bee fhunned which areapt to heap up putretaction in Boars 
che body by their corruption, fuchasare crude fruits, cheefe, 
2221 milke-meats, fifhes, and laftly fuch things as are ofaditficult and 
* hard digeftion,but prone to corruption. Pappe is fit for children, 
fyrthat hey require moift things, but thefe ought to an{wer in a certaine fimilitude 
otheconfiftence and thicknefle of milke, that forhey may the more eafily be con- 


ooted & affimulated, & {uch only is that pap which is made wich wheat flower, not 


cude, bur bakedin an oven, that the pappe made therewith nor be toovilcide 


rthicke, ifit fhould onely bee boyledin a panne as much 4s the milke wouldre- 
wire; or elfe rhe milke would bee too terreftriall, or too wateriih, all the fatty por- 
imthereof being refolved, the cheefy and whayith portion remaining, if it fhould 
wilefo much as were neceffary for the full boiling ot the crude meate ;they which 


vemealeorherwife in pappe yeild matter for the generating of grofle aud vilcide 


wmoursinthe ftomacke, whence happens obftructionin the firtt veines and {ub- 


hance of theliver, by obftruction wormes breede in the guts, and rhe {tone inthe 


dneyesand bladder. The patient mutt be fed often,and with meates of good juice, 
chthe worms through want of aourifhment, fhould gnaw the fubftance of the guts. 


| Nowwhen as fuch things breed‘of a putride matter, the patient fhall be purged, and 
Ne putrefaction repreft by medicines mentioned in our treatife of the plague.’ For 


he Quick killing and cafting of them forth, fyrupe of Succory, or of lemmons with romana wa 


arbe, alittle Treacle, or Mithridate, isa fingular medicine, if chere beno feavers ashavethe 
| Joumay alfo for the fame purpofe ufe this following medicine. X, cornu cervi, pul, wormes mutt 
"Wer, thori, 2.3; &. fem. tamacel. Cy AB, i. fiat decociio pro in 


be purged 


Waturs infunde r hei optimi, i.cinam. i. di folve fyrupt de abjintiio >. make a po- 
‘02, give it in the morning three houres before any broath. Oyle of Olives drunke, 


_ swormes, as alfo water of knot-graffe drunke with milke, and in like manner all 


terthings. Yer I could firft with them togivea glyfter made of milke, hony and : 
War, without oyles and bitter things, left {hunning thereof, they leayethe lower 
sts, and come upwards, for this is naturall to wormes, to fhunne bitter things, and , 
Ow (weer things, Whence you may learne, thatto the bitter things which you 


ove by the mouth, you muftalwaies mixe fweet things, that allured by che {weet- 


“sile,they may devour them more greedily,that fo they may kill them. 
would 


* om 
* 


i 


{fart{-horne 
sood agunft 
che worms. 


Supp: fteries 
cic 
4 


A piaitcr a. 
the 
VOL Ics > 


A cwrtion. 
¢ 


768 Concerning the Small Pecks, 


— 


would with milke and Sugar, mixe the feeds of centaury, rue, wormewood 
and the like: harts-horne is very effectual again{t wormes, wherefore yo, 
fuie che thavings thereof in the water or drinke that the patient drinkes, 4. alin, 
fome thercofin his brothes. Soalfo treacle drunke or taken in broth kills 
the wormes; purflaine boiled in brothes, and deftilled and drunke, is alfo pods 
ezinft the worms,as alfo fuccory and mints, alfo a decoction of the leffer hg, Pt . 
and {ebeftens given with fagar before meate itis no effeGuall to pur wee 
feeds in their pap, and in roaftedapples, and{fotogive them it. Alfo you may 
fuppolicorics after this manner, and purthemup intothefundament, 


albi, yafura eboris, cornucervi ufti, ireos an. Dil. melle albi sii. 


» 
May jp, 


adomnia concorporanda, fiant Glandes :\et one be put up every day, of the Weigh o 


3 ii. for children ; thefe fuppofitories are chiefly to bee ufed for Afarides, thof 
which adhere to the right gut. To fuch children as can take nothing by the mou 
you fhallapply cataplafmes to their navells made of of cummin feeds th. 
floure of lupines, worme-wood, foutherne wood, tanfic, the leaves of Artichokes 
ruc,the pouder of coloquintida, citron {eeds, aloes, arfemart,horfe mint,peach leaves 
Coftus amarus,Zcdoaria, {ope and oxegall. Such cataplafmes are oft times {pred Over 
ali che belly, mixing therewith aftringentehings for the ftrengthening of the parr 
oile of myitles, Quinces and maftich ; you may alfo apply a great onion hollowed iy 
the midft, and filled with Alocsand Treacle, and foroafted in the embers they 
beaten with bitter almonds, and an oxe gall. Alfoyou may make cmplaters of hj. 
rer things,as this which followes. lk. fells bubmls, fuces abfivthis, an. 5 ii colgey, 
i. ceramtur mifceantur frrnl, cum farina lapinerum make hereo{ 
emplafter tobe laid upon the Navell. 

Liniments and ointments may bee alfo made forthe fame purpofe to anoinrhy 
belly, you may alfo make plafters for the navell of Pilale Ruf. anointing inthe 
meanc time the fundament with hony and fugar, that they may bee chafed from. 
bove with bitter things, and allured downewards with fweete things. Or elfe tae 
wormes that have beene caft forth, dry them in an iron pan over the fire, then pou: 
der them, and give them with wine or fome other liquor to bee drunke, for fotlhey 
are thought quickly to killche reft of the wormes. Herero alfo conduceth the juice 
of citrons, drunke with the oile of bitter almonds)or fallade oile. Alfo fome mak 
bathesagainft chis affe@ of wormewood, galls, peach leaves boiled in water, and 


then bathe the childe therein. | 
But incuring the wormes, you muft obferve thar this difeafe is oft times entat. 


eled with another more gricvous difeafe, as an acute and burning feaver,afluxso 


{couring, and the like,in which(as for <xample fake) a feaver being prcfenc and con: 
joyned therewith, if you fhall give wormfeeds, old Treacle, myrriic, aloes, you fhal 
encreafe the feaver and fluxe, for that bitter things are very contrary tothe 
chefe affe@s. Butif, on the contrary, inafluxe whercby the wormes are excluded, 
you fhall give corrall, andthe floure of Lentiles, you fhall augment tlic fcaver, 
king the mattermore contumacious by dry and aftringenr things, Theictore 


Afcaver fome- Phyfician fhall be carefull in confidering whether the teaver bee a fymptome of the 


rimes2 fymp- 


rome and {ome- 


wormes, or onthe contrary it bee effentiall, and not fympromaticke, that this beisy 


rimesa difeafe. knowne, hee may principally infiftin the ufe of fuch medicines as refift both afie's 


as purging and bitterifh in a feaver and wormes, but bitter and fomew hat aftricive 
things in the wormes and fluxe. 


L 1B. 29 


(qs Avicen 
/en thinkes 
whofe defa 
much chang 
this difeafe 
whole bod 
yirulency, 
peares that 
asaremela 
difeale isc 
gaint 
tionofthe 
isthe 
conformat:! 
of a folutio 
cersand ch 
tive, antece¢ 
orcomes 
mation, wi 
clinedtom 
for leprous 
corrupted 
whole mat 
Vitiated. 
biting in an 
laduceth 
tes, Bich as 
very hor p! 
they incra 
thoughr th 
are divers] 
then in all 
in whole 7 
Perfons, 
Ufeafe rg, 


‘ 
7 
hjans have 
| Sca b and 
| 
4 
4 
| 
ef 3 
x 
‘ 
TPs 
¢ 
4 
i= ONT] d Ca 
| 4lOorg 
Cares 
Of mel 


¢, WOrmcwood 
wherefore you 
ent drinkes, al{oy 
taken in broth, killers 
drunke, is alf{o 
of theleffer 
ficCtuall to pur worme. 
it. Alfo you may mele 
idament, 
ry day, of the Weight of 
d tor Afcarides, as thofe 
nothing by the mouth 
cer of cummin feeds, the 
i¢ leaves ot Artic hokes 
mint, peach leaves, 
arcoft times {pred Over 
ethening of the part, a 
great onion hollowed jp 
{ted intheembers, then 
rmake cmplafters of bir. 
abfinthiz, aw. ii, colocyn, 


» aloce 
May 


me purpole to anointthe 
anointing inthe 
may bee chafed froma. 
ete things. Or elf take 
over the fire, then pou- 
o bee drunke, for fothey 
» alfo conduceth the juice 
de oile. Alfo fome make 
ves boiled in water, and 


lifeafe is oft times entan- 
urning feaver,a fluxe or 
being prcfenc and con 
myrrhe, aloes, you fhall 
Bry contrary to clic cuicol 
he wormes are excluded, 
laugment thic fcaver, ma- 
things, Therefore the 
bee a fymprome of the 
Bromaticke, that this being 
cines as refift both affects, 
and fomewhat altrictive 


al 


tiveyantecedent,& conjun@:the primitive caufe is either from the firft conformation 
| orcomes tothem afrer they areborn. it is thought to be in him from the firft confor- male tale. 
- mation, who was conceived of depraved & corrupt menftruous blood, & fuchas er. profe. 


Cuar. VI. 
Abort defcription of the Elephantiafis or Leprofie,and of the canfes sheresf. 


His difeafeistermed Elepbantiais becaufe the skinne of firch as are trou- 
; bled cherewith, is rough, fcabious, wrinckled and unequall, like the skin 
J2) FF of an Elephant. Yetchisname may feem to be impofed thereon by rea- 
te 34 {on of the greatneffe of the difeafe. Some from the opinion of the Ara- 
signs have termed it Lepraor Leprofic (bucunproperly, forthe Lepra is akinde of 
scab and difeafe of the skinne, whichis vulgarly called Malum (anc#i manis) which 
word for the prefent we will ufe, as that which prevailes by cuflome and antiquity. 


Now the Leprofie (according to Paulus) isa Cancer of the wii vie body, the which 


Avicen addes) corruptsthe complexion, forme and figure of the members. Ga- 
ipthinkesthe caufe arifeth from the errour of the fanguifying taculry, through 
whofe default the affimulation ia the flefh and habite of the bouy isde praved and 
uch changed from it felfe, andthe rule of mature. Bur ad Glawconem, hee defines 


Lib. 4. 
Lip. 


his difeafe, An effufion of troubled or groffe blood into the veines and habir of cne 
| whole body. Thisdifeafe is judged great, for that ic partakes of a certaine venenate 
- yirulency, depraving the members and comclineffe of the whole body. Now it ap- 


There isa cer- 
peares that the Leprofie partakes of a certaine venenate virulency by this, that fuch cine hidden vi 


' saremelancholicke in the whole habit of their bodies, are not leprous. Now this tlmcy inche 
| ditale is compofed of three differences of difeafes, Firft it confifts of a diftemper a- —— 

oainftnature, as that which at the beginning is hotand dry, and at length the ebulli- 

| cionofthe humours ceafing, and the heat dilperfed, it becomescold and dry, which 


isthe conjanét caufe of this fymptome. Alfo it confifts of an evill compofition or 
-onformation, for that it depraves the figure and beauty of the parts. Alfo it confiits 


B ofafolution of nausea as the flefh and skin are cleftin divers parts with ul- 


cersand chops: the leprofie hath for the moft part 3.gencrall caules,that is,the primi- 


? The primitive 


‘ined tomelancholly;who was bc got of theleprous feed of one or both his parents, eo rh 


| forleorous perfons generate leprous, becaufethe principall parts being tainted and ther frit con 
F compted with a melancholy and venenate juice, it muft neceflarily follow that the ‘=> 


vhole maffe of blood and {eed thar falls from it, and the whole body fhould alfo be 


veined. This caufe happens cothofe that are already born, Sy long ftaying & inha.- 


vtingia maritime countries, whereas the groffe and mifty aire, in fucceife of time, 


F induccth che like fauleinto the humours of the body ; for thargiccording to Arppocra- 
its, ich as the aire is, fuch isthe {pirir, and fuch the humours. Alfo long abiding in 
| Veryhor places, becaufe the blood is torrified by heate, but in cold places, for thac 
Sev inerafface, andcongealing the fpirits, doe after a manner ftupefie, may bee 
thought the primitive caufes of this difeafe. Thus in fome places of Germany there 
| ledivers leprous perfons,but they are more frequent in Spasme and overall Africa, 
then in all the world befide, and in Languedoc, Provence and Guyenne, are more thao 
| \whole France belides, Familiarity, copuiation, andcohabication with leprous 
| Petlons, may be reckoned amongftthe caufes thereof, becaufe chey rransferre this 
| their familiars by theirbreath, fweat and {pittle lcfron the edges of the 
Pes Orcuppcs. This difeafe isalfocaufed by theroo frequent uic of fale, {piced, 
“tide and orofle meates, as the fleth of Swine, Affes, Bearcs, Pulfe, milke-meats ; 
crofle and trong wines,drunkennefs,gluttony,a laborious life, full of forrow 


0d cares, forthar they incraflate, and as it were burne the blood. Burthe retention 


“clancholy excrements, asthe fuppreffion of the hemorrhoids, courfes, fmall 
Pockes and meazells, as alfo a quartaine feaveraccultomed tocome at fet times , the 


forthatthey defile the mafle of the blood witha melan- 


| Moly droff and filth. Now yournuft underftand that the caufe ofthe leprofie by 


“tcteation of the fuperfluitics, happens becaufe the corrupt blood isnot 
red 


-— 

| 

| | 

| 


i the crudity, for thatit!isnot agimulated, and by delay, itis further hardnc® 


Concerning the Small Packs, Lis. 26 


ted, but regurgitatcs overthe whole body, and corrupts the blood thar fhould », 
rith all che members ; whereforethe affimulative faculty cannot well affim, | mg 
reafon of che corruption and default of the juice, and thus in conclufion the a by 
fie is caufed. Theantecedent cauiesarethe humours difpofed toaduftion 
ruption into melancholy by the torride heat ; for in bodies pofleffed with {i ch 
the humours by aduftion eafilyturne into melancholy, which in time a; “at, 
the malignity and corruption of avirulent and venenate quality, yeelds a b- ; > 
andeffence tothe leprofie. The conjun&caufes are the melancholy 
Taeconjun® are now partakers ofa venenate and maligne quality, and{ pread over the wh.) 
How iccomes tohabite ofthe body, corrupting and deftroying it firft by ahor and dry di hone 
ocdeadly.  andthen byacold and dry, contrary to the beginnings of life. Forhence 


bledeath muft enfuc, becaufe our life confifts in the moderation of hear. ’ 


CuHuapr. VII. 


The figues of a Leprofie, breeding, prefemt, and alrcamy confirmed, 


He difpofition of the body and humors to a Leprofic is theweg by 
the change of the native and frefh colour of the face, by thar affea 


<4 
of the face, which is commonly called Gutta rofacea,red & 


{uffufions and puftles, the falling away of the haires, a great thirst. 


anda drineffe of the mouth both by night & day,a ftinking breath 
little ulcers in the mouth, the change of the voice to hoarienefl,; 
defire of vencry above nature and cuftome. Now there are fou 

rhe bevinning times Of this difeafe, the beginning, encreafe, ftate and declenfion. The beginning 
ofaLeprofie. is when as the malignity hath not yet gone further than the inner parts and bowells, 
| wheruponthe ftrength muft needs be more languid. The encreafe is when as thevi- 
The encreale. rulency comes forth,& the figns & fymptomsareevery day encrealed in number 
vhefare  itrength. The ftate is when as the membets are exulcerated. The declenfionis, whi 
The declenfion.a8 the afpect of the face is horride, the extreme parts fall away by the profundity 
and malignity of the ulcers, fo that none, no not of the common fort of people, car 

doubt of the difeafe. According to the do@rine of the Antients, wee mutt in{ea. 

ching out of the fignes of this difeafe being prefent, have chiefe regard to the head, 

For the fignes of difeafes more properly andtruely thew themfelves in the face, 5) 

reafon of che foftuefic and rarity of the fubftance therof, and the tenuity of thesia 

that coversit ; whereforeablacke and aduft humour diffufed thereunder, 

(hewes it {elfe,and that not onely by the mutation of thecolour, bur al{o of the C 

racterand bulke, and oft times by manifett hurting it. Wherefore you auft oblerve 

in the head whether it have {Caules, and whether inthe place of thuic harres tata 
fallenaway, others more tender, fhort and rare grow up, which is likely to happ" 

throush defte& of fitnourithmentto prcferve and penerate haires, througs cortupt 

on of the hairy fcalpe that fhould be ftored with {uch nourifhment, and of thee’ 

it felfe, and through the unfitneffethcreof tocontaine haires ; laftly by cheactim™ 

Thefirtfiene my ofthe vapoures fent up fromthe aduft humours and entrailes, fretting 20" 
ofthe Leprofie. the roores of the haires. But if not onely the haire, buzalfo fome portion o! hess 
and ficth abourthe rootes of thehaire, come away by pulling, it isaoague™ 
of perfec corruption: Ict this therefore be the firft fign of a leprofic. A iccom ad 
ry certain figne is,a numerous & manifeft circumfcription of round and hat pule 
or puftles under theeie-browes,& behind the cares and in feverall places of HC" 
re{embling round and hard kernells, occafioned by the default of the aflimais ‘ 
faculty. The caufe of this default isthe groflencfle of the flowing nouriline”” 
which meanes it being impa&, and ftopping in the ftraitnefle of the way)’ 
round at it were compaffed about in the place whereas it fticks, and by 


IT, 


OT 


Y,fuch as ay 
thy [cab.an 
The Caufe 


“Ad corrodifl 


-_ 


2C¢ 


rhird 
and as it we 
fumption 
but the acce 
Aowing chic 
reafon chat 
nefle ofthe 
rough and 
jmmoveab! 
obrule and | 
realonof ch 
thefe being 
acrimontie ¢ 
ne(s. Now c 
cilirated th 
being deftit 
is, the noftr 
orofle hu: 
nottrils ; wi 
thicknetfle 
the face anda 
the partitio 
featthither 
The feventl 
and corrofi 
prous per{c 
MOUTS, ast 
{welling & 
caufethe ro 
tittous huin 
the caufe w 
hard & rou 
renin re; 
the cies are 
Whole bod 
tioned can{ 
Others wirt 
fora 
forts of Ley 
anorhey of 
Lrounded 
Ul the exer 
intl 
Commins 
“cles of 
the (Oreme 
lattly, thea 
Pens to (uc! 
‘AM Oderar, 
ed With a d 
orphew ¢ 


“2tofthe 


fi 
4 ¢ 
2 
P 
° 
3 
i 
4 
3 
a 
4 
; 
| 
5 
, J Ly “ 
’ 
? 


Lise 


iood that fhould 
otwell affimulate 
onclufion the Lepro 
tocduftion and Cor. 
fleffed with fuch hear 
ich in time Acquiring 
icy, yeelds a beginn; 
ncholy Humors which 
pread over the Whole 
ot and dry diftemper 
te. For hence ineyj,,’ 
eration of heate and 


confirmed. 


a Leprofie is thewed by 
the face,by chat affe@ 
Avofacea,red & blackith 
he hatres, a great thirft, 
day,a ftinking breath, 
¢ voice to hoarfenefle, a 
m. Now there arc foure 
The beginning 
inner parts and boweils, 
creafle is when as thevi- 
»ncreaied in number & 
“The declenfionis,when 
way by the profundity 
non fort of people, can 
tients, wee mutt in fear- 
Bhiefe regard tothe head. 
umfelves in the face, by 
d the tenuity of the skin 
vfed thereunder, eafily 
sour, but al fo of the 
ecfore you oblerve 
¢ of thofe haires thatare 
shich is likely to 
haires. throug) corps 
| ihment, the habit 
sts laftly by the acrimo- 
Bettrailes, fretting afundet 


ofome portion 


ept 
it argume 


aleprofic. A fecond 


pf, 
owing nourithme 


Frheskin 


he fact, 
fe erall places of the 
d= fault of the afimalating 


Bele of the way>' gro’ of 
ftcks, and by che 


itisfurther 


29. Meax ies ara ormes, 


agae is,the more contract and cxa@ roundneffe of the eares, their groffeneffe, 


yadasit Were grainy {piflicude or den feneffe; the caufc of their roundnefs is the con. 
(amption of the flaps & fiefhy part through want of nourifhment,and excefs of heat: 
pyr the occafion of their grainy (piffitude is the grofneffe of the earthy nourifhment 


thither. The fourth fignis a lion-like wrinkling of the forehead, which is rhe 
ejfon that fome terme this diicale morbus leoninas ; the caufe hereofis the great dri- 


efie of the habit of the body, which alfo is the reafon that the barke of an old oak is 


B oughand wrinkled. The fifth is,the exa@ roundnefle of the eyes,and their fixt and 


moveable fteddinefle; verily the eyes are naturally almoft round,yet they appeare 
and fomewhat broad on the forefide, but end in a Cows on hind by 


BB esionof the concourfeand figure of the mufcles and fat invefting them. Therefore 


jefe being confumed either through defect of laudible nourifhment, or elfe by the 
rimonic of the flowing humour, they are reftored to their proper figure & round- 


aes. Now che mafcles which moved the eyes being coniumed and the fat which fa- 
ciliated their motion wafted,itcomesto paflethat chey ftand ftiffe and unmoveable, 
peing deftitute of the parts yeelding motion,and the facility thereof. The fixth figne 
s,the noftrils fat outwardly, but inwardly {trait and contracted, that is, an earthy 


x orofle humour forced from within outwards, which fwels the fides or edges of the 


voltrils; whence itis,that the paflages of the nofe appear as it were obftructed by the 

hicknetfe ot this humour ; burthey are deprefled and flarted by reafon of the reftof 
| shefaceand all che neighbouring parts fwoln more than their wont;adde hereto that 
| theparticion is confumed by the acrimony of the corroding and ulcerating humour 


eatthither,which makes them neceffarily to be depreft, & fend forth bloudy fcabs. 


The feventh,is the lifting up,thickneffe and {welling of the lips,the filthinefle,ftinke 
™ x dcorrofion of the gums by acride vapours rifing tothe mouth ; but the lips of Le- 
prous perfons are more {wolne by the internal! heat burning and incraffating the hu- 
| mous, asthe oucward heat ofthe Sun doth in the Moores. The eighth figne is the 
(welling & blackneffe of the tongue, and as it were varicous veins lying under it; be- 
 culethe tongue, being by nature {pongious and rare, is eafily ftored with excremen- 


titious humours, fent from the inner parts unto the habit of the body : which fame is 
thecaufe why the grandules placed about the tongue above and below, are {fwolne 


hard &rouad,no ocherwife than fcrophulous or meazled fwine. Laftly,all their face 
bunches or puthes,and is over-{pread with a duskie aad ob{curerednefs; 
 theeies are fiery, fierce and fixed, by a melancholick chache@ick difpofition of the 
| whole body, maniteft fignes whereof appearein the face by reafon of the foremen- 
toned caufes , yet fome leprous perfons have their faces tin@ured with a yellowith, 
p others with a whitith colour, according to thecondition of the humor,which ferves 
| fra Beis to the leprous malignity.For hence Phyficiansaffirme thac there are three 
hotsof Leprofies,one of a redith black colour,confifting in a melancholick humour; 
“other of a yellowith greene, in a cholericke humour , another in awhitifhyellow, 
m sounded upon adult phlegme. The ninth figne is a ftinking of the breath,as allo of 
ill the excrements proceeding from leprous bodies, by reafon of the malignity con- 
Sived in the humours. The tenth is,a hoarfneflc,a fhaking, harfh and ob{cure voyce 
 Onming as it were out of the rofe, by reafon of the lungs, recurrent nerves, and 
Maclesofthethrorcle cainted with the grofleneffe of a viru'entand aduft humour ; 
| Seforementioned conftri@ion & obftruction of the inner paflage of the nofe; and 
Lily, the af perity and inequality of the weazon by immoderate dryneffe, as it hap- 
{uch as have drunk plentifully of trong wines without any mixture. This 
mm Moderate drinefle of the mufCcles ferving for ref{piration makes them to bee trou- 


cd with a ditficulty of breathing, The eleventh figne is very obfervable, which isa 
Motphew or defaedation of all the skin, with a dry roughnefle and grainy inequali- 


Yiluch as appears in the skins of plucked geefe, with many tetrers on every fide,a fil- 
| thy icabsand ulcers not cafting off onely a branlike fcurfe,bur alfo {cailes and crufts. 


Ne caufe of this dry {cab,is the heat of the burning bowels & humours, unequally 


“attaGing and wrinkling the skin, no otherwife chan as leather is wrinkled by the 


ofthe Sun or fire. The caufe of the filthy fcab & ferpiginous ulcers, is the eating 
“corroding condition of the melancholy humour, and the venenate corruption, 
Tees it 


IIIL 
Why iris cabled 


meorbus leonsnus. 


y- 


VI. 


VII. 


Vill 


I % 


= 
x. 
vc { 
pues 
| a 


ALLL 


XLILL 


XVI. 


XVII. 


XVILI. 


X 1X: 


X X. 


da 
: Meax tes and Wormes, rc. Lis 
it alfobeing the author of corruption, fo that it may be no marvellif the digeai, > 
culty of che liver being {poyled, the afimulative of a maligne and unfir Matte 
intothe habit of the body cannot well nor fitly performe that which May be f 
bodies good. The twelfth is, the fenfe of acertain pricking,as.it were of ROads ~ 
dies overall theskin, caufed by an acride vapour hindred from paffing loth 
intercepted by the thickneffe of the skin. The thirteenth isa confumption ap ry aad 
ciation of the mufcles which are betweene the thumbe and fore-flnger,nor Onely L, 
reafon that the nourifhing and affimulating faculties want fit matter Wherewith 
may repaire the loffe ofthefe parts, for that is common to thefe with the rcft of 
body, but becaufe thefe mufcles naturally rife up unto a certaine mountanoys 
therefore their depreffion is themore manifeft. And this is the caufe that the ¢, i 
ders of leprous perfons ftand ont like wings , to wit,the emaciation of the inne, ss 
ofthe mufcle TrapeXites. The fourteenth figne is the diminution of fenfe or a 
neffe over allthe body by reafon that the nerves are obftructed by the thickness 
the melancholick humour hindring the free paflage of the animal {pirit that is — 
come to the parts that fhould receive fenfe,thefe in the interim remaining free whic 
are fent into the mufcles for motions fake, and by this note I chiefly make crval) 
leprous perfons,thrufting afomewhat long and thick needle fomewhat deep intg 
ereat tendon endued with mok exquifite fenfe, which runs to the heel, which, if}, 
do not well feele,i conclude,that they are certainly leprous. Now, for thatthey i 
lofe their fenfe, their motion remaining entire, the caule hereof is that the ner, 
which are diffeminated to theskin are more affced,and thofe that run into the my 
cles are not fo much; & therefore when as you prick them fomewhat deep, they fel 
the prick,which they do not inthe furface of the skin. T he fifteenth is the corrupt 
of the extreme parts poflefled by putrefaction and a gangrene, by reafon of th. 
corruption of the humours fent thither by che ftrength of the bowels, infecting wih 
the like rainture the parts wherein they remain: adde hereto that the animal fenfiriye 
faculty is there decayed,and as often as any faculty hath forfaken any part, there 
prefentiy after a manner neglect it. The fixteench is, they are troubled with 
dreames,for they feeme in their fleep to {ee divels,ferpents, dungeons, graves, dead 
bodies,and thelike , by reafon of theblack vapours of the melancholic humow 
troubling the phantafie with black and difmall vifions, by which reafon alfo {ucla 
are bitten of a mad dog fearethe water. IT he feventeenth is, that at the beginning and 
in the increafe of the difeafe they are fubtle,crafty and furious by reafonotf the heat 
of the humours & bloud ; but at length in the ftateand declenfion they become cial: 
ty and {ufpicious, the heat and burning of the blond and entrailes decaying by lintle 
and little;therefore then fearing all things wheicof there is no caufe,& difiruftingo! 
their owne ftrength they endeavour by craft, malicionfy ro circumvent wit 
whom they deal,for that they perceive their powers to faile them. The eighteenth, 
a defire of venery above their nature, both forthatthey are inwardly burned wits 
ftrange heat, as alfo by the mixture of flatulencies therewith (for whofe cencration 
the melancholick humour is moft fic)which are agitated, & violently carried chirough 
the veins and genitall parts by the preternaturall heat ; bur at length when this heat 
is cooled and that they are fallen into a hot and dry diftemper, they mightily adhe 
venery, which then would bee very hurtfullto them, as it alfo is at the beginning 0! 
the difeafe,becaufe they have {mall ftore of {pirits and native heat, both whichat 
diffipated by vencry. The nineteenth is, the fo great thicknefle of their orofle andli 
vide bloud,that if you wath it, you may finde afandy matter therein, as {ome have 
found by experience, by reafon of the great aduftion and affationthercof. Then" 
ticth is, the languidnefle & weaknefle of the pulfe (by reafon of the oppreflion 0! te 
vitall and pulfifick faculty by acloud of groffe vapours). Herewith othcir ue 
fometimes is thick and troubled, like the urine of carriage bealts, if the urenary 
be permeable and free, otherwife it is thin, ifthere be obftruction, which only 
that which isthia to flow forth by theurenary paflages; now the urine 1s ofrentim™ 
of a pale ath-colour,and oft- times it fmels like as the other excrements 4010 this rt 
eafe.Verily there are many other fignes of the Leprofie, asthe flownefle of the be) 


Lene 
the 
Nee 


by reafon of the heat of the liver,often belchings by reafon that the ftomack!s 7 | 


| €alcis take 


thermore t 

judged intem 

doc not out 

and corrup 

Leprofie,f 

withftandis 

ther an app 

Sun. Ther 

equall pray 

ceitfull and 
vation of t 

the weakne 
ty of breat 
depravatio 
caufe of thi 
confirmed 
with but 
dy to fall ; 
diet and cx 
ted, where¢ 
of 00d o: 
ae fick of 
fthe blou 
Phyfician 
ican bed 
ton of thal 
liver boyi 
is dire 
Prous b 


€ation of 


| Jeprous pe! 
whichtra 
hat! 
“onc lude | 
4 
a 
‘ 
| 
| 
’ 
q 
| 
4 
fu 


rvellifthe digehives, 
ne and unfic Matter fem, 
t which may be for the 
irwere of Roads Or 
rom palling forth, ang 
mconfamption and ema. 

ore-flnger,nor onely 

matter wherewith th 
hele with the reft of the 
ine mountanous tumor 
he caufe that the thou). 
ciation of the inne; Dart 
ution of fenfe,or a hum. 


ed by the thickneffe of 


{pirit,that it canno: 
m remaining tree which 


eI chiefly make tryal o¢ 


‘fomewhat deep into the 
o the heel, which, if they 
Now, for thatthey thus 
hereof is that the nerves 
ofe that run into the muf 
omewhar deep, they feel 


prene, by reafon of the 
1¢ bowels, infeting with 


mre troubled with tcrrible 
, dungeons, graves, dead 
the melancholic humour 


Rous by reafon of the heat 
lenfion they become craf- 
trailes decaying by linle 
no caufe,& diftrufting of 
co circumvent chofe with 


inwardly burned witha 
th (for whofe generation 


at length when this heaic 
Bi per, they mightily abhor 
alfo is at rhe beginning of 


neffe of their groffe ane 
Etter therein, asfome have 


ealts,ifthe urenary 
truction, which only iu 
Bow the urine iso 
rexcrements do 
the flowneffe of 


26. 


ifteenthis the corruption 


thatthe animal enfitive | 
faken any part, therett 


which reafon alfo {uch as 
that at the beginningand | 


ethem.The cighteenthis, 


violently carried through | 


tive heat, both whichate | 


filcis taken away which {preadeth and is 
of their iflue. 

| 
isofrentin® 
a 

he belly 


ack is 
Bon thar the ftomack's® 


20. cazles and Wormes, (re. 


sled py the refluxe of a melancholy humour, frequent {necfing by reafon of the ful. 
nelle of the braine ; to thefe,this may be added moft frequently,that the face and all — 
spe skin is unctuous OF greafie,fothat water powred thereon, will not in any place ad- WY 
bere thereto : I conceive it is by the internall heat diffolving the fat that lies under great. 
sheskin, which therfore alwaies lookes as if it were greafed or anointed therewith in 

ous perfons. Now of thefe forementioned fignes, fomeare univocall, that is, 
ghich truly and neceffarily thew the Leprofie: otherfome are equivocall or com- 
gon,that 1S, which conduce as well to the knowledge of other difeafes as this. To 
paclude, thatafluredly is a Leprofie which is accompanied with all, or certaincly 


cmoft part of thefe forementioned fignes. 


CuHap. VIII. 


Of ProgueRicks in the and how to provide for {uch as 
fland in feare thereof. 
Why the Le. 


totic Leprofie is a difeafe which paffeth to the iffue, as contagious almoft as profes uncu- 
the plague, {carce curable atthe beginning, uncurable when as it is confir- 


3 4 med, becaufe it is a Cancer of the whole body; now if fome one Cancer 


of fome one part fhall take deepe roottherein,itis judged uncurable. Fur- 


the remedies which to this day have bin found out againft this difeafe, are 
| judged inferiour and unequall in ftrength thereto. Befides, the fignes of this difeafe 
| doenot outwardly thew themfelves before that the bowels be feazed upon, pofleffed 
= andcorrupted by the malignity of the humour, — in fuch as have the white 
of which you may {ee about Buraes 
withRanding inwardly burn with fo great heat,that it will fuddenly wrinkle and wi- 
® theranapple held a {hort while in their hand, as if it had laid for many daics inthe 
| Sun. There is another thing that increafeth the difficulty of this difeafe, which isan 
| cquall pravity of the three principall faculties whereby lifeis preferved. The de- 
| ceitfulland terrible vifions in the fleepe, and numneffe in feeling, argue the depra- 
| vationof the animall faculty ; now the weakneffe of the vitall faculty is fhewed by 
‘he weakneffe of the pulfe,the obfcurity of the hoarfe and jarring voice,the difficul- 
me ‘yofbreathing, and ftinking breath;the decay of the naturall is manifefted by the 
toravation of the work of the liver in fanguification, whence the firft and principal] Thecure. 
ofthis harme arifeth. Now becaufe wee cannot promile cure to fuchas have a 
confirmed Leprofie; and that we dare not do it to fuch as have been troubled there- 
with but for a fhort {pace,it remains that we briefly fhew how to free fuch as are rea- 
m ‘yto fall into fo fearefull a difeafe. Such therefore muft firft of all fhun all things in 
| detand courfe of life whereby the bloud and humours may betoo vehemently hea- Their die 
ied, whereof we have formerly made fome mention.Let them make choice of meats 
| ofgood or indifferent juice (uch as we fhall defcribe in treating of the dict of fuch as 
velickof the plague ; purging bleeding, bathing,cupping, toevacuate the tinpurity 
| ofthe bloud,and mitigate the heat of the liver, fhall bee prefcribed by fome learned Gelding good 


ux,& in little Brittazn,who not- 


ag intt the Le 


de Tarenta muchcommends gelding in this cafe,ncither do I chink 
‘can be difliked. For men fubjectto this difeafe may be effeminated by the ampura- ; 

ton of their tefticles, and fo degenerate intoa womanifh nature, and the heat ofthe 

m “ctboyling the bloud,being extinguifhed they become cold & moiit, which rem- 


etisdire€ly contrary tothe hot & dry diftemper of Leprous perions ; befides the 


| ‘che 
onofthe oppreflion 0: 
Herewithalfotheir | 


prous being thus deprived of the faculty this dif- 
ed amongft mankind by the propa- 


The the Twentieth Booke. 


Tet 3 


LLL - 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 
Rr 
4 


J 


- 


AMAD DOGGE,AND THE BL 


TINGS AND STINGINGS 


OTHER VENEMOUS 
CREATURES. 


Tut One AND TweEnrTIETH Book. 


A 


The caule of writing this Treatife of Poyfoms. 
CAS Po 1 VE reafons have principally moved me toundertake to write 
a\_ this Treatife of poyfons, according tothe opinion of the Anci- 
{Gy} ents. The firftis,chat Il might inftruct the Surgeon what reme- 
dics mutt prefently be ufedto fuch as are hurt by poy fons, in the 
interim whilft greater meanes may bee expected froma Phyfi- 
ad We cian. The fecond is, that hee may know by certaine fignes and 

SBA notes fuch as are poyfoned orhurtby poyfonous meanes, and 

{o make report thereof tothe Judges, orto fuchas it may con- 
cerne. The third is,tharthofe Gentlemenand others who live in the Countrey,and 
tarre from Cities and ftore of greater meanes, may learne fomcthing by my labours 
oy Which they may helpe their friends birten by an Adder, madde Dogge, or other 
boyfonous creature,in fo dangerous, fuddenand ufualla cafe. The fourth is, thate- 
very one may beware of poyfons, and know their fymptomes when prefent, that 
being knowne,they may {peedily feeke fora remedie. The fifth is, that by this my 

| /adour all men may know what my good-will is,and how well minded lam towards 
| thecommon wealth in generall, and cach man in particular, tothe glory of God. 
| [doe not here fo mucharme malicious and wicked perfons to hurt, as Surgeons to 
| Provide to helpe and defend cach mans life againft poy fon ; which they did not un- 
derftand,or at leaft feemed not fo to doe, which taking this my labour in evill part, ; 
ve malicioufly interpreted my meaning. 

But now at length,that wee may come to the matter ; I will begin atthe generall 
divifion of poyfons, andthen handle each /pecies thereof feverally : but firft let us whariscobe 
sethisrule That, Poyfon is that which either outwardly applyed or ftruck in, or poys 

| QWardly taken into the body, hath power to kill it, no otherwife, than meate well 
is apt to nourifh it. For Conciliater writes,that the properties of poy{on are con- 
to nourifhments in their whole fubftance , for as nourifhment is curnedinto 
dloud,and in cach part of the body whereto it isapplyed to nourifh, by perfee affli- 
Mulstion is fubftieuesd in the place of that portion which flowes away cach 
ns 


‘ 
| S 
| 
po 


( oncerning P oyfons, (re. | 


of po yfons. 


AU poyions 
have not 2 pe- 
culiar Antipa- 
chy with the 
heart. 


Cap.¢ lib 6.de 
affect. 


The differences pofure and conformation ofthe body. Now all poyfons are {aidto 


Thus on the contrary poyfon turnes our bodies into a nature like it {elte and ver 


nate, for as every agentimprints the force and qualities thercof in the fubjeQ Paticn: 


chus poy fon by the inamoderation of faculties in their whole nature contrary 

no otherwife than fireturneth chaffein am,’ 
ment into its owne nature,and fo confumes it. Therefore it istruly delivered}, 
Ancients, who have diligently pryed into the faculties of naturall things, th,, . , 


changeth our fubftanceinto its nature, 


Poyfon that may kill men by deftroying and corrupting their temper, and the Com. 


Proceed cithe, 


from the corupt aire, or from living creatures, plants and mineralls, or by an artific.. | 


all malignity in diftilling, fabliming and diverfly mixing of poy fonous and fy; 
things. Hence arifefundry differences ofpoy fons ; neither doe they all worke afe 
the fame manner ; for fone corrupt ourfatureby the unmeafurableneffe of the ma. 


nifeft andelementary qualities whereof they confift,others from a {pecifick and 
cult propertie. Hence it isthat fome kill fooner than otherfome ; neither js ittrue, | 


that all of them prefently affaile the heart, guf others are naturally at deadly frite 
with other parts of the body , as Cantharides with the bladder, the {ea Hare wirh 
the lungs, the Torpedo with the hands, which it ftupefieth,though the fithers rod be. 
betwixt them. Thus of medicines,there are fome which are apt prefently to comfor 


and ftrengthen the heart ; others the brain, as fechas ; others the ftomack,as Cin. 7 


mon ; Alfo there are fome poyfons which work both waies, that is, by manifett ang 


occult qualities, as Ewphorbiam forthat both by theexceffive heate andthe whole | 


fubftance, or the difcord of the whole fubftance with ours, corrupts our nature, Ap 


argument hereof is,that T reacle,which by its quality is manifeftly hor, infringeth 


the force thereof, as aifo of all others of an occult property.Poifons which work by 
an occult and {pecifick property,do not therefore doe it,becaufe they are too immo. 


derately hor, cold, dry, moift; but for that they are abfolutely fuch, andhavetha | 
efience fromthe ftars and cceleftiall influence, which is apt to diflolveanddeftroy | 
the ftrengthof mans body, becaufe being taken,but even ina {mall quantity,yerare | 


they of foperniciousa quality, that they kill almoft in a moment. Now poy{ons do 


not onely kill being taken into the body, but fome being put or applyed outwardly, | 


neither doe venimous creatures only harme by their ftinging and biting, but alfo by 
their excrements, as {pittle,bloud,the touch and breath. 


Cuape. Il. 


How poyfons being faa in quantity, may by their only towch 
caufe fo great alterations. 


T feemeth ftrange to many, how it may come to pafle, that poy {or,'2- 


sys ken or admitted ina fmallquantity, may almoft in amoment produce 


Antidotes and Counter-poyfons, which are oppofed to poyion, can fo fudden') 


{fo pernicious effe&s over all the begy,and all the parts, tacultics,a0d 
} actions, fo that being admitted but in a little quantity, it{wels upthe | 
body intoagreat bigneffe. Neither oughtit tofeeme lefle ftrange,how 


breakeand weaken the great and pernicious effects thereof, being itis notlikly i 


f follow that 
poylons. 


inferlimits otf 
oerorlater th 
ansrightly 
refiftor yeeld 
fortof poylo 
persandcom@ 
andonthe com 
the famein py 
proportion, 
plentifully , 
oherfome wi 
me alkoned than 
exactly know 
lon 

fon,orhow 
me arrive 2 
tie paflages 
¢Nterinto tha 


that fo fmalla particle of poyfon or Antidote can divide it felfe into fo many, | 


fo farfevered particles ofourbody. Thereare fome (faith Galew) who thinketl | 


fomethings by touchonely, by the power of their quality, may alter thofe things 


Whether 


which are next tothem, and that this appeares plainly inthe feaTorpede, ast | 
which hath fo powerfull a quality, that it can fend it alongit the fifhers 


band,and fo make it become torpide or numbe. Buton the contrary, Philofop” Be Sah 


teach, that accidents, fuch as qualities are, cannot without their {ubjeéts remove 

diffufe themfelvesinto other fubje@s. Therefore Galens other an{wer is 
able to reafon, that fo many and great affeés of poyfons and remedies arifé 
from acertaine fpirit or fubtle humidity ; not truly, 


orthat this {pirit and | 


midity may be difperfed over the whole body and all the pares chercof which! 4 ;* 


4s, but chat lit 
‘he heb 
of che | 
jomackes and 
yancity 
‘become he 
hig 
quantity 
| net} ation ini 
th 
kegs ace 
AD T he 
thet 
I 
: | 
mi Who have tr 


ke it {elte and 
the fubje 
ature contrary to us 
rneth chaffein am,” 
uly delivered by the 
rall things, thar itis 
mper,and the con, 
dto proceed Cither 
lls, or byan 
yfonous and 
they all worke after 
rableneffe of the ma. 
m a {pecifick and oc. 
Neither is it try, 
rally at deadly ftrite 
t, the fea Hare with 
ph the fifhers rod bee 
prefently to comfort 
he ftomack, as Cina. 
at is, by manifeft and 
heate and the whole 
rupts Our nature, An 
eftly hor, infringeth 
ifons which work by 
le they are too immo- 
ly fuch, and have that 
diflolve and deftroy 
all quantity, yet are 
nt. Now poyfons do 
applyed outwardly ; 
nd biting, but alfo by 


ly touch 


pafle, that poy for,'a- 
in amoment produce 
he parts, faculties,and 
vaority, it fwels up the 
emc lefle ftrange, how 
pylon, can fo fuddenly 


t, being itis not likely 


Belfe into fo many,ae 


sales) whorhinke tha 
may alter thofethings § 
the {ca Torpede, as that 
oft the fithers rod ro the 7 
contrary, Philofophers 


cir {ubje&ts remove 


q 


cke 
q 


r anfwer is more 
nd remedies arife 
his {pirit and 
arts thereof whic 
fees, 


Concerning Po y/ons, 777 


ur that little, which is entred the body, as caft inby the ftroake of a Spider, 
fing of 2 Scorpion, infe@s and corrupts all the next parts by contagion with wondrous 
i equality thefe others that are next to them, untill from an exceeding {mall . °°? 

* ‘on of the bloud, if the ftroake fhall light into the veines, it thall fpread over 
we slemafle of bloud ; or of phlegme, if the poyfon fhall chance to come to the 
ad fo the force thereof fhall bee propagated and diffufed over all the hu- 
bowels. The doubt of Antidotes is leffe, for thefe being taken in grea- 
-quuntity when they fhal come into the ftomack,warmed by the heat of the place, 
sy become hot, & fend forth vapours,which fuddenly diffufed over the body by 
fcheir fubftance, doe by their contrary forces dull and weaken the ma- 
“ wy of the poyfon.Wherefore you may often fee when as Antidoies are given in 
vf quantity than is fit, that they are leffe prevalent,neither doe they anfwerto our 


~ Gation in overcomming the malignity of the poyfon ; fo that it muft neceffari- 


| follow chat thefe muft not onely in qualities, butalfo in quantiy bee fuperiour to 
| pylons. 


Whether there be any fuch poyfons as will kill At a fet time ? 


Theopbrafims thus anfwers ; of poyfons, fome more fpeedily performe 
their parts, others more flowly, yet may you finde no {uch as will kill 

afelimits of time, according to the will and defire of men. For that fome kill {oo- 
ror later than others ; they do not this of their owne or proper nature, as Phy fici- 
astightly judge, but becaufe the fubject upon whichthey light, doth more or leffe 
cfitoryceld to their eflicacie. Experience fheweth the truth hereof ; forthe fame poy 
(tof poyfon in the {ame weight and meafure given to fundry men of different tem- come w kil{e- 
pessand complexions, will kill one in an houre, another in fixe houres, or in a day, 
indonthe contrary will not fo much as hurt fome third man. You may alfo obferve 
‘he fame in purging medicines, For the fame purge given to divers men in the fame 
noportion, will purge fome fooner, fome later, {ome more f{paringly, otlicrs more 
and otherfome not atall ; alfo withfome it will woike gently, wich 
xierlome with paineand gripings. Of which diverfity there can no other cavfe be 
dtoned,than mens different natures in complexion & temper, which no man can fo 
sadly know and comprehend,as to have certain knowledge thereof, as how muchi 
ud how long the native heat can refift and labour againft the ftrengch of the poy- 
on, or how pervious or open the paflages of the body may bee whereby the poy fon 
my arrive atthe heart and principal! parts. For io fuch (for example fake) as have 
hepaflages of their arteries more large, the poyfon may more readily and {peedily 
into the heart together with the aire that is continually drawn into body. 


Crap. IIII. 


Whether [uch creatures as feed poy fonows things be poyfonons, and whether 
they may be caten fafely and withont harme ? 


eS i Ucks, Storkes, Hernes, Peacocks, Turkies, and other birds, feed upon 


| Toads, Vipers, Apes, other 
‘3 venemous things. Wherforc it is worthy the queftioning ,w hecher {uch 


like creatures nourished with fuch food,cankill or poyfon fuch perions RP 
as thall afrerwardeatthem? ©Matthiolws writesthat all late Authors, 


a treated of poyfons,to be abfolutely of this opinion, That men may {ately fon may bee: 
i ouc 


out any danger feed upon fuch creatures, for that they convert the beafts in" 


to 


B® cra the propounded queftion; whether there may be poyfons which within no poyfons kil 

a certaine and definite time (put cafe amoncth or yeare) may kill men, 
| | 
Sas 


Concerning ‘Poyfons, CC. Lig 


to their nature after they haveeaten them, and on the contrary , are not char 
by them. This reafon though very probable, yet doth it not make thefc beafts, ua 
wholly harmeleffe,efpecially ifthey be often eaten or fed upon. Diofcoride, be 
len feeme tomaintaine this opinion, whereas they write, that the milke, whic, 
thing elf han the relented bloud,of {uch beafts as feed upon {fcammonie, elle No. 
and (purge, purgeth violently. Therefore Phyficians, defirous to purge 3 my 
childe,give purges tothe nurfes, whence their milke becomming purging, my 
both meatand medicinetothe childe. The fleth of Thruthes, which teec 
niper berries, favours of Juniper. Bivds that are fed with worme-wood Cal, 
either taft bitter, or have the ftrong fent of Garlike. Whitings taken with parli 7 & 
fo {mell thereof, that they will not forgoe that fmell ortafte by any falting te, 
or boyling,for which fole reafon,many who hate garlike,are forced to abftain 
thefe fifhcs. The fieth of Rabbirs that feed upon Pennyroyall and Juniper, favour i 
them ; Phificians wifh that Goats,Cows,and Affes,whote milke they would 
Con{umptions or other difeafes, fhould bee fed fome {pace before, and every - #§ 
with thefc or thefe herbs which they deeme fit for the curing of this or thar dif. d 
tibdelim».  Eor Galenaffirmes that hce doubts not, but hatin fuccefle of time the fle(} ofc 
oman cures wil] be changed by the meats whereon they feed,and at length favou; thereof 
Therefore I donoc allow that the flefh of fuch things as feed upon venemoy; thin - 
fhould be eaten for food,unleffe it bee forme long {pace after they have dijujeg a, 
repaft, and that all che venome bee digefted and overcome by the efficacy ofth.. I 
propet heat,fothat nothing thereof may remaine in taft, fmell or fubftance, 
The o-cafion of all vanifhed away.For many dye fuddenly,the caufe of whofe deaths are unknown, 
fuddeadeath which peradventure was from nothing elfe, but che fympathy and antipathy of. | 
inmanys dics, forthat thefethings caufe death and diflcafe to fome, that nourith Otherfomefa:. asmay kill by 
cording to our vulgar Englifh proverbe; That which isone mans meate is anorhe, ME found, as 
‘mans Poyfon. ] cverresthe co 
Serpent, as 
me firousto awak 
me inc putreficd. 
their lefh, wh 
me which lay hic 
by A:ppocrate 
JEE will firft declare what the generall fignes of poy{ca are, and happened by 
then will we defcend to particulars, whereby we may pronounce tic Gelh of «| 
/ 3) that one is poyfoned with this or that poyfon. We certainly know the bones rei 
AVA that aman is poyfoned, when as heecomplaines of agreatheavie fell away : ng 
5 nefle ot his whole body, fo that hee is weary of himfelfe; whens fretting 
purcfaction, 
Tothefe 
4 Waenas they | 
at difting 
prop: 
bur onely by 
Which may 
“ithitand rh 
king by 
that the ven: 
ten Or itung 
Pe for fe: 
Wider Tou! 
often 
them up in 
tung. ist 
"aturall hea 


become 


Cuar. V. 
The general fignes of fuch as are poyfomed. 


Common tignes 
ofiuch asare 
poy loned. 


Signesofhot 
mn) fons. 


\ 
” 
s 
° 


ON. Diofcoride, 


diftafe 
Of creg. 


thereof, 
UPON Venemous things 


they have ditujed 
the efficacy of 
ll or fubftance, but bee 
deaths are Onknowne 
Y and antipathy of bo. 
nourith otherfomef ac. 
mans Meate is another 


es of poyfon arc, and 
by we may pronounce 
mn. We certainly know 
laines of agreatheavi- 
my Of himfeifc; when as 
from the orifice of the 
artaftethat meat,how- 
ace changeth fudden- 
colour, much differing 
ith frequent vomiting, 
unquietneffe, that all 
hat the poyfon workes 
pout any manifeftfenic 
{wears, for ufually 
ey areat enmity,as 
rhole fubftance, and 
ly affaile the heart, our 
Faculty. Now will wee 
elementary qualities, 
n impreffion of neat!9 
inner parts, with great 
cefle of heare they bee 
Arfenicke, Sublimats 


caufe in the 
me, they then omack 


8, ZI. 


the milke,whi-}. 
fcammonie, hej 0. 


Secpent,as Gilbertus Anglicus afirmeth ; for dying thereof, when as his fervant, de- 


— 


(oncerning P oyfons, re. 


and guts intolerable pricking paines, rumblingsin the belly, and con- 

Thefe are fucceeded by vomitings, with fweats fome- 

a hor,fomewhiles cold, with {wounings,whence fuddaine death enfues. Poy- 

mm shat kill by too great coldneffe, induce a dull or heavie fleepe, or drowzinefle, Signs cold 

et vhich youcannot eafily rouze or waken them ; fometimes they {o troublethe *° 

pe that the patients performe many undccent geftures and anticke trickes with 

~ mouthes and eyes, armes and legges, like as {uch as are franticke ; they are trou- 
ch cold fweats, their faces become blackifh or yellowith, alwayes ghaftly, 


sled WI 
ebodies are benummed, and they dye in a fhort time unleffe they be helped ; 
“(08 of this kinde are Hemlock, Poppie, Nightfhade, Henbane, Mandrage. Dry stineeatides 
oasare ufually accompanicd by heate with moifture, for although /alp4ur bec poytons. 
“and dry, yet hath it moifture,to hold the parts together,as ali chings which have 
_galttence have, yetare they calleddry, by reafon that dryneffe is predominant 
nea fuch things nmkecthe tongue and throate dry and rough, witlrunquench- 
alethirlt ; the belly is fo bound, that fo much as the urine cannot have free pailage 
allthe members grow {qaallide by dryneffe, the patients cannot flcepe; poy- 
got this kindeare Lytharge, Cerufle, Lime, Scailes of Braffe, Filings of Lead, 
yeared antimony-On the contrary,moift poyfons induce a perpetuall fleep,a fluxe Signesot 
couring, the refolution ofall the nerves and joints, fo that not fo much asthe poyiens. 
wesmay be faithfally conteined in their orbes,but will hang as ready to fal out; the 
parts,as the hands, feet, nofe and ears corrupt & putrefic,at which time they 
with thirft by reafon of their trong aeat,alwaies the companion of 
refaction, & oft times the author thereof: now when this commethto pafle,death 
sathand. Very many deny that therecan be any moift poyfons found, that is, fuch 
«may kill by the eflicacy of their humidity, becaufe there are no fuch tltings to bee 
fund, asmay cometoche fourth degree of moifture. Yet there is an example that 
werresthe contrary, which wasof one, who fleeping on the night, was bitten by a 
ioustoawaken his Matter out of his fleepe, tooke him by the arme, all the flefh be- “4” 
aeputrefied, felloff, and prefently the bones alfo fellafunder, being deprived of 
ixirfleh, which could not happen, unleffe by excefle of the venemous humidity 
mich lay hidin the teeth and (pictle of the ferpent. Alfo wee have found it noted 
y Hippocrates, that ina rayny, numide, and foutherly conftitution of the yeare, it 
uppened by the maligne violence of the venenate and putrefying humidity, thar 7° °* 
ieGelh of the armes and legges becomming rotten, fell away by peecemeale, and 
». bones remained bare; yea alfo and the bones themfelves in fome, putrefyed and 
laway : neither certainely doth the Lwes venerea killby any other meanes, than The vinte 
Wafretring and putrefying force of humidity,by whofe efficacy the folidity of the excefico: nai 
snes is diffolved ; then much more the fleih may bee tainted and confumed by Sure. 
wrefation, 

Tothefe and fuch poyfons which worke by amanifeft andelemenrary faculty, 
‘asnas they fhall bee received intothe body after what manner foever, you thall 
othwith oppofe their contraries, and if by chance it bee not manifeft, what,and of 
‘atdiftiné kiad of poyfon thatis, you mutt know that fuch poyfons as worke by 
<cult properties, it is not by reafon as yet found out how they will affect the body, 
onely by experience. Thereforeto thefe you muft oppofe their like antidotes, 
"hich may by their whole fubftance ftrengthen the heart and vitall faculty, and 
Ntitand the ftrength of the poyfon. Buttothis our diftinctioa of poyfons,wor- ay poyfons 
by a manifeftandelementary quality, their opinion is contrary, whoaflirme cele. 
“ia: the venome of all poyfonous beaftsare therefore cold, for that fuchas are bit. 
“Sor ftung withthem, are forthwith felt to bee colderthan aftone. Andthat fer- 
tor fear of cold, when as winter is at hand, and 
or elfeas vipers uicto due, lye ones, er which, 
ben ndethem ftiffe and numbe, and fo unapt for call 
hat in yourhand. Butthe coldneffe that is perceived or felt in {uch as are bitten 

dg, is notoccafioned by the coldneffe of the poyfon, but by the abfence ot the 


“tural heate, withdrawing it iclfeinthe very inftant of the ftroake, from the 
ce 


make thefe be 
Oe 
way 
In fucki, 9 
PUTB ing becom,” 
Which feed Upon J 
rMe-wood or 
© bY any falting fry. 
fosced tO abftain tro, 
Juniper, !aVour of 
cthey would fo, 

before, and CVery ds 
P of this or thar 
pt came the flefh 
| 
| 


ie 


4 


(oncerning Poyfons, ce. 


= 


incipal 


cobetuchas fae into thecenter of the body, both for the defence of the heart, as the prin, 
scpoyfoned Dart, asalfo for chat there is nothin swhich fo much diflipates,or fo much 
orfusare the vitall heat, as poyfon ( of what kinde foever it be) doth. 


cg d. 


Crap. VI. 
How, or by what meanes to fhunne, or ¢{chew Poyfons. 


isamatter of much difficulty toavoyd poyfons, becaafe fuch | 
GAG»: 2s atthis time temper them, are fo throughly prepared for dece 
S54 ED a and milchief,that they will deceive even the moft wary and quick, | 
ted, | fighted ; for they fo qualific their ingrate tafte and {mell, by the 
| \ admixture of {weet and well {melling things, thattheycannore, 
fily bee perceivedeven by the skillfull- Therefore fuck as feare | 


“Vhat fuch as 


featepoyoning poy foning, oughtto take heed of meates cooked with much art, very tweete, | 
anit obterv foure, or notably endued with any other tafte. And when they are oppreft 
hurger or thirft, they muft not eate nor drinke too greedily, buthave a diligent re. 

ard to the tafte of fuch things as they eate or drinke ; befides, before meat let them 

take {uch thingsas may weaken the ftrength of the poyfons ; fuch asisthe tat bro J 

of good nourifhing flefh meats; in che morning let them arme themflelves with trea. 

cle or mithridate,and conferve of rofes, or the leaves of rue, a wallout and dry figs, | 

befides, let him prefently drinke a little draught of Muskedine or fome other 00d 

wine. when one felpeds hee hath taken any poy{fon in meat Or drinke, let him for. | 

beare fleeping. For bc fides thatthe force of poyfon is oft times fo rapid, thatit cop. 


which it pref 
malignity of t 
ofafulphures 


‘by feene ie kt 
ey fumes our life in a fhort {pace, as fire doth ftubble, as alfo for that it is drawne more rae i 
whvandhow AWardly into the fecret paflages of the body by fleepe. Wherefore in fuch a caf i may iohel 
itis betcer to procure vomit by drinking warme, or butter diflolvedin An 
procured.  warme oyle,oradecoGion of line, or fenugreeke feedes, or fat broth, for thusthe sad Giver an, 

received poyfon is alfo caftforch therewith, or clfetheacrimony thereof retunded, by fu 


and the belly loofed. 


You may fee this by daily experience, for cauftickes, veficatories, and thelikea- mouth and n 


ly kill che foi 


crid thiags being applyedtoan anointed part,will not bliftermorexulceratethe pat. ter the 
Neither doth the vomit conduce onely inthis, thatit excludeth the poyfon,busr their n ou 
fhewes either by the tafte, {mell, or colour, the kinde ofthe taken poyfon; fo that purgin 
chen by ufingthe proper Antidote,it may beethe more eafily and {pecdily retilles, the b m 4 
yet notwithftanding if youconceive thatthe poyion have defcended deeper into 


the Guts, you may witha glyfter draw away che reft thereof which adhereste the 
whenany of tae Guts. Bur if the patient cannot vomit, taal! fome purging medicine 
wherewith they given him forthwith, and fuch as are thought mere particularly co reiill 
‘hall be purged -fyrch as are Agaricke, Aloes, the lefler Centaury, Kubarde and orher things, 
ding to the direétion of the learned Phyfitien. Then thall you sdminificr gy 
made Cafsta, fatty decoions, theeps fuct, or buster or Cowes milke, within’ 
mucil2ges of Line feed feeds, quince feeds,and other tings as ate 
ly given in a Dyfentery, or bloody fluxe, that fuch things may iiader the adhelion | 
of che poyfon tothe caates of the guts, and by their unctuoulneffe reiunde the | 
mony of the poyfon, and mitigate if any thing fhall already be ulcerated, and 20 


Witthou fay 
Of ire, as ot 
that is burar 
fing all thinoll 
Peoples for 
lortha fulph 
are burne in ; 
Pope Che 
Poyfoned by 
and dyed the 


lately defend the found parts from the maligne effects of the poyfor. But let tuso° | etplace of : 
a perperuall rule, That the poy fon bee {peedily drawne backe by the fame wey " _ hin by the 


Certaine 


ney trcd into the body ; as, ifit entred by {melling in at the noftrills, let it bee at A 
sommes. back by {neeling,it by the mouth into the ftomack,let it be excluded by vost" 
the fundament into the belly,then by glifter;if by the privities into the 
by metrenchites or inje@ions made therinto;if by abite,fting or wound, 
bee made by fuch things as have a powerfull attractive faculry ; for thus we Nek 


verfions,that by thefewe may not onely hinder the poyfon from aflailing the Thefaf ( 
bot alfo that by this means we may draw it from within outwards. Wherfore 
ligatures caft avout the armes, thighes and legges, are good in this cafe, tej Out onth 


| 


H ppitl g glaile 
bashes 
WOOG, 
ge good, Det 
he be very we 
helly of an Ox 
mer scold, tt 
| | Phyfician, if it 
; 
| 
| ‘ 
H 
eit 
7 
pel 
| dome and co 
| 
- | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Mander, 
\ 
: other m 


Ons. 


oft wary and Uick, 
ifte and fmell, the 


, thatthey canno; Ca- 


Lig. 


fart, asthe Pring ipall 
or fo much Oppugres 


yions, becaafe fuch 
Prepared for deceir | 


erefore {uch as feare 


art, very iweete, falc 
are oppreft wir}, 
uthave a diligent re. 

Dcfore meat let them 
uch as isthe tat broth 
themflelves with trea. 


wallnut and dry figs, 


mpc or fome other good 
r drinke, let bim for. 

's fo rapid, that it con- 

mc hat it is drawne more 
ierefore in {uch acafe 
or butter diflolved in 
mfat broih, for thusthe 
ony thereof retunded, 


matorics, and the like a- 
or exulcerate the part. 


eth the poyfon, 
aken poyfon ; fo that 
and {pecdily reliftea, 
efcended deeper into 
which adhereste the 
ome purging medicine 
wlarly co refill poyion, 
nd orher rhings, accor- 
adopipifier glyftes 
Cowes milke, with ioe 
uch things as are 
binder che adhelicn 
recunde the 
be ulcerated, and 


ixcluded by vomit,tf 
sincothe wom 


vy: for thus we make 


royfon. But let this be 
by thefame way 
Rrills,lecic bee 


be.thes 


or wound, lerrevaliio® 


rom aflailing the hea". 
ivards. Wherfore 
Hin thiscafe. Alfolage 
cuppis 


21. Concerning ‘Poy/ons, 781 


pit glaifes applyed with much fame to fundry parts of the body, are good. 
rf » bashes of warme water, with a decoction of fuch things as refift poy fon, as fou- 


wood, calaminte, ruc, betony, horehound, penny royall, bayes, {cordium, 


2 zood, being provoked fo muchas the ftrength of the patient can endure. But if 


lage, fcabious, mints, valerian, andthe like,are good in this cafe. Alfo fweates 


severy wealthy, whom we fufpec poyfoned, it will bee {afer to put him into the 


gally ofan oxe, horfeormule, andthen prefently into another affoone asthe for- 
ga scold, that fo the poyfon may bee drawne forthby thegentle and vaporous 


eofthe new killed beaft ; yetdoenone of thefe things without the advife ofa 


phy fitian, ifit may conveniently be had. 


Cuar. VII. 


How the corrupt or venemous Ayre may killa Man, 


st 
pentup in the cavities and bowells of the earth, and deprived ofthe free- 
fomeand commerce of the open aire, is corrupted, and acquires a maligne quality, 


ghich it prefently transferrethuatofuch as meet therewith, Alfo there isa certaine prowehunders 
milignity of the aire which accompanieth thunders, and lightnings, which favoures and lightnings 
ofalulphureous virulency, fothat whatfoever wilde beaftes thall devoure the crea- 
B® wreskilled therewith, they become madde, and dye immediately , for the fire of 


lightning hath a farremore rapid, fubtle, andgreater force than other fires, fo that 
rmay rightly be termed a Fire of Fires. 

Anargument hereof is,that it melteth the head of a fpear, not harming the wood, 
nd filver and gold, not hurting the purfe wherein it is conteined, Alfo the aire is in- 
ieGed by fumigations, which prefently admitted into the body and bowels by the 
mourh and nofe in re{piration, by the skinne and arteries in per{piration, doth eafi- 


ylill the {pirits and humours being firft infected, and then within a fhort {pace af- 
w,thelolid fubftance of the principal parts, & chiefly of the heart being turned in- 
‘their nature,unleffe the man be firft provided for by {neefing, vomiting, fweating, 


urging by the belly or fome other excretion. For that poyfon which is carry ed into Whether che 


vapour that a 


opntQH E aireis infected and corrupted by the admixture of maligne vapours, By howanay 
either arifing from the unburied bodies of fuchasare flaine ingreat con. andwhat 


flicts, or exhaling out of the earth after earrh-quakes the ; meanes the ae 
q forthe aire, long may beinfotted 


by {mmell isthe moft rapid & effeQuall, by fo mach asa vapor or exhalation from 


‘ofmore fubtle & quicklier piercing effence than an humor. Yet notwithftanding, burnt thing 
fay, itis not credible,that any canbe kild by any vapor raifed by the force ™Y Po = 


tae, as of a Torch, ora Warming- pan, for that the venenate quality of the thing 
‘atts burat, is diffipaced and confumed by the force of the fire, purging and clean- 
‘gall things. This reafon is falfly faignedto the deftruction of the lives of carelcfle 
‘ople; for fulphureous brands kindled atacleere fire, doe notwithftanding cali 
“ta fulphurcous vapour. Whethesdoenot Lignam aloes and Juniper,when they 
in aflame, {mell leffe {weetly ¢ 

Pope Clement, the feventh of that name, the Uncle of our Kings Mother, was 
yfoned by the func of a poyfonous Torch that was carryed lighted before him, 
iddyed thereof. «ata hiolus telleth,that there were two Mountebanks in the mar- 
ktplace of Siewwa, the onc of which, but f melling toa poyfoned gilly-flower given 
tin by the other, fell downe dead prefently. uP 
_Acertaine man not long ago,when he had put to his nofe,and {melled a little unto 
‘onander, which was fecretly poyfoned, was prefently taken witha Vertige, and 
ilhis face {welled,; aad unleffethat hee had gotten {} peedy helpe by iternutatorics 
- a. meanes, hee had died fhortly after of the fame kipdeof deaththat Pope 
‘mat did, 


f The fafett prefervative apaintt fuch poy fons, is not to {mell tothem : moreover, 
nik affirme, that there are prepared fome poyfoas of fuch force, that being anoin- 


but onthe faddle,they will kill the rider, others, that if you but anoint the ftir- 
Vv rops 


A 


hiftery, 


4 
q 

j 

¢ 

| 
wos 
q 


\ 


732 Concerning ‘Poyfons, 


rops therwith, they will fend fo deadlie poyfonousa qualitie into the rider 
his boots,that he fhall dietherof within a fhort time after:which thing shoe os 
be fcarce credible, becaufe fuch poyfonstouch notthe naked skin, yet have th 
examplein nature, whereby they may defend themfelves. For the Torpedo ~ 
narcoticke,and certainelic deadlic force, into the arme, and fo into the bod ie 
Fifher,the cords ofthe net being between them. 


Yan 
Nds 2 
Of the 


Cuap. VIII. 
T hat every kinde of Poyfow bath its proper and peculiar Signes and Effedi;. 


oftiferous aire 
REIREES poyfonsare ditin&in fpecies, focach differs in their figngs ang members 
EVAN effects ; neither is it poffible to find anie one kinde of poyfon, which may health change 
be accom panied or produce all the fignes and effects of all poy fons, oth. poilonous 
| “eres wife Phyfitians fhould in vaine have written of thefignes and effea (yn for fuch as 
| cach of them,as alfo of their proper remedies & antidotes. For what kind of poyion 7 fuch as be in mag 
fhall that be, which fhall caufe a burning heat in the ftomack,bellie, liver, bladde; (ynmer 2nd 
kidneies,which fhall caufea hicketting,which fhall caufe the whole body totremh|. fitting creacurc™ 
and fhake, which fhall take away the voice and {peech,which thal] caufe convulfions which proceed 
fhall weaken the pulfificke facultie, which fhall interceptthe freedome of breathino ismore power! 
which fhall ftupefte and caft intoa dead fleepe, which fhall together, and than from 
caufea Vertigointhehead, dimneffe in the fight, a ftrangling, or ftoppage of thy from fuch as ha 
breath, thirft, bleeding, feaver,ftoppage of the urine, perpetual! vomiting , vipers which hg 
lividneffe,and palenefs of the face,refolution of the powers,and manic other things efficacic Of po) 
Hor poyfons all which are caufed by all forts of poyfon. Laftly, no bodic will denie, bur shat ftence,& the 21 
killfeonerthan hot poyfons may kill more {peedily than ceid, forthat they are more {peedily adv. have larger 
~~ ated by the native heat. Therefore tho 
the like poifon 
| Crap. IX. alfo ftrengthet 
| refilts pernici¢ 
The Effects of Poyfons from particular venemous things, and what Prognopicks it caufeth the « 
may thence bee made. | Antidotes,ast 
treacle, becaul 
istheopinion of Cornelius Celfis, and almoft of allthe anuents, cold;moift an 
That the bite of everie beaft had fome virulencie , but yet {ome fuch ag confilt 
morethan otherfome. They are moft virulent that are infi@edby plants aad 
| venemous beatts, as Alpes, Vipers, Water-{nakes, and all kindes foners. 
ae wild beaftsare (aR \ =) of Serpents, Bafiliskes, Dragons, Toads, Mad dogges, Scorpions, 
virulent. SS Spiders, Bees, Wafpes,and the like. They are lefle maligneywhic! 


are of creatures wanting venome, as of Horfes, Apes, Cats, Dogges not mad, and 

manic other things, which though of their owne nature they are without poilon,ye J 

in their bites there is fomething more dolorificke and ill natured, thanincomme: | 

wounds inflicted by other occafions : I belecvethat in their flaver or /anses, heres | 
| fomething, [know not how toterme it, contrarie to our nature, which imprints“ 
maligne qualiticin theulcer, whichalfo you may obferve inthe tearings or {crate | 
chings cf fuch creatures as have tharpe clawes, as Lions and Cats. Moreovet mak | 
affirme that they have found by experience, that the bites of men are not alrogethet 
Thebjcesofa Without virulencie, ef; pecially of fuchas are red haired and freckled, cheiflic 
iis red haired man 2$ they are angred; itis probable that the bites of other perfons want t!!s maliga | 
virulent. tic, fecing that their {pittle will cure {mall ulcerations. Wherefore if there (hal! hap 


pen difficultie of cure in a wound,caufed by a mans biting, which is neither rea hale | 
red nor freckled, neither angrie ; this happens not by meanes of the fpittle, 8 a. 
anie maligne qualitie, but by reafon of the contufion,caufed by the bluntneffe 0! a 
teeth, norcutting, but bruifing the part, for being not fharp, they cannot! 
enter the ficfh,unlefie by bruifing and tearing, after the manner of heavic an 


— | | | 
weap 
i ent but pri 
| 
in rhe {pace | 
(hort (pace 
a 
Wha 
ANN | 
humou 
cing evacu 
ahd Patticular 
| “Opick medi 
if Wales bevin | 
| 


t the Torpedo 


into the bodie of the 


ts in their fignes and 
poyfon, which ma 
of all poyfons, othe. 


fignes and effeds or’ 


what kind of po 

ellie, liver 
hole body totremble 
all caufe convulfions 

-edome of breathing. 
together, and at once 
pg, or ftoppage of the 
vomiting , tedneffe, 
d manic other things, 
i¢ will denice, but that 
emore {peedily adtu- 


— 


what Prognofticks 


oft of alithe antients, 
lencie, but yet fome 
it that are infiiGed by 
{nakes, and all kindes 
d dogges, Scorpions, 
maligneywhich 
Yogges not mad, and 
e without poifon,yet 
red, than in common 
aver or fanies, thercss 


re, whichimprints’ 
the rearings orfcrat- @ 
ats. Moreover manit 


en are not alrogethet 


-ckled, cheiflie whe" 
ns want this 
ore if there thal! 
ich is neither red hate | 


pi 


Om ent,but principally if the poifon be fent into the bodie by a live creature, for in 
scnpoiion there is much heat;alfo there is therein a greater tenuity, which ferves as 
icles thereto Into what place or part foever of the bodie they tend,the which the 
“jonstaken from dead creaturesare defective of. Wherefore fome of thefe kil! 2 
‘gainthe (pace ofan houre, as the poifon of Afpes, Bafiliskes and Toads; others 

splefle in two or three daies {pace, as of water Snakes; a Spider, and Scorpion 
eqoire more time CO kill, yet all of them admitted but in the leaft quantity, doe ina 
sot (pace caule great and deadly mutations inthe bodie, as if they had breathed in 

hiferous aire,and with the like violence,taint and change into their owne nature 
rhe members and bo wels,by which thefe fame members do in the time of perfect 
raith change laudible meats into their nature and fubftance. The place whereas 
ie(e poilonous Creaturcs live, & the time,conduce to the pernicioufneffe of the poi- 
og for fuch as live in dries mountanous and fun-burnt places kill more {peedily than 
ichasbe in moift and marith grounds; alfo they are more hurtfull in winter than in 
immer and the poifon is more deadly which proceeds from hungry, angry and 
iting creatures, than that which comes from fuch as are full and quiet ; as alfo that 
ghich proceeds from young things, chiefly when as they are ftimulated to venery, 
«more powerfull than that which comes from old & decrepite;from females worie 
‘gn frommales ; from fuch as have fed upon other venemous things, rather than 
fom fuchas have abftained fromthem, as from fnakes which have devoured toads, 
sigers which have fed upon fcorpions,fpiders & Caterpillers. Yet the reafon of the 
Acacicof poyfons from their proper, that is, their fubtle or groffe confi- 
fence, the greater or lefle aprneffe of the affected body to fuffer. For hot men that 


hve larger & more open veins & arteries,yeeld the poifon freer paflage to the heart. 


tielike poifon ; fuch as are full,are not fo foon harmed asthofe that are fafting : for 
meats belides that by filling the veflels,they give not the poifon fo free paflage,they 
ifoftrengthen the heart by the multiplication of {pirits, fo that it more powerfully 
fils pernicious venome. Ifthe poifon worke by an occult and {pecifick propertie, 
cuufeth che cure and prognoftick to be difficult,and then mutt we have recourfeto 


Antidotes,asthefe which in their whole fubftance refift poyfons, but principally to 


foners. 


i CH A 
What cure mui bee ufed tothe bitings and ftingings of venemens beafts. 


Therefore thofe svhich have more cold & ftraight veffels, are longer erethey die of 


plintsand mineralls: and which are not prepared by the detcftable art of empoi- 


>and weapons, wounds being occafioned by fuch are more hard to bee cured, Conmied 
och asare made by cutting and fharp weapons, But of the fore-faid bitings of wounds harde: 


“an 
creatures,there are few which doe not killina fhortf pace,and almott ina than 
are cut, 


ueacle, becaufe chere enter into the compofition thereof medicines which are hot, wry 
coldymoift and dries whence it is,that it retunds and withf{tands all poifons,chicfly 


ichas coofittofa fimplenature,fuch asthefe which come from venemous creatures, force ofali fin. 


ple poyfons, 


Ure mutt {peedily bee ufed without any delay tothe bites and ftingings 
Ls 44 XY of venemous beafts, which may by all meanes difperfe the poy fon,and 
keepe it from entring into the body ; for when the principal! parts are 


polleffed,it boots nothing to ufe medicines afterwards. Therefore the joubleindi. 


“NSA Ancients have propounded a double indication to leadeus tothe fin- cation inthe 
cure of vene- 


ding out of medicines in fuch’a cafe, to wit, the evacuation of the virulentand vene- “"*. 


‘ate humour, and the change or alteration of the fame andthe affe&ed body. But 
icing evacuation is of two forts, to wit, univerfall, which is by the inner parts, and 
Particular which is by the outward parts. We muft begin at the particular, by fuch 
‘Ovick medicines as are fit to draw out, and retund the venome; for we muft not al- 
Wales begin a cure with generall things,as fome thinke, efpecially in externall difea- 


ts 


Vvva hereto 


ts Wounds, fractures, diflocations, venemous bites and punctures. Wherefore. 


i oncerminy ovfons. (Pt. 783 
| 
Act throups, 
and | 
| 
of the fpittle, 
the bluntnefle 0 ‘ly 
of heavic an 
er tr oaks 


Concerning Poy/ons, OC. 


as focedil y as you may, you fhall apply remedies fit for 


pi 


Punds 


renemousbites rin with fea-water, 4qna vita, OF wine, or vineger wherein old treacle o, 
fhill be diffolved. Let fach wafhing be performed very hot,and ftrongly <) 
sisi then leave upon the wound and round about it, linnen ragges, or Jig 
che fame liquor. There be fome who thinke it not fit to lay treacle there 


Muftarg 
lafeg jn 


0, becay 


Lib.de theriaes. a8 they fay,it drives thepoyfonin. But theauthority of Gales convinceth that, 


efore that th. 
CONfutes 


“nome by th 


Moteo. 
CON lume 
Ndo. 
‘al are ta. 
tha: 
ignity of 


nion,for he writeth that iftreacle be applyedto thiskind of wounds b 
venome fhall arrive at the noble parts, it much conduceth. Alfo reafo 
for vipers flefhenters the compofition of treacle which attracts the y 
fGimilitude of fubftance,asthe Load-ftone draweth iron, or Amber ftrawes 
ver, the other fimple medicines which enter this compofition, refolve ang 
the virulencie and venome, and being inwardly taken, it defendeth the hea: 
ther noble parts, and corroborateth the {pirits. Experience teacheth thar py. 
@reacleout _fitly given in the itead of treacle worketh the like effect. The medicines ;| 
ward ad ken inwardly and applyed outwardly forevacuation, mutt bee of fubrle p 
rengooda. they may quickly infinuate themfelves into every partto retundthe 1, 
gaintvene- the poyf{oa, wherefore garlike onions, lecks,are very good in this cafe,forthz 
are vaporous ; alfo /cordinm,uc, dictamnus, the lefler Centaury, horehound 


mous bites. 


the milkie juice of unripe figs,and the like,are good; there is a kind of wilde byojog 
amongtt all other plants,which hath a fingular force againft venemous bites Whe... 
Theforce itis termedEchium and viperinum,and that for two caufes; the firitis, becaufe ins). | 


d of 


| chiwm. purple flowersrthat grow amongft the leaves, there is a refemblance to the he; 
a viper or adder. Another reafon is,becaufe it heales the biting of a viper nor onely 


in heate,yet doe they helpe in difcufling and refolving it: yet, asmuchas wee may. 
wee muft labourto have evacuation and alteration rogether. It is moft convenies: 
ifthe part affected will permit, to apply large cupping-eglafles with much flame ars 
hornes ; alfo fucking is good, the mouth being firft wafhed in wine wherein {om 


treacle is diffolved, and with oile, left any thing fhould adhere thereto, foritw:!) | 


hinder it, if fo bethe mouth bee no where ulcerated. Itis good alfoto apply hort. 
caches; fome wifh to apply to the wound,the fundaments of hens or turkies tliat !yy 
egees, for thacfuch are opener behinde, firft putting fale upon them that they ma 
gape the wider, fhutting their beaks and opening them now & then left they ‘hou’. 
t be ftifled, and ever and anon tofubltitute others in ftead of fuch as die or are fallow: 
ted : forthusitis thoughtthe poyfon is drawne forth, and pafleth into the dire by 
the fundament. There beeothers which had rather apply to the wound five bird: 
cut afunder inthe midft, and fo laid to hot, for that they gheflé thele refift puy ion 
byanaturalldifcord. Butcertainely itis by their heate whereby they doe norone. 
digeft toads,afpes, vipers,{corpions and other venemous things, but alfo weare alu". 
der and foften fand,ftones,and moft dry and {tony feeds in their gizzards;w! erelore 
we muft think them very good to draw out the poyfonand diffipate it. But nothing 
The efficacieof Is fo turcible to difperle and retund the venome,as the impreflion of caureries, ©!) 
cially a@uall, forahot iron workes more effeCually and {peedily, and cauleth a" 
Ulcer Which will remaine open a longertime, Wherefore tocaufe the [pcedier 
ling away of theefchar, you fhall tcartfie itto the quick, and then plentiluliy a 
nointche place. Forthusthe poyfon will the fooner paffe forth. but chis mutt dee 
done before the poyfon enters far into the body, for orherwife Cauterics will no 
only do no good, but further rorment the patient,and weaken him to no purpole.L“ 
drawing plafters be laid to the wound & neighbouring parts,made of 
penrine, blacke pitch, and othergummy and refinousthings. Afrerthe fa lings") 
theforceof Of che Efchar, bafilicon fhall beeapplyed, quickned witha litle Precipitate, 
precipitatea-~ yery effeCtuall in thefecafes, for that it draweth forth the virulent (ames outo' 


botrome of the wound, neither dothit fuffer the wound to bee clofed {peedi'y: To 


Lip. 


Lotionsftfor of venemous beats, as for example, the wounds fhall bee prefently Wathed with 


applyed outwardly, but alfo helpeth fuch as are bitten, being drunke in wine. vey 
and will not fufter thofe thar have lately drunke thereof to bee bitten atall. wily, 
hath the like effe@ though thefe oft-times agree with the poyfon in quality;; 


which purpofe they put in a piece of ofa {punge,or a roote of Gentian or Hermor 


Cn 
ot by pert 
-jeaale the ul 


tor at 
mutt obieive 
aor yomit,no 
he palt after ti 
},pour, but cl 
er fooner 
36 you fu 
of che bodic 
Michridate 2 
ric whole bo 
(acther than 
fyrther than ¢ 
trong gly 
(od further W 
an Antic 
greater in qu 
Waerefore 
know chat ch 
and decay of 
letche dilte 
the applicac 
heat ait ch 


feeme as colc 
generall cur: 


ruane every 
tieir meat. 
turned into: 
Way becom 
trary caufes 
depth of wi 
dtie, But fy 
Winter by 
“Urn into me 
Clufech or b 
fate whic 
Catein 
“Come ma 
dog hath p 
Ris head hea 


" 
- 
4 
‘ 
4 — 
| 
| ~ 
Z 
4 


— — 
Concerning ‘Poyfons, 785 


il or fame acride medicine, as egypttacum or Precipitate mixed with the powder 
sAlame, ora cauftick bearen ro powder. But you mutt alwaies obferve this, thac 
a your ointments you mutt alwaics mixe fome Treacle or Mithridate,or the juice 
f |ypericon, OF the like, which have power to attractand difperfe the poyfon, and 
janlethe ulcer; yet if too vehement heat fhali caufe fuch paine as is likely to bring When hor 
by the diflipation of the {pirits, then neglecting the cure of the proper 
jeale for atime, wee muft labour to correct the fymptome. But in this cafe you poyfoned 
aytoblerve tas rule, that you let no bloud, give no purging medicine, nor glyfter, 
sor vomit, nor ufe no bath,nor other thing that may procure {weat,untillthree daies 
xe pult after the bite or fting. In the meane {pace, let the patient (hun all manner of 

pour, but chiefely venery, left by caufing an agitation of the humours, the poyfon 

foonertotheheart. Therefore then it istime toufeuniverfall evacuations,when 

(hall fufpect that the poyfon is diftufed over the veines and whole inner part 

the bodic befides. Before you thall give nothing, unlefle medicines of Treacle or 

yichridate and the like things, which have a faculty to refit poy (on, and itrengthen 

aewhole body by their benigne and vitall vapour, although their {ubftance goe no 

ther than the ftomack. Thus pills when they are fwallowed, though they yoe no 

ther than the ftomacke,yet doe they draw matter out of the joints and head . and 

jong glyiters, though they paffe no further than the guts,yet by their quality diffur- Antidores mut 

-dfurther with the vapour, they draw fromthe moft diftant parts yet you rault 

swean Antidote, not onely more powerfull thanthe poy(fon in quality, butalfe° 
~ greater in quantitic, chat fo it may the more eafily overcome and expell the poyfon. 

Woerefore you mutt give ittwice ina day, and continue it fo long untill you thal! 

wowthatthe ftrength of the poyfon is weakned and overcome by the remiffion 

ind decay of the maligne {fymptomes. Yet in the meane while, you muft not neg- 

ache diftemper caufed in the partby the poyfon, but muft rather correct it by 

‘he application of remedies contrary to the diftemper, as by cold things, if great 

peat afflict che affected part and whole bodie ; by hot things on che contrary, ific 

emeas cold as a (tone, which oft-times happens. And let thus much fuffice for the 

genetall cure of poy fons:now willwe come totheir particular cure. 


Wine wherein fome J | 
re thereto, tor it wil! 
1 alfoto apply horf{e- Cuap. XI. 
lensorturkies that lay 

that lay Why dozecs fooncr become mad than other creatures, and what bee 


mi them thacthey may 
then leftthey (hould @ the fignes thereof. 


h as die or are fuffoca. ages become mad fooner than other creatures, becaufe naturall¥ 


tieth into the bird by chey enjoy that temper and condition of humours which hati an 
hewound live birds cafie inclination torhatkinde of difeafe, and as ic were a certaine 

be chefe refift poy {on Pi difpofirion, becaufe they feed upon carrion and corrupt, putrice 


y they doe nor oncly and ftinking things, and lap waterofthe like condition; beides 


S,butalfo wearealun- the trouble and vexation of lofing their mafters, makes them ro 
pizzards;wherclore wineevery way , painfully fearching and {melling to every thing, ane neg lecting 
pateit. But nothing ‘itirmeat. A heating of the bloud enfues upon this paines, and by this heate ic is 
ion Of wned intoa melancholy,whence they become madde. But yet dogges coe notal- 
edily, andcaufeth an Fay become mad by meanes of heat, but alfo by occafion of cold, char ts, by con- 
mcavfethe[peedierfal- Gl tary caufes for they fall into this difeafe not onely in the dog-daies, buralfo inthe 
then plentitully an- ofwinter. For doages abound with melancholike humouis,to wit, coldand 
rh. Butchis maltbee tne, Bur fach humours as inthe fummer through exceffe of heate, fo in the depth of become 
ic Gauterics willnot Winer by conftipation and the fuppreffion ot fuliginous excrements, they eafilie mad, not onely 
vim tonopurpolc-Lct utinto melancholic. Hence followes a very burning and continual feaver, which 
deol Galbanum Guleth or bringeth with ic a madneffe. Adde hercto,that in the depth of winter the che 
Afterthe which is contained within is redoubled, and in lke manner as the fcorching 
¢Precipitate, teinfummer, it breeds and curnes the humours into melancholic. Allo dogges 
ulent fanies our dxcomemadde by contagion,as fuch as are bitten by another madde dogge. A mad 
¢ -lofed {peedily. 1° dghath parkling and fierie eics, with a fixed looke,cruell and a {quint, hee carries 
Ccntian or Her Shad heavily, hanging downe towardsthe ground, and fomewhat on onc fide, 
Vvv 3 


Lip 
the bites & pt 
Wathed 
pid treacle Or Muftarg 
itrongly hafeg in 
BCS, Or line teepeg 
acle thereto, becau(. 
COAVINCerh that 
before thar the 
V Teaion COnfutes 
ts the "enome by the 
ber ftraw,. Moreno 
ang COnfume 
}deth the Neattando 
cheth that Mthridate 
nedicines thatare ta. 
Of fubrle Patts, tha 
und the walignity of 
this cafe,forth., they 
shorehound, rocker 
ind of wilde bugloffe 
nemous bites whence 
 firit 1S, becaule in the 
blance to the head of | 
Of a viper nor onely 
crunke in wine. yea, 
- bitten at all. Wilde 
€ poyfon in quality as 
asmuchas wee may, 
It is moft convenienr 
with much flameand 
| 
~ 


7 86 Concerni ng Poyfe Ce L 1B. 2) 


capes,and thiuttsforth histongue, which is livideand blackifh sand being cig, 
breathed cafis forth much filth at his nofe, and much foaming matter at his mouth. by realtor 
in his gate, asf he faipeéted and feared all things,he keepeth no one or certain “ : ich isenem 
but runsone while to this fide, another while to that, and {tumbling like one hed; oat 
drunke, he oft-tiunes falleth downe onthe ground ; he violently aMfailes whatfoeye chem. | 
he meets withall, whether it bee man, tree, wall, dog,or any thing elfe ; othe; is Mm acmpero ca 


fhun him, and prefently fenthima farrecff. But if another unawares chance ty 

foule on him, he yeelds himfelfeto his mercy, fawnes upon him,and Privily laboy., ag 

to get from him, though hee be the ftronger & greater. Hee is unmindfull of _glafles fot 

and drinking, he barkes not,yet he bites all he meets without any difference nor elves therein, 

ring his ma(ter, as who at this time hee knowes not from a ftranger or enemie, Foe | 
Whymelane it is the property of melancholie to difturbe the underftanding,fothatfuch Perfons 
cholike p-rfons as are melancholike,doe not onely rage againft and ufe violence to their friend: and 
hunthenelves- parents, but alfo upon the:nfelves. But when as he fees water,he trembles and 


and his haires ftands up on end. 


meth wondrou 
19, being abiog 
of their fearin: 
sndthat feare 
hisor that kin: 
pigutthings, | 
fecke darkeneli 
wherewirh 
matter lowes | 
rated part. The 
were, Of t 
(ometimes 
expulfive facu 
ofthe venome 
dryneffe,or el! 
untill ac length 
come by the b1 
feedily and fi 
perifhed of chill 


XII. 
By what fignes we may know man is bitten of a mad dog. 


T isnot foecafie at the firftto know a man thar is bitten wich; 
¢%a| mad dogge;and principally for this reafon, becaufe the wound 
made by his teeth caufeth no more pain chan other wounds u(y). 
ly do; contrary tothe wounds made by the fting or bite of other 
poyfonous creatures, as thofe which prefently after theyare in. 
flidted, caufe fharpe paine, great heat, {welling and abundance of 
— other maligne accidents,according tothe nature of the poyfon, 
but the malignity_of the bite of a mad dogge appeares not before that the yenome 

thall invadethe noble parts. Yet when you are fufpicious of fuch a wound, you may 

acquire a certaine knowledge and experience thereof by putting a piece of bread in. 

tothe quircure that comes fromthe wound. For ifa hungry dog negleé, yea more 

fly from it,and dare not fo muchas {mell thereto, it is thought to bee a cerraine figne 

that the wound was infliéted by amadde dogec. Others adde, Tharif any give this 

Signesofthe piece of breadtohens, that they will diethe fame day they have eatenir ; yer thi 
 jatrer, making experiment thereof, failed, for devouring this virulent bread, ty 
ig ot became nota jorthe worfe. Wherefore I think the former figne to be the more cer- 
taine, for dogs havea wonderfull and fure {melling faculty, whereby they cafilic 

fent and perceive the malignitie of the like creature, But when as the raging virulen- 

Signesby which Ci hath invaded the noble parts, then the patients, becomming filent and {orrow. 
you may gather full thinke of many things, and at the beginning make a noife with their teeth ; they 


The biteofa 
mad dog notve- 


ry painefull ar 


rhe firft. 


| 


é 


make no an{werto the purpofe, they are more teftie than ordinaric, and intheir iz 
red. fleepesthey are troubled with dreames, ard ftrange phantafies, and fearful! vilions, ait istaken in 
and laftiy,they become affraid of the water. Butafrerthatthe poifon hath fixcc: with wathed 3 
felfeinto the fabftance of the noble parts, then all their faculties are difturbed, «! oratall times 


the light of their memorie,fen{es,reafon and judgement is extinguifhed.Whereio’ toheat or co!) 


becomming {tarke mad, they know not fuch as ftand by them, nor their friends, 0° humours ther 
they meet withall &themfelves BB ofthe pall 
& nailes &feer. Often twitchings like convulfions do fuddenly rife in cheirlimds;! the 
judge them occafioned by extraordinary drinefs, which hath as it were wholly drunk be fome who 
up all the humiditic of the nervous parts ; thereis agrcat drineffe of the mouts with Mad: {uct ac | 
intolerable thirft, yet without any defire of drink,becaufe the mind being trod! snot defpers 
they become unmindful & negligent of fuch things as ther, thar 
ful for them;the.cyes look fieric & red, & all the face is of the fame ed of Aeon 
think of dogs,and {cem to fee them, yea and defire to bark and bite ine pp ylofg 

Why menber ner of dogs; [conjectare that the virulent humour hath changed al!the humo! * ended 

commingzmad the whole body into the like nature,fo that they thinkthemfelves alfo dogs ; nence char 

cheir voice becomes hoarfe by much endevouring to barke, having forgot 

~ 


* 
* 
: 
| 
iA 
#4 
+ 
] ome 
at. 2 
| 
. 
‘ 
* 4 
— 


Lig 21. 


(h sand beinp fhorr 
atter at his mone}, 


ONE OF Certain part,’ 


wares chance 
sand privily labours 
amindfull of 
difference,not 
Orenemic, 
tothat fuch perfons 
‘totheir friends ang 


rembles and fhakes, 


dog. 


thar is bitten with 3 
becaufe the wound 
other wounds ufual. 
ing or bite of other 
tly after theyare in- 
ng and abundance of 
gature ofthe poyfon; 
ore that the venome 
a wound, you may 
a piece of bread in- 

yca more 
bee a certaine figne 
Thatif any give this 
vecatenir yer this 
virulent bread, 
eto be the more cer- 
rhereby they cafilic 
s the raging virulen. 
g filent and forrow- 
ith theirceeth ; they 
dinaric, and intheir 
and fearfull vifions, 
poifon hath fixed 
ties are difturbed, all 
bouifhed. Wherefore 
northcir friends, 
lyes withtheir teeth, 
rife incheir limbs; ! 
t were wholly drunk 
© of the mouth with 
sind being troubled, 
ethem,and are 
me colour; they iil 
bite juft after che 


ed alithe humour & 
es alfe dogs ; whence 


ving forgot all ae 


eimpudent dogs,to the great horrour of the beholders.For their voice Prowes 
DY rcafon of the great drynefle of the 4/pera arteria; they fhun the light,as that 
‘sich is enemy CO melanchol y,wherewith the whole fubftance of the braine is 
‘qifhed 5 00 the contrary,tacy defire darkeneffe, as that which is like and friendly 


“nem. But they are affraid of the water (chongh good to mitigate their great die Why they are 


| aigor that kind of melancholic begets a feare of thefe or thele things, but chiefly of 


Concerning ‘Loy/ons, 787 


of heat and drineffc)and they fy trom looking. glafles, becaufe they imagin ths 
feedogs in them, whereof they are much affraide, by reafon whereof they fhua 
water and all police and cleare bodies which may fupply the ufe of a looking- 

iife; fo that they throw themfelves on the ground, as if they would hide them- 
‘jgestherein,lelt they fhould be bitten againe: for they affirme that he which is bit- 

aby amad dog,alwaies hath a dog in his minde, and fo remaines fixed in that fad 

sgitatione Wherefore thinking thax he fees him in the water,he trembles for feare, 
aftherefore fhunsthe water. Others write that the body by madneffe becom. 

ath wondrous dry, wherefore they hate the water,as that which is contrary there. 

9, being abfolutely the moifteft clement, and fo they fay that this is the reafon 

heir tearing the water. writes that madaefle isakindeof melancholic, 

ojthat feare is the proper fymprome thereof, according to Hippocrates wherctore Aphor.as 


yjgutthings, {uch as looking. glaffes and warer, by reafon that melancholic perfons 
wekedarkenefle and folitarineife, by reafon of the black corruption of the humour 

chey abound, They fallinto cold fweats, afomic, ftinking and greenith 

outer fowes from the ulcer,by reafon of the heat of the antecedent caule and ulce- 

aed part. The urine moft commonly appeares watrith, by reafon that the ftrainers, 

sitwere, of the kidnies, are ftraitned by the heat and drinefle of the venome. Yer 

jmetimes alfo it appears more thick and black, as when nature powerfully ufing the 

apullive facultie,actempts to drive forch by urine the melancholy humour, the {eat 

oithevenome. Alfo fometimes it is wholly fuppreft, being either incraflated by hor 

drynelfe,or elfe the mind being carried other waies,and forgetfull of its owne duty, rhebleeota 
length the patients, vexed by the cruelty of fo many fymptomes, and over- 
come by the bicrerne(Te of pain, die frantick, by reafon that medicines have not been 
iedilv and firly applyed. For few ofthofe who have ufed remedics in time, have part«urable- 


wrilhed of thus difeate. 


XIII. 
Proguosticks. | 

DEE cannot focafily fhunthe danger weare incident to by mad doys,as that phe venome of 

of other beafts, by reafon he is adomeftick creature, and bouled under 

the fame roofe withns. Thevirulency that refides in his foame or {la- 

»@- ver is hot and dry, maligne, yenenate and contagious, fo chat it cautcth oadnedle, 

diftemper likeit felfe, inthe body whereto it {hal! apply ic felic, and 

read it felfe over the whole body by the arteries ; for it doth not onely hurt when 

Sitistaken in by a bite or puncture, bur even applyed to the skin,unleffe it be forth- 

Wh wathed away with fale water or urine. Neither doth this venome hurt cqualiy 

cratall times alike,for it harms more or lefle,according to the inclination of the aire 

‘heat or cold,the depth of the wound, the ftrength of the patients body, and the ill 

‘ours thereof,and their difpofition to putrefaction, the treedome and largenefie 

‘ithe paflages. Now maligne fymptomes happen fooncr or later, asin foine about 

he fourtierh day, in others about fixe moneths, andin othersa yeareatter. There wyaherrhe 
ome who thereupon are troubled with the falling ficknefle, and at length grow Hyarephoive of 

"ad: as fall into a feare of the water,never recover. Yet Avices thinks their cafe 

‘hotde{perate, if as yet they can know their face ina glaffe ; for hence you may ga- 

"tt, that all che animall faculties are not yet overthrowne, butchat they flandin 

trong purzations,as we fhall thew hereafter. tels chat a Ahiftory. 

) ylofopher, who taken{with chis difeafe and a {care of water, when as hee de- 

‘ded with a great courage unto the bath, andin the water beholding the thape of 


7 


that bit him, hee madea {tand, but afhamed thereof,he forthwith cry 


as 
tu 
a 
4 
ia 
a 4 
\ 
j 
a 
a 
a 
| 
| 
a 
~ 
| 
i 


A hiftory. 


The force of 
Sorrell. 


Theforce of 
Docks. 


A hiflory. 


Concerning Poyfons, oc. 


thereof, and fo was freed from his difeafe together with his erroneous OPinion }, 
isa deadly figne to tumble themfelves on the ground, to have ahoarfe voic. fe 


thatis an argument thatthe weazon is became rough by reafon of too exceffiv. 
nefic. Finally, the principall parts being poffeffed, there is no recovery or | if. toh 


hoped for. Men may fall mad, though they bee not bit by amad dog. For as the b 
mours are often inflamed of themfelves,and caufe a Cancer or Le rofie 
fo madneffe in melancholic perfons. The bites of vipers and other yenem 


they dic before fuch can come forth or fhew themfelves. Great wounds made} 
mad dogs are not equally fo dangerous as little, for from the former,creat pl 
venemons matter flowes out,but in the latter it is almoft all kept in. 


— 


Cuar.XIIIL 
What cwre muft be to fuch as are botenby a mad doc, 


he was delighted,not knowi 


large,then fuffer itto bleed long 
haulted ; ifit be not great, it fhall 


it fentin, reftores the patient to health, both thefe by often expericnce are affirmed 


to have certaineevent. Others chaw unground wheat,and lay it upon the wound.” _ 
thers roaft beanes unde hot embers, then huske them and cleave them, and{o | 
apply them. Alfothe wound may be wholefomely wathed and fomented with ade | 
cottion of Docks,and then the herb beaten may be applyed thereto; alfothe pai | 
may drinke the decoétion, and by this one remedy Aésins affirmes that he hath rec 
vered divers ; for thus it moves urine plentifully,which is thought much to conduct | 


tothe cure of this difeafe. There be fome who apply the leaves of betony and “s 
tles beaten with common fale ; others make a medicine tuthe fame purpo/c 
the {ame manner of an Onion, the leaves of Rue and fale. Yet the reft are excec“* 
Treacle diffolved in vite or {trong wine,and rubbed hard upon the 
the bloud may follow, laying upon the wound when you have wiped it,clot 
ped inthe fame medicine, then prefently apply garlike or onions beaten \! 


7 
Lip, 2) 

Quid cani cum Balneo ? (i) What hath a dogtodoe with a Bath? which words 
uttered, he threw himfelfe forcibly into the Bath, and fearelefly dranke of the wae 


dothey 
tures caufe not like fymptomes to thefe that come by the biting of a mad dogbeens 


enty of 


Ft His cafe alfo requires {peedy remedies, for fuch things are in vaine whigs 
come long after the hurt. The Lawyer Baldws experienced this to his 
<q harme ; for being by chance lightly bit inthe lip by alittle dog wherwiy | 
that he was mad, & negle@ingthe 
by reafon of the fmallneffe thereof,after fome foure moneths {pace,he died mad.ho. 
ving then in vaine aflayed all maner of medicines. Wherefore obferving thefe things : 
both for evacuation,as alfo for alteration, which we have formerly mentioned in th: 
generall cure of wounds infli@ed by the bite or fting of venemous creatures, andby | 
all the meanes there {pecified, we muft draw forth the venome ; and if the wound): 
and much, for fo fome part of the poyfonwill bee. | 
be enlarged by {carification, or an occult cauteric 
neither {hall it be healed or clofed up atthe fooneft,till fourty daies be pafled Sorte! 
beaten and applied to the wound, and the decoction thereof taken inwardly, is very 
effeGuall in this cale,as 4étins afirmes. To the fame purpofe you may with goo: 
fucceffe make a lotion and friction with muftard diffolved in urine or vinegar,leaving 
upon the wound a double cloth moiftned in the fame decogtion : laftly,all acride.b» | 
ting and very attractive medicines are convenient in this cafe. Wherefore fom 
apply Rocket boyledand beaten with butter and fale ; others take the flowre of 
Orcbas andtenperit with hony, falt and vinegar, and apply it hot. Horfe-dung 
bovled in fharpe vinegar, or brimftone beaten to powder and tempered wit! 
ones fpittle, is good. Alfo black pitch melted with fome falt, and alittle Zw J 
bium mixed therewith and ‘fo applied, is good. Some write, thatthe hairesof tht | 
dogee whofe bite caufed the madneffe,applyed by themfelves, by their {ympae 
or finilitude of fubftance draw the venome from within outwards ; for oa 5cip 
on beaten andapplied tothe place whereas it ftung,by drawing our the poy!on that J 


and ufe all thi 
Opening th 


dedby perfons 
10 
hes | 
eh com 
moo 


y firft. 
Mex, Or the 


1B. 21. 
fale and 
damoifelle 
4mad dog ha 
gar! | 
saslicke by its 
ome Who wt 
4 goat, of whi 
ot che feeds 
of river: crabs 
fume ng 
in th 
Many have c 
gainft madne 
wherefore 
fach thing: 
and manifok 
mitted into 
wiesofama 
that it be pre 


> 


cruel maligni 
medicines. / 
Bathes alfo 
{weats. 
Rrengthen th 
things, whic 
poiloned,or | 
la fome warn 
be the readili 
brightnefle o 
the body janx 
things Orefen | 
hot allaied fel 
heat hinder el 
trailes, The: 
Meats, whic] 
“attand och 
meate to {aric 
“unger than 
a fhort whi 


ther draw 


} 
- 
F 
= 4 
4 
ae! 
> 
: 
j 
’ : “a ; 


1B. 2) a 


* 


¢ which Words be: 


thes venemous 
of amad dog,becaufe 
cat Wounds made} 
ormer,great plenty of 


in. 


— 


ad doe. 


NZS are in vaine whieh 
ienced this to his 
y alittle dog wherwith 
negle@ing the wound, 
ipace,he died mad. ho. 
obferving thefe things 
rerly mentioned in the 
ous Creatures, and by 


's and if the wound be © 


the poy fon will be cx: 
or an occult cauteric, 
daies be pafied.Sorre! 
aken inwardly, is very 
¢ you may with good 
‘ine or vinegar, leaving 
mn: laftly all acride,b:- 
Wherefore fome 


FrONCOUS Opinion, 
¢ ahoarfe voice fo 
recovery or lifer, a 
ad For asthe by 
-profie.fo do they aj. | 


take the flowre of 


y it hot. Horfe-dung 
and tempered with 
and alittle Zwpher- 
that the haires of the 
s, by their fympathic 
rards ; for foa ScOrpi 
out the poy fon that 
Kpericnce are afirmed 
jt upon the wound,¢- 
cleave them , and{o 
d fomented with ade- 
rereto; alfo the patient 
mes that he hath rec? 


ught much to conduce 
ves of berony andre 
andatter 
deddy 


fame purpolc 
he reft are excecae 


dupon the pate 
e wiped it,clot 7 

mos 


ions bearen W 


4 q 


21. Concerning Loyfons, 7385 
atine : by thi | 
fale and turpe OY thus onely remedy | freed one of the daughters of hifory, 


poifelle de Grow trom the fymptomes of madneffe,and healed the wound swhen as 
gad dog had bit her grievoufly in the calfe of the right leg. Alfo it is good prelent- 


tocate garlick with bread,and then to drinke after it a draught of good wine, for 


by its {pirituous heate will defend the noble pats from poyfon. There bee 
‘yne who with to cate the rofted liver of the dog that hurt them, or elfe the liver of 
goat, of which remedies as yet I have had no ex perience. Others prefcribea dram 


Fhe feeds of Agnas castus to be drunke with wine and butter. Others the powder 
bs, burnt and dr unke in wine. Or, Krad. gentiane 3 flaviatil:- 

in in polliwems reda. Zrii. terra fizill.38.mifce. give 51 of this fame 

owder in the decottion of river. crabs, & let them drink thereof oft at fund ry times. 

have caftthemfelves into the fea, neither have they thence had any helpe 3- 

winft madnefle, as Ferrand Pozet the Cardinall reftifieth in his booke of poy fons ; Leaping into 
yaerefore you muft not relie upon that remedie, but rather you muft have recourfe che feanocer 
(uch things as are {et downe in the books of Phyficians, and approved by certeing “se 
manifold experience. But feeing that no poyfoncan kill,unleffe it beraken orad- 
gitted into the body, we muft not fear any harme by (prinkling our bodies with the 
gues of amad dogge,viper,toad,or any other fuch like vencmous creature, if fo bce 
at it be prefently wiped or wathed cleane away. 


CHarp. XV. 


What cure muft beufed to (uch as feare the water, but yet are able to 
know themfelves in a glaffe. 


quel malignity of this poyfon already admitted into the bowcls,by gentle purging 
nedicines. Affuredly, fuch and fo great danger is never overcome without danger. 
bithes alfo conduce, which may dilperfe and draw forth the poyion by cauting 
weats. Alfo many and frequent treacle potions are good, to retund the venome and 
keagthen the bowels ; alfo it will be fitting to give them water and all other liquid 
‘igs, which they fo much abhorre, ina cup witha cover. Alwaies Ict fuch as are 
roiloaed,or bitten or ftung,by a mad dog or other venemous beaft, keep themfelves 
niome warme and light place,that the poyfon which by coldnefle is forced in,may 
the rerdilier drawne out by the means of heat,and the {pirits bee recreated by the 
irightneffe of the aire,and therefore move from the center tothe circumference of 
nebody let the roome be perfumed with {weet things. To eat very hor and fale 
Nuings Prefently at the beginning,as onions, leeks, all {piced meats, and ftrong wine 
wallaied feems notto be befides reafon ; becaufe fuch things by their {piricuous 
at hinder the diffufion of the poyfon over the body, and ftrengthen the filled en- 
‘ales, There be fome alfothat would have them to feed upon groffe and vifcous 
neats, Which by obftru@ing the veffels,may hinder the paflage of the poyfon to the 
“atand ocher parts; and by the fame reafon it will be better to fill rhemi{elves with 
Neate to fatietie,than otherwife, becaufe the maligniry of humours is encreafed by 
“get,than which, nothing can be more harmfull to venemous w ounds. Yet with- 
®athort while after,as within five or fixe dayes, they muft returne to a mediocritie, 
ad ufe all things temperate, boiled meats rather than roafted,and that ina deco@ton 
“Opening things, fo to move urine. Laftly they muft keep {uch a diet as melancho- 
“tperfons ought to do, neither fhallthey let bloud, left fothe poyfon fhould bee 
‘ther drawne into the veines : but it is good thar the patients body be foluble from 
“Very firt, Let their drinke be wine indifferently allayed with water, oxymel (im- 
“S; Or the {yrupe of the juice of Citron with boiled water ; or ele this tollo 7 re 
ulep 


| 
Uch as have not their animal faculty as yet orecome by the maligniry of 
theraging venomic, muft have {trong purgations giventhem. Whi re- 
UF fore, if in any cafe Antimonie bee ulefull, then is it in this, as thar 
| Rkae which caufeth {weats, loofeth the belly,and procures vomiting. For it 
isapait of extreme and dangerous madneile to hope toovercome the 


790 Concerning Poyfons, 
Why flcepe} Julep. Re. fuccilimonum, malorumcitri, an. 3%, fac. eran. acid qua acer, 
1S 


hurtful tofach 70%, 70f. an. aq. fort, coc?, quantam fufficit, fiat Fulep, at artis eff, Sleep is to he 


Ssarebieten 9 avoided untill the force of the poyfon is abated, for by flecp the humours flow, back 
intothe bowells, Allthingsthat reftft poyfon muft bee given any way Whatfoe 

poyfoned. lemons, oranges, amgelica rootes, gentian, tormentill, burnet, vervine, cay 

nedictus, borage, buglofle, and the like. Let all things that are afterwards {e, bef ‘ 

the patient be meats of good juice, {uch asareveale, kid, mutton, partridge, pull 


capons, and the like. 


Cuarv. 


Of the biting of aViper or Adder, andthe {ymptomes and cure thereof. 


5. He remedies that were formerly mentioned againft the bitings of 


AUts 

ent. 


‘ 


wm madde dogges, the fame may bec ufed againft al! venemous bite 


and ftings, yetneverthelefle each poyfon hath his peculiar anti- 
“24% dote. Vipers or Adders(as we vulgariy terme them) have in thei: 


.gummes, orthe {paces betwenetheir teeth, little bladders filled 


with avirulent fanzes, whichis preffed out into the part that they 


pices ) 
yeric ima 
he extinction 
rearie thereto | 
heart, thefe pa 
sines are feco 
grbaa, the ret 
yeines which 2 
nedin them. | 
eares, fundam 


The fymptoms. bite withtheir teeth. There forthwith arifetha pricking paine, the part atthe frp 


A hiftory. 


A hiito: y. 


Remedies tor 
the bite ofa 
viper. 


Lid, de 


putrefie, the tc 


is much {wollen, and then the whole body, unleflé it be hindred : groffe and blgo. thing, and {to} 


AP he cure ts 
dy filth {weats out of the wound, little blifters rife round about it,as if it were burnt a char ie m 
the wound gnawes,and as it were feeds upon the flefh,great inflammation poffefferh Antidotes 


the liver andthe gummes, and the wholebody becomes very dry, becomming of, 
yellowifh or pale colour, with thirft unquenchable ; the bellie is griped by fits,: 
cholericke vomiting molefteth them, the ftomacke is troubled witha hicketting the 
patientsare taken with often fownings, with cold {weate, the forerunner of death, 
unlefle you provide by fit medicines for the noble parts, before the poy {on (hall in. 
vadethem.  Mathiolus tells that he faw a countrie-man, who, as he was mowing, 
meadow, by chance cut an Adder in two with his fithe, which when he thoughti 
was dead, he tookethe one halfe whereon the head remained, witlout any feare in 
his hand, but the enraged creature,turning about her head, cruelly bit him by one of 
his fingers, which finger asmen ufually doe (efpecially when as they thinke orno 
fuch thing) hee put into his mouth, and fucked out the blood and poy fon, and pre- 
{ently fell downe dead, 

When as Charles the ninth was at Montpelier, ] went intothe fhop of one Farges 
an Apothecary, who then madea folemne difpenfation of Treacle, where 
tisfying my felfe with the looking upon the vipers which werethere ina glalle, re 
dy forthe compofition, Ithought rotake one ofthemin my hands, bur whileft th 
I toocurioufly and fecurely handled her teeth which were in her upper jaw,co¥ red 

vitha skinne,as it were a cafe tokeepethe poyfon in, the beaft catched hold o! 
very end of my fore-finger, and bit me inthe {pace which is betweene the naileane mm 
the fichh; whence prefently there arofe great pain, both by reafon of che part endus 
with moft exquifite fenfe, as alfo by the malignity of the poyfon: forthwith! | 
ceeding ftraitly bound my finger above the wound, that fol might prefle fortht'* | 
blood and poyfon, left they fhould diffufe themf{elves further over the vody. 
folvedoldireac'e in aqua vite, whercin I dipped and moiftened cotton,and!0 pul” 
tothe wound, and within afew dayes I throughly recovered by this oncly | 
cine. You may ulcin ftead of Treacle, Mithridate and {undry other things, ¥"" @ 
by reafon of their heat are powerfall drawers, as aiquill rofted in hor embers, 5° 
licke and leeks beaten and applyed, barly floure tempered with vinegar, hony," 
goats dung, and fo applyed like a pultis. Some thinke it fufficient forthwith 0" | 
and fomentthe wound with vinegar, falt, anda little hony. Galen writes 
poy{fon infli@ted by the bite of aviper, may bee drawne forth by apply! 
wound the head of a viper, but otherfome apply the whole viper bearento™ 


CHA 


w \ \ 
= 
an 
L~ 
ray 
~, 
allde [1] 
» 
x 
OF 


3 ll. aqua acete 3 
6 eft. Sleep iS 
1umours flow back 
y Way Whatfoeyer 

carduy; be. 
terwards fet befo,. 


partridge, Pullers, 


wre thereof. 


gainft the bitings of 
mt all venemous bites 
th his peculiar anti- 
them) have in their 
little bladders filled 
tothe part that they 

, thepartat the 
ed : grofie and bloo- 
it,as if it Were burnt, 
ammiation pofleffeth 
ry, becomminflofa 
ie is griped by fits,a 
witha hicketting,the 
forerunner of death, 
ethe poy fon fhall in- 
ashe was mowinga 
when he thoughtit 
without any feare in 
elly bit him by onc of 
asthey thinke or no 


and poy fon, and pre- 


he fhop of one Farges 
reacle, where not [2- 
ethere ina glatle, rea 
hands, bur whileft that 
her upper jaw,cov: red 
& catched hold of che 
betweene the naile an 
nfon of the part enducd 
yfon: forthwith ¢x- 
might prefle forth the 
er over the body. Tait: 


ed cotron,and fo 


r me l- 
this onely mer 
ed by hich @ 


iry other things, 


fed inhorembers, 


icient forthwith rows 


y. Galen 
forth by app!y! 
viper bearento mail. 


§ 


| Tapittic. By thecruelrie of his caufticke and putrefying venome, hee burnes the 


char ene 
ing 


( oncerning ‘Poyfons, 791 


« 


S HAP. XVII. 


Of the Serpent called Hemorrhous. 


HE Serpent Hemorrhous is focalled, becaufeby his biting hee caufeth 
@ blood to droppe out of all the paflages of the wounded bodie s hee is of a The 
{mall bodie, of the bigneffe of a viper, with cies burning witha certaine 
ficrie brightneffe, and a moft beautifull skinne. The backe of him (as ‘ 
writes) isf{potted with manic blacke and white {pots, his necke little and his 
jeveri¢fmall » the part which he bites, forthwith growes blackith, by reafon of 
-»extin@ion of the native heat,whichis extinguithed by fuch poifon which is con- 
nethercto inits whole fubftance. Then followes a paine of the ftomacke and 
vat, thefe parts being touched with the peftiferous qualitie of the poifon. Thefe 
ines are feconded by vomiting, the orifice of the ventricle being relaxed by a Di- 
bth, theretentive facultie of all the parts of the bellie bein 9 weakened, and rhe 
vines which are {pred through the guts, not being able to retaine the blood contci- 
zdinthem. For the blood is feen to flow out, as in ftreams, from the nofe, mouth, 
ares, fundament, privitics, corners of the cies, rootes of the naile, and gums, whiiciy Wonderful 
the tceth falling out ofthem. Moreover there happens adifficultie of brea. 
ing, and ftoppage of the urine, with a deadlice convulfion. 

Thecure is forthwith to {carifie, and burnethe bitten part, or elfe to cut it quite 


of, if that it may be done without danger of life, and then to ufe powerfullie draw- 
Antidotes. 


The figure of the ferpent Hemorrhous. 


Crar. XVIII. 
Of the Serpent called Seps. 


He Serpent Seps isfocalled, becaufe it caufeth the part which it bites, Thereawn of 
forthwith to putrefic,by reafon of the cruell malignitie of its poyfon. It 
isnotmuch unlike the Hemorrhous, but that it curles or twinesupthe theses. 
tailein divers circles. Paw/anias writes thatthis ferpent is of an afh-co- 
=, 1 broad head, {mall necke, bigge bellie, writhen taile, atid as he goes, hee ruins 
“clikea crabbe. But his skin is variegated and {potted with feverall colours, like 


which he hath bic,with moft bitter paine ; he caufeth the thedding of the haires 


Was Aétins addeth, the wound at the firft cafteth forth manifeft blood, but with- 
“alittle while after, ftinking filth. The putrefyed affected parts waxe white, and 
| dieall over becomes of the colour of that fcurfe, which is termed Alphos, fo 
| ” the wickedneffe of this putrefactive poifon, not onely the {pirits are refol- 
alfo the whale bodie confumed, as by fire, a peftilent carbuncle, and other 
“tide tumours, arifing from a hot and humide or {fuffocating conftirvtion of the 
oy Now forthe remedies, they muft be fuch as are former ly preic ribed againtt the 
“OSS of a viper. 


The 


| 
~ a 
4 
| 
| SSS SSQ 
s 
| 
4 
| 4 
| ; 
| A yea 
a 
P 
A, 


792 Concerning Pryfons, Ce 


The Figure of the Serpem Seps. 


XIX. 
Ofthe Bafiliskeor Cockatrice. 


penn 1 Hc Baliliske far exceeds all kinds of Serpents in the curftnefs of irs poy. : 
PAZ) fon. Therefore it is affirmed by Nécander, that into what place foever } 


‘ 


Theeficacyof Gye 4 § a he comes, other venemous creatures do forthwith fie thence, for thy 
none of them can fo much as endure his hifling, for he is thought 
ot che Batalis&. 


Why the Baf- 


oacly fight. 


The 


the Baliliske hath the {ame force ; he is bred inthe province of Cyreue, of the length 


of fome twelve fingers, with a white {pot in his head, refembling acrowne;hech | 
foth away all ferpents with his hiffe : Weafels arcthe deftru@ion of iuch moniters: 
thus it plealed nature,thatnothing fhouldbe without its equall ; they affailetaem | 
their dcnnes, beingeafily knowne by the barrennefle or coniumption of the ‘ol* 
Nothinginna- Thefe kill chemalfo by their fent, and they die, and the fight of nature is ended:tht | 
nature to the magnanimous Lion, left there fhould be nothing which he migit 
hath oppofed the weake creature the Cocke, by whofe crowing onaely he's 
edand put coflight. Era/i/tratus writes,thata golden yellownefle affects che putter 
prt of fuch as are hurt by a Bafiliske, but a blackneffe and tumour poffeffeth the ws 7. 
ofthe body, all theflefhof the mufcles within a while after failing away? & 
Cure. mealc. An antadote againtt this be made of a dramme of 


without 


equall, 


Symptons. 


all things even with this,& not with his biting and touch only  befide; 

ifany ot them haften to getanie meate or drinke, and perceive that the Bafiliskeis | 

not farre from thence, he flies back,and neglects the getting of nourifhment necefly. 
Lib. detheriag. Tit for life. Galen writes, that the Bafilisk is a yellowith ferpent, with a tharpe head, | 
and three rifings diftinguifhed with white fpots, and rifing up in forme of acrowne, | 
by reafon whereof hee is {tiled the King of Serpents. Certainely the violence of his | 
liske is thought pOyfon in killing ments fo great, that he is therefore thought to kill men, andothe 
killbybis  crearures bv his fightonely. Solinws affirmes, that the body of a dead Baliliske hath 
wondrous faculties. Wheretorethe inhabitants of Pergamum, in ancient times,give 
a mightie price for one, to hang upon the joiftes of the remple of C4 poll, fo to drive | 
away the Spiders and Birds, Ieftthey fhould there weave their webs, orthe other | 
build their nefts inthat facred place. Verily no ravenouscreature wil! touch ther | 
carkafle; but ifconftrained by hunger they doe touch it, thenrhey forthwith fal 
downe dead inthe fame place: and this happens nor oncly by eating their body, but | 
by devouring the bodies of fuch beafts as are killed bytheirbitings. They kil | 
Cap. ote the trees and (hrubs by which they paffe, not onely by their touch, burevenwith @ 
their breath. Amongft the wefterne Aithiopians is the fountaine Nigrvs, neer whic? 
there is a ferpentcalled Catablepas, final! in bodie,and flow, having agrcathead, 
which it {Carcecan carrie, but thatit alwaies upon the ground, otherwilet 
would kill abundance of people, for it forthwith kills all that fee che eyesthereo!, 


fore it need nc 
families have: 
cidepy was fal 
qualities of 
Actius Wri 
parts of their | 
the irft chere 
putrefaction, 
loofe the bel! 
Avicen preici 
reafon of the « 
Ue feeds,and 
zard dull, var 
faith the is 
Upon horcoa 
ate quickly c 
Ons This cr 
fame dividia 
thecold hum 
vatiegated, w 


| 
a i 
= 
j j | 
— 
4 if 
"Fi 
“ 
d an 
j i 
b 
| 
| ‘ | ; 4 
. 


( oncerning ‘Poyfons, 793, 


and drunken, or elfein the juice of poppie. Bur C4 thinkes it fu perfiu. 


"eto Write remedies again{t the Bafiliske, whenas the fight and hearing onely kills 
either {ee or heare her. 


The figure of a Bafiliske. 


he curftnefs of irs poy. CHap. XX, 

nto what place { 

O¢ver @ | 

ah for that _ the Salamander, 

Orhe is 

id conch "hed (He Salamander kils not onely fuchas it bites by making a venemous 
ive that the Bafiliske jc but it alfo infects the fruitsand herbs over which it creeps, wich ota 
nourifhment neceffy. +4 a {pittle or groffe moifturewhich {weats out of all the bodie, to the great 

nt, withafharpehead. § we danger of the healthand life of fuch as eat thefe things at unawares:wher- 

in forme Of acrowne. rcitnecd not feeme ftrange, whichis received by fome late writers, thac fome 

ely the violence of his ig fitilieshaveall died by drinking water out of pits, whereintoa Salamander by ac- ; 
to kill men, andother fallen. For ifitfhallcreepe uponatree, it intects all the fruit with che remper of 
a dead Bafiliske hath qualities of cold and moift poyfon, wherein it yeelds not to Aconite. 

in ancient times,gave Actius writes that fuchas are in feted with the poyfonota Salamander, certaine 

of dpollo, fo to drive mtsof their bodie grow livide, fothat they fall away often, being putrefycd. Ac S ymptomes. 
cit webs, orthe other there appeare white {pots over the body, then red, afterwards blacke with 

“ature Will touch their mitefa@ion, and the falling away of the haires. Thecure is, to procure vomit, to phe cure. 
nthey forthwith fall | nfethe belly wich aglyfter, andto give them Treacle and Mithiidate in potions. 

cating their body, but prefcribes the fame things againft this kinde of poyfon as again{t opium, by 

cir bitings. They kill of the cold nature of them borh;the proper antidote is turpentine, flyrax,net- | 

‘touch, but even with iseeds, and cypreffz leaves. Déofeorides writes that the Salamander isa kind of Li- rib. 2. cap. 4. 


uid dull, variegated,and waich ts falfly rep ited not to be burnt by fire. But Pliny 
aiththe is fo cold, that the extinguifheth the fire by her onely, being laied 
wonhorcoales. Onthe contrary, Marbre/ws faith that caft into a great flame, they 
tequickly confumed. It is eafie out of to reconcile thele difagreeing Opini- pow a Salas 


ne Nigrs#s, neer which 
, having agreat head, 
ground, orherwilett 
fee the eyesthereo!, 


f Cyrene, of the length “0s; This creature, faith hee, paffeth through a burning flame, and is not hurt, the erp meet be 
ing acrowne; hecha- ‘in: dividing it {elfe and giving her way, but it fhee continue any time in the fire, gre. 

ion of {uch montters: necold humour being confumed in her, fhe is burnt. Now the Salamander is black, 

they aflailethem 11 Witgated, with yellow {pots, ftarre-fafhion. 


fumption of the 
f nature is ended:thu: 
which he might 
ng onely heis 
affects the bitte" 
our poffeffeth che 
r falling away picce 
Ca For dilloives 


ft 


T he 


— 
8,2 
j 
* 
” 
= - 
4 
= | 
x x= 
| 
. 
7 


a 
2 


os 


Thecrafcef che 


Triple lo. 


force. 


Symptomcs,, 


Curt. 


His ftopatying Jy ato the arm of the fifherman, but alfo over all his body, although his fithers pok / 


ee? SCAN dle were thruit into the part, and without any fwelling. Thel¢ | 


— Concer ning Puy/ons, CTC. 


The fzercof sSalamander, 


Crap. 
Of the Torpedo. 
=== He Torpedohath his name from the effe&, by reafon that by his oye, 


a ‘eai and power the members become torpid & numb; in muddy thoars 
KA} T Sou lives upon fish, which the catcheth by craft. For lying inthe Mud, the 
fo ftupefyes thofethat are nigh her, that fhe eafily preyesu nthem, | 


BASSO Al (he hath the fame power over men, for fhe fends a numneflenot on. BR that 


be betweene them. 


T heeffigies of Torpedo. 


Cuar. XXIL 


Of the Bitings of A 
E wound which is made by an Afpe is very fmall, asifanee 


fymptomes follow upon her bite, fuddaine darkneife 
eyes, much agitation in all their bodies, bur gentle 

ding a moderate paine of the ftomacke troubles them,t 
heads are continually troubled with convulfive tyitchings, 


14) 

q 


| ONs 


dy goaintt all 


forts of vene 
nefit in treacle 
lent,and appr 
will not bee at 
compofed of t 
which they b 
mentthe wout 
after the wou 
ces of this dec 


ed of his reco 
| Witt treacle d 
‘reto fome 
Clpeciall 
checkstremble, and their eye- lids fall gently ro reft and wad : Yy ferous and 
blood which flowes from the wound is little, but blacke; death no longer 


the Llands& 


Mithrida 


than the third part of a day, willtake them away by convulfions, ron (we 
refiftance with fitting remedics. The male Afp makes two wounds, the ads to thee 
as it alfo happensin the bitings of vipers. Now for that the poyfon of A i “hines’ 

the blood inthe veines and arteries,therefore you muft ufe againft {uch thigg ot 


Was ff Ced fron 


| 
| 
794. Lip 
powred 1000 
jad che like. 
| oft deadly 
xe 
| that by 
i cent tO 
| Wale hi 
they force th 
they Compo 
| harmelefie, OI 
Inake thar tne! 
‘hat he could 
= 


bs in muddy thoars 
fily preyes u 


very finall, asifanec- 
any {welling. Thele 


darkneffe cloudstheit 
urgentle norwithftan- 
nbles them, their fore 
five twitchings, the 


yroreftand fleep ; 


ith no longer deferred 
‘ons, unleffe you make § 


male four, 
unds, the fe is “sto theentrailes.I by chefe meanes fo farre prevailed, that on the day after hee 


aint it fuch thiogs * "freed from all his maligne fymptomes. Therefore I judged it onely remained 
are 


yfon of Afps ¢ 


a he like. When as the hurt part becommeth purple, black or greene, it is afigne 


fonthatby his touch, | 


Dr lying in the Mud, the 
Nthem, 
ds a numnefle nor One. | 
though his fithers pole 


21. 


Concerning ‘Poy/ons, 795 


— 


hor & fu tle of parts,as mithridate or treacle diff olved in aqua vite, and the fame 
gred into the wound , the patient mutt be warmed by bathes,trictions, walking, 


jrrnenative heat is extin@ and fuffocated by the malignity of the venome. There- 
it is beftto amputate the member, if the partie bee able to endure it, and 
sede nothing which may hinder. go writes, that he faw a Mountebank at Flo- Ahi*ory. 
gee, who, that he might fell che more of his Antidotes,and at the better rate.let an 
bite him by the finger,but he died thereof {ome ioure houres after. To the 
purpofe you may reade Mathiolus whereas hee writes thar thofe Im poftors or Alpes 
yguntebanks to cozen the better, and deceivethe people, uic to huntand take vi- !ebure- 
sean afpes long after the {pring, that is, then whenas they have caft forth their ied Ther. 
~otdeadly poyfon ; then they feed them with meats formeriy unufuall to them fo ad pifenem. 
at by long keeping and care, atthe lengththey bring it to pafle, that they put offa 
part of their venemous nature ; neither being thus fatistied, they makerhem of- 
tO bite upon pieces of flefh, that fo they may caft torth inrochem rhe ve- 
sont Which ts contained in the membraine betweene their teeth and gums. Laftty 
ey force them to bite, lickeand {wallow downe an aftringent medicine, which 
heycompofe and carry about for the fame purpole, that tothey may ob{ruct rhe 

esby which the venome ufed to flow out, tor thus at length their bires w ill be 
ramelefle, or without great danger. This therefore is their art,that fo may fel 
thei counterfeit treacle tothe people at a high rate,asthat whichis a moft {ate reme- 
dy againtt all potfonous bites.Chriffopher Andrew in his book called escoiatria,writes, Againttehe 
the [lands of Spaine are every-where full and ftored with ferpents,a{pes,and all 
‘ots of venemous beafts, againft whofe bites they never obferved or found any be- Siiaoniell 
ftintreacle. But che efhcacie of the following Antidote is fo certaine and excel- 
ent,and approved by {o manifold experience, that inthe confidence thereof, they 
villnot bee affraid to et themielves bee bitten by an Afpe. Now this medicine is A certain remmes 
compoled of the leayes of Mullet, Avenes & red ftock Gilly flowers in like quantity, oY ae 
whichthey boile in (harpe vinegar and the urine of a found man, and therewith to- = abet 
nentthe wounded part. Y ct if he have not taken nor ufed any thing of a good while 
ierthe wound, it will be better and more certaine, if the patient drinke three oun- 


sof this decoCtion fatting two houres before meate. 


CuHuarp. XXIII. 
Of the biting of 4 Snake, 


Ay nity of the bite of a{nake, and the remediesthereof. When as King 


Charles the ninth was at Moulins, /oafier Le Feure,the Kings Phyfician, 
and I were called tocure the Cooke of the Lady of Caftelpers. Who 
SENSES gathering hoppesinahedge to make a falad, was bit on the hand by a 
‘ukethat there Jay hid, hee putting his had to his mouth, fucked the wound to cale 
“epaine by fucking forth the venome. But his tongue forthwith {welled fo bigge, 
“athe could not {peak his mind : befides his whole arme,cven to his thoulder, was 
. ke fort much {welled, his paine was fo vehement,that it made him {woune twice 
“My prefence, his face was wan and livid like to adead body, and though | defpai- 
ot his recovery, yet not fuffering him to bee quite forfakeo, | wafhed his mouth 7. 
"Atteacle diffolved in white wine, and gave him fomethereof to drinke, adding 
lome «qua vita. opened his fwolne arme with many and deepe fcarificati- 
“Selpecially inthe place where he was hurt, I fuffered the bloud which was whol- 
**tousand fanious, to low more plentifully, I wafhed the wounds with treacle 
~“Mithridate diffolved in aqua vite,and then puchim exceeding warme in bed, 
“Scuriag fweatzand making him to lie awake, left fleep thould draw the poyfon in- 


pea Have thought good in a true hiftory to deliver the virulent malig- 4 hiforic. 


Xxx 3 for 


| 
4 
of 
| 
| 
| 
~ 


Concerning Poy/ons, 


tor a verfeet cure,that the wound thould be long kept opcnand wafhed witht. ,. 
qeicher was deceived, for within a few dayes he wasperfeGly recovered, 


is = * 


Crap. XXIV. 
Of the bitings of Toads. 


Toads wanttceth, yet-with their hard & rough gums they fo 
A Repl ly prefle or pinch the part which they fhall take hold on, that they will 
Ra force their poifon thereinto, and fo over the whole body by the pores: 
prefled part. Moreover, they caft forth their veaome by urine. pitt. 
and vomit upon herbes,but chiefly upon Strawberries, the which they are reporte ; 
reatly to affect. Hence many fuddenly and ignorantly catch their deaths, 

A hiftory. I heard froma man of very good credit, that there were two merchants not far. 
| from the Citie Tholoufé,who whileft dinner was providing, walked into the carder, 
that belonged tothe Inne, where they gathered fome fage leaves, and unwathed a; 
Were, put them intocheir wine. They hadnotas yet dined, w hen being taken 
ocevioneaby With afudden Vertigo, the whole Inne feemed to run round, then lofing thei: light, 
rhe poyfonot they fellintoa fowne, intermixed now and then with convulfions. But they (tam. 
srr nered with their lippes and tongues becomming blacke ; a froward and horrid lool 
with coatinuall vomiting, andacold {weat, the forerunner of death which prefenr. 
ly fazed uponthem, their bodies becomming exceedingly much {wolne. Buttle 
Juftices of the place fufpeGing that they were poyfoned,made the Inne-keeperand 
the Guefts to be apprehended, being examined, they all conftantly & with one yoies 

sanfwered, that tne dead parties ate of the {ame meat and drinke which the reft di 
but oncly tharthey put fage into their wine. A Phyfician was asked the queftior 
whether fage might be poyfoned; he anfwered,it might : but to come to the purpole, 
thatit muft appeare whether any venemous creature had povioned the plant with 
her fpittle or venemous/aszes. This which was lightly pronounced,and only by con: 
icGture, wasby the eye found tobeetrue. For atthe roote thereof there was found: 
hole inthe ground full of Toads, who got out by putting in of warme water, mace 

credibicchat the plant was poyfoned by theirfpitcle and urine, whereby youu 
underftand how uawifely they doe, who devoure herbes and fruits newly gather 


without wafhing. Allo we muft take heed left falling afleep in the frelas,wee lye 
neere the holes which toads or other venenious beatts of the like nature! 

| . their habitation. Fok thence a veneimous or deadly aire may be drawn into! 

Mayfiogs. Forthe famecaufe wee muft abftaine from cating of trogs in the moneth of Mey, 

caufe chen they engender with toads. Oxen in feeding fometimes lick up imaito.cs 

together with the yrafle,which prefently will breed their great harme,for caer 

the oxen fwell fo big, that they often burft withall. Neither is the venome te 


turn yellow, {wellover all their bodies, are taken with an Afthmaticke 
breathiug,a fowning,and laftly by death it felfe. Phe.c lo” 


mentary qualities therof,coldnefs & moifture,which are chiefly predominant" 

19;dut much rather by the occult property which is aptto purrefic the | 
The cure. bOdy wher. toit fhall happen. Dherfore it wil be convenient to procure 
Wat she poifon be roken bythe mouth, to give gly&ers, ro weaken thet" 
ofthe poifon by horand attenuating Antidotes, as treacle & mithridate 
good wise; batin conclufion to digeft it by bathes, ftoves,and much and 
crcife. Ronaeletias in his book de Pifcibus, afirmes the fame tuings ot tic ch 


no ne of toads, as we have formerly delivered : yet that they feldome 
they cai forrh either their urine; the which they gather in a great quantity 

bladder, or elfe their venemous fpittle or breath againft fuch as tucy 
or aflaile ; befides, the herbs which are tainted by their poifonous breath, 


deadly only being taken inwardly, bur even fprinkled upon the 
with wipe the place, & wath iewith urine, water & falt.Such as are poi once vy 


fyimptoms are judged inherent in the poyfon of toads, not only by reaion 


err OL! 


t! 
Led with {tror 
bigger than t! 
and oft-timesm 
can {carcebe 
Locufts, watt 
unknown in HE 
to betrue by 
9 digging the 
thither again! 
opia,by chafi 
ons,accordin 
browne,redi(] 
fome are wit! 
habire. In Tu 
lland Pharos 
gins to be inf 
pained, hee is 
his paine is 
an Ague, his 
Paine,as if he 


a 

Oorides writ 

dy thereto, as 

dy to anoint 

Oe wound 

ule barly mes 

hels and lat 

‘nd applyed 

Ike lore 

abryony 

“(hes Acar; dil 

CXceedin 

ule Ofa bath: 

Now S 

allo oi! 

Juice of radi 
gf ra 


— 
» 
a; 
é 
| 
\ 
¢ 
> 
| 
| 
‘ 
~ 
Gea” 


wathed with treacle 
recovercd. 


n gums they fo {trait 
d on, that they will 
body by the pores o¢ 
by urine, {pittle 
ich they are reported 
heir deaths. 
merchants not farre 
alked into the Parden 
ves, and unwathed as 
‘d, when being taken 
hen lofing their light, 
lions. But they ftam- 
ward and hortid look 
death which pielent- 
nuch{wolne. But the 
ethe Inne-keeperand 
tly & with one voice 
ke which the reft did, 
asked the queftion, 
> come to the purpofe, 
yfoned the plant with 
ced,and only by con- 
eof there was founda 
‘warme water,madcit 
ie, whereby you may 
fruits newly gathered 
the fields, wee lye not 
like nature have mace 
drawn inrothe lungs. 
he moneth of May,be- 
lick up {mail toads 
t harme,for thercupod 
is the venome 0! toads 
ckin,unlels thcy fort. 
are Doll ontd DY 
wmaticke difficuluc o! 
it {elfe. Thefe to ber ris 
ly by reaion of the <a 
Ay predominant chere: 
efic the humors ol that 
ro procure vomur,cipe 
ro weaken the 
mithridare djdolved 
ad muchand great 
hings of the curice 
feldome 
rreat quantity 
yas they meete 


e erat 


Lip, 2) iis. 2!. 
sort juchasare {priakled withtheir fj pittle or urine, are {ufficient to kill fuch as eate 
sen. The Antidotes are jaice of beronie, plantaine, mugwurt, asal{o the bloud of Antid 
1 rtoiles made with flower into pils, and forthwith diffolved in wine,arid drunken. gaint the pc 
writes thatthe heartsand {pleens of toads refift poifon. The vulear Opinion wads. 
thinke that the toad-ftone is found in their heads, which is good againtt 


Concerning ‘ 
Concerning oo 797 


nt); jon. 


Cuar. XXV. 
Of the flinging of a Scorpion. 


Scorpion is a {mall creature witharound bodicin forme of an E220, Thedelcription 
with many feet,and along taileconfifting of many joints,the laft wher- 
of is thicker and a little longer than the reft, atthe very endthercofisa 
ting, in {ome two, hollow and replete with cold poyfon, the which by 

the fting it cafts into the obvious body; ic hath five legs on each fide for- 

dwith trong clawes, not ualike toa Crab or Lobfter, but the two foremoft are 

bigger than the reft ; they are of a blackifh or footie colour, they goe afide,afide ; 

nd oft-times faften themfelves with their mouthes ard fect fo faft to men, that they 

an{carce be plucked therehence. There be fome who have wings like the wings of winged Sco 
Locufts, wafting the corn & ali green things withtheir biting and burning. Such are pion. 
unknown in France. Thels fice over divers Countries like winged Ants. This is likely 

obetrue by that which Mathrolus writes,that the husbandmen in Caftile in Spain, 

indigging the carth oft-times finde a {warm of Scorpions, which betake them{elves 
thitheragainft winter. writes,that Scorpions laid waftea certaine part of Aithi- 

opiajby chafing away the inhabitants. The Ancients made divers kinds of Scorpi- 
ons,according to their varietic or difference of colours, fome being yellow, others 
browne,redifh,afh-coloured, greene, whitifh, blacke, duskie ; fome have wings, and 

ome are without. Phey are more or lefle deadly according to the countries they in- 

labite. In Tufcaniec and Scythia they are abfolutely deadly, but at Trent and inthe 

land Pharos their ftinging is harmleffe.The place ftung by a Scorpion prefently be- Sympronics. 
unsto be inflamed, it waxcth red, growes hard and fwels, and the patient is azaine 

ined, hee is one while hot, another while cold, labour prelently wearics him,and 

spaine is fomewhiles more and fomewhiles lefle, he {wears and (hakes as if he had 

MAsue, his haire ftands upright, paleneffe difcolours his membeis, and hee feels 2 

huneas if he were pricked with needles over all his skin, wind flicth out backwards, 

itelveste vomur and to ftoole,but doth nothing, he ismolefted wich 2 conti- 

mal feaver and owning, which at length proves deadly,unlefle it be remedied. Dz- 

horides writes that a Scorpion beatenand laid to the place where he ftung,is a reme: 
thereto, as alfo eaten roafted tothe fame purpofe. [cis an afuall, out certaine reme. te 
te anoint the (tung place with the oy! of Scorpions. There be fome who drop into 

Newound the milkic jaice of figs, others apply thereto Calamint beaten, orherfome 

lebarly meale-mixed with a decoction of Rue. Snailes beaten together with theiz 

laidthereon prefently affwage pain. Su/pbar caixed with turpentice, 

applyed plafter-wile,is good ; asalfo the leaves of # ue beaten & laid thereto. 

‘lore alfo the herbe Scorproides, which thence tooke its name, is convenient, as al- 

root boiled and mixed with s little fulphurand old oile. Difeortdes af- 
limes Agarick in powder or taken in wine to be an Antidote ag2intt poy fges, verily 
“Sexceeding good agiintt the ftingings or bitings of ferpents. Yet che continual 

“Cota bath (tands in ftcad of all rhefe, as alfo {weat and crinking wioe fomewhat 

“ald. Now Scorpions may bee chafed away by a fumigation of Sulphur and Galba- scorpionschar 
allo oile of Scorpions dropped into their holes,hinders their comming forth. 
Juice Of radith doth the fame. Forthey willnever touch one that is belineared with bekirra- 
of radifh or oarlikeyyea verily,they willnot dareto come neare him. divhes. 


CHAR. 


Xxx 3 


‘a 
4 - 
- 
i 


Concerning ‘Poy/ons, 


L 18,2) 
CHar.XXVI, 


Of the flinging of Bees,Wafpes, 


GSS Walpes, Hornets and fuch like,caufe great paine in the skin youn. 


& 


: “ je ©, ded by their ftinging, by reafon of the curftnefle of the venome y hich 


they fend into the body bythe wound, yet are they feldome deadly, by, 
yet ifthey fet upon a man by multicudes,they may come to kill him, po, 
<** thus they have fometimes been the death of horfes. Wherefore becayy. 

i fuch as are ftung by thefe, by reafon of the cruclety of pain, may think they are wou», 
) ded by a more virulent and deadly creature, I thinke it not amifleto fet downe wh, 
The {vmptoms.fignes follow upoatheir ftingings. Great paine preicncly arifeth, which continucth 
untill che fting left in the partis taken forth, the part becomes red and {wolne, ang 
there rifetha puth or little blifter. The cure is, forthwith tofucke the Wound very 
hard,and thercby to draw forth the flings, which ifthey cannot thus be goiten gy: 
the vlace,if nothing hinder, is to be cut, or clfe temper afhes with leven or oile, ang 
foapply them: the partalfo may be very conveniently put into hot water,and there 
fomeared for an houres {pace, and at length wafhed in {ca water. Crefles beaten ang 
applied, afwage the paine and difcufle the humour caufing the tumour, Ox dung 
macerated in oileand vinegar,and applyed hor,doth the fame. There are fome why 
apply tothe part the fame creatures beaten,as we formerly faid of Scorpions ; beans 
chawed and laid to the part aflwage paine. Vinegar, hony and falt applied exceeding 
ho:,are good, if befides, you dip a cloththerein, and lay it uponthe place ; /u/phur 
vivum tempered with {picele hath the fame effe&. The milkie juice of unripe tigs in. 
corporated with hony,is judged very eft:Quall but it is muchthe better,mixed with 
treacle. Wafpes will not fting nor bite fuch as anoint their bodies with the juice of 
mallowes mixed with oile. They may bee quickly chafed away with the fume of 
brimftoncand fuch like things. A wafpe is faid, if fhee find a viper dead, to dip her 
fling inthe others poyfon, and thence men learned to empoifon the heads of thar 
Phedire arowes. The rough and hairy worm.s,which are commonly called Bear-wormes, 
Jeuworaxs. efpyecially thofe which breed about a Pinetree,caule great itching, rednelle &{wel. 
ling in the part which they bite,touch or grate upon very hard. A remedy hero! 

onions beaten with vinegar,andthe reft of the things formerly mentioned. 


Thecure. 


Of the bite of a S$ pider. 


A» 


alurking hole, fo to lycin waite to catchthe intrapped tyes, 
foroprey upon them. Thereare many forts of Spiders, one? 
termed Rbagiam, round and like a blacke berry, whence 
the name; ithathavery {inall mouth under the iniait of che 
ly, and moft fhort feet, as they were imperfect, her bite a3 
paincfull as the fting of aScorpion. Another is called Lapws or the Wollc pices 
becaufe doth not onely lye in waite to catch flyes, bur allo bees and walpe; 


Piders weave webs with various art, yet in thefethcy alwaics make 


Differences of 
Spiders. 


itis larecr chanan Ant, but headed like one, the bodie thereof is blacke, ands 
white {pots or ftreakes running towards the backe, The fourth kind may 
led Vefparium, in other things rclembling a Wafpe,dut chat it wants the 
redifh colour,and living onely on herbes. The Ancients have thoug 
to bee ven¢mous. Now their poyfon is therefore thought to bee cold, 
: {ymptomes thence arifing are winde in the beliy, refrigerationsof the extreme | 


ofthe body, numnefle in the bitten part, with fenfe of cold and thaking. T 
matt forthwith be wafhed with very hor vinegar ; then muft you lay 


and all fuch things as may fice intoher webbe. The third is aamed sinter 


hough their 


avs 


hick quality, 
yrenary parts 
into the body 
iawardly, hava 
rheir mourhe 

putredinous h 
fortaken 
rothe belly, ' 
ble the wafhit 
nefle,reftle{n: 
the corroded 
youmay kno 
conveyance ¢ 
continuall er 
ftead of whic 
water, 
whole bodie 
ting, drinking 
the ulcers an 
in ftead ther: 
crimome of t 
O; this poy! 

enjoy the 

Danquer, and 
cite him the 

vloud at his | 
Ws, who prc 
unde 
Upwards wit 

Drelen: 
Violets, w 


and caufed h 
40 vifcidet 
parts, 25 
POptes 
Crinke one 
Kid, and DO: 

their hun 
or alpe 
Jath, 
Bu 


« 
fi... 
4? 
~ ii ) 
‘ 
j 
a 
£ 4 
ne 


Az I 5.21. 


iis in the Skin Wour. 
ithe venome which 
eldome deadly, bur 
omc to kill him. Fo, 
Wherefore becayf 
uink they are woyn. 
eto fet downe whar 
1, Which continucth 
ed and {wolne, and 
cke the wound very 
tthus be gocten our, 
h leven oroile, and 
hot water,and there 
r. Crefles beaten and 
tumour. Oxe dung 
There are fome whig 
of Scorpions ; beans 
ult applied exceeding 
onthe place : fulpbur 
Lice of unripe figs in- 
he better,mixed with 
lics with the juice of 
way with the fume of 
iper dead, to dip her 
{on the heads of their 
called Bear-wormes, 
ing, rednefle & {wel- 
l. A remedy hercotis 
mentioned. 


efethcy alwaics make 
ve incrapped Hyes, and 
ol Spider s, oneh 


erry, waence irtaket! 
erthe midit of che ver 
aperfedct, her bite is 
orthe Wolfe- spider, 
alfobecs and walpcs, 
ispamed CM 
otis blacke, hath 


arth kind may bee 
iewants the 


° 
thoughe their 


sold, becawic 


, 3. 216 ( oncerning Poyfons, & 
Gach like things beaten, then procure {weat by art, as by bathes and ftoves, yer 


hing is more effeCtuall than treacle and mithridate. 


XXVIII. 
of Cantharides and Bupreftes, 


their fmell isungratefull. They are hot and dry inthe fourth degree, and 


focaufticke, corrofive and venemous, not onely by reafon of their cau- 


fick quality, but becaule of afecret antipathy which they naturally have againgt the Excmies tothe 
venary parts ; Which effects they produce not onely if they bee taken by the mouth Bladder 
iqrothe body,but even applyed outwardly to raife blifters. Such as have taken them S ymptomes. 


qwatdly, have thetaft of pitch or fome thing like sedria, orthe rofen of Cedars, in 
ei mouthes, it is likely that this taft proceeds from the humours diffolved by the 
sredinous heat in the ftomack, guts & liver,and the vapours that therehence arifc - 
frtaken inwardly, they gnaw, exulcerate and burac all parts from the mouth even 
othe belly, whence enfuetha bloudy fluxe, excrements flowing out, which refem- 
iethewafhings of new killed flefh. Then followes a burning feaver, vertigo, mad- 
nelle reftlefneffe,the braine being dilturbed by the plenty of vapours lifted up from 
‘ecorroded and burnt parts and humours, which therefore when as they appeare, 
youmay know the affect isuncurable. Inthe parts appointed forthe receiving and 
conveyance of the urine they caufe a burning inflammation, excoriation, {trong and 
continuall ere€tion of the yard, whence enfues a bloudy and painefull ftrangury, in 
ead of which there oft-times happens or fucceeds an Ifchary or ftoppage of the 
water, whence a gangrene and mortification of the part, and foin conclufion of the 
wholebodie befides. When as Cantharides are taken inwardly,the remedie is vomi- 
tine drinking of Cowes mike tocorred the heat and drynef{e,good alfoto mitigate 
heulcers and ftay the dyfentery ; itis good alfo to inject it into the guts by glytter. 
Inftead thereof {allade oile,or oile of {weet almonds is convenicné to retunde the a- 
vimonie of the poyfon faftned to the fides of the ftomack. The reft and whole cure 


oithis poyfon you may learne by the following hiftory. A certain whore,the better A hitter y, 


ocnjoy the company of a young Abbot who loved her , entertained him witha 
mnguet, and fprinkhed divers of their cates with the powder of Cantharides, to in- 
‘ite himthe more to venery. The next day, when asthe Abbor caft forth pure 


loud athis fundament and yard which ftood very ftiffe, hee called fome Phyfici- 7)... 


ins, whoprefently by the foreinentioned fympromes, which were all very apparent 
ohim,underftood that he had Cantharides given him: wherefore they purged him 
wards with vomits, and downewards by glyfters made with French barly Rice, 
‘decoction of mallowes, feeds of lincand foenugreck, oyle of lillies, goats fuct : 
‘kn prelently afterthey gave hima little treacle wich a good quantity of conlerve 
tviolets, which might draw the poy{on outwards, they gave him milke to diinke, 
‘idcaufed him to ufe injcétions into the urenary paflage and guts made of refrige- 
‘ting things, as the juice of lettuce,purflaine, cucumbers,gourds,mclons ; of tough 
ad vilcide things, that fo they might fticke the more cafily and long tothe ulcera- 
‘cdparts, asthe mucilages of pflium, mallowes, quince-fecds, fyrupe of water-lil- 
°S, popies and violets, trefhbutter, and oile of {weet almonds, andthey made tum 
‘tnke onely barly water, or the common ptifan; they Jet him feede on veale, 
ud, and porke boyled with lettuce, purflaine, barly and violet leaves, the which 
»/ their humidity might felaxe the belly, and by their toughnelle lenitiethe rough- 
Nel or a{peritie ; they applyed alfo refrigerating things to the loines, thare and pe- 
tw aflware the heate of the urine. At length they put him into awarme 
2th, andre conclude, they left nothing unattempted to draw forth or weaken the 
ylon. Bur all their endeavours were in vaine, for the Abbot dyed, not being 


“stitute of remedies conveniently prefcribed, but overcome by the contumaci- 
ous 


Antharides fhine as itwere with agolden colour,acceptable tothe eye, by Thedelcription 
reafon of the commixture of a blewith or greenith colour therewith, yet °°" 4" 


| 
799 | 
’ 7 
| 
| 
| 
on 
d TT 
we 
he extreme 
dthaking. The’ | 
t id | 
ercto 
you ay ch 


& 


i 


Cantharides ap 
plyedto mc 
head.ulecrat¢e 


the bladdcr. 


A remedy a- 
Lepious 


pu 


he L¢ afon Or 
wie faine. 


live 
dies aocordin2 
tothe diver ity 
of tne parts. 


Concerning orc. 


ous malignity ofthe poylon.The Phyficians pains had far better fuccefle in 2 Citi 
Gearlewoman againft this kinde of affect, her whole face was deformed with red 
ficricand filthy puttles, fo that all fhunned hercompany as if thee had been. 

bled with a Leprofie, and were ready to forbid herthe fociety of inen; flee, 
to Paris,and calling Hollerius and Grealmus Phyficians, mee and Caballus being 
gcons, ‘hce made agrievous complaint, and befought us earneftly for fome rem dy 


acainit fo greata deformity of her face ; having diligently contidered her caf 


- 


- 


146.21 


ice will {pit 

nee (hall din 

you mixc Aig 
will by 
ceive thls bys 
hold. Then 


pronounced her free from a Leprofie ; but we judged ft fitto apply to her whole ;,.. gowing fort 
a veficatorie of Canthartdes, three or foure houres after the application whereof armenicKe, 

the medicine being come to worke its effect, her bladder began to burne exceeging hereto fOme | 


+he owing 

But fort 
wee Will ia 
withthe Lan 


ly, and the necke of her wombeto {well, with gripings, contiouall vomiting 
of water and {cowring, atroublefome agitation of the body and members.a burnin: 
andabfolurely fiery feaver.1 forthwith called the Phyficians,it was decreed tha, 
fhould drink wine pleatifully, and that it fhould bee injected by the fundamen, ™ 
the guts, and by the urenary paflage into the bladder and the neck of the womb, ang 
that fhe thould keep her felte, untill the paine were mitigated,in a warme bath mg¢- 
of the decodion of Line. feces, the roors and leaves of 
violers henbane,purflaine and lettuce her loynes and genitals fhould be 
red with Hn (7 popaleon ftirred and incorporated with OXyCcrate, ky 
thefe meancs,all the fymptomes were mitigated. Her face inthe interim jp; 
blifter,and much purulent matter came cut thereof, and fo the deformity, where. 
with Shee was formerly troubled, vanifhed away for ever, fo that within a whilegs. 
ter fhee was married, and had many children, and is yet living in perfeé health. 

Buprestes allo are of the kinde ot Cansharides, being like unto them in fhape ang 
faculty. Ifan Oxcor Sheepe or any other creature fhall in feeding devoure one of 
them, hee will preiently {well up likea Tuone, whence alfo they take their name 
if aman takethem inwardly, hee thail endure the like fymptomes as in taking Cav 
thariaes,and over and befides both his ftomacke ard his whole belly thal! be won. 
derfully puffed up,as if he hada Dropfie. It is probable thar this inflation like atym. 
pany happenneth by humours diffuled and refolved into vapours by the fiery acii. 
mony ofthe venome : They are to bee cured after the fame manner as fuchas 
have drunke Caztharides, Laftly, asin allothcr poyions which are taken intothe 
body, foalfo here, if the poyfontaken by the mouth bee thought as yet tobcein 
the fLomacke, you muft then procure vomit. If ir bee gotten into rhe guts,then mul 
it be drawn away by glyfters ; if diffufed over all the body, then mult you make ule 
of fuck things as may drive the poyfon forth from the center ro the circumference 
fuch as are bathes and ftoves. 


ferve their ta! 

by he! 
bee helped | 
the Viper, th 
outthe Vipe 
anand 


Cwar.XXixX. 
Of Horfe. Leaches 


BEDS Oric-Leaches are alfo venemous, efpecially duch as live in muddy itt 

king ditches, for thefe are lefle hurtfull which refide in cleat & pare 
‘fag ics, ters. Wherefore,before they are to bee ufed in cafes of Phylic, they 
we mult. be kept for fome dayes {pace in cleane water, that fothey may 
pureethemiclves; otherwile they may chance to leave ulcers are 
cure inthe places whereto they (hall be applyed, andthe rather, if they bee viorent 
ly plucked off, becauie they by that meanes leave their teeth faftned in the pt" 


. Jinwhtt Ma POurthe wit 
Now hee which by chance hath fwallowed a Horfe-leach,muft bee asked wit 
part hee feeleth her, thatis, the fenfe of her fucking, For if thee ftickeinthetop’ tO 


the T hroate or Gullet, or in the iddeft thereof, the part {hall hee often walle Wry taney 
with muftard diffolved invinegar. If thee beeneare the orifice of the ven" 


* 


it is fic that the patient by little and little {wallow downe oyle with a littley* 


gar. Butiffhee faften to the flomack-, or the bottome of the ventricle, th : 
ent by plucking ofthe part fhall perceive a certaine fenfe of {ucking, 


a* 


# 
A 
i | i * 
4 4 ae 
a 
q 
a 
4 7 — 
| 
wh 
4 
aa 


_ 


r fuccefle fpit bloud, and will forfeare become melaacholicke. To force her thence, 
eformed w h ain ee fhall drinke warme water with oyle; but if fhee-annot fo bee loofed, then thal] 
‘ited, a ive Aloestherewith, or fome thing endued wrh the like bitrernefle, for thee 


nm 
by that meancs leaveher hold, and{obee forth by vomit. You may per- 


Caballus Came his by fuch as are applyed tothe skinne, on th external! parts, for by the 


Cing § ceive 
tly for fome re — perfion of bitter things, whether they bee full or enpty, they will forfake their 
nfidered her medy ide Then fhall the patient take aftringent things, which may ftoppe the bloud 
ly to her whole a wing forth of the bitten part, fuch is conferve of Rola, with serra (igsHata, bole 


amenicke, aud other moreaftringent things,ifneed fo require. For if they fhall ad- 
yercto fore greater branch of fome veine or artery, it willsee more difficult to ftop 
howing bloud. 

put for that not the earth onely, butthe fea alfo produceh venemous creatures, 


pplication Whereof 
to burne CXCecdino. 
allvomiting, Makin 
members.a burnj, 


warme bath made 


was decreed that fh. gee ill in like fort treat of them, as wee have already done cf the other, beginning 
y the fundamen, into withthe Lampron. 
ck of the womb,and 


CHuarp. XXX. 


tals fhould be anoin. 
d with oxycrate. p 

INterim rofe al] ina 


Of the Lampron. 


be deformity, where. HE Lampron, called in Lazine isa fea fith fomething in fhape the defeription 
at within a while af. Sox refembliag a Lamprey, but fhee is bigger and thicker, and hatha lar- of the Lampron 
in perfect health. ger mouth, with teeth long, tharpe and bending inwards, fhe is of a duf- 
to them in thape and tetrad kic colour, diftinguithed with whitifh fpots, and of fome two cubits 
eding devoure one of lnyrh;the Ancients had them 11 great efteem,becaufe they yeeldgood nourtfhment, 
mm they take their name: admay be kept long alive, in pooles or ponds, and fo taken as the owners pleafe to 
mies as in taking cavetheirtable, as it is {ufficiently knowne by the hiftorie ofthe Roman Cra/fus. 
le belly thal! be won- Shee by her biting induceth the fame fymptomes as the viper , and it may 


bee helped by the fame meanes. Verily the Lampron hath fuck familiarity with Thenaturali 

the Viper, tha* leaving her naturall element, the {ea,fhe leapetha fhoare,and feeketh 

outthe Viper in her den to joyne with her in copulation, as itis written by Vine. 


mand Nicander. ‘ 


is inflation like atym- 
ours by the fiery acri- 
Manner as as 
ich are taken intothe 
ought as yet to bee in 
ico the guts, then mutt 
en mult you make ule 
tothe circumference, 


CHAP: REE 


Of the Draco-marinus or (e4- Dragon. 


ASVHE fea-Dragon called by the French Viva, for his vivacity (and by the 


Evelith a Viver, or as fome fay a Qua viver) becaule being raken ia tith- 
ing and drawne out of the fea,fhee is faid long to furvive. Her pricks are 
poyfonous. but chiefly thofe that are atthe edges of her gils. Which is the 
alon thar Cookes cut off their heads before they ferve them uptothe table; 
‘dat Rovea the fifhermen lay them not upon their ftalles to fell before they 
‘We cutoff their heads. The wounded part of {uch as are hurt, paines them much, Sympromes 
"th inflammation, afeaver, fowning, gangrene and deadly mortification, unleffe 
dequickly withftood. Not very long agoe the wife of Monfieur Fromaget, Secre- 
“of the requefts,was wounded witha prick of this fith in her middle fiager, there 
~“0Wed a fwelling and rednefle of the part, without much painc , but perceiving 


as live in muddy 
dein clear & pare we- 
afes of Phyfick, they 
ter, that fothey may 
to leave ulcers hard co 
rif rhey bee violent: 


+h faftned in the pat. “tlwelling toencreafe, being made more wary by the mifchance of her neigh- 
ult bee asked in wha! utthe wife of Monfiear Bargclowne Lievcenant particulier in the Chaftelet of Pa- 
ce fticke in the top ©! ee died not long before by the likeaccident being neglected, fent for mee ; | : 
hall bee often waihee Mer ‘tending the caufe of her difeafe, laid to her pained finger and her whole hand, ! 
ifice of the ventricle eg 2 pultis made ofa great Oaton roafted under the coales, leaven anda little 
yle wich The next day I withed her to dip her whole hand into warme water,{fo to 


he ventricle, the pat! “aw forth the poyfon, then I divided the skin about it with much (carification,but 


ot {ucking, the uperficiarily ; tothe gafhes I applyed Leaches, which by fucking 


j 
| 7 
| 
| 
‘ 
~ 


ae S02 Concerning Lip.) | 
fufficient quantity of bloud, I put thereto treacle diflolved in aqua vit 
| day the {welling was affwagedand the paine eafed, and within’ afew daies the. ty 
perfeGly well. Déofcorsaes writes that this fifth divided in the midft and applyeg ° 
the wound, will curcit. a 
XXXII. 
Of the Paftinaca narina, or Sting-Ray, which fome call the Pierce-clay 
ing- Attinus 
Sieijeneetl by a Sting-Ray(as Actus hath written) che Place of the | 
wound doth manifeftly appeare ; there enfues thereon lafting pain. in 
Lib-9 Cap.48. 
The virulency | | 
arrowes, for the force of the poyfon remaineth, the fifh dead, which willi) 
nor onely living creatures,but plants alfo. Fifhermen, when they catchthisfihr. @ 
The one 
“lly look 


; 
\ 
~ 
— 


Lip. 21. q 


a 


Vite. 


a few daics 
nidft and applyeg. 


Prerce-claw. 


icten) the place of the 
con lafting paine ang 
t ithath a fharpe ang 
ithe ftroake may be 
cir whole bodies fur 
whofe roots itis faft. 
eth, if the gums bee 
hite hellebore, or of 
lence offered to them. 
hem have two ftings, 
teeth turned towards 
ous than the Perfians 
dead, which will kil) 
ey catch this fith,pre- 
ith. But if by chance 
lay it tothe wound. 
e true Antidote of his 
, upon the fifhes that 
reof turned towards 
have here given you 


The 


1B. 21. Concerning ‘oy/ons, 


The fzure of Sting-Ray, 


\ 


\ 


\ \ 


\\\ 


~~ 


\ 


\\\ 


~ 


Cease 


tbe Lepus marinus, or Sea- hare. 


Riso rwy cals the Sea-hare, amaffe or deformed peece of fiefh. Galen 


faith that it is like a Snaile taken torth ofthe hell. Itis exceeding poy- 
(onous in the judgement of the Antients ; wherefore itis not am.fleto 

fot downethe defcription of it, left wee might cate it at unawares, 

~”* carneftly view it, or {mell thereto, as alfo that we may ufe itagainft the 

thereof itis an inhabitant not only of the Sea, but of Lakes of 

‘yelpecially fuch as are muddy; it isof the fame colour as the hair of rw ar 

Sithatha holein the head, out of which hee putteth a certaine prece an 

buckes it backe againe when as he is feene. Paulus, Pliny, Galen The be- 
atreof one opinion, andagree in this, that ifa woman big wich child ” cat 
look upon one, fhe will vomit & prefently after abort. They ave run 
“WS poyfon, faith Drofcorides, are troubled with paine in the 

“pped. Ifthey doe make water, then is it bloody ;they run downe 

Mat, which {mels of fith ; acholericke vomiting fometimes mixed with blood en- 

that all chcir bodics turne yellow, their faces {well, and their fecte, The 
chiefly their genitall member, whichis the caufethey cannot make water 

) Gales writes that it is the property of the Sea- hare to exulcerate the Lunes. T - The Antidore. 
tidore is Affes milke, Muskedine, or honyed Wine continually drunken, 

“tion of the roots and leaves of Mallowes, It is good for the falling away oft 


S. 
“. [have here given you the figure thereof out of Rondeletius his boux of | or 


7 
i 
4 
\\ 
7 
~_* 
| | =| 
‘ 
g* \ ASS 
at 
WN 
AS 
g 
= 
q ‘ 
S> 
Ze 
‘ a! 
3 
=x 


Concerning Poyfons, (oc. 


The figure of aSea-Hare. 


‘ *- — 


4 


‘ Cuar. XXXIV. 
Of the Poyfon of Cats. 


S49} Or onely the braine of a Cat, being eaten, is poyfonous and deadly to 
man, buralfo their haire, their breath, yeaand their very prefenceto 


{ome prove deadly.For although any hair devoured unawares, may be 
choske. enough to choake one, by ftopping the inftruments of refpirarion, yer 


the haires of cat by a certaine occult propertie, are judged mott dange. 

rous in this cafe:befides alfo,their breath is infected with a certain hurtful! malni. 

tie. For Mathiolws {aith that he knew fome, who being fo delighted with Cats, that 
pray they could never go to bed without them,have by fo often drawing in the aire with 
fullcothelungs their breath, fallen inco aconfumption of the Lungs, which occafioned their death. 

Moreover,itis manifeft chat the very fight of their cies is hurtfull, which appeares by 
this, that {ome butfeeing or hearing them, prefeatly fall dowae ia a lowne ; yet! 
would not judge that to happen by the malicious virulency of the Car, butalfoby 
the peculiar nature of the party, anda quality generated with him, ang fent from 
heaven. Whenas, faith Mathiolas,acertaine Germaine in winter time, camewith 


A hiftory. 
us into a ftovetofupper, where as were divers of our acquaintance ; a ccrtaine Wo- 


man, knowing this mans nature, left that hee fhould fee her kitling which thee kept, 
and fo fhould goe away ina chafe, the fhut her up in a cupboard inthe f2mechamber. § 
But for all that hee did not {ee her, neither heard hercry, yet withina little |pice, | 
A wonderfull 4 3 
when hee had drawne inthe aire, infe@ted with the breath of the Cat, tharqualy 


antipathy be- 


tweencaman of temperament, contrary, or encary to Cats being provoked, he began to 
looke pale, andto cry out(all of us admiring it) Acre Lies a Cat in fome corner 0! es 7 
neither could he be quiet untill the Cat was taken away. fuch as have caren | 


and a Cat. 


Phe Antidote ‘ 
againtt ce 


brains of aCav and mad : they are helped by procuring vomit, and tiking the Antidote ayaint 
poy fon, that is, halfe a Scruple of Muske, diffolved and civuke in wine. 
fome who prefcribe the confedtion Diamo{chum to beetsken every 
Carsdancerous hOures before meat. By this you may gather that ic is nor fo fabulous chat tne“ 
tor childrens mon fort report, that Cats will kill or harme children ; for lying to their mou 


with the weight of their whole bodies, they hinder the pffage forth of 
nous vapours, and the motion of the Cheft,and in{c@ and flifie the {pirits of 


intants, by the peftiferous and exhalation which they fend forth. 


Cust 


forrchwith infla 


and ftand forth 


anoint the bod 
milkineatt, icc 


matter out of cl 


Uopleafing ima, 
Oftheminde fo 


| “on of the min 


braines of a Catare taken with often Vertigoes, andsow aid 


~ 
T here vee | 


| Whence their y 
neigh likeah 


rening, foule | 
Y treacle 


che COM | 
hes | 


ole, Which b 


makes them loc 
ofthe Sardoniag® 
juice of Balme. 

The juice, fr 
fame day, Or at 
hereof by the 
confumption, 
hence it 1s 


conreined in thy 


become fo weal 
their bodies, 


| taine little cre 


bred, and live 


dryed and druni 
| two drammes. 


the feed of Ra 


Dorycinums 
rent in their mc 


~ 


ofthe humour, 


dy hereto are 2 
andthe broth 


Stlasum WAAR IC 


lameas thefe 
Hend ine dri 


ody, andexoli 
‘lymptome, 


Of Mufhhron 


4 
© 4 4 2 [B 
i 
‘ } ™~ 
| 
4 ted 
j 
thm | 
| 
| 
(luc 
» but Pitt 


nous and deadly to 
cir very preienceto 
ed unawares, may be 
ts of reipiration,yet 

judged mott dange. 
ain hurtfull maligni- 
hted with Cats, thar 
wing in the aire with 
cafioned their death. 
which appearcs by 
yoe in a fowne ;yetl 
tie Car, butalfo by 
shim, and fent from 
‘nter time, came with 
ance ; accrtaine Wo- 
tling which thee kept, 
in che {2me chamber. 
withina little pace, 
the Cat, thar quality 
he began to twcat,to 
fichas have eaten the 
hen become foouth 
Antidote avaingtthis 
ein wine. There bee 
evcry mornibe, foule 
‘abulous chat the 
ing rothew mout'e® 
ge forthott he fuligt 
fle the {pirits of rendet 
d forth. 


Concerning ‘Poyfons, 


Cuar. XXXY. 


Of certaine poyfonous Plants, 


Aving defcribed the poy{fons that come from living creatures, come to 
(peake of fuch as are trom PI ints, beginning with the Sardonian herb, 
whichis allo called Apium rifus : this is a kinde of Ranunculus or Crow- 4piwarifu:. 
foore : (and,as ir isthougbt,the round leaved water Crow. foote, called 
yqh-crow-foote or {peare-wort) it taketh away the underftanding of fuch as cate 
eof, and by a certaine diftention of the nerves, contraéts the checkes, fothat it 


Oy 


looke asif they laughed ; from this affeét came that proverbiall [peech 


Sardonian laughter, taken in evill part. His Bezoar, as one may terme it, is the pis Antidore. 
ce of Balme. 
“The juice, fruit,and fubftance of Napellws, taken inwardly, killethaman the 
ome day, or at the furtheft in three dayes : yeaand fuchasefca pe the deadly force 
nereof by the {peedy and convenient ufe of Antidotes, fall into ahecticke feaver,or 
onumption, or become fubject to the falling ficknefle, as Avices affrmeth. And 

rece it is chat barbarous people poyfontheir arrowes therewith. For the lipprs are 

inthwith inflamed, andthe tongue fo {wells, that by reafon thereof it cannot bee 

onteined in the mouth, buc hangs out with great horrour ; their eyesareenflamed 

nd ftand forth of their head,and they are troubled witha Vertigoand fowning,they 

come fo weake that they cannot ftirre their legges, they are {wollen and puffed in 

eitbodies, the violence of the poylonis fo great. The Antidote thereof is a cer. 

nine little creature like a * Moufe, which 

ed, andlives onthe root of Napellus, being bee) weak, 
(yedand drunke in pouder, tothe weight of of reade, muy s fora Flye, a Moule; for chere is no 


Moufe co becfornnd, but whole fwarmes of Tlies. whic! 
wodrammes, In want hercof, you may ufe (7S 20s you may finde the defeription of an 


theleed of Raddith or Turneps to drinke, and Anti‘erc made with thems in Lebels Stirp- Adverf. pug. 30%. 
oint the body alfo with the oile of Scorpions. ; 
Dorycinum and Solanum Manicum, ot deadly night-fhade, are not much diffe- Derysicwn and 
cntintheir momall fymptomes or effects. Dorycinum being drunke, refembleth 
ailkintaft, ic caufeth contiauall hicketciag, it rroubleth the tongue with the weight Nighe-thade. 
thehumour, it caufeth blood to bee caft forth of the mouth, and certainc mucous 
matter out of the belly, like that which commeth away in the bloody fluxe. A reme- 
hereto are all fhell Fithes, as well crude as roafted, alfo fea-lobfters and crabbes, 
adthe broth or liquor wherein they are boyled, being drunke. Now the root of Thefympcoms. 
‘num manicum dyaake inthe weight of one dram in wine, caufeth vaine and not 
“picaling imaginacions, but double this quantity caufetha diftraion or alienation 
tteminde for three dayes; but fouretimes fomuch, kills. The remedies arethe 
thefe prefcribed azainlt Dovycinum. 
Henbine drunken, or orherwile taken inwardly by the mouth, cavfcth an aliena- pendane. 
‘tof the minde like drunkennefs; this alfo is accompanied with an agitation of the 
ody, and exolution of the fpirits like fowning. But amongft others, this is a nota- 
tlymptome,that the patients fo dote, thatthey thinke themf{elves to be whipped : 
"tence their voice becomes fo various,that fomtimes they bray like an afle or mule, 
‘gh likea horfe, as Avicen writes. The Antidote is piftick aurs eaten in great plen- The gnridcr-. 
)teacle alfo and mithridate diffalved in facke, alfo wormewood, ruc and milke. 
OfMuthromes, fome are deadly and hurtfull of their owne kinde and nature, as 
idle, Which broken, prefently become of divers colours, and forthwith putrefie : 
“Was Avicen faith thofe are which be found of a grayith or blewith colour) others 
hurtfull in qualitie, yet eaten in greater meafurethar is fitting, become 
“idly; for feeing by nature they are very cold and moift,and con{equently abound 
"*0o0 {mall vilcofiry, as the excrementitious phlegme of the earth or trees where- 


“they gtow, they fuffocate and extinguiflithe heat of the body, as overcome by 
“St quantity, and ftrangle asitone werehanged, and laftly kill. Verily Lcannot 
“ite, Dut pittying Gourmondizers, who though they know chat Muthromes are 


Yyy the 


Liz 13.21. SOs 
= v4 i q 
af 
a ¢ 
| 


é 


the feminary and gate of death, yet doethey witha great deale of doo, mon 
ly devoure them ; I fay,pitying them, I will thew them, and teach them the ; 
they may feed upon this{o much defired difh, without the endangcring of the 
health. Know therforethat Mufhromes may be eaten without danger,if thar the lr 
firft boyled with wild peares : butif you have no wilde peares, you may fu 
defe@ with others which arethe moft harfh, either newly gathered, o: d 


- 


Thew Anudote 


ryed in th, 


fun. The icaves,as alfo the bark of the fame Tree,are good,cfpecially of the w) dio 


peares are their Antidote : yet Conciliater gives another, to wit,Garlick CatCn crude 


wherero in like fort vineger may bee ficly added, fotocut and attenuate the to, ‘a 
vifcousand groffe humors, heaped up, and in danger to ftrangle one by the too olen, 


in s.epideme titull eating of Mufhromes, as it is delivered by Gales. | 
colchicumor  Ephemerum, which {ome call Colchicum or Balbus fylvefiris, that is, medow 


me.dow-irentron being taken inwardly,caufethan itching over all the bodie, no otherwife tha, 
thofe chatare netled,or rubbed with the juice of a Squill, Inwardly they teele onayy. 
ings, their ftomacke is troubled with agreat heavinefle, and the difeafe encreaging 


therc are ftreakes of blood mixed with theexcrements. The Antidote the; 

The Antidote. womans milke, Affes or Cowes milk drunken warme, and ina large quantity, 
Mandrage taken in great quantity,eicher the root or fruit caufeth great flecpinesp 
fadncfie, refolution and languifhing of the body, fo that after many {critches and 
oripings, the patient falls afleep in the fame pofture as hee was in, juft as if hee wers 
ina Lethargie. Wherefore in times paft they gave Mandrage to fuch as were tohee 
difmembred. The apples,when as they are ripe, and their feeds taken forth, may 
fafcly eaten, for being green and with their feeds in them,are deadly. For there ari. 
{than intolerable heate, which burnesthe whole fuiface of the bodic, thetonope 
and mouth waxe dry,by reafon whereof they gape continually, fo to take in the coli 
aire ; in Which cafe unleffe they be prefently helped, they dic with convulfions. Bur 
Theewe, may be eafily helped, if they thall prefently drinke fuch things as are conveni. 


ie 


Mandrage. 


cat therefore. Amongtt which, in Cowcilsators opinion, excell radifh feeds caten with 
faltand bread for the {pace of three dayes. Sneefing fhall be procured, if the former | 
vemedy do not quickly refrefh them,and a deco@ion of Coriander or Penay- royal! 


in faire water fhall be given them to drinke warme. 


ovate: T he ungratcfull tafte ofthe juice of blacke poppy, which is termed Opiam, asi. 
Whynetufed fo of Mandrage,ecafily hinders them from being put into meate or drinke, 
in poylonings- ehey may be difcerned, and chiefly for that neither of them can kill, unletle theybe i 
taken in agood quantity. But becaufe there is danger, left they bee givenin grester 
quantity thanis fitting by the ignorance of Vhyficians, or Apothecaries, you may 


by chefe fignes finde the errour. 


bh fy toms. ‘Ae 
forced thereby to caft off his dull fleepe wherein hee lay, yet keepes hiseye-! 


(hur, being unable ro open them. But by this agitation there flowes out! wear,W hic 
{meis of Opium, the bodie waxeth pale, the lippes burne, the bone is 
they breath littleand feldome. When as their eyes waxe livid, unlcile they d« 
drawne afide, and that they are depreffed in their orbe, we muft know that ceath® 
athand. The remedy againft this is two drammes of the pouder of Cafforeum gv 


in wine. 


Hemfocke. Hemlocke drunken, caufeth Vertigés, troubleth the minde, fo that the patients | 
may bee taken for mad men ; it darkeneth the fight, caufeth hicketting, and 
the extreme parts, & laitly ftrangles wich convulfions,by fuprefling or Roppine 
breath of the Arterié. Wherefore at the firft,as in other poyfons,you mult endever’ | 


The 5 mptomse 


to expell ic by vomic ; then inject glyfters, co expell chat is got into the guts 3! 


ufe wine Without mixture,which is very powerfull in this cale. Peter Aponcn| 


the Bezoar or Antidote thereof to bee a potion of two drams of T! eacle, wit 


fh a 


coctiou of Diétamans or Gentian in wine. He which further defires to 
{elfe of che effects of Hemlock, let him read athiolus his commentary 


talib. 6. dif. corides, where as he treats of the fame fubjec. 
Aconitam called {6 of Acoma a towne of the Periendines, whereas P 


srowes. According to Mathiolws, it Wolves, Foxes, Dogges, Cats, Swine, 


Aconitum. 


Concerning Poyfons, Ly 


rt, how 


Pply tha 


There enfues heavie fleepe, with a vehement itching, fo thar the patient oft. times 


thoes 


rentifuly 
| 


othach a 
cher here deli 
the raile ofa! 


. 
mee 
ce DY 
{weet 
effe it Cal 
5 
he chelt 2° 
| makes all rhe | 
| fan. that 
| r | 
ons, veins 
le it finde 
let C 
| 
| & 
|. 
LI | Utell ifthe 
Pe unde, 
4 
_ 
| 


Lis, 21, 

of doo, moft 
h them the 
dangcring Of thej, 
anger,if thar they be 
ou may fupply thar 
red, or dryed in the 
lally of the wildsfo, 
arlick eaten crude 
ttenuate the touch, 
one by the too plen. 


that is, medow fof. 
, no otherwife than 
dly they teele pnaw. 
difeafe CNcreafing, 
Antidote thereof jc 
large quantity. 
eth great fleepineffe, 
many {critches and 
in, juft as if hee were 
ofuch as were tobee 
s taken forth,may be 
eadly. Forthere ari- 
bodice, the tongue 
fotrotake in the cold 
ith convulfions. But 
hings as are conveni. 
adifh feeds caten with 
ocured, if the former 
der or Penny- royal! 


s termed Opium, as al- 
Bre or drinke, bur that 
in kal, unletle they be 

bee givenin greater 
pothecaries, you may 


tthe patient oft times 
ret keepes his eye-lids 
owes out fweat,which 
Jaw- bone is re Laxed, 
vid, unleife they 
uft know that death’ 
der of Cafforeum give" 


de, fo that che patients 
icketting, and be nuas 
Breffing of topping 
yns,you muft enc 
sot into the gue , the 
perer Aponenis 


defires to ent 
mmentary 


whereas it plent 
pres, Cats, Swine, 


sot Treacle, witha? 
torin 


Didj- 


ifully 
e. Pat- 
chels 


(oncerning Poyfons, 807 
and all wilde beatts,mixed with fo devoured by them, but 


by oncly (melling thereto. Scorpions, if touched by the roote of Aco. 
numme and torpid, and (o dic thereof; arrowes or darts dipped therein, 
wounds. ‘Thole who have drunke Aconite, their tongue forthwith 
eet witha certaine aftriction, which wi hin awhile after rurneth to bit- 
ffe sit caufeth a Vertigo, ania (hedding of tearcs, and a heavine fle or ftrairnefle 


and partsabout the heart ; i¢ makes them breake wind downewards,and 
aii rhe body to tremble. Pliny attributes fo great cclerity and violence to this 
iy that if the genitalls of female creatures bee touched therewith, it will kal 


day; ther isno prefenter remedy than {peedy vomiting afrer the poi- 


caken. BUC Conciliator thinks Ariftolochia to be the Antidotethereof.Yetfome, 
by experimenting it againft the ftinging of Scorpi apainit 


heing siven warme in wine. For it isof fuch a nature,thar it kilieth the party un fenot Scorpr 
feit inde (omething in himto kill, for then it ftrives therewith as if ic had tound 


jyerfary- | 
both the poifons being of their own nature deadly, thould dyeto. 


per that man may by that meanes live. There are divers forts thercof, one wher. Thediferences 


athatha 
het here 
yeraite of a feor pion. 


The figure of a certaing kind of A conite. 


is The Yew. 
Treesalfoare not without poylon, asthe Yew and Walnut tree may witnelle iscruein 


-itell ifthey feede on the leaves of Yew, arc killed therewith. if they fore 
“deunder itor fic under the fhadow thereof, are hurt therewith, and o 
thereof. Butif they eatit, they are taken with a bloudy fuxe, and a cold itisno: 
tlle over all their bodyes and akinde of ftrangling or ftoppage of their breath, 
All which things the Yew caufeth not fo much by an elementary and cold bot & 
Sdyacertaine occult malignity, whereby it corrupteth the humours, and fhayeth daily sxtucues 


Yyys theo 


ath leaves like to fowes-bread, or a cucumber,and a root like 
WN 
of 
a 1 
| 
\y Ny, 4 Bilal 
NZ 


- 


oncerniig “Puy otis, 


TheAnidote. the ours. The fame things are good againtt this, as we have {er dowac 


lock: Nicander affirmes,that good wine being drunken is a remedy cheret 


0, 
The Wall nue allo malignityina Wall-nut tree which Grevinus affirmes thac be tound 


Fo, 
that la(ted fixe dayes. Theremedies arethefameasagainftthe Yew, and pain 


uct. ence, whileft hee unawares fate under onc & {lepe there in the mid of Sy 
waking, he hada fenfe of cold over all his body ,a heavinefle ot his head 


— * 


XXXVI. 
Of Bexar, and BeXoarticke medicines. 


OR that we have made mention of Bezoar, in treating of the, 
of poyfons, I judge I fhall not doe amifle, it I thall 
word meanes, and the reafon thercof. Poyfon abfolurzly ra} 
which kils by a certaine {pecifick antipathy contrary to ourn 
an Antidote or Counter-poyfon is by the Arabians in the; 


Bezoar. thereof were found out, icbegan co bee morerare and deare, and it was proliibited 
by an Edié from che King of the countrey, that no body fhould fell a Goare tothe 
ft-anger Merchants,unleffe he firft killed him,and tooke forth the ftoac,& brougitt 
to the King. Of the notes by which this ftone is tryed,(for there are many coustel- 
feits broazh: hither) the firft is already declared ; the other is,it may bee blowneup 
by the breach, like an oxes hide ; for if the wind breake through, and doe notftay i" 
the denfiry thereof, itis accounted counterfeit, They ufe it, induced thereto by ou! 
example, not onely againft poyfons, but alfoagainitthe bites of venemous bea’. 
The richer fort of the Countrey purge twice a yeare, to wit, in March and Septe® 
ber; and then, five daies together they take the powder of this {tone macerated! 
Rofe-water,the weight of ten graines at a time : for by this remedy they thinke chelt 
youth is preferved, as alfothe ftrength of their members. There be fome wn0 take 
the weigher of chirty graines ; yet the more wary exceed not twelve grains. The fame 
auctor addeth that he ufeth it with very good fucceffe in inveterate inclancholy 
eaics as the itch,fcab,retters & leprofic; therefore by the fame reafon ir may ¥¢ be 
given againft a quartaine feaver. Befides, hee affirmeth for certaine that the pow 
conteined in the midft of the ftone,put upon the bires of venemous bests. prefent 
ly freerhthe patient from the danger of the poy fon,as alfo applied ro peftilent C ‘i 
buncles when they are opened,it drawes forththe venome, Buc becaule the {ma 


CMedig 
NC, What the 
CD iS thay 
ature. So 


tonguetermed Bedezahar, as the prefervers of life. This word is unknowne toth. 


G cekes and Latines, and in ufe onely withthe Arabians and Perfians, becaufe the 
thing it felfe firft came from them, as it is plainely fhewed by Garcias ap berts, Phy. 
fician tothe Vice-Roy of the Indics,in his hiftory of the Spices and Simples of), 
Eaft-Indies. In Perfia faith hee) and a certaine part of India isa certainckindey 7 
Goete called Pazain (wherefore in proper {peaking, the ftone fhould beetermy 
Pazar, of che woid Pazain, that fignifies a Goate ; but wee corruptly termeit ay 
Or Be zoar) the colour of this beaft iscommonly reddifh, the height thereot ings. 
rent, in whofe ftomack concretes the ftone called Bezoar ; it growes by littleandiit. | 
Afgneof rue tle about a itraw or fome fuch like fubftance in feailes like to the f{cailes of an onion, 
Brtvate {that when as the firft {caile is taken off, the next appeares more fmoothand hi. | 
ning as you ftil] take chem away, the which amongft others is the fi enc of good be. 
zoar and notadulrerate. This ftone is found in fundry fhapes, but commonly itre- 
fembles an Acorne or Date-ftonc ; it is fomezimes of afanguine colour, and other. | 
w ules of ahony-like or yellowith colour, butmoit frequently of a blackish or dark 
ereene, refembling the colour of mad Apples,orelfe of a Civer Car.This tah & 
no heart nor kerneil inthe midft, but powcer in the cavity thereof,which isalool #& 
the fame faculty. Now this ftonc is light,& not very hard,but fo that ir may eaiilybe 
{craped,or raiped like alabafter, fo thar it will diflolve,being maceratedinw- 
ter; at firft ir wos common amongft us,and of no very ercat price, becaule oui peo 
Theutee Who trafficked in Perfia, bought it at aneafie rate. But after that che faculties 


by the fame f 
of on fuch as \ 
wasa COOKC| 
rer for ftealins 
roknow of hi 
Antidote wh 
fons, which 
death, that ch 
he was willin: 
his lite, but t 
he then had p 
after the poy 
within a Whil 
torments, anc 
ing thirfty, a1 
ot the Jaylor 
on hands anc 
ung, with {to 
mouth, fund: 


him nogoo 


and exclaim. 
lcarcely pati 
[tound the b 
Cautery wi! 
oth Bezahar 


FE tc ATMNOLO 
i, rnls i {) 4 L 
mit fych as are CY 
| nts 

by ougot J 
— + he wirlitt 
scold, and ~. 
| 
| 
| | 
| 


ul explaine, whar the 


ry to OUr Nature. So 
fans in their mothe; 
dis unknowne tothe 
Perfians, becaufe the 
ap horte, Pb, ys 
es and Simples of ti. 
$2 Certaine kinde of 
ne fhould bee termed 
rruptly terme it Bezar 
eight thereot indife- 
owes by little and lit- 


more {mooth and fhi. 
5 the figne of good Be. 
» but commonly it re- 
ne colour, and other. 
y of a blackith or dark 
t Cat. This ftone bath 
reaf,which js allo of 
o that ir may eaiily be 
long maccrated in wa- 
ice, becaufe our peo- 
ter that che faculties 
and it was proliibited 
ld fell a Goare to the 
he ftoae,& brougitit 
ere aremany countc!- 
it may bee blowne up 
h, and doe nor ftay in 
duced thereto by out 
s of venemous bealls. 
March and Seprem- 
his ftone maceratedi0 
1edy they thinke their 
rere be fome who take 
elve grains. The fame 
erate inclancholy ail 
reafon irmay well be 
taine thar the powde 
mous besfts, prefe™ 
plied ro peftilent Ca" 
Bur becaufe the {mall 
pocks 


ating of the remedies 


Plolutely taken iSthar 


pe {cailes of an onion, 


( oncerning 


CPC. 


ycksand meazles are familiar inthe Indies, and oft-times dangerous, it is there gi- 
ps with good fucceffe, two graineseach day inRofe water. Mathiolws {ubtcribeth Lib. s. in 
othis opimon of Garcias, witnefling that hee hath found it by frequent experience, 

age this tone by much exceeds not only other fim ple medicines of this kind,bur al- 

igfuch asare termed ther/acalsa, and what other Antidotes foever. Heretoal{o con- 

sats Abdalanarach;, \Wee (faith he) have feene the {tone which they call Bezahar, 
jig the fonnes of Almirama the obferver of the Law of God ; with which ftone hee 
oghta ftately and almoft princely houfe at Corduba, 

some yeares agoea certaine Gentlemav,who had onc of thefe ftones which hee A hiftory. 
yougut out of Spaine, bragged before King Charles then being at Clermont in Au- 
wn, of the moft certaine eflicacie of this ftone againft all manner of poy- 

ngs. Phen the King asked of mee, whether there were any Antidote which was e- , 
in like maner prevalent againft all poifons Lanfwered,that nature could 
sgtadanit It for neither have all poyloss che like efles neither doe they arife from dote sgainu all 
yecaule 5 fOr fome worke from an occule and {pecifick property oftheir whole na- 224m 
gse,others from fome elementary quality which is predominant. Wherefore each 

gut be wichftood with ics proper and contrary Antidote,as tothe hor, chat which 

scold, and co that which affailes by an occult proprictie of forme, another which 

bythe lame force may oppugne it, and that it was an cafe matter to make trial! here- 

fon fuch as were condemned to bee hanged. The motion pleafed the King , there 

95a Cooxe brought by the Jailor who was to have been hanged within a while af- 

erfor ftealing two filver difhes out of iis mafters houfe. Yetcthe King defired firft 

of him, whether hee would take the poifon on this condition, that it the 

Antidote which was predicated to have fingular power againft all manner of poi- 

ions, which fhould bee prefently given him after the poifon, fhould free him trom 

death, thas chen fac fhould have his life faved. The Cooke an{wered chearfully, that 

hewas Willing toundergo the hazzard,yea,and greater matters, not only for to fave 

hislite, but to (hun the infamy of the death he was like to be adjudgedto. Therefore 

bethen had poyfoa given him by the Apothecarie that then waited, and prefently 

erthe poyfon,fome of the Bezahar brought from Spain, wuich being taken down, 

withina While after hee began to vomit, and to avoid much by ftoole with grievous , 
ments, and to cry ouc that his inward parts were burnt with fire. Wheretorc,be- 

ngthirly, and defiring water, they gave it him , an hourc atrer,with the good leave 

tthe Jaylor,I wasad mitted to him, find him on the ground going like a beaft up- 

mbands and feet, with his tongue throft forth of his mouth, his eyes flerie, vomi- 

ng, with tore of cold {weats,and laftly,the bloud flowing forth by his eares, nofe, 

mouth, fundamentand yard. Igave him eight ounces of oile todrinke, but it did 

limnogood, foriccametoolate. Wherefore at length hee died with great torment 
feveath houre from the time thatheetooke che poifon being 

cucely pafled. Lopeaed his body in the prefence of the Jailor and fuure orhers, and 

ltound the borome of his tomacke blacke and dry, as if it had beene burnt witha semen 
Cuxtery ; whereby | underftood he had {ublimate given him ; whofe force the Spa- sri 


wh Bezahar could not reprefle, whereforethe King commanded(o burnc it. 


809 


Of Mineral Poyfons. 


ae ae Tener or mettals are cither fo taken forth of the bowels of the earth, 
orelic from fornaces. Of thefe many are poifonous, as arfenicke, fubli- 
mate,» laifter,ceruffe,lytharge, verdegreace, orpiment, filings ot Iron, 
MOB brafle, thie load-ftone, lime, and the like. Such as have taken {ublimace, Thefymptomes 


ot fuchashave 


the rongueand jawes become ttraightned and rough, as ifthey drunke 


‘Acjuice of unripe fervices:you cannot amend this afperity with lenitive gargari{mes 
Ut With much labour and time ; for as foone as it defcends into the ftomack, it {tick- 


frets and exulcerates ; it caufeth = 
able 


“Ato it. Therefore prefently after it 
Yyy 3 


’ 
d Hem 
c be tound by experi. 
his head, aod pai 
cw. 
| 
| 
| 


eres 


: 


Verdegreace. 


Litharg-. 


Thelcailes of 
bratic. 


Th Loa 


Filings of Lead 


& of Iron. 


Arfi.ick, Refeae 
ker Or 
bane: 


tl aquenched 
L and Qre 
Piment» 


Aqua fortis. 


Cerutfe. 


Platters 


Concernirig Puyjows, PRP 


rine is (uppreft, the cheft can {carce performe the office of breathing, the bell, 
griped,and {o great paines happen tothe other extreme parts, thar unleffe the 
helped, the patient will die; for prefently will grow upon them, unlefle ith. J Mee 
ly hindred, the devouring and fierie furie of the poy{on, rending Cating into 
uts and ftomacke, as ifthey were feared with an hot iron, and bloud Aoweth f tg 
of the ears,nof{e,mouth,urenarie — and fundament, and then their cafe i Orth 
rate. Thefe and who elle foever fhall take any corroding poyfon, thall be cy, “iP 


| ed wi 
the fame remedies,as thofe that havetaken Cantharides. ns) 


Verdegreace fo ftops the inftruments of ref{piration, chat it ftrangles fach 


taken it. Thecure is performed by the fameremedies as helpe thofe that haye,,) 
Arfenick. 


Litharge caufeth a heavineffe in the ftomack, fuppreffeth the urine, mekes:h. bo 
dy iwelled and livide, Weeremedy this, by giving avomit prefently, then | 
pidgeons dung mixedin ftrong wine, and fo drunken. Peser Aponenfis wiih. 
give oile of fwect almonds and figs. Alfo it is good to give relaxing and bum, bin 


glyfters,andto anoint the belly with frefh butter,or oile of lillics. 


The {cailes of braffe drunke by troubling the ftomacke, caufeacafting andi, 
ring. The remedic is, ifthe patient forthwith vomit, if he enter into a bath Made of | 


the decoction of f{nailes,if he annoint his belly and breaft with butter and oj) of) 
lics,and injeét laxative and humecting glyfters. 


The Load-ftone makesthem mad thar take ir inwardly. The Antidote thereof. | 
the powder of goid and an emerald diunk in {trong wine, and glyfters of milke an 


oile of {weet almonds, 


The filings of lead,and the {Cailes or refule of iron,caufe great tormentto fuchs 
takethem downe. The which we helpe with milke and {reth butter diflolyey 
therein, or with oile of fweeralmonds drawne without fire, wath relaxing and hy. 


mecting gly fters untill the paine be perfectly afiwaged. 


Rifagallum, Rofeaker or Rat{-bane, becaule it is of a moft hotand dry nature in. | 
duces thirft and heat over all the body, and fo great colliquation ofall the humours, 
that although the patients by medicines fpeedily given cfcape death, yet can they | 
not during the rcfidue of their lives, ufe their members as they formei ly did, being 
deftiruce of their ftrength, by reafon of the great dryncffe and contraction of the 


joynrs. The Antidote thereof is oyle of pine kernels {peedily given,and that roth: 
quantity of halfe a pint ; then procure vomir,thcn give much mulke to diink,and ely. 
tters of the lame,and let chem {up up fat broths. 

Unquencht Limeand Auriprgmentam, or Orpiment drunke, gnaw the flomacke 


and gucs with great tormenting paine, and caufe unquenchablechirft, analperityo! J 


the jawes and throat, difficulty of breatking, foppage of the urine, and abloudy 
flux. They may bee helped by all fat, humecting, and relaxing things whichic. 
tund the acrimonie, by lenitive potions, and fuch things as lubricate the belly; % 
allo by creames, and the mucilages of fome feeds,as with a deco@tion of thie {eeas«! 
Liane, mallowes, marfh-mallowes and other fuchthings fet downe at large inthe 
cure of Cantharides. 

Thefe exceeding acride and ftrong waters wherewith Gold-fmiches and C')” 
mifts feparate gold from filver, being taken intothe body, are hard to cure, 
they are forthwith diffufed over all the body, firft burning the throat and ftomac™ 
Yetit may behelped by the meanes prefcribed againft unquenched Lime and Or. 
piment. 

Ceruffe caufeth hicketting anda cough,makes thetongue dry, & che extreine parts 
of the body numbe with cold, the eyesheavic to fleepe. The patients very often ia 
the midft ofthe day fee fome vain phantatie or apparition, which in deeds nothin? ; 
they make a blacke and oft-times bloudy water, they dic ftrangled unlciic rhey ag 
hel ped The Antidote,in the opinion of Agtius and Avicen, is cammonic drunkin 
new wine,or hony and wine, and other diuretick things, and fuch things as pro’ 
vomit,ind purge by ftoole. 


Plaifter, becaufe it concreteth and bccommeth ftony in the 


18.2.8 
able chirlt, and unexplicable torments; thetonguc is {wolne, the heart faints, thas 


Deed). 


am aa 


drunk@ 


,or 
velly with oy 


is ho 
ck, Platear im: 
fom things h 
chat ic penetra 
hard mettals , 
purgeth by 
firre up the ch 
as thofe wihicl 
or platters 
Others afh 
ed, it aflwage: 
rick inflamma 
and diflipater! 
anointed ther@ 
humours by 1 
afirmeth, tha 
the heart 
that Quickfily 
hy large quan 
very fubftanc. 
thecary, fer 
water, drunk« 
Within a few 
by ftoole, the 
pound 
another argu 
of, becaule it 
For unquenc! 
iclle it excec 
ince, bur 
Coldnefl= co 
therein. fo th. 
Verily it is 
tcalon of the 
4tevery hor, 
Weis feore dl 
Count quickfi 
‘anus tels tha 
tall times dri 
ftoole wit 
Who in 
eed from i: 
For by 
orth the 


4 
The packs nts 
| 
74 ‘Lo gf 
| CO! 
‘ 
| 
i 
{ 
: 
4 ee 
‘an 


» UNI cfle it be (Deed; 


bloud Gowerh 
en their Cafe is 


a, fhall be Cured With 


trangles fuchas have 
thoie that haye taken 


urine, mekes the bo 

refently, then after ix 
A porenfis Wifheth to 
axing and bumcéting 
Ics. 

fea cating and (cou. 
rinto a bath made of 
butter and oile of ji). 


ie Antidote thereof is 
plyfters of milke and 


eat tormentto fuch as 
butter diflolyed 
vith relaxing and hu- 


rot and dry nature, in- 
on Of all the humours, 
Geath, yet can they 
y tormeily did, being 
nd contraction of the 
piven,and that rothe 
to diik,and 


e, gnaw the flomacke 
cthirft, an alperity of 
urine, and a bloudy 
king things which re- 
bricate the belly ; as 
odion of the feeds of 
owne at largeinthe 


id-fmiches and 
hardtocure, becauic 
throat and ftomacke. 
nched Lime and 


the extreme pars 
patients very ofteo 
chin deedss aorhits ; 
eled unk {Te they bee 
s (cammonic drunk in 
fuch rhings as procure 


the ftomacke, cauferh 
{tgangula- 


— 


Ap. 21. bonerning re. Sir 


by itraitening ani itooping theinftruments thar ferve for breathing. 


tae patients receive cure by tic fame remedies, as thofe who have eaten muth- 


drunke Ce ruffe: you muit adde Goofe-greafe in the elyfters, andanoint the 
selly with oyle of lillies and butter, 


Of Quick-filver. 


Wick-filver is fo called becaufeit refembicth filver in the colour, and is in Thereafon why 
perpetuall motion, as ifithad afpirit orliving foule. There isa great itis® calles. 
controyerli¢e among ft authors concerning it. For moft of chem affirime it >. 
SASS hot, among{t whom ts Galen, Halyabas, Rhafes, Aristotle, Con(lantine, I-? 
Nicholas Majfa: they maintain their opinion by an aigument drawn Meteor | 
om things helping and hurting ; befides from this, thatit is of fuch fubcle parts, 
penetrates, diffolves, and performeth all the actions of heate upon dente and 
mettals to attenuateth,incidet b,dryeth,caufeth falivation by the mouth, 
purgeth DY the ftoole, movetia urine and {weat over allthe body, neither doth it 

aicreup the thinner humours oncly, burin like fore the groffe, tough and vilcous, 

sthole which have the Lwes Venerea fiad by experience ufing iceither in ointments 

of plafterss 

Others afirme it very cold and moyft, for that put into emplafters and fo apply- 

dj. itaflwageth paine by ftupefaction, hindring the ecrimony of puftles and chole- 
rickinfdammations. But by itshumidity ir fofteneth fcirrhous tamours, diflolvech 

and difipateth knots ana knobs ; befides, it caufeth the breath of fuch as are 

anointed therewith to ftinke, by no other reaton, than thar it putrefies the obvious 

humours by its great humidity. dvrcens experiment confirmes this opinion, who 

dicmeth, that the blond of aa Ape that drunke Quickfilver, was found concrete a- 

boutthe heart, the carcalfe being opened. Math:olus moved by thefe reafons, writes 116. Dig<.a8. 
thatQuickfilver killeth men by the exceffive cold and humide quality, if taken in a- 

tylarge quantity, becaufe it congeales the bloud and vitall {pirits, and atiength the 

vy fubftance of the heart, as may bee underftood by the hiftory of a ceraine Apo- 4 hiftoric. 
tiecary, fet downe by Concrliator , who, for to quench his feaverifh hear, in ftead of 

water, deunke off a g!afle of Quickfilver, for thatcame firft to his hands ; hee dyed 

Wthina few houres after, but firft hee evacuated a good quantity of the Quickfilver 

 hoole, the refidue was found in his tomack being opened and that ro the weight 

viene pound ; befides, the bloud was tound concrete about his heart. Orhers ule 

“other argument to prove it cold, and that is drawne fromthe compolirton there- 

ot, becaule it confilts of lead and other cold mettals, Bur this argumenc is very Weak, 

bor unquenchr Lime is made of flints and {tony matter, which ts cold, yet neverthe- 
clcitexceedsin heat. Paracel/us affirmeth that quickfilver is hotinthe interior 235.4. de nae. 
‘unce, hur cold in the exterior, thatis, cold asic comes forth of rhemine. But char 
to bee loft as it is prepared by art, and heat onely toappeare and bee lets 


‘derein,fo that it may ferve in ftead of a tinCture in the tran{muration of mettals.And 
iwily itis taken fora rule amongft Chymifts, thar all metals are outwardly cola,by 


’ 


‘talon of che watery fub‘tance that is predominant in them, buc that inwarcry they 
“every hot, which then appeares when asthe coldnefle together with the moy- 
“Utets fesregated, tor by calcination they become cauftick. Moreover many ac- 
quickfilver poyfon, yet experience denyes it. For Afarianus Barali- Tratt.de cofi 
tels that hee {aw a woman, who for certaine caules and affects, Wourd at ieve- 
‘ll times drink one pound and an halfe of quickfilver,which came from her againe 
toole without any harme. Morcover he athrmeth that hee hach knowne lundry 
in adef{perate Cholick (which they commonly call mzferere mez) have deene 
“eed ftom imminent death, by drinking three pounds of quickfilver with water on- 
J: Por by the weight ic opens and unfolds the twined or bound up gur, and thrults 


hardand {topping excremiecats ; he addcth thac others have tound cb me. 
jicine 


he heart fainrs 
cathing, the belly : 
| / 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Concerning Pyfoas, oc. 


dicine effectual againft the cholick, drunke in the quantity of three ounces, 4,,,.> 
us Mufa writes, that hee ufually giveth quickfilver tochildren ready to¢ 
worms. Avicen confirmeth this, averring that many have drunke quick{ilyey 
out any harme, wherefore hee mixeth it in his ointments againft {caules and Seeks 

children; whence came that common medicine amongft the countiey people 

kill lice by anointing the head wich quickfilver mixed with butter or axKncia, : 
Quickflver thiolws affirmeth that many think it the laft and chiefeft remedy to giveto wom 


good ‘or women ravaile that cannotrbee delivered. I proteft, to fatisfie my felfe concerning this 
Cravaiic. 


Mg. 
ein 


ter, I gaveto a whelpea pound of quicklilver,which being drunke downe, it mre 


without any harme by the belly. Whereby you may underftand that ir js whol 
withoutany venemous quality. Verily itisthe onely and true Antidote of the oe 
Venerea,and alfoa very fic medicine for maligne ulcers, as thas which more 
fully impugnes their malignity than any other medicines that worke onely by their 
firft qualities. Befides, againft that contumacious{cabbe, which is vulgarly called 
Forthedifeate manis, there isnotany more {peedy or certaineremedy, Moreoye 
called mawn Guido writes, that if a plate of lead bee bef{meared or rubbed therewith, and then {o, 
{pace laid upon an ulcer, and conveniently faftned, that it will foften the 
lous hardnefle of the lips thereof, and bring it to cicatrization, which thing I my 
{elfe have oftimes found true by experience. 
Libgdecomp.  Certainely before Gucdo,Galen much commended guickGiver againft maligne yl, 
cers & cancers. Neither doth Gaden affirm that lead is poyfonous( which 
deer, poyfonous, becaufe it confifts of mach quickfilver) but hee onely faith thus much, 
that water too long keptin leaden pipes & ciflernes, by reafon of the droffineffe thy 
it ufeth to yvather in lead, caufeth blondy fluxes, which alfo is familiar cto brafle and 
copper. Orherwile many could not without danger beare in their bodies leaden 
bullets during the {pace of fo many yeares, asufually they doe. It is declared by 
T headoricke Herey inthe following hiftories, how powerfull quickfilver is to refolve 
and affwage paines and inflammations. Not long fince, (faith hee) a certaine Do- 
Againt che pa. of Pay fick his boy was troubled with parotsdes with great iwelling, hcat,pain& 


beating sto him,by the common confent of the Phy ficians there prefent, applyed 


3 . 
an anodine medicine, whofe force was {0 great, thatthe tumor maniteftly fublided at 
the firft drefling, and the paine was much aflwaged. Atthe fecond drefling allthe 
fymptomes were more mitigated. At the third drefling, I wondring at the fo great 


effects ofan Anodine Cataplafme, obf{erved that there was quickfilver mixed there. 
with, and this happened through the negligence of the Apothecarie, who mixed the 
fiinple Anodine medicine prefcribed by us,in a mortar wherein but a while before he 
iad mixed an oyntment whereinto quickfilver entred, whofe reliques, and/ome 
partthereof yet remained thercin. This which once by chance fucceeded well, | 
afterwards wittingly and willingly ufed to acertaine Gentlewoman troubled with 
: the like difeafe, poffefling all the region behind the eares, much of the rhroate, and 


a great part of the cheeke, when as nature helped by common remi dics could note 
vacuate neither by refolution nor fuppuration, the conteined matter greatly vexing 


her with paineand pulfation. I tothe medicine formerly ufed,by the coafent of He 
Phy fi, ians, put fome quickfilve vy fo within a few dayes, the cimour was digettes 
and refolved. But fome will fay,itrefolves the ftrength of the nerves and limos, # 
you may fee by fuch as have beene anoynted therewith for the veneres, 
tremble in all cheir limbs during the zeft of their lives. This is true,ifany wicit 
intempcerately without incafure, anda difeafethat may require fo great a remedy 
for thus we fee that Gilders, Plumbers and fuch as digge io mines, by the contiol™ 
afcent of che vapours of quickfilver tothe braine,the fountaine of the ac rves, by! 
folving the [pirits,and diffipating the radicall and fubftanrificke moylture, 
them {ubje& tothe trembling of their joints. Verily if it bee killed and incorpor 
with hogs greace, anda liftbefmeared therewith, which may encompafle the 9° 
seaintlice like a girdle,it will drive away lice, fleas and cémices , and anoynted about the naver 
feas&e. jt kilstche wormesinthe guts. There are two forts of quickfilver, the one 
the other artificiall. The naturallis found running or flowing in the veins ane” 


ehercof. Artie 
elsof theearth, and amongft metals, and in the fornaces of filver mines. 


two cubits 
tad Ones dor 
of an hind ‘Ca 


‘Weazel] colt 


buttocks hi | 
Nath an 


18.21. 


is made c 
probablc tha 
Cinnabar? 
colour, cous h 
red greace, ber 
yre, cleare,th 
hecomes more 
ger. Or elle g 
eit forth by ic 
frly given prc 
, For quic: 
ot rhe fir 
friendly If. 


this invetcratcl 
will propoun 
be of the figni 

thing really an 
Chymera and 7 
lucha beaft, | 


name, it is fo: 
fgnifie,than 
the word and 
mongfttheLa 
lame thing is | 
that beaft char 


than really in 
Becaufe of th 
thatever he di 
ing dilic 
Where inany 
found it 
Elephants, Ea 
Countryes. | 
Orthar hach b 
cles have cons 
(tiption of ti 
Cornes are for 
Prets it, of ch 
thetaile of a | 


ole of goats 


lott haires 


¢ 
a* 
“Cr 
ij 
a | 
a 
j 
i> ok He 
% 
| 
q q f 
| 
| 
| 
| 
# { 
| 
| 
: 
| 
a 
4 
| 


Comernine Voy/ons, 


AB. 21. 


enade of minium (as it isin Vitruvius) and ot the powder of Ivory. Alfo ie 
<grobable that by art it may bee extracted our of all metals, but chiefly out of Lead 

of cinnabaris. You may eafily diftinguith thefe kindes by the dull and blackith 
gloat, rough and Bt offe fubftance, which as it runs, leayes an impreffion like meL 
_ggreace, being as it were the excrement of lead. The beft quickfilver of all is 


ye, cleare,thin and very white : it may beecleanfed withthe drofle of Lead, and Howto puri- 


ke quic kf} 
{caules and {cabs jp 


md that it is whol! 

Antidote of the Lues 
vhich more power. 
orke oncly by their 
chis vulgarly Called 
remedy. Moreover 
rewith, and then for 
it will {often the ca}. 
» Which thing] my 


ragainft maligne yl. 
(which manyathrm 
ely faith thus much, 
bi the droffineffe thar 
amiliar to brafle and 
their bodies leaden 
moc. [tis declared by 
ickfilver is to refolve 
hee) a certaine Do- 
welling, heat, pain & 
re prefent, Lapplyed 
naniteftly fublided at 
cond drefling all the 
ndring at the lo great 
ckfilver mixed chere- 
carie, who mixed the 
but a while before he 
¢ reliques, and fome 
ce {ucceeded well, | 
voman troubled with 
h of the throate, and 
emi dics,could not 
matter greatly vexing 
by rhe conient of the 
tumour was digefted 
‘nerves and limos, #8 
he Lwes vencred, WHO 
is true,if any ulcit (09 
re fogreat aremedy 
1s, by the 
of the nerves, bY 
cke moyifture, miaket 
killed and incorpor** 
 encompafie the b° 
minted about the nave" 
ilver, the one 


bow: | 
in the veins and 
he Art 


ilvermines. T 


ply given produceth marvellous cffccts ; nothing is more contrary theretothan 


fe, FOF quickfilver, though ofits owne nature ponderous, flyeth upwards by the 
yceotthe fire, and forfaketh gold by that meanes, than which nothing is ‘bee 


égendly co it. 


ines, 


Of the Unicornes Horne. 


(@ @ Here are very many atthis day who thinke themfelves excellently well 
armed againtt poy fon and all contagion, if they be provided with fome 

powder of Unicornes horne, or intufion made therewith. There- 
upaae fore I have thought it good to examine more diligently how muchtruth 
(hisinveterate, and grounded opinion hath. The better to performe this taske, I 
vill propound three heads, whereto I will dire& my whole difcourfe. The fi: ft thall 
beof the fignification of this word Unicorn. The fecond, whether there be any fuch 


WH ithingreally and truely fo called, or whether it bee not rather imaginary ; like as the 


Clymeraand Tragelaphus ? Thethird, whether that which is fayd to be che horne of 
(cha beaft, hath any force or faculty againft poyfons? Forthe firft, that is, the 


tame, itis fomewhat more obfcure what the word (beimg Licorne) in French may Whatthe name 


Ogiveto women in secomes more thin, being boyledin fharpe vinegar, wish fage, rofemary,time,lavan- 
oncerning this mar. it, OF elfe give 1 bya pound at atime toa whelpe, co drinke downe, and ocing 
edowne, it y ovded forth by it , boyle it againe in vinegar, for thus it hath wondrous facultics, and 


ignife,than what the Latine or Greek word is, For the French name is further from“? 


heword and fignification , but itis fo clear and manifeft,that this word Unicorns a- 
nongftthe Latines fignificth a beaft having but one horn,as it is vulearly known,the 


amething is meant by the Greek word Monoceros. But now for the tecond,] thinke rhaethereisne 
fuch beaft as au 


Llnicorne. 


tut beaft thatis vulgarly called & taken for an Unicorn, is rather a thing iinaginary 
tanreally inthe world. Iam chiefly enduced ro beleeve thus, by thefe conjectures. 
becaule of thofe who have travelled over the world, there is not one that proteffeth 
thatever he did fee rhat creature. Certainly the Romans conquering the world, & be- 
ng diligent fearchers after all things which were rareand foexcellenr, any 
Where inany corner of the world,this beaft could have been found they would have 
und it out,and engraven it upon their coynes, or Armes, as they did Crocodiles, 
clephants, Eagles, Panchers, Lyons, Tygers, and other creatures unknowne to thele 
untryes. For thefe that have writtea of the Unicorn,eitherrthatthey bave heard, 
orthat hach been delivered by tradition, or what they in their owne mindes and fin- 
ueshave conceived, you thall fearce finde two that agree together, cicher inthe de- 


ition of the body, or in the nature and condition ofher. P/:ny writes, that 


“ornes are forthe fafhicn of their bodies liketoan horfe; that is, as Cardane inter- 
Mtsit ofthe bignefle of ahorfe, with the head of an Hart, the feet of an Elephant, 
taile ofa Boare, with one black horne in the midft of his forehead, of the length 


‘tan hind calfe of chree moneths old, not with feet like an Elephant, but cleft like 
Yofe of goats, with an horne not only of two, but ofttimes of three cubirs long, of 
‘Weazel] colour, with anecke not very long, norvery hairy, bur having few and 
wt haires hanging to the one fide of the necke, the legs are leane and tunall, che 
high, but very hairy. Cardane diffenting from both thefe,wrires, that hee 


an hornein the midft of his forehead, but that itis onely the length esse 
ngers, 


WOcubits. who (as Mathiolus jelts) never faw Unicorncs befides pain- opini« 
Yones,doth on the contrary athrme them not to be of the bignefle of an horic, but concerning 


Linicornes. 


4 
4 
I 
ounces, 4 
UNCCS. An; | 
cady toc © 
ar. 
©OPlety 
ict 
| 
( 
din 


Se 
CAD. 


nature et whic 
UInicorne. 


nary Unicorns 


Concerning ‘Poy/ons, (oc. 


814 


fingers. Andrew Thevet mentions an Unicorne feene by a certaine Tukithsa. 


jach, which was of the bigneffe of a Bull of five or fixemoneths old, ang } idee 

horne, but that not in the midft of theforchead, butupon the top of the crown... 
the head; he was lege’d and footed likean Affe, but longer haired, and had ¢ ay Of 
much unlikethe Rangifer, a beaft not unknowne in the fubpolare or nor Tweet 
trics. 

Thus various therefore isthe report concerning the fhape of this Beat, Nein, 

is there lefle differenceconcerning her nature and conditions. For Pliny Writes 
the Unicorne is a moft fierce beaft,and hatha great bellowing voice, and thy, hy 
cannot therefore betaken alive. Cardane renders a reafon of this hercenefie, Becaul 


(faith he)it inhabits the defarts of region {qualide, and filthy 


with toads and {uch like venemous creatures. Others on the contrary affirme } mu. 
bee of 2 moft milde, amiable, and gentlenature of all others, unleffe one purpoely 
offend her, or ufe her too harthly ; for feeing thee feeds not by ftooping hier heag,, 
the eround, becaufe thee is hindered therefrom by the length of her horne, {hy mut 
neceflarily feed upon the truit that hangeth upon trees;out of cratches o; mans} sr 
fhe fearlefly and harmelefly cakes all manner of fruits, herbs, theaves of corn, apples 


peares, oranges and pulfe. And herein they have proceeded fo farre, thatthey jeion J 


they will love Virgins, entifed by their beauty, fo that ftayed inthe contemp|arigy 
ofthem, and allured by their entifements, they by this meares are ottentajer 
by hunters. fa this opinion is Lewes Vartoman, who denies that Unicornesare 
or fierce ; for he faith that he faw two, which were fent our of Aethiopia tothe Sy). 
tan, who keprrhem fhut up in Pennes, in Mecha, acity of U4 rabia felix, renown 


» non of the 


quired of the inhabirants, what their opinion was of {uch a beaft, yet could he never 
heare any tidings thereof. Whence itis eafie to difcerne, that fuch beats haye nei. 


ther beene in our, norin Vartemans times. The fo great variety of diffenting opini 
ons, cafily induccth me to beleeve thatthis word, Unicorne,is notthe propernme 


of any bealt inthe world, and that it isa thing onely feigned by Painters, and Wii. 


ters of natural chings,co delight the readersand beholders. For as there is butone 
right way, but many by-waies and windings, fo the {peech of truth is but one, and 


that alwaics fimple and like it felfe burchat of alye is divers, and which may eafily 


refell it {elfe,by the repugnancie and incongruity of opinions, if one thou!d {ay no- | 
thing. What therefore (will fome fay) of what creatures are thefe hornes, whichwe J 


Whatthe ord foe wholly different from others, itthey be not of Unicorns? 7 Sever chinks them no. 


hornesarc. 


the fifh Roharde, which lives inthe ed and Athiopian Sea, and being fo 


they fell chem for Unicornes borne. Verily chat which ts termed Unicorics ivi 
being burnt, fends fortha {melllike to Ivory. Now Cardanus athrmes tha 
and boncs of Elephants made foft by art, may bee drawne forth, and brougy 


what forme you pleaie, like as Oxe bones are. For what isthere in the world wu! | 


The Unicoraes the thiriting defire of gold will not make men to adulterate and counterfei' Bit! 
1rTncisnot cr : 7 heretore 
istiare that we come to the third fcope. Grant there be Unicornes, mutt 


poylon. 


{ 


follow that their hornes muft be of fuch cficocy againtt poy fons ¢ If we judg 


fons, in fuch as Thave hadincure. Ifthe maiter muft bee tryed by witnciics 
thorities,a great part of the Phy ficians of better note have long fince bid adicu,2% 
have detracted from the divine and admirable vertues for which itforme!y ** 
much defired. And this they have done, moved thereto by many juit, 
Ciallreafons. Uhe firtt is of Rondeletius,who inthis cafe affirmes that horns 
ed with notafte nor fmell, and therefore have no effect in phyficke, 


fiornes and 
hones noctcte 


yorth, to make the greater benefit and gaine by them, as ot the 


3 


pings of Linicornes horne, which they fell forthe weightin gold, as chat | 


wer 


by the Sepuicher of Mabomsct, Thevet travailing thither, tels that he diligentye. 


thing elfetnan Elephants bonesturned and made into the fafhion that wee feetien; 
for thusintie Eaftern countreics, {ome crafty merchants and cunning companions 
turne, hollow, and being fottened , draw to what length they pleafe che tect) oo 


ta, TN 


vents, and the experience of things, Ican prorelt thus much, that Lave 
tryall the reof, vet could never fad any good fuccefle in the ufethereot a pol 


Apother reafol 
rhe heart, whic 
eheathe heart, 
srrothe heart, 
allchings are p 
chings that 
conteines no ft 
neuher can itt 
iaice, {0 15 
become C4) 
fimilitude nor 
len concerning 
commended 
Charles the nin 
cuftome of dip} 
opinion to be 
{carce be im pu 
no 900d, foce 
gold, orcl{feb@ 
the magaified 
other more cog 
When as upon 
(oy reafon of ¢ 
judgement) wi 
uesthereto 
merly given,b 
plain word 
Bucif at any at 
thathe did ir | 
the abundanc: 
mea difpot 
hath Dower tc 
teply, that ne} 
any finell, no! 
Perly called ¢ 
facy 
Poyfon from, 
itany doe no 
thall freely Op | 


lar 
le 
é tyory doc HO 
= 
Wik 
he ricit,as 
> 
opr any 
VOl le da 
| 
‘ 
4 
=. 
— 


f ot the Crowne of 
d, and had Cares Nort 


Cornortherncoyy 


this Beaft. Neithey 
Por Pliny Writes thar 
VOICE, and that fhe. 
shercenefic, Becaufe 
Bnd filthy abounding 
atrary affirme herr, 
mnicfle one Purpofely 
ftooping her headto 

her horne, the 
mratches or mans hand 
caves Of corn, apples. 
farre, thatrhey feion 
inthe contemplation 
anes are Oftentaken 
t Unicornesare wild 
Aethiopiatothe Sul- 


that he diligently en- 
ift, yet could he never 
tfuch beafts have nei- 
cy of diflenting opini. 


snotthe proper name 


yy Painters, and Wri. 
or as there is but one 
f truth is but one, and 
and which may eafily 
if one thould {ay no- 


Sever thinks them no- 
ion that wee fee chem; 
1 cunning companions 
ry pleafe the cecth of 
and being to handled, 
med Unicornes 
affirmes thar thetecth 
rth, and broughrint 
rein the world mica 
nd counterfeit? Bet 
yrnes, mutt tc fore 
ons If we judge 
nat Linave often mses 
ufethercot avainit po 
ed by witnciles 
fince bidit adicu,2n¢ 
hich it formerly 
any juit, 
ses that horns 
whicke, 
nymuch predicat 
sot the fhavings 
gold, as that 


taine TukithSan, 


abia felix, renownd 


befe hornes, which we | 


Te it bee 
¢ chest 
r 
hich 


ivory 


od with the like fuccefie, I prefcribe Ivory to fuchas are poor,and Unicornes horn 


( oncerning Poy/ons, 


good again{t poyfonsand wormes, which things thinke Harts. horne and 
no leffe effectually performe; which is the caufe why for the fame difcale, 


as that they fo much defire. This is the opinion of Rosdeletins who with- 


* 


or gay difference was wont for Unicoraes horne to prefcribe not onely Hartf-horn 
vory, but alfo the bones of Horfes and Dogges, andthe ftones of Myrabalanes. 
nother reafon is, that whatfoever refifts poy {on is cordiall, that is,fitto ftrengthen 
heart, Which is chicfly aflailed by poyfons , but nothing is convenient to ftreng- 
veg the heart, unleffcit bee by laudible blood or fpirit, which two are onely familie 
-rotac heart, as being the work-houfe of the arterious blood and vital {pirits. For 
ihings are preferved by their like, as they are deftroyed by their contraries for 
i ¢hings that generate, generatethings like themfelves. But Unicornes borne, as it 
oneines no fmell, fo neither hathicany aéry parts, but is wholly earthy and dry, 
scher can it bee converted into blood by the digeftive faculty, tor as it is without 
sice, {0 isit without flefh. For asitcannotbee turned into Chy/us, fo neither is it fir 
become Chymus (thatis) juice or blood. Therefore it is joyned to the heart by no 
jqilitude nor familiarity. Furthermore, there is nota word in Hippocrates and Ga- 
wsconcerning the Unicornes horne, who notwithftanding have in fo maf places 
amended Hartts-horne. Therefore D. Chapelaine, the chiefe Phy fitian of King 
curlesthe ninth , often ufedto fay , thathee would very willingly take away that 
of dipping a piece of Unicorns horn in the Kings cup, but that he knew thar 
gpinion to be fo deeply ingrafted in the minds of men, that he feared, that it would 
be impugned by reafon. Betfides (he faid) if fucha fuperftitious medicine do 

nogood, fo certainely it doth no harme, unleffe it be to their eftates that buy it wich 
gold, or elfe by accident, becaufe Princes, whilft they rely more than is firting upon 
nemagaified veriues of this horne, neglect toarme themfelves againft poyic%s by 
xhermore COnvenient meanes, fothat Death oft-times takesthem at unawares. 
When asupon atime [ enquired of Lewes Dwaret the Kings Phyfitian and Profeffor 
(yreafon of the great opinion thatall learned men juftly had of his learning and 
udgement) what he thought of this horne.He anf{wered, that he attributed no facul- 
usthereto : for the confirmation whereof he rendred the fecond reafon I have for- 
nerly given,but more largely and elegantly ; neither feared he to affirme it aloud,& 
oplain words to his audicory of learned men,comming from all parts to hear him. 

butifat any time(orecome by the faultot the times & place)he prefcrib’d this horn, 
iuthe did it for no other entent,than to help faintings or fownings that happen by 

teabundance of ferous humors, floating inthe orifice of the ventricle, which makes 

uenill difpofed, becaufe this mixed with other things endued with the like faculty, 

wth power to drinke up the waterifh humidity by its earthy drineffe. But fome will 

ply, that neither the Lemoian,nor Armenian earth,have any juice in chem, neither 
ay {inell, nor aéry {pirit. It isgranted, neither truely are fach things truely and pro- 

xtly called cordiall, butonely by eventandaccident, forthat by the excellent 

itiive faculty they have, and ftopping the paflages of the veffels, chey hinder the 

hoyion from entring into the heart. This is my opinions of Unicornes horne, which 

‘any doc not approve of, hee fhalldoe mee a favour, if for the publike good, hee 

full freely o ppofe his ; but inthe interim take chisin good part which I have done. 


The End the One and Twentieth Booke. 


In what cafes 
good. 


5 

Ona 
q 
| 
| 
cH 


the 


Tue TwenrTie Seconp Booxke. 
The defcription of the Plague. 
HE Plague isacruell and contagious difeafe, which every yy... 


where, likeacommon difeafe, invading Man and Beatt, kils plague is. 
INS very many ; being attended, and as it were aflociated witha 
continuall Feaver, Borches, Carbuncles, Spots, Naufcouf- 

neffe, Vomitings, and other fuch maligne accidents. This 
y>, difeafe is not fo pernitious or hurtfull,by any elementary qua- 
As litic, asfrom a certain poyfonous & venenate malignity, che 
force wherof exceeds the condition of common putrefaction, 
Ye Lwill not deny but that it is more hurtfull in certain bedies,times and regions,as 
ily many other difeafes, of which Hippocrates makes mention. But from hence we sid. 3-«pber. 
only collect, that the force and maligaity of the plague,may be encreafed,or di- 
nahed, according tothe condition of the Elementary qualities concurring with 
t, but norche whole nature and eflence thereof to depend thereon. 

This peftiferous poy fon principally affailes the Vitall {pirir, the Store-houfe and 
riginall whereof isthe Heart, fo chat ifthe Vicall Spirit prove ftrongcr, it drives it 
attromthe Heart ; butif weaker, it being overcome and weakened by the hoftile 
dluult, flies backe into the fortreffe of the Heart, by the like contagion infeting the it COMeCS 
tart, and fo the whole Body, being {pred into it by the patfages of the Arterics. 
Hence itis, peltilent: Feavers are fometime fimple and folitary, other-whiles af- 
octated with atroope of other affects,as Botches, Carbuncles, Blaines, and Spots, 
“one Or more colours. 

itis probable {uch affeas have their originall from the expulfive Faculry, whether 
“ong or weake, provoked by the malignity of the ragusg matter : yer afluredly di- Bubo's, Care 
lymptomes and changes arife, according to the conftitution of the body ofthe 
“tent, and condition of che humor in whichthe virulency of the plague is chiefly ’ 
“Acrent, and laftly,in the mature of the efficient caule. | 

thought good, by this defcription, to expreffethe nature of the plague, atthis 
{Wirt entrance into this matter, for we can {carce comprehend it in a proper defi- 
‘Non. For although the force thereof be definite and certaine in nature, yet it is noc 
“ogcther certaine and manifeft in mens minds, becaufe it never happens after one 


St: fo thatia fo ereat variery, itis very difficult to fet down any thing generallan d 
“Taine, 


C 


4 
N 
4a 
a 
f 
= 


Concerning the Plague. 


A 3705 3. 
Ais 17 
i 


The fecon: 
caulceshave 
their power 
from (God as 
the firlt caufe. 


The 2enerall 

Caules oi rhe 

Padeue. 


de los. 


ai/etis. 


of the yecre 
may be {aid to 
want their ica. 
fonadknefle. 


Howese feafons and blacke Cloudes ; if the Winter bee gentle and warme without a0) 


4 


Crap, II. 


ofthe Divine caufesef anextraordinary Plague. 


| mongft Chriftians, that the plague and other difeafes, whici, ity 
lently affailethe life of man, are often fent by the jug anger o 
God punifhing our offences. The Prophet mes hath rie 
taughtit, faying, Shall there be afflsction, fhall there be evil! 
ty, and the Lord hath not done it ? On which truely we ought 
lyto meditate, and that fortwo caufes: The firttis, thar we. 
waics bearethis in minde, that wee enjoy health, live, move, and have oy;}.;,.. 
from God, and that it defcends from that Father of Light : and for this canfe yw... 
alwvaics bound to give him great andexceedigg thanks. The other is, thatknoy 


at length repent, and leaving the way of wickednefle, walke inthe pathts of o4); 
truc knowledge of the caufes of the plague, and by a certaine Divine Philo( 


without the firft caufe goe about nor attempt, much lefle performe any thing, For 


from hencethey borrow their force, order, andconftancy of order: fothatrhy 
ferveas ! n{truments for God, whorules and governes us, and the whole World, ‘ _ 
performe all his workes, by that conftant courfe of order, which hee hath appoint, 
unchangeable from the beginning. Wherefore all the caufe of a plague is notto be 
attributed to thefe ncere and inferiour caufes or beginnings, asthe Epicures andy. 
cianifts commoaly doe, who attributing too much, yea all things to nature,havek 
nothing to Gods providence, On the contrary, wee ought to thinke, and beleevein | 


allour things, That even as God by his omnipotent Power hath created all things 


of norhing, fo he by his eternall Wiledome preferves and governes the fame, leacs 
and enclines them as he pleafeth, yeaverily at his pleaiure changeth their order,and | 


the whole courfe of Nature. 


This caufe of an extraordinary Plague, as wee confeffe and acknowledge, (o hers 
we willnot profecute itany further, but thinke fit to leave it to Divines, beau 
it excecds the bounds of Nature, in which I will now contain my {clfe.Wherior # 


let us come to,the naturall caules ofthe plague, 


Crap. III. 


Of the Naturall Caufes of the Plague, and chiefly of the Seminary o 
the Plague by the corruption of the Aire, 


generall and naturall caufes of the Plague are abfolutely 

’> the infection of corrupt Aire , anda preparation and fitneffe of corr 
23 humours to take that infection , for it is noted before out of the dott ; 
of Ga/en, that our humours may bee corrupted, and degenerate 10 (ych 
an alienation which may equall the malignity of Poyfon. 


The Aire is corrupted, when the foure feafons of the yeere have nottheir "i 


nablenefle, or degenerate from themfelves, either by alteration, or by alienation 
as if the conftitution of the whole yeere bee moift and rainy by reaion e na 
therly wind, whichis cold and dry, and bythat meanes contrary t© pucrefate 
on; ifthe {pring which fhould betemperate, fhall be faulcy in any excefico 
per ; it the Autumn fhall be ominous by Fires in the Aire, with ftars {hooting 
it were falling down,or terrible comets,never feen without fome difafter 5 1"! 


out 
mer be hot,cloudy and moift,and without winds, and the clouds flie from the 


T isaconfirmed, conftant, and received opinion jp aj} Aces. 
in aC). 


are | 
ino | 


the calamities, by fending whereof the Divine anger proceeds to revenge weep. | 


| | 
nefle. For thus we hall learne to feein God, our felves, the Heaven and Earth, | 


: phy 
teach, God to bee the beginning and caufe of thefecond caules, which cannor we | 


rt 

bil 


ii? 
| 


he 


L 18.24: 


the Nort 
yeere, WETE NE 
inhis bookes 
ruption 
brought 10, it 
{erous- Altic 
fomewhiles 
put neither 
cride and filthy 
‘om the Bo 
‘the carth, 0 


Whalecaft up 
Buras fithe 
cqufetha pett: 
rop of the W 
thom, & rifing 
Gith,hapneth 
trey, Many hii 
But fulshurec 
from places 
corrupt the a! 
eat, and fo tra 
feed, togethe: 
who by hurt: 
taines, freed 
fwiads ri 
tacy W 
them thither 
ficbethu 
exhalations 7: 
Plague rcigne 
workein 
Wedoecag 
ther kinde th 
and wholly 
Manifeft real 
quickly enter 
CVeritcomes#y 
rating into a 
arile in the pl 
virulency afi: 
by the pecul! 
ceiving the 
Wherefore it 
inking plact 
bodies 
the Aventha 
hefTe Would 
May prefenrl 
Ut when 
and fimple a 
Which is pol 
dege 
Yamono{t 2 


| 
TIC nal 
J 
hath 
3 
| 
4 ~~ 


“if 


Pinion inall Ace, 

difeafes which 

t by the jut ano, 


{ince 


{mes hath lonc 
lithere be Cvill ac; 
Crucly we ought dai. 
firft is, that wee 2} 
and have our bejno. 
for this canfe we ane 
ther is, thatknowin, 
Co revenge, wer may 
the pathts of 
eaven and Earth, the 
¢ Divine Philofophy 
Ss, which cannot wel 
forme any thing, For 
forder ; fothatthey 
the whole World, to 
h hee hath appointed 
a plague is not to bec 
Epicures and Lu- 
ps to nature,have lett 
thinke, and beleeve in 
hath created all things 
ernes the fame, leads 
ingeth their order,and 


‘acknowledge, fo here 
it to Divines, becaule 
n my {elfe. Wherefore 


Seminary 


abfolutely 
und firneffe of cortuy" 
ore out of the doctrilc 
d degenerate into tues 


re have not their fealo- 
ion, or by alienation * 
by reaion of 
ne without apy arty 
contrary put! 
any excefic of diftem 
h ftars fhooring, 
me difafter ; if che {um 


uth 
nds flie from the SOUP 


~.* 


othe North. Thete and fuch like unnatural! conftitutions of the feafons of the 
veete, Were NEVET better, ormore excellently handled by any, than by Hippocrates 
“. his bookes F piaemion. Thereforethe Aire from hence drawes the feeds of cor- 
andthe Peitileace, which atthelength, the like exceffeof qualitiesbeing 
ought in, it fends into the humours of our bodies, chiefly fuchas are thinne and 


TOUS. Although the peftilence doth not alwaies neceffarily arife from hence, but 


>gewhiles tome other kinde of cruell and infectious difeafe. 


pyrneither is the aire onely corrupted by thefe fuperiour caufes, but alfo by pu- How theaire 
geand filthy ftinking vapours {pred abroad through the Aire encompaffing us, ee 
the Bodies and Carkafles of things not buried, gapinges and hollownefles 
fmecarth, OF finkes and {uch like places being opened: for the fea often ovesflow- 
g the land in fome places, & leaving in the mud or hollownefles-of the earth (cau- 


7 of yyearth-quakes) the huge bodics of monftrous Fifhes, which it hides in its wa- 


path given both the occafion and matter of a plague. For thus in ourtime,a 
waalecaft upon the Tufcan fhore, prefenrly caufed a plague over alltha: country. 
putas filhes infect and breed a plague in the aire,fo the aire being corrupted often 
y(etha peftitence in the fea among fifhes,efpecially when they either {wim onthe 
op of the Water, or are infected by the peftilent vapours of the Earth lying under 
rifling into the airethrough the body of the water, the latter wherof 47//fotle 
“hhapneth but feldome.Butit often chanceth, that the plague raging in any coun- 
«y,many fithes are caft upon all the coaft, and may bee icenc lying on great heaps. 
):{ulphuceous vapours,or fuch as partake of any other maligne quality, fent forch 
fom places under the ground,by gapings and gulfs opened by earthquakes,not only 
sonrupe the aire, but alfo infect and taint the Seeds, Plants,and all the fruits which we 
et, and (0 transferre the peltilent corruption into us, and thofe beafts on which we 
food, cogether with our nourifhment. The truth whereof Empedocles made manifet, 
sjoby ‘hurting up agreat Gulf of theearth,opened in a valley between two moun- 
vines, freed all Sicily from a plague caufed from thence. 

finds rifing fuddenly fhall drive fuch filthy exhalations trom thofe regions in 
which they were peftiferous, inte other places, they alfo will carriethe Plague with 
themthither. 

fitbe thus, fome will fay, & fhould feeme that whercfoever ftinking and putride 
lulations arife, asabout ftanding Pooles, Sinkesand Shambles, there fhould the 
iovercigne, and ftraight fuffocate with its noyfome poyfen the people whicis 
vorkein {uch places : butexperience findes this falfe. 

We doe anfwer, that the putrefaction of the plague is farre different, and of ano- mae 
bet kinde than thiscommon, asthat which partakes of acertaine fecretmalignity, 
ad wholly contrary to our lives,and of which wee cannot eafily givea plaine and sitrene ‘rom 
mnifelt reafon. Yerthat vulgar purrefaction wherefoever it bee, doth eafily and 
uickly entertaine and welcome the peftiferous contagion, as often ac, and wicnfo- 

‘eritcomes, as joyned to it by a certaine familiarity, and at length, it felfe degc ne. 

sting intoa peftifcrous malignity, certainly no otherw ife than thofe difeafes which 

uilein the plague time, the putride difeafes in our bodies, which at the hi ft wanted 

‘uulency and contagion, as Ulcers, putride Feavers, and other fuch difcafes, rated 

peculiar default ofthe humours, eafily degenerate into peftilence, prefently Inapeltilene 
<tiving the tainture of the plague, to which they bad before a certain preparation. 
Whereforein time ofthe plague, I would advife ali Men to fhunne fuch exceeding estes become 
‘inking places, as they would the plague it : thatthere may be no preparation 

‘Nour bodies, or humoursto catch that infection (without which, as Galew teacheth, rib. 1. de dufer 
“Agent hath no power over the Subje, for otherwife in a plague time, the ficke-.J¢ 

Te Would equally feaze upon all) fo thatthe imprefhon of the peftiterous qualiry 

diy prefently follow that difpofition. 

but when we fay the airc is peftilent,we do not underftand that fincere,clementary’; How the aire 
ind fimple asit is ofits own nature,for fuchis not fubje& ro putrefaction, but thar fai ro 
*hichis polluted with ill vapoures rifing from the earth, ftanding waters,vaults,or 
degenerates, and is changed from its native purity & fimplicicy. But certain- 

Yemongft all che conftitutions of the Aire, fit to receive a peftilent corruption,there 
Lzz2 


8. bi? 


> 
| 
4 | 
1 
«| 


A Southerly 
conttitution of oy ft,and principally in places neare the Sea, there fiefh cannot long be kep 


theairemthe 


tucll ofthe , prefently ist 


Lig 22, 


t bur It 


Plague. Further, wee muft know, that the peftilent malignity which rifeth from the c3 
caffes or bodies of men, is more eafily communicatedtomen ; that which ies 
from oxen,to oxen ; and that which comes from fheepe,to fheep, bya Ceftaine f 


pathy and familiarity of Nature: nootherwife than the Plague which (ha Ph 


upon fome one ina Family, doth prefently {pread more quickly amongtt the tae 


that Family, by reafon of the fimilitude of temper, than amongft others of anoth 
Family,difagreeing in their whole temper. Therefore the Aire thus altereda, 


eftranged from its goodneffe of nature,neceflarily drawn in by infpiration ang tran. | 
{piration, brings in the feeds of the Plague,and fo confequently the Placue jr {elf 


into bodyes prepared and made ready to receive it. 


Cuap. Illi. 


Of the prepamation of humours toputrefaction, and admi(ison of 
peitiferous smpre[sions. 


“* nenate quality. 


Three caufsot Humours putrefie either from fulocfle, which breeds obftruction,or by diftempe. 


the putrefvéton rare excefle,or latly by admixture of corrupt matter & evill juice, whichill feedin 


of humours. 


the Seeds of the Plague: which the filthy fcabs, maligne fores, rebellious ulcers,and 


putrid feavers, being all forerunners of greater putrefaction and corruption, doct. 
Paitions of the ftifie. Vehement paflions of the minde, as anger, forrow, ericfe,vexation and feare, 
mind helvef lel pe forward this corruption of humours, all which hinder natures diligence and 


ward the pucre= 


care Of concodtion : For asin the dog-dayes, the Lees of wine fubfiding to the bot- 


humows. tome, are by the ftrength and efficacy ot heat drawne up tothe top, and mixed with 


the whole fubftance of the wine, as it were by acertaine ebullition, or working : 50 
melancholy humours,being the Dregs or Lees of the bloud, ftirred up by the pal 
ons ofthe mind, defile or taint all the bloud with their feculent impurity. 


We found that fome years agone by experience, at the barrell of St. | 


wounds,by what weapon foever they were made, degenerated into great and filthy 


putrefaGtions & corruptions, with feavers of thelike nature,& were commonly dec 


mined by death,what medicines, & how diligently foever they were a pplyed;whic 
caufed many to have a falfefufpicion that the weapons on both fides were poifoned 
But there were manifeft fignes of corruption and putrefaction in the bloud let che 
fame day that any were hurt, and in the principall parts diffected afterwards, chat 
was from no other caufe, than an evill conftitution of the Aire,and the minds of the 
Souldicrs perverted by hate,angerandfeare. 


Guar 


hor and 


Aving fhewed the caufes from which the Aire doth putrefie, becom, 

Gia (C corrupt,and is made partaker of a peftilent and poy{/onous conttitution, 
wee muft now declare what things may caufe the 
and makethem fo apt to receive and retaine the peftilent Aire andy. 


doth {pecially caufe to abound in the body: For the Plague often followesthedrin. | 
king of dead and muftie Wines,muddy aad ftanding waters,which receive the finks 
and filth ofa City ; and fruits and pulfe eaten without difcretion in {carcity ofo. | 
ther Corn,as Peafe, Beans, Lentils, Vetches,Acorns,the roots of Fern,& Gras made | 
into Bread. Por fuch meats obftruc,heap up ill humours in the body,& weakenthe | 
{trength of the faculties, from whence proceeds a putrefaction of humours, andin | 
that putrefaction a preparationand difpofition to receive, conceive and bring forth 


forth and exp 


puptthe Aire, 


lations, and p 
by their unna 
thin and moy 
feaze upon th 
that famous 
slmoft over t! 
ereat heavine 
nelle of the h 
ving. 
This,altho 
ly dyed who 
lent and pecu 
Suchalfo 
uluall, with 2 
the Low Cor 
Autumne. 
Asfoone a 
hundred fel] { 
ple firucken \ 
continually 
leave (weatin 
yetfreed of j 
tac heart, 
Atthe firft 
Wards very fi 
red and conti 
all reftored. 
feavers. fluxe 
inflammation 
POcks and me 
hotalwayes. 
Caufethat diy 
lt btings,and 


Walities of 


They athr 


out of 
44 creepe j 


Setles Horn 
thin 


“Vaporous 


oles, Toad: 


t and ftill feaf 
is none more fit than a hot, moyft and {till ieafon: For the exceffe of 
/ 
Fmbrion anc 
| 
| 
| 
| 
> | 
| 
| | 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
— ‘ 


iB. 22. 


{fe of fuch quali 
which 1s hor and 


long be kept, by 


i rifeth from the Car 
; that which tifer 
P, bya certaine lym. 


pue which fhall 


yamongttthereR 


others of anor}, 

infpiration and tran. 
y the Plague ir lelfe, 


Ami (sion of 


oth putrefic, become 
ylonous conttitution, 
humours to putrefie, 


peftilent Aire and ye. 


ion,or by diftempe- 
ice, whichill feeding 
en followes the drin- 
hich receive the finks 
tion in {carcity of o- 
Fern,& Grails made 
body, & weakenthe 
n of humours, and in 
ceive and bring forth 
rebellious ulcers,and 
d corruption, doc te- 
fe,vexation and feare, 
natures diligence and 
{ubfiding to the bot- 
‘top, and mixed with 
ition, or working : So 
ftirred up by the pafli- 
timpurity. 
of St. Bennis.Fot all 
d into great and lthy 
ere commonly deter 
y were applyed;which 
fides were poifoned. 
in the bloud letche 
edafterwards, that 


¢,and the minds of 


Guar 


L Lonmerning the Plague. 


Wat fignes inthe Aire and Earth prognofticate Plague, 


EE may know a Plague to bee at hand and hang over us, ifatany time 

the Aire, and {eafons of the yeare fwarve from their natural! conftiru- 
ir tion, after thofle wayes I have mentioned before ; if frequent and long 
°F} continuing Vieteors or fulphureous Thunders infe@the Aire; if fruits, 

feeds and pulfe be worme-eacen; If Birds forfake their nefts, egges or 

young, without any manifeft caufe ; if we perceive women commonly to abort, by bai a tia 
ontinuall breathing in the vaporous Aire, being corrupted and hurtfull bothtothe ... ‘requent in 
fmbrion and origiaall of life, and by which it being fuffocated, is prefently caft a pettilenr ica. 
th andexpelled. Yernorwithftanding, thofe airy impreffions doe not folely core 


‘puptthe Aire,but there may be alfo others ravied by the Sunnc from the filthy exha- 


yions,and poy {onous vapours of the earth and warers, ox of dead carcaffes, which 
py their unnaturall mixture,eafily corrupt the Aire, fubje@ to alteration, as which is 
fin and moyft, from whence divers Epidemiall difeales, and {uch as every-where 
aze upon the common fort, according tothe feverall kinds ot corruptions, fuch as 
ut famous Catarrhe with difficulty of breathing, which inthe yeare 15 10. wenr ACarrhe 
over the World, and raged over all the Cities and Townes of France. with 
eat heavinefie of the head (waereuponthe French named it Cucuda) witha trait. killing 
elle of the heart and lungs, and a Cough, a continuall Feaver, and fometimes ra- 
ring. 
This,alchough it feazed upon many morethanit killed,yct becaufe they common- 
\y dyed who were either let bloud,or purged, it thewed ir felfe peftilent by that vio- 
entand peculiar and unheard of kinde of malignity. 

Suchalfo was the Englith Sweating-fickneffe, or Sweating-feaver, which un- 5). 
vlaall, with a great deale of terrour invaded all the lower parts of Germany, and {wearing ficke 
the Low Countryes from the yeare 15 25. untothe yeare 1530. and that chiefly in **"* 
Autumne. 

Asfoone as this peftilent difeafe entred into any City, fuddenly two or three 
uundred fell fick on one day,then it departing thence to fome other place. Tie peo- 
pie firucken with it languifhing, fell down in a{woune,and lying in their beds, fweat 
continually having a feaver, a frequent, quick,and unequal! pulfc ; neither did they 
ave (weating till the difeafe left them, which was in one or two dayes atthe moft: 
iettreed of it, they languifhed long after, they all hada bearing, or palpitation of 
heart, which held fome for two or three yeeres, and others all their life after. 

Atthe firft beginning it killed many,before the force of it was knowne : but afcer- 

Matus very few, when it was found out by practice and ufe, that thofe who furthe- 

tdand continued their {weats, and ftrengthened themfelves with Cordials, were 

‘lteRored., But at certaine times many other popular difcafes {prung up, as putrid 

“ers, fluxes, bloudy- fluxes, catarrhes,coughes, phrenzies, {quinances, plcurifies, 

‘tammations of the lungs,inflammations of thecyes, apoplexies, lithargies, {mall 

Mocks and meazels, fcabs, carbuncles,and maligne puftles. Wherefore thie plague is Theplagueis 

‘dtalwayes, norevery-where of one andthe famekind, but of divers; which isthe 

“alethat divers names are impofed upon it, according to the variety of the effects oe 

‘Otings and fym ptomes which accompany it,and kinds of putrefaction,and hidden 

ttalities of the Aire. 

hey affirme, when the Plague is at hand, that Mufhromes grow ip greater abun- Wheat fignes in 

out of the earth, and upon the furface thereof many kindes of poyfonons 

‘cteepe in great numbers, as Spiders, Caterpillers, Butter-flyes,Grafle-hoppers, 

‘tes Hornets, Wal oes, Flyes, Scorpions,Snailes, Locufts, Toads, Wormes, and 

‘things as are the off-{ pring of putrefactiion. And alfo wilde beafts tyred with 

‘porous malignity ef their Deanes and Caves in the earth, forfake them ; and 

“8, Toads, Vipers, Snakes, Lizzards, Afpes and Crocodiles are {eene to flee 
3 away, 


‘ 
4 
\ 
| 2 
| 
° 
| } 
| | 
| 
| 4 
} 

4 

a t 


Concerning the Plague. Ly B, 22 22. 
away, and remove their habitations in great troopes. For thefe, as alfo fomeon 
te have amanifeft power by the gift of God, and the infting of Rene sang i 
prefage changes Of weather,as raines,fhowers, aad faire weather ; and feafons Of the 7 she con’: 
yeare,as the Sprin g, Summer, Autumne, Winter, which they teftifiec by their fingin aking Vapo 
chirping,crying,ying,playing,and beating their wings,and fuch like fignes ¢, ale d,oppe 
they havea perception of a Plague at hand. And morcover, the carcafles of fom The Nor ch 
ofthem whichtooke leffe heed of themfelves, fuffocated by the peftiferoys Poy i ‘ake 
of the ill Aire containedin the earth, may bec every where found, not onely in thc fe ope ns ¢! 
dens, butalfo in the plaine fields. W eftertv: win 
Howpeltilens  Thele vapours corrupted not by afimple putrefaction, but an occult malj hity 
vapoursmiay are drawne out of the bowels of the earth intothe Aire, by the torce ot the Syn and yin they bl 


killplansand Srarres, and thence condenfed into clouds, which by their falling upon corn. <ome from the 


ck trees and grafle infect and corrupt all things which the earth produceth,andal{o kil Kindle acl 
thofe creatures which feed upon them ; yet brute beafts fooner than men, as Which er houfe \ 

ftoope and hold their heads downe towards the ground (the maintainer and breede, ix, Rofes, 
of this poyfon) that they may get their food from thence. Therefore at fuch tiger Broo: 

skilful! husbandmen, taught by long experience, never drive their Cattell of She. 

to pafture, before that the Sun, by the force of his beames, hath wafted and diffing. be 

red into Aire this peftifcrous dew hanging and abiding upon boughes and leaye of » Goat in thei 


which the Go 
fame reaion h 
ery arc apiert 


trees herbs,corne and fruits. 
' But onthe contrary, that peftilence which proceeds from fome maligne quality 


from above, by reafon of evill and certaine conjunction of the Stars,is more 


. 
to men and birds,as thofe who are neerer to heaven. dy isnot one! 
more eafic ent 
Cuar. VI. Yet the cor 
oneill fent dr 
| By ufing what cawtions in Aire and Dict, ome msay prevent the Plague. my miod that 
Changeot ple Aving declared the fignes fore-fhewing a Peftilence: now weemu caufing all th: 
by what meanes we may fhunthe imminent danger thereof,and calttheir carc 
| prevention of | defend our {elvesfromit. No prevention feemed more certaine 10 vapour as a ft 
134) the Ancients, than moft fpecdily to remove into places farredifta its Lodging. 
SY from the infected place, and to be moft flow in their returne thither BR their Antidor 
| Twothings of Baine. Butthofe,who by reafon of their bufinefle or employments, cannotchang: Whileftth 
1 chiefeaccount their habitation, muft principally have care of two things: The firftis, thatthy HM the Sunne: 
| or prevention flrenuthen their bodies, and the principall parts thereof againft the datly imminent withthecomil 
invafions of the poyfon, or the peltiterous and venenate Aire. The other, that they Nall pollution 
abate the force of it,that it may not imprint its virulency in the body; whichmay placesand 
donc by corre@ing the excefle of the quality inclining towards it,by the oppolition Allpublik 
of its contrary. For ifit bee hotter than :s meet, it muft bee tempered Ifthe Piao 
‘ things ; iftoocold,with heating things : yet this will not fuffice. For wee ouzhtbe Be ward by thie 
f fides, to amend & purge the corruptions of the venenate malignity difful d throug? for performa 
it, by {mels and perfumes refifting the poyfon thereof. The body will be “Ccaufe the ir 


More eafily 


ned and more powerfully refift the infe@ed Airc, if it want excrementutious ™ 
ate More 


imours, which may be procured by purging and bleeding.and tor the reft 


Dietfor preven dict appointed,as fhunning muca varicty of meats,and hot ana things “cane contr 
ionofthe all {uch which are eafily corrupted in the ftomacke, and caufe obftructions, rom coldnet 
| the — thofe things which be made by Comfit. makers; we muft (hun faticty and ner Clally atthe § 
nelle, for both of them weaken the powers, which are preferved by thc moderate 
of meats of good juice. of the 
ee Let moderate exercifes in a cleare Aire,and free from any venemoustainturs? After a Jit: 
ia cede your mealcs. Matthe Pring 
Let the belly have due evacuation eisher by Nature or Arr. Cot the Paffices 
Letthe heare,the feat of life,and the reft ot the bowels be ftrengthened wit! commin 
dials and Antidotes applyed and taken (as wee thall hereafe r thew) in the Nor the 
epithemes, ointments, emplafters, waters, pills,po wders,tabicts,opiates fume? luch there 


| and fuch like. 


A 
J 


Lis. 22. 


— 


as alfo fome ort... 
tinct of Name. 
, and feafons of the 
he by their finging 
like fignes : 
carcafics of fom, 
peftifcrous poy{on 
d, not Onely in their 


n occult 
orce ofthe Sun and 


alling upon corp 
bduceth,andal{o bil 


than men, as Which 


ref ore at luch times 
cir Cattell oy Sheep 
1 Wafted and diffipa. 


oughes and Icaves of 


ome maligne quality 
dtars,is more hurtful! 


it the Plague. 


ence: now weetnult 
it danger thereof, and 
cd more certaine to 
to places farre diftant 
heir returne thither a- 
ments, cannot change 
The firft is, that thy 


oft the daily imminent | 


The other, that they 
e body; which may be 
as it, by the oppofition 
em pered with cooing 


ce. For wee ought be- 
gnity diffulcd chroug 
yody willbe ftrengthe- | 
excrementitious hu- { 
dtor the reft aconven! 


fe obitru 


red by the moderate 


venemous eqinture,P! 2 


Cot 
ftrengthened with C 


cts,opiates fumig 


* 


intaincrand breeder | 


ions, iuchas 
bun fatiety and drunken 


— 


Make choice of a pure Aire & free from all pollution,& far remote from (tinking 


q ibeit Antidotes, but alfo with fome other poyfons. 


1B. 22° 


oncerning the Pla 


ices, for fuch is molt fit to preferve life,to recreate and repaize the { pirits ; where. Difcommodi- 
onthe conirary, acloudy or miftie Aire, and fuch as isinte@ed with groffe and [ °f3<loudy 
sinking vapours, duis the {pirits, de jects the appetite, makes the body faint and ill oe nc 
iqured, op che heart,and is the breeder of many dileafes. 
The Northern wind is healthfuil ssecaule it is cold and dry. But onthecontrary, 
ge Southe.rne wind, becaufeit is hotand moyft, weakens the body by floth or dul. 
welt, opens the pores, and makes them pervious to the peftiferous malignity. The 
winde is allo unwholcfome, becaufe it comes acere to the nature ot che 
Souherac wherefore the windowes bee (hurt up on thar fide of the houfe on 
hey blow, but opened ou the North and Eaft fide,unlefs it ha ppen che Plagiie 
(rom thence. 
Kindle acleare fire in all the lodging Chambers of the houfe, and perfume the The efficacy of 
houfe with Aromatick things, as Frankin{e nce, Myrrhe, Benzoine, Ladanwm, agalnit che 
grax, Rofes, Myrtle. leaves, Lavender,Rofemary, Sage, Savory, wilde Time, Mar- 
erame, Broome, Pine-apples, pieces of Firre, Juniper berries,Cloves, Perfumes : 
ad let your Cloathes be aired in the fame. 

There be fome, who think it a great prefervative again{t the peftilent Aire,to keep 
;Goatin their houfes, becaufe the capacity of the houfes, filled with the {trong fen 
which the Goat fends forth, prohibits the entrance of the venemous Aire : which 
amereaton hath place alfo in {weet {mels,and belides, it argues,that {uch asare hun- Moderatere: 
pryarcapter to take the Plague,than thofe who have eaten moderately : for the bo. 
iyisnot ftrengthened with meat, bucall the paffages thercof are filled by the 
yours diffuted from thence, by which otherwife the infe@ted Aire would findea 
ore calic entrance tothe heart. 

Yetthe common fort of People yeeld another reafon for the Goat, which is that 
oncill fent drives away anorher,as one wedge drives forth another; which calleth to 
my miod that which is recorded by Alexander Bened: Gus, chat there was a Scythiar. 
Paylician, which caufed a Plague, arifing from the infection of the Aire,to ceafe, by 
culing all the dogs, cats,& fuch like beats which were in the City,to be killed, and 
cittheir carcafles up & down the ftreets,that fo by the comming of this new putride 
our as a {tranger, the former peftiferous infe@ion, as an old gueft, was pur out of 
is Lodging, & fo the Plague ceafed, For poyfons have not onely an antipachy with 


(0 


Why rhe South 
windis p {ti- 
lent. 


A range artto 
ariveca way cnc 
Viaguc, 


Theantipethy 


of poyfons with 


Whileftthe Plague is hot, it is not good to ftirre out of doore before the rifing of sgt 
he Sunne: wherefore wee muft have patience, untill hee have cleanfed che Aire 
nilthe comfortable light of his Beames, and difperfed all the foggy and noctur- 
pollutions, which commonly hang inthe Aire in dirty, and efpecially in low 
placesand Vallies. 

All publike and great meetings and affemblies muft be fhunned. 

ifthe Plague begin in Summer, and {eeme principally to rage, being helped for- 
wird by the fummers hear, it is the beft ro performe a journey begun, or undertaken 29 galery 
‘ot performance of neceffary affaires, rather upon the night time, than onthe day, nightor by day. 
oscaufe the infeétion takes force, ftreneth and fubrlety of fubftance,by which it may 
Dore ealily permeate and enter in,by the heat of the Sun ; but by night mens bodies 
“emore ftrong, andall things are more grofle and denfe. Bur you muft obfervea 
cleane contrary courfe if the malignity feeme to borrow ftrength, and celerity F 
Omcoldneff. Bur you muft alwayes efchew the beames of the Moone, but efpe- Whythe Mooa 
“ally atthe full: For then our bodiesare more languid and weake, and fuller ofex- 8°0°°"™* 
“Mentitious humours. Even as trees which for that caufe muft be cut downin their 
“ton of the Moone, that is,in the decreafe thereof. 

ttera little gentle walking in your Chamber, you muft prefently ule fothe means 

“atthe principal! parts may be firengthened by {ufcitating the heat & {pirits,& that 

“Palligesto them may he filled, that fo the way may bee fhut up fromthe infecti- | 
. ‘omming from without. Such as by the ufe of garlick have not their heads trou- ae 
their inward pacts inflamed, as Countrey people, and (uch asare uled toit, plague. 


*luchthere can can beenomore certaine prefervative and antidote agai r pe- 
OWS 


Whetherin the 


— 
7 
4 
| 
a 
| 
| 
| 
7 


Wharwaterto. Bor water, if che Plague proceed fromthe rainture of the Aire, wee mutt w 


bemade choice aine-water, becaufe itcannot bur bec infe@ed 
inthe Llague (hun and avoyd ? bythe CON 


cine. the Aire. Wherefore the wazerof Springs, and of the deepeft Wellsa, 


the 


Viagus both ine commended being drunke,and rubbing the noftrils,mout 
wardly taken & 


outwardlyap- for the Treacle- water ftrengthens the heart, expels poyfon, and is not onely goo 
plycd. for a prefervative, but alfo rocure the difeafe it felfe: For by {weat it drives forthe | 


ACordiall 
watct. 


— 


‘824. Concerning the Plague. 


Lin 22, 


“ftiferous foos or mitts, andthe nocturnal ob{curiry, than totake itin the 
with a dratight of g00d wine ; for it being abundantly diifufed prefently 
body, fils up the paflages thereof,and ftrengtheneth it ina moment. the 


holly 
of 


heft. Bur if the malignity proceed from the vapours contained in the Carth yoy bar 


make choice of Raine-water. Yet it is more fafeto digeft every fort of 
ling it, and to preferre that water before other, which is pure and cleare torheg " 
and withoutcithertaft or fmell,and which befides fuddenly takes the extrem. ao, 
tation of heat and cold. at My | 


vV— 


Cuar. VII. 


ofthe Cordiall Remedies by which we may preferve our bodies in feare of the 
Placwc,and cure thofe already infcched therewith, 


“ 


Sie 


plaffe Vial!,and let there be added thereto of Saffron two drams, of bole Armenick, && 
Terra Sigifata,ycilow Sanders, {havings of [vory and Harts-horne, of eachhalieaa | 
ounce, then let the glafie be well ftopped,and fet in the Sun for the {pace of eizhtot 
ten daies. Letthe prefcribed quantity be taken every morning fo oft as fhall be need- | 
full. It may bee given without hurt to fucking children, and to women greatiit 
child. But thatic may bethe more pleafant, it muft bee {trained through an Hippo 
cras bag, adding thereto fome fuger and cinamon. | 
Some thinke themfelves fufaciently defended with a root of Elecampaine,Zedo- 
aric,or Angelica,rowled in their mouth,or chawed betweene thcir teeth. 
Others drinke every morning one dram of the root of Gentian brufed, being a+ 
cerated for the {pace of one nightin two ounces of whice- wine, 
Others take Worme-wood wine. 
Orhers fup up in arere egge one dram of Terra Sigillata, or of Hartt. horne, with! 
little Saffronjand drinke two ounces of wine after ir. | 
There be fome that doe infufe bole Armenicke,the roots of Gentian, Tormentil, 
Diptam,the Berries of Juniper, Cloves, Mace,Cinamon, Saffron, and {uch like,9” 
ga vite and {trong white wine,and fodiftillitin Badieo Maria. 
This Cordiall water that followeth is of great vertue. Take of the roots ofthe 
long and round Ar: #olochia, Tormentill,Diptam,of each three drams, of 


two drams, Lignwm Aloes, yellow Saunders of cach one dram,of the leaves 0! 


mult be take 


ever mornin: 
Ch 
{trong wine. 
The follow 
blets. Take of 
drams; of Cy 
Cytrons,Cin 
conferve of R¢ 
‘sufficient : 
them two hou 
conferves of | 
powder. Ort 
ofeach halfe a 
Armenick pre 
muck as will 
roots of borh 
and an halfe ; 
royall, of eac! 
{cn pies : of A 
és,and yellay 
fticke, fhavin 
dram ; of bol: 
conferves of 
ounce : of loa 
{crup| 
halfea dram t 
Treacle anc 
ding for ever: 
Rofes, or of 
Ofthefe being 


jiu, ot. J ol 
| of cache 
be 4 drams sof 
| of 3 diftiiacio: 
warer is. 
| ces, Jumper us 
niche 
m margarite mfr 
: (gee ascannot eat without much labour, exercife and hunger, and who | 
| are nolovers of Break-fafts, having evacuated their excrements bef. 
. hey go¢e from home muft ftrengthen the heart with {owe Antido... 
ainft the virulency of the infeion. Amongft which Aqua 
or Treacle-water,two ounces, with the like quantity of Sacke, jsmych 
h and cares With the {ane. 
He poyfon contained within. Ie fhould be made in June, at which time all fimple med). | 
iit cines, by the virall heat of the Sun,are in their greateft efficacie. : 
The compofti. Thecompofition whereof is thus: Take the roots of Gentian, Cyperss, Tormentill. | 
oathercof, Fraxinella,Elecampaine,of each one ouncesthe leaves of Muller,Cerdow | 
Bencdicius, Divels-bit, Burnet, Scabious, Sheepes Sorrell, of each halfea handfull, 
. ofthe tops of Ruea little quantity; Mirtle Berries one ounce ; of red Rofe leaves, | 
the flowers of Bugiofic, Borage,and Sr. Johns wurt,of each one ounce: let them be 
all cleanfed,dryed and macerated forthe {pace of twenty foure hours in one pound 
a of white wine or Malmefey,and ot Rofce water or Sorrell water; then letthem bee | 
putin avefl-llof glaffe, and adde thereto of Treacle and Mithridate, of cachioue 
| | ounres: then diftill chemin Balneo Marie,and let the diftilled 
ae 
| “lethat is not 
| more y cam 
hee The quan 
follow 


Kes the extrep 


feare of the 


anchunger, and Who 
ir excrements before 


With forme Antidote. 


hich beriacele, 
tity of Sacke, js much; 
cares with the faine. 
and is not onely good 
weat it drives forth the 


time all imple medi. 


ves of Muller, Cardaus 
ach halfe a handful! 
5 of red Rofe leaves, 
ne ounce: let them be 
re hours in one pound 
er; then letthem bee 
hridate, of cach foure 
water bee received ina 
ns, Of bole Armenick, 
orne, of each halfeaa 
or the {pace of eight or 
{o oft as fhall be need- 
{to women great with 
ed through an Hippo- 


their teeth. 
tian brufed, being 
ie, 


ofHartfhorne, with 


Gentian, Tormentill, 
con, and {uch like,ia ” 

ake of the roots of che 
drams, of Zedoaris 


3,0f the leaves of Scot 


dium. 


light, 
my. 


D,Cyperss, Tormentill, 


AB. merming tbe ‘Plague. 


St. Johns wurt, Sorrell, Rue,Sage,ot cach halte an ounce, of Bay and Juniper 


og ies,of each three drams,Citron feeds one dram,Cloves,Mace, Nutmegs,of each 


grams,of Mattick, O/:banum, bole Armenick,7 evra Sigillata, fhavings of Hartf- 
“ae and ivory, of each one ounce, of Saffron on fcruple, of the conferves of Ro- 


puglofle flowers, waterelillies, and old Treacle,ot cach one ounce,of Camphire 
wiiea dram,of Aqua Ute halfea pint,of whice wine two pints and a half,make ther- 
jiftillacion in Balnco Maria. The ufc of this diftilled water is even 2s Treacle 


prepared halfe anounce, of the powder of the Electuarie de Gemmss and Dia- 
gsr frigidum,che powder of Hart{-horne,and red Corall, of each one dram: 

gixe them with the fyrupe of the rindes and juice of Pome-citrons as much as thal} 
fice, and m ake thereof a liquid Ele€tuary in the forme of an Opiate, let them take 
acy morning the quantity of a Filberd,drinking after it two drams of the water of 
vious, Cherry €s, Carduus Benedidéws, and of {ome {uch like cordiall things,or of 
wine. 


The following Opiate is alfo very profitable, which alfo may be made into Ta- Anopiata. 


iets. Take of the roots of Angelica,Gentian, Zedoarie, Elecampainc, ot cach two 
ans; of Cytron and Sorrell feeds,of each halfe adramme of the dryed rndes of 
cyrrons, Cinnamon, Bay and Juniper berries, and Saffron, of each one fcruple ; of 
im -icrveot Rofes and Buglofle, of each one ounce; and fine hard Sugar as much as 
(ficient: make thereof Tablets of the weight of halfe a dram, let him take one of 
m ixntwohoures betore meate : or make thereof an Opiate with equall parts of 

onferves Of Bugloffle and Mel Anthofatum, and fo adding all the reft dry andin 


ywder. Or take of the roots of Valerian, [ormeatill, Diptam,of the leaves of Rue, Ancthe. 


ofeach halfe an ounce ; of Saffron, Mace, Nutmegs, of each halfe a dram; of bole 
Ammenick prepared halfe an ounce, of conferve of Rofes and fyrupe of Lemons as 


wots of both the Arz/tolochia’s, of Gentian, Tormentill, Diptam, of each one dram 
adanhalfe ; of Ginger three drams ; of the leaves of Rue, Sage, Mints and Penny- 
yall, ofeach two drams ; of Bay and Juniper berries, Cytron feeds, of each foure 
iuples of Mace, Nurmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon,ofeach two drams ; of Liguam alo- 
sand yellaw Saunders,of each one dram ; of Male Frankincentfe, :. Olibanum, Ma- 
licke, fhavings of Hart{-horne and Ivory,of each two {cruples; of Saffron halfe a 
am sof bole Armenicke, Terra Sigillata, red Corall, Pearle, of each one dram ; of 
waferves of Rofes, Bugloffe flowers, water-lillyes and old Treacle, ofeach one 
nce ; of loafe {ugar one pound and aquarter : a little before the end of the making 
tup,addetwo drams of Confectie Alkermes,and of Camphire diffolved in Ro{e-wa- 
tone fcruple ; make thereofan Opiate according to Art, thedofe thereof is from 
ulfea dram to halfe a {cruple. 

Treacle and Mithridate faithfully compounded, excell all Cordiall medicines,ad- 
ding for every halfe ounce of each of them, one ounce and a halfc of conterves of 
lofes, or of Bugloffe, or of Violets, and three drams of bole Armenicke prepared : 


Ofthefe bei ith ftirri d her, makeaconferve: Ic 
eino mixed with ftirring. and incorporated together, ma : 
»f Elecampaine,Zcdo- Ba 


wk betaken inthe morning the quantity of a Filberd: You mutt choofe that Trea- 
Me ‘cthat is not leffe than foure years old,nor above twelve : that which is fome-what 
judged tobe moft mect for cholerick perfons,but that which is old for fleg- 
@ “ickandoldmen. Foratthe beginning the ftrength of the Opsum that enters in- 
‘othecompofitionthereof, remaines in its full vertue for ayeare : but afterwards 

More years old it waxeth,the ftrength thereof is more abolifhed,fo that atlength 


Whole compofition becommeth very hot. 
Theconfeéction of Alkermes is very effe@tuall both for a prefervative againft this 


Neale,and alfo for the cure. | 
Ne quantity of a Filberd of Rubarbe, with one Clove chawed or rowled inthe 


“outh, is fuppofed to repell the comming of the peftilent Aire: as alfothis compo- 
Take 


lon following. 


The EleCtuary following is very effectuall. Take ofthe bef Treacle three oun- ACordiall ele: 
4s Juniper berrics and Carduus feeds of each one dram and a halfe, ofbole Arme- *“*" 


muck as will bee fufficient to make thereof an Opiate liquid enough. Or take ofthe Another. 


prefemly oye, all the 

rene. 

re, WCC mutt Whol]! 

¢ bythe 

{t Wellsar- thonol.. 

inthecarth yo, 

2tcr by bo 
nd cleare | 
| 
| 


Conc 


Ly 22, 


Auc. 


A March-pane. Or take of Pine-Apple kernels,and Fiftick outs, infufed for the {pace of hours 


Pils 


Other pils. 


Other pils. 


Take of preferved Citron and Orange pils, of cach one dram; of conferyeo, Ro 
be taken inthe 0. 
morning asain 
tne pellilent 


(es, and of the roots of Buglofle, of each three drammes ; of Citron feeds hy f, 
ounce ; of Annife feeds and Fennell feeds, of each one dram ; of Angelica; 
{cruples ; fugar of Roles as much as fufficeth : Make a Confection and cover; 
leaves of Gold, andtake alittle of it outofa {poone before you goe abroad 


morning. 


With 
Very 


in the water of Scabious and Rofes, ofeach two ounces ; of Almonds bisp¢} 4 
the fore-named waters halfe a pound : of preferved Citron and Orange pj}; * In 
one dram anda halfe : of Angelica roots foure {cruples : make them accordin 
art, unto the forme of March-pane, or of any other fuch like confection : ang ho 
a little piece thercof often in your mouth. old 
The Tablets following are moft effeCuall in fuch a cafe. Take of the 
Diptam, Tormentill, Valerian, Elecampaine,Eringoes,of each halfea dram; of 


Armenick, Terra Sigilata, of each one {cruple ; of Camphire, Cinnamon, quit bee macer 
iceds, and Zedoarie, of each one fcruple ; of the Species of the Eleduarie Dita kno as bigge a 
zariton Frigidum, wo {cruples, of conferve of Rofes, Bugloffe, prelerved Citron iathefaid iofut 
pils, Mithiidate, Treacle, of each one dram ; of fine fugar diflolved in Scabious yous vere any 
Carduus water, as much as fhall fuffice : Makethereof Tablets ot the Weight of, principall ufec 
dram or half adram :take them in the morning before you car. Me ond Fomentat! 
The pils of Rufus are accounted moft effectual prefervatives,fo thar Rufus hin. Tholefivee 
felfe faith, that he never knew any to be infected that ufed them: the composition ofthe peftilen 
thein istius. rte Cinamon 
ake of the beft Aloes halfeadram ; of Gumme Ammoxiacam two drammes; of BB Vinegar of Ro 
My crhe two dramsandan halfe ; of Mafticke two drams ; of Saffron {even grains, ledinafaire li 
Put them all cogether, and incorporatethem with the juice of Citrons,or the fyrope | Take of W. 
of Lemons, and make thereof a mafle, and let it bee kept in leather : Letthe patient BB Angelica, of ¢: 
take the weight of half a dram every morning two orthree hours before meat, &le ME Tieacle and 4’ 
him drinke the water ot Sorrell after it, which through its tartnefle,and the thinncie letalpony 
ofits parts, doth infringethe force and power of the malignity or putrefaction; HR “ied in box: 
For experience hath taught us, that Sorrcll being eatem or chawed inthemouphdoh ied for the fa 
make the pricking of Scorpions unburtfull.And for thofe ingredients whichdoen- Burthere is 
tcr intothe compofition of thofe pils, Aloes doth cleanfe and purge, Myrrherefils J Sus-Take o 
putre faction, Mattick ftrengthens, Saffron exbilerates and makes lively the drammes 
governe the body,efpecially the vitall and animall. me 20d Saffron, « 
Thofe pilsthat follow are alfomuch approved. Take of Aloes one ounce, of Icruple, of Mu 


Myrrhe halfe an ounce,of Saffron one {cruple,of Agarick in Trochifces, two dram, ‘heinfufion off 
of Rubarbe in powder one dram, of Cinnamon two {cruples, of Matticke onedian Violets off 
and a half, of Citron feeds twelve grains : Powder themallasis requifite ; andmakt ofeach halfe aff 
thereof a mafle with the fyrupe of Maiden-haire: Let it beufed as afore-{2id. rand with 

If the maff begin to waxe hard,the pils that muft prefertly be caken, muft bemo! ae winte 
lifted with the fyrupe of Lemons: | Mask, 

Take of wathed Aloces two ounces,of Saffron one dram, of Myrrhehalfanounc, rootof O 
of Ammoniacum diflolved in white wine, onc ounce, of hony of Rofes, Zecox" F alfof Amb 
red Saunders,of each one dram,of bole Armenick preparedtwo drams,of red Corl ta 
haif an ounce,of Camphirc halfea {cruple : make thercof pils according to Att. But | nd for ; 
thofe that are fubjeét or apt to the hemorrhoids ought notatall, or very {cldow? ayes of 
ufe thofe kindes of pils that doe receive much Aloes. Ben: 

They fay that King Mstbridares afhimed by his owa writing, that whofoever t008 uch like,o 
the quanury of an hafell Nut of the prefervative following, and dranke4 lictlewi? 
after it,fhould be free from poyfon that day. Take two Wall-nuts,thofe that be “"s 
dry,two figs,twenty leaves of Rue,aad three grains of falt: beat them, 
rate them together and let them be uled as is atorefaid. 

This remedy is alfo faid to be profitable for thofe that are bitten or ftung by ver 
venemous bea(t,and for this onely, becaufeir hath Rue, inthe compofirion chereo"* 
But you mutt forbid women that are with child the ufe of this medicine, fo! ni 
hot and dry in the third degree,and therefore it is faid to purge the wom bane Pe 


: Fe H 
AD lenc 
the | 
are tron 
| oves, 
A 
i 


Lis, 22, 
, of conferyve Ro. 
itron feeds half. 
ogclica roots four 
on,and cover jx With 
U got abroad CVery 


¢ {pace of fixe hours 
imonds blenchedin 
Orange Pils, of cach 
> them ACCOrding tg 
bnfcction : and hold 


Take of the root. of 
ialtea dram ; Of bole 

Cinnamon, Sorrel] 
Electuarie Diamar. 
ie. prelerved Citron 
lved in Scabious and 
ets of the weight 


es,fo that Ruffus him. 
isthe Compofition of 


um (WO cdrammes; of 
paffron feven graines : 
Citrons,or the fyrupe 
ather : Let the patient 
urs before meat, & let 
efle,and the thinncfie 
nity or putrefaction : 
ed in the mough,doth 
edients which do en- 
purge, Myrrhe refifts 
s lively the {pirits chat 


F Aloes one ounce, of 
‘rochifces, two drams, 
of Mafticke one dram 
is requifite ; and make 
das afore-{aid. 

be taken, muft bemol- 


M yrrhehalfan ounce, 
y of Roles, Zecoaric, 
wo drams,of red Coral 
according to Art. But 
all, or very feldomet? 


that whofoever rook 


bitten or ftung by fome 


he compofitio 
his medicine, for Rue 


ree the womb, 


and drankea little wine 
_puts.thofe that be vely 
eat them, and incorpo 


achereo! 


d 
yoke 


»*f/ 
Lomerning tbe Plague. 


cgtheflowers,whereby the nourifhment is drawae away fromthe child. Of fuch 
of mediciaes, every one may make choice of chat that is moft agreeable to 
fte,andas much thereof as fhall be {ufficient. 


Cuap. VIII. 
Of locall medicines to be applied outwardly, 
on Hole medicines that have proper and excellent vertues againit the pefti- 

lence, arenotto bee neglected te bee applied outward) y, Or Catried in 

2 the hand.And fuch are all aromaticall, aftringent, or {pirituous things, 

Jew, Which therfore are endued with vertue to repell the venemous and pefti- 

from Comming and entring mto the body,andto ftrengthen the heartand 
Of thiskind are Rue, Balm,RKofemary, Scordium, Sage, Worme-wood, 
Nurmegs, Satfron, the roots of Angelica, and Lovage, and fuch like,which > 
sft bee macerated one night in fharpe Vinegar and Agua vite, and then tyed ina 
agasbigge as an egge : or rather let ic be carried ina {ponge, made wet foaked 
athe {aid infufton. For there is nothing that doth fooner and better hold the {piri- 
vusverme and ftrength of aromaticke things, than afponge. Wherefore itis of 
incipallufe either to keep or hold {weet things tothe nofe, or toapply Epithemes 
Fomentations tothe heart. 

Thofe {weet things ought to be hot or cold, as the feafon of the yeere, and kinde 
fhe peftilence is. As forexample, inthe Summer you ought to infufe and mace- 
ute Cinamon and Cloves beaten together, witha little Saffron in equall parts, of 
Vinegar of Rofes, and Rofe water,into which you muft dippea fponge, which row- 
cdinafaire linnen cloath, you may carry in your hand, and often {mell to. 

Take of Wormewood halfe a handfull, ren Cloves, of the roots of Gentian and 
Angelica, of cachtwo drammes, of Vinegar and R ofe water, of cach two ounces, of 
Treacle and Mithridate, of each one dramme,beat and mixe them all well together, 
ndleta{ponge be dipped therein, and ufed as above-faid. They may alfo bee en- 
dofed in boxes made of {weet wood, as of Juniper, Cedar, or Cyprefle, and fo car- 
icdtorthe fame purpote. 

Butthere is nothing more eafieto be carried than Pomanders : the form of which 
ithus- Take of yellow Saunders, Mace, Citron pills, Rofe and Mirtle leaves ofeach 
wodrammes, of Benzoin, Ladanum, Storax, of each halfe a dramme, of Cinamon, 
and Saffron, ofeach two Scruples, of Camphire and Amber Greece, of cach one 
Muske, three graines. Makethereot a Pomander, with water, with Pomands 
deinfufion of Tragacanth. Ortakered Rofe leaves, the lowers of Water. tillics, 
ad Violets,of each one ounce, of the three Saunders, Coriander feeds, Cicron pills, 
vicach halfean ounce, of Camphire, one dramme, let them all bee made into pou- 
ctr, and with Water of Rofes and Tragacanth make a pomander. 

Inthe winter it is to be made thus:take of Storax,Benzoia, of each one dram and a 
ulkof Mask, halfa Scruple,of Cloves, Lavander,and Cyperns,of each two drams;of 
of Orris,é.Flower-de- Luce,and Calamus aromaticus,of cachtwo drams and 
‘halfof Amber Greece,three drams ; of gum Tragacanth diflolved in Rofe water & 
‘4Uite.as muchas fhall fuflice : make thereofa Pomander. Sweet poder 
_ And for the fame purpofe you may alfo ufe to carry about with you {weet pou- 
ctsmade of Amber Greece, Storax, Orris, Nutmegs, Cinamon, Mace, Cloves, 
‘ton, Benzoine, Muske, Camphire, Rofes, Violets, Juncus odoratus, Marjoran, 
luch like, of which being mixed together,Pouders may be compounded & made. 
3. Take of the rootes of Orristwo drams, of Cyperss , Calamus Aromaticus, red Ro- 
*0feach halfe an ounce, of Cloves halfea dramme, of Storax one dramme, of 
‘liske eight graines : mixe them, and makca pouder fora bagge: ortakethe roores 
tOrtis two ounces, red Rofe leaves, white Saunders, Storax, of cach onc ounce,of 
“perus one dram, of Calamus Aromaticus, one ounce, of Marjoram, halfe an ounce, 
‘ Cloves, three drammes, of Lavander, halfea dramme, of Coriander fecdes two 
“ammes, of go0d Muske, halfea fcruple, of Ladanum and Benzoin,of cach a dram, 
atmegs and Cinamon, ofeach two drammes: Make thercofa fine pouder, and 
ay it in 2 bag. ir 


Of what noture 


é 
— — 
4 
q 
a 


Bagge with yellow Saunders, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, and Tieack f 
gether, and incorporated, and {priackled over with ftrong vinegar and Rok ae ac che ued 
in Summer, and with {trong wine and Muskedine inthe Winter. “ley ere fro 

Thefe {weet Aromaticke things that are fofull of f{pirits {melling fweerly 
ftrongly, have admirable vertues to ftrengthen the principall parts ot the bod. metals 
to (tirre up the expulfive faculty to expell the poyfon. ding 

Contrarie-wife, thofe that are ftinking and unfavory, procurea defite toy). “he 

difolution of the powers, by which it is manifeft how foolith and he which 
thinestodee pér{wafion is, that counfaile fuch asare ina peftilent conftitution of the aire ually 
cichewed. ceive and take in the ftinking and uafavoury vapours of finkes and privies 
efpecially in the morning. not tt eit 
But it will not fuffice to carry thofe prefervatives alone, without the ofany, 
therthing, but it will be alfo very profitable to wath all the whole body in Viens for alice ae 
of the decoétion of Juniper & Bay berries, the roots of Gentian, Marigolds Tok beftowe 
Wort,and fucl like,with Treacleor Mithridate alfo diffolved init.Fot 
enemy to all poyfons in general, whether they behot or cold: for it refifterh Shinde 
reth putrefaction, becaule itis cold & dry:thertore in this,inanimate bodies 4.4 ; old 
Herbes, fruits, and many other fuch like things,may be kepta long time withoy: ekinie 
trefaction. Neither is it tobe feared, thaticfhould obftme@ the pores, by reafon 


Ir will be very convenient alfo to apply to the region of the heart, aba, 


its coldnefle,if the body be bathed in it: for it is of fubtle parts,and the {pices bovled | hath cafily tak 


in it, have vertue to open. 

Whofoever accounteth it hurtfull to wath his whole body therewich, lethim wig, | 
onely his arme-holes, the region of his heart, his temples, groincs, parts of genera. 
on, as having great and marvellous {ympathy with the principal! and noble pars 

It any miflike bathing, let him annoint himielf with the following unguent Tile | 
oyle of Rofes, four ounces ; oyle of Spike, two ounces ; of the pouder of Cinamon 
and Cloves, of each one ounce anda halfe; ot Benzoin, halfean ounce ; of Must 
fixe graines ; of Treacle, h:lfeadramme, of Venice Turpentine, one dramme and; | 
halfe Waxe,as muchas fhall fuffice ; makethercot a foft unguent. 

You may alfo drop a few drops of oile of Maftick,of Sage, or of Cloves, and {uch 
like, into the cares, with alittle Civetor Muske. 


An unguente 


Sicknefie, the 
me pigatethe pla 
andfobecarr 
themfelves, ni 
mufty corne, t 
houfes muft b 


IX. 
Of other things tobe obferved for prevention, in feare of the Plague. 


ischiefly tobe efchewed, for by it the powers are debil'tated fich 
the {pisics difftpated, and the breathing places ofthe body diminilhe, peony 
and laftly,all the ftrength of nature weakened. A fedentary lifes 
Da) WG #') fhunned,as alfo excefie in diet, for hence proceeds ob{truction," thereto a 
ruption of the juices, and preparation of the body to putrcfaction etter an 
the peftilence. hall provide 


Women muft be very carefull that they have their courfes duely, for hopping 
fides the cuftome, they eafily acquire corruption, and draw by contagion tt rel r 
Running ulcers tHe humours into their fociery. Suchas have fiftulous, or otherwile old wiccrs,™ 
goo! intimeof not healethem up ina peftilent feafon, for it isthen more convenient rather 0 + 
eftilence. ones, andthe fe in convenient and declining places;that as by thefe channels 
finke of the humors of the body may be emptied. 
The Hemorrhoids, bleedings,& other the like accuftomed evacuations, mule 
be ftopped,unleffe they exceed meafirre. Moreover,they muft at fuch cimes cake 
that they touch or handle not, any of thefe things whercin the feedes oF 
peftilence may lye hid, fuch as are, hempe, flaxe, quilts andcoverings 
as have had the plague, have laid; skins and all leathern things, hangings pid 
Placestobe 9 YOumuft dwell farre from church-yards, efpecially from thofe wherei® 
‘hunnedin of fuch ashave died of the plague,are not buried deep in the ground, asin the"; 


tume¢ of plague. 


| 
| 
| 

rir 
| SN Fa) Vase 
Bx \ O 
| | 
| 
>, 
tOfale. 
$difeafe le: 
| they (hal 
© know 
| Wee inthe bodi 
Ous beat 
| 
admoni 
i of i n I (h 


he heart, a bap 
ind Tiecack {h 
inepar and Ro 
er. 

imclling fweer] 
Parts Of the bug 


Be Dlleg 
iken to. | 
Water 


Y,and 
‘urea defire 
cion ofthe aire, tore. 7 
S and privies, aNd tha 


thout the ufe of any o 7 


an,Marigolds,S.Johns 
init. For vinegar js 
for itrefifteth &hinde. 
nimate bodies.as 
long time without pu. 
the pores, by reafon of 
5,and the {pices boyled 


therewith, let him wath 
parts Of generati- 
pall and noble parts. 
lowing unguent.T ake 
pouder of Cinamon 
ounce of Muske, 
ine, one dramme anda 
ungucnt. 

or of Cloves,and {uch 


of the Plague. 


yowers are debilitated, 


A {edentary life is to be 

ds obftruction, the 

dy tO putrcfaction and 


duely, for topping 


by contagion che re 
he) wile old rs, me 
nvenient rather to make 
as by thefe channe’ 


tat fuch times take 
the feedes or fue 
overings wh 
ps hangings 


hole body in Vinepa 


ithe body diminithes, | 


evacuations 00 


jotth¢ 

eyein thould quickly come tothetr deaths. Thekeepers of rhe gares of the city fhall 
dcloath> § senonithed, that they take {peciall care that fuch as are infected, or come from a 
the corps Place, doe not enter inta che for from one, the evill may comety pread 


thole where! bechurch further, for one fparke may {er a whole city on fire, andone {cabby fheepe 
ground, asin' of ‘tawhole flock, And becaufe there is nothing which may morc perfectly purge 


22. Concerning the ‘Plague. 829 


Sie Inmocent in Paris, ia which place by the {ame reafon it fundry times happens 
buried bodies are pluckedup, rent and torne by dogs. Alfolet them dwell 
sere from places of execution, fhambles of fleth and fith, from tanne-houfes, dicts, 
cloth-dreffers, farricrs, skinners, and fromthe places wherein 
aaals arc calt or wrought. The filth and dung, efpecially of Swine, Privies, ftan- 
jipgand muddy waters, and laftly allthings of the like evill {mell, muft be farre re- 
ote from your habitation ; the belly muft not bee emptied into thofe places, into 


sich the excrements of fuchas have the plague are caft. The company of fuch as «.. 
“aally vificechofe ficke of the plague, mutt be efchewed,as of Phyftians, Apothe- 
«jigs, Surgeons, Nurfe- Keepers, Grave-makers and Bearers. For though they have 

othe plague,yet comming forth of a peftilent place,they may carry with them ly. 

aohidin their garments, the feedes thereof. You may gather this by fuch as have 
ir alittle while ftayed in a perfumers fhoppe, for the perfume diffufed in the aire, 

ftowes the {mel upon the garments of {uch perfons,fo that gone from thence,(uch 

smect them, will judge them tocarry perfumes with them. They {hall alfo fhunne You mut doe 
ong watchings, found fleeping, all paifions of the minde, efpecially anger, hunger, 
journying in the fan, for that hath oft-times occafioned a diary teaver,which wh reby you 
th not feldome beene {eene toturne into a peftilent one, for by dilating the pores 
itheskinne, they have given entrance to the peftilent aire, which by that meanes 


wheafily taken hold of the humour difpofed to putrefaction. 


Cuar. 
Of the office of Magiffratesin the time of the Plagne. 


Agiftrates ought to havea fpeciall care that no filth be heaped up, either 
/\\weAlee i private or publike places : let all things bee kept neat in every houfe, 
“AUS and let all the ftreets be kept cleane, the dung and filth bee carried forth 
of the city,as alfothe dead carcaflcs of killed dogs and cats, for becaule ana 
they oft-times licke and devoure the excrements of fuch as have the cats mutt be 
‘ickaefle, therefore they may by their familiarentry into found houtes, there pro- ramet a 
note the plague. Wherfore they mutt cither be driven forth of the city, or killed, °°” 
nd{obe carryed forth and buried deepe in the ground. Wells, {prings, and rivers 
hemfelves, muft bee freed and cleanfed from all impurity. Care muft bee had that 
corne, tainted flefh, nor ftinking fifh be not fertofale.Publike bathes and Why Bathes 
woufes mutt bee prohibiced, for thatiathefe, mens bodies are weakened, and made 
wreyeelding and pervious to the peftiferous aire. They thall commit the cure of be alloned, 
as have the plague, to learned, skilfullaad honeft Phyfitians, Apochecaries,and 
urgeons. 

Such asare knowne to havethe plague, fhall bee feparated from fuchas are free 
istefrom,and bee fentto fuch fit places as fhall bee provided for them , for thisis 
xtterand more humanely done, than to (hut up every man in his owne houtfe. They 
dill provide and forefee that the houfhold ftuffe of {ach as have the plague bee nor 
“tofale. They fhall fer fignes andnoted markes upon tie houles feazed upon by 
sdifeate lett they thould unawares run into danger. Wherefore co the fame pur- 
Nethey fhall procure thar the Surgeons & others thar vilice the ficke of the plague 
‘Yy be known by fome conf{picuous marke, that {uch as pifle by them may be ad- 
‘onthed of the danger; they thall alfu take care that the bodies of the dead be buri- 
“a {beedily as may be.Forthey fooner & more gritvouily patiefi¢ ina {horttime, Such as dye of 
“Mthe bodies of others of what death iocver they dic. Wherfore neither birds nor che plague dos 
Q0us beafts dare once rouch their bodies,though unburied, for by rafting them quickly 


Aaaa the 


\ 
. 
a 
a 
4 
| | 
t 
| 
| a 
* 
a | 
* 


Lib. a. de occult 
Sal. 


the aire, and cleanfe it from all manner of noyfomneile and infe@ion, than fire 
command that there be kindled, and perpetually kept burning fires 
odoriferous and flrong {melling things, as Juniper, Turpentine, Broome, ang} 


like. 


sthey 
With 
¢ 
In fiead hereof Levewas tells that the fouldiers of the Garrifon of Tormey uledin, 


Plaguetime to difcharge their Cannons laded oncly with Powder, turning the; 
mouths upon the citty, andrhat morning andevening, thatby the veheme; 
the moved aire, the peftiferous fogges might bee chaled away, and by the hese: 
the burned powder, the venenate and noyfome quality of the aire might bee Ph 


Cy of 


Thevillanyof ded. Laftly, {judge it fit to admonifh Magiftrates thatthey have their cies and ming. 


fomc bafe peo- 
plc. 


hands of theeves and murderers , for thefe, by providence or {trength, wee 


attentive upon a murderous and impious kinde of bearers and nurfe-keepers, yp; r 
allured with a defire of gain(which whileft the plague reignes,they get abundam|, 
anoint the walls, doores, threfholds, knockers of gates and lockes withthe flr}, Xe 
ointments taken from fuch as have the plague, thatthe plague within a wh}, 
feazing upoathefealfo, the maftersofthem flying away, and the family difperfed | 
they may there reignealone, and freely and without punifhment carry thence wh: | 
they pleafe, oft-times ftrang!ing fuch as lye ready to dy, left recovering, they minty | 


etheiraccufers. ThisI remember happened at Lyous, Anpo Dom. 1565, 


CuHap. XI, 


What caution mut beenfed in chafing Phy fittans, Apothecaries and 
Surgeons, whomay have care of fuchas aretakew 
with the Plagne, 


4 


common- wealth,to appoint learned, skilful, and honeft Ph {i 
ans, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, and fuch as have more regardio | 
the law of God than to gaine,to have the care & cureotiuchasae 
vifited. But principally letthem notrake Surgeons and Apotic 
2A caries called by proclamation with found of wumpet, thatuthy 
willtake this charge,they fhall become free without examination or reward. built 
them rather be allured by gifts and honeft rewards, not only then when as necelliy 
recth, but alfo afterthe plague is over.For fuch fervant Surgeons and Aporhccans im 
asarecailed by proclamation, fo to gaine freedome, are moft commonly unssiltul | 
and unexperienced Dunces, who,confcious of their owneignosance, anc | 


| 


undergocthecxamination ofthe Maticrs of their Companies, refuie no hazzaid, 
however dangerous, with defireto obtaine their | 

Ir is farre worfe and more dangerouscto fall into the hands of fuch, thaain | 
id 


chance to efcape , but wee feeke for and embrace the other, and having found cca 


lay our throats bareunto them, fo by their unskilfulneffe to be burchered, Coral | 


ly by the fault of the tiincs, and the negle@ of Magiftrates, it is almoft come ye 
pafle, that ifany honeft and learned Phyfitians and Surgeons fhall undertase 
cure, they are commonly forced thereto by the Magiftiate for feare of mn +” 
or fining. Therefore becaufe they doe it againft their wills, they fhew “sa 0 
lcfle vigilant, cheerefull and painefull about the ficke. They coine unwilling)" 
compelled hereto, becaufe by the memory of the forepaft time, they yon i 
know, how fordide and bafely Magiftrates, when the plague hath beene uit 
have bin in paying the promifed reward to menof their condition, who nave of 
ly runintodanger ; for thence it happens that during the reft of their lives tty 


fit idle at home, forthat they are imtamous and feared by the peopl oncly 10! 


thita whileagone they vifitcd {uch as had the plague. | would have" 


viftraces prudent, faithfull,and free inchoofing honeft, learned and shilf yl! nie? 


may undergoe this fo difficult and dangerous a charge. Cutt 


isthe part of Magiftrates in the fo ereat neceffity of the offl Ged 


thie 


Lis. 2 


the giver c 
ging and | 
the feeds o 
teries to be 
lictle and 
the mufcle 
of the left] 
Letthem va 
fats, ant fa 
br torte, né 
rule, 
bulrant len; 
and bags fo 
it noted by 
fitably 2pp. 
it felfe to p 
maxing the 
Let their 


Or elle if th 
Cloth yfriez 
the infeGio 
ther linnen 


| 320 
WO? 
4 
| 
| 
fick 
lather than 
’ 
When as 
is 
| pour atiltno 
af, > 
ded DY 
thin 
aroun 
: 
e008 we 
a 
4 


B. 22. Concerning sbe ‘Plagues. 
Cae 
on, than fire,they CHA?P. XII, 


g fires made y ith 


, Broome,andihe J How fach as undertakethe cure of the Plague ought to arme themfeélves. 


a rit thinkeand hold for certaine, that they are not called Qurjorsarein 
is ce by men, but by God, fo direGing the counfels and a- the hands of 
ail the heats ions of men as hethinketh fir. Therefore they fhall confidently 
pc Aneta re enter into the cure thereof, for thar our lot, life and death are in 
hands of the Lord: but notwithftanding they ought not to neg- 
ect remedies, which are given to men for prevention, left by neg- 
P a ich lecting the gifts of God, they may teem to neglect him al fo that is 
cy Shi ~ antly ) the giver of fo many goodand excellent benefits. Therefore firft let them by pur- 
: ging and bleeding evacuate the humours fubje¢ to putre faction, and to conceive 
ne family dif re che feeds ofthe peftilence, Let them maketwo fonranella’s by application of Cau- Whereto make 
re Family Gilpericd, reries to bee as riveletsto evacuate the excrementitious humours which are daily by Muesinthe 
geass thence what litle and lictle heaped up in us; let one of them bee in the right arme alittle below ~ vet 
overing, they misht themufcle Epomes, the other the {pace of three fingers under the knecontheinfide 
om. 15 65. of theleftlegge. This is found by experience a very certaine meancs of prevention. 
; Fs Letthem wath their whole bodies with the following lotion. K. aque ro(: aceti ro- 
fambucins ,vini aut vi. rad. enule camp. angelica, centian. 
Xedoar. an. baccar, jumiperi, cr hedera, an. 3 ii. falvie, rori(mar, abfinth, 
Cortic# citri, 38, theriaca Cr mithridat. an 3i.congualande conqua 
hecaries ana juliant Lento ferventer ad ufums ante commemoratum. The Epithemes,unguents (yp 
ken and bags formerly defcrided fhall be applyed rothe region of the heart. [have read 
noted by John Bapssst T beodofius amongitt other things, Arfenick may be pro- pif. 
| ftably applyedto the region of the heart,that {0 ic may by little and little accuftome 
eceffity of the aft Ged i felfe to poyfons, that afterwards itmay bee lefie harmed by their incurfion, firft 
1, and honeft Phy fiti- making their affault uponir. 
ac have mote rcgara to Lettheir garments be made of Chamelet, Dutch farge, Satin, Taffaty,or the like. what ro weare. 


re & cure of fuch 
burgeons and Apothe- 
trumpet, that chey 
ion or reward, but let 
when as necellity 
~ons and 
ommonly unskiltul 


nocance, and fearins | 
CS, no hgzzal 


Orelfe if they cannot of thefe, lec them be of fome other handfome ftuftc but not of 

cloth, frieze or the like, that may takethe venenate Aire, and carry it withthem to 
theintection of the fouad. They tha!l oft-times change their clothes, fhirts and 0- How tovilite | 
ther linacn, and perfume them with aromaticke things ; let them warily approach 
tothe ficke, more warily fpeake ante him, with cheir faces looking away from him, 

atherthan towards him, fothatthey may not receive the breathof his mouth, nei- 

ther the vapour nor {mell of any of ais excrements. 

When as I upona time being called to vilit one that lay ficke of the plague, came pittory. 
woneare and heedlefly to him,and prefently by fudden cafting off the cloathes,laid | 

him bare, chat fo I might the better view a Bao chat hee had in his rightgroine, and 

‘Wo Carbuncles that were on his belly,then prefently athick, filthy and putride va- 

Pour atifiag from the broken abfceffe of the Carbuncle, as out of araked puddle, 

cended by my noftrils to my braine, whereupon I fainted and fell down fenfelefle 

‘ponthe ground ; raifed up alittle after, all rhings feemedto me torun round; and 


sof fuch, thaa jatu thie 
Be or ftrength, wee may 

ind having ound 
be burchered. Ceci 


come to on my ives ready to fall againe, but that I ftayed my felfe by taking hold of the bed pote. 
ndertake me ‘one thing comforted mee, that there appeared no fignes that my heart was affe- 
wn s¢ither by paine or panting,or the ftrong and contumacious failing ot my pow- 


‘SAn argument that che animall {pirits were oaly diffipated by a venenare vapour, 
ind that the fubftance of the heart was no way wronged, wasa f{necfing which twoke 
wlovioleatly, that I {neefed ten times,and then fella bleeding at che nofe ; which 
q ts | beleeve freed me from all the impreffioa of the malignity. Ler others 

imed by this mine exam ple,learne to be wifer and more wary in this cale, left they 


Wetoa worfe mifhap than befell mee. 


Aaaa2 Cuare 


| 

ris almol 
Mall 
for feare 
they fheW 
they | ingly and 
cney 
t time, pall, 

ath beene overt {- 
ndition, Whe y may 
he pcople ont’) 
a and skilful! men | 


Concerning the P lague. 


Crap. XIII. 
Of the fignes of fach as are infecked with the Plague. 


EE muft not ftay fo long before wee pronounce one to have th. 
Plague, untill there be paine anda tumour under his arme- holes. 
\in his groine, or {pots (vulgarly called Tokens) appeare over 
442>\ the body,or carbuncles arife : for many dye through the venenare 
malignity, before thefe fignes appeare. Wherefore the chiefeg 
cme’ and tructt fignes of this difeafe are to be taken from the heart, bein 

the manfion of life,which chiefly and firft of all is wont to be affailed by the force of 
the poifon. Therfore they that are infected with the Peftilence,are vexed with often 
{wounings and fainting ; their pulfe is feebler and flower than others, but fometines 
more frequent, but that is {pecially in the night feafon ; they fecle prickings ove, 
all their body, as ifit were the pricking of needles ; but their noftrils doe itch e{pe. 
cially by occafion of the maligne vapours rifing upwards from the lower and inner, 
into the upper parts, their breaft burneth, their heart beateth with paine under the 
left dug difficulty of taking breach, Prifficke, Cough, paine of the heart, and fachan 
clation or puffing up of the Hypocowdria or fides of the Belly, diftended with thes. 
bundance of vapours raifed by the force of the feaverifh heat, that the Patient wil 
of ina manner{eemeto havethe Timpany. They are molefted with a defire to vomit, 
vomitingin and oftentimes with much and paintull vomiting,wherein green and black matter is 
— feen, & alwaies of divers colours, anfwering in proportion to the excrements of the 
lower parts,the ftomack being drawn into a confent with the heart, by reafon of the 
vicinicy and communion of the veffels; oftentimes bloud alone, & that pure,is exclu- 
ded & caft up in vomiting;and it is not only caftup by vomiting out of the ftomack, 
but alfo very often out of the noftrils, fundament,and in women out of the wombe; 
the inward parts are often burned, and the outward parts are ftiffe with cold, the 
whole heat of the Patient being drawn violently inward, after the manner of a Cup- 
Their looks areping-glaffe, by the ftrong burning of the inner parts ; then the eye-lids waxeblew, 
‘addenly chan- as jt were through fome contufion, all the whole face hath a horrid alpeé, andas 
™ were the colour oflead,the eies are burning red, & as it were,fwoln or puffed up with 
Bloud,or any other humour, hed teares ; and co conclude,the whole habit of the bo- 

dy is (omewhat changed and turned yellow. 
Many haveaburning feaver, which doth fhew it felfe by the Patients ulcerated 
jawes,unquenchable thirft,drynefs and blacknefs of the tongue,and it cauleth 


Wheneecere 
erin Ggnes of the 
Plague may be He | 
raken, 


phrenfie by inflaming the braine, thatthe patients running naked out of thex beds, | 
fecke to throw themielves out of windowes into the pits and rivers that are at 
In fume the joynts of the body are fo weakned,that they cannot goe nor ftand, from 


Why fomethat the beginning they are asit were buried ina long {woune and decpe {leep, by reatoa 
rae mores that the feaver fendeth up tothe braine the groflt vapours from the crude and ¢0 
fleepy, humours, as it were from greene Wood newly kindled to make a fire. 

Such fleeping doth hold himefpecially while the matter of the fore or Carbu 
is drawne together, and beginneth to come to fuppuration. Oftentimes when th 
are awaked out of fleepe, there doe {pots and markes appeare difperfed overt ® " 
with a ftinking {weat. But if thofe vapours be fharpe that are ftirred up unto! or 


in ftead of fleepe they caufe great waking,and alwaycsthere is much diverfitic 


cidents in the urine of thofethat are infe@ed with the Plague,by reafon of the ne 


rimes, ane 


temperature and condition of bodies : neither is the urine at 4 hewrilt 


men of the fame confiftence andcolour : For fometimes they are like us ait | 
nd 


of thofe that are found and in health, that is to fay,laudable in colour a d , 
hin unt 


Why theirus , 
: becaufe that when the heart is affected by the venemous Aire, that entret soleil 


rinesare like 


ae the {pirits are more greatly grieved and molefted than the humours: but! 
{pirits, are infeed and corrupted when thefedobegintocorrupt. shy 
But Urines onely thew the difpofitions of the humours or parts 9 whi 
are made,colle@ed torether,and through which they pafle. 


acle | 


head; | 


1B. 22. 


This reafo 
che maligaity 
e(t che matte 
Many havs 
the {pace of 
And rocon 
up in this kin 
che bodies an 
ja one, and 


-beating 
inthe bed, w 
colour; and 
{weat,are ve 

There are 
nefle, prickit 
and faring! 
derftanding 
thofe are 
and troubled 
clouds or coll 

Spiders W 

Ifthe flef 
the fefhabo, 
have alaske 
dure; ifthey 
yet forall ch 
bee 

dwne alid. 
ys ifthe 

Vulfion and 

deathis at 

Purge or ler 


| 
j 
{ 
q 
» 
| 
i 
‘ i 
| 
? 4 
BA 
on 
i. 


bne to havethe 
arme-holes,or 
pppeare over all 
oh the venenatc 
ore the chicfeft 
the heart, being 
d by the force of 
exed with often 
rs,but fometimes 
le prickings over 
rils doe itch e[pe- 
lower and inner, 
h paine under the 
heart, and fuchan 
tended with thea- 
at the Patient will 
a defire to vomit, 
and black matter is 
excrements of the 
art by reafon of the 
chat pure,is exclu- 


ot goc Nor ftand, 


om the crude 30 

ake a fire- 

frhe fore OF 
Oftentimes 


Rirred upunto? 
is much divert 


out of the ftomack, 
out of the wombe; 
(tiffe with cold, the 
e manner of a Cup- 
eyc-lids waxc blew, 
orrid afpect, and as 
oln or puffed up with 
hole habit of the bo- 


he Patients ulcerated 


c,and it caufeth fuch a 

ed outof their 

a0 
s that are ath 

river 


ealon 
decpe {lcep,b) cold 


Carbuncle 
he they 
the skit; 
difperfed ove! d 


Concerning tbe ‘Plague. 


LIB. 


This reafon (eemeth truer to merhantheirs which fay, that nature terrefied with 
sje maligaity of the poyfon avoyds contention, and dothnot refift or labourto di. 


“che matter that caufech the difeafe. 


* Many havetheir appetites fo overthrowne, that they can abftaine from meat for 
ne fpace of 

" Andro conclude,the variety of accidents is almoft infinite,which appear & {ori 

yp in this kinde of difeafe, by reafon of the diverfiry of the poyfon, mad mls oe, 


a¢bodies and grieved parts : but they doe not all appeare in each man, but fome 
one, and fome in another, __ 


What (ignes inthe Plague are mortal. 


Aad 


ie. T isa moft deadly figne in the Peftilence, to have acontinuall and bur- 

aly fing Feaver, to have the tongue dry, rough, and black, to breathe with 
> difficulty, andto draw in a great quantity of breath, but breathe out lit- 

tle; cotalke idely ; tohave phrenfie and madneflc together, witlrun- 
ss quenchablecthirft and great watching ; to have Covulfions, the Hicket, 
peart-beating,and to fwoune very often and vehemently; further,tofling and turning 
inthe bed, with a loathing of meats,and daily vomits of a greene, blacke and bloud y 


colour ;and the face pale, blacke,of a horrid and cruell alpect, bedewed with acold 
(weat,are very mortall fignes. 


There are fome which atthe very beginning have ulcerous and painefull weari- Anulcerous & 
nelle, pricking under the skin, with great torment of paine; the eyes looke cruelly 
taringly voyce waxcth hoarfe, the tongue rough and ftutting, andthe un- 
ftanding decaying, the Patient uttereth and talketh of frivolous things. Truely the Piague 
are very dangerouily ficke, no otherwife than thofe whofe urine is pale, black, 
ind troubled like unto the urine of carriage beafts, or Lye, with divers coloured 
clouds or contents, as blew, greene,black,fatty and oylie,as alfo refembling in thew 
Spiders Web, with a round body fwimming on the top. 

Ifthe fleth of the carbuncle be dry and blacke,as it were feared with a hotiron, if 

lie lethabout it be blacke and blew,if the matter doe flow back,and turne in,if they 
hive alaske with greatly ftinking, liquid ,thin,clammy, blacke,greene or blewith or- 
uure;ifthey avoyd wormes by reafon of the great corruption of the humours, and 
yet for all chis the patient is never the better;if the eies waxe often dim, if the noftrils 
contracted or drawne together, ifthey have aprievouscrampe, the mouth bee 
irawne afide,the mufcles of the face being drawn or contra&ed equally or uucqual- 
Me 'y;ifthe nailes be blacke ; ifthey be often troubled with the Hicket,or have a Con- 
me ‘lion and refolution over all the body, then you may certainly prognofticate that 
me uhisat hand, and you may ufe Cordiall medicinesonely, but itis too lateto 
purge or let bloud. 


CHaPp. XV. 


Signes of the Plague comminz by contagion of the Aire without 
any fault of the humours. 


OU fhall underitand thatthe Peftilence proceeds from the corruption 
oy [2 ofthe aire,if it be very contagious, and difperfe it felfe into fundry pla- 
ces ina moment. If itkill quickly aad many, fo that whileft {undry per- 

se z fons go¢ about their ufuall bufineffe, walke in che places of common re- 
x... fortand through the ftreets, they faddenly tall downe and dye, no figne 
*the difeafe or harme appearing, nor any paine opprefling them ; for the maligni- 
} of the corrupt Aire is quick and very {peedy in infecting our {pirits, overthrowing 


Aaaa 3 the 


e.by reafon he dives | 
ine at all Himes, ane inal 

ey are like unto che 

in colour and 

ire, that entreth in ynte 

humours: but 

corrupt. 
urs OF parts if which che 


Concerning 


the ftrength of the heart and killing the patient. The patients are not troub] we re 


Why they have great agitation, becaufe tle {pirits diflipated by the rapid malignity of the Poy {on 


no fores. 


SignesOf choler. 


cannot endure that labour; betides they are taken with frequent {wouning fey, of 


chem have Bubo’s, few have Blains come forth ; and by the fame reafonthe;, Urine 
are like to thofe of found men. . 
Cuar. XVI. 
Signes ofthe Plague drawne into the body bythe fault and putre. 
faction of humours. 


from plenitude obftruction, diftemper,and the ill juice of meats, Now 


[Garo muft wee deliver the fignes of each corrupt humour which reignes ip 
char it may be reduced to foundnefle and perfection of nature by theo 
pofition of its contrary or elfe beeevacuated by phyfick. Therefore 

the body be more yellow chan ufuall, ir isa figne of choler offending in quantity a4 
quality. If more black,then of melancholy ; if more pale, then of phlegme : if more 
red,with the veines fwolne up and full, then of bloud. Alfothe colour of the rifing 
blaines, tumours and fpots, exprefle the colour ofthe predominant humour, 
rhe excrements caft forth by vomit, ftooleand otherwife ,the heavineffe and chee. 
fulneffe of the affected body ; the manner of the prefent feaver ; the time of the yer 
age,region, diet. Such thingsas have a cutting, penetrating, attenuating, andclean. 
fing faculty take away obftruction. By meanes of obftruction feavers oft-times ac. 
company the Plague, and thefe not onely continuall, but alio intermitting, liketerti 
ans or quartaines. Therefore that Plaguethat is fixedin the infeCtion or corruption 
ofa cholericke humour, fhewes it felfe by the forementioned fignes of predomina- 
ting choler,to wit,the heate of the skin, blaines and excrements,as alfo in the quick. 
neffe of killing and vehemency of the fymptomes, bitrerneffe of the mouth, a paine. 
fulland continual! endeavour of going to ftool, by reafon of the acrimony of choler 
ftimulating and raking the guts in the paflage forth. That which refides in the cor- 
rupt fubftance of groffe humours, as of bloud,fheweth it felfe by many and plentiful! 
{weats, by a fcowring, by which are avoyded many and various humours; and olt- 
times alfo bloudy matterthat proceeds from corrupt phlegme, it invades with more 
found fleep,& a caufelefs wearinefs ofall the members, when they are awakened out 
oftheir fleepe, they are not feldome troubled with a trembling over ali their join's, 
the entrance and way of the fpirits into the members being obftructed by the grolle 
neffe of the humours. That which is feated in the corruption of a melancholy hu 
mour,is accompanied with heavinefle and paine of the head, much pentfivenelle,« 
deep and {mall pulfe. But the moft certaine figne of the Plague refiding in thecor- 


*S<2¥ Ormerly we have reckoned up the caufes of the corruption of humours 


Whenchcurine ruption ofthe humours, is to bee taken from the urine. For the fignes of the vitiated 


isto be looke 


upon. 


Whyfomeare ticethereof. But fome are much troubled with thirft, others not at all, becaule cho 


muchtroubled Jer or Phlegme fometimes onely putrefie in the flomacke or orifice of thevent® | 
with thirit,o- 


4 humours cannot but thew themfelves inthe urines: therefore troubled urines, «04 


fach as are like thofe of carriage beats, as alfo blacke and greene,give certaineno- 


thers net atail, cle, fometimes befides they will weaken the governement of the natural! faculaies 0 


the part, asof the appetite. But ifthe feaver happen by the default and infection 
both of the Aire and Humours, then will there bee a great confulion 0 
mentioned fignesand fymptomes. 


| pre 
con 


charles the Fr 
chat were very 


to Alary one ol 
onofthe Aire 
on: For when 
denly it went 

any griefe or: 


rhe fort | 


Gut 


fant 
or fuffoca 


paticnts doe th 


making water 


thematrer ; 


Chamber on ¢ 
King fo fearfu 
Alchoughr 
diet and cond: 
guine, more < 
is the nourihe 
pallages and | 
in, are more | 
athome, but 
pleafurejare a 
of the peftile: 
That pelt 
ousas that w! 
tickand mel 
Caule in then 
coid and lef 
putrefie. 
Men that 
Naughty qua 
fation 
other difeafe 
but they all 
Wander up at 
aan end. 
But here a 
have ho por 
Contrary from 
Matthofe ard 
fores in 
thereof tum 
org 


“ers in their 


you 
Ba = kif 
going 
on das th 
4 
; | 4 
i 4 
4 q 
q 
ve 


d putre. 


ruption of humours 
of meats. Now 
which reignes in us, 
of nature by the op. 
yfick. Therefore if 
AN Quantity and 
phlegme if more 
colour of the rifing 
ant humour, as alfo 
cavineffe and cheer- 
the time of the year, 
enuating, andclean. 
feavers oft-times ac. 
neermucting, like terti- 
fection or corruption 
fignes of predomina- 
alfo in the quick. 
f che mouth, a paine- 
¢ acrimony of choler 
ich refides in the cor- 
y many and plentifull 
us humours ; and oft- 
,itinvades with more 
hey are awakened out 
g over all their joints, 
tructed by the groffe- 
of a melancholy hu- 
much penfiveneffe, a 
ue refiding in the cor- 
-fignes of the vitiated 
troubled urines, and 
ene, give certaine 
‘ot at all, becaufe cho- 
orifice of the vent! 
naturall faculties 
default and infectio® 
-onfufion of the fore- 


Crap. XVII. 


Of the Prognoftication that is tebe inilitutedinthe Phagwe. 


sieP0 U may well fore-tell the future motions andevents of difeafes, when 
cw 7:4, you throughly know the nature of the dileafe, and accidents thereof,and 


y the condition, function, and excellency of the body and grieved parts : 

Although chat this may bee {poken in generall, That there is nocertaine 
~e@ition in piftilent difeafes, either to health or death, for they have very un- <iction in the 
motions, fometimes iwift and quick, fometimes flow,and fometimes choa- 

og or luffocating in a moment, while one breathes in the venemous Aire, as hee is 

ingabout any of his neceffary affaires having puftles rifing in the skin with (harpe 

~jaand as though the whole body were pricked all over with-needles, or the ftings 

xpeese Which I have feene with mine eyes in the Plague that was at Lyons when 

-igrlesthe French Kang lay there. It many times commeth to pafs that the accidents 
sgewerevery vehement and raging a little before, are fuddenly aflwaged, and the 

ents doe thinkethemfelves better, or almoft perfe@ly found. Which happened Ahiftory, 

a vary one Of the Queene- Mother her Mayds, in that notable peftilent conftituti- | 
ofthe Aire, that yeare when Charles the French King lay at the Caftle of Koffili- 

»: For when the was infected, a great tumour or Babe arofe in her eroine, and fud- 

‘enly it went in againe,fo that the third day of her fickneffe, the faid the was without 

gygriefe or difeafe at all, but that fhee was fomewhat troubled witha difficulty of 

nking water ; and I think it was becaufe the bladder was enflamed by che refluxe of 


; bur fhee wasfound in mind and body, and walkedup and downe the 


“TS in their bodies. 


Chamber on the fame day thatthe died, The ftrangeneffe of which thing made the 
King fo fearfull that he hafted to depart thence. 

Although this difeafe doth {pare no man,of what age, temperature, complexion, Why young 
jitand condition foever, yet it affauleeth young men that are cholericke and fan. W<n‘poner ie 
wine, more often than old men that are cold and dry, in whom the moyfture that gan old 
sthenourifher of putrefaction by reafon of their age is confumed, and the wayes, 
uliges and pores of the skin,whereby the venemous Aire fhould enter and pierce 
more {trait andnarrow. And moreover, becaule old men doe alwayes ftay 
home, but young men for their neceflary bufineffe, and alfo for their delight and 
slcalureare alwayes abroad in the day time, in the Aire, where-hence the pollution 
ifthe peftilence commeth more often. 

That peftilence that comes by the corruption of the humours, isnot focontagi- wha» plage 
sas that which commeth by thedefault of the Aire. But thofe chat are phlegma- mo! cuntayt- 


@ ‘kand melancholy,are moft commonly grieved with that kinde of peftilence, be- °"~ 


auf in them the humours are more clammy and groffe, and their bodies more 
coidand leffe perfpirable, for which caufes the humours fooner and more {pcedily 
Ntrefie. 

Men that are of an ill juice are alfo moft apt tothis kinde of peftilence, for in the 
laughty quality of the juicethere isa great preparation of the humours unto putre- 
action : You may know it by this, that when the peftilence raigneth, thereare no 
wher difeafes among the common people, which have their original of any ill juice, 
dat they all degenerate into the Plague. Therefore when they begin roappeare and 
vander up and downe, it is a token that the peitilence will fhortly ceafe, or is alinolt 
tan end, | 

Butherealfo I would have youto underftand thofe to bee ofan ill juice, which 

eno pores in their skin, by which, as it were by rivers, the evill juice which is CS é 
Contrary to nature, may be evacuated and purged. And I have noted and obferved, Wholcait 
hatthofe are leffle in danger of the Peftilence which have cancerous ulcers and ftin- the Plagues 
ng fores in their nofes, and {uchas infeéted with the French Pocks, have by reafon 
“eteof,tumours and rotten ulcers, or have the Kings evill running upon them, the 


‘profic or che Scab : and to conclude, all thofethat have fiftulous and running ub 


{think 


‘3.22 | 
not troubled wir}, 
nity Of the poyfon 
t iwouning tey, of 
wat: 


836 Concerning the Plague. 


I thinke thofe that have quartaine Feavers are the better priviledged {o; 44... 
becaufe that by the Fit caufing {weat, that commeth every fourth day, the C Lam, 
much of the evill juice that was engendered. Y aoy; 

This is more liketo beetrue, than tothinke that the poy fon that commeth 
without,may be driven away by that which lurketh within. fron 
Whofibjee  Contrariwife,women that are great with child,as I have noted,beca 
thereto. much ill juice, being prohibited from their accuftomed evacuations, 2 
cake this difeafe,and do feldome recover after they are infected. 
Signes thatthe Blacke or blew impoftumes, and {pots and puttles of the fame Colour, 
difcale is inew- the skin,argue that the difeafe is altogether incurable and mostal], 


ule they Days 


fene  Whenthe {welling or fore gocth or commeth before the feaver jit is 200d for 

t for it declareth that the malignity is very weak and feeble,and that nature hath or». 
come it, which of it felfeis able to drive fo great portion thereof fromthe 


A deadly figne- But if the fore or tumour come after the feaver, itis a mortall and deadly figne 


is certaine thatit commeth of the venemous matter not tranflated, but difperfe, 
by the viGory of nature, but through the multitude ofthe matter, with the try 
whereof nature is overcome. 
When the Moone decreafeth, thofe that are infected with the Peftilence arein 
ercat doubt and danger of death, becaufe then the humours that were collected «, 
gathered together before the full of the Moone, through delay and abundance 4, | 

{wellthe more, and the facultiesby which the body is governed, become m, 
weake and feeble, becaufe of the imbecility of the native heate, which before wy: fe 
nourifhed and augmented by the light, and fo confequently by the heat of the) ae™ 
Moon: For as itis noted by Ari/fot/e,the wainings of the Moone are more 
weak : and thence it is that women have their menftruall fluxes chiefly or moft cop, | 
monly at that time. 
"oe ee Ted In agrofle and cloudy Aire the peftilent infection is lefs vehement and contagious | 
moftconta.i- than inathin and fubtle Aire whether that thinnefle of the Aire proceed tromte 
heat of the Sun,or from the North wind & cold. Therfore at Pars ,where naturally, | (neal 
and alfothrough the abundance of filth that is about the Citie, the Aireisdarkeand 

erofle, the peftilent infection is leffe fierce and contagious than it is in Provsnce, for . 

the fubtlety of the Aire ftimulates or helps forward the Plague. 
Bur this difeafe is mortall and pernicious wherefoever it bee, becaufe it fuddenly 
affaulteth the heart, which is the Manfion, or as it were the fortrefle or caftleoflile: 
but commonly not before rhe fignes and tokens of it appeare on the body: andyct & 
| you fhall fcarce find any man that thinketh of calling the Phy fitian to helpe to pie- | 
| ferve him from {o great danger before the fignes thereof be evident to bee feeneand | 
felt: butthenthe heart is aflaulted. And when the heart is fo aflaulred, whathope | 
Vharefets Of life is there, or health to be looked for ¢ Therefore becaufe medicines come ott | 
-:apanstraaag times toolate, and this malady isas it were a fudden and winged meflenger of out | 
death, it commeth to pafle that fo many dye thereof. And moreover, becaulc atthe | 
firft {ufpicion of this fo dire and cruell a difeafe, the imagination and mince (whole 
force in the diverfly ftirring up of the humours is great andalmoft incredible) is{0 
troubled with feare of imminent death, and difpaire of health, that together witt 


Ore 


there is grea 
ly and abun 


| the perturbed humours, all the ftrength and power of nature falleth and fink) 
downe. 
This you may perceive and know,by reafon that the keepers of fuchas ar rt 
and the bearers which are not fearefull, but very confident, although they doc a4 
| the bafeft offices which may be forthe fick, are commonly not infected, and {claom 
dye thereof if infeed. 


nute of tim 
mendment 
pure, finces 
There bi 
ting the wi 
But I think 
that wind 
mous Air 
agitated, 
Clofeand 
Patient tom 
Cerated i 
fing it up 


4 i ‘ > 
He Plagu 
‘ tO wi ? 
a 
hence 
oreforc 
chere 
into 
i} 
ant to 
§ no or a} bling 
ae 
3 
‘ 


with the w 


erned, become m, Ire 
ate, Which before was 
by the hear Of the tal 
Ne are more cold and 
Chiefly or com. 
and contagion: 
Ire proceed from th 
Where natural}y 
, the Aire is darke and 
in Provan; ¢, for 


becaufe it luddenly 
refie or caftle of life: 
n the body : and yer 
to helpe to pre- 
dent to bec feene and 
Mlaulted, what hope 
Medicines come oft: 
ed meflenger of our 
over, becaule atthe 
n and minde (whole 
oft incredible) is fo 
, thattogether with 
> falleth and finketh 


of fuchas are ficke, 
rough they doe all 
fected, and {eldome 


Nor 


Concerning she ‘Plague. 8 37 


XVII. 


How a peftilent feaver comesto be bred im ss. 


atic Plague oft-times findeth fuel in our bodies,and oft-times allurements, 
} co wit, the putrefa@ion of humours, or aptnefle to putrefie : bur it never 
chence hath its firft Originall, for that comes alwaies fromthe defiled 
therefore a peftilent feaver is thus bred in us : The peftilent Aire drawne the 
aiggtion Into the lungs, and by tran{piration intothe utmoft mouthes of the waics trom che 
egpd arteries {| pread over the skin,the bloud or elfe the humours already putre- -_ 
or apt to putrefie therein, are infeted and turned into a certaine kindof ma- 
~vefembling the nature of the agent. Thele humours, like unquencht lime when 
with water, {end forth a putride vapour, which carryed tothe prins 
arts and heart efpecially, infecteth the {pirituous bloud boyling in the ven- 
«thereof, and therewith alfothe vitall {pirits ; and hence proceeds a certaine 
withheate This heat diffufed over the body by the arteries,together with a ma- 

p quality taints all,even the folid parts of the bones withthe peftiferous venome, 

“yeides, caufeth divers fymptomes, according to the nature thereof, and the 
@ .jirionof the body and humours wherein it is. Then is the confli@ of the ma- 
vy afailing,& nature defending, manifeft,in which if nature prevaile,it,ufing the 
‘oofthe expulfive faculty, will fend & drive it far from the noble parts,either by 
ys,yornits bleeding, evacuation by ftoole or urine, buboes, carbuncles, puftles, 
.ysand other fuch kinds of breakings out over the skin, But on the contrary, if the Signes thae na. 
jjgaity prevaile, and nature be too weake, and yeeld,and that firft he be troubled S#o™™ 


panting or palpitation of the heart, then prefently after with frequent 


xtings,the patient then at length willdye. For this isa great figne of the Plague 


vapeltileat Feaver, if prefently atthe firft, with no labour, nor any evacuation 
sathe (peaking of, their ftrength faile them, and they become exceeding faint. 
‘way find the other fignes mentioned in our preceding difcourfe. 


Cuar. XIX. 


Into what place the Patient ought to betake himfelfe fo foone as 
be finds himfelfeinfected. 


E have faid chat the perpetual! and firft originall of the peftilence 
2 commeth of the Aire, therefore fo foone as oncis blafted with the pe- 2s 
tiferous Aure, after he hath taken fome the the Plague. 
ey thereof, hee mutt withdraw himfelfe into fome wholefome Aire, 
7 that is, cleane and pure from any venemous tufection or contagion, for 
‘ere is great hope of health by the alteration ofthe Aire; for we doe moft frequent- 
y and abundantly draw in the Aire of allehings, fo that we cannot wantitfor a mi- 
nuteoftime: therefore of the Aire that is drawne in, dependeth the correction, a- 
nendment, orincreafe of the Poyfon or malignity that is received, as the Aire is 
pure, fincere or corrupted. 
There bee fome that doe think it good to fhutthe patient ina clofe Chamber, fhut- 
‘ing the windowes to prohibite the entrance of the Aire as muchas they are able: 
But Ithinke it more convenient that thofe windowes fhould bee open from whence 
that wind bloweth that is dire€tly contrary unto that which brought inthe vene- _ | 
mous Aire ; For although there be no other caule, yet if the Aire bee not move d, or poses ae 
ezitated, but fhutup in aclofe place, it will foone bee corrupted. Therefore ina , 
Clofeand quiet place that is not fubjeé to the entrance of the Aire, f would with the 
Patient to make wind, orto procure Aire with athick and great cloth dipped or ma- 
‘crated in water and vinegar mixed together, and tyedtoa long Staffe, that by rof- 


‘ing itup and downethe clofechamber, the wind or aire thereof may coole and re- 
create 


4 
‘¥ 
AY, 


— 
9 
| Irth day ‘ ArT) | 
that con 
“MONS, are yer 
rr 
Me Colour, dis... 
motral}] | 
Oftal) 
it | | 
“4200d finn, | 
“Mature hath. 
‘rom the jnp, 
nd dcadly lion. 
“Ory 
red, bur Gil: @ 
1 the Peftile, 
atwere colleG-4 
and abun, 
— 
| 
| 
| 
| 


to, 


Themarenals 


can 


Sweet candbes. 


A (weer water 
to fineli to. 


A Nodg'sto 


fariweet tires. 


Concerning the 


create the patient. The patient muft every day bee carried inte, ~anths 


the beds andthe linnen cloaths muft be changed : there muft alwaies he." 
bright fire in the patients chamber,and efpecially in the night, wherel, " pita 
be made more pure, cleane, and voyd of nightly vapours, and of the dite, 
lent breath proceeding from the patient, or his excrements. Inthe me ad 
(if it be in hot weather) the patient fhould be weakened or made more ‘fa Ome | 
fon that the heat of the fire doth difperfe and watt his f pirits, the Flooy mt OY ty 
the chamber muft bee {prinkled or watered with vin egar and water, or Oung 
the branches of vines made moift in cold water, with the leaves and ¢ Nery vi 
ter-lillyes, or Poplar, or fuch like. In the fervent heat of f{ummer hee ap, Wl 
from Fumigations that doc {mell too ftrongly, becaufe that by affay)ri, hie 
they encreale the paine. B the be 
Ifthe patient could goe to that coft, it weregood to hang all the cham)... 
he lyeth,and alfothe Bed, with thicke or courfe linnen cloaths moiftened in br, 
and water of Rofes. Thofe linnen cloaths ought not to be very white, i, 
browne, becaufe much and great whitenefle doth difperfe the fight, and by q.9." 
the {pirits, doth encreafe the paine of the head : for which caufealfo the Ci _ 
ought notto bee very lightfome. 


Contrariwife, on thenight feafon there ought to bee fires and perfumes made | 
aul 


which by their moderate light, may moderately call forth the {pirits, 
Sweet fiies may be made of little pieces of the wood of Juniper, Broom, Af | 


Tallow mixed with fome {weet things. 


A fponge macerated in Vinegar of Rofes, and Water of the fame, and alittle: 


the decoction of Cloves, and of Camphire added thereto, ought alwaies to be 1 
dy at the patients hand, that by often {melling unto it, the animal {pirits may 0¢!* 
created and ftrengthened. 

The water following is very effeCtuall for this matter. Take of Orris, foure 0% 
ces ; of Zedoarie, Spikenard, of cach fixe dramimes ; of Storax, Benzoin, Cinamor, 
Nutmegs, Cloves, of cach one ounce anda haife; of old Treacle, halfean ounts: 
bruife them into a groffe ponder, and macerate them for the {pace of ewelve houre 
in foure pound of white and ftrong wine, then diftill them in a Limbeck of glafle on 
hot athes, and in the diftilled liquor wet a fponge, and then let ic be tyed in a lines 
cloath, or clofed in aboxe, and fo often put unro the noftrills. Or take of the vi 


negar and water of rofes, ofeach foure ounces; of Camphire, fixe graines ; of T sid 


cle, halfa dram : let them be diffolved together, and put into a viall of glalle,¥ 
the patient may often putunto his nofe. 


This Nedw/s following is more meet forthis matter. Take of Role or 


Thofethat are rich and wealthy may have Candles and Fumes made of waxe,) 


as may DE WI 
Thertore ni 
that recover 
dyed. 
“Sweet, gral 
qailitely | 
fyone enflan 
foreengeadt 
arethe hume 
braine, whe 
Muftard, fal 
they 
onofrhem 
letchis bec t 
wellleaven 
meat as m2\ 
aad very lit 
lets, Partric 
Moor-Hen 
inoitened 1 
ses,Cytro! 
garden, & 
of difeafe, 
faction oft 
onofthe n 
macke, an 
difeafes of 
amon. 
Ifthe p: 
Lettuce, P 
rigolds, C 
tron, tor & 
Hing roots 
by reafon 
Voke thea 


pieces o! 
aoittened rh 
| he patient 
For ia the 
vers Ol the he 
ypyoumutt 
a lictic 
rocts, Mirrhe,groflely beaten rogether,and layd onthe burning coals | 
fing difh. Trucly the breath or {moake of the wood or berries of Tuniper. jerhanet, A a. 
i . to drive ferpents a great way from the place where itis burnt. The vertueof thes, 
tree againtt venome is lo great, as Pliny teftificth, that a ferpent wil! Not Come unde 
the fhadow thereof, no not in the morning nor evening, whenthe fhaddow ofa 
thing is mo‘t great and long, but fhe will runne from it. Imy felfe have proved) 
| ifa circle or compafle bee made with the boughes of an Afh-tree, anda fixe made 
the midit thereof, ana a ferpent put within the compaffe of the boughs, thatthefy. 
pent will rather runne into the firethan through the Ath boughes, 
There isalfo another meanesto correét the Aire. You may (prinkle vinegar: 
the decoction of Kuc, Sage, Rofemary, Bay berrics, Juniper berries, Cyperas 
i fuch like,on {tones or bricks made red hot, and putin a pot or pan,thatall the whole | 
a chamber where the patient lyech may be perfumed with the vapour thereof. i 
| ve Alfo fumigations may bee made of fome matter that is more groffeand clamny, | 
# ae! that by the forceof thefirethe fumemay continue the longer, as of Ladannm, | 
Myrrhe, Mafticke, Rofine, Turpentine, Srorax,O/:banum, Bu rzoin, Bay | 
niper berries, Cloves, Sage, Rofemary, and Marjoram, ftamped together, and | 
like. 
We yet 


oncerning the Plague. 


8. 22 
“gail; of Orris halfe an ounce ; of Calamus Aromaticns, Cynamon, Cloves of each 


ton 4rammes ; of Storax and Benzoin, of cach one dramme and a halfe ; of Cyperus, 
gadramme : beat them into a grofle pouder, make thereof a Nod#/abetwecne 
pieces of Cambricke or Lawne of the bigneffle ofan hand-ball, then let it bee 
aoitened in cight ounces of Roie water, andtwo ounces of Rofe vinegar, and let 
se patient fmellunto it often. Thefe things mutt be varied according to the time: 
gor inthe Summer you mutt ufe neither Muske nor Civer, nor fuch like hotthings : 
_4morcover women that are fubject vo fits of the Mother, and thofe that have Fea- 
oF the head-ach,oughr nortoufe thofethings that are fo ftrong {melling & hor, 
nt yOu muft make choice of rhings moregentle: Therefore things that are nade 
vith alittle Camphire and Cloves bruifed and macerated together in Rofe water & 


of Rofes, {hall be fufficient. 


What Diet ouzhtto be obferved, and first ofthe choice ef Meas. 


‘esand perfumes Mads 


tae {pirits, m pie a He order of diet ina peftilencdifeafe ought to bee cooling and drying ; 
vniper, Broom, Ath Not (lender, but fomewhat full. Becaufe by this kinde of difeaie there 
in gum Arabick Oni commeth wafting of the {pirits, and exolution of the faculties, which 
ing coals put inferreth often {wouning, therefore that lofle muft be repaired as foone why suchas 


mm asmay be with more quantity of meates that are of cafic concoction and digcftion. have the plague 
ricrfore [never {aw any being infected with the peftilencethat kepta flender diet, 
utrecovered his health, but died ; and few that had a goed ftomacke,and fed well, 
dyed. 

Sweet, grofle, moift and clammy meates, and thofe which are alrogether, and 
giilitely ot fubtle parts, are to be avoyded ; for the {weet do eafily take fire, and are 
joneenfamed ; themoift will putrefie , the groffe and clammy obftruct, and there- 
ixeengeader puircfaction , thofe meats that are of fubtle parts, over-much attenu- 
vethe humours, and enflamethem, and doe ftirre up hot and fharp vapoursinto the 
baine, whereot commeth a Feaver. Therefore wee mutt efchew Garlike, Onions, 
\ultard, falted and {piced Meats, and all kind of Pulfe muft alfo be avoided, be caufe mutt be: 
hey engendergrofle winds, which are the authors of obftruction : but the decodti- thunued. 
nofthem is noralwayes to be refufed, becaufe it is a provoker of urine. Dherefore pre manna of 
letchis bee theit order of diet: lettheir bread bee of Wheat or Barly, weil wrought, «ict 
well leavened and falted, neither too new nor too ftale: lerthem bee fed with fuch 
ucatas may be eafily concoéted and digefted,& may engender much laudable juice, 
iad very little excrementaill, as are the ficfhof Wether-lambs, Kids, Levercts, Pul- 
lets, Partridges, Pigeons, T hruthes, Larkes, Quailes, Blacke-Birds, Turtle. Doves, 
Moor- Hennes, Pheafants, and fuch like, avoyding water- Fowles. Letthe Fleth be 
| wiftened in Ver-juice of unripe Grapes, Vinegar, or the juice of Lemmons, Oran. 
xs,Cytrons, tart Pomegranates, Barberries, Goofe-berries, or red Currance, or of 
garden, & wild forrell : tor all chefe fowre things are very wholefome in rhis kinde 
v'difeafe, forthey doe ftirreup the appetite, refiftthe vencmous quality and putie- 
‘ation of che humours, reftraine the heat ofthe Feaver, and prohibit the corruptt- 
on ofthe mearesin the ftomacke. Alchough that thofe that have a more weake 
macke, and are enducd witha more exact fenfe, and are fubject tothe Cough and 
ifeates of the Lungs, muft not ufethefe, unleffe they be mixed with Sugar and Cy- 
damon, 

Ifthe patient at any time be fed with fodden meats, let the brothes be made with 

ttuce, Purflaine, Succory, Borage, Sorrell, Hops, Buglofic, Crefles, Burnet, M2- 
‘igolds, Chervill, the cooling Seeds, french Baily and Oatmeale, witha lictleSaf- 
ton, for Saffron doth engender many {pitits, and refifteth noyfon. Torhefe ope- 
ting roots may be added forto avoid obftruction ; yet much broach mutt be refu! cd 

y reafon of moifture. T he fruit of Capers eaten in the beginning of the \\cale pro- 


Yoke the appetite, and prohibit obftructions, but they ought not ro bee ae 
with 


ay {prinkle vineoar of 
berries, nuts, 
rpan,thatall the whole 
vapour thereof. 

Ore grofle and clammy, 
aser, as of Ladanum, 

4zoin, Bay berries, Ju- 

ped together, and {uch 


umes made of waxe,or 


he fame, and a little of 
>ht alwaies to be rea- 
tinal {pirits may be re- 
k of Orris, foure oun- 
Benzoin, Cinamor, 
«acle, halfean ounce: 
Pace of twelve houres 
a Limbeck of glafle on 
ryed ina linnes 
Ns. Or take of the vir 
_ixe graines ; of Irea- 
viall of glafle,which 


of Rofe 
pugs 


~ik 2 
lt Ger. 
ales be 
cht, wher Clear, od 
31d of aire] 
d the file) Cin 
the Inthe ped 
NCane time 
~ tim, 
made More faine 
5, the Floor or... 
(42V@S and How ere 
immer heemyp 
at by affaulting 
all the Chamber... 
Ty white, Dur 
he fighr, and ty 
| 
oF Is thouphe 
Che Vertue of th, Af, 
ent wil] Dot come 
ken the fhaddo WV OF 
y felfe have UVCdth 
anda fre Made 7 
he boughs, thar CE ict 


Concerning tbe Plague, Lip. 


Broaths, pur 

Fifhcs are altogether to be avoyded, becaufe they foon corrupt inthe Sto 
butif che patient be delighted with them,thofe that live in tony places mick 
fen, that isvo fay, thofe that live in pure and fandy water, & about rocks ang * 
as are Trouts, Pikes, Pearches, Gudgions, and Cravifes boyled in milk, Wilk. 
fuch like. And concerning Sea-fith, he may be fed with Giltheads, Gy >a 
all the kinds of Cod-fith,Whitings not feafoned with falt, and Turbuts. 

Egges potched and caten with the juice of Sorrell, are very good. Likew; eB 
ly water feafoned with the graines of a tart Pomegranate, and if the Feayer je, 
ment, with the feeds of white Poppy. Such Barly water is cafieto be coney Ged te 
digefted, it cleanfeth greatly, and moiftens and mollifieth the belly. Burin - 


Marts, With 


OME 


procures an appetite to vomit, and paine of the head, and thofe muft abftain, from | 


it. But inftead of barly water they may ufe pap, and bread crummed inthe ¢ 
onof aCapon. 


For the fecond 


Peares. 


i altel Andinthe latter end of the Meale, Quinces roafted in the Embers, Marmelgt. of | 


themealeey Quinces,and conferves of Bugloffe or of Rofes,and fuch like, may be taken ; 
this pouder following. 


Take of Coriander feeds prepared, twodrams; of Pearle, Rofe leaves, (hayins 7 
ofHartf{ horneand Ivory, of cach halfea dram , of Amber two fcruples of Cin, 


mon cne {cruple; of Unicornes horne, and the bone in a Stagges heart, of each hal 


a (cruple ; ot Sugar of Rofes, foure ounces : Make thereof a pouder, and ufeir afte, 


mcats. 


If the patient be fomewhat weake, he muft be fed with Gelly made of the fle(hof 
a Capon,and Veale fodden together in the water of Sorrell, Carduus with | 
a little quantity of Rofe vinegar, Cynamon, Sugar, and other {uch like, as the pre. 


fent neceflicy fhall feeme to require. 
Inthe night feafon forall events and mifchances,the patient muft have ready pre: 
pared broath of meats of good diyeftion, with a little of the juice of Citrons «1 


Pomegranates. 
Arctaurative hisreftaurativethat followeth may ferve for all. Take of theconferveofbu- 
drinke. oloffe, Borage, Violets, Water-lillies,and Succory,of each two ounces ; of the pou- 


der of the EleCtaary Diamarzaritum Frigidum, of the Trochifces of Camphire,ot 
each three drams: of Citron feeds, Carduas {ceds, Sorrell feeds, the rootes of Di} 
tamnus, Tormentill, of eachtwo drammes; of the broath of a young Capon, mace 
with Letwuce, Purflaine, Bugloffe and Borage boiled in it, fixe pints, ; putthem in 
a Lembecke of glaffe with the flefh of two Pullets, of fo many Partridges, and wita 
fifteene leaves of pure gold: make thereofa deftillation over a foft fire. Thentae 
of the diftilled liquor, half pint, ftraine it through a woollen bagge,withtwo ou 
ces of white Sugar, and halfea dram of Cynamon : let the patient ufe this when he 
is thirftie. Orelfe put the flefh of one old Capon, and ofa legge of Veale, two mi 
ced Partridges, and two drammes of whole Cinamon without any liquor, in alem- 
becke of glaffe, well luted and covered, and fo let them boile in Ba/neo Maria 
the perfect concoction. For fo the fiefhes will bee boiled in their owne juice, with: 
out any hurt of the fire; then let the juice bee prefled our therehence with 2 prefic: 
give the patient for every dofe, one ounce of the juice with fome cordial! watcls, 
fome Tr:fantalum, and Diamargzaritum frigidum. 

The preferves of {weet fruits are to bee avoided, becaufe that {weer things yr" 
into choler ; but the confe@ion oftart prunes, Cherries, and fuch !ike may bee : 
ufed. But becaufe there isnokinde of fickencfle that fo weakens the ftrengt),#' “ 
plague ; it isalwaics neceffary, but yet {paringly and often, to fecd the patie 
having refpe unte his cuftome, age, the region, and the time : for throug" me 
neffe there is great danger, left chat the venemous matter that is driven out 6 che 


perficiall parts of the body, fhould be called backe into the inward parts, by *° im 


with over-much Oyle and Salt, they may alfo with good fucceffe “lites | 


For the fecond courfe, let him have raifons of the Sunve newly foddeninp,, 
courte water with Sugar, foure Damaske Prunes , tart Cherries, Pippins, and Katharine fa 


le 


the juice of Ct 
chat are uled a: 
The ule of 
rell well clari 
the beft hard 
trained and cl 
tweene meale: 
Lettuce, Scal 
and clarified | 
allwaters, an: 
put thereto o! 
through a 
itrons, 
Tholerhat 
drink fill, fo 
lomwhiat cart 
alfo crad: 
comes a fe 
Oxycrate 
and reprefle 
alfo expeller! 
bled with {pit 
uch muft av. 
Take of fa 
foure ou; 
the patient ch 
alfe an ounce 
Rofes, of 
‘hereof a J ule 
ted Currance 
et boyled, h 
CS, and vine 
tell of faire di 
But if the 
dy ature, I 
“ine water cdl 
‘nd contrari 
“Me, asthe S; 


gil 
‘qgs inthe g 
pis 
ba 
é 
j 
3 
: 
| ; | | 
& 
sive it 2 Cait. 
~ 
| ch with: 
| OT OL 
7 
| 
| 
i 
pe 
i 


Lis. 22 


fuccefle bee 


rupt inthe Sto 
pout rocks and 
-din milk, Wilk 


Gurnarts 
Turbuts. 


be concoged 
belly. But in 


mmed inthe deco}. 


iewly fodden in Row | 


ppins, and Katharine 


smbers,Marmelate of 
may be taken : Or elfe 


Rofe leaves, fhavines 
vo {cruples of Cing. 
heart, of each half 
ouder, and ufcit afer 


y made of the ficth of 
rduus benediiius with 
t {uch like, as the pre- 


‘mutt have ready pre- 
juice of Citrons or 


f the conferve of Bu- 
» ounces ; of the pou- 
(ces of Camphire, of 
ds, the rootes of 
young Capon, made 
pints, ; putthiem in 
Partridges, and with 
afofcfire. Thentake 
bagge, with two oun 
ient ufe this when he 
eof Veale, two 
rany liquor, in 2 len 
in Balneo Maria unto 
cir Owne juice, with- 
hence with aprefic: 
cordiall 


hat {weer things 
uch like may bee 
ns the ftreneth, ast 


| 1B. 22. 


Rom acke, an d the ftomacke it felfe thould beefilled with cholericke, hot, thin, 
Co harpexcremenotall humours, whereof commeth biting of the ftomack, and gri- 


. 
'y places 


ons, 
with 


good. Likewif Bar. 
if the Feaver |y¢ Vehe. 


fome 
fe muft abftaine 


Concerning tbe Plague. 41 


Cuar. XXI. 
What drinke the Patient infected ought tou(e, 


F the feaver be great and burning, the patient muftabfain from 
Wine, unleffe that he be fubjeé to {wouning : and he may drinke 
Sage) the O.xyme/ following in ftead thereof. 
Takeof faire water, three quarts, wherein boyle foure ounces 41 
+ of hony untill the third part bee confumed, {cumming it continu- 
D~| ally , then ftrain it, and pur it into a cleane veffell, and addethere- 


to four ounces of vinegar, and as much cinamon as wil] fuffice to 
weicataft. Or elfe afugred water, as followeth. Take two quarts of faire water,of 
iatd fugar, fixe ounces, of cinamon, two ounces, ftrain it through a woollen bagge 
x cloth without any boiliag ; and when the patient will ufe it,put thereto alittle of 
hejuice of Citrons. The fyrupe of the juice of Citrons excelleth amongft all others 
ufed againft the peftilence. 
Theule of the Julep following is alfo very wholfome. Take of the juice of Sor- 4 juicy. 
«ll well clarified, halfe a pint, of the juice of Lettuce foclarified, foure ounces, of 
he beft hard fugar, onepound, boile them together toa perfection, let them bee 
trained and clarified, adding alittle before the end a little vinegar, let it beufed be- 
weene meales with boyled water, or with equall portions ofthe water of Sorrell, 
Lettuce, Scabious and Buglofic: ortake of this former defcribed Julep ftrained 
indclarified foure ounces, let it be mixed with one pound of the forenamed cordi- 
llwaters, and boile them togethera little. And when they are taken from the fire, 
pit thereto of yellow Sanders one dram, of beaten Cinamon halfe a dram, ftrain ic 
‘ough a cloth : when it is cold let it be given the patient to drink with the juice of 
Lions, 
Thoferhat have accuftomed to drink Sider, Perry, Beer or Ale, ou sht toufe that 
ink full, fo that it be clear,tran{parent, and thin, and made of thofe fruics that are 
omwhat cart;for troubled & dreggith drink doth not only engender grofle humors, 
uallo cradities, windinefs, and obftructions of the firft region of the body where- 
‘comes a feaver. | 
Oxycrate being given in manner following, doth affwagethe heat of the feaver, qhe commoii- 
nd reprefle the putrefa@ion of the humours, and the fiercenefle of the venome, and tesofexyuae 
dio expelleth the water through theveines, iffobee that the patients are rot trou- 
ted with f pitting of blood, cough, yezing, and altogether weake of ftomacke : for ful, 
uchmuft avoydall tart things. 
Take of faire water, one quart ; of white or red vinegar three ounces ; of fine Su- 
tit, foure ounces ; of fyrup of Rofes, two ounces : boile thema little, and then give 
‘Xe patient thereofto drinke. Or take of the juice of Lemmons & Citrons, of each 
ualfean ounce : of juice of foure Pomegranates, two ounces; of the water of Sorrell 
id Rofes, of each one ounce of faire water boyled, as muchas fhall fuffice : make 
‘ktcof'a J ulep, and ufe it betweene meales. Or take of Sirupe of Lemmons and of 
‘Currance, ofeach one ounce : of the water of lillies, foure ounces ; of faire wa- 
‘“tboyled, halfe a pinte, make thereofa Julep. Ortake of the fyrups of water 
“Sand vinegar, of each half an ounce, diffolve it in five ounces of the water of Sor- 
of faire water one pinte : make thereof a Julep. 
But if the patient be young, and have a {trong and good ftomacke, and cholericke phe drinking of 
Mature, thinke it notunmeet for him to drinkea full and large draught of foun- cold water, eo 


ofecd rhe pauient, fill 
for through 
s driven out co the 


ward parts, by 2° ye 


hom & whic 
“ine water cold for that is effetuall to reftraine and quench the heat of the Feaver, 


profitable. 

““contrariwife, they that drinke cold water often, and a very fmall quantity ata 

“sas the Smith doth fprinkle water on the fire at his Forge, doc encreafe che a 
Bbbb an 


Lae 
| | 
’ 
} 
Bok 
4 
< 
| 


4 
4 


Concerning the Plagu 


and bu rnin g,and chereby make itendurethe longer. Therfore by the judgment of Ca 


fas, when the difeafe is inthe chiefe encreafe, and the patient hath endured thirg ¢ 
the {pace of three or four daies,cold water mult be given unto him in ercat Guantin, 
fo that he may drink patt his fatiety, that when his belly and ftomacke are led)” 
yond meafure, and fufficiently cooled, he may vomit. 
Some doe not drinke fo much thereof as may caufethem to vomit,but do ¢.;. 
even unto {atiety, and foufe it foracooling medicine; but when either of thet 
done, the patient mutt. bee covered with many cloaths, and fo placed tha hee “i > 
and tong and great heat,found fleep commeth, by which great {weat is fent oy my 
that is a prefent helpe. 
But thirft muft fometimes be quenched with little pieces of Melons, Gourds ¢ 
cumbers, with the leaves of Lettuce, Sorrell, and Purflaine, made moitft or fokedin 


fleepe; and for the moft part, after long thirft and watching, and afer long fun. ms 


cold water, or with a little {quare piece of a Citron, Lemmon, or Oran emma | 
ced in Rofe water, & {prinkled with Sugar, and fo held in the mouth,and then choy 


ged. 


But ifthe patient be aged, his ftrength weak flepmatick by nature, & SiVeN to Wing 


when the ftate of the Feaver is fomewhat paft, and the chicfe heat beginning toa. 


iwage, he may drink wine very muchallayed at his meat, for to reftore his ftreneth, | 


and ro fupply the want of the wafted fpirits. The patient ought not by any mene 
to fuffer great thirft, but muft mitigate it by drinking, orelfe allay it by wafhing}j. 
mouth with oxycrate and {uch like, and he may therein alfo wath his hands and hi 
face, for that doth recreate the ftrength. Jf the fluxe or lask trouble him, he may yery 
wellufeco drinke fteeled water, andalfo boyled milke, wherein many {tones co. 


For dryneffe or Ming red hor out of the fire have beene many times quenched. Forthe dryneffeand 
roughnelleof roughnefle of themouth, it is very good to have a cooling, moiftening and lenity. 


the mouth. 


ing lotion ofthe mucilaginous water of the infufion of the feeds of Quinces,pfilinn, 
ideft, Flea-wort, adding theretoa little Camphire, wath the Water of Plantain and 


Rofes ; then cleanfe and wipe out the filth, and then moiften the mouth, by holdiag 


thercija little oile of {weete Almonds mixed with alittle fyrupe of Violets. Ifthe 


Forthe Ulcers FOUghnef{e breed or degenerate into Ulcers, they muft be touched with the water ot 


thereof, 


The choice of 


waters. 


Hip. fect. 
26. 


the infufion of fublimate, or 4qua fortis. 

But becaufe wee have formerly made frequent mention of drinking of water, 
have herethought good to fpeake fomewhat of the choice and goodnelle of wateis 
The choice of waters is not to be neglected, becaufe a great part of our dict depend 


knead bread, boile meat, and make broaths therewith. Many thinke that rain water 
which falls in fummer, and is kept in a cifterne well placed and made, is the who: 


fomeft ofall. Then nextthereto they judge that {pring water which runnes outer | 


thetops of mountaines, through rocks, cliffes and {tones : inthe third placethey put 


Well water, orthat which rifeth from the foots of hils. Alfothe river wateris 
that is taken out of the midft of ftreame. Lake or pond water is the wortt, efpecialy | 
if it ftand ftill; forfuch is fruitfullof and ftored with many venemous creates,” | 
Snakes, Toads, and the like. That which comesby the melting of Snow andlces | 


very ill, by reafon of thetoo refrigerating faculty and earthy nature. Butot 
and well waters thefe are to be judged the beft, which are infipide, without ime 
colour ; fuch as are cleare, warmith in winter, aad cold in fummer, which are" 


ly horand quickly cold, that is,which are moft light, in which ali manner pullc, tu" | 


neps, and the like,are eafily and quickly boyled.Laftly,when as fuch asuluall “e 
thereof, have cleer voices and fhrill, their chefts found, anda lively and fre{h coo 
in their faces. 


Cast 


Lips, 


thercon, for befides that we ufe it either alone,or mixed with wine fordrink,weal) 


ridotcs. We, 
ofall begin tl 
fendsthe hea 
sifo other An 
of Poyfon an 
poyfon in th 
thebody by 
The Ant 
the poy fon ; 
itfhould ove: 
which canno 
fome portior 
imprefions 
thofe Antid: 
and mixed 1: 
thevenome: 
ing therto m: 
the venenate 
of nature and 
There are ot 
other: asa S 
thridate exc 
manfion of | 
fon, notons 
thehearr, BE 
fonsunto thi 
ind robbe jt 
Theriaca ad 
thefe thing: 
ver. Bue the 
ence, altino 
Feaver, but 
CiNes, as wit 
Water of S 
Old Treac] 
thofe that a: 
adram. 
The pati 
ate, Orany 
Which whe 


un up and 
diffolve nar 


| a 
a 
| 4 | 
Ayreisp 
che AY 
a. egfe voyd 
@ in 9 
‘ 4 \4 1 
4 ~ 
| 
a 
1 
} 
| 4 
tt 


the judgement of Cer 
th endured thirft 
Ercar quantin, 
omacke 


en ether of thefe jc 


d after ‘ONG fuinefy, 


and 


Mclons,Gourd< Cu 
ade moitft or { oked 
OF Orange macera. 
outh,and then chon. 


ture, Piven to win 
heat beginning to a 
reftore his {trength 
t not by any meanes 
it by Wathing his 
wath his hands anc his 
uble him, he may very 
cin many {tones com. 
» Forthedryneffeand 
oiltening and lenify. 
ds of Quinces, pfilinm, 
Vater of Plantain and 
he mouth, by holding 
‘upe of Violets. If thc 
shed with the water of 


bf drinking of water, | 
d goodnefie of waters. 
artof our dict depends 
wine for drink we allo 
thinke chat rain water 
id made, is the whoic- 
Ber which runnes outot 
the third place they put 
the river water js good 
is the wort, efpecially 
renemous creatures, 
ting of Snow and Ice is 
y nature. Butof pring 
fipide, without fmell,© 
mmer, which are quick- 
Sch all manner pulie, 
n as fuch asufually 


alively and frefh colout 


Cuar.XXII, 
Of Antidotes to becufed in the Plagwe. 


(Ow we muft treate of the proper cure of this difeafe, which muft bee u- 
m fed as foone as may be poflible, becaufe this kinde of poyfon in fwift- 


SG 


ALANS neffe exceedeth the celerity ofthe medicine. Therefore it is betterto 
Hcy errein this, that you fhould think every difeafe to bee peftilent ina pe- 
PFS ftilent feafon, and to curcitas the Peftilence : becaufe that fo long as 


1 Ayreis polluted with the feeds of the Peftilence, the humours in the body are. 


fone in fected with the vicinity of {uch an ayre, fo thatthen there happeneth no dif 
yevoyd of che Peftilence, thatis to fay, which isnot peftUent from the beginning 
w his owne nature,or which ts not made peftilent. 


Many begin the cure with bloud. letting, fome with purging, and fome with An- the bee'nning 


adores. We,taking a confideration of the fubftance of that part that is aflaulted firft 
eoyant Cie 


fall begin the cure with an Antidote, becaufe that by its !pecificke property, it de- 
iqdsthe heart from poyfon,as much as it is offendedtherewith. Although there are 
sfo other Antidotes which preferve & keep the heart & the patient from the danger 
(Poyfon and the Peftilence, not onely becaulethey doe infringe the power of the 
yyfon in their whole fubftance, but alfo becaufe they drive and expeil it our of all 
hebody by {weat,vomiting,{cowring, and fuch other kinds of evacuations, 


[19.22 Concerning the Plague. 


The Antidote muft begiven infuch aquantity as may bee fufficient to overcome In what quanti. 


‘hepoyfor ; but becaufe it is not good to ufe it in greater quantitie than needeth, ieft 
ould overthow our nature,for whofe prefervation onely it is ufed,cheretore chat 
which cannot bee taken togetherandat once, muft bee taken at feveralltimes, that 
fmeportion thereof may daily bee ufed fo long, untill all the accidents, effects and 


ty rhey mull 
be taken, 


inprefions of the poyfon be paft, and thatthere be nothing tobe feared. Some of why poignous 
oe Antidotes confift of portions of venemous things, being tempered together, things are put 


sdmixed in an apt proportion with other medicines, whofe power ts contrary to 
‘hevenome: as 1 reacle,which hath foran ingredient the Acth of Vipers, that it be- 
ingtherto mixed may ferve as a guideto bring all the antidote unto the place where 
evenenate malignity hath made the chiefe impreflion ; becaufe by the fimilirude 
ofnature and {yinpathy,one poyfon is fuddenly {natched and carryed unto another. 


into Altidores, 


Thereare other abfolure poifonous, which nevertheleffe are Antidotes one unto an- some 
ther: asa Scorpion himfelfe cureththe prick of a Scorpion. Bur Treacle and Mi- Antidotes to 


f 


‘hridate excell all other Antidotes : for by ftrenethening the nobleft part, andthe 
nanfion of life, they repaire and recreate the wafted Spirits,aid overcome the poy- 
00, not onely being taken inwardly, but alfo applyed outwardly to the region of 
theheart, Batches and Carbuncles : for by an hidden property they draw tue poy- 
asunto them, as Amber doth Chafte, and digeft it whenit is drawne, ana {poile 
idrobbe it of all its deadly force ; as itis declared at large by Galler, in hus booke 2a 
Theriaca ad Pifoncm, by molt true reafons and experiments. But you wilifay chat 
‘ielethings are hot,and thatthe Plague is often accompanied witha burning 
er. Butthereto Lan{wer,thereis not fo great danger in the Feaver as in the Pefti- 
although in che giving of Treacle,{ would not altogether {eeme tonegicétthe 
‘caver, but think it good to minifteror apply it mixed with cordiall coolin g medi. 
‘ines, as withthe Trochifces of Camphire,fyrupe of Lemons, of water Litlies, the 
Water of Sorrell, and fuch like. And forthe fame caufe wee ought not to choofe 
Old Treacle, but that which is of amiddle age, as of one or two yearcsold : to 
that are ftong, you may give halfe a dramme,and tothofe that are more weake, 
ram, 
_Thepatient ouzhtto walke prefently after that hee hath taken Treacle, Mithri- 


ANCLLOMe, 


How to walxe 
atrer rhe taking 


“ate, orany other Antidote but yet as moderately as heecan : not like unto maby, ofan Antidere. 


*ich when they perceive themfelvcs to bee in fected, doe not ceafe to courfe and 


‘Un up and downe, untill they have no ftrength to fuftaine their bodies, fur fo they 


tifolye nature, fo that it cannot fuifice to overcome the contagion. After mode- 


TALE 


Bbbba 


— 
vomit,butdod-;.. 
ai? 3 a 
SA 
hep, 
iS i¢nt Our 
| 
| 
| 
\ 
(MAF: | 
i 


Concerning the Plague. 


Lip 22 


rate walking,the patient muft be put warm tobed,and covered with many clos. 
warm brick-bats or tiles applyed to the foles ot his feet; or in ftead thereof Othes », 
ule {wines bladders filled with hot water, and apply them tothe eroines and Uma 
holes, taprovoke fweatt : for {weating in thisdifeafe isa moftexcellen 
both for toevacuate the humours in the Feaver, and alfo to drive forththe a, 
ty in the Peftilence, although every {weate brings not forth the fruit of he, th IR. 
George Agricola faith, that hee faw a woman at Ms/sia in Germanie,that dig fas For 
for the {pace of three dayes,that the bloud came forth at her head and breat Cat fo 
nevertheleffe fhee died. 


This potion following will provoke -fiweate. Take the roots of China thay 


A fudorifick 


potion. thinne pieces one ounce and halfe of Guajacum two ounces ; of the bark, 
mariske one ounce ; of Angelica rootstwo drams of the fhaving of Harf. hotne ‘ 


ounce; of Juniper berries three drams; put them into a viall of glaffe that wi) Cones; 
fixe quarts, put thereto foure quarts of running or river water thatis pure and ¢ - 
maccrate them for the {pace of one whole night on the hot afhes : and inth, 
ning boilethem allin Maria, untill the halfe bee confumed, which 
done in the {pace of fixe houres; then letthem be ftrained througha bagge an, th 

ftrained againe, but let that be with fixe ounces of fugar of Kofes, and a Jirt|. Tree 
cle : let che-patienttake eight ounces or fewer of that liquor, andit will pro... 
{weat. The powder following is alfo very profitable. Take of the leaves of Dijign 


A fudorifick 


powdery ws, the rootsof Tormentill, Betony, of each halfean ounce, of bole Armenici. 
prepared one ounce, of Terra Sigilatathree drams, of Aloesand Myrthe, ofe,ci 


halfe adram,of Saffron one dram, of Mafticke two drams : powder them all accor. 


ding to art, and give one dram thereof diflolved in Rofe-water,or the water of wi); _ 
forrel), and let the patient walke fo foone as he hath takenthat powder ; then let hiy 


be laid ia his bed to {weat as I have fhewed before, 
A ditilled wa. 


Plazue. 


fixe ounces thereof with Sugar and a little Cinamon & Saffron : then lethim Wak, 


and then {weat asisaforefaid : the Treacle and cordiall water formerly prefcribed | 
are very profitable for this purpofe. Alfothe water following is greatly comms: 
ded. Take of Sorrell fixe handtuls,of Rue one handfull: dry them & maceratethea | 
in vinegar forthe {pace of foure and twenty houres, adding thereto foure ounces ot 
Treacle : make thercofa diftillation in Baluco Marie, and let thediftilled wateroe 
kept for your ufe ; and fo foone as the patient doth thinke himfelfeto be infectedia 
him take foure ounces of that liquor, then let him walke and fweate. He mufticave 
What meane to f{weating whenhe beginneth to waxe taint and weake, or when the humourthat | 


Another. 


beuledin Iwea runs downe his body begins to wax¢ cold,then his body muft be wiped with warm 


ting. 


heatis called away from performing the office of concoétion :alfo he mutt or lets 


when heis in his {weat,leftthe malignity goe inwardly withthe heat and {piritsune 


the principall parts ; butifthe patient bee much inclined to fleep, hee mult bee Kf" 
from it with hard rubbing, and bands tyed about the extreme parts of his body, 

with much noife of thofe thatareabout him, and let his friends comfort hia 
with the good hope that they have of his recovery ; but if all clus will o 
keepe him from fleepe, diflolve Caforeum in tart Vinegar, and andi¢ 
it bee injected into his noftrils : and let himbec kept continually waking the o 
day, ind onthe fecond and third, evenunto the fourth ; thatisto fay, unto th 1a 
fect expulfion ofthe venome ; and let him nor fleep above three or foure — . 
a day and night. Inthe meane time let the Phyfician that thall bee preient co" 
all things by his ftrength : for itis to be feared,that great watchings will diffolve™ 


MOr. | 
U bee | 


The water following isgreatly commended againft poyfon. Takethe roaso 
the Gentian & Cyperus,of cach three drams ; of Cardaus benedidins, Burnetjofeachon 
handfull ; of Sorrell feeds and Divels-bit, of cach two pugils ; of Ivieand Junipe 
: berries,of cach halte an ounce ; of the flowers of Buglofle, Violets and red Roles, of | 
each two pugils powderthem fomewhat groflely, then foake or ftecpethemion 
nightin white wine and Rofe water:thenadde thereto of bole Armenick one our, 
of Treacle halfean ounce, diftill them all in Marig, and keepethediltilled 
quor ina a vial of glafle wel covered or clofe topped for your ufe:letthe patient tse | 


clothes, anddryed, The patient oughtnot to fweat with a full ftomacke, for 


eyflives to 2 

aquar 
C7 
mifce, fiat 
vyub.coral. 
pithema. Or. 
choct. Dil. cap) 
acetirolat. 

Orell{e, 494. 

flor. nenuph. q 
mul ommsa, 
feliby its fell 


leate 
acuated,& 
trariwife, th 
meth to 
Sted with the 
full queftion 
aire: This « 
Pierce untor 
While behin 
4S the brain 
ther colleQill 
reafonth 
Whatfoever; 
of natur 


tat is, by di 


+4 18.22 
| 
els they a’ 
a{cariet, OF 2 ¢ 
| 
| 
| 
| 
a 4 
Beal 
ik 


Lip 22 1B. 22. Concerning the Plague. 


senoth,and make the patient weake: you mutt not let him cate within three houre 


sett his{weating ; in che meanefeafon,as his ftrength (hall require, let him take the 
ade of a preferved Citron, conferve of Rofes, bread toafted and fteeped in wine, 


” meat of a pr eferved Myrabolane, or fome fuch like thing. 


Mes = and inthe 


les, and 


the leaves of Diam, 
¢, Of bole 


Dwder them all accor. 
the water of wild 
powder ; then let him 


on. Takethe roots of 
es, Burnet,of each one 
; of Ivieand Juniper 
plets and red Rofes, of 
¢ or fteepe them fora 
Armenick one ounce, 
keepe thediltilled li- 
le:lerthe patient take 
mo: then lerhim walk, 
formerly preicribed 
1g is greatly commet- 
1em & macerate them 
ereto foure ounces of 
he diftilled water bee 
lelfeto be infected, let 
‘eate. He mutt leave 
hea the humour that 
be wiped with warme 
Iftomacke, for fo the 
alfo he mutt nor fleep 
eheat and {pirits unto 
ep, hee mult bee kept 
arts of his body, 20 
friends comfort him 
t if all chis will 90 
nd Aguas vite, and let 
ually waking the 
sto fay, unto che per 
ree or foure houres 
all bee preient 
hings will diflolve! 


Wilcon:. & 

hatis pur ain 
pure and Cleare 

mor. 
Which Willbes 
us a bagee,and then 
alittle Tre, | 

and it will PlOVoke q 


Cuar. XXIII, 
Of Epitbemes to be ufed for the flrengthening of the principall parts. 


Here arc aifo fome topick medicines to bee reckoned amongft Antidotes, whereof they 
which mutt be outwardly applyed as {peedily as may be; as cordidlland made. 
hepaticke Epithemes for the fafety of the noble parts, and ftrengthening 

of the faculties,as thofe that drive the venenate aire farre fromthe bow- 

Jc:they may bemade of cordiall things not onely hot,but alfocold, that they may 

enperthe heat,and more powerfully repercuffe. They muft be applyed warme with 
scarlet, or a double linnen cloth, or a foft {punge dipped in them, if fo be that a Care noi fiero be ap- 
wacledoe not poflefie the regions of the noble parts, for it is not fitto ufe reper- a 
fives to 2 Carbuncle. Youmay make Epithemes after the following formes; 

aquar plantac. folan. am 3iv.aque vini granat. aceti, 4n.5ili. fantal. 

nh. Grcoral. rub, pulverif.an, Siti, theriac. vet. 3%. camph, Dii. croct Di. carsoph. 

milce, fiat epithema, Or clfe,R. aqu.vof: plantag. an. 3x. aceti rof. 3iv.cariph. fant. 

wh.coral. rub. pulverif. pul. diamarzartt fragid. iS. caphure mo(chi an. Di.fiat e- 

sithema, Or, siv.aceti fant. rub. Si. caryophyl, 

Dil. caphare Di, bole arm, terra figil. Zedoar. an. i. fiat epithema. Or elie, 

aqua rofat. an ib. capbur D8. thertac. mithridat.av.5j, flat epithema. 

Orel, aqu. rofar. wenuph. buglof.acctofe, aceti rofar.an.'b. 8. fant 
caphur.an. 5h. mithrid.cr tbertac. an. dil. terantur mifceantur {i- 

mul omnia. When you intend toufe them, take fome portion of them in a vef- 

idlby its felfe, wherewith let the :affe&ted bowell be fomented warme. 


; 


XXIIIL 


Whether and blond. letting bee nece [ary inthe beginning 
of pestilent d:feafes. | 


foon as the heartis trengthened & corroberated with cordials & an- 
tidotes, we muft come co phlebotomy & purging, As concerning bloud. azainttblove- 
letting inthis.cafe,thereis.a great controverfic among Phyficians:T hofe the 
chat wifhirrobe fay oratfirme that the peftilear Feaver doth infixe ~ 
‘Gefelfe in the'bloud; aad therein alfo the peftilent malignity taketh its 
late. and therefore it will fooneinfeet the cther humoars,unietle thar the bloud be 
wacuated, & the infection chat remaiheth in the bioud:ke thereby. taken away. Cor - 
viatiwife, thofe thatdo not allow phlebotomy in this cafe,alledge,chat it often com- 
meth to pafle that the bloudis voyd of maiignity whenthe other humours arc infe- 
&ed with the venemous contagion.! Ifany man require myjudgement in this doubt- 
full queftion, I fay, that thé peftilence fometimes doth depend on the defaule of the 
dite: This default being drawne, through the paflages of the body, doth atiength compolog 
Pierce untothecatrals,as.we may underftand by the abfcefles which breake out one ofthis consio- 
While behind theearesfometimes in the arme-holes,and fometimes in the groines, verhie. 
4sthe braine, heart. or liver are infeéted. Andhereofalfo come Carbuncles, and o- 
ther colleGtions of matter, and: eruptions, which are feene in all parts of the body, 
oy reafon that nattire, wing the ftrength of the expulfive faculty, doth drive forth 
Whatfoever is neyfotaeor hurtfull. Therefore ifthe Phyfician will follow this mo- 
‘0 of nature, he mufeneither purge not let bloud, left that by a contrary motion, 
is, by drawing in from without, which proceeds 
B 3 y 


thereof 

the groines ar,” 
oft EXCellenge remed., 

ve forth the malig y, 

anie,that did {Wear 
Dts Of China fhaved ; 

0fthebarkeop | 

of Hatf-horne Or | 
Myrrhe, ofeach 


ly from-within, fhouldbe troubled, So wee often fee in thofewho are purped 

bloud fet fuch Buboes as come through unlawtall copulation, chat the...” 
thereby made contumacious, and by drawing i inwardly, it fpecdily 
French Pocks. 

Wherefore, when Buboes, Carbuncles and other peftilent Cruptions a 
which come through the detault of the Aire, we ought to abftain from pur pea 
phiebotomie ; but it is fufficient co fore-arme the heart inwardly and ome 
with Antidotes that arc encucd with a proper vertue of refifting the poyfon 

it is not to bee doubted, but that when nature is debilitated with both kindes , 
cuation, aud when the fpirits together with the bloud are exhaufted, the venem 
Aire wiil foone pierce, and be receivedintothe empty body, where it eXerciferh ; 
tyranny to the utter deftrution thereof. Mi 
A hiltory. In the yearc of our Lord God 1565. inwhich yeare there was great mors) 
throughourall France, by reafon of the peftilence and peftilent difeafes, barnes 
& diligently enquired ofall the Phyficians & Chirurgians of all the Ciries (through 


which King Car/es the ninth paffed in his progrefleunto Bayon)what ficce(fey,., 


Matter, 
Cauferh the 


patients had afterthey were lettenbloud and purged, whereunto they 
{woune,when 
bythe aking 
dyed ; but others which were not let bloud nor purged, but took cordiall Antidor; i 
inwardly, and applyed them outwardly, forthe moft part efcaped and recoverd 
their health : forthat kind of Peftilence tooke its originall of the primitive and{), 
pedin wine, o 


alike, thar they had diligently obferved, that all chat were infected with the peg; 
lencejand were letten bleed fome good 
what {trongly purged,thenceforwards waxed weaker and weaker, and {oa length 


tary default of the Aire, and sot of the corruption of the humours, 


When pweing “The like event was noted inthe hoarfeneffe that we fpake of before : that isto fay 
andbeedog thatthe patients waxed worfeand worfeby purging and phlebotomie ; but yer! do | 


indy Detuicad. 


not difallow cither of thofe remedies, if there be great tulneffe in the body, efpeci. 


ally ia the begiqning, and if the matterhave acruell violence, whereof may beet 
red the breaking in untafome noble part. For wee know that it is confirmed by #). 
feta. pocrates that what difeafe foever is caufed by repletion, muft be cured by evacuation 
Ape and chat in difeafes that are very fharpe, ifthe matter dofwell,itought robe rcncd- & 
day, fordelay in ‘uch difcafesis dangerous ; but fuch 


caufed orinflicted upon mans body by reafon or occafion of the peftilence, but of tic 


difeafed bodics, and difcafes themfelves commixed together with the Pefticnce: | 
therefore then peradventure it ts lawfullto puree ftrongly,andtoletagoodqua. 
ould take hold of the matter thatispree 


ty of bloud, k ft thatthe peftilent venome 
pared, and fo infcét it with a contagion, whereby the Peftilence taketh new and 


Cap  tarregreater ftrength ; efpecially as Ce/fus admonifheth us, where he faithsthat, by | 
how much rhe fooner thofe fudden invafions doe happen,by fo muchthefooner: 
medies mutt be ufed,yea or rather rathly applyed therefore ifthe veines {well, he 
face waxe fiery red, if che arterics of the temples beat ftrongly, ifthe 
ry hardly breathe by reafon of a weightim his ftomacke, if his {pittle be bloudy thea 

 oughthe cobeeletbloud wichout delay, for the caufes before mentioned. |t (eens 


muftbeleor be{tro open theliver veine onthe arme,whereby the heart and the [pleene 
h ' Ph “ne be better difcharged of their abundant matter , yet bloud-letting is not good at 

tines, for itis not expedient when the body beginneth to waxe ftiffe by realon 

the comming ofa Feaver , for then by drawing backe the heatand {pirits inwardly, 

the our vard parts being deftiture of bloud ,waxe ftiffe and cold;therefore bloud cat- 


not bee letten then without great loffe of the ftrength, and perturbation ofthe hoe 


mours. And it is to be noted, that when thofe plethorickecaules are prefent, (hi 
is one Indication of bioud-letting in a fimple peftilent Feaver, and another!" thi 
which hath a Bubo,ideft,a Botch or a Carbuncle joined therwith. For in one o - 
of thefe, being joyned with a vehement & ftrong burning Feaver,bloud mutt 
ten by opening theveine that is neareft untothe tumour or fwelling againft 
keeping the ftraightnefs of the fibres, that this being 
morc dire@ly from the part affe@ed - for all and every retraction of patrefic¢ 

unrothe noble parts, is to be avoyded,becaufeit is moyfome and hurful to naturts*” 


Concerning the 


of the heate. 


quantity of bloud,or had their bodies 


be 
open,the bloud might soul 


median mutt 
yeine ofthe h 
well,bur alwa 
hethird day 
wichin foure 


ftrength of ¢! 


Mooly minift 


Cle, and let ek 


[ithe cum: 


have conlidem™ 


andlag 
your finger 0: 
cher by nature 


you muft lee it 


Antidotes tha 
sepaire the {tr 


pole fixe oral 


this forme: J 
fing ly powdr 
ake three dr 
Dore and A 


eine: | pletion, 
q 
/ 
| tke and is | 
hinde of the h 
We 
| the, fic lans ha 
We | th 
3s, 
4 4 x 


22. | Concerning the Plague. 


which is called Ad wafa, $d eff, unto the veflels, and 4d vires untothe 


ch: and therewithall he hatha tumourthat is peftilent in the parts beloncin 
ghis head or necke, the bloud bee let our cephalick median shee, 
x our of onc of their branches difperfed in the arme on the grieved fide, Burif 
h occafion of fatte,or any other fuch like caufe, thofe veines doe not appeare 
thearme, there bee fome that give counfellin fucha cafe to open the veine that is 


“he patient. F herefore, for example fake, admit the patient be plethoricke by re- 


Ward he fore-finger and the thumbe 
ng the y eene the rore-naser and the thumbe, the hand being put into warme water, 
in shat veine may {well and be filled with bloud, gathered thither by meanes 
ufted, the ofthe heate. 
vhere enereign tumour beunder the arme-hole,or about thofe places,the liver veine,or the 
its gedian be opened which runneth alongftthe hand : ifit be inthe eroine, the 
was great mortal; wine of the hamme, ot Saphena, or any other veine above the foote that appeareth 


difeafes, ell but alwaies on the grieved fide. And phlebotomie mutt bee performed before 


the Cities (thy acthirdday: for this difeate is of the kind ornature of fharpe difcafes ; becauie that 
n)what fuceefleth®, Be whin foure and twenty houres it runneth paft helpe. In letting of blou4 you mult 
to they all anfwereg’ conlideration of the ftrength. You may perceive thatthe patient 1s ready to 
feted with the Pegi. iwoune, when that his forehead waxcth moyft, with aimall {weate fuddeuly arifing, 
id their bodies fom-. aking or patne at the ftomacke, with an appetiteto vomit, aiid defire togoeto 
ker, and foatlengrh joole,gaping, blackneffe of the lippes,and fadden alteration ot the face unto pale- 
ak cordial Antidotes sfc: and laftly moft certainely by a {mall and flow pulfe : and then you muft lay 


finger on the veine, and {top it untill the patient come to himfelte againe, ci- 
mer by nature, or elfe reftored by art; thatis to fay, by giving unto him bread di D- 
pedin wine, or any other like thing : then, if you have not taken blouc enough, 


raped and recovered 
primitive and 
urs. 


before: thatisto fay, youmuft let it goe againe, and bleed omuch as the greatneffe of the diteafe, or the 
otomie ; but yer! doc iy wengsh of the patient will permit or require: which being done, fome one of the 
in the body, efpeci. BB Amidores that are pre{cribed before will be very profitable to be drunk, which may 
whereof may bee fea- iepaite the {trength,and infringe the force of the malignity. 
cured by evacuation: 
ought co be remedi- Crap. XXV. 
fuch difeafes are not : 
peftilence, but of the Of purging weedicinesin apeftilent difeafe. 
with the Peftilence; 
to let agood quaiit's Fyou call to minde the indications, purging (ball feeme ne- 
he matter that is pre- ey ceflary in chis kinde of difcafe, and that muft bee prefcribed as the pre- 
ence taketh new and & fent cafe and neceffity requireth ; rightly confidering that the difeate is 
ere he faithsthat, By hae p)p fudden,and doth require medicines that may with all {peede drive out 
much thefooner re- BSS of the body the hurtfull humour wherein the noyfome quality doth 
the veines {well, the hidden ; which medicines are diverfe by reafon of the diverfity of the 


tinde of the humour, and the condition ortem perature of the patient. For this pur 
Pole fixe eraines of Scammonie beaten into powder, or elfe tenne graines are com. 
moly miniftred to the patient with one dram of Treacle. Alfo pils may be made in pus 
tus forme : Take of Treacle and Mithridate, ofeach onedram ; of Su/pber. vivem 
powdred halfe a dram ; of Diagridinm foure graines : make thercot Pils. Or, 
ukethree drams of Aloes of Myrrhe and Saffron,of each one dram; of white Hel- 
reand Afarabacca, of each foure {cruples : make thereof a matfe with old Trea- 
and let the patient take foure {cruples thereot fora dofe, three houres before 
Rate, Refs his pils may be profitably given tothofe that are weake. The ancient 
Vlicians have ereatly commended Agarick for this difeafe, becaufe it doth draw 

hoyfome humours out of all che members : and the vertues thereof are like unto 
hfe Of Treacle; for itisthought to ftrengthen the heart, and ro draw out the ma- 
ignity by purging. Tothofc that are ftrong the weighit of rwo drams may be given, 
thote that are more weake, halfe a It is betrer to give the infufionina 
than in fubftance for being elected and prepared truly into Trochifes, 


if the parent canve- 
pittle be bloudy thea 
ntioned. Irfcems 
and the {pleene may 
is aot g00d at al 
xe ftiffe by reafon of 
and {pirits inwardly, 
therefore bloud ca" 
turbation ofthe hu- 
fes are prefent, chere 
, and another in chat 
h.For in one of 


may be called a moft divine kinde of medicine. | 
highly prayled by the experience of many ; but becaufe ! know 


Whac purges 
fit in che! 


— 
Lip. 22, 84.7 
ho are Purged o, | 
Ny char the Matter is 
eruptions 2PPtare | 
in from Purging and 
er,bloud mutt’ 
loud might | 
of putrefic and 
4 hurfulto nature, 
{ 
= | 


ule thereof is condemned by the councell and decree of the School of Phyficiane> 
Paris, I will here ceafeto {peake of it. | AS ar 
T hofe medicines that caufe {weats are thought to excellall others, when th. p 
ftilence commeth ofthe venemous Ayre : among whom the efficacy of tha; ay c 
followeth hath beenc proved, tothe great good of many in that Peftilence whi. 
was lately throughoutall Germany, as Matthias Rodler Chancellor to Dyke “he 
the Count Palatine fignified unto me by Ictters, ange 


An effectual They doetakca bundle of Mugwort,and of the afhes ther cof after itis burnt 
mena make a lye with foure pints of water ; then they doe. fet it over the fire, ang 
scheime,  Gtinaveffell of earth well leaded, untill the liquor be confumed, the earthy dio, 
falling unto the botrome like unto falt, whereof they make Trochifces of the weich 
of acrowneof gold : then they diflolve one ortwo of thole Trochifces, according 
tothe ftrength of the patient, in good Muskadine, and give it the patient to drinke 
and let him walke after that hee hath drunke it for the {pace of halfe an houre. ¢),." 
lay hina in his bed,and there {weat him two or three houres, and then he will yo» 
atid his belly will bee loofed as ifhee hadtaken Antimony ; and fo they were a) % 
the moft part cured,efpecially all thofe that tooke that remedy betimes, and befy,, 


the difeafe wentunto their heart, as I my felfehave proved in fome that were ficke 


sthiey 
Doy|. 


Thevertuesot at Paris, with moft happy fuccefle: Truely Mugwortis highly commendedby hs 


Mugworts ancient Phyficians, being taken andapplyed inwardly or outwardly againgt they; 
tings of venemous creatures,{o that it is notto be doubred but thacir Oreatyer. 
tue againft the Peftilence. 

heard it moftcertainly reported by Gsloertus Heroaldus Phy icianof 

Lib.7.dep/c.3. pilier, that cight ounces of the pickle of Anchoves,drunke at one draught, is amog 


certaine and approved remedie againft the Peftilence,as he and many other haye of. 
ten found by experience. For the plague is no other thing but a very great putref. 


forthe correAion and amendment whereof, there is nothing moreapt or fi 
than this pickle or fubftance.of the Anchoves, being melted by the fun andtorce of 


the faltchat is trawed thereon. There be fome which infufe one dramme of Wale. | 


wort feede in white wine, and affirme that it drunken will performe likeefieds 
Antimony. Others diffolvea little weight of the feed of Rue being bruiled in \uf 
kadine, withthe quantity of a Beane of Treacle, and fo drinke it. Orhers beater 
bruife an handfull ofthe leaves or tops of Broome in halfe2 pint of white wine, an 


{o give ittothe patient t6 drinke, to caufe him to vemit, loofe his belly, andmile | 
him to {weat. ‘Truly chofe thatare wounded or bitte with venemous beafts, i!thy 7 
bind broomc above the wound, it will prohibit or hinder the venome fromdifpee 


fing it felte, or going any further: thereforea drink made thereof will probibittht 
venome from going any nearer the heart. Some take of the roote of Elecampunt, 


Gentian, Tormentill,Kermes berries and broom ; of the powder of Ivory and Hint | | 
horne, of each halfe a dram : they doe bruife and beate all chefe, and infulethen 


the {pace of foure and twenty houres in white wine and Aqua vite yn the wari 
bers,and then ftrainc it, and give the patient three or fourc ounces therco! drink 
this provokes {weat,and infringeth the power of the poyfon: and the potion l.08 
ing haththe fame vertuc. 

good Muftard halfan ounce,of£ Treacle or Muthridate the weight of a best 
diffolvethem in white wine, and a litle Aqua vite, and Ietthe patient 
fweat thercon with walking. You may alfo roafta great Onion made hollow, @ 
filled withhalfe a dram of Treacle and Vinegarundertheembers ; and then 
it, and mixe the juice that is preffed out of it with the water of Sorrell Cardo a? 
diilus, or any other cordial thing, and with ftrong wine, and give che 
dtitke thereof to provoke fweat, andto repell the malignity. Or elfe rake 
Garlick as the quantity of a big Nut ; of Rue and Celandine, of each wwenty oe? 
bruife them all in white anda little Aqua vita ; thea f{traine and 
Pirientthereofto drink. There be fome that doe drink the juice that is pr‘ af 

‘ot Celandine and Mallowes, with three ounces of Vinegar, and halfe an er 

the oyle of Wall-nuts,and then by much walking doe unburthen their {tom 


belly upwards and downewards, and fo arc helped. When the venemous ay! a 


Mitigared no 
cure {leep| 


sjready crept 
cee | 
molt {over a 
_Mat hiola 
miniftred unt 
de IS 
rovoking Vo 
Copper ofe d 
Some do giv 
ro expel the pa 
breaft and che 
shat are tron; 
hing at all, b 
ficient quant 
may ftrengthe 
humours an 


LEAL 


mer, hinder o 
with fiery rex 
head. IPrhis 


veine in the 2 


out of chem. 
require and | 
and joyne to 
And of fuch 
iveand 
It Were alfoy 
Onerate her{e 
herally aketh 
Prelencly cur 
(ttiving toc} 
by pricking 
The Lord 
ine atthe nx 
Was freed of 
all,and fhort! 
Vered his hea 
Ped when it 
Wet in O 
Plyed unto rif 
oltrils, the 
(Cd with the | 
Sigille 
Nore the pari 


& 
| j 
j 
' 
4 
| 
| .. ey 
Ma 
Chor 
4 \ 
| 
| | 
ag 
i 4 | 


olot Phyficians at 
when the Be. 
acy of that which 
eftilence Which 
lor to Duke 


ter itis burnt, they 
he fre, and Doyle 
the earthy dreo 
tifces of the Weichr 
chifces, accordin 
patient todrinke 
alfe an houre then 
hen he will vomit, 
lo they were al] fo, 
ctimes, and before 
ome that were (icke 
commended by the 
ardly againtt the bj. 
vatat hath great ver. 


s Phyfician of Afom. 
e draught, is a moft 
nany other have of. 
Very grcat putrefa- 
hing more apt or fit 
the fun andtorce of 
e dramme of Wale. 
yrme the like effect as 
cing bruifed in Mul- 
Orhers beate or 
t of white wine, and 
his belly, and make 
mous beatts, if they 
enome from difper 
‘of will probibictht 
vote of Elecampaine, 
of Ivory and Hart 
infule them for 
ite on the warn ei 
es thercof to drinke; 
d the potion follow: 


the weight of a bea", 
patient drink tt, an 
n made hollow, 4 . 
n {trait 
3 and che 


d give che paticot 


Or elfe take as 


feach ewenty leave 


traine dt, and 


and halfe an 
ben their 
venemous 


15. y 

Seady crept into and infe&ted the humors, one dram of the dryed leaves of the Ba 


te macerated for the {pace of two dayes in Vinegar and drunke, is thoughtto bee 
molt foveraigne medicine to provoke i weat,loofenefle of the belly, and vomiting. 


giniltred unto the patient with the juice of Carduus Bene 


Copperole diffolved in R ofe- 


1 | gay ftrengthen the belly and ftomack,and withhold the a 


Sorrell ar du ws Bente 


ed ont | 
ice that is prefied 


| 


Concerning the Plague. 


_mathiolas in his Treatife de Morbo Gadico writeth, that the powder of Mercury The effects o! 


sthus, or With cheele@ua- 


peroie againtt 


i Gemmis, Will drive away the Peftilence bc tore it be confirmed in the body, by the Plague. 

ovoking vomit,loofenefs of the belly & iweat:one dram of Calchanthum or white 

i¢-water, performeth the like cffe@ in the fame difeafe. 
come do give the patienta little quantity of the oyle of Scorpions with white wine 
expel the poyfon by vomir,& cherewithallthey anoint the region of the heart,the 
yeattand the wrefts of the hands. I think chefe very meet to be ufed often in bodies 
‘gt are {trong aad wel exercifed, becaufe weaker medicines do evacuare little or no- 
wing atall, but onely move the humours,whereby commeth a Feaver. Whena {uf. 


écent quantity of the malignity 1S evacuated, then you muft muinifter things that 


gitation or working cf the 


yours : and fuch is the confeétion of Alkermes. 


CHuar. XXVI. 


Of many Symptomes which happen together with the Plague : and first 
of the paine of the head. 


sews, OF che malignity be carryed into the braine,and nature be not able to ex- phe caueof 
pellit,it inflames not oncly it, but alfothe membranes that cover ir phrenficin che 
<q which inflammation doth one while hurt,trouble, or abolifh the imagi- viagn. 
} nation,another while the judgement, and fometimes the memory, ac- 


cording to the fituation of the inflammation, whether it bee in che for- 


| met, hinderor middle part of the head; but hereof commeth alwayesa Phrenfic, 


with fiery rednefle of the eyes and face, and heavinefle and burning of the whole 
wad. LPthis willnot be amended with Clifters, and with opening the Cephalicke 
in the arme,the arteries of the rcemples muft be opened, taking fo much bloud 
chem, asthe greataelfe of the Sympromes and the ftrengcth of the patient fhall 


quireand permit. Truly the incifion that is made in opening of anarterie will clofe 


and joyne together as readily, and with as little difficulty,as the incifion of a veine. 

And of fuch an incifion ofan artery,commeth prefent helpe, by reafon chat the ten- The benef: o! 

weand fharpe vapours do plentifully breath our together with the arcerious bloud. °pingan 

were alfo very good to provoke a fluxe of bloud atthe nole,if nature be apt to ex. 

onerate herfelfe that way. For,as Hippocrates faith, when the hiead is gricyed, or ge- Apb.10./ 

ietally aketh, if matter, water, or bloud fow ouratthe noftrils, mouth or eares, it 

nelcntly cures the difeafe. Such bleeding is co be provoked by ftrong blowing, or 

tuving to cleanfe the nofe, by {cratching or picking of the inner fides of the noftrils, 

y pricking with an horfe haire,and long holding downe of the head. 

The Lord of Fontains,a Knight of the Order,when we were at Bayon,had a bice- Abiftery. 

“ng atthe nofe, which came naturally for the ipace of two dayes, and thereby hee 

"as freed of a peftilent Feaver which he had before, a great {weat riling therewith- 

and thorel yatter his Carbuncles came to fuppuration,and by Gods grace he reco- 

icred his health being under my cure. Ifthe bloud doe flow outand cannot be ftop- 7, pay tice 

edwhen it ought, the hands,armes,and legges mutt be tyed with bands, and {pon. ding. 

S$ Wet in Oxycrate muft be put under the arme-holes, cupping: glaffes muft be ap- 
Yedunto the dugges,the region of the liver and {pleen ; and you mutt put into the 

‘olttils, the doune of the willow tree,or any other aftringent medicine, incorpora- 

‘‘dWith the haires pluckt from the flanke,belly or throat of a Hare, bole Armenicke, 


| “rs Sigillata, the juice of Plantain and Knot-grafle mixed together ; and further- 
m | cthe patient mutt be placed or laied ina coole place.Butif the pain bee nothing 


“ated notwithftanding all thefe fluxes of bloud,we muft come co medicines that 


cure leep, whofe formes are thefe. 


Take 


a 
| 
| 
| iy | 
= | 


Medicines to 


eight graines of Opium: ofthe foure cold feeds, and of white Poppy feeds, 
halfe an ounce,and let the fame be boyled in broths with Lettuce and Pur{la; 
the Pils de Cynogloffo,id eft, Hounds tongue may be given. Clifters that proyo, 


Take of green Lettuce one handtull, flowers of water Lillies and Violets, ote 
procursfleep. two pugils, one bead of white Poppy bruifed, ofthe foure cold feeds, ofeach 
drams, of Liquorice and Raifons,of each one dram : make thereofa deco@iop 
in the {training diflolve one ounce and an halfe of Diacodson : make thereof a 


potioato be given when they goceto reft. Alfoa Barly-creame may be Prepared 
the water of water-Lilliesand of Sorrell, of each two ounces, adding thereto Pin : 
Of cach 


muft be ufed,which may be thus prepared : | 

Take of Barly-water, halfeapinte ; oyle of Violets and water-Lillies, each 
two ounces ; ofthe water of Plantaine and Purflaine,or rather of their juices. 1)... 
ounces ; of Camphire feven graines, andthe whites of three egges : make the, 
Clifter. The head mutt be fomented with Rofe-vinegar,the haire being firf (haven 
away,leaving a double cloth wet therein on the fame, and often renewed. Sheepes 
lungs taken warme out of the bodies,may be applyed to the head,as long as they 2, 
warme. Cupping-glaffes with and without {carification may be applyed ro the pe.) 
and fhoulder-blades. The armes and legs muft be ftrongly bound, being 
bed to divert the fharpe vapours and humours from the head. Frontals may aly). 
made on this manner. Take of the oyle of Rofes and water-Lillics, ot eachry, 
ounces, ofthe oyle of Poppy halfe an ounces of Opiwm one dram, of Rofe-vineoa 
one ounce,of Camphire halfeadram,mixe them together. Alfo Nodules May bee 
made of the flowers of Poppies,Henbane,water- Lillics, Mandrakes beaten in Rof. 
water with alittle Vinegar, anda little Camphire, and let them be often applyed:, 
the noftrils: for this purpofe Cataplafines alfo may be laid tothe forehead. As Tak. 
of the mucilage of the feeds of Pilinmydeff, Flea-wort,and Quince feeds extracted 
in Rofe-water,three ounces ; of Barly-meale foure ounces; of the powder of Role. 
leaves,the flowers of water-Lillies and Violets,of each halfe an ounce; of the feeds 
of Poppies and Purflaine of each two ounces ; of the water and vinegar of Rofts,of 
eachthree ounces: makethereofa Cataplafme, andapply it warme unto the head 


tee 
COfa 


A Caraplafine. Or take of the juice of Lettuce, water- Lillies, Henbane, Purflaine,of each halfa pin, 


Anoimment 
fur chereines. 


clothes or Chamelet {pread thereon. Tothe region of the heart may in 


of Rofe-leavesin powder, the {ceds of Poppy, of cach halfe an ounce ; oyleof Ko- 
fes three ounces ; of Vinegartwo ounces; of Barly-mealeas mucii as {hall {ulice: 
make thereofa Cataplafme in the forme ofa liquid Pultis. When the heate ofthe 
head is mitigated by thefe medicines, and the inflammation of the braine allwagee, 
wee mutt come unto digefting andrefolving fomentations, which may dilperfew: 
matter of the vapours. But commonly in paine of the head,they doe ule to bind ihe 
forehead and hinder part of the head very ftrongly, which in this cafe mult dec 
voyded. 


Cuarp. XXVII. 
Of the heat of the Kiduies. 


heat of thekidniesis tempcred by anointing with 


ment bec renewed cvery quarter of an houre, wiping 
liques of the old.Or,Re.aq.rof.tb 


wrung out againe, and often changed ; the patient fha!l not lye upona 
but.on a quilt {tufied with the chaffe of oates, or upon a matte with man 


time bec applyed arefrigerating and alexiteriall medicine, as this whic 


Concerning the 


Galen.newly made,adding therto the whites of egs 
tea, that fo the ointment may kcep moyft the longer ;lerthist™ | 


have 
anointed the part,lay thereon the leaves of watér- Lillies or" 


cold herbs, & chen prefently thereupon a double lianen cloth dipped 


y doubit 
the 
lowe! 

h 


ona fcariet 
546, 
ar. pra | 
che head 
halon onder it 
foles of the fee 
from noile, ang 


vers COsours a 
ter, asred, yel 
moft part they 
them Lemticul, 
called Papilion 
regions of the 
thearmes 
oncly affect th 
they proceed 
and broad, att: 
clude, they ar 
Or quantity. 
ltthey are 
ly without an 
The caufe « 
by reafon oft 
tie beginning 
or Botch,or C 
tonofthe hu 
tOreceive ther 
oreake out alo 
noevil] lymp 
peare, for the 
(er, and fome: 
Or heat of the 
and ccafed. 
Wherefor 
death of the 
Untotheskin 
endea 
alittle before 
"00 the skin 
Proftrate, and 


i = 
: 
‘i roan j 
3 
at) 
é ‘ 
7 4 


Lica, 


deco@ion 
2 


hake thereof ala 
may be Prepared 
Bing thereto fixe 
PPY feeds, of cach 
and Purflaine, alfy 


that provoke flee 


er- Lillies, of cach 

their JUICES, three 

es : make thereof. 
re being firft fhaven 

renewed, Sheepes 

long as they are 
applycd to the nect 
being firft wel rub. 
rontals may alfo bee 
Lillics, of cachtwo 
im, OF Rofe. vinegar 
O Nodules may bee 
akes beaten in Rofe. 
be oftenapplyedto 
forehcad.As, Take 
ince feeds extracted 
he powder of Rofe- 
ounce; ofthe {eeds 
vinegar of Rofes,of 
arme unto the head. 
each half a piar, 
ounce ; oyle of Ko- 
nuch as fhall fufhce: 
hen the heate of the 
hebraine aflwaged, 
ich may difperfe the 
y doe ufe to bind the 
this cafe mult bee a- 


i 

g with 
thites of egs wel 9% 
longer ; let this 
wiping away the! 
siv.alb.ove? vin 
wwe 
fum. When you 
dipped in oxy 


fe upon a feather of | 
¢ with many 


cart may in the 


this which follow” 


3.22: (Concerning the ‘Plagne. 


rofat. iii. oles wenupharins, accsirof. aquarofar. 4n.3i. theriace, 3 i, cintmens 


Of thefe melted and mixed together make a foft ointment, which {pred for the 


“aon a {carlet cloth may be applyed to the region of the heart. Or, sheriaca Ops. 


“6 fucci citri acid, cr limonw,an. 35, coral rub. [em. rofar. rub. an.5 8. caphure, 


am let chem bee all mixed together, and make an ointment or lini- 


Arche head ofthe patient as he lies in his bed, thall be fet an Ewre orcockewitha..__. 
ive th hich by droppi Themoit of 
bgfon nader it to receive the water, which by dropping may refemble raine. Let the d:op>ine wacer 


foles of feet and palmes of the hands be gently {cratched, andthe patient lye far fhep, 


noite, and fo at length he may fallto fome reft. 


—— 


Cuar. XXVIII. 


ofthe Eruptions and Spots, which commonly are called by the name of 
Parples and Tokens. 


skinne, in peftilent feavers, is marked and variegated in divers pla- cences 
9 [a ces with {pots, like unto the bitings of Fleas or Gnats, which are not al- ofthe fonsla 
waics fimple, but many times arife in forme like unto a graine of millet, 
The morc fi pots appeare, the better it is forthe patient: they are of di. 
ers colours according to the virulency of the malignity, and condition of the mat- 
er, asred, yellow, browne, violet, or purple, blew and blacke. And becanfe forthe 
not part they are ofa purple colour, therefore wee gall them Purples. Orhers call 
them Lenticule, becaufe they have thecolour and forme of Lentiles. They arealfo names,and the 
ciled Papiliones (¢) Butterflies, becaufe they doe fuddenly feaze or fall npon divers 
regions of the body, like unto winged Butterflyes, fometimes the face, fometimes 
thearmes and fegpes, and fometimes all the whole body ; often timesthey doe not 
oncly affe& the upper part of the skin, but goe deeper into the fiefh, {pecially when 
‘hey proceed of matter that is grofle and aduft. They doc fometimes appeare great 
nd broad, affeting the whole arme, legge or face, likeuntoan Eryfipelas: tocon- 
clude, they are divers according to the variety of the humour that offends in quality 
Of quantity. | 
Ifthey are ofa purple or black colour, with often fwouning, and finke in fiidden- 
without any. maniteft caufe,they forefhew death. | 
the caufe of the breaking out of thofe {pots, is the working or heat of the bloo 
‘yreafon of the cruelty of the venome received, or admitted. They often arife at 
cbeginning of a peftilent feaver : many times beforethe breaking out of the Sore, 
ot Botch,or Carbuncle, and many times after : but chen they fhew fo great a corrup- 
wonof the humours.in the body, that neither the Sores, nox Carbuncies will futhce 
oreceive them, and therefore they appear as forerunners of death. Semetimes they 
xeake outalone , without a Botch or Carbuncle; whichif they bee red, and have 
noevill fymptomes joyned with them,they are not wontto prove deadly : theyap- 
pare, for the moft part,on the third or fourth day of the difcafe, and fometimcs ia. 
‘c,and fometimes they appeare not before the patient be dead, becaute the working 
ordeat of the humours being the off-{pring of putrefaction, isnot as yer reftrained 
and ccaled. 
Wherefore then principally the putride heat, which isereatclt a little before the. Why they fom 
‘ath ofthe patient,drives the excremental humors,whichare the matter of the {pots 
“Motheskin ; or el{ebecaufe nature in the laftconfli@ hath contended with fome otehe patient. 
ater endeavour than before(which iscommonto all things that are ready to dye) 
‘little before the inftant time of death, the peftileat humour being prefently driven 
“ato the skinne; and nature thus weakened by this extreme conflict, falleth downe 


"0ltrate, andis quite overthrowne by the remnant of the matter. 


When fignesef 
d death. 


CwrAP- 


J 
j 
C 
leeds, of 
eecs, Ca lan 
| 
| 
| 
~ 


¥ 
i 


Concerning the Plague. 


Cuar. XXIX, 


Of the Cure of Eruptions and Spots. 


U1 muft firft ofall take heed left you drive inthe humoyr that is¢ 
on 


ming outwards with repercuffives: therfore beware of cold 
in & things, Phlebotomy, and drowfie or found fleeping. Fo; PULRing 


ving forth. 4% doe draw the humours inwardly,and work contrary to 

better to provoke the motion of nature outwardly, by ap ply in, 
ing medicines outwardly and miniftring medicines to provoke {wear lee 4] ry 
otherwife by repelling & {topping the matter of the eruptions, there w;\] bee ie 
danger left the heart be opprefled with the abundance of the venome flow), h ' 
or elfe by turning into the belly, it inferres a mortal! bloody fluxe: whict, ii at 
modities that they may bee avoided, have thought good to fet downe thc wn = 
whofe efficacy I have knowne and proved many times, and on divers per fon. vh | 
by reafon of the weaknefle of the expulfive faculty, and the thickneffe of thesh in " 
the matter of the {pots cannot breake forth, but is conftrained 
skin, lifting it up into bunches and knobs. 


I was brought unto the invention of this remedy, by comparifon of the jij. 5, 


s 
* 


The indicanon 


ofcuringtaken When underftood that the eflence of the French pockes (and likewife of jhe ref 


fomthelike, Jence)confifted ina certain hidden virulency, and venemous quality, I {oon d¢/;». 
ded unto that opinion, that even as by the anointing of the body with the ungren 
compounded of Quick-filver,the grofle and clammy humors which are fixed jp: 
boncs, and unmoveable, are diffolved, relaxed, and drawne from the center into sh 
fuperficial! parts of the body, by ftrengthening and ftirring up the expulfive faculty 
and evacuated by {weating and fluxing atthe mouth, that fo it fhoul!d come to pati 
in peftilent Feavers, that nature being ftrengthened with the fame kinde of un@ioy 
might unloade her felfe of fome portion of the venemousand peftilent bumov, by 
opening the pores and paflages, and letting it breake forth into {pots and puftles in: 
into all kind of eruptions. Therefore I have anointed many in whom nature feeme: 
to make paffage for the venemous matter very flowly, firft loofing their belly with: 
Clifter, and then giving them Treacle water to drinke, which might defend theyi. 
tall faculty ofthe heart, but yet not diftend the ftomack,as though they had hadthe 
French pockes, and I obtained my expe@ed purpofe :in ftead of the Treaclewar 
you may ufe the decoGion of Gwajacum, which doth heat, dry, provoke fweat,ini 
repel! putrefaction, adding theretoalfo vinegar, that by the fubrictythereof,iimy 
picrce the better, and withftand the putrefaction. This is the defcriprion of 
pucne. 


Anointmentto “Take of Hogs-greace, one pound, boyle ita little with the leaves of Sage, Time, & 
3; Rofemary, ofeach halfean handfull, ftraineit, and in the ftraining 
they appear too ounces Of Quick-filver, which hath bin firft boyled in vinegar with the forementin 
— ned herbs; of Sa/ Nitrum, three drammes ; the yelks of three egges boyledun| & 
they be hard , of Treacle and Mithridate, of each halfe an ounce ; of Venice 1s 
pentine, oyle of Scorpions and Bayes, of each three ounces ; incorporate them alto 
gether in amorter, and make thereof an unguent, wherewith annoint the pati’? 
arme-holes and groines,avoy ding the parts that belong to the head, breaft anc back 
bone : then let him bee laid in his bed and covered warme, and let him {weat ‘" 
for the {pace of two houres, and then let his body bee wiped and cleanfed, a4! 
may be Jet him be laid in another bed, and there let him be refrefhed with the bio" 
of the decoction of a Capon, rear egges, and with fuch like meats of good julct a 
are cafic to be concodted and digefted; let him be anointed the fecondand third 
unleffethe {pots appeare before. 
Ifthe patient fluxe atthe mouth , itmuft not bee topped : when the 
puftles doe all appeare,and the patient hath made an end of {weating, it {hall be . | 
venient to ufediureticke medicines, for by thefethe remnant of the 


fpots, which happely could nor all breath forth, may cafily be purged and avoys 
y urine. | 


4 are behind the 


rate: 


andthe liver, 1 
and clammy, {< 
skinne ;and 
Efthar onthe p 
maketh the pati 
dened nerve w: 
to aknob, and 

before mentiog 
little, it is a goo 
lyunto his juft 

dainely, and ca 
moment, have 

hing. Bubocs 
andin all other 
lodainely brin 

loreit isnot go 


May bee alfod , 


Lake of | 


Ounce of Mit! 
'Y Well relaxe ; 
‘hat matter 


ying fomenta 


Which fal! be 


Veficato 


» 
tofed inthe bi 
) sae? f if 
whic 
pe 
‘ ‘OM, Cy 
| / ff 
O\ 
| 
\ 
4 
te 


1B. 22. 


— 


humour that ic 
¢ of cold,al} 
B-For all 
ytonature, p 


* 


Ot it 


applying of dray, 
{wear inwardly 


home flowing bac). 


difcom, 


dy, 


there will bee 


which 
downe this reme 
ivers perfons. 
knefle of the Skinne 


ed tolurke underth, 


Of the like, Fo, 


ikewife of the pefti- 


ality, I foon defcen. 
dy with the uNguent 
hich are fixed inthe 


n the center into the 
ne expulfive faculty, 


fhould come to pafic 
nc kinde of unéion, 


eftilent humour, by 
pots and puftles,and 
nature feemed 
ng their belly witha 
might defend the vi- 
gh they had had the 
yfthe Treacle water 
provoke [weat, and 
rlety thereof, ic may 
{cription of theun- 


ves of Sage, Time, 
ning extinguith five 
the forementio 
egees boyled untill 
of Venice Tur- 
-orporate them alto 
mnoint the patient 
-ad, breaft and back: 
et him fweat there 
id cleanfed, andit 
hed with the broth 
ts of good juice that 
-cond and third cay; 


when the fpots and 
ating, it {hall be 


of the matrer of 


purged and avoyded 


Com. 
Ing 


if 


[18.22 853 


q 

any noble or gentlemen refufe to be anointed with this unguent, let them be en- 
jofed inthe body ofa Mule or Horfe that is newly killed, and when that is cold,let 
nem bec layed in another, untill the pufties and eruptions doe breake forth, being 
by that naturall heat. For fo Atathiolws writeth that Y/entinus, the fonne | 


(Pope 4 lexander the fixt, was delivered from the dan eer of moft deadly poyion ne 
gnich he had drunke. | 


the Plague. 


7 


CHuar. XXX. 
Of a peftilent Bubo, or Plazue-fore. 


URES. Peftilent 2440 isatumor atthe beginning long and moveable, andin the wiara pelt? 
ftate,and full perfection copped, and with a fharp head, unmoveableand 
fixed deepely inthe glandules, or kernels ; by which the braine exone- 

veer? yates it felfe of the venemous and peftiferous matter into the kernells hae 

sebehind the cares, and in the neck : the heart,into thofethatare in the arm-holes ; 

| andthe liver, into thofethat areinthe groine: thatis, when all the matter is croffe 

| gndclammy,fo that it cannot be drawn out by {pots and puftles breaking out on the 

skinne ;and fo the matter of'a Carbuncle is fharpe, and fo fervent, thatic maketh an 

onthe place where itis fixed. In the beginning, while the is breeding, it 

maketh the patient to feele,as it were, accord or rope ftretched in the place, or a har- 

me cencanerve with pricking pain : & fhortly after the matter is raifed up as it were in- 

(oaknob, and by little and little it groweth bigger, and is enflamed, thefe accidents 

before mentioned accompanying it. If the tumour bered,and encreafe by little and 
lie, tis a goodand falutary figne : butif it be livid or black, and come very flow- 
lyunto his jut bignefle, it is a deadly figne : It is alfoa deadly figne if it encreafe fo- anddeadly. 
dinely, and come unto his juft bigneffe as it were witha fwift violence, andasina 

moment, have allthe fymptomes inthe higheft exceffe, as paine, {welling and bur- 


ee 2g. Buboes or Sores appeare fometimes of anaturall colour, like unto the skinne, 


andin all other things like untoan oedematous tumour, which notwithftanding will 
y bring the patient to deftruction, like thofe rhatare livide and black, where- 
ioteit isnot good ro truft too much tothofe kindes of tumours. 


XI. 
7 Of the sure of Buboes, or Plague-fores, 


O foonas the Bubo appeares, apply a Cupping-giaffe witha great Theuteof cup’ 
4 Game unto it, unleffe it bethat kinde of Bubo which will {udden- ping gaffes in 
ly have all the accidents of burning and {welling in the higheft na- 
ture, but firft the skinne muft be anointed with the oyle of lillies, 
| thatfoit being made morc loofc, the Cupping- giaffe may draw 
. ND i the ftronger and more powerfully , it ought to fticke to the parc 
lorthe {pace ot a quarter of an houre,& be renewed and applyed again every three 
‘warters ofan houre,for foatlength the venom fhall be the better drawn forth from 
“ly noble part that is weak,and the work of fuppuration or refolution, whicht oever 
"ature hath affaied, will the better and fooner bee abfolved and perfected : whica 
may bee alfo done by the application of the following ointment. ' 
Take of Lucuentum Dialthea one ounce and a halte; oile of Scorpions halte af Alinimety 
Wace sof Mithridate diffolved in 4quavite, halfe a dramme , this liniment will ve- 
'Y Well relaxe and loofen the skin, open the pores thereof, & {pend forth portion of 
“x matter whichthe Cupping-glaffe hath drawne thither : in ftead thereot molli- 
Jing fomentations may bee made, and other drawing and {uppurating mecicines. 
"nich fhall be defcribed hereafter. 
Veficatory applied in amect place the Bubo ‘profits them very 
= 


a 
| 
| 
» 
| 


| may bethe better exonerated. | 
a4 Spurge, Crow-foot, Arfemart, Beare-foot, Briony, the middle barke of T 
lers-joy, the rindes of Mullet, F/ammu/a or upright Virgins. bower, are fir for 
blifters. If youcannot come by thofe fimple medicines, you may apply this 
followeth, which may be preparedat all times. 


of foureleaven, two drammes ; of Maftard one dramme, anda little Vinega; 
vinegar is added theretoto withhold or reftraine the vehemency of the Cay, 


Why 1 ficato dipped in warme water, and anointed with oyle or frefh butter. Some apply Cayre. 
rres age betrc! 
| chan cauteric 

ina pellilent 


and then ler the medicine following, which hath vertue to draw, be applied. 


Srrong corawing 


cataplainess jtunder the hot Embers, beat it with a little Leaven, and alittle Swines ereafe.and 


Renactis very profitable, for iris hot,and cherforeattraQive, being mixed with«: 


Leaven and Bafilicon : you ought toufe thefe untill the abfcefle be growneunto's 
re full ripenefleand bignefle ; but if prefently afterthe beginning there bec great’ 
flammation, with fharpe painc, asic often happeneth, efpecially when the 
be of thekinde of Carbuncles, wee mutt abftaine from thofe remedies that asc ho 
and attractive, and alfofrom thofe that are very emplafticke and clammy ; 
they doe altogether clofe the pores of the skin, or becaufe they refolve the chine! 
part of the collected matter, which if it might remain, would bring the other {00 
to iuppuration : or elfe becaufe they may perchance draw more quantity of theno | 
matter than the part can beare, whereof commeth rather corruption than mature 
on: and laft of all becanfe they encreafe the feaver and pain,which inferreth dang" 
of aconvulfion or mortall Gangrene. Therefore in fuch a cafe it is beft ro ule co J 
and temperate locall medicines, as the leaves of Henbane and Sorrell! roafted 


the coales, Galens pultis,and fuch like, 


cut away plague - 


4 Concerning the P lague. 

putnot above: 3s for example.I tthe Bubo bein the throat,the Veticatory mutt be 
4 , plied unto the fhoulder-blade on the fame fide , if it be in the arme-holes, it my hh. 
4 applicd in che midft of the arme, or of the fhoulder-bone,on the inner fide : if jp, he 


eroin, in the midft of the thigh onthe inner fide, that by the double Palfageths: ic | 
open forto draw out the matter, the part wherein the venome is gathered together | 


rave]. 
raifine 
Which | 


q Take Cantharides, Pepper, Eaphorb:um, Pellitory of Spain, of cach hal fe. dram. 


the 
des. but in want of this medicine it fhall fuffice to drop f{calding oyleor water, o,, | 


burning candle, or to lay a burning coale onthe place : for fo you may raife blige. 
which muft prefeatly be cut away, and you mutt fee that you keep the ulcers opens: J 
flowing as long as youcan, by applying the leaves of red coleworts, Bectes, of Jy;: 


_ ries,but Veticatories work with more {peed : for before the Efchar of the Cauteric, 

will fall away, the patient may dye: therefore theulcers thatare made with Vefic:, 9 
Bubs. tories will {uffice to evacuate the peftilent venome, becaufe that doth workerarhe | 
by its quality than its quantity. Let the abfcefle bee fomented as is fhewed before : J 


Fill a great onion, being hollowed, with Treacle andthe leaves of Rue,then roxt J 


fo apply it warme unto the abfceffe or fore ; let it be changed every fixe houres. 0: § 
i Take the roots of Marfh-mallowesand Lillies, of each halfea pound ; of Linc, Fee. 
Y nugreek, and Muftard feeds, ofeach halfe an ounce; of Treacle one dramme; ten 
Viegcs, and as much Hogges greafeas fhall fufhce: make thereof a cataplafme xc. 
cording to Art.Or,take ot Ontons and Garlicke roafted in the embers, of each thie: J 
ounces : bruifethem with one ounce of fower leaven,adding thercto Uneuentum 
_ flicon,one ounce; Treacle one dramine, Mithridate halfea dramme; of old Hoes J 
yreace one Ounce, of Cantharides in pouder one {cruple,of Pigeons dung two drains 
beat them and mixe them together into the forme of a cataplafme. Hercuntoc: 


There are many that for feare of death, have with their owne hands pulleca"" J 

Again fuch as the Bubo with a paire of Smithes Pincers: others have digged the fle(h round 200% 
it, and {o gottenit wholly out. And to conclude others have become {0 mad, 
they have thruft an hot iron into it with their owne hand, that the yenome™ >” 

have a paffage forth : of ail which I doe not allow one; forfuch ab{ceffes 

comc from without, as the bitings of virulent beafts, but from within, and ™°" 

ver becaufe pain is by thefe means encreafed,and the humour istnade malig’ 
and fierce. Therefore I think it fufficient to ufe medicines that relaxe, open the 


ofthe skinne, aad digeft portion ofthe yenome by tranfpiration, as 


— 


L 1B. 22. 


1 akethe 
of theleaves 
rhe fraining, and 
m of hot bread 
milk or Goates m 
andapply chem v 
of Balilicom TWO O 
one dram : Let itt 
chylow and Bafilic 
be melted a 
(ee, feeleand kno 
on, it be ope 
tis beft co be do 
dammation, bec; 
parts, and 
mut it be looked 
that left while na 
which ftriking th 
the veines,{hould 
there be fume thal 
were in the mid{ 
forth at: yet ik ict 
ver,and all accide 
that often degene 
day the work of {; 
later by reafon of 
of the part: when 
lying medicines,t 
cer by putting im 
But itthe tumour 
curedto come fi 
with (harpe medi 
When the Ca 
Uebelow ir.that t 
in falling away. | 
have open and 4. 
peaking of whi 
of great paine. | 
greene, or bla 
ly humour by 
Nour,fo that by 
‘gangrene and 
With repercuflive 
Percuffives Ta! 
two ounces 
and water-Lillic: 
about the Bubo 
“aguent Rofats 
things doe not ft 
“Sour it mult bee 
Qrated of poruol 
P'Oper and natur 
unto it. In {; 
. 
where 


a 
3 
iz | 
al 
| ating | 
a 
| 
| | 
| 
¢ 
is 
q 
wy 
2 | 
t ie 
| 
| 
sam. 
iy 
| 
3 
— 
= 
4 
| 
4 
| 


a 
B 
2 ya 


Pry mutt be 
oles, it muf be 
fide if in), 
Palfagerhs, is | 
cred together. 


irke of Travel. 
Chit forraifine 
ply this which | 


h halfea dram. | 


¢ Vinegar the 
f the Canthar;. 

Or Water, or 
raife bliflers. 
ulcers open & 
Beetes, ot Iyic 


ic apply Canute. 
the Cauterics 


de with Vefica. 


th workerather 


hewed before 


-applicd. 

Rue,then 
ines greafe,and 
fixe houres. Or 
j : of Linc, Fo- 
le ddramme ; ten 
a cataplafme ac- 
rs,of each thice 
> Uneuenium Ba- 


ne; of old Hogs 


lung two drams! 
Hercunro ols 


mixed witholi) 


prowne untor's 
ere bec great 
hen the abfeciles 
dies that are hot 
lammy ; becaute 
folve the thinner 


the other foonct | 


antity of tlichot @gengrene and mortification thentire places about che mult bee armed Whearepereat 
yn than maturat)- repercuffives,but notthe abfccfle it felfe : and this may be the forme of the re- 
inferreth danget Mculives Take of the juice of houfe-lecke, Purflaine, Sorrell, Night-thade, of 
is beft ro ule ounces, of Vinegar one ounce, the whites of three egges, of oy le of Rofes 
ell roafted unde! “dwater-Lillics, of each twoounces anda halfe: ftirre them together, and apply 
our the Bubo,andrenew it often : or boylea Pomgranatein vinegar, veat it with 

ands pulled aw") Rofatum, or newly made, and apply itas is aforcfaid. If thefe 
flefh round 20°59 Wings doe nor ftop the influxe of other humours, the abicefle it {elfe and the places 
ome fo mad, ‘9 Sour it muft bee {carified roundabout, ifthe part will permitit, thatthe part ¢xo- 
he venome mig ®tated of portion of the venome may not ftandin danger of the extinction of the 
ab{ceffes doc °° Wm Pper and naturall heat,by the greater quantity and malignity of the humours thac 
ithin, and unto it, In {carrifying you mutt have care of the great veflels,for feare of an ir- Why too wuch 
ade more malis°° WM “Pugnable luxe of bloud, whichin this cafeis very hard to bee ftayed or refifted ; csi 
ce, open the Ph decaule the partit felfe is greatly inflamed,and the humour very fierce; for the 
as arethelc “Pullion whereof nature, carefull for the prefervation of the part and all the body 

Follows €Cccce 2 befides, 


heft 


gomill and Melilote flowers, of each halfea handfull; of Liafeeds halfe an ounce ; 
stheleaves of Rue halfe a handfull : boyle them and ftrainethem, dip fponges in 
aining, and therewith let the tunvour bee fomentedalongtime, Or, Take the 
nof hot bread,andfprinkle it with Treacle-water,or with ta,and Cowes 
‘ilk or Gates milke,and the yolks of three egges, putthemallone ftupes or flaxe, 


nd apply them warmé unto the place. Or, Take of foure Rie leaven foure ounces ; 


i pajilicon two Ounces ; three yolkes of egges ; oyle of Lillies ewo ounces; Treacle 
snedram : let it be received on ftupes,and apply ed in like manner.Or, Take of Dia- 
ioslow and Bafilicen, of each two ounces ; oyle of Lillies one ounce and an halfe : ler 
jem bemelted and mixed together,and let it be applyed as is abovefaid. When you 
ie, feele andknow, according co rcafon, that the Babe iscometo perfect {u ppurati- 


iemult be opened with an incifion knife, or an aGuall or potentiall Cautery,but 
zis belt co be done with a porenciall Cautery,unleffe that happely there be great in- oddone, 
becaufe it doth draw the venome from beneath untothe {uperficiall caucay. 


¢s, and maketha larger orifice for the matter that is contained therein: neither 
gult it be looked for, that nature fhould open it of her {elfe, for then it were danger 
hat left while nature doth worke flowly,a venemous vapour fhould bee ftirred up, 


| which ftriking the heart by the arteries, the braine by the nerves, and the liver by 


ae veines,fhould caufe a new increafe of the venemous infection. For feare whercof 
ere be furne that will not expect the perfect maturation and {uppuration, but as it 
sercin the midft of the crudity and maturity will make an orifice for itto pafie 
forth at ; yet it it be done before the tumour be at his perfect maturity, paine,a Fea- 
yet,and all accidents are {tirred up and enraged, whereof commetha maligne alcer 
haroften degenerats into a Gangrene. For the moft parc abour the tenth or eleventh 
day the work of {uppuration feemeth perfected and finifhed; but ic may be fooner or 


My ixerby reafon of the application of medicines,the condition of the matter,and ftate 
ofthepart:when the mattercommeth forth,you muft yet ufe fuppurative and molli- 
jing medicines,to maturate the remains thercof;in the mean while cleanfing the ul. 


erby putting mundificatives into it, as we fhall declare in the cure of Carbuacles. 
wedto come forth againe,by applying of Cupping-glafles with {carification,and 


When the Cauteries are applyed, it fhallbe very good to apply aveicatary a lir- 
‘cbelow ir,that there may be {ome paflage open for the venoine while the Efchar is 
afalling away. For fothey that are troubled with the French Pocks,fo lang as they 
‘weopen and flowing ulcers, folong arethey voyd of aby paine thar is worth uhe 
peaking of which ulcers being clofed andcicatrized,they dec prefentdly complain 
great paine. If you fulpe@ that the is more maligne by reafoa that iis of 
‘greene, or blacke and inflamed colour, as are thole that come of a melaacho- 
v humour by aduftion , turned into a groff: and rebellious melancholy hw- 
uour,fo that by the more copious influxe thercof into the part, there is dagger of 


Take the roots of Marih-mallowes and Lillies,of. each fixe ounces ; of 


Iwitthe tumour f{eeme to finke in or hide it felfe again, it muft be revoked and pro- Howto dsaw 

forth a fore 

(harpe medicines, yea,and with Cauteries both actuall and porentiall, 


| 
E 
| 
| 
| 
4 
a 
* 
ay 


— 


6 Concerning the PL cH. 


& humonr to flow outas the patient is able to abide without the loffe of his 
Moreover, you may {pend forth the fuperfluous portion of the malignizy , 


each one ounce, of Fennell-feeds and Anife-iceds, of each halfe an Ounce, of; 


times they may draw and fuckthe venome intotheir bodies,farre more ftron 
betterthan cupping-glaffes,becaufethey are endued witha naturall property 


dead, portion of the venome may be diffipated and exhaled. But if nevertheleffe there 
be any fearcofa Gangrene at hand,you muft cut the flefh with a deeper Icarification, 


not onely avoyding the greater veflels, but alfothe nerves, forfeare of convulfion ) 


and after the {carification and a fufficient flux of bloud, yon muft wath it with Aeyy. 
tiacum, Treacle and Mithridate diflolved in {ea-water, Aqua vsta and Vinegar, Fo; 
fuch a lotion hath vertue to ftay putrefa&ion, repell the venome, and prohibite the 
bloud from concretion: but itrhe Gangrene cannot be avoyded fo, cauteries may be 


applied co the part:efpecially aQual,becaufe they do more effeQually repel the force 


of the poifon,& ftrengthen the part.Prefently after theimpreffion of the hot iron, the 
efchar muft bee cut away even unto the quicke fleib, thatthe venemous vapours and 
~thehumours may have a free paflage forth, for it isnot to bee looked for that thy 
he come forth ofthemfelves. With thefe inunctions they are wontto haiten the 
BGher falling away of the Efchar. Take of the mucilage of Marfh-mallowes and Linfeeds, 
of cach two ounces, frefh butter or Hogs-greafe one ounce,the yolks of three egges, 
incorporate them together, and make thercof an ointment : butter, Swines greaie, 
oyle of Rofes, withthe yolks of egges,performe the felfefamething. Whenthet!- 
char is fallen away, we muft ufe digeftives. Astakeof the juice of Planraine, water- 
Betrony,and Smallage, of each three ounces, hony of Rofes foure ounces, Venice 


Turpentine five ounces, Barly-flower three drains, Aloestwe drams, oyle of Roies 


foure ounces, Treacle halfea dram,makea mundificativeaccord|ngto Art. Or,Take 


Venice Turpentine foure ounces, Syrupe of dryed Roles and Wormewood,of ac! 
one ounce,of the powderot Aloes,Maftick,Myrthe, Barly-flower,ofeach one dtp, 


Againft carin 


of Mithridare halfe an ounce, incorporatethem together. This unguent chat follow. 
eth is very meet for putrefied and corroding ulcers: Takered Orpiment one ounce, 
of unquenched Lime, burnt Alome,Pomgranate pills, ofeach fixe drams, of oliis- 
num,Galls,of eachtwo drams;of Waxeand Oile as much as fhiall fuffice,make 


Thepraiger Ofan unguent. This doth mundifie ftrongly, confume putrefied fiefh, and dry up 


Agptiacum. rylent humidities that engender Gangrenes. But there isnot a more excclicntu"™ 
guent than Aeyptiacum cncrcaled in ftreagth, for befides many other vertucstha'’ 
hath, it doth confumeand wafte the proud fiefh, forthere is neither oyle nor W2* J 


that gocth into the campofition thereof,with which things the vertue of {harp¢ ue 


dicines convenient for fuchulcers, is delayed,-and as it were dulled and hinder 
from their perfec operation fo long as the ulcer is kept open. There have bin many 


that being difeated with this difeafe, have had much matter & venemous filth come 
out at their ab{ceffes;fo thatir feemed fufficient,asd they have bin thought wel 
vered, vet have they dyed fuddenly. In the mean while when thefe things 2r¢ 19°” 


ing,cordial medicines are omitted to ftrengthen the heart. And 


mutt be renewed at certaine feafons, thae nature may be every way unloadc? 
burthen of the venenate humors. 


Lin, a2, 


befides, feemeth to labour and worke. Bat’ yet you mutt fuffer fo much of th eblous 
{tre Nth 


laxing, mollifying and refolving fomentations : as, Takethe roots of Marth, ~ 


lowes, Lilliesand Elicampaine, of each onc pound, of Linfeeds and Fenugreek o: 


leaves of Ruc,Sage, Rofemary, of each onc handfull, of Chamomill and Melilo, 
flowers.of each three handfuls; boyle them all together,and make thereof decog. 
on fora fomentation ; ufeit witha fpunge according to Art.Alfo afterthe aforel 
fcarification, wee may put Hens, or Turkiesthat lay egs(which therefore have tly: 
fundaments more wide and open, and forthe fame purpofe puta little fale into thei 
fundaments) upon the fharpetop of the Babs, that by fhutting their bils at feyer,)) | 


gly and 
aoainn 
poyfon, forthey eat and concoé Toads, Efts, and fuch like virulent bentis: whe 


onc henis killed with the poy{on that flee hath drawne into her body, you my a. I 
ply another,and then the third, fourth, fift and fixtwithin the fpace of half an hoyre 
There be fome that will rather cutthem, or elfe ufe whelps cut afuader in the mign J 
and applyed warme unto the place,that by the heate of the creature that is yer {car¢, 


of 


taine 
bigas a feed or gr 
abic, fo that the s 
feth likeuntoas 

ific were with nex 
whilethe meate 
midft thereof apy 
this bladder, you 
hadbin a burning 
buncle ; but the fi 
red, darke, precn, 
like unto {tone pi 
cle, whereot fom: 
reth like paine as 
taketheir 
iron: and thefe ar 
ditionof the mac 
verjoyned with 
vered or preffed w 
ings, faintings.c 
hotonely to the p 
preflion of the 
inmany that have 
fo that ch 
ofmatter,unleffe 
waich caufeth the 
erfubrlety, fo th 


= 


‘ What Pi 


itis a 


| Which excluded th 


arbuncleand 
affected, n 
commet 
‘Were from th 
Patients mind, 
the Bubeo or ¢ 
ligne,efp 
they pref 
“uncles that 


ia 
PCT! 
4 
| 
7 
| 
Lei 
if | 
at 
Brel 
| 
i 
ge 
4 
| 
* 
| 
| 
; 
~ 


ore have their 


fale into thei 


bils at feveral) 


Operty avainft 
beatfts when 
you muft 


halfan houre. 


rin the mid{t. 
at is yet {carce 
rthelefle there 


t {catification, 


convulfion 
it with Mey. 
Vinegar. For 


| prohibite the 
uteries may be 
repel the force 
1¢ hot iron,the 
Is Vapours and 
for that they 


tto haiten the 


and Linfeeds, 


of three egges, 
Swines preaic, 
When the Ef- 
nraine, water- 
wnces, Venice 
oyle of Roles 
Art. Or, lake 
wwood,of cach 
ach one dram, 


ntthat follow- 


ent one ounce, 


rams, of olila- 

ce,make there* 
and dry up 
eexcclientun- 
rvertuesthat 


Concerning the Plague. S57 


CHarp. XXXII. 
Of the Nature Camfes and Signes of apeftilent Carbuncle. 


Peftilent Carbuncle is a fmall tumour, or rathera maligne puftle, hot 
and raging, confifting of bloud vitiated by the corruption of the proe buncleis. 
perfubftance. It often commeth ro paffe through the occafion of this 


tained within the dominion of nature. Inthe beginning itis fcarce fo Cuduils. 
pigas a feed or grain of Millet ora Peafe, {ticking firmly unto the part and immove- 
pic, fo that the skinne cannot be pulled from the flefh; but fhortly after it encrea- 
th likeuntoa Bebe untoa round and fharpe head,with great heat, pricking paine,as 
fir were with necdles, burning and insolerable, efpecially a little before night, and 
whilethe meate is in conco&ing, morethan when it is perfe@ly concocted, In the 
nidft thereof appeareth a bladder puffed up and filled with fanious matter, If youcut 
his bladder, you fhall fiade the flefh underit parched, burned and blacke, as if there 


hadbin a burning cole layed there, whereby it feemeth that it took the name of Car- When called, 


wncle; bur the flefh that is about the place is like a Rainebow,of divers colours, as 
nddarke, green, purple, livid, and black ; bur yet alwaics witha thining blackneffe, 
ikeunto {tone pitch, or like unto thetrue precious {tone which they calla Carbua- 
de, whereot Lome alfo fay it tooke the name. Some call it a Naile, becaufe it infer. 


rcthlike paincas naile driven into the flefh. There are many Carbuncles which 


uketheir beginning with a crufty ulcer without a puftle, like to the burning of a hor 

ron: and thefe areofablackecolour, they encreafe quickly, according tothe con- 

drionof the matter whereof they are made. All peftilent Carbuncles have a Feas syimpromeset 
etjoyned with them, and che grieved part feemethto be fo heavie, as if it were co. Caunclas. 
wed or preffed with lead tyed hard witha ligature : there commeth marrall {wou- 


ngs, raging, gangrenes and mortifications, 
j wtonely to the part, but alfo tothe whole bodie, by reafoa (as I thinke) of the op. 


elon of the {pirits of the part, & the fuffocation of the naturall heat,as we {ce alia 
omany that havea peftilena Bubo. For a Babo and Carbuncle are tumours of a near 


~ 


Ouncle ditter, 


vaich caufech the Carbuncle more fharpe;burning and ragiog;by reafon of its grea. 
tlubtlety, fo that it maketh an Efchar onthe place where it is, as we noted before. 


Cuar. XXXIIL. 


what Pro znofticks may Lee made in peftilent Baboes and Carbunsles. 


eyowexjOme having the Peftilence have but one Carbuncle, and fome moic in 


divers parts of their body, and in many it happencth thatthey have the 


Bebo and Carbuncle before they haveany Beaver ; which giveth 
iv - 


Se) ter hope ofhealth,if there be no other maligne accident therewith: for 
i itisafignethat nature is the victor, and hath gotten the upper hand, 
tlich excluded the peftilent venome before itcouldcometo affaule the heart. Bur. 

“Carbuncle and Bubs come after the Beaver, it is mortall ; forit is a token that the 


“tis affe@ted, moved and incenfed withthe furious rage of the venome ; whereot come alter Ure 
“cently commeth a feaverifh heat or burning, and corru ption of the humours, fen‘ 

“Were from the center unto the fuperficies of the body. It isa good figne when 

patients minde isnot troubled: from the beginning untill the feventh day ; bur 

the Bubo or Carbuncle fiaketh downcagaine fhortly after that itis rifcn, iis 

B rail ligne,efpecially if ill accidents follow it. If after they arc brought to fup- 

~ onthey prefeatly waxe dry without any reafon thereof, iris an ill fizne: Thotc 


“Duncles that are generated of bloud have a greater Efchar thao thoferhat are 
Cccc 3 mace 


untameable malignity, thatthe Carbuncle cannot be governed or con- Thefencect: 


thnity, that the one doth {carce come without the other, confifting of one kinde Howrhematre 
tmatter,unleffe chat which maketh the Babois more groffe and clammy, and thar 


With re 
k,of 
Cafore(, 
ronglyand 
| 
oylenor waxt 
eof fharpe @°- 
and hindered 
have bin many 
ous come 
gughe wel reco 
hings are in 
And purgatio® 
Curr 


— 


— 


~ Concerning the Plague. 


Huge 
Abicefies com. 
monly deadly. 


Deadly Car 
bunctes, 


A hiftory. 


made of choler, becaufe that bloud is of a more groffe confiftence,and therefore 
cupieth a greater roome in the fieth : contrariwife, a cholerick humour is more {mall 
in quantity and thinne,and it taketh little roome in the upper part of the flefh onely 
asyou may fee inan Eryfipeles. And [have feene Carbuncles whofe Efchars Were 
as broad andas large as halfe the backe: alfo I have feene others, which Poing y 
by the fhoulders to the throat, did fo cate away the fiefh that was under them at 
the roughartery or wind-pipe might be feen bare, when the Efchar was fallen 
thad once a Carbuncle which was in the midft of my belly, fothat when the Efchar 
was fallen away,I mightvery plainly feethe Pirstomauns or Rim: & the cicatrice har 
remaincth is as broad as my hand : butthey doe not {pread themfelves {0 far wie, 
out thegreat danger or death of the patient. There are alfo fome Carbuncles whic, 
beginning at the parts under thechin, difperfe themfelves by little & little unto the 
pattell bones,and fo ftrangle the patient.So in many, the Budves in the groin arifes. 
bovea great part of the mufcles of the Epigas#rium. Truly of thole abfceffes thar are 
fo large & great in quantity,& fo terrible to be feen, there is great danger of death to 
the patient,or at leaft tothe grieved part. For after the con{olidation, the part rem}. 
neth as ifit were leprous, which abolifheth the ation of the part, as I have {ene jp 
many.Oftentimes alfo the corruption of the matter is fo great, that the fleth leaverh 
the bones bare : but Carbuncles oftenleavethe joints and ligaments quite relolyed 
through the occafion of the moifture that is foaked & funk in unto them;forthey of. 
ren cait our putrefied & virulent fanious matter:whereby eating and creeping ulcers 
are bred,many blifters & puftles arifing up in the parts round about it ; which thort. 
lv breaking into one, make agreatulcer. Thefe come very feldome and {lowly unre 
fuppuration, or at leaft tocaft outlaudible matter,efpecially if thy have their origina! 
of choler,becaufe the matter is {6oner burned with heat,than fuppurated. Therefore 


then, ifthey can bee broughtto fuppuration by no medicines, it thetumourftillre- 


maine blacke, ifwhen they are opened nothing at all, or elfe avery little fharpemu- 
fture doth come forth,they are altogether mertall : and there is {carce one of athou- 
fand who hath thefe accidents that recovereth health : difperfed {mall blifters,com- 
ming of vapours ftirred up by the matter thatis under the skinne, and are there ftey- 
ed and kepx from paflage forth, doe not neceflarily fore-fhew death in Carbuncles. 
But if the part be fwolne or puffed up, if it be of agreen or black colour,and if itfec!s 
neither prieking nor burning, it isa figne of amortall Gangrene. Buboes or Catoun- 
cles {feldome or never come without a Feaver : but the Feaver is more vehement 
when they are in the emunGories, or nervous pasts, than when they arc in the {i hy 
parts, vet itis leffe, and all Symptomes arc leffe, and more tolerable in a man thats 
{trong and ofa good temperature : Carbuncles nor oncely affect the outware, out 
fo the inward parts, and oftentimes both together. If the heart be vexed in {uch fort 
with a Carbuncle that nothing thereof appeareth forth on the fuperficiall parts, all 
hope of life is paft, and thofe dye fuddenly, eating, drinking or walking, ance 
thinking any thing of death. Ifthe Carbuncle be in the middriffe or lungs,they $ 
foon fuffocated : [fit be inthe braine,the patient becommeth frantick,and fo cyet 
If it be inthe parts appointed for the paflage of the urine,they dye of the {uppres” 
of their water,as it happenedin the Queene mothers waiting maide atthe Cattico: 
Rofsilion,of whom I {pake before. Ifit be in the ftomacke, it inferreth the accisth 
that are fhewed in this hiftory following. ; 
While I was Surgeon in the Hofpitall of Paris,a young and {trong Monxc of‘ 
order of St. ¥#@or, being overfeer of the women that kept the ficke peop!< ofthat 
place, fell into a continuall Feaver very fuddenly with his tongue 
(by reafon of the putrefied and corrupted humours, and the vapours rifing {rom the 
whole body unto that place) and hanging out like unto an hounds, with unquenc®- 
able thirft, often {wouning and defire to vomit. He had convulfions over ail Nis 00° 
dy through the vehemency and malignity of the difeafe, and fo hee dyed che thif 
day : wherefore thofe that kept the ficke people in the Hofpitall, thought that he ha 


been poyfoned, for the certaine knowledge whereof the Governours of the Holp* 


tall commanded his body to be opened. of 


[therefore calling to mee a Phyfician and Surgeon, wee found ia the borromé 


Lis. 22. 


| 

Cauceric, with 
gack Was orcatly ¢ 
gee comlidering, 
gomacke, We all 
sick. But behold 
{petted diverflyt 
of hole {pots ; Crug 
(pots OF markes th: 
dit, and faid that 
enumber of then 
fon into the flefh 
ofthem,and fo cut 
beblacke : ng 
of his boc 
other fickneffes or 
him, that his face 
hardly know him. 
and fentence, and : 
theHofpitall, fert 
peftilent Carbunc 


bitter 
burni 


fiupes we 
Lillies, Linfec 
draw forth 
‘lowing, 

ake the leaves] 
“dtethem wirh 


ij 


Ae 
me skinne, they 
NererOre tr je ha: 
“id lid Dultis — 
% al. Natio 
Mua Ce it. Take 
Me. ufje >* 4% 
the: 
Cach 
4 | 
>: 4 | 


Lis. 22. 
herefore oc. 
$ more {ma]] 
ficfh onely 
“{chars were 
ich going up 
CT them, that 
fallen away 
nthe Efchar 
cicatrice thar 
fo far with. 
uncles which 
ittle unto the 
Proin arifc a- 
cefles that are 
cr of death to 
1¢ part remai- 
have feene in 
¢ fleth leaverh 
quite relolved 
m;for they of- 
reeping ulcers 
; which fhort- 
id {lowly unto 
ethieir original 
ed. Therefore 
umour {till re- 
tle fharpe moi- 
one of athou- 
blifters,com- 
are there {tay- 
n Carbuncles- 
sand if itfecle 
oes or Carbun- 
ore vehement 
re inthe Aefhy 
in.aman cthatis 
urward,butal- 
edin fuch fort 
ciall parts, ali 


iking, and not 


lungs,they 
fo ayct 


at the Cattle 


g Monke of the | 


e people ot that 


rifing from che 
with unquench- 
over all his 
emit 


the {up preflion 


Concerning toe Plague. 


a print orim preffion, as if it had been :nade with an hot Iron or potenti- 


a 
> 


bel 


h the ace “Macth-mallo wes and Lillies,ofeach foure ounces, Linfeeds halfe an ounce, boyle 
“a, beat them, and then ftraine them througha fearle, adding thereto of freth but- 


| th poe and an halfe, of Mithridate onedramme, of Barly-meale as much as 


icke, dry roug! OV 
ae mot effeuall to draw the venemous matter forth, and to make a perfect 


‘Cauterie, with an Efchar or cruft as broad as ones naile, all the reft of his fto- 
was ercatly contracted and fhrunke upogether, and as it were horny; which 


@ ...confidering, and efpecially the Efchar which was deepe in the fabftance of the 

B® i nacke, weall faid with one voice that he was poy foned with Sublimate or Arfe- 

@ |, Bur behold while I was fowing uphis belly, I perceived many blacke { pots 

diverfly throughout the skin: then I asked my company what they thought 

fpors; truely (laid it feemeth unto me that they are like unto the purple 

markes chat arc in the peftilence. The Phyfician and the Chirurgion deni- 

B® jj, and faid chat they were the bitings of fleas. But I perfwaded them to confider Bow to diftin: 
squander of them overall the whole body, and alfo their great depth and depref- guith purple 
into the flefh ; for when we had thruft needles deep into the fleth in the middeft 
frnem,and fo cut away the flefh about the needle, we found the flefhaboutthence. 
: moreover his noftrils, nailes and cares were livid, and al! the con- 

B i;xion of his body was contrary, and farunliketo the bodies of thofe that died of 

ier ficknefles or difeafes. Alfo it was credibly reportedunto us by thofe chat kept 

jn, that his face was foaltered a little before he died that his familiar friends could 

adly know him. Wee perfwaded by thefe proofes, revoked our former opinion 

.jfentence, and madea certificate to bee fent unto the Governoursand Matters of 


jcHofpitall, fetting our handsand feales unto it, to certifie them that hee died of a 
»-tilent Carbuncle. 


Cuar. XX XIIII. 
Of the cure of apeltilent Carbuncle. 


ERY the forenamed fignes of a peitilent Carbuncle, and efpecially by the Why Empla- 
fey) 4 bitterneffe of the paine, malignity ofthe venemous matter, and by the ftick, very hor, 

burning Feaver that is therewithall annexed, Ithinkit manifeft, thar 
> ersarc norgood 
‘6 very hot, emplaftick,and drawing medicines fhould not bee applyed to 


for a carbuncle. 
this kind of tumour ; becaufe they piohibite or hinderthe exhalation, 


B “wating forthof the venenate malignity; becaufe that by ftopping the pores of 
‘skinne, they increafe andcaufe a greater heat in the part than there was before. 
‘ictetore it is better to ule refolving medicines, which may affwage heate, and re- 
wvethe pores of the skinne. Theretore firft the place muft be fomenred with wa- 
ndoyle mixed together, wherein alittle Treacle hath beenediflolved, leaving 
“conftupes wet therein: you may alfo ufe the decoction of Mallowes, the roors 
i Lillies, Linfeeds, Figges, with oile of Hypericon,for to make the skinne thin, and 


a forth the matter ; and the day following you muft apply the Cataplafme 
Vlowing, 


t 


*kethe leaves of Sorrell and Henbane,roft them under the hot athes ; afterwards A Carsplaine 


a them with foure yolks ofegges, two drams of Treacle, oyle of Lillies, three "32s" 4°"" 


Carbuncle. 


“ces, Barly-meale as much as fhall fuffice: make theteofa Caraplafme in the form 


pultis, this affwageth heat,and furthereth f{uppuration,Or, Take the roots Another. 


make thereof a Cataplafme according to Art: thofe Caraplafmes that 


uration, efpecially when the fuxe of the matter is not fo great,burchar the part 
fate it. Take the roots of white Lillies,Onions, Leaven,of cach halfe an ounce; Other Ca 
eds, Pidgeons dung,Sope,of each one dram ; fixe {nailes in their fhels of 
Treacle and Mithridate, of each halfa dram, bate them all rogether,and 


|  *Parate them with the yolks.of egs,maketherot a Catapiaime,& apply it warm. 


wh 


2 ake the yolkes of fixe egs ; of fale poudered one ounce ; of oyle of Lillies and 
“WS, Ofcach halfe a dramme; Barly-meale as much as fhall {uffice : make there- 


of 


| 
| 
ughe chat he hy = 
he Ho} 
rs of 
} | 
' the bo his 


1 


860 


Profeflors ercatly commend Scabious eround or brayed berweene {tones 


2 peitiien: 


BEAT 
tee 


Lecs doth mitigate paiae and fuppurate. A Radith root cut in flices, and {0 the 
diawevoutth® one after oneuntoa Carbuocle or peftilent tumour, doth mightily dray ou 


fuppuration in Carbuncles : allo anegge mixed with Barly-meale,and oyle of Vig, 
tlices 


powel- 


Lu 


herbecalled Divels-bir being bruifed,worketh the like effect : 1 have often Uled the 
medicine following untothe heat of Carbuncles, with very good fucceffe ; it doy}, 
alfo affwwage paine and caufe fuppuration. Take of thefoot{craped from a chimp 
foure ounces, of common falt two ounces, beatethem into fmall powder, addins 
chereto the yolkes of rwoegges, and ftirre them well together untill itcometo have 
the confiftence of a pultis, and let it bee applyed warme unto the Carbuncle. Inthe 
cabult beginning the point or head of the Carbuacle muft bee burned, if it bee blacke, by 
when, why dropping thereinto {calding het oyle, or Aqua forts : for by fucha burning the ye. 
yoy nomic is {uffocated as touched by lightening, and the paine is much leflened, a5] 


Thetop of a 


have proved oftentimes: neither is itto bee feared left that this burning thouldbee 


too painfull, fer it coucheth nothing but the point of the Carbuncle, Which by rea. 

| fon ofthe Efchar that is there, is voyd of fenfe. After this burning, you multgoe 

forward with the former deferibed medicines, untill the Efchar tcemeth to feparare 

mitthheakh, it felfe fromthe ficth round abourit, which is a token of the patients recovery, for 

it fignifieth that nature ts {trong and able torefift the poyfon. After the fall of the 

“fchar you muft ufe gentle mundificatives, as thofe which we have preicribed ina 

peftilent Bubo, not omitting fomctimes the ule of fup purative and mollifying medi- 

cincs, that whilethe grofle matter is clean{ed, that which is as yet crude may bee 

sceovtti Drought tofuppuration ; for then the indication is twofold,the one to fuppuracethar 

} which remainesas yet crude and raw in the part, and the other to cleanfe chat which 
remaines concocted and perfe@tly digefted in theulcer. 


Of the itching and inflamsnsation happening in peftilert ulcers, ana 
how to cicasrize then. 


troubled with 


itching ning and great itching pricke and vellicate the part. The caufe may 


cles and peitilent Bwboesare difficultly cicatrized by reafon of the corroding 


fault by the corruption of the wholefubftance caufeththe ab{cefle. Befides, {uct 


quitcure hath no free paflage forth ; fo the fanies,of its owne nature acride and a 
roding,doth by delay acquire greatcr acrimony and introfitie, forhat by 1s ove 
couch diffolving the adjacent fich, it hinders the conjunction and unition of or 
ofthe ulcer ; but in the interim the lips of the ulcer become callous, which, cack : 
they be liclped by curting,or cating medicines, the ulcer cannot be healed,tor' a 
their demity they hinder the {weating out of a fufficient quantity of the dewy 


her 
Twoforrs €E- to healeup the ulcer. Now the ulcer being plained and brought cqualito rhe ot 


pulotsks we muftufe Epuloticks, thatis, fuch things as havea faculty co cicatsiz¢ - 


Concerning the Plague. | 


of at Cataplafme. Takeof ordinary Diachyloz toure ounces ; of Ungacntum Bafilic on 7 oy 


seeffehof two ounces ; oyle of Viciets halfean ounce: make thereofa medicine. Many ang; 


“ ond mixed with old hogs greafe, the yolkes of egs, and a little fale; for it wi! ae ; 


iy the poyfon. The juice of Colts foote doth extinguith the heat of Carbuneles ; ¢}, 


by anointing 


‘ - not 
proceeding fromthe cholericke, or phlegmaticke and fale bloud, which being! ' 


| 18. yy 


ondenfing and 

jor fome without m 

litharge, bur 
bole armenicke, 

4 many metalline 
ged,but fuch must 
gaich excelleth oct 
culty con folidatir 
nour, growes lank 
‘is kind of ulcers,ag 
imprinted in the pa 
down fome mca 
Carre be too big or 


binding to the part 


snd lofe the acrimco 
of Tartar or Argole 
isa moyft vaule o 
which is good to b 
thought to be inch: 
roafted at the coals # 
hree following 
pw 
ment; itatrenuates 
NG tartar. Scere 
miveanter predi cla 
tindem mali ci 
ferpemt. Fi.bulliat im 
som.cruds, pulvers 
thismedicine be ke 
clothes therein, an 
the redneffe of the 
facewith warme w 


‘ipecially that wh 

Othe inclination 
ttkind ofexcre 
uiually fymptoma 


ulcers are commonly round, and therefore more hard to be cicatrized, fot that fon Of the m 


“Od it away-crude 
‘in, the 
then fhall prods 
Which are un 
deadly 


and by 


| 
an Why che adja parts adjoyning to a peltilent ulcer oft-times are iuperiici. 
Cent pats ate PAS eycc ad realayr liccrous pultles. which here and there with ve 
Of {una 
pen cither externally or internally ; internally by 
which {weating from the ulcer, moyftens the neighbouring parts, pelt 

tne of the Pores of theskinne induce OY the CONMAUGIa TZ OU 
iicines. TOL is. the place mutt bee fomented with difcufling andres hemor 
ih Afomenration Medicines. Toremedy this, the place mutt bee fomented with calcuiling abe: | 

forthisitch. ing things,as aqua fortes, whichthe Gold-{mithes have ufed for feparauing 

| 
bor 


L I B, 22 
Balilicon 
Many a Nnci- 
two {ton es } 
rit cafe P 
| oyle of Vio. 
dfothe flices 
confolidating the fleth,which by being moiftened by anexcrementitious hu- 
often ufed the 3 


ceffe it doth <iated inthe part, as by a burning coale, 


romachimn 

weer, adding 
come to have 
uncle. Inthe 
ce blacke, by 


Loncermng the Plague. 
“oadenfing and hardening 


22; 


hing the furface of the eth, of thefe there aretwo kinds ; 
without much biting bind and dry, fuch are pomgranate pils, oake barke, 
harge, burnt bones, {cailes of braffe, galls, cyprefle nuts, Miniem,antimo- 


, polearmenicke, the burnt and wathed thels of oifters, Lime nine times wathed, 


a y many metalline things. Others are next tothefe, by which proud fiefhis confu- 

4 but fuch muit be {paringly ufed : of this kind is wathed Vicrioll, burnt Alome, 
B ichexcelleth other Epuloticks, by reafon of the excellent drying and aftringent 
Buc, growes lanke. For that the fcarre which is made, is commonly unfightly in Remedies 2 


gainft thedefoz- 
micy of {carres. 


.skind ofulcers,as red, livide, blacke,fwolne,cough, by reafon of the great aduftion 


therefore [ have thought good here to 
fome meads by which this deformity may be correéted or amended. If the 


Bicebe too big or high, it thall be plained by making convenient ligation and ftraie 
~ Bipding to the parca plate of lead rubbed over with quickfilver ; but you may whi- 
WB itby anointing it with Lime ninetimes wathed (that fo it may bee more gentle 
~ Bsilolethe acrimony) and incorporated with oile of Rofes.Sometake two pound 


Tartar or Argole, burne ic, and then powder ir, put itina cloth,and fo let it hang 
ing thouldbee moyft vaule orcellar,and fet aveffell under it to receive thedropping liquor, 
which by rea- ~ Bpichis good to be rubbed for agood f pace, upon the fcarre. The fame faculty is 
you multgoc to be inthat moyfture of egs which {weats through the fhel,whileft they are 
ethto feparate B wted atthe coals;as Emplait.de newly made: The 
recovery, for following compofitions are much approved. lk. Axwngia [aille nonies lot2in 
preferibeding chen let them all be incorporated togethcr,and make an oint- 
ilifying medi- !tatrenuates the skin and cleanfeth {pots. byof.oles femsin.cucurb. an.3i. 
rude may bee tartar.58, cere alb Liquefiant fimul lento iene, desde adde [permat. ceté 3vi. re- 
fuppurarethac predittaabigne douec infrigsd.poftca adde troch.alb. Rhafis pal. caph. 3i. 
nfe that which coms mali cires {acco omnia diligenter commifce, fiat linmentum. Or clickk.rad. 
Si.bullias tn aq, com. dimid. deinde addefulph. viviignem non experts, 
pulverif.an. addatwr caph, feces byofcyami Let 
— usmedicine be kept in a lead or glaffe veflel,and when you would ufe it,dip linnen 
thestherein, and laythem to the part. You may alfoufe thefe medicines againft 
| «redneffe of the face,and you may fetch them off in the morning by wafhing the 
<<with warme water and bran. 
fuperficiarily Cuarp.XXXVI. 
here with bur- 
caufemay hap- 7% Of fundry kinds of Evacuations, and firft of fweating and vomitinz. 
iting 
by He peftilent malignity is not oncly evacuated and fent forth by the erup. why che pct 
application of tion of puftles and {pots, but alfo by {weat, vomit, bleeding at nofe, atthe 
fling and relax | hemorrhoids, by the courfes,a fuxe of the belly, and other wayes,fo that way by oacway, 
rarating of mc- ~nature by every kind of excretion may be freed rom the deadly poyfon, by muy. 
eft by Carbun- “cially that which is not as yet arrived atthe heart.But chiefe regard muft be had we mutthave 
srroding (aes | the inclination of nature, and wee muft attend what way it chicfly aimes at, and cone —_— 
which being /tkind of excretion itaffedts. Yet fuch evacuations are not alwayes criticall, but nse. 


Befides,tuch 


red, for that che 


of the 


acride and cot 
itsbururs | 
{ 
which, 
-aled, for tliat bY 


by 


i ‘ually (ymptomaticall, for that oft-times nature is fo irritated by the untameable 
~@ .“Sary of the matter, that iccan no way digeft it, but is forced by any meanes to 
away-crudeasitis. Wherefore ifnature may feeme by the moyftnefle of the Signes 
ws the fuppreffion of urine,& other fignes toaffecta crifis and excretion by fwear, "**" 
4 * thall procure it by the formerly mentioned meanes. It is delivered by the 
“chtsthat all fweats in acute difeafes are falutary,which happen upon a Criticall 
Which are univerfall and hot, and fignified before the criticall day. Bur inthis A mut 


the dewy sic deadly difeafe of the Plague, wee mutt not expect aCrifis, but as {oone as 
uallto the bywhat meanes wee may tofree nature from fo dire and porentan c- 
cicatrizewlce™ 


But 


* 
\ 
\ 
? 
& 


Concerning the Plague. [1B 
i But oft times thetough and groffe exctementitious humours may bee purged by Hick tring isa 
vomit, which could nor be evacuated by {trong purges. Therefore alfo by this ms fort h (ach thi 
BY ner of excretion may we hope for the exclufion of the peftilent venome, if there he 3 ne ion only is no 
) nothing which may binder, and nature by frequent naufeou{nefle may feem to afieg P de vapour, fron 
P this way: the endeavour thereof fhall be helped by giving fome halfe a pint of Wat er or Carbunc 
How oP warerto be drunke with foure ounces of common oyle, an ounce of vinegar yoke the tunic 
| little juice of raddifh, after the taking of the potion it is fit to thrnft into the hic 
a goofe quill dipped in the fame oile,or elfe a branch of Rofemary,or elfe by bs 
7 ing in the fingers fo to procure vomit ; alfoa potion of cight ounces of the mucilao; "¢ erall remedi 
7 nous water of the decoction of Line feeds will procure vomit. Or elfe, K. rad , 1 hel sthat hick 
su taleol. fect, vel (ems. ejus, cr (em. antriplicis, ax. 9 iii. bwHiant imagua cons, quod repletion 
i pro dofi,sn colatura diffolve OXY fyr. acet, am. 38. whibeatur potio larga tepid by Treaclean 
clfe, K. oxym. Gal. 5 vi. ol. com, 5 ii. paretur potis sepia. But nature mutk not be fore’ ~yred by the ufe o 
muftnotbe  Unleffe ofits own accord it undertake this motion, for forced and violent Now the who! 
Forced. diftends the nervous fibers of the ventricle, dejects the ftrength, breaks the iter is chiefly 2 
the Lungs, whence proceeds a deadly {pitting of blood. Wherefore if the ftomac, i Tait che Tae 
fhall trouble it felfe witha vain and hurttull defire to vomit, it fhallrather be bia ca: 
thened with bagges of rofes,worm woad and Saunders, ufing inwardly the juice 
Quinces and Berberics, and brothes made for the fame purpofe. iz fone. But we 
fected part, when 
Cuar. XXXVIL erto ule diverfio 
Of {pitting, Salivation, Sncefine, Belching, Hicketting, and making 
of Water. 


Hat long evacuations may be made by {pitting and falivation, you may 
- learne by theexample of {uch as havea plurifie, forthe matter of th: 
a Plurifie being turned into pas, the purulent matter fuckt upby the rare 
? é% and {pongeous fubftance of the lungs,and thence drawn intothe Afers 

| Arteria, islaftly caft out by the mouth. 
There is none ignorant, how much fuch as have the vemeres are helped by 
‘~livation and fpitcing. Bur thele fhall be procured by Mafticatories of the roots of Ire 
9s,Pellitory of Spaine, Mattick, and the like, the mucilage of Line feeds beldinthe | 

mouth will workethe fame effea. 

That fuch as have a moift braine may expell their fu perfluous humours by {nee- 
fingand blowing their nofes, the braine by the ftrength of the expulfive faculty, be 
ahs | ; ing ftirred upto the exclufion of that which is harmefull,may be knowne by thee 


{pitting in pefti- 
Jent cifleales. 


cy, 


of cl Mulbert 
Butifthe. 
Cant/ 
Ly frictions and 


ample of old people and children which are daily purged by their nofes cupping in the io 
is ftirred up to both kindes of excretion from caufes eitber internal or external aches applyed: 
1 from the internall, as by a phlegmaticke and vaporous matter, which conteinc¢! aths, fomentari. 


the braiac, offends it ;externally, as by receiving the beames of the funneinthes0- 
| ftri's,or by tickling thee with a feather,or blowing intothem the powder of Hells 
bore, Enphorbium, Pyrethrum,Muttard feed,and the like fterauramentories. Forth 
| the braine is ftraitened by its owneexpulfive faculty, to theexcretion of tliat whit 
istroublous unto it. Sneefing breaketh forth with noife, for that the matic! 
through ftraits, to wit, by the {training paflages of the Os cribrefexm, whichis leate 
at the roots of the noftrills. It is not fic to caufe {necting in a body very plethorit 
: leffe you have firft premifed generall medicines, left the humours {hould bee not ® 
powertully drawne into the braine, and focaufe an Apoplexie, Periige, 
fymptomes. 
The commodi- By belching the flatulencies conteined in the ventricle, being the off- {pre 
vies otbelching: crydity, or fatulent meats, are expelled, thefe by their tafte and {mell, 


of, Or rather by 

orifices of the vei 

Kncholne, the 
‘rVile, @ 

Derries, Brox 

othe d0yling 


king, {weet, bitter or tart, thew the condition and kinde of crudity of the bo 
from whence they are raifed: now vomiting freeth the ftomack of crndiucs, but 
diftemper muft be corrected by contraries,as altering thingsto be preferibed 


* 
\ 4 
| 
i} 
Hatt 
mithrid 
| 4,3 ii, me 
4 


a 

= 

L B.2> 


eC purged by 


leem toafieg 
Pint of warm 
inegar, and, 


tothethroare 
by thrut. 


the mucilaoj. 
> kk, vad. 
(uf 
tepida Or 
not be forc’r, 
Cnt VCMmitin 
sthe veffels of 
{the ftomack 
her be ftrene- 
ly the juice 


akong 


tion, you may 
matter ofthe 
updby the rare 
intothe Afpers 


e helped by fa. 
he roots of Ire- 


eeds held in the 


mours by {nee- 
ve faculty, bee 
wae by the cx- 
ofes braine 
llor exterpall: 
ch conteinedin 
funne in the no- 
wader of Helle 
tories. Forthea 
of that which 


by this man. 
1c; if there be. 


“ickerting is acontraction and extenfion of the nervous fibers of the ftomack,to 
4 forth {uch things as are too contumacioutfly impact in the coates thereof ;yctre- 

am aonly is not the canfe thereof,but fometimes inanitionalfo ; fo oft times a pu- 

‘fe vapour, from fome other place, breaking into the ftomacke, as from a peftilent 

sybo, Ot Carbuncle ;alfo all acide and acride things, becaufe they pricke, vellicate & 

yvoke the tunicles of the ventricle, as vinegar, {piced things, and the like ; often & 
‘ontumacious hicketting after purging, a wound or vomiting, isill ; but ifa convul. 

‘on prefently happen thereon, it is deadly. 

seyerall remedies muft be ufed according to the variety of the caufes : for repleti- 
phelps that hicketing that proceeds from inanition, & evacuation that which hap- 
gs by repletion : that which proceeds from a putrid and venemous vapour, is hel- 
sal by Treacle and Aatidotes;that which is occafioned by acide and acrid thin 95,15 
wed bythe ufe of groffe, fatty, and cold things. 

Now the whole body is ofttimes purged by urine, and by this way the feavourifh The whole bo. 
is chiefly and properly accuftomed to bee evacuated: nota few, being trou- 
Jedwith the Lwes venerca, when as they could not be broughrto falivationbyun- 
jjon,have bin cured by the large evacuation of urine caufed by diuretick medicines. 

Niurcticks Wherewithall you may move urine, are formerly defcribed in treating of 

»e{tone. But we muft abftaine from more acride diureticks, efpecially when as in- ee 
»mmation is inthe bladder; for otherwife the noxious humours are fent to the af. to abftnine from 
sied part, whence there is danger of a deadly Gangrene. Therefore then itis ber~ “ticks. 
«to ule diverfion by {weat. 


XXXVIII. 
Of the Menftrwall and H amorrhoidall purgation. 


Ot onely reafon, but alfo manifold experience inducethus to be- 
leeve that women, by the benefit of their menftruall purgation, 
e{cape and are freed from great, peftilent, andabfolutely deadly 
/difeafes ; wherefore it muft bee procured by remedies, both ine 
-wardly taken,and outwardly applied: thefe may be taken inward- vole the cours 
| ly with good fuceefle, Ca/sia lignes, Cinamon, the barke ofthe 
wrota Mulberry, Saffron, Agricke, Nutmeg, Savine, Déagridium, and divers o- 
nes. But ifthe affe@ require more vehement medicines, the rootes of Tithymel, 
Antinony, Cantharides (taken in {mall quantity) movethe courfes moft powerful. 
) frictions and ligatures made upon thethighes and legges conduce hereto,as alfo 
“oping in the inner and middle part of thethighs, the opening of the vein Saphena, 
“aches applyed to the orifice of the neck of the womb, peffarics, nodula’s,glyfters, 0 
uths,fomentations made of oderifcrous things, which by the fragrancy of their things 
d0r, or rather by their heat,may attenuate & cut groffe humors,open the obftructed the cours. 
wulices of the veines, {uch are the roots of Marfh-mallowes, Orris,Parfly, Fennell, 
iteholne, the leaves and floures of St. Johns Wort, Afparagus, Rocket, Baime, 

dervile, Mugwort, Mints, Penny-royall, Savory, Rofemary, Kue, Time, Sage, 
bay berries, Broome, Ginger, Cloves, Pepper, Nutmegs, andthe like; the vapour ° 
tthe boyling whereof, letrhe woman, fitting upona perforated feat, receive by a 
‘tonell into the necke of her wombe, covering herfelfe warme on all fides, that fo 
‘sthing may otherwife breath forth. Of the {amethings may bce made bathes, as 
"ell generall as particular. Alfo peflaries are good made afterthis manner, Kx. the- 
‘“.mithrid. an. 5 8.caftor. cum. ammoniac. an.3 i, mifce cum bombace in [ucco merce. 
fiat pefarium. Or elfe, rad. petrofelin. cr fenng. fub cineribus coctas de. 
ontufas cum pul. [taphyfag. pyreth. croce cy oleo Lilioram, fo make a peffary inthe 
“me ofa fuppofitory ornodula. Or, pulu. myrrh. aloes, an,5 i. fol, (abs. ni- 
te, ii, rad. Helleb. migr. 5 i. croci, Di. cumfucco mercur. wmclle com- 
Py ‘Make a peflary in Cotton. This which followes is more effeQuall. Fe. faces rwe. 
am, 3 ij. myrrh. cupherb. castor. fabin. diacrid. terebinsh. 


Peflariesto pre 
vokethe cerns. 


| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
ye matter pallet 
,, which is beats | 
plethorick 
(hould bee mors 
crtige, the Lise 
the off- fpring ot 
ell, plealing 
y of the humor 
preferibed 
Hick 


a 


we 


864 Concerning the 


Blow to ftop the 
too immode- application of cupping elaffes under the dugs, frictions and ligations Of the ') 


ratcly, parts, as the armes, putting up of peflaries, application of refrigerating and altrin 


provoke. 
the 
ides, ifthe thighes or legs were broken, by ventoles applyed with great flame tothe inner 


Lis. 22 


make a peflary according to art; letathredhang outofthe onc end of the pellaries 


that fo you may eafily draw them forth as you pleafe, 
But if this menftruous flux once provoked, low too immoderately, it mut b- fo 


ped by ufing meats of grofler and more vifcide juice, by openinga veine in thy. arm 


gent plafters, tothe lower belly, fhare and loines,laying the woman in a CONVenien: 
place, and not upon a feather-bed. Nt 
This following injection ftoppeth the blood flowing out of thewombe, 
plant. c fabror. an. Ibi, gallar,immatur. ii, berber. {umach, balauf 
vitriol.rom. alum. roch. an. it, buliant omnia fimul,¢> flat decoctie: of this make 
jection intothe wombe. In the performance ofall thefe things, I would hayes, 
Surgeon depend upon the advice of a Phyfitian, as the occafionand place 
mit. 
But if nature endeavour to free it {elfe of the peftilent matter by the hcemorrho. 
ides, you may provoke them by frictions and ftrong ligatures in the lowe; 


ethe 
I Der. 


Pals, as 


fide of the thigh, by application of hot and attractive things to the fundament, fich 
as are fomentations,emplafters,unguents,fuch as is ufually made of an onion rofted 
tinder the embers, and incorporated with Treacle, anda little oile of Rue : after rhe 
dicemorrhoid veines,by thefe meanes,come to thew themfelves,they thal be rubbed 
with rough linnen cloths,or fig leaves, or a raw onion,oran oxe gall mixt with fome 
pouder of Coloquintida: laftly you may apply horfe-leaches,or you may open them 
witha Lancet, ifthey hang much forth of the fundament, and be {wolnewith much 
blood. But ifthey flow too immoderately, they may be ftayed by the fame meanes 
as the cour{es. 


XXXIX. 


Of procuring evacuation by ftoole, or a fluxe ofthe belly. 


: SAS 7j\fstureoften times, both by it felfe, of its owne accord, as alfohelped 
BING by laxative and purging medicines, cafts into the belly and guts,asi0- 
tothe finke of the body , the whole matter ofa peftilent difeafe, 
whence are caufed Diarrhza’s, Lienteries, and Dyfenteries ; you may 
diftinguith thefe kindes of fluxes of the belly, by the evacuated excte- 
ments. For if they be thinne and fincere, that is, reteine the nature of one, and that 
a fimple humour, as of choler, melancholy or phlegme,and ifthey be caft forthin 


agreat quantity,without the ulceration or excoriation of the guts,vehement or 
ting paine, then itisa Diarrhse, which fomealfo call flaxws bumoralis. 


wheais. Lienteria, when as by the refolved retentive faculty oftheftomacke and guts calc 


by ill humours, either there colle&ed, crflowing from fome other place, of 9° 


Bais fenteriais when as many and different things,and ofttimes mixt with bloos, ac* 


infunder the coats of the veffels. 


ifia any kinde of difeafe, certainely in a peftilent one, Guxes of the belly 


pen immoderate in quantity, and horrible in the quality oftheir contests, a5 qu" 


vifcous, frothy as from melted greace, yellow, red, purple, greene, afli-colous & 
Thectule ofva- blacke, and exceeding ftinking. The caufeis various, and many forts of 


rious, and ftink which taken hold of by the peftilent malignity, turne into divers fpecies, o 
ing excrements 


A 


inthe plague, im their whole kindeboth from their particular, as alfo from mature in 
reafon of the corruption of their proper fubftance, whole infeparable igae 


which is ofttimes accompanied by wormes. | | 
Inthe campe at Amiens a peftilent Dyfentery was overall the Campe, io 


Whara cold & moift diftemper,the meat is caft forth crude, 8 almoft as it was taken. 


forth with pain, gripings, and an ulcer of the guts, caufed by acride choler, <: 


is the 


q b0- 


Lt 8.22. 


dics, obferved th 
(wollen, and 
out of which, as I 
ofthe furamers fu 
-ride and choleri 
fhallknow whetl 
ofthe blood 
you muft rather 5 
mouth. 
Therefore if b 
falpect in a peftil 
parts,neither int! 
torward by art, a: 
ohenicon diflolve 
 Alfo Glyfters 
and paines, and d 
becaufe they free 
by opening and a 
frecly free it felfe 
mixe orthre 
retunde the vene 
There may alf 
of hrera picra and ¢ 
ny sili. of oxe gal 
3. The want of 
over. 
and well incorpos 
dula’s, of the big 
them more acride 


hate, berberies, | 
he following 
hy ofthe choleri 
boiled in the wat 
marble mort 
nuk, Wherto add 
his following’ 
WNO received it 
happy fucce 
1. 

3 \facchar, 3 
theyolk 
thay Pepher 
dogge hath f¢ 
Quine es rofte 
elerved berbe: 
ftomack and 


| 
| 4 
| 
=z 
i 
j 
d 
ix 
~ Wek y 
; 
bases 
| 
hea 
te 


Lip.2> 


the peffaries 


mutt be fon. 
1610 the arm 
OF the upper 
2nd aftrin. 
& COnVenien: 


nbe, aque 
mach, balauff. 
this make in. 
have the 
ace fhall per. 


heemorrho. 
IWEF parts, as 
¢ to the inner 
dament, fuch 
onion rofted 
Lue : after the 
hal be rubbed 
ixt with fome 
ay Open them 
Newith much 

fame meanes 


as alfo helped 
ind guts,as in- 
‘lent difeaic, 
ries you may 
acuated excrc- 
pf one, and that 
e caft forth in 
hement or frete 
Iris calleda 
nnd guts cauied 


LU 
rplacc, or by? 


istaken. A 


blood, arecalt 


the belly 
rents, as Liquics 


sofillhumou™> 


choler, 


obfet 


oath. 
' Therefore if by gripings, a sewe/mns, che murmuring and working of the guts,you 
ig{pect in a peftilent difeafe, that nature endeavours to disburden it felf by the lower 
garts neither in the meane while doe it.{ucceed to your defire,then mutt it be helped 


inward by art, as by taking a potion of 38. of brera fimplex, anda dramme of Dia. 4 potions 
Jenicon diflolved in worme- wood water. 


Alo Glyfters are good in this cafe, not onely for that they affwage the gripings 


od paines, and draw by continuation or fucceffion from the whole body, but alfo 
caule they free the mefaraike veines and guts from obftruction and ftuffing,fo that 
wopening and asit were unlocking ofthe paffages, nature may afterwards more 
vecly free it felfe from the noxious humours. [n fuch glyfters they alfo fometimes 
sixe two orthree drammes of Treacle, that by one and the fame labour they may 
«unde the venenate malignity of the matter. 

There may alfobe made forthe fame purpofe fuppofitories of boyledhony 3i.. 
therapicra and common falt, ofeach 3 6, or that they may bee the ftronger,ofho- 
wy Of oxe gall 3 i,of Scammony ,esphorbiam and cologuintida poudred, of cach 
i}, The want of thefe may be fupplied by nodula’s made inthis forme. kk. vite, 


fellis bubuls, mellis, an. 3 &, falis com. 5 &. let thembe ftirred together, 


dwell incorporated, and fo parted into lirnen ragges,and then bound up into no- 
dola's, of the bigneffe of a filberd, and fo putup into the fundament ; you may make 
hem more acride by adding fome powder of Eaphorbinm or Coloquintida. 


—_ 


Cuar. XL. 
Of flopping the fluxe of the belly, 


SSB olent and immoderate {courings, for that they refolve the faculty,and 


We lead the patient into a confumption and death, therefore ifthey thail ap- 


We pear to be fuch,they muft be ftayed in time by things taken and injected 
by the mouth and fundament. To this purpofe may a pudding be made pug. 
* of wheat flower boyled in the water of the decoction of one pomcera ding to ftay the 

lvesberberies, bole armenick, terra fieiHata, and white poppic feeds, of each 5 i." 

The following Almond milke ftrengthens the ftomacke, and mitigates the acrimo- 

'y ofthe cholericke humour;provoking the guts to excretion. Take {weet Almonds 

boiled in the water of barly, whercin {teele or Iron hath been quenched, beat them 

1@marble morter, and fo with fome of the {ame water makethem into an Almond 

tuk,wherto adding 5 iof Diarhodon Abbatis you may give it to the patient to drink, 
Thisfollowing medicine I learnt of Dr. Chappelaiwe the Kings chiefe phyfitian, 

"NO receivedit of his father, and helditas a great fecret,& was wontto prefcribe it 

happy {uccefle to his patients is thus, IX, bols fi lapid. hamat ‘TD. Chappclaires 

pics mavalis, if, coral rub. marg. elect. corn. cervi uft.c> loti inag, plant, an, medicine oMay 
\facchar. rof.5 ii. fiat pulvifc. of this let the patient take a{poonefull before mear, 

tWith the yolke of an egge. 
Chri topher Andrew in his ecoiatria much commendcth dogges dung, when as 

“dogee hath for three dayes before bin fed oncly with bones. 

Quinces tofted in embers, or boyled ina por, the conferve of cornelian cherries, 

"eletved berberies and myrabalans, rofted nutmeg taken before mear, {trengthen 


Xe omack and ftay the laske ; the patient mnft feed upon good meats, and thefe ra- 
Dddd thet 


18.2% (Concerning the Plague. 865 
the mouths of the araike Veines and Arteries, opened and mach | 
20d whereas they entered intothe guts, were juftlike little Catyledones, 
eof which, as I prefled them, there flowed blood. For both by theexceffive hear at 
“fehe furamers funne, and the mindes of the ensaged fouldicrs, great quantity of a- : 
humour was generated, and {o flowed into the belly : but you 7 
whether the greater orthe lefler guts be ulcerated, better b y the mixture 
B® fche blood with the excrements, than by the fite of the paine, therefore in the one 
SB oymutt rather worke by Glyfters, butin the other, by Medicines taken by the 
= 
| 
af};-coloures 
in general, 
figne 1S (tinc:: 
in this che 
their 
dics 


Concerning the Plague. 


Lip.22 


4 
B 

> 

Ointixtnts. 


i 
Glefters to {tay 


a tute. 


A very alitrin- 
elytter, 


A nouri thing, 
glyfter. 


ther roaited than boiled. His drinke fhall be chalibeate water of the doco& 
foure pomegranate beaten, oF of the decoction of a quince, medlars,cervices, my I. 
beries, bramble berries, and the like things, endued witha faculty to bind. and 
wafte the excrementitious humidities of the body : thefe waters hall be mixed With 
fyrupe of red currance, Julep of rofes, and thelike. | 

Let the region of the ftomacke and beily be anointed with oile of matticke, wo 
chatelinum, mayriles andquinces. Aifo a cruft of bread newly drawn forth of the 
ven and fteeped in vinegar and rofe water, maybe profitably applycd; orelfes Cata. 
plaf{me ofted rofes, fumach, berberies, myrtles, the pulpe of quinces, maflick, bean 
flower, and of rofes made up with calibeate water. 

-Anodyne, abftergent, aftringent, confolidating and nourifhing gly fers bee 
injeQed. Thefe following retund the acrimeny of humours, and aflwage Paine, R 
fol. lactuc. hyofc. acetof. portul.an, mM. 1. flor, violar, ey nenuph. an.p i. fiat decoétig 4 
‘Ib colatura diffolve cafsiafifiul. 5 vi. olet rofat. menuph. an. fiat clyffer. 0; 
elfe, K.vofirab. bord, mund. fem. plant.an. pi. fiat decottio, in colaturd adde oles jj. 
vitel. ovor.ii. fiat clyfter. Or, decottionis Capt, crur.vitekin.cy capit.vervicin, yn, 
cum pelle, ii. in qua coquantur fol. violar, mercnr. plantag. an. m i. hord.myyd 
i. quatuor fem. frigid. major. an. 5%, in colature 1D diffolve cal]. recenter 
ol, viol. 3iv.vitellor. ovor, ii. fach. rub. 3i. fiat clyfter. Or, flor. chamam, 
aneth.anp i.vad, bifmal She frat decoctio i nlacte; colatura adde muc fem, lin, fenuer, 
extract. in aqua malv. ii. facchar. rub. 31. olei cham. & aneth, an. 3i%. vitellor, ovyy. 
ii. frat clyfler. 

Such gly fters muft belong kept that they may more readily mitigate paine. When 
fhavings ofthe guts appeare in the ftooles, it isan argument that there isan ulcerin 
the guts; therefore then wee muft ufe detergentand confolidating glyfters, as this 
which followes. 

hordeiimsegr. pii.rof-rub. flor. chamam. plantag. apit, an. pi. fiat decottio, inco- 


“lature diffolve mells rofat. fyr. de abjinth, an. vitel. ovor.ii. This following 


olyfter confolidateth. Re. facci plantaz. centinod. portulac.nu 3 ii. bol. armen. fing, 
dracon. amyl, an. i. febi diffoluti, 5 iii. fiat clyfter. Alfo cowes milke boyled 
with plantaine and mixed with fyrupe of rofes isan excellent medicine for the ulce. 
rated cuts. 

This following glyfter bindes. caud. equin. plant. polygon. an.m i.fiat 
in lacie ufialate ad quart. ill. in colatnraaade bol: arm.terra figil. 


albumina duor,ovor, fiat elyfter. Or elle, fac. plant. arnoglof. 


dentia facta depuratorum quantum {uf ficit procly (tere addendo pul, boli armen, 
gil. fang. dracon. an. 3 i, ol.myrtbin. c& rofat. an, 3 ii. fiat clyfter, 
It pure blood fow forth of the guts, [could wifh you to ufe ftronger altrictives 


To which purpofe1 mucheommenda decodtion of pomegranate pills, of cypre' 
nuts, red rofe leaves,fumach,alome, and vitrioll made with {mithes water, and {0 
made into glyfters, without any oyle. It will bee good withthe fame decoction (0 


meat the fundament, per/nanm, and the whole belly. 


Aftringent glyfters ought notto bee ufed before that the noxious humouts be 
drawne away and purged by purging medicines, otherwife by the ftpppage hereof, 


the body may chance to be opprefied. 


Itthe patient bee fo weake that hee cannot take or {wallow any thing by mouth: 


nutritive glyfters fhall be given him. decoctionis capi pinguis, cruris vite” 


coct. cum acetofa, bugl (fo, boragine, pimpincha, lactuca, 3 x. vel 
i. butyri recentis 


vitehos ovorum, num ill.facchars rofati, aque Vita, an, 


16, CUP He pe {i 
ing 
gaine. 
humo 
breathing placcs 
(elles againit na 
ved and difculle 
at. Therctore the 
the peftilent malt 
forth,and | 
ssnature and the: 
pecially when as 


H 
{tilen 
The 


DIO 
comc unto the N 

Andtheinfant ic 


4 
the Nu rf 


whol y abftaine 
lucke, with water 
Neat muft bee fe 
icruple of tre] 
is al{i 
and both the wre! 
oltea unto Tyeac! 
Nature may b. 
“hudren are 
for when 
fon Sand firm th 
prep 

“YTupe of fucc 


a 
\ 
Ve 
« 
they 
rier 
4 4 | 
} 4 4 
lay be pres 
be 
armenic! 
Drone 
| tha 
PhyGer. 
* 
i} 
4 4 
Yuck: £7 
LOUTH 
= 
ul 
| 
4 


ocoction Ota 
ervices mul. 


to binde and 
e mixed with 


nafticke, Mof- 
orth Of the 
orelfeacara. 
ymaftick bean 


yfters thall bee 
paine, 
fiat decottig aa 
fiat cly fler. Oy 
Ade olei rof. jj. 
t.Vervicin. una 
n i. bord.mund. 
mter extradl 
chamam. mel/. 
cm,lin.fanucr, 
. vitellor. ovor. 


te paine. When 
Pre isan ulcer in 
olyfters, as this 


st decottio, in 
[his following 
bol. armen. 


ine for the ulce- 


mi. fiat 
dracon 


armcni, terra 
nger aftrictives. 


pills, of cypretic 
‘es water, and lo 


milke boyled | 


pod. | 


decoétion tofo- | 


nus humours bec 


Roppage hereof, ‘outh, for when they are able to concoct and turne into bloud meatsthat are more 


Concermng the ‘Plague. 867 


Cuar. XLI, 


Of evacuation by infenfible tran{piration. 


one He peftilent malignity as itis oft times drawne by the pores, by tran{pira- 
“7 (@\ tion into the body, fo oft times itis fent forth invifibly the fame way a- 
gine. For our native heat that isneveridleinus, difperfeth the noxious 
jumours attenuated into vapours and aire through the unperceivable 


weaning places of the skin. An argument hereof is, we fee thatthe tumours and ab- Tumours are 


er 


againit nature, even when they are come to fuppuration, are oft times refol- oft-rimes difcuf 


. fed by the force 
gad difcufled by the onely efhicacy of nature, and heate, without any helpe of shuineatin 


«Therefore there isno doubt, but chat nature being prevalent,may free it felf from ‘hey 
he peftilent malignity by Tranf{piration, fome Abfceile, or Carbuncle being 
,yetorth,and fome matter colle@ed in fome certaine part of the body, For when 

«qature aad the native heat are powerfull and ftrong, nothing is impofhible co it, c- 

‘cially when as the paffages are alfo in likemanner tree and open. 


CHap. XLII. 
How to cure Infants and Children taken with the Plague. 


Sate that it happen that fucking or weaned children be infe@ed with the pe- 


4 lane? (tilence, they muft bee cured after another order than is yet defcribed. 


The Nurfe of the fucking childe maftgoverne her {elfe fo in dyet and 
the ufe of medicines,as if fhe were infected with the peftilence her felf : 
Her dyetconfifteth inthe ufe of the fix things not naturall. Therefore gc«. 

cube moderate, for the fruit or profit of that moderation in dyet cannot chufe but 


the Nurfes mitke,and fo unto the infant who liveth onely by the milke. | 


~ 


‘dtheanfant ic felfe muft keepthe fame diet as necre as he can in fleep,waking,and 
wulion, or avoydiag of fuperflaous humoursand excrements of the body. Ler 
hu Nurfs bee fed with thofe things that mitigate the violence of the feaverifh hear: 
‘cooling brethes, cooling herbs, and meats of amoderate temperature : fhee muft 
‘ly abltaine from wine, and anoint hes nipples, as. often as {hee giveth che infant 
“cwith water, or juice of forrell tempered with {ugar of rofes. Butthe infants 
“utmuft bee fercified againft the violence of the encreafing venome, by giving it 
tsicruple of treacle ia the Nurfes milkey the broth of a pullet,or fome other cordi- 
awater. [cis alfo very neceflary to anoint the region of the heart, the emunctories, 
boththe wrefts with the fame medicine : neither were it unprofitable to imell 
Treacle diffolved in rofe water,vinegar of rofesand a litle aqua vita, that 
Suture may bee ftrengthened againft the malignity of the venome. When the Medicine: may 
“crea are weaned,and fomewhat well growne, they may takemedicines by the °° aren) 


‘land firm than milk.the may eafily aGuate a gentle medicine. Therefore a po- 


thing by mouth, prepared for them of twelve graines of treacle,diffolved with a little of 
Vitel 
quibss di gor 


vecentis non 


of fuccory in fome cordiall water,or the broth of a capon : unleffe that a- 
B “diather give it with conferve of rofes,in forme of a bole: but treacle muft bee 
children in very {mall quantity, for if it be taken in any large quantity,there 
dancer left hat by inflaming the humours, itinferre afeaver. Furthermore, 


“may be prepared to be takenoften, mrade of acapon (eafoned with forrell, let- 
llaine and cooling feeds, adding thereto bole armenick and terra (igillata,of 


“lone ounce, being tyed ina rag,and fometimes preffed out from the deco@ion. 


“Sole armenicke, whether it be by its marvellous faculty of drying, or by fome | 


Dddd 2 ferved 


wal Property, hath this vertue,that being drunken(according as Galen witnefleth) 


BL“ thofe that are infe@ted with the peftilence, if fo be that they may bee cured 
that thofe that cannot be cured with bole armenick, cannot bee pre- 


‘ * 
_ 
4 
4 
q 
4 
4 
> 
4 
a 
| 
| 
| | 
a 
# 
4 
4 i 
aa 
4 


wcae. and vaporous, they are cafily delivered of fome portion of the venenate matt: A 


through the pores of the skin by provoking fweat, wich a decoction of parily | 
prunes, figs,and the roots of forrell,with a little of the powder of Hartshorne, , 


\e 


> 
& preffed outin rhe hot of fage,rolemary lavender, bayes,chamom| 


liloce and maliowes,or clfe {wines bladders halte filled with the fame decod 


$68 Concerning the Plague. 

ferved by any other medicines. But becaulethe bodies of children are 


vory. Bucthat the fweat may be more abundant and copious, apply {pung.s ¢; eg 


| 
theformeofa 
purge to be gt- 
eatoachild. diffolvetwo drams of Diacatholscon of fyrupe of Rofes laxative three drams ; make 
thereof a {mall potion. This isthe cure of the Peftilence and of the peftilent Feaver, 
as far as I could learn fromthe moft learned Phyficians,and have obferved my {elfe 
by manifold experience by the grace and permifhon of God : of whomalone,as the 
Author ofall good things that mortall men injoy,the true and certaine prefervatives 
againit the peftilence are to be defired and hoped for. 
End the Twentie fecond Booke. 
‘MMation,an yt 
“Uy violent ftroal 
libftance, then 
‘over the d 
yt Meanes : 
avether eye all 
‘may feem 


LIB. =>: 
yy 
| 
Sai 
WY VA 
chearme-holes, and to the groines. Inthe tune that they {weat,lettheir { GI 
nedtocoolethem. Alfo Iet anodule of Treacle,ditlolved in vinegar and | 
| Rofes.bec appled to the noftrils ; but alwaies ufc a moderation in {wearino 
ai that children are of afubftancethat is eafte to be diflipated and refolved : Rey 
| rentimes although they do not {weat,yetthcy feclthe commodities of {wearing | 
matter of the venome being diffipated by the force of the heat through the porec oc 9 
the skin. Burin the {weating while the face is fanned,and {weet & cordial! », 4 
plyed to thenoftrils, nature muft bee recreated and firengthened, which other; J 
would be debilitated through fweating, that it may bee better able to expell they. M. A 
nome. After that che {weat is wiped away, itis very profitable to take a porio, 
conlerve of Rofes, with the powder of Harts horne or of [vorie diflolved inthew,, J O R 
ters of Bue loffe and Sorrel,the better to coole and defend the heart. If there apne, 
any tumour underthe arme-holes or iathe groine, let it bee brought to maturation 
: with a mollifying, relaxing, drawing, and then witha fuppurative fomentation, o; 
Cataplafine; alevaies ufing and handling it as gently as you may,confideringtheien. 


ire Warme 


fenenate matte, 


of Par{] feede 
“) 
arts horne, Or]. 


dipped 


,chamomil ine. 
Cecoction, to 
eir faces be tan. 
par and Water of 
veating, becaufe 
Ived : fo char of. 
Of {weating, the 
ugh the pores of 
rdiall things ap. 
which otherwife 
to expeli the ve- 
take a potion of 
olved in the wa. 
Af there appeare 
to maturation 
fomentation, or 
nfidering the ten- 
pation following 
one dram, infufe 
, inthe ftraiming 
ree drains ; make 
peftilent Feaver, 
pbferved my felfe 
rhom alone,as the 
nine prefervatives 


MEANES AND 


ANNER 


SUPPLY THE NATURALL 


or accidentall defects or wants 
in mans body. 


Tue Twentrisc JTuirp Booke. 


Cuapr. I. 


How the lojje of the natural! or true eye may bee covered, 
hidden er fhadowed. 


Aving at large treated inthe former Bookes of tumours, wounds, 
> ulcers, fractures ang luxations,by what meancs things diffolved 
and diflocated might bee united, things united {eparated, and fu- 
perfluitics confumed or abated : Now itremaines that we {peak Thefouith cu. 
of the fourth office or duty of the Chirurgian, whichis ro fupply Yo 45"!sc™ 
or repaire tlofe things that are wanting by nature, through the 
3 defaule of the firft conformation, or afterwards by fome mif- 
| chance. Therefore, if that through any milchanceyas by an in- 
tmmatioa, any mans eye happen to be broken or put out,& the humors {pilt or wa- 
orif it be &trucken qut of his place or cavity wherein it was naturally placed,by 
Violent ftroak,or if it wafte or confumeé by reafon of aconfumption of the proper 
Hfance, then there is no hopeto reftore the fight or function of the eye, yet you 
BY cover the deformity of the eye fo loft (which is all you can doc infuch a cafe) 
'/this meanes : Lfthat when you have perfectly curedand healed the ulcer,you may 


| “another eye artificially made of gold or filver, counterfeited and enamelled, fo 


Xitmay feem to have the brightneffe, or gemmie decencie of the naturall eye, in- 
cplace ofthe eye that is fo loft. 


= 4 
: ai 4 15. 869 
OF THE 
-4 
| 
> 
Dddd 3 The 


The formes of eyes 


fhewing both the inner and onter fide. 


SS 


AYN SY 


head behinde above the earc,unto the greater corner of the eye 


thatend wherewith theempty hollowneffe muft be cove 


portraiture of fuch a firing or wiar. 


may bee hadowed or covered. 


artificially made of zold or fo and enameled. 


‘| But ifthe patient beunwilling, orby reafon of fome other meanes cannot wear | 
4 this eye {o prepared, in his head, you may make another on this wile. You mutt have 
aftring or wiar, of iron bowed or crooked, like unto womens eare-Wiars, madeto | 
bad the head harder or loofer as it pleafeth the patient, from the lower part ofthe | 
sthis rod or wiar mutt | 
be covered with filke,and it muft alfo be fomewhat broad at both the ends, leftehar 
the fharpenefle thereof fhould pierce or pricke any part that it commeth unto, Bur 
red, ought to bee broader 
than the other, and covered with a thin piece of leather, that thereon the colours o! 
the eye that is loft may be fhadowed or counterfeited. Here followeth the figure: 


The forme of an iron wiar wherewith the deformity of an eye shat lof: 


or cut away, the 
red ,neither ts 
the heat muift nec 
of, Burcontrari 
are incontinent! 
and whole futte 
them from {ome 
bur by a borrow 
other vitall facu! 
Wherefore in 
another made by 
artificially made 
muft bee {0 colo 
thatit May as apt 
ed with little chr 
therebe any por 
annexing fome 
onhisupper lip; 
face. Therefore 
kindes. 


The formee of 


Portion of the 


‘Ous edges of 


2 
iB 4 3 
fy 
4 7 Veg 
By what mea 
NAVE) 
| 
Wwe 
tt 
4 
i 
| 
cn 
\\)))} ))) . 
if KX | 
{7 
There ras 


eA J/upplement of the defects i» Mans body, 


CHAP. II. ‘ 


By what meancs 4 pars of the nofe that is cut off,may be reored , or how in head of 
the mofe that cut off, another counterfert nofe may be faften~ 
cd or placed in the flead. 


3 | Hen the whole nofe is cut off from the face, or portion of the no- 

ftrils from the nofe, it cannot bee reftored or joyned againe : for 

itis Notin men asitisin plants. For plants havea weake and fee- Why thepars 
{ bleheate, and furthermore it is equally difperfedinio all the fub- Plants ocing 
ftance of the plant or tree, neither isit eafie to be confymed or wa- 

aga f{ted, for when the boughes or branches of trees are broken, torne, bur thofe of 
cutaway, they live neverthelefle,and will grow againe when they are fet or graf- 
»q neither is there any feate for the heart rightly prepared in them from whence 

B® heat neceffarily run,and difperfeic felfe continually into all the parts there- 

es Cannot Weare f Burcontrariwife,the feparated parts of more perfect living creatures, as of men, 
geincontinently deprived of life, becaufethey havetheir nourifhment, life, fenfe, 

-Wiars, madeto wiwhole fuftentation not of themfelves, by faculties flowing or commin,; unto 


lower part of the hem from {ome other parts, neither are they governed by their own heatas plants, 


iv 


rod or wiar mutt a borrowed heat, fo that above or befide the naturall faculty of the liver, an- 
he ends, leftthar 9 wher vitall faculty commeth unto it from the heart. 
nmeth unto. Bur Wherefore in ftead of the nofe cut away or confined, itis requifire to fubftirute 
httobee broader sother made by Art, becaufe that nature cannot {upply that defect: this nofe fo 
onthe colours of ificially made,muft be of gold, filver, paper or lianen clothes glewed together, it 


@cth the figure or ut bee fo coloured, counterfeited and made both of fafhion, figure and bignelle, 
 saritmay as aptly as is poflible,refemble the natural nofe: it muft be bound or ftay- 
with littlethreeds or laces untothe hinder part of the head orthe hatte. Alfoif 
herebe any portion of the upper lip cut off with the nofe, you may thadow it with 
fome fuchthing thatis wanting unto thenofe,and cover it withthe haire 


nhisupper lippe, that he may not want any thing that may adorne or beautifie the 
ace. Therefore I have thoughrit necefflary to fet downe the figure or forme of both 


mele kindes. 


Bas 15 loft 


The forme of a nofe artificially made, both alonc by it felfe, andalfi with the up- 
ver lip,covered asit were withthe hasre of the beard. 


NN 


by, 
4 
HAT | 


Ze 
Ze 


| 


There was a Surgeon of Italy of late yeares which would reftore or repaire the A frags one 
of the nofethat was cut away after this manner. Hee firft {carified the cal- 


Wedges of the maimed nofe roundabout, asis ufually done in the cure of a 
ips 


f — = 
4 
1B, | 
| 
q N 
5 
i 
4 a or = 
| Ai; YY SQ AQ 
/ 
a ~ 
Caat 
‘ 
| 
« 
‘ 


A hifftory. 


eA fupplement of the defetls in Mans boay, Lis, 2; 


lips : then he madea gafh or cavity in the mufcle of the arme,which is called Bap 

as large as the greatneffe of the portion of the nofe which was cut away did requi 1% 
And into that gath or cavity fo made, he would put that part of the nofefo Wound 
& bind the patients head to his armas ifit were toa poaft, fo faft thar it might rem | 
firme, ftable and immoveable,and not leane or bow any way, and about forty da me 
after, or at that time when he judged the flefh of the nofe was perfe@ly agoluin, 
ted withthe fiefh of the arm, be cut out as much of the ficfh of the arme, cleaving ft 
unto the nofe,as was fuflicient to fupply the defect of that which was loft, & then he 
would make iteven,& bring it,as by licking,tothe fafhion & forme of a nofe as ne 
as art would permit,& in the mean while he did feed his patient with ponadoe« ce. 
lics,& allfuchthings as were eafie to be fwallowed & digefted.And he did thic work 
of curing the place where thie fieth was fo cut out,only with certain balmes & " 

tinativeliquors.A younger brother of the family of St.7 being weary of 3 fhe 
nofe,which being artificially made,he had worn in the place of his nofe that ws cut 
off, went tothis Chirurgian into Italy,& by the means of the fore-named practice he 
recovered anofe of ficth againe, tothe great admiration of all thofethatknewhin | 
betore. This thing truly is poffible tobe done, but it is very difficult both tothe pati- 
ent fuffering, and alfo to the Chirurgian working. For that the fleth that is taken oy 
of the arme,is notof the like temperature asthe fiefh of the nofe is, alfo the holes of 
the reftored nofecannot be made as they were before. 


Cuap. III. 
Of the Placing of teeth artificially made in ftead of thofe that 


are loft or wanting. 


=| T oftentimes happencth thatthe foreteeth are moved,brokenor 
{tricken out of their plac¢s by fome violent blow,whichcaulech 
24 deformity of the mouth,and hinders plain pronunciation. Ther 
aj fore when the jaw is reftored (if it were luxated or fractured) and 
the gums brought unto their former hardneffe, other teeth artifi- 
cially made of bone or Ivory may bee put inthe place of thofe 

" that are wanting, and they muft bee joyned one faft unto another, | 
and alfo fo fafiened unto the naturalltecth adjoyning,that are whole; andthis mult | 
chiefly bee done with a thread of gold or filver, or for want of either, witha com: 
mon thread of filke cr flaxe,s it is declared at large by Hippocrates, and allo 


bed in this figure following, 


The figure of teeth bound or fastned together. 


~ 


* 


the meanes 


ofthe palla with 
gut ic mutt bee as 
onthe upper fide 
which,when ic is 
more {woine anc 
ificiall. pallat cat 
isthe true figure 
or twice yout by 


The ft gure of 
| bé 


. 
— 
— 
- 
eee 
Le 
714 f cs 
a 
| 
a 
| an’ 
a 
Ne 4 
4 q 
Te, 
Cer 
i | twen 
| by w 
4 


eA fupplement of the defetts in Mans body 872 


Lis. 23 


4 


RY did requir,? | 


Cuar. 
of filling the hokownelfe of the Pallat. 


Gly Any times it happeneth that a portion or part of the bone of the pallat, rire caufer and 

being broken with the fhotof agun,or corroded by the virulency of the burctharentues 
> de : 


venerea,talls away, which makes the patients to whom this happe- pam 
neth, that they cannot pronounce their words diftin@ly, but ob{curely 
and {nuffling : therefore I have thought ita thing worthy the labour to 
- W jaythe meanes how it may behelped by art. It muft be done by filling the cavity . 
@® pthc pallac with a plate of gold or filver a little bigger than the cavity its felfe is. 
sgt emutt bee as thick asa French Crowne, and made like unto a difh in figure, and 
gthe upper fide, which fhall be cowards the braine,a little fpunge muft bee fattened, 
shich, when it is moiftened with the moyfture diftilling from the brain, will become 
sore {wolne and pufted up, fo that it will fill the concavity of the pallat, that che ar- 
gciall pallat cannot fall down,but ftand faft and firme,as if it ftood of it {elfe. This 


ofe that wes cy, 


ed Practice he 
that knew him | 


pati- he true figure of thofe inftruments, whofe certain ufe I have obferved not by once 
lfothe ur yrwiceyout by manifold triall in the battels fought beyond the Alpes, 


The figure of plates to fill or fupply the defects of the Pallat. 


\ AN 


vey 
we 


4 


oved, broken or 
swhichcaufeth 
ciation. Ther- The ficwre of another plate for the Pallat, onwbofe upper fidethere a button which 
r fratured) and may be turned when it is put into the place, with afmall Ravens bik, 
hertecthartifi- like this whofe figure ss here expre([ed. 
place of thofe 
t unto another, 
and this mutt 
r, witha com- 


nnd alfo defcri- 


Cuar. V. 
How so helpe fuch as cannot {peake by reafon of tbe of 
[ome part of the tongue. 


A certaine man dwelling ina village named Chafteam, being fome hiltery. 
234 twenty foure miles from Bearges, aad a great piece of his tongue cut off, 
“* by whichoccafion hee remained dumvbe fome three yeares. It happened 
on 


A Hance gave place and authotity to thisremedy,as to miany other in our art. A :emed) found 


out by accident. 


4 


might remain 
did this wor} 
malmes & apply 
Weary of af 
| 
OF / | 
| = 
| 
a ~~ 


Jupplement of the defeéls nm Mans body, Lisa, 
; onatimechat as hee was inthe fields with reapers, hee drinking ina woodden ar 
was tickled by fome of the ftanders by, not enduring the tickling, hee 
| broke out into articulate and intelligible words. He himfelfe wondring there me 
delighted with the novelty of thething, asa miracle, put the fame dith to his 
juft in the {ame manner as before, and then he {pake fo plainly and articulate] 
he might be underftood by themall. Wherefore a long time following he 
| carried this difhin his bofome, to utter his mind,untillat length neceflity,the ie : 
of artsand giver of wit,inducing him, hee caufed awoodden inftrument to 
cut and made for him, ltke this which is here delineated, which hee alwaic: 
hanging at hisneck,asthe oncly interpreter of hismind and the key cf his 
ital atthe holes are 
q \ she care chat 1S | 
i Aninftrument made to fupply the defect of the [peceltwhen oft fhe eare b 
the tongue # cut off. Jtogether, 
| hinder part of the 
mult be permitted 
hideor cover the 
-qunterfeited by 
ere,and fo retein 
fromthe Coppe ot 
| heeye, and the ic 
The ufe of the Inftrument ss this. 
A.{heweth the upper part of it which was of the thickneffe of a nine- pence, which Y 
he did fo hold betweene his cutting teeth, that it could not come out of his wouth, 
nor bee fecne. B. fheweth the lower part, as thick as afixe-pence, whichhedid»u 4 
hardtothe reft of his tongue,clofeto the membranous ligament which is under 
tongue. That place whichis depreftand fomewhat hollowed marked withthe! 
4 ter C. isthe inner part of the inftrumenr. D. fheweth the outfide of the fame. He: 
hanged itabout his necke with the tring chat is tyed thereto. 


an 7 extor the Phyfician of Bourges thewed me this inftrument : and I my 
tryall thereof ona young man whofe tongne was cut off, and it facceeded well, 
took very good effect. And I chink other Surgeons in fuch cafes may dothe like. 


* 


Cuap. VI. 
t 4 : Of covering or repairing certain defects or defaults in the face. 
oftentimes happeneth, that the face is deformed by the fudden fix 
thing of Gunpowder, or bya peftilent Carbuncle, fo that onc ca" 
behold it without great horrour. Such perfons moft be fo trimmed ; 
ordered, that chey may come in feemely manner into the company o 
Others. Thelips ifthey beeeither cur off with a fword, or deform J ration inthel 
with the crofion or eating of a peltilent Carbuncle or ulcerated Cancer, {orhatt< | din accident, bug 
teeth may be feene to lyc bare with great deformity. If the loffe or confumption wheathey 
the lip bee not very great, it may be repaired by that way whicli we have pre! cribed ly when ¢l 
inthe cure of hare-lips,or ofan ulcerated Cancer. But if it be grear, mutt fuch lik 
be alip of gold made forit,fo thadowed and counterfeited, that it may not bemvs" Dens el eed 
unlike in colourto the naturall lip, maftbe fattened and tyed tothe hat siti 


that the patient weareth on his head, that {0 it may remaine ftable and fi vee 
HAP 


* j 
a 
} 
| 
| 
| 
| 
] 
] 
| 
| 
| 
| 
1 
| 
‘ 
“7 
4 


dy. 


wo 
ing thereat 
ith his mo), Of the defects of the cares. 
ing he as want their cares, either naturally or by misfortune, as through 3 
fity,the mig, wound, carbuncle,cancer,or the biting of wild beatts if fo be that the 


entto benes:} in Ze care be not wholly wanting, watted, confumed, or torne away, but 
:). 28,) thatfome portion thereofdoth yet remaine, then mutt ic not bee neg- 
~~ lected, but mult have many holes made therein with a bodkin, and after 
the holes are cicatrized, let fome convenient thing , made like unto the picce 
-neeare that 15 loft, bee tyed or faftned unto it by thefe holes. 
the eare bee wholly wanting, another bee made of paper artificially 
ged together, or elfe of leather, and fo faftened with laces, from the toppe or 
»jer pare of the head, thatit may ftand inthe appointed place, and fothe haire 
skbe permitted to grow long, or elfe fome capworne under the hat which may 
jeor cover the deformity, unleffe you had rather have it to bee fhadowedand 
.ycerteited by fome Painter,that thereby it may refemble the colour of a naturall 
»cand {0 retein it in the place where it ought to ftand, with a rod or wiat comming 
nthe toppe or hinder part of the head,as wee have {poken before inthe lofle of 
<eye and the forme thereof is this. 


alWaics carryed 


e-pence which 
it of his mouth, 
rhich he did 
ich is under the 
ced with rhe 
fthe fame. Hee 


[my felfe mace 
eded well, and 


dothe like. 


Cuare. VIII. 


Ce. Of amending the aeformity of fach as are crooke-baci#. 


<4 He bodies of many,efpecially young maids or girles (by reafon that they | 
are more moift and tender than the bodies of boyes) are made crooked 
2 in procefle of time, efpecially by the wrenching afide and crookednefle 


the fudden fia 
lat one cannot 
fe trimmed and 


hecompany ot ofthe backe-bone. Ithath many cauf:s, thatis to fay, inthe firft con- Caufeso! 
|, or deformed “imation inthe wombe, and afterwards by misfortune, as a fall, bruife, or any fuch | 
cer, forhatthe “accident, but efpecially by the unhandfome and undecent fitnation of their b 
onfumprion Wheathey are young and tender, cither incarrying, fitting or {tanding (and ef- 
cribe d ‘cially when they are taught co goe {oone) faluting, lewinge, Wriun 9, orin do- 
heri must “S40y fuch like thing. 
ty not be much @ ft the: meane while, that Imay not omit the occafion of crookednefle, that hap. 
othe hatorcap  Sieldome tothe country people, but is much incident to the inhabicants of great 
firme. and cities, which is by reafon of the ftraitneffe and narrownetlc of the gar- 


CyuaAar ments 


| 
| 
| 
| 
AU 
\\ 
\ 
AW A 
tt SSS 
=+\ 
= 4 
| — ; 
— 
a 
} 
44 


Aninftrument 

for fuch ascan.- 
not hold eheir 
water, 


*, 


ments that are worne by them, which is occafioned by the folly of moth 
whilethey covetto havetheir young daughters bodies fo {mall in the midc! 
be poflible, pluckeaad draw their bones awry, and make them crooked. F 
caments of the back-bone being very tender, foft and moift at thatage, cany 


ir ftrait, and ftrongly, batbeing pliant, eafily permitsthe {pondels to flippe. Ot fia 


Wry in. | 

wards, outwards, or fidewife, as they arethruft or forced. Y 10 
The remedy for this deformity is to have breaft-plates of iron, full of holes aj). | 
ver them, wherby they may be lighter to wear ;, and they mutt be fo lined wir}, bom. | 


baft, thatrhey may burtno place of the body. Every three moneths new 
be made for thofe that are not yet arrived at their full growth, for other 
daily afflax of more matter,they would become worle. Butthefe plates wil! dy +), 


{mall good that are already at their full growth, ; 


The forme of an iron to amend the crookedne/fe of 
the Body. 


/ 


} 


Cuae. IX. 


How to relieve fach as have their urine flow from them againft their wills, ane 
[uch as want their yards. 


former part,and this the hinder part thereof. Now this is the fhape thereo!. 


fupplement of the defects in mans body. 


“TS, Who 
may 
OF thelj. 


MN thofe that have the ftrangury, of what caufe foever that malacy J 
commeth, the urine pafleth from them by drops, againtft their 
and confent. This accident is very grievous and trouble! omic, ¢ | 
2+ pecially to men that travaile: and for their fakes onely Ihave." 
vented the inftrument here bencath defcribed. It is made lieu" J 
toaclofe breech or hofe,it mutt be of latin,& to contein fome 

ounces ; it muft be put into the patients hofe, between his thighs,unto whichit™* J 
be tied with a point by the ring. Into the open and hollow mouth of this initrum<) 
which is noted with the letter C.the patient muft put his yard,& into thisconca\" | 
or hollowneffe gocth a ftay fomewhat deep, it is marked with the letter B. anc 
or placed there, both to hold or beare the end of the yard, and alfo by his clot 
joint that it muft have unto the veffell, toftay the urine from going backeagai™) 
when it isonce in. Butthe letters A, and D. doefignifie alithe inftrument ; 


Thofe that hav: 
making of urine,{o 
Ihave devifed 
whichmay be mad 
A.and C. doe fh 
the broader end. 
plied to the lower 
forthe paffage of 
trom the patient, 


The defcri} 
A 


The fizt 
\ 
Mey 
» ASS q 
4 
fi 
| 
| = 
| — 
= 
aN 
Bit = 
SS 


mot hers, W . 
ureofaninitrument. which 
middle as may The figure of an inftrument, yon may call A Bafon,or receptacle for 


the Urin 
ed. For the li. Fe 


lippeawry in. 


| of holesallo. 
ned with bom. 


W plates muh 
therwife by th- 


es will dothem 


of 


Thole that have their yards cut off clofeto their bellies, are greatly troubled in 
waking ofurine,f{o they areconftrained to fir downe like women, for their eafe. 
deviled this pipe or conduit, having an hole through it as big asones finger, 
@ viichmay be made of wood, or rather of latin. 

B AsndC. doe thew thebigneffe and length of the pipe: B. fheweth the brick on 
xbroaderend. D.fheweth the outfide of the brinke. This foftrument mutt be ap- 
lidtothe lower part of os pecfimis: onthe upper end it is compafled with abrink 


B vie paflage of the urine, for thereby it willreceive the urine the better, and carry 
@ ‘onthe patient, as he ftandeth upright. 


The defcription of «pipe, or conduit, [erving inftead of the yard in ma- 
king of water, which therefore wee may call ap arts 


fictall Yard, 
wiks, and 

pever that malacy 

init their Wis TT 
sonely [haves 
Ie js made like | 


| 


ontein fome four 
nto which i mult 
this inftrumen, 
ro thisconcavit¥ 
etter B. and made 
alfo by his clole 
ping backe again, 
Aryment ; the 


ethereo!- 


(A 


Eece CHAP. 


. 
( WSS 
= SS 
4 
C 
() 
| 
YY ¥ 
| 
= 
SJ 
= yp jf fp 
The 


We away of histhumbe, which did hinder his griping, which I refufed to doe, and told 


X. 


hat meanes the perifbed function or action of athambe or finzer may |, 


a fynew or tendonis cutcleaneafunder., the action in th, Dan 
om whereof it was the author, is aleogether abolifhed, fo that the mem}... 

cannot bend or ftretch oat it felfe, unlefie it bee holpen by arr 
ching I performed in a certain gentleman belonging to of 
moerency, genotallofthe French Horfemen, who in the battle of p, ty 
received fo great a wound with a back-fword, uponthe outfide of the wre(tot,),. 
sight hand, that the tendonsthat did ere or draw up the thumb were cut clean in 
funder, & alfo whenthe wound was throughly whole and confolidated, rhe thumh 
was bowed inwards, and fell into the palme of the hand, fo that he could not exter, ; 
or liftit up,ualeffe it were by the helpe of the other hand, and then it would prefen,. 
ly fall downe againe ; by reafon whereof hecould hold aeither fword, {pcare. 5, 
Javeline in his hand, fo that he was altogether unprofitable for war, without whic} 


he {uppofed there was no life. Wherefore hee con{ulted with me aboutthe cytrin 


him that I conceiveda meanes how it might bee remedied without cutting away 
Therefore I caufed a cafe ro bee made for it of Latine, whereinro put the humbe: 
this cafe was fo'artificially faftened by two ftrings that were put into two Ringo: 
made in itabove the joint of the hand, that the thumbe ftood upright, and ftr,; oh 
out, by reafon whereof he was able afterwards to handle any kinde of weapon. 


The forme of thumebe or finger. ftall of tron or latine, to lift up or erti 
the thumbe, or any other finger that cannot be ercited 


with her 
egsbe not we! 
Well placed in c 
Nelearneth to 
m 6Waxe, 
but contrari 

ards, This m 
other, for by bo 
wil! 
0 that in thof 
Would make thc 
“Wards .as thor 
0, 


N 


| Uddluyy 
/ 


if that in any man the finewes or tendons which hold the hand apright, bem 
afunder with a wound, fothat hee isnot able to lift up his hand, it may ealily **“y 
reed or lifted up with this inftrument that followeth, being made of a0 ¢4!" 
ftreight, thin, but yet ftrong plate of latine, lined on the inner fide with filke, iy 
fuch like foft thing, and fo plac’t in the wreft ofthe hand, chatit may come 
palme, or the firft joints of the fingers, andit muft bee tyed above with conve"" 
ftayes, and fo the difcommodity of the depreffion, or hanging of the hand, may") 
avoyded ;thereforetMisinftrument may be called the Erector ofthe han 


‘ 
+ 
it = 
4 
AAA 
Ve 
ATWite 
1 ~ Lily's 
4 Mult he . 
the 


may be 


in thar Dart 
at the membe- 
DY art: which 
Annas of 
attle of Dreux 
ne wreftot the 
ere Cut clean jn. 
mated, the thumh 
ould notextend 
would prefent. 
ord, {peare, nox 
» Without which 
bout the cutting 
to doe, and told 
ut cutting away, 
put the thumb 
into two Rings, 
ight, and ftraight 


¢ of weapon. 


ip or erect 


and apright, be cut 


it may ealily bee 


ove with 


of the hand, may 06 
of the hand. 


iB. 2}. 


made of an equ 
ewith filke, OF aN 
may come Unto 
convenics 


eA fupplement of the defetls in Mans body, 


— 


The Erecior of the Hana. 


MUR > 771 


Cuap. XI. 


Of belping thofe that are Vaxi or Valgi,that is, crooke-legzed or 
crooke-footed, inwards or outwards, 


(e068 Hofe are {aid to bee Varous, whofe feet or legs are bowed or crooked in- Whar varysis. 


if, iA wards. This default is cither from the firft conformation in the wombce, 
through the defaule in the mother, who hath her legs in like manner croo- 
“Q9% ked:or becaufe that in the time when fhe is great with child,the common. 
with her legsa croffe or elfe after the child is born, & that, either becaute his 
sbenot well {wathed, when he is laid inco the cradle,or elfe becaufe they bee nor 
vl placed in carrying theinfant,or if he be not wel looked unto by thc nurfe when 
clearneth to goc, for the bones of infants are very tender, and almoft as flexible as 
but contrariwife, thofe are called valez, whofe legs are crooked or bowed out 
tads. This may come through the defaule ofthe firft conformation, afwellas the 
‘iet,for by both, the feet and alfo the knees may bee made crooked ; which thing, 
‘tofoever willamend, muft reftore the bones intotheir proper and natural! place, 
othat in thofe that are varous hee muft thruftthe bones outwards,as though hee 
Yould make them valgous, and in thofé thatare valgous, hee muft thruft the bones 


§ Wards asthough hee would make them varous:neither is ft fufficient ro chruft chem 


Out they ought alfo to be retained there in their places after they are fo thruft,for 
“hetwife they being not well eftablifhed;would flip back againe. 

They muft bee ftayed in their places by applying of collers and bolfters on that 
“ewhereunto the bones doe leane and incline themfelves; for the fame purpofe 
ots may be made of leather, of the thickneffe of a teftone, having a fiit in the for- 
“et part all along the bone of the leg, andalfounder the fole of the foot,that being 
“We together on both fides,they may be the better fitted,and fit the clofer to the 
“3+ And let this medicine following be applyed all about the lee. K.thuris ,ma/ftich. 


roch. vefina pint ficca, pulverif.an lil. fa- 


albwws.ovor.g.f. make thereofa medicine, You may alfo addea lit- 


“‘Urpentine.left ic fhould dry fooner, or more vehemently than is neceflary. But 
“mutt beware, and take great heed left that fuch as were of late varous or valgous 


: Mud attempt or ftraine themfelves to goe before that their joynts be confirmed, 
“Ho the bones that were lately fet in their placesymay flipafideagaine. And more- 


Eece 2 


V¥ 


A plafte 
hold taftreitce 
red bones. 


" | 
| 
\ | | ew TIT \ 
YS \ 
| 
I 
| \ 


4 

ee 


- 


over, unull they are able cogoe without danger, letthem weare hi 


clofetotheir feet, that the bones may be ftayed the better and more firnely in the 
places, but let that fide of the foale of the fhooe be underlayed whither the Foote did 


incline before it was reftored. 


The forme of little bootes, whereof she one ss open and the other fhut. 


| | 


ip 


Lit 


Witt 


j | 


ef 


Cwar. XII. 


By what meanes armes,legs, and hands may be made by art and placed in fiead of 
the natural armes,legs,or hands that are cut off and loft. 


Sra) Eceflicy oftentimes conftraines us to find out the meanes whereby we 
may help and imitate nature, and fupply the defeét of members that 


are perifhed and loft. And hereof it commeth that we may performe 


made by art, and undergoe our neceffary flexions and extenfions with 
both of them. [ have gotten the formes of allthofe members made {o by art, and 
the proper names of all the engines and inftrumenis wherby thofe artificially made 


are called,to my great coft and charges,of a moft ingenious & excellent Smith dwe!- 


ling at Paris,who is called of thofe that know him,and alfp of ftrangers,by no othe! 
name than the little Leraine, and here I have caufed themto bee portrayed or!" 
downe,that thofe that ftand in neede of fuch things, after the example of them, 14) 
caufe fome Smith,or fuch like workman to ferve them inthe like cafe. They arene 
onely profitable for the neceffity ofthe body, but alfo for the decency and com¢ 
nefiethereof. And here followeth their formes. 


ph {hooves ty 


the functions of going, ftanding and handling with armes and hands | 


This figure 


a nt of the defetls in A4ans b 
J £4, A 
| > . 
= 
rine = | 
| = 
SAN IA 
\ > 
) 
7 
. 
\ 
| 
| 
| 


eA fupplement of the defettsin R4ans boay, | 
The forme of an hand made artificially of iron. 
Fr 
=A 
| SSS — 
WY 
WW) 
din ftead of 
The figure followitte fheweth the back-fide of an band artificially macke,and 1G 
mcs whereby we that it may betyed tothe armeor fleeve. 
may performe 
nrmes andhands ¢ 
extenfions with 
de fo by art, and 
artificially made 
ent Smith dwel- 
gers,by no other 
portrayed or {ct 
le of them, may 
le. They are not 
ncy and comeli- 


be 
Reece 3 The 


‘ 
\ 
~ 
x 
“ty 
— 


{ 
1 
4 


> 


| oA Jupplement of the defetls in Mans body. 


The forme of an arme made of iron very artificially. 


A, Sheweth the fi 
bee on both [ides 
eththe pillow oi 
that fo it msay 
buckles put thr 
moveable, that 


what fafbronit 


It happens alf 
othis leg wound 
with very great { 
thatfhould draw 
nen band made \ 
ned foot,and at t 
ofthe leg, & ic m 
littup and erectt 
the letters A A. 


SS 


STAY 


\ 


- 


a! he MAS 
” 
Tae: 3 
| 
The defeription of legs made artificially of 
7 |b AY 4 4 
| S | 
| Pom | 3 4B 
|= NF | 
| = = | 
; 4 = 4 |= 
= E ie | 
’ 
D/ | Z 
= Z Z 


2 
fie 
- 


- 
SSP / 


er 


| 

ECT TT 


Sheweth the ftumsp or fleck of the weodden leg. BB.Sheweth the two flayes which muft 
bee on both fides of the leg, the fhorter of thems bee on theinner fide, CC.Shew- 
uhthe pillow or boliter whereonthe knee muft rest in the bottome between the two ftayes, 
that (0 st mayreft the fofter. DD. Sheweth the thongs or girths withtheir round 
inckles put throngh the two ftayes on either fide to flay the knee 1 his place firm andim- 
moveable, that rt not afide, E. Sheweth the thigh it (elfe,that you may know after 
what fafbtonit must fland, 


It happens alfo many times, that the patient, that hath had the nerves or tendons 
i{his leg wounded,long after the wound is whole and confolidated,cannot goe but 
‘ith very great paine and torment,by reafon that the foorcannot follow the mufcle, 
hathhould draw itup. That chis maladie,may be remedied you ought to faften alin- 
va band made very {trong, unto the fhooe that the patient weareth on that his pai- 
ed foot,and at the knee it muft have a flitwherethe knee may come forth in bowing 
ifthe leg, & it muft betruffed up faft unto the patients middle, that it may the berter 
itupand — the footin going, This band is marked in the figure following with 
‘neletters A A. 


})) 


fupplement of the defeéls in Mans body 
4 
? The forme of a woodden Leg made for poore men, 
| . 
‘4 al Zur: 
7 
\ 
7 
Z 
Aum 
= 
= 
= 
Som 
q Z 
‘ 
4A 
1 SSS 
a 


eA Jupplement of the defeéls in Mans body, 


: 


Cuap. XIII. 


of amending or helping lamene(fe or halting. 


‘\ 


if 


his fhort foot this fitting crutch,which we are now about.to deferibe 
b 

tle labour or no pain atall. Itwas taught mee by Nicholas Picard Chirureian to thy 
Duke of Loraine. The forme thereof is this, 


5 


Wr 


in 


A. Sheweth the flaffe or ftilt of this crutch, which must bee made of wood. b. 5 bewih 
the feat of iron whereonthe thigh refteth, juft under the buttocke. ©.S heweth a pre 
which ftayeth up the feat whereen all the weight of the patients body restesh, 
eth the ftirrop, being made of iron, and bowing crooked upwards that foot m4) 
firm and not off tt when the pasient gocth. E.Sheweththe prop thai fhayethor 
eth the flirrop to ftrenethen beweth the foote of the ff lt or crutch on 
ron with many pikes, and compafjed with a ring or ferule, foto keepe st from 
G. The croffe or head of the crutch which the pattemt muit put wader brs arme-woret 
leane upon,as it ts to be (eencin the figare. 


The the Twentie third Booke. 


Alting is not onely a great deformity alfo very troublefome ang 
vous. Therefore if that any man be grieved therewith by reafon thao, | 
of his legs is fhorter than the other, st may beholpen by putting | 


y the hel pe of this,he fhall not onely goe upright, but alfo more eafily and wir} lit. 


particul 
by thetr [pe 
with 
law of Mary 
mixed an 
he feed is a cert 

the bene fe » 
and { wol) 
"Oud of both th 

feede of the 
and e 

Matter, or | 

bee white, 


lps 
stable bees, 


For th 
Creature acai! 
49 ain, 


which fwiy 


‘mmeth from 
Parts bogl, fi 
pare thero 


— 
7 
8 
O8. 2 
& 4 
~ 
“la 
©) 
“hy 
4 
A 
> 
WA é ~ 
~ _ 
= 
i 
j = J ' Pa ~~ 
f | | | A] 
ls > bal Gee \ 
j 
4 
| 
| 
| 


. 


omeand 
-afon that One 
putting under 
deferibe Fo; 
and with jir. 
iruUreian tothe 


GENERATION 


MAN. 


— 


THe Twenty Fourtu Book. 


— 


Tae PREFACE. 


‘Bee %S OD, the (reator and maker of all things, immediately after the ditindion 


Wars the (reation of the world of his unfpeakable counfell and in-° a4 © 
eftimable wifedome not onely diftinguifhed mankinde all 
(@) other living creatures alfo, into a double fex, to wit, of male 


NS IJ? andfemale ; that fo they being moved and enticed by the al- 
Lurements of luft, might defsre copulation thence to have 
nation. For this bountif ull Lordh ath appointed it as a folace unto every living The cauleot 


againft the moft certaine fatall nece/sity of death : that for as much 
seach particular ltving creature Cannot Continue for ever, yet they may endure 


d. B. Shewe 


jtheir [pectes or kinde by propagation and fucce/sion of creatures, which ts by 
foot ms) fand vureation fo lone as the world endureth. Inthis conjunétion or copulation, re 


ai ftayeshor bold | nifhed with uch deletkable pleafure, which God hath chiefly eftablifhed by 
utch made of Marrimony, the male and female yeeld forth their feeds, which pre- 
it from ‘uly mixed and conjoyned, are recesved and kept inthe females Dombe. For, what {ed's 
his arme-wolete feed ts acertaine fpumous or foamte bumour replenifhed with vitall fpirit, 
ithe benefit whereof it were by a certain ebudition or fermentation it puf- 
“up and {wolne bigger,and both the feedes being feparated from the more pure 
‘uid of both the parents,are the materiall and formall beginning of the 
“fede of the male being caft and received into the wombe, 15 accounted the 
pall and efficient caufe, but the feede of the female reputed the {ubja- 
nctrer, or the matter whereon it worketh, Good and laudable /eede ought 
white fhining, clammy, knotty, melling Iske unto the elder or palme, de- 
ble t0 bee s,and [inking downe to the bottome of water being put into it, for 
fwimmeth on the water is efleemed unfruitfull ; for a great portion 
Gy eth from the brain, yet fome thereof falles from the whole body,e> from all 
both firme and [oft thereof.For unlefJe st come from the whole body 
part therof all every part of the if[ue cannot be formed € parrsofths 


i 


B 38 5 | 
| 
\ 
\ 
L 
a 
| 
| 
N 


Whercfore ma- 
ny difeaies are 


hereditary. 


How feed is to 

underftood 
a fallfrom the 

whole body, 


Whar moveckh 
2imanro 
bation. 


Why the geni- 
ralls are enducd 
with a 


of this or that entrall being tranflated from the parent tothe childe. The,, 


and life, and alfo the formative faculty to fall down from all the parts ing, the 
feed, thatys wrought or perfected by the Tefticles, for proofe and confirmation 


whereof alledge that manysperfeét, found, abfolute, and well 
oned children, are borne of lame and decrepit parents. 


Rix 


Cuap. lI. 
Why the generative parts are endwed with great pleasure. 


EG Certaine great pleafure accompanieth the function of the parts appointed 
2 forgeneration, and beforeir, in living creatures that are of a luity age, 


furious defire : the caufes thereof are many,of which the chiefeftis, Tha 
the kind may be preterved and kept for ever, by the propagation and {ubfitution o: 
other living creatures of the fame kinde. For brute beafts which want reafon, and 


therefore cannot bee folicitous forthe prefervation of their kinde, never cometo 


carnall copulation, unlefle they be moved thereunto by a certaine vehement provo- 
cation of unbridled luft, and as ic were by the ftimulation of venery. But man, that 


iscndued with reafor, being a divine and moft noble creature, would neveryecld 


nor make his minde fubje@ toa thing fo abject and filthy as iscarna!l copulation, 
but chat che venereousticklings,raifed in thofe parts relaxe the feverity of his min, 


or reafon admonith himthat the memory of his name ought net roend with hist; | 


but to be preferved unto all generations, as farre as may be poffible, by the prope 
gation of his {eed or iflue. Therefore by reafon of this profit or commociy, 
ture hath endued the genitall parts with a far more exact or exquifire (cnic iat 
other parts, by fending the great finewes unto them, and moreover flic hath cis 


them to be bedewed or moiltened with a certain whayith humour, notiouci un 


the {ced fenttrom the glandules or kernells called firuated in men at 
ginning of the necke of the bladder, but in womenat the bottome of the wou” 
this moifture hath a certaine {harpeneffe or biting, for that kinde of humour ofa! 
therscan chiefly provokethofe partsto their function or office, and yeeldt scm? 
deleGable pleafure, while they are in the execution ofthe fame. Forevento | 
ifhand fharpe humours, when they are gathered together under the skinne, ift*! 


waxe warme, tickle with a certaine pleafantitching, and by their motion infer'¢ of 
light : but the nature of the gefiicall parts or members is not ftirred up or prove” | 


to the expulfion of the feed with thefe provocations of the humours, ear 
eath cont’ 


“» 


cher in quantity or quality onely, buta certaine ereatand hot ipirit or br 
ned in thofe parts, doth begin to dilate it felfe moreand more, which ca 
taine incredible exceffe of pleafure or volupruoufnefic, wherewirh che ge 


ing replete, are {pread forth or diftended every way unto their full greatncl: 


Concerning the Generation of Man. is. 24 


like things areengendered of thetr like: and therefore it commeth that thec 
refembleth the parents, not onely inftature and favour, but alfoin the conf “ : 
mation and proportion of bis lims and members, and complexion and tey, 8 
ture of his inward parts, fo that difeafes are oft times hereditary, the ye, ar 
Jome which fuppofethis falling of the feed fromthe whole body not to ke nih 
ftood according tothe weight and matter, as if it were a certaine portion of ? 
the blood feparated from the reft ; but according tothe power and forme. 
to jay the animall, naturall, and yitall [pirtts, being the framers of “elt 


» when matter aboundeth in thofe parts, there goeth a certaine ferventor J 


— 


d iS given to met 


womadss wo 
eceive that feed fo« 


at 


rher, , 
folds or bendings 


ntedalonger tim 
ofthefe flexions or 
much as they are lo 
was begun to be cc 
hetefticles of met 
refticles of Wome 
eeble, but the tec 
ule the fabftancg 
the female in her! 
capacity of the w 
lurements, baits, 
lightedin venere@ 
for humane cot 
downe unto it, an 
neereneffe of the 
embraces of wo 
once premeditate 
in bearing the bu 
that fhe {hall futt 
Men that ufe ro 
andbloody hum 
hardly make wat 
which nature ha 
urine {lippery,& 
walted,(o tif 
themto make wal 
intot! eccncul 
intothe wombs 
the woman to: 
leftthat throu 
the {pitits are c 
the nervous, { 
aflatulent {pir 
mouth thereo 
veflels, which 
the womb, 
_ themans feed 
Or Conceptio! 
ly Wrought 1 
the wombe 
mans feed in 
4Woman chil 
Mans feed, a 
Wives have h: 
you may fee 
and by their 
Not alwaies 
‘emperature 
Vertue, and { 
get fom: 


7 
hat the 
0 fticles ; t 
rO 
in¥v b Cit 
REIRG 
wy HIM 
4 
ball 
> 


Parts appointed | 


of a lufty age, 
taine fervent or 
chiefeft is, Thar 
fubfitution of 
ine reafon, and 
never comecto 
bement provo- 
, But man, that 
sld never yeeld 
1] copulation, 
ity of his minc, 
id with his life, 
, by the propa 
mmeodity, 
> fenfe than the 
he hath cauied 
ytrmuch unlike 
men at the be- 
f rhe wombe: 
amour of all o- 
yeeldtiem2 
even fo whay- 
skinne, if they 
ion inferre 
por provokes 
abounding 


breathconter 


rcauferh 
1¢ genital! 
reatnelic. 


a 


ya 


| 


oncerning the an. 887 


— iven to men whereby they may caft out their feed direétly or ftraightly in. 


womans wombe, and the necke of the wombe to women, whereby they may 

weve that feed focatt forth, by the open or wide mouth of the fame necke, and al- 

a¢hat they may caft forth their owne feed, fent through the {permaticke veffels un- 

otheit relticles ; thefe {permaticke veilels, thatis to fay, the veine lying above, and phecaufe ot 
ne artery lying below, do make many flexions or windings, yct onc as many as the thefoldinas 0 f 
sher, like unto the tendrills of vines diverfly platted or foided together,and in thefe _ waza 
is ot bendings the blood and fpirit which are carryed unto the tefticles, arc con- 

sgeda longer time, and {o converted intoa white {eminall fubftance. The lower 

flexions or bowings doe end in the ftones or tefticles. But the tefticles, for as 

gych as they are loofe, thin, and {pongeous or hollow,receiving the humour which 


to be concocted in the forenamed veffels,conco@ ic again themielves:but 


peretticles of men concoc the more perfectly for the procreation of the iliuc;& che 

oficles of Women more imperfectly, becaufe they are more cold, lefle, weake and 
weble, but the feed becommeth white by the conta@ or touch ofthe tefticies, be- cles more im- 
fe the fabftance of them is white. The male is fuch as engendereth in another,and ?"“* 

he female in her felfe, by the {permaticke veffels which are implanted in the inner ; 

pacity of the womb. But out of all doubt unleffe nature had prepared fo many al. 
ements, baits, and provocations of pleafure, there is {carce any man fo hot or dc- hor: venercous 
ishtedin venereousaés, which confidering and marking the place appointed 

f¢ humane conception, the loathfomnefle of the filth which daily falleth 


downe unto it, and wherewithall it ishumected and moiftened, and the vicinity and 


ereneffe of the great gut uader it, and of the bladder above ir, but would fhun the 
mbraces of women. Nor would any woman defirethe company of man, which 
once premeditates or forethinkes with her felfe onthe labour that hee fhall faftaine 
inbearing the burthen of her childe nine moneths, and of the almoft deadly paines 
that fhe {hall fuffer in her delivery. 

Men that ufe roo frequent copulation, oftentimes in ftead of feed caft forth a crude why the firan- 
indbloody humor, and fometimes alfo meere blood it felfe ; and ofttimes they can 2" em 
urdly make water but with great pain,by reafon tha: the clammy and oily moifture, senialen 
which nature hath placed in the glandulés called proftate, to make the paffage of the 
wine llippery,& to detend it againft the fharpeneffe of che urine that pafleth through 
iswalted,(o that afterward they {hal ftand in-necd of the help ofa Surgionto caufe 
ihemto make water with cafe & withoutpain,by injecting alittle oile out of a firinge 
not! econduit of the yard .For generation itis fit the man caft forth his feed wy. ainos 
tothe wombe with acertaine impetuolity, his yard being ftiffe and diftended, and necetiary unto 
thewomantoreceivethe fame without delay into her wombe, being wide open, 
itthat through delay che feed waxe cold, and fo become unftuitfull by reafon that 
the {pitits are ditlipared and confumed. The yard is diftended or made ftiffe, when 
thenervous,{pongeous, and hollow fubftance thereof is replete and puffed up with 
dflatulent { pirit. The womb ailures or drawes the mafculine feed into it felfe by the 
mouth thereof, and it receives the womans feed by the hornes from the {fpermatic 
veflels, which come from the womans telticles iato the hollownefle or concavity of 


the womb, that fo it may be tempered by conjuncion,commiftion & confufion with 


themans {eed, and foreduced or brought unto a certaine equality : for generation 


or conception cannot follow without the concourfe of two feeds, well and perfec- 

ly Wrought in the very {ame moment of time, nor withouta laudible difpotition of 

the wombe both in temperature and complexion « ifinthis mixture of feedsthe 

uans feed in quality and quantity exceed the womans, it will bea man child, if nor, 

4woman childe, although thatin either of the kindes there is both the mans and Wo- wr. a mate. & 
mans feed, asyou may {ee by the daily experience of thefe memwho by their firft whyatemaleis 
Wives have had boyes onely, and by their ft econd wives had girlesonely: the like 8" 
you may fee in certaine women, who by their firft husbands have had males onely, 

by their fecond husbands females onely. Morcover, one and the man is 

Notalwaies like affected togeta man or awoman childe, for by reafonof hisage, ¢ 
‘Mperature and diet, hee doth fometimes yeeld forth feed endued with a mafculine 

Vertue, and fometimes with a feminine or weake vertue, fothat itis no marvaile if 


Ucn get fometimes men,and fometimes womenchildren. Crap. 


“iB B. 
124. 

} 

Pat the chi}, 

q.. 

here ar, 
portion of aij 

Coat 1¢ 

) 

yf for Mati 
arts into th, 
( Mation 
prot ti. 
Sher 


Concerning the Generation of Man. 


Cuarv. Il, 


of what quality the feeds, whereof the male, and whereof the fems)- 


is engendered, 
NA Ale children areengendered of amore hot and dry {eed,and Wome, | 
\\96/ K of amore cold and moift : for there is much lefle ftrength in col, cs 
| in heat,and likewifein moifture than in dryneffe ; and that is th. 
| Why men why it will be longer beforea girle is formed in the womb than 
Inthe feed lyeth boththe procreative and the formarive power: 
example ; In the power of the Melon feed are tiruate ftalkes, branches, leaves 
Mowers, truite, the forme, colour, (nell, tafte, fecdand all. The like teafon jc of. 
in power ftom ther feeds ; fo Applegrafts engrafted in the ftock of aPeatettec, beare Apples: ang 
hint comauch WE doe alwaics finde and fee by experience, thatthe tree (by vertue Of grafting) ther 
urfloweth. is grafted, dorh convert it felte into thenature of the Sions wherewith It ispratted 
Why DUtalthough the childethat is borne doth refemble or is very like unto the father o, 
dienaremot themother, as his or her feed exceedeth in the mixture, yet tor the moft part i: hap. 
peneth that the children are more like untothe father than themother, becaufe 
‘hee, Inthe time of copulation, the minde of the woman is more fixed on her husbang 
than the minde of the husband or,ortowards his wife: for in the time of copulation 
or conception, the formes, or the likenefles of thofe things that are conceived; 
keprin minde, arctran{ported and imprefled in the childe or iflue ; for fo theyaf. 
firme that there wasa certain Queene of the Zthiopians who brought forth a 
' child, the reafon was (as fhe confeffed) that at the time of copulation with her Kine 
fhe thought on a marvellous white thing, wich a very {trong imagination. Therefore 


oN Hefiod advertif{eth allmarried people not to give them felves to carnall copulation 

when they return from burialls, but when they come from feafts and plaies, left that 

eottcn. their fad, heavie, and penfive cogitations, fhould bee fotransfufed and engrafted in 

the ifuc, that they fhould contaminate or infec the pleafant joy fulneffe of his |ifz, 

oar... With fad, peafive and paflionate thoughts. Sometimes it happeneth, although very 

‘imesthe child feldome, the childe is neither like the father nor the mother, butin favour refer. 

bleth his Grandfather,or any other of his kindred, by reafon thatin the inward paits 

~" ofthe parents, the engrafted power and nature ofthe grandfather lieth hidden: 

which when it hath lurked there long not working any effect, at length breakes fori 

by means of fome hidden occafion : wherein nature refembleth the Painter,making 

the lively portraiture ofa thing, which as far as the fubject matter will permit, doch 

forme the iflue like unto the parents in every habit; fo that often times the dileales o! 

: the parents are transferred or participated unto the childrén, as it were by a certaine 

a hereditary ticle: for thofe thatare crooke-backt get crooke-backe children, thoi: 

that are lame, lame; thofe chatare leprous, leprous; thofe that have the ftone, 

; dren having the ftone ; thofe that have the ptificke, children having the prifick;an¢ 

thofe chat have the gout,children having the gout: for the feed followes the powe!, 

es | a. Mature,tem perature, and complexion of him that engendereth it. Therefore of rhofe 

ound children. eafed, weake and dileafed children are begotten, unleffe happely the feed of one o 

| the parents that is found doth correct or amend the difeafed impreffion of (ie 

at ther that is difeafed, or elfe the temperate and found wombe as it were by the g° 
of tle and pleafant breath thereof. 


C 


f welling, 
yency of their luft 

,certaine {trong « 
parts, Which pierc 
imagination, defi: 
ons feemeth to be 


Jifeafed Jo get that are in health and found, healthy and found ; and of thofethat are weakeand 


= the expulfio 


“Y other good va 
Yombe : and wh 


What theca 
Ae 


end forthe con{e: 
of mans life, as it 
iotblood that ts 
purpofe, which b 
ven by the proper 
doth ftirre upint 
The males of b 
rage, and are almo 
times waxe mad, | 
kinde, they prefer 


hat ths 


Nore Wanton kill 
| GUgs, that the ma 
| Mul Rive and wa | 
| Ying the mans {cell 


to enflamc 


CCret parts 


*theticklino pl 
‘ant time 


acting of the fe 
Andthat 


Parate lelfe f; 


at > 
tre j B 2A 
> 
| 
| 

{ 7 

4 
| 
Ay / / 
y , 
| 


tmale 


Hand women 


hin cold than 


POWer: as for 
nches, leaves 


tcafon is of 


Apples ; and 
Stating) ther 
Lit is prafted. 
0 the father or 


part it hap. 


becaufe thar 


her husband, 
of copulation 
conceived or 
or fo they af. 
fortha white 
vith her King, 
n. Therefore 
all copulation 
rlaies, left that 
d engrafted in 
{fe of his lite, 
very 
favour reiem- 
inward paits 
lieth hidden : 
breakes forth 
inter,making 
permit, doth 
he difeales of 
‘by a certaine 
ildren, thofe 
ic ftone, chil- 
prifick and 
esthe power, 
fore of thofe 


reakeand dil- . 


eed of one of 
Kon of rhe o- 


by the gen 


C Kale 


atisthe | 
b than ad bo a 


Cuar. III. 


What the caufe why the Females of all brute beafts, being great with youn 
ave ucither defire, nor admit the males, have 
brought forth their Young. 


He caufe hereof is,that,forafmuch as they are moved by fenfe only, why the 
aNthey apply themf{<lves unto the thing that is prefent, very little, or 

422. nothing atall perceiving things that are paft,andto come. Therfore 
Za after they have conceived,they are unmindfull of the pleafure that 

@ is paft,and doe abhor copulation : forthe fenfe or feeling of luft 
isgivenuntothem by nature, onely for the prefervation of their 
kinde, and not for voluptuoufneffe, ordeleGtation, But the males Why of brace 
aging, {welling, and as it were ftimulated by the provocations of the heat, or fer- pe ee ES 
wacy of their luft, dothen runne unto them, follow and defire copulation, becaufe with uf follow 
,certaine {trong odour or fmell commethintothe aire from their fecret or genital! 
ts, Which pierceth into their noftrills, and unto their braine, and fo inferreth an 
qgination, defire, and heat. Contrariwife, the fenfe and feeling of venereous 
ysfeemeth to be given by nature to women, notonely forthe propagation of iffue Whereforea 
nd forthe confervation of mankinde, butalfo to mitigate and affwage the miferics Wor 
fmans life, asit were by the entifements of that pleafure : alfothe great fore of childe, defircth 
otblood that is about the heart, wherewith men abound, maketh greatly tothis 
urpofe, which by impulfion of imagination, which ruleth thehumours, being dri- 
ea by the proper paflages,downe from the heart and entralls into the genital! parts, 
oth tirre up in them a new luft. 

The males of brute beafts, being provoked or moved by the ftimulations of luft, 
atand are almoft burft with a Tentigo or exrenfion of the genitall parts,and fome- 
‘ines waxe mad, but after thatcthey have fatished their luft with the female of their 


\indethey prefently become gentle, and leave off {uch fierceneffc. 


Vhat things areto be obferved, as neceffary unto ceneration inthe time 
| of copulation. 


the husband commeth into his wives chamber hee muft cn- 


rertaine her with all kinde of dalliance, wanton behaviour, and al- 
68579 i lurements to venery: but ifhe perceive her to be flow, and more roven ry and 
AVA RASS ‘cold,he mutt cherifh,embrace, and tickle her,and {hall not abrupr- 
ily, thenerves being fuddenly diftended, breake into the field of 
ete nacure, but rather fhall creepe in by little and liccle, intermixing 
Wrewanton kilfes with wanton words and {peeches, handling her fecret parts and 
‘ts, that fhe may take fire and bee enflamed to venery, for fo at lengththe wombe 
‘Rtive and waxe fervent witha defire of cafting forth its owne {ced, and recei- 
mans (cedto bee mixed together therewith. Butif all thefe things will noc 
: “hee to enflame the woman, for women for the moft part are more {flow and flack 
“othe expulfion or ycelding forth of their feed, it fhall be neceffary firfito foment 
WB lecret parts with the decoction of hot herbes made with Mufcadine, or boiled ia 
other good wine, and to put alittle muske or civet into the neck or mouth ofthe 
"ombe : and when thee fhall perceive the efflux of her feedto approach, by reafon phe meeting of 


*thetickling pleafure, fhee muft advertife her husband thereof, that at the very in- the 9 
. neccuary EC- 
or moment, hee may alfo yeeld forth his feed, that by the concourfe or 


“ing of the feeds, conception may be made, and foat length a child formed and 
@ . And chatic may have the better fucceffe, the husband muft not prefently fe- 
himfelfe from his wives embraces, left aire {trike intothe open wom 


j | B 2 4 
‘ 
q 
| 
| 
4 


Concerning the Generation Man. 


Cuap. V. 

i By what ficnes it may bee knowne whether the woman have concerved 


The fupprefle 


and fo corrupt the feeds beforethey are perfe@ly mixed together. \When them: 
| departs, lerche woman lye ftill in quiet, laying her legges or her thighes acroff: 5 
upon another, and raifiny them up alittle, left chat by motion or downeward ey 
| tion, the feed fhould be {hed or {pilt : which 1s the caufe why fhe ought at tha: tj : 
not to talk, efpecially chiding, nor to cough, nor {neefe, but give herfelfe to rep 
quictnefle, it it be poflible. 


[)18.24. 


That thew 


| or not, 
the feed in the time of copulation, or prefenrly after be nor pile feede with feede is 
om x ; ifin the meeting of the feedes the whole body doe fomewhe mixed and coagulat 
fhake, that isto fay, thewombe drawing it felte together tog}, the wombe, a cert 
| compreflion & cntertainment therof,ifa little feeling of pain doy) over unfcimmed m 
eay] runne up and downe the lower belly and about the navel! sf thee Moreover, this c 
ep A be fleepy, if fhe loath the embracings of a man, and it her face bee beforethe time tha 
pale, itis atoken thatthe hath conceived. paffeth it abour, hat 


soesorfpecks Infome,after conception fpors or freckles arife in their face, their eyes are depre/. 


inthetaces of fed and funkein, the white of their eyes waxcth pale, they waxe giddy inthe head yw! 


| eae ray by reafon that the vapours are raifedup from the menftruall blood thatis ftopped, J 

fadneffe & heavinefle grieve their mindes, with loathing and way wardnefle, 

} fon thatthe {pirits arecovercd withthe fmoaky darkenefle of the vapoures : paines of 
in the teeth and gummes, and {wouning often times commeth, the appetite is 20 


ved or overthrown,with aptneffe to vomit, and longing, whereby it happeneth tha 

Why many wo- they loath meats of good juice, and long for and defire illaudable meates, and thofe 

being weat that are contrary to nature, ascoales, dirt, afhes, ftinking falt-fith, fowre, aultercand 

tat fruits, pepper, vinegar,and fuch like acride things,and other,alrogethercontiay @ 
| nearer, and de. to nature and ufe, by reafon of thecondition ofthe fupprefled humour adounding 

esitenddae falling into rhe orifice of the ftomack. This appetite fo depraved or overthrown 

contrarytonae eOdureth in fomeuntill che time of childe-birth; in others it commieth tn the thud 

cure. moneth after their conception, when haires do grow on the childe, and lailly itlea J 

veth them a little before the fourth moneth,becaufe that the child,being now 

ter and a great part of che excrementaliand iuperfluous huxnout 

, Thefuppreffed or topped tearms in women that are great with childe, are divided 

ccarmesdivided into three parts : the more pore portion maketh the autriment forthe chilae, 

| into three parts. cond afcendeth by little and little into the dugs, and theimpureft of all remains 

in the wom) 2bourthe infant, and maketh the fecuadine orafter- birth, wher! 


fre thoferhar 


the 


tor 


the 


Laftly,ifyou would know whether the woman have conceived or 1 reat! 
when the goethto fleepe, fome meed or honyed water to drink, and if fhe have*s 
ping in her guts or belly, fhe hath conceived, ifnot, fhe hath noc conceived. 


it; in folding-wife 


themiddeft under ; 
ced, Buta man m 


for they ar 
| bee feene in the fee 


doe not fo vreatl 


| 49d encreafe of 


thacertaine clan 


mankinde by the 
Henne, and takir 


forinfo doing, on 
wihthenavell. T! 
ledthe fecundine of 
Ths little skiane 
of Hippocrates as p 
together, but 


Wombe. Tho: 


the Working a 


fecundine clea: 


| infant lieth as inafoft bed. Thofe women are great with child whofe urine ismo* ~~ 
fharpe, fervent, and fomewhat bloody, thebladdernot only waxing 
compr<flion of the wombe, fervent by reafon of the blood conteined in it, 
the thinner portion of the fame blood being expreffed, and fweating out 
Hine. de morp. bladder. A {welling and hardnefle of the dugs, and veinesthatare under tie | 
the breaftes and aboutthem, and milkecomming out when they are prelicd, wi Frer 
certaine ftirring motion in the belly, are certaine infallible fignes of orcatnelle ergy Denci 
4 childe. Neither in this greatnefle of childe bearing, the veines of the dugges Veinc 
butof all che whole body, appeare full and {welled up, efpeciaily che veines 
thighes and legges, fo that by their manifold folding and knitting together, 
appeare varicous, whereofcommeth fluggifhnefic of the whole body, 
impotency or difficulty of gomg,cfpecially when the time of 
not.gi 


: 
= — —— 
WE n 
wes -« , ci 
| TAS ~< | 
| 
4 
“8cther thar 
vefle]s 
4 


Bved 


be not {pilr, 
oc fomewhar 
pether forthe 
9 of pain doth 
navell, if thee 
if her face bee 


yes are depref- 
dy inthe head, 
hatis ftopped, 
rdnefle, by rea- 
POUres : paines 
petite is depra- 
happencth that 
sates, and thole 
yre,auftereand 
pether contrary 
our abounding 
or overthrowg, 
eth in thethid 
and laftly ittea- 
now grca- 
gous 
lde, are divided 
childe, the te- 
all remainetn 
ch, whereia the 
fe yrine is Mor 
+ warme by the 
it, but alte 
ring out the 
nderthe dugs 
orcfled, with 4 
orcatnelic wi 


he dugges onels 


onceived. 


* 


Cust) 


 Cuap. VI. 


That the wowsbe, fo fone as it hath received the fede, is prefently con- 
tracked or drawne together, 


] Feer that the feeds of the male and female have both mer, and are 
mixed together in the Capacity of the wombe, then the orifice 
thereof doth draw ir felfe clofe together, left the feedes fhould 
fall our. There the females feede goeth andturneth into nutri- Why thefemale 
ment andthe encreafe of the males feede, becaufe all things are ®¢i8™"* 
nourifhed and doc encreafe by thofe things that are moft fami- malefecd. 
liar and like unto them. But the fimilitude and familiarity of 
dewith feede is farre greater than with bloud, fothat when they are perfectly 
sixed and coagulated, and fo waxe warme by the ftraight and narrow inclofure of 
sewombe, a certaine thinne skinne doth grow about it, like unto that that will bee 
weruofcimmed milke. 
Moreover, this concretion or congealing of the feede, is like unto an egge laved 
vforethe time that it fhould : that is to fay, whofe membrane or tunicle riiat com- 
ofleth itabout, hath notas yet encreafed or growne into a fhelly hardneffe about 
., in folding-wife are feene many {mall threads dividing themfelves, over-{pread 
uhacertaine Clammy, whitith or red fubftance, as it were with blacke bloud. In 
»emiddeft under it appearcth the navell, from whence that fmall skinne is produ- 
@ <i, Buta man may underftand many things that appertaincunto the conce 
| {mankinde by the obfervation of twenty egges,fetting them to bee hatched under way to under- 
alenne, andtaking one every day and breaking it,and diligently confidering ir humane 


Bixinfo doing, on the twentieth day you fhall finde the Chicke perfectly formed 
That little skin that fo compaffeth the infant in the wombe is cal- 
fecundine or Chorion, butcommonly the after-birth. 
This little skinne is perfectly made within fixe dayes, according tothe judgment _ 
‘Hippocrates, as profitable and neceflary not onely tocontaine the feeds fo mixed -“™?™ 
gener, but allo to fucke nutriment through the orifices of the veflels ending in 
Wombe. Thofe orifices the Greekes doe call Cotyledones, and the Latines Ace. WhatcheCoty- 
@ vals, for they are as it were hollowed eminences, like untothofe, which may #4” 
xeene in the feete or fnout ofa Cuttle fifh many times in adouble order, both 
ithe working and holding of their meate. Thofe eminencescalled Acetabuls 

te not {o greatly appeare in Women asin many brute beafts. Therefore by thefe 


<{ccundine cleavethonevery fideuntothe wombe, for the confervation, nutriti- 
*aadencreafe of the conceived feede. 


Crap. VII. 


Of the generation of the navel, 


25 nencies groweth prefently another veflell, that isto fay,a veineto the 
<3} veinc, and an artery tothe artery :thefe foft and yet thin veflels,are fra-. 
med witha little thin membrane, which being {pread under, fticketh . 
tothem, for to them itis ia ftead of amembrane, anda ligament anda 
“cle or a defence,and it is doubled with the others,and made ot the veine and ar- 
the navell,to compaffe the navell. T hefe new {mall veffels of the infant,with 
orifices, doe anfwer directly one to oneto the cotyledones or eminenccs of the 
@%,they are very fwall and little,as it were the hairy fibresthat grow upon roots 
@ “ein the carth,and when they have continued fo a longertime,they are combi- 
scther,that of wo they are made one vefiell; until that by continual! connexi- 
thofe veffels go and degenerate into great vefiels, called clic 
2 


"ERR Fter the woman hath conceived, to every one of the aforefaid emi- 


PUOT 4 compendious 


ic Man 1 
OHS, One 
CWardiin, 
atthattime 
‘Ctorcttand 
| 
| 
the veines 
they 
an iS it 
erance het 
o1ve 


ncerning the Generation of Man. Lis, 24. 


“Ticall veffels,or the veflels ot the navell, becaulethey do make the navell,and do ep. 
Theveineneverter intothe childs body by the hole of the navell. Here Galen doth admire the fin. 


jpyncth itfelte gular providence of God and Nature,becaufe chat in {uch a multitude of veffels 


with the aee'y. ty fo long a paflage or length that they go or are produced, the vein doth never co, 
found it felfe nor ftick roche artery,nor the artery to the veine, but every veife]| joy. 

neth it felfero the veffell of its owne kinde. But che umbilicall veine or navel! Veing 

entering into the body of the child,doth joyne it (elf prefently to the hollow p Arto! 

the liver, but the artery is dividedintotwo,which joine themfelves to the two 

arteries along the fides of the bladder, & are prefently covered with the peritonsyy, 

& by the benefit thereof are annexed unto the parts which tt goes unto. Thofe {in9); 
veines and arteries are as it were the rootes ofthe child, bur the veine and arteyy o¢ 

the navell are as it were thabody of the tree,to bring down the nutriment to noy;iy), 

the child, For firft we live in the wombe the life of a plant,and then next the life of, 

fenfizive creature ; and asthe firft tunicle of the child is called Chorion or Allantoig., 

fothe other is called Azmios or Agnina, which doth compaffe the feed or child abgy. 

oncvery fide. Thefe membranes are moft thin, yea for their thinnefle like unto 

{piders web, woven oneupon another,and alfo connexed in many places bythe cy. 
cal-tremities of certaine {mall and hairy fubftances,which at length by theadjun@ion of 
krhalltbe their likedo get ftrength; wherby you may underftand,what is the caufe why by gj. 
aan vers aid violent motions of the mother in going and dancing or leaping,and al{o of 
cheinfintia infantin the wombe, thofe membranes are not almoft broken. For they ate 
wonbescco Conjoyned by the knots of thofe haizie fubftances, that betweenc them nothing, 
judgementof neither the urine nor the {weate cancome, as youmay plainely and evidently per: 
Gucsinbis ceive inthe diffection of a womans body tiiatis great with child, not depending 
‘the On any other mans opinion,be it never fo old or inveterate: yet the ftrength of tho{e 


name of the f- membranes is not fo great but thatthey may bee foone broken inthe birth by the 


kicking of the child. 


Cuar. VIII. 
Of the umbilical ve(fels, or the veffels belonging to the navel. 


Anold opinion 
cenfured. 


narrower, becaule the childe wanteth or ftandeth in need of mucl 
more bloud for his conformation and the nutriment or increafe of his parts,e9° | 

9} 
vitall {pirit «formed 


Thefe vefiels making the body ofthe navell, which,as it is thougir. 


To whacufeche nine ortenne dayes, by their doubling and folding, make knots § 


knots of rhe 


childs navellinknots of a Francifcan Friers girdle, that ftaying the running bhloud in chote ts | 


ei 
the knotty windings, they might more perfectly concoct the fame : as way be 


mr the ciaculatory {permatick veflcls, for whichufe alfo the length of the navell 


an ell, fothat in many infants that are fomewhat growne, 1s1s found three | 


times doubled about their neck or thigh. 
Thechildinthe 
wombetaketh the navell, and not by hismouth, neither doth hee enjoy the ufe of cy: 
his narrime™ or fundament, neither necdeth hee the fundtions of the heart. 
Lis bloud goeth unto it by the arteries of the navell,and into the iliack arter'¢ 
mouth. the iliack arteries unto all the other arterics of the whole body, for by # 
tow thechild Of thefe onely the infant doth breathe. Therefore it is not to bee fuppol t 
breaheth.  carryed or drawne in by the lungs uito thie heart, inthe body of the childe, 1 

trariwife from the heart to the hiags. For neither the heart doth performe* 


neration or working of blous, or of the vitall fpirits. For the iflue 


Any of theancient Writers have written that there arefivevelles 
“found inthe navell. But yet in many, nay all the bodies | fougtt 
Jin forthem, Icould never finde butthree, that is tofay,oncvel’, @ 

which is very large, fo that in the paflage thercof it wi'l 

the tagge of a poynt, and two arteries, but not fo large, but muci 


ly Dy 
Aslong asthe childe is in his mothers wombe, hee taketh his pe ania posi : 

CS, 


or {pisitucl 
har ale” | 
bur com 
hee 


or infant is 


cenit} 


Lis. 24. 
rented with them 
hath obtained a! 
nat bc calledach 


of the ebu 


slfointothe vein 
itcommeth to p 
leth, not onely 
that flow unto: 
bles which are 
Thefe three bul. 
the three princi; 
mer time it is ca 
called an embric 
allthe membe; 
fucketh groffert 
this bioud,becat 
ought to prepar 
bigneffe above: 
Only a certain c: 
place. From th 
low velne, cali 
Which are like u 
0two branche 
Particular parts 
Io the meane 
Minences or C 
fervent and {p: 
endued vy 
Veliellto bec wi 


“nual! motion. 


In this the v< 
’Rother on the 
“attying thithe 
{ote of an arr: 
ter Whereof 
“attying unto a 


a 
“pa. 
‘ 
i 
~ — 
VA 
{A 
OE 
a 
| 
* 
* 
~ 
; 
4 


— 


I 8B, 
|,and do CQ. 
nire the fin. 
tveffels ang 
con. 
y vcfilej] joy- 
1avell veing. 
yllow Part of 
he twoiliack 
Thofe {mali 
and artery of 
nf to Nourifh 
tthe life of, 
Allantoides 
rchild abour 
like unto the 
es by the ex. 
adjunétion of 
ile why by dij. 
ng,and allo of 
‘or they are {o 
hem nothing, 
gevidently per- 
ot depending 
eneth of thofe 
he birth by the 


ell. 


eare five vellels 


bodies I fought 
Bo fay, onc veine, 
f ic will receive 
large, but much 
necdof much 
fuse 
his © 


ughr, is formes 


like unte the 
ud 10 chofe chert 
ys may be feenem 
the navell 1s halic 


» 


pnd three OF fours 


unrea with them as they are made and wrought by his mother. Which,untill it 
ath obtained a full, perfe& and whole defcription of his parts and members,can- 
nat 


24. Concerning the Generation Man. 


be called a child, bur rather an embrion, or an im perfect fubftance. 


of the ebullition or {welling of the (cedin the womsbe, and of the cemcretion 
of the bubbles or bladders or the three principalentralls, 


the fixe firlt dayes of conception the new veffels arethought 

to bee made and brought forth of the eminences or cotylidons 

xz.| of the mothers veffels, and difperfed into all the whole {eede, as 
"yi they were fibres or hairy ftrings. Thofe as they pierce the 
wombe,fo do they equally and in like manner penetrate the tuni- 
| cle Cherion. And itis carried this way,being a paffagenot only 
neceilary for the nutriment and conformation of the parts, but 
ointothe veines diverfly woven and difperfed into the skin Chorson, For thereby 
:commeth to paffe that the feed it felfe boilerh, and as it were fermentetis or fwel- 
eth, not onely through occafion of the place, bur alfo of the bloud and virall fpirirs 
hat fow unto it, andthen itrilethintorhebubbles or bladders like unto the 

bles which are occationed by the raine falling intoa river or channeil full of water. 

Thefe chree bubbles or bladders, are certainrude or new formes or concretions Of The three 
hethvee principall entrals, chatistofay,of the liver, heartand braine. Allthisfor- 


mertime itis called feed,and by no other name; but wiien thofe bubbles arife, it is when che fede 


clledanembrion, orthe rude torme ofa body untill the perfe& conformation of isealled an 
{ithe members : on the fourth day after that the veine of the navellis fermed, it” 


ficketh grofler bloud, that is,ofa more fuller nutriment out of the,Cotylidons.And 


branches, whereot the one goeth upwards, the othicr downwards unto all the 
particular parts of the body. 

lathe meane feafonthe Arteries ofthe navell fuck {pirituous bloud out of the e- 
minences or Cotylidons ofthe mothersarteries, whereof,that is to fay, of che more 
‘event and {pirituous bloud, the heart is formed in the fecond bladder or bubble, 
iting endued with amore fiefhy, found and thicke fubftance, as it behoovech that 
Vellell to bee, which is the fountaine from whence the heate floweth,and hath a con- 
Unuall motion. 

Inthisthe vertue formative hath made two hollow places, one onthe right fade, 
nother onthe left. In the right,the root of the hollow veine 1s infixed or ingrafted, 


m “trying thither neceflary nutriment for the heart; in the left is formed the ftamp or 


ote of an artery, which prefently doth divide it felfe intotwo branches, thegrea- 
tt whereof goech upwards to the upperparts, and the wider unto the lower parts, 
“tying unto all the parts of the body life and vital! heat. 


3 CHAP. 


| 
IS 24 ‘ onpe CUrGles Cilat ICC. WihCTE } 
Mm ouwhtto prepare the liver fully & abfolutely made. For then it isofa notable great 
: ile above all the other parts, & therfore it is called parenchyma, Decaule it is DUE called Paren: 
Ja certain congealing or concretion of bloud brought together thither or in thr: 
= | >From the gibbous part thereof {pringeth the greater part or trunke of the pol- 
wvyeine, called commonly venacava, which doth difperic his {mailbranches, 
chare like unto haires, into alfo the {ubftance thereof : and then it ts civiced in- 
triment oncly 
~2e 10° 
of eyes, afl 
t. 
arterics,a0% con 
for by thems’ 
ippoied chat 
he childe but 
etits & 


$94. Concerning the Generation of Man. 4, 


CHuap. 


of the third bubble or bladder, whenein the bead andthe 
braine formed. 


MHe farre greater portion of the feede gocth into this third bubble, thy: 
RAN istofay, yeelding matter for the conformation of the braine ang,/| 
chytheoreae e/X| Hoag, the head. For a greater quantity of feede ought to goe unr 
hy the g O the 
“rtionof ghertogthawy conformation of the head and braine, becaufethefe parts are not fan. 
54 euine or bloudy as the heart and liver, but in a manner without bloud ; bonie,mar. 
coeneadand row, cartilaginous, nervousand membranous, whofe parts, as the veines, arteries 
nerves, ligaments, panicles, and skinne, are called {permaticke parts, becaufe they 
obtaine their firft conformation almoft of feede onely : although that afterwards 
they are nourifhed with bloud, as the other Aiefhy and mufculous parts are. By yet 
the bloud when itis come unto thofe parts, degererateth and turneth into athin 
fomewhat fpermatick, by vertue of the affimulative faculty of thofe parts, All the 
other parts of the head, forme and fafhion themfelves unto the forme of the braing 
when it is formed,andthofe parts which are fituated and placed about it for defence 
efpecially,are hardened into bones. 
Whythehen! The head asthe feate of the fenfes, and manfion ofthe mindeand reafon, is fitu. 
<9 ret ated inthe higheft place, that from thence, as it were from a lofty tower or turret, 
ght rule and governe all the other members and their functions and actions, that 
are under it, for there the foule or life which is the rectrefle or governelie is fituated . 
and from thence it floweth and is difperfed intoallthe whole body. Nature hath 
framed thefe three principall entrals as proppes and fuftentations for the weight of 
all the reftof the body: for which matter alfo fhee hath framed the bones. 

The firft bones thatappeareto bee formed, or are fuppofed to be contormed,are 
the bones called offa Idsum,connexed or united by {pondils that are betweene them : 
then all the other members are framed & proportioned by their concavities & hol. 
lownefles, which generally are feaven,that is to fay,two of the eares,two of the noie, 
one of the mouth, and in the parts beneath the head, one of the fundament,and ano. 
ther of the yard or conduitofthe bladder, and furthermore in women, oncofthe 
= ofthe wombe, without the which they can never bee made mothers or beare 
children, 

When all thefe are finifhed, nature, that fhee might polith her excellent worke in 
all forts, hath covered all the body and every member thereof with skinne. Into this 
excellent work or Microcofmes fo perfected,God,the author of nature and all things, 

Exod.to.quss. infufeth or ingrafteth a foule or life: which St. Augustine proveth by this fentence 
of Mofes : Ifany man {mite a woman with caoild,fothat thereby fhe be delivered be 
fore her naturalltime,and the child bee dead, being firft formed in the wombe, let 
him diethe death: but ifthe child hath not as yet obtained the full proportion and 
conformation of his body and members, let himrecompence it with mony. T here. 
fore itis not to bee thought that the life is derived, propagated or taken from Ys 
dam or our parents,asit were an hereditary thing diftributed unto al! mankindeby 
their parents; but we mutt believe it to be immediately created of God,even 4 the 
very inftant time when the child is abfolutely perfected in the lineaments of his D0 
dy, and fo given unto it by him. 


The mizinche So therefore the rude lumpes of fiefh called mole that engender in womens 
wombeliveth —wombes, and montfters of the like breeding and confufed bigneflc, althoug!: by 


nec asthe child. 
ae fon of acertaine quaking and fhivering motion, they feemeto have life, ye they 


cannot beefuppofedto bee endued witha life ora reafonable foule : but they nav 
their motion, nutriment and increafe wholly of the naturalland infixed faculty° 


the feed. 
But even as the infant in the wombe obtaineth not perfec conformati hic 
the thirtieth day, fo likewife it doth not move before the fixtieth day: at ¥”" 


whereon it worket! 


| ling of the mydv. 


| Unto him that for 


nave 


the wombe, and of the generative or procreative fpirit that is engrafied naturally! 


on before 


ume | 


females about 
ofthe efficacy of ¢ 


dy prefently execu 
placed about it cat 
ly, but efpecially 
proceffe of age or 
Thofe inftrume 
when the forme o 
head of Ther (ites. 
Tonin, that lived 


and foft,hath cauf: 
narrowtor them : 
feaver, which inter 
Pretently after @ 
dtygifts : hereot 
others with know 
fame {pirit other 
with diverfitics off 
vine providence : 
ought to contens 


Potter power to 
todithonour ir 
mane creature t 
with all humilit 
lent foule negle< 
With the conte: 
leparated from | 
OTiginall, 
Therefore th 
all motions arte 
he Ancients hi 


‘iptions. For 
‘Ovifible, anim 
S, Of the minde 
“ur foules 
hey doe betto 
‘though this li: 


| 
B. 24 
De 
aL 
. moftcom 
emotion. But nc 
he | il ] 
E foul 
wombe 
formins 
4 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Sub Zar 


ubble, thar 
aine and al! 
UNTO the 
are not f{an- 
Donie,mar. 
CS, arteries, 
decaule they 
t afterwards 
are. But yer 
Lintoathin 

arts. All the 
of the braine 
tfor defence 


‘afon, is fitu. 
Wer OF turret, 
d actions, that 
ie is fituated 
Nature hath 
the weight of 
ones. 
ontormed, are 
tweenethem : 
cavities & hol- 
yo of the nole, 
nent,and ano- 
en, oncofthe 
thers or beare 


llent worke in 
inne. Into this 
-and all things, 
y this fentence 
e delivered be- 
he wombe, let 
proportion and 
mony. There- 
taken from 
mankinde by 
God,even atthe 
ments of his bo- 


der in womens 
although by r¢4- 
ve life, yet they 
e+ but they have 
nfixed faculty ° 
afted naturally 


Formation before 


h day : at whic 
cme 


yen the forme or fafhion of the headis fharpe upwards or piramydall, as wasthe 
ind of Therfites, chat lived in thetime of the Trojag warre, and of Tribeu/et and 


895 


eit is moft commonly not perceived by women, by reafon of the fmallncfleof 


gotion. But now let us f{peake briefly of the life or foule, wherein confifteth 


,. principal original! of every fun@ion in the body , and likewife of gene- 


Cuapr. XI. 
Of the life or foule. 


HE foule entreth into the body , fo foone as it hath obtained a per- Thelifegoett 
fe& and abfolute diftin&ion and conformation ofthe members in the "time the 


AS wombe : which in male children, by reafon of the more ftrong and rs 


that coth cm 


@7* forming heate which is engraffed in them, is about the forticth day,and sender the 


ld,betore th 
,females about the forty fifthday, in fome fooner, and in fome later, by reafon bos othe 


‘the eficacy of the matter working, and plyantneffe or obedience of the matter chiidand cach 


yereon it worketh, Neither doth the life or foule being thus in{pired intothe bo- Pe 


hoch his perfe® 


yorefently execute or performe all his functions, becaufe the inftuments that are proportion and 
ced about it cannot obtaine a firmeand hard confiftence neceffary for the live. 6" 
. but efpecially for the more divine minifteries of the lifeor foule, but ina long 


Why the life or 


foule doth not 


celle of age or time. rerently exe- 
‘Thofe inftruments of the fouleare vitiated cither inthe fir conformation, as 


(min, that lived in later yeares ; or alfo by fome cafualty, as by the violent hand- 


) ing of the mydwife, who by compreffion, by reafonthat the {cull is then tender 
od foft,hath caufed the capacity of the ventricles that be under the braine to be too 
a wnowfor them : orbya fall, ftroake, diforder in diet, as by drunkennefle, ora 


«vet, which inferreth a lithargie,exceflive fleepineffe,or a phrenfic. 

Prefently after the foule is entred the body, God endueth it with divers and fun- 1 core.ta. 
lygifts : hereof it commeth that fome are endued with wifedome by the {pirir; 

sherswith knowledge by the fame fpirit;others with the gift of healing by the 

imefpirit ; others with power, dominion and rule ; others with prophetie ; others 
nthdiverfities of rongucs;and to others other endowments,as it hath plealed the di- 

ine providence and bounty of God to beftow upon them, againft which no man 

nght to contend or fpeake. For it isnot meetthat the thing formed fhould fay 

mo him that formed it, why haft thoumade mee on this fafhion ¢ hath nor the 

‘otter power to make of the fame lumpe of clay one veffell to honour and another 
odihonour ¢itisnot my purpofe, neither belongeth it unto mee or any other hu- 
mnecreature to fearch out the reafon of thofe things, but onelytoadmirethem 
vthall humility : But yerI dareaffirme this one thing, thatanoble andexccl- 
cat foule aceleéteth elementary and tranfirory things, and is ravifhed and moved 
wth the contemplation of celeftiall, which it cannot frecly enjoy beforcirt bee 
<parated from this earthly enclofure or prifon of the body,and be reftored unro its 

Therefore the foule isthe inward Extelechza or perfection,or the primative caufe Whar the fous 
fall motions and functions both naturall andanimall, andthe true forme of man. 
The Ancients have endeavoured toexprefle the obfcure fenfe thereof by many de- 
‘iptions. For they have called it aceleftiall {pirit, and a fuperiour, incorporeall, 
Oifible, animmortall eflence,which is to bee comprehenced of its felfc alone, thar 
Softheminde or underftanding. Others have not doubred but that wee have 
‘ut foules infpired by the univerfall divine minde, which as they are alive, fo 
‘Ney doe beftow life onthe bodies unto whom they areannexed orunited. And pig tie is toatl 
“hough this life bee difperfed into all the whole body, and into cvery portion of the wholebody, 
yet is it voyd of all corporall weight or mixtion, and it is wholly anda- 
“ae in every feverall part, being fimple and indivifible, without all compolition or relifeo 
yetendued with many verwes and facultics; which it doth utter in divers Sump 2° 


indiviliple, 


parts 


3 4 5 
4 
4. 
~ = 
4 
\ 
4 
| 
‘ j 
+; 
| 


For whatca 


the intérnal! 


caciscalled primitive power of feeling or perceiving is fituated, for it ufeth the miniftery °' 


896 Concerning the Generation of Man. 


partsofthe body: Forit feelcth, imagineth, judgeth, remembreth, unde... 
and ruleth all our defires, pleafures and animall motions; it feeth hearerh 
cafteth, toucheth sand it hath divers names of thefe fo many and fo 
which it performeth in divers parts of the body. Itis called the foule 


caufe ic maketh the body live, which of it felfe is dead. It is called the ¢; 


é Ve 


r 
& 


to nuniane 


infant asin aman,according to its owne nature. 
Threekindsof But thereare three kindes of bodics informed by a foule whereby they Jive. i" 


~ 


ising bo-icss  firft being the moft imperfeG, is of plants the fecond of brute beafls,and the third of 
The fuperionwe mea. Theplants live by a vegitative, beafts by a fenfitive, and men by an intelle. 
Ctive foule. And as the fenfitive foule of, brute beafts is endued with all the yertye: 


STL AC al) mc 


poncrsoftue Of the vegetative, forthe humane intelicctive comprehendeth the vertues of 
caferiour, inferior, not feparated by any divifion, but by being indivifibly united With realy & 


and undeiftandisg, into onc hymane forme and foule whereon they depend, py, 


becaufe we havefayda little before, that divers funGtions of the life are refident. an, 
appeare in divers parts of the body, here in this place, omitting all others, wee wii 9 


profecute thofe only which are accounted the principal. 


The principall functions ofa humane foule, according to the opinion of many, 

are foure in number, procceding from fomany faculties,and confequently from 9 
O0€ {oule ; they arethefe: Thecommon Senfe,Imagination, RKeafoning, and Me. 
mon eaters. mory. Aadthey thinke that the common or interior fenfe doth receive the formes § 
The function of ANd images of fenfiblethings,being carryed by the {pirit through the paflage of the 
the common nerves,as an inftrument of the externall fen{es,as ic were a meflenger to goe between 
Nem «and it ferves not onely to receive them, but alfo to know, perceiveand dif 
cernethem. Fortheeye, wherein the externall fenfe of feeing confifteth, dothao: 

know white or blacke. Therefore itcannot difcerne the differences of colours, as 

neither the tonguetaftes, nor the nofe favours, nor the eares founds, nor laftly, che 


haads their touching quality: yea, the eye doth not ofit felfe perceive that it leeth, 


northenofe that it{melleth, nor the cares that they heare, nor thetongue 
fteth, northe hands that they touch. For all things are the officesandfun J 
tions ofthe common fenle ; for this fenfe knoweth that the eye hath feenefome 
thing, cither white, blacke, red, aman, horfe, fheepe, or fome fuch like mateui 
thing, yea, even when the fight is goneand paft, and fo likewife the noleto have i 
{inelied this or that favour,the eareto have heard this orthat found, the tongucto 
have tafted this or thattaft,and the hand to have touched this or that thing, bee «hy 
never fa diverfe. For all the externall fenfes,and all the functions thereof docndan¢ | 
are referred tothe common fenfe, asit were the lines ofa circle fromthe circum | 


rence into the centre,as it is exprefied in this figure. 


For which caufe it iscalled the common or principll fenfe, for that the! 


vice of the externall fenfes to know many and divers things, whole 
| 


TUNGinn, | 


eae Oreath, becaufe itinfpireth ourbodies. Icis called reafon, becaufe it 
ondticreafon from falthood, asitwere by a certaine divinerule. Itis termed the minde. 
dversnames is mindfull of things paft, in recalling and remembring them: and itjs calles | 
vigour or courage, becaufe it giveth vigour and courage to the flugeifh week 
torines. mafle ofthe body. And laftly itis called the fenfe & underftanding, becayf- 

prehendeth things thatare fenfible and intelligible.Becaufe itis incorporeall 
not accupic a place by corporeall extenfion, although notwith{tanding j: 
whole bedy. Icisfimple,becaufe it is but oneineflence, not encreafed nox 7 


thed:for it is no lefle in a Dwarfe than ina Gyant,and it is like ang Cat 


ein | 


jorh difcerne and 


ofirien and 


gmentatton, belo 
counfell of nat 


jiperficially, light 


(hould prefe 
prince, wh 
unto the 
sad Averrou have 
Nextunto the® 
necaufe Of it 
he Geekes Phanta 
waiesin them, fo 
ofe they feeand 
which the nature 
this faculty of thq 
uato it 
For it is recora 
ring Timsot hems 
fently leaped frog 
mollifyed his tun 
of Imagination 
courage of they 
were caufe him 
caufe him to ret 
whofoever it wa: 
oa high, with bo 
afight or {pectac 
ftricken with fuct 
ludden falling d 
from an high a: 
downe headlong 
eer, thattheir 
appeareth that | 
this power of imi 
lonand underft 
fuftain and hold 
After this ap 
Reafon, being t 
together, com} 
Mages of thing 
difcerne and tr 
This faculty 
of the body x 
thing, with an 
yeth the Origin 
compareth 
What to follo: 
motions of the 
fheth the {pea 
Sence and di 
(Peake. 
After Reaf 
ving all forme 
: and asa 
tealeth th 
‘dherence oft 


- 
| 
at: 5B 
| 
i 
& 
; 
i’ 
i 
ij 
hea | 


© gifeerne and judge, but fimple things, that are of themielves, and without any The common 


ofirion and connexion, which may conftitute any thing true or falle,or any ai- 
sentation, belongeth onely to the minde, uncerftanding orreafon. For this was eth tho things 
-couofell of nature, that the externall {enfes thould receive the formes of things 
perficially, lightly andgently oncly, likeas aylafle, notto any other end but chat 
ey fhould prefently fend them unto the common fenie, as it were unto their cen- 
cand prince, which he (that is to fay the common fenfe) at length delivereth to be 
“lected unto the underftanding or reafoning faculty of the toule, which Avicen 
Averros have fuppofed to be fituated in the former par’ of the braine. 
Nextunco the common fenfe followeth the phantafic or imagination, (0 called, Wat Imagina- 
Orporeall jrc,, of it arife the tormes and Ideas thacare conceived in the minde, called ot 
it filler) geGeekes Phantafmata. This doth never reft inthofe that fleepe : neither al- 
afed nor dimin; agg miesin them, for oft-times in them itcaufeth dreames, and caufeththem ro fup- 
“tand grear jn... plethey feeand perceive fuckthings as were never perceived by the fenics, vor 
the nature of things, northe order of the world will permit. The power of 
y they lives pp. ag ais faculty of the minde is fo greatin us, that often it bringeththe whole body in 
,and the third of unto it. 
by anintel|.. Foritisrecorded in hiftory, that Alexander the Great fitting at Table,and hea- 
allthe vertycs Wy Timothews the Mufician fing a martiall Sonnet unto his Citherne,that hee pre- 
Of allthe goly leaped fromthe table, and called forarmes ; but when againe the Mafician 
ated With reafon qollifyed histune, hee returned to the Table and face downe as before. The power 
cy depend, Pye Wy fimagination caufed by muficall harmony, was fo great, that it {ubjeCted to it che 
‘arc refident, and Wy courage of the Worlds conquerour, by whofe various motion, it would now as {é 
lothers, wee will ¥§ werecaufe him to runne headlong to armes, and then pacifie and quiet him, and fo 
a @ wie himto returne to his chaire and banquetting againe. And there was one 
pinion of many, WM whofoever it was, who fome few yearesagone, feeing the Turke dance ona rope 
fequently from whigh, with both his feet faftenedin abafon, turned hiscyes from fo dangerous 
iloning, and Me. aihtor {peGtacle, although hee came to the place of purpofe to fee it, and was 
eceive the formes fricken with fuch feare, that his body fhooke and heart quaked, for feare left thar by 
the paflage of the Wi judden falling downe headlong hee fhould breake his necke, Many looking downe 


gocbetween fom an high and lofty place, arefo ftricken with feare, thac fuddenly they fail 
perceiveand dif Wi dwacheadtong, being fo overcome and bound withthe imagination of the dan- 
iifteth, dothnor xr, thattheir owne ftrength isnot able to fuftaine them. Therefore it maniteftly 
ces Of colours, as “Wj apeareth that God hath deale moft gracioufly and lovingly withus, whounto 
is, nor laftly, che his power of imagination, hathjoyned another, that is, the taculty or power of rea- 


seive that it feeth, onand underftanding ; which difcerning falfe dangers and perils from true, doth 


Jat thing, bee they This faculty of Underftanding or Reafon is fubje& tono faculty or tnftrument The funscr 
of the body, but is free, and penetrateth into every fecret, intricate and hidden 
omthecircumic- thing with an incredible celerity : by which aman fceth what will fallow, percei- 

‘eth the originalls and caufes of things, is not ignoraat of the proceedings of rhings, 
‘¢compareth things that are paft with chofe that are prefent and to come, decreeing 

¥hat to follow, and what. to avoyde. This bridleth andwith-holdeth the furious 
Notionsof the minde, bridleth the overhafty motions of the tongue, and admoni- 

heththe {peaker that before thé words paffe out of his mouth, hee ought with dili- 

Stace and difcretion to ponder and confider the thing whereof hecis about to ; 


IDeake, | 


“ingall formesand images that it receiveth of the fenfes,and which Reafon fiallap- 
‘or that thereto che @ Point, and asa faithfull keeperand conferver, receiveth all things, and inteth 
e miniftery of a a ind icaleth them as well by their owne vertue and power, as by the impulfion and 


hofe difference B® Xhercace ofthofe things in the body of the braine, without apy impreffion of the 


‘tongue that itt2- {tain and holdup aman chat he may notbe overthrowne by them. 

1e offices and fun | Afterthis appeareth and approacheth to performe his function, the faculty of WhatRcafonie. 
> hath feene fome @ Nealon, being the Prince of all the principall faculties of the foule; which bringeth 

ich Like material’ Wi together, compoferh, joyneth and reduceth all the fimple and divided formes or 

‘the nofeto have | mages of things into one heape, that by dividing, collecting aad reaioning it mig he 

d, the tonguctO TMM difcerneand try truth from falfhood. 


After Reafon and Judgement followeth Memory, which keeping and confer- Wha: Memo- 


Concerning the Generation of an. 897 
| 


* 


$98 Concerning the Generation of Man. 


— 


matter; that when occafion ferveth, we may bring them forth therehence a 
atrealurie or ftore-houfe. For otherwife, to what purpofe were itto reade, he, 
and note fo many things, unlefle wee were able tokeepe and retainethem in min : 
by thecare and cuftody of the Memory or Braine ? Therefore afluredly Gog hath 
given us this one onely remedy and prefervative againft the oblivion and ignoranc. 
of things,which although of it {elfe and of its owne nature it bee of greater Cficacie 
yet by daily and often meditation itis trimmed and made more exquifite ang Der. 
WiGowethe And hence it was thatthe Ancientstermed wiledomg the daughter of 
daugheer of m+” andexperience. Many have fuppofed that the manfion orfeate of the Memor ; 
sericnce is: inthe hinder part, or inthe ventricle of the Cerebelum , by reafon thar jt jc ape 
to reccive the formes ofthings, becaufe of the engrafted dryneffe and hardneife 


thereof. 


CHap. XII. 


Of the naturallexcrementsin general, and efpectally of thofe that the chidde 
or infant being inthe wombe excludeth. 


REfore I declare what excrements the infant excludeth in the wombe 
i and by what paflages, I thinke it good tofpeak of the excrements which 


all mendoe naturally voyde. Allthat iscalled an excrement which 
Zee Nature is accuftomed to feparate and caft out from the laudible and noy. 
NK rifhing juice. There are many kinds of thofe excrements. 
The excrement The firftis of the firft concoction, which is performed inthe ftomacke, which 
com being driven downe intothe inteftines or guts, is voyded by the fundament. 
The excrement 1 he fecond commeth from the liver,and it ufually is three-fold,or of three kinds; 
vtheicond one cholert-ke, whereof a great portion is fent into the bladder of the gall, thatby 
seine, AWeating out there hence, it might ftirre up the expulfive faculty of the gutsto ex. 
pell and exclade the excrements. The other is like unto whay, which gocthwith 
the bloud into the veines, and isas it werea vehicle thereto to bring it unto all the 
parts of the body,aad into every Capillar veine for to nourifhthe whole body ; and 
after it hath performed that function, it is partly expelled by f{weate, and partly fen 
intothe bladder, and fo excluded with the urine. The third isthe melancholicke 
excrement, which being drawn by the milt,the purer and thinner part thereo! goeth 
11to the nourifhment of the milt, and after the remnant is partly purged out downe- 
wards by the hamorrhoidall veines, and partly fent tothe orifice of the {tomacke, 
rhe excrement and provoke the appetite. The laft commeth of the laft concoction, 
ofthethird con. Which is abfolved in the habit of the body, and breatheth our, partly by infentsbie 
cottonis triple. cran{piration, is partly confumed by {weating, and partly flowetl our by theev!- 
dentand manifeft paflages that are proper to every part : as ithappeneth inthe 
braine before all other parts ; fer it doth unloade it felfe of this kinde of excrem¢a 
by the paflages of the nofe,mouth,eares, eyes, pallat bone and futures of the {cull. 
Therefore if any of thofe excrements bee ftayed altogether, or any longer tha 
itis meete they fhould,the default is to beeamended by diet and medicine. Furthet 
more,there are other forts of excrements not naturall, of whom wee have cntrc 
ted at large in our booke of the peftilence. | 


When the infant is in the mothers wombe, untill hee is fully and abfolutely {or- 


The ufeofrhe 


navell@rigs. med inall the liniments of his body, hee fends forth his urine by the paflage of th 


navellor wrachws. Buta little before the time of childe-birth, the #rachus is clolees 
andthen the man childe voydeth his urine by the conduit of the yard, andthe w* 
man childe by the necke of the wombe. This urine is gathered together and com 
tained in the coate Chorion or Allantoides together with the other excrements, 
to fay,{weat, & fuch whayith {uperfuities of the menftruall matter, for the more calle 


Se mer re Ge bearing up of the floting or fwimming childe. But in the time of child-birth, when 
ee... the infant by kicking breaketh the membranes,thofe humous runne out,which Ww" 


the mydwifes perceive, they take it as acertaine figne that the childe isat hao 


5 Out of 


jment,unlefic itb 
cles are burft Dy 


| withthe more lau 
| jswontto yeeldo 


For 


ifthe infant co 
and with the! 


ona 
wombe, toamene 


foreover, when 


mourn, wherefore 
ning the meats iat 

downe from: 
sutany hole in th 
‘afuader the me: 
excrements | 


womb, that isto fi 
red by chemfelve 
dogges, fheepe, 3 
rion and Allanto: 
man childe, fhe i 
bearing, bur if o! 
hot asmen. 
The males be 
ita womaaconc 
atule they Jeage 
the male 
dren rather in cha 


hie 
wherein hie is c 
“nt motions, | 
CONnCepracles 
Purfuing the ai 
then is very 
Meth into the 
teafon of the re 
becke of his m 
uc Called Os 
Onely twit 
Barrow apa 
Confirm 


ay 
y 4 
a4 
py tacit 
y 
a4 at | \ 
he wom 
| 
? | 
| 
e 
hatan excre- Vey) 
| 
| 
aot ht | 
x 
Bie bat 


he chidde 


in the wombe 
ements which 
ement which 
idible and nou- 
macke, which 
ament, 
of three kinds: 
he gall, that by 
the guts to ex- 
ich goeth with 
it unto allthe 
mole body ; and 
and partly fent 
melancholicke 
t thereof goeth 
red out downe- 
{the ftomacke, 
aft concoction, 
ly by 
our by the evi- 
pppeneth inthe 
eof excrement 
Softhe{cull. 
any longer than 
icine. Further- 
ee have entrea- 


abfolutely for- 
he paflage of the 
vrachus is cloled, 
ard, andthe we 
gether and con- 
crements,that 
‘or the more 
hild-birth, 
out,which 


childe isat For 


— 


| 
AB. 24. 
ifthe infant come forthtogether with thofe waters, the birth is like tobe more 


vje,and with the better fucceffe ; for the necke of the wombe and all the genitalls 
thelt moifture relaxed and made flippery, that by the endeavour and {tir- 


Concerning the Generation of Man. : 


® .. ofthe infant the birth will be the more cafic, and with the better fuccefle : con- 


ra 


oawile, ifthe infant bee not excluded before all thefe humours bee wholly flowed 

gone, but remaineth as it were in a dry place, prefently through drineffe the 

weke of the wombe and all the genitalls will be contracted and drawne together, {0 

ofthe childe will bee very difficuleand hard, unleflethe necke of the 

ombe, to amend that default, be anointed with oile,or fome other relaxing liquor, 

joreover, when the childe is inthe wombe, he voideth no excrements by the fun- 
»nent,ualefie itbe when at the time of the birth,the proper membranes and recep- 

iesare burft by the ftriving ofthe infant, forhee doth not take his meat atthe 

, yen, wherefore the ftomacke is idlethen, and doth not execute the office of tur- 

cog the meats into Chylus, nor of any other concoction; wherefore nothing can 

o¢downe from it into the guts. Neither have I feldome feene infants borne with- Chidrenborn 
yrany hole in their fundamentr, fothat I have beene conftrained witha knife to cut withoura pat 
,{uader the membrane or tunicle that grew over and ftopped it. And howcan Sons 
chexcrements be engendered, whenthe childe being inthe wombe, is notrithed 

iththe more laudable portion of the menftruall blood? therefore the iffue or child 

swontto yeeld or avoyd two kindes or forts of excrements, folong as heisin the 

womb, that isto fay,fweat and urine,in both which he fwimmes; but they are {epara- 

edby chemfelves, by acertaine tunicle called A/antordes, as it may be fecne in kids, 


Bm dogees, (heepe, and other brute beafts ; for as much as in mankinde the tunicle Cho- 


Allantoides or F arciminalis be all one membrane. If the woman be great of a 4pb-42 5- 
gin childe, fhe is more merry, ftrong, and better coloured, all the time of her child 
aring, but if ofawoman childe, fhe is ll coloured becaufe chat women arenot {0 
hotasmen. 
Themales becin to ftirrewithinthree moneths and an halfe, but females after : 


‘:womamconccivea male child, the hath all her right parts ftronger to every work: 
sverefoffhcy do beginto fet forwards their right foot firft in going, & when the 


- y Aph, 47. fect, 
Jeage on the right arme, the right dug will fooner {welland waxe hard ; 


iemale children ftirre more inthe right fide than inthe left, and the female chil- 


ica rather in chelefr than in the sight fide. 


XIII. 


With what travel the Childe ws brought iato the world, and of the caufe 
of this labour and travel. 


NeewRHen the naturall prefixed and pre (cribed time of child-birthis come,the 
MWOLY childe’being then growne greater, requires a greater quantity of food : 
which when he cannot receive in fuflicient meafure by his navell, with 
ercatlabour.and ftriving hee endeavoureth to get forth : therefore then 
hee is moved with a ftronger violence, and doth breake the membranes 
"derein he is contained. Then the wombe, becaufe it is notable to endure fuch vio- 
lent notions, nor to fuftaine or hold upthe childe any longer, by reafon chat the 
‘oncepracles of che membranes are broken afunder, is relaxed. Andthenthe childe 
Purfuing the aire which heefeeleth to enter inat the month of the wombec, which isporne 
then is very wide and gaping, is carried with his hcad downewards, and {o com- 
Rth intothe world, with great pain both unto it felfe,and alfo unto his mother,by 
talon of the rendernefs of his body,& alfo by reafon of the extenfion of the nervous 

of his mothers wombe, and feparation of the bone called Os fromthe 

We called Os facram. For unleffe thofe bones were drawne in funder, how could In the time of 
twinnes that cleave faft together, but alfo one childe alone, come forth at 
Marrow a paflage as the necke of the wombe is ? Not onely seafon, but alfo expe- andes /aerum 


arc drawne & 


confirmeth it; for I have opened the bodies of women prefently atter they * "Cnc 


AVC from anothers 


CACC 4S Out of i 
reade, heare 
ly God hath 
nd 1ENOrance 
ufite and Der. 
theMemory 
wey 
that IT Is apt 
and hardn¢ le 
\ 


have died of travell in childe-birth, inwhom Lhave found bones of to 
drawne the breadth of ones finger from Os /acrwm: and moreover, in many une 
i whom I have been called being in greatextremity of difficultand hard travel) Yk 
not onely heard, but alfo felt the bonesto crackleand makea noife, when 


feleand heard the noife of thofe bones feparating themfelves one from anor), With 


about the region of the coccix and Os facrum, fo that when nature is not able :... 


hard. 


CHarv. XlVv. 


Of the fituation of the infaist in the wombe. 


TheGruation of 
the infant in 
rhe wove Is 


divers, 


65) e® for Ihave found it altogether uncertaine, variable and divers both in| 


=) after they were dead,and in the living by helping them by the indulty 


following plainely defcribeth, . 


and feet being lifted upwards, as the former figure fheweth at large. 


Sometime 


hand upon the coccyx or rumpe, by the violence of the diftention. Alfo hone, ma 
trons have declared unto me that they themfelves, a few daies before the birt) shaye | 


ereat paine. Alfoa longtime after the birth, many doe feele great Paine and a he 
paire the diflolved continuity of the bones of Z/ium, they are conftrained to | altal 

the dayes of their life after. Butthe bones of the fhare called Offa pubis, have ne... 

An Italian fa- feene to be feparated,as many do alfo affirme. It is reported that in they br 
le. the coccyx or rumpein al! maidens, that when they come to bee marticd they ms, J 
beare children with the Ieffer travailein childe-birth, butthisis a forgedraly 

thar bone being broken, is naturally and of its owne accord repaired, and} yned af 

oether again witha Calas, wocieby the birth of the childe will be more dificy); and 


Ea sO Cannot fhew the certain firuation of the infantinthewombe. 
ving and dead women : in the dead by opening their bodics prefently 


of my hand, when they have beencin danger of perifhing by travelio! 
chiid-birth for by putting my hand inrothe womb,I have feltthe intant comming 
forth, fometimes with his fect forwards, fometimes with his hands, and fometims 
with his hands and fect turned backwards, and fometimes forwards, as thc figure J 


hs Thave often foundthem comming forth with their knees forwards, and fom | 
times with one of the feet, and fometimes with their belly forwards, their hac 


Sometimes 
fant 
wards ft via 
times beadl 
his armes do 
and tbat w 


Inthe bodies: 
children no big 
inaround comp 
boththeir hands 
moreover, [pro 
nis mother/whc 
with his face up 


¥CT. 


| teports that 2 


the pofleffion c 
hat the went ch] 
Child. birth. Tt 
‘at at that tim 


as the fiz 
a 
ff 
fy 
j 
| 
= 
~ \ 
4 5 
7 ( a 
2> 
‘ey me ““<Centh mone 
> “She —— 2% 
| 
| 
coldaet 
the 


in Many une, & sometimes I bave found the in- One time I obferved inthe birth of 
d trave] Thaye | fant comming with his feet down. twinnes, that the one came with bys 
when I laid my } wards firiding awide, and [ome. head forwards, andthe other with 
honeft times headlong, ftretching one of bis feet, according as here 
the birth,| ave | his armes downward ont at length, I have thought good 
anorhey With | and that was an Hermapbrodite, to defcribe 
and ache as the figure following plain. them. 
Not abletore. ly declareth, 


ined to hale al] 
is, Nave ACVer 


taly they breaj 
rricd they ma 

forecd ta! for 
joyned tO. S 

te difiicultang | S 


f 


tin the wombe, 
ivers both in hi- 
modics presently 


inthe bodies of women that died in travaile of childe I have fometimes found 


by the inault no bigger than if they had beene but foure moneths in the wombe, fituated 
by tr avelt iparound com pafle like ahoope, with their head bowed downe to the knees, with 
iohtheir hands under the knees, aad their heeles clofe to their buctockes. And 
5, and fometumes noreover, I proteft before God that I founda childe being yetalive in the body of 
ds, as the figure smother? whom I opened fo foone as fhee was dead) lying all along {tretched our, 
@ vith his face upwards, and the palmes of his hands joyned together, as ifhe were at 


° é 


CHAP. XV. 


Which is the legitimate and natural, and which the illegitimate or unnata- 
rall time of childe birth. 


MO all living creatures, except man,the time of conception and bringing Mankindejhath 
SW forrli their young is certaine and definite; butthe iflue of man commeth fore 
Jeet 1258 into the world, fometimes in the feventh, fometimes in the cighth, and forth young 

Scrmade fometimes, which is moft frequent, inthe ninth moneth, fometimes in 
m tenth moncth, yea fometimes in the beginning of the eleventh monet h. M affart- 

“teports that Lucius Papyriws the Pretor, the fecond heire com mencing a (uit, gave 

te poflefion of the goods away from him, feeing the mother of the childe affirmed 
, 4 fome- “athe went thirteen moneths therewith, being there is no certaine definite time of 
ards, anc hands i child. birth. The child chat is borne in the fixt moneth cannot be long lived, becaufe 
ards, their hane | ‘tat that time all his body or members are not perfedly finifhed or abfolutely 
Ce med. In the feventh moneth ic is proved by reafon and experience that the infant Why the child 

® be lone lived. But in the eight moneth it is feldome or never long lived: the reae isfcarcealiveia 

thereof is. asthe Aftronomers fuppole; becaufe that at that time Saturne ruleth, *e 
“ole coldneffe and dryneffe is contrary to the originall of life: but yctthe phifi- 
“reafon is more true: for the phyfitians fay that the childe inthe wombe doth 
““eQtimes in the feaventh moneth ftrive to bee fet at liberty from the inclofure ot 


% Wombe, and therefore it contendeth and laboureth greatlic, and fo with labou- 
ning 


Sometime 


| 
‘ 
“SS = 
Kor 
KG 
| 
\N 
= 
\ | 
| 


Lib. 4. de bift. 
C4), 


Concerning the Generation of Man. 


ting and ftriving it becommeth weak,that all the time ofthe eight moneth jr cangy 
recover his ftrength again, whereby itmay renew hisaccaftomed ule of ftrivino an f 
that fome by fuch labouring and ftriving, hurt themfelves, and fo dye. Yet for 
{trong and lufty women are thought to bring forththeir children, being lively 
ftrong,on the eight moneth, as Arifforle teftificth of the Aegyptians, the Poets of th 
inhabitants of the Ifle of Naxus, and many of the Spaniards. Furthermore, | 
fuificiently marvaile, that the wombe, which all the time of childe-bearing js {, ols 
fed together, that onecanfcarce puta probe into it, unlefle it be happely by reafon 
of fuperfoetation, or when itis open fora {hort time to purge it felfe, thar Prefen;! 
beforethe time of childe-birth, it fhould gape and waxe fo wide, that the infan, 
affe through it, and prefently after itto clofe againeas if ithad never becn Opened 
But becaufe that the travell of the firft time of childe-birth, is wont to be very gi. 
cultand grievous, I thinke it not unmeet that all women, a litrle before the time of 
their firft travell, anoint and relaxe their privie parts with the unguent here defer. 
bed. Ik. (per. ceti, 3 ii. ol. amygd. dul. 5 iv. cere alb. medul, cervin. iii. axung. ay) 
callin, an. i. tereb. venet. 5 ii. make thereof an ointment co anoint the thighes, 
{hare, privie parts and genitalls. Furthermore, it {hall not bee unprofitable, to 
atrufle or girdle of moft thinne and gentledog-skinne, which being alfo anointed 
with the fame unguent, may ferve very neceflarily for the better carrying of the jp. 
fant in the wombe. Alfo bathes that are made of the deco@ion of mollifying herbs, 
arealfo very profitable to relaxe the privic parts a little before the time of the birth, 


he naturall& That is fuppofedto bee a naturall and eafie birth, when the infant commeth foxx) 
eafiechild birth with his head forwards, prefently following the flux of the water ; and thatis more 


How the we- 
man thattra- 


birth muftbee “! 
placedinher breath at more liberty,and have the more power or ftrength to labour. —_ 
bed. LOM” 


difficult, when the infant commeth with his feet forwards : all the other wayesare 
difficult. Therefore Mid-wives are to be admonifhed that as often as they (hal! 
perceive the infant to becomming forth none of thofe waies, but either with his bel. 
ly or his backe forwards, as it were double, or elfe with his hands and feet together, 
or with his head forwards, and onc of his hands ftretched out, chatthey fhould 
turne it, and draw it out by the feet ; forthe doing whereof, if they be not {ufficienr, 
ict them crave the affiftance and helpe of fome expert Chirurgian. 


CHuarp. XVI, 
Signes of the birth at hand. 


Here will bee great paine under the navell, and at the groines, and {prca- 
ding therehence towards the Vertebre of the loines, and then eipecis\') 
when they are drawne backe from the Os facrem, the bones Ihaancth: 
Coccix are thrutt outward,the genitalls {well with paine, and a certalne 
feaver-like fhaking invades the body, the tace waxethred by realon of the encca 


ty 


vour of nature, armed unto the expulfion of the infant. And when thete fiznc: 
peare let all things bee prepared ready tothe childe- birth. Therctore firlt of al st 
the woman that is in travell be placed in her bed conveniently, neither with here 
vellethin child owards, nor fitting, but with her backe upwards and fomewhat high, that them 


the ought to have her legs wide one from another, and crooked, or her heelc 


14. 
what bowed uptowards her buttocks ,fo fhe may lean on a ftafie chat multbe | 


ced overthwartthe bed. There are fomethat do travel ina ftoole or chair mace 


the purpofe : others ftanding upright on their feet, and leaning on the poalt s r 
| 


ofthe bed. But you mutt take diligent heed that you doe not exhort or per! « 
woman in travell to ftrive or labour toexpell the birth before the forenamed ae 
thereof doc manifeftly fhew that itis at hand. For by fuch labour or pains he ™'s 

be wearied or fo weakened, that when thee fhould ftrive or labour, fhe fha! 


the bufinefic isto be commitredtonature and tothe Mid-wife,And the wom?" 


child mutt onely bee admonithed that when thee fgeleth very ftrong 


pi 


| 
power or ftrength foto doe. Ifall thefethings doe fall out wellin the childe-bitt” 


cort. Caf Si ¢ 
,mott fubtle ang 
Gculeand painei 
the decoction of 
deliverance of ¢! 
Morcover,let 
renas {hee putre 
parts about it. 
iqdani Oi. Make 
ting a little pep; 
and given in a p 
(peedy delivera 
pole. Kk. cortic 
ff, ficten ti. 
cer. Vi. Make 
is above-faid, 2 
Many time: 
wombec, havin 
ortunicle 
Rriving of the: 
inthe wombc. 
dappy, becaule 
doch betaken | 
Ken of eafie d: 
bringeth chat 
the genitals o: 
when fhee wo: 
narrow or {trai 
taketwo orth 
and temperc 
lome the win: 
tobee ufed. a 
aS the Phy fic: 
and paine of t 
Throwes < 
(Mature beine§ 
matter thar | 
With great vi 
forth withou 
tothe womb@ 
thereof thar 
the time of 
prevented 


ling of the p: 


i) 
a (rom 
fon thatthe wets 
.edry,tnis O1nt 
lots 51) 
cla 511. 
| arteme fi 
Liliorvum > 
4 
& 
A 
| 
| tay 
wit 


ring is fo Clo. 
ely by icafon 

he infanr may 
decn opened, 
be very diff. 
re the time of 
nt here defer}. 
lil. AXUNG, an 
nt the 
table, to make 
alfo anointed 
rying of the in- 
herbs, 
me of the birth. 
ommeth forth 
and that is more 
ther Wwaycs are 
tenas they thal! 
rer with his bel. 
d feet together, 
that they fhould 
not {ufficient, 


yines, and {prea- 
then efpecially 

ones Ilia andthe 
C; and certane 
yn of the endca 
n thefe figncs ap- 
ore of all let 
with her face 
vigh, that fhe may 
sbour. Therefere 
her heeles 


dthe women 
ong paine,ths 


24. Concerning the Generation Man. 903 


therewith ftrive with moft {trong expreflion, fhutting her mouth and nofe 
Chee picafe, and at the fame time let the inydwife with her hands force the infant 

avove downewards. But if the birth bee more difficult and painefull,by rea- unsionw 
og thatthe waters wherein the infant lay are flowed out long before, and the womib !upply the de- 
edry, this ointment following is to be prepared. Kx. butyrirecentis fine fale in aqua 
lobe 511. mucaginis ficuumfemin. lini cy altheae cum aqua fabine extracla, an, flowed our t00 
liltorum 31. Make thereof an ointment, wherewith let the mydwife often 
pnoyar the fecret parts. Alfo this powder following may bee prepared. Ix. Cina- late 

gim, corte CAfsi@ fistul, didéamsns an, 8 facch. albi ad pondus omnium : make thereof 

mot fubtle and fine powder. Let the woman that is in extremity by reafon of dif- A powderro 
painefull travellin child-birth, take halfe an ounce thereof ata time, with caufe ipeedy de- 


liversvice In 


ye decoction of linfeede, or in white wine, for it willcaufle more {peedy and eatie child-bisth. 
ieliverance of the childe. 
Moreover, let the my dwife anoynt het hands with this ointment following as of- 
enas {hee putteth them into the necke of the wombe, and therewith alfoanoint the 
parts about it. Ke. oletex feminrbus lint 3i.8. olei de caftoreo 36. callie mo{chate Dist, 45> 
dani 5i. ake thereof a liniment. Moreover, you may provoke (neefing,by put- 
inga litele pepper or white hellebore in powder intothe noftrils. Linfeed beaten, 
iad given in a potion, with the waterof Mugwort and Savine, is luppofed co caufe 
ipeedy deliverance. Alfothe medicine following is commended for the fame pur- A potion cau 
pole. Re cortices cafsia fiftud. conquaffate 3 it. crcer. rab. m. S.ballant cum vino albo fing - 
gua fuffictents, {ub finem addendo fabine, dit, in colatura pro adde cimamomi 5%, 
ager. Vi. Make thereof a potion, which being taken, let {neefing bee provoked,1s it 
sabove-aid, and let her fhut or clofe her mouth and noftrils. 
Miny times it happeneth that theinfantcommeth into the world ont of the 
wombe, having his head covered or wrapped about with portion of the fecundine 
ortunicle wherein it ts enclofed, efpecially when by the much, ftrong, and happy 
triving of the mother, he commeth forth together with the water wherein it lyeth 
tie wombe, and then the mydwives prophefie or foretell chat the childe fhall be 
uppy, becaufe hee is borne as it were with ahoodon hishead. Bur I fappofe thar it 
doch betoken health of body both to the infant and alfoto his mother ; for it is ato- 
«not eafie deliverance. For whenthe birthis difficult and painfull,the child never 
yingeth that membrane out with him, butit remaineth behinde inthe paflage of 
hegenitals or fecret parts, becaufe they are narrow. For even fothe Snake or Adder 
when {hee would caft her skinne thereby to renew her age, creepeth through{ome 
urtow or ftraight paflagc. Prefently afterthe birth, the woman fo delivered muft what a woman 
uketwo orthree {poonefuls of theoyle of {weet almonds extracted without fire, 
md tempered with fugar. Some will ratherufe the yolks of egges with Lugar, afer her del 
Omethe wine called Ipocras, others cullifes or gelly : but alwaics divers things are verance 
‘obee ufed, according as the patient or the woman inchildbed fhall be grieved,and 
Phyfician {hall give counfell, both to ceafe and aflwage the furious torments 
ind paine of the throwes, to recover her f{trength and nourith her. : 
Throwes come prefently after the birth of the child, becaufe that then the veines phecanfeos 
(nature being wholly converted to expulfion)caft out the reliques of the menftruall theaite:- 
matter that hath beene fupprefled for the {pace of nine moneths, intothe wombe “*°""™ 
with great violence, which becaufethey are grofle, {limie and dreggifh,cannot come 
forth without great paine both to the veines from whence they come, and alfo ua- 
tothe wombe whereinto they goe : alfo then by the converfion of that portion 
thereof that remaineth into winde, and by the undifcreete admiflion of the aire in 
the time of the child-birth, the wombe and all the fecret parts will {well, unletie ir 
be prevented with fome digefting repelling or mollifying oile,or by artiticiall row- 
ling of the parts about the belly. 


2 CHA? 


i B 2 + 
cthitcangor 
ftriving ang 
ye. Yet lOme 
ing lively and 
¢ Poets of the ‘ 
Leann 
ethart muftbe p 
Ae 
or chair mace" 
thepoaitorpr 
ror 
forenamed 
or pains {he 
n the 
with 4 


Concerning the Generation of Man. 


Cuar. XVII. 
What to bee done prefently after the child us borne. 


fecun, Refently after the child is borne, the mydwife mutt draw ayy, 
or after birth, as gently as fhee can : but if fliecannor, la 
birth mult bee’ 2) ©) put her handsintothe wombe, and fo draw it out, feparating iy from 
WAS che other parts; for ocherwifeif it fhould continue longer , ir 
or ofthe ee” bee more difficult to bee gotten out, becaufethat prefently afte; the 

ee birth,the orifice of the wom)e is drawn together and clofed, and then al! the fecun. 
The bindingot dine muft be taken from thechild. Therefore the navell {tring mutt bee tyed with ‘ 
chechildsna- goublerhread aninch from the belly. Let not the knot betoo hard, left thar Dart of 
the navell ftring which is without theknot fhould fall away fooner than it 
neither too flacke or loofe, left that an exceeding and mortall fluxe of bloud thoy), 
follow after it is cut off, and left thatthrough it (that isto fay, the navell tring) the 
cold aire fhould enter into the childs body. Whenthe knot is fo made, the nay¢|). 
ftring muft be cut in funder the breadth of two fingers beneath it with a fharpe knite. 
Upon the feGion you muft apply a double linnen cloth dipped in oyle of Rofes, 
of {weet almonds, to mitigate the paine ; for fo within afew dayes after, that which 
is beneath the knot wil! fall away, being deftitute of life and nourifhment,by reafon 
thatthe veine and artery are tyed fo clofe, that no life nor nourifhment can come 
unto it: commonly all mydwives doe let it lyeunto the bare belly of the infanr, 
whereof commeth grievous paine and griping, by reafon of the coldneffe thereof. 
which dyeth by little and little, as deftitute of vitall heat. But it were farre better to 
rouleit in foft cotton or lint, untill it be mortified,and fo fall away. 

T hofe mydwives doe unadvifedly, who fo foone as the infant is borne, doe pre- 
fently tyethe navell ftring and cut it off, not looking firft for the voyding of the{e- 
cundine. When allthefe things are done, the infant muft bee wiped, cleanfed and 
rubbed from ail filth and excrement with oyle of Rofes or Myrtles. For thereby the 
pores of the skinne will bee better fhut, and the habite of the body the more ftreng- 

4 thened. 
i T here bee fome that wafhinfants at that time in warme water and red wine, and 
afterwards annoynt them with the forenamed oyles. Others wafh them no 
with wine alone, but boyle therein red Rofes and the leaves of Miyrtles, adding 
thercto a little {alt ; and then ufing this lotion for the {pace of five or fixe cay¢s, 
they not onely wath away the filth, butalfo refolve and digefi,if there beeany hard 
or contuied place inthe infants tender body, by reafon of the hard travell and/- 
The defauks bourin child-birth. Their toesand fingers bee handled, drawne afunder and 
Wacarecomon- bowed, and the joynts of the armes and legges muft bec extended and bowed for 
newlytorne. many dayes and often; thatthereby that portion of the cxcrementall humour that 
remainethin the joynts,by motion may bee heated and refolved. If there bee any 
default in the members, either in conformation, conftruction or fociety with io 
thatare adjoyning to them, it muft bee corrected or amended with {peed. Molto 
ver, you muft looke whether any of the natural! paflages bee ftopped, or cove’ 
The defaules of With a membrane, asit oftenhappeneth. For if any fuchcover or ftop the once 
com mation of the eares, noftrils, mouth, yard or wombe, it muft bee cut in funder by the Chiy- 
amended.  turgion, andthe paflage muft bee kept open by putting in of tents, peflarics 0! 
felsyleft otherwife they thouldjoyne together againe after they are cut. If he nave 
one finger more than hee fhould naturally, if his fingers doe cleave clofe togeth** 
like unto the fecte ofa Goofe or Ducke, ifthe ligamentall membrane that is une“ 
thetongue bee more fhort and ftiffer than it ought, that the infant canno* fucke, 
nor in time to come,fpeake, by reafon thereof; and ifthere be any other thing 
trary tonature, it muft bee all amended by the induftry of fome expert Chy"™ 
gion. 
Many times in children newly borne, there fticketh onthe inner fide of thet 
mouth and on their tongue,a certain chalkiefubftance,both in colour & conliien” 


untotheir long: 


| tumour 


{) 18.245 | 


this aflect proces 
it che white an 
generate vi 
yolefle ic bee c 
mutt bee clean{c 
dipped in a me 
monds, hony al 
Ged, and fo clea 
Moreover it \ 
of oyle of alm 
nefle of che we 
cough, and fon 
ifchey bee joyng 
tery Ca! 
proper remedic 
Maoy from 
France call 
withthe skinne 
have haires up: 
moft part red. 
with great defo 
the meaftruall 
ifhappely che : 
the veines Into 
wien they are 
of the femina! 


thing they long 
force Or powc 
child is torme 
homore than | 
prefently afre: 
tier. Some of 
thatare on the 
they are parrak 
May bee irrita 
Ul, for being 
call Noli me ba, 
may Dee deale 
dy the roots wi 
thread, they m 
ding to the oe 
There are { 
and bunches, 
them often w 
that ar 
Pierced throu 
length being d 
“away, the 
fuperfluow 
© Powder of 
‘Oot of the 
With oyle of y 
There is a] 
Ting efpecial 
Painefull tum, 


2 
i 
= 
| 
| 
q 
4 
| 
» 
a, 
4 
| 
‘ 


— 
4 


Lis, 24. 
Sige igs afte proceeding from the diftemperature of the mouth, the French-men call 


white Cancer. will not permit the infant to fuck, & will fhortly breed & de. Remedies 


“egerate into ulcers thar will creepe into the jawes, and even unto the throate, and 


(aw aWay the 
-annot, let her 
rating i from 
scr, it would 
ntly after the 
all the fecyn. 


salefle it bee cleanfed f pecdily , will bee their death, -For remedy whereof, it 
yt bee cleanfed by deter fives, as witha linnen cloth bound toa little fticke, and 
jjoped in a medicine of an indifferent confiftence made with oyle of {weete al- 


v 


jonds, hony and fugar. For by rubbing this gently on it, the filth may bee molli- 
.2,and fo cleanfed or wafhed away. 

" Moreover it will bee very meete and convenient to give the infant one {pooneful] 
foyle of almonds, to make his belly loofe and flippery, to aflwage the rough- 
veffe of the weafon and gullet, and to diffolve the tough phlegme,which caufeth a 


ee tyed with a ugh, and fometimes difficulty of breathing. Ifthe eye lids cleave together, or 
t that part of ‘they bee joyned together, or agSlutinated to the coats cornea or adnata ; ifthe wa- 
rthanit Called bydrocephalos affect the head, then muft they bee cured by the 
f bloud thould yoper remedies formerly prefcribed, againft each difeafe. 
vell ftring) the \Maoy from their birth have {pots or markes, which the common people of 
ade, the navel]. france call Segmes, that is, markes or fignes. Some of thefe are plaine and equall 
a fharpe knife. vihthe skinne, others are raifed up into little tumours, and like unto warts, {ome 
le of Rofes, or uve haires upon them, many times they are {moothe, blacke or pale, yet forthe 
ter, that which noft part red. When they arife inthe face, they {pread abroad thereon many times 
nent,by reafon sth great deformity. Many thinke the caufe thereof to bee a certaine portion of 
mentcancome matter cleaving to the fides of the wombe, comming ofa frefh flux, 
ly of the infant = nappely the man doe yet ule copulation withthe woman, or clfe diftilling out of 
dneffe thereof, jeveines into the wombe, mixed and concorporated with the feedes at that time 
farrc better to are congealed, infecting this or that part of the iflue, being drawne out 


ithe feminall body, with their owne colour. Women referre the caule thereof 
ntotheir longing when they are with childe ; which may imprint the image of the 


died a hingthey long for ordefire, inthe childor iffue thatis not as yet formed ( as the 
, cleanfed and j ‘vce or power of imagination in humane bodies is very great:) but when the 
For thereby the ‘uld is tormed, a0 imagination is able to leavethe imprefflion of any thing in ir, 
he more ftrene- than itcould caufe hornes to grow on the head of King Chypus as hee tlept cya 
vefently after hee was returned from attentively beholding Bulls fighting toge- hing cnypus. 
d red wine, and acts Some of thofe {pots bee curable, others not ; as thofe that are grear, and thoie 
vath them not on the lips, noftrils, and eyelids. But thofe that are like unto warts, becaule uncitra- 
iyrtles, adding iky are partakers of a certaine maligne quality and melancholicke matter, which ° 
e or fixe dayes, y dec irritated by endeavouring to cure them, are not to bee medled with at 
re beeany hard for oeing troubled and angered, they foone turneintoa Cancer (which they 
Jeravelland la: | all Nol metanczere), Thofe that are curable are {mall, and infuch partsas they andhow 
yneafunderand oce dealt withall without danger. Therefore they mutt bee picrced through theyare 
tandbowcdfor i yy the roots with aneedle and a thread, and fo being lifted up by the ends of the 
all humourthat 7 ‘ead, they muft bec cut away, and the wound that remaineth mutt be cured accor- 
Tf there bee any ag to the generall method of wounds, | 
ciety with thote There are fome that fuppofe the red {pots that are raifed up into little knobbes 
fpeed. Morco- nd bunches, may bee wafhed away and confumed by rubbing and annoynting 
ped, or coverc | ee often with menftrual! bloud, or the bloud of the fecundine or after-birth. 
Aofethat are hairie and fomewhat raifed up like unto a Want or Moutle,muit bee 
ftopt Chy- ‘etced through the roots inthree or foure places, and ftraightly bound, fo that at 
der by tne “agth being deftitute of life and nutriment, they may fall away : after they are fal. 
away,the ulcer that remairteth muft bee cured as otherulcers are. If there bee a- 
‘lof rogether, 'y {uperfluous fleth remaining, itmuft bec taken away by applying Aigyptsacum, or 
LOE ader powder of mercury,and fuch like: but if it be doubted that it commeth from the 
ranc that cke ‘otofthe tumour that may happely remaine, it muft bee burned away by the 
pnt canno: oyle of vitriol! or aqua fortis. 
other  - rut There is alfo another kinde or fort of fpots, of alivide or violet colour, com- 
expert Chy Ling e{pecially in the face about the lips, witha foft, flacke, laxe, thinne, and un- 
’inetull tumour. and the veines as if they were varicous round about it. This kinde 
nner fide of the “tum it arileth on children th dand cryin 
& confifbencés our groweth greater when it arifeth on children thatare way war y 
this 


‘ 
* 
f 
> 
\ 
A 


906 Concerning the Generation of Man. Lis.2y 
and of ciper yeares that are cholericke and angry, and then it will ba. 
of | 


a diverte colour,like unto alappet or flap of fleth that hangcth over the Turk eet 
bill. When they have done crying, or ceafed their anger, the tumour wi] 
to his owne nacurall colour againc. But you muft not attempt to cure tin 
that are of thefe conditions, People | 


Cuar XVIII. 


How to pull away the fecundine or after-birth. 


hay woman that is with child the fecond time, as it were afecond bir). 
HES for if there bee feverall children in the wombe at once, and of differen | 
Ps) (exes, they then have every one their feverall fecundines, | 
is very neceflary to bee knowne by all mydwives. For they dog 
The caufsot my times remaine behinde in the wombe when the child is borne , cither by reafon : 
cheftayingof of the weakenefle of the woman intravell, which by contending and Jaboyrin, 
the the birth of her childe, hath fpent ail her ftrength: orelfe bya tumour | 
fuddenly inthe necke of the wombe, by reafon of the long and difficult birth, and 

the cold aive unadvifedly permitted to ftrike into the orifice of the wombe, fo, 


Why itis ealled 
the fecundine. 


Suppofe that they are called fecundines, becaufe they doe 


{o the liberties of the wayes or paflagesare ftopped and made more narrow, forhy J 
nothing can come forth: or elfe becaufe they are doubled and foulded jn the J 
wombe, and the waters gone out from them withthe infant, fo thactheyremain J 


as it were ina dry place : or elfe becaufe they yet fticke in the wombe by the 
knots of the veines and arteries, which commonly happeneth in thofethatarede. J 
livered beforetheirtime. For even as apples which arenot ripe, cannot bee pulled J 
from the tree but by violence ; but when they are ripe, they will fall offoftheir J 
owne accord : fo the fecundine before the natural! time of the birth can hardly bee J 
pulled away but by violence ; but atthe prefixed naturall time of the birth, irmay J 
eafily be drawne away. | 
s-cideatsrhae and grievous accidents follow the ftaying of the fecundine ; {uffocation 
| eng ofthe wombe, often {wouning, by reafon that grofle vapours arife from che putic- 
cundines. faction unto the mydriffe, heartand braine : therefore they muft bee pulledaway J 
with {peede from the wombe, gently handling thenavell,if itmay bee fo pollibly 
rhe manner of done. But if itcannot bee done fo, the woman mutt bee placed as fhee was wont 
drawing ourthe when thatthe childe will not come forthnaturally, but muft bee drawac foi by 
remaineager att. Therefore the mydwite having her hand annoynted with oyle, muft putt J 
chebirth. gently intothe womb, and finding out the navell ftring, mufl follow icuntillircome | 
unto the fecundine,and if it doeas yet cleave to the wombe by the cory !idons, thee 
muft fhake and move it gently up and downe, that fo when it is fliaked and looled, 
fhee may draw it out gently ; but if ic fhould bee drawne with violence, it were to 0° 
feared left cliat the wombe fhould alfo follow : for by violent attraction {ome © 
the veflels, and alfo fome of the nervous ligaments, whereby the wombe is faltene’ 
on each fide, may bee rent, whereof followcth corruption of bloud fhedde 
the veflels, andthence commerh inflammation, an abfceffe or a mortal! 
heeanfeofthe Neither is there leffe danger of aconvulfion by reafon of the breaking or tient” 
rye dang: vous bodies, neither isthere any lefie danger of the falling downe of the womb. 
f that there bee any knots orclods of bloud remaining together with che 
dine, the mydwife muft draw them out oneby one, fothacnot any may bee ict 

behinde. 

women have voyded their fecundine, when it could not bee crawae 
ye DY mcanes,long after the birth of the child, by the necke of their 
violes:pulling meale, rorten and corrupted, with many grievous and painefull accidents. All 
bee very requifite to provoke theendeavour of the expulfive faculty by fet 
MUWtatories, aromaticke fomentations of the necke of the wombe, by | 


injections : and coatrariwife,by applying {uch things to the noftrils as yecld ‘i 2 ¢ 


| 1B. 


wich 


jece> 


nixed roget! 
eof a womans 


that is fucked, tl 
rupted milke unt 
‘now that there 
by this, becaufe 
milke or take an 
coloured, as ye! 
ly evacuate the 
thofethings fo: 
maske Roles. | 
fome milke out 
little and liccle 2 


the birth, bur 
tallhumours. & 
Other, Or man 
milke may be: 
Purified. 
Fora certa 
ofthe body n 
Nerate from | 
the manifeft | 
herefore it 
Out, wherew 
‘Otake any di 
@nother, top 
NOreover,m: 
are farre 
fen, than hy 


“Ke 
i 
st 
AN 
LZ 
* 
| 
| 


1p. 24. Concerning the Generation of Man. 907 


an 


“gr or fmell, with a potion made of mugwurt and bay berries takenin hony and 
. mixed together, or with halfea dramme of the powder of favine, or withthe 
womans head, burnt and beaten to powder,and given to drink; and to con. 
ith all things that provoke the tearmes or courfes. 


— 


Cuap, XIX. 


What things muft bee csven to the infant by the mouth, before hee bee 
permittedto fuck the Teat or Dugze, 


<1 T willbee very profitable to rub all the inner fide of the childes To draw Seame 
mouth and pallat gently with treacle and hony, or the oyle of fromthe childs 
{weete almonds extracted without fire, and if youcan, tocaufe — 

yy icto {wallow fome of thofe things: forthereby much flegma- 
J ii tick moyfture will bee drawne from the mouth, and alfo will bee 

» moved or provoked to bee vomited up from the ftomacke; for 
if thefe excrementall humours fhould bee mixed with the milke 
fucked, they would corrupt it, and then the vapours that arife from the cor- 
oped milke unto the brain would iaferre moft pernicious accidents. And you may 
gow that there are many excrementall things inthe ftomacke and guts of children 
this, becaufe that fo foon as they come into the world and often before they fuck 
nike ortake any other thing, they voyde downewards many excrements divertly 
loured,as yellow, greene, and blacke. Therefore many, that they may ipeedi- 
yevacuate the matter that caufeth the fretting of the guts,doe not onely ininifter yn eB. 
thofe that are de holethings fore-named, but alfo fome laxative fyrupe, as that that is made of da- rupted in a fleg. 
annot bee pulled Roles. But before the infant bee put to fuck the mother, itis fitting to prefle Bomack. 
ill fall off of their ‘ome mike out of her breaft into its mouth, that fo the fibres of the ftomack may by 
| ileand liccle accuftome themfelvesto draw in the milke. 


doe the 
afecond birth - 
and of different 
1€S, Which thino 
rthey doe ma. 
either by reafon 
y and labouring 
2 tumour rifing 
ficult birth, and 
the wombe, For 
€ narrow, fothar | 
| toulded in the | 
bat they remaine | 
wombe by the 


th can hardly bee 
f the birth, icmay 


ne 3s luffocation 

trom the putic- 

t bee pulled away 
my bee fo poflibly 
as thee was wont 
drawne forth by 
oyle, muft puric 
w ic untillircome 
-corylidons, thee 
haked and looled, 
nee, it were to be 
traction fome oF 
vombe is faftened 
sud fhedde out 


anmr 


That mothers ought to nur{e or give fucke unto their owne children, 


thing elfe but the fame bloud made white in the dugges, where- 
with before it was nourifhed in the wombe. For the mother 


eaking of the nel 
ne of the womDde. 
with rhe fecua- 


any may bee he 


bee drawne forth out, wherewith the infant may benourifhed. But ifthe mother orthe nurfe chance pat 

eir wombegpicc® any difeafe, as a Feaver, Scouring, or any fuch like, let her givethe child to 

accidents. €other, ro give it fucke, left thatthe child chance totake the nurfes difeafes. And 


ve faculty by fet NOreover, mothers ought to nurfe their ownc children, becaufe for the moft part 


be, by mollity ing HM ‘ey are farre more vigilant and carefull in bringing up and attending their chil- 


ilsas yeela 2 
{ayous 


panke dren, than hired and mercenary nurfes, which dee not fo much regard the infant, 


as 


it will bte 
Turkie.co, 
will iCturn. 
UIC LIN peony). 
—$—$—$_$ $$ 
| 
| 
| 
heir owne children were greatly The motiers: 
smilke is farre more familiar 
of any other nurle : for itis 
for the {pace of afew dayes after 
on and avoyding of the excremen- 
fe her breafts to bee fucked of an- 
fome or fober maide, whereby the 
breafts, and alfo by little md iitcic 
nortali@2 purihted, 
B® = Foracertaine {pace after the birth, the milke will bee troubled, and the humours 
| @ the body moved: fo that by long ftaying in the dugges, it will fecmeto dege- 
| feo irs naturall as the grofleneffe of it is tomewhat congealed, 
cwidenticd 
ft heate in touching, and the yellow colour thereof teftiheth evidently. 
Litic meceflarv that others fhould come in place thereof when itis facked 


Gelliba2, cz. not abfolutely performe the duty of amother unto their childe, as +4 
the Roman Empcrour was wont to fay. Forthisisacertaine unnatural! 
fe and halfe kinde of a mothers duty, to beare a childe, and prefently to 
or put it away as if it were forfaken : to nourifh and feede athing in their wop, 

when they ice it in the world alive, a creature or reafonable foule, now requirip 

the help and fuftentation of the mother. 7 


a 


Crap 
Of the choice of Murfes. 


(ry any husbands take fuch pitty on their tender wives , that the 


y pio. 


<= videnurfes fortheir children, that unto the paines that they have fy. 
i (tained in bearing them, they may not alfo adde the trouble of Nurfing 
AS them: wherefore fuch a nurfe muft bee chofen which hath had two o, 
three children. Forthe dugges which have beenc already fucked an, 
accuftomed to bee filled, have the veines and arteries more large and capable tore, 
ceive the more milke. Inthe choyce of anurfe there are tem things to bee confide. 


red very diligently: as, herage,the habit of her body, her behaviour, the cong}. 


heft 


fore it isco bee fuppofed that they have the lefle nutriment for children. 


The belt habie 
of body 0 a 
nuric. 


11.8 


borne of gouty orleprous Parents. 


Of what beha- Shee ought tobee quicke and diligent in keeping the childe neate and clear 


iow the nucle chafte, fober,merry, alwaics laughing and {miling on her infant, often finging unto | 
it, and {peaking diftin@ly and plainely, for fhee isthe onely miftriffe to teach 
childeto fpeake. Let her bee well mannered, becaufe the manners of the nuric vy 
participated unto the infant together with themilke. For the welpes of cogg**" | 


nuit bee, 


they doe fucke Wolves or Lioneffes, will become more fierce and crucll thao othct | 
wife they would. Contrariwife, the Lions whelps will leave their favagenefle a 

fiercencffe, ifthat they bee brought up and nourifhed with the milke of aby 
or other tame beaft. If a Goat give a Lambe fucke, the fame Lambes woo" 
more hard than others : contrariwife,ifa Sheep give a Kyd fuck,the fame Kys™ 


| or choak them. 


this caufe,becaufe many nurfes being overloaden with wine & banqueting, we 
their children unto their breafts to fuck ,and then fall afleep,and fo! uddenly ft 


ze “8 Concern ing the Gener ation of M aN, L 18,24 
eo the gaine they fhall have by the keeping of it, for the moft part. Thotetha dor | 
not nurfe their owne children, cannot rightly beetermed mothers : fo, they dg 


| 
Mer. 


(which they neither know nor fee) with their owne bloud, and then nor to Dourityi. | 


tion of her milke, the forme, not onely of her dugges or breafts, but alfo of hertears 
or nipples, the time from her child-birth, the fexe of her laft infant or chiide, tha J 
_-{yee bee not with childe, that fhee bee found and in perfe@ health. As concerning J 
snake. het age, thee ought not to bee under twenty five yeares, norabovechirty five: the J 
time that is berweeneis thetime of ftrength, more temperate,and more wholefome 

and healtny,and leffe abounding withexcrementall humours. And becaufeherbo. J 

dy doth not then grow or encreafe, fhec mutt of neceflity have the more abundance 

ofbloud. Afterthirty five yeares in many the menftruall fluxes doceale,andthere: J 


Thenurfe mukt alfo be of agood habit,or fquare or wel fethody, her breaft broa, J 
her colour lively ,not fat, nor leane, but well made, her 4. fh not foft and render, but 
thick, and hard or ftrong, whereby fhe may be the more able to endure watching & 
taking of pains about the child ; fhe muft not have ared or freckled face,but browne § 
or f{omewhat fhadowed or mixed with redneffe : fortruly fuch women are morehot J 
than thofe that are red in the face, by reafon whereof they muft needs concoct and 
Lib, de inf, autr. their meate the better into bloud. Foraccording tothe judgementol se" 
Cheronenjis, as blackifhor browne ground is more fertill than the white ; cyen'02 | 

browne woman hath more ftore of milke. You muft looke wellon her head, J 
fhee fhould have the fcurfe or running fores ; fee that her tecth bee not foule or 10 
ten,nor her breath ftinking nor no ulcer nor foreabout her body, and that fhe beat 


Birch, 
will be 
hare 


will be more foft than another Kyds haire.She ought to be fober, and the rath! of 


| rhe conception 


| will caufe it to | 
(much the chil® 


| facke or hangin 


| heace is more 
| oftheir {welling 


| thatareofa com 


| the childe can 
| very laborious. 
| thathe cannor 


| tty, quality,co 


fome 


th inthe 
| Orthe fuper. 


“ttle 


quantity Of milk 
have a 
them that are 


cqufethat theret 


nodity both ro 
roche nurfe chil« 
‘ved than ot! 


ofthe infane in 
which breedeth | 

Alfo thee oug! 
jugges will con 
folidand firme, : 
little rivelets 
eatto nourilh th 
were fuffocated. 
out: and mo 
breaft, may {tris 
wiucke, or if 
nole on the hard 


great deformity 
ftand fom 


Wee ju 
Matic will nor | 
“pecially a hor 


MN the infane 
bee 


Othe Maile, ale 


th 


too 

and tall 

of sit fhewer! 
all. Boy ther 


| 
{ 
‘4 
Ned to bee the 
me ic 1 
“Orones th: 
i« 
| ere Ore, if 
| Dee brow, 
iv letic rowne 
>What red 


if (oncernin the Generation of eM an. 


“Shee ab{ftaine from copulation : for copulation troubleth and movetl: the 
.mours and the bloud, and therefore the milke it felfe ; and it diminifheth the a sbitsine 
of milke, becaute it provoketh the menftruall flaxe, and caufeth the milke 


Naturall, | 

intly to abande, have acertain we as We may perceive to breathe from 
in their Wombe ago that are incenied with the fervent luft and defire of venery. And moreover,be- 


wyfethat thereby they may happen to bee with childe, whercofenfucth difcom- 
zodity both to her owne childe thacis within her body, and alfo tothe nurfe child: 
othe nurfe childe, becaufe that the milke that it fucketh will be worfe and more de- 
saved than otherwife it would bee, by reafon that the more laudable bloud after 
yg conception remaineth about the wombe , for the nutriment and increafing 
in the wombe; andthemore impure bloud goeth into the dugges 
rich breedeth impure or uncleane milke: but to the conceived childe, becaufe it 
iicaufeit to have fcarcity of foode ; for, fo muchas the fucking childe fucketh 
much the child conceived in the wombe, wanteth. 
Allothecought to havea broad breaft, and her dugges indifferently bigee, mot what dues 
bat they have fi. ycke or hanging , but of a middle confiftence, betweene foftand hard ; tor (uch mufecughe 
rouble ofnurfing will concoc the bloud into milke the better, becaufe that in firme fleth 
hhath had two ismore {trong and compact. You may by touching try whether the fieth bee 
heady fuckedand 9g! and firme, as alfo by the difperfing ofthe veines, eafily to bee feene by reafon 
ad capabletore, welling and blewneffe, through the dugges, as it were into many ftreams 
Bs to bec confide. litle rivelets ; forin flcth that is loofe and {lacke, they lic hidden. Thote dugges 
aviour, the condi. ofa competent bignefle, receive or containe no more milke than is fuffici- 
uta! fo of her teats atto nourilh the infant. Inthofe dugges that are great and hard, the milke is as it 
an or chiide, that ee fatfocated, topped or bound in, fo that the childe in fucking can fcarce draw 
As concerning gt: and moreover, ifthe dugges bee hard, the childe putting his mouth tothe 
ve hirty five: the wat, may ftrike his nofe againft ir, and fo hurt it, whereby hee may either refufe 
A more wholefome ucke, or if hee doth proceede to fucke, by continuall fucking, and placing of his 
d occaufeherbo. weonthe hard breaft, it may become flat, and the noftrils turned upwards, to his 


nour} ;, 
DOW requiring 


Ss. that they pro- 


more abundance  geatdeformity, when hee fhallcome to age. Ifthe teates or nipples of the dugges 
fos cafejand there: ftand fomewhat low or depreffed inwards on the toppes of the dugges, 


Nilercn. WB xchilde can hardly take them berweenc tts lippes, therefore his fucking will bee 

hier breaft broad, “Wrylaborious. [f rhe nipples or teats bee very bigge, they wall fo fill all his mouth, 

foftand tender,but whe cannot well ufe his tongue in fucking or in {wallowing the milke. 

Ndire watching & WR Wee may judge of orknowthe nature and condition of the milke, by the quan- Whatisco bee 


dficc.but browne favour and tafte : when the quantity of the milke is fo lutle, eblcrvedin ths 
yncn are morchot not fafiice to nourifh the infant, it cannot bee good and laudable ; for it 
ceils concoct and "BReuthfome diftemperature either of the whole body, or ar Ieaft ofthe dugges , 
dgement of Sextus decially a hot and dry diftempcrature. But when it fuper-abound th, and is more 
rewhire; cven{o2 inthe infant can fpend, it exhauftcth the juice of the nurfesbody; and when ic 
her head, left nnorall bee drawne out by the infant, it cluctereth, and congealeth or corrup- 
ent foule or rol ‘inthe dugges. Yet I would rather wih itto abound, than to bee defective, 
anc that fhe be aot f “ (uper-abounding quantity may bee prefled out before the child be ferto the 
ne;tc and cleane, WR That milke that is of a meane confiftence betweene thicke and thinne, is eftec- The laudabie 
often finging unt? bee the beft. For it betokenerh the ftrength and vigour of the faculty that conliftence ot 
niftr icin the breafts. Therefore ifone droppe of the milke bec layd on the 
ersufthe nuricare § ls of ones thumbe, being firft made very cleane and faire, if the thumbe bee not 
elp-s of ’ved,and it runne offthenaile, it fignifieth thar ic is watery milke: bucifitfticke 
deraclithan othe! enaile, although the end of the thumbe bee bowed downewards, it fheweth 


cir ane “istoo groffe andthicke: burif it remaine on the naile fo long as you hold it 

mill ¢ of any Bitch, Wj *eht, and fall from it when you holdit alittle alide or downewards by little and 

mbes woo!l willb® "sit theweth it is very good milke. And that which is exquifitely white, is beft 

the f me Kyds ba’ ‘tl. Bor the milke is no other thing than bloud made white. | 
ran {the rather tor Therefore, if it beeofany orher colour, it argueth a default inthebloud : fo that Whythe miike 
ang: cring, “cc browne, it betokencth melancholy bloud ; if it be yellow, it fignifieth cho- 

fo {u idenly “tke bloud ifit bee wanne and pale, it betokeneth phlegmaticke bloud, if it bee 

| She red, ic argueth the weakeneffe of the faculty that engendreth the milke. 


It 


Ly B.2, 
& 
| 
} of — 
| 
| 


«gle Concerning the Generation of Man. 


It oughtto be {weet, fragrant, and pleafane in{mell ; for if it ftrike into the nog ee 

Whya woman with a certaine fharpenefle,as for the moft part the milke of women that * hy 

sear ., haire and little freckles on their faces doth, it prognofticates a hot and cholerict “. 
onherfacecan- ture : if with acertaine fowernefle, it porteadeth a cold and melancholy natur. Na. 

tafte it ought to be f{weer, and as it were fugred, for the bitter, faltith, tharp, ang 

‘ ticke, isnaught. And here I cannot but admire the providence of nature, which hot | 

caufed the blood wherewith the childe fhould be nourifhed to be turned into ae 

which unleffe it were fo, who is he that would not turnehis face from, and ah}, mi 

{o grievousand terrible afpectacle of the childes mouth fo imbrued and 

with blood? What mother or nurfe would not beaftonifhed or amazed at eye, . 

ment with the feare of the blood fo often fhedde our, or fucked by the infan; Hr i 

nourifhment? Moreover, we fhould want two helps of fuftentation, that isto 

butter and cheefe. 

Neither ought the childeto bee permitted to fucke within five or fixe dayes af 

it is borne, both forthe reafon before alledged, and alfo becaufe he hath need ot 

much time to reft quiet, and eafe himfelte after the paines hee hath {uftained j, his 

birth : inthe meane feafon the mother onuft have her breafts drawne by fome 

that drinketh no wiae, or elfe the may fucke or draw them her felfe with an aig. J 

all inftrument which I will defcribe hereafter. 

Whytharnmfe That nurfethat hath borne a manchilde isto be preferred before another becaye 

thachath borne hey milke is the better concocted, the heate of the male childe doubling the mothers 

2 heate. Aad moreover, the women that are great with childe of a 

belo. c another Childe, are better coloured, and in better ftrength, and better able to doe any thing 

all che time of their greatneffe, which proveth the fame : and moreover the bloods 9 

Why fhecan. More laudable, andthe milke better. Farthermore, it behoveth the Nurfetobe 

notbeagood broughton bed, orto travell at her juft and prefixed or naturall time : for whenthe 

nulicwhole  childe is born before his time of fome inward caufe, it argueth that there is fome de. 


childe was Dorr 


sefore therime. fault lurking and hidden in the body and humours thereof. 


«4 


ence, caule over 
scovered witli 
 certaine and wa 
Ifthe nurfe be 
of it commeth t 
thing with his b 
hisnurfes fig hr, 
sirerwards he c. 
| do ftick firmiy ! 
ofthofe that ar: 
ter or lefler cor: 
being confirme 
ficeencreaietn: 
caliedthe Anra 
they,they biin 


hands d 
[ 


Nelicand firc: 
on therewitiis 
Bur if men (as 
clety and com 
doe, bur ir co 
lhould not th 
and pliant as v 
and crook-ba 
their parent: 


What aict the Nurfe ought toufe, andin what fituation {hee ongut 
place the infant inthe cradle, 


in cating, drinking, fleeping, watching, exercifing and refting,t% 
nurfes dict muft be divers, according as the nature of the childe borin 
habit and temperature (hall be :as for example, ifthe childe bee altoge 
ther ofa more hot blood, the purfe both in feeding and ordering net 
fe]fe ought to follow a cooling diet. In generall, let her eat meatesot 

ood juice, moderate in quantity and quality, let her live in a pure and clecreaut, 

et her abftaine from all {pices, and all falted and {piced meats, and all tharpe tins 

wine, efpecially that which is not allayed or mixed with water, and carnall copii 

Anger greatly tion witha man, let her avoydall perturbations of theminde, butangere!pecisy) | 
huicethche Jet her ufe moderate exercife, unleife itbe theexercife of her armes and upper pay | 
Theexereife o¢tather than the legges and lower parts, whereby the greater attraction of the blood, | 
the arms is belt thar mu ft be turned into milke, may bee made towards the dugges, Let her piace het 
Arne nuis:, childe fo ia the cradlethat his head may be higher than all the body, thatio mee" 
thouldbepla- Crementall humours may bee the better {ent fromthe braine unto the paffages ti 
are beneath it. Let her fwathe it fo asthe neck andall che back-bone may be 
and equal!. As long as the childe fucketh, and is not fed with ftronger meat, | 
berrer to lay him alway on his backe, than any other way, for the backe 1s, 4 ic Wer 

the Keele ina thip, the ground-workeand foundation of allthe whole body whist | 

onthe infantmay fafely and eafily reft. But if hee lye on the fide, it were dang? 

left that the bones of the ribs being fofe and tender, not ftrong enough, andun'*) 

wich flacke bands, thould bow under the waight of the reft, and fo wax¢ crooke 

whereby the infant might become crooke-backed. But when he beginneth (0 ” | 


“* 


» 


Bei: BB. 24- 

9 Was 
WALE OO | 
the moi 

him bee 

ght-Lome, 
i 
ont 
| salefle the light 

peing very 

(tome that can 
18, hecome poore-b 
become trcembill 
are round avd 

| bee b. 
i, Or other 
Zu be a} 
fart 


ed and 


the infane for his 


or fixe dayes after 


ne by fome maide 


ubling the mothers 
childe of a male 
le to doe any thing 
reover the blood js 
h the Nurfeto bee 


lef 


fing and refting, the 


of the childe bothin 
ie childe bee altoge- 
and ordering her 
et her eat meates of | 
pure and cleereaire, 


ind all fharpe things, 
and carnal copula 


te with an attifici. 


re another, becayfe 


ime : for whenthe | 
at there is fome de. © 


but angerefpecially, 


mes andupper parts, 


‘action of the blood, @ 


res, Let her place her 


thatfo the ex- 


nto the paflages that 
bone may be ftraight 
ftronger meat, 


he backe is, as it wer 


lide, it were 
enough, aad unite 


a 
q 


whole body swhere- 


id to waxe crooke?s 


beginneth to 


eet 


“a 


= 


Things are Mo 
Biel the light come directly into the childes face, he turneth himfelfe every way 
} ing very forrowfull, and ftriveth to turne his head andeyes that hee may have the 


és obit ® .., andco bee fed with more {trong meat, and alfo the bones and connexions of 
into the nog rill begin ro waxe more firme and hard, hee muft bce layed one while on this fide, 
en that have while on that, and now and then alfo on his backe. And the more hee 

and cholerick ,, M_oveth, the more let him be accuftomed to lye on his fides ; and ashee lieth in the 


RE ile, let him bee turned unto that place whereat the light commcth in, left that o- 
vewite he mg ht become poore-blind, for the eye of its owne nature is bright and 


‘ye fome, and therefore alwaies delireth the light, and abhorreth darkenefle, for 
| ft delighted with their like, and fhunne their contraries, Therefore 


sht 3 and that often turning and rowling of his eyes at length groweth intoa 


| some that cannot bee left: and fo it commeth to paffe that the infant doth either 
ion, that isto fay, | 


ome poore-blind, if hee {et his eyes ftedfaftly on one thing, or eile his eyes doe 


WB ...ome trembling, alwaics turning and unftable, if hee caft his eyes onmany things 
about him: which ts the reafon that nurfes, being taught by experi- 
1¢ hath need of 
th fultained in his | 


Why anarch of 
ace, caufe over the head of the childe lying in the cradle, an arch or vault of wick- wickers nnult bc 


«covered with cloath to be made, thereby to reftraine, dire, and eftablith theun 
«taine and wandering motions of the childeseyes. 
nurfe be fquint. eyed, the cannot look upon the childe but fide- waies,where- 
‘iccommeth to paffe that the childe being moift,tender, flexible and prone to any 
sing with his body, and fo likewife with hiseye, by along and daily cuftome unto feth the childe 
sourfes fight, doth foone take the like cuftome to looke after that fort alfo, which a — 
ierwards he cannot leave or alter.For thofe evill things that we learn in our youth, © 


I io tick firmby by us,but the good qualities are cafily changed into worfe. Inthe cies 


sihofe that are fquint-eyed,thoferwo mufcles which do draw the eyesto the grea- 

or lefler corner, are chicfly or more frequently moved. Therefore either of thefe 

xiag confirmed in thelr turning afide by long ufe, asthe exercife of their proper of- 
‘ecncreafeth the ftrength,foone overcomes che contrary or withftanding mufcles, 

aliedche Antagonifts, and brings them into their {ubjetion, fo that will they nill 

ney,they bring the eye unto this or thatcorner as they lift.So children become left. How children 
unded, when they permit their right hand to languifh with idlencfle and fluggifh. become left- 
firengthen their left hand with continual] ufe and moticn to co every acti- hanced. 
atherewithall,and fo bring by the exarcife thercof,more nutriment unto that part, 

lurifmen (as {ome affirme) being of ripe yeers and in their fuil growth, by daily fo- 

‘ety and company of thofe that are lame and halt doe alfo halt, not minding foto 

ioe, bur it commeth againft their wills, and when they thinke nothing thercof,why 

hould not the like happenin children, whofe foft and tender fubftance is as flexible 

ud pliant as waxe unto every impreffion? Moreover, children,asthey become lame 

and crook-backt, fo doe they alfo become fquint-eycd by the hereditary deiault of 

parents. 


CHarv. XXIII. 
How to make pappe for chi ldren. 


A ppe is amoft meet foode or meat for children, becaufe they require : 

moilt nourifhment, and it mult bee anfwerable in thickenefle to the Three laudabie 

2 milke, that o it may not be difficult to be concocted or digefted.For aan 
h thefe three conditions, fo that it be made with wheaten fow- 


How the meale 
chat not crude but boiled : ler it be put into a new earchen pot -_ pepe: 
ime when bread is ferthere- withall. 
ead bee baked and drawne Why themeale 


wherewuth the 


Neale crude with the milke, are conftrained to abide onc of thefe difcommodt- made mu fi 
“S or other, either to givethe meale groffe & clammy unto the child, if thatthe pap ?sovsderw 
dconely boiled over the fire ina pipfinor skillet fo long as thall bee neceflary 


| 
oul rill 
| 
Nature, } | 
fharp, and ftip 
ture, which hath 
into 
at (Very p 
| 
J 
| 
4 
= 
se and 
or pipk 
‘Oto bee baked, and 
Ur. iris leffe cl and crude. Thofe that mixe the 
OT wher elie Ciamin pap mult de 


( oncerning the Greneration of an. Lit 24 
for the milke , hence come obftructions in the mefaraike veines, and in thea 
veines of the liver, fretting and wormes inthe guts, and the ftone inthe ; cines 
elfe they give the child the milk, defpoiled of its butterifh and whayith seeata 


the terreftriall and cheefelike or curdlike remaining, ifthe pap be boiled Jon?" 


neceflary for the meale : for the milke requireth not fo great, neither can Ty 
long boyling asthe meale. Thofethat doe ufe crude meale, and have no 
ave greatly boundto nature forfo greata benefit. But Galen willeth child 
Mourifhed onely withthe nurfes milke, fo long as the nurfe hath Cough tonone. | 
and feed it. Andtruelythere aremany children that are contented with milkeo “y 
and will receive no pappe untill they are three monethsold. If the child a, any 
beecoftive, and cannot voide the excrements, lethim have acataplafme 

A aioe one dramme of Aloes, of white and blacke Hellebore, ofeach fifteene : 
childs belle ing all incorporated in as much of an oxe gall asis fufficient,and extended o, (Dread | 
on cotton like unto a pultis,as broad as the palme of ones hand, and fo apply ic). 
the navell warme: moreover,this cataplafme hath alfo vertue tokill the it Aa 
For thefreiing"he belly. Many times children have fretting of the guts, that maketh them ;, ; - 
whighcommeth ofcrudity. This mutt bee cured by applying unto the belly 
or moift woole,macerated in oile of chamomile. 
If when thie childes teeth begin to grow, he chance to bite the nipple of the nurf 


hur t by I 


breatt, there will bee an ulcer very contumacious and hard to be cured, becay/(. thar 


ofene nipples be cured with fomenting it with allome water, and then prefently after thef. 


Fortheuleers. the fucking of the childe,and the rubbing of the cloaths doe keep it alyyai 


er tcats. 
mentation putting thereupon a cover of leade, made like unto a har, as they arehere | 


defcribed, with many holes inthe toppe, whereat both the milke, andalf thers. 9 
nious matter that commeth fromthe ulcers may gocout, for lead it felfe wil) <y,. 


wicers. 


The figure of leaden Nipples to be put upon the Nipple or Teat of the Narfe 
when it is ulcerated. 


Children may be caufed to ceafe their crying foure manner of waics,tlatis 104) | 


by giving them the ceat, by rocking them in a cradle, by finging unrothem,a% yy 

changing the cloaths and fwathes wherein they are wrapped. They muttnot bee 

rocked too violently in the cradle, left thatthe milke that is fucked fhou!d be com’? 

ted by the too violent motion, by reafon whereof they muft notbe handled violent 
Wharmoderate/¥ any other way, and nor altogether prohibited or not fuffered ro cry. For 
crying worketh 1Ng the breaft and lungs are dilated and made bigger and wider, the natural! a 
“the ftronger, and the braine, noftrills, the eyes and mouth are purged, by thet" 
What immo- and filth that come from the eyes andnoftrills: Burthey muft not bee poe : 
tocry long or fiercely, for feare of breaking the produétion of the Peritone#”; | 
thereby caufing the falling downe of the puts into the cod, which rupture's 

of the Greekes Emterecele, or of the caule, which the Greekes call Epsploce’*- 


| 
It luffer 


ren to ‘a 


BTaines, be 


For therecta © 
nature for NO O 
teeth app 
ding to the ju 
crucit 
onof the 
cannot want 
L 
peare, if the ci 
with pieafare 
that he hachth 
rot be weaned 
tofay, his tec 
profic.. But 
when the mee: 
the teat, wher 
ted or rubbed 
or wWorme-wo 
that are {cabo} 
at cheir mouth 
aidfound of 
thoie are 
bodies, whic 
{sdaine falli 


fom the inf 
Cundine IS ¢ 
death there 
Was before 


faculties whi 


CaVier tha 
Cheaviert 
dy any w 


vexed \ 


Zi 4 ~ 
O12 24. 
; 
| 
‘ ‘ A 
/ 
ie 
/ 
~ 
| 
= 
L — ~ 
= « > 
d —-~ 
= == 
iff Yj, / pp 
vithe won 
+ a 4 


Lip 


4.. 


and in the (mal) 
in the reines, Crarv. XXIII, 


yilh 
Of the weaning of children. 


pAny-are weaned in the eighteenth moneth, fome inthe twentieth,but 

‘ all, or the moft part, in the fecond yeare, for then their teeth appeare, nea 
s by whole prefence nature feemeth to require {ome harder meat than 

|B milke or pappe, wherewith children are delighted, and will teed more 

caraeftly thereon. Bur there is no certaine time of weaning of children. 

cop thereeth of fome willappeare fooner, and fome later ; for they are prepared of 

ure for no other purpofe thanto chaw the meat. If children bee weaned before wy children 


yeiteeth appeare, and bee fed with meat that is fomewhar hard and folid, accor. be 


a 
\ 


ing the judgement of Avicen, they are incident to maay dileales comming 
ll the worme« in ough crudity, becaufe the ftomacke is yet but weake, and wanteth that pre parati- peare. 


aketh them ro ofthe meates which ts made in the mouth by chawing ; which mea of ripe yeers 


the belly ganot want Without offence: whencthechildeis two yceres ald, and cheteerh ap- How children 

vate, ifthe childe more vehemently defire harder meates, and doth feed on tiem, 
ipple of the nur; ith pleafure & good fuceefie, he may be fafely weaned; for it cannotbe fuppoled 
ured, becaufe thas gg athe hath this appetite of hard meats in vaia, by che inftinct of nature. Yet hie nay 
it alwaies ray .;. gotbe weaned without {uch an appetite, if all other things be correfpondent,thiar is 
fently after the fo. histeeth and age, for thofe things that are cater without an appetite, cannot 
at, asthey archere pro. But if the childe be weake, lickly, or fecble, he ougat not to be weaned.And 
ke, and alfothe(;. whenthemeet time of weaning commeth, thenurfe muft now and then ufe him to 


Bd it felfe will cure |My deteat, whereby he may leave it by little and little, and then let the reate be anoin- 
wdor rubbed with bitrer things,as with Aloes, water of the infufion of Colocysthus, 
oworme- wood, or with muftard, or foote fteeped in water, or fuch like. Children wharchitdeen 
f the Nurfe aatare feabby in their heads,and over all their bodies,and which void much flegme are 
xcheirmourh and noftrills, and many excrements downwards, are liketo be ftrong 
ndfound of body ; for fo they are purged of excrementall humours : contrariwife, 
nolethat are cleaneand faire of body, gather thematter of many difeafes in their 
»odies, which in procefle of time will breake forth and appeare. Certaincly by the An often caute 
hdaine falling of fach matters into the backe-bone, many become crooxebackr, 


kednetle, 


CHAP. XXV. 


By what figaes it may bee knowne whether the childe in the wombe 
bee dead or alive. 


F neitherthe Chirurgians hand, nor the mother can perceive the mott certaine 
infant to move, if the waters bee flowed out, and fecur dine come ; ms Sis joe 
forth, you may certainely affirme thatthe infantis dead in the 
wo nbe, for this is the moft infallible figne of ail others ; for be- 

caufe the child inthe wombe doth breathe but by the artery of the 


navel), andthe breath is received by the Cotyledon of the arteries 


| 


‘waices,that is to fay, 


> unrothem,and by ofthe wombe, it mutt of neceffity come to paffe that when the fecundine is feparated 
They muft not bce ‘tom the infant, no aire or breath can come unto it. Wherefore fo often asthe fe 
thould be corrup- Undine is excluded beforethe childe, you may takeit foracertaine tokca of the 

be handled violent’ daththereof: when the childe is dead, it will be more heavieto the mother than it 
tocry. For by cry Nas before when it was alive, becaufcitis now nomore {uftained by the {piritsand 
the natural! pats ‘culties wherewith before it was governed and ruled, for fo we fee dead mento be 
urged, by the teares “Vier than chofe that are alive, men that are weak through hunger and famine morehcavie 
not bee permit’ °cheavierthan when they are well refrethed,and alfo when the mother NET tevebeing 

the 29° dy any way the infant falleth that way alfo even as it werea ftone. The mother ts 
Lich rupture 1s cali¢ ‘(0 vexed with fharpe paine from the privities even to the navell, with a perp: cuall 


batied in 
all Epiplocele- “circ of making water, and goingto ftoole, becaule that nature is who.ly 
CHA? 5 5° Hhh h the 


ler can it fuffe, 
ave No hurtby;, 
Nchildren 
Nough tonouriq, 
With milke onl, 
Childat anytim. 
blafme Made 
tended OTinre.1s 
| 


(_oncerning the Generation of —M an. 13,24, 
jhawhichis Che expullioa or avoidance of that whichis dead : for that whichis alive will expe) 
alivewillnot the dead fo farre as it can fromit feltc, becaufe the onc is aicogether differen; from 
that the other; but likeneM, ifany thing, conjoynesand unitesthings together; the 
nitalls are cold in touching, and the mother complaineth that fhe fecleth a coldn ir. 
in her womb, by reafon thatthe heat of the infant is extinguifhed, wherewith before 
her heate was doubled: many filthy excrements come trom her, and alfo che Mo. 
thers breath ftinketh, fhe fwouneth often, all which for the moft part happen w;, hin 
three daics afrer the death of the childe : for the infants body will fooner COrrupr in 
the mothers wombethanit would inthe openaire, becaufe thar, according to ch. 
1b. de tomorib Jadgement of Galen, all hot and moift things, being in like manner enclofed in 2 fio, 
and moitt place, efpecially if by reafon of the thickeneffe or ftraiteneffe of the place 
they cannot receivetheaire, will fpeedily corrupt. Now by the rifing up of 
vapours from the dead unto the braine and heart, fuch accidents may foone follyy 
her face will be clean altered, feeming livid and ghafly, her dugs fall and hang Jog¢. 
Why the belly20d lanke, and her belly will be more hard and {wollen than it was before, In all bo. 
a. woman will dies fo patrefying, the natural heat vanifheth away, and in place thereof fucceederh 
be more sai preternaturall, by the working whereof the putrefyed and diffolved humours ;2 
wueidwinin (tirred wp into vapours, and converted into winde, and thofe vapours, becau{c they 
ber Me and fill more fpace and roome (for naturalifts fay that of one part of water 
wasalive, teu parts of aire are made)doefo puffe up the putrefyed body into a greater 
You may note the fame thing in bodies that are gangrenate, for they caft forth many 
fhirpe vapours, yetnevertheleffe they are {wollen and puffed up. 

Novw {0 fone as the Chirurgian thall know thatthe childe is dead by all thefe 
forenarned fiznes, he fhall with all diligence endeavour to favethe mother fo {pee. 
dily as hee can, and ifthe Phyfitians cannot prevaile with potions, barhes, fumig:- 
tions, fternuratorics, vomits, and liniments appointed to expell the infant, let him 
prepare himfelfe tothe worke following , but firft let him confider the ftrength of 

Thefgneso'? che woman, for if he perceive that fhee bee weake and feeble by the {malnefle of her 

me pulfe, by her {mall, feldomeand cold breathing, and by the altered and death-lie 
colour in her face, by her cold {weats, and by the coldneffe of the excreme paits, le 
him abftaine from the worke, and oncly athrme that fhee will dye fhortly ; contran- 
wife,ifher ftrength be yet good, let him with all confidence and induftry deliver her 
on this wife fromthe danger of death. 


Cuar. XXVI. 


Of theChyrurgicak extraction of the childe from thewombe 
either dead or alive. 


HH Hercfore firft ofall the aire of the chamber muft bee made tempt 
late, and reduced unto acertaine mediocrity, fo that may 
ther betoo hot nor roocold. Then fhe muft be aptly placed, hat 


isto fay, overthwartthe bed fide, with her buxtockes {omewbal 
high, having ahard ftuticd pillow or boulfter underthem, fora 
fle may be in ameane figure of fituation, neither fitting alrogetnet 
upright, nor altogether lying along on her backe ; for fo {hee ™ 
reft quietly, and draw her breath with eafe,ncither fhall the ligaments of he WO 
bee extended foasthey would if fhee lay upright on her backe, her heeics — 
How fhe amt up clofeto her buttocks,and there bound with broad and foft 
bebound. Therowler muft firft comeabout her neck, and ther croile. wife over het {houlders, 
and {oto the feet, and there it muft croffe again, and fo be rowled about the 
thighes,and then it muft be brought upto the necke againe, and there mac¢ fs 
thar the may not be ableto move her felfe, even as onc fhould be ryed whea he ® 
be cur ofthe ftone. But that thee may not bee wearied, or left tharher bod 
yeeld or finke downeas the Chirurgian draweth the body of the infant from” 


After whit fore e/ 
in trave]] mut | 
be placed when 
dead inher 
wombe, mutt be 


the woni2) 

the child,semg 
erawne out,’ 


and fo hinder the worke, let him caufe her feet to bee {et againit the fide of the de> | 


y thou. 


happen o-her 


When it Were 
be dra yne MU 
When the boc 
“ng union, 
‘here-hence 
bis mouth 
| "Ould come, 
| My feeme he 


[18.24-. 
and then let fc 
Then thatthe 
with the more 
bfelinaen cloa 
rings (if hee w 
anointed with 
chen let him p 
sentleand {lip 
forme and 
or not. And 
mouth or orih@ 
feermi1y come 
one of chem gx 
(ome broad an 
Laor,and wher 
muft put his h 
wombe, and « 
yato he had b: 
lethim join th 
the whole bo 
deavour of thx 
wards as the i: 
clofing her m< 
violence, may 
tie wombeac§ 
inthe necke o 
itintodraw oj 
the Chirurgiat 
ingthem fo, h 
Therefore rha 
tyed it, and DU 
loot is tyed, 2 
from thence | 


\ 

. 


no further, ne} 
ides, or bee d 
bove his head. 


or lo his heac 


4 
, } a 
aay 
| 
| 
| 
| 
4 
dra 
back. 
de reat 
th a 
Nd of 
ght h 
and urt th 
| 
ae 
| 


Li B. 24, 
vc will expel] 
differen: from 
ether: the pe. 
ctha coldnefle 
erewith before 
d alfocthe mo. 
happen within 
ner COrrupr in 
cording tothe 
clofed in a hot 
fle of the place 
fing up of fuch 
y loone follow, 
and hang loofe 
fore. In allbo- 
mreor fucceedeth 
ed humours are 
irs, becaule they 
ne part of water 
preater 
y caft forth many 


dead by all thefe 
> mother {fo {pce- 
, bathes, fumiga- 
he infant, let him 
the ftrength of 
{malnefle of her 
and death-like 
xtreme parts, let 
fhortly ; contrari- 


Bduftry deliver her 


pombe 


bee made tcmpc- 
fo that ic may ocr 
aptly placed, that 
itockes {omewbat 
underthem, forhat 
fitting aleogethet 
Le. for fo fhee may 
ments of the wo 
her heeics mutt ec 
(ofr linnenrow 


d there made falt, , 
ye ryed wheo he is 
chat her body (how. 


her, 
the infant from 
ft the fide of che me 


th 


‘ght hurt the mother. Which being done, I turned him with his feete forwards, 


D1B.24+ Concerning the Generation of Man. 915” 


Then rhatthe aire may not enter into the wombe, and that the worke may bee done #2" 42! 


to pr him. 
ith the more decency, her privie parts & thighs muft be covered with a warm dow: fel/c and his pa- 


ufelinaen cloath, Then muft the Chirurgion, having his nailes clofely pared,and his tieattothe 


(if hee weare any) drawne off his fingers, and his armes naked, bare, and well 


“gehen lee! ome of the ftrong ftanders by hold her Fatt! by the legs and fhoulders. How theChi- 


gointed with oyle, gently draw the flappes of the necke of the wombe afunder,and the woube. 
sen fet him put his hand gently intothe mouth of the wombe, having firft made it 
watieandflippery with much oile ; and when his hand is in, let him finde outthe 

me and fituation of the childe, whether it be one or two, or whether it be a Mole 

of Ot And when he findeth that he commeth naturally, with his head toward the erie a hs 
aouth or orifice of the wombe, he mutt lift him up gently,and fo turne him that his that is dead in 
otmay come forwards, and when he hath brought his feet forwards, he muft draw t womb mutt 


eofthem gently out at the necke of the wombe, and then hee muft binde it with “ewer ne 


me broad and foft or filken banda little above the heele with an indifferent flack our. 


gor,and when he hata fo bound it, he muft put it up againe into the wombe,then he 
u(t put his hand in againe, and finde out the other foote,and draw it alfo out of the 
sombe, and when it is out of the wombe, let him draw out the other againe where- 
nto he had before tyed the one end of the band, and when hee haththem both out, 
-thim join them both clofe together, & fo by them by little & littlelet him draw all 
ye whole body from the wombe. Alfo other women or Midwives may help the en- 
‘eqvour of the Chirurgion, by prefling the patients belly with their hands downe- 
wards as the infant goeth out ; and the woman her felfe by holding her breath, and 
jofing her mouth and noftrills, and by dziving her breath downewards with great 
iolence, may very much helpe the expullion. I with him to put backe the foot into 
he wombe againe after he hath tyed it, becaufe if chat he fhould permit it to remain 
nthenecke of the womb, it would hinder che entrance of his hand when he putteth 
tintodcaw out the other. Butifthere bee two children inthe wombe at once, let 
ieChirurgian take heed leftrhat he take not of either of them a legge, for by draw- 
agthem fo, hee fhall profit nothing atall, and yet exceedingly hurt the woman. 
Tvreforerhat he may not bee fo deceived, when hec hath drawne out one foorand 
yed it, and put irup again, let him with his hand follow the band wherewithal! the 
votistyed, and fo goe untothe foot, and then to the groine of the childe, and then 
warhence he may foone finde out the other foot of the fame child : for if it fhould 
uppen ocherwile, he might draw the levges and the thighes out, but it would come 
wlurther, neither is ic meet that hee fhould come out with his armes along by his 
is, or bee drawne out on that fort, but one of his armes muft bee ftretched out 2- 
uwehis head, and the other down by his fide, for otherwife the orifice of the womb 
ven it were delivered of fuch agroffe trunke, as it would be when his body fhould 4 caution toa- 
dra vne out with his armes aloag by his fides, would fo fhrinke and draw it felfe void frangling 


void rangi 
body fhould come untothenecke, onely by the accord of naturerequi- our. 


drawing 


‘gunion, that ic would ftrangle andkillthe infant, fo that hce cannot be drawne the body. 
uere-hence unleffe ic bre witha hooke put under, orfafened under his chiane, 

‘his mouth, or in the hollownefle of his eye. But if theinfantlyethas if hee 3 
"ould come with his hands forwards, or if his hands bee forth already, fothat it ne he 
w {eemehee may bee drawne forth eafily that way, yet it muft not be fo done 5 drawn out wich 
tlohis head would double backwards over his fhoulders, to the great danger of for- 
“mother. Once] was called unto the birth of an infant, whom the midwives had 4 hiftory. 
“aved to draw out by thearme, fo that the arme had been {fo long forth that itwas 


“Wgtenate, whereby the childe dyed ; [told chem prefently that his arme muft bee 


againe, and hee muft beeturned otherwife. But when it could not bee put 


‘ke by reafon ofthe great {welling thereof, and alfo of the mothers genitals, I 
“etmined to cut it off with an incifion knife, cutting the mufclesas neare as I could 
oulder, yet drawing the flefhupwards, that when I had taken off the bone 
Paire of cutting pincers, it might come downe.againe to cover the fhivered 
¢ bone, left otherwife when it were thruftin againe into the wombe, it 


hinrout as is before fayd. But if theramour either naturally or by fome 
Hhhha accident 


| 
4 
| 


Concerning the 


To dinmnith the 
wma wherewith 
the infant Doing 
dead inthe 
wombe ,fwelleth 
& is puttedup 
thathecannot 
be gotten out of 
the wombe. 


jow to - head 
ofthe intanrit 


ted tromthe 
bod be 
arawncout. 


accident, that isto fay, by putrefaction, which may perchance come, bce 
that hee cannot bee curned according to the Chirurgions intention, nor be 


remaincein the 


wombe fepata- have fometimes againit my will, and with preat 


Generation Man. 


fo great 
drawne 
hee Mu 
eXam Dle 


out according as hee lyeth, the tumour muft bee diminifhed, and then 
bee drawne out as isaforefaid, andthat muft bee done at once. As for 
if the dead infant appeare at the orifice of the wombe, which our mydwiye call 
the Garland, when it gapeth, is open and dilated, but yet his head being mor, 

reat and puffed up with winde fo that itcannot come forth, as caufed to be, fo 
through that difeafe which the Greeks call Mucrophifocephalos the Chirurgion my) 
fatten ahooke under his chinne, or in his mouth, or elfe inthe hole of his cye, o; 
elfe,which is better and more expedient, in the hinder partothishead. For whe, 
the fcullis fo opened, there willbee a paflage whereat the winde may pafle Out, and 
fo when the tumour falleth and decreafeth, let him draw the infant out by |ittle ap, 
little,but not rafhily, left he thould break that whereon he hath taken hold:the figy;. 


of rhofe hookes is thus, 


The forme of hookes fer drawing ous the infant that is dead 
in the wembe. 


But it is nc 
wombe, by re 


unleffe the be} 
ttrument, thar 


But if the breaft bee troubled with the like fault, the hookesmutt bee faltened* 
bout the chanell bone : ifthere bee a Dropfie or a Tympany in the belly, the hools 
mutt bee faftned cither in the fhort ribs, chat is to fay, inthe mufclesthat are Dee 
tweencthe ribbes, orefpecially, if the difeafe doe alfa defcend intro the fecte,abou 
the boncs thatare above the groince ; orelfe putting the crooked knife here picture 
intothe wombe with his lett hand, let him make incifion in the childs belly, 49°"? 
ect out allhis entrals by theincifion, for when hee is fo bowelled, all the = 
that caufed the dropfic will out. But the Chirurgion muft do none of all thefe 
but when the child is dead, and the woman that travelleth in {uch danger that 
cannot otherwift be holpen. 

But if by any meanes it happeneth that all the infants members bee ¢ 
little and little, and rhat the head onely remaineth behinde in the wombe, 
forrrow feene , then the 
being anoynted! with oyle of Lillies or frefh burter muft bee put into the wo bch | 
wherewith the Chirurgion muft find out the mouth, putting his fingers into fe | 
with his right hand hee muft put up the hooke,according tothe direction ort if “| 
hand,gently,& by little & little, and fo fatten it in the mouth,eye,or under the¢ r 
and when hee hath firmely fixed or faftened it, hee muft therewith draw 0% eS 
head by little and little, for feare of loofening or breaking the part where’ iat 
hath hold, In ftead ofthis hnoke you may ufe theinfiruments thacare 


ue away 
whic 
left hand 


it 


. 


: 
| 
the branches; 
{ 
| 
Pet 
| it / 
Cloled 
painefull fr 
— 
litere 
and alf 
an. al duc: 
Cota 
= 


(18.24 Concerning the Generation of Man. 


me, bee fortes: yed,which theretore I have taken out of the Chirurgery of Francés Datechamps, for 
, norbedrawne made,that they may eafily take hold ofa /phzricall andround body with 


a 
4 


d then hee mutt he branches,as with fingers. 

rmydwives aa { Gryphons Talons, that to fay,infiruments made to draw owt the head 

cad being more of 4dead infant that u feparated inthe wombe from the 

caufed to bee fo rest of the body. 

Chirurgionmy; 4 


le of his cye, or 
ead. For when 
ay pafle our, and 
tout by little and 
hold:the figure 


dead 


/ 

‘ 


{ 


butit is mot very eafie to take hold onthe head when it remaineth alone in the Why thehead 
vombe, by reafon of the roundneffe thereof, for it will flip and flide up and downe, 2°"82"°"" 


2 the wombe,is 
nlellethe belly be prefled downe, and on both fides, thereby to hold it unto the in- more ditliculteo 
twment,that it may with more facility take hold thereon. be drawnec out. 
XXVII. 
What mult bee doue unto the woman im travell prefentsy af- 
| ser ber deliverance. 


bee Here is nothing fo great anenemy toa womanin travel, ¢fpecially to Coldan enemy 

nuit bec ‘hooks her whofe child is drawne away by violence, as cold : wherefore wich women» 
he belly, ren all careand diligence fhee muft bee keptand defended from cold. For 
mufclesthat arc after che birth, her body being voyde andempty, doth eafily receive 
Neayre that will enter into every thing that is empty, and hence fhee waxeth cold, 


inrorhe tecte,about 
“wombcis diftended and puffed up, andthe orifices of the veflels thereofare {hur 


knife here picture 


{ 
childs belly, a¢"° ‘dclofed, whereof commeth fuppreffion of the after. birth, or other after purga- 


chings ons, And thereof commeth many gricvous accidents, as hyftcricall fuffgcation, 

that fhee Minefull fretting of the guts, feavers; and other mortall difcafes. king of cold in 
uch dang : 


What woman foever will avoyde that difcommodity, let her hold her legges OF womantharis 
away by “ighes acroffe, for in fo doing, thofe parts that were feparated will bee joyned and a vk 

bers bee cut ays hl Wy “letogether againe. Let her belly bee alfo bound or rowled with a ligature of 

hand different breadth and length, which may keep the cold ayre fromthe wombe, 

| ‘Mdalfo preffe the bloud out that is contained in all the fubftance thereof. Then 
chen herfome Capon broth or Caudle, with Saffron, or with the powder 
ducis,or elle bread toafted and dipped in wine wherein {pice is brewed, che region of 

“‘oreftore her ftrength, andto keepe away the fretting of the guts. When tbe 

nc tit “undine is drawne out, and is yet hot from the wombe, it mult bee layd warme Nal 

rewith draw 0", “othe region of the wombe,efpecially in the winter, but inthe fummer, the hot 

~ defctl- Tl “ne of a Weather newly killed muft be laid unto all the whole belly,and onrothe 


bec Hhhh 3 region 


| 
| 
| 
i 
| | 
| | | | 
| | 
4 i] 
/ \ | | 
} 
)) \ 
| ty ‘ 
= 
> 
Af, 
\ 
\ 
| 
| 


— 
~ 


region of the loynes. But chen the curtaines of the bed muft bee kept drawne 
ali the windowesaad doorcsof the chamber muft beekepe fhut with all diljc. 
thatno coldayremay come untothe woman that travellicth, but that thee ma 
| and take her reft quietly. The Weathers skinne muft bee taken away atter tha’ 
hath lyea fyeor.fixc houres; aad theaallthe region of her belly mutt bee ano): : 
ted with the oynement following, 
Muzuentsfor Re, /permatts Ceti, sii. olei amygdal, bypericon.an. 318. fevihircin: 
| thewonnin mgyrtillor. 31. cera nove quantum fufficst ; make thereof an oyntment, Wherewieh 


thereaion of let her bee annoynted twice in the day :let a platter of Galbanum bee applyed toy), 


=>. 


the region o! 
-navell, inthe middeft whcreof put fome few graines of Civet or Muske, fo thate} 
norbewsnsl& Hell of the plafter may not {trike up into her noftrils. Then let this medicine 

-hemedi ing f0llowiag bee applyed, commonly called Tela Gualterina, Kk. cere nove 3 iii, 

cailed Tela fpermatis Cett.3 1%. terebinth. venctain aqua rofacea 311. oles amy dulciun, 

Gualterina. oy periconis an. 3 ie olet maftich. cr myrtimi, an. 53%. axungre cervi3 iS. melt them, 
together, and when they are melted, take it from the fire, and then Cippe alinnen 
cloth thercin, as bigge as may ferve ro fitthe region of the belly, whereunto itis yo 
bec applyed. Thefe remedies will keepe the externall region of the belly fiog 

wrinkling. 

Burt of all other, the medicine following excelleth. Be. rub. firyy 
anthos quart. iii. let them bee cut allin fmall pieces, and put into an earthen pot 
well nealed with lead, and clofe ftopped, then let it bee fet in the dung of hori 
for the {pace of forty dayes, and then bee prefied or ftrained, and ct the liqoy: 
thar is ftrayned out bee kept in aglaffe well covered, and fet in the funne for 
{pace of three or foure dayes, and therewith annoynt the belly of the womanthy 
lyethin child-bed. If thee bee greatly tormented with throwes, let the powde: 

vpowderr following beegivenunto her. amifi conditi cornu cervi an, 

tre dadtylor. 3 iii. ligns aloes cimamom: an, 2 ii. make thereof a mol 

a fubtle powder, let her take 91, thereof at once with white wine warme. Or, kad 

confolide major.91 8. nucleorum perficorum, nucis mofchat. an. Dil. carab, 5), ambre 
gra, iil. make thereota powder, let her take one dramme thereof at a rine 
with white wine, or, if fhee have afeaver, with the broth of aCapon, Let there dx 
hot baggesapplyed to the genizalls, belly and raynes ; thefe bagges mult bee mace 
of milict and oates fryed in atrying- pan witha little white wine. 

DUtif through tie violence of the extraGion the genital! parts bee torne, as ancl. 

¢ when the ent writers affirm it hath cometo pafle,fothat che rwo holes,as the two holes oF the 

reine tonne privie partsand of the fumdamrent have beene torne inro one, then that whichis 


| —"" vontmutt bee ftitched up, and the wound cured according toart. Which is amo 
unfortunate chance for the mother afterwards, for when fhec fhall travellagaine, 
fyce cannothave her genitall parts toextend and draw them{elves in againe by 
| fon of the fcarre. Sothat shen it will bee needtull that the Chirurgion thall agate 


openthe place that was cicatrized, for otherwile fhee fhall never bec deliveree, 
alrnough fhee ftrive and contend never fomuch. Ihave done the like cure in ve 


womenthat dwelt in Paris. 


What cure mult bee ufedto the Dugges and Teases of thofe that 
are brought to bed. 


ALTA 


26 E great ftore and abundance of milke bec in the breafls, and the ¥° 


dilvethe man beenot willing to nurfe her owne childc, they mutt bee annoy” 
: ted withthe unguent following, to repel! the milke, and cauic 
( WLR. bee expelled through the wombe. Ik, oles myrtini an- 
rofat. 51. incorporate them together, and therewith annoy" 
en dugecs foure times aday, and prefently after the annoynting befpriokle theo" 
the powder of myrtils, and then apply the plafter following. kx, pale. 


Routh thereo 
Nelle thereof 
rertaine 
“emoft par 
% a feaver, 
“tome, 


draw the mil! 
wombe comn 
little welpes | 
ed in the! 
glafle, where' 
or dugge, and 
breafts her fe! 


In fteede 


j 
{ort } 
The leaves 
r 
fhe trOUE “4 
ric 
+ wich OY 
(houget, 
out of tac 
A 
wiNt, apps) 
| 
sles AP} 
dapplycd ¥ 
This medi 
vinegar a0 
Me | 
high 
| 
@ 
Ay } 
t i OSS, and 
Rei “uithed 
pleal 


2 


kept drawne 
ith all 
that fhee May lye 
away atre; thar it 
mult bee 40Noin. 


fevi hircini. 
ment, Wherewirh 
ceapplyed tOthe 
Muske, {0 that the 
let this 
+ COVE 
dulciny, 
iS. melt ther 
hen dippe alinnen 
whereunto itis 


of the belly from 


rub. Ibi. florum 
to an earthen pot 
he dung of horfcs 
and let the liqour 
n the funne for the 
of the womanthzay 
es, let the powde: 
cervi an. 
ake thereof a moft 
rarme. Or, 
carab, ambre 
ve thereof at a time 
pon. Let there be 
ees mult bee made 


bee torne, as anci- 
two holes of the 
then that whichis 
. Which is amott 
(hall travel! againe, 
es in againe by rea- 
urgion fhall againe 
ver bee deliveree, 
he like cure in (WO 


bofe that 


rcafis, and the WO 

muft bee annoy” 

ike, and caule 
myrtint aw. 
erewith annoyne the 
e{priakle them with 
K, wo 


« 


Concerning the Generation of Man. 919 


mo[chat. AM, cupre/si sii. balauft. myrti 3 if. Ireos, florent. 38, o- 


5 iii. terebinth. veneta ij, cere nove quantam fufficit, make thereof a 


The leaves of brooke-lime, creffes and boxe boyled together in urine aad vine- 


gparethoughta prefent remedy for this purpofe, thatis to fay, to draw the milke 


breatts. And others take the clay that falleth downe into the botrome of 


wherein the grindftone, whereon {words are grownd,turneth, and mixe 
wich oyle of rofes, and apply it warme unto the dugpes, which in fhort {pace, us , 
vsthought, will affwage the paine, ftay the inflammation, and drive the milke 
wt of the dugges. The decoction of eround Ivie, Peruwincle, Sage, redde Rofes 
roach Alome being prepared in oxycrate, and ufed in the forme of a fomen- 
rion, 1S thought to performe the like effect :the like vertue have the lees of red 

-ige, apptyed tothe dugges with vinegar, or the diftilled water of unripe Pine-ap- 

jesapplyed to the breafts with linnen clothes wet therein, or hemlocke beaten 

ajapplyed with the young and tender leaves of a gourd. 

“This medicine following 1s approved by ufe : Take the leaves of Sage, Smal- By wharreavon. 
se, Rue, and Chervill, and cut or chop them very {mall, and incorporate them ~ — : — 
;yinegat and oyle of Rofes, and fo apply it wasme to the breaft, and renue ir beingtattened’ 
day In the meane time let Cupping. glaf'es bee applyed to the inner fide on 
shethigh and groine, and alfo above the navell. For this isvery effectual to 
igw the inilke out of the breafts into the wombe by the veines, whereby the milkeoutofths 
communicatcth with the breafts. Moreover, they may let children or 
itlewelpes fucke their breatts, whereby they, may draw out the milke that is fix- 

dfat in their dugges, in fteed whereof wee have invented this inftrament of 

fe, wherewith, when the broader orifice is faftened or placed on the breaft 


,dugge, and the pipe turaed upwards towards her mouth, thee may fuck her owne 
eats her felfe. 


The forme of alittle glaffe,which being put on the 
nipple, the woman may fucke ber 
owne breajfts. 


In fteede of this inftrument, a violl of glafle being firft made warme, and the 
nouththereof applyed to the nipple or teat, by reafon of the heate and wide- 
ile thereof will draw the milke forthinto the botrome thereof, as it were by a 
tttine fucking. The after purgations being firft evacuated, which is done for 
“emoft part within twenty dayes after the birth, if the woman bee not in aanger 
ta feaver, nor have any other accident, let herenter intoabath, made of mar- 
ome, mints, fage, rofemary, mugwurt, agrimonie, pennyroyall, the flowersot 
‘anomile, melilote, dill, being boyled in moft pure and cleare running water. 
Alltheday following let another fuch like bath bee prepared. whereuato letthefe 
following bee added. kk. farini fabarum & aven. An. 1B, iti. farin, orobi, lu. 
dy gland. an. tb.i, aluminis roch. 3iiii. com, ii, gallarum, 
"it, an. Ziti. rofar. rub, m.vi. chariophyl. mucum mofchat, an. > iii. boyle them 
“common water, then few themall in a cleane linnen cloth, as itwereina 
“ge, and caft them therein intg the bath whercin Iron red hot hath beene ex- 
*guithed, and ler the woman tiat hath lately travelled fit downe therein fo long 


“idee pleafeth, and when thee commeth out, let her bee layd warmein were 
and 


lar 
) 
: =. 
a, 
~ 
— 
= 
4 
q — 
, 


* 


7 neration of <M an. 
( oncerning the Ge f an. 24 24- 
and let he: take preferved Orange pull, or bread toafted and dipped in]... there! 
or in wine brewed with {pices, and then let her {weate, if the f{weate wil 
forth of its owne accord. ™ move fis =the 
Atingentfo. On the next day let aftringent fomentations bee applycd to the genitals 
wife prepared, Ke. gallar.mwcum Cupre[st,corticum Lranat.an. i, rofar. thyp, 


parts. major an. aluminisrocha, (alu com. an. Sit. boyle them all together in req 4, 


wine, and make thereofa decoction for a fomentation, for the forenameg uf 
Adifilledlie The diftilled liquor following is very excellencand effectuall to confirme and 
0 


iS in trave 
qiteth Of int 
gover ne the cf 
|” The birth 1 


quor torte draw in the dugeges, orany other loafe parts. charyophyl. WUC chat. Aucum, 


ether the 


dugsthacare cuprefsi. an. 5 18, maftich. 5 ii. alumin.roch. 8. glandiuns corticys hi 

poole and Hacke. fey Granat. ii. terra figillat. 31. cornu cervi uftt 5 moyrtilloy a | childe © 
guinis dracon, an. boli armeni. 3 ii. iveos florent.5i. fumach. berber, Hy pour ig was 
comquaf[entur omnia, cy macerentur [patio duorum dicrum. in tb whic” 
Ib ii. prucorum fyveftr. mefpilorum, pomorum quernorum,e7 Ib §, aque fabrorum {ce 
denique fortifs,3iv. afterward diftill it over a gentle fire, and keep the diftilled , ch 
for your ufe, wherewith letthe parts be fomentedtwice in aday. And after;h, fo, he ate 
mentation, let wollem clothes or ftupes oflinnen cloth be dipped in the liquor, and pn te q 


then preffed out and laid to the place. When all thefe things are doncand paft, the 


woman may againe keep company with her husband. may be made 


iaachairetha 
chair mult ha 
birth,may hat 


CHar. XX1X. 
What the causes of difficult and painefal travel in child-birth are. 


Theeanfes af He faule dependeth fometimes onthe mother, and fometimes on the in. 
thedfficule = RY ea fant or childe within the wombe. Onthe mother, if thee bee more fat, 
fhee bee given to gurmundize or great eating, if fhe be too leane or yong, 
as Savanarola thinketh her to bee, thatis great with childe at nine year: 


velleth. of age, or unexpert, ormore old, orweaker than fhee fhould bec, eyther by 


turc or by fomeaccident: asby difcafesthat thee hath hada little betore the tine 


of child-birth, or with agreat fuxe of bloud. But thofe that fall in cravell before 

the full and prefixed time, are very dithcult to deliver, becaufe the fruit is yctun- 

ripe, and not ready or caficto bee delivered. Ifthe necke or orifice of the womb: J 

bee narrow, eyther from the firft conformation, or afterwards by fomecharc’, ] 

as by an ulcercicatrized : ormore hard and callous,by reafon that it hatldecee | 

torne before at the birth of fome other childe, and focicatrized againe, {fo thas 

the cicatrizced place bee not cut even in the moment of the deliverance, bo J 

the childeandthe mother will bee in danger of death; alforthe rude handling J 

The paSionsofthe mydwife may hinderthcfree deliverance of the child. Otrentimes women 
lerted in travell by fhamefac’tneffle, by reafon of the prefence of fome man, or 
fome womanthere prefenr. 
Ifthe fecundine bee pulled away fooner than it is neceflary, it may cauleagi 

fluxe of bloud to fill the wombe, forthat then itcannot pertorme his exclufive! 


Ve 
ei 


hicles 
nydwives O 
Of great pai 
tt weaknei! 
The caufes « 
man 
harpe fretr: 
hement lab: 
carrying of 
fen and 
Forall 
the womb« 


culty, nootherwife than the bladder when it is diftended by reafon of overab" Alfo wh 
dance of water that is therein, cannot caft it forth, fo that there is a ftoppage ol Wombe th: 
urine. Butthe wombe is much rather hindred, orthe faculty of child-bithis!e? | Weare on tt 
ped or delayed, if together with the ftopping of the fecundine,there be like 
or fome other body contrary to nature in the wombe. In the fecundines of? | vexpreii | 
women whom I delivered of two children that were dead in their bodies, fore le | 
great quantity of fand like unto that that is found about the banks of rivers;°°" Boreas Orda 


the gravell or fand that was in each fecundine was a full pound in weight. Women to# 


Thecautsof  Alforhe infant may bee the occafion of difficult child-birth, as, if too Digs” odiesare: 
dificulechild- come overthwart, ifit come withits face upwards, and its buttocks © fan: 
birth that are afti 


intheinfant. come with its feet and hands both forwards at once, ifit be dead and {wolne 
fon of corruption, ifit bee monftrous, if it have@pro bodies or two heads!" "| 
manifold or feven-fold, as Albwerafis affirmeth hee hath feene, ifthere bee" 


| 


Seat : bur 
nal 


ch con 


4 


: 
ty 
i 
tel 
a 
: 
4 4 
7 
J 
& 
a ‘ 
; 
‘ ia 
ii 
| 
< 
& 
m 
4 


will 
he genitals on this 
ar. rub. mi. thym, 
together in redd, 
forenamed ufe 
chat. hucum 
querni, an. thy 
1 My rtilloy fan 
rber. Hy ppuris, ay 
fabrorum, aces; 
the diftilled liquor 
And afterthe fo. 
the liquor, and 
doncand paft, the 


birth are. 


ometimes on the in 

{hee bee more fat, i! 
etoo leane or yong, 
childe at nine yearcs 
bee, eyther by na. 
ttle before the une 
fall in travell before 
fethe fruit is yctun- 
rifice of the wombe 
ards by fome chance, 
yn that it hath 
edagaine, fo thats 
1¢ deliverance, both 
he rude handling of 
rentimes worlcn are 
of fome man, or hate 


may caufe agree 
his exclutive 
reafon of overabun- 
reis aftoppage (he 
of child-bith is {top- 


he fe nes of 
e fecundi 


heir bodies, Liou" 

yanks of rivers, fo chat 
b, as,ifroo bigs 


Yattocks forwards, 
ead and fwolne by * 


two heads, 


more a 
enc, ifthere bec 


anne>s 


there be cithcrame*’ 


Fic bee 


“ened thereto, ifit be very weake, if when the waters are flowed out, it doth not 


ich being cold, doth {o binde, congeale and make fife the genital parts, that 
,.y cannot bee relaxed : or, being contrariivife too hot, it weakeneth the woman 
in travel, by reaion that ic wafteth the {pirits, wherein all che ftrength con- 
ch: or inthe ignorant and unexpert mydwife, who cannot artificially rule and 


pee 


overne the endeavours of the woman in travel]. 
The birth is wont to bee eafic, if ie bee in the due and prefixed naturall time, ifthe whichis ane 


Concerning the Generation of Man. 921 


yeor {tirre, or Offer its {elfe to come forth. Yet notwithftanding, ir happeneth The external! 
acrimes chat the fauit 1s neitherin the mother nor the childe, but in the aire, 


cule child-birth. 


yide offer himfelfe luftily to come forth with his head forwards, prefently after “> 


»gaters are come forth, and the mother in like manner lufty and {trong : thofe wher 
ich are wont to bee troubled with very difficule child-birth, ought alittle before rs 


child: births 


herime of the birth,to goe into an halfe tub filled with rhe decoétion of mollifying 


.oces and{eeds, to have their genitals, wombe,and necke thereof to beeanoynrcd 


mach oyie, aod the inteftines that are fulland loaded mutt bee unburthened of 


neexcrements, and then the expulfive faculty provoked with a fharpe glyfter, that 
»-ymours and {welliag of the birth concurring therewith,the more eafie exclufion 
ay bemade. But [like ir rather better, thatthe woman in travell fhould be placed 
,achaire that hath the backe thereof leaning backwards, than in her bed, but the 
jit muft have a hole in the bortome,whereby the bones that mutt be dilated in the 
jth,may have more freedome to clofe themfelves againe. 


Cuar. XXX, 
The caufes of Abortion or untimely birth. 


Bortion or untimely birth is one thing, and cfiluxion another. They whac aborti- 


call abortion the fudden exclufion of the childealready formed and a- 


livebefore the perfect maturity thereof. Byt that is called cflluxion, wharEffuxi- 
“6 whichis the falling downe of feeds mixed together and coagulated but 
me for the {pace of a few dayes, enely in che formes of membranes or tu- 

ices, congealed bloud, and of an unfhapen or deformed piece of ficth; rhe 

wdwives of our countrey call ita faife branch or budde. This effluxion is the caufe Womenarein 
great paine and moft bicter and cruel! torment to the woman : leaving behinde 
tweakneile of body farre greater than ifthe childe were borne atthe duc time. fluyionthonat 
Tie caufes of abortion or untimely birth, whereof the the child is called an abor- ‘hesuco"” 
many, as a great {Couring, a ftrangury joyned with heate and inflammation, 
larpe fretting of the guts, agreat and continuall cough, exceeding vomiting, ve- 

ement labour in running leaping, and dauncing, and bya great fall from on high, 

arying of a great burthen, riding ona trotting horfe, orina Coach, by vehemenr, 

ikea and ardent copulation with men, or by agreat blow or ftroke onthe belly. 

‘orall thefe & fiuch like vehement and inordinate motions diflolve the ligaments of 

wt wombe,and fo caufe abortion or untimely birth, 

Alfo whatfoever preffeth or girdeth inthe mothers belly, and therewith alfo the Girdingofthe 
‘Ombe thatis within it, as are thofe Ivory or Whale-bone buskes, which women oe oo 
Weare on their bodies, thereby to keepe downe their bellies ; by thele and {uch | 
‘Kethings the childe is letted or hindred from growing to his fullftrength, fo that 

Yexpreffioa, or as it were by compulfion, hee is often forced to come forth be- 
the legitimate and lawful! time. Thundering, the noyleof the fhooting of 
teat Ordnance, the fouad, and vehement noyfe of the ringing of Bells conftraine 
Yomen to fall in rravell bcfore their time, efpecially women that are young, whole 
odiesare foft, flacke andtenderer than thofe that bee of riper yeares. Long and 
‘cat fafting.a great fluxe of bloud,efpecially when the infant is growne fomewhat 
at : but if it bee but two moneths old, the danger is not fo great, becaufethen hee 
*edeth not fo great quantity of nourifhment, alfo a long difeafe of che mother, 


"ch confumeth the bloud, caufeth the childe to come forth being aati of 
flore 


‘ 
| 
| 


922 Concerning the Generation of 


L 13.24 


ftore of nourifhment betore the fic time. Moreover, fulnefle, by reafon Of thees 


ting great ftore of meates, often maketh or caufeth untimely birth ; becaufe js 
verh the ftrength,and preffeth down the child: as likewife the ufe of meats thar 


of 


Howbathes& anevilljuice, which they luftorlong for. But bathes, becaufe they relay. thel 


hot houf:scaule g yments ofthe wombe, and hot houfes, for that the fervent and choakine ay re jc 
uatimely ved into the body, provoke the infant to ftrive to goe forth totake the cold ay 


and {o caufe abortion. 


their time, and are accounted as the caufes of abortions, for that they Caufe cre 

and vehement trouble inthe body. Thofe women that are like to travel! betore the 

time, their dugs will wax little: therefore when a woman is great with childe ifher | 

dugs fudden!y wax {mall or flender, it is a figne that thee will travell before her time 
? 


the caufe of fuch fhrinking of the dugs is, thatthe matter of the milkeis drawnehy, | 
intothe womb: by reafon that the infant wanteth nourifhment to nourith ang {y-. 
cour it withall. Which {carciry the infant not long abiding, ftriveth to poe forth,» | 
feck thatabroad which he cannot have within,for among the caufes which do mol. 
itip.sph-33.fes. tthe infant to come out of the womb, thofe are moft ufually named with Hippocrae: 


the neceflity of a more large nutriment and aire. 


Ther fore if a woman that is with child have one of her dugs {mall, if the have two 


children, fhe is like to travell of one of them before the full and perfe@ time : forhy 


Women arein if the right dug be {mall, it is aman child, but ifit be the left dug it isa female, Wo. } 
mee the men arcin farre more paine when they bring forth their children before thetima 
hon it were at the fulland duetime, becaufe that whatfoever ts contrary ton. J 


than atrhedue 


ciucotbirch. cure,is troublefome, painefull,and alfo oftentimes dangerous. If there beany e:rou 


com:nitted at the firft rime of childe-birth, it iscommonly feene that it happeneth 


thefe tend. alwayesafter ateachtime of child-birth. Therefore,to find out the caufes of thater. 
birch continues rour , you muft take the counfell of fome Phyfician, and after bis couniell en. 
sees deavour to amend the fame. Truly this plafter following being applycdto the reines 


doch confitme the wombe, and ftay the infant therein. adams 9 ii. galang. 1. 
A plafter tay mofchat, nucis enprefst, boli armeni, terra fizill. fanguin, dracon. 
orum, hypociftid.an.3 maftich.myrrha, ii. gummi arabic. terebin' 
venet, ii.prcis naval. i. cera quantum fafficit, fiat emplaf?. fecuncem artem ; [prea 
it for your ufe upon leather. Ifthe part begin co itch, letthe plafter be taken away, 
in ftead thereot ufe wnguent. rofat. or rcfriz. Galen. ox this that followeth. 
myrtini, maltich. cydonior.an. 3 i. hypocift. bol: armen. (arg. dracon. acatiz, fat. 
citrini 5 8. cera quant. fuf. make thereof an oyntment according unto art. There ae 
What children women that beare the child in their wombe ten or cleven whole moneths, and {uch 
are ten or ¢- 
leven moneths children have their conformation of much and large quantity ot feede: wherefore 
inthe wombe. they will bee more bigge,great and ftrong, and therefore they require more 
come to cheir perfe@ion and maturity; for thofe fruits that are great will nor bee!0 
foone ripe as thofe that are {mall, Butchildren that are {mall and little of body 
tea cometo their perfection and maturity in even or nine months: ifall other thin? 
are corre{pondent in greatneffe and bigneff of body, it happeneth for the molt ps 
thatthe woman with child is not delivered before the ninth moneth bee done, 
A malewill beethe leaftwife in the famemoneth. But a male child will bee commonly borneat™ 
bornefooner beginning,or a little before the beginning of the fame moneth, by reafon of hist 
thanatemale. prafted heat which caufeth maturity and ripeneffe. Furthermore, the infant is 


come to maturity and perfe¢tion in a hot woman than ina cold, forit isthe prope | 


ty of heat to ripen. 


What women foever,being indifferently well in their bodies, travell in the fee... 
third moncth wirhout any manifeft caule, thofe have the Cotylidones os rey 
AS Full of filth and matter,and cannot hold up the infant, by reafon of the 
thereof, but are broken : Moreover, fudden or continuall perturbations of the 
minde, whether they beethroughanger or feare,may caufe women to travell before 


| isdead, the lun 
ogther in the a! 
owne fubftanc 
by reafon 
Venales 
which is calle 

realon thereof 
little conduits 
| isderived, anc 
wombe. Wh 
| Iedons of the 


tismothers lu 
| fages. There fo 
tis farre bere: 
| hecartelage, 
| ogthe 
ing lifted up, 


hed or 


fot becaufe h 
te {pirits by 


may know w 


nuining inh: 
Celle thercas 
4Weakene(f, 
Parated as y< 
Clofe COcher 
Naining) ma 
leney of tho 

have bin mo 


and therefore 


You fhall « 


forit will be. 


Otten 


Petiwade in 


. 
4 4 * 
* 
ner, 
. by tac contrat 
| 
‘ ‘ ‘TV ore 
lux of 
un 
ig 4 Cilare 
, 


2fon of the 


acthey caufe or 
ravell betore thei 
with childe.ifhe, 
ll before her time. 
is drawne back 
nourifh and fic. 
eth to goe forth to 
les which do make 
d with Hippocrates. 


all, if fhe have two 
erfe& time : fothar 
it isafemale, Wo. 
en before thetima, 
rfs contrary to na- 
there be any ¢rrour 
e tharit happeneth 
he caufes of that er- 
er bis countell en- 
plyed ro the reines 
11. GALANG. 5 1, 
balanft. an. aca 
rabic. terebinth. 
ndem artem {pread 
be taken away, & 
followeth. Ry, oles 
Acatia, 1. 
art. There are 
moneths, and {uch 
feede : wherefore 
equire more time C0 
will not bee fo 
little of body do of- 
is: ifallotber things 
ch for che moft pat 
ethbec done, or 
monly borne at the 
by reafon of his 
the infant 1s {oonct 
forit is the prope 


Cwa’ 


lareof 


rturbations of th. 
Ntotravell before 


avell in the fecond 
tylidones of their @ 


Concerning the Man. 


XXXI. 


How to preferve the infant being in the wombe, when the 
mother 1s dead. 


aS F all the fignes of death appeare in the woman that lieth in travell, 
and cannot be delivered, there muft then be a Chirurgian ready 
Sok | Lee and at haad, which may open her body fo foone as {hee is dead, 


whereby the infant may be preferved in fafety ; neither can it bee why ic isnot 
fuppofed fufficient if the mothers mouth and privie parts bee 
held open ; for the infant being enclofed in his mothers wombe, tape korg 
and compaffed with the membranes, cannot take his breath, but hold openthe 


and dilacations ofthe artery ofthe navell. But when the mother 
dead, the lungs doe not execute their office and funGion: therefore they cannot pusitcr fo {oons 
the aire that compalfeth the body by the mouth or 4/pera artersa into their 
fubftance, or into the arcerics that are difperfed throughout the body thereof, 
-eafon whereof tccannot fend it unto the heart by the veiny artery which is called dy. 

venalis + forifthe heart want aire, there cannot bec any in the great artery 

hich is called arterta aorta, whofe function itis to draw it from the heart; alfo by 

son thercof it is wanting in the arteries of the wombe, which are as it were the 

rleconduits of that great artery, whereioro the aire that is brought from the heart 

sdesived, and floweth ia unto thele litcle ones of all the body, and likewife of the 

sabe. Wherefore it mutt of neceffity follow that the aire is wanting to the coty- 

dons of tne fecundines, tothearteric of the intants navell, the iliacke arteries aifo, 

adtherefore unto his heart, and founto all hisbody: forthe aire being drawne by 


mothers lungs, is accuftomed to come to the infant by this continuation of paf- 


‘ 


Therefore becaule death maketh all the motions of the mothers body to ceale, belly 


sfarre better to open her body fo foone as thee is dead, beginning the incifion at of the woman 
ncatelage, X/phordes, or breatt-blade, and makingit ina forme femicircular, 
igtheskinne, mufcles and per/ton eum, not touching the guts : then che wombe be- cur opentotave 
glifted up, mult be cut, le fithat otherwifethe infant might perchance be cau- the 
od or hurt with the kaife, 

You fhall oftentimes the childe unmoveable, asthough hee were dead ; but 


becaufe ne is dead indeed, but by reafon chat he, being defticute of the accefic of 


ac{pivits by the death of che mother, hath contracted a great weakenefle yet YOU may bec 
yy know whether hee be dead indeed or not, by handling the artery of the navel, 
vitwill bear and pantif he be alive, otherwife not ; but if there be any life yet re- 
uining inhim, fhortly after he hath rakea in the aire, and is recreated wiv the ac- 
tlethercof, he will move all his members, and alfo all his whole body. In fo great 
Weakenefle or debility of the ftrength of the childe, the fecundine muft not bee fe- 
hated as yet from the childe, by cutting the navell {triag, burit muft rather be laid 
“etoche region of che belly thereof, thatchereby the heat (if there be any joz re- 
Ming) may bee ftirred up againe. BucI caanot fufficiently marvaile at the info- 
“cy of thofe chat affirme that they have feene women whole bellies and wombe 
wWebin morethan once cut,and the infanttaken our, when it could no otherwife 
‘gotten forth, and yet norwithftanding alive; which thing there isno man can 
Xtlwade me can be done, without the death of che mother, by reafon of the necef- 
ereatneffe of the wound that muft be made in the muicles of the belly, and fub- 
“ce of the wombe, forthe wombe of a woman tharis great with childe, by rea- 
Sathatit fwelleth, and is diftended with much blood, muft needs yeeld a great 
“Xof blood. which of neceffity muft be morrall. Ando conclude, when thatthe 


known wherhe: 
che intant bc a» 
live or not. 


] "ound or incifion of the womb¢c is cicatrized, it will not permit or fuffer the womb 


“0€ dilated or extended to receive or bearea new birth, For thele and {uch L ke Ow 
this kinde of ctire, as defperate and dangerous, is not(in mine opinion) 


OSuled, 


CHA?: 


reaion of the 
meats | 
hey rclaxe the} 
‘Lils @ 
Oaking ayrejc,, 
| 
| 
B 


Concern 


— 


XXXII. 
Of, 


Uperfcetation is when a woman doth beare twoor more 

at one time in her wombe, and they bee enclofed each in fey 
)| -rall fecundine : butthofe that are includedin the fame {ccundin, 
#& | are{uppofed to bee conceived at one and the fame tinie of copaly , 
)} tion, by reafon of the great and copious abundance of feed. 5, 
thefe haveno number of daies between their conception & | 


What fuperfo. 
£ation ts. > 


temper, is contracted or drawn together about the meate, to comprehend ir oy ey». | 
ry fide, though fmall in quantity, as it were by both hands, fo that it cannot roy) 
neither unto this orthat fide ; fothe wombe ts drawne together unto the con ception | 
about both the feds,as foone asthey are brought into the capacity thereof, and js (9 | 
drawtie in unto it on every fide, thar it may come together into one body, notper. | 
mitting any portion thereof to goe inro any other regjon or fide,fothat by onetime | 
of copulation the feed that is mixed together, cannot engender more children thay 
swomane On, Which are devided by their fecundines. And moreover, becaufe there areno | 
woubeisnot fuchcellsinthe wombes of women, as are fuppofed, or rather knowne to bee inthe | 
Stinguithed wombs of beafts, which therefore bring forth many at one conception or birth. Bur 
" now ifany part of the womans wombe doth not apply and adjoine it felfe clolelyto | 
tlic conception of the feed already received, left any thing fhould be given by nature 
for no purpofe, it muft ofneceflity follow that it muft be filled with aire, which wil 
alter anu corrupt the feeds. Therefore the generation of more than one infant ats 
time, having every one his feverall fecundine, is on this wife. Ifa woman conceave | 
by copulation witha man as this day,and if that for a few daies after the conception, 
the orifice of the wombe be notexadly hut, but rather gape a little, andif thee doe 
then ufe copulation againe, fo that at both thefe times of copulation there may dean 
effufion or perfea mixture of the fertile feed ifthe wombe, there will follow anen 
conception, or fupertoetation. For fuperfoetation is no other thing than a certane | 
fecond conception, when the woman already withchilde, againe ulcth copulatiea | 
Lil. defepafe. With aman, and fo conceiveth againe, according tothe judgement of Hippocratts 
cationtias. , Bur there may be many caufes alledged why the wombe which did joyne and oe 
afeerthecon. oth open and unlofe it felfeagaine. For there bec fome that fuppole the women | 
ecptionofthe be openat certaine times afterthe conception, tharthere may be an iffue out for | 
caine excrementall matters that are contained thercin,and therefore that che wom 
wardsopen. that hath fo conceivedalready,and fhall then ufe copulation witha man againe is | 
alfo concc:veagaine. 
Others fay that the wombe of it felfe, and of its own nature is very di firous 0 

or copulation, or elfe being heated or enflamed with the pleafant moron o! a 
moving her thereto,dothat lengch unclofe ir felfe to receive the mans feed: fc! 
wife it happeneth many times that the orifice of the ftomack being {hur aitcre* be 
is prefently uploofed again, when other delicate meats are offered to be eaten: ny 
{fo may the wombe unclofe it felfe againe at certain feafons, whereotcome 


Lib.7.cop. 1s. iffues, whofe time of birth and alfo of conception are different. For as Pt 
when there hath bina little fpace between two conceptions, they are bor 
asitappeared in Hercales and his brother Zphicles ; andinher, which} 
children at a birth, brought torth onc like unto her husband, and anorher 

the adulterer. And alfointhe Procomefian flave ox bond. woman, who oy 

tion onthe {ame day brought forth one like unto her mafter, and anothe! a 

his fteward : and in another who brought forth one at the due time o! childe % 

and another at five moneths end. And againe in another, who bringing wil 
burthen on the feventh moneth, brought forthtwo more in the moneths! - z sat 

Bur this is a moft manifeft argument of fupertoetation, that asmsby chia 

inthe wombe (unleffe they bee twinnes of the fame {exc) to many 


The reaion ef 


uc all at once. Foras prefently after meat the ftomacke which is naturally of; 


LB. 24. 


here, as T have o 
ceived in the fat 
fecundine. But : 
tfeemeth to bee 
preatts. Althoug! 


births. 


heere entreate, ts 
| gad hard,conceiv 


hhedinto member 
moderate fuxe of 


| fecundine, bur as 


There are fom: 


ture ofthe wontar 


mansfeed. Butch 


tithera Afola, or a 
without aco 
leed,and the man 
| the fame opinion 
| the mans feed thai 
ly puffes up or mal 
Hotinto any perf 
decrees of Hippo 

| deine to the gen 
| Low antruicfull a: 
| Mation already b 

| the mole commet 
‘SWormes are gen 
atera fort prolif 

‘Aclofed, by the | 

ONCeption or ch 

“icreale,and 
mans 
mall cloal 

Sehaviour. 


Rife 
is more 


- 
gt the Generationof Man 
| ‘ Pf R 2 
| 
| » 
4 
7 j 
TY 
2 fi 
b 
| +. 
| F t 
| 4 \ 
| 4) cal 
j 
ON Fou 
. 
\ . fe} 
7730 ! 
| 
Ab Hen th 
‘ty: 


More children 
fed cach in his feve. 
the fame fecundin- 
ame tinie of copula. 
ndance of leed, and 
conception & birth. 
naturally ofa 
mprchend ir on cye. 
hat it cannot rowle 
unto the conception 
ity thereof, and is {o 
bone body, not per. 
> fothat by onetime 
r more children than 
becaufe there are no 
knowne to bee in the 
ception Or birth. Bur 
inc it felfe clolelyto 
ld be given by nature 
vith aire, which will 
than one infant ata 
[fa woman conccave 
after the conception, 
little, andif fhee doe 
ition there may bean 
re will follow anew 
ching than a certaine 
ine ulerh copulanea 
ment of Hippocrates. 
h did joyne and cloic 
jppolc the wom (0 
e an ifluc out ror ¢ 
‘fore that the woman 
‘tha managaine, fla! 


very dcfirous of feed 
ar motion oF man 
e mans iece 
red to be eaten: a7 
\ereotcome manifo 


wey are both! 


sere, a5 [have often {cene my felfe. And it is very likely that if they were con- ; 


Cie 


for like- 


cing fhuc after {mall cloake or cover to women to avoide the fhame and reproach of theis 


yalten 
‘ 

4 


- 4 


Concerning the Generation Man. 


ived in the fame moment of time, that they fhould all bee included in one 


“cundine. Burt when a woman hath more children than two at one burden , 
sfeemeth to bee a monftrous thing, becaufe thar nature hath given her but two 
eats. Although wee fhall hereafter rehearfe many examples of more numerous 
pirths. 


XXIII. 


ofthe tumour called Mola, or a growing in the wombe 
of Women, 


F the greeke word cMyle, which fignifieth 2 Mill-ftone, this tumour The reafon of 
called Mo/ahathits name: for it is like unto a Mill-ftone both inrhe "> 
round or circular figure, and alfoinhard confiftence, for thewhich 
felfe fame reafon the whirle- bone of the knee is called ofthe Latines 
mola, and of the Greeks My/e, Butthe rumor called Afo/a,whereof we 

were entreate, is nothing elfe buta certain falfe conception of deformed Acth,round What a meleis. 

odhard,conceived in the wombe as it were rude and unperfed, and not diftingui- 

iedinto members, comming by corrupt, weake, and difeafed feed, and of the im- 

soderate luxe of the termes, as it is detined by Hippocrates. This is enclofed inno 

icundine, but as it were in its owne skinne. 

There are forme that thinke the Mo/a to bee engendered of the concourfe or mix- 
weofthe womans feed and menftruall blood, without the communication of the 
But the opinion of Ga/en is, that never any man fawa woman conccive 
‘thera Mola, or any other fuch thing, without copulation of man, as an hen laieth wr nag 
vos without a cock: for the onely caufe and originall of that motion ts inthe mans 
«ed,andthe mansfeed doth onely minifter matter for the generation thereof. Of ls 
he fame opinion is Avicen, whothinketh the Mo/a to be made by the confluxion of envendered: 
hemans feed that is unferrile,with the womans; when as it,becaufe un fruicfull,one- 
ypufes up or makes the womans {cedto {well as leaven intoa greater bignefle, but 
intoany perfect fhape or forme. Which isalfo the opinion of Ferzelu:, by the 
eres of Hsppocrates and Avicen: forthe immoderate fluxes of the courfes are con- 
acing to the generation of the mo/a, which overwhelming the mans feed, being 
“owantruicfull and weake, doth conftraine it to defift from its enterprife of confor- 
ution already begun, as vanquifhed or wholly overcome: for the generation of 
commeth not ofa fimple heat working spon a clammy and grofic humour, 

‘Wormes are generated ; but of both the feeds, by the efficacy of a certaine {pirir, 

tera fort prolificall, as may be underftood by the membranes wherein the mo/a is 

iclofed, by rhe ligaments whereby many times itis faftened or bound tro therrue 

or child, engendered or begotten by fuperfoetation and finally, by the 


Lib. de fteril. 


eale,and greacand fluggifh waight. [fall men were not perfwaded that thecon- 


mans feed mutt of neceffity concurre to the generation of the me/4,it would 


behaviour. 


a 


How to difcerne a true conception from a falfe conception 
or Mola. 


The hanes of a 
trae and lawfull conception. But the more proper fignes of the mola are enclo‘ed 


BIAS thefe : there is acertaine pricking paine, whichat the beginning trou- 


it would if it werethe true iffue,and will be diftended with greater hard- 
0d is more difficult and troublefome to carry,becaule it is contrary to natu es 
lili an 


‘ 
LIB 
| 
| 
ic 
hs 
an 4 antO @ 
1 ani skier | 
ho bringing = 
ale Ae hs 
ne monet is fOLION* 
asmany chil ore. bell 
al s if it wer 
A 
WCl ioonel roan 


926 ( oncerning the Cyeneration of 


and voydot foule or lite. Prefently after the conception the dugges fwel] and 

up, but thortly they fall and become lanke and laxe ; for nature fenderh milk thirh ed 

in vaine, becaule there is no iffue in the wombe that may {pend the fame. Thee er | 

will move before the third month, although it be ob{curely, but the true con = ~~ 

py what facultyywill not: but this motion of the is not of the intelle&uall foule,bur of thes, 
the wombe of the wombe, and of the fpiritof the feed difperied through the fubftance 
h, mola ; for itis nourifhed and encreafeth after the manner of plants, but nor by Rt np 

cheers OF foul or fpirit fent from above, as the infant doth. Moreover,that motion thar 
onotthe mela infant hath in its due and appointed time, differeth much from the motion of the os 
5 forthe childe is moved to the right fide, rothe left fide, and to every fid 
rae infant in. Dut the mola, by reafon of its heavineffe, is fixed, and rowleth in manner of 


thewomb- carried by the weight thereof unto what fide foever the woman declincth he; fel | 
The wolsdoth The woman that hath awso/ain her wombe doth daily waxe leaner and Jeane, inall | 


— 


eure roench her members, but efpecially in her legges, although notwithftanding towards niche 
wombe. they will {well, fo that thee will bee very flow or heavie in going, the natura}! hea | 
fiwarionoithe foriaking the parts remote from the heart by little and little ; and moreoye; he 
| bodyiss belly fwells, by veafon that the menftruall matter refteth about thofe places, ang 
| not confumed in the nourifhment of the mo/a: fhe is {wolne as if fhe had the dropfic 
but that it is harder, and doth not rife againe when it is prefled with the fingers, The 
, | navell doth not ftand out as it will do when thetrue iffue is conteined in the womb. | 
neither do th courfes flow as they fometimes do inthe true conception bur (ome. 
| times great fluxes happen, which cafe the waight of the belly. In many whenthem. 9 
la dothcieave notvery fait, it fallech away within three or foure monceths, being nor 


as yet come unto its juft bigneffe ; aadmany times it cleaveth to the fides of the § 

wombe and Coryledons very firmely, fo that fome women carry it in their wombs | 

five or fixe yeeres, and fomeas long as they live. 

T he wife of Gailiam Roger Pewterer, dwelling inS. Vidors ftreet, bore a molsin 
A hiftery. 
her womb feventcen yeercs, who being of theage of fifty yeers, died having 
opened her,tound the body of her womb to bealmoft loofed,and not tyed or bound 

by its accu‘tomed ligatures, butas it were hanging onely by the necke,and further: 

more cleaving to the Kalladjoyning to it, having but onely one tefticle and that on 

the right fide, and that fomewhat broader and looferthan ufual] : the liornes were | 


The te 
The 
Shove! 

cr and 
Shewet 
Pir Th 


] not to be feene except it were onthat fide, the veffells were on the necke onely, ani 
there very manifeft and puffed up, it was as bigge asa mans head. hadcaken 
t it out of her body, Ibroughe it home unto my houfe,that at my leafure I might fince | 


out what was conteined in it fo long , therfore ona certaine day,callingtogetherth« 
chiefe Phyficians of Paris, as Mafslaus, Alexis, Vigor, deS. Pont. Feure, Brovel,Fiv 
lars, Grealmus, Ravin, Hautin, Rrolan, Lufjon sand Chirurgians, 
| as Brun, Cointerell, Guillemean : all thefe being prefent, I opened the wombe, and! 7 


4 The found it inall the body thercofand in the proper tunicle,fofchirrhous, and fo hard, 
ried feveneeene that J could hardly cut or make a knife to enter into it: the body thereof | | 
Jecess inthe fingersthicke. Ia the midft of the capacity thereof I founda lumpe of | 
as both my fits, like unto a Cowes udder, cleaving to the fides of the wombe 

certaine places, ofa very thicke, unequall and cloddifh fubftance, with many bod 
therein, even as are commonly found in wennes and griftles, difperfed throug" : 
as if it were bones. The judgement of all that were prefent was, thatchis grea | ! 
morat the firft was a mola,which in procefs of time degenerated into a {chiri 
dy,together with the proper fubftance of the womb. Moreover, in the mid¢leo'" ‘ 


neck of the womb,we found atumor as big asa Turkies egge,of fubftance hard ca | 


tilaginous and bonie, filling all the whole necke, but efpecially the inward onihie | 
the womb, which the common people of France do cali the Garland,{o that by 
pafflage nothing could goe out, or enter into the wombe: all that tumour ¥° i” a 

nine pounds and two ounces, which I, by reafon of the novelty of the thing, Keep 
my clofet, and here I have defcribed it. 


A A. Shew th 


Sheweth 
Shew 


j 
4 ~ 
‘ 
® 
: 
7.4 
+ 


an 


fwell and pun, The externak and defcreption of the fore.named wombe. 


ndeth milk thither 
the true CONCEption 
ule,but of the facy). A 
the fubftance of the fe 

s, but not by realon ZE 

hat motion thatthe A 

emotion of thems. A 

oevery fidegently A 

manner of a ftone, YP 

declineth her 


mer and leaner in aj} 
ding towards night 
g, the naturall hear 
and moreover, her 
thofe places, and is 
the had the dropfic, 
ith the fingers. The 
teined in the womb, 
nception ; but fome- 

many whenthe ms. 
‘moneths, beingnor J Sheweth the body of the worsbe. 
h to the fides of the B. The tefticle. 


\) 


\ 


‘ 


rry itintheirwombs J C. The neck of the wombewherein that little tumour was contained, 
LD. Sheweth the end of the necke of the wombe that was plucked infan- 
ftreet,borea molsin der,andalfo the veffels whereby it drew the nutrimevt wnt t. 


5, died ; andi having Sheweth the band. 
dnot tyed or bound | LER. The ve(fels difperfed thorow the wombe. 
necke,and further- | 
The d:feriptionof the womb being open and fhewing the Mola comtaineatherein. 
pall: the | 
the necke oncly,and 
id. WhenI had taken 
Jeafure I might fince 
y,calling together the 
i$. Feure, Brovet,} 
Jon sand Chirurgians, 
edthe wombe, and 
hirrhous, and 10 hard, 


\dy thereof was three 


— 


AY 
S 


~ 


\ 


\ 


\ 


* bd 


re 


of fubftance 
y the inward or! 
arland,{o that by* 
that tumour weight’ 
ry of the thing, keep | 


he wombe. 
Shew the externall and {uper fi ciall part of embe. 
Mm OBB. Shew the thickne(fe of the body or proper fabstance of the ¥ 
©. Sheweth the Mola. 
D. Shew shat concavity wherein the mola couteined or inclofed in the 
4 111 2 


As 


27 
pil 
ZZ 
Yi Z V4 
F 44 Yy) 
I WG “yy 
W/Z Li 
ML 
Va 
\ 
SSP 
MAG 
ADS 
LA \ = AZ, 
—— 
| 
\ 
ZA 
| 
| 
| 
otrhe VW ombe put! Dry. > =, \ | | 
ho: SS SSF “Nit 
i 
= 


Concerning the Man. 


— 


Lip,» 


4 


A vaine or un- 
profitable con- 
ception. 


The wa/akils 
the infant in 


che womb when 


it isfaftened 
unto it. 


Tho‘e things 
chat provoke 
the 

cibly doeallo 
confume or 


@all the gale. 


The Chirurgi- 
callextraétion 
ofthe mola.. 


owers{or- 


As long as che woman carried this Mo/cin her wombe, thee felt moft tharpe ba 
Pain 


in her belly, theregion of her belly was marvellous hard, diftended and large. | 


it were a woman that had many children at once in her wombe, fo that many p 
ficians when thetime of child-birth was paft, fuppofed that {welling of the je); 
come of the dropfic, and affayedte cure it as they would the dropfie, but for 
medicines they couldufe, the belly became neverthe lefler. Oftentimes the ». 
was ftopped forthe fpace ot three dayes,andthen the making of urine was very | 


’ 


yto 


Ine 


weeke, by reafonthat the guts were prefled by the weight of the Mo/a. At Cettaing 


feafons, as every third moneth, there came exceeding great fluxes, the matter there 


of could not be carryed through the capacity of the wombe, as wee faid before, be. 
caufe it was exactly fhutand ftopped, butthrough the veflels by which Virgins, and 


alfo certaine other women great with childe evacuate their menftruall matter, 
Molabeexpclled or caft out in the firft or fecond moneth, as many times it fohap. 
peneth, it is called of women an unprofitable orfalfe conception. Sometimes ther. 
are found in one wombetwo or three molesfeparated one from another ,and fome. | 
times bound or tyed to the found and perfe& infant. As ithappened inthe wife of | 
Valleriolathe Phy fician, which was delivered of a Mola which the had carryed ip he, 
wombe twelve moneths, annexed with a child of foure moneths old, which hadde. | 

rived the infant both of its roome andnutriment. For it is alwaycs to be certainely 


thatthe Moda,as a cruell beaft, by its focicty and keeping it from its 
ment and place, kils the infant that is joyned unto it. 


[remember once I opened the body of adead woman, which hada Mé/sinhe | 
wombe as bigge asa goofe egge, which when nature had aflayed by many vaine eo. 
deavours tocaft out, remained notwithftanding, and at length putrefied, and there. | 
with infected the whole wombe, whereof fhe dyed. There be fome which judging | 
themfelves great with childe, doe aboutthe ninth or tenth monethexpell 
thing but founding*blafts of winde ; whereby the wombe fuddenly falling downe 
and waxing more {l-nder,they are faid in amockery to have been delivered of a fart. 
To conclude,whatloever refembles being with child, if it be not excluded at the duc 
and lawfulltime of child-birth by irs owne accord or by the ftrength of nature,then 


mutt it bee expelled by arr. 


What cure must bee ufed to the Mola. 


LL things that provoke the flowers and fecundines, and exclude 


fant being dead, are to be prefcribed,given inwardly, put up, | 


Foxe cd outwardly,as thetrochifces of like, 
having fomentations that are relaxing and mollitying alwaics applye 
totheplaces. You mutt ufe thefe medicines and phlebotomy, diet and bathestien 
& fo long as it (hall feem neceffary to the Phyfician thatis prefent. But if it harp” 
chat the mola is {eparated or loofed from the wombe, and nature cannot xp." rt 
whenitis fo loofed, Ietthe Chirurgion place the woman in that fituation 
faid the was to bee putin, when the child was tobee drawne from her. Theo open 
ing her genital! parts, let him take hold on it by putting an inftrumentinto!t, oo 
by reafon of the likencfle thereof, is called'a Gry phons Talon, for it cannot pe tis 
hold on otherwife,by reafon of the roundneffe thereof, for it hath no place 
it may be taken hold of: therfore,when one taketh hold on ir with his hand,it 
be holden faft by reafon of the flipperineffe thereof, bur will run and flip backe 
the hollownefle of the wombe, like untoa bowle or great ball ; but it ma 
eafily taken hold on with the Gry phons Talon, if the belly be preffed on 
that it may remaineftill while the Gry phons Talon takes hold on it,for W 
taken good hold onit,it may be eafily drawne out. When the mo/a is crav ie 
muft be ufed tothe woman,as is ufed toa womanatter that is 
of child. 


the 


full unto her, and many times alfo her excrements were {topped for the 


lulpected to bei: 
pell, Mare(cotius 
andme and Pin. 


Vellous and alm 
| gether (cirrhou: 
| Othe loynes: 


| Gllow-like font 
Whereof fome 
| there were, fo 

¥eares fince tha 
fuch a gres 
For the wat 
fhe had bin fou 


L18.24) | 


T he feur 


beriun 
mors of the wo 
thofe hiftories fc 
Tfabel Rolant 
(0 St. Gervife hi 
yeare of our Lor 
dy being openc 
Mefentery wast 
athisleafure he 


the Mefentery a 


ly Cartilasinous 
'Y, Very one cl 


fained to keep 
¢ lived » anc 
°M its roots o 
Of grievou: 


the Oynes and 


; 
it 
| 
3 
ge | 
af J 
| 
| 
OFT: 
6 j 
| | 
ba. 
: 
diftin 
- 
4 
‘ 
4 
av 
| 
| 
@ y ls 2 
4 
ade 


moft tharpe Pain 
and large, as if 
, fo that many P}, 

ling of the belly to 
pfic, but forall che 
irentimes the uring 
UTINC Was Very pain. 
d for the { of 
¢ Mola. At cettaine 
Sy the matter there. 
wee faid before, be. 
which virgins, and 
truall matter. If the 
times it fo hap- 
ne Sometimes there 
n another,and fome- 
pened inthe wile of 
e had carryed in her 
s old, which had de. 
aycs to be certainely 
ping it from its nutri. 


ich had a Me/a in her 
d by many vaine en- 
putrefied, and there- 
{ome which judging 
yneth expell no other 
denly falling downe 
n delivered of a fart. 
rcexcluded at the due 
ength of nature,then 


, and exclude tic 
y, put up, and aj ply- 
fuch like, 
ying alwaics apply¢ 

diet and bathcesrhen 
ent. But if it happee> 
ature cannot cxpe! it 
hat fituation that 


om her. Theo open: 
hich 


ken 


on it,for when ne 
wiolaiS drawne 
rer that fhe 3s ce 


= 
— 
4 
aa 


prefied on both {ides 


q be AS as it were naturally knit or joyned. 


Lis. Concerning the Generatiouof Man. 


The feure of an inflriument called a Gryphons Talon, to draw out the Mola 
when itis loofe im the wombe. 


Crar. XXXVI. 


Of Tumours or [wellings happening to the Pancreas or fweet-bread, 
andthe whole M cfentery. 


(22248 He tumours of other places and parts in the belly ovighr diligently to bee 
diftinguifhed from the mo/e,and other tumours of the wombe. For when 
tumours arife in the g/amdula called Pancreas,and inall the whole 
terium, many unskilfull Chirurgionstake them for mo/a’s or {cirrhoustu- 
aos of the wombe, and fo goe erroneoufly about to cure them, as fhall appeare by 
hofe hiftories following. 
shel Rolant the wife of Zohn Bony dwelling in Paris inthe ftreet Moncey neere Ahittovy. 
0St, Gervife his Church, being threefcore yeares of age, departed this lite in the 
our Lord God 1578. onthe twenty fecond day of October: and her bo. 
yoeing opened in the prefence of Doctor -Mz/ot the Phyfician, hee when the 
\iefentery was taken out of the body, caufed it to be carried home to his houte, chat 
his leafure he might find outthe caufe of this mortall difeafe, which was alwayes 
uipected to bein the Mefentery. Therefore ona time calling Varadems, Brove,Chap- 
ull, MarefCotius Arragonius, Baillutins, Reburtius and Riolan,all Doors of Phylick, 
adme and Pinews Chirurgions, to his houfe to fee the fame. Wh ere wee found all 
he Mefentery and the Pancreas in the Mefentery {wolne and puffed up witha mar- 
iellous and almoft incredible tumour, fo that it wayed ten pound and an halfe, alco- 
scther {cirrhous on the out fide, cleaving on the hinder part onely tothe vertcbres 
{the loynes: burton the fore part tothe alfo feirrhous and whol- 
cartilacinous. Moreover,there were infinite other ab{cefles in the fame Mefe Apoktumerof die 
every one clofed in his feverall cyft, fome filled with ahony-like, fome witha 
llow-like, fome with an albugineous, and fome witha waterifh liquor or humour, 
Thereof fome alfo were like unto pap, and to conclude, looke how many abfecties 
‘here were, fo many kinds or differences of mattcrs there were, Ic wastheneight The 
kares fince that rumour began to grow by litrleand litcle without feeling and paine 
nto fuch a greatnefle,becaufe that the Mefentery it {elfe was without pain in aman- js separated 
tt. For the woman her felfe could do all the faculties ofnature almoftas wellas if "om bos 
Xchad bin found and whole,except that two moneths before fhe died, {he was con- fee 
fined to keep her bed, becaufe fhee had a continual feaver, which endured {o long 
& fhe lived, and alfo becaufe thar the Mefentery, being asit were lepa rated or torne 
tom its roots or feate, did rowleup and downe inthe belly, not without the fec~ 
ing of grievous pains : for,as we faid before, it did ftick but only to the vertebres of 
dt loynes and Peritoneum, and nothing at all tothe gutsandother parts whercunto 


liii: There- 


— 
¢. 
| 
rume 
for it cannot be 
ath no place where 
| 
ith hishand,it 
~ int 
run and flip 
may vec mor | 
iC 


Concerning the Generation Man. 


Therefore becaufe the weight and heavinefle thereof deprefledthe bladg., ; 
caufed a great difficulty in her making of water, and alfo becaufe it relied fon 
euts,it made it very painefull for herto goc to ftoole, forhat the exCrements 
notcome downe except fheetookea tharpe glyfter to caufe them: and 
ning glyfters, they could not be put up high enough, by reafon of the greatnelfe 
the ramour which enclofed and fhutthe way ; and fuppofitories did no good a. , 
It wasalfo very difficule for her to take breath, by reafon that the midriffe , 7. 
phragma was comprefied with the tumour. There were fome that did fafpedt i lols 

Thedvopfe amola, others thoughtthat it came by reafon of the dropfic. Affuredly this 

comminge’* caufed thedropfie to enfue ; neither was the caufethereof obfcure, forthe fun Bion 

aefenerum. Of the liver was quite fruftrated by reafon thatthe concoction or alteration o444,, 
Chylus was intercepted by occafion of the tumour :aad moreover, the liver jr frp. 

had aproper difeafe, for ic was hard and fcirrhous, and had many abfcefles bo.) 

vithin and without it, and all overit. The mile was {carce free from putref.4;,, 
the guts and Kall were fomewhat blew and {potted,and to bee briefe, there was no. 
thivg found in the lower belly. 

There is the like hiftory to bee read, written by Philip Ingrafsias, in bis booke of 
fumours,ofa cettaine Moore that was hanged for theft, for (faith he) when his body 
wasioublikely diffected inthe Mefenterinm were found feventy 
and fo many abicefles were contained or enclofed in their feverall cy{ts or skins,and 
flicking to the external! runicle, efpecially of the greater guts: the matter conteyned 
in them was divers, for it was hard,knorty,clammy, glutinous, liquid and wareii{h, 
burtthe entrals,e{pecially the liver and the;milt, were found and free from all manne; 
of tainture, becaufe (asthe fame Author alledgcth) nature being f{trong, had fenral| 
the evill juice, andthe corruption of the entrals into the Mefentery : and verily this 
Moore, {fo long as he lived,was in good and perfect health. Without doubt the cor. 
Lib 6.part.morb. Taption Of faperfluous humours forthe moft part is fo great (as it is noted by Ferre. 
Cap. 7. fius) that it cannot bee received in the receptacles that nature hath appointed forir; 

therefore then no {mall portion thereof falleth downe into the parts adjoyning, and 

rhe a¢ fury; Cfpecially into the Mefentery and pancreas which are as ie were the fink of the whole 
wnisthefiake body. Inthofle bodies which through continual! and daily gluttony abound wit 
cCholer,melancholy and flegme, ifit be not purged in time, nature being {trong and 
lufty,doth depell and drive it downe into the pancreas and the Mefentery which arc 

as places of no great repute, andthat efpecially out of the liver and mult by thoi 
veines or branches of the vena porta which end or goe not into the guts, but are tr- 

inated in the Mefentery and pancreas. In thefe places divers humours are heapec 
rogether,which in procefle of time turne into a loofe and foft tumour;e then if 

vrow bigecr,into a ftiffe,hard and very {cirrhoustemour. Whereof Fe nei 

meth that in chofe places he hath found the caufes of choler, melancholy,fuss,°y- 
ptions,tedious and uncertaim fevers 26 

ly of many hidden difeafes, by the taking away whereof fome have receivec 


The Scrophu- health,that have been thought paft cure. Moreover Jagra(sias afhimeth out 
laes inthe 
Ade fcatcrum,. 


Polux that Scrophulaes may be engendredin the Metentery, which nothing os 
fromthe mind & opinion of Galen, who Gaish that Scrophulaes are nothing ¢! ¢ 
indurate & {cirrhous kernels.But the Mefenterium with his glandules being urea! and 
many making the Pancreas, dotheftablith, ftrengthen and confirme the dis ifions 
theveifels. Alfothe fcirrhus of the proper fubftance of the wombe is to bee ail 
guithed from the mola : for in the bodies of fome women that I have opened, | 9" 
found the wombe annoyed witha fcirrhous tumour as big as a mans head, ia 
ring whereof Phyficians nothing prevailed, becaufe they fuppofed itto beca””” 
in the capacity ofthe wombe, and nota {cirrhous tumour in the 
thereof, 


A (cirrhus of 


ehe womec. 


rhe act of gener: 
crude and wate) 
refticles, where 
wanton copulat 
copious 1n quai 
znd puffed up 
the feed of the: 
thofe mcn neve 
fence in their te 
ordelighted w 
thacthey yeeld 
be parents Of m 
Phe wom, 
when hac! 
man be more q 
cut forthe {ton 
by certaine bra 
fochatafcer ch 
leminall marc< 
to be bet iveen 
topped, che | 
iDirits from chy 
fy follow, th 
rh. 
Cahnat 
in 
imercepted o1 
leed, bur a ce 
With tome fee 
M reove rt t 
too thor. o 
Woman,and { 
cannot vy 
lighe allo 
TOOked, and 
Or traighely 
the conduir o 
Cannot ejacul 
Alfo the D2 
2nd you may | 
Water : for ex 
ken ofthe pal 
Hot fhirinke 
Calethe 
Ure or 
that Nave thei 
With an evill | 


AB 24. 
Bie 
be’ 
| 
} 
i 
‘ 
| 
* 
meat 
i 
| 


the bladder i 
ule it refted on th. 
excrements won|d 
aNd as concer 
the greatneffe of 
did no good ataj} 
he midriffe or dig, 
did be 
iredly this difeafe 
re, forthe funtion 
or alteration of the 
cr, the liver jt {cl fe 
many ablccfles borh 
from putrefection, 
iefc, there was no. 


145, in bis booke of 
when his body 
rophuloustumonrs, 
cy{ts or skins,and 

e Matter conteyned 
liquid and watciith, 
ree from all] manner 
 {trong, had {enrall 
ery : and verily this 
hout doubt the 
itis noted by Ferre. 
sth appointed for it; 
arts adjoyning, and 
he fink ofthe whole 
urrony abound with 
ire being ftrong and 
lefentery ,whick are 
and milr by thote 
the guts, but are tcr- 
humours are heaped 
moursé then if cicy 
Fernelins 
lancholy,fluxcs,¢y- 
rtaim fevers,and lait- 

have received 
wmeth out of Jal 
hich nothing 
are nothing clic 
dules being yreat and 

rme the divifions of 
pmbe is to bee diftin- 
have opened, I have 
mans head, in thect 
pofed it to bees 
“tumour in the body 


CHa? 


Lis, 24. 


Concerning the Generation Man. 931 


Cuar.XXXVII. 


Of the canfé of barrenneffe in men. 


See out again: for {uch is the feed of old men and {triplings,and of fuch as ufé 


pron copulation. Furthermore, that the feed may be fertile ic mut of neceflity be 
pious 10 quantity, butin quality well concocted, moderately thicke, clammy, 
od puffed up with che abundance of fpirits ; both thefe conditions are wanting in 
feed ofthem that ufe copulation too often : and moreover, becaufe the wives of 
jofe men never gather a quantity of feede laudible both in quality and confi- 
sence inthetrtelticles, whereby it commeth to paffe thar they are the leffe provoked 
delighted with venereous actions, and performethe act with lefle alacriry, fo 
4acthey yeeld chem {elves lefle prone to conception. Therefore let thofe that would 
parents of many children ufe a mediocrity in the ufe of venery. 

[he woman may perceive thatthe mans feed hath fome diftemperature in it, if How checutting * 
wien thee hacti received it into her wombe, fhee feeleth it fharpe, hot or cold, if the (**:<vcines be 
nin be more quick or flow inthe a&. Many become barren afterthey have beene ar veer 
ftone, and lixewile when chey have had a wound behind the cares, where- barrcn. 
weertaine branches of the jugular veines and arteries have been cur, that are there, 
nthatafcer chofe vellels have been cicatrized, there followed an interception of the 
iminall matter downewards, and alfo ofthe community which ought of neceffity 
obebetweenethe braine and the telticles, fo that when the conduits or paflages are 
topped, che ftones or tefticles cannot any morc receive, neither matternor lively 
birits from the braine in fo great quantity as it was wont, whereof it muf of necel- 
iy follow, that the feed mug bee leffer in quantity, and weaker in quality. 

Thofe chat have their telticles cut off, or elfe compreffed or contuled by violence, 
children, becaufe chat either they wane the help that the tefticies fhould 
ninifler in che of generation, or becaufe the paflage of the feminall matter is 
imercepted or (topped with a Callus : by reafon whereof they cannot yecld forth 
iced, bur a certaine clammy hnmour conteyned inthe glandules called projfate (yet 
wthfome feeling of delight). 

Moreover the defects or imperfe@tions of the yard may caufe barrenneffe : as,if it 
thort, or if ic bee fo unreafonable great, that it renteth the privie parts of the 
vwonan.and fo cauferh afluxe of bloud, for then it is fo painefull to the woman, that 
hee cannot voydeher feed, forthat cannot bee excluded without pleafure and de- 
light ,alfo ifthe fhormneffe of the ligament that is under the yard doth make it to bee 
Cooked: and violate the ftiffe ftraightneffe thereof, fo that it cannot be put directly 
or ftraightly in the womans privie parts. There bee fome chat have not the orifice of 
theconduit of the yard rightly in the end thereof, bura litcle higher, to chat they 
ejaculate or caft out their feed direly into the wombe. 

Alfo the particular palfie ofthe yardis numbred among the caufes of barrennefle Thefignetete 
tad you may prove whether the palfie be in the yard by dipping the genitals in cold fr 
Water : for except they do draw themfelves together or {hrinkeup after it, itis a to- 
ken of thie palfie, for naeabers that have the palfie, by the touching of cold water,do 
bue remaine in their accuftomed laxity and lootenefle : but inthis 
‘alethe gcnitals are endued with {mall fenie; the feed commeth out without plea- 
lite or (tiffenefle of the yard ; the ftones in touching are cold; andto conclude,thofe 
that have their bodies daily waxing leane through aconfumption, or that are vexed 


With an evill habit or difpofition, or with the obftru@ion of fome of the entrals,are 


and unfertile, and likewife thofein whom fome noble pact 


Op Here aremany caufes of barrennefs in men,that is to fay,thetoo hot,cold, 
fa dry ormoyf diftemper of the feed, the more liquid and flexible confi- 
(AD ftence thereof, fo that it cannot {tay in the womb. but will prefently 

pe actof generation too often and immoderatcly : for thereby the feed becommeth How the ed 

ieand wateri{h, becaufe that ie doth not remaine his duc and lawful! time inthe 

..cicles, wherein 1¢ fhould be perfe@ly wrought and concocted, but is evacuated by 


932 (Concerning the Generation of <M an. 


and pencration exceedeth the bounds of nature with fome great diftem perature an 
laftly thofe who by aby meanes have their genital! parts deformed. 


Macickbanés omit thofe that are witholden from the of generation by inchantm 


and enchanted witching, and enchanted knots, bandsand ligatures, for thofe cau {es belon. 
i nom not to phyfick, neither may they bee taken away by the remedies of our arr, Th. 
i Doétors of the Cannons lawes have made mention of thofe magick bands which 
may have power inthem,in the particulartitle De frigidss, malefcsatss, impotentily, 
incantatis : alfo St. Augwft.hath made mention of Joan, 
Cuarv. XXXVIITI. 
of the barrenne(fe or anfruitfulne(fe of momen, shachath her g: 
| Woman may become barren or unfruitfull through the obftrugig, of hat w 
Thecaulewhy the of the feed, or through ftraightnefle or narrowneffe {paring 
| wompeis nar- ars sad necke of che wombe,comming either throug tne default of theform. i T hofe that h 
| row. irive facultie, or elfe afterwards by fome mifchance, as by an ableeg. ismorcliquica 
2a {cirrhus, warts, chaps, or by anulcer, which being Cicatrized, doy) anditis {paring 
make the way more narrow, fo that the yard cannot have free risually 
WE The membrane Moreover, the membrane called Hymen, when it groweth inthe midft orinthebo, GR prefently afer 
come of the neckof the wombe, hinders the receiving of the mans feede. The figresof 
womb be over flippery,or moreloofe,or flack,or over wide, it maketh the womanto profulion of a | 
bee barren, fo doth the fuppreffion of the menftruall fluxes, or the too immodere bemade flipp~ 
flowing of the courfes or whites : whichcommeth by the default of the wombeg; JR bythechaps « 
fome entrall or ofthe whole body, which confameth the menftruall matter,and cy. likeuntothe ord 
rieth the feed away with it. willchap aad« 
Thecaneof  Thecoldand moytft diftemperature of the wombe,extinguifhes and fuffocatesthe Willelote and) 
of mans {ced, and maketh ic thar it will not ftay or cleave unto the wombe,and Awomanis 
it be conconéted : burthe more hot and dry doth corrupt for want of nourifhmen, ofowers doc 
for the feeds that are fowne either ina marifh or fandy ground cannot profperwell: BR" isyet Oped. i 
alfo a mola contained inthe wombe,the falling down of the wombe, the leannelleof ved if, it wall b 
the womans body, ilihumours bred by cating crude and raw fruits,or great orover. 
} much drinking of water, whereof obftructions and crudities follow, which hinde: ume that the fi 
her fruirfulneife. Furthermore, by theufe of ftupefactive things, the feminall ma dew into 
ter is congealed and reftrained,and though it fow and becaftout, yeritisdeprived “OUP Againe,o 
ofthe prolificke power,and ot the lively heatand {pirits,the orifices or corylidons hofe whic! 
of the veines and arteries are ftopped,and fo the paflage for the menftrual! matter hardly or feld: 
tothe wombce,is topped. When the Kall is fo fat that it girdeth in the wombent- difeafed, and 
rowly, ichindereth the fruitfulnefle of the woman, bee $00. 
mans feedto enter into the wombe. Moreover the fatand fethy habirofthemanor are fom 
WOMAN hinder generation. For it hindreth them thatthey cannot wommbe 
ue tall parts together by how much the more bloud gocth into far,by fomucht wien the 
leffe is remaining tobe turned into feed & meniftruall bloud, whichtwoarerheo may bear 
& principals of generation, Thofe women thatare {peckled in the atoever do 
3.04. what lean, & pale,becaufe they have their genitals moyftned witha are kepr, 
tickling humour,are more giventovenery than thofethat are red & fat. Finally," forth 
pocrates {ets downe foure caufes onely why women are barren andunfruitfull. 
firft is, becaufe they cannot receivethe mans fecde, by reafon of che defaule of et Pliny 
neck ofthe wombe ; the fecond, becaufe whenit is received into the wombe, tt? By lecond 
cannot conceive it; the thirdis,becaufe they cannot nourifhit; the tourtl, | of 
they are notable to carry or beare ituntill the due and lawfulltime of her ag 
things are neceflary to generation,the obje@, wil, faculty,concourfe of the decfupy 
Db the remaining or abiding thereof inthe wombe, untill the due and appointed 02° om i 
tall time. tater ; wi 


m Senitable 
Natill the third 


a ‘ a4 
q 
fe 
| 
we 
3 


by inchantmen? 

ole caufes belon. 
Of Our art. Th. 
bands 
ENT Ly 
Joan, 


he obftruGion of 
rrownelle of the 
ault of the forma. 
is by an ablceffe, 
CiCatrized, dorh 
paflage thereinto: 
aidft or in thebor. 
feede. Alfoif the 
ceth the womanto 
1¢ COO ImMmModerate 
of the wombe or 
all matter,and car- 


5 and fuffocates the 
yombe,and ftay till 
nt of nourifhmenr, 
profper well : 


se, the of q 


($,Or great or over- 
Ow, which hinder 
5, the feminal] mat- 
yeritis deprived 
ices or cotylidones 
enftruall matter 
inthe wombe nar- 
willnor permit the 
habit of the man or 
ot joyne their geni- 
 far,by fomuch the 
ich two are rhe orl 
ed in the face fome 
ha falzith, fharp 20d 
& fat. Finally, 
rdunfruitfall. The 
of the defaule of the 
othe wombe, they 
the tourth, becaule 
rime of birth. Thele 


arfe of the feeds,andé 


and appointed 


Concerning the Generation 


Cuar.XXXIX. 
The fignes of a diftempered wombe. 


A 


NS Hat woman is thought to have her wombe too hot, whofe courfes Thefignes of 
| FOS comme forth {paringly and with paine, and exulcerate by reafon ot bor wombe- 


The fignesofa 


cold wombée 


vilclote and joyne together againe as it were with glew. 
Awoman is thought tohave all opportunities unto conception when her courfes A mecctime ‘es 
lowers doe ceafe, for then the wombe is voyd of excrementall filth, and becaufe one?" 
‘isyet open, ic will the more eafily receive the mans {eede, and when it hath recei- 
edit, ic will better retaine icin the wrinkles of the cotylidones yet gaping asit were 
rough and unequall places. Yet a woman will eafily conceave a little bc tore the 
inethat the Howers ought to flow: becaufe that the menftruall matter falling at firtt 
ieedewinto the wombe, is very meetand ficto nourifh the feede, and not to drive 
againe,or to fuffocate it, 

Thole which ufe copulation when their courfes fall downe abundantly will very 
udly orfeldome conceive, and ifthey doe conceive, the child willbe weake and 
dileafed, and eff pecially if the womans bloud chat flowes out be unfound ; but ifthe 
oud bee good and laudable, the childe wil! bee fubject to all plethoricke difcafes. 
There are fome wvomen in whom prefently after the fluxe of the termes, tlic orifice 

tthe wombe will be clofed, fothat they muft of neceffity ufe copulation with a 
naa when their menitruall luxe fluweth, if at left they would conceive at all.A wo- 
um may beare children from the age of fourteene untill forty or fifty: whichcime 

"hofoever doth excced, will beare untill threefcore yeares, becaufe the menftruall 

“xes are kepr,the prolificall faculty is alfo preferved : therefore many women have 
‘ought forth children at that age,bur after that time ne woman can beare,as Arssto- 
“writeth. 
Yet Pliny {faith that.Coraclia (whowas of the houfe of the ) being in the Lib.7.cap-1 4- 
‘xy fecond yeare of her age, bare Volufius Saturnias, who was Contull Valefcus ib.6, cap.a> 
“Tarenta alioaffirmeth, that he faw a woman that bare a childe on the fixty fecond 

icare of her age, having borne betore on the fixtieth and fixty firftyeare. Therefore 

‘Sto bee {uppofed tinat by reafon of the variety of the ayre, region, dict and tem- 

‘rament, the menftruall fuxeand procreative faculty ceafeth in fome fooner,in | 
“me later which variety taketh place alfo in men. For in them although the feede Lib.7.¢e/ if. 
le for the moft part inthe fecond feventh yeare, yet trucly it 


“ull the third feventh yeare. And whereas moft men beget childsen yer 
threcicore 


| 
Lis. 24, 24- 
emperature and | 
Be 
heate, the iuperfluous matter of the bloud being difiolved or 
a turned into wind by the power of theheat: whereupon that men- } 
(truall bloud that floweth forth ismore grofleand black. For itis 
the property of heat,by digefting the thinner fubftance,to thicken 
thereft, and by aduftion to make it more black. Furthermore,fhee 
hath her genitals itching with the defire of copulation, will foone excludethe 
@ (dein copulation, and (hee fhall feete it more fharpe as it goeth through the paf- 
wes, That woman hathtoo cold awombe whoie flowers arccither topped, or 
iw {paringly, and thofe pale and not well coloured. na 
Thofethat have lefle dcfireof copulation, have delight therein,and their feed 
morc liquic and warerifh, and not ftayning a linnen cloth by fticking thereunto, 
nditis (paringly and flowly caftforth. That wombe istoo moiftthar foweth con- Thefignes of a 
Me ually with many liquid excrements, which therefore will not hold the feed, but ™” 
cfently af.er copulation fufereth itto fall out, which will eafily caufe abortion. 
toodry a wombe appeare inthe lictle quantity of the courfes, in the The fisnesofs 
@ yofulion ofa {mallquantity of feed, by the defire of copulation, whereby it may “*y wombs 
Me nade flippery by the moyfture of the fecde, by the fiflures in the neckethereof, 
ythechaps and itching, for allthings for want of moyfture will foone chap, even 
Me \kcuntothe ground, which in the fummer by reafon of a great drought or dryneffe, 
Me chap and chinke this way and that way, andon the contrary, with moifture it 
& L 


threefcore ycers old, which time it they pafle, they beget ull feventy yetthere.> 
fome knowne that have begot children untill the eightieth yeere. Moreove, , a 


writeth that the King begora fonne when hee was fourefcore and 
yceres of age, and alfo Catothe Cenfor after that he was fourefcore, xe 


— 


— 


Lib. cap. 


CuHuar. XL, 


Ariit. lib. 7. ag 
biflor. azim. 


The 


The progaolti- 


CATIONS. 


A hiftory. 


ner fide thereof outward. And fometimes the foolifh rafhneffe of the midwite. whey 
fhee draweth away the wombe with the infant, or wich the fecundine Cleaving ff 
thereunto, and fo drawing it downe andturning the inner fide outward, Fujther 
more, a heavic bearing of the womb, the bearing or the carriage of a great burtheo, 


holding or firetching of the hands or body upwards in thetime of greatneffe wie) aoe uckiew he 
childe, a fall,contufion, fhaking,or jogling by riding, either in a waggon or a coach, | 
or on horfe backe, or by leaping or dancing, the falling downe of a more large and pt a Se 
abundant humor, great griping, a {trong and continual! cough, a Texe/mus, or often 
defire to goto ftoole, yet not voiding any thing, necfing,a manifold and great birth, ment mutt vie 


dificult bearing of the wombe,an aftmaticall and orthopnoical! difficuley of brea. 
thing, whatfoever doth waightily prefle downe the Diaphragm or Midriffe,or tie 
mufcles of the Epiga/trium, the taking of cold aire in therime of travel! with childe, 
or in the flowing of the menftruall fluxe, fitting ona cold marble ftone, or sny othe: 
fuch like cold thing, arethought often timesto bee the occafion ot thefe accidents, 
becaufe they may bring the wombe out of its place. 

[t falls downe in many (faith Ari/fotle) by reafon of the defire of copularion tha 
they have, cither by.rcafon of the luttineffe of their youth,or elfe becaufe they have 
abftained a long time fromit. 

You may know thatthe wombeis fallen downe by the pain of thofe parts where: 
heace itis fallen,that is to fay by the cntrals loynes, os facrumyand by atractablet 
mour at the necke of the wombc, and often with a vifible hanging out, of 3 diverie 
greatneile, according to the quantity that is fallen downe, Ir is !ecne {ome 
times like unto apicee of red fleth, hanging outat the necke of rhe wombe, 1" 
bigneife and forme of a Goole egge ; ifthe woman ftand upright, fhee feclet 
weight to ly on her privie parts, but it the fit or ly.then the perceivetl ton her bacs; 
or goctothe ftoole,the ftraight gut called smte/linum recium will bee picfled or 0% 
den as it were with a burthen, if thee lye on her belly, then her urine will bee {07 
ped, fo that fhee thall feare roufe copulation witha man. | | 

When the wombe is newly relaxed ina young woman, it may bee foone cur’ 
but ifir hath beene long downe inanold woman, itis not to bee helped. If 
palfte of the ligaments thereofhave accafioned the falling, it {carce admits of cu, 
but if ic fall downe by meanes of putrefaction, itcannot poffibly be cured. Ifag 


quantity thereof hang out betweene the thighes, ic can hardly be cured ; but its" 


rupted by taking the ayre, and by the falling downe of the urine and filsh,and byt 
motions of the thighs in going it is ulcerated,and fo putrefies, 


I remember that once [ cured a young woman who had her wombe hang!3""" 


at her privie parts as big asan egge, and I did fo well performe and perfect th cuts 


thereof, that afterwards fhe conceived,and bare children many times, and 
never fell downe, | 
CHA? 


Of the falling downe, or perverfion, or turning of the wombe. 
wombe is faid to fall downe and be perverted, when it is moved 
Wharis thetal- . Our dr2 
of its proper and naturall place ; as when the bands and ligatures there 
thewombe. of being loofed and relaxed, it falleth downe unto one fide or othe, muft be 
into its owne necke, or clfe paffeth further, fo tharit comes OUt 2t the el 
rhecaues, Becke, anda great portion thereof appeares without the privie parts, Theretore then cupping 
what things foever refolve, relaxe, or burft the ligaments or bands Whereby the ed intotl 
wombce is tyed, are fuppofed to be the caufes ofthis accident. It fometimes happens arte. 
by vchement labour ortravell in childe-birth, when the wombe with violence ey orcat 
, cluding the iflue andthe fecundines, alfo followes and falls downe, turning the in. man after anotl 


bee fo layed on 
drawne backe: 
thenthe necke 


ofthe wombe | 
atringent dec: 
lome, horfe-ta 
theirirons; of i 
kled : let a pe 
let it bee eight 
patients body # 
of an ovall for 
paine as need 1 


# 
y 
of 
; 
4 
™~ 
a 
# j | 
4 | 
| 
| 
{ 
j 
i 
= 
| | 
ate 
| 
ak 
4 
3 
Wit 
«“y 
ee 
4. 
a 
} 
* 


Lis. 24., 
venty yetthere ar. 
re. Moreover. Plin 


fourelcore and fixe 
ore, 


yhen it is moved our 
and ligatures there. 
one fide or Other, or 
atic Comes Out at the 
parts. Theretore 
bands whereby the 
t fometimes happens 
be with violence ey. 
turning the in. 
»f the midwite,when 
mundine Cleaving faft 

e outward. Further. 
ge of agreat burthen, 
cof grcatneffe with 
Waggon or a coach, 
eof amore large and 
AT enefmns, or often 
sifold and great birth, 
all difficulty of brea- 
a or Midriffe,orthe 
f travell with childe, 
mle ftone, or any othe: 

on of thefe accicents, 


ire of copulation that 
fe becaufe they have 


ofthofe parts where- 
land by a tractable tu 
ging our, of a diverle 
e. Ir is feene iome- 
of the wombe, oi 
right, fhee feeleth the 
‘eiveth ton her back, 
Mill bee prefled or [oa- 
er urine will bec ftop- 


may bee foonc cured, 
o bee helped. If the 
{carce admits of cure, 
bly be cured. Ifa orcat 
be cured ; but it 
ne and filth,and by 

rwombe hanging 
and perfect the ce 
y times, and her 


neration of Man. 935 


Crap. XLI.' 
Thecure of the falling downe of the Wombe. 


Y this word, falling downe of the wombe, we underftand every moti- Remedies‘o: 
on of the womb ont ofits place or feat: therefore if the wombe afcend the aeenfion of 


2) upwards, wee mutt ufethe fame medicines as ia the ftrangulation of the weos 
 wombe. Ifitbee turned towards cither fide, it mult bee reftored and 
drawne backe toits right place, by applying and ufing cupping glaffes. 
gatif it defcend and fall downe into its owne neck, but yet not in great quantity, the 
woman muft be placed fo that her buttockes may be very high, and her legs acrofle; 
‘hen cupping glaffes mutt bee applied to her navelland Hypoza/friwm,and wher the 
wombe is fo brought into its place, injefions that binde and dry ftrongly muft bec 
into the necke ofthe wombe, ftinking fumigations muft bee ufed unto the 
privie parts, and {weetthings ufed tothe mouth and note. Butifthe wombe hang 
jowne in great quantity betweene the thighes, it muftbe cured by placing the wo- femdaabdie 
ginafter another fort, and by ufing other kinde of medicines. Firft of all (hee mult wonle proper 
hee (0 layed on her backe, her buttockes and thighes fo lifted up, and her leggcs (oY °° 
jrawne backeas when the childe or fecundine are to bee taken or drawne from her ; 
hen the necke of the wombe, and whatfoever hangeth our thereat, mutt be anoin- 
ed with oile of lillies,freth butter, capons greafe,and fuch like,then it muft be chruft 
gently with the fingers up into its place, the fick or pained woman in the mean time 
xlping or furthering the endeavourby drawing in of her breathas it fhe did {uppe, 
jrawing up as it were that whichis fallen downe 
After that the wombc is reftored unto its place, whatfoever is filled with the oint- 


| ment muft be wiped with a foft and cleane cloth, left that by the flipperineffe there- 


wombe fhould fall downe againe, the genitalls muftbee fomented with an 
itringent deco@tion, made with pomegranate pills, cypreffe nuts, galles, roach al. 
‘ome, horfe-taile, fumach, berberies, boiled inthe water wherein Smithes quenca 
‘eirirons; of thefe materialls make a. powder, wherewith let thofe places be { prin- 
‘led: let a peflary of acompetent bigneffe be put in at thenecke of the wombe, but 
‘tit bee eight or nine fingers in length, according to the proportion of the grieved 
ptients body. Let them bee made cither with latin, or of corke covered with waxe, 
ofan ovall forme, having athredat one end, whereby they may bee drawne backe a- 
ptine as need requires. ; 


The formes of ovall peffaries. 


A. oeweth the body of the Pe(fary. 
heweshethe thread wherewish st mouft be tyed te the high. 


When 
\ 


’ 
‘ a = ry 
| 
‘ \ 
| 
~ = 
= 
= AB A 
Z 
| 
A 
4 
4 
4 
B 
| 
4 
| 
| 
| 


Trati.das mirada. 


mor bor. caul. 


A hiftory. 


Lip, 24 


936 Concerning the Generation Man. 


7_ 


Caies 


ration. makethercof adecoGion for your ule. Give her allo glytters, that when the QUES are 


emptied of theexcrements, the womb may the better be received into thy voydand 
empty capacity ofthe belly : forthisreafonthe bladder is alfo to be em Dried p 
otherwifs it were dangerous left thatthe wombe lying betweene them bor) bein 
full, fhould be kept down and cannot be put up into its owne proper place by 
therof.Alfo vomiting is fuppofed to be afingular remedy to draw up the wom,, 


Hiow vom ting ts failen down: furthermore alfo it purgeth out the phlegme which did Moiften dnd 


is profit blero? 


chefallingdown telaxethe ligaments of the wombce for as the wombe inthe time of copularig, 
efthe wombe. the beginning af the conceprion is moved downewards to meet the feed, forthe No, 
macke, even of its owne accord, is litred upwards when itis provoked by thei jury 
of anything that is contrary unto it, to caft it out with greater violence, but when; 
is fo raifed up, it drawes up together therewith the perstonawm,the wombe, ane 
the bodie or partsannexed untoit. If it cannot bee cured or reftored unto irs 
by thefe preicribed remedies, and that it be ulcerated and fo putrefyed that it canpoy 
wom svacaitts be reftored uato his place againe, we are commanded by the precepts of art to cure 
ees away, and thento cure the womb according to art, but firft it fhould be tyed, ands 
much as is neceflary muft bee cut off, andthe reft feared witha cautery. I hereac 
fome women that have had almoft alltheir wombe cut off, without any danger of 
rid. 6. their lite, as Paw/us ceftifiech. 
rpif.zo.th2, Langius Phyfitian tothe Count Palatine, writeththat Carpus the Chirurgian 
tookc our the wombe of a woman of Bonenia, he being prefent, and yet the woman 
lived and was very well afterit. Astonins Benivenius Phyfitian of Florence, writetl 
that hee wascalled by “golivs the Phyfitiantothe cure of awoman whole wombs 
was corrupted and fell away from her by peeces, and yet fhee lived ten yeeresal- 
ter it, 
There was a certaine woman, being found of body, of good repute, and about 
he age of thirty yeers,in whom fhorily after fhe had been married the {econ ume, 
which was ia daze 1571. having no childe by her firft husband, the lawtuli lignes 
of aright conception did appear : yet ia procefle of time there arofe about the low- 
er part of her privitics the fenfe or feeling of a waight or heavinefic, being fo 
blefomeunto her by reafon that it was painefuil, and alfofor that it topped her 
tine, that fhe was conftrained to difclofe her mifchance to Chriftopher Mombey 
rurgian her neighbour dwelling inthe fuburbs of $. Germans ; who havingie 
the tumour, or {welling in her groine, affwagedthe paine with mollifying anc eo 
dine fomentations and cataplafmes; but pre fently after he had done this, hee 
onthe inner fide of the lip ofthe orifice of the necke of che wombe,an apoltume!>” 
cen & running as if ic had biaout of an abfcefle newly broken, with fanious 
fomewhat red. yellow,& pale,running out a long time. Yet for all this the 
the heavinefs or waight was nothing diminifhed,butdid rather encreafe daily io 
from the yeere of our Lord 1 $73. the [could notturne herfelfe being in bed on 
or that fide, unleffe fhe layed her hand on her belly to beare and cafe her felte of pe 
waight, and alfo fhe faidwhen fhe turned her fel, fhe feemed to feele a thing like 
toabawle torowlc in her body unto the fidewhereunto fhe turned her 
could fhee goe to ftoole, or avoyd herexcrements ftanding or fitting, unlefle $e 
lifted up that waight with her hands towards her ftomacke or midriffe : wheo 
was about to go fhe could {carce fet forwards her feet, asif there had fomething oat 
ged between herthighes, that did hinder her going. At certaine feafons that 
apoftume would open, or unclofe of it felfe,and flow or run with its wonted | rt 
matter, but then fhe was grievoufly vexed with paine of the head, andalitict men 


bers, fwouning, loathing, vomiting, andalmoft choking, fothat by the 


The cutting a- 
way of the 


With 


4 
[Roe 


L 18.24» 


on ofa foolifh 
Ling and {trens 
ay frectings Of 
fel] downe ; bt 
whom (he 
dament, but it 
Chirurgians, a 
her in this ext 

When we h 
of her difeate, 
bee cut away, | 
gave a manife! 
daies wee drc\ 
rothe 
and alfo to out 
fo, becaufe on 
being the relic 
out by little an 
ficke woman 
nine dayes be! 
was topped f 

After this 4 
three monet: 
lhaving open 
not finde the 
lous body, wh 
the want there 


2... 


bee 


~ 


head. But Ic 
allthat I had 

Yet once ] 
tracted roam 
that hindered 
acertaine very 
Orifice of the 
the termes mi 
Zers, and tol: 
hortly after 
this is ene \ 
Not in all 
feldome) it { 
OF it is very ¢ 


44, Whenall this is done, let the ficke woman keep her felfe quiet in her hea 
her buttocks lying very high, and her legsacroffe,for the tpace of eight orter 
ald inthe meane while the application of cupping glaffes will flay the wom) 
right place and {eat after itis reftoredtherceunto : but if thee hath taken | 
cold aire, let the privie parts be fomented with a difcuffing and heating 
on this wile. fol. alth, (alu, lavend, rori{mar, artemif. flor. chamam me! | 
maide 
POled of vein 


quiet in her bed. 
of 


ath taken any burt is 
heating fomentatio 
chamam mel |. 
lan 
water and Wine, and 
hat when the guts are 
ed into the Voydand 
0 to beempried, fy, 
ene them both beir 
oper place by reafon 
awup the wom) that 
Bich did moiften ang 
time of copulation» 
et the feed, fothe fo. 
ovoked by the injury 
but when je 
wombe, and al{o 
ftored unico irs place 
trefyed that it cannor 
rece pts Of art to cur jr 
hould be tyed, and as 
a cautery. Lhereare 
vithout any danger of 


arpus the Chirurgian 


and yct the woman 


n of Florence, writeth 
yan whole wombe 
e lived ten yeeres af- 


od repute, and about 
‘ried the fecond ume, 
d, the lawfuli lignes 
arofe about the low- 
‘inefle, being fo trou- 
that it topped her u- 
opher M ormbey a Chi- 
ns «who having 
mollifying anc 200- 
done this, hee found 
nbe,an apoftume ror 
with fanious 
all this the feeling o 
ncreafe daily ,fo that 
Be being in bed on thus 
deafe her felte of the 
feele a thing like 
ned her 
or fitting, unleffe thee 
midriffe : when fhee 
had fomething 
ne feafons that 
th irs wonted faniovs 
ad, 
hat by the per a) 


“nof foolifh woman fhe was induced and co 


ingand ftrength thereof was fo great and vio] 


ntented to take Antimoninm; the wor- 


ent, that after many vomits, with ma- ken ina poric 
- Kenna pouor 
wy trettings of the gutsand watry dejedtions or ftooles, the thought her fundament caute che 


|downe; but being certified by a woman that wasa familiar 7; wombe to fall 
(he fhewed her felfe, that there was n of downs, 


othing fallen downe at or from her fun- 
jgment, but it was from her wombe, thee called, in the yeere of our Lord 1575. 


Chirurgians, as my felfe, Zames Guillemean, and Antony Vieux,that we might helpe 
her in this extremity. 

Wien we had diligently and with good confideration weighed the whole eftate phe genes of 
other difeafe, wee agreed with one confent, that that which was fallen down fhould thefubftance 
yee cut away, becaufe that by the blacke colour, ftinking, and other fuch fignes ir 9‘? "°"* 
paved manifelt teftimony ofa putrefyed and corrupted ing. Therefore for two 
daies wee drew out the body by little and little, and piece-meale, which feemed un- 
rothe Phy ficians that wee had called, as Alexius, Gaudinus, F enreus,and Violaneus 
«od alfo to our felves, to be the body of the wombe, which thing we proved to bee 
fo, becaufe one of the tefticles came out whole, and alfa thicke membrane or skin, 
peing the relick of the mola, which being {uppurated, and the ab{ccfle broken, came 
out by little and little in matter; after thatall this body was{fodrawne away, the 
fcke woman began to waxe better and better, yet notwithftanding for the {pace of 
sine dayes before tt was taken away, fhe voided nothing by fiege, and herurinealfo 
was topped for the {pace of foure daics. 

After this all things became as they were before, and thee lived in good health 
three moneths after, and then died of a Pleurifie that came on her very fuddenly,and 
lhaving opencd her body ,obferving and marking every thing very diligently could 
not findethe wombe atall, but inftead thereof there was acertaine hardand cal- 
lousbody, which nature, who is never idle, had framed in {tead thereof to fupply 
thewant thereof, orto fill the hollownelffe of the belly. 


Of the tunicle or membrane called Hymen. 


N fome virgins or maidensin the orifice of theneck of the WoMD thee 
there is found a certaine tunicle or membrane called of apti- bea membrane 
AWA! ent writers Hymen, which prohibiteth the copulation of a man, “4 4m” 
| and cauferh a womanto be barren; this tunicle is fuppofed by ma- 
\ ny, and they not of thecommon fort onely, but al/o learned Phys. 
244 firians, to be, as it were, the enclofure of the virginity or maiden- 
head. But Lcould never finde it in any, feeking of all ages from three to twelve, of 
illthat [had under my hands in the Hofpitall of Pars. 
Yet once I faw it ina virgin of feaventcene yeeres, whom her mother had con- 
tracted to. a man, and fhe knew nevertheleffe there was fomething in her privic parts 
that hindered her from bearing of children, who defired me to fee her ; and | found 
Accrtaine very thin nervous membrane a little beneath the nymphe, neere untothe 
Otifice of the neck of the wombe ; inthe midft there was 4 very littic hole whereout 
etermes might flow : I fecing the thickenefle thereof, cut it in funder with my 
ters, and told her mother what the fhould doe afterwards: and crucly thee married 
hortly after and bore children. Realdus Columbus is of my opinion. ond faith that 
this is ene very feldome, for thefe are his words: under the aymphe in many, but 
Notin all virgins, there is another membranc, which when itis prefent(w hich is but 
eldome) it Roppeth, fo that the yardcannot be put into the orifice of the wombe ; ‘ 
itis very thicke above towards the bladder, it hath an hole by which the courfes 
low out. And heealfoaddeth that he obferved itin two young virgins, aiidin one 
‘lder maide. 
4vicen writeth that in virgins in the neckeof the wombe there are tunicles com. Lid, 3./o 2 
Poled of veines and ligaments very little, rifing each part of che necke 


0. II, ré, 


s 
4, 
ie 
wt | 
# 
4 
4 
| 
eg 
| 4 
a 
| Bh 


is 


happen. 


the breaking and violating or renting of the little veines which are woaven and be. 
forcadall over the fuperficial & inward parts of the womb and neck thereof ,defcen. 
ding into the wrinkles,whichin thofe that have not yetufed theact of generation, a, 
: Whar vieginsat clofed asif they were glewed together: although that thofe maides that are at their 


pooner reg a due time of marriage, feele no pain nor no fiux of blood, ef pecially if the mans yard 
nocbleedartheir be anfwerable to the neck of che womb; whereby it appeares evidently how preatly 
inhabitants of Fe% ,the metropolitane city of Mauritania, are deceived: tor Ly 
the writeth thar it is che cuftome among them, that fo foon as the married 
man and his {poufe are returned home to their houfe from the church where they 
have been married,they prefently fhut themfelves into a chamber,and make falt the 


dore, whilethe marriage dinner is preparing : tn the mean while fome old or grave 


938 Concerning the Generation of Man. Lin, 2 
- which atthe firft time of copulation are wontto bee broken, and the blood to tunp ne mydwives 
out. Almanfor writeth that in virgins, the paflage or necke of the wombe one, and dida 
i wrinkled, or narrow and ftraight, and thofe wrinkles to be woaven or ftayed rope ¢childe-birth 
i ther with many little veines aad arteries, which are broken at the firft time of Copy. ost Therefc 
lation. | 2 vere void of h 
are the judgements of Phy ficians of this membrane : Midwives wil] Certain. ad her urine 
midwivesabout Jy affirme that they know a virgin from one that is defloured, by the breach " ioffe of appeti 
4 eens foundneffe of that membrane. But by their reporttoo credulous Judges are foone Led the orifice 
to commit an errour. For that Midwives can {peake nothing Certainely of he knew alfo tk 
i this membrane, may bee proved by this, becaufe that one faith that the firuatio, shereof,and th 
7 thereof is inthe very entrance of the privie parts, others fay it is inthe midgt of the yous and tora 
i) necke of the wombe, and others fay it is within at the inner orificethereof, and (ome willed him to 
are of an opinion they fay or fuppofe thatit cannot be {een or perceived before thebloud, wh 
ii the firft birth. But truly of a thing fo rare,and which is contrary to nature,there can. fied bloud as \ 
| not be any thing {poken for certainty. Therefore the blood that commeth out arth: ofall difeate a: 
i firft time of copulation,comes not alwaies by the breaking of that membrane, by by caufe itis wort 


matron ftandeth waiting before the chamber dore,to receive a bloody linnen cloth edas it were | 
the new married husband is to deliver her there, which when fhe hath received, fhe ded with fuln 
brings it intothe midft of all the company of guefts, asa freth fpoile andteftmony that it maker hil 
of the married wives virginity, and then for joy thereof they all fall co banqueting orefled ir. 
folemnely. But ifthrough evill fortune it happeneth thar in this time of copulation Moreover ff 


tane fubftanc 
orwhites, 
juice, putrefy; 
vapours. [| 
Cidents, as ru 
ter (WIth 
the ftomack. 
hing fit vex 
Or drouGnes} 
Une of 
It hath b< 
COrraption ¢ 
thing is mort 
tegrity of its 


the {poule bleedeth not in the privie parts, thee is reftored againe unto her parents, 
which is a very great reproach unto them,and all the guefts depart home fag, hears, 
and without dinner. 

Morcover, there are fome, that having learned the moft filthy and infamousarts 
-citofbands & of bawdry, proftitute common harlots to make gaine thereof, making men thatae | 
nau ghtily given to beleeve that they are pure virgins, making them cothinke 

the act of generation is very painefulland grievous unto them, as ifthey had acver' 
fed it before, although they are very expert thercia indeed, for they doe cauk ie 
necke of the wombe to be fo wrinkled and fhrunke together, forhat the tices tit 
of thall even aimoft clofe or meet together , then they putthereinto the bladcers Oi 
fifhes, or gales of beafts filled fuil of blood, and fo deceive the ignorant and you's 
lecher, by che fraud and deceit of their cvill arts, and in the time ol copulation tne) 
mixe fighes with groanes, and womanlike cryings, and the crocodilestcates, 8 


they may feemeto be virgins, and never to have dealt with man before. 


de 


COrrupcoll 
Cuap. XLITI. Orderly, and 

A memorable bi flory of the membrane called Hymen. clpecially if 

Wier ws writeth that there was a maid at Camburge, who in of the 

ae G OVE. deft of the necke of the wombe, had a thicke and ftrong mee o th to their 
ae yrowing overthwart, fo that whenthe monethly termes (hou! th 

our, it would not permit them, fothat thereby the menftruali fide to 

on was {topped and flowed back againe, which caufed agreattum atds uneg 

diftenfionin the belly, with great torment, asif fhe had beene in travel with ¢ the Othe blac 


‘ * | 
é 
4, 
| 
= 
ij 
q > 
| 
4 
* 
Be 
¥ 
: ay 
4 
q 
> 
wy 
~ ‘ 
q 


Li.24, 


ye mydwives being called, and having f{eene and confidered all that had beene 


the blood to runn 
e igge,and did appeare, did all with one voyce affirme,that thee fuftained the paines 


he wombe iS V 


vilde-birth, although that the mai 
ven or ftayed tope fchilde-bitth, although that the maide her felfe denyed that thee ever dealt with 
¢ Arlt time of co Du. an. Therefore then this forefaid Author was called, who, when the mydwives 
, B® .-evoid of help and counfell, might helpe this wretched maid, having already 
dwives will certain. her urine topped now three whole wecks,and perplexed with, great watchings 
I, by the breach or  jofeof appetite, and loathing: and whenhee had {eene the grieved place,and mar- 
Judges arefoone ycdthe orifice of the neck of the wombe, he faw it {topped with a thick membrane - 
othing certainely o¢ Mm pekaew alfo that that fudden breaking out of bloud into the wombe and the velels 
h that the fituation aereof,and the paflage for thofe matters that was ftopped,was the caufe of her gric- 
isinthe midft ofthe yous and tormenting paine. And therefore heecalleda Chirurgian prefently, and 
scethercof, and{ome jj willed him to divide the membranethat was in the midft, that did {top the fluxe of 
or perceived before ebloud, which being done, there came forth as much black congealed and putre- 
to nature,there can. jdbloud as wayed fome eight pounds. In three dayes after fhee was well and void 
tcommeth out at the alldifeafe and paine. Ihave thought it goodto fet downe this example here, be- 
at membrane, but by aufe itis worthy to be noted,and profitable to be imitated ,as the like occaGon (hal! 
h are woaven and be. happen. 


neckthereof,defcen. 


aides that are at their Cuar 


ally ifthe mans yard 
avidently how greatly @ Of the ftranculation of the wombe, 
redeceived: for Leo 
ofoonasthe married He ftrangulation of the wombe, or that commeth from the wombe, is an whatis the 
e church where they 69) Na interception or ftopping of the liberty in breathing or taking wind, be- *vangulation o 
ber,and make faft the ‘p) (as caufe that the wombe, {wolne or puffed up by reafon of the acceffe of “SY” 
nile fome oldorgrave ye erofie vapours and humours that are contained therein, andalfo {natch- 
bloody linnen cloth | cdasit were by aconvulfive motion, by reafon that the veffels and ligaments diften- 
fhe hathreceived, fhe ded wich fulnefle,are fo carried upwards acainft the midriffe and parts of the breaft, 
{poile and reftnony that it maketh the breath to bee fhort, and often as ita thing lay uponihe breaftand 
ail fall ro banqueting ir. 
is time of copulation Moreover, the wombe {welleth, becaufe there is contained or inclofed in it a 
mince unto her parents, nine fubftance,caufed by the defluxion either of the feed or flowers,or of the womb fwelleth. 
Boarthome fad,heavic, owhites, or offome other humour, tumour, abfceffe, rotten apoftume,or fome ill 
uice,putrefying, or getting or engendering an ill quality, and refolvcd into grofle 
thy and infamousarts i vapours. Thele,as they affect {undry or divers places, inferre divers and fundry ac- 
making mea thatare ‘dents, as rumbling and noyfe in the belly, if icbeinthe guts, defire to vomit, af- Theaccideres 
e them co thinke that er (with feldome vomiting) commeth wearinefie and loathing of meat,ifirtrouble 
asifthey hadnevertl- tcftomack. Choaking wich ftrangulation,if it affaile the breatt and throate ; {wove of the wombe. 
for they doe cauic tuc dig,if it vex the heart; madacfle,or clfe that whichis contrary thereto, found fleep 
fothatthe fidesthere- ordroufineffe, if it grieve the brain: all which oftentimes prove as maligne as the bi- 
reinto the bladders 0: ing of amad dogge, or equall che ftinging or bitings of venemous beats. 
1ejonorant and young lt hath been obferved, that more grievous fymptomes have proceeded from the why the ftian. 
me of copulation they ‘oiruptionof the {eede, than of the menftruall bloud. For by how much every oases gre ; 
crocodilesteares, that thing is more perfect and noble, while it is conteyned within the bounds of the in- coruptiono: - 
nn before. egtity of its owne nature, by fo much it is the more gricvous and perillous, when thetced ismore 


dangerous 


corruption it hath once tranfgrefled the lawes thereof. Bur this kind of accident 
doth very {eldome grieve thofe womea which have their menftruall fluxe well and ofthe corrupt 
orderly, and doe ule copulation familiarly ; but very often thofe women that have 0 Hehloss 
Nottheir menftruall fluxe as they thould, aad do want,andare deftitute of husbands, 


‘lpecial ly if they be ereat eaters,and lead a folitary life. When the veflels and liga- The cauf ofthe 
surge, who inthe mc Nents of the wombe are{wollenand diftended as wee faid before, fo muchas isad- yo ine. 
and ftrong membrane “ed to their latitude or breadth, fo much is wanting in their length : and therefore divers paw 


ly termes fhoule — 7 “hapneth that the wombe,being removed out of its feate, doth one while fall rothe ™* 
‘the menftruall ma) fide cowards the liver, fometimes to the left fidetowardsthe milt, fomeumes 
fed agreat rumour wands unto the midriffe and ftomacke, fometimes downewards, and fo forwards 
in travell wich chi ‘ne ‘Nothe bladder, whereof commeth an I{chury and ftrangury; or backwarcds,whcre- 
Kkkk 2 0) 


a 
4 
— 
— 


9 4.0 Concerning the Generation of Man. L 
of commeth oppreffion of the ftraight gut, and fuppreffion of the excrem 
the Tenejmus, 

Buc alchough wee acknowledge the wombe to decline tothofe parts which = 
named, yet it isnot by accident oncly, as when it is drawne by the proper and, 
mon ligaments and bands, wheathey are contracted or made fhorter, being dig 
ded with fulneffe, but allo of its felfe, as when it is forced or provoked throy, 74 
griefe of fomething contrary to nature that is contained therein : it wandreth fom : 
times unto one fide, and fometimes unto another part witha plaine and cvider, - 


noc greatly milde,butavoydeth any ching that is offenfiveand hurtfullsyet we deny that fo 


movei oy an ace- 


Whereof come 0 diftended by reafon that the childeis great, that it doth preflethe midritfe, miohs 


fuch diversacci- be tronbled witha ftrangulation likeunto this ; but much rather by a venemoys hy. 


dents of {tran- 


étions thereof. Neither doth the variety of the parts receiving only, but alfo of rhe 
matter received, caufe variety of accidents. 
Theeaufeof For, fomeaccidentscome by fuppreflion of the termes, others come by coyzy». 
See Seg ion of the feede, but if the matter bee cold, it bringeth a droufinefic, being lifted yy 
be, wate the braine, whereby the woman finketh downe as if fhee were aftonifhed, ang 
lyeth: without motion, and fenfe or feeling, and the beating of the arteries, and the 
breathing are fomtimes it istchought.they are not at all, but thatthe wo. 
man is alrogether dead. It icbemore groffe, itinferreth a conyulfton if it partici. 
pate of he nature of agrofie melancholick humour, it bringeth fuch heavineile,fear, 
and iorrowfulnefie, thas the party that is vexed therewith fhali thinke that thee fhall 
Theeautof: dic prefently,and cannot be biought out of this minde by any meanes or realon : if 
of 9 cholerick humour,it caufech the madnefle called furor aterinus,and {uch a pra. 
ling,that they {peake all things that are tobe concealed;anda giddineile of the head, 
by reafonthat the animal ipurit is {uddenly fhaken by the admixtion of a putrelice 
vepour aad hot fpirit : but nothing is mor: admirable, than that this difeate taketh 
che patient fometimes with laughing, and fometimes with weeping, for fomeatthe 
firft will weepeandthen laugh in the difeafe and ftate thereof. 
A hiflory. But it exceedeth all admiration which Holerius writeth ufually happened totwo 
yf che daughters of the Provoft of Roven. Forthey were held with long laughter 
for an houre or two before che fitte, which neither for feare,admonition, vor for aly 
orher meanes they could hold ; and their parents chid them and asked them wnert- 
tore they did fo,they anfwered, thatthey were notable to ftay their lauginer, #4 
Theafention of the wombeis diligently to bee diftinguifhed from the ftrang ulation 
ofthe wombis thereof; forthe accidents of the afcention and of the %rangulation are not one, 
the woman is onely oppreffed with acertaine paine of the heart, dithculty of 
thing, or {wouning, but yet without feare, without raving or idle talking, of 44) 
ther greater accident. 7 
Therefore often times contrary caufes inferre the afcention : that is, overmus" 
deynefle of the wombe, labouring thronghthe of moyfture, wheicdy "» 
forced after tooviolent and immoderate evacuations ef the flowers, and in chi’: 
bed, and fuch like,and laborious and painefull trayell in child-birth, through 
occafion it waxeth hot, contrary to nature, and withereth and tarneth ir felte 
certaine violence unto the parts adjoyning, that is to fay, unto the liver, fromackt 
and midriffe: if happely it may draw fome moyfture therehence unto it, Lomi 
that the wombe may bebrought unto its place upwards by often {melling to ont 
things, yet in the meane while it infers not the ftrangulation that wee 
before. 


> €d 


ents, end 


rhe wombe fo 
ned rO lye dov 
pain, and top 
wards, althous 
wombe, as 
| f{ydden, their u 
| withunablenet 
rion of the fentf 
theirlegs,andt 


ow 


blaile before | 
lcurely the tha 
loa fine down 
being held bet 
that there is {2 
Prove moft ce 
blowing fome 
Burthough th 
the viral! 
With tran{pira 
the conrractio 
For lo Ayes, g 
ive unmoveal 
inthem becat 
CCof the art 
the breaft bec 
“tved by refrl 
Our which al 
For he bei 
POled dead th 
f the incifio 
“tt members 
gto fhew 


L 1B. 
tain 
rhewombeis motion, like tne omack Which Imbraceth any thing Me 
May Dee bp OY Tie SOF tiat fide +. Jumps 
- fF eanefehe mour breathing out amaligne and grofie vapour, not onely by the veines and ay, 
| wor ries, but alfo by the pores that are invifible, which pollutesthe faculties of the py. | 
if touchneth with ifs venemous maugnity & infection, and intercep tun. : 
| 
j 
PAD OAA YH 
| 
Ps “hye > 1 
me Ved.whether | 


the cxcrements, 


ofe parts which wee 


the proper and Com. 
uorter, being diften. 
rovoked through the 
wandreth fome. 
laine and evident Na. 
ing thatis gentle and 
we deny that {o reat 
his or that fide, fo, 
whofe wombcs are 
le the midriffe, 
er by a venemous hy. 
y the veines and arte. 
faculties of the parts 
dintercepts the fyn- 
only, but alfo of the 


| erscome by COITUp- 
inefic, being lifted up 
were aftonifhed, and 
{the artcries, and the 
at all, bur chatthe wo. 
Snvulfion if it partici- 
fuch heavineile,fear, 
thinke that thee fhall 
meanes or realon : if 
and {uch a prar- 
iddineile of the head, 
ixtion of a putrelica 
vat this difeate taketh 
‘ping, for fomeat the 


-reor. 
lly happened rotwo 


id with long laughter 
monition,nor for any 
idasked them where- 
their laughter. The 
om the ftrangulation 
ation arenorone, but 
wrt, dithiculry of brea 
idie talking, or aay 


on : that is, overmuch 
oviture, W hereby it is 
owers, and in childe 
birth, through w hich 
curneth it felte witha 
ro the liver, ftomack 
Shence unto it- Tomit 
en fmelling to 
onthat wee defcrive 


4 q 
B 

= 


and 


Concerning the Generation Man. 


Cuar. XLV. 
The fignes of imminent frrauzulation of the wombe. 


E fore that thefe forenamed accidents come, the woman thinks that a cer- 
A (2 taine painefull thing arifeth from her wombe unto the orifice of the fto- 

(993 mackeand heart, and thee thinketh her felfe to bee oppreffed and choa- 

AW ked, thee complaineth her felfe to bec in great paine, and that a certaine 
ype or heavie thing climes up from the lower parts unto her throat, and ftoppeth 
.winde, her heart burneth and panteth, And in many the wombc and veflels of 
yewombe fo fwell, that they cannot ftand upright on their legs, but are conftrai- 
jtolye downe fat on their bellies, that they may bee the leffe grieved with the 

jine, and to prefle that downe ftrongly with their hands, that feemeth to arife up 
wards, although that not the wombeitfelfe, butthe vapour afcendeth from the The wombcit 
come, as wee faid before: but when the fitte is at hand, their faces are pale on a doth nor & 
(den, their underftanding is darkened, they become flow and weak in the leoges, 
sithunablenefle to ftand. Hereof commeth found fleepe, foolith talking, intercep- vapour thereof, 
ion of the fenfes,and breatheas if they were dead,loffe of fpeech, the contraétion of 
eirlegs,and the like. 


Cuarp. XLVI. 


How to know whether the woman be dead in the ftrangulation 
of the wombe or not. 


Have thought it meet(becaufe many women not onely in ancient times, Womeniiving 


but in our owneand our fathers memory have beene fo taken with this «ken tor diac 
é/ | fk kind of fymptome, that they have beene fuppofed and layd out for 

dead htruly th ive: downe the fignes in {uch 

Xm py dead, although truly they were alive :) to fer downe the fignes in fucha 


cafe which do argue lifeand death. Therefore firft of all it may be pro- 
ied whether fhe be alive or dead,by laying or holding a cleere and {mooth looking- 
blile before her mouth and noftrils. For, if fhe breathe, although it be never fo ob- 
curely,the thin vapour that commeth our will ftaine or make the glaffe duskic. Al- 
(oa fine downifh feather taken from under the wing of any bird, or clfe a fine flocke 
ting held before the mouth, will by the trembling or fhaking motion thereof, fhew 
that there is fome breath, and therefore life remaining inthe body. But youmay 
rovemoft certainly whether there be any {parke of life remaining in the body, by How won 
lowing fome facefing powders of pellitory of Spaine, & ellebore into the noftrils. gisFocationot 
burthough there no breath appeare, yet muft you not judge the woman for dead,for 
‘de {mall vitall heat,by which,being drawnintothe heart, fhe yet liveth, is contented 
vith tran{piration onely, and requires not much attraction, which is performed by breaching, 
‘hecontraétion & dilatation of the breaft and lungs unto the prefervation of tts fe/fe. 
for fo Ayes, gnats, pilmiresand fuch like, becaufe they are ofa cold temperament, How flies, 
live unmoveably inclofed in the caves of the earth, no token of breathing appearing ae pan 
‘them, becaufe there is a little heat leftin them, which may be conferved by the Of- cer without 

ceof the arteries and heart, that isto fay, by perfpiration, without the motion of 
‘ie breaft, becaufe the oreatelt ufe of refpiration is that the inward heat may be pre- 
rved by refrigeration and ventilation. Thofe that do not mark this, fall into that er- 
tour which almoft coft the life of him who in our time firft gave life to anotomicall 

Miniftration,that was almoft decayed and neglected. 

For he being called in Spaine to open the body of a noble woman which was fip- Ahiftury 

Poled dead through ftrangulation of the wombe, behold at che fecondimpr: fion 
‘tthe incifion knife, the began fuddenly to come to her felfe, and by the moving of 
‘tt members and body, which was fuppofed to be altogether dead, and with cry- 
°g,t0 thew manifeft fignes that there was fome liferemaining in her. Which thing 


K kkk 3 {trooke 


¥ 
— 
me 
# 
~ 4 
4 
4 
j 
* 


ftrooke fach an admiration & horror into the hearts of all her friends itv... 
fent, that they accounted the Phyfician, being before of a good fame and re 1 Pte 
infamous, odious and deteftable, fo that it wanted but little but that they wei % ‘ 
{cratched out his eyes prefently : wherefore hee thought there was no ‘tre avg 
_ . forhim,ifhe would live fafe, than to forfake the countrey. But neither coy), ; Wa 
alfoavoyde the horrible pricke and inward wound of his conf{cience (from, re 


judgment no offender can be abfolved)for his inconfiderate dealing, but with; nf 


wealth,and the art of phyfick. 


Cuar. XLVII. 


How to know whether the franzulation of the wombe comes of the upprefsion 
of the flowers, or the corruption of the feed. 


The fignes of 
fu ffocation of 
the womb come 
mung Of COr- 
rupticed, 


on of the feed,all the accidents are more grievous and violent ; difficulty 


ircomesufthe the head, to loath her meat, andto bee troubled with fadnefle and feare, but chic 


with mclancholy.Moreover when fhe hath fatisfied,and every way fulfilled her 
“and then prefently on a fudden begins to containe her felfe.Itis very likely that thee 
is {uffocated by the fuppreffion of the flowers, which formerly had themwell and | 
fufliciently which formerly hath bin fed with hot,moift,and many meats,andtheie. | 
fore engendring much bloud, which fitceth much,which is grieved with fome weight 
and {welling in the region of thebelly, with paine inthe ftomacke, and adeno 3 
‘vomit, and withfuch other accidents ascome bythe fuppreflion ofthefowea. & 


Thefignesof "Thofe whoare freed fromthe fitofthe fuffocation of the wombe, cither by nature | 
one recove!'S or by arr,ina fhort time their colour commeth into their faces by little and lictle,and | 
the whole bedy beginneth to wax ftrong,and the teeth, that were fet and cloted 


oferfromthe 
hulfocarion of 


tewoubes egoecher,begin(the jawes being loofed) to open and unclofe againe,and laftly,fome 


moifture foweth from the fecret parts with acertaine tickling pleafure ; butinione J 


women, as inthofeefpecially in whom the necke of the wombe is tickled withthe 
my dwives fiager,in ftead of chat moyfturecomes thick and groffe feed, which no): 
fture or feed when itis failen, the wombe being before as it were raging, {s reftored 
unto its owne proper nature and place, and by little and lictle all fymptomes val 
Whythefap- 2Way. Men by the fuppreflion of their feede have not the like fy mptomes as woml 
preision have, becanfe mans {eed is not fo cold and moyft, but far more perfect and bette! 


deadly gefted, andtherefore more mect co refift putrefaGion, and whiles it is brought’ 


comen. drawn together by little and lutle, itis diffipated by greatand violent exercile. 
Cuar-XLVITI. 
Of the cure of the ftrangulation of the wombe. 
ifcale 
The pulling o: Feing that the ftrangulation of che wombe isa fudden and (harp 
the haires of it therefore requireth a prefent and {peedy remedy, for if it be 
the lower parts > alad y coil’ 


are profitable it many times caufcth prefent death. Therefore,when this malar, 
both forthis meth, the fick woman prefently be placed on her bac 
breaft and ftomack loofe, and al! her clothes & garments flack 
fame. about her, whereby fhe may take breath the more eafily;and fhe muft be calle 
her ownce name, with a loud voice in hereares, and pulled hard by che mpl 


dayes after, being confumed with forrow, he dyed,to the great lofle of the 


ere are two chiefe caules elpecially,as moft frequently happenin 
yp trangulation of the wombe: but when it proceedeth from the cOrTupti. 


of breathing goes before,and fhortly after comes deprivation thercot.rh | 
whole habit ofthe body feemeth more cold than a {tone : the woman isa widow. 
or elfe hath great {tore orabundance of feed, and hath been wed to the company of 
The Genswhen 4 Man, by the ablence whereof fhe was betore wont to be pained with heavinefie of J 


Lap. 24. 

emples and acy 
king Of cain 
(elfeagaine, b 
he drawne do\ 
figarures all th 
with falt and \ 
put into the w 
iii 

(pales of her f 

orcat 
che inmer part 
wards,and alf 
or drawn bac! 
wombe,whic! 
ting in this int 
fiver or latin; 
end which go 
each fide, but 
as you wil hay 

unto af{wathe 


The | 


ated 
« 
Bae 
+ 
hah. 
‘a4 
‘ 
Hey a 
a era. 
a 
f 


Concerning the Generation Man. 943 
~mples and neck, but yer efpecially by the haires of the fecret parts, that by provo- ; 
jag of cau‘iNg paine in the lower parts,the patient may not onely be brought toher 
jfeagaine, but alfo that the tharpe and maligne vapour alcending upwards, may 
. grawne downewards «the legs and armes mutt bec bound and tied with painefull 
jgatures sallthe body mutt bee rusbed over with rough linnen clothes bef prinkled 
«ith falt and vinegar, untill it be very fore and red, and let this peffiry following be 
pat into the wombe. facet mercurial, artemif. an. pul. bened. a pcflary, 
cam). zalan?. minor.an.i. make thereofa peflary. Then ferthe 
nales of her feet bee anoyated with oyle of bayesor with fome fuch like oyle, leta 
eat cupping-glafle witha greatflame be applyed tothe belly below the navell. to 
inner part of the thigh,and tothe groin, whereby both the matter that climes 
gardsand alfo the womb it felf running the fame way,may be broug!it down vards 
» drawn back. There may be madea fumigation of {pices tobe received up into ce 
uppre(sion ombe,which, that it may be the eafier done, the wombe may be held open by pur- 
jing in this inftrument here defcribed into the neck thereof. Letit be made of cold, 
{iver or Latin into the forme of a peffary ; atthe oneend thereof,that is to fay. chat 
appening of the | ™ which goeth up into the necke of the wombe, let there be made many holes on 


of the common 


smn the corrupti.. B «ch fide, but at the lower end let it be made witha {pring,that it may openand {hut 
olents diffic, ™ £ you wilhave it-Alfo it mult havetwo laces or bands by which it muft be made taft 
tion thercot.the (wathe or girdle tyed aboutthe patients belly. 
1a 1S a Widow : The forme of a Pe(Jary to be put inte the neck of the worbe to hold it open. 
the company of 
ith heavinefie of | 
are, but chiefly 
ulfilled her luft, | 
likely that thee | 
dthem well and © 
neats,and there. | 
ith fome weight | 
and a defire to 


i 
= 
4 
~ 
y 
D 
4 


of the flowers. | 
ither by nature 

e and littleand 
and cloted 
and laftly,fome 
re ; butiniome 
Sckled with the 

d which moy- 
ing, 1s ftored 
Iptomecs 
mesas women | 

exercile. 


2 
+ 
7 
‘ 
‘ 


| 
7 
| 
the 
cd 
he negic&s 
s malady com” 
* 
having 
s flack & 
call 
pe cal 
e fale 
re le > 


womb unto trefied ill juice. Contrariwife, Ict the noftrils bee perfumed with foetide and ranke 


(Concerning the Generation of <M an. 


The defcription of 4 veffell made with «funnel or pipe 
forto fumigate the wombe. 


qugwort, lav™ 
of {upp afitor! 
and muske, © 
cally drawne 
wm. 
‘echados 
nud dilfolve me 
5. mak 
mAs. empl, Ox 
convemently 
q rhe reg ion of t 
copul zion, 2 
more prefentt 
Letthemy 
cloves, orelfe 
ders, and wit! 
roucheth the 1: 
of warme 
wombe, fhal! | 
pours,whercb: 
aad diflipated 
the wombe,an 
hold itfora {¢ 
With 210es. 


Theaatterof The matterandingredients of {weet and aromaticke fumigations, are cinnamon, 
fweetfumigae Callam. aromat. lig. aloes, ladanum,benzoin, thyme, pepper, cloves, lavander, ca- 
laminth, mug wort, penniroyall, a/epta mo/chat. nutmegs,muske, moffe, amber, {qui- 
Bywhar power Nant, and fuch like, which for their {weet {mell and {ympathy, allure or entice the 


iweet fumigacis wombe downewards,by their heat confume and digeft the thicke vapours, and ps- 
ois do reflore 


nature {mels, and let thefe be made with gam. galbanum, fazapenum, ammoniacum, 
Stintina 44s bitumen, oyle of Jeat, {nuffe of atallow candle when itis blowne our, withthe 
to beapplied ro fume of birds feathers, ef pecially of Partridges and Woodcocks, of mans haire ol 
goats haire,of old leather,of hor{e hoofes, and fuch like things burned, whole noy- 
{ome or offenfive favourthe wombe Avoyding, doth returne unto its owne place oF 
feateagaine. | 
Moreover it fhall be very neceflary to procure vomit by thrufting a goofe feather 
Avicensfecree GOWNe into the throate, orelfe the haires ofthe patients owne head. Shortly afte! 


forfufocarion fhee muft ufea potion of fifteene graines of blacke pepper bruifed and diffolvedin 


ren to plencifa 
Cal] them pure 
Perfluous 
Natas in plants 
before 
Orthe courfl 
Sleede bein 
hould the chill 


by dromel,or water and hony mixed together, or in fome ftrong wine, which wer. 
Avicesholdeth forafecrer. Without this fu 

Alfo in ftead thereof three houres before meat 3 8, of treacle diffolved in 3i.o! thered too > 

the water of wormewood may be given her : Alfo it is thought that one drop of th¢ Vt fy ities 

oyle of Jeat dropped onthe tongue, is avery profitable remedy. There bee fom’ isin fomey “Ay 

Cefereum drune chat allow a potion of halfe a dram of Caitoreum diflolved in white wine, or inthe Very often hf 


ken. 


brothof a capon: alfo it is profitable not opely to give her treacle to drinke, but al- 


{o There are’ fo 


2 
eét it 
ime tO drop 
Fwhites 
me 
{ris alio re 
| 
\ 
j 
f 
‘ f | 
— 
— 
¥ 4 
. 
‘1 
4 ~ 
4 Ad =f 
4: | = \7 = 
| tre | 
S 


Concerning the Generation of Man, — 945 


LAB. 


imeto drop two drops of oyle of fage, or fome firch chymicall xprefsions ing 


oyle into the eates. tothe wombc, 
thee bee droufie ot fleepy, fhe muft be awaked or kept waking with fneefing pow- 


yrs of white ellebore and pellitory. 


fris alfo requifite to inje& glyfters both into the fandament and fecret parts, 
chich muft be made of che decoétion of things that difcuffe winde, as of Calaminc, Thematter ot 
lavender, pennyroyall, chamomel,melilote,and fuck like;and let peffaries 
{app ofitories be made of ladanum, ginger, mofchat. treacle, mithridate,civet 
,imuske, of the oyle of cloves, annifeeds, fage, rofemary, 


| clo and fuch like chymi- 
ily deawae this following is a convenient defcription ofaglyfter. Ruradié. enu- A glyfler fcat- 
Ireos ebult ari ftoloch. an. 3 i. fol. abfynth. artemefia, matricar. pulez. orizani, 


baccarem lauri fambuc.an. p.i./em.amios cymini,rute ii. floviions 
ig¢hados vort{marin, falvia, centaur. minor. an. p. il. flat decoctso, cape colatura iz 
yadifolve mellis anthofati, facch. rubr.¢> bened.an.3 i. diacharth.3 ii, ole; ancth. nara. 
y5i5. makethereof a glyfter, and apply this plafter following to the belly. kk. 
nif. empl, oxycrocer, melilot.an, 5 iii. olei nard. as much as fhall fuffice to make ic 
onveniently foft, make thercof a plafter, and {pread it on leather, and apply it to 


ye region of che belly when the fitte is ended:if the be married let her forthwi 


B copulation, and bee {trongly encountered by her husband, for there is no remedy &apleafancre- 
B® gore prefent than this. medy for the 


Let the mydwife annoint her fingers with o/eum nardinum ox mofchetalinum, ot of the nome 


Joves, or elfe of {pike mixed with muske, ambergreefe, civet,and other fwveet pow- Ticklingof che 
as, and with thefe let her rub or tickle the top of the necke of the wombe which 
@ wycheth the inner orifice; bat her fecret parts muft firft be warmed by the a pplying 
iwarme linnen clothes, for foat lengththe venemous matter contained in the 
 vombe, fhall bee diffolved and flow out, andthe maligne, tharpe and flatulent v2- 
B® yours, whereby the wombe is drivemas it were into 2 fury or rage, fhall bee refolved 
B addifipated,and fo when the conjun& matter of the difeafe is fcattered and watfted, 
hewombe,and alfo the woman fhall bee reftored unto themfelves againe. Some 


@ ‘old it fora fecretto rub the navell with the juice of garlicke boyled and mixed 
With 


th ufe A quick ,cerz2in 


Case. X LIM, 


e cinnamon, 


Of womens monethly fluxe or courfes. 
lavander, ca- fe 
yamber, iqui- they call the fluxe of bloud, that iffueth from the fecret parts of of 
or entice the women, monethly flowers*or courfes, becaufe it happeneth to them thenamesot 
ours, and pu- A FS 


89 every month fo long asthcy are in health. There bee fome which call 
SA ES themtermes, becaufe they returne at theirufuallrime. Many of the 
French men call it fepmaines, becaufe in fuchas fir much, and are gi- 
‘to plentifall feeding, icendareth almoft for the {pace of feven dayes. Some 


ide and ranke 
a (fa 
Bour, wich the 


mnans haire oF ‘ulthem purgations, becaufe that by this fluxe alla womans body is purged of fu- 
whole noy- “luous humonrs. There bee fome alfo that call thofe fluxes the flowers, becaufe 
wne placeot |B thatas jn plants the flower buddeth out before the fruits, fo in women kinde this flux 


Ng th before rhe iffuc, or the conception thereof. 

Forthe courfes fow not beforea woman bee able foconceive : for how fhould 
Shortly aftet “tleede being caft into the wombe have his nourifhmentand encreafc, and how 
ddiffolved!® boildthe child have his nourifhment when it is formed of the feed, if this neceff ay 

yhich remedy “tout were wanting inthe wombe ¢ yetit may beefome women may conceive Whatwenien 
this duxe of the courfes : but that isin fiich as have fo much of the humour 


flux not appca- 
tered together, asis wont toremainein thofewhich are purged, although it bee ring acail, 


grearg quantity that it may flow out, as it is recorded by Ariivotle. But as it 
ome very great, andinfome very little, fo itis infomefeldome, and in fome 
There ave fome that are purged twice, and fome thrice in amoneth, but it ts 

together 


eoofe feather 


~- 
3 
I B 2 
4 
4) 
tee, 
/ 
a 
>4- 
f h a 
eT 
in 
> 
bv] 
. 
€ 
> 
2 
# 


/ 


havethisacn- many and greatly nourifhing meats, which fit idely at home all day, which havin 
rua ton no (lept all night, doe notwithftanding lyc in bed fleeping a great part of the day a! re 


&foralonger Which live in a hot, moyit, rainie and foutherly ayre, which ule warme bathe. of 
‘pacethano-  fweet waters aad gentlefri@ions, which ule and are greatly delighted Carnal| 


copulation : in thefe and {uch like women the courfes more frequently . 
bundantly. 
Whatwomen But contrariwife, in thofe that have fmall and obfcure veines, in thofe tha, haye 


their bodies more furnifhed and bigge either with flefh or with fat,are more feldome 
icfegudater’ purged, andalfo more {paringly, becaufe that the fuperfluous quantity of bloyg 
more thorttime yfeth to goc into the habit of the body. Alfo tender, delicare and faire women in 
nae ot purged than thofe that are browne and endued with a more compact fleth, be. 
caufe that by the rarity of their bodies,they fuffer a greater wafting Or diffipation o¢ 
their fubftance by tran{piration. Moreover,they are not fo greatly purged with this 
kind of purgation, which have fome other folemne or accuftomed evacuation in any 

other place of their body, as by the nofe or hemorrhoids. 
Whyyoungwo- Amdas concerning their age, old women are purged when the Mooneis old, ang 
menare purged young women when the Moone is new, as itis thought. Ithinke the caule thereof 
mene that the Mooneruleth moyft bodies, for by the variable motion thereof th. 
| Sea floweth and ebbeth, and bones, marrow and plants abound with their genira| 

humour, 

Therefore young people which have much bloud, and more fluxible, and thei; 
bodies more fuxible,are foone moved untoa fluxe, although it bee even in the fir 
Wayoldwo- quarter of the Moones rifingor increafing : but che humoursof old women, becau(: 
chey wax ftiffe as it were with cold,& are not fo abuodant,and have more denfebo- 
the Moone. — dies and ftraighter veffels, are not foapt to a fluxe,nor dothey fo eafily flow, excep: 
it becin the full of the Moon,or elfe in the decreafe ; that isto fay, becaule the blouc 
that is gathered in the tullof the Moon falls trom the body even of its own weigh, 
for that by reafon of the decreafing or wane of the Moone this time of the monthis 


more cold and moyft. 


— 


Cuap. 
The caufes of the moncthly flux or courfes, 


The maretiall Ecaulca woman ismore cold, and therefore hath the digeftive faculty 
caufeofthe more weake, it commeth to pafie, that thee requireth and defireth more 
monthly fluxe. | meate or foode than {hee can digeft or concoé And becaule thatiu- 
perfuous humour that remaincth is notdigefted by exercife , nor by 

SHI the efficacy of {trong and lively heat, therefore by the providence oF 

benefit of nature it fowcth out by the veines of the wombe, by the power of thecx- 

Whenthe pulfive faculty, ar its ownecertaine and prefixed feafon ortime, Bur thence! pecially 
it beginneth to flow, anda certaine crude portion of bloud ro bee expeiled, being 
hurtfall and maligne otherwife inno quality, when nature hath laid her principal! 
foundations of the encreafe of the body, fo that in greatnefle of the body, fhe hat" 

come as it were ina manner to the highelt toppe, that is to fay, fromthe thirteenth 

tothe fifticth yeare of our age. 

Moreover, the childe cannot bee formed in the wombe, nor have his nutrimet 

Thefinal caufe. or encreafe without this fluxe : therefore this is another finall caufe of the monethly 
Awomanex- flux. Many are perfwaded that women do farre more abound with bloud than mc; 
rater ™ confidering how greatan abundance of bloud they caft forth of their fecret pa! 
bloud. every moncth; fromthe thirteenth to the fiftieth yeare of theirage : how much We 
men great with childe, of whom alfo many are menftruall, yeelde unto the aut 

mentand encreafe of thechilde in their wombes,and how much Phyficians take 
from women that are with childe by opening ofa veine, which otherwife would 


bee deliveredbefore their naturall and prefixed time ; how great a quantity ther 


Wharwomen together inthofe who havea great liver, large veines, and are filled and feq with 


dyed with 2 
| ynto’the nour! 
dotheafily dig 
Me cold than ama 
more hur 
nefle and wea! 
monethly 
no fuch need 11 


by eating of ra 
tthe veifels, 
wombe, by di 
ice thereof, b 
membrane gro 
wombe, whic! 
nothing of age 
hot befides nar| 
Many wom 
Ker into a certall 
tout, or mani; 
Mans, and they 
Inthecity 


q 
4 
a 
4 
a 
q 
4 
j 


| 


beate children 
Ropped for a | 
like and rough 
thing ha ppene: 
the beginning | 
health, the 
neile, that they 
that a 


hofe that haye 
more feldome 
of bloud 
Women are 
pact fleth, be. 

diffipation of 
rged with this 
Cuation in any 


ine is old, and 
caule thereof 
thereof the 
their genirall 


ible, and their 
ven in the firt 
men, becaule 
more den{e bo- 
y flow, except 
aufe the bloud 
sown weight, 
f the month is 


eftive faculty 
defireth more 
-caufe that {u- 
rcife, nor by 
yrovidence or 
wer of the ex- 
hen efpecially 
peiled, being 
her principall 
ody, fhe hath 
the thirtcenth 


his nutriment 
ch: monethly 
bud than men, 
ir fecret parts 
ow much wo- 
into the nutt} 
hyficians take 
verwile WOU 


antity there° 
they 


i310 idin the birth of their children, and for ten or twelve daies after, and how % 
vest gquantity of milk they {pend for the nourifhment of the child when they pive 


“be, which milke isnone other thing than blood made white by the power of the 
“gels that are in the dugges, which doch fuffice to nourifh the childe, be be great or 
wales yet aotwithftanding many nurfes inthe meane whileare menftruall -andas 


m betruc, fo certainely this is true, that onc dramme (that I may fof peake nanexcee: 
gins blood, is of more eficacy to nourifh and encreafe, than two pounds of Wo- dethawoman 
blood, becaufe it is farremore perfe&, more concocted, wrought, and better the quality 
with abundance of fpirits : whereby it commeth to paflethatamanen-° 
with more ftrong heat, doth more eafi 


ly convert what meat foever he eateth A manis more 
ato the nourifhment & fubftance of his body ; & if that any fu perfluity remains,he 


than a wo- 


heafily digeft and {catter it by infenfible tran{piration. But a woman being more fore: | 


fore not 


than aman, becaufe taketh nore than fhee can concoa, doth gather toge- 
humours, which becaufe cannot difperfe,by reafon of the unperfeé- 
wffe and weakeneffe of her heat, itisneceflary that thee fhould fufter, and have her 


purgation, efpecially when groweth unto fome bignefle ; but there is 
yfuch need in aman. 


Cuapr. LI. 
The caufes of the {upprefsion of the courfes or menfiruall fluxes 


8) (EW other part of the body whatfoever, often opening of a veine,great 
Liew’ 9, {weats, ulcers flowing much and long, {cabbinetfe of the whole 
skinne, immoderate groffenefic and clammineffe of the blood,and 


eating of raw fruites, and drinking of cold water, by fluggifhnefle and thicknefie 
ittheveffels, and alfothe obftruction of them by the defaults and difeafes of the 
wmbe, by diftemperature,an abfcefle, anulcer, by the obftruion of the inner ori- 
uethereof, by the growing of a Callus, caruncle, cicatrize of awound or ulcer, or 
umbrane growing there; by inje@ing of aftringent things intothe necke of the Thefoolith ens 
vonbe, which place many women endeavour foolifhly to make narrow : I fpeake 


king the orifice 


‘thing of age,greatnefle with child, & nurfing of children, becaufe thefe caules are of che wombe 
wot belides nature, neither doethey require the helpe of the Phyfitian. 


narrow, 1s re- 


: warded with the 
Many women, when their flowers or tearmes be ftopped, degenerate after a Mane gifcommodiry 


4 cinto acertaine manly nature, whence they are called Viragines, that isto fay, oftupping of 
tout, or manly women ; therefore their voice ismore loud and bigge, like untoa 
“uns, and they become bearded, 


the flowers. 
What women 
are called wirse 
Inthe city Abdera({aith Hippocrates) Phaethafa the wife of Pythe.ss atthe firkt did 
and was fruitful, but when her husband was exiled, her flowers wert ea. 7. 


topped fora long time : but when thefe things happened, her body became man- 


> @ “andrough, and had a beard, and her voice was great and {brill. The very fame 

ro Nawmy/ia the wife of GorgippusinT bafus. Thofevirgins that from. 
ns beginning have not their monethly fluxe, and yet neverthelefle enjoy their per- char are called 
health, they neceffarily be hot and dry, or rather of a manly heat and dry~ 


q “lc, that they may fo difperfe and diffipate by tranfpiration, as men doe, the ex- 


that are gathered,but verily all {uch are barren. 


Lip.2 4. 94-7 
and fed with 
the dayalfo 
> 
me bathes of 
uently and 
He courfes are fuppreffed or {topped by many caufes, as by fharp: 
vehement, and long difeafes, by feare, forrow, hunger,immode- 
pig F. morrhoides, fluxes of blood at the mouth, and evacuations in any 
aw 


Cuar. LILI. 
What accidents follow the fupprefsion or flopping of the monthly 
_fluxe or flowers. 


Hen the flowers ormonethly fluxe are ftopped, difeafes affed 


womb,and from thence paffe into all the whole body. For there, aromatic 
commeth fuffocation of the womb, head ache, {wouning, beatin { ‘knard, and 
of the heart, and {welling of the breafts and fecret parts, inflamm potions 
tion of the wombe, an abfceffe, ulcer, cancer, a feaver, good. 
| nefie, vomitings, difficult and flow concoction, the dropfie, The apoze 
blood the full wombe prefling upon the orifice of the bladder, blacke and bloody Dil. Pimpin 
nelleoftheu- urine, by reafon that portion ofthe blood f{weateth out intothe bladder. In majore 
women the topped matter ofthe monethly fluxcis excluded by vomiting, y:jn. peon.fenical. 
: tthe fowers, and the hoamorrhoides, in fome itgroweth into varices. In my wife, when the. wes ME dingthereto Ci 
Hiftories of amaide,the menftruallmatter wasexcluded and purged by thenoftrills. The wis. ofthe fyrupe 
fachaswere of Peter Feure of Cafteaudun,was purged of her menftruall matter by the duggesey., nedthrough a 
pargedo ey moneth, and infach abundance, that fcarce three or foure cloaths were morning. 
by thenofeand dry it and fucke it up. Let peffarie 
dugges, In thofe that have not the fluxemonethly to evacuate this plenitude by fome par Me things, beaten 
.or place of the body, there often followes difficulty of breathing, melancholy, mag. We apellary, and: 
neffv, the gout, an ill difpofition ofthe whole body, diffolution of the ftreng:hos MH thejuice of mu 
the whole body, want of appetite, a confumption, the falling fickeneffe, anno. WI fowers,as wit! 
plexie. ersiong, and 


Thofe whofe blood is laudable, yet not fo abundant, doe receive no other di. J 


things nodula 
commodity by the fuppreffion of the flowers, unlefle it be that the wombe burnes 


adding theretom™ 


or itcheth wich the defire of copulation,by reafon that the wombce is diftended wit) ther ought the: 
and itching blood, efpecially if they lead afedentary life. Thofe womentha wdthey mult 
chefupprefsion beenc accuftomed to beare children, are not fogricved andevill ateafewhen the orifice oft 
ofthe monechstheir flowers are {topped by any chance contrary to nature, as thofe women which nyroyallorm 


Butitisto bd 


‘s moft grievous did never conceive, becaufe they have beene ufed to be filled, and the veflels by rea. 
default of the | 


fon of their cuftomary repletion and diftention, are more large and capacious: when | 


the courfes flow, the appetiteis partly dejected, forthat nature, being then wholly Wi Ack bee cured’ 
applied to expuliron, cannot throughly concoé or digeft, the face waxeth pale,and WH vertue provoke 
without its lively colour, becaufethat the heat with the fpirits, go from withoutin. WB the wombe is e 
wards, fo to helpe and aide the expulfive faeulty. ey “ours fharpen. 
“tealed. Soift 
| } Cfuxe of the 
Cuap. LILI, Mol things be. 
Of provoking the flowers or courfes. fr 
He fuppreflion of the fowers is a plethorick difeafe, and therefore mult J hall have 
[SX be cured by evacuation, which muft be done by opening the veine areu 
led Saphena which is at the ankle, but firft Ict the bafilike veine of “except the 
Whythe veine arme be opened, efpecially if the body bee plethoricke, left that 
ihould a greater attraction be made into the wombe, and by fuch attraction or 80%" irning the 
beopenedbe. INgin, there fhould come a greater obftru@ion. When the veines of the wombe a 
= —— fa- diftended with fo great a {welling that chey may be feen, it will be very profitable | 
Horle-leeches ‘apply horfe- leeches tothe neckethereof: peflaries for women may be ufed; but - | 
t be applied so migations ox aromaticke things are more meet for maides, becaufe they are bafhtu | 
20d fhamefaced. Unguents, liniments, emplafters, catapla{mes, that ferve for that | 
matter, are to bee prefcribed and applied to the fecret parts, ligaturesand frictions 
thethighes and legges are not tobee omitted, fomentations and fternutatories aie 
! beufed, and cupping glaffes are to bee applied to the groines, walking, dancing," | 


ding, often and wanton copulation with her husband, and fuch like exercifes, ne 
yO 


yoke the flow 
bru 
pint, origant 
ry horchoun q 
5, the berr 
per* | 


/ 


pthly 


ifeafes the 
dy.For thereof 


ouning, beating 
parts, inflammga. 


aver, naufeoul 


¢ dropfie, ftran. 
ke and bloody 


dder, In man 

OMiIting, Urine, 
» When fhee was 
trills, The wife 


the dugges eve. 


de by fome part 
lancholy, mad- 
the ftrength of 
enefle, anapo. 


women which 


2pacious : when 
wg then wholly 


axcth pale,and 
om without in- | 


ey are ba 


dat ferve 
and frictions © 


hs were able to : 


re no other dif- | 
wombe burnes 
diftended with 
pfe women that | 
iil ateafe when 


veilels by rea- | 


therefore mutt 

the veinecal- 
ce veine of the | 

left chat there 
we 
action or flo 
the wombc ar 
be ufed; but fu: 
(h full 


for chat 


utatories are 
g, dancing, 
exerciles, 


4 


the Generation Man. 949 


woke the lowers. Of plants, the flowers of St. Johns wort, the rootes of fennelj, and 
jpnt4Qus, brufcus or butchers broom , of pariley, brooke- lime, bafill, balme, beto- 
w garlicke, onions, crifta marina, coftmary ,the rinde or barke of caffia fiftula, cala- 
pint, origanum, pendyroy all, mugwort, thy me, hiflope, fage, marjoram, rofema- 
" horchound, rue, favine, {purge, faffron, agaricke, the flowers of elder, bay ber- 
ies, the bertics of Ivic, {cammony, Cantharides, pyrethrum or pellicory of Spaine, 
The aromaticke things are amomum, cynamon, {quinacth, NUIMEYS, C4- thing». 


onus aromaticus, Cyperus, oinger, cloves, galangall, pepper, cubibes, amber, muske, 
pikaara, and fuch like ; of all which let fomentations, fumigations, baths, broaths, 


3 


Plantsthat pro- 
voke the flowers 


wales, potions, pills, fyrupes, apozemes, and opiatesbe made asthe Phyfitians fhall 
good. | 


The apozeme that followeth is proved to be very effe€iuall. fol. flor. ditam. 


An apozeme te 


pi. pimpinel. m omuinm capihar. an. pi. artemif. thymi, marjor. origan. an.m 
major, petrofelin. fe rad. paon. biftort. an.3 ciccrum rub. fem. 

OF jn.fenical. an. 9 8, make thereof a decoction in a fufficient quantity of water, ad- 

ingthereto cinamon 9 iii. in one pinte of the decoétion diffolve(after it is trained ) 

the fyrupe of mugwort, and of hiflope, 44.3 ii. diarrbod. abbat.3 i. \et it bee ftrai- 

wdthrough a bagge, ii. of the kernells of dates, and let her take 3 iiii. inthe 


gorming. 
| Letpeflaries bee made with galbanum, ammoniacum, and {uch like mollifying 
B hings, beaten into a maffe in amortar witha hot peftell,and made into the forme of 
ipclary, and then let them be mixed with oile of Jafminc, euphorbium, an oxc gall, 
hejuice Of mugwort, and other fuch like, wherein thereis powerto provoke the 
fowers, as with fcammony in powder: letthem beas bigge as ones thumbe, fixe 
erslong, and rowled ia lawne, or fome fuch like thinne linnen cloath; of the fame 
hings nodula’s may bee made. Alfo peflarics may be prepared with hony boyled, 
B viding thereto convenient powders,as of {cammony, pellitory, and fuch like. Nei- 
ieroughe thefero ftay long inthe necke of the wombe, left they fhould exulcerare, 
B adthey mutt be pulled backe by athreed that muft bee putthrough them, and thea 
heorifice of the womb muft be fomented with white wince of the deco@ion of pen- 
@yoyallormother-wort, 
buritisto be noted, that ifthe fuppreffion of the flowers happeneth through the what caufesof 
of the topped orifice of the womb,or by inflammation, thefe maladies mutt 
cured before wee come unto thofe things that of their proper ftrength and 


the {topping of 
the flowers 


muft be cured 
provoke the flowers : as forexample, iffuch things be made andgiven when before the dit 


cwombe is enflamed, the blood being drawnc into the grieved place, and the hu- ** 

| ours fharpened, andthe body of the wombe heated, the inflammation will be en- 

Soifthere be any fuperfluous fichh, ifthere be any Callus of a wound or ul- 
‘,orif there be any membrane fhutting the orifice of the wombe, and {0 topping: 
itfluxe of the flowers, they mutt firft bec confumed and taken away before any-of 


bee adminiftred. But the oportunity of taking and applying of things, 


duit be taken from the time wherein the ficke woman was wont to be purged before rop ovoke the 
“opping, or iffhe never had the flowers, in the decreafe of the moone; for fowe 
‘ilhave cuftome, nature, and the externall efficient caufe to helpe art. When thefe, Why horheu- 

“dicines are ufed, the women are norto bee put into bathesor hot houles, as man bure thole 
: except the malady proceed from the denfity of the veffels, and the grofleneffe. alibiats 


flowers are te 


clamminefie of theblood. For {weats hinderthe menftruall fluxe, by diverting «provoked. 
“turning the matter another way. 


Lill 


CHAP. 


a 
| 
a 
q 
| 
q 
4 
iL 
i 
4 
a 


950 the Generation an. 


— 


Crap. 
The fignes of the approaching of the menfiruall fluxe, 


the monethly fluxe firft approacheth, the dugges itch ang} 
Bip more {wollen and hard than they were wont, the woman is mp, 


do loveand bes fee rous of copulation, by reafon of the ebullition of the provoked | mir 
what women and the acrimony of the blood that remaineth, her voice be- : 


docloaththe & OM meth 
df bigger, her fecret parts itch, burne, fwell, and waxe red. they 
onwhenthe Jong, fhee hath paine in her loynes and head, naufeoulneffe and vomiting troUbler! 
the ftomacke : norwithftanding,if thofe matters which fow together in the Wwombe 
either of their owne nature, or by corruption, be cold, they loath the ag Of penery 

tion, by reafonthat the wombe waxeth feeble through fluggifhneffe and watery fy 

4 mours filling the fame, and it howeth by the fecret parts very foftly. Thofe maid. 
Wich what ac- thar are marriageable, although they havethe menftruall fluxe very well, yer hey 


cidents thofe 
are troubled with headache, naufcoutnefle, and often vomiting, want of apperire 


that are ma. 


Longing, an ill habite of body, difficulty of breathing, trembling of the heait, 


arenotmaried, . 


arctroubled. Ding, melancholy, fearfull dreames,watching,with fadnefle and heavinefle, becayle | 


that the genitall parts burning & itching, they imagine the a@ of generation where. 
DY it commethto pafie that the feminall matter, cither remaining in the tefticles in 
many accidents great abundance, or elfe powred intothe hollownefle of the womb, by the ticklino 
of the genitalls,is corrupted, and acquirctha venemous quality,and cauleth {ych |ik- 
accidents as happens in the fuftocation ofthe wombe. 

Maides that livein the country are not fo troubled with thofe difeafes, becay’ 
there isno fuch lying in wait for their maiden-heads,and alfo they live {paringly anc 
hardly, and {pend their time in continuall labour. You may fee many maides {0 fu! 
of juice, that it runneth in great abundance, as if they were not menftruall, into the: 
dugges, and isthere converted into milke, which they have in as great quantity a 

Aph. 36, fe%.5. Nurfes,as we read it recorded by Hippocrates. 1fa woman which is neither great with 
child, nor hath born children, hath milke, fhe wants the menftruall fluxes ; whereby 
you may underftand that that conclufion is not good which affirmeth thata woman 
which hath milke in her breafts, either to be delivered of childe, or to be great with 

Lib. 2.defube. Childe : for Cardanus writeth chat hee knew one Astony BuXus at Genwa,whio being 
thirty yecres of age, had fo much milk in his breafts as was fufficient to nur{ea child, 

Thecfficienr forthe breeding and efficient caufe of milke proceeds not onely from the engratted 

caufeofthe faculty of the glandulous fubftance, but much rather from the aétion of the man 

mikes feed , for proofe whereof you may fee many men that have very much milk in thes 
breafts, and many women thatalmoft have no milke,unleffe they receive mans ce’. 
AHo women that areftrongand lufty like unto men, which the Latines call /174¢'- 
wes, that isto fay, whofe feed commeth untoa manly nature, whenthe flowers at 
ftopped, concoé the blood, and thereforewhen it wanteth paflage forth, by th 
likeneffe of the fubftance it is drawne into the duggs, and becommeth perfect milk: 
thofe that have the flowers plentifully and continually for the {pace of fouic oF 1" 
daics, are better purged and with more happy fucceffe than thofe that have sem! 
a longer time. 


CHAP: 


Ly B24 


man is troub® 
rhegummes 
arteries \ 
and fides oft 
dren are foun 
which are {pam 
moderate flu 
nable copula 
and the diffo! 
ers hoW 
atter-birth, bf 
(onthat the v 
forth of the i 
and exulcerat 
body critica! 
dainely ro be 
groffe, black 
more cleerc, 


iNaltringent | 
bo 
drunke in {te 


quench: 
the fame. 


de Caten arthal 
dry rofes, 
Wine isto 


oe muft cho 
Sareto be 


dire Is to be c 
Cold things 


‘tength four 


if 
wr 
Ay 
+ 
4 
| 
3 
4 
a 
@ 
| 
4 


Btch and 
TOVOked blogg 


pice becommeth 
red. If they {tay 


troubler) | 


Thole maides | 
y well, yet they 


Lis, 24. | 


( 


the Generation Man. 


LY. 


What accidents follow immoderate fluxes of the flowers 
or courfes. 


F the menftruall flux fhloweth immoderately, there alfo followes 
4p Many accidents ; for the cocoétion is fruftrated, the appetite o- 
vege] verthrown, then followes coldneffe throughout all the body, ex- 
Olution ofall the faculties,an ill habice of all the body, leannefie, 
the dropfic, ahe@ticke feaver, convulfion, {wouning, and often 


rin the x fodaine death : ifany have them too exceeding immoderate! 

he act of the blood is fharpe and burning, and alfo ftinking, the ficke wo- 
eand watery bu. agg manis troubled with a continuall feaver, and her tongue will bee dry, ulcers arifein 


hegummes and all the whole mouth. In women the flowers doe flow by the veines By what pores 
nd arteries which rife out of the {permaticke veffels, and are ended in the botrome th< “ower dos 


How ina wo- 


ant of appetite, | gy m4 fides of the wombe, but in virgins and in women great with childe,whofe chil- man andina 
the heart, (wou. Mam aenare found and healthfull, by the branches of the hy pogaftrick veine and artery, maide 
avinefle, becayie which are{pred and difperfed over the necke of the wombe. The caufe of this im- 
neration,where. i moderate flux isin the quantity or quality of the blood, in both the fault is uareafo- an unreaiona- 
nthe tefticlesin sblecopulation, efpecially with a manthat hatha yard of amonftrous greatncfle,) 
», by the tickling | ndthe diflolutioa of the retentive faculty of the veflels: oftentimesalfotheflow- 


4s low immoderately by reafon ofa painfull & a difficult birth of the child or the 


aufeth fuch like | 


§ atcr-birth, being pulled by violence from the cotyledons of the wombe, or by rea- 


lifeafes, becaufe oothat the veines andartcries of the necke ofthe wombe are torne by the comming 


efparinglyand @ lothof the infant with great travell,and many times by the ufe of fharpe medicines, 
maides fo  udcxulcerating peffaries. Oftentimes alfo nature avoides allthe juice of the whole 
ruall,intotheir | body critically by the wombe after a great difeafe, which fluxe is not rafhly or fo- fheciic| 
reat quantity as to be topped. That menftruall blood that foweth fromthe wombe is more flowers 
ither great witli | blacke, and clortty, but that which commeth from the necke ofthe wombce is 
uxes ; whereby | @ aorecleerc, liquidand red, 
ththata woman | : or necke of the 
m4, WHO peng CHAP. LVI. 
to nurfea child, | 
m Of {topping the immoderate flowing of the flowers or courfés. 
ion of the mans | | | 
rch milk in their OY muft make choice of {uch meats and drinkes as have power to incraf- 


fate the blood, forasthe flowers are provoked with meats that are hor, 


eive mans {ecd. | 
ines call 
the flowers are 
ge forth, by the | 
th perfect milk 
of foure or five | 
thavethem for 


: extreme parts of beatts, as of oxen, calves, fheep, either fryed or fodden 
with forrell, purflaine, plantaine, fhepheards purfe, fumach, the buds of brambles, 
sand fuch like, It is fuppofed thata harts horne burned, wafhed, and taken 
Naltringent water, will ftoppe all immoderate fluxes ; likewile fangus draconis, 
bolus armenus, lapis hamatites,corall beaten into moft fubtle powder and 
unke in fteeled water ; allo pappe made with milk,wherein fteele hath oftentimcs 
CN quenched, andthe floure of wheat, barly, beanes or rice, is very cffectuall for 
ite fame. Quinces, cervices,medlars, cornclian berries, or cherries may likewife 
faten atthe fecond courfc, Juleps are to be ufed of {teeled waters, with the lyrupe 
tary rofes, pomegranates, forrell, myrtles, quinces, or old conlerves of red rofes, 
but Wine is to bee avoided : but if the ftrength be fo extenuated that they require it, 
muft choofe and aftringent wine tempered with ftecled water ; exerci- 
are to be fhunned, efpecially venereous exercifes, anger is to bee avoided, a cold 
“eisto be chofen, which, if it be not fo naturally, muft bee made fo by {prinkeling The infiguion 
Cold things on the ground, efpecially if the fummer orheat bee then in his full of oder os 
‘tength ; found fleeping ftayes all evacuations except fweating. The opening of a 
Lill 3 veine 


CHAP: 


7” — 
| 
| Aally and of fubtle parts, fothey are {topped by fuch meares as are cooling, 
Nee thickening, aftringent and ftipticke, as are barly waters, foddearice, the 
| 
| 
ij 


Aa unguent, 


An aulbringent 
laycCtion. 


A — rot, 


A2TICS 


Thereafon of 
the name. 


The differences 


What women 
arc apt to this 
fluxe. 


ons of the upper parts are greatly commended in this malady. 


But if you perceive that the caufé of this accident lieth ina cholerick jj! juice miy 


ed withthe blood, the body muft bee purged with medicines that purge chole, my 
water, as Rubarbe, M yrobalanes, Tamariods, sebeftens, and the purging fyry of 


rolcse 


LVIL 


Of locall medicines to bee ufed againft the immoderate flowing 
of the Courfes. 


ING likewile inje@ions and peffarics. This or fuch like may bee the forme of 
an unguent. o/, maflich. ey An. 211, Hucum cuprey. olibani 
ED an, 5 ij. vofar. rubr.3i.pulv. maftichin, boli armen. tery: fizilles 
an.3 cere quantum fufficit, fiat anguentum. At injection may be thus made. 
plantac.rofar, rabrar, burfe paftor. centinodii, an.ib corticts querni, acum 
now maturar. an, 3 ii. berberts, famach, balauft, alamin.roch. an. 35 i. make there. 
of a decottion, and inject it with a fyringe blunt pointed intothe wombe, left 
fhould be fharpe it might hurt the fides of the necke of the wombe ; alfo {nailes bes. 
ten with their thells and applied to the navell, are very profitable. Quinces roafteg 
underthe coals, and incorporated with the powder of myrtills, and bole armeaic;. 
and put into the necke ofthe wombe, are marvellous effectuall forthis matter, The 
forme ofa peflary may bethus. IX, gallar. tmmaturar. combuft. in aceto extings. 
5 ji. ammo. 5 fang, dracon, pul.vad. fympbyt. fumsach. ma ftich, fucci acacie, cornu cer, 
uff. colophen, myrrha, [coria ferri, an. 51. capher. ii. mixe them, and incorporate 
them all together with the juice of knot. graile, fyngreen, night-fhade, henbane, wa- 
ter lillies, plantaine, ofeach as muchas is fufhcient, and make thereof a peffary; 
Cooling things, as oxycrate, waguertum rofatum, and {uch like, are with great 
profirufed othe region of the loines, thighes, and genital] parts : but iftliisimmo- 
d:rate flux doe come by crofion, fothatthe matter thereof continually exulcerateth 
the necke of the wombe, let the place be anointed with the milke of a fhee Affe, with 
barly water, or binding and aftringent mucelages, as of pii/inwm, quinccs, gumme 


tragacantli, arabicke, and fuch like. 


Cwar.LVIII. 
Of womens fluxes,ortheWhites. 


TES Efidesthe forenamed fluxe, which by the law of nature happenethte 


women moncthly, there is alfo another called a womans fluxe,becauic 
aye.) itis onely proper and peculiartothem : this fometimcs wearict the 
ap) Woman witha long and continual! diftillation from the wombe, 


dy,to be often troubled with this difeafe, and therefore they will fay among! “4 
¢ 


J r 


+ 


veineinthe arme, cup ping glafles fattened on the breafts, bands, and painful] trig. 


unguents are made to ftay the immoderate fluxe of the tearmes, and | 


eth acertat 
rer wherelt 
Alfoicv 
srt it caule 
rer of an ulm 
Phyfician : | 
matter 
leffer, ¢ 
ces, efpecia 
out paine. 


ture, they ca 
fharpe, 
aconfumpti 
dow: 
continual! {2 
ficke woma2! 
the fhame th: 
ception, bec 
Viten times. 
in ab{ceffe 3! 
theab{ceffe 
lometimes int 
This difea 
Whole filth ar 
Womb ir 
Many 
‘trough it 
thanto have i 
*pplied there 
cleanfin 


{wound 
ing, 


4 
felves that 
(mn ockes W 
be hough 
fels O fcthey 
blood, anc 
. 
| ee Fe9 through the wombe,comming from the whole body without paine;™ 
otherwile than when the whole fuperfluous filth of the body is purged by the reine 
| or urine ; fometimes it returneth at uncertaine feafons,and fometimes with pain ane | 
the places ofthe wombe: itdiffereth from the menftrual! fluxe,bec4 
: that this for the {pace of a few dayes, as it fhall feeme convenienrto nature, caltct? | 
forth laudable blood, but this womans fluxe yeeldeth impure ill juice, fometimes!* 
| nious, fometimes {erous and livide, otherwhiles white and thicke, like unto bat) 
creame, proceeding from flegmaticke blood: this laft kind thereof is freque™ 
Therefore wee {ec womenthat are and ofa foftand loofehabireol | 
— 


painfull 


ick ill juice mix. 
purge choler ang 
urging fyrupe of 


plood, and not atall except the woman be cither great with childe, or ceafe to bee a very 
gealtruall for fome other caufe ; for then in ftead of the monethly fluxe there flow- er gags 
tha certaine whayifhexcrement, which ftaineth her cloaths with the colour of wa- 


neg 


tearmes, and 
ectheformeof 


3 j.make there. 
wombe, leftifir 
Balfofnailes bea- 
Quinces roafted 
bole armesick, 
his matter, The 


er wherein flefhis wathed. 


Alfoit very feldome proceeds of amelancholy humour, andthen for the moft 


part it cau fetch a cancer in the wombe. But often times the purulent and bloody mat- 
er of an ulcer lying hiddeninthe wombe, deceiveth the unskilfull Chirurgian or 


Phyfitian : but it is nor fo hard toknow thefe difeafes one fromthe other ; forthe 


patter that floweth from an ulcer, becaufe ( asit is faid ) it is purulent, it is cenloerite 


lefler, groffer, ftinking, and more white. But thofe that have ulcers in thofe pla- 
ces, efpecially in the necke of the wombe,cannot have copulation with a man with- ae 


olibani, myrtil. out paine. 


CHar. LIX. 
Of the caufes of the Whites. 


>) Ometimes the caufe of the whites confifteth in the proper weakneffe of 
the wombe, or elfein the uncleanneffe thereof, and fometimes by the 


4 


Me defaule ofthe principall parts. For if the brain or the ftomacke be coo- 
led, or the liver Ropped or fchirrous, many crudities are engendered, 
cacie,cornucer, 


peffary: 

are with great 
tifthisimmo- 
ly exulcerateth 
(hee Affe, with 
linccs, gumme 


nd incorporate : 


@ ‘oethame that flee taketh becaufe fuch filth floweth continually ; it hindereth con- 
ception, becaufe it either corrupteth, ordrivech out the feed when it is concei 


Yhole filch and fuperfluous excrements of a womans body floweth downe into the 
@ Yomb ,as ic werciato a fink, becaufe it is naturally weak, hath af inferiour fituation, 
“any veffellsending therein ; and laft of all, becaufe the cour{cs are wont tocome 
@ ‘cough it ; asalfo by reafon of the ficke woman, who often times had rather dye 


- whichifthey runneor fall downeintothe wombe that is weake by na- 
ure, they caufe the fluxe ofthe wombe, or whites : but ifthis fluxe be moderate and How 2 womans 


ot fharpe, it keepeth the body from maligne difeafes ; otherwife it ufeth toinferre fx¢is whol. 


iconfumption, leannefle, palencflc, and an oedematous {welling of the legges, the cauferh 
ulling downe of the wombe, the dejection of the appetite and all the faculties, and dilcates. 
continuall fadnefle and forrowfulneffe ; from which it is very hard to perf{wade the 

licke woman, becaufe that her minde and heart will bee almoft broken, by reafon of 


How it Ieteeth 
| ved, theconception. 
Uiten times, if it ftoppeth for a few moneths, the matter that ftayeth there caufech 


inab{cefle about the wombe inthe body or necke thereof, and by the breaking of 


® ‘icab(ceffe there followeth rotten and cancerous ulcers, fometimes inthe wombe, 


ometimes in the groine, and often inthe hippes. 


This difeafe is hard to bee cured, not onely by reafon of it {elfe, as becaufeall the Why itis hara 
CO becured. 


hanto have that place feene, the difeafe knowne, or permit locall medicines to bee 


thereto: for {o faith Momtanus, that on atime hee was called to a noble wo- abittory. 


nan of. Jta/y who wastroubled with this difeafe, untowhom hee gave counfell to 


‘ve cleanfing decotions injected into her wombe, which when fhee heard, the fell 
“toa fwoune, and defired her husband never thereafter toufe his countellin any 


* 


CHaArY. 


Lill 3 


elves that they whites. And asthe matter isdivers, fo it will ftaine their 
smockes a different colour. Truely if itbee perfectly red and fanguine, it is to 
B® pechoughe chat it commeth by errofion, or the exolution of the fubftance of the vef- 
¢lsofthe wombe, or of the neckethereof: therefore it comme Jome of 
happeneth 
s fuxe,becatic 
wombe, 
hout 
by the 
with pain ate 
ne 
{ometimes | 
‘ke unto bat 
habite 
har 
among 
{elves 


Cc HAP. L 
The cure of the Whites, 


If the fuxe ofa che matterthat floweth our in this difeafe bee of ared colon, i 
keeps no order orceitain time in its returning, Pherfore Phleboto. 
menftruall flux. |@haemed Baie, my and other remedies which we have {poken of, as requifite fo, 
che menftiuall fuxe when it oweth immoderately, is here neces. 
fary to beuled. But if itbeewhite, or doth ceftitte or arguethe 
juice of this or chathumour by any other colour, a purgation mult be prefcribed of 

A womans flux fych things as are proper tothe humour that offends: toritis not good to ftop 


4 


skoiegnel a flux fuddenly ; for it isneceffary,that fo the body fhould be purged of 1UCH filch of 
abundance of humours: forthey that doc haften to {top tt,caule the droofie, by rea. 
fon that this finke of tumours is turned backe into the liver; or elfe a cancer inthe 
womb, becaufe it is tayed there; or afeaver, or other difeafes,according to the cog. 
dition of the part that receiveth it. Therefore we muft not come to locall deve: lives, 
deficcatives, reftrictives, unleffe we have firftuted univerfall remedicsaccordingr) 
What baths are art. Alom bachs, baths of brimftone, and of bitumen,or iron, are convenient forthe A. [hewet 
profitable, whites that come of a phlegmaticke humour; inftead whereof bathes may beema: fbewet® 
of the decoction of herbes thac are hor, dry, and endued with an aromaticke pow. C. /heweel 


er, with alome and pebbles, or flint-ftones red hor throwne into the fame. Lerthis ANG As | 
Analtrinsenr the forme ofacleanfing decoction and injection. RX. fol. abfynth. agrimon, conti. D, 
injection, wed. burf-paft. an. m8, boylethem together, and make thereof acecoction, in which EE 

diflolve mellisrofar. 5 ii. aloes, myrrhe, falis nitri, an. 3 i, make thereof an injeGion, be fray 


the woman being {0 placed ona pillaw under her buttockes thatthe necke of the 
wombe being more high, may be wide open : when the injection ts received, let the 
woman let her legges acroffe, and draw them upto her butrockes, and fo fheemay 
keepe that which is injected. They that endeavoarto dry and bind morc ftrongly, 
adde the juice of acatia,ereenc galles, the rindes of pomegranates, roch alome, ro- 
matie vitrioll, and they boile themin Sinithes watcrand red wine ; peflaries may be 
of the like faculty. 
TheGonesofa che matter that commeth forth be of an ill colour or fmell, itis thatchereis 
putretyedulcer a rottenuicer ; therefore we ought to inje&@ cthofe things that have powertocorrect | 
inthewonibe. the putrefaction : among which ezyprsacum, diffolved in lye orred wine, excelleth. @ 
Theviculene Thereare women which whenthey are croubled witha virulent Govorr/ea, oran 
Gonorrhea is involuntary fluxe of the feed, cloaking che faule with an honeft name, doe untruly 


likeuncoel 
fwomen. fay that they have the whites, becaufe that in borhthefe difeafes a great abundance 


Huxe of women. 
of filth is voided. Butthe Chyrurgian may ecafily perceive that malady by therot- § fome are lik, 
tennefle of the matter that floweth out, and hee thal) perfwade himfelte charit will thew thern(& 
not bee cured without falivation or fluxing at the mouth, and fweats. Inthemeane | Of the wom 
while Ict him putin aninftrument made like unto a peflary, and caufe the ficke wo- Wart with ail 
man to hold itthere : this inftrument muft have many holes in the upper eng, , like unto th 
through which the purulent matter may paffe, which by ftaying or {topping mish: 


get a fharpneffe ; asalfo that fo the womb may breathe the more freely, and may be 
kept more temperate and coole by receiving the aire, bythe benefit ofa {pring 
whereby this inftrument, being made like untoa peffary, is opened and fher. , 


The 


. 
> 
od 
Hig y 
‘a 
ai 
4 
+B 
‘a 
a 
4 
i 
i 
‘ 
a | 
“it. 
| | 
T 
leTe Is 
Ad ratec 
on 
> 
Y fitus bil ‘ 
4 


L 13.24. 


red colour, ir 
ly, becaufe je 
ore phieborto. 

S requifite for 

is here necef- 

arguethe jl] 
 prcfcribed of 
ato ftop fuch 
or 
ropfte, by rea. 
m Cancer inthe 
thecon- 
‘all detertives, 
's according to 
enient for the 
may bee made 
pmaticke pow- 
fame. Letthis 
jagrimon, centi- 
action, in which 
of an injection, 
e necke of the 
eceived,let the 
ind fo fhee may 
more ftrongly, 
och alome, ro- 
eflaries may be 


thar is 
ower tocorrect 
ine, excelleth. 
baa, OF an 


reat abundance 
ady by the rot- 


felfe tharit will 
s, Inthe meane 
nfe the ficke wo- 
he upper coe, 
(topping might 
ly, and may be t 
nefitofafprins 


land fhat. 


The forme of an infirument made like arto a peffary, wherthy the 
may bee ventilated, 


UMM, 


A. fheweth the end of the inftrument, which muft have many holes therein. 


[heweth the of the infirnment. 


C. the plate whereby the mouth of the instrument is opened and fhut, as wide 


and as close aS You welt, for ho receive the aire more freely, 


Di jhewerhthe fbrinc. 


EE thelaces and bands to tye about the patients bady, that the inftrumsent may 
be flayed and kept faft in his place. 


- 


LXI. 


Of the hamorrhoides and wartes of the necke of the wombe. 


Ike as inthe fundament, foin thenecke of the wombe there are. 
OSL | hoemorrhoides, and as it were varicous veines, often times flow- of thehemor- 
Sa4| ing with much blood, or witha red aad ftinking whay ith humor, thoides reg 
Some of thefe by reafon of their rednefle and great inequality 

if ic were of knobs, are like unripe mulberries, and are called vul- 
garly vene morales thatis to fay,the veines or hoemorthoides like 

unto mulberries ; others are like unto grapes, and therefore are named #vales ; other 

fome are'‘like unto warts, and theretore arecalled vena verrucales slome appcare & 

hew themfelves with a great tumour, others are little and ia the bottome of the neck 

of the wombe, others are in the fideor edgethercof. chrocherdox isa kinde of wharan Acro 
wart with a callous bunch or knot, having athin or {lender root, and a greater head ,“e"» 

like unto the knot ofa rope, hanging bya {mall thread; itis called of the Arabians, 

There is alfo another kinde of wart, which becaufe of his great roughnefle and un- i. 
quality is called thymus, as refembling the flower of Thyme. All fuch difeafesare ;.°°°"7"™ 
¢xa{perated-and made more grievous by any exercile, efpecial ly by venereous acs: 

Many times they. havea certaine malignity, and an hidden virulency joyned with 
them, by occafion whereof they are aggravated even by touching onely, becaule 
hey have their matter of a raging humour : therefore tothefe we may not rightly 
Wea true, buc-onely the palliative cure, as they terme it: the Latines call them one- 


fiews, but the French men namethem with an adjunct, St. Fracrins figges. 


St. Piacriat 


higacs. 


Y 
J ‘ 


“~~ 
. 
| 
if 
| QD AWAY {/ 
> CA. 
\ 
~ [7 
AA 
4 
4 
a 
a 
4 
a 
& 
q 
a 
d 


Cwarp. LKIT. 


ofthe cure of the Warts shat are in the necke of the wombe. 


CD IY, 
What wartsof Ge = 
the womb mutt COW 


be bound and lo @4Z 
cut off, 


a dilater made for the purpofe. 
DiversS pecula matricis, or Dilators forthe in{pection of the matrix. 


\ 
\ 


N= 


Hin 


we 


An other forme of 4 dilater or Speculum matricis, whereof 
the declaration followet. 


— 


iy, 


\ 


\\\* 


ite 
AN 


\ 


A. fheweth the ferew which foutterh and openeth the dilater of the matrix. 


B.B. fhewshe armes or branches of the inftrument, which ought to be eight or 


fingers tong. 


iB, 24 


the wombe, if. they beenotmalion. | 
warns shat and toft. ‘Thofe that lyehid 
arctobeetyed witha thread, and to cut of. 
BYP deep inthe wombe, may be feene and cured by opening the mairix wich 


‘mine 


But 


But ches 
rjents bod 
(id, whic 
rotyeche 
jer them-b 
che cucing 
left they 
or {ome 0! | 
is molt 
lum, rock. 
boile them 
rouching a 
fore. Ace 
pered with} 
ip were 
miftrefle of 
tis likely) 
berweene t 
onthe han 
The leaves 


‘ 


ad 


ces of leach 
thefire. Th 
eat, hor Ope 
thereof, all 
and the grie 
plaimes,em 
peflary mutt 
much drawn 
Conaylomaat 
rifing ef 
Cooling an 
ofegges, anc 
along time i 
an inflamma 


~ 
| | = 
j 
Wit 
| | Wht sf 
| 
a i 
J 
A> 
WLS) x 
| 4 OF AY 


ishrifing efpecially in the wrinkled cdges of the fundamentand neck of the womb, mara are. 


Wats 


But thefe dilaters of the matrixought tobe of a bigneffe cor re{pondent to the pa- 
jents body: ; letthem be matrix when the woman is.placed as wee have 
aid, when the child is to be drawne out ofher body. That inftrument is moft meet 
rotye the warts, which wee have defcribed in therelaxation of the palate or Hvula: 
jerthem-bee tyed barder and harder every day untill they fall away. Therefore for Three {copes 
thecuring Of warts thereare three chiefe {copes, as bands, fections, Cauterics and ofthe cure of 
leftthey grow up againe, let oyle of vitriollbe dropped on the place, or aqua fortis, W2'si8 


wombe. 
orfome of thelye wherewith potentiall cauteries are made. This water following 
molt efte@uall to confume and.wafte warts. kx. 


aq. plantaz.3 Vi.virid, aris, 3 
lum, roch, fab, com.3,8, wit.xom or fublim. an.d beat them al ltogerher, and water to con- 


boile them ; letone ortwo dro ps of this water be dropped onthe grieved place, not ames 
rouching any place clfesbut if tuere be anulcer,itmuft be cured as | have thewed be- 
fore. A certaia. naan, ftudious of phyfick, of late affirmed to me that oxe 


dung tem- 
Unguentsto.. 
pered with the leaves or powder of favine, would wafte the warts of the wombe, if confame warts. 


were appliedtherero warme; which whether it be true or nor, 
miftrellc of things,be jadge ; verily camtharides put into unguents, will doe it. and (as 
itis likely) more effeCtually ; forthey will confume the calloufnefle which eroweth 
betweene the toes or fingers. Ihave proved by experience that the warts thar crow 
yn the hands,may be cured by applying of purflain beaten or ftampt in itsown mice 

The leaves and Rowers of marigolds doe certainely performe the felfe fame thing. 


let experience, the 


LXIIIL 


of chaps » and thofe wrinkled and hard excrefcences which the greeks 
call Condylomata. 


{apps or fiflures, are cleft and very longlittleulcers, with paine very What char: 
}y {harpe and burning, by reafon of the biting of an acride, falt and dry. 
14) ‘ng humour, making fo great a contraction, and oftentimes narrow- 
Spy) eile in the tundament and the necke of the wombe, that fearcely the 
=4 toppe of oncs finger may be put into the orifice thereof, likeunto pie- 
cts of leather or parchment,which are wrinkled and parched by holding of themro 
liefire. They rife fometimes in the mouth, forhatthe patientcan neither peake, 
cat, nor open his mouth, fo that che Chirurgian is conftrained tocutit. Inthe cure Sie 
hereof, all fharpe things areto be avoided, andthofe which mollific are to be ufed, 


B «ad the grieved part or place is to be moiftened with fomentations, liniments, cata- 


plaimes,emplafters, and if the malady bee inthe wombe, a dilater of the matrix or 
peflary mutt be putthereinto very often,{oto widen that which is over hard, & too 
mich drawn together or narrow, and then the cleft little ulcers mutt be cicatrized, 


Comaylomata are certaiae wrinkled and hard bunches, and as it were excrefcences of condyloe 


Cooling and relaxing medicines oughtto be uled againft this difeale,fuch as are oile 


5 J Thecure 
fegees, and oyle of linfeed,take of each of them two ounces, bear them tocether 


‘long time in aleaden mortar,and therewith anoint the grieved part; but if there be 
‘Ninflammation, put thereto a little camphire. 


LXIV. 
Of the itching of the wombe. 


N women, efpecially fuchas are old, there often times commeth anit- 
ching in the neck of the wombe, which doth (vo crouble rhem with pain ofthe womb is, 
and adefireto f{cratch, that it taketh away their {leep, Norlong focea 


Woman asked my counfell,that was fo troubled with this kind of mala- 
ay dy,that fhe was conftrained to extinguish or ftay the itching burning of 
her 


|| 
iB, } 
: 
chid 
‘ W if h 
a 
: | 
| 
- 4 
| 
| 
4 
» 4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
, 
r 
© 


Ahittory. 


The caufeof 
theitch, 


Thecure. 


An efteGuall 


remedy. 


The differences 


and fignes, 


A hiftory. 


4 wmeutnt. caulat. NOt Without defert, to affwage the itch, and dry the {cab. Some ufe this that follow. 


her fecret parts by fprinkling cinders of fire, and rubbing them hard on the place. | 
coun felled herto take agypt. diffolved in fea-water or lye, & inje& it into her fecrer 
parts with afyringe, and to wet ftupes of flaxe in the fame medicine, and put them 
up into the wombe, and fo fhe was curcd. Many times this itch commeth inthe {yp 


_damenror tefticles of aged men, by reafon of the gathering together or con flux. of 


falt Aegmne, which when it falleth into the cyes, it caufeth the patient to have much 
adoe to refraine fcratching : when this matter hath difperfed it felfe into the whole 
habite of the body, it caufeth a burning or itching {cabbe,which muft be cured bya 
cooling and a moiftening diet, by phlebotomy and purging of the falt humoy, 
by bathes and hornes applied, with fcarification and anointing of the whole body 
with the unétion following. axang. porcin. recent. ib j fap. nig. vel Lallics, 
nitri, afjat. tartar. feaphifag. an. 38. fulph. viv. argent. viv. Sil. acet. quart; 


incorporate them all rogether,and make thereof a liniment according to art, ang ufe 


itasis {aid before: wnguentum enulaturs cum mercurto thought to have great force, 


eth. alum. (pum. witr. felph. viv. an.5 vi. flaphif. 3i. let them all be diffolved jp 
vinegar of rofes, adding thereto batyr. recent. q.f. make thereof a liniment for th 
forenamad ufe, 


Of the relaxation of the great cut or inteftine, which happeneth to women, 


s Any women that have had great travell and ftraines in child-birth,have 

the great inteftine (called of the Latines ¢ra//um intestinum) or gut, re- 
¢ laxed and flipped down; which kind of affe@ happeneth much to chil- 
B dren, by reafon of a phlegmaticke humour moiftening the {phincer 
mufcle of rhe fundament, and thetwo others called /evatores, Forthe 
cure thereof, firft ofall the gut called rec#um inteftinnm orthe ftraight gut,isto befo- 
mented with a decoction of heating and refolving herbes, as of fage, rofemary, |3- 
vander, thyme, and fuch like ; and then of aftringent things,as of rofes, myrtills, the 
rinds ot pomegranats, cyprefle nuts, galles,with a little alome, then it muft be iprin- 
kled with the pouder of things that are aftringent without biting, and aft of allitis 
tobe reftored and gently thruft into its place. That is fuppofed to bee an eftcGuall 
and fingular remedy for this purpofe, which is made of twelve red {nailes put intoa 
pot with 3 6. of alome, andas much of falt, and fhaken up and down a long time,{or 
fo at length when they are dead there will remainean humour, which mutt bee put 
upon cotton, and applied to the gut that is fallen downe. By the fame caufe (thats 
co fay of painefull childe-birth in fome women) there arifeth a great {welling inthe 
navell; for when the peritoneum is relaxcd or broken, fometimes the Kall, and 
fometimes the guts flippe out : many times flatulencies come thither : the cauf¢, 4 
now fhewed, is over great ftraining or ftretching of the belly, by a great burthen ca 
ticd inthe wombe, and great travaile in childe-birth : if the fallen downe guts mak¢ 
that tumour, paine joyned together withthat tumour doth vexe the patient, an ifit 


be preffed you may hearcthe noile of the guts going backe againe : if it be the Kall, 
then the tumour is foft, and almoft without pain, neither can you heare any noile by 
compreffion : if it be winde, the tumouris loofe and foft, yet it isfuch as willyee! 
to the preffing of the finger with fome found, and will {oone returne againe : the 
tumour be great, it cannotbe cured unleffe the peritonewm bee cut, as it is faid in! he 
cure of ruptures. Inthe church. porches of Paris I have feene begger- women, 


by the falling downe of the guts, have had fuch tumours as big as a bowle, who 00° 


withftanding could goe, and doe all other things as if they had beene found and io 
perfect health: I think it was becaufe the faces or excrements,by reafon of the great- 
neffe of the tumor, and the bigneffe or wideneffe of the inteftines, had a free p 


in and out. 


CHAP. 


afla ge 


Jobn Gromom 
the like in 
dy, and incl 
childe died 


itching ang 
many times 
The caule 
mingforth 
ofthe child, 
(Wellin of 
ine than it \ 
On its cumn 
Phyfitian mil 
mutt nor fi 
thirfteth by 
the fyrupe 
things that 4 
Nfome fort 
mollifie are 
the loo 
all often 
With oyle off 
4% Of the 
Some think A 
lecret 
of | 
liquorice 
tapes and 
any tc 
feratchin, 
Veareth the 


L | B. 24 
i 
LA 
4 — 
q 
A yt} y Za 
en chat: 
open 
frhe R 
n Ore 
| Or! y 
Cuar LXV 
713 
bs 
i 
i 
# ‘ 
j 
4 
if 
i 
| 7 
i 
q 
4 
a 


Lis. 


bn the place, | 
into her fecrer 
and put them 
eth inthe fyp. 
Or cOnfluxe of 
to have much 
tO the whole 
tbe cured by a 
falt humour, 
whole body 
el gallict, faljs 
Bt. 70/. quart. i, 
to art, andufe 

C great force, 
mis that follow. 
be diflalved in 
iment for the 


VOTHCH » 


ild-birth, have 
m) OF gut, re- 
much to chil- 
the {phincter 
atoves. Forthe 
eut,is to be fo- 
rofemary, la- 
s, myrtills, the 
muft be {prin- 
d jaft of all itis 
ean effcQuall 
ailes put into a 
long time,for 
h muft bee put 
e caufe (that's 
(welling in the 


-the caufe, as 


Lt, as willyee! 


e foundan 


on of the 


ada free palleg® 


CHAP: 


: 


the Kall, and 


at burthen cat 
whe guts make 
satient, and if it 
it be the Kall, 
re any noife by 


eagaine :if the 
s it is faid in the 
r-women, 


{- 
le, who 
dio 


Concerning the Generation Man. 


Cuar. LXVI. 
Of the relaxation of the navellin children, 


Vy Feen times in children newly borne, the navell {welleth as bigge as an 
egg, becaufe it hath not bin well cut or bound, or becaufethe whayith 
humours are flowed thither, or becaufe that part hath extended it felfe 


too much by crying, by reafon,of the paines of the fretting of the 
childes gats, many times the childe bringeth that tumour joined with 


nabicefle with him from his mother wombe: but letnot the Chirurgian affay not 
en that ab{ceffe, for if itbe opened, the guts come out through the incifion, as 1 to be opened. 


pave feene in many, and efpecially ina child of my Lord -artiewes ; for when Pe- 
ur ofthe Rocke, the Chirusgian,opened an abf{cefle that was in it, the bowels ranne 
oot atthe incilion, and the infant died; and ic wanted but little that the Gentlemen 
of my Lords retinue that were there,had {trangled the Chirurgian. Therefore when 
jubn Gromontiws the Carver defired me, and requefted mec of late that I would doe 
the like in his fonne, I retufed to doe it,becaufe it was in danger of its life by it alrea- 


jy,and in three daies after the abfceffe broke, and the bowells gufhed out, andthe 
childe died. 


_ 


Cuar. LXVII. 
Of the paine that children have in breeding of teeth.. 


me neth aboutthe feventh month of the childs age. This pain commeth with 
ching and {cratching of the gummes, an inflammation, fluxe of rhe belly, whereof 
many times commetha feaver, falling of the hair, aconvulfion, and at length death. 


Hildren are greatly vexed with their teeth, which caufe great paine when 


they begin to break, as it were, out of their fhell or fheath, and begin 
come forth, the gummes being broken, which for the moft part happe- teeth. 


The caufe of the paine is the folution of the continuity of the gummes by the com- a 
tag forth of che reeth. The fignes of that pain is an unaccuftomed burning, or heat + 


ifthe childes mouth, which may bee perceived by the nurfe that giveth is fucke,a 
welling ofthe gummes and cheekes, and the childes being tnore way ward and cry- 
ing than it was wont, and itwill put its fingers co its mouth, and it will rabbe chem 


onits gummes asthough it were about to {cratch, and ir flavereth much. That the Thecure. 


Phyfitian may remedy this, hee muft cure the aurfe as if fhe had the feaver, and thee 
mutt not fuffer the childe to fucke fo often, bue make him coole and moift when hee 
by giving him at certaine times /yrupus alexandrinus, (yrup.delimonibus, or 
the fyrupe of pomegranats with boiled water, yetthechilde muft not hold thofe 
things that areactually cold long in his mouth, for fuch by binding the gums, doe 


Xfome fort {tay the teeth that are newly comming forth; buttaings that lenifie and 


nollifie are rather to bee ufed, that is to fay, fuch things as doc by little and little re- 
lixe the loofe fleth of the pummes, and alfo affwage the paine. Therefore the nurfe 
halloften times rubbe the childs gummes with her fingers, anointed or bef{meared 
with oyle of {weet almonds, freth butter, hony, fugar, mucilage of the fceds of p/ilz- 
#,0r of the feeds of marth mallowes extra&ed in che water of pellitory of the wall. 
Some thinke that the braine of a hare, or of a fucking pig rofted or fodden, through 
‘lecret property,are cffectuall forthe fame : and on the outlide thall be applied a ca- 
‘“pla(me of barly meale, milke, oyle of rofes, and the yelkes of egges. Alfoa fticke 
liquorice fhaven and bruifedand anointed with hony, or any of the forenamed 


(cratching doth aflwage the painfull itching, and rarifie the gummes, and in fome 


"eareth them that che teeth appeare the fooncr. But many times it happeneth that pain ofthe 


all 


‘Jtapes,and often rubbed in the mouth or on the gummes,is likewife profitable : [0 whaepower 
’ alfo any toy for the childe to play withall, wherein a wolves tooth is fet, for this ratching of 


breeding recth. 
Thefgnes. 


the gums harh 
to afiwage the 


j 
j 
4 
4 
Fo 
a a 
a 
& 
* 
a 
| 
| 
| 
& 
* 4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 ry 
* 


( oncerning the Generation of an, 4, 
all thefe and {uch Jike medicines profit nothing atall,by reafon of the contum,,.... 
¢ orthe weakneffe of the child 
the gums, by hardnefle orthe weaknefle of the childes nature: therefore jp luch 
caufe, before the forenamed mortall accidents comc, I would perfwade the Chiry 
gian to open the gummes in fuch placcs as the teeth bunch out witha little {we} ™ 
with a knife or lancet, lo breaking and opening away for them, notwithftang:,” 
that alittle fuxe of blood willfollow by thetenfion of the gummes : of Which king 
of remedy I have with prof{perous and happy fuccefle made tryall in fome of mine 
owne children, inthe prefence of Fewrens, Altinus,and Cortinus, Do@ors of Ph 
fick, and Gusllemeau the Kings Chiryrgian, which is much better and more {af than 
to doe as fome nurfes doe, who taught onely by the inftiné of nature, with thei 
} nailes and {cratching, breake and teare,or rentthe childrens gummes. The Dy}, 
Nevers hada fonne of eight moneths old, which died of late, and when wee, y;,, 
| the Phyfitians that were prefent, diligently fought for the caufe of his death, we 
could impute it unto nothing elfe, than tothe contumacious hardnefle of the pyn,. 
j which was greater than was convenient for a childe of that age ; for therefore :},. 
teeth could not breake forth, nor make a paflage for themfelves to come forth. o¢ 
U which our judgement this wasthe tryall,that when we cut his gummes with a kyj/- 
' we found all his teeth appearing as it Were in‘an array, ready to come forth, whic), 
1 ifit had bin done when he lived, doubtlefle he might have beene preferved, 
The End the twenty fourth Booke. 
Cords ng 22. 
fended burt 
figers 
Wh; 
levided : 0” 
AnRoile fa 
ue which j 
Known toll 
ad tt noe her 
y Matt 
So 


the membran 
lomee Imes bo 


four, and 
conclud™ 
Tring from 


. 
i+ 
4 
iF 
é 
| 
a 
ry | 
P- 
: 
J 


by 


contumacy of 
ereforc in fuch » 
rade the Chirp, 
alittle {wel}j, 
of Which kind 

nfomeof mine 
JoGors of Phy. 

a more fafe than 
ture, With their 

s. The Duke of 
when Wee, With 
bf hisdeath, we 
{Te of tine gums, 
br therefore the 
> come forth: of 
es witha knife, 
e forth, which 
ferved. 


> 


* 


STERS 


AND 
PRODIGIES. 


THe Twenty FirtH Booxw - 


Ee call Monfi ers, whatt bings foever are brought fort 
ry tothe common decree and order of nature. So thee terme montter 
1S. 


[x that infane-monftrous , which ts borne with one arme alone, or 


299 with two beads, But we define Prodigies, thofe thin which | 


differing and diffenting from nature : as, if a woman 
B louldbee delivered of a Snake, ora Dogge. Of the firft fore are thought all 
ofein which any of thofe things, which ought, and are accustomed to bee, ac- 
Birding to nature rgwanting, or doch abound, ts changed, worne, covered or de- 
inded bu rt or in his right place: for fomtimes fome are horn with more 
teers chin ches ocherfome but with one finger : fome with thofe parts 
vided which befoyned, others with thofe parts joyned which fhould bee 
vided: fome are barne with the privityes of both fexes, male and female, And 
aw Geate with a borne upon her knee. Noliving creature was ever 
ine which wanted the Heart, but fome have beene feene wanting the Spleene, étoi 
‘vers with-two Spleenes, and {ome wanting one of the Reimes. And none have 
known to have wanted the whole Liver, although fome have bin found that 
“dit not perfettand whole : arid therebaye beenc thofe which wanted the Gall, 
“en by nature they fhould. bave had it: and be/ides, it hath beene feene that the 
“er, contrary to his natural fite, bath lien on the left fide, and the Spleene on 
| right. Some women alfo have had their privities clofed, and not perforated, 
membranous obftacle, which they call the Hymen, hindering. And men are 
Oa times borne with their {undaments, cares, nofes, and the reft of the paf]a- 
hut, and are accounted monjtrous, nature erring fromits entended /cope. 
We to conclude, thofe Monfters are thought to portend fome ill, which are much. 
Jing from their nature. 


CHAP. 


Mmmm 


~ = 
a 
\ 


CuHap. I. 


of the caufe of Monfters sand firft of thofe Monflers'which appeare 
the glory of God, and the punifhent of 
mens wickedne/fe. 


and 


Here are reckoned up many caufes of monfters ; the firft whereof is;h, 
eX glory of God, that his immenfe power may be manifefted to thofe which 
ey are ignorant of it, by the fending of thofe things which happen contra; y 
$ ronaturc:for thus our Saviour Chrift anfweredthe Dilciples(asking whe. 
ther he or his parents had offended, who, being born blind, received hisfight from 
him)that neither he nor his parents had committed any fault fo great, but this to hay¢ 
happened onely that the glory and majefty of God fhould be divulged by that mira. 
cle, and fuchg@rcat workes. | 
Another caule is, that God may either punifh mens wickednelfle, or fhew fignes | 
of punithment at hand, becaufe parents fometimes lye and joine themiclves tog. 
ther without law and meature, or luxuriovufly and beaftly, or at fuch times as they 
ought to forbcare by the command of God and the Chucch, fuch monttrous, har. 
rid andunnaturall births doe happen. 
At Verona Anno Dom.125 4.a mare foaled acolrt, with the perfe& face of aman, 


but all the reft ofthe body like an horfe: alittle afrer that, the warre betweeneth: 
Flor@stines and Pifans began, by which all wasin acombuttion. 


inthis ourti 


The figure of 4 Colt with a mans face. 


“nor berha 
Woor more} 
Wonders, bec: 
parts hal 
Natures con | 


About the time that Pope Jalias the fecond railed up all and the greater faming o 
part of Chriftendome, againft Lewes the twelfth the King of France, inthe @ 


our Lord 15 12.(in which yeere, upon Eafter day, neere Ravenna was fought tht | had 
mortall battell, in which the Popes forces were overthrowne)a monfter was child 
in Ravenna, havinga horne upon the crowne of his head, and befides, th, it liy 
and one foot alone, mofl like to the feet of birds of prey, and in the knec thereof 
the privities of male and female, the reft ofthe body like a man, as you born he 
by the following figure. th 
't lived 


Tht 


. 
¢ 
>. 
he ‘ 
@ 
i 
ay 
‘ke 
ay 
= 
ary 
ARG 
7 
3 24 == = | A 
é 
di 
4 
| 
Whick 
| m may! 
1 
Beto 
O Othe 


| B, 25. 1B. 25. 


M y onflers and Prodigies. 


The figure of awinged Monjter. 


The third caufe is, an abundance of 
feed & overflowing matter. The fourth, 


the fame in toolittle quantity, and defi- 
cient. The fift, the force and efficacy of 


cof isthe imagination. The fixr, the ftraightnefle 
(e which ofthe wombe. The feaventh, the difr- 
contrary derly fice of the party with childe, and 
ing whe- the pofition of the parts of the body. The 
2ht from eighrh, a fall, ftraine or ftroake, ef{pecial- 
isto have ly upon the belly ofa woman with child. 
The ninth, hereditary difeafes, or affects 

| by any other accident. The tenth, the 
ew fignes confufion and avingling cogethes of che 
ves toge- feed. Thecleventh, the craft and wic- 
es as they kednefle of the divell. There are o- 


rous, hor- thers which are accounted for monfters, 


becaufe they have their original! or ef- 


of aman, e fence full of admiration, or doe aflume 

weenethe a certaine prodigious forme by the craft 

I. ome begging companions, therefore we will f peak briefly of them in thei: place 

our treatife of monfters. 
Of monfkers caufed by too great abundance of (eed, 

| wea Eeing wee have already handled the two former and truely final! 

caufes of monfters,we muft now come to thofe which are the ma- 
tereall,corporeall, and efficientcaufes,taking ourbeginning from 

that we call the too great abundance of the matter of feed. It isthe 

| opinion of thofe Philofophers which have written of monfters, 

thatifat any timeacreature bearing one at once, as man, fhall caft 

feed in copulation than is neceffary to the generation of one body, it 

onely one fhould beebegot ofall that therefore from theace either 

Yoormore muft arife : whereby tt commeth to pafle, thatthefe are rather judged 

= Minders, becaufe they happen feldome, and contraryto common cuftome. Super- 


‘ous parts happen by the fame caufe, chat twinnes,and many at one birth, contrary 
B Ytaures courfe, doe chance, that is, by a larger effulion of feed than is required fox 
iraming of that part, that foit exceeds either innumber or elfe in greatnelle. So 
tells that ia histime in the Eaft an infant was borne,having all the parts from 
‘elly-upwards double, but from thence downewards fingleand fimple : for it 
idtwoheads, foure eyes, two breafts, foure hands, in all the reft like to agother 
and itlived alittle while. Celias Rhodiginus faith he faw two monfters in J/a/y, 
BXone male, the other female, handfomly & neatly made through all their bodies, 
“cept their heads, which were double , the male diced within afew daics after it was 
but the female (whofe fhape is here delineated) lived 20.fiveyeers,whichis 
Bary to the common cuftome of montfters ; for they for the moft partare very Mon?“ 
lived, becaufe they both live and are born, as it were, againftnatures confent ; jive. 
be ‘Which may beadded, they docnot love themfelves, by reafon they are made a 
2 eto others, aad by that meanes lead a hated life. 


Mmmm 2 The 


we 
. 
a... 
i thee 
> > 
| 
he y‘ 
tiie | 
; foug! 
5 
er Was 
fWwO 
~4 . 
nee the 
~ 
y 


— 


The effigies of 4 maide with twoheads. 


But it is moft remarkeable which ;, 
cofthenes tclleth of this woman-inonf, 
for excepting her two heads, {lice 
framed in the reft of her body t ,, 
exact perfection : her two heads 
the like defire toeat and drinke, to 
to {peake, and to doe every thing ; the be 
gcd fromdore todore, every one givina 
to her freely. Yetat length the was banihe 
Bavaria, left that by the frequent looking 
upon her, the imaginations of women | 
with childe, ftrongly moved, fhould make 4 
the like impreffion inthe infants they bare 
in their wombes. 


The effigies of two gtrles whofe backes 
evew together. 


Inthe yeere of our Lord 1475. at Ver 
na in Italy,two Giles were borne with 
their backes fticking together from the 
lower part of the fhoulders unto the very 
buttockes. The novelty and ftrangenelle 
of thething moved their parents, being but 
poor, to carry them through all che chiete 


townes in Italy to get mony ofall juchas 
came to fee them. 


Inthe yeere 1530.there was aman tobee feene at Paris, out of whofe belly 
| | ther, perfe@ in all his members except his head, hanged forth as if he had beeng**" 
3 tedthere. Theman was forty yeeres old, andhee carried the other implanted § 


growing out of him, in his armes, with fuch admiration to the beholders, that" 
anne very carneftly to fee hum. 


The 


» 
4 
2 
| 7 j “> 8) ‘ 
* ‘ — 
™ 
¢ 
Je 
~ 
a, 
| = 
= 
—_ = = ~ _ =" 
= 
f = 
SS Se | 
> 
I = 
4 
3 => | S 
Z = 
— - 
BAPE >= 
a 
| 
~ 
~~, 
J 
4 
3 
~ 
— 


cable which Lye 
woman -inonfter 
heads, fhee Was 
ner body to aq 
two heads had 
crinke, to {lee pe 
ry thing : fhe be! 
very Onc giving 
th the was banifhe 
frequent locking 
tions of women 
ved, fhould make 
intants they bare 


d 1475. atv 
mvere borne with 
pether from the 
rs unto the very 
ind ftrangenefle 
arents,being but 
oh all che chiete 
ny of alliuch as 


thofe beliy ano- 
ve had been grai- 


er implanted of} 


lders, that many 


The 


Lip. 25 


é 


* 


The figure of 4man with another crowing out of him. 


<n) WP's 


Wii 


ite 


Of <M onfters and ‘Proaigies. 


At Quwiers,a village fome ten miles 
from 7 #rine inSavoy, in the-yeere 1578. 
upon the feventeenth day of fanuary,a- 
bout cight aclocke at night,an honetft ma- 
tron brought forth a childe having five 
hornes, like toRams hornes, fet oppofire 
to one another upon his head : he had alfo 
along piece of fiefh, likein fome fort toa 
French-hood which women ufed to wear, 
hanging downe from his forchead by the 
nape of his necke almoft the length of his 
backe: twovother pieces of flefh, like the 
collar ofafhirt, were wrapped about his 
necke : the fingers ends of both his hands 
fomewhat refémbled a Haukes talons, and 
his knees {eemed to be in his hammes :the 
rivht leg and ehe right foot were of avery 
red colour ; the reft of the body was of a 
tawny colour; itis {aid he gave foterrible 
a (critch when he was brought forth, that 
the Midwives, and the reft of the women 
thacwere at herlabour, were fo frighted 
thatthey prefently leftche houfe andran 
away. Whenthe Dake of Savoy heard of 
this monfter, he commanded it fhould be 
brought co him, which performed, one 
would hardly think what various cenfures 
the Courtiers gave of it. 


i 5. Z 5. y 
LAL 
2 WW _ Q 
= 
= 
1 
4 ‘ A ¥ / 
q- LA, 
ji 
« Ji ure 
f\ 
] 
a 
if 
ocak? 
/ 
4 c ‘ 
4 
= \ 4 \ 
: = 
\ 
— 
— | — 
4 — == 
SEY 
~ = - VAAN = = 
ERS 
ic = 
= — 
j 
~ / ~ 
- 
— 
= 
=} 
— 
] = 
~ 
‘ 
> = ~ 
= 
q 
= 
— 
7 
‘ 


966 Of and Prodigies. 
| The [bape of a moniter founa in an egze. 


ther wit 


The monfter you fee here deliner 
ated, was found inthe midd]e and 
ianermoft part of an ¢ 


With the 
face of aman, buthaires yeeldin, 
Y) horrid reprefentation of {nakes. the 
chinne hadthree other fret. 
Y ched forth like a beard. Itwas 
Y feene at at the houte of on. 
Gy Bancherona Lawyer,a maice};, 
Z king many eggsto butter: the whire 

Ze ofthis cege given a Car, prefers] 
killed her. Laftly,this monfter com. 
Z sing tothe hands of the Baron sy. 


necy, Was brought to King Chay/e 
the ninth being then at We7. 


The ef of amonflrous childe, having two 
cads two armes foure legs. The effizies of woz. 
LOZEL OY 


in the yecrers.46. a woinan at Paris in het 
moneth Of her ‘account, brought fortha 
childe having two heads,twoarmes and foure 
legees : I diflecting the body of it, found bur 
onc heart, by which one may know it was bu 
onc infant. For yowmay know thisfrom 4- 
ri Sotle, whethet the monftrous birth bee one 
ormore joined teg¢ther, by the principall 
part: for it the body have but ong ‘heart, it's 
but one, if two, itis double by the joyningto- 
getier inthe conception. 


| 


a 
| 3 . yeere 15 7¢ 
ody that you fee ex 
q 


De 
wre 
Lat hy a Pet? Gil 


q 
\ 
\ ™ > J \s J 
= CAF wrss “A 
~~) 
d 
| 
~~. - 4 ae, 
= = § > 4 —= 
* 
‘ ~ — ws 
q 


3.25. Of Moonflers and Prodigies. 
portraiture of Twinnes joyned toze- 
ve ther withore bead 
WitP 
ce here delin 


middle and 
With the 
yeeldino 
Of inakes: the 
{nakes ftrer. 
id. It was firft 

C houfe Of one 

a maice 
acter: the white 
sat, prefently 
monfter com. 
the Baron Se. 
King Charles Ss Z 


Towers was delivered of twinnes joyned toge- 
ther with one head, and mutually embracing 
each other. Rewatws Ciretus the tamous Chi- 
rargian of thofe parts, fent mee their Sceleton. 


VAD 


The effizdes of two girles, beingTwinngs, 
joyned together by their fore-heads. 


t Paris in het 
weht fortha 
ics and foure 
t, found but 
yw it was but 
his trom 4- 
ith bee one 
¢ principall 
heart, itis 
joy ning to- 


Munfler writes that in the village Bri fanz, 
not farfe From Wormes, in the yeere 1495. he 
{.wtwo Girles perfect and entire in every 
part of their bodies, but they had their fore- 
heads fojoinedtogetherthat they could not 

parted or fevered by any art: they lived 
together tenyceres ;then the one aying, it 
was necdfull to feparate the living fromthe 
dead: but fhe did not long out-live her fitter, 
by reafon of the malignity of the wound 
made in parting them afunder. 


inthe yeere 15 70.the ewenticth of July, at Pars, inthe {treet Gravilliers atthe 


Wm She of the Bell, cheferwo infants were borne, differing in fexe, with that fhape of 

Tee 58 °°¢y that you fee expreffed in the figure. They were baptized in the Church of St. 
ofthe fields, and named Ladovicus and Ludovicaxtheir father was a Mafon, 

Stame was Peter German, his furhame Petit Diew (7) little-God, his mathers name 


Mathea Petronilla. 


The 


In the yeere 1569. a certaine woman of 


| 
‘ 
j 
* 
} / 
* 
4 
‘ 
| 
° 
‘ 
4 
SSS SAT (We 
= 
SS 
S 
— 
« 
= * 
he -= = — 
4 
q 
as Le 4 


Of ii4onfters and Prodigies. 


The fhape of the infants lately borne at Paris, 


& 


“Gy 
\ wy 4 


The fzure of two girlesjoyned together 
in their breafts and belly, 


Ia the yeere 1 572.1n Pont de See, neare Axe 
gers a little cowne,were borne upon the tenth 
day of July, two gitles, perfe@ in their limbs, 
bur chat they had but foure fingers apiece on 
their left hands: they clave together in their 
fore parts, from theirchin to the navell,which 
was but one, as their heart was alfo but one, 
their liver was divided into foure !obes:they 
lived halfe an houre, and were baptized, 


Calius R Ledizinus tells chat in a cown ot his 
country called Sar%ano,Jtaly being troubled 
wich civill warres, there was borna moniter 
of unufnal bignefs;for he had two heads, hia 
ving all his limbs anfwerable in greatne!s 
tallneffero achild of foure months old : be 


at the fetting on of the fhoulder, it 
third hand put forth, which did not exceed 
the eares in length, for it was not allicen** 
was born the 5. of the Ides of March 15 14 


~— 
—> 
— 
~ 


Y 
ff 


tween histwo heads,which were bot! alike; 


2 F. 


q he fgure of one 
45 


The figure of ami 
ead 


In the yeere 157 
you from Car; 
the. wite « 
Wwhof 
ole fhape you fe 
Sut of one onely fe 


j 
f 
Veg Z 
Set 
| ORS 
| Thefeure ofachildwithtwo Leads. 4nd the body as b12 22 as one of foure neo? | NYS Rs 
q ‘ 
Cor Sp 
| 
( = SS 
(My 2 
SU) = — ZY 
SE Es = | 
[SS 
— SS 
j 


See, Neare 
pon the teath 
in their limbs, 


pers apiece on | 


perher in their 
navell,which 
alfo but onc; 
re lobes:they 
yaptized, 


a town ot his 
ing troubled 
yn a monttet 
wo heads,ha- 
greatncis & 
nths old : be- 
re bhothalike, 
lder, it hac a 
id not excce: 

hot allfeen** 
Marth 15 14+ 


The 


29. 


Of “Monfters and Proaigies. 


qhefizureof one with foure legges ana 
as mapyarmes. 


wh ¢ 


Fovianus Pontanus tells inthe yeere 1529. 
2 the ninth day of Fanuary, there was a man 
ZZ childe borne in Germany, having foure armes 
AA and as many legges. 
A 


The figure of aman out of whofe belly another 
head fhewed it felfe. 


In the yeere that Francis the firft King of 
“rance entered into Jeague with the Swé/fes, 
there was bornea monfter in Germany, out of 
the midft of whofe belly there ftood agreat 
head ; it came to mans age,and this lower,and 
as it were inferted head, was nourifhed as 
muchas the true and upper head. 


Inthe yeere 1572-the lattday of Febrwary,inthe parithof ¥iabaz, inthe Way as 
You goe from Carnuta to Pars, in a {mall village called Bordes, one called Cypriana 
»tranda the, wile of fames Merchant a husbandman, brought forth this montter 
whole fhape you {ee here delineated, which lived uarill the Sunday following,being 
Sut of one onely fexe, which wasthe female. 


The 


| 
' 
= 
“So 
| — 3 SS 
Z 
= 
: = 
(ORCAS 
1. = 
: = 
SS 
= 
SS 
ff +- SEA 
q 
LS 
| 
4 ‘ 


Of Monfters and Prodigies, 


— 


The fhapeoftwo monftrous Twinnes, being but of one onely Sexe, 


Symp) 


c 
(TSS 


( 


— 
Ww 


Yj 
( 


y) 


~ 


Inthe yeere 1572. 0n Ealter Munday at  1et% in Loraine, in the Inne Whofe 
figne is the Holy-Ghoft, a Sow piggeda pigge, which had eight legges, foure cares 
and the head of a dogge ; the hinder part fromthe belly downeward was parted j, 
two as intwinnes, but the foreparts grew into. one; it had two tongues in the moyrh 
with foure teeth in the upper jaw, and as many in the lower, The fexe was not ¢o he 
diftinguithed, whether it were a Bore or Sow pi pec, for there was one flit under the 
taile, and the hinder parts were allrent and open. The fhape of this monter, as itis 
here {ct downe, was fent me by Bergefias the famous Phyfitian of Mertz, | 


The fhape of 4 monftrous Piece. 


| 


PY 


Cuap. III, 
Of women bringing many children at one birth, 
man isa creature bringing ufually butoneata birth: butthere have 


been fome who have brought forth two, fome three, fome foure, !1V¢s 
tixe, or more at one birth. Empedecies thought that the abundance 0! 


Fe feed was the caufe of fuch numerous births; the Stoskes affirme the di- 
vers cells or partitions of the wombe to be the caufe: for the feed being 
| 


ufly parted into 
brought fort! 


eth no place for ¥ 


wom 
Cafar brought 
g.lathe 554: 
forth five children at 
naa to have bin then 
grernall injury did al 
reports that it 
yere borne at one birt 
yerall cimes Was deliv 
children lived. 
s,vill,a Gentleman © 
were baptized. In our 
fom Chambellay 
‘he Lord of Maldemei 
fcond yeere fhe had 
ff yeere fixe, and of 
of aldemeure. Int 
thedaughter of Mac 
one child,the tenth d: 
livered untillit was pt 
tin Cromerus the auth 
{prung from a noble a 
w, brought forth at o 
sary, inthe yeere 
ltalian had twenty ch 
and that fhe was fo b! 
her knees, with abro: 

following figure. 


7 4 pee 
Of 
97° 
Bat 
fo, for in Wo 
= 
4 
Z_ Z nestor ofrentwit 
“~ : — s 4 
( 
| 
~ > \ 
| 
Up FH) ig AS 
SAMUS 
Ma / 7, \\\ le | . 
Ge IZ 
f I, 
| 


Tone whore 
S, foure ear, 
Was parted jn 
in the mouth, 
WaS Not to he 
flit under the 


therehave 
foure, fives 
undance ot 
rme the di- 


feed being 
Vall- 


parted into thefe partitions, and the conception divided, there are more 
F jgren brought forth, no otherwife than in rivers,the water beating againft the 
Acs, is turned into divers circles or rounds. But Ariftot/e faith there is no reafon 
© sink £0, for in women that parting of the womb into cells, asin dogs and fowes, 
OF chao place ; for womens wombes have but one cavity, parted into two recefles, 


| 


4. de £en. anim, 
CAD. 4s 


-right & left, nothing comming between,except by chance diftinguifhed by a cer- 
.{ne;tor often twins lye in the fame fide of the womb. Ariftotles opinionis,thata 
3 ..aa cannot bring forth more than five children at one birth. The maide of As- 
Cafar brought forth five at a birth, 8a thort while after, fhe & her children di- 
jlothe yeet 1554. at Bearn in SwitXerland,the wife of Dr. John Gelinger brought 


och five childrenat one birth,three boies and two girles. Albmcra/is, afirmes a wo- 


§ ;a to have bin the mother of feven children at one birth; & another who by fome 

gernall injury did abort, brought forth fifreene perfeGly fhaped in all their parts. 

8 ).yreports that ic was extant in the writings of Phyfitians, that cwelve children 

§ ccborne at one birth and chat there was another in Peloponnefus which foure {e- Lib. 7. cap, 
all times was delivered of five children at one birth, and that the greater part of Cap 3: 

children lived. It is reported by Dalechampius that Bonaventurathe {lave of one 

wvill,a Gentleman of Seva,at onetime brought forth feven children,of which four 

ete baptized. In our time, between Sarte and Maine, in the parifb of Seaux, nor far 

om Chambellay thereis 2 family and noble houfe called Maldemeure.the wite of ° 

Bc Lord of Maldemenre, the firft yeere fhe was married brought forthtwinnes, the 

§ (cond yeere fhe had three children, the third ycere foure, the fourthyeere five, tlic 

‘tyeere fixe, and of that birth fhe died: of thofe fixe one is yet alive, and is Lord 

| Maldemeure. Inthe valley of Beanfort, in the county of 4xjo#, a young woman 
hedaughter of Mace Channiere, when at one perfect birth thee had brought forth 

9 echild,the tenth day following the fellin labour ofanother,but could not be de- 

\vered untillit was pulled from herby force,and wasthedeathofthe mother. 

iw Cromerus the author of the Polith hiftory, writeth that one Margaret, awoman book 
(ung from anoble and antient family neere Cracovia, and wifeto Count 
«brought forth at onebirth thirty five live children, upon the twentieth day of 74- 

wy,intheyeere 1296. Francifcus Picus Mirandula writeththat onc Dorothy an 

(lian had twenty children at two births, arthe firft nine, andat the fecond eleven, 

adthat the was fo bigge, that fhe was forced to beare upher belly, which lay upon 

etknees, with abroad and large {carfetyed about her necke, as you may fee by the 

ollowing figure. 


Ihe 


— 


2 
‘ 
onfter, a 
* 
q 
4 
q 
> 


The pitture of Dorothy, great with child with many child 


ren, 


\ 
Ss 
= 
=: 
Andtheyaret 
GA chended here againe, who affirmethe caule of 
aricty of the cells of the wombe, for th 
ave fevencells ? feignea womans 


Or It 
on the leftfide for females Foca ee right fide for 


| an males, three 
thefefeven cells to have bin div: lat there have bnene fome thatathirned Sera 
| fed,doth bring forth a diveis which the feed dif 
| cells furni/ crcafe,accor Variety of 
hed with the matter of feed. which thouch j tothe variety of the 
| Opinion of H/ppecrates,in his book De Page feemeto have beenth. 
| to reafon,and torhofe things which are it is repugnant 
| cap-g. YUtth, are begot and brought forth » WHO faith twinnesand more at one 
the hand, thatis, by theabundan le caule that the fix finger growth 
pious thancan bee al] taken up i plenty of the feed, Which js ereater and moreco: 

forced into one, it maketh 1 natura’! framing of one body : for if ill be 
greatneffe or number ; but if : ay the parts encreafed more than is fir F herin 
more th asit Were, cloven into dj 

| re than one at one birth. inte divers parts, it cayfct 

Cu Ap, I V. , 

Of H crmaphrodites or § crats. 


maphrodites, becaufe they draw thie 
Ormation from the plenty and abun- 
ccaule they are of both fexes, the wo- 
For hereupon it commeth to 
Wales endeavours to produce 


Of onfters 4NG Proaigies. L 
— 259 j 8. 25. 


(omething like it fe 
is the caufe that on: 
Yer fome make 
gale Hermaphrod: 
noc 
f-cond is the femal 
militade of a mans 
‘he cod and {tones 
prefle figures of me 
Me other, yet arc found 
of water: the four 
ly pertorme the pa 
bath fexescomple, 
awoman: the lawe 
which they will re: 
departed from the { 
both, and promifc 
are fignesby whic! 
ayleinthe male or 
are apparent} 
fions, and fo perfor 
ifthe haire ofthe h 
habite of the body 
is predominan 
the and | 
wrthout any vit the} 
and yeeld {ced, the 
butif the conform 
cy, is thoucht to! 


af. 
one Of them is alwa 


T 
Lhe figure of Herma 


tovether wii 


— 
9 /* 
Ae 
“SA 
| 
\- 
ANY 
ity (28 Nd here alfo we mult fj 
Caulc of the; ult Peake of Ais 
| of their generation andco | j 
of feed, and are called fo 3A! 
: ycelding as much feed ast 
| palle that the forming faculty 


and 


omething like it felfe) doth labour both the matters almoft wich equall force, and 
«the caufe that onebody is of path flexes. 
Yer fome make foure differences of Hermaphrodites ; the firft of which is the 
ale Hermaphrodite, who isa perfect and abfolute male, and hath onely aflit in the 
»yinevm not perforated, and from which neither urine nor feed doth ow. The 
-cond is the female, which belides her naturall privity, hatha fcthy and skinny fi- 
wilitade of a mans yard, but unapt forerection and ejaculation of feed, and wanteth 
{tones ; the third difference is of thofe, which albeit they beare the ex- 
figures of members belonging to both fexes,commouly fetthe one apainftthe 
f -her, yet are found unapt forgeneration, the one of them onely ferving for makin 
yiwacer: the fourth difference is of thote who are able in both fexes, and through- 
y pertorme the part both of man and woman, becaufe ihey have the genitalls of 
soth {exes compleat and perfed,and alfo the right breaft like a man, andthe left like 
a. woman: the lawes command thofe tochufe the fexe which they will ufe, and in 
chey will remaine and live, jadgingthemto deathif they be found ro have 
\-parted fromthe fexe they made choice of, for fome are thought to have abufed 
yorh, and promifcuoutly tohave had their pleafure with men and women. There 
1 .cfiznesby whichthe Phyfitians may difcerne whether the Hermaphrodites are 
1 Jeinche male or female fexe, or whether they are impotent in both : thefe fignes 
«¢moft apparent in the privities and tace;torif the matrix beexact in all its demen- 
ions, and fo perforared thatit may admita maas yard, ifthe courfes dow that way, 
‘che haive of the head bee long, flender, and foft, andto conclude, ifto this tender 
I ishire of the body atamide and weake condition of the minde be added, the female 
4 &xcis predominant, and they are plainely to bee judged women. Burif they have 
che and fundament full of haires (the which in women are commonly 
wirhoutany)it they havea yard ofa convenient largenefle,if ic ftand well & readily, 
ind yeeld {eed, the male fexe hath the preheminence,and they areto be judged men. 
burif the conformation of boththe genitalls be alike in figure, quantity, and cftica- 
y, it is thought to be equally ablein both {exes : although by the opinion of 4rifio- 


fe of numerous «, thofe who have double genitals, the onc of the male, the other of the female,the 
ignea womans ne of them is alwaics perfeét, the other imperfect. 

r males, three | 

lites orScrats : Hermaphrodttctwinnes cleaving 

rmedevery of together with their backes. 

he feed difper- | 


variety of the 
have been the 
itis repugnant 
es and {cn{es. 
d morcat one 
growcth or 
and more co- 
forifirall be 
fir, either in 
rts, itcauletn 


Anno Dom. 1486. In the Palatinate, 
at the village Robach, necte Heidelberg, 
there were rwinnes, both Hermaphro- 


WW) 


together. ... 


Bhey draw te 
Bantry and abun- 
fexes, the WO- 

commethto 
isto proc uce 
fome- Nona | 


dites, borne with their backs fiscking 


I 4. gé gene ? 
anim, 


— 
‘ 4 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Pad 
— — a 
1 
oe . \ — = 
3 


OfeM onflers and Prodigies. 


The effizies of an Hermaphrodite, having 
8 foure hands and feet. 


The fame day the Henetians and Cengez 
entred into league, there was a monfter bom 
in /ta/y having foure armes and feet, andh 
one head;sit lived a little after it was baptized 
James Ruef a Helvetian Chirurgian hee 
faw the like, bue which befides had the Drivie 
ties of both fexes, whole figure I have there. 
fore here {et forth. 


\\ 


\ 


CuHuapP. Y. 
Of the changing of Sexe, 


Wiss Matus Lufitanus reports that in the village E/quina, there 
Envy, WYP) maid named Maria Pateca,who atthe appointed age for her cour- 
eo Uxai| [es to flow, nad in fteadof thema mans yard, lying before that 
iy. > fe] time hid and covered, fo that ofa womati fhe became aman, and 
UE Fa N\A therefore laying afide her womans habite, was cloathed in mans, 
and changing her name, was called Emanuel; who when hee had 
got much wealth by many and great negotiations and commerce 
in Jndra,returncd into his country ,and marrieda wife : but La/itanus {aith he didnot 
certainely know whether he had any children, but that he was certaine he remained 
alwaics beardleffe. 

Anthony Loquenenx, the Kings keeper orrecciver of his rencsof St. Owintinat 
Vermandois, \atcly afirmed to me that he faw aman at Rezmes, at the ane having the 
fign of che fwan,in the yeer 15 60. who was taken for a woman untill! the fourtecath 
yeere of his age ; for then it happened as he played fomewhat wantonly witha maid 
which lay inthe fame bed withhim, his members (hitherto lying hid) ftarted fort 
and unfolded them felves : which when his parents knew (by helpe of the Ecclett- 
afticke power) they changed his name from Joaneto and put him in mansap- 
parell. 

Some yceres agone, being.n. he traine of King Charles the ninth, inthe French 
Glaffc-houfe, I was fhew@d aman called Germane Garnierus, but by fome Germant 
Marta (becaufe in former times when he was a woman hee was called Mary) he was 
of an indifferent {tature, and well fer body, witha thicke and red beard ; he w2s& 
ken for a girle untill che fifteenth yeere of his age, becaufe there wes no figne of %- 
ing a man {cene in his body, and for that amongft women, he in like attire did tho! 
things which pertaine to women : in the fifteenth yeere of his age, whilcft hetome- 
whatearneltly purfued hogges given into his charge to bee kept, who running 190 
the corne, he leaped violently over a ditch, whereby it came to paffe thatthe ftay° 
and foldings being broken, his hidden members fodainly broke forth, but not with- 


Out paine ; going home, hee weeping complained tohis mother that his or 
orth: 


— 


1B. 25 


cath : with which I 
peard he was turned 
Cardinal the Bithoy 
qd habiteofa man 
pliny reports that: 
ents; but by the cor 
aufethey thoughe 
hing. Certaincly 
have hanging forth 
nay drive forth thar 
peing encreafed and 
hood) overcome, it 
by defe& of he: 
orowing heat fome 
fre [thinke it mani! 
women have t 
hat have degenerate 
inperfect tothe m 
perfect. 


want 
ture int: 


& 


The effictes of 4 mon 
of aefec? of 


i 
4 ‘ L 
=> 
= 
= y SS 
~ “4 j 
(( 
Lt 
Lin = 
| 
NX. 
| 
ee 
4 
} 
a a 
- 
¢ 
Ay 
> . 
/ \& 
/ 
> 
é 


and Cencefes 
montter borne 

d feet, and but 
was baptized, 
r21an faith hee 
had the priyj- 
have there. 


4, there wasa 
‘for her cour- 
ig, before that 
ue aman, and 
thed in mans, 
when hee had 
nd commerce 
ith he did not 
he remained 


bf. Qaintin at 
ne having the 
he fourtecath 
By witha maid 

) ftarted forth 
the Eccleit- 
nin mans ap- 


inthe French 
ome 
Mary) he was 
rd he was 
10 figne of 
ttire did thole 
ileft be fome- 
running into 
thatthe ftaycs 
but not with- 
his guts came 
forth: 


ah : with which his mother amazed, calling Phyfitians and Surgeons to counfell, 
gtd he Was turned into aman ; therefore the whole bufineffe being brought to the 
r,dinall the Bithop of Lessncure, an aflembly being called, he received the name 
.jhabiteofa man. 
A piiny reports that the fonne of Cafinus of a girle became a boy, living with his pa- 
ants, but by the command of the Soothfayers he was carried into a defart Ifle, be- 
thought fuch monfters did alwaies or portend fome monftrous 
“Waing. Certainely women have fo many and like parts lying in their wombe, as men 
hanging forth ; onely a {trong and lively heat feemes to bee wanting, which 
§ «zy drive forth that which lyes hid within : therefore in proceffe of time, the heat 
B sing encreafed and flourifhing, and the humidity (which is predominant in child- 
nod) overcome, itis not impoflible that the virile members, which hitherto flug- 
defe& of heat, lay hid, may be put forth, efpecially if tothar ftrength of tiie 
sowing heat fome vehement concuffion or jactation of the body be joined. There- 
re Lthinke it manifeft by thefe experiments and reafons,that it is not fabulous thats 
§ nc women have beene changed into men: but you fhall finde in no hiftory men 
degenerated into women ; for nature alwaies intends and goesfrom the 
B perfect to the more perfe@, butnot bafely from the more perfecto the im- 


Ve 

turc intending twinnes,achilde isborne with two heads, 2nd butone 
arme, oraltogether lame inthe reft of his limbes. 


Cuap. VI. 
Of monflers caufed by defect of feed. 


a9,e2¢ F,on thecontrary, the feed be any thing deficient in quantity, for the 
ny rey conformation of the infant or infants, fome one or more members will 
He be wanting, or more fhort and decrepite, Hereupon it happens that na- 


theeffigies of a mon(trous childe,by reafon 


of the acfect of the matter of feed. 


Anne Dom. 1573. aw at Se. Andrewes 
Churchin Paris, aboy nine yeeres old, 
borne inthe village Parpavilla, fixe miles 
from Guife;his fathers name was Peter Ke- 
ward, and his mother, Marquete : hee had 
but two fingers on his right hand, his 
arm was Well proportioned from the top 
of his fhoulder almoft ro his wreft, but 


WSS 


YES = 


"4 from thence to his two fingers ends it 
yy a W De was very deformed, he wanted his leggs 


My, 


and thighes, although from the right but- 
—tocke a certaine unperfee figure, having 
onely foure toes, fcemed to put it felfe 
forth ; from the midft ofthe lefr buttock 
two toes fprung out, the one of which 
was not much unlike a mans yard, as you 
may fee by the figure. 


. 
3. / 
* yy) 
= 
AW 
SS = \\ 
= alll | 
(ft 
= 
S ™ 
4 
N be 


Of.M onfters Prodigies. 


2. Lib, 


In the yeere 1562. inthe Calends of November, at Villa franca in Gafcony. th 
monttet, a headleffe woman,whofe figure thou heere feeft, was borne, which; fioy, 
Dr. 7ohn Altines the Phyfitian gave to mec when I went about this booke of Mon. 
fters, he having received it from Fontanus the Phyfitian of C4agoleftre, who fer. 
oufly affirmed he faw it. 


The figure of a monstrous woman without a headgbefore and behind. 


ree 


LLL 


A few yeeres agone there was 2 man of forty yeeres oldto be feene at Pari, whe 
although he wanted his armes, notwithftanding did indifferently performe all trol 
things which are ufually done withthe hands, for with the top of bis fhoulder. bead 
and necke, hee would {trike an Axe or Hatchet withas fure and ftrong a blow intoa 
poatt, as any other man could doe with his hand ; and hee wou!d lafha coach-mans 
whip, that he would make itgivea great crack, by the ftrong retraction o. the are: 
buthe ate, drunke, plaid at cardes, and fuch like, with his feet. But at laft he wast 
ken for athiefe aad murderer, was hanged and faftenedtoa wheele. 

Alfo notlong agoe there was a woman at Paris without armes, which never 
lefle did cut, few, anddoe many other things, asiffhehadhadherhands. _ 
We read in Hippocrates, that Attagenss his wife brought forthachilde allo! 
without any bonc,and notwithftanding it had allthe parts well formed. 


L1B.25- §& 


The effigies 0 


| 


2 
¢ > qn y 
S > SSH = A 
> 
/ NM ™ > 
> - 


Whic Theeffigies of aman wethons armes, doing all that is ufuaby done with hands; 


ooke of Mon. 
tre, who feri. 


— 


L 18.25. 


ind. 


at whe 
forme allithole 
fhoulder.head 
ablow intoa 
yacoach-mans 
on of € alre: 


? 


oe 
all of icin 


The 


Ngan} 


(Tr 
ar 
= SS 
oe Z | = 
SS 
= 
| _— 
\ 
| = = | 
Phe effizies of a monfter with swo heads two legs, and but one arme. 
4 AY 
Y, SS 
SS 
AS 
FEN 
\ 
= 
= 


Meonfters and Prodigies. Linas 


Cuar. VII. 
ofmonfters which take their caufe and [bape by imagination, 
OKIAGH He antients having diligently fought into all the fecrets of nature. have 


Theforceof . fi marked and obferved other caufes ofthe generation of montters 
magination fe ‘ 
oe AZA| PAY derftanding the force of imagination to bee fo powerfull in us, as for the 


upon the body 


and humours. 


ex 


moft part, it may alter the body of them that imagine, they foon per fy, 
ded themfelves thatthe faculry which formeth the infant may be led and governed 
by the firme and ftrong cogitation of the Parents begetting them (often deluded 4 
noéturnall and deceitfull apparitions)or by the mother conceiving them, and {o the 
which is ftrongly conceived inthe mind, imprints the force into the infant conc, 
ved in the wombe: which thing many thinketobe confirmed by (Wofes, hecaufe hn 
tells that 74cob encreafed and bettered the part of the fheepe granted tohim by 7, 
ban, his wives father, by putting roddes, having the barke in part pulled off, finely 
ftroaked with white and greene, in the places where they uled to drinks, e{pec; ally 
at the time they engendered, that the reprefentation apprehended in che concepti. 
on, fhould be prefently impreffed inthe young , forthe forcs of imagination hah 
fomuch power over the infant, that it fets upon itthe notes or characters of rhe 
thing conceived. 

We have read in Heliodorus that Perfina Queene of —4ethiopia, by her husband 
Hidustes being alfo an Aithiope, had a daughter of a white complexion, becaufe jn 
the cmbraces of her husband, by which fhe proved with childe, the earneftly fixeg 
her eye and mind uponthe picture of the faire Andromeda {tanding oppofite to her, 
Damafcene reports that he {awa maide hairy likea Beare, which had that deformity 

by no other caufe or occafion than that her mother earneftly beheld, in the very in. 
ftant of receiving and conceiving the feed, the image of St. /o4m covered withaca- 
mells skinne, hanging upon the poafts of the bed. 

T hey fay Hippocrates, by this explication of the caufes, freed a certain noble wo. 
man from {ufpicion of adultery, who being white her felfe, and her husband al{o 
white, brought fortha childeas blacke as an Ethiopian, becaufe in copulation {he 
ftrongly and continually had in her minde the pi@ture of the thiope. 


The effigies of «maid all hairy and aninfant that was blacke by the 
imsazination of their Parents. 


Gey. chap, 39. 


é 

f 


There 


There are fome 


at the with: 
mothers imaginat 
pecaule whenithat 
of things;which 

ebeltto keep the 
fhapes and figures 


The effigies of a hor 
hands, and oth 


- 


— 


4 
| 
4 
4 
= 
} A \ 
a 
4 ay 
* 
{ 
J 
“ih 
= 
3 
= 
| 
‘ 
i } | io 
iy: 
By, | 
Th il 
y |) 
4 - 4 
» 
| = , | 
> \ Fz \ \) = y We 
q 
yt 


a j 


Lip.zs 


of nature, have 
nfters : 
in us, as for the 
y f00n perfwea. 
and governed 
en dcludcd by 
and fo thar 
infant conce}- 
jes, becaufle he 
tohim by Lz. 
led off, finel: 


key ‘pecially 
cae concept. 
ination hath 
iracters of thé 
y her husband 
on, becaufe in 
mearneftly fixed 
ppofite to her, 
hat deformity 
In the very in- 
ered with aca- 


ain noble wo- 


husband allo 
-opulation {lie 


the 


There 


There are fome whothinke the infant once formed in the wombe, which is done 
oft withintwo & forty.dayes afterthe conception, isin nodanger of the 


gothers imagination, neither of the feed ofthe father which is caftinrothe vomb: 
ecaufe whenithath got a perfect figure, it cannot bealtered with any external form 
chings;which whether it be truc,or no, is not here to be enquired of: truly I thiak 
yeftto keep the woman, all the time fhe goeth with childe, from the fight of fuch 
and 


figures. 


che effigies of a horrid Monftcr, having feet, 


hands, and other parts like a Calfe. 


In Stecquer avillage of Saxony, they fay,a 
monftcr was borne, with foure feet, eyes, 
mouth, and nofe likeacalfe, with around 
and redde excrefcence of ficfh onthe tore- 
head, and alfo a piece of fiefh like a hood 
hung from his necke upon his backe, and ic 
was deformed with its thighes torne and 
cut. 


Anno Dom. 15 17.in the parifh 
of King{-wood,in the forreft 
era, inthe way to Fontain-Bleaw, 
there was amontfter berne, with 
the face of a Frog, being {een by 
John Belanger,Chirurgian tothe 
Kings Engineers, before the 
Juftices of the towne of Harmoy ; 
principally John Bribon the 
Kings procurator inthat place. 
The fathers name was Amadeus 
the Little, his mothers, 2/agdales 
ne Sarbucata, who troubled with 
a feaver, by awomans perf{waf- 
on, held a quicke frogge in her 
hand antillit died, (he came thus 
to bed with her husband and 
conceived; Bellanger,a man of an 
acute wit, thoughr this was the 
caufe of the monftrous deformi- 
ty of the childe. 


= 
am 


_ 


CHaAp. 


— 
| 
| 
| 
—— 
= 
SS 
4 
f Avit witht) a TACE LIRE A 
hy > 
= 
> 
=) — \ 4 } 
Min ZAR S 
= 
may 
Se 
\ 
\ SS 
72 
& 
s— 
-- 
ye 
= _ == 
‘ 


onfters and Prodigies. 
Cuar. VIII. 
Of Monflers caufed by the ftraitneffe of the wombe. 

| FE areconftrainedtoconfefle by theevent of things, that Mon 
AG fers arebred and caufed by the ftraitnefle of the wombe. fo, 

apples hanging upon the trees, if beforethey come to ripe 


be | 1¢ occalion 


of montters. 


 neffe, they bee putinto ftrait veflels, their growth is hindered, 

| fome whelps which women take delight in, are hindered rom 
{ bao ei any further growth by the littleneffe of the place in Which 
they arekept. Who knowes notthat the plants growing in the earth, arc hindered 
from a longer progreffe and propagation of their roots, by the oppofition of a gin, 
or any other folid body,and therefore in {uch places are crooked, flender and wea) 
but on the other part, where they have free nourifhment, to bee ftrait and trong ; 
for fecing that by the opinion of Naturalifts, the place is the forme of the thing pla. 
ced . it isneceffary that thofe things that are fhut up in ftraiter {paces, prohibiced of 
free motion, fhould be leflened, depraved and Jamed. 

Empedocles and Diphilus acknowledged three caufes of monftrous births : The 
too great ox fimall matter of the feed ; the corruption of the feed; and deprayation of 
erowth by the ftraitneffe or figure of the womb: which they thoughtthe chiefef of 
all ; becaufe they thought the cafe was fuch in naturall births,as in forming of metals 
and fufible tings, of which ftatues being made,doc leffe exprefle the things they be 
made for, ifthe moldes or formes into whichthe matter is poured, bee rough, {co. 


brous, too ftrait, or otherwife faulty. 


CuHap. IX. 


Of monflers caufea by the sll placing of the mother ,in fitting, lying downe, 
any other fite of the body im the time of her being with childe, 


NEYSMEE often too negligently and carelefly corrupt the benefits and corpo- 
rallendowments of nature inthe comelineffe and dignity of conforma. 
N tion itusa thing to be lamented and pitied in all, but efpecially in wo. 

9) Ac @ men with childe, becaufe that faulc doth not onely hurt the mother, but 

deformes and perverts the infant which is conteined in her wombe : {or 
wee moving any manner of way, mutt neceflarily move whatfoever is wirhin us. 

Therefore they which fit idely athome allthe time of their being with chile, ot 

crofie. legged, thofe which holding their heads downe, doe fow or worke withthe 

needle, or doe any other labour, which prefle the belly too hard with cloaths, bree- 


ches or {wathes, doe produce children wrie-necked, ftooping, crooked and disfigu- 


red in their feet, hands, and the reft of their joints, as you may {ee inthe following 


figure. 


/1 8B. 5: 


The effi zu 


= reafo: 
¢ 

may | 
ftrous manner; an 
or broken, or 2 Au 
fion of the whole 
fore will be {mali 


Of mente 


times 
lies hi 


theit like, dwarfe 
fat. 


Pa 
H 
rr 
: 
| 
| 


\ Liss 


gs, that mon. 
vombe ; for fo 
¢ to juft ripe. 
hindered, So 
| indered from 
place in which 
» are hindered 
Of a flinr, 
der and Weak, 

t and ftrone + 
the thing pla. 
prohibited of 


s births : The 
Jepravation of 

the chiefeft of 
ming of metals 
hings they be 
mce rough, {ca- 


07 


ts and cospo- 
of conforma- 
ecially in wo- 
ye mother, but 
r wombe: for 
is within us. 
ith childe, or 
orke with the 
-loaths, bree- 
ad and disfigu- 
he following 


The 


ond 


— 


The effizies of achslde, who from the fir(t conception. by the fite of the 
mother, badbs hauds and fect 


Cuar. X. 
| 
Of monflers canfed by a ftroake, fall, or the Like occafion. 


nia, Tere is no doubt but ifany injury happentoa woman with childe, by 
ro, reafon of a ftroake, fall from on high, or the like occafion, the burralfo 
may extend tothe child. Therefore by thefe occafions the tender bones 
: may bee broken, wrefted, ftrained, or depraved after fome other mon- 
tous manner; and more, by the like violence of fuch things, a veint is often opened 
or broken, ora Auxc of blood, or great vomiting is caufed by the vehement concul- 
fion of the whole body, by which meanes thie childe wants nouridhment, and thexe- 


fore will be {mali and little, and altogether monftrous.. 


CHAP. XI. 


Of menfters which have their original by reason of bereditary aifea;es, 


Y the injury of hereditary difeafes, infants grow monftrous, that is, mon: 
ftroufly deformed : for crooke-backt produce crooke-backt, and often 
times fo crooke’ , that betweene the bunch behind and before, the head 
lies hid, as aT ortoife in her thell : folame produce lame, flat nofed 


their like, dwarfes brir , forth dwarfes, leane bring forth kane, and fat produce 


tat. 


CHA?, 


nd Prodi gies: 981 


by 
| 
i 
| af, 
+, 
KYO da 
‘ 
SSS 
| SSS SS 
| SS s 
SS 
WN 
“ES 
SS 
—— 3 (EE = 
¢ 
‘ 
a 4 ¢ 


Card. lib. 14-de 
rerum Cape! 


Lis.2s 
Cuap. XII. 


Of monsters by the confufion of feed of divers kindes, 


Fiat which followeth isa horrid thing to be fpoken ; but the chaft mind 
yan JR of the Reader will give mee ee and conceive that, which not one! 
G a the Stoikes, but all Philofophers, who are bufied about the fearch of the 
@ caufes of things,muft hold, That there is nothing obfcene or filthy to he 
{fpoken. Thofethings that are accounted obfcene may bee {poken without bla, 
but they cannot bee acted or perpetrated without great wickedneffe, fury and i ad. 
nefle : therefore that ill which is in obfcenity confifts not in word,but Wholly inthe 
act. Therefore in times paft there have. beene fome, who nothing fearing the De; 
neithcr Law, nor themfelves, that is, their foule; have fo abje@ed and proftrated 
themfelves,that they have thought themlelves nothing different from beats: where. 
fore Athcifts, Sodomites, Out-lawes, forgettull of their owne excellency and diy; 
nity,& transformed by filthy luft,have not doubted to have filthy and abhomina}j. 
copulation with beafts. This fo great, fo horridacrime, for whofe expiation all the 
fires in the world are not fufficient, though they,too malicioufly crafty, hayecon. 
cealed, and the confcious beafts could not utter, yetthe generated mii-fhapen 
hath abundantly {poken and declared, by the unfpeakable power of God, the reven. 
ger and punifher of fuch impious & horribleactions. For of this vatious and promi. 
cuous confufion of feedes of a different kinde, monfters have beene generated and 
borne, who have beenc partly men and partly beafts. 

The like deformity of iffue is produced, it beafts of a different {pecies doe copu. 
fate rogether, nature alwaies affeCting to generate fomething which may bee like it 
{elfe : for wheat growes not but by fowing of wheat; nor an apricocke but by the 
letting or grafting of an apricocke ; for nature is a moft diligent preferver of the {pe. 
cies of things. 


The effigies of amonfter balfe man and halfe dogze. 


Dom. 14.93-there was gene- 
rated of 2 Woman andadogee, an 
fue, which from the naye!l upwards 
perfeatly refembled the fhape of the 
mother,but therehence downewards 
the fire, that is, the dogge. This mon- 
fler was fentto the Pope thatthen 
reigned, as Volaterane writeth :allo 
Cardane mentions it ; wherefore | 


have here given you the figure there- 
of. 


Cali 45 


calius Rhodigin 


witha Goat,and 
on an intant was b | 
he fathers. 


The figure of am 


Anno Dom. 111 
rowed a pig with th 
refembling a {wine 


The fi ear 


Anno Dom. 15 64. 
alow t 
‘man io the head, { 
for it had th: 
‘he fecond day afte 


OW, by reafon of 


» 
+2 
i 

Bal 
7 
‘ 
} 
< 
i “ & = 
VIS ASS 
WN | 
AWS 
—- 
= 
| 
al 


caliws Rbod:ginas writes that at Stbaris,aheards-mancalled Chrathis fellin love 

Goat, and accompanied with her, and of this deteftable and brutith copulati- 


9 ,2n infant was born, which in legges refembled the damme, but the face was like 
she farherSe 


he chaft minde The figure of 4 monfler in face refembling a man, but 4 Goat in his other members. 
hich not one] 

{earch of the 

Or filthy to be | ' 

ing the De; aS 

(pration allthe y\3 


ity, havecon- 
ii-fhapen iffue 
od,the reven- 


$ and promif- 
ecneratedand Anno Dom. Ina certainetowne of Liege (as faith Lycoftbenes ) afow far. 
§ owed a pig with the head, face, hands, and feet of a man, but in the reft of the body 
ies doe copu- cembling a {wine. 
may bee like it 
ke but by the The figare of apiece, withthe head, face, hands and feet of mas. 
ver of the {pe- 


dogee, an il- | 
| 


ell upwards 
efhape of the Bers 


downewards 
This mon- Anno Dom. 15 64. at Braxels,atthe houfe of one Joeft peert,in the treet War- 
ope that chen wesbroec#s, alow farrowed fixe pigs, the firft whereof was a monfter reprefenting 
writeth :allo inan in the head, face, fore feet and fhoulders, but in the reft of the body another 
wherefore ! ae, for ir had the genitalls ofa fow pigge, and it fucked like the other pigs. But | 

efigurethere- Br fecond day after it was farrowed, it waskilled of the people together with the 

_ 9 v, by reafon of the monftroufneffe of the thing. Here followeth the figure 

‘Xteof, 

The 


Calis 


i 
E 
| | 
== 
| 


onfters and Prodigies. Lip. 25 


The efficies of amonfler balfe man and halite fwine. 


Anno Dom. 1571. at Axtwerpe, the wife of one Michael a Printer dwelling with 
one John Moline a Graver or Carver, atthe figne of the Golden Foor, in the Cam. 
rate, on St. 7 his day, atren of the clocke inthe morning, brought forth: 
montler wholly likea dogge, butthatit hada fhorter necke, andthe head ofa bird 
but without any feathers on it. This monfter was not alive, for that the motherwas 
delivered before her time; but fhe givinga great {critch in the ioftanc of her delive- 
rance, the chimney of the houfe fell downe, yer hurt nobody, no not fo muchasz, 


ny one of toure little children that fate by the fire fide. 


The figure of a monfter like a dogge, but with ahead like abird, 


Ewe 
Lews Cellens wriceththat hee hath read inan approved author, that a0 


brought forth a Lion,a beaft of an unlike andadverfe naturete het. fs 
Anno Dom. 1577. inthetowne Blandy, three miles from there 


bed a Lambe, having three heads, the middlemoft of which was bigger than he" 


felon 
frames 

ly 
formict) 


when onc bleated they all bleated. John BeHanger the Chirurgian of A 
that hee {aw this monfter, and he got it drawne, and fentthe figure therco 
with tbat hemane monfter that hadthe head of a Frogge, which we hav¢ 


defcrided. 
Tht 


There are fome 
divine caufe, fort! 
tall caufe of monft 
forementioned pa 
nature, like that w 

Yet Aftrologe: 
of) referre the call 
and Stars, accordi 
ofthey tell this ral 
village, a Cow br 
Prehended the hea 
ently burnt toge! 
they gave credit b 
it Was not occafio 
Pofition ofthe fta 


* 
| 
% 


AddiGed themfels 


> 
\ j 
/ 
= 
ify = 
= 
ZY 22 S S\N 
> ~ ‘ , 
| 
J 
= 
} | atv 
a 
4 
t 1 34> 
} 
| 
ie 
», 


The figure of athree-headed Lambe. 


~ 


N 
AS 
= d 


= 
ad 


4 


\ 


N: 


er,dwelling with 
‘oot, in the Cas. 

brought forth 

he head ofabird. 

t the mother was 

ant of her delive- 


hot to muchas There are fome montters in whofe generation by thisthere may feeme to be fome 
§ (vine caufe, for thattheir beginnings cannot be derived or drawne from the genc- 
nllcaufe of monfters, that is, nature, or the errors thereof, by reafon of {ome of the 
lorementioned particular caufes: fuch are thefe monfters that are wholly againft all 

gy tature, like chat which we formerly mentioned,of a Lion yeaned by an Ewe. 
| Yer Aftrologers (left there fhould feeme to beany thiag which they areignorant 
of) referre the caufes of thefe ro certaine conftellations and alpects of the lanets 
ind Stars, according to Aristotles {ay ing in his Problemes ; in confirmation where- 
ofthey tell rhistale. It happenedin the time of Albertus Magnus, that in acertaine 
lillage, a Cow brought forth a Calfe, which was halfe aman : the towne{men ap- 
hrehended the heard{-man,and condemned him as guilty of fuch acrime, to be pre- 
ently burnt together with the cow , but by 200d lucke Albertus was thereto whom 
they gave credit by reafonof his much and certaine experience in Aftrologie, that 
twas not occafioned by any humane wickednefle, but by the efficacy of acertdine 


Pofition ofthe ftarres, that this monfter was borne. 


third. 


| Crap. XIII. 


Of menflers occapt ed by the craft and fabtlety of the Devil, 


thatan 


w, there was 


| 
rant! 


SSSA N treating of.uch monfters as are occafioned by the craft of the 
“NM Devill, wee crave pardon of the courteous Reader, if peradven- 


he 


. | eds} ture going further from our purpofe, wee may feeme tofpeake 
more freely and largely of the exiftence, nature, and kindes of 
e therec serly 1 Devills. Therefore firft it is manifeft that there are Conjurers, cerers and how y 
Charmers,and Witches, which whatfoever they do, performe ic they come 


by an agreement & compa with the Devill,to whom they have 


‘died themfelves: for nong canbe admitted into that fociety of Witches, who 


Cove hath 


i, 2 5 4 LAB. 25. 
| 
4 | 
Ww. We 
AD\\ 
ANT 
GY 
\\\\ \\ 
| 
| 


"986 


What induceth 


them thereto, 


Exod, ¢7p. 22. 
Levit. Ca). 9. 


Hebr.1, 
Gadlat. 32,39. 


26. 34° 


evill {purits O- 


mankind, 


rhe powerof aNd heavenly habitation of God the creator. Thefe harmefull and crafty { 


O/ Adonfters and Prodigies. 

hath not forfaken God the Creator, and his Saviour, and hath nor tran 
worfhip due to hin above,upon the Devill, to whom he hath obliged 
affuredly, whofoever addicts himfelfe to thefe magicall vanities and Witch. croé 
doth it, cither becaufehee doubts of Gods power, promifes, ftudy and ee ; 
willrowardsus: orelfe forthat hee is madded with an earneft defire of 
thingstocome orcl{ebecaule difdaining poverty, hee affects and def res 
poore eftate to become rich on the fodaine. It isthe conftant Opinion of 

ancient and modern, as well Philofophers as Divines,that there are fom 
which when they have once addicted themfelves to impious and diye! 
by the wondrous craft of the Divell, doe many ftrange things, and chan Pe and 

rupt bodies, and the bealch & life of them, and the condition ofall mundane things 
Alfo experience forceth us toconfeffe the fame, for punifhments are ordained 
the lawes againft the profeflors and pradtifersof {uch arts ; but there are no 
ordained agaiaft thofe things which neither ever have beene, nor eve; camej 
the knowledge of mea : for fuch things are rightly judged and accounted fo; j,, or: 
fibilities, which have never beene feene nor heard of. _ 

Beforethe birth of Chrift there have beene many fich people, for you may find 
in Exodus and Leviticus lawes made againft {uch perfons by Mofes, by whom God 
gave the lawto hispeople. The Lord gavethe fentence of death to Ochafias by his 
Prophet, for that he turned into thefe kinde of people. We aretaught by the (crip. 
tures that chere aregood and evill {pirits, and that the former are termed Angel); 
bur the latter Devills ; forthe law is alfo faid to be given by the miniftry of Angel. 
and itis faid that our bodies fhall rife againe at the found of a trumpet,and the voice 
ofan Arch. angell. Chrift faid that God would fend his Angellsto receive the eleg 
into the heavens. 

The hiftorie of Fob teftifieth that the Devill fent fire from heaven, and killed his 
fheep and cattell, and raifed winds that fhooke the foure corners of the houfe, and 
overwhelmed his children inthe ruines thereof. The hiftory of Achab mentioneth 
a certaine lying {piritin the mouth of the falfe Prophets. Sathan entring into Judas 
moved him to betray Chrift. Devils, who in agreat number poffefled the body of 
aman,were called a Legion, andobtained of Chriftthat they might enter into 
{wine, whomthey carried headlong intothe Sea. : 

In the beginning God created a great number of Angells, that chofe divine and 
incorporeall fpitits might inhabire heaven, and as meflengers, fignific Gods ples: 
lure tomen, and as minifters or fervants, performe his commands, who might beas 
overfeers aud protectors of humane affaires. Yet of this great number there were 
fome who were blinded by pride, and thereby alfo caftdowne from the prefeace, 


fone 
TUS 

lude mens mindes by divers jugling trickes,and are alwaies contrivin g fomething to 
our harme, and would inafhort {pace deftroy mankinde, but char God reftraines 


their fury ; for they can onely doe fo much as is permitted them : Expelled heaven, 


himfel fe, 


fuch men. 
atts, can 


Thedificrences fome of them inhabite the aire, others, the bowels of the earth, there ro remaine un 


acyl ide 


The delufions 
of devills, 


till God thall come to judge the world: and as you feethe clouds in the aire fome- 
whiles to refemble centaures, otherwhile ferpents, rocks,towers, men,birds, filhes, 
and other fha pes : Lo thefe {pirits turne themfelves into al! the fhapes and wondrous 
formes of things ; as ofttimes into wild beatts, into ferpents, toads, owles, lapwings; 
crowes or ravens, goats, afles,dogs,cats, wolves, buls and the like. Moreover,tliey 
times allume and enter humane bodies, as well dead as alive, whom they torment 
and punith, yea alfothey transforme themfelves into angelis of lighr. 
They feigne themfelves to bee {hut up and forced by magical! rings, but that's 
onely their deceit and craft, they with, feare, love, hate, and oft times as by the 4p- 
pomrment and decree of God they punifh malefacors: for we read that God {ent 
evill angels into Egy pr, thereto deftroy. They houle on the night,they murmut * 
rattle, as if they were bonnd in chaines,they move benches, tables,counters, prOP* 
cupboards, children in the cradles, play at tables and cheffe, turne over bocks,'¢ 
mony, walk up & down roomes,and are heard to laugh,to open windowes & do!tss 


caft founding vetlels, as brafle and the like, upon the ground, breake ftone wee 
gla 


Ot transferred, 


And | 


5 
‘ona @ 
all, both 


LiB.25- 
glafies, and ma 
when as Wee atl 
ben. hey are 
oblines, Patri: 
of lies, Prince o 
Offices any 


' 


= 


rer, For then thy 
or injure them 

The {ame aut 
Briot, the Gove 
wasa Devill, w! 
had digged into 
and poured the : 
day that he was | 
and bad hina bee 
Devill oftended 
by the head, tha 
the Workman 
after. 


lu 

patentS of lyes, 
turne themielve: 
and trickes they 1 


sy? 
4 
4 
| 
q 
. 
“* 
\ ) vb 
> 
; 
| 


ged himfel fe. 

and Witch. crafre 
dy and : 
of kno. 


Win 
ind dcfires frome 


of al], both 
lome fuch Men 
divellif}, arts, Can 
Change and coy. 
mundane things. 
sare Ordained 

here are no lawes 
OF CVCT Came into 
ounted for impof- 


Or you may finde 
5, by whom God 
tO Ochafias by his 
ug he by the {crip- 
termed Angells, 
niltry of Angels; 
pet,and the voice 
Orcceivethe eleQ 


en, and killed his 
of the houfe, and 
{chab mentioneth 
tring into Judas, 
efled the body of 


might enter into 


thofe divine and 
ynifie Gods plea- 

who might beas 

mber there were 

Chic prefence, 

crafty {pirits de- 
ing fomething to 
God reftraines 
axpelled heaven, 

re ro remaine un- 

inthe aire fome- 
1en, birds, filhes, 
es and wondrous 
owles lapwings, 
oreover,they or 
m they torment 
elit. 

rings, but thats 
es as by the ap- 
ad that God tent 
they 
counters, props» 
over bocks,t 
ndowes & doress 


ke ftone pots and 


And 


Of onflers and Prodigies. 85 — 


and make other the like noifes. Yet none of all thefe things appeare to us 

yhen as Wee arife in the morning, neither finde we any thing out of its place or bro- 

en. T hey are called by divers names ; as, Devills,evill Spirits, Sucubi, Hob- their 
joblines, Fairies, Robin-good- fellowes, evill Angels, Sathan, Lucifer, the father 


oflies, Prince of darkeneffe and of the world, Legion,and other names agreeable to 
eit ofices and natures. 


xX ly. 


Of the fubterrene Devils, and as haunt Mines. 


Ewss Lavater writes, that bythe certaine report of fuchas worke 
Mines, thatin fome Mines there are f{eene {pirits, who in the Wha the 
one OY oy | (hape and habite of men, worke there, and running u dd —— 
N 6 Up and GOWN doe, 
22) iceme to doc much worke, when as notwith{tanding they doc 
| Joy | Nothing indeed. But in the meane time they hurt none of the by- 
FS} Itanders,unlefle they bee provoked thereto by words, or laugh- 
et, Forthen they willthrow fome heavie or hard thing upon him chat hart them, 
or injure them fome other way. 
he fame author affirmes that there isa filver Minein RActia, out of which Peter 
priot, the Governour of the place,did in histime get much filver. In this Mine there 
wisa Devill, who chiefly on Frie-dayes, when asthe Miners put the minerall they 
hd digged intotubbes, kept a great quarter, and made himlelfe excecdiug bufie, 
ad poured the minerall,as he lifted, out of one tubbe into another. Ic happened one 
day chat he was more bufie than he ufed to be, fo that one of the Miners reviled him, 


nd bad hina bee gone ona vengeance tothe punifhment appointed for him. The 


Devill offended with his imprecation and f{cofte, fo wrefted the Miner, taking him 
® bythe head, that twining his necke about, hee fethis face behinde him, yet was not 
eworkman killed therewith, but lived, and was known by divers for many yecres 


ter. 


Cruar. XV. 


By what meanes the Devills may deceive #5. 


Ur mindes involved inthe earthy habitation of our bodies, may bee 
deluded by the Devills divers waies ; for they excell in purity and 


lenge a great preheminence, as the Princes of this world,over all {ub- rics, and from, 
lunary bodies. Wherefore itisno marvell if they, the teachersand 
nitent$ of lyes, fhould caft clouds and mifts before our eyes fromthe beginning, & 

themfelves intoa thoufand fhapes of things and bodies, that by thefe juglings 

ndtrickes they may fhadow and darken mens mindes. 


Cuarp. XVI. 
Of Sucubi and Incubi. 
Owerfull by thefe forementioned arts and deceipts, they have lundry 
times accompanied with men in copulation, whereupon fuchas have 


had to doc with men, were called Swcubi, thofe which made wie of wo- The of 


the name. 


men, Incubi. Verily St. Augustine feemeth not to be altogether againtt de civis 
it, but that they, taking upon them the fhape of man, may hilthe pea 
QO0002 


fubtlety of eflence, and in the much ufe of things : belides, they chal- povints are i. 


| 
GiisS Cire 
| 
| 
| 
4 
4 | 
« 
7 | 
4 


* 


988 


O f onfters and Prodigics. 


A hiltory. 


Anorber- 


An opinion 
aonfuccd. 


Averrois his 


hiftory convi& 


falfhood. 


The illufions 


che devills. 


A hiffory. 


Our fins are 


the caule chat 


che devilsabuile 


us. 


thennwary, by the flames of luft, from vertue and chaftity. 

Joh Reef in his book of the conception and generation of man, writes that in h; 
time, a certaine woman of monttrous luft, and wondrous impudency, had to dont, 
night wich a Divell, that turned himfelfe into a man, and that her belly {welled m 
prefently atter theact ; aad whenas fhe thought fhee was with childe, the fe}} Into f 
ericvous a difeafe, that thee voided all her entrailes by ftoole, medicines 
all prevailing. 

The like hiftory is told of the fervant of acertaine Butcher, who thinking to, - 
tentively on venereous matters, a Divell appeared to him inthe fhape of a wor, ko 
with whom (fuppofing itto beeawoman) when as hee had to doe, his genjtai IS fo 
burned after the aét, that becomming enflamed, hee died with a great deale of to ‘ 
ment. 

Neither doth Peter Palndanus,and Martin Arelatenfis thinke it abfurd ¢o affirms 
that Devills may beget children, if they fhall ejaculate into the womans wom) feed 
taken from {ome man, either dead or alive. Yetthis opinion is moft abfurg and fal 
of falfitie, mans feed confifting of a feminall or fanguincous matter, and myc) f; 
rit : if ic runne otherwaies than into the wombe from the tefticles, and ftay never fp 
little a while, it lofeth its ftrength and cfhicacy, the heat and [pirits vanifh; ing away 


dV. 


for even the roo ercat length of a mans yard, is reckoned amongft the caufes of 3, 
rennefle, by reafon that the feed is cooled by the length of the way. Ifany in copy. 
lation,after the ejaculation of the feed, prefently draw themfelves from the Womans 
embraces,they are thought notto generate, by reafon of the aire entring into the yet 
open womb, which isthoughtto corrupt the feed. By which it appeares how 
that hiftory in Averres is, ofa certaine woman that faid fhe conceived with child by 
a mans {eed thed in a bath, and fo drawne into her wombe, {he entring the bath pre. 
fently after his departure forth. Iris much leffe credible that Divells can copulate 
with women, for they are of an abfolute {pirituous nature, but blood and flefh) arene. 
ceflary for the generation of man. What naturall reafon can allow that the incorpo- 
reall Divells can love corporeal! women ? And how can we thinke that tliey can ge. 
neratc, who want the inftruments of generation? How can they who neither eate 
nor drinke be faid tofwell withfeed ¢ Now where the propagation of the {pecies is 
not neceflary to bee fupplied by the fucceflion of Individuals, Nature hath givenno 
defire of venery, neither hath it imparted the ufe of generation ; but che divels oace 
created were madeimmortall by Gods appointment: Ifthe taculty of generat: 
on fhould be granted to devills, long fince all places had becne full of them. When 
fore if at any time women withchilde by the familtarity of the devill, {ceme torr. 
vell,we muft thinke it happens by thofe arts we mentioned inthe former chapter, to 
wit,they ufe to {tuffeupthe bodies of living women with old clouts, bones, pieces 0! 


iron, thornes,twifted haires,pieces of wood, ferpents,and a world of fuchtrumpay, 


wholly diffenting froma womans nature : who afterwards, the time, as it were,o! J 


their delivery drawing nigh, through the wombe of her that was falfly judged wit! 
child, before the blinded, and, as it were,bound up eyes of the by- {tanding womes, 
they give ventto their impoftures. The following hiftory recorded in the writings 
of many moft credible authors, may give credit hereto. 

T here was at Conflanceafairedamofell called Margaret, who ferved a wealthy 
Citizen: the gave it outevery where that fhe was with child by lying withthe dev 
ona certaine night. Wherefore the Magiftrates thought it fit fhe fhould bee kept" 


prifon, that it might bee apparent both to them and others, what the end of this¢* 


ploit would bee. Thetime of deliverance approaching, thee felt paines like cho! 
which women endure in travell; at length, after many throwes, by the midwives 
helps, in ftead ofachilde, fhee brought torth iron nailes, pieces of wood, of g!2"*; 
bones, ftones, haires, towe, and the like things, as much different from each oth 
as from the nature of her that brought them forth, and which were formerly (hi 
in by the devillto deludethetoo credulous mindes of men. 

The Church acknowledgeth that devils, by the permiffion and appointment* 


God punifhing our wickednefle, may abule a certaine f{hape, fo toute copulatt 
| wil 


Ly B.25. 


talls, as by the helpe of nature, tothe end, that by this meanes they may a, 


fend difeate 
citrated wit! 


all 


with mankind 
hee falfe, but « 
sot without t 
and perturbat 
could concels 


che wombes « 
ren as faculty 
ever have wi 
devill, as they 
der, and beaut 
and wickedne 
Wherefore 
infinite cefire 
things and 
order of rhist 
corporeall, w 
nereous actio' 
cay of the {pe 
reall fotorem 


J gy £3 
GUdlis een 


thine hy eth 


pertons. 
Thus 
Cers by Satha 
kinde, comm 
the wondrou: 
invoke [ kno: 
“ONS, incanrat 
Certaine writ! 
‘Ongs, founds 
Seftures andj 
Waxe, and bo: 
prick, 
lent; and they 
We know 
ound fome,t 
Oimpotent, a 


Or that they { 


accom | al 
A 
| 
q 
4 
, 
— 
4 
4 


1B, 25, 


icy May draw afide 


DN, Writes that in his 
ney, had tg doe by 
belly {welled up 
fic fellinto fo 
‘dicine 

S Nothing at 


10 thinking too 
fhape of a woman 

o¢, his genital}s 
great deale of toy. 


t abfurd to affirme 
oimans Womb {eed 
oft abfurd and 
ter, and much fpi. 
and ftay never fo 
vanilhing away 
tthe caufles of bar- 
Ifany in copu- 
3 from the womans 
cntring into the yet 
ippeares how falfe 
ived with child by 
tring the bath pre- 
ivells can copulate 
Bod and fiefh arene- 
that the incorpo- 
<¢that tlicy can ge- 
y who neither eate 
on of the {pecies is 
hath givenno 
but che divels once 
acuity of generati- 
lLofthem. Where- 
levill, feeme Co tra- 
former chapter, to 
uts bones, pieces oi 


time, as it were, of 
falfly judged with 
-ftanding women, 


‘ing, with che devil 


t paines like chole 


ereformerly thrult 


ndappo 


wit: 


ded in the writings | 
ofervedawealthy | 


-fhould bee kept 
tthe end ofthiscx- 


lof fuchtrumpery, | 


s, by the midwives © 
of wood, of olafie, a 
t from each other, | 


intment of 
toute copulaner 


gith mankinde, Butthata humane birth may thence arife, it not onely affirmesto 
yee falfe, but detetts as impious, as which beleeves that there was never any man bes 
sot without the feed of man, our Saviour Chrift excepted. Now what confufion 
sad perturbation of creatures fhould poffeffe this world (as Ca(ianus faith) if divells 
-ould conceive by copulation with men? orifwomen fhould prove with childe by 
accompanying them, howmany monfters would the divells have brought forth 
fom the beginning of the world: how many prodigies by cafting their feed into 
the wombes of wilde and brute beafts? for by the opinion of Philofophers, as of- 
en as faculty and will concurre, the effe& mutt neceflarily follow : now the Devils 
sever have wanted wili todifturbe mankinde, and the order of this world : forthe 
jevill, as they fay,is our enemyfrom the beginning ; and as God is the author of or- 
der, and beauty, fothe devill, by pride, contrary to God, isthe catfer of confufion 

Wherefore 1i power fhould accrew equall to his evill minde and nature, and his 
infinite defire of mifchiefeand envic, whocan doubt buta great confufion of al! 
hingsand {pecies, and alfo great deformity would invade the decentand comely 
order of this univerfe, monfters arifing on every fide ? But feeing that devills are in- 
corporeall, what reafon can induce us to beleeve that they can be delighted with ve- 
nercous ations ¢and what will can there be where as there is no delight, nor any de- 
aay of the {pecies ta be feared ? feeing that by Gods appointment they are immor- 
«il, fo to remaine for everin punifhment : fo whatneed they fucceflion of indivi- 
juallsby generation? wherefore if they neither willnor can, it isa madaefle te 
hinke chatthey doe commixe with man. 


XVII. 
Of Mazicke and fupernaturall difeafes and remeaices. 


Hat I may re{refh the mind of the Reader, invited tothefe hiftorics 
of monfters,raifed up by the art of the divell, witches,and conju- 
rers,his fervants, have thought good toadd the following hifto- 
rics of certaine difeafes, and remedies {upernaturall, and wholly 


amongtt men by God being offended, fo they cannot cx pcé cure 
~~  Otherwife than from God, from whence they are thoughit fuper- 
naturally to have their eflence and cure. Thus the aire oft-times, yet chiefly inthe 
ine of King David, being defiled withthe peftilence, killed fixty oddethoufand 
berfons. 
Thus £Xechias was ftrecke with a grievous difeafe : Job was defiled with filthy u! 


cers by Sathan at Gods command, And asthe Deviil, the cruell enemy of man- 


kinde,commonty ufeth by Gods permiffionto afflictthofe, fo wicked perfons by 


the wondrous fubtlety of the devill, offer violence, and doe harmeto many. Some ; 


invoke know not what fpirits, and adjure them with herbes, exorci{mes, impreca- 
tions, incantations, charmes : others hang about their neckes, or otherwite carry 
certaine writings, charaers, rings, images, and other fuch impious ftuffc. Some ufe 
ones, founds or numbers: fometimes potions, periumes, and {mells ; fometimes 
Seltures andjugling. There be fome that makethe portraiture of che abfent party in 


masicall,out of Fervelins. There are difeafes,whichasthey are fent 


aisittarce, 


Waxe, and boalt that they can caufe or bring a difeafe into what foever part thercot 


they prick, by the force of their words and {tarres, into the like part ofthe party ab- 
lent; and they have no few other trickes to bring difeafes. 

We know for certain that magicians, witches, and conjurers, have by charmes fo 
bound fome, that they could not have to do with their wives and have made others 
lo impotent, as if they had bin gelt or made eunuches. Neither do wicked men one- 
ly fend difea{es into mans body,but alfo devills themfelves. Thefe truely are foone 


citraéted witha certain fury,but in this onething they differ from fimple madaefle, 


© 


tor that they {peake things of great difficulty, tell things paft and hid, difclofe the 


r 
LCCrets 


QO000 3 


‘ 
2% Ta. 
] 
/) 
a} 
= * 
4 
YY 
. 


cod 
wee 


M onflers and Prodigies, Lin, 25. 


- 


990 
fecrets of fuch asare prefent, and revile them many waies, and are terrified 
or grow angry by the power of divine words. 

A hiftery. One nor very long agone,being by reafon of heat exceeding dry inthe Night; 
rifing out of his fleep, and not finding drinke,took an applethat he found by hein 
and eating it, he thought his jawes were fhutand held faft as by ones hands, and he 
he was almoft ftrangled: and alfo, now poffeffed ot a Devill entring into him os 
{eemed in the darke to bee devoured of a hugeexceeding blacke dogze, whi: hte 
afcerwards reftoredto his former health, orderly related to me. There were diva 2 
who by his pulfe, heat, aadthe roughnefic of his tongue, thought him to be in 4 ¢ 2 
ver, and by his watching, andthe perturbation of his minde, thought him oncly ty 
rave. 

A hiftory. Another young Noble-man, fome fewyeeres fince, wastroubled at fet times 

} with a fhaking ofthe body, andas it were, aconvullion, wherewith one while he. 
would move oncly his leftarme, another while the right arme, and alo fometigne« 
but one finger onely, fomewhiles but one legge, fometimes the other, and at orher 
times the whole trunk of his body, with fuch force and agility,that lyin 2 in his bed 
he could fearce be held by foure men ; his head lay without any thaking, his tongue 
and {peech was free, his underftanding found,and all his fenfes perfe@ inthe 
height of his fit-He was taken atthe lea{trentimes a day, wellin the {paces betweep 
but wearted wich labour : irmight have beene judged a true Epilepfic, if the under. 
ftanding and fenfes had failed. 

The moft judicious Phyfitians whowere called to him, judged ita conyylfop 
cofen-germane tothe falling fickenefle, proceeding from a maligne and venemoys 
vapour impact in the {pine of the backe, whence avapour difperfed it felfe over al} 
the nerves, which pafle from the {pine every way into the limbes, but notintorhe 
brainc. Torcmovethis, whichthey judged the caufe, frequent elyfters are ordii. 
ned, and {trong purges of all forts, cupping glafles are applied to thc beginnings of 
thenerves, fomentations, unctions, emplatters, firft to difcuffe, then to ftrengthe: 
and weare away the maligne quality: Thefethings doing little good, he was {wea. 
ted with bathes, ftoves, and a decoction of Guajacum, which did no more goodthan 
the former, forthat wee were all farre from the knowledge of the truce caufe of his 
difeafe : for in the third moneth, a certaine Devill was found to be the author of all 
this ill,bewraying himfelte by voice, & unaccuftomed words and fentences, as well 

eat latine as greeke (though the patient were ignorant of the grecke tongue) : he laicdo- 

by Spacking o¢ penmany fecrets of the by -ftanders, but chiefly of the Phyfitians, deriding them for 
grecke. that hee had abufed them tothe patients great harme, becaufe they had brought his 
body fo low by needlefie purgations. 

W hen his father came to vifite him, he would cry out long before he came at him, 
or faw him, drive away this vilttant,& keep him from comming in herc,or elfe pluck 
his chaine from about his necke: for on this (as it isthe cuftome of the French ordet 

Devilswax an- Of Knights) chere bangs the image of St, Michael. If holy or divine things were read 

gry,andareter- before him, he fhooke and trembled more violently. When his fit was over, liee '¢ 

avine membred all that he had done, and affirmed that hee did it againft his will, and that 

; he was forry for it. The devill, forced by ceremonies and exorcifmes, denied that 

he was damned for any crime, and faid that he was a {pirit : being asked who hew*s, 

and by what meanes and power he did thefe things, he faid that hee had many hao! 

tations into which hee could betake him felfe, and ia the time of his reft, hee cou!“ 

torment others : that he was caft tato this body by a cerrain perfon whom he would 

not name, and that heentred by his feet up to his necke, and that he would go for 

againe the {sme way, when as hisappointed time was come. He {poke of funary % 
ther things, as others which are poflefled ufeto doe. : 

Now I \peake not thefe things as new or ftrange, butrthat it may appeare that 

vills fomeumes entring into the body, doe fomewhiles tormentit by divers and U"- 

couth waies; other whiles they doe not enter in, bur cither agitate the good humo! 

of the body, or draw theill into the principall parts, or with them obftruct the vei 

o other paflayes, or change the ftructure of the inftruments, from which cavies 

numerable difeales proceed: of thefe,Divells arethe authorsjand wretched and 


Lib. 25. | 
lorne perfon 
nature. 

Pliny tells 
fe: but wh 
ded in {eript: 
chodonox or 
there borh 1* 
che entratics 
chat Circes, 
with an inch 
{soiled Orca 
yed and witr 
yers, would | 
have beene a 
had enchant¢ 
things them 
prarances of 
Phyficke, th 
rous. 

[ have feen 
fcrouie hange 
jucncecremor 
much worfe. 
whica becau! 
{uc r{tition, 
them, where! 
wher arile tron 
the whole 
mentioned, al 
difeafes, who 
cinesand {up 
neither the afl 
ftittous med: 
three Kings, 
the tooth ach 
Os nom come: 
Which they a 
patients 

Lfawacert 
Wouid ftanch 
Parpote fay 
charmes are c 
que facilis ti 
his hands wit! 
Exsltabo te D 
Scorpion, the 

Asthere 
alfo. To hel ps 
mult bee tryed 
"diculous lay 
“Mes there js 
of Apsllonius 1! 
that diedavioll 
ofa mad dogg. 

killed with the 
1artaine acue 
“anshead, (ha 


4 
Ms 
Bd 
* 
2 
é 
4 
| 
> 
». 


Lis, 25. 


terrified, trem}. 


ry in the nighttime 
mc found by chance. 
nes hands, and thar 
tring into him, hee 
dogge, Which hee 
There were diver. 
thim tobe ina fea. 
yught him oncly [9 


oubled at fet times 
vith one while hee 
ind allo fometimes 
her, and at other 
at lying in his bed. 
haking, his tongue 
perfe even inthe 
he {paces between, 
epfic, if the under. 


xed ita convulfion, 
Bone and venemous 
it felfe over al] 
mcs, but notintothe 
elyfters are ordai- 
the beginnings of 
then to ftrengthen 
rood, he was {wea- 
10 more goodthan 
etrue caufe of his 
ye the author of ail 
fentences, as well 
neue): he laied o- 
deridineg them for 
y had brought his 


rehe came at him, 
here,or elfe pluck 
fthe French ordet 
ce things were read 
was over, hee re- 
Bt his will, and that 
i{mes, denied that 
isked who he was, 
had many 
his reft, hee could 
whom he would 
me would go forth 
voke of funary 


y appeare that de- 
by divers an dun- 
he good humours 
obftruatthe veins 
which caufes 19° 


wretched and for- 
lorae 


forne perfons the minifters : and the reafon ot theic things is beyond the fearch of 


ture. 

r pliny tells that the Emperour Nero in his time, found magicall arts mo vain and 
f,1{e: but what need we alledge profane writers, when as tho things that ate recor- 
ded in {cripture of the pythoniffe, of the woman {peaking in her belly of King Nebw- 
chodonoXor, of the Magitians of Pbaraoh, and other fuch things not a few, prove that 
there borh is, and hath beene Magicke? Pliny tells of Dewarchus, that he tating of 
the entrailes of a {acrificed childe, turned himfelfe into a Wolfe. We read in Hamer 
Circes, in the long wandering of uly Jes, changed his companions into beatts, 
with an iachantedcuppe or potion: andin Virgil, thatthe growing corne may bee 
(oiled or carried away by inchantments: which things, unleffe they were appro- 
yedand witnelfed by many mens credits, the wifedome of Magiftrates and Law- 
yers, would not have made fo many Lawes againit Magitians, neither would there 
have beene a mal& impofed upon their headsby the law of the twelve tables, who 
had enchanted other mens corne. But as in magicall arts the devill doch not exhibite 
things them {elves, as thofe which he cannot make, but onely certaine thewes or ap- 
pearances of things: foin thefe which are any wayes accommodated to the ufe of 
Phyficke, the cure is neither certaine, nor fafe, but deceitfull, captious, andd ange- 
rous. 

{have feene the Jaundife, over the wholebody, cured inone night, by awritcen Icisbut a de- 
(coule hanged about the neck: alfo I have feene Agues chafed away by words and 
jwnceremonies, but within a fhort while afterthey returned againe and became the: 
much worfe. Now there are fome vaine things,and verily the fancies of old women, “ll 
whica becaufe they have long poffetledthe minds of men, weakened with too much 
jpeeftition, we termethem fuperftitious. Thefe are fach as we cannot truely fay of 
hem, vherefore and whence they have the faculties afcribed to them: for they nei- 
er arife from che temperament,neither from other manifeft qualities ncither from 
the whole fubftance, neither from a divine or magicall power, from which two lat 
mentioned, all medicines beyond nature, and which are confequently to be ufed to 
difeafes, whofe eflence are fupernaturall, muft proceed. Such like old wives medie 
cacsand fuperftitious remedics are written figures and characters, rings, where fuperftitious 
neither the afliftance of God or Spirits is implored. Let me aske you, is it not a {uper cee ye 
tious medicine to heale che falling fickeneffe, to carry in writing the names of the Sieates. 
thee Kings, Ga/par, Melchior, and Balthafar who came to worthip Chiift ? To help 
thetooth ache, ifone whilft Maffe is in faying, touch his teeth, faying thefe words, 

03 non comminuetisexeo? vomiting with certaine ceremonies and words, 
Which they abfenct pronounce, thinking it (Pificient if that they but oncly know the 
patients name. 

Lfaw a certaine fellow that with murmuring a few words, and touching the part, 
Would ftanch blood out of what part foever it howed ; there be fome who to that <# 
purpole fay this, De latere ejus exivit Sanguis Aqua, How many prayers or 
charmes are carried about to cure agues fome taking hold of the patients hand, fay, 
Eque facilis tibi Febris hac fit, atgque Marie virgins Chriffi partus. Another watheth 
hishands with tHe patient before the fit, faying to himfelfe that folemne Pialme, 
Exaltabo te Deus meus Rex, &c. Uf onetell an Affe in hiseare thathee is ftung bya 
Scorpion, they fay that thedanger is immediately over. 

As there are many fuperftitious words, fothere are many fuperftitious writings 
lfo. To helpe fore eyes, a paper wherein the two grecke letters, mand A, are written 
mut bee ryed in athred, and hanged abourche necke, Andtorthe tooth ache this 
idiculous faying, Sérigiles, falce(que dentate, dentium dolorem perfanate. oft 
‘mes there is nofmall (uperftition ia things that are outwardly applied, Such is that 
Apollonius in Pliny, to {carificthe gammes in thetocth ache withthe tooth of one 
that died a violent death : ro make pils oftheskull of one hanged,againft che birings 
ofamad dogge: to curethe falling fickenefle by eating the ficth of a wilde beaft, 
“led with the fame iron wherewith a man was killed : chat he {hall be freed froma 
Wartaine ague who (hall drinke the wine whereinto the {word that hath cutoffa 
head, fhalibe puc : and he, the parings of whofe nailes fhallbe tyed in a linnen 


cloath 


a 
a 
4 
4 
J 


Of onfters andProdigies. 


Lib. de imp, 


992 


clothto the necke ofa quicke Eele, and the Bele let goe into the water againe. Th, 
paine of the Milt to be aifwaged, if a beafts Mile bee laid upon it, and the Phy ftion 
fay that hecures or makesa medicine for the Malt. Any onc to bee treed trom the 
cough, who fhall {pitin the mouth of a Toad, letting her goc away alive. The ey 
tcr wherein one hath beene hanged put about the temples, tohelpe the head a 
This word Abracadabra, written ona paper,after the manner defcribed by § sate, 
and hanged about the necke, to help agues or feavers, e{pecially femitertians. Whi 
truthcan bee in that which fundry afhrme, that a leafe of Lathyris, which is. kinds 
of Spurge, if itbe plucked upwards, will caufe vomit, but broken downewards vil 
move to ftoole? You may alfo finde many other fuperftitious fiGions conceryj,, 
herbes, fuch as Galen reports that Andreas and Pamphilus writ,as incantations, tran 
formations, and herbes dedicated to coniurers and devills. = 
[had thought never in this place to have mentioned thefe aad the like, byt yp. 
there may becevery where found fuch wicked perfons, who keaving the arts 2.3 
means, which areappointed by God to preferve the health of mans body ye ro st, 
fuperftitious & ridiculous remedies of forcerers, or rather of devils, which notw)', 
Rtanding the devillfometimes makes to performe their wifht for effeas, that he. 
may ftill keep them en{nared & addi&ed to his fervice. Neither is it to be Spproved 
which many fay, thatitis good to be healed by any art or. meanes, for that healinoj- 
agood wore. This faying isunworthy ofa Chriftian, and favours rather of hip, 
that trufts more in the devill than in God. Thoie Empericks are not of the focier, 
of Sorcerers and Magitians, who heale ftmple wounds with dry lint, or lint diptin 
water: this cure is neither magical! nor miraculous,as many fuppofe,but wholly p; 
turall, proceeding from the healing fountains of nature, wounds & fractures which 
the Chirurgian may heale by onely taking away the impediments, that is, paine, de. 
fluxion, inflammation, an ab{cefic and gangrene, which retard and hinder the cure 
offach difeafes. The following examples willfufficiently make evident the devils 
maliciouf{nefle, alwaies wickedly and craftily plotting againft our fafety and life. 
A certaine woman at Florence (as Lanzius writes) having a maligne ulcer,and de. 


ing troubled with intolerable paineatthe ftomacke, fothat the Phytitians could 


cive her no cafe: behold ona fudden fhee vomited up long and crooked nailes, and 
praffe needles, wrapped up with wax and haires,and at length 2 great gobbit of deff, 
{o biegethata Giants jawes could {carce {wallow it. 

But that which happenedin the yeere of our redemption 1539. inacertaintown 
calied Fazenftall, inthe Bilhopricke of Ez/let, exceeds all credit, unleffethere were 
eye-witnelles of approved integrity yetliving. In this towne, one “/rich Neufe/er 
a husbandman, wastormented with grievous paine inthe one fide of his belly, hee 
{odainely got hold ofan iron key with hishand under the skinne, which w2snot 
hurt, the which the Barber. Chirurgian of the place cutout with his razour ; yet for 
all thisthe paine ccafed not, but heegrew every day worfe than other: wherefor 
expecting no other remedy but death, he gota knife and cut his throat. His dead be 
dy was opened, and in his {tomacke were found around and longifh piece of woos, 
foure fteele knives, part fharpe,and part toothed like afaw, and two {fharpe peices 
ofiron, each whereof exceeded the length ofa{panne,there was alfoas it were a4): 
ofhaire. All thele things were putin by the craft and deceit of the devill. Thus 
farre Langius. 


Ofthe Coxenages and crafty Trickes of Begcars. 


Aving treated of Monfters, it followesthat wee {peake of thofe 
A i) | which cither of themfelves, by reafon of their nature full of admiratio” 

WF} fy have fomekinde of monftroufneffe in them ; or elfe from fomeot 
ities Waics, as by the craft and cozenage of men.And becaufe to the late me" 


tioned crafts of the Devill, the fubtle devices of begging companions are fowew!™” 


ALA? 


L I 


‘Le, therefo 
oft 
meets with th 

Anne Dom. 
che Church di 
freed thereof, 
up and bound 
{0 ro move {u 
hid,every on 
ly fattened, fom 
hended and la 
shrough the 

{hadabro 
eace obferve 
crous ulcer thg 
itfeemed to d 
beheld the w« 
ulcer, ane the 
fomewhat fat 
fulpect fomet 
on, and got] 
narrowly. W! 
ned withacoi 
to the hidden 
warme Water, 
and yellow fr 
menick, the w 
her breaft per 

The begga 
tricke by a be; 
an oxes Milr, 
might drop o 
vering the ed; 
ligently enqu 
nifhed. 

Within leff 
ty companio: 
wit,a Kerchem™ 
and * Cliquet 
Was [pread ov 
with glew lik 
tied by all mei 
ther came 
With this foc 
Was bornea! 
Wicked difeat 
len {wathe ab. 
fo ftraitened | 
hoarfe that he 
(peaking hee 
draw his brea 
he obtained 
Weretruely le 
Was about his 
Blewed puttle 
4800d and na 
Satly viewc 


4 
4 
4 
3 
4 
‘ 
| 
j 


id t] hike. Anesth 
like, but tha: 
aving the arts and 


body, tothe 
ils,which notwir! 


etic cis. thatio 

ISiTtO be approved 
5 for that healing jc 


‘norof the fociery 
lint, or lint dipt int 
ofe,but wholiv 
& fractures. which 
3 that is, paine, de- 


ind hinder the cure 


r farety and life. 

igne ulcer, and ve. 
Phytitians could 
rooked naules, and 


pear 44014 


\. 


meds 

Thcre We 

IN 

} les Blu 

ce of his deny, fat. 


» 


TeZOUls 

. 


ro 
roar. riisadcaa vv 


ifh piece of wood, 
{harpe PCices 

Hoas it wereapal 


Frhe devill. i nus 


ake of thofe 
full of admiratiors 
e from fomeot’ 


hufe to the laft 
nions are fowewh™ 


25, Of <M onflers and P rodigies. 99 


jike, therefore | will handle them in the next place, thatthe Chirurgian being ad- 
gonithed of them, may be more cautious and cunning in difcerning them when hee 
peers with them. 

Anno Dom. 1525. when I was at there ftooda crafty beggar begging at a hittory of 2 
he Church dore, who tying and hiding his owne arme behind his backe, fhewed in counterteie 
thereof, one cut fromthe body of one that was hanged, and this he propped 
pand bound to his breaft, and fo laid it open to view, as if it had been all enflamed, 
ro move fuch as pafled by unto greater commiferation of him. The cozenage lay 
bid,every one giving him mony, untill at length his counterfeit arm not being fure- 

y fattened, fell upon the ground, many lecing and obferving it: hee being appre- 
pended and layed in prifon, by the appointment of the Magiftrate, was whipped 
“rough the towne, with his falfe arme hangine before him, and fo banifhed. 

[had a brother called John Parey,a Chirurgian, who dwelt at Vitre in Britany she Another of 
once obferved a young woman begging, who thewed her breaft, as ifit had acan. 
ous ulcer thereon, looking fearfully by reafon of much and fordid filzh, wherewith 
rfeemed to defile rhe cloath that lay under it. But whenas hee had more diligently 
beheld che womans face, and the frefh colourthercof, as alfo of the places aboutthe 
slicer, andthe good habite of the whole body agrecable tothat colour (for fhe was 
fymewhat fat, and of a very good habite of body) he was eafily hereby inducedto 
fulpect {ome roguery and deceit. He acquainted the Magiftrate with this his fufpici- 
on, and got leave that hee might carry her hometo his houfe, fo to {earch her more 
narrowly. Where opening her breaft,he found under her arme-pit, a fponge moifte- 
ned with a commixture of beafts blood and milke,and carried through an elder pipe 
1 the hidden holes of her counterfeit cancer. Therefore he foments her breaft with 
warme watcr, and withthe moifture thereof loofeth the skinnes of blacke, greene, 
indycllow frogges, laid upon it, and ftucke together with glew, made of bole ar- 
nenick, the white ofan egge,and flower ; and thefe being thus fetched off, he found 
herbreaft perfe@ly found. 

The beggar being caft forthis into prifon, confefled that fhee was taught this 
tricke by a beggar that lay with her, who himfelfe alfo, by putting about his legge 
inoxes Milt, and perforating it in fundry places, that fo the forementioned liquor 
night drop out, counterfeited an ulcer of a monftrous bignefic and malignity, co- 
vering the edges of the Milton every fide with a filthy cloath, This beggar was di- 
liently enquired after, but could not bee found; and fo thee was whipped and ba- 
ilhed., 

Within leflethan ayeere after there came into the fame city another notable craf. Of one's 
tycompanion, who prefently taking up the church doores, laid open his wares, to pros. 
wit,a Kercher with fome {mall pieces of mony lying thereon, a wooden Barrell, 
and * Cliquets, wherewith he would evernow and then make a great noife : his face » Cy caucts are 
was (pread over with great thicke puftles, being of a blackith red colour, and made things made 
with glew like thofe that have the Leprofie : this his ghafty look made him to be pi- ower onpy oa 
tied by all men, which was the caufe that every one gave him mony. Then my bro- wool-card, but 
ther came fomewhat nearer him, and asked him how long hee had beene troubled 
with this fo cruell difeafe ; hee anfwered with an obfcure and hoarfe voice, that hee <2. ofboordsio 
Was borne a Leper from his mothers wombe, and that his parents both died of this fattened toge- 
Wicked difeafe, fothartheir members fell away piece-meale. Now hee hada wool. 
len wathe about his chapps, wherewith (having his left hand under his cloake) hee willmakea _ 
0 traitened his chapps, that mach blacke blood rofe into his face,and made him fo 
hoarfe that he could {carce {peake ; yethee could norconteine himfelfe, but that in areuled by the 
beaking hee ever now and then flackened the fwathe with his hand, the freclier to French bes 
daw his breath: which when my brother had obferved, fufpecting fome cozenage, st 
he obtained leave of the Magiftrate to fearchand examine the man whether hee 
Weretruely leprous,orno. Firft therefore he tooke away his {wathe or rowler that 
Was about his necke, then wafhed his face with warme water, fo that the counterfeit 
Slewed vuftles were diffolved, and his face,free from all taintnre, fhewed it felfe of 
200d and natural! colour'and fhape. Then he laid bare his whole body, and dili- 
scatly viewed each part, andfound no figne ofaleprofic, one or other. Which 


when 


Acounrerteirc 
ulce; of the leg 


J 
441A V « he h- 
2 
686607 
AL LULIS. f 


tt 


OfeM onfters and Prodivies. 


A multitude of 
beggars hurt- 
fuil coche city. 


How to dilco- 

verfuchas 
counterfeit the 

Jaundife. 


Ot one coun- 
cerfcating the 
falling of 

the fundament. 


when the Magiftrate ouce heard, he made him to bee put in prifon, andto bethr. 
whipped through the ftreets of the city, with his barrell hanging before him ap . 
his cliquets behind him, adding thereto the punifhment of perperuall banifbnen, 
It happened that as hee was whipped the third market day, the people crycd gy... 
the hang-man in jeft, that he fhould not feare to lafh him foundly, for being leprone 
he could not feeleit: the executioner incited by this cry ofthe people, dig fy 
bour him, that the wretch died of his whipping within a fhort while after, hay; 
juft reward for his wickednefs. For thefe impoftors, befides that they live like dro... 
feigning this orthat difeafe, and {o being idle, enjoy the fruits of others Ja}... 
they alfo divers times conf{piring together, take away the lives and goods of hones 
and fubftantiall citizens, and other people: forthere are fome of them, the: ;,.. 
evening, as men that haveno habitation, defire lodging for a night, and ir)... 
eranted them, they, when asthe mafter of the houfe and his family are afleep: 
pen the doores to their comrades,men as wicked as themfelves, and kill and carry 
way all they can. . 

Certainly we may juftly affirme that this crafty begging is the mother and [choo!. 
of all difhonefty : tor how many acts of bawdry and poifoning every where corre. 
the wells and publicke fountaines? how many places havebeene burnt ypg, é 
the thew of begging ¢ where can you get more fit {pies ¢ where more fit undertaie,. 
and workers of ali manner of villany, than out of the crew of thele begears- 

Some of them thereare, who be{meare their faces with foot layed in water, for, 
{eeme to have the Jaundife. But you may at the firft fight find out the deceir, by the 
native whiteneffe of the utter coat of the eye, called Adata, which in {uch as truely 
have the Jaundife, ufeth to bee died and overcatt with a yellowifh colour , alfo yoy 
may be more certaine thereof, if you wet a cloath in water or {pittle, and fo rub the 
face, for the adventitious yellowneffe will quickly vanith, and the truce native coloy, 
fhew it felfe, 

Some there bee, who not content to have mangled, and filthily exulcerated their 
limbes with caufticke herbs, and other cauteries ; orto have made their bodies more 
fwolne, or elfe leane,with medicated drinks ; orto have deformed themfelves {ome 
other way, but from good and honeft Citizens, who have charitably relieved them, 
they have ftollen children, have broken or diflocated their armes and legees, have 
cutout their tongues, have deprefled the cheft, or whole breaft, that with thele,as 
their owne children, begging up and downe the country, they may getthe more te. 
liefe, pitifully complaining that they came by this mifchance by thunder, or light- 
ning, or fome other ftrange accident. 

Laftly they part the kingdome amongft themfelves as into Provinces, commu 
nicate by letters one to another, what newes or new quaint deviles there are tocon- 
ceale or advance their roguery : to which purpofe they have invented anew 120 
guagconely knowneto themfelves, forte difcourfe together and nor bee uncer. 
ftood by others. [ We here vulgarly terme it Canting }, 

D*, Flecelle, a Phy fitian of Pars, entreated me to beare him company to his cout 
try houfe at Champiguy, foure miles from Paris. Where as foone as wee arrive’, 
and were walking inthe Court, there came prefently tous a good lufty well 
manly woman, begging almesfor St. Fiacrefake, and takingup her coat anane' 
fmocke, fhee flewed a great gut hanging downe fome halfe a foor, which {eemed’ 
if it had hanged out of her fundament, whcreour there dropped filth like unto p* 
which had all ftained her legges and {mocke, moft beaftly and Alrhy co loose wpe” 
F lecede asked her how long {he had beene troubled with this difeafe : fhe aniwet“" 
that it was foure yeeres fince fhe firft had it. Hence he cafily gathered that {he plac’ 
che counterfeit ; for it was not likely that fuch abundance of purulent matrer ¢40 
forth of the body of fo well fleflit and coloured a woman ; for fhe would rather ha 
been very leane and in aconfumption. Wherefore provoked with juft anger, by 
(on-of the wickedneffe of the deceit, he run upon herand threw her downe upon 
ground, and trod her under his fcer,and hit her divers blowes upon the belly, fo 4" 
he made the gut which hung at herto, come away,and by threatning her with mo 


grievous punishment, made her confeffe the cozcnage, and thar it was nor here 


Lis. 29. 


but of an Ox 


‘the onc o 
poles. 
Nor very | 
feers of the f 
oners, for ©: 
wherefore 
fhould be tr} 
are therefor« 
report fhe w 
{neared wit! 
che necke of 
med moiftur 
fhe might 
led forth but 
ing firft whit 
by ficly app! 
burften. 
Anno Do 
man, being a 
caftto meet 
them her mis 
as {hee flept 
hand unto h- 
gnawing of h 
wherefore as 
the re{t, rhere 
berius, Cheva. 
Hollerius 
ty, the ferper 
hadnofuch fi 
Speculums mat 
her head or 
onely wee ob 
thor, by cont 
we had obfer 
fie her and m. 
thata more ft 
gentle, we mi 
and con{ciou: 
Packing up he 
hot bidding h 
loffe of the ho 
Upona Pack 
br Ought Sea-! 
Country, feeingy 
Such as feigl 
mouths, Suc! 
their Wretts « 
ind defilethcifl 
body - Laftly 
that have the 
With they befix 
vulgarly terme 
ting, and cheat 
in Afia, 


al 
wi 
| 
q 
q 
q 
4 
: 
2.4 
q 
a 
4 
wet. 
/ 
rh 
4 
¥ 


Mm. andtob Cthrica 


ng before him 
petuall banifhinen, 
people crycd Curt 
for being 
eople, did fo 
/hile after, havino 
cy live like dron,. 

of others 
nd goods Of honen 
of them, that in; " 
night. and it beino 
mily are alleen. 
nd kijland carry 4. 


nother and ichoole 
very Where corrup, 
beene burnt under 
ore fit undertakers 
fe beggars? 

yedin water, forg 
it the deceit, by the 
ch in as ucly 
colour ; alfo you 
ttle, and fo rubthe 
true Native colour 


y exulcerated their 
‘their bodics more 
id themielves {ome 
bly relieved them, 
s and legees, have 
that with thele, as 
iy getthe more 
thunder, or light- 


vinces,& commu 
there are tocon- 
vented anew 
wd not bee uader- 


pany to his coun- 
> as wee arrived, 
mod lufty well fiefhe 
sher coatand het 
tr, Which feemed as 
filth like unto p*, 
hy co looke 
afe : fhe aniwerce 
red that fhe plaice 
ulene matrer came 
Byvould rather have 
juft anger, by 
‘+ downeupon che 
nthe belly, fo tha 
ing her with mor 


it wwas nor 
but 


yytof an oxe, which being filled with blood and milke, andtyed at bothends, thee’ 
pur the one of them into her fundament, and !et the filth flow forthat very little. 

oles. 
Not very long agoce, a woman equally as thameleffe, offered herfelfe tothe over- Ofonefaigning 
feers of the poore of Parss, entreating that fhe might be entred for one of their Penfi- ” alling, 
oners, for that her wombe was fallen downe by a dangerous and difficult birth, \yonb-. - 
wherefore fhe was unable to worke for her living. Then they commanded that {hee 
fhould be tryed and examined, according tothecuftome, by the Chirurgians which 
sretherefore appointed, Who feeinghow thewhole bufinefle was carried, made 
report fhe was a counterfeit ; for the had thruft an oxes bladder, ha!fe blown and be- 
ineared with beaftly blood by the neck, whereto fhe had faftned a little fpunge,into 
thenecke of her wombe, for the {punge being filled and {wollen up by the accufto- 
med moifture of the wombe, fo held upthe oxes bladderthat hanged thereat, that. 
fh: might fafely goe without any feare of the falling of it outjncither could it be pul 
led forth but with good force. For this her device thee was put into Prifon, and be- 
ing firft whipped, wasatter banifhed. Their cozenage is nor much unlike this,;who. 
by ficly applying a (heepes paunchto their groine, counterfeit themfelvesto bee, 
burften. 

Anno Dom. 1561, there came to Pars alafty, ftout, andvery fat Norman wo- Ofabegzar 
man, being about fome thirty yeeres old, who begging from doore to doore, did ftfaigned hes 
calt to meet with rich women, and very familiarly and pitifully would relate wato fnaccin hee 
them her misfortune, faying fhe had a fnake in her belly which crept in at her mouth 
as (hee {lept in an hempe-land: thee would let one feele her ftirre, by putting their 
hand unto her belly,adding alfo that fhe was troubled day & night with its unceffane 
gnawing of her yuts. The novelty ofthis fad chance,moved allto pity & admiration, 
wherefore as much asthey could,they aflifted her with means & countfell. Amongft 
the re{t, there was a woman of great devotion and charity, who fending for Dr. Ho/- 
krins, Cheval, and mee, asked us if this {nake could by any meancs be gorten forth, 

Hollermus gave her a {trong purgation, hoping that by (tirring up the expullive facul- 
ty,the ferpent might be caft forth, together with the noxious humors.Buc chis hope 
hadno fuch fuccefle. Wherefore when as we met againe, wee thoughtit fit to pur 2 
Socculum matricés intothenecke of her wombe, fo to fee if we could difcerne either 
her head or taile: but I making large dilatation of her womb,could [ee no fuch thing, 
onely wee obferved acertaine voluntary motion, whcreot thee her felfe was the au- 
thor, by contracting and dilating the mufcles of the lower belly. Which when as 
wehad obferved, perceiving the deceit and impofture, we thought good {0 to terri- 
fe her and make her confefle the deceit, totell her that fhee muft take another, but 
thata more ftrong purgation, that what wee could not doe by the former, as more 
gentle, we mighrattaine to by the latter, as farre ftronger. She aiilembling all feare, 
and con{cious of her craft and diflimulation, after wee were gone in the cvening, 
packing up her ftuffe, anda great deale more than her owne, the fecretly ftole away, 
bot bidding her hofteffe “arewell : and thus at length the fraud was apparent, tothe 
lofle of the honeft Geatlewoman. [{aw this baggage, fixe daies after, fitting luftily 
pon a Packe-horfe, atthe gate Mont-marire, and laughing heartily with fuch as 
brought Sca-fifh to towne, and thee was returning (as it was moft likely) into her 
country, feeing her cozenage was difcovered bere. 

Such as feigne themfelvesdumbe, draw backe and double their tongues intheir 
mouths. Such as falling downe counterfeit the falling fickeneffc, bind traitly Doth sich asfaigne 
their Wrefts with places of iron, tumble and rowle themfelves in' the mire, {prinkle themiclve 
ind defiletheir heads and faces with bealts blood, and thake their limbes and whole ve 
body. Laftly by putting fope into their mouths, they foame atthe mauth like thofe 
Cat have the falling fickenefle. Otherfome with floure make a kind of glew,where- of fuchastaign 
with they befmeare their whole bodies, as ifthey had that Leprofie or Scab, thar is themiclvesie- 
Vulgarly termed, Malum (andi mans. Neher mult we thinke this art of countertei- pe 
‘ing and cheating begging to bee new, and of late invention, for long agoe it flou- 
in Afia,even in the time of Hippocrates, as may appeare by his booke De 4ére, 

Lois; Aqaw. Butby how much this difeafe hath taken more deepe roor, and 
growne 


+ 4 
¢ 
| 
| 
| 
j 
f 
af 


ox 


and 


grown morc inveterate by proceffe of time, by fo much it muft more dili gently an 

carefully bee looked to and prevented, by cruelly punifhing fuch counterfei;s . ™ 
that by this fained begging, as the nourifher of {loth and thoppe of all dithones,, 
tbar which is caken fromthe good is beftowed upon the ill, and one wicked & sed ‘ 
terfeit beggar hurts all other wretched people. By A 7 


Cuapr. XIX. 
firange or monstrous accidents in Difeafes. 


Hat monftroufneffe foever was in the laft mentioned parties, it 
madeup by the craft of beggars for filthy gaine. But if there}, 
ny monftroufneffe in the following narrations, it is of nature }),. 
working, as it were, miraculoufly, by fome fecret and occuls 

meanes ; forthus there are oft times montfters in difeafes. Before 

thetowne of St. de Angeley,a fouldier called Francis, of 
company of Captaine Maret, was wounded with a Harquebuze-fhot on the belly 
into thebelly betweene his navell and fides ; the bullet was not taken out, becaufe the Chirurgi. 
cameforthat ans, who fearched him diligently, could not finde it: wherefore hee was troubled 
sic fundament. with prievous and tormenting paines, untill theninth day after hee received the 
wound, the bullet came forth at his fundament: wherefore within three weekes of. 
ter he was perfeGly whole. Hee was healed by Simon Crinay, the Chirurgian of the 
Frenchcompanies. 

Abullecftick-  Fammes Pope, Lord of St. Albanes in Dawpbine, was wounded at the skirmifha 
a, pari. Chafenay, having three harquebuze bullets entring into his body, one whercof pier- 
«nt recovering. ced under his throate, where it buncheth outas with a knot, neare to the pipe of his 

lungs, evento the beginzing of the vertebra of the necke, in which place the leaden 
bullet ftuck, and as yet doth remaine.Hereupon he was atilicted with many and {ear- 
full fymptomes, as a feaver, and agreat {welling of his whole necke, fo chat for ten 
whole daies he could {wallow nothing but broaths and liquid things. Yct he recove- 
red, and remaincth wellat this prefent, by the cure of fames Dalam the Chiturgian. 

lexander Beneditius makes mention ofa certaine countrie-man, who, (hot into 
sap. the backe with a dart, drawing out the fhaft, the head was left behinde, being in 
enc length about the breadth of two fingers, but hooked and fharpe on the fides. When 
por anco the ,, asthe Chirurgian had carefully and diligently fought for it,and could by nomeanes 
acthefunda- finde it, he healed up the wound, but two months after this crooked head came forth 
at his fundament. 

Afwallowed fameauthortelleth that at Venicea virgin fwallowed ancedle, which {ome 
needle voided two yeeresafter the voided by urine, covered over with a ftony matter, gathered’ 
byuine. vifcous humours. 
Ancedicun. Perlan, the wife of Wikiam Guerrier,a Draper of Pars, dwelling inthe 
ninginatthe Jewty,as the rode on horfe-backe into thecountry, a needle out of her pin-cufhion, 
burrockecame which got under her by accident, ran fo deepe into her right burtocke, that it coul- 
spaine. Me not by any artor force bee plucked forth. Foure moneths after thee fent for meet 

come to her, and the told mee that as often as fhe had to doe with her husband, the: 
{uffered extreme pricking paine her right groine; putting my hand thereto, 
felt it, my fingers met with fomething fharpe and hard : wherefore I ufed the mat 
fo, that I drew forth the necdle all rufty : thismay be counted a miracle, that 
naturally heavie, fhould rife upwards, from the buttocke to the groine, and pici* 
the mutcles of the thigh, without caufing an ab{ceffe. re 
Aneedicinthe 470 Dom.1566.thetwo fonnes of Lawrence Colle (men excellent in cutting for 
mieft of a ftone phe ftonc) tooke forthaftone of the bigneffe of a wall-nut, in the midft wherco! 

ancedie, jult likethofe that fhooe-makers ufe : the patients name was Peter C0 

dwelling in the ftreet Galana, at the place called CVanbert at Pare, and I rhinke 
is yet living. This tone was fhewedto King Charles the ninth, forthe monftro 


Monftcrs hap- 
pen alfo in dif 

A bullet fhor 


Lin. 25 


De 
bladder of 
bled with the 
yard, each of t 
together waigl 
lying at Saint’ 
mer, andinch 
otherwifle mu¢ 
brethren, I hay 


- 
| 
q ferve amo 
or 
‘shed nine ¢ 
4 atient re 
‘fent. 
7 rc a fo ) 
ladder {taye 
5 
af 
v4s 
j 
’ 
Th 
' 
t 4 
} 
} 
4 4. 
| 
bel 


— 


Lip.z5 | Of Monflers and P rodigies. 997 
my other Anno Dom. 1570.the Dutchefle of Ferraraat Pa. 
of all dithone rs, fen for Joun Colo, ca of a ConfeGioner. This ftone, though ic 
ne wicked & a gaighed mine OUNCES, aNd was as thicke as ones fift, yet was it happily taken out, the 
COun- pacient recovering, Francs Rou/fet, and fofeph javelle,the Dutcheffe Phyfitians, be- 
(EE prefent. Yet not long after this Confectioner died by the ftoppage of his water, 
ccafon of ewo other little ftones,which about to defcend from the kidneies to the 
ftayed in the mid-way ofthe Ureters. The figure of the extracted {tone 
was this. 
The figure of a fone taken forth of the Bladder of a Confeétioner. 
bned parties, it woe | 
Buc if cherebes. 
fecret and occu}: “GOO 
in difeafes. Before 
lled Francis, of the y 
aufe the Chirurgi. SS 4 UYU. 
heewastroubled 
t hee received the 00 
inthree weckes af- 
Chirurgian of the oo 
at the skirmifh at 
, one whercof pier- VU 
re tothe pipe of his 
hplacetheleaden —— 
ith many and fear- Ss 
cke, fo chat for ten 
ps.Yetherecove- 
‘Anno Dom. 1§ 66. Laurence Collothe younger, tooke three {tones out of the 
behin bladder of one dwelling at Marly, called commonly Tire-vit : becaule being trou- 
Wen bled with the ftone from the tenth yeere of hisage, hee continually fcratched his 


uld by no meanes 
d head came forth 


eedle, which fome 
ater, gathered a- 


® ss, dwelling in the 
her pin-cufhion, 
ocke, that it could 
we fent for mec to 
her husband, fhee 
hand thereto, 

el ufed the mate 
iracle, that ftects, 

croine, and picice 


lent in cutting 
nidft whereot 
was Peter Cocqa!”> 
is, and I thinke hee 


the 


forthe monftrou!- 


prefer¥* 


yard, each of the {tones were as bigge as an Hens egge; of colour white, they all 


@ ‘ogether waighed twelve ounces. Whenthey were prefented to King Charles, then 

ying at Saint (Mawre des Fau(fex, hee made one of them to bee broken with a ham- 
ner, and in the middeft thereof there was found another, of achefnut colour, but 
otherwife much likea Peach ftone. Thefe three ftones, beftowed on mec by the 
uethren, I have here reprefented tothe life, 


q 
‘ 
i ole 
j 
4 _ 


8 F 


T he effigies of the three forementioned tones whereof one is broken, 


\ 


[have in the diffeQing of dead bodies, obferved divers ftones, of various formes 
and figures, as of pigges, whelpes, andthe like. Dalechampiws celleth that hee fw. 
man,which by an abicefft of hisloins,which turned to a Fiftula, voided many {tones 
out of his kidneies, and yet notwithftanding could endure to ride on horf-backe. 
orinacoach. John Magnus, the Kings moft learned and skilfall Phyfitian, having in 
cure a woman, troubled with cruell torment and paines of the belly and fundamenr, 
fent for me, that by putting a Speculum into the fundament, he might {ec if he could 

Aitonebythe perceive any difcernable caufe of fo great and pertinacious paine : and whenas hee 

foreeofpur- could fee nothing which might further hitn inthe finding out of the caufe of her 

paine (following reafon asa guide) by giving her often gly{tersand purgations, hee 

fundament. brought it foto paffe, that thee at length voided a ftone at her fundament of the big. 
nefle of a Tennis ball: whichonce avoided, all her paines ceafed. 

Epid. Hippocrates tclisthat the fervant of Dyferss in Lari/fa, when thee was young, in 
fing venery was much pained, and yet fometimes without paine, yer {hee never con- 
ceived. But when as fhe was fixty yeeres old, fhe was pained in the afrer-noone asi 
fhe had beene in labour. When as the one day before noone had eaten many leckes, 

afterward {hee was taken witha moft violent paine, farre exceeding al] her tormes, 

neckeof the and the felta certaine rough thing rifing up in the orifice of her wombe. Bur {lic fal- 
wane. ling into a{woune, another woman putting in her hand, got out a {harpe {tone of 1h 
bignefle of a whirle, and then fhe forthwith became well, and remained fo. 

In a certaine woman, who, as Holertus tells, for the {pace of foure moneths Was 

palp. coud. troubled with an incredible paine in making water, two ftones were found in her 
heart, with many abfcefles, her kidneyes and bladder being whole. 

Anno Dom. 1558.1 opened in John Bourlier a Taylour,dwelling inthe ftreet of 5¢ 
Henore,a watry abiccficin his knee, whereinI found aftone, white, hard, #° 
imooth, of thethickenefle of an Almond ; which being taken out, hee recovered: 

No prrt of the Certainely there is no part of the body wherein ftones may not breed and grow. 

bodv wherein Anthony Benevenius a Florentine Phyfitian writes, that a certaine womad 

Hones lowed a braffe needle without any paine, and continued a ycere after without ict 

Aneedi_iwal- ling or complaining of it : but at the end thereof fhe was molefted with great pai 

lowed,came — in her belly; tor helping of which fhe asked the advife of allthe Phy fitians fhe cov!’ 

making, in the interim, no mention of the fwallowed needle. Wherefore fhee 

yeexcsatter. no benefit by all the medicines fhe rooke ; and fhee continued in paine forthe! pe 
of twoyceres,unrill at length the needlecame foith ata little hole by her navel," 
then fhe recovered her health. 


A 


fell much av 
in his growe 
forth in the 
lier. 
Monnfieurt 
ofa {word o! | 
rwelfrh day 
of Britaxie, 
There hava 
children tha 
paflage forth 
by the necke 
lechampius 
Is ic nor 
Mother, hav 
that were any 
A certaine 
Was taken wif 
therewith ha 
10, being op 
blood rwo 
ftanding her 
Anne Dom 
of fourty yec 
ted up a crea 
gure, colou: 
blacker;they 
towne broug 
Courtin Phy! 
This folio 
Miration, A 
fobbery con 
Phyfitians,th 
the reftrhe L& 
View and difc 
did breed,an 
that they mis 
ly beene trou 
Pening his bi 
as they defir: 
Place. the bo 
ted with gre: 
eS, and gc 
Alexander 
all her teeth, 
fOurefcore yi 


| 
VQ 
eweene 
j € -- mcm ) ral 5 
= = > | ying 1m 
YEE & Sill Uf, 73 F 
— 
fil 
| 
| 
arte 


$,0f various formes 
Leth that hee faw a 
cided many ftones 
a on hork-backe, 
Phyfitian, having in 
lly and fundamentr, 
Mglit fee if he could 
and when as hee 
O;: the caufe of her 
purgations, hce 
¢ament of the big- 
Bel. 
> Was young, in u- 
yet fhee never con- 
he afrer-noone as if 
vaten many leckes, 
Hing all her former, 
»ymbe. Bur flic fal- 
afharpe ftone of the 
nained 
‘gure moneths was 
were found in her 
» inthe ftreet of St. 
white, hard, 
hee recovered. 
Breed and grow. 
mine womaa fwal- 
after without iee- 
d with great painces 
hyfitians fhe could, 


¢ by her navel, an 


A 


V herefore thee had 
paine for the {pace 


A Schollar named Chambelant, a native of Bowrges, a ftudient in Parws, inthe Col- , forie of graft 


ledge of Pre/fe, {wallowed a ftalke of graffe, which came afterwards whole out be- {wallowed, 
»weene two Of his ribbes, withthe great danger ofthe {chollars life. For it could mee pee 
not come there unleffe by pafling or breaking through the lungs, the encompaffing whole againe 


berweene the 
gembrane, and the intercoftall mufcles, yethee recovered, Fernelins and Hugnet ha. 


ying him in cure. 

cabrolle Chirurgian to Mounfiewr,the Marthall of Anville,told mee that Frances... 

cuillenet the Chirurgian of Sommers, a (mall village fome eight miles from Mom- 
er, had sn cure, and healed acertaine theepheard, who was forced by theeves to fo'th tan ab- 
(wallow a knife of che length of halfe afoot, witha horne handle of the thickenefle pont a 
ofones thumbe: he kept itthe {pace of halfe a yeere, yet with great paine,andhee 

fell much away, but yet was not in aconfumption, untill ar length an abfceffe rifing 

inhis groine, with great ftore of very ftinking quitture, the knife was there taken 

forthin the prefence of the Juftices, and lett with Poubert the Phyfitian of Atom. 

lier. 

Monnfieur the Duke of Rohanhad a Foole called Gaido, who {wallowed the point The point of 
ofafword of the length of three fingers, and hee voidedit at his fundament on the {°t Swaliow- 
wwelfth day following, yet with much adoe: there are yet living many Gentlemen forch sc che 
of Britanie, who were cye-witnefles thereof. fund ament- 

There have been fundry women with childe, who have fo caft forth piece. meale Wonderfulj 
children that have died in their wombes, as that the bones have broke themfelves a of 

pallage forth at the navill, but the feth, diflulved as it were into quitture, lowed out the woube. 
by the necke of the wombe and the fundament, the mothers remaining alive, as Da- 
champius obferves out of Aloncrafis, 

Is itnotvery ftrange that there have bin women, whotroubled with a fit of the women trae: 
Mother, have lien three whole daycs without motion, without breathing,or pulfe bled with the 


that were any way apparent, and fo have beene carried out for dead? ae 0 out 
A certaine young man, as Fernelzas tells,by fomewhat too vehementexercife, . 
Animpoftume 


was taken with {uch acough, thar it left him not for a moment of time, untill hee gic ouir,of the 
therewith had caft forth a wholeimpoftume of the bignefs of a pidgeons egg, where- bignelle ofa 
io,being opened, there was found quitture exquifitely white and equall. He fpi 
blood two dayes after,hada great feaver,and was much diftempered : yet notwith- 

tanding he recovered his health. 

Anne Dom. 1578. Stephana Chartier, dwelling atSt. Maure des F au(fer, a Widow Worms caft up 
of fourty yeeres old, being ficke of a tertian Feaver,in the beginning ot her fit vomi- ‘heft ofan 
tcdup a great quantity of choler, and together therewith three hairy wormes, in fi- . 
eure, colour, and magnitude like the wormes called Beare-wormes, yet fomewhat 
dlacker;they lived eight whole daies after without any food: the Chirurgian of this 
towne broughtthem to Dr. slot, who thewed them to Feure, Le Gros, Marefcot ang 
Courtin Phy tficians, and to me alfo. 

This following hiftory,taken out of the Chronicles of Mon/trele, exceeds all ad- This narcation 
Miration, A certaine Franck-Archer of Mawdon, fourc miles from Paris, was for Sxoreds noe 
robbery condemned to bee hanged : in the meane rime it was told the King by the wer it 
Phyfitians,that many in Parés at that time were troubled with the ftone,and amongtt belicte. 
the reftche Lord of Bofcage, andthatit would be for the good of many,ifthey might 
View and difcerne withtheir cyes the parts themf{elves wherein fo cruella difcafe 
did breed,and that it might be done much better in a living chan inadead body,and 
thatthey might make tryall upon the body of the Franck- Archer, who had former- 

'y beene troubled with thefe paines. The King eranted their requelt ; Wherefore o- 
pening his body they viewed the breathing parts, and fatisfied themf{elves as much 
as they defired, and having diligently and exactly reftored each part to its proper 
Place, the body, by the Kings command, was fewed up againe, and drefled and cu- 
ted with great care. It came fo to pafle, that this Franck-Archer recovered ina few 
daies and getting his pardon, got good {tore of mony befides, | 

Alexander Benedi Gus tells that hee faw a woman called Yséforia, who having loft ron lb, 64 

all her teeth, and being bald, yet had others came up in their places, when as fhe was 


‘Ourefcore yceres old. 
| Pppp a2 


Stephen 


— — — 
“ 
| 
| 
-Z 
= 
- 
= 
3 = 
= | 
Sec = 


1000 OfeMonfters and Prodtytes. 


(18. 25. 


rarityand vq 


Stephen Tefirer a Chirurgian of Or/eance,told me that not long agoc he cure, 
Charles Periguell,a Serjeant of Orleance, of a wound received in hishamme. whe are many, 
by cherwotendons bending the ham, were quite cut infunder. He took this ord perviousto n 
the cure ; hee caufed the patient to bend his legge, then hee fewed together th. rin che fhape of n 
of the currendons, then placed the member in that fite, and handled ir wi, h ety nd ny) havet he 
that at length he healed the wound, the patient not halting at all. Truely this jc ne S Boman: ncithe: | 
ry memorable thing, and carefully and heedfully to be imitated by the Young 
rurgian. When | 
~ many have I feen, who wounded and thruft through the body with monttcll 
arrowes, pikes, bullets, have had portion of the brainecut off by a woung ot th: @  ilikeamanev 
head, anarme or legge taken away by acannon bullet,yet have recovered ¢ ang how Me yellow, yert 
many on the contrary, have died of light and finall wounds, not worth the fies and ao | 
king of BB was feeneanc 
A certaine man was fhot in neareto his groine with anarrow, whom we haye {een peared by 
faith H:ppocrates, and he recovered beyondall mens expectation ; Thearroy, head cinued {o 
was not taken forth, for it was very deep in neither did the wound bleed very much 


| neither was it en@amed, neither did he halt: but wee found the head, and tooke;, 
forth fixe yeeres after he was hurt. Now Huppocrases gives no other reafon of jrs (. 
long ftay, but that he faith it might be fufpected it lay hid betweene the Nerves, and 

that no veine nor artery was cut thereby. 

Crap. XX, 
Of the wonderfull original, or breeding of fome creatures. 

SEE have read in Boiftey, that a certaine workeman of Avicxion, when 
~~ iftare as hee livedin that city, opened a leaden coffin, wherein adeadbo. 


NY \\Vars dy lay, that was foclofely foudered, that the aire could nor getin;and 
e A aN as he opened it,he was bitten by a ferpentthat lay therein, with fo vene. 
‘“* mous and deadly a bite, that ic had neerero have coft him his life. Yee 


Ic isa ‘common the original! of this creature is not fo prodigious as hee fuppoferh, for it is an uluall 


thing for a Serpentto breed of any putrefyed carcafle, but chiefly of amans. In our time 
thedead corps Bapti/ta Leo writes, that inthe time of Pope Martin the fift, there was a live {er- the which as 1 
Pent found enclofed ina vafte, but folid Marble, nochinke appearing in {uch denic youmay fee h 
inafolide Mar. £0lidity, whereby this living creature might breath. : 

ble. Whilcft in my vine-yard,chat is at Avewdon, I caufed certain huge ftones to be bro- 


ken to pieces, a Toad was found in the midft of one of them. When as[ muchad: 
mired thereat, becaufe there was no {pace wherein this creature could be generated, 
encreafe or live, the Stone-cutter wifhed mee notto marvaile therear, for it was 
Thecaueor Commonthing, and that he fawitalmoft every day. Certainly it may cometo pall¢ 
fuch wonderful that froin the more moift portion of ftones, contained in places moift and uncer 
geactations. — oround, and the celeftiall heat mixing and diffufing it felfe over the whole maileo 
the world, the matter may be animated for the generation of thefe creatures. 


an 


—— 


Cm ar XXL 


Of the wondrous wature of fome marine things, and other liumeg 
creatures. 


laft mentioned creatures were wonderfull in their ofiginal!, or 
ther in their growth : but thefe which follow, though they be not come 
dertull of themfelves, as thofe that confit of their owne proper 


and that working wel! and after an ordinary manner yet they 
or 


rarity 


é 
& 


drous to us, or rather monftrous, for that they are not very familiar [0 Us. 


éa 
eat F 
by 
‘ it 
7 4 
d 
4 
4 
4 
| 
j 
4 a 
‘ 
4 
‘ 


i ] 25, 


§ agoc he cure 
his hamme, 
le took this 
d together 
ied it with 
Truely 


by the y Gung Chi 


thar art, 


body with fword. 
by a wound Of the 
covered ¢ and how 
ot Worth the {peq. 


hom we have {eer 
; Thearrow head 
d bleed very much, 
head, and tooke jr 
her reafon of its {o 
ene the nerves, and 


res. 


Avi¢nion, wheri 
therein adeadbo- 
uld not getin ;and 
rein, with fo vene- 
him his life. Yet 
, for it is an uluall 
ofamans. 
rere was alive fer- 
aring in {uch dente 


e {tones to be bro- 
Then as I much ad- 
ould be generated, 
rcrear, for it was 
may come to paile 
moift and under 
he whole mafle of 
e creatures. 


ir offgitall, 
be not won- 
me proper nature, 
yetthey are wor 


‘ar tous. For the 
rarity 


d One 
here. 
Order jn 
the ends 


Is 


2 5. Of Mi onfter 


sand Prodigtes. 


grityand vattnel ie Of bodies, isin fome fort monftrous. Of this fort there 
se many, efpecially inthe Sea, whofefecret corners and receptacles are net 
pervious co men: as Tritons, which from the middle upwards are reported to have 


re 


che {hipe Of 
7 have the facesof women, and {caly bodies,yea where as they have the {hape of 
gan: neither yet can the forementioned confufion and conjunction of feeds takea- 
ay place here, for, as we lately {aid, they confit of their owne proper nature. 
“When Mena was Prefident of Aizypt,and walked on the bankes of Nilus, he faw 
$ca-monfter in the fhape of a man,comming forth of the waters: his was juft 
ikea maneven to the middle, with his countenance com pofedto gravity, his haires 
ycllow, yer intermixed with fomegray, his ftomack bony, his armes orderly made 
and jointed, his other parts ended ina fifh. Three daies after in the mornin e there 
was (eeneanorher Sea-monfter, but withthe fhape or countenance ofa woman, as 
sppeared by her face, her long haire, and {wollen breafts: both thefe monfters cons 
inued {o long above water that any one might view them very well. 


The effigies of the Tritonand Sirenof Nilus. 


Inourtimes,faith Rondeletias,in Norway was a montfter taken in atempeftuous fea, 


the which as many as faw it, prefently termed a Monk, by reafon of the fhape which 
youmay fee here fet forth. 


men. Andthe Sireses, Neréides oy Mere-maidces,who (according to Lib. g.cap. 


am, 
q 
idot 
idol 
4 
4 ‘ pe 
| 
| 
, 


Of onflers and Prodvyies. 


The figure of afifhrefembling a Monke. 


Anno Dom. 153. there was feenea fea-monfter ia the habite of 2 Bifhop, cove. 
red over with {cailes: Rowdeletins and Gefmer have defcribed it. 


Zhe figure of a fifh inthe habite or fhapeof « Bifbop. 


CccGeccecc 
Wf 


razr 


\ 


j 


Ly 2¢. 


1138.25] 
pri 
head of a be 


Not long 
fea, amonti 
and 
brought CO . 
ing deftiturc 
Forrefi. 


Anno Dam. 
Cept the care 


af 
“ay 
A We 
PITTA AA 
Ts ai 
q 
BAAN 
S 
NS \ S 3 
ap Bes | 
| 
: 


on 

Gefuer profefleth that hee received from Jer ome Cardane this mon iter, havine the 

head of a Beare, the feet and hands of an Ape. ™ 
The effigies of a Sea-monfler headed like a Beare. 
| J 

Not long before the death of Pope Paw/ the third, in the midft of the Tyrrhene 
fea, amontter was taken,and prefented to the fucceflour of this : it was in thape 
and bignefle like to a Lion, but all feaily, and the voice was like a mans voice. It was 
brought to Rome tothe great admiration of all men, but ir lived not long there, be- 
ing deftitute of its owae natural place and nourifhment, asitis reposted by Philip civ, 5. chro, 
Forreft. 

The effizies of a Lion-like [caily Sea-monfrer. 
¢ of 2 Bifhop, cove. fi 


pop. 


Anno Dom.15 23.the third day of November, there was feen at Rome this fea-men- 
fer, of the bigneffe of a child of five yceres old, like to a man even to the navell, ex- 
ceptthe cares ; in the other parts it refembled a ffh. 


| 
| 
——\" A = 
| 
The 
a 
N j 4 
4 


The effigies of aSea-monfler with amans face. 


- 


a 
‘ 


Via 


Gefner makes mention of this Sea-monfter, and faith that he had the fioure these 
of from a Painter, who tooke it from the very fifh, which hee faw at 4utwerse, Te 
head lookes very ghaftly, having two hornes, pricke eares, and armes not much un. 
like a man, but in the other parts it was like a fifh. It wastaken isthe [lyrian 
itcame a {hore out of the waterto catcha little child : for being hurt by Rone co4 
by fifhermen that faw it, it returned a while after tothe thore from whence it Acd, 
and there died. 


The cffigtts of aSca Devil, 


Gefnertel's that a Sea-monfter with the head, mane, and breaft of ahior!’, 2% 
re{t of his body like a fith, was feenc and taken in the ocean Sea, broughigco 20 
and pre/ented tothe P ope, 

Olaus Magnas tells that a Sea-monftertaken at Bergen, with the head and ot 
a Calfe, was given him bya certaine Englifh Gentleman. The like of which * 
prefented larely to King Char/es the ninth, and was long kept living in rhe water af 
Founiaine Pleau, and it went ofttumesathore. This is much diffrent from 
mon Sca-calfeor Scale, 


great 
ger tuskes, {hai 


by this figure. 


Olaus M 
Anne Dom. 1 5 
two foot long. 
ver was fo lore 


iwine, having a 
his fides, his w 


a4 ry 
1 
: 
— 
| 
{ ‘ 
rig y/ j ‘ = 3 \ . 
ae (<<, = \ 
EARS ERS AAO SS | 
i 4 ‘4 
phe 4 
ah a i. ic 


d the figure there. 
at Antwerpe. Lhe 
mcs nor ee 
ic lily rian a. 25 
ait by tones 


il} WhHCDCE it Ax 


yf aorfe, ane! file 


broughsso Lome, 


head and fhape of 


ke of which W 
ain che waters 
~ 
‘at from the 


B, 25. 


~~ 
y 


* Thisherefi- 

gured is the {ca- 

Morte, caken 
commonly by 


The effizies of 4 monftrous * Sea-calfe, 


| i \ é Yoyages: and! 


phant co o¢ the 
fame, bur that, 
the Painter 
hath thewed his 
skill ron much 
in the one : and 
the other is an 
old Morfe,as 
this here figu- 
red isa young 


SO 
> ij 


Thtsgreat monfter was feene in the Ocean fea, with the head of a Bore, but lon- 
per tuskes, fharpe and cutting, with fcailes fet ina wonderfull orders as you may fee 


by this figure. 


The effigies of aSea-bore. 


Olaus Magnus writes that this monfter wastaken at T4y/ean [land of the North, 
Anno Dom. 15 38. it wasof a bignefloglmoft incredible, asthat which was feventy 
wo foor long, and fourteene high, and feven foot betweene the eyes: now theli- 
etwas fo large that therewith they filled five hogfheads, the head refembled 2 


wine, having as it wereahalfe moone onthe backe, and three eyes in the midft of 
us fides; his whole body was {caily. 


The effigies of 4 monjlrons Sea-[wine. 


The Sea Elephant is bigger thanthe land Elephant, as He¢#or Boétius writes in his 


‘cription of Scotland ; icisacreature that lives both inthe water and a fhoresha- 
ving 


IR Ge 
£5 
if} 
7 if}, ff 
/ 
| 
| \\ \\ \ \\ ve | | \ ‘= yy’ 
buss, \ \\\ a \ \\ \ & ~ _ 
Yj J \ \\\ \\ \ \\ = (2 - ph 
| 
\ \ 
\ 
wha 
7 A 
‘ 


1006 OfeM onflers and'Prodigies. 


ving twotecth likecoelephants, with which as oft as hee defires to fleepe, he har 
himfelfe npon a rocke,and then he {leeps fo foundly,that Mariners fecing him 2 ; 


when as he is not awaked by this meanes, they throw {tones at him, and make , 
noife, with which awakned,he endeavers to leape back into the fea with his ae, 


with kim asthey pleafe. Wherefore they then kill him, take our his far, and 


elteemed of. 
The effizies of a Sea-Elephant. RELY 


The Arabians of Mount MazZovan, which runnes alonett the Red Sea, chiefly 


feed ona fifhcalled Orobone, which is very terrible and much feared by other filh, 
being nine orten footlong, and of a breadth agreeable thereto, and it iscovered 
with {cailes likea Crocodile. : 

A Crocodile isa vafte creature, comming fometimesto be fifteene cubites long, 
and feeing it isa creature that doth not bring forth young, ic uferh atthe 
moft to lay fome fixty egges, no bigger than Goole egyes, rifing to {uch bigne!l 
from fo {mall beginnings(tor the hatched young one is proportionable tothe egge’ 
fhe is very long lived. 

It hath fo {mall and ufelefle a tongue,that it may feemeto have none at all. Where- 
fore {ecing it lives both on land and water , as jt lives on land ir is to bee taken fora 
tongue, but ast lives part of the life in the water it hath no ule of a congue, and ther- 
fore isnotto bee reputed one. For fithes cither wholly want tongues, or elie have 
them {0 impedite and bound, that they ferve for little ufe. The Crocodile onely of 

The Crocodile all other things moves the upper jaw, the lower remaining unmoveable : for het 
yale feet, they are neither good to take nor hold any thing; fhe hath eyes not unlike thole 

epee" of fwine, long tecth ftanding forthof the mouth, moft fharpe clawes, a {caily skit, 
Expendedii- 10 bard that no weapon can pierce it. Of the land Crocodile (re{embling this both 
geaitr Piniilo- land and water one) is made the medicine Crecod:lea, moft fingular for fore eyes, 


ing anointed with thejuice of leekes, it is good againtt fuffafions or dimnefle of the 

| fight ; it takesaway freckles, puftles,and {pots; the Gall anointed on the eyes, he!) 
Cataracts, but the blood cleares the fight. 

€o/imogr aph T hevet faith they live in the fountaines of the river Né/ws, or rather ina lake flow 


ing from the fame fountaines, and that he (aw fome that were fixe paces 
How they, take yard croffe the backe, fo that their very lookes were formidable. They catch ©" 
Crocodiles ghus when asthe water of Ni/ws falls, the Lgyptians let down a line, having 
to faftened an iron hooke of fomethree pound waight, made very large and {f10"S 
upon this hooke they puta piece of the Acth of a Caniell or fome other bealt ; 


when as he fees,he prefently falls upon ir, and devoures it hooke and all, where 


when he findes himfelfe to bee cruelly pulled and pinched, it would delight yo" v 


fee how he frets and leaps aloft ; then they draw him thus hooked, by litle wl 7 
uy | 
rhe) 


gle to the fhore, and faftcn the rope furely to the next tree, left hee fhould fall 


L B, 25, 


have time to come afhore, and to bind him, by cafting {trong ropes about him. o 
med violence, but finding himfelfe faft, hee growes fo gentle, that they may 4 ve 

or cut his skiajoto thongs, which becaufe they are {trong aad doc not rot, are mr 


LOA 


hem thatare 
belly, where 
him, they ma 
hiltory of 47, 
codiles, aad t 
withche chi! 
thereby. 
True (fait 
ny part of Na 
are inno orhe 
of living crea 
cumber, like t 
che Sea feath: 
T he fea fe 
ment, afcer th 
{ea-ptickes, f 
prepuce is ar 
eer and fome: 
bright onthe 
You may b 
Pliny makes 
bles a faire bu 
hangs upon a 
diftinguifhed 


Inthe Sea 
by monftrous 
fare and obfe: 
tisjuftlikea 
ina Cone, no 
(cailes,it hath 
Would fay 

The Sarma 
Countries, an 

4{trellin mag 
‘he ends of hi 
Pearles, the ne 
fer wirh | 
"ery ugly tob 
the which witll 


at 
4 
wisiles 
my , — tn. 
Hed 
DP 
y, 
j | 
| 
| | 
| 
ry 
4 4 
| 


L 1B, 25. Of Monfters and Protigtes. 1007 


~~ 


fleepe, he hangs thatare about him then with prongs, and {uch thingsthey fo belabour his 


ceing him at feg_ | pelly, where as his skin is foft and thinne, that at length they kill him, and uncafing 


about him. Bur 
and makea Great 


with his aecuto. 
C they may deale 
is fat, and divide 
Ol, are inuch 


Red Sea, chiefly 
‘ed by other fifh, 
and it iscovered 


iene cubites long, 
yes, it ufeth at the 
fuch bignefle 
able tothe egge): 


»ne at all. Where- 
ro bee taken fora 


tongue, and ther- 
ues, or elie have 


ocodile onely of 
oveable : for her 
s norunlike thofe 
yes, a {caily skin, 
mbling this both 
for fore eyes, be- 
+ dimneffe of the 
athe eyes, helps 


her ina lake flow- 
paces long,and 
Chey catch then 
ine,having there 

large and (trons: 
ther beaft ; whic? 
nd all, wherewit® 
ald delight you 


i, by licle and 


che 


yin, they make ready his flefh, and eat it for delicions food. jobn Lereus, inhis 


piltory of Brafil, writes that the Salvages of chat country willingly feed upon Cro- ‘?*** 
codiles, aad that hee {aw fome who brought into their houfes young ones, where- 


with ibe children gathering about it, would play without receiving any harme 
thereby. 


True (faith P/éay) is that common opinion, Whatfoever is brought forthina- cap.? 


sy part of Nature, that alfo is in the fea, and many other things overand above, thar 
jeinno other place. You may perceive that there are not onely the refemblances 
of living creatures, but alfo of other things; if you looke u pon the [word, faw,cow- 
cymber, like in {mell and colour to that of the earth, that you may leffe wonder at 
the Sea feather and grape, whofe figures I have here given you out of Rondeletius. 

The fea feather is like chofe feathers of birds, which are worne in hats for orna- 
ment, after they are trimmed and dreft for that purpofe. The fithermen call them 
(ea-ptickes, for that one end of them refembleth the end of amans yard, when the 
prepuce is drawne offit. Aslongas ir is alive it {wells, and becomes fometimes big- 
ecrand fometimes lefler ; but dead, it becomes very flaccide and lanke : it thines 
bright onthe nightlike a ftarre. 

You may by this gather, that this which wee here exprefle isthe Grape whercof 
fliny Makes mention, Oecaufe in the furface and upper part thereof it much refem- 
blesa Faire buach of Grapes ; it is fomewhat longih, like a mis-fhapen clubbe, and 
hangs upon a long ftalke. The inner parts are nothing but confufion, fometimes 
diftinguifhed with litcle glandules , like that wee have here figured alone by it 


fe Ife. 


x be figures of the Sea Fegther and Grape. 


WY 


\ \ 


Inthe Sea neere the Ifland Hi/paniola inthe Welt Indies, there may befeene ma- 
ty monftrousfithes, amongft which Theves in his Cofmography thought thismoft 
treand obfervable, which in the vulgar language of the natives is termed 4/oes. For 
tisjuft likea goofe, with along and ftraight necke, with the head ending fharpe, or 
inaCone, not much unlike a {ugar-peare, it isno bigger than agoofe, it wanteth 
(cailes, it hath foure finnes under the belly for (wimming,when it is above water you 
Would fay that it were a goofe. 

The Sarmatian, or Eafterne Germane Ocean contaiaes fifhes unknowanc to hot 
Countries, and very monftrous. Suclis that which refembling a {naile, equallsa 
rrellin magnitude of body,anda ftag inthe largenefle and branches of her hornes? 
theends of her hornes are rounded asit were into little balls, fhining like unto 
Peatles, the necke is thicke,the eyes fhining liketo lighted candles, with a roundith 
bole fet with haires like toa cats, the mouth wide, whereunder hangs a piece of Aeth 
Very ugly to behold. Irgoes on foure legges, with fo many broad and croo ed feer, 


’e which witha long taile, and variegated like a Tiger, ferves her for finnesto {wim 


withall. 


: 
q 
M 
| 
| 
q 
| 
q 
| 
| 
q 


i. 


withall. This creatureis fo timerous, that though it be an Amsphibinm, that is, Which 
lives both in the water and afhore, yet ufually it keeps it felfe in the fea, neithe, dork 
it come afhoreto feed unleffe in a very cleare feafon. The fleth thereof is very 2004 
and gratefull meat, and the blood medicinable for fuch as have their livers jj] 
Thebloodof ed, ortheir lungs ulcerated, as the blood of great Tortoifes Is 200d for the Lep, : 

fie. Thevet inhis Cofmography affirmeth that hee faw this in Denmarke. 
ete. mer deepe lake of frefh water, upon which ftands the great city or towne of T he. 
Tom, libs 20, fFitan, in the Kingdome of Mexico, which is built upon piles, like as 

there is found a fith of the bigneffe of a Calfe, called by the foutherne Salvages, eh 
dura, but by thofe of the place, and the Spaniards the conquerers of thar place, Hy. 
ga. Itisheaded and eared almoft like a {wine ; from the chaps hang five long bear. 
ded appendices, of the length of fome halfe a foot, like the beard of a Barbell. Ic harh 
flefh very gratefulland good te eat, It bringeth forth live young like as the Wha), 
As it fwimmes in the waters, it feemes greene, yellow, red, andof many coloy,. 

like a Chameleon: itis moft frequently converfant about the fhore fides of the lake 
and there it feeds upon the leaves of the tree called Hoga, whence alfo the fifh hath 
its name. Itisa fearefully toothedand fierce fifh, killing and devouring luchasis 

meeteth withall, though they bee biggerthan her felfe : which isthe reafon why 
the Fifhermen chiefly defire to kill her, as Tever affirmeth in his Cofmogra 


phy. 


The monftrous Hoga. 


Andrew Thevet inhis Cofmography writes that as he failed to America, hee (aw 
infinite ftore of flying fifhes, called by the falvages Balampech, whorifing out of the 
water, flye fome fifty paces, efcaping by that meanes from other greater fith that 
thinke to devoure them. 

This kinde of flying fith exceeds not the bignefle of a Mackrell, is round headed, 
with a blewifh backe,two wings which equall the length of almoftall their body: 
They ofttimes flyein fucha multitude,thatthey fall foule upon the failes of {hips, 
whileft they hinder one anothers fight, and by this meanes they fal! upon the “pw 
and becomea prey to the Sailers; which fame thing wehave read confirmed by 74” 

Inthe Venetian gulfe, betweene Venice and Ravenna, two miles above af 2 
nd not 


Lis. 25. 
Jong, atthe 
brought alive 


ofthe like hadi 


There are fo 
betruely f{aid, 
framing of the 
of here, as the 
little fithes, as 
them ro be thell 
intheir /Pecies 
they creepe ing 
thefe that is te: 
under whicha 
plucke and drall 
wherewith h: 
oneach fide, a 
egges, which! 
joyned togeth 
CanseHus Or {m 
after, thé of m 
stowne bigeci™ 
fimulated wit 
and convenienfl 
tation, and thefl 
Gut poffeffion 
Purple sande 
then feekes am 


a 
VY 
A 
7. - = 
j= 
| 
. 
| 
es one again{t another, with rwo cares, anda double mouth,a fnout very 
at greene, two wings, five holes in her throat, like thofe ofa Lampiey, atale * 
| 


or towne of Th, 
like as Venice is 
Ne Salvages, An. 
that place, 
five long bear. 
a Barbell.[t harh 
ke as the Whale 
f many colours 
fides of the lake 
al{o the fith hath 
ouring fuchasie 
sthe reafon why 
his Colmogra. 


Ameriea, hee {aw 
yrifing out of the 
gereater that 


is round headed, 
(tall their body: 
he failes of fhips, 
t upon the decks, 


nfirmed by 


above 24/04 
nonftrous, 
in aline, and net 
every flethy 
ey, ataile an ¢ 

long 


SS: 


Lis. 25. Of onfters and Prodigies. 


on 


— 
jong, atthe fetting on whereof there were two little wings. This montter'was 


broughtaliveto Quio%a,and prefentedto the chiefe of the cit hj ° 
ofthe like had not beenc formerly f{eene. 


The figure ofa monftrous flying Fifh. 


AY 


\ 


ZF 
} 


=“ 
= ys) F 
= 
— 
| | | 
ES COWS 


~. 


f 
~ i 


There are fo many and different forts of fhells to be found in the Sea, thatit may 
betruely faid, that Nature, the hand-maid of the Almighty, defports it {elfe in the 
framing ofthem. In fogreat diverfity I have chiefly made choice of three totreat 
othere, as thofe that arc worthy of the greateft admiration. In thefe lye hid certain 
little fifhes, as {nailes in their fhells, which Arifotle calls Cancel, and hee affirmeth 4 de 
them to be the common companions of the * crufted and fhell fifhes, as thofe which $°*), 9.4 : 
intheir /pecies or kinde are like to Lobfters, and ufe to be bred without fhells ; butas me 5» 
they creepe into fhells, and there inhabite, they are like to fhell filh-s. Itisone of 

: Orumps. an 

thefe that is termed the Hermite. He hathtwo fomewhat long and {lender hornes, fich, 
under which are hiscyes, alwaies ftanding out of his head, as thofe which he cannot Thece&npcis | 
plucke and draw in, as Crabbes can, His fore-feet have clawes upon them, pice cra a 
wherewith he defends himfelfe, andvarries meat to his mouth, having two other 
oneach fide, and a third being lefler, the which heufethin going. The female laics 
egges, which hang forth ather backe part as if they were put upon a thread, being 
joyned together by certaince little membranes. Laftly, in the opinion of Alvan, the Lib. 7.cap. 31. 
Cancels or {mall Cray-fih is borne naked and withouta fhell, but within a while 
sfter, fhe of many which thee fides empty, makes choice ofa fit one, and when as 
Browne bigger, the cannot bee contained or dwell any longer therein, or clic being pyey chance 
fimulated with a naturall defire of copulation, fhe removes into amore Capacions their hadicati- 
and convenient one, Thefe little Cray-fathes ofttimes fight together fo: their 
‘ation, and the ftronger catrics away theempty fhell, or elfe makes the weakerto 
Quit poffeflion. Ndw the fhell is either of a Nerita, or Twrbo, and oft tines of a im 


Purple ; and entringinto pofleffion, the carries it about, there feeds aid growes, a: 


then feckes amore capacious one, as 4rs/tor/e faith in the torme: ly cited place, 


Q999 


> 
1009 
\ 
y, 
4 
| 4 
2) 
3 
, 4 
| 
\ q 
j 


Somethink 
pliny termed 
fith, buc of ali 
cellus and Cane 
naked, having 
he wants it, he 
But the 
changeth not! 
Crabbes, it ne 
or Pinneisak 
cher is it at 
Pinnophylax 
may plainely ; 
Volupt. fait! 
live afunder. 
a dwarfe Cra 
the Pimnoter 
notice thereot® 
together upo! 
this hercraftr 
led by Pliny, c 
But chat wh 
Cicero is alcrib 
large fhels,enct 
fore When lirrl 
the thrimps bit 
gether. But P: 
of his, whereag 
greater. 
But amonett 
fer, of fome ca 
face upwardst 
forth ali the w: 
theewo firftte 
finenefs or thit 
of her armes, 
failes along in: 
in water, and fi 


onfiers and Prodigies. 


— 


The effigies of she empty fhells ag the Cancelli #fete crees 
ell, 


L | B. 25, 


The figure of him out of his Cel, 


/ 
= 


‘\\ 
\\ 
33 
“a 4 
4} 


gst 
a: > j 
y 
— 
N - =/ 
4 y y la 
, 
f | = | 
— 
> 
= ie — 
= | 
4%, fl = 
> AS Ay 
Ale 
— 
| 
| 
a 


pliny termed Pimnoter ; but in truth the Piynoter is nota kinde of Cancedus or Cray- 
fh, but of alittle Crab, Nowin Arz/fotle there ismuch difference betweenc Can- 
Vhat the 


cellus and Cancer parvws, though Pliny may feemeto confound them ; for he is bred 
naked, having his cruft oncly, but without a thell: wherefore feeing chat by nature crab is, 

he wants it, he diligently fearches for it, and dwells in it, when as he hath found it: 

But the Pswnoter isnot bred by it felfe alone, butin Pimne and fome others, and hee 

changeth not his habitation, becaufe (as Ar:/lotle thinks) being of the kind of dwarfe 

Crabbes, itnever growes biggc, ncither dwells icin empty fthells. Now the wharthe pp, 
or Pinne is a kinde of fhell-fifh, it breeds in muddy placcs, and isalwaies open, nei- xis. , 
ther is it at any time without a companion,which they theretore call the P:wmoter or 
Pinnophylax(4.e. the Pin-keeper,as Pliny faith. Verily thatthefe things are thus,you 
may plainely perceive by thefe words of Athenaus. Chry(ippus Solenfis 5. de Honeft. 
Volupt. {aith the Pixna and Pinnoter aflittand further cach other, neither can they 
liveafunder. The may bereferred tothe kinds of oyfters, but the Pinvoter is 
a dwarfe Crabbe: the Piw#a_ opens her fhell forthe little fifhes to enter thereinto; 
the Pssnoter {tands by, obferving ifany come ia, whichif they doe, he gives the Pin The familiai. 
notice thereof by biting, who prefently thereupon fhuts her fhell, and fo they feed 727°"! 
together upon that they catch by this meanes. Thus Athenenus. Shee is alfo for Pianorer, 
this her craft mentioned by Plutarch in his writings. The Pinnoter is fometimes cal- 

led by Pliny, Cancer dapis affectaior. 

But that which by thefe authors is attributed tothe dwarfe Crabbe, thefameby _ | 
Cicero is alcribed tothe little fhrimpe : now the Prxna (faith hee) opening her two Libs. de mat. aes 
large thels,enters intoconfederacy withthe little fhrimp for getting of food,where- 
fore when little fifhes fwimme into her gaping fhell, then the Pnva, admonifhed by 
the {hrimps biting her, fhuts her fhell ; thustwo unlike creatures get their livings to- 
sether. But Plwtarch feemes to makethe Pinva to be the Pearle Oifter, inthat work 
ofhis, Whereas he enquireth whether the craft of Water or Land beaftes beethe 

reaters 
But amoneft the moft miraculous fifhes may fitly bee placed the Nawtilos, or Say- 
ler, of fome called Pompylos (itis thought tobeea kinde of Po/ypus) it comes with the “?*** 
face upwards tothe toppe of the Sea, raifingit felfe by little and little, that caftiog 
forth ali the water by a pipe, asif ithad aPumpe, it eafily floats ; then putting backe ~ 
theewo firft tendrills or armes, it extends betweene them a membrane of wondrous 
finene{s or thinneffe,which gathering aire like as a faile,and fhe rowing with the reft 
of her armes, fhe guides her felfe with her taile in the midft,as a Rudder. Thus thee 
failes along in imitation of Pinnaces,and if any thing affright her;he prefently takes 
in water, and finkes herfelfe. 


Lib. 9. cap. 4%. 
Lib. 3. Déipne, 


The fhape of the Nautilus, or Sayler-fi/h. 


a 
| 
Ip q L1B.25 Of Monft (7S and Prodictes. 
| 5. ‘ 
‘ 
>’ 
MA? 

WS AGU / BE ASC 
’ 

The 


1012 Of Monfters and Prodigies, Lip. 25, 
cheWhale The better to ftore this treatife of Monfters, abufing the name with the Poets, we 


mayberecko- Willreckon up the whale amongft the Sea-monfters,by reafonof his monftroys and 


ned gs wondrous magnitude. Now the Whale isthe greateft by much of all the fithe: of 


his mouth is eighteene foot long, teeth they have none, but in ftead thereof jp cach 

Jaw horny blacke excrefcences or finnes [which we vulgarly terme Whale- bone: 

which by little and little end in {mall haires like to a {wines briftles, which comm), 
and ftanding out of his mouth, are in ftead of Guides, left whileft he fvimmes with 
a blind and rapide violence,he mightrunne again{t arocke. His eyes are diftant on. 
fromthe other the {pace of foure elles, which outwardly appeare {mal}, but inward. 

ly they are bigger than a mans head ; whercforethey are deceived that {ay thar th 
are no bigger than an Oxes eyes : his nofe is fhort, but ia the middle of his forchead 
he hatha pipe whereat hee drawes in the aire, and cafts forth a whole thower o, ,. 
ver of water, thattherewith he will even finke the vellels ot boats ofthe Marriners . 
when hee hath filled himfelfe beyond meafure, hee cryes or roars with {0 grea o¢ 
ftrong a voice, that hee may bec heard two milcs off. Hee hath two verylarge finnes 
upon his fides wherewith he {wimmmes, and under which in time of danger he hides 
his young ; hee hath none upon his backe. His taile in fite is like to the tailes of Dol. 
phines, neither is it much unlike in fhape, which when he moves, hee fo toffeth the 
A whale brings 2&8, that he drownes and overturnes the boats that heetoucheth. You may by dif 
forth young, & feéting them finde that a Whale brings forth live young, and gives them fucke s for 
fusklasthem- the male hath tefticles and a yard, but the female awombe and dugges. T hey are 
taken in divers places about winter, butchiefly about the coaft of quitaine, arg 
{mall rowne whichis vulgarly called Sarr, fomefixe miles diftant from Bayon; 
whereunto I being fent by King Charlesthe ninth when he was at Bayer, to curethe 
Prince of Reche Sar-You, Lwas aneye witneffe how they are caught ; andalfo I con- 
firmed that which [had formerly read rothat purpofe, in that excellent andmoft 
ow they are true hiftory of fithes fer forth by Kondeletins, Now at that towne there isa little hill, 
caught. inthe toppe whereof there isa T ower of very great antiquity, from which as froma 
_ watch-Tower they keepe watch whether or no any Whales {wimme that way. 
Wherefore the watch-men from the tower, cither feeing, or by the horrible noife 
hearing a Whale to pafle by that way, they give warning thereof to the inhabitants 
by the beating of Drums, and ringing a Bell : which figne once given, they all ruone 
forthwith, as to extinguifh the city if it were on fire, being furnifhed with weapons 
and all things fitting for that purpofe. Forthe people of that country are very dili- 
gent and expertin catchingthe Whale. Wherefore in each of the boats furnifhed 
with all things cither to affaile or flye, there are put ten lufty rowers, and divers 0 
thers furnifhed with harping-irons toftrike the Whale ; which being caft and fafte- 
nedinher, they loofe out huge long ropes faftened to them, untill fuch timeashe 
be dead, then together with the ropes, and aflifted by the waves of the fea,they draw 
the Whale(wearied with running and labouring,and fainting by reafon of che mag: 
nitude and multitude of his wounds, being inthe time oftheir conflict diligently 
chafed and driven toward the fhore) a land ; & merrily part the prey, each whereot 
hath his thare, according to the number of the ironsthrowne,the magnitude of the 
wound, and the neceffity andexcellency of the wounded part for life: each oftheit 
_ harping. irons are knowne by their pecaliar markes. In the heat of the skirmifhm2- 
ny ftand up and downe in boats, onely for this purpofe,to take up firch as chance 
whethe fe. Sea, left they fhould be drowned. The males are caught with more dif- 
 lecace more ficulty, the females more eafily, efpecially if their young ones bee with thein ; for 


-eafily caught whileft they linger to helpe and fuccour them, they lofethe occafion of elca- 


males. ping. The fichh is of no efteeme, the tongue onely is commendable ; for being ¥°"Y 


arge,and ofa very laxe fub{tance, itis poudred,and by moft Gentlemen accounts 
fora dainty. The larde is difperfed over many countries, to be boiled & eaten Wt 
fifh inthe time of Lent, that Gourmandizers may have fomething to ferve them!" 
ftead of flefh which is then forbidden. There is great ftore of fat ia them in the parts 
under the skin and belly, which melted, concretes not againe, by reafon of the ae 
tlecy of the parts, they keepe itto burne in lanapes, and to ufe about their 
( 


the Sea,for moft commonly this beaft is thirty fixe cubits long, eight high, the {]j, of 


L j B. 25> 
houles of the fi 
Aquitaine are 
which arecomi 


buskes for wo! 
make feats or hq 


Inthe river § 


of Fuly, there wi 


the top of her h 
foot lon’, and 
tothe end of he 
fide, fhe had ew 
holesfor them, 
judged mon'tro 
that are not hor 
lower jaw, che 
chaw their mea 
There is (as ! 
called Ectences, 
more flowly if 


of Remora, tor 


{cazing On her 
ftand (till asif 


to hove ftayed 


his yuldiers, 


havie came 


Shee alfo {ta 


| 


his fhip of all li 


the caule being 
Cauic thereof, t 
fhewed her ro ¢ 
Couatermaund 
Thereforet 
World, & that w 
ine thereto.Ce 
Of fhips, cando 
tally ¢ Yea & w 
Whoa farre off, 
“ven the {trong 


4 4 v 
au 
L 
4 
‘| 
4 
Aid 
4 = 
" 
% ’ \ 
a 
| 
2 a | 
x 


ith the Poets, we 
is Monftrous ang 


thereof jn 
W hale. 
W hich COMmin 
c [vimmes With 
diftane One 
all, but Inward. 
pat fay thatth 
of his forehead 
le fhower or 
the Marriners : 
with fo great or 
very large finnes 
danger he hides 
he tailes of Dol. 
ee foroffeth the 
may by dif. 
them fucke , for 
gees. They are 
Aquitaine, ara 
t from Bayon ; 
tO Curethe 
andalio I con- 
ellent and mof 
re is 2 little hill, 
which as froma 
mime that way. 
e horrible noife 
> the inhabitants 
mn, they all ruone 
d with weapons 
ry are very dili- 
boats furnifbed 
s, and divers Oo» 
caft and fake- 
fuch time as he 
fea they draw 
fon of the mag- 
dict diligently 
whereof 
2gnitude of the 
: each oftheit 
1¢ skirmifh ma- 
ch as chance to 
with more dif- 
with them ; for 
afion of efca- 
. for being very 
nen account¢ 
& eaten wit 
ferve chem 
em in the parts 
fon of the 


heir fhips- The 
houfes 


allthe fithes of 
thigh, the flit of 


| 


Li B.2 Of onfters and P rodigies. 


houles of the fith-eaters are builded with their bones ; alfo orchardsin the coatt of 
Aquitaine are fenced with thefe bones. The finnes that ftand forth of their mouths, Whnielios 
which are commonly called Whale-bones, being dryed and polifhed, ferveto make ei 
buskes for women, whip-ftaves, and little ftaves, as alfo to ftiffen garments. Many 
make feats or ftooles of the vertebra, or {pondills of the backe-bone. 


The manner of the cutting up of the Whale. 


\= 


A] 


Inthe river Scalde, ten miles from Cdatwerpe, Dom. 1577. the fecond day 
of July, chere wasa Whale taken, ofa blackith blue colour, fhee had a {pout hole in 
the op ofher head, outof which thee caft great ftore of water : fhe was fifty eight 
foot lone, and fixteene foot high : hertaile was fourteene foot broad ; from the eye 
tothe end of her nofe was fome fixteene foor. Her lower jaw was fixe foot oneach 
fide, fhe had twenty five teeth, which thee could hide in her upper jaw, there being 
holesfor them, it berng wholly toothlefle ; for which one thing this Whale may bee 
judged mon/‘trous, for that nature hath denied them teeth, and for that in creatures 
that are not horned, it is fo ordained by nature, that when they have teeth in their 
lowerjaw, they thould have others alfointhe upper toan{wer tothem, foto 
chaw their mear. The longeft of thefe teeth exceeded not fixe inches. 


There is(as Pleny reports) avery {mall fith accuftomed to live about rockes, it is 9. cz. 25. 
called Echeness, never exceeding the length of a foot ; itis thought that thippes goe 7 4"3* © 


more flowly if this (tick cothem : whereforethe Latines have alfo given it the name 
of Kemora, torthaca (hip being under faile with agood wind, may by the Echeness 
{-azing on her as if fhe would devoure her, be ftayed againft the Saylers wills, and 
ftand (till as iffhe were ina fafe harbour. Wherefore fhee is faid in the AGian fight Re nora. 
tohve ftayed the thip of Marcus Antonius, haftening to goe about and encourage 
his ouldiers, fo that he was forced to enter into another fhip, and thereupon Cefars 
havie came upon them too haftily, and before they were provided. 

Shee alfo ftaid the fhip ofthe Emperour Cazus, comming from .4/#ra to Antes, 
his thip of all thenavie making no way ; neither did they long wondcr at this ftay, 
the caufe being prefently knowne ; fome forthwith leaping into the Seato finde the 
cauethereof, there found her about the fhip, even fticking tothe Rudder, and they 
fhewed her to Caius, being wraththat this fofmall athing fhould ftoppe him, and 
Couatermaund the endeavour of forty Rowers. 

Therefore this little fifh tames andintringes the violence and madneffe of the 
World & that with no labour,not with holding or any other way, but only by ftick- 
ing thereto, Certainly how ever it comes to pafle,who from this example of holding 
of thips, can doubt of any power or eff.& of nature, in medicines which grow natu. 
tally 2 Yea & without this example, the Torpedo out of the feaalfo may be fufficient, The wondrous 
Whoa farre off, and at a diftance, if it be couched with a {peare or rod, will benumbe er aes 
‘ven the ftrongeftarmss, and retarde the feet, how ever nimble to runne away. or 


3 CHAP 


* 


I a 
~IB,2 
= 
| 
“7 | | — S — = 
d 


oh 


— 
— ».% 
1014. Monfters and Prodigies, Lip.as 


Cuar. XXII. 
Of the admirable nature of Birds, and of fome Beafts, 


HAT there beedivers things not onely inthe Sea, but alfo ip 
and earth, which by the wonderfull condition oftheir nary; 
quall that of Monfters, the onely Eftrich may ferve fora witnefle. },. 

the biggett of Birds,though indeed it partly refembles a bird, and ba 

TheEfrichis beaft (and itis familiar to 4frzca and Athiopia) as which contrary to th 
berwcenea bird beafts hath feathers, and againft the cuftome of birds, cannot flye aloft ; for j, hath 

’ not feathers fitro flye, but like unto haires, yet will it out-run ahorfe. The Naturalt 

Thewondrous force of the ftomacke in concocting is miraculous, asto which nothing is yn; 

force of her fto- aMe. 
macke. able : thee layes egges of a wondrous largeneffe, fo that they may bee framed into 


cuppes : their feathers are moft beautifull, as you may perceive by this followino 
figures : 


the aire 


T he figure of an Eftrich. 


Any one may cafily gather of what a prodigious magnitude an Eftrich is, bythe 
greatnefle of his bones. Three of thefe birds were kept atthe Kings charge, by the 
Mare{chall de Rets : one whereof dying, it was beftowed upon mee, whercof I have 
with great diligence made aSceleton. 


May 


* 
cer 
» 
q 
ow 
/ 
4 j 
| 
\ 
AK ‘ 
* 
= 
= 
al 
is 
rr 
Ww 
OT 
te Wo, 


Lip.as 


-alfo in the aire 
Nature may 
a witneffe. Ir je 
bird, and Part! 
to the Nature of 
loft « for it hath 
The naturay 
hing is untame. 
bee framed ; nto 
this following 


aftrich is, by the 
s charge, by the 
, Whercof I have 


Zhe 


Of Monfters and Prodigies. 


The delineation of the Sceleton of an E ftrich. 


— 


4, Shewesthe head, which wasfomewhat thicker than the head of a Crane; 
of the length of ones hand, plaine from the crowne evento the beake ; the beake 
being divided tothe middle region of the eye, being roundifh at the end thereof. 

B. The necke,a yard long, confifting of feventeene vertebr2, each whereof on 
each fideis furnifhed witha tranfverfe procefle looking downewards, of fome fin- 
gers length, excepting the two which are nextthe head, as which want thefe,and 
are joyned togetherby Ginglymos. 

C. The backe is ot a foors length, confifting of feven Vertebre. 

D, The holy-bone of two foot long, in whofe top thereisa tranfverfe proceffe, 
under which there lyesa great hole, 

three more, but lefie. 

F.G.H After which there followes the cavity or focket,whereinto the head of 
the thigh-bone is received and hid. This externally and on the fide produceth a 
perforated bone, ncted with the letter, 7. perforated I fay atthe beginning, for it 
is prefently united at the letter, X. then is itforked and divided into two other 
bones,whereof one ts bigger than the other. The lefie is notec with the letter, Z. 
then are they both united at the letter AZ. each of them Is haife a foot and foure 
inches long. But from that part whereas they firft begun to bee divided, to thar 
whereas they are united, there isa hole fome foure fingers bread, but the length 
of ones hand, or more, and it is noted with the letter, VW, The refidue of the bone 
is like to a pruning knifethree inches broad, but fixe in length : at the end wheree 
under isthe letter, 0. itis joyned by coalition. 

P, The rumpe contilting of nine vertebra, liketoamans. The thigh-bones are 
two, whereot that which is noted with the letter 9 1s of thelengrh of a foot, and 
of thickeneffe equalltoa horfesthigh, The other next under (which peradven- 
ture you may call the fegge- bone) noted with R.isa footand halte long: it hath 
joyned theretothe Fibwla, or lefler tocile ot the like length, but which growes 
finaller as it comes lower. 


_S,Isthe legge,to which the foot adheres, being one and ahalfe long, d 


L LB, ya 5. 
4 lols 
| ow” 
om, 
| 
| 
— | \ ™ hiy 
/ 
| 
Zz AY 
4, 
A 
yy 
Y 
) 
S\Y 
%, 
i 
<6 


j 
4 


1016 Of-M onfters and Prodigies. 


ded at the end into twoclawes,the one bigger, the other leffe, whereof each congy 


of three bones. 


T. Eight ribbes, which are inferted ‘into the S ternon, the three Middlemog o¢ 
0 


thefe have a bony production like toa hook, 

VAs the Sternon, confilting of one bone of fome fodts len 
buckler, to this thereis joyned another bone, which ftretched 
ribs, is in ftead of clavicles or collar-bones. 

X. The firft bone of the wing, which is one foot and halfe long. 
7, Two bones under this, equivalent to the ell and wand, under wh 


are fixe other bones compofing the point of the Wing, noted with Z. ichthere | 


This whole Sceleton is feven foot long, and fo many foot or more }; 
feerto the beake : there are other obfervable things in her the 
have thought fittoomit them for brevities fake. Mutt 


Jerome Cardane io his bookes De /ubsilitate writes that in the Ilands o 
onofthebitd ¢a’s, youmay fometimes find lying upon the ground, or take up in the waters adead 
ofParadile. bird called a Manwcodcata, that is in Hebrew, the bird of God, it is never feene aliv 
Ir lives aloft in theaire,it is like a Swallow in body and beake, yet diftinguifhed mn 
divers coloured feathers : for thofeon the toppe of the head are of a golden colour 
*whofoever  thofe of the necke like toa Mallard, but the taile and wings like Peacocks; * it wane 
panne mas fect: Wherefore if it become weary with flying, or defire fleepe,it hangs up thebo. 
erugh ofthis dy by twining the feathers about fome bough of a tree. It pafleth through the aire 
bird, wherein it muft remaine as long as it lives, with great celerity, and lives by the sire 
the -aucéarium and dew onely. The cocke hatha cavity depreft in thebacke, wherein the hen 
edlib. §- 49%. and fits upon her egges. I faw one at Parts which was prefented to King Charles the 


T he effigies of a Manucodiata, or bird of Paradife. 


rom,  Weehave read in Thevers Cofmography, that he faw abirdin America, which in 


12, that country {peech is called Towca, in this very monftrons & deformed, for 


beake in length and thickenefle,exceeds the bigneffe of the reft of the body git fee«® 
on pepper, as the black. birds and felfires with us do upon Ivic berries, which are not 
leffe hot than pepper. 

A.certaine Gentleman of Provence brought a bird of this kinde from thatcou™ 
try,to prefent itto King Charles the ninth,but dying inthe way he could not prele™ 


italive. Wheretorethe King wifhed the Mare/chal de Rets to give her tome, eK 
| 


aight rake forth 


gth, reprefentj, 
Over the three | 


fthe Moly. 


25. 


‘qos raritics.| 
and feat 
{aw, and of fuch 
certaine mon 

Thevet writes 
called 
ftrous creature, | 
ly; che skinne, a 
ces {potted &va 
andwanting hu 
Grit bruifed, cham 

inthe Realm 
Plimatq, and C 
fone five degre« 
fterne Germane: 
unlike our Doc ; 
are few bealtsth 
reacheth no furt 
rough, having h. 
tedin fome plac 
Leopards are : f 
dalis it isfo wil 
as be feen. There 
tothercft of the 
yet is hetaken at 
ken, he is as 
his crowne two 
he holds up his h 
the leaves and b 


4 
4 4 
a? 
' q 
| 
4 
1% 4 
ban 
j 
rt, { 


hereof each Confifts 
iree middlemof of 


eth, reprefenri,, 
over the three firtt 


ng. 

under which 
with Z, 

nore high from rh. 
compoture, but 


there 


nds of the Molmc-. 
he waters, adead 
never leene alive, 
liftinguifhed with 
a golden colour, 
acocks; * it wants 
t hangs up the bo- 
through the aire, 
d lives by theaire 
rein the hen laies 
King Charles the 


merits, whichin 
med, for thar the 
body it feecs 
es, which are 
from that 
ould not preient 


ertome, that 
might 


Of onfters and Proaigies. 1017 


— 


q sight take forth her bowells and embalme her, that fhe might bee kept amongft the 

Kings rarities. did what I could yet-aatlong after Mic rotted : the refembled a crow 
in body and feathers, but hada yellowi(h beake, cleere, fmooth, and toothed like a 
gw, and of fuch length and thickeneffe as we formerly mentioned. I keep it yet asa 
certaine mon ftrous thing. 

Thevet writes thatin the Iland Zocetera there is frequently founda certaine wild. 
healtcalled of the bigneffe of an Athiopian Monkey. Itisavery (ib... 
frous Creature, but in nothing more, than that it is thought to ive upon the aire on- 
ly ,theskinne, asif it were died in graine, is of a {carlet colour, yet is it in fome pla- 
ces (potted & variegated:it hath a round head like to a boule, with feet round, broad, 
andwanting hurtfullnailes. The Mooreskillicand ufe tocat the ficth of it, being 
g(t bruifed, that fo irmay bethe more tender. 

inthe Realme of Camota, of Ahob, of Benga, and other mountaines of Cangipa, estates us 
Plimatig, and Catagan, which-arein the inner beyond the river of Ganges, jig, 13) 
foe five degrees beyond the Tropicke of Cancer, isfound abeaft, which the we- 
fterne Germanes call Giraffe. This beaft in head, eares, and cloven feet, is not much 
yalike our Doe it hath a very flender necke, but itis fome f1xe foot long, and there 
are few bealtsthat exceed him inthe length of their legges : histaile is round, but 
reacheth no further than his hammes, his skin is exceeding beautifull, yet fomewhat 
ough, having haire thereon fomewhat longer thana Cow, it is {potted and variega- 
redin fome places with fpors of a middle colour, betweene white and chefnur, foas 
Leopards are : for which caufe by fome grecke Hiftorians itis called a Cameleopar- 
dalis : it is fo wilde before it bee taken, that with the good-will it will not fo much 
ssbe feen. Therefore it inhabites and lives only in defart and fecret places,unknown 
tothe reft of the beafts ofthatregion. He prefently flyes away at the fight of aman, 
yet is hetaken at length, for that he is not very {peedy in his running away, once ta- 
ken, eis as eafily and {peedily tamed as any wild beaft whatloever. He hath above 
bis crowne two ftraight horns covered with haires, and of a foots length, When as 
be holdsup his head and neckehee isas high asa Lance. feedsupon herbes, and 
the leaves and boughes of trees, yea and heisalfo delighted with bread, 


a 
2 
| 
4 
‘ 
4 
a 
* 
a 
a * 4 
q 
. 
> 
j 
4 = ~ ‘ge 
“ ‘ 
i 
od 


Tbe effigies of 4 Giraffa. 


~ 
7 
a 
\¥ 


WY 


i, 


4 

- - 


= 


7 
‘ 


f 


Such.as faile in the red fea alongft the coaft of Arabia, meet with an land called 
by the Arabians Cademota;inthat part thereof where the river P/ata runnes, is found 
a wild beatt, called by thebarbarous inhabitants Parafjowpi, being of the bignefle 0 
a Mule,headed notunlike one,yet rough and haired like to a Beare, but not of {0 dark 
2 colour, but inclining to yellow, withcloven feet like a Hart: thee hath two long 
hornes on her head, but not branched, fomewhat refembling thofe fo much mag 
fyed hornes of Unicornes. For the natives ofthe place, bittenby the venemous 
tooth of either beaft or fith, are prefently helped and recover by drinking the wat“ 
wherein luch hornes have beene infufed for fixe or feven dayes{pace, asZ/evei 
his Cofinography reports. 

In one of the Ilands of the Mo/wcea’s there is found a Beaft living both on land and 
water like asa Crocodile ; it iscalled Camphurch,it is ofthe bignefle of an Hart," 
hath one horne inthe forehead, moveable after the fathion of the nofe of a Tutky- 
cocke : itis fomethree foot and an halfe long, and never thicker than a mans ari 5 
his neck is covered over with haire of an ath colour,he hath two feet like to 4 goles 
feet, wherwith he {wims both in frefh and falt waters.His fore feet are like C0 4 g* 


accke fhort, his 


L1B.25- 
pelives upon fith 
corne, and thatch 
‘he Liand lovesto 
ynem{elves the 
opfervable in 
Mauritania inc 
bring fort! 
nelargenctic of 
more fpeedily a 
many things aboy 
Buflics, with 


cing, down 
of an hand, his m 
theupper part wi; 
gad {trong, not 
they kneele to ac 
felves) his feet ar 
into five clefts. | 
breadth long, wi 
that narure hath r 
they finde them: 

focate and kill rh: 
man running by ¢ 
dy. 
They feed up. 
rooted, which th 
handfulls high, v 
they went to fe: 

head-ftail or reir 
pleafe. Yet doe t 
feeme after fome 
ned by their kno 

irt taking him: 
they tread him ur 
that Elephants 
tery, neither rouc 
When they know 
With young;ther 
iNfecrer. The fe 
like Women, they 
their mouths, andl 
tous and {tupen 
and itis ufc 


7 
4e 
a” 
1183 
fs | 
Vg A, | 
4 
| 
J 
| 
| 
j | 
I, | 
| 
/ 
| 
| 
4 
y 
/; 
x" f, 
it 
Ry 
‘ \ 
| 
ii my 
S 
SS 
, ~ = 
q 
~ 
| | ~ 
iJ - - | 
ag 
tah 
if 
| 
qa 
rt! 
Nee 


han Ilandcalled 
runnes, is foun 

of the bignefle of 
but not of fo dark 
ehath two long 
fo much magol- 
the venemous 
rinking the watet 
ace, as Hever ia 


both on land and 
{le of an Hart, it 
nofe of a Turky- 
an a mans armc 5 
tliketoa 
are uae toa “ 


Of <M onfters and Prodtgies. 


WF ives upon fih. Many have perfwaded themfelves that this beaft is akind of Uni- 
BF ogcne, and thar therefore his horne thould bee good againft poyfons. The King of 


1019 


ye Iland loves to be called by the name of this beaft;and (0 al{o other Kings take to 


nem {elves the names of the wilde beatts, fifhes, or fruits, that are moft pretious and 
ofervable in their dominions, as Tevet reports. | 


yauritaniaand Athropia, and that part of Africke that is beyond the defarts and 


xcs, bring forth Elephants ; but thofe of Jwdia are farre larger. Now although in | 
of their body they exceed all foure footed beafts, yet may they bee TheInditn 
{peedily anc cafily tamed than other beafts. For they may be taught to doe 
® oiny things above the common nature of beafts. Their skin is fomewhat like toa aga 
® jufes, with litcle hatre upon it, but chat which is, is ath coloured, his head large,his 
 ..cke hort, his eares two handfulls broad, his nofe or trunke very long, and han- 

‘ing down almoft to the ground, hollow like as a trumpet,the which heufethin ftead 
@ o(anhand, his mouthis not farre from his breaft, not much unlikea {wines, from 
part whereof two large teeth thruft forth themalelves, his leggesare thicke 
not confifting of one boneas many formerly have falfly believed (for 
kneeleto admit their Rider, or to bee laden, and then rife up againe of them- 
“Bi (ives) his feet are round likea quoit fome two or three hands breadth, and divided 
BH inofveciefts. Hehathatailelikea Buffle, but not very rough, fome three hands 
BW bcadth long, wherefore they would be much troubled with flyes and wafpes, but pow they kes 
urnarure hath recompenced the fhortnefs of their tailes by another way; for when fysfromthsw 
ivy finde themielves molefted, they contra& their skin fo ftrongly, that they fuf- 
BH icare and kill thefe little creatures taken in the wrinkles thereof , they overtake a 
“@ mansunning by going onely, for his legges are proportionable to the reft of his bo- 
| 


They feed upon the leaves and fruits of trees, neither is any tree fo {trong or well 


@ pored, which they cannot throw downe and breake. They grow to bec fixteene 
~@ hadfulls high, wherefore fuchas tide upon an Elephant are as muchtroubled as if 
went to fea. They are of fo unbridleda nature, that they cannot endure any 
B head-ftall or reines, therefore you muft fufter them to take the courfe and way they 
“B pkale. Yet doe they obey their country men without any great trouble ; for they 
after fome fort to underftand their fpeech, wherefore they are eafily gover- 
~@ ted by their knowne voices and words. They throw down a man that angers them, 
fit taking him up with their Trunke and lifting him aloft,and then letting him fall, 
@ they tread him under foot, and leave him not before he bee dead. Ariftor/e writes | 
@ thar Elephants generate not before they be twenty yeeresold : they know not adul- 
neither couch they any female but one,from which they alfo diligently abftain not knows 
they know fhe hath once conceived. It cannot be knowne how long they goe 
with young;the reafon is for that their copulation is not feen,forthey never do it but 
infecret, The females bring forth reftingupon their hindelegges, and with paine 


lke women, they licke their young, and thefe ptefently fee and goe, and fucke with 
eir mouths, and. not with their Truokes. You may fee Elephants teeth of amon- 
tous and ftupendious bignefle, atVewice, Rome, N aples, and Paris ; they terme it 
vorv, and itis ufed for Cabinets, Harps, Combcs, and other {uch like ufes, 


lephantsare 
gger than the 


Libig: dé 


icphant goes 
with youngs 


a 
‘ 
— © 
4 
| a 
a 
| 4 
_ 
me 
| 
a 
* 
4 


We haverea 


ronguc Beaug 
Canell, their bh. 

more fierce or v 
Salvages ufe the 
poyfon. 

The fame au 
inthe han ds of « 
was not unlike ; 
fore tect were 
railc, he was of; 
bled aman, but 
were Like a Tic 


\ if \\\\ 


\\\\1 


5 


| \\ 
\ SS 
SN 
at Py 

\ 


A, 


a 


This followi: 
that have feene 
Nefle ofa Monk 

face of achild : | 
Perplext . it is of 
long, and fh 
frequently than 
ects. It is {trang 
‘eeneto feed up 


Oufes to make 


4 
| 


\\ 


VERN 


WO 


NS 
SRR 


> 
| ers and ‘Prodigy 
T OT AALS ep Ant. 
| | 
= 2 | 
4 
‘ at! ~ 
Ss Wh S r = “a | 
SAN \\\\ : S = 
wil } 
‘ (hi 
/ 
| 
ne 
a 
. te: 
a 
By 


24. Of ~M onfters and Prodigies. 


We have read in 7 hevet that in Florida thereare great Bulls, called in that coun- 
rongue Beawtro/, they have hornes ofa foot long, a bunch on their backe like a 
Camel, their haire long and yellow, the taile of a Lion ; there is fcarce any creature 
nore fierce or wild, for itcan never be tamed unleffe it be taken from the dam. The 
salvages ufe their Hides againft thecold, andtheir hornes asan Antidote againft Their bores 


good agoinkt 


yfon. oylons. 
The fame author affirmes that whileft he fayled in the red fea, hee faw a monfter Ton. talib 


athe hands of certaine Indian merchants, which in bigneffe and fhape of his limbs “”"*” 
was not unlike a Tiger, yet had the face ofa man, but a very flat nofe: befides, his 

fore feet Were like a mans hands, but the hinde like the feet ofa Tiger, hee had no 

nile, he was ofa dun colour: to conclude, in head, cares, necke, and face it refem- 

bled aman, butin the blackifhand curled haire,a More; forthe other parts they 

werc like a Tiger; they called it Thanacth. 


The fizure of abeaft called T hana@h. 


Tom. 2, lib. 7%. 
Cap 


; 
ce. 
4 


This following monfter is fo ‘ftrange that it will {carce bee believed, but by thofe 
that have feene it: it is bred in America, and by the Salvages called Hist, of the big- 
ile ofa Monkey, with agreat belly, almoft touching the ground, and the head and 
lace of achild : being taken, it mournes and fighes liketo a man chat is troubled and 
erplext . it is of anafhe colour, hath the feet divided into three clawes, foure fin- 
ts long, and fharper than thofe ofa Lion: it climbes trees, ard lives there more 
tequently than upon the ground, the taile is no longer than the breadth of three fin. 
ets. It is ftrange and almoft monftrous that the{e kinde of creatures have never bin 
eeneto feed upon or cat any thing: for the falvages have kept them long intheir 
loufes to make triall thereof, wherefore they thinke them to live by the aire. 


L 1B, 2 
— 4 
4 
' 
LVF 
4 — 
HL 
| 
4 
4 
& A q 
— — "4 
4 
@ 
\ 


Blood as goed 
AS ballome, 


Plin. Lb. 8. 


Of Monfters and Prodigies, Lins 


The figure of 4 beaft called Haiit. it 


[have taken this following monfter out of Leo’s African hiftory ; it is very de. 
ormed, being round after the manner of a Tortoile, two yellow lines croffing each 
Fother at right angles, divide his backe, at every end of which he hath one eye, ang 
alfo one care, fo that fucha creature may fee on every fide with his foure eyes, as 
alfo heare by his fo many eares : yet hath hee but one mouth, and one belly to con. 
taine his meat ; buthis round body is encompaffed with many feet, by whofe helpe 
he can go any way he pleafe without turning of his body, his taile is fornething long 
and very hairy attheend, The inhabitants affirme that his blood is more cfeQuill 
in healing of wounds than any balfome. 


2 


N \ 


Itis ftrange thatthe Rhinoceres fhould be a born enemy tothe Elephant; 


he whets his horne, which growes upon his no(e, upon the rockes, and fo pr epares 
himfelfe for fight,wherein he chiefly aflailes the belly asthat which he knowes to be 
the fofteft : he is as long as an Elephant, but his legs are much fhorter, he is of the 
lour of box,yet fomew hat {ported Pompey was the firft that fhewed oneat oh 


q 
| 
- \ 
| 
= 
| 
> 
— 
| 


~ 
we 
/, 
4, 
/ 
4,3 +. » 


Y it is very de- | 
nes crofling ach SN 
athoneecye,and 
us foure eyes, as i ag 
oncbellytecon- 
»bywhofehelpe | 


hij), 


an 


SA 


¥ 
¢ phant; wherfore 
and fo prepares 
he knowes to be 
ey, he is of rhe 
Bi one at Rrrr2 Africa 


The ef fizies of 
/ 
& 
a@ 
J 
== 
| \ 
| (() A 
< 
— 
| 
> 


Of M onfiers and Prodigies. 


Africa produceth the Cha- 
meleon, yet is itmore fre- 
quentin heisin fhape 
and greatnefie like a Lizard, 
but that his legs are ftraighr, 
and higher, his fades are joy- 


Arif. lib.a-bif. ned to the belly as in fith, & 


CAD. iz 


The fan 


thature che 
colour of the 


Chameleon. 


his backe ftands up after the 
{fame manner, his nofe ftands 
out not much unlike a {wines, 
his taile is long, and endeth 
fharpe, andhee foulds it up 
in around, likea ferpent, his 
nailes are crooked, his pace 
flow likeasthe Tortoife, his 
body rough, hee never (huts 
his eyes, neither doth hee 
looke about by the moving 
of the apple, but by the rur- 
ning of the wholecye. The 
nature of his colour is very 
wonderfull, for he changeth 
itnow and then in his cyes 
and taile, and whole body 
befides and hee alwaics affi- 
mulates that which heis next 
to, unlefie it be red or white, 
His skin is very thinne, and 
his body cleare; therefore 
the one of thefe two, either 
the colour of the neighbou- 
ting things in fo fubtle- 
ty of his cleare skinne, cafily 
fhines.as ina glaffe ; orelfe 
various humors diverfly ftir- 
red upin him, according to 
the varicty of his affections, 
reprefent divers colours in 
his skinne, asa Turky-cocke 
dothin thofe fiefhy excref- 
cences under his throat, and 
upon his head : hee is pale 
when heis dead, «Mathiolus 
writes that the right eycta- 
ken from aliving Chameleon 
takes away the white {pots 
which are upon the horny 
coat of the eye; his body be- 
ing beaten, and mixed with 
Goats milke, and rubbed u- 
pon any part, fercheth off 
haires ; his gall difcuffechthe 
Cataracts of the eye. 


Lis.25 


The fizereof a Chamelcon. 


~ 


i2 


3S. 
« * 


\ >A 
4 
~ 
— 


‘ 


Tt 


+) 


darts fhiclds,tr@ 
Sunnes, ana chy 

Antiquity bh 
appeared with 
was {0 horrible 
into grievous d 
one hower 
oreat {word in 
over which the 
the onea 
kinds of weapo 
long and terri 


Alfo there ha 
heaven, which h 
© borders of H; 
September, ann 


~ 


a ¢ 
Bit 
102 
p.2 
* 
Pi; Lib. 8. 
~ 
1) aly 
/ 2 
4 
‘ ANS x _ at ~y 
- 
= 
| 
> 
| = = t | 4 
— 
(A 


le 


CHAPe 


= 
Li B.25 L1B.25. Of onfters and Prodtgies. 1025 


Cuar. XXIII. 
Of culeftiall Monfters. 


in-S> Eradventure it hath not bin ftrange that monfters have beene genera- 
tedupontheearthand inthe Sea: but for monfters to appeare it 
Za heaven, and in the upper region of the aire, exceeds all admiration. 
“> Yet have wee often read it written by che antients, chat the face of 
(PS heaven hath beene deformed, by bearded, tailed, and haired Co- 
) mets ; by meteors reprefenting burning Torches, and lamps, pillars, 


jartsfhiclds,troups of clouds, hoftilely affailing each other; Diagons,two Moones, 
sunnes, and the like monfters and prodigies. 


Antiquity hath not feeneany thing more prodigious than that Commet which aCiserailh 
neared with bloody haire in Zve/fi ber, 1528. forit 
appeared Wi haire in Zvefline, uponthe ninth day of Ofober, 1528. bloedy haire 
was (0 horrible and tearefulla {pe@tacle, that divers died with feare, and many fell 
into grievous difeafess going from the Eaft to the South, it endured no longer than 
one howerand aquarter: inthe toppe thereof was feenca bending arme holdinga 
{word in athreatning hand; at the end thereof appeared three ftarres, but that 
over Which the point of the {word directly hanged was more bright and cleare than 
the relt : on each fide of this Comet were feene many {peares, {words, and other 
tinds of weapons died with blood, which were intermixt with mens heads, haying 
long and terrible haire and beards, as you may {ee in the following figure. 


The figure of afearefwll Comet. 


Alfo there have beene feene great and thicke barres of Iron to have fallen frorii 
‘aven, which have prefently beene turned into {words and rapicts. ArSucelia io 
Ne borders of Hungaria, a {tone fell from heaven with a great noife, the feventh day 


TD September, anne Dom. 15 14.it weighed two hundred and fifty pound : the Citi- 


@ *s hanged it up with a great iron chaine put through it,in the midft of the Charch 
Rirr 3 of 


| | 
\ 
a ip 
P . 4 
A j 
» 
"Dr, 1 
Vad 
4 
f 
4 q 
| 
, 
" - j f 4 
YY \| GES 
SS — f= Vp * 
| 


onfters and Prodigies. Ly B.25 


Li’. 6a). $7: 


of their City, andufed to thew it,asa miracle, tg travellers ot better note thar 
that way. P/:ny reports that the clafhing of armour,and the found of a trumpet a 

heard from heaven often, before and afterthe Cimbrian ware, The 
alfo writes thatin the the third Conful-fhip of Mariss, the Amarines and 
{aw the heavenly armies comming from Eaftand Welt and fo 
thofe being vanquithed which came trom the Eaft. Which fame thing was feene 2? 
Lufalia, acatowne called Judea, two houres after mid-night, Dom In 
But in Dom, 1550. upon the nineteenth day of July, in Saxony, not tarre 
Wittenberg, there appeared inthe aire a great ftagge, incompafled with two 
hofts, making a great noifein their conflict, and at the fame inftanc it rained blood 
in great abundance, the fun feemed to be cloven into two pieces and the one of * ea 


prefagesof the to fallupon the carth. A little before the taking of Confiantinople fromthe Chrift; 


taking of Con- 


Rontinople- 


ans, there appeared a great army in the aire appointed to fight, attended op With 2 
great company of dogs and other wild beafts. Julius Obfequins reports that in 


Manttrous rains Dom. 458. it rained fleth in /ta/y, in greater and leffer pieces, part of which wer, de 


Earthquakes. 


Eid. 2, bap. 73. 


voured by the birds before they fell upontheearth: that which fell wpone! 
kept long unputrefyed, and unchanged in colour and finell. Anno Dom, 989, 
the third being Emperour, itrained corne in Jtaly. Anno Dom. 180. it rained mili. 
and oyle in great abundance, and fruit-bearing trees brought forth corne. Lycofjy. 
nes tells thatin the time of Charles the fift, whilett Ataidenbere was befieged, three 
funnes firft appeared about fevenaclocke in the morning, and then were leene for 
a whole day, whereof the middlemoft was the brighteft,the two others were red. 
difh and of a bloody colour ; but inthe nighttime there appeared three moones. 
The fame appearedin Bavaria, anno Dom.155 4, 

But if fo prodigious and ftrange things happeninthe heavens befides the com. 
mon order ofnature, fhall wee thinke it incredible thatthe like may happen in the 
earth ? Anno Dom. 5 42.the whole earth quaked, mount twa caft forth flumesand 
{parkes of fire, withwhich many houles of the neighbouring villages were burnr. 
Anno Dom. 1531. in Portygak there was an earthquake for eight dayes, and it qua- 
ked feven or cight times each day ; fothat in Lisbone alone it caft downeathouland 
and fifty houfes,and morethan fixe hundred werefpoiled. Ferrara lately was al. 
moft wholly demolifht by a fearefull earthquake, A’bove all which ever have been 
heard is that prodigie which happened in the time of Plray, atthe death of Nerorhe 
Emperour inthe Marucine field, the whole Olive-field of Vectiws At arcellusaRo- 
mane Knight going over the high way, andthe fields which were againtt it com. 
ming intothe placethereof. Why fhould I mention the miracles of waters, trom 
whofe depth andftreames, fires and great fames have oft broke forth They tell 
out of St. Luguffine, that the fire of the facrifice, which for thofe feventy yeeres o! 
the Babylonian captivity endured underthe water, was extin euifhed, Antiochus {el- 
ling the prieft-hood to Jafoz. What miracle is this, thatthe fire fhould live in the 
water, above its force and naturall efficacy, and that the water fhould forgetthees- 
tinguifhing faculty! Verily Philofophers truely affirme that the elements, which ac 
underftood to bee contrary, and to fight in variety among themfelves, are mutually 
joyned and tyed together by amarvellous confederacy. 


le earth 


The End the Twenty fift Booke. 


earth, and 
notbing 17 
the horride 
them fitting 
twas tha 
dicines, ha 
Itc. 
bealing. 
only for theq 


‘ 
é 
4 
| 
YA 
te. 
r 
_ 
a“, 
( 
ore 
a\ 
| 
vk. | 
tt 
tu 
4 
oi. 
Ae 
Sear 
4 
~ 


‘tter Note that pag 
of a Trumpet were 
Phe fame author 
7€5 udortinge. 
mand {fo joyning 
| thing Was feene 
anno Dom, 
Bony, not farre from 
d with (Wo armed 
int it rained blood 
nd the one of them 
from the Chrift;. 
mattended on with 4 
eports that in 
of which were de. 
tell upon the earth 
10 Dom. 989. Othe 
SO. it rained milke 
th corne. Ly ofthe. 
vas befieged, three 
ben were leenc for 
» others were red- 
red three moones. 


befides the com- 
happen in che 
(t forth flames and 
llages were burnt. 
dayes, and it qua- 
downe athouland 
vara lately was al- 
chever have been 

death of Nerothe 

1s (Marcellus aRo- 
were againit it com- 
‘s of waters, trom 
eforth They tell 
feventy yeeres 
hed, Antiochus {cl- 
fhould live in the 
forget the 
lements, which are 
are mutually 


Lips 


FACULTIES 


SIMPLE MEDICINES, 


42a 90 


THEIR COMPOSL 


tion and Life. 


Tue Twenry SixtH Book, 


Tut PREFACE, 


Ye Mong/t the caufes which we terme healthfull, and 
NAYS other remedies which pertain to the health of man, 
; and the expelling of ‘Difeafes, Medicines eafly 
challenge the prime place ; which (as it is delive- 


ved bySolomon) God hath produced out of the 
earth, and they are not to be abborred by a wife man - for there is 


the horride torments of difeafes. Therefore Herophilus called 
them fittingly adminiftred, Tbe hands of the Gods, eAnd hence 
it was that fuch Phyfitians as excelled in the knowledge of Mee 


dicines, have amongst the Antients acquired an opimon of Di. 


cannot words bee what power they have 
bealing. Wherefore the knowledge of them 1s very necefJary not 
only for the prevention, but for the driving away 


CHAP, 


The excellen- 


cy of 
cines. 


4 
q 6 
L1B.20. 1027 
OF THE 
4 - 4 


é 


1028 Of imple Medicines, and their 
What 4 Medicine 6, and how it differeth from nourifhment. 


WEGBEE definea medicineto bee, That which hath power to change the bo. 


We LY dy according to one or more qualities; and that fuchas Cafinot be 
ile = @» Which may be converted into the fubftance of our bodies. But we define 
he ~~ them by the word power,becaufe they have not an abfolute nature but 
be as by relation and depending upon the condition of the bodies by whom they os 
y taken. For that which is medicine to one, is meat to another, and that which js tye. 
tethis, is medicinetothat. Thus for example, Hellebore is nourifhment toy}, 
j Quaile, but amedicine to man : Hemlocke is nourifhment to a Sterling, bu poifon 
toa Goole: the Ferulais food to an Affe, but poifon to other catrell. Now ehis gi, 
verfity istobe attributed to the different natures of creatures. | 
It isr¢corded in hiftory,that the fame by long ufe may happenin men. Theyre. 
port that a maide was prefented to Alexander the great, who, nourifhed with Nape/. 
éas, aod other poifons, had by long ufe made them familiar to her, fothatthe very 
breath fle breathed was deadly tothe by-ftanders. Therefore it ought to feeme no 
marvailc, if itat any time happen, that medicines turne into the nature and nouri(h. 
ment of our bodies : for we commonly may {ee birds and {wine feed upon ferpenrs 
and toads without any harmce : and laftly, 


—Serpentt Ciconia pullos 
Nutrit, cy per deviarura lacerta: | 
eadem fumptis quarunt Animalia penne. 


The Storke with Serpents and with Lizards caught, 
In waylefle places nourifheth her brood : 

Andthey the fame purfue, when as they’re taught 

Toufe their wing, to gettheir wifh’t for food. 


— 


Crap. I, 
T he differences of Medicines in their matter and [abftance. 


Ix Ven as the concealed glory of worldly riches lyeth hid inthe bowels 


The earth rhe 
chests VA Rye Y of the earth, and depths of the fea and waters, as gold, filver, andall 
meds AAS TU forts of metals,gemmesand pretious ftones, furniflit with admirable 


ment, as a patrimony, fo ample and plentifull provifion of nature for our delight in 
nourifhment, and neceflity of healing. Therefore the antient Phifitians have! ight- 
ly delivered, that all forts of medicines may bee abundantly had from living ¢'** 
tures, plants, the earth, water and aire. ' 
wharmedicines. Medicines are taken from living creatures either whole and entire, of elfe 
partsandexcrements of them. Wee oft times ufe in Phificke whole 
ing foxes, whelps, hedge-hogs, frogs, {nailes, wormes, crabbes, and other living 


tures. Weealfo makeule of fome parts of them, as the liver of a wolfe oF — 


changed into our nature : contrary whereto we terme thar Hourifhmeny 


~ 
* 


Lip. 26. 


lungs of the fo: 
marrosy, the c 
fych other part® 
medicines take: 
fom urine, duq 
Linde, under 
others of this n 
Wee take m 
erees, {hrubs, 
lantaine, and 
pith, wood, b 
fines, mofles, a 
Things take 
frones, Or min 
earth, chalke, ol 
filver, braffe, n 
rg, and others. 
antimony, cet 
pholix, verdlgr | 
dry kinds, bot! 
The tollow 
water, andail: 
water Mints, a! 
falr, Alcyonin: 
creatures of th 
erowes In plen 
found in the d 
From the aig 
and alfo all oth 
they receive f: 
fome ftay,as 2 


a a 


the Medicine. 


vertues; fo we may behold the fuperficiesof thisearthclothea witht: 
moft an infinite variety of trees, fhrubs, and hearbs: where wee Mf 
contemplate and wonder atthe innumerable diverfities of roots, leaves, 
fruits, gummes, their {mells, pleafant and colours, but much more herve 

tues. This{ame motherEarth, as with herbreafts, nourifheth marvellous 
kindes of living creatures, various in their {pringing, encreafe and ftrength. WV 
in the immenfe goodnefle of God, the great Archite& and framer of allthings,co" 

moit clearely apr 2 nan. aswho_ hiected toour gover 

; 


to change the ho. 

fuch as cannot bee 
ethar Hourifhmenr 
dies. But we define 
bfolute Nature, bur 
by whom they are 
that which is Meat 
ourifhment to the 
erling, but poifon 
cell. Now this di. 


inmen. They re. 
rifhed with Napel. 
er, fothatthe very 
oughtto feeme ng 
ature and nourifh- 
feed upon ferpents 


ht, “4 


rid inthe bowels 
ld, filver, andall 
t with admirable 
yclothed with al- 
where wee 

leaves, flowers, 
nore at their 
arvellous diftine 
ftrength. Where 
of all things,doth 
toour goveri- 
for our delight ia 
itians have right 
from living crea- 


entire, or the 
ole creatures, 45 
other living 


rolfe or goat, 
Q lungs 


Lins 


Lin. 26. Of fimple Medicines, and their 

iyngs of the foxe, the bone of the ftagges heart,Craninm humanum, fat, blood, fleth A 
marro'v, the cods of the Caffor or Beaver, which is therefore termed Ca/foreum, and 
iych other particles that are ufefull in Phyficke. We know alfo that there are {ome 
medicines taken from excrements, as hornes, nailes, haires; feathers, skin; asalfo 
omurine, dung, Ipittle, hony, egees, waxe, milke, wooll,f{weat, and others of this 
Linde, under which wee may com prehend muske, civet, pearle, efipus, and fundry 
others of this nature. 

Wee take medicines from plants, both whole, and alfo from their parts, whether ¢ 
wees, farubs, or herbes. For we ofttimes ufe fuccory, marfh-mal lowes, mallowes, 

iantaine, andthe like, whole: but otherwhiles onely ‘the roots of plants, their 
pith, wood, barke, fhoots, ftalkes, leaves, howers, feeds, fruits, juices, cummes, ro- 
fnes, mofles, and the like. 

Things taken from the earth for thé ufe and matter of medicine, are either earths, wysttcom cit 
fones, or mineralls. The forts of earth are Bole armenicke, Terra figillata, fullers cath = 
earth, chalke, potters clay, and fuch like. Stonesare the pumice, Marchifite of gold, 
fiver, braffe, marble, the load. ftone, plaifter, chalke, vivum, lapis fpecula- 
rg,and others, Metals and mineralls are gold, filver, tinne, lead, braffe, iron, fteele, 
antimony, cerufle, brfm{tone, cinnaber, licharge of gold and filver, tutty, true Pom. 
pholix, verdigreece, alume, romanevitrioll, coprofe white and greene, {alts of fun- 


I dry kinds, both the Arfenickes, and fuch like. 


The tollowing medicines are from frefhwater, raine water, {pring water, river wha: fomth 
water, and all things thence arifing, as water lentile, common flagges, water lillies, watt: | 
water mints, and all thecreaturesthat livetherein. From the falt wateraretaken 
lalr, -Alcyoninm, all forts of corall, fhels of fith, as alfo cuttle bones, fponges, and all 
creatures of the tea. From waters mixt of fale and frefh, the herbe Aadroface (which 
erowes in pleaty in the marthes at Fontignan and Cape de Sete) A/pbaltum, which is 
found in the dead fea. 

From the aire proceeds Manna,therefore called mael atrium hony of the aire, what font thé 
snd alfo all other kindes of dew that are ufefull in Phyficke by reafon of thevertues ti 
they receive from the funne which raifeth them up, from the aire, whereas they make 
ome {tay,as allo from the plants,whereupon they fall and refide. 


C uap.Ill. 
The differences of fimples in their qualities and effects. 


SLL the mentioned forts of fimples are endued with one or more of the 


ed, foure faculties, whereof I now purpofe totreat. 


| 
. Ae The firft faculty common to all the reft, and as it were their founda- 
Ction, fowes fromthe foure firft qualities of the prime bodies or cle- 
ments;that is, heat, coldneffe, dryneffe,and moifture, and this eithei 
‘impleorcom pound, as one or two of thefe prime qualities exceed in the temper of 
themedicine, asit may appéare by the following tables. 


7 Heat, 
The fimple quality } Coole, 
is cicherto Humect, 
| Dry. 


‘The compound,arifing from )Heats and moiftens, 
two joyned qualities, either )Coolesanddrics, 
\Cooles & moiltens. 


A 
| 


{ Heats, 
Arrenuates, 
Rarifyes, 
moderate, < Opens the paffages, 
| | Digefts, 


Suppuratcs. 
Heat, which is 


Violent attraction, 

Rubrification, 
J}Confumption, 
Colliquation, 
Ancfchar, 
Mortification. 


-Inflames and 


burnes, 


followes 


Cooleth, 
Obftru&eth. 


Congeales, 
inmoderared Supetyes, 
Mortifyes. 


Cold, whichis 


Humeds, 
Lubricates, 


moderate, SLevigates and mitigates, 
Moifture, which is Glues. 


Obftruéts, 


immoderate, up into a fatulent tumour, efpecial- 


ly if it be a vaporous humidity. 


: Dryes, 
moderate, 
Attenuates. 
Binds, 
Contracts or thrinks, 
Caufethchops and {cailes. 


Drynefie, which is | immoderate 3 


5. bmp. de 


whichis cold in thelike degree : Wherefore all fimple medicines are, 


Hot, ft | 
Cold, 
Moitt,5% Mil, the degree. 
Dry, fourth, 
‘Heat, firft, Obfcure, 
Coldneffe, fecond, . yManifeft, 
The )Moifture, Cof thedrhird, degree, Vehemenr, 
Drynefle 4 fourth. Exceflive. 


Exanple'of  Anexample of heat diftinguithed thus by degrees,may bee thus, Warme W! 


hsau 


L 
“ome to the th 


cheir degrees. 


The effe& of thefe qualities is diftinguifhed, and as Galez obferves, digeftediato’ 
eliment. thefe orders, which wee terme Degrees ; fo that by acertaine proportion and mes 
{ure, they may ferveto oppugne difeafes, asthe fame Galen afirmes. For toa difeaie 
(for example) hot in the fecond degree, no other medicine muft bee ufed than this 


(er is 
che degreesof temperate ; that whichisa little hotter, is in the firft degree of heat; if manif 


hot, it is in the iscond degree ; bur if it heat more vehemently, it may be thougiit!? 


ree of heate. 


medicines 
eafily give con 


Firft 


Abfinthium. 
Althea. 
Amygdala 
Bita. 
Brafvie ae 
Chamaemelum. 
Ladanum. 
Semen Lint, 
Saccharum. 
Ervum, (ive 0} 
Vinum & 
the fecond 
more Or lefii 


Third 


Abrotanum. 
Agnus caltus. 
Anifum, y 
Ariftolochia, 
C hamadrys 
Sabina, 
Calamintha. 
Cinamomum. 
Juniperss. 
Hy (fopus. 
Origanum. 
Sagapenum. 
Chelidonium 
Ruta (alive. 


Firft deg 


Atriplex, 
Hordeum, 


Cydonia mala. 


Third deg 


ence G 
| 
4 
Be 
‘ 
& | a 
ow. 
~ 


Of imple «Medicines, and their Ufe. 


-ome to the third; but if it fcald,then we know thatit hath artived to the fourth de 
recofheate. Such alfois the diftinQiom of coldneffe, moifture, and drineffe, by 


their degrees. Wherefore it will be worth our labour, to give you examples of cer 
medicines, diftinguifhed in thei order and degree, by which you nay the more 


give conjeCure of the reft. 


Firft degree. 


Abfinthium. 

Althea. 

Amygdala dulcia. 
Bita. 

afta, 

Ch meme 

Semen Lim, 
Saccharum. 

Ervum, five Orobws. 


more Or leffe yeares old. 
Third degree. 
our, e{pecial- Abrotanums. 
nidity. Acnus caftus. 
Anifum, Afarun. 
Ariftolochia, 
Chamadrys 
Sabina, 
Calamintha. 
Cinamomum. Irs, 
junipers. 
Hy (fopms. 
Origanum. 
ves, digefted into Sagapenut, 
s.For toa dileaie Ruta (alive. 
Becufed than that 
are, 
Firft degree. 
Atriplex, 
Hordeum, 
Cydonia mala. 
Malvag. 
Pyra. 
Pr 
Rofa, 
i6l4, 
Warme water is Third degree. 


Vinum novum : For oldis judged hat in 
che fecond or third degree, as it is 


Simple Medicines hot in the 


Second degree, 
Ammoniacum, Apium. 
Arthemifia. pytis. 
Anethum. Crocus, 
Panugreacnm. Ficus. 
Maftiche. Thus, 
Salvia Myrrha. 
Marrubium, Mel, 
Melifja. mofchata. 


Pix utraque tum arida corporibus particé- 
lifque folidioribus aptior, tum liquide de- 
licatioribus. | 

Scilla. Sal. 

Sarcocoha, Opopanax. 

Bryenia. Amini. 


Simples hot in the 


Fourth degree: 


Alium, 
Capa. 
Esphorbium. 
dV aft 
P y7er br 
Stuapi. 
Anacarat. 
Chelidonium minus, Galen, Yet aurs, by 
reafon of the gentlenefs of the ayre, 8 
moifture of our foile,is not {0 acride, 
Ruta fylveftris, This, as all wilde and not 
cultivated things,becomies more {trong 
and acride than the Garden Rue, 


Simples coldin the 


Second degtee. 


Acacia. Cucurbita. 

Cucumis. 

Malazransta acids, dulcia temptyrate 
font ports. 

Plantago. 

Polycannm. | 

Solanum hortenfe,nam id quod fomniferwes 
dicitur,vi refrigerandi ad papaver 


Fourth degree. 


Cicuta. 
Papaveris cenera omnia, excepte 


1021 


-= 
| 
a 


Third degree. Fourth degree. Fiche. 
Portulaca. buic incidend: abflercend 
Sempervivam. vim attribuit Gal.Certe nitrolum fal 
Mandragora. fam gufin percipitur, quo fit wz calid, 
ficca fit natura. 
Opium. 
Simples moift inthe 
Firft degree. Second ee. 
Bugloffum., Ammoniacum. 
Viola. Latluca, 
Malva. Cucurbita, 
Rapum, 
pinacta. Melones Portulaca. 
Simples dry in the 
Firft degree. Second degree. 
Thus. Artemifi 4. Pix arida. 
Chamamelum. Orobus, Plantazo. 
Brafsica. Balauflia. Nux mofchats, 
Sarcocolla. Lens. 
Crocus, Maftiche. 
Faba. Mel. Sal, 
Fanugracam. Antthum. 
Hordeum intecrum. Myrrha. 
Third degree. Fourth degree. 
Abrotonum uftum, Piper. 
Abfinthium, Myrt Allium, 
Acetum. Naflurtium. 
<Uilium. Cuminum. Sinapt, 
Saugus draconis. Eupherbium. 
Galla. Sabina. 


The effe&s of 
the firft quali. 
ties by acci- 


- Thofe we have mentioned have of themfelves and their own nature al! fuch qu 
lities, yet doe they produce farre other effects by accident, and befides cheir owne 


Nature in our bodies, by reafon of which they are termed accidental! caules, Ths 


fhali be made manifeft by the following examples. 


Externall heat by accident refrigerates the body within, becaufe it opensthi¢ pal. 


fages and pores, and cals forth the internal] heate, together with the {pirits ané Y 
mours by {weats : whence it followes, that the digeftionis worfe, and the appet"* 
is diminifhed. The fame encompaffing heate alfo humeéts by accident, woileit! 
diffufesthe humours concrete with cold : for thus Venery is thought to humed. 
The like may be faid of Cold, for that it heates nor by its proper and native, but 
by an adventitious force : whereof you may make tryall in Winter, when 4“ 
ambient cold, by ay the pores of the body , hinders the breathing forth and 


diffipation of the native 


eat. Whence it is inwardly doubled, and the concotie 


better performed, and the appetite ftrenethened. This fame cold alfo dries by * 
cident, whenas it by accident repercuffcs the humour that was ready co fiow cow? 
into any part, and whilft it concretes that which is gathered in the part : tor thus vy 
the immoderate ufe of repercuffers,an oedematous tumour,proceeding from giols 
and viicide phlegme, degenerates into a ferrhus. 

Drinefic and moifture, becaufe they are more paffive qualities, fhew their effet 
by not fo manifeft operations, as heate and cold doe ; but in compariion of heim 


they are rather to be judgedas matter or a fubjec. 


Of 


Hence we 
on the cont 
vifcous marth 
pores of the 
quality of full 
minations fr 


perations of 
{wage painc, 
Performe 
Thusthee 
IS, Of drying 
Catrizine facy 
we & 
Courles, and: 


= 


x 
at 
| 
r 
OF 
| 
| 
C4 
|. 
Lomitics 
* 
mode ité 
| 
| 
With m 
| Cond 
implanred 
| Planted in 
a 
mar 
si 
| 
+ 


nai abflerzend, 
erte nitrofum 
fit ut calide 


idA. 


70. 
mo{chats. 


nature all fuch que: 
hefides their owne 
ntall cauics. This 


fe it opens the pal. 
che fpirits and hv- 
andthe apperits 
Bccident, whilefts 
Richt tohumee- 
yper and native,*" 
nter, when 4 at 
Breathing forth a0 
the concottic® 
id alfo dries by 
eady to flow 
e part: tor thus by 


eeding from 


fhew theit effects 
mpariion the 


Cuar: 


Carar. IV. 
Of the fecond faculties of Medicines, 


g Eeterme thofe the fecond faculties of Medicines, which have dependance 
upon the firft, which are formerly mentioned, as it is the part 


fRarefie, £Conden!, 
| Repercufle, 
en Shut up 
tetog 
OF Heate Attenuate, OF Coldto. [ncrailate, 
Levigate, Exafperate, 
LCleanfe. 
Soften, § Harden 
Of Moittureto Ot Drineffe to Seiffen, 


Hence weterme that an attractive medicine, which hath an artractive faculty, as 
on the contrary, that a repercuffive, that repels ,adetergent , that which cleanfes 
vifcous matter. We call that an Emplafticke medicine, which not only fhuts upthe 
pores of the body, but reduces the liquid bodies therein contained to a certaine ¢- 


quality of fubftance. Thus alfo emollients, relaxers, and the reft, havetheir deno- 
minations from their effects, as we fhall declare hereafter. 


C HAP. Vv. 
Of the third faculties of Medicines, 


4 


performe fuch like operations in or about the body. 
Thus the generation of flefh is produced by the concourfe of two faculties, that 


is,of drying and cleanfing. But drineffe and aftriGtion produce a glutinating and ci- 


catrizing faculty. A hot and attenuating faculty caufeth fweats , movesurine, the 
courfes, and the like inthe body ; but contrary faculties retarde and ftop the fame, 

Tomitigate painc, proceeds only fromthe firft faculty, to wit, fcom heate, or a 
moderately heating faculty ;to procure reft,from cold oncly , or coldactle joyned 
with fome moifture. But to procure vomit, procecds neither from the firft nor {e- 
cond faculty, but from a certaine occult and effentiall property, which is naturally 
implanted in Agaricke,and other naufcous and vomitery medicines, 


Cuap. VI. 
Of the fourth faculty of Medicines. 


°3 He fourth faculty of medicines is not of the fame condition with thofe +4. fourth f 
thac are formerly mentioned; for it depends not upon them,or any other 
(3B manifeft or elementary quality, buton an occult property of the wholev. anes 
fubftance, by meanes whereof, it workes rather ppon this than that part, occultprop 
‘on this rather than that humour. Wherefore Phyfitians cannor by any reafon“* 
inde out this faculty, but only by experience, as we have faid a little before of me- 


(ff dicinces 


OO 
= Lis. 26. 
nga OF He third faculty of medicines depends for the moft part upon the firft and 
mR Be fecond faculties, fometimes conjoyned,othcrwhiles feparate.Alfo fome- 
me. times it followes neither of thefe faculties , but a certaine property and 
m9 inexplicable quality, which is only knowne by experience. Now theo- 
m perations of this third faculty are to agglutinate, to fill with flefh,to cicatrize, to al. 
wage paine, to move or ftay the urine, milke, feed, the courfes, {weats, vomits,and 


Min, 


dicines procuring vomit. Heace it is, that names are given to thofe medicines 
thofe parts that they chiefly refpe@: For they are termed Cephalicks which relpeg 


the head, as Betony, Marjerome, Sage, Rofemary, Stachas : Pneumonicks, whi-1 
refpe&the Lungs, as Liquorice,f{weet Almonds, Orris,Elecampane. Cordial: 
ftrengthen the heart, as Saffron, Cinamon, Citrons ; but chiefly their tindes. By. 
glofic, Corall,Ivory.Stomaticall which re{pect the (tomacke,and the orifice there. 
of, as Nutmegs, Mint, Anife, Matticke, Pepper, Ginger. Hepaticks which 
the Liver,as Wormwood, Agrimony, Spikenard, Succory, Sanders, Splenit; 1, 
which have relation to the {pleene, as Time, Epithymum, Broome flowers, Cetrac, 
Capers, the barke of their rootes, the barke of Tamariske. Diurcticks, fich as.’ 
{pest the kidneyes and urenary paflagcs,as the rootes of Smallage, Afperagus pon, 
nell, Butchers brome,the foure greater cold feeds, Turpentine, Plantaine Saxifoos 
Arthniticks, or fach as ftrengthen the joynts, as Cowllips,Chamapyt ss, Elecampane 
Calaminte, Hermodaéiles,and the like. 
To this ranke may be referred purging medicines, which,furnifhed witha fpej. 


{ ficke property, fhew their efficacy on one humonr more than another humour, ay, 
f that impaé& more in one partthan in another. For thus Agricke chiefly draye- 
} phlegme from the head and joynts,Rubarbe drawes choller chiefly from the Liye, 
1 and hurtsthe kidneyes. But let us here forbeare the confideration of f uch thines, as 
i not appertaining to Surgery. But fome medicines of this kinde are furnifhed wih 


ie one fimple faculty, otherfome with more, andthofe contrary , wherect your tafe 
| may give you {ufficientnotice : for Rubarbe at the firft touch of the toncuc is found 
acride and hor; but when you coxae to chaw and throughly rotafte it, you thall fed 
ir to partake of an earthy aftriction. Therefore becaufe taftes give notice of the fy. 
culties of medicines, thercfore have thought good to treat of them bricfy 


VII. 
Of Tastes. 


Afte, as Galen delivers according to Ariffotle and Theop! rains, isa 
certaine concoction of moifture in drinefle, caufed by meanes o! 
heare, which we know or difcerne by the tongue well rempered, 
and fittingly furnifhed with {pittle and his nervis. Thereare nine 
differences of taftes ; for there are three judged hot, ro wit, the 
cride, bitter, and :three cold, the acide, auftere, and acer: 
three temperate, the {weer, the oily or fat,and the infipide. Now 
they are thought fo many, according to the different degrees of concoction tor 
appeares oreater in hot taftes, and as it were a certaine aflation, but lefic in cold, but 
indificrent, and as it were an elixation in things temperate : therefore Natut¢ 00- 
ferves this order inthe concoction of fapide bodies, that at the firft the acerbe 
fhould take place, then the auftcre, and laftly, the acide ; from thefe (as ic were) 
diments of concoction, arifes an infipide, then an oily, then a [weer pericctly Col 
7 cocted and temperate. This concoction exceeding the bounds of mediocity, 
there arifes a falt tafte, then a bitter, and then an acride with the highcit 
almofta fiery heate. Yet I would be thus underftood, that all things that are oy 


Ol 


Libs mpl. 


Vr 
fet e ¢ 
a 


Differences of 
taftes, 


acride by na 


ds, by a tut 


Lis. 
rudime 
very ma 
their per 
other fu 
them in 
Thea 

Ieffe hu 
drycs, it 
rates ;th 
Cyprefi 
Thea 
for thea 
increaledy 
elfe of mq 
ayery, or 
cerbe, hay 
Chefnuts 
cerbe ches 
auftere is 
tle humid 
on Of a w: 
humidity # 
[have 
meanes {a; 
poled deg: 
of heate 
Nowb 
things are, 
they aredy 
pallages - y 
powerfully 
moifture, 
18,1Na mo; 
nelians, M 
termedac: 
The acid 
it penetrate 
attenuates. 
of the deer 
iS {trong ev 
rhoides and 
the juice of 
ture of cold 


The fwee: 


Theinfip 
taltes, it Is 10 
Con (ti Dates. 
turc fapide, do not alwayes afcend tothe height of {weetnefle by the « | The oily 
cerbity, aufterity, and acidity,as though it were of abfolute necefliry char ait fies, lubricat 
that are fweete,they fhould firft bee acerbe, auftere, andacide. For there are 

taings round, eipecially in plants and their fruits, which when they fhail aris: 

cicir periection and maturity, are acide, bitter, or falr, but being more 

come to full perfection, they have acertaine {weetnefic, which afterwa! COily, fro 
ther digettion, or perfection and concoction, acquire a bitter, auftere, or and te 
For thus bittetneffe in Wormwood and Aloes, acrimony inPepper or 04S, tipens, 
+) a perfeciion of nature, a full ripenefle and perfe@ concoction,and not anexcc’ 64t,Honey, 

ii 
Ses 


Medicines from 
licks Which refpeg 

cimonicks, which 

anc. Cordials thar 

y rindes, 
tie orifice there. 
icks Which refpeg 
nics. Spleniticks, 
e lowers, Cetrach, 
cticks, fuchas re. 
Afperagus, 
Eiecampane, 


pifhed witha {pcci- 
humour, and 
icke chiefly drawes 
efiy from the Liver, 
pt: of fuch things, as 
are furnifhed with 
whereof your tafte 
thetonruc is found 
it, you (hall had 
ive Morice of the fa- 
hein bricfly. 


nc Theophrasins, is a 
ucd by meanes of 
guc well rempercd, 
vis. Lhereare fine 
dhot, to wit, the 
uliere, and accroe: 
ithe infipide. Now 
concoction ; fork 
tt leficin cold, 
erefore Nature 
acerbe talte 
weet pericctly Cor 
is of mediocitty> 
ighett exct fle, 0 
lings that are by 


py the degrees at 
chat all ching 
Kor there are m4) 


tV 
all arrive 
Ci y {h not 


L18.26- Of fimple «Medicines, and their Ue. 1035 
rudimentin Services and Cornelians;acidity or tartneffe is alfo fo in verjuice.Butin 

very many things it fo fals out, that the {weet or fatty tafte become fo,and acquire 

their perfection by concoGion, as in Grapes, Figges, Peares, Apples,and almoft all 

other fuch fruits, as wee ufually feedupon. Therefore I will now treat of each of 

them in order, firft beginning with the cold taftes. 

The acerbe tafteis cold and terreftriall and of a (ubftance abfolutel y groffe, being The acerbe 
leffe humide than the auftere, bute much Ieffe than the acide. It notably cooles and ane 
dryes, it condenfats, binds,repels,efpecially from the fu perficies,and it alfo exaf pe- 
rates ;this talte refides, and may be found in Pomegranate pils, Galls, Samach , and 
Cyprefle nuts. | 

The auftere is nigheft intemper and effects tothe acerbe,but fomewhat moifture: Theanttere. 
for the acerbe abfolutely confilts ina terreftriall & cold fubftance. Wherefore this, 
increafed by a degreeof concoction, acquires more {tore eyther of heate alone , or 
el{c of moifture alone, or elfe of both rogether : moifture, I fiy, and that is cither 
ayery, or cl{ewatry. Therefore if thefe fruits, which before their maturity are a- 
cerbe,have an acceffion of heate, then doe they become { weet, as you perceive by 
Chefnuts ; but if there-be an acceflion of moifture only, and thatmore grofle, of a- 
cerbe they become auftere: for both the taftes are in the like degree of cold,but the 
auftere is the moifture. Butifto the fame frigidity remaining in fruits,a certain fub- 
tle humidity accrew, then isthere caufed anacide tafte. But if they have an acceffi- 
on of a watrifh moiftureand heate, they willacquirea {weet tafte, or elfe oily, if the 
humidity accrewing with the heatebe ayery. 

I have judged it requifite to admonith you hereof, that you might know by what 
meanes fapide bodies mitigated become {weet of acerbe , as it were by thefe intet- 
pofed degrees of aufterity, acidity,and oylineffe,as they acquirea various acceffion 
of heate and moifture feparately, or conjunly, 

Now by all that wee have delivered, youmay gather, thatall acerbe and anftere 
things are cold and dry ; and as they are cold, they repell and hinder defluxions : as 
they aredry and terreftriall, they condenfate, incraflate,conftipate, and ftraiten the - 
pallages yea, and they alfo cicatrize: but acerbe things performe this farre moré 
powerfully, as thofe which are abfolutely terrene, cold, and dry, not partaking of 
moifture, or water. Now autftere things confift (as it were) ina middle matter, that 
is, ina more dilute terrene body, as it is apparent in Services,unripe Grapes, Cor- 
nelians, Medlars, Crabs, wilde Peares, andall forts of unripe fruits , whence it is 
termed acrude tafte. fas) I 

Theacidetafte is of a cold and watrith nature, but moft fabric, by benefit whereof The acide eafte: 
it penetrates, and divides almoft as powerfully as the acride. Itincides, or divides, 
attenuates, bites, cleanles, opens obftructions, repels and dryes. Forby the meanes 
of the deep piercing cold, it repelsall defluxions ; and by the drying faculty, which 
is {trong even in its watry confiftence, it ftayes and ftops all bleedings, the hemor- 
thoides and dyfenteries. The force thereof is chiefly manifeft in Vinegar,asalfo in 
the juice of Citrons, Sorrell, Cherries, Berberries, and the like. And this is thena- 
ture of cold taftes, now itis time we {peake of fuch as are temperate. aa 
Theinfipide is unproperly termed a tate, as that which is rather a privation of Th* inipide. 
taltes, it is in fome fort cold, and of a very watrith and groffe nature , ic infpiffates, 
conftipates, and ftupifies. This kinde oftafte is chiefly manifeft in water, and next 
in Gourds, Citruls,and many fuch like things. 
The oily tafte is hot, humide,and ayery ; therefore it hume@ts, relaxates, molli- tThesily. 
fies, lubricates. Of this kinde are oyle, butter, fat which is not raucide by age , nor 
acride by nature, as that of Lyons and Foxes. . 
The {weer tafte is made by amoderate and well concocting heate, confifting in a Thefirect. 
matter more tenvious and hot than the iofipide, but infomewhat more grofle than 
the oily, from which in the firtt qualities it doth not differ ; therefore it is of a hot, 
ayery, and temperate nature. T herefore every {weet thing detergeth, levigates,con- 
CO&s, ripens, relaxes, and aflwageth paine. Examples of this tafte may be had tn Su- 
gar, Honey, Manna, {weet Almonds,Milke, and other like. Nowlet us come to hot 


S({fa The 


| 
| , 
, 
| 
| 
1 ere, Of acidac [als 
Poer or Pellicory> 
r~ -e{fle Of 
ve)! 


The falrtafte is hot and aftringent, leffe earthy than the bitter , as that which 
fidesias it were inamiddle matter. For it proceeds from an earthy drinefle, which. 
formerly tortified & atcenuated by the force of heate ina watry humidity. Wher. 
torethat which is fale contracts the pores, cuts, cleanfes, digefts, or rather dryes y ' 
the humours by the drineffe thereof, without any manifeft fenfe of heate, Whence jr 

js, tharit vindicates from putrefaction. Under this kinde are contained all forts o¢ 

fale, as fale-Peter,niter, fal Ammoniacum, fal gemms,common falt,fea water,and 
other like. 

be The bitter tafte is hot, earthy, and drying for the matter thereof is proffe ang 

earthy, which the abounding heate hath torrified and dryed up. Wherefore bitte; 
>» things taken inwardly, purge and carry away {uperfluous humours : and outward ly 
applyed, they mundifieand deterge ulcers, they open the mouthes and paffages o¢ 
the veines oft-times by their abftergent faculty; whence it is that they move th. 

courfes and hemorrhoides. The principall things indued with this tafte are A. 

lacs; Gall, Wormwood, Gentian, the leffer Centaury, Coloquintida, Fumirory, 

Soor, and fuch like. 

Theacride tafte is hot, of a fubtle and fiery nature ; for itis kindled of a hor, fab. 
tle,and dry matter,neither can it confift in any other. Therfore that which is acride, 
heats, prickes or bites the mouth by the acrimony, it heates,and oft-times burnes. it 
penetrates, opens the paflages attenuates, attracts and drawes forth groffe humours, 
evacuates and fends forth urine, the courfes, and {weat : befides it oft-times is fep. 
ticke,bliftering,and efcharotick ; and laftly burning,and caufticke, The fepticke & 
putrefactive things are fublimate,Chamelea,the juice of Z bapfta. The veficatorics are 
Ditrander, Cantharides,Crow foot, Muftard, Pellitory of Spaine, Expherbinm, But 
the caulticke and efcharoticke are Lime, Oake afhes,and the like. 

But wee know medicines not onely by the tafte, but alto by our other fenfes, as 
touch, fight, hearing, fell. And as by the tafte,fo alfo by thefe we judge of and try 
the goodneffe of medicines, and diftinguith the true legitimate from the adulterate, 
The couch judges whatare hot and cold,moift and dry,rough and gentle,or{mooth, 
hardand foft, brittle or friable, glutinous and vifcide, dry or flippery. We approve 
of the goodnefle of medicines by their colour, brightnefle, or duskinefle, whereof 
the cye is judge ;for wee commend that Senna which is fomewhat greenith, but 
diflike thewhiriflr: as alfo we like well of fuch Caffia as is blacke both within and 

without; fhining and full,and not-dry and fhrunke up. Yet the judgement of the firt 
qualities, by the colour is deceitfull, or none at all; for fuch things as are white, of 
‘er. bie ott Of the colour of Snow, are not therefore cold : for fundry of them are hot,as Lime. 
Neither are redthings to betherefore judged hot ; for Rofes coole. A! fo medicines 
arechofen by the fmell ; for fach as havea good, frefh, and naturall fmell, are com- 
monly hot,andin their perfe@ vigour. On the contrary, things that {mell are 
for the moft part cold and evanide. By hearing we diftinguith things full trom fuch 
as aréempty: thus we choofe Caffia, which fhaken, makes no noyfe with the graids 
or feeds ratling in ir. Hitherto we have explained the firft, fecond,third, and fourth 
faculties of medicines in generall,& have fhewed how they may be found out : 10¥ 
fou ft we more particularly treat oftheir fecond and third faculties, becaufe by 
fon of thefe they chiefly comeinto ufein Surgery’: Yet let mee firft briefly fhew bY 
what meanesiand arts they may beprepared. 


Lip. 26, 


The bicter. 


The acride. 


238") 
tlio iT ' Ft. 
grit 
an 
* 
32) 
* 


To 
medicines, 
is nothing 
elfe,than by 
artto make 
them more 
commodi- 
ous for ufe 
and com- 
pofition, 
whereby 
they are cy- 
ther made 


‘ 
i 
| rp: 4 
% 
Bika 
ag. 
i 
> 
ae 
* 
4 4 4 
ae 
¥ 
w 
i 
4 
& he 
~ 


OF /mple edic ines, and their 


26, 


as that which 
drineflgyy hich ic Cuar. VITI. 


imiditys: $V here. Of the preparation of medicines. 
ratherd yes up | 
heate, whence ; | By bruifing, as Brafie, ) (The thing which is to be beaten. 
Cate, eit | | 
rained all orts of | when medi- _\ fron, The ftretigth or force wherewith it 
Watergand fuch cinesare broké } Lead, mutt be performed, 
| by ftriking and / Glatle, confides , The time or {pace. 
a q gente, rubbing or W ood, ; ring ’ The fituation. 
cof i at inding i 
S gre cand : grinding ina Marb!e, The things to be added. | 
bitter that The confiftence which the thing 
S:an outwardly either ike, beaten muftbe of. 
sand pafliges of | fearfi hereby } Wood. ) Wherein je ta! 
By carting, W ereby | Wood, Wherein is tobee nored, thatthe fame 
at they Move the : we feparate the pure | Parch- confiderdtion is to bee had in fear- 
this tafe are A- | More and finer fromthe { ment, fing, as in beating ; therefore fuch 
tida, Buiitory, | | ftrong. more impure and Horle things as areto bee finely pow dred, 
grofs,which isdone haire. mnuft bee fearfed in a finer fearfe: 
of aor, fub and fearfes, fuch as are more grofle, in a 
made o awnhe,) fer 
at which isacride, 

pft-timespnrnes,it i | Which is nothing elfe but a diffol- >\Either by heate onely 5 
| fle hy ‘ } | By diffol- ving Of afimple or compound ¢ for by heate gums and 

{ i More ving medicine,ofa thick or hard con-(6 hornesare mollified:or 
1S 7 lea- | molli- fiftence,either into a mean confi-{9 by liquor, as by vine- 
ibe & fant, | fying. {tence, ora little moreliquid or gar, water, wine, juice 
he veficaforics are | foft, which is performed of Lemmons,&c, 
Euphor But 3 2 By deficcation§ Is nothing elfe, but the confaming of the PBy the Sun, 
| OF hardening, luperfluous and hurtfull moifture , and or 
r other fen{es, as them more = which is performed, cither Fire. 
e judge akandtry commodi- &, ) By infufion,which is nothing elfe but the | Nutrition may bee reduced, 
9m the ad@ilterate. ous for ufe = tempering or macerating ofa medicine which is nothing clfe, butas 
entle.offmooth and ¢om- sn little beaten or cut, in fome liquor ap-} it were a certaine accretsion 
6 propriate and fit for-our purpofe,asin¢ of the medicine, by being 


pery. W Cag prove 
skinefie waereof 
what h, but 
e both within and 
gement firft 
os as are Write, Of 
are hor Lime. 


whereby fome, Milke, Vinegar, Water, Oyle, and the} moiftened , macerated, rub- 
they are ey- 


ther made 


pofition, whole. | 


All whj 


like, fo long as the nature of the medi-| bed, or ground with fome 
cine requires. To infufion moifture,efpecially w** heate, 


j 


By burning, that is, by confuming the humidity £ ) 

| whichis in them, And that, either that they may » as 
| be the better powdred, being otherwife too Fatty 
| glutinous, or that they may lay afide their grofs | 
| 


le. Alfo effence,and become of afubtler temper ; or that J 
ot they may put off, or partly lofe fome fiery qua- | 

all fmell, com- lity,as acrimony, Gal.lsb.4.cap 9 fimplicium, Or bultible_ matter 4 

hat wang that they may acquire a new colour, Now all |  alome , falt, 
os full 19@tn fuch | things are burnt, eyther j,_ Darley, &c. 

yie with che grains | By boyling or elixation, which is performed by a humide heate, as | Fires 

/ chird, afta fourth burning is by adry, & that either that wee may increafe the weake | 

be found Gut : NOW faculties of fuch medicines as are boyled, by boyling them with 

becaul€by rea- fuch as are {tronger ; or elfe to weaken fuch as are too ftrong, OTS 
t brichyl ew by OF miixe elfe wholly co difsipate fuch as are contrary :Or that one faculty; 

ws he ture. | may arife of fundry things of different faculties being boyled to- 

| b% gether,or for the longet Kee ing them, or bringing them to a cer- : 

| taine forme or confiftence’: all which are done, eyther by the | Sun. 


By wathing or {'14rd,asimet- I< To be finely beaten, that the water 

cleanfing, wher- | tals, ftones, = | May penetrate into all their fub- 

| by che impurity parts of living = ftance.Or tobe diflolved,& caft in- 

ofthe mediéine | creatures;con-| toavefiell filled withwater,and {o 

is wafted away2 denfed juices, > Stirred, & then faffered to fubfide; 

on | & other like : | fothar the far may {wim aloft: and 

"3 | fuch things are | Or foft,as Ro- ae this muft be done lo long that rhe 

| | eyther fines,Gums; | < water retaine nothing thereot 
Fats,Oyles. colour, fmell, or tafte, 


S{f{f 3 CHuar, 


* 

L LB 2 6: 
| 
4 


Zz 


~ 


1038 


Of jimple M edicines and their U/fe. Lin, 26. 


are 
underttood by 


the name of 
repcellers. 


The difterences 
of reperculsives 


IX. 


Of repelling, or repercufsive med.cines. 


Carth; 
’6 parts ; by whichname alfoaftringent medicines are underftood, be 


a 5 “@\ caufe they hinder the falling downe of the humours upon the part. Re. 
percuflives arefuch, either of their nature and of themfelves, elfe 
by accident,being not fuch of their own nature. T hefe which of them. 
felves are fuch,are of two kinds;for fome are watrifh & moift, without any altrigiy. 
faculty, which almoft wholly proceeds from anearthy eflence; wherefore thoes. 
culty of repelling which they poflefle, they have it wholly fromcoldneffe. Of). 
kinde are lettuce, purflaine, fow-thiftle, duckes-meat, kidney wort, cowcumber: 
melons, gourds, houfe-lecke, mandrake apples, night-fhade, henbane, and the |i. 
which coole powerfully,and unleffe they be taken away before the part waxe black. 
ith, they extinguith the naturall heat.Other fome are of an earthy cilence, and there. 
fore aftriGtive; burt yet fome of thefe are hot, other forme cold. Such thingsas are 
cold of temper, and of an carthy confiftence, are properly and truly termed repe}. 
lers. Ofthefe, fomeare fimple, other fome compound : the fimples are plantaine, 
vine leaves, leaves of rof{es, oakes, brambles, cyprefle, berberies, famach, al! unripe 
fruits, verjuice, vinegar, red wine, the juice of {ower pomegranats, acacia, the juice 
of barberrics, and quinces, hypoci/fs, pomegranate pills, oake barke, the flowers of 
wilde pomegranates, the meale ot barly, beanes, panic ke, oats, millet, orobus mixed 
with juices in forme ofa pultis, bole armenick, fanguss draconis,cerulle, litharge serrs 


Epelling or repercuffive medicines are cold, and of groffe and 


ve 
» 


figilata, fallers carth, chalke,marle, the load-ftone,lead, corails, all marchifites,an- 


Why things of 
fubtle parts are 
oft cimes mixed 
with repercul- 
fives. 


Repellers by 
accident. 


When, and to 
whatparts re. 
cufSives 


mutt be appli- 
Pp 


timony, /podium, truce pomphilix, allforts of earth, and other things of the like na. 
ture. 

Now compound things are oleum rofaceum, omphacinum, mirtillornm, 
cidoniorum, nenupharis, unguentumrofatum, album rhafis, camphor di. 
acalcitheos, diflolvedin vinegar and oile of rofes, deficeatsvum rubrum, popuieon, em. 
plaftrum nigrum (eutetrapharmacwm of Galens defcription, emsp/. contra rapturam, ae 
cerufa, pro matrice. All {uchcold repercuflives are more effeCtuall if they be aflociae 
ted with tenuity of fubftance, either of themfelves, or by mixture with fome other 
things : for to this purpofe we often mixe vinegar, camphire, and the like thingsot 
fubtle parts, with repercuffives of groffe parts, that they may ferve as vehiclesto car- 
ry in the repercuffives faculty. Repercuffives of grofle parts and hot,are wormwood, 
centory, gentian, agrimony, favin, coriander, mint, bay leaves, cardamomes, Cals 
mus aromaticus,aloes, {pikenard, faffron, nutmeg, cinamon, amber, falt, alome, 
porole, /alphar, oleum abjinthinum, maftichinum, nardinum, coflinwm, ceratsm, 0%. 
ftemachicum, fantalinnm, emplaftrum diacalcitheos But {uch things as repell by acc 
dent, are bandages, comprefies, linnen cloaths,and rowlers ofall forts, cates, cau 
ries, blood-letting, cupping, pamefull fri@ions in the oppolite parts, and other 
like things as are properly faidto make revulfion. The ufe of repercuflives ist force 
backe the humour which flowesfrom any other place into the part, and thus hey 
mitigate the heat of fuch inflammation as that de fluxion of humors hath caufed, y¢4 
oft times to aflwage and helpe paine,the feaver, abicefle, maligne ulcers, and mort 
fication. Such repercuffives mutt alwaies bee {0 oppofed to the difeafe, hat rel a 
may bee had to the temper,compledtion, and particular nature of the part aoe 
they areapplied; for all parts cannot equally beare the like force of repercuflive’ 
nervous & other {permatick and cold parts. Furthermore ,there are fome par 
to wee may by no meanesapply repercuflives, as the groines, arme- pits, 2° A "1 
glandules or kernells which are behind the eares and brainc, left the humour for 
retire backe into fome of the principall parts: the like reafon isalfo of = 1 20 
the bodies of women, children, eunuches,cannot endure fo ftrong repercu™ “steak 
the like exceffe of coldas manly and vigorous bodies may. Befides, every ©” 
requires not repercuflives, for if the body bee repleat with ill humours, tt 


choric 


hee pic: 


Lis. 


thoricke, 
as neithe 
or fhallc 
ufe of att 
ching aga 
fet upon 
{traitenc 
or elfe br 
remper ¢ 
eale. 


the acrim: 
ple or con 
The fir 
lilium, 
bina, calam 
murculus, 
phorbinms, 
omnes [als 
nm de [pica, 
nuns, lanrin 
tiatum, enu 
Thofe 
quick. filve 
bitings of 
Thefe 
ture, they | 
dung, cow 
like. 
Cuppin: 
ftraight lio 
{poken ot | 
Atrradin 
and fharp: 
tives : but ¢ 
ftrenethen 
en forward 
confumed 
fits; they 
4nd hollow 


Nailes, thor 
Ons, 


st 


ae! 
> 
4 
: 
iat, 
« 


Feroffe and Carthy 
ire underftood, be 
the part. Re. 
the mfelves, or 
which of them. 
thout any altriGiye 
wherefore that fa. 
scoldneffe. Of this 
not, Cowcumbers, 
nbide, and the like, 
he part waxc black. 
eflence, and there. 
Such thingsas are 
truly termed repel. 
plesare plantaine, 
8, fomach, all unripe 
ats, d¢acia, the juice 
ark>, the flowers of 
mixed 
rufic, licharge,serra 
, all marchifites 
rings Of the like na- 


tillornm, papaveris, 
em plaftrum dt. 
populeon, 
conir a rupturam, de 
lif hey be aflociae 
re with fome other 
nd the like things of 
reas vehicles to car- 
ot,are wormwood, 
carcamomces, ¢4/4- 
er, ‘alt, alome, 
ceratnm, G al, 
sas repell by acci- 
mi foris,cafes, caute- 
rts, and other fuc 
reufives isto force 
axt, and thusthey 
rs hach caufed, 
‘wleors, and mort! 
difes{e, that refpet 
the part whereto 
of reperc uflives,as 
e parts whet: 
me-pits, and cholic 
he humour fhou! 
alfo >f bodies, fF 
Be repeccuflives 


shore 


miides, every 
mous. ifit bee 


2 9 
= 


gation, cannot be fafe 


Lis.26. Of fimple Medicines, and their ll/e. 
shoricke, the ule of repercuffives, unleffe after penerall pur 


as neither ifthe humour which is in motion thal] be venenate,grofle, acrid, critical], 
or fhall caufe great paine in the part, for then on the contrary wee muft rather make 
ufe of attractives. But now ifthe difeafe be great,weake repercuflives will availe no- 
thing again{tit,as lettuce againft a great inflammation ;and thou fhalt doe ill if thou 
fet upon a {mall defluxion with powerfull repellers; for by that meanes the skin is 
ftraitened, and the paflages thereof ftopt, whereby the inflammation is encreafed, 
or elfe brought toa (chirrhys. Wherefore letthe Chirurgian havea care thathee 


remper the force of his Repercuffives according to the magnitude of the dif- 
cale. 


— 


CuHap. X, 


Of atiraftive medicines. 


4 


AYNGE N attractive medicine is contrary to the repeller ; the greeks call it Hel. Wharan arta 
cwm,it is of a hot and thin fabftance, whereby it draweth forth into the {u- medicine 
PRONG perficigs of the body that which lyeth hid in the center, although fome. ” 
~or@ times it doth it by an occult quality ; other whiles alfo by accident,as by 
the acrimony. Thofe things which by a manifeft quality doc attract, are either fim- 
ple or compound. 

Thefimple are Bryonia, allium, capa, porrum, araflolechia, hermodactyli, ciclamen, arcs8ivesby 
lilium, figillum beatae Maria, arum, afarum, afphodelus,gentiana, pyrethrum, ruta, fa- 
bina, calamentums, omnes tithymalorum [pecies, vifcum, abrotanum, anogallis urtica, ra. 
munculus, firuthium, and fuch like : ammoniacum, bdellinm, gabbanum, (agapenum, en. 
phorbinms, afphaltam, cinise face vini vel aceti, calx viva, fulphur, fal amsmoniacur, 
omnes falis [pecies, auripigmentum, oleum vetus, adeps leonts, urfi,canis, anferis, vipes 
14, axungia porci Vetuftate Acris, aut attriturotarum., Compofita vero, wt ole. 
um de (pica, philofophorum, de t-rebinthina, de croco, de fcorpionsbus, rutaceum, vulpi- 
num, lanrinum, ancthinum, de vitriole,unguentum Azrippe, aragon, eu awxiliare, 
enulatum, theriaca, mithridatium, empl. de melilote, diachylon magnum par- 

vim, oxycroceum, divinum. 

Thofe things which draw by a fecret property in nature, as are the load-ftone, py 0, cccubs 
quick-filver, pyony, amber, all antidotes and treacles that are remedies againft the 
bitings of venemous beafts, andall purging medicines. 

Thefe which draw by accident, performe it otherwife than of their owne na- py accidene 
ture, they have that quality out of putrefaGion and corruption,as doves dung,goats 
oe dung,mans dung,and all kinde of dungs : alfo leven, old cheefe, and fuch 
ike. 
Cupping glaffes, leaches, fyrenges, rougher and harder fri@tions, fucking, paine, 
ftraight ligations, cauteries doe alfo draw, but aftera different manner from them 
{poken of before. 

Attractive medicaments muft neither burne nor difcufle, and being very ftron 
and {harpc, they fhould bee tempered and mixed with oyle of rofes, and other leni- 
tives : but to weake ones fhould be added oyle of bayes, calx viva, and {uch liketo 
ftrengthen them. The ufe of attractives isto draw poyfon toward the skin,& to haft- 
en forward critical ab{ceffes; and they make thofe parts which were benumbed and 
confumed,to have life,they reftore the refrigerated parts by drawing thither the [pi- 
tits; they draw forth the vifcous filth of maligne ulcers that lies hid in thenerves, 
4nd hollow paflages of them ;they alfo draw out {cailes of bones, {plinters of wood, 


Nailes, thornes, arrowes, and that matter which js impa in hardened inflammati- 
Ons, 


Theit wis 


q 
, 

4 

* 
H 


Whar a refol- 


ving medicine 


iS. 
The differences he 


thereof,’ 


Crap. XI. 
Of refolving medicines. 


Hat is called a refolving medicine, whichby hear, and the renuity of 
fubftance opencth the pores, attenuates the humours, diffipares and ii 

cuffech by evaporating the unprofitable matter. There are two a 
alt, thefekindes of medicines, the onciscalled Areoticum or rarifying 

the otheris termed Daphoreticum or digefting. 

The Areeticam by ameane heat, andnot dry,and endued witha tenuity of fab 
ftance, opencth and relaxeth theskinne, and draweth forththe matter (hy up i 
der it, whereby it may eafe paine, like as Anodines, becaufe it doth not much depart 
from a temperate heat. 

But the D/aphoreticam being muchhotter, whatfoever fticketh inthe pait 
there impact, it doth by thin vapour infenfibly diffipate : therefore the acrid and hot 
things are in this cafeto be made ufe of rather than artractives,becaule that cold ang 
groflenefic is more difficultly to be digefted, andthe length and involution of th, 
waics being to be confidered. The Arxoticke, which we may cail Weake refolvers, 
are either fimple or compound. 

The fimples are thefe, bifmalvatota, parietaria, adianthum, mercurialis, conlys, 
Valeriana, rofmarinus, falvia, thymus chamaemelum, meltlotum,anethum, farieg border, 
tritict, {eminis lini, fanugract, nigella, furfur,adeps gallina cunicul) 
almoft all metalls unleffe fuch as are acrid. The compounds are olewm chame. 
molinum anethinum,liliaceum catelorum,lumbricorum, K e:rinam, de vitellis overum de 
tritico,amy 2dalarum dulciumngwentum de althes, empl.diachylum, ireatum, Diaplio- 
retickes or digeftives, are alfo both fimple and compound : thefimple are Arij}o/o- 
chia, enula campana, iris, cepa, {cylla, figrhum Salomenis, figilum beate Marie,bry- 
nia, panis porcinus,dracunculus, afphodelus, origanum, mentha, pulegium, fabine,(ir- 
pillum, calamentha, byfopus,urtica, arthemifia, lavendula, chamepytis, anifum, 
lum, cuminum, piper mofchata, coriandrum, bacce lauri junipert farina fabarum, 
bupinorum, orobi, milit,frumenti, furfur, mica panis, acetum tepidum, oxycratum,vi- 
num vetus aut aromaticum, mel, aqua Vite, muria, adeps tauri,equi, leowis cans, 
medulla cervi, cruris bouis & arittis, ammoniacum, galbanum, opopanax., [acapenum, 
myrrha, bdellium, thus, terebinthina, pix nigra, ladanum, flyrax,calamita, 
frercus caprinum,columbinum, caninum, bubulum, alice flercorum (pecies. | 

Compound diaphoretickes are olenm amy cdalarum ATU perinnm, Lourie 


pum, de [corpiomibus,irinum, coftinum, nardinum, de terebinthina, de 


‘ 


raphaninum, ¢cucumere agreti, vulpinum, rutaceum, phi lofophorum de lateribus, de 
phorbio, de tartaro, de petroleo, dekerva, Agrippe, 
enulatum, empl. de Vigo, without addition,and with addition, 
acalcitheos, diflolved in adigefting oyletothe forme efa cerat. 

Arzotickesare profitably ufed in the increafe and ftate of fuperficiall tumou! 


Theufeofdis- _ But Diaphoretickesare not to bee ufed in the encreafe of tumours, unieilclom* 


pher cticks: 


and groffe, and lying hid deep in the body, fothat the vertue of medicaments 


ftringent bee added, left by their morc ftrong digeftion, they fhould draw and m 
creafe the defluxion : but when the tumours decline, they are then oncly to 
in the parts chiefly where theskinne is den{e and hard,and when the humour 's¢° 


(olil- 


tives areto be applied ; for you may not apply relaxers or diaphoretickes the 


ver, [pleen, ftomacke,or bowels,unleffe youadde fome aftriagents, of which a greet 
part mult be aromatickes. | aicks 
To the parts where fenfe is more dull, may be applied the ftronger diaphorc" ; ; 
but thofe partswhich areendued with amore exquifite fenfe, as theey¢ 
nerves, to chem we muft apply weaker. When the matrer is grofle and cold, | vt 
cutting and atrenuating, and then emollients are to be ufed, and fo by degrees co" 


todiaphoretickes; otherwile that onely is refolved which isthe mo!t agg 


hardly come thereto : but confideration is to bee had of the parts to which t¢ 


~ 


Lin. 26§ 
yaproficabl: 
be afflicted 

fphacel,it 1S 
rhe humout 
by Hollerius 


ble ro rhe na 
fiftence, 
it differeth f 
There bec 
proper qual! 
bring to fupy 
Simples at 
fum, acanthy 
decoction eat 
lit, femtuts Lt) 
ance patorwrn, 
butyr az, 
puert. 
~-Compoung 
diachylon com 
Thofe thi 
an emplaftic 
thy and thic! 
fich like. Su 
pores. Henc 
whileft iz kee 
fuppurable n 
ripening in 
increafe with 


Which ic is ap 
trariwife, tha 
by the quality 

Although 
‘ure; fo many 


og 
A. \ 
th 
q 
q 
j 
adi 
“ie ft 
ari... 
* 4 


Lis.zg. 


idthe tenuity of his 
>, diflipates and dit 
are (wo forts of 
Li Cum Or rarifying 


ith a tennity of ful. 
matter fhut up un. 
not much depare 


inthe pait being 
retheacridand hor 
caufe that cold and 
d involution of the 
mail weake refolvers, 


mer curialis, ebulus, 
| hum, fariva hordes, 
cunicull 
S are oleum chame. 
Bc de 
Diaphio- 
are 
Ate Maria, bryo- 
wlegium, [abina, 
anifem, fani¢he 
farina fabarum, 
ALUM, Vi- 
|, Leonis, canis, hircl, 
Dovanax , [acapenum, 
alamuta, bentoinum, 
‘pecies. | 

perinnm, 
ae creco,canabinuM, 
Je lateribus, ae 
Av AGOn,MAT~ 
lon, oxycrocenm, di- 


perficiall tumouts- 
pers, unlefic fome 
sould draw and 
eroncly to beul¢ 

tre humour is col 

medicaments 
cowhich refolu- 
boretickes to the 
of which a great 


Cer diaphorcticks; 
theeye andthe 
and cold, thing? 
fc: by degrees 


inaft {ubtie of che 
yoproi- 


[is.26. Of fmple Medicines, and their 1044 

yaproficable matter, the groffcr becomming concrete and hardened. Burif the part 
pe afflicted with a continual! dcfluxion, forhatthere m vy be danger of a gangrene or 
fphacel,tt isnot lawfulchen to make ule of refolvers, but you mutt in the place where 
rnehumour flowes, devide the skin by {carification, asit is moft learnedly noted 


py Hollersus in that profitable booke of his left to pofterity, whofctitle is, De mate- 
CUT WT 


Cuaprp. 


Of fuppuratives. 


Suppurative medicine is faidto bee that, which fhutcing the pores, and Sippel: 
. OF Witt a fuppu. 
preventing eran{piration by his emplafticke confiftence, increafeth the racivemedicirte 
matter of native heat, and therefore turneth the matter caft outof the * 
yeflels into pus and fanies. Iris of nature hot and moift,and proportiona- 
bleto the native heatof the part to which it is applied, and of an emplafticke con- 
iftence, that fo it may hinder the native heat from being exhaled . in which reipeé 
itdiffereth from emollients and mala@ickes, of which wee hall {peake hereafter, 
There beetwo kindes of {upporatives, for fome doe it of chemfelves, and by their Diffrencesof 
proper qualitie ; others by accident, Thofe things which by their owne ftrength do “Prete 
bring to fuppuration, are either fimples or compounds. 

Simples are radix Liltorum.capa, allium, malvarumomniam folia femina, buglof. 


fum, acanthus, fenccio, viola, parietaria, crocus, caules, ficus, pafjula mundaté, witha 


decoction of thefethings, farina tritici, farina volatiles, farina hordes excorticati, lo- 
lis, feminis lins fenugract, calbanum, ammoniackm, [lyrax pinguis, ladanum, vifcum 
ancupatorem thes, Dix, 4, refina,colla, adeps fuillus, vitulinus,vaccinus, caprinus, 
butyrnem, vitellas af pas humida , flercus [xilum , colwmbinum, caprinnmy 
wert. 
Compounds are olenm liliorum,lumbricorum, decroco, anguent. bafilicnm, emplaft, 

diachylon commune, magnum, de mucilaginibus, 7 

Thofe things doe fuppurate by aecident which worke it onely by the meanes of Suppurauves 
anemplafticke confiftence : for fo often times aftringents, becaufe they are of car- 
thy and thicke parts,are found to fuppurate ; {uch are aazacntum de belo nutritumand 
fuch like. Such alfo are thofe which bythcir coldneffe keep the heat in, and fhut the 
pores. Hence'iis itthat the qualities of forrell are commended to generate pas: for 
while it keepeth the heat within, it encreafeth his effects, to the thickening of the 
fuppurable matter, and the overcomming other rebellious qualities, We ufe things 
ripening in great inflammations, whofe growth we cannot hinder with repellers,or 


increafe with refolvers or difcuffers. 


Cuap. XIII. 
Of mohifying things. 


Hat is dcfinedto bee a mollifying medicine, which by a ftronger heatthan 64) 4. 00; 
that which is proper to fuppuratives, without any manifeft quality of 5. mpi. 


Re be drying or moiftning,again malaxeth or fofteneth hardned bodies: where- pow fuppuree 


fore this differs from that which fuppurates, becaufe that may bee horin 


the firft or fécond degree, according to the feveralltemper of the body, OF partto 
Which itis applied, working rather by the quantity of heat cban the quality: con- 
trariwife, char which mollifieth being endacd witha greater heat, rather worketh 
by the quality of the heat, being atherwife in dryne ffc and moifture temperate. 
Although as many things agree together in fome reipects, though of a divers na- 


ture; fo many emollients are fuch as are hot in the firft degree, and dry in the ape 
an 


. 
4 
3 
-_ 
| 
a 
a 
a 
a 
a 
q 
— 
| 4 
j 
] 
a 
7 
\ 
4 
| q 
| 
4 


———1©1 


Of fimple Medicines, and their ULfe. 


The ditferen. 
ces of emolli- 


Their ule 


Things obfer- 
vablein the 


ef emollients. 


—— 


and third, that forhey may the better difperfe and diffufe that which is congealag 
by taking away a little of the humidity, which is contained within the part aff Bed ) 
bur not by exhaufting it wholly by the violence of heate or drincfle : for he,’ 
would follow a greater bardnefle. “an 

Things mollifying, are either fimple or compound ,; and thefe againe ron 
weake. The weake are, Radix hliorum albornm, cucumeris agre/lis,althea folia 
va, bifmalva, liliorum, anet hi fummitates, viola, branca urfina, femen malve 
va, lini, fenugr act, carici pingues, mundata, pedum, ca pitum.inteinorym ver, 
vecinorum decoclum, adeps ex jwsioribus caflratis, domefticis, faminis Mal ih 
deps fuillus, vitulinus, hadinus,caprinys, bubulus, vulpinus, callinaceus ar feriny, 
tinus, olorinus,efficaces. The weaker are things more gentle, as, Butyrum, lan, fruci. 
ds, cera pimguis, vitellus ovi , medulla ex ofsibus , cervina, ovilla, caprina. Thecom 
pound are oyle, wherein are boiled mollifying herbes, as, O/eum Liliorum chem 
linum, amygdalarum dulcium. Stronger emollients arc, Acetum, adeps taurinus 
nus, cervinus, leoninus, pardalinus, apri,equi [evum, pinca, 
ammoniacum, bdelium, flyrax, galbanum, ladannm, propolis, opepanax, une.de 
emp.diachylon commune Cr magnum, de mucilaginibys ceroncum, oxycroceum 
de vizo. 

We ufeemollients in fcirrhous tumours of the mufcles, or in the lips of ulcers, in 
any of the limbes, belly, glandules, bowels, by reafon of a grofle, cold,and vifcoys 
matter, cyther flegmaticke,or melancholicke. Yet thofe tumours which come of mp. 
lancholy, commonly turneto cancers,which are exafperated by mollifying things, 
On the contrary,fuch as proceed from a flegmaticke matter,are brought to an equa. 
liry of confiftence,by theufe of emollients. Furthermore, there are threethings ob. 
fervable in the ufe of emollients : the firftis, duely to confider how much the afe. 
&ed part differs from his proper and natural! temper aod proportion, that {o wemay 
apply an equivalent remedy. The fecond is, that wee diftinguith the natures of the 
arts. The third is that we artificially gather after what maner this mollifying mu 
e performed, that is, whether we fhould mingle with the emollients, deterfiye o; 
difcuffing medicines. For there are many defperate {chirrhous tumours, thatis,{uch 
ascanno be overcom: by any emollient medicine , as thofe which are growne fo 
hard,that they have loft their fenfe ; and thereupon are become {mooth and with- 
out haires. Here you muft obferve, that the part fometimes becomes cold in {0 
preat an exceffe, that the native heate plainly appeares to Janguifh, fo that itcanot 
atuate any medicine. That this languifhing heate may be reliciteted, an iron ftove 
fhall be fet neere to the part, wherein agood thicke peece of iron heated red hot 
thall be inclofed, for fo the ftove will keep hota long time. 


Tht 


q 7 
> 
~ 


f 


risa 
>. 


SAAN 
Ve 
Crates harh: 
Ort Dere 
The fim pl 
iris. cnula, 
musterrae, | 
bus. amyod: 
“um 
4420, [cori a 
[a 710 Hilo 
Vinum dulce 
lowre things 
Syrupus de ai 
Vem, oleurm 
anol] 
luous matte: 
to the | 
Whole body 
"On to be hz 


q 
é 
| 
ob 
| 
# 
== 
] 4 
4 
aA.” 
| 
Siar. 
4 
4 
2 
4 


Lis.2 6. 
which is congealed 
hin “he part aff, ted 
dri ictle : for hereon 


refe 
thee, folia mal. 
femen malva. bifmal. 
tum inte vey 

MAC HEAL Ser ings ang. 

SyBatyrum, lana 

Thecom. 

taurinus. 

, 

pamax ,ung.de althea 


Joannis 


the lips of ulcers, jp 
ile, cold,and vifcous 
s which come of me. 
by mollifying things, 
brought to an equa- 
¢ arethreethings ob. 
how much the affe- 
prtion fo we may 
natures of the 
mollifying muft 
ollients, deterfive or 
mours, that is,fuch 
vhich are growne fo 
fmooth and with- 
becomes cold in fo 
ith, fo that it cannot 
Bcitated,an iron ftove 
iron heated red hot 


The 


Of fimple. Medicines, and their 10 42 


The figure of an iron ftave. 


\ 
\\ 


MM 
\ 
\ SANS \ 


ih 


\\ 


ww 


\ 
\ 
AY 


\ 

\ 


SY 
SAN 


oo 06 


A. The cafe of the ftove. 
B. The iron Bat to be heated. 
C. Theliddeto fhus the loves 


Cuapr. XIV. 
Of Deterfives, or Mandificatives. 


Deterfive is defined to be that which doth deterge or cleanfe analcer, 
and purge fortha double kinde of excrement ; of the which one is thic- 

ker, which is commonly called fordes, which is drawne forth from the 
GV) SG bottome of the ulcer, by the edificatious quality of tie medicine, the o- 
cher is more thin and watery, Whichthe Greekes call Z¢4or,the Latines 
Sanies, which is taken away by the drincfle of the medicines and therefore Aippo- 
crates hath well advifed, that every ulcer muft be cleanfed and dryed. 


Ot Deterfives, fome are‘fimple, forme compound, fome ftronger, {ome weaker. Desires - 


The fimple are eyther bitter, {weet, or fowre: the bitter are Geatiana, Ariffolechia, 
rts, enula, [cilla, fer pentaria, abjinthine, marrabiam, perforata, ab- 
rtonon, apium, chelidoninm, ruta, hy(fopus, [cabsofa, arthemifia, eupatorium, aloe, fu- 
musterre, hederaterreftris,a lixivium made with the afhes of thefe 
bus, amycdala amara, fa04, terebinthina, myrrba, mastiche, fagapenum, galbanum, Am- 
montacum the gals of Bealls, flercas caprinum,uriin benecodla, (quamma arb, 4s 
“020, (coriaaris, antimoninm, calx,chalcitis, mify, alumen. lweetare¥ iola, 
mellilotum, ficus pingues, dactyls, paffe, glycyrrbixXa, agua hordes, agua 
vinum dulce, mel, (accharum, ferum lattis, manna, thus, The fharpe are all kinde of 
lowre things, Capreali vitium, acetum, and other acide things. The compound are 
‘yupus de ablinthio, de fumaria,de marrubio,de eupatorio, de arthemifia, acetofas lixi- 
oleum de vitckhs de terebinthina, d ATO muna: ficativan 


“apo, adoftolorum, pulvis mercurial. We ufe fuch thinys as deterge, that the fuper- Theu 


luovs matter being taken away, nature mzy the more conveniently regenerate fleth 
0 fillup the cavity : Bucia the ufe of them, conlideration is filt to bee had of the 
Whole body, whether it be healihy, plethoricke, or ill difpofed, there is confidera- 
tion to be had of the part, which is moy fterand drier, cndued wich a more exquilite 


18.26. 
— 
| 
| =\ 
: 
|_| - = 
4 SS 
; 
| | — = 
neg 
{ 
| 
/ 
| Mf Yj 
My 
Q 
> 


Of fimple Meatcines,and their Ue, 
or duller fenfe. But oftentimes accidents befall ulcers befides Nature,asa cally, 9 


fluxion of a hot or otherwife maligne humour, and the like fymptomes, | » a 4 de. gonts, a 
fideration isto be had, whether it bea new or inveterate ulcer ; for from COn. ulcer be 
cording to the indication, remedies are appointed different in quantity and te. ac. ftem pe! 
fo that offentimes wee are conftrained to appoint the bitter remedy in fie put: 
{weet. Neither truly with a painfull and dry ulcer doth any other thang liquid the drying t 
terfive agree : neither to the moyft any other than thatof a dry contiftence te. this for § 
Powders. P le, 
Cuar. XV. 
m 
Of Sarcoticks. 
bee ulcd 


=<%, Hat medicine is faydto be farcotick, which by its drinefle helpes 
Nature to regenerate ficfh in anulcer hollow, & diligently cleap. 
fed from all excrements. But thisis properly done by 
| different in quality and quantity. Wherefore,if we {peak ae. 
cordingtothe cruth ofthe thing, there is no medicine which cay 
properly and truly be called farcoticke: For thofe which yulox. 


No medicine 
uly farcotick, | 


ly goc under that name, are only accidentally fuch;as thofe which without bitige 
and crofion dodry upand deterge the excrements of an ulcer, which hinder the en. 
deavour of nature in gencrating of ficfh, For as by the law of nature, from thar ngy. 
rifhment which flowes to the nourifhing of the part, there is a remaine, or a certairg 
thin excrement, flowing from fome other place, called by the Greckes /chor,andby 
the Latines Sanies: Thus by the corruption of the part there concretes another grof- 


fer excrement, termed Rypos by the Greekes, and Sordes by the Latines. That makes true skinn 
the ulcer more moyft, this more filthy. Hence it is,that every wound which requires and binds 
reftitution of the loft fubftance, muft be cured with two forts of medicines, the one farcoticke§ 
todry up and wafte the fuperflaous humidity thereof, the other to fetch off the which on! 
filth : and by how much the wound is the deeper , by fo much it requires more li- for that it \ 
quid medicines, that fo they may the more eafily enter into every part thereof. thatonly 
_ But diverfity of things fhall be appointed according tothe various tempcrof the aftri@ion. 
part. For if the affeCted part fhall be moyft by nature, fuch things fhal! be cholenas Wa, iris, CCP 
fhallbe lefle dry :if onthe contrarythe partbe dry, then fuch things (hall bee uled equina, cu} 
as be more dry ; but many forts of medicines fhall be aflociated with the farcoticks, OC earum ¢ 
according tothe manifold complication of the affects pofleffing the ulcer. T here- cortex ligni 
fore nature only is to be accounted the workmafter, and the efficient caufe inthert- aurt, argent 
generating of fleth, and laudable bloudthe matterial! caufe , and rhe medicine the Corum (cori 
helping or aflifting caufe,or rather the caufe without which itcannot be : as, that oy tas 
cleanfing and moderately drying without any vehement heat, takes away all hinde- ries lignoru 
rances of incarnation and orders, and fits the bloud to receive the forme ot fell de betonica, 
This kinde of medicine,according to Galen, ought to be dry only in the firlt degree, Weufle E 
left by too much diinefle, it might drink up the bloud and marter of the future ficth, Skinne, Int! 
which notwithftanding is to be underftood of farcoticks, which are to bee applye = the body 
to 2 delicate and temperate body. Foriftheulcer be more moyft,or the body ver to ha 
hard clian is fir, we may afcend to fuch things as are dry, evenin the third degi® ¢plethoric 
And hence itis, that fuch drying medicines may firft be called deterfives, 
prefently farcoticks. A farcoticke medicine is eyther fimple or compound, (trong ODE 
Simple Sarco. OF Weaker. Simple farcoticke medicines are, 4 riftolochia utraque, 1715, ae lung 
cunculus, afirum, fymphyti omaia genera, betontca, fanicula, miblefolium, lingua the ( 
verbena, (cabiofa, pinpinella, hypericom, [cordium, plantazo, rubia major be ¢ {cari 
fa ci. Terebinthina lota non lota refina pint arabicum 


fiche, colophonia, manna thuris, cortex ejufdem, aloe , olibanuws , myrrha,mel, 

‘ 

[angus draconts, lythargyros amri, podium, pompholix,tutia, plumoum 

Compound ria ferr?, The compound [arcoticks are, O hypericonus, ol.ovorem, malic 
Sacorickes., ely cetera olea, quabalfami HOM NE UN aurcum,emp.de vere” 


4, 
247 
4 
ea 
1 °F 
ag 
J j 
q 4 
é 
j 
q 
4 | 
ay 
\ 
q 4 i 
" 
4 
4 
al. 
= 
WR Se 
* 
| 


Mature, asa cays 


mptomes. Laftly, con. 
er for from hence, 2c. 
n quantity and Quality; 
remedy in ficad of the 
other than a liquid de. 
a dry confiftence 


onis, de Janus, Emp Lratia Det, Emp.nigrum., We ule not farcoticks before that the 
ulcer be cleanfedand freed from paine, defluxion, inflammation, hardnefle, and di. 
ftemper. In uft ng thefe things we confider the tem per of the body, and the affeed 
: For oft-tines a part otherwife lefle dry by nature, requiresa more powerfull 
drying medicine, and ftronger farcotick, than another part which is more dry, and 
this for fome other reafon, which ought to come into our confideration : For exam- 
ple, the glans would be move dryed than the prepuce,although it be of atemper lefle 
dry, becaute it is the paflage of theurine. Wherefore wee mutt diligently obferve 
the condition of the affeGted parts , and thence taking indication , make choice of 
more ftrong farcoticks. For both that which is too little , and that which is too 
much farcoticke, makes a fordid ulcer : the fi:ft, becaufe it dries nor fufficiently.the 


Jatter, for that by its acrimony it caufeth defluxion. Therefore diligent care muft 
bee uled in the examination hereof. 


by its drinefie helpes 
& diligently cleap- 
tly done by bloudip- 
re,if we mult {peak ac. 
O medicine which can 
thole which vulgar. 
which without biting 
» which hinder the en- 
lature, from that nou. 


remaine, or a Certaine 


XVI. 


Of Epuloticks,or shinning medicines, 


N Epuloticke medicine is that which covereth the part with skit: 
4 > iris faid to bee fuch as by drinefle and aftri@ion without bitin 
deficcates, bindes,and condenfates the fcth intoa certain callous 
fubftance, like to che skinne, which we commonly calla cicatrize 
or {carre: yet this, asthe generating of fcth, is the worke of na- 


Greckes /chor,and by LG, ture. A medicine thereforeis faid to be Epuloticke, for tharitaf- 
Mcretes another grof- fifts nature in fubftituting and generating a {carre, in ftead of the 
Latines. That makes true skinne, whileftit confumes the fuperfluous humidities, condentates, incratiates, 
‘ound which requires and binds the next adjacent flefh ; therefore it ought to dry more powerfully than 4 
of medicines, the one farcoticke. Epuloticke medicines are of three kindes: the firft is the true cpulotick, ri 


other to fetch off the 


which only dries and binds. The {econd isan acride and biting epuloticke, which, Epuloticks. 
shit requires more 


for that it waftes the proud fieth, is called fo ; and this muft bee {paring] y ufed, and 


ery part thercof. 
rarious temper of the 
ngs fhall be chofen as 
chings fhall bee ufed 
with the farcoticks, 
ng the ulcer. here- 
icient caufe io there- 
nd the medicine the 
apnot be as, that by 
takes away all hinde- 
ve the forme of ficth- 
ily in the firft degree, 
et of the future fieth, 
-hare to bee apply¢ 
ft,or the body more 
nin the third degte* 
deterfives, and 
compound, 
1715, 
efolzum, lingua ¢ 
5 [arcoe: [ia 4- 
bs, mel, 
mA hi nn™, 


em pac 
gant, 


thatonly to hard and rufticke bodies. The third is that which oncly dries without 
aftriGion. The things whereof they confift are thefe : Ariftolochia utraqne, centia- 
Wa, iris, Contaurinm majus,pentaphyllon, fymphitum majus, chamedrys, betonica, caude 
tquina, cupatorium,verbenaca, plantagints cy fymphyts folia, calle,bacca myrtt, 2landes 
carum calices, balauflia, cupre/si nuces, maltcorium, cortex quercus, cortex tamaricis, 
cortex lignt aloés, acacia, colophonia, farcocolla, fanguss dracon, ladanum “ithareyros 
aurt, argeatt, cerufa, plumbum ufium, alumen ufium, tathia, {quamma aris ferri, & 
torum (coria, arugo, flos aris, as uftum cy lotum, falphur vivum, chryfocells, corali,bo- 
us armenus, terra figillata, cineres buccinarum, oftreorum, filicis, offa ufta cy ficcata, ca- 


nies lignorum, unz.diapompholygos, ung. rubrum, cwp.de corufa, 
debetonica, diacalcitheos ,emp.nigrum. 


We ufe Epuioticks when as the ulcer is almoft filled up,and equall to the adjacent Theirur 


skinne, In the ufe of thefe we muft alfo have refpe& to the tendernefleand hardnefle 
ofthe body ; for fuch things as are corrofives to tender and delicate bodies, are epu- 
loticketo hard and rufticke bodies. Alfo wee muft have regard, whether the body 
be plethoricke or replete with ill humours, for fuch do not eafily admit cicatrizati- 
on. Alfo it is moft worthy of your obfervation, to marke whether the ulcerthat is 
(be cicatrized, be fed or nourifhed by the prefent defe@ of any part, asthe liver, 
Pleene, lungs, or a varix lying about it. Forit cannot be cicatrized before thefe im- 
Pediments (if any fuch be) be taken away. Laftly,the callous lips of an ulcer,unleffe 
‘ey be fcarified or foftened, hinder cicatrization. Therefore all {uch defaults muft 
betaken away, and then fuch an epulotickeapplyed, as may not by the too much 
tinetle leave the fcarre too hollow, orthe too little, leave it too high. 


T tee CHAP: 


a 
~ 
« é 
¥ 
’ 
‘ 
4 
q 
# 
q >. 
| 
4 
] 
| | 
* 
a 


Cuar-XVII. 
Of Azglutinatives. 


> Glutinating or agglutinative medicine is of a middle nature, },. 
tween the farcoticke andepuloticke,more ftrong than the former 
cAg, and weaker than the latter , for it is dry tothe fecond degree, Ie 

by the drying and aftridtive faculty, voide of all deterfion CON. 
Af SA x. joynes parts that are diftanr, or rather lends helping hands to Na. 
Ak oe ture the principall agent in this work. Glutinatives, whether they 
be ftrongly or weakly fuch , doe agglutinate either by their Pro- 
Agelutinaive pet oraccidentall nature : Of this fort are Phantaginss omnes {pecies, confolida 
medicines. millefolinm, verbena, pimpinella, pilofella, cauda equina , fempervivum, 
phium, famicula, atractilis, folsa quercus dracunculs, falix, ebulus, fambucus, pentan 

phyon, veronica,cortex pini, ulmi,palma quercus, Aqua vitis, aq.¢ folliculis ulmi, 

cus calaminthe, vinumaufterum, terebinthina, myrrha, [angus draconts, belws armen, 

terra fizillata, omnia denique acerba. 

Glatinatives Glutinatives by accident are thofe that hinder de fluxion, and binde the Part , 2s 
byacciden™ = Sutures, Bandages, reft,rowlers, and the like. We ule glutinatives in greene, ands 
yet bloudy wounds , whence the Greekes call aglutinative medicine Eneme, 3). 

though fometimes they are ufed to inveterate, maligne, fiftulous and finuous ulcers, 

for they hinder the defluxion from comming to the lips of ulcers. You muft con{. 

der, when as you intend to apply them, whether the skinne be whole or no : Fory. 

cers knit together, or healemore difficultly, ifthe skinne be rubbed off, or cut, oro. 

therwife loft. Neither ought you to be unmindfull of the fore- mentioned cautions 

and indications drawne from the fexe , the tenderneffe or hardnefle of the affected 

body, the continuanceand magnitude of the ulcer : for hence indication mutt bee 

taken, what the quantity and quality of the medicine ought to be. 


Cuar. XVIIL 
Of Pyrotickes, or cawsticke Medicines. 


Hat medicine is faid to be Pyroticke or Caufticke, which by its acrimony 


and biting, commonly confifting in an earthy confiftence, either fupert 
CS ‘eat cially corrodes, or more deeply cates and putrefies, or laftly, burnes and 
==5"" confumes theskin and fleth, fothat it even pierces into callous and bard 
Thise degrees bodies. Therefore there are three degrees of Pyrotickes; for fome are termed Ca 
*Cauticks. thareticke or corroding, for that they wafte the proud ficfh of an ulcerated or any 
other part, and thefe are judged the weaker fort of the Pyrotickes. Orherfome are 
termed Septicke or putrefying, as thofe which deftroy and diflolve the renderan 
new {prung up flefh, and raife blifters in theskinne , and thefe are more power" 
than the catheretickes. Laftly,there are otherfome termed moft powerfull Elc 
tickes, which by their fiery and terreftriall quality caufe efchars or crults a 
upon they arealfo termed Ruptoria,& porentiall Cauteries : Now all thele di . 
ces are taken from that they are more or lefle powerfull. For it oft-times 
that according to the differenttemper and confiftence of the parts, according i . 
longer or fhorter ftay,a Cathzereticke may penetrate as farre as a Septicke , 4° 
the contrary, an Efcharoticke may enter no farther than a Septicke. 
Cathareticks,  Thefeare judged Cathzretickes, Spongia ufta, alumen non 
lum uflum,cale mediocriter lota, arnzo, chalcanthum,(quamma aris, olen™ 
trochi{ci andronis, phafionis, afphodelorum, ung. Acyptiasum, apeflolorum, 
curii,ar{enicum fublimatum. 
Sep..cksand Septickes and Veficatories are, Radix (cilla, bryonia, figill, 


ufium, 
de 
pul 


b ane 


Veficarorics, Rite hor ik ia 
radix rananculs, panis porcini apium,rifuc, bas tithymallorums, bac 


beatae Marie, th 


Lis. 
cardus, fi 
remper at 
ro nature 


fhall trear 
Wee uf 
chercfore 
penetrate 
rickes, an: 
haufted hi 
gies. Wi 
pointed, n 
cretion f@ 
paines, 
and dry tl 
putrefacti 


receiving th 
cauled eithe 
the body re 
ISNO paine 
corporis dole; 
P2ined in 2: 
Ulaffected a 
Of temper + 
{carce an ya 
the quantity 


| 
d 
+ 
“> 
i 
q j 
| 
j 4 
4 
< 
| 
4 
4 
% con 
- * 
P 
| 
‘Yahora 
| 
“fC Tem 
Bay len it 
“eh 
{ 


aiddle nature , be. 
gthanthe former, 
degree. Ir 
ILdetrerfion, con. 
iping hands tona- 
tives, whether they 
either by their pro- 
5, confolida HiT Ague, 
, 

,[ambucus , penta- 
Be folliculy ulmi, 
conts , bolus armenus, 


binde the part, as 
es in greene, and as 
dicine Enama, al- 
and finuous ulcers; 
rs, You mutt confi 
or no : Forul- 
bed off, or cut, or o- 
mentioned cautions 
acfle of the affected 
ndication mutt bec 


ich by its acrimon 
ence, either apt 
or laftly, burnes 2 


har 
ro callous and 
5 med Ca- 


Of fimple Medicines, and their fe, 


cards, fimapt 


, canthariaes, arfenicum fab 


nature. 
E{charotickes or Cauttickes are, Calx viva, fex vini cremata 


hall treat hereafter. 


wWeeufe Catheretickes in tender bodies and difeafes not ver 
chercfore by how much they are leffeacride & painfull by fo much oft-rimes they 
penetrate the deeper, for that they are Icfle troublefome by delay but we ufe Sep- 
rickes, and fometimes Efcharotickes in ulcers that are callous, putride, and of inex. 
hautted humidity, but principally in caaccrs, 


carbuncles, and exceffive hemorrha- 
gies. When as we makeufe ofthefe, the patient muft have a co 


nvenient dyet a 
pointed, muft abitaine from wine : laftly, they muft not be ufed but with great dif 


cretion ; for otherwife they may caufe feavers , great inflammations, intolerable 
paines, fwounings, gangrenes, and {phaccls. Cauteries heedfully ufed, ftrengthen 
and dry the part, amend anuntameable diftemper, dull the force of poyfon, bridle 


limatum : Bor all thefe weaken the native 
remper and confiftence of the part, and draw thereunto humours plainly contrary 


putrefaction and mortification, and bring fundry orher benefits. 


Cane: XIX. 


Of Anodynes, or fuch as mitigate or affwaze painc. 


~ 
~ 


>| 


i> — Yo . . 
5 ia fed by fome fodaine diftemper, or folution of continuity. There are 


thequanricy. Boththe foreementioned qualitics, e{pecially aflociated with matter, 
asalfo certaine externall caufes too violently affailing,fuch as thefe that may caufe 
contufion, cuit, pricke, or too much extend. Wherefore paine is a {ymptome of the 
touch, accompanying almoft all difeafes ; therefore oft-times leaving thefe, they 
turn the councell of the Phyfitian to mitigate them, w** is performed cither by mi- 
Usating the efficient caules of paine,or dulling the {en{fe of the part.Hereupon they 
Makethree differences of Anodynes: For fome ferveto cure the difeafe,otherfome 
(Omiticate it, otherfome ftupefie, and are narcotick. We terme {uch curative of the 
difeafes, which refit, and are contrary to the caufes of difeafes. Thus paine, caufed 
y2 hot diftemper, is taken away by oyle of Rofes, Oxycrate, and other fuch like 
things, which amend andtake away the caufe of paine, to wit,the excefic of heate. 
tine caufed by a cold diftemper, is amended by Olcwm Laurinum, Nardinum, de 
“atereo. Paine occafioned by too much drineffe, is helped by Hydre/lewm,a bath of 
‘tthharnd warme water. Laftly, by this word Anodync, taken in the largeft fenfe, 
"eunder(tand all purging medicines, Phlebotomy, Scarification, Cauteries, Cup- 
ines, Glyfters, and other fuch like things as evacuate any ftore of the dolorificke 
‘ater, But fuch as are prope 


“mperate, others hot and moift in the firft degree, and confequently, 


‘acad all diftemperatures of thiskindeare accounted Sallade oyle,oyle of fweere 


Trtt 2 Almonds, 


1047 


» O pracipue aceti, 
jgnis, whercto are reterred all Cauteries, as well actuall as potentiall, whereof wee 


contumacious Their ule. 


4 


) nature of paine. Mow paine is a forrowfull and troublefome fenfe,cau- Wh pane its 


arly rermed Anedynes, are of two forts : for fome are What property 


neere to thofe 
atare temperate : thefe preferyethe native heate in the proper integrity, thus they 


LB. 26. 
| 
| 
Etore we treat of Anodyne medicines, we thinke it fitto {peake of t 
pes departure froma naturall temper or union: the fenfibleneffe of the body 
m rceivingthe dolorificke caufe : laftly,the apprehention of this induced change, 
@ cauled cacher by diftemper or union; for otherwife with how exquifice foever fenfe 
— | tie body receiving the caufe is indued with,unleffe itapprehend and marke it, there 
isno paine prefear. Hence isthat Aphorilme of Hippocrates, Quicung; parte aliqua 
corporis dolentes dolorem omnino now fentiunt, his mens egrotat, that is, Whofoever 
palaed in any part of their bodies doe wholly feele no paine, their underftanding is 
and depraved. Heat, cold, moifture,and drinefle,induce a fodain change 
oftemper ; and heate and cold caufe fharpe paine, drinefle moderate , but moifture 
7 ® karceany acall: for moifture caufeth not paine fo much by its quality, as it doth by 
an 
an uicerated oF 
Les, Orherioms 
olve the tender 4 r 
are more powe 
powerfull 
rs or crults ret 
w all chele quite 
ofr-times hapP" rhe 
rts, according on 
a Sepricke » 4 
icke. 
non 
ris, ae 
ftolor 
beate Marie, 
A emphor dus 
cat 


Of, ‘imple M edicines, and their Llfe. Ling 


a 


1048 


almonds, the yolks of egs, and a few other fuch like things, thefe ftrengthen the & 
tive beat,thatthus encreafedin fubftance,it may with the more facility orecome the 
caufe of paine : befides alfo, they rarifie, attenuate, digeft, and confequently evacy. 
ate both grofie and vifcide humours, as alfo cloudy flatulencies hindred from pagf, 
forth :fuch are flores chamamelz, meliloti,crocus, oleum chamamelinnm, anethinumy 
leum lini, oleum ex femine althea, lumbricorum, ovorum, ¢x tritico, butyrum, lana fucci. 
da, {uillus adeps, vitulinus, gallinaceus, anfe humanus, ex anguilla, cunicula, 
Lacmuliebre, vaccinum, mucage feminw lini, fanugract, alibaa, malve. 
jufmodt feminum as allo Decoctum liltorum, violaria, capitis, ptdum, cy in | 
tefinorum arietis hac. 

Narcotickes,or ftupefying medicines, improperly termed Anodines, are cold j, 


his minde ev. 
dicaments w! 


Narcoticks im- : fitian. 
properlyter- the fourth degree, therefore by their excefle of intercept Or hinder she an 
med anodines. nigel {pirit to the part, wherice itis that they takeaway fen. 

paflage of rhe animal! p part, y y iente; of they have tham 


this fort are hyofeyamus,cicuta, Jolanum manicum, mandragora,papaver, opium, il 


fima vinculd- 
odynes inall di greater com} 
eo Youmay make ufeof the firftfort of Anody feafes, which are caule alwaies 


them. cured by the oppoficion of their contraries:but of the fecond,to expugne painesthy | difeale. For 
are not very contumacious,that by their application wee may refift defluxion, ip. 


things as are 


Gammation, the feaver, and other fymptomes. But whereas the bitternefle of paing 
is fo exceffive great chat it will not {toop to other medicines, then at the length mug of th, 4 y ie ‘ 
weecometo thethird fort of anodynes. Yet ofttimesthe bitterneffe of paineis(y ma 
great that very narcoticks muft be applied in the firft place,if we would havethepar J thedifeare « 

andthe whole man to be in fafety. Yet the too frequent ufe of them, efpecially alone feéts mave 
withoutthe addition of faffron,my trh,cafforenm,or fome {uch like thing, ufethtobe thar 
| very dangcrous : forthey extinguifhthe native heat, and caufe mortification, manj- | on polition ; 
fefted by che blackeneffe ofthe part. But intolerable paines, to wit, fuchasareoc, tendtof 

cafioned by the excefft of inflammation and gangrenes, may bee fooner mitigated | ments 
by opening a veine, purging and {carifying the part affected, than cither by proper. | VeG 
ly termed anodines or narcotickes, to wit, that paine may bee the remedy ofpaine. Gargarifmes 
‘ By purgers we here enderftand not onely fuch, as taken by the mouth, produce that pedient that [ 


Titvab, t.em.3. feet, but alfo fuch as outwardly applied performe the fame,asthofe whereof 
cap. 35. us makes mention. As, 
Re, pu!pa feu medul. colecynth, femin. eruc. rut. fylveft. elaterii, gr. cindsi,lathyrid. 
expurgatar. galban. nitri,cera, finguloram, 5 iii. opopan. 5 ii. terebinth. Syi.terendatt. 
applicd. vito, Cy taurino felle paulatim irrigato, donec apte imbibantur, Then apply itabout the 
navillevento the fhare, for thus it will purge by ftoole ; if on the contrary you ap- 
ply it tothe borrome of the ftomacke, it willcaufevomit. Another; x. e/aterit, 2u 
colocynth.{cammon. {quamma arts, radic.cucumer. agreft. lathyrid, an. i, aut pro 
thyrid.tithymal. fuccam terito cribrato, ac cum oleo plarimum falis habente 
maznam inde pilame lanaconfertam hoc medicamento illitam,umbilico aut lumbs 
Thecompolite cate. Or, fellis taurin.5 i. er. cindsi virtd, iv. fucci lupinor.virid. ii. cwphirb. 
purging 3i. pulp. colocynth, tantundem adip. vulpin, recent. ii. adip. viper, ii 8. frercor.m- 


ment. iV. pon. caftor. fingulor. 5 iv. ol. liguftrin. vi. ol. amtig. 3 i. fiat ungueniom® 


medicines corm 


Of Overgrown: 


vel oleam, \t purge without trouble, and befides the other commodities it alio's 

againtt diftraction or madneffe. Two fpoonefulls isthe greateft quantity ignetic 
ufed at onetime, forin fome one is fufficient: anoint with it the navillandtherc- | 
bouts, andajuft purgation will enfue thereupon, which if it fhall flye out beyond | twelve at = “a 


your expectation,you may foment the belly witha fponge moiftened in warm wit h 
ine, and it will be prefentl lins lib.) uted by 
and preffed forth againe, and it will be prefently ftayed. Moreover Fernelins Ounces. 
methodi, makes mention of a laxative ointmenr. 
Weights 


— by this, 
(Ng letter thus 
Meafure the qu 
refore we 
the halfe part Oo} 
'Y Rote of the af 


a 
| 
ve 
¥ 
4 

~ 

4 
| 
¢ 

» 4 

P 

* 2 

/ 


Lin.26. 
renethen the na- 
ity orecomethe 
equently evacy- 
red from paffing 
manethinum, o- 
tyrum, lana fucci. 
a,cunicula, a- 
4, malva, vel e.. 
5, pedum, in- 


lines, are cold jn 
ept or hinder the 
-away fenfe: of 
ar 


cafes, which are 
puene paines that 
defluxion, in. 
tterneile of paine 
length mut 
cffe of paine is fo 
have the part 
 efpecially alone 
hing, ufeth to be 
rtification, mani- 
it, {uch as are oc- 
B{ooner mitigated 
‘ither by proper- 
remedy of paine. 
uth, produce that 
(fe whereot 


Pe cindii,lathyria. 
th Svi.terendate- 
apply it about the 
contrary you ap- 
r: Reelaterit, 
An, Di, aut pro la- 
shabente ; 
C0 aut appli~ 
ivid. 3 ii. ewphord. 
ii 8. flercor. 
= i. fiat unguent 


quantity t0 
navilland 
ll Aye out beyor 

ned in warm wine 
Fernelins lib. 7° 


Crat 


moditi¢s italiois 


Lis.26. Ofjfmple Medicines, and their tlL/e. 


Ciar. XX. 
Of the compofition and ufe of Medicines. 


wee have {po 
Avi 
BR thinke good to fa 


ken of the facultics of fimple medicines, now wee 


: ) y fomething of the compounding of them: for fo by 
‘Va p the Architeé are had & known every thing apart,and then he fetcles the 
Ades workementothe building, the conceived torme of which hath beene in 
his minde ever fince hee did enterprife it. Therefore the compofition of divers me- 


dicaments with their qualities and effeéts, is a naingling appointed by the art of the 
Phyfitian. Hence therefore rhewm, aloe, rofa, abfintbium, although they have divers 
fybftances and faculties, yet 


| are notwithftanding called fimple medicines, becaule 
they have that varicty from nature,not from art. But we many times call fimple fuch 


things are com pounded by art, as oxyfacch. fimplex, ascompared to 
greater compofitions. And therefore oftentimes weeule com pound medicines, be- 


caufealwaies the fimple medicine alone, hath not ftrength enough tooppugne the Thenccedig 


ompound 
difeafe. For many times the ficke labour with manifold,and not fimple affeéts,from medicines, 


which there being taken a various indication, we gather contrary fimple medicines, 
to apply to every a‘fect, inone compofition. But often times the nature of the part 
ofthe patient, or of che body affected, requireth another kind of medicament which 
may bee proper for the removing that difeafe; wherefore itis fo madeto oppugne 
the difeafe and not offend the body: and we mingle many other together, whofe ef- 
fects maytemper one another. Moreover,the compofition of medicines was necefla- 
ry, that becaufe thofe things which have nota good tafte, colour, or {mell, by art of 
compofition might be made more gratefull, Compound medicines of which we in- 
tend to {peak, are Glyfters,Suppofitories, Noduli, Peflaries,Oiles, Liniments, Oint- 
ments, Emplafters, Cerats, Pultiffes, Cataplafmes, Fomentations,Embrocations,Epi- 
themaes, V elicatories,Cauteries, Collyria, Errhina,Sneefing powders, Malticatoriess 
Gargarifmes, Dentifrices, Bags, Fumigations, Semicupiums, Baths. But firft it is ex- 


pedient that I fay fomething of weights and meafures, with their notes, by which 
medicines commonly aremeafured and noted by Phyfitians. 


Gal. a. 
fan. f. tuted, 


CHuarp. XXI. 


Of weights and meafures, andthe notes of both of them. 


Very weight arifeth from a beginning and foundation,as it were for as A graine the 


our bodies doe arife of the foure firft fimple bodies or elements, into beginning of © 


YZANY which they are often refolved : fo all weights doarife from the graine, *““®"" 
a2) whichis asit were the begianing andend of the reft. Now hereby is eae erga 
underftood a barly corne or grainc, and that fuch as is neither too dry, 
or overgrowne with mouldinefle, or raacide, but well conditioned, and of an indif- 
ferent bigneffe. 

Ten graines of thefe make an Ob0/us ; two Oboli, or twenty graines make aferu- Obotus 


ple,three fcruples, or fixty graines make adramme, eight drammes make one ounce, 


oF "fre A dramme. 
twelve ounces make one pound mcedicinall, whichis forthe moft part the greatcft An ounce. 


waight ufed by Phyfitizns, and whichthey feldome exceed ; and it is refolved into 
ounces, drammes, icruples, ob0/4 and graines, whichis the leaft weight. To exprefle 


A thefe weights we ule certaine notes, the pound is exprefled by this note, tb, the 
ounce by this, 3. the drammethus, 3. the {cruple thus, 3. the ob0/vs with the begin- 

§ “ng letter thus, o¢o/. the graine with his beginning letter thus, g. But fometimes we 
Nealure the quantity of medicines by meafures and not alwaies by weights ; and 
therefore we expretie a handiull by this note,m: a pugill thus,p, number thus, n. and 
“chalfe part of every weight and meafureis exprefled by this note,®. put after eve- 
7 ‘Yoote of the aforefaid weights and meafures of the fame fort, as the halte pound, 


Tete 3 Ib, 


a 
4 
Ow 
+ 
a 


2 
i 


Of imple Medicines, and thetr Ly 


ib 8. the halfe ounce, 5 6. and fo ofthe reft. Moreover, in defcribingthe fame me di. 
cament wee ufe the notes fometimes of weights, fometimes of mealuics; and th ae 
fore it isto bee noted that herbes, greene or dry, are figned with thele Notes, m. p 
but thofe which are dry and be brought to powder, with thefe notes, 5. 3, p, . 


Roots, (3,5. p.m. 
Barks, | 3. 
Seeds, | by thefe|5.5._ 
Fruits, ?notes, %an,p.3.9.5. 
Flowers, p.m. 3.5, 
Pulfes, j 3.9. 


~ All other medicaments either dry or liquid, are defcribed with thefe notes, tb, 5. 


3,5. obol. g. 
Having expounded thefe things, let us come to the defcription of compound medi. 
cines, beginning with glyfters firft, as the remedy which is moft common ané f2. 
 miliar, andalmoft chiefly neceffary of all others. 


Of Glyfters. 


Gl) fter isan injection prepared firft and properly forthe groffe inteftines 
Whataglyfter 
is and fandament;for fometimes glyfters are uled & made for the ftomack, 


downewards,as we fee in Apoplexies. T heretore there is no part of the body which 
receives not fome benefit by glyfters, but more or leffe according to the vicinity 
Differencesof they have with the belly, and che ftrength of the glyfter : for there are divers forts 
glyfers, of ciyfiers, fome emollients, otherevacuating, fome anodines, fome aftringents, 
{ome cleanfing, {ome farcoticke, and epuloticke, and fome may bee faid to nourith. 
Themarerials Oey areal! made of the parts of plants or beafts, with compound medicines cithe 
ofglyttes.  folutive or altering, and others according tothe advife of the Phyfician. The parts 
of plants which are ufed to this purpofe, are roots, feedes, leaves, flowers, fruits, 
fhours, juices, mucilages. Parts of beafts are yelkes of egges and whites, honey, 
chickens, capons, old cockes well beaten, heads and feet of fheepe, the inreltines, 
whey, milke, fewer, axungia, and fuch like in decoGtions, wherein wee mingle and 
diffolve finple and compound medicines. Wee fometimes ufe without any other 
medicament, to make a glyfter with oyle alone, as oile of nuts for the Cholicke, of 
whey alone,the decodtion of the head and feet of the fheepe alone, and of thede- 
coction of Cicers and barly do we prepareglyfters. | 
The quantity of a glyfter is fometimes lefle according to the divers difpofirion of 
men and their difeafcs: for weake children the quantity islefle: for women with 
child, and in the cholicke, dyfentery, lyentery, or when much hardened excrement 
is within. But when wee would abundantly move the excrement, and there 159° 
thing that may hinder, the dofe ofa glvfter for the moft part is halfe a pound, 0% 
pound, or three quarters of a pound. The glyfter muft bee injected warme 0! 10% 
more or lefle according to the nature or condition of the ficke; for being cold ito’ 
fends the inteftines, andthe ncighbouring nervous parts, which arecold of sic!" 
felves. It muft bee given by degrees, for being injected fodaincly, the winde wl 
is ufually in the guts will beat it backe againe, whence comes intolerable pais. °““ 
this will bee more cleere by that wee fhall teach concerning the differences 0! gly- 
fters, whereof there fhall be fufficient examples- 
malv. violar. bifmalv. acanth. an.mi.radic. alth.llior. an. Fi. pafful 


Their quantity. 


Ancmollient 


ping. 8. fiat decoctio ad gua diffolve caf]. butyr. recent. an. 31, ol. viol. 5 ili. fiat 


Glyfters 


Lis.2¢ 
Gly {te 
divers Si 
cold whic 
ori ab 
cart har 
ol.anel h.ch 


Re quat. 
hordet inte 


Viel. 


Re Fumi 
femins arn 
mech. \3.C. 
fale, 51. Al 
focorrceett 
again(t 
istorchole 
coctions of 
t1veWwm, Dia 
gentle are 


Re. Flor.cll 
the decoGio 
chari albi.o. 
{ters fhou!d 


decoction it @ 
OVOrum 
the immod 
crements. 
Guts, and fit 
{cribed beto 

Alimenta 
being boy le 
eclly, which 
the mouth, by 
ofthe ftomac 
in wine. whe 
deco@ion of 

tity of white 

therefore Su 
inding. He: 

TB, j, fa | 


opt. Siv.fi 


beni 1b Vit 


| 
| ipicen, reines, Diadder, WOMDbe, Mcicentery, ana aio for the Neac, irom 
fharpe elyfters, the hurcfull is brovcht 
OP whence oftentimes by fharpe glyfters, the hurtfull matter is brought 
7 


ithe fame medi. 
uics;and there. 
cle notes, m, 
De 


notes, fb, 5, 


ompound medi- 
mmon fa- 


proffe inteftines 
mor the ftomack, 
mr the head, trom 
tter is brought 
the body which 
o co the vicinity 
are divers forts 
yme aftringents, 
- {aid to nourifh. 
medicines either 
irian. The parts 
flowers, fruits, 
whites, honcy, 
the inreftines, 
wee mingle and 
ithout any other 
he Cholicke, of 
and of the de- 


rs difpofirion of 
Bor women wit 
Bened excrement 
and there 1s 10° 
fe a pourid, one 
warmic O! hot, 
cing cold it of- 
cold of cen 
ne winde 
rable pain. Hut 
erences of 


i. frown 


gl. viol. fi4? 


Glyfters 


L himple edicines, and their LLje, 


Gly fters,that doe evacuate,are prepared by the councell of the Phy fitian. and of 
divers Simples, being boyled for feverall purpofes. Therefore if the humours bee 


cold which are to bee evacuated, the Gly {ter fhall beafter this manner : kk. Sa/vie, A Glyfter to e. 


grigani, abrotoni, {:mivum an:fi, fenic.cumini an 
carthar Sil. Makeadecogtion of chem, wherein diflolve Diaphon.Hier.Si 
(3. Mellis Clyfter, 


To evacuate Cholericke matter, prepare aGlyfler after this manner, 


quat.remollient .pariet.Cichor: end: .an.m.&. Semin.geat vivid. (Major.an.difi. 


hordet integr? pi. Make a decoction of them, and diflolve ia it 


oevacuate melancholy, this Gly ster following wik be ufefull. 


Ke Fumiter.Cent anr.minoris, -Mercurialis, an.m.i. Polyp. Du.folicul, fenne,an iit. 
feminss Make a decoction, and diflolve there in, Confect. Ha- 
extract ii. olet violati, lilior.an.3%. Sach.rub.mellis viol.an 
fal, 31. And thofe Glyfters doe not only evacuate the humours that offend, but al- 
fo correct the diftemper of the bowels and inward parts. Por the Gly fters dcicribed 
again{t pituitous and melancholy matrer,helpe the cold diftemper ; but that which 
istorcholer, the hot diftemper. Purging medicines, which are diflolved in rhe de- 
coctions of Glyfters, are very ftrong, as, Confec?. Hamech.Benedilla, Diaprun. Solu- 
Diaphenicon, being ufed from 5. vi.to 5i.at moft: but the weaker and more 
gentle are Catholicon. Cafsia, Hitra fimplex, from Svi.to Jil.at molt. 


An Anodyne Gly fter is ufually made without (uch thines ae 
purge or evacuate : ds, 


R. Flor.Chamam.rnelil. boyle them in Milke, and to An Anodyre 
the deco@tion adde (Mucazinss feminw lini fanugract extracte in agua Malva} ii. fa- 


chari albi,olei anethi, chamameli,an.3\. vitellos ovorum duos, fiat Clyfter. Thele Gly- 
{ters fhould bc kept longer in the body, that fothey may more eafily mitigate pane. 


T be example of an afringent Gly fler. 


Ry, Equifets, boyle them in latte uftulsto, to Zxii.tothe An aftringene 
decoction ttrained adde Bols armeni, fanguinu Ar acon, an. ii. ole: ro 311. album, Glyfters. 


ovorum duorum, fiat Clyffer. We ule thefe kinde of Glyflers in Dy tenteries,and in 
the immoderate fluxe of the Hemoroid veines, having firft evacuated the vfuall ex- 
crements. Glyfters, which be farcoticke, epuloticke, and cleanfers of the greater 
guts, and fit for the curing of ulcers, areto be prepared of fuch medicines as are de- 
{cribed before intheir proper Chapters, 


Alimentary Glyfters are mad¢ of the decoction of Chickens, Capons, Cockes, nurthine 
being boyledto a gelly, and ftrongly preft forth. They are alfo prepared of Marrow, Glyfters. 


eclly, which are not altogether fo ftrong as thole which are commonly taken by 
the mouth, becaufe the faculty of concoétion tn the guts, is much weaker than thar 
ofthe ftomacke. Oftentimes alfo the matter of thefe kinde of Glyfters are prepared 
in wine. where there is no paine of the head or feaver , but more frequently inthe 
deco@tion of Barley,and in Milke,adding the yelkes of Egges,and fome {mali quan- 
tity of white Sugar, left by the cleanfing faculty it move the guts toexcretion. And 
therefore Sugar of Rofes is thought better, whichis conceived co bee fomewhat 
binding. Here you may have examples of fuch Glyfters. Ke. Decod#ionts Capi per fecte 
colts tb fachari albi, 3B.mifce, fiat Clyfter. K.Decodti Pulls Galatins, an (>, 
vini opt Ziv. fiat Clyfter. RK, Decodt: hordei mundati in cremorem tb, Laci ss 
boni ovoruem duos, fiat Clyfter. We ule thefe kinde of Glyfters to 

then 


vacua cacold 


phic ginatcke 
mpl, 5 humour, 


| 
q 
Viet. AR lat C viier 
4 
| a 
é 
| 


Of fimple —M edicines, and their Lis. é 


Their Argu- 


ment chat deny 


Glyfters to 
nourifh. 
Confuted firft 
by reafon. 


Secondly by 
experience. 


The common 
ule of Glyfters. 


The ficke,ha- 
ving received 
the Glyfter, 
guuft turne to 
esefide 


then children, old and weake men, and bodies whichare ina Conlumption. But; q 
the ufe of thefe there are three things to be obferved: Firft, that the faculent excre. 
ments be taken away, cither by ftrength of nature, or by art, as by a luppofitory, o, 
an emollient Glyfter, left the alimentary matter, being mingled with them, thoniq 
fo be infected and corrupted. The other is, that there be great quantity given | thar 
{o fome may afcend tothe upper gurs. The third is, that the ficke fleep after the ta. 
king of it ; for fo it is more eafily converted into nourifhment , and the alimentg; 
matter is better kept : for fleep hindereth evacuations. In Glyfters of this kinde Wee 
mutt beware of Salt, Honey,and Oyle ; for the two firft provoke excretion by their 
acrimony, andthe Jaft by his humidity doth relaxate and lubricate. They, who 
thinke no kinde of Glyfter can nourifh or fuftaine the body, relye upon this reap . 
That it is neceflary whatfoever nourifheth , fhould have a triple commutation Or 
conceion in the body: firft,in the ftomacke ; fecondly, in the liver : thirdly. jg 
allthe members. But this opinion is repugnant to reafon and experience: to realop 
fox that a certaine fenie of fuch things as are defedtive, is implanted in all and every 
of the natura!! parts of our body. Therefore fceing nutrition is a repletion of tha, 
which isempty, without doubt theemprty and hungry paits will draw from any 
piace that nourifhment which is fit and convenient for them, and in defect thereof. 
whatfoever they meet with,which by any familiarity may aflwage and fatisfie thei 
defire, But the alimentary Glyfters, by us defcribed, confift of things which agree 
very well with the nature of our bodies, and fuch as are boyled and ordered with 
much art, foto fupply the chylification to bee performed in the ftomacke. There. 
fore they may be drawne in by the meieraicke veines of the guts, which, according 
to Galen, have acertaine attraGtive faculty. And thence they may bee eafily carried 
through the gate veine, liver,and fooverthe whole body. And experience tea- 
cheth, that many fick people, when they could take nothing by the mouth, have bin 
fuftained many daies by the helpe of thefe kinde of Glyfters. Whatis more to bee 
faid¢ We have feen thofe whohave taken a Suppofitory by the fundament,and yo- 
mited it at the mouths by which it alfo appeareth,that fomething may flow without 
danger of the ficke from the guts into the ftomacke. 
~ Commonly they give Glyfters any houre of the day, without any refpect of time, 
but it fhould not be done unleffe a great while after meales, otherwife the meate,be- 
ing hindered from digeftion, willbe drawne out of the ftomacke by the Glyfter. 
Glyfters are ufed to helpe the weaker expulfive faculty of the guts, and by con(e- 
quence alfo of the other parts, both that fuch as through want of age, and old peo- 
ple,and fuch as by reafon of great imbecility by fickneffe cannotadmit of a purging 
medicine, may by this meanes at leaft eafe themfelves of the trouble and burdenof 
hurtfull humours. Gases hath attributed to Storkes the invention of Glyfters,which 
with their bils, having drunke Sea water, which from faltneffe hath a purging qua- 
lity, wath chemfelves by that part, whereby they ufeto bring away the excremenis 
oftheir meates, and of the body, Buta Glyfter is fitly taken after this maner : whi- 
left the Syrenge is exprefled, let the patient hold open his mouth : for by this means 
all the mufcles of the Abdomen, which helpe by compreffion the excretion of the 
puts, arerclaxed. Let him weare nothing that may gird in his belly, let him lye up- 
on his right fide, bending in a femicircular figure ; and fo the Glyfter will the more 
eafily paffe to the upper guts, and (as it were) by an overflowing, wet and wafhall 
the guts and excrements. It hapneth otherwifeto thofe who lye uponehcir left fide ; 
for the Gly fter being fo injeGed, is conceived to abide, and (as it were) co {top 10 
the [nteftinum rectum, or Colon, becaufe in this fite thefe two Inteftines are oppret- 
fed, and as it were fhut up with the weight of the upper guts, A little while he may 
lye upon his backe after hee have received the Glyfter , and prefently afrer hee may 
turne himfelfe on cither fide. And ifthere be paine in any part, fo long as he isable 


he may incline to that fide. Morcover,becaule there are many, who cannot by any 


reafoa bee perfwaded to fhew their buttockes to him that fhould adminifterti¢ 
Glyiter,a foolith thamefaftneffe hindering them : therefore I thought good 10 


this , ‘sce co give the figure of an Inftrument, with which ong may gives x4 


fter to him 
jittle up. 
intothe G 


now ufual! 
forme 
made of th 
Cattle. for 
tharp with 
Honey, or 
monly 
Re, Mei. is 
Suppofico: 
away with 
and refterh 
Of the head 
alfo, when 
manifeft hulj 
filled by th 
Waies by ¢! 
Nodule: 
ftead of 
little a 
bert, the 
drawne for 
cui ada 


} 
filo appenfi. 


A Peflir 
Made with 
the neckeo 


4 
‘| 
+ 
q 
a 
j 
q 
| 
4 
i - 
| _ 
= 

> te * 

@ 

i 
A 
4 
‘ 
i 
it 
7 
be 
1 4 
; 
q 
j 
a 
a 


pnon. Burin 
Brculent CXcre. 
ppofrory, Or 
gthem, thould 
ry piven thar 
p after the ta- 
he alimentary 

this kinde Wee 
ection by their 
They, who 
n this trealon 
mmutation or 
r:thirdly in 
toreafon, 
nalland every 
letion of thar 
Hraw from any 
thereof, 
d fatishe their 
Which agree 
fordered with 
acke. There. 
ich, according 
eafily carried 
xperience tea- 
mouth, have bin 
sis moretobec 
ament,and vo- 
my flow without 


efpect of time, 
the meate,be- 
athe Glyfter. 
mand by 
mc, and old peo- 
lit of a purging 
Sand burden of 
lyfters,which 
apurging qua- 
he excrements 
is maner : whi- 
by this means 
mcretion of the 
him lye up- 
willchemore 
Bet and wafhall 
their left fide ; 
ere) co ftop 10 
es are oppret- 
Me while he may 
y after hee may 
as he isable 
m® cannot by any 
adminifterthe 
Bought 
4 
aay Gives het 


manifeft hurt ; as,in an Enterocele, where the gut fo {wels, that over and above it be 
filled by the glyfter infufed,it would the more prefle the Peritoxexm, fo that {traight- 


fer to himfel fe, by putting up the pipe into the fundament, lifting the burtockesa 
litleup. The pipeis marked with this Letter 4, The body of the Syrenge,where- 
into the Glyfter mu be put, with this Letter 3. 


The figure of a Gly iter pipe and Syrenge, by benefit whereof a 
man may give himfelfe aGly iter. 


| CHapr. XXIII. 
Of Suppofitories, Nodules, aud Peffaries. 


3}Suppofitory is a certaine medicament, formed like untoatent, or gob- 
ort \2? bet of pafte, fuch as is commonly ufed to fat Fowle. It is putup into the 

ral fundament, that it might excite the {phin@er mufcle to fend forth thofe 

ASW) NSC excrements which are kept intheguts. Antiently it had the forme of 

an Acorne, whence it iscalledto this day Glans. Tne Suppofitories we 

now ufually make have the forme of aPeffary , that is, round and longifh, inthe 

forme ofa waxc Candle. They are either weake, ftronger,or fharpe ; the weake are Thedifferen: 
made of the ftalkes or the rootes of Beets, of Lard, boiled Honey with Salt, or of ©** | 
Caftle-fope. The ftronger of purging powders, as, Hiera with Saltand Honey. The 

fharp with Scammony ,Zephorbinm Cologuintida, and like things powdred,and with 

Honey, or the juices of tharpe herbes, or ming!ed with the gals of Beatts. It is com- 

monly made thus: as, K. Melis 31. Sales aut pulveris alterias irritantis 3i. The forme- 

Re, Melis coct: 3\.pul.Colocynthidos 8.Salis gemma. Di. fiat Suppofitortum. Wee ule Theut, 

Suppoficories, when the ficke by his infirmity is unwilling , or not ableto beare or 
away with a Glyfter, as in burning Feavers : or,when as one being injected, is flow, 
and reftethinthe guts. And we ufe the fharper Suppofitories in feporiferous affects 
of the head, that they might provoke the dull faculty of the guts to expulfion. As 
alfo, when the condition of the difeafe is fuch, that by the ule of Glyfters there is 


waies by the relaxed or broken part it might eafily be devolved into the Codde. 
Nodules have the fame ufe with Suppoficories,and are oftentimes fubftituted in 
ftead of Glyfters. They are made of gentle medicines, asthe yelkes of Egees witha 
little Salt and Butter, or of Gall and Honey tyed up in aclothin the forme of a Fil- 
bert, the {tring of it may hang forth, whereby the Nodule in the fundament may be 
drawne forth. This defcription may be an example of Nodules : ke ViteHum The forme oka 
ovi, cui adde (alis modicum, fells vervecis, mellis an. 5? butyri mifce, fiant Noduli Nodale. 
A Peffury is croffer than a Suppofitory, and is appointed for the wombe, being Pediaries. 
made with Cotton-wooll or Silke fteeped in fome medicament, and then put into 
the necke of the wombe. 
A Peffary 


| 
7 3 — 
— 
& SS 
q | = 
4 
f | “4 
\ ~ AW Sa 
4 . 7 \ \ = —¥ ~ 
| 
fe 


Their ule. 


Againit the fuf- 
focation of the 


Mother, 


The making 
oiles by ifufi- 
on, 


A peflary is ufedcither toulcers of the necke of the wombe, or for the Procuring, 
or topping of the Men/fraa, or againft fordide and hurtfull humours of the womb. 
caufing hy{tericall paffions, and therefore to be wafted away andevacuated. T here. 
fore in the compofition of peflaries are ufed gummies, juices, feeds of herbes, roots, 
and many other things, according tothe advife of the Phifitian , they are al{o made 
of a folide confiftence, the bignefle of a finger,that they may enter into the necke of 
the wombe ; thefe being tyed with aftring, which muft hang forth to plucke ir 
out withall when occafion ferves. This following may bean example of their de. 


Of fimple Medicines,and their Lis, 26. 


{cription. myrrh. aloes, an. 5 i. fabin. femin. nigel, arthemif. an.3 i.radic, eHebor 


nig. Si. croci,D i.cum mercurial, melle fiat pefjus letit bee tied to the thioh 
withathread. Orthis, ma/lich. thurii, an. 5 ill. alum. rof. rub. nuc, ji. 


ladan. bypoci. fumach, myrtil. an, 9 iii. fiant pefi cum fucco arnoglof. cotoniorum, Ac. 
cording to this example others may be made for to mollifte; to binde, to cleanfe. to 
incarnate,to cicatrize and cover the ulcers of the womb : they areto be put uD when 
the patient licth inbed,andto be kept all night. 

Peffaries are alfo made of medicinable powders, not onely mingled with fome 
juice, but alfo with thofe powders alone being put into a little bagge of fome thinne 
matter, being ftuffed with alittle cotton that it might be of a convenient ftifteneffe, 


and this kinde of peffarics maybee ufed profitably in the falling of the mo. 
ther. | 


An example of oné mentioned by Rondeletius in hs booke of inward 
Medicines , ws as followeth, 


Re, Benioini, fyracis, caryoph. an. 3 i. gal. mofch. 3%. mofchi, or. vi. fiat pulvis this 
being made up with cotton may be putupintothe body. 


XXIV, 
Of Oyles, 


Ich) 10, of Olives ; but the word isufed more largely, for we call every juice 


f4/ of a fluxible, unctuous,and aiery fubftance, Oyle. There are three 
“S™. differences of thefe oleaginous juices: The firftis of thofe things 


un <2 which yeeld oile by exprc flion, as well fruits as feeds being bruifed, 


that by beating the oily juice may be preflied forth ; fomeare drawn 
without fire, as oile of {weet and bitter almonds, oyle of nuts, of palmaChriffi. O- 


thers are madeto ruone by the helpe of fire,by which meanes is gotten oile of baics, 
linfced oyle, rape oyle, oile of hempe, and'fuch lixe : The manner of drawing oile 
from {eeds is fet downe by -Me/ue in his third booke. 

The fecond fort is of thofe oyles which are made by the infufion of fimple medi- 
cinesin oyle, wherein they leave their qualities : and this isdone three feverall 
waics, the firft is by boyling of roots, leaves, tops of flowers, fruits, feeds, gummes, 
whole beafies, with wine, water, or fome other juice, with common, or any other 
oile, untill the wine, water, or juice bee confumed, which you may perceive tobee 
perfely done, if you caft a droppe of the oyle into the fire, and it maketh no noile 
but burneth. It isto be remembred chat fometimes the feeds or fruitsare for acet- 
taine time to be macerated before they are ferto the fire ; but it aft bee boiled in 4 
double veffell, left the oyle partake of the fire. 

After this manner is made olenm coftinum, rutaceam, decroco,cydoniorum, myrtills- 
rum, mali ichinum, de eapherbio,vulpinum, de {corpionibus, and many others. The {e- 
cond ts by acertainetime of maceration, fome upon hot afhes, others in horfe dung, 
that by that moderate heat the oile might draw forth the effects of the infafed me- 
dicines into itielfe. Thethird is by infolation, thatis, whenthefe or thefe flowers, 


being infufed in oile, are expofed to the funne, that by the heat thereof the we mt 
| | chang 


> 


tle. Moreove 
mon oile of t 

Againe,w 
lofophor 47,0 


which have af 


lages of fenus 
times added 5 


the liniment 


An 


RK. ol. amy 
MUCAT fem. 
linimentum. 


KK. ol, aw) 
etar. 5 8, fiat ! 
thefe which 
the body, be 
able to any 
astheeare,t 
part, they w 

They are 
ments is tha 
Unguents w 
ufedin gangt 
fatty things, 
in the place 
confiftence, 


ea change and c 
 change,ane. 
Th chird 
divers 
after ¢ 
ju 
iL {peake 18 
(hall ip 
Weeule 
i 
j é 
7 
4 
~ 
+ — ‘4 
ra 
d 
| 
ay 
‘ 
4 
q 
a 
«3 
‘ 
. 


Lis.26. 


the procuring, 
of the Wwombe 
ulated. here. 
herbes, roots. 
y arc alfo made 
sto the necke of 
hto plucke 
ple of their de. 
l.radic, ellebgy 

1 to the thigh 
cupref. ij. 
boniorum, Ac. 
Cleanfe, to 
€ put up when 


led with fome 
mof fome thinne 
ftiftenefle, 
of the 


wpard 


mat pulvis. this 


preffed forth 
mall every juice 
are three 
f thofe things 
cing bruifed, 
mine are drawn 
naChrifli, O- 
oile of baies, 
drawing oile 


fimple medi- 
three feverall 
gummes, 
,orany other 
erceive tobee 
keth no noile 
are foracer- 
ec boiled ina 


myrtilie- 
Bhers. The 
fen norfe dung, 
einfufed me- 
hefe lowers, 
f the oile may 
change 


1055 


change,and draw into him {elfe the faculty of the flowers which are infuled : of this 
,indeare oile of rofes, chamomile, dill, lillies, of water lillies, violets, and others, 
ys you may fecan Me/me, 


Thethird kinde is properly that ofthe Chimifts, and is done by refolution made 


sfrer divers manners, and ofthis fortthere are divers admirable qualities of divers The manner of 
oleazinous juices, whether they be made by the funne or fire, or putrefa@tion, as we = by refolu, 


hall Speake in his place hereafter. 

Wee ule oiles when wee would have the vertue of themedicament fo pierce 
Jeepe, or the fubftance ofthe medicines mingled with the oileto bee foftand gen- 
‘le. Moreover, when wee prepare oiles that fhould be of a cooling quality,the com- 
mon oile of the unripe Oliveis to be ufed : of that fhould the oile of rofes be made. 

Againe, when we would prepare oiles of heating qualities, fuch as are 0 /ewm phi- 
jofophorwm, or Of Tiles, ripe oile istobe chofen. 


CHAP. XXV. 


Of Limiments. 


“Dy || for befides oile it is compounded with butter, axungia, and 
t Miifuch like, whichisthe reafon why a liniment is more effica- 
i||cious in ripening and mitigating paine, than fimple oile. The 
varicties of liniments is drawn from their effects, fome coole, 
others hear, fome humect, fome ripen, others by compofiti- 
on are made for divers ufes. The matter whereofthey areu- 

fually made, is oile, axungia, fewet, butter, all chofethings 
which have an oily fubftance or confiftence, as ffyrax liquida, turpentine, the mucj- 
lages of fenugreeke, marfh-mallowes, marrow, and other like. Tothefe are {ome- 
times added powders of rootes, feedes, flowers, rindes, metals, but {paringly, that 
the liniment may be of aliquid confiftence, 


An example of a liniment that is zoodto attenwate, beat, and digeft, is 
this that followeth. 


ol. amyed. amar. lilior. an. 3 i. axung.anat. gallin, an. 5%, butyr. fal. expert. 


mucag. fem, alth. fanugr.¢xtract.ip aq, hy an. 3%. pulver.croci, irees, an. i. fiat 
linimentum. 


This may be anexample of a liniment to humect and mollifie. 
of. amsycd. dulc,3ii.axung. human. 3 8. mucag.femin, malv, extract, in aq, pari- 


tar, 5 flat linimentum you may addea little faffron. There bee many others like 
thefe which may be made for diversaffe&ts, They are eafily applied to every part of 


_ the body, becaufe they are not fo liquid as oiles : the reafon is,they are more agree2 


able to any ofthe parts. Ifthey beto enter intoany crooked narrow paflage, fuch 
as theeare, they muft be more liquid, and have more oile : if they be to fticke onthe 
part, they will admit of more axungia and fewct. ey rete 

They are deceived who thinke thatthe difference betweene liniments and oint- 
ments is,that there is no waxe in liniments as there is in unguents ; for there be fome 
unguents which admit not any waxcto bee added, as 4zyptiacam, and all fuch as are 
uied in gangrenes,and all forts of putride ulcers ;becaufe to thefe kinds of difeafes alk 
fatty things, as oiles, fats, rofines, and waxe, areenemies. Therefore wee fubftitute 
inthe placeofthem in ezyptsacum, hony and verdigreace; for of thefe it hath his 
confiftence, and his quality of cleanfing. 


Crag, 


Liniment is an externall medicine of a meane confiftence, link 
between an oile and an ointment,for it is thicker thanan oile; mami, — 


a 
q 
a 
: 
4 
| 
q 
= 
° 
‘ 
- 


1056 


CuHuar. XXVI. 
Of Ointments. 


= Yntments are of a more folid confiftence than Liniments, and are 


Oyatinenea & \ therefore of more force. Their differences are partly taken from 
ces. their effects ; for {ome heate, others coole,fome dry, and {ome hu. 


mect, cleanfe, {ome corroborate, fome wafte dead fleth, and o. 
thers cicatrize , partly fromthe variety of colours, partly from the 
firft invertors, as, 4/bum rhajis, Deficcattvum rubrum: partly from the number of 
the fimple medicaments whereof they bee made, as, Tetrapharmacum, Triphay 
macum, or Natritum: partly fromthat medicament which is principall in the com. 
pofirion, henceare they called, Unguestum de Lytharzyro, de Minio, Dsapomphe|;. 
gos, and fuch like. They are compounded of herbes, rootes, feedes, fruits, metta|s. 
and parts of Beafts ; the juices and other liquid things being confumed away by 
boyling, as we have {aid in the Chapter of compound Oyles. Herbes,and the parr; 
of them, if they be dry, muft be powdred, and alfo mettals ; but being greene, they 
are boyled and {trained forth, and the juice fo prefled is wafted by boyling. Gums 
and Rofins fome are powdred, others being put to fome convenient liquor aredif 
folved by fire : So Waxeis diflolved inthe Oyle. Inthe compofition of uNnguents 
this proportion is ufually obferved, that for one ounce of powder, two ounces of 
Waxe, and eight of Oyle is added : notwithftanding for that Waxe ferverh onely 
to the confiftence of the oyntment, itis better to leave the quantity to the wil] of 
: the Apcthecary,; but he may be more {paring in adding Waxe tothe oyntments in 
, the Summer than in Winter : for the heate of Summer, drying them, addeth tothe 
i confiftence ; by examples propounded, thefecommon preceps will more plainly 
appeare. 
Ungueitum ad- Ole rof Siv.pil.lepor.bol.armen.terra figil.an.3j. bal.Gallar, an.5?.tritis terendis, 
firingense fimul mixts,addita cera qued uf fictt, fiat wuguentum, Here wee mutt obferve, that 
there bee three waies of making Oyntments : The firft is of thofe which are made 
only by ftirring or grinding in the Mortar without any fire, and fo is made 42wen- 
tum nutritum. The fecond is, when we diflolve Waxe in Oyle, Fat, or fome {uch 
fubftance with fire : and being all diffolved, wee mingle the powders accordingto 


the proportion we noted before. After whichmanner are madelngwentum Aureum, 


Bafilicon, Diapompholigos, Deficcttivum rubrum, Enulatum. The third fort is when 
we bruife herbes with a Peftell, and mingle thea, with Axungy , boy ling themto- 
gether, andthen ftrainingthem, and the Oyntment is that which is trained. There- 
fore let us proceed to explainethis by examples. 


Ke, Lythar.auri triti Cy loti tb ref. rof.Ziv. fiat Ungnentum. Firlt, wee 


Ungutntum nun 


aeaats put the Lytharge into the Mortar, powring ina little Oyle , and working it witha 
" Peftell, that it may grow thicke, then with the Oyle we puta little Vinegar, conti- 
_ nually working, untill they mingle intoone body , now and then betweene whiles 
‘ adding fometimesa little Oyle, fometimes a little Vinegar , untill the whole bee 


brought tothe confiftence ofan Oyntment. If ofan Oyntment of this kinde thou 
wouldft make a blacke plafter, by degrees confume all the Vinegar , {0 {hall the 
plafter fhine and grow blacke. 
cnguentum au Cere citr.3violei boni lb 
veut ci, Si. fiat Unguentum. Firft,diflolve the Waxewith a good part of the Oylc, then 
adde the Rofin and Colophony broken fmall. The& being diffolved, take the com- 
pofition from the fire, and then adde the Turpentine ; when the whole is fomewhat 
cooled , addethe O/:banum and Matfticke being finely powdred, then the Saffron, 
which fhall be macerated in the reft of the Oyle. | 
—‘Tetrapharmacon is fo called, becaufe it is made of foure fimple medicines, 
Som (ites Waxe, Rofin, Pitch, Tallow, ofeach alike quantity ,and fo equally mixed. 
Refin.picis nigr.adip.vituli. cera an.zii., Olei veteris olivarum maturare™, 


if you would haveit hardcr,tbi, chat oyntment alfo is called 
ax 


f imple <M edicines, and their Lin.26 


rofat.viol. 4 
and worke 
alittle Oy 
Ry, Rad.e 
them accor 
being boy! 
put tothe s 
the Quick 
K.Oleir 
powdred, 
together, 
Re, Rad. 
gam 
fufed for ti 
fumed, ana 
Waxe cut i 
Vinegar, & 
Heder«,Co 
vi parvi O 
(Cordus, F 
expertis ib; 
be bruifed 
the reft of 
time, but 
and mine |. 
pinte of 
ved by calt 
menr. 
Re. Tereé 
proprie acci 
aqua 
vires, contra” 
thuris mafi 
Unguentum 
of five hou 
of Honey 
Wwarme, th 
added. TI 
led and inc 
Frankinfen 
der, and {p 
Re. Cortix 
tic. fabar. al 
Prunor. filv 
Then thefe 
Re Pulve 
ia eft, querc 


bi cy lo 
2 gentle fir 
~~ 
-4 
| 
| 
q 
4 
4 
4 
te 
hy 4 


iments, and are 
artly taken from 
and fome bu. 
ead fleth, and o. 
» partly from the 
n the number of 


macum, Tripbar- 


ipall in the com- 
Diapomphe|;- 
S, fruits, mettals, 
olumed away by 
bes,and the parts 
ing greene, they 
boyling. Gums 
it liquor aredif 
ion of unguents 
> (Wo ounces of 
xe ferveth onely 


ty to the will of 


he oyntments in 
m,addeth tothe 
ill more plainly 


B.tritis terendis, 
ftobferve, that 
» which are made 
is made Uncoucn- 
t, or fome fuch 
ers according to 
uird fort is,when 
oyling them to- 
{trained. There- 


tum. Firft, wee 
orking it with a 
Vinegar, conti- 
Betweene whiles 

[i che whole bee 
this kinde thou 
ar, fo fhallrhe 


he Oyle, then 
1,take che 
le is fornewhat 
1en the Saffron, 


ple medicines, 
mixed. 
Bafilicon , the 


Waxe 


Waxe being cut {mall and diflolved in Oyle, then adde the reft of the things, which 
being diffolved, thou fhalt havethe defired oyntment. 

K.Ole folani bortenfis, iv .Cefuf.lot Pompholyzos, plum- itr g.Diapo®- 
biufti loti, olib.puri, am.3\>.fiat Uncuentam. Diflolve the Waxe in the Oyle with 
a gentle fire, then you fhall take it from the fire, and adde to the reft of the ingredi- 
ents, working them together in a ftone Mortar, powring on the juice by degrees, at 
jeaft fo much of it as will incorporate. 

Litharg.auri, ceruf.an.3i(, Camphor. 53. cere, 3iiP. Ungadefecati- 
rofat.viol.an Ziii.fiat Unguentum.Diflolve the Waxe in the Oyle,then fetitto coole, 
and worke in the powders witha {patter, and at laftaddethe Camphor diffolved in 
alittle Oyle of Rofes, or Rofewater. 3 

Re, Rad.enul.campan.coct.cum aceto cy contuf.ut decet Axu COMMB. 
an.zi).argen, vive extinels, tercb. lot.an fal.commu. pulverat:, incorporate 
them according toart. The boyledrootes muft be drawne througha Sieve, which 
being boyled by a gentle fire with the Axunzia, muft bee continually ftirred , then 

ttothe Sale with Oyle & Waxe:when you fet it fromthe fire rocoole,then adde 
the Quickfilver,being killed with alittle Axanzia and Turpentine. 

K.Olei make it thus: Letthe Ceruffe bee finely 
powdred, and putinto the Oyle and Waxe whilft itis hot, and fo worke the whole e 
together, untill chey fhall be brought into abody. | 

Re Rad, Ath.\bj Lint, fenugr.an.tb (>, Scille xiii. Olei comb. ii. cer terebinth, De Alibea 
cam refn.siii, The rootes and feeds being bruifed, are in- 
fufed for three dayes in five pintes of water; boyle them untill three ounces be con- 
fumed, andthen draw forththe Mucilage, and boyle it withthe Oile, then adde 
Waxe cut {mall: chefe being taken from the fire, the Calbanum being diflolved with 
Vinegar,& mingled with the Turpentine, muft be added together with the Gummie 
Heder, Colophony,and Rofin. 

Re. Ocul-populi fol:papaverts nigr..Mandrag, byofcyamii, latuca, fampervi- 
vi parvi Cy magni, viole nigra, folani, umbilics vencris, few cymbalar. bardane, an:3\, 
(Cordus, Fernelius , Nicolaus fingulorum siii.prafcribunt) Adipis fwillt recentis falis 
expertis \bii vini boni, fiat Unguentum.The Poplar buds and Violet leaves mutt 
be bruifed and maccrated inthe 4.xvuzéa for the {pace of two moneths, that is,untill 
the reft of the herbes beready ; forthey cannot bee gathered before the Summer 
time, but the Poplar buds and Violets may be hadin March. They muft be bruifed 
and mingled very well, and fet in a warme place for eight dayes; then adde one 
pinte of {trong Vinegar, and boyle them till it be confumed, which may bee percei- 
ved by cafting a little of it intothe fire, then ftraine it forth, and put up the Oynt- 
meng. 

Re. XiV.O , florss, feu viridss aris (nam hic flos aris non Ong. 
proprie accipitur pro granulis, qua (cimtilarum tuftar ab are exilinnt dum a fabris ferra-™” 
aqua tingitur : fed pro virial aris ufurpasur, cujus contra maligna ulcera note font 
vires, contra qua omsnind comparatum) \.ammon. Sxiv.aristol.lon. 
shuris mafeuls an. Sviemyrrhe galbani an diti.bdellis, Svi, Litharg.3ix, olei, flat 
Unguentum. The Litharge isto be mingied with two ounces of Oyle for the {pace 
of five houres, and witha gentle fire to be boyled untill it come to the confiftence 
ofHoney , and be alwayes ftirring , left ic burne : being taken from the fire and 
warme, the Waxcand the Rofin, being diflolved, withthe reft of the Oyle,muft be 
added. Then put to it, whenitis cooling, thc Gummes diflolved in Vinegar, boy- 
led and incorporated with the Turpentine. Then the Ariffolochia, Myrrhe, and 
Frankinfenfe are to be mingled,and laft of all the Verdigreafe, being in fine pow- 
der, and {prinkled in:and fo the unguent is made. . 

Ke. Cortic.median.caftan. cortic.median.querc. cortic.median, zland, mirtil.equel.cor- 
tic. fabar. acinor.uvar. forbor. ficcor. lor 
Drunor, filveft. an.ri plantagints, lbyiii, cer.mov, Sviii oles myrtillor 
Then thefe things which follow,being finely powdred, are to be fprinkled in. 

Re Pulveris corticis median: caftan.corticis mediani gland.cortic, median. arb. gland. 
deft, off.cruris bovis myrtih.acinor wvar. forbor. ficcoran3 

Trochifcorwm 


\ 


7 
7 * * 
' 
1 
| q 
| 
i 
| 
| 
| 
3 
4 
! 
7 
2 


re... 


— ‘Rapes 
2 


Trechifcorumde carabe, 3ii. fiat Unguentum, make a decoction cor ticis median; 
arbors quercus,acini forbor equif.feminis myrtil.folior. pruns fy]: 
veftris, cort.fabar.cortic.mediant gland.cortic.castan gallar.inthe Plantaine sates 
forthe fpace of two houres, then ftraine it , and divide the liquor into nine Parts 
wathing the Waxe, diffélved with the Oyle ot Myrtils {even times; the liquor beine 
all {pentyand the Waxeand Oyle being melted, then infperge the POWders, Cry); 
bows, ofsium, forbor.me [pil 
num myrtil.acinor. evar. and at laftthe Trochiices carab.atter this manner {hal! you 


make this Oyntment. 
ftoma- abjinth, maflich.de {pic.rofat.an.3 (3, pulver.abfinth.rof. an 
sho, Caryoph.cinam.mastich.galang.an.di. Powder thofe things which are to bee pow. 


dred, and with a fufficient quantity of Waxe make a foft oyntment, wherewith je, 
the ftomacke be annointed one houre before meales continually. 

tang.ad morfus Cer.alb tii. ceruflitharg. auri, an andi. tharis,3i, ole; 

4.t- ib}, Boyle the Litharge inthe oyle to a meane confiftence, then adde to the Waxe 

——_ 8& Cerufle, and when it will not fticke to the fingers,take it from the fire, and putin 
the Medulla, when it beginneth to coole, the Myrrha and Thus, being fincly pow. 
dred, muft be caft in by little and little,and the oyntment may be put up for ufe. The 
chops of the fundament, and remollient Peflaries are likewife made ot it , and it js 
very good againftthe bitings of madde Dogges, and the punctuics of nerves and 
tendons, keeping wounds forhat they doe not agglutinate. 

3.De comp.med. pinguts, popanacis in aceto forts, oleo liliorum vetert porct 

fee-gen. ziti.fiat Unguentum. Oleumex finapiis good againtt thole bitings of mad beafs 
and pun@ured nerves : for it doth Open wounds when they are cicatrized. Oynr. 
ments are ufed to overcome the contumacy of a ftubborne evill by their firme and 
clofe fticking to , efpecially if there fhall need no medicine to goe further into 


the body. 


— 


XXVIII. 
Cerats and Emplafters. 


Whaca Cerat Uch affinity there is inthe compofition of a Cerat and Emplafter , that 
3S. 


f Sf oftentimes the one is taken forthe other, as is ufually done in Oynt- 


~ 
The differen. : ments and Liniments. A Cerat is acompofition more folide and hard 
= (Qs -oe,)than an oyntment, and fofter than a plafter, having his name from 


Waxe,which taking away the fluidne(s of the oyle, bringeth him to his 
confiftence, The differences of Cerats are taken {ome from the parts by which they 
arc called, 2s Ceratum flomachicum : {ome from the effects,as Ceratum refrigerans Gé- 
deni : Others from the fimple medicaments which are the chiefe in the compofiti- 
on, aS, Ceratum Santalinum. The proper matter ot Cerats is, new Waxe & Oyle, 
being appropriated tothegriefe of thefe, orchofe parts ; fothat Liniments & Oynt- 

ments doe {carce differ from Cerats, if they admit of Waxe: for if oyntment of 
Rofes thould have Waxe added to it, it were no longer an oyntment, but a Cerat. 

Cerats, which are made with Rofins, Gummes, and Metals, doe rather deferve 
thenames of Emplaftersthan Cerats. And therefore Ceratum ad Hernias, we 
monly call Emplaftram contra Rupturam, that paihe or inflammation do grieve any 
art, we make Cerats of plafter, diflolved with Oyle, left that the more hard an¢ 
vie confiftence of the Emplafter fhould be troub)ctome ro the part, and hinder 
perfpiration : and therefore laying afidethe compofjtion of Cerats, let us {peake of 

Emplatters. | 

n Emplafter is acompofition which is made up of all kinde of medicines, ¢{pe- 

cially of fatand dry things, agreeing in one grofle,vilcous,folid,and hard body {ti 
king co the fingers. The differences of Emplafters are taken from thofe thing, 

-which the variety of oyntments are taken from. Of thofe things which goe into the 


‘compofition ofan Emplafter, fome are only ufed for their quality and og 


Rmplafters. 


Lin. 26 
Wine, Ving 
ding G4 
be ulefull 
eft, to cle 
brought 
dainly avy, 
juice, or Wi 
rather bee 
are boy led 
rhings 
worth our 
For roots, | 
powder, ar 
che fire, 
compolicic 
which ts {tr 
to be 
ther things 
ro docin £ 
Mucilages, 
much of oj 
which are ii 
jathe 
ved in fom 
that jiquor. 
folved iu 
on ofthe li 
have the cx 
ved, firained 
eled with th 
in for Vin 
of weake< 
Other G 
platters lait 


Auripi comer 


laft,uolefic 


like conlidd 


-tn afrer the 


rhe 
contili« 
dure as lon: 
tharge of fh 
Over, this 
boyled ro h 
fats, chen th 
You thall k: 
nous, and {t 
youth® 
hardto beb 
The quat 
butan artifix 
make rhe 
Make being | 
{tead of 
fiicke medicff 
Moitall 
the conlittedl 


| 3 
a 
4 
og 
by 4 4 
7 
OF 
q 
> ] 
& 
‘ 
q 
‘ 
4 ‘ 
| 
die 
4 
4 
if 
4 
q 
4 
4 
y 
} 
; 
‘ 
1 
& 


Or Wine, Vinegar, Juices. Others to make the confiftence, as Litharge (which,accor- 
oltor.prunt yl ding to Galea, is the proper matter of Emplafters) Waxe, Oyle, and Rofin. Others 
lantaine water peulefull for borh, as, Gums, Metals, parts of beafts,Rofin, as Turpentine to di- 


Nine parts. 
¢ liquor being 
waders, 
{hal} you 


thuris, 3i, 
ase the W axe 
ire, and putin 
hacly pow. 
D forufe. The 
f it, and it is 
of nerves and 


porct A 
of mad beafls 
rized. Oynr- 
cir firme and 
further into 


nplafter, that 
one in Oynt- 
slide and hard 


gelt,to cleanfe,anddry. Of Emplatters, fome are made by boyling, fome are 
brought into a forme without boyling ; chofe which bee made without fire, doe {o- 
dainly diy, nor are they vilcous : they are made with meale and powdcr, with fome 
juice, or with fome humid matter mingled with them. But platters of this kind may 
rather bee called hard oyntments, or cataplafines : for platters properly fo called 
are boy led, fome of them longer, fome fhorter . according to the nature of thofé 


. menthan3i things which make to the compofition of the Emplafter : Therefore it will bee 
‘to bee Pow. worth our kabour to know what Emplafters doc aske morc, or which leffe boyling. 
IwhePewith ler For roots, woods, Icaves, ftalkes , flowers {ceds, being dryed, and brought into 


powder, are to be added laft, when the plafter is boyled as it were , andtaken from 
the fire, Ieftthe vertue of thefe things beloft. But if greene things are to be ufedina 
compolicion, they areto be boyled in fome liquor, and being preffed forth, thar 
which is {trained to be mingled with the reft of the compofition, or if there be juice 
ro be ufed, itisto be biuifedand preffed forth, which is fo robe boyled withthe o- 
ther things, that nothing but the quality is to remaine with the mixture,as wee ufe 
to doe in Empl.de Janua, feu Betonicayc> Gratia Dei. The fame is to bee done with 
Mucilages, butchat by their clammineflethey domorerefift the fire. But there doth 
much of oyle and honey remaine in plafters when they are made. Thofe juices 
which are harcued by concretion, as, 4loes, Hypocy itis, Acacia, whenthey are ufed 
inthe compofition of a plafter, and be yetnew, they muft be macerated and diffol- 
ved in fome proper liquor, andthen they arc to bee boyled tothe confumprion of 
that liquor. Gums, as, Opepanax, Galbanum, Sagapanum, Ammoniacum, mult be dif- 
folvediu Wine, Vinegar, or Aqua vite, then ftrained and boyled to the confimpti- 
on ofthe liquor, aud then mixed with the reft of the plafter. And that they may 
have the exact quantity of Gums and Pitch, it is neceffary that firft they bee diffol- 
ved, firained, and boyled, becaufe of the ftickes and fordid matter which are min- 
eled withthem. You muft have refpeé alfoto the liquor you ufe to diflolve them 
in ; for Vinegar of the beft Wine doth more powerfully penetrate, than that which 
is of weake and bad Wine, 

Other Gums, which are drier, are to be powdred, and are to bee mingled with 
platters laft of all. Metals,as, Ais wflum, Chalcitis, Magues, Bolus Armenus Sulphur, 
Auripiementum, and others, which may bee brought to powder, muft bee mingled 
laftunleffe advice begiven by long boy ling to dull the fierce qualities of them. The 


i$ name from like confideration isto be had of Rofin, Pitch, and Turpentine, which mutt be put 
th himto his in after the Waxe, and may notbe boyled but very gently ; but the fats are mingled 
by which they whilftthe other things are boyling. The Litharge is to be boyled with che oyleroa 
efrigerans Gé- jut confiftence, if wee would have the platter dry without biting. Cerufle may en- 
he compofiti- dure as long boy ling, butrhen the platter thall not bee white , neither will the Li- 
axe & Oyles tharge of filver make a plafter with fo good a colour as Litharge of gold. More- 
eatart Oynt- over, this order mult bee obferved in boyling up of plafters : the Litharge muft bee 


oyntment of 
but a Cerat. 


boyled to his confiftence ; juices or mucilages are to be boyled away, then addethe 
fats, chen the dry Rofin, Waxe, Gums, Turpentine, and after them the powders 


You fhall know the plafter is boyled enough by his confiftence, grofle, hard, gluti- Sinasefs 
nous, and {ticking to the fingers, being coaled in the ayre, water, Or upon a {totte, platter perfet 
Alfo you fhall know it by his exact mixtion, if rhatall the chings become one maffe 'y Sey'«s 
hardto be broken. 

The quantity ofthings which are to be put into a plafter can hardly be defcribed, yyequanciey | 
but an artificiall conjceCturemay be given, by confidering the medicaments , which of things" be 
make rhe plafter ftiffe, and of a confiftence, and the juft hardoefle and foftneffe they f*""” ae 
make being boyled. Waxe is not put into fuch plafters wherein is Labdanum,for that 
isin ftead of Waxe. For if there thall be in the compolition of a plafter fome empla- 
Licke medicaments, the Waxe fhall be the leffe : Contrariwife, if they thall bee al- 
mo(tall liquid things, the Waxe fhall be increafed fo muchas {hall be neceflary for 
the confiftence of the plafter. The quantity of the Waxealfo mutt bee altered ac- 

| Vvvv 2 cording 


athet deferve 
144, WE COM 
do grieve any 
yore hard and 
t, and hinder 
etus {peake of 


dicines, e{pe- 
ard body fti¢- 
thofe things, 
ch goe into the 
nd faculty, 

Vine, 


‘ 
Fa 
| | 

| 

| 

i 

* 
| 
| 


1060 


Of imple Medicines, and their LLfe, Lis.z6. 


Empl. deVigo 


Ds feu ce 


cording tothetime, or the aire ; therefore itis fit toleave thisto the artand judge. 
ment of the Apothecaric. Emplafters are fometimes made of ointments by thead_ 
dition of waxe, or dry rofine, or {pme other hard or folide matter. Some would ; hat 
a handfull of medicaments poudred,fhould be mingled with one ounce,oran ounce 
and an halfe of oile, orfome fuch liquor, butfor thisthing nothing can Certainely 
beedetermined: Onely in plafters defcribed by the Antients there mutt bee pre, 
care had, wherein hee mutt bee very well verfed, who will noterre inthe defcribin 
the dofe of them ; and therefore wee will here give you the more common formes 
of plafters. 

ol. chamem. aneth,de (pica, liliacei, an. ii. ol, decroce, i. pingued. porci, 


with Mercury. pingwed. vitul. tb emphorb. 3 y.thuris,5 x. ol. laurs, 318. ranas viv, nuvi. pineued, 


viper. vel loce human.3 il lumbricor _lotor.in Vine, ill (8, [uc C1 ehul; enul, 474, 
5 ii. (chananthi, tachados, matricar. an, m ii. vini oderiferi, ' ii, Litharg, auri, tb j, 


rebinth. clare, ii. ftyraces liquid, 31/8. argemti vivi extinch, much asthe prefene 


occafion fhall require, and the ficke fhall be able to beare, and make up the plaifter, 
To one pound ot the plafter they doe commonly adde foure ounces of quick. filver, 
yet forthe moft partthey doe encreafe the dofe, as they defire the platter thould be 
ftronger : the wormes mult be wafhed with faire water, and theo witha little wine 
tocleanfe them from their earthie filth, of which they aretull, and fo the frogs are 


to be wafhit and macerated in wine, and fo boiled together tothe confumption of g 


third part; then the f{quinanth muft bee bruifed, the feverfew and the ftzchas cyt 
fmall, and they being added, tobe boiled tothe confumption of one pint, and be. 
ing _ fufficiently, the decoction being cooled fhall bee {trained and kepr ; and 
the Létharge is to be infufed for twelve houres inthe oile of chamomile, dill, lillies, 
faffron,and the axungies above {poken of. Then boile them all with a gentle fire, by 
and by taking it from the fire, and adde one quart of the decoCtion above {poken of, 
then{et it tothe fire againe thatthe decoction may beeconfumed, and then by de. 
addetothe reft of thedecodtion : the oile of {pike fhall bee referved unto the 

ft, which may give the plafter a good {mell. Then are added the juices of walwort 
and enula, which muft bee boiled untill they bee wafted away. Afterwards it being 
taken from the fire, tothe compofition is added the frankincenfe and euphorbium, 
and white wax as much as fhall fuffice. When the whole maffe thall coole,then at lat 
is mingled the quick-filver extin&,turpentine, oile of bitter almonds, baies, {pike,of 
line, ftyrax and axungia, being continually ftirred, and it fhall bee made upupona 
ftone into rolls. Unleffethe quick-filver be well extinguifhed, it will runneall in- 
to rae place,and unleffe you tarrie untill the compofition coole,it will vapour away 
infume. 

Ry, croci, 3 ii. bdellii, maftich, ammon. flyrac. liquid.an. 5%. cera alb. th tereb. 3 vi. 
medul.cruris vacca,adipis anferini, an. 3i. efypi, vel fi defit, axung. gallin. 3 ix.oles 
nara. quantum [at is ad magdaleones formandes,exprefionis (cille, 5 i [8.olibami, evi 
sul. 3i. Theefypas, fepum, adeps, medulla, cera,are to bee diffolvedtogether ; when 
they coole, adde the ammoniacum diflolved in the decoction of feaugreeke and cha- 
momile, halfe an ounce, and fo much juice of {quils, then put tothe ftyrax and tur 

tine, ftirring chem continually ; thenadde the ddel/sum, ol:banums, mattich, aloes, 
rought into fine powder, and when they are perfectly incorporated into a maile, 
let them bee made up with olewm nardinum into rolls. 

terebinth, tb refin. thi, cer, alb.3 iv. maftich. 3i.fol. verben.betonis. pimpintl, 
44.m i. The herbes being greene, the tops are to bee cut and bruifed ina {tone mor- 
tar, and boiled in red wineto the confumption of one third part. To the ftrained|!- 
quor adde waxe cut into {mall pieces, and being diffolved by the fire ; the liquor be- 
ing con{umed put to the rofine, when it fhall coole adde the Maftick powdred,wor- 
king it with your hands, by which it may bee incorporated with the reft ofthe 
things. 

Re. fucct beton, plantag.apii,an.% i, cere,pich,refin.tereb. an, th fiat empl. the 
juices areto bee mingled with the waxe being diffolved, and boiling them untill 
three parts be confumed, addethe rofine and pitch, which being diflolved and hot, 
muft be ftrained, and then addethe Turpentine, and make up che plafter. f 


4 rad, alth, ficunm 


Ina, 


Lis. 24 


croci, 
and draw fof 
serch. zalb, at 
by lictle andy 
co art, and 
myrrha, anc 
oyleof 
COM 
them contin 
the platter wi 
Kye. Lythar: 
mingled wit 
come to 2g0 
not take it fr 
u. ol. vet. 
oyle bee min 
to 2 200d co 
fpatter 
from the fire§ 
pices 
guerat, 5 vi. ¢ 
pulveris Vern 
1b i, fiat 
oile of myrti! 
Cut IN pieces, 
glew or {tiffe 
and waxe bro§ 
afterwards th: 
terebinth, ma’ 
vermes, fan 
continually 
peftell ina mom 
aneth. an. 
at empl. Ferne! 
the oiles and 
liquor be con{q 
fa mult be add 
my 
fep: VACCini, an. 
Hil, 3 lil. tered. 
aNd mini ums ari 
tle rofe water,| 
of rofes and 
liftence of 
after adde tlic 
Of a plafter. 
Re, bitharc. 


pini, ce 
the oyle before] 
; after 
mult bec 
Waxe and rofinc 


We ufe plaite 


‘ 
ee 
| 
| 
me 
| 
a 
4 
4 
4 
| 
4 
a 
| 
% a 
wt 
4 
| 
a | 
| 


Lis.26, 
artand judge- 
ents by thead. 
me would thar 
c¢e,oran ounce 
can Certainely 
mutt bee Preat 
the defcribing 
mmon formes 


wed. porci, th 
NU. Vi. pinened, 
buli, enul, 4n4, 
Aart, ib te. 
as the prefene 
p the plaifter, 
f quick. filver, 
after fhould be 
tha little wine 
o the frogs are 
fumption of a 
he ftzchas cut 
> pint, and be- 
and kept ; and 
le, dill, lillies, 
| gentle fire, by 
ove {poken of, 
nd then by de- 
erveduntothe 
es of walwort 
wards it being 
| euphorbium, 
ole,then at laft 
baies, {pike,of 
up upon a 
runne all in- 
| vapour away 


(&. tereb. 3 vi. 


gallin. 5 ix.oles 
libani, [evi Ut 
gether ; when 
reckeand cha- 
ftyrax and tut- 
h, aloes, 
J into a mafie, 


omic. pimpinel. 
a ftone mor- 
he ftrained li- 
the liquor be- 
owdred,wor- 
he reft ofthe 


fiat empl. the 
them untill 
hived and hot, 


rer. 


Lis, 26. Of fimple Medicines, and their U/e. 


XL. croci, picts com. (or rather picis savalis, becaufe this em plafter is ufed to difcuffe | 


and draw forth the matter which caufeth the paine of the joints) coloph, cera, an. 3 ii. =" ie 
terch. galb,ammon. thuris, myrrha, maflich. ax. 3 The cera, pix, and colophonia are 
by little and littleto bee diffolved, to which adde the guimmes diffolved according 
coart, and mingled with the terebinth; andtaking it from the fireadde the thus, 


myrrba, andat laft the crecws in fine powder, and then make it up into rowles with 
oyle of wormes, 


4.01. com. 1b ii. ceruf. fubtilif: bi. boile them together witha gentle fire, ftirrin 


them continually untillthey come tothe body of an emplatter : if you would have Dé cerujas 
the platter whiter, take but 3 ix. of the oile. 


triti, acet. fortif.an. tb 8. ol: antiq.™ i. fiat emplaftram : letthe oile bee rripharmacum; 
mingled with the litharge for the fpace of tweive houres,then boile them untillthey / *gram 
come to agood confiftence, putting in the vinegar by little and little; but you thall 
not take it fromthe fire untill the vinegar be quite wafted away. 

ol. vet. tb iii, axung. vet. fine fale, tb ii. lytharg. trit. tb iii. vitrio/.3 iv. let the Dizpalmas ei 
oyle bee mingled with the lytharge for the {pace of twelve houres; and boile them diacha/ciseos. 
roagood conliftence, thenaddetothe axungia, ftirring continually witha 


{patter made of the palme tree, reed, or willow, and being fufficiently boiled, take it 
from the fire, and adde the vitrioll in fine powder. 


KK, pices naval, aloes, an. 3 iti. /ytharz. cere, coloph. galban. ammoniac. it. vifei 
queral, 3 Vi. gypfi uft.utrin{que ariftoloch. ana, 3 iv. myrrhe, thuris,an. 5 vi.tereb,3 it. 
pulveris vermiumterrefirinm, callar. utrinfg.confolid. bol. arm. iv. fang. humani, 

bi, frat emplajt. If you would have it of avery good confiftence,you may add of the 

oile of myrtills or maftich, 1b &, you fhall make it thus : Take the skinne ofa Ramme 


| cutin pieces;and boyleit in an hundred pints of water and vinegar untill it come tod 


olew or ftiffe gelly, in which you fhall diffolve the quer. then adde the pitch 
and waxe broken into {mall pieces,and if you will you may adde the oile with them, 
afterwards the za/ban. and ammoniac. diflolvedin vinegar, being mingled with the 


terebinth, may be added. Then adde the litharge, bol. ariftoloch. confolida, 


vermes, fanz. human. At laft the myrrhe, thus, colophon, and alse, ttitring them 


| continually ; andthat they may bee the better mingled, worke the plafter witha hot 


peftell ina mortar. 
1... mucag. fem, lini, rad, alth.fanug, lilsacet, cham. peymeaginibas: 


aneth, an.3i S.ammon. opopanac. facap. 8, croci, 3 ii. cera nov. ib §, tered. 8. fi- 
| atempl, Fernelius hath 5 xx. of wax : the wax being cut finall mult be mingled with 


the oiles and the mucilages; {tirring them continually with a wooden [patter till the 
liquor be confumed. Then the 


} ta muft be added, and laft of all the faffron finely poudered. 


gummes diffolvedand mingled with the terebinthi- 


1.01. rof. myrtil.ung. populeon, ana, iv. pinguedinis gallin-5 ii. febi arietis 


VACCINI, 5 V1. pinzued. porct, lytharg. Auri, argenti, an. Ml. 5 1V. 


iii. tered. 3 iv. cera, g.f. fiat emplaftrum vel ceratum mole, The lithargiros, cerufa, 
and minium are to be brought into fine powder, feverally being {prinkled witha lit- 
| de rofe water,left the fineft of it fhould flye away ; thefe being mingled with the oile 
} ofrofesand myrtles, witha gentle fire may bee boiled untill they come tothe con- 


fitence of hony ;then adde the axungia’s, and boile them till the whole grow black, 


after adde the febum, and that being diffolved take it from the fire; and thenadde 


theanguensum populeon, and {ome waxc ifthere be need, and fo bring it to the forme 
fa plafter. 


kk, litharg. puri pul, ol. ivin. chamam, aneth.an.3 Vili. mucag. fem. lini, fenng, Dischylon mage 


ficunm ping. uvar.pafjar.fucci treo, (cille, @fipt,icthyocolla, an. 3 tereb. 
Dili. pini, cere flava, an.3ii,fiat emplafirum: The litharge isto be mingled with 
the oyle before it be fet to the fire, then by a gentle fire itis to be boiled to a juft con- 
~ 4 ence; after the mucilage by degrees muft bee put in, which being confumed the 
Wices muft bee added and the i@hyocolla,and they being wafted too,then putto the 


“axe androfine, then taking the whole fromthe fire, add the ¢efipus and terebin- 
(ina, 


We ule plafters when wee would have the remedy fticke longer and firmer tothe Theufe of 
| 3 part 


° 
ae 
a 
4 
* 
& 
é 
* 
q 


q 

4 


part, and would not have the ftrength of the medicamentto flye away or exhale too 
fuddenly. 


Cuarp. XXVIII. 
Of Cataplafmes and Pultifjes. 


made of herbes boiled tender, and fo drawne through an haire fearfe, adding ojl-, 
andaxungia’s thereto. Thecrudeare made of herbes beaten, or their juices mixed 
with oile and flower,or other powders appropriate to the part or difeafe., as the Phy. 
fitian fhall thinke fir. The quantity of medicines entring thefe compofitions can 
{carce be defined, for that they muft be varied as we would have the compofition of 
a fofter or harder body.Verily they ought to be more grofle and denfe when as we 
defire to ripen any thing, but morefoft and liquid when wee endeavour to difcuffe, 
We ule cataplafmes to affwage paine, digeft, difcuffe and refolve unaaturall tumors 
and flatulencies. They ought to be moderately hot and of fubrle parts, fo to atrrag 
and draw forth ; yettheir ufe is fufpected the body being notyet purged, for thus 
they draw downe more matter into the affected part. Neither mutt wee ufe thefe 
whenas thematter thatisto bedifcufledis more groffe and earthy, for thys 
the fubtlerparts willbe onely difcuffed, and the grofle remaine impa@ in the part 
unleffe your cataplaf{me be made of an equall mixture of things ,not only difcufling, 

Lip. 2.adglae, DUt alfo emollient, as it is largely handled by Galen, 
ubi defcbirrbo. This fhall be largely illuftrated by examples. As, medwl, panss, 1b 6, decoguay. 
in latte pingni, adde olei chamenms, 3%, axung. galin. 5 i, fiat cataplafma. Or, rad. 
lth. 3 iii, fol. malv. fenecionis, an.m i. fem. lini, fenug. an. ii. ficus, ping, nu.vi. de. 
A ripeningca- Coquantar in aqua, per fetaceum tran{mittantur, addendo ole: lilior, 31. far. bord. 
4xung. porcin.5 i &fiat cataplafma, Or, far. fab. cr oreb. an. 3 ii.pulv. chamem.¢ 
plafine. melil. an. 3 iii. ol, irin. cy amyzd. amar. an.>i.fucci rut. 3%. fiat cataplafma, Pultifles 
How pulslies differ not from cataplafmnes, bur that they ufually confift of meales boiled in oile, 
sleGuens “water, hopy, or axungia, Pultifles for the ripening of tumours are made of the floure 
of barly, wheat, and milke, efpecially in the affects of the entralles ; orelfe todry 
and binde,of the meale of rice, lentiles, or Ovobus with vinegar; orto cleanfe,and 
they are made of hony, the floure of beanesand lupines, adding thereto fome old 
oile, or any other oile of hot quality, and fo make a difcufling pultis. Alfoanodine 
Aripeningea- Pultifles may bee made with milke; asthusforexample,X. arin. triticea, il. mice 
taplaime. purifsimi, iti. decoquantur in lacte, cy fiat pulticula. farin. hordei &fab. an. 
3 il. far. 5 iit. decoquantur in hydromelete, addendo mellis quatt. i. olei amyg. amar. 
li. fiat pulticula, Weeufe pultifies forthe fame purpofe as wee doe cataplaimes, 
to the atfe&s both of the internall and externall parts. Wee fometimes ufc chem for 
the killing of wormes, and fuch are made of the meale of |upines boiled in vine- 


gar, with an Oxes gall, or ina deco&ion of Worme-wood, and other fuch like bit- 
terthings. 


Their ule. 


CHAP: 


in Water OF ¥ 
and lillies. 
nugrecke. 
which aret 
orthe halfe 
Re. 
an 
agua, Una 
fiat fotus. 
fion and nec 
Weule 
part, that fo 
attenuate th: 
dicines. Th 
pleafe. The 
the male: wil 
wrine Our, am 
(efpecially 
hot the long 
thing, that { 
ding to Hipp 


ther futures, 
Or membran 
feeds. fruits. 
They are bo 
alfo be made 
Sometimes 

l.cum acet: 
braine, whe: 
les, with a fo 

We ufe E: 
Diaflole of 
the in flamed 
Cmbrocation 
kenor difloc 


'sbound. Fal 


KG 
Ataplafmes are not much unlike to emplafters leffe properly {0 calfeg 
The matter of Ws 7 for they may be {pred upon linnen cloaths and ftoupes like them, and : 
foapplied tothe grieved parts. They are compofed of roots, leayec 
fruits, flowers, feeds, herbes, juices, oiles, fats, marrowes, mealesto. 
| P—emTeA fines. Of thefe fome muft bee boiled, others crude. The boiled 3,, 
CES 
Wey \ 


or exhaletoo 


erly fo called, 
like them, and 
roots, leaves, 
es, meales,ro. 
he boiled are 
, adding oiles 
r juices mixed 
as the Phy- 
npofitions can 
ompofition of 
fe when as we 
our to difcuffe, 
paturall tumors 
ts, fo to atrrad 

reed, for thus 
mt wee ule thefe 
thy, for thus 
pact in the part 
nly difcuffing, 


1b 8, decoguan. 
ma. Or, rad. 
nu.vi. de. 
bord. 
vu. chamam. 
Bafma, Pultilles 
oiled in oile, 
de of the floure 
- orelfe todry 
to cleanfe,and 
reto fome old 
. Alfoanodine 
ticea, ii. mice 
ordei Cr fab. « 
lei amyg. amar. 
cataplafmes, 

es ufe them for 
boiled in vine- 
fuch like bit- 


CHAP: 


ic. 


2 


CHAP. 


Of Fomentations, 


RSAC Fotus or fomentation isan evaporation or hot lotion, chiefly ufed tomol- 
Gf # lifie, relaxe and aff wage painc, confifting of medicines having thefe fa- 

ASS culties. A fomentation commonly ufethto be moift, being ufually made 

of the fame things as embrocations, to wit,of roots, feeds,flowers,boiled 

in water or wine. The roots here ufed are commonly of mallowes, marfh-mallowes, 

and lillics. The feedes are of mallowes, marfh-mallowes, parfly, finallage, line,fe- 
mugrecke. Flowers areofchamomile, melilote, figges, raifons, andthe like: all 

which areto bee boiled in wine, water, orlye, tothe con{umption of the third pare 

orthe halfe: as, 

RK, Rad.alth.cy lilil.an3ii.fem. lini, fanuz. cumin.an. diii. flo.cham.melil, aneth, 
an in aquis partibus aqua vini,ant in duabus partibus 
agua, Guna Vink, aut in Lixivio cinerss farmentorum, ad tertia partis Confumptionem, 
fiat fotws. Inimitation hereof you may eafily defcribe other fomentations, as occa- 
fion and neceffity fhall require. 

We ule fomentations before we apply cataplafmes, oyntments or plafters to the Their ui 
part, that {owe may open the breathing placcs or pores of the skin, relaxe the parts, 
artenuate the humour,that thus the way may be the more opento the followiag me- 
dicines. The body being firft purged, fomentations may beufed to what parts you 
pleafe. They may be applyed witha female {punge, for it is gentler and fofter than 
the male; with felt, woollen clothes, or the like dipped in the warme decoction 
| wrung out, and often renued ; otherwife, you may fill a Swines bladder halfe full 
1 (efpecially in paines of the fides) of the deceGion, or elfea ftone bottle, fo to kee 
} hot the longer ; yet fo, that the bottle bee wrapped in cotton,wooll, orthe like foft 


| thing, that fo it may not by the hardnefle and roughneffe offend the part, accor- siete 
ding to Aippocrates. 2.DE in 


Of Embrocations. 


Embroche,or Embrocation is watering, when as fromon high wee What an 
A vd (as it were) fhowre downe fome moifture upon any part. This kinde of °°" * 
(Sy remedy is chicfly ufed in the parts of the head, and it isufed tothe coro- 
: aN nall furure, for that the skull is more thin in that part, fo that by the /s- 

* racula or breathing places of this {uture,more open than thofe of the o- 
ther futures,the force of the medicine may more cafily penetrate unto the Meninges, 
or membranes of the braine. The matter of Embrocations is roots,leaves flowers, 
feeds, fruits,and other things, according tothe intention and will of the Phyfitian. 
They are boyled in water and wine, tothe halfe or third part. Embrocations may 
alfo be made of Lye or Brine againft the cold and humide afte&s of the braine. 
Sometimes of oyle and vinegar, otherwhiles of oyle onely. 1X. f0/. plantag.c& folan. 
cucurb.an.i. flor.nymph. & rof.an.p.§. fiat decodt ad 
bi aceti sii. fi alte fubeundum fit,ex quarrrigetur pars inflammata. \n affects of the 
braine, when we would repercufle, we often and with good fuccefle ufe oy le of Ro- 
les, with a fourth part of vinegar. | 

We ufe Embrocations, thattogether with the ayre drawne intothe body bythe Theis. 
Diaftole of the arteries, the fubtler part of the humour may penctrate, and {o coolt 
the inflamed part : for the chiefe ufe ofembrocations isin hot affeéts. Alfo wec ufe 
embrocations, when as for feare of an hemorrhagic, or the flying afunder of a bro- 
ken or diflocated member, we dare not loofe the bandages wherewith the member 
isbound. For then wee drop downe fome decoétion or oyle from high upon the 


bandages, 


* 
a 
| 
all 
q 
| 
~ q 
q 
| 


1064. 


Whatan Epi- 
themcis. 


Ia the fixth 
Chapier. 


theme. 


Their ufe. 


The ule of po 
rentiall caute- 
ries. 


The matter of 
chem. 


bandages, that by thefe the force of the medicine may enter into the affected 
member. 


— 


Cuarp. XXXII. 
Of Epithemes. 


* 


rel 
» 


parts of the lower and middle belly, like to a fomentation,and not myc}, 
unlike an embrocation. They are made of waters, juices,and powders by 
means whereof they are ufed to the heart, cheft, liver, and other parts 
Wine is added to them for the more or lefle penetration, as the condition of the hor 
or cold affect fhall feeme to require ; for if you defire to heate, more wine mut hee 
added, as in fwouning by the clotting of bloud, by the corruption of feed, by drink. 
ing fome cold poy fon : the contrary is to be donc ina fainting by diffipation of the 
{pirits by feaverith heates , alfo vinegar may bee added. The matter of medicines 

roper to the entrailes is formerly defcribed, yet we commonly ufe the /pecies of ¢. 
leGuaries, as the (pecies elect.triafantali the liver being affected, and Diamargaritop 
in affeéts of the heart. The proportion of the juices or liquors to the powders ufes 
to be this,to every pinte of them 3i.or 3i[°.of thefe,of wine or elfe of vinegar 3), Yoy 
may gather this by the following example. 


A cordiallEpi. an iiifucci (cabsof.5ii. pul.elec?. diamarg, frigid 


ficet citri cy card.ben.dn crocs mofchi an.zra.s ad. 
dendo vini fiat Epithema pro corde, 

_ Epithemes are profitably applyed in hedticke and burning feavers to the liver, 
heart, and cheft, if fo be that they be rather applyed to the region of the lungs, than 
of the heart ; for the heate of the lungs being by this meanestempered, the drawnin 
ayre becomes leffe hot in peftilent and drying feavers. They are prepared of hu- 
mecting, retrigerating, and cordiall things, {oto temper the heate, and recreate the 


vitall faculty. Sometimes alfo we ufe Epithemes to ftrengthen the heart, and drive 


there-hence venenate exhalations , lifted or railed up from any part whichis gan- 
erenate or {phacelate. Some cotton, or the like, fteeped or moiftened with {uch li- 

uors and powders warmed, is now and thento be applyed to the affected entraile; 
this kinde of remedy,as alfoall other topick and particular medicines, ought notto 
beufed, unlefle you have firft premifed generall things. 


Cuar. XXXII. 
Of potential Cautertes. 


CRAG Hat kinde of Pyroticke, which is termed a Potential! Cautery, 
burnes, and caufeth an efchar. The ufe of thefe kindes of Caute- 
eh Van ries is to make evacuation, derivation, revulfion, or attraction of 
the humours by thofe parts whereto they areapplyed. Wherefore 
2% they are often and with good fucceffe ufed in the punctures and 
€% bites of venemous beafts, in a vencnous, as alfo in a peftilent 3009 
and Carbuncle,unleffe the inflamoratioh be great:for the fire doth 
not only open the part, bur alfo retunds the force of the poyfon,cals forth and plen- 
tifully evacuates the conjun& matter. Alfothey are 9ood in phiegmaticke and con- 
tumacious tumours s for by their heate they take away the force and endeavours of 
our weake heate. Alfothey are profitably applyed to ftanch bleeding , to cate oF 
wafte the fuperfluous fiefh of ulcers and wens,to bring downe the callous lips of ul- 
cers, and otherthingstoo long here to infift upon. 
The materials of thefe Cauteries are Oake afhes, Pot aflies, the afhes of Tartar, of 


Tithy:mals or {purges, the Figge-tree,the ftalkes of Coleworts and Beanes, cuttings 


o! 


| trt, or Sandi 
Dp Pithema, or an Epitheme, is a compofition ufed in the difeafes of 


the fale or tha 


[1B.26. 


of Vines, 2s # 
and the like; 
and ef{charot! 
the continuir 
thought goo. 

Take of u 
When the L 


of each foure 
they be boy! 
foure and tw¢ 
athicke and ¢ 
with the 
lum, and the; 
and asioone 
here tothe B 
of powdred 
over the fire u 


lum, witha 
magnitude as 
violl or glafic 
Take a bun 
ewo lirtle bun 
put into 3 veil 
ever now and 
halfe a pound 
thele, being n 
ten ftirring it, 
come cleare. § 
almoft wholl; 
is fufhiciently 
merly mentio 
Take of the 
a Lye; powre 
done three or 
Capitellum, w! 
inthe fourth d 
comes fiery 2! 
athes only, w! 
thought fuffic 
Or, Takeo! 
the athes of O 
two dayes {pa 
and be often fi 
ving many ho 
thec apitelium 
be put twice o 
Caufticke quali 
fire,and when 
made of thisc 
The follow 
Plyed to the ar 
Paine, efpecia 
Into the skinn 
fingers end, an 


¢ 
° 
* 
a4 q 
- 
| 
| 
4 
| 
| 
4 
‘ 
& 
4 
: 
1 
| 
4 
* 4 


ifeafes of the 
and not much 
d powders by 
id other parts, 
of the hor 
wine mutt bee 
ced, by drink. 
lipation of the 
of medicines 
he /pecies of 
JiaMargariton 
powders. ufes 
inegar 31. You 


cort.citri 


s to the liver, 
he lungs, than 
thedrawnin 

repared of hu- 
d recreate the 
art, and drive 
which is gan- 
with fuch li- 
ted entraile ; 
5, ought not to 


iall Cautery, 
des of Cautc- 
attraction of 
d. Wherelore 
punatures and 
peftilent 
rthe fire doth 
and plen- 
icke and con- 
ndeavours of 
to cate of 
ous lips of ul- 


s of Tartar, of 
ancs cuttings 
of 


| tea ftirring it, then f{traine the Cap:tellum or liquor through a thicke cloth untill it be- 
come cleare. Put it intoa bafon, and fet it over the fire, and when as the moifture is 
 almoft wholly fpent, let two or three ounces of vitriol] be added when the moifture 


| tsfufficiently evaporated, make cauteries of that which remaines , after the for- 
_ merly mentioned manner. 


Take of the afhes of found, knotty, old Oake as much as you pleafe,make thereof 


| aLye; powre this Lye againe upon other freth afhes of the fame wood, let this bee » 
| donethree or foure times,then quench fome lime in this Lye,& of thefe twomakea 
| Capitellum, whereof you may make moft approved cauteriess For fuchafhes are hot 


inthe fourth degree ; and in like fort the ftones, whereof the lime by burning be- 

comes fiery and hot to the fourth degree: Verily, [ have made cauteries of Oake 

athes only, which have wrought quickly and powerfully. The Capitelum or Lycis the Gene 

thought {ufficiently trong, itthatan Egge willfwimme therein without finking. good 
Or, Takeof the athes of Bean ftalkes three pounds, of unquencht lime, Argoll of 

the athes of Oake wood, being all well burnt, ofeach two pounds. Let them for 


two dayes {pace be infufed in a veffell full of Lye made of the afhes of Oake wood, 


and be often ftirred up and downe. Letthis Lye then be put into another veffell, ha- 
ving many holes inthe bottomethereof, covered with ftrums or {traw pipes, that 
the Capitellum flowing through thefe trait paflages may become more cleare. Let it 
be put twice or thrice upon theafhes, that fo itmay the better extract the heate and 
caufticke quality ofthe athes. Then putting it into a Barbers bafon , fet it over the 
fire, and when it fhall begin to grow thicke, the fire muft be increafed, and cauteries 
made of this concreating matter. 

The following cauteries are the beft chat ever I made tryallof, as thofethat ap- ? 
plyed to the arme in the bignefle of a Peale , in the {pace of halfe an houre without The faculty of 
Paine, efpecially ifthe part of it felfe be painlefle and free fram inflammation, cate _—" 
into the skinne and fleth evento the bone,and make an ulcer of the bignefle of ones 
fingers end, and they leave an efchar fo moyft and humide, that withia foure or five 


dayes 


the affected of Vines, as allo fal ammonzacum, alkali, axuncia vitri, fal sitrem,Komane Vitrioll, 
andche like; for of thefe things there is made a falt, which by its heate is caufticke 
¥ andefcharoticke,like to an hotiron and burning coale: Therefore it violently looles 
continuity by eating into the skinne, together with the fleth there-under. [have 
thought good here to give you divers formes of them. 
} Take of unquenchr Lime extinguifhed in a bowle of Barbers Lye three pounds : The formes ef 
} When the Lyeis{ettled, let it be ftrained,and into the ftraining put of Axungia vi. 
tri, or Sandiver, calcined Argol, of each two pounds, of Sal nitrum ammoni acum, 
of each foure ounces, thefethings muft be beaten into a grofle powder, then muft 
they be boyled over the fire, and after the boyling let them remaine in the Lye for 
| foure and twenty houres {pace, being often ftirred about, and then ftrained through 
| athicke and double linnen cloth, leftany of the earthy droffe get rhorow together 
with the liquor. This {trained liquor, whichis as cleare as water, they call Capitel- 
lum, and they put it in a brafen Bafon, fuch as Barbers ufe,and fo fer it upon the fire, 
| andas{ooneas it boyles,they keep it with continuall ftirring, left the {alt fhould ad- 
here tothe Bafon ; the Capvtellum being halfeboyled away , they put intwo ounces 
of powdred vitrioll,fo to haften the falling of the efchar,and fo they keep the bafon 
| overthe fire uneill all che liquor be almoft wafted away, Thenthey cutinto peeces 
|‘ the fale or that carthy matter, which remains after the boyling away of the Capite/- 
lums,de with aknife or hot iron fpatula forme them into cauteries of fuch figure and 
magnitude as they thinke fitting, and fothey lay them up, or keep them for ufeina 
| violl or glaffe clofly topped, that the ayre get notin: Or, 
Take a bundle or fufficient quantity of Beane ftalkes or huskes,of Cole wort ftalks 
| two little bundles, of cuttings of Vines foure bundles,burn them all to athes, which 
put into :t veflell of river water, fo let them infufe tor a dayes {pace, being ftirred 
ever now and then ; to this adde two pounds of unquenchtlime, of Axungia vitri 
halfe a pound, of calcined Tartar two pounds, of Sa/ ter foure ounces, infufe all 
thefe, being made into powder, inthe forefaid Lye for two or three dayes {pace ,of- 


1066 Of /imple Medicines, 


dayes fpace it will fall away of it felfe without any {carification. I have thoughe 
Thecaule of poodrocall thele cauteries Silken or Velvet ones, not oncly for that they are 
rer Silke,gentle aad without paine, but chiefly becaufe I obtained the defcription of 
them ofa certaine Chymift, who keptitas agreatfecret, for fome Velvet and much 
entreaty: T heir defcription isthis, 
Their defcrips Take of the afhesof Beane ftalkes, of the afhes of Oake wood well burnt of 
tion. each three pounds, let them bee infufed in a pretty quantity of river water, and 
bee ofcen ftirred up and down, then adde thereto of unqueneht lime foure pound. 
which being quencht, ftirre it now and then together for two daies {pace,that the 
Capitellum may become the ftronger,then ftraine it through a thick & {trong linnen 
cloth, & thus (trained, put it three or foure times upon the athes,that fo it may dyayy 
more of the caufticke tacultics from them, then boyle it in a Barbers bafon, or elf 
an carthen one well leaded,upon a good Char-cole fire, untill it become thicke 
Buta great part of the fecret or art confifts in the manner and limit of this boy ling ’ 
for this Capiicllum becomming thicke and concreating into falt, muft not bee kept 
{o long upon the fire, untill all the moyfture fhall bee vanifhed and {pent by the 
heare thereof : for thus alfo the force of the forefaid medicines , which alfo cop. 
fifts in af{pirituous fubftance, will bee much diffipated and weakened , therefore be. 
fore it be come to extreme drinefle,it fhallbe taken off from the fire, to wit, when 
as yet there fhall fome thicke moyfture remaine,which may not hinder the cayre. 
ries from being made upintoa forme. The made up cauteries fhall bee pur up into 
a glafle moft clofely luted up orftopped, that the ayre may not diflolve them, 
and fo they {hall be laid up and kept in adry place. Now, becaufe the powder of 
Mercury is necretocauteries in the effects and faculty thereof, which therefore jg 
termed Pulvis Angelicus tor the excellency;theretore I have thought good to give 
you the de{cription thereof, which is thus : 
Thedctripti- "Re, Auripigmenti citrins, flor is arts, an nitri, 18, alumin.roche, Bij. vitri- 
onof Mercury, rom. Let them all bee powdred,and put intoa Retort, having a large receiver 
or Angelicall 
powder. well luted put thereto. Then fet the Retort over a Fornace , and let the diftillation 
be made firft witha gentle fire, then increafed by little and little, focharthe receiver 
may waxca litle reddifh. 
vivi, tb S.aqua forts, "bi. ponantur in phiala, fiat pulvrs, ut fequitur. 
Take a large earthen pot, whercintro put the violl or bolt head wherein the 4r- 
ecninum vivum and Aqua fortis arecontained, fetting it in afhes up to the necke 
thereof, then fet the pot over a fornace, or upon hot coales, fo thatit may boyle 
and evapourate away the Aqua forts: neither in the snterim will the glafle bee 
in any danger of breaking, when all the water is vanifhed away , which you 
may know is done when as it leaves {moaking ; fuffer it to become cold, then 
take it forth of the afhes, and you fhall finde calcined Mercury in the bortome, 
of the colour of red Lead, feparared from the white, yellow or blacke excre- 
ment ; for the white that concretes in the toppe is called Sublimate , which if 
it fhould remaine with the calcined Mercury , would make it more painfull in 
the operation. Wherefore feparating this calcined Mercury, you fhal! make it 
into powder, and put it in a brafle veflell upon fome coales, ftirring or cur 
‘ning it with a /patwla for the {pace of an houre or two : for thus it will lofe 
2 great part of the acrimony and biting, whence it will become Jeffe painfull 


in the operation. 


CHA P- 


nd their 


which with hq 
ointments,or 
fiftence differs 


example or de 

canthari: 
fi quod fit fates 
tomakeup 
rience teachet! 
medicine in| 
medies sc{pec 
and punctures 
contumacious 

Alfo weule 
ed part, for thu 
wee mult make 
that the part m 
ly rubbed, that 
of the skin mor 
the body. 


TrochifCes ot 
the greater and 
forthe apple 
tothe eyes : alf 
€nt liquor, that 
Therefore cc 
intention an 
ofthe eyes doc 
they enter more 
contiften 
“t4are made of 
Salles, and othe 
“N0dines, and 
Sometimes t! 


26 
«3 
| 
fi 
4 
hee 
\ A q 3 
A 
4 
| 
| 
Ab 
| 
| 
a4 ’ 
| 
q 
- 


LLIB. 26. 


ive thought 
ney are like 
cription of 
a and much 


i burner , of 
Vater, and 

ire pounds, 

ace,thatthe 

rong linnen 

(may draw 
afon,orclfe 
ymec thicke, 
is boyling , 
Lot bee kepr 
pent by the 

alfo 
iercfore be- 
O Wit, when 
r the caute- 
putup into 
olve them, 
powder of 
therefore is 
700d to give 


Vitri- 
argc receiver 
diftillation 
the receiver 


ut fequitur. 
reinthe Ar- 
o the necke 
cmay boyle 
e glafle bee 
which you 
e cold, then 
botromic, 
lacke excrete 


e, which if 
painfull 
hall make it 
ring or cur- 
it will lofe 
efile painfull 


Cuar.XXXIIL 


Of V eficatories, 


and rubrifying ointments, catapla{mes, or plaftersare made of 
acride medicines, which have pow 


What veficaro- 
er todraw forth to the fuperficies tie and rubrié- 


of the body fuch_ humours as lye deepe, by exulcerating the skin and ing medicines 
bs (eS) caufing blifters. Their matter isthe fame with fepticke medicines, as ta 
finapi, anacardus, cantbarides, eaphorb. radices {cille, bryon. andthe like, 
which with hony, turpentine, leaven,gum,or rofine, may be made into catapla{mes, 
ointments, or plafters ; therefore the com polure of velicatories, or rather their con- 
fiftence differs not from that of hard or foft unguents. Therefore | will give you one 
example or defcription of them, which is thus. ' 

x, camtbarid. euphorbit, finapi, an.3 8, mellis anacardini,3 j.modico aceti,¢y fermen- The deferiozi- 
sj quod (it fatis excipiantur, flat veficatorium. Some of the antients thinke it better onot a velca. 
romakeup thefe medicines with water rather than with vinegar, becaufe expe.‘ 
rience teacheththat vinegar abates the ftrength of muftard. Wee ufethis kinde of ... . of 
medicine inlong difeafes, when as wee cannot any thing prevaile with other re- 
medies ;¢{pecially in the head.ache, megrime, epilepfic, /ciatica, vout, the bites 


| and punctures of venemous creatures, peftilent carbuncles,and other inveterate and 
contumacious difeafes. 


Alfo we ufe them when as wee would reftore life and ftrength toa dead or decay- 


ed part, for thus they are drawne backe together with the heat; for which purpofe 
| wee muft make choice of more gentle veficatories, as fuch which onely rubrifie, fo 


that the part may onely become red, and not be burnt : the part mutt firft be ftrong- 


ly rabbed, that the decaied and dull heat may bee rowzed and ftirred up, the pores 


| of oe skin more opened, that the force of the medicine may enter the deeper into 
the body. 


Cuar. XXXIV. 
of Collyria, 


Collyrium isa medicine proper for the eyes, made of powder fine- What 
ly levigated and ground into the forme of A/cohol, asthe Arabi- 
\ cAX ans and our Alchymifts terme it: yet the word in a more generall 
y acceptionis ufed forany liqnide medicine, made with liquors 
7, and powders, and applied or to any part. Wherefore colyria The difference: 
are of threckindes, fome are moift or liquid, which are properly 
called collyria ; others dry, which are of the fame confiftence with 


| Trochifces ; others have the confiftence of hony, or a liniment. The liquid ferve for Theis ule: 
| the greater and leffer corners of the eyes; thofe of the confiftence of hony are meet , 
| forthe apple ofthe eye ; but the dry are to be made into powder, and fo blowne in- 

| tothe eyes : alfo fometimes they are to be diffolved in fome juice, or other conveni- 

tatliquor, that fo they may be made into moift col/yria. 


Therefore collyria have divetsufes,andare applied to feverall parts according to 


the intention and counfell of the Phyfitian : for liquid col/yria put into the corners 
| oftheeyesdoe more readily mitigate the heate of their inflammation, by reafon 
| they enter more eafily by the tenuity of their fubftance, fuch thingsas have amore 


irme confiftence adhere more tenacioufly, and worke more certainely. Moift colly- _ 


| made of juices, mucilages, waters of herbes, flowers, feeds; metalline bodies, 
_ | Silles, and other fuch like medicines, which are repercuflives, refolvers, detergents, 
| ‘Nodines, and the like, according to the nature of the prefent difeafe. 


Sometimes they are made of juices and diftilled waters onely, othervhiles _ 
crs 


eg 
4 
| 
| 
| q 
| 
| 
| 
— | | 
| ‘7 
’ 
| 
y 
HA Pe 
3 


= 


ders,or dry collyria made into powder,are mixed with them,togetherwiththe wh: | 
ofan Powders are prefcribed to 3 ii. and liquorsto 3 iv. or v, in fo 
for the eyes ; but for other parts, as when it isto be injected into the urenary p ee | Py cargoph, ca 
they may be tothe quantity ofa pinte. Dry Codyri4 are made of pow ders 
exceeding finely beaten or ground, and incorporated with fome juice, whence jr “‘ Ibe fixie red 
is thatthey differ little from Trochifces. Wherefore the collyrinm album Rhais is ~ errhines in 


now ufually termed a Trochifce, andkept with them. Cathzreticke powders are 
not applied in the forme of a moift colyrium, but in the forme of a liniment, that jc 
incorporated with fat oroile. All thefe things fhall be made more plaineby the fo). 


an apoplexie, | 
rall remedics 


What an ete 


Their ditferen- 


A repercufsive plant. cr rofar.an.3 ii. album. ovi unum, bene agitatum, mifce, fiat collyrign 
rofar. viol. an, iti. trochif: alb. Rhaf.cum opio, ti. fiat collyriam. Or, Re, up 
Adetergent. farnuz. iii. mucag. fem. lini, ii, facchar. cand.> 1.croct, i. fiat collyr. Re thurs he 
myrrh. an. ii. tut. prepar.¢> antimon. let. an. ii. cum chelidon, fiat collyriuyy 
umbrafiecaud. fellisperdic. aut lepor.5 &. facci famcul.9 i, facchar. cand. ii, firnp, 

Wee ufe collyria in wounds, ulcers, fiftulas, fuffufions, inflammations, and other b 

difeafes of the eyes. of viole 


CHaP XXX V. 


Of Errbines and Sternutatories. 


| AL: 1X R rhines are medicines appointed to bee put into the nofeto purge the 
1, NYE LY braine of its excrementitious humours by the noftrills, or to deterge 
fuch excrements asare therein, by reafon of an polypus, or the 
} SELVA like difeafe. Errhines are either liquid or dry, or elfe hard, and of the 
~~ conliftence of anemplafter. Liquid errhines,which ufually are to purge 
the head, are made of the juices of herbes, as beets, coleworts, marjoram, pimper- 
nell, hyffope or balme,or of their deco@ions takenalone, or mixed with wine, 0° 
fyrupe, as exymel (cilliticum, fyrupe of hyflope, rofes, or mel anthofatum : {ome- 
times powders are mixed with thefe liquors, as of pepper, exphorbiwm, pellitory o! 
Spainc, hore-hound, migella romana, caftoreram, myrthe, white ellebore, {ow- bread, 
and other like, in a finall quantity, to wit, to 5 i. little more or leffe according tothe 
vehemency of the difeafe. Wee will make this more plaine by examples. 


Theformesf RX, fucci beta, majoran, brafic.an.3i. depurentur, & modice bulliant cum vini albi, ftich, and the Ii! 
5 ii oxymoelit. (cillit.5 fiat errbinum, When asyou defire to attra more power- the mouth for f 
fully from the braine, you may diffolve in errhines fome purging medicines, 2s 2g dicines, as ot pe 

Kicke, diaph enicon, (enna, carthamus, andthe like hencedoth arife the diftincion among ft which 


of errhines into fuch as are meetto purge phlegme, choler,and melancholy. This 


Anerthine pur- fOllowing example isfetdowneby Rondeletins, Bc. rad. pyreth. irid. an. >i. puleg. 


ging phlegme. calamm. origon. an. mi. agar,.trochife.5 iii. flor. anthos cy ftachad.an. pi. fiat decoctio as of berberics, 
colasur diffolve mellis anthofati feillit. an. 3 iii. fiat caputpurginm. But it isdc- Mouth, draw 


terto this purpofe to make ufe of purging fimples, as agarick, turbeth,coloquintida, 
andthe like, than of compofitions, asdiaphanicon, for thefe make the decoction 
more thick, and leffe fit to enter the paflages of the noftrils, and the fieve-like bon¢s, 
but apt rather thereto caufe obftru@tion,and intercept the freedome of refpiration. 


faces beta, 5 i. aq. fal. cy beton. an. 3 ii. pul. caftor. 9%. piper. & pre mafticatori:s 
powders: Di. fat caputpurgiwm. Dry errhines that are termed fternutatories, tor that they cae mouth withall. 
{neefing, are made of powders onely, to which purpofe the lait mentioned thing® maftiches, =. ex 
areufed alfoaromatickethingsin a {mall quantity, as to Jii.at the molt: Gifeafes of theb 
Re, wajor.migel. caryoph, ZinXib. i. acor.pyreth. & panis porcin. an. 9%. cupher” and fometimest 
D i, terantur deligenter, in nares mittantur, ant infufflentur. Errhines of the com 
fiftence ofemplafters, by the Latines vulgarly called Nafalia, are made of the de- Mafticatorics 
fcribed powders or gums diffolved in the juice of fome of the forementioned herbs 4S alfotothem\ 


incorporars 


‘Ingrate tafte, th: 


difeafes off 
nerea : Wherefo 
divert the matt: 


pills, and fo giv 
upina finelinn 
on of acride m 
as fome acride 


& loathing. y 


ling them up an 
the quantity 


reth. faphifag. 
Or, Re, 


then errhines ari 


| 
rhincis. 
Pop! 
wh 
ry 
d 


ith the white 
Nn Medicines 
ary pafflage, 
Of powders 
whence it 
Rhajis is 
| powders are 
ent, that is, 
eby the fol. 


iat 
Or, de. 
yr. Fe, thurs. 
collyr in 


Li. fyrup, 


ms, and other 


to purge the 
br to detergc 
plypus, or the 
md, and of the 
y are to purge 
am, pimper- 
ith wine, of 
matum: {oime- 
, pellicory of 
{ow- bread, 
fording tothe 
ies. 
4773 Vin albi, 
more powci- 
cines, as agar 
e diftinaion 


oloquintida, 
Bic decoction 
e-like bones, 
f refpiration. 


But it is 


yramidall forme to bee put into the noftrills. As, majoran, falv. nizel. ii. pip. 
alb. caryoph, calang. an. Di.pyreth, euphorb. as, 3 pans 
serantur, in pulverem redizantur. And then with turpentiae and waxe as much as 


incorporated with turpentine and waxe, that fo they may the better be madeinto a 


1069 


The matter of 
folid errliimes. 


fhall be futhcient, make them up into of a pyramidall or taper fafhion. Wee Their ule. 


ufe errhines in inveterate difeafes of the braine, asthe epilepfic, feare of blindnffe, 
an apoplexie, lethargie, convulfion, the loft {enfe of {melling : yet we firftufe gene- 
rall remedics and evacuations, left by f neefing andthe like concuffion of 
che brain for the exclufion of that which is offenfive thereto, there thould be madea 
ercater attraction of impurity from the fubjacent parts. Li 
yp intothenoftrils warme out ofthe palme of the hand, 
mouth being tn the interim filled with water, left the attra@ed liquor fhould fall up- 
on the pallat,and {o upon the lungs: dry errhines are to be blown into the nofe with 
a pipe or quill:folid ones muft be faftned toa thred,that they may be drawn forth as 
need requires, when as they are put up intothe noftrils. The morning (the belly be- 


ing empty) is the ficteft time for the ufe of errhines. If by their ufe the nofe thall be 


troubled with an itching, the paine thereof muft bee mitigated with womans milke, 


tothe quantity of 5 8. the ufingthem. 


or oyle of violets. The ufe of attra@tive errhines is hurtfull to fuch as are troubled Te whom they 
-with difeafes of the eyes,or ulcersin the nofe, as it oft times falls out in the Lwes ve. Hull. 


nerea wherefore inthis cafe it will bee beftroufA 
divert the matter from the nofe. 


pophlegmatifines, which may 


CHarp. XXXVI. 
Of Apopegmatifmesor Maflicateries. 


Pophlegmatifmotin Grecke, and Mafficatoria in Latine, are medicines 
yf which kept or heldinthe mouth and fomewhat chawed, doe draw by 
themouth forthof the braine excrementitious humours, efpecially 


when as the medicines are received in hony or waxe, and formed into 
pills, and fo givento chawupon. The fecond is when as the fame things are bound 
upina finelinnen cloath, {oto be heldin the mouths The third is when as a decoGi- 
on of acride medicines is kept inthe mouth for a pretty {pace. The fourth is when 
as fome acride medicine, or otherwife drawing flegme, as pellitory of Spaine, ma- 
ftich,and the like, is takenof it felfe to the quantity ofa hafell nur, and fo chawed in 
the mouth for fome fpace. The matter of mafticatories is of the kinde of acrid me- 
dicines, as of pepper, muftard, hyflope, ginger, pellitory of Spaine, and the like , 
amoneft which you muft make choice chiefly of fuchas are not troublefome by any 
ingratetafte, that forhey may bethe longer kept in the mouth with the lefle offence 
& loathing. Yet mafticatories are fomerimes made of harfhor acerbe medicines, 
as ofberberies, the {tones of prunesor cherries, which held for fome {pace inthe 
mouth,draw no leffe {tore of fegme than acrid things;tor the very motion and row- 
ling them upand down the mouth attra@s,becaufe it heats,com preffes, 8 exprefles: 
the quantity of the medicine ought to bee from 36%. 103i5.: as, Re. py- 
reth. aphifag. an. 3 if, maftich.> pulverentur involventur nodulis in mafticatoria, 
Or, XinXzb. finap. 5 i. euphorb.9 ii. piper. 8. exciptantur mele, fiant 


What an 
phiegmatifn 1S, 


phlegme : now they are chiefly made foure manner of waies ; the firft is Thedifferences 


reth. pre mafficatoriis. Re. by thym. origan. [alv. an. i. boile chem in water to wath the 
Bat they caufe mouth withall. Or, %:#%26. caryoph, an. 91, pyreth. pip. an, 3 fraphifagr. ii. 
rioned things maftiches, 3%. exciprantur, fiant paftills pro mafticatoriis. We ufe mafticatories in old 
he moft: 45» difeafes of the braine, dimneffe of the fight, deafnefle, pufties of the head and face, 
> 6. enphord. andfemetimesto divertthe excrements which runne tothe nofe being ulcera- 
s of the con- ted.” | 
de of the de- Mafticatorics are very hurtfull to fuch as havethcir mouths or throats ulcerated, + a hure 
tioned herbs. as alfo tothem whofe lungs are {ubject to inflammations, deftillations and ulcerssfor 
incorporats then errhines are more profitable to derivethe matter of the difeafe by the noftrils. 


X xxx For 


4 
4 
‘ 
4 
— 
( 
¢ 
q 
* 
3 . 
| 
4 


1070 


oo 


For though the humour drawn from the braine into the mouth by the meanes of the 


mafticatory ,may bee thence caft forth by coughing and {pitting, yct in the interim 
nature will bee fo inured to that paflage for the humour, fo that it will run thay Way 


whenas wee fleepe, and fall downe upon the parts thercunder, weake either by n 
ture or by accident. 


The time fitteft for the ufe of Apophlegmarifmes isthe morning, the body being 


firft purged : if any ingratefull tafte remain in the mouth, or adhere to the rongue by 


ufing of mafticatories, you fhall take it away by wafhing the mouth with warm w3. 
cer, or adecodtion of liquorice and barly. 


Whatagargle 


IS. 


Theditferences 


thereof, 


matter. 


An aftringent 


gargle. 
An anodine 


garple. 


A deterlire. 


Of Garzari{mes. 


S| Garegle or gargarifme isa liquid compofition fit forto wath the 
mouth and allthe parts thereof, to hinder defluxion and inflam. 
s.|| mation, to heale the ulcers which are inthofe parts, to aflwape 
“ipaine. Their compofition istwofold, the firft is ofa deco@ion 
Mi of roots, leaves, flowers, fruits, and feeds fit for the difeafe ; now 
<Ey\ the decodtion is to be made either in taire water alone,or with the 
—— admixture of white or red wine, or inthe decottion of liquorice 
and barly, or of pe¢torall things,as the intention of the Phyfitian is to repel Coole, 
or hinder inflammation, as in the tooth-ache caufed by marter which is yetin moti. 
on ; to difcuffe, as in the tooth-ache already at the height; orto cleanfe, as inthe ul. 
cers of the mouth, orto dry and binde, as when it is fitto heale the ulcers already 
clean{ed. 

The other way of making of gargarifmes is without decoction, which is, when 
as wee makethem either of diftilled waters oncly, or by mixing them with fyrupes, 
mucilages, milke, the whey of Goats milke carefully ftrained. There are mixed 
fometimes with a deco@ion, diftilled waters and mucilages,me/rofatum, oxyrne! |im- 
plex, diamoron,dianucum, hiera picra, oxyfacchara, [yrup.de rofts ficces, aceso/us, 
and other things, as the prefent cafe fhall feemto require,as alome, balay (t/2,myrrhe, 
olibanum, ginger, pepper, cinamon, dry rofes, andmany fuchthings, even forhat 
oft times there enter into gargles fuch medicinesas have force to draw from 
the braine, as pellitory of Spaine, carthamus, turbith, and fuch things as hayeno 
bitterneffe, which is the caufe chat neither agrick nor coloquintida ought to enter in- 
to gatgarifmes, | 

The quantity of liquor fora gargarifme is commonly from 1 {>. to "i. mixe 
therewith fome § ii. of {yrupes, but put in powders {paringly, as fome 9 iii, Alome 
may fometimes bee putin ro 5 vi.let mucilages be extradtced out of 5 ii. of feeds : let 
thefe ferve for fome examples, 

plant. polygon. oxalidis,an.m i. refar. rub. p (3. hordei, pi.fiat decottio ad 5 Will. 
in quadiffolve fyrups myrtillorum,5 vi. dianucum, 3%. fiat gargarifina, Or, cham. 
mclilameth. aw. pi.rof.7ud.p, paljal. mund. & ficwum,an.p ili, decoquantar in 
partibis vini aqua, aad3vi. addendo mucag.fem. lini, & fenugr. an. 3 ii. fiat 
rif ima. 

Or elfe, kk. aq.plantag. liguft. abfinth. an3ii. mellis rofati colati,> yi. 
ficcar. de ablinih. Vi. fiat gargarifma. 


Weufe garglcs inthe morning tafting after general! purgations they arc fome- 
times taken or ufed cold, when as a maligne, acride, and thiane humour fals dow", 


fometimes warme, but letthefe things bee done according as the Phy fitian (hall ad 
vife. | 
CRAP 


citherne thole { 


pumice, fal nitr§ 
allthefe aretob 
bones burnt ca 
added certaine 
powders if mix 
arabicke and tr 
of fome fingers 


ferve for dentif; 


Sometimes c¢ 
may beufed fo: 
with drying an 

Allthe differ 
MICIS, CF COV 
cinamom. C 
fepia,© 8. maftic 
rorifmarini, an. - 
 falis 
Ci, , Ah 
tur pyramides 
an. 3 il. cogmanty 
KX, falis, = vi. als 
lentur in alembic 

Dentrifices a 
wee allo ofttim 
of the cummes. 

The antients 
ftrenethen their 
with whorsthi 
Noblemen and ¢ 
aftringent 

Our people cq 
the teeth, but thd 


| : 
‘eA 
| A j , 
VA ~ 
| 
= 
4 
~ 
rX iP = — 


— 


IB,26,. 


Neanes of rhe 
the interim 
un that Way 
ither by na- 


vody being 
by 
Warm wa- 


wath the 
and inflam. 
to allwage 
a decoction 
lifeafe ; now 
,or withthe 
of liquorice 
epell, coole, 
yetin moti- 
,as inthe ul- 
cers already 


chis, when 

ith fyrupes, 
¢ are mixed 
pis y 
(tia,nayrrhe, 

even fothat 
draw from 
ashaveno 
bc to enter in- 


to mixe 
5 iit. Alome 
f{eeds: let 


io ad 3 viii. 
Dr, cham. 
pinyin 
Li. fiat 


. fyrupi ye fare 


vey arc iome- 
fals downe, 
tian (hall ad- 


GHAP: 


Cuar. XX XVIII. 
Of Dentifrices. 


Entifrices are medicines prepared and ferving divers waies for to i ies 
cleanfe, whiten, and faftenthe teeth; for from their ufe they take se gpa 
‘theirname, Of thefe fomeare dry, otherfome moift : of thedry 

) {ome have the forme of opiats, others of pouders groffely beaten, 

butthe moift are commonly made by diftillation:the matter of dry 
| dentifrices is taken from detergent and drying things, fuch as are whereot chey 
corall whiteand red, harts-horne, fcuttle bones, alome, cryftall, 
pumice, fal nitre, myrrhe, frankincenfe, b4/au/fia, acornes, all forts of fhels of fithes: 
allthe{eareto bee made into powder either by burning, or without ic, for {cuttle 
bones burnt caft fortha ftinking and unpleafant {mell. To thefe for fmell fake are 
added certaine aromaticke things, as cinamon, cloves, nutmegs, and the like : fuch 
powders if mixed with fome fyrupe, as oxymel (cilliticam, or with mucilage of gum 
arabicke and tragacanth, will become opiates, to be made intoa pyramidall forme 
of fome fingers length, round or fquare, and tharpe pointed, that dryed they may 
ferve for dentifrices. 

Sometimes emollient roots are boiled with falt oralome, that dryed againe they 
may beufed for dentrifices : moift ones are made of drying herbs, diftilled together 
with drying and aftringent things. 

Allthe differences fhallappeare bythe following examples. (bong. pu- 

mics,  covancervi uft. an. 3 ii. coral.rub. cryftal.an. 5 i, alum. fal. uft,an. 318, Demifrice, 
caryoph. rofar. rub. pulver.an, Dii. fiat pulvis pro dentifricie, Or, 
maftiches, coralli rubri ufti, an. 3 ii. cormu cervi ufti, i aluminis, carbons, 
rorifmarini, an. 5 i.cinamomi,3 ii. fiat pulvis pro dentifricio, Or, fapia, alum, 
Cy falis wfti,an. Si. cryftalli, clandinm,myrrha, thurs, an. ii. cortices granatorum, ma. 
cimamonsi, an. Dis fiat qui excipiatur mucagine gummi tragacanth.cr formes. 
tur pyramides longa, ficcand, pro dentifricio. Or, K. rad. malva juniors bifmalve, 
an. 3 il. coquantur inaquafal(a aut aluminofas, deinde ficcentur in furnopre dentifricie, 
KX, falis, = vi. alumin. iii. shuris, maftiches, fang. dracon. an. 3%. aqua ref. vi.di/til- 
lentur in alembico vitreo pro dentifricto. 


Dentrifices are not onely good to polifh, cleanfe, and ftrengthen theteeth; but gyeruse: 
wee alfo ofttimes ufe them for the tooth-ache, the difeafes of the mouth, and ulcers 
of the gummes. You may ufethem in the morning, before and after meat. 

The antients,of lentiske wood made themlelves tooth- picks, and fuch devices to 
frengthen their loofe teeth, which alfo at this day is in ufe with thofe of Languedock, 
with whorathis wood is plentifull, fo that it may be brought thence for the ufe of 
Noblemen and Gentlemen ; myrrhe may alfo ferve for this fame ufc, and any other 
aftringent wood. | | 

Our people commonly ufe the ftalks of fennell,yet havethey no faculty to fatten 
the teeth, but their fmell is gratefull. | 


~ . ag 


* 


Cuar. XXXIX., 
Of Bagees or Quilts, 


Hyfitians terme a bagge or faceulus, the compofition or mixture of Whara bag o 
dry and powdred medicines put in a bagge, therefore it is as it were 
A a dry fomentation. Their differences are not drawne from any other rheis gifferen- 
ie thing than fromthe variety of the parts whereto they are applied : 
Sal” DG fuch as are forthe head mutt be made into the fafhion of a cap,thofe 

. which bee for the whole veritricle muft be made into the forme of a 


citherne; thofe forthe {pleene, like to an oxes tongue : laftly, fuch as are forthe li, 
XxXXX 2 ver 


* 
4 
i 
3 
. 
| 


—— 


ver, heart and other parts mult be made acc ording tothe figure of thofe parts. T heir 
matter is ufually taken from whole feeds fryed in a frying- pan,or made into powder 
thereare fometimes added roots, flowers, fruits, rinds, cordiall powders, and other 
dry medicines,which may bee eafily brought into powder, and conduce to the o; ie. 
ved parts ; the quantity is different according to the magnitude of the affected arts 
In the books of practifers it is commonly found prefcribed from jiii. to 5vi6, fom,’ 
times flowers, and dry herbs are prefcribed by handfulls and pugils : and here there 
is need ofan artificial] conje@ure to conceive and appoint a fit quantity of powders. 
but let us give you fome examples. 
Aquiltforche 4.70/47. rub. pi. maftich. 58. coralli rub.3 iii. fem, anifi, & fanic. an. 3 ii. 
ftomacke. >i. fummitat. abjinth. cy menth. an. mi.trits omnibus, fiat facculus 
companchus pro ventriculo. | 
Acapforaceld furfurts macri, p i. mili, 51. falis,9 ii. rofar. rub. flor. vorifmarini. flechados, c4. 
head. ryoph. an. mii. fol. beton, cy (alu. iii. tritss omsnibus fiat cucupha, interfuta cale. 
facia tharis, & fandarachae exustorum,capiti apponatur. | 


A quilt‘for the flor, borag. buglof. vielar. an. pii.cortic, crtrs ficct, macis, ligni aloes, rafuree. 


heart. boris,an,3 i. de corde cervi, croci, am, Dii. fol. m pulveris diambre,3 
contritis omnibus fiat facculus e ferico pro corde, irrorandus aqua [Cabiofe. 
Their ute. Wee ule bagges forthe ftrengthening of thenoble parts, asthe braine, heart, [j. 


ver, as alfo for thofe leffe noble, asthe ftomacke, {pleene, breaft laftly for difcyr. 
fing flatulen cies in what part foever, as inthe collicke, and in a baftard pleurifie pio. 
ceeding from flatulencies. The powders mutt bee ftrawed upon carded bombaft. 
thatthey runne nottogether, andthenthey mutt bee fewed up or quilted in a bagpe 
of linnen or taftaty. 

~ Wee oftentimes moiften thefe bagges in wine or diftilled water, and fometimes 
not with the fubftance thereof, but by the vapour only of fuch liquors put into ahoe 
difh: thus ofttimes the bagges are heated by the vapour onely, and oft timesat the 
fire in a difh by often turning them. Thefe, if intended for the heart, ought tobee of 
crimfon or skarlet filke, becaufe the skarlet berry, called by the Arabians Kermes, is 
faid-to refrefh and recreate the heart. Certainly they muf alwaies be made of fome 
fine thing, whether it be linnen or filke. 


— 


| Cuam XL. 
Of Fumigations. 


Suffitus or fumigation is an evaporation of medicines ha- 
ving fome vifcous and fatty moifture: of fumigations fome 
are dry otherfome moift,the dry have the form of trochifces 
or pills : their matter ought to be fatty and vifcons, fo thatit 

¥j may fend fortha {moake by being burnt : fuch are /adanum, 
myrrhe, mafticke, pitch, waxc, rofine, 
/tyrax, frankincenfe, olibanum, and other gummes, which 
nay bee mixed with convenient powders : for they yeeld 
them a body and firme confiftence; the fumigations that ate 
made of powders only ,yceld neither fo {trong nor long a fume. an 
Thequantity of che powders muft bee from 3 8. to $i 8, but the gummesto 5! 
as, fandaracha,mastiches ,rofar. an. 5 i. benioini, galang. an. sii. terebinthina exci 
ptantur, cy fiant incenfis fuffumizentur tecumenia capitis. marcafite, 
Sit: bdelliimyrrhe, ftyracts,an. 31 cera fleve,c> terebinih.quod ficit, fiant forme 
forthe hard. faffamigio. W.cinnabaris, ftyracis & benXoini, an, 5 il. com terebinth. fant 
trochifce pro fuffumigio per embotum. 
newes | Weceule fumigations in great obftructions of the braine, ulcers of the !ungs, the 
ror the relicks 444m, an-old cough, paines ofthe fides, wombe, and the difeafes of fome other 
of the Lyes Ve- parts : {ometimes rhe whole body 1S fumigated, asinthe cure of the Laes verneree {0 


What a fumiga- 


rion Is. 


Their differen. 
cesand matter. 


Accphalicke 
fume: 


procure {weat ; fomcumes oncly fome one part whereto fome reliques of 


Lis. 26. 
adheres fuch 
rum, Lhefum 
may all be carri 
ang cares. 

In fumigatio 
mouth; which 
ftrils into the b 
pour may flyc; 
herbes, others 
fire-ftone is qu 
mide vapour. 
affeas, when a: 
ample thereof. 

laterem ui 
bee quen 
aqua Vita, mak 

Fumes of tl 
perly fo called 
the application 
migation, 

fu 
an. ii. decoqua 
and oft times {: 
hereafter. 


following exa 

Re, malv.oif> 
bit folis, alkeken 
decoquantur in 

Weeufe the! 
and lower bel! 
of diflipating t! 
uling it is thus; 
caufe the patic: 
head. left they | 


enter thereinto 


| 
| 
| 
4 | 
| 
| 
< 
7 ry > ie 
4 ae / 
4 4 
= 


“US 


hados, CA. 
uta cale. 


5, 7Aafure 
Ambra, 3 (3. 


heart, 
for difcuf. 

eurifie pro- 
bombaft, 
d in a bagpe 


fometimes 
into ahor 
times at the 
httobee of 
Kermes, is 
made of fome 


dicines ha. 
ations {ome 
f trrochifces 
Bs, fothatic 
re ladanum, 
e,caflorenm, 
es, which 
they yeeld 
ons thatare 


mmes to 5 il. 
nthina exci 
marc afit 
frant forme 
ebinth. fiané 


ssoftthe Lees 
adheres; 


adheres ; fuch fumigations are made of cianabaris, wherein there is much bck + eT 
rum, Lhetume mutt be received by a funnell, that fo it may not bee difperfed, but dling them, ; 
| all be carried unto the part affected, as is ufually done in the affects of the womb 

ana ¢eares. 

In fumigations for the braine and cheft, the vapour would be received with open 
mouth; which thence may paffe by the weazon into the cheft, by the palate and no- 
ftrils into the braine : but in the interim let the head bee vailed, that none of the v2- 
pour may flye away. Moift fumigations are made fomewhiles of the decoGion of 
herbes, otherwhiles of fome one fimple medicine boiled in oile, fometimes a hot 
firc- ftone is quencht in vinegar, wine, aqua vita, or the like liquor, fotoraife a hu- 
mide vapour. We oft times ufe this kinde of fumigation in overcomming {cirrhous 
affects, when as we would cur, difcuffe, penetrate deep, and dry : take this as anex- 
ample thereof. 

Re. Laterem unum fatis craljum, aut marchafitam ponderis tj, heat it red hot,and then The manner 
letit bee quenchtin fharpe vinegar, powring thereon inthe meane whilea little fumigs. 
aqua Vita, make a fumigation for the grieved part. = 

Fumes of the decoction of herbes doe very little differ from fomentations pro- 
perly focalled; forthey differnot inthe manner of their compofure, but onely in 
the application to the affected parts : therefore let this bean example of a humide fu- 

falv.rut.orizan, an, pi.rad, bryon. afar.an. few. finap. cumin. A moiftfume 
ii. decoquantur in duabus partibus aqua, cy unavini pro fuffituaurts cam emboto forthecaccs 
and "7 times fuch fumigations are made forthe whole body, whereof we hall treat 
hereaiter. | 


a 


Cuarp. XLI. 
Of aparticular,or halfe- Bath. 


Semicupinm or halfe-bath is abath forthe onehalfe of the body, 
that is, forthe parts from the belly downewards ; itis called alfo * 

tAC an infe/sio, becaufe the patient fitteth to bathe in che decodtion of 

125 herbes: in which forme and refpect a femicupium differs froma fo- 

7, mentation ; foritis compofed ofthe fame matter, to wit, ade- 
coction of herbes, roots, feedes, fruits, but in this the quan- 
tity of the decoctionis the greater, aswee fhallteachbythe 
following example. 

malv.bifmalv. cum toto, an, m1 3. beton. faxifrag. pariet, an. mi. fem.melon. mi- 
lit folis, alkekengi, an, iii. cicer.rub. p ii. rad. graminis, fanicul, eryngii, an. 
decoquantur in fufficienti quantitate aqua pro infe(/. 

Weceufe thefe halfe-bachs in affe&s of the kidneyes, bladder, wombe, fundament, The ut. 
and lower belly, or otherwife when asthe patient by reafon of weaknefle and feare 
of diffipating the {pirits, cannot fuffer or away witha whole bath. The manner of The manner of 
ufing it is thus ; fill fome bagges with the boiled herbes, or other parts of plants, and ee 
caufe the patient to ficuponthem ; yetintheinterimkeepe the vapours from the 
head. leftthey fhould offend it, by cafting over ita linnen cloath, or elfe let himnoe 


enter thereinto untill the vapour be exhaled. 


The 


Parts. Dheir 
CO powder. 
and Other 
tO the rie 
svib, fome. 
here there 
powders. 
| 
CHAP. 
elungs, the 
fome other 
es vencréa 


The faculties 
ot Barhes. 


Their differen- 
ces. 


Naturall Baths. 


How to know 
whence the 
Bathes have 


their efficacy. 


Cuarv.XLil. 
Of Bathes. 


S772 ge@ Aries are nothing elfe than as it were a fomentation of the whole body 
o ah \<") both for preferving health, andthe cure of difeafes : this is a very com. 
==>) modious form of medicine, and among other external! medicines much 
«celebrated by the Greeke, Arabian, and Latine Phyfitians. Fora bath 
28 befides that it digefts the acrid humors, and footy excrements lying un. 
der the skin, mitigates paines and wearinefle, and corres all excefle of diftemper - 
moreover, inthe cure of feavers;and many other contumacious and inveterate dif. 
cafes it is the chiefe and laft remedy, and as it were the refuge of health, ftored with 
pleafing delight. Bathes are of two forts, fome naturall, others artificiall : natural], 
are thofe which of their owne accord, without the operation or help of art,prevaile 
or excell in any medicinal! quality. For the water which of it felfe is devoide of aj} 
quality that is perceivable by the tafte, if it chance to be ftrained through the veines 
of metals, it furnifhes and impregnates it {elfe with their qualities and effets : hence 
it is that all fuch water excellsina drying faculty, fometimes with cooling and 
aftri@ion, and otherwhiles with heate anda difcufling quality. The bathes whofe 
waters baing hot or warm, doe boile up,take their heat from the cavities of the earth 
and mines filled with fire; which thing is of much admiration whence this fire fhould 
arifein fubterrene places, what may kindle it, what feed or nourifh it for fo man 
yceres, and keep it from being extin@. Some Philofophers would have itkindled 
by the beames of the funne, others by the force of lightnings penetrating thebow- 
els of the earth, others by the violence of theaire vehemently or violently agitated, 
no otherwifethan fire is ftrucke by the collifion ofa flint and fteele, Yet itis better 
to referre the caufe of fogreat an effe& unto God the maker of the Univer{e, whofe 
providence piercing every way into all parts of the World, enters and governes the 
fecret parts and paflages thereof. Notwithftanding they {eeme to have come neereft 
the truth, who referre the caufe of heat in waters unto the ftore of brimftone contei- 
Ned in certaine places of theearth, becaufe amongftall minerals it hathmoft fire 
and matter fitteit for the nourifhing thereof. Therefore to it they attribute the flames 
of firewhichthe Sicilian mountaine continually fends forth. Hence alfo itis 
that the moft part of fuch waters fmell of Sulphur,yet others fell of Alom,others 
ofnitre, others of Tarre, and fome of Coproffe. | 
Now you may know from the admixture of what metalline bodies the 
waters acquire their faculties by their tafte, fent, colour,mud, which adheres to tlie 
channels through which the water runnes, as alfo by an artificiail feparation of the 
more terreftriall parts from the more fubtle, For the earthy droffe which fubfides of 
remaines by the boiling of fuch waters, willretaine the faculties and fubftance of 
Brimftone, Alume,and the like minerals: befidesalfo, by the effects and the cure 


of thefe or thefe difeafes you may alfo gather of what nature they are. Wherctor¢ 


The condition 
of natural! ful. 
phureous wa~ 

ters. 


Of aluminous 
watcrs. 


wee will defcribe each of thefe kinds of waters by their effects,bevinning firft with 
the fulphureous. 

Sulphurcous waters powerfully heat, dry, refolve, open, and draw from the cen- 
terunto the furface of the body; they cleanfe the skin troubled with {cabs & tettars ; 
they ceafe the itching of ulcers,and digeft & exhauft the caufes of the gout,thcy help 
paines ofthe collicke and hardened ff But they are not good ro be drunk, not 
onely by reafon of their ungrateful {mell and tafte, but alfo by reafon of the maliti- 
of their fubftance,offenfive to the inner parts of the body, but chiefly co the 

iver. 


Aluminous waters tafte very aftrictively , thereforethey dry powerfully, they 


have no fuch manifeft heat, yet drunke, they loofe the belly : [believe by reafon of 


their heat and nitrous quality they cleanfeand ftay defluxions, and the courfes flow- 
ing too immodcratcly ; theyalfo are good againft the tooth-ache, cating ulcers, 49 
the hidden ab{ceffes of the other parts of the mouth. Salt 


Salt and nitrg 
bind, cleante,d 
ming of bruiles 

Bicuminous \ 
newes ; they 
they wath, and 

Brafen wat 
digeft, cur, bin: 
lids, andthey ' 
ment. 

[ron waters 
hardened mitts. 
ding of the uri: 
liver and kidney 

Leaden water 
the like may be 
neralls,as whic 
they patie. 

Hot waters or 
ftiffenefleand 2 
upon the joints, 
on of a grotic,t: 
barrennetic io 
caufelcffe wearl' 
both forrs, the { 
humour, tor che 

Yet fuch mutt | 
they would 
baths healethe h 
are more freque 
of the bowels, a: 
kidneies, bladd« 
perthe heat ofc 
Courfes, unvolu 
this kindeare ch 
which inwardly 
fic without any 
broaths of rhein 

by the intufiog 
Bumftonc, 
raine warer, irony 
bythe pacicat, fi 
metals queachea 
them agau! 

Befides thei 
Withouttheadm 
tuxed therewith 
they oughctobe 
iLatany time the 
Pores of theskin 
remaining het ws 
Nelle, whereby ti 
be too hot.or co! 
Of iweeror warm 
les ‘for they brin 
‘Ne native colow 


a8. 
4 
~ 
a 
4 
q 


; 


1B.2 6. 


phole body, 
very com- 
ines Much 
For a bath, 
un. 
per 
eterate 
ored with 
l: Natural], 

mrt, prevaile 
oide of al} 
the veines 
Cts : hence 
ooling and 
hes whofe 
the earth 
fire fhould 
br fomany 
itkindled 
the bow- 
my agitated, 
itis better 
fe, whofe 
bvernes the 
me necreft 
contel- 
h moft fire 
the flames 
ce alfo itis 
om,others 


odies the 
eres totlic 
ion of rhe 
ubfides or 
b{tance of 
dthe cure 
hercfore 
firft with 


the cen- 
cetta4rs 5 
they help 
Jrunk,not 
he maliti- 
to the 


| lly, they 


reafon 
rfes low- 
ulcers, and 


Sale 


26. Of fimple Medicines, and their 


Salt and nitrous waters fhew themfelves fufficiently by their heat : they heat, dry, 60/-),.5, 2. 
bind, cleante, difcuffe, attenuate, refift putre faction, take away the blackenefle com. tious | 
ming of bruifes, heale fcabby and maligne ulcers, and he! pe all oedematous tumors. 


Bituminous waters heate, digeft, and by long continuance foften the hardened fi- bimuminces, 
newes ; they aredifferent according to the various conditions ofthe bitumen that 
they wath, and partake of the qualities thereof, 

Brafen waters, that is, fuch as retaine the qualities of brafle, heat, dry, cleanfe, Ofbrafen. 
digeft, cur, binde, are good again{teating ulcers, fiftula’s, the hardnetle of the cyc- 
lids, andthey wafte andeat away the flethy excrefcences of the nofe and funda- 
ment. 

[ron waters coole, dry, andbind powerfully, thereforethey hel peabfcefles, o; 
hardened mults, the weaknefles of the ftomacke and ventricle, the unvoluntary fhed- 
ding of the urine,and the too much flowing termes, asalfo the hot ciftemper of the 
liverandkidneyes. Some fuch are in the Lucan territory in /¢a/y. 

Leaden waters refrigerate, dry,and performe {uch other operations as lead doth: Of leaden. 
the like may bee faid of thofe waters that flow by chalke, plafter, and other fach mi- 
neralls, as whichali of them take and performe the qualities of the bodies by which 
they pafle. 

Hot waters or barhes helpe cold and moift difeafes, asthe Palfie, convulfion, the Of hoebaths 
ftiftenefleand attraction of the nerves, trembling palpitations, cold diftillations 
upon the joints, the inflation of the members by a dropfie,the jaundife by obftruai- 
on of a grofic, tough, and cold humour, the painesof the fides, collick,and kidneies, 
barrennetic in women,the fuppreffios of their courfes, the fuffocation of the womb, 
caufeleffe wearinefle, thofe dileafesthat {poile the skinne, as tertars, the leprofic of 
both forts, the fcabbe, anc other difeales arifing froma groffe, cold and obftructing 
humour, tor they provoke iweats. | 

Yet fuch muft fhunne them as are of acholericke nature, and havea hot liver, for Towhom hurt: 
they would caufe a cachexia and dropfic by overheating the liver. Cold waters or 
baths healethe hot diftemper of the whole body & each ofthe parts therof,and they 
are more frequently taken inwardly than applicd ourwardly ; they help che laxnefle 
of the bowels, as the refolution of the retentive faculty of the ftomacke, entralls, 
kidneies, bladder, and they alfoadde f{trengthto thems Wherefore they both tem- 
perthe neat of cheliver, andalfo ftrengthen it, they ftay the Diarrhea, Dy fentery; 

Courfes, unvoluntary {hedding of urine,the Gonnorrhea, Sweats,and Bleedings. In The spaw: 

this kiadeare chiefly commendable the waters of the Spaw inthe country of Liege; 

which inwardly and curwardly have almoft the fame faculty, and bring much bene. 

fic withoutany inconvenience, asthofle thatare commonly ufed in the drinksand 

broaths of the inhabitants. slonw 391 
inimitation offmaturail baths, there want of cheny be made artificiall ones, 

by che infufiog. and mixing the powders.of the formerly defcribed' mineralls;as, baths 

alfo youmay many times quench in common ot 

raine water, iron, braffe,filver and gold heated red hot,and fogive them to be drutk 

bythe patient, for {uch waters doe ofrcimes retain the qualities and faculties ofthe se... 

metals you may perecive by the-happy fuccefle of fch as have 

ufed chem againfl the Dy featery. 

Befides thefe there are alfo other bathes made byastof timple water, Thefaculty of 
withouttheadmixture of any other thing,: butotheewhiles with oredicinall thines abath of 
xed therewith, and boiled therein. Burafter what 

they oughttobe warme, for warm water humects, relaxes, mollifies ‘the folid parts) 
ifarany time they bee toodry, hard, and cenfe ; by theatcititious heat itoperis the 
Pores of theskinne, digelts, attracts, and difcuffes fuliginous and: acridexcremefits’ 
remaining betweenethe ficth and the skin. Itis good againft {un-burning.and weatd- 
nefle, whereby the fimilar parts are more thanis fit. To conclude,whether we 
be roo hot.or cold, or too dry, or be naufeous, we find mdnifelt profit by baths made 
of (weet or warme water, as chofethat may fupply the detec of fritions and exerci- 
cs : for they bring the body to a mediocrity of temper,they encreafeand ftrengthen 
the native colour, and by procuring fweat dilcuile flatulencies; therefore: they are 


very 


4 
a 
* 
4 
3 
2 
| 
| 

a 

| 

q 


1076 Of imple Medicines, and their Ulfe. 
very uletull in he@icke feavers, and inthe declenfion ofall feavers, and avaing ra. 
Whyweput ying and talking idely, for they procure fleep. But becaufe water alone cannot lon 
eHeinkobaths. 4 dhere tothe body, let oile bee mixed or put inthem, which may hold in the war, f, 

and keep it longer tothe skinne. 

Thefe bathes are good againftthe inflammations of the lungs and fides, for they 
mitigate pain,and help forward that which is fappurated to exclufion,when as gene. 
rall remedies according to art have preceded, for otherwife they will caufe a oreater 
defluxion on the affliG@ed parts:for a bath(in Galens opinion)is profitably ufed to dif. 
eafes when asthe morbifick matteris concocted. To this purpofe is chofen rain wa. 
ter, then river water, forhar it be nor muddy,and then fountaine water ; the water of 
ftanding lakes and fennes isnot approved of, for itis fit chat the water which js 
made choice of fora bath of fweet water, fhould bee light and of fubtle parts, fo, 
baths of waters which are more than moderately hot or cold yeeld no fuch commo. 
dity; but verily they hurt inthis, that they fhut up or clofe the pores of the body. 
and keepe in the fuliginous excrements under the skinne ; other bathes of fiveet or 
fre(h water confift ot thefame marter as fomentations doe, whence it is that fome 
of them relaxe, others mitigate paine, others cleanfe, and otherfome procure the 
courfes, that is compounded of a deco¢tion of ingredients or plants having {uch o. 
perations. To thefethere is fometimes added wine, other whiles oile, formetimes 
frefh butter or milke, as when the urine is topped, when nephriticke paines are vio. 
lent, when the nerves are contracted, when the habite of the body wadtes and wrin- 
kles with ahe@ticke drynefie, for this corrugation is amended by relaxing things, bur 
it is watred,and as it were fatted by humecting things,which may penetrate & tran{. 
fufe the oily or fatty humidity into the body thus rarified and opened by the wam- 
nefle of a bath. 

Anaodine bathes are made of a decoé@tion of medicines of a middle nature, fuch as 
are temperate and relaxing things, with which wee may alfo fometimes mixe refo!- 
ving things ; they are boiled in water and wine, efpecially in paines of the collicke 

_ proceeding from vitreous phlegme, or groffe and thicke flatulencies conteined or 
Whywemutt fhutup inthe belly;kidneyes, or wombe. In fuch bathes it is not fitto fweat, bur 
ver — in onely rofic in them fo long untill the bitternefle of the paine be affwaged or mitiga- 
fren, ted, left the powers weakened by paine, fhould bee more refolved by the breaking 

forth of {weat : emollients are fometimes mixed with gentle detergents, whenas 
the skin is rough and cold,or whenthe {cailes or cruft of {cabs is more hard than u- 
fuall, then in cenclufion we muft come to {trong deterfives and driers, laftly to dry* 
ing and fomewhat aftrictive medicines, fo to ftrengthen the skinne, that it may not 
yeeld it felte focafie and opento receive defluxions. By giving you one examp!s 

, the whole manner of prefcribing a bath may apppeare. 

A mollifying&, rad. lilior. albor. an. ii, malv, pariet. violar. fem. lini, fanny. 
anodine bath... bi/malv, an, i, lor. cham, melil, ancth, an. p Vie fiat decoctio in fufficienti agua quanti 
tatecut permifezto oles liliorum cy lini, ana, tb ii, fiat balneumin quo dintius natth 

Cautionstobe ,, Bathesthough noble remedies approved by ufe and reafon, yetunleffe they bee 
ebierved in the fitly and difcreetly ufed intime, plenty, and quality,they doe much harme ; for they 
wicofbaths:  canfe fhakings and chilneffe, paines, denfity of the skinne, ortoo much rarefaction 
andoft times a refolution of all the faculties. Wherefore a man mult 
 sdefttindfull of chefe cautions before he enterabath : firft, that there beno weakneile of 

any sobleand principal! bowell,for the weak parts eafily receive the humors which 

the bath hath diffufed and rarified, the waies lying open which tend from the whole 
body tothe principal! parts. Neither muft there be any plenty of crude humours” 
the firlt region, for.fo they fhould be attracted and diffufed over all rhe body : there 
fore it is novonely fitthat general! purgations fhould precede, but alfo particular DY 
the belly andurine: befides,the patient fhauld bee {trong that can tafting endure? 
bath as long as it is need full. Laftly,the bath oughrtto be ina warme and filent plac 
left.any coldaire by its blowing, or the water by its cold appuilfe, caulea fhiveiiog 
ox fhaking of the body, whence a feaver may enfue. 


yyy The morning is 4 fit time for bathing, the ftomacke being fafting and emp bf 


Lib.26- 


fixe hours atre 
wife the mcat | 
macke tare the 
make choice o 
day; | 
him hee take 
damaske prun 
fhoulJ {tay in, 
the humide 
they mauft pre! 
crements,drav 
cleanfed, ler 
good nce an 
iniom fort 
That quant 
th 
the {piritsoy' 
thern. Some v 
ther ot 
feéted nervo 
were In chis| 
throug ‘ly ¢ 
Thete 
bathes w 
Srovcs arr 
fame, which 
they entred at 
funcdr\ plac 
to fpeake of th 


make 
Alfo youn 
bottome there 
Wherein the p 
Ceive the exh 
{weating : but 
happens that! 
faint, 
the hot exhal: 
der them, and 
fo take the be 
thereof, But! 
Cannot ashe y 


a 
| 
7 
+ 
9 
~ 
| 


Lin.ze. 


ra. 
annotlon 
the water, 


es, for they 
cn as gene- 
fea Preater 
uled to dif. 
fen rain Wa- 
he water of 
cf Which is 
le parts, for 
ch commo. 
fthe body, 
of {weet or 
mis that fome 
procure the 
ing {uch o. 
fometimes 
Nes are vio- 
$and wrin- 
things, bur 
mre & tran{. 
y the warin- 


ure, fuch as 

mixe refol- 
he collicke 
onteined or 
{weat, bur 
id or mitiga- 
e breaking 
ts, whenas 
bard than u- 
aitly to dry* 
at it May nor 
ne example 


lini, foenug. 
quae quantt« 
utius 


fTe they bee 
Cs for they 
rarefaction 
Ban muft bee 
of 
ors which 

a the whole 
humoursia 
ody :there- 
articular by 
ng endurc4 
filent places 
a fhiveiing 


idem pty, of 
fixe 


in 


Of hmple Medicines,and their Ufe. 


1077 


§xe hours after meat,if it be requifite that the patient fhould bathtwicea day,other- 


wife the meat yet crude would bee {natched by the heate of the bath out of the fto- for bathing. 


macke into the veines and habite of the body. Many, ofall the fcafons of the yecre 
make choice of the{pring and end of fummer,and in thefe times they chufeacleare 
day, newher croubled with ftormy windes, nortoofbarpe anaire. As long asthe 
patient is inthe bath, itis fittchathe take no meate, unleffe peradventure to comfort 
him heetake a little bread moiftened in wine , orthe juice of an orange, or {ome 
damaske prunes to quench his thirft: his ftrength will thew how long itis fit that he 
fhould {tay in, for he muft not ftay there to the refolution of his powers, for in baths 


the humide «nd fpirituous fubftance is much diffipated. Comming forth of the bath, Howto orde: 
they muft prefently get them to bed, and be well covered, that by {weating, the ex. the patien' 


commung forth 


crements,drawue the skinne by the heat of the bath, may breake out the (weat ofihebath, 


cleanfed, let himufe gentle friGtions, or walking, then let him feede upon meat of 
good juice and eafie digeftion, by reafon thatthe ftomacke cannot bur be weakened 
iniome fort by the bath. 

T hat quantity of meat is judged moderate, the weight whereof fhall not oppreffe 
the (tomacke : venery after bathing muft not beeufed, becaufe to the refolution of 
the {pirits by the bath, itaddes another new caufe of further {pending or diffiparing 
them. Some with thofe that ufe the bath by reafon of fome contraction, paine, or o- 
ther affects of the nerves, prefently after bathing, to dawbeor befmeare the af- 
fected nervous parts withthe clay or mudde of the bathe, that by making it up as it 
were in this pafte, the vertuc of the bath may worke more eff-Gually, and may more 
throughly center inro the affected part. 

Thefe cautions being diligently obferved, thereisno doubt burtthe profit by 
yathes wll be great & wonderfull : the fame things areto be oblerved in the ufe of 
Stoves or Hot-hontes, forthe ufe and eficé of baths and hot-houfes isalmoft the 
fame, whichthe antients therefore ufed by turne, fo that comming forthof the bath 
they entred a ftove, and called it alfo by the name ofa bath,as you may gather from 
fundry places of Gales inhis Methodus med, wherctore Ithinke it fit in the next 


to {peake of them. 


CuHap. XLIIL. 
Of Stoves or Hot-howfes. 


'T ovesarecither dry or moift: Dry, by raifing ahotand dry aéry 
44 exhalation,foto imprint their tacultics in the body,that it thereby 
waxeth hot,and the pores being opened, runnes down with {weart. 
There are fundry waiesto raife fuchan exhalation : at Pare, and 
wherefoever there are ftoves or publicke hot-houles, they are rai- 
(ed by acleere fire put under a vaulted fornace, whence it being 
prefently diffufed, heatsthe whole roome. Yet every one may 
make himfelfe fucha ftove as he fhall judge beft and fitreft. 

Alfo you may put red hot cogle {tones or bricks intoatubbe, having firft laid che 
bottome thereof with brickes of iron. plates, and fo feta featinthe midft thereof; 
whercin the patient fitting, well covered with acanopy drawne over him, may re- 
ceive the exhalation arifing from the ftones that are about him,& fo have the benefit 
fweating : but inthis cafe we muft oft looke to and fee the patient, for it fometimes 
happens that fome, neglected by their keepers otherwile employed, becomming 
faint, and their fenfe failingthem by the diffipation of their {ptrits by the force of 
the hot exhalation, have funke down with all cheir bodiesupon the ftones lyingun- 
der them, and fo have beene carried halfe dead and burnt into their beds. Someal- 
fo take the benefit of {wweating in a fornace or oven, as foonc as bread is drawne out 
thereof, But I doe not much approve of this kinde of fweating, becaule the patient 


cannotas he will, much leffe as he pleafeth, lye orturne himfelfcchercin. 
Yyyy Humide 


The difference: 
of 


How made. 


2 
i 
| 
: 


che face, as fur 


Humid ftoves or fudarories are thofe wherein {weat is caufed by a vapour or moift 


J he delineation of 4 bathing Tubbe, having 4 double bottome, 
with aveffell neare thereto, with pipes comming 


heatsthis vapour muft be raifed from a decoction of roots, leaves, flowers,and feeds di feafes,the cog 
which are thought fit for this purpofe; the decottion is to be made in water or wine js not onely cx 
or both together. Therefore let them all be put into a great veffell well lured. from of corrupt wat 
the top of whofe cover iron ortinne pipes may come intothe bathing tub ftandine Ontheconrg 
neere thereto, betweene the two bottomes thereof, by meanes whereof the ho; va. and comcely,fo 
pour may enter thereinto, and diffule it felfe therein. Now it is fic the bath ing forcif the {po 
fhould bee furnified witha double bottome, the one below and whole, the other mours, the box 
fomewhat higherand perforated with many holes, whereupon the patient {itrin, principal! bow 
may receive a fudorificke vapour over all his body : now this vapour, ifar any time things belongs 
it become too hot, muft bee tempered by opening the hole, which muft for the (am. may {mooth ci 
purpofe be made in the top of the pipe, that fo it may be opened and fhut at pleafiyr. a laudible colo 
In the interim the tub fhall bee clofely covered wherein the patient fits, hee putting Firft the fac 
forth onely his head,that fo hee may draw in the coole aire. In defe& of fuch Pipes, ter lillies, of d 
the herbs {hall bee boiled by themfelves in a caldron or kettle, and this thal] bee Ge hath bin ficep 
thus hot into the bathing tubbeat the:patients fect, and fo by cafting into it heated be defcribed . 
ftones, a great and fudorificke vapour fhall be raifed. ofthe ointmer 


and retaineth 
prepared, yo 
beaurifie, 


therefrom, and entring betweene the two Re. gum. tra 
bostomes of the Tubbe. 


BIS, fic 
[alss com. Ai, 
cern(a tn aceto 
sto to aptaws 
jag io filrred, 
iy, vu ae 
Tech, an.3 
and thea be inf, 
diftilled roget! 
{mooth and lo 
linnen cloaths 
yard, juice of le 
portion, with 
is very good fo 
BIC 
laGis if 


ry 
af 


Cuarp. XLiy. 


Of Fuci, that us, wafhes, and fuchthings for the fmoothing 
and beautifying of the skinne. 


Over. NU. VI. cer 
There is a: 
fmooths the rx 
Take roe 
themin water , 
Water is cold, ¢ 
When as you 20 


& to reftrainethe wandring lufts of their husbands, may endevour by att . 


to away thofe {pots and deformities which have happened to fall on their faces 


Water. 

either by accident or age. Re his cerull 
Asthecolourof Thecolourthat appearesin the face, either laudible or illaudible, abundant!y Mentum. adden 
thewes the temper both of the body, as alfo of thofe humours that have chechielé ty Fine pO 
thatisthereun- AOminion therein : for every humour dyes the skinne of the whole body, bur chic! five dayes, then 
dcp, ly of the face, with the colourthereof : for choler bearing {way in the body, the fac 2 gentle Fre uni 

lookes yellowith ; phlegme ruling, it lookes whitith or pale; if melancholy exceed, Canterice 
then blackifh or {wart ; but if blood have the dominion, the colouris frefl and red. Dy Soe Rae 
Yetthereare other things happening externally which changerhe native colour ~ Partes aguales,/ 


— 
9,9, 0.9.9, 9,0 
SSA 
DOK BHis following difcourfeis not intended forthofe women which ac 
“AR dicted to filthy luft,feek to beautifie their faces, as baits and allurement: 
to filthy pleafures: but itis intended for thofe onely, which the bette! 


our Or moift 
s,and feeds, 
iter Or Wine 
luted, trom 
ub ftanding 
tthe hot 
athing tub 
the Other 
tient fittin 
atany time 
or the fame 
Pleafure. 
€¢ puttin 
pipes, 
fhall bee fer 
tO it heated 


which ad- 
llurements 
the better 
our by art 
cheir faces 


bundantly 
the chief 
but chief- 
ly, the face 
ly exceed, 
and red. 
e colour of 
che 


L1p.26- Of/mple Medicines,and their 


1079 
che face, as fun burning, cold, pleafure, forrow, feare, watching, fafting, paine, old 
difeafes,the corruption of meats and drinks : for rhe flourifhing colour of the chec ks 
js not onely extinguifhed by the too immoderate ule of vinegar, but by the drinking - 
of corrupt waters the face becomes {wolne and pale. 

Onthecontrary,laudible meats and drinks make the body to bee well coloured 
and comely,for thatthey yeeld good juice, and confequently 2 good habite. There- 
fore if the {pots of the face proceed from the plenicude and ill difpoficion of hu- 
mours, the body thall bee evacuated by blood-letting: if fromthe inf rmity of any 
principall bowell, that muft firft ofall bee ftrengthened, but the care of all thefe 
things belongs tothe Phyfitian : we here onely feek after particular remedies which 
may {mooth the face, and take away the {pots, and other defeats thereof, and vive it 
alaudible colour. 

Firft the face fhall be wathed with the water of lilly flowers, of bean flowers, Wa- Warers 
rer lillies, of diftilled milke , or elfe withthe water wherein fome barly or flarch withto wath 
hath bin ftceped. The dryed face fhall be anointed with the ointments prefently to “*** 
be defcribed ; for fuch wafhing cleanfeth and prepareth the face to receive thefarce 
of the ointments, no otherwife than an alumed lye prepares the baires co drinkeu 
and retainethe colour that wee defire. Therefore the face being thus cleanfedand 


prepared, you may ufe the following medicines, as thofe that havea faculty to 
beaurifie, extend,aud {moorth the skinne : as, 

RK. gum. trazacanth. conqualf. 5 ii. difemperentur in vale vitrio bb jj. 4g Compound It 
munis, fic di/jolventur, inde albe(cet Aqua, Or elfe, lithareyrt $ li. ceruf. 
falis com, an. 5%. aceti, aqua plantag.an. 5 11.caphur, |’. macerentur litharzyros thetace,. 
cern(a tn aceto feorfim per tres aut quatwor horas, fal vero camphorain Agua quam Virgins 
tuto tuo aptam delegerss then filcer them both feveral] ,and mixe them together be. 
ing fo filered, when as you would ufe them. 

Re, lactis vaccint, tb ii. arancioram limon. an. ow. iv. facchari albifiimi, alum, 
rech. an.5 i.diftillentur omnia fimul : let the lemmons and oranges bee cut into flices, 
and theo be infufed in milk,addiag thereto the fugar and alome;then Jet the mall be 
diftilled together in ba/#co Maria ;the water that comes thereof will make the face 
{mooth and lovely. Therefore about bed time it will be good to cover the face with 
linnen cloaths dipped therein. Awater alfo diftilled of fhailes gatheredin a vine- 
yard, juice of lemmons,the flowres of white mullaine,mixed together in equall pro. 
portion, with alike quantity of the liquor contained in the bladders of elme leaves, 
is very good for the fame purpofe. Alfo this, 

Re, mica panis albi, tb iv. flor. fabar.rofar. alb. flor. senuph. lilior. & ireos, an, ib ij, 
ladis vaccini, tb yi. owa. nu, viii. aceti opt. i. diftidentur omnia fimul in alembice vie 
treo, fiat aqua ad faciei manuum lotionem. Or, de fem. 
plilss, 5 rof. di{folwt. 31%, borac. fal. gem. an. i. fiat linimentum pro fas 
cie. Or. Ke, caponem vivum, cafewm ex lacle caprino recenter Confectem, limsn. 
over. nu. vi. cern[. lot. in ag. rofar. il. boracis, 518. camph. 5 ii. aq. flor. fabar. iy, f- 
at Omnium infufto per Xxiv. horas, poftes diftillestur in alemoico 

There is a moft excellent fucus made of the marrow of {heepes bones, which The marrow ct 
fmooths the roughnefie of the skinne,beautifies the face; now itmuft be extra- 
&ed. Takerhe bones, fevered from the ficth by boyling, beatthem, and fo boyle the face, 
themin water, when they are well boyled, take them from the fire, and whenthe 
water is cold, gather the fat that f{wimmes upon it, and therewith anoint y.our face 
when as you goe to bed, and wafhicinthe morning with the formerly prefcribed 
Water. 

Re. fabis ceruff. ung. citrin. vel fpermat. ceti, 5 i, malaxenttr fimul, fiat linie Howto make 
mentum, addendo olei ovor.> ii, The Sat thus made, grinde Cerufleintove. 
ty fine powder,and infufe tb i. thereof in a portle of diftilled vinegar for foure or 
five dayes, then filter ir, then fet that you have filered ina glafed earthen yellell over 
a gentle fire untillit concrete into falt, jultas you doethe capitelism in making of 

Re excrementi lacert. ofvis [apia, tartart, vini albi, rafur. corm, cerv. farin. 
Partes equales, fiat infundatur in aqua diftillare amygdalarum 


4 


, 
| 7 
f 
j } 
4 
~ 
| 


Medicines, and thew 


Low to paint 
the face. 


Why worlein 
winter thanin 
(Commer. 


Dicer. 


Remedies. 


An approved | 


drawn out of the bafilica, then from the vera frentis, and laftly fromthe vein oft: 


vinealinms, flor. nenuph. huic addito mellis albi par pondus : \et them be all incorpora. 
ted in a marble mortar, and kept ina glafle or filver veffell, and at night anoiny the 
face herewith ; it wonderfully prevailes againft the rednefle of the tace, if after the 
anvinting it you fhall cover the face witha linnen cloath moiftened in the formerly 
defcribed water. 

Re, fublim.2 i. argent, viv, faliv, extinih. ii. margarit. non perforat.9 i. caph.3,6 
incor porentur firmul mortario marmorce, cum piftillo ligneo, per tres horas ducantuyy 
fricentur, reducanturque in tenui{simum pulverem, confcchus abluatur aqua 
aeficcetur,ferveturg adufum,adde foliorum argenti,nu.ex. Whenas you 
would ufethis powder, putintothe palme of your hand a littic oile of maftick, 
of {weet almonds, then prefently in that oyle diflolve alittle of the defcribed pow. 
der,and fo work it into an ointment, wherewith let the face be anointed at bed-time. 
but it is fic firft to wath the face withthe formerly deferibed waters, andagaine jp 
the morning when you rife. 

When the face is freed from wrinkles and {pots, then may you paint the cheekes 
with a rofie and flourifhing colour; for of the commixture of white and red arifeth 
native and beautifull colour ; for this purpofe take as much as you {hall thinke fir of 
brafill,and alchunct, fteep them in alume water, and therewith touch the cheeks and 
lips, and fo fuffer itto dry in : there is alfo {panifh red made for this purpofe. others 
rub the mentioned parts with a fheeps skinne died red: moreover the friQion that is 
made by the hand onely, caufeth a pleafing redneffein the face, by drawing thithe; 
the blood and {pirits. 


Guar. XLY. 


Of the Gutta Rofacea, or 4 fitry face. 


wd 


Histreatile of Fuci puts me in mindeto fay fomething in this place of hel- 
ping the preternaturall rednefie which polleffeth the nofe and checkes, 
and oft times.all the face befides, one while with a tumour, other whies 
without, fomctimes with puftles and {cabs, by reafon of the admixtion 
of anicrous and aduft humor. PraGitioners have termedit Gutta rofacea,T his thewes 
both moreandmore ugly in winter thanin fummer, becaufethe cold cloferh rae 
pores of theskiane, fothat che matter contained thereunder is pent up for want ot 
tranfpiration, whence itbecomes acrid and biting, fothatasit were boiling 
lifts or raifech the skinne into puftles and {cabs ; it is a contumacious difeafe, and olf 

times notto be helped by medicine. 
~~ Forthe gencrall method of curing this difeafe, itis ft that the patient abitasc 
from winc, and fromall thingsin generall that by their heat inflame the blood, and 

diffafe it by their vaporous fubftance : he fhall (hunne hot and very cold places, anc 


fhall procure that his belly may be foluble,citherby nature or art. Let blood filtoe 
f che 


nofe. Letleaches be applied to fundry placcs of the face, and cupping glalles with 
{carificationto the fhoulders. | 

For particular or proper remedies, if the difeafe be inveterate, the hardaefle fhall 
firft be foftned with emollient things, then affaulted with the following ointments, 
which thall be ufed or clianged by the Chirurgian as the Phyfician fhall rhinke fit. ' 

(uce: citrt, Slii.ceruf. quantum fufficit ad enum tn[biffandum, argent: Vivi 
va falphure vivo extindt,5 .incorporentur fimul, cy ungucutum. 

Re, boracts, 3 ii, farias citer. fabar. an. caph. 34. cum mele fueco cepe fit 
trochi(ci : when you would ufe them, diflolve them in rofe and plantaine watc!, and 
fpread them upon linnencloaths,and fo apply them on the night rime to the affccte 
parts, and fo Ict them be oft times renued. 


Re, wnguenticitrini recenter difbenfati, ii. fulphuris vivi, = (3. cam modico oles jem: 


cacurh. G fucci limonum, fiat unguentum; with this let the face be anointed when yo“ 


Rody ofthe ha 


Lin.26- 
to bed, i 
reafon of bran 
rofe water , 
face. 

Re cera. 
ceto aquaro, 
night, and ir 
this kinds of : 

Ke, 
is diftilled for 
cleare and we! 
and inthis de 
quantity of ¢! 
face inthe ev: 

album, o 
matt, D1.incor 
argent: Vivi, 
beo, cy fiat unc. 
path. acut. & a 
and make an 

u. rad, 
face: limonum 
8, alam, 
be diftilled in: 

RY. apath. 
5 8. facci limon 
tandantur 
Tt 
the (ame purpc 

For ttaying 
ren With vince 
the fpurges, 

i. (sl 
rar per é ERIM 
gar, withcopc 
prefie it throu 

But iccinet 
and corroding§ 
thereforeto {a 
ointmenr. 

R. fereo. vee 
oles vitel.evo? 


Ad ufam. Tot! 


Medicines. 


“fe T hy 
be 
N 
ACTOS 
we 


| 
| 


Line. 


incorpora- 
it anoint the 

if after the 
he formerly 


1. Caph, 
ducantur 
BY rt 
hen as you 
mattick. or 
ribed 
tbed-time: 
ndagaine in 


the cheekes 
redarifetha 
thinke fit of 

cheeks and 
ole, others 
that is 
Ving thither 


of hei- 
nd checkes, 
ther whiles 
admixtion 
his fhewes 
| cloferh che 
for want of 
oiling up, 
afe, and off 


nt abftaiic 
blood, and 
places, and 
ood firltbe 
vein of 
olaffes with 


dneffe fhall 


ointments, 
hinke fit. 
enim 


co cepa fans 
watc!r, 4 


the affected 
dico olei 


dine 


goetobed, inthe morning let it bee wathed away with rofe water; being white by 
reafon of bran infufed therein: moreover, fharp vinegar boyled with branne and 
rofewater, and applicd as before, powerfully takes away the redneffe ofthe 

face. 

cera. litharg, auri, fulphuris vivi pulverifati, an. 36, ponantur in phiala cum a- 
ceto aquarofarum linnen cloaths dipped herein fhall be applied co the face on the 
night, and it fhall bce wathed in the morning with the water of the infufion of bran: 
this kinde of medicine fhall be continued fora moneth. | 

Re. fanguinis tanri, lj. butyri recentis, |b fiat diftillatio, utatur. The liquor which 
is diftilled for the firft daies is troubled and ftinking, but thefe pafled, it becommeth 
cleareand well {melling. Some boile bran in vinegar and the water of water lillies. 
and in this decoction they diflolve of /u/phur and camphirea fit proportion tothe 
quantity of the decoction, and they apply cloaths moiftened in this medicine to the 
face inthe evening. 

album. ovor. nu. ti. aqua 3i fucci plantaz. lapath. acut. an.3i fubli. Todry up he 
mati, D1.incorporentar in mortariomarmoreo. porci decies in aceto lota,=iv. puitles, 
argenti Vivi ,% i. aluminis, fulphuris vivi, an. 35. piftentur omnia diu in mortario 
beo, fiat unguentam, arzentam vivum non debet nifi extreme loco affundi, Re. rad. la- 
path, acut. & afphodel, an. ii. coquantur in acetoferllitico, poftea tundantur, fetaces 
trajictantur, addende auripigmenti ii. folphuris vivi, 5 x.let them be incorporated 
and make an ointmentto beufed to dry up the puftles. 

rad, Lilioram fub cineribus codtorum, 5 iv. piftillo tufts; fetaceo trajectis, adde 
tyri recentis, axung.perct, lote in aceto, an. falphuris vivi, iii. camphor. iii. 
facet limonum quantum [uf ficit, malaxentur fimul cr fiat unguentam, lactis virzina. 
lis, 1b 8, aluminis,5 %.(ulpharis vivi,% i. frcci limonum, 3 vi. [alis com.3 letthem all 
be diftilled in a glafle alembicke, and the water kept for the forementioned ufes. 

Ry. dapath.acat. plantagin. af{phodel. i\>. oles vitel. ovor. =i. tercbinth. vener. 
5 8. facci Limonum, Siti. aluminis combuft, Si. argenti vivi extinét. liliorum, 
tundantur omniain mortario plumbeo, addendo {ub finem arzent. viv. ne mortario 
adherefcat. The jaice of onions beaten with fait, or the yelkes of egges are good for 
the fame purpofe. 

For ftaying and killing of Ring-wormes and Tettars, the leaves of hellebore bea- Tokill cectars. 
ren with vinegar are good, the milke of the fig-tree is good of it felfc, as alfo thar of 
the fpurges, or muftard diflolved in ftrong vinegar with alittle fulphur. Or, 

u. fulphuris , calcanthi, alumixis , aw. macerentur ia accte forts, trajician. 
tur per inteum, apply theexprefled juice. Others maceraté an cgge in fharpe vine 
oar, withcoporofe and (ulphur vivum beaten into fine powder, then they ftraine or 
oreffe it through a lionen cloath. 

But fecing the forementioned medicines are acride, and forthe moft part esting 
andcorroding, itcannot bee buttharthey muft make the skinne harfhand rough, 
thereforeto fmoothand levigate it againe, you fhall make vfeof the following 


ointment. 
ven, tam din lota, st acrimoniamnullam habeat,butyri falis expertisan. he 


oles vitel.ovor.% i, porci inagua rofarum lote, cere parum, fiat linimentum SKINNC. 
dd ufum. To the fame purpofe you may alfo make ule of fome of the forementioned 


medicines. 


CHuar. XLVI. 
Toblackethe haire. 


T firft the haires, (totake the /wcus or tinGure, and tO retaine it) mut 
aWA\ee@ be prepared with Lye, wherein alittle roche Alomc is diflolved. .Thus, 
the fatty {cales may be wafhed and taken away, which hinder, and (as ic 


4 


were) keep away the , that itcannotadhere or penetrate intothe 


hody ofthe haire. Then muft we come to particular or proper & fitting medinings 


| 
| 
4 
| j 


1082 


— 


‘fimple Medicines, and their Lis.2 6. 


— 


What things 
are fit tody 


the hauys 


Howte wath 
Lime. 


for this purpofe. Thefe ought to be aromaticke and cephalicke,and fornew hat tip. 
tick,thar by their odoriferousand aftringent power they may ftrengthen the animal 
faculty : Fatthermore,they muft be of fubtle parts, chat they may cater even into the 
inner rootes of the haires. 

Ke. Sulphurts, vitriolt, gallarum, calcis vive, litharey 14, aM. Sti. [corte ferri 38, in poll 
linemreducantur, cum aq. communi incorporentur,wt inde fiat ma(fa: with this at bed 
time let the haires bec rubbed, and in the morning let them bee {moothed with the 
fame. 

calcis lote, 3 i. lithargyri 3 (3. cum decocho gallarum, corticam, nuchm, fat 
maffa, addendo oleichamem. 3 ii. Re. lytharg. aurs, 3 ti. ciner, clavellat. calcis oy 
31. diffolve omnia cumurena hominis donec acquwrant cenfifientiam unguenti pro unions 
capillorum. %,.calcis lota, 3 iv. litharzyri utriu(q; il. decoct. falv, cors, 
nat. fiat pafta ad formam pultis fatis liquide: let the haireat bed time bee 
herewith, and wafhedin the morning with wine and water. 

Now the manner of wafhing lime isthus : Infufe in ten or twelve pints of fir. 
water one paund of lime, then poure out the water by ftooping the veifell, putrip 
more in the ftead thereof; the third time in fkead of common water powre thereon 
the water of rhedecoction of fageand galls, letthelimelye therein for fo many 
houres, then in like manner powre it off by ftooping the veffell; and thus you (hai! 
have your lime well wathed. There is alfo founda way howto die or black the haire 


A water fo black by only powring of fome liquor thereon : as, a7genti puri (Simi, 2 li. reducantur in 


ahe haire. 


To make the 
haire of a fax- 
en calour. 


A depilatory. 


tenui[simas laminas, ponantur tn ampulla CHM agua {eparations Auri ¢7 argen. 
ti, G aqua rofar.5 vi. The preparing of this water is thus, put intoa violl the warer 
of feparation and the filver, and fet itupon hot coales foto diflolvethe filver, which 
being done then take it from the fire,and when itis cold,adde thereto the rofe water, 
But if you would black it more deeply,adde more filver thereto, if lefle, then a{mal. 
ler quantity ; to ufe it, you muft fteepe the combe wherewith you combe your head 
in this water. 

plumbi (ti, 3 ii. gallarum non perforat. cortic. nucum, an. 3 iii. terre figil, ferret: 
hifpan. an. 3 ii. vitriol. rom,3 vi.falis gem. i (3. caryoph. nace mofch. ai. i. fal 
mon, aloes,an.3 fiat palvis : let this powder be macerated in vinegar 
for three daies {pace,then diftill it all in an alembick,the water that comes therefrom 
is good for the forefaid ufe. The following medicine is good to make the haires of 
a flaxen colour. 1. flor, cenist. fachad.cy cardamom. an. 3 i. lupinor. 
buxt, corticis citri,rad. centian. cy berber. cumaquawitri fiat lenta decoctie: 
herewith bathe and moiften the haires for many dayes. 


Cuar.XLVII. 
Of Pfilothra, or Depilatories : aud alfo of Sweet waters. 


Edicinesto fetch off haire, which by the Greeks aretermed ?//- 
i thra,and Depilatoria in latine vulgarly, are madeas you may learn 
by thefe followingexamples, Kk, cales vive, 3 iii. 
let the lime bee quencht in faire water, and then the orpimentad- 
= | ded with fome aromaticke thing: havea care thatthe medicine 
lye not too long uponthe part, otherwife it will burne ; aod 
medicine muft bee made tothe confiftence of a pultis and applied warme, firft fo- 
menting the part with warme water;for then the haire will fall off by gentle rubbing 
or wafhing it with warme water : butif there happen any excoriation thereupon,you 
may helpe it by theufe of snguentum rofatum, or fome other of the like faculty. 

Ry. calcis viv. aurip. citrin.an.3i, amyl. puma argent. an.3 terantar 


tur cum aq. com. bulliant fimul : you fhall certainly know that it is futhciently boi- 


led, if putting thereinro a goofes quill the feathers come prefently off make 
into powder equall partsof unquenche limeand orpiment, they tye them up 


after 


L 1B.26- 

after by gently 
waters are very 
becaufethey y! 
or. Lavend, ib 
fiat diftikati 
lation, if you p 
glaffe, or put th 
chus made: Ix. 
lentur in balneo 
rous thing 
rifmar! 
77 


‘ 
47 
| 
| 
i 
& 
= 
7 ~ od « 
{ - 
4 
7 
4 | — 
=* 
4 = 
4 | 
| 4 
Ss 
> * 
* 
Another, 
4 


Lis.z 6. 


ewhat 
the animal 
‘en into the 


£8, tn pol. 
at bed 
¢d with the 


» MUCKIN, Kas 
vig, 
TOUNCL ome 
Cort, £ra- 


1¢ bee died 


pints of faire 
ell, putting 
Nre thereon 
or fo Many 
us you thal! 
ack the haire 
ducantur in 
li che water 
iver, which 
ro{e water. 
then a{mal.- 

your head 


figil, ferret. 
5 |. falss Am 
in vinegar 
ms therefrom 
¢ haires of 


afjat.rafer, 


& decoctie 


rmed Pfilo- 
may learn 
jgmentt, 
pimene ad- 
medicine 
this 
e, firft fo- 
tle rubbing 
eupon,you 
Bike faculty. 


[18.26 Of Ample Medicines,and their Ue. 


after by gently ftroaking the head, the haire falls away ofit felfe. 
waters are very fitting forto wath the hands, face,and wholebod 

becaufe they yeeld a gratefull fmell : the fii (tis lavander water thy 
for. lavend. Ib iv. aq.rofar. cy vini alb, an, ji. aq, vite 
fiat di ftillatioin balaco Maria : this {ame water ma 
lation, if you put fome lavander flowers in 
elafie, or put them in da/nec, adding a little 
thus made : K, caryoph. it.aq.rofar. tb 
lentur in balneo Marie, 


sto be made. Lavander 
iV. mifceantur omnia fimul, 
y allo bee had without diftil- 
faire water, and fo fet them to funne ina 
vile of {pike and musk. Clove water is 
il, macerentur [patioxxiv. horarum, Gy diffil- Clovewaree 
Sweet water commonly focalled, ismade ot divers odorite- sweet water, 
rous things put together; asthus, kx. mentha, majorane, falvia, ro- 

rifmarint, lavendule, an, mii. radicésireos, ii. caryophylorum, cinte 

nucis mofchatea, ana, limonum, num. iy. 
macerentur omnia in agua rofarum, [patio 
vigint: quatuor horarum, diftit- 
bentur in balneo Maria, 
addendo Mofchi, 


The End the fixt 


‘ 
‘ 
> ~ 
- « 
4 
~~ = 
w 


sp 


The foll 10S SWCCT WALCIGs 
, as alfo linnen, 
| 
| 1” we hal 
iently bol- 
forme make 
emupina 
hyn while 
| | | 


DISTILLATIONS. 


HAP. i. 
what Difilation is,and how many kinds thereof there be, 


=) Aving finif ht the Treatile of the faculties of medicines, it 

now {cemes requifite that we fpeake fomewhat of Chymi- 

firy and medicines as are extracted by fire. Thefe are 

luch as confit ofa certaine fift effence feparated from their 
earthy inpurity by Dittillation, in which there is a fingular, 

and almoft divine efficacy in the cure of difeafes. So that of 

—¥} fo greatan aboundance of the medicines there is fcar{e any 

<3} whicharthis day Chymifts dec not diftill;or otherwife make 

a them more {trong and effe Quall chan they were before. Now 

om Diftillation is a certaine art or way by which the liquor or humid past of things,by Whatditil: 
Oem hc vertue and force of fire or fome femblable heate (asthe matter fhall feeme tore parton de, 
quire) is extracted and drawne,being firft refolved into yapour andthen condens'd 

by cold. Some call this art Swb/imation or fublimiog, which fignifics noe 

Wm (ung elfe but to feparate the pure fromthe unpure; the parts that are more fubrle 

iad delicate,from thofe that are more corpalent,grofle and excrementitious; as alfo 

(omake thofe matters whofe fubftance is more groff’,to become more pure and fin- 

cre, eyther for thatthe terreftriall parts are ill uniced and conjoyned, or otherwife 
confufed into the whole and difperfed by the heate and focarried up, the other 

{offer parts remaining together inthe bottome of the vefle]l.Or a diftillationis the 

Om ‘xtration or effufion of moifture diftilling drop by drop fromthe nofe of the Alem- 

decke or any fuch like veffells. Before this ctfufion or falling downe of the liquor 

UB licre goes acertaine concoction performed by the vertue of heate ; which feparates 

ihe fubftances of one kind from thofe of another that were confufedly mixed toge- 

9 ‘cr in one body ,and fo brings them into one certaine forme or body,which may be 

and profitable for divers difeafes. Somethings require the heate of a cleare 

tre, others a flame,others the heate of the Sunne, others of Afhes or fand or the fiy 

longs of Iron; others horfe dung,or boyling water or the oiely vapour of ficame 

WM thereof. Inall thefekinds of fires, there are foure confiderable degrees of heate. 

OM The fit is conteined inthe limits of warmth,and fuch is warme water,or the vapour 

Wa ‘fhot water. The {ccondisa little hotter,but yet fo as the hand may abide it with- on 
Out any harme, fuch is the heate of Afhes. The third exceeds the vchemency of 

Oe the fecond ywherefore the hand cannot long endure this without hurt, and {uch is the 

heate of fand. The fourth is fo violent, that it buructh any thing that commeth 

@ “are, and fuch are the filings of Iron. 

The firftdegree ismoft + codifiill fuch things as are fubtle and moift as: hea 


lowers. The {econd fuch as are fubtle and dry as thofethings which are odoriferoug roma end as; 


F id aromaticall, as Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves. Therhird is ficcett to diftill fuct 
‘bingsarc of a moreden{e {ubftance and fuller of juice;fych asare Roots and 


- 
q 


Of Diflillations. Linas 


The matter 
the for 
F ornaces, 


A round forme 
the eft tor 
F ornaces. 


oumms, The fourth is fit for mettalls and mincralls as,Allum, Vittioll, Ambe, 
let, In like manner you may allo diitill without heate; as wee ule ry doc 
thoferhings which are dittilled by ftraining, as when the more pure iS drawn: and 
feparated trom that which is moft unpure and catthy, as wee doc in Lac Vio, Al 
and other things whichare firained through an bypocras bag, or with Peete 
cloath cutin the forme of a tongue, or by fetling, or by a vefle}) med, wy 
wood: fometimes alfo fomethings mzy bee diflilled, by coldneffe and humjq;,, 
and fo we make the oile of Tartar,Myrrhe and Vitriolls,by laying them upon 3 md 
ble ina cold and moifi place, 


Of the matter and forme of Fornaces. 


Ke naces to bee made Of brickes and clay, otherfome of clay one 
which are the betrer and more lating it ijobee the clay bee fat 
y welltempered with whites of Epgcs andhaire. Yet in fuddain 

- cafions when there is prefent necefliry of diftilation, moy 
made of bricks, {0 laid rogether that the joynts may not agree, bucbe unequal! ¢ 
fothe ftruCture will be the fronger. The beft and fiereft forme of a Fornace di. 
fiillarion is round;tor fo the heate of the fire carried up equally diffulcs it (elfe, vere 
way, which happens notina Fornace of another hgure, Js {quare Or ttianoutse 
for the corners difperfe and feparate the force ot the fire. Their mavaiude 
ruuft bee fuch as fhalibee fit for the receiving of the veffell. For their thickner 
fo great as neccflizy thal! feeme torequire. They mutt be made with two 
diftinguitht as it were into two forges, one belove which may receive the alhes of 
the coales or the like other fuell, the otber above to containe the burning coales oy 
fire. The botrome of this upper mutt cyther bee an iron erate, or el{cit mutt bee 
perforated with many holes,thar /o the afbes may the more eafily fal! downe iato 
the botrome, which otherwife would extinguifh the fire; yet {ome Fornaces have 
three partitions, as the Fornace for reverberation. In the firft and lowett the afhes 
are receivid,in the fecong the coales are put, & in the third the matter which isc. 
cind or eife diftilled, The third ought to havea femicircular cover,that {0 the heate 
or flame may bee refeéted upon the contained matter. The lowes partition (hal 
have one or more dores, by which the fallen downe afhes may bee taken forth, But 
the upper mult havebutene, whereby the coales er wood may be putin, But in the 
top or upper pare of the Fornace where it fhall feeme moft fir.there thal! be wo ot 
three holesmade, that by them you may blow the fire and that the {p,oake may 
more freely pafie our, Butthefe forementioned dores muft have their {hvtrers, 
ju(t like an ovens mouth. But in defeét of a fornace or fit matter to build one with- 
all,wee may ufeakercle,fet upon a trefoore after the manner that wee {hall prefent- 
ly declarewhen wee come to {peake of that diftillation which is to bee made by 
Balneum Marie, 


mattcrand forme of Fornaces ufes to bee divers. For fome} 
| 


Cuar. III, 
Of velfeks fir for Diftillation, 


“am Effells for Diftillation confift of different matter and forme, for they 
Spare eyther ef Lead, Tinne or Braffe, or elfe earthen vellells 


> thele are {omctimes leaded, fometimes not: or elfe they are ol - Id, 


28. 
filyer or glaffe. 
robe refufed, ¢! 
raken into cheb 
ro be in Lead; 
gre containcd 
which favov's 
{ych waters as ar 
and violent pict 
them, & as it w 
led Jiquors,and 
heads are more | 
them to favour c 
hurtfuli, bur ch: 
tails therefore 
rers mettall lea 
called terra 
glafies are thoug 
mettall.and 
informe and hg 
and longilb, 
in the beakes of! 
place give you | 
neceflary. 


itm 
Si! chin: 
the 
for diftillation, 
erackes 
not oncly tor fea 
tion mutt be cen 
ought not to be p 
upor fly 
thrite diftilled, | 
Materialls, or 
But in each och 
the hre ,for the m 
lo Preat heate : 
call oyles of Sage 
againe, for that w 
{éparate them iro 
Quor, to which p 
fome thines wht 


comcs laft aS 1g | 
If you WoOu! 


thar which they 


} 
| 
q 
A 
i 
| 
* 


For fome Fo;. 
of clay onely 
lay bec fat and 
fucdaime oc. 
Oibaces May be 
pe une all. for 
rornace for dj. 
felfe every 
OF triangular, 
Cir mavaitude 
beir thickneffe 
[wo botromes, 
re the athes of | 
rhing coales or | 
el{e it muft bee 
all downe 
Fornaces have 
owelt the afhes 
ter which is cal. 
that {o the heate 
partition thal! 
tken forth, Bur 
tin, But in the 
{hall be two or 
{moake may 
their fhvtrers, 
build one with- 
e¢ {hall prefent- 
o bee made by 


rme, for they 
n veflells and 


y are of Gold, 
filverl, 


L1B. Of Diftillations. 


filverorglafle. Now for leaden veffells they are worfe than the reft, and utterly 

robe retufed, efpecial'y when asthe liquors which are drawne by them are ro bee 
taken into the body bv the mouth, by reafon of the maligne qualities which are {aid 

1o be in Lead; by which occafion, Galen condermnesthofe waters which runne, and 

are contained in Leaden pipes, which by reafon of their falrifhneffe and acrimony 

which favovis of quickfilver,they caufe dyienteries, Therefore you May perceive 

fuch waters as are diitilled through a leaden heal ro bee endued wich a more acrid 

and violent piercing vapour, by reafonthe portion of that faltifhnetie guleivedin 

them, & as it were thaved from the top of the Alembecke or head defiles the 

led iquors,and whitens and turnes them into a milky fubftances but copper or bratie Brae worte 
heads are more hurtfullthan Lead, for they make the waters that come throven 

them to favour or participate of brafle, Thofe that are of gold and filver are Iefle the bo 
hurtfuli; but the greatneffe of the coft hinders us from making heads of fuch mere"! for us 
rails ; therefore we muft havea carethat our veflclls for diftillarion be eyther of 
ters mettall leaded, or elfe of brafle, or of that jugge mettall which is commus!y 

called terra betovacenfis and thefe rather thanof Lead or any other mettall, Ver ily 

glaffes are thought the beit;and next tothem, carthen veflells leaded, then of ju; spe 
mettall,and laitly chefeof tose, There is great variety of veflells tor difiiation 
informe and figure ; for {ome are of an ovall or cilindricall figure, that is, of around 

and longilb; others are twincd and crooked, others of other fhapes,as you may {ce 

inthe beakes ofthe Chimicks, Ofchis almoftiofinite variety of figures I willin fc 

place give you the delineation and ule of fuch as fhall feeme co bee moft 


neceflary. 


— 


C HA I I I J 
\ things are to be coufidered in difts Ration. 


make choyfe-of a fit place in your houfe for the fornace, fo thae 
aC! it may neither hinder any thing, nor be ia danger of the falling of apy 

ching that (halllyc over it. When you (hall dittill any thing of a mas: 
ligne or venenate quality ,ye fhall ftand by it as little as you may, leaft 
the vapour fhould doe you any harme: when you provide glafle vefiells 
for diftillation, maake choice of fuch, as are exquifitely baked, without Hawes or 
crackes and {uch as are every where {moorh. Let not the fire at firft be very violent, 
not onely for feare of breaking the veffells, bat alfe for that che heft fire in diftilla- 
tion mutt be gentle, and fo increafed by little and little, The things to be diftilled, 
ought not to be put in too great quantity into the body of the ftill, leaft they fhould 
tileupor fly over. Horthings,that they may be more effectual muft bee twice or 
thrife diftilled, by powring upon them their owne diftilied water or other frefh diniied. 
materialls, or elfe by diftilling them feverally and by themiicives: of thts kind are 

But in each other repeated diftillations you muft fomething leflen the force of 
the tire for the matter attenuated by the former difti!lation cannot afterward indure 
fo ereat heate : bur aromaticke things,as Cloves, © innamon. &c. as alio the chimi- 
call oyles of Sage, Rofemary,Time,&c. ought not to bee diftilled or over 
againe, for that we muft prefently after the firft diftillation have a diligent care to 
eparare them irom the phiegme, thats, the more warry fubftance of the whole li- 
quor; te which purpole we have regard to that which is diftilled, forehere are 
fome things which firft fend over their phlegme as Vinegar, otheis, whercinit Gira inthis 
comes laft,as * agua vste. 

If you would give to things to bee diftilled another ta fe or fmell than, is meart no 


that which they have naturally, you may mixe with them fome oduriferous nem. ees 


— 
| 
Ith a 
Cc 
4 
4 
UPON a+ 
4 
~ 
of 
‘ 


1096 
thing as Cinnamon,Camphire, or Muske, or the like, as you pleafe, and fy diftiy The effigzcs 
them together, The difisied liquors which are drawne by the heate of afhy< a 4 
fand, favour of and retaine a certaine empyrewma, or imatchof the fire; fo, he 


helping of which,you (ha!l put them into glaives very clofe ttopr, and io CXPofe 
them to the {enie, and nowand then open the glaffes thas this fiery IMpre sho 
may exhale,and the phkegrmex be coniumed, if that there fhallbe any. But thoys; 
all difiillaticn, three are many thingsto be obferved, yct are there two things chic 
ly worthy of ncee. The firft is, the matter that isto be drtlilled and wrought upon 
thatis of whatkind itis, and what the nature thereof may doc and futier. Other 
isthe Fornace, which ought to bee provided of a convenient matter and f. 
gure for that which isto be dillilled : for you cannot draw any thing of any matter 
ncither of every mixture being diftilled can you rightly expea oyle or water. For 
mixt bodics dve not confilt of an cquail portion ot the foure Elemenis, but fome 
are more aiery, others more fiery, fome participate more of the water, othere 
more of the earth, and that prefently fromeneir firft original. Therefore as war. 
thines.yeeld more water, fo aiery and fiery things yeeid more oyle when they are 
diftilled; neither are allinftruments fit forthe extracting OF every liquor, More | 
ever you muft note, that the watery liquor lometimes comes forth in the firlt place Me 
and prefently after by the helpe of a ftronger fire followes the oilely which we finde 
happens as ofrcn asthe plant OF Parts of the plants which are od, OF a cold 
tmperament;tor in hot things it happens orherwile,tor the firft liquor which come 
forth is oilely, and the following waiterith. 


x 


—, 


C HA V. 
Of what fafhion the velfels for the diftillineg of waters ought to be, 


Orthe diflilling of any kind of waters, two kind of veffells are neceffary, 
which are comprehended under this one generall name of an Alem. 
aif Alembecke. bocke. They callone of them the body, or containing veff Il, the other 

he head, that is, the cap or top wherein the afcending vapours are con. 
depiaced or turned inro water, called the head, becaute it ftands over the bouy, 
likeas an head; fromthe head there comes outa pipe or nofe whereby the diftilled 


liquor flowes drop by drop incothe receiver,as you may {ce by the following figure. 


"The oarets of 


Toe Fornace fora Balneum Maria with the Alembeck, and their recesvers. 


A, Shewes a brafe kettle 
Jullof water. 


B. The cover of the bettle 
perforated two places, 
to pafjage furth 


thy Weffells, 


C. A pine or Chimneys & 
ded tothe kettle whert® 
the fire is containta 


fil 


- 

~ 
* 
— 


berate the Waser. 
D. The Alembecke 
fting of hus boay ana bene 
B. The receiver wheres | 
the liquor Now forthe 
| in 
The balne Mari. 


| 
| f 
' | 
+ 
% = 
EA 
| Z} 7 “VW 
air 
- 
CS 
> 
SS/ 
/ 


B.28, 


and fo diftiy) 
c of afhes 
nres; for the 
d fo CKPofe 
Though jn 
thingschicg. 
rougie 
r. ihe Other 
and fi. 
matter 
i Water. For 
bur fome 
‘ater, Othere 
fore 2s Watry 
ay hen they are 
vor. More. 
he farft Dlace 
hich we finde 
are of a cold 
which Comes 


be, 


are neceflary, 
of an Alem. 
cl, the other 
OUrs are Cone 
ver the body, 
ry the diftilled 
owing figure. 


esvers. 


a brafe kettle 


‘aa 


er of the kettle 
d in two places, 


afjage forth 


or Chimney 

kessle 
is containca 


lembecke confi- 
ana heads 


ceiver wherento 
led liquor 


The 


B. 25. 


The effigtcs of another balneum Mariz,mot fo ¢a/y teberemooved as the former. 


a 


_ Now forthe faculeies ofdiftilled waters it is certaine,that thofe whi re draw 
in balne Marie or a double veflell,are farre better and efficacious, becaute, they 


A. Shewes the velfel or Copper that con. 
taines the water. 


B. The Alembecke fet in water. 


cepa Tn But leaft the bottome of the Alem- 
AD I~SS- A) bicke being halfe full,fhould floate up 


fj 20d downe in the water, and fo fticke 


if 


4 


— 


F&% againft the fides of the Kettle; I have 
thought good to thew you the way 
meanes co prevent chat danger. 


4 7 

' 


A. Shewes the Veffell or glaffe Alem- 
becke. 

B, A plate of Lead whereon tt lands, 

C. Strings that bind the Alembecke to 
the plate. 

D. Rings through which the frings 
are put,to fafsen the Alembecke. 


made after this following manner. 


A Fornace with his veffells to diftill liquors with the fieme of boyling water. 


- A.Shewes the bead of the Alembecke, 


made for that purpofe. 


\\\\Y 


AW 


| | | the hard touch of the brafen veffetl, 


\\ 


\ 


ter as it plac’t inthe Fornace. 
E, The Fornace containing the veffell, 


\ \\ AN 


nifbt and difSipated by the hewte of the fire, 
G. The Receiver, 


3 


= Youmay alfo diftill the liquors of 
things the vapour or fteame of 
A, boyling water, if fo be that youbce 
provided of Veffells and formes 


B The body thereof, placed a braffe veffek 
C; Abraffe veffell perforated iw many places 


FA to receive the vapour of the water 
fell comteine th Alembecke compafjed 
AX cA about with favduft, not onely that it may the 
oF ie bester and longer retaine the heate of the 
vapenr, but alfo leaft it fhou/d be broken by 


D. shewes the braffe veffell containing the wa- 


F. A Fannell by which you may now and thet 
powresmwater, [lead of that which ts va 


ch are drawne 


4 
re = re 
SSR 
— 
My \ 
~ 
Cc 
> 
~ 
> 
Sy 
; 
YE IA\ BS 
A = SS // — \ 
|] | == ~{/} a 
| 4 
| 
| 
“a 
j 
= 
| 
> 
7 4 
\ 
Ail 
= 4 
~ ~ 
HEC OF 
Q 


Of Diftillations. 


— 


Why thofe not oncly rereine the fmell of the things which are diftilled » butalfo the tafte.,. 
thingsthae acidiry, and other qualities, fo that they will 
Rule vets, ther favour of {moake nor burning ; for the milde and gentile heate of a bath COR. 


more the taines by his humidiry,the more fubrle parts of the plants that are diftilled, thay they 
i be wot diffipated and exhaled, contrary to which it ufually happens in things w 


thinese hic! 
dont are diftilled by the burning heate of wood or coales. For theic lida 
nitrous and acrid tifte, favouring of the fmoake of fire, Befides,they acquire 
ligne quality from the veflclls outot which they are diftilled,efpecially if chey bee ,¢ 
Lead, whence they contract qualities hurtfull to the principall viral, and Aatural) 
parts. 

Thereforethe plants which are thus diftilled if they be bitter by nature. prefently 
become infipid, as you may perceive by wormewood water thus diftilled. el 
things which are diftill’d in Balneo Marie ate contained in a glaffe veflell, fro: 
which they can borrow no maligne quality. Theretore the waters {odrawne are me re 
efie€tualland pleafing intafte, fmell, and fight. You may draw waters nor on: 


trom one kind of plant, but alfo from many compounded and mixed to» 


ther : Of thefe fome are alimentary, others medicinal], yea and purging: other 
acquird for imeil, others for wafhing or fmoothing of womens faces, as wee {h 
fhew hereatter, 


HAP, V I, 


How the materials muff be prepared before Diftillation, 


9 475, Hings before they be put into the Alembecke muft undergoe a preparati- 
on, thatis,they rouft be cutfmall, beaten and macerated, that is, {teeped 
= ee infome liquor, that fo they may be the more eafily diftilled and yeeld 
tye @ the morewater, and retaine their native {mell and faculties; yet {uch 
what things PYCparation 1s notconvenient forall chings; for therebe fome things, which aceds 
needenotte no infufion or maceration, but muftrather bee dryed before they bee as 
Sage, Time,Rofemary,and the like,by reafon of their too much humidity, it willbe 
difolved. fuficient to {prinkle other things with fome liquor onely. In this preparation there 
are two things obfervabdle, to wit, the rime of the infufien and condition of the li- 
quor wherein thefe things ought to bee infufed. The tine of the infufion is dife. 
rent according to the variety of che matter to be macerated; for things that are hard, 
folid,dry or whole, muft be longer macerated, than fuchas are tender, frethily ge. 
theied or beaten: whence itis that rootes and feedes require a longer timeof in 
fufion; flowers and leaves a fherter,and the like of other things. The liquors 
in infulion muft be made, ought tobeeagreeable to the things infuled. For ho! 
ingredients require hot liquors, and cold {uch as are cold wherein they may be intv- 
fed, 
Such things as have net much juice, as Betonie, wormewood and the like, of 
which are very odorifcrous,as all aromaticke things, would be infufed in wine, 10 
to preferve their {mell, which otherwife by the force of the fire, by reafon of the 
tenuity of the fubftance,eafily vanifhes. But if wee defire that the diftilled liquor 
fhould more exadly reteine and have the faculty of the things whereof it '5 
Themaceratie diftilled, then muft you infufe it in the juice thereof, or fome fuch appropria’ 
in ther owne Liquor, that it may fwimme in it whileft itis diftilled, or at leatt let it bee fprincs!e 
juice, therewith, | | 


Cn aP. 


as the waters ¢ 
as thofe wate: 
are reft: 
are purging 
fmoothing the 
led of arormati 
Todiltill R 
them for the {g 
their prefled 
cloiciy luted 
have tormer', 
The diftilled 
Keftauratir 
ton Aid,’ ap 
your pulps | 
fire,mixe ther 
frefbjbut firli 
little 
Bur if you: 
medicna'} vC 
Cordial] p ) 
ferve of Bug! 
it be ina peftit 
ded; each of 
early termed 
with the heatre 


A 


| 
Log 
4 | J » 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| \ 
\ 
\ 
| 
} 
ith 


Lo ie.28 
® 

o the tafte_, 
hey will 
a bath con. 

led, that the 
things which 
Certuine 
if they bee of 
and Aatural] 


ure, prelently 
led. 
Vefiell, from, 
WHE are More 
rs nor Oncly 
nixed togc. 
ping. Others 

aS Wee hal! 


preparati- 
lat 15, itceped 
ed and yeeld 
les; yet fuch 
which necde 
ediftilled, as 
ity; ic willbe 
aration there 
ion of the li- 
Eifion is difie- 
that are hard, 
r, frefhly ga- 
'r time of in- 
mquors where- 
Bied. kor hot 
may be intu- 


the like, or 
in wine, {0 
eafon of the 
iftilled liquor 
whereof it 1s 
appropriatc 
pee fprinckled 


C HaP. 


— 


— 


Cuar. VIL. 
Of the art of diftilling of wasters. 


ap BD ye Efore I defcribe the manner how to diftill waters, I thinke it not amiffe 

| [5) brictly to reckon up how many forts of diftilled waters there bee, aud what The varictes 
423 the faculties of them are. Therefore of diftilled waters {ome are medicinal!, “,"""” 
as the waters of Roics,Plantainc, Sorrell, Sage, and the like:othersare alimentary, _ 


as thofe waters that we call Reftauratives-ocherfomeare compofed of both, tuch as 
are thefe reftaurative waters which are alfo mixed wuh medicinal things; others 
are purging, as the diftulled water of greene and frefh Rubarbe. otheriome ferve for 
fmoothing the skinne, and others for {mell, of which fort are thoie that are deftil- 
led of aromaticke things. 

To diftill Rofe water, it will be good to macerate the Rofes before you diftiil Rote warez, 
them for the {pace of two or three dayes, infome formerly diftilled Rofewater. or 
their preficd our juice, luting the veffell clofe, then put them into an Alembecke 
cloicly luted to his head and his receiver, and {0 put into a Balweum Marie, as wee 
have formerly deicribed, 

The diftilled Alimentary liquors are nothing elfe than that wee vulgarly cal] 
Keflatratives ; this isthe manner andart of preparingthem, ‘Take of Veale, Mut. 
ton, Kid,€ apon, Pallet,Cocke, Partridge,Pheafant, as much as fhall feeme tit tor 
your purpote: cutitimall, and lealt ic fhould acquire heate, or empyrewma from the 
fireymixe therewith a handfull of French Barley, and of rea Role leaves dry and 
froin, but firli eeped in the juice of Pomegranats, or citrons and Rofewater with a 
little Cinnamon,as much, 

Bur it youdefire that this reftaurative fhould not onely bec alimentary bur alfo 
meaicinall, you fhall adde thereto fuch things as fhall refit the difeafe, fuch as are 
Cord ial] pouiders as of El.Diamargarit. frigid. De Gemmis,Aromaticum Rojat, 
ierve of Buglofic,Borrage,reets hearbes, feeds and otherthings of chatkind., Bur if 
itbe in a peftifereus feafon, Treacle, Mithridate and other thal! be ad- 
ded; each of thefe thall be laid inrankes or orders ome over another, which is ul- 
garly termed fratum foper firatam, inagialie Alembeck,and ciffilled in balneo Adaris 
with the heate of Afhes,or elfe of warme fand,as the following igure thewes. 


T be delineation of a Balnevim Matiz which may alfo ferve for to diftill with Afhes, 


A; shewes the Fornace with she bole to take 
forth the Afpes, 

B. Shewes another Fornace.as it weve fer in the 
other : now it of Braffe, ana through 
the miaft of the kettle made alfo of braffe, 
that [othe comteined water or afoes may bee 
the more eafily heated. 

The kettle wherein the water afhes.or 
are conteined. 

'D. The Alembecke fet in the water, afbes, oF 
fand,with the moutbes of the 

E. rhe bettome of the fecond braffe Fornace, 

whofe op is may With whic COmE AIRES 


the fire. 


| | 
| 
_ — 
— 
~ ) 
4 & 
\ 
= = (7; 
— 
= 
| —— 
<> 
(1 
| | 
A 
| = 
= 


2096 Of Diftillations. 1,138.28 


Aacthes wey There may be made other reftrauratives in fhorter time with le(le labour 
of making res To chis parpofe the flefh muft be beaten and cut thinne,and {6 thruft throu 
Goubdlethred, fo thatthe peices thereof may touch each other; then put them into 
a Glaffe and let the chred hangout; fo ftop up the glaffe clofe with a linnep cloth 
Cotton, or Towe, and lute it up with pafte made of meale and the whites of evo.’ 
then fet it upto the necke ina kettle of water, but fe that it touch not the bottome 
but Jet itbe kept upright by the formerly defcribed meanes;then make a gcntle fire 
thereunder, untill che contained fleth by long boyling fhall bee diffolved into jUyce 
and that will commonly be in fome foure houres fpace, This being done,ler the ¢ % 
be taken from under the kettle,but take not forth theglaffe before the water be cold 
leaft it being hor fhould be breken by the fuddaine appulle of tie cold aire, Where. 
fore when as itis cold, let it be opened, andthe thred with the peeces of Heth be 
drawne forth, {o that onely the juyce may be left remaining; then ftraine it throyoh 
a bagge, and aromatize it with Sugar and Cinnamon, adding a little juyce of Citron 
Verjuice or Vinegar, as it fhall beftlike the patients palate. 4 
After this manner you may quickely, eafily and without grea coft haye 
and prepare allforts ot reftauratives afwell medicated as fimple, But the force 
and faculty of purging medicines is extracted after a cleane contrary manner than 
the oyles and watersare drawne ef Aromaticke things, as Sage, Rofemary, Time 
Anifeedes,Fennell,Cloves, Cianamon, Nutmegs, and the like, For che ftr: neth of 
thefe,asthat which is{ubtile and ayery ,fliesupwards in diftillation ; butthe {tr noth 
of purging things,as Turbith, Agaricke,Rubarbe and the like,fubfade inthe bottome 
For the purgative faculty of thefe purgers infeparably adheres to the bodies and (ip. 
tances. 


Now for {weet waters and fuch as ferve to fmeoth the skinne of the face they may 
be diftilled in Bs/#eo Marze like as Rofe water. 


and coft 
oh With 2 


VIIL: 


How to diffill Aqua vita,or the piri t of wine, 


+ vee the more noble and effe€tuall it becomes. ‘Therefore fome diftill it feventimes 
re@tifieds over, 
Acthe firftdiftillation it may fuffice to draw a fourth or third part of the whole; 
to wit,of 24. pints of Wine or Lees,draw 6.or 8,pints of dittilled liquor. 
Atthefecond time the halfe part of that is 3.or 4.pints, 

Ac the third diftillation the halfe part againe, thatis, two pings ; fo that the 
oftger you diftill ic over, the leffe liquor you have, burit will bea great deale the 
more efficacious. I dce well like thatthe firft diftijlation bee made in Albes; the 
fecondin Balneum Marie. Toconclude,that 4qua Vite isto be appreoved of,necither 
is it any oftnerto be diftilled, which put into a {poone or faucer, and there ict on 
fire, burnes wholly away and leaves no liquor, or moifture in the botrome of the 
veffell ; sf you drop a dropof oyle intothis fame water, it ingontinently falls‘ 
the bottome; or if you drop a drop thereof into the palme of your hand,it 
quickly vanifh away, which are two other notes of probation of this liquor. 

faculties and effe&s of aqua vite are innumerable, it is good againit che 

of the (pirie of Cpheplic and all cold difeafes, it alwages the paines ofthe teeth, it is good for pai 

wine &uresand wounds of the Nerves, faintings fownings gangreenes and mortification, 
bothof its ficlh,as alfo put to other medicines for a vehicle, | 

There is this difference betweene the diftilling of wine and Vinegar, wine bein; 

of anayery and vaporous fubftance, that which is the beft and moft effe@tuall ini, 

wit, 


L 18. 28. 


wit, the aicry 2 
fore the reliduc 
nature; On the 
jafipide and 
regation Of th 
remaines noth! 
phiegme ischic 
hethat hopes t 
fubftance thar{ 
negat, he 
thicke as honey 
caule a ereat 
The vetteli: 
Retort fet in | 
thereto,having 
ned ina barrell 
forth thercot, 
drawing of oy 


Of tn 4 


doe this, whic 
them into areta 

bow les,or in ar 
learne by theie 


A Retort with | 
Cryftahoow. 


A, Shewes 
B. The receiv 
OF The Cryfia 


= 
7 
Akecofgood White or Clarret wine or Sacke which is not fow 
es muftie,nor otherwife corrupr, or of the Lees rhat quantity which m: | 
lerveto fillthe veffe}] wherein you make the diftillauonto a thi 
rhen put on your head furnifhed with the nofe or pipe, and {9 make vour 
diftillation in Balsco Maria. The oftner it is diftilled. or (as they rearme ir) 
g 


ur and coft 
ugh with a 
t them INto 

nnen clorh 
sof 
bottome. 
a gentle fire 
into 
the fire 

ter be cold 
Where. 
's Of Heth be 
Cit throush 
¢ of Citr on, 


coft have 

t the force 
lanner than 
ary, Time, 

ftrength Of 
the lirenowh 
ne bottome. 
lies and {ixb- 


e,they may 


t fowre nor 
y Which may 
third part ; 
9 make your 
it) re@tified, 

feyen times 


‘the whole : 


fo that the 
meat deale the 
| Alhbes ; the 
med of,ncither 
there ict on 
trome of rhe 
ently falls to 
hand,ir will 
or, 

dagaintt che 
for pon- 
ertification, 


wine being 
tuall inir, co 
wit, 


wit, the aicry and fiery liquor,comes from it prefoatly ac che firft diftillation, There- 
fore the relidue that remaines in the bortome of the veflell,is of a cold, dry and serid 
nature; omche contrary the water that comes firlt from Vinegar being diftilled 1s 
jafipide and flegmaticke, For Vinegar is made by the corruption of wine and the ie- 
gregation of the fiery and aiery parts; wherefore the wine becomming towre,tuere 
remaines nothing almoft of the former fubftance but phlegme; wherefore {eeing 
phiegme ischiefly predominane in Viregar,ic firft rifesin diftillation. Wherctore 
hethat hopes to diftill the {pirit of Vinegsr, hee muft caft away the piilegmaticke 
fubftance that firft rifes, and when by his tafte he thal perceive the fpirit of the V1- 
negat, he thall keepe the fire there under, untill che flowing liquor fhall become as 
thickeashoney; then muft the fire betaken away, otherwife the burning of ic will 
caule agreat ftinch. 

The veffells ficto diftill aqua vite and Vinegar are diverfe, as an Alembicke or The citi: 
Retort fet in fand or Afhes ; a Coppar or brafle borrome of a ftill, with ahead EWrer 
thereto, having a pipe comming forch thereot which runs into aworme, or pioe fafte 
ned in abarrcllor veficll filled with cold water, and having the lower end comming 
forththercof, whole figure wee fhall give you when as weecome to {peake of the 
drawing of oyles out of vegetables. 


Cuap. 1X. | 
Of the manner of recitfying, that bow to encreafe the ftrenp th Of wate? 5, 
ihat have beene once diftillea, 


Nag O rectifie the waters that have beene diftilled in Balaco Marie, you mult 
soy, {ct them in the Sunne in glafles well {topped and halfe filled, being fet im The fri way. 
fand to the third part height,. that the water waxing hot by the 

of the Sun may feparate is {elfe from the phlegme mixed there- 
with,whica will be performed in 1a,or.15,dayes. There is another betrer way to 
doe this,whici is co diitill chem againe in Balneo with a gentic fire, or if you will put 
them into aretort furnifhed with his receiver, and fer them upon cryftall or iron 
bowles,or in an iron mortar dire&tly oppofite to the bcames of the Sun, as you may 
learne by thefe enfuing fignes. 


The 


A Retort with bis receiver flanding upon Another Retort with bi receiver flan- 
Cry ftaloorles, jw? oppofite te the ding Marble or Iron mertar ,di- 
Suune beames, rectly opposite to the Sun. 
WW 


7 
a 


he Retort. 
A. Shewes the Retort. A. Shewes the | 
B. The receiver B. The Marble or tron mortar. 


C, The Cryftallbowles. C, The 


4 
| 
| q 
| 
4 
\ : | 
\ = 7 


1102 Of Diftillations. 


Cuarp. X- 
Of difléllation by filtring, 
ee) Ou fhall fet three bafons or veflells of convenient matter in that fite 
Y & order that cach may be higher than other; that which ftands ip the hi ” 
place, {hall conteine the liquor to bee diftilled, and that which ftands] 
eft thall receive rhe diftilled liquor, Out of the fir and fecond 
hang fhreds or peeces ofcloth or cotton,with their broader ends inthe liquor or 
pervelicll,and the other {harper ends hanging downe, whereby themore {ubtle 
defzcate liquor may fall downe by drops intothe veflell that ftands under it,bur on 
grofler and more fecuicnt part may fubfide in the firftand fecond veffel]. You be 
this meanes may at the fame time diftill the fame liquor divers times, if you plac 
many veficlls onc under another after the forementioned manner, and {o pur theese 
into cach of them, fo that the loweft veflell may receivethe purified liquor.In head 
of this diftillation Apothecaries oft times ufe bagges, 
This manner of diftillation was invented to make more cleare and pure waters and 
all juices and compolitions,which are of fuch a liquid confiftence. You may tal, m 
Lae Virgmes, example ofthis trom Lec Virgins, or Virgins milke,ot which this is the deicripti. 
Ri, /:tharg auré diligenter pulverif,%ii). macerentur in aceti boni =v}, trinm hor 
Spatio, feor fim etiam in aqua communi fal ‘nfundatar. 


inen 


diftill them both by threads, then mixe the diftilied liquors,and you fhall haye rh): 
which fof the milkic whitencffeis termed Virgins milke, being avaingt the 
rednefle and pimples in the face,as we have noted in our Antidotary. 


The defeription of veffells to performe the diftikation or filsration by fhreds. 


Ch.a4.ot (uct. 


4 A, Shewes the vefell: 
B, TheCloshes or jhreds 


| 


} 


HAP. Xx I. 
What and bow many wayes they are te make Oyles, 


Ou may by three meanes efpecially draw or extract the oyles thar you 

defire. The firft is by expreffion, and fo are made the oyles of Olives, 

nuts, feeds, fruitsand the like. Vader this is thovght to bee conreined 

clixation,when as the beaten materials are boyled in water, that fo che 

oyle may {wimme aloft, and by this meanes are made the oyles of the feedes of the 

berries of Elder and Danewort, andofbay-berries, Another is by infufion, as that 

ty infyfione Which is by intufing the parts of plants and other things in oyles. The third is by 

diftillation, fuch is that which is drawne by the heate of the fire , whether 

By diftillatie by afcent or by defcent,or by concourfe ; The firft way is knowne by alls now itis 

: thus, take almonds in their huskes,beate them, worke them intoa maffe, then put 

them into abagee made ofhaire, or clfe of ftrong cloth firft fteeped in water or in 

white Wine,then put them into prefle and fo extract their oyle. You may doe tie 

{fame in pine apple kernells, Hazell nuts,Coco nuts, nutmegs, peach kernells,che 

iceds of gourds & cucumbers, pifticke nurs, and all fuch oiely things.Oyle of 
jle of Bays ? ? 

berries. may be made of ripe bay-berries newly gathered, let them be beaten ima morter and 


fo boiled inadouole vefiell, and then forthwith putinto prefic, fo to extract oyleas 
vel 


Oiles by ex- 
preision, 


thisworme! 


B. 25 
you docfrum 
ly noted. ©, 
chey are 
gentic fire co 
oyle be refoly 
forth the oile 
oyle wherein & 
t 
che oyle, the 
maine bet icb 
co w 
thought g00¢ 
lam cum flo.cen 
of Summer 
folved, be thd 
Ex oles rofats > 
he coniump: 


cend, Orherio 
their body, \ 
{tance of aran 
Pepper, 
OY: 
that prop rth 
Water, intuic tl 
over, end 
furnace Havin 
head (hallwas 
the berter rye ( 
ver tothe no! 
contcined int 
There ts a1! 
and infufed as 
covered with 


lowes forth y 
this worme } 
led by little 
but take heed 
{welling up by 
lently fy OVC! 

Obijerving 
fture flowing 
which you 


< 
— 4 
wa 
> 
= 
— 
q 


[B. 23. 


the hi heft 


thal} 
or 
re fubtle and 
PCT it. bur the 
ell, You by 
you place 
O put fhreds 
fleag 


Waters and 
may ta ke an 
deicription, 
bor arin 
ndatar. then 
all have thar 
avaintt the 


reas, 


sor fhreds. 


mes that you 
of Olives, 
e conteined 
that fo che 
edes of the 
fion, as that 
third is by 

, whether 
mis now itis 
e, then put 
warer or in 
ay doe the 
-ernells,the 
le of baycs 
sorter and 


act oyleas 
you 


hat fire and 


Lis. 28. Of Diftillations. 


youdoc from Almonds,unleffe you had rather 


etit by boyling as 
lynoted. Oyleof Egges is madcof the of boiled #2 
chey are fo, rub them CO peeces with your fingers, then frie them ina panne iors a 
gentle fire continually ftirring them with a {poone watill they and the 
oyle be refolved and How from them;then put them into haire cloth and fo prefic 
forththe oile. The oyles prepared by infufionare thus made, make choile of zood 
oyle wherein let plants, or creatures, or the parts of them bee macerated for fome 
tine, thacis, untill chey may feeme to have transfuled thei; faculties into 
the oyle, theu let them be boiled, fo {trained or prefied out. But if any aquofity ree 
maine, jet itbe evaporated by boyling. in compounding of oyles adde sume 
ro them of whichthough we have fermerly fpoken in our Antidotary, yee have [ 
thought £00d to give you this one example. Rr flor byper.tb &. immittantur zn phia- 
lam cum flocent.c> gum.elemi,am.3ij.olet com.tb.i). Let them be expofed ail the heare 
of Summes.o the Sunne. If any willadde aqua vite Wherein fome Benzoin is dif- 
folved, be fhallhave a moft excellént oy le in this kind. Oyle of Mailicke is made 
Ex oles rofatt majlich. 51ij.wini optime=viij. Let all bee boiled together to 
the confumption of the wine,then tirainc the Oyle and referve it ina veffell, 


Cuap. XII, 


Of extracting Oiles of vegetables by Diflillation. 


becaufethe oyly fubftance that is conteined in {imple bodyes is of two 
kindes, cherefore the manner aifo of extraGing istwofold. For fome is grofle, ear- 
thy, vifcous, and wholy confufed and mixt withthe bodyes out of which they 
oughrttobe drawne, as that which wee have fiyd is ufvally extracted by expretiion, 
this becaufe it moft tenacioufly adheres tothe groffer {ubftance, and part of the bo- 
dy, therefore it cannot by reafon of thisnaturall groflencfle;, bee littedup, or af- 
cend, Orherfome are of a flender, and aiery fubftance, which iscafily fevered from 
their body, wherefore being put.to diftillation it eafily rifes: fuch isthe oyly fub- 


{tance of aromaticke things, as ofIuniper, Anifeeds, Cloves, Nutmegs,Cinnamon, 


Of 


Oy'e of S, 
Lohms wort. 


Of Matticke, 


What oyiles 
areto be 
drawne by 
expreision, 


Pepper, Ginger,and the like odoriferousand {picy things. This isthe manner of The&rf 


extracting oyles out of chem; let your matter be well beaten and iofufed in waters to 
that proportion, that for every pound of the materiall , there may bee ten pints of 
water; infufe it in a copper bottome, having ahead thereto either tinned or filvered 
over, and furaifhed with acouller filled with cold water. Set your velfell upona 
furnace having a fire in it,or elfe in fand,or afhes. When as the water contained in the 
head fhall waxe hot, you muft draw it forth, and putin cold, that forhe {pints may 
the berrer be condenfed, and may not fly away: youfhall putalong neckt recei- 
ver tothe nofe of the Alembecke, and you fhall increafe the fire, untill the things 
contcined in the Alembecke boyle, 

There is alfo another manner of performing this diftillation, the matter preferved 
and infufed as we have formerly declared, fhallbe putin a brafie or Copper bottome 
covered with his head. to which fhall be htred,and welllured, a worme of Tinne, 


this worme fhall runne througha barrell filled with cold water,that the liquor which 


flowes forth with the oyle, may be cooled in the paflage forth; at the lower end of 
this worme you fhall fet your receiver, The fire gentle arthe arf, fhall be encrea~ 
fed by little and little, untill the conteined matter, as wee formic tly fayd, do boyle; 
but take heede that you make nottoo quicke or vehementa fire, for fo the matter 
{welling upby boyling may exceede the bounds of the containing ve fiell,and 10 vio- 
lently fy over. | 
Obferving theferhings,: you thall prefently at the very firft fee an oiely moi- 
flure flowing forth together with the watrifh, When the oy!< hath done owing 


which you may know by che colour of the diftilled liquor, as alfo by che contaltence 


and 


manner of 
drawing oiles 


bydiftillation. 


Another way, 


| 
| 
all hearbes that carrytheir flowres and feeds inan umbell, have 


11 
en put out the fire; and you may feparate the oyle from rhe water 
likea Thimble and tyed to the end ofa fticke or,which is better, 
with a glaffe funnell, of inftrument made of glafle for the fame purpofe. | Here You 
muft alio nore that there be fome oiles that iwimme upon the topof the wat« I, as 
What cile of anifeedes;otherfome on thecontrary, which fall to the bottome, 4s oile of 
Cinnamon, Mace,and Cloves. 


The deferip= 
tion of Peps 
Per, 


Moreover you maft notre, that the watrifh moifture, or water that is diftilled with 
oile of Anifeede and Cinnamon, 3s whitifh, and in fuccef{e of time, will in {ome 
{mall proportion turne into oule, A\fothele waters muft bee kepe feveral!, forthey 


are farre more exccileat than thofe that are diftilled by Ba/nenm Marie. Clpecially 


thofe that firft come forth together withthe oyle, Oiles are of the iame taculries 
the bodies from whence they are extracted, but much more effectual): {or 
force which formerly was diffufed in many poundsofthis, orthat medicine, js af 
rer diftillation contracted in a tew drams. For example, the facultie chat was dif. 
perfedover j.pound of Cloves, wiilbe contracted into two ounces of cyle ar rye 
moft; and that which was ina pound of Cinnamon will be drawne inro 3 3 ij 
at the moft of vile. Butto draw the greater quantity with the kfler eherge, aig 
withoucteare of breaking the veficlls whereto giaffles are Like thar youd. 

Rill chem incopper veffells,for you neede not teare thar the oyle which is diftiljeq 

by them will contra& an ill quality trom the copper, for the watrifh moifture thar 

fiowes forth together therewith will binder it ei pecially if the copper thal! becnned 
or filvered cver.| have thought good to deicribe and fet before your eyes the whole 
manoer of this operation. 

A Fornace with fet veffells to extract the Chymicall oiles,or fpirits of Sage, Ro/em ary Time, 
Lavemaer, Anif{-cas,Fennek f eas, C loves, Nutmegs Cinnamon,P epper and the 
ko aifiillsbe fpirst of wine,of Vinegar aua aqua vires. ficaa of the bar 
rehand worme, youmay ufeabead with «bucket or rewler about it, 


A. Shewes the bottome, which onebt to be of 
Copper and tinned on the infide, 
D 5) B. The head. 
- 
or C. The Barrel/ filled with cold water to refri- 
gerate ana conden{ate the water and ole 
2 that run throuch the pipe or wornwe thsi i 
pat throuch is, 


C 
pipe ofbraffe or lastin, or rather morme 
of Titne running through the Barrell, 


freunder it, 


- 


Now becaufewe have made mention of Cinna mon, Pepper,and other fpices, which 
grew not here with us, I have thought good to defcribe thefe our of Thevets Col 
mogtaphy,he having feene them growing. Pepper growes on fhrubs in dedia, thele 
fhrubs fend forth little branches whereon hang clufters of berries, like to Ivy ber 
ries,or bunches of {mall blacke grapes,or curraticc, The leavesare like thofe of th¢ 


Citron tree, but tharpith and pricking, 


The indians gather thefe berries with great diligence, and flow them up in larg° 
cellars,as foone as they come to perfe& maturity, Wherefore it oft times 


that therg are than 200, fhippes upon the coaft of the lefler an 


L. The Alembecke fet inthe fornace withthe 


of thar count 
dotes avain{i 


bites of Scr; 


in fauces ithe 
as is blacke, 
bearce blacke; 
which, is wh 
happens upo: 
The tree th 
very like tob 
from this 
is that we rc) 
and he fettin: 
Galen Writes 
taking of fom 
ftreng:henst! 
mixture of 
to medicines, 
againft all col 
com p< {ition | 
beate it groffe! 
ing thus mixe: 
ten ftirring of 
and vellels Jea 


— 


| 
Anether j 


ficient to covet 
thea {top up th 
for 8 dayesin 
facultyes of the§ 
{hall {ee ir per! 
€nded,you tha! 
tity of the fam« 
the rin@ure the: 
tinGured with 
Bur ifthe ma 
Of great price, : 
Infule itonceo 
be €xtracied o1 
Thefe thing: 
With the colou: 
luted to its hea 
the aqua vita, 
fence remainin; 
Now if you c 
Pot Well leaded 
for thus atleng 


* 
. 
F 
4 
— 
— 
z 
= 
4 
— 
— 
{ 


1 B.28, 


water by 
chis Detter, 
| Here you 
water, as 
a$ of 


tilled with 
in forme 
i, torthey 
efpecially 
taculties 
for the 
icine, is af. 
at was dif. 
Cyle at the 

harge, and 
that you di- 
iS diftilied 
oifture thar 
beunned 
the whole 


and the 
of the bar- 


yeht to be of 


ter to refri- 
ter and oyle 
that th 


907 4 
arrell, 


sce withthe 


of thar country, to carry tbence Pepper and other {pices, Pepper isuled in Anti. The ules 
dotes azaintt poy fons, It provokes urine, digefts, attracts, refolves, and curesthe 
| bites of Scrpchis. [cis properly applyed and taken inward! y againit a cold ftomacke- 
in fauces ithelpes concection and procures appetite; you muft make choyife of fuich 
as is blacke, heavie, and not flaccide, The trees which beare white, and chofe thar 
beare blacke pepper, are fo likeeach other, thatthe natives them(elves Lnow not 
which, is which, unleffe when they have their fruire hanging upon them : as the like 
happens upon our Vines which beare white and blacke orapes, 
The tree that yeelds Cinnamon growes in the mountaines of Zndia and hath leaves 
very like to bay leaves; branches aad fhootes at certaine times of the ycere ai 2 cut heen ey 
from this eree, by the apppintment of the King of that province, the barke of which , 
is that we terme Cinnamon. Thisis fold to no (tranger unlefleat the Kings plealure 
and he fetting the price thereof, it is not lawtull for ochers to cut any thereof, 
Galen Writcs that Cinnamonis of very fubtle paris, hot in the third degree and par- 
taking of fome aftriction; therefore it curs and diflolves the excrements of the body 7" 
{trengthens the parts, provokes the courfes when as the y ftoppe by reafon of the ad- 
mixture Of groiic humors;it{weetens the breath, and yeeldsa fine tafte and {mell 
to medicines, hippocras,and fauces, Of Cinnamon thereis made an excellent warer 
againit all cold difeafes, andalfoagainft {woonings, the plague and poyfons. The 
compcfition thereof is this, Take of the choyfeft and beft Cinnamon onc pound, 
beate it groffely, and put thereto of Rofe ware: 4 pints,of white wine halfe a pint,be- Anexcellent 


L 1B. 28. 


nexcej.cn. 


ing thus mixed, put chem into a glaffe and folet them ftand in infufion 4 houres,of. 

ten firring of them. Then diitill them in Bs/neo Maria, clofely lutin 
and vellels leaft the {pirit fhould fly away. 


g the receiver 


an 


Cuarp. X IIL 


Ansther manner bow to draw the effence and Spirits of berbes, flowers, feedes, 
and [pices as alfo of Rubarbe, Agaricke,T urbith Hermodacishs, 
and other Purgers, 


aS eee OU may extract the eflences and {pirits of the things mentioned in the ti- 
le of this chapter as thus. Take Sugar,R ubarbe,Cinnamon,or any other 
material you pleafe; cut it fmall,or cl{ beate it,then putir inro a glaffe 
REY with along necke,and poure thereupon as much aqua vite as fhall be fut- 
ficient to cover the materials or ingredients, & to overtop them fome fingers b redth, 
thea ftop up the glafle very clofe that no ayre enter thereinto; Thus fuffer itro infufe 
for § dayes in ba/nee witha very gentlc heare ; for thus the aqua vste will extract the 
faculryes ofthe ingredients, which you fhall know thacit hath done , when as you 
fhall {ee it perfectly tinétured with the colour of the ingredienrs, The Cighe dayes 4 fignethae 


- 


ended, you fhall put this fame aqua vite into another veffell hlled with the like quan- 
tity of the fame materialls prepared after the fame manner,that i¢ may alfo take forth &¢tcht ove ch 
the tin@ture thereof,and doe thusihree or foure times,until! the «gua be dcepely 
tinQured with the colour of the infufed Ingredients. ents, 

But ifthe materialls from whence you delire to extract this {pirit or eflence, bee 
of great price, as Lignum Aloes, Rubarbe, You muftnorthinke it {uthicienc te 
infule itonce onely, but you muft goe over it twile,or thrife, untill all the eficacie 
be extracted out thereof;you may know that it is all wholy infipide. 

Thefe things thus done, as is fitting, put allche liquor tincured and furnifhed A ignechae 
With the colour and ftrength of the ingredients,inco an Alembecke,{itted and clofely 
luted to its head, and fo put into Baleeum Maria, that fo you may extract or draw off their Aaengths 
the aqua vita, tokecpe for the like purpofe,and fo youthail have the {piric, and 
fence remaining in the b »trome. 

Now if you defire co bring this extra& to the height of honey, fet it in an earthen 
Pot well leaded, upon hot afhes, fothat the chinne partthereof may be evaporated, 
for thus atlength, you fhall have a noble and effectual! cflenceof that thing 


Aaaaa which 


| 
pices, which 
wets Col 
dia, thele 
Ivy bere 
hofe of the 
p in lar pe 
s happens, 
an liland 
of | 


06 Of Difiillations. L 13,22 


“which you b 


ave diftilled, whereof one {cruple will be more powerfull in purging, 


than two or three drammes of the thing its {clfc, 


Whata 


The differ 
rences of 
Gumn cs. 


Cautions in 
diftilling of 
summes, 


How to make 
oyle of Tut- 


pentine®. 


How to extract oyle out of Gums ,condenfea juices, and rofines.as alfo ont of fome woods. 


LL oylesthat are drawne out of Gummes,oy¢ly woods and mettalls, 
extracted by that veflell which we vulgarly rermea Ketort, It beg 


Wer Ye cade of glaile, or jugges mettall well Leaded, and of fuch bigneile ». 


Sau apa fhall be convenient tor the operation you intend, though common), it 
should be made to hold fome gallon and an halfe of water; the necke thereof 
bea foorte and an halfe, or at leaft a foote long. The receiver is commonly 
whereinto the necke of the Retortis fitted and inferred. Then the Retort bee 
in an earthen pan filled withathes, or fand ,and fo fet into a furnace, as you a ay fee 
by the following figure. | 

Of gummes {ome are liquid, fome folide ;and ofthe lolide, fomeare more folide 
than otherfome;thofe that are folide are more troublefome co diftill than the liquide 
for they are pot {o cafily diffolved or melted, neither coe they yeeld fo well tothe 
firc,{othat oft they are burntbefore they bee diflolved ; wherice ig pha: 
fome for every pound of folide gumme, addetwo or three pounds of moft clears an 
liquide oyle of Lurpentine. Befides liquide things are allo hard tobe diftilled, be 
caufe when as they come to be throughly hot ar the fire, they {well upfo much, thy: 
they exceed, or runne out of theRetort, and fofallintothe receiver, as chey were 
put into the Retort, efpecially iffobe thatthe fire betoo horat the firft- Manyto 
{hunne thisinconvenience, addeto the things put into the Retort, fome fand, asi 
were, to balatt it withall. 


The figure ofa furnace, with bis earthen paw ana rece:ver. 


A. Shewes the fornace. 


B. The earthen pan, or velfell to fer the 


C. the Retort or Cucnrbite. 


D. The receiver. 


Oyle of Rofin and ‘Turpentine is thus made;take two or three pounds of Turpen 
tine, and put it into a Retort of fuch largenefle, that three parrs thereof might 
maine empty, and for every pound of Turpentineadde three or foure ounc’s © 
fand; then place the Retort in an earthen pan, filled with fitted afhes, and/et itupo” 
the fernace as is fit, and to the necke thereof fir and clofely Jute areceiver. Lal'ys 
kindle thereunder a foft fire at the firft, leaft the contained materialls fhou'd 0% 
over; cocreailc this fire by little, and little, and take heed that the things beeome 


hot on afuddaine, Ac the firft acleare and acide liquor will drop out, 


ina certaine tediment ufes to concreat;then will flow forth a moft cleere 
what refembling the watry and phlegmaticke Jiquor;then meft the fire be lomew? 
encreafed, that the third oyly, cleare, chinneand very goldencoloured liquor 2) 


fife and diftill;buethen alf{o a clearer and more violent fire mutt be rayfed,that fo 


Lis. 28. 
May extra’ 
ly thicke. T! 
tine, and rece 
receive them 
rate your deli 
ounce of Tur: 
punctures of 1 

But you tha 
put it intoa 
drawing of 0} 
There diltills; 
yet portion o 
matter, whic! 
of oyle, from 

This oyle ; 


fecis, 
OFT ounce 


Balneo A 
this isthe ti ue 
Pouder, and rh 
then Dlacc the 
@cellar, and fe: 
an Oilely warer 
equall quaotitich 
horfe dung wh 
ned liquos 
by this meanes | 
dra‘v ot ‘the ADM 
pors &cleagreo: 
Alkanet.anda 
Now jet us 
YOu One ortwo 
and ts this. 
Re terchingh 
bedere. cer 
Ci Marrone , 
Vite Ib 
The maaney 
lointufed for th 
laid, you mult < 
lores ot liquor 
the thi: 
is ctf 
thar it: 

bleeeine 
thele fame efte 
Pius and is 
thuris 


| 
| 
| 
\ SS — 
~ | 
1 


in purging, 


ome wWeods. 


mettalis, are 

It muft bee 

bignctle as 
commenly it 
hereof mutt 
only a vial! 
t {hall bee fer 
5 YOU may [ce 


more folide 
nthe liquide, 
owell tothe 
ce itis that 
oft cleare and 
diftilled, be- 
o much, that 
as they were 
rit Manyto 
ne fand, asit 


to fet the Retort 


nds of Turpen- 
of might 
wre ounces of 
gndfet 
ceiver. Laftlys 
ls fhould runn® 
ngs beeome 


— 
Lis. 28. 
may extrac an oylethat willbe red like a carbuncle,and of a con(iftence indifferent. 
lythicke, Thus therefore youmay extrad, foure kinds of liquors out of Turpen- 
tine, and receive them being different in feverall receivers; yet 1 judge it better to 
receive them all in one, that (o by diftilling them againe afterwards you may fepa- 
rate your defired oyle; now there will ten ortwelve ounces of oyle, flow from an 
ounce of Turpentine, This kind of oyle is effeCtuail agaiaft the (alice, Convulfions, 

unctures of the nerves, and wounds ofall the nervous parts. 

But you fhall thus extract oyle out of waxe; take one pound of waxe, melt it, arid pow 
put it into a glafle Retort fet in fand, or afhes, as wee mentioned alittle before im 
drawing of oyle of Turpentine, then deftili ir, by encreafing the fire by degrees. 

There diftillsmothing forth of waxe, befides an oyly fubfance and a little Phlegma, 

yet portion ofthis oyly fubiiance, prefently concreats into a certaine butter-like 
matter, which therefore would be diftilled over againe; yeu may draw Zv j, OF vilj. 
ofoyle, from one pound of waxe, 


This oyle iseffeciuall again Contufions, and alfo very good againft cold af. 
fects. 


Of Diftillations. 107 


- 


RA P. X V. 
Of extracting of oyles ont of the harder forts of Gammes, as myrrhe, 
maftich framkincenfe and she iske. 


BWA! Ome there be who extract thefe kinds ofoyles with the Pictort {er in athes 
ONS orfand, aswe mentioned in the former Chapter of oyles of more liquid 
gums, adding for every pound of gumme two pints uf Aqua vite, andtwo 
or three ouncesof oyle of Turpentine,then lec them infufe for eight or ten dayesin 
Baineo Marie, or cl{ein horfedung; ther they {er it to diftill in a Retort. Now 


this isthe true manner of making of oyles of Myrrhe ; Take Myrrhe made into fine How to make 


pouder, and therewith fill hard Eeeesin ftead of their yoalkes being taken out 


| > myer 
then place the Egges upona gridiron, or {uch like grate in fome moift place as 


accliar, and fet under them a Leaden earthen panne; the Myrrhe will diffolve into 
an oilely water, which being prefently put intoa glafleand well Ropped, withan 
equall quaoritic of refified aqua vite, and fo fet for theee or foure nyonthes in hot 
horfe dung, which paft the veffell thall be taken forth and fo {topped that the contei- 
ned liquor may be poured into an Alembecke, for there will certaine groJe {erling 
by this meanes remaine in thebottome, then fet your Alembecke in Ba/neo ond {0 yy, ata 
draw off the aqua vite & phlegmaticke liquor ,and there will remaine inthe bottome a 


a ita pleafing 
purs &cleare oile,whereto you may give acuriouscolour by asixing therewith fome 
Alkanet,and a {mell by droping thereinto alittle oyleof Sege,Cinnamenorcloves 
Now fet us fhew the compotition aad manner of making ot balfames by giving 
you one or two examples; the firft of which is taken out of Pefatrws his Chirurgery; 
and is this, 
R.terebinth. opt. tb. j-ol. lauring Ziti}. galoant gum, elem. = thuris, Myrrh, his 
hedera, centaur, majorss, igus aloes, an. 3iij. galanga, caryophyll, confolida majors, 
Cimamoni, nucis dictamus verminm terrefirinm, 


vite tb vj. 

The maaner of making it is this, let all thefe things be beaten and made fimal!, and 
lointufed for three dayes {pace in aque vzta, then diftilled in a Retort juft aS wee 
aid, youmuft diftill oyle of Turpentine and waxe. There will flow hence three 
Orts of liquors, the firft watrifhand cleare, the other thinne, and of pure golden 
Colour ; the thirdofthe colour of a Carbuncle, which is the true Balfame. Jhe 
rit liquor is etfeGuall againft the weakeneffe of the ftomacke comming of acold 
“aule,for thatit cuts flegme and-difcuffes Hatulencie:; the iccond he!pes frefh and 
or bleeeing wounds, as allo the palfie. The third ts chietly effectuail againtt 
thele fame effets, The compofition of the following Ba//famum is out of Fal. 
Pits and is thise WR. serebsnth. clare, 1h. ij. olet de femine Lint Ib. j. refine 
thuris myrrbe, aloes, maftiches, farcocolla, macis, ligni Alves, 


balfame. 


Aaaaa 2 


| 
op out, 
ere oyle, 
ebe fomewhal 
liquor may 
ar ig vou 
fed ,that 1o' 
may | 


Of Diftillations. L 18.28 


What franz 
kinfente is, 


he faculries 
thereot. 


The figne of 
cals 
<iacd vitrioll, 


Lerthem all be putin a glafle Retort, {et in afhes and fo diftilled. Fir 
there will come forth acicere water, then prefently after, a reddifh oyle, moft pro. 
flcable for wounds. 

Now you muft know that by this meanes,we may cafily diftill all Axungia’s, farts 
parts of creaturcs ,woods, all kinds of barkes andiceds, if fobee that they be f rf 
macerated as they ought to bee, yet fo that there will come forth more Watry than 
oyly humidity. Now for that wee have formerly frequently mentioned 7 hys o, 
frankinfen{c, | have heere thought good out of Thevers Coimography to give vou 
the defcription of the tree from which itflowes. The trankineenfe tree (faich hee) 
erowes naturally in Arabsa, refcmblesa pine, yeclding amortiore that is prefen;); 
hardened,and it concreates into whitilh cleare graines, fatty within, which cof in. 
the fire,take Hame. Now frankincenfe is adulterated with pinc-rofinand Gum me 
which is the caufe that yeu fhall feldome finde that wich us, as itis here defenbed - 
you may finde ont the deccitasthus, for that neither Kofin nor any other oumme 
takes flame, for Rofin goes away in {moake, but frankincefe prefenely burnes, The 
{mell alfo bewrayes the counterfeite, for it yeelds no gratefull {mell as frankincen{e 
doth, The arabéans wound the tree that fe the liquor may the mote reacily toy 
forth,whereofthey make great gaine. It fillsup hollow Vicers and cicstrizcs ther. 
wherefore it enters as a cheefe ingredient into artificial! balfames frankinc. nic aiuge 
made into powder and applyed, {tanches the blood that flowes out of wetncs. 

Marbiolus taith, that it being mixed with Fullers earth, and oyle of Rofcs, isa fin. 
gular remedy againft the inflammation of the breafts of women, lately delivered of 
childe. 


- 
— 


Cuap. XVI. 


T he making of oyle of Vitriall. 


Rata Ake ten pounds of Vitrioll, which being made inte powder, put it into an 
earthen por,and fet it upon hot coales,untill it be calcined,w hich is when 
as it becomes reddifh;atter fome five, or fixe houres, when as it {hall bee 
SYS) throughly cold,breake the pot, and let the vitriollbe againe mace into 
powder, that {0 it may be calcined againe, and you fhall doe thus fo often and long 
untill it hall be perfe@ly calcined, which is when as it fhall be exa@ly red; then lec 
it be made into powder, and put into an earthen Retort, like that wherein «gua for- 
tis is ufually drawne, adding for every pound of your calcined vitrioll of tile threds, 
or powdered bricke 1 quarter; then put the Retors furnifhed with its recciver intoa 
fornace of Reverberation, alwayes keeping a ftrong fire, and thar for the {pace of 48 
houres, more or lefle according tothe manner and plenty of the diftilling !iquor, 
You fhall know the diftillation is finifhed when as the receiver {hall begin to reco- 
ver his native per{picuity,being not now filled with vaporoufe {pirits, wherewith 
as long as the humor diftills it is replenifhed and lookes white, 7 
Now for the receiver there are 2 thingstobe obferved, Theffirft is, that it bee 
great andvery capacious, that it may not be diftended and broken by the abune.% 
flowing of vaporous fpirits,as it doth oft times happen ; another ching is,chat you! 
it ina veflell filled with cold water,leaft it fhould be broken by being over Lot; yO 


may cafily perceive all this by the eafuing figure. 


A table ar 


Edici: 
Cre: 


Hor nes. 
Hooves. 
H. 
Feathers, 
Shells. 
Stulles, 
Scales. 
Sweates. 
Skinnes. 
Fatts. 
F lef, 
Blood é 
Eatratles. 
Vrine. 
Smells wheth; 
a“, 
Foxes. 
Whelpes. 
Hedgehogs. 
Fro 2S. 
Wormes. 
Crabs. 
Cray- fifhes., 


Scorpions. 
Horfeleaches. 
Swallowes. 
Dunes, 


From Plant 
Roots. 


Moje, 


Pith, 


Szens, 


| 
— 
4 
@ 
tad 
q 
4 
4 
j 
> 
| 
4 
7 
| 
a 
i 
j 
3 
q 
| | 
| 
. 


isa 


iftilled, 


kungia’s, farts, 
t they be 
ae Watry than 
ioned 7 bys or 
y tO give you 
¢ (faith hee) 
at 18 prefentiy 
which into 
and Gum me, 
re def{cribed 
other gumme 
ly burnes. The 
trankincenle 
tlow 
them; 
nic alone 
'@unds. 

Ao{es, isa fin- 
ly delivered of 


,putitinto an 
,Which is when 
asit fhail bee 
made inte 
often and long 
ly red; then let 
herein agua for- 
ll of tile ihreds, 

recciver inte 
the {pace of 48 
iftilling liquor. 
begin to reco- 
its, wherewith 


is, that it bee 

y the abundaat 

is chat you!et 
> overs hot; you 


28. 


nm 


A Fornace or Reverberation fyrni(btd with his Retort and Receiver. 


A. Shewes the Foruace. 
B. The Retort. 


C. The Receiver. 


D, The veffell filed with cold water. 


Cuap. XVII 


A table or Catalogue of medicines and infiruments ferving for the cure of Difeafes. 


 Edicines and medicinallmeates fit for the cure of difeafes,are taken from living 


Creatures, plants ang minera!ls. From living creatures are taken, 


Hornes, 
Fi00ves, 
Hares. 
Feat her Se 


Shells. 


Sculles. 
Scatles. 
Sweates, 
Skinnes. 
Fatts. 
Ficfb. 
Blood ; 
Eatrailes. 
Vrine. 


Smells whether they be fincking or fweetesas 
alfo poyfons: whole creatures themfelves, 


AS 
Foxes. 
whelpes. 
Hedgehogs. 
Fro 2S. 
Wormes. 
Crabs, 

Cray- fifbes, 
Scorpions, 
Horfeleaches. 

§ wallowes & 
Dungs. 


From Plawts thats, 
Reots, 

Pith, 

Sens, 


Bones, 
Extreame parts, 
Hearts, 

Li Vere 

0 

Braine: 

wombe. 
Secundines 
Teiticles. 
PiXle, 

B ladder 
Sperme, 
Taile. 
Coats of the Ventrisse. 
Expirations, 

Br sft le Se 

Silke. 

webves, 

Téarves, 

Spsttle. 

Honey. 

Waxe,. 

Egees. 

Milke, 

Butter, 

Cheese. 

Marrow 

Reinet, 


Trees, furwbs, and hearbes are taken, 
Baas, 


St abkese 
Leaves. 
Floures. 


Aa@aaa 3 


Caps 


4 
‘le, moft 
4 
j ~~ =I 
B = 
: 
| 
—— = = 
— — 
| 
: 
| 
‘ 
. 
4 


L 18 2: 


| Cups. Cums. finite othert! 
| Fibers, or hairy threds. Rofins. hath prod uc 
or fpiffament. Manna, which fallin, cad, 
me like dew upon plants prefently con. 
Wood. creates. and 
Meale. whole plants as written 
Maloyes. Coll 
Onions Capur; 
Oyless Ecleg mat: 
i Mettalls, or mineralls, are taken cither from the water, of earth, and are cithe, nentifrices. 
kinds of earth, ftones,or mettalls, &c. 
| The kinds of earth are, Saphire, Apophiegm: | 
Bole Armenicke, Chryfolite. Gargari (mes, 
Terra figillara, T opace. pills. 
Fuilers earth. Loadftone. Boles. 
Chaulke, The Pyrites or fire-flone. Fotwns. 
Okar. Alablafter. Emplat 
Plasfler. Marble. Vngsents. 
Lime. Criftall, and mary other precious Rowe, 
Now the kinds of flone are, The kinds of Salts as well watmrall as art fer LIBIMNCHIS. 
Flists. are, Embrocations. 
Lapis judaicus. Common fale. Fomentatiozns. 
Lapis Lyncis. Sal Epéthemes, 
The Pumice. Sal Alkali, 
Lap.Hamatites. Sal Ammoniacum, Refolwers. 
Amiantus. Salt of Vrine. 
Galaétites, Salt of tartar ana gentraily all (alts that Emolisents. | 
Spunge flones. may be made of any ind of plams, Munazfcative 
Diamonds. 
Thofe that are commonly called mineralls are, 
Marchafite. Alumen {ciflile , Common Alome, Corrofi ives, 
Antimony. Alumenrotundum. Rownd Alem. Age lustinative 
Aufcovy Glafe. Alumen liquidum. Anoaynes, 
Futty. Alumen plumofim. Apozeme *, 
Arfuicke, Boraxc,or Barrace, luleps. 
Orpimens, Bitumen, Syrupes. 
Lazure, or blew, Naphtha, Pow 
Rofe agar, Cinnabaris, or Vermillion, Tablets. 
Brim tone: Litharege of Gola, N 
i Ouicke filver, Litharge of Silver Reflauratiues 
White Coprefe, Chryfocolla. 
Chalcitis, Scandaracha. Expre [lions 
Pfory. Red Leaa, Gellyes 
Koman Vitrioll White Lead and divers other Prifans 
Colcothar, vitrioll, or greene Coprofe. Barly-creames 
Ponadoes 
Now the Mettals themfelves arc, A sma milke 
Gold, Braffe, M archpai nes 
Silver, Copper, Wafers 
fron, Steele. ~ ydrofi 
Lead, Lattin ana fuch as arife from the fe, as fhe ydrome! 
Oxy mel 
Now from the waters, asthe Sea, Rivers, Lakes and F ‘ountaines, and the mueé of Oxycrate 


thefc waters, are takeg divers medicines, as white and red Corrall, Pearles and iD- 


| 
| 
ia 
‘ 
| 
‘ 
7 | 


which falling 
prefently 


and are eithe; 


yall as arthe: 


Ali 


of plant Se 


lome, 
Aleme. 


and the mue of 


Pearles and 


~ — 
fnite other things which mature the handmayd of the great Architect of this world, 
hath produced for the cure of difeafes; fo that into what part foever you turne your 
eyes, whether to the furface of the earth, or the bowelsthereof, a great multitude of 
remedies prefent them{clves to your view. The choyfe of all which is taken from 
their fubltance, or quantity, quality, a@ion, place, feafon, fmell, tafte, fice figure, 
and weight, other circumitances, as Sy/viws hath aboundantly thewed in his booke 
written Dponthis{ubyect. Ofthele fimples are made diverfe compofitions. as, 


Collyria, 
Caputpurgia, 
Eclegmata, 
pentifrices. 
Dearifcalpia, 


Apophiegmatufmi. 


Gargari (mes, 
Pills. 

Boles. 

Emplatfiers., 
VRERERIS. 
Cerates, 
Limiments. 
Embr oc ations 
Fowsentations, 
Epit hemes. 
Altractives: 
Ref overs. 
atives 
Emollients. 
Munazficatéves; 
ImCavnatives. 
Correfives. 
Avg lwtinatives. 
Anoaynes, 
Apozeme*, 
luleps. 

PowaerSe 
Tablets. 


Opiates, 

Conferves, 

Preferves, 

Confections. 

Rowles, 

Vormits, 

Stermutatoryes, 

Sudorifickes. 

Glyffers. 

Peffarzes. 

Suppofitoryes: 

Trochifces. 

Fromtal/s. 

Appes- 

Stomichers. 

Barthes. 

Hal fe-bathes 

irgins-milke. 

Fuci. 

P ications. 

Depilatoryes, 

Veficaboryes. 

Potentiall canterias. 

Nofe-gayes. 

arcs. 

Cannopyes, or extended cloathes to make 

Artificial fountaines, to Aifiill or droppe 
aowne liquors. 


Now thefe that are thought to be nourifhing medicines are, 


Reflauratiues 
Cabiffes 

Expre [ions 
Gellyes 

Ptifans 
Barly-creames 
Ponadoes 
Almond-milkes 
Marchpaines 
Wafers 

Hydro facchar 


Hydromel and uch other drinkes. 


a lucibages 
Oxy mel 
Oxycrate 


Rofe V inégar 
Hy drzlium 
Metheglin 
Cider 
Drinke of Servilfés 
Ale 
Becre 
ar 
Ver \wite 
Oyle 
Steeled water 
Water brewed with bread cramenes 
Hippocras 
Perry,4nd [uch like, 


Waters 


- 
4 
| 
} 


Lin. 28. 
Waters and diftilled oyles,and divers other Chymicall extra@ions. 

Asthe waters and oyles of hot,dry and aromaticke things, drawne in a COPper 
Alembecke, withacooler, with ten times as much water in weiohtas of hearhe 
now thehearbes mutt be dry,that the diftillation may the better {ucceede. "3 

Waters are extraéted out of flowres put ina Retort,by the heate of the Sunne 
of dung, or ot an heape of preticd out Grapes, or by Balneo, it there bee 2 
putand clefcly lured thereto, All kindcs of falt of things calcined diflo] 
ccr,and twile or thrife filtered, that fo they may become more pyre and 
oyle. 

Other diltillations are made cither in Cellars by the coldnefle or moy ftore of th 
place,the things being layd either upon a marble, or elfe hangdup ina bagce-and 
thus ismade oyleor Tartar, andof falts, and other things of An aluminous no. 
cure, 

Bones muft bce diftilled by defcent, or by the joyning together of veflels, 41) 
woods, rootes, barkes, fhells of filies,and {eedes, or graines, at of corne,broome 
beanes,and other things whole juice cannot be got out by expreffion, mutt bee gi. 
{tilled by defcent, or by the joyning together of vefieiis in a Reverberatory fornace 

Mettalls calcined and having acquired the nature of falt, ought to bee difiy) 
and filrred, and then evaporated ull they bee dry; then let them bee diflolyed 
in diftilledvinegar,and then evaporated and dryed ayaine;for fo they wil! afi! 
ina Cellar upona Matbie, or inabagge, Orelfe by putting them into ae!afiere. 
tort,and fetting itin fand, and fo giving fire theretoby degrecs untill all che watery 
humidity be diftilled;then change the receiver.and lute another clofe tothe Retoy: 


then encreafe the fire above and below, and thusthere will flow forth an ovle yery 


red coloured; Thus are all metaliine things diftilled,as Alomes.falts ac. 
Gummes axungze, and generally all rofins are diftilled by retort fet inan earthes 


velicll flied wich Afhes upon a fornace; now the fre muft be encreafed by little and 
little according to the diftcrent condition of the diftilled matters. 


or 
rCclyer 
ved in wa. 
ht to yeeld 


The veffels and Infirnments ferving for diftillations are 
commonly thefe. 


Bottomes of Alembeckes, The fecret fornaces of Philofophers: 
The heads of them, from whence the li- The Philofophers egee: 


guors droppe. Cucurbites 
Refrigeratorics. Kerorts 
Vefiels for fublimation. Bolt heads 
For Reverberation, Vrinalls 
For diftilling by defcent, Reccivers 


Crucibiles and other {uch. 


Veffells fo fitted together that the lower 
Veffells for Calcination. 


moitt receives the mouth of che uppers 


Haire {trainers . moft , whence they may bec termed 
Bagees, conjoyned Vefieclls: They are wica 10 
Earchen platters. diftilling per ce/cenfum, 


Veflclis for circulation, as Marbes exquifiily {meorth for 
Pellicanes. ons to be made in Cellars. 

Earthen Bafons for filering: Pots to difloive calcined mettalls i 
Fornaces. 


a 


Ings wh: 
Tronkes or | 

with fprin: 
A vent, or cog 
like a peti 
Hollow cent 
Sundry Cau 
ointed. 
Conttri dior: 
Colume!! 
9 
Speculum 
A trunke or} 
in it, 
Crooked Kt 
A pipe in for 
Divers truific 
{ters. 
A {thou'der-! 
necke,to hi 
A needleted 
XC. 
Pipes with fer 
rures, 
Cutting mul 
Mullets 
Mulletstot: 
Mulietsto dr 
Anincifton k 
Scrapers to pk 
Or elf{e 
Cuttiog or b 
A Leaden 
Chitlels 
A Gimblet: 
that whic! 
{unke {ta\ 
Levatories, 
foored on® 
Orher Levat 
handies,a 
depreft bo 
Sawes. 
A defquama 
Plyers tota 
A Gimbler: 
ATrepan f 
the {crew. 


pr 
4 
| 
i 
4 
4 
+4 


Lis: 28. 


e in a COpper 
as of hearbes. 
ecde, 
bf rhe Sunne.or 
bee a receiver 
in wa. 
and fit to yeelg 


roy {tore of the 


ina bagge:and 
aluminous no. 


Of veficls, Ajj 
corne,broome, 
> Mutt bee di. 
atory fornace. 
to bce difiolved 
n Bee diflolved 
ll eafily diftil) 
a giaflie 
all the watery 
‘tothe Retort, 
th an oyle very 
ct in an carther 
led by little and 


ilofophers: 


that the lower- 
hof cheupper 
ay bee termed 
ey are ufed in 


h for diftillati- 
rs, 
mettalls in: 


23. 


A CATALOGVE OF THE 
Chirurgions Inftuments mentio- 
nedin this whole worke. 


Ings wherein little Lancets lye hid, cover or capthat keepes it from running 
RK to open Impofiumes. 1N too farre, 
Trunkes or hollow Inftruments going A plate tofet one foote of the compaffe 
with{prings, upon, 
A vent, or cooler for the wombe made Acutting paire of Compafles both open 
likea peflary. and fhut, 
Hollow rents. A fit isftrumens to deprefle the Dura 
Sundry Cauteries, as flat round, tharpe ter without hurting trhercol. 
pointed, cutting, &c. A fyring to make injection withall. 
ConftriGory rings to twitch er binde the A paire of Pincers with holes through 


Columella, them to take up the skinne for making a 
—Orth. Seton, 
Speculam as well dry, as moyftened with 
yntmeants. 
CVteri, Crowes, } 
A trunke or pipe with an a@uall Cautery Parrois, | {traighr, 
in it, Swans, | Beakes, and’\crooked, 
Crooked Knives. Duckes, either>coothed ,or 
A pipe in forme ofa quill: Lizards, imooth, 
Divers trufles with one, or more boul- Cranes, 
fters. Catchebullets, and Plyers todraw forth 


A thoulder-band to bee put about the peicesof maile, and iplinters of bones 
necke,to hold up a truffe. _ that lye deepe in, 
A needle te draw through a golden wire, Hollow and {mooth Dilaters, divertly 


&e. made forthe different wounds of the 
Pipes with feneftclis,and needlesfirforfu- parts. 
tures, Probes fit for to put flamulaes into 


Cutting mullets. wounds; andthefe either ftraighr, or 
Mullets onely to hold and not to cut. crooked, perforated, or unpertorated. 
Malletstotake forth {plinters of bones. Screwed mullets to draw forth barbed 
Mulletsto draw teethe heads of Arrowesand the like, 
An incifion knife, Lancets to let blood, and icarrifie as well 
Scrapers to plaine or fmoeth the bones, _ ftraight,as crooked. 

or elfe to cut them. A Pyatces, or Matte:mdrawer. 
Cutting or hollow Scrapers. Ligatures, bands, {wathes, thongs of 
A Leaden mallet to drive the {crapers or Leather, woollen, linnen, round, flit, 

Chiflels into the fcull. fowne together; againe fome are up- 

A Gimblet in fhape and ufe refembling — per binders,orhers under binders, 

that which ss ufeto lift up the Againethefe are cither expreiling, or elfe 


funke ftaves of their caske withall, conteining and that either the applyed 
Levatories, of whichkind is the three medicines, or the lips of wounds, or 
footed one, membersputin a fit pofture, which 


Other Levataries, which taken bytheir therefore they call a farcoticke Liga- 
handles,andtheir tongues put underthe ture. 


depreft bones, lift them up- Thred, 
Sawes, Bottomes, or clewes of thred,or yarne. 
A defquamarory Trepan, Pledgets, compreties ,boulfters,doubled 
Piyers to take forth {plinters of bones. cloathes. 
A Gimblet to perforate the tcull. Ferule, or Splints, 


ATrepan fit to divide the feull , with Callies, 


the {crew,peirnt or procer, brace, and Boxes. 
funche 


4 
4 

| 

| 
| 
| j 
4 
Ag 


. 


( atalogue of the (hirurgions Inftruments. Lap. 
Gloffocomics. A Gimbler to breake the ftone. 
Ambi,akinde of Gleflocemic. Hookes, 


A pully, with irs wheeles, and wooden Hollow probes flit on their v 


er 

and lronpinnes, whereon the wheeles Winged Inftruments to sidered 

may runne: ftoines, 
Ropes afwell to draw and extend ,as hold Aninftramentto clenfethe bladder. 

up the member, &c. Spathulees ftraight and crooked, 
Screw pins, Cupping-glafles, 
A hand-vice, Hornes, 
Hookes. Pipes or catheters to weare Carunclee. 
Buttons or ftayes to faften to the skinne Artificiall members, as eyes of goid ep. 

to hold together the lippes ef the amelled 

wounds. An Vrinall, or cafe to fave the water jp 
Linte. An artificial) yard. | 
C ufhions pillowes, linnen cloathes, Crutches, 
Files, Niples, or leaden covers for fore breafts 
Denti{calpia, Dentifricia, Denti/picia Gi iffias talicnts to draw fortha 
Catheters,guiders of the worke. of the wombe. 


A bathing chaire or feat, bathing tubbes, A fucking glafleto draw a breaft withall, 
halfe tubs, caldrons, funnells, with all Peflaries, both long and ovall, 
other circumftances belonging toa Syrings ro give glifters, as alfo te make 


bath. into the cares, and wombe. 
Stoves, or hot honfesto {weate in, 


THE 


Gratia fed le 
Nec futt 
Nam quod J Li 
P 2onias fu 
Sed tua tam } 
Gratia, 


| 1 Be? 
De 
THE 
i | 1 
| 
| 
| 
4 
by 
q*, = 
J 
| “is 
x: ) 
> 


Caruncles. 
es OF goiden. 


the water in. 


r fore breatts. 
Pith a 


breaft withall, 
rall, 


alfo to make 
and wombe. 


THE 


~ THE EFFIGIES OF Hirrocrates O 
PRINCE 
PHYSITIONS. 


7 
obese: 
Z ” (te 
>. 


N iC TV ( Hippocrates \quod te potuere [uperbee 
oi munquam fleEtere opes , 

Cecropide fronti ex aure fulgente coronans 
™  Promeriti memores impofuere tua. 
Gratia fed levis eft, Atkats tantus Athenis 
Nec fuit binc uni quam tibt partus hones. 
Nam quod qua recreent languentia corpora merbo 

Ponias fueris promere largus opes. 
Sed tua tam fundit, quam magni machina munds 

Gratia, infignis tam tna fama volat. 

BON. GRA. PARIS; MEDIC. 


SELECT 


B.29 
it water, 
one, 
Upp 
Pper lid CS 
dra 
W th 
i~ adder | 
% 
OD k e d 
| VE 
BS 
TESA Si) 8 ¢ = 


SELECT APHORISMEs 
CONCERNING CHIRVRGE- 


rie collected out of the Aphorifmes 
of the great Hippocrates, 


Aph. 27. fedt. 6. 
V gern being fuppurate or hydropicall, are burnt, or cut therefore. jf.) 
| the matter, or water flow forth at once, they certainely dye, ; 
Oe 
The drinking of wine, or a bath, fomentation, bloed-letting, or purging. helpe th. 
paines of the ¢yes. 
35. 6, 
Such as have hidden, or not ulcerated Cancers, had beftermot to cure them, fo, 
healed they quickely dye, not cured they live the longer. 
5 5. 6, 
Gouty paines ufually flirre in the Spring and Fall. 
28. 6. 
Eunuches are not troubled withthe Goute, neither doe they become bald. 
6. 
Whofoever are troubled with the Goute, have eafe in forty dayes, the infammzti. 
on cealing, 
66, 5. 
In great and dangerous wounds if no {welling appeare, it is ill, 
67. 5. 
Soft tumors are good, but crude ones ill. 
2 5° 6. 
For an Eryfipe/as, or inflammation to returne from without inwards, ix is not good, 
burtocome from within outwards, is very good. 
9. 7. 
An Ery/ipelas comming upon the baring ofa bone, is evill. 
20. 7. 
Putrefa&tion, or fappuration comming upon an Ers/pelasis ill, 
6, 
If varices or Hemorrhoides happen to {uch as are mad, their madnefle ceales. 
ag,, 
A fluxe of blood enfuing upon a great pulfation in Vicers is ill, 
26. 2, 
it is beater that a feaver happen upon a convulfion, than a convulfion upona feavet 
Thole Vicers that have the skinne {mooth or fhining about them, are evill. 
a3. 6. 


The wound is deadly whereby the bladder, braine, heart, midriffe, any of the {mal 
Guts, ftomacke or Liver are hurt, ; 


45- 6. 7 
Whatfloever Vicers are of a yeares continuance or more, the bone muft neceflaruy 


{caile, and the fcarres become hollow. 


2. 7 
The bone being affe&ted, ifthe fleth be livide, iris ill. 


14, 7. 
Stupidity and lacke of reafon, upon a blow of the head, is evill. 


24. 7 
happens ifabone (towit, the fall) bee cuteven tothe hollowne!” 
thereof. 


Whilett 


28 


Whi {ft P bes 


is already § 


Cold things 4 
thingsare § 


Two paines i 
the other. 


A corruptiong 


A livid of dr 


When as abc 
cut afunder 


ifany of the 


Thofe that ha 
they cicape 


Bleeding at ay 


Cold is biting 
puration 


Thofe whohs 


{eGion. 


hofoeverb 
foith they 


not fit ta’ 


oncly forct 


It is betrer rot 


} 
a. 
a. 
¢ 
» 
ek 
4 
4 
“a0 
| 
be 
4 
4 


phorifmes. | ra 


Lin:28 


MEs 
G FE 


L1B. 29 


Whilft Pas,or matter isin generating, paines and feavers happen rather than whenic 
is already made, 


418. 5: 
Cold things are burefullro the bones, teeth, nerves, braine, fpinall marrow, but hos 
things are good, 


46. 2, 
Two paines infefting together, but not the fame place, the more vehement obfcures 
the other, 


A corruption and ab{ceffe of the bone is caufed by the corruption of the fefh, 
506. Coacer prandte 


tthe fall 
retore, ifal A livid et dry Vicer,er yellowith,is deadly. 
19. 
irging,helpe When as abone,or griftle,or nerve, or {mall portion of the checke,or the prepuce ig 
cut alunder,it neither encreafes nor growestogether, 
Ifany of che {mall guts be cut, it knits not againe, 
50. 7. 
Thofe that have the braine {fphacelate, thasis, corrupt,they dye within three dayes;if 
they cicape thefe,they recover, 


cur¢them, Fo, 


9. 
bald. Biccding at a wound caufing a the foretelier of deat! 
Se 
Cold is biting to Vicers, hardens the skin, caufes paine,notcalily comming to Lup. 


fhakings convulfions,crampes, 


508. Coac. 
Thofe who have the temples cut, have a Convulfionupon the parts contrary to the 
{eGion, 
44> 7- 


Whofoever being fuppurate are burnt or cut, if pure and whire quitture fhall how 
forth they elcape-but if thar which is bloody, feculent,and ftinking, thea they dye, 
Galen.comment.ad Apher, 29. 2. 
Itis not fit.to take in hand to cure fuchas are in a defperace cafe, but to leave them, 
oncly foreteHing the end of the difeafe. 
Celfus,Cap.10.Lib,2, 
tas beteer to try a doubtfull remedy channone at all. 


1S, is not good 


(fe ceafes. FINI &. 


upona feaver 


eevill. 


any of the fmall 


rant neceflarily 


* 
«+ 
| 
Bbbbb 
4 
* 
wWhileit 


4118 L 13,28 


PRINCE OF PHYSITIONS NEXT 


TO Hiuprocrarss, 


the 
Healch ts nx 
remedics 
Remedies k: 


and realo! 
fuch asd 


found our 
Science wit! 
\ | Hee that wo: 
j ¥ motabie we 
himfelfe ¢ 
SSS fubjedt. 
Ww: SS It isthe part c 
difeat 
= = etter pau 


The Chirure¥ 
Ous, and 
much to be 


X03 erat Hippocratem divino é femine Divim, 
Or bem munertbus conciliare 
Scripta involuit tam muito enigmate veruns 
Vt guamuts folers nullus habere queat. 
Pergamei auxilio nift fint monimenta Galeni, 
Qxi dotta ambages /uftulit arte fens. 
Ergomaéte efto virtute,arcana refolvens, 


One nullt fuerant nota (Galene) priws; 


He that hath 
rations of t 
for ofthe j 
ned thercingy 
a brave C 
tead much 
or impucd: 


Obfiringen{qie orbem aterne tibi munere totum, He fhall nev: 
A ternis facras te quog. temporibus thy, that ha 
3 turgery by 


Bon, Gra Paris.M spice 


You fhall comil 
Of reco ver! 
fer of dea 


troublefon 


I 
‘e A 
We 
ty 
} 
a 
‘ 
’ 
cmt, 
a 
| 
4 


“pRactife is an operation agre 
the rules and lawes of the Thcory,. 
7 “ 2 | 
Health is not received by words,but by 
remedies fitly uied. 


Remedies knowne ‘and approved by ufe 
and reafon,are to be preferred before 
fuch as are unkiiowne, or but lately 
found our. 

Science without experience gets the Phy- 
fition no great credie wih the patient. 


Heethat would performe any great and 
notable worke, muft diligently apply 
himfelfe to the knowledge of his 
fubject. 

6 

It isthe part ofa good Phyfirion to heale 
the difeafe, orcertainly to bring itroa 
better pafie,as nature fhall give leaye- 


7 | 
The Chirurgion mutt be aétive, induftri- 
ous, and well handed, and net crufitoo 
much to bookes, 
8 


He that hath ner beene verfed in the ope. 
rations of the Art, nora frequent audi- 
tor ofthe Lectures of fuch asare lear- 
ned therein, and fers fortk himielfe for 
a brave Chirurgion for that hee hath 
read much,he is either much deceived 
or impudent. 


9 
He fhallnever doe any thing praife-wore 
thy, that hath got his maftery in Chi- 
turgery by gold,not by ule, 
10 
You fhall comfert the patient with hope 
ofrecovery, even when as there is dan- 
cer of death. 
To change Phyfitiens and Chirurgions is 
troublefome, but not good for the Pa- 


Bbbbb2 


f 
# 


eable to Though tie difeafe 


y 


* 


prove-jong, Yet it is 


hot fit hac che Phy tition give over (he 


patient. 

Great wounds of large veflells, are tobe 

judged deadly. 
14 

Every contufion maft oe broughe to fup. 
puration. he 

UO 

As thenature or kindof the difcafe muft 
bee knowtte fo ‘allo mitt che 
medy. 

“46 

An Abfceffe of the bone of ‘the pallace; 
is in danger to caufe’a’ flinking 
breath. 


17 
Bleeding caufed by heate muft be repreft 


by cold, 
18 


Wounds of nervous parts require medi- 


cirtes which by the tubrlety of the parts 
may cntcr in and draw from farre. 
19 
It is not fic for fuch as have Vicers ia 
theit Leggcs, neither to walke, ftand 
nor fig, but to reft themfelves in 
bed. 


20 


All biting and acrid medicines are off:n- 


five tocleane Vicers, 
2I 


For reftoring of diflocations you mutt 


hold them faft, ftretchthemour, and 
ferce chem in. 


22 
A great Gangreene admits no cure, but 
cutting. 
A moniter is a thing diffenting from the 
lawes of nature. 


24 
Wounds of the Cheit prefeatly become 
fanious and purulent, 


35 


L 12,28 Lise 28. 
SSE: 
SS 
A «4 
| 


‘ 


er yeeles por unleffe 


aad 


gently procurcs {weate, 
36 
troublefome to d 
people, and hard to be helped 
3 young bodies they are neither 
ver of dileaics. 


Round Vicers.unleffe they bedrawne into Exercifed bodies are lefft fubjeg tod; 
another figure,doenoteafily healeup. _feales. 


j but In 
{0 troy. 


An Eryfipelatous Vicer requires purga- Moift bodies though they neede ji,,) 
31 large evacuation. 


Crying is good foraninfant, for it ferves 3 
in ftead of exercife andevacuation.  Sickepeople dye fooner of an hot diftes). 
perthan of a cold, by reafon of the 


3 
Greefe is good for none but fach as are  quicke and ative operatinn of fire, 


very fat. 40 
The quitture that flowes trom an js 


33 | 
Idleneffe weakens and extinguifbeth the _laudible, which is white, imooth and 
native heate. eguall. 


2 


— 


we {pecke, 2 
motion. 
pronouncet!) 
a Chirurg ior 
careful! 
and love tow 
Carried away 
{tifie thele w 
report of th 
Law. 
Itis record: 
for three 
The firit iff 
Continuity, 
{word, have 
teafon of th 
the excellenc 
Dodkin, knife 


2 

i 

ye cr 

nemous ¢rea- 

H The wounds made by all €a- Anill natured Vic 
4 curesare dangerous. powerfull re |) Ls 

The fouth wind blowing, wonndedmem* 4 bath refalves and difeum qt 

| 

1 
>, 

4 

1 

| 
The end of ti ventileaventh Booke 
> fi 
4 
| 


CS humars, aad 


efome to old 
helped ; but ig 
gcither {9 troy. 
US, 


a 
e 
jee to di 


neede {imal} R E O R S> A N D O 
cy 10 neede of M B AL 
anhotdiftem. | KAD. 


reafon of the 
ef fire. 


Oman Viceris 
¢, fmeothand Tue TvvENTIEIGHTH Booke. 


RH occ Ow it oncly remaines that wee inftru the Chirurgion w,,, epi- 
F in making or framing his reporte, or opinion, eyther mrgien mut 
of the death of any perfon,or ofthe weakenefic, or depri- cme 
vation of any member inthe function or execution of its Reports. 
properofiice andduty. Herein it is meete that hee be 
very confiderate,that isto lay, ingenious or wile in ma- 
king his report,becaufe the events of difeafes are oftcn- 
times Coubrfull and uncertaiae, neither can any man fore- 
4 celithem certain'y whether they be for life or death» 
by reafon of the manifold nature of the fubje@ of which 
we {peake, and a!fo the uncertaine condition of the humors both in their kind and we 
motion. Which was the caufe why Hippocrates even in the firft of bis Aphorifmes gculs, 
pronounceth, thar judgement 1s difficult. Bur firft of all, it 1S very expedicnt that 
2 Chirurgion be of an honeft mind,that hee may alwayes have before his eyes a 
carefull regard oftrue piety, thatisto fay, the feare of God and faith in Chrift, 
and love toward his neighbours with hope of life everlafting, leaft that hee being 
carried away by favour, or corrupted with money or rewards, thould afirme or te- 
ftifie thele wounds ro bee {ma'l that are great, and thefe great that are {mal} ; for the 
report of the wound is reccived of the Chirurgion aecording to the civill 
Law. 
Itis recorded in the workes of ancient Phy fitions that wounds may bec called great 
a The firft is by reafon of the greatneffe of the diffolved unitie or refolution of forthree , 
Continuity,and fuch are thefe wounds which made by a violent ftroake with a backe- 
ford, have cut off the arme,orlegge,or overthwart the dreaft. The fecond is by 
teafon of the dignitie or worthinefle of the part; now this dighiry dependeth on 
@ the excellencic of the action; therefore thus any little wound made with a 
q Dodkin, knife, ia aay part whofe fubftance isnoble, as inthe Braine, Heart, Liver 


= 
‘ 
ad 


o ces#8 


o 
8 


ids not waoleffe 
) | 
4 DDOD 3 OF 


or amy other part whofe action and function is necetlary to preferve fife, as inthe 


Weafant, Lungs or Bladder,is judged great, The third is, by reafon of the greatnede 
and ill habit, orthe abundance of ill humors or debility of allthe wounded body :fo 
thofe woundes that are made in nervous parts, and old decayed people, are fy, dte 
begreat. Burin fearching of wounds let the Chirergion take heede that he be no; 
deceived by his probe. For many times it cannot goc into the botrome of thie 
wound but ftoppeth, snd ftickethin the way, either becaute he hath not placed the 
patient, in the {ame pofture, wherein he was when he received hishurts or cl{e fo; 
that the ftroake being made downe right, flipt afide to the right or left hand jor elf 
from below upwards, or from above downewards, and therefore hee may expe 
that the wound is but little and will be cured inafhort time, whenitis like to bee 


How longa Jong in curing, or elfe mortall. herefore from the firftday it behooveth him to 


fufpead his judgement of the wound untilitheaineth, tor 1athat ume the accidents 


will fhew themifelves manifeftly, whether they be {mail or great, according to the 


cdmdition of the wottnd:or wounded bodyes, aad the ftare of the ayre according to 
his primitive qualities, or venomous corruption: 


General But generally the fignes,whereby wemay judge of difcafes, whether they bee 
fignes wheres oveat or {mall, of ~ontinuance, Mortal! or not mortall, are foure. For 


by we sudge 
ofdifeates. they asc drawne« 


nature, and ¢eflence of the difeafe, or from the caufe 
che fimilitude, proportion ard comparifon, of thofe 
difeafes with the {cafon or prefent conftitutic he times, Therefore it wee are 
called tothe cure of a greene wound, whofe na id danger, is no other butafim. 
ple felution of Continuity in the muiculous ficfh,wemay prefently pronosnce thar 
wound to be of no danger, and that it willfoone be cured. But if it bave an Vice 
annexed unto it, chat is ifit be fanious, rhen we may fay it willbe more difficult and 
long in the curing; and fo we may pronounce of alldifeafes, taking 2 figneof thei: 
eflence and nature, But of the fignes that are taken of the caules, let thisbce an ex 
ample. A wound that is made witha fharpe pointed and heavie weapon,as wit) an 
halbcard being ftricken with great violence muft be accounted great, ycaand allo 
mor tall if the accidents be correfpondent. 


But ifthe patient falltothe ground through the violence of the ftroake, if achoe 
lericke vomiting follow thereon, if his fight faile him, together witha gidaine!, 
if blood come forth at his eyes and nofthrills, if diftraction follow with lot'c of me. 
mory and fenfcof feeling, we may fay; thatall the hope oflife, remainerh inone 


{mall figne which is tobe deduced from the effeAis of the wound. But by the cous 

paring it unto the feafon that then is, and difeafes that then aflaule mans body, wee 
ofthe ayre, may fay,that all thofe that arc wounded with gunfhot are in danger of death as it hap» 
pened in the {chit mifhesat the feige of Roan, andatthe battall of Saint Desa, bo! 

at that time, whether it were by reafon of the faultofthe heavens, or ayre,throvg 

thie evil humors ef mans body, and the difturbance ofthem; all wounds that wae 

made by gunfhor, were for the moft part mortal!. Solikewife at certaine feaions 0! 

the yeare, we fee the fimall pockes and meafels breake forth in children, as it were 

by a certaine peftilent contagion tothe deftructionof children onely, ioterring4 

moft crucll vomit and laske, andin {uch a feafon the judgement of thofe !s 

hot difficule. But you by the following fignes may know what parts are wounded 
facture’ Tf the patient fall downe with the ftroake, if he lye fenfelefle, asit were aflecpe, 
he voyde his excrements unwittingly, if he betaken with giddinelle, if bleod coms 

at hisearcs, mouth, and nofe, and ifhe vomit choller,-you may underfand the" 

the {cull is fractured, or pearced through, by the defeé in his underftanding 

courfe. You alfo may whenthe {cull is fra@tured, by the judgement! 

externall fenfes, as it by feeling it with your finger you finde it elevated or ceps fed 

beyond the nacurall lioits, it by ftriking it with the end of a probe, when the Pe’ 

cranium Oxnectvous filme rhat invefteth the {cull is curcrofle wife; and fo 

there from it,yeeld abafe and unperfe& found like unto a pot fheard thas is broke" 


or rather like uoro an earthen pitcher thac hatch a cleft or rene therein. 


or cfte&ts thereo}, 


' 


death by a But we may fay, that death is at hand if his reafonand anderftanaing fave 010), : 
weundenthe he be fpecchicile, if his fight for ke him, if he would tumble headlong our 1" 
Jv 


feaver, if bis 
or dry, and Ca 
if he have an 
on, OF abfolu 
hath his throg 
wound, and 
forthe patic 
thararecut 4 
from anotne 
wound bath 
at che wounc 
ficulty, if he 
irmay be gai 
fo caulerh h: 
caftup by vo 
aad ftinking, 
eawnot lye b 
death, his we 
littie and litt] 
We may | 
comming ov 
vous Wiormne 
to be wound 
trembling of: 
cold fweare, 
death. 
VVienthe 
teeleth a grea 
ihortnefle of 
upwards, W 
nounce that ¢ 
Death app 
by reafon of @ 
functions 
Dbe marr: 
orconvulfio: 
the excremen 
are aitogeche: 
VV hen the 
kine paline « 
at the Lowe: 
thence dow! 
yea and fomell 
W hea the! 
tollowezh a \ 
Cxtreamc pa 
wound, 
When the 
wound, the | 
breakes fort! 
&ccidents-an 
When che 
Ments come 
preat violenci 
When th. 
inaking his \ 
Mmethdowne 


iB: 9) 
: bed, being r 
| 
> 
i 
4 
4 
i 


iB, 
as inthe 
greatnefic 
ded body 
are faydte 
lathe benor 
trome of the 
Ot placed the 
Or cile for 
hand ,or elfe 
¢ May exped 
Ss like tobee 
boveth him to 
the accidents 
to the 
according to 


ther they bee 
re foure. For 
from the caufe 
of thofe 
fore it wee are 
ther but aGim.- 
ronomnce thar 
have an Vicer 
Be difficulr and 
figneof their 
this bee an 
pon,as with an 
, yeaand alfo 


pake, 1f achoe 
tha piddinc fle, 
mith lotle of mc- 
maneth in one 
but by the come 
ans body, wec 
death it 
gint For 
ayre,tbrovg) 
unds that were 
Btaine feafons of 
ren, as it were 
inferring a 
thofe difeales ts 
s are woundcd. 
ere afleepe, if 
if blood come 
underftand that 
anding and dil- 
loemento! you! 
red or depre 
when the Pe’/- 
and fo divided 
that is broken, 


ing faile hia, 
long out ot his 
bed 


1124 


2 8. Of Diftillations. 
bed, being notat all able ro moove the other parts of his body; if he have a contiouall 
feaver, if his rongue be blacke with d riencile, ifthe edges ofthe wound bee blacke 
of dry, and caft forth no fanious marter, ifthey refemble the colour of falted fleih, 
ifhe have an apoplexie, phrenfic, convulfion or palfie with an iavoluntarie excreti- 
on, or abfolute fupproflion of the Vrine and excrements, You may know chat a man 
hath histhroate, that is,his weafon and winde pipe cur, Firft bythe fight of bis 
wound, and next by rhe abolithmentof the function or office thereof both wayes, 
forthe patient can neither {peake nor {wallow any meate or drinke; and ehe pares 
thararecut afander, divide themfelves by retraction upwards or downewards one 
from another, whereof commeth fodaine or prefent death, You may know thata a ara 
wound hath peirced into the breft orconcavity, of the body, if the ayre come forth Forced in the 
at the wound ,making a certaine whizzing noy fe, if the pati¢nt breathe witli preat dif- captcity of the 
ficulty, if he fecle a great heavinefle or weight, on or about the midriffe, whereby 
irmay be gathered chat a great quantity blood, lyeth onthe place or midriffe,and 

fo cauleth himto feele a weight or heavineffe , which by little and little, will bee 

caltup Sy vomiting. Buta little after a feaver commacth,and the breath is unfayory, 

aad fiinking, by reafon that the pucrebying blood is turned into fawies the patience 

cawnot lye but on his backe, and he hath an often defye to vomit, bur if heecfeape 

death, his wound will degenerate into a Fiftula, and at length will confume him by 

litte and little. 

We may know that the Lungs are wounded, by the foaming and fpumous blood, Signes thar 
comming outboth at the wound and caft up by vomiting; hee is vexed with a gree— tre tunssae 
vous Niortneffe of breath and with a paine in his fides, We may perceive the Heart / 
to be wounded by the aboundance of blood that commeth out atthe wound, by the 
trembling of all the whole body, by the faint and {mall pulfe, paleneffe of the face, That the 
cold fweare, with often fwounding, coldneffe ofthe extreame parts, and fuddaine 
death, 

Wienthe midrifie (which the Latinescall Diaphragms) is wounded, the patient pre 


Signesthat the 
throat¢ is cut. 


teeleth a great weight inthat place, he raveth and talketh idlely, he is troubled with 
thortnefle of winde, acough, ard fit of greevous paine, and drawing of the entralls 
upwards. Wherefore when all thefe accidents appeare, we may certainely pro- 


nounce that death is at hand. — 


Dcath appeareth fodainely, bya wound of the hollow Veine,or the great Arterie, RE 
by reafon of the greatand violent evacuation of blood and fpirits, whereby the ¢+and ¢reaz_ 
junctions of the Heart and Lungsare flopped and hindred. Areery. 

Tie marrow of the backebone being pierced the patientis affaulted witha Palfiec The fpinal 
orconvulfion very fuddainely, and fence and motion faileth inthe parts beneath it, marrow. 


the excrements of the bladder, are either evacuated againg the patients will, or 
are altogether ftopped. 


When the Liver is wounded,much blood commeth out at the wound, and pric- 


king paine difperferh it felfeeven unco the {word-like griftle, which hath its fituation 
atthe Lowerendef the breft bone called Stervom; the blood that falleth trem 


thence downe into the inteftines dothoftentimes inferre moft maligne accidents, 
yea and fomerimes death, 


Wheatheftomacke is wounded,the meate and drink come out at the wound, there 
tolloweth a vomiting of pure choler, then commetia {weating and coldneffe, of the 
extreame parts, and therefore we oughtto prognofticate death to follow fucha 
wound, 

When the milt or {[pleene is wounded, blacke and groffe blood cometh out-atthe 
wound, the patient will be very thirfty, with paine on the left fide, and the blood 7" 
bréakes forth into the belly, and there putrifyiag caufeth moft maligne and Srecvous 
accidents-and often times death to follow, 

When theguts are wouaded ,the whole body is griped and pained, the excre- the gues: 
ments come outat the weund, whereat alfo often times the breake forth with 
great violenee. 

When the reines or Kidnyes are wounded, the patient will have great paine in 
making bis Vrine, and the blood commethourtogether therewith, the paine come. Phe hdneyer, 
methdowneeven unto the groine, yard, andrefticles, When 


— 


a 
a 
a 
4 
a 
4 
Px 
a 
| 
- 
a 


How toma ke Reports and to Embalme thedead. Lup. 28. 


"The bladder, 


The vwemb, 


The Nerves, 


Signes that 
an jofane 1S 
{mothered 
or over=iayd, 


Signes of fuch 
asare flaincby 


Lightniag. 


Lib.2 AP, 54. 


W hen the bladder and Vreters are wounded, the paine goctheven the en. 
tralls;the parts allabour, and belonging to the groine are diftended , the V;in. 
is bloody thatis made, and the fame alfo commeth often times ovr at the 
wound, 

Whenthe wombcis wounded, the blood commeth out at the Privities, and aj! 
ther accidents appeare, like as when the bladder is wounded, re 

Whenthe finewcsare pricked or cut halfe afunder, there is Prceat paine in the af 
fected place,and there followeth a fuddaine inflammation, fluxe, abiceffc, feayer 
convulfion, and oftentimesa gangrecne or mortification of the part, where 
meth death, unleficit be fpeedily prevented, 

Having declared the fignes and tokens of wounded parts, itnow remaincrh thar 
we ferdowne other fignes of certainc kindes of death that are not common, oy p .. 
turall, whereabout when there is great {trife and contention made, it oftentimes js 
determined and ended by the judgement ef the difcreere Phy fition or Chirur. 

ion, 

Therefore chance that anurfe cither through drunkenneffle, or negligence: 
lyes upon her infant lying in bed with her, and fo ftifies or {mothers it to death, |/ 
your judgement be required, whether the infant dyed through the defaule, or ney. 
ligence of the nurfe ? or through {ome violent or fuddaine difeaies that lay bidde,y 
and lurking in the body thereof ? You fhall finde out the truthof the mare; by 
thefe iignes following. 

For it the infant werein good health before, if he were not froward or crying. jf 
his mouth and aofethrills now being dead,be moyftned or bedewed with a cerraine 
foaine, if his face be not pale bur of a Violet or purplecolour, if when thebody js 
opened the Lungs be found {wolne and puffed up, asit were with a certaine vapo. 
rous foame and all the other entralls found, itis atoken that the infant was ftifed 
finothesedor ftrangled by tome outward violence, 

ltthe body ordead copes ofaman be found lying ima field, or houfe alone, 
and yoube called bya magiitrate to deliver your opinion, whether the man were 
flaine by lightning or fome other violent death? you may by the following fienes 
finde out the certainery hereof. 

For every body that is blafted, or ftriken withlightning, doth caft forrh or breathe 
out an unbolfome, ftinking or {ulphureous {mell, fo that the birdes or fowles of the 
ayre, nor dogges will notoncetouch it, much Icfle prey or feede on it: the part 
that was ftricken often times found, and without any wound, but if you fearch it 
well, you fhall findethe bones under the skiane to be bruifed, broken or fhivered 
in pecces. 

But if the lightening hath pierced intothe body, which makiag a wound therein 

(according to the judgement of Plsny) the wounded part ts farre colder than all the 
reft of the body. For lightning driveth the moft thinne and fiery ayre before it, and 
{trikerh it into the body with great vielence, bythe force whereof the heate that 
was in the part isfoone difperfed, wafted and confumed, Lightening doth alwayes 
leave {ome impreilion or figne of fome firecither by yfionor blacknefle: for 19 
lightning ts without fire. 
Morcover whereas all ether living creatures when they are ftriken with lighte- 
ning fall oa the contrary fide, onely man falleth on the affected fide, ifhee be not 
turned with violence coward thecoalt or region from whence the lightening 
came. 

If aman bee ftriken with lightening while he is afleepe, hee will be found with 
eyes open; contrarywilc, if hee be ftriken while kee is awake his eyes will be clo. 
{ud (as Pénée writeth: )Philip Commines writeththat thofe bodyes that are Strick 
with lightning are not fubject tocerruption as others are. 

Therefore in ancient time it was their cuftome neither to burac, nor bury 
for the brimftone which the lightning bringeth with ir, was unto chem iv ‘teal 


falt, for that by the drynefie and fiery heate thereof it did preferve chem from pe 
erefaction, 


ot com. 


Alfo it may be enquired in judgement, Whether any that is dead and wonder ; 


ived cic! 
man, if he dys 
edges {wol! 
30 , will b 
gad function 
thenceforth 
fore by thefc 
dead or alive 
The like « 
gher he wer 
print of ther 
will be contr 
mide; allo of 
{pondile, and 
legges will be 
morcover th 
hanging Our : 
fodainely hea 
like as it were 
thefe lignes ay 
the fame 
and {piri's de 
Wholoeve 
throwne into 
alive, will be 
certaine clam 
fingers will be 
{craping in th 
take hold to {. 
watcts being 
all the patiage 
clofed, and fe 
mattcr about 
wornc and ex 
But as col 
the upper para 
the water tha 
which a 
putryfying be 
orelfe are cai 
with che flch 
nd are caf 
But sow 
tified orime 
Vou may tort 
Lord God 
was fenrford 
and fhew my 
the other his 
MOL perceive: 
Were cold, th 
ther could th 
Therefore al! 
of death they 
others thoug| 
and others ju 
wii 


* 
| 
* 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4. 
ae 
* “ 


the en. 
the Vring 


ues, and al] Q- 


aine 1D the af. 
lceffe, i Caver 
whereof com. 


remaincth thar 
or na. 
t oftentimes js 
or Chirur. 


negligence 
if todeath, 
Cfaule, or neg. 
bat lay bidden 
the matter by 


tdor crying, if 
with a certaine 
len the body js 
2 CCrtaine vapo- 
nt was ftifled, 


tr houfe alone, 
the man were 
llowing fisnes 


orth or breathe 
rfowles of the 
on it: the part 
f you fearch it 
en or fhivered 


wound therein 
lec than all the 
‘ before it, and 
the heate that 
g doth alwayes 
knefle: for no 


n with lighte- 
ifhee benot 
the lightening 


be found with 
yes will be clo- 
at are ftricken 


or bury them, 


hem from pu- 


and, wounded, 
recele 


hem in ftead of 


5.28 Bow to make Reports and to Enbalme toe dead 1125 


seceived thefe wounds alive or dead. Truely che wounds that arc made onaliving 
man, ifhe dye ofthem, after his death will appeare red and bloody, with the fides or wounds given. 
edges {wollne, or pale round about: contrary wife, thofe that are made ina dead ames 
mio, will bee neither red, bloody, {wollae, nor puffedup, Fora!! the faculcies 

gad fanctions of life inthe body doe ceafe and fall together by death; fo that 
thenceforth no fpirits nor blood can be fent,or flow unto che wounded place. There- 

fore by thefe fignes which fhall appeare, it may be declared tliat hce was wounded 

dead or alive. 

The like queftion may come in judgemcat when a man is found hanged, whe- Signes whee. 
ther he were dead, or alive. Therefore if he were hanged alive, the imprefficn or 
print of the rope will appeare red, pale, or blacke, and the skinne round abouc ic 9 da. 
will be contracted or wrinkled, by reafon of the compreffion whichthe cord bath 
mide; allo often times the head of the a/pera arteria is rent and torne, and the fecond 
(pondile, and che necke luxated or mooved ourofhisplice. Alfo the armesand 
legges will be pale, by reafon of the violent and fodaine fuffocation of the {pirits: 
morcover there will bea foame about his mouth, and 2 foamteand &lchy matter 
hanging out at his nofetbrills,being fent thitherboth by realon that che Lungs are 
fodainely heated and fuffocated, as alfo by the convullive comcufii nm of the braine 
like as it were in the falling fickneffe. Contrariwaife, ifhe be hanged dead, none of 
thefe fignesappeare: for neither the printof the rope appearcs red or pale, butof 
the fame celour as the other parts of the body are, becaufe indead men the blood 
and {pirirs doc not tlow re the greeved parts, 

Whofoever is found dead inthe waters, youfhall know whether they were 
throwne into the water aliveor dead. For allthe belly of him that was throwne i fiund deadio 
alive, will be {wolien,and puffed up by reafon of the water that is contained therein, 
certaine clammie excrements come out at his mouth and nofethr ills, the ends ot his live os dea 
fingers will be worne and excoriated, becaufe that hee dyed ftriving and digging or 
{craping in the fand or bottome of the river, fecking fomewhat whereon hee might 
take hold to fave him({elfe from drowning. Contrariwife if he be throwne into the 
waters being dead before,his belly will norbefwollne, becaufe that ina dead man 
all the paflages and conduites of the body doe falltogether, and ar¢ flopped aad 
clofed, and for thata dead man breathes not, there appeareth nofoame nor filthy 
matter about his mouthanrd nofe, and much lefle canthe toppes of his fi gers be 
worac and excoriated, for whena manis already dead,he cannot ftriveagainig death . 

But as concerning the bodies of thofe that are drowned, thofe that {wimme on 
‘he upper part of che water being fwollne or puffedup, they are not fo by reafon of 
the water thatis containedinthe belly, burby reafonof acertaine vapour, iato 
which a great portion of the humors of the body are converted by the efficacy of thie 
putryfying heate, Therefore this {welling appeareth notin all men which doc perith, 
orelfe are caftout dead into the waters, but onely in them which are corrupted 
with the filthinefle or muddinefle of the water, long timeatter they were diowned; 
and are caf onthe fhore. 

But now I willdeclarethe accidents that cote tothole that are luffocated and 
tifled or fmeothered with the vapour of kindled or burning charcoales,and how fimothersd by 
vou may foretell the caufes thereof by the hiftory following. Inthe yecre of our — 
Lord God 1575.thetenth day of May,I with Robert Greasline DoGor of Phylicke, 
was {enc for by Mafter Aamellanadvocate of the Court of Parlamenc of Pare, co fee 
and (hew my opinion on two of his fervants, of whom the one was his Clarke, and 
the other his Horie-keeper. All his family f{uppofed them dead, becaufe they could 

not perceive or feeletheir Arteries to beate, all the extreame parts of their budycs 
Werecold, they could neither {peake aor move,their faces were pale aod wade ,act- 
thercould they bee raifed up withany violent beating or plucking bythe hance, 
Therefore all men accounted them dead, ahd the queftion was onelyof what kind 
ofdeath they dyed, for their mafter fulpectedchat (ome bedy had frangled rhem , 
others thought that cach of chem had ftopped ome anothers winde wiih hands: 
and others judged thatthey were taken with a fodaine apoplexie. bur [ preicutly 
cnguited whether there had beene any fire made with Coales in the hevic pr. 
white. 


* 
a 
7 
i 
| * 
a 
| ‘4 
| 2 
sug 
4 
| 
* 


1126 How tomake Reports and to Embalme the dead, 18:28. 
| whereunto their mafter giving care, fought about allthe corners of the chamber hele were 


‘ (for the chamber was very little and clole) and at laft found an carthen panne with 
charcoale halfe burned; which when we once faw, we all affirmed with one voyée 
that it was the caufe of allthis misfortune,and thatit wasthe maligne fume and y.’ 


yapour Proc 
or wind, 
to jay, pain 


nemous vapour, which had fmetheredthem, as it were by ftopping the Pallages o¢ that they arc 

their breath. Therefore I put my hand to the regions of their hearts where | Might daiacly obft 

perceive that there was fome life remaining by the heat and pulfauon that L tele the grofine!! 

though it were very little, wherefore we thought it convenient to augment and ep, Ror fo Hit 

creafcit. Therefore firft of all, artificially opened their mouthes, which were very wine, fpeake 

faft clofed, and fticking obftinately together; and thereinto both with a !poone ang hath b conv: 
| alfo with a filver pipe, we put aqua vita often diftilled with diflolved diera and tye. bis {(peech 2¢ 
cle;when we had injected thefe medicines often into their mouthes, they began ont’ 
moove andto ftretch themfelves, and to calt up andexpell many vilcous eXcre. sheim tobe | 

mentall and filthy humors at their mouth and nofirells, and their Lungs feemed:, unleffe by m 

be hot, as it were inthcir throates, nofethrells.: 

Therefore then we gave them vomitorics of a great quantity Of Oxmel.and bear. culties moo 


them often violently on thelaft {pondill of the backe, and firft of the loynes, both 
with the hand and knee (for unto this placethe orifice of the ftomacke is turned } 
that by the power of the vomutory medicine, and concuffion ofthe ftomacke, they 
might be conftrainedto vomir, Neither did our purpofe faile us, for prefently 
they voided clammie, ycllow and {pumous fleame and blood. 


although ar’ 
pares, by re: 
conlider the} 
be by the fing 
voutly attic 


} Butwee notbeing content withall this, blowcd upintotheir noftrells oy The proo 
of a Goofe quill, the powder of Eaphorbium, thatthe expullfive faculty of the braing defe& of che 
mightbe ftir:cd upto tke expulfios of that which opprefled it; therefore prefently ginning or of 
| the braine being {haken,or mooved with fnecfing and inftimulated thereunto by 
rubbing the chymicall oyle of mints on the pallate and on the cheekes, they ¢xpel- And even 
led much vifcousand clammie matter at their noftrells. tion, yer wit! 
Then we ufed frictions oftheir armes, legges, and backe-boness and miniftered were at hand 
fharpe clifters ,bby whofe cflicacie the belly being abundantly loofened ,they beganne intercepted, 
} prefentlyto {peake and to take things that were miniftered unto them of their owne diftributing | 
accord, and io eame tothemfelves againc. of re{piratior 
In the doing ofall thefe things, Gutllemeaw Chirurgion unto the King,and of the braine, bi 
| Paris, and Joby of Saint Germanes the Apothecary, did much helpe aad turthet from going | 
us. Luags were 
. In the aiternoone that the matter being wellbegunne might have good {uccelle, forto perfer 
lohn Hautse, and Lewis Thibaut,both mofk learned hifitions , were fent for unto men were in 
‘ us, with whom we might coniult on other things that weretobedone, They hig be no life. 
Ag : ly commending all things that we had done already,thought it very convenient that For the I 
i cordiails fhould be miaiftered unto them, which by ingendering of Jaudab!< humors, vapour chat 
‘ mig it not oncly generate new fpirits, butalfoattenvate and pusifie thofe tha were grofleneffe a 
grofle and cloudy in their bodies, The reft of our coafultation was {pent ia tie made, for it 
. quirie of the caui¢ of fo dire amifchance. Forthey fayd that it was no new o that compafi 
: ftrange thing, that men may be {mothered with the fume and cloudy vapour of 0 it moderate | 
ning coales, foure qualit: 
For wercadcin the workes of Fudgofius ,Volateranus and Egnatius, that asthe ficient. Th 
Aory, PCrour Jovémiaw, travelled in wintertime toward Rome, he being weary his jour it be of arhir 
ney, re{ted ata Village called Didaftanes, which divideth Bishyns from Galstis, nigne fubtta: 
pi where he lay in a chamber that was newly made, and plaiitered with lime, wherein But thefe! 
# they burnt many coales, forto dry the worke or plaiftering, that was butas yet drew into thi 
greene onthe walls or roofe ef the chamber. Now he dyed the very fame night For far {t,1) 
: being {fmothered or ftrangled with the deadly and poyfonous vapour of the burned in that little 
charcoale,in the midft of thenight;this happened to him in the eighth moneth of his than the ayr@ 
reigne, the thirtyeth yeerc of hisage, and on the rweatyeth day of Auguit. But fo 
what ncede we tocxemplific this matter by the ancient hiftories, {ecing that 20t Furtherm 
ny yeeres {ince three fervants dyed inthe houfe of John gold {mith,who dwe the burning 
leth at the turning ef the bridge of the Change,by reafon of a fire made of coales ind ~ Thirdly, 
clofe chamber, without achimney where they lay, Andasconcerning the caules, maixcion of tJ 


thelc 


j 

a 

4 a 

4 


the chamber 
‘O panne with 
one 
fume and ye. 
he paflages of 
| where I Mighe 
won that I te}, 
qj (bent and en. 
mich were Ver 
1 a /poone and 
hiera and trea. 
acy Began to 
UCOUS exere. 
Ings jeemedtg 


beate 
| loynes, both 
mackc 1S turned } 
‘omacke, ihey 
for prefently 


r nottrells oye 
y of the braine 
fore prefently 
therevato by 
s,they expel- 


ind miniftered 
they beganne 
of their owne 


he King,andof 
and further 


good fuccefle, 
e fent for unto 
¢. They high- 
Fonvenient that 
dable humors, 
rhofe thae were 
{pent ig the 
as no new oF 
vapour of bur- 


hat as the Em- 
ary im his 
from Galati, 
Slime, wherein 
was butas yee 
Bry fame night 
of the burned 
moneth ef his 
Auguit, Bue 
that aot ma- 
ith, who dwel- 
Mic of coales ina 
ni the caules, 
thelc 


thefe werealleaged, Many were of opinionthar it happened by the default of the 
yapour preceeding from the burned coales, which being ina place voydofall ayre 
or wind, inferres {uch like accidents as the vapour of mufte or new wine doth, chat is 
to fay, paine,and giddinefie of the head. For boththefe kindes of vapour befides 
thac they are crude, like unto thofe things whereef they come, can alfo very fud- 


daiacly obftruct the originall of the Nerves, and fo caufe aconvullion, by reaion of 


the groflnefle of their fubftance. 

For lo Hippocrates writing of thofe accidents thathappen by the vapour of new 
wine, {peakerh, [fany man being drunken doe fuddainely become Ipeechicile and 
hath a convulfion, he dyeth unleffe he have a feaver therewithall; or if be recover not 
his {peech againe when his drunkennefle is over. 

Evenonthe fame manner the vapour ofthe coales affaulting the braine caufid 
them to be ipeechleffe, unmoveable and voyde of all fenfe, and had dyed thor'y 
unleffe by miniftring and applying warme medicines intothe mouth and to rhe 
nofethrells the grofinefle of che vapour had beene atteguated, and the expulifive fa- 
culties mooved or provoked toexpellall thofe things that were noyfome: and alfo 
although at the firft fight the Lungs appearedto be greeved more than all che ochee 
parts, by reafonthat they drew the maligne vapour inte the body, yet when you 
conlider then well, it will manifeftly appeare thatthey are not greeved, unleffe it 
be by the fimpathy or affinity that chey have with the braine when itis very gree- 
voutly athiced., 

The proofe hereof is, becaufe prefently after, there followeth an interception or 
dete& of the voyce,fenfe and motion: which accidents could not bee unletle thebe- 
ginning or Originall ofthe nerves were intercepted or letted from performing its 
function oeing burthened bv fome matter contrary to nature. 

And even asthofe that have an apoplexie doe not dye but for want of re{pira- 
tion, yet witheut any offence of the Lungs,even fo thefe two young mens deathes 
were at hand,by reafon chaccheir re{piration or breathing was ia 2 manner altogether 
intercepted, not throughany default of the Lungs, but of the braine and nerves 
diftribucing fence and motion tothe whole body and efpecially to the initrurments 
of re{piration, Others contrariwife contended and fayd,that there was no default in 
the braine, but conjectured the interception of the virall {pirits leeted or hindered 
from going up untethebraine fromthe heart, by reafon that the paffages of thic 
Luags were flopped, to be the occafion chat fufficient matter could not be afforded 
forto perferve and feed the animall fpirit. Which wasthe caufecthat thole young 
men werein danger of death, for want of refpiration, without the which there can 
be no life. 

Forthe heart beingin fuchacafe, cannot deliver it felfe from the futiginous 
vapour that encompaileth it, byreafon thac the Lungs are obitru@ed by the 
grofleneffe of the vapour of thecoales, whereby infpiration cannot well bee 
made, for it is made by the compaffing ayre drawne into our bodyes = bur the ayre 
that compaffeth us doth that which nature endeavourethto doc by in{piration, for 
itmoderateth theheate of theheart, andthercfore it ought tobee etdued with 
foure qualities, The firftis,thatcthe quantity that is drawne imo the body bee 
ficient. The fecond is, that it be cold, or temperate inquaatity, The third ts, thar 
it be ofarhinne and meane confiftence. The fourth is, that icbe ofagentie andbe- 
higne fubftance, 

But thefe foure conditions were wanting inthe ayre which thefe two young men 
drew into their bodyes being in aclofe chamber, | 

For fir tit was little in quantity by reafon that {mall quantity thar was contained 
in that little clofe chamber, was partly confumed by the fire of coales,no otherwile 
than the ayre that is conteined in a cupping giafic is confumed in a moftoent by che 


- flame fo fo@ne as it is kindled. 


Furthermore it was neither coldnor temperate, butasit were enflamed with 
the burning fire of coales. 
. Thirdly, it was more greffein confiftence than it fhould bee by reafon of thead- 


mixcion of the grofler vapour of the coales: for the nature of the ayre is fo charit 
may 


The oteahon 
of 

etfecha:' ave 
the 


Co a TT 
fheavre 
to 


2 
4 
| 
a 
a 
4 
= 


may bee foone altered, and willvery quickly receive the formes and impreffions 
efthofe fubftances that are about it, 

Laftly, it was noyfome and hurtfull in fubftance, and alrogether offenfive tOthe 
aiery fubftance of our bodies For Charcoale are made of greene wood Durne in 
pitsunder ground,and then extinguifhed with their owne fume or fmoake. 4s all 
Colliers can tell. Thefe were the opinions of fcarned men althoveh th. 
were not altogether agreeable one unro another, yet both of them depended on 
their proper reafons, For this at leait is manifeft, that thofe paflages which ate 
common to the breaft and braine, were then {topped with the groffeneffe of ihe 
vapout of thecoales:whereby ic appeareththat both thefe parts were in faulr. foras 
much as the confent and connexion of them with the other pares of the body is fg 
preat, tbat they cannot Jeng abide found and perfec without their mutual helpe 
by reafon of the loving and friendly fympathy and affinitie that is betweene a|) the 
parts ofthe body ane with another. 

Wherefore the ventricles of the braine,the paflages of the lungs and the fleepie 
Arteries being ftopped,the vitall {pirit was profubited from curring into the brain, 
and confequently theanimall fpirit retained and kept in, fo that it cov!d not com, 
or difperfe irs felfe rhroughthe whole body, whence happened the detcét of woof 
the faculties neceffary for life, 

a It many times happeneth and is a que ftion too frequently hancle¢ CONCErNin 
ofvirgmiue, madenhcadss whereof the judgement iS vCry difficult. Yet fome ancient 
women and Midwives will bragge that they afiuredly know it by certaine and 
infallible fignes. For (fay they) in fuch as are virgins there isa ccrtaine nucmbrane 
or parchaaent- like skin inthe necke of the womb, which will hinder the thrufting 
in of the finger if ic be put inany thing deepe, which membraine is broken when 
firitthey havecarnall copulation, as may afterwards be perceived by the free ¢p. 
‘trance ofthe finger. Befides,fuch as are defloured have the necke of their wom) 
more large and widey as on the contrary, itis more contradted, ftraite and narrow 
invirgins, But how deceitful! and untrue thefe fignes and tokens are, {hall eppeare 
by thar which followeth; for this membraine isa thing preternatural!, and which 
is (carce found to be in one ofa thoufand trom the firft conformation. Now the necke 
of the womb will be more open or ftraite according tothe bignefle and age of the 
party. Forall the parts of the body have a certaine mutuall proportion and com- 
mcaiurationin a well made body. 
Lib.deernr, deuvertwshath wrinen, that at Ledfowre in Ga/comye, a WOman was delivered ot 2 
popul, child inthe ninth yeare of her age, and that fhe is yet alive and called Jeane du Perit 
being wife to Videaw Becbe the receiver of the amercements of the King of Navare: 
which is 2 moft evident argument,that there are {ome women more able to accom- 
pany witha manat wine yeares old, than many ouierat fifteene, by reafon of the 
ample capacity of their wombe andthe necke thercof; Befides alfo, this paflage is 
enlarged in many by fome accident, as by thrufting their owne fingers mort 
ftrongly thereinro by reafon of fome itching, or by the putting up of a Nodule, of 
Peffaric of the bigneile of a mans yard,forto bring dewne the courfes, Neither to 
Aph.39.fe4 have milke in their breafts is any certaine figne of loft virginity ; For Hrppocrates 
thus writes; Butifa woman whichis neyther with child, nor hath had ene, 
milkein her breafts then her courfes have failed her. dtr 
debi. Moreover,4riftotle reports that there be meni who have fuch plenty of milkein 
qoienal ony. their breafts, that it may be fucked or milked out, > 
Lib, Cardan writes,that he faw at Venice one Antony Buffey fome 30. yearcs old, who 
bad milke ia his breafts in fuch plenty, as futhiced to {uckle a child, fo thar it did 
onely drop, but {pring out with violence like a womans milke. Wherefore ict 
Magiftrates beware leaft thus admonifhed,they too iafbly affent to the reports © 
women. Let Phyfitions and Chirurgions have a care leaft they doe tooimpudent- 
ly bring magiftrates intoanerrour, which will not redound fo mueh to. the 
difgrace,as co theirs, 
But if any defireco know,whether one be poyfoned, ler him fearch for the Sy™/~- 


tomes and fignes foregoing and particular treatifeofpoyfons, But er 
oul 


L I 


doGrine of o 
jmitation wh 
fhall be of de 
third of an 11 
bers. 

P. Cl 
Counteill, eng 
on his head, 
effracture,or 
the braine,b 
convulfion,c 
chatcertaisc 

re with m: 

By the Conf 
being woun 
of three fing: 
alfo ofa vein 
dingly weak: 
livide, and ¢: 
health and fat 

By the Luft 
owne brorhe: 
foure fingers 
the Veines, A 
life, by reafoi 
fuch as are gr. 

the like, Wh 
fic wherof ith 
der of his life. 
under my hang 

We the © 
day of Match 
wounds, Thal 
bignefle of «| 

forced to plu 
right cheeke, 
fiicched it wit 
oftwo finger: 
were torced t 

a Wallnut, bed 
fourzh was ot 

the cutting off 
itis, that he 4 
led. | 

Now becafl 
alegge; iris 

for 
toallthe parca 
Cnts armes or} 
Nerves are hq 
But ifthe fang 
that the excri 
ate totally fu, 
the loynes aff 
fenfe and mo 

the {phincter 

by whichmd 


thing there 


- 
4 
a 
a 


depended on 
ges wluch are 
iienefle of the 
in fault, foras 
the body is {g 
mutuall helpe 
-tweene all the 


and the leepie 
into the braine, 
‘ould not come 
ciedt of (wo of 


led concerning 
fome ancient 
y and 
ne membrane 
thie thrufting 
s broken when 
by the free en- 
of their womb 
aite and narrow 
‘¢,fhall eppeare 
rail, and which 
the necke 

and age of the 
rtion and com- 


s delivercd of a 
d Jeane au Perié 
King of Navare: 
able to accom- 
y reafon of the 
o, this paflage is 
e fingers more 
f a Nodule, of 
fes, Neitherto 
For Hippocrates 
had ene, have 


of milke in 


reares old, who 
(o that at did not 
Wherefore let 
the reports © 

vooimpudent- 
Syto:the judges 


1 for the SymPp- 
But that this 
| dodirme 


i 


j 
4 


L1B.2 


Howtomake Reports, and the Dead, 


Jo&rine of making Reports may bethe eafier, I thinke it fir, togive prefidents, in 
imitation whereof the young Chirurgionmay frame others, The firlt prefident 
fhall be of death to enfue; aflecond of a doubfull judgement of life and death; the 
third ofan impotency of amember; thefourthof cthehurting of many mem- 
bers. 

[A-P. Chirurgion of Par% this twentieth day of May by the command of the 
Countell, entred into the houte of Joba Broffey, whom Ifound lying inbed,wounded 
on his head, with a wound in his left temple, piercing the bone with a fra@ure and 


effracture,or depreffion of the broken bone, fcaules and mseninges into the {nbftance of 


the brane, by meanes whereof, his pulfe was weake, he was troubled with faving, 
convulfion,cold {weate,and his appetite was dejected. Whereby may bee gathered 
thaecertaise and fpeedy death is at hand. In witnefle whercof have figned this Re- 
pore with my ownc hand, | 

By the Coroners command I have vifited Petr Lucey, whom I found ficke in bed, 
being wounded with a Halbard onhis right thigh. Nowrhe wound is of the bredth 
of three fingers, and fo deepe that it pierces quire through his thigh wich the cutting 
alfo ofa veine and Artery, whence enfued ctfufion of biood, which hath excee- 
dingly weakned him, and caufed him to {wound often;now allhis thigh is wollne, 
livide, and givesoccafionto feare worflefymptomes, which is the caufe that the 
health and fafety of the party isto be doubted of. 

By the Iuftices command I entred into the houfe of James Bertcy, to vilite his 
owne brothers; J found him wounded in his right harme, with a wound cf fome 
foure fingers bigaefle, with the cutting of the tendons bending the legge, aad of 
the Veines, Arteries, and Nerves. Wherefore I afirme that he is in dangerof his 
life, by reafon of the maligne fymptomes that ufually happen upen fuch wonnds, 
fuch as are great paine, a feaver, inflammarion, abfceffe, convulfion, gangreene and 
the like, Wherefore he ftands in neede of provident and carefull drefling, by bene- 
fir wherof if he efcape death,without doubt he will continue lame,during the remain- 
der of his life, by reafon of the impotency of the wounded part, And thislafirme 
under my hand, 

We the Chirurgions of Parts, by thecommand of rhe Senate, this twenticth 
day ef Match, have vilited Mafter Lewss Vertoman, whomwee found burt with five 
wounds. The firft inflicted on his head, in the middle of his forehead bone, to the 
bigneffe of three fingers,and it penetrates even to the fecond table,fo that we were 
forced to plucke away three fplinters of the fame bone, The other was atwflart his 
tight cheeke,and reacheth from his¢are, to the midft of hisnofe, wherefore wee 
flitched it with foure ftitchese The third is onthe midit of his belly, of the bignefle 
oftwe fingers, but fo deepe thatit afcends into the capacity of the belly, fo that we 
were forced to cut away portion of the Kall, comming out therear, to che bignefle of 
a wallnut, becaufe having lo& its naturall colour, it grew blackeand putrified. The 
fourth was uponthe backe of his left hand, the bigneffe almoft of ffoure fingers, with 
the cutting of the Veines, Arteries Nerves and part of the bones of that part;whence 
: is, that he willbe lame of that hand, howfoever carefully and diligently heze 

ed. 

Now becaufe by hurting the fpinall marrow, men become lame, fometimes of 
alegge, itis fit you know thatthe {pinall marrow defcends fromthe braine likea 
tivelet for the diftribution ofthe Nerves, who might diftribure fenie and motion 
toall the parts under the head, wherefore if by hurting the {pinall marrow, the pati- 
entsarmes or hands are refolved or numme,or wholy without fealc,it isa figne theie 
Nerves are hurt which come forth of the fifth, fixch,feaventh vertebra of the necke. 
But ifthe fameaccidents happento the thigh, legge or foote with refrigeration, fo 
that the excrements flow uavoluntarily, withouc the patients knowledge, or elfe 
aretotally {uppreft, it isa figne thatthe tinewes which proceed fromthe vertebre of 
the loynes and holy -bone are hurt or in faule ,fo chat che autmail taculry bettowing 
lenfe and motion upon the whole body,and the benefit of opening and {hurting to 
the {phincter mufcle of the bladder and fundament,cannot lhew its {-if 10 thefe parts, 
by which meanes fuddaine death happens, efpecially if there be ditliculcy of brea. 
thing therewith. Cccce Be- 


A certificate 
of death, 


Anotherira 
doubrfull cafe 


In the 'affe of 
amcmber. 


Another in 
the hurts of 
Givers Parte, 


Lin:28. 
1d im preflions 
ffenfixe toth 
ood burnt ip 
imoake, aS all 
| 4 
j 
| 
| 
| 
* 
| 
| 
| 
i 


Being to make report otachild killed with the mother, have a care” that you 


tion in 
make a difereete report, whetherthe childe were perfeét in all the parts and mem. 
bes BCLs thereof, that the judge may equally puniththe author thereof, For he dof 
ing killed, teth farre greater punifhment, who hath killed achild perfeétly thaped and mace jp, be building 
all che members; that is, hie which hath killed a live childe, thanhe which hath Cheops beg 
led an Embryon, that certaine concretionof the fpermaticke body. For Mole; foace there kil 
punifheth the-former with death, as that he fhould give life for life, but the fgor lou 
with a pecuniary mulde.But judge it fir to ex emplifie this report by a prefident, building 
1 A.P. by the ludges command vilited Miftris AZargaret Vimary, whom | found man{h iD, as 


fickc in bed, having a ftrong feaver upon her, with a convulfion and ¢fHuxe ot blood 


nificent Sep: 
out of her wombe, by reafon of a wound in her lower belly, below her navillon:),, 3 


purpoilc kad 


right {ide penetrating into the capacity of her belly,and the wombe thercir,; whence Aromaticke, 
it hath come to pafle, that fhe was delivered before her time, of a male childe, pcr. {trewed the: 
fect in all his members but dead, being killed by the fame wound piercing throyes, which being il 
his {cull, into che marrow ofthe braine. Which ina fhort time will be the deary ¢¢ taken off,the | 
; the mother alfo, Inteftimony whereof | bave put my hand and {cale, summe; 
| dead bodye: 
: The manner how to Embalme the dead, men the Fam 
and Nobles 
! Had determined to finifhthis my tedious worke with the precedent trea- pioully and @ 
‘ife of Reports ;buta better thought came in my head whieh was, to bripo cient and lat 
man whole cure | had undertaken, from his infancie, to his ond. and that Jofeps 


and Alves at 
Of Lefus Chri 
tegrity 


to his grave, {o that nothing might be heere defe@ive which the Chirurgion migh: 
by his profeffion, performe about mans body either alive, or dead. \ crily there 
hath fcarfe ever beenea nation fo barbarous, which hath nor onely beene caret 


for the burial], but alfo for the Embalming or preferving of their dead budyes, For Jewes had rca 
Theetreof the very Seythéans who have feemed to exceede other nations in barbarou{nelle, ang ment comm 
thes 94%. lohumanity,have done this; for (according to Herodotus) the Scythians bury nor the cher with {ps 
ming of their King, before that being embowelled and fiuffed full of beaten Cy. But the bo 
prefic, frankincecfe, the feedes of Perily, and Annife, heebe alfo wrapped In cear- firft ofallbe 
} Thelike care Cloathes, The likecare hath alfo poffefied the mindes of the Ethiopians; for having keptas the k 


afaw,thall ba 
thishes, leg 
and Arteric 


of the Ertieprs disburdened the corpes of their friends, of their entrails and fiefh, they plaiftered 

them over. and then having thus rough caft them, they painted them with colours 
{oro exprefle the dead to the life; they inclofed rhemthus adorned ina hollow pillar 


; of glaffc that thus inclofed they might be feene and yet ner anoy the {pearors with otherwii¢ w 
} their {mell. Then were they keprthe {pace of ayeere, inthe hands of their next reft of the b« 
f kindred; who during this {pace offered and facrifized tothem, The yeare ended,they the whole bi 
} carryed them forth of the Citry and placed them abeur the walls cach in his prope! ftrong vine 
Lib,3, vault, as Herodorws afirmes. But this pious care of the dead, did farre otherwile common 
Ofthe the than it did cther nations, For they were fo ftudious to pretetve places of th 
4 SAMS the memory of their anceftors, that they embalmed their whele body with arom. grofiely pos | 
ticke oyntments, and fet in tranflucent Vroes, or glaffe Cells in the more vend 
q nent and ionoured part of their houfes, that fo they might have them cayly in thelt odorata, car) ity 
fight, and might be as monuments, and inciters to ftirre them up to imitate their 
thers and Grandfires vertucs, Befides alfo the bodyes thus embalmed with aromatics thing fall o 
& balfamick oyntments were in {teed of a moft {ure pawn, fo that if had folved with 
ncede of agrear{um of money ,they migh’ eafily procure it,of {uch as knew chem Chy micall 
: their neighbours by pawning the bodye of fome of their dead parents. For by this tioned pow 
rh meanes the creditour was certaine, that he which pawned it would fooner loele his Laftly, I 
if: life, than break his promife: Bur if all things fo unhappily fucceeded with aay, that hearbes. i 
| through poverty he could not fetch home bispawre againe, but was forced to of in beiciged i 
| goe it, he was fo infamous amongft all men,during the reft of his life as one banifhed, lime, comng 
or forlorne; and loofing his freedome he fhall become a fervant,yea {corned and For thus 
| viled of all men, he fhould beaccounted unworthy toenjoy the lightand fociery kept along 
. men. And certain¢ly the e#gypsrans underftanding the life, which we heere lead, be not pur i 


to beof fhort continuance, comparifon being made with that which wee are to live Why the des 


aiter 


j 
} 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
] 
\ 
| 
| 
| 
4 
{ 


L IB, 28. 


care that you 
arts and Mem- 
F Or he mcri. 
ed and made jn 
which hath kil. 
dy. For Mofes 
but the other 
aprefident. 
whom I found 
ftiuxe ot blood 
er navillonthe 
therein; whence 
ale childe, pcr. 
lercing throuceh 
De the death of 


precedent trea- 
ch was, to bring 
is cnd, and even 
biturgion might 
d. Verily there § 
ly beene carefuli a 
‘ad budy<s, For 
barovineflé, and 
imsbury not the 
lof beaten Cy- 
awrappedincear- 
piams;forhaving 
, they plaiftered 
m with colours 
in a hollow pillar 
{petarorswith 
ds of their 
eareended,they 
ach in his proper 
rreotherwilc 
dious to preterve 
dy with aroma. | 
inthemoreemi- 
mdayly inther 
imitate theirfa- @ 
with aromatick 
nyeLgyptian had 
as knew them & 
‘nts. For by this 
fooner loete his 
with any ,fo chat 
as forced to for- 
as one banifhed, 
fcorned and r¢- 
Hhrand fociery of 
we heere !cad, 


h wee are tolive 
after 


balme the Dead. 


after the feparation of rhe foule from the body ,theywere more negligent in building 
their houfes they dwelt in, but in raring the pyramides which fhould ferve them in 
fteed of fepulchers they were fo beyond reafon fumpeuous and magnificent,ehat for 
rhe building ofone of thefe edifices fo renowned over all the world, which King 
cheopes begun, a hundred thouland men were every 3 moneths, for twenty yeeres 
fpace there kept at worke: itwasfivefurlongs, and being {quare, each fide was 
800. foot long, and fo much in height. Almoft all the pecces of marble went to the 
building thereof, were thirty foote long, engravemand carved with various worke- 
man{hip, as Heredotus reports, But before the bodyes were commitred to thefe mag- 
nificest Sepulchers,they were carryed tothe Salters and Embalmers, who for thar 
purpofe kad allowanceoutof the publicke Rocke. Thefe befmeared them with 
Aromaticke, and balfamicke oyntments,and fowed up the incifions they made,then 
itrewed them overs with falt,and then covered them with brine, for 7o. dayes, 
which being expired,they wafhed them, being taken thence, and all the filth being 
taken off,they wrapped them in Corton cloathes, glewed together with a certaine 
oumme; then their kinfemen placed them thus ordered ina woodea Coffinne carved 
liketoaman. This was the facred aad accultemed riteof embalming and burying 
dead bodyes amongft the eZgyptéans which were of the richer fort. Our Countric- 
men the French ftirred up with the like defire, embalme che budyes of their Kings 


and Nobles, with {picesand iweete oyntments, VVhich cuftome they may feeme. 


pioully and chriftianly to have taken from the Old and New Teitament, and the an- 
cient and laudible cuftome ofthe Iewes; for you may readeinthe New Teltamenc 
that Jofeys boughra tine linnen cloath, and Nicodemus brought a mixture of myrrhe 
and Alves about 100. pound weight, thatthey might embalme and bury the body 
of Jefus Chrift our Saviour, for a figne andargument of the renovation and futere ia- 
tegrity which they hoped for by the refurreQionof the dead. Which thing rhe 
Lewes had received by tradition from their anceftors. For /ofepb in the old Tefta- 
ment commaunded his Phyfitions, they fhould embalme the dead body of his fa- 
ther with {pices. 

But the body which is to be embalmed with {pices for very long continuance, mutt 
firft ofall beembowelled, keeping the heart apart, thatit may bee embalused and 
keptas the kinsfolkes thallthinke ft. Alfothe braine, thefcull being divided with 
afaw, thal] beraken out. Thenthall you make deepe iacifions along the armes, 
thighes, legecs, backe, loynes and burtockes, efpeciilly where the greater Veines 
and Arteries runne, firft that by this meanes the blood may be prefled forth, which 
otherwife would purrifie and give occafionand beginning to putrefaction to the 
reft of the body; and thenthat there may be {pace to put inthe aromaticke powders, 
the whole body fhallbe wafhed over witha fpunge dipped in Agua vite, and 
{trong vinegar, wherein fhall be boyled wormewood, aloes, coloquintica, 
common falc and Alume. Then thefe incifions, andallthe paflages and open 
places ofthe body , arid the three bellyes fhall be flufled withthe following {pices 
groffely powdered. pul.rofar.chamam, melil, balfami, menthe, aneilit, fatvia, 
vend.vorifmar majoran.thymt, abfinthy cypers, calawmi aromat. gentiane,ireos flovent af] 
odorata, caryophy ll. nucis mof chat. cimamonifiyracis calamite, benjoini, myrrbe, aloes fan- 
tal.omuiam Let the incifions be fowed up and the open {paces thacno- 
thing fall out; then forthwith let the whole body beanointed with Turpentine dif- 
folved with oyle ofrofesand Chamomile, adding if youthall thinkeit fr, fome 
Chymicall oyles of {pices, and then ket it be againe firewed overwith the Loremen- 
tioned powder; then wrap it in 2 linnen cloath,and then inceare-cloathes. 

Laftly, let it be put in a Coffinof Lead, fure foudred and filled up with dry fweerte 
hearbes. But if there be po plenty of the forementioned {pices,as it ufuall happens 
in befeiged townes, the Chirurgion flaall be contented with the powder of queached 
lime, common alhes made of Oake wood. 

For thus the body being over and above wafhed in ftrong vinegar, or Lie, {hall be 
kept along time, if fo be chat a great and diffolving heate doe not beare tway ,or if it 
be not pur ina hot and moyft place, And this condition of time and place ts the caule 
Why the dead bodyes of Princesand Kings, though with Argand coft, 


The reafon of 
buiiding the 
ramides, 


fohn 19,393 


Gen Sooz. 


The manner 
of embalmin 
for the long 

comtinuance. 


How to em= 
balme bodyes 
when as we 
want ipices, 


Why the bos 
dves of Our 
Princes, how 
wellfoever 
emba'med, 
corrupt 


withia fey 


* 
J 
| 
L 
| 
~ 
| 
4 


within the {pace of fixeor feavendayes, io whichthey atekept tobee fhewedtg 
the people aftertheir embalming doe caft ferth fo greevous afenc, that none Can 
endure it, fothat they are foreed to be putina leaden Cothinne, For the ayre which 
encompafleth them groweth {0 hot by reafon of the multitude of people flowing to 
the {peAacle, and the burning of lights night and day, that the {mall portion of th. 
native heate which remaineth being diffipated, they eafily putrefic, efpecially Whey 
as they are not firft moyftened & macerated in the liquor of aromraticke things,as th. 
gyptians ancicotly ufed to doe, ftceping them in brine for 70 dayes,as I tormerly 
told you out of Heredosm, I putin minde hereby, ufe, that fothe embalming 

become the more dureable, to ftecpe the bodyes (being embowelled, and pricked 
all over with fharpe bedkinnes, that fothe liquor hindring putrefaGtion may pene. 
trate the deeper into them) in a woodden tubbe filled with firopg vinegar of the de. 
cofion of arematicke and bitter things,as Aloes, Rue, Wormewood, and Colo. 
quintidas and there keepe them fortwenty daycs, pouring thereinto eleven o, 
twelve pints of Aqua vste, Then taking it forth, and fecting ic on the fecte,] keene jp 
in a cleare and dry place. 1 have athome the body of ope that was hanged, which} 
begged of the Shriffe,embalmed after this mannet,which remaines found tor more 
than25 yecres, fothat youmay tellailehe mufcles ofthe right fide (which I haye 
cut up eveatotheir heads,and plucked them from thofe that are next them for diftin. 


ctions fake, that fo may view them with my cyes, and handle them with my 


hauds as often as I pleafe, that by renuing my memory | may worke more certaine| 


remaines whole, andthe Lungs,Heart, Dsaphragma, ftomacke, {pleenc, kidneyes, 


and furely, when as I have any more curious operation te be performed) the left fide 


beard, haires, yea and the nailes,which being pared, I have often obfervedto grow 
againe to their former bignefic, 

And Iet this be the bound of this our immenfe labour, andby God? favour our 
reft;to whom Almighty ,all-powerfull, immortall and invifible, be afcribed all bo- 


nour and glory forever,andever, Amen. 


Labor tmprobus omnia vineit: 


Theend of the Treatife of reports, and 
embalming the dead. 


partem/. 


Cupiens 


Nam fi acu 
mC 
LO 
ante tran{vé 
Cor am Apome: 
lacer at, 
rant dolor 

evaferit, | 
eft, max 
gantly accr@ 
Tizing of 
Praifed anc 
teach us wi 
againft che ¢ 
fed, thacth 


1B.29 
J 
ha 
ct 
| 
| 
~ 
~ 
4 
4 
i q 
4 
i 4 
| 
2 
a RAL 
i€ 
{ 
j 
i 
& 
‘ 4 


L 
fhewedtg 
hat none Can 
mhe ayrewh ich 
le flowing to 
POrtiOn Of the 
pecially When 
things. as the 


may pene. 
Hear Of the de. 
G, and Colo- 
Oto cleven or 
keepe je 
inged, which 
ound tor more 
(which I have 
hem for diftin. 
hem with my 
Ore Certaine! 


‘NC, kidneyes, 
crvedto crow 


favour our 
{cribed all ho- 


d) the left fide. 


AND TREATISE, 


NING THE VOYAGES 
MADE INTO DIVERS PLACES. 
BY 
Amsross Pare of 
and cheefe Chirurgion to the King. 


Tue Booke. 


— 


Ruely I had not pur my handtoethe penne, tO write ON o¢whathe 
{uch a thing, were it not that fome have impudently in- Adverfaryacs 
jured, taxed, and mere through particular hatred, dif- 
Hi graced me, than for zeale or lovethey beare tothe pub- 

licke good; which was,concerning my taanner of tying 
the Veines and Arteries,writing thus as followech. 

Male igitur & niminm arroganter inconfultus ¢y teme- The wordsok 
varius quidam, vaforwim uftionems poft membri rem 
fectionem a veteribus omnibus plarimum commendstam 
femper probatam damnare aufuseh, novum quendarm desr. 
gandi modum,contra Veteres omnes medicos fine rationc, cxperiembia \udicz0 aecere 
cupiens nec animadvertit majora multe perisuls ex vaforum delicatione quam acts 
partemfanam profuuade tran{figende adminiflrari vult, immincre quam ex ipfauftione. 
Nam fi acu aervofam aliquam partems, vel nervum ipfum pupucerit, dum ita nove cy 
inufitats modo venam abjurde comatur confringere, nova inflammatio conjeque- 
qua Conwulfio 4 convulfionecita mors, Quorum [ymptomatum metu Galenus non 
ante tran{verfa vulnera (were audebat (quod tamen minus erat periculofam) quam mafcs: 
loram aponeurofes denudaffet, Adde quod forcspes quibms poft fect ionem shernmcarnem 
lacerat, cum retracla orsginem vafa fe poffe extrahere fomniat, nen minorem adfe- 
rant dolorem quam ionita fcrvamente aameta, Quod fi quis lantatum expertus incolnmis 
évaferit, is Deo optimso maximo cuius Bene ficentia crudelrtate ifta car nificima liberatus 
Cf, maximas gratias habere Semper agere debetswhichis thus: li then ,and too arre- 
gantly acertaine indifcreet and rafh perfon would blame and condemmne the caute- 
tizing of veflelisafterthe amputation of arotten and corrupted member, mucky 
Praifed and commended and alwayes approved by the Ancients;ticfiring to thew and 
teach us without reafon, judgement, andexperience, anew way totye the vellells, 
againft che opinion of the Ancient Phyfitions, taking noheede,nor being well advi- 
{¢d, thac there happens farre greater perills,and accidents, through this acw way of 
Cecce 3 


L133 
| 

I, and Pricked 

= 


eA n eApolopie or Treatife, L 29. 


tying the veffells (which he will havetobe made with a needle, piercing deepely the 
{ound part) than by the burning and nftion of the fayd veffells; for ifthe need|¢ thal} 
pricke any nervous part, yea the nerve it {elfe, when he fhall by this aew and yn. 
cuftomed way abfurdly conftraine the veine by binding it, there muft neceflarily 
follow a new inflammation; from an inflammation aconvulfion, froma cONnvulfic 
death: for feare of which accidents, Ga/enneverdurft ftitch cranfyerfall Wounds 
(which notwithftanding were dangerous) before he bad difcoveredthe 
neurofes of the mufcles. Moreover the pincers with which after the fe@tion, the fh 
is againe dilacerated, while he thinkes to draw the veflells our which ate draw ne jg 
toward their originall, bring no leffe paine than the cautering irons doe, And if a, 
one having experimented this new manner of cruclty have efcaped danger, he Ousht 
to render thankes co almighty God forcver,through whofe geodnefle he hath beens 
freed from fuch cyrannie, feeling rather his execugoner than his methodical] 
rurgion. 
The Authors 6 what fweete words are heere for one, who isfayd to be a wile and learned Do. 
anfweree be remembers not thathis white beard admonifheth bim, not to {pcake aay 
thing unworthy of hisage, and that he ought co put offand drive out of him allen. 
vie and rancor conceived againft his neighbour. So now 1 will proove by authority 
reafon and experience,that the fayd Veinesand Arteryes ought tobe tyed. 


Autherities. 
Inthe booke A? for Authorities, I will come tothat of that worthy man Hippocrates, who 
of Fiftulaes of wilsand com mands the cure of Filtula’s in the fundamentc by ligature well ro 
inthe 3 chap, CON{ume the callotiry, as toavoyd hemorragie. 
Galen in his method, {peaking ofa fiuxe of blood made by an outward caule, of 
>. Freatite Whom {ce heere the words, Icis (faithhe) moft {ure to tye the roote of the veffell , 
"A which I underftand te be that which is moft neere to the Liver,or the heart, 
Vices commands totye the veine and the Arterie,after it is difCovered towards 
his original. 
Guido of Canliae, {peaking of the wounds of the Veines and Arteries, injoynethi che 
Chirurgion to make rhe ligature inthe veffell. 
Inthe book Matter Aodier {peaking of afluxe of blood, commands expreffely, to tyethe 
chap.4. of the veficlls, 


tf Chi- . + 
pas ig Calmetheus in the chapter of the wounds inthe Veines and Arreries, tells amoft 
Wounds chap. {ure way to ftay a fiuxe of blood, by ligature of the veflell. 


Saithe 6 chap, _ Cédfes from whom the fayd Phyfition hath {natched the moft part of his booke, 


of the 5 book. chargcrh exprefiely, to tye the vetiells in a fluxe of blood happening to wounds, a2 
remedy mott eafic and moft fure, = 
inthe chor “6/aleusinhis Chirurgery, willeth that the veflells be tyed ina fluxe of blood. 


the 3 booke, lobn de Vigo treating of ahemorragie in bleeding wounds, commands totye thé 
Veine, andthe Artery. 


Tagaultins treating of the meanes to ftay a fuxe of blood, commands to pinchtht 

chap. Weime er Artery with a Crow or Parrots bill, then to tye it with avery 

booke. thr ed, 

Intheg treat, Péter of Argihata of Ballonzne,difcourfing of a fluxe of blood, and the meants 

ftoppe it, giveth a fourth way expreffely, whichis made by ligacure of che vel* 
{clis. 

Inthefirt Andreas aCruce, aVenetian, makes mention of amethed, to ftay a fuxe of 

on 3.chap.16, by the ligature of the veffells, 

pases upon Alechamp commauds to tye the Veines, and Arteries. 


ea See then (my little good man)the authorities which command you to tye the vel 
Paul, fells. As forthe reafons, I will debate of them, 


Inthebookr, hemorragie (fay you) is not fo much ro be feared in the feGion of the Call, 
ch.ot Angealo> as that of the Varices, and theincifion of the temporal! Arteries, as after the ampu- 


Cle, Joe 


In tuebooke tation ofamember. Now you your felte command, that in cutting the Variees,(h¢ 


Huxe of blood be flopped by the ligature of the You command 
peaking 


{peaking of 
outwardayrg 
ning the Caf 
Firlt havior 
it 

Jed, when 
anger,and a 
fon from bc 
rize the 
pensa new 
red by God | 
you have nog 
ought nor thm 
Jite hath 
{sit not mor 

whofe auth< 

cureth not,t 

Itisathing 
out ftaying t§ 
conditiens 
fome | 
commended 


that we 
we che 
the 
ang with the® 


Ow fo; 
paine if 
vulfion,Feaval 
wards befo: | 
there is mac: 
Nature 
alio the bor 
partthere re] 
It happenet! 
mewed, the 
ed,the ligart 
which is 
Or ef{char,w 
bit requires. 
which are {ci 
how mucht 
me when ic! 
the Hux of b 
itthus ? In § 
Therefore, & 
commande: 
Oncly to 
Rous putrifay 
noted, that 
your booke 
hor would | 
flux of bloc 
fuccefie, 


* 
4 
| q 
q 
e a 
a 4 
7, 
bs 
i 
4 
a 
7 
‘ 
: 
a” 
4, 
i 
f 
| 


L B. 2 9- 
ig de=pely the 
nerdle thal} 
unac. 
noceflari}, 
a cNvulfion 
rfal] Wounds, 

the Apo. 
the fief) 
trawne ip 
¢, And if any 

Set, ought 
‘Behath beene 
ocical] Chi- 


Mearned Do- 
Ipncake any 
Of him allen. 
Byauthority, 
ved. 


who 
(Ufe.aswellro 
Vaid caufe, of 
ofthe veffell , 

vere! towarde 


yneth the 


tye the 


amoft 


sis booke, 
unds, asa 


nds to tye che 


s ty pinch the 
avery tirong 


meanes 
ure >f che vel* 


fia: a fluxe of 


ae) tye the vel- 


of che Call, 
cer rhe ampu- 
he’ .riees,the 
and the fame, 

{peaking 


containing divers voyages. 


{peaking of the ftirch, with the amputation and fe@ion of the Call, changed by the 
outwardayre, fee hecre your owne words: Afrerthat muft bee confidered concer- 
ning the Call: forifthere beany partcorrupted, putrified, withered, or blackith, 
Firlt having tyed, for fearc ofa tluxe efblood, you doe not bid afterward to have 
it cauterizeds butto fay thetruth, youhave your eyes {hut, and all your fenfes dul- 
Jed, when you would ipeakeagainft furc a method, and thar iris got but through 
anger,and an iliwill, Forthere is nothing which hath more power to drive r¢a- 
{on from her feate, thancholer andanger. Moreover when one comes to caute> 
rize thedif{membred parts, oftentimes when the efcar comes to fall off, there hap- 
pens a new flux of blood: As] have feene divers times, nor having yet iafpi- 


red by God, with fo fure ameanes then, when I ufed the heate of fire. Which if 


you have not found, or underftood this method in the bookes of the Ancients, you 
ought not thus to tread it under your feete, and ipeake unluckcly of one who all his 
lite hath preferred the prefit ofthe Common-wealth before his owne particular. 
{s itnot more than reafonableto bee founded upon the faying of Hippacrates; upon 
whofe authority you ferve your {elft, which is thus ? That whac the medicament 
cureth not,the doth, and wharthe iron doth not amend, the fire exterminareth. 
It is a thing which favours not of a Chriftian,to fall to burning ac the firtt dath with- 
out ftaying for any more gentle remedies. As you your lelfe write, {peaking of ch 
conditiens required ina Chirurgion tocure well; which pafge you borrow trom 
fome other place for that which may bee cone gently without fire, is much more 
commended than otherwife, [sit nora thing which all {chooles holdas a Maxime. 
that we mutt alwaies begin with mot? calle remedies ,which if they be not fuiticienr, 
we mult chen come to extreame,following the do&trine of Hippocrates? Galen com- 
mands in the place before alledged, to treate or dreffe the dileafed quickly fafely, 
and with the leatt of paine that is poflible. 


Let m come now to Reafor. 


Ow fo itis,that one cannot apply hot irons but with extreame aad vehement 
paine ina fenlible part void of a Gangreene, which would be caufe of a Con- 
vulfion, Feaver, yea oft times of death. Moreover,it would beca leng while after- 
wards beforethe poore patients were cured, becaufe that by the action of the fire 
there is made an efchar, which proceeds from the fubje& fleth, which being fallen, 
Nature muft regenerate a new fiefh “in ftead of that which hath beene burned, as 
allo the bone remaines difcovered and bare, and by this meanes, for the moft 
part there remaines an Vicer incurable, Moreover there is yer another accidenr, 
it happcneththat oftentimes the cruft being fallen off, the ficth not being well re. 
newed, the blood iffucth out as muchas itdidbefore. But when they fhall berty- 
ed,the ligature falls not off untill firft the flefivhave very well covered them againes 
which is prooved by Ga/en,faying ,that efcharoticke medicines which caufea crutft 
or efchar,whenfoever they falloff, leave the part more bare than the natural] ha- 
bitrequires. Fos the generation of a cruft proceeds from the parts fubje@, and 
which are {cituate round about it, being alfo burned, as 1 may {ay : wherefore by 
how much the part is burnt, by fo much it loofeth the natural} heate. Then tell 
me when ic is neceflary to ule ef{charoticke medicines, or cautering irons >? Tis when 
the Hux of bloed is caufed by erotion, or fome Gangreene or putrifaction, Now is 
itthus ? In frefh bleeding weunds there is neither Gangreene nor putrifaction. 
Therefore, the caureries ought not tobe there applyed, And when the Ancients 
commanded to apply hot iroastothe mouthes of the veilells, ic bath not beene 
oncly to ftay the flux of blood, but cheefely to correct the maligaitie, or ganerce- 
hous putrifacticn which might {poile the neighbouring parts. And it muft be here 
noted, thar if I had knowne fuchaccidentsto happen, which you have declared in 
your booke, in drawing and tying the veflells, 1 had never beene twice dectived; 
nor would | ever have lettby my writings to pofteritie, fuch a way of {topping a 
flux of blood: But I writ it after I had it done and did it very often, with happy 


Jn the chaptes 
of burning,2 
booke leate 
Inthe 
booke leate 


Gelenina. 
booke of the ~ 


> Merh.ania in 


the beoke of 
Art et 

Hippo rates 

A phe the 6, 
booke lL. 

In thebooke 
of arte panVa, 


Of whatthe 
e(char Made, 


Inthe book 
of his Meth, 


Words of the 
adveriary ‘ 


liccefle, Scethenwhat may happenthrovgh your inconfiderate countell, with- 


Our 


q «* 
4 
q 
= 


1136 
prepoGtion Ot examining,or ftanding upon the facility of tying the fayd veffells.For fee, here’. 
ofthe Advts your {cope and propolition,to tye the veflells after amputationis a new remed y, fay 
(ary. you ; then ie mutt not be ufed, it is an ill argument for a Doctor. 

But as for that (fay you) one mutt ufe fire after the amputation of member 

to confume,and drie the putrifa@ion, which isacommon thing in Gangreenes, 
mortifications, that indeed hath no place here, becaufe the practile is toampy. 

Inthes,booke tate the part above that which is mortified and corrupted; as Cel/ms writes and com. 
ye mands,to make the amputation upon the found part, rather than to leave any whi, 
cb, 338 of thecorrupted. I would willingly aske you, it when a veine is cuctranfver{e, ang 
that itis very much retracted towards she originall, whether you would make 

confcience to burne till thar yeu had found the orifice of the veine, or artery; ang jf 

ee be not more cafie onely with a Crow bill to pinch and draw the veffell, aud {o tie 
ten booke it? In which you may openly fhew your ignorance, and that you have your min. 
the 2, feifed with much rancor and choler. We daily fee the ligature of the vetiells pragj. 
fed with happy fuccefle ateer the amputation of apart, which I wiilnow verific by 
experiences and hifteries,ofthofe to whom the faid ligature hath becne made, ang 


neA pologte or Treatife. L 18,29, 


perfons yet living, 
Experiences, 
A notable He 16.day of Jene 1582.intheprefence of Mafter John Licbaud doSor inthe 
biftory, faculty of Phy ficke at Pars ,Cland Viard (worne Chirurgion,Matter 


Haron,Chirurgion of Monfieur de Sesvray,and | Charbonel matter Barber 
rurgion of Pars,well underftanding the Theoricke , and Practicke of Chirurgery dig 
with good dexterity amputatethe lefe legge of a woman tormented the {pace of 
three yeares with extreame painc, by reafon of a great Carses which was inthe bone 
Aftragal, Cyboides great and little focsse,and through all the nervous parts,through 
which the feitextreame and inrollerable paines night and day: fhe is called Azary of 
Hoftel, aged 28 ycares, or thereabouts, wife of Peter Herve, Efquire of the Kitchin 
to the Lady Dacbeffe of Fzex, dwelling in the fircete of Verbow onthe other fide 
Sait AZartiz in the fields, dwelling at the fignc of the Saint Jobas head; where the 
= _ layd Charbonell cut off the fayd legge, the breadth of foure large fingers below the 
of charbenell, aCe, and after that he had incifed the flefh, and fawed the bone, hee griped the 
Veine with the Crow bill then the Artery,then tyed them; from whence I prorett 
to God (which the company that were there, can witnefic) that in all the operation 
which was {odainely done, there was not {piltone porrenger of blood; and! bid 
Inthe?,fenz the fayd Charboned -to let it bleed more, following the precept of Hippocrares, that 
bookeot Vis it is good in all wounds and alfo in inveterate vicers, fo letthe blood iunne; by this 
meanes, the part is lefle {ubject to inflammation. The fayd Charboned# continued the 
drefling of her,who was cured intwo moncths, without any fluxe of bluod happes 
ning unto her, or other illaccident; and fhe went tofee youat your lodging being 
perfectly cured. 

Another hiftory of late memory, of a finging man of our Ladyes Church named 
mafter Colt, who broke both the bones of his legge which were crefht in divers 
pecces, iniomauch thatthere wasno hope of cure: to withfand agangreene and 
mortification, and by confequence death. Monfiewr He/in Docter,Regent in the 
culty of Phyficke, a man of honour and of sood knowledge, Claud Viard,and Simon 
Peter, {worne Chirurgions of Paré, men well exercifed in Chirurgery; and Balsie- 
mar of Lefire, and Leonard de Lefchenal, Mafter Barber Chirurgions, well experi- 
mented in the operations of Chirurgery, were allof opiaionto withftand theac- 
doneby View Cidents aforefayd,to make entire amputation of the whole legge, alittle above the 
ard, broken & fhivered bones & the torne nerves, veinesarteries;the operation was 

bly done, by the fayd Pzard, and the blood fiancht by the ligature of the veiielis im 
the prefence of the fayd Helse, and matter Towfard great Vicar of our Lacyes 
Church, and was continually dreft by the fayd Le/chenal,and I went to {ec him othe 
whiles; he washappily cured witheut the applicationef hot irons, and walketh 
lotilyon a woodden legge. 


ery, 


Another 


N the year 
Lisi prefen 
and allthe bo 
Legge Dy rea, 
dy was prepa 
che knec, Dy 
in fuch work< 
application 0! 
ro the King,al 
cure was Vilit< 
tic of Medicin 
Inkeeper,dwe 
to fay, that th 
hands, gave h 
be pray 


A Gangreem 
Prasedvts 
ofthe 
conftrained to 
wand, coatter & 
fence of Matte 
blood was {tani 
and in health, 


Watermag 
named Jot 
the bones of h: 
full and nece til 
which was do! 
dwelt atrhatt 
blood ftancht 

preicnt living 


Merchant} 
named the 
temporall 
with great im 

turne ; [ was 
Viard {worne§ 
needle anc th: 
quickly cured; 
uc who was if 


Sergeaift 


of a {word 


>...» 


4 
a - 
q 
* 


is to ampu. 
and Com. 
Pvc any whir 
infverie, and 
uld make no 
rtcry; and if 
1, aud fo tie 
your mince 
tiells 
verifie by 
made, and 


oor inthe 
darber Chi- 
rurecry.did 
the ipace of 
inthe bone 
rts through 
lled Afary of 
the Kitchin 
cother fide 
where the 
1S below the 
¢ eriped the 
ce I proteft 
he operation 
ds andI bid 
ates, that 
Inne; by this 
oaunued the 
pluod happe- 
dging being 


urch named 
{fhtin divers 
pgreene and 
nt in the fa- 
d.and Simon 
and Baltba- 
well experi- 
ftand theac- 
Be above the 
Bon was pim- 
veilelis in 

our Ladyes 

ec him other 
land walketh 


Ansiher 


> 
reenes, and 


containing divers voyages. 


Another Hiftery, 


N the ycate 1583. the 1o.day of December, T ouffaim Poffow borne at Romieville, at 
this prefent dwelling at Beasvags neare Dourdan, having his Legge all ulcered 

and all the bones cariez d and rotten,prayed me forthe honor of God to cut off his 
Legge by reafonof the great paine which he could no longer endure. After his bo- 
dy was prepared I caufed his legge to be cut off, fowre fingers below the rotwls of 
che knec, by Daniel Powlet one of my fervarts, to teach himand toimbolden him 
infuch workes; andthere he readily tyed the veflells to ftay the bleeding, without 
application ofhotirons, inthe prelenceof dames Guillemean ordinary CRirurgion 
co the King,and John Charbonel matter Barber Chirurgion of Parzs :and during the 
cure was vilited by Mafter Laffz/e and Matter Courtin Doors, Regents in the facul- 
tic of Medicine at Par. The faidoperation was made inthe houle of 
Inkeeper dwelling at the figne of the whire horfe inthe Greve.I will not here fo rece 
ro fay, that the Lady Princeffe of Montpenficr, knowing that he was poore and in my 
hands, gave him money to pay for his chamber and diet.He was well cured, God 
be pray {ed,and isreturned home tohis houfe witha woodden Leg. 


Another flory. 


A Gangreene happened to halfe of the Legee to one named Micholas Afefwager Gangreene 
aged threefcore and fixteenc yeates, dwelling in S. Honorestixect, atthe figne happening By 
ofthe Basket;which happened to him throughan inward caufe, fo that wee were saute. 
conftrained to cut off his Legge to fave his life: and it was taken; off by Authony Re- 
waved, eoatter Barber Chirurgion of Pars the 16.day of December 1533. in the pre- 
fence of Matter Le Fort,and Mafter Le Note {worne Chirurgions of Parés; andthe 
blood was ftanched by the Ligature of the veffells,and hee is at this prefent cured 

and in health,walking with a woodden Leg. 


Another Hiftory. 


atthe Port of Nese, dwelling neare Monfienr deMa,Poftmafter, 

named Jobs Bouffereas, in whofe hands a Musket brake afunder, which broke 

the bones of hishead, and rent and tore the other parts in fuch fort that it was need- 

full and neceffary to make amputation of the hand two fingers above the wrif; 

which was done by James Guillemean then Chirurgionin ordinary to the king, who Operation 
dwelt atrhattimewithme. The operatienlikewiie being redily. done, and the 
blood ftancht by the Ligature of the veffells without burning irons: hee is atthis 


oreient living. 
Another Hiftory. 


A Merchane Grocer dwelling in S',Den# treet at the figne of the great Towrwogs Operation 
named the Judge, who fell upon his head, where was made a wound neare the oa ta 
temporall mufcle, where he hadan artery opened, from whence iffued forth blood 
with great impetuolity, info much that common remedies would not ferve the 
turne; Iwas called thither, where I found Mafter Ra/fe, Matter Cozareret /Matter 
Viard,{worne Chirurgions of Paris,to ftay the blood; where prefently I tookca: 
needleand thread, and eyed the arteric, and it bled no more after that, and was 
quickly cured. Mafter Rom/felet can witnefie it, not long Deacon of your Facul- 


uc who was in the cure with us, 


Ancther Hiftory. 


Sergeait of the Chaftlet dwelling neare S. Andrew des Arts,who had a ftroake Another 


of a {word upon the throate in the Clackes medow, which cur afuncer the - 
gular 


operation, 


> 
B 
| 
q 
4 
ig 


y gular veineexterne,4s foone as he was hurt he put his handkercher upon the woung 
and came tolooke mee at my houfe,and when hee tooke away his handkercher ¢};- 
blood leaped out with great impetuofity :1 fuddainly tyed the veine toward the 
roote: he by this meanes was ftanched and cured thankes be to God. And if One 
had followed your manner of ftanching blood by cauteries, I leave it to be fuppofed 
whether he had beene cured; I thinke hee had beene dead inthe hands of the Opes 
rator. If I would recite all thofe whofe veflells were tyed to flay the blood which 
havebeenecured, I fhould not have ended thislongtime; fothat me thinkes ther. 


are Hiftories enough recited to make you beleeve the blood of veines and arterics 
is furely ftanched without applying any actuall cauterics. 


Dv Barrys. 


He that doth firive againft experience, 
Daignes not totalkeof any learned fcience, 


Ow my little Mafter, fecing that you reproach me,that I have not written 3 

che operations of Chirurgery in my workes which the Ancients writ of, | 
Chan {ould be very forry for it : for then indeede might you juftly call me Carnifex, | 
bookez.cnap. have left them becaufe they are toocruell,and am willing to tollow the modeincs. 
-pooke who have moderated {uch cruelty : which notwithftanding you have followed ftep 


9 lection Fe 
by flep, as appeareth by the operations here written, extracted from your boo} e, 
which you have drawne here and there from certaine ancicat Authors,fuch as fy). 
low ; and fuch as you have never practifed nor iecae, 

The firfi operation, 

In the 2.booke O inveterate fluxions of the eyes,& Migrimes, Paulus gineta as allo 

ofthechap.of J commandto make Arteriotomie, {ec here the words of the fame Azesmete, You 


booke vt ch. Marke the Arteries which are behind theeares, then divide them in cutting to the 


nitetthe very bone,and make a great incifion the breadth oftwo fingers; which is the willl. 


Inthe 4.chap, {0 of Aetius thatthe incifion be made tranverfe, cutting orincifing the length of 


sr at two fingers, even ti'l charthe Artery be found, as you command to bee done in 
worke, your booke ; but I holding the opinionof Gases, who commands to drefle the di. 


Booke 6 chap» feafed quickly, fafely and with the leaft paine that is poffible, 1 teach the young 


7,Booke > 
chaps. Chirurgionthe meanestoremedy fuch evills in opening tbe Arteries behind the 
cares, and thoic of the Temples, with one oncly incifion, asa letting blood, and nat 
to make a great incilion and cut out worke for a long time. 
The fecomd operation. 
T O fluxions which are madealong time uponthe eyes, Paw! and Albuss- 
fiscommand to make incifion which they call or Augiolegie of the 


chap.of Peri. Greekes;and fee heere the words of Paw/,Inthis operation firft the head is {haved, 


taking heede of touching the temporal! mufcles, a tran{verfe incifion bee 
made,beginning at the left Temple and finifhing at the right, which you have put 
in your booke word for word, without changing any thing; which fheweth open- 
ly youare aright wound-maker;as may be {cene in the Chapter which youcalithe 
en Crownecut, which is made halfe round under the Coronal! future from one tem- 


of the 9, book ple to the another even to the bone. Now I doe notteach fuch acrucll kind of reme- 
of myworkese dy, but infiruct the operator by reafon, authority and notable proofe of afureand 
certaine Way to remedy fuchaffeGions without butchering men in this kind. 
The third. 


Book 6,chap. N the cure of the Empyems, Paul Albucafisand Celfus commanded to 


4¢-bookez, BM apply fome 13.0thers 15. Cauteries to give iflue to che matter contained in che 
z.chap.2z, the faid Cel/ws in the aforefaid place appointeth for Afthmatick peoples 


which 


29 
is a thi 
fince the Chig 


is no Other qu 


ferior part, | 
out to? mMecnilp 


N Paps that 
incifiod, tc 
briefe it isto 
done by tacy 


Lbucrajis 
irons, wi 
ly repugnant 


N the Parac 

us Aureltanus 
applics mine aq 
Stomacke, 
the {pondills, 
is likewile of 
commands to 
fuch akind of | 
ther kiad of p 
belly,as may 6 
in my workes 
is notin pract™ 


N the Sciati 

mors difplac 
the bone : Dz. 
king indicaria 
the place of ¢! 
from the holy 
happen, as 
der called 


[N the outw: 

right upen a 
Ving raifed th 
rope in a pull; 
which 
Siving the ft 
reduce them | 
low the fayin 
in the difeafe 
lowes, puttit 


¢ 
| 
| 
] 
a 
a 
a 
4 
‘ a 
q 
é q 
4 


written aj] 
ms Writ of, J 
Carnifex, | 
> mMOderncs, 
lowed 
your booke, 
luch as fol. 


inthe, You 
utting to the 
s the will al. 
ic length of 
moce done in 
Birefle the di- 
ch the young 
m behind the 
00d, and net 


and Albuca- 
zolegze of the 
mad is {haved, 
ion mutt bee 
ou have put 
cweth open- 
1 YOu calithe 
m ope teni- 
ind of reme- 
of afureand 
kind, 


nmanded to 
Bained in che 


— 


Lis. 296 


which is a thing out of all reafon (with refpe@ to their honour be it {poken) thar 
fince the Chiturgions {cope is to give iffue tothe matter therein contained ,there 
is no other queftion thanto make apertion, to evacuate the matter in the moft in- 


ferior part, 1 have thewedthe young Chirurgion the meanes to doe it fately, with - 
out rormenting the patients for nothing. ? 


containing divers 


The fourth. 


Paps that aretoo and Albacrafis commandsto make a croffe 


lsac che 2;treaa 


incifion, to take eut all the far, and then joyne together the wound by fitch: Jn tile. Doda. 
briefe,itis to fleaamanalive, which I have never practifed, nor counfell it to bee 2! 
done by the young Chirurgion. 
chap 4.5,bcok 
2, chav.47,. 


T he fifth, 


A Lhucrafis and will cauterize the Liver and the Spleene with hor Inthe firt 
irons,which the modernes have never practifed, for indeede reafon is manifett- 
ly repugnant thereunto. 


in booke 2, 
thap.3 2. 


47 
Inthe ,book 
chap :,De 


[N the Paracentefis which is made in the third kind of Dropfie called Afcites Celi. interne: mers 
us Aurelianus commandeth divers apertions to be in the belly, le 

appliesmine actual] cauteries, that is to fay ,foure about the Navell, one upon the 

Stomacke, one upon the Spleene, one upon the Liver, two behind the backe upon cae 

the fpondills, ome of them neare the breaft, the laft neare the Stomacke. inthe 3.book 

is likewile of the fame epinion,to open the belly with divers cauteries. Pau/eL¢inet rere: 

commands to apply five actual cauteries to make the [aid Paracentefis. But abhorring 

{uch a kind of burning of which you {peake much in your third booke, I thew anoe 

ther kind of practife, the whichis done in making afimple incifion in the fayd 

belly,as may be {cence in my werkes, with happy fucceffe,I doe not teach yong men 

in my workes the manner of burning, which the Ancients have called 


isnot in practife though Cel/ws writeth of it. 


The Sixth, 


The Seawenth, 

[N the Sciaticke proceeding from an internall caufe, and becaufe the vifcous hu- 450) 

mors difplace the bones, Pau/commandsto burne or cauterize the {aid joynt to <bap.zs.book 
the bone : Déa/corides commands the fame, Which I doc not finde expedient, ta- 
king indicarion from the fubjacent parts forthere where ene would burne, tis in the 
the place of the foure twin mufcles,under which paffeth the great Nerve defcending 
from the holy bone; which"being burnt, I leave it to your cenfiire what mighe etthe book 
happen, as Galew remarketh {peaking of the which be made ia the fhoul- 


der called Aurwerus. 


The Eighth. 


N the outward Laxation ofthe Spondills Hippocrates commands to bind the man sentence the 

right upon a Ladder,the Armesand Legges tyed and bound : then afterwards ha- 
ving raifed the Ladder tothe top ofatower, ortheridgeof anhoufe, with a great of the booke 
ropein a pully, then to let the patient fall plumbe downe upon che hard pavement; 
which Héppecrates {ayes was done in histime, But ldoenot fhew any fuch way of ene ss,booke. 
giving the ftrapadoto men, but I fhew the Chirurgion in my workes, the way to 
reduce them furely, and without great paine. Moreover I fhould be forry to fol- 
low the faying of che fayd Héppocrates,in che third booke De morte, who commands 
in the difeafe called Volvmlusto caufe the belly to bee blowne with a paire of Bel- 
lowes, putting the nofell of them into the sas? imum recinm, and then blow _ 

tl 


the wound 
dkercher the 
the 
And if one 
be luppofed 
theope. 
hinkes there 
and artcrics 
why ch : 
4 
\ 


1140 


eAneA pologie or Treatife, L 1B.29, 


A faire fimi- 


till rhe belly be much ftretcht, afterwards to give an emollient glifter, and to flop 
the fundament with afponge. Such praGifeas this 1s not made nowa dayes,there. 
fore wonder not if I have not fpoken of it. And younot being contented to atch 
together the operations of the above faid Authors you have alfo taken divers in my 
workes,as every man may know : which fheweth manifeftly that there is hothing o 

your owne in your Chirurgions Guide, I leave out divers other unprofitable Opera. 
tions which you quote in your beoke, without knowing what beafts they are, in nea 
ver having feene tiem practifed; but becaufe you have found them written in the 
bookes of the Ancients,you have put them into your booke, 

Moreover you fay that you will reach me my leflon in the operations of Chjry>. 
gery, which I thinke youcannot doe: becaufe I have not onely learned them in p 
Study, and by the hearing for many yeares the lcflonsof DoGors of Phyficke. but 
as I have fayd before in my Epiftle to the Reader, I was refident the {pace of three 
ycares in the Hofpitall of Pars, where | hadthe meanes to fee and learne divers 
workes of Chirurgery, upon divers difcafes,together withthe Anatomy, vpon a 
preat number of dead bodies, as oftentimes I have fuficiently made tria!! publickly 
in the Phy fitions{choole at Pars, and my good lucke bath made mee feene much 
more. For being called to the fervice of the Kings of France ( foure of which | 
have ferved) have beene in company at Barrells, Skirmithes, affaults, and beleig. 
ing of Cirties and Fortrefles; as alio beene fhut upin Cities with thole pha 
have beene befeiged having charge to drefle thofe that were hurt. Alio [ have 
dwelt many yeares in this great and famous Citty of Paré, whicre,thankes bee to 
God, I have livedin very good reputation amongft all men, and have not beene 
efteemed the Icaft in rancke of men of my profeifion, teeing there was not any cure, 
were it never fo difficult and great, where my hand and my counfeil have not beens 
rc quired, as I make it appeare in thismy worke. Now dare you (thele things being 
underftood) fay you will teach mee to performe the workes of Chirurgery, fince 
_ you never went further than your ftudy ? The operations of the fame are foure in 

gencrall (as we have declared heretofore) where you make but three, that isto fay, 
joyne that which is feparated ,feparate that which was conjoyned,and to take away 
that whichis fuperfluous, andthe fourth which I make,is as much neceflary as in- 
duftrious invention, to addero Nature that which is wanting, as I have {hewed 
hecre above. Alfo itis your willthat the Chirurgion make bur the three operati- 
ons above fayd without medling to ordaine a fimple Cataplafine, faying it is chat 
which comes to your part belonging tothe Phy fition: And that che Ancients (in the 
diicourfe which you have made to the Reader) have divided the praife of Phytick 
intothreekinds, that isto fay,Diet,Medicine,and Chirurgery, But! would wil. 
lingly demand of you,who hath made the partition, and where any thing fhould be 
done, who are thofe which are content with their part, without any enterprize 
uponthe other? For Aippocrates, Galen, -£tius,Avicen, inbricfe, all che Phifit- 
ons, aswell Greekes and Latins as Arabians, have never fo treated of the one, that 
they have not created of the other, forthe great affinigie and tye that there is be 
tweenethemtwo, and it fhould bee very difficult to doe otherwife. Now when 
you will vilifie Chirurgery fomuch, you {peake againft your felfe, for in your 
Epiftle which you have dedicated to Monfieur of Adartienes,you fay, that Chirur- 
gery is the moft noble part of Phyficke, as well by reafon of the original/;antiquity, 
neceflity , ascertainty inher actions; for (hee workes Lace aperta, astearnedly wii- 
teth Cell inthe beginning of his feaventh booke;theretore it isto be beleeved you 
res went out of your fludy, buttoteachthe Theorick (if you have beene able co 

O¢ it.) 
The operations of Chirurgery arc learn’t by the eye,& by the rouch.I will fay that 
you muchrefemble a young Lad of Low Britanyot plump buttocks, where was ufte 
fufhicient;who demanded leave of his father to come toParis,to take France,being 2! 
rived the Organift of our Ladys Church met with him at the'Pallace gate,wtio wok 
him to blow the Organs, where hee was remaining three yeeres : hee faw hee could 
fomewhat {peake French, he returnes to his father, and ‘told him that he {pake good 


French, and morcover he knew well, to play on the Organs: his farher receivec him 
very 


_theydoe, Mo 


Being entred ta 
malter Organitt 
fweares,Let hin 
gothing but pla 
chingelfe, bur t 
gans found (cha 
cannot ip any 
as Ihave fayd by 
chat the laboure 
ner of tilling the 
thing if he pur n 
wile iS if No gre 
Chirurgery welf 
well remarkedir 

rari: qua 
taram, quam 
cured by cloqu 
difereete man #! 
fhall become rh 
with oratory; t! 
which is thus: 


To talke's 
But werk 
Aptly to. 
And guide 


Ariftotle inthe 
is almoft like un 
And indeed we 
they intend, cha 
experience Is 
trary isa know! 
healeable than 
more wife and 


france, 

Aiciat a Dok 
and mere farao' 
it was by his {c! 
ted by a Counfi 


Qnd ready to cut 
thar : 


F wngtod 


Reaaer ¢ 


_ See younow 
if you bearea gt 
as foone as you 
ding of che fam 

Members, ro 
ad more (ure: 


— 
very ) y Vs 
went the Or 
4 
j 
4 
q 
- 
q 
| 
a \ 
a 
a 
= 
| 
a } 
a 


1B,2 9. 


ted CO Patch 
divers in my 
is Nothing o¢ 
ta ble Opera. 
CY areyin neo 
ritten in the 


of Chirpr. 
, them 10 my 
vicke: bur 
pace of three 
Larne Givers 
‘MY, Lpona 
publickly 
leche much 
of which 
and beleig. 
Bh thole char 
Ihave 
ankes bee to 
‘hot beene 
otany cure, 

C not beene 
things being 
rgery, fince 
are foure in 
hat ts to fay, 
O take away 
efiary as in- 
ave fhewed 
opcrati- 
ig it is that 
ients (in the 
e of Phyfick 
would wil- 

fhowld be 

y enterprize 
the Phifiti- 
cone, that 
there 1s bes 
Now when 
for im your 
bat Chirur- 
ljsantiquity, 
arnedly wri- 
eleeved you 
ene able to 


will fay that 
mrewas {tufte 
pce. being ar- 
te,who took 
v hee could 

fpake good 
received him 
very 


day there. 


concerning 


very joyfully, forthat hee wasfo wife and learned ‘info fhort atime. Hee 
went to the Organilt of their great Church, and prayed him to permic his fenne to 

lay on che Organs, to the end he might know whether his fonne was become fo 
skilfull amafter, as he fayd he was; which the Organift agreed to very willingly. 
Being entred to the Organs, he caft himfelfe with a fullleape tothe bellowes, the 
matter Organ ift bid bim play, and that he would blow; thenthispoed mafter an- 
{weares,Let him play himfelfe on the Organs if he would forhim, hee could doe 
nothing but play on the bellowes, I thinke alfo my little mafter, that you kaow no- 
thing elfe, bur to prattle in a chaire;but I will play upon the keyes,aod make the Or- 
gens found (chat is to fay) | will doethe operations of Chirurgery, that which you 


9 cannot in any wife doe, becaufe you have not gone from your ftudy or the {chovles, 


as [have fayd before. But alfo,as I have fayd already inthe Epiltlero the Reader, 
that the labourer doth little profit by talking ofthe {eafons, difcourf: of the man- 
ner Of tilling the carth,to what {eedes are properte cach foyle; al! which isno- 
thing if he put not his hand toche Plough, andcouple the Oxen together. So likes 
wife 1s If NO great matter if you doc not know the Pradticke,foraman may execute 
Chirurgery well,alchough he have notongue atall, As Cornelsws Celfs hath very 
wellremarkedin his Gooke when he faith, Aforbos wom eloquenita, fed remeags cu- 
rari: qua [iquss elinguss , atfcretus bene norit ,bunc Bliquante majorem medicum 
teram, quam fi fine afu linguam excolaerit; that isto fay; Diicaies are notto bee 
cured by eloquence, but by remedics well and duely appiyed, which if any wife and 
difcreete man though he have uo tongue know well the ufe thereof, this man in time 
fhall become the greater Phyfition, than if without praG@ife his tongue were dips 


with oratory; the which you your felfe confefle in your fayd booke by a Perrafticke 
which is thus ; 


To talke’s not al in Chirargions Ars, 
But workine with the bands. 

Aptly to dve(fe each greeved part, 
And guide, pre, knife and bands, 


Ariflotieinthe firtt booke of fis Metaphy ficks the firft chapter faith, Experience 


salmoft likeuntefcience, and by the fame, Art and {cience have beene invented, 
7) Andindeed we {ee thefe which are experimented, attaine fooner to that which 
| they incend,cthan thofe which have reafon and not experience, becaufe thatthe fayd 
| experience is a kaowledge of fingular and particular things, and {cience on the cone 
trary isa knowledge of things univerfall, Now that whichis particular is more 
healeable than that which is univerfall, therefore thofe which have expersence are 
"4 morewife and more efteemed, than thofe which want it, by reafon they know what 
theydoe, Moreover | fay,;thatfcience without experience, bringeth no great afiu- 


rance, 
Alciat 2 Do&or of Adilan, boafted one day of himfelfe; that his glory was greater 


and more famousthan chat of Counfellors, Pre fidemts,mafters of Requeft:becauie that 
it was by his {cience, and his inftructions that they became fuch:but he was aniweta- 
ted by a Counfellor, rbat he was like unto a whet{tone, which made the knife fharpe 
and ready to cut, not being able foto docitfelfe, and alledged the veries of Horace 


that : 


Fungebatar vice cots, 
Reddere qua ferrwm valet exors fecarnal, 


See younow (my little mafter) my anfwers to your calummniations, anid pray you, 
ifyou bearea good minde(to the publicke good) to review andcorrect your booke, 
as foone as you can, and norto hold young Chirurgion in this crrour by che reas 
ding of che fame, where you teach them reufe hot ironsafter the amputation of 


J members, to ftay a fluxe of blood, feeing there is another meanes,and not fo crucli 


and more fureandeafic. Moreover ifto day after amaflauit of aCitty, where die 


Ddddd 


4 
a 
¥ 
4 


eAn eApologte or T veasife, 


— 


ri 4 2 L iB. 2 9. 
. ver{e Souldiers have had armes and legges broken, and thot off by Cannon Bullets 
Cutlas or other inftroments of warre; to ftay the fluxe of blood, if you thould yf. 

hot irons, it would be needfull to have a forge, and much coales te heate them: and 

the fouldiers would hold you in fuch horror forthis cruclry, that they would 

kill you like a Calfe, evenasintimes paft they did to one of the chiefeft C hirwrgi, 

ons of Rome, which may.be found written before inthe third chapter of the Ipero. 

duStion of Chirurgery, the 1 booke. Now Ieaftthe Sedators of your WIitings 

fhould fallipte fuch inconveniencie, I pray them to follow the merhode aforefayd, 


the which I have hewed to be true and certaine, and approved by authority, reafon 
and expenicncte 


he Voyage of Thurin,15 36. 


Oreover,I will heere fhew co the readers the places where [have had meanes 

to learne the Art of Chirurgery, for the better inftructing of the young Chi. 

rurgion: and firit in the yeere 1536,the great King Francis fent agreat Army to 

Tharia, to recover the Cittyes and Caftles, which the Marquefie of Gua, Lieyte. 

nant generall of che Emperorhadtaken: where the high Conftable of Framce the 

great maiter, was Lievcenant gcnerall of che Army,and Montteur de Moxtian Colo. 

Theretiring NCl gencrall of the toete, of whichI wasthen Chirurgion. A great part of the Ar. 
my arrived inthe Country of Suze; wefoundthe eacmy which {ftopt the pallape, 
and liad made certaine Forts,and trenches, infomuch thattohunt them out ang 

make them leave the place, we were forced to hght,where there were divers hurt 
and (laine, as wellof the one fide as ofthe other: but the enemies were con{tray- 
ned to retire, and get into the Caftle, which was cavfed partly by one Captaine 
Ratt, whoclimed with divers of the fouldiers of hiscompany vpon alittle Moup- 
taine; there where he fhot dire@ly upon the enemies, hee received a fhot upon the 
anckle of hisright foote, wherewith prefently he fellto the ground; and fayd then, 
Now isthe Rattaken. [deefled him,and God healed him. We entred the throng 
in the Citty,and pafled over the dead bodycs, andfome which were not yet dead, 
we heard them cry under our horles feete, which made my heart relent toheare 
them, And truely I repented to have forfaken Paris to fee fo pittifull a {pe ctacle. Be- 
ing in the Citty, l entred into a {table thinking to lodge my owne, and my mais 
horle, where | tound foure dead fouldiers, and three which were leaning againt 
the wall, their faces wholly disfigured, and neither faw nor heard, nor {poake; and 
their cloathes did yet flame wyh the gunpowder which had burnt them. Beholding 
them with pitty, there happened tocome aneldfouldier, who asked meif there 
were any poflible meanes to cure them, Itold himno: he prefently approached co 
them, and gently cut their throates without choler. Seeing this erear crucity, | 
told him he was a wicked man,he an{wered me that he prayed to God, that whento- 
ever he thould be in fuchacafe, that he might finde fome one that would doe as 
much to him,to the end he might not miferably languifh, Andto rerurne to our for- 
mer difcourfe,the enemie was {Omoned to render, which they {oon did ,& went our, 
their lives onely faved, with a white ftafte in their hands;the greareft part whereot 
went and got tothe Caftle of VzZane,where there was about 200. Spaniaids, Mon- 
ficurthe Conftable would not leave them behind,to the endthat the way might 
be made free, This Caftle is feared upon alittle mountaine, which gave great al- 
furance to them within,that one could not plane che Ordinance to beare upon it,and 
were fommoned to render,or that they fhould be cut in peeces; which they flatly © 
rave antwere making anfwere that they were as good and faithful! fervants tothe Empe- 
ofthe Souls rer,as Monficur the Conitable could bee tothe King his mafter. Their aniwels 
cher heard, they made by force ofarme, two great Cannons to be mounted in che night 
withcordsandropes, bythe Swiffers and Lan{fquenets; when asthe ill luck¢ 

would have it,the two Cannons being feated, a Gunner by great negligence ict of 

fire a great bagge of Gunpowder; wherewithhe wasburned together with te" OF 

twelve fouldiers; and moreover the flame of the powder wasa caufe of difcovering 


the Artillery, which made them thatallnight, they of the Cattle did poche but 
ingot 


Hifory. 


1 3.29. 


fligote at thar p 
they kild and ni 


The next dag 


made a breach, 


forthem; 


ro the breach, a 
mount a 
company in thi 
were taken alt 
end they might 
and foolifh, to 
the fayd foulc: 
ry, didall their 
of our fouidier: 
fore of workc 
feene wouuds | 


Vigo, in the firil 


by weapons of 
their cure com! 
fhould be min 

oyle, koo 

willing tc knov 
firft drefling, 
wounds, with ¢ 
At laf wanre 
yolkes of egge: 
quiet, fea 
not uled the bu 
fit chem, whe 

dige {tive mcoik 
tumor having 
fayd durning o 

edges oftheir 
poore men we 

the fame abov: 


I found meanesm 


wherewith he: 
yeeres, bctore 
prefents he ga 


oyle of Lillies § 


joyfull and m\ 
to that which 

wounds mace 
ned Lievtcnas 
menio 
and other 


three of them, 


or to! 
Lord Marfhal 
appointed Sou 
lnfomuch that 
{hall fent for 
Art (chan the « 
whercof at laf 
him, and was 
I con{uleed w 
doc any ferio 


— 


non Bullets 

u fhould ufe 
ethem: and 
they would 
eft Chirurgi. 
of the Intro. 
ur WIitings 
ic atorefayd 
Ority, reaton 


had meanes 

young 
cat Army 
jHaft, Lievte. 
Of France the 
ontian 
art ofthe Ar- 
pt the paflage, 
them out and 
divers hurt 
cre conftray- 
ne Captaine 
little Moun- 
Shot upon the 
ad fayd then, 
ed'the throng 
pot vet dead, 
lent toheare 
ipectacle. Be- 
and my mans 
aning againit 
t {poake; and 
n. Behelding 
meif there 
Bpproached co 
eat crucity, | 
when{o- 
‘euld doe as 
ne to our for- 

1 & went our, 


part whereot 


niards; Mon- 
> way might 
eave great al- 
¢ upon it,and 
they flatly re- 
ro the Empe- 
heir aniwere 
in the night 
sche ill lucke 
ligence fet on 
c with ten OF 
f difcovering 
nothing out 
ingot 


= 


L 13.29. 


fhoore at that place where they difcovered thetwo peccees of Ordinance, wherewitly 
they kild and hurt a great number of our people, 

Thenext day early inthe morning a Battery.was made, whichin afew houres 
made a breach, which being made they demanded to parly with us; but rwas too late 
forthem; For inthe meane time our brench foore, feeing them amazed, mounted 
tothe breach, and cut them all in peeces, excepta faire young lufty mayd of Pied. 
mount, Which a great Lord would have keptand preferved tor him to keepe him 
company inthe night, for feare of the greedy wolfe. The Captaine and Eafione 
were taken alive, but foone after werehanged vpon the gate of the Citty, ro the 
end they might give example and feare to the Impcriall fouldiers notto bee {0 
and foolith, to be willing to hold fuch places againit fo grcata Army. Now all 

the fayd fouldiers of the Caftle, {eeing our people comming wich a moft violent fu- 
ry, didall their endeavour todefend themfelves, thicy kild and huct a great company 
of ourlouldiers, with Pikes, Muskets, and {tones,where the Chirurgions had good 
ftore of workecut out, Now at thattime I wasa freth water Souldier, had nocyet 
{eene wounds made by gunrfhot at the firft drefling. true,] had readin hn de 
Vigo, in the firft booke of wounds in generall,the eighth chapter, that wounds made 
by weapons of firedid participate of Venenolity, by realomot the pouder, and for 

their cure Commands to cauterizethem with oyle of Elders {calding hot , in which 

thould be mingled alittle Treackle; and pot to faile, before | would apply of the 

fayd oyle, knowing that fuch a thing might bring tothe Patient great paine, I was 

willing to know firft, before [applyed it, howebe orher Chirurgions did for rhe 

drefling, which was toapply the fayd oylethe hotteit thar was poffidle into rhe 

wollnds, with tenes and fetons ; infomuchthat I tooke courage to doe as they did. 

At laf wanted oyle, and was confraincd in fteed thereof, to apply adiigeitiveof 

yolkes of egges, oyle of Rofes,and Turpentine. In thenight I could not fleepe in 

quiet, fearing fome default in not cauterizing,that | fhould.findethofeto whom I had 

not uied the burning oyle dead impoyfoned, which made me rife very carly tO Vi- Experience of 
fit them, where beyond my expectation I found thofeto whom I had applyed my 
digeftive medicine, to feelelittle paine, and their wounds without inflammation 
tumor ,having refted reafonable wellin the night: the other to whom was ufed the 

fayd burning oyle, I found them feverith, with great paine andtumour about the 

edges oftheir wounds.And chen I refolved with my felfe never fo cruelly, roburae 

poore men wounded with gunfhot. Being at I found a Chirurgion, who had 

the fame above all others, for the curing of wounds of Gunthor, into whofe favour 

I found meanes to infinuate my felfe, to have the receipt of his balme, as he called it 
wherewith he drefled wounds ofthat kind, and hee held me off the {pace of two 


concerning diver fe 


Exemplary 
punthment. 


-yeeres, before I could poffible draw the receipt from him. Intheend by gifts and 


prefents he gave itme, which was this, to boyle young whelpes new pupped, in 
oyle of Lillies, preparedearth wormes, with Turpentine of Weasce. Then was exccttene 
joyfull and my heart made glad, that I had underftood his remedy, which was like meee em 
to that which I had obtained by great chance, See then how [have Jcarned to dreffé Gunster. 
wounds made with gunfhot, not by bookes. My Lord Marthall of A¢omtian remai- 
ned Lievrenant generall forthe King in Piedmont, having tenor twelve thonfand 
men in garrifon through the Cittyes and Cattles,who often combated with {words 
and other weapons, as alfo with muskets;and if there were foure hurt, I had alwayes - 
three of them, and if there were quefticn ofcutting off anarme or alegge, or to 
trepan, or to reduce a fracture or diflocation, I broughtit well topafie, Thelayd 
Lord Marfhall fent me one while this way another while that way, for to dreffe the 
appointed Souldiers which were beaten afwellin other Cittiesas that of Tharza, 
infomuch that I was alwayes in the Countrcy one way or other. Monticur the Mar- 
thall fent for a Phy (ition to Mé/am, who hadno leffe reputation inthe medicinal 
Art (chan the deceafed Monfieur fe Grand) totake him in hand for an hepaticall flux, 
whercofatlaft he dyed. This Phyfitian was acertaine while at Thurs to deale wah 
him, and was often called to vifite the bust people, where he alwaycs found me, and 
I confuleed with him, and fome other Chirurgions, and when wee had refolved to 
doc any ferious worke of Chirurgery,twas Ambrofe Pare that put his hand thereto, 

| Ddddda where 


| 
a 
4 
| " 
| 
a 
a 
q 
a 


eAn eApologie or Treatife, Lis. 29. 


— — 


Witneffe of 
the dexrerity 
of the Auther, 


Thedeath of 
Martha'l 
Ment 


The Englith 


where I did it promptly and with dexterity, and witha great aflurance, in fo much 
thatthe fayd Phyfition admired me, to fee mefoready in the operation of Chj. 
rurgery ,feeing the {mall age which I had, One day difcourfing with the fayd Lorg 
Marthall, he faydto him, Signor,tw bai un Chirurgice Ziovane di anmims eels vecchig 
di fapere ¢ di e/perientia, Guarda lo bene, perche egls ts fara fervicie ce bonore. That iste 
fay, Thou haft a young Chirurgion of age, but he is old in knowledg and experience 

prefervehim well; for he willdoe thee fervice,and honour, But the old man knew 
not that I had dwelt three yeares in the Hofpitall ot Pars, there to drefle the difes. 
fed. Inthe end Monfieur 44arfhad dyed with his hepaticall fluxe. Being dead, the 
King fent Monficur the Marfhall of 4anebawt co be in his place, who did me this ho. 
nuur to pray mero dwell with him, and that he would ufe me as well or better thay, 
Moatficur the Marfhall Afonmtian;, which I would notdoc forthe greefe Lhad 
the lofle of my mafter who loved me intimatcly,and I him inthe like manner;and (, 
I came backe to Paris. 


The V oyage of Marolle and of low Brritany, 15 43. 


1 Went tothe Camp of Marofe, with the deceafed Monfieur de Roban,where King 
Francis was in petfon,and | was Chirurgion of the company of the fayd Monfiey; 


de Rohan. Now the King was advertized by Monhfieur de Effampes, governour of 


Brittany thet che Exgisfh had hoyfte Sayle to land in Low Brsttany, and prayed 
him that he would fend Monfieur de Robaw and Monficur de Laval for fuccour, be- 
caufe they were the Lords of that Countrey, and for their fakes thofe of that Coun. 
try would beate backe the enemy and keepe them from landing. Having received 
this advertifement, his Mzjefty difpatched to fend the fayd Lords for the rcleefe of 
their Countrey, andro each was givenas much power astothe Governour; in { 
much thatthey were all three the Kings Lievetenants, They tooke willing}y this 
charge upon them, and fpeedily went away in Pofte, and lead me with them to Ley. 
dreneau,there where we found every one inarmes, the Alarum bells founding on 
every fide, yea five or fixe leaguesabourthe Harbors, thatisto fay,Breff, Conquct, 
Croson,Le Fou Doulac,Laudanec,cach of them well furnifht with Artillery ,as Cannoas, 
Demy-cannons, Culverins, Sakers, Serpemtines, Falcons, Harque buzes, in breete 
there was nothing wanting in Artillery, or fouldicrs afwell Bréttawes as French, to 
hinder that the Englifh made no landing, as they had refeived at their parting from 
England, The enemies Army came unto the very mouth of the Cannon, and when 
we perceived them that they would land, they were faluted with Cannon fhot,and 
we difovered our men of warre together with our Artillery:they fled to Sea againe, 
where I was glad to {ce their veffells hoife faile againe, which was in a great pugiber 
and in good osder, and feemed likea Foreft which marched upon the Sea. I fawa 
thing 2lfo whereat 1 marveiled much, which was thatthe bullets of great peeces 


Lis. 29. 
reat {choole@ 
he entred into 
neere the little 
ding wheneca 
ing any thine, 
the little man 
him on his 
chen all the cog 
Dative hadag 
and would hav 
were againe a 
reat man let | 
pitch of his {t 
he had given | 
with his tayle | 
not againe to | 
ted unto him; 
J fayd he was« 
jabbering, tna 
cultomed te a 
I would neede 
found much 
any 2percion 
which [could 
Dispedefin or 
fells, or by the 
Mefsieurs de R 
fifty double d 
man. and Mon 
my hoyicat 


Little whi 
Parpig 
three peeces off 
which was 


fac, (who was 


made great rebounds, and grazed wpon the water as upon the ground. Now to make abe 
the matter fhort, the Englith did usno harme, and returned whole and found into 3 4 
England, and left usin peace. We ftayd in that Countrey in garrifon,till we were al- 
fured that theirarmy was difperfed. Inthe meane time our horfemen exerciled b — 
their feates of activity,as to run at the ring, fight in duell,and others, fo chat there was 
{till fomething toimpioy me wichall, Monficur de E/fampes, co make {port and the enc 
pleafure tothe fayd Monfieur de and Laval, and other gentlemen, caufed di- he had 
verie Countrey wenches, tocome to the feafts, to fing fongs inthe Low 
Dances of the Congue, where their harmony was like the croaking of Frogges, while they aici skint sh T . 
loves Moreover made them dance the Brittany Triory, without mooving fecte oF i pl 
buttockes, heemadethem heare and fee much good. Otherwhiles they cavled 
Wraftlerslice the Wraftlers of the Citryes,and Townes, to come where there was a Prize tor oe and it Wa 
tle Brusana the beft,and the {port was feldome ended,butthatone or other had alegge of am orphin,who 
arme broken, or the fhoulder or hippe difplaced: there was a little man of Low 


tany of a {quare body and well fer, who held a long time the credit of the field, and 


b him & One of his fe 
Oy hisskill, and ftrength,threw five or fixe to the ground; there came to et Bt the lett v 


Ag 
{ee 
te 4 
| 


/1B.29. 


in fo Much 
ion of Chi- 
> fayd Lorg 
Vecchkig 
ee. That 
experience 

d man knew 
mic the difes. 
ng dead, the 


better than 
efe l had for 


anacrsand 


3, where Kin 
Monficur 


and prayed 
fuccour, be- 
fthar Coun- 
Ng received 
he rcleefe of 

vernour; in 

willing ly this 
mthemto 
founding on 
eft, Congquet, 
Cannons, 
™z¢s,inbreefe 
aS French, to 
parting from 
and when 

fhot, and 
mo Sca agaive, 
[flaw a 
great pecces 
to make 
d fund into 
ll we were af- 
en exercifed 
hat there was 
{port and 
n, caufed di- 
Low Brsttan 
they aiein 
ing feete or 
they cauled 
a Prize for 
legge or an 
) of Low Brs- 
he field, and 
tcohima 
greak 


me this ho. 


‘Overnour of 


LiB. 29. 


concerning diverfe 


great {choole mafter, who was fayd tobe one of the beft wraftlers of all Brittany - 
he entred into the lifts,having taken off his long jacket,in hofe and doublet and bein g 
neere the little man, he feemed as if he had beene tyed to his girdle. Notwithftan. 
ding when cach of them tooke hold ofthe collar, they were a long time without do- 
ing any thing, and they thought they would remaine equal] in force and skill; but 
the little man caft himfelfe with anambling leape under this great Pedaat,and tooke 
him on his (houlder, and caft him on his Kidneyesf{pread abroad like a frogge, and 
chen all che company Jaught at the skilland ftrength of this little fellow. This great 
Dative had agreat {pight, for being caft by folittleaman: he rofe againe in choler 

and would have hisrevenge. They tooke hold againe of cach others collar and 
were againe a good while attheir hold withour falling to ground: in the end this 
great man let himfelfe falluponthe little, and in falling pur his clbew upon the 

pitch of his ftomacke, and burft his heart, and kildhim ftarke dead. And knowing 

he had given him his deathes blow, tooke againehis long caffocke, and went away 
with his tayle betweenchis legges and hid him(elfe, feeing thatthe little man came 
not againe to himfelfe, either tor Wine, Vinegar or any other thing that was prefen- 
ted uato him; I, drew neere tohim, and felt hispulfe which did nor beate at a!l,then 

Ifayd he wasdead; thenthe Brsstanes who affiited the wraftling aloud in their 
jabbering, that isnot inthe fport, And fome fayd that the fayd Pedagoge was ac- 
cultomed te doe fo, and that buta yeere pafled he had done the like ina wraftliag, 
1 would needes open the body to know the caufe of this fodaine death, where | 

found much Dloodin che Thorax and in the inferiour belly, aad I itrived to finde out 

any apertionin theplace, from whence might iflue fo great aquantity of blood, 

which [could not doe for allthe dilligence I could make, Now I beleeve it was per 

Diapedefin or Avaftomofin isto fay by, the apertionof the mouthes of the vef- 

fells, or by their porofities; the poore little wraftler was buryed- I tooke leave of 
Mefsieurs de Rohan, de Laval,and Effamps. Montieur de Rohan, cave mee aprefent of 
fifty double duckets, and an ambling horfe, and Monfieur #e Zava/ another for my 

man, and Monfienr de Effamps, a Diamondof thirty Crowues, andio returnedte 

my honieat Pars. | 


The Voyage of Parpignan, 1543. 


ALbittle whileafter Monfieur de Reban tookemie with him polte, touke campe of 
Parpienam;, being there,the enemy made a Sally forth, and came and inclofed 
three peeces of our Artillery, where they were beaten back,to the gates of the Citty; 
which was not done without hurting and killing many,and amongft the reft de Bri/- 
fac, (who wasthen chiefe mafter of the Artillery) received a musket thot upon the 
thoulder:retarning to his Tent,all the others that were hurt followed him, hoping 
to be dreft by the Chirurgions, that oughttodreffethem. Beingcome to his Tent 
and laydon his bed, the bullet was fearched for by three or foure the moft expert 
ay the Army, who could not finde it, but faydit was entred into his 

ody. 
In the endhee called forme, to feeiflwere more skilful! than them, becaufe 
he had kiowne me before in Piedmonnt: by and by I made him rife from hisbed,and 
prayed him to put his bedy intothatpoftureas itwas then when hee received his 
hurt; which he did taking a javelin betweene his hands ashe held the Pike in the 
skirmith. I put my hand about the wound, and found the bullet in the flefh, making 
alittle tumor under the Ommplate : having found it I fhewed them the place where it 
Was, and it was taken our by Mafter Nicholas Lavernaut Chirurgion to Monfieur the 
Delphin,who was the Kings 'Lievtenantin that army, yct notwithftanding the kho- 
Nour remained to me for finding of it. 

I faw onething of great remark whichis this: that afouldier in my prefence gave to 
One of his fellowes afiroake withan Halbard upon the head, penetrating even 


to the left ventricle of the brainc, without falling to the grovud, a 3 
| | reoke 


The little 
Brittan kild, 


Thebody os 
pened by che 
Authors 


Addcefle of 
the Author. 


Hiftory, 


bis 
4 
ag 
4 
’ 
A 
3 


eApol ogie or Treatife, 


ftrooke him {aid,he had heard thathe had cheated at Dice, and thathe had drawn 
a great f{umme of mency,and that it was his cuftome to cheate ; was called to dre(iz 
him, which I didasit were forthe laft, knowing wellthat he would quickly die. 
having dreft him he returned all alone to his lodging , which was at leaft two hu. 
dred paces diftant : 1 bid one of his companions fend fora Brief to difpofe of th. 
affaires of his fuule, he helpt him te one who ftayd with him to the laft gafpe. Th, 
next day the patient {ent for mee by his thee friend ina beyes apparel! to come ¢,, 
drefle him, which I would not doe,fearing hee fhould dic under my hands; and ¢, 
puritoff, I fayd muft not take off the dreffling cil the third day, by reafon he 
would die though hee were never touched, The third day hee came flapgering ang 
found me in my Tent accompanied withhis wench, and prayed mee mot} affcc;, 
natcly to dreffe him : And fhewed me a purfe wherein he had an hundred or {ix{cor. 
peeces of Gold, and that he would content me to my detre ; for all that, yer nor 
withftanding I left not offto deferrethe taking off bis drefling, fearing leatt jy. 
fhould dic atthefame inftant. Certaine Gentlemen defired me to goe drefl> 
which I did attheir requeft, butindrefling him be died under my hands ina Cop, 
vulfion. Now this Prieft accompanied him untill death, who feazed upon the 
purfe for feare leaft another thould take it, faying, hee would fay Mailes for pj, 
foule. Moreover bee furnifht hinfelfe with bis cloathes, and with al! the ref o§ 
histhings. Ihave recited this Hiftory asa monftrous thing, that che Sorldic; fel} 
not to ground when he had received this great ftroake, and was in good fenfes cyep 
tilldeath. Sooncafter,the Campe was broken fordivers caules; the onebecayle 
we were advertized that fourc companies of Spantaras were entred into Parpionan. 
the other, that the Plague begun auch in our Campe, and it was teld usby the Deo. 
ple of the countrey that fhortly there would bee a great overflowing of the Sea, 
which might drowne us ail; and the prefage which they had, was a very oreat 
wiade from Sea, whicharofe in fuch manner that there remained not one Ten 
which was net broken and everthrowne, for allthe ftrength and dilligence thar 
could be given ; andthe Kitchins being all uncovered, the winde raifed (0 the dug 
and {and which falted and poudred our meate, in fuch fort that wee could no 
cate it, fothat wee were conftrained to boile it in pots and other vefle]|s well co- 
vered. 

Now we did not uncampe our felves in fo goodtime, but that there were many 
Carts and Carters Mules, and Mule drivers drowned inthe Sea, with great lofleo! 
baggage. ‘The Campe breken,| returned to Para, 


The voyage to Lawdrefy. 4544. 


ing France raifed a great Army to vidtuall Lamdrefj: onthe other fide the Em- 

perour had no jecile peopic, yeamuch more ; that is te fay, eighteene thouland 
Germans tonne thoufand Spaniards, fixe thouland Wadons, tcnne thouland Enzii/h, 
and a matter of chirtecne or fouretcene thoufand Horfe. Ifaw the two Armies 
meare one another within Canon thet, and it was thought they would never part 
without giving battaile, There were fome certaine foolifh Gentlemen who 
would approach the enemies Campe;certaine {het was made at them, and {ome dy- 
ed at the place, others had their Legoesor Armes carried away, The King having 
done what hee defired, which wasto revictuall Lamdre/j, recived himielfe with his 
Army to Guife, which was the day after All Saints, onc thoufand five hundred forty 
tourc,and from thence I returned to Pare, 


T he Voyage of Boulogne, 1545. 


fees while after we went to Bowlegne, where the Englifh {ecing our Army, ict 
the Forts which they had, that is to fay, Mow/ambers; the litele Paradile, 
Monplaifir the fort of Shatifon the Pertet,the Fort One day going througs 
the Campetodreti¢c my hurt people, the enemics who were in the Tower of Or- 


der, fhotofapecccot Ordinance, thinking tokill horfemen which 
talk 


29 


Calke one witlf 
which threw 
which it di 
coate, whic! 
blacke and b’ 
Scarification 
had made; a 
remaincd de 
what rhe mo 
made mce 
mce. 

The Soul: 
fter) | thinke 
would have! 
Guile France 
above the rig 
the other tic 
head of the L 
fuch fort thar 
pincers, N 
of bones, ne 
wascured:th 
Lance wentt 


Wenethe | 
raine of 50 
ready. intl 
Army: Monig 
having foure } 
and Risprave 
Entiones, an 
taine Chartel, 
King. This 
dred Horie, 
thouland five 
kettiercson | 
great nu mbe! 
companied 
ces:there wa! 
Gunrds, amg 
the 
amounted 
Company; 
omitrotellt 
Count of S4 
Wings of t! 
teft to God 
it was not to 
by force, by 
Onc of th 
with others ¢ 
to finde vict 
and returac 
trated the fe 
the right (ha 


« ‘ 
> 


ad drawne 
‘d to dreff- 
uickly die: 
it two hun. 
of the 
paipe. The 
come to 
pds; and fo 
realon hee 
and 
or lixfcore 
bat, nor- 
leatt hee 
drefle him, 
a3ina Cop. 
upon the 
es for his 
Blithe reft of 
Otildier fel} 
fenfes even 
one becaufe 
. by the pco- 
of the Sea, 
a Very 
Of one Tene 
Hligence char 
d{othe dug 
could not 
le}ls well co- 


> were many 
reat lofie of 


ide the Em- 
ne thoufancd 
land Engiifh, 
two Armics 

never part 
lemen who 
nd fome dy- 
ung having 
elfe with his 


indred forty 


r Army, ictt 
le Paradife, 
ing througk 
‘ower of Or- 
ich ftayd to 
talke 


— 


containing divers oyages. 


Lis. 29. 


talke one with another, It happened the Bullet patfed very peare one of them ‘ 


which threw him tothe ground, and t’was thought the faid Buller had toucht him 
which it did not at all, butonely the winde ef the faid Bullet in the midgt of his 
coate, which went with fuch a force that all the outward part of the Thighbecame 
blacke and blew,and had muchadoe to ftand, I dreft him, and made himdivers 
Scarifications to evacuate the contuf{ed blood , which the winde of the {gid Buller 
had made; andthe rebounds that it made onthe ground, kild foure fouldiers which 
remained dead inthe place. Iwas not farre from this ftroake, fo tbat I felt fome- 
what the mooved aire, without doing mec any harme, than a little feate which 
made mce ftoope my head very low, burthe Bullet was already paffed farre ocyond 
mce. 

The Souldiers mock’t meto be affraid of a Bullet already gone. (My little Ma- 
fter) [thinke if you had beene there, hat I had not beene affraid alone,and that you 
would have had your thare ofit. What fhall {fay more > Monficur the Duke of 
Guife,Francis of Lerraine, was hurt before Bullogne with a ftroake of a Lance which 


T hehart of 
Monficur 


above the right eye, declining towards the nofe,entred and pafl’d quite through on ae curr. 


the other fide berweene the sucha and the care, with fegreat a violence, thatthe 
head of the Lance with a great part of the wood was broken and remaiacd within, in 
fuch fort that it could not bee drawne our but with great force, yea with Smiches 
pincers, Notwithftanding all chis violence which was aot done without breaking 
of bones, nerves, and arteries,and other parts, my faid Lord, by che h«'pe of God 
wascured: the faid Lord wentalwayes with open face, which was the ca ife chat the 
Lance went chrough en the other fide, 


The voyage of Germany, 1552. 


Went the voyage to Germany in the yeare 1552. with Montlieur De Rohan Cap- 

raine of 50.horfe ,where | was Chirurgion of his company, which I have faidal- 
ready. Inthis voyage Monfieur the high Conftable otf Frasce was-Generall of the 
Army : Monticur de Cha(telon, fince Admirall, was chicfe Golonell of the foote, 
having foure Regiments of Laniquenets,under the condutofthefe Captaines, Recrod 
and having each of chem twoKcgiments, each Regiment was of tenne 
Enfienes, and cach Enfigneof five hundredmen, And befides thefe, was Cap- 
taine Chartel,who conducted the troopes thatthe Proteftant Princes had jentte the 
King. This wasa very faire company on foote, accompanied with fiftcere hun- 
dred Horfe, with the following of cach onetwo Archers,which might make foure 
thoufand five hundred Horfe, befides twe thouland Light horfe, aad as many Muf- 
ketriereson horfebacke, of whom Monfteur de Awmalle was Generall, befides the 
reat number of Nobility who came for their pleafure. Moreover, the King was ac- 
companied withtwo hundred Genclemen of his houfe,&& likewile with divers Prin- 
ces:there was alfo for his troope that ferved him, the French, Scottifh, and Swiffers 
Guards, amounting to fixe handred menon foote, and the companics of Moniicur 
the Delpoin, Adefiicres de Guife,de Aumale, and of the Marfhall S, Andrew, which 
amounted to foure hundred Lances, which was a mervelousthing to fee fuch a faire 
Company; and in this equipage the King entred into Thow and Mets. I[willnet 
omit to tell chat it was ordained, thatthe Companions of Adefieres de Roham,of the 
Count of Sancerr, of Jarnac, which was each of them of fitty horfe went by the 
Wings of the Campe ; and God knowes we had fearcitie of victualls , and 1 pro- 
teft to God that at three divers times I had thoughe | fheuld have beene famulhr, and 
it was not for want of money for I had enough, aad wecould not have vicualls duc 
by force,by reafon that the Pefamts withdrew it all into the Citt es and Caltles, 


Onc ofthe fervants of a Captaine of the company of Mon..eur de Roam, went 


with others thinking to enter into 2 Church where the Pe/aats were reured,thinking 
to finde victuals by force or love: butamongft the reft this man was well beaten, 
and returned with feaven wounds, with a {word inthe head ; the lealt of which pene- 
trated the fecond table of the fcull, and he had foure other upon the armes,agc upon 


the right fhoulder, which cut more than one halfe of the blade-bone, of ae 


4] 43 eAn eA pologte or Tr eattfe, L 12,2 9. 


~ He was brought backe to bis mafters lodging , who fecing of him fo wounded an, 

that they were to depart thence the morrow after at the breake of day, and no 

thinking ever he could be cured, made him a grave, and would have caft him there. 
Charity ofthe in, faying that,or elfe the Pefants would maflacre and kill him ; 1 mov d with it. 
Authors ty told him that he might yet be curcd if he were well dreft: divers Gentlemen of 
the company prayd him that he would caufe him to bee brought along with thy. 
Baggage, feeing I had the willingneffe to drefic him; to which he agreed, and afte, 
that I had cloth’d him,he was but put intoa Cart ppon a bed well covered and we! 
accommodated, which one horfe did craw. I did the office of a Phyfition, Apo. 
thecary,Chirurgion,and Cooke ; I dreft him even to the end of his cure, and Gog 
cured him, in fo much thatall thefe three Companies admired at this cure, 
horfemen of the company of Monfiecur de Rohan, the firit mutter that was made, 
gave me each ene,one Crewne,and the Archers halfe a Crowne. 


The voyage of Danvillurs, 1552. 
A T thereturne from the Gerwsan Campe, King Heary befciged Danvsdiers tho 


within would notrender, “They were well beaten and our pouder failed Us, 
in the meane time they fhot much at our peeple. There wasa Culverin fhor pals‘ 


atraverfe the Tent of Monficur de Robam, which hita Gentlemans Leg, which was - 


of his traine; which 1 was taineto finifh the cutting off, the which was done with. 
out applying hot irons, | 
Another The Kiag fent for pouder to Sedan, which being come they begana greater bar. 
fitorye — tery than before, in fuch fort that they made abreach. Mefrers de Guife, and the 
high Conftable being in the Kings Chamber,told him they concluded the next day 
to make aflault,& that they were affured they fhould enter into it,& that they fhould 
keep it fecret left the enemy were advertized.And allot them promifed notto {peake 
of it to any one. Now there was a Groome of the Kings chawber who lay under the 
Kings bed in the Campto fleep,underftood that they refolved the next day to give an 
aflault,he prefently revealed it to acertaine:Captaine and told him that for certaine 
the day following aflault fhould be given, & that he had heard it of the King,& praid 
the faid Captaine thathe would not {peake a word of it to any body,which he pro- 
mifed . but his promife was not kept,for at the fame inftant he went and declared it 
toa Capraine,& this Gaptaine to another Captaine,and from the Captaines ro fomt 
of the Souldiers,faying alwayes,fay nething. Itwas fo well hid that the next day 
early inthe morning there was fecne the greatcft part of the Souldiers wich their 
round hofe and their breechescut at knee for the better mounting at the breach. The 
King was advertiz’d of the rumor which runne through the Campe, that thie af- 
fault muftbe given, whereof hee much mervailed, {ceing there was but chrec of 
that advife,which had promifedone to another, not totell itto anyone. The 
. King fent for Monficur de Guife, to know if hee bad not talked of this affaulr; hee 
{wore and affirmed to him he had not told itte any body . and Monfieur the Con 
ftable {aid as much ; who faid to the King he muft expreflély know who had decla- 
red this fecret counfell; feeing they were but three. Inquilition was made frem 
Captaine to Captaine, inthe end the truth was found; for one fayd twas {uchaone 
told me,anether fayd asmuch, till atlenpththey came to the firft, who declared he 
had learndit of aGroome of the Kingschamber, named Guyard, borne at Blots,the 
fonne of the deceafed King Francis his Barber, The King fent for him intohis Tent, 
inthe prefence of Monficur de Guife, and of Monfieur the Corflable, to undet- 
itand from him whence he hadit, and who teld him that this aflaulr was to bee gi- 
ven. The King told him that if he did nor tell the truth, that he would caule him to 
be hanged; then he declared,he lay downe under hisbed thinking to fleepe, amd fo 
having heard it,he declared itto a Captaine who was a friend of his, tothe end hee 
might prepare himfelfe with his Souldiers the firft for the aflaulr. Afrerthe King 
knew the truth; he told him,he thould never ferve him againe and that he deferved 
neenlne- tobe hanged, and forbid himever to come againero the Court. My Groeme 
ecets ot Prins Of the Chamber went away with this fad newes, andlay with one of the Kings 
| Chirurgions 


Lis. 29 
Chirurgions 


wounds withl 
gill morning 
mmervailed at 
was the caulc 
defperation, 
Guyara Was | 
nough for th: 
felvestothe : 
diers {cnt aw. 
with my Ger 
him to his hx 
good cheayx 
little Mafter. 


Little w 
make {p 
de Vendo{me,\ 
in France, 
with 
follow himt! 
fickein her Oa 
her;and that 
me that hee w 
as one of his 
I durft not to 
3. Or 4. leagu 
witha numbe 
themicives;ar 
them doe the! 
putconfiden: 
of Bavins, at 
they mult go 

was made larg 
ancly aod n¢ 
ket fhot, pik 
put fireto th 
Our pcop:c, 
edge of 
thirtic, hop@ 
chal 
Souldicis w: 
ged andiiran 
diver Villas 
Wee went: 
the Enemies 
the Tov>z 
topfly turvy. 
Iwill not yc 
Montficur 
which had p 
my duty tn 
Bullets whic 
vers more Ww! 
than there w 


~ 
4 
\ 
4 
= 
4 


unded ang 
y, and hot 
him there. 
with 
tlemen of 
m2 With the 
|, and after 
d and wel! 
ion, Apo. 
» and God 
ure. The 
was Made, 


liers thofe 

failed us, 
hot pafs'd 
which was 
done with. 


reater bar- 
fe, and the 
e next day 
fhould 
tto{peake 
yunder the 
to give an 
Or certaine 
,& praid 
sch he pro- 
declared it 
1¢s to 
¢ next day 
with their 
reach. [he 
vat the 
we chree of 
ne. The 
fault; hee 
rche 
had decla- 
nade from 
siuchaone 
eclaredhe 
Bios the 
yhis Tenor, 
to under- 
to bee gi- 
vie him to 

DC, ard {o 
meend hee 
rthe King 

e deferved 
Groeme 
the Kungs 
muirurgions 


containing divers veyages. 


Chirurgions inordinary, named Mafter Lewis, and in thenight gave himflelfe fix 
wounds with a knife,and cut his throate;yet the faid Chirurgion perceived nothing 
rill morning, vill hee fawrhe bed bloody, andthe dead body by him: hee much 
mervailed at this {peétacle upon his waking, and was afraid leaftthey fhould fay he 
was che caufe of this murcher; but was foone freed, knowing the caufe to bee from 
delperation, havimg loft the good amitie which the King bore to him, The faid 
Guyara was buried. And thofe of Desvidiers when they {aw the breach large e- 
nough for them to eater in,and che Souldies prepared for the affuule, yeelded them. 
{elves tothe mercy of the King, Thechiete of them were prifoners, and the Soul. 
cicrs scot away witheutrarmes. The Campe being broken up I returned to Pars 
with my Gentleman whofe Leg I had cut off, dreft him and God cured him;! {enc 
him to his houfe merry with a woodden Leg,and was content, layin g thar he {caped 
tohave ocene milerably burnt, as you writcin your booke, my 
Incie Wiatter, 


The Voyage of Caftle the Compt, 1552. 


: A Little while after King Henry levied an Army of thirty thoufand men, to gce 


~ 


de Vendofme, was chi¢cie of the Army,and the Kings Lievtenanr. Being at §,Dewss 
in France, {tay ing while the companics pafs'd by, hefent for mero Par’ to come | peak 
with him;being there, he prayed me,and his requeft was acommand, that I would 
follow him this voyage ; and I about to make my excufe told him him my wife was 
fickein her bed made me anfiwer, thacthere were Philitions at torto cure 
her;and that he as weil letc his owne,who wasas well delcended as mine; promifin 
me chat hee would ule me well and ferthwith gave command that I thould be lodged 
as one of his Tratnae. Seeing this preat aficction,which he had toleade me with him, 
I durft not to refufe him. i wentand met with him at the Caftale of Comp:, within 
3. or 4. leagues of Hedin, there where tliere wasthe Emperors Souldiers in garrifon 
witha number of Pe//ants round about hee caufed them to be {ummond to render 
themfelvessand they aade an{wer they fhould never havethem but by peeces,and let 
them doe their worft, and they would doe their beft to defend them{elves, They 
putconfidence in their ditches full of water, and intwo houres witha great number 
of Bavins, and certainc empty Caskes,way was to pafi¢ over the foote : when 
they muft goc co the affaule and were beaten with five peeces of Cannon, till a breach 
was made large enough to enter in,where they within received the aflaule very vali- 
antly aod not without killing and hurting a great number of our people with muf- 
ket thor, pikesandftones. in che end when they law themf{elves conftrained, they 
put fireto their poucer and munition, whichwas the caule of burning many of 


The King of 


make {poile about Hedin, The King of Navarre who was then called Montieur NaSarreprays 
ed the Aurher 


to tolloywy 
him. 


Hiftory of 


defperate 


our people, and of theirs likewife, and they were all almoft pur to the people, 


edge of the {word. Notwithftanding fome of our Souldiers had taken twentic ur 
thirtie, hopingto have ranfometor them, That was knowne, and ordered by the 
Counfell chat it fhould be proclaimed by the Trumpet through the Campe, that all 
Souldiers who had any Spaniards prifoners were to kilithem, upon paine co be han- 
ged andftrangled,which was done upon cold blaod.From thence we went and burnt 
diver Villages, whofe barnes were full of all kind of graine,to my great greefe. 
Wee wentalong even to Towrmahan, where there was a verygreat Tower where 
the Enemies retired, butthere was no man found in it, all was pillaged , and 
the Tow sz was made to Ieape by a Mine, and then with Gunpouder turned 
topfy curvy. After that, the Campe was broken up, and I returned to Pars. 
Iwill not yet forget to write that the day atter the Caftle of Comps was taken , 
Monfieur de Vendofme {ent a Gentleman tothe King to make report to bim of ald 
which had pafs‘d, and amongft other things, told the King that I bad greatly done 
my duty in dreffing thofe that were weunded, and that i had fhewed him eighteene 
Bullets which I hau taken or drawne ourofthe hurt bodies, and that there were di- 
vers more whiz. i could neither finde, nordraw out, and rold more good of mee 


thanthere wasby halfe. Then tlic King faid hee would have mec into his 
| and 


Thetaking of 
Caftic of 
Compt. 


; 
‘ 7 
i 
a 
4 
: 
! 


pologie or Treatife, 29° 


The names 
ofthe Princes 
who wercat 
the feige of 
Mert, 


Weta, 


Commiftien 
ofthe Author 


and commanded Monfieur de Gogaier his chiefe Phyfition to write me downe as he 
tertained one of his Chirurgions in ordinary, and that I thould goe mecte wirh hin 
at Rbcimes within tcn or twelve dayes ; which I did, where he did methe honoy,, 
command me that I would dwell neare him,and that he would doe me good, om 
I rhankt him moft humbly for the honour it plealed him todoe me, in calling me 


his fervice, 


The Voyage of Mets, 1552. 


He Emperour having befeiged Adets ,and inthe hardeft time of winter, as ec) 
| one knowces of frefhmemory and that there was inche Citty fiveor fixe rho, 
{and men, and amongft the reft feaven Princes ; that isto fay, Monfieur the Dy)... 
of Guifethe Kings Lievtenant, Ascfseurs d’ Anguien, de Conde, de Moxtpenfiey 
Roch upon Yon, Moniieut de Nemours and divers other Gentlemen, witha aumbe, of 
old Captainesof warre, who often made fallies forth upoa the enemics, (45 \, 6. 
fhal! foeake of hereafter) which was not done without flaying many, as Well onthe 
one fide asthe other. For the moft part all our wounded people dyed, and ig was 
thought the medicaments wherewith they were drefied were poyfoned 5 which; cay. 
{ed Monfieur de Guwifé and other Princes co fendto the King tor mec, and that tye¢ 
would fendi me wih Drogues to them, for they beleeved theirs were poyloned, 
feeing tharus their hurt p-cple few efcaped, not beleeve there was any poy. 
fon, but the great ftroakes of the Curlafles, Musket fhor, and the extiemiry of 
cold were thecaufe. The King caufed one to writeto Moaficor the Marthal! of ¢. 
Andrew which was his Lievrenant ar that hee found fome meanes to make 
meenter into Azets, Thefaid Lord Marthall of S.andrew and Monilicurthe Mar. 
fhall of old 722e,20t an /talzan Capta:ne, who promifed them to make me enter in, 
which he did, and for which hee had fittecne hundred Crownes: the King having 
heard of the promife which the /ra/éan Captaine had made, {ent for mee and com- 
manded me to take of his Apothecary named Daigue fuch, and as many Drocucs 
as I fhould thinke fit for the hurt who were befeiged which I did,as much as 2 pot. 
horfe couldcarry. The King gave me charge to ipcake to Monficur de Gsife and to 
the Princes, and Captaines who were at Adets, Being arrived atWerdun, afew 
dayes after Monficur the MarthailofS. Azdrew, caufed hories to be givento mee, 
and my man and for the /ta/san, who {pake very goed high Datch, Spams/b and H's on 
with his owne naturalitongue: When we were within cight or teane Leagues 


5 
of Mets, wee went not butinthe night, and being neare the Campe, I faw a 


league and a halfe off bright fires roundabout the Citty, which feemed as if 


allthe earth were on fire, and I thought wee could never paffe through thofe fires 
without being difcovered, and by confequent be hanged and ftrangled, or cut in 
peeces, or payagreat ranfome, To {peake truth,[ withed my felfe at Perws, for the 
eminent danger which Iforefaw. God guided fowell our affaires that wee entred 
into the City at midnight with a certaine Token, which the Captaine had 
with another Captaine of the company of Monfcur de Gys/e: which Lord | 
wentto, and foundhim inbed, whoreceived me with great thankes,being joyfull 
of mycomming. Ididmy meflage to him of all thatthe King had commended me 
tofaytohim ; [told him] hada little letter to give him, aad that the acxt day | 
would not faile te deliverithim, That done he commanded mee a good lodging, 
and that] fhould be well uied, and bid mee ! flould not failero be the next day up- 
onthe Breach, where I (hould meetesvith all the Princes, and divers Captaines, 
wich I dids;who reeeaved me with great joy, whodid mee the honour toimbrace 
me,and tcilme was very welcome, adding withall they did nor feare to dye if 
they thouldchance tobe hurt: Monfieur de La Roch upon Ton Was the firft thattea- 
fied me, and inquired ef me what they fayd atthe Court concerning the Citty of 
Adets; Ltoldhim what I thoughtgood, Then prefently he defircd mee to goc 
one of his Gentlemen, named Monfieur de Magnane at this prefent Knight of the 
Kings order,and Lieveenant of his Majefties Guard ; whe had his Leg broken bya 
Cannon thot, Ifound him in his bed, his Leg bended and crooked, 

: drefing 


L 2g 
dreffing upor 
girdle, with: 
he felt, not { 
poliure and 
rhathe was 
and is yet at 
upon Tomicna 
ken hee wou 
cerraine Cay 
given me in 
givng forthe 
and that he + 
charge, bec 
Horace, the § 
Mertmoran. 
vet n 
Laude, Mou! 

foucant Ox as 
which ic wot 
very well do 
wards of Mo 
had brought 
chiefely to 

which 
fent for mee 
to follicite ab 
ftone raifed b 

bone. They 

earth as dead 
and was four 
happened to 

{fwell’d and li 

Os Coronale.\ 
day living, 

ty double Ca 

Monfieur 

houfes to De} 

eed.end to cig 
other pofts 
of the houfesj 
enemic fhou! 
with any 
earth to mak‘ 
taines, Liev 

diers,and C: 

men,and tho! 

fheets,and w 

no fooncr be# 

The wall bei 

Fox, and {pall 
upon paine 
fhould be {fog 

Citty ; the 

putthem up 

Truely the 
breach, and: 
fifty men inf 


4 
> 4 


Gach 
fixe rhoy- 
the Duke 
after dela 
number of 
‘Sy (aS wee 
Wellon the 
It' Was 
Which cay. 
ind that hee 
poyioned, 
poy- 
rremity of 
rihall of S. 
esto make 
mithe Mar- 
mc Cntcr in, 
ing having 
‘and com- 

Drogucs 
1 as a poilt- 
wife and to 
afew 
ento mee, 
Walon 
¢ Leagues 
ec, I faw a 
emed as if 
thofe fires 
or cut in 
ris, forthe 

ee entred 
taine had 
ch Lord I 
ing joyfull 
mended me 
day | 
d lodging, 
xtday up- 
Captaines, 
to imbrace 
e todye if 
‘(t that fea- 


1¢ Citty of 


eto goc {ee 
Inight of the 

by a 
ithout any 


drefling 


containing divers voyages. 


“9 


Lis. 29. 
drefling upon it; becaufea Gentleman promifed him cure. having hisn 
oir dic, with cer taine words. The poor wept,and tried which Hiflery. 
he felt, not fleeping either night or day, in foure dayes: then I mock’t at this im. 

poliure and falle promife. Prefently I did fonimbly reftore and drefle his Legge 

that he was without paine and llepe all night and fince(thanks be to God)was cured. 

and 18 yet at this prefent living, doing fervice to the King. The faid Lordof the Rach 

upon Tow ient me a Tunne of wine to my lodging, and bidtell me, when it was dron- 

ken hee would fend mee another. That done,Monfieur de Guifegave mea lift of 

cervaine Captainesand Lords, and commanded metore!l chem what the King had 

given me incharge; which I did,which was to doe his commendations andathank{- 

pivng forthe duty they had done, and did in the keeping of the City of Afets , 

and that he would acknowledge it, I was more than eight daies in acquitting my 

charge, becaufe they were many ; firfttothe Princes and others, asthe Duke of 

Horace, the Countof Martigwes, and his brother, Monficur d- Bauge, the Lords 
Montmorancy and d Anville, then Marfhall of France, Meonficur de La Chapel, Bonni- 

vet Caroue now Governonur of Rohan, the Vidafme of Chartres, the Count of 

iude, Moufieur de Birow now Martfhall of France, Monfieur de Randan the Roch- 
foucant, Boxdaille a’Etrez,.the yonger, Monficur de § lobpnin Dolphiny many others 

which sc would bee too iong to recite; and chicfely to divers Captaines who had 

very well done their duty in defence of their lives, and Citty, I demanded afrer- 

wards of Monficur de Gaife what it pleafed I fhould doe withthe Drogues which I 

had brought, hebidmeimpart them to the Chirurgions and Apothecaries, and 

chiefely to the poore burt Souldiers in the Hofpitall which were in great number, 

which I did,and canaflure you, Icouldnot doe fo muchas goe fee them,but they 

fent for mec to vifit and drefle them. All the befeiged Lords prayed meecarefull y The burt of 
to fellicite above all others Monfieur de Péenme who was hurt at the breach bya amo 
ftone raifed by a Cannon fhotin the Temple with a fracture, and depreffion of the pand and ca 
bone. They told mee that prefently when hee received the ftroake, hee fell to the" 
earth as dead, and caft blood out of his mouth, nofe,and eares with great vomitings, 

and was fourcteene dayes without {peaking one word, or having any reafon; there 
happened to him alfo ftartings fomewhat like Convulfions, and had all his face 

fwell’d and livid. Hee was trepan’d onthe fide of the temporll mufcle upon the 

Os Coronale.1 dreft him with other Chirurgions,and God cured him, and is at this 

day living, God bethanked. The Emperour caufed battery tobe made with for- 

ty double Cannons, where they {pared no pouder night norday. Prefeatly when 
Monficur de Gus(efaw the Artillery feated to make abreach, hee made the neareft 

houfes to be pulled downeto make Ramparts, and the pofts and beames were ran- 

oed.end to end, ang betweene two clods of earth, beds and packs of wooll, and then 

other pofts and beames were put againe upon them asbcfere, Now much wood 

of the houfes of the fuburbs which had beene put to the ground (for feare leaft the 

enemie fhould be lodged,clofe covered,and thatthey fhould noc helpethemfelves 

with any wood) ferved wellto repaire the breach. Every one was bulicd to carry Princes earsi. 
earth tomake the Ramparts nightand day, Me/fieres the Princes, Lords and Cap. ‘4 ** Bakes 
taines, Lievtenants , Enfignes,did all carry the basket, to give example to the Soul. 
diers,and Cittizens to doe the like, which they did,yea both Ladies and Gentlewo- 

men,and thole which had not baskets, helpt themfelves with kettles,panniers,fackes, 
fheets,and with what elfethey could to carry earth 5 in {o much thatthe enemy had 

no feoner beatendowne the wail, but hee found behinda Rampart more ftrong. 

The wall being fallen our Souldiers cryed to thofe withour, the Fox, the Fox, the 

Fox, and {pake a thoufand injuries one to another. Montieur de Gaife commanded 

upon paine of death that ho man fhould {peake rothem without, for feare leaft there 

fhould be fome Traitor who would give chem intelligence what was done inthe 

Citry ; the command made, they tyed living Cats at the end of their Pikes, and 

put them upon the Wall and cryed with the Cars miau,miau. 

Truely the Emperialifts were very much vexed tohave beene fo long making 2 Bregcis 

breach, and at fo great expence, which was the breach of fourefcore fteps, to enter 


fifty menin front, where they found a Rampart more ftrong than the wall; _ 


— 


WDC aS 
C with hing 
‘honour to 
0d, Ther, 
| 


Tythe, who were joyfullto dye in the bed of honour. And where there wasa horfe 
hurt he was flayed, and eaten by the Souldicrs in fteed of beefe and bacon, and it was 
fic ] muftrunne,to dreffeour hurt men. A few dayesafter,other fallyes were made, 
which did muchanger the enemies, becaufe they did not letthem fleepe bur little 
infatety. Monfieur de Guife, made a warlike firatagem which was, he fent 4 
who was none@bthewifclt with two paire of Letterstoward the King, to whom 
he gave ten Crownessand promifed the King fhould give him an hundred ,provided 
he gave himthe lereérs. Inthe one he fent word that the eremy made no figne of re. 
tiring himfelfe, and by all force made agreat breach which he hop’t to defend, yea 
to the lofing of his life, and ofall thofe that were within, and that the enemy had 
{o well placed his Artillery ina certaine place which he named, that with great dit- 
ficulty was it kept that they had not cntredintoir, fecing itwas aplace the molt 
weake efallthe Citty: but he hoped quickely to fillit up againe in fuch fort, that 
they cannot beableto enter. One of thele letterswas fowed in the lining of his 
doubiet, and he was bid to take heede that he told it not toany man, And there was 
alfo another givento him: whereinthe fayd Monfieur de Gas/e fent werd to the 
King, that he & all the befeiged did hope wellto keepe the Citty,and other matters, 
which I ceale tofpeake of. They made the Pefant goe forth inthe nighr, and prefent- 
ly after, he was taken by one that ftood Sentinell, and carryed tofhe Duke of 4/4, 
to underftand what was done in the Citty, andthey asked him if he had any letters, 
he fayd yes,and gave them one; and having feene ig he was put to his oath, whether 
he had any other ,and he fwore,not; then they feltand fearch’t him, and found that 
which was fowed to his doublet, and the poore mefleager was banged. 

The fayd letters were communicated to the Emperor, who caufed his countell to 
be called there,where it was refolved fince they could doe nothing at the firftbreach, 
thar prefently the Artillery fhould be drawne to the place which they thought the 
moft weake, where they made great attemptsto make another breach, and dig d 
and undermined the wall, and endeavoured to take the Tower of Hell, yetthey dur!t 
not cometo the afflault. The Duke of Albe declaredtathe Empcror that the fouldi- 
ers dyed dayly, yet more than the number of two hundred, and that there was but 
little hope toenter into the Citty, feeing the feafon, and the great quantity of foul- 


dicrs thatthcrewere. The Emperor de manded what people they were chat 
an 


fence made the 
tCd give itt 


— 


and ifthattheg 
were all poord 
them to cater} 
chey were of 2 
month, and th 
ner part from | 
fhould loofe a 
cherein, witht 
draw doublet 
Parifiens, and 
with the Prin 
Citry, having 
all, they advife 

diets, nor Citg 
fith, or Venif 
feare Ieaft they 
sion;dut thar t 
with Bifguite. 
fifh,as Greene! 
Beanes, Rife, 
Nutmegges, a 
out that would 
lowed therein 
well and ful! d 
Ctualls were d 
of the perion, | 
derfiood from | 
Adets, till be ha 
which was won 


ble wrhanapo 
we would 
Affes, Mules, 
which we cou! 


themfelves wit 
the Artillery, 2 


chaines of tr 
Batiquades, ‘ 
Moreover {cal 
eyes, Alfoth 
houfes, there: 
them to got 
der given to th 
dewes billets, 
braines; mort 
Carts and palli! 
to interlay wit! 
and wilde fire, 
beene bearen i 
of Guard, the 
Ces, who have 
Out making a; 

céne fomuch 
Sreat Baftall:o: 
Companied 
till the laft 
fhould carry hg 


eAn eA pologte or T reatife, L L 13.29. 

fell uponthe poore Catts, and fhot atthem with cheir muskets as they ufe to doe gr 

birds. Our people did oftentimes make allies by the command of Monfieur ge 

Guifeé, Theday before there was agreat prefic to make themiclves enrowled, wha 

mut make the fally chiefely of the young Nobility,led by well experimented Caps 

taines. Infomuch that it was a great favour, to permitthem to fally forth, andr unne | 

upon the enemyrand they fallied forth alwayes the number of one hundred, or fixe. | 

f-ore armed men with Cutlafles, Muskets, Piltolls, Pikes, Partifans and Halberds 

which went even to their trenches to awaken them, Where they prefently made 

an alarum throughout all their Campe jand their Drummes founded, plan, plan, | 2, 

ti, ta,ta, ta, ti, ta, tou, touf,couf: likewife their Trumpets and Cornets, founded, 

tothe faddle, to the faddle, to the faddle, to horfe,to horle, tohorfe, tothe faddle, 

tohorfe. And alltheir fouldiers cry’d Arme, arme, arme¢, to armes, to armes. to 

armes, arme, toarmes, arme, toarmes, likethecry after Wolves, and al! diver: 

tongues, according totheir nations: and they were feene to goc out from thei; L 

tents, and little lodgings, as thicke as little Bees, when their Hive is diicovered 

fuccour their fellowes, who had their throates cut like fheepe, The horfemen like. 

wife came from all parts, agreat gallop, patati, patata, patati ,patapa, ta, ta, parata, 

patata,and tarried well thatthey mightnot bee inthe throng, where ftroakes 

were imparted to give and receive. Andwhen ourmen faw they were fosced, 

they returned into the Citty, ftill fighting, andthofe who runne after were : 

beaten backe with the Artillery whieh they had charged with flint ftones,and foure. 

{quare peeces of iron; and our fouldicrs who were upon the fayd wall made a yolle, 

of fhort, and fhowred downe their bullets upon them like haile, to fend them backe 

to their lodging, where divers remained inthe place of the combate, and alfo our 

men did notall come with wholeskinnes, andthere ftill remeined fome for the 


1B.2 


to doe at 
pnfieur de 
wled,who 
Caps 
and runne 
d, Or fixe. 
ialberds 
ly made 
» plan, Ca, 
‘ounded, 
faddle, 
armMes 
all divers 
rom their 
cred to 
en hikes 
(2, patata, 
¢ ftroakes 
Bc forced, 
nfter were 

and foure- 

¢ avolley 

em backe 

d alfoour 

for the 

fasahorfe 

amd it was 

ere made, 

>but little 

1ta Pefant 

to whom 

,provided 

lone of ree 
fend, yea 
nemy had 
great dif- 
the molt 
fort, that 
ne of his 
there was 
erd to the 
er matters, 
id prefent- 
Re of Albs, 
ny letters, 
», whether 
found that 


ro 
rfitbreach, 
ought the 
and dig'd 
they durft 
he fouldi- 
re was bur 
ity of foul- 
hat dyed, 
and 


9, 
e 


carts and pallifadoes, pipes and h 


concerning diverfe Voyages. 


L 13.29. 


and ifthatthey were gentlemen of remarke or quality: anfweare was made » that they 
wereall poore fouldiers; then faydhe, itmakesno matter if they dye, comparing 
them to caterpillers and grathoppers, which eate the buddes of the earth: And if 
they were of any fathion, they would notbee inthe campe for twelve fhillines the 
month, and therefore no great harme if they dyed. Moreover he fayd he wou'd he- 
ncr pact from before that Citty, till he had taken it by force, or famine, although he 
fhould loofe all his army: by reafonof the great number of Princes which were 
therein, with the moit part ot the Nobility of France, From whom hee hoped to 
draw double his expence, and thathe would goe once againe to Paris, to vilitethe 
Pariftens, and make him{elfe King ofallthe kingdome of France. Monfieur ae Gute 
with the Princes, Captaines ,and Souldiers, and generally allthe Cittizens ot the 
Citty, having under%ood the intention of the Emperor, which was io extirpate us 
all, they advifed ofall they had todoe: And {ince it wasnot permitted tothe foul. 
diers, nor Cittizens, no nortothe Princes, nor Lords themfelves to cate either frefh 
filh,or Venifon, aslikewifefome Partridges, Waodcockes, Larkes, Plovers for 
feare leaft they had gathered{ome peftileatiall ayre which might give us any conta- 
sion;but that they fhould content themlelves with the ammunition tare,that isto fay, 
with Bifquite, Beefe, poudered Cowes, Lard, and gammons of Bacon: Likewife 
ifh,as Greencfith, Salmon, Sturgeon, Anchovies, Piichers and Herrings,alfo Peafe, 
Beanes, Rife, Garlike, Onions, Prunes, Cheefe, Butter ,Oyle, Salt, Pepper, Ginger, 
Nutmegges, and other Spiceriesto putinto pyes cheefely to horfetleth which with. 
out that would have hada very ill tafte; divers Citizens having gardens inthe Cirtty 
lowed therein creat Kaddifhes, Turnippes, Carrots, and Leckes, which they kept 
well and full deare, againft the extremity of hunger. Now all thefe ammunition vi- 
Gualls were diftributed by weight, meafure, and juftice, according to the quality 
of the perfon, becaufe we knew not how long the feige wouldiaft. For having un. 
derftood from the mouth of the Emperor, tharhe would never part from before 
Mets, till be had taken itby force, or famine; the victualls were leflened, for thag 
which was wont to be diftributedtothree, was now fhared amonsft foure, and de. 


fence made they fhould not fell what remained afrer their dinner, but twas permit- 
ted to give itto the wenches that followed the Campe. And rofealwayes from ta- 


ble with an appetite, for feare they fhould be fubjectto take Phyficke. And before 
we would yeeld our felvesto the mercy of our enemies; had refolved to cate our 
Affes, Mules, Horfes, Dogges, Cats, and Ratts, yea our bootesand other skinnes 
which we could foftenandfric. Allthe befeiged did generally reloive to defend 


themfelves with all forts of inftruments of warre, that isto fay to ranke, and charge 


‘the Artillery, at the entry of 
chaines of iron. Alfoall k 


the breach with bullets, ftones,Cart nayles,barres, and 
inds and differences of artificial! fire; as Boeites, 
Batiquades, Granadoes, Potts, Lances, torciics, (quibbes, burning faggots, 
Moreover {calding water, melted lead, powder ot unquenched lime to blind their 
eyes, Alfo they wererefolved to have made holes through, ~whenede.- 4 theit 
houfes, thereto lodge musketicrs, thereto batter inthe Hanke and haften 
them to goe, or elfe make themlye for altogether. Allo chete Was Ore 
der given to the women to ulpave their ftreetes, andto caft them cut at theit re 
dewes billets, tables, treflles, formes , and ftooles which would have ange their 
braines: moreover there was alittle further ,a (trong Court of Gast, with 
ogs heads, fild with earth, for barriquacoesto {erve 
ets, field peeces, harquibuzes, muskets, and piftotls 
broken legges and thighes,infomuch chat they had 
le; and where they had forced this Court 


of Guard, there was orhers at the crofiing of the ftreets,cach diftant an senate pe 
ces, who have beene as bad compamions as the frftjand would not have a = i 
Out making agreat many Widdowes,and Orphans. And if fortune ‘wou 
beene fo much acainft us ,as to have broken our Courts of gard, there was 

Creat Baftallions ordered in quare,and triangle,to combate 
companied with a Prince to give them boldnefie, and | 
till the laft gafpe, and to dye altogether. it 
thould carry his trealure, rings, and our 


to interlay with faulcons,faulcon 
and wilde fire,which would have bre 
beene beaten in head, in flancke,and in tay 


- 
4 
4 
a 
ek 
‘ 
alll 


eAn eApologie or Treati/fe, 


ethers to put the fire ineach houfe, ro burne our enemies and us together: the Citi 


to burne them in the preat place, and to put them into afhes rather than the enem 
fhould prevaile and make tropheyes of their fpoyles; likewile there was people ap. 


P 


ointed to put fire to the munition, and to beate out the heads of the Wine caskes 


zens had accorded it thus, rather than to feethe bloody knifeupon their throate, and 
their Wives and Daughters violated ,and to be taken by force, by the cruell and jn. 
humane Spaniards. Now we had certaine prifoners which Montieur de Gus/e {ent 1. 
way upon their faith,to whom was {ecretly imparted our laft refolution wal and def. 
perate mindes; whio being arrived in their Campe,jdoe not deferre the publifhing. 
w ich bridled the great impetuofity,and will of the fouldiers to enter any more ino 
the Citty to cut our throates, and to enrich themfelves of our pillage. The Eo: De. 
ror haviog underftood this deliberation ofethe great warriour, the Duke of Gwif, 
put water in his wine, and reftrained his great choller and furie, faying He could age 
enter into the Citty without making a great flaughter, and butchery ,and (pil! much 
blood, afwell of the defendants, as of the affaillants ,and that they fhould be dead to. 
ecther, and inthe end could have nothing elfe but a few afhes,and that afterward jc 
might be {poken of that, as of the deftru@ion of ermfalem already made by Titm and 
¥e{pafiaw. The Emperor thcn having underftood our lalt refolution and lecing their 
little prevailing by their battery. and undermining, and the great plague which was 


-inhis whole army, and the indifpofition ofthe time; and the want of vicual!s apd 


moncy, and that his fouldiers forfooke him, and went away in great compénics. 
concluded in che end to retirethemifelves accompanicd withthe Cavallery of bis 
Vantgard,with the greateft part of his Artillery, andthe Battalia; The Morquefie 
of Brandeborg was the laft which uncampt,maintained by certaine bands of Spantirds, 
Bohemians, and his Germane compaines,and there remained one day and a halfe ajrer, 
to the great greefe ef Monfieur de Gase, who caufed foure peecesof Artillery tobe 
brought out of the Citry, which he caufed to be difcharged at him on one fice; and 
the other to haften them to be gone, which he did full quickely, with all his Trocp:s, 
Fic being a quarter of aleague from Mets was taken witha feare leaft our Cavallery 
should fall upon him in the Rere, which caufed him to put fire to his munition 
powder, and leave certaine peeces of Artillery and much baggage which hee could 
not carry becaufe the Vantgard, and the Battalia, and great Cannons had too much 
broken the way. Our horfemen would by all meanes have gone out of the Citty to 
have fallen upon their breech. But Monficur de Gusfe would never permit them,but 
on the contrary we fhould rather make plaine their way, and make them bridges of 
gold and filver,and Iet them goe, being liketo a good thepheard, who wil! not loofe 
enc of his fheepe, Seenow how our wellbeloved Imperialifts went away from be- 
fore the Citty of Adess, which was the day after Chriffmas day, to the great content- 
ment of the befeiged,and honour of Princes, Captaines and Souldiers who had cn- 
dured the travells of this feige the {pace of twe monthes. Norwithftanding they 
did not all goe, there wanted twenty thoufand whowere dead afwell by Artillery, 
by the {word,as alfo by the plague, cold,and hunger, and for { pight they could sot 
enter into the Cirty to cut our chroates, and have the pillage:and alfo a creat sum- 
ber of their horfes dyed, of whichthey had catena great partin ftcedof Becfe and 
Bacon. They went wherethey had beene encamped, where they found divers dead 
bodyes nar yet buried, and the earth all dihged like Saint Janmocents Churciiyard, 10 
the time of the plague. They did likewife leave ia theirlodgings, pavillionsand tents, 
divers lick people:alfo bullets,armes Carts, Waggons,& other baggage with a great 
many of Munition loaves {poyled and ruttea by the raine and {now, yer'rhe (ouldiers 
had it not but by weight and meafure;'& likewile they left great provifion of wood, 
of the remainders of the houfes,of the Villages which they had pluckt downe 203 

milcs compaffe, likewife divers other houfes of pleafur: belonging to the Curtizens 

accom panied with faire gardens, graffe plotts_fild withfruite trees, for without that 
they had beene fterv'd with cold, and had beene conftrained to have rais’d che {eige 
fooner. The fayd Monfieur de Gusfe cauled the dead tobe buried, and drefle thei 
ficke people, likewife the enemies left in the Abby of S. Arzou/divers of chetr burt 
fouldiers which they could not leade with thera:the {ayd Montieur de Gasfe lens chem 
all Victualls enough and commanded me and otherChirurgions to goe dreile a 


L 18.29. 
and give then 
donethie like 
mane,& theré 
of Milan X © 
have beene « 
nefle of che 5; 
on which the 
chan the Ido! 
Andafew 
they fhould 
and VVazgor 
Carters, toh 
turned backe 
they never lca 
them atthe p 
their Carts, a 
bring backe t! 
vers Carts 
backe, for feall 
the cau{e of 
cold; tor the 
caves of the cq 
had his ficic 
fine goid, and 
and made goc 
that in the mc 
combe, to tak 
found alwaye: 
fo the greate! 
{hooes, and di 
in mudde, hal® 
the Emperors 
patients into tl 
tookelcave 
me with alov! 
of Aéets. [rec 
to be given m 
leave me Pool 


he pleated to: 


Harles th 

feur the | 
where there 
prevent that t 
fent Mefiers 
of Captaines, 
fayd Lords fo 
ble. The Kio 
any neede, N 
army: there wa 
there was abo 
about it to dra 
many idlers a! 
Artillery,ton 


aiall aniweat 


¢ 
4 
| 

a 


iB.2 9. 
the enemy 
People ap. 

ine caskes 
Br: the Citi. 
throate, and 
rucll and in. 
Guile fenr a. 
wil and def. 
publithing. 
y more into 
The Em pe. 
ike of Guife, 
© could nor 
bd {pill much 
be dead 
afterward it 
by Titus and 
fecing their 
> which Was 
Victual!s and 
companies, 
allery of his 
re Marquefie 
of § Pamtards, 

a halfe after, 
rtillery tO be 
lide: and 
his Troopes, 
ur Cavallery 
us munition 
+h hee could 
bad too much 
the Citty to 
them,buc 
m bridges of 
wil] not loofe 
ay from be. 
reat content- 
who had en- 
tanding they 
by Artillery, 
cy could pot 
2 creat 
f Becfe and 
| divers dead 
urchyard, 10 
monsand tents, 

witha great 
the {ouldiers 
Bon of wood, 
downe 20Fr3 
ce Cuittizens 
without that 
is 'd the feige 
drefle their 
f cheir hurt 
chem 
drefle them 


and 


Liss 


and give them medicines; which we willingly did, and thinkethey would not have 
done thie like toward others (becaufe the Spaniard is mott cruell,perfidious and inhu.. 
mane,& therefore enimy co all nations)which is proved by Lopeza Spaniard & Benzo 
of Milan & others who have written the hiftory of America, theVV elt Indies who 
have beene conttrayned to cenfeffe,that the cruclty, avarice bla{phemy,and wicked- 
nefle of the Spaniards, have altogether alienated the poore sedans, trom the rel igi~ 
on which the fayd Spaniards are faydtohold, And all write they are leffe worth 
than the Idolatrous /ndzans, by the cruel] ufage done to che fayd Zndrans, 

Anda few dayes after we fenta Trompet to Thiosvilie toward the enem vy, that 
they f{hould fend backe for their wounded men in fafety, whichthey did with Carrs 
and VVaggons, but norenough. Monfteur de Gui/e, caufed chem to have Carts aud 
Carters, to heipe to carry them tothe fayd Thicwville. Ourfiyd Carters being re- 
turned backe, brought us word that the way was paved with dead bod yes, and chat 
they never lead backe the halfe,for they dyed in their Carts,anu the Spaniards feeing 
them atehe point of death, beterethey had caft our their gafpe, caft them out of 
their Carts, and buryed them in the mudde, and mire, faying they had noorder to 
bring backe the dead, Moreover our fayd Carters fayd, they met by the way di- 
vers Carts loaden with baggage fticking in the mire, which they durft net fend for 
backe, for feare leaft thole of Azets fhould fall uponthem- I will againe returne to 
the caufe of their mortality, which was principally through honger, plague, and 
cold; for the {now was two foote thicke upon the earth, and they were lodged inthe 
caves of che earth, onely covered with a little ftraw. Noewithftanding each fouldier 
had his ficid bed, and a covering firewed with glittering ftarres, more brightrhan 
fine gold, and every day had white fheetes, and ladg’d atthe figne of the Moone, 
and made good cheere when they had it, and payd their hofte fo well ever night, 
that in the morning they went away quitte,ihaking their eares, and they needed no 
combe, totake away the doune outof their haires, eitherof head or beard, and 
found alwayes a white tablecleath, lofing good meales for want of Victualls. Al- 
fo the greateit part ofthem had neither boores, nor duskinnes, flippers, hofe, or 
fhooes, and divers had rather have none than have them, becaufe they were alwayes 
in mudde, halfe way ofthe legge; and becaufe they went bare leg’d, we called them 
the Emperors Apoftles. After the Campe was wholly broaken, I dittribuced my 
patients into the hands of the Chirurgions of the Citty, ro fini(h their cure: then I 
tookeleave of Monficur de Guife, and came backe toward the King, who received 
me withaloving countenance , and demanded of me how I did enter into the Citty 
of Aéets. Irecounted to him, allchat haddone, hecaufedtwo hundred crownes 
to be given me, and one hundred I had atmy going out, and told me he would nor 
leave me poore;then I thanked him moft humbly of the good and che honour which 


he pleafedto doe me. 
The Voyage of Hedin, 1553. 


(7 \arles the Eoaperor caufed the Citty of Theresenne to be beleiged where Mone 
Clicur the Duke of Savey,was General] of the whole army:it was taken by afiaule 
where there was a great number of ourmen flaine and prifoners. The King willing to 
prevent that the enemy fhould not alfo come tobefeige the Citty &Caftle of Hedin, 
fent Mefiiers the Duke Bowillion the Duke Horace,the Marquefle of number 
of Captaines,and about eight hundred fouldiers during the feige of Therowenne,the 
fayd Lords fortified the fayd Caftle of Hedin, infuch fort that it feemied impregna- 
bie. The King fent me ro the fayd Lords to helpe them with my Art, if there were 
any neede, Now foone after the taking of Therouenne, we were befeiged with the 
army: there was aquicke cleare fountaine or Spring, within Cannon fhot, where 
there was about‘foure{core whores, and wenches of the enemics, who were round 
about it to draw water. I wasupon a Rampart bebolding the Campe, and fecing fo 
many idlers about the fayd fountaine, I prayed Mentfieur ae Poms Commiflary ofthe 
Artillery, to make one Cannon fhot,at that roguifh company, he made me much de- 


niall an{wearing me thag {uch kind of people were not worth the powder they thauld 
Eecee 2 watte, 


: 
= 
q 
= 
3 
4 
Gy 
a 
4 
* 
met 
j 


56 eAn eApoloote or Treati/fe, Li 20. 


wafte, Againe I prayed himto levell the Cannon,telling of him,the more dead the 
fewer enemies;which he did through my requeft ,and at that fhhor fifteene or fixtcen- 
were kildand many hurt, Our fouldiers fallied forth upon{the enemies, where 
there was many kild ,and flaine with musket {hot and fwords, as well on the one fide 
asofthe other,and our fouldiers did often make fallyes forth upon the enemies Ww, 
fore their trenches were made; where I had much worke corour, forhar I had ny 
night nor day for drefling the wounded. And will tell this bythe way, tha, 
we had put many of chem ina great Tower, laydupon alittle ftraw, and their pj). 
lowes were ftones, their coverlets were their cloakes, of thofe that had any. Whi) 
the battery was making,as many thot asthe Cannons made,the patients fayd they fe); 
paine in their woundes, asif one had giventhem blowes with a ftaffe, the one cry’ 
his head, the other his arme, and fo of other parts; divers of their wounds bled efre() 
yea in greater quantity than firft when they were wounded, and then it was | my 
runne co ftay their bleeding. My little mafter, if you had beene therc, you had beene 
much troubled with your hot irons, you had neede to bave-had much chareoale to 
make them red hor, and belee ve they would have flaine you liks a Galfe for this 
cruelty. Now through this diabolical! tempeft of the Eccho from thefe thundring 
Inftruments,and by the great and vehement agitatiou of the collifion of the ayre re. 
founding and reverberating inthe wounds of the hurt people, divers dyed. and o. 
thers becaufe they could not reft by reaion of thegroanes and cryes that they made. 
night and day; and alfo for want of good nourifhment and other good ufage aecef. 
fary to wounded people. Now my little mafter, if you had beene there, you would 
hardly have given them gelly,reftauratives, cullifes, preflures, panado, cleanfed 
barly, white meate, almond milke, Prunes, Raifons,and other proper meates for 
ficke people: your ordinance would onely have beene accomplifht in paper, bur in 
efie& they could have had nothing but old Cow beefe, which was takenabout He. 
dix for our munition, falted and halfe boyled ,infomuch that who would have cate 
ithe muft pull it with the force of his tecth, as birdsof Prey doe carrion, | will 
not forget their linnen wherewith they were dreft, which was onely rewathed every 
day,and dryed atthe fire,and thereforedry & ftubborne like Parchment, I leave you 
to thinke how their wounds could heale well. There was foure lufty whores to whom 
charg was givento wath their linnen, who difcharged their duty under penalry of the 
batoonc and alfo they wanted both foapé and water.See then how the ficke people 
dyed for want of nourifhments, and otherneceflary things, One day our encmies 
fained to give usa generall affault, to draw our Souldiers uponthe breach, to the 
end to know our countenance and behaviour:every one ranne thither, we had made 
great provifion of artificiall fire, to defend the breach; a Prieft belonging to Monii- 
cur 44 Bottles tooke a granado,thinking to throw it onthe enemies, and fet it on fire 
fooner then hie ought to have done: it brake afunder, and the fire fell among{t our 
fire workes, whichwere put into a houfeneere the breach; which was to us a merVve- 
lous difafire, becaufe it burned diverfe poore fouldiers: iralfo tooke bold onthe 
houfe it {elfe,and we had beeneall burned had not great helpe beene ufed for to 
quenchit; there was out one Well there wherein was waterin our Cafile, which 
was almoft quite dryed up, and in fteede of water, we tooke becre and quenched tt: 
then afterwards we had great fcarcity of water; and to drinke the reft chat remained 
which we muft ftraine through napkins- 

Now the enemy {eeing thisfmoake and tempeft of the fire workes which calta 
very great flame and cla(hing noy(e, beleeved wee had putthe fire on purpole tor 
the defence of our breach, toburne them, andthat wee had great ftore of orhe!s. 
That made them to be of another opinion,than to take us by aflaule;they did under- 
mine, and digge into the greateft part of our walls, fo that it was the way to 
throw wholly the Caftle topfie turvic, and when the mines were finifhr, and 2% 
their Artillery thor, the whole Caftle did fhake under ws, like an ecarchquak*, 
which did much aftonifhus, Morcoverhe had levelled five peeces of Art)<'y 
which they had feated u pona little hill, to play upon our backes when wee (how 
goeto defend the breach, 


The Duke Horace had a Cannon fhot upon one fhoulder,which caried away 
grme 


L 18.29 


srme on one 
ly word, H 
lace. 
Likewile } 
his Lungs; @ 
a Trumpet w 
pleafed him 
raines, Licv 
fhould g0¢ 
next day we 
fel] was held 
tlemen and o 
poflidle tobe 
hope that I h 
fire which | | 
day, by reat 
The dead bo 
like Fagots, 
entred into oi 
another; wh 
ed me like a! 
ther, norco 
what was occ 
on doe his du 
ftance, and ai 
underftood t! 
not well;and 
fine cioth 
let cut and {/a 
hart, and a littl: 
mingicd a litt! 
and the heele: 
fhooes, into 
Kings Chiru: 
Ipraydhimt 
which he ager 
him as | my 
foners, eptred 
dred fifty thr 
of Vidars, th 
Monfieur de 
and all other 


and the moli 


and fo many 
Afterward 
ours eftcemc 
their lives fa, 
retained: jon 
cords, which 
the faid cord: 
them that ch: 
were; and it @ 
their hands,o: 
and totall mo 
throats. Sccil 
Now 
fleur de Mart: 


— 
° 
3 


IB. 2? 9- 
dead the 
or {ixteene 
es, where 
he one fide. 
nemies be. 
had 

way, thar 
nd their 
ny. Whilft 
iyd they 
ne ORC cry d 
Died efre(h 
was i mutt 

had beene 
harcoale tO 
lfe for this 
thundring 
the ayre re. 
‘ed. and o. 
t they made, 
ulage necef- 
, yOu would 
lo, Cleanfed 
meates for 
aper, bur in 
nabeut He. 
d have eate 
srion. I wiil 
ralhed every 
I leave you 
res to whom 
nalry of the 
micke people 
encmics 
each, to the 

c had made 

to Monti- 
fet iton fire 
mong {t our 
a merve- 
hold onthe 
ufed for to 
file, which 
uenched it: 
at remained 


vhich cafta 
Epurpofe for 
e of others, 
did under- 
ay to over- 
Mir. and chat 
earthquake, 
t Arciliery 
wee {hould 


d away his 
arme 


L 13.29. concerning diverfe Voyages. 


arme onone fide, and the body onthe other, without being able to {peake one one- 
y <8 His death was tous a great difafture for the ranke which hee held in this 
_Likewile Monfieur de Martigues hada ftroake with a Bullet which peirc’t through 
his Lungs; I dreft him,as I will declare hereafter. Then we demanded Parle. and 
a Trumpet was fent toward the Prince of Piedmont, to know what compofition it 
pleafed him to makeus; His anfwer was, that allthe chiefe, as Gentlemen Cap: 
taines, Lievtenants,and Eafignes,fhould be taken for ranfome, and the Souldiers 
fhould goe out without Armes; and if they refufed this faire and honett proffer, the 
next day we oughtto be affured they would have us by aflaule orotherwife. Coun. 
fell was held,where I was called to know if I would figne as divers Capraines, Gen- 
tlemen and others,that the place fhould bee rendred up. 1 made anfwer it was not 
poflibletobe held, andthatI would fgne it with my proper blood, for the lirtle 
hope that I had, that wee could refift the enemies force, and alfo for the great de- 
fire which I had to be ont of this torment,and hell; for I flepr not eyther nightor 
day, by reafon of the greataumber of hurt people which were about two hundred. 
The dead bodies yeelded a great putrifaction, being heaped one upon the other 
like Fagots, and not being covered with earth becanfe we hadit nor; and when I 
entred into one lodging, Souldiers attended me at the dore to goe dreffe others at 
another; when I went forth, there was {triving who fhould have me, and they carri- 
ed me like a holy body not touching the ground with my foote ia {pight one ofano- 
ther, nor could [iatisfie fo great a number of hurt people. Morcover I had not 
what was neceflary to dreflechem withail; tor itis not fulficient the Chirurgi- 
on doe his duty towards the patients, but the patient muft allio doe his, and the affi- 
ftance, and all exterior things;witnelie Hippocrates in lus Aphorifme. Now having 
underfiood the refolution ot the yeeiding up of our place, I knew our affaires went 
not well;and tor feare of being knowne I gave a veluet Coate,a Satin doublet,a very 
fine cloth cloak lin’d with velver,to a Souldier,whogave me a {curvy old torne doub- 
let cut and flafht with ufing,and a leather jerkin well examined, and an ill favoured 
hat, andalittle cloake ; {mutche the collarof my fhirtwith water in which had 
mingled a little foote ; likewife I wore out my ftockings with a ftone at the knees 
and the heclesas ifthey had beene wornea long time, and I did as much to my 
fhooes, info much that they would rather take me fora Chimney {weeper, thana 
Kings Chirurgion. I went inthis equipage towards Monfieur de AZertigues, where 
I pray d him that le would take order that I might remaine neare him to dreffe him, 
which he agreed to moft willingly, and had as'much defire Ethould remaine with 
him as Imy felfe, Soone after, the Commiffioners who had charge to elect the pri- 
foners, entred into the Caltle, the feaventeenth day of one thoufand five hun- 
dred fifty three, where they made Meffieurs the Duke of Boxzhon, the Marqueffe 
of Villars, the Baron ofCulan, Monfieur de Pont commiflary of the Artillery, and 
Monfieur de Martigwes’ and { to be taken through the requett ehat he made tothem; 
and all other Gentlemen which they could’ perceive were able to pay any tanfome, 
and the moft part of the Souldiers and the cheefe of the Companies, having fuch, 
and fo many prifoners as they would. 

Afterward the spanifh Souldiersentred by the Breach without any refiftance,for 
ours efteemed they would hold their faith and compofition that they fhould have 
their lives faved, They entred in with a great fury to kill, pillage, and rifle allthey 
retained: fome hoping to have ranfome, they tyed their fiones with Arquebule 
cords, which was caft over a Pike which two held upontheir fhoulders, then pulled 
the faid cord witha great violence and derifion, as it they would ring a Beil, telliag 
them that they muft putthemfelves tothe ranfome, and tell of what houfes they 
were; and if they faw could have no profit; made them cruelly dye betweene 
their hands,or prefently after their genitall parts would have faine into.a Gangreene, 
and totall mortification; but they kild them all with their Daggers, and cus their 
throats. Scenow their great cruelty and perfidioufnefie,et him cruft to chat will, 
Now roreturneto my purpofe being lead trom the Caftle to the Citty with Mon- 
fieur de Martigues, there wasa umes the Duke of Savoyes, who asked oor 

ecee 3 


* 
a 
a 
j 
4 
« 


eA pologie or T reatife, Lin.29. 


if Monficur de Adartigues wound was curable, lan{wered,not; who prefently wene 
and told the Duke of Savoy, now I thought he would fend Phyfitions and Chirur. 
gions to vifitand dreffe my faid Monfieur de Martigues:in the meave time | thought 
with my {elfe whether I ought to make it nice and not to acknowledge my {elfe 2 
Chirurgion for feare leaft they fhould retaine mee to dreffe their wounded, and jn 
the end they would know I was the Kings Chirargion, and that they would make 
me pay agreat ranfome. Onthe other fide | feared,if 1 fhould not make my felf- 
knownetobee a Chirurgion,and to have carefully drefled Monfieur de Martizues. 
they wouldcut my throate, fothat I tooke arefolution to make it appeare CO them 
he would not dye for want of good dreflng and looking to. Soone after, fee,their 
arrives divers gentlemen accompanied withthe Phyfition and Chirurgion to the 
Emperour, and thofe of the faid Duke of Savey, with fixe other Chirurgions fo}. 
lowing the Army,to fee the hurt of the faid Lord of Adartigaes,andto know of mee 
how Ihad dreffed him, and with what medicines, The Emperours Phyfition bid 
me declaje the efience of the wound, and how I had dreft it. Now all the aififtance 
had avery attentive care toknow if the wound were mortall or not:] began to make 
a difcourle that Monfieur de Martigues looking over the wallto perceive them thor 
did undermine it, received a fhotfroman Arquebufé quite through the body,pre- 
iently was called to dreffe him, {faw hee caft blood out of his mouth, and his 
wounds. Moreover he hada great difhcultie of breathing, and caft out winde by 
the {aid wounds with a whiltling, in fo much that it would blow out a Candle, and 
he faid he had a moft fharpe pricking paine atthe entrance of the Bullet. I doe be. 
leeve and thinke it might bee fome little peeces of bones which prickt the Lungs. 
When they made their Syftole and Diaftole,I put my finger into him;where | found 


the entrance of the Bullet to have broken the fourth Rib in che midd!e and {cales of 


bones which thefaid Bullet had thruftin, andthe outgoiag of it had likewile bro. 
kenthe fift Rib with peeces of bones which had beene driven from within outward. 
I drew out fome but notall, becauie they were very deepe and adherent. I put in 
each wound a Tent, having the head very large, tyed with a thread, leaft by the in- 
{piration itmightbee drawnc inro the capacity of the Thorax, which hath beene 
knowne by experience tothe detriment of the poore wounded ; for being fallen in, 
it cannot be taken out, which isthe caufe that engenders putrifaction, a thing con- 
trary tonature. The faid Tents were annvinted with a medicine compos’d of yo!ks 
of Egees, Venice Turpentine, witha little oyle of Rofes: My intention for parting the 
Tents was to ftay the flux of blood ,and to hinder that the outward ayre did notco- 
ter into the breatt which might have cooled the Lungs and by confequent the heart. 
The faid Tents were alfo put,tothe end that iflue might bee given for the blood thar 
was {pile within the Thorax. I put uponthe wound great Emplafters of Dzacalcitheos 
in which I had relented oyle of Rofes and Vinigar to the avoyding of infammati- 
on, then] putgreat ftupes of Oxycrate, and bound him wp, but nor bard, 
the end he might have cafie re{piration; that done | drew from him five porrengers 
of blood from the Bafilicke veine of therightarme, tothe end to make revullion of 
the blood which runs from the wounds into the Therax having firft taken indication 
frem the wounded part, and cheefely his forces,confidering his youth and his {an- 
guine temper; Hee prefently after wentto ftoole, and by his urine and feege calt 
great quantityef blsod. And as forthe paine which he faid he fele at the eorrance 
of the Bullet which was as ifhe had beene pricked with abodkin, that was becaufe 
the Lungs by their motion beate againft the {plinters of the broken Rib, Now the 
Lungs are covered with acoate comming from the membrane called P/ewra, inter 
weaved with nerves of the fixt conjugation from the braine, which was caule © 
the extreame pain he felt; likewife he he hada great diflicultie of breathing, whic) 
proceeded from the blood which was fpilt inthe capacitie of the Thorax, and up 
the Diapbragme, the principall infiryment of refpiration, and from the dilaccrati- 
onof the mufcleswhich are betweene each Rib, which helpe alfo to make the exp 
tation and the infpiration;and likewife becaufe the Lungs were torne and wounded 
* by the Buller, which hath caufed him ever fince to {pit blacke and putrid blood in 


coughing. The Feaver {eazed him foone after he was hurt, with faintings and {woo- 
pings. 


plored and ret 


pings. [tfeen 
pours arifing 
downe, and 
will grow mor 
and is dilated 
vapours out : | 
is con{tra 
Lungs cannot | 
growcs preate 
is drawne 
heart by the 2 
de: his drink 
bad a great qu 
fpread or {pill 
being laid ont 

What thal! 
hurt hath not: 
{tooles. Thele 
burthat he w 
difcourfe I dr 
and other afl: 

The {aid PI 
and adolithe 
fame inftant @ 
Lord Martigu 
well dreft he : 
well dreG. ar 
could nor be | 
mortal! of nec 
difcontented 


offered himic 
tocure him, 
Phy titions,C 
fayd Lord o 
wile goe any 
me to forbid 
gaes,which || 
dye in my ha 
tienes, And 
came preient 
Senor Car 
jure 4 Dios 
m0 ago que yo 
bare la dicta 
magor 
Duke of 
Ged, that 
inthy hand,® 
drinke any 
shou maiit b 
ter wounds 
doe it, 
He dema 
acroile, mg 
drett him,p: 
obferve a 


1158 i | ; 


9. 
otly went 
i Chirur. 
thoughe 
my fielfe 2 
and in 
make 
‘my felfe 
Martinues 
reco them 
r, {ce their 
tothe 
r2tons fol. 
»w Of mee 
vfition bid 
Bc asliftance 
manto make 
> themerhar 
bod y;pre- 
h, and his 
it winde by 
andle, and 
Idoe be. 
the Lungs. 
mere | found 
ind {cales of 
ewile bro- 
| in outward: 
nt. I put in 
t by the in- 
hath beene 
g fallen in, 
a thing con- 
of yolks 
"patting the 
did not en- 
mr the heart. 
e blood thar 
tacalcitheos 
nflammati- 
hard, 
porrengers 
revulfion of 
nindicarion 
ind his {ane 
dfeege caft 
he eotrance 
as becanfe 
>. Now the 
leura, imter- 
as caufe of 
hing, which 
, and upon 
m cilacerati- 
the expi- 
wounded 
id blood ia 
s and iwco- 


— — 
i 


containing divers VOVAES. 


nad a great quantity of blood {pilt witbin the capacity of the Thorax, and being 


ipread or {pilled along the fpondifls, doth not fo much preffe the Lungs as it doth 


What thall I fay more,but chat the faid Lord Martignes fince the time hee wag 
hurt hath not repofed one houre onely,and hath alwayes caft out bloody urines and 
itooles. Thefe things then Meffieres confidered,one caa make no other prognofticke 
but that he will dye in a few dayes,which isto my great greefe. Having ended my 
difcourfe I dreft him as I was wontshaving difcovered his wounds, the Phyfirions 
and other affiftants prefently knew the truch of what I had faid. 

The faid Phy {itions having felt his pulfe and knowne his forces tobe almoft pent, 
and aboli(hed, concluded with mee that ina few dayes he would dye; and atthe 
fame inftanet went all toward the Lord of Savoy, where they all faid, thatthe 
Lord Martigues would dye in afhort time, he anfwered,it were poffibleif hee were 
well dreft he mightefcape: Then they all with one voyce faid, hee had beene very 
well dre@, and folliciced with all things neceflary for the curing of his wounds, and 
could not be better, and that it wasimpoflible to cure him, and that his wound was 
mortallofneceflity. The Monfteur de Savoy thewed himfelfe to bee very much 
difcontented and wept, and askedthem againe if for certaine they all held him de- 
plored and remedilefic, they allanfwered, yes. Then acertaine impoftor 
offered himfelfe, who promifed on his life that he would cure him, and if he failed 
tocure him, they fhould cut him inan hundred pecces, but he would not have any 
Phy fitions,Chirurgions or Apothecaries withhim. And at the fame inftant the 
fayd Lord of Savoy told the Phyfitions and Chirurgions they fhould notin any 
wife goe any more to {ce the fayd Lord of Martigues. Alfohefent a Gentlemanta 
me to forbid me upon paine of life not to rouch any more the faid Lord of Mare#- 
gues, which I promifed not to doe ; wherefore I was very glad, iceing he fhould not 
dyein my hands,and commanded the faid impoftorto drefie the faid Lord of Adar- 
tioues, Andtbat he fhould have no other Phy fitions nor Chirurgions but him; he 
came prefently to the {aid Lord of Adartigwes who told him, 

Senor Cavallero el fener Dugue me ha mandaae que viniefe a curar vofira herids, yo os 
jure 4 Dios que antes de acho dias yo os haga [abir aCavaho con la lanfaen puno covtalque 
no gue yo quos togue, Comereis y biberets todas comidas que fueren deveftrogu(to 
hare la dicta pro V.m.) deftoos de veu afegnirar fobre de mi, yo be Sanado »un hos que 
tenian magoresheridas que laVofira, That isto fay, Lord Cavalleere, Monfieur the 
Duke of Savoy hath commanded me tocome dreffe thy wound ; I{weareto thee by 
Ged, that before cight dayes I will makethee mount on horfebacke with th y Lance 
inthy hand,provided,that no man may touch thee but my felfe; thou fhalt cate and 
drinke any thing thou haft a miadeto, [ will performe thy dict for thee, and of this 
shou mai(t be aflured upon my promife, have cured divers who have had grea- 
ter wounds thar thine: and the Lord replyed, God give you the grace to 

He demanded of the fayd Lord a fhirt and tore it inlittle ragges, which hee pur 
acroffe, muttering, and murmuring certaine words over the wound ; and having 
dreft him,permutted him to cate and drinke what hewould, telling him hee would 


obferve a dyct for him, which he did,cating but fix prunes and fixe bis of bread ata 


nines. Itfeemedto mee thatthe faid feaver proceeded from the pueredinous va- 
pours arifing from the blood which isout of his proper vefiells, which hath faller 
downe, and willyet ow downe, The wound of the Lungs is growne great and 
will geow more great, becaufe it is in perpetuall motion, both fleeping and waking, 
and is dilated and compreft to let in the aire to the heart, and caft fuliginous 
‘apouts out : by the unnatural] heare is made inflammation,then the expullive ver- 
tue is conftrained to caft out by cough whatfoever is obnoxious unto ic: forthe 
Lungs cannot be purged but by coughing, & by coughing the wound is dilated,and 
| growcs greater trom whence the blood iilues out in ereat aboundance, which bleod 
is drawne from the heart by the veine arterijall co give them nourifhment, and tothe 
neart Dy the venacava; his meate was barly broth, ftewed prunes, foimctimes para. 
dg; bis drinke was Ptifan: He could not but upon his backe which fhewed he 
= being faid on the fides or fitting. 


eA n'eA pologte or Treatife, 12,29, 


of Martigues dyed; and my Spaniard, fecing of him in the agony, eclipft him(c}f. 
ard gotaway without bidding , farewell to any bodys and I beleeve if he had been. 
taken he had bin hang’d for hisfalfe promifes,which he had made to Monficus the 
Duke of Seavey, andto divers ether gentlemen, 

He dyed about tenne of the clocke in the moraing, andafter dinner, the fayd 
Lord of Savoy, fent Phyfitions and Chirurgions and his Apothecary, with a great 
quantity ef Drogucs, toembalme him; they came accompanied with divers gentle. 
men and Captaines of the Army. | 

The Emperors Chirurgion came necre to me, and prayed me kindly to open the 
body; which I refuled, telling bim I was not worthy to carry his plafter boxe afre, 
him: he prayed me againe, which then I did for his fake, if it fo liked him. I woulg 
yetagaine have exculed my {elfe, that {eeing he was not willing co embalme him, 
that he would give this charge to another Chirurgion of the company; he made m- 
yet anfwere, that he would it fhould be I, and if L would not doe it, L might herege 
ter repent it: knowing this his affection, for feare hethould not doe me any 
{ure, i tooke the rafor and prefented it to all in particular, telling them | was goy 

well praGifed to doe fuch operations which they all refufed, 

The body being placed uponatable, trucly i purpofed to fhew them thar J was 
an Anatomilt,declaring tothem diverfe things, which fhould be heere too long to 
recite, 1 began totell all the company that I was {ure the bulict had broken two ribs, 
and that it had paft through the Lungs, and that they fhould finde the wound much 
enlarged, becaufe they are in perpetual! motion, fleeping or waking, and by thismo. 
tion the wound was the moredilacerated. Alfothat there was great quantity of 
blood fpilt inthe capacity ef the breft, and upon the midrifle, and fplintersof the 
broken ribbes which were beaten in at the entrance ofthe bullet,and the ifluing forth 
of it, had carried out. Indeed all which | hadt old them was found true in the dead 
body. 

oe of thePhyfitions asked me, which way the blood might paffe to be caft our 
by Vrine, being contained inthe Thorax. Lanfweared him that there wasa mani- 
feft conduit, which is the Venms Aswygos,who having nourifht the ribbes, the reft of the 
blood defcends under the Déaphragee,and onthe left fide is conjoyned to the emul. 
gent veine, whichis the way by which the matter in plearefies and in Empsema, coe 
manifeftly empty themfelves by urine and ftoole. As itis likewile feene, the pure 
milke of the breits of women ncwly brought tobed, todefcend by the ALammllary 
Veines, and to be evacuated downewards by the necke of the wombe without being 
maixt withthe bleed. And fucha thing is done (as it were by amiracle of nature)by 
her expulfive and {equefting vertue, whici: is feene by experience of two glaffe vel= 
fells called Mount-wine; let the one be filled with water, andthe other with Claret 
wike, and let them be putthe one uponthe other, thatis to fay, that which {hall bee 
filled with water, upon that which fhall be filled with wine; and you fhall apparent- 
ly {ce the wine mount up tothe top ef the veffell quite through the warer, and the 
waterdefcend atraverie the wine, and goe tothe bottomie of the veffel| without 


mixture of both; and if fuch a thing be done foextcriorly and openly to the fen{e of | 


our cye, by things withour life you muft beleeve the fame|in our uader{tanding. 
That nature can make matrer and bleod ro pafle, having beene cuit of their veflells 
yea through the bones without being ming!ed with the good blood. 

Our difcourfe ended, I embalmed the body, and put it into a Coffinne; after that 
the Emperors Chirurgion tooke me apart, and told me if I would remaine withhim 
that he would ufe me very well,and that he would cloath me anew, alfo that I {hould 
ride on horfebacke. I thanked him very kindly for the honour he did me, and told 
kim that I had no defireto doe fervice to ftrangers, and enemies tomy Countrey; 
then he told mee I was a foole, andif he were prifoner as I, hee would ferve the, 
— co get his liberty. In the end [ told him flat that I would pot dwell at all with 

Me 

The Emperors Phyfitien returned toward the fayd Lord of Savoy, where he de- 
clared the caufe of the death of the fayd Lord of ssartignes, and told him that ; 

| impofliole 


Lis. 29. 


— 


impoflible fcr 
that L had do: 
his fervicc,an¢ 

Having bec 

ftewards nam< 
he would ufe @ 
had relolved 
Doke of Savoq 
Gallies. 
Monfieur a. 
Ggnes of foare 
jn bis Leg thi: 
worth, that he 
anfwered that 
be cut. 

Soone atter 
diers, which: 
no more fren 
welcome, an 
cer in his Leg, 
of me. I tolc 

Then he m 
rated Leg : h 
I began to 
cated: rhat is 
hollow and fo 
feede it; befi 
through the « 
face and beara 
begin with un! 
order of dyet, 
great nourithn 
mutt begun w 
away the callo 
will very harc 
perience. 
{hould be don 
P Jantaine anc 
and finiihime 
end no fuperi 
his bed, whi 

Legs fhould 
things done a 
fhould be app 
be cured of ¢! 
withrhe Chir 
him | would 
his Vicer: wh 
asked me if 1@ 
provided he \ 
would perfor 
be cured, he 
I befeech’t hig 
would betocg 
hoped withic 
and it fhould 
the reft 


* 
we 
* 
4 
4 
* 4 
* 
a 


¢ fayd Lord 
ft him(e|fe 
| had beene 
onficur the 


the fayd 
vith a great 
&cntle. 


[Oo Open the 
boxe atrey 
[would 
balme him, 
Made me 
ght hereaf. 
iny difplea. 
nl was nor 


that I was 
TOO long to 
two ribs. 
ound much 
thismo- 
q uantity of 
ecersof the 
fluing forth 
in the dead 


be caft 
asa mani. 
ereftotthe 
the emul. 
sema, Coe 
che pure 
Nd 
hout being 
nature) by 
vel« 
with Claret 
h fhali bee 
apparent- 
er, and the 
without 
he fenfe of « 
‘rftanding. 
eir veflells 


after that 
-withhim 
sat I fhould 
and told 
Countrey; 
i ferve the; 
at al] with 


ere hede- 
rhat it was 


impofable 


Lis. 29 


a 4 
& 


containing divers veyages. 


impoflible for all the men inthe would to have cured him; and confirmed againe. 
that [had done what was neceflary tobe dene, and prayed him to winne 
his fervice,and {poke better of me than I deferved. 

Having beene per{waded to take meto his fervice, he gavechar f hi 
ftewards named Monfieur de Bouchet tote! me, if] would dwell is fe 
he would ufe mekindly: anfwered him, that I thank’t him humbly, and 
I had refolved notto dwell with any ftranger, This my aniwer being heard by the 
“se os Savey, he was fomewhatin choller, and fayd, hee would {end mee to the 
_ Monfieur ae Vaudeville ,Governout of Gravelin,and Colonell of feaventeene En- 
fignes of foote,prayed him,to give me to him,co drefle him of anVicc r which he had 
in his Leg this tix or feaven yeares; Monficur de Saveytold him becauie I was of 
worth,that he was content, and if Lranckled his Leg it would be wel] done, Hee 
ee that if hee perceaved any thing, that hee would caufe my throate to 

e cut. 

Soone after, the faid Lord of Vandevile fent for meby fowre Germane Halber. 
diets, whichafirighted me much, notknowing whither they led mee, they {pake 
no more French than L high Dutch; being arrived athis lodging, he told mee | was 
welcome, andthatl washis; andasfooneas | fhould have cured him of that V1- 
cer inhis Leg, that he would give me leave to be gone without taking any ranfome 
of me. I told him | was not able to pay any ranfome. 

Then he made his Phyfition and Chirurgions in ordinary to fhew mec his ulce- 
rated Leg; haviug {eene and confidered ir, we went apart into a Chamber where 
I began totellthem, thatthe faid Vicer was annuall, not being fimple but compli- 
cated: that is to fay, of around figure, and fcaly, having the lips hard and callous, 
hollow and fordid,accompanied with a great varicous veine which did perpetually 
feede it; befides a great tumor, and a phlegmonous diftemper very painefull 
through the whole Leg, ina body of cholericke complexion ; as the haire of his 
face andbeard demonttrated. The method to cure it (if cured it couldbe) was to 
begin with univerfall things, thatis, with purgation and bleeding, and with this 
order of dyet, thathee fhould not ufe any wine at all, nor any falc meates, or of 
great nourifhment, chiefely thefe which did heat the blood: afterward the cure 
muft begun with making divers fcarifications about the Vicer, and totally cutting 
away the callous edges or lips,and giving a long or a triangular figure,forthe round 
will very hardly cure, asthe Ancients have left it in writing, which is {eene by ex- 
erjence. Thatdone,the filth muft be mundified, as alfo che corrupted fleth,which 
fhould be done with Vaguestum eLgyptiacum, and upon ita bolfter dipt in juice of 
P Jantaine and Nightfhade and Oxyerate, and roule the Leg beginning at the foote, 
and finifhine at the knee,not forgetting alicele bolfter upon the /arzcous veine,to the 
end no faperfluities fhould flow tothe Vicer. Moreover that he fhould take reft in 
his bed, which is commanded by Hippocrates, who faith, that thofe who have foare 
Legs fhould notufe much ftanding or fitting, but lying along. And after thefe 
things done and the Vicer well mundified, a plate of Lead rubbed with quickefilver 
fhould be applyed. Seethen the meanes,by which thefaid Lord VaudeviHe might 
be cured of the faid Vicer;all whichthey found good. Thenrhe Phyfition left mee 
withthe Chirurgion, and went to the Lord Yaudeville,to cell him that he did affure 
him I would cure him, and told him all that I had refolved to doe, for the cure of 
his Vicer: whereof hee was very joyfull. He made meeto bee calledto him, and 
asked me if I was of the opinion that his Ylcer could be cured, and I cold him, yes, 
provided he would be obedient to doe what he ought. He mademe a promtife hee 
would performe all things which [ would appoint ; aad as foone as hts Vlcer fhould 
be cured, he would give me liberty to returne without paying any ranfome. Then 
I befeech’t him tocome to abeteer compofition with me, telling him chat chetime 
would betoo longto bee in liberty, if I ftaydrill hee was perfectly well, and thatl 
hoped within fittcene dayes the Vicer fhouldbee diminifhed more chan one halic, 
and it fhould bee without paine, and that his Phyfitions and Chirurgions would f- 


nith the reft of thecure very eafily, Towhichheeagreed, and chen rooke a peece 


« 
3 
2 
| 
| 
j 
* 
a 
* 
a 
4 
4 
a 


oA pologie or T 


L 1B.29, 


of paper,and cut itthe largencfle of the Vicer, which I gave him,and kept as much 
my {elfe. prayd him to keepe promife, when he fhould finde his bufineffe done. 
He {wore by the faith of a Gentleman he would doeit; then I refolved to dreg. 
him well, according to the method of Galen, which was, that after all { tranoe 
things weretaken out of the Vicer, and that there wanted nothing bur hilling Up 
with flefh, 1 dreft him but once a day and he found that very ftrange. And likey). 
his phyfition which was but a freth man in thofe affaires, who would periwade mee 
with the Patient, to drefle him two or three times aday, I prayd bimto let me do. 
what I thought goods and that it was not tO rolong the cure, but on the contrary 
to haften it, for the great defire Ihadtobein liberty. And that he would looke in 
Galen in the fourth book of the compofition of medicaments fecundam genera, who 
faith, that ifa medicine doe not remaine long upon the part it profits not io much, as 
when it doth continue long, a thing which many Phyfitions have beene if norane 
of, and have thought it hathbeene better to change the Plafter often. And this jj} 
cuftome is fo inveterate and rooted, that the Patients themf{clves aceufe oftentimes 
the Chirurgions of negligence, becaufe they doe net oftner remove their empla. 
fterssbut they arecdeccived. Foras you have underftood and read in my wo, kesin 
divers places : The qualities of all bodies which mutually touch opera (€ av 
another, and both of them fuffer fomething, where one of them is much ftronge; 
than the other, by meanes whereof the faid qualities are united, they tarniliarife 
withthe time, although they are very much differing from the manner, that rhe 
quality ofthe medicamentdoth unite, and fometimes becomes like to that of the 
body, whichisa very profitable thing. Therefore they fay, he is to be praifed much 
who firft invented not to change the Plafters fo often, becaule it is knowne by experi. 
ence,this 1s 2 good invention. 

Moreover it is faid,great fault is committed to drefle Vicers often in wiping of 
them hard, for one takes notaway onely the unprofitable excrement, which is the 
pus or Sanies of the Vicer,butthe matrer whereof the fleth is engendred; whereture 
for the reafons aforefaid it isnot needefull to drefle Vicers fo often, 

The faid Lord Vaudeville, would fee whether that which I alledged out of Galey 
were true, and commanded the faid Phyfition to looke there, forthat hee would 
know it he caufed the booke to be brought upon the table, where my faying was 
found true, and then the Phvfition was afhamed, and I very joyfull. So char the 
{aid Lord of Vamdeville defired not to bee dreffed but once a day, in fo much tha 
within fifreene daycs the Vicer wasalmoft cicatrized 5 the compofition beiag mace 
betweene us,l began tobe merry. He made me eate and drinke at his Table, when 
there was not men of more great ranke with him. 

He gave mea great red fearfe, which hee commanded me toweare. I may {ay ! 
was as glad of itas a dog that hatha clog, for feare he fhould goe into the vineyard 
and eate the grapes. The Phyfition and Chiturgion led mee through che Campe 
to vific their hurt people where Itooke notice what our enemies did; 1 perceived 
had no more peeces of Cannon, but oncly twenty five or thirty peeces fur 
the field, 

Monfieur de Vaudeville held Monfieur de Bauge prifoner, the brother of Monficur 
de Martignes who dyed at Hedin, The faid Lord of Bawge was prifoner inthe Caltle 
of the heape of wood belongingtothe Emperour, whohad beene taken at There 
by two Spanifh Souldiers. Now the {aid Lord of Vandevills having looked 
well upon him,conceived he mnft be a Gentleman of fome good honfe,and to be the 
better affured ,he caufed him to have his ftockings pulled off,& feeing his ftockings 
and his feete cleare and neate, together with his white fine focke, itconfirmed him 
the better in his opinion, that it was a man wasableto pay fome good ranfome. He 
demands of the Souldiers if they would take thirty Crownes for their prifoner,and 
that he would give ic to chem prefently, towhich they agreed willingly, becauie 
they had neither meanesto keepe him, nor feede him, befides they knew ot 
worth, therefore they delivered their prifoner into che hands of the {aid Lord ot 
Pauaevile, who prefently fent him to the Caftle of the heape of wood with a guard 


of foure Souldiers with other Gentlemen prifoners of ours, The {aid Lord sis 


Lis. 2¢ 
would not dg 
but with bre® 
after the tak 
the place of ? 
the reft reft.! 
of rhe death ¢ 
his keeper de 
claced unto 
derftood tha 
to Montieur 
good newes 
Souldiers to 
{and Crown 
the prefent h 
name. Ihe 
with bis 
ded the Caorg 
hung with T 
time chey m< 
Thean{w« 
mot 
{trifle ae 
I returned w 
his {aid prifo 
wastruc, for 
Duke of Sav 
for him and 
prifoners bc! 
expen{es. 
Returnins 
their great 
came Dacke a 
lefle the mar! 
country peo 
away thei{to 
likewile dor 
the mifcheetq 
And to re 
well of his \ 
me my leave 
ville, where 
who reccive: 
He fent for § 
to under {tan 
full report, 
had carrica | 
leaft rhe ene 
to retire my 
of this great 
fromthe Soi 
afterthe tab 
was a prifong 
Gogaier his 
me,for rhat 


7 
é 4 

4 
7 


1Bs29, 


‘Pt as much, 
ineffe done. 
‘edto dreffa 
r all {trance 
filling up 
ANd likewi{e 
rfwade mee 
U let me doe 
contra ry 
ld looke in 
£emera,who 
much, as 
ignorant 
And this j]| 

oftentimes 
heir CMpla- 
ly WOrkes in 
OC avainit 
ich fronger 
tamiliarife 
thatthe 
>that of the 
ailed much 
by €x peri~ 


Wiping of 
which is the 
Wherefore 


ut of Galen 
hee would 
laying was 
So thar the 
© much that 
beiag made 
able, when 


he vineyard 
the Campe 
perceived 
rpeeces for 


»f Monficur 
athe Caltle 
n at There- 
ring looked 
ndto be the 
is {tockings 
frmed him 
vome. He 
rifoner,and 
ly, becavfe 
mew nor his 
aid Lord of 
vitha euard 


Lord Bawge 
wouid 


1163 


would not difcover bimfelfe, who hee was, and endured very much being kepr 
but with bread and water,and Jay upon alittle raw. The faid Lord ‘of 
after the taking of Hedin, fent word to the {aid Lord Bauge and other prifoners, that 
the place of Hedin was taken, and the lift of thofe that had beene {lainc,and attain oft 
the reft reft Monfieur de A¢artigues,and when the {aid Lord of Bange heard che {i ound 
of rhe death of his brother the Lord Adaatigues he began much to wecepe and lament: 
his keeper demanded of him,why he made fo many & fogreat lamentations>He de_ 
claced unto them that it was for Monfieur de Martigaes his brothers fake. Having un- 
derftood that, the Captaine of tbe Caftle difparcht a man away quickly, corel ie 
to Montieur de VasdeviMethat he had a good prifoner; who having received this 
good newes rejoyced greatly, and the next day fent me wich his Phyiition and foure 
Souldiers to the wood Cattle to know if his prifoner would give him fifteene thou- 
fand Crownesfor a ranfome ; ke would fend him free to his owne houfe, and for 
the prefent he defired but the iccurity of two Merchants of Antwerp chat hee would 
name. The faid Lord Vaudeville perf vaded me that I would make his agreement 
with his prifoner, See then why he fent me to the woodden Cattle, andcomman- 
dedthe Captnine of the Caftle toufe him well, and toput him intoa Chamber 
hung with Tapefirie,and that they fhould make hisguard more ftrong,and fromthat 
time they made him good cheare at his expence. 

The an{wer of the faid Lord of Bawge was,thatto put himfelfero mnafome hee was 
not adle;and that,that depended upon Monfieur 4’Efamps his Vnckle, and of Mi- 
ftriffe de Breffurehis Aunt, and that he had net any meanes to pay fuch aranfome. 
I returned with my keepers ro the faid Lord Vamdeville, and told him the anfwer of 


his {aid prifoner, whotold me, Perhaps he fhould not out at fo goodarate, which 


wastrue, for he was difcovered. And forthwith the Queene of and the 
Duke of Savoy fent word tothe Lord Vauaevite, that this morfell was too great 
for him,and that he muft fend him tothem, (which he did) and that he had enough 
prifoners befides him : he was put to forry thoufand Crownes ranfome befides other 
expenf{es. 

toward the {aid Lord Vandevile I paffed by S. Omer, where I faw 
their great peeces of battery, whereof the preateft parr was flawed andbroken, I 
came backe allo by Thero#enne, where I did not fee 10 much as ftone upon ftone, un- 
leffe the marke of agreat Church, Forthe Emperour gave commandement to the 
country people within five or fix leagues about, that they fhould empty and carry 
away the ftones; in fo much, that now one may drive a Cart overthe Citry, as is 
likewife done at Hedin, without any appearance of Caftle or Fortreffe. See then 


the mifcheefe which comes by the warres, 
And to returneto my purpofe,prefently after my faid Lord Yas devrlle was very 


~ well ofhis Vicer and little wanted of the entire cure, which was the caufe hee gave 


me my leave, and made me beconducted witha Pafleport by a Trumpet to Abbe. 
ville, where ltooke poft,and went and found the King Hesry my Matter at Aufimon, 
who received me with joy,aad a goodceuntenance, 

He fent for the Duke of Gws/e the high Conftable of France and Monfieur Efrez, 
tounder ftand by me what had paft at chetaking of Hedia ; and made them a faith- 
full report, and aflured chem i had feene the great peeces of Battery, which they 
had carried to S. Omer. VVhereof the King wasvery joyfull, becaufe hee feared 
leaft rhe enemy fhould come further into France. He gave me ewo hundred Crawnes 
to retire my felfero my ownchoufe, wasvery glad to bee in liberty and out 
of this great tormentand noife of Thunder from the Diabolicke artillery, and farre 
from the Souldiers ,blaf{phemersand deniers of God.{ will not omit cotell here chae 
afterthe taking of Hedsm, the king was advertifed that! was not fliine, bur that! 
was a prifoner, which his Majeftie caufed to be writtento my wife by Monfieur ds 
Goguier his cheefe Phyfition, and that fhee fhould not be in any trouble of miad for 


me,for rhat I was fafeand well,and chat he would pay my ranfome., 


The 


we 
| : 
& 
5 
=) 
- 


eAneA pologte or Treatife, 


The BattellofS. Quintin. 1557: 


Frer the batteli of S.Quéntin, the King fem me tothe Fere in Tartemis toward 

Menfieur che Marfhall of Bowrdisloz, tohave a Pafleport by the Duke of s4q), 
to goc ro dreffe Monficur the Conftable, who was grievoufly burt witha Piltoll thor 
in the backe, whereof hee was like to dyc, and remained a prifoner in his enemiec 
hands. Butthe Duke of Savey would never give content that I fhould goe tothe 
faid Lord Conftable;faying hee fhould not remaine without a Chirurgion, ang ¢)y2, 
he doubted! was not fent onely to drefle him, but to give him fome arvercitemen, 
and that he knew! underftood fomething elfe befides Chirurgery, and that he knew 
me to have beenc his prifonerat Hedin, Monficur the Marthall of Bosrdilloradye.. 
tized the King of the Dukesdeniall, by which meanes the King writ to the (aj, 
Lord of Bourdslon, that if my Lady, the Lord high Contftables wife, did any 
body of her houfe; which was an able man, that I fhould give him a letter, ang ;h;; 
I fhouldalfo have toldhimby word of mouth, what the King and Monficur the 
Cardinal] of Lorraine had given me incharge, Two dayes after there arrives a feryany 
ofthe Lord Conftables Chamber, whobrought him fhirts, and other Jinnen, {yy 
which the fayd Lord Marfhall gave Pafieeport, to goe to the fayd Lord Conftabie. 
I was very glad thereof, andgave him my letter, and gave him his leflon, of thay 
which his Mafter fhould doe, being prifoner. 1 had thought being difcharged ofmy 
embaffage to returne toward the King. But the fayd Lord of Bowrdillompray’d me 
to ftay with him at the Fere to dreffea great number of people who were hurr, and 
were thither retired after the battell; andehat he wouldfend word to the King, the 
caufe of my ftay; which 1 did. The woundsof the hurt people were greatly ftinc. 
king, and full of wermes with Gangreene and putrifaction; fo that I was conftray- 
ned tocome to my knife to amputate that which was {poyld,which was not without 
cutting off armes and legges, as alfoto Trepan diverfe. Now there were not any 
medicines to be had at the Fere, becaule the Chirurgions of our Camps had carried 
all withthem;{ found out that the Chariot of the Artillery tarried behind at the 
Fere,nor had it yet beene toucheds I prayd the fayd Lord Marfhal! that he would 
caufe fomeof the droguesto be delivered unto me which were in it; which he did, 
and there was given to me, one halfe oncly ata times and five or fixe dayes after | 
way con{trayned co take thereft, neither was there halfe enough to drefle fo preata 
number of the people, andto corre& and ftay the putrifaétion, and to kil! the 
wormes which were entred into their wounds; I wafhed them with e£yptiacum 
diflolved in wine and Aqua vste, and did for them,all which I could poffible ,yet not 
withftanding all my diligence, very many of them dyed. 

There were Gentlemen at the Fere who had charge to finde out the dead body of 
Monlicur de Bow-Dolpbin the elder, who had beene ilaine in the battell; they prayed 
me toaccompany them to the Campe to finde hina out amoneft the dead, if it were 
poflidle, whichindeed wasimpoflible; feeing that the bodyes wereal! disfavoured 
and overwhelmed with putrefa@ion, We faw morethan halfe a league aboutus the 
earth covered with dead bodyes; neither could we abidelong there, for the cadave- 
rous fents, which did arife from the dead bodyes ,afwell of men, as of horfes. And 
I thinke we were the caufc,that fo great anumberofflyes, rofe from the dead bo- 
dees, which were procreated by their humidity and the heate of the Sunne, having 
their taylesgreene and blew; that being up in the ayre made a fhaddow ia the Sunne 
We heard them buzze,or humme, which was much mervailetous. And I thinke 
it was enough tocaufe the Plague, where they alighted. (My little mafter) | would 
you had beene there as I was, to diftinguifh the ordures and alfo to make report to 
them which were never there. Now being cloyed and annoyed inthat Countrey, 
I prayd Monficur the Lord Marfhall, to give me my leave tobe gone, and that | 
was affrayd 1 {houldbe ficke, by reafon of mytoo great paines, and the ftinckes 
whichdid arife fromthe wounded bodyes, which did almoft al! dye, for 


what diligence foever was ufed unto them, He made other Chirurgions, to — 


L 138.2¢ 


finifh the dr@ 


favour. H 
wounded. 


beenc hurr, § 


He Kio 

with fif 
thatin the w 
to be my m 
tooke hisc! 
backe,onc \ 
Dourlan \eei 
atus. Capt 
nemics, 
Thofe of Do. 
who kild an 
reft Captain 
well, and for 
taine feaver, 


Spaniard fecia 


musket bulic 
firoakehe w 
and was alto: 
Ordinary cot 
with che loi! 


caped good 


returncdto P 


in his houle @ 


Ertl willl 


they mad 
kild fome of 
icene to be fo 
them yet alt 
{eeingthey co 
difeafes and 
The King cai 
this place inf 
into Englana, 
the Campe, 
feare ofthe P 
food cheere. 


Ow for 
the affa 


who were hull 


ayre, that di 
had poyfone 
Well treated 
without. Th 
before the af 


hy | ‘ — 
“ | 
G 4. 2 9 
| 
| 
ad 
4 
, 


Be29, 


‘mu tCOward 
uke of Sav 
fhort 
Cnemies 
£0¢ tothe 
and char 
verulemenr 
that he knew 
Atllom adve 
the faid 
did fend aly 
Cer, and thar 
lonfieur the 
veS a lervane 
lionen, for 
Conftable, 
ON, Of thar 
irged ofmy 
ypray d me 
burt, and 
King, the 
sreatly ftinc. 
$ conftray- 
hot without 
cre not any 
had carried 
chind at the 
t he would 
hich he did, 
jayes afrer 
de fo preat a 
to kill the 
ble, yet 


ead body of 
hey prayed 
d,if it were 
isfavoured 
about us the 
the cadave- 
orfes. And 
1e dead bo- 
ne, having 
athe Sunne 
nd Ithinke 
r) | would 
report to 
Countrey ; 
and that | 
he ftinckes 


1145 


finifhthe dreffing of the fayd hure people, and I went away with his good grace and 
favour. Hewrote aletter tothe King, of the paines Ihad taken with thepoore 


wounded. Then I returned to Pars, where I found yct many Gentlemen who had 
beene hurt, and were there retired after the battel]. 


The Voyage of the Campe of Amiens ,155 3. 


T He King fent me to Dowrlaz, and made me tobe condu&ted by Capitaine Gova/t 
with fifty men in armes, ior feare I fhould be taken by the enemies, And {eeing 
that in the way we were alwayes in alarums, I caufed my mantoalight, making him 
to be my matter for thattime,and I got upon his horle,which carryed my male,and 
tooke his cloake and hat, and gave him my amblihg Mare. My man being upon her 
backe,one would havetaken him forthe matter, andl for the fervant. Thofe of 
Dourtan \eeing us farre off, thought we were enemics, and let flye their Cannon fhot 
atus. Captaine Govaf my conductor, made figne with his hat, that we were not e- 
nemics,fothatthey left fhooting, and we entred into Doarlen with orcat Joy. 
Thofeof Dowrlan made afally forth, upon the enemies five or fixe dayes before, 
who kild and hurt diverfe of our Captaines, and good fouldiers; and amongft the 
reft Captaine $*. valiant at the {word, whom Monficur de Guifé loved very 
well, and for whom chiefely the Kiag fent methithcr, who being in the fitofa quat- 
taine feaver, would ncedes goc out to command the greateft parc ofhiscompany: 4 
Spaniara {ccing him that he commanded, perceive dhee was a Captaine, and fhora 
musket bulict quite through his necke; my Capraine Saint Awbinthought with this 
ftroakehe was dead, and with the feare(I proteft to God) he loft his quartane ague, 
and was altogether freed from it. I drefled hima with Portall Chirurgion in 
ordinary tothe King, and divers other Souldiers: fome dyed, others efcaped quit 
with the lotle of a legge, or an arme, or the lofle ofaneye, and they fayd they ef. 
caped good cheape, efcapethatcan. VVhenthe enemic had broke their Campe,I 
returnedto Pars. Heere [hold my peace of my little mafterswho was more at eafe 
in his houle than I at che Warres. 


The voyage of Harbor ef Grace, 1§63. 


Et I will notomit to fpeake of the voyage of the Harbor of Grace; then when 
they made the approaches to plant the Artillery, the Englith who were within it 
kild fome of our Souldiers,& divers Pioners, who undermined ,who when they were 
feene to be fo hurt that chere was no hope of curing, thei fellowes ttript them & put 
them yet alive,in the mines, which ferved them for fo much filling eareh, 
(veingthey could not withftand an affault,becaufe they were very much attainted with 
difeafes, and chicfely with the Plague, they yeelded, their lives and jewells faved, 
The King caufed them to have fhippes to returne to England, deing glad to be out of 
this place infeéted with the Plague: the greateft part dyed, and carryed the Plague 
into England,and fiuce bave not yet beenecxempted, Captaine Sar/abows matter of 
the Campe, waslefethere in garrifon, with fixe Enfagnes onfoore, who had no 
feare ofthe Plague, and were very joyfull to enter therein, hoping there to make 
eood cheere. My little matter had you beene there you had done as they- 


The Voyage to Rowen, 1562. 


Ow for the taking of Ro#enthey kilddivers of ours before the affaule, and at 
Nu affaulr; the day atter they entred inte the Citty, | Trepaned eight or nine, 


who were hurt at the breach with the f{troakes of ftones. There was fo malignant an 
ayre, that divers dyed, yea of very {mall hurts, infomueh that fome thought thicy 
had poyfoned their bullets: thofe within faydthe like by us, for although they were 
well treated in their neceffities within the Citty, yet they dyed allo aiwell as thoic 
without. The King of Nevar was hurt inthe fhoulder with abullec tome iew dayes 


before the aflault: I vifited and helpt todrefle bim, with his owac Chirurgion, 
med 


\ 
4 
‘ 
4 
i 
| 
| 
4 
| 
ye of = 
> 
= 
« 


finde the buller, I fearcht for it very cxadly, I perceived by conje@ure, that it wac 


by the head of the Adiwtoriwm, and that ithadrunne into the cavity of the 
aedtone , which was the caufe we could not findeit. Themoft partof them fayd 
it was entred and loft within the cavity of the body. Monfieur the Prince of th. 
Rocke upon Ton,who intimately loved the King of Navarre, drew me toone fide, ang 
askt me if the wound was mortall, I told him yea, becaufe all wounds wade in prea: 


joynts, and principally contufed wounds,were mortall according to all Authors vio 


have written of them.He enquired of the others what they thought, and cheefely of 
the fayd Gilbert, whotoldhimthat hee had great hope chat the King his matter, 
would be cured, and the fayd Prince was very joyfull. Foure dayes after the Kin 
andthe Queene mother, Monfieur the Cardinal! of Bourber his brother, Monficyy 
the Prince of Rocke upon Ton, Montieur de Gui/e, and other great perfonages, after 
had drefled the King of Wavarre,caufed a con{ultation to be made ia their prefences. 
where there was diverfe Phyfitions and Chirurgions: each man fayd what feemed 
good unto him, and there was not onc of them, whohadnot good hope of him: 
{aying thatthe King would be cured, and pertifted alwayes on the contrary. 
Monficur the Prince of the Rocke upon Yon who loved me, withdrew me alide ang 
fayd I was oncly againft the epiaion ofall the reft, and prayd me notto be obfiinare 
egain{t fo many worthy men. | aniwered him,that faw any good fignes of 


cure, I would change my advife, Divers con{ultations were made, where [ never 


changed my word, and progrofticke, {uch as I had made atthe firft drefling, and 4}. 
wayes fayd that the arme would fall into a Gangreene, which it did, what diligence 
foever couldbe hadto the contrary; andgave up his fouleto God the eighteenth 
day of bis hurt. Monficur the Prince pon Yow , having heard of the death of the {ayd 
King, feat his Phyfition and Chirurgion toward me, named Fewre now in ordinar 
tothe King, and to the Queene Mother ,to tell me, that he would have the bulletta. 
ken out, and that it fhould be lookt for in what place fo ever it could be found : then 
I was very joyfull, and told them that I was well aflured to finde it quiekely, which 
I did in their prefences, and divers gentlemen, It was lodged inthe very midft of 
the cavity of the Adiutory bone.My fayd Prince having it,fhewed it to the King ani 
the Queene, who all fayd, my prognofticke was found true, The body was lay” 
to reftin the Cafile Galliard,and I returned to Paris, where I found divers hurt men 
who werc burt atthe breach at andcheetely dalsans, who delired me very 
much to dreflethem, which I did willingly; there were diversthat recovered:and o- 
thers dyed.I beleeve(my little mafter)you were called to drefle (ome of them for the 
ereat number there was of them. 


The Voyage of the battell of Dieux 15 62. 


He day after the battell given at Drewx, the King commanded me, to goe dreile 

Monkicur the Count of Ew, who had beene hurt with a Piftoll thor in the right 
thigh, neere the joyat of the bippe; which fraGured and broke rhe Os 
vers places, from whence divers accidents did arife, and then death, which was to 
my great greefe, The day after my arrivall 1 would goe to the field, where the bat- 
tell was given, te fee the dead bodyes;1 {aw a league abour, all rhe earth covered, 
where there was by eflimation five and twenty thoufand men, or more. All which 
were difpatche in the {pace of two houres. I would (my little mafter) for the love! 
beare you, that you had beenc there to recount it to your {chollersand to your chil- 
dren. Now inthe meanctime while I was at Dreux I vifited and dreft great num- 
ber sooner and poore Souldiers, & amongit the refit mary Swiffer Captaines,] 
drefled 14 in one chamber,onely all hurt with Piftoll thot,’ and other inftruments of 
Diabolicall fire, andnot oncef the foureteene dyed. Monfieur the Count of 
being dead, I madeno long tarrying at Drewx; there came Chirurgions frem Pars 
who performed well their duty toward the burt people, as Pigray, Cointeret, Hubert, 
and others;and | returned to Par#, where | found diverfe gentlemen wounded, who 
had rezired them{elves thither after the battell tobe dreft of their hurts. 


The 


were bat 


L 128.29 


~Viingt 

he nea: 

with drew ¢! 
where the 
ther Chirurg 
med Szret, a 
time 


of the 
hurt in che 
part ofthe 
ing there he | 
of his Chiru 
fhould be {er 
ehat it were 
fayd Lord 
flat he woul: 
the Queene 
was a 
him, Andug 
ly, 
commanded 
ferve him in: 
me aletter fr: 
and from the 
to my great ¢ 
there were cr: 
that Mounalic® 
fhot through 
him, and alfo 
of their nece! 
ic waspoflib! 
grave dicd,\ 
Montlicure 4@ 
like place as 
worke that ¥ 
incifions 
greatly broka@ 
neft reward, 
made it 
hurt, atid a 
after the bat 
my good mag 
brother, 


4 

| 
| 
| 
| 

| 
a 
4 
a 
a 


Could nor 
that it was 
vity Of the 
ince of the 


fide, and 


bade in great 


muthors who 


! cheefely of 
his matter, 
er the Kin 

Monfieuy 


pretences. 
what feemed 


Ope ot him; 


ntYary, 

ne alide and 
be obflinate 
bod fipnes of 
here I never 
fling, and 
phat diligence 
erghteenth 
thofthe fayd 
in ordinary 


che bulleeta- 


feund : then 
kely, which 
ery midft of 
the King and 
dy was layd 
vers hurt men 
ired me very 
vered;and o- 
fthem,forthe 


to goe drefie 
tin the right 
femor#s id. 
which was to 
here the bat- 
rth covered, 
. All which 
r the lovel 
to your chil- 
@ great num- 
Captaines,] 
ftruments of 
Count of Es 
frem Paris 


sheret, Hubert, 


ounded, who 


The 


a 
# 3 
3 
4 
4 a 

a 
4 


concerning diverfe Voyages. 


L 13.29. 


The Voyage of the battelof Moncontor. 1569, 


DY the battell of Moncontewr King Charles was at Pleffti the Towers , where 
“ he neard they had wonne it; a great number of hurt gentlemen and Souldiers 
with drew themfelves into the Citty and fuburbes of Towers, to be dreft and helpr 

where the King and Queene Mother commanded me to thew my duty withthe O- 
ther Chirurgions, who were then in quarter, as Pioray, du Bots, Portail, and one nas 
med Séret, a Chirurgion of Towers, amanvery skilfull in Chirurgery, and at that 
time Chirurgion to the Kings brother; and for the multitude of the wounded wee 


_ were but Jittleinrepole, nor the Phyfitions likewife. Count Mansfield Governer 


of the Daeby of Luxembourge, Knightof the King of Spaines order, was greatly 
hurt in che bateell, inthe lefrarme, with aPiftoll thor, which broke a preat 
part ofthe joynt of the elbow, and had retired himfelfe to Boureneil ncere Towers -be- 
ing there he {ent a gentlemento the King, aflectionately to beteech him to {end one 
of his Chirurgions to helpe him in hishurt. Counfell was held what Chirurgion 
fhould be fent. Mon fieur the Marfhall of Afontmorency told the King andthe Queene, 
that it were belt to fend him his cheefe Chirurgion, anddeclaredrothemthat the 
fayd Lord Mansfe/d was one part ofthe caufe of winning the bartell. The King fayd 
fiat he would not that I fhould goe, bur would have me remaineclofeto him. Then 
the Queene Mother fayd , I fhould burgoe andcome, andthat he muft confider it 
was a {trange Lord,who was come from the King of Spaines fide to help and fuccour 
him, And upon this he permitted me to goe, provided that I thould returne quick- 
ly. Afterthis refglution he fentfor me, and likewiferbe Queene Mother, and 
commanded me to goe finde the fayd Lord Aéans fie/din the place, where I was to 
ferve him inall I could, for the cure of his hurt; 1 went andfound him, having with 
me aletter from their Majefties: having feene it, he received me with a good will, 
and from thenceforth difcharged three other Chirurgions that dreft him;which was 
to my great greefe, becaufe his hurt feemed to me uncureable, Now at Bourgmedl 
there were retired divers gentlmen, who had beene hurt at the fayd battell, knowing 
that Mounfieur de Gasfe was there,who had beene alfo very mach hurt with aPiftoll 
fhot through one legge, well aifured that he would have good Chirurgions to drefle 
him, and alfo that hee being kind and liberall, wouldaffifithem with agreat part 
oftheirnecefiicies. And for my part,| did helpe and ayd them in my Art as much as 
it waspofible;fome dyed,lome recovered,according to their hurts. The Count Ris- 
ave died, who had {uch a fhor in the fhoulder,as the King of Navarre before Rouen; 
Monfieure de Ba/Jompiere Colonell of rwelve hundred horfe, was burt allo in fucha 
like place as Couat Mansfield,whom I dreft and God cured.God fo well blefled my 
worke that withinthree weekes I led him backto Pars, where 1 moft yet make fome 
incifions inthe arme of the fayd Lord A4ans field, to draw outthebones which were 
greatly broken and caries'd, he was cured by the grace of God, and gave mean ho 
neft reward, fo that I was well contented with him and he with me, as he hath fince 


made itappeare : he writ aletter tothe Duke of A/cothow that he wascured ot his 
hurt. and alfo Monfieur de Ba/fempiere of his, and divers others, which Ihaddreff’e 
after the battell of A¢ontcentowr, and counfelled him to befeech the King of France 


my good mafter,to give me leave to goc fee Monficur the Marquefle of Asret his 
brother, 


Poyage 


a 


as 
4 
| 
| 
| 
4 
| 
3 
ie 
- 
| | 


eApologie 


Voyage of F landers. 


Onfieur the Duke of /cot did not faile to fend a Gentleman to the King with 
M. lerter, humbly to befeech him to doe him fo much good and honour,as to 
perautand command his cheefe Chirurgionto come lee the Marquefic of Aarer his 
brother; who had received a Musket fhot neare the knee, with fracture of the 
bone,about feaven monthes fince, with the Phyfitions and Chirurgions in thofe 
parts were much troubled tocure, The King fent for me,and commanded me to g0¢ 
{ee the {aid Lord Asret,and to belpe him in all that I could for thecure et his hurr. 
I told him 1 would imploy all that lictle knowledge which it had picafed God to 
giveme, I went then conducted by two Gentlemen to the Caftle of dures, which 
is a leagueand a halte from Afewmes in Hasmawt, where the faid Marquefle was:as 
foone as [ arrived | vifited him, and told him the King had commanded me to come 
fee him, and co diefic him of his hurts; hetold me he was glad of my comming. and 
was much beund tothe King to have done him the honour, to have fent me co him, 
I found himin a great Feaver, his eyes very much fanke, with a countenance 
gaftly aud yellow ,his tongue drieand rough, and all the body emaciated and /cane, 
his fpcech low like that of a dying man ; then found his thigh much {well djapo- 
ftemated, ulcerated, and calting outa greene ftinking matter; fearcht it wich 
filyer probe, and by the tame | found acavity neare the groyne, ending inthe mid- 
dle oi the chigh, and othersabout the knee, fanious and cuniculous, alfocertaine 
{cales of bowes tome feparated, othersnot, The Legge was much tumified, and 
foaked with a pituitous humor, cold,moift,and flarulent ; info much that the natu. 
ral] heate was iathe way to be fuffocated , and extinguifhed,and the faid Legge croo- 
ked and retracted toward the buttockes, his rumpe ulcerated the breadch of the 
palme of an hand, and he faid he feletherea great paine and foaarting, and likewife 
inhisreines, info much that hee could not take any reftaight or days neither had 
hee any appetite to cate, butto drinke enough ; it wastold mee hee tell often into 
faintingsafd {woonidgs,and fometimes as it were into an Epilepfie, and had often- 
times defire to vomit, with {uch atrembling that hee could not carry his hands to 
hismouth. Secingand confidering all thefe great accidents, andthe forces much 
abated ; truly was muchgrieved to have gone to him, becaufe me thouvghe there 
was little appearance that he couldefcape. Notwithftanding to give him courage 

and goodhope, Itoldhim, thatl would quickly fethim on foote by the grace of 
God, andthe Phytitions and Chirurgions helpe. Having feene him, i wenra walk. 
ing intoa Garden, where! prayed to God that hee would give me the grace tocure 
him, and that hee would give ablefling toour hands, and medicaments, tocom= 
bate again{t io many complicated maladies. 1 bethought in my minde the wayes 
I muftkeepe to doe it. They called mecto dinner, Lentred into the kitebin where 
I faw taken out of a great pot,halfea Mutton,a quarter of Veale, three great peeces 
of Beefe, and two Pullets, and agreat peece of Bacon, with great ftore of good 
Hearbes. Then I faidto my felfe this broth was tullof juice, aad of good oovrith- 
ment; Afrer dinner all the Phyfitions and Chirurgions aflembled, we entred into 
conference in the prefence of Monfieur the Puke of Afcot, and fome Gentlemen 
that did accompany him ; I began torell che Chirurgions chat 1 mervailed much 
they had made no apertions in the Marqueffes thigh, which was al| apoltema- 
ted, and the matter which iffued out was very foule and ftinking, which shewed it 
hadalong time lurked there, and that J] had found with my probe a Caries inthe 
bone, and fmall fcales which were already feparated; they made mee an{wer,hee 
would never give confent, and likewife it was almoft two monties {ince the y could 
winne him to put on cleane fheetson his bed, reither duit one fearce touch the covet- 
let,he feelt fo great paine, Then faid I, for to cure bim, we muft touch other chings 
than the coverlet of the bed. Each one {aid what hee thought beft of the Lords 
ereefe,and to: conclufion held it altogether deplorable. I cold them there was yet 
fome hope ,becaufe of his youth, and that God and nature doe fometime {uch chings 
Which iccme to Phyfitionsand Chirurgions to bee impoffible, My confulcation 
was 


cause the he 


Lis.29 
was, that 
joy nt of the 
mufcles 
yeines, anc 
and ulcer :§ 
the caufe 
the maria 
fiance of 

che whole t! 
whreh caul 
the whole t 
wife that th 
lipfie,and tr 
from doing 
roconveri i 
and 
the body a: 
for every pa 


tification, 
through 
fide, and lc! 
in Outward,s 
andthe fiet(h 
fore fayd 1 
ceafewhco: 
have alreac 
Vicer which 
without bel 
{hine in iC ; 
thenulcer, | 
becaufe of ¢! 
put bim iota 
all chat wee @ 
vapors of th 
Diafto:< ot 
{pirits co ch 
tharibai ly 
the putrid 
the caule 
becaufe he 
with extreal 
paine. 
the heate of 
the mouth. 
throate fec 
becured bj 
inthe chigh® 
leaft by a 
which mi,! 
unco the prg 
preene, ang 
could not! 
muft bee ag 
hearbes bo 
an earthen 
lianen clot! 


q 
= 
. 
“ 


1B.29. 


¢ King with 
onowr,as to 
Of Aares his 
‘ture of the 
ons inthofe 
-dime te 
et his hurt. 
God to 
ures, which 
uctle was:as 
to come 
and 
to him. 
countenance 
gcdand jeane, 
rcht it witha 
1g in the mid- 
alfo certaine 
mified, and 
hat the naru- 
Legge croo- 
breadth of the 
mand likewife 
neither had 
tell often into 
nd had often- 
his hands to 
forces much 
houghe there 
him courage 
y the grace of 
i wenta walk. 
grace tocure 
nts, tocome 
de the waycs 
itehin where 
great peeces 
ore of good 
mood oovrifh- 
entred into 
‘a Gentlemen 
vailed much 
apoltema- 
ch fhewed it 
Caries inthe 
Be anfwer,hee 
ce they could 
rch the cover- 
other chings 
of the Lords 
mhere was yct 
mc {uch chings 
confulcation 
was 


29. contatning devers voyages. 


was, that all thefe accidents were come by reafon of the bullet bi in 

joyat of the knee which had broken the Ligaments, tendons,and 
mufcles which tye the fayd joynt together with the Os femorss, alio nerves 
veines, and arteries from whence had followed paine,inflammation apofteme 
and ulcer: and that wee muft begin the cure by the difeafe cabich Was 
the caufe of all the fayd accidents, that is to fay, to make apertions togive iflue 
co the matter reteined in the interfpaces of the mufcles, and in the {uve 
fance of them: Likewife to the bones which cavfed a sreat corruption in 
the whole thigh, from whence the vapors did arife and were carryed tothe hearr 
whrch caufed the fincope, and the feaver; and the feaver an univertal! heate through 
the whole body; and by confequent, depravation of che whole Occomomie. Like- 
wife that the faid vapours were communicated to the brainc, which caufed the Epi- 
lipfic,and trembling, andto the ftomacke difdaine and loathing, and hindred ie 
from doing his functions, whichare cheefelyto conceg and difgeftthe meate, and 
toconvert itinto Chylss, which not being well concocted, they ingender crudities 
and ebftructions, which makes that the parts are nor nourifhed, and by confequent 
the body gryes, and growes leane; and becaufe alfo irdid not doe any exercife, 
for every part which kath not his motion remaincth languid, and «tropbrated,be- 


— caufe the heate & {pirits are mot fent or drawne thither,from whence followes mor- 


tification. And to nourith and fatrenthe body , frictions muft be made univerfally 
through the whole body, with warmelinnen cloathes, above, below, on the right 
fide, and left, and round about: tothe endto draw the blood and fpirics from with- 
in outward, andtorefolve any fuliginous vapours retained betweene the skinae, ' 
and the flefh ; thereby the parts fhallbe nouriihed and reftored, (as | have hereto.’ 
fore fayd in the tenth booke treating of wounds of Gunfhot) and wee muftthen 
ceafe when we {ee heate and redaefie in the skinne, for feare of refolving that wee 
have already drawne, and by confequent make it become more leane. As forthe 
Vicer which he bad upon hisrumpe, which came through toolong lying uponit 
without being remooved, which was thecaufe that the {pirits conld not florifh or 
fhine in it ; by the meanes of which there fhowld bee inflammation, apofteme and 
thenulcer, yea with loffe of fubftance of the fubje& fleth , witha very great paine ; 
becaufe of the nerves which are diffeminated in this part. That wee muft likewife 
put him into another foftbed, and give him a cleane fhirt, and theets; otherwife 
all chat wee could doe would ferve fornothing, becaufe that thofe excrements and 
vapors ofthe matter retained {o long in his bed, are drawne in by the Syftole and 
Diafto!e of the Arteries whichare difleminared through the skin, and caufe the 
{pirits co change and acquire an ill quality and corruption, whichis feene infome 
thar fhall lye ina bed where one hath {weate forthe Pox, who will get the Pox by 
the putrid vapours which fhall remaine foakedin the theets and coverlers. Now 
the caufe why he couldin no wife fleepe, and was as it were in a confumption,t’was 
becaufe he eate little, and did notdoe any exercife, and becaufe hee was grieved 
with extreame paine, For thereis nothing that abateth fo much the ftrength as 
gine. Thecaufe why his tongue was dry and towle,was throughthe vehemence of 
the heate of the feaver, by the vapors which afcendea through the whole body to 
the mouth. For aswefay inacommonproverbe, whien an Oven is well heate,the 
throatefeclesit. Having difcourled of the caules and accidents, 1 fayd they muft 
be cured by their contraries, and firft we muft appeaic the paine, making apertions 
inthe thigh co evacuate the matter retained, not cvacuating all at a time for feare 
leat by a fodaine great evacuation there might happen a great decay of {pirits, 
which might much weaken the paticnt and thorten hisdayes. Secondly, to looke 
unto the great {welling and cold in his Legge, fearing leaft it fhould fall istoa Gan- 
preene, and that actuall heate muft bee applyed unto him becaule the potential 
could not reduce the intemperature, de potentsa ad actam forthis caufe hot brickes 
muft bee applyed round about, on which fhould bee catt a decoction of nervall 
hearbes boyled ia wine and Vinegar, then wrapt up in fome napkin, andto the feere 
an earthen bortle filled with the fayd decoction, flopt and wrapt up with tome 


lianenclothes; alfo chat fomentations much be made upon the chigh sand whole 
2 


4 
4 
+7 
- 


eAneApologicor 


Treatife, L 1Bs2 9, 


Legge,of a deco@ion made of Sage Rofematy, Time, Lavender, flowers of Camo. 
mile,melilot and red Rofes boyled in white wine, anda made with Oak. 
athes witha little Vinegar, and halfean handfullof falt, This deco@ion hath ver. 
tue ro attenuate, incife, refolve and drye the grofle vifcoushumor. The fayd fo. 
mentations mutt bee ufed along while, tothe endthere may beca greater refoly. 
tion; for being fo done a long time together, more is tefolved than attracted, be. 
caufethe humor contained in the part is liquified, the skin and the fleth of the muf. 
clesis ratified. Thirdly,that there muft be applyed upon the rumpe a great emp). 
fter made of the red deficcativeand wy menentum Comitiffa of cach equall parts incor. 
porated together, tothe end to appeate his paine and dry up the Vicer, alfo to make 
him a little downe pillow which might beare his rumpe aloft without leaning upon 
it. Fourthly to refrefh the heate of his kidneys one fhovld apply the unguent cal. 
led Refrigerans Galewi frefhly made, and upon that the leaves of water Lillies, Then 
a napkin dipt in Oxycrate, wrung out and oftea renewed: and for the corroboration 
and ftrengthning of his heart a refrefhing medicine fhould bee applyed made with 
oyle of menuphar, and unguent of Rofesanda little faffron dillolvedin Role Vine. 
gar,and Treaklefprcad upon a peece of Scarlet: For the Sémcope which proceded 
fromthe debilitation of the naturall ftrengthtroubling thebraine. Alfohe mutt ufe 
good’ nourifhment full of juice, as rere egges, Damaske prunes ftewed in wine 
and fugar, allo Pamade made with the broth ot the great pot(of which I have alrea- 
dy {poken) with the white flefhy parts of Capons, and Partridge wings minecd 
{mall,and other roftmeate cafie of difgeftion, as Veale, Goate, P igeon, Partridge, 
and the like. The fauce fhould be Orenges, Verjuice, Sorrell, fharpe Pomegranc:s 
and that he fhould likewife eate of them boyled with good hearbes; as Sorre|], Ler- 
tice,Purflan, Succory, Boglofle, Marygolds, and other thelike. Atnight hee might 
ufecleanfed barley with juice of Newaphar and Sorrell, of each two ounces, with 
five or fix graines of Opiamandof the fourecold feedes bruifed, of each halfe an 
ounce, which isa remedy nourifhing and medicinall, which will provoke him to 
fleepe ; that his bread fhould be of Meflin, neithertoonew nor too ftale; andtor 
the great paine of hishead, his haire muft be cut, and rub his head with Oxirr/od:- 
num luke watine, and leave adouble cloth wet therein upon its likewife fhould be 
made for him a frentall of oyle of Rofes, Nesuphar Poppies, and a little opivm and 
Rofe Vinegar, and a little Campher and to renew it fometimes, Moreover one 
fhou!d cauie him to {mell to the flowers of Henbane and Nenuphar bruited with Vi- 
nigcr Rofewater, anda littlecampher wrapped in a handkercher,which fhall be of. 
ten and along timc held to his nofe tothe ead that the fmell may be communicated 
tothe braine, andthefethings tobe continned till thatthe great inflammation and 
paine be paft for feare ofcooling the braine toomuch. Befides,one may cavie itto 
raine artificially in powring downe from fome high place into a kettle, and that it 
make fucha noyfe that the patient may heare it, by thefe meanes fleepe thal! bee 
provokedonhim. And asforthe retraction of his Legge that there was hope to 
rcdreffe at, when evacuation was made of the matter and other humors contained in 


the thigh, which by theit extention (made by repletion) have drawne backe the 


Leg,which might be remedied in rubbing the whole joynt of the knee with /“a24¢r- 
tam Dtalthea and oylcot Lillies, and alittleagua vite, and uponit tobe |aid,blacke 
wooll withthe ereafe thereof. Likewife putting inthe hamme a feather.-pillow fou!- 
ded in double,and by little and little to make his Legto ftretch out. All which my 
difcourfe was well approoved of bythe Phy fitions and Chirurgions:the confuleation 
ended wee went to the ficke patient, and 1 made himcthree apertions in his thigh, 
from whence iflued out great quantity of matter and Samies ; and at the fame time 
drew out fome fcales ofbones, nor would] let out too much aboundance of the 
faid maser for feare of too much decaying his ftrength : Then two or three houres 
after I caufeda bed tobee made neare his owne, where there were cleane white 
sheets then a {trong man lifted him into it, aud rejoyced much inthat hee wastaken 
out of his foule ftinking bed. Soone after hee demanded to fleepe, which hee did al- 


moft foure houres, whereallthe people of the houfe beganto rejoyce, cheefely 
Monficur the Duke of A/cet his Th 


L 18.29 
~The: dayes 


applyedto ™ 
the finuofityg 


made with 


on ita great 
fuch dexterir 
diminifh, T 


chat it reftor@ 


con{ultation 
ceafed he be: 


his Phy {ition 


rwomoncth 
poorc whick 


cothencedyJ 
helpe them. 


whereof he \ 
have acon{o 


we fo 


carried and 
by. The Cc 
him, came th 
amendment, 
ing and drint 
all merrily 


men neighod™ 


And as {oon 


out another 


ereatly loved 
by reafon of! 
infomuch tha 


of the Citty @ 


Monts, wher 
He told then 


{were that 


me better co 


goe thither, | 
cer they 


ner ready, 2 

will. Wew 
me, and tot! 
likewife to | 
pany, he wa 


Cattle of 44 


to recount 


pany had dr 


alittle wit! 
hada defire 


Afcot and 


the Couptt 
fought and 
it was but B 


iven it us 


the fayd M 
people can 
keepe him 
50 gentic 
his brother 


* 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
4 | 
aq 
‘ 


rsof Camo. 
mic with Oake 
| on hath Ver. 
he fayd fo. 
Cater reloly- 
ttracted 
the muf. 
preat Cm pla. 
| parts iacor- 
alfo tO make 
canine Upon 
Uneuent cal. 
lies, Then 
etroboration 
made with 
Rofe Vine- 
ach proceded 
he mu(t ule 
wed in wine 
I have alrea- 
ings minced 
. Partridge, 
pmegrances ; 
orrel], Ler- 
1t hee mighe 
uNCces, with 
ach halfe an 
oke him to 
ale; and for 
h Oxirrbodz- 
ic fhould be 
le optums and 
vTCover one 
fed with Vie 
fhallbe of. 
mmunicated 
IMation and 
y cavle itto 
and thacic 
ve fhall bee 
vas hope to 
ontained in 
e backe rhe 
Waguen- 
laid, blacke 
illow foul- 
| which my 
onfulrarion 
an his thigh, 
{fame time 
Hance of the 
hree houres 
leane white 
was taken 
h hee did al- 
cheefely 


The 


The dayes followi injeGions j 
made with bottome and cavities the Vicer, 
IN qua Vite,and fometimes in wine, 

PP and dry the {pongie and loofe fieth,bolfters. at rh 
the finuofityes hollow tents of Lead. that the Sanies mix 
on ita great Emplatt ves might have paflage our; and ups 
fuch he Diacalcishees diflolved in wine:likewife I did rowle it with 
dissinith me at ke hadno paine,which being appeafed the fever began mucii to 
Then! made him drinke wine moderztel 
rately allayed with water, kn 
that it reftores and quickens the {pirits: and all the thinos whi 
confultation were accomplitht according to time bis nd fe per 
“5 Cs an 
began to grow better, and difcharged two of his 
ylitions , forhat we were butehree withhim. Now I remained th 
two moncthes, which was not without feeing divers ficke peop! ree — 
poore whickhcame to me three or feure leagues about. The 
tothe ncedy,all which he r gave meateand drinke 
Y> ccommended tome, andprayed mealfo for his fake 

helpethem.| proteft I did not refule avy onc, and did to tiem what! off 7 ‘ould, 
whereof he was joyfull. Then when I faw he beganto mead, Ite! i visemes 
have aconfort of Violo Ki, hee muft 
oions & ajelter to make him merry,which he did:in one th 

we fo wrought, that he could hold himfelfe up ina chaire, and made himkifeeob 
carried and walke in his garden, and at the gate of bis Caftle to fee rhe sate 
peopie patle 

by. The Countrey people of two orthree Jeagues about knowing they could fe 
him, came the teatt day male and female, to fing and dance pell mel] of 

amend ment,all being very gladro fee him, which was nor done without lau 

ing and drinking.He caus {till a barrellof beere tobe given them, and the d 

al! merrily to hisgood heairh, And the Cittizens of Asont Hainaut and 
mea neighbours came to fee him in admiration, as a man coming tromthe abe: 

And as foone ashe began tomend, he was not without company, and as one een 

out another came in, to vilitehim: histable was alwayes well covered. Hee was 

greatly loved of the Nobility and of the common people,as well for his liberality as 
by reafon of his beauty, and honefty, having a pleafant looke and a gracious fj bic 

infomuchthat thofe that beheld his face were conftrained tolovehim. The heeft 
of the Citty of Afomts came on Saturdayto befeechhim to permit mee togoe to 

Monts, where they had a great defire te feaft,and make me good clicere for his fake 

He told them he would pray me ro goe there, whichhe did. But I made them an. 

{were that they fhould not doe me fo much honour, asalfo that they could not ‘ve 

me better cheere than had with him. And he prayed mee againe affe Qionatch tO 

soe thither, and that fhould doe that for his fake, to which [ agreed, Thed 
rer they fetcht me with two Coaches, and being arrived at Monts we found the 
ner ready, and the cheefe of the Citty with their wives, {tayed for mee witha good 
will. We went to the Table and they placed meat the upperend, and drankeallro 
me, and tothe health of Monfieur D’auret, faying that he was very happy, and the 
likewife to have obtained me to take him in hand, for that they knewrhat in this 
pany, he was greatly honoured and loved, Afterdinnerthey led mcebacke tothe 
Caftle of Aaret,where Monficur the Marquefie flayd for me with great expeQation 
to recount unto him, what we had done in our banquet, I told him that all rhe com- 
pany had dranke divers times to his health:in 6 weekes he began touphold himfelfe 
alittle with crutches, andto giow very fatand geta lively nacurall colour. Now he 
hada defire to goe to Beaumont which is the dwelling place of Monfieurthe Duke of 
Afcot and made himielfe carriedinagreat chaire with eight mes by turnes, and 
the Country folkes where we pafled along, knowing ‘twas Monfieurthe M arquefl € 
fought and {trove together who fhould catty him, and conftrained us to drinke,bue 
it was but Beere, but I bcleeve haditbeene Wine or Hippocras they would have 
given it us with avery good will, fo much did they fhew themfelves joyfullto fee 
the fayd Marqueffe, and prayd all to God for him. Being arrived at Beaumont all the 
people came before us to doc him reverence, and prayed God toblefle him, and 
keepe him ingood health. Weentred into the Caftle where there was more than 
50 gentlemen which the Duke of 4/cot had fent for to come make good cheere with 


his brother, who kept his table furnifht three daycs together. After dinner the 
gentic- 


containing divers vo ae inte 


4 
j 
| 
{ 
3 
24 
« 


eAn Treatife, 


1172 


gentlemen runnc at the Ring, playd at Foyles,and rejoyced greatly to fee Monficy; 
Aaretoecaufethey had heard he would never come out of his bed againe, or be cy. 
ted of his hurt. was alwayes at the upper end of thetable, whercevery one dranke 
carovfts to bim,& me, thinking to make me foxt which theycould not do:foud dran}. 
but according to my old cuftome.A few dayesafterwee returned backe and took 
leave of Madam the Dutchefle of 4/cot, who tooke a Diamond ring from her fin oe 
which fhe gave me, acknowledging I had very well dreft ber brother; which Di. 
mond was more worth than fifty Crownes. Monfieur dures crew ftill better and ber. 


ter, and walked all alone round about his garden with crutches. | beg’d leave of him 


divers times ,to come away to Par#s, declaring that his Phyfition, and Chirurgion, 
would well doe the reft that remained, for the cure of his greefe. And now to begin 
alittle to eftrange my felfe fromhim, I prayd him to give meleave to goe fee the 
Citty of Antwerp which he willingly accorded to: and commanded his Steward to 
conduct me thither accompanied with two Pages: we pafled through A7Zal:enes and 
Bruxele, where the cheefe of the Citty prayed the fayd Steward, that at our revurne 
they might heare of it; and that they had a greatdetire to feaft me, as they of Monys 
had done, I thank’ them moft kindly, and tol them that [ was not worthy of {uch 
honour; I wastwo dayes and a halfeto feethe Citty of Antwerp, where (ome Mer. 
chants knowing the Steward, prayd him to dee them the honour,that they might be- 
ftow a dinner or {upper uponus, There was firiving who fhould have us, and were 
allvery joyfull toheare of the good health of the Marquefle of Awret, doing me 
more honourthan | expected: To conclude, we came backe tothe Marquetle mg- 
king good cheerc, and within five or fixe dayes I asked my leave of him, which he 
granted with great greefe,and gave me an honeft Prefent, andof great valew, and 
made me be conducted by the fayd mafter of his houfe and two Pages, even tomy 
houle at Part. 

I have forgot to tell you, thatthe Spanzards have fince ruined, and demolifhe his 
Cattle of Aarer, fack’t, pillag’d, rifled and burm all the honfes,and Villages belong. 
ing unto him, becaufe he would not be of their fide, inthe flaughters and ruines of 
the Low Countryes. 


T he Voyage of Bourges, 15 62. 


. q He King with his Campe remained not leng at Bosrges, butthofe within yeeld- 


edit up, and went out with their jewells faved, I know nothing worthy of me- 
mory, but that a Boy of the Kings privie kitchin, who being neere the walls of the 
Citty before the compofition was made, cryed with a loud voyce, Huguenot, hugue- 
not, fhoer heere, fhoote heere, having hisarmes lifted up, and hishand flretched 
out; a fouldier fhot his hand quite through with a bullet: having received his ftroake, 
he came and found me out todrefle him, My Lord high Conftable, {ecing che Boy 
to have his hand all bloody, and all rent andtorne; demanded ofhim who had hurt 
him. Then there wasa gentleman who faw the thot made, fayd it was well beftow'd 
becaufe he cried, Hagsenot {hoot here fhoot here. Then the fayd Lord Conftab!le fayd 
this Huguenot was a good musketiere, and bare a pietiful! mind, for ic was very 
ly if he would have thot at his head, he might have done itmore ea fily chan in the 
hand, Idrefl’d the fayd Cooke who was very ficke, butatlength wascured, ut 
lameneffe of his hand, and ever fince his companions cal] hiny {ic is 

ivineg, 


The battell of Saint Denis, 1567. 


AN as for the battell of Saint Demss,there were divers {laine afwell on one fide 4s 
on the other ours being burt, went backe to to be dretled together with 
the Prifoners who were taken,whereof I drefled a great part, The King com manied 
me by the requeft of the Lady high Conftable , togoe to her houle co dreile my 
Lord, who had received aPiftoll {hot in the middle of the {pondilis ef his dace, 
whereby he prefently loftall fence and motion of thighes and legees, with recension 


118.29. 


Of excremcn 
becaulethar 
fenfe and mo 
hemence of 
daycs hedy 
fayd wound 
befeech the 
countcrs, and 


N° Tia 
we hav 
divers Crt 
with the dec 
Chaftedan chi 
Phyiicke anc 
rurgions if ch 
to learne fom 
the young C@ 
a grcevous 
deceated Kin 
was found gr 
ving a black: 
was Under hi: 
his words,an 
to open it tor 
atly did, and 
which are dr: 
other like litt 
tained a flimy 
left bios in ché 
Monhieur @ 
Feaver,acco 
two dayes w 
the feaver ce. 
and were by 
[have pub 
[have alway 
Not ingood 
fhewerh the 


a 
" 
« 
2 
4 
4 
ia ; 
a 


9. 
fee 
e, or be cu. 

} one dranke 

drank 

x and tooke 

ym her finger 

which Dia- 
etter and ber. 

i leave of him 

Chirurgion, 
ow to begin 
fee the 

s Steward to 

lalignes and 

it Our returne 
mhey of Monts 
mrthy of {uch 

fome Mer. 
icy might be- 

US, and were 

et, doing me 

arquefie ma- 

which ke 
valew, and 
even tomy 


emolifht his 
ages belong- 
and ruines of 


ithin yeeld- 
orthy of me- 
wallsof the 
hugue- 
nd flretched 

his ftroake, 
eing the Boy 
ho had hurt 
ell beftow’d 
onftab!le fayd 
as very likce 

than in the 
scured, but 
he is 


gone fide 4s 
ogether with 
commanded 
to drelle my 
his backe, 
ith retention 
of 


115.29. concerning diverfe Voya 


Ofexcremcnts ,not bein gable to caft out his Vrine, nor anything by the fundament 
becaufethat the fpinall marrow, (ftom whence proceede the, finewes to give 
fenfe and motion to the inferiour parts.) was bruifed, broken, and torne by the vee 
hemence of the bullec, He likewife loft his reafon, and underttanding, and in a few 
dayes hedyed, The Chirurgiens of Parts were a long time troubled to drefle the 
fayd wounded people, I beiceve (my little mafter) that youfaw fomeof them, I 


befeech the great God of Vi@ories,that we may never be imployed in fuch evill en. 
counters, and dilafters, 


The voyage of Bayonne, 1564, 


Nn [fay moreover,what I did in the voyage with the King to Bayonne, where 
we have beene two yearesand more tocompaile all this Kingdome, where in 
divers Cittiesand Villages I have beene called into confulrations for divers difeates, 
with the deceafed Montieur Chaplaine cheefe Phifition to the King, aod Moniteur 
Chafiedan cheete to the Queene Mother, aman of great honour and knowledge in 
Phyiicke and Chirurgery: making voyage | was alwayes inquifitive of the Chi- 
rurgions ifthey had marked any rare thing of remarke ia their practice, to theend 
ro learne {ome new thing. Being at Bayonne (here happened two things of remarke for 
the young Chirurgions. The firit was, chat Idreft a Spemz/b Genticman, who had 
a grcevous great impeftume in his throate: he came to have beene touched by the 
deceaied King Charles ior the Evill. made incifioninhis Apofteme, where there 
was found great quantity ofcreeping wormes as biggeas the point of a fpindle, ha- 
ving a blacke head; and there was great quantity of rotten flefh. Moreover there 
was under his tongue an impottume called Reaa/e,which hindred him to utrer forth 
his words,and to cate and {wallow his mcate : he pray’d mee with his held up hands 
toopen it for him if it could be done without perill of his perfon, which I immedi- 
atly did, and found under my Lancet a folid body, which was five ftones like thofe 
which are drawne from the bladder. The greateft was as big as an Almond and the 
other like little long Beanes,which were five in number ; in thisapofteme was con- 
tained a flimy humor of a yellow colour which was morethan foure {poonefills; I 
left hioxin the hands of a Chirurgion of the Cittyto finith the cure. 

Monfieur de Fentaiwe Knight of the Kings Order,bad a great continual] peftilent 
Fea ver accompany ed with divers Carboneles in divers parts of his body, whe was 
two dayes without cealing to bleed at nofe,nor could itbe ftancht;and by that meanes 
the feaver ceafed with averygreat{weat, and foone after the Charboncles sipened 
and were by me dreffed and by the grace of God cured, 

I have publifht this Apologie to the end that each man may know, with what foot 
[have alwayes marched, and I thinke there isnetany manfo ticklifh, which taketh 
Not ingood part what I have faid, lecing my difcourfe is true, and that the effect 
fheweth the thing cto the eye, reafon being my warrant againft all Calumnies, 


The endof the Apologie and Vayages. 


Geges 


q 
q 
| 
| 
> 
4 
4 
* 
* 


THINGS TREA: 


ted of in this WWorke. . 


A 

Bortions why frequent in apefislent 
fon. Pac. 821 

their caules,erc. 921 

Abdo Gores mufculi. 223,07 238 
Ab/ceffes bow to be opened. 259 
Acowiie,the [ymptomes canfed thereby, and 
their cure. 807 


AGinall Cautertes preferred before Poten- 
trall,749. Ti and ufé,750. 


75.1. Thesr force againft venemows bites, 


784 
A&ion, the definition and dsvsfion bhere- 
of, 23 
Volumtary Action. 24. 
Adders their bitings , the /ymptomes there 
one nfuing together with thecure. 79° 
Adipofavena. 116 
Adduiaores mufcult- 222 
Adjunct s of things natuvall. 27 
Adnata. five Conjunctiva, one of. the coates 
of the Eye. 182 
Zigilops what ,9 48. the differences thereof, 
Ibid.she cure. 
priacum, the ferce thereof againji 
trefaction, 433, 4 clanfer and not 4 fap- 
purative, 46. defcriptions thereof, 456s 
4.23. the praife thereof. 856 
Afterbirth, fee Secumarme. I 
After-tonguc. | 19 
After-wreft. 518 
Age what, the fiomthereof. 9 


she fowre feafons of 102 


Azes compared 


jeave, 70 
A gonie what. 40 
Agues, fee Quotidian, Quartaiae ,Tertian. 

Baflard Agues how 2865 


Agelutinative medicine’, 326. their nature 
and ufe. "41046 
Aire an Element the prime gualithes thereof, 
thenecefity thereof for /if?.29 whith 
hurt full,30 under flood tiereby, ib, 
How it changes our bodies.31%. Thou chia 
Summer colder than the Braiwe, 35 7: 
Tow becomes hartfall,a1 6: How to be 
corveched.429.Of what force in breeding 
3 3.what force the Starre, have 
upon 434. How that which ts ¢ 
or vinemous may kill aman:782,. How 
tt may bee corrupted 819. Pent up it ts 
apt to putrifie,8 37. change thereof con. 


aucesto the cure ofthe 37 
Allantoides tunica, there is no fach, 

by three feverall reafons. 


Albugineus humozjthe theres, 18.4 
Almonds of the throate or cares their Hifto- 
.bheir tumer with the Paafes and 
fignes thereof, 29>. The 294 
Almonds encreafe the paine ofthe bead, 


om 35 
Alopecia phar the whirh-enra 
and how and which nor. gg 
Amnios tunica the fubfance 4nd mapofare 
CLESs > Amphi- 


J 


The Table. 


Amphibliftroides, vel retifermis 
103 

Ampstation of a member when to be made, 
457, How to be performed.458. To 
fianch bleeding enfuing thereon,459.how 
to dreffe the part,460.To performe the 
rcft of the cmre, 461. Sometimes made 

ata jornt 46 3 
Anatomy the necefity of the knowledg there- 
f,79. Athrecfold method thereof, 80. 
The definition thereof,crc. ibid. 
Anatomical adminiftration of the lower 
Belly 87, Of the fernon,1 39. Axiomes, 
122,152,183 ,212,226 

Ancurifma what,286.° Hew cared, 287. 
Which incurable, iid. 
Anger, the effecis thereof. 39 
Angina, fee /quinancie, 
Anima how many wayes taken.7 . See foule, 
Animal parts which,83, Their 
4 

Anodyne medicines,1047. For the eyes, 
379 in paines of the tecth. 401 
Antidots mult be given in great quantities , 
735,No one againft all poyfons, 809. 
To be ufedin the cure of the plague, 843, 


844 
Antipathy, fee fympathy. 
Antipathy betweene fome Men and aCat, 


Arachnoides, five araneola tunica. 

183 
Araoticke medicines. TO40 


Archagatus 4 Remane Chirwrgion, flaine by 
the people. 5 
Argeorum Vivum, fee Hydiargyrum. 
Ariftomachus rhe Philofopher a eveat ob- 
Server of Bees. 59 
Arme or fhoulderbone,the fractures theres. 


j 
Arme and the aud mufcles thereat 


214.Tbe defeci thereof bow to be fapplyed. 


880,882 
Arfaicke the poyfoncses quality thereof ang 
the cure, 810 


Arromes, wounds made by them, and their 
several formes, 438. How tobe drawn: 


forth. 440 
Artery what 97. The divifion of the orcas 


dtfcendent Artery, 113,115. 


on of the left fubclavian Arsery,153. Of 


the Axillaric,211. Of the crurah.2>3, 
Not dangerous te be opemed,641. Ronch 
Artery.157,Ficure of the Arteries, 154 
Arteria Venola amd the diftr ibution there. 
of, 147. Carotydes,15 3. Cervicalis, 
ibid, Intercottalis, ibid. Mammaria, 
ibid ,mufculofa, ibid. Humcerariadu- 
plex,ibid. Thoracica duplex, ibid. Af. 


804. Of poyfoms wiih poyfows. $23. pera,15 6.Mufculaj225. 
Ants,59-Their care, 60 Arthrodia what. 243 
Apes their smmitation of mens actions, Articulation and the kinds thereof, 242, 

69 243,244 
Apium rifus, the poy/omous quality thereof, A{carides bawe knowne, 766 
with the cure. 80 


Apologie concerning wounds made by Gun- 


5 Mfcites, fee Dropfie, 


A/pe his bite ana the fyrmptomes that happen 


foot,4.32+Thas fach wounds are not poy- thereon with their cure. 794 
fontd,436 Concerning binding of Affes milke how tobe ufed im the care of 
fels,ere. 1133 Heéfigue, 395 
Apophlegmatifmes what, and their Aftragalus, | 233 
1069 Arheroma what,271.The cure thereof, iv. 
Apophyfes clinoides, 172,174 Atrophia how helped, 634,635 
Aphorifmes concerning Chirurgery felecied Attractive medicines what, 1939 
out of Hippocrates, 1116. 1117. Of Auriculacordis, 145 
the Author. Auripigmentum, the quality, 4nd 
Apoftumes, [ee impeflumes. the cure thereof. 810 
Aposhecaries, choife of [uch as foal bave Antamne pire condition thereof. 10 
care of thofe ficke of the Plague. 830 Axsomes anatomical, 122.152,18 3,212; 
Appendices glandulofz, 122 22.6. Philofophisall. 134 
Aqua fortis the poyfoneus quality, and the 
cure thereof, al $10 
Aqua theriacalis the defcription manner B 
of making thereef,755 good againft 
the Plague. at $24 
Aqua bewdifisled, 1100 Backe-bone and the wféethereofi 198 
Agueus humor, 183 Bagges the diverfity and nfe. 


Ball bellowes. 
Balneum Max 
pal(ames fu 
wounds. 
p.lfame of V 
of Fallop: 
Bandages,s he. 
for the 
them,55 4 
fraciares, 
57: 
Barnard the 
Barvennes th 
Women. 
pafiliske, he: 
thereof. 
Battailes whe 
Voyages. 
Bathes 
Bathes thesr 
How to kn 
cacy,iDic, 
bartfallit 
Beautroll 
Bearwo7mces . 


Beares their 
Beafts seven! 
facultse 
care of 
may be tar 
thers 
ses thetr 20 
59. fe 
Baggars 


Belly why 
lower bel: 
Bezoar ana! 
Biceps mui 
Binding of 
apologic 
therefore 
ence, 11 


Birds thez 
53. Ra 
UC 


Bird of Pa 
Birth, fee G 
Bitings ¢/ 


Bitings of 4 
Adder 
Bitter shi 


a 
- 
4 
a 
a 
4 


tunica. 
1832 


yrum. 
ob- 


| 59 


375 
cles thereof 


880,88, 
sherees,ang 
S10 

494 their 
to be 
440 

of the orcas 
5. Diftribati- 


9,153. OF 


Ah, 223, 
04 Ss Roach 
Artertes, 4 
shut Lom here. 

Cervicalis, 

Mammaria, 

uM Craria du- 
lex,ibid, Af- 


243 
phercof, 242, 


2435244 
766 


that bappew 


794 
the care of 
395 
233 
¢ thereof, ib. 
6345635 
1039 
T45 
quality, and 
SIO 
10 
+,183,212, 
184 


198 
_ 1071 


laine by 
> 


Beautroll abeaft of Florida, 
Bearwormes, the bites and the cure thereof. 


The Table, 


Ball bellowes. 
Balneum Marie, 1096,1097 
Balfames fit to heale fimple, mot contu/ed 
Wounds. 434 
Balfame of cfalius bis de[cription, 1107, 
Of Fallopius bis defcription, ibid. An a- 
nodyne,and farcoticke ome, 402 


Bandages, their differences,5 5 3, What cloth 


beft for thers ibid. Indications how te fit 
them,554. Three kinds ntceffary in 
fracinres,555 Common precepts for their 
ufe,557-V wheretothey ferve, 558 
Barnard the Hermite, 1017 
Barrennes, the cause thereof inmen.9 31. 
women. 932 
Bafiliske, her defcription, bite and the cure 


thereof, 792 
Battailes where the Author was present, 
Voyages. 20 
Bathes good it paine of the Eyes. 646 


Bathes their faculties and differences 1074 
How to know whencethey bave therr 
cacy,ibid, Their facultzes and to whom 


bartfull1o75 balfe bashes, 1073 


798 


Beares their craft: 56 
Beafts, inventors of fome remedies,5 6 Their 


facultse iu perfageng 57. Thesr love and 
cure of their young,60. Moft wild ones 
may be tamed,64. They know one ano- 
thers votce. 72 
ces their government Care ana juftice 
59. fiincing the cure thereot,793 


Bacgars their coufinages awa crafty trickes. 


992.993 6s 
Belly why not bowy, 85. The dswifton of the 
lower belly, > 
Bezoar and Bezoarticke medicines. 808 
Biceps mutculus. 218 and 231 
Binding of the veffels for 
apologie therefore, 1133. Authorsties 
therefore, 1134..Reafon, 1135. Expert 
ence, 1136. Héflories 10 confurme st. 
1137 
nirds their indufiry in building their nefis, 
58. Ravenous birds, 70. Counterfect 
mans Voice,72.They bave tanght men to 


_ 


wounds of the Cheft, 
Bladder of the Gall, 4 
Bladder of Vrine,123. The fabftance fizure. 
Crc.ibid. Signes of the wounds thereof, 
397. thereof and their cure 481. 


686 
Bleare-eyes their differences and cure. 
6 
Bleeding in wounds bow helped 328. How 
foppea by binding the veffells, 341, Why 
deviled by our Author, 462. in amputs- 
tion of Members, 459 
Blood the temper thereof,11. The material 
ana efficient caufes thereof,.12, Where 
perfected ibid. the fonre humors com- 
prehended under that general wame ibid. 
compared with new wine, ibid the nature, 
confiftance,cotoar tafte ana ufe, 13 
Blooa-letting whether ntceffary at the be- 
ginning of, pefli lent difeafes. S45 
Bloodletting, whennece/fary ina fynochus. 
261.When tm an Eryfipelas,263. When 
ia 4 Tertian, 267, le what wounds not 
frary,326. The two chiefe indications 
shereof,359.Wwby nece/fary inthe Fracture 
of the beele,632..See Phlebotomie. 
Bloody Vrine and the caufes thereoferc. 
6385 
Boate: bone, 234. 
Bedy how divided,83.85. The forepart 
thereof 86. The backe part, 87. The croos 
kedueffe thereof how helped. 876 
Bolfters and other afe. 359 
Bones, bow they feele, 31. Their definition, 
138. Their differences,1 3 9-How hurt by 
the Trepan,3 65. What haflens their 
fing, ibid. Their corruption, 371, How 
belped. 372 
Bones of the fcwll,162. Of the face,t78, Of 
the nofe.179 the auditory 
Of the arme,214. Of the backe, 198. 
Of the breaft,1 36. Of the cubst 217.0f 
the wref, afterwre/? ana fingers.218. 
Seede-bones,220.0f the Thigh, 228. Of 
the Legge.2 31. Of the foote,2 33. Of the 
Tees,234. A briefe recital of all the 
Boxes . 239 
Bones more brittle in frofty weather, 562. 
fooner knit in young bodies, 563. Their 


ine. ibid. generall cure being broken or diflocated. 
Bird of Parads[e. 1017 564. How tohelpe the fymptomes happe- 
Birth, fee Child-birth. ning thereon.5 66. Why they become rét- 
Bitings of man ana Beat venendte. 360 ten in the Lue vencrea, and Lom it may 
(782 beperceived,7 47. How helped. ib, 

Bisings of 4 Mad-dogge, Adder exe. fee Dog, ficking jt the Throate or daw, bo rhe 

ecot out, 

singer not fis to bee injeted into Brachixus Mutculus. 218 


G 3}. 


ve 
| 
a 
ig 
4 
4 | 
7 
a 
| ¢ 


The Table. 


Braine and the Hiftory thereof.165. The 
Ventricles thereof, 166. The mamillary 
proce(jes. ibid, 

Braine, the mooving or concufSion thereof, 
350 bow cures, 376 

Breafts,137. Their magnitude, figure,crc. 
ibid. How they communicate with the 


woebe. 138. 
Breaft-bone,the Hiflory thereof. 126 
Breaft bone, the deprefzon or fracture there- 

of, bow helped, 570 
Brevis muf{culus. 218 
Bronchocele, the differences thereof and the 

cure. 298 
Bruifes fee Contufions. 


Bubo what meanes the humor that caufes 
them flewes downe. 224 
Bubo's, venercall ones returning in againe 
caufes the Lues venerea, 724. Their 
eff cient and material canfes,74.6, Their 
cure, ib id 
Bubo'sin the Plague, whence their original 
817.The defcription, fignes and cure, 


85 3 progmofticks. 857 
Bubonocele what: 304 
Ballets (hot out of Gums doe not burne.410- 


They cannot be poyfoned, 


maine im the body after the healing of 


wonnds. 429 
Buprefles the:r 800 


Burnes, bow kept from bhiftring,Ar0. See 
Combuftions. 


1002 

Cacochymia what. 37 
Cacum inteftinum, 106 
Calcancum os, 234 
arteria. 113 


Callus what, and whence it proceeds, 323 
Better generated by meates of evolfe 
rifhmsent,562. Made more bandfome by 
Ligation ibid, The material ana effici- 
ent caufes thereof, 588, Medicines con- 
ducing to the generation thereof, ibid. 
How to know it breeding 589. What 
may hinder the generation thereof, and 
bow to helpe it being ill formed. 590 

Camells their kinds and condition, 70 

Cancer, the reafon of the name,r79.Canfes 
thereof ibid. differences,280. Which not 
to be cured ibid. The cure if mot nlcerated, 
ibid .Cwre if wlcerated,281. Topicke me- 
dicines tobe thereto applyed, 282 


Cancer or Canker in a childs mouth howto 
be helped, 905 


Cannons, fee Guns, 


Cantharides, their malionitieand the he/ 


thereof,799.Applycd to the head they 
ulcerate the biadder. 


Capons fubject to the Gout. 707 
Carbuncles whence thisr original! 8 7.Why 
focalled, together with their nature ca 


$09 


ufes 
ana fignes, 357. progmoflickes bid 

Caries offium, 
Carpiflexores mufculi. 222 
Carpitenfores mufculi, 22] 


Cartilago fcutiformis, vel enfiformis. 


Caruncles, their caufes, figures and ho 

742:Otber wayes of cure, 744 
Cafes their forme and ufe, 560 
Ca/pilly a flrance 69 
Catagmatsicke powders. 363 


Catalogue of Medicines and Infirumen;; 
for thesr preparation, 1109 
Of Chirurgiwal Infiruments, 1113, 


| II! 
Cataplafmes their matter and ufe. 10 bs 
Catarractes, where bred.13.4. Their difi- 
vences, causes, (v6.651. Their care at 
beginning he couching of them, 


: | 653 

Catarrhe fometimes wmalicne, and kzlling 
Cathareticke medicines, 1046 


Cats, their poyfomous quality, amd the An- 
sipathy betweene feme mew and them. 
Te 

Cauflicke medicines their mature and oe. 
1046,1047 

Canteries, act wal ones preferrea before poten 
t1all,74.9. Their feverall formes, 749, 
750,751. Their ufe, 741+ Their force 


ORES 1064 
Cepbale what. 243 
Cephalica vena. 210 
Cephalicke pouders how compof cd. 752 
Cerats whatythesr differences. 1508 
Ceratum afypt ex Philagrio. 1060 


Ceruffe.the poyfonows quality theréof ana toe 


CHT e. S10 
Certificates 0 fumary cafes. 1129 
Chalazionan affeé? of the eyelid. 642 
Chamelion his fhape ond nature. 1024 


Chance fometimes excveacs Art 49° 


out remedies. 409 
Change of native temper, borp it happens. 
18 


Chaps Chops occafioned by the Lues 
Ncrea,and the cure,7 54. 1m arvers parts 


by 


againft venemous bites, 784, Potential 


by othe; 
Chartoale 
Chemotis 
Cheft andi 
Vifion 
358.7 
abe 
Chia, whe 


Children x 
the junc 
wombe.: 
their me 

Child-birtr 
patural 
Women 0 
us ath. 

China root. 


Chirurze’). 
Chirurgin, 
Choler thet 
effects thi 
and the 
Cholericke 
mers ana 
brooke fa 
Chorion 
Chylus 
Cirfocele, 
Cure. 
Chavicle, 
Cleitoris. 
Chyfier, wi 
bloodless: 
Coates 
fiance, 4 
eyes.132 
Cockatrice. 
Cockes are} 
Colchicu: 
and the « 
Collicke, 4 
Colon. 
Collar-bon 
I 38 


hele it, | 


Collyriat 


* 
7 
mm 
% 
— | 
* 
wal 
a 
& 
7 
* 


4nd the belpe 
be head they 
Soo 

7°7 

all, 81 7 Why 
MAb Can fes 
ches ibid 
859 

371 

222 

22I 
enfiforrais. 
136 

ts ana cure, 
744 

560 

69 

363 

A uments 
9 IIIO 
L113, 
II [4 

ufe. 1062 


. Their diffe- 
Their care at 
ching of them. 
652 
¢, ana kzlisme 
| $21 
1046 
ly 4nd the An- 
ana them. 
804 
and ufe, 
1046,1047 
a ¢ poten- 
749, 
+ Their force 
4, Potest, 
1064 
243 
210 
ca. 752 
1508 
1060 
and toe 
810 
1129 
‘A 642 
TO24 
4.9. 
409 
it happens. 
18 
phe Lues ve- 
Parts 


by 


by o:ber meanes,and their cure, 
Char toate caufeth ocat ron. 

Chemois am affect of the Eye.lids, 
and she parts thereef,136. Why part- 
Y. griftly, partly bony, ibid, The di- 

fion thereof. 37. The wounds thereof, 
35S. Their cure. 389. They eafily dege- 
crate Fiftula. 391 
Chita, whetber alive or dead inthe wombe, 
913. If dead,tnen how to be extracted, 

| 914,915 
Children why beke their fathers, and grand- 
8388. Borne without a paffage in 
the fumaament,898. Their fite mthe 
wombe.900.901. When ana how to bee 
Their paine in breeping 
téeth, 959. They may have impoft wmes in 
their mothers wombe, 594 
Childbirth and the caufe thereof,899. The 
naturall unnatural time thereof, 
women bave ne certaine time 

it is at hand 902,Whats tobe done after 


it. 904 

China root, the preparation ana ufe thereof. 
73° 


Chirurgery fee Surgery. 

Chirurgun,fee Surgzon. 

Choler.the temper thereof, 11. The nathre 
confaftance, coloar tafe andufé,13- The 
effects thereof 15. Not naturali bow bred 
and the kinds thereof. 16 

Cholericke per fons ther habite of bodie,man- 


ners and difeafes.17. They cannot long 
brooke fasitag, 707 
Chorion » bat. 132 
Chylus what. 12 
Cirfocele, a kind of Rupture 
312 


Cinnamon and the water thereof. 


Chavicle, fee Collar-bone. 

Cleitoris. 

Clyfter, when prefently to bee given after 
bloodlerting,262 See Glyfier. 

Coates common coate of the Mufetes the 
flance, quantity, Of the 
eyes, 182 Of the wombe. 132 


Cockatrice, [ce Ba/iltske. 
Cockes are kingly andmartiallbirds, 66 


Colchicum the poyfonous thercef. 


and the cure. 866 
Collicke, and the kinds thereof,ec. © 
10 


Colon. 
Collar-bones, or Clavicles, their Hijtery, 


138 139. Theer frackure,5 68. Howto 
helpe it, iDide Thesr diflocation and care, 
601 


Collyria what their differences 


Colour ts the bewrayer of the temperament 28 


Columells fee Vvula, 
Combuflions aud their differences, 449. 
their cure, 45o 
Common fenfe what , 8 96 


Comparifon Letweene the bieger and leljer 
world. 


761 

Comp!exus mufculus, 201% 
Compofition of medicines the necefiity there- 
of 1099 


Compreffes, fee Boilers. 
Concectiom, fault of the firft concoction net 

mended in the after. 707 
Concufjcon of the Braine 25 0.bow helped. 376 
Conaylomata, what they are and their cure, 


| 
Conformation, the fawits thereof muft bee 
Jpeedily helped 904 
Congeftéon, two taufes thereof. 250 


Comiufions what, their caufes,4a2. Their 
gemerati cure ibid. How to be handled if 
With a wound 445 How without a 
bow kept from vangremng, 2.46 

Contu/sons of shevibs Thew cure 624. 

Convulfion,the kinds and causes thereaf.329 
the curé,330 331 Why of the contrary 
part 1 wounds of the bead. 357 

Convulfive twitching in broken members 


and the caufe thercof. 586 
Comteshave taneht the art of anacranumng 
66 

Cornea tunica. 183 
Corone, what. 243 
Coronalis vena, 
Corroberating meaicimes. 270 
Coty le whats. 243 
Cotyledoncs what. 129,891 


Courfes, how to provoke them, 863 948. 
How to flop them 864.951 952.The reas 
fon of their name 945 Their caufes.946, 
caufes of their 947. Weaat 
[ymptomes follow thereon,9 48 [ymptomes 
that follow their imimoaer ate flowing. 951 

Crabs. 69 

Crampe thecaufe and curethereof. 722 

Cranes obferve order in fying and keepe 


watch, 67 
Cremaller mufeles, 120 
Cridones what difeafe and thecwre, 319 
Crocodiles may ve tamed, 76 
Crookedne(e how be/ped. 876 
Artery, 22 
Crureus muiculus, 232 
Crus how taken, 223 
Cry ftallinus humor. 184. 


(ubitthe bones and mufcles thereof. 


Cubit-bones,the fraciure of them, 575 
Cuboides 


aA 
a 
| 
a 
* 4 
q 
% 
a 
a 
5 
| 
| 


The Table. 


Cuboides os. 234. 
Cupping olaffes and their ufe,694. ‘Their ufé 
in the cure of 4 Bubo, 353 
cures accidental and flrange,49,50. De- 
ccit fill, 51 
cuftome bow forcible, 33 
Cuticle, the matter, quantity, figure.cec. 
thereof. 
Cuttell-fifh bis craft. 68 
Cy /tice gemelle, I12 
Dartos, 11g 
Death, the inevitable caufe thereof, 41. 
How[udaaine to many. 778 


Definstion of Chirurgery. 


3 

Definition how different froma defcription, 
80 

Defluxion of bumorshow diverted, 256 
Delirium, the cau/es thereof, 3 34.The cure. 
335 

Deliverance in Childbirth bow furthered, 
903.Which dificult,g21.Which eafie.id, 
Delroides mufculus, 216 


co 7 Wherefore Some are heredttary 8 86. 
Atonflrowus accidents 
4 them. 996 


Diflocations, their kinds and manner, 3, 


sheer differences ,5 94. Caufes,ib.Siones 
595 -Prognofticks,595.The general cure. 


564.597. Symptomes that may befall ; 
di [located member, 634 


Diflocation of the jaw, 600. The cure, 
cy 601. Of the Collar. bone,601 the 
fpine, 602. Of the bead, 603. Of the 
ne cke,603,O0f the Rumpe, 607. Of the 
Ribs, ibid. Of the fhowlder 608, Of the 
Elbow 619. 0f the Styliformis procef. 
{us,621.Of the wreft,622.Ofthe After. 
wreft,623.Of the Fingers ibid. Of rhe 
thigh or bip ibid. Of the whirlebone 
630. Ofthe knce forwards, 631, Of the 
greater and leffe Focile,6 31.632, Of the 
heele.632. Of the Pafterne or Anckle 
bone,633, Of theinflep and backe of the 
focte,6 33.Of the toes, 34 
Di/membring fee Amputation. 


Dentifrices, their differences, matter, and Diflemperature and the diver fity thereof.ay 


forme. 
Depilatories, 1182 
De rina. 8 9 


Deter fives,259.1043.Theirufe. ibid, 
Devilis and their differences,9 36 .Their ti- 
sles and names, 987. They are tertificd 


and angred by divers things. 990 
Devill of the Sea, 1Oo4 
Diabete what, thecaufes, fignes and cure. 

688 

Diaphoreticke medicines. 140 
Diaphragma, /ee Midriffe, Why called 
Phrewes, 142 
Diaphy {1s whae. 231 
Diary feaver, the canfes and fignes, 260. 
The cure, 261, 
Diarthrofis, 242 
Die-tone. 234. 


Diet hath power to alter or preferve the tem- 


perament. 28 


Lier convenient for fuch as have the Gout, 
707. For {uch as feare the fione,667,In 
prevention of the Plague,822.1 the cure 
thereof. $39,840 841 

Differences of mufcles, 92,93 

Dipitum flexores mufculi.222,237 238 

Digitum cenfores mufculi. 


221,237 
Diploc what, 163 
Dijeafe the definition and divifion thereof, 

41 Caufes. | ibid, 
Difeafes ftrenge and monftrom, 49 


Difeafes incrdent to fanguine, chelericke, 
phlegmaticke and melancholscke pzrfons 


Diftillation and the kinds thereof, 1093, 
Fornaces the veffells therefore.1094. 
What to be comfidered therein,1 095 
to prepare the materialls therefore,1098 
Howto asfiill waters.1099. How Agus 
Vite.1 100. How to fre thems. 1101, 
To difisllin the Sun.ibid, By filtring. 
1102, Of Oyles.1103 Of Spirits 1105; 
Of Oyles out of Gummes.1107. Of 
of Vitrioll, 1108 

Docilisty of Beafts, 69 

Dogs their love totheir mafiers,61, Ther 
docilitic.6 9 why they become mad fooner 
than other creatures, 735. How their 
bites may be knowne. 736. Proguoflicks. 
787. Thecure of {ach as are bitten by 


them. 788 
Dorycninm, the poyfopows quality thereof 
and the cure. 805 
Doves free from sdultery. 62 


Draco marinus, the Sea Dragon his poy/e- 
nous puntiure the fymptomes c cure, 80% 
Dracunculus what,315.Thecure, 316 
Dragons their craft. oe 
Dreames of the fang mine cholericke,phlegma- 
ticke and malancholicke perfons, 17,15. 
Not tobe neglected, 36 
Dropfie what,299. The differemces, 
tomes and canes ibid. Signes amd prognee 
Sticks, 300.The cure,301, Following 

4 of the mefentery. 939 
Dugges thesr fabftance, magnitude, 
What to be dome te them to ary up 918 


Duodemu 
Dura mate 
by Trep 
we ales fe 
ftumat io. 


Eares 
a 
pine 
pea. 

Eares of the 

Eare Wax. 

Earth a col 

Earthquake 

Ecchymous it 

Echo,the ¢a: 

E [fects of PLE 

chely. 

Ejscutatort 


Elbow the ar 
fi oréit a 
in[iac,62 
fis, 

Elements bo. 
par Guals 
om are,7. 
ibid. 74 


Elephants th 
Uvhere bre 
Embalmine 
how. 
Embrionw 
Ewmsbr ocat 
Emollicnt 


Emplaflers 
Stenes 
Their #{¢ 
cation. 

Empilatiru 
De grati 
de lanu.@ 
ceruia, 
prum.s 
OS ibid. 
cilagint 
chyluc 

Empyem: § 

Emsptine(/¢ 

Emulgens 

Enarthrot 

Enteroccl¢ 

Ephemera 


fignes th 


a 
5 
4 
4 
ig 
al 
x 


tary 886. 


accidents 


©34 
,Of the 
03. OF the 
07. Of the 
DOS. Of the 
ms proce![- 
Df the After. 
bid. Of the 
whirlebone, 
63 I, Of the 
Ofthe 
or Anckfe, 
i backe of the 


634 


'y thereof.ay 
eof, 1093, 
fore.10 94. 
-How 
efore, 1098 
How Aqua 
them.11Ol, 
By filtring. 
B77 sts 
27. Of 
1108 

69 

5,61. Their 
¢ mad fooner 
How their 
rognoflicks. 
mre bitter by 
788 
ality thereof 
S05 

62 

pon his poyfo- 
cure, 8 Or 
mre, 316 
68 
cke,phlegma~ 
ms,17,18. 
36 

COS, 
aud prognoe 
slowing upon 
932 

de, (36.137 
milke.9 18 
Duo- 


The Table. 


Duodemum,the magnitude,dre. 105 


Epider mis, 


Dura mater what,164+ The hurts thereof Epidydimis, 119 
by Trepanning and bow helped,37 3. Be- Epigaftriti whet,8-7. The comb aiming parts 
mcases for the inflammation andthe Apo- thereof. ibid 

frumation thereot,374.Why it cafilyen- Epigaftrica vena. I 17 
AMTES ACY LAC Mes, 375 Epiglottis what. 195 
| E Epiploon what. 

Eares their parts and Epiplois yena. 113 
wounds and cure,386.T0 [apply their de- Epiplocele, 3°4 


875 .Thetr ulcers 479. Their frope 
ping and thinos falling into them how hel- 


pea. 655 
Eares of the beart. 145 
Eare wax for what ufe tt ferves. 190 
Earth a cold and dry element, 6 
Earthquakes, their caufe, 415 
Ecchymofs what ana how cured. 343 
Echo, the caufe thereof, 190 
E fects of Phlegme. 14.Of choler awd melan- 

chely. 15 
Eysculatorte veffells in men 121.12 women, 
127 


Elbow the aiftocation thereof 619 .how to re- 
jfiore tt A:flocatea outmar aly 19. Jo the 
infide,621.Why to anchylic- 
fs, ibid. 

Elements how underftood, and their princi- 
pallqualsties,6.. What thofe of generatz- 
on ave,7. Whatthefe of mtxt bodies are, 
ibid. The caw(e of sherr tranfmstation, 

415 

Elephants,their Arength, piety,¢rc. 62,63. 
where bred,and ther qualities. 1019 

Embalming the dead, 1130. The manner 


how. 1131 
Embrion,when it takes that name, 893 


Embrocation what, & how performed, 106 3 
Emollient and refolving meascines,2 75s 
27 
Emplafters what, their drfferences,1058. 
Signes they are perfecily boyled 1059. 
Their 1m thezr appli- 
cation. 269,270 
Emplaftrum de Vago cum Mercurio, 1060 
De gratia Dei De Betoniea five 
de lanua.sbid. Oxycrocivm, 1061. De 
cerula, Tripharmacum feu 
grum,sééd, Diapalma feu Diacalcithe- 
os ibid. Contra R upturam, #6,De Mu- 
cilaginibus,s6éd. De minio, Dia 
chylum magnum. ibid, 
Empyema what,2.98 .The cure thereof.299 


Emptine(/¢. 37 
Emulgeas Arzeria,114.Vena, 116 
Enarthrofis, kind ofartsculatiom, 242 
Enteroccle 4 kind of Ruptare. 304 


Ephemera febris,260, The caufes and 
fremes thereef,ibid. The cure. 262 


Epithemes to ftrengthen the principal parts, 
845-Thetr compofition and ufe. 10 64 
Epomis mufculus. 216 
Epulis what,che /ymptomes and cure, 292 
Epulotsckeor skinning medicines their kinds 
and ufe. I04§ 
Errbines their differences, defeription and 
ufe. 1068 
Ery {ipelas what.262. what tumors refers 
red thereto.25 3, The differences thereof, 
262.Progmofticks,267.Their cure. ibid, 
Erychrois tunica, 
Efcbar how 10 haften the falling away there- 
0f,856. Medicines caufing it. 1047 
Efebaroticks,104.7. Why to fpreading 
Vicers. 401 
Eftrich betweene a bird and a beaft, 1014, 
The {celeton of one, 
Evacwation and the kinds thereof.37. what 


to be obferved therein. 38 
Esvaches aSimulated to women. 27 
Excrements of the firft, fecond and third 

concoction what. 898 
Exercife, the ufe and beft time for it,34.The 

quality thereof: 35 

Exemphalos,er fandsing forth of the navilh 

Epoftofis in Lue venerea. 7a 

Experience withont reafon, of what ac- 

count. 45 
Eye-browes. 181 


Eyelids,181, To fay them being too laxe, 
64.1.Te open them fafined 
To helpe thetr itching. 644. 

Eyes their fite and quickse(fe,181. Figure, 
heir mafcles coates 
wounds, 
379. to bide the lojfeor defect of them, 
669. their ulcers,476 .thesr cure, 477, 
their affects 641,642 inflame 
. 645 


F. 

difclofer of affections and paffions 
40, the wounds thereof, 373.How to 
heipe the redne(fe thereof. 1080 

Faculties what.21 their divifion. 22 


Falling downe of the Fundamens the caufes 
and 


59 
2 
3 
neral cure 
ay befa 


e Table 


cure thereof. 313 
fubftance,and 0. 
gt. Why not zenerated under the skull, 
377. How to be diflinguifhed from the 
cure thereof being woun- 


ded, 398 
Fauces what. 194, 
Faulion,ber fight with the Herue. 


Faults of conformation muft be fpeedtly bel» 
ped, Of the firft concotiion, not 


helped in the after, 707 
Feare and the effects thereef. 39 
Feaver (omerimes a/ymptome,otherwhiles a 

difea 


Feavers accompanying Phiegmons and their 
cure,260, Happening upon Eryfipelous 
tumors, 165. Vpom Ocdematous tumors, 
275. V pon Schirrowstumors,284. The 
of baflard intermitting Feavers. 


286 
andtheir bones,233. Their twofold 
ufc. 236 
Feirce Clare afifd. 8 03 
Fomales of what fecde generated. 
Fiora auris what, 189 
Fibula. 231 


Figures in Anatomy , and firft of the forepart 
of man,8 6. Of the backparts,87.Of the 
lower belly ana parts thereof, 100,102, 
107.114,122.O/ the ftomacke,104 .Of 
the velels of feede andVrine,118.Of the 
Bladder «nd Yardj124. Of the wembe, 
127, Of fome parts im women different 
thofeof mon, 13%. Of the bollow 
49. Of the Arteries,154. Of the 
rough Artery or Weazon,157. Firft and 
and {ccond of the braine, 164. Third of 
the Cerebellum,167. Fourth and fifth 
of the fixth of the brane 
170, Seaventh fhewing the Nerves of the 
Braime,i7t. The eighth of the braine, 
i73.O/fthe/pinal marrow,176. Of the 
rye 185 Of the chiefe mufeles of the face. 
188 Ofthe lower law,189.0f the cares, 
190.Ofthe backbone,197 Sof tae 
clesinfumary parts of the body,199,200 
201,202,203,204 247 Of the nerves 
215, Of the bones in the hands 
the thigh-bene,228. Of the bones of the 
frete, 235. Ofthe Sceleton, 239,240, 

241 

Figures of in Chirwreery, 

See lnftruments. 
Figures of divers forts. of lavelins and 
row beads. 438 

Pegures of Of dé- 

vers beasisyerc, as of the Succarath,61.0f 


the Elephant,6 3.1020. Of the Rhingce. 
105,65 Of the Cammed,7t. Of the Cry. 
Of a Cr4b,279. Of the 
SCOrpLOM, Ore. 7 62 3/ 64 Of the 

9 Of the Ser pent fevs 
792 .Of the bafiliske,79 3. Of the fals. 
manaer amd Torpedo,” 94. Of the fizne. 
Kay Of the Sea-bare, O04, OF 
Mowke and Bifhop fifhroo2, Of the Se, 
Devil, 1004, Of the Sea Adore ang 
Bore,t105.1006, Of the Fifh Hoos 

1008.Of 4 monflrous fiying filb, 

Of Bernard the Hermite 1010, Of th. 
fayling fifo, Of thewhale,io: 4, 
Of Efirich, 1014. Of the birds of 
radife 1016.Of4 Giraffa, 1018, Of 
Beaft called Thanacth,1021, Of the heal 
Hayt 4 monftrovws African bea/l, 102: 
of a Chameleon, 102 
Figures of Furnaces and other things fit tor 
diftillatson, 1096 
110g, 
Froure of a fractured arme with a wound in 
a fit poflure.5 76 .Of a Lee fradlured with 
4 wound and boundwp.5 84. Of Ligatyre 
for extenfion,5 98 toreflore the 
located [pine,605. ourting the 
der intojoynt.609,61 O,611,612 612 
614. Of the Ambi aud the ufe thereof. 
615,616, Of reftorine the diflocated 
bow 610. Of the thigh: ane difocated in- 
wards ,628 .Outwards,629. Of re/loring 
Aknee dillocated forwards. 631 
Figure of 4 Semicupium.670. Of 4 Barreh 
tobe ufedin the cure of aCaruncle, 743. 
Of the Helmet floure 807. Of the fite 
the child in the wombe, goo. Of leaden 
Nippies.912, Of a elaffeto fuckethe 
by 5S h, 919 
Figures of Artifictall Eyes,870. Of Nofes, 
1.0f Teeth, § 72-Palars.873, How to 
fupply the defect of the tomeue,874.0/ the 
Earess875 Iron Breafiplates 876, ofan 
Vrine-Bafom and artifictal/ Yard, 


tw 


of an iron finger 878 -of an erector 6, 


tne Boores for face are 
crookclegged 880. of an artsficiall hana, 

88 1.of arme and legge, 882,883.07 

a Crutch. 884 
Filings of Lead thew barwme taken inwards), 
and cure. 
Filtration the manner and ufethereof.1 102 
Fingers and their parts, c>c.218 their di/lo- 
cAation,623.Why eafsly reftored ibid. bor 

to take away fach as be 404 
beipe thofe that flicke together,661-How 

to fupply their defet?s. $78 


Fire 


Fire ana thc | 
aga 
Fifhes their 


Fifber,a 
Flatalent 
care. 
Flatulencies 
the Goute 
Fiftula \achi 
Fiftulaes wh 
4 The 
485.7% 
Cc bet 
Flelhy 
F le fh q Mick ‘ | 


lexores M 
Flux of 
Flax of the 


Flying fifo pf 

Focile wha: 
on of the: 
partion) 

Foment ation 
ken bones 
Alts,5 91. 


Formaces, th 


Forntx. 

Faxes and th: 

Fradare wh 
501. The 
How te + 
dcaaly 
why neare 


Fraclares 0; 


338. O 


fift kina 


genera 
35 
By noife,@ 
Why Trem 
Fractures: 
6” 
 Collar.ba 
S69. OF 
Ribs,5 7) 


| 
| 
FI 
the far (i 
finde she 
An Eira 
Sé4t the} 


the Rhingce. 
Of the Cro. 
79 Of the 
cr Pens 
pens FERS, 
Of 
g the fiz 
S04, Of the 
the Sea 
Adorfe ang 
Hoga. 
filb, tooo. 
OF the 
3, 
birds of Pa- 
Of 
[. Of the bea/} 
n beaft,1022 
1024. 
things fit tor 
IIoOr 
IOO.110g, 
ha woundin 
mith 
Of Ligatnres 
eftore the A:/- 
ine the fhouls 
(1,612,613, 
fe thereof. 
diflocated E|- 
aihocated in- 
OF refloring 
631 
> Of 4 Barreh 
TAR, 
Of the fite of 
. OF leaden 
to fucke the 
919 
0. Of Nofes, 
$73. How to 
74.0f the 
S 76, 0f 475 
Yara, $77. 
an erector of 
(ach as are 
ficiall hand 
$2,883. 
$84 
inwards), 
S11 
hereof. 1102 
8 their di/lo- 
ed ibid. bow 
rfiuous, 
67, 661.HOw 
$78 
Fire 


The Table. 


F ire and the qualzties hereof 6. The ferce 


the Plague. $23 
Fifoes their indufiry.5 7.7 bey may be tamed 
6 
Fifber,a Filh fo called.’ 6 3 
Flatulent Tumors, their vaules, fienes and 
care. 269 
Flatulencies about the jeynts wounterfeiting 
the Goute, 718 


Fiftula lachrimofa, fee 

Fiftulaes what their differencer, fignes, 
4.3 4..Their cure, ibid. in the 2ands nt, 
485. The care,48 6-V pom wounds of the 
Cheft and the cure. 391 

Flefhy Pannicle,the Hiftory thereof. 90 

Flefh quickly putrifics im maritime parts. 

416 

lexores mufculi.230,Superior, | 238 
Flux of bloodin wounds how helped. 328 
Flux of the Gedy how to bee flopped. 865 , 
866 

Flying of monftrous (bape. 100g 

Focile what,231. Hew tocure the feparati- 
om of the greater and le{jer,631- The fe- 
partion from the palternebone, 632 


Fomentations and their #fé,1063. For bro-- 


ken bones .591.They burs plethoricke bo- 
Aies,591. What tobceobferved their 


fe. 591,634. 
Formaces, their matter ana forme, 1094, 
1096,1097,¢7¢. 

Forntx. 168 


Foxes and their craft. 67 
Fradiure what and the differences thereof, 
$01. Their caufes,562-Signes and prog- 
nofticks tbid. Their generallcure, 5 64. 
How to helpe the {ymptomes,566, Why 
deadly in the joynt of the fhoulder,5 70. 
why neare a joynt more dangerous, 581 


Fractures of the [cull sheir differences , 337, 


338. Of the caufes ana fignes,339, 
Signes manifeft to fenfe,34.6. A Fiffure, 
the fir(t kind of Fraciure.341. How to 
finde it being leffe mansfeft.342% A con- 
tufjom the fecond kind of fracture, 343. 
An Effradiure the third kind,346. A 
Seat the fourth kind,3 48. Befonstuc the 
fift kind, ibid. The Procusfticks, 352. 
general care of themand their {ymp- 
tomes 356.They are burt by venery,35 9 

By moife,360. The particular cure, 362. 

Why Trepanta. 364 
Fra@ures more particularly and firft of the 
mofe,567. Of the lower jaw, ibid. Of the 
Collar.bone, 568. Of the theulderblade, 
569. Of the breaft bone,570. Of the 
Ribs,5 Of tl: vertebra,or Rack-bones- 


573+ Of she Holy-bone,574. Of the 
Rampe,ibid, Of the Hip,ibid. Of the 
fhoulder or armebone,575,. Of the Cubite 
or Ell a Wand, ibid, Of the Hand.577. 
Of the Thigh, ibid. Of the Thigh neave 
the joynt,5 81. Of the patella or whirle- 
bone,582. Of the legge,582. Of the 


bones of the fecte, 
Fractures affociated with weands, how tobe 
bound up: 557,584. 
French Poxes,fee Lues yenerea- 

kinds and af2. 34. 
Fuct,bow mde, 1078 
Fumigation, their differences, matter ana 
forme, 10721073 


Pundament tie falling downe thereof. 313, 
95 8.The cafes and cure. 1D1ds 
Fuugus, excrefcence fometim:s happe- 
Fractures of te (cul, 270,971 


G, 


G Alens Effigzes and praife. 1118 
Gall and the bladder therecfjexe. 110 


Ganglion what,272. Properly fo called, 
27 
Ganoreene what .452.,The generall and 
tical cafes, ibid. That which occa ftv. 
ned by cold,upos what part it feafes,454. 
S 4s 5. The £e- 
nerall cure.ibid.7 be particular cure.45 6 
Gargareon. 192 
Gargarifmes their matter and forme,1079. 
repelling, ripening aud detergent ones. 


297 
Garlicke good acainft the Pla ewe, 823 
Gatirica vena. 112 


Gaftrepiplois vena,i1z.Major.i 113 
Geefe their warinel[ein fleeing ever mount 


Taurus. 68 
Gemelli mafculi. 237 
Gemini mufculi. 230 
Generation, what st 1,22. What neceffary 

therete. 889 
Generation of the Navill, Sgr 
Giddineffe, fee Vertigo. 

Ginglymos what. 343 
Giraffa a france beat. 1017,1018 
Glandula what fort of Tumor. +272 
G!andula lachrimalis. 182 


Glandules in generall,108. At the rovie of 
the tongue 193. Ther? inflammation ang 


cnre, 293 294 
Glans penis,i26. Not rightly perforated, 
how tobehelped, 663 


Glyfters, their differences, materials crc. 


Sewerall defcriptions of them, 
| 10st, 


q 
* 


The Table | 


1051. They may wourilh, 1052 
Goates dung is good bo difcuffe febirrbous tu- 
mors. 279 
Golden ligature how made, 309 
Gomplofis what, 243 
Gonorrhea, bow different from a viralent 
frrangury,7 35.1 be cure. 740 


Gout the names and kinds thereol,697.Tbe 
occult caufes thereof, ibid. The mani- 
eft caufes thereof, 699. omt of what 
parts it may flow,70L» Signes that it 
flowes from the Brainy, or Liver, ibid, 
How to know this or that humor accom- 
panying the Gouty msalignitt,7 02,Prog- 
moftickes: ibid. cenertl method to 
prevent and curt »p.wmssing fome- 
times go0d,77 O05 ther gentrall remedies, 
706, Diet comvement,7O7. What wine 

not good,708. How to frengthen the 


a Cholericke Goute,7 1 4.What be done 
after the fit over,717. Tophior knets 
how canfedibid. The hip goute or fciats~ 
64,719.1he cure thereof. 720 

Grifiles what,1 36. of the nofe,186. ofthe 
Larinx. 194. 

Groines their wounds,399.Their Tumors, 

‘fee Bubo's. 

Guajacum, The choife faculties and parts, 
728, The preparation of the decodtion 
thereof,729, The ufé. 730 

Gullet and the Hiftory thereof, 157. The 
wounds thereof. 387 

Gums overgrowne with flefh, bow tobe hel- 

pea. 293 

Gans, who their inventer,4.06, Their force, 

4.07.7 he caufe of their reports. AIS 

Gunpouder not poyfonows, 409.412. How 
made. 412 

Gutta rofacea what,1080,Thecure.1081 

Guts their fubflance fioure and number 105 
Their fite and conmexion,106. Action, 
107.How tobe taken forth, 115, Signes 
that they are wounded,396- Their cure, 


-397eTheir Vicers, 480 
H. 


Lmorrbotdes what, their differences 


ana cure, 487.10 the necke of the 
wombe, 955 
Hemorrhoidalis interna,r12, Externa. 
117 

Hemorrhoidalisarteria, five mefente- 
rica infcrior. 


joynts ibid. The palliative cure thereof, 
709. Locall medicines in a cold Gout, 
710, Ina hot or fanguine Goute,713, In 


Hamsorrhous @ Serpent bis bite, the pms 
andcure, 7 
Hayt,s flrar ft. 1022 
Flasre what ibe originall and How 
to make blacke, 1081.1082, Hop to 
take it off. 1082 
Hairy {calpe, the connexion and ufe. 16. 
The thereof not tobee neplecied 
ibid, Thr care thereof being contufed. 
Hard takemsenerally what/208 209. 
wre/bereof with the cwre,577. 
to the defect thertof; 879.22, 
Hares bow they provide for their Joung, 
61 
Hare-lips what ,333,Their ture, 384 
Harmonia whas, 
H k 7 
Head,she generall defcription thereof, 1< 9. 
The comtaining and contained parts 
thereof,160.The mufculous skin thereof, 
ibid, why affected when any membre. 
nous part is burt 160, The watry Tamor 
thereof 28 9. The wounds thereof. 337, 
338,¢7¢. The falling away of the Haire 
and other affect sthereof, 637,628 
The diflocation thereof, 603 
Hearing, the Organe, objet? theres; 
2 
Heart and the Hiftory thereof, 144.1 
The ventricles shereofias Signes of the 
wounds thereof. 388 
Heate one and the fame the efficient caufe of 
allbumors at the fame time,\14.. Three 
caufes sbhercof. | 250 
Hecticke feaver with the diff erencescaufes, 
fienes and cure. 393 
Hedg-hogs how they provide for iheir young. 
61 
Heele, andthe parts thereof,234. Why 4 
fratinre thereof fo dangerous ibid. The 
diflocation thereof,632. {ymptomes 
lowing upon the contafion thereof, ibid: 
Why abject to inflammation. 633 
Hemicrania, /ee Ategrim, 
Hemlocke the poyfonows quality thereof, ana 


the cure, 06 
Henbane the poyfonoms qaality,and the care. 
Bos 

Hermapbrodites,28 ,and 972, 
Herne bis fight,and the Falcon. 7° 
Hernia ana the kinds thereof,304. Humo- 
ralis. 
Herpes ana the kinds thereof,264.The care. 
265 

Hip-gont, fee Sciatica, 

Fp, 


Hipps, 


— 


fickes, 624 
wardly OT 
616.backwa 
ward difloca 
on, 629. thi 
backward d 

Hippocrates 

Hoga, A 

Holes of the j 
external B. 
Si MCS 


Holy-bone, 
ue, 198.6) 
Hordeolum 
Hornes 
Horfe-leach 
their virule: 
Hot-houfes, 
Hulpalis,4 » 
Humeraria am 
Vena, 
Humours, ¢ 
bed ge of then 
ang fic 
Ros, Cain! 
of the. grea 
Humours of 
Aqueus, 
Cry ftallin 
Vitreus, 
Hy datis, 
Hydrargyrt 
ther cof 
Hydroph 
Wh 
Hydroceph 
re fs 
Hydrocele, 
Hy men, 
Wheth « 
A histers§ 
Hy oides os# 
fite ors. 


. Hypochon 


H y pochy Mm 
Hy pogaltr 
Hy popyon 
Hy pothens 


Aundic 
law, the 
Ons, 

he frac 
Flow to 


j 
4 
* 
4 
| 
| 
ad 
a 


the Signes 
791% 

1022 
€,I60 « 
2. How to 

165 
bee 
contufed 


parts 
s skin thereof, 
any membre. 
T aor 
thereof. 
of the mee! 
3 7363 8.07 Ce 
603 
thereaf, 
24 
f, 144,145. 
Signes of the 
388 


caufeof 


Three 
250 
CMCES CAUSES | 
393 
éheir young . 
61 
34. Why a 
“ibid, The 
septomes fol- 
hereof, ibid: 
633 


thereof, and 
$06 


and the cure. 
Bos 


70 
04. Humo- 
313 
4. The care. 
265 


Fup, 


“The Table. 


Hippe, di flocation thereof, 623. progne- 
fi ches, 624. fignes thatit is diflocated ons- 
wardly or tnwardly 625 .d:flocated forwards 
626.backwards ibid. howto reftore the in- 
ward di flocatton, 627.the outward d:flocati- 
en, 629. the forward diflocation, ibid. the 


backward location, 630 
Hippocrates 47s effigres, ay 
Hoga, 4 monftrous filh, 1008 


Holes of the inuer Bafis of the the 
external Bafis thereof, 175. {mall ones fome- 
times remain after the cure of great wounds, 

| 334 

Holy-bone, his number of Vertrebrajand their 
ufe, 198. the fracture thereof, 575 

Hordeolum, 42 affect of the Eye-lids, 642 

Hornes ufed in Read of Ventofes, 696 

Horfe-leaches, therr application and u(e,ibid. 
their virulency, and the cure, 800 


Hot-houfes, how made, 1077 
Hulpalis,a monftrous beef, 1017 
Humeraria arteria, 153 

Vena, 210 


Humours, their temperaments, 11. the know- 
ledve of them wece(Jary, ibid. their definition 
and dw fion,12. Serous and fecundary, as 
Ros, Cambium, Gluten, 15. 4” argument 


oftheir great putrefaction, 417 
Humours of the eye, 182 
Aqueus, 182 
Cry ftallinus, 134 
Vitreus, ibid. 
Hydatis, 643 


Hydrargyrum, the choice, preparation, and 


thereof inthe Lucs venerea, 73 
Hydrophalia, whether wacureable, 737 
What cure muft be ufed therein, 789 


Hydrocephalos, what, 289. The caufes, di ffe- 


rences, fignes, crt ibid. The cure, 290 
Hydrocele, 304.311 
Hy men, 120 

Whether any or no, 937 
A history thereof, 938 


Hyoides os, the reafon of the mame, compofure, 


fite, cre. thereof, 191 
_Hypochondria, thesr ite, 85 
Hypochyma. 651 
Hy pogaltrice vene, 117 
Hypopyon, 650 
Hypothenar, 222 
I. 
Aundice, 4 medicine therefore, 303 
law, the boues thereof, and their proauct:- 
ORS, 178 
7 he fractare of the lower jaw, 567 
How to belpeit, 568 


The d flocation thereof, 


609 
The cure, 


ibid. 


Ibis , abird, the inventer of glyfters, 56 
Ichneumon, how hee armes himfelfe to affarle 


the Crocod:le, 66 
Idlenefle, the difcommodities thereof, 35 
Jejunum inteftinum, 105 
Ileon, 106 
[liaca arteria, 11§ 

Vena, 117 
Ilium os, 227 
[ll conformation, 41 
Imagination, and the force thereof. SOT 


Impoftors , their smpudency and craft, 51 


| 372 

Impoftume,what, their caufes and differences, 
249 
Sigues of them in generall, 250 


Proznoftickes, 252 
What confiderable in opening of them, 259 
Inanition, fee Emprtineffe. 
Incus, 163.19f 
Indication, whence to be drawne,s. of feeding, 
33.what, 42. the kindes, 43.4table of them, 
43. ebfervable in wounds by gun-fhet, 426 
Infant,what he muft take before he fucke, 907 
their crying what it doth, 912.how to be pre~ 
ferved inthe wombe when the mother ts dead, 
923. See Childe. 
Inflammation of the almonds of the throat,and 
their cure,293, 294. ofthe Uvula, 294.0f 
the eyes, 645 
Inflammation binders the repofition, er put- 
ting ai flocated members into joint, 619 
what,their manner, matter, andufe, 


Ico73 

Inftruments fed in Surgery for opening ab- 
feeffes, 258.259 
A vent fer the wombe, 233-955 


An iron plate and aliuall cautery for the cure 
of the Ranula, 29 
Conttrictory rings to bindthe Columella, 

Speculum oris, ibid. & 332 
A trunke with cautery tocauteriZe the U- 
vula, 296 


incifion knife, 298 
An actual cantery with the plate, for the cure 
of the Empyema, 299. 0f 4 pipe to evacuate 
the water inthe Dropfic, 303. Wherewith 
to make the golden lig ature,2 10. to fitch up 
wounds, 227 
A RaXour or incifion knife,34.1. A chifel,ib. 
Radulzx,vel Scalpri, 34.3.4 threefoored le- 
vatory, 34.4. Other Yevatories,345- 346. 
Sawes to divide the skull, ib.a de{quamatory 
Trepaz,346.Roftra phictaci, 347. Scrapers, 

Hhhhh pin 


. | - 
2 
The 
How 
their 
* 
6! 1 
243 
q 
ereof, IS9Q 
& 


The 


pincers, and a leaden mallet ,ib. 4 piercer to 


enter aTrepan,3 65 .Trepans,3 66-367- Te- 
rebellum,267.4 lentill-like cut- 
ting compajfes,368. 369. Acondutt pipe, 
fyrenge,370.t0 depreffetbe dura Meninx, 
373-4peculum oculi,379. for making 4 Se- 
ton,382. Pipes ufedin wounds of the cheft, 
392.40 draw out bullets, 
lasers ¢ Probes to draw through flammula’s, 
422.t0draw forth arrow-heads, 439. 441+ 
A fcarificator,446.A difmembring knife,& 
fam,45 9.4 dilater to openthe mouth,464.4 
pyoulcos, or A Glol- 
focomium, 578. A: lattin Caffe, 587- 
A pulley and hand-vice,599.the glofloco- 
mium ¢alled Ambi,615./stle hooks needles, 
and anincifion knife totake away the Web, 
648.files for filing she tecth,65 8. for clean- 
fiag & drawing the teeth, 6 6o0.cutting mul- 
lets,to take off fuperfiuows fingers,662,4 Ca- 
thater,665.Gimblet to break the ftonc inthe 
of the yard,671. other instruments to 
take out the frone,672.ufed in cutting for the 
frone,673.- (0.680. 681.4 Lancet, Cup- 
tobe ufed for vento- 
fts,696.Cathaters to weare away caruncles, 
744. Trcpans for rotten benes, 748. aciuall 
cauteries.74.9.Gryphons tallons, 927.929. 
Hooks to draw forth thechilde, 916.Specu- 


la matricis, 956 
Inftruments, when nece{Jary in reftoring bro- 
ken bones, 565 
Intercartalaginei mufculi, 206.207 
Intercoftalis arteria, 113-153 
Intercoftales mufculiexterni, 206. interni, 
207 

Interoffes mufculi, 223-239 
Inteftinalis vena, 112 
Intromoventes mufcull, 230 


oy, andthe effects thereof, 
oints,their wounds, 403. how to flrenzthen 
them,708 .how to mitigate their paines cau- 


fed onely by diftemper, 716 
I{chiadica vena,224. Iichium os,227 
Iflues, or fontanels, 706 
Itching of the Wombe, 957 
Judgement,why difficult, 1121 
Junks, what, $59. their ufé, 560. 


All its fubftance, Gc.101.102. what to 


¢ done when it falls out in wounds, 398 
Kernels ef the cares, 189. 


Kibes, where bred, 238 
Kidneyes their fabftance that 
they are wounded, 397.ulcers, their cure, 
431.686.their beat how tempered, 850 


Kings- evil what ,the caufe,27 


Table. 


i 


Knee d:flocated forward how to reflore it. 631 


L. 
Agophthalmia, what,378.the cau [es and 
cure, his 
Lamenes how helped, 
Lamprey, thetr care of their young, 61 
Lampron,their poyfonous bite, Bo, 


Larinx,what meant thereby, 1 mani. 
tude figure,compofure, orc. 
Latiflimus mufculus, 208 
Leaches, fee Horfe-leaches. 
Legge,taken in general, what, 222.the bone 
ther of 231 .thewounds,399. the fracture 
cure,582.thecure of the Authors leoze being 
broken,s 82.585 their crovkednelfe how 
fupplied, 832.8832 
Leprofie,& the caufes therof,769.the 
779,C7°¢.why called Morbus leoninus,+7; 
the prognofficks, diet cure, 77 3.it (ometimes 


followes the Lues venerea, 724 
Lepus marinus, the poy/on, the 
cHre, 


Levator mufculus,208.Levatores Ani.ic7 
Life, what, tts effec?s See Soule, 
Ligaments, their 4f2,96. why without 
198.their difference,199.their wounds,ac4 
Ligatures for wounds are of three forts,229 
too hard hurtfull, 374.they bee neatly 
made,s555.for what ules they chiefly ferve, 
358. twufe at thisday for fractures, 
how in joyued with wounds, 584 
which for extenfion,598. See Bandages. 
Lightning, the wonderfull the 
ing fimcll therof, 4 \ 4.how it may infect the 


Aire, 781 
Lime «nquencht,the hartfull qnality care, 
810 


Liniments are not to be uledin wounds of the 
Cheft,390.their matter, form, & ule, 1055 
Lion, provident Care im 66 
Lion of the fea, 1003. Lippitudo,644 
Litharge,its poyfonous quality cure, 810 
Liver,what,109.2ts ful Rance, Gc.ibid.1 
of the wounds therof,396.w hy it cal- 
led parenchyma, 893 
Loines, their nerves, 226 
Longus mufculus, 205-218-232 
Lues venerea, what, 723.the hurt it caueth, 
ib.the caufes thereof,724.in what humor the 
maliznity refideth,725.it canfes more pais 
in the night thanin the day, ib. fometimes 
lyesloug hidjib. fignes therof,746. 
feicks,727 how to be oppugned,7 28 .t0 whom 
wine may be allowed,730.the fecond manner 


of cure,ibid.the third manner of cxre,7 4 
pre 


the fourth ? 
fomes 37 
746.7 


747 betta 


ana their 
ofthis di 
moisture, 
Lumba ris 
Arter! 2 
Lumbric! 
Lungs, 
of their 
Luxation, 
Lying {7 | 


A ( id 


Magilts at 
Males ¢f 
Malleolus 
paffaze, 
Mammuill: 
Mamunar! 
¢: 
his boay, 
and fema 
Mandrake 
Marrow. 
fenfe of | 
CCT 7 
Maftoideu 
Matticato 


Matrix, 


Medow- fa 
of ana 
Meat,tve 
accaltor 
32.074 
time, 10 
Meazels,* 
itch net, 
Mediaitin 
Medicines 
finition 
ftance.\ 
faculties,. 
faculties 


Meerim, 


+ 


Melanchdl 


ture 


15.0f 
Melanchd 


18. why 
Meliceris 


_ 
.« 
a 
a 


64 


Ae its 
1b, 

223.the bone 
rs lezge being 
bow he |. 
832.882 

9.the fignes. 
leoninus 771 
formetimes 
724 
yma ptomes 
S03 
bres Ani, 
See Soule, 
vithout fenfe, 
WOUBAS AO 4 
ree forts, 329 
uff bee neatly 
hiefly ferve, 


chures, § 
wounds, 584 


Bandages. 
the tink. 
infect the 
Ality cure, 
810 
wounds of the 
Ufe, 1055 
Bz, 66 
pitudo,64.4 
~cure, 810 
fo. 
why it cal- 
$93 
226 
0§.218.232 
rt it caufeth, 
at humor the 
CS more pain 
b. fometimes 
46. procno- 
12 8.to whom 
ond manner 
of CMTC, 7 34- 
the 


the fourth maner,7 36. how to cure its jmp - 
tomes737 tt canfes bunches onthe bones, 
746.rotten bones how perceived cy cured, 
74.7 .tettars and chaps occafioned thereby, 
and their cure, 75 4'. howto cure children 


ofthis difeafe, 755. it kills by exceffe of 
motsture, 779 
Lumbaris regio, five lumbi, 85. 


Arteria, 114. Vena. 116. 
Lumbrict mufculi, 222-239 
Lungs, their fubftance, 2. ft 

of their wounds,388.which cwrable,3 92. 
Lupix,what, their caufes and cure, 272 
Luxation, $93. which uncureable,s 95. 
Lying é# bed, how it muft bee, 36 


M 

Adde dogge, Dogge. 
Magick, andthe power. thereof, 989 
Magiftrates office in time of plazne, 829 
Males of what feed generated, 888 
Malleolus,one of the bones of the auditory 

paffage, 163.191 
Mammillary proce//es,166.their 169 
Mamuinaria arteria, 153 


The Table. 


Membranofus mufculus, 232 
Memoric, what. 897 


Menftruall flaxe, fienes of the fir/t approach 
thereof. 950. See Courfes. 


Meninges, their number crc. 164 
Mercury, fublmate, its cauftick force, 809 

the cure, 81a 
Meremaid, 1004 


Metentery, éts fubftance, 108. the tu- 
mors therof,929. the fink of the body,930 
Midriffe, tts 
of the wounds thereof. 388 
Milk foon corrupts in a phlegmatick ftomack 
907.the choice therof.gog bow to driveit 


downewards, 918. 
Millepes, caft forth by urine, 762 
Milt, fee Spleence. 


Mola, the reafon of the name,and how bred, 
925. hem to be difcerned from atrue con- 
ception, 925.4 hiftory and defcription of 4 
flrange one, 926. the figurethereof, 927. 


what curetebe ufed thereto, 928. 
Mollifying medscines, 141.142 


Monks-heod, the poyfow andcure, 905 
Monttrous creatares bred in man,76 25°C. 


excellency,74.07c. the divifionof Montterswhat,g61.their caules,e> defirip- 


his body,83. why diftinguifhed into male 


and female. 885 
Mandrake, its danger, and cure, $06 
Marrow, whyit may feeme tobave the 

fenfe of feeling. 589 
Maileter 18 
Maftoideus mufculus. 204 


Matticatories, their forme and ufe, 1069 
Matrix, Wombe. 
Medow-/faffron,the poyfonous quality ther- 
of, and cure. 809 
Meat,the quantity and quality thereof, 31 
accuftomed more grateful and nonri/bing 
32.0rder tobe obferued in eating ,33 .the 
time, ib. fit to generatea Callus. 589 
Meazels,what,their matter,75 7. why they 
itch not, 75 8 their cure, 759 
Mediaftinum, ubfance, oe. 
Medicines, their excellency.1027.their de- 
finition and difference in matter and fub- 
flance.1028.in qualities and of their firft 
fecond,thir fourth 
faculties, 103 preparation, 1937 .the 
y,and 
Meerim, the canfes, oc. thercof. 640 
Melancholy, the temper therof, the na- 
.13.the effects theres, 
15.0f st corrupted. 16 
Melancholick per/ons their 


tions,962.0rc. caufed by defect of feed, 
975 .by imacination,9 7% .by frraitne/jeof 
the womb,g8o.by the of the mother, ibs 
by a ftroak,6.981 confufion of feed of 
divers kinds,932.by the craft of the De. 
vil,g85. Of 
Morie, Sea.calfe or Elephant, 1005.1006 
Mortification, amd the fignes thereof,a75 
Mother, fee Womb. 


Mothers fittef to nurfe their own childrens 
907.their milk molt familiar to them, ib. 
Motion, which voluntary, 25. taken for all 
manner of 34 
Mouth,and the parts therof,193.the alcers 
and their cure, 478. how to prevent cy 
heal them in cure of the Lucs venerea,735 
Mummie , frequently ufedin contufions, 
447. not good therein, 448 
Mundificatives, 1043 
Mutcles, what, 92.their differences, and 
whence fure 
ther enquirie into the parts ofthem, 96. 
Mufcles of thé Epigaftrium ,97.0f the 
dament, 106 the teficles, 120. of the 
bladder, 124. of the yard, 125. the bread 
mufcle, 180. that open and {hut the eye 
ibid. of rhe eye, 182. of the nofe, 186. of 
the face, ibid. of the lower jaw, 188.0f 
the bone HyOides, I9t. of the tongue, 


18. why they hurt themfeives. 786.  192.0f the Larinx, 194.0fthe Epiglot- 
Meliceris, what kinde of tumor, 271 tis, 195, of the neck, 199. ef the O 
Hhhhh2 losnes., 


4 
° 
B>- 
the cau 
| * 


blade, 207. of the arme,21 4. ofthe cubit, 
217. moving the hand, 320.0f therfide 
of the hand, 222. moving the thigh,229. 
ofthe legze,232. moving the foot,237- 
of the toes, 238. Aw epitome or briefe 
recital of all the mufcles, 244-245. 


Mufculous skisne of the head, 160. the 
wounds thereof and their cure, 360. 


Mufculofe vene, 117.Arteriz, 153. 
Muthromes, hurtful and deadly 
lity, and the cure, S05. 
Mulicke, the power thereof, 49. 
Mydriafis, 4 difeafe of the eye, the caufe, 
and cure, ) 650. 


N. 
Ailes,why added to the fingers, 209. 
why crow continually, ibid. whence 
generated. 220. 


Napellus,the poy [enous cure,8o5 


Narcotickes, 357. cautions intheir ufe, 


264.:mproperly termed Anodines,1048. 


Nature oft doth flrange things in curing 
difeafes, 385. 


Naturallparts,and their divifion, 8a, 
Naturall, ee Things, Faculties, Actions, 
Navell, what, the figure, andcompofure, 
133. the ceneration thereof, 891. there- 
taxation thereof in children, 959. the 
fuelling or flanding forth thereof, 303. 
the cure, 3 04- 
Nautilus, or fayling-filb. Iolr. 
Neck, & the parts t/crof,196.the wounds 
thereof, 38 6.the Aiflocation her of. 602. 
Necrolis, or mort: fication, 457. 
Nerves, what, 96. their distribution to 


the naturallparts, 115. 0f the fixth con- 


jugation, andtheir 
mus coftalis, ib.recurrens, ib. ftomachi- 
CUS, 153. their [even conjuzations,i70. 


Nervesofthe neck, back and armes.212. of 


the loines, boly-bene, and thigh, 226. 
Nerves and nervous parts, their wounds, 
399. their cure, 4 0. 
Night-thade, the deadly night-lnade, his 
poyfonous quality, and thecure, Sos. 
Nightungales excellently, 
Nipples, 1 3 to help shesr forene[s,g12 


Nodus, what, 272. 
Nodules, their forme and ufe, 105 3- 
Northren people how tempered, 20. 


Nofe and the parts thereof,136,the wounds 


thereof, 384. their cure, ib. how to fupply 
the defect thereof,871. the ulcers there- 


of, 477. their cure, ib. the fracture, 5 67. 


The Table. 


loimes, 205 ,'206+ 207+ of the fhoulder- Nurfes 


their error in binding and lacing ot 
children, 606. they may infect children 
with the Lues venerca,and be infected by 
them, 724. participate their Atfeafes to 
their children, 907, the choice of them 
908.909. of their diet, and other ciy. 
cumftances, 910. 
Nutrition, what,22.24. 


O. 
O) Blique defcendent mujcles., 97. alcen. 


dent mufeles, 92, 
Obliquator externus mufculus, 
Obruratores mufculi, 220, 


Ocdema, what 267.which tumors refery4 
shereto,25 4.the differences therecf, 26>. 
the caufes,ib.figns,prognofticks cure >69 

Ocfophagus ,or Gullet the fubftance, attra. 
force, Orc. thereof, 15 7.the magni. 
tude figure, fite,temper, and action,152 

Oile of whelps the defcription,aud w/e ther. 
0f 409.423. it helps forward the (cas. 
ling of bones, 751, 

Oiles, and the feverall making of thems, 
105 4-10§5.1102.b9 
out of gums, 1106.1107, 

Ointments, their differences, defcriptions. 
and ufe, 1056-1057, L058, 

Old age, andthe divifion thereof, 9. it 
difeafe, 2. 

Old wives medicines, 

Olecranum, war, 21’ 

Omentum, or the Kall, the (ubfiance, mag- 

nitude, figure,and compofure thereof, tot. 
the connexion, temper , and twofold 
fomiimes binders conception, ibid. 

Operations of Surgery, of what nature, 4 
why fome which are mentioned by the An- 
tients, are omitted by our Awthor, 1128. 

1139. 

Opium, why not ufed in poyfoning §06.the 

[ymptomes caufea by it and their cure, 1D. 

Order to bee obferved in cating our meate, 


- we 


OC. 3 3.1m lying to fleepe, 34- 
Organicall parts, which, Si. 
What obfervable ineach of them, ibid. 
Orifices of the heart, 146. 
Orpiment, tbe poyfonous quality t hercef, 
and the cure, S10. 


Os & offa, occipitis 5162. Batiliarc, ibid. 
Coronale,ib. Bregmatis, five paricta- 
jia,ib. Petrofa, ibid. Cuneiforme, five 
{phenoides.ib. Ethmoides,cribroium, 
{cu {pongio{um, ibid.Zygoma, {ive ju- 
gale. 178. Hyoides , ypfiloides, &c- 
191-Sefamoidia ,220. [lium,227-Il- 
chium,ibid. 


Pubis 


Pubis, 
Innomifg 


Ozena, 4/ 
anacares 


Pallate, th 
Ce. 


How to fu 
Palmaris n 


Palfic, 


The 


Follows 
Pancreas, ! 


The tums 
Pannicle, ; 
Pappe, bon 

andthe co 
Paracente 

gaint 

Th pla 
Parafloup! 
Paraftates 
Paronych 

he cus 
Parotides, 
Thera 


Partridge, 
Parts, 
Orzanit 
Infirum 
Things 
Princsp 


Of zene 
tnte : 
be con 


Of thec 
Paffions 0} 

They bel 
Pattinaca 
Patella, 
PeGoralis 
Pedium, » 
Pediofus n 
Pelvis, the 


2 
- 
By 
ai » * 
rs 
The dii 
Nata, what, 272. Nates, 168. 
| 


na lacing of 
children 
infected by 
lo 
of them, 
na other Cir. 

9 io, 
mphez, 130. 


$,97.afcen. 
938. 

IS, 
230. 

mors referrd 
ereof, 267. 
ks,cure,262 
Lance, attra. 
the magni. 
achion,15&. 
ud ther- 
‘ra the {cat- 
751. 

ne of thems, 
106.1107. 
e{criptions , 
D5 7. 
Of, Dutt 
32. 

991. 

217. 

ance, mag- 
101. 
fold ufe, 
ception, sbid. 
nature, 4. 
by the An- 
hor, 1138-6 
1139. 
12, S06.thE 
Ir cure, 
our me ate, 
34° 
Sie 
ibid. 
146. 
thereof, 
S10. 
iliare,ibid. 
e parieta- 
yrme, {ive 
ribrofum, 
a, five 
oides, &xc- 


Pubis 


The Table. 


228, 

234- 
See Bones, 
Ozxna, 4 filthy ulcer of the wofe, the canfe 
andcure, 477. 


Pubis, 
Innomunata, 


Ainc, and the caufes thereof, 250. 
It maft be a/jwazed, 256. 
The difcommodities thereof, 257-6 
In wounds how helped, 229. 
Pallate, the nerves, holes, and coat thereof, 
re. 193. 


How to fapply the defects thereof, 873. 
Palmaris mufaulus, 222. 
Palfic, the differences, caufes, crc. thereof, 

22. 

The cure, 333- 
Followes upon wounds of the necke, 386. 
Pancreas, the fubftance, fite, Orc. thereof, 
109. 

The tumours thereof, 929. 
Pannucle, fee Flefhy. 

Pappe, bow to be made for children, 911. 
and the condition thereof, ibid. 
Paracentefis, and the reafins for and a- 
gaint tt, 301. 
The place where, and manner how, 302. 


Parafloupi, 4 /frange beaff, 1or8. 
Parattates, their fubfiance, Oe. 
Paronychia, what, 314. 

7 be cure, ibid. 
Parotides, their fite and ufe, lol. 


Their a. fference, prognoflicke, cure, 


291.292. 

Partridge, their care of their younz, 60. 
Parts, fimilar, Sr. 
Orzanicall, ibid. 
Inftrumentall, $2. 


Things confiderablein each part, ibid. 
Principal parts which,ana why fo called, 
ibid. 

Of zeneration, 82.836. aiftinguifhed 
three, $3. 

T he containing parts of the lower belly, 
37. 

Of the cheft, 137. 
Paffions of the mizde, their force, 
They helpe forward putrefattion, 820. 
Paftinaca marina,or the fiing-Ray 802. 


Patella, what, 231. 
Peftoralis mufculus, 208. 
Pedium, what, 234: 
Pediofus mufculus, 238. 
Pelvis, the fite and ufe thereof, 168. 


Pericardium, and the hifkory thereof, +43, 
Pericranium, what, and the ufe thereof, 


160. 
Perinzum, whats, 125. 
Perioftium, 160. 


Peritoneum, the fubftanceavd quantity 
thereof , 100. 


The figure,compofure, fite,wfe, 101. 
Perone, 231. 


Peronzus mufculus, 237+ 
Perturbations of the minde, fee Pafsions. 
Peflaries,their forme and nfe,10$ 3.1054. 
Peftilence, fee Plague. 
Peftilent feaver, how bred, $ 37. 
Pharinx, what, 194. 
Phlebotomy, the invention thereof. 56. 
ina Synochus putrida, 261. 


The ufe, cope, thereef, 691. 
How tobe performed, 693. 
See Blood-letting. 

Phlegme, the temper thereof, 
1s blood halfe concotted, I3- 


Why it hath no proper receptacle, ibid. 
The nature, confiftence, colowr, tafte and 
ufe, ibid, 
T he effects thereof, 14. 
Not natural, how bred, and the kindes 
thereof, 16- 
How many watesit becomes(o,. 267. 
Phlegmaticke perfons, thetr manners and 
difeafes, 17. 
In fafting they feedupon themfelves , 
O7. 
Phiegmon, what kinde of tumour, 54 
What tumours may be reduced thereto, 


253- 

How different from a phlegmenous cha 
254. 
Hew generated, ibid. 
The caufes, ana fignes thereof, 55, 
The cure, 256. 
The cure when it is ulcerated, 258. 
Phrenica Arteria,. 113. 
Phrhifis oculi, 646. 


Phymofis & paraphymofis,what, 663. 
Phy fick, the fubject thereof, Sr. 
Phyficians to have care of fuch as have the 


plague,bow to be chofen, $30. 
Phytfocele, 304. 
Piamater, 1646 
Pidgeons, fee Doves, 
Pilor fith, 67, 
Pine glandule, 168. 
Pinna auris, which 189. 
Pinna & Pinnoter, 
Pifmire, fee Ant, 
Pith of the backe. 175. 
Hhhhh 3 Plague, 


wi 
4 
Cn 


The Table 


Plague what, $1.7.How it comes to kill, ib. 
Divine cafes thePof, 818. Natural cau 
fes,ibid. Signes of the aire and carth that 
prognofticate it, 821. Cautions in aire 

and diet to prevent it, 822. Preferva- 
tives azainft it,824.825.826.Other ob- 
fervations for prevention, 828. Such as 

die thereof quickly putrefie, 829. How 

fuch as undertake the cure thereof muft 
arme themfelves,8 31.Signes of infecti- 
832. Mortall fignes, $33. Signes 
thereof, withont fault of the humors, ib. 

with the putrefaction of them, 834. 
Prognostickes therein, 335. What to be 

done whenone findes himfelfe infected, 

$37. Diet, 839.840.:341. Antidotes, 

843.844. Epithemes to flrengthen the 

principall parts,345. Whether purging 
and bleeding bee neceffary atthe begin- 
ning, 845. What purzes fit, 347.5) mp- 
tomes accompanying the difeafe, $49. 
Spots or Tokens, 851. Their cure, 352. 
See Bubo’s, and Car- 
buncles Sundry evacuations, 361.862. 
How to cureinfants and children there- 


of, 867. 
Plaifter, the hurtfall qualitie thereof, and 
the cure, SIO. 
Plafters, (ee Emplafters. 
Plantaris mufculus, 238. 
Pleura what, the original, magnitude, fi- 
gure, Orc. 140. 
Pleurifie, what, 298. 
Plexus choroides, 167. 
Pneumatocele, 312. 
“Poly pus, the reafon of the name, 290. 
T he differences, ibid. 
The cure, 291. 
Poplitzus mufculus, 233¢ 
Porus' biliaris, III. 
Potentiall Cauteries, 1064. 1065. 


Pox, French Pox, fee Lues vencrea. 
Small pox what, their matter, 757. 
What pernitions {ymptomes may happen 


upon them, 758. 
Prognoftickes, ibid. 
The care 75 9e 
What parts to be armed againft, and pre- 

ferved therefrom, 760, 
Poylons, the caufe of writing them, 775. 
What they are, } ibid. 
Their differences, 776+ 
All of them have not a peculiar Antipa- 
pathy with the heart, ibid. 


How in fmall quantities they may work 
great alterations by touch onely, ibid. 


Thereafons of their wondrous effedis, 


777. none of them kill at a fet time, bia 
How they kill fooner or later, bid. Whe. 
ther things feeding on poyfons, be poy/y. 
nous, ibid: Generall fignes that one js 
poyfoned, 778. How 10 fhun poyfon, 
The generall cure of poyfoms, ibid. Whe. 
ther vapours avifing from things burns 
may poy {on one, 781. Each poyfon hath 
its proper effects,782. Their effets ang 
prognofticks, ibid. The cure of poyfonou, 
bites, 783. 

Poyfonef Adders, Ajps, Toads, ce, (ee 
Adders, Alps, Toads, Orc. 

Poy fonous plant 5 and the remedies 4in ft 


them, 805, 
Poy fons of Minerals, and their remedies. 
809, 


Preputium, 126. to belpethe fhortnesi 
thereof, and {uch as have beene circumc;- 
fed, 662. Theulcers thereof are wore 


than thofe of the Glans, 737. 
Preparation of fimple medicines, and the 
divers kinds thereof, 1037. 
Prefervatives the plague, 324, 

825.8266 

Principall parts which, and why (0 called, 
326 

Proceflus mammillares, 167. 


Procefles of the Vertebrz, right, Oblique, 
196.that caked the tooth.ib, 
Acromion 4sd Coracoides, 208, 

Prodigie, what, 961. divers of them, 

I025.1026. 

Prognoftickes im Impostumes, 25 2.in an 
Erifipelas, 267. Ocdema, 268. 
in a Scyrrhus,278. #7 4 quartain Acse, 
285. an Aneurifma, 287. the Pa- 
rotides, Dropfie, 300. in 4 
Sarcocele, 312+ wounds, 323. in 

fractures of the skull, 352. in wounds of 
the liver and guts, 397.in a Gancrenc, 
455.10 wleers, A68in Fraciures, 562. 
in Diflocations,5 95.18 4 diflocated Fam, 
in the diflocated Vertebrx, 606. 
in adiflecated Hippe, 624.in the ftone, 
666.in fupprefiion of the urine, 634. 
inthe ulcerated reines and bladdcr,686- 
inthe Gout,702. inthe Lues yenerea, 
727. in a virulent firangury, 73.9417 the 
frmall pox, 758. inthe leprofie, 773 
cerning poylons,782.1n the bite of 4 mat 
the plagwe,83 5. in plagne 


fores, 357: 
Pronatores mufcull, 222 
Properties ef 4 geod Surgeon, 
Proptofis ocull, 646- 
Preftates, 


Proud 


Proud fle) 
Piilothrag 
Pudendz 
Pulfe, the 
Pulfation 
Pultiffés / 


Punctus a 
Punctur 
Purging, 
ning of 
Purple /p 
heir 


Pus, 07 
How q 


AiG 


Putrefacth 
7207) 
Three 
Pyes may 
Pylorus, 
Pyramid 
Pyrotick 


Ua 
jig fic 
Progn 


Quick filv 


Whett 


Rad 
Radius, 
Ramus f 
Mefen¥ 
Ranul., ; 


Ratf-ban 


lity an. 
Raving, 


i pe 
OW 
& 
Pre 
j 
j 
| } 
A 
A 


time, ibid, 
b ide Whe. 


that OnE 
9,980, 
Ibid. 
mcs burnt, 
fon hath 
effects and 
poyfenous 
783. 

AS, OC. fee 


ies againg 
805, 
remedies, 
fhortnejfe 
€ CHMNCI- 
are worse 

es, and the 
1037. 
Zul, 
$2 5-826. 
My fo called, 
167. 
bt, oblique, 
he tooth,ibe 


of them, 
125.1026. 
252.1% 4% 
ema, 268. 
rtain Ag#e, 
in the Pa- 
300.4% 4 
[, 2223.47 
of 

t Gancréent, 
pures, 562. 
pcatea fan, 
‘bre, 606- 
n the flone, 
rine, O84- 
dder,O386-6 
venerea, 
739-17 the 
» 773 
ite of a maa 
5. sn plague 
357s 

222° 

646- 


Proud 


The Table. 


Proud flefh inulcers, how helped, 47 2. 


Pfilothra, forme and 1082. 
Pulfe, the triple ufe thereof, ” 22. 


Pulfation t# 4 Phlegmon how caufed,255. 
Pultifft's bow dsfferent from Cataplafines, 


1062. 
Punctus aureus, 309. 


Puncture of a nerve,why deadly, 400. 
Purging, whether nece(fary in the bezin- 
ning of peftilent difeales, $45. 
Purple (pots, or tokens inthe plague, 851. 
T heir cure, S52. 
Pus, or quitture, the ficnes thereof, 258. 
How it may flow fromthe wounded part, 
and bee evacnated by urine and ftoole, 


684. 

Putrefaction in the plague different from 

common pwtref action, 819. 
Three caufes thereof, Soo. 

Pyes may be taught to (peake, 72. 

Pylorus, 104. 

Pyramidall wu/cles, 99. 

Pyrotickes,sheir nature, kindes, and ufc, 

1046. 

Q. 
Uadrigemini mufculi, 230. 
Quartaine ague or feaver, the canfes, 
ff gas, [ympromes, 2 84. 
Prognofticks and cure, 285. 

Quickfilver, why fo called, SII. 
Whether het or cold, ibid. 
Wherefore good, 812. 
Thekindes thereof, ibid. 
How to pur fie it, S13. 

See Hydrargyrum. 

Quotidian feaver, the caufe thereof, 275. 
he fignes, fymptomes 276. 
Thecure, 
Howto bee distingwifbed froma double 

Tertian, ibid. 
R. 


Acke-bones, their fracture. 573+ 
Radith root drawes ont vensme power- 


fully, 860. 
Radius, what, 217. 
Ramus fplenicus, 112 

Mefenteriacus, 11}. 
Ranula, why focalled, the caufe and 

Ratf-bane, or Rofeager, the poyfonous qua- 
lity and cure, 


Raving, fee Delyrium. 


Reafon, and the funttions theres 8 
Reéti mufculi, 


202.222. 
Rectum inteftinum, 
Reines, (ee Kidneies. 

Remedies (upernatur all, 989. 
See medicines, 

Remora, the wondrous force thereof, 1013 
Repletio ad vafa & ad vires, 376 
Repercufsives, 461. 
What diffwades their ufe, * 253- 
When to be ufed, 256 
Fit to bee putinto, and upom the eye, 

Their differences, I 28. 
Reports how to be made, 1121. 
Refolving medicines, angetheir kindes , 
1040. 

Refolving and ftrengthening medicines , 
264.292. 

Refpiration how a voluntary motion, 25. 
The ule thereof, 143. 
Rett mece/Jary for knitting of broken bones, 
580. 
Rete mirabile, 172. 
Whether d:fferent from the Plexus cho- 
roides, 1746 
Rhinocerote, 65> 
Hu enmsty withthe Elephant, 1023. 
Rhomboides mufculus, 206.208, 
Ribs, their uumber, connexion, and con- 
fiftence, 


Their contufion, and a ftrance [ymptome 
fomet: mes happening thereow, 
Their f rach u7e, the danger and cure, 


I. 

Symptomes enfuine thereon, 

T heir diflocation and cure, 607. 
Right mufeles of ihe Epigaftrium, 98. 
Rim of the belly, 100. 
The figure, compofure, thereof, 
rol. 

King-wormes, 26 4e 
Rotula genu, 2316 
Rough artery, 156. 

Rowlers, fee Bandages. 
Rules of Surgery, rIrg, 
Rumpe, the fractures thereof, 575° 
The d:flocation thereof, 607: 
The cure, ibid. 
Ruptures, 3 
Their kindes, ibid. 
Their cure, 305.306.307.311. 
Se 

Acer mufculus, 207: 
Sacr# venz. 117% 


; 
7 
¢ 
| 
— 
4 
q 
a 
‘ 
| 
q 
| 
| 
“7 
4 


The Table. | 


Sacro-lumbus mufculus, 206. 
Salamander, the fymptomes that enfue upon 


his poyfon,,and the cure, 
Salivation, 38. 
Sanguine perfons, their manners and difea- 

17. 
Sapheia vena when and where to be opened, 
224. 

Sarcocele, 304-. 

The prognoftickes and cure, 312. 
Sarcotickes, fimple and compound, 1044. 

None truely fuch, ibid. 
Scabious, the effect thereof against. a pefti- 

lent Carbuncle, 860. 
Scailes, how knowne tobe fevered from the 

bones, 586. 
Scailes of Braffe,their poyfonoss quality and 

cure, Silo, 

Of iron, their barmeandcure, ibid. 


Scald-head, the fiznesand eure thereof, 


638. 
Scalenus mufculus, 
Scalpe, hairy /calpe, 160. 


Scaphoides os, 
Scarrs, bow to helpetheir deformity, 361. 


Scarus, 4 filh, 67. 
Sceleton, 239.240.2411. wwhats242. 
Sciatica, thecaufe, Ge. 719. 

~The cure, 720. 
Scirrhus, what, 278. 


What tumours referred thereto, 254. 

. The differences, fignes and prognofticks, 

Cure, ibid. 
Scorpion bred iw the braine by felling to 
Bafill, 761. 
Their defcription, fling, andcure, 797. 
Scrophule, their caufe and cure, 274. 
Scull andthe bones thereof, 162. 
The fractures thereof, See Fractures. 


Deprefsion thereof how helped, 3.44. 


Where to be trepaned, 369. 
Sca feather and grape, 1007. 
Sea-hare,his decription,poyfon and the cure 

thercof, 803. 
Seafons of the yeare, Io, 


Secundine, why prefently to be taken away 
after the birth of the childe, 904. 


Why fo called, 906. 
Caufes of the flay, and {ymptoms that fol- 
low thereon, ibid. 
Seed-bones, 220.236. 
Seed, condition of that which good, 
885. 

The qualities, 888. 
The cbullition thereof rc. 893. 


24. 

Semicupium, the forme, manner, and of 
thereof, 1073. 
Semifpinatus mufculus, 207, 
Senfe, common fenfe, and the funttions 
thereof, 896. 
Septum lucidum, 167. 
Septicke medicines, LO46, 
Serpent Hamorrous,his bite & cure,79 1 
Seps, Ais bite and cure, ibid. 
Bafiliske, bis bite and cure, 792 
ut (pe, bes bite and cure, 794. 
Snake, his bite and cure, 795. 
Serratus mufculus major, 204. pofterior 
& fuperior, ibid. minor, 208, 
Serous 4amour, 15. 
Sefamoidia offa, 220.226. 


Seton, wherefore good, 381. the manner of 
making thereof, ibid. 
Sepe,what, and the difference thereof, 27. 
Hiftories of thechange thereof, 974. 
Shane and fhamefac’tne(fe,their effet?s,4o 
Shin-bone, 231. 
Shoulder-blade,the fractures thereof,s5 609. 
the cure, 570. the diflocation, 608. the 
Jirft manner of reftoring it,609. the {e- 
cond manner ,610.the third maner.611. 
the fourth manner ibid.the fifth,612.8/¢ 
fixth,614. bow toreftore it diflocated 


forwards, 617. outwards, 618. %p- 
wards, ibid. 
of [anguinc,cholericke,phlegmat k, 
and melancholick per fons, 17.18. 
Signes general whereby to juaze of di/- 
eles, 1122.07. 
Silkewormes,their indufery, 60. 


Similar parts,bow many and which, 
Simple medicines,the:r difference in quals- 
tres andeffects,1029. hot, cold, moz/f, 
driein all 
cidentall qualities, 1032. their prept- 
vation, 1037- 
Siren, 100], 
Skin twofold,the utmoft or (carfe-skin. 
the true skin,89. the fabftance, magni- 
thereof. ib. 
Sleepe, what it 8, 35. the fit time, the u{2 
and abufe thereof, 36. when hurtful, 


277. how to procure it, 850. 
Smelling, the object and mediun therecf, 

Snake, Ais bite, and the cure, 795. 


Solanum manicum, the peyfenows 


and c: 
Solcus § 
Solutio: 

re pa: 
Sorrow 
Soule, of 
body. 
Sounds. 
Southe; 
South wf 
Sowninds 

Sparro, 

youn. 

Spermat 

Spermat 

126.t/ 

Sphinct 

the bl, 

Spiders, 

ana 

Spinal] 


bereos | 


Spinatus 
Spine,t bel 
0f 60 
Spirit 
Vital, 
their 
Spirits, 4e 
flowers 
Splecne, 
¢ the; 
Splenius 
Splints a7 
Spring ,th 
Squinanci 
thereof, 
Stapes,on 
fage, 
Staphilon 
thereof 
Stars, 4on 
Steatom: 
Sternon . 
thereof 
Sternutam 
Stingino 0 
Bees, W 
Sting-R 
ft an 
Stink 47 j; 
Stomacke, 


Why the greateft portion therof 2oes tothe 
: generation of the head andbrain, 894. 
Seeing, the infirument , object yc. thereof 
| 


$94. 
hereof. 


er 
B612the 
flocated 


13. up- 


ibid. 
rmatick, 
17.18. 
of 
2 
60. 
Si. 
quali- 
, moift, 

heir 
prepa- 
1037- 
1001. 
in. $8- 
marni- 

| 
the ufe 
purt full, 
85 
shereof, 
7952 
gualit}, 
and 


The Table. 


Sol cus mufculus, 238. frenes of the wounds thereof, 
Solution of comtinuitie,42. why harder to cers thereof, ¢ 

repaire in bones, 562. Stones, (ee Tcfticles. 


Sorrow, the effects thereof, 39. 
Soule, or life, what it performes in plants, 
beafts men,7 .whenit enters into mans 


body cre 95- 
Sounds whence the difference, 191. 
Southerne people how tempered, 17.” 


South winde why peftilent, $23. 
Sowning what,the caufes andcure. 334. 
Sparrowes with what care they.breed their 

young, §8, 
Spermatica arteria, 114, vena, 116. 
Spermatick veffels men,1 1.9. im women, 

126.thecaufe of their foidings, 887. 


Sphincter mufcle of the fundament,106.0f 


the bladder, 124. 


Spiders, their cndufry,5 8. their differences 
ana bites, 798. 
Spinal] marrow,the coats fubftance 
thereof,1 75 .fignes of the wounds thereof, 
389. 

Spinatus mufculus, 205. 
Spine,the di flecation thereof,602.603.how 
toreflore it,604.a further enquirie there- 
0f,605 .prognosticks, 606. 
Spirit what, 25. threefold, viz, Animall, 
Vitall, and Naturall,r.5. 26. fixed, ib. 


their ufe, 27. 
Spirits, bow tobe extracted out of herbs aud 
flowers crc. 1105. 


Spleene, the fubRance, magnitude, figure, 
oc.thereof, 


Splenius mufculus, 201. 
Splints and thetr ufe, | 559 
Spring,the temper thereof, IO. 
Squinancie,the differences, {ymptomes, 
thereof,296.the cure, 
Stapes,one of the bones of the Auditorie paf- 
fage, 163.191- 
Staphiloma,,an affect of the eyes, the caufes 
thereof, 649+ 
Stars, bow they worke upon the Aire, 30. 
Steatoma, what, 271. 
Sternon , the anatomicall adminiftration 


thereof, 139. 


ufe 1968. 

Stinging of Bees, Wafps, Scorpions, orc. fee 
Bees, Wafps, Scorpions, 

Sting-Ray, the fymptomes that follow his 


fling and the cure, 802. 
Stink am infeparable companion of putrefa- 
318. 


Stomacke, the fubftance, magnitude, CrCl. 


480... 


Stone, the caufes thereof, 664." of it 
inthe kidneyes and pro 
fickes,666.the prevention-thereof,667. 
what to bee done when the ftonc falls into 
theureter, 669 .fignes tt 15 fallen ont of 
the ureter intothe bladder, 670. what to 
be done when it is in the necke of the blad- 
der or the pafjage of the yard,671% .howte 
cut for the fone inthe bladder, 672.673. 
674.076. how to cure the wound, 679. to 
help the ulcer whem the urine flowes our by 
it, 681, how to cut women for the fone, 
682. aivers flrange ones mentioned, 


996.997- 
Storkes, their piety, 61. 
Stoves, how to be made, 1077, 


Strangury, the caufes, Gc. thereof, 688. a 
virulent one, what, 738. the caufes and 


differences thereof, ibid. proguostickes, 
739. fromwhat part the matter thereof 
flowes, ibid. the general cure, 740. the 


proper cure,74.1.why tt [ucceedeth imme- 
derate copulation, | $37. 


Strangulation of the mother or womb,939. 
fignes of the approach thereof, 941. the 


caules and cure, 942. 
Strengthening medicines, fee Corrobora- 
ting. 
Struma, Kings-evill. 
Sublimate, fee Mercury. 


Subclavian, fee Arceric and Veine. 
Subclauius mufculus, 206. 


Succarath,abeaft of the weft Indies, 61 
Suffufio, fee Cataract. 
Sugillations, fee Contufions. 


Summer, the semper thereof, 10. 
Supinatores mufcult, 
Suppuration, the fignes thereof, 25 1. caw- 

fed by natarall heat, 275. 
Suppuratives, 258.275. 292.4weffectual 


ont, 433. their differences, crc. 
bow they differ from emollient, ibid. 
Superfoetation what, 924. thereafon, 
_ thereof, ibid. 


Stermutamentories , their defcription and Suppofitories, their difference, forme and 


ufe, 1703. 
Supprefsion of sine, fee Urine. 

Surgery, what,3.the operations thereof,4. 
Surgeons, what for them, 3.their 
office,a. the choice of fisch as (hallhave 
care of thofe fick of the plague, 830. they 
be carefullin making reports, 1121 
how long in (ome cafes they muft fatjend 


tothe 
24. 
and ufe 7 
1073. 
207. | 
nchions 
396. 
167. | 
1046. 
re,79ot 
ibid. 
192. 
794. 
7935+ 
of{terior 
208. 

0.236. 
anner of 

ibid. 
of 
974- 7 / 
fec?s 4.0 
q 
f,569. 
OR. be j 
the fe- 


* 


their judgements, 1122. they muft have a 
they bring Magiftrates inte an cr- 
toreport or make certificates 


im divers cafes, 1129 


Care 


Sutures of the skull, their number, @¢-161 


and maner how to be performed, 326-327. 


Sweating fickne/fe, 821 
Sweet bread,108. Sweet waters,1083 


Swine afsift their fellowes, 


67 
Symptomes, their denfiition, and aivifi- 


Sympathy and Antipathy of living crea- 
tures 73 


? 
Symphyfis, 4 kinde of articulation, 243 
Synarcofis, Synarthrofis, Synchondrofis, 
Syneurofis, 243 
Synochus putrida, its caufeandcure, 261 


T. 


Alparia, 272 
Tarentula’s poyfomoms cure,ag 
Tarflus, what, 181 
Taftes,what, their differences, 1034.their 
feveral denominations, matures, 1035. 

Tafting, what, 22. 
Teeth, sheer number, divifion, cy ufe,179 
wherein they differ from other bones, ib. 
pain of them how helped, .thetr affects, 
657. bow to draw them, 659.60 cleanfe thé, 
660.how to fupplytheir defe? 872.00 help 
thepainin breeding them, 959 
-Temporall »ujcle, 188. what enfues the 
cutting thereof, 
Temperament what the divifion therof,7 
ad pondus,ib.ad juftitiam,8.0f bone, 


wanting in fome,ib.why not to be trepaned, 
162.167. Sutures in wounds, their forts 


Thigh-bone the appendices and proceffi 
thereof, 228.229.the fracture and cure, 


tothe joint,s80.its diflocation, 
623.720./ee Hip. 
Things saturall,s. not natural, 2 9 why 
caled,ib.againft nature, 41 
Thorax,the cheft and partsthereof, 35 


Thoracica arteria, 153 
Throat,how to get out bones, awd {uch like 
things that flicke therein, 655 


Throttle,and the parts thereof, 194 
Throwes,and their caufe, 903 
Thymus,what, 156. Tibia,2 >; 
Tibizus anticus mufculus, 237. pofticis, 
238. Tinea,what, 638 
Toad, bis bite. and cure, 796 
Tongue, tts quantity, Oe. wounds, 
tts Cure,385 tts impediment contract. 
on,and the cure,661.t0 fupply its 

873. Tonfillx,293.their inflammati- 
ons, and their cure, 293.294 
Tooth-ache, the caufes, fienes 656. 
Tophior knots at the joints in fome that 
have the gout, how caufed,7 17. in theLw- 


es venerea how helped, 746 
Torpedo, ba craft flupefying force,zo4 
Touching, bow performed, 22 
Toucha,s france bird, 1016 
Trapezius mufculus, 208 
Tranfverfarius mufculus, 205 


Tran{verfe mujeles of theEpigaitrium,99 
Treacle, how ufefull in the zout,70 6.bow it 

the force of fimple poyfons, 783 
Trepan,when to be ovlied, 342. their de- 
feription, 365. where tobe applyed, 369 
Trepaning why ufed,364. bow performed, 

ib. caution in performance thereof 


gament,griitle tendon, veine, artery, 9.0f Triangulus mufculus, 207 


ages,ib.of bwmours, 11. 
Temper of the feafons of the yeare,10 
native temper how changed, 18 
Temperatures tm particular,as of the fon- 
therne, northern, cc. people, 19.20 


Tenfores mufculi,230. Tentigo,130 
Tertian gues, or feavers, their caufes, oc. 
265. thcir cure, | 266 

Telticles, their fubfiance, 119.10 women 
126, their wounds, - 399 
Teftudo,what, 272 


Tettars,their kinds, and canfes,264. their 
cure,265- 1081. occafioned by she Lucs 
venerea,7§5 4.therr cure, | 
 Thanatth,afirange beaf#, = 1021 

Thenar mufculus, 222.& 238. 

Thigh,the nerves Ie its proper 
399. 


rton, root. Trochanter,229 
Trufles,their forme and wfé, 306.307. 
Tumors,their differences,24.9. their cene- 
rall camfes fignes,250.cenerall cure,252. 
which bardeft so be cured ib.the four prin- 
3. flatulemt & watrifh their jicns 
and cwre,269.270.0f the gums,292.0f 
the almonds of the threat, 293. of the na- 
vell,303.0f the groine and cods, 304. 0f 


knees, 314 
Turtles, 63 
Tympanites, Dropfic. 

V. 


Alves of the heart, their aétion, fitt, 
orc 
Varicous bodies, 120 


Varices,what,their caufes,ficnes and 


483. Vis 


V ital] par | 
Vitreus hg 
Viver,or, 


Ulcers co 


475 few 


Vas bri 
Vala cy. 
Veine, 
112.4 
afcende 
they ar 
184” 
the ei 
bary,2 
nicx 
Ne cr 
ralis,ju 
pupis, | 
210.2) 
phem, 
lis, icl 
Vener 
head 
Veneno 
Venane 
mace 
Vennfs 
Ventriclc 
Venricl« 
Verdegr 
Venebrz 
thehe/ 
theloi ns 
of the |p: 
Verigoy 
Vefiels fa 
Veficator 
peitilent 
defcripts 


Virginity 


peyfenes 


what bo« 
Caules, 
their cen | 
One 
472. wi 


breeding 


We, 


— 
f 
* 
aw 
¥ 
* 
4 
* 
4 
4 


rocelfes 
ye ation, 


why fo 
135 
ch like 
655 
194 
11,231 
mofticus, 
at, 638 
96 
ntracti- 
defects, 
mmaAti- 
93-294 
656. 
pme that 
theLu- 
746 
Wel, 
22 
1016 
208 
205 
rium,99 
6.bow it 
783 
their de- 
a, 369 
rformed, 
rcof.366 
207 
ter,229 
06.307- 
peir gene - 
Urel,252- 
prin- 
heir figns 
of the na- 
, 304-6F 
314 
62 


jon, fits 
146- 

12° 
and care, 
Vas 


The Table. 

Vas brev C5 {er venofum. IT? how to prevent them, <8 

557. they mult be (eldome 

Vata ejacularaia, 12 Vatti mufculi,2 32 dre/t when the callie f 589 

Veine what,97.Gate veine,c> its diftribution, Umbilical velfels, how what, 892 


112.ae(cenden hollow veine its diftribution, Unction to bee in the Lues vencrea, 731: 


afcendent hollw veine, cr its diftribution, 116 their ufé,732. cautions in thew ule, ib. andthe 
they are more than arteries,155.tbofe of theeies, inconveniences following the immoder at ufe,73 4 


she the cephalick,210. med:an, il.di- fiickes.aud cure, 


of the fubclavian veia,ib. of the axtl- Unguentum adftringens, 105 6,nutritum,é6. au~ 


of the crural, | 224 
porta, 12.cava,2 1 6.arteriola, 147.phre- apom pholigos, 105 7. déficcativum rub. 76.c4 
nicx coronales,azygos, intercoftalis,mamma- nulacum,4.Album Rhafis,- 7, Althex,ib. 
148.axillaris,hume- puleon,7é. apoftolorum, #6. comitiffx, 
ralis,jugularis interna & externa, 149.recta, — ftomacho,1058.ad morfus rabiofos, bid. 
pupils 152- cephalica, humeraria, mediana, Unicorn,/fany fuch beaft.what the name imports, 
210.alvatella,& plenicaer1. {apheia, vel fa- 813. what the ordinary horns are, 814. not cffe- 
azainft peyfon, ib. effceuall onely to dry, 


lis, ichiadica major, 225 ib.tmwhat cafes good , S15 
Venery., at{commodities in wounds of the Voices, whence lo various, 194 


| 359 Vomits,their force, 38 their deferiptions, 277 
Venenous bites and flings, how to be cured, 78 3 Vomiting why it happens tn the Collick, 106.the 
Venane of 4 mad dog outwardly applied, caufeth fittest time therfore, 705 .t0 make it eafie, ib. 


mace|{e , 787 Voyages awd other employments wherinthe Au- 
Venolces, their form and ue, 694.695  thorwas prefent;of Thurin,r 1 42.0f Marolle& 
Venrricle, fee ttomacke, low Britany, 114.4. of Perpignan, 1145 .0f Lan- 
Ventricles of the brain, 166 drefie,cr Bologne, 1146. of Germany, 1147.0f 


Verdegreace, poyfonous qualst y andcure,810 Danvelliers,1 148. of caftle of Compt ,it49.0f 
Verebra,cy their proceijes 196.0f theneck,ib.of Mets, 1150. of Hedin, 1155 .\ Bartell of S. 
theholy-hone ,198.how different from thofeof Quintin, 1164. Voyage of Amicns,of Harbour 
theloins,205.Tenth of the back, bow the middle of Grace,1165.t0 Roven, ib. battell of Dreux, 
of the [pine,r06,their diflocation, See Spine. 1166 of Moncextour,1167. voyage of Flanders 
Vertigoyts caufes fignes,639.the cure,640 1168.0f Burges.1172.bastell of S.Denis,1 172. 
Vellels for  Voyageof Bayon, 
Veficatories why better than cauteriesin cure ofa Urachus,134. Ureters,their 
peitilent bubo,854. whereof made, 1046.tberr Urine ffopt by diflocation of the thigh-bone, 626 
defcription and ufe,1067. Viper,fee Adder. fepprefsion thereof how deadly,666.bew tthap- 


Virginity, the fignes thereof, 1128 pens by internak caufes, 683.b7 external, 684. 
Virall parts which, 84. their divifion, ibid. prognofticks,ib.things wuprofitable im the whole 
Vitreus humor, 184 body,purcedsthereby, 68 3.bloody the differences 
Viver,or,as fome terme it, the Weaver, a fifh, bus and caufes thereof, 685 the care, 687. fcalding 

poyfonous pricke cy the cure,  therof how helped. 740. areceptacle for as 


Ulcers conjoined with tumors how cured,26 5.18 | 

what bodies not eafily cured, 417. their nature, plague fomtimes like thofethat are in health,832 

caules, .fignes, prognofticks, 468 Utelif, 4 ffrange fifb,69. Uvea tunica,183 

their cenerallcnre, 70. fignes of adiftempered Vulnerary potions,their ufe,752.the names of the 

one,cy the cure,4.7 painefullone thecure, fimpleswhereof they are compofed, 75 3.their 

472. with proud flefh in them, ib. putrid and form, and when chiefly to bee afed, ib. 

breeding wormes, 4.73.4 fordid one, ibib,ama- Uvula,the fite therof, 193. the infidmation 

ligne, virulent , and cating one, 474. edver. andrelaxation thereof.r.94.thecure, 29§. 

475 haw +a hem WwW. 

4 VAlouttree and the malicnity therof,So8 

Warts of the neck of the womb.o55 their 

156. the skin,1o79 

their flinging how helped, 789 

\g,and the difcommed:ties thereof, 37 

qualities, 6.Ceft in time of placue,8>4 

Was 


cannot keepe 7t,877. Urines of fuch as bave the 


~ 
| 
>«. 
¥ 
j 
—_ 
. 
4 
* 
* 


Table. 


Waters,bow tobe diftilled,tog9. Watrilh ts 
mors their fignes ama cure, 269.270 
Weapons,of the Antients compared with thofe of 
the moderne times, 407 
Weazon,the fubflance,cre .therof,15 6.bow to be 
opened in extreme difeales.294.the wounds ther- 
0f 7.the ulcers thereof, 480° 
Weakneile, two caufesthereof, - . 250 
Weboacthe eyewhich curable which not,647; 
Weights ana meals ures with their notes, 1049 
Wens, their caufes dad cure,272.273.bow to d- 
fiinguifo them inthe breaft from a Cancer, 272 
Whale, why reckoned among mon flers.1012.they 
bring forihyoung & fuckle them ib. bow caught, 
ibid. 
Whale-doxe, 1013 
Whirle-done the fracture thereof andcare, 582 
the aiflocation thereof, 630 
White 
Whites, the veafonof the wame,differences, oc. 


954 
Wine,wh ch not in-théGoat,.. 
Winds, their tempers and qualities, | 20.3Q. 


Winter,and thet emper it encréa- 


feth the native heat, II 
Wifedome the daughter of memorie and experi - 
ence, | 898 
Witches burthy the Devils afi:/flance, 989 
Wolves, their deceits and ambufhes, 66 


Wombe, the fubstance, magnitude, Gc. thereof, 
128.129.the coats thereof, 132. fignes of the 
wounds thercof,347 ulcers therof thezr cure, 

82. when it hathrecerved the feed it 1s fhut wp, 


1.the falling downe thereof how caufed,go6 
it ts not diftinguifhed intocells, 924.4:fcirrhus 
thereof,930.{ignes of the diftemper thereof,9 22 
which meet for conception, ib.of the fallir.¢ down 
pervertionor turning thereof,934.thecurether 
mufl be cut away whi nit patrefyed, 
936.the ftrangulation or fuffocation therof,939. 


fee Strangulation. 
Women, their how to know whether 


they have conceived 8909.their travell in child- 
birth,and the caufe thereof, 899. what mull bee 
done to them prefently after their deliverance, 
917.bearing many children at abirth,979.971 
Wondertull wet, ; 172 
Wondrous original of  feme creatures, 1.900 
nature of fome marine things, ” 
Wormes 14 the teeth their caufes,and hor 


658.bredin the head,762.caft forth 


765 how generated,and their diffeiences , f 
monftrous cure, 767 
Wounds may be cured only with Lat ¢ water,s 
Woundstermed great inthree refoils,322 
Wounds poyfoned how cured, 98a 
Wounds of the head at Paris, add of the lees a 
Avignon, why hard to bee cured, 4 27 
Wounds ,what,the divers appellition and div, fi- 
bn of them,321.their caufes fignes,322 Prog. 
nostickes,323 fmsall ones fometimes mortal, >, 4 
their cure in general ibid. to their 
328.to helpe paine,329. why jome die 
ones, and others recover of great, 351. wlethe, 
better to cure in children or in ald people,s 252 
Wounds of the bead fee Fractures Of the mu/cy. 
lous skinne thereof, 360 their cure, 261. f the 
of the ege-browes, ib, of the 
of the checke, 382.0f the nofe,384..0f the torrve, 
385 .0f the cares, 386. of the wecke and 
ibid. of the weaX on and Gu let, 387. 0f th. 
.388.0f the heart lungs and midriffe, ibid. 
fpine,389. what wounds of the lungs curable, 
392. of the Epigaftrium or lower belly, 96. 
their cure, 397.0f the Kall and fat 398.0 the 
groincs,yard,and tifticles, 399.0f she theches, 
and legges ibidwf the nerves and nervoms pats. 
ibid.of the joruts,4.03.6f the ligaments, 
Wounds contufed mufi be bronght to fuppartt- 
On, 417 
Wounds made by are not barnt, neite) 
muft they becanteriZed, they may be deel: 
fed with fuppuratives, 410.why hard to cae, 
ibid. why they looke blacke, 413.they havens 
Efchar,ibid.why fo deadly, 4.15.1 what 
not cafily cured,a17. their,divyi a 18. fiers, 
ibid.bom tobe dreft at the 
the fecond time, 424. they all are comtufed, 43 
Wounds made by arrowes how d:fferent from 


thofe made by gunthet, | 43 
Wrett, and the bones the diflocate- 
on thereof, andthe cure, 22 
Y 


Ard, and the parts thereof, 125.the wounds 
thereof, 399. helpe the cord thereof, 66% 

the maligne ulcers thereof, 737. fupply ihe ae- 
feck thereof, for makixeg water, 877 
Yew tree. bis malignity, Raa 


= 
a 
« | 
* * 
4 
- 
~*~ 
* 
4 
4
