The Markandeya Purana
F. Eden Pargiter (translator) (1904)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): F. Eden Pargiter's 1904 Bibliotheca Indica English translation of the Markandeya Purana (this scan a 1969 reprint of the 1904 translation). Public domain.

========================================================================

MĀRKANDEYA PURĀNA


TRANSLATED WITH NOTES +7 ~


BY. 7 yk , kā, a
F. EDEN PARGITER, B.A ee
Indian Civil Service; + 5
Judge of the High Court of Judicature Calcitta;
Late Boden Sanskrit Scholar, Oxford. kis


g
Pali
„T
=


bis.
ie R i


je


-


INDOLOGICAL BOOK HOUSE


1675, DAKHNI RAI STREET, CK 34/10 NEPALI KHAPRA,
SUBHASH MARG, POST BOX NO. 98 5
MEAN
DELHI-6 VARANASI Le SE ae
DR ae
INDIA bas F Ne pe AI \
f = La 1)
1 VA $


PUBLISHED BY :


S.B. SINGH
INDOLOGICAL BOOK HOUSE


oe Y


PRINTED BY TODAY & TOMORROW’S PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS
FARIDABAD, INDIA.


—_


PREFACE.


This translation of the Markandeya Purana was under-
taken by me for the Asiatic Society of Bengal many years
ago, when I hoped to be able to carry it through in no long
period ; but onerous official duties left little leisure, and for
‘years removed me to a distance from the. Society’s Library
and other means of reference. Thes Society was réluctant
that the translation should be droppedy-and it has therefore
been continued as well as leisure permitted. It is hoped
that in spite of these difficulties the translation may be of
service to scholars, and the notes with all their short-
comings not unwelcome.


CALCUTTA : ;
3rd December, 1904.


i INTRODUCTION.


This translation of the Markandeya Purana being made for the
Asiatic Society of Bengal naturally follows the edition of this work
prepared by the Rey. Dr. K. M. Banerjea, and published in the Biblio-
theca Indica in 1862; yet other editions and some MSS. have been
consulted and are referred to. The translation has been kept as close
to the original as possible, consistently with English sense and idiom ;
for a translation loses some of its interest and much of its trust-
worthiness, when the reader can never know whether it reproduces the
original accurately or only the purport of the original. The time
during whieh the work has been in hand has rendered it difficult to
maintain one system of transliteration throughout; but, in order to
place the whole in a consistent state, the system established by the
Royal Asiatic Society and approved by the Asiatic Society of Bengal
has been adopted in the Index and in this Introduction.

The general character of this Purana has been well summed up by
Prof. Wilson in his preface to his Translation of the Visnu Purana,
except that his description hardly applies to the Devī-māhātmya.
“This Purana has a character different from that of all the others.
It has nothing of a sectarial spirit, little of a religious tone; rarely
inserting prayers and invocations to any deity ; and such as are in-
serted are brief and moderate. It deals little in precepts, ceremonial
or moral. Its leading feature is narrative; and it presents an
uninterrupted succession of legends, most of which when ancient are
embellished with new cireumstances, and when new partake so far
of the spirit of the old, that they are disinterested creations of the
imagination, having no particular motive, being designed to re-
commend no special doctrine or observance. Whether they are
derived from any other source, or whether they are original inven-
tions, it is not possible to ascertain. They are most probably, for
the greater part at least, original; and the whole has been narrated
in the compiler’s own manner; a manner superior to that of the
Puranas in general, with exception of the Bhagavata.”


iv
Oomposition.


The Purana is clearly divisible (as Dr. Banerjea noticed) into five
distinct parts, namely :—

1. Cantos 1-9, in which Jaimini is referred by Markandeya to
the wise Birds, and they directly explain to him the four questions
that perplexed him and some connected matters.

2. Cantos 10-44, where, though Jaimini propounds further ques-
tions to the Birds and they nominally expound them, yet the real
speakers are Sumati, nicknamed Jada, and his father.

8. Cantos 45-81: here, though Jaimini and the Birds are the
nominal speakers, yet the real speakers are Markandeya and his dis-
ciple Kraugtuki.

4. Cantos 82-92, the Devi-mahatmya, a pure interpolation, in
which the real speaker is a rgi named Medhas, and which is only
repeated by Markandeya.

5. Cantos 93-136, where Markandeya and Kraustuki carry on
their discourse from canto 81.

The 137th canto concludes the work; it isa necessary corollary
to the first part.

There can be no doubt that only the third and fifth of these parts
constituted the Purana in its original shape as Markandeya’s
Purana. The name would imply that originally Markandeya was the
chief figure, and it is only in the third part that he appears as the
real teacher. There is, however, clearer evidence that the Purana
began with the third part originally, for this is asserted almost
positively in canto 45, verses 16 to 25. There Markandeya, after
declaring that this Purina, equally with the Vedas, issued from
Brahma’s mouth, says— I will now tell it to thee...... Hear all
this from me..... „as I formerly heard it when Dakga related it.”
These words plainly mean thatthe true Purana began here; or, if the
necessary words of introduction be prefixed, that it began at verse 16
or 17, which verses have been slightly modified since in order to
dovetail them into the preceding portion.

The first and second parts were composed afterwards and then
prefixed to the Purana proper. That they were later compositions
is implied by the fact that the Birds recite the Purana proper as an


v


authority, and is indeed indicated by the origin attributed to them.
While the original Purana was proclaimed to bea revelation from
Brahma himself, no higher authority is claimed for the first and
second parts than Markandeya andthe unknown brahman Sumati
Jada. Further, mention is made in canto 20, verse 33, of Puranas
which narrate Visņu's manifestations. This expression is vague.
If it means lengthy descriptions of some of the incarnations, such
Puranas might be the Visnu, Brahma-vaivarta, Brahma and
Bhagavata ; but the last two were pronounced by Prof. Wilson to
be late compositions, and the reference here may be to the former
two only, to which he assigned about an equal date with this Purana.
There is nothing definite to show whether the first and second
parts had been united before they were prefixed to the Purana proper,
or whether the second part was inserted after the first had been pre-
fixed; yet it would seem more probable that they had been united
before they were prefixed. There is a marked similarity between
them.

The prefixing of the discourses delivered by the Birds to the
Purana proper raised the Birdsto the primary and chief position and
tended to derogate from Markandeya’s pre-eminence ; but clashing
was avoided and Markandeya’s supremacy was preserved by two expe-
dients ; first, he was introduced at the very beginning in order that he
might expressly declare the wisdom and authority of the Birds ; and
secondly, the original Purana was interfered with as little as possible
by making the Birds repeat it in its entirety as Markandeya’s teaching,
conclusive upon the subjects dealt with in it. The Birds on begin-
ning it retire from further notice, but reappear with Jaimini in the
final canto to conclude their discourse and give consistency to the com-
bined instruction. This was a termination rendered necessary by the
prefixing of the first two parts to the original Purana.

The second part appears to have been amplified beyond its primary
scope. It discourses about birth and. death, about the hells, about
sins and their punishments and about yoga or religious devotion.
All these subjects are briefly dealt with, though the description of
the different hells is ampler than in other Puranas, but the last
subject leads to a discursive expusition. Tf dealt with like the other
subjects, the exposition would pass from canto 16, verse 12


vi


immediately to canto 37, where king Alarka is driven by adversit

seek Dattatreya’s advice and that rsi expounds the doctrines of r to
to him in cantos 88 to 43, and the story naturally- closeg a
canto 44. But the reference to that king and that rsi Was con.
sidered to require some elucidation at. canto 16, verse 13, hence the
story of Dattatreya and the story gt Alarka’s parents Rtadhvaja ;
and Madālasā are made the introduction to the direct exposition of
yoga, with the result that he digression is so long that, when the
subject of yoga is reached, its connexion with J aimini’s questions
has been lost. to sight; and even the passage from the story of Datta.
treya to that of Alarka at the end of canto 19 is inapt and abrupt.

Both these stories moreover appear in their turn to have been ex-
panded beyond their natural course. The story of the brahman and
his devoted wife in canto 16, which furnishes an unnecessary
explanation of the birth of Dattātreya, is a story of common town
life, an absurd anachronism compared with what it explains; and
it seems with its reference to a temple dedicated to Anastiya during
her life-time to be an interpolation intended for her glorification.
The story of Rtadhvaja and Madālasā is a charming one of simple
marvel and runs its natural course in cantos 20 to 27 as faras Mada-
lasa’s instruction of her son Alarka in kingly duties; but the follow-
ing cantos 28 to 35, in which she expounds the laws regarding’ brah-
mans, sraddhas, custom, &c., hardly accord with the story or with
her position and knowledge, and seem to be an interpolation. Some
teaching on such matters being deemed desirable, here was the only
place where the addition was possible.

The Devi-mahatmya stands entirely by itself as a later interpola-
tion. It is a poem complete in itself. Its subject and the character"
attributed to the goddess shew that it is the product of a later age
which developed and took pleasure in the sanguinarý features of
popular religion. The praise of the goddess Maha-maya in canto 81
is in the ordinary style. Her special glorification begins in canto 82,
and is elaborated with the most extravagant laudation and the mon
miraculous imagination. Some of the hymns breathe deep i,
feeling, express enthusiastic adoration, and evince fervent pes,
meditation. On the other hand, the descriptions of the battles oe
with wild and repulsive incidents, and revel in gross and amean


vii


fancies. The Devi-mahatmya is a compound of the most opposite
characters, The religious out-pourings are at times pure and eleva-
ted: the material descriptions are absurd and debased.

The ending of the Purana deserves notice. It closes with the
exploits of king Dama. According to the Gaudiya or Bengal MSS.,
which Dr. Banerjea followed, the Purana ends abruptly in canto 136,
leaving Dama acquiescing tamely in the flight of his father’s murderer
Vapugmat. The up-country version (the ending of which he placed
in an appendix) is found in the Bombay and Poona editions and
carries the story on till Dama takes vengeance on Vapusmat. Dr.
Banerjea considered the abruptness and incompleteness were strong

evidence of the genuineness of the Bengal ending ; and no doubt that
is a fair argument, but it overlooks the character of the two endings.
The pusillanimity which that ending ascribes to Dama jars with the
whole tone of his threat in canto 135 which both versions account
genuine. On the other hand the up-country ending narrates the ful-
flment of that threat, and the savage and even inhuman incidents.
which it mentions are hardly explicable if it is spurious, for Dama after
killing Vapusmat used Vapusmat's blood and flesh for the oblations
due to his murdered father, and also (it is implied) gave certain
degraded brahmans a cannibal feast. A forger would not wish nor
dare to invent in his eulogy of one of the kings such repulsive inci-
dents, desecrating the most sacred rites and tenets of his religion,
_ nor if we can imagine such a forgery did occur, could it have ever
obtained even tolerance. It is impossible, therefore, to think that the
up-country ending is a forgery; and if it be the true original, one
can easily understand why such an ending should have been struck
out, and how the reviser, unable to invent or palm off a new ending,
had to bring the story to the abrupt and jejune conclusion of the
Bengal version. The up-country ending has, therefore, been adopted
as the true version in this translation, and the Bengal ending has
been noticed separately. The former discloses, like stray passages
elsewhere, that savagery was not absent from the earliest memories of
the Aryans in India.

For the purpose of discussing the Purana further, it will be
convenient to consider the first and second parts as composing one
Section, and the third and fifth parts as composing another Section;


viii
and this division will be observed in what follows. The Devi-mahat-
mya constitutes a Section by itself.


Place of Origin.

With regard to the question of the place of its origin, the
Purana in both its Sections professes to have emanated from Western
India.

The second Section as the oldest may be considered first. In
canto 45, vs. 24 and 25, Markandeya says positively that Cyavana was
the rsi who first declared it: Cyavana obtained it from Bhrgu and
declared it to the rsis, they repeated it to Daksa and Markandeya
learnt it from Daksa. Now Cyavana is intimately associated with the

-west of India, especially with the region about the mouths of the
rivers Narmada and Tapti. His father Bhrgu and their descendants
Rcīka, Jamadagni and Paragu Rama are connected in many a
legend with all the country north, east and south of that region.
That was the territory of the Bhargava race (see pp. 310 and 368).
As Cyavana settled near the mouths of those rivers, the Purana itself
claims to have been first declared by him in that region.

Markandeya himself wasa Bhargava. This is stated in canto 45, v.
18 and canto 52 vs. 14-17; and also in the Maha-bharata, Vana-p.
cexvi. 14104-5. The Bhargavas spread from Cyavana’s region, es-
pecially eastward along the valleys of the Narmada and Tapti, as
those valleys were gradually wrested from the hill races by the Yada-
vas and Haihayas, the most famous conquerors of which race were
Arjuna Kartavirya and Jyāmagha. The former reigned in Mahis-
mati on the Narmada; and the latter apparently conquered further
eastward (see M. Bh., Vana-p. exvi., Santi-p. xlix; Hari-V., xxxiil.
1850-90, and xxxvii. 1930-87 ; Visnu P., cli-clxxiv; and Matsya P.
xliti.-13-51 and xliv. 28-36). Markandeya is said to have paid visits
to the Pandavas and to have had a tirtha at the junction of the Gan-
ges and Gomati (M. Bh., Vana-p. lxxxiv. 8058-9), but his special
abode appears to have been on the river Payosni (the modern Purna
and its continuation in the Tapti, see p. 299) (id. Ixxxviii. 8330).
Both by lineage and by residence therefore he belonged to that wes-
tern country, and the original Purana must have been composed
there. Bhargavas are continually alluded to throughout the Purana.


ix


As regards the first Section, it is said the Birds, to whom Jaimini
was referred, were living in the Vindhya mountains, and it was there
that they delivered the Purāņa to him. They are explained of course
to be four brahman brothers in a state of transmigration, and it ap-
pears to be implied in canto 3, vs. 22-24, that their father, the muni
Sukrsa, dwelt on or near the Vindhyas. He had a brother named
Tumburu. There were other persons of this name, such as ‘Tumburu
who was a guru among the Gandharvas (see pp. 571, 647, 648, and 118
as corrected; and M. Bh., Sabha-p. li. 1881.) ; butit seems permissible
to connect this brother Tumburu with the tribes of the names Tum-
bura and Tumbula who dwelt on the slopes of the Vindhyas (p. 343).

The Birds are said to have dwelt in the Vindhyas in a cave, where
the water was very sacred (p. 17), and which was sprinkled with
drops of water from the river Narmada (p. 19); and it is no doubt
allowable to infer the situation from these indications, namely, some
cliffs of the Vindhya hills where those hills abut on the river
Narmada at a very sacred tirtha, Such a spot cannot be sought
above the modern Hoshangabad, for the river above that was encom-
passed in early times by hills, dense forest and wild tribes. Among
the very sacred places where the Vindhya hills on the ‘north approach
close to the river, none satisfies the conditions better that the rocky
island and town of Mandhāta, which is to be identified with Māhis-
mati, the ancient and famous Haihaya capital. The modern town
of Mahesar, some fifty miles lower down the river, claims to be the
ancient Māhismatī, but does not satisfy the allusions: Mahismati
was situated onan island in the river and the palace looked out on the
rushing stream (Raghu-V., vi, 43). "This description agrees only
with Mandhāta. Māhismatī was sacred to Agni in the earliest times
(M. Bh., Sabhā-p. 1125-63), Mandhāta has special claims to sanc-
tity ; it has very aneient remains ; it has become sacred to Siva,
and the famous shrine of Ornkāra and other temples dedicated to him
are here (Hunter, Impl. Gaz., “ Mandhata. ”). The hills close in on
the river here, and on the north bank are Jain temples. In these hills
on the north bank overlooking the river ab Mandhata we may place
the alleged cave where the first part of the Purana professes that it
was delivered; and this identification will be found to explain many
further features of the Purana


x


With regard to the second part it may be noticed that Sumati Jada,
whose words the Birds repeat, belonged also to the family of Bhrgu
(p. 63). Hence this part belonged to the same region where the
Bhargavas predominated. With this view agrees the statement that
the rainy season lasts four months and the dry season eight months
(p. 147), as I understand isthe rule in this region. It is further
worthy of note that eyes of blue colour, like the blue water-lily
(nīlotpala) are given to Lakgmi (p. 104) and to Madālasā (p. 114);
and such a comparison is rare, I believe, in Sanskrit. Tt was (may
it be inferred?) in Western India that people with blue eyes could
have been seen as visitors in circumstances of such appreciation that
their features became a model of beauty.

There are some other matters that might have been expected to
yield information of a local character, such as the lists of various trees,
plants, birds and animals (pp. 24-3), 164-6 and 244-5) and the
peculiar exposition of the construction and nomenclature of fortresses
( pp. 240-2 ). Ihave, however, been unable to deduce any definite
conclusion from the latter, and the lists betray no special local charac-
ter, but rather aim at being as comprehensive in their way as the
geographical cantos (57 and 58).

Both the first and second Sections, therefore, plainly emanated from
Western India, and indicate the middle portion of the Narbada and
Tapti valleys as their place of origin. It remains to consider the
Devī-mānātmya, and the following considerations point to the same
place of origin, especially to Mandhāta.

The Devi-mahatmya must have originated in some place dedi-
cated to the goddess in her terrible form, The poem has now become
a text-book ofthe worshippers of Kali throughout Northern India
and in Bengal, especially at the great Durgā-pūjā festival, but it did
not originate in Bengal. The goddess whom the poem glorifies is a
goddess formed by the union of the vigours or energies ( tejas, not
Sakti) of all the gods (p. 473), and she is called Mahā-māyā,
Candika, Ambika, Bhadra-kālī and Mahā-kālī (pp. 469, 476, Be.
and 521). Though identified with Sri once (p. 484), yet she is
generally identified in the hymns with S'iva's consort as Durga,
Gauri, Siva-dūtī and Mahā-kālī ( pp. 484-5, 494-6, and 521). The
goddess Kali, however, who is also called Camuyda ( p. 500), is made


xi


a separate goddess who issued from Candika’s forehead (p. 499);
and Caņdikā gave her the name Camunda, because (as itis expressed
in a bon mot) she had killed two great demons Canda and Munda
(p. 500). Whether this derivation has any imaginary truth or not
must be very doubtful, because fanciful derivations are common in
this Purina and elsewhere. The Saktis of the gods are made separate
emanations from the gods, and are called the Mothers, maty-gana
(pp. 502, 504). The poem is therefore a glorification of Durga in
her terrible aspect, with Kali as an emanation from her.

One would therefore look among the strongholds of Siva worship
for the birth-place of this poem. Now itis remarkable that of the
great linga shrines (which are reckoned to be twelve), no less than
six are situated in or near the very region of Western India where
the Purana originated; viz, Omkara at Mandhata, Mahakala at
Ujjain, Tryambak at Nasik, Ghrnegvara at Ellora, Nāganāth east of
Ahmadnagar, and Bhima-gankar at the sources of the river Bhima.
Mandhāta was doubly distinguished, for another famous linga was
Amyegvara on the south bank of the river there. At none of them
however, except at Omkara, was Siva or Durga worshipped with
sanguinary rites, as far as I can find.

In the Mahā-bhārata Durga has the names Mahākālī, Bhadrakālī,
Canda and Candi; and she is also called Kali, no distinction being
made (Virata-p. vi. 195; Bhīgma-p. xxiii. 796-7). The name Ca-
muņdā does not apparently occur there. Camunda was worshipped
with human sacrifices, for she is mentioned in the fifth Act of the
Malati-madhava, where her temple is introduced and her votaries
tried to offer a human sacrifice at the city Padmavati. Padmāvatī
was a name of Ujjain; but some scholars would identify it with
Narwar which is on the R. Sindh, though that town seems to be too
distant to suit the description at the beginning of the ninth Act.
Whether Padmavati was Ujjain or not, there can be no doubt from
that description that it was situated in the region north of the
Vindhyas between the upper portions of the rivers Chambal and
Parbati, that is, in the region immediately north of Mandhāta.

The only local allusion in the poem is that the goddess is Mahā-
kālī at Mahākāla (p. 521), which is a shrine of Siva at Ujjain ; and
it is possible the poem may have been composed to proclaim the


xii


māhātmya or glory of that place. But this is hardly probable, be-
cause the allusion is very brief, and the worship there was not ap-
parently of the kind to originate this poem. Moreover, if Padmavati
was Ujjain, the Malati-madhava distinguishes between the temple of
Cāmuņdā and the shrine of Mahākāla, for the temple is described as
being adjacent to a field which was used as a burning-ground for
corpses and which must have lain outside the city ; and if Padmāvatī
was some other town, the allusion here to Mahākāla has no con-
nexion with Cāmuņdā or Candika at Padmāvatī. It is hardly pro-
bable that, if this poem originated at. Ujjain, the goddess at the
shrine of Mahākāla would have been referred to in this manner.
Hence this passage more probably conveys only a commendatory
allusion ; and it seems more natural and appropriate to connect the
poem with Mandhata, where this phase of sanguinary worship was
particularly strong.

The worship of Camunda points to the same conclusion, Human
sacrifices had long been abolished in the civilized countries of India,
and the offering of such sacrifices at Padmavati could hardly have
been a survival but must have been introduced from elsewhere.
Such a practice would naturally be clandestine. Human sacrifices
were offered in those times only among the rude tribes of Central
India, among whom such sacrifices survived till the last century ;
hence it may be inferred that such offerings to Camunda at Padmā-
vati must have been introduced from places which bordered on those
tribes and were affected by their rites. The middle portion of the
Narbada valley was eminently such a place. Pointing in the same
direction is the statement in the Mahā-bhārata that Durga had her
eternal abode on the Vindhyas and was fond of intoxicating liquor,
flesh and cattle (Virāta-p. vi. 195). It seems reasonable then to
conclude that the Devi-mahatmya is earlier than the Mālatī-
madhava ; and if so, the name Camunda and the form Candika occur
apparently the first time in this poem.

Mandhāta was a famous ancient tīrtha and appears to have fallen
into neglect and been almost deserted in the 11th and 12th centuries
A.D., but its glory was revived. About the year 1165 “a Gostin,
named Daryāo Nath, was the only worshipper of Omkār on the island,
which pilgrims could not visit for fear of a terrible god called Kal


xiii

Bhairava and his consort Kali Devi, who fed on human flesh. At
last Daryio Nath by his austerities shut up Kāli Devi in a cave, the
mouth of which may yet be seen, appeasing her by erecting an image
outside to receive worship; while he arranged that Kal Bhairava
should, in future, receive human sacrifices at regular intervals. From
that time devotees have dashed themselves over the Birkhala cliffs
at the eastern end of the island on to the rock’ by the river brink,
where the terrible god resided; till in 1824 the British officer in charge
of Nimar witnessed the last such offering to Kal Bhairava.” (Hun-
ter, Impl. Gaz., “ Mandhata”). There does not appear to be any
information, what kind of worship was offered there before the 11th
century, yet the facts suggest strongly that such sanguinary rites were
not a new ordinance but had prevailed there before.

Both Siva and his consort in their most terrible forms were thus
worshipped at Mandhata, which was almost exclusively devoted to their
service; and it is easy to understand how such a sanguinary form of
religion could take shape here. This region of the Narbada valley was
specially connected with demon legends, such as the demon stronghold
of Tripura and the demon Mahisa, after which the towns Tewar and
Mahesar are said to be named. It also bordered on the Naga coun-
try. Mandhata, with such associations, would be the most probable
birth-place of this poem, and the brief allusion to Mahakala would then
be only a collateral one; yet, even if thepoem was composed at Ujjain,
the conclusion would still remain good that the poem originated in
this region of Western India.


Date of the Purana.


The question of the date of the Purana is more difficult, since all
questions of chronology in Sanskrit writings are most uncertain, One
definite and important date may be first noticed. Mahamahopadhyaya
Haraprasād Sāstrī found a copy of the Devī-māhātmya in old
Newari characters in the Royal Library in Nepal, and it is dated
993 A.D. (See his Catalogue), It may be safely inferred therefrom,
that this poem must have been composed before the beginning of the
10th century at the latest. The Devī-māhātmya cannot therefore be
later than the 9th century and may be considerably earlier. Since itis
the latest part of the Purana, the other parts must have been


xiv


composed earlier, and the question for consideration is, how much
earlier ?

Prof. Wilson in his preface to his Translation of the Visnu Purana
pointed out that this Purana is later than the Mahā-bhārata but
anterior to the Brahma, Padma, Naradiya and Bhagavata Puranas,
and conjectured that it may be placed in the ninth or tenth century
A.D. This, as already noticed, is too recent, moreover it has been
discovered since that his estimates of the composition of the several
Puranas under-reckon their age, and that the periods assigned by him
should be moved some centuries earlier. For instance, he conjectured
the collective writings known as the Skanda Purana to be modern and
“ the greater part of the contents of the Kasi Khanda anterior to the
first attack upon Benares by Mahmud of Ghizni ” (Preface, p. Ixxii)—
which must mean that the Kāšī Khanda is earlier than the 11th century
A.D. But Mahāmahopādhyāya Haraprasād S'āstrī found in the
Royal Library in Nepal a copy of the “Skanda Purana” written in
the later Gupta characters of the 6th or 7th century A.D. From that
it is obvious that the composition of the Skanda Purana must have
taken place four or five centuries earlier than Prof. Wilson’s estimate.
Hence it is possible that a corresponding modification of his estimate
regarding the Markandeya Purana should be made, and that: would
place it about the 4th century A.D.

Further evidence is obtained from Jain writings that the Pura-
nas are much earlier than Prof. Wilson estimated. Thus the Padma
Purana of the Jains, which was written by Ravigena in imitation of
the Hindu Padma Purana, contains, I understand, a couplet showing
that it was composed in the year 678 A.D; and that Purana men-
tions all the Puranas. All are mentioned again in the Jain Adl
Purana of Jinasena who lived about a century later. This evidence
would demonstrate that all the Hindu Puranas had been composed
before the end of the sixth and probably by the end of the fifth
century A.D ; though of course it leaves room open for subsequent
additions and interpolations in them. .

A common method of estimating the age of a Sanskrit composition
is to consider the religious and philosophical ideas embodied in it ;
yet to discuss questions of chronology on the basis of such ideas seems
to be more interesting than convincing. Such ideas have passed


XV


along a course of development in India, but it is doubtful how far
general inferences therefrom can be safely applied to fix the date of
= particular work. Where such ideas are founded on sacred composi-
tions, which are the subject of reverent study, there must be flows,
eddies and intervals of stagnation, and even rapids and back currents,
iu the stream of such ideas. Their course may be compared with
similar speculations, not in a single European country, but in the
whole of Europe, for India has always comprised many countries ; and
the history of Europe during the last four hundred years shews,
whether it would be easy to determine the date of a writing on such
subjects in Latin solely from its contents, for the progress of thought
in the different countries has been neither simultaneous nor uniform,
Similarly in India, there can be no doubt that, while religion and philo-
sophy have had their general course of development, the course has
been very unequal in the different countries, so that it would not be
unreasonable to suspect that at the same time one country was ad-
vancing, another was stationary, and a third was even degenerating
under political adversity. The development of religion and philoso-
phy in India then -is not so clear that one can do more than venture
to conjecture upon such grounds, at what period or periods this Purā-
na, which was written in Western India, was composed. And, as already
mentioned, it has so little of a sectarian spirit or of special doctrines
that the basis for conjecture is meagre. Subject to this caution the
following features may be noticed.

Among the deities, Indra and Brahma are mentioned oftenest ; next
stand Vigņu and Siva ; then the Sun and Agni; and lastly Dharma
and others. Indra is mentioned most often in the first and fifth
parts, and Brahma in the third and fifth parts ; while Vigņu and Siva
do not show any particular preponderance. If the Devi-mahatmya
is put aside, the Sun is the deity that receives the most speqial ado-
ration, and his story is related twice, first, briefly in cantos 77 and 78,
and afterwards with fullness in cantos 102-110. To this may be
added the cognate worship of Agni in cantos 99 and 100. Such
marked reverence for Agni and the Sun would be natural in such a
place as Māhigmatī, which (as already mentioned) was specially sacred
to Agni before the worship of Siva obtained supremacy there. Kama_
rapa, the modern Gauhati in Assam, is mentioned as specially


e
XVI


appropriate for the worship of the Sun (p. 581), and why it should
have been so characterized seems unintelligible unless it was consi-
dered to be an udaya-giri.

The prominent notice of the great Vedic god Indra, and of Brahma the
earliest of the post-Vedie gods, would indicate a fairly high an-
tiquity for the Purana, especially for the second Section, which
boldly claims to have issued from Brahma’s mouth equally with the
Vedas (p. 219) and thus to stand almost on an equality with them—
an honour which none of the other Puranas ventures to arrogate for
itself. Such an antiquity would also explain the high position as-
signed to the Sun and Agni, who are also among the chief Vedic gods ;
yet the special praise offered to the Sun may, as Dr. Banerjea hinted,
be perhaps attributable in part to Persian influences.

The first Section of the Purana is certainly later than the Maha-
bharata, for the four questions that Jaimini propounds to the Birds
arose expressly out of that work. These questions are, frst, a reli-
gious enigma, Why did Vasudeva (Vigņu) though devoid of qualities
assume human shape with its qualities of goodness, passion and
ignorance? secondly, a social perplexity, Why was Draupadi the
common wife of the five Pandava brothers ? thirdly, a moral incon-
gruity, Why did Baladeva expiate the sin of brahmanicide by pilgri-
mage? and fourthly, a violation of natural justice, Why did Drau-
padi’s five sons all perish in their youth? The obtrusion of these
questions implies that the Mahā-bhārata was firmly established as an
unimpeachable authority, so that difficulties involved in it could not
be disputed and must admit of reconciliation with the laws of
Righteousness.

The explanations offered by the Birds appear to be these. Vāsu-
deva (Vigņu) existed in quadruple form; the first form was devoid of
qualities, but each of the others was characterized by one of the
three qualities, so that in his assuming human and other shapes with
all the qualities no violation occurred to his nature. The second
question is solved by the assertion, that because of Indra’s trans-
gressions five portions of his essence became incarnate in the
Pandavas, and his wife became incarnate as Draupadi, so that she was
still the wife of only one person. The third question seems to turn
on the ideas, that brahmanicide was a heinous sin expiable by death


xvii


and that pilgrimage was a pious undertaking ; how therefore could
such a sin be expiated by such action? The answer seems to be that
the sin was unintentional, being due to overpowering sensual in-
fluences, and did not call for the full rigour of punishment, while
the real penance consisted in confession. The fourth question is
solved by a story of transmigration; Draupadi’s sons were five Vigve
Devās who were cursed by Visvāmitra to assume human form for a
brief period.

The first two guestions and answers call for some notice and throw
some light on the age of the first Section of the Purāņa.

With regard to the first guestion, Dr. Banerjea has remarked in his
Introduction that the description of Vasudeva belongs to the school
Nārada-paūcarātra, to which Sankarācārya has given an elaborate
reply in his commentary on the Brahma Sūtras; while no trace of
this doctrine is to be found in the second Section of the Purana. As
Sankara lived in the 8th century A.D., that school existed before
him, The first part of this Purana was, therefore, probably prior to
his time; yet it may possibly havebeen later, This comparison then
yields nothing definite.

The second answer presents some remarkable peculiarities when
compared with the Mahā-bhārata. That work gives two explana-
tions about Draupadī's wifehood, first, why she was destined to have
five husbands, and secondly, why the five Pandavas became her
husbands.

The first explanation is given twice in the Adi-parvan, viz., In
clxix. 6426-34 and in exevii. 7319-28. She had been a rgi's daughter
and unmarried; in order to obtain a husband she propitiated Siva
with austerities, and he offered her a boon. She begged for a
husband, and in her eagerness made the request five times, hence
he promised her five husbands, and in spite of her objection adhered
to his word and promised them to her in another life. Hence she
was born as Drupada’s daughter. In the latter of these two passages
and in line 7310 she is made an incarnation of Lakgmī.

The second explanation is given in Ādi-parvan excvii. 7275-7310.
Indra went to Siva on Mount Himavat and accosted him rudely, but
Siva awed him and pointed to a cave in the mountain wherein were


four prior Indras. Siva said that Indra and those four prior Indras


3


xyili


should be born in human shape in order to reduce the over-popula-
tion of the world, and that Laksmī should be born and be their
common wife, Accordingly Indra was born as Arjuna and the prior
Indras as the other Pandavas, and Laksmi was born as Draupadi.

Now these stories in the Mahā-bhārata itself furnished some ex-
planation, and why Jaimini should have felt any perplexity, if he had
these explanations before him, is at first sight strange. This suggests
a doubt whether they were then in the Mahā-bhārata, or whether they
were inserted there afterwards to meet this very question. On the
other hand, it may be noted that these explanations did not really
solve the difficulty, for the five Indras who became the Pandavas
were not the same deity, and thus Draupadī's husbands were still
separate persons. On this point, therefore, the difficulty remained,
and the answer given by the Birds removes it (though at variance
with the Maha-bharata) by declaring that the Pandavas were all
incarnations of portions of the same deity, Indra, and were thus really
only one person. The Mahā-bhārata, however, presented a further
difficulty, for why should Laksmi have become incarnate to be the
wife of incarnations of Indra? The Birds alter this by declaring
(again at variance with the Maha-bharata) that it was Indra’s own
wife who became incarnate as Draupadi. Both these contradictions
are left unnoticed; yet it is said very truly that there was very great
perplexity about this matter (p. 19).

This incongruity of Laksmi’s becoming incarnate to be wife to
incarnations of other deities suggests a further speculation. In the
Maha-bharata as it now stands, Krsna is an incarnation of Visnu,
and it was proper that Laksmi should become incarnate to be his
queen. Nevertheless that work states that she became the wife of
five persons all distinct from Visnu. May it be surmised that these
explanations in the Mahā-bhārata were fashioned before Krsna had
been deified, and before it was perceived that they could have any
bearing on his story ? If so, it is quite intelligible that it was deemed
necessary, after Kygna was deified, to remove the incongruity by as-
serting that Draupadi was an incarnation, not of Lakemi, but of
Indrani. This view, that the revised explanations here given regard-
ing Draupadi and the Pandavas were necessitated by the deification
of Krsna, seems not improbable. If so, the revision and the name


LJ
XIX


Vasudeva, by which Vignu is specially addressed in the first part,
would indicate that the first part was composed, when the Krsna
legend had become so well established that it was needful to bring
other stories into harmony with it.

The Purana contains little reference to the political condition of
India; yet it may be pointed out that all the stories narrated in the
first Section relate to Madhya-deša, the Himalayas and Western
India, while no mention occurs of Southern, Eastern or North-
Western India: In the second Section, few illustrative stories occur
apart from the main discourse on the Manus and the royal genealo-
gies. Only one dynasty is treated of, that in which the chief
princes were Vatsapri, Khanitra, Karandhama, Aviksit and Marutta.
These were famous kings, especially Marutta who was a universal
monarch. I have not been able to find anything which indicates
where their kingdom was, yet it must have been somewhere in
the Middle-land or North-West, because of Marutta’s relations
with Vrhaspati and Sathvartta (M. Bh. Ašvam -p. iii-vi); the
Middle-land here comprising the country as far east as.Mithilā
and Magadha. In the second Section the only allusions to other parts
of India are one to the river Vitastā in the Panjab (p. 488); one
to an unknown town in South India (p. 412), and several to Kama-
rūpa, the modern Gauhāti in Assam; but the author’s knowledge of
Eastern India was so hazy that he treats Kāmarūpa as being easy of
access from the Middle-land (p. 581). Is it reasonable to draw any
inference from the mental horizon here disclosed? It agrees with
the state of India in the third century A.D.

The geographical cantos 57 and 58 are no doubt special compi-
lations and may to a certain degree stand apart. ‘They appear to
aim at being comprehensive, and to enumerate all the countries, races
and tribes till then known, whether ancient or medizval. This com-
prehensive character rather prevents the drawing of any large definite
conclusions from them, yet two points may be noticed.

The Hunas are placed among the peoples in the north in canto 58,
though the context is not very precise. The Huns in their migra-
tions from the confines of China appear to have arrived to the north
of India about the beginning of the third century A.D., and one
branch the White Huns, established a kingdom afterwards in the


xx


Oxus valley. India had no actual experience of them until their first
invasion, which was made through the north-western passes in the
middle of the fifth century (Mr. V. Smith’s Early History of India,
pp- 272, 278). The allusion to the Huns therefore, with the position
assigned to them in the north, in canto 58, is plainly earlier than
their invasion, and is what a writer in the third century or the early
part of the fourth century would have made,

In these two cantos Pragjyotisa is placed in the east, and no men-
tion is made of Kāmarūpa. Prāgjyotiga was the ancient kingdom
that comprised nearly all the north and east of Bengal (p. 328);
later on it dwindled and seems to have lingered and perished in the
east of Bengal; and after that Kāmarūpa came into prominence in
` its stead. In the Mahā-bhārata and Ramayana Pragjyotisa alone is
named; Kāmarūpa is never, I believe, mentioned there, and it occurs
in later writings only. In the Second Section however Kāmarūpa is
mentioned, and no allusion is made to Prāgjyotisa. This difference
tells in favour of the antiquity of these cantos.

With tegard to the Devi-mahatmya, if the comparison made above
between it and the Mālatī-mādhava is reasonable, it would follow that,
since Bhavabhūti who wrote that play lived about the end of the
seventh century A.D., this poem must be anterior. It would repre-
sent the incorporation of barbarous practices borrowed from the rude
tribes of Central India into brahmanic doctrines, and might be
assigned to the sixth or perhaps the fifth century.

From all these considerations it seems fair to draw the following
conclusions. The Devi-mahatmya, the latest part, was certainly
complete in the 9th century and very probably in the 5th or 6th century
A.D. The third and fifth parts, which constituted the original Purana,
were very probably in existence in the third century, and perhaps


even earlier ; and the first and second parts were composed between
those two periods.


Other matters of interest.
Certain other matters may be mentioned, which are of great
interest in the Purana,
In the first part Jaimini, though a disciple of Vyasa and a famous rei
(Maha-bh., Sānti-p. cceli. 18647), is yet made, when perplexed by
four difficult questions in Vyasa’s own work, the Mahā-bhārata, to


xxi


seek instruction, not from Vyasa but from Markandeya; and this
raises a presumption that there was an intention to make Markandeya
equal with, if not superior to, Vyasa. Further, Markandeya does
not himself explain the questions but, declining with a transparent
excuse, refers Jaimini to the Birds. The Birds, though said no doubt
to be brahmans undergoing a transmigration, were inferior in educa-
tion and fame to Jaimini, yet they were deemed fully capable of
authoritatively answering the questions that puzzled him. It seems
hard to avoid suspecting again in this construction of the story, that
there was an intention to exalt the instruction given by the munis of
the Vindhyas to equality with, if not superiority over, that given in
Madhya-dega. It may be mentioned that according to certain le-
gends Vaisampayana’s pupils were transformed into partridges (¢i¢tir7)
in order to pick up the Black Yajus verses disgorged by one of their
companions; but it does not seem reasonable to ascribe the introduc-
tion of these Birds as dramatis persona in this Purana to any imitation
of those legends, because the nature of the stories is wholly different.
The use of the Birds seems rather to be the application of a class of
ideas common in the animal-tales of folk-lore to religious teaching,
and to be similar to the machinery employed by Bana in his story of
Kādambarī.

In the second part it is worthy of note that indulgence in spiritu-
ous liquor and in sensual enjoyments is viewed with little or no
disapprobation in the story of Dattātreya ; and meat and strong
drink are mentioned as most acceptable offerings in the worship of
Dattātreya (p. 106), as an incarnation of Visnu (p. 99). Meat of
various kinds, including even hog’s flesh, is declared 2 be moai
gratifying to the pitrs. Such food was not unknown in ancient
times, for it is said that during a severe famine king Trišaūku
supported Vigvamitra’s wife with the flesh of deer, wild pigs and
buffaloes (Hari-V., 724—781).

A most extraordinary passage may be noticed in conclusion. It is
related of king Dama that, after taking vengeance on pono Vapus-
mat, “with Vapusmat’s flesh he offered the cakes to his [murdered]
father, he feasted the brahmans who were sprung from families of
Rākgasas ” (p. 688 with 679). Brahmans at times lost their caste
and became degraded; but here the position is reversed and certain


xxii
descendants of Rāksasas were reckoned as brahmans. Such canni-
balism is, I believe, unparalleled in Sanskrit, and it is almost incredible
that there should have been brahmans of any kind whatever who
would have participated in it. Eatimg human flesh was not unknown
in ancient times (p. 427), yet a story is told in the Maha-bharata
where Rākgasas and even flesh-eating Dasyus disdained the flesh of a
true though degraded brahman (Sānti-p. clxxii. 6420-29). This
story of king Dama would seem to imply that it is of real antiquity,
and that the account of the dynasty in which he occurred, and which


is the only dynasty described, must be a purāņa in the full meaning
of the term.


CONTENTS.


CANTO. Introduction. PAGE.


1 Jaimini applied to Markandeya for instruction on four 1
questions. Markandeya referred him to four learned Birds,
sons of Drona and the Apsaras Vapu who was cursed by the

2 rgi Durvāsas to be a bird; and narrated the story of their 6

8 birth, and of their education by Samika; and explained 11
that they were four brahmans, who were so born, because
cursed by their father Sukrga for not offering their bodies
as food to a famished bird.


The Birds’ discourse on Jaimini's four questions.


4  Jaimini visited the Birds at the Vindhya Mts. and they 17
answered his four questions thus :—Vigņu assumed bodily
5 forms in order to accomplish good; Draupadi became the 21
joint wife of the five Pandavas because they were all
6 emanations of Indra; Baladeva committed brahmanicide 23
7 during intoxication and expiated it by pilgrimage ; and five 32
Vi$ve Devās, who, on seeing Visvamitra’s brutality to king
Harigcandra, censured Vigvamitra, incurred his curse thereby
and were born as the five sons of Draupadi to die young and
unmarried.
This story led the Birds at Jaimini’s request to narrate 38
the whole story of king Hariscandra's sufferings and
9 ultimate beatitude; and the terrible fight which resulted 59
therefrom between Vasistha and Visvamitra as gigantic
birds.
The Birds’ discourse on Jaimini’s further questions.
Discourse on life, death and action.
Jaimini propounded further questions regarding concep- 62
tion, fostal life, birth, growth, death and the consequences
of action; and the Birds answered them by reproducing


8


10


xxiv
Canto.
the instruction that a brāhman Sumati, nick-named J ada,
once gave to his father (cantos x—xliv).

Thus the Birds gave in Jada’s words a description of
11 death, after-existences and certain hells ; of human concep-
12 tion and birth, and the evils of all existence; of certain other
13 hells and the various terrible torments inflicted there; and
they narrated the story of king Vipagcit’s descent into hell,
14 with a discourse regarding actions and the specific punish-
15 ments for a long list of various sins, and of his deliverance

trom hell together with other persons confined there.


Stories illustrating religious devotion (yoga).


16 The Birds, continuing Jada’s discourse, broached the sub-
ject of yoga or religious devotion, but prefaced it with a long
narrative (cantos xvi to xliv). A brahman Mandavya was
saved from a curse by his devoted wife, who stopped the rising

17 of the sun and gained a boon from Atni's wife Anasūyā; the
gods in conseguence blessed Anastiya, and Brahma, Vigņu and
Siva were born as her three sons Soma, Dattatreya and Durva-

18 sas; Dattatreya indulged in sensual pleasures; Arjuna Kar-
tavirya, however, being advised by his minister Garga to
propitiate Dattatreya, because Dattatreya (being an incar-
nation of Visnu) had once saved the gods from the demons,

19 did so and by Dattātreya's blessing reigned gloriously.
This led on to the story of Alarka, which is used to convey


political, religious and social instruction (cantos xx to xliv),


Alarka’s birth and education.


20 King Satrujit’s son Rtadhvaja lived in intimate friend-
ship with two Naga princes; they told their father Asva-
tara—how Rtadhvaja had succoured the brahman Galava

21 with the help of a wondrous horse named Kuvalaya, and
descending to Patala, had killed the demon Patala-ketu there,
and had rescued and married the Gandharva princess Mada-

22 lasā, and was famed as Kuvalayāšva; and also how 4
demon had caused Madālasā to die on a false report of


Paar.


91


99


101


106


109


113


121


xxv


CANTO.
Nao Page.


23 Kuvalayāšva's death. King Aévatara, by propitiating Sa- 126
rasvati then, gained perfect skill in poetry and music
(which are described), and by propitiating Siva received

24 Madālasā restored to life; he invited Kuvalayāšva to 136

25 Pātāla and gave Madālasā back to him. Kuvalayāšva had 140

26 a son by her, and she prattled to the infant; they had 142
three other sons and she named the youngest Alarka.


Political, religious and social instruction.


27 Then followed an exposition of political, religious and social 145
doctrine in the guise of instruction given by Madālasā to
Alarka. She instructed him in the duties and conduct

28 of a king; in the duties of the four castes and of a brah- 148

29 man’s life; in the general duties of a grhastha and various 151

30 religious matters; in the duties of a grhastha in detail; 155

81 in the srāddha ceremonies; in the performance of the Pār- 157

82 vana Srāddha and the persons to be excluded; in the par- 164
ticular foods, periods, sites and ordinances to be observed in

33 the sraddha; in the Voluntary srāddhas and their benefits 168

34 and proper occasions; in the rules of Virtuous Custom, 170

35 generally and with much detail; about diet, puritication, 180
conduct, holy days and various religious ceremonies.


Exposition of religious devotion (yoga).

36 Rtadhvaja then resigned his kingdom to Alarka and de- 186
37 parted to the forest. Alarka lived in pleasure, but, being 187
reduced to great straits by his brother and the king of
88 Kasi, sought relief from Dattātreya. Dattatreya spoke 191
about thesoul and, on Alarka’s asking about religious devotion
89 (yoga), expounded the method, conditions and signs of its 198
40 proper performance ; the attendant ailments and the stages 198
41 which lead to tinal emancipation from existence ; the way 202
in which a yogi should live, beg, eat and reach his end;

42 the composition, meaning and efficacy of the word “Om”; 205
43 ill omens and their signification ; and the seasons for, and 207
the importance of, yoga. Alarka then relinquished the


XXVI


Cavro. | Page.
44 kingdom, but his brother, glad at !Alarka's conversion, de- 213


clined it and departed. Alarka gave it to his son and de-
parted to the forest. This ends J ada’s exposition.


The Birds’ discourse on Jaimini's further questions.
Discourse on Creation.


45 Jaimini put further questions, and the Birds answered
them by repeating what Markandeya had taught Kraustuki.
This discourse runs on to the end of the Purana.

Markandeya, after extolling this Purana, described the
course of creation from Brahma through Pradhana, &c., and

46 the mundane egg; he discoursed about Brahma, and ex-

47 plained divine and human time and the four ages. He de-

48 scribed the creation of the earth and all it contains; the
gods, demons, pitrs, mankind, &., and the positions assign-

49 ed them; the origin of the primeval human race and its

50 social and moral evolution ; the birth of the nine Sages,
Rudra, Manu Svayambhuva and his descendants, Daksa and
his offspring; A-dharma and his progeny, especially the

51 goblin Duhsaha and his powers, whose brood of goblins and

52 hags are named with their particular functions; the crea-
tion of the Rudras ; and the wives and offspring of the
yis and pitrs, : `

Account of the Manus.


53 Markandeya next discoursed of the Manus and man-
vantaras. He told of the first Manu, Svāyambhuva, and
his descendants who peopled the seven Continents, J ambu-
dvīpa was oceupied by Agnidhya, and his descendant Bharata
gave his name to India, This introduced the subject of
geography.

Geography.
54 Markandeya described the earth and its continents, espe-
cially J. ambu-dvipa ; and also Mount Meru, first briefly, and
55 then with full mention of neighbouring forests, lakes and
56 mountains ; and the course of the Ganges in the sky and on


217


224
228
232
237
246


257
268


271


275


278
280


Canto,


57


58


59


XXVII


kolu r: . GT Paar,
. mentioned the nine divisions of Bhārata, 283
and then dealt with India in detail; naming its seven 284
mountain ranges and its scattered hills; and its rivers, dis- 290
tinguishing them according to their sources, in the Himā-
laya, the Paripatra, the Vindhya, the Rksa, the Sahya, 298
the Malaya, the Mahendra and the Suktimat ranges, 303
He named the various peoples inhabiting India and its 307
confines, according as they dwelt in the Middle Land
(Madhya-dega), in the north-west, outside northwards, 311
in the north, in the east, in the south, in the west, 324
around the Vindhya mountains and beneath the Himalayas. 340
Next representing India as resting upon Visnu in the form 348
of a tortoise, Markandeya named the various peoples (with
the corresponding lunar constellations) as they were dis- 349
tributed over the middle of the tortoise’s body, over its 358
face, its right fore-foot, its right flank, its right hind-foot, 370
its tail, its left hind-foot, its left flank and its left fore-foot; 384:
and he added some astrological, religious and political
comments. He then described the countries Bhadrāšva, 387


60 Ketumāla, the Northem Kurus, Kimpurusa, Hari-vargay 390


61


Ilāvrta, Ramyaka, and Hiraņmaya.


Account of the Manus (resumed).


Mārkaņdeya related the birth of the second Manu. A 391
brahman visited Himavat and met an Apsaras Varūthinī ;


62 2 Gandharva Kali by personating him gained her affection ; 399


63
64
65
66


67


and she bore a son Svarocis. Svarocis delivered a maiden 401
Manoramā from a curse and married her, and also rescued 406
her two girl-companions and married them; after living 408
long in heedless pleasure with them, he had three sons 411
whom he established in separate kingdoms by the know-

ledge called Padmini; and he had by a forest goddess

another son Dyutimat who became the second Manu, 415


68 Svārociga ; and his period is noticed. The allusion to the 415


knowledge Padmini introduced a discourse on its supporters,
the Nidhis.


Canto. Pager.
69 Continuing, Markandeya related how king Uttama 419
banished his queen for bad temper, and helped a brahman
to find his ill-tempered wife who had been carried off; he
70 was rebuked by a rgi for his own conduct ; he recovered the 425
brāhman's wife, whose. bad temper a Raksasa consumed.
71 A Naga king had taken the queen to Pātāla, and she was 429
72 hidden; the brāhman changed her nature and the Raksasa 432
restored her to king Uttama; she bore a son, who became
78 the third Manu, Auttama, and his period is noticed. 436
74 Markandeya related how king Svarāstra when driven 438
from his kingdom, met his deceased queen, and had a son
who became the fourth Manu, Tāmasa ; his period is noticed.

75 The rsi Rtavac made the constellation Revati fall; a maiden 443
was born therefrom; she married king- Durgama and bore
a son, who became the fifth Manu, Raivata; his period is

76 noticed. Cāksusa, being changed when an infant by a hag, 449
became king Vikranta’s son, but turned an ascetic and be-
came the sixth Manu, Cāksusa; his period is noticed.

77 Continuing the manvantaras, Markandeya said the Sun 455
married Tvastrs daughter Sañjña and had two sons Vaivas-
vata and Yama; Sañjñā quitted him, leaving her Shadow

78 behind, because his splendour was excessive; Tvastr pared 458
his splendour down while the gods hymned the Sun ; the Sun
regained Saiijūā ; he had by the Shadow a son who will be the

79 eighth Manu, Savarni. Vaivasvata is the seventh and present 461

80 Manu; his period is noticed. ‘The future period of Savarni 463
with its ysis, gods, &c., is prophesied.


The Devi-mahatmya.
81 The mention of Sāvarņi introduced the Devi-mahatmya. 465

Markandeya related that king Suratha, being ousted from
his kingdom, met a vaigya driven from his family, and both
consulted a rsi about their longings for home; the gi as-
eribed their feelings to the goddess Mahā-māyā (Great
Illusion), and related how, when she was lauded by Brahma,
Vigņu slew the demons Madhu and Kaitabha.


Canto, Paar.


82 The rgi then recited her exploits. Here begins the Devi-
māhātmya properly. The demons under Mahisa vanquish-
ed the gods, and the goddess was formed as Candika (Am-

83 bikā) out of their special energies combined; she began a
great battle and destroyed the demons, all the demon chiefs


473


478


84 and finally Mahiga himself, The gods praised her in a 482


hymn, and she promised to befriend them always. Again
the gods were vanquished by the demons Sumbha and
Nisumbha, and invoked her; she appeared, and. Sumbha
86 wanted to marry her but she declined; he sent an army
and she destroyed it ; he sent another with Caņda and Muņda;
87 the goddess Kālī destroyed them and Caņdikā gave her the
88 combined name Cāmuņdā; Sumbha sent all his armies;
89 Candika killed the chief Raktavīja, then Nigumbha in spite
90 of Sumbha’s aid, and many demons, and finally Sumbha
91 himself; whereat the universe was filled with joy. The
gods praised her in a hymn and she promised to deliver them
92 always. She descanted on the merits of this poem. The
gods regained their supremacy; and she is extolled. Here
ends the Devi-mahatmya properly.
93 After hearing this poera king Suratha worshipped Candi-
kā, and she promised he should be the eighth Manu, Savarni.


Account of the Manus (resumed).


94 Markandeya, continuing, mentioned the other future

Manus, the ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelth named Sāvarņa,
95 and the thirteenth named Raucya; and their periods. Ha

narrated the story of Raucya. A prajapati Ruci was ur ed
96 by the Pitrs to marry; he propitiated Brahma and prused
97 the Pitrs in a hymn; they appeared and promised him a
98 wife and extolled his hymn; he married an Apsaras and had


497
499
501
506
509
511


519


522


524
526
529


534
588


99 a son who will be the thirteenth Manu Raucya. Santi, the 539


disciple of an irascible rsi Bhūti, finding the sacred fire ex-


100 tinguished, offered a hymn to Agni. Agni restored the fire 546


and promised to Bhūti a son who should be the fourteenth


CANTO. Page.
Manu, Bhautya. Bhautya’s period is noticed. This account


of the manvantaras is extolled.


Commencement of the Genealogies.
101 At Kraustuki’s request Markandeya began the genealo- 550
gies. Brahma created Daksa, from whom came Mārtaņda,
the Sun. Then mentioning that Brahma was born from
the mundane egg, and produced the lokas (worlds), and
next the four Vedas with their merits—Mārkaņdeya di-
verged into a laudation of the Sun.


The majesty of the Sun.


102 The gods and the Vedas are declared to be manifesta- 553
103 tions of the Sun. The Sun’s glory was at first too great, 556
and Brahma with a hymn induced him to contract it
104 and then finished the creation.  Marīci's son Kašyapa 558
begot the gods, demons, mankind, če. The demons over-
came the gods and Aditi sought help of the Sun in a
105 hymn. He became her son as Mārtaņda and destroy- 568
106 ed the demons. The story of the Sun and his wife Sañ- 566
jma (as told in cantos lxxvii and Ixxviii) is re-told here
with more detail regarding the Shadow-Safijūā, the curse on
107 Yama, the paring down of the Sun’s splendour, the hymns 572
108 offered to the Sun, and the Sun’s offspring and the sta- 574

tions alloted them.
109 Further Markandeya related that king Rajya-vardhana 577
when old resolved to resign the kingdom, but his people in . j
110 grief propitiated the Sun, and the Sun granted him great 583
length of life; the king similarly obtained the same boon
for them. This story is extolled.


The Genealogies resumed.


111 Markandeya mentioned Manu Vaivasvata’s seven sons 587
112 and Ilā-Sudyumna, Purūravas, Ge. Manu's son Pūgadhra 590
killed a brahman’s cow and being cursed became a šūdra.

113 Karūsa's descendants were mentioned. 593
Digta's son Nābhāga married a vaišya maiden wilfully


XXXI


Canto. Pis


114 and became a vaifya; their son Bhanandana conguered thē 597
earth, but Nābhāga declined to reign. Then Nābhāga's
wife explained that she was not really a vaigya, but that her
father was a king who became a vaigya under a rsi’s curse

115 with a promise of recovery, and that she was a princess and 601
had become a vaigya under Agastya’s curse.

116 Bhanandana became king. His son Vatsapri rescued a 604
princess Sunandā from Pātāla after killing a demon king

117 who had a magic club, and married her. His son was 610
Prāmšu, and Prāmšu's son Prajati. Prajati’s son Khani-
tra was beneficent; his brothers’ ministers practised magic

118 to dethrone him but destroyed themselves; Khanitra re- 615

119 signed the kingdom in grief and went to the forest. His 617
son Kgupa performed sacrifices for the harvests. His son

120 was Vira and grandson Vivimša. Viviméa’s son Khanine- 619
tra while hunting met two deer eager to be sacrificed, and

121 by Indra’s favour obtained a son Balāšva. Balasva was called 628
Karandhama because of a fanciful victory.

123 His son Aviksit married many princesses and carried off 256
123 princess Vaigalini at her svayamvara: the suitor kings 628
conquered and captured him, but she refused them all:

124 Karandhama rescued Avīkgit, but Aviksit refused to marry 631
the princess after his discomfiture ; she turned to austerities
125 and obtained an assurance from the gods: Avīkgit's mother 687
by a ruse obtained a promise from him to beget a son:

126 while hunting he rescued the princess from a demon and 641
127 pleased the. gods : she proved to bea Gandharva maiden and 645
Avīksit married her in the Gandharva world ; she bore a son
128 Marutta there. Aviksit returned but refused the kingdom 649
129 because of his discomfiture. Marutta became king, and was 658
a universal monarch, a great sacrificer, and Jiberal benefactor
180 to brahmans. The Nagas gave great trouble, and he at- 658

* tacked them, but Avīkgit interposed in favour of the Nagas;

131 2 battle was averted by the rgis, and the Nagas made repara- 660

tion. Marutta’s wives are named.


132 His son Narisyanta enriched the brahmans permanently 665


xxxii
Canto. Paar.
133 ata great sacrifice. His son. Dama was chosen by the 668
Dašārņa princess, and defeated the suitor kings, who, in vio- -
184 lation of marriage laws, opposed him. Dama became king. 674
Narisyanta was murdered in the forest by Vapugmat one of
135 those kings. Dama bewailed, and vowed vengeance against 678
186 the murderer ; he slew Vapusmat and celebrated his father’s 680
obsequies with Vapugmat's flesh and blood.


Conclusion.
187 The Birds closed their long repetition of Markandeya’s 684
instruction to Kraustuki, with an encomium on the Puranas
and this Purāņa in particular. Jaimini thanked them.


„R


ie ted


P.


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.


2, 1. 23, after sacred add customs.
20, 1. 19, for Sáma read Sáman.
l. 26, for nara read nara.

25,1. 6, dele -phul.

26, 1. 21, for Asoka read Ašoka.

27,1. 25, for Peninsular read Peninsula.

29,1. 18, add unless it is the same as the bird ‘ putra-priya”
which was so named because its note resembled
‘putra putra” Ramay., Ayodh.-k. (Ed. Gorr.)
cv. 11, (Ed. Bom.) xcvi. 12.

29, l. 24, for btween read between.


P. 29,1. 33, add See Raghu-V., vi. 36.


P.


81,1. 8, for famalies read families.


Cantos VII, VIII & IX for Haris-éandra read Harigcandra.


42, 1. 15, for back read bark.
44, 1. 11, for compassionate read passionate.
55.1. 18, for Brahman read Brahman.
1. 17, for Brāhman read the Prajapati.
65, 1. 29, for the read thee.
89, 1. 33, for not therefore long read therefore ; dele not.
93, 1. 15, for etcetera read et cetera.
99,1. 6, for Dattatreya read Dattdtreya.


P. 100,1. 12, for yogi read yogi.
P. 102, 1, 35, for Bāla-khilyas read Vālakhilyas.
PP. 100-107, passim for Lakshmi read Lakshmi.


P. 108, heading, for XX read XIX.


P. 109,1. 1-3 read i


nstead And the doctrine of religious devotion
was indeed declared by Dattatreya to that high-
souled royal rishi Alarka who was faithful to


his father.


P. 113,1. 2, for excedingly read exceedingly.


XXXIV


P. 118,1. 5, for him, the large-thighed* hero, the chief of ‘his
race, read Tumburu*, the spiritual preceptor of
her family.

l. 7, for accepted her read arrived.
note*, cancel the note and substitute See canto exxvii,
verses 13 and 26.

P. 122,1. 15, dele funeral.

P. 124, last line, for son and daughter read son’s wife.

P. 125, 1. 38, after anxiety add ”

P. 138, 1. 30, after inspirer add ”

P. 186, 1. 12, for atru-jit’s read Satru-jit's.

P. 148,1. 14, for religion read righteousness.

P. 159,1. 84, for begun read begin.

P. 178, bottom, for Kāmatās read Kāmatas.

P. 174, 1. 14, for carry read use.

1. 15, for are carrying read have used.

P. 177, 1. 20, read instead the wise man should bathe, keeping his
clothes on; and so also after resorting to a
place where bodies are burnt.

P. 179, 1. 34, for guru read gurus.

P. 181,1. 2, for Aolidoys read holidays.

P. 182,1. 3, for screened by many read concealed within many

things.

P. 197, 1. 34, for practice read practise.

P. 201, 1, 7, for Gandarvas read Gandharvas.

P. 236, 1. 8, for aptor read aptor.

P. 289,1. 8, for is read are.

P. 241,1. 21, add The Bombay edition reads instead “the khar-
vataka and the drami.”

P. 242,1. 1, to varma-vat add note The Bombay edition reads
* kharvata ” instead.

1, 21, add The Bombay edition reads “ jana” instead of
« jala.”
], 88, add The Bombay edition reads “ dramí ” instead.
P. 245, 1. 27, for mentioueed read mentioned.
P. 269, 1. 21, for Dhimravati read Dhimravati.


XXXV


P. 288, 1. 23, dele the words from In a list to Naga-rat.

P. 298,1. 8, for Vritra-ghni read Vritra-ghni.

P. 300, 1. 40 for Silāvati read Silavati.

P. 332,1. 4, add May this name be identified with the town
Kodungalūr (the modern Cranganore) north of
Cochin? It is a place of sanctity, and was
formerly an important town and harbour.

P. 366, 1. 6, add See p. 445.

P. 368, 1. 18, for Badavā read Badavā.

P. 403, 1. 12, for mightly read mighty.

P. 445,1. 85, add and p. 365.

P. 469,1. 9, for universel read universal.

P. 486, 1. 25, for my read may. j

P. 581, 1. 27, for ungnents read unguents.

P. 636, last line, for om read from.


THE


MARKANDEYA PURANA.


OM! REVERENCE TO THE ADORABLE VISHNU!


May Vishnu’s lotus-feet, which power have

To dissipate the woes wrought by the fear

Of existence, and which are lauded high

By ascetics, assiduous, whose minds

From all things else are rapt—may those same feet,
Whose steps the earth, the sky, and heaven o’erpassed;


To sight appearing, purify your souls!


May He protect you, who is skilled to save

In every kind of sin impure; whose form

Within the bosom of the sea of milk

Upon the hooded snake reclines ; and at

Whose touch the sea grows mountainous, its spray
Up-tossing from its waters by his breath
Disturbed, and into seeming dancing breaks !


Caro I.


The Curse on Vapu.


Jaimini applies to Markandeya for instructwn regarding certain
difficulties in the: Mahūbhūrata—Mūrkaņdeya refers him to four
learned. Birds, the sons of Drona, and narrates their history—Their


1


2


CANTO 1.


mother Vapu, an Apsaras, was condemned by the Muni Durvdsas to


become a bird for tempting him.


Having adored Nāršyana, and Nara the best of men, the goddess
Sarasvati, and then Vydsa, let him utter the verse of Victory!


1


10


11


12


13


The illustrious Jaimini, the disciple of Vyása, interrogated
the great Muni Márkaņdeya, who was engaged in the per-
formance of austerities and the study of the Veda.

“Sir! the high-souled Vyása related the story of the Maha:
bhārata, which is replete with splendid spotless collections
of various Sastras, which is characterized by accuracy regard-
ing the different classes, is embellished with beautiful words,
and contains complete knowledge of primd facie assertions, and
established conclusions. As Vishnu is chief among the gods,
as the brahman chief among men, and as the crest-jewel chief
among all decorations, as the axe* is the best among weapons,
as the mind best among the organs, so in this world is the
Mahábhárata the best among all the Sastras. Here are des-
cribed both. Wealth and Virtue, Love, and Final emancipation
from transmigration; these have both reciprocal and peculiar
consequences. It is the best Dharma-sastra, it is the most
eminent Attha-é4stra ; it too is the foremost Kama-sastra, as
well as the noblest Moksha-gistra. It has been declared, Sir,
by Veda-Vyása the wise, to be the authority for the. sacred
and maxims of the laws of the four periods of a brahman’s
life. For this Mahá-śástra has been so constructed, dear
Sir, by Vyása. the noble in deeds, that although beset with
difficulties it is not overthrown by them. The earth has
been freed from the dust of passion by the stream of Vyasa’s
words, which has descended from the mountain of the Veda,
and has swept away the trees of bad reasoning. Therefore
have I come to thee, Sir, being desirous to know truly the
story of Vyasa, in which melodious sounds are the geese, the
noble story is the splendid lotus the words are the expanse
of water, and the Vedas are the great lake —this precious
and long story of the Mahábhárata. Why was Janšrdana


* Or Indra’s thunderbolt.


THE CURSE ON VAPU. 3


Vasudeva, who is the cause of the creation preservation and
destruction of the world, although devoid of qualities, endued
14 with humanity ? And-why was Drupada’s daughter Krishna
the common wife of the five sons of Péndu? for on this point
15 we feel great perplexity. Why did the mighty Baladeva
Haldyudha expiate his brahmanicide by engaging in a pilgri-
16 mage? And how was it that the unmarried heroic high-souled
sons of Draupadi, whose protector was Pāņdu, were slain, as
17 if they had no protector ? Deign to recount all this to me here
at length ; for sages like thee are ever the instructors of the
ignorant.”
18 Having thus heard his speech, the great Muni Markandeya,
devoid of the eighteen* defects, began to speak.


Markandeya spoke.

19 “ The time for my engaging in religious rites has now arrived,
most virtuous Muni! and this is not esteemed the season

20 for a long discéurse. But I will now tell thee, O Jaimini,
of those birds who will speak to thee and so resolve thy

21 doubts. "They are Pingéksha and Vibodha, Supatra,. and Su-
mukha, the sons of Drona, the noblest of birds, versed in the
principles of philosophy, and meditators on the Siastras.

22 Their mind is unclouded in the knowledge of the'meaning of
the Veda and Sastras. They dwell in a cave of the Vindhya
mountains, visit and question them.”

23 Then, thus addressed by the wise Markandeya, replied the
Muni pre-eminent, his eyes wide open with astonishment.


Jaimini spoke.


24 “Very wonderful is this, O brahman! that those birds have
gained knowledge most difficult to be acquired, as if birds

* The 18 defects are said, in a translation begun by the late Rev. K. M.
Banerjea, to be these—palpitation, fear, thickness in specoh, indistinctness,
speaking through the nose, discordanoy, want of emotion, disconnectedness,
roughness, hoarseness, high pitch, inaccuracy in pronunciation, perturbation,
want of cadence, sing-song, shaking the head, weakness of voice, aud un-


meaningness.


2 CANTO I.


mother Vapu, an Apsaras, was condemned by the Muni Durvdsas to
become a bird for tempting him.

Having adored Néréyana, and Nara the best of men, the goddess
Sarasvati, and then Vyasa, let him utter the verse of Victory!


1 The illustrious Jaimini, the disciple of Vyasa, interrogated
the great Muni Markandeya, who was engaged in the per-
formance of austerities and the study of the Veda.

2 “Sir! the high-souled Vyasa related the story of the Maha:
bhārata, which is replete with splendid spotless collections

3 of various Sdstras, which is characterized by accuracy regard-
ing the different classes, is embellished with beautiful words,
and contains complete knowledge of primd facie assertions, and

4 established conclusions. As Vishnu is chief among the gods,
as the brahman chief among men, and as the crest-jewel chief

5 among all decorations, as the axe* is the best among weapons,
as the mind best among the organs, so in this world is the

6 Mahábhárata the best among all the Sāstras. Here are des-
cribed both. Wealth and Virtue, Love, and Final emancipation
from transmigration; these have both reciprocal and peculiar

7 consequences. It is the best Dharma-šistra, it is the most
eminent Attha-Sastra ; it too is the foremost Kūma-sāstra, as

8 well as the noblest Moksha-Sdstra. It has been declared, Sir,
by Veda-Vyása the wise, to be the authority for the sacred
and maxims of the laws of the four periods of a brahman’s

9 life. For this Mahš-šāstra has been so constructed, dear
Sir, by Vyasa the noble in deeds, that although beset with

10 difficulties it is not overthrown by them. The earth has
been freed from the dust of passion by the stream of Vyása’s
words, which has descended from the mountain of the Veda,

11 and has swept away the trees of bad reasoning. Therefore
have I come to thee, Sir, being desirous to know truly the
story of Vydsa, in which melodious sounds are the geese, the

12 noble story is the splendid lotus the words are the expanse
of water, and the Vedas are the great lake —this precious

13 and long story of the Mahábhárata. Why was Janārdana


# Or Indra’s thunderbolt.


THE CURSE ON VAPU. 3


Vasudeva, who is the cause of the creation preservation and
destruction of the world, although devoid of qualities, endued
14 with humanity? And. why was Drupada’s daughter Krishna
the common wife of the five sons of Pžņdu ? for on this point
15 we feel great perplexity. Why did the mighty Baladeva
Halāyudha expiate his brahmanicide by engaging in a pilgri-
16 mage? And how was it that the unmarried heroic high-souled
sons of Draupadi, whose protector was Pandu, were slain, as
17 if they had no protector ? Deign to recount all this to me here
at length ; for sages like thee are ever the instructors of the
ignorant.”
18 Having thus heard his speech, the great Muni Markandeya,
devoid of the eighteen* defects, began to speak.


Markandeya spoke.

19 “The time for my engaging in religious rites has now arrived,
most virtuous Muni! and this is not esteemed the seagon

20 for a long discéurse. But I will now tell thee, O Jaimini,
of those birds who will speak to thee and so resolve thy

21 doubts. They are Pingāksha and Vibodha, Supatra,.and Su-
mukha, the sons of Drona, the noblest of birds, versed in the
principles of philosophy, and meditators on the Sistras.

22 Their mind is unclouded in the knowledge of the:meaning of
the Veda and Sastras. They dwell in a cave of the Vindhya
mountains, visit and question them.”

23 Then, thus addressed by the wise Markandeya, replied the
Muni pre-eminent, his eyes wide open with astonishment.


Jaimini spoke.

24 “Very wonderful is this, O brahman! that those birds have
gained knowledge most difficult to be acquired, as if birds
* The 18 defects are said, in a translation begun by the late Rev. K. M.
Banerjea, to be these—palpitation, fear, thickness in speech, indistinctness,
speaking through the nose, discordanoy, want of emotion, disconnectedness,
Sad hoarseness, high pitch, inacouracy in pronunciation, perturbation,
want of cadence, sing-song, shaking the head, weakness of voice, and un-


meaningness.


4 CANTO I.


25 possessed hyman speech. Tf their birth is of the brute creation,
whence have they the knowledge? And how is it that those

26 winged ones are called the children of Drona? And who was
this famous Drona, who had those four sons. Do those virtuous
high-souled birds possess the knowledge of righteousness P ”


Markandeya spoke.
27 “Listen attentively to what happened of yore in Nandana
at the meeting of Indra and the Apsarases and Narada.
28 Narada saw Indra the king of the gods in Nandana, sur-
rounded by a band of those wanton maidens, with eyes fasten-
29 ed on their faces. Sac'Ys lord, immediately he was seen by
that best of Rishis, rose up, and respectfully gave him his own
30 seat. Those heavenly maidens, on seeing him, the slayer of
Bala and Vritra, rise up, prostrated themselves before the
31 Devershi and stood reverently bending. He then, worshipped
by them, duly greeted Indra, when he had seated himself, and
conversed pleasantly with him.
32 “Then in the course of their talk, Indra said to the great
Mnuni— * Declare, which of these dancers pleases thee most. Is
33 it Rambhá, or Karkaśá, or Urvasi, Tilottamá, Ghritdc’l, or
34 Menaká? or whichever delights thee.’ Narada, best of dvijas,
hearing this speech of Indra, pondered and then addressed
35 the reverently bending Apsarases:—‘She, of you all here
present, who thinks herself pre-eminent in beauty, nobility
36 and good qualities, let her dance before me. There is indeed
no success in dancing for one who is destitute of good qualities
and beauty. Good dancing implies graceful comportment:
other dancing is vexation.’


Markandeya spoke.
37 “And immediately on that speech, each one of those bowing
ones thus exclaimed—‘I excel in good qualities; not you, nor
38 you!’ The lord Indra seeing their agitation said, ‘ Let the Muni
be asked, he will say which of you excels in good qualities.’
39 What Narada, sought by those followers of Indra’s will,
40 then said, heat that from me, O Jaimini! ‘She among you


THE CURSE ON VAPU. 5


who by her power perturbs the most noble Muni Durvisas,
who is. performing austerities, dwelling on the mountain, her
among you I deem pre-eminent in good qualities.’


Markandeya spoke.


41 “Having heard that his sentence, they all exclaimed, with
trembling necks, ‘ this is impossible for us!’
42 “ Among them an Apsaras named Vapu, confident of perturb-
ing the Muni, replied, ‘I will follow where the Muni dwells;
43 now will I make that tamer of his body, who has yoked
the horses of his organs, but a poor charioteer whose reins
44 drop before the weapons of love. Whether it be Brahma, or
Janirdana or the purple S'iva, his. heart will I now pierce
with the arrow of love.’
45 “Having thus spoken Vapu departed then to the Snowy
mountain to the Muni’s hermitage, where the beasts of prey
46 were quelled by the might of his austerities. Stopping at the
distance of a call from where the great Muni is seated,
47 the lovely Apsaras sang the cuckoo’s melody. Hearing
the strains of her song, the Muni astonished in mind went
48 to where sits that beauteous-faced maiden. On seeing
her, beautiful in every limb, the Muni, summoning his
resolution, was filled with anger and resentment, knowing
49 that she had come to perturb him. Then the great Rishi, the
performer of mighty austerities, pronounced this sentence.
50 * Since thou hast come here, O maiden! intoxicated with pride,
to cause me pain by obstructing my austerities, which are ac-
51 complished with difficulty, O Apsaras, therefore shalt thou,
polluted by, my wrath, be born in the foolish race of birds
52 for the space of sixteen years, losing thine own form, and
taking the form of a bird; and four sons shall be born to
53 thee, O vilest of Apsarases; and without having gained affection
among them, absolved from guilt by dying in the field of
battle, thou shalt regain thy dwelling in the sky. Never
make any reply,’ i ;
54 The Brahman, red-eyed with anger, having Bani this
grievous sentence on that proud maiden, whose tinkling


CANTO II.


bracelets were trembling, abandoned the earth, whose waves
were very tremulous, and departéd to the heavenly Ganges
whose stream consists of a multitude of renowned qualities.”


Canto II.
The Birth of the Sparrows.


The story of the Birds continued—Kandhara, king of the birds


killed a Rakhasa Vidyud-ripa for killing his brother, and, marrying
the Rékhasa’s wife, had a daughter by her named Tūrkshi who was the
~ Apsaras Vapu—She married Drona—When pregnant by him she was
killed at the battle of the Kauravas and Pandavas, and there laid four
eggs from which the four Birds were born—The Birds were nourished
by the Muni S'amika.


{=


_ Markandeya spoke.

The king of the birds, Garuda by name, was the son of
Arishtanemi: Garuda’s son was renowned as Sampati: and
his son was Supárśva, heroic, mighty as Vayu: Suparéva’s son
was Kunti; Kunti's son was Pralolupa. And he had two sons
Kanka and Kandhara. —

On the top of Kailisa, Kanka saw the Rikshasa famed as
Vidyud-rūpa, whose eyes were like a lotus leaf, a follower
of Kuvera, who was busied in a banquet, clad with strings of
bright garlands, sitting in company with his wife on a beau-
tiful clean rocky seat. Then the Rikshasa, immediately he
was seen by Kanka, filled with anger, said, “Wherefore hast
thou come hither, O vilest of the egg-born? Why hast thou
approached me when I am in company with my wife? Such
is not the rule of the wise in matters that must be accom-
plished in secret.”


Kanka spoke.


“ This mountain is common both to you and me and to other
creatures also; what special ownership then canst thou, Sir,
have here ?”


THE BIRTH OF THE SPARROWS. 7


Markandeya spoke.

9 The Rakshasa with his sword slew Kanka, while he was thus
spéaking, who fell defiled with the streaming blood, quivering
and senseless.

10 Having heard that Kanka was slain, Kandhara the king of
the birds, bewildered with anger, resolved speedily to slay

1] Vidyud-ripa. Having gone to the mountain-top, where Kanka
lay slain, the king of the birds, his eyes swollen with anger
and resentment, and sighing like the king of the Nagas

12 performed the Sankalana for his elder brother. Where sits
the slayer of his brother, there he went, rocking the lofty

13 mountains with the mighty wind from his wings. He, with
blood-red eyes, overtopping the mountains, and forcibly hurl-
ing down masses of clouds with his wings, used to destroy

14 his enemies suddenly. There he saw that demon, whose
thoughts were intent on drinking, whose face and eyes were of
a copperish colour, and who was seated on a golden conch,

15 whose crest was covered with strings of garlands, who was
adorned with yellow sandal, whose face was very horrible
with teeth that resembled the inside of the Ketaki leaf.

16 And he saw, seated on the Rakshasa’s left thigh his long-eyed
wife, named Madanika, whose voice was soft as the cuckoo’s.

17 Then Kandhara, whose mind was filled with wrath, addressed
that inmate of the cave, “O thou of utterly evil soul! come

18 forth and fight with me. Since thou hast murdered my
trustful elder brother, therefore I will bring thee, while en-

19 grossed in drunkenness, down to Yama’s abode. To-day, slain
by me, shalt thou go to all those hells that are the abodes of
the murderers of those who trust in them, and of the mur-


derers of women and children.”


Markandeya spoke.

Addressed even thus by the king of the birds in his wife’s
presence, the Rakshasa, filled with anger, then answered the
91 bird. “If thy brother has been slain, then have I displayed

my valour ; thee, too, to-day, will I slay with this sword, O


20


8 CANTO II.


22 bird. Stay a moment, thou shalt not move here alive, O
vilest of birds.”
Thus he spoke and seized his bright sword that resembled
23 a mass of-collyrium. Then took place a marvellous battle
between the king of the birds and Kuvera’s warrior, such
24 as between Garuda and Indra. Then the Rākshasa, in anger
swiftly hurling his sword, black as charcoal, flung it against
25 the king of the birds. And then the king of the birds, slightly
springing up from the ground, seized it with his beak, as
26 Garuda seizes a serpent; and the egg-born one broke it with
his beak and talons, and shook it. Thereupon, the sword
27 being broken, they began to fight with their arms. Then the
Rākshasa, being attacked in the breast by the king of the
birds, was speedily deprived of arms, feet, hands and head.
28 When he was killed, his wife besought protection of the
29 bird: somewhat fearful, she said, “I am thy wife.” That
noblest of birds, taking her, returned to his abode, having
obtained a recompense for his brother by the slaughter of
"80 Vidyud-rūpa. And she, the daughter of Menakt, with beauti-
ful eyebrows, capable of assuming forms at pleasure, on reach-
ing the house of Kandhara, took a form resembling Garu-
31 da’s. Of her, he then begat a daughter named Tarkshi,
(namely Vapu the loveliest of the Apsarases, who was consumed
by the fire of the Muni’s curse). Then the bird gave her the
name Tārkshi.
32 And Mandapāla had four sons of boundless intellect, Jari-
33 tari the eldest and Drona the youngest, best of dvijas. The
youngest of them, righteous in soul, thoroughly read in the
Vedas and Vedāngas, married her the beauteous: Tfrkshi,
34 with the consent of Kandhara. And after a while Tarkshi
conceived ; when she had gone seven fortnights in her preg.
35 nancy, she went to Kurukshetra. The very terrible battle
between the Kurus and Pandavas was then being fought, and,
in consequence of her action being predestined, she entered into
36 the battle. There, then, she beheld the contest between Bha-
gadatta and Arjuna. The sky was thick filled with arrows,
37 as if with locusts. Discharged from the bow of Arjuna an


THE BIRTH OF THE SPARROWS. 9


arrow, black as a serpent, fell with great force and pierced
88 the skin of her belly. Her belly being pierced, four moon-like
eggs fell on the ground as if on a heap of cotton, from the
39 fact that their allotted period of life was not ended. At the
same time that they fell, fell the great bell, the cord of which
was cut by an arrow, from the noble elephant Supratika.
40 It reached the ground evenly all around, cutting into the
surface of the ground, and covering the eggs of the bird which
lay upon flesh.
4] And after king Bhagadatta, ruler of men, was slain, the
fight between the armies of the Kurus and Pandavas went on
42 many days. At the end of the battle, when Dharma’s son
Yudhishthira approached the son of Sūntanu to hear the high-
43 souled Bhishma proclaiming the entire laws, a sage named
Samika came to the spot where, O best of dvijas, lay the eggs
4d within the bell. There he heard the voice of the little birds
chirping, whose voices were inarticulate on account of their
45 infancy, although they had transcendant knowledge. Then the
Rishi, accompanied by his disciples, lifted up the bell and
saw with surprise the young motherless and fatherless birds.
46 The venerable Muni Samika, having so seen them on the
ground there, filled with astonishment, addressed his attendant
dvijas.
47 Well was it-said by the chief of the dvijas, Ušanas himself,
the regent of the planet Venus, when he saw the army of
48 the Daityas intent on fleeing, hard-pressed by the gods. ‘Ye
must. not go, turn ye back; why run ye away, ye feeble ones ?
Abandoning valour and glory, where have ye gone ? Ye shall
49 not perish. Whether one perishes or whether one fights,
one possesses life as long as God originally. created, not as
50 long as one’s mind desires. Men perish, some m their
homes, some in flight; so, too, do they meet their death when
51 eating food and drinking water. So, too, others, when
sporting themselves, seated in the chariot of. Toye; free from
sickness, their bodies unpierced by arrows, fall into the power
52 of the King of the departed. Others, when intent on mus-


terities, are led off by the servants of the King of the departed :


2


10 CANTO II.


and others occupied in meditation and study have not gained

53 immortality. Of yore, Indra hurled his thunderbolt against
Sambara, yet that demon, though pierced thereby to the heart,

54 did not perish. By that very thunderbolt, indeed, and by
the same Indra, when their time was come, the Džnavas

55 were slain, the Daityas forthwith perished. Perceiving
this, ye should not fear: return ye.’ Then those Daityas, aban-

56 doning the fear of death, turned back. This speech of
Usanas is proved true by these most noble birds, which even
in the superhuman battle did not meet with destruction.

57 Whence comes the laying of the eggs, O brahmans? Whence
comes the even fall of the belt? And how comes it that the

98 ground is covered with flesh, fat, and blood ? Certainly these
must be some brahmans; they are not ordinary birds. The
favour of destiny shows great good-fortune in the world.”

09 Having spoken thus he looked at them and spoke again,
“ Return, go to the hermitage, taking the young birds with you.

60 Where these egg-born may have no fear of cat, or rat, of

61 hawk or ichneumon, there let the birds be placed. O dvijas,
what is the use of great care? All creatures are destroyed
or preserved by their own actions, as have been these young

62 birds. Nevertheless men must exert themselves in all matters 2
he who does a manly act gains commendation from us, the
good.”

63 Thus urged by that illustrious Muni, those young Munis,
taking those birds, went then to their own hermitage, delight-
ful to ascetics, where clusters of bees settled on the boughs of

64 the trees. And he, the noblest of dvijas, gathering wild
roots, flowers, fruits, grasses, such as his mind loved, perform-

65 ed the various religious ceremonies ordained by the Veda to
all the deities, to Vishnu, Rudra, and the Creator, to Indra,
Yama, and Agni, to Varuna, to Vrihaspati and Kuvera, and
also to Vayu, to Dhátri and Vidhātri.


10 e


THE VISIT TO THE VINDHYA MOUNTAIN. 11


Canto III.


The Visit to the Vindhya Mountain.


The Story of the Birds continued—The Birds, when full-grown,
were endowed with speech, and explained that wonder to the Muni
Samika—They were the four sons of a Rishi Sukrisha—Indra
appeared to the Rishi in the form of an aged bird, and asked for
human flesh—The Rishi ordered his four sons to sacrifice themselves
—They refused, and he cursed them to be born in the brute crea-
tion, but, moved with compassion at their entreaty, bestowed on
them perfect knowledge—Hence they were born as birds.

Markandeya spoke.

Thus he, the most virtuous Muni, O princely brahman,
nourished them day by day with food and water, and in safety.
After a month they resorted to the sun’s chariot-road, being
gazed at by the Munis’ sons, whose eyes were tremulous
with curiosity. After seeing the earth, with its cities, and
with its ocean and noble rivers, which appeared of the size
of a chariot wheel, they returned to the hermitage. The
spirited birds were wearied in their souls with their toil: and
their knowledge was developed there through their energy.

They all performed the reverential circamambulation around
the Rishi, who was expounding the truths of the law in com-
paseion for his disciples, and respectfully saluted his feet
and said, “We have been delivered by thee, O Muni! from
dreadful death ; thou hast given us shelter, food, and water;
thou art our father and spiritual guide. Our mother died,
when we were still in the womb; nor have we been nourished
by a father: thou, by whom we were preserved when young,
hast given us life. Thou, of perfect pendonan on the earth,
lifting high up the elephant’s bell, didst purge away evil
from us who were withering like worms. ‘How may hese
strength-less ones grow ? When shall 1 see them flying
in the sky? When shall I see them alighting on a tree of the
arth, settling within the trees ? When shall my natural
colour be obliterated by the dust which the wind from their


12 CANTO IIL


ll wings raises, as they flit about near me?’ Thou, dear Sir,
thus thinking, didst nourish us; now we, those very birds, are
grown up and have become wise, what ought we to do?”

12 Having clearly heard this their perfectly articulated speech,
the Rishi, surrounded by all his disciples, and accompanied

13 by his son S'ringin, being full of eager curiosity, and covered
with horripilation as with a garment, said, “Tell me truly the

14 cause of your power of speech. Through whose curse did
you incur this wondrous transformation both in form and
speech? Deign here to tell me that.”


The birds spoke.


15 “There was of yore a most virtuous Muni named Vipulasvat.
16 To him were born two sons Sukrisha and Tumburu. We are
the four sons of soul-subdued Sukrisha ; to that Rishi we were
ever submissive in reverence, religious practices and faith.
17 As he desired, who was diligent in the performance of
austerities, and who constantly kept his organs under control,

18 we at once produced fuel, flowers and everything else, and
whatever was needed for sustenance.

19 “Now while he and we thus dwelt in the forest, there came
the king of the gods in the appearance of a bird, mighty in
size, with broken wings, stricken with age, with eyes of a

20 copperish colour, down-cast in soul; desirous to prove that
venerable Rishi, who practised truth, purity, and patience,
and who was exceedingly lofty in mind; and for the coming of
the curse upon us.


“ The bird spoke.


21 “‘O exalted dvija, deign here to save me, who am consumed
with hunger. I seek for food, noble Sir! be thou my in-
22 comparable refuge. As I was standing on a summit of the
Vindhya Mountains, I fell, Sir, at an exceedingly swift blast sent
23 by the wings of a bird. So there I Jay on the ground, lost
in unconsciousness, without memory, for seven days; with the
94 eighth day I regained consciousness. Now fully conscious,
pressed. by hunger, I have come for help to thee; I am seek-


THE VISIT TO THE VINDHYA MOUNTAIN. 13


ing for food, deprived of all pleasure, and with a mind in

25 pain. Therefore turn, pure-minded sage, thy steadfast mind
to my rescue; give me, O Brahmarshi, food suitable to
support my life.’

26 “He, thus invoked, answered him, Indra in bird-like shape,
“I will give thee the food thou desirest for the support of thy

27 life” Thus having spoken, that best of dvijas further asked
him, * What food shall I prepare for thy use P’ and he replied,
‘My chiefest delight is in human flesh.’


“ The Rishi spoke.


28 “Thy childhood is past; thy youth, too, gone; thon art as-

29 suredly in the decline of life, O egg-born. Why art thou
most malign-hearted even in old age, thou in whom of all

30 mankind every desire has ceased? What has thy last stage
of life to do with human flesh? Assuredly no.one is created

31 foremost among evil-beings! Or what need hast thon to ad-
dress me, being what I am? One should always give when
one has promised—such is our professed opinion.’

32 “Having thus spoken to him, the Brahmarshi resolved that
it should be so. Calling us quickly and commending us accord-

33 ing to our good qualities, the Muni, agitated at heart, ad-
dressed a most severe speech to us all, who were respectfully

34 bowing, full of faith, with hands reverently joined. ‘Ye noble
dvijas, whose minds are improved, are bound by obligations
equally with me. A glorious progeny has sprung from you, just

35 as ye, O twice-born, have sprung from me. If a father is
deemed by you a guru worthy of reverence and most exalted,
perform ye then my promise with cheerful mind.’

36 “ Whilst he so spoke we exclaimed respectfully, * What thou
shalt say, consider that in truth as already accomplished.’


“ The Rishi spoke.
37 Of me has this bird sought protection oppressed with


hunger and thirst; wherefore let him be straightway satisfied
38 with your flesh, and let his thirst be quickly assuaged with


your blood.


14 CANTO III.


“Then we, afflicted, our terror visible in our trembling, ex-
39 claimed, ‘Alas, alas!’ and said, ‘not this deed! How for
the sake of another’s body can a wise man destroy or injure
40 his own body? for a son is even as one’s own self. A son
pays those debts, indeed, that have been declared due to the
pitris, the gods, and men; a son does not offer up his body.
41 Therefore we will not do this; we have done as has been
done by men of old. While alive one receives good things,
42 and while alive one does holy acts. When one is dead, the
body perishes, and there is an end of righteousness, &c.
Men skilled in holy law have declared that one ought by all
means to preserve one’s self.’
43 “Having heard us speak thus, the Muni, burning as it were
with anger, again addressed us, scorching us, as it were, with
44 his eyes. ‘Since ye will not perform this my plighted word
for me, therefore, blasted by my curse, ye shall be born among
the brute creation !’
45 “Having thus addressed us, he next said to that bird, ‘ When
I have performed for myself the final sacrifice, and my obsequies,
46 according to the S'āstras, do thou unhesitatingly eat me
here, (O best of dvijas): this my body I here grant thee for
47 food. The brahmanhood of a brahman is deemed such, so far
indeed as he maintains his truthfulness, O chief of the feather-
48 ed race. Not by sacrifices accompanied with presents, nor by
any other act, do brahmans acquire such great virtue as by the
observance of truth.’
49 “Having thus heard the Rishi's speech, Indra, in bird-like
form, his soul filled with astonishment, then replied to the
50 Muni, ‘ Applying thyself to deep meditation, O lord of brah-
mans, quit this thy body ; for living thing I never eat, O lord
of brahmans.’
51 “Having heard this his speech, the Muni concentrated himself
in deep meditation. Perceiving that his fixed resolution, Indra,
52 further, resuming his own form said, ‘Ho! princely brah-
man, understand with thy understanding what is to be under-
stood, O man of understanding! To prove thee have I thus
53 transgressed, O sinless one! Pardon me then, O pure- -minded


THE VISIT TO THE VINDYA MOUNTAIN. 15


one: and what wish is there of thine that may be granted ?
Pleased most highly am I with thee, for maintaining thy true
54 word. Henceforth, knowledge like Indra’s shall be revealed
to thee, and no obstacle shall withstand thee in austerities and
holy law.’
55 “But when Indra after speaking thus had departed, we pros-
trate on our faces thus implored our father, the renowned
56 Muni, who was filled with anger. ‘Dear father, high-minded,
deign to pardon us miserable ones who dread death ; for life
97 is dear tous. In an aggregate of skin bones and flesh, filled
with pus and blood, wherein one should take no delight, therein
58 do we find this delight. Hear too, Sir, how people are be-
guiled when overcome by those powerful enemies, their faults,
59 love, anger and so forth. Great is the fortress which has
Wisdom for its rampart, the bones for its pillars, the skin for
60 its walls and banks, the flesh and blood for its plaster. Nine
gates it has; it is capable of great effort; it is enclosed on all
sides with sinews; and there the Sentient Soul* sits firm as
$1 king. He has two rival ministers, the Intelligencef and the
Understandingj ; those two strive to destroy each other as
62 foes. Four enemies desire the destruction of that king, Desire, §
63 Anger, and Covetousness; and Folly|| is the other enemy. But
when that king closes those gates and stands firm, then he
becomes indeed both happily strong and free from alarm;
64 he displays his affections; he is not overcome by his enemies.
65 But when he leaves all the gates open, then the enemy named
66 Passion] assails the gates of the eyes, etc. Gaining an entrance
by the five gates, he penetrates everywhere and spreads widely :
then indeed enter, following on his track, the three other
67 terrible enemies. That very enemy, Passion, having entered
there, forms a close union with the Understanding, together


# Purusha. '

+ Buddhi, perceptive faculty.

t Manas, cognitive faculty.

§ Kama, love, desire, affection.

|| Moha, folly, infatuation.

T Riga, passion, emotion ; used as equivulent to Kama,


16 CANTO III.


68 with the other gates which are known as the’ organs. He,
difficult to be approached, having reduced into subjection the
organs and the Understanding, and having reduced into sub-

69 jection the gates, then destroys the rampart. The Intelligence,
seeing the Understanding the dependent of that enemy, perishes
forthwith. And there, deprived of his ministers and abandoned

70 by his subjects, the king, his strategetical points gained by
the enemies, perishes. Even so Passion, Folly, Covetousness and

71 Anger prevail, evil in their nature, wrecking the memory of
mankind. From Passion springs Anger; from Anger is born

72, Covetousness ; from Covetousness arises Folly ; from Folly errors
of memory ; from loss of memory loss of the intellect ; through

73 loss of the intellect man perishes. Shew favour, O thou most
virtuous! to us who have thus lost our intellects, who are
compliant to Passion and Covetousness, and who covet life.

74 And let not this curse take effect, which thou hast pronounced,
Sir! Let us not tread the miserable path of darkness, O best
of Munis !’

“ The Rishi spoke.


75 “ ‘What I have uttered, will never become false; my voice
- 76 has not spoken untruth hitherto, O sons! Fate is here supreme,
I think. Fie on worthless manhood, whereby I have been
thoughtlessly forced to do a deed that ought not to be done!
77 And since I am besought reverently by you, therefore, when
endowed with the nature of brutes, ye shall obtain the highest
78 knowledge. And ye, having your paths illuminated by
knowledge, with the stains of pain removed, free from doubt,
shall through my favour gain the highest perfection.’
79 “Thus, Sir, we were cursed of old by our father through the
power of destiny ; hence we have descended to a lower grade of
80 created beings for a long time; and we were born on the
field of battle; we were nourished by thee: thus have we
acquired the nature of birds, O brāhman. There is no man
in this world who is not bound by fate.”
Markandeya spoke.
81 Having heard this their speech, the venerable and eminent


82


83


84


85


THE INCARNATION OF THE FOUR-FORMED GOD. 17


Muni Samika answered those dvijas who stood near him,
* Even before did I make this remark in your presence, ‘ These
are not ordinary birds; these must be some brāhmans, who
even in the superhuman battle escaped destruction.” ”

Then they, permitted by that affectionate high-souled Muni,
went to the Vindhya, the goodliest of mountains, clad with
trees and creepers. Hitherto have the righteous birds re-
mained on that mountain, engaged in austerities and the study
of the Vedas, and resolute in meditation. Thus those Muni’s
sons gained the hospitality of the noble Muni, acquired the
shape of birds, and are dwelling on the Vindhya range, in a
cave of the noble mountain, where the water is very sacred,
with their minds subdued.


Canto IV.
The Incarnation of the Four-formed God.

Jaimini visits the Birds, and explaining the reason of his visit, puts
them the four questions that perplexed him—After invoking
Vishnu, Brahma and S'iva, they explain the first question, why
Vishnu, though devoid of qualities, ts endued with humanity.

Mārkaņdeya spoke.
Thus those birds, the sons of Drona, became learned; and
they dwell on the Vindhya mountain: visit them and ask


them. sing
Jaimini, having heard this speech of the Rishi Markandeya,


went to the Vindhya mountain, where dwelt those righte-
ous birds. And when Jaimini reached that mountain, he
heard their voices as they were reading, and having heard
filled with surprise, he reflected. a brāhmans are read-
ing, observing the beauties of tc Sore passages, regu-
lating their breath, without any intermission, distinctly and
without faults: wondrous is this, methinks, that Sarasvati
does not forsake these Muni’s sons, although they are born in
the brute creation. One’s circle of relatives and a friend and
whatever else is desired in one’s home—all that forsakes oue


3


18 CANTO TV.


7 and departs; Sarasvati does not abandon one.’ Thinking even
thus, he entered the mountain cave; and entering saw those
8 dvijas standing on a ledge of the rock. Looking at them as.
they were reading, their faces free from blemish, he then
addressed them all, with mingled sorrow and joy.
9 “Hail to you, O brahmans! Know that I am Jaimini a
disciple of Vyasa, who am come to you, being eager for learn-
10 ing. Verily be ye not angry; whereas ye, being cursed by
your father, who was exceedingly wrathful, have been turned
11 into “birds, that was indeed altogether fate. In a family of
immense wealth some intelligent members, itis said, were born ;
when their wealth’ was lost, they were well comforted,
12 O bréhmans, by S'abara. Men after giving to others become
beggars themselves ; and others, after killing men, have been
killed themselves ; and others, after having overthrown men, have
been themselves overthrown ;—those very men, through the decay
13 of austerities. Thus Ihave very often seen opposites of this
kind: the world is constantly distressed by the destruction of
14 existence and non-existence. At such thoughts as these in
your minds, ye should not give way to sorrow: so much is
invulnerability to sorrow and joy the fruit of knowledge.”
15 Then they all did Jaimini honour, by giving him water for
his feet, and the arghya offering; and they bowed to him, and
16 questioned him with deep respect. Then all the birds address-
ed him, the disciple of Vyasa, rich in austerities, as he sat at
ease, resting himself, with his fatigue mitigated by the breeze
from their wings.
The birds spoke.
17 “To-day has our birth become fruitful, and our lives have been
well-lived, inasmuch as we see thy lotus-feet which are worthy
18 to be praised by the gods. The blazing fire of our father’s
anger, which continues in our bodies, has been quenched to-
19 day by the water of the sight of thee, O bréhman. We trust
that all is well in thy hermitage among the deer and birds,
among the trees too, and the various kinds of creepers, shrubs,
20 reeds, and grasses. Or perhaps we though respectful have
not spoken this fittingly ? Whence can evil befall those who


THE INCARNATION OF THE FOUR-FORMED GOD. 19


21 have met with thee? And here, shew us favour, tell us the
cause of thy visit; union with thee, as with the gods, is great
prosperity ; by whom, powerful for our good fortune, hast thou
been brought to our view ? ”


Jaimini spoke.
22 “Let the reason be heard, O bréhmans, why I have come here
to the Vindhya mountain’s delightful cave, which is sprinkled
23 with drops of water from the river Narmadš. At first I
questioned the great Muni Markandeya, a scion of Bhrigu’s
race, since I found difficulties in connexion with the Mahé-
24 bharata. And he, when asked by me, replied, ‘ Drona’s high-
souled sons are living on the mighty Vindhya mountain;
25 they will-declare the fall meaning to thee.’ And I, impelled
by his speech, have come to this great mountain: therefore
hear me fully ; having heard, deign to give an explanation.”


The birds spoke.
26 "The matter being one specially known to us, we will declare
it; listen then, free from distrust; why should we not tell
27 thee that of which our intellects are cognizant? For evenin
the four Vedas, for in the Dharma-šastras also, and in all
the Angas and whatever else is conformable to the Vedas—
28 in these does our intellect range, O best of brāhmans; but
29 nevertheless we are not able to give a promise. Therefore
declare fearlessly what is doubtful in the Mahabharata; we
will declare it to thee, O thou who art wise in the law; if not
there will be bewilderment.”
Jaimini spoke.
30 “Hear, O ye pure ones! the matters in connexion with the
Mahábhárata, which are doubtful to me here; having heard,
31 deign to explain them. Why is Janārdana Vasudeva, who is
the support of everything and the cr of all causes, al-
32 though devoid of qualities, endued with humanity ? And why
was Drupada’s daughter Krishné the common wife of the five
sons of Pandu? On this point there ts very great perplexity.
33 Why did the mighty Baladeva Haltyudha expiate his brah-


34 manicide by engaging in a pilgrimage? And how was it that


20 CANTO IV.


the unmarried heroic high-souled sons of Draupadi, whose
protector was Pandu, were slain, as if they had no protector P

35 Let all these doubtful points in connexion with the Mahé-
bhārata be explained to me; that I having attained my object,
may return to my hermitage in comfort.”


The birds spoke.
86 “Having paid adoration to Vishnu, the lord of the gods, the
pre-eminent, the universal soul, the immeasurable, the eternal,
37 and the changeless; to him who subsists in four forms, possessed
of the three qualities, and devoid of qualities, the most choice,
38 the most venerable, the most excellent, and the immortal; to
him than whom there is nothing more minute, than whom there
is nothing more immense, by whom—the unborn one, the begin-
89 ning of the worlds—this universe is permeated,—this universe
‘which, characterized by appearance and disappearance, by visi-
bility and invisibility, has, men say, been created and also been
40 destroyed in the end: and having paid adoration with
profound meditation to Brahmā, the creator, who purifies the
three worlds with his mouths as he utters the Ric’ and Sima
41 hymns: also having prostrated ourselves before the lord,
conquered. by one of whose arrows the bands of the Asuras do
42 not interrupt the sacrifices of the sacrificers: we will declare
the whole doctrine of Vyasa, who was wonderful in his actions,
by whom, in delivering the Mahábhárata, justice and the other
virtues were made manifest.
43 “Theo waters were called Nara by Munis conversant with
truth; they were originally his place of movement*; hence he
44, is called Nārāyana. The adorable god, the lord Narayana, per-
vading all things, lives, O brahman, in a quadruple form: he
45 is possessed as well as devoid of attributes. His first form is
inscrutable ; the wise behold it bright; it is covered with gar-
46 lands of flame; it is the acme of perfection to devotees ; it is
both far and it is near; it is to be understood as transcending
attributes ; when called Vasudeva, it is seen devoid of egoism ;
47 its shape, colour, etc., are not real but imaginary ; it is indeed
48 always pure; it is the sole form of pre-eminence. His second


* Ayana.


INDRA'S TRANSFORMATIONS. 21


form, called Sesha, supports the earth below with its head ;
it is described as being characterized by the quality of darkness;
49 it belongs to the brute creation. His third form is active, and
devoted to the preservation of creatures; it is to be considered
as consisting chiefly of the quality of goodness; it is the
50 fashioner of virtue. His fourth form abides in water; it lies
on a serpent as its bed; its attribute is passion ; and it is always
indeed active.
91 “The third form of Vishnu, which is assiduously intent on the
preservation of creatures, always maintains righteousness on the
52 earth. It destroys the haughty Asuras, the exterminators of
righteousness ; it protects the gods, and holy men, who are
53 devoted to the preservation of righteousness. Whensoever,
O Jaimini, the wane of righteousness occurs and the rise of
54 iniquity, then it creates itself. Having formerly become exis-
tent, as a wild boar it repelled the water with its snout, and
55 lifted out the earth like a lotus with one of its tushes. Having
taken the form of the man-lion, it slew Hiranya-kasipu, and
56 destroyed Viprac'itti and other Danavas. I cannot now enu-
merate its other incarnations, those of the dwarf, etc.: his
57 recent incarnation here was this one in Mathura. Thus that
form, which is characterized by goodness, becomes incarnate ;
and it is designated Pradyumna ; it is occupied in the work of
58 preservation. And ever by Visudeva’s will, it exists in divine
form, human form, and brute form, and partakes of their several
natures.
59 “Thus this has been declared to thee, how that the lord
Vishnu, though all-successful, assumed human form. Hear


again the sequel thereof.”


Canto V.
Indra’s Transformations.

The Birds explain the second guestion—Draupadi was the wife
of the five Pdndavas, because they were partial incarnations of
Indra, and she was the incarnation of his wife.

The birds spoke.


l «Of old, O brahman ! when the son of Tvashķri was slain,


22 CANTO V.


Indra’s splendour, oppressed by the brahmanicide, suffered a
2 grievous decline. Then because of his wrong conduct Indra’s
splendour entered Dharma; and, his righteousness and splendour
being gone, Indra became splendourless.
3 “ Then hearing that his son was slain, the prajāpati Tvashtri
enraged, tearing out a single matted lock of hair, uttered this
4 speech. ‘Let the three worlds and the gods thereof see my
might this day, and let Indra the perverse brahmanicide see,
5 by whom my son when engaged in his own business was des-
troyed” Thus having spoken, he, his eyes red with anger,
sacrificed that lock of hair in the fire.
6 “Then uprose Vritra, the mighty Asura, encircled with flame,
huge in body, with great teeth, resembling a mass of broken
7 collyrium. He, the enemy of Indra, of immeasurable soul
surpassing the might of Tvashtri, mighty in valour, increas:
8 ed daily a bow-shot im stature. And Indra, having seen the
mighty Asura Vritra eager for his slaughter, unnerved by
9 fear, sent seven Rishis, desiring peace. Then the affectionate-
minded Rishis, who delighted in benevolence towards all crea-
tures, brought about friendship and treaties between him and
10 Vritra. When Indra violating the rules of the treaty slew
Vritra, then his might overwhelmed by the sin of the slaughter
11 weaaed; and that might which quitted Indra’s body entered the
wind, which pervades everything, is imperceptible, and is the
supreme deity of power.
12 “And when Indra, assuming the form of Gautama, violated
13 Ahaly4, then the lord of the gods lost his form. Thereupon his
beauty of limb and feature, which was exceedingly captivat-
ing, forsook the wicked lord of the gods and went to the
Ašvins.
14 * Perceiving the lord of the gods to have lost his uprightness
and glory, to be powerless and formless, the Daityas endeavour-
15 ed to conquer him. Daityas of exceeding might, desirous to
conquer the lord of the gods, were born in the families of kings
16 of surpassing valour, O great Muni. Then the Earth, afflicted
with their weight, once went to the summit of Meru, where is
17 the abode of the heaven-dwelling gods. Afflicted with their


i BALADEVA'S BRAHMANICIDE. 28
excessive weight, she declared that the cause of her distress
18 arose from the Danavas and Daityas. ‘These Asuras, widely
resplendent, have been slain by you; they have all been born in
19 the world of men in the families of kings; their armies are
numerous indeed : oppressed by their weight, I am sinking
downward; do ye, O ye thirty gods, devise how tranquillity
may be attained for me.’
The birds spoke.
20 “Then the gods descended with portions of their glory from
heaven to earth, to benefit the creatures and to alleviate the
21 burden of the Earth. Dharma himself relinquished the
glory which is innate in the body of Indra, then was born
22 of Kunti the resplendent raja Yudhishthira; Vayu relin-
quished his might, then was born Bhima; and from the half
of Indra’s power was born Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha;
23 Yama’s two sons, resembling Indra in form, of glorious dignity,
were born of Madri. Thus the adorable Indra became incar-
24 nate in five forms. His auspicious wife was born as Krishyá
25 from Agni: she, Krishņģ, is the wife of Indra alone, and of no
one else. The lords of ascetics can even multiply their bodies.
96 “Thus the fact of her being one wife to five men has been
explained to thee; be it heard how Baladeva went to the


Sarasvati.”


Canto VI.
Baladeva’s brahmanicide.


The Birds explain the third question—Baladeva, in order to
avoid siding with the Péndavas and Kauravas, went to the Raivata
forest —Overcome by intoxication, love, and the influences of the
place, he killed Sita for not saluting him—To expiate that'sin
he undertook the pilgrimage.

The birds spoke.
l The plough-armed Ráma, knowing the perfect affection of
Krishņa for Arjuna, deliberated much—“ Can what has been
2 the be better done? Without Krishna, assuredly, I will not
go near Duryodhana ; or how, siding with the Pandavas, shall


24 CANTO VI.


3 I slay king Duryodhana, my royal son-in-law and disciple ?
Therefore I will go neither to Arjuna nor to king Duryodhana.
4 Iwill myself bathe myself at holy bathing places, so long as
it conduces to the ending of the Kurus and Pandavas.”
5 Having thus taken leave of Krishna, Arjuna and Duryodhana,
the descendant of Sūra, surrounded by his army, went to Dvā-
6 rakš. Arriving at Dvdravati, which was thronged with glad
and well-fed citizens, Rima Halšyudha drank a draught at the
7 holy bathing places, which are to be visited in future. Having
drank his draught, he then marched to the flourishing park of
Raivata,* taking with him the intoxicated Apsaras-like Revati.
8 Encircled by a bevy of maidens, the hero went on, intoxicated,
stumbling in his walk. And he saw a forest, fascinating, beyond
9 compare, loaded with the fruits and flowers of every season,
thronged with troops of monkeys, sacred, dotted with clumps of
10 lotus-flowers, a great forest abounding in pools. Listening to the
copious, pleasure-inspiring, love-soft, beautiful, ear-delighting,
melodious songs poured forth from the mouths of the birds, he
11 saw the trees there, loaded with the weight of the fruits of
every season, bright with the blossoms of every season, ren-
12 dered resonant by the birds;—mango trees, hog-plums,t
kāmarangas,f cocoanuts, and tindaka trees,§ and little bel


* A mountain near Dvārakā in Gujarat. The woodland scene described
seems to be a fanciful one, compounded from the authors observations every-
where.

+ Amrataka, the Hog-plum, Spondias mangifera ; the modern amra. It is
both wild and cultivated. I give the botanical names, from Hooker’s Flora
of British India, of all except the most common, as many of the trees have
no English names, and are better known by those names: but there can be
no doubt that the various species in a genus are not always distinguished, and
that the Sanskrit names are sometimes as much generic as specific. The
descriptions are taken from Roxburgh’s Flora Indica, Edn. Clarke, 1874, from
Olivers Indian Botany, 1869, and from Firminger’s Manual of Gardening for
India.

1 Bhavya, Averrhoa carambola, the modern kdmranga. A garden tree.

§ I do not find tindaka in Prof. Monier-Williams’ Dictionary: tinduka
occurs in verse 14. The late Rev. Dr. Banerjea, in a translation he began,
translates it Ebony, which is Diospyros melanozylon, the modern tindu. It is

a large tree, growing in most woody mountainous parts of India,


BALADEVA'S BRAHMANICIDE. 25


13 tenas, T cumin,+ pomegranates,t citrons,$ jack trees,|| mon-
key-jack trees, plantain trees, and very charming ka-
dam trees,** and pārdvata treest+ kankola trees,ff nalina

14 trees,§§ docks, |||| marking-nut trees, emblic myroba-


Rainis I do būti find this in the Dictionary. Bilva, the Bel or Bengal

ree ge marmelos ; the modern bel-phul and s‘rt-phal. Both wild and
eee It bears panicles of large white flowers, which are used in
worship.

t Jira, Cumin, Cuminum cyminum ; the modern jfra; this is a slender
cultivated annual. Jira also means Panicum miliacewm, Roxb., the modern
cheena, which is a cultivated cereal from 2 to 4 feet high. (Roxb., p. 104.)
Neither scems appropriate.

t Dādima, the Pomegranate, Punica granatum; the modern ddrim or
ddlim. A cultivated tree in India.

$ Vija-pūraka, Citron, Citrus medica, the modern nebu. A cultivated tree
in India.

|| Panasa, the Jack or Jack-fruit tree, Artocarpus integrifolia ; the modern
kdnthdl. A cultivated tree. (Roxb., p. 633: Oliver, p. 272: not in Hooker).

T Lakuc'a, the Monkey-jack, Artocarpus lacucha; the modern dephul. A
garden tree. (Roxb., p. 634; Firminger, p. 188; not in Hooker).

** Nipa, Anthocephalus cadamba (Nauclea cadamba, Roxb.) ; also kadamba,
the modern kadam. A garden tree, highly ornamental with its large, globular,
beautiful, orange-coloured heads of flowers, and very useful from its extensive
close shade (see Roxb., p. 172).

++ Parivata: the Dictionary says this is Diospyros embryopteris (glutinosa,
Roxb.), which is the modern gdb: but this tree is also tinduka, which occurs
in the next verse, and tindaka has occurred in verso 12. Piravata means
also a dove or pigeon, and has been corrupted into the Bengali páyrá; might
not pirāvata, the tree, be corrupted into the Bengali peyūrā, which means the
Guava, Psidium guyava ? Ā

tt Kankola. I do not find this in the Dictionary. Read Rise kalian for
kan'koldn? Kan'kella is given as the Asok, Saruca indica (Jonesia asoka,

i s in verse 15.
R S ES ai translates this as the indigo plant, pot Tapt Moz
nier-Williams says nalina, neut., is tho Indigo shrub, Indigofera tinctoria ahile
nalina, masc. as hero, is the Carissa carandas ; but the latter occurs in the
Rī A the Dock or Sorrel, as Prof. Monier-Williams gives it.


The Dock is Rumez vesicurius, Roxb. The Sorrel is Ozalis corniculata, Hooker
e Doc í


iver. pp. 181 and 269).
e the Marking-nut tree, Semecarpus anacardium, the Bengali
?


4


26 CANTO VI.


lans,* and gdb treest bearing large fruits, almond trees,f
karamcha trees,§ yellow myrobalans,|| beleric myrobalans.J
15 He, Yadu’s descendant, saw these and other trees, and also aso-


16 kas,** punnžgas,tt serew-pines,ff and vakulas,$$ c’ampakas,_||||


bhela. A tree, growing in all the mountainous parts of India, with large
panicles of small greenish yellow flowers. (Roxb., p. 268.)

* A’malaka, the Emblic Myrobalan, Phyllanthus emblica, the modern
amla (Roxb., p. 684 and Oliver, p. 279). I do not find it in Hooker. Emblica
officinalis is an earlier name.

+ Tinduka, Diospyros embryopteris (glutinosa, Roxb.), the modern gdb. It
is a tree common in Bengal, and among the mountains in the Circars. Its
frnit is as large as a medium-sized apple.

t In‘guda, the Almond tree, Terminalia catappa, the modern badém A
beautiful large tree, growing everywhere.

$ Karamarda, Carissa carandas, the modern karamcha. A common small
tree, with beautiful, white, jasmine-like flowers.

|| Haritaka, the Yellow or Chebulio Myrobalan, Terminalia chebula ; a large
forest tree.

{ Vibhitaka, the Belerio Myrobalan, Terminalia belerica, the modern bahera ;
a large forest tree.

##* A'goka, the Asok, Saraca indica (Jonesia asoka, Roxb.). A middling-sized,
very handsome, garden tree, with large, globular bunches of rather large
flowers. The flowers are of a beautiful orange colour when they first expand,
and gradually change to red, forming a variety of beautiful shades: they are
fragrant during the night. (Roxb., p. 312).

tt Punniga, Rottlera tinctoria, (Roxb. and Oliver): it is still called punndg.
I do not find it in Hooker. A tree, a native of Coromatdel.

tt Ketaki, the Screw-Pine, Pandanus odoratissimus, (Roxb. and Oliver), the
modern keord. A large shrub, with panicles of large white, sheath-like
leaves, enclosing bundles of closely-packed minute flowers. “It is the tender
white leaves of the flowers, chiefly those of the male, that yield that most

delightful fragrance, for which they are so universally and deservedly
esteemed ; for of all the perfumes in the world it must be the richest and most
powerful.” (Roxb., p. 707. )

§§ Vakula, Mimusops elenghi, the modern bakul. A tree, commonly culti-
vated, with flowers middle-sized drooping, white and fragant ; but Firminger
says they are small, pale-green. (Roxb., p. 318; Hooker, p. 458; Firm.,
p- 490).

|||| O'ampaka, Michelia champaca, the modern champak or cīimpd. A garden
tree with large yellow delightful fragrant flowers.


BALADEVA'S BRAHMANICIDE. 27


saptaparņas,* karņikáras,ł and Spanish jasmines,t
pšrijāta trees,$ kovīdāras,|| mandāras, and jujube
17 trees,** delightsome Bignonia treesft in blossom, and
devdār trees,t{ sál trees,§§ palmyra palms,|||| and ta-


* Sapta-parņa, Alstonia scholaris. An ever-green tree growing in the drier
forests of India.

+ Karnikira, Pterospermum acerifolium, the Bengali kanak-champa. A
Himalayan tree, but also grown in gardens. It has very large, pure white,
fragrant flowers.

t Milati, the Catalonian or Spanish Jasmine, Jasminum grandiflorum, the
Bengali jdt¢ or chamelt, Hindustani chambelt. It is a spreading garden shrub
with graceful pinnate foliage and middling-sized white fragrant flowers,
which retain their odour when dried and are much used for perfume. (Firm.,
p. 518). Mālati also means the Clove-scented Echites, Aganosma caryophyllata
(Echites caryophyllata, Roxb.), now called mālati, which is a climbing shrub,
with bay-like leaves and sprays of middling-sized fragrant white flowers.
(Roxb., p. 245; Firm., p. 618.)

§ Pārijāta, Erythrina indica. A large tree growing all over India, with
racemes of numerous large bright scarlet flowers. This tree is generaliy
called manddr now.

|| Kovidéra, Bauhinia variegata, the Bengali rakta-kanchan. A garden tree
with large reddish-purple flowers.

47 Mandāra. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is Erythrina fulgens, but I do
not find it in Hooker or Roxburgh. May it be F. stricta, which grows in the
Western Peninsular aud much resembles E. indica? In Bengal E. indica is
now generally called mandār.

#% Badara, Zizyphus enoplia (jujuba or scandens, Roxb.), the Bengali kul, the
A small tree with fruit of the size of a large cherry.

++ Pātala, Bignonia suaveolens, Roxb., the modern pdrul. I go not find it in
Hooker. A tree, with large, exquisitely fragrant, dark dull carson flowers.
It blossoms during the hot season. Prof. Monier-Williams calls it the Trumpet-
but I do not find this name in any of the Botanical books I have


Hindustani ber.


flower tree,
consulted:
tt Deva-dāru, Pinus devdara,
in Hooker. A great tree, native
species of pine is native in the iri
i i i is Gujarat scene.
ie : eee iris robusta, the modern sál. An immense timber


Roxb., the modern devddr. I do not find it
of the mountains north of Rohilkhand. No
ula (Oliver, p. 294) ; this tree therefore


i Tala, the Palmyra Palm, Borassus flabelliformis, Roxb., the modern tal.
Not in Hooker. Fans are made from the large fan-like leaves.


28 CANTO VI.


18 málaş,* kimšukas,t and fine vanjula trees :—inhabited by
chakors,§ and woodpeckers, shrikes,|| and parrots, koils,{[ and
19 sparrows, green pigeons,** and jivajivaka pheasants,tt by priya-


* Tamšla. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is Garcinia nanthochymus (Xan-
thochymus pictorius, Roxb.) ; thisis a tree, a native of the mountainous districts
in India. But Roxburgh says the Tamila is Diospyros cordifolia, which
Hooker unites with D. montana ; this is a common tree.

+ Kims'uka, Butea Ji rondosa, the Bengali paldsh. Oliver calls this tree the
Dhak, (p. 195), but I do not find this name anywhere else. It is a common
tree, with handsome, irregular, orange-red flowers in racemes which are
covered with a soft greenish-purple down. (Roxb., p. 540.)

t Vanjula, Ougeinia dalbergioides (Dalbergia oojeinensis, Roxb.), A tree
with racemes of numerons, rather small, very pale rose-coloured flowers,
somewhat fragrant.

§ C'akora, Caccabis chukor. The Chakor is said in Prof. Monier-Williams’
Dictionary to be the Greek partridge, Perdix rufa or Tetrao rufus, but the
Greek partridge, Caccabis sazatilis, is a different species, inhabiting Europe,
from the chakor the Asiatic species. The chakor is found in the Himalayas
and the other northern ranges. It is always 2 bird of the hills, ana does not
occur in Gujarat, where this sceno is laid (Jerdon’s Birds of India, Edn.
Godwin-Austen, Vol. II, p. 564; Hume and Marshall’s Game Birds of India,
Vol. II, p. 33). Tetrao rufus is the name Linnzous gave the European bird.
Perdis rufa seems, from the edition of his works in the Bengal Asiatic
Society’s Library, to be an earlier name. There are other partridges in the
plains of India, Ortygornis gularis, &c., but I do not think the reference can
be to them, for the writer seems to be mentioning birds inhabiting the
Himalayas; sce the note on tho J ivajtvaka pheasant, below.

ll Bhringa-réja. Prof. Monier-Williams translates this, Malabar ghrike,
Lanius malabaricus. This bird stands in Jerdon as Edolius malabaricus, and
is, I am informed by Dr. J. Scully, a king-crow. Another bird may be meant,
the Malabar Wood-shrike, Tephrodornis sylvicola, but, as the writer seems to
be referring to birds found near the Himalayas, bhringa-réja may mean
any kind of shrike, almost every kind of which is common throughout the
greater part of India. (Jerdon, Vol: I, p. 400).

` «7 Kokila, tho Koil, Eudynamys orientalis (Jordon, Vol. I, p- 342).

¥* Harita, the Green Pigeon, probably the Bengal green pigeon, Crocopus
phenicopterus, OT the Orange-breasted green pigeon, Osmotreron bicincta. The
Southern green pigeon, Crocopus chlorigaster, and the Green īmperial pigeon,
Carpophaga sylvatica, are not found near the Himalayas.

+t J ivajivaka. Prof. Monier-Williams gives the synonyms jiva-jiva and
jivanjiva, and explains the word as a kind of bird supposed to be a pheasant,


BALADEVA'S BRAHMANICIDE. 29


putras,* and pied-crested cuckoos,+ and by various other birds,
20 warbling pleasingly and very melodiously :—and the lakes,
beautiful and placid, crowded on all sides with the lotus
water-lilies,t and lotuses,§ and the brilliant blue water-


or the chakor. As the chakor is mentioned already, it must have the firat
meaning. Taking it to be a kind of pheasant, I would suggest that it is the
Cheer Pheasant, Phasianus Wallichi. The Sanskrit name looks like an ono-
matoposous one, and the cry of this bird is “ something like the words chir
a pir, chira pir, chir chir, chirwa chirwa.” Cheer is the native name. Tho
bird is found in Garhwal and Kumaon and the neighbouring country, and
inhabits tho middle slope of the Himalayas (Humo and Marshall, Vol. I, p.
169: Jerdon, Vol. II, p..527). If this bird be a pheasant, it is clear the writer
is mentioning, not the fauna of Gujarat, but of the country near the Hima-
layas, for it appears from Hume and Marshall, and Jerdon, that no pheasants
are found in India except in the Himalayan and Indo-Burmese mountaing and
forests.

* Priya-putra. Ido not know what this bird is. The name affords no
indication.

+ C'ātaka,the Pied-crested Cuckoo. Prof. Monier-Williams says the bird ig
Cuculus melanoleucus, but I find no such name mentioned in Jerdon. It is
the Coccystes melanoleucos of Jerdon (Vol. I, p. 339), which he says is called
chatak. It is found all over India.

t Kumud, the Lotus water-lily, Nymphea lotus (Oliver, p. 155). There
seems to be some confusion in distinguishing btween the Sanskrit names for
the lotus and the water-lilies, and I would attempt a solution in this and the
following notes.

Of the water-lilies, Nymphea, large water-herbs with leaves and flowers
floating on the surface, there are 2 species common in India, viz., N. lotus, the
Lotus water-lily, and N. stellata, the Blue water-lily.

N. lotus has leaves 6—12 inches broad, and flowers 2—10 inches eee
white, rose, or red. This species combines Roxburgh’s N. rubra and N. edulis
(esculenta). Its Sanskrit name is kumud, and probably: ale ; the red
variety is raktotpala. It closes during the day and pens at night. ;

The latter species, N. stellata, has flowers 1—10 inches broad, slightly
odorous. It comprises 3 varieties, (1) cyanea (X. cyanea, Roxb.), iet me-
dium-sized, blue; (2) parviflora, flowers usually smaller, blue; (3) versicolor
(N. versicolor, Roxb.), flowers larger, white, blue, purple, or SERV ie
The blue-flowered N. stellata is called ee utpala, kuvalaya and ntlotpala.

„114: Roxburgh, p. 427.
as as iki or Sacred oink, Nelumbium speciosum. ans is aie
only species of Nelwmbiwm in India. It is a large erect water-herb with its


30 CANTO VI.


21 lilies,* with water-lilies,t and lotuses ;f and thronged with
kádamba geese,§ and ruddy shieldrakes|| and water-fowl, J
22 with kdraņdava ducks,** pelicans,tf geese, ľ} tortoises, and


leaves and flowers raised high above the water. Its leaves are peltate, cupped,
2—3 feet in diameter. The flowers are 4—10 inches broad, white or rose-
red. Its Sanskrit names are kamala, nalini, padmint, pundarfka, sarasi-ja,
and sahasra-patra. The flower is padma and panka-ja. The red variety is
kokanada and témarasa. Roxburgh says the white variety is called in Sanskrit
sitdmbu-ja, and the red variety raktotpala ; but these names more properly
designate the white and red varieties of the water-lily (Nymphea), and Prof.
Monier-Williams translates them so. The Lotus opens during the day and
closes at night (Hooker, Vol. I, p. 116; Olivers Indian Botany, p. 166;
Roxburgh, p. 450.)

* Nilotpala, the Blue water-lily, Nymphea stellata, see note on kumud,
supra p. 29.

+ Kahlāra. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is the White esculent water-
lily, Nymphea lotus, but Roxburgh assigns it to his N. cyanea. Can it mean
the rose-coloured variety of the N. lotus or stellata? See note} on kumud,
supra p. 29.

t Kamala, the Lotus, Nelumbium speciosum ; see note § on Pundarika, supra
p. 29. But there must be some difference between the two.

§ Kādamba, a kind of goose with dark-grey wings (kala-hansa), so Prof.
Monier-Williams. It seems to be the Grey Lag-Goose, Anser cinereus, which
is called kar-hdns in Behar. (Hume and Marshall, Vol. III, p. 55; Jerdon,
Vol. II, p. 779.)

|| O'akravāka, the Ruddy Shieldrake or Brahminy Duck, Casarca rutila.
Anas casarca is the Linnean name. (Hume and Marshall, Vol. III, p. 125;
Jerdon, Vol. II, p. 791.)

q Jala-kukkuta. This is probably the Water-hen, Gallinula chloropus, com-
monly called the jal-murghi, which means the same. (Jerdon, Vol. II, p.
718.)

*% Kérandava, a kind of duck; also called karanda. -I would suggest that
this is the Common Teal, Querquedula crecca, which is now called kerra in
the N. W. Provinces, and kardo in Sindh. (Hume and Marshall, Vol. III,

p, 205; Jerdon, Vol. II, p, 806.)

++ Plava. Prof. Monier-Williams translates this as pelican, Pelicanus fusi-
collis ; but I do not find any such species in Jerdon. It may be the Grey
pelican, Pelecanus Philippensis, which is the most abundant species in India.
(Jerdon, Vol. TI, p. 858.)

tt Hansa. This is of course general, and means any kind of goose or
duck.


BALADEVA'S BRAHMANICIDE, 31


divers ;* thronged with these and other birds swimming in the
water all around.
23 So gazing on the delightful forest, Sauri accompanied by the
maidens gradually proceeded onwards to an incomparable
24 bower of creepers. There he saw brahmans, deeply read in
the Vedas and Vedángas, belonging to the families of Kušika,
25 and Bhrigu, Bharadvija, and Gotama, and brahmans sprung
from various famalies, all eagerly listening to the tales,
26 seated on large outer garments made of the hide of the black
antelope, and on the kuša grass and on kuša-grass seats; and
27 Sūta (their bard) in the midst, reciting glorious tales of the
olden times, based on the deeds of the first Surarshis. Seeing
28 Rama, whose eyes were red with. drinking, all the brahmans,
perceiving he was intoxicated, rose up in haste, saluting the
29 plough-bearer, except that scion of the bards. Then filled with
rage, the mighty plough-bearer, who caused all the Dūnavas
to quake, rolling his eye, smote Sūta.
30 When that bard was slain while repeating the words of the
Veda, all those brahmans, clad in black antelope skins, depart-
31 ed from the wood. And the plough-armed hero, perceiving
himself disregarded, thought, “This is a very grievous sin
32 that I have committed; for since I have come here to a
brahmans’ abode and have slain Sita, these dvijas perceiving
33 me have all departed. And my body has a disgusting odour,
as it were of blood, and I perceive that I am contemned as
34 a brahmanicide. Fie on my rage, and the wine, my arrogance,
my cruelty! Possessed by them, I have committed this most
35 grievous sin. To expiate it I will perform a twelve-year vow,
making the confession of my deed the uttermost penance.
36 This then is the pilgrimage which I have now OAS I
37 will go to the Pratilomi Sarasvati itself.” Hence he, Ráma,
went to the Pratilom4 Sarasvati.
Next listen to this reference to the story of the Pandaveyas.


* Madgu, a kind of diving bird. It is probably the Little Grebe, Podiceps
iki commonly called dub-dubi from its inyeterate diving. (Jerdon,
3 : : (
Vol. II, p. 822.) But it may be the Bald Coot, Fulica atra, which is also a
. Il, p- i


ready diver (id., p. 715.)


32


10


11


CANTO VII.


Canto VII.


The Birth of the Sons of Draupadi.

The Birds explain the fourth question—King Haris-c'andra
incurred Visvdmitra’s anger, and to appease him gives up to him
his kingdom and all his wealth—Visvdmitra ill-treats the queen,
and five Visve Devas censure him for his brutality—He curses
them to be born as men, but exempts them from marriage—They were
born as the five sons of Draupadi, and died young.

The righteous birds spoke.

There lived formerly in the Treté Age a most exalted Rajar-
shi named Haris-c'andra, virtuous in soul, a ruler of the earth,
brilliant in fame. No famine, nor sickness, nor untimely death
occurred among men, nor did the citizens delight in evil, while
he ruled asking; nor, further, did the people become uproari-
ous through wealth, valour, austerities or spirituous liquors ;
nor were any females born who failed to reach womanhood.*

And he, of mighty arm, when once chasing a deer in the
forest, heard women repeatedly crying, “save us”! The king,
giving over the deer, called out “fear not! who is this per-
verse being that, under my rule, behaves with injustice ?” At
this interval also the Raudra Vighna-rāj, the opponent of every
undertaking, who was following that cry, deliberated :—“ This
Viśvámitra, full of heroism, undertaking incomparable austeri-
ties, keeping a vow, is mastering the sciences of Siva and
others, which have not been perfected before. Those sciences
being mastered by this man, who governs his mind in patience
and silence, are verily lamenting, afflicted with dread. How
can I manage this? Glorious is this noblest of the Kausika
family; I am much weaker than he: these terrified sciences
are thus bewailing: it appears to me difficult to be accom-
plished. Now this king has come in my way, calling out
repeatedly ‘fear not! ; into him indeed entering, I will speedily
accomplish my desire.”

Then the king possessed by that Raudra Vighna-raja, who had
thus taken counsel with himself, uttered this speech in anger :—


* An allusion to infanticide?


THE BIRTH OF THE SONS OF DRAUPADI. 33


12 “ Who is this wicked man that binds fire in the corner of his
garment, when I the lord am present, gleaming with the

13 glowing splendour of my power? He to-day, pierced in every
limb by my arrows, which in their flight from my bow illumine
the other regious of the sky, shall enter upon a long sleep.”

14 Thereupon Vigvémitra having heard the king’s speech was
enraged: and, when that great Rishi was enraged, those

15 sciences perished in a moment. The king moreover, seeing
Visvāmitra, rich in austerities, being terrified, suddenly trem-

16 bled exceedingly like the leaf of the peepul tree.* When the
Muni exclaimed, “ wretch !” and “stand!”; then the king fall-

17 ing prostrate in reverence addressed him :—“O adorable lord!
this is my duty! I have committed no fault! Deign not O
Muni! to be angry with me, who am engaged in my duty.

18 A king, conversant with his duties, must give gifts, and
must afford protection, and lifting his bow must wage war,
according to the Dharma-$āstras.”

Višvāmitra spoke.

19 “To whom, O king, must thou give gifts, whom must thou
protect, and with whom must thou wage war? Speedily
declare this, if thou fearest unrighteousness.”

Haris-c'andra spoke.

20 “I must always give gifts to brahmans principally, and to
others who are straitened in their means; I must protect those
in fear; I must make war with enemies.”

Visvamitra spoke.

21 “If your highness, a king, duly regards the duties of kings—I

am a brahman desirous of a reward, let the desired fee be


given me.”


* Ficus religiosa. The leaf, which varies from 2} to 54 inches in length
and almost the same in breadth, is ovate-cordate, and has a long slender apex
(acumen) 1 to 2 inches long. It has a round flexible stalk 2 to 3 inches long,
which is twisted so as to make the inner surface of the leaf face outwards
from the branch. The leaf hangs downwards by the long stalk, with its
inner surface, which is slightly concave, facing outwards, and thus catches


the lightest breeze.
5


34. CANTO VII.


The birds spoke.

22 The Raja, having heard this speech with gladdened sonl,

deemed himself as it were born anew, and addressed the sage
23 of the Kaušika race: “ Be it declared, adorable sir! what, free
from doubt, I must give thee; consider it as already given,

24 albeit most difficult to be obtained, whether gold or money,
son, wife, body, life, kingdom, city, good fortune—whatever is
the desire of my own soul.”

Viśvámitra spoke.

25 “O king! this present has been accepted, which thou hast
given: first, however, hestow the fee appertaining to the
Rāja-sūya sacrifice.”

The Raja spoke.

26 “O brahman! I will indeed give your honour that fee. Choose,

O.chief of the dvijas, whatever present thou desirest.”
Visvamitra spoke.

27 * Give me this earth, with its ocean, and with its mountains,
villages and towns; and thy entire kingdom, O warrior, with

28 īts multitude of chariots, horses, and elephants ; also thy trea-
sury and treasure ; and whatever else thou possessest, excepting

29 thy wife, and son and body, O sinless one! and excepting thy
virtue, which, O thou that knowest all the virtues, follows its
possessor when he moves. tat need for me to Bay more ?
Let all this be granted me.’

The birds spoke.

30 With gladdened mind the king, unperturbed in countenance,
having heard the Rishi’s speech, joining his hands respectfully
replied, “ So be it!”

Višsvāmitra spoke.

31 “If all thy property is given me, thy kingdom, the earth, thy
army, thy wealth,—whose is the lordship, O Rajarshi! when 1
the ascetic am seated in the kingdom ?”


Haris-c'andra spoke.
32 "At what time I have yielded up the earth to thee, O brah-
man! at that time thon, Sir, art the owner . how much more
now the king”


THE BIRTH OF THE SONS OF DRAUPADI. 35


Viśvámitra spoke.
83 “IfO king! the whole earth has been given me by thee,
thou must deign to depart from the realm where I hold sway,
34 unfastening all thy ornaments, such as thy waist-band and
every thing else, and clothing thyself with the bark of trees,
together with thy wife and son.”


The birds spoke.

35 Having said “ So be it!” and having so done, the king started
to go, in company with his wife Saivyd and his young son.

36 Then he addressed the king, having obstructed the road as
he was moving—“ Where wilt thou go, without giving me the
fee appertaining to the Raja-sūya sacrifice ?”

Hariš-c'andra spoke.

37 “ Adorable Sir! this kingdom has been given thee free from
adversaries: these our three bodies, O Brahman! are al] that
remain to me this day.”

Visvāmitra spoke.

38 “Nevertheless thou must assuredly give me the sacrificial fee ;
a promise unfulfilled, especially to brahmans, proves injurious.

39 As long as brahmans delight, O king! in the Rūja-sūya sacri-
fice, so long indeed must the fee for the Rája-súya sacrifice be

40 given. After making a promise, one must bestow the gift;
and one must fight against assailants ; so too the afflicted must
be protected; thus hast thou already agreed.” ;

Haris-c'andra spoke.

4] “Adorable Sir, I have nought at present; I will give thee
the fee after a while: and show me favour, O Brahmarshi!
bearing in mind noble behaviour.”

Visvāmitra spoke.
42 “What length of time must I wait for thee, O guardian of


men! Tell me speedily, or the fire of my curse shall con-


sume thee.”
Haris-c'andra spoke.
43 “Ina month will I give thee the fee-money, O Brahmarshi! At
present I have no means; deign to grant me thts permission.”


36 CANTO VII.


Visvamitra spoke.
44 “Go, go, O noble king; observe thy duty; and may thy way
be auspicious ! May there be no enemies !”


The birds spoke.

45 Permitted to go, the king departed; his queen, Ti was

46 unused to walk afoot,* followed him. Seeing that most noble
king departing from the city with his wife and son, the citizens
raised a cry and followed the king, exclaiming—

47 “Alas, O master! why leavest thou us, who are afflicted
with continual sufferings? Thou, O king, art devoted to
righteousness, and thou art the benefactor of the citizens.

48 Lead us also, O Rajarshi! if thou regardest righteousness.
Stay a moment, O king of monarchs! Our eyes as bees drinkt

49 thy lotus-like mouth. When again shall we behold thee, who,
when thon goest forth, art preceded and followed by kings ?

50 Here is thy wife, holding her young son in her hand, following
thee, before whom, when thou goest forth, go thy servants seated

51 on elephants! Here goes to-day walking afoot the king
of monarchs, Haris-c'andra! Alas, O king, what will thy

52 very youthful, beautiful-browed, soft-skinned, fine-nosed face
become, when injured by the dust on the road? Stay, stay,

53 O best of kings, observe thy own duty. Mildness is a very
noble virtue, especially among kshatriyas ; what need have we
of wife, what need of children, or of wealth, orof grain,

54 O master? Abandoning all this, we have become mere
shadows of thee. Alas master! alas Mahárájá! alas, O lord!

55 why dost thou abandon us? Where thon art, there indeed
will we be. Thatis joy, where thou indeed art. That is our
city where thou art. Thatis Svarga where thou, our king,
art.”

56 Having thus heard the citizens’ address the king, overwhelmed
with grief, stood then in the road through very compassion for

57 them. Still Visvāmitra, seeing him distressed by the citi-
zens’ exclamations, approaching him, with eyes rolling in anger


* Read padbhydm for pradbhydm.
+ Better pivama for pibdmo, let us drink ?


THE BIRTH OF THE SONS OF DRAUPADI. 37


58 and impatience, spoke: “Fie on thee, vile in thy conduct,
false, crooked in thy speech! who also, after giving me thy

59 kingdom, wishest again to withdraw it.” The king thus roughly
accosted by him replied thus trembling, * I am going,” and de-

60 parted hastily drawing his wife in his hand. - Thereupon the
sage of the Kaušika family suddenly belaboured with a wooden
staff the very youthful toil-wearied wife, as the king was

61 drawing her along. Seeing her thus beaten, the king Haris-
candra, oppressed with pain, exclaimed “ I am going ;” nor did
he utter aught else.

62 But then spoke five Vigve Devas full of pity, “ This Viévi-
mitra is very wicked; what worlds will he obtain, who has

63 uprooted this best of sacrificers from his throne ? By whose
funeral ceremony further shall the soma juice expressed at
the great sacrifice be purified, by drinking which we shall
reach the exhilaration that is preceded by incantations ?”


The birds spoke.


64 Having heard this their remark, the sage of the Kaušika race,
exceedingly enraged, cursed them—“ Ye shall all assume human

65 form!” And propitiated by them, the great Muni added, “ Al-

66 though in human form, ye shall have no offspring. There
shall be neither marriage of wives for you, nor hostility : freed

67 from love and anger ye shall become gods again.” Thereupon
those gods descended to the mansion of the Kurus with their
own portions ; they were born of the womb of Draupadi as the

68 five grandchildren of Pūndu. Hence the five heroic Pūnda-
veyas did not take to themselves wives, through the curse of.
that great Muni.

69 All this has been decfared to thee with reference to the tale
of the Pindaveyas. Thy four questions have been answered
in song. What, else dost thou wish to hear ?


38


CANTO VIII.


Canto VIII.
The Story of Haris-c' andra (continued).


Visvamitra not satisfied demands further fees, and Haris-c'andra
in desperation sells his wife and his son to a brahman and himself
to a canddla, and gives Visvdmitra all the price—Haris-c'andra
earns his livelihood as the c'andála’s servant at a burning-ground
in the most abject state for a year—Then he sees a vision of his
future transmigrations with a promise of happiness ultimately—
His son is bitten by a snake, and the queen brings the corpse to the
burning-ground—Lhey recognise each other and bewail their mis-
fortunes—Both resolve to immolate themselves on their sons funeral
pile; but the gods interpose and restore his son to life—Dharma
explains that he had personated the c'andūla—Indra calls the king
to Svarga, but he refuses to go without his faithful people—He,
and his queen and people ascend to Svarga in perfect bliss.

Jaimini spoke.

Ye have declared this in order according to my questions :
great is my curiosity regarding the story of Haris-c'andra.
Ah! passing great was the woe incurred by that magnanimous
king; I trust he obtained a happiness fully commensurate,
O bršhmans!

The birds spoke.

Hearing Viśvámitra’s speech, the king moved on slowly, full
of sorrow, followed by his wife Saivyā with her young boy.
The king having reached the divine city* of Benares—the
choice of Siva who pronounced that it was not to be enjoyed
by men. Distressed with sorrow, he travelled afoot with his
compliant wife. On entering the city, he saw Visvamitra
present. Seeing: he had already arrived, Haris-c'andra bowed
reverently and, joining his hands respectfully, addressed the
great Muni :—“ Here is my life, and this is my son, and this is
my wife, O Muni! Take that as the choicest arghya offering
with which thou shouldst quickly deal. Whatever else we
should do, deign to excuse that.”


* For parim read purtm,


THE STORY OF HARIS’-C/ANDRA. 39


Vi$vāmitra spoke.


9 “Gone is the month, O Rajarshi!; let my fee be given me, if
thy word regarding the Rija-sūya sacrifice be remembered.”
Haris-c'andra spoke.

10


“O brahman, rich in fadeless austerities ! to-day the month


will, in truth, be completed : await this half-day which remains,
but not long.”


Visvamitra spoke.
11 “Be it so, Maharaji! I will come again: unless to-day thou
shall make the gift, I will pronounce a curse on thee.”
The birds spoke.
12 Thus having spoken the bréhman departed: and the Raja
then took thought—‘ How shall I give him the fee which has
13 been promised? Whence can I find powerful friends?
Whence can I get wealth at this moment? Blameworthy is
14 my present: how can I escape going downward? How much
more am I abandoning life! To what region shall I, who am
nothing, go, if I perish without having performed my promise ?
15 I shall become a robber of bréhmans, a worm, a wicked man,
the vilest of the vile; or I shall become a slave—better indeed
let me sell myself.”


The birds spoke.

16 Then his wife in words broken with weeping answered the
king, who was distressed, dejected, anxious, with downcast

` 17 face—“ Leave off care, O Mahárájá; preserve thy truthfulness ;.
a man destitute of truth should be avoided like a burning-

18 ground. There is no. higher righteousness, thev say, for a
man than this, namely, maintaining his truthfulness, O noble

19 man! Oblations to consecrated fire, or study, or the whole
circle of good deeds, such as liberality, &c. ere fruitless in
90 him who speaks at random. Truthfulness is constantly
declared in the Dharma-gastras to tend to the salvation of men

of understanding; and falsehood to the overtlirow ce men of

91 uneducated minds. A king named Kriti, after offering seven
úya sacrifice, fell forthwith from


He
horse-sacrifices and a Raja-s


92 Svarga for falsehood. O king, I have given birth to a child—


40 CANTO VIII. =


Thus having spoken she wept aloud. The king spoke as fol-
lows to her whose eyes were bathed in tears.


Haris-c'andra spoke.

23 “Cease, lady, thy agitation ; here stands thy boy ; pray, speak
what thou desirest to say, O thou who art graceful in thy
gait!”

The queen spoke.

"24 “O king, I have given birth to a child: the wives of good

men bear fruit in their sons. Do thou therefore, being such a

man, give me in exchange for wealth, and pay the brahman

the fee.”


The birds spoke.
25 Hearing this proposal, the king lost his senses; and on re-
26 gaining consciousness lamented, sorely grieved :—“ Dire is this


grief, O lady, that thou thus mentionest to me: is thy joyous
27 intercourse with me, wretch that I am, forgotten ? Ah! alas!
how couldest thou suggest this, O sweet-smiler. Repugnant
28 is this plan: how can I execute it?” Thus having spoken,
the king, repeating the word “Shame! shame!” fell to the
29 ground overwhelmed by faintness. Seeing the king Haris-
candra prostrate on the earth, the queen full of sorrow,
uttered these piteous words :—


‘The queen spoke.
30 “Alas! Mahārājā! from whom has come this evil thought,
that thou, who art accustomed to coverings made of the hair
31 of the spotted deer, hast fallen on the bare ground? Here
sleeps the king, my lord, on the ground,—he, by whom ten
thousands of choice cattle and wealth were dispensed among
32 brahmans. Ah! woe! what has this king done to thee, O
brahman, that he, the equal of Indra and Vishnu, has been
33 reduced to a state of coma?” Having soliloquised thus, she,
beautiful-hipped, fell swooning, crushed by the intolerable
34 great weight of her hysband’s misfortunes. The child seeing
his parents lying thus helpless on the ground, being exces-
35 sively hungry and very unhappy, spoke :—“ Father, dear
father, give me some food ; mother, mother, give me something


THE STORY OF HARIS'-0/ANDRA. 4].


to eat. I have become dreadfully hungry, and the tip of my
tongue is growing parched.” `
The birds spoke.
86 At this interval arrived Višsvāmitra great in austerities ;
but, seeing Harié-clandra lying on the ground in a swoon,
37 he sprinkled the king with water and addressed him thus :—
“ Rise up, rise up, O supreme king; give me the fee I desire.
38 A debtor’s misery increases from day to day.” Then being
39 refreshed with the snow-cold water, the king, recovering con-
sciousness, and perceiving Visvamitra, again fell into a swoon,
40 and the Muni grew angry. The brahman, making the king
recover, spoke :—* Let my fee be given me, if thou regardest
41 righteousness. By truth the sun sheds warmth; in truth
the earth stands firm; truth in speech is the highest righte-
42 ousness: Svarga is based on truth. Also a hundred horse-
sacrifices and truth are placed in the balance—truth verily
43 outweighs the hundred horse-sacrifices. Otherwise what
motive is there for my speaking thus peaceably to thee, base
44 one, evil-intentioned, and cruel, false in speech ? Since thou
art powerful as king, let this my kindly feeling be heeded. If
45 O king, thou shalt not give me the fee to-day, when the
sun reaches the Western mountain, then I will assuredly curse
thee.” :
Having spoken thus the brāhman departed; and the king
46 remained, weak with terror, fugitive, vile, indigent, harassed
by the malicious and therich. His wife again spoke thus—
47 “Let my proposal be complied with, lest consumed by the


fire of his curse thou perish.” "But the king, thus urged
48 by his wife again and again, replied—* Lady, kere without
pity I proceed to sell thee; what even the malicious could z
49 do, that do I, if my voice be able to utter 50 hard a gad
as this.” Thereupon having so spoken to his wife, he wen


unnerved to the city and then, his throat and eyes impeded


with tears, uttered this speech ;—
The king spoke.
50 “Ho! ho! citizens, listen ye all to my mord: e do ye
ask me, ‘ho! who art thou?’ I am mischievous, inhuman’


6 GOS Lee EN


42 CANTO VIIT.


öl either a very cruel Rakshasa, or even more wicked than that

52 I, who will not yield up my life, am come to sell my wife. If
any of you has need of the desire of my life as a slave-girl,
let him speak quickly while I survive.”


‘he birds spoke.


58 A certain aged brihman approaching accosted the king—
“Deliver the slave-girl to me; I ama purchaser, paying

o4 ready money. I have no little wealth, and my wife is very
young; she cannot perform the household duties; therefore

55 give me this girl. This wealth is proportionate to the skill,
age, beauty and disposition of thy wife: take it; deliver me

56 the maiden.” When thus addressed by the brahman, king
Haris-c'andra's mind was lacerated with grief; nor did he

57 make him any reply. Thereupon the brahman binding up
the money in cash in the end of the king’s back-cloth dress,

58 dragged off the queen, seizing her by the hair. But the
child Rohitdsya, who had a boy's side-locks of hair, and who
was clutching her dress with his hand, wept on seeing his
mother dragged away.


The queen spoke.


59 =“ Loose, loose me, noble Sir! while I take a look at my boy.
A future view of him, kind Sir! will be difficult to get.

60 See! come my child to me thy mother thus gold into slavery.
Do not touch me, my royal child! I must not be touched by

61 thee now!” Then suddenly the boy seeing his mother dragged
along, ran to her crying “Mother!” with tear-soiled eyes.

62 The bráhman purchaser, seeing the child had approached,
kicked him with his foot; the latter, however, exclaiming
“ Mother!” did not leave hold of his mother.


The queen spoke.


68 “Shew me favour, O master! and buy this boy. Although
purchased, I shall not be a diligent servant to thee,. Sir,

64 when separated from him. Do thou in this way beam fa-
vourably on me unfortunate; unite me with my child, as a
cow with her calf.” |


\


THE STORY OF HARIS’-C’ANDRA. 43


The brāhman spoke. |
65 "Take thou this wealth and give me the boy: the wages
of a man and woman have been fixed by those conversant with
the Dharma-sistras at a hundred, a thousand, and a hundred
thousand pieces, and a price of ten millions by others.”


The birds spoke.
66 Accordingly then he bound that money in the king’s upper
garment, and taking the boy bound him close together
67 with his mother. Seeing them both, his wife and son, led
away, the king lamented sorely grieved, sighing deeply again
68 and again. “My wife whom neither the wind, nor the sun,
noy the moon, nor the populace formerly gazed on, here she
69 is, fallen into bondage. Here is my boy, who is sprung from
the Solar race, and whose hands and fingers are very young,
70 disposed of by sale. Shame on me, sorry fool that I am! Ah,
my darling! ah, my child, my pet! my imprudent conduct,
base man that I am, has brought me into thraldom to fate;
yet I am not dead, ah shame!”


The birds spoke.

71 While the king was thus lamenting, the brāhman taking -
them both disappeared hastily among trees, houses and other

72 high objects. Then Vi$vāmitra meeting the king, demanded
the wealth; Haris-c'andra delivered that money to him.
73 Considering those riches, procured by the sale of the wife,
insufficient, Kauśika enraged addressed the sorrow-stricken
74 king. “O kshatriya, if thou deemest this a fitting sacrificial
fee for me; then behold thou quickly my supreme might,
75 arising from austerities well performed here, and from stain-
less brāhmanhood, and from my terrible majesty, and from


my perfect study.”
Hari$-c'andra spoke.
76 “More will I give thee, adorable one; be pleased to wait


some time; at present I have nought; my wife has been sold,


and my young son.”
Viśvámitra spoke.
77 “This fourth part that now remains of the day, o king, for
that I must wait ; nought more must I say to thee.


44 CANTO VIII.


The birds spoke.


78 So, having uttered the harsh pitiless speech to the supreme
king, the angry Kaušika took the money and quickly departed.

79 When Vigvamitra had gone, the king, encompassed by a sea
of fear and sorrow, after reflecting in every aspect, spoke aloud,

80 with downcast face :— Whatever man desires me for a slave,
bought with money, let him speak quickly, while the sun yet
shines.”

81 Then advanced hastily the god Dharma, wearing the form
of a c'andála, foul-smelling, disfigured, uncouth, bearded,

82 with projecting teeth, compassionate, dark in complexion, his
belly pendulous, his eyes tawny and haggard, his pronuncia-
tion rude, and carrying a batch of birds, adorned with gar-

83 lands taken from corpses, a skull in his hand, his face long,
horrid to look at, talking much and often, surrounded by a
pack of dogs, dreadful, a staff in his hand, hideous.


The c'andāla spoke.

84 “Iam an applicant to thee; tell me quickly thy own hire,
at which, whether little or much, thou art to be acquired,”
The birds spoke.

85 There gazing at him, such as he was, cruel-eyed, very
coarse, muttering, very bad in disposition, the king asked

* Who art thou ?”
The c'andála spoke.


86 “I am a c'aņdāla, known here in this greatest of cities as
Pravira, famed as the slayer of those condemned to death, the
gatherer of blankets from corpses.”


Haris-c'andra spoke.


87 “I should not wish to become the despicable slave of a
c'andāla; better to be consumed by the fire of the curso
rather than to be thrall to a c'andāla.”


The birds spoke.
88 While he was so speaking, the great hermit Viśvámitra


THE STORY OF HARĪS'-C'ANDRA, 45


arrived, his eyes rolling with anger and wrath, and said this
to the king :— i
Viśvámitra spoke.
89 “This c'andála is ready to give thee no little wealth; why
is not my full sacrificial fee paid me P”


Haris-c’andra spoke.
90 “ Adorable descendant of Kušika! I know myself to be


sprung from the Solar race; how, though desirous of wealth,
shall I go into bondage to a c'aņdāla ?


Visvémitra spoke.
91 “If thou wilt not give me the c/andéla’s wealth, obtained
in exchange for thyself, at the fixed time, I will assuredly
curse thee.”


The birds spoke.


92 Thereupon the king Haris-c'andra, his life bound up in
his anxiety, overcome with agitation seized the Rishi’s feet,

93 exclaiming—" Be thou gracious | Tam a slave; I am in suffer-
ing; frightened am I; and I am specially thy votary: shew
me favour, O Brahmarshi! Deplorable is association with

94 c'aņdālas. Instead of the balance of the money, I would be
subject to thee indeed, O mighty Muni! thy agent in every
matter, thy servant, obedient to thy will.”


Visvāmitra spoke.


95 “If your honour is my servant, then, given by me to the


clandéla for a hundred millions of money, thou hast fallen into


slavery.”


The birds spoke.


96 When he had so spoken, the low out-caste then, C īn
mind, giving that pelf to Visvamitra, Borns the king and
97 led him, bewildered by blows of oe staff, his senses utterly
confused, grieved at his separation from his loved kindred,


to his town.


98 Then king Baris-c'andra, dwelling in the c'andāla's town,


46 CANTO VIII.


99 at morning, noon and evening sang this :—‘‘ My .downcast
girl seeing before her my downcast son, filled with grief,
100 remembers me; hoping ‘the king will free us both, by
giving, when he has amassed wealth, more wealth than this
to the brāhman” She, fawn-eyed, does not know that I
101 have done more wickedly. Loss of kingdom, abandonment
of friends, sale of wife and son, and this c'aņdāla-life that
102 I have sunk to :—alas! a succession of misfortunes.” Dwell-
ing in this condition, he remembered unceasingly his beloved
son and his soul-engrossing wife; deprived of all his pro
perty, and abject.
103 Now for some time king Haris-c'andra, as a servant to that
man, became a gatherer of garments from dead bodies at the
104 burning-ground, and was instructed by the c'andāla, who
: gathered garments from dead bodies—‘‘ Stay here day and
105 night on the look out for the arrival of corpses. This part
is to be given to the king, and a sixth part is for the corpse,
let three parts be for me, and two parts for thy wages.”
106 Thus instructed he went to the mortuary house and to the
southern quarter, where then stood in Benares the burning-
107 ground, a place of horrible cries, frequented by hundreds of
jackals, strewn with the garlands from corpses, foul-smelling,
108 reeking with smoke, thronged by Pišic'as, Bhūtas, Vetdlas,
Dakinis, and Yakshas, crowded with vultures and jackals,
109 encompassed by packs of dogs, thickly strewn with heaps:
of bones, full of dreadful odours; pervaded with the cries
of the friends of the various dead persons and with a terrible
110 hubbub—* Ah! son!—friend !—ah! kinsman !—brother !—
my child, dear to me now !—ah ! husband !—sister mother !
111] —ah! maternal uncle!—paterna] grandfather !—maternal
grandfather !—father !—grandson !—where art thou gone!
—come, my kinsman!”; where was heard a great din of
112 persons uttering such cries as these :—a place filled with the ©
113 sputtering of burning flesh, marrow and fat. Black half-
burnt corpses, their rows of teeth just bursting into view,
grinned from amidst the fire, as if saying, * This is the body’s
114 final state! Here the fire crackled along rows of bones of


THE STORY OF 'HARIS'-C'ANDRA. Aq


various ages ; and there was the sound of the wailing of the
relations, which was caused by the merriment of the puk-
115 kasas.* There is heard a very loud and frightful sound,—
as if at the close of the age,—of Bhūtas, Vetdlas, Pigdc’as,
116 Gaņas and Rākshasas singing. Crowded with great heaps
of buffaloes’ ordure and cows’ dung; and surrounded with
high piles of the ashes derived therefrom, mixed with bones;
117 darkened by the confusion of the crows among the many
offerings, garlands and lamps; filled with many sounds, the
118 burning-ground resembles Naraka.t The burning-ground
reverberated with the fire-pregnant, inauspicious yells of the
she-jackals ; it was impenetrable by reason of the terrific cries ;
very direj with the close contagion of fear; and. painful by
reason of the sounds of lamentation. i
119 - The king arrived there, unhappy, ready to grieve: “ Ah
servants, ministers, brihmans! Where has that my kingdom
120 gone, O Creator? Ah Saivya! ah my young son! forsaking
me, luckless one, through Visvamitra’s fault they both, mine
121 own relatives, have gone elsewhere.” There revolving thus in
his mind over and over again the words of the c'aņdāla,
dirty, uncouth in every limb, his hair long, mal-odorous, bear-
122 ing a flag, armed with a club, somewhat resembling Death, and
running hither and thither, exclaiming “This price has been
«. 123 obtained for this corpse, and shall I get it P This is mine,
this is for the king, and this for the head c'ándála ;”?
the king, while running in all directions, and while alive,
124 entered into another birth. Clothed in patched cloth made
of old rags well fastened together; his face, arms, belly and
feet covered with ashes from funeral piles and with dust;
125 his hands and fingers smeared with various kinds of fat,
oil and marrow; sighing; intent on satisfying himself by
126 feeding on various corpses and water ;§ his head dressed with
* A low caste.
+ Naraka, the general name for hell or the place of torment; it is distin-
guished from Patdla, the lower regions.


t Bead bheyam for bhayam ?
§ The text ndnd-éavodana-kritéhdra seems to be incorrect.


48 CANTO VIII.


bands of garlands therefrom; he sleeps not either by day

127 or by night, frequently exclaiming “ah! alas!” In this
manner passed twelve months as if a hundred.

One day that noble king wearied, separated from his kind-

128 red, and uncouth in form, beffig overpowered by slumber, fell

indeed into a dead sleep; and there on his pallet beheld a

129 great wonder:—Through the power of destiny, he had in

another body by diligent occupation at the burning-ground

130 given the guru his fee, and there was immunity from the inflic-

tion of pain for twelve years. Then he saw himself conceived

131 in the womb of a pukkasa woman. Further the king, when

in that condition, considered thus—‘ Immediately I am

132 born, I will verily practice the duty of liberality.” There-

upon he was born. Then as a pukkasa boy he was always

ready to perform the obsequies of the dead bodies in the

133 burning-ground. On his reaching his seventh year, a dead

bréhman was brought to the burning ground by the rela-

tives; then he perceived that the brāhman had been poor and

134 virtuous. But he, asking for his wage, despised the brahmans ;

those brāhmans mentioned there what Visvamitra had done,—

135 * Do thou a deed most sinful, and vicious, O evil-doer; Haris-

clandra the king was formerly turned by Višsvāmitra into

136 a pukkasa for breaking the slumber of a brāhman, by

the destruction of his merit.” When he did not have patience

137 with them, they then in anger cursed him— Go forthwith

thou vilest of men to terrible Naraka.” Immediately upon

138 these words, the king still in his sleep saw Yama’s mes-

sengers, bearing nooses, terror-inspiring. He saw himself

139 then seized by them and led off by force. Sorely afflicted,

exclaiming, “Alas now, O mother! O. father!” he fell

140 into Naraka into a tub of oil. And he was torn asunder beneath

by saws and the edges of razors, and suffered pain in dense

141 darkness, feeding on pus and blood. He saw his dead self,

seven years old, in the form of a pukkasa. Day by day in

142 Naraka he is burnt and roasted in one place; he is afflicted

and shaken in another place; he is killed and torn asundor


THE STORY OF HARIS’-C’ANDRA. 49


in another place; in another he is made to melt away and to

143 blaze; in another place he is assailed with cold winds. He
remained in Naraka one day, which was as long 88 a hun-

S dred years; soa hundred years there in Naraka are called by
144 the demons. Thereafter cast upon the earth he was born as
a dog, eating filth and vomited matter, and enduring cold
145 and heat: in a month he died. Next he saw his body born
as an ass, an elephant, a monkey, an ox, 4 goat, a cat, and

a heron, a bull, a sheep, a bird, a worm, a fish, a tortoise, and

146 a wild boar, a porcupine, a cock, 8 parrot, 8 maina,* and mo-
tionless living objects, a snake and other corporeal beings.

147 Day by day consumed with grief he saw the birth of one
living being after another; a day was as a hundred years.
148 A full hundred years thus passed with him there born among
the lower creation. And the king saw himself born once again

149 in his own race. While in that state, he lost his kingdom
in dice-playing; and his wife was carried off, and his son too ;

150 and he sought the forest alone. There he saw & terrible
ravenous lion approaching with open mouth, accompanied by a

151 young elephant}; and again he was devoured, while ready
to bewail his wife, ‘Ah S'aivy£! where art thou gone now,

152 forsaking me here in misery?’ Again he saw his wife with
her son imploring him, ‘Rescue us O Haris-c'andra! What

153 hast thou to do with dice-playing, my lord? Thy son has
fallen to a lamentable condition, and so has thy wife S'aivyš.”
Then he no longer saw them, though running about again and

154 again. And again he saw,—he the king was seated in
æ G/ériké, a mainf. There are several kinds of mainas (or mynas). The
best known are the Common maina.Acridotheres tristis, which is a brown bird
common thronghout India, and the Nepal Hill maina Eulabes intermedia,
which is a black bird found along the lower ranges of the Himalayas. Both
are commonly caged and learn to talk, but the latter attains much higher pro-
ficiency. (Jerdon’s Birds of India, Edn. Godwin-Austen, Vol. II, pp. 325 and
839). Prof Monier- Williams says S'áriká is Gracula religiosa or Turdus salica.
The former name is an old name of the Southern Hill maina (Ē. religtosa) and
of the Nepal Hill maina (E. intermedia). (Id, Vol. II, pp. 337, $39). J


do not find the second name in Jerdon.
4 Sarabha; or a fabulous animal with cight legs, stronger than a lion,


7


50 CANTO VIII.


Svarga ; she poor thing was brought by force, with dishevelled

155 hair, stript of her garments, exclaiming ‘ Ah! alas! rescue
me! in repeated cries. Then again he saw there through

156 Yama’s ordainment—the dwellers in the sky are calling out
‘Come hither O king! Yama has been addressed by Višvā-

157 mitra, O king, regarding thee” Yama’s servants, who bore

-_nooses of serpents, having thus spoken, lead away the prince

158 by force. Yama related Visvāmitra's deed. At that point, how-
ever, his change which resulted from iniquity came to an end.
These were all his states of being which were revealed in sleep ;

159 they were all experienced by him during tivelve years. When
the twelve years were spent, being brought forcibly by the

160 demons, he saw Yama in bodily shape. Yama addressed the
king, This anger of the high-souled Visvāmitra is difficult

161 to be resisted. Kaušika will inflict even death on thy son.
Go thou to the world of men, and undergo the remainder of
thy suffering. When thou art gone there, O supreme king!

162 thou shalt obtain happiness.’ And when the twelve years
expired, the king, at the end of his misery, fell from the sky,
being thrust away by Yama’s messengers.

163 And when fallen from Yama’s world, he awoke through the
agitation of fear, exclaiming, “Alas! woe is me!” thinking
of the working of the corrosive substance in his wounds.

164 “In my sleep I have seen grievous woe, the end of which I
do not perceive: but have twelve years, as I have seen in

165 my sleep, gone with me?” he inquired with agitation of the
pukkasas standing there. “No” replied certain of the by-
standers ; and others said exactly the same.

166 Then the king grieved at hearing this, sought the gods
for refuge, ejaculating, “ May the gods bestow blessings on me,

167 on S’aivy4 and on my child. Adoration to great Dharma!
Adoration to Krishna the creator, all-comprising, pure,

168 ancient, and immutable! Adoration to thee, O Vrihaspati !
and adoration to thee, Indra !”

169 Having uttered this prayer, the king employed himself in
the pukkasas’ occupation, in fixing the price of corpses, as
if again dead in memory. Filthy, matted-haired, black,


THK STORY OF HARIS'-0' ANDRA. 51


170 armed with a club, despondent was the king. No son had
he, nor wife indeed, in the track of his memory ; ruined in
energy was he through the loss of his kingdom; dwelling
then in the burning-ground.

171 To that place came his queen, bewailing, bringing her son

172 dead, for the boy had been bitten by a snake. “Ah my
darling! ah my son, my child!” thus she was oft exclaim-
ing; emaciated, pallid, insane, her hair covered with dust.


The queen spoke.

173 “Alas O king! dost thou not see to-day on earth this
thy child, whom thou didst formerly see playing about, now
bitten by a huge snake and dead P”

174 The king, listening to that her lamentation, hurried thither

175 thinking “here will be a dead man’s blanket.” But the king
did not recognise as his wife her, who was weeping sorely,
who worn with his long absence was like a woman in another

176 birth. The princess too seeing him, who formerly had
beautiful locks, now with matted curls did not recognise the

177 king, who was like a withered tree. The king. seeing the
snake-bitten child, who was characterized with the kingly

178 marks, on the black cloth, fell into a reverie:—* Ah! alas!
to what a state has this child born in the family of some king

179 been brought by malignant Death! For, since I have seen

' my child thus lying in his mother’s lap, my child Rokitdsya

180 with his lotus-like eyes recurs to my memory. Such in-
deed would be my child, and of about this age, if dreadful
Death has not made him his thrall.”


N The queen spoke.

“Ah my child! through disregard of some sin this great
and terrible evil has befallen us, the end of which we do not
Ah, my lord king! how dost thou remain placidly
lace without consoling me who am miserable?


181


182 perceive.


i me ;

ca of Parii forsaking of friends, sale of wife and
Be hild—what has thou not done to the Rajarshi Haris-c'andra,

child— a i


O creator ?”


g4 Hearing this her. lament the fallen king, recognising his
1 ;


52 CANTO VIII.


185 loved wife.and his dead son, exclaimed “Alas! this is in-
deed my very S'aivyā, this is my child!” and wept consumed
186 with sorrow, and fell into a swoon. She too recognising him
fallen inte that state, fainted with affliction and sank motion-
187 less to the ground. The king and queen both regaining con-


sciousness together, wailed in deep suffering, oppressed with
the load of anguish.


The king spoke.


188 “Alas my child! when I look on thy very young face, with
its beautiful eyes, brows, nose and curls, is not my afflicted
189 heart torn asunder? To whom, as he comes to me of him-
self sweetly babbling, ‘Father, dear father,’ shall I affec-
tionately exclaim with an embrace, ‘ My child, my child’?
190 By whose knees shall the yellow dust be brought that shall
191 soil my upper garment, my lap and body ? Born of my body
and limbs, thou wast the delight of mind and heart to me,
who, bad father that I am, sold thee, O my child, like a chattel.
192 After snatching away my large kingdom entire, with its
resources and wealth, Fate as a noxious serpent then bit my
193 child. Just gazing on the lotus-face of my son, who has
been bitten by the serpent Fate, even I am now blinded
194 by the dire poison.” Having thus spoken, incoherent through
tears, he took the boy, and embracing him, fell motionless in
@ swoon.


The queen spoke.

195 “This tiger-like man is known truly by his voice; he has
the moon-like mind of a wise man; itis Hari$-c'andra with-
196 out doubt. And his nose is prominent in front and goes
downwards; and like opening buds are the teeth of him,
197 the renowned, the high-souled. Wherefore has this king come

to the burning-ground to-day ?”
Ceasing her grief for her son, she looked at the prostrate
198 king. Agitated, surprised, afflicted, sorely oppressed on ac-
count of her husband and son, gazing earnestly, she then
saw her husband’s abominable staff fit for a low outcaste.


THE STORY OF HARIS'-C ANDRA. 58


199 Thereupon the long-eyed lady fainted, and gradually regain-
ing consciousness, spoke falteringly :—

“ Fie on thee, O Fate ! most doleful, unruly, abominated, who
hast reduced this god-like king to the position of a low out-
201 caste. Though thou didst make him undergo loss of kingdom,

forsaking of friends and the sale of wife and son, yet hast
thou turned the king, after he was parted from us, into this
202 c'aņndála. Ah! O king! why dost thou not now raise me,
who am thus afflicted, from the ground and tell me to mount
203 to thy couch? I do not see this day thy regal umbrella, nor
yet thy golden vase, thy chowrie or fan ; what is this revolu-
204 tion? He, before whom formerly, when he moved, kings in
the guise of servants .freed the earth from dust with their
205 own upper garments,—such having been, he the supreme
king now walks oppressed with grief in the burning-ground,
which is thickly strewn with jars and pots, with skulls fast
fixed therein; where the hair of corpses is concealed by the
206 remains of sacrificial ceremonies and strings; where the
cavities of the dry ground are bedecked with oily exudations ;
which is dreadful by reason of the mixing of the marrow and
half-burnt bones with the ashes and charcoal; where the
207 small birds have been scared away by the cries of the
vultures and jackals; which has spread gloom over the
regions of the sky with the colour of the trails of smoke from
208 the funeral piles; where the night-roaming demons are
joyful through the delight of tasting carrion.”
209 Thus having spoken the princess embraced the king’s neck
and, bearing hundreds of woes and griefs, lamented with sor-


rowful voice;—


200


The gueen spoke.


910 “O king, is it sleep or waking truth ? Tell me Sir, this
that thou art thinking of: my mind is bewildered indeed.
211 If this be so, O thou conversant with righteousness, there is
no help in righteousness, nor in worship of bréhmans, gods
212 and others, nor in protecting the world; there is no such thing
as righteousness. Whence are there truth, and candour, and


54, CANTO VII.


meekness, in that thou, the devotee of righteousness, hast been
ousted from thy kingdom ?”
213 Hearing this her speech, sighing deeply he related in
faltering accents to the slender-limbed lady, how he had
214 become a low outcaste. She also the timid lady wept very
long, and sighing deeply, full of grief, told him how her son
had met his death.


The king spoke.
215 “My darling, I choose not to undergo affliction for a long
time, nor is my soul docile, O slender-limbed lady. Behold
216 my ill-fortune. If I shall enter the fire, with the permis-
sion of the c'aņdāla, I shall in another birth go again into
217 bondage to c'aņdālas. I shall fall into Naraka, as a worm-
eating insect; into Vaitarini* which is slimy with much pus,
218 fat, blood, and sinews. Reaching the Asi-patra wood, I
shall be frightfully cut to pieces; or reaching Mahd-raurava
219 and Raurava I shall be burnt. Surrender of life is the shore
for one sunk in the ocean of grief. I had just one son, who
220 was this boy, to continue my family. He too has sunk
through the violence of the waters of my Fate, which are
very strong. How shal} I resign my life? I am dependent
221 on others; and in a strait. Or, does not a man afflicted with
pain regard evil? There is no such suffering in the brute
222 creation, nor in the Asi-patra forest. Whence is there such
sufering in Vaitarini as in the bereavement of a son? I will
223 fall then with my son’s body into the blazing fire, O
slender-limbed ! Thou must pardon my ill-deeds; and do thou
who hast my permission go to the brāhman's house, O bright
224 smiler! And hearken, O slender-limbed! to my word with
respectful mind. If one makes gifts, if one offers sacrifices,
225 if the gurus are satisfied, there may be union for me in an-
other world with my son and with thee. But whence in this
226 world will there be this aim forme? In company with thee
I shall speed happily on in the search for our son, which I
shall make laughingly or somewhat secretly, O bright-smiler.


* The river of Naraka.


THE STORY oF HARIS'-C'ANDRA. 55


227 Thou must pardon at my request all that I have spoken ill;
despise not that bréhman through pride that thou art a
queen ; thou must please. him with thy utmost. efforts, as if
he were thy lord and god, O beautiful lady!” :


The gueen spoke.
“I also, O Réjarshi, unable to endure the burden of grief
will assuredly enter the blazing fire with thee here this day.”
The birds spoke.

229 Thereupon the king heaping up the funeral pile, placed
his son thereon ; and then associated with his wife he joined his

230 hands reverently, thinking of the Supreme Soul, Siva,
Narayana Hari Vasudeva, the ruler of the gods, who'sits in
the cave-like recesses of the heart, of Brahman who is without
beginning or end ; of Krishna, yellow-clad, beautiful.

23]. While he was thinking, Indra and all the gods, making

232 Dharma their leader, assembled in haste. Approaching spake
they all—‘Ho! O king! hearken, O lord! This is Brāh-

233 man, visible to open sight, and.the adorable Dharma himself ;
and here are all the Stdhyas,* the Maruts,t the Lokaptlas,f
with their vehicles, the Nigas,$ the Siddhas|| and the Gand-

234 harvas, and the Rudras** and the two Ašvins,—these and
and others, many in number, and also Visvāmitra, whom the

235 three worlds could not formerly make a friend. But Visvā-

mitra desires to proffer thee friendship and good.”

He mounted, thereon he met Dharma, and Indra and Visva-


mitra.


228


Dharma spoke.
936 Benot rash, O king! I Dharma have visited thee, gratified
with thy patience, self-command, truth and other virtues.”


® Class of inferior deities.

+ Wind-gods.

-t Guardian-gods of the world.
*$ Human-faced serpents of Pātūla.

i-gods.
|| OJass of demi-go ae
i-pod8, Indra’s celestial m ane 1
i fee demi-gods ( personified roaring of tho wind).


56 CANTO VIII. 7


Indra spoke.
237 “O virtuous Harié-c’andra! I Indra have approached nigh
thee; the eternal worlds are won by thee and thy wife and
238 son! Accompanied by thy wife and son, ascend, O king! to
the third heaven, which to others is very difficult of attain-
ment, but which has been won by thine own deeds.”


The birds spoke.

239 Then Indra, the lord, going to the funeral pile, poured
down from the sky a shower of nectar that prevents sudden

240 death, anda very copious shower of flowers, accompanied
with the sound of the heavenly drums, here and there on

241 that closely-gathered assemblage of gods. Then the high-
souled king’s son arose, very youthful in body, in per-

242 fect health, placid in his organs and mind. And king
Haris c’andra immediately embraced his son; and in pos-

‘sessing his wife regained his own Fortune. He was decked

243 with heavenly garlands; and was happy, completely satisfied
in heart, and filled with supreme joy.

244 Indra at once re-addressed him. ** Accompanied by thy wife
and son, thou shalt gain supreme felicity. Ascend, O vir-
tuous king, by the results of thy own actions!”

Harig-c’andra spoke.

245 “O king of the gods! while unpermitted by my master the

low onutcaste, I will not, without having recompensed* him,
-ascend to the abode of the gods.”


Dharma spoke.
246 “Perceiving this thy affliction that was to be, I myself de-
scended as the low outcaste through an illusion of myself;
and I displayed that inconsiderate conduct.”


Indra spoke.

247 Ascend, O Haris-c'andra, to the supreme abode which is
desired by all mankind on the earth, the abode of men holy in
deed.”

Haris-c'andra ‘spoke.
248 “O king of the gods, adoration tothee! hearken also to this
* For a-gatva read a-dattud ?


THE STORY OF HARĪS”-C'ANDRA, 57


7 Bai a m with affection, I speak to thee whose

ha eee ea : ed pana bonignity. My subjects in

y of Košali* remain with minds sunk in my grief;

how disregarding them shall I now ascend to heaven ?

250 The murder of a brāhman, the killing of a guru, the slaugh-

ter of cattle, and the slaying of women—egual to these has

been pronounced the great sin incurred in the abandonment

251 of one’s adherents. Neither in this world nor in the other

do I see happiness for one who abandons an obsequious

252 and innocent adherent, who ought not to be abandoned. If

they go to Svarga in company with me, O lord of the gods!
then I too will go; or I will go even to Naraka with them.”


Indra spoke.

253 “Many are their merits and sins, various and diverse.
How wilt thou again attain to Svarga which will be enjoyed
by multitudes ?”

Hari$-c'andra spoke.

254 “O Indra, by the influence of the householders a king enjoys
his kingdom, and sacrifices with great sacrifices, and works -

955 meritorious deeds; and therefore by their influence have I
performed everything; I will not forsake those benefactors

256 in the desire to gain Svarga. Therefore whatever, O lord of
the gods, I have done well, whatever I have given in alms,
whatever sacrifices or prayers I have made, let that be com-

257 mon to them and us. For whatever fruit of my action must

be eaten through long time, let that be for me and them to-

gether just a single day through thy favour !”
The birds spoke.
“So shall it be!” thus having spoken Indra, lord of the

d Dharma, and Visvimitra, Gādhrs son,

ds. Indra went from Svarga


258
three worlds, an


259 became propitious in their min mt
to the earth, with a company of ten million heavenly


chariots and addressed the people of Ayodhyš thus, “ Ascend
260 to heaven. And having heard with affection that
ss Indra and the king's speech, and having brought


speech of
f * J.e. Ayodhyú.


8


58 CANTO VIII.


261 Rohitāsya, Visvamitra himself, great in austerities, with the
gods also, the Munis, and the Siddhas, enthroned the king’s son
in the charming city of Ayodhya, after enthroning the king.

262 Then all the people, his glad and prosperous friends, with their
children servants and wives, ascended to heaven with the king.

263 Those people moved step by step from one heavenly chariot to
another. Then king Haris-c'andra also grew in gladness.

264 The king, attaining unparalleled dignity with the heavenly
chariots, sat on the figure of a city which was surrounded
with ramparts and walls.

265 Then beholding his prosperity, Usanas, the eminent spiritual
guide of the Daityas, conversant with the meaning and the
truth of all the S'āstras, sang a verse there.


S’ukra (Usanas) spoke.

266 “ike unto Haris-c'andra there has been no king, nor shall
there be. Whoever, when afflicted with his own sufferings

267 listens to those of others, may he obtain great happiness! May
he who longs for Svarga gain Svarga; may he who longs for a
son gain a son; may he who longs for a wife gain a wife; may

268 he who longs for a kingdom gain a kingdom! Ah, the majesty
of patience! ah, the great fruit of liberality! since Haris-c'an-
dra has reached his city and has gained his sovereignty.”

The birds spoke.

269 This whole story of the deeds of Haris-c'andra has been
declared to thee: hear the remainder of the discourse next,

270 O best of Munis! the outcome of the Rūja-sūya sacrifice,
which was the cause of the decay of the earth, and the cause


of that outcome; viz. the great battle of the Mainá* and
Heron.*


* Adi, also called S'arāli. The dictionaries all say this bird is Turdus.-gin-
ginianus, which is the old name. It is Jerdon’s Bank Maina, Acridotheres gin-
ginianus, which is common thronghout Upper India, and burrows in the river
banks (vol. II, p. 326). Jerdon gives salik (Sfrik&é) as the general Bengali
name for mainas ; but I do not trace either of these two words in his book.

+ Vaka. Prof. Monier-Williams called this bird Ardea nivida, but I do not
find this name in Jerdon. Bak, bag, (Bengali) and baglá (Hindi) are the
general modern names for various kinds of common herons, egrets and


THE BATTLE OF THE MAINA AND THE HERON. 59


Canto IX.
The Battle of the Maind and the Heron.


Vasishtha, enraged with Visvdmitra for his cruelty to Haris-

candra, cursed him to become a heron, and Visvdmitra cursed
Vasishtha to become a mainéd—Both Munis as gigantic birds
have a terrible fight, and are at length pacified by Brahmá.


The birds spoke.


When Haris-c'andra had left his kingdom and had gone to
the abode of the thirty gods, there came out from his resi-
dence in the water the glorious family priest, Vasishtha,
the Muni, who dwelt at the Ganges, at the end of twelve
years; and he heard the whole of the deeds of Visvamitra,
and also the downfall of the noble-dealing king Haris-
c'andra, and his association with the c'aņdāla, and his sale
of his wife and son. That most illustrious Muni having
heard the story, being full of affection for the king, grew
wrathful in his dignity against the Rishi Visvamitra.


Vašishtha spoke.


“Tt was Visvamitra who destroyed my hundred sons; yet on
that occasion I was not so wroth as I am this day, on hear-
ing that this king, who was high-souled, eminent, worshipful
towards the gods and bréhmans, had been ousted from his
kingdom. Since that king, truthful, tranquil, devoid of ERY,
even towards an enemy, faultless also, upright in soul, vigilant,
a relier on me, has been reduced to the last extremity together
with his wife dependants and son, has been expelled from
his kingdom by Visvāmitra, and has been greatly worsted,
therefore that 4jmpious préhman-hater, uprooted from among


The Large Egret (Herodias alba, Jerdon), the Smaller Egret (H.

and the Little Egret (H. garzetta) are all white ; tho Cattle Egret
h coromandus) and the Pond Heron, generally known 88 the Paddy-

ee (Ardsola leucoptera), which are most commonly called bag and bagld,
,


have white bodies (Jerdon, vol. LI, pp. 744-761).


bitterns.
egrettoides),


10


1]


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


CANTO IX.


the wise, blasted by my curse, the fool, shall be turned into a
heron,”* —


The birds spoke.


Hearing the curse, the glorious Vigvimitra likewise,
Knusika’s descendant, inflicted the counter-curse, ** Do thou also
become a maint.”f Both those most illustrious sages were
transformed into birds through their mutual curses, the
glorious Vašishtha and Višvāmitra, Kugika’s descendant.

Both of them, boundless in might, allying themselves with
other classes of beings, fought together, exceedingly exasperat-
ed, great in strength and prowess. The Maing increased in
size to two thousand yojanas; as the Heron, O bréhman,
increased to three thousand and ninety. And then those
two, of wide heroism, assailing each other with blows of
their wings, created sore fear among the creatures. The l
Heron, his eyes swollen with blood, lifting his wings beat
the Maina; and he also, stretching out his neck, struck the
Heron with his feet. Overthrown by the wind from their
wings, mountains fell down on the earth ; and struck by the
downfall of the mountains the earth quaked; and the earth,
as it quaked, caused the waters of the seas to swell up, and
reeled over on one side, turning towards the descent to Pátála.
Living beings perished, some by the fall of the mountains,
others by the waters of the seas, others through the quaking
of the earth. Thus everything being terrified was turned
into lamentation, bereft of conscicusness; the world was
greatly agitated, and its countries were thrown into confusion,
people exclaiming ** Ah, my child! ah my beloved child ! come,
here I am fixed”—“ah my darling wife /?—« my beloved
husband !”—“ this rock is falling, escape quickly.”

Then, when the world was thus distressed and averted in
terror, surrounded by all the gods, advanced the fore-father,
the lord of the universe, and replied to both those combatants
who were violently enraged—*' Let this your strife cease, and


* See note +, p. 58.
+ See note *, p. 58.


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30
31


32


33


THE BATTLE OF THE MAINA AND THE HERON. 61


let the worlds recover their stability!” Although they heard
the words of Brahmá, whose birth is inscrutable, yet both
of them, filled with anger and fury still fought, and did not
desist.

Thereupon the fore-father, the god, seeing the destruction
of the worlds, and desiring the welfare of both of them, dis-
sipated their brute-nature ; and the god, the lord of creation,
addressed them both, clothed in their former bodies, Vasishtha
and the noble descendant of Kušika, the state of darkness
having been dispelled :—

* Stay thou, my beloved Vašishtha, and thou, most virtuous
Kau$ika, this contest that, while involved in the state of
darkness, ye desire to carry on. This outcome of the Raja-
siya sacrifice of king Haris-c'andra, and this war between
you two, are causing the earth to waste away. Nor moreover
does that best of the Kangikas offend against that king, for
since he has caused him to attain to Svarga, O brahman! he
occupies the position of a benefactor. Do ye both, the
creators of obstacles to your austerities, who have fallen into
subjection to lust and anger, cease; for worthy are your
prayers, and ample is your power.”

Thus admonished by him, both then grew ashamed, and.
embracing lovingly forgave each other. Thereupon, hymned
by the gods, Brahmá departed to his own world, and Vasishtha,
to his own place, and Kaušika also to his own hermitage.

Those mortals, who shall fittingly relate and who shall fit-
tingly hear this battle of the Main4 and the Heron, and the
story of Hari$-c'andra, what they hear shall verily dispel
their sins; nor shall they ever encounter antagonistic


duties.


62


CANTO X.


Canto X.
Oonversation between a father and son.


Jaimini asks the Birds for instruction how living beings come
into existence and die, and how the foetus lives and develops—The
Birds repeat the explanation that a wise young brahman Sumatt,
who was nick-named Jada* because of his apparent stupidity, but
who remembered his former existences, gave his father—He ex-
plains how death occurs, and describes the after-eaistences through
which a living being passes according as tt has lived well or ill—
He describes incidentally the hell Raurava.


Jaimini spoke.

Declare my doubt, when I enquire, O powerful brāhmans,
wherein the appearance and disappearance of living beings
consist. How is an animal ‘produced? How too does it
develop? How, again, is it placed when contained within the
womb, pressed upon by the limbs? How, again, when it has
issued from the womb, does it grow ? And how at the moment
of departure is it deprived of the sentient state P Every dead
person also experiences the results of both his good and his bad
deeds, and how then do those deeds bring aboutt their results to
him? Why does the foetus not become digested there in the
stomach, as if it were converted into a morsel of food ? In the
female’s belly, where the various foods consumed are digested
although highly indigestible, how is it that the little animal
is not digested there? Declare all this to me, free from
doubtful terms ; this very matter is a transcendant mystery,
where men do err. ; ;


The birds spoke.

Unparalleled is this burdensome question that thou hast
propounded to us; it is difficult to be imagined, touching as
it does the existence and death of all living beings. Listen to
it, Sir! as a son, most thoroughly righteous, named Sumati,f
once declared it to his father.


# See Canto XIV.
4 For sampddayanti read sampddayatt (neuter, dual, present participle) ? *
t For Samatir read Sumatir,


10


LI


12


13


14


15


16


17


18
19


20


21.


22


CONVERSATION BETWEEN A FATHER AND SON. 63


A certain highly intelligent brāhman of Bhrign’s line ad-
dressed his son Sumati who had undergone his initiation, and
who was tranquil, and in appearance stupid. ‘ Study the
Vedas, O Sumati, in order from the beginning, be zealous in
obedience to thy guru, make thy food of victuals collected by
begging. After that taking upon thee the duties of a house-
holder, and performing the chiefest sacrifices, beget the
desired offspring. Next resort to the forest, and then living
in the forest, my son, be a wandering ascetic,* free from
family ties. Thus shalt thou attain that highest object of


religious knowledge, the Supreme Being, reaching which thou
shalt not grieve.”


The birds spoke.

Thus frequently counselled, he through his stupidity never
replied: still the father again and again repeatedly admonish-
ed him affectionately. He thus frequently exhorted by his
father, through paternal love, alluringly and in pleasant
terms, spoke thus at length with a laugh :—

“ Father ! I have repeatedly studied this that thou enjoinest
me to-day, the other Sastras also, and the various mechanical
arts. Ten thousand births and more have passed into my
memory; disgusts and gratifications have sported in the
decay and the rise of my mind. I have seen partings and
meetings among enemies, friends and wives; I have seen
mothers of various kinds, and fathers of various kinds also.
T have tasted joys and sorrows thousands of times. Many
kinsmen have I gained, and fathers of divers kinds. I have
also dwelt in women’s wombs, slimy with ordure and urine ;
and thousands of times have the pains of sicknesses also taken
grievous hold of me. Many sufferings have I endured in
my stomach in childhood, and youth and old age: all those do
T remember. I have been begotten of bréhmans, kshatriyas
and vaigyas, and even $ūdras; and again of cattle and insects,
of deer and birds. I have been born moreover in the houses
of kings” dependants, and of kings resplendent in battle, and


# For parivrāļa read parivrdy.


23


25


26


27
28


29


30


31


32


33


34


CANTO X.


in thy dwelling also. I have been a servant and a slave
frequently to men. I have been a master and a lord, and a
poor man as well. I-have given blows, and I have received
blows from others, and my own blows have procured me
blows in return. Others have given me gifts, and I have given
gifts to others many a time. I have been gratified also by
the deeds of father, mother, friend, brother, wife and othen
relatives. And often have I fallen into misery with my face
washed with tears. Whilst thus wandering, O father, in
the crowded circle of mundane existence, I have gained this
knowledge, which procures final emancipation from. existence.
That being known, all this body of religious rites, called
Rie’ Yajus and Siman, is worthless, and does not appear fit-
tingly to me. vOf what use consequently are the Vedas to
me, who am. mature in wisdom, satiated with the knowledge
of the gurus, void of desires, virtuous in soul? I will gain,

O braéhman! the highest seat, that Supreme Soul, which is
exempt from the qualities of the sixfold actions, pain, pleasure,
joy, and love. Hence, O father, I will abandon this well-known
series of pains which is tainted by love, joy, fear, inquietude,
anger, resentment and old age, and which is hampered with
hundreds of nooses in close contact ensnaring one’s own self as
game, and I will depart. Does not the duty enjoined by
the three Vedas, which poo in unrighteousness,* resemble
the result of sin?”


The birds spoke.

Hearing that his declaration, which was interrupted by joy
and surprise, the eminent father with gladsome mind goes
ed his son.

The father spoke.:

What is this thou sayest, my son? Whence arose Sikes
wisdom? How came thy stupidity before, and thy awakening
now? Is this a curse-wrought change inflicted on thee by a .
Muni or god, since thy wisdom which was obscured has


become manifest ? ”


# A pun on dharma and a-dharma. Prof. Monicr-Williams gives trayt-
dharma 88 masc. only.


>


CONVERSATION BETWEEN A FATHER AND SON. 65


The son spoke.

85 Titan, father, how this happened to me, entailing pleasure
and pain on me, and who I was in another birth, end what
is beyond myself.

36 I was formerly a bráhman, my soul fied on the Supreme
Being; I attained the highest perfection in the considera-
tion of the knowledge of the Supreme Being. While con-

37 tinually occupied in devotion, through constant application

- to study, through association with the good, through my
own natural disposition, through deliberation, behaviour and

88 purification, while occupying myself in this indeed I ex-

“© perienced the sublimest joy at all times, and I gained the
position of a spiritual guide, the most successful remover of

89 the doubts of disciples. A: long while afterwards I attained
absolute perfection; and my good disposition warped by


‘ 40 ignorance fell into calamity through carelessness. Begin-


ning from the time of my departure I had ‘no failure of

. memory, until a year had. passed and had returned to my
41 recollection of my births. Being such, I, keeping my organs
under control, will strive indeed, O.father, by means of that
"my former study, so to act that I may not have another
42 existence. For this is the result of learning and liberality
that I remember former existences; this indeed is not obtained,

O father, by men who apply themselves to the duty.enjoined


43 by the three Vedas. Being such I, from my former hermitage


* . indeed, recurring to the duty of perfection, will attain to.
_ «devotion to one. object and will strive for the final emancipa-


‘44, tion of my soul. Declare thou then, Sir! what is perplexing


in thy heart: and to this extent let mej bringing the joy,
_- my debt.”
The birds spoke.
45 Mher ranon the father spoke to his son that speech of a man
of faith, which relates to the perfection of mundane existence,
and which we have been asked by thee, Sir.


The son spoke.


', 46° “Listen, O father, how I have often perceived the truth ; the


‘circle of mundane existence is ever young, the duration of
9 ,


66
47


48


49


50


51


52


53


54


55


56


57


58


59


60


61


62
63


CANTO X.


which is not known. I then tell thee the whole, with thy
permissior, O father, commencing from the period of depar-
ture, as no one else will tell thee.

“ Hot moisture is excited in the body; it is set in motion by
a strong vital air; blazing without fuel it pierces the sites of
the vital organs. And then the vital air, called Udana, passes
upwards, impeding the downward course of the water and
food consumed.

“ Hence he, who has offered presents of water and has given
food and drink, obtains joy therefrom in adversity. He also,
who has bestowed food with a mind purified by faith, is then
satisfied even without food. He, who has not spoken un-
truth, nor caused a breach of amity, a faithful believer,
meets a happy death. Men who have been intent on the
worship of the gods and brāhmans, and who are unspiteful,*
fair, charitable, shamefast, die happily. He who would not
forsake righteousness through lust, or anger or hatred, who
acts up to his words and is gentle, meets a happy death.
Men who do not give away water, nor give away food, endure
then,.on the approach of death, burning thirst and hunger.
Those who give away fuel overcome cold; those who give
away sandal overcome heat; and those who do not inflict dis-
tress overcome the woeful life-ending pang. Those who cause
error and ignorance suffer grievous terror ; base men are op-'
pressed with intense pains. A false witness, a liar, and he
who teaches evil, they all and also blasphemers of the
Vedas die in delusion.

“Then Yama’s officers, tēta foul-smelling, carrying
hammers and maces, hard-hearted, approach the false man.
When they meet his eyesight, trembling seizes him, and he
bewails without ceasing his brother, mother, and children.
His voice seems thick, O father! and monotonons; and his
sight wanders through terror; and his mouth grows dry with
his breathing ; his breathing grows loud; his sight fails; next
he is pervaded with pains; then he quits the body. Preceded
by the vital airs he assumes another body, similar to the


* For anustyavah read an-asiyavah,


64


65


66


EXPERIENCES OF LIVING BEINGS AFTER DEATH. 67


former, produced by the actions of the former, intended for
chastisement, born of no mother and father, like the previous
one, with the periods of life and death conformable thereto.

“ Thereupon Yama’s messenger speedily binds him with
cruel fetters; drags him, bewildered as he is with the blows
of his staff, to the southern region. And s0, to some place
which is rough with kuša grass, thorns, ant-hills, stakes,
and stones, where a fire is raging, which abounds in hundreds
of holes, and which is heated by the blazing sun, which is


` scorched by his rays, he is haled by Yama's emissaries, terrible


67


68


69


76


“97


through their ghastly cries. Being dragged about by those
fearful servants, being eaten by hundreds of she-jackals, he,
the evil-doer, proceeds by an awful road to Yama’s abode.
Men who give umbrellas and shoes, and who bestow garments,
those men pass along that road in ease ; and so also do those
who give away food. Thus encountering afflictions, the man
oppressed with sin is led in twelve days to the city of king
Yama.

“ While the body is being burnt, he experiences a great
burning ; also while it is being beaten, and while it is being
divided into pieces, terrible agony. While the body is being
wetted a living being endures a very long. pain, even while
it is inhabiting another. body, through the consequences of
its own acts. There the deceased feeds on the water that his
relatives offer together with the sesamum seed and the cake
that they offer. The anointing with oil by relations, and the
kneading of the limbs that they perform,—a living being is
nourished thereby, and by what his relations* eat. A living
being does not encounter excessive affliction on the earth


through his deceased relatives ; and so: when -dead he is


nourished by his relatives who make gifts. „,

“ Being led off he sees his own abode for twelve days and he
enjoys the water, cake &c. that are offered on the earth.
After twelve days, the man who is being carried off, next sees
Yama’s city, awful, made of iron, terrible in appearance.
Immediately he has gone there he beholds Yama, with fiery


* For sa bandhavdh read sva-bandhavah ?


78


79


80


85


87


8


91


92


CANTO X.


red eyes, like to 2 mass of broken collyrium ; in the midst of
Death, the destroyer Time and others; his mouth gaping with
projecting teeth, his countenance dreadful with frowns ; a lord,
surrounded by hundreds of deformed, horrible and crooked
diseases; busy in awarding punishment, with long arms, a
noose in his hand, very formidable. Then the living being
takes the happy or miserable course decreed by him. But
the false witness goes to Raurava, and the man who is un-
truthful. Listen while I describe the nature of that Raurava.

* Raurava* is in truth two thousand yojanas in size. Then
there is a chasm, just knee-deep, very difficult to pass over:
in it charcoal is heaped up and made level with the ground.
Tt burns vehemently with its glowing surface of kindled
charcoal. In its midst Yama’s servitors cast the evil-doer.
He runs about there, being burnt by the violent fame; and
at each step, his foot is wasted and consumed again and again ;
day and night he continues on the move.

“When he has thus passed over a thousand yojanas he is
released, and then enters another similar hell Niraya,t to
purge away his sins. Afterwards when he has passed
through all the hells, the sinner enters the brute creation,


, among worms, insects and birds; among carnivorous animals;


among mosquitoes and such like. After having been born
among elephants, trees and such like, among cattle, and
among horses also; and among other evil and noxious crèa-
tures; he attains humanity, and is born a man, contemptible:
as a hunch-back or a dwarf; among c'aņdālas, pukkasas and
such-like castes; and then accompanied by the remainder of
his sin and merit, he enters the castes in ascending order,
such as sūdras, vaišyas, kings and so on; also the position
of brāhmans, the gods and Indra. Sometimes in descending
order, and thus evil-doers fall headlong into the hells.
“What happens to righteous-doers, listen while I declare
that. They take the holy course decreed by Yama. Bands
of Gandharvas singing, bevies of Apsarases dancing, brilliant


# Terrible, t Devoid of happiness,


93


94


95


CONCEPTION AND GESTATION. 69.


with various celestial garlands, bedecked with strings of pearls
and anklets and gay with music,* and heavenly chariots
beyond compare go forth quickly to them. And when
they descend therefrom, they are born in the family of
kings and other high-souled men: there observing upright
conduct, they experience vigorous* pleasures, and afterwards
they go upwards; and otherwise, when they take the down-
ward path, they become men as before.

“This has all been declared to thee, how a living being
perishes. Next listen, O Brahmarshi, how the fœtus begins.”


Canto XI.
Conversation between the father and son (continued).


Sumati (Jada) explains how living beings are conceived and

born, and mentions the evils of all existence.
The son spoke.

“Now human impregnationj of women is a seed sown in
darkness; immediately it is discharged it sets out from
Naraka or Svarga. Dominated thereby the two seeds attain
firmness, O father! and next the character of a speck—of a
globule—of a ball of flesh. As there may be a minute seed in
the ball of flesh, so it is called a germ. So the five limbs up-
grow according to their parts; and the minor limbs also, the
fingers, the eyes, the nose, the mouth, and the ears, grow out of
the limbs; similarly the nails and other features grow out of
them. In the skin is developed the hair of the body, and
afterwards the hair of the head. The womb verily increases
in size equally with it. Just as the cocoa-nut enlarges together
with its shell, so it grows in size. The womb is situated with
its mouth downwards. But atthe bottom of the womb the fetus
develops, placing its hands on either side of the knees: and
its thumbs are placed upon the kmees, and its finger in
front of them ; behind the knees are the eyes, and between


* For -fobhitdni read -$obhitā £
+ Ugra; or noble.
t For nishekam mdnavam roud nisheko ménavah 2


70


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


22


CANTO XI.


the knees is the nose; and the buttocks rest on the heels; the
arms and legs lie outside.

“In this way gradually grows the human being, when
contained in a woman’s womb: in the womb of other crea-
tures, the position of the fœtus corresponds to its form. The
gastric fluid* renders it firm. It lives on the food and drink
taken by its mother. Thus the gestation of a living creature is
meritorious, and constitutes a means of obtaining merit. Also


` the cord, which is called Apydyani, is fixed in its navel, and it


becomes fixed in the belly of women. As women’s food and
drink penetrate into their womb, the fœtus increases in size,
its body being nourished thereby.

*Numerous matters of its transmigrations oceur to its
memory ; hence distressed on this side and on that it becomes
dispirited, thinking, ‘Never again will I thus act, when once
I am delivered from this womb; assuredly I will so strive
that I do not again undergo conception.’ Thus it meditates,
recollecting the hundreds of pains attending existence, which
have been experienced aforetime, and which spring from
destiny.

“ Afterwards in the course of time the fœtus turns round
with its face downwards, since it is born in the ninth or tenth
month. While it is being expelled, it is pained by the wind
of the prajapatis, and it is expelled wailing, being pained at
heart by its sufferings. And when expelled from the belly, it
falls into an intolerable swoon; and it gains consciousness
when it comes into contact with the air. Thereupon Vishnu’s
magical power, which effaces consciousness, assails it; its
soul being stupefied thereby, it loses its knowledge.

“Thereafter the human being, bereft of knowledge, enters
on childhood ; and afterwards on boyhood, youth and mature
age; and again the human being undergoes death, and so
birth. Hence he revolves in this round of mundane existence,
like the jar and rope at a well.

“ Sometimes a man reaches Svarga, sometimes Niraya ; and
sometimes the dead man goes to Naraka and Svarga. Some-


* Agni; or, the digestive faculty,


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


1


2


DESCRIPTION OF THE HELLS MAHA-RAURAVA, &C. 71


times indeed re-born here, he obtains the consequences of his
owp actions; and sometimes the man who has consumed the
consequences of his actions, passes at death with a very small
remainder. And hence he is sometimes born here with a
scanty stock of good and evil, having almost consumed them
in heaven* and in hell,} O brāhman! In the hells there is
this very great suffering that the dwellers in Svarga are
visible thence, O father; and the denizens of hell rejoice,t
as they are hurled down. Even in Svarga there is an
unparalleled pain in that from the very time of ascension
there this thought revolves in one’s mind, ‘I shall fall from
hence’: and from viewing the hells great suffering is felt;
day and night one is cheerless, thinking ‘I shall go this
course.’ One who is being born has great suffering in re-
maining in the womb; and after birth one has suffering in
childhood and old age. The connexion also between desire
envy and anger is grievous to bear in youth; and old age is
almost all suffering; the heaviest suffering lies in death.
Both for him who is borne off by Yama’s messengers, and
for him who is hurled down to the hells, there are again
destined both conception, and birth, death and hell.

** So in this round of mundane existence creatures revolve
about, like the jar and rope at the well; and having been
bound with the fetters of nature, they are bound repeatedly.
No pleasure is there a whit, O father in this world crowded
with hundreds of pains; why then should I in striving for
emancipation from existence observe the three branches of
religion ?”


Canto XII.
Jada describes the Hells Mahd-raurava, Tamas, Nikrintana,


Apratishtha, Ast-patra-vana, and Tapta-kumbha to his father.


The father spoke.
* Good, my son! thou hast declared the deepest obscurity of
mundane existence, relying on the great fruit that grows
from the bestowal of knowledge. Therein thou hast verily


æ Svar-loka. + Naraka. t For modante read stdante ?


72


14


15


16


CANTO XII.


described the Rauravas as well as all the Narakas ; tell me of
them at length, O mighty in intellect!”
The son spoke.

“ I have described to thee first the hell Raurava, now listen
to the description of the hell named Mahé-raurava,* O father!
There for seven times five thousand yojanas all around the
earth is made of copper; beneath itt is fire. Heated by the heat
thereof the whole region shines with a light equal to that of
the rising moon, most intensely severe to sight touch and the
other sensations. There the evil-doer is deposited, bound hand
and foot, by Yama’s servants; he moves rolling about in the
midst. Preyed upon by crows, herons, wolves, and owls,
scorpions, and mosquitoes, and vultures he is speedily drag-
ged out into the road. Burnt and confounded, he exclaims
repeatedly, “ Father! Mother! Brother! Dear one!” Full of
fear he can get no repose. In this manner therefore emanci-
pation from existence is attained to by violent men, who evil-
minded have committed sin, in ten thousand times ten
thonsand years.

“Moreover there is another hell named Tamas if itis bitterly
cold naturally ; itis as long as Mahš-raurava, and is enveloped
in darkness. There the men, afflicted with the cold, running
about in the awful darkness, encounter one another and seek
refuge clasping one another. And their teeth adhere together,
chattering with pain through the cold ; there are also other
plagues the strongest of which are hunger and thirst. A cut-
ting wind, laden with particles of snow, pierces their bones ;
pressed with hunger, they feed on the marrow and blood that
trickle down therefrom. Constantly licking, they whirl about
in mutual contact. So there in Tamas very great affliction is
indeed endured by human beings, until, O most worthy
brahman ! their sins are completely consumed.

“ Next there is another notable hell, known as Nikrintana.$
In it potter’s wheels revolve incessantly, O father! Human


* Very terrible. t Darkness.
+ For tasya read tasyd ? § Cutting off,


25


31


32


DESCRIPTION OF THE HELLS MAHA-RAURAVA, GC. 73


beings are mounted thereon and are cut by the string of Fate
which is borne on the fingers of Yama’s servant, from the
sole of the foot to the head ; and these men do not lose their life
thereby, most virtuous brāhman! and their portions severed
in hundreds reunite. In this way sinners are cut in sunder
during thousands of years, until indeed the whole of their
sins are consumed.

“Listen also while I speak of the hell A-pratishtha, the
occupants of which hell undergo intolerable pain. Those
wheels are there indeed, and jar and well-ropes on the other
side, which have been constituted causes of pain to men who
engage in sin. Some human beings mounted on the wheels
whirl around there; for thousands of years no other condi-
tion is theirs; and then another man is bound to the jar and
well-rope, as the jar in the water. Human beings whirl
around, continually spitting out blood, with blood pouring
from their faces, and with eyes streaming with tears. They
are visited with pains that are beyond endurance by living
creatures.

“Hear also of another hell called Asi-patra-vana ;* which
has the ground covered with blazing fire for a thousand
yojanas, where they are grievously scorched by the very
fierce vehement beams of the sun. The living beings that
inhabit the hell are ever falling down there. In the midst
thereof appears a charming forest with moist leaves. The
leaves there are sword-blades, O most virtuous brāhman!
Myriadst of powerful black dogs also bark there, with long `
muzzles, with large teeth, formidable as tigers. Then gazing
at that forest before them, with its cool shades, the living
beings hasten thither, oppressed with raging thirst, crying * Ah
mother! ah dear one!’ in deepest woe; their feet burnt by the
fire lambent on the ground. When they wend there, a wind
blows, that hurls down the sword-leaves, and so casts the
swords down upon them. Thereat they fall to the earth into
a mass of blazing fire, which has pervaded the entire surface

# Sword-leaf- forest. + For ayuta-gobhitah read ayutašo 'sildļ ?


10


74


33


36


37


38


39


CANTO XIII.


of the ground, and is constantly licking in other directions.
Thereupon the terrific dogs quickly rend many limbs from
the bodies of those wailing ones. I have described this
-Asi-patra-vana to thee, dear father !

“ Next learn of me about the very dreadful Tapta-kumbha.*
On all sides heated pitchers are sur1cvnded with the flameg
of fire, and are filled with oil iron and powder which boil over
on to the heaps of blazing fire. Into them the workers of
iniquity are cast head-long by Yama’s servants.t They are
boiled, and foul the water with the marrow that oozes from
their bursting limbs. Terrible vultures pulling them out
fracture the eye-bones of their bursting skulls ; again they are
dropped into the same pitchers by the impetuous birds ; again
they become united with the liquefied heads, limbs, sinews,
flesh, skin and bones, by means of the oil in the seething vessel.
Then being quickly and vigorously stirred up by Yama's ser-
vants with a spoon, the sinners are churned up in the whirling
pool of copious oil. Such is the Tapta-kumbha that I have
fully described to thee, O father !”


Canto XIII.


Conversation between the father and son (continued).


Sumati relates an incident in one of the periods he spent in
heil—King Vipas-c'it comes there and asks why, in spite of a
righteous life, he was condemned there.


The son spoke.


Now I was born in a Vaišya's family in the seventh life
that preceded my present one. Once upon a time I obstructed
the cattle at their drinking. In Consequence of that act I
was consigned to a very terrible hell, fearful with flames of
fire, infested with birds with iron beaks, muddy by reason of
the streams of blood that Jtowed from limbs crushed by
machines, pervaded with the sound of blood pouring down
from sinners who are being cut asunder. When cast down


* Burning-pitcher, t For ydmyak read ydmyaiķ.


10


11


12


13


14
15


16


17


KING VIPAS'-C'FT'8 VISIT TO HELL. 75


there I spent a hundred- years and more, scorched by the
intense heat, and burning with thirst.

On a sudden a wind blew on me there, bringing gladness, de-
liciously cool, issuing from out of a pitcher of meal and sand.*
Through contact with it all the men were relieved of their
torments, and I too gained a bliss supreme, such as the celes-
tial beings enjoy in Svarga. And with eyes fixed in a wide
gaze of joy, im wonder at what this was, we saw at hand a
peerless perfect man; and Yama’s dire servant, staff in hand,
like Indra’s thunderbolt, was showing the path in front, and
a voice came saying “come hither!” Then that man seeing
the hell filled with hundreds of tortures, moved with com-
passion, addressed that servant of Yama.


The man spoke.


“Ho! servant of Yama! say, what sin have I committed,
for which I have incurred this deepest hell, frightful for its
torments? Known as Vipaé-c’it, I was born in the family of
the Janakas, in the country of Videha, in very truth a guar-
dian of men. I sacrificed with many sacrifices; I protected
the earth with uprightness ; nor did I let fighting rage; no
guest departed with averted countenance; nor did I offend
the pitris, the gods, the rishis or my servants; nor did I covet
other men’s wives, or wealth, or aught else belonging to them.
At the moon’s changes the pitris, on other lunar days the
gods, voluntarily approached mankindt as cows a pool. The
two religious duties, both sacrifice and meritorious work,
perish inasmuch as the performers of domestic sacrifices depart
sighing with averted faces. The merit amassed in seven lives
is dissipated by the sighing of the pitris ; the sighing assuredly
destroys the destiny that springs from three lives. Hence
I was ever indeed kindly disposed to what concerned the gods
and the pitris; being such, how have I incurred this very


terrible hell ?”
* Or, camphor. t Purusha.


76


CANTO XIV,


Canto XIV.


Jada's* narrative (continued)— The conversation with Yama’s officer.


10


Yama's officer tells ting Vipaš-c'it why he was condemned to
hell—He explains to him the nature and results of good and evil
deeds generally, and mentions at great length the punishments
awarded to various special sins.

The son spoke.

Thus interrogated then by that high-souled king in our
hearing, Yama’s officer, though dreadful, with modest speech
replied.

Yama’s officer spoke.

“ Mahárájá! it is even as thou hast said, undoubtedly.
Nevertheless thou didst commit, Sir! a very trifling misdeed ;
I will recall'it to thy mind. The wife whom thou hadst, a
Princess of Vidarbha, named Pivari,—her season of aptitude
for sexual intercourse was formerly rendered barren by thee,
who wast enamoured of the resplendent Kaikeyi; hence for
the transgression in the matter of her season thou hast incur-
red, Sir! a deadful hell such as this, As the Fire expects
the fall of the liquid butter at the time of the Homa oblation,
even so does Brahmá expect the deposit of seed at the
approved season. A righteous man who disregarding that
season, may become absorbed in objects of desire, would still
incur sin by reason of the debt due to his ancestors and
would fall into hell. Such indeed was thy sin; naught
else is found; come then! go, O king, to the enjoyment of thy
meritorious acts.”


“I will go, O servant of the god, where thou shalt lead me.
Something I ask, deign to declare it to me aright. These


* The ‘ Stupid one,’ Sumati's nickname,


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


25


NATURE AND RESULTS OF GOOD AND EVIL DEEDS. 77


other men as it is being reproduced anew. Why are these
grievously afflicted men torn with a saw ? Why are these
other men, immersed in oil, boiled among meal and sand ?
And these other men are dragged about by iron-beaked:
birds; say, of what kind are they, screaming with loud
cries through the pain caused by the loosened bodily bands.
Pained by the wounds in every limb, why are these.men, who
have wrought iniquity, struck by the onslaught of the iron
beaks day and night. Tell me without reservation, through
what maturing of their acts are these and other torments
seen among sinners.”
Yama’s officer spoke.

“Since thou askest me, O king, concerning the rise of the
fruits of sinful actions, I will tell thee that succinctly and
correctly. A man verily attains merit and demerit in regular
order ; and his sin or his merit diminishes as he consumes it.
But no human action, whether virtuous or sinful, quickly
cleanses except by consumption. Diminution arises through
consumption. And he abandons merit and demerit through
consuming it; hearken to me! From famine indeed to famine,
from affliction to affliction, from fear to fear go needy. sin-
ners, more dead than the dead. A manifold. course do
creatures take through the fetters of their actions. From
festival to festival, from Svarga to Svarga, from happiness to
happiness go the faithful, and the peaceful, the rich, and the
doers of good. But sinners, when slain by sin, encounter
perils from beasts of prey and elephants, terrors from snakes
and thieves; what surpasses this? Decked with fragrant
garlands, clad in fine apparel, enjoying beautiful carriages
dwellings and food, those who are praised ever go to sacred
groves with their meritorious deeds.

“Thus men’s merit and demerit are amassed in the sum of
many hundreds of thousands of lives: they spring from the
germs of pleasure and pain. For as the seed, O king, awaits
the water, so do merit and demerit await him who acts:
otherwise than at the right time and place. A trifling sin
committed by a man, when it reaches the place and time,


78


26


27


28


29


30


31


36


37


39


CANTO XIV.


inflicts the pain produced by a thorn, when the foot is planted:
down heedlessly. Then it inflicts the acuter severe pain that
is caused by pins and wedges, and likewise scarcely endurable
headaches and other pains. It causes the pains engendered
by eating unwholesome things, by cold, heat, fatigue, inflamma-
tion and such like. Moreover sins have regard to one another
amid the confluence of their results. In this way heinous
sins have regard to the deteriorated state of protracted
illness, če; and they verily tend to the consequences produced
by weapons, fire, calamity, pain, imprisonment, and so forth.
A trifling good deed confers at once a pleasing fragrance, or
touch, or sound, taste, or shape; more marked likewise after
a long time, and great when arising at the proper period.
And in this way pleasures and pains spring indeed out of good
and bad actions. A man stays here consuming the produc-
tions of numerous mundane existences. And the results of
knowledge or ignorance are checked by race and country,
and remain there united merely by outward sign to the soul.

“ Never and nowhere doth the man exist who doeth not a
wicked or holy act in body, mind, or speech. Whatever a man
receives, whether pain or pleasure, whether great or insig-
nificant, it produces a changed condition of the mind; by so
much either his virtue, or on the other hand his sin, gradually
diminishes by consumption, just like food that is being eaten.
In this way these men, dwelling within hell, diminish their
awful heinous sins by torments day and night. Likewise, O
king, they consume their virtues in the company of the im-
mortals in Svarga with the songs and other joys of the
Gandharvas, Siddhas and Apsarases. In the condition of a
god, and a human being, and a brute creature, one con-
sumes good or evil, arising from virtue or sin, and characterized
by pleasure or pain.

“What thou engnirest about of me, O king! namely * Of
what particular sins are the tortures of wicked-doers the
consequences P” that I will declare to thee in full detail.

* When vile covetous men have gazed on others’ wives and
on others’ goods with evil eye and evil mind, these birds


Al


42


45


47


48


49


50


öl


PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 79


with adamant beaks tear out their eyes; and they have their
eyes reproduced continually. Moreover during as many twink-
lings of the eyes as these men have committed the sin, so many
thousands of years they undergo the eye-torture.

“ Those men who have given instruction in wicked S'žstras,
and those who have advised such instruction, for the purpose of
completely destroying the sight even of their enemies; those
who have repeated the S’4stra improperly ; those who have
given utterance to an evil word ; those who have blasphemed
the Veda, the gods, the dvijas and their guru; for so
many years these very terrible birds with adamant beaks
tear out those men’s very tongues as they are continually
reproduced.

* Also base men, who have caused dissension among friends,
or dissension between a father and his son and relations,
between a sacrificer and a spiritual preceptor, between
a mother and her son who is her companion, and between
wife and husband,—see! these men who are such are torn with
a saw, O king!

* Also those who cause pain to others; and those who forbid
joyousness ; and those who deprive others of fans, breezy places,
sandal, and ušir grass;* and base men who have inflicted
suffering on innocent men at lifes end,—these participators
in sin, who are such, are placed within meal and sand.

“ Moreover the man who eats another's s'rāddha,. when
invited by the other to a ceremony either to the gods or to the
pitris, he is rent in twain by birds.

“ But whoever lacerates the vitals of good men with wicked
words, these birds unchecked continually strike him.

And whoever indulges in backbiting, dissembling in
speech, dissembling in mind, his tongue is assuredly torn in
twain thus by sharp razors.


* Andropogon muricatus, Roxburgh; the modern khas-khas. "The roots,
when dry, and then gently moistened, emit a pleasant fragrance ; they are
employed to make large fans; and also screens, which are placed before doors
and windows, and which being kept moist during the hot winds render the
air that passes through them cool and fragrant (Roxb. p. 89).


80
52


53


54


55


56


57


58


59


60


61


62


CANTO XIV.


« Whoever, puffed up, show contempt towards their parents
and gurus—these men, who are such, are plunged head fore-
most into a pit reeking with pus, ordure and urine.

“Those who eat, while the gods, guests and living beings,
dependants and visitors, and also the pitris, the fire and birds
are left unfed ; those evil men feed on carrion and exudations,
and they become Sūc'i-mukha birds,* as large as mountains.
Behold! these are men of that kind.

“ But those who feed a brāhman or a man of another caste
in one company disagreeably on earth,—those men, like these
persons, feed on ordure.

« Whoever eat their own food neglecting a man, who has
gone forth in company with them, and who being destitute
seeks wealth,—these men, who are such, feed on phlegm.

“Those men who, without washing their hands and mouth
after meals, O king! have touched cattle, bréhmans and the
fire,—these hands of theirs placed in fire-pots are licked
repeatedly.

“But those men who, without washing their hands and
mouth after meals, have gazed longingly at the sun, moon
and stars,—in their eyes Yama’s servants place fire and
augment it.

“ Moreover whatever men have touched čattle, fire, their
mother, a bréhman, their eldest brother, father, sister,
daughter-in-law,- their gurus and the aged with their feet,
they stand mid piles of charcoal, with their feet bound with
red-hot iron fetters, enduring burning up to the knees.

« Whoever have eaten in an unhallowed manner milk,
khichree, goat’s flesh, and things offered as food to the gods,—
the eyes of those sinners, as they lie hurled to the ground
gazing with starting eyes, are torn out, see! from their faces
by Yama's servants with pincers.


# The dictionaries do not say what bird this is. I would suggest from the
meaning of the word, that it means a Honey-Sucker (the commonest species of
which is the Purple Honey-Sucker, Arachnechthra asiatica), or it may be the
Hoopoe, Upupa epops, which also has a long slender beak (Jerdon, vol. I, pp-
370 & 890.)


63


64


65


66


67


68


69


70


71


72


73


74


PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 81


* And base men who have hearkened to blasphemy against
gurus, the gods, and dvijas, and against the Vedas,—these
servants of Yama continually drive iron wedges, red as fire,
into the ears, of such wicked men who rejoice in such Hangs
though they bewail the while.

“Whoever, led by anger and covetousness, have broken up
and destroyed beautiful rest-houses,* the abodes of gods and
brāhmans, and assemblages in the temples of the gods,—
Yama’s exceedingly cruel servants continually flay the skins
of those men from their body by means of these sharp instru-
ments.

* Whatever men have made water in the path of cattle,
brāhmans, and the sun, these entrails of theirs are drawn
out through the anus by crows.

* Where a man after having given his daughter to some
one, gives her to a second person, truly that man is thus
divided into many portions, and swept along in a stream of
burning corrosive.

* Whatever man, moreover, engrossed in his own nourish-
ment abandons his destitute children, dependants, wife and
other relatives in a famine or in a disturbance, he indeed
in his hunger thus gets portions of his own flesh, which
Yama’s servants cut off and put into his mouth.

Whoever through avarice abandons those who have sought
protection and who are dependent on him for their livelihood,
he indeed is thus tortured by Yama’s servants with tortures
by means of machines.

* Men who check good deeds all their lives long are ground
with the grinding of rocks, as are these evil-doers.

“Men who carry off pledges are bound with bands on all
their limbs, and are devoured day and night by insects, scor-
pions, and ravens.

“ Wicked men who indulge in sexual intercourse by day,
and men who defile others’ wives, are worn away by hunger,
have their tongues dropping from their palates by reason of
thirst, and are racked with pangs.

* Prapd, road-side sheds for accommodating travellers with water.


11


82
75


76


77


78


79


80


81


83


85


CANTO XIV.


“Moreover, see the “seemul tree”* with its long iron
thorns; mounted thereon the bodies of sinners are pierced,
and they are foul with the streams of blood that pour forth.

“ See also, O tiger-like man! these defilers of others’ wives,
who are being destroyed by Yama’s servants in the “ mouse.” +

* Whatever man, deposing his spiritual preceptor, stub-
bornly pursues his learning or art,—he verily, bearing thus a
rock on his head, undergoes affliction in the public way, suffer-
ing exceeding pain, emaciated with hunger day and night, his
head quivering through the pain of his burden.

“Those who have discharged urine, phlegm or ordure
in water,—they, such as these persons, have come to a hell
stinking with phlegm ordure and urine.

“ Pressed with hunger these men are devouring one another's
fiesh—these men formerly did not eat according to the rules of
hospitality mutually.

“Those also who have discarded the Vedas and the fires,
themselves kindling their own fires,—they, such as these persons,
are repeatedly hurled down from the loftiest summit of a
mountain.

“Those men who have married virgin widows and have
grown old to the full extent of life-—these turned into worms
are consumed by ants.

“ By receiving favours from an outcaste,t by performing
sacrifices for an outcaste, by constant attendance on an outcaste,
@ man ever reaches the condition of an insect that lives among
stones.

“The man, who eats sweetmeats all by himself, while his
relatives or his friends or a guest look on, eats a pile of
burning charcoal.

“ This man’s back is continually devoured by fearful wolves,
because, O king! he was a backbiter of people.


* Sálmali, the Cotton or Silk-cotton tree, Bombax malabaricum (heptaphylla,
Roxb.), the Bengali simul, the Hindustani semal. It is a large tree, common
almost everywhere, with stout hard conical prickles (Hooker, vol. I, p. 349;
Roxb., p- 514). Here it means a kind of instrument of torture.

+ A kind of instrument of torture. f See Canto XV. verse 1.


86


87


88


89


90


91


92


93


94


95


PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 88


“Blind, moreover, deaf, dumb, this man roams about, sick
with hunger—he, base man, was ungrateful to men who oc-
cupy themselves in conferring benefits.

"This man, who returns evil for good, working injury to
his friends, very evil-minded, drops into Tapta-kumbha ;
thereafter he will suffer grinding; then he will go to Karam-
bha-baluké ;* next he will undergo mechanical tortures; then
Asi-patra-vana ; and rending with saw-like leaves. After ex-
periencing, toc, division by the thread of Fate and manifold
torments, how he will obtain expiation herefrom I know not,

“Corrupt Bréhmans, for having assailed one another when
assembled at S'rāddhas, drink verily the moisture that exudes
from every limb.

“ A gold-stealer, a brāhman-slayer, a drinker of spirituous
liquors, a defiler of his guru's bed, remain, being burnt in
blazing fire beneath, above, around, for very many thousands
of years; thereafter they are re-born as men afflicted with
leprosy, consumption, sickness and other diseases. And when
again dead, they enter hell; and when again born, they under-
go a similar malady until the end of the kalpa, O king!

“A cow-slayer also goes to hell for a rather less period,
namely, during three lives.

“ There is likewise a fixed ordinance regarding all minor sins.

“To what various grades of creatures, for what several
definite sins, men go, when released from hell—listen to me
while I recount that.”

Canto XV.

Conversation between the father and son—(Continued).

The exposition of sins and their punishments is continued, and
Jada concludes his story of king Vipas-c'it—The king by his
ee delivers all the inhabitants of hell and ascends to heaven.

Yama’s officer spoke.

“For accepting anything of value from an outcaste,t let a
dvija be born an ass: but let him who sacrifices for the
outcaste become a worm, on his release from hell.


* See Canto XIII, verse 5. t Seo Canto XIV. verse 83,


84 CANTO XV.


©


2 “ But the dvija who has misbehaved towards his spiritual
preceptor,* by coveting the latter’s wife and the latter’s pro-
perty in his mind, undoubtedly becomes a dog.

3 “The man also who scorns his parents is born an ass; for
reviling his mother and father he is born a main&;+ and he

4 who scorns his brother’s wife becomes a pigeon; but for
injuring her he becomes a tortoise.

5 “ He who, while eating his brother’s pinda, does not pursue
his brother's welfare, being overwhelmed with folly is indeed
born after death a monkey.

6 “He who carries away a deposit is born a worm on his
release from hell: And the detracter when released from hell

7 becomes a Rākshasa. And the man who destroys trust is
born a fish.

“For carrying off through folly paddy, barley, sesa-

8 mumļ seed, mash beans,§ kulattha beans,|| mustard-seed,{
chickpeas,** beans,tf šman rice,tt mudga beans,§§ wheat

* Upadhyaya. . t Sériké ; see note * p. 49.

t Tila, Sesamum, Sesamum orientale, Roxb. (indicum, Linnaeus); the
modern til (Roxb., p. 491). Not in Hooker.

§ Masha, a kind of bean, Phaseolus mungo, variety radiatus, the Bengali
mdsh-kaldy. It is esteemed the best of all the leguminous plants, and the
meal is made into bread for many religious ceremonies. (Hooker, vol. II,
p. 203; Roxb., p. 557.)


|| Kulattha, a kind of bean, Dolichos biflorus, the Bengali kulattha
(Hooker, vol. II, p. 210; Roxb., p. 563.)

T Sarshapa, Mustard, Sinapis campestris ; which combines Roxburgh’s S.
dichotoma, (the Beng. $ddd rdi or sarishd, Hind. sarson), and S. glauca (the
Beng. sveta rdi). From both varieties an oil is expressed which is used in diet,
and for various other purposes. (Hooker, vol. I, p. 156; Roxb., p. 497.)

*% O’ana, Chick pea or Gram, Cicer arietinum, the Beng. but, chand and
chhold ; it is the same as vartula, (Hooker, vol. II, p. 176; Roxb., p. 567;
Oliver, p. 196.)


tt Kaléya. This is the general name for most of the commonly cultivated
kinds of beans, Phaseolus,


ff Kalama, the dman (hemanta) or later rice, which is sown in May and
June and is reaped in December and January. The dus (d$u) or early rice is
sown about April and reaped abont August.


§§ Mudga, Green gram, Phaseolus mungo, the Beng. mug or mug-kaldy. `


13


14


16


17


18


19


20


PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 85


and flax, or other crops, a man void of understanding is
born a large-mouthed rat resembling an ichneumon.

“ Moreover for improperly touching another’s wife he is
born a horrible wolf. And the foolish sinner who violates his
brother’s wife becomes a dog, a jackal, a heron, a vulture, a
snake, and a bird of prey,* by degrees. And the sinner, who
has violated his friend's wife, his guru’s wife, and the king’s
wife, becomes a cock-cuckoo when released from hell. The
man of lustful soul is born a hog.

“ Let him who hinders sacrifice liberality and marriage
become a worm.

“ And he who gives his daughter away twice is verily born
a worm.

“He who obtains food, without giving some to the gods
the pitris and brāhmans, is indeed born a crow when released
from hell.

* He who scorns his eldest brother, or a brother who is like
a father to him, is indeed born a curlew when dismissed
from hell.

“ And the śúdra for approaching a brahman-woman is born
a worm; for begetting offspring of her, let him become an
insect living within wood. And a c'andāla for the same sin
is born a hog, a small worm, a diver.

“ A man ungrateful, base among men, who returns evil for
good, when released from hell is born a small worm, an in-
sect, a bird, a scorpion also, and a fish, a crow, a tortoise,
then a pukkasa.

“ For slaying an unarmed man, a man is born an ass. The
murderer of a woman also and a child-slayer are born worms.

“ But for stealing victuals a man is born a fly.

“There is moreover a difference among victuals, listen
thereto. For taking rice-food, he is born a cat, when quit


Masha (see note $ above) is a variety of this. (Hooker, vol. II, p. 203; Roxb.,
p. 556).

* Kan-ka. This must mean a bird of prey. Vaka which is a synonym
has just been mentioned.

+ Madgu; sce note * p. 81.


86 CANTO XV.


21 from hell; but for taking rice-food mixed with sesamum and
oil-cake he ts born a rat; and for. taking clarified butter
22 anichneumon; for taking goat’s flesh, a crow, a diver.* He
who carries away fish-meat becomes a crow; he who carries
away venison a hawk; but when salt is taken away, the offen-
der becomes a water-crow:* when curdled milk ts taken away,
23 a worm; and for stealing milk he is born a hen-heron;f
24 but he who steals oil is born a cockroach; for taking honey
a man is born a gad-fly; for taking a cake, an ant ;§ but for

25 stealing pulseļ| a small house-lizard ;
“For stealing distilled spirits let the sinner become a
francolin partridge ;$ and for taking iron be born a crow.
26 When brass is carried off, he is born a green pigeon ;**
when a silver vessel ts carried off, a pigeon; but for taking
27 a golden vessel, he is born a worm; and for stealing
a garment of woven silk he becomes a partridge:t} and
when a silk garment is taken away he is born a silk-


* See note t p. 85.

+ Vic'i-kāka. I do not find this in Prof. Monier-Williams’ Dictionary. I
would suggest that it is a Tern, most probably the Black-bellied Tern, Sterna
javanica, which has a black and grey plumage and is found in every river in
India. The Terns are commonly called gangd-chil or gdng-chil, i. e., the river-
kite. (Jerdon, vol. II, pp. 834 and 840.)

t Balākā. Balāka is the Pond Heron or Paddy-bird, Ardeola leucoptera,
the Beng. konch-bak. (Jerdon, vol. II, p. 751.)

§ Pipilika; the modern pipirš or piprā denotes the larger species of ants.

|| Nishpāva ; this appears to be a general name for most kinds of pulse.

€% Tittiri, the Francolin or Meadow partridge, of which there. are two
species in India, (1) the Black partridge, Francolinus vulgaris (the modern
titir or kala-titar) which is found throughout the whole of Northern India,
and (2) the Painted partridge, F. pictus (also called kala-titar) which is found
in Central and part of Southern India. (Jerdon, vol. II, pp. 558 and 561).
The former is probably the bird meant here.

** Hirita ; see note ** p. 28.

++ Krakara.. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is Perdix sylvatica, but I do
not find any such name in Jerdon. It is probably either the Grey partridge |
Ortygornis ponticeriana, which is common throughout the greater part of
India, or the Kyah partridge, O. gularis, which is found throughout Behar and

.. Bengal. (Jerdon, vol. II, pp. 569, and 572.)


28


29


30


31


32


36


37


38


39


*


PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 87


worm; when very fine cloth, an instrument of horn* and
fine cloth are carried off, the sinner is born a parrot ; and so too
for taking a garment of goat’s-hair or sheep’s wool, and a linen
one; when a cotton thing is taken away he is born a curlew;
and the stealer of a barken thing ts born a pond-heron:; for
taking paint and potherbs he is born a peacock. The man who
carries off a red garment becomes a jivanjiva pheasant ;+ for
taking splendid perfumes let him become a musk-rat ; and for
taking clothes a hare; for theft of fruit a man becomes a eu-
nuch; for theft of wood, a wood-insect ;{ and a flower-stealer
becomes a poor man; a carriage-stealer lame ; and one who
takes vegetables becomes a green pigeon ;§ and one who takes
water a pied-crested cuckoo.|| One who takes away land,
after going to Raurava and the other very terrible hells |
becomes grass, a bush, a creeper, a climbing shrub, a reed
and a tree by degrees ; and the man afterwards, when his sins
have been diminished to insignificance, becomes a worm, an in-
sect, and a grasshopper, a bird, an aquatic animal, a deer ; and
having attained the condition of kine, and despicable castes
such as c'aņdila and pukkaša, he becomes lame and blind, deaf,
leprous, and afflicted with pulmonary consumption ; he is seized
with diseases affecting the mouth and the eyes and the
anus; and he becomes epileptic; he attains also the condi-
tion of a $ūdra. This truly is known to be the course of
stealers of cattle and gold.

« And fierce men who steal learning, who fall short in their
rewards to the guru; the man who makes another's wife his
own wife,—he becomes a eunuch, the foolish man, when
escaped from the torments of hell. .

“He who makes the Homa oblation in unkindled fire is
born afflicted with the pains of indigestion, and dyspeptic.

« Abuse of others, the returning evil for good, hurting


Sirngike. I do not find this word in the dictionary.


+ Jivan-jiva or jiva-jivaka, See note tt p. 28.
t Ghuņa-kitoka: or, an armadillo.

$ Hūrita: see note ** p. 28.

|| C’étaka : see note T P. 29.


45


46


52


53


CANTO XV.


the vitals of others, coarseness, and cruelty, paying court to
other men’s wives, perfidy in taking other people’s property,
and contempt of the gods, dishonesty, fraud towards men,
and avarice, manslaughter, and the continued performance
also of whatever things are forbidden;—one should know
these to be the after-characteristics of those who are released
from hell.

“Compassion towards all creatures, concord, aid to other
people, truth, speech directed towards the welfare of all
creatures, inculcation of the authority of the Veda, veneration
of gurus devarshis Siddhas and rishis, association with the
good, hospitality, study, friendship,—let the wise man under-
stand these and whatever other things constitute the deeds
of truth and righteousness, fo be the marks of sinless men
who have quitted Svarga.

“This: I have declared explicitly to ee, O king! con-
cerning men, holy and wicked, who eat the fruits of their
own actions. Come then, we go elsewhere. Thon hast now
seen everything, for thou hast seen hell. Come then, let
us go elsewhere.”

The son spoke.

Thereupon the king prepared to follow him; and then a
cry went up from all the men that abode in torment, ‘ Be
gracious, O king! stay but a moment, for the air that clings
to thy body gladdens our mind, and entirely dispels the
burning and the sufferings and pains from our bodies, O
tiger-like man! Be gracious, O king"

On hearing this their entreaty, the king asked that servant
of Yama— How do I afford gladness to these men? Have
I done sucha mighty deed of merit in the world of mortals,
wherefrom falls this gladdening shower,? Declare me that.”


Yama's officer spoke.


“ Inasmuch as thy body was nourished with tho food that
remained, after the pitris the gods guests and servants were
satisfied, and since thy mind was attached to them, hence
the air that clings to thy body brings gladness ; the torment, O


54


55


56


57


58


64:


65


THE STORY OF KING VIPAS"-C'I7. 89


king! does not hurt the evil-duers. Whereas thou didst offer
the horse-sacrifice and other sacrifices according to precept,
hence from seeing thee Yama’s engines weapons fires and
crows, which cause intense suffering, such as crushing cutting
burning and so forth, grow mild, O king! when counteracted
by thy majesty.”

The king spoke.

“Neither in Svarga nor in Brahma-loka do men experience
such joy, methinks, as arises from conferring bliss on suffering
creatures. If, while I am present, torment does not hurt
these men, here then, fair Sir, I will remain firm as a moun-
tain.”

Yama’s officer spoke.

“Come, O king; we proceed. Enjoy the delights won by
thine own merit, casting aside here the torments of evil-
doers.”

The king spoke.

“ For that reason* I will not go as long as these are in sore
suffering. From my near-presence the denizens of hell grow
happy. Fie on the sickly protection-beggingt life of that man,
who shews no favour to one distressed, even though he be a
resolute foe! Sacrifices, gifts, austerities do not work for the
welfare of him, who has no thought for the succour of the
distressed. Whoever bears a cruel mind towards children,
the sick and such like, and towards the aged also, I do not
hold him human; he is truly a Rakshasa. But if these men
have pain originating in hell, whether produced by the heat
from fire, or produced by overpowcring smells, and if they
have the intense pain arising from hunger and thirst that
causes faintness, yet the grant of deliverance to them excels,
I consider, the joy of Svarga. If many sufferers shall obtain
happiness, while I undergo pain, should I not in truth
embrace it ? Go thou not therefore long.”


* For tasmdt read asmdt, (from hence) ?
+ For daraņdrthinum read saranarthanam (from arthand), since jivanam is


neuter ?


12


, 90


66,


67


68


69


70


7l
72


73


74


75


76


CANTO XV.


Yama’s officer spoke.

“ Here have both Dharma and Indra arrived to lead thee
away. Thou must certainly depart from us: go therefore,
O king!”

Dharma spoke.


"Fittingly worshipped by thee, I lead thee to Svarga;
mount this heavenly chariot and linger not; let us go.”


The king spoke.

“ Men in thousands, O Dharma! suffer pain here in hell;
and being in affliction they cry to me to save them; hence I
depart not.”

Indra spoke.

“ These evil-doers have come to hell in consequence of their
own deeds; thou also, O king, must go to Svarga in conse-
quence of thy meritorious deed.”


The king spoke.

“Tf thou dost know, thou, O Dharma, or thou, O Indra,
S’ac’’s lord, how great indeed is my authority, then deign*
to speak aright.”

Dharma spoke.

“Just as drops of water in the sea, or as stars in the sky,
or as showers of rain, as the sands in the Ganges—just as
these drops of water and other things are innumerable, O
Mahū-rājā ! even so thy merit is in truth beyond reckoning.
In thy evincing now this compassion here in the hells, the
reckoning of that merit of thine has verily amounted to a
hundred thousand. Then go, O king! enjoy then the abode
of the immortals; let these also consume away in hell the
sin arising from their own actions!”

The king spoke.


“ How shall men attain their desire in things connected
with me, if in my presence these pe


ople gain no prosperity.
Hence, whatever good deeds I Possess


, O lord of the thirty
gods ! by means thereof let the sinner


s who are undergoing
torment be delivered from hell joz


* For arhathah read arhatha ?


77


78


79


80


81


ANASŪYĀ'S GAIN OF A BOON. 91


Indra spoke.
“Thus hast thou, O king! gained a more exalted station:
see too these sinners delivered from hell!”


The son spoke.

Then fell there a shower of flowers upon that king, and
Hari making him mount the heavenly chariot led him to the
heaven-world. Both I and the others, who were there, were
released from the torments; thereafter we entered the other
earthly existences, as determined by the results of our own
actions.

Thus these hells have been reckoned up, O brahman! And
for what particular sin to what particular kind of creature a
man descends, it has all been recounted to thee in detail,
as I saw it of yore, having gained the accurate knowledge that
springs from previous experience. What else do I tell thee:
next, noble sir?


Canto XVI.
Anasūyd's gain of a boon.

The father asks Jada for instruction on yoga or religious
devotion—Jada begins a long exposition, which starts with a
story of Anastiya—A certain brahman was cursed by Mdndavya at
night that he should die at sunrise, and his devoted wife restrained
the sun from rising—All activity ceased, and the gods in alarm


_ besought Atri's wife Anasiiya—At her exhortation the wife relents,


the sun rises, and the brdhman dies, but is restored to life by
Anasúyá—Anasúyá obtains from the gods the boon that Brahmá,
Vishnu and Siva should be born her sons, and that she should
attain yoga.

The father spoke.

Thou hast declared to me, O son, the established nature of
mundane existence which should be shunned exceedingly, a
nature which is immutable like the rope and bucket at a well.
I have thus then learnt it in its entirety such as it is. Say,
what must I do in this thus-ordained mundane existence ?


92


10


11


CANTO XVI.


The son spoke.


If, O father, thou dost believe my word implicitly, then
abandoning thy condition as a house-holder become a dis-
tinguished hermit. Following that vocation according to
precept, forsaking thy fire and possessions, directing thy soul
towards the Supreme Soul, indifferent in regard to the various
opposites,* relinquishing thy property, become a mendicant,
eating only every other meal, subdued in soul, unwearied,
grown intent on religious devotion,+ withdrawn from contact
with external things. Thereafter thou shalt attain to that
religious devotion,—which is the cure for connexion with
pain, the cause of final emancipation from existence, incom-
parable, unutterable, devoid of worldly attachments ; through
connexion with that devotion thou wilt never again have union
with living beings.


The father spoke.


My son, tell me next of yoga, or religious devotion, the
cause of final emancipation from existence; by which I may
escape such suffering as this, when I am again born among
living beings. Since I am intent on attachments, and my soul
does not by reason of the bonds of mundane existence attain
to religious devotion, being itself even devoid of religious
devotion,ž speak now of that religious devotion. Sprin-
kle with the water of thy words, which are cool with the
water of the knowledge of Brahma, me whose body and
mind are disordered with pain through the heat of the sun of
mundane existence. Re-vivify with the draught of the nectar
of thy words me, who am bitten by the black serpent of igno-
rance, who am in anguish from its venom, and dead. Hasting
with the keys of the knowledge of approved goodness, liberate


me, who am galled by the chains of selfishness in the matter
of son, wife, home and land.


* Pleasure and pain, &,
+ Yoga.
1 Or “devoid of means ;” there seems to be a pun on the word yoga.


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


28


24


ANASUYA’S GAIN OF A BOON. 93


The son spoke.
Listen, dear father! how of yore the wise Dattdtreya, when
duly questioned. expounded the system of religious devotion
at length to Alarka.*


The father spoke.
Whose son was Dattūtreya ? Again, how did he discourse
about religious meditation? And who was the distinguished
Alarka, who enquired concerning religious meditation ?


The son spoke. f

There was a certain Kausika bráhman in the town Prati-
shthána; he by reason of sins committed in other births was
diseased with leprosy. His wife used to honour him her hus-
band, thus diseased, as a god, by anointing his feet, knead-
ing his limbs, bathing, clothing, and feeding him, and by
cleansing the flow of mucus, blood etcetera, and with atten-
dance in private, and with affectionate conversation. Though
always exceedingly venerated by that modest lady, he being
harsh continually menaced her by reason of his excessively
fiery temper. Nevertheless his wife, bowing before him, used
to esteem him a divinity ;+ nevertheless she used to esteem
him, who was extremely loathful, as superior to all.

Being also of a constantly roaming disposition, the brahman
ordered his wife—‘ Do thou bring me to her dwelling. Pro-
cure for me that courtezan whom I saw living in her house
in the high-way, O religious one; she indeed dwells in my
heart. I saw the maiden at sunrise, and here is night


` come upon us. She does not depart from my heart, ever


since I saw her. If she, lovely in every limb, with large
hips and swelling breasts and slender body, does not embrace
me, then thou wilt indeed behold me die. Beautiful is love
among mankind; and she is courted by many; and I am
unable to go; it appears perplexing to me.”

Then having heard that speech of her husband who was
sick with love, she his consort, sprung of a high family, very


* For Anarkdya read Alarkdya, see Canto XXXVI.
+ For davatam read daivatam,


94
25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


33


34


. 35


36


CANTO XVI.


virtuous, faithful to her husband, gathered a compact retinue,
and took abundance of money, and bearing her husband on
her shoulder, moved on, slow in her gait, along the high
road, in the cloud-covered night, while the sky was revealed
by the fitful lightning; for the bráhman lady was desirous
of doing her husband pleature.

And on the road, the brāhman, while borne on his wife’s
shoulder, through fear of thieves in the darkness pushed
away Mandavya, who was no thief and who was afflicted with
grievous pain, being impaled on a stake. Enraged at the
brush wiģh a foot, Mandavya addressed him—* He, who
has with his foot pushed me away who am thus exceedingly
afflicted, he sinful in soul, base among men, has gotten a
miserable condition. At sunrise, helpless, he shall be bereft
of life assuredly: at the sight of the sun indeed he shall
perish.” Thereupon his wife hearing that most cruel curse,
exclaimed distressed—' The sun verily shall not arise!”

Then the sun failed to rise, and there was continual night
for many lengths of day. Thereupon the gods grew afraid,
fearing “ How indeed should not all this universe pass into
dissolution, when the Vedas are not uttered, and when it is
deprived of oblations with fire and of the Svadhā and Svāhā ?
Without the ordinance of day and night, there is an end of
months and seasons: and again from the cessation of these
south and north are not known in the sun’s half yearly course.
And without knowledge of the half yearly course where would
be time, such as the year? Without the year no other know-
ledge of time exists. By reason of the utterance of that
devoted wife, the sun rises not: without the sun’s rising,
bathing giving of gifts and the other actions can not indeed.
exist ; nor indeed does the fire spread, and sacrifices are seen
to cease; nor indeed do we get satisfaction without the homa
sacrifice. Mortals satisfy us with the appropriate shares of
the sacrifices: we favour mortals with rain for the perfect-
ing of their grain and other crops. When plants have
ripened, mortals sacrifice to us with sacrifices; worshipped in
their sacrifices &c., we bestow on them their desires. For


A


45


46


47


48


49


50


öl


52


ANASÚYÁ’S GAIN OF A BOON. 95


we pour rain downwards, and mortals make their rain
ascend ; for we rain with showers of water, men with showers
of clarified butter. And evil-minded men, who do not give
us the periodical sacrifices,* being greedy eat themselves our
share of the sacrifice. We defile the water, the sun, fire and
the winds, and the earth for the destruction of those mis-
chievous sinners. Through partaking of bad water &c., very
dire portents work towards the death of those doers of evil
deeds. But to those high-souled men, who after delighting
us consume the remainder themselves, let us allot the blissful
worlds. Therefore all this universe of a truth does not exist,
unless these things increase and endure. How indeed may
the days be liberated ?’—so conversed the gods with one
another.

Having heard the speech of these assembled gods who were
fearful of the destruction of the sacrifices, the god Brahma
spoke, “Majesty is subdued by majesty indeed, and austeri-
ties also by austerities, O ye immortals! Hearken therefore
to my advice. Through the might of the faithful wife the
sun does not rise, and from his not rising loss befalls mortals
and you. Hence do ye, through desire that the sun should
rise, propitiate Atri’s faithful wife Anasūyā who is rich in
austerities.”

The son spoke. .

She, propitiated by them when they resorted to her, said
“Let your wish be asked for.” The gods petitioned for day,
saying “ Let it be as before !”


Anasúyá spoke.

“The might of a faithful wife may not be lost in any wise.
Hence while honouring that good lady, I will liberate the day,
O ye gods! that day and night may again exist, and that
that good lady's own husband shall not perish.”

The son spoke.
Thus having addressed the gods, she the beautiful went to


X Nitya-naimittiki ; see Canto XXX,


96


57


58


59


60


61


62


63


64


65


66


CANTO XVI.


her temple, and being asked by that lady regarding the welfare
and righteousness of her husband, spoke.
Anasūyā spoke.

“ Perchance thou rejoicest, O blessed lady, at the sight of
thy husband’s countenance! Perchance too thou esteemest thy
husband far above all the gods! Through obedience indeed
to my husband I have gained a great reward; through the
obtainment of the results of every wish obstacles have been
removed. Five debts a man must ever discharge, O virtuous
lady. Thus, he must amass wealth according to the duties
of his own caste: and he must next apply the wealth gained
to a fitting object according to the precepts: he should always
live full of compassion, observing truth, candour, austerities
and liberality: and he must daily perform the ceremonies
prescribed by the S'āstras and free from anger and enmity,
with faith preceding, according to his ability. A man with
great pain gradually obtains the worlds specially allotted to
his own caste, suchas that of the Prajā-patis and other worlds,
O virtuous lady. So women by obedience to their husbands
obtain half of the entire merit painfully earned by their
husbands. There is no separate sacrifice for women, nor
Sraddha, nor fasting: for by obedience to their husbands
indeed they reach these desired worlds. Therefore, O vir-


. tuous and exalted lady, let thy mind ever be turned towards


obedience to thy husband, since a husband is a wife's supreme
bliss. Whatever worship the husband may offer by right
ceremonies to the gods, and whatever to the pitris and guests,
even one half of that does the wife, whose mind is centred on
him alone, enjoy by very obedience to her husband.”


The son spoke.


Having heard that her speech, the lady saluted Atri’s
wife Anasúyá respectfully in return, and replied thus to her—
“Happy am I, favoured am I, and regarded by the gods am
I, since thou, O lady blessed by nature, again increasest my
faith. I know this—none among women has a condition
equal with her husband, and love for him tends to her benefit


67


68


69


70


71


72


73


74


75


76


77


78


79


ANASUYA’S GAIN OF A BOON. 97


in this world and the next; through her husband’s favour
both here and after death, O illustrious lady, a woman gains
happiness; for a husband is a woman’s deity. Do thou,
being such a woman, O exalted lady, tell me who have reached
thy temple, what I, a noble* woman, must do, or what my
noble husband must do, O beauteous one!”

Anasūyā spoke.

* Indra and these gods in distress have approached me;
they are searching for the day and night, the virtuous acts
prescribed for which have been discarded in consequence of
thy speech. They beg for the natural uninterrupted con-
tinuance’ of day and night: I am come for that object, and
do thou listen to this my speech. Through the absence of
day there is the absence of all sacrificial ceremonies; through
the absence of these the gods do not get their nourishment,
O ascetic lady. Through the destruction of day also all
work is cut short; from the destruction thereof the world
will perish through drought. Therefore if thou desirest to
deliver this world from calamity, be gracious, O virtuous
lady, to the worlds; let the sun run his course as before.”


The brāhman lady spoke.
“‘Mandavya exceedingly furious, O illustrious lady, has


cursed my lord, saying ‘at sunrise thou shalt meet thy


doom! ”
Anasúyá spoke.

“Tf, however, it pleases thee, O lady, then at thy word I
will make thee even a new husband, in form the same as before.
For I must in every way propitiate the majesty of faithful
wives, O high-born lady—thus I do thee honour.”

The son spoke.

On her saying ‘be it so!’ the ascetic lady Anasúyá then
summoned the sun, raising up the arghya oblation, at mid-
night on the tenth night. Then the adorable sun, in ap-
pearance ruddy as the full-blown lotus flower, with wide
disc, rose aloft above the mighty mountain. Forthwith indeed


, * For drydud read dryaud ?


13


98


80


81


82


83


84,


85


86


87


88
89


90


CANTO XVI,


her husband was bereft of life and fell on the ground ; and
she caught him as he fell.
Anasūyā spoke.

“Be not dejected, O lady; behold my power. Thou
hast succeeded through thy obedience to thy husband.
What further need hast thou of austerities ? Since I have
nowhere seen another man equal to thy husband, in form,
in disposition, in intellect, with sweetness of speech and
other adornments, in very truth let this bréhman, freed
from sickness, young again, obtain life in company with his
wife for a hundred autumns. Since I see no other deity the
equal of thy husband, in very truth let this bréhman regain
his life in sound health. Since thy* effort is constantly
directed to propitiate thy husband by deed mind and word,
let this dvija then come to life,”

The son spoke.

Then the brāhman arose, free from illness, young again,
with his own lustre illuminating the dwelling, as it were an
ever-youthful god. Then there fell a shower of flowers, ac-
companied with the strains of heavenly instruments and


other musical instruments. And the gods were delighted and
said to Anasūyā.


The gods spoke.
“Choose a boon, O blessed lady. Inasmuch as thou hast
accomplished a great matter for the gods, therefore the gods
will grant thee a boon, O ascetic lady.”


Anasūyā spoke.

“Tf ye gods headed by Brahmá, being favourable, will grant
me a boon, and if ye deem me worthy of a boon, then let
Brahmá, Vishnu, and Siva become sons to me, and let me
in company with my husband attain religious devotion, to
the end that I may be delivered from affliction.”

* Be it so,” exclaimed Brahmá, Vishin, Siva and the other
gods to her; and they departed, duly honouring the ascetic
lady.


* For mama read tava ?


+=


10


11


THE BIRTH OF DATTATREYA, 99


Canto XVII,
The Birth of Dattétreya,

The Prajd-pati Atri begot three sons by his wife Anasiyd,
namely, Soma, Dattdtreya, and Durvdsas, who were incarnations
of portions of Brahmd, Vishnu and Siva respectively —Their
offices are described—Dattatreya, assembling young Munis about
himself, tested their loyalty, by living immersed in a lake and
by revelling in sensual pleasures.


The son spoke.

Then after many days’ time the adorable Atri, the second
son of Brahmá, looked upon his wife Anastyā. Her, bathed
after menstruation, very lovely in body, seductive and perfect
in form, free from blame, the love-possessed Muni enjoyed
mentally.

But while he contemplated her, a powerful wind through
and above brought the change that was produced in her.
The ten regions of the sky seized the white-lustred form of
Brahma, as it fell all around, in the form of Soma, charac-
terized by passion, That mental Soma was begotten in her
as the son of the prajā-pati Atri, the life and possessor of
every excellence. Magnanimous Vishnu being pleased begot
of her Dattétreya, the bréhman, in whom goodness predomi-
nated, by production from his own body. Dattdtreya was he
called; he sucked Anasúyá’s breast: he was Vishnu indeed
incarnate; he was Atri’s second son. He issued from his
mother’s womb seven days afterwards, being enraged on
seeing that the haughty king of the Haihayas was near and
was offending Atri, being angry he at once desired to burn
up the Haihaya. Filled with indignation at the long pains
and toil of his residence in the womb, a portion of Siva
was born as Durvāsas, in whom darkness predominated.
Thus three sons were born of her, being portions of Brahmá,
Siva and Vishnu.

Brahmá became Soma, Vishnu was born as Dattģtreya,
Siva was born as Durvūsas, through the boon granted by the


12 gods. The prajā-pati Soma, ever causing creepers and medi-


100 CANTO XVII.


cinal plants and mankind to grow with his cool rays, abides
13 in Svarga. Dattdtreya protects offspring from destruction
by the malignant Daityas: and Vishnu’s portion must also be
14 knowu as the benefactor of the docile. Durvasas, the ador-
able birthless god, destroys the scorner ; assuming a formidable
L5 body, he is haughty in look mind and speech. The adorable
prajā-pati, the son of Atri again created the Soma plant.*
Dattatreya also, being Vishnu, enjoyed objects of sense while
16 engaged in profound meditation. Durvāsas, deeming his
father and mother to be the chiefest object of devotion,
assuming the form known as ‘ frantic,’ roamed about the earth.
17 Surrounded by the sons of Munis, the lordly yogi Dattatreya
also, desirous of obtaining exemption from all attachments,
18 long immersed himself in a lake. Nevertheless those youths,
resorting to the bank of the lake, did not forsake him, who
19 was magnanimous and exceedingly benign. When after a
hundred heavenly years were ended, all those youthful Munis,
through affection for him, still forsook not the bank of the
20 lake, the Muni, taking his noble wife clothed in heavenly
raiment, beautiful and plump in form, arose from the water,
21 thinking, “If these sons of Munis shall forsake me because
of the presence of a woman, then I will remain free from all
22 attachments.” When nevertheless the sons of the Munis did
not forsake him, he next drank intoxicating liquors in com-
23 pany with his wife. Thereupon they did not forsake him,
though he was engrossed in drinking spirituous liquor in
company with his wife, and though he was rendered impure
by addiction to singing, musical instruments and such like,
24 and also by intercourse with his wife ; deeming that the high-
souled Muni when with her was detached from religious rites.
The lord of yogis, although drinking spirituous liquor, incurred
25 no fault. Dwelling like Mātarisvan within the abodes of
c'aņdālas, drinking strong drink he, skilled in yoga, the lord


* The text appears to be corrupt. Another reading has been suggested by
Babu Hari Mohan Vidyabhushan, the pandit of the Bengal Asiatic Society,
from a MS., utreh pulras for atrik punas ; this is preferable and I have adopt-
ed if.


GARGA’S SPEECH. 101


of yogis, attended by his wife, performed austerities, being
meditated on by yogis who longed for deliverance from
mundane existence.


Canto XVIII.
Garga’s speech.


Arjuna the son of Krita-virya, on succeeding to his kingdom,
resolves to rule worthily—His minister Garga advises him to pro-
pitiate the Muni Dattdtreya—And narrates how, when the Daityas
and Danavas had conquered the gods, the gods by Vrihaspati’s
counsel propitiated Dattātreya, who, being an incarnation of
Vishnu, was enjoying himself with Lakshmi; and how, when
the demons penetrated to Dattdireya's hermitage and seized
Lakshmi, they were destroyed by Dattdtreya.


The son spoke.


Once upon a time Arjuna, the son of Krita-virya, when
Krita-virya had departed to heaven, boing invited by the
ministers and family priest and by the citizens to be in-
augurated as king, spoke thus—

“Tt is not I will wield regal sway, which surpasses hell, O
ministers, if I leave that foolishly unaccomplished, for the sake
of which taxes are levied. Merchants, giving the twelfth part
of their wares to the king, travel on the road protected from
robbers by the watchmen. And the herdsmen and husbandmen
giving the sixth part of the ghee, buttermilk and other pro-
duce, enjoy the rest. Ifthe merchants gave a larger portion
than that out of all their wares and other property, then
that would tend to the destruction of the sacrifices and pious
works of the extortionate king who took it. If people who
follow that and other livelihoods are protected by others,
hell is surely the lot of a king who takes the sixth part as his
revenue. This has been decreed by men of old as the perma-
nent income of a king. When a king fails to afford protection
from thieves, that is the same as theft; and it would be sin in
aking, Therefore if, by performing austerities, he has gained


102


10


1]


12


18


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


CANTO XVIII.


the coveted position of a yogi, he is the only king.who possesses

power to protect the earth. Therefore I indeed will be a

weapon-bearer in the earth, worthy of honour, endowed with

prosperity ; I will not make myself a participator in sin.”
The son spoke.

Understanding that his resolve, standing among the minis-
ters spoke the leading Muni, Garga by name, mighty in
intellect, advanced in age.

“Tf thus thou desirest to act, rightly to govern the king-
dom, then hearken to my speech and act, O royal scion!
Propitiate, O king, Dattátreya, the illustrious, who made
his abode once in a bucket, who protects the three worlds,
who is busied in religious deyotion, who is illustrious, who
looks impartially everywhere, who is a portion of Vishnu, the
upholder of the world, incarnate on earth. By propitiating
him the thousand-eyed Indra gained his abode, which had been
seized by the evil-minded Daityas, and slew the sons of Diti.”

Arjuna spoke.

“How did the gods propitiate majestic Dattétreya P And
how did Indra regain his godhead, of which he had been
deprived by the Daityas ?”

Garga spoke.

"There was a very fierce contest between the gods and
Danavas. The lord of the Daityas was Jambha, and the leader
of the gods was Sac'i’s spouse. And while they fought a
heavenly year elapsed. Then the gods were worsted, the
Daityas were victorious. The gods led by Vipra-c'itti were
vanquished by the Ddnavas: they strove to flee, being dis-
pirited at the victory of their enemies. Desirous of compass-
ing the slaughter of the army of Daityas, accompanied by the
Bālikhilyas* and Rishis, they approached Vrihaspati and
took counsel. Vrihaspati said, * Deign to gratify with your
faith Dattātreya, Atri's high-s.uled son, the ascetic, who is
occupied in improper practices. He the boon-giver will grant


* Read ‘ Bala-khilyas’? These are divine personages of the size of the
thumb.


22


23


24


26


27


29


30


31


GARGA’S SPEECH. 103


you a boon for the destruction of the Daityas; then, O gods,
shall ye and your friends slay the Daityas and Danavas.’

“ Thus exhorted the gods then went to Dattdtreya’s hermi-
tage, and they beheld the high-souled Muni, attended by
Lakshmi, hymned by Gandharvas, and engrossed in guaffing
spirituous liquor. Approaching they expressed in words their
salutations to him, which were the means of accomplishing
their objects. And the heaven-dwellei3 lauded him; they
offered him food, viands, garlands and other presents ; when
he stood, they stood near; when he moved, thoy moved; when
he reposed on his seat, they worshipped him with heads
down-bent. Dattatreya addressed the prostrate gods, * What
desire ye of me, that ye do me this obeisance ?’


“The gods spoke.

‘The Danavas, headed by Jambha, have attacked and seized
upon the earth the atmosphere and the third world, O tiger-
like Muni, and our shares of the sacrifices entirely. Employ
thou thy wit to their destruction and our deliverance, O sin-
less one! Through thy favour do we desire to regain the
three worlds which they now possess.’ i


* Dattūtreya spoke.
. ‘I am drinking strong drink, I have remnants of food in my
mouth, nor have I subdued my senses. How is it, O gods, ye
seek for victory over your enemics even from me?’


“ The gods spoke.
‘Thou art sinless, O lord of the world; no stain hast thou,
into whose heart, purified by the ablution of learning, has
entered the light of knowledge.’


“ Dattdtreya spoke.

‘Tyme is this, O gods! all learning have I, who am impar-
tial in view: but by reason of association with this woman I
am now impure after eating. For commerce with women
when continually pursued tends to depravity.’

< Thus addressed, the gods then spoke again.


104.


32


36


37


38


39


40


41


42


43


46


CANTO XVIII,


“ The gods spoke.


‘This woman, O sinless brāhman! is the mother of the
world; she is not depraved, even like the sun’s halo of rays,
which touches the dvija and the c'aņdāla alike.”


Garga spoke.

“Thus accosted by the gods, Dattdtreya then with a smile
spoke thus to all the thirty gods ;—‘If this be your opinion,
then summon all the Asuras to battle, O most virtuous gods,
and bring them here before my view—delay ye not—in order
that the glory of their strength may be consumed by the fire
of my glance, and that they may all perish from my sight.’

“The valiant Daityas, summoned to battle by the gods in
compliance with that his advice, advanced with fury against
the troops of the gods. The gods being slaughtered by the
Daityas were quickly demoralised by fear; they fled in a
body, seeking protection, to Dattatreya’s hermitage. Even
there the Daityas penetrated, driving forward the heaven-
dwellers, and saw the high-souled mighty Dattdtreya; and
seated at his left side his wife, Lakshmi, loved by all the
worlds, beauteous, her shape most graceful, her countenance
like the moon, her eyes lustrous as the blue water-lily,* her
hips large and breasts full, uttering melodious speech, adorned
with every womanly virtue. Seeing her before them, the
Daityas, seized with longing, could not bear the intense love
with fortitude; and pined in mind to carry her off. Desisting
from the gods, but desirous of seizing the lady, they were
shattered in vigour, being bewitched by that sin. Then com-
pact together they spoke— If only this jewel of womankind
in the three worlds might be our prize, successful then should
we all be—this is our engrossing thought. We are resolved
therefore, let us all, foes of the gods, raise her up, place her
in the palki, and bear her to our abode.’

“Thereupon possessed with longing and thus mutually ex-
horted, afflicted by love, the united Daityas and Dénavas
raised up his virtuous wife, mounted her in the palki, and


* Nilotpala, the blue water-lily, see note f page 29.


47


48


49


50
51


52


53


54


55
56


57


58


GARGA’S SPEECH. 105


placing the palki on their heads set off for their own homes.
Thereon Dattdtreya smiling spoke thus to the gods— Bravo !
ye prosper! Here is Lakshmi borne on the heads of the
Daityas. She has passed beyond the seven stations, she will
reach another, a new one.’ `


“ The gods spoke.
‘Say, O lord of the world, in what stutions has she her
abode; and what result of a man’s does she bestow or destroy ?’


* Dattitroya spoke.

‘When stationed on the foot of men, Lakshmi bestows a
habitation; and when stationed on the thigh, clothing and
manifold wealth; and when taking her position in the
pudenda, a wife; when resting in the bosom, she grants
offspring; when stationed in the heart, she fulfils the thoughts
of men. Lakshmi, is the best fortune of fortunate men.
When resting on the neck, she adorns the neck with loved
relatives and wives, and close contact with those who are
absent. When abiding in the countenance, the sea-born god-
dess bestows beauty fashioned according to her word, real
command also, and poetic fire. When mounted on the head,
she forsakes the man and thence resorts to another abode. And
here, mounted on their head, she will now desert these Dai-
tyas. Therefore seize your arms and slay these foes of the
gods; nor fear them greatly ; I have rendered them impotent ;
and through touching another's wife their merit is consumed,
their might is broken.

Garga spoke.

« Thereupon those enemies of the gods, being slain by divers
weapons and their heads being assailed by Lakshmi, perished—
thus have we heard. And Lakshmi, flying up, reached the
great Muni Dattūtreya, being hymned by all the gods who
were filled with joy at the slaughter of the Daityas. There-


upon the gods, prostrating themselves before the wise Datta-


treya, gained as before the uppermost heaven, being freed from
if thou wishest to


affliction. Likewise do thou also, O king!
obtain matchless sovereignty according to thy desire, straight-
way propitiate him.”

14


106


CANTO XIX


Canto XIX.
The Episode of Dattdtreya.


King Arjuna, taking Garga’s advice, propitiates Dattdireya, who
grants him the boon that he should reign righteously, prosperously and
gloriously—Arjuna is then installed in his kingdom, and his reign is
described—The blessedness of worshipping Vishnu, who ts Dattdtreya,
expounded—The story of Alarka is then begun.


[=>]


10


The son spoke,

Having heard the Rishi speak thus, king Arjuna, Krita-
virya's son, proceeded to Dattūtreya's hermitage and wor-
shipped him with faith; by kneading his feet and other
services, and by offering honey and other delicacies, and by bring-
ing garlands, sandal, and other perfumes, water, fruit &c. ;
also with preparations of rice, and by removing the Ķishi's
fragments of food. Pleased therewith the Muni addressed the
king in the very same way, as he had formerly addressed the
gods.

"Ever indeed am I an object of reproach for my enjoy-
ment of spirituous liquor and other bodily pleaswres, and an
object of reproach for this enjoyment in that I have my
wife here by my side.* Deign thou not thus to obstruct me
who am unable to benefit thee 3 O conciliate one who is able.”

Thus the Muni addressed him ; and Arjuna Kūrtavirya, re-
calling that speech of Garga’s, replied then, bowing before him.


Arjuna spoke,

“Why dost thou beguile me, my lord, resorting to thy
illusory devices. Sinless thou art, and this brāhman lady is
the path of all existence,”

Thus invoked, the benign brāhman answered him, the illus-
trious Kartavirya, the subduer of the earth.

“Ohoose thou a boon; since thou hast declared my secret,
I have felt thereby intense gratification in thee to-day, O
king. And the men who shall worship me with perfumes,
garlands and such like, with offerings also of meat and strong


# The text appears obscure.


11


12


13


14:


l5


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


ARJUNA AND DATTĀTREYA, 107


drink, and with sweetmeats accompanied with clarified butter,
—and who shall worship me and Lakshmi with songs also and
the worship of brāhmans, and with lute, flute, conchs and other
gladsome musical instruments ;—to them I will give supreme
gratification, children, wives, wealth and other blessings, and I
will ward off the violent blows of scorners. Do thou then
choose the choice boon that thy mind desires: my face is very
gracious to thee through thy declaration of my secret name.”


Kartavirya spoke.

“Tf my lord thou art gracious, then grant me supreme pros-
perity, whereby I may protect my people and may not incur
iniquity. I desire to have knowledge in the customs of others,
irresistibility in fight, and the dexterity of a thousand arms.
May my paths be unimpeded on hill, in air, in water, and on
land, and in all the hells! And may my death come from a
superior man! And let me have moreover a guide to the
right path when I stray from the path: and may my guests*
be worthy of praise in the imperishable bestowal of wealth!
And let there be freedom from impoverishment in my country
with repeated recollection of me! May my faith in thee be
ever in truth unwavering !”


Dattitreya spoke.
« Thou shalt receive all those boons in the matters that thou
hast specified; and through my favour thou shalt become a
universal monarch.”


Jada spoke.

Thereon Arjuna prostrated himself before Dattātreya. And
having convened his subjects, he duly received his inaugura-
tion. Then he . the Haihaya, established in his kingdom,
having received supreme prosperity from Dattitreya, owning
exceeding power, made proclamation ;— Henceforth whoever
besides me shall lay hold of a weapon, I shall put him to death
as a robber or as one bent on injuring others” After this


order had been issued, there was no man that bore arms in


* For 'tithayah read tithayah, days?


108
24


25


26


27


28


29


30
81


32


33


34


35


36


37


CANTO Xx.


that country, except that valiant tiger-warrior. He it was
who was the guardian of the villages, and he the guar-
dian of the cattle. He it was who was the guardian of the
fields and the protector of the dvijas. He also was the
guardian of ascetics, and the guardian of caravans; the guar-
dian of those who were sinking amid the fears of robbers,
rogues, fire, arms and so forth, as in the sea, and of those who
were involved in other calamities; he was the destroyer of
hostile warriors. He it was who was ever remembered as
the upholder of mankind. And there was exemption from im-
poverishment, while he ruled as king. He offered many
sacrifices, complete with gifts and fees. He also practised
austerities. He performed exploits in battles.

Having seen his prosperity and exceeding honour, the Muni
Angiras spoke.

“Assuredly kings will not follow in Kartavirya’s steps,
either with sacrifices, alms-giving, or austerities, or with high
exploits in battle.”

On the very day when the king received prosperity from
Dattūtreya, he performed sacrifice to Dattūtreya. And there
all his subjects having seen the king’s supreme prosperity
that day offered up sacrifices with devout attention.

Such is this magnanimity of the wise Dattatreya; who
ts Vishnu, the guru of all things movable and immov-
able, endless, high-souled. In the Puranas are narrated the
manifestations of the bearer of the bow Sārnga, who is endless,
inscrutable, the bearer of the conch discus and club. What-
ever man ponders on his highest form, happy is he, and he
may soon pass over mundane existence. ‘Ho! I am ever in
truth easy of reach by faith even to Vaishnavas,’—how is it
that a man should not have recourse to him, whose are these
very words? For the destruction of unrighteousness, and for
the practice of righteousness, the god,who is without beginning’
and without end, preserves the stability of nature.

Moreover I tell thee of Alarka* also, the famous birth.


* Read Alarkam for Anarkam.


THE STORY OF KUVALAYASVA. 109


And thus has been related the union between the high-souled
Rajarshi Alarka, who was faithful to his father, and Datt4-
treya.


Canto XX.
The Story of Kuvalayāšva.


King S'atru-jit?s son Rita-dhvaja receives into intimate friendship two


Naga princes in the guise of bréhmans—They live with him by day,
and spend the nights in Rasdtala —They extol him to their father, and
relate his story as follows—Rita-dhvaja sets out to succour the brahman
Gdlava against a Daitya Pdtūla-ketu, with the aid of a wondrous horse


named Kuvalaya.


&


1


2


8


Jada spoke.


There was formerly a valorous king named Satru-jit, in
whose sacrifices Indra was pleased by receiving the soma
juice. His son was a valiant destroyer of his foes; the peer
of Vrihaspati, Indra and the Ašvins in intellect, prowess and
beauty. The king’s son was continually surrounded by young
princes, who were his equals in age, intellect, virtue, prowess
and behaviour. He was sometimes resolved on investigating
the whole Sāstra literature; at other times engrossed* with
poetry, dialogue, singing and the drama. Moreover he enjoyed
himself both with gambling pastimes, and in the discipline of
all kinds of weapons: he was intent on the study of elephants,
horses, and chariots suitable for war.t The king’s son en-
joyed himself in company with the young princes, being
absorbed in pleasure by day and night alike. But while they
sported there, numbers of young bréhmans, young princes
and young vaisyas of the same age came to enjoy themselves


affectionately.
Now after a time two young Nagas, the sons of Ašvatara,Ļ


% Wor -sambhavaih read -sambhavaļ ?
+ The text appears corrupt ; for yogydni yuddha- read yuddha-niyogya- ?


t A Naga prince.


110


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


CANTO XX.


visited the surface of the earth from the Ntga-world. Dis-
guised in form as bréhmans, youthful, handsome, those two,
in company with the young princes and the other dvijas,
remained there linked in friendship, occupied with various
amusements. And all those young princes and the young
brāhmans and vaišyas, and those two young Naga princes
engaged in. bathing, kneading the limbs &c., adorned them-
selves with garments and perfumes, and occupied themselves
with the business of kings.* As day after day went by, the
two young Nagas enjoyed themselves, being bound by affection
for the king’s son. And the king’s son received the highest
pleasure from those two, by various amusements, and by jests,
conversation, dc. Apart from those two he neither ate, nor
bathed, nor drank sweet drinks; he did not disport himself,
nor take up his weapons to improve his accomplishmentss
And those two, spending the night in Rasitala,t mainly oc-
cupied in sighing in the absence of that high-souled prince,
visited him day after day.

* With whom do ye both, my sons, find supreme affection
in the mortal-world ?” thus inquired their father of both
those young Nagas. “ Whilst I have seen you both many days
here in Pātāla, I ever behold you both with kindly counte-
nances by day and night.”


Jada spoke.

Thus questioned by their father himself, the two illustri-
ous sons of the Naga king falling prostrate, with hands reve-
rently joined, replied.

The sons spoke.

“Tt is the son of Satru-jit, dear father, famed by name as
Rita-dhvaja, shapely, upright in conduct, a hero, proud, kind
of speech, no sneaking tale-bearer,t eloquent, learned,
friendly, a mine of excellencies, an honourer of the honour-
worthy, intelligent, modest, adorned with courtesy. Owrmind,


* The text seems incorrect, For -samyuktdmé read -samyuktáé?
+ The lower world.
} Fer andprish{a-katho read andprishtha-katho,


22


23


25


26


27


28


29


30


THE STORY OF KUVALAYASVA. 111


being ravished by attendance on him, affection for him and
pleasure with him, finds no delight in the Naga-world or the
air-world.* By separation from him chill Pātāla does not
tend to warm us, dear father ; through union with him the sun
by day tends to gladden us.”


The father spoke.

“He is the happy son of a holy father, whose excellencies
such accomplished persons as ye are thus celebrate even in his
absence. There ace evil-dispositioned men learned in the
Sšstras ; there are good-dispositioned men who are fools :
but I esteem him, my sons, the happier who equally possesses
knowledge of Sastras and a good disposition. A father has
indeed a son in that son, whose friends always declare his
friendly qualities, and whose enemies his valour, among the
good. Perchance ye have preferred a request to him asa
benefactor: he has done something to satisfy your mind, my
children. Happy is he! The life of each high-born one has
been well lived, when petitioners to him turn not away, and the
petition of his friends is not powerless. In my house what-
ever gold and other metals, jewels, animals for riding, and seats
there are, and whatever else imparts delight ; that should be
given him without hesitation. Fie on the life of that man,
who, while failing to make a return to beneficent friends,
believes that he really lives! The wise man who, cloud-like,
showers benefits on his circle of friends and injury on his
foes,—men wish him prosperity.”


The sons spoke.

«What might any one do for that successful man, whose
petitioners are all always honoured in his house with the grant
of all their desires. The jewels that are in his house, whence i
can we have them in Pátála? And whence his animals for
riding, his seats, and carriages, ornaments and clothing P The
knowledge that he has, is found nowhere else. Even for the
wise he is, dear father, the ablest remover of alldoubts. One
thing he has done, and that in our opinion was impossible of


* For bhuvo loke read bhuvarloke ?


112 CANTO XX.


accomplishment, except by Brahmá, Vishņu,* S'iva, and the
other lords.”+


The father spoke.
35 “ Nevertheless I wish to hear what was his highest deed,
whether it be impossible or possible of accomplishment. Ig
36 anything impossible to the wise? Men who have determi-
nation attain to the position of the gods, lordship over the
immortals, and the position of being worshipped by them, or
37 any other coveted arduous thing. There is nothing unknown,
or inaccessible, or unobtainable, either in heaven or here,
to strenuous men who have brought their mind, organs
38 and soul under control. An ant by walking travels thousands
of yojanas ; even Garuda, if he does not move, does not move
39 asingle foot. Where is the surface of the earth, and where
is the site of the polar star? Yet Dhruva the son of king
40 Uttāna-pida, a denizen of the earth, reached it. Relate then
how the good young prince did his feat, that ye may discharge
your indebtednees, my sons !””


: The sons spoke.

41 “The high-souled prince has told us this feat he did before,
dear father; that he spent his youth, being noted for his good
conduct.

42 “But formerly, dear father, a certain brāhman, the wise
Gálava, bringing a magnificent steed, approached Satru-jit ;

43 and replied to the king— A certain vile Daitya, an evil-doer,
O king, springing up, is destroying my hermitage without

44 cause day and night, assuming the several forms of a lion, an
elephant, and forest-roving beasts, and of other small-bodied

45 animals. When I am absorbed in profound meditation and
deep contemplation, and intent on vows of silence, he raises

46 obstacles so that my mind wavers. Thou art able instantly
to burn him with the fire of thy anger, but not we. DoI
desire that austerities arduously acquired should be squan-


* Govinda.
+ The text seems incorrect. For tasyristi kartuvyam road tasya kritam
kdryam ? And for ffvardd read isvardn ?


KUVALAYASVA GUARDS THE BRAHMAN GĀLAVA. 113


47 dered, O king? But one day O king, having perceived the

demon, I heaved a sigh, being distressed by him, and exced-

48 ingly-depressed in mind. Thereupon this horse fell forth-

with from the sky itself, and a voice from no corporeal being

49 exclaimed—hearken to it, O lord of men !—“ Unwearied the

noble steed can traverse the whole circle of the earth with

50 the sun. He has been produced for thee. Nor is his

course stayed in Pātāla, in the sky or in water; nor does he

succumb when moving in every direction, or even among the

51 mountains. Since he will traverse the whole circle of the

earth unwearied, he will become famed in the world under the

52 name Kuvalaya. And the base sinful Danava, who day and

night torments thee, him shallslay, O brahman, the king named

53 Satru-jit mounted on this horse ; and his son Rita-dhvaja get-

* ting this jewel of a steed shall attain to fame by means of him.”

54 Inow have met with thee: do thou, O king, ward off that

obstructer of my austerities, for a king is interested therein.

55 Therefore I have told thee, O king, of this gem of a horse: do

thou command thy son, so that righteousness may not perish.’

56 “ At his word the king, righteous in soul, mounting his son

Rita-dhvaja, who had performed a solemn ceremony, on that

57 gem of a horse, sent him away then with Gūlava. And the
Muni, taking him, departed to his own hermitage-home.”


Canto XXI.
Kuvalaydšva's marriage with Maddlasā.

Rita-dhvaja, called also Kuvalaydšva, wounds and pursues the
Daitya Pétéla-ketu.—In the pursuit he falls through a chasm into
Pdtdla and reaches the city Purandara-pura—There he meets Madd-
lasd, (daughter of the Gandharva king Visvdvasu,) whom Patdla-ketu
had carried of'—He marries her with the help of her companion
Kundala, who then admonishes them on the blessings of marriage—
He kills the Daityas who oppose him, and brings her home to his area
who praises and blesses him.

The father spoke.
1 > “Relate my sons what the king's son did after he Penexted.
in company with Gālava; your story is a surprising one.’
15


114


CANTO XXI.


The sons spoke.

“ The king's son, residing in Gélava’s pleasant hermitage,
subdued every obstacle to the reciters of the Veda.

“ The base Danava, infected with frenzy and arrogance, did
not know the prince Kuvalayāšva who was dwelling in Gūla-
va's hermitage. Then assuming the form of a hog, he ap-
proached to outrage the brāhman Gálava, who was busicd in
the evening service. On an out-cry by the Muni's disciples,
the king’s son hastily mounting the horse pursued the boar,
shooting arrows at him; and drawing his mighty bow, that
was decorated with pretty designs, he struck the boar with an
arrow shaped like the half-moon. Wounded by the iron
arrow, the wild beast, intent on its own speedy escape, set off
for' the large forest dense. with mountain trees. The horse
followed him impetnously, swift as thought, being urged on
by the king’s son who was obeying his father’s,command.
After traversing thousands of yojanas with speed the quick-
paced boar fell into an open chasm in the earth. Immediately
after him, the king’s son also, on his horse, fell into the great
chasm, which was enveloped in crass darkness. Then the
beast was lost to the sight of the king’s son therein; and he
saw Pātāla clearly there, but not that animal,

“Next he saw the city called Purandara-pura filled with
hundreds of golden palaces, embellished ` with ramparts.
Entering it, he beheld no man there in the city,
wandered about he next saw there a woman hastening along.
He questioned her, the slender-limbed, ‘ Why or on whose
account are you proceeding ?’ The noble lady replied not a
word and ascended into the palace. And the king’s son
fastening up his horse on one side follo
wide-eyed with amazement but fearless.

“Then he saw reclining on a very spacious couch, all made
of gold, a solitary maiden, full of love, as it were Rati ;—her
face like the clear moon, her eye-brows beautiful, large-hipped
and full-breasted, scarlet-lipped,* slender-bodied, her eyes


and as he


wed her indeed, being


© Vimba-lipped. The Vimba, Cephalandra indica (Momordica monadel-


18


19


20


21


22


28
29


31


pha,
It is


KUVALAYĀŠVA MEETS WITH MADALASA. 115


like the blue water-lily, her nails red-tipped, black-complexion-
ed, soft-skinned, her hands and feet copper-coloured, her
thighs round and tapering, her teeth beautiful, her locks
dark-blue fine and strong.

“ On seeing her, lovely in every limb, as it were a creeper on
the body of the god of Love, the king’s son thought her the
deity of Rasdtala. And the beauteous maiden immediately
she saw him, with his dark blue wavy hair, and well-developed
thighs shoulders and arms, deemed him the god of Love.
And she rose up, the noble lady, feeling an agitation in her
mind. The slender one was overcome at once by bashfulness,
astonishment and dejection. ‘Who is this that has come ?
Is he a god, or a Yaksha, or a Gandharva, or a Naga, or a
Vidyddhara, or a man-accomplished in virtuous deeds and
love?” Thinking thus, and sighing often, she seated herself
on the ground and then the fascinating-eyed lady swooned
away. The king's son, being also smitten by the arrow of
Love, revived, her, saying ‘Do not fear.’ And then! that
maiden, whom the high-souled prince saw before, being dis- .
tressed took a fan and fanned her. After reviving her, the
maiden, on being questioned by him, somewhat bashfully made
known the cause of her friend's fainting. And the noble lady
related to the king’s son in detail all the cause of the fainting,
which occurred at the sight of him ; and also her story as ‘the
other lady had told it.

“ The lady spoke.

‘The king of the Gandharvas is named Visvávasu, and this
is his beautiful-browed daughter called Madélasé. The son
of Vajra-ketu, a fierce Danava, the cleaver of his foes, was
named Patala-ketu, a dweller within Pūtšla. He, raising an
illusion of darkness, carried off this maiden when she was in
her garden, unattended -by me, and brought her here, the
villain. On the coming thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight,
it was foretold, an Asura shall carry lier off; but he does not


i


Roxb.) bears a bright scarlet berry, 2 inches long, and 1 in diameter.
a climber, common everywhere (Hooker, vol, II, p. 621; Roxb. p. 696).


116 |


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


39


45


CANTO XXI.


deserve the lovely-limbed maden, auy more than a sudra
deserves to hear the Veda. And when the day was over,
Surabhi said to the maiden who was ready to kill herself,
“This base Dunava shall not get thee. He who shall pierce
him, when he* reaches the world of mortals, with arrows,
that one, O noble lady, shall shortly be thy husband.” And
I am her prudent companion, Kundalā by name, the daughter
of Vindhyavan, and the wife of Pushkara-mdlin, O warrior.
My husband having been killed by Sumbha, I am wandering,
in fulfilment of a vow, from one place of pilgrimage to another
by a divine course, ready for another world. Patala-ketu,
evil-souled, when he had assumed a wild boar’s form was
pierced by some one with an arrow, to secure the deliverance
of the Munis. And I having really followed him, have
returned in haste: it is indeed true, the base Dānava has
been smitten by some one.

* And this lady fell into a swoon: hear what is the cause.
The maiden is full of affection for thee eveu at first sight, O
pride-inspirer! who resemblest the sons of the Devas, distin-
guished for gracious speech and other virtues. And she is
allotted as wife to the other, who has wounded the Dinava.
For this reason she fell inro the deep swoon, and all her life
the slender-limbed maiden will indeed experience suffering.
On thee is fixed her heart, O enamoured hero ; and she will
have no other* husband all her life long. Hence is her suffer-
ing. Even so was Surabhi's prophecy. But I have come here,
my lord, through affection for her, experiencing
there is in truth no difference between one’s friend’s body and
one’s own. If this lovely lady gets an approved hero for her
husband, then assuredly may I engage in austerities with a
mind at ease. But who art thou? and wherefore hast thou
come here, O high-minded hero? Art thou a Deva, or Daitya,
Gandharva, Nūga, or Kinnara? For not here can men come,
nor is human body such as thine.
I have spoken truthfully.’


* The Danaya,


grief; for


Declare thou that, even as


t For c'dnyo read ndnyo.


46


47


48


49


50


51


52


53


55


56


57


58


59


KUVALAYĀŠVA MARRIES MADALASA. 117


“ Kuvalayāšva spoke.


‘What thou askest me, O lady skilled in holy law, who I
am and why I have come, hear that, O lady bright of under-
standing! I tell it thee from the beginning. Son of king
Satru-jit, I was despatched by my father, O beauteous one!
I reached Gālavas hermitage for the purpose of protecting
the Muni. And while I was affording protection to the Munis
who observe the holy law, there came oné, disguised in hog-
like form, to hamper them. Pierced by me with an arrow,
shaped like the half-moon, he rushed away with great speed:
mounted on horseback I pursued him. Suddenly I fell'as in
play into a chasm, and my horse also. Thus mounted on
horseback, wandering alone in darkness, I met with light,
and saw thee lady; and when questioned, thou gavest me no
answer whatever. And following thee I entered this splen-
did palace. Thus I have related this truly. No Deva am I,
or Dānava, nor Naga, nor Gandharva or Kinnara, O sweet-
smiling one. The Devas and the rest are all objects of venera-
tion to me, O Kuņdalā. Iamaman; thou must not be afraid
of this at any time.’


The sons spoke.


“ Gladdened thereby, the noble maiden, gazing dully through
bashfulness on the noble countenance of her friend, uttered
no word. And again the friend, being gladdened, answered
him, after saying to her, ‘Truly has he related it, O maiden
obedient to Surabhi’s word !’


“ Kundala spoke.

‘ O hero, unvarnished truth is the word thou hast spoken;
and her heart, perceiving it no otherwise, will gain com-
posure. Surpassing beauty indeed clothes the moon, and
light clothes the sun: prosperity attends the happy man,
fortitude the resolute man, and patience the great man.
Thou indeed hast assuredly slain that wicked base Dinava:
how shall Surabhi, the mother of cattle, speak falsely ?
Therefore happy verily is this maiden and blessed with good


118 CANTO XX1.


fortune, in gaining union with thee. Perform, O hero, the
needful ceremony, celebrated according to rule.’


The sons spoke.

60 “*T am ready to comply,’ thus spoke the king’s son to her,
O father. And she thought of him, the large-thighed* hero,
61 the chief of his race. And he taking fuel and kisa grass,
accepted her immediately, through affection for Maddlasi and
62 through respect for Kundala. Kindling fire, he sacrificed,
being conversant with the mantras, and caused the blessed
maiden to take part in the marriage ceremony. And as he
63 had come, he departed then, being a wise man, to his own

hermitage-abode for the purpose of practising austerities.
“ And the companion} said to the maiden ‘My wishes are
64 fulfilled, O lovely-faced one. Now that I have seen thee, re-
„Splendent in beauty, wedded to this husband, I will perform
65 matchless austerities, with a mind at ease; and, having my
sins washed away in the waters of the sacred pilgrimage-

places, I shall not again become such as I am now.”
“ And then bending courteously she addressed the king’s
son, being desirous to go, yet shaken in her speech through
love for her friend.


“ Kundala spoke.
66 *No counsel should be given even by men to such as thou
art, O man of boundless understanding! and much less there-
67 fore by women; hence I offer thee no counsel. But yet thou
hast caused me also to confide im thee with a mind drawn by
love towards this slender-waisted one: I will remind thee, O
68 foe-queller. Verily a husband must ever cherish and protect
his wife. A wife is her husband's help-meet unto the com-


* For tumbūrum read tumborum, “whose thighs are like the tumba,” a
kind of long gourd, Lagenaria vulgaris (Cucurbita lagenaria, Roxb.) It ap-
pears to be a wild variety. The common plant is the Sanskrit alfvu, the
modern kadu or ldw, It bears a large, thick, membranous or almost woody
fruit, often 14 foot long, usually bottle- or dumb-bell-shaped (Hooker, vol. II,
p. 613; Roxb., p. 700). i

+ For sakhtm read sakht ?


69
70
71
72
73


74


75


76


78


79


80


81


82
83


KUVALAYASVA RETURNS WITH MADĀLASĀ. 119


plete attainment of religion, wealth and love. When ‘both


_wife and husband are controlled by each other, then all the


three combine, religion, wealth and love. How without a wife
does a man attain to religion or wealth or love, my lord? In
her the three are set. So also without a husband a wife is
powerless to fulfil religion and the other duties. This three-
fold group resides in wedded life: Men cannot perform the
worship of the gods, pitris and dependants and of guests, with-
out a wife, O prince! And riches, although acquired by men,
although brought to their own home, waste away without a
wife, or even where a worthless wife dwells. But there is
indeed no love for him without a wife,—this is clearly evident.
By community of the wedded pair in their duties he may
attain to the three duties. A man satisfies the pitris with
children; and guests with preparations of food ; likewise the
immortal gods with worship; as a man he satisfies a virtuous
wife. Moreover for a woman there is no religion, love,
wealth or offspring without a husband. Hence this three-
fold group rests upon wedded life. This have I spoken to
you both; and I go as I have wished. Prosper thou with her
in riches, children, happiness and long life.’
The sons spoke.

“ Having spoken thus, she embraced her friend and bowed
to the prince; and she departed by a divine course according
to her own purpose.

*€ And Satru-jit’s son, being desirous to depart from Patdla,
mounted her on the horse but was perceived by Danu’s off-
spring. Thereon they suddenly shouted out, * She is being
carried off, she is being carried far away, the pearl among
maidens, whom Pátála-ketų brought from heaven. Besides
he has won the might of the Danavas, the iron-staff, the sword,
the club, the spear, the bow, together with Pūtdla-ketu.”
‘Stand, stand!’ thus exclaiming, the Dūnava chiefs then
rained* a shower of arrows and spears on the king’sson. And
Satru-jit’s son, excelling in valour, split their weapons with


* For vavarshur read vavrishur ?


120
84.


85


86


97


98


99


CANTO XXI.


a multitude of arrows, laughing as if in sport. In a moment
the surface of Patila was covered with the swords, lances,
spears and arrows, which were split by the multitudes of
Rita-dhvaja’s arrows. Then taking up Tvashtri’s weapon
he hurled it against the Dinavas; thereby all those Džnavas
together with Pātūla-ketu were turned into heaps of bones
bursting with the excessive heat from blazing rings of fire,
just as the oceans were burnt up-when the fire of sa fell
on them.

“Then the prince, seated on horseback, after slaying the
chiefs of the Asuras, came to his father’s city with that pearl
of women; dnd prostrating himself he recounted every-
thing to his father, both the visit to Pátála, and the meeting
with Kuņdalā, and the meeting with Madālasā, and the con-
flict with the Dānavas, and their slaughter with the weapon,
and the return.

“ His father, having thus heard the exploits of his graceful-
minded son, was both filled with affection and embracing his
son spoke thus—‘I have been delivered by thee, O son,
worthy, magnanimous, who hast saved from their fears the
Munis who follow true religion. The fame handed down
by my ancestors has been further augmented by me: thou, O
son, mighty in valour, hast multiplied it. Now he, who does
not diminish the glory, wealth or heroism which his father
has acquired, is known as an ordinary man. But whoever
strikes out by his own might fresh heroism still, exceeding his
father’s heroism, the wise call him great among men. Who-
ever lessens the wealth and heroism and glory acquired by
his father, the wise call him base among men. I then had
accomplished even as thou hast the brdhman’s deliverance.
And the visit to Patala that thou madest, and the destruction
of the Asuras that thou didst effect, even this, my child, is
in excess, hence thou art great among men. Therefore thou
art fortunate, my boy. I indeed in getting thee, such a son
as this, excelling in virtues, am to be praised even by
righteous men. That man does not, I hold, gain the affec-
tion of adopted sous, who dves not surpass his son in wis-


KUVALAYASVA’S HAPPY LIFE. 121


dom, liberality and valour. Fie on the birth of him who
100 is known in the world through his father! He who attains
fame through a son, his birth ts the birth of a nobly born man.
The fortunate man is known by reason of himself; the
101 ordinary man by reason of his father and grandfather; the
base man attains distinction through his mother’s relations and
his mother. Therefore, my son, prosper thou in riches and
102 heroism and in happiness. And never let this daughter of
the Gandharva be parted from thee.’
“Thus he was addressed by his father kindly again and
103 again in various sort; and after an embrace he was permitted
to depart with his wife to his own residence. He lived there
104 joyfully in the society of his wife in his father’s city, and also
elsewhere in gardens, woods, and mountain-tops. And she,
the lovely, the beautiful-waisted, having prostrated herself
before the feet of her parents-in-law, thereafter morning by
morning enjoyed herself in companionship with him.”


Canto XXII.
The story of Kuvalaydsva (continued) : Maddlasd’s death.


Pétdla-ketu’s brother Tdla-ketu, in the guise of a Mum dwelling on
the bank of the Yamund, induces Kuvalaydsva to guard his hermitage,
on the pretext that he had certain ceremonies to perform in the
water—Disappearing within the water he goes to the palace and reports
that Kuvalaydšva had died in battle with the Daityas—Madālasā dies
through grief, and the king and queen utter their lamentations, and
perform the prince's obsequies—Tdla-ketu then returns to the hermitage
and releases the prince.

The sons spoke.


1 “Many days afterwards the king again addressed his son,
` ¢Mounting this horse go quickly to rescue the brāhmans,
2 and patrol the earth, morning by morning, day by day,
for the brāhmans' freedom from molestation must always be

3 sought after. There are evil-behaved Danavas in hundreds,
born in wickedness ; do thou so act that the Munis may ex-


16


10


12


13


14


15


16


17


CANTO XXII.


perience no obstacle from them.’ Then the king’s son did as
he -was directed by his father. After traversing the whole
earth, the king’s son did obeisance to his father’s feet in
the forenoon, as each day came round; and then during the
rest of the day he enjoyed himself with her, the slender-
waisted one.

“One day, however, while moving about, he saw Pitila-
ketu’s younger brother Tāla-ketu, who had fixed his hermitage
on the bank of the Yamuné. The wily Dánava had assumed a
Muni's shape. Bearing the previous enmity in mind, he
accosted the king’s son—‘O royal prince! I accost thee, do
thou then accomplish my request if thou art willing: nor must
thou refuse my petition, thou that art true to thy promise!
I will offer a sacrifice to Dharma, and the oblations also
must be made. ‘The funeral piles must be put up there, since
they have not yet ascended into the air. Hence give me,
O hero! this thy own ornament that is about thy neck
for gold, and guard thou my hermitage, until I praise
within the water the god Varuna, the lord of marine animals,
with the mantras prescribed by the Vedas for Varuna’s
worship, which cause creatures to thrive, and in haste
return.’ To him as he spoke thus the prince did obeisance
and then gave his neck-ornament, and replied to him, ‘Go
sir! with a mind at ease; I will stay in this very spot near
thy hermitage according to thy command, Sir! until thy
coming again. No man shall cause thee molestation here
while I stay. And do thou in perfect confidence, without
hurry, O brāhman, accomplish thy purpose.’

“ Being thus addressed by him, he then plunged into the
water in the river, while the prince guarded the other’s magic-
raised hermitage. And Tāla-ketu went from that river to


the prince's town, and spoke thus in the presence of Madálasá
and other persons.


“ Tāla-ketu spoke.


‘The hero, Kuvalayāšva, while guarding the ascetics close
to my hermitage, fighting with a certain wicked Daitya


28


29


30


31


32


33


MADĀLASA'S DEATH THROUGH DECEĪT, 123


and striking down the brāhmans' foes in the conflict with all
his might, was pierced in the breast with a spear by the
wicked Daitya who resorted to magic. While dying he
gave me this neck-ornament; and šūdra ascetics gave him
to the fire in the wood. And the frightened horse which
uttered distressed neighings, with tearful eyes, was led off
by that cruel Dánava. This beheld I, malicious, evil-doer.
Whatever should forthwith be done in this matter, let it be
done without delay. And take this neck-ornament as a con-
solation to your hearts, for we ascetics may not have anything
to do with gold.’


The sons spoke.

“ Having so spoken, he left it on the ground and departed
as he had come. And those people afflicted with grief, fell
down, ill with fainting. Immediately recovering conscious-
ness all those royal handmaids, and the queens and the king
lamented sorely distressed. But Madálasá seeing that his
neck-ornament, and hearing that her husband was slain,
quickly yielded up her dear life.

“hereon a great cry arose in the houses of the citizens,
even as there was in the king’s own house. And the king
beholding Madilasā bereft of her husband and dead, made
answer to all the people, having recovered his composure
after due reflection. ‘Ye should not weep, nor I, I perceive,
when one considers the fleetingness of even all relations.
Why do I bewail my son ? Why do I bewail my daughter-in-
law ? I think after due reflection, that neither should be
bewailed, since events happen as they are fated. Why
should my son, who in obedience to me has met death when
engaged in guarding the dvijas according to my command,
be bewailed by the intelligent? Assuredly if my son has
quitted his body on account of those dvijas, will not that body,
to which he resorts, cause him to rise higher? And how is it
possible that this high-born lady, thus faithful to her husband,
should be bewailed P For women have no deity besides a hus-
band. For she would have to be thus bewailed by us, and her
relatives, and other compassionate persons, if she were


124


35
36


37


38


39


41


42


45


CANTO XXII.


separated from her husband. But this noble lady, who on
hearing of the death of her husband has immediately follow-
ed her husband, should not for this reason be bewailed by
the wise. Those women should be bewailed, who are sepa-
rated from their husbands ; those should not be bewailed who
have died with them: but this grateful wife has not expe-
rienced separation from her husband. Verily what woman
in both the worlds would think her husband human, who
gives ‘er all happinesses both in this world and the next ?
Neither should he be bewailed, nor yet this lady, nor I, nor
his mother. We were all rescued by him who resigns his life
for the sake of the brihmans. For my high-souled son, by
relinquishing his body which was half consumed, has freed
himself from his debt to the brahmans, to me, to religion.
Though losing his life in war, he did not surrender his
mother’s honour, the spotless fame of my family, or his own
heroism.’

“Then Kuvalayáśva’s mother, having heard of her son's
death, looked upon her husband and, immediately after her
husband, spoke similarly.


“ The mother spoke.


‘Not such gratification did my mother or my sister get,
O king! as I have felt in hearing that my son has been slain
while protecting the Muni. Those who die, sighing, in
great distress, afflicted with illness, while their relatives
lament,—their mother has brought forth children in vain.
Those who, while fearlessly fighting in battle to guard cattle
and dvijas, perish crushed with arrows, they indeed are
really men in the world. He who turns not his back on sup-
pliants, friends, and enemies, in him his father has a real
son, and in him his mother has given birth to a hero. A
woman’s pain of conception reactes, I think, its success at
the time when her son either vanquishes his foes or is slain
in battle.’


The sons spoke.
“ Then the king bestowed the funeral obsequies on his son


KUVALAYASYA’S RETURN HOME. 125


and daughter: and having gone forth bathed and offered
the water to his son. i

47 « And Téla-ketu also, having issued from the Yamunš's
water, spoke this honied speech respectfully to the king's

48 son. ‘Depart, O prince; thou hast caused me to be success-
ful. While thou hast remained stationary here, the long

49 wished-for business, and the sacrificial acts to Varuna the
high-souled lord of the ocean, all that I have completed, as
I had desired.’

50 “The king’s son did him reverence and departed to his
father’s city, mounting on that steed which sped along like
Garuda and the wind.”


Canto XXIII.
Kuvalaydšva's visit to Patdla.


Kuvalaydšva, returning home, learnt what had happened—He
mourns his loss, and shunning women lives a cheerful life—The Naga
king Asvatara, hearing this story, engages in austerities and extols Saras-
vati—Sarasvatt, propitiated by him, restores him his companion
Kambala, and gives them both perfect skill in poetry and music—Both
propitiate S'iva, who at their request gives Ašvatara Maddlasé as his
daughter, restored to life as before—At Asvatara’s suggestion, his sons
invite Kuvalaydšva to their palace in Pdtdla and introduce him to
their father—Asvatara asks Kuvalaydšva to relate his story.


The sons spoke.

1 The king’s son reaching then his own city in haste, desirous
to salute his parents’ fect respectfully, and eager to see Madá-

2 lasá, beheld some people of the city downcast, with joyless
countenances, and then again astonished with joyful faces:

3 and other people with wide-open eyes, exclaiming “ Hurrah !
hurrah!” embracing one another, filled with the utmost

4 curious interest. '* Long mayestthou live O most fortunate
prince! Thy adversaries are slain ;- gladden thy parents’ mind
and ours also, which is relieved of anxiety.

5 Surrounded before and behind by the citizens who were
crying out thus, his joy forthwith aroused, he entered his


126


CANTO XXIII.


father’s palace. And his father and mother and other rela-
tions embraced him, and then invoked on him auspicious bless-
ings, saying “Long mayest thou live!” Thereupon having


done obeisance, surprised at what this might mean, he ques-


17


18


19
20


tioned his father; and he duly explained it to him.

On hearing that his wife Madalasa, the darling of his heart,
was dead, and seeing his parents before him, he fell into the
midst of a sea of shame and grief. He thought, “ The maiden,
on hearing I was dead, gave up life, the virtuous one: fie on
me harsh-minded that Iam! Malignant am I, worthless am
I, that I live most pitiless, when deprived of that deer-eyed
one who encountered death for my sake!” Again he thought,
having firmly composed his mind, banishing hastily the rising _
distraction, and breathing hard outwards and inwards, feeling
undone.

“If I abandon life because she has died on my account,
what benefit shall I confer on her? Yet this would be praise-
worthy in women’s opinion. Or if being downcast I weep,
repeatedly exclaiming ‘ah! my beloved,’ still this would not
be praiseworthy in us; for we are men assuredly. Frigid with
grief, downcast, ungarlanded, uncleansed, I shall then become
an object of contumely to my adversaries. I must cut off my
enemies, and obey the king, my father. And how then can I
resign my life which is dependant on him? But here, I con-
sider, I must renounce pleasure with woman, and yet that
renunciation does not tend to benefit the slender-limbed one.
Nevertheless in every way I must practise harmlessness, which
works neither benefit nor injury. This is little for me to do
on her account who resigned her life on mine.”


The sons spoke.

Having thus resolved, Rita-dhvaja then performed the
ceremony of offering water, and immediately afterwards per-
formed the obsequies ; and he spoke again.

Rita-dhvaja spoke.

“Tf she, Madilast, the slender-limbed, were not my wife, I
would not have another companion in this life. Besiden
that fawn-eyed daughter of the Gandharva, I will not love


21


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


KUVALAYASVA’S WIDOWED LIFE. 127


any woman—so have I spoken in truth. Having given up
that wife, who observed true religion, whose gait was like the
elephant’s, I will not assent to any woman—this have I declared
in truth.”


The sons spoke.

And having renounced, dear father, all the delights of
woman, bereft of her, he continued to sport in company with
his peers, his equals in age, in the perfection of his good dis-
position. This was his supreme deed, dear father. Who is
able to do that which is exceedingly difficult of accomplishment
by the gods, how much more so by others ?


Jada spoke. .

Having heard their speech, their father became dissatificd ;
and after reflecting the Naga king addressed his two sons, as
if in ridicule.

The Naga king Ašvatara spoke.

“ If men, deeming a thing impossible, will put forth no effort
in the deed, from the loss of exertion there ensues loss. Let
a man undertake a deed, without squandering his own man-
hood; the accomplishment of a deed depends on fate and on
manhood. Therefore I will so strive, my sons, hence-
forth—let me so practise austerities diligently,—that this
may in time be accomplished.”


Jada spoke.

Having spoken thus, the Naga king went to Plakshāvata-
rana,* the place of pilgrimage on the Himavat mountain, and
practised most arduous austerities. And then he praised the
goddess Sarasvati there with his invocations, fixing his mind
on her, restricting his food, performing the three prescribed
ablutions.f

ASvatara spoke.

“Desirous of propitiating the resplendent goddess Jagad-
dhátrí Sarasvati, who is sprung from Brahma, I will praise
her, bowing my head before her. Good and bad, O goddess,


* Where the R. Surasvati tukes its rise.
+ At morning, noon, and evening.


128 CANTO XXIII.


whatever there be, the cause that confers alike final enancipa-
tion and riches,—all that, conjoint and separate, resides in
32 thee, O goddess. Thou, O goddess, art the imperishable and
the supreme, wherein everything is comprised; thou art the
imperishable and the supreme, which are established like the
33 Atom. Theimperishable and the supreme is Brahma, and
this universe is perishable by nature. Fire resides in wood,
34 and the atoms are of earth. So in thee resides Brahma, and
this world in its entirety ; in thee is the abode of the sound
Om, and whatever is immoveable and moveable, O goddess.
35 In thee reside the three prosodial times,* O goddess, all that
exists and does not exist, the three worlds,t the three Vedas,
36 the three sciences,f the three fires,§ the three lights,|| and
the three colours,{ and the law-book; the three qualities,
the three sounds,** the three Vedas, and the three ūšramas,*f
37 the three times, and the three states of life, the pitris, day,
night and the rest. This trinity of standards is thy form, O
38 goddess Sarasvati! The seven soma-samsthā sacrifices, and
the seven havih-samsthā sacrifices, and the seven páka-
samsthāff.sacrifices, which are deemed the earliest by those


* Mátrá ; short, long, and prolated.

f Loka; earth, atmosphere and the sky.

f Vidyá; metaphysics (with logic), the art of government, and the prac-
tical arts (?)

§ Pūvaka ; gārhapatya, fhavaniya, and dakshiņa.

|| Jyotis; fire on the earth, ether in the atmosphere, and the sun in the
sky.

4 Varna; or, the three castes.

*% Sabda.

tt Asrama; those of the griha-stha, vana-prastha, and bhikshu,

ff The names of these sacrifices are thus given me by the Pandit of the
Bengal Asiatic Society. The Soma-samstha are (1) agni-shtoma, (2) atyangi-
shtoma, (3) ukthya, (4) shoģašin, (5) atirdtra, (6) vijaheya, and (7) aptor-
yima. The havih-samsthi are (1) agnyūdheya, (2) agni-hotra, (3) darša-
pūrnamisan, (4) c'dturmūsyani, (5) pašu-bandha, (6) sautra-maņi, and (7)
agrajaneshti. The pāka-samsthi are given differently by different authors.
According to Apastamba they are (1) aupdsana-homa, (2) vaisva-deva, (3)
parvana, (4) ashtaké, (5) Sréddha, (6) sarpa-bali, (7) isānn-bali. According
to Baudhūyaņa, (1) huta, (2) prahuta, (3) ūhuta, (4) Silagava, (5) bali-


=


THE INVOCATION OF SARASVATI. 129


who think differently, and which are as eternal as Brahma,*
39 are performed by those, who assert that all things are Brahma»
with the utterance of thy name, O goddess. Undefinable,
40 composed of half a measure, supreme, unchanging, imperish-
able, celestial, devoid of alteration is this thy other suprome
41 form which I cannot express. And even the mouth does
not declare it, nor the tongue, the copper-coloured lip, or
other organs. Even Indra, the Vasus, Brahmá, the Moon and
42 Sun, and Light cannot declare thy form, whose dwelling is the
universe, which has the form of the universe ; which is the
ruler of the universe, the Supreme Ruler; which is mention-
ed in the discussions of the Sánkhya and Vedanta philo-
sophies, and firmly established in many Sákhás; which is
43 without beginning middle or end; which is good, bad, and
neutral; which is but one, is many, and yet is not One ; which
assumes various kinds of existence ; which is without name,
44 and yetis named after the six guņas, isnamed after the classes,
and resides in the three guņas; which is one among many
powerful, possesses the majesty of the S aktis, and is supreme.
45 Happiness and unhappiness, having the form of great happi-
ness, appear in thee. Thus, O goddess, that which has parts
is pervaded by thee, and so also that which has no parts; that
which resides in non-duality, and that which resides in duality
46 (O bráhman). Things that are permanent, and others that
perish ; those again that are gross, OT those that are subtler
than the subtle ; those a gain that are on the earth, or those that
are in the atmosphere or elsewhere ;—they all derive their
47 perceptibility from thee indeed. Everything—both that which
is destitute of visible shape, and that which has visible shape ;
or whatever is severally single in the elements; that which is


harana, (6) pratyavarohana, and (7) ashtaki-homa. According to Gautama,
(1) ashtaké, (2) parvana, (3) Sraddha, (4) Sravani, (5) égrahéyani, (6) c'aitri,
and (7) &Svayuji.

* A MS. in the Sanskrit College reads ddye for ddyd, and sandtane for
sandtandh ; with this reading the first lino of the verse would qualify devi
sarasvati, if sandtane be taken as an drsha form of sandtani. But these verses


seem obscure.


17


130 CANTO XXIII.


in heaven, on the surface of the earth, in the sky or else-
where ;—is connected with thee by thy vowels and by thy
consonants ! ”
Jada spoke.
48 Thereupon, being praised thus, the goddess Sarasvati, who is
Vishnu's tongue, answered the high-souled Naga Ašvatara.


Sarasvati spoke:

49 “I grant thee a boon, O Naga king, brother of Kambala ;
speak therefore: I will give thee what is revolving in thy
mind.”

Ašvatara spoke.

50 * Give thou me, O goddess, Kambala indeed my former
companion, and bestow on us both a conversance with all
sounds.”


Sarasvati spoke.
51 “ The seven musical notes,* the seven modes in the musical
scale,t O most noble Naga! the seven songs also,f and the


* Svara, a “musical note.’ There are 7 svaras, viz., shadja, rishabha,
gūndhāra, madhyama, panc’ama, dhaivata, and nishdda ; and they are designa-
ted by their initial sounds, sa, ri, ga, ma, pa, dha, and ni: but the arrange-
ment varies, and Prof. Monier-Williams in his dictionary places nishéda first,
shadja fourth, and panc’ama seventh. Those 7 svaras compose the ‘“ musical
scale,” grdma (Beng. saptak). The interval between each consecutive pair of
notes is divided into several ‘lesser notes’ called $ruti ; thus there are 4
between sa and ri, 3 between ri and ga, 2 between ga and ma, 4 between ma
and pa, 4 between pa and dha, 3 between dha and ni, and 2 betweeen ni and
sa in the higher octave—that is 22 s'rutis in all. The svaras correspond to
the ‘natural notes” and the s’rutis to the * sharps and flats’ in European
music. (Raja Sourindro Mohun Tagore's Sangtta-sdra-sangraha, PP. 22—24,
where the names of the s’rutis are given; and his Victoria-giti-mālā in Ben-
gali, Introduction.)

+ Grāma-riga. I do not find this in the dictionary. Does it mean the
< geries of musical scales” that can be formed by taking each of the notes
(svara) as the ‘key’ note P Thus there would be 7 scales, as thera are 7
notes. But Baja S. M. Tagore calls this svara-grām (Beng.), and he Bays
that only 3 such scales were common in early times, viz., those with shadja,
géndhéra and madhyama as key notes (Victoria-giti-m4l4é, Introduction,


. 2).
Š i GB I do not know what the seven songs are,


SARASVATI’S GRANT OF A BOON. 181


52 same number of modulations,* so also the forty-nine musical
times,* and the three octavesj—all these thou and also Kam-
53 bala shalt sing, O sinless one! Thou shalt know more yet
through my favour, O Naga king. I have given thee the four
kinds of quater-verse,§ ‘the three sorts of musical tunes,|| the
54 three kinds of musical movoment,J also the three pauses in


* Mūrc'hanš. This seems to be “running upor down the scale;” it is
defined thus—


Kramdt svardndm saptdndm drohag c'dvarohanam
Mūrc hanetyuc'yate gráma-traye téh sapta sapta c'a.


As there are 7 scales obtained by taking any of the 7 notes as the key note,
there would be 7 mtrc hands; and this applies to the 3 octaves (grdma-
traya), so that there are 21 m#rc’hands altogether (Sangita-sdra-sangraha,
p. 30, where their names are given). But in his Bengali Treatise Raja
S. M. Tagore explains mire‘hand, to be the “ passing uninterruptedly from one
note (svara) to another, and in the process sounding all the intermediate
motes and lesser notes (s'ruti)”” This corresponds to ‘slurring’ With
this meaning the number of possible mirc hands is almost indefinite.

+ Tāla, the “ division of time in music.” It consists of three things, kdla,
the duration of time, Xriyd, the clapping of the hands (accentuation), and
mdna, the interval between the clappings. It seems to correspond to the
‘bar’ and the ‘kinds of time’ in European music. European music has only
8 kinds of time, Common, Triple and Compound, each with a few subdivi-
sions; but in Hindu music there is the utmost variety. I do not know
what the 49 télas here meant are; but Raja S. M. Tagore gives two lists of
dest-télas, one enumerating 120, and the other 72.

t Grima, the “ octave.’ Hindu music uses only three octaves, which are
called nimna (Beng. uddrd), madhya (muddrd) and uc'c'a (tard).

§ Pada.

|| Tala. This seems to refer to the olassification of the tdlas, viz., Suddha,
adlan.ga (or sdlan.ka or sdlaga, v. r.) and san-ktrna, (Raja 8. M. Tagore's
Bangita-sfra-sangrahs, p. 201) ; but this classification is also applied to the
rdgas (see his Victoria-giti-māli, Introduction, p. 9.). The fuddha are ex-
plained to be the famous kinds complete in themselves; the sdlanga are
those produced by a mixture of two simple ones; and the senktrņa those
produeed by a mixture of many gimple ones.

S Laya, “musical speed.” The 3 kinds are druta, guick, madhya, mean,
and vilambita, slow ; the druta being twice as fast as the madhya, and the
madhya twice as fast as the vilambita. Laya does not take account of pro-
sodial time. This corresponds to “ the movement ” in European music,


132 : CANTO XXIII,


music,” and the four-fold todya.t This thou shalt know through
55 my favour O. Naga king, and what lies further. What is
contained within this and dependant thereon, measured in
vowels and consonants—all that I have given to thee and
96 Kambala. I have not so given it to any other on the
earth or in Pātāla, O Naga: and ye shall be the teachers


of all this in Pātšla and in heaven and on earth also, ye
two Nagas !”


Jada spoke,


57 Having spoken thus, the lotus-eyed goddess Sarasvati, the
tongue of all, then disappeared at once from the Ná ga’s view.
98 And then, as it all happened to those two N ágas, there was
begotten in both the fullest knowledge in versification,
musical time, musical notes, &e.
59 Then the two Nagas, observing musical time on the lute-
strings, being desirous of propitiating with seven songs the
60 lord who dwells on the peaks of Kailisa and Himalaya,
the god Siva, who destroyed Kama’s body, both exerted
61 themselves to the utmost, with voice and tone combined, being
assiduous morning, night, noon and the two twilights. The
bull-bannered god, being long praised by them both, was
62 gratified with their song, and said to both, “ Choose ye a
boon.” Thereon Agvatara with his brother doing reverence
63 made request to Siva, the blue-throated, Umá’s lord,—
“If thon, O adorable three-eyed god of the gods, art pleased
64 with us, then grant us this boon according to our desire ;


* Yati, “a break in the laya” (laya-pravritti-niyama), ‘a rest? in music,
Yy Ļ)


The 3 kinds are samd, sroto-gatd, and g0-puc'c'hi. The samá may occur at


the beginning, in the middle, or at the end of the laya, and in each of the 3
kinds of laya. The sroto-gaté occurs apparently when the time quickens
(accelerando) after the rest, that is when tho laya changes from vilambita to
madhya, or from madhya to druta, or from vilambita or madhya to druta.
The g0-puc'c'hd occurs apparently when the time becomes slower (rallentando,
ritardando) after the rest, that is when the laya changes from druta to mad-
hya, or from madhya to vilambita, :

+ Todya. I do not find this word in the dictionary. Does it mean
* drom-music ?”


65


66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74:
75
76


77


78


79


MADALASA IS RAISED TO LIFE AGAIN. 133


let Kuvalaydéva’s deceased wife, Madálasá, O god, at once
become my daughter of the same age as when she died, re-
membering her life as before, endowed with the selfsame
beauty, as a devotee, and the mother of Yoga; let her be
born in my house, O S'iva.”


S'iva spoke.

« Ag thou hast spoken, most noble Naga, it shall all happen
through my favour, in very truth. Hearken also to this, O
Néga. But when the śráddha is reached, thou shouldst eat
the middle pinda by thyself, most noble Naga, being pure, and
having thy mind subdued; and then, when that is eaten,
the happy lady shall rise out of thy middle hood, the same in
form as when she died. And having pondered on this thy
desire, do thou perform the libation to the pitris; immediate-
ly she, the fine-browed, the auspicious, shall rise out of thy
breathing middle hood, the same in form as when she died.”

Having heard this, both then adored S'iva, and returned,
full of contentment, to Rasftala. And so the Naga, Kam-
bala’s younger brother, performed the śráddha, and also
duly ate the middle pinda; and, while he pondered on that
his desire, the slender-waisted lady was produced* at once,


fn the selfsame form, out of his breathing middle hood.


And the Naga told that to no one: he kept her, the lovely-
teethed one, concealed by his women in the inner apartments.
And the two sons of the Naga king pursuing pleasure day
by day, played} with Rita-dhvaja like the immortals. But
one day the Naga king, being intoxicated, spoke to his sons,
«Why indeed do ye not do as I told you before? The king's
son is your benefactor in my opinion; why do ye not confer
a benefit on him, the pride-inspirer? Thereupon they both,
being thus admonished by their kindly-affectioned father,
went to their friend’s city, and enjoyed themselves with
the wise prince. Then both, after having held some other
talk with Kuvalaydsva, invited him respectfully. to,eome to
their house. The king’s son said to them, “Is not this your


* For yajne read jajne. + Read cikriddte for ciktiddte.


134
80


81


82


83


84:


85


86


87


88


89


90


91


92


93


94


CANTO XXIII.


house? Whatever is mine, riches, carriages, garments, &c., that
is indeed yours. But whatever ye desire should be given you,
riches or jewels, let that be given you, O young dvijas, if ye have
friendly regard forme. Am I cheated by such a cruel fate as
this, that ye do not evince any sense of ownership in my
house? If ye must dome kindness, ifIam to receive favour
from you, then consider my wealth and home as your own.
Whatever is yours is mine, mine is your own. Believe ye
this in truth. My life has gone out into you. Never again
must ye speak of separate propeity, O virtuous dvijas:
since ye are devoted to my favour, I-have adjured you by my
heart affectionately.”

Thereupon both the young Nagas, their faces beaming with
affection, replied to the king’s son, somewhat feigning anger.
“ Rita-dhvaja, without doubt, we must not think in our mind
in this matter otherwise than thou hast now spoken. But
our high-souled father has himself repeatedly said this—‘ I
wish to see that Kuvalaydšva”” Thereon Kuvalayāšva
rising from his seat of honour, prostrated himself on the
ground, saying, `“ Be it as your dear father says.”


Kuvalayāšva spoke.
“ Happy am I! Most rich in merit am I! Who else is there
like me, that your father shews an earnest mind to see me ?


Rise ye therefore, let us go: not even for a moment do I wish
to transgress his command here. I swear by his feet !”


Jada spoke.

Having spoken thus the king’s son went with them both,
and issuing from the city reached the holy river Gomati.
They passed through it, the Naga princes and the king’s son:
and the king’s son thought their home lay on the other side
of the river. And drawing him thence, they led the prince
to Patéla; and in Pātila he beheld them both as young
Nagas, lustrous* with the gems in their hoods, displaying
the svastika marks. Gazing with eyes wide open with
amazement at them both, who were most handsomely formed,


* Read kritoddyotau for kritodyotau.


KUVALAYASVA’S VISIT TO PATALA. 135


95 and smiling he spoke kindly— Bravo! most noble dvijas !”
96 And they told him of their father, the Naga king, Asvatara
by name, peaceful, worthy of honour by the heaven-dwellers.

97 Then the king’s son saw charming Pātāla; which was
adorned with Nagas, young adult and old, and also with

98 Naga maidens, who were playing here and there, and who wore
beautiful ear-rings and necklaces, as the sky is decked with
stars; and elsewhere resounding with drums, small drums,

99 and musical instruments, mingled with the strains of singing,
which kept time with the sounds of lutes and pipes; filled

100 with hundreds of charming houses. Gazing about on Patéla
Satru-jit’s son the foe-queller, walked about accompanied by
those two Nagas his friends.

101 Then they all entered the Naga king’s residence, and they
saw the high-souled Naga king seated, clad in heavenly
garlands and raiment, adorned with gems and ear-rings, re-

102 splendent with superb pearl-necklaces, decorated with armlets,
blessed with good fortune, on a throne all of gold, the frame of

103 which was overlaid with a multitude of gems coral and lapis
lazuli.

They showed the king to him saying “ That is our father ;”

104 and they introduced him to their father, saying “ This is the
hero Kuvalaydéva.” Then Rita-dhvaja bowed at the feet of

105 the Niga king. Raising him up by force, the Naga king
embraced him warmly, and kissing him on the head he

106 said * Long mayest thon live, and destroying all thy foes, be
gsubitissive to thy father. My son thy virtues have been

107 mentioned even in thy absence, happy that thou art; thy
rare virtues have been reported to me by my two sons.

108 Mayest thou indeed prosper thereby in mind, speech, body
and behaviour: the life of a virtuous man is praise-worthy ;
a worthless man although alive is dead. A virtuous man,
while accomplishing his own good, brings complete satisfac-

109 tion to his parents, anguish into the hearts of his enemies,
and confidence among the populace. The gods, the pitris,

110 bréhmans, friends, suppliants, the maimed and others, and
his relatives also desire a long life for the virtuous man.


186 CANTO XXIV.


The life of virtuous men, who eschew abuse, who are com-
passionate towards those in trouble, who are the refuge of
those in calamity, abounds in good fruit.”

Jada spoke.

111 Having spoken thus to that hero, the Naga next addressed

his two sons thus, being desirous to do honour to Kuva-
-112 layāšva. “When we have finished our ablutions and all the
other proceedings in due order, when we have drunk wine and
enjoyed other pleasures, when we have feasted up to our

113 desire, we shall then with joyful minds spend a short
time with Kuvalayāšva in hearing the story of the success of

114 his heart’s festival.” And atru-jit’s son assented in silence
to that speech. Accordingly the lofty-minded king of the
Nagas did as he had proposed.

115 The great king of the Nagas, true to his word, assembling
with his own sons and the king’s son, filled with joy, feasted
on foods and wines, up to fitting bounds, self-possessed and
enjoying pleasure.


Canto XXIV.


The story of Euvalaydšva (continued).


! The Recovery of Maddlasé.

The Naga king Ašvatara asks Kuvalaydšva what gift he can confer
on him—Kuvalaydšva replies he needs nothing, and is sufficiently
gratified by the kings favour—The king urges him and at his sons’
suggestion the prince asks to see Maddlasd even in illusion—The king
brings her in as an illusion, and afterwards restores her to Kuva-
layāšva. ,

Jada spoke.
1 His two sons and the king’s son respectfully attended the
2 high souled king of the Nagas, after he had banquetted. The
high-souled Nága manifested kindly regard towards his sons’
3 friend with suitable conversation, and said, “Declare, Sir,
what pleasure I must do thee who hast entered my ‘house;


10


1l


12


13


14


15


KUVALAYASVA’S MEETING WITH THE NAGA KING. 137


cast away hesitation towards me as a son would towards his
father. Whether silver or gold, raiment, carriages, or seats,
or whatever thou dost highly appreciate that is hard to be
got—ask that ot me.”


Kuvalayāšva spoke.

“Through thy favour, illustrious Sir! gold and other wealth
are in my father’s house; I have no need of any such thing
at all now. While my father rules this earth for thousands
of years and thou also rulest Pátála, my mind is not expectant
in solicitation, They are both possessed of Svarga and are
very rich in merit, who from their youth possess, in their
father’s lifetime, a mere particle* of wealth amidst his
krores of wealth, friends equally-educated, and a body
free from sickness. My fathert holds the wealth; have I
not youth ? When wealth is wanting, men’s minds become
prone to petitions. When I have it in full measure, how shall
my tongue make petition? Those who need not think
whether they have any riches at home or not, happy are they,
sheltered in the shadow of the tree of their father’s arm.
But those, who even from childhood losing their father
have had the care of a family, they have in my opinion,
through the ruin of their taste for happiness, been tricked by
the Creator. We therefore through thy favour always give
willingly to supplicants the hoards of money, gems and other
wealth left by our fathers. I have everything then here,
since I have touched thy feet with my crest-jewel, since I have
touched thy body.”

_ Jada spoke.

Being answered thus ina modest speech, the noble Niga

replied kindly to the young prince, the benefactor of his sons.
The Naga spoke.

“Tf it be not thy mind to receive of me gems, gold or other
gift; whatever else may please thy mind, mention thou it. I
will give it thee.”


# Wealth as small as the point of a blade of grass.
+ Read janitrd for janitā.


18


138


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24,


25
26


27


28
29


30


CANTO XXIV.


Kuvalayasva spoke.


“ My lord, through thy favour, I whom thou dost ask have
everything at home: it has been gained especially through
sight of thee. And herein I am successful, and my life has
been rewarded, that I a mortal have embraced thy body who
art divine; that the dust of thy feet has found a seat on
my head. What indeed have I not gained thereby, O Niga
king? But if thou needs must give me the boon that I
desire, then let not the faculty of working righteousness
depart from my heart. Gold, gems, jewels and such like,
carriages, houses, seats, women, food and drink, and children,
and tasteful garlands and ointments,—both these various
objects of desire, and also vocal and instrumental music and
whatever other music there be—all this I hold to be the fruit
of the tree of good works. Therefore a man must start
from the root thereof; he must exert himself, while ruling
his spirit; nothing in the world is hard of attainment to those
who adhere to good works.”


ASvatara spoke.

“ So shall thy mind be, O wise man, relying on righteous-
ness; and truly all this is the fruit of righteousness as thou
hast said. Nevertheless thou must certainly take, now that
thou’ hast entered my house, what thou thinkest hard to be
gained in the human world.”


Jada spoke.

Having heard this his speech, the young prince then
looked at the faces of the Naga king’s sons. Thereupon both
those heroes prostrating themselves told their father clearly
all the young prince’s thoughts.


The sons spoke.

“ When this prince’s beloved wife heard that he was slain,
she forsook her dear life, being deceived by a certain cruel,
bad-minded Danava, who shewed his enmity. She was the
daughter of the Gandharva king; she was named Madélasé.
Then he, mindful of the past, made this vow, dear father,
t No other shall be my wife save Mad4las4.’ This bero Rita- .


31


32


33


34


35


37


38


39


40


* A: Daitya.


MADALASK IS SHOWN TO KUVALAYASVA. 139


dhvaja longs, dear father, to behold her, lovely-limbed : if
this may be done, let it be done.”


Ašvatara spoke.
“ Such magical power as that belongs to one who is exempt
from such gross elements. How can this be except as a dream
or as an illusion proceeding from Sambara puk


Jada spoke.

Then S'atru-jit's son prostrated himself before the high-
souled Nága king and replied, being touched with affection
and modesty. “If thou showt me now, dear father, Madālasi
even in illusion, I hold that thou hast done me the greatest
favour.”


Agvatara spoke.

“Took thou here then, my son, if thou wouldest see the
illusion. I must show thee favour ; a visitor at one’s house,
though a child, is master.”

Jada spoke.

The Nága king led in Madšlass who was concealed in the
house, and next he uttered some gibberish distinctly in order
to bewilder them. And then he showed the young prince the
beauteous lady, saying, “Is she or is she not, O prince, thy
wife Mādalast ? ”

Jada spoke.

Then, seeing the slender one, he lost his reticence that very
moment; he moved towards her, uttering the word
“ Beloved!” And the Nága Asvatara hasting held him off.


Agvatara spoke.

“Tt is illusion, my son! touch her not! I told thee so at
first. The illusion quickly vanishes when touched or other-
wise meddled with.”

Thereupon he fell to the ground, overwhelmed by a faint ;
and exclaiming “Ah Beloved!” he thought of his noble
wife. ‘Alas for the love of this king towards my steadfast
mind, whereby I have been thus overthrown without the


+ Read daréayase for daršaja te?


140 CANTO XXV,


41 weapons of foes. She was shown as an illusion, though i was
clearly no illusion at all by reason of the action of air, water
and fire, earth and ether.”


Jada spoke.
42 Then the Nága reviving Kuvalayééva, related to him the
whole story of her recovery from death and allelse that had
43 happened. Thereat rejoicing he took again his loved one, and
after doing obeisance to the N ága departed in great splendour,
mounted on the horse, to his own city, having attained* the
object of his thoughts,


Canto XXV,


The story of Kuvalaydšva and Maddlasd (continued).


—


Kuvalaydšva, returning home, lives in perfect happiness with Madé-
lasé—He succeeds his father Satru-jit—A son is born to them, Vi-krdn-
ta—Maddlasd prattles to the infant.


Jada spoke,

1 Reaching then his city he narrated the whole story fully to
his parents, how he had regained his slender-limbed one who
2 had died. And the beautiful, slender-limbed lady bowed at
the feet of her father and mother-in-law, and did honour as
3 before to her kindred with obeisance, embraces and such
4 greetings, according to propriety, and their ages. Then the

citizens held a great festival there in the city.
And Rita-dhvaja long enjoyed himself with his beautiful-
5 waisted wife, both among mountain torrents, and on river
sand-banks, and amid pleasant woods, and in groves. She
also, longing to consume her merit by the delights of love,
6 enjoyed herself with him, her greatly-beloved, in pleasant `

places. J i

7 A long time afterwards the king Satru-jit, haying ruled the
carth worthily, underwent the law of Death, Thon the citi-


* Read abhyupetah for abhywpetam ?


10


11


12


13


14:


15


16


17


MADALASA AND HER FIRST SON. 141


zens inaugurated as king his high-souled son Ķita-dhvaj:,
noble in conduct and action.

While he duly protected his subjects as if they were his
own sons, Madālasā gave birth to her first-born son. The
father gave that clever child the name Vi-kršnta. The re-
tainers were pleased thereat and Madālasā langhed. Madā-
lasá spoke to her infant boy in the way of prattle,* as he lay
on his back crying not unmelodiously.

“Perfect art thou, darling, nor has thy name been given
thee now in mere fancy. This very body of thineis composed
of the five elements, not indeed for this reason dost thou cry
—wherefore then? Nor indeed does your highness (this title
is thy birth-right) cry because thou art a king’s son. Doubt-
ful are the various good and bad qualities, that are connected
with the elements, in all thy organs. Since in a man here the
elements, extremely weak, increase by the means of the ele-
ments, namely, by means of the food and water and other
nutriments given, of what hast thou no gain, of what hast
thou no loss? Do not grow infatuated at this thy bodice
which is already decaying, and in that thy body; thy body
is given thee by good and bad deeds; the bodice is fastened
on thee by persons infatuated with pride and other pas-
sions. Do thou greatly esteem each aggregate of elements—
some one aggregate as a dear father, some other as a child,
some other as a mother, some other as a loved wife, some other
as thy own property, some other as not thy own. A man
beguiled in mind thinks that evils tend to assuage evils, that
enjoyments tend to happiness. Again the unwise man, great-
ly beguiled in mind, thinks that these very evils are plea-
sures. Laughter, gazing at the bones,t a pair of excessively
bright mocking eyes, firm plump flesh in the breasts and
elsewhere, in a woman—that is Love’s abode; is not woman


* Ullépana: not in the dictionary. Ullāpa is said to mean “calling out in
a loud voice,” “ change of voice in grief, sickness, Go. ;” bat no such meaning
is admissible here.

+ Asthi-sandarsana; this scems meaningless. Akshi-sandaršana seems
superfluous.


142
18


CANTO XXVI.


hell? The carriage rests on the earth; and the body is
seated in the carriage; and even in the body there is another
seated, the soul. There is not the same perception of owner-
ship in one’s body, as there is this excessive infatuation with
at.”


a EEE


Canto XXVI.


The story of Kuvalaydsva (continued).
The Education of his Sons.


—


Two other sons are born, Subdhu and Satru-mardana—A fourth son
is born whom Maddlasé names Alarka—She criticizes these names—
The king objects to her way of educating them, and wishes them to be
brought up as kshatriyas—She prattles to Alarka.


+


Jada spoke.

Now the gueen trained up that son, as he grew day by day,
to unselfish thought by talking and other means. As he
regularly gained’ strength, as he gained his father’s intelli-
gence, even so he acquired knowledge of himself through his
mother’s talk. So the youth, instructed by her from his
birth, having understanding and being unselfish, did not
turn his mind towards family life.

A second son was born to her. His father named him.
When he said “This is Su-bāhu,” Madālasā laughed. Him
also when a child she spoke to with prattle and other talk
the same as before, and thus he, having a good intellect, ac
guired knowledge from his childhood.

When the king named the third-born son Satru-mardana,
she the beautiful-browed laughed again very long thereat.
The slender-limbed mother similarly instructed. him also from
childhood. Devoid of desire he performed ceremonies, but
not anything beneficial.

Now the king, when desirous of naming the fourth son, 84W
Madšlas, well-behaved as she was, laughing slightly: the


10


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


BIRTH OF THREE MORE SONS. 143


king, somewhat eagerly curious, spoke to her as she was
laughing.
The king spoke.

“Tell me the cause of your laughter, at the very time when
the name is being given. Vi-krinta, Su-bāhu and the other
Satru-mardana,—the names given by me are I think fine,
suited to the kshatriya kindred, and indicative of heroism
and majesty. If these are not good, lady,—if you think this
in your mind,—then do thou give a name to this my fourth
son.”


Madalasé spoke.

«I must obey thy command, Mahá-rájá, as thou tellest me;
so I will give a name to thy fourth son. ‘Alarka’! Learned
in religion he shall acquire fame in the world, and this thy
youngest son shall have understanding.”

On hearing that name given the son by the mother, the
king, laughing at ‘ Alarka’ as inappropriate, said—

The king spoke.

“This name that thou hast given to my son, beauteous
lady,—why hast thou given such an inappropriate one? What
is its meaning, O Madalasa ?”

Madālasū spoke. |

“This is my fancy, Mahū-rājā; I have given it as being
practical. So do thou listen, O king, to the meaninglessness
of the names given by thee. Since wise men speak of a pervad-
ing soul; and ‘kranti’ is described as the course which passes
from one place to another place; since the soul is all-per-
vading in that it is ubiquitous and does not move abont ;
therefore this appellation Vi-kranta, ‘passed beyond,’ appears
to me meaningless. The appellation Su-báhu, * fine-armed,’
given to they second son, that too is meaningless because the
soul is incorporeal, O king. The name that thou hast given
the third son, Ari-mardana, ‘ foe-crusher,’ I think that too is
inappropriate ; and listen to the reason: as regards it. Since
there is only one soul in all bodies, who then, O long, is
regarded as its enemy in this world, or who as its friend ?


144
22


23


32


33


34


CANTO XXVI,


Creatures are crushed by creatures; how can the incorpo-
real be crushed? This fancy is meaningless because of the
Separate existence of anger and the other passions. If a
bad name is fixed upon because of mutual dealing, why dost
thou think there is no meaning in the name Alarka ? ”*


Jada spoke.


Being thus excellently addressed by the queen, the king,
having great understanding, assented to his loved wife who
spoke correctly. And the fine-browed lady spoke to that son,
just as to the elder sons, what would arouse the intellect.

The king said to her. “ Why dost thou deal thus, O foolish
one, with the temperament of my child, by giving him a mis-
chievous education as thon didst before to my other sons. If
thou shouldest do what pleases me, if my word should be ac-
cepted, then restrain this son within the path of activity. So
the path of action will not lead to utter destruction, O lady;
and so the pinda offering to the pitris will not cease, O virtuous
one. The.pitris dwell in the Deva-loka, they are also born as
brutes, they become men likewise, and they reside within the
class of elements. By offering the pinda and water a man,
busied in the ceremonies, ever nourishes them, O fine-browed
one, both the righteous and the unrighteous, those worn out
with hunger, those harassed by thirst; he nourishes the gods
likewise and guests. The gods, mankind, the pitris, departed
spirits, goblins, and guhyakas, birds, worms and insects live
upon man indeed. Therefore, O slender-limbed, cause my son
to acquire thoroughly the whole duty of kshatriyas, as re-
gards this life and life in the next world.”

The queen Madilasi, being thus admonished by her hus-
band, apoke to her son Alarka, with prattling words.
“Thrive my son! rejoice my husband’s mind with thy deeds,
in order to benefit friends and destroy enemies. Happy art
thou, my son, who alone, with never an enemy, wilt long pro-
tect the earth: from protecting it mayest thon have full
enjoyment of happiness, and from righteousness thou shalt


e Alarka, a furious dog, or a fabulous hog with eight legs.


THE EDUCATION OF ALARKA. 145


36 obtain the fruit, immortality. Mayest thou delight the
bréhmans at the holy festivals! Mayest thou fulfil the longing
among thy kinsmen! Mayest thou think kindly in thy heart
for another! Mayest thou restrain thy mind from the wives

87 of others! Please continually the gods with numerous sa-
crifices, and the dvijas who resort to thee with wealth. And

thou shalt long satisfy women with unparaileled affections, and

38 thy foes with battles, O hero! As a child gladden the mind
of thy kinsmen; and as a boy the mind of thy teacher by
observance of his commands; as a young man gladden the mind
of women who are the ornament of high families; as an old

39 man the mind of the hermits in the forest. Exercising thy
sovereignty mayest; thou gladden thy friends! Guarding the
good, mayest thou offer up sacrifices, darling! Destroying
the wicked and thy enemies in battle, mayest thou meet thy
death, my child, on behalf of cattle and brāhmans ! ”


Canto XXVII.


The Education of the Sons (continued).


Madálasá instructs Alarka in a king's duties—Enforcing especially
the necessity for self-control, prudence and maintenance of the latos.
Jada spoke.
1 Now being talked to in this way by his mother every day,
2 the child Alarka grew in age and intelligence. Then this son
of Rita-dhvaja, on reaching boyhood, received investiture
with the sacred thread, and being intelligent did obeisance to
3 his mother and said, “ What I ought to do now for happiness
in this world and the next world, tell all that to me who am
bowing respectfully before thee?”
Madālass spoke.
4 * My child, a king inaugurated in his kingdom must in the
first place conciliate his subjects, without obstructing his own
5 duty. Eschewing the seven vices, which are radically injuri-
ous, he must guard himself from his adversaries without de-


19


146


10


1]


12


13


14


15


16


CANTO XXVII.


parting from good counsel. Just as a man meets destruc-
tion in eight ways from a fine-wheeled chariot, so undoubtedly
does even a king without departing from good counsel.
And let him recognise the bad and good ministers through
his enemies’ faults; and he must strenuously trace out his
enemy’s spies by spies. But a king must not confide in
friends, acquaintances, or relatives ; let a king trust even in
an unfriendly person, if so obliged by his affairs. A king
must himself be conversant with the stationary, prosperous
and deteriorating conditions of state policy, be familiar with
the merits of the’ six measures of military policy,* and not
be enslaved by desire.

“A king must first subdue himself, and his ministers, then
his dependants, and afterwards his citizens; then let him,
fight against his enemies. But he who, without having
iadeed conquered these, desires to conquer his adversaries, he,
with his own self unsubdued and with unsubdued ministers,f
is killed by his enemies’ party. A king must therefore, my .
son, first conquer desire and the other passions; for when
they are conquered, victory is his assuredly; vanquished by
them, a king perishes. Desire, and anger, and covetousness,
intoxication and pride, joy also, and enemies—these in truth
tend to destroy kings. Let him restrain himself, recollect-
ing how Péndu himself was killed when engrossed in love:
and how Anuhrédat killed his own son throngh anger; and
how Aila§ was killed through. covetousness ; how Vena|| was
killed by dvijas through intoxication: how Anfyus'7 son Bali
was killed through pride; Puranjaya through joy. Recol-


* lecting how, when these were conquered, high-souled Marntta


vanquished all, let a king cast out these his own faults.


Viz., sandhi, peace; vigraha, war; ydna, marching ; daana, encamping ;


dvaidht-bhdva, dividing his forces ; and samfraya, alliance.
+ For 'jitdimd jitdmdtyah read 'jitdtmdjitimdtyak ?


7


Bon of Hiranya-kaSipu.


§ Purūravas.
|| A son of Anga.
€ Sho was his mother,


17


18


19


20


26


27


28


29


EXPOSITION OF A KING'S DUTIES. 147


“A king should learn the ways of the crow, cuckoo and
bee, of the deer, serpent and peacock, of the goose, cock and
the red goat. A king should act like an insect against an
opponent ; and a.king should carry out the ways of the ants at
a fitting time. A king, who possesses the natural character
of the moon and the sun, ought to know for the sake of good
policy the behaviour of sparks of fire and of ‘the seeds of the
seemul tree.* And a king ought to gather wisdom from
a courtezan, the lotus flower,t and a grasshopper, a doe-hare,
and the breast of pregnant women, and also from a woman of
the cow-herd caste.

“A king should assume the five forms of Indra, the Sun,
Yama and the Moon, and also of the Wind in the work of
government. Just as Indra nourishes the people on the earth
with showers of water for four months, so should a king
nourish them with largesses. Just as the Sun draws up the
water with his rays for eight months, so should a king collect


` the tolls and other dues by truly subtle means. Just as Yama


restrains friend and foe when the time arrives, soa king
should be impartial towards friend and foe, towards the
Vicious and the virtuous. Just as by gazing on the full
Moon, a man grows affectionate, so, where the people are all
peaceful, that isthe practice he should adopt from the moon.
Just as the Wind moves mysterious among all creatures, so
should a king move among the citizens, ministers and others,
and among his relatives by the agency of spies.

“The king, my child, goes to Svarga, whose mind is at-
tracted neither by covetousness, nor by love, nor by riches, as
by other motives. The king goes to Svarga, who keeps
within their duty erring foolish men, who are swerving from
their duty. He, in whose kingdom the duties of the four
classes and the four periods of a brihman's life do not fall
into desuetude, has, my child, eternal happiness after death


30 and ina future state. A king’s highest duty, and that which


© B'4lmali ; see note °” p. 82. The pods contain a quantity of silky cotton
which is blown about, when the pods burst.
4 Nelumbium speciosum ; see note § p. 29.


148 CANTO XXVIII.


brings supreme felicity for him, is the maintenance among
men of their own laws,* since it is disturbed by evil-minded

31 men. By protecting creatures indeed a king reaches suc-
‘cess; he who duly protects gains by his efforts a portion of
righteousness.”


Canto XXVIII.


The Education of the Sons (continued).
Maddlasd's Exhortation.


Madālasd enunciates to Alarka the special duties of the four castes—
and of the four periods of a brāīvman's life—and the duties common to
those four castes and periods, which must be strenuously maintained.

J ada spoke.

1 Having listened to that his mother’s exhortation, Alarka
also further questioned his mother both about the duties of
the four classes, and about the duties appertaining to the four
periods of a brāhman's life.

Alarka spoke.

2 “Thou hast expounded, gracious lady, this the duty relating
to the system of kingly government. I wish to hear that
duty which concerns the four classes and the four periods of a


bréhman’s life.”
Madālasā spoke.
3 “ A brāhman's duty is held to be threefold—liberality, study,


sacrifice. There is no other fourth duty. His duty is regard-
4 less of his position. Irreproachable sacrificial and educa-
tional occupations, and the acceptance of gifts from the purified
—this is fitly proclaimed his threefold means of livelihood.
5 Liberality, study, sacrifice—this is declared to be the threefold
duty of a kshatriya also: protection of the earth, and sub-
sistence by weapons are his means of livelihood. Liberality,
study, sacrifice.—that indeed is the threefold duty of a vaišya


* Dharma.


A BRAHMAN’S FOUR PERIODS OF LIFE. 149


also: merchandise, and the tending of cattle, and agriculture
7 are his means of livelihood. Liberality, and sacrifice, obe-
dience to dvijas, I have declared to be the threefold duty of
the $ūdra also; and his means of livelihood are a handicraft,
8 obedience likewise to dvijas, nourishing them, buying and
selling. These are said to be the duties of the four classes. '
“ Hear also the connexions among the four periods of a brāh-
9 man’s life. A man who has not erred from the duty of his
own class gains perfect felicity: he goes to hell after death,
10 if he has served what is forbidden. And as long indeed as
a dvija is not invested with the sacred thread, so long, my
son, he acts, speaks and eats unrestrainedly.
11 “When duly invested with the sacred thread, he becomes.a
brahma-c'šrin in his guru's house, and he should dwell there.
12 I relate his duty; hear it of me. Private study, atten-
dance on fire, bathing, and wandering about for alms, and
always eating that food after informing his guru and obtain-
13 ing permission from him. He should be diligent in the guru’s
business; there should be thorough evoking of his affection ;
and when summoned by him, he should read intently, his mind
14 withdrawn from everything else. After acquiring one, two or
all the Vedas from his guru's month, he is authorized to give the
15 guru his fee with words of eulogy. But let him enter on the
griha-stha period when desirous of the period of family life ;
or, by his own wish, on the všna-prastha period and on the
16 fourth period. Or let the dvija await his decease there in
the gurn's house, obedient to the guru's son if the guru be
17 dead, or to the guru’s disciple, if there be no son. Obedient,
free from self-conceit, let him pass through the period of a
brahma-c'rin.
“Next when he has desisted therefrom, through desire for
18 a griha-stha's. status, let him then rightly marry a wife,
sprung from the family of a different* Rishi, his equal, free
from sickness, not deformed, for the sake of a griha-stha’s
19 status. And having gained money by his own toil, let him duly


© A-samdna. His family and hers should not be descended from the same
Rishi. This indicates exogamy. a


150


20


21


22


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


CANTO XXVIII.


please the pitris, gods and guests by faith; and also nourish
those who resort to him, his dependants and children, and
his female relatives, and the afflicted, the blind, and the out-
cast, the birds and the cattle,* to the utmost of his power
with gifts of food. This is the duty of a griha-stha; sexual
intercourse also at the proper season: but he should not, to
the utmost of his power, neglect the performance of the five
sacrifices. And let the man himself, being zealous to the best
of his power, together with his dependants, eat the remains
of the food consumed by the pitris, the gods, the guests and
paternal kinsmen.

“Now I have declared this griha-stha period distinctly. I
describe to thee the duty of the v4na-prastha: be it heard.
Having seen the succession of his offspring, and the stoop of
his body, let the wise man enter upon the véna-prastha period,
for the purpose of purifying his soul. In it there is the
enjoyment of the forest, and attraction by penances, sleep-.
ing onthe ground, sacred study, ceremonies for the pitris
gods and guests, the homa oblation, the three daily ablu-
tions,t the wearing matted hair and a bark dress, and dili-
gence in meditation unceasingly, the use of forest unguents.
This is the vāns-prastha period, for the purification of sin,
and beneficial to the soul. But after that comes another, the
last, period of the bhikshu.

“Bat hear from me the nature of the fourth period, which
with its peculiar duties has been described, my darling, by
high-souled men conversant with its duties.t Renunciation
of every association, sacred study, abstinence from anger,
control over the senses, no long dwelling in one habitation,
abstaining from undertakings, and eating food obtained by
begging once a day, also desire for the awakening of know-
ledge of the soul, and gazing at the soul. Now I have
acquainted thee with this duty in the fonrth period.

“ Hear from me the common duty of the other classes.and of


# For pafavas read c'a pagiaps ?
+ At dawn, noon, and sunset.
t For yah sva-dharmo ’sya read sva-dharmo yasya ?


82


35


GENERAL DUTIES OF ALL CLASSES, 151


the periods of life. Truthfulness, purity and harmlessness,
freedom from envy, and patience, mercy, generosity,* and con-
tentment ts the eighth virtue.

These duties have been succinctly described to thee con-
cerning the classes and the periods of life: and a man should
stand wholly within these his own peculiar duties. And
the man, who, overstepping his own duty named according to
his own class or period of life, should behave otherwise,
should be punished by the king. And the king who over-
looks men, who after forsaking their own duties commit sin,
loses his pious acts. Therefore a king must vigorously
punish all the classes that behave contrary to their special
duties, and he must keep them within their own occupations.”


Canto XXIX.


Madálusá’s Exhortation (continued).


Madélasé explains to Alarka the position of a griha-stha—and perso-
nifies ae a cow, the Vedas, pious acts, the words of the good and the
worde evdht, svadhd, vashat and hanta—She describes the ‘bali
offering, and utsarga oblation—the duties of a griha-stha to guests—the
$rāddha—and further duties to guests—She pronounces a blessing on
the pis state—and quotes a song by Atri on it.


Alarka spoke. :

« And what men must do who are engaged in the griha-stha `

period; and what becomes confined in the absence of action,

and what increases by action; and what is beneficial to men ;

and what a good man should avoid at home; and how things
are done—declare that accurately to me who ask.”

Madšlasā spoke.

“ My child, a man on assuming the griha-stha status, thereby

nourishes all this earth and conquers the worlds he longs for.

The pitris, the Munis, the gods, living things, and mankind,


* For akdrpyanyam read akdrpanyam f


152


10,


11.


12


13


14


15


16


17


© The oblation to the gods.
t The oblation to the pitris.


CANTO XXIX,


and worms, insects, and flying creatures, birds, cattle, and
Asuras subsist upon the griha-stha, and derive satisfaction
from him; and gaze indeed at his countenance, wondering,
‘ Will he give us anything ?’

“ The support of everything is this cow, my child, which con-
sists of the three Vedas, in which the universe is established,
and which is believed to be the cause of the universe. Her
back is the Rig-Veda; her loins the Yajur-Veda; her face
and neck the Sima-Veda; and her horns are pious acts; her
hair the excellent words of the good; her ordure and urine
are tranquillity and prosperity ; she is supported on feet which
are the four classes ; she is the sustenance of the worlds; being
imperishable she does not wane. The word svāhs,* and the
word svadhā,* and the word vashat, my son, and the other
word hanta are herf four teats. The gods drink of the
teat which is the word svahé ; and the pitris of that consist-
ing of svadhs; and the Munis of that which is the word
vashat; the gods, living things and Asuras, and mankind
drink constantly of the teat which is the word hanta.
Thus this cow consisting of the three Vedas, my child, fattens
them. And the man, who grievously sinning causes their
destruction, sinks into the hell Tamas,§ the hell Andha-
tēmisra|| and the hell Témisra.{ And the man, who gives
this cow drink with his own children and with the immortals
and other objects of worship at the proper time, attains Svarga.

“Therefore, my son, a man must nourish the gods, rishis,
and pitris and men and living things daily, eyen as his own
body. Therefore having bathed and become clean he should,
composed in mind, delight the gods, rishis and pitris, and the
prajé-pati also with water at the proper time. And a man**
having worshipped the gods with thefragrant flowers of the
great-flowered jasmine, should next delight Agni; and the |
bali offering should also be made. Let him: cast the bali


|| Complete darkness.
T Deep gloom.


f Read tasyés for tasyd, ** Read ménavah for ménavéh.
§ Darkness. C S


Fea
Ra


18


19


20
21


22
23
24
25


26
27


28
29
30


31


- THE RITES OF HOSPITALITY. 153


offering to Brahmá and the Visva-devas inside the house, and
to Dhanvantari to the north-east; let him offer the bali
eastward to Indra, southwards to Yama, and the bali west-
wards to Varuna, and northwards to Soma. And let him also `
give the bali to Dhatri and „«Vidhātri at the house-door, and
let him give it to Aryaman outside and all around the houses.
Let him offer the bali to night-walking goblins in the air, and
let him scatter it to the pitris, standing with his face south-
ward. Then the griha-stha, being intent and having his mind
well composed, should take the water and cast it, as a wise
man, into those places for those several deities, that they may
rinse out their mouths.

“ Having thus performed in his house the family-bali, the
pure griha-stha should perform the utsarga oblation respect-
fully for the nourishment of living things. And let him
scatter it on the ground both for the dogs, and low-caste men
and the birds; for certainly this offering to the Visva-devas
is declared to be one for evening and morning. .

And then he, as a wise man, having rinsed out his mouth,
should look towards the door the eighth part of a muhūrta,
whether a guest is to be seen. He should honour the guest,
who has arrived there, with rice and other food and with
"water and with fragrant flowers and other presents, according
to his power. He should not treat as a guest a friend, nor a
fellow-villager, nor one who bears the name of: an unknown
family, nor one who has arrived at that time. Men call
a bráhman who has arrived, hungry, wearied, supplicat-
ing, indigent, a guest; he should be honoured by the wise
according to their power. A learned man should not inquire
his lineage or conduct, nor his private study; he should esteem
him, whether handsome or unhandsome in appearance, as a
prajé-pati. For since he stays but a transitory time, he is
therefore called an a-tithi, ‘a guest.’ "When he is satisfied, the
griha-stha is released from the debt which arises from hospita-
lity. The guilty man, who without giving to the guest him-
self eats, he incurs only sin and feeds on ordure in another life.


* The guest transferring his misdeeds to that man, from whose


20


154


32


33


34


35


36
37


38


39


41


42


45


CAXTO XXIX.


"house he turns back with broken hopes, and taking that man’s .


merit, goes off. Moreover a man should honour a guest re-
spectfully according to his power with gifts of water and
vegetables, or with just what he is himself eating.

“ And he should daily perform the śráddha with rice and
other food and with water with regard to the pitris and bréh-
mans; or he should feed a brāhman, Taking up an agra* of
the rice, he .should present it to a brāhman: and he should
give an alms to wandering bréhmans who ask. The alms
should be the size of a mouthful, the agra four mouthfuls,
Bréhmans call the agra four times a hanta-kéra.t But
without giving food, or a hantakéra, an agra or an alms,
according to his substance, he must not himself eat. And
he should eat, after he has done reverence to guests, friends,
paternal kinsmen, relatives, and petitioners, the maimed, and
children and old men and the Bick, © 1

“Tf a man consumed with hunger, or another who is destitute
wants food, he should be fed by a householder who has ade-
gnateļ substance. Whatever kinsman is dispirited when he
reaches a prosperous kinsman, the latter gets the sin that has


“Thus a weight is placed on the shoulder of one who
undertakes family life, Vidhétri, and the gods, and the
pitris, the great Rishis, all shower bliss on him, and so also


period— ‘ Having done reverence to the gods
and guests, relatives likewise, and fo


© A measure,
¢ A formula of salutation, or an offering to a guest,
Í Read samarthe for samartho ?


THE OCCASIONAL RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES. 155


the fragments on the ground for both dogs and low caste men

46 and birds: for he should certainly perform this offering to the
Viéva-devas evening and day. And he should not himself
eat flesh, rice and vegetables and whatever may have been
prepared in the house, which he may not scatter according to
the precept.’ ”


Canto XXX.


Madālasi's Exhortation (continued).

Maddlasd explains to Alarka the ceremonies to be performed by a
grika-stha, which are of three kinds, continual, occasional and periodi-
cal—She explains the occasional srdddha, which ts celebrated for men
and women.


Madálasá spoke.
1 “ Now what the griha-stha’s ceremonies are, the continual,
and the occasional, and the periodical, listen thereto, my son.
2 «The continual are comprised in the five sacrifices,* these


that I have described to thee: and the occasional are the

others, such as the ceremony on the birth of a son, and so

3 forth. The periodicalt are recognisable by the learned as
"the sacrifices at the moon's changes, the śráddha and others.

< Beref I will tell thee of the occasional éréddha celebration,

4 of the birth-ceremony that should be performed similarly by

men or the birth of a son; and everything duly related in

order that should be done at marriages and on other occasions.

5 And in this the Nēndi-mukhe pitris§ must be worshipped ;

and he should give the pindas mixed with curds and contain-

6 ing barley, facing northward or eastward, with composed

mind making the oblation. Some men like it with the offer-


* Brahma (i. e. Veda)-yajna, deva-yajns, pityi-yajna, manushyaeyajna, and
bhūtā-yejna (all created beings.)

+ Read nitya-naimittikam for nitya-naimittika.

t Read atra for tatra ? :

$ Nine pitris, viz., the six parents, grandparents and great-grandparents on
the paternal side, and the grandfather, great-grandfather and great-great-
grandfather on the maternal side.


156


10


ll


. 12


13


14


15


16


17


18


CANTO XXX,


ing to the Visva-devas omitted. And in this ceremony the
dvijas must be arranged in pairs, and must be worshipped in
dextral circumambulation. This is the occasional ceremony
during growth, and the other is the funeral obsequies.

* And the graddha for a single deceased person should be
performed on the day of the death; listen to that. And it
should be performed omitting the offering to the gods, and
with a single vessel. And the oblations-with-fire* should not
be made in the fire without the ceremonies. And he should
give one pinda to the deceased person near the fragments of
food, and sesamum-seed and water on the right, accompanying
them with the recollection of that person’s name. ‘May he
be exempt from decay,’ let the celebrant say, and ‘may enjoy-
ment be his,’ let the others delighted say, at the place where
the bréhmans are dismissed. Men must do this every month
for a year. Now at the expiration of the year, or whenever
the ceremony is performed by men, the srāddha for deceased
sapiņdas must be performed for him also: so the rule is
stated ; and that must be without the offering to the gods,
and accompanied with a single argha offering in a single
vessel. And that ceremony must not be performed there in
the fire without offering the oblations-with-fire: and on the
right there, he should feed the single dvijas.

“And there is another distinction, consisting in an extra
ceremony every month ; do thou listen attentive to me, as I
tell thee of it, while it is being described. He should fill
four vessels there with sesamum-seed, perfume and water,
three for the pitris, one for the deceased person, my son.
And he. should scatter the arghya-oblation in the three ves-
sels, and in the deceased's vessel,t uttering the words ‘Ye
samáná’ §c., he should perform the rest as before.

“This sréddha for a single deceased person is ordained
precisely the same for women also. The éraddha for deceased
sapindas does not exist for them, if they have no son. The
Srāddha. for a single deceased person must be performed

* Avihans.
+ Read preta-pdtre for preta-pátram P


19


20


21


22


23


25


THE PARVANA SRADDHA, 157


every year for a woman by the men, duly on the day of her
death, as.has been here mentioned for men.

“ But if there are no sons, the sapindas; if they are want-
ing, the sahodakas,* and those who may be the mother's
sapiņdas and those who may be the mother's sahodakas,
should duly perform this ceremony for a man who has no
son, and for one who has begotten only a daughter. The
daughters and their children should in this way perform the
ceremony for the maternal grandfather. But those who are
designated as the sons of two such persons should worship
their maternal and paternal grandfathers fittingly with the
occasional śráddhas.

“When all these relatives are wanting, the women should
perform the ceremony without the mantras for their husbands ;
when they too are wanting, the king should cause the cere-
mony to be performed by a member of his own family, and
the cremation and all the other ceremonies to be performed
properly by men of that caste; for the king indeed is kins-
man to all the classes. i

“Thus these continual and occasional ceremonies have been
described to thee, my child. Hear the other periodical cere-
mony appertaining to the éréddha. The new moon is
just the cause there, and the time is the moon’s waning: the
fixed time indicates the constancy of that ceremony.”


Canto XXXI.


Description of the Pdrvaņa Sraddha.


Maddlasd mentions the seven sapinda ancestors, and the lepa-
bhujas, and the remoter ancestors—She explains how the celebrant of
the érdddha nourishes them all—She enumerates the times for the
Srdddha, and the persons who should and who should not be invited to
it—Bhe describes how the Sréddha should be performed.


1


Madálasá spoke.
“ After the performance of the sraddha to deceased sapindas,
he who is the father’s great-grandfather passes to the class of


* The samduodakas.


158 CANTO XXXI.


those who feed on the lepa,* having lost his share in the pinda

2 offered to the pitris. He, who is the fourth there-above
among those who feed on the lepa bestowed by the deceased’s
Son, ceases to eat thereof and obtains the satisfaction that is
freed from the relationship.

3 “The father, and grandfather, and also the great-grand-
father—these truly must be known as the three males who

4 are related by the pinda.t And those who are related by
the lepa are said to be the three others reckoning upwards
from the grandfather’s grandfather: and the celebrant is

5  theseventh among them. Such have Munis declared this
seven-ancestral relationship to be, reckoning from the celebrant
upwards. And there-above are those beyond participation in
the lepa.

6 * Next are classed all the other ancestors, both those who
dwell in Naraka, and those who have become animals, and
those who reside within living creatures and other things.


7 “By what several means the celebrant, while performing
the srāddha rightly, nourishes all those ancestors, hear that,
my child.

8 “ Now truly those ancestors who have become pišac'as obtain


satisfaction from the food that men scatter on the ground. —
9 Those ancestors, my son, who have become trees, receive satis-
faction from the water that drips from the bathing garment `
10 on the ground. But the drops of water, that fall from the
limbs on the ground, minister nourishment to those ancestors in
11 the family who have attained divinity, And when the
pindas are taken up, the particles of food that fall on the
earth,—those ancestors in the family who have become animals
12 gain nourishment therefrom. The children moreover in
the family who, being capable of performing religions cere-
monies but not having undergone the purificatory rites, are
burnt on their death, they in their distress subsist on the
13 scattering of the food and the water used in scouring, And


© The wipings of the hands after offering the funeral oblations to the three
sapindas.
+ Sopipdas,


14


15
16
17
18
19
20
21


22


23


THE TIMES FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ŠRĀDDHA, 159


the water, both that which ts used by brāhmans for rinsing out
the mouth after meals, and that which is used by them tc.
sprinkling the feet,—the other ancestors likewise gain satisfac-
tion indeed- therefrom. So whatever water and food is
scattered by the celebrant and by those dvijas, whether it be
unsullied or fragmentary, that, my child, in the family of
those who duly perform the śráddhas, nourishes the other
ancestors who have been born among the several crea-
tions. With the šrāddhas, which men perform with ill-got-
ten wealth, are satisfied those ancestors wha have been born as
c'andalas, pukkašas and other men of degraded castes.

“ Thus many here derive nourishment, my child, through
their relations who perform the sraddhas, by means of the
casting away of food and drops of water. Therefore a man
should perform the srdddha in faith according to rule even
with vegetables: no one perishes in the family.of one who
performs the sraddha.

“I will mention the periodic times for it; and learn of
me by what rule men perform it.

“The graddha must necessarily be performed on the night
of the new moon, at the moon’s waning every month, and on
the eighth days* also.

“Learn of me the voluntary seasons. On the arrival of a
distinguished bréhman, on an eclipse of the sun or moon, at
the solstice, at the equinox, at the sun’s passage from one sign
into another, and on the occasion of a portent,t my son, on
acquiring property worthy of a śráddha, and on seeing a bad
dream, and at occultations of the constellation or planet:
under which one is born, one should perform the gréddha
according to one’s inclination.

“A distinguished bréhman learned in the Veda, a yogi,
one who knows the Veda, one who has mastered the J yesh-
tha-séman, one who has thrice kindled the fire Nūc'iketa, one
who knows the three verses which begun with ‘ madhu,’t one


# Of three months.

+ For vyatipdte read vyatipāte. This word has several other meanings,
which are admissible.

Y Rig-V. I. 90, 6—8.


160


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


33


CANTO XXXI.


who knows the ‘tri-suparna’ hymns, one who knows the six
Vedāngas, a daughter's son, a Ritvij priest, a daughter's hus-
band, and a sister’s son, and a father-in law also, and one who
is skilled in the business of the five sacred fires, and one who
is eminent in austerities, a maternal uncle, and one who
is anterior to one’s parents, a disciple, a relative by marriage,
and a kinsman—these brāhmans are all worthy of invitation
to a frāddha.

“ A religious student who has been incontinent, and a sick
man, and one who has a limb superfluous or deficient, the son
of a widow remarried, and a one-eyed man, an adulterine son,
and a widow’s bastard, my son, a traitor to his friends, one
who has bad nails, an impotent man, a man with brown teeth,
a brāhman negligent of his duties, a man cursed by his father,
a slanderer, a vendor of soma juice, one who has de-
flowered his daughter, a medical man, and one who has dis-
carded his guru and father, a hired teacher, a friend,* and
the husband of a previously-married woman, one who
discards the Vedas, and one who abandons the sacred fire, a
man who has been corrupted by the husband of a low caste
woman,t and others who habitually practise i improper acts,
—all these persons are verily to be shunned in ceremonies to the
pitris, (O brāhmans.)

The celebrant should invite the above-mentioned brihmans
on the day before, to the function performed in honour of the
gods and pitris, and should fetch them also.

* And both he, who shall perform a gréddha that ought to
be performed by those self-controlling men, and he, who
indulges in sexual intercourse after having offered the śrád-
dha and eaten the food,—the ancestors of these two men verily
lie down in that semen a month. Moreover he who eats ata
graddha and he who goes to a érdddha after intercourse with
a woman,—the ancestors of those two men feed on semen and
urine for that month. Therefore a wise man must first issue


* Bhritakidhyšpako mitrah. This seems strange,
+ For vrishali-pati-dishitah read vrishalt-dishité-patik, one who has married
a low-oaste woman or a deflowered girl P


35


36


37


38


39


40


41


42


43


THE RITUAL OF THE ŠRĀDDHA. 161


an invitation; and men who have intercourse with women
before the day arrives must be shunned.

“ With his mind controlled he should feast those who
have come seeking for alms, or ascetics who control them-
selves at the proper times, after first propitiating them
with prostrations and other reverential acts. Just as the time
of the waning moon is dearer to the pitris than that of the
waxing moon, so the afternoon pleases the pitris more than
the forenoon. One should do reverence to these dvijas, who
have arrived at his house, with a welcome; and with the
pavitra in hand he should seat those, who have rinsed out
their mouths, on seats. In the case of the pitris the number
of brdhmans should be uneven, and in the case of the Gods*
even ; or, according to the circumstances of the celebrant, there
should be one brahman for the pitris and one for the Gods.
In like manner for the maternal ancestors the number of brah-
mans should be uneven or only one. The brāhmans intended
for the Visva-devas may be identical on the side of the pitris
and maternal ancestors ; but some other men desire that they
should be distinct. He should place the brahmans intended
for the Gods with their faces toward the east, and those for
the pitris toward the north.t The ceremony due to the
maternal ancestors has been similarly expounded by the wise.

Let the intelligent man giving kuša grass for a seat, and
worshipping’ with the arghya and other offerings, giving
things pure and such like, and obtaining permission from
them,—let the wise dvija perform the invocation to the gods
according to the mantras. And having also given the arghya
offering to all the deities with barley and water, and having
duly given perfume, garlands, water and incense accompanied
with a lamp, let him both perform the whole of the dextral
circumambulation for the pitris ; and having given a double
quantity of darbha grass, and having obtained permission


* For devai read daive.
+ The text is very obscure, and seems corrupt. For this translation I am


indebted to Babu Harimohan Vidyfbhushan, the Pandit of the Bengal Asiatio
Society.


21


162
44


45


46


47


48


49


50


öl


592


54


50


56


- CANTO XXXI.


from them, let the intelligent man perform the invocation to
the pitris, prefacing it with the mantras. And let him also
perform the dextral circumambulation and give the arghya
offering and barley and money and sesamum seed, intent
on pleasing the pitris. Then permitted by the dvijas who
say, ‘Perform the ceremonies in the fire P let him offer rice
unmixed with condiments or salt according torule. The first


-rite consists in uttering ‘Sváhá! to fire, the bearer of


oblations to the pitris; and let the next be *Svāhi! to
Soma who is esteemed by the pitris; and the third offering is
* Svāhā” to Yama, the lord of the departed. And let him
put the remains of the offering into the vessels of the dvijas ;
and. taking hold of the vessels let him give the rice according
to rule. He should say allably “ Ho, do ye enjoy yourselves
happily !”* and then they also should eat happily, with their
minds attentive thereon and observing silence. And a man
should leisurely give them whatever food they like best, dis-
playing no wrath and alluring them appropriately. And let
him utter the mantras which vanquish the Rakshasas, and let
him strew the ground with sesamum seed and with white
mustard: for the sraddha possesses abundant devices for
protection. And letthe man, permitted by the dvijas who say
“Ye are satisfied and we are satisfied by those who are
nourished and satisfied,” scatter food everywhere on the
ground. Similarly then haying obtained permission, let him,
with voice body and mind controlled, give the dvijas severally
watert to rinse out their months. Then, my son, let. him
with his left hand put the pindas with rice and sesamum-seed
on the darbha grass, near the remains of the food, for the
pitris. Let him composedly also give them water with the
part of the hand} sacred to the pitris, since O prince! he
celebrates the sacrifice with faith for the pitris. Similarly
he should, after giving the pindas on.behalf of the maternal
grandfathers according to rule, then give water for rmsing


* For yathé sukham read yathé-sukham ?
+ For dpa% read apah.
t Pitri-tfrtha, the part between the forefinger and thumb.


57


58


59


60


61


62


63


64:


65


THE RITUAL OF THE ŠRĀDDHA, 163


out the mouth together with scent, garlands &c.; and having
given the brāhmans” fee according to his ability, address
them “ May Svadhé be fortunate!” and let him cause them,
who being satisfied say “ Be it so!” to pronounce the Vaisva-
devika mantras. Let him say “ May they be pleased !” “ Hail
to you, O Vigve devas.” And on those brāhmans, saying, “Be it
so!” he should request their benedictions. He should dismiss
them, addressing them pleasantly and prostrating himself in
faith ; and he should attend them as far as the door, and he
should return, a gladdened man. Then he should perform
the continual ceremony, and should also feed guests. And
some very good men wish for a continual ceremony to the
pitris, and others do not wish it for the pitris. He should
perform the remainder as the first part: some think ‘not
with a separate cooking vessel,’ some prefer it repeated exactly
in the same order.* Then the celebrant should eat that rice
in company with his servants and others.

Thus should the man skilled in religious law perform com-
posedly the sraddha to the pitris, or so as satisfaction accrues
to the brahmans. There are three pure things in a šrāddha,


sesamum-seed,t sacrificial grass, and the sesamum-plant;t


and they say these, (O princely brahman,) are to be avoided,
anger, journeying, haste. A silver vessel is also commended
at srāddhas, my son. Now silver is for use, for looking at and
for giving away ; for when the offering to the pitris is milked
out in a silver vessel, the pitris give ear to the earth ;§ hence
the pitris desire silver, which increases their affection.


* The text seems obscure.

+ Dauhitram, see note f, p. 84.
f Tila.

$ The text seems incorrect,


164


CANTO XXXII.


Canto XXXII.


The ordinance of the Sraddha.


Madalasd explains what kinds of food please the pitris at šrāddhas
and for what periods—what kinds are to be avoided—what sites should
be avoided for the ceremony—what men and animals should be exclud-
ed—ant, what defilements must be avoided—Yogis must have priority at
the sraddha—ancient' songs are to be sung—and what benefits accrue
from the performance.


1


Madalasa spoke.


Next hear, my son, with faith this* that I say,—what is to
be ayoided in order to please the pitris, or what conduces to
their pleasure.

The pitris are satisfied with clarified butter and rice for a
month. The paternal grandfathers receive satisfaction with
fish-meat for two months. Venison should be known to satis-
fy the pitris for three months; and the flesh of hares
nourishes the pitris for four months ; birds’ flesh satisfies them
for five months; hog's flesh for six months; goat’s flesh for
seven months; and flesh of the black antelopet for eight
months ; flesh of the ruru deer gives them satisfaction for


nine months, without doubt; flesh of the gayalt gives them


satisfaction for ten months. Moreover sheep’s flesh§ satisfies
the pitris for eleven months; and milk of kine or anything
made of milk satisfies them a year. Flesh of the rhinoceros,
flesh of the red-goat, the dark tulsi plant,|| and honey, and
flesh of the rhinoceros{] and whatever else is given by members


* For imam read idam,

+ For aineyam read aiņeyam.

f For gavasyāmisham read gavaydmisham ;

§ For tirabhram read aurabhram.

|| Kéla-Séka: Ocymum sanctum, Roxb. I do not find it in Hooker,
T Dauhitra; but the rhinoceros is already mentioned.


FOOD ‘TO BE OFFERED. IN THE ŠRĀDDHA, 165


of their own family, and turmeric: and soma juice, and a śrád-
dha performed at Gayš -without doubt yield the pitris end-
9 less satisfaction. Syámáka* grain and rája-śyámákat grain,
and likewise small-grained rice,f wild rice,$ and paushkala
grain, these among grain tend to satisfy the pitris.
10 Barley, vrihi rice||, and sesamum-seed, and wheat, green
gram, and mustard, priyangu** seed, koviddratt seed, and
11 the finest pulse,f{ markataka§§ seed, raja-méshal||| pulse, and
aņuf grain should be eschewed ataSraddha. Viprāshika***
12 seed and lentilst++ are forbidden in a srāddha. Garlicttt and
red garlic,§§§ onions,|||{|| carrots, T. asparagus,**** and
13 whatever other vegetables are shunned on account of their taste


* This according to Roxburgh is Panicum frwmencuceum, the Beng šydmd;
but he says the Beng. sydmd also denotos P. colonum.

+ Perhaps this may be-Panicum hispidulwn, which Roxburgh says is-called
Beng. bata-$ydmd.

t Prasttika.

§ Nivāra.

|| The dus, or rainy season crop?

4 Mudga; see note $$, p. 84..

** Priyangu, Panicum italicum, (Roxb. p. 101:)

tt Kovidūra, Bauhinia variegata ; see note-||,-p. 27.

tt Nishpāva ; see note.||, p. 86.

§§ Markataka ; this does not seem to be known.

||| Rāja-māsha. Prof. Monier- Williams says this is Vigna cutiang (Dolichos
catjang, Linn. and Roxb.). (Hooker, vol. II, p. 205).

gg Panicum maliacewm, Roxb., the modern chind.

##*. Viprishika; not given in the Dictionary.

ttt Masūra. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is either Ervum hirsutum or
Cicer tens (Roxb. p. 567). The former is the "modern mestr chaná, and the
latter masūr. Hooker’ appears to combine both in Vicia hirsuta, which seems
to.be the common Lentil (Hooker, vol II, pp, 177 and 179).

‘ttt Lasuna.

$$$ Grinjana.

I Ralāņģu.

«T Pinda-milaka.

Xt Karambha, neut. Prof. Momer-Williams does not give the neut, but
says karambhi, fem., is Asparagus racemosus, which is also called šata-mūli.
( Roxb. p. 291; not in Hooker).


166 CANTO XXXII.


and colour; gšndhšrik4* and kadus,t salts and salted things,
14 and reddish juices,f and things that are manifestly salt—these
should be indeed avoided in a šrāddha. And whatever has been
obtained by talk or through bribes or other improper means is
not commended, nor what has been acquired from an outcaste ;
15 and wealth that has been obtained unlawfully as the pur-
chase-price of a bride is forbidden in this ceremony. And
water that is bad-smelling and frothy, and very scanty, and
16 water that cattle would disdain, and what has been taken
by night, and what has been left after every one has cooked,
and what is unfit for drinking in a tank—that water should
17 be avoided always in the ceremony to the pitris. All milk
from deer, sheep, camels, and from animals that have un-
cloven hoofs, from buffaloes, and from the yak, and cow’s
18 milk that is not more than ten days old,§ and what has
been brought to a person who has asked for it on account of
19 the pitris,—such milk must be always avoided by the good
in the srāddha ceremony.
And in this ceremony ground must be avoided that is
swarming with insects, that is rough, and that has been
20 scorched by fire, and that is hot with the words of enemies
and wicked men, and that is foul-smelling.
Men who disgrace their family or who injure their family by
21 separating themselves from the śráddha, naked men and crimi-
nals may destroy the ceremony to the pitris with their glance ;
a eunuch, and a man repudiated by his relations, a cock, and
22 the village hog, and a'dog, each ruins srāddhas by his look, and
so also do Rakshasas.


Hence let a man offer the ceremony being well secluded, and


# Gándháriká; not in the Dictionary. Professor Monier- Williams says gan-
dhāri denotes Hedysarum alhagi (Roxb., p. 574), and the Prickly Nightshade
(which appears to be Solanum Jacquini, Roxb., p. 191); but neither seems
appropriate, The text as it stands seems corrupt. For géndhérikdm road
gandholikam, whioh might mean “ dry ginger”?

+ Alšbu; see note * page 118,

1 Nirydsa; or ‘ gums.’

§ A-nirdaša. This seems strange.


23
24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31
32


33


VARIOUS RULES REGARDING THE ŠRĀDDHA. 167


scattering the ground with sesamum seed. Thus may safety
be secured in the éraddha even for both, my child.

What has been touched by a corpse or by a recently-
delivered woman,* and by those who have been long ill, by
outcastes, and by filthy persons, does not nourish the pitris.

And the celebrant must moreover avoid the sight of a
woman who is in her courses; and he must shun sitting to-
gether with bald-pated men and drunken men at a srāddha, out
Of respect.

And whatever is infested with hair-lice, and whatever has
bēen gazed at by dogs, and whatever is putrid and stale, and
the brinjal,t and ferments,f and whatever has been fanned by
the wind from clothing, are indeed to be avoided at a sriddha.

Whatever, in the shape of articles of food possessed by
thee, is given with supreme faith to the pitris according to
their name and family, that becomes food for them. Hence
a man of faith, who desires the pitris' satisfaction, must place
the best that he has in the vessel and according to rule at a
ceremony to the pitris.

And the yogis must always be fed by a wise man at a
éréddha; for the pitris are patrons of religious devotion ;
hence one should ever worship them. Now if a yogi is fed
first, he can save the person for whom the sacrifice is offered
and those who feast, just as a boat saves in water, better than
thousands of bréhmans.

At this ceremony also songs in honour of the pitris are sung
by those who recite the Veda, songs which were§ formerly sung
by the pitris to king Purūravas. «When will any one of us have
a son, the chief among his race, who, eating the remains of
food left by the yogis, will offer the pinda on earth ? Or will
offer the pinda, buffalo-beef, the clarified butter, or the vegeta-


`


# For fava-sūtaka-samsprishtam read stitakd-gava-samsprishtam ?

t Vártáki, the brinjal, Solanum melongena, Roxb., the modern begun. Prof.
Monier-Williams calls it the egg-plant. It is a well-known and favourite
vegetable. i do not find it in Hooker.

t For abhishavdms read abhishavds ?

§ For dsin read ásan. V


t68 CANTO XXXIII.


ble kála# mixed with sesamum-seed, or khichree at Gaya for

34 our monthly satisfaction? May we obtain? the offering to
the Visva-devas and the soma juice, buffalo-beef, and the
finest clarified butter, and the divine foodž by getting a young§
rhinoceros !”

85 Let him duly offer the śráddha on the thirteenth day and
when the moon isin the asterism Maghé, and milk mixed with
honey and clarified butter during the winter half of the year.

36 Let aman therefore, my son, worship his own.pitris in faith,
hoping to gain all his wishes and his own deliverance from

37 evil. Men’s pitris, when delighted with Srāddhas, please the
Vasus, the Rudras and the Adityas, the constellations, the

38 planets and the stars. The "pitris, when delighted with
Srāddhas, bestow long life, wisdom, wealth, knowledge,
Svarga, final emancipation from existence, and joys and
sovereignty.

39 I have declared to thee, my son, the srāddha ceremony
as it has been expounded : hear, my child, the praise of
the Voluntary Srāddhas according to the various days on which

they are performed.


Canto XXXIII.


The benefits to be obtained from the Voluntary Srdddhas.


Madélasé explains the benefits to be obtained from performing the *
Sréddha voluntarily with a view to the benefits—on the various days of
the lunar fortnight—and when the moon is tn the different asterisms.

Madálasá spoke. -
1 The first day of the lunar fortnight, if the érdddha be per-
formed on it, is auspicious for the acquisition of wealth; the

# There are many plants of this name.

t For afnuvámahe.read afnuvémahai ?

t Astiryam. in the text, but it seams incorrect, Read dauryam on désuram
from asura? sura is in the dictionary, but not dsurya,

§ Vishdņa-varjya, hornless.

|| Kémya Sréddha.


10


‘ll


12


13


THE BENEFITS FROM VOLUNTARY SRADDHAS. 169


second bestows men; and the third seeks for boons; the
fourth destroys enemies; in the fifth a man acquires for-
tune; in the sixth he may become worthy of worship: in the
seventh he acquires chieftainship; in the eighth the highest
prosperity; in the ninth he gains women; in the tenth
perfect gratification of his wishes. So let him, assiduous in
the ceremonies, gain all the Vedas in the eleventh. And in
the twelfth the worshipper of the pitris gains continual vic-
tories, offspring, mental vigour, cattle, prosperity, indepen-
dence and perfect nourishment. The man of intense faith,
who performs the šrāddha on the thirteenth day, gains length
of life and sovereignty undoubtedly. Since one is successful in
éraddhas by means of choice food, he, whose ancestors died or
were slain with weapons in their youth, should, if he wishes
for their pleasure, perform the ceremony on the fourteenth

day. The pure man, who performs the šrāddha diligently on
the night of the new moon, obtains all his wishes and attains

Svarga everlastingly.

By worshipping tbe pitris when the moon is in the asterism
Krittiké, a man obtains Svarga. A man who wishes for
offspring may obtain it when the moon is in the asterism
Rohini; and he may gain vigour when she is in the Saumya
signs of the Zodiac ;* and he may obtain valour when she is
in the asterism Ærdrá; and lands and other possessions when
sheisin Punar-vasu; and nourishment by always worshipping
when she is in Pushya ; and noble sons when she is in A-Sleshé ;
and pre-eminence among his relations when she ts in Maghé ;
and good fortune when she ts in Phalguni.t And the man of
liberal disposition obtains offspring when she is in Uttara
Phalguni. A man who offers érddhas when she is in Hasta
verily attains excellence. And so a man of goodly form may
obtair offspring when she is in C'itrā. Svāti bestows success
in trade; Visdkha gives philoprogenitiveness. Men who per-
form the śsráddha when the moon is in Anurádhá attain imperial
rule; and when she is in Jyeshthā lordship; and when she ts


* They are Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, and Capricornus,
+ For phalguņi read phalgunt.


22


170 CANTO XXXIV.


14 Múla perfect health. Acquisition of fame comes from perform-
ing the šrāddha when she is in Ashadhé; and freedom from
grief in Uttarā Ashidhi. And one gains bright worlds by
performing it when she ts in Sravaņa ; and immense wealth

l5 when she is in Dhanishthé. One may acquire intimate know-
ledge of the Vedas when she isin Abhi-jit ; and success in
medicine when she is in S ata-bhishaj; goats and sheep by
performing the ceremony in Bhādra; and amorous dalliance

16 in the latter part of Bhádra. And one who performs the ér4d-
dha when she is in Revati acquires the baser metals ; and when
she is in Ašvini horses; and when she is in Bharani full length
of life.


Hence a man who is skilled in trne knowledge should
perform the voluntary śráddhas at these seasons.


e


Canto XXXIV.


Alarka’s Education ~The exposition of Virtuous Custom.*


Maddldsd mentions the benefits of the observance of Virtuous Custom—
which consists in the pursuit of righteousness, wealth and love—She
mentions a large number of general rules regarding religious worship,
eating, social behaviour, private actions, and marriage—She gives general
rules regarding the sacrifices, and describes the portions of the hand to
be used therein—and mentions how one’s residence should be chosen,


d pitris be worshipped by


to the gods and the oblations
to the pitris; and with food


2 living creatures, all dependants,
gars and other petitioners be worshi

3 house, who observes the good c
mestic sacrifices, my child.
periodic ceremonies,”


* Sad-ūc'ira,


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


PURSUIT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, WEALTH AND LOVE 171


Alarka spoke.

« Thon hast declared to me, mother, the threefold ceremonies
to be observed by men, the perpetual, the occasional, and the
periodic.* I wish to hear, O lady who gladdenest thy family,
about Virtuous Custom by practising which a man gains happi-
ness in the next world and in this.”


Madálasá spoke.

« A householder must ever maintain Virtuous Custom tho-
roughly: for one who has lost Virtuous custom has no happi-
noss here or in the next world. Sacrifice, alms-giving and
austerities do not tend to the welfare of a man here, who
habitually transgresses Virtuous custom. For a man who
follows bad custom does not find long life here. One must
earnestly follow Virtuous custom; Virtuous custom destroys
what is inauspicious.

4 T will expound to thee my son, the nature of that virtuous
custom. Hear it from me with single mind, and even 80
maintain it.

< A householder who performs the domestic sacrifices must
strive to accomplish the three-fold objects of life:t in full suc-
cess therein lies the householder’s own success here and in the
next world. With a quarter of his Wealth let him, master of
himself, lay up a store for the next world; and with half let
him support himself and perform the periodic sraddhas ;
and treating a quarter as his capital, he should increase it,
by exerting himself on his own account. Thus, my son, Wealth
ought to be fruitful according to Virtuous custom. Similarly
a wise man must practise Righteousness in order to withstand


sin; and so also the third, Love, yields fruit here indeed on ac-
d the third, Love, is not impeded


count of the next world. An
through fear of diminution. Love also js said to be two-fold


from its not being opposed by this three-fold class. Let a man


consider all these successive correlations.
“Hear from me those opposite correlations, such as Right-


eousness, &c. Righteousness aims at a succession of right-


* Nitya, naimittika, and nitya-naimittika.
+ Dharma, káma and artha.


172.


17


18


19


20


21


22


28


25


26


27


CANTO XXXIV.


eousness.* Righteousness is not destructive tó one’s own
Wealth. And Love is diverse from both ; and those two again
are diverse from it.

“ At the Brāhma moment a man should think of and ponder
over Righteousness and Wealth, after rising up and rinsing
out his mouth, standing towards the east, self-restrained,
pure: let him worship the twilight with the constellations in
the east, the twilight with the sun in the west, as is right:
he should not neglect it even when free from adversity.

* He should eschew conversation with the wicked, falsehood,
and harsh speech, evil books, evil words and the homage of
evil, my son.

* Evening and morning, with soul restrained he should offer
the homa oblation.

“He should not gaze up at the orb of the sun at sunrise or
at sunset.

“He should look in a mirror in order to dress his hair ;
he should wash his teeth; and delight the gods in the very
foremoon.

“He should not defecate or void urine in a path leading to
the villages, to temples, to places of pilgrimage or to the
fields, nor on cultivated ground, nor in a cattle-pen.

“ He should not gaze at another's wife naked, He should not
look at his own ordure. He should avoid seeing, touching and
talking with a woman in-her-courses.

“He should not void urine, or defecate, or engage in sexual
intercourse in water,

"He should not step on ordure, urine, hair, ashes or pot-
sherds: and a wise man should not step on husks, charcoal,


bones or decayed things, or on rope, clothing, &c., whether on
a road, or on the earth.


“ Moreover a householder should do reverence to the pitris,
gods and mankind, and to living creatures, according to his
capability, and afterwards eat himself. And aman hould
always eat his food, facing the east or the north, with his


* Or, brings wealth as a consequence of righteousness,


28


29


30


31


32


33


34


35
36


37


38


MORAL AND SOCIAL MAXIMS. 173


mouth well rinsed out, restraining his speech, pure, with his
mind intent on his food and with his face between his knees.

“ An intelligent man should not divulge another's fault ex-
cept in the event of injury.

“ Food should be avoided in which salt is visible, and which
is very hot.

“A man of self-control should not defecate nor void urine
while walking or standing.

“ And he should not eat anything at all while rinsing out
his mouth. While he has remains of food in his mouth, he
should not carry on any conversation and he should cease his
reading, and he should not touch a cow, a brāhman, fire, or
his own head:

“ Nor should he look at the sun or the moon or the con-
stellations with passionate desire.*

«And he should avoid a broken seat and bed and cup.

“ He should offer a seat to gurus, accompanying the offer
with rising up and other respectful acts ; and he should salute
them respectfully and converse with them agreeably; and
he should follow them. He should not speak about them ad-
versely.

“And when clad in a single garment he should not eat nor
engage in the worship of the gods.

“ An intelligent man should not carry dvijas, nor-should he
void urine in fire, nor should he ever bathe or sleep naked.

« And he should not scratch his head with both hands; nor
should men wash their heads frequently without cause. And
when his head is washed he should not touch his body with
oil at all.

“ And he should cease his own reading, when every one is
abstaining from reading.

“ He should never void urine against a brahman, the wind,
cattle or the sun; facing north by day, and facing south by
night, ke should do his voidance of urine and fæces during
illnesst whenever he desires.

* Kamacas.
+ For dbddhdshw read dbddhdsu.


174


39


40


41


42


43


45


46


47


48


49


50


CANTO XXXIV.


“He should not talk of his guru’s evil-doing, and he should
appease him when angry. He should not listen to abuse
when others utter it.

“And he should yield the path to brāhmans, to the king, and
to one who is ill with pain, to his superior in learning, to a
pregnant woman, to a man labouring under a burden, to a
younger man, to the dumb, blind and deaf, to a drunken man,
and to a mad man, to a prostitute, to an enemy, to a child and
to an outcaste.

“An intelligent man should respectfully circumambulate a
temple, and a fig-tree standing on a sacred spot, and a place
where four roads meet, his superior in learning, a guru and
a god.

“He should not carry shoes, clothes, garlands Ge. that
others are carrying.

*He should avoid the sacred thread, an ornament, and the
water-pot on the fourteenth, eighth and fifteenth days of the
moon and at its four changes. He should also eschew rub-
bing his body with oil, and sexual intercourse with his wife,
on those days.

* And a wise man should never stand with his foot or his leg
extended: nor should he throw out both his feet; nor should
be press one foot on the other.

“He should eschew deadly attacks, kās and calumny. A
clever man should not display deceit, self-conceit, or sharp-
ness. He should not disgrace with ridicule fools, insane per-
sons, or thosein calamity, the deformed, or magicians, or those
who have limbs deficient or superfluous.

* He should not inflict punishment on another in order to in-
struct a son or disciple.

“ Likewise the wise man should not draw his seat towards
him and sit down.

“ Ho should not prepare a cake, khichree or flesh for himself.
He must have his food evening and morning, after doing re-
verence to his guests.

“ Facing eastwards or stories, restraining his voice, he
should always wash his teeth, my child.


51


52


53


00


56


62


MORAL AND SOCIAL MAXIMS. 175


« He should eschew the prohibited vegetables.

«A man should certainly not sleep with his head to the
north, nor with his head to the west; he should sleep, plac-
ing his head to the north east or east.

* He should not bathe in perfumed water, nor at night ; bath-
ing except by day is declared to be most potent for calamity;
nor when he has not bathed, should he wipe his limbs with a
cloth or with his hands. Nor should he shake his hair, nor
should be.shake his clothes.* Nor should an intelligent man,
when he has not bathed, ever apply unguents:.

“ Nor should he wear red clothing, nor even variegated or
black clothing: nor should he make a complete change of his
clothing or in his ornaments. And transparent} raiment
should be avoided, and also whatever is very much damaged,
and whatever is infested with lice, or has been trampled on,
or has been looked at by dogs, and has been licked or thrown
down, or has been befouled by the extraction of pus.

“He should never eat flesh from the back, or flesh unfit for
the gods and pitris, or prohibited flesh, my son, or things
which are visibly salt. Food that is long stale or that is not
fresh must be avoided, my royal son, because of the changes
that occur in flour, vegetables, sugarcane and milk; and meat
long stale must be avoided, because of the changeļ that
occurs in it.

“ He should avoid lying down at sunrise and sunset,

“ Not when unbathed, nor when reposing, nor while thinking
of other things, nor when sitting on his bed or on the earth,
nor when making a sound,§ nor when clad in a single garment,
nor when speaking, nor without giving to spectators, but
when bathed a man should eat evening and morning accord-
ing to rule.

“ A wise man should not resort to other men’s wives. Adul-
tery destroys the religious acts and the life of man. Nothing


* For udsast read vdsdmst ?

+ For vidašam read višadam? I do not find vidaša in the dictionary.
t For vikdrdmšc'a read vikdrde'c’a ?

§ For fabdavut read šubdayan ?


176
63


64


65


66


67


68


69


70


71


72


78


74


75


76


CANTO XXXIV.


indeed is so short-lived in the world, as a man’s intercourse
with another’s wife here.

“Let him perform the worship of the gods, and the cere
monies to fire, and the respectful salutation to his guru, and
also the ceremony of eating his food, after duly rinsing out his
mouth. Facing eastwards or northwards he should reverent-
ly rinse out his mouth, my son, with frothless, inodorous, pure
and holy water. He should avoid the five earths from be-
neath water, from a habitation, from an ant-hill, from ground
infested with mice, and where purificatory, actions &c. have
been carried on. After washing his hands and feet and sprink-
ling water on them he should, with his face between his knees,
and composed mind, rinse out his mouth. He should drink
water three or four times after twice wiping the sides of his
mouth, the apertures of the body, and his head. After duly
rinsing out his mouth with water, being pure, he should per-
form the ceremony to the gods, the rishis, and the pitris di-
ligently. A man should always perform the ceremonies, pre-
serving a composed mind. A wise man should rinse out his
mouth, after he has sneezed, or spitten out, or donned his
raiment. After a sneeze, and licking, and a vomit, and spitting
&c., he should rinse out his mouth, touch a cow’s back, and
look at the sun; and he should hold up hisright ear, since
this is in his power; inthe absence of the former, he should
do the latter; if the former be wanting, it is desirable to do
the latter.

“ He should not gnash his teeth, nor beat his own body.

“He should also avoid sleep, reading and food at both
twilights ; and sexual intercourse and setting out on a journey
at the evening twilight.

“ In the fore noon, dear son, he should in faith perform his
worship to the gods, and at noon to men, and in the afternoon
to the pitris. - And with head bathed, he should perform the
ceremonies to the gods or the pitris. And he should trim his
beard facing eastwards or northwards.

* He should eschew a maiden although well-born, if she is de-
formed, or sickly, or disfigured, ortawny-coloured, or talkative,


77


78


79


80


81


"82


88


85


86


87


85


SOCIAL AND MORAL MAXIMS. 177


or contaminated by everybody. And one who is free from
deformity, who has a beautiful nose, and is marked with
all the auspicious marks—such a maiden as that should a man
always marry who desires welfare. He should marry one
who isin the seventh or fifth degree distant from his parents :
he should guard his wife, and he should shun jealousy, by day,
in sleep and in sexual intercourse.

“He should avoid a deed that causes pain* to others, and
the infliction of pain on living creatures.

“A woman, during menstruation, should be avoided by all
the castes for four nights. He should avoid just the fifth night
of the moon in order to avoid the birth of females: then let
him approach his wife on the sixth night, that night is the
best among the even nights, my son. Sons are begotten on
the even nights, daughters on the odd nights: therefore a
wise man who wishes for a son should always cohabit with his
wife on the even nights. Lawless men cohabit with their wives
in the morning, and eunuchs at evening.

“ After shaving, and vomiting and sexual intercourse, my
son, the wise man should resort to the place where bodies
are burntt and should bathe, keeping his clothes on.

“One should not revile or ridicule the gods, the Vedas,
or dvijas, good, truthful or magnanimous men, a guru, or
devoted and virtuous wives, or persons who are sacrificing or
performing austerities my son. One should never listen to
those unmannerly persons who do such things.

“ One should not mount on a high bed or seat, nor on a low
one.

“ One should neither dress unbecomingly, nor speak unbe-
comingly. One should be clad in pure white raiment, and
adorned with white flowers.

« Neither with the haughty, nor with the insane, nor with
fools, nor yet with the unmannerly should a wise man form
friendship ; nor yet with those of bad disposition, nor yet with
thosē who are corrupted with thieving and othor vices, nor yot


® Upa-tapaka ; not in the dictionary,
+ Katu-bhiwi.


23


178 CANTO XXXIV.


with spend-thrifts, nor with the covetous, nor yet with enemies,
nor with prostitutes, nor with inferiors, nor with the husbands

89 of prostitutes. He should never make friendship with the
mighty, nor with inferiors, nor with reprobates, nor with the

90 ever-timid; nor yet with fatalists. He should contract friend-
ship with good men, with those who always observe Virtuous
custom, with the wise, with the honest, with the powerful,
with those who are resolute in action.

91 “In company with one’s friends, the initiated, the king,
Snātaka brahmans, and one’s father-in-law, one should do re-
verence to the.Ritvij priest, and the five other venerable per-

92 sons and to guests. One should do reverence, my son, to
dvijas, who have dwe fora year, with an offering of honey
and milk according to one’s ability and with alacrity at fitting
times. Aud the brahman who desires bliss should observe
their governance, and if intelligent he should not contradict
them even though always scolded by them.

94 “Having performed the household worship properly in the
fitting place and in due order, he should next worship the fire

and offer it the oblations in due order. He should make the

first offering to Brahmā, and then to to the prajā-pati, and the

96 third to the Guhyas, and the next to Kašyapa. Then having
offered to Anumati* he should next offer the household bali
and the constant oblations, that I have alread


y explained to
97 thee, according to the ritual. Next he shonld make the offer-


ing to the Vigva-devas, then the offerings to all creatures, and
separately to the gods according to place and appor
98 And he should make the three oblations to Parjanya, the
Dharitris, and to Ménaka,+ and to Vayu in every direction,
99 to the east and other regions of the sky in due order ; and to
Brahmá, to the Air and'to the Sun in order, and to the Vigva-
100 devas and to all beings; and then he shonld offer to the
Dawn, and to Siva northwards; and southwards to the pitris,
10] exclaiming 'Svadhž, reverence!’ Having done it on the


93


95


tionment.


** The fifteenth day of the moon’s age, personified.
+ This is said to Arum Indicum, the Beng. mukn-kduhvu,


the stems and
tubers of which are generally eaten (Roxb., p. 625)


MINOR RELIGIOUS RULES. 179.


right and to the north west, saying, ‘O Yakshma,* this is for
thee!” he should, if he wishes, offer the remains of the food

102 and the water from ‘the vessel according to therule. Then
taking up the first part of the food, he should offer it with «he
benediction Hanta to the brahman according to the rule and
justice.

103 “He should perform the ceremonies to the gods and other
objects of worship, with each one’s special portion of the hand ac-
cording to rule; and he should perform the ceremony of rinsing
out the mouth with the portion of the hand sacred to Brahmé.

104 This is called the portion of the hand sacred to Brahma for
the purpose of rinsing ont the mouth, viz., a line drawn to the

105 left of the thumb of the right hand. The pitris’ portion of
the hand is said to be the part between the. forefinger and
the thumb; by that he should offer the water and other obla-

106 tions to the pitris, except in the nindi-mukha éréddha. And
the gods’ portion of the hand is at the tips of the fingers ; the
ritual of ceremonies to the gods should be performed there-
with. The prajé-pati’s portion of the hand is at the root of
the little finger, his ceremony must be performedt therewith.

107 Thus always with these portions of the hand sacred to the
gods and pitris, he should always perform the ceremonies,

108 never with any other portion of the hand. It is proper al- r
ways to rinse out the mouth with the portion of the hand
sacred to Brahmá; and to offer the oblation to the pitris with
the portion of the hand sacred to the pitris; and that to the
gods with the portion of the hand sacred to the gods; and
the offering to the prajá-pati with his own portion of the hand.

109 A wise man should perform the cake-and-water ceremony to
the n4ndi-mukha ancestors, and whatever is offered to the

_ prajé-pati, with the -portion of the hand sacred to the praja-
pati. f

110 “A sensible man should not carry water and fire at the same
time; nor should he thrust out both his feet towards guru
and the gods.


* Pulmonary disease, + Read kdryam for kāyam?


180 CANTO XXXV.


111 ‘He should not look at a neifer sucking.
** He should not drink water with the hands joined together.
“ At all periods of personal purification whether important
112 or unimportant, he should not delay for the sake of purifica-
tion.
* He should not blow the fire with his month.
* One ought not to take up one's abode, my son, where
113 four things do not exist, viz., a person who pays debts, and a
physician, a brāhman learned in the Vedas, and a river full
of water. Where there is a king who has vanquished his
114 foes, who is powerful, and who is devoted to righteousness,
there should a wise man always dwell: whence can come
happiness, when the king is worthless? Where the king is
-115 unassailable, where the earth is prolific, where the citizens
are well governed and always: practise justice, where folk are
116 charitable, there does residence bestow happiness. In a
country where the husbandmen are not generally gluttonous,
and where all medicinal herbs are procurable, there should a
117 sensible man dwell. One ought not, my son, to dwell there,
where these three things: are constant, a person desirous of
conquering, and a former enemy, and folk who are always
118 holding festival. A wise man should always dwell among
good-tempered neighbours.


“Thus, my son, have I, thy well-wisher, expounded this to
thee.”


Canto XXXV.


The education of Alarka (continued).


An exposition of things permitted and forbidden.


Maddlasd describes what food may be eaten and what not—
how various things are to be cleansed when impure, and what
things are always pure—how one who has contracted impurity
should purify himself —what actions and conduct one should avoid—


10


11


12


RULES AS TO EATING AND PURIFICATION. 181


She insists on the necessity of maintining the daily sacrifice—She
mentions what holidoys are allowed the variot  castes—She des-
cribes certain post-funeral ceremonies—and purification after deaths
and births.


Madalasd spoke.

Next do thou hearken to the remedial measures for things
forbidden and permitted. Rice should be eaten that has been
kept awhile, mixed with oil, and long stored; and wheat,
barley, and butter-milk and preparations thereof unmixed
with oil. The hare, the tortoise, the go-simp;* the porcupine,
and the rhinoceros, my son,—these indeed may be eaten; and
the domestic pig and fowlshould be eschewed. The remains
of food at a sraddha after the pitris and gods and other reci-
ptents have been satisfied may be eaten at the dogire of the
brāhmans. A man who eats flesh that has been killed for the
purpose of medicine is not defiled.

Shells, stones, gold, and silver, ropes, and garments, and
vegetables, roots and fruits, and wicker-work vessels and lea-
ther, and gems, diamonds. and coral, and pearls, and men’s
bodies are best cleansed with water; just as iron things with
water, and stone by scrubbing. Oily vessels are cleansed with
warm water, and winnowing baskets, grain and antelope-skins;
and the pestle and mortar for husking rice, and thick cloths,
and a storo by sprinkling; and all kinds of bark-made things
are best cleansed with water and earth. Grass, wood and
medicinal herbs are best cleansed by sprinkling; and all
woollen things and hair have ceremonial purity. White mus-
tard is cleansed with oily sediment or the sediment from
sesamum seed. Things that are injured are always cleansed
with water, my son. So also cotton things are cleaned with
water and ashes. Timber, ivory, bone and horn are best
cleaned by scraping. Harthen pots are purified ceremo-
nially by re-burning.

Pure are alms, a workman's and) wares for sale, and a


* Godh4, the Go-simp a very large kind of lizard found in jungle.


182
13


14


l5


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


CANTO XXXV.


woman's face, : whatever passes. along the high-road, what is
unknown, what is brought by slaves and other menials, what ig


admirable for its sound, what is long past, what is screened by


many, what is light, what is extremely abundant, what is
young, and what is done by the old and the sickly, kitchens
when the business in them is ended, women who are suckling
children. Pure also are running water, and odourless bubbles.

The ground is cleansed through time, by the rubbing of
bodies, and the passage of cattle, by smearing, by digging,
by watering, by houses, by sweeping and by worship.

Things infested with hair-lice, or sniffed at by cattle, or
infested with flies should be sprinkled with earth water and
ashes to be cleansed, my sun; things made of udumbara
wood* with vinegar; tin and lead with salt. Brass things
are cleaned with ashes and water; and the over-flows of fluids
are pure. A thing soiled by ordure is cleaned with earth and
water and by removing the smell; and other such-like things ©
by removing the colour and smell.

Water is pure that has satisfied cattle, that is in its natural
state, thatis lying on the earth; and likewise flesh that has
been slain by O'aņdālas, Kravyādas and others. And clothes
and other things lying on the high-road are said to be made
pure by the wind. Dust. fire, a horse, a cow, the shade, the
rays of the sun and moon, the wind, the earth, drops of water,
and mosquitoes and other insects inflict no contamination
though they may have been in contact with what is corrupt.
A goat and a horse are pure as regards their face; but the face
of a cow or calf is not pure when the mother is in milk ; a hawk
is pure when it knocks f uit down. A seat, a bed, a carriage,
boats, and grass on the road—they are purified by the rays of
the moon and sun and by the wind, in the same way as articles
of trade.

After walking along the high road, and after matters of
bathing, hunger, drinking, and weariness, one should clange


* Udumbara, Ficus glomerata, Roxb.; a large tree, common about villages
(Boxb. p. 646.)


25


26


27


28


29


30


81


32


33


34


35


PURIFICATORY AND SANITARY RULES. j 183


one’s clothes and duly rinse out one’s mouth. "Bad roads,* mud,
and water, when one comes into contact with them, are cleaned
by leaving them alone; and things made of mud or brickt
are.cleansed by contact with the wind.

On taking up a morsel of rice-food that has been damaged
through over-maturity, he should discard it, and should rinse
out his mouth with water and earth, and should sprinkle the
remainder with water. One who has eaten bad food whether
wittingly or unwittingly, should fast for three nights in order
to assuaget that fault.

After touching a menstruous woman, a horse, a jackal, aad
other animals, or a woman recently delivered of w child, or
people of low caste, one should bathe for the sake of purifica-
tion; and so should those who have carried a corpse. After
touching an oily human bone a man becomes clean when he
has bathed; after touching a dry human bone he becomes clean,
by rinsing out his mouth, or by touching a cow, or by gazing
at the sun. Moreover one should not disregard! blood, spittle,
aud unguents for the body. ;

A wise man should never stand in gardens and other ,
places in the afternoons. Nor should one hold converse with
a woman hated by the populace or with a widow.

One should cast remnants of food, ordure, urine and the
water used for washing the feet, outside the house.

Without taking up five pindas one should not bathe in


* another man’s water; one should bathe in holy ponds, and


in the Ganges, in lakes and rivers.

After touching or holding converse with blasphemers of the
gods, pitris, and holy Sastras, sacrifices, prayers and other
sacred objects, one should purify one’s self by gazing at the
sun. And after looking at a menstruous woman, a śúdra, an
outcaste, or a dead body, the unrighteous, a woman recently
delivered of a child, a eunuch, a naked person, and persons
of low caste, and on those who give away children, and


* Vi-rathy4; not in the dictionary. f For upasamena read vpašarmdīju ?
+ Ishta, brick ?


184


36


37


38


"89


40


41


42


43


44


45


+


CANTO XXXV.


on the paramours of other men’s wives, the wise must in.
deed perform this purification of themselves. One conver.
sant with righteousness, after touching forbidden food, a wo-
man recently delivered, a eunuch, a cat, a rat,a dog ora
cock, and an outcaste, what is cast away, a C'aņdāla, and
those who carry away corpses, is purified by bathing; and so
also one who has touched a woman in her courses, and the
domestic hog, and even two men who have been contaminated
by the impurity of'a newly-delivered woman.

The base man, both he who daily neglecta the continual
ceremony, and he who is abandoned by bréhmans, is polluted.
One should never allow the continual ceremony to cease; but
if it is neglected, there is a stoppage to the re-birth of his
deceased relatives.

A br4hman should spend ten days, exempt from alms-giving,
the Homa sacrifice and: other ptous acts: and a kshatriya
should spend twelve days: and a vaisya half.a month; buta
Sidra should remain a month, exempt from his.peculiar- occu:
pation: thereafter all should ‘pursue their own occupation, as
already expounded.

Water ought to be presented to a departed person, after his
body has been burnt outside by his relatives,* on the-first,
and fourth, seventh and ninth days of the moon. His relatives
should-gather together the ashes and bones.on the fourth day ;
it is prescribed that after gathering them together, they
should touch their limbs with them. But the ‘sahodakas `
should perform all the ceremonies, after the gathering to-
gether of the remains. If the sapindas are touched by them,
then both the sapindas and the sahodakas lose their purity.t

If a person dies directly of his own free will, by the sword,
by water, by hanging, or by fire, by poison, by. a fall, or
in any other unnatural way, or by religious fasting to death,
or by fasting to death from vindictive motives ;f or-if he
Gotrika.

For mritdhani read mrijd-hénis,


t For verse 45 of the text read—


Anvaksham ic'c'hayd šastra-toyodbandhana-vahnisnu
Visha-prapdtādi-mrite préyonaganayor api.


46


47


48
49


50


5l


52


53


Bå


55


56


57


The text appears to be corrupt.


PURIFICATORY RULES AFTER DEATHS. 185


dies as a child, or as a sojourner in a foreign country, or as a
religious mendicant, purification will be effected at once; and
others say the period of impurity* is declared to be three days
for the sapindas; but if, after the other person is dead, the
sapiņda also dies, in this case the ceremonies must be perform-
ed during the days called the period of the first impurity.
This same ordinance is applied also to the impurity caused
by the birth of sapindas, among sapindas and properly among
gahodakas also. When a son is born, the father must bathe
with his clothes on. And if, after one child has been born
there, another should be born, the purification in that case
also is prescribed according to the days of the elder-born child.
When ten or twelve months or half a month have elapsed,
all the castes should duly perform their respective rites and
ceremonies. Next the ekoddishta sréddha should be performed
for the departed person. And men of understanding must


. give gifts to the brihmans; whatever is most desired in the


world, and whatever is prized at home, those very things
therefore must one who hopes for immortality give to a brah-
man endowed with good qualities : but at the end of the days,
after they have touched water, a chariot, a weapon, a goad
and a rod, and after they have performed the ceremonies,
they should make the oblationt ordained by the laws of their
respective castes, and ‘perform all pure acts that confer bliss in


- the next world and in this.


A wise man must study the three Vedas, and must be con-
tinually occupied therein ; he must amass riches righteously,
and strenuously perform sacrifices ; and he must fearlessly do
whatever does not entail censure on the soul of him who does it,
my son, and whatever ought not to be concealed in public. The
good man that so does, my child, brings splendour to his home
by acquiring righteousness wealth and love.


This amended reading is taken from a


private MS. consulted by the pandit of the Bengal Asiatic Society for me, but
prdydnas'anayor seems preferable.

* A-fauclakam; not in the dictionary..

+ For updddnam read upadānam ?


24


186


CANTO XXXVI.


Canto XXXVI.


The Story of Madélasé (concluded).


Rita-dhvaja Kuvalaydšva on reaching old age resigns his kingdom to


his son Alarka, and Maddlasd gives him a token-ring—Both depart to
the forest to practise austerities.


+


10


` Jada spoke.

Being thus instructed by his mother, Rita-dhvaja’s son at-
tained his youth and duly married a wife, and begat sons,
and as a lord offered sacrifices, and always closely observed
his father’s commands. Then after a long time Rita-dhvaja,
on reaching extreme old age, anointed his son in the sovereign-
ty, and with righteous soul desirous to depart to the forest to
practise austerities in company with his wife descended from
his throne, a mighty protector, an illustrious king.

And Madálasá delivered this her last discourse to her son,


in order that her son might abandon attachment to sensual
pleasures.


Madalasé spoke.

“ When intolerable pain, arising from separation from thy
dear kinsmen, or caused by the opposition of thy enemies, or
springing from the destruction of thy wealth or from thy own
self, may befall thee as thou rulest thy kingdom, observing the
laws of a householder—for the householder who depends on
selfishness makes unhappiness his abode—then, my son, draw
forth and read from this ring that I have given thee the
writing that is inlaid in delicate letters on the plate.”.

Jada spoke.

So saying, she gave him a golden ring, and the blessings
appropriate for a man who lives the family life. Then
Kuvalayāsva and his queen Madālasi, bestowing on their son
the kingdom, departed to the forest to practise austerities.


ALARKA’S REIGN AND DIFFICULTIES. 187


Canro XXXVII.


The conversation between the Father and Son (continued).
The discrimination of the Soul.


Alarka ruled righteously and prosperously, but was greatly addicted
to pleasure—His brother Subdhu, wishing to correct him, formed an
alliance with the king of Kasi—Both attacked Alarka to wrest the king-
dom from him, and reduced him to great straits—In his distress he-
looks at Maddlasd's token-ring and seeks relief from Datidtreya—He
explains to Dattatreya wherein lies his suffering, and launches into a
metaphysical disquisition on the soul, the mind, the body, and plea
sure and pain.


Jada spoke.

1 And Alarka also, righteous in soul, protected justly and
like children his glad people who practised each his own

2 business. Inflicting ‘punishment on the wicked, and worthily
affording protection to the peaceable, he experienced intense
delight; and he offered great sacrifices. i

3 And there were born to him sons, mighty and valiant,
righteous in soul, magnanimous, who were adversaries to evil

4 conduct. And he amassed wealth by means of righteousness,
and righteousness again by means of wealth ; and since those
two things are not antagonistic, he enjoyed even the pleasures

5 of sense. , Thus many years passed away as if but a single day,
while he ruled the earth, devoted to righteousness, wealth

6 and the gratification of his desires. No feelings of indifference
occurred while he enjoyed his loved objects of sense; nor
again did he grow satiated in amassing: righteousness and
wealth.

7 His brother Subthu, who roamed the forests, heard that he
was thus besotted in his attachment to pleasure, and uncon-

8 trolled in his senses. The prince, being desirous of admo-
nishing him, pondered long and concluded that an alliance on
his part with the king’s enemies would be beneficial to the


188


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24:


CANTO XXXVII.


king. Then he cleverly made repeated visits to the king of
Kāši, who had numerous armies and chariots, as his protector,
in order to regain his kingdom.

That king collected together his army against Alarka, and
despatched a messenger to demand that the kingdom should be
gived up to Subšhu. Alarka refused, cognizant of his own
justice, to give up the kingdom then in obedience to that com-
mand, and returned answer to the messenger of the king of
Kasi ;—* Let my elder brother come to me with affection and
ask for the kingdom for himself. I will not yield up the
smallest bit of territory through fear on an attack.” Even
wise Subihu made no request then. Supplication is not the
duty of kshatriyas, for he was mighty in valour.

Then the king of Káśí accompanied by all his army
marched to attack the country of king Alarka. And forthwith
forming a close union with the contiguous kings he attacked
with some of their many vassals, and reduced him to
subjection. And without harassing Alarka’s neighbouring
kings by molesting their realms, he thus subjugated both the
governors of the fortresses and the forest tribes. He re-

duced into submission some kings by bribes, and some by
creating dissension, and others who were well-affected towards
Alarka by conciliation.

Then the king with his small army, harassed by the adver-
sary’s host, found his treasury depleted extremely by the foe
that blockaded his city. And being thus straitened and with
his treasury diminishing daily, he fell into intense dejcction
and perplexity of mind. After suffering the keenest pain, he
then bethought him of the ring, about which his mother Ma-
dálasá had formerly spoken to him. Then bathing and puri-
fying himself, he addressed the brahmans, and drawing out
the ring saw the motto thereof in clear characters. The king
pronounced what his mother had written thereon, while the
hair of his body was visibly standing erect, and his eyes werc
expanded with joy:—‘ Association must be shunned by every
soul; if to shun it be impossible, it should be formed with the
good, for association with the good is a panacea. Love must


25


26


27


28


29


30
31


32


33


34


35


36


ALARKA SEEKS AID OF DATTATREYA. 189


be shunned by every soul; if to eschew it be impossible, it
should be displayed towards the desire for final emancipation
from existence, for that desire is a cure therefor.’

Now having exclaimed repeatedly, ‘How can men really
attain bliss ?’, and having decided that it was through the de-
sire for final emancipation since that desire is appropriate*
thereto, the king next pondering upon association with the
good, and suffering the most poignant grief, visited illus-
trīous Dattātreya. On meeting him, magnanimous, stainless
and devoid of attachments, he prostrated himself and wor-
shipped him and addressed him with propriety; “O brāh-
man! show me favour, thou who art the refuge of refuge-
seekers ! Remove affliction from me, who am in affliction, and
over-addicted to desires.”


Dattatreya spoke.

“ At once indeed do I remove thy affliction, O king. Tell

me truly, wherefore hast thou that affliction, O king ? ”
Jada spoke.

Being thus addressed by that wise Muni, the king pondered
over the seat and the nature of his three-fold affliction. The
king, being noble in intellect, held long and repeated delibera-
tion with his soul, being steadfast the while, and then laughing
spoke thus:—

“ Tt is not myself, nor the earth, nor the sea, nor the stars,
nor the wind, nor the air; but I wish for happiness in bodily
concerns. Pleasure and pain pass to deficiency or excess in
this body composed of five elements: what welfare should
I not get, if such I might have, in another body wherein I
should possess a constant and perfect good-disposition and
should be raised and depressed through inequalities P
Moreover a man of self-denial is perceived by his difference
from others. And so does bodily pleasure or pain generate a
good disposition in one who looks upon the subtle third por-
tion which exists merely a moment? Since pain dwells in
the mind,t and pleasure again is a mental thing; therefore


* For tatsangato read tatsangata ? t Manas.


190


37


38


39


41


42


CANTO XXXVIII.


neither pain nor pleasure belong to the Ego; for the Mind is
not the Ego. Inasmuch as neither Self-consciousness,* nor
Mind, nor Intellectt is the Ego, why then does the in-born
pain in something else affect me ? Since the Ego is not the
Body, nor the Mind, the Ego is distinct from the Body and
the Mind. Therefore let pleasures and pains dwell in the
Mind or in the Body; how is the Ego concerned hereat?. If
my elder brother covets the sovereignty over this body, it is
an aggregate of five elements. How then is my Self concerned
with the action of the qualities therein? He when seated
therein and I are distinct as regards the Body. He who alto-
gether lacks hands and other organs, flesh, bones and head,
what connexion, even a slight one, has that man here with
elephants, horses, chariots and other treasures? Hence my
Self has no foe, it has no pain, it has no pleasure, nor city, nor
treasury, nor army composed of horses, elephants, &c., neither
has'he, nor a third person, nor any one, nor have I any of
these things. For as the air that occupies the orb of a small
water-jar and a pitcher, though one, is perceived in many
ways, so Subihu and the king of Káśí and I, methinks, -are
perceived among bodies by bodily differences.”


Canto XXXVIII.


The conversation between the Father and Son (continued).
A series of questions.


Dattatraya moralizes on the consciousness of Self and its results,
under the parable of a tree, and asserts the non-materiality of the Soul.
Alarka asks for instruction about Yoga or religious devotion.


Jada spoke.
Then the king prostrating himself before the magnanimous


# NM. + Buddhi. t For maņdalu read mandala.


10


1]


12


A DISQUISITION ON THE SOUL. 191


bréhman Dattdtreya, renewed his Speech, bending respect-
fully before him.

“No whit of affliction have I, O brāhman, when I look on
things in a proper frame of mind: those who look on things
amiss are always sunk in a sea of unhappiness. In whatever
thing a man’s intellect becomes self-engrossed, he receives
woes therefrom and pays them back. There is not 80 much
pain when a cat eats an unselfish Sparrow or mouse, as when
it eats a domestic fowl. I then feel neither pain nor pleasure,
since I am beyond the material world.* Whoever is subject
to created things by means of created things, is indeed sensi-
tive to pleasure and pain.”


Dattatreya spoke.


“Tt is even so, O tiger-hero! as thou hast just aeciared.
The thought ‘it is mine’ is the root of pain ; and the thought
‘it is naught of mine’ is the root of calmness. From my
question indeed has this sublime knowledge sprung up in
thee, who hast cast off the conviction ‘It is mine as if it
were the cotton of the seemul tree.”+

“With the thought ‘it is I’ the germ has sprung up; with
the thought ‘it is mine,’ the germ has grown shoulder-high :
and home and lands are its topmost boughs; children and
wife and other relations are its young shoots; wealth and
corn are its great leaves; it has developed not once only; and
merit and demerit are its outmost flowers; pleasure and pain
are its full-grown fruit. There it fills the path of final
emancipation ; it oozes out at the commingling of fools; it ig
rich with festoons of bees which are the desire to be doing;
knowledge of what ought to be done is the full-grown tree,
Those who, wearied with the road of worldly existence, berake
themselves to its shade are dominated by error, knowledge
and happiness; where is their superiority? But those, who


* Prakriti.
t The capsules when ripe burst, and the silky cotton inside is scattered
Over the ground for many yards around,


192 CANTO XXXVIII.


hew down the tree of selfishness with the axe of learning,
which is sharpened on the whet-stone of association with the

18 good, travel along that path. Reaching the cool, dustless,
thornless grove of religious knowledge, the wise, ceasing from
action, attain supreme emancipation from existence.

14 “ Neither art thou, O king, nor am I a gross object consist-
ing of the elements and of organs: neither must I declare we
are an elementary rudiment, nor that we both have a soul as

15 an eternalorgan. Or, whom O king do I see the chief of us two,
since the conscious soul* is sublime, and the personal aggre-

16 gate consists of qualities. Just as mosquitoes, the dumbur
trees,* reeds, munja grass, fish and water have separate
existences though they dwell together, so is it with the body
and the soul, O king.”


Alarka spoke.


17 ‘Adorable Sir! through thy favour has sublime knowledge
of this kind been revealed to me, which causes one to discern

18 the power of the Supreme Intellect ; but no stability remains
here in my mind which is assailed by objects of sense; nor
moreover do I see how I may be delivered from the bonds of

19 Nature, or how I may cease to exist again, or how I may
attain in perpetuity to this state of being devoid of qualities and

20 to one-ness with Brahma. Therefore, O brāhman, mighty in
knowledge! expound religious devotion$ properly to me, who
thus beseech thee, prostrate before thee, for association with
the good is beneficial to men.”


* Kshetrajna.

+ Udumbara, Ficus glomerata, Roxb, the modern dwnbur, (p. 646) not in
Hooker.

t Saccharum munja, Roxb. (p. 82).

§ Yoga.


YOGA OR RELIGIOUS DEVOTION. 193


Canto XXXIX.


Yoga, or Religious Devotion.

Dattatreya continues his exhortation—Final emancipation from
existence ts attained through yoga or religious devotion,—and the
means dre restraint of the breath, mental abstraction, restraint of
the senses, and deep meditation. These means are analyzed and
explained at length. What circumstances are inimical to yoga.
The improper performunce of yoga entails bodily ailments. How
such bodily ailments may be cured. The signs of the proper per-
formace of yoga.

Dattātreya spoke.

A yogi’s removal of ignorance by the attainment of know-
ledge is ‘ mukti '; this is union with Brahma, and separation
from the three qualities of Nature. ‘Mukti,’ or final emancipa-
tion from existence, comes from religious devotion; and reli-
gious devotion comes rightly from knowledge, O king; know-
ledge comes through suffering; suffering ts the lot of those
whose minds are engrossed with self. Hence the man who
desires final emancipation should strenuously discard every
association; when associations drop, the designation ‘it is
mine’ disappears. Freedom from selfishness tends indeed: to
happiness; the perception of faults comes from passionlessness ;
and passionlessness comes indeed from knowledge; knowledge
is preceded by passionlessness. That is'one's house, where
one resides ; that is food, by which one lives ; that which tends
to final emancipation is described as knowledge or ignorance.
By consuming merits and demerits, O king, and through not
doing voluntarily constant acts that ought tobe done, through
not amassing subsequent acts, and through diminishing acts
that have been previously amassed, the body never again falls
into the bonds of action.

This I have declared to thee, O king! Listen also to this
religious: devotion from me, by adopting which the religious
devotee may attain to an eternal identity with Brahma.

25


194:


ll


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


OANTO XXXIX.

First indeed the soul must be conquered by soul; itis
indeed a hard victory for religious devotees. He should put
forth effort in that victory. Hear from me the means thereto,
He should burn up his faults by restraining his breath,* and
his stains by steady mental abstraction,t his sensual enjoy-
ments by restraining his senses,f and his unbridled qualities by
deep meditation.§ Just as impurities are burnt out of metals
when they are melted, so the faults wrought by
sense are burnt out by restraining the breath. The religious
devotee should first accomplish the regulation of his breath.

Now stopping the inhalation|| is designated prāņāyāma,
‘restraining the breath.’ Pranayama is of three kinds, which
are named the ‘slight,’ the ‘medium’ and the * intense.‘
I will describe its measure; hear it of me, O Alarka! The
‘slight’ extends during twelve mátrás or prosodial instants,
and the ‘medium’ is double that, and the ‘intense’ is well-
known as containing thrice that number of instants. The
time of a mātrā is that of the winking and opening the eye-
lids once. The measure of twelve. mátrás is fixed' for the
reckoning of the prāņāyāma. With the first he should overcome
perspiration, and with the second agitation, and with the third
dejection; he should gradually overcome his faults. Now as
lions, tigurs and elephants, when kindly treated become mild,
so the breath falls within the control of the religious devotee.
As an elephant-driver brings a rutting elephant under control
according to his wish, even so a religious devotee who has the
wish brings his breath to perfect control. For as the proud
lion when tamed does not attack deer, so the obstructed wind
destroys men’s guilt but not their body. Therefore the reli-


gious devotee while engaged in devotion should pay good heed
to the restraining of his breath.


Hear its four conditions that bestow the result of final
emancipation. They are cessation** of the consequences of action,


the organs of


„* Priņfytma. || A-pina, a meaning not in the dictionary.
+ Dhāranš. T Uttariya, a meaning not in the dictionary.
1 Pratyahéra. ## Dhvasti.
$ Dhyana.


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


35


METHOD OF PERFORMING YOGA. 195


and the power of obtaining everything,* harmonyt and
serenity,t O king! Hear also their nature as I describe it in
order. Where the fruits of good and bad actions die away,
and the mind attains pellucidity,§ that is called ‘ dhvasti.”
When the religious devotee himself always continuously resists
the desires of this world and of the next world, such as covet-
ousness and infatuation, that is ‘ prapti’ everlasting. When
the religious devotce possessed of equal power perceives, by
the advantage of his knowledge, the past and future remotely
concealed meanings of the moon, sun, stars and planets, and
gains success, then occurs the condition of pranayama called
‘samvid.’ The state by which his mind, and his five vital airs,
his organs of sense and the objects of those organs become
serene, is called ‘ prasāda.”

Hear also, O king, the characteristics of praniyéma, and
what kind of seat is enjoined for one who always practises
yoga.

Adopting the padma half seat, and the svastika sitting
posture, he should utter the syllable Om! in his heart and
practise his religious devotion. Sitting cvenly on an even
seat, drawing in both his feet, and firmly fixing his thighs
rightly in front, he should cover his mouth; he should sit
without touching his private parts with his heels, with
his senses under control; he should raise his head slightly ;
he should not close his tecth together. Gazing at the tip of
his own nose and not looking around, the religious devotee
should conceal the activity of darkness with passion, and that
of passion with goodness, and taking his stand in unsullied
goodness should practise devotion. He should hold in his
organs of sense from their objects of sense, and his breath and
other faculties and his mind, he should advance to abstrac-
tion with a steadfast cohesion. But he who should draw in
his desires, asa tortoise draws in all its limbs, always
delighting in soul and self-collected, sees soul in soul. The
wise man after purifying himself externally and internally,


* Prapti. t Prasūda.


t Samvid.


3 Apa-knshaya-tya ; not in the dictionary.


196


36


37


38


39


40


Al


42


43


44


45


46


47


CANTO XXXIX.


and filling out his body from the navel to the neck, should
advance to abstraction. A ‘ dharani,’ or steady mental
abstraction, is called twelve prāņūyāmas. Two kinds of
dhāraņš are known in religious devotion by devotees who are
conversant with the truth. Moreover when a religious
devotee is steeped in devotion and controls his soul, all his
faults perish, and he becomes whole ; and he sees supreme
Brahma and the qualities of Nature Separately, the sky and
the primordial atoms and the unsullied soul.

Thus a religious devotee, who restricts his food and who is
intent on restraining his breath, should occupy ground, which
has been thoroughly and gradually reclaimed, as it were his
house. Unreclaimed ground when itis taken possession of
increases faults, diseases and foolishness, therefore he should
not occupy unreclaimed ground.

* Prāņāyima * or restraining the breath is so called from the
restriction* placed on the breath ; and this is called * dhérand’
or mental abstraction, by which the mind is abstracted ; since
the organs, which are occupied with words and other actions,
are restrained by religious devotees by means of devotion, that
is called ‘ pratyáhára, or restraining the senses.

And the means for this is declared by paramarshis who
were religious devotees, so that diseases and other faults may
not spring up in a religious devotee. Just as the thirsty may
drink water gradually by vessels, pipes and other means, so a
religious devotee who has overcome his distress may drink air,
First in the navel, and nextin the heart, and thirdly in the
breast, then in the neck, the mouth, the tip of the nose, in the
eye, eye-brows, and the middle of the head, and in what is
there-beyond, is known the highest mental abstraction. By
attaining to these ten mental abstractions he reaches equality
with the imperishable. Not puffed up; nor hungry, nor
wearied, and undisturbed in mind, the yogi should practice


his yoga respectfully in order to attain final occupation, O
king!


* Upa-sam-rodha ; not in the dictionary,


48


49


50


51


52


53


54


55


56


57


58


METHOD OF PERFORMING YOGA. 197


When it is neither very cold nor warm, when there is no
strife, when it is not windy, at these times the ascetic who is
deep in meditation should not* practice yoga. In a place
where there is a noise, or fire, or water, or where study is going
on, in a decayed cow-shed, at a place where four roads meet,
amid a collection of dry leaves, in a river, in a burning-ground,
in a place infested by snakes, in a place of fear, or on the edge
of a well, amid a number of funeral piles or ant-hills—in these
places a learned man should avoid practising yoga. And if
there is no appearance of goodness, he should avoid the place
and time. There should be no sight of evil during the practice
of yoga; hence he should avoid that. Whoever disregards
these places and in his infatuation practises yoga, verily his
faults tend to his hindrance. Hearkento mein this. Deafness,
stupidity, failure of memory, dumbness, blindness and fever—
those several evils straightway befall him who practises yoga in
ignorance.

If a yogi should have these faults through inadvertence,
yogis should attend to their cure in order to destroy them.
Hearken to me in this. He should engage in mental abstrac-
tion, after eating rice-gruel, mingled with oil and very warm.
In the diseases of rheumatism, flatulence, and enlargement of
the abdomen, circulation of the internal or obstructed wind of
the body should be regulated by a diet of rice-gruel.t In
tremor{ a yogi should fix his mind on a mountain as it is
steady, in dumbness on the faculty of speech, and in deafness
on the ear; just as one whose tongue is parched with thirst
should meditate on a mange fruit. In whatever respect the
body is disordered, in that very respect he should think
steadily of whatever thought may remedy the disorder, such
as, a cooling thought amidst heat, and a heating thought
amidst cold. He should place a stake on his head and beat
wood with wood.


* For na yogam read sa yogam, he should practice yoga P

+ This is the translation of the Pandit of the Bongal Asiatic Society : the
text seems obscure. .

1 For kalpo read kampe; so a MB.in the Sanskrit College.


19§ CANTO XL.


59 In that way memory immediately recurs to a yogi who has
lost his memory. He should think steadily of the wind and
60 fire which indeed pervade the heaven and the earth. These
injuries are cured through what is non-human or what springs
61 from goodness. If goodness that is non-human should enter
within a yogi, he should utterly burn ont the sin that dwells
in his body by steady thought of the wind and fire.
Thus must every soul thatis wise in yoga compass its
62 preservation, O king, since the body is the means of attain-
ing righteousness, wealth, love and final emancipation from
existence. The yogi's knowledge perishes through perplexity
at the narration of the marks of the activities, therefore the
63 activities must be hidden. Tranquillity,* perfect health,
gentleness, a pleasant odour, scanty excretions, a fine com-
plexion, benignity, and softness of voice, are indeed the first
64 indications of the activity of yoga. A loving person proclaims
one’s virtues in one’s absence. That creatures do not fear him
is the chiefest sign of complete perfection. He who is not
injured by excessive cold, heat, or other natural agents, and does
not fear other persons, has attained complete perfection.


Canto XL.


The Yogi's bliss.

Dattdtreya explains to Alarka the ailments that beset a yogt's
soul and mentions their five varieties. He describes the yogi's duties,
the stages by which final emancipation is attained, the eight pre-
monitory marks of final emancipation, and the results of union
with the Supreme Spirit.

Dattūtreya spoke.
1 I will succinctly declare to thee the ailments} that prevail
in the soul of a yogi when it is viewed: hearken to me.
2 He longs for rites performed with a view to future fruition,
and the objects of human desire, for women, the fruits of


* A-lolya; not in the dictionary. t Upa-sarga,


AILMENTS CONNECTED WITH YOGA. 199


alms-giving, for science, for supernatural power, for the baser

3 metals and riches, for heaven, god-head, and supreme god-

head, for actions that yield copious supplies of elixir vitse,*

for flying on the storm-winds, for sacrifice, and the power of

4- inhabiting water and fire, for the fruits of graddhas that con-

* tain every gift, and religious mortifications. Thus he longs

5 when mentally ailing by reason of fasting, meritorious acts,

and worship of the gods, and by reason of those several

actions.

A yogi should strenuously restrain his mind when beset

6 with such thoughts. By making his mind cling to Brahma he

is liberated from ailments. When these ailments are overcome

7 other ailments still beset a yogi, arising out of goodness, pas-
sion and ignorance.

Ailments arising from illusive vision,t from hearing, and.

from the deity,f and mental aberration,§ and enthusiasm||—

8 these five are roots of bitterness which tend to embarass the

religious meditations of yogis. The ailment arising from

9 illusive vision is such to a yogi because in itappear Vedic

matters, poetic matters, science and the mechanical arts with-

out end. The ailment connected with hearing is so-called

10 because he perceives the meanings of sounds in all their com-

pleteness, and he receives sound from thousands of yojanas.

11 The wise call that ailment one from the deity, as in the case of

a madman, when like a god he sees all around and in the eight

12 directions. When the yogi’s mind wanders without support

through his own fault by reason of his fall from all the rules of

13 good custom —that is well known as mental aberration. When

the seething whirl-pool** of knowledge like a whirl-pool of


% Read rasdyana-c’aydh for rasdyana-c'ayah ?

+ Pratibha. Prof. Monier-Williems gives the meaning « relating to divina-
nation,” but in this place it seems to relate to vision, 88 the context shows.

t Daiva.

§ Bhrama.

|| Avarta. Deliberation, revolving (in the mind), 50 Prof, Monier-Williams;
but it seems a much stronger word.

q Ko'áru.

#* Kvarta,


200 CANTO Xu.


water engulphs the mind—that ailment is called enthusiasm,

14 All beings of divine origin, when their religious meditation
is destroyed by these great and terrible ailments, revolve
again and again.

15 Therefore the yogi, having clad himself with a mental white
blanket, should cast his mind prone on supreme Brahma, and
meditate on him. A yogi should always be intent on
religions meditation, he should eat sparingly, he should subdue

16 his senses. The yogi should contemplate in his head the
subtle conditions of the seven objects, viz., earth &c.; he
should contemplate the subtle earth, until he comprehends its

17 subtlety.* He deems the earth to be his soul, arid he quits
its bonds. Moreover he quits the subtle taste in water,* and

18 also the form in the fire; and he likewise quits touch in the
wind, as he bears the subtle form in mind ; and he quits the

19 subtle activity of the sky, and likewise its sound. When he
enters with his mind into the mind of all created things, his
mind bearing a mental subile condition of them becomes

20 subtle also. Likewise the man, conversant with religious
devotion, on attaining to the intellect of all creatures, gains
and relinquishes the most perfect subtlety of intellect. For

21 the man conversant with religious devotion, who relinquishes
these seven subtle things after having thoroughly compre-

22 hended them, there is no retrogression, O Alarka! The soul-
cognisant man, after fully seeing the subtlety of these subtle
conditions of the seven objects, then utterly abandoning it

23 may proceed to supreme bliss. And towards whatever created
thing he evinces feeling, O king! to that very thing he be-

24 comes attached, and he perishes. Therefore the corporeal being,
who after perceiving the mutually-associated subtle things

25 abandons them, may gain supreme bliss. Having conjoined
these very seven subtle things, O king! passionlessness
towards created and other things tends to the fina] emanci-
pation from existence of the man cognisant of the entities.f

* For tat-saukhyam read tat-saukshmam ; so a MS. in the Sanskrit College.
+ For atsu read apsu ?
i Sad-buūva,


26-


27


32


33


34


35


36


INDICATIONS OF UNION WITH BRAHMA. 201


When he becomes attached to perfumes and other delights, he
perishes; he again reverts to human nature apart from
Brahma. Whatever subtle created, thing the yogi desires,
after transcending the subtle conditions of these seven objects,
in that very thing he meets his extinction, O king! He
meets his extinction in the bodies of gods or Asuras, or of
Gandarvas, Nigas, or Rékshasas; nowhere does he gain any
attachment.

Where minuteness, and lightness,* greatness and the power
of obtaining every thing, freedom of will,t and lordship, and
magical domination and again self-mortification are—one finds
these eight sovereign-like qualities fully indicate union with
the Supreme Spirit,t O king. The quality of minuteness is far
subtler than the subtle; lightness means swiftness ; greatness
consists in being universally reverenced ; the power of obtain-
ing everything, inasmuch as nothing is impossible of obtain-
ment by him; freedom of will consists in his power of pervading
all things; and lordship inasmuch as he is lord; magical
domination indeed, the yogi’s seventh quality consists in his
subjugating things; where the wishes are said to remain
stationary,§ there|| is self-mortification. By these causes of
sovereignty I have declared O king! in eight points the
indicatory marks of the yogi’s final emancipation from
existence, and of his sublime union with the Supreme Spirit.

Thenceforth for him there is no birth, nor growth, nor
death; he neither decays nor does he alter; neither from
Bhir-and the other worlds, nor from the family of created
beings, does he experience severance, or moisture, or burning
or dryness ; nor is he captivated by sounds or other sensual
impressions; nor do sounds and other impressions exist for


% Laghimé,

+ Prfkāmya.

t Nir-vina.

§ But better, for apyuktam read santyaktam? “Whero the objects of the
wishes are renounced.”

|| For yatra read tatra ?

T Samsúc'aka : a word not in the dictionary.


26


202


37
38
89


40


41


CANTO XLI.


him; one who experiences them is not united with them.
For as an impure lump of gold, when its impurities are purg:
ed away by fire, unites with another lump into one, and
undergoes no difference ; even so the ascetic, when his faults
are burnt out by the fire of religious devotion, unites with
Brahma. As fire when thrown into fire may attain sameness ;
and, bearing the same name and having the same substance
may not be perceived by any distinction ; even so the yogi,
when his stains are burnt away, attains to union with supreme
Brahma, and never acquires a separate existence, O king!
As water when thrown into water unites, so the yogi’s soul
attains to sameness in the Supreme Soul. —


Canto XLI.


The Yogt's religious course.
9 g


Dattatreya expounds to Alarka how a yogi should live ;—froim
whom he should gather his alms ;—what his alms should be ;—how
he should. eat after worshipping the Jive vital airs ;—what his
religious obligations are ;—and how he attains to final emancipa-
tion from existence.


Alarka spoke.

Adorable Sir! I desire to hear thoroughly about « yogi’s
religions course, since the yogi while pursuing the way to
Brahma does not sink into despondency.

Dattūtreya spoke.

Respect and disrespect, which two things cause men plea-
sure and distress, these are opposites and effect the yogi’s final
bliss. Respect and disrespect, these two things men indeed
describe as poison and ambrosia; of them disrespect is am-
brosia, but respect is a dire poison.

He should plant his foot after it is purified by his eye; he
should drink water that has been purified through cloth ; he


A YOGf'S RULES OF LIFE: 203


should use speech that is purified with truth; and he should.
meditate on what is purified by the intellect.

5 The yogi should nowhere become a guest, nor attend
éraddhas, or sacrifices, pilgrimages to the gods, or festivals,

6 nor visit the banker for the sake of any advantage. The yogi
should roam about for alms among what is flung away, among
what is smokeless, where the charcoal is extinguished, among
all people who have eaten, but not constantly among all the

7 three. The yogi should not move about occupied in religious
meditation and spoiling the path of the good, so as that folk

8 should despise him or treat him with disrespect. He should
seek his alms among house-holders, and at the houses of
vagrant mendicants :* his livelihood is declared to be the best

9 and first one. Also the ascetic should ever resort:to modest,
faithful, tranquil and high-souled brahman householders who

10 are learned in the Vedas; above and after them, to uncorrupt
and non-outcasted men. The practice of seeking alms among
men of no caste is the last livelihood he should wish for.

11 Alms consists of rice-gruel,t or dilute butter-milk,+ milk or
barley-gruel,§ fruit, roots, or panic seed,|| grain, oil-cake, and

12 meal. And these are fine articles of food, and cause a yogi
to obtain felicity. A muni should employ them with faith
and with the most perfect meditation.

13 Having first taken one sip of water, let him remain silent
with mind composed; and then is prescribed the first oblation
to the vital air called Prina,{ and the second should be to the

l4 vital air Apina ;** and the next to that called Sam-āna ;t+


* Yáyávara.

+ For yavdgim read yavdgis? The dictionary gives this word as fem., and
yavdgim seems an impossible neuter.

t Takram.

§ Yfvaka.

|| Priyangu, Panicum italicum, (Roxb. p. 101.)

4 Préna; this has its seat in the lungs, and expresses pre-eminently life
and vitality.

** Apána; the vital air that goes downwards, and out at the anus.

+t Sam-duw ; the vital air that circulates about the nayel, and is essential to


digestion,


204


19


20


21


22


23


25


CANTO XLI.


the fourth to that called Ud-4na ;* and the fifth to that called
Vy-dna.t Having performed these oblations separately,
restrainīng his breath, he should at len
his inclination.


while
gth eat according to
He should drink water once again, and after
rinsing out his mouth, he should touch his heart.

Honesty and sanctity, self-sacrifice, and uncovetousness,
and harmlessness,are the five principal religious obligations
of mendicants. Freedom from anger, reverence towards gurus,
purity, abstemiousness in food, and constant study of the
Vedas—these are the five well-known observances, He should
devote himself to essential knowledge, which can effect his
objects ; for the multiplicity of knowledge that exists here is
a hindrance to religious meditation. He who acts with the
thirst, that he ought to know this and he ought to know that,
may perhaps never gain that knowledge in thousands of ages.
Discarding associations, subduing anger, eating sparingly,
and controlling his organs, he should regulate the gates of
his body by the intellect, and apply the understanding to
profound contemplation. The yogi who is constantly occu-
pied with religious meditation should always have due re-
course’to profound contemplation, in empty places and in
caves and in forests. Control over the speech, control over
the actions, and control over the mind, are the three controls:
he who invariably possesses these controls is a great ‘ three-
control’ ascetic. Who, O king, is agreeable, and who is dis-
agreeable to him to whom all this universe, both real and
unreal, and composed of good qualities and bad qualities, is
composed of the Supreme Soul ?

When he whose intellect is purified, to whom clods and
gold are alike, and whose mind is thus composed towards all
created things, comprehends the supreme eternal and im-
mutable to be the supreme condition he ceases to be born
again. The Vedas and all sacrifices and ceremonies are very
good; prayer is better than sacrifice ; and the path of know


* Ud-ána; the vital air that rises up the throat and’ passes into the head.
+ Vy-ana ; the vital air that circulates or is diffused through the body.


26


EXPOSITION OF THE WORD OM. 205


ledge than prayer; and profound contemplation cut off from
associations and feelings is better than knowledge; when that
is attained, the eternal is gained. He who is composed in
mind, who is intent on Brahma, who is attentive, and pure,
whose delight is concentrated on one object, and who controls
his organs—that high-souled man may compass this yoga or
religious meditation; thereupon he gains final emancipation
from existence through his own religious meditation.


Canto XLII,


Exposition of the word “ Om” with regard to the
Law of Religious Devotion.


Dattūtreya expounds the composition, meaning and efficacy of the
sacred word “Om”—It designates the Supreme Soul Brahma ;
and thorough comprehension of it and meditation on it bring
final absorption into Brahma.


Dattdtreya spoke.

The yogi who lives thus, rightly busied in religious devo-
tion, cannot be turned away even by hundreds of other lives.
And when he has beheld the Supreme Soul, visible, existing
in all forms, whose feet and head and neck the universe
composes, the lord and creator of the universe, let him in
order to attain thereto utter the one mighty and holy syllable
Om! Let it be his study as he listens to its true form.

A and U and M are its three letters; these are its three
instants; they are characterized by goodness, passion and
ignorance. And another, a half instant,* which has its seat
on the top of the syllable, is without quality and can be
understood by yogis only. Itis called gándhárí,ł as it is to
be uttered in the gāndhāra note. Being pronounced it


* Anusy4ra; into which the M may be converted ?
+ A meaning not in the dictionary.
f Bee note * page 130.


206


10


ll


12


13


14


15


16


17


CANTO XLII.


reaches the head, and it conveys the feeling of ants moving
over the body.

As the syllable Om being pronounced reaches the head, the
yogi who is lost in meditation of Om should become united
with Brahma, the Supreme Soul. Life is his bow, the soul is
his arrow, Brahma is the target sublime. It is to be pierced
by the heedful man; he should be united with Brahma, as
the arrow becomes embedded in the target.

The syllable Om, consisting of three and a half instants,
should be known in its true sense as the three Vedas—the
Ric’, Sima and Yajus—the three worlds, the three fires, and
the three deities Vishnu, Brahma and S'iva. And the yogi,
who is absorbed in religious meditation thereon, may obtain
extinction therein.

Moreover the letter A is designated the bhir-loka, or terres-
trial world; and the letter U the bhuvar-loka, or atmospheric
world; and the letter M with its nasal mark is decided to be
the svar-loka, or celestial world. Now the first instant is
called the discrete,* and the second the indiscrete, and the
third instant is the intellectual faculty ;t the half instant is
the highest abode. In this very order must these stages of
religious meditation be known. By uttering the word Os,
everything both existent and non-existent may be grasped.
Now the first instant is short, the second is long, and the
third is prolated, and the half instant is not cognisant to
speech.

Such is this word. Brahma is designated the Supreme
“Om.” The man who truly understands it and further
meditates on it, escaping the circle of mundanc existence
casts off the. three-fold bonds, and gains sublime extinction
in Brahma, the Supreme Soul. And he who is bound with
the unconsumed results of his actions, after experiencing death
through ill omens,§ and recollecting it at the time of his


* Vyakté.

+ C'ic'-c'hakti.

t Final emancipation from existence.
§ Arishtatas.


ILL OMENS PRESAGING DEATH. 207


departure, attains to a yogi’s condition again. Hence by
means of imperfect religious devotion, or again by perfected
religious devotion, are always to. be known the ill omens,
so that he does not sink into despondency at the time of his
departure.


Canto XLIII.


An account of Ill Omens.


Dattdtreya mentions the signs of approaching and impending
death, which are partly natural phenomena and partly
dreams—also the appropriate seasons for religious devotion—and
by various similes and apophthegms indicates how final eman-
cipation from existence is to be attained—Alarka thanks Dattd-
treya for all the instruction and, going to the king of Kdši and
Subdhu, relinquishes his kingdom in their favour.

Dattūtreya spoke.

“ Listen Maharaja ; I will declare those ill omens to thee,
by considering which the yogi knows his own death.

“The man who does not see the path of the gods,* the pole-
star, the planet Venus, the moon’s shadow and the morning
star,f may not live more than a year. The man, who sees the
sun’s orb devoid of rays and fire encircled with rays, does
not live more than eleven months. He, who in his dreams
clearly perceives gold and silver in his vomit and in his urine
and fæces, may live ten months. He who sees departed
persons, Pis'āc'as and other demons and the cities of the
Gandharvas and golden-coloured bulls, lives nine months.
He who when stout becomes thin, and when thin becomes
stout quite unaccountably, and loses his natural functions,
lives for eight months. He, whose foot becomes cracked at
the heel or at the toe in dust and in mud, lives seven months,


x Deva-mérga ; said to mean the penis or anus.
+ Arundhati.


208


22


23


CANTO XLIII.


HE a vulture, a pigeon, a raven, or a crow, or a hawk, or g
blue bird alights on one’s head, that indicates a life of six


` months. When a man is assailed by flocks of crows or a


shower of dust, or when he sees his shadow unnatural, he
lives four or five months. When he sees lightning flashing
in the south in a cloudless sky, or sees a rainbow at night,
his life will last two or three months. He who cannot see his `
own body in clarified butter, in oil, in a mirror, or in water,
or who sees it head-less, does not live more than a month.
When the smell from a yogi’s body resembles that of a goat
or the smell from a corpse, know O king that his life will be
half a month. When one’s breast and foot dry up imme-
diately after he has bathed, and when water does not
quench his thirst as he drinks, he lives ten days.

“ When the wind as it strikes one cuts one’s vitals, and
when one feels no delight from the touch of drops of water,
his death has arrived. Whoever sits on a bear, a monkey or
a carriage, and goes singing towards the south in his sleep,
for him death brooks no delay. He whom a woman clad in
red or black raiment, and singing and laughing, carries off to
the south in his sleep, he will live no longer. He who sees
a single powerful naked mendicant laughing and leaping in
his sleep may find death impending. The man, who sees him-
self sunk to the crown of his head in a sea of mud in his
sleep, dies at once. And he, who sees charcoal amidst the
hair of the head, or ashes or a waterless river issuing from 4
serpent, in his sleep, will after ten days die on the eleventh
day. He, who in his sleep is beaten with stones by formi-
dable and hideous black men who raise their weapons aloft,
may die at once. He, in front of whom a she-jackal runs
howling at sun-rise, whether meeting him or passing him,
dies at once. He, whose heart is possessed with hunger
immediately after he has eaten, and whose teeth chatter, has
without doubt* reached the end of his life. He who does not
perceive the smell of a lamp, and who is terrified in the day


* For saméayam read saméayah ?


37


38


ILL OMENS PRESAGING DEATH. 209


as well as at night, and who does not see himself reflected in
another’s eyes, lives no longer. He, who has seen both a rain-
bow at midnight and all the planets in the day-time, should
as a sensible man deem his life consumed away. He, whose
nose becomes crooked, and whose ears bend down or stick up,
and whose lēft eye waters, has lost his life. When his face
becomes reddish, or his tongue black, a wise man should
know that his death is impending. And one should know
that he, who in his sleep journeys to the south on a camel, or
an ass, or a carriage, will die outright. He, who cannot
hear his own murmuring when he shuts his ears, and who
cannot see the light with his eyes, lives indeed no longer.
He over whom a door is closed after he has fallen into a pit,
and who cannot rise up from the hole, in his sleep, his life
ends thereat. Sight directed upwards and unsteady,* and
blood-shot and rolling around, and warmth in the mouth, and
dryness at the navel prognosticate a new body for men. He
who in his sleep may enter the fire, and not come out there-
from, or if he similarly enters water, his life ends thereat.
The man who is attacked by evil spirits at night or by day,
without doubt meets death at the end of the seventh night.
One should pronounce that death is impending over the
man who sees his own clean white clothing red or black.

«A. revolution in men’s natural disposition and a reversal
in their nature proclaim always that Yama and Death are at
hand ; as when a man despises and reviles those very persons
to whom he has always been well-behaved, and whom he has
considered most deserving of his reverence; when he does
not worship the gods; when he abuses the aged, the gurus
and brahmans; and when he shows no kind treatment to his
mother, father, or sons-in-law, or to yogis skilled in learning
or to other high-souled men. But when the time arrives,
wise ment} must understand that.

“ And yogis must always diligently understand at the close


* Sampratishtha; not in the dictionary.
t For purushas read purushais ?


27


210


39


40
41


42


43


45


46


47


48
49
50
51


52


CANTO XLIII,


of the year that ill omens produce their results day and night,
O king. And the obvious very formidable series of results
therefrom must be considered ; and having ascertained them,
he should fix that time in his mind, O king. And having
ascertained that time accurately, the yogi should resort to a
safe place and apply himself to religious devotion, so that
that time may not be fruitless to him. And the yogi having
beheld the ill omen and abandoning the fear of death, and
having regarded then its nature, as it has come after a long
time, should apply himself to religious devotion as an
adept therein in just that part of the day, both in the fore-
noon, and in the after-noon and at mid-day on that day. Or
where he has seen that ill omen during a part of the night,
there he should engage in religious devotion until that
day arrives. Then abandoning all fear, and mastering that
time self-controlled, he should stay in that habitation or
wherever he feels his soul firm, and engage in religious medita-
tion on the Supreme Soul after overcoming the three qualities :
and when his soul grows composed of the Supreme Soul, he
should cease even from the use of his mind. Thereupon he
attains to that sublime absorption into the Supreme Soul,
which is beyond the senses, which transcends the intellect
and which is unspeakable.

“ All this I have declared to thee, Alarka, in its real meaning.
Hearken to me briefly how thou mayest attain to that
Brahma.

“The moon-stone does not emit water, if untouched by the
rays of the moon; that is a well known simile for a yogi.
That the sun-stone as long as it remains untouched by the
rays of the sun does not emit fire, is also a simile for a yogi.
Ants, rats, ichneumons, house-lizards, and sparrows inhabit a
house like the owner of it, and when it is broken down they
go elsewhere ; but since they feel no such paini at the destruc-
tion of that house as the owner feels, O king; that simile
points to the yogi’s perfect bliss. Anant, though itis compos-
ed of earth and has but a small body, constructs a heavy heap
of earth with the still minuter point of its mouth: that is a


53


54


55


56


57


58


59


60


61


62


63


64


69


ALARKA THANKS DATTĀTREYA, 211


lesson for a yogi. When yogis see a tree, clothed with leaves
flowers and fruit, being destroyed by cattle, birds, men and
other creatures, they become perfected. When a yogi sees the
tender horns of the young ruru deer, which look merely like
the forehead-mark, growing together with him, he may attain
final beatitude. When a yogi takes a vessel full of liquid
from a mound on the earth, and when he sees the human
body towering up high, what has he not learnt? When a
yogi has truly understood the effort that a man makes, when
all his wealth sufficient for his living has been dug up, he
has attained success. That is one’s house where one dwells ;
that is food on which one lives; and that is wealth by
which one prospers; that is happiness when one thinks ‘ what
self-interest have I in this matter.’ Just as a man, although
he is importuned by his organs, accomplishes his object by
their means, so a yogi may accomplish his highest aim by
means of the intellect and other faculties of other persons.”


Jada spoke.
Then king Alarka prostrated himself before Atri’s son, and
bowing courteously and filled with intense joy, spoke thus :—


Alarka spoke.

O joy! that this most sore dread, which has sprung from
my defeat by my foes, and which has rendered me anxious
about my life, has been caused by the gods, O brāhman !
O joy, that the victorious attack from the immense hosts of
the king of Kasi (routed by which I have come here) has
brought about for me this meeting with thee! O joy, that
my army was weak! O joy, that my dependants were slain!
O joy, that my treasury became exhausted! O joy that I
grew terrified! O joy, that thy feet came to my recollec-
O joy, that all thy words have found an abode in my

O joy, that I have both gained knowledge from
O joy, that thou hast also shown


tion !
mind!
meeting with thee, Sir !
compassion to me, O brāhman !

“ Although destitute a man attains success at the auspi-
cious rise of the Soul, just as this calamity tends to my benefit


212
66


67


68


69


70


71


72


73


74


75


76
77


78


CANTO XLIII,


through my meeting with thee. Subghu is my benefactor
and so also is Kāši's lord, through both of whom I have come
to thy presence, O noble lord of the yogis. Now I have had
the stains of ignorance burnt out by the fire of thy favour,
I will so strive that I may not become such a vessel of misery,
I will quit my position as a householder, which is a forest of
trees of pain, on receiving permission from thee, my high-
souled instructer in wisdom.”
Dattātreya spoke.

“ Depart O king! fare thee well! As I have declared unto
thee, so do thou practise, free from egotism, free from pride,
in order to attain to final emancipation from existence.”


Jada spoke.

Thus addressed he prostrated himself before that Muni,
and hastened to where the king of Kā$i and his elder brother
Subāhu were. Alarka hastening near smilingly addressed
the king of Kasi, that valiant hero, in the presence of
Subāhu :—“ O king of Kasi, who desirest my kingdom, enjoy
thou the mighty kingdom even as it pleases thee, or give it
to Subāhu !”

Ā The king of Kasi spoke.

“Why, O Alarka! hast thou relinquished the kingdom
without a contest? Thisis not right fora kshatriya; and
thou, Sir, knowest the law of the kshatriyas. When his
counsellors are vanquished, a king shonld abandon the fear
of death, and fix his arrow aiming at his enemy as his target.
Having conquered him, a king should certainly enjoy the


choice delights of his desire, and should sacrifice with large
sacrifices in order to gain final bliss.”


Alarka spoke.

* Even of this very nature was my mind before, O hero !
Now my object is changed, and do thou hear the cause. As
thes body is an aggregate formed of the elements, so is the
heart of men, and so are all the qualities likewise even among
all animals. Since this intellectual faculty is single indeed,
and there is no other, how then does knowledge create the


79


80


81


82


83


SUBAHU’S JOY AT ALARKA’S AWAKENING. 213


condition of friend and enemy, of lord and servant? I fell
into that dire misery which was produced by fear of thee,
and I have gained knowledge from Dattatreya’s favour, O
king. When one subdues all the senses, and abandons utterly
every association, and fixes one’s mind on Brahma, in that
victory is the sublimest victory. And since there is nothing
else to be accomplished in order to attain that final beatitude,
therefore restraining his senses he attains final beatitude. I
then am not thy foe; nor art thou my enemy; Subáhu here
is not my injurer. I have seen all this as my own soul; seek
then another adversary, O king!”

Thus he addressed the king. Then uprose Subšhu delight-
ed, and saluting his brother with the word * O joy! spoke
thus to the king of Kasi.


Canto XLIV.


Jada’s exposition in his conversation with his father (concluded).


Subdhu explains to the king of Kasi that it was to reclaim his
brother Alarka to a proper frame of mind, that he had induced
the king to conquer Alarka—Subūhu expounds to the king the
conditions of attaining final emancipation from existence, and
both depart—Alarka resigns his kingdom to his son, and betaking
himself to the forest attains final bliss.

Here ends Jada’s exposition to his father.

The Birds then conclude by saying that Jada and his father
attained final bliss.

Subahu spoke.

“In that I have resorted to thee for refuge, O tiger-king,

I have secured every object. I will depart. Rest thou happy !”
The king of Kasi spoke.

“What object hast thou secured, Sir? And what aim
hast thou attained? Declare that to me, O Subéhu, for I
feel a keen curiosity. Thou didst stir me up, saying ‘ Conquer


KS


214


10


11


12


13


14


15


CANTO XLIV.


and give me the great kingdom, that belong
grandfather and is dominated by Alarka.’
attacked the kingdom of this thy younger
brought this army for thee.
race.” * i


ed to my great-
Thereupon I
brother, and
Therefore enjoy it as befits thy


Subáhu spoke.

“ O king of Káśí, hearken, why I made this endeavour, and
stirred thee up, Sir, to an unwonted endeavour. This my
brother, who understands truth is addicted+ to unrefined
pleasures. My two elder brothers are wise and unbeguiled,
because our mother dropped admonition into the ears of both
of them and into mine, just as she dropped milk in their
mouths and mine during our infancy, O king. Our mother
taught those subjects, that men consider should be known,
to both of them and to me, but not to him, Alarka,
who wished to be illustrious, O king, As merchants, who are
travelling for gain, feel a common grief, if one of them
perishes, so is it with us, O king. Since he, Alarka, has
caught the infatuation of domestic life, and is perishing, O
king ; since he is related to this my body, and bears the idea
of a brother; hence I, concluding that he would obtain the
perception of passionlessness through suffering, resorted to thee,
Sir, to carry out the undertaking. Therefore he has been
brought through distress to passionlessness through instruc-
tion, O king; the work has been accomplished ; mayest thou
fare well. Idepart. ‘Having dweltin Maddlas4’s womb, and .
having drank of her breast, may he not follow the path that
is travelled by the sons of other women, O king!’ Sol
deliberated and I did it all by resorting to thee; and it has
been accomplished. I will again depart to seek final beati-
tude. A

«I do not approve of those, O king! who neglect their
own family, a kinsman, or a friend, when these are in difficul-
ties; for, though possessed of organs, they are maimed indeed.


% For bhunkshvasva kulocitam read bhunkshva svakuloc'itam ?


+


For s/akto read sakto ?


17


18
19


20


21


22


23


25


26


27


SUBAHU’S EXHORTATION. 215


He who falls into difficulties when he has an able friend, or
member of his own family, or kinsman, they should be denied
righteousness, wealth, love and final emancipation, but he
should not be denied them. Through association with thee,
O king, I have accomplished this great undertaking. Well
mayest thou fare! I will depart. Mayest thou participate
in knowledge, most noble king P
The king of Kāši spoke.

“ Thou hast done a great benefit to good Alarka; how is it
thou dost not turn thy mind to benefit me? Since associa-
tion of good men with good men yields fruit and is not bar-
ren, therefore I have attained the prosperity that is bound
up with thy patronage.”


Subahu spoke.


“The four-fold aims of men are known as righteousness,
wealth, pleasure, and final emancipation from existence.
There thou hast righteousness, wealth and pleasure, all of
them,—the last is wanting. I will succinctly expound it to
thee ; listen now with singleness of mind thereto; and hav-
ing heard and rightly deliberated strive after bliss, O king!
Thou must have no dealings, O king, with the notion “Mine,”
nor the notion “1”; for when one considers rightly, righteous-
ness has no correlation in the absence of righteousness.
When thou hast thought in thy soul, ‘I must comprehend of
what I am’; when thou hast thought in after nights ‘I must
consider the external and the internal’; thou must discern
him whose beginning, attributes and ending are impercep-
tible, who is changeless, devoid of intelligence, both percep-
tible and imperceptible ; und thou shalt discern ‘Who am I P
When this indeed is discerned thou hast discerned everything.
To discern the soul in what is not soul, and -qne’s own pro-
perty in what is not one’s own—this is folly. I as such have
passed everywhere, O king, according to the intercourse of
the world. T have declared all this that thou hast asked :


now I depart.”
Having spoken thus to the king of Kasi, the wise Subahu


216


28


29


30


31


33


34


35


36


37


38


39


CANTO XLIV.


departed. And the king of Kasi ha
Alarka departed to his own city.
Alarka, also, enthroned his eldest son as king.
ing every tie resorted to the forest, for
After a long time becoming


ving done obeisance to


,„ and abandon.
his own perfection,
purged of the contrary qualities
and free from all worldly possessions, he attained an unparal-
leled pitch of religious devotion and gained supreme and final
bliss. Perceiving all this universe with its gods, demons and
human beings perpetually bound and being bound in the
meshes woven of the qualities ; being drawn by the causes
brought into existence by sons and other children,


by nephews
and other relations, and by one’s own


and other people’s pro-
perty, and so forth; oppressed with woe, wearing diverse
appearances, wholly enclosed within the mud of ignorance,
possessing no deliverer ; and perceiving himself wholly passed
beyond, the large-minded king sang this song—* Alas, woe is
it that I occupied the kingdom formerly ! So have I since
learnt. There is no happiness superior to religious devotion.”


Jada spoke.

Dear father, do thou practise this sublime religious devo-
tion to attain final emancipation from existence; whereby
thou shalt attain to that Supreme Soul, in reaching which
thou shalt not grieve. Then I also will go. What need have
I of sacrifices? what need of prayers? Action in one who
has attained success works towards re-absorption into the
Supreme Soul. Obtaining permission from thee, I also,
free from the contrary qualities, free from worldly possessions,
will so strive after final emancipation that I may attain to
supreme bliss.


The birds spoke.

Having thus addressed his father, and haying obtained
permission from him, the wise Jada, abandoning all worldly
possessions, departed, O bréhman. His father also, who was
most large-minded, in like course after becoming a vána-
prastha entered on the fourth stage of life. There having
met with his son, and having forsaken the bonds formed of


ādai


JAIMINI AGAIN ADDRESSES THE BIRDS. 217


the qualities &c., he attained supreme perfection, being wise
and having acquired self-knowledge at the same time.

40 All this has been declared to thee, O brahman, which thou,
Sir, did ask of us-—at full length and with truth. What
else dost thou desire to hear ?


Canro XLV.


The Birth of Brahma.


Jaimini.thanks the Birds for all the information they have given
him, and asks about creation, the world, mankind Sc.,—In reply they
relate what Markandeya had taught Kraushtuki regarding all those
matters, as follows.

Mérkandeya extols this Purana as having emanated from Brahmá
and having been handed down by eminent rishis—Adoration is paid
to Brahmá.

The identity of Pradhdna and Prakriti ts asserted—Brahmé alone
existed at first—From him emanated’ Pradhdna, which is called the
Imperceptible—Out of it issued Mahat (the Intellectual priciple)—
And out of Mahat issued Ahankdra (the principle of Individuality)
with its three characters, the Evolving, the Modifying, and the Ener-
gizing—The Evolving Ahankāra created sound, touch, form, taste and
smell, and their corresponding elements, ether, air, light, water and
earth—The Modifying Ahankdra produced the eleven human organs—
The characters of the elements are expounded.

Mahat and the other principles produced an egg, the composition of
which is described—It was animated by Brahmá as the Soul, and tt
contained the universe, the gods, demons and mankind.

Jaimini spoke.
l Ye have well related this to me, O noble brāhmans, both
activity and inactivity, the two-fold deeds enjoined by the
2 Veda. Ah, through your father’s favour, ye have such
knowledge as this, by which ye have overcome folly although
3 ye have descended to this animal stote. Happy are ye in
28


218


10


11


12


13


14.


15


CANTO XLV,


that your mind, steadfast in your pristine state towards the
attainment of final emancipation, is not Swayed by the be.
wilderments that spring from objects of sense. O joy that
the wise lord Markandeya made you known to me as the dis-
sipators of every doubt! For men who wander in this
thronged mundane existence there is available association
with such as your honours; not for ascetics. Tf I after gain-
ing association with you who have perspicacity in knowledge
Should not succeed in my object, then assuredly* there can
be no success for me elsewhere. Both in activity and in
inactivity, in knowledge and deed, no one else has, I think,
a mind so unsullied as your honours have.

If then your mind, O noble brihmans, is favourable to-
wards me, then deign to expound this completely ;—How did
this universe, both moveable and immoveable, come into
existence? And how will it fall into dissolution at the pro-
per time, most excellent bréhmans? And how came the
families+ that sprang from the gods, the rishis, the pitris,
created things &c.? And how did the Manvantaras occur ?
And what was the history of the families of old ; and whatever
creations and whatever dissolutions of the universe have oc-
curred ; and how the ages have been divided ; and what the
duration of the Manvantaras has been; and how the earth
remains stable; and what is the size of the world; and what
are the oceans, mountains and rivers and forests according to
their situation; what is the number of the worlds, the bhúr-
loka, svar-loka &c., including the lower regions; and what is
the course of the sun, moon, and other planets, of the stars and
heavenly bodies also. I wish to hear of all this which is
destined to subversion ;f and what will be the end when this
universe is dissolved.


closely-


The Birds spoke.


Unparalleled is this load of questions which thou hast


* For nytinam read núnam. f Ahūta-samplava.
+ For varnšūd read vamšd ?


16


17


18
19


20


21


22


28


24


25


26


27


28


TAK ANTIQUITY OF THIS PURANA. 219


asked, O brahman: we will declare it to thee; listen to it
here, O Jaimini, as Markandeya expounded it formerly to the
calm and wise Kraushtuki, a young brāhman, who had com-
pleted his term of studentship. Kraushtuki asked the high-
souled Markandeya, whom the brāhmans were waiting: upon,
what you have asked, my lord; and we will tell thee what
the Muni, Blrigu's son, told him with affection; listen, O
brāhman, after having paid adoration to the Forefather Brah-
má, the lord of the universe, the origin of the universe, who
presided over creation, who in the form of Vishnu presides
over its maintenance, and who in the form of the terrible
Siva destroys it at the dissolution.


Markandeya spoke.


Formerly as soon as Brahma, whose origin is inscrutable,
came into being, this Puršņa and the Vedas issued* from his
mouths; and many paramarshis composed the collections of
the Purdnas; and the Vedas were divided by them in 2
thousand ways. Righteousness and knowledge, passionless-
ness, and sovereignty—these four indeed were not perfected
without instruction from him, the high-souled. His seven
mind-bornt rishis took the Vedas from him, and his mind-born
ancient munis took the Puriņa. C'yavana took it from
Bhrigu, and he declared it to the brahmans , and this purdņa
was repeated by the high-souled rishis to Daksha; and then
Daksha repeated it to me. I will now tell it to thee: it de-
stroys strife and sin. Hear all this from me with composure,
illustriots Muni, as I formerly heard it when Daksha related
it.

Having paid adoration to the origin of the universe, un-
born, changeless, the asylum, the upholder of the moveable
and immoveable universe, the supreme object, Brahma, the
first male,—the cause which. itself unbegotten, works in pro-


* Anuvinihsrita, not in the dictionary.
+ Mānasa.
f Anaurasya; not in the diotionary.


220


29


. 30


31


32


38


34


35


36


37


38


39


40


CANTO XLV.

duction, maintenance and dissolution, wherein everything -ig
established—having paid adoration to him, Hiranya-garbha,
the framework of the world, the wise, I will duly tell of the
multitude of created things, matchless, great, primeval, formed
for special ends, various in shape, possessing characteristics, as-
certainable by the five standards of measure, possessing the
five streams of life, governed by the soul, existent as if per-
petual and temporary—listen thereto with sublime composure,
illustrious Sir!

Pradhāna is the cause, which is designated the Imperceptikle,
and which the great rishis call the subtle, permanent Prakriti,
composed of good and evil. Brahmá at first existed certain,
imperishable, undecaying, immeasurable, self-dependent, des-
titute of odour, form. and taste, devoid of sound and touch,
without beginning or end, the origin of the universe, un-
changed* by the power of the three qualities, not modern,t
unknowable. Subsequent to the dissolution, all this universe
was pervaded by him completely.

Then from him, in whom the three qualities existed in
equipoise, and in whom the Soult became prevalent, O Muni;
and next from the coming into existence of the qualities
which were being created, at the time of creation the first
principle Pradhāna came into existence. It enveloped
Mahat;$ as the seed is enveloped by its rind, even so Mahat
was enveloped by the Imperceptible. It ig three-fold, that
characterized by goodness, that by passion, and that by
ignorance. Then from it was evolved Ahankāšra,|| which is
three-fold, the Modifying, the Energizing,** and the Evol-
vingtt which is characterized by darkness. And it was en-
veloped by Mahat, just as. Mahat was by the Imperceptible.

Now the Evolving Ahankdra, modifying itself, created the
subtle element{{ of sound§§ next. From the subtle element


* For -prabhavadpyayam read -prabhavivyayam ?


+ A-simprata, t Kshetra-jna.
$ The great Intellectual principle. | The principle of Individuality.
g Vaik4rika. *k Taijasa. tt Bhūtādi. tt Tan-mitra.


§§ For éabdas tanmdtrakam read gabda-tanmdtrakam ?


41


42


43


44


45


46


47


48


THE PROCESS OF CREATION DESCRIBED. 221


of sound came the Ether, which has the property of sound ;
now ether is the sound-element, and the evolving Ahankdra
enveloped it then. The subtle element of touch is indeed
born next without doubt; the mighty Air is born, its pro-
perty of touch is well known. And the air, modifying itself,
created the subtle element of form; Light was produced from
the air; it is said to have the property of form ; the air which
is the element of touch enveloped the element of form. And
light, modifying itself created the subtle element of taste;
therefrom indeed water also was produced; it has the pro-
perty of taste; now the element of form enveloped the water*
which is the element of taste. And the water, modifying
itself, created the subtle element of smell; therefrom Solid
Mattert is produced ; smell is well known to be its property.
Now in each element resides its peculiar subtle element; there-
by its possession of that subtle element is a well-established
fact. Andhence those elements are uniform, inasmuch as no
difference can be predicated. They are all neither calm, nor
terrible, nor crass.{ This is the creation of the elements and
the subtle elements from Ahankāra when it is characterized
by darkness.

From Ahankéra in its Modifying character, which is distin-
guished by goodness and possesses goodness in excess, the
modificatory creation began at once.

The five organs of the intellect,§ and the five organs of
action, men call these the energetic|| organs; they are the ten
Vaikirika deities. The mind] is the eleventh organ among
them. Such are the Vaikdrika deities known to be. The
ear, the skin, the pair of eyes, the tongue, and fifthly the
nose; men say** these are the organs connected with the in-
tellect for the purpose of perceiving -sound and the other
impressions. The pair of feet, the anus, the organ of genera-
tion, the pair of hands, and tle voice may rank as fifth with


* For dpo read apo; for the water was enveloped by the light which
preceded it; but the change spoils the metre.

+ Sanghata. + Mudha. § Buddhi.

|! Taijasa. T Manas. ** Ror vakskyate read c'akshate ?


222


53


54:


55


56


58


59


60


61


62


*


t


t


CANTO XLV.


them; walking, evacuation, sezual deli
speech—that is the work for each
Ether has the element*


ght, manual work and
of these organs respectively,
of sound only. When the element


„of touch accrued, Air comes into existence with two proper-


tiest ; touch is known to be its peculiar property. Moreover,
when to form accrued both the properties, sound and touch,
then Fire also came into existence with its threet properties;
it has sound and touch and form. Sound, and touch and
form,—when the element of taste accrued to them, then Water
with its four properties came into existence ; itis to be known
as being characterized by taste. Sound and touch and form
and taste, when smell accrued, they consolidated with the
element of smell enclosed this Harth; hence earth has five
properties; it is seen to be the gross one among created
things.

Calm and terrible and crass§ are their distinguishing
marks; thereby they are known: they contain one another
through their mutual interpenetration. Within the earth
ts contained all this|| visible and invisible world firmly en-
closed. And those distinguishing marks are perceptible by
the organs of sense, and are recollected by reason of their
permanency. They take each successive one the property of
its preceding one. These seven principles when un-combin-
ed are distinctand have various energies : they could not have
created mankind, unless they had united. And meeting in
mutual combination, they become mutually dependent; and
when they all unite into one, they have the marks of a single
complex body.

By reason of their being governed by the Soul and also
through the favour of the Imperceptible, Mahat and the other
principles, which have different limits, cause an ege to come
into existence, There like a bubble on water, the egg gra-


dually increased by means of the things that existed, O Sage
most intelligent! In its enlarged state it lay on the water.
Mátra. § Múdha.
Guna. || For imam read idum ?


For dvi-gunas vead ri-gunas? S Purusha,


66


67


68


69


70


71


72


73


THE PRODUCTION OF THE MUNDANE EGG. 223


The Soul,* having increased inside the egg sprung from Pra-
kriti, took the name Brahma; it indeed was the first cor-
poreal being, it indeed is called Purusha. And Brahma
existed first, the original maker of created beings. That egg
enclosed all these three worlds with all that they contain
moveable and immoveable. Meru was born from it, and as
the after-birth were born the mountains; the oceans were the
fluid contained within that egg which held the great Soul.
Within that egg was all this world, with the gods and de-
mons and mankind, and the continents and other lands, the
mountains and oceans, and the throng of luminous worlds.

Then the egg was enveloped by water, air, fire and ether
and by the evolving Ahankara externally, ten times over by
each of them. It was then surroundedt by Mahat which I
have mentioned, which had the same magnitude. Mahat
together with them all was enveloped by the Imperceptible.
With these seven coverings formed from Prakriti was the
egg enveloped. Enveloping one another the eight Prakritis
existed. This very Prakriti is permanent; and that Purusha
is limited by it.

Hear thou, moreover, briefly of him who is spoken of by
the name Brahma. Just as one sunk in water, on emerging
from it, seems to be born from watert and flings the water
away, so Brahma is both Prakriti and the Soul.$ The Jm-
perceptible is declared to be his sphere of action;|| ence
Brahmá is called Kshetra-jna, the Soul. A man should
know all theso characteristics of the Soul and its sphere of
action.

Such was this creation from Prakriti; and it is governed
by the Soul; the first stage of creation was preceded by non-in-
telligence, it became manifest like the lightning.


* Kshetra-jna. + For veshfitah read veshtitam ?
t Fox jala-sambhavam read jala-sambhavah ?
§ Vibhu. || Ksbetra.


224


8


CANTO XLVI.


Canro XLVI.


The computation of Brahmd's life.


Markandeya moralizes on Brahmá and Prakriti—and describes
Vishnu and S"iva as special forms of Brahmé—He explains how
human and divine years are reckoned, the duration of the four
ages, the Krita, the Tretd, the Dvdpara and the Kali, and of a
Manvantara, and the length of Brahmd's day and life.


Kraushtuki spoke.


Adorable Sir! thou hast related to me correctly the gencsis
of the egg, and thou hast told me of the birth of the mighty
Soul Brahmá within the egg of Brahma. I wish to hear this
from thee, O scion of Bhrigu’s race, when things are not
created, and nothing exists, everything having been destroyed
by Time at the end of the dissolution of the Universe.


Markandeya spoke.

When all this universe becomes dissolved in Nature,* this
dissolution is designated ‘natural + by the wise. When the
Imperceptible subsists within itself, and when all modifica-
tion is suspended, Nature and the Soult subsist with same-
ness of character. Then both darkness and goodness subsist
in equipoise, neither being in excess or in deficiency, and
permeated by each other. Just as oil exists in sesamum
seeds, or as. ghee in milk, so passion also exists permeant
within darkness and goodness.

The day of the Supreme Lord§ lasts from the birth of
Brahma, as long as the two half paras which compose his
life ;|| and his night during the dissolution is of the same
duration. Now at the dawn of day he awakes, he who is


* Prakriti. t Prākrita. f Purusha. § Pareša.
|| The text seems incorrect; a better reading obtained from a MS. belong-
ing to Babu Nagendra Chandra Basn of Calontta is utpatter for utpattir, and
dyur vai for dyusho. Bee verse 42. :
a The same MS. reads tat-sama% samayo instead of faf-samd samyame;
with practically the samo meaning,


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


THE COMPUTATION OF BRAHMA’S LIFE. . 225


tbe origin of the universe, who is without beginning, who is
the cause of all things, whose soul transcends thought; every
one else works in an inferior way.

The Supreme God, guickly enters into Nature and the Soul,
as the lord of the universe, and agitates them with his intense
supernatural power. Just as love, or a breeze of Spring,
entering into young women tends to produce agitation, so
does he, who is the embodiment of supernatural power.
When Pradhāna is agitated, the god Brahmá is born and is
contained within the cavity of the egg, as I have already
told thee. At first he is the agitator; as the husband of
Nature, he is the thing to be agitated; and he exists with
contraction and expansion even in the state of Pradhāna. He
is born, though he is the birth-place of the universe; though
devoid of qualities, he possesses the quality of passion; when
he assumes the character of Brahmá, he engages in creation.

In the character of Brahma he creates mankind; then
possessing an excess of goodness, he becomes Vishnu and
protects them righteously; then, with darkness prepondera-
ting in him, hehas Rudra dissolves the whole universe with
its three worlds, and sleeps. He possesses the three qualities,
and yet he is destitute of qualities. Just as he is at first the
pervading Soul, then the preserver, and lastly the destroyer,*
so he takes appellations which designate him as Brahmá,
Vishnu or Siva. As Brahmá he creates the world; and as
Rudra he destroys them; and as Vishnu he holds a neutral
position. These are the three conditions of the Self-existent.
Passion and Brahmá; darkness and Rudra; goodness and
Vishnu the lord of the world: these indeed are the three
deities; these indeed are the three qualities. These verily
are mutually paired, and are mutually dependant: they are
not separated for a moment; they do not forsake one another.

Thus Brahmá, the four-faced god of gods, is anterior to
the universe: assuming the quality of passion, he engages in
creation.


* Ldvaka (from ld), one who cuts to pieces, one who destroys. Would not
ldyaka (from If) be better, one who brings on the dissolution?


29


226
21


22


23
24:


25


26
27


28


29


30


32


33


CANTO XLVI.


Brahma who is adored as Hiranya-garbha, the first of the
gods, and without beginning, who sits in the middle of the
lotus-like earth, was born in the beginning. One hundred
years is the full length of life for him, the high-souled, accord-
ing to the true Brahmya computation.


Hear from me how it
is reckoned.


A-kashthé is said to be composed of fifteen winks of the


eyelids; and thirty kdshthis make à kald; and thirty such


kalās make a muhūrta. A day and night among men contain,


it has been settled, thirty muhūrtas; and with thirty days
are reckoned the two lunar fortnights and the month ; of
six months consists the sun’s half-yearly course; the two
half-yearly ccurses on the south and north of the equator com-
pose the year. Such a year is a day and night of the gods ;*
the day thereof is the sun’s northern half-yearly course.

Now of twelve thousand divine years consist the four ages
named the Krita, the Tretā, Ge.
are divided.


Now the Krita age is said to have contained four thousand
years; its commencirig twilight was four hundred years, and
the closing twilight was of the same duration. The Tretd
age was three thousand divine years; and three hundred
years was its commencing twilight, which was indeed of that
duration, and its closing twilight was of the same duration.
The Dvāpara age was two thousand years; and its commen-
cing twilight is declared to have been two hundred years, and
its closing twilight was two hundred years. The Kali age
is a thousand divine years, O brahman; two hundreds of
years are called its commencing and closing twilights.

This period of twelve thousand divine years is called a yuga
it has been laid down by the poets; a thousand times this
period are called one of Brahmā's days.

In one of Brahmé’s days, O brahman, there may. be four-
teen Manus. They live according to their portions; that
thousand is divided among them. The gods, the seven


* Thus one divine year = 360 human years.


Hear from me how they


THE COMPUTATION OF BRAHMA'S LIFE, 227


rishis, and Indra, Manu, and' the kings his sons, are created
with Manu and pass to dissolution with him in regular order,
34 Seventy-one repetitions of the four ages, with a fraction in ex-
cess, constitute a manvantara; hear from me its computation in
35 human years. Thirty full crores reckoned duly, O brahman,
36 and sixty-seven lakhs more by reckoning, and twenty thou-
sands—this is the period of seventy-one times the four ages
without the excess fraction; this is called a manvantara.
37 Hear it from me in divine years; eight hundred thousands
of years by divine reckoning,* and fifty-two thousands of
38 years more in addition. A day of Brahmá is declared to be
this period multiplied fourteen times.* At its termination
the dissolution is declared. by the wise to be the necessary
result, O brahman.
39 The Bhūr-loka, the Bhuvar-loka and the Svar-loka are
‘perishable and pass} to dissolution; and the Mahar-loka
40 stands, yet the dwellers therein by reason of the heat go to
the Jana-loka. And Brahmá sleeps indeed during the night
in the three worlds which have been dissolved into one ocean.
41 That night is of exactly the same duration. At its termina-


* This line as it stands in the text seems incorrect. The four ages con-
tain 12,000 divine years or 4,320,000 human years, and 71 times this period
Contain 8,52,000 divine years, or 306,720,000 human years. This latter
period agrees with the enumeration in verse 36 (viz., 30,67,20,000 years), but
instead of the former the text gives 8,000 + 52,000, i. e., 60,000 divine years,
unless we read $ata-sahasrdņi for varsha-sahasrani. Yutam, however, seems
Wrong as regards both grammar and meaning.

t This does not agree with verse 31, if we take the words “this period”
to refer to verses 35, 36 and 87. In verse 31 one of Brahmi's days is said to
be 12,000,000 divine years or 4,320,000,000 human years, but 14 times the
period mentioned in the latter verses contain 11,928,000 divine years, or
4,294,080,000 human years. We must bring in here the excess fraction Te-
ferred to in verse 84, which by calculation is found to be }; thus 713 times
the yuga of 12,000 divine years = 857,142 divine years of the manyanta
and 14 times this last period exactly = 12,000,000 divine years of Brahmé’s
day. Similarly with regard to human years.

f For dydti read dydnti?


228


CANTO XLVII.


tion creation begins again. And so passes one of Brahmd’s
years, and a hundred years is the whole. For a hundred of
his years is denominated a Para; and a Paršrdha or half a
Para is well-known to be composed of fifty years. So thena
Parardha of his life has elapsed, O brahman; at the close of
which occurred the Maha-kalpa, which is famed as the Padma.
Of the second Pardrdha which is now passing, O brahman,


the first kalpa (or cycle) ordained is this one called the
Vārāha.


Canto XLVII.


The Oreation from Prakriti and the Vikdras.*


Markandeya continues—After the Pddma Mahd-kalpa Brahmá
awoke, and as Nūrdyaņa raised the earth out of the. sea
of dissolution and fashioned it in its present shape—Then he
created, first, the vegetable world—secondly, the animal world—
thirdly, the gods—fourthly, mankind—fifthly, Anugraha—and
sixthly, the bhútas— Markandeya summarizes the nine creations,
viz., these six, and the three described in Oanto XLV.


Kraushtuki spoke.


Tell me fully how Brahmá, the adorable, the creator, the


lord of all creatures, the master, the divine, created all crea-
tures.


Markandeya spoke.


Here I tell thee, O brahman, how the adorable eternal
framer of the worlds created all the universe moveable and
immoyeable.

At the dissolution which followed the Padma} Mahd-kalpa,
the lord Brahma awoke after having slept through the mght.


* The products evolved from Prakriti.
+ For padmdvasdne read pdūmdvasdne ?


13


14


15


16


17


THE CREATION FROM PRAKRITI AND THE VIKARAS. 229


Then with goodness predominating in him he gazed on the
empty world. And here men utter this verse to Nārāyaņa,
who has Brahmš's own form, god of the universe, changeless
in might. “Nard means water and bodies ”*—we have thus
heard it is a name for water; and in it he lies, hence he is
called Nārāyaņa.

On awaking he knew that the earth had disappeared with-
in that water, and then became desirous through reflection to
delivert the earth therefrom. He assumed as of old in the
kalpas and other times, other bodies such as those of a fish, a
tortoise and other animals, and likewise he took the body of
a boar. The lord who is composed of the Vedas and sacri-
fices assumed a heavenly form composed of the Vedas and
sacrifices, and entered the water; he reached everywhere and
existed everywhere. And the lord of the world raised the
earth out of the lower regions, and set it free in the water,
while the Siddhas who abode in Jana-loka bent their thoughts
on him. The earth floated like an immense boat on that
ocean, but does not sink by reason of the amplitude of its size.
Then he made the earth level and created the mountains on
the earth. Formerly when creation was burnt up by the
then world-destroying fire, those mountains on the earth were
totally consumed by that fire. The rocks were engulphed in
that one ocean, and the water was driven together by the
wind; wherever they adhered and remained, there the moun-
tains grew into being. Then he divided the earth, adorned
with seven dvipas; and he fashioned the four worlds, the
Bhur-loka and the others, as before.

While he pondered on creation, as of old in the kalpas and
other times, he next became manifested as devoid of intelli-
gence, as enveloped in darkness. Darkness, folly, infatuation,
gloominess, and blind consciousness—ignorance,f composed of
these five, became manifested out of the Supreme Soul.
Creation irrational became established in five ways while he
was meditating. Externally and internally it was destitute of


* Tanavah. + Sam-ud-dhāra; not in the diotionary. t A-vidyš.


230 CANTO XLVII.


light,* its soul was concealed, it consisted of v
and since vegetation is declared to be
this is indeed the Mukhya creation.

18 He considered that creation incapable of causation,§ and
thought of creating another yet. While he was meditating
on its creation, the animal world, in which the stream of lifeļļ

19 is horizontal, came next into existence. Since its activities
„are displayed horizontally, hence it** is known as the
srotas.” Cattle and other guadrupeds are well-kno
of that kind; they are indeed characterized chiefly by igno-

20 Trance and are unintelligent; and they stray in wrong courses,
and in their ignorance are subservient to knowledge; they
are self-swayed, and devoted to self; they comprise twenty-

21 eight classes. They all possess light* internally, but they
are mutually circumscribed.++

He thought even that creation was incapable of causation,

22 and while he meditated, another came into existence; now .
this, the third, was the group of beings in which the stream -
of life passed upwards ;tt it was characterized chiefly by good- `
ness. Those beings abound in pleasure and affection ; they

28 are uncircumscribed outwardly and inwardly; and possess
light* externally and internally ; they originated from an up-
ward stream of life. Now that third creation of the Supreme


Being who was satisfied in goul thereat is known as the crea-
24 tion of the gods.


Brahma was pleased.


egetation +
n Primary,”t hence


* tiryak-
wn as being


When that creation came into being,


* Praktša, This is defined by 8’ri-dhara Svimf to mean **


* clear knowledge”
(prakrishtam jnénam). It had no clear external perception of sound &., or
clear internal feeling of happiness, &o,


t Naga.
$ For drishtud sdédhakam read drishtudsddha
verse 21,


t Mukhya,
kam; see the second line of
l| Srotas; or the current of nutriment,
%* For sd read sah ?
tt A-vrita. S’ri-dhara explains this as, **
nature, &o.”*
tt Urdhva-srotas.


T Tiryak.


mutually ignorant of their birth,


THE CREATION FROM PRAKRITI AND THE VIKARAS, 231


Then he meditated further on another creation which should
25 be capable of causation and be the highest. While he medita-
ted so, and meditated on truth, the group of beings in which
the stream of life passes downwards,* and which is capable
of causation,t next became manifest out of the Impercepti-
26 ble. Since the streams of life in them moved downwards,
hence theyf are “‘arvadk-srotas;”’ and they possess light§
copiously ; they are characterized chiefly by ignorance and pas-
27 sion. Hence they have abundance of suffering, and are con-
tinuously engaged in action; and they possess light externally
and internally. They are mankind and are capable of causation.
28 Anugraha|| was the fifth creation; it is disposed in four
ways, by contrariety,4 and by perfection,** bytranguillity,tt
29 and by satisfactionjj likewise. The objects of this creation
moreover have knowledge of the past and of the present.
30 The creation of the origins of the gross elements$$ and the
` gross elements|||| is called the sixth; they all possess com-
prehensiveness,9{] and are prone to mutual division ;*** and
the origins of the gross elements are to be known as both
impulsive and devoid of propensities.
31 Now the creation of “mahat” is to be known as the first
by Brahmá; and the second of the 'tan-mātras” is called
32 the creation of the “ bhútas;” and the third creation is that
of the “ vikūras,”+tt and itis perceptible by the senses. So was
produced the creation from Prakriti wherein Intelligence pre-


* Arvāk-srotas. + For sddhakaļ read sūdhakam ?

f For ta read te? § Prakd$a, seo note * p. 230.

|| This is the Pratyaya-sarga or intellectual creation of the Sénkhya philo-
sophy. But S/ri-dhara explains it as an inferior creation of gods (deya-sarga),
who are characterized by both goodness and ignorance. It is oharacterized
by ignorance because it is nourished by the ignorance among immoveable
objects and the animal creation; it is characterized by goodness, because it
harmonizes with and thrives upon the perfection and satisfaction among
mankind and the gods; and it is called Anugraha, because it favours (anu-
grahaka) the several natural dispositions of those objeots.

T Viparyaya. ** Siddhi. tt Snti. tt Tushti.

$$ Bhūtfdika,. lill Bhūta. «T Pari-graha. ##* Sam-vi-bhiga.

ttt The products evolved from Prakriti.


232
33


34


35


36


CANTO XLVIII.


ceded. The “mukhya” creation was the fourth, the mukhya
things are known as immoveable. The fifth was that called
*tiryak-srotas ”* and “tairyag-yonya.” Next was the Sixth
creation, that of the “ ūrdhva-srotas” sf it is known as the
creation of the gods. Then the creation of the “ arvāk-srotas ”
is the seventh; itis that of mankind. The eighth creation
is “anugraha” ; itis characterized by goodness and ignorance,
These last five creations are known as those which were
evolved from the Vikāras,f and the first three as those
evolved from Prakriti.$ The ninth creation was Prākrita
and also Vaikrita; itis known as “ Kaumāra.”|| Thus these
nine creations of the Praja-pati have been declared.


Canto XLVIII.
The Course of Creation.


Markandeya relates how Brahmá created the Asuras, the gods,
the pitris and mankind, and the night and day and the two
twilights—He mentions the times when those bein
—He relates the creation of the Rékshasas, Yakshas, Serpents,
Piséc'as, and Gandharvas—Next of all beasts, birds and other
animals—Then of various sacred hymns and metres—Then of the
lightning, thunder, and other phenomena—And lastly Brahmá
assigned all things their shapes, pursuits and names.


Kraushtuki spoke.


gs are powerful


O adorable Sir, right well hast thou related the creation


briefly to me; tell me, O bréhman, fully of the origin of the
gods.


* For tiryak-srotas read tiryak-srotds ?


t For tato *rddha-srotasdm read tathorddhva-srotasdm ?
t Vaikrita. § Prakrita.


|| This is the creation of Nila-
kumāra and the other mind
tion is called prakrita because Rudra s
mentioned in that canto,
Kumūras were created by
(vikriti-bhita),


lohita Rudra (see Canto LII) and of Sanat-
-born song of Brahmá, the Kumiras. This crea-
prang into existence by himself, as
verse 3. It is algo called vaikrita, because the
Brahmá in the form he assumed of a vikára


ca


10


1l


12


13


THE COURSE OF CREATION. 233


Markandeya spoke.


Creation is impregnated with the good and bad* actions of
previous existence, O brāhman; and because of this well-
known lawt. created beings, though they are destroyed in the
dissolution, are not delivered, from the consequences of their
actions.

The gods and other divine beings, and stationary things, and
the four classes of mankind, O brāhman, were produced in
his mind when Brahma was engaged in creation.

Then being desirous of creating the four classes of beings,
namely, the gods, the Asuras and the pitris, and mankind, he
infusedt himself in the waters. The particle of darkness
grew up in excess as the Prajd-pati was rapt in medita-
tion. First then out of his buttocks, as he was desirous
of creating, were produced the Asuras. And then he cast
aside that body which was composed of the particle of dark-
ness; that body cast aside by him forthwith became Night.

Being desirous of creating, he assumed another body and
experienced delight; then were produced from his mouth the
Gods in whom goodness predominates. And the mighty lord
of created beings abandoned, that body also, and when cast
aside it became Day wherein goodness predominates.

Then he took another body which was indeed characterized
by the particle of goodness ; the Pitris were produced from
him while he deemed himself to be a pitri. The lord, after
creating the pitris, abandoned that body also, and when
abandoned it became the Twilight that intervenes between
day and night. Next the lord assumed another body charac-
terized by the particle of passion, and then were produced
Mankind who spring from the particle of passion. After
creating mankind, the lord abandoned that body, and it be-
came the Twilight that ends the night and begins the day.

Thus these bodies of the wise God of gods have become
famed as the night and day, and the evening twilight and


* For kuéald kuéalair road kušuldkušalair.
t For khydtd read khyātyū ? 1 Or, united himself with.


30


284 CANTO XLVIII.


14 the morning twilight, O bréhman.


by the particle of goodness, namely, the morning twilight, the
evening twilight and the day; the night is characterized by
l5 the particle of darkness, hence it is called Tri-yámiká.* Hence
the gods are powerful by day, but the Asuras by night, and
mankind at the coming of the morning twilight, and the pitris
16 at the evening twilight. At these times these classes of beings are
undoubtedly powerful and unassailable by their foes;
when they light upon the adverse times they lose their power.
17 The morning twilight, the night, the day, and the evening
twilight, these four are indeed the bodies of the lord Brahmā,
and they are invested with the three gualities.
18 Now after creating these four, the Prajā-pati, feeling hunger
- and thirst, took another body composed of passion and'dark-
19 ness during the night; during its darkness the adorable
unborn god created bearded monsters wasted with hunger ;
20 and they endeavoured to eat up that body. Some of those
monsters, who said “let us preserve} it from them,” were
called Rakshasas in consequence ; and those who said “let us
devourf it” were called Yakshas, from yakshana, ‘eating, §
O brāhman.
21 When the creator Brahmá saw them, the hair of his head
through his displeasure grew withered|| and lost its erectibi-
22 lity] Through its downward gliding** it became the Ser-
pents,ft and from its losst} of erectibility they are known as
the Ahis or Snakes. Thereupon in anger at having seen the
23 Serpents, he fashioned beings possessed with anger ;§§ they
were born as the flesh-eating demons, tawny-hued and fierce.


Three are characterized |


and


* That is, “having its course with the three others,” from tri and ydma
(from root yd); or, “keeping the three others in check,” from tri and sia
(from root yam). The meaning “having three watches” from tri and ydma
(from root yá) is discarded here.

+ Rakshama. t Kh&déma.

§ Yakshaņa seems a SSR E jakshaņa,

fryanta read štrņas tu
i adds. ** Barpaņa. tt Sarpa. ff Hinatva.
§§ For krodhdtmdno read krodhdtmano ?


THE COURSE OF CREATION. 235


Next while he meditated on the earth,* the Gandharvas
94 were born as his offspring. They were born from him as he
drank speech in,t hence they are known as the Gandharvas.
When these eight classes of divine beings were created, the
25 lord next created other things, birds and cattle.j He created
goats§ from his mouth; and he created “sheep from his
26 breast; and Brahmá fashioned kine|| from his belly and from
his loins; and from his feet swift] horses and asses, and hares
27 and deer, camels and mules and other animals of various
kinds; plants and fruit-trees were produced from the hair of
98 his body. When he had thus created the cattle and plants,
the lord performed a sacrifice
From him at the beginning of the kalpa, at the commence-
29 ment of the Treti Age issued the cow, the goat, mankind, the
sheep, the horse, the mule, and the ass (these animals men
call domestic cattle), and others (which they call wild animals,
30 hearken to me), zamely the beast of prey, the cloven-hoofed
beast, the elephant, monkeys, fifthly birds, sixthly aquatic
beasts, and seventhly creeping animals.
31 And for the sacrifices he fashioned from his front mouth
the gāyatri, and the tric’a strophe, the tri-vrit hymn of praise,**
32 the rathantara sšmans, and the agni-shtoma verses. And he
created from his right mouth the yajur hymns, the tri-shtubb
metre, sacred hymns,*$+ and the fifteen hymns of praise,f} and
33 the brihat-siman and the uktha verses.§§ He fashioned from
his hindmost mouth the sáman hymns, the metre jagati, and


* Dhydyato gám. + Pivato vác'am ; the derivation is not apparent.

f Pafavo; by ancient use for pašun.

§ Ajdh for aján, by ancient use ; 80 also avayo for avin ‘sheep.’

|| Gdvas for gás, by ancient use. But the MS. in the Sanskrit College
Library, Calcutta, reads instead—

Tatah svac'c'handato Imydni vaydmst vayaso 'srijat.

«Then he created other winged animals from his bodily energy according
to his wish.”

T Samátanga; not in the dictionary : from the root sam-d-tang ?

#* The eleventh hymn of the ninth Mandala of the Rig-Veda sung in a
special way. tt C’handas, tt Stoma.

§§ For uktam read uktham.


236


34


35


36


37


38


39


40


41


42


48


44


+


CANTO XLVIII.


the fifteen hymns of praise,* the vairūpa sáman, and the ati.
rātra verse.t He created from his left mouth the twenty-
first Atharva hymn, and the aptor-yāman sacrificial verse,+
the anu-shtubh metre and the virdj metre.

The mighty adorable god created at the beginning of the
kalpa the lightning, the thunderbolts and the clouds, and
the ruddy rainbows, and the periods of life.t And crea-
ted things great and small were produced from his limbs.

Having created the first four classes of beings, the gods,
the Asuras, the pitris and mankind, he next created the
things that exist both immoveable and moveable, the Yakshas,
the Pigac’as, the Gandharvas and the bevies of Apsarases,
men and Kinnaras and Rākshasas, birds, cattle, wild animals
aud suakes, and whatever is changeless and changeful,
stationary and moveable.

Whatever actions they were severally endowed with ori-
ginally at their creation, those very actions they are endowed
with when they are created again and again. Noxiousness
and harmlessness, gentleness and cruelty, righteousness and
unrighteousness, truth and falsehoud,—animated thereby they
have their being; therefore they severally take delight in
those characteristics. The lord, the creator, himself ordained
diversity and specialization§ among created things in their
organs and pursuits and bodies. And he assigned the names
and shapes of created things, and propounded the duties of
the gods and other beings, even by the words of the Veda at the
beginning. He gives names to the Rishis, and to the several
created classes|| among the gods, and to the other things that
were brought forth at the close of the night. As the signs
of the seasons appear at their appropriate season,** and various
forms appear amid alteration, so those very signs and forms
appear as actual factstt in the ages and other periods.


Stoma ; but another reading is seventeen.
A part of the seven soma-samstha sacrifices.


ámsi ; or, birds. § Viniyoga.
i i) eae For sarvaryyante read s‘urvaryante ?
isnt.
# For yathdritau read yatharttau ? tt Bhava.


THE COURSE OF CREATION. 237


45 Snch then* were the creations of Brahma whose origin
is undiscernible ; they occur from kalpa to kalpa as he awakes
at the close of his night.t


Canto XLIX.


The Course of Creation.


Mérkandeya describes the creation of the primeval human race,
and their simple condition and happy life—When they ultimately
died out, modern men fell from the sky, and lived in kalpa trees—
Passionate affection sprung up among them—and covetousness next,
which destroyed the trees, and drove them to form communities—Thetr
measures of length are explained—and fortresses, towns, villages and
houses described—The Tretd Age began—with the existing rivers and
vegetation—and the people lived on the vegetation—They then took
private possession of property according to might, and the vegetation
perished—Then they supplicated Brahmá, and he created all existing
cereals and plants—The seventeen cereals and the fourteen sacrificial
plants are specified—Brahmd ordained their means of livelihood,
which could be gained only through labour, and their laws, castes, Gc.
— The spheres assigned to various classes after death are mentioned.


Kraushtuki spoke.


1 Thou hast told me, Sir, of the group of beings in which
the stream of life passes downwards; tell me fully, O


$ 2 - bréhman, how Brahmá created the human creation, and how


he created the classes of men, and how their qualities, O
wise Sir; and tell me what business has been assigned to
the brāhmans and those other classes severally.
Markandeya spoke.
3 While Brahmá was first creating and was meditating on
trath, he created a thousand pairs of human beings from his


4 mouth, O Muni; when born, they come into being, charac-
terized chiefly by goodness, and self-glorious. He created


* For ta read tu? + For sarvaryyante read s‘arvaryante ?
t Or, current of nutriment.


238
5


15


16


17


18


19


CANTO. XLIX.


another thousand pairs from his breast; they were all
characterized chiefly by passion, and were fiery and impa-
tient. And he created again another thousand miserable
pairs from his thighs;* they were known as characterized
chiefly by passion and ignorance, and as enviously disposed,
And he created another thousand pairs from his feet ; they
were all characterized chiefly by ignorance, aud were un-
fortunate and little of understanding.

Then those living beings, produced in pairs, were rejoicing
together; urged by their mutual distress they hastened to
sexual intercourse. Thenceforward pairing originated. in
this kalpa. Women did not have their courses month by
month ; hence they did not then bring forth offspring, although
they engaged in sexual intercourse. They bring forth just
pairs of children once at the close of life. Thenceforward
pairing originated in thiskalpa. By meditation and thought
those human beings give birth to offspring once, Sound and
the other objects of sense were pure severally in their five
marks.

This was this creation of the human race which the Prajé-
pati formerly produced. Sprung of his lineage they worship-
ped this world, and they pay homage to rivers, lakes, and
seas and the mountains also. During that age those human
beings lived indeed feeling little cold or heat. They received
delight according to their natural dispositions from the objects
of sense, O wise Sir; uo opposition, nor enmity, nor envy
existed among them. They paid homage to the mountains
and the seas; they lived wholly without habitatious ; their
actions were unswayed by love; their minds were always
joyful. Neither Piśác'as, nor Nagas, nor Rākshasas, nor en-
vious men, nor cattle, nor birds, nor crocodiles, nor fish, nor
creeping insects, nor egg-born animals hindered them, (for
those animals are the offspring of iniquity,) nor roots, nor
fruits, nor flowers, nor the seasons, nor the years. Time was
always happy ; there was neither heat nor cold in excess; 88
time passed by, they attained wonderful perfection. More-


`


# For marutah read trutah.


20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27


28
29


30


31
32


33


THE COURSE OF CREATION. 239


over they enjoyed satisfaction in the fore-noon and at noon;
and again satisfaction came without exertion to those who
wished for it, and exertion also sprang up in the mind of
those who wished for it. The water was exquisite. Perfec-
tion was merry with many a delight for them ;* and another
was produced that conferred every wish. And with bodies
uncared for, those human beings had lasting youth. Without
resolve they produce offspring in pairs; alike is their birth
and form, and together also they die. Devoid of desire and
hatred they lived to each other. All were equal in form and
length of life, without inferiority or superiority. They live
their measure of life, four thousand human years; nor have
they misfortunes through affliction. Everywhere moreover
the earth was entirely blessed with good fortune.

As the people died in the course of time, so their prosperity
gradually perished everywhere; and when it had altogether
perished, men fell down from the sky. Those kalpa trees
were commonly produced which are called houses ; and they
brought forth every kind of enjoyment to those people. At the
beginning of the Treti age the people got their subsistence
from those trees. Afterwards in the course of time passionate
affection sprung up suddenly among them. By reason of
the occurrence of passionate affection menstruation occurred
month by month, and conception frequently took place.
Then those trees were called houses} by them. But branches
certainly fall from other trees, O brahman; and they yield
clothing:and ornaments out of their fruits. In the separate
cavities of the same fruit of those trees was produced very
strong honey, which excelled in smell, colour and taste, and
which no bee had made; on that they subsisted at the begin-
ning of the Treta age.

Afterwards in course of time those people grew covetous
besides ; their minds being filled with selfishness they fenced


* Tho text siddhir ndmndvayo na sé seems incorrect ; instead of it, another


MS.


reads siddhir ndndrasollasd, which I have adopted.


+ Raga.
f Does this mean the trees were called houses (gfiha) from the offspring
(garbha) begotten there?


240 -CANTO XLIX,


the trees* round ; and those trees perished by reason of that

34 wrong conduct on their part. Strife sprang up in conse-
quence; their faces felt cold and heat and hunger. Then
for the. sake of combination and resistance they made towns

35 at first; and they resort to fortresses in inaccessible deserts
and wastes, in mountains and caves ; also they industriously

constructed with their own fingers an artificial fort on. trees,

on mountains and in water, and they first made measures
intended for measurement.

37 A minute atom, a para súkshma, the mote in a sunbeam,t
the dust of the earth, and the point of a hair, anda young
louse,f and a louse,§ and the body of a barley-corn ;|| men

38 say each of those things is eight times the size of the preced-
ing thing. Eight barley-corns egual an angula or finger-

39 breadth ;** six finger-breadths are a pada,t+ and twice that
is known as a span;ff and two spans make a cubit measured
with the fingers closed in at the root of the thumb ;§§ four
cubits make a bow, a pol>,|||| and equal two nūdikds; two

40 thousand bows make a gavyūti ;44 and four times that are
declared by the wise to be a yojana ;*** this is the utmost
measure for purposes of calculation.

41 Now of the four kinds of fortresses three occur naturally ;
the fourth kind of fortress is artificial. Now those mep

42 constructed it laboriously ;t++ and they also constructed, O


36


* For vrikshds read vrikshdms ? + For trasha-renur read trasa-renur.

t For nishkdém read likshd. § For yúkám read yikd. || Yavodara.

g For ekādaša-guņam teshām another MS. reads kramdd ashta-guņdnydhyr,
which is much better.

** For yava-madhyam another MS. reads yavdnyash{au.

Tt A foot’s breadth? t} For vitasti-dvigunam read vitastir dviguņam ?

S$ For -veshfanam read -veshtanah? This relation indicates a long arm, or
small hands and feet. An average cubit so measured would be equal to about
15 inches. Illl Danda.

TT A stretch of pasture-ground. Taking the cubit at 15 inches, this length
would be 10,0C0 feet, or abont 15 mile.

##% Taking the cubit at 15 inches, the yojana equals 40,000 feet, or about
Ta A text tac’ c'a kurydt satastu te appears corrupt, A potter reading is
tac’ c'akrur yatnatas tu te from a MS. in the Sanskrit College Library.


THE DEVELOPEMENT OF MANKIND. 241


brahman,* the pura,* and the khetaka, the droņi-mukhaf
likewise,§ and s&khd-nagarakas and the three kinds of kar-
43 vatakas,|| and the grdmas together with the arrangement of
the ghoshas, and the separate habitations therein ; and they
44 built lofty ramparts surrounded on all sides with fosses. They
made the pura, or town, extend for a quarter of a yojana in
every direction, and slope down to water on the east; they
made it auspicious and peopled it with colonies from noble
families.** And with a half of it they laid ont the kheta,tt
and with a quarter of it the karvata;tt and then the inferior
portion which is made with the remaining quarter is called the
46 droni-mukha.§§ A town destitnte of ramparts and fosses|||| is


* For dvijaļ read dvija? The vocativo seems preferable as Markan deya
is relating what happened in a previous age, and the work described would
not fall to a bréhman’s duty. If dvijah be retained, the word kurydt must be
understood.

f This is explained in verse 44,

f These two words are explained in verse 45.

§ For tadva read tadvad.

|| These two words are not in the dictionary ; they are explained in verses
45 and 46. For karvatakam trayt read karvataka-traytm ?

T Sanghosha is not in the dictionary. For gramd-sanghosha-vinydsam read
grāmam sa-ghosha-vinydsam ? Gráma is explained in yerse 47, and ghosha in
verse 50.

** S’uddha-vampSa-vahirgamam.

tt Prof. Sir M. Monier-Williams explains kheta, “ a village, the residence
of peasants and farmers; a small town, half a pura” ; but here it apparently
means a particular portion of the pura; does it mean the “inhabited or
residential area ” ?

Tf This word is said to meah “a village, market-town, the capital of a
district,” but here it denotes a particular portion of the pura; does jt mean
the bazfr or the ' area occupied with the market and shops” ?

§§ This word said to mean “the capital of a district, the chief of 400 vil-
Jages,” but here it evidently refers to the lowest part of the pura; does it
mean the “area inhabited by the labouring population or the lowest classes ” P

Ill For prdkdram parikhd-htnam read prdkdra-parikhd:hinam ? Or, is the
verse intended to say that a town surrounded with a rampart but without g
fosse is a varma-vat? This would agree better with the meaning of varma-

` wat. Prof. Sir M. Monier- Williams explains it as "an unfortified (7) town,”


31


242 CANTO XLIX.


called a varma-vat ; and a g4khé-nagaraka* is another kind of
town which possesses ministers and feudatory princes. More-
over, a dwelling placet which abounds with šūdras and water,t
where the cultivators are independently prosperous,$ and
which is situated on land that can be used for fields, is called
48 agrama.|| The dwelling-place, which men make, different
from cities and other abodes, for the sake of their business,
49 is to be known as a vasati by modern men. The grūma,
which springs up on the land of another grdma, and thrives,
which has no fields of its own, which is for the most part
vicious, and which is the resort of a king’s favourites, is
50 called an dkrimi.** And a collection of cattle and herdsmen,
who have brought their utensils there on carts, where there
is no barter, is called a ghosha ;+} its situation on the land
may be wherever they please.


51 Those people thus made towns and other abodes for them-
selves to dwell in; they made houses for the several couples


* This word is said to mean, “‘ a * branch-town,’ a suburb,” but here is seem®
to mean a ‘ town with branches,’ a “ capital town” or “metropolis.”

+ Vasati; see verse 48.

t For šidra-jala-prdydh read sidra-jala-prayd ?

§ For -krshibaldh read -krishtbald ?

|| The village. The word thus denotes a local area, and includes both the
dwellings and the fields. It seems to designate specially the large and pros-
perous villages.

S The word is explained in the dictionary as '' a dwelling-place, dwelling-
house, abode, residence,” but here it is explained to be a “ mart,” apparently
either permanent or temporary. It corresponds to the modern (Persian)
word ganj, or the vernacular word hdt (Sanskrit hatta), in Bengal. The word
vasati appears as basti in the modern vernaculars, and means in Bengal
‘the populated part of a village,” and “the part of a town occupied by the
common bamboo-built houses.” The verse seems to indicate that the
word vasati was either newly-coined, or had recently acquired (or the author
wished it to acquire) a special meaning. The complete change from this
meaning to that of the modern basti, which rather excludes any notion of
trade, is note-worthy.

«% Or akrimt. These words are not in the dictionary. If we might read
d-kramt instead, the word would be rather appropriate.

tt This word is said to mean “ a station of herdsmen.” It appears to de»
note a temporary dwelling only, resorted to for purposes of pasturage,


THE DEVELOPEMENT OF MANKIND. 243


52 todwellin. As trees were their first kind of houses, so, with
a remembrance of all that, those people built their houses.

53 As some branches of a tree go in one direction, and others go
in another direction, and some rise upwards and some bend
downwards, even so they fashioned the branches in their

54 houses. Those branches, which were the branches of the
kalpa trees at first, O brahman, became rooms in the houses
in consequence among those people.

55 Those people ruined the trees by their strife, and afterwards
pondered* on their means of livelihood. When the kalpa

56 trees had utterly perished along with the honey, those people
were distressed by their afflictions, and suffered from thirst
and hunger. Then became manifest their perfection at the

57 beginning of the Treti age. For their. other business was
spontaneously accomplished ;+ they had rain according to
their desire. The waters of their rain are the riversj which

58 flow here. By the obstruction of the rain$ the rivers, whichļļ
existed on the earth scanty of water before that, became]
deep flowing channels.

59 And then by their union with the earth plants came into
existence, of fourteen kinds, both those which grow on un-
cultivated soil, and those which grow unsown, both culti-

60 vated and wild. And trees and shrubs bearing flowers and
fruit in their seasons were produced. This manifestation of

61 vegetation appeared first in the Tretd age. On that vegeta-
tion the people subsist in the Treté age, O Muni, And then

62 - lapsing into novel passion and covetousness those people next
took possession of rivers and fields, mountains, and trees,
shrubs and plants in their own right even according to might.


* For ac'intayat read ac'intayan ?

+ For vdrttd-sva-sūdhitd read vdrttd sva-sddhitd ?

t Nimna-gata neut=nimna-gi? This meaning is not in the dictionary.

$ For vrishfydvaruddhair read vriehtyavarodhair ?

| Nimnagéh ye. If this is correct, we must tako nimna-ga masc. as “a
river,” a meaning not given in the dictionary ; if wo read nimna-gah fem as
usual, we must read ydh for ye.

T For abkavat road abhavan 7?


244: CANTO XLIX.


63 Through that their sin those plants perished before their very
eyes, and the earth then devoured those plants at once, O
64 most wise brāhman.* Moreover when that vegetation had
perished, those people fell into still further confusion.
Suffering from hunger, they resorted to Brahma, the most
65 high, as their preserver. And he, the mighty lord, knowing
full well then that the earth had swallowed it up;t milked
66 her treating mount Meru as her calf.t This earth-cow was
then milked by him, the cereals came into existence on the
67 face of the earth, the seeds, the cultivated and wild plants
besides, which are annuals,§ known as comprising seventeen-
classes according to tradition, The various kinds of both
68 rice. and barley, wheat, anu grain,|| sesamum, priyangu, T
udāra,** koradisha,f} and c'inaka,tt'mūsha,$$ green gram, ||||
69 ` and mastra,{/{ the finest pulse,*** and kulatthaka,tft ādhaka


# For dvijak read dvija ?

+ Grasta. The context seems to require this word to be taken in an active
sense.

$ The calf is tied near the cow, while she is being milked, as otherwise,
it is said, she will not let her milk flow.

$ Phala-pikānta. '

|| Panicum miliaceum, the modern chiná, Roxb. p. 104. It is a cultivated
cereal, grown on an elevated, light, rich soil, immediately after the rains.

g] See note ** p. 165.

** The Dictionary says this is a kind of grain with long stalks, but I cannot
trace it out in Roxburgh.

tt Paspalum scrobiculatum, the modern kodo, Roxb. p.93. He says “ The
seed is an article of diet with the Hindoos, particularly with those who in-
habit the mountains and most barren parts of the country, for it is in such
countries only where it is cultivated, it being an unprofitable crop, and pot
sown where others more beneficial will thrive. I haye eaten of the boiled
grain, and think it as palatable as rice.”

tt This is said to be Panicum miliaceum which is already mentioned ; the
word means fennel also, but that is inappropriate. I do not find any other
grain of this name.

55 See note $ p. 84.

||| Mudga ; See note §§ p. 84.

aqq See note ttt p 165.

##* Nishpiva; see note || p. 86.

ttt See note || p. 84.


THE DEVELOPEMENT.OF MANKIND. 245


pulse,* and chick-peat and hempf are known as the seven
teen classes. These are the olden kinds of cultivated plants.
70 -And there are fourteen kinds of plants for use in sacrifices,
both cultivated and wild, viz., the various kinds of both rice
71 and barley, wheat, anu grain, sesamum, and seventh§ among
them priyangu, and eighth kulatthaka, and šyāmākaļ| grain,
72 wildrice, wild sesamum,] and gavedhuka** grass, kuruvindat+
grass, markataka,{{ and venu-gradha ;§§ and these indeed are
traditionally known as the fourteen cultivated and wild plants
78 for use in sacrifices. When these plants are abandoned,|||| they
do not spring forth again.
Thereupon the adorable self-existent Brahma devised
74 means of livelihood for the advancement of those people, and
the perfection of the hands which results from work. Thence-
forward plants were produced, which must ripen after plough-
75 ing. But when their livelihood was thoroughly ordained, the


* The dictionary does ngot give édhaka, masc. or fem., as the name of any
plant; but fdhaki, fem., is said to mean a kind of pulse, Cajanus indicus,
Spreng. I do not find it in Roxb., but Oliver calls the Pigeon Pea Cajanus.

+ For c'anakd$ read c’anakd§. See note ** p. 84.

f S'aņa. For gandh read gandh, as in several MSS.

§ The reckoning seems wrong; priyangu is the sixth and kulatthaka the
seventh,

|| See note * p. 165.

T Yattila is not in the dictionary. For yattild read jartildh.

*4 Cois barbata, Roxb. p. 649; it is a coarse grass, and cattle do not eat it.
It is also said to mean Hedysarum lagopodioides, which is mentioueed by Rox-
burgh (p. 573), but of which I find no description in his work.

tt Cyperus rotundus, Roxb. p. 66; a common grass, the roots of which dried
and powdered are used as a perfume. i

ff This has been mentioned in Canto XXXII, verse 11, and is described in
the dictionary as “a kind of wild panio; a species of grain.” I find that
Carpopogon pruriens is assigned by Roxburgh to the Sanskrit word markati
(p. 553). That is a common legume, but he says no use seems to bo made of
it, except that the hairs of the legumes are used as a vermifuge and sre be-
lieved to be poisonous.

§§ This is not in the dictionary, and I do not know what it is.

Ill Prasrishtā. Does this mean that these plants grow only in a cultivated
state P


246 CANTO L.


lord himself next established bounds for them according to
justice and according to their qualities; also the laws of
the castes and of the four periods of a brihman's life, and
` of the worlds* with all their castes which duly maintain’
righteousness and wealth, O most righteous Muni.

77 Prājāpatyat is traditionally declared to be the sphere
assigned after death to brāhmans who perform the ceremonies,
Aindrat is the sphere of kshatriyas who flee not in battle.

78 Māruta$ is the sphere of vaišyas who observe their own
proper laws. Gdandharval| is the sphere of the various claases

79 of šūdras who perform mental service. The sphere of those
eighty-eight thousand rishis who live in perpetual chastity
has been traditionally declared to be that of the inhabitants

80 of Jupiter. The sphere of the Seven Ķishisf has been tradi-
tionally declared to be that of hermits. Prajapatya** is the

- sphere of householders; the abode of Brahmá is for those
men who have abandoned all worldly coucerns; the world
of immortality is for yogis—such is the ordinance of the
various spheres assigned after death,


76


Canto L.


The mandate to the Yaksha Duhsaha.


Brahma next created the nine Sages, Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Angiras, Maric't, Daksha, Atri and Vasishtha—and also
Rudra, Sankalpa and Dharma—All these were all-wise and devoid of
passions—Bralmd in anger created a being half male, half female,
who at his order divided himself into many male and female beings.


* Loka. |

+ The heaven of the pitris ?

+ The 18th lunar mansion ?

-§ The constellation Svati.

|| Géndharva is the name of one of the nine portions of Bhārata-varsba ;
but this seems inappropriate.

aq The constellation Ursa Major.

*## Seo yorse 77.


THE CREATION OF THE NINE SAGES. 247


Brahma then created the Manu Svdyambhuva and his wife S'ata-
rúpá—They had two sons Priya-vrata and Uttdna-pdda, and also two
daughters. Ruc'i married one daughter Riddhi and begat Yajna and
Dakshind.

Daksha married the other daughter Prasūti and begot 24 daughters,
whose names are mentioned, and who became Dharma’s wives, and also
11 other daughters whose names are mentioned, and who became the
wives of the other sages and of Agni and the Pitris—The children of
these daughters are mentioned.

A-dharma and his offspring are mentioned, Naraka, Bhaya, Mrityu
4c.—The actions of Mrityu’s sons are etplained—Chief among them
is Duļsaha—to him Brahma assigned a dwelling and raiment, a long
catalogue of bad deeds as nourishment, and certain places and times
for his success, but excluded a list of other persons and places from
his inflyence.

Markandeya spoke.
1 Then while he was meditating, mankind were begotten
in his mind, together with their occupations, and implements

2 which were produced from his body. Spirits in bodily form*

were produced from the limbs of him, the wise god. All
those whom I have already mentioned came into existence.
3 All created beings from the gods down to those whose
condition is stationary are known to be subject to the three
qualities :+ such was the constitution of created things,
immoveable and moveable.
4 When all that offspring of him, the wise one, did not in-
crease, he created other mind-born sons like unto himself, viz.,
5  Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Angiras, Maric’i, Dak-
sha, and Atri, and the mind-born Vasishtha j—these were the
6 nine sons of Brahma, they are positively mentioned in the


Puranas.
Next Brahmá further created Rudra, whose birth was from
7 his soul when it was angry, and Sankalpa, and Dharma who


was begotten before all the preceding sons.
* Kshetra-jita.


+ Goodness, passion, and ignorance.
t For Va$ishtham read Vasishfhum,


248


10


12


13


14


18


19


„wOrlds, the high-souled Brahmá grew very wrathful;


CANTO T.


And those who with their sons and other relatives Were first
created by the Self-existent, felt no attachment for the worlds,
but showed disregard and were composed in mind. They
all knew the future, they were free from
envy.

When they thus showed disregard at the creation of the


passion, free from


then
was produced there a male* like to the sun, possessed of an


immense body, the body being half man’s and half woman’s,
“Divide thyself” said the god, and then disappeared. And
he being thus accosted Separated the female and male
natures; and he divided the male nature into eleven parts.
-Then the divine lord divided the male and female natures
into many parts with men, gentle and cruel, calm, black and
white.

Next the lord Brahmá became the guardian of his off-
spring by creating the first Manu Svāyambhuva,$ begotten
from and like unto himself, O brāhman,f and the woman
Sata-rūpā, who was cleansed from blemishes through austeri-
ties. The divine and mighty Manu Syéyambhuva took her
for his wife. And through him her husband Sata-rūpā
brought forth two sons, Priya-vrata and Utt4na-pida, famed
through their own actions, and two daughters also, Riddhi
and Prasūti. Then their father gave Prasūti in marriage 2
Daksha and Riddhi to Ruc'i§ of yore. The Prajá-pati Rica
took his wife, and from them both a son Yajna was born and
a daughter Dakshiná,|| O illustrious Sir; these two Loen
became husband and wife, and Yajna begat of Dakshiņá
twelve sons; the glorious sons of Yajna and Dakshiņá were
the gods well known as the Yámas in the epoch of Manu
Svāyambhuva.

* Porusha. i

+ The son of Svayam-bht (the Self-existent Brahmá).

t For dvija read dvija ? =

§ He is one of the Praja-patis. l ; U are
|| This verse must refer to Ruc’i, as Daksha’s progeny is mentio


verse 19.


20


21


22


23


24


26


27


28


DAKSHA’S OFFSPRING. 249


And Daksha moreover begat twenty and four daughters of
Prasūti; hear also from me their names in order—Sraddha
(Faith), Lakshmi (Good Fortune), Dhriti (Constancy), Tushti
(Satisfaction), Pushti ( Nourishment), Medha (Mental Vigour),
and Kriyi (Action), Buddhi (Intelligence), Lajjá (Modesty),
Vapus (Bodily Beauty), Santi (Tranquillity), Siddhi (Per-
fection), and Kirti (Fame) the thirteenth. The lord Dharma
took these daughters of Daksha for his wives.

Besides them and younger were the eleven lovely-eyed
daughters—Khyati (Celebrity), and Sati (Truth), Sambhuti
(Fitness), Smriti (Memory), Priti (Affection), and Kshama
(Patience), and Sannati (Humility),* and Anasūyā (Sin-
cerity), Urjé (Strength), Svāhi (the oblation to the gods),
and Svadhá (the oblation to the pitris). The Rishis Bhrigu,
Bhavat and Maric'i, and the Muni Angiras also, Pulastya
and Pulaha, and Kratu,t Vasishtha, and Atri, Vahni and the
Pitris in order—these Munis, the most illustrious among Munis,
took these daughters, Khyāti and the others, a marriage.§

Sraddha gave birth to Káma (Love); dnd Sriļi to Darpa
(Pride) ; Dhriti to Niyama (Restraint) ber son; and Tushti
also to Santosha (Contentment); Pushti to Lobha (Covetous-
ness); Medhi to Sruta (Revelation); Kriyi to Danda
(Punishment), Naya (Prudence), and Vinaya (Decorum) ;
Buddhi gave birth to Bodha (Wisdom); and Lajji to Vinaya
(Decorum); Vapus to Vyavaséya (Industry) her son; and `
Santi gave birth to Kshema (Ease); Siddhi to Sukha
(Happiness) ; Kirti to Yasas (Renown). These were the off-
spring of Dharma.

She bare by Kama a grandson to Dharma, namely, Har-
sha (Joy) who brims oyer with joyousness.

* For Santatié in the text read Sannatiš see Canto LII, v. 24.
+ That is, S'iva; and he married Satí. She putan end to herself in


consequence of her father Dakshw’s curse, und was re-born as the daughter of
Himavat, when Siva married her again. Seo Canto L11, vv. 12-14.


t For Kritué read Kratué.

§ See Canto LII, vv. 14, &o.
i| Z. e. Lakshmi.

T This seems obscure.


32


250
29


30


3l-


36


37


38


CANTO L.


Now Himsá (Injury) was the wife of A-dharm
eousness) ; and Anrita (Falsehood) was born o
daughter Nirriti (Destruction) was born of her, and two sons
Naraka (Hell) and Bhaya (Fear), and Máyá (Illusion) and
Vedaná (Pain). And with these two females the two sons
formed two married pairs; and of those two, Máyá gave birth
to Mrityu (Death) who carries created beings away, and
Vedaná gave birth by Raurava* to her son Duhkha (Misery),
And Vyādhi (Sickness), Jari (Old Age), Soka (Grief),
Trishna (Thirst) and Krodha (Anger) were begotten by
Mrityu; or all these, who have the characteristics of A-dhar-
ma, are traditionally declared to have sprung from Duhkha,
No wife have they, nor son ; they all live in perpetual chas-
tity. ;

Nirriti also was the wife of Mrityu, and Mrityu had another
wife called A-lakshmi (Ill Fortune) ; and by tbe latter Mrityu


a (Unright.


f her, anda


‘had fourteen sons. ‘I'hese are his sons by A-lakshmi;


they carry out Mrityu's commands; they visit men at the
times of dissolution; hear about them. They dwellin the ten
organs of-sense and in the mind; for they influence man or
woman each towards his own object of seuse; and assailing
the organs of sense they influence men by means of passion,
anger and other feelings, so that men suffer injury through
unrighteousness and other evil ways, O brihman.

And one of them takes possession of self-consciousness,
and another resides in the intellect; hence bewildered by
folly, men strive to destroy women.

And another} famed by his name Duhsahat resides in men’s
houses; he is wasted with hunger, his face is downwards
bent; he is naked, clothed in rags, and his voice is as hoarse
as a crow's. He was created by Brahmá to eat all beings.
Him, exceedingly terrific by reason of his long teeth, open
mouthed, very terrible, and ravenous in mind, him thus ad-


* Rauravs is the name of a particuler hell, but here it seems to be


equivalent to Naraka.


+ For anye read anyo ?
f The “ Unenduruble,” “ Intolerable.”


40


41


42


48


4,4,


45


46


47


48


THE MANDATE TO THE YAKSHA DUHSAHA. 251


dressed Brahmá, the store-house of austerities,* the fore-

father of the worlds, he who is entirely consubstantial with

Brahma, the pure, the cause of the universe, the changeless.
Brahmá spoke.

“Thou must not devour this universe; quit thy anger,
keep thee calm; cast off the atom of passion and forsake this
career of ignorance.”

; Duhsaha spoke.

«T am wasted with hunger, O ruler of the world, I am

thirsty also and my strength is gone. How may I be satisfied,


.O master? How may I grow strong? And tell me, who


will be my refuge where I may abide tranquil ? ”-


Brahma spoke.

“Thy refuge shall be men’s houses, and unrighteous men
shall be thy strength. Thou shalt be satisfied, my child, with.
their neglect to perform the constant sacrifices. And spon-
taneous boils shall be thy raiment; and for foodt I give to
thee whatever is injured, and what is infested with vermin,
and what has been gazed into by dogs, likewise what is con-
tained in broken pots, what has been made still by the breath
from a man’s mouth, the fragments that remain from a meal,
what is unripe, that on which perspiration has fallen,j what
has been licked, what has not been cooked properly, what
has been eaten of by people sitting on broken seats, and food


that has fallen on the seat,§ and what turns away from the .


sky|| at the two twilights, what is distinguished by the


I . . . .
sound 'of dancing and musical instruments, what a woman 1n
such a woman has eaten of


her courses has polluted, what
and has gazed at, and whatever food or drink has been


damaged T at all—these shall be for thy nourishment, and


whatever else I give to thee; whatever persons, who have


* Or, for tapaso nidhih read tapaso nidhe, vocative ?


+ For dharam read dhdram ?

t For a-svinnam read d-svinnam ?

$ For dsanndgatam another reading is dsandt-gatam which is preferable.
|| Vi-din-mukha ; not in the dictionary.

q Upa-ghatu-vat; not in the dictionāry.


252 CANTO L.


not performed their ablutions, have sacrificed or


given in
49 alms, without faith or in contempt; what has been cast away


without the previous use of water, and what has been render-
ed valueless, and what has been exhibited in order to be dis-
carded, and what has been given away through utter amaze-
ment; what is corrupt, and what has been given away by a
person in anger or in pain, that O goblin,* thou shalt obtainķ
as thy reward; and whatever the son of a re-married widow
does as an undertaking for the next world, and whatever
the daughter of a re-married widow so does ; that, O goblin,
shall be for thy satisfaction. The wealth-procuring cere-
Monies in which a maiden engages along with her -lover for
the sake of the obligation of dower, and the ceremonies also
which are performed according to wicked books, shall be for
thy nourishment, O goblin; and whatever has been studied
53 for the sake of enjoying wealth{ and whatever has not been
read truly—all that I give thee, and these periods also for thy
perfection. Thou shalt ever have conquering power, O
Duhsaha, among men, if they approach a pregnant woman
carnally, orif they transgress the evening rites and the
constant ceremonies, and among men who have been corrupted
by wicked books, deeds or conversation.
55 “Thy business lies in creating social dissensions, in render-
ing cookery useless, and in interrupting cookery; and thy
56 dwelling shall perpetually be in household wrangling. And
men shall dread thee§ in what pines away,|| and in bullock-
carts and other conveyances which are shut up, in rooms which
57 are not sprinkled at twilight, and at death. On the occasions
of eclipses of the stars] and planets, and at the appearance


50


51


52


54


* Yaksha. S ik

+ Tad-bhdgi in the text seems incorrect. Another reading is tad game
but tvad-bhdgi and tvad-gdmi seem preferable. Another reading is prépsyast,

i e adopted.

ay 4€ mies. IES another and better reading is artha-nirvritau
which I have adopted. A third reading is áfu vikritam.

§ For tvattvo read tvatto ?

Il A-poshyamiņe. 4 Nakshatra.


THE MANDATE TO THE YAKSHA DUHSAHA. 253


of the three kinds of portents, thon shalt, O goblin, over-

58 come men who disregard propitiatory ceremonies. Men who
fast vainly, who always delight in gambling and women, who
confer benefits according to thy word, and who are religious
hypocrites, shall be thy prey.

59 “Study by one who is not a brahma-c'āri, and sacrifice
performed by an unlearned man; austerities practised in a
forest* by men who indulge in worldly pleasurest and by

60 men of unsubdued soul; the action which is done according
to their respective occupations by brihmans, kshatriyas,
vaisyas and šūdras, who have fallen from their castes, and who

61 desire to gain the objects of the next world, and whatever
the results of that action—all that shall be thine, O goblin.
And more yet I give thee for thy nourishment; hearken

62 thereto. Men shall give thee a plenteous bali offering at the
close of the Vaisvadeva ceremony, first uttering thy name
and then saying “this is for thee.”

63 “ Abandon the house of him, who eats only properly cooked
food according to rule, who is pure within and without, who

64 is free from covetousness, who governs his wife.j Abandon
that house, O goblin, where the gods and the pitris are wor-
shipped with their respective oblations, and where the female

65 relatives and guests are honoured. And abandon that house
also, where concord§ dwells at home among the children, the
aged, the women and men, and among the various classes of

66 kinsmen. Abandon that house, O goblin, where the women.
folk are delighted, are not eager to go outside, and are always

67 modest. Abandon that house, O goblin, at my command,
where the bedding and viands are suited to the ages and rela-

68 tions of the inmates. Abandon that house, O goblin, where
the inmates are always kind, and busied in good deeds, and

69 possess the common household utensils. And thou must also
ever abandon that house, O goblin, where the inmates do not


* For tapo-vane read tapo vane ?
Grūmya-bhuj.

Y For 'jita-atrtkas read jita-strikas ?

§ For maitrt-grihe read maitrt grihe ?


254


70


71


72
73
74
75
76


77


79


80


81


CANTO L.


keep their seats while the religious preceptors, the aged, and
dvijas are standing and where they do not stand. That will
not be an excellent abode for thee, where the house-door ig
not penetrated by trees, shrubs or other vegetation, nor by a
man who pierces one’s vitals, Abandon the house of the
man who supports the gods, the pitris, mankind and guests
with the remnants of his food, Abandon, O goblin, such
men as these, the true in word, the forbearing in disposition,
the harmless, and those free from remorse, and also the un-
envious, Abandon the woman, who is devoted to her husband's
service, who keeps aloof from associating with bad women, and
who feeds on the food which has been left by her family and
husband. Abandon the bréhman dvija always, whose mind is
engrossed with sacrifice, study, discipline and alms-giving, and
who has made his livelihood by means of the performance of
sacrifices, teaching, and receiving alms.* And abandon, O Duh-
saha, the kshatriya who is always energetic in alms-giving,
study, and sacrifice, and who earns his livelihood from good
taxes and by the occupation of arms. Abandon the stainless
vaišya, whois endowed with the three previous virtues,+ and
who gains his livelihood from the keeping of cattle and trade
and cultivation. Abandon also the šūdra, who is diligent in
alms-giving, sacrifice and the service of dvijas, and who sup-
ports himself by menial service under brāhmans and other
“Tn whatever house the master of the house earns his
livelihood without contravening śruti and smriti, and where
his wife is obedient to him from her very soul, and where the
son shows reverence to his spiritual preceptor and the gods
and his father, and where the wife shows reverence to her
husband—whence should there be fear of misfortune in that
house? When a house is smeared over in the evenings, and
thoroughly sprinkled with water, and the bali of S
made in it, thou canst not gaze thereat, O goblin. :
houses where the sun sees not the beds, and where fire an


* X-dana. 3
+ Guna, viz., alms-giving, study and sacrifice,


82


83


88


89


90


91


92


THE MANDATE TO THE YAKSHA DUHSAHA. 255


water are constantly kept, and where the lamps behold the
sun, are places patronized by Lakshmi. That house is not
a resort for thee, where are kept a bull, sandal-wood perfume,
a lute, a mirror, honey and ghee, and where copper vessels
are used both for poisons and for the clarified butter of hol y
oblations.

“That house is thy temple, O goblin, where thorny trees
grow, and where leguminous plants creep about, and where the
wife is a re-married widow, and ant-hills are found. That
house is thy dwelling, wherein live five men, and three
women, and as many cows, and where the fire from the fuel
is mere darkness, Thou shalt quickly, O goblin, parch up
the house, which contains one goat, two asses, three cattle,
five buffaloes,* six horses, and seven elephants. Wherever a
spade, a da,+ a basket, and also a caldron and other utensils are
scattered about, they may give thee shelter. Sitting ‘by
women on the wooden pestle and mortar, and also upon
udumbara wood,t and the utterance of sacred verses at the
privy, this shall be advantageous for thee, O goblin. Roam,
O Duhsaha, to thy heart’s content, in that house where all
kinds of corn whether cooked or uncooked, and where the
scriptures also are disdained. Endless misfortunes take up
their abode in that house, where fire lies upon the lid of the
caldron or is offered with the point of a spoon. Thou, O
goblin, and other Rūkshasas also shall have a dwelling in the
house, where human bones lie and where a corpse remains a
whole day and night. Resort at once tc those men who feed
on a kinsman’s pinda and water, without giving any to the


sapindas and sahodakas.
“ Abandon the house where the lotus and the white lotus


are found, where a maiden dwells who feeds on sweetmeats,$


* Mihisha (m?) ; iu this sense, not in the dictionary.
+ Datra, a large heavy knife witha curved-in point, used for all purposes


of cutting, chopping and splitting.


t This is forbidden becanse the tree is holy.


§ Modakišini ; a$in, from aś, to eat, not in tho dictionary.


256
93


94


96


97


CANTO L.


and where a bull and a fine elephant*
the habitation where the unarmed, the
bear arms without engaging in battle


are kept. Abandon
deities, and those who


, are esteemed worthy
of honour by men. Roam not in that house, where are cele-


brated as of yore the great urban and rural festivals which
were famous of old. Visit those unlucky men who fan them.
selves with winnowing fans,f and who bathe with the water
poured from jars§ or with the drops of water from cloths,
and with water splashed up by the tips of their nails, Join not
thyself with the man who establishes the country customs,
the conventional ordinances, the laws regarding kinsmen,


“who performs the victorious homa, oblation and the auspicious


sacrifice to the gods, who maintains perfect personal purifi-


cation according to the precepts, and who fashions the pub-
lic talk.” i


Markandeya spoke.
Having spoken thus to Duhsaha, Brahmá disappeared from `
sight there, and the other followed the command of the lotus-
born god. £


* For vrishabhairdvato read vrishabhairdvatuu ?
t For kalpyate read kalpyete or kalpyante 2
f This seems to be the best meaning; but if so Sirpa-vatin would be


more intelligiole.


§ Ye kurvanti must be understood.


THE OFFSPRING OF DUYSAHA, 259


Cano LI.


The Offspring of Duhsaha.
Duhsaha had eight sons and etght daughters—their names are


mentioned—The evil functions of the several sons and daughters are
described, and the remedies against them--Their offspring are men-
tioned, and their evil actions described.


These beings are almost all perscnifications of physical ¢ injuries,


moral vices and social offences.


Markandeya spoke.

_  Duhsaha had a wife named Nirmishti*; now she was be-

gotten in Kali’s wife when she saw a c’andala at the time of
her menstruation. They had sixteen children, who pervade
the world, eight sons and eight daughters, all very terrible.
Dantūkrishti and Ukti, and Parivarta the next, Anga-dhrish
and Sakuni and Ganda-pranta-rati, Garbha-han and the last
Sasya-han were their male children. And they had eight
daughters besides; hear their names from me. The first was
Niyojiks, aud the second Virodhini, and Svayam-hģra-kari,
Bhrémani, Ķitu-hārikā, and two other very terrible daughters
Smriti-harā and Vija-harā; and the eighth daughter was
named Vidveshani who causes terror to mankind.

I will describe what the several functions of the eight sons
are, and what ure the remedies against the evils which they
work; hearken to me, O brahman.

Dantākrishti+ taking his station in the teeth ot newly born
children produces intense wind,f with the desire of effecting


* Prof. Sir M. Monier- Williams gives the name as Nir-mūrshti (Uncleaned)


which seems preferable.
t Teeth-attraater, Lock-jaw ?


f Sam-harsha; or bristling of the huir of the body.
33


258


14


15


L7


18


CANTO LI.


an attack from Duhsaha, The remedy against him is to be
applied by men by means of white mustard cast upon the beq
and upon the teeth of the sleeping child; and by bathing it
with medicinal herbs of great splendour, by reciting good
scriptures,* and by supportingt it on a camel, a thorn, a
sword, a bone, or a linen cloth.

Now the second son assigns good and bad
while he says repeatedly, “let it be so!”
Ukti,t and that is his precise function. Hence wise men
must alvays say, * May fate be auspicious!” And when any-
thing bad is heard or spoken, let praise be offered to Siva,
and to Brahmá, the spiritual preceptor of all that exists both


moveable and immoveable, ard to each person’s own parti-
cular family-deity.


fortune to men,
; hence he ts called


The son who finds delight in always interchanging the
foetus bétween one womb and another, and in interchanging
the words in the mouth of a speaker, is called Parivartaka$ ;
a wise man should preserve himself against him by means of
white mustard and the ‘prayers and spells that destroy
Rakshasas.

And another son|| like the wind announces good and bad
fortune as indicated by throbbings in men’s bodies; and the
remedy against him is to strike the side of the body with kūsa
grass.

Another son Sakuni stationed ona crow or some other
bird, announces weal or woe’ by means of food or birds.**
With regard thereto, however, the Prajé-pati has said, “In
an evil matter delay and the abandonment of the undertaking
are best ; in a good matter one should act very speedily.”


* sac'c'hudstra read sac'c'hdstra.
or


t Vidhtraņa; not in the dictionary. f The Word of Fate.
$ The Interchanger. || Anga-dhrish, the Assailer of the body»
€ S'akuni, a Bird (in general). The word kus'alaiļ in the text is not sup-
ported by the MSS. and seems wrong. They read S'akunih (which I have
or $akunam, “an omen.”
mis this seems the best meaning; butit might also be read
kha-gatas as an adjéctive to S'akumiķ


19


20


2]


22


23


25


26


27


28


29


30


THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHA. 259


Another son* stationed in the borders of the cheeks for
half a muhūrta, O brūhman, consumes every undertaking, and
eulogium, and sincerity. By addresses to bréhmans, by
praise to the gods, and by extracting roots, O brāhman, by
ablutions with cows’ urine and mustard seed, so also by
worship paid to the constellacions and planets, and also by
the observance of righteousness and the Upanishads, by
repeatedly looking at weapons, and by contempt for birth
Gaņda-prānta-rati succumbs.

Another most terrible son,f moreover, destroys the fruit
of pregnant women. Women should always secure protection
against him by constant personal purification, by writing out
famous spells, by wearing auspicious garlands and other
decorations, by dwelling in well-cleaned houses, and by abstain-
ing from over-exertion, O brāhman

The other son Sasya-hant moreover is he who destroys the
growth of the crops. Against him indeed one should secure
protection by wearing worn-out shoes, and by walking on the
left side, and by causing a c'aņdūla to enter ths field, and by
offering the bali outside, and by eulogizing the soma juice.

And Niyojiki$ is the daughter who incites some men to
seize and otherwise molest other men’s wives and other men’s
goods. Immunity from her comes by reciting purifying
prayers, by refraining from anger, covetousness and other
passions, and by resistance with the thought ‘ She is inciting me
to these acts.’ When one is railed agaiust or beaten by
another, one should wisely think ‘she is inciting him,’ and
should not fall into subjection to her. In this mundane exis-
tence, where there are other men’s wives and other alluring
objects; the wise man should consider, ‘She is inciting my
mind and my soul here.’

And the next daughter who causes opposition between a
loving married couple, among relatives and friends, between
parents and children, and among fellow-caste-people||—


* Ganda-pranta-rati, the Reveller in the borders of the cheeks.


t Garbha-han, the Foetns-destroyer.
§ The Inciter.


t The Crop-destroyer.
|| Savarnika ; in this sense not in the dictionary


260 CANTO LI.


she is Virodhini.* One should secure

31 by offering the bali, by enduring outrageous language, and
by observing the šūstras and Virtuous Custom.

Another daughter destroys grain from


32 the milk from cows, and ghee, and the
things.


protection from her


granaries and houses,


produce from prolific
She is called Svayam-hārikā+ ; She is ever addicted


to concealment, She consumes the half-cooked food out of
the kitchen, and whatever is kept in the store-house; and she
always consumes whatever food is being served upj,
34 with the person who eats it.


83


along
She takes the remains of food
from men and also their food. She is hard to be restrained.$


She takes the success which men have accomplished from
their business offices and from their abodes, O brāhman. She
is constantly taking the fluid and the milk out of cows' ud-
ders and women's breasts, the ghee out of curdled milk, the
oil out of sesamum seed, and the spirituous liquor out of the
liquor-stores, the colour out of saffron|| and -other coloured
objects, and the thread out of cotton clothes. She is rightly
named Svayam-hārikā, for she is perpetually taking things
away, O brāhman. For the sake of protection against her one
should make a pair of peacocks and am artificial woman ;
and prophylactic marks should be drawn** on the house,
and allowing the house to be littered with fragments of foodtt
should be avoided, and vessels in which milk and other things
have been kept should certainly be cleaned with the ashes of
the incense offered to the gods in the sacrificial fire. AU that
is well-known to be a preservative.


39 Now the other daughter, who produces perturbation in a


35


36


37


38


* The Strife-maker. ‘+t The Voluntary thief.

$ For pari-vis'yamdņam read pari-vishyamdņam. This half-line has nine
syllables by poetic license.

§ The MSS. read dur-dhard instead of the text dur-hard, I have adopted
the former; the latter might mean “a confirmed thief.”

|| For kusambhuka read kusumbhaka? This would be the same as kusum-
bha, but is not in the dictionary.

q Rakshas. ## For lakhyd read lekhyd.

tt For c'a soshmatd another reading is c’oc’c’hishtatéd which I have adopted
s preferable.


THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHA. 261


40 man who dwells in one place, is called Bhramani.* Now a
man should secure protection against her by scattering white
mustard seed or his seat, on his bed, and on the ground

41 where he sits; and a man should reflect, ‘This wicked,
evil-minded creature causes me to go astray’; he should
mutter the ‘ Bhuvas’ hymn repeatedly, with composed mind.

42, Another daughter robs women of their monthly courses,
when they have begun and before they have begunt ; she is

43 known as Ritu-hdrikd,t the daughter of Duhsaties „One
should cause one’s women-folk to bathe at places of pilgrimage,
at temples, beside sacred public objects,§ on mountain tops,
at the confluence of rivers, and in excavated places in order

44 to subdue her. And one who knows the spells and knows
the principles of action should cause them to bathe at the four
changes of the moon and at dawn,|| O brahman; and a
physician4 who is skilled in medicine should cause them to
bathe with choice herbs combined together.

45 And Smriti-hārikā** is another daughter who deprives

` women of their memory. And she may be overcome by
observing places distinguished separately.

46 And Vijdpahérinit+ is another daughter very terrible,
who robs man and woman of their seed. And she may be
overcome by eating clean food and by bathing.

47 And the eighth daughter named Dveshaņi,tt who causes
terror among mankind, is she who renders a man, or even

48 a woman, newly hated. Now in order to vanquish her,

"one should offer an oblation$$ of sesamum seed moistened
with honey, milk and ghee; and one should also perform.
a sacrifice which will procure friends in order to van-
quish her.


€ The Bewilderer.
_ t For atha pravrittam another reading is tathdpravrittam which I have
adopted as preferable. A third reading is athdpavrittih.

t The Stealer of the Menses.

§ O'aitya; the primary meaning, “a funeral pile,” geoms inapprupriate
here.

|| For parvamtshasi read parvasishasi. or neduah read vaidyaņ.

*® The Stealer of the Memory. +t Ths Stealer of seed.

ft The Hater §§ Homayet; verb from homa? Not in the dictionary.


262
49


50


öl


52


60


61.


* For tapasds' read tapasdm P


CANTO Lī.


Now these sons and daughters have thirty-eight children,
O brahman; hear from me their names.

Vijalpa (Chatterer) was Dantakrishti’s daughter, and Kala-
há (Quarreller) also. Vijalpi indulges in contemptuous,
false and corrupt talk. In order to vanquish her, let the wise
house-holder ponder on her and preserve his self-control.
Kalaha is always creating disturbances in men’s houses; she
is the cause why families perish. Hearken how she may be
subdued. One should throw blades of durbā grass smeared
with honey, ghee, and milk in the bali ceremony, and offer a.
sacrifice to fire, and extol one’s friends, for the performance
of a. propitiatory rite to avert evil from all living beings, and
boys along with their mothers, and the sciences, and pe-
nances,* religious vows and the great moral duties.* In the
cultivation of land and in the profits of trade let men always
pacify me. And let the Kushmandas and the Yatu-dhanast
and whatever other beings are named according to their
classes, let these, when duly adored, always become pacified.
By the favour of Maha-deva,§ and by the counsel of Maheé-
varaļ| let all these soon become satisfied with regard to men.
When pleased let them cast aside every evil deed and evil
work, and every result that springs from the great sins, and
whatever else causes obstacles. By their favour indeed let
obstacles wholly perish. And in all marriages and in cere-
monies performed for increase of prosperity, in meritorious
undertakings and in religious devotion, and in the worship of
spiritual teachers and the gods, in the rites of prayer and
sacrifice, and in the fourteen pilgrimages, in the pleasures
enjoyable in bodily health, and in happiness, liberality and
wealth, and among the aged, children and the sick, let them
always pacify me.

Ukti had sons Soma-pi, Ambu-p4, and Ambho-dhi, and
Savitri, Anila and Anala; and he had also a son Kála-


t Samyamasya yamasya c'a.


t Two classes of evil-spirits. § S'iva. || Siva.
T That is, Soma-drinker, Water-drinker, Ocean, Sun, Wind and Fire. This
line, however. seems incongruous.


62


63


64


65


66


72


73


74


THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHA. 263


jihva* who resides in the palms.t He torments those bad
men in whose mothers he abides.

Now Parivarta had two sons, Viripat and Vikriti,§ O
bráhman ; and they both inhabit the tops of trees, ditches,
ramparts and thé sea. They both interchange the fœtus
from one pregnant woman to another, if she walks about
among trees and the other places which they frequent, O
Kraushtuki. In truth, a pregnant woman should not ap-
proach a tree, nor a mountain, nor a rampart, nor the sea,
nor a ditch.

Anga-dhrish begat a son, by name Pis'una. If he enters
the marrow inside men’s bones, he consumes the energy of
even invincible men.

Sakuni begat five sons, Syena (Hawk), Kaka (Crow), and
Kapot* (Pigeon) Gridhra (Vulture) and Ulúka (Owl).|| The
gods and the demons took them. And Mrityu (Death) took
Syena; Kala (Destiny) took Kaka ; and Nirriti (Destruction)
took Ulūka who causes great terror; Vyadhi (Sickness) took
Gridhra and was his lord; and Yama himself took Kapota.
And the evil beings which sprang from them are indeed said to
produce sin. Hence he, on whose head a hawk and the
other birds should alight, should take effectual pacificatory
measures for his safety, O brāhman. Jf they are born inside
a house or if likewise water should settle in a house, a man
should abandon that house and also a house on the top of
which pigeons alight. When a hawk, a pigeon, and a vul-
ture, a crow, and an owl have entered a house, O brahman,
one shonld prophesy the end of the residents in that dwelling.
A wise man should abamdon such a house and should employ
pacificatory measures. Even in sleep indeed it is unlucky to
see a pigeon.

And the offspring of Ganda-pranta-rati are said to be six
im number. They dwell in women’s menses. Hear from me


* Black-tongue.

+ For tdla-niketanah read tdlu-niketanah, who resides in the palate ?
t Deformed. $ Ill-health.

|| For gridhroliikais’ read gridhroltikdu ?


964 CANTO LI.


also their peculiar periods. Of his offspring one takes possession
of the first four days after menstruation and the thirteenth
75 day; and another is powerful on the eleventh day; another
at dawn ; and two others on occasions of srāddhas and alms-
76 giving; and another at festivals; hence these days should be
shunned. by the wise in sexual intercourse.
Garbha-hantri had a son Nighna* and a daughter Mohani.+
77 The former enters within and eats the fœtus; and after he
has eaten it, the latter beguilest it. Through her beguiling,
78 the offspring are born as snakes, frogs, tortoises, and reptiles
also, or yet again as ordure. The son may enter into the six-
months pregnant woman who in waywardness eats flesh§ ; or
79 into the woman, who seeks the shade of a tree by night or
at a place where three or four roads meet, who stands in a
burning-ground or any place pervaded by strong smells, who
80 leaves off her upper garment, or who weeps at midnight.
And Sasya-hantri kad one son named Kshudraka (Puny).
81 He is constantly injuring the growth of the crops, when he
has gained a weak place. Listen thereto. And he, who sows
82 highly pleased at the beginning of an inauspicious day, pro-
vides an entrance behind him for this sprite into the fields
which touch other fields along their boundaries.|| Hence it
is the proper practice that a man should worship the moon,
83 and then carry out his undertaking and sow his seed in glad-
ness and contentment, with a companion.
84 Niyojikā, who was Duhsaha’s daughter as I have said,
gave birth to four daughters who bear the names Prac’odiké
(Instigator), Matt (Intoxicated), Unmatté (Frantic) and Pra-
matté (Wanton). Now they are always entering into young
women in order to destroy them, and incite them here vehe-
mently towards unrighteousness with the appearance of
righteousness, and to love which bears no appearance of love,
86 and to that which is not wealth with the appearance of


85


* Nighna means “dependant”; bnt here it rather seems to mean “ slayer.”
+ Beguiler. t Mohayate.

§ For gurviņtf-mūmsam read gurvintm mdmsam,

|| Antopasangishu. Upa-sangin, a word not in the dictionary.


87


88


89


90


91


92


93


94


95


96


97


THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHBA. 265


wealth, and to a final emancipation from existence which
bears no appearance of final emancipation. Evilly disposed
without purity they lead young women to gaze at strange men;
those angry sprites* cause strange men to wander near women
for the sake of philandering. Those female sprites enter into
a house and into clothing when they are reddened by sunset,t
and wherever the baliis not offered to Dhātri and Vidhātri
at the proper time. They make a suddenļ attack upon men
and women$ among those people who eat or drink with drops
of water clinging to them.

Virodhini kad three sons, O’odaka (Instigator)|| and Grá-
haka (Seizer) and the other Tamah-prac'c'hādaka (Gloom-
enveloper). Hear their characters from me. Where the
pestle and mortar, and where a woman’s shoes and her upper
and lower garments are befouled by contact with burning oil,
and are disdained; and where people use a seat, after first
drawing it to them with a winnowing basket or a hatchet or
other implement or with their foot ; and where pastime is held
in a house without respecting the place which has been smeared
and cleaned ; where fire is taken up and carried elsewhere in
the bowl of a spoon—there Virodhini’s sons are impelled and
display their activity. One dwells in men's and women's
tongues and utters falsehood as truth; he is called C’odaka ;
he works calumny in the house, And another who acts with
care dwells in the ears and is exceedingly evil-minded ; he
takes hold of people's words; so he is called Grāhaka. The
third is he who, with evil mind, attacks men’s minds and
enveloping them with darkness arouses anger; 30 he ts called
Tamah-prac'c'hādaka.

Now Svayam-hāri gave birth to three sons br C'aurya
(Theft), Sarva-hūri,T Arddha-hāri,** and also Virya-hari.tt


* For tdbhir ashtdbhik read tdbht rushfābhi).


+ The text violates sandhi and seems obscure.
reading, sandhyd-rakte hy
t For dsv read ds’v ?
|| For O'odaka-grdhakas read c'odako grdhakas ?

af He who steals the whole.


I have adopted a different


-athdmbare instead of sandhyarksheshu udumbare.
§ For nava-ndrfshu read nara-nārisht.


*% THe who steals half


tt Ho who steals one’s vigour


34


266 CANTO LI.


In the houses of those who do not rinse their mouths out after
meals, and in the houses of those who observe bad customs,
98 and among those who enter the kitchen with unwashed feet,
and in granaries snd cattle-pens and houses where perfidy
99 prevails—in such places all these sprites fittingly sport and
have their pleasure.
Now Bhrāmaņi had one son; he is known as Kāka-jangha
100 (Crow-leg). No one possessed by him can get pleasure in
the town. He enters into the man, who while eating sings
to a friend, and who sings and laughs at the same time, and
101 who indulges in sexual intercourse during the twilight, O
brahman.
The daughter Ritu-hāriņi gave birth to three daughters ;
102 the first daughter was Kuc’a-hard,* the next Vyanjana-hšri.
103 ka,t and the third daughter was called Jita-hdrini.t The
first robs of both breasts the maiden, all whose marriage rites
are not performed duly, or are performed after the prescribed
104 time. And the second robs of her signs of puberty the mar-
ried maiden, who has been married without duly offering the
sraddha, and without paying due reverence to her mother.
105 When the lying-in chamber is destitute of fire and water, and
is devoid of incense, when it has no lamp or weapon or pestle,
106 when it is destitute of ashes§ and mustard-seeed, the third
daughter enters in, and bringing about immediate delivery
snatches away the new-born child, and castes the child away
107 in that very place, O brihman; she is called Jāta-hāriņi;
very terrible is she, she feeds on flesh. Hence one should
strenuously guard against her in the lying-in chamber.

And she, who destroys the memory of men destitute of gelf-
control through inhabiting empty abodes, had a son, b
109 Pra-c'aņda (Impetuous). From his gon’s sons were born the

Likas|| in hundreds and thousands and eight tribes of C'an-
110 dalas, very terrible with staves and nooses, Then the Likas and
those tribes of C’andalas were possessed by hunger, and ran at


108


y name


# She who steals the breasts,
t She who steals new-born children,
|| A class of evil spirits.


+ Sho who steals the signs of puberty
§ Bhūti,


THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHA. 267


111 one another, desirous of eating one another, But Pra-c’anda
restrained the several tribes of C'andālas, and established
them with such and such ordinances: hear what those are,

112 Hearafter from to-day whoever shall give a dwelling to the
Likas, I will assuredly cause an unparalleled punishment to

113 fall on him. The female Lika who shall give birth to off-
spring in the dwelling of a C’andéla,* her child shall die first
and she also shall perish at once.

114 Now Vija-harini, who robs man and woman of their seed,
gives birth to two daughters, Vata-ripat and A-rūpā. I

115 will tell thee of her method of attack, The man or the wife,
to whom Váta-rúpá casts a son at the end of the impregnation,
suffers from the seminal secretion becoming dried up through

116 disorder of the wind within the body.§ Similarly both the
man who eats without first bathing, and the man who eats
flesh,|| are deprived of their seed at once by A-rūpš. A man
or a woman, if he or she neglects personal cleanliness, lapses
into sterility. T

117 Now the daughter called Vi-dveshaņí has a countenance
‘rugged with frowns. She had two sons, Apa-kāra** and Pra-

118 kégaka.t+ These two sons come to a man, who delights
in calumny, who is inconstant, and who uses impure water,
119 and who hates mankind, and stay with him permanently.
Hated by mother, by brother, by beloved friends, by kinsmen,
120 by strangers, » man perishes from righteousness or wealth.
Now one son, working sin, divulgesjj men’s peculiar qualities
121 in the world; and the second plucks away§§ one’s good
qualities and the friendship that exists among people.


* O'aņddla-yonyo ’vasathe seem wrong ; read c'aņddla-yony-avasathe instead P


+ She who has the form of wind. t Form-less.

S Vfta-Sukra-tvam ; such is said to be the meaning of this word.

|| Viyoginaf in the text seems wrong. I have adopted another reading,
yo vai tathaiva pigitdšanaļ for yo 'sau tuthd c'dpi viyoginah.

€T This sentence is made the first line of verse 118 inthe text, and is
clearly ont of place there. I have placed it after verse 116 which is the na-
tural context.

#e Apa-karsha, which must be the real name of the son (see verse 121) is
preferable to Apa-kéra, for neither son has anything to do with injuries ; but:
all the MSS. read apakdra, and I have not ventured to alter it.

tt That is, Divnlger. tt Pra-kišoyati. $$ Apa-karahati.


268 CANTO LIT.


All these are the offspring of Duķsaha, in the pedigree
of that goblin*; they are notorious as observers of wicked
customs; it is they who have overspread the whole world,


Canto LIIL.


The Oreation and Appellations of the Rudras.

Mdrkaņdya narrates the creation of Rudra in his eight personalities
—and mentions their names, stations, wives and sons—He mentions
briefly the wives and offspring of the rishis, Bhrigu (from whom he
himself was descended), Maric'i, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Vasishtha, and Agni, and also of the Pitris.


Markandeya spoke.


1 Such was the creation, which Brahmá of inscrutable origin
made, characterized by darkness. ! will tell thee of the
creation of the Rudras. Hearken to me while I narrate it.

2 ‘Now they were eight sons indeed of Brahmd, and they had
wives and children.

At the beginning of the kalpa, while the Lord was medi-

3 tating about a son who should be his equal, there appeared
in his lap a youth blue and red in colour ; and running about

4 he cried with a sweet voice, O brāhman. * Why criest
thou?” answered Brahmá to him as he cried, “Give me &

5 name,” then replied he to the lord of the world. “ Thou art
named ‘Rudra,’+ O divine one; cry not, assume some forti-

6 tude,” thus was he addressed. Then he cried seven times more,
and the Lord gave him seven other names, and stations for

7 these eight personalities, and wives and sons, O brihman. The
Lord, the forefather, called him Bhava, Sarva, and Isina,

8 and Pasu-pati, Bhima, Ugra, and Mahā-deva. He gave these

names, and assigned stations for these—the sun, water, the

earth, fire, tho wind, and the ether, an initiated brāhman,


€ For yakshanah read yakshasya P


+ Bye pun on the root rud, to ory, to weep; rudra would thus moan
crier,” '' weeper.” {


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


THE CREATION AND APPELLATIONS OF THE RUDRAS. 909


and the moon. These were the wives* in order,—Su-varc'a-
nā, and Umā, and Vi-keši, and the next Svadhs, Svāli, the
Digast and Dikshā, and Rohini in due order—of the sun and
the other stations, O brahman, together with Rudra and the
other names. And there were born to him gradually C'ara,
and Sukra, Lohitanga, Mano-java, Skanda, and Sarga, San-
tána and Budha successively.

Such was Rudra himself. He found Sati for his wifet ;
and. through Daksha’s curse Sati quitted her body. She
was the daughter of Himavat by Mend, O brahman; her
brother was Maindka, the chiefest friend of Ambho-dhi (the
Ocean.) And the lord Bhava married her again as his only
wife.

Khyáti the wife of Bhrigu§ gave birth to the two gods
Dhatri and Vidhftri, and to S’ri who was the wife of the
supreme god Niérdyana. Ayati and Niyati were the two
daughters of high-souled Meru; they became the wives of
Dhātri and Vidhdtri. A son was born from each of them,
both Prana and Mrikanda.

The latter was my illustrious father. I am his son by
Manasvini ; Veda-širas is my son, he was born of Dhūmravatī.

Hear also from me of the offspring of Prāya. Dyutimūn
was the son begotten by Prana, and A-jaras was his son
also; from them both issued many sons and grandsons.

Sambhūti was the wife of Maric’i||; she brought forth
Paurna-misa; he high-souled man had two sons Vi-rajas and
Parvata; but I will defer mentioning their sons till I detail
the genealogies, O brāhman

And Smriti was the wife of Angiras, ond daughters were
born of her, S'infbali, and Kuhu, Ráká and Bhanumati.

Moreover, An-asty4 gave birth by Atri** to sons without
blemish, Soma, and Durvāsas and the yogi Dattūtreya.

Dattoli was born the son of Pulastyatt by his wife Priti:


* Tanavah. + The eight regions of the sky.
t See Canto L, verses 22-25, $. See Canto L, versas 22-25.
|| See Canto L, verses 22-25. | See Canto L, verses 22:25.


%% For anusúyd read anasúyá ; sce canto L, vorses 23-25,
+t See Canto L, versos 22-25.


270 | CANTO LII.


23 he was known as Agastya in a previous life during the
Svāyambhuva Manv-antara. i
Now Kshamā, the wife of the Prajé-pati Pulaha* brought
24 forth three sons, who were Kardama, and Arva-vira and
Sahishnu.
Now Sannati was the wife of Kratu+; she gave birth to
25 the Bālikhilyas, the sixty thousands, which they are, of rishis
who live in perpetual chastity.t

Now seven sons were born of Urjé by Vasishtha,§ Rajas,
Gātra and Urdhva-bšhu, and Sa-bala, and An-agha, Su-tapas,
Sukta; all these are well-known as seven Rishis.

Agni, who is arrogant, was the eldest son of Brahmá; by
him Syah4|| begat three sons of exalted vigour, O brāhman,
Pāvaka, and Pavamana, and Suc'i who pervades] water;
but in descent from them were forty and five others. These
and the father and his three sons are often spoken of as the
invincible and illustrious forty and nine.

Brahmá created the Pitris** whom I have mentioned to
thee, who are the Agni-shvāttas,t* the Barhi-shads,tt those
who did not maintain the sacred fire on earth and those who
did maintain the fire.$$ By them Svadhiļ||| gave birth to
two daughters, Mená and Dhāriņi; they both were teachers
of the Veda, and they both were female yogis.


26


27


29


30


31


* Bee canto L, verses 22-25.

t For drādha-ratasdm read drddhva-retasdm.
§ See canto L, verses 23-25.

|| For kháhá read svdhd ; see canto L, verses 23-25.

€ Jalāšinam.

** This account differs from what Manu says (III, 193-199).

+t The Manes, especially of those who on earth negleoted the sacrificial


fire. tt A particular olass of the Pitris.
S$ An-agnayas and sdgnayas; these appear to be the same as Manu's
Agni-dagdhas and An-agni-dagdhas, (III. 109). :
ll] Sce canto L, 23-25.


+ See canto L; verses 22-25. - ~


THE SVĀYAMBHUVA MANVANTARA. 271


Canto LIII.


The Story of the Suéyambhuva Manv-antara.

Markandeya states the duration of the Manv-antaras, and mentions
the names of the Manus past, present and future—He mentions the
descendants of Manu Svdyambhuva and his son Priya-vrata, and
explains how the whole world with its seven continents was peopled
by them and divided among them—Jambu-dvipa was assigned to
Priya-vrata's son Agnidhra, and was portioned out among Agnidhra’s
sons—Hīs eldest son Ndbhi begot Rishabha, and Vaska begot
Bharata, to whom India was assigned.


Kraushtuki spoke.


1 Adorable Sir! I wish to hear fully of this Sváyambhuva
Manv-antara also which thou hast mentioned. Tell me of it,

2 and also of the duration of this Many-antara, and its gods and
rishis, and the kings who ruled during it, and also who was
the lord of the gods during it, adorable Sir!

Markandeya spoke.

3 The duration of the Manv-antaras has been declared to be
the four yugas multiplied by seventy-one and a fraction.*
Hear the duration of a Manv-antara from me in human

4 reckoning. Thirty times ten millions are announced, and
twenty thousands, and sixty-seven lakhst more by computa-

5 tion—this is the length of the Manv-antara in human years,
omitting the fraction: itis known to be eight hundreds of

6 thousands and fifty two thousands more besides of years by
the divine reckoning.

At first was the Manu Svaéyambhuva, then the Mann

7 Grade. Auttama,f and Tūmasa, Raivata, and O’akshusha ;
these six Manus have passed, and Vaivasvata ts the Manu now.

8 These are to come, the five Sivarnas and Ruuc'ya, and
Bhautya.§ Of these I will tell thee fully afterwards in con-


* See Canto XLVI, verses 34—38.

+ Niyuta. Verses 4, 5 and 6 agree with Canto XLVI, verses 95—37.

f For auttamas read auttamis.

§ The text appears to be wrong. For Sdvarnih panc'a raic'ydsc’a bhauryds
read Sduarndh panc'a rauc yasc'a bhautyas. Tho five Sūvarņu or Būvurņi Manus


-


272


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17
18


19


20


CANTO LIII.


nexion with their respective Manv-antaras; and of their goda
and rishis, and the lords of the Yakshas and the Pitris who
lived during each, of their commencement and end, O brahman.

Hear who were his offspring, and who were the wives of:
those their high-souled sons.

Now Manu Svāyambhuva had ten sons equal to himself,
by whom all this tributary earth with its seven continents,
with its mountains, and with its oceans was peopled accord-
ing to its countries. It was first peopled in the Sviyam-
bhuva period in the Krita and Tret4 ages by the sons of
Priya-vrata and the grandsons of Svayambhuva.

A daughter was begotten of Prajā-vati by the hero Priya-
vrata. Now that illustrious daughter gave birth through tho
Praji-pati Kardama to two daughters and ten* sons; those
two daughters were Samrājt and Kukshi; their ten brothers
were warriors equal to the Prajd-pati their father. Agnidhra,
and Medhā-tithi, and Vapush-mat{ the next, Jyotish-mat,
Dyuti-mat. Bhavya, Savana, they were seven of them indeed.
Priya-vrata anointed those seven as kings over the seven
continents. According to that his statute, hear their conti-
nents also from me.

Their father made Agnidhra thus king over Jambu-dvipa ;
and he made Medhā-tithi lord over Plaksha-dvipa ; and he
made Vapush-mat lord of Slmali, Jyotish-mat lord over
Kuša-dvipa, Dyuti-mat lord over Kraunc'a-dvipa, Bhavya
lord over Saka-dvipa, and his son Savana ruler over Push-
kara-dvipa.

Mahd-vita and Dhštaki were the two sons of Savana, the
ruler over Pushkara-dvipa ; he divided the Pushkara§ land
into two parts, and assigned to them une part each.


are n”. 8 Savarni, n°. 9 Dakhsha-sfvarņi, n°. 10 Brahma-sfvarņi, n°. 11 Dliar-
ma-sģrarņi and n°, 12 Rudra-sfvarņi.


* Onlv seven are mentioned in verse 15,
4 This name as a feminine is not in the Dictionary.


t Vapushyot in the toxt seems incorrect: Vapush-mat is gīven corrcotly
in verses 48. and 26.


y For pushkarah road pushkaram ?


21
22


23


24:


31


32


33


34


35


THE SVAYAMBHUVA MANVANTĀRA. 273


Bhavya had seven sons, hear them by name from me;
both Jala-da, and Kumara, Su-kumára, Manivaka, and Kušot-
tara, Medhģvin, and Mahž-druma the seventh. He portioned
out for them countries in S4ka-dvipa, which were named after
them.

Moreover Dyuti-mat had seven sons; hear them also from
me; Kušala, and Manu-ga, Ushna, and Prakara, Artha-kéraka,
and Muni, and Dundubhi who was famed as the seventh.
And they had countries in Kraunc'a-dvipa, which were named
after them,

In Ku$a-dvipa itself also there were seven countries called
by the names of the sons of Jyotish-mat; hear their names
from me—Ud-bhida, and Vaiņava, Su-ratha, and Lambana,
Dhritimat, and Prākara, and Kapila the seventh.

And Vapush-mat the lord of Silmali had seven sons, bots
Sveta, and Harita, Jimūta, and Rohita, Vaidyute, and Mána-
sa, and Ketu-mat the seventh. And they had seven countries
in Sālmali, which bore the same names.

Medh4-tithi, the lord of Plaksha-dvipa had seven sons, and
Plaksha-dvipa was divided into seven parts by the countries
which were named after them, first the Siéka-bhava country.
then Sišira, Sukhodaya, and Ananda, and Siva, and Kshe-
maka, and Dhruva. 4

In the five continents, which begin with Plaksha-dvipa and
end with Sfka-dvipa, righteousness also must be known as
arising from the divisions of the castes and the several stages
of a bréhman’s life. The righteousness which is settled,* and
springs from one’s natural disposition, and is exempt from
the rules of harmlessness is well-known to be universal in
these five continents.

His father Priya-vrata gave Jambu-dvipa to Agnidhra at
the frst, O brāhman. He had nine sons indeed, who were
equal to the Prajé-pati Priya-vrata. The eldest was named
Nabhi; his younger brother was Kim-purusha; the third son
the fourth was Ildvrita; and the fifth


was Havir-varsha ;
sixth was called Hiraņya; the seventh


son was Vaéya; the
# Nitya.
35


274 CANTO LIII.


of them was Kuru; the eighth was known as Bhadráśva - ; and
the ninth was Ketu- mála. Designated by their names was
the arrangement of their countries.

36 Perfection exists naturally in Kim-purusha, and the other
continents,* with the exception of that named from the
mountain Himat; and the perfection is almost complete hap-

37 piness which comes without exertion. There is no adversity
there, nor old age, death or fear; neither righteousness nor
unrighteousness existed there, nor had the people differences of

38 position, such as high, low or middling; nor have the four
ages existed there, nor periodic times, nor the seasons of the
year. ;

Now Agnidhra’s son Nábhi had a son Rishabha, O bréhman.

39 Rishabha begot Bharata, a hero, the best among his hundred

sons. Rishabha having anointed his son in his stead betook

“himself to the strictest life of a wandering religious mendi-

cant, and devoted himself to austerities, an illustrious hermit,
dwelling in Pulaha’s hermitage. His father gave Bharata
the southern country named after the mountain Himaj;

4) hence the country is called Bhšrata after the name of that

high-sonled king. Bharata also had a righteous son called

Su-mati; and Bharata transferred the kingdom to him and

lege to the forest.

Now during the Sviyambhuva ‘period Priya-vrata’s sons,
and their sons and grandsons enjoyed§ the earth with its

seven continents. This was the Svāyambhuva creation; I


44 have narrated it to thee, O bréhman. What else shall I
fully tell thee of in the first Manv-antara ?


42,


43


* For kimpurushdkhydni read kimpurushdāyāni ?
+ Himthvaya. See also verses 40 and 41 where this is said tobe a name
for India. This meaning is not in the dictionary,


1 Himéhva ; this meaning, ‘ India,” is not in the dictionary.
§ For dhuktvd read bhuktd,


THE DESCRIPTION OF JAMBU-DVIPA, 275


Canto LIV,


The description of Jambu-dvipa,

Markandeya tells Kraushtuki further the size of the earth, and th»
order and dimensions of the seven continents and their oceans—He
describes Jambu-dvipa, the countries in it, and Meru and the other
mountains ; and mentions various local facts,

Kraustuki spoke.

How many are the continents, and how many the oceans,
and how many are the mountains, O brāhman? And how
many are the countries, and what are their rivers, O Muni?
And the size of the great objects of nature,* and the Loké-
loka mountain-range; the circumference, and the size and
the course of the moon and the sun also—tell me all this at
length, O great Muni.

Markandeya spoke.

The earth is fifty times ten million yojanast broad in
every direction,f O brūhman. I tell thee of its entire consti-
tution, hearken thereto. The dvipas which I have mentioned
to thee, began with Jambu-dvipa and ended with Pushkara-
dvipa, O illustrious brahman; listen further to their dimen-
sions. Now each dvipa is twice the size of the dvipa which
precedes it in this order, Jambu, and Plaksha, Salmala, Kuéa,
Kraunc'a and Saka, and the Pushkara-dvipa. They are
completely surrounded by oceans of salt water, sugar-cane
juice, wine, ghee, curdled milk, and milk, which increase
double and double, compared with each preceding one.

I will tell thee of the constitution of Jambu-dvfpa; hearken
tome. It is a hundred thousand yojanas in breadth and length,
it being of a circular shape.$ Himavat, and Hema-kita,
Nishadha,|| and Meru, Nila, Sveta and Sringin are the soven


* Mahé-bhita. + This word must obviously be supplied; see verse 8,
t Taking the yojana as 40,000 feet (seeOanto xlix, 40), this diameter of the


rth equals 3,787,878,788 miles. A
§ Vrittau. This distance cannot apply to the ciroumference (vritti) aa well,
* the ciroumference, length and breadth cannot all be the same.

|| The text reads Ķishabhs, which disagrees with other Purénas and verses


and 28.


276 CANTO LIY.


10 great mountain-systems* in it. Two of these great moun-
tain-rangest are a hundred thousand yojanas in extent, and
are situated in the middle of Jambu-dvipa ; there are two more
mountain-ranges which are south of those two, and two more
which are north. They are severally less by ten and ten
thousand yojanas in length}; they are alltwo thousand yojanas
12 in height, and they have the same breadth. And six of
the mountain-ranges in itextend into the sea. The earth
is low on the south and north, it is highly elevated in the
middle.
On the southern half of the elevated ground§ are three
countries, and on the north are three. Ildvrita is situated
between those halves, and is shaped like the half-moon.
14 Eastof it is Bhadraéva, and west is Ketu-mila.||
Now in the middle of Ildvrita is Meru, the mountain of
gold. The height of that immense mountain is eighty-four]
thousand yojanas; it penetrates downwards sixteen thousand
yojanas, and it is just sixteen thousand yojanas broad; and
since it is fashioned like a cup,** it is thirty-two thousand
yojanas broad at the summit. It is white, yellow, black and
red on the east and other sides consecutively ; and a brāhman,
a vaišya, a Sūdra, and a kshatriya are stationed there according
to the castes. Moreover, upon it on the east and the seven
18 other directions of the sky consecutively} are the Courts of Indra
® Varsha-parvata.


+ Nishadha on the south of Meru, and
Vishņu-Puršņa, Bk. II, ch. ii..


11


13


15


16


17


Nila on the north, according to the


ft The text of the first line of verse 11 seems wrong: read instead, as in the
MS.—Daéabhir dašabhir nytindh sahasrais te parasparam. Hema-kúța (south
of Nishadha) and S’veta (north of Nila) are 90,000 yojanas long. Himavat
(south of Hema-kūta) and S'ringin (north of 8'veta) are 80,000 yojanas long-


The decrease is due to their position in the circle of the earth. See Vishnu-
Purana, Bk. IL., ch. ii. S Vedi.

|| These are the nine countries mentioned in canto liii, verses 82-35.

47 For c’atur'-asttt read c'atur-aftti ?


% S'arāva; other authorities compare it to the inverted seed vessel of 8
lotus, which is somewhat like an inverted cone.


tt The MS. reads puryo dikshu for pifruddishu, with practically the same
meaning.


THE DESCRIPTION OF JAMBU-DVIPA. 277


and the other Loka-pālas; and in the centre is Brahma’s
Court, which is fourteen thousand yojanas high.
19 Moreover below it are the subjacent hills* with a height
of ten thousand yojanas. On the east and other sides con-
20 secutively are the mountains Mandara, Gandha-mddana, and
Vipula, and Su-pāršvat ; they are decorated with trees as
standards. The kadam treet is the standard on Mandara,
2) the jambu tree§ on Gandha-mādana, and the agvattha treeļļ on
Vipula, and the great banyan on Su-párśva. These mountains
22 are eleven hundred yojanas in extent. Jatnara and Deva-
kūta are two mountains on the east side; they str’ ` up to
Nila aud Nishadha without any space intervening between
93 them. Nishudha** and Paripatra are on the west side of Meru;
these two mountains, like the two former, extend to Nila
24 and Nishadha. Kailása and Himavat are two great mountains
on the south; they stretch east and west; they extend inte
25 theocean. Sringdvat aud Jūrudhi, moreover, are two moun-
tains on the north; they, like the two on the south, extend
26 into the ocean.t+ These eight are called the boundary moun-
tains, O brdhman. Hima-vat, Hema-kūta and the other
27 mountains comprise, one with another, nine thousand yojanas,
eastward, westward, southward and northward. Similarly
Meru stretches to the four quarters in the middle in Ilavrite.
98 The fruits which the jambutt tree produces on the mountain


* Vishkambha-parvata.

+ Mandara is on the Hast; Gandhé-médana on the South ; Vipula on the
West; and Su-pūršva on the North. See Canto lvi, verses 7, 18 and 16.

f See note **, page 25.

§ Eugenia Jambolana, Hooker, vol. II, p. 499; Roxb. p. 898. A large trov,
common everywhere, with a rather crooked trunk, shining leaves, and edible
fruit. The bark yields brown dyes.

„|| Calléd algo pippala ; Ficus religiosa (Oliver, p. 272; Roxb. p. 642); the
modern peepul; a large sprending tree with a grateful shade, common every
where. See also note *, p. 33.

G Vata, Ficus benghalensis (Oliver, p. 272; F. indica, Roxb. p. 639), the
large, common, well-known tree. #* Read Rishabha ?
+t For antarvdntar read arnavdntar ?
tt For jambd road jambud f


278 OANTO LV.


29
30


31


32


Gandha-mādana, are as large as an elephant’s body; they
fall on the top of the mountain. From their juice Springs
the famous Jambū river, in which is found the gold called
Jāmbū-nada. That river passes around Meru and then
enters Jambū-mila, O brāhman; and those people drink of it,

In Bhadrāšva Vishnu is figured with a horse's head; in
Bhirata* he has the shape of a tortoise; and he is like a
boar in Ketu-méla; and he has a fish’s form in the north.
In all those four countries, worldly affairs are governed
by the arrangement of the constellations, O brahman; the
people there study the influence of the planets.


Canto LV.


The Geography of Jambu-dvipa.


Mérkandeya mentions the forests and lakes and mountains around


Meru—aAll the heavenly beings dwell in that region where there is


the most charming scenery—Bhirata alone is the land of action, which
entails merit and sin.


K


Markandeya spoke.


Hear from me of the four forests and lakes which exist on
Mandara and the three other mountains, O bhrāhman. On
the eastis the forest named O’aitra-ratha, on the southern
mountain the forest Nandana, on the western mountain the
forest Vaibhrāja, and on the northern mountain the forest
Sfvitra. On the east is the lake Aruņoda,f and on the south
Minasa, on the west of Morn is Sitoda, and Mahé-bhadra on
the north.

On the east of Mandara are the mountains S ttārtta,$ and
C’akra-munja, and Kulira, Su-kanka-vat, and Mani-éaila,
Vrisha-vat, Mahi-nila, Bhavāc'ala, Sa-bindu, Mandara, Venu,
Tāmasa, and-Nishadha, and Deva-$aila.


* For bhárite read bkdrate ?


+ For $ailashu read šaileshu, f Or Varuņoda, see Canto lvi, verse 6.
§ B'ttūrttat read Sttdntaf? Bee verse 17, and Canto lvi, verse 6.


6


THE GEOGRAPHY OF JAMBU-DVIPA. 279


The mountain Sikhara with its three peaks.* and Kalinga,
Patangaka, Ruc'aka, and the mountain Sūnu-mat, and Tām-
raka, Visūkha-vat, Svetodara, and Sa-mūla, and Vasu-dhāra,
Ratna-vat, Hka-gringa, Maha-saila, Raja-saila, Pipāthaka, and
Panc’a-gaila, Kaildsa, and Hima-vat the loftiest of mountains;
these mountains are said to lie on the south side of Meru.

Su-raksha,t and Sisiraksha, Vaidurya, and Kapila,ž and
Pinjara, Mahs-bhadra, Su-rasa, Kapila, Madhu, Anjana,
Kukkuta, Krishna, and Pandura tlīe loftiest of mountains,
and the mountain Sahasra-sikhara, Pāripūtra, and Sringa-
vat; these mountains are well-known as lying'on the west of
Meru beyond the subjacent hills§ which are on the west side.

Hear yet the other mountains on the north. S ankha-kūta,
Vrishabha, and the mountain Hamsa-nābha, and the moun-
tain Kapilendra, Sinu-mat, and Nila, Svarna-éringin, S'áta-
éringin, Pushpaka, Megha-parvata, Virajiksha, Varihūdri,
Mayūra, and Jārudhi ; these are said to be the mountains On
the north of Mert, O brāhman. .

The valleys among these mountains are exceedingly charm-
ing; they are decorated with forests and lakes of the clearest
water. In them men are born who practise meritorious deeds,
O bréhman. These are terrestrial Svargas, O brāhman ; they
surpass Svarga with their excellences. In them no fresh
merit or sin accrues. Even the gods are said to enjoy merit
in them. And on these mountains, Sitdntaļ| and the rest, O
bréhman, are the great and resplendent abodes of the Vidyé-
dharas, the Yakshas, the Kin-naras, the Nagas, and the
Rākshasas, and the gods, and the Gandharvas, which possess
great merit and are studded with charming groves which the
gods frequent. And the lakes are charming; the breeze is


* See.Canto lvi, verse 9. S/ikhara must be first mountain on the south,
and tri-kéta must be an adjective qualifying it.


+ See Canto lvi, verse 14.
f The text “Kapila” seems erroneous, as it mentions Kapila again in the


next line. Another reading is Pingala.


§ For viskambhdt read vishkambhdt ; see Canto liy, verse 19.
|| See verse 4.


280 CANTO Lv.


20 pleasant at every season. Nor anywhere on these mountains
do men have any kind of mental agitation.

21 Thus have I told thee of that four-leaved lotus-flower
which is the earth ; its leaves are Bhadráśva, Bhárata and
the other countries on the four sides. The country named

22 Bharata, which I have told thee of on the south, is the land
of action; nowhere else is merit and sin acquired; this must
be known to be the chief country, wherein everything is

23 fixedly established.* And from ita man gains Svarga and
final emancipation from existence, or the human world and
hell, or yet again the brute-condition, O brahman.


Canto LVI.


The Descent of the Ganges.

Karkan describes the course of the River Ganges from the moon
on to mount Meru, then in four streams flowing east, south, west and
north, of which the southern stream was allowed by S'iva to flow
through India at the entreaties of King Bhagiratha.

He describes briefly the happy condition of all the other countries
(except India) in Jambu-dvipa.

Markandeya spoke.

The foot of Nūršyaņa, moreover, who is the origin of the
universe, supports the earth. The divine river Ganges
2 which issued thence flows in three courses. She enters the

moon, which is the womb of the nectar and the receptacle of
the waters, and thence, having purified with her contact the
rays of the sun} which is indissolubly connected with the moon,
3 she fell on the summit of Meru, and then divided into four
streams. As she fell from the summit and the sides and the
outer bounds of Meru, she turned around, and finding no
4 support fell scattering her waters widely. Dividing her
waters equally at the foot of Mandara and the three other


5 mountains, she fell, piling high the rocks broken off from their
bases by her waters.


1


€ Prati-shthita.
+ Jagad-yonim in the text seems impossible. Read jagad-yoneh ?
t Or, being purified by contact with the rays of the sun.


THE DESCENT OF THE GANGES FROM MERU. 281


The eastern stream, which is celebrated by its name Sité,*
6 flowed to the forest C’aitra-ratha,f and overflowing it, passed
on to the lake Varuņoda,ž and thence to the mountain
Sitanta,§ and thence to the other mountains on the east in
7 order. Descending to the earth in her course, she flowed
from Bhadrāšva into the ocean.
Moreover the second stream called Alaka-nandé flowed
8 south towards Gandha-mddana into the forest Nandana that
delights the gods and that lies at the foot of Meru, and over-
9 flowed the lake Minasa with great force, and reached the de-
lightful kingly mountain Sikhara,|| and thence overflowed all
10 the mountains which I have mentioned in order on the south,
and reached the lofty mountain Hima-vat. There the bull-
11 bannered Siva held her and would not let her go. The
lord was propitiated by king Bhagiratha with fastings and
hymns, and Siva released her there. She entered the south-
12 ern ocean in seven streams, and in three streams on the east ;
imundating as a great river the south with the overflow from
her stream, behind Bhagfratha’s chariot.
13 Moreover the great river famed as Sva-rakshu fell on
Mount Vipula on the west side, and went towards the forest]
14 Vaibhrija; and thence the great river overflowing the lake
Sitoda reached the mountain Sva-rakshu,** and thence she
15 went to the mountain Tri-sikha ;tt and thence falling on the
* The text appears incorrect. For pirudštte 'tivikhyātd read pirvd stteti
vikhydtd ?
+ ‘Seo canto lv, verse 2.
f Or Arunoda, see canto ly, verse 3.
§ See canto lv, verse 4.
|| See canto ly, verse 6.
T For sdo'alam read sd
** There seems to be a confusion in the te
river and the mountain, which latter is called Su-ra


for Sva-rakshuh then read Su-raksham ? ža :
++ This name seems erroneous. See canto ly, verse 9, where Siširāksha is


mentioned as the second mountain. No mountain of the name Tri-Sikho is
mentioned in that and the following verses among the western mountains.
The two should agreo ; compare Vrishabha in verse 18, and canto ly, verse 12


36


vanam? See canto lv, verse 2.
xt between the names of the


ksha in canto lv, verse 9;


17


18


20


21.


22


23


* Sfvitra ; see canto lv, verse 2,
t See canto lv, verse 3.

|| For vashershv read varsheshv.
4 Karma-jd, this seems preferable to dharma
## For toydtthé read toyotthd.

44 Dharma-jf ; verse 23 reads karma


CANTO LVI.


summits of the other mountains on thé west in order, - she
reached Ketumala and entered the salt ocean.

Now she flowed on to mount Su-pāršva also, which is at
the foot of Meru; there she is famed as Soma. She flowed
to the wood of Savitri.* Overflowingt it, she reached lake
Mahé-bhadra ;f and thence she passed as a great river to
mount Sankha-kifa ;§ and thence reaching in succession
Vrishabha and the other mountains on the nortk, and over-


‘flowing the Northern Kurus she entered the great ocean.


Thus I have appropriately described to thee, O brahman,
this river, the Ganges, and the countries according to their
arrangement in Jambu-dvipa. In Kim-purusha and all the
other countries dwell people, who have almost unalloyed
happiness, who are free from sickness, and wha are exempt
from low and high diversities of condition. In each of the
mine countries in it are seven mountain ranges. And then
in each country there are rivers flowing down from the
mountains. In Kim-purusha and the seven other countries,
O brahman, waters bubble up from the ground ; here in Bhá-
rata we have rain. And in these eight conntries|| men enjoy
a perfection which comes from the trees, from their own
natural dispositions, from the localities, from the water, from
their mental condition and from their actions. The tree-
bestowed perfection is obtained from the trees that grant
them every wish; the natural is well-known as that which
springs from the natural disposition ; and the local delight
is that which is connected with the land itself ; and the
water-given** perfection comes from the delicacy of the water ;
and the mental is derived from meditation ; and the perfec-
tion which comes from reverential service and the performance
of other duties is denominated righteousness-produced.tf


t For pdvayantt read pldvayantt.
§ See canto ly, verse 12.


-já in verse 26.


-já instead, which seems preferable.


NINE DIVISIONS OF BHĀRATA, 283


26 And in these countries the ages do not exist, nor bodily nor
mental sicknesses; nor is there any undertaking involving
merit or demerit there, O brāhman. i


Canto LVII.


Mūrkaņdeya mentions the nine divisions of Bharata, one of which
is India—He mentions the seven mountain ranges in India (exclusive
of the Himdlaya Mountains) and names twenty-two separate hills—
He mentions the chief rivers in India, grouping them according to
the mountain ranges out of which they rise—He mentions the chief
peoples in India and on its borders, arranging them according to
the main natural divisions of the country—and he concludes with
general descriptive remarks and an encomium on India as the sole


land of action.
Kraushtuki spoke.
1 Adorable Sir! thou hast fully described this Jambu-dvipa.
Just as thou hast declared it, merit-producing action exists
2 nowhere else, nor action that tends to sin, except in Bharata,
O illustrious Sir! And from this land both Svarga is at-
tained, and final emancipation from existence, and the me-
3 dium end also. Verily nowhere else on earth is action
ordained for mortals. Therefore tell me, O brihman, about
4 this Bhārata in detail, and what are its divisions, and how
many they are, and what ts its constitution accurately; it is
the country,* and what are the provinces and the mountains
in it, O brāhman ?
Markandeya spoke.
Hear from me the nine divisions of this country Bharata ;
6 they must be known as extending to the ocean, but as being
mutually inaccessible. Theyt are Indra-dvipa, Kašerūmat.t


Ct


* Varsha.

+ This and the three following verses agree closely with the Kūrma Purána
canto xlvii, verses 22—25.

t Tho dictionary gives the word as kaferu-mat; the Kūrma Purina as
kaseruk-mat (canto xlvii, verse 22), in preference. Another form is said to be
Kasetw.


284 CANTO LVII.


7 Tāmra-varņa,* Gabhasti-mat, and Nāūga-dvipa, Saumya,
Gándharva,ł and Varuna; and this is the ninth dvipa
among them, and it is surrounded by the sea.[t This dvipa

8 is a thousand yojanas from south to north.§ At its east end
are the Kirštas,|| and at the west the Yavanas. Within
it dwell brāhmans, kshatriyas, vaigyas and š$ūdras, O brih-

9 man. They accomplish their purification with the occupa-
tions of sacrifice, meditation, trade, &c.; and they seek their

10 mutual business through these occupations, and they gain


Svarga or final emancipation from existence, merit and sin
then.


The seven mountain ranges** in it are Mahendra,tt


* The Kūrma Puriņa gives the word as témra-parna in preference (canto
xlvii, verse 22). It is Ceylon.


+ Or, gandharva, Kūrma Purana, canto xlvii, verse 23.


1.This is understood to mean India, as the following verses show ; seo
Wilsons Vishnu Purana, Edn. FitzEdward Hall, Book II, chap. iii, note on
the similar passage. But this Purána states clearly enough (see verse 59
below) that India is not surrounded by the sea, but bounded by it only on
the east, south, and west, and only partially so on the east and west, for
verse 8 places the Kiritas and Yavanas there respectively.


$ The yojana is defined in canto xlix, verse 40, to be about 40,000 feer ;
this length therefore is 7,576 miles.

|| The Kirétas are the uncivilized tribes of the forests and mountains ;
here the word appears to denote all the races with the Burmese typo of
features along the eastern limits of India.

A The Greeks originally, and afterwards the Mohammedans.


*t For the notes in this Canto I have consulted


, Wilson’s Vishnn Purina
(Edn. FitzEdward Hall),


General Cunningham’s Ancient Geography of
India (187) ), his Archmological Survey of India Reports, besides other works


and maps.

tt “Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and thc
northern Ciroars to Gondwana, part of which near Ganjam is still called
Mahindra Maloi or hills of Mahindra.” Wilson’s Vishnu Purana, Book II,
chap. iii, note. The rivers which flow from theso hills are named in versef
28 and 29, but only a few of them have been identified. This range then


appears to be the portion of the Eastern Ghats between the Godaveri and
Mahānadi rivors, and the hills in the south of Berar,


See, however, note on
the Sukti-mat range on the next pago.


MOUNTAIN RANGES OF INDIA. 285


1] Malaya,* Sahya,t Sukti-mat,t the Riksha moun-


* This is the southern portion of the Western Ghats. Only four rivers
are mentioned in verses 27 and 28 as rising in these hills, and none of them
appear to have been identified ; but as the River Kaveri is said in verses 26
and 27 to rise in the Sahya mountains, the Malaya mountains can be only
the portion of the Western Ghats from the Nil-giris to Cape Comorin.

+ The Sahya mountains are the Northern portion of the Western Ghats,
and, as appears from the rivers which rise in them (see verses 26 and 27),
extend from the River Tapti down to the Nil-giris.

f This’ range is not definitely identified, nor the rivers which are said
in verses 29 and 80 to rise in it

General Cunningham says the R. Suktimati “ derived its name from the
Suktimél (sic) mountains, in which it had its source” ; asserts that the river
must be the same as the Mahtnadi ; and infers that the Sukti-mat mountains
must “correspond with the high range of mountains to the south of Sehoa
and Kinker, which gives rise to the Mahanadi, the Pairi and the Seonath
rivers, and which forms the boundary between Chattisgarh and the fendatory
state of Bastar.’ (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. XVII, pp. 24 and 69; and map
at end.) His premises seem to me unsafe ; and his conclusion confounds
the Sukti-mat range with the Mahendra range, and must be incorrect, for the
latter range appears to be identified beyond doubt.

Mr. Beglar proposes to identify the R. Sukti-mati with the Sakri (which is
a tributary of the Ganges, and flows northwards about 85 miles east of Gaya),
to connect the river with the Sukti-mat range, and apparently to identify the
range with the hills in the north of the Hazaribagh distriot. He proposes to
strengthen this position by identifying the rivers Kiyul (another tributary of
the Ganges, east of the Sakri) and Kaorhari (which I do not find, but which
scems to be another small tributary) with tbe Rishi-kulyé and Kumari, which
riso in the Sukti-mat mountains ; see verses 29and 30. (Arch. Survey Reports,
vol. VIII, pp. 124 and 125). But the Sukti-mat rango and Sukti-mati river
do not seem necessarily connected ; neither this nor the Vayu Puršņa makes
the river rise in the Sukti-mat range, (see verse 23) ; Sakri does not appear
the natural equivalent for Sukti-mati, (there is besides another river Sakri, a
tributary of the Seonath,) nor Kiyul and Kaorhari of Rishi-kulyā and Kuméri ;
Bakri corresponds better with Sakuli (see verse 23) ; and the hills in the
north of the Hazaribagh district are not remarkable, and are rather the ter-
mination of the Vindhya range than a separate mountain system.

The only monntains, which have not been appropriated to the Sanskrit
names, are the Aravalli mountains and the southern portion of the Eastern
Ghats, so that this range might be one of these two; and if the former
are rightly included in the Páripátra Range, (see note f, vext page) the
S'ukti-mat rango might be the southern portion of tho Eastern Ghats and


286 CANTO LVII.


tains,* and Vindhya,t and Péripdtra.t And there ate
other hills besides them in thousands, which are situated
12 near them. Their summits are broad and lofty, and are
delightful and spacious;—Koléhala,§ and Vaibhrāja,|


the hills of Mysore. If, however, the Sukti-mat range must be placed in
Berar, the Mahendra range will be restricted to the Eastern Ghats.

* These are said to be the mountains of Gondwana, see Wilson’s Vishnu-
Purana, Book II, chap. iii, note. Judging from the rivers which are said in
verses 21 to 25 to rise in the Vindhya and Riksha Ranges, it appears this
range consists of the hills which form the water-shed between the Nar-
budda, Sone and Mahanadi on one side, and the Tapti and northern tribu-
taries of the Godavari on the other side; that is, it comprises the Satpura
Hills, and the hills extending through the middle of Berar and the south of
Chutia Nagpur nearly into West Bengal.

t For vindka$ read vindhya$. This does not denote the whole of the
modern Vindhya Range, but only the portion of it east of Bhopal, and also
the water-shed hills which extend from it into Behar, as will appear from
a comparison of the rivers which rise in it according to verses 21—23.

f Called also Pariyétra. This is the western portion of the modern Vin-
dhya Range, west of Bhopal, as appears from the rivers which rise in it
according to verses 19 and 20. Prof, Wilson says (Vishnu Purana, Book
II, chap. iii, note) “ the name, indeed, is still given to a range of moun-
tains in Guzerat (see Colonel Tod's Map of Rajasthan),” and that may be
considered an offshoot of the main range. If the Vayu Purdna is right in
reading Varņišā instead of Venvé in verse 19, this range would also probably
include the Aravalli mountains in Rajputana. If this be so, the configuration
of this range, a curve around the west and south of Malwa, would suggest a
derivation for both the names, viz., Péripitra, from pari + pátra, “ the moun-
tains shaped like an enclosing receptacle ”, or “tho mountains which form 4
protection around;” or Pāriyūtra, from pari + yd, “the mountains which
curve around” The name may thus still survive in the Pathar range, which
lies between the rivers Chambal and Banda. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VI,

. p. l and map; and vol. XIV, p. 151).

§ Mr. Beglar proposes to identify this hill with the Kawa Kol range, whioh
is east of the R. Sakri (a tributary of the Ganges about 85 miles east of
Gaya) ; but there does not appear to be anything about the range agreeing
with the description in the text. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VIII, pp. 123
to 125, and map at end).

|| This asa mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary, and I do not find
any such mountain. The Véyn Puršņa reads Vaihdra instead (xly 90), which

: is B synonym for a famous hill called Vuibhara or Baibhdra, near Raju-griba,


FAMOUS HILLS IN INDIA. 287


13 Mandara*, the hill Durdurat, Vata-svanot, and Vai-
dyuta§, Maindkal|, and Sva-rasaf, Tunga-prastha**,
14 Naga-giritt, Roc'anaķļ, the hill Pūņdara$$, the hill


and about 28 miles north-east of Gaya. (Cunningham’s Ano. Geog. of India,
yol. I, p. 452, map and p. 463; Arch. Survey Reports, vol. I, p. 21 and plates
III and XIV; vol. III, p. 140).

* Mandara, the famous mountain, is situated about 85 miles, south of
Bhégalpur in Behar (Arch. Survey Reports, vol: VIII, p. 180).

+ I do not find this in the dictionary. There is a hill called Turturiya,
which stands a little south of the junction of the R. Mah&ngdi with its tribu-
tary the Seonath, and which was a pluce of pilgrimage. (Arch. Survey
Reports, vol. VII, p. 202; vol. XIII, pp. 146—152),

t This as a mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary. The Vayu Purfņa
reads Pétandhama instead (xlv. 91). Ido notfind either. But Mr. Beglar
found a hill Bathan or Bathani in South Behar, and mentions a hill called
Banthawa or Pandhawa in Buddhist records These names might be easy
corruptions of Pétandhama. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VIII, p. 46).

§ This as a mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary, and I do not find
it. Isit to be connected with Baijnath or Vaidya-nath, the famous place of
pilgrimage, near the R. Karma-niši, south of Ghazipur ? There does not seem,
however, to be any prominent hill there. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VIII,
p. 187; and vol. XIX, p. 27). Or, should the reading be Vipula? Vipula is
8 well-known hill near Raja-griha (Ano. Geog. of India, vol. I, p. 452, map,
and p. 464; Arch. Survey Reports, Vol. I, p. 21 and plates III and XIV).

|| This appears to be the mountain in which the R. Sone takes its rise, the
river being thence called Mainéka-prabha (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VIII,
p. 124) ; but some placed it between the southern point of the Indian penin-
sular and Ceylon (Prof. Sir M. Monier-Williams’ Dictionary), and in this con-
nexion see canto lii. verse 13.

T This as a mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary ; and I do not find
it. The Váyu Purána reads Sasurasa or Su-sarasa instead (xlv. 90); I do
not find any such hill. ‘

#8 I do not find this. The Vayu Purana reads Gantu-prastha instead (xlv.
91), which seems a mistake.

+t I do not find this.

tt I do not find this.

§§ The Vāyu Purfņa reads P&ndura (xlv. 90); neither is mentioned iņ the
dictionary as a mountain. Should we read Pžņdava instead ? There are two
hills now which are called Páņdua hill or the Pūņģus' hill, one found by Mr.
Oarlleyle north west of Bairft (or Vairáța) in Aivar (Arch. Survey Reports,
vol. VI, pp. 95—101) ; and the other by Mr. Beglar north of Hatta and near the
R. Ken in Bandelkhand, where pilgrimages are atill made (id.. vul. VII, p. 56).


988 CANTO XLVII


Pushpa*, Dur-jayantat, Raivataj, and Arbuda§, Rishya.
mūka, and Go-maņtaf, Kūta-saila**, Krita-smara++, and
15 Sri-parvatat{, and Kora§§, and other mountains in, hundreds,
By them the people, both Mlec'c'has and Aryas, are mingled
together according to their divisions.
16 The chief rivers of which those people drink, hear
them from me duly. Gang, Sarasvatil|||, Sindhu, T and
17 C’andra-bhigé*** also, and Yamuná, and Sata-dru,ttt


* I do not find this.

+ Ido not find this. The Vayu Purana reads Uj-jayanta instead (xlv. 92),
which Gen. Cunningham identifies with Girinar hill in the peninsula of Gu-
jarat (Anot. Geog. vol. I, p. 825). There are also the Ajanta hills, north east
of Aurangabad (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. IX, p. 121) which seem to be the
game as the Ajayanti hill (Anc. Geog. of India, vol. I, p. 556).

t This is near Dwarakā or KuSa-sthali, the capital of the country Anarta
in the peninsula of Gujarat; and the Girinar hill mentioned in the last pre-
ceding note is sometimes identified with this hill.

§ The modern Mount Abn, at the south end of the Aravalli range,

|| Rishya-mūka is in the Dekhan; but I do not find its exact site.

4] This appears to be the hill of Gwalior. Gen. Cunningham says it was
originally called Gopdc'ala and Gopa-giri, Gopdhvaya, and later Go-manta
(Arch. Survey Reports, vol II, pp. 372, 878). The Vayu Purana mentions
Go-dhanu instead (xlv. 91), which suggests Go-vardhana, but Go-vardhana does
not suit the metre. It is strange, however, so famous a hill should be omitted.

*% I do not find this.

tt I do not find this. Is this to be connected with the Kéramér hill, in
Gandhira? (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. II, pp. 92 and 106, and map at p.
87 ; vol. XIX, p. 126).

ff Mr. Beglar, in a list of tirthas where portions of Pšrvatt's body are fabled
to have fallen when she was destroyed at Daksha's sacrifice, mentions “ Sri
Parvat, near the Karatoya River.” This must be the river mentioned in verse
25, for I do not think there is any suoh hill near the other Karatoya in Nortb
East Bengal.

§§ The Vayu Purfņa reads Káru or Ketu (xlv 92); none are mentioned a8
mountains in the dictionary. There is a hill called Kolla in Mewat (Arch.
Survey Reports, vol. XX, p. 188),

| The modern Sursooty, between the Jamna and the Sutlej. For a clear


description, see Arch. Survey Reports, vol. XIV, pp. 87—90, and Plate XXVI..
qq The Indus.


### The B. Chenab in the Panjab, the Greek Acesine:
+ttt The R. Sutlej ; the Greek Hyphasis.


FAMOUS HILLS IN INDIA. 289


Raivata,* and Arbuda, + Rishyamūka, t and Gomanta, §


p. 121) which seem to be the same as the Ajayanti Hill (Ano. Geog. of India.
vol. I. p. 555).

* Raivata, or Raivataka, was near Dváraká or Ku$a-sthali, which was near
the extreme western promontory, and was the capital of the country Anarta,
in the peninsula of Gujarat; for in the M.-Bh., a festival on this mountain is
described, in which the citizens of Dváraká went out there with their fami-
lies, in thousands, on foot or in carriages (Adi-P. coxix. 7906-17); and itis
called the ornament of the gate of that city in the Hari-V. (cxiii. 6861-70;
and oxiv. 6410-15.). The Girnar hill mentioned in the last preceding
note is sometimes identified with this hill, but Mt. Girnar is about 110 miles
from Dvūrakt, and this distance is incompatible with either of the passages
quoted. There does not appear to be any mountain close to that city, but
the Baradé group of hills is not far from it, and they are the only hills
that comply with the conditions (see Arch. Surv. of W. India, by J. Bur-
gess, Kathidwad, pp. 12,15, 84 and 154). Raivata is not necessarily a singlo
mountain, for the Hima-vat, Vindhya and other ranges are often spoken of
in the singular. I would therefore propose to identify Raivata with the
Barada Hills in Hálár, the western corner of the peninsula.

+ The modern Mount Abu, at the south end of the Aravalli range. Vasish-
tha is said to have had his hermitage there (M.-Bh., Vana-P. Ixxxii. 4097-8).
The country around Arbuda was noted for its breed of horses (id. Sabhf-P.
1. 1861.)

t Rishyamūka is in the Dekhan. It was the scene of Rama’s meeting with
Sugriva and Hanūmān. I have proposed to identify it with the range of
hills which stretohes from Ahmadnagar to beyond Naldrug and Kalyani, divid-
ing the Manjira and Bhima rivers (Journal, R. A. S., April, 1894, p. 253).

§ There are two hills of this name. One is mentioned in the Hari-Vamfa
as situated in a gap or opening (vivara) of the Sahya Mts. (xcvi. 5331-40).
It was three or four days’ journey by swift chariot from Karavira-pura
(xovi. 5825-40; and c. 5650-52), i.e. probably 100 or 120 miles in a hilly
country: and that city, which was the capital of the country Padmāvata,
was on the Sahya Mts, on (and therefore near the source of) the R. Veņvā,
and presumably near S'úrpáraka (xey. 5212, 5228-31; and xovi. 5283-5322).
This R. Venva would therefore appear to be the river Purna (or ono of the
other small rivers south of Surat), flowing into the Gulf of Cambay, sonth
of the R. Tapti; Karavira-pura would have been near its source on the
Western Ghats, and Gomanta would probably be the hills S. or S.-E. of Nasik.
The other Gomanta is the hill of Gwalior. Gen. Cunningham says it was
originally called Gopdc'ala and Gopa-giri, Gopdhvaya, and later, Go-manta


37


290 CANTO LVIT.


15 Kite-gaila,* Krita-smora, t and Sri-parvata,t and
Kora,§ and other mountains in hundreds. By them the


people, both Mleččhas and Aryas, are mingled together
according to their divisions.


16 The chief rivers of which those


people drink,
hear them from me duly. Ganga,


Saras-vati,|| Sin-


(Arch Survey Reports, vol. II. pp. 372, 373). The Vāyu Purana mentions
Go-dhana instead (xlv. 91); but I have met with no hill of this name else-
where; it suggests Go-vardhana, but Go-vardhana does not suit the metre.

* I do not find this.

+ I do not find this. Is this to be connected with the Karamar hill, in
Gindhira? (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. II. pp. 92 and 106, and map at p.
87; vol. XIX. p. 126).

t Sri-parvata, or Sri-fnila, is the name of a lofty rock which over-hangs
the R. Krishņā in the Kurnool District; itis the site of a famous temple
called Mallikérjuna, one of the twelve great Linga shrines (Arch. Surv. of
S. India, by R. Sewell, Vol. I. 90; Arch. Surv. of W India, by J. Burgess,
p. 223). The Agni Purana places Sri-parvata on the R. Kaveri, and says it was
dedicated to the goddess Sri by Vishnu, because she had once performed some
austerities (cxiii. 3, 4). But Mr. Beglar, in a list of tirthas where portions of
Pārvati's body are fabled to have fallen when she was destroyed at Daksha's
sacrifice, mentions “Sri Parvat, near the Karatoya River.” This may perhaps
be the river mentioned in verse 25, for I do not think thero is any such
hill near the other Karatoya in North-East Bengal.

§ The Vayu Puršņa reads Káru, or Ketu (xlv. 92) and a mountain Konva is
mentioned in the Bhigavata-P. (V. xix. 16); none are mentioned as moun-
tains in the dictionary. There is a hill called Kolla in Mewat (Arch. Survey
Reports, vol. XX. p. 133).

|| The modern Sursooty, between the Jumna and Sutlej. For a clear
description, see Arch. Survey Reports, vol. II. 214, &c; and XIV. pp. 87-90
and Plate XXVI. There can be little doubt that in anoient times it was 4
very muoh larger river than it is now; see an interesting paper in the
Journal, Beng. Asiat. Sooy. 1886, Part II. p. 340; but in later times it
perished, as it does now, in the sands of the desert, and Vinašana was
the name of the place where it disappeared (M.-Bh., Vana-P. lxxxii.
5052-5 ; and Salya-P. xxxviii. 2119-20.). South and East of it was the
Drishudvatt, and between them lay the sacred region called Brahmdvarta
(Manu II. 17, 18) and Tri-pishtapa (M.-Bh. Vana-P. Ixxxiii. 5074 and 7075)
and also apparently Brahma-kshetra (ibid., 5076). The name Saras-vatt, how-


ever, was given to the seven rivers 8u-prabhd, Kdfic'andhsht, Visdld, Manoramd,
Ogha-vatt, Su-renu and Vimalodakd (id., Salya-P, xxxix. 2188-2216.)


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA, 291


17 dhu,* and C'andra-bhigi + also, f and
Yamuna, and Sata-dru, § Vitastā, || Irāvati, T
Kuhu.** Go-mati,ff and Dhūta-pāpā,tt Būhudā, §§


* The Indus. As to its ancient course through Sindh, see Journal, Beng.
Asiat. Socy., 1886, Part II. p. 328.

+ The R. Chenab, in the Punjab. It was also called the Asiknt, the Greek
Akesines.

1 Or, “and another O’andra-bhdgd.” There were two rivers of this name
(M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 322 and 327), but I have found no data to identify
the second, =

§ The R. Sutlej; the Greek Hyphasis. In ancient times this river probably
did not join the Beas, as it does now, but pursued an independent course to
the confines of Sindh. It flowed South-West from where it issues from the
Himalayas, into the channel called the Naiwal and then along the dry bed
called the Hakra or Ghaggar, at a distance of 30 to 50 miles south of, and
more or less parallel to, its present course. See Journal, Beng. Asiat. Socy.,
1886, Part II. p. 382.

i] The modern R. Jhelam, in the Panjab; the Greek Hydaspes.

g The modern R. Ravi, in the Panjab; the Greek Hydraotes.

## This, does not appear to be known, though it is also mentioned by the
Vayu (xlv. 95) and Kūrma Puranas (xlvii. 27), both of which read Kuht. As
it is mentioned in conjunction with rivers in the Panjab, is it to be identified
withthe Kubhd (Rig-V.x., 75. 6.), the Greek Kophén, the modern Kabul river?
(Cunningham, Anc. Geog. of India, I. 37).

ff The modern Goomti, which joins the Ganges on the Jeft bank below
Benares. There was, however, another and older Go-mati (Rig-V. x. 75. 6),
which is probably the modern R. Gomal, a western tributary of the Indus
(Muir, Sansk. Texts, II. 357).

tt Gen. Sir A. Cunningham says this is a name of the. Go-mati
(Arch. Surv. Repts, I. 315). The tèxt is Go-matt Dhúta-pápá c'a; and the Vayu
(xlv 95), Karma (xlvii. 27), Variha (Ixxxv.) and Vishnu Poranus all read the
same. ‘The two words are also linked together in the Muha-Bharata (Bhish-
ma-P. ix. 325), but not, I believe, in the Rimfyana, whore the Go-matt is gene-
rally called “ crowded with cattle.” Dhúta-pápá then either means the Go-
mati, and the translation would be, “and the sin-cleausing Go-mati;” or it '
denotes some tributary of that river.

§§ Thero were two rivers of this name, this one (seo M-Bh., Bhishma-
P. ix. 337), and another in the Dekhan (ibid., 322; AnuSés.-P. clxv. 7653: and
Rāmiyaņa, Kishk. K. xli. 13). This river is mentioned in various passages
(M-Bh., Vana-P. Ixxxiv. 8045-6; Ixxxvii. 8323; xov. 8513; Santi-P. xxiii.
668, &c.; Anu$ūs-P, xix. 1408-11; and Hari-Varnša xii. 710), and from these


292 CANTO LYIT.


18 and Drisad-vati,* Vi-pāsā,t Devika,{  Rankshu, §
Nigéird, || and Gaņdaki, T and Kaušikā ** are the rivers ++


it appears to have been a considerable river between the Go-mati and Ganges,
īn or near the territory of Ayodhya, and having its source well up in the
Himālayas. Tho only river which satisfies these conditions is the modern
Ramgangi, which joins the Ganges on the left, near Kanauj; and this river
therefore is probably the Báhudá.

* Or, better, Drishad-vatt ; the famous river between the Saras-vati and
Jumna. It was the southern and eastern boundary of Brahmāvarta (Manu ii.
17). For a fall description, see Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 214, Ge.;
and XIV. $7-90, and plate xxvi. Seo also note under Saras-vatt in verse 16.

+ Read Vi-pdéd, for Vi-pdsd. It is the modern R. Bias, in the Panjab, the ,
Greek Hyphasis. Itis now a tributary of the Sutlej, but was probably
altogether separate in olden times, for the Sutlej then had an independent
course considerably to the south-east.

t There are two Devikis, one in the Dekhan (Ramfy. Kishk. K, xli. 13),
and this river (M-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 324; Anušās-P. xxv. 1696-7 ; and Vana-
P: cexxi. 14229). From the second of these passages it appears that the
northern Deviki was near Kashmir, andit may probably be identified with
the modern river Deeg, a tributary of the Ravi onitsright bank. The
Devikd, which is mentioned in Vana-P. Ixxxii. 5044-9, geems to be a lake, and
may be the same as Devikd Sundarikd-hrada in AnuSés.—P. xxv. -707-8.

§ I do not find any riverof this name mentioned elsewhere. The Vaya `
Purana reads Ikshu (xlv. 96), and this ocours in the M-Bh. (Bhishma-P. ix. 924);


but I have found no data to identify it, Probably, however, we should read
Vakshu or Vankshu, which is the Oxus. ās


|| This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purana gives the same name (xlv.
96), and the Varāha reads Nisvtrd (lxxxv); while other readings are Niéc’itd,
Nirvtrd, and Mic'itd. The Niéc’ité and two other rivers, the Nic'itd and Ntvdrd,
are mentioned in the Bhishma-Parva list (ix. 326, 328), and the Nirvtr4 in
M-Bh., Vana-P. lxxxiv. 8116-9, but there appears to be nothing to identify
them beyond that the Nirvirā is connected with the KanSiki (see note **
below) in the last passage and its context. è

«7 The R. Gandak, which flows into the Ganges on its north bank near
Patna. It has shifted its course considerably ; and formerly it flowed east of
its present course, through the middle of the districts of Champaran,
Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga. i

#* Or, generally, Kaušikt; the modern R. Kosi, which flows into the Ganges
>n its north bank, through the district of Purnea. It has shifted its course
‘ery remarkably. Formerly it flowed east of its present position.

tt Or, as the text may be read, “and the Apaga flow,” &c. There is a river


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 293
1
which flow from the slopes of Hima-vat, O brāhman,


19 The Veda-smriti, * Veda-vati, +
Vritra-ghni,j and Sindhu, $


called the Apagd in Kuru-kshetra (M-Bh. Vana-P. Ixxxiii, 6038-40; Cunning-
ham’s Arch. Surv. Repts., XIV. 88, and plate xxvi). The Kūrma Puráņa reads
Lohint c'eti instead (xlvii. 28); and the Váyu (xlv. 96) and Varāha Puranas
lxxxv) mention the Lohita. The Lohita is the Brahma-putra, which till last
century flowed round the south side of the Garo Hills, and then south-
ward through the districts of Maimansingh and Dacca. Lohint, though fem.,
no doubt means the same. The Vayu Purana reads Kausikt c'a trittyd tu
instead (xlv. 96), which may mean the " third Kausikt,” for there seem to
be three rivers of this name (see M-Bh, Vana-P. coxxi. 14281); or may
refer to a river Tritfyd which is mentioned in the M-Bh. (Sabhi-P. ix. 373);
but I would suggest as preferable, Kaušikt Karatoyd tu, or Kaugikt c'a
tri-srotds tu. The Karatoyd is the modern Kuratee in the Bogra District
in North Bengal; and Tri-srotas or Trih-srotast (see M-Bh., Sabhi—P.,
ix. 375) is, I believe, the ancient name of the modern Teesta, which is
east of that; both now flow into the Brahmaputra ; but the first formerly
flowed into the delta, before the Ganges and Brahmaputra shifted their
courses. (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., XV. 127 and 131, and plates
i. and xxxiii. The Varaha Puršņa adds the C'akskush-matt (lxxxv), an
unknown n*me. ;

* Or Veda-smritd. Both names are mentioned in the M-Bh., the former
in Anušis.-P.- clxv. 7651, and the latter in Bhishma-P. ix. 324; and the
Veda-smriti is also mentioned in the Bhégavata-P. (V. xix. 17); but I have
found nothing to identify it.

t Or Vedasint, or Vetasinf. I have not met with these two names else-
where; the Veda-vatt is mentioned in the M-Bh., (Bhishma-P. ix. 324;
Anuššs.-P. clxy. 7651 J, but there appears to be nothing to identify it.

t Or Yrata-ghnt, as the Kūrma Purana reads (xlvii. 28). I have not met
with either name elsewhere, and the river is not known apparently.

$ This is most probably the modern Kali Sindh, a tributary of the R.
Chambal, though it may also be the Sindh, which is a tributary of the Jumna,
between the Chambal and Betwa. The former is the more probable, because
it is a large river and rises well up in the Paripdtra range, and suits the fol-
lowing incident better. This Sindhu was a river of much note, and on it was
a great tirtha, where Agastya met Lopt-mudri, daughter of the King of
Vidarbha, and she chose him for her husband (M-Bh., Vana-P. xovi, xcvii; and
cxxx. 10541). The name of this tirtha may have been Sindhiittama, (id.
Ixxxii, 4082-4095; and Anušis-P. clxv. 7650); but if so, it must be distin-
guished from the great tirtha Brecht ane: which was on the Indus (Vana-P.)
lxxxii. 5021).


294 CANTO LVII.


Veņvā,* and Anandini* also, Sada-nira,{ and Mahi, §


* This name is not in the dictionary, but it occurs several times, and isa
variation of Vend. There is a river of this name inthe Dekhan (see verse
24, note to Veņyd', and onein Western India (sce verse 26, note to Venyd), but
I have not met with any river of this name in North India. Both the Vayu
(xlv. 97), and the Eūrma (xlvii. 29) Puriņas read Varņāšū instead ; the Varaha
reads Parņd instead ilxxxv), and the Kūrma offers Parņd and Parņdšd in
a note, (loc. cit.) The Varņāši or Parņāši is the modern Bands, and there
are two rivers of this name ; one a tributary of the Chambal, rising near
Udaypur (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., VI., plate i.), and the other,
a stream rising near Mt. Abu and flowing into the Rann of Kachh; the
former is tle larger, andis probably the river meant in the text. Cun-
ningham writes the name Parņdšd (id. VI. 157) and Parņa-ndšd (id. XV. 132),
but the latter form seems doubtful. Devdvridha is said to have married
one of these rivers (Hari V. xxxviii. 1999, and 2004-10), probably the second.

+ Or, Sdnandint. The Vayu (xlv. 97) and Kūrma (xlvii. 29) Puranas
read C’andand instead, and the latter proposes Bandhand and Sibandhani
in a note. The Varáha reads O'undandbhd náíadác'árá (lxxxv.) for this and
the next river, but not very intelligibly. None of these names appear to be
identified.

t The river “that is always filled with water.” The inclusion of this
name among the rivers that rise in the Piripitra Mountains is strange
yet the Kirma Purana places it in the same group (xlvii. 29, note). I have
met with no river Sadé-nfré except that in North India. A river Sadé-nira-
mayá is mentioned in Bhishma-P ix. 340, but there is nothing to identify
it. The Vāyu Purana reads Satird and Saddtird instead (xlv. 97), but 1 have
not found these names elsewhere.

A few remarks may be offered about the Sadd-ntrd in North India. Sa-
yana says itis the Karatoy’, the modern Kurattee (see verse 18, notett),
but it is stated in the Sata-patha Brihmaņa (I iv. 1), that the Sadū-nirā
was the boundary between Kosala and Videha. Itis therefore identitied
with the R. Gandak by Dr. Eggeling (loc. cit., note) and Muir (Sansk Texts,
II. 419-422). But the old stream of the Gandak flowed through the districts
of Champaran, Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga, i.e, through the middle of the
Videha country; andthe Gandaki and Sadá-nírá are mentioned as distinct
rivers in M-Bh., Sabhi-P xix., 794. The Sadū-nirā can hardly, therefore, be
the same as the Gandak, and is more probably the modern Rapti, a tributary
of the Saray, and the midway position of the Rapti eminently satisfies the

osition of a boundary.

The R. Mahi, which rises in Malwa and falls into the Bay of Cambay.
The Vayu Purana has 8 variant, Mahatt (xlv. 97), and the Varáha reads Roht


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 295


20 Para,* C’arman-vati,+ Nūpi,f Vidisé,§ and Vetra-vati, |
Siprā, J and Avarņi ** also are known ++ as those connected
with the Pāripātra mountains.


21 The Sona, t} and Maha-nada, §§


(Ixxxv.); both seem incorrect. The Mahitdé mentioned in M-Bh., Bhishma-P.
ix. 328, appears to be this river.

* Or Pará, according to the Vayu Puriņa (xlv. 98). This is said to be
the modern R. Parbati, which rises in Bhopal and falls into the Chambal
(Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., II 308 and Rennell’s Atlas of 1781).

+ For C'arman-vatt, read C’arman-vatf. The R. Chambal, the largest
tributary of the Jumna.

t This is not in the dictionary. The Kūrma Puriņu mentions the
Sura and the Súryá (xlvii. 29), but I have found no other mention of them,
and they do not appear to be known.

§ This must, no doubt, be connected with the town Vidis4, which was on the
R. Vetra-vati (Megha D. i. 25) the modern R. Betwa (see next note). Vidišā
appears to be the modern town Bhilsa. The R. Vidiši therefore was pro-
bably the small tributary which joins the Betwa on its left bank at Bhilsa.

|| The modern R. Betwa, which rises near Bhopal and flows into the
Jumna. There was another river of this name in Western India (Hari-V.
cIxviii, 9514-6). The Vardha Purana reads Veda-trayt wrongly (Ixxxv).

4 This is the river on which Ujjayint, the modern Ujjain, stands (Megha
D. i. 81, 32). Another Sipri is mentioned in verse 24.

** This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The
Vāyu Purána reads Avanti instead (xlv. 98), which is preferable, and would
be the river of the Avanti country (see notes to verses 52 and 55, below).
The R. Avanti therefore is probably the river which rises near Mhow and
flows into the Chambal. The Varéha Puriņa reads Vapantt (Ixxxv.)
erroneously.

tt For smatd4, read smritāk.

tt The R. Sone which rises near the source of the Narbada and flows
into the Ganges above Patna. It was also called Hiranya-bahu and Hiranya-
váha; the Greek Erannoboas. For changes in its course, see Cunning.
Arch. Surv. Repts., VIII. 4-24.

§§ Or, Muhd-nadt. It flows through Orissa into the Bay of Bengal. The
main stream is now considered to be the river which rises near Kanker, but
that cannot be the source meant in the text, for it would belong to quite a
different water-shed. The Mahd-nada here must designate the branch now
called the Hasdu or Hestho, which rises near the source of the Sone (Cunning:)
Arch. Sury. Repts., XVII. platei.). The Varaha Purana omits the Maha-nadi
altogether, and reads Jyott-rathd instead (Ixxxv). This river, which is also


296 CANTO LVII.


Narmadā, * Su-rathā, t Adri-jé,f Mandikini,$
and Dasarna, || and C'itra-kūtā J also,
22 Clitrotpalā, ** and Tamasā, tt Karamodā, tt


called Jyoti-rathyd (M-Bh., Vana-P. lxxxv. 8150) and Jyoti-rathā (Hari-V.
clxviii 9510-12) is said to be a tributary of the S'ona in the former passage,
and is placed in the Dekhan in the latter. It is, therefore, probably the
modern Johila, the southern of the two sources of the R. Sone.

* The modern Narbada or Nerbudda, which rises near the Sone and flows
into the Gulf of Cambay.

+ This is notin the dictionary, and I have not met the name elsewhere;
itis a synonym of Jyott-rathd ? (See last page, note §§). The Kūrma Purina
mentions the Su-rasd (xlvii. 30), and so also the Varaha (lxxxv) ; instead
of this and the next river the Viyu Purana reads Su-mahd-drumd or,
Surahddrumd (xlv. 99); but I have not met with any of these names
elsewhere, except Su-rasa in the Bhigavata-P. (V. xix. 17)

f This is not in the dictionary, but is mentioned in M-Bh., Anušās-
P. clxv. 7648. I have found nothing to identify it.

§ The R. Mandakin, which flows near Mt. Chitrakut into the R. Paisuni,
a tributary of the Jumna between the Ken and the Tons (Cunning., Arch. Surv.
Repts., XXI. 11). Mr. Beglar’s proposal to identify it with the R. Reur, a
goutherntributary of the Sone (Ibid. XIII. 42-54) depends upon his identifica-
tion of Mt. C'itra-kūta with Ramgarh hill in Chhattisgarh, and is untenable

(see Journal, R. A. S., April, 1894, page 240). The river Reur, or Rer, is also
called Arand, and all these forms appear to point'to Eraņdd as the original
name.


|| The river of the country DaSairna, the modern R. Dasdn, between the
Betwa and the Ken.

{| This is notin the dictionary. It is no doubt to be connected with Mt.
C'itra-kūita, the modern Chitrakut (see Journal, R. A. S. April, 1894,
page 239),and is probably the stream which flows round the south and
east of the modern Mt. Chitrakut, past Karwi into the Jumna.

+ This is not in the dictionary, but a O’itropald is mentioned in M- Bh,
Bhishma-P. ix. 341. Cunningham says C’itrotpala is the name of the modern
main-stream of the Mahd-nadi below its junction with the Pairi (Arch. Surv.
Repts., VII. 155, and XVII. 70) ; but that river as mentioned already (page
295, note §§) would belong to a different water-shed.

++ Or Tdmast, as the Kúrma Purina reads (xlvii. 30). Itis the R. Tons
which flows into the Ganges on the right bank below Allahabad.

tt This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found the name elsewhere.
The Vayu Puriņa ixlv. 100) and the Variha (Ixxxy.) read Karatoyd instead.
Should we read Karma-nodd, as n synonym of Karma-ndéi ? The river


"FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 297


Pišāc'ikā, * and Pippali-$roņi + also, Vi-pāšā, f
23 the river  Vaūjuli, $ Sumerujā, || Sukti-mati, J


meant is no doubt the modern Karamnasa, which flows into the Ganges on
the right bank just above the Sone.

* I have not met with this river elsewhere. Pi$dc'a:was a name given to
various races, chiefly barbarous hill tribes (Muir, Sansk. Texts, II. 59). In
this place it would, no doubt, mean the tribes inhabiting Rewah and Chuta
Nagpore, and the Pisac’ika is probably one of the southern tributaries of the
Sone, such as tho Rer (see page 296, note §), or Kanhar.

+ Or Pipyald front, as the Vayu Puriņa reads (xlv. 100); or Pippald, as
the Varéha reads (Ixxxv). I have not found any data to identify it, but have
seen the name assigned to the modern river Paisuni or Parsaroni, a tributary
of the Jumna between the Ken and the Tons (Arch. Surv. Repts., XXI. 11),
and these words may well be corruptions of Pippali-šroņt.

+ This appears to be the river mentioned in M.-Bh., Anu$ds-P. xxv. 1733
and perhaps 1710-11 also. It is probably the modern Bias which flows past
Saugor and joins the R. Ken, a tributary on the right bank of the Jumna.
(Cunning., Arch. Surv. Repts.,XXI. 157, and plate xxxiv). The Ken or Kiyán, an
important stream, does not appear to be mentioned ; it is said to be a corrup-
tion of Karna-vatt (Ibid. 156; and II. 446), though Lassen gives Kdyana as
its ancient form (Ind. Alt., Map). Was Vi-pdéd the ancient name of this whole
river? The Vi-pi$i in the Panjab is mentioned in verse 18. The Variha
Purána reads Visdld (lxxxv), and the Kurma mentions this name as a
variant (xlvii. 31). There are several rivers of this name, and the river
here meant is no doubt the Saras-vatt Visdld at Gaya (M.-Bh., S’alya-
P. xxxix. 2188-9, and 2205-6), probably the modern Lilajan which flows
past Bodh Gaya.

§ I have not found this name elsewhere. The Vardéha Purdņa reads
Vaūjukd (lxxxv), the Kūrma Mañjulá (xlvii. 81), and the Vayu Jambuld
(xlv. 100). Of these names I have met only with Maijuld elsewhere
(M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 311), but with no data to identify it. The river
meant is probably that on which Gaya stands; its eastern source is called the
Mohana, its middle portion the Phalgu, and the eastern branch, into which it
divides. the Jumna.

|| The Váyu Purdņa reads Siterajé (xlv. 101), and the Vardha Vfrajd
(Ixxxv), I have not met with any of these names elsewhere, but the M.-Bh.
mentions three rivers Vird (Bhishma-P., ix. 329), Vira-vatt (ibid., 332) and
Vtrankard (ibid., 833), which are all distinct. The Matsya Purina reads two
names instead, the Sunt and Lajja (oxiii. 26), probably erroneous.

{ This river has been much written about but does not seem to be identi-
fied safely yet. See p. 285, note}; and also Cunning., Arch, Surv. Repts.,


38


298 CANTO LYII.


Sakuli,* Tridivā in regular order, + Vega-vāhini+ also § flow
from the slopes of the Vindhya|| Mountains.


IX. 55. It is mentioned in the Hari-Varnša (clxviii. 9509-13) and is said there
to be in the Dekhan ;it seems to be meant by the name Mukti-mat¢ in M.-Bh,
Bhishma-P. ix, 842; and perhaps it is referred to in Hari-V. xxxvii. 1980-7,
These passages, however, may allude to two rivers of this name. It was the
river on which stood Sukti-mati, the capital of O’edi; see note to C'edi in
canto lviii, verse 16.

* The Vāyu Puriņa reads Makrund or Makshand (xlv. 101), and the
Varaéha Pankint (lxxxv), but I have not met with any of these names else-
where. The Sakuli, however, may probably be identified with the R. Sakri,
which flows into the Ganges on the south, about half-way between Patna
and Monghyr (Cunning., Arch. Surv. Repts., VIII. platei; and XV. plate
iv). There is also another Sakri which is a tributary of the R. Seonath, a
tributary of the Mahánadí (id. XVII. plate i), but that rises rather in the
Riksha Mts. The Bhishma-P. list mentions a river called Makart (ix. 331);
and the Matsya Puriņa reads Mukutd instead (cxiii. 26).

t The text Tridivá-kramu seems wrong, and I have adopted the reading of
the Váyu Purina Tridivá kramát, which is preferable. The word kramdt,
if right, would indicate that the rivers are mentioned in regular order from
west to east. The Tridivá is also mentioned in the M.-Bh., (Bhishma-P. ix.
824; and Anušis.—P. clxy. 7654), but no data are given to identify it. It may
be noticed there is a river called the Krumu (Rig.-V., X. 75.6), which is pro-
bably the modern R. Kuram, a tributary of the Indus, south of the Kabul R.
(Muir's Sansk. "Texts, II. 357); butit cannot be intended here. Another
Tridiva is mentioned in verse 28.

f This is not in the dictionary, but it occurs in M.-Bh., Sabht-P. ix. 371.
The Vayu (xlv. 100) and Variha (lxxxv) and Kūrma Puriņas (xlvii. 31) read
Bálu-váhiní instead, and the last gives Ratna-vdhiné as a variant.


I have not
met with either of these names elsewhere.


§ The Variha Puriņa. adds another river Rdtrt (lxxxv), but I have not met
with it elsewhere.

|| The text reads Skandha, which is clearly wrong. The Vūyu (xlv. 101)
Kūrma (xlvii. 31) and Variha Poranas (lxxxv) read Riksha. There is certain-
ly some confusion in this group of rivers, for the Manddkini, Dašārņi, and
Tamasā rise in the Vindhya watershed, while the Sona, Mahd-nada, and
Narmada riso rather in the Riksha Mts; but the rivers mentioned in verse 24
rise in the Riksha Mts, so that the proper reading here should no doubt be
Vindhya. The Agni Purana says the Narmadā rises in the Vindhya Mts.
(cxviii. 7); so that perhaps this river and also the Sone and the Hasdu
branch of the Mahénadi, which all rise close together near Amara-kanteka,


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA, 299
94 The Sipré,* Payoshni, t Nir-bindhyā,£ Tapi,§ and


may have been considered to belong to the Vindhya watershed. There seems
to have been some vagueness in this matter, for the Utkalas and (Dakshina)
Kosalas are classed among the races who inhabited the Vindhya Mts. in verses
58 and 54.

* One Sipré has been mentioned already in verse 20, and the Hari-Vamša
says there is a Sipré in the southern region (clxviii. 9509). The Vāyu Puriņa
reads Madrd instead (xlv. 102); and the Kūrma (xlvii. 32) and Vardha (Ixxxv)
Sighrodd. I have not found either of these names elsewhere, but a river
Stghrd is mentioned (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 336) and another called Sivd
(ibid., 332). The Matsya Purana reads Kshiprd (cxiii. 27).

+The Payoshni was in the southern region (M.-Bh., Vana-P. lxxxviii.
8329-35); it was the river of Vidarbha (ibid. cxx. 10289-90), and was sepa-
rated from the Narmada by the Vaidūrya Mts. (ibid. cxxi. 10306-7). It was
the modern river Purna (the tributary of the Tapti) together with the lower
part of the Tapti into which the Purna continues. A careful consideration
of King Nala’s remarks (ibid. lxi. 2317-9) with a map will show that the view
described could only have been obtained from a position on the Satpura Mts.
about longitude 75°; hence the Payoshni visible from there could be only the
Such was considered the main stream in old times,
Gen. Cunningham's proposal to iden-
a tributary of the Jumna between the


lower part of the Tapti.
and it was a famous and sacred river.
tify the Payoshni with the Pahoj,
Sindh and Betwa, (Arch. Surv. Reports, VII. plate xxii.) is untenable as


regards this famous river; but there were two rivers of this name (M.-Bh,,


Bhishma-P. ix. 324 and 327), and the Pahoj may be the other Payoshni.
The Varsha Puriņa reads Payollt (Ixxxv), which seems a mistake.

t Or Nir-vindhyd ; or according to the Vaya Puršņa, Nir-bandhyd (xlv. 102).
One river Nir-vindhyé is mentioned in the Megha-D. (I. 28 and 29, com-
mentary) as lying between the R. Vetra-vati (or Betwa) and Ujjayini (Ujjain),
and (if the Paré is rightly identified with the modern Parbati, see note to
verse 20) must be the modern Parwan which is west of the Parbati; but `
that river risesin the Vindhya Range according to the Megha-Dúta, and be-
longs to the Páripátra watershed according to verses 19 and 20 above; on
either view it is out of place here. There was, however, another large river
of this name in the Dekhan, for it is mentioned along with the Payoshnf,
the Tapi and the Godavari and its tributaries in the Bhigavata-Purdna (V.
xix. 17), and judged by its position there, it may be the Pen-ganga & tributary
of the Warda. Aa


§ See note to Payoshņf above. This is the upper part of the modern Tapti


before it joins the Purna. This branch was hardly known in early times ;


it does not appear to be named in the Mahé-Bhérata or Réméyaya, nor


300 CANTO LVII.
Nishadha-vati,* Venya,+ and Vaitarani, t Sinibalf, § Kumud.


is it mentioned in the copious list in the Bhishma-P. (ix).
no doubt, it was hidden amid hills and forests.

* Or Nishadhd, as the Vāyu Purina reads (xlv. 102). I have not met
with this name elsewhere, but it naturally suggests a connexion with Nishadha,
the realm of Nala. As regards Nishadha, see the note to verse 54 below,
This river then may be one of the small tributaries of the Narmada
or Tapti, which rise in the middle part of the Satpura Range. The Kūrma
Purana reads Mahdnadt instead (xlvii. 32), which may mean the Mahinadi
in Chhattisgarh and Orissa, but is unsatisfactory, as it has mentioned that
river before (ibid., 80). The Matsya Purana reads Rishabhd instead (oxiii. 27),
which I have not met elsewhere.

t This form is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Puriņa reads Venvd (xlv. 102);
the Kūrma reads Vinná and gives Veņyd and O'intd as variants (xlvii. 82).
C’smta is no doubt an error. The other names are merely different forms of
the same word. The river is called Venvd in the Hari-V. (clxviii. 9509-10)
and also in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P, xxx. 1118), but in the latter poem itt is
generally called Vend, and this seems the proper term (Bhishma-P. ix. 335;
Anušis-P. clxv. 7648; Vana-P. lxxxviii. 8328, clxxxix. 12909, and lxxxv.
8176-7 ; whether the same river is also meant in line 8175 is not clear).
From the passage last cited it appears the Veņdis the river which joins the Goda-
vari and Varadā (the modern Warda), that is, the modern Wain-ganga and
its continuation the Pranhita. The Varfha Purana reads Veshndpdid (lxxxv)

which seems a mistake. This river appears to be also called Su-vend (M.-
Bh., Vana-P. clxxxix. 12909) in contra-distinction to the Krishna-vend
(ibid. ; and also id. Vana-P. Ixxxy. 8180-1 ; Bhishma-P. ix. 335, and Anušis.-
P. clxy. 7648; and Hari-V. olxviii. 9509-11) which appears from the second
passage to be a tributary of the Vena, and which I have proposed to identify
with the western tributary rising near Deoghar and Seoni (Journal, R. A 8.,


1894, p. 244). Another river of this name is mentioned in verse 26, and 8
Veņvd in verse 19.


The reason was,


f This is no doubt the modern Bytarni, which flows through the north
of Orissa; and if it is rightly classed here, the Riksha Range must include the
hills which stretch along the south of Chuta Nagpore.

§ The Viyu Purina reads Sitibdhu (xlv. 102), the Kūrma Baldkd (xlvii. 32)
and the Varáha Vedipdld (lxxxv). None of these rivers are mentioned in the
dictionary, but the name SYnibdhu is given. I have not found any of these
names elsewhere, except Baldkd in M.-Bh., Anu$$s.-P. xxv. 1706-7, which ,
may be a river, but appears from the context to be in Northern India. Per-
haps the reading should be Sildvatt or Sila@vatt, which seems to have been the
ancient name of the modern river Selye; this after uniting with the Búp-


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA, 301
25 vati,* Karatoyd,t Mahā-gauri,f and Durgā,$ and Antaķ-$irā ; ||


narain is the river on which Tamluk, the ancient Tdmra-liptaka (see verse
44 below), is situated; and which may well find mention here. Perhaps
the name Baldkd may be connected with the modern river Bardkar, a tri- ,
butary of the Damudé; these two combined form the largest river in
Western Bengal, and flow close to Tamluk. Tamluk was a famous port, and
it would be strange if the rivers near it were overlooked. The M.-Bh. men-
tions a river Sata-balé (Bhishma-P. ix. 828). The Matsya Puriņa reads
Viéva-mald instead (cxiii. 37). I have not met either name elsewhere.

* I have not met with this name elsewhere. It may be the Subarna-rekha
or one of the small rivers in the north of Orissa; or may we conjecture
Damud-vatt, and identify it with the R. Damudd in West Bengal? See the
last note.

+ One river of this name in North Bengal has been mentioned in verse 18
note; and there was another of the same name in the north of India (M.-Bh,
Anušūs.-P. xxv. 1699); neither can be meant here. I have not found any
Karatoyd elsewhere, which rises in the Riksha range. The Vūyu Purané
reads Toyd instead (xlv. 103), and so also the Vardha (Ixxxv); but I have
not found this name élsewhere. Perhaps the reading should be Karabhdc'a.
Karubhd or Kapifé is the name of a river on the confines of Utkala and
Kalinga (Raghu-Y. iv. 38, commentary), but no details are given to identify
it. The name Kapišd suggests identification with the modern Cossye or
Kansai (the chief river in the Midnapur district) which is said to be modified
from Karmsavatt, but may well be a corruption of Kapisd-vatt.

t This is also mentioned in M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 841. It is no doubta
synonym of Brakmdņt and Brdhmaņt, all being names of Durgt; it would
then be the modern R. Brahmaņi in Orissa.

$ There are two rivers of this name mentioned in the Bhishma-P, list (ix. 837
and 841) in the M.-Bh., and the second is that intended here, as it is placed
with the Mahd-gaurf; but I have not met with the name elsewhere. It
may be a synonym of the small river Brihmani which flows through the
Moorshedabad district into the right bank of the Bhagirathi branch of the
Ganges.

|| This is not in the dictionary. The Vāyu (xlv. 103) and Kúrma (xlvii. 33)
Puršņas read Antah-éild. The Vardha reads Antydgird (Ixxxv), which is no
doubt an intended synonym. I have not met with any of these name (V?-)
where, but Antra-$ild is mentioned (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 337). Antah-cy
seems to be the correct form; and if the name is descriptive, the river 1.
probably one of the northern tributaries of the Mahdnadi; all of which are
encompassed with hills. See however a people called Antar-giryas in verse 24
below.


302 CANTO LYII.


those rivers* flow from the slopes of the Riksha+ Mountains,
have holy waters and are bright.
26 The Godavari,t Bhima-ratha,§ Krishné,|| and another]


* The Varéha Purdna mentions also Maņijdld Subhd (Ixxxv); I have not
found the former name elsewhere; but the Subhd is mentioned in the
Hari-Vaynša (clxviii. 9509-10), and a river Maningdé is mentioned in the
Bhishma-P. list (ix. 342) There are no data to identify them, except that
the passage in the Hari-Varhša places the Subha in the Dekhan.

+ The text reads Bindhya or Vindhya, and yet makes the next group ‘of
rivers also rise in the same range. The Váyu (xlv. 103) and Kūrma (xlvii
88) and Varāha (lxxxv) Puranas read the same; but the proper reading
must be Rikshaas the Vishnu Puršņa says (Bk. II. Chap. iii), for the
Tāpi, Veny4 and Vaitarani certainly do not rise in the former mountains
but in the latter. The Agni Purina wrongly groups the Tipi and Payoshni
with the Godavari and other rivers as rising in the Sahya Mts.

+ The modern Godaveri. This river was famous from the earliest times.
Jana-sthāna, the scene of Rama’s first conflict with the Rakshasas was the
country on both its banks between its tributaries the Manjira and Pranhita
(see Journal, R. A. S , 1894, p. 247).

$ Or Bhtma-ratht as the Vayu (xlv. 104) and Varéha (lxxxv) Purdņas read:
Bhtma-raksht which the Kūrma gives (xlvii. 34) seems incorrect. The former
is the name as given in the M.-Bh. (Vana-P. Ixxxviii. 8328; Bhfshma-P.
ix. 327; and Anu$is,-P. olxv. 7653), This is the modern Bhima, the tributary
of the Krishņš, rising near Poona. The Varáha Puršņa adds immediately
Maratht (Ixxxy); isita mistaken repetition of the last three syllables of
the preceding river? I have found no such river.

|| The modern Kistna. This river received very little notice in ancient
times, and was almost unknown compared with the Godavari and Kaveri. `
Besides its inclusion in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 340), it is doubtful if it is 50
mentioned in the M.-Bh., or Rámáyaņa. It is omitted from the lengthy
account of Sahadeva’s conquests in the south (Sabha-P. xxx), and the detailed
pilgrimage itineraries (Vnna-P., Tirtha-yftri-P.) and other geographical
discourses’: 1, does not occur in the story of Raghu’s conquests even in
the late poem,the Raghu-VathSa, The reason seems to be that the country
througīt which tt flows was nearly all forest in ancient times.

Q For tūthūtard of the text the Vayu Puršņa reads c'a vañjulá (xlv. 104)
and. the Kérma ca vafyatd or c'a vatsart (xlvii. 34). I have not found these
Jamėës elgt where. Perhaps we should read some name like Mañjirá, as the
large southern ` tributary of the Godavari is now called, though its earliest


Dame was apparently Manddkint (Réméy., Yuddha K, cx. 38, 89; Journal,
'P A 5, 1894, p- 250).


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 303


Veņyā,* Tunga-bhadra,+ Suprayogā,t Vūhyā,$ and the
27 river Kaveri; || these noble rivers] issue from the slopes
of the Sahya** Mountains.


The Krita-mālā, ++ Tamra-parni, Pushpa-


* This form is not in the dictionary. The Varāha Puršņa reads Veņd
Ixxxv); the Kūrma Veņd or Varņd (xlvii. 34); and the Vayu Vaiņt (xlv.
104)—all mere variations, the proper name no doubt being Vend. This is
the third river of this name mentioned here, see verses 19 and 24. It is
probably the same as the Vind in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 828), and the
Veņņd in the Bhagavata Purana (V. xix. 17). Is it to be identified with the
R. Penner which is between the Kistna and Kaveri; though the Sanskrit
name of the Penner is said to be Pináká (Arch. Surv. of S. India, by R.
Sewell, I. 123 and 129) ?

t The modern Tumbhudra, the larga southern tributary of the Kistna,
consisting of the combined streams of the Tunga and Bhadra.

f This is not in the dictionary, but it is also mentioned in the Bhishma-P.
list (ix. 328) and in the Vana-P. (cexxi. 14232), and was a large and known
river. Though not apparently identified, it is probably one of the large western
tributaries of the Kistna.

§ This is not in the dictionary, but the Varáha Purána agrees (Ixxxv)
and the Matsya (cxiii. 29). I have not found the name elsewhere and it does
not appear to be identified. The Agni P. reads Vdradd (cix. 22), the large
southern tributary of the Kistna called Varada or Vedavati.

|| The modern Cavery or Coleroon in south India. It was better known

` than the Kistna in ancient times. It is mentioned in the M.-Bh., (Vana-P.
Ixxxy. 8164-5 ; clxxxix. 12910; and Bhishma-P. ix. 828) and Rámáy. (Kishk.
K. xli. 21 and 25). King Jahnu is said in the Hari-Varn$a to have married this
river, and made the Ganges his daughter (xxvii. 1416-22; and xxxii.
1757-61).

T The Matsya (axiii. 29) and Varáha (lxxxv) Puršņas add the Vaiijuld;
as to which see verse 26 note T.

* The text reads Bindhya or Vindhya here, after having read it already
in verse 25; and offers Sahya a as variant ina note. The latter ic m-ni-
festly the proper reading, and agrees with the Kūrma (xlvii 34) and Váyu
(xlv. 104) Puržņas.

ft This is not in the dictionary. The Agni Purina agrees with it (oxyi:ii. 8):
the Kūrma reads Ritu-mdld (xlvii. 85), the Varina S'ata-mdld (lxxry),andtt?
the Bhigavata Kata-mdld (V. xix. 17). Is it to be identified with th) Vea'a-
mali which flows out north of Cochin? The people of Kac'c'ku or Coorin are
mentioned in canto lviii. verse 28.

tt This is mentioned asa place of pilgrimage in the M.-Bh. (Vam.p,


304 CANTO LVJI.


28 jā,* Sitpald-vati;+ these are rivers{ which rise in the
Malaya Mountains, and have cool water.
And the Pitri-somā, § and Rishi-kulya, || Ikshuké, { ang


Ixxxviii. 8340), and the Raghu-V. says (iv. 49 and 50), that the vanquished
Péndya kings gave Raghu the choicest pearls from the sea at the mouth
of the R. Tamra-parni, where (the commentator adds, it is well-known) pearls
were produced. This river then was in the Pandya country and flowed
into the G. of Manaar. It is the modern Chittar, the river of Tinnevelly
(Arch. Surv. of S. India, by R. Sewell, I. 303).

* The Vayu Puriņa reads Pushpa-jdti (xlv. 105), the Kūrma Pushpa-vatt
(xlvii. 35), and the Varaha Pushpd-vatt (Ixxxv). I do not find any of
these names elsewhere. A tirtha Pushpa-vatt is mentioned | M.-Bh., Vana-P,
lxxxy. 8154-5), but it was situated between Dakshina Kosala (Chhattisgarh)
and C’ampé (Bhagalpur). A river Pushpa-vent is mentioned (id., Bhishma-P,
ix. 342), which is joined with a river Utpald-vatt and therefore is probably
the same as the river in the text. A Pushpa-vdhint is mentioned as situated
in the south in the Hari-Varmnša (clxviii. 9510-2).

+ This is the same as the Utpald-vatt mentioned in the last note (M.-Bh.
Bhishma-P. ix. 342) and the Utpald (Hari-V., clxviii. 9510-2); and the Vayu
(xlv. 105) and Karma (xlvii. 35), Matsya (cxiii. 30) and Variha (1xxxv) Puranas
read Utpald-vatt.

f There are only six noteworthy rivers rising in the Malaya Mts., viz., the
Vaigai, Vaippar and Chittar on the east, the Amaravati (a tributary of the
Kaveri) on the north, and the Ponani and Peri or Veda-mali on the west.
The Chittar is the Tamra-parni, hence the three others named in the text
must be found among the five remaining modern rivers.

§ Not in the dictionary. The Vayu Puršņa reads Tri-sdmd (xlv. 106), and
the Agni P. also (cxviii. 8); while the Varáha reads Tri-ydmd (lxxxv). I
have met only with the Tri-siima elsewhere (Bhigavata Puriņa, V. xix. 17).
It is probably one of the small rivers on the Eastern coast, for the interior
behind these mountains was not well known. The Matsya Puriņa reads
Tri-bhdgd (cxiii. 31) which I have not met elsewhere.

|| This is the river on which Ganjam stands, and it bears the same name
still. Itis mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 343). The Vayu Puriņa
reads Ritv-kv?yd (xlv. 106), by mistake. Another Ķishi-kulyd is mentioned
in verse 23

T Thisis not in the dictionary. The Váyu (xlv. 106) and Vardha Puranas
(lxxxv) read Ikshuld; and Ikshudd which the Matsya Purana reads (oxiii. 31)
is, a variant., I have not found any of these names elsewhere, but the R. Ikshu


is nentioned (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix, 324), It is probably one of the small
steams on the Eastern coast,


FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 805


29 Tridivā,* Lūngūlini,f and Vathsa-karét are known to
spring from the Mahendra § Mountains.
The Ķishi-kulyā,|| and Kumari, g Manda-gā,** Manda-


* This is the second Tridivd, see verse 23; but I have not found two
rivers of this name mentioned anywhere olse., Instead of Tridivd c'a yd as
in the text, the Matsya Puriņa reads Tridivdc'ald (oxiii. 31).

+ This is the modern Languliya, on which Chicacole stands, between
Vizianagram and Calingapatam. The Varáha Purdna reads Múlin? or Ldmi-
lint (Ixxxv) and the Matsya Mili (cxiii. 31); Ihave not found these names
elsewhere and they seem incorrect. The Ldngalt mentioned in the M.-Bh.
(Sabha-P. ix 374), is probably this river.

f The Varāha Purdna reads Vamésa-vard (lxxxv), and the Vayu Vamśa-
dhard (xlv. 106) ; the latter is the correct name. It is the modern Bans-
dhard, the river on which Calingapatam stands.

§ The Kūrma Puriņa omits this group of rivers altogether, and puts
three of them Tri-sdémd, Rishtké and Vaméa-dhdrint into the next group
(xlvii. 36). The Matsya Puriņa mentions three more rivers, the Tdmra-
parní, Saravá and Vimald (cxiii. 31), but all these seem doubtful. A Támrá-
parní. has been mentioned in verse 28. A Sardvatt is named in the Bhishma-
P. list (ix. $27), and a Vimald or Vimalodd in various passages (e. g.
Salya-P. xxxix. 2214-5; Hari-V., clxviii. 9517-8); but they are in North-
ern and Western.India.

In note +f on page 284, the Mahendra mountains are said to be “the
portion of the Eastern Ghats between the Godavari and Mahanadi
rivers and the hills in the south of Berar,” but this proposition must be
modified on a full consideration of all the foregoing identifications. Gondwa-
naas used by Wilson was applied to a very wide tract in Central India.
The Mahendra Mts. cannot extend as far west as Berar nor beyond the
Wain-ganga; and must bo limited to the hills between the Mahanadi, Goda-
vari and Wain-ganga, and may perhaps comprise only the portion of the
Eastern Ghats north of the Godavari. Itisin this last tract only that the
name has survived. Seo Raghu Vamiéa, iv. 43.

|| This is the second Rishi-kulya, see verso 28. The Vayu Purana reads
Rishtké (xlv. 107), and the Vardha Rishikd (lxxxv), and the Matsya Kdšikd
(cxiii. 32). I have not met with these names elsewhere.

S] The Vāyu Puriņa reads Su-kumdrt (xlv. 107), and the Vardha Lisatf
I have not found these names elsewhere, but the Kumárí is mentioned in the
Bhishma-P list (ix. 313). i

** This is mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 340). The Varáha Purana
reads Manda-gtminf(lxxxv); and for this and the next river the Kirma reads
Gandha-mddana-gdmint (xlvii. 86), which is probably erroneous.


39


306 CANTO LVII.


30 vahini,* Kript,f and Paláśiní ž are known to Spring in the
Sukti-mat $ Mountains.
All the rivers || possess holy merit; all are rivers flowin
31 into the ocean; all are mothers of the world; T they are
well-known to cleanse from all sin


* This is mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 340), but hardly in the
same connexion.

+ The Vayu Purana reads Ktpd (xlv. 107), and the Kūrma Kshiprd or
Rūpd (xlvii. 36). I do not find any of these names elsewhere. A river
Krityā is mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 826), but that appears from
its context to be in north India.

f This is mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 330), but in so differ-
ent a connexion that the references appear to be to two separate rivers. Tho
Matsya Purana reads Pdšint (cxiii. 32), which however I have not met else-
where.

§ These Mts. are but very rarely mentioned, and in pase 285 note f I have
noticed what has been written about them. "They were in the Eastern re-
gion, for Bhima in his conquests in thet quarter marched from Hima-vat
towards Bhallāta and congnered the Sukti-mat Mountain (M-Bk., Sabhé-P.
xxix. 1079). Though Bhallita does not appear tc have been identified, the
only noteworthy hills in the eash which have not been assigned to tke other
great ranges are the Garo, Khasi and Tippereh Hills which bound Bengal ie
that direction. Can these be the Sukti-mat Mts.? There sesms to be no
improbability in this, for the river Lohits or Brahme-putra and the country
Kama-ripa, which is in the Assam Valley, were known. If this identifica-
tion is satisfactory, the R. Kwmdrt raay bo the modern Somefwart which
flows sovthward between the Garo und Khasi Hills (both being names of
Dnrgá); andthe Krivá may perhaps be the Kepili which flows into the
Brahma-putra a little above Gauhati, tho ancient Kéma-ripa; the other
streams are nob recognizable.

|| Saras-vatyah. Or shonld this mean only the rivars called Saras-vatt ?
There were seven rivers specially distinguished by this name (M.-3h , Salya-P.
xxxix. 2188-9), numely, 1. the Su-prabhd among tho Pushkaras (ibid. 2198-2200);
that is, near Ajmir; 2. the Kdīic'ondksht in Naimisha forest (ibid. 2201-4),
which was on the Go-mati; 3. the Viséla at Gaya (ibid. 2205-6); 4. the
Mano-ramd, the swift stream flowing from Himavat in the north part of
Kosala (ibid. 2207-10) ; 5. the Oyha-vatt, which seems to be in Kuru-kshetra
(ibid. 2212-8); 6. the Su-reņu, which seems to be in Kuru-kshetra or near
Gangi-dvara (ibid. 2211-4); and 7. the Vimalodd cr Vimalodakd at Haiman-
ta-giri (ibid 2214-5).

q Visvasya miaturah ; compare M-Bh., Bhishma-P, ix. 344.


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN INDIA. 307


And others, small’ streams, are mentioned in thousands,

32 O brāhman, those which flow only during the rainy season, and
those which flow at all seasons.

The Matsyas,* and Aégvakitas,+ and Kalyas, f


* The people and their country both went by the name Matsya. This
country was part of the region called Brahmarshi (Manu ii. 19). It was
south or south-west of Indra-prastha, the modern Delhi (M-Bh., Sabhé P.,
xxx. 1105-6; the mention in ibid. xxix. 1083 may be a mistake; but the
Matsyas are named twice in the Bhishma-P. list, ix. 347 and 348, unless one
name be a mistake for Vatsa); and it was west of Siirasena, which was tho
country round Mathura, the modern Muttra (Virata-P., v. 141-5; see note
in canto lviii. verse 7): hence Matsya comprised the modern Alwar State and
the land around that. It appears to have extended up to Kuru-kshetra,
because no other country which could intervene is mentioned in Manu ii. 19.
Its capital was Upaplavya or Upaplava (Salya-P., xxxvi. 1973-6) which was
1} or 2 days’ journey by chariot from Hastinapura (Udyoga-P., Ixxxiii. 3010-
17; lxxxv. 8040; and lxxxviii. 8101). Cunningham says Matsya was the
country west of Agra and north of the R. Chambal, i. e., the whole of Alwar
with portions of Jaypur and Bharatpur; and its capital was Vairdta, the
modern Bairat (Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 242; and XX. 2, and plate i).

The Viya Fursņa reads Vatsas instead (xlv. 110). Vatsa or Vatsya was
in the region east of Delhi (Sabhd-P., xxix. 1084), and king Vatsa who is said
to have given his name to the country was grandson of Divodisa, king of
Benares (Hari-V., xxix. 1587, 1597; and xxxii. 1753). Kauédmbf was tho
capital, and it has been identified by Cunningham with the modern Kosam
which is on the north bank of the Jumna about 81 milésabove Allahabad.
Hence the country was also called Kaufdmba (Arch. Surv. Repts., I. 801-310),
Vatsa or Kaušimba therefore comprised the lower part of the Ganges and
Jumna Doab and also probably the tract south of that, on the other side of
the Jumna.

t The Viyu Puriņa reads Kisashnas, Kisashļas or Kisadyas instead (xlv.
110); but none of these names aro in the dictionary. The Matsya reads
Kirdtas (oxiii. 35) but they are out of place here. The toxt reads Mutsydšvaki-
ah kulydšc'a, but I would suggest instead Matsydé c'a Kanydkubjd$ c'a, thus
reading Kanyd-kubjas or Kdnya-kubjas instead of Asvakiitas and Kulyas.
Kanyá-kubja or Kinya-kubja is the modern Kanauj, on tho Ganges about
50 miles above Cawnpore; it was a famous city all through Indian history.
People called Sukufyas are mentioned (Bhishma-P. ix. 347), Ašvakas (ibid.
351), and Atvtakas (ibid, li 2105).

f This is not in the dictionary asa people; the word occurs in Vana-P.,
(oxxy. 10408), but does not appear to mean a people there. See the last note.


308 CANTO LVII.


33 the Kuntalas,* the people of Káśi,ł and the Košalas, +
and the Atharvas, and Arka-lingas,§ and the Malakas, I


* This country is said by Muir to be one of the Piśác’a countries (Sansk,
Texts, II. 59), but there were three people of this name, one in tho Dekhan
(Bhishma-P., ix. 367), who are mentioned in verse 48 below; and two others
elsewhere (ibid. 347 and 359). Those mentioned in verse 347 are the people
meant here, for they are grouped with the people of Kasi and Kosala; and
they probably ocenpied the country near Chunar (south of Benares), which
Cunningham calls Kuntila (Arch. Surv. Repts., XI. 123). The third people
were probably in the West.

+ Benares, the ancient Vdrāņast. It was the capital of an ancient and
famous kingdom. According to the Ramayana Kasi was a kingdom (Adi-K.,
xii. 20) while Prayāga and the country all around it was still forest (Journal,
R. A. 5., 1894, pp. 237-239). Its sacred character dates from comparatively
late times, for it was one of the exploits for which Krishna was extolled that
he burnt it for a succession of years and devastated it (Udyoga-P., xlvii.
1883; and Hari-V., clxi. 9142-3). For some vicissitudes in its early, history,
see Hari-V., xxix. and xxxii.

t Košala, Kosala or Uttara Kosala, with its capital Ayodhyd, is the modern
Ondh. Gen. Cunningham says it meant more particularly the country north
and east of the R. Rapti (Arch. Surv. Repts., I. 327; and XVII. 68); but it
seems rather to have denoted the country stretching from the Rapti on the
east (see page 294 note f) to the confines of the Kuru and Ptūc'ila kingdoms
on the west. Northward it was bounded by the tribes that inhabited the
slopes of the Himalayas, and southward by the kingdom of .Benares. It was
distinguished from another Kosala, which was called Dakshina or Mahé
Kosala and which is mentioned in verse 54. ž

$ These two names are not in the dictionary, and I have not found them
elsewhere; they seem to be mistakes. The Vayu Purfņa reads instead of
them atha pūršve tilangáś c'a (xlv. 111); but this is doubtful and unsatis-
factory, for the Tilangas are mentioned as a southern people in canto lviii.
verse 28. The Matsya reads and Avantas and Kalingas (cxiii. 36), but these
are hardly satisfactory; the former are mentioned in verses 52 and 55, and
the latter in verses 87 and 46 below. Perhaps Arka-lingas may be meant
as a synonym of Sūrya-vamnšas, the Solar Race, yet this again is hardly
satisfactory, for that race reigned in Kosala, which has just been mentioned
separately. There is a low group of Brahmans in Behar called Atharvas
(Risley's Tribes and Castes of Bengal, I. 26).

|| This is not in the dictionary and seems erroneous. The Vayu Paraņa
reads Magadhas instead (xlv. 111), the people of Magadha or South Beba”,

but this is unsatisfactory for the Magadhas are mentioned in verse 44, The


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN INDIA, 309


and Vrikas *; these f are well known generally as the
peoples who inhabit the Central Region. |


Matsya reads Múkas (cxiii. 36), which I have not met elsewhere. The read-
ing should be Malajas probably. "They are mentioned in the M-Bh. (Bhish-
ma-P. ix. 857), and Rémfyana (Adi-K. xxvii. 16-23), and from the course
described in the latter poem as taken by Visvā-mitra and Réma it appears
they were neighbours of the Kardshas, (see note to verse 53), and occupied
the district of Shihūbid, west of the Sone, for Višvi-mitra and Ráma cross-
ing from the Sarayū to the south of the Ganges entered that district, which
had been inhabited by the Malajas (ibid., 8-16.)

* The Vrikas are named in Bhishma-P., li. 2106, and a king Vrika is allud-
ed to in the Hari-Varnša (xiii. 760-61) ; but there is nothing to identify them.
The Matsya Purina reads Andhakas (cxiii. 36). The Andhakas were a
subordinate family of the Yadava race, and are often mentioned in the
M.-Bh. (e.g. Udyoga-P. lxxxv. 304), and Bari-Varnša (xxxv. 1907-8; and
xxxix, 2044; and xciv. 5190-5204), but they dwelt in Su-rāshtra in the
West and appear to be out of place here. The most probable reading seems
to be the Vrajas, the people of Vraja (or Vriji, as it was also called),
the modern Braj, the country north-west of Mathura or Muttra.

+ This is a short list. Besides these the Viyu Puriņa has two lines at the
beginning of this group, viz, “the Kurus, the Páñcálas, and the Silvas, and the
Jéngalas, tho Siirasenas, the Bhadrakdras, the Bodhas and the lords of Sata-
patha” (xlv, 109 and 110); much like a passage in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P.,
ix. 346-7). The Matsya has the same lines, but gives the last two names as
Béhyas and Putav'c'aras (cxiii. 85, 36). For the Kurus, see canto lviii. verse 9;+
for the Pšūcālas, canto lviii. verse 8; forthe Salvas, canto lviii. verse 6; the-
Jūngalas are no doubt the people of Kuru-jangala, see note to Kuru, canto
lviii. verse 9; forthe Sdrasenas, see canto lviii. verse 7. The Bhadrakūras
are ment:oned in the M.-Bh. (Sabhé-P., xiii. 690) and may perhaps be the
same as the Bhadras mentioned in Vana-P. ccliii. 15256; they appear from
those pussages io have been situated on the west bank of the Jumna, some-
where between Delhi and Muttra. The Bodhas are mentioned in the M.-Bh.
(Sabh4-P., xiii. 590; Bhishma-P., ix. 347) and are probably the same as
the Bodhis (Rámáy., Ayodh-K. lxx. 15), who appear to havo been situated
onthe eastern ‚confines of the Panjab. I have not met Béhyas elsewhere;
itscems erronetus. Sata-patha seems to be erroneons, and Patao'c'ara is much
better. ‘The Patac’c‘aras are mentioned in the M-Bh. (Sabhi-P. xiii. 590-1;
xxx. 1108; Virdta-P., i. 11-12; &o.,) and appear from the second of these pass-
nges to hove dccupicd the tract south of the Apara-matsyas, that is,
probably the.country south-west of Gwalior.

t Madhya-le$u, the whole of the Ganges basin from the Panjab as far :


310 CANTO LVI.


34 Now along the northern half of the Sahya mountains * that
region, in which the river Godavari flows, is a delightful
35 one compared even with the whole earth ;


Go-vardhana
is the charming city of the higli-souled Bhūrgav


a race. +


east as the confines of Behar; but Manu restricts it and defines its limits
thus (ii. 21)—north, the Himalayas; south, the Vindhya Range ; west,
Vinašana which is where the R. Saras-vati perishes in the desert (M-Bh.,
Salya-P. xxxviii. 2119-20) ; and east, Prayaga or Allahabad.

* The text Sahyasya c’ottare yás tu seems incorrect ; these words cannot
well go with the preceding verse, for no people north of the Sahya Mts,
and south of the Piripitra Mts. could be within Madhya-desa i and they do
not agree with the following words. The Vayu Furana reads sahyasya
c'ottardrddhe tu, which I have adopted. That Purána agrees and is a little
fuller—‘ Now along the northern half of the Sahya Mts., where the river
Godavari jlows, that region is a delightful one within the whole of this earth.
This paradise named Go-vardhana was built there by Sura-rija for the sake of
Rama’s spouse; the trees and herbs there were brought down from above by
the Muni Bharadvija for the sake of Rima's spouse. He made a delightful
wooded tract the private part of the palace (antah-pura) ” (xlv. 112-114).
The Matsya Puriņa reads Sahyasydnantare c'aite and is similar, but varies at
the second sentence, thus—“ Where for the sake of Rama’s Spouse the hill
named Go-vardhana, Mandara, Gandha-mādana, trees from Svarga and
heavenly plants (oshadhth, aco.) were brought down by the Muni Bharadvija
for the sake of the spouse; hence that region excels in flowers, therefore it has
become delightful.” (cxiii. 37-39), The Rima alluded to here must be
Ramá Jémadagnya or Parašu-Ržina, who dwelt in this region; see the next
note. F

ft These people are here placed on the east side of the Sahya Mts. among
the sources of the Godavari. This region and the country west of it on the
other side of these mountains and the tract northwards to the Narmada are
connected in many a story with Bhrigu, his son C'yavana and his descendants
Rio‘ika, Jamadagni and Para$u-Rūma (e. g. M-Bh., Adi-P. clxxviii. 6802-10;
Vana-P. cxxi and cxxii with Sata-patha, Brāhmaņa IV. i. 5; Vana-P. lxxxix.
8364-5; cxv. 10150-2; Sdnti-P. xlix. 1778-82; Vana-P. xcix. 8681-2 with
Sénti-P. ii). The Bhirgavas were however a numerous race and spread
into other regions ; they are also mentioned as one of the eastern peoples in
verse 43 below. They held a high position and appear to have been numerons
in king Krita-virya's kingdom at Mūhish-mati, and after his death their
wealth, it is said, brought down on them the hostility of the Kshattriyas
(Adi-P. cIxxviii. 6802-15). Go-vardhana (masc.) as a city is not in the dic-
tionary. I lhuve not found it alluded to elsewhere.


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN INDIA. 311


The North-western peoples are these—The Vahlias*


* Vdhltka or Béhlika or Bdlhika is said in the dictionary to be the modern
Balkh, and in Lassen’s map to be the ancient Bactriane; but there was
another country, if not two tribes of this name, in the Panjab. The name
is written Vdhltka or Vahlika and there may have been a distinction between
the two words, for both are mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 354 and
861). These were not uncommon names, and there were two princes called
Vahlika between Parikshit and Bhishma in the Lunar Dynasty, and the later
princo is styled a king (M-Bh., Adi-P, xciv. 3745, and 3750-51; and xcv.
3798-3800). The Vahlikas are mentioned twice in the Ramayana and are
placed in the western region (Kishk. K. xliii. 5), and also in the northern region
(ibid., xliv. 18). A distinction as between two people of this name is also
indicated by the mention of two independent kings of the Vahlikas reigning
contemporancously in the M.-Bh. (Adi-P, clxxxvi. 6992; Sabhd-P. xxxiii. 1266
and 1272; Udyoga-P. iii. 74 and 77). One of these two peoples was closely
connected with the Madras, for Salya, king of Madra, is also called lord of the
Vihlikas (Adi-P. cxiii. 4425-40; and lxvii. 2642), and his sister Madri is
called Vahliki also (ibid., cxxv. 4886); and an ancient eponymous king
Váhlíka is placed in the same Krodha-vaša gana with the eponymous kings
Madraka and Suvira (ibid., lxvii. 2695-6). The other people of this name
appear to have been closely connected with the Daradas who were a moun-
tain-tribe in the north of the Panjab (see note to verse 38), and are the
modern Dards of Dardistan; for an ancient king. Darada the Vāhlika is
mentioned who did not belong to the Krodha-vasa group (Adi-P. Ixvii. 2694),
and the Vahlikas are linked with the Daradas (Bhishma-P. cxviii. 6484) and
are mentioned with the Kimbojas and Yavazas and other ultra-Panjab tribes
(Droņa-P. cxxi. 4818; see also Sabha-P. xxvi. 1031-2). If these inferences may
be trusted, one Vahlika or Vihlika was situated in the plains of the Panjab
alonyside Madra-deša and very possibly south of it (see Rámáy., Ayodh-K.
lxx. 16-19, with note to Madrakas in verse 36, and note to Kaikeyas in verse
87) i. e , between the rivers Chenab and Sutlej; and the other among the lower
slopes of the Himalayas, very possibly between the Chenab and Bias. The
name Vūhlika appears to have been altered in later times to Bdhtka seemingly
by a punning resemblance to vahis, “ outside, ” because they were shut out by
the Saras-vati, Kuru-kshotra and other natural featnres from the central
country which remained true to Brahmanism. The people cf the Panjab
were then collectively called «frafļas or Bahtkas, and they and all the tribes
boyond ‘were stigmatized as impure and contemptible by the arrogant and
intolerant brahmens of Madhya-dega (Muir's Sansk. Texts. II. 482, and
M-Bh., Karna-P. xliv. 2026 &o. ; sce also Cunhingham's Arch Surv, Repts., lī.
6, 14,17, 195, dc).


312 CANTO LVII.


and the Vātadhānas,* and the Abhiras,+ the Kala.


* This people is mentioned in several passages in the M-Bh. (Sabha-P, 1,
1826; Udyoga-P. iii. 86; Bhishma-P. ix. 354; and Droņa-P. xi. 898), and their
name appears to be derived from an eponymous king Vatadhdna, who was of
the same Krodha-vaša group as the eponymous kings of the Vūhlikas, Madras
and Sauviras (Adi-P. lxvii. 2695-9). No doubt therefore they dwelt along-
side those tribes. Their country Vūtadhāna was part of the territory
stretching from Paūc'a-nada to the Ganges, over which the hosts assembled on
the Kauravas’ side spread at the beginning of the great war (Udyoga-P. xviii.
596-601), and it was in the western region (Sabhá-P, xxxi. 1190-1). From
these data it may be inferred that the Vātadhūnas inhabited the country on
the east side of the Sutlej, southward from Ferozpur. Manu declares a
Vatndhina to be the offspring of an outcaste brahman and a brahman
woman (x. 21), but that is no doubt an expression of the same arrogance
which in later times stigmatized all the Panjab races as outcastes (as
mentioned in the last note), for Vátadhána dvijas were among the people
whom Nakula conquered (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1190-1).
Vādhadhēnas (xly..115) erroneously.

f They were an aboriginal tribe and are called mlec'o'has and dasyus.
(M-Bh.,Vana-P. clxxxviii. 12838-40; and Mausala-P. vii. 222, &c ) They were
scattered over various tracts and gained their livelihood invarrious ways.
Three divisions of them are mentioned in the M-Bh. (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1192),


those who dwelt along the river Saras-vati, those who lived by fishing, and
those who inhabited the mountains.


The Vayu Purana reads


The first group occupied the north
portion of the desert as far east as Vinaš$ana on that river, for it is said the


river perished there because of her hatred of them (Salya-P. xxxviii. 2119-
20), and as far west as Pafic’a-nada (Mausala-P. vii. 220-242; and viii. 270;
where Paūc'a-jana is probably a mistake for Paūc'a-nada); this group is
probably the tribe of Abhiras mentioned in Bhishma-P. ix. 354, and Rimfy.,
Kishk. K. xliii. 19. The second group must no doubt mean those who lived
by the sea and not simply on rivers, hence it would have inhabited the coast
along the Rann of Kachh and the delta of the Indus; and it is no doubt the
tribe of Abhiras mentioned in Kishk. K. xliii. 5. The context indicates that:
the third group were the monntainescs of the Aravalli Range and the hills
of Malwa; but there was another soction of this group which appears to
have occupied the hilly tracts in the north or west of the Panjab, for it is
classed with the Daradas aud Kéémiras (Bhishma-P. ix. 875 ; and see note .
to verse 38), and with the Péradas (Sabhi-P, ]. 1882: und see note to verse337),
The Abhiras were closely connected with the Stidras in these three groupings
(Sabhi-P. xxxi. 1192; and see Tote to next verse). The descendants Of al}
these Abhiras are the modern Ahirs who are scattered widely over Hindustañ


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 313
36 toyakas, * and the Apardntas,+ and the Siidras,{ the


proper. Another body of Abhiras was found in the Dekhan (see verse 47).
Tho Abhiras are said in the Hari-Vathsa to have been dominated by the
Daityas and Danavas in ancient times, and to have been the chief inhabitants
of the country from the Jumna to the peninsula of Gujarat (xciv. 5142-80).

* So also in the Matsya Puriņa (exiii. 40). This word is written Kdlajoshaka
in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 354), but I have not found either name else-
where. Possible readings might be Bdla-jartikdh or Bdla-kuthikdh. The
former, however, seems inappropriate ; the Jartikas are the same as the Bahikas
(Karņa-P. xliv. 2033 ; Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 13 and 195) who are noticed
in the note to “ Vahlikas” (page 311). The “ Būlas and Kathis” wonld be a
preferable reading. The Bilas, according to Cunningham, occupied the northern
portion of Sindh and were ousted from there abvut the middie of the seventh
century A D. and moved south-east. The Káthis (the Kuthzi of the Greek
writers), according to the same authority occupied the Rechna Doab between
the Chenab and Ravi rivers and also probably the northorn portion of
Sindh; they have retained the former territory, but those who held the
latter were driven from it about the middle of the seyenth centary A.D.
and settled in the peninsula of Gujarat where they have given the nam
Kathiawar to a district (Arch. Surv. Repts., JI. 33-37).

+ Apardnta means “living at the western border.” A people of this name
is mentioned in the M -Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 355), and allusion is often made to
Apardnta and the Apardntas (e.g. Vana-P., cexvii. 7885-6; and Santi.Pr., xlix.
1780-2); but the word, though it no doubt designates a people living in the ex-
treme west, yet seems to have a general meaning. m most passages (sec verse
52 below), and those passages which use itin a restricted sense do not agree—


a country in the middle of tho sea (Raghu-V.,


thus Apardnta is stated to be
verso 34 are placed


iv. 58, commentary), yet the Apardntikas in canto lviii.,
in the tortoiso's tail, that is, north of Sindhuu and Sanvira which are placed by
verse 30 in the right hind foot. Cunningham, judging from the spots where


coins have beeu_ found, was inclined to locate them in Northern Sindh and parts
LV. 136, 137) which will satisfy canto


of West Rajputana (Ach.Sury, PRepts., x
lviii., verso 34. The Vayu Purina reads Aparttas instead (xlv. 115) which
seems erroneous. The Ramayana mentions simply the Aparas (Kishk.-K.,
xliii. 23). The Matsya Purana reads Purandhras (cxiii. 40) erroneously.
the Sadras are often linked together with the Abhtras (M.-Bh., Sabhé-P.,
XXXi. (92; Bhishma P., ix. 375; Droņa-P., xx. 798; Salya-P., xxxviii.
2119-20). They appear to have been considered dasyus (Sānti-P., clxxi.
6372, and clxxiii. 6446) and mlec'c'has (Vana-P., clxxxviii. 128380
where ' Sura seems x mistake for Sidra); yet their women are alluded to in-
rather favorrable terms (Sabbi-P., l. 1829). Thoy wero divided into the s#me


40 c


314 CANTO LYII.
Pallavas, * C'arma-khaņdikas, + Gāndhāras,f and Gabalas,$


three groups as the Abhiras, viz., men of the plains, men of the sea-coast, and
men of the hills (Sabhé-P., xxxi. 1192), inhabiting much the same regiong
(see note tc Abhiras in verse 85; for Stiras in Rāmāy., Kishk.-K., xlii. 19
read probably Siidras), hence it would seem these two people were considerably
intermixed and were probably closely connected aboriginal races, One
group of the Sūdras was known to the Greeks as Sudraka, and is placed by
Cunningham in the middle of the triangle of the Panjab (Anc. Geog., I.
214-218 ; and Arch. Surv. Repts., II.),
* This is no doubt a mistake for Pahlavas, which the Vayu Purana reads
(xlv. 115) and which occurs in canto lviii., verso 30; though Pallavas are
mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., li. 1990). The Pahlavas are understood
to be the Pehlavi or ancient Persians. Two people of this name are mentioned
in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 855 and 375), but there appear to be no data to
make a distinction as the allusions to the Pahlavas are generally vague,
unless it be supposed there was a Pahlava colony in the Panjab; and this
supposition would snit this verse, for the Persians were altogether outside
India. The Hari-Varnša says King Sagara defeated a great confederation of
Pahlavas and othēr people, abrogated their laws, degraded them and made
‘them wear beards (xiii. 7683-4; and xiv. 775—788); but this seems a late fable,
on a par with their being called dusyus (id., cxv. 6440-3). The Rāmfyaņa
Easa an absurd fable about the creation of the Pahlavas and other foreign
races by Vasnizhtha (Adi-K., ly. 18-20 ; and lvi. 2-3); when contending with
Visva-mitra he mado mhis cow create Pahlavas. Sakas, Yavanas, &o., and
Vi$vē-mitra destroyed them alī'n' 1 succession.
t Or C’arma-mandalas ag in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 355) which this Purána
has followed closely in enumeratinys this group of races. The Vayu, however,
reads the same as in the toxt (x lv. 115). I have not found any of these
names elsewhere; but the name 1 suggests identification with Samarkand.


The Matsya Puriņa reads Atta-khana likas or C'dtta-khaņdikas (cxiii. 40) which
appear to be erroneous,


1 Gdndhdra was the whole of zhe lower basin of the Kabul river (Arch)


Surv. Repts., II. 15, and map to p. 87). It was a famons country in ancient
times, its kings ranked with the highest Indian Sovereigns, and its princesses
married into the noblest royal families. The Passages in which the Gān-
dhfras are pronounced bad and impure (e.g., Sānti-P., Ixy. 2429-31; and covii.
7560-1 ; and Karna-P. xliv. 207 0) betray the interpolated sentiments of a later
age (Muir’s Sansk. Texts, II. 482), `

§ This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purána reads Yavanas instead
(33v. 116), and so also the Matsya (oxiii. 41); this word is supposed to hare
den0ted the Greeks originally, but the Yavunas appear to have been kn


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 315
87 the Sindhus,* Sauviras,¢ and Madrakas, and the


in India long before Alexander’s time. The Bhishma-P. list mentions the
Giri-gahvaras in this region (ix. 375). V

# Primarily Sindhu meant the country along the Indus, but it has generally
denoted the lower portion of that country, that is, the modern Sindh more or
less closely. It is placed by canto lviii., verse 30 in the Tortoise’s right hind
foot, and it stretched down to tho peninsula of Kathiawar which is called the
territory of Sindhu-Rāja in the Hari-Vaynša (cxiv. 6407-12) The Sindhus
are mentioned frequently in the M.-Bh., and are named twice in the Bhishma-
P. list, first in connexion with the Pulindas (ix. 848), and again in conjunc-
tion with the Sauviras (ix. 361), but there do not appear to be any other
passages which tend to shew a division. Sindhu had a well-known breed of
horses (Drona-P., xxiii. 973).

+ The Sauviras claimed descent from an eponymous king Suvtra of the
same Krodha-vasa group 2s the Madras and Vāhlikas (M.-Bk., Adi-P., lxvii.
2695-6) ; but the genealogy of Suvira in the Hari-Varnša (xxxi. 1679) is fanci-
ful. Savvira was closely connected with Sindhu, ior the two ure often
coupled together, and Jayad-rathe king cf Sināha was also lord of Sauvira
and the Sauvires, and is styled Saindhava and Suvira indifferently (Vana-
P., colxiii. 15576-81; cclxvi. 15618 and 15655-7 ; and cclxvii. 15639-51).
Cunningham identifies Sauvira with the country between the Indus and
Jhelam, that is, the Sindh-Segar Doab (Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 4-6, 14
and 23) ; that hardly agrees with the position assigned to it in the Tortoise'g
right hind foot, but-the collocation of races in that region is rather confused.
May we sappoce that Snuvirs was rather the name of tke people whils
Bindhu more properly denoted the territory? The Sauviras might then
bave inhabited the northern part of Sindha, ant Sauvira would have beeu
that portion only of the larger area. This theory seems to satisfy the
conditions generally. .

Along with the Sanvires end Saindhaves the Karma Purana mentions
(xlvii. 40) “the Hūņes (or Kūņus), the Malyas (or S'ilvas), the inhabi-
tants of Balyé (or Kaipe}.” For the Hiinas, see note to canto lviii., verse 45;
Kane seems erroneous ; for the Silvas, seo canto lviii, verso 6; Malya seems
erroneous ; Bdlyd and Kalpu seom unidentifiable.

+ The Mudras or Madras cleimed descent from an eponyīaons king
Madraka of the same Krodha-vasa gronp as the Sauviras avd Vūhlikas
(M.-Bh., Kdi-P., ixvii. 2695-6 ; and see note on page $11); but his genealogy
in the Hari-Vaznéa (xxxi. 1679) seems fancifnl. Cunningham places Madra
between tho Jhelam and Ravi rivers, thut is, in the Ghej and Rechna Doabs
(Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 4, 8, 14 and 39), yet he also says it is the country
between the Jhelam and Bias, or between the Chenab and Bias (ibid., 196);


316 CANTO LVII.
people who dwell along the Satadru,* the Kalingas, +
?


but it could hardly have comprised much of the Chej Doab for the Kaikeyas
occupied the greater part of that (see note to next verse). The capital of
Madra was Sdkala (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1197) which Cunningham has identified
with the modern Sangala, on the R. Apagd which is the modern Ayak (Arch-
Surv. Repts., II. 195-6 and Karņa-P., xliv. 2033). The R. Irivati flowed
through Madra-deša, but rear the eastern border (ibid., 2088-41; and Matsya,
Puriņa cxiv, 7 and 15-18.) Madra then was the country around Sangala,
with tho tracts on either sido watered by the Chenab and Ravi. It was a
famous kingdom. The weird story told about king Vyushitáśva’s queen
(AXdi-P., cxxi. 4695-4714) no doubt means her sons became Madras and did
not originate the Madras. In later times the brahmavs of Hindustan pro-
nounced the Madras, like the Gindhiras, base and impure (Sūnti-P., cevii.
7559-61 ; and Hari-V., xiv. 784); see especially Karņa-P., xliv. 2033-53, where
the Madras are abused in good set terms. The Váyu Puriņa reads Bhadrakas
erroneously (xlv. 116).

* That is, the Sutlej, Satadru-ja, But this seems mistaken, for the Viyu
Puriņa reads Sakas and Hradas (xly, 116); and the Matsya Sakas and Druh-
yas (cxiii. 41). Tho Sakas, therefore, are no doubt one of the people meant
(see note to canto Iviii, verse 6). Hrada seems erroneous, The Drubyas
may be connected with Yayátis son Druhyu who was king of the West,
(Hari-V. xxx. 1604 and 1618); but I have not met with them elsewhere.

+ This seems erroncous. These people are mentioned in verse 46, and there
seems to be no ground for thinking any Kalingaslived in North India; yet
Kalingas are mentioned in such a connexion (Bhishma-P., ix. 376; and lxxi.
3132; and see note to Arkalingas in verge 33), and a town Kalinga-nagara is men-
tioned in the Rimiy. on the west of the Go-mati and not far from it (Ayodh.
K., lxxiii. 14, 15). A tribe called Kulingas is alluded to (Drona-P., cxxi.
4819). The Vayu Purina reads Kulindas instead (xlv. 116), which is no doubt
right. Cunningham says the Kulindas or Kunindas are the modern Kunets
who occupy Kullu and the Simla hills and the slopes below, along both sides
of the Sutlej (Arch. Surv. Repts., XLV. 116 and 125-130). The Kulindas ex-
tended further cast along the southern slopes of the Himalayas as far as
Nepal, for they were the first nation which Arjuna conquered in his North-
ward march from Indra-prastha (Sabha-P., xxv. 996), aud they also occupied
the hills north of Mundara, that is, the Almora hills (id., li, 1858-9; and
note* to page 287 above); indeed the name appears to have comprised a
considerable body of hill tribes, for “all the countries of Kulinda ” are spoken
of (Vana-P., elxxvii. 12350),

The Matsya Puriņa reads Pulindas (exiji. 41). The Pulindas were a rude
tribe inhabiting the Himalayas and intermixed with Kirátas and Tangaņas


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 317


the Pāradas,* the Hāra-bhūshikas,+ the Matharas, f
and the Bahu-bhadras, $ the Kaikeyas,|| the Daša-mili-


(Vana-P., cxl. 10863-5; and Droņa-P , cxxi. 4846-7; and see notes to verses
40 and 41); they were considered mlec'c'has (Vana-P., clxxxviii. 12838-40),
and are declared to haye become degraded because of the extinction of
sacred rites, Ge. (Anušis.-P., lvii. 2103, &c.). There was another body
of Pnlindas in Central India (Sabha-P., xxviii. 1068; and xxx. 1120; and
Sánti-P., cevii. 7559).

* The Pūradas are generally mentioned with hill tribes (Sabhá-P., 1. 1832; liv
1869; and Drona-P., cxxi. 4819). They appear to have been a hill tribe
like the Kulindas and Tanganas (see note to verse 41 below) and to have
dwelt in the western portion of the Himalayas (Sabhi-P., li. 1858-9), though
they ure placed in the tortoise’s right hind foot by canto lviii., verse 31;
the races placed there, however, are strangely confused. Manu says they
were Kshattriyas and became degraded because of the extinction of sacred
rites, dc. (x. 48-44) ; and the Hari-Vamša says king Sagara degraded them
and ordered them to wear long hair (xiii. 763-4; and xiv. 775-83), and they
were mlec’c’has and dasyus (id., cxv. 6440-42), Tho Vayu Puriņa reads
Paritas instead (xlv. 116).

+ Thisis notin the dictionary. The Viyu Purina reads Hdra-pirikas
instead (xlv. 116), and the Matsya Ifdra-mūrtikas (cxiii. 41); but I have
not found any of these names elsewhere. Should tho reading be Hdra-
ldņakas ? The Hira-hūņas are mentioned in the M.-Bh., as a people outside
India on the west (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1194; 1. 1844; and Vana-P., li. 1991).

t The Vayu Puriņu reads Ramatas instead (xlv. 117), and the Matsya
Rdmaļkhas (oxiii. 42), and the Kirma mentions a people called Rdémas (xlvii.
41). The reading should, no doubt, be Ramatas, Ramathas or Ramathas; they
were a western people mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Sabht-P., xxxi. 1195; Vana-
P., li. 1991; and Sūnti.-P., Ixy. 2480). The Ramanas (Bhishma-P., ix. 374) may
be the same people. There aro, however, no sufficient data to identify any
of them.

§ The Viyn Puriņa reads Ruddha-katakas instead (xlv. 1.17); the M.-Bh.
mentions tho Béhu-bddhas (Bhishma-P., ix. 362) and the Balabhadras (Karna-P.
vi. 153); and the Matsya Purina reads Kantakdras (cxiii. 42); but none of
these scems satisfactory and I have not met any of them elsewhere.

|| These people were called Kekayas, Kaikayas and Kaikeyas. An epony-
mous ancestor Kaikeya is assigned to them by the Huri-Varnša (xxxi. 1679),
but his genealogy seems fanciful. They were a powerful and famous nation,
and were noted bowmen (Sabhi-P., iv. 126; and Vana-P., celxyii, 15654),
They inhabited the Panjab and appear to have joined the Madras, for the two
are sometimes coupled together (Sabhi-P., li. 1870; and Droņa-P., xx. 799); and


318 CANTO LYII.


38 kas,*. and the settlements t of Kshattriyas, and the fami.
lies of Vaišyas and Sūdras. f
The Kambojas,§ and the Daradas,]|| and the


canto lviii. places them both in the tortoise’s left side (verses 42 and 45). Their
capital was Rdja-griha (Rámáy., Adi-K.,lxxix. 35=44) or Girt-vraja (id., Ayodh,
K., lxxi. 1; and lxxii. 1). Lassen places the Kaikeyas between the Ravi and
Bias rivers. Cunningham, however, dissents and places them on the line of
the Jhelam, west of the Bāhikas, and proposes to identify Giri-vraja with
Girjak, which was the ancient name of J alalpur on that river (Arch. Surv.
Repts., II. 14); and this agrees with the Rimay. (Ayodh. K., lxx. 16-19).

* These people are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 374). The
Vayu Purana reads Daša-mdnikas (xlv. 117). Does the word mean “the ten
tribes of Milikas” ? The Malikas may perhaps be identified with the Malli
(Arch: Surv. Repts., II. 87). The Matsya Puriņa reads Daša-ndmakas
(cxiii. 42), which seems mistaken.

+ Upa-ni-veša,a word not in the dictionary. It seems to be synonymous
with ni-veša which appears to be the word meant in the corresponding passage
in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 374, kshattriyd yoniveédé c'a ; but kshattriyopanivesaé
c'a would be preferable). Ni-ves'a is used elsewhere in the M.-Bh.(eg., Sa- -

. bhd-P., xiii. 615; and xix. 798), and in the Rimiy.. (Kishk.-K, xliii. 24), and
appears to denote a military colony or settlement in a foreign country.

i That is, Sūdras.as a caste, and not as 2 race; asa race they have been
mentioned in verse 36.

§ The Kimbojas were in the extreme north of the Panjab beyond the
Indus, and were classed with the Daradus (Sobha-P., xxvi. 1031), with Yavanas
and Sakas (Udyoga-P., xviii. 690), and with Ginas (Bhishma-P., ix. 373).
Their country was famous for its largo and fleet breed of horses which are
often mentioned (Sabha-P., 1. 1824; Bhishma-P., lxvi. 8131; Drona-P., xxiii.
972; cxxi. 488i-2;—also Rimiy., Adi-K., vi. 24; and Sundar.-K., xii.
36;—and Reghu-V., iv. 70)? Lassen places Kamboja doubtfully south of
Kashgar and east of the modern ‘Kefiristan (Ind. Alt, map). They
wero Aryans by language (Muirs Sausk. Texts, II. 868-9). Manu says (x.
43—14) they were Kshettriyas and became degraded through the extinction
of sacred rites, dc. ; they are called mlec'c'kas (Vana-P., clxxxviii. 12838—40)
and said to have evil customs (Stnti-P., cevii. 7560-61). The Hari-Varhsa
says they were degraded by King Sagara and ordered to shave the whole of
the lend like the Yavanas (xiii. 763-4; and xiv. 775-83). The Ramiy. has
an absrrd fable about their origin (Adi K. lvi. 2; see page 314 note +).

j| Darada is tho modern Dardistan, the country north of Gándhára and
porth-west of Kūšmir. This region satisfies all the allusions to the Daradas.
They were a hill people (Droņa-P., cxxi, 4885-7 and 4846-7 ; neighbours


COUNTRIES AND RACES NORTH OF INDIA. 319
39 Varvaras,* the Harshavardhanas,t and the C’inas,t the


of the KaiSmiras (id., lxx. 2495), of the Kambojas (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1031),
and of the C'inas and Tushūras (Vana-P., clxxvii. 12350) ; they fought
largely with stones and were skilled in slinging stones (Droņa-P., cxxi. 4835-
47). Manu says they wero Kshattriyas and becamo degraded because of the
extinction of sacred rites, &c. (x. 43 and 44); and like the Pāradas and others
they were considered mlec’c’has and dasyus (Hari-V., oxy. 6440-6442),

* This word is also written Barvarg and Barbara, and often means any bar-
barous race. The Varvaras are generally mentioned in conjunction with the
Sakas or Yavanas (Sabhā-P., xxxi. 1199; Vana-P., coliii. 15254 ; Sinti-P., covii.
7560-61; &c); and from these allusions it appears they were mainly a west-
ern or north-western race; but Varvaras wore also to be found in the east or
north-east of India (Sabha-P., xxix. 1088), and seemingly also in the south
(Vana-P., li. 1989) like the Savaras (Santi-P., lxv. 2429). The name no doubt
represents the rolling of the letter 7 or rough and unknown speech; hence it
would be applied to various rude tribes.

+ This is not in the Gictionary. The Vayu Puriņa reads Priya-laukikas in-
stead (xlv. 118), but I have not found either word elsewhere. Canto lviii
mentions certain Bhoga-prasthas (verse 42) in the north. All these names
secem suggestive, and may perhaps be equivalents of Utsava-sanketa (people
who have no marriage and practise promiscuous intercourse, utsava. meaning
affection, and sanketa, a gesture of invitation) a people mentioned in the M.-
Bh. in the north among the hills (Sabhi-P., xxvi. 1025) and west (id., xxxi.
1191) ; though also in the south (Bhishma-P., ix. 363); and the Raghu-V.,,
places them in the Himalayus (iv. 78). This derivation of Utsava-sanketa is
given in a note to the commentary on Raghu-V., iv. 77.

t The Chinese; but C'fna comprised the country of Thibet along the
whole range of the Himalayas, for tho C’inas are linked with the Kémbojas
in the north-west (Bhishma-P., ix. 373), they are frequently mentioned among
the retinue of Bhaga-datta king of Prāg-jyotisha, in the cast (e.g, Udyoga-
P., xviii. 584-5; see note to verso 44 below), and they were near the sources
of the Ganges in the country midway betweon those regions (Vana-P.,
clxxvii. 12350; Sdnti-P., cecxxvii. 12226-9). The country had a valuable
breod of horses (Udyoga-P., Ixxxv. 8049). In the M.-Bh. the C’inas are
always spoken of with respect and even admiration (Udyoga-P., xviii.
584-5), and’one of their kings called Dhautamilaka is classed among eighteen
famous ancient kings who extirpated their kinsmeņ (id., lxxiii. 2730) ; hence
Manu's remark that the C'inas were Kshattriyas and became degraded because
of the extinction of sacred rites, &c. (x. 48 and 44) betrays the sentiments
of a later age. The Vayu Purana reads Pfnas (xlv. 118) erroneously. "The
Raméy. mentions also Apara-c’tnas (Kishk,-K., xliv. 15), “ the further C’inas.”


320 CANTO LVII.


Tukharas* are the populoust races of men outside.t
- And the Atreyas,§ the Bharadvajas,|| and Pushkalas „T the


# For tu khārdš read tukhdrdš. The Tukhéras are mentioned in the

M.-Bh. (Sabhā-P., 1. 1850) and Rámáy. (Kishk.-K., xliv. 15). The Véyn
Purana reads Tushdras (xlv. 118), and they are mentioned in the M.-Bh.
(Vana-P., li. 1991; Stnti-P., lxv. 2429; Šo.). The two names seem to mean
the same people. They were an outside northern race bordering on the
Himalayas (Vans-P., clxxvii. 12350). In the Hari-Vaméa they are classed
along with Sakas, Daradas, Pahlavas, &c., and considered to be mleo’ c'has
and dasyus (cxv. 6410-42), they are ranked with wild hill-tribes as originat-
ing from king Vena’s sins (v. 310-11), and are said to have been
repressed by king Sagara (xiv. 784). Lassen identifies them with the
Tochari, and places them on the north side of the Hindu Kush (Ind. Alt,
map). The Réméy. has an absurd fable about their origin (Adi.-K., lvi. 3;
Bee page 314, note *),

+ Bahuld. The Véyu Purina reads Pahlavas or Ratna-dhdras instead
(xlv. 118), probably erroneously ; the former have been mentioned in verse
86. Ihave not met with the latter word elsewhere, but it may be noticed
that great quantities of precious stones were found among the Tukhfras
and other northern nations (Sabhé-P., 1. 1849-50).

t Vahyato-nardh. The Váyu Puršņa reads Vēhyatodardh or kshatodarah
instead (xlv. 118) erroneously.

§ This tribe is mentioned in the Bhishma-P, list (ix. 376). The Hari-V.
says’ that king Raudrāš$va's ten daughters all married the rishi Prabhi-kara
of Atri’s race and gave rise to the Atreyas (xxxi. 1660-68) ; and Atreyas
are mentioned asa family of brahmans dwelling in Dvaita-vana (M.-Bh.,
Vana-P., xxvi. 971) which was a forest and lake near the Saras-vati (ibid.,
clxxvii. 12354-62), The Matsya Purana reads “the Atris” (oxiii. 48), which
is the same. Are they to be identified with the Atreya gotra of brahmans
(Bisley's Tribes and Castes of Bengal, I. 27) formerly living perhaps in
Sirmour or Garhwal; or to be connected with R. Atreyi (Sabha-P., ix. 374)
the modern Atrai in North Bengal? The former seems more probable.

|| Or Bhūradvājas; they are named in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 376).
Bharadvaja is often mentioned in the M.-Bh. in connexion with the upper
part of the Ganges near the hills (e.g, Adi-P., cxxx. 5102-6; clxvi. 6828-32 ;
Vana-P., oxxxy. 10700-728; and Salya-P., xlix. 2762-2824). These were
no doubt his descendants, living in Garhwaél or Kumaon. The name
Bharadvāja is given to various caste divisions (Bisley’s Tribes and Castes
of Bengal, I. 96.)

4 Tho Vayu (xlv. 119) and Matsya (oxiii. 43) Puriņas read Prasthalas
and they are no doubt the same as the Proshakas (Bhishma-P., ix. 376)


COUNTRIES AND RACES NORTH OF INDIA. 321


40 Kušerukas,* the Lampdkas,t the Sūlakāras,t the


all being placed in the same connexion. If Cunningham 18 right in identi.
fying Lamptka with Lamghan (see second note below), Pushkala suggests
Pushkaldvatt or Pushkurdvatt. (Rūmūy., Kishk.-K., xliii. 23), the ancient
capital of Gándhára (Ano. Geog., 1. 49), but the Gándháras have been men-
tioned in their proper place in verse 36 above. I have not met the name
Proshakas any where else. .

Prasthala was a country closely connected with Trigarta, for Su-Sarman
king of Trigarta is also called lord of Prasthala (Virdta-P., xxx, 971;
Bhishma-P., lxxv. 3296; Ixxxviii. 3856; and Droņa-P., xvii. 691), and Trigarta,
comprised the territory from Amballa and Pattiala to the R, Bias (see note
to verse 57). Prasthala was also near the Panjab (Drona-P., xvii. 691; and
Karna-P., xliv. 2063-70), and in the second of these passages its people are
classed along with the Panjab nations, and all according to the ideas of a
later age were pronounced degraded (Muir, Sansk. Texts. II. 482). From
these data it seems Prasthala must have been the district between Ferozpur,
Pattiala and Sirsa. If this position be right, the Prasthalas do not fall into
the group of northern peoples named in the text, and the correct reading
‘cannot be Prasthalas.

* The Vayu Puriņa reads Kaserukas (xlv. 119); and the Matsya Daserakas
(oxiii. 48). I have not met the first form of name elsewhere ; but the
Dašerakas, or DaScrakas, or Daserakas are mentioned as joining in the great
warin the M.-Bh. (e.g., Bhishma-P., 1. 2080; oxviii. 5483; Drona-P., xi.
897; and xx. 798); and they appear to have comprised several bands, as
the word gana is nearly always added to the name; but there are no
data to identify them.

f This name occurs in the M.-Bh. (Drona-P., oxxi. 4846-7) and there the
Lampikas are described asa mountain tribe, like the Daradas and Palindas,
who fought largely with stones and were skilled in slinging stones; but
otherwise there are very few references to them in the M.-Bh, Lassen
identifies Lampaka with the Lambage and places them south of the Hindu-
Kush, in modern Kafiristan, Cunningham says Lampika is the modern Lam-
ghan, north-east of Kabul (Anc. Geog., I. 17 and 27), which agrees with
Lassen. The Matsya Parna reads Lampakas (oxiii. 43), no doubt by a mistake.

f The Viyu Purina reads Stanapas or Tunapas (xlv. 119). I have not
met any of these names elsewhere, but the latter words resemble the
Stana-yoshikas (Bhishma-P., ix. 376),-and also Tunayas (ibid., 871), whose
grouping however is different. Tho Matsya Purāņa reads Talagdnas (oxiii. 43),
which seems erroneous. Perhaps the Sūlakdras may be identified with the
Sunuvārs, a cultivating tribe of Nepal, forming part of the highest class
(Risley’s Castes and Tribes of Bengal, II. 281).

41


322 CANTO LVII.


C’olikas,* and the Jagudas,t and the Aupadhas,t ana
the Animadras,§ and the races of Kiratas,|| the


* The Vēyu Purana reads Pédikas instead (xlv. 119). Canto Iviii. verse 37
places the C'ilikas in the Tortoiso's tail at the westernmost part of India.
I have not met with either namo elsewhere. The Matsya Puriņu reads
Bainikas (exīii. 43), “ Soldiers.”

+ Or Jugudas according to the Viyu Puršņa (xlv. 119). The Jūgudas
are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Vana -P,, li. 1991). The Matsya Puriņa reads
Jūngalas (oxiii. 43), which is of no help, for it cannot refer to Kuru-jāngala
(see note to Kurus, canto lviii, verse 9), and I have not met with any other
Jūngala; but the same Puriņa mentions the Jagudas as a people through
whose country the Indus flows, 80 that they appear to be north or east of
Kashmir (cxx. 46-48). 4

f The Viyu Purdņa, reads Apagas instead (xlv. 120). I have not met
with either name elsewhere. Should the reading be Apavas, the descendants -
of Vasishtha? Atreyas and Bharadvijas have been mentioned, and Gilavas
are named in verse 57.

§ Or Animadras or C'dnimadras. The Viyu Purana reads C'dlimadrdš
c'a (xlv. 120). None of these names are in the dictionary, and I have not met
any of them elsewhero. m

|| The word Kirdta is no doubt the same as the modern names Kiráti
and Kirdnti, which mean “a native of the Kirint-des or mountainous
country lying between the Dud-Kosi and the Karki rivers in Nepal. The
term includes the Khambu, Limbu and Yákhá tribes; and the Danuār, Hayt
and Thžmi also claim to be Kirinti,” but their claim is disputed by the
first three tribes which are superior (Risley’s Castes and Tribes of Bengr'l,
I. 490). But formerly they had a much larger range and were spread along
the greater part of the southern side of the Himalayas, for Arjuna encount-
ered them in his northern expedition. {Sabhé-P., xxv. 1002), Bhim» in his
eastern (id., xxix. 108Q), and Nakula in his western expedition (id. xxxi-
1199). Thoy formed a group of closely allied yet distinct tribes or clans,
for two separate Kirita kings are named (Sabhé-P., iv. 119 and 120), seven
kings are alluded to (id., xxix, 1089), “all the Kirftas” are spoken of
(Vana-P., li. 1990), and they are mentioned thrice in the Bhishma-P. list
(ix. 358, 364 and 376). Their chief territory was among the mountains
Kailisa, Mandara (see page 287 note*) and Haima (Anušis.-P., xix. 1434),
that is, the region around Lake Mūnasa. They were allied to the Tanganns
(see next verse) and Pulindas (see page 316 note +) for .the three people jn-
habited one largo kingdom ruled by Su-báhu, who was king of the Pulindas

(Vana-P., oxl. 10863-6) and is also styled a Kiráta (id., clxxvii. 12849). The
tribes differed much in material condition, for some were civilized and


COUNTRIES AND RACES NORTH OF INDIA, 323


41 Tāmasas,* and the Hazhsa-mérgas, t the Kāšmiīras,f
and the Tunganas,§ the  Siilikas,|| and the


open to fricndly intercourse (Yana-P., cxl. 10865-6; and Udyoga-P., Isiii.
2470), and others were clad in skins, lived on fruit and roots and were
cruel (Sabhé-P., li. 1865), Their women were used as slaves (ibid., 1867).
Tho Rimdy. describes them as wearing thick top-knots (Kishk.-K., xl. 30).
Manu's remark that the Kirftas were kshattriyas and became degraded
because of the extinction of sacred rites, do. (x. 43 and 44) reflects the
opinions of a later age.

* The same people are mentioned again in.verse 67, but I have not found
the namo elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary. The Váyu Puriņa
reads Zomaras (xlv. 120), and the Bhishma-P. agrees (ix. 377). The Matsya
Purina mentions the Tomaras and tho Harhsa-márgas as two tribes through
whose countries flows the R. Pivani, one of the three large rivers which riso
in the middle of the Himalaya mountain system and flow eastward (cxx.
57-59). The river is doubtful, but the passage places the Tomaras and the
Harsa-mirgas in the east of Thibet.

+ “The duck-fowlers.” They are mentioned again in varse 56, and also
in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 877); and seem to be the same as the Hamsa-pudas
(Drona-P., xx. 798) and perhaps Hamsa-kdyanas (Sabha-P., li. 1870); but
there appear to be no data to identify them, excopt that they were a people in
eastern Thibet as explained in the last note.

t The people of Kashmir. They are named twice in the Bhishma-P, list
(ix. 361 and 375). i

§ Or better, as the Váyn Puráņa reads, Tanganas (xlv. 120) the Rimiy.
calls them Tankaņas (Kishk.-K., xliv. 20). "Thoy were a mountain tribe
and are mentioned rather often in the M.-Bh., where two sections are spoken
of, the Tanganas and Para-tanganas (Sabhi-P., li. 1859; Bhishma-P., ix. 372;
and 1. 2083), that is, “the nearor” and “the further” 'fangaņas. ‘They
were intermixed with the Kiratas and Pulindas (or Kulindas), for they all
inhabited a large kingdom ruled over by Sa-būhu, which was in the middle
portion of the Himalayas (Vana-P., exl. 10563-5; Sabht-P., Ji. 1858-9);
and they are also linked with the Ambashthas (Droņu-P., exxi. 4819). They
are said to lave occupied the upper part of the valley of tho R. Surayú
(dict ). Like other hill tribes they fought Jargely with stones and were
skilled in slinging stones (Drona-P., cxxi. 4835—47).

|| This resembles Súlakáras in the last verse.
C'ūlikas (xlv. 121), which has also been mentioned in that verse. Lhe
Sūlikas are mentioned in the Matsya Puriņa as it people through whoso
country flows the R. C'akshu, une of the three large rivers which rise in the
middle of the Himalaya mvuntuin-system and flow westward (exx. 40, 46).


Tho Vayu Purina reads


324. CANTO LVII.


4z Kuhakas,* the Urnas,+ and D
of the Northern countries.


Hear from me the peoples who inhabit the Eastern
countries. The Adhrārakas,$ the Mudakaras,|| the Antar.


vas; f these are the peoples


C’akshu may perhaps be meant for Vakshu, which is the Oxus
Sūlikas would be a people on the Oxus in Turkestan.

* Kuhaka means a juggler. The Vayu Purana reads C'dhukas or Ahukas
or Ahukas (xlv. 121); Ahuka was the name of a family of the Andhakas
(e.g. M.-Bh., Udyoga-P., Ixxxv. 8041; and Hari-V., xxxviii. 2017-24), but
they were jn the west and cannot be meant here. I have not met with
any of these words elsewhere as the name of a people in the north. The
Proper reading may be Kuhukas. Kuhuka would be the same as Kuhu, and
the Kuhus are mentioned in the Matsya Puršņa as a people on the line of
the Indus (cxx. 46—48).

+ These people are mentioned again in verse 57. A country Urņa-deša
īs placed by Lassen on the Sutlej north of Garhwal (Ind. Alt., map). The
whole of the upper Sutlej valley is now called Nari-khorsum or Hun-des.
The Váyu Purána reads Pūrņas here (xlv. 121), which seems erréneous.

t These appear to be the same as the Darvas in .verse 57. They were a
northern people and are generally associated with the Trigartas and Daradas
(Sabha-P.; xxvi. 1026; and li. 1869) and other tribes in the north of the
Panjab (Bhishma-P., ix. 862) A river or town called Darvi is mentioned
(bid.), and a tirtha, Darvi-sankramaņa is placed between the sources
of the Jumna and Indus (Vana-P., Ixxxiv. 8022-4); and this tract perhaps
was their territory. But Lassen Places the Darvas between the Indus and
Jhelam in the north-west of Kashmir (Ind. Alt., map).

$ This seems incorrect. The Vayu Purfņa reads Andhravdkas (xlv. 122),
which is hardly acceptable, the Andhras being properly in the South, rather
than in the East, and being presumably intended in verse 48 (see note to
Andhas). The Matsya Puriņa reads Angad vangā instead (oxiii. 44), which


is preferable, but these nations are mentioned below {see page $25 note ł and
page 326 note *).


3 if 80, the


| The Matsya Purina reads Madgurakas (oxiii. 44), and the Váyu Sujarakas
(xv. 122). Ihave not found any of these names elsewhere, except that
Madguras, “ divers,” are mentioned in a totally different connexion in the
Hari-Varnša (xcv. 5233-9), Seemingly the word should be connected with
Modd-giri in the Eastern region where a kingdom once existed (M.-Bh.,
Sabha-P., xxix. 1095); is it to be identified with the modern Mungir
(commonly Monghyr) on the Ganges in Behar, where there isa small out-
crop of hills. Cunningham says Mudgala-puri, Mudgaldframa (to which the


Matsya Purana reading approximates) and Mudga-giri were the old names of


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 325


43 giryas,* the Vahir-giras,t and the Pravangašj also,


Mungir ; and an earlier name was Kashta-harana-parvata (XV. 15 and 18), but
this last is open to the objection that no name can well be older than that pre-
served in the M.-Bh. The Mudgalas are mentioned in Droņa-P., xi. 897.

* Or Antgr-giri as the Matsya Purana reads (cxiii. 44). They gre men-
tioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 857). The name, no doubt, means “those
* who dwell amid the hills,” and as the peonle are placed in all these passages
in proximity to the Angas, it seems reasonable to identify Antar-giri with
the Kajmahall hills (in the modern district of the Santhal Parganas) which
form a marked natural division between Anga and Vanga. In the only
other passage where I have found this mame (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1012) Antar-
giri, Vahir-giri (sce next note) and Upa-giri are mentioned in obvions contra-
distinction and are placed in the Northern region; it is doubtful, therefore,
whether they denote the tracts mentioned here; and they may perhaps refer
to some portion of the slopes of the Himalayas.

+ Or Vahir-giri as the Matsya Puráņa reads (cxiii. 44). The name, no
doubt, means “thase who dwell outside the hills,” and these people are
mentioned along with the Angas and Malajas in the Bhishina-P. list (ix. 357).
If we may identify Antar-giri with the Rajmahall hills (see the last note),
Vahir-giri might well designate the outskirts of those hills bordering on
Anga, that is, the southern portions of the Bhagalpur and Monghyr districts
and the lands bordering thereon to the south in the Santhal Parganus and
Hazaribagh.

f I have not met this name elsewhere, though it is stated in the dictionary
to be the name of a people and analysed thus, Pravam-ga=Plavam-ga; I would
suggest, however, that it should be read here as Pra-vangas, “ those who are in
front of the Vangus,” i. e., the Angas. The Matsya Puriņa reads Angas and
Vangas (oxiii. 44). The Angas are clearly meant. Anga was a distinct and
settled country in early times, and its princes were allied with Aryan royal
families (M.-Bh., Kdi-P., xov. 3772 and 3777; and Rimfy., Adi-K., x. 1-10).
This people are said to have been so called after an eponymous king Anga;
he, Vanga, Kalinga, Pundra and Suhma are described with considerable
circumstantial detail as the five sons of king Bali’s queen (Bali being king of
the Eastern region) by the rishi Dirgha-tamas (M.-Bh., Adi-P., civ. 4217-21;
and Hari-V., ixxi. 1684-93). Anga comprised the modern districts of Bhagal-
pur and Monghyr, excluding the extreme north and sonth portions. The ancient
name Anga dropped out of use and Bihar (of Buddhist origin) has usurped
its place; is the word Pra-vanga here significant of the change ? The
capital was first called Mdlint, and that name is said to have been superseded
by the name O’ampé in honour of aking C’ampa, Loma-pida’s great grand-
gon (Hari-V., xxxi. 1699 and 1700; and M.-Bh., Sénti-P., v. 184-5), but tho


326 CANTO LI.


the Rangeyas,* the manadas,t the Māna-vartikas, t


Rāmšy. makes a punning connexion between this name and the groves of
c'ampaka trees around the town (Adi-K., xvii. 23); it is the modern Bhagal-
pur on the south bank of the Ganges (Vana-P., lxxxv. 8156). The tract near
C'ampi was called Stita-vishaya (Vana-P , cccvii. 17150-51), that is, “ the land
of bards or charioteers.” The Angas are mentioned twice in the Bhishma-P,
list (ix. 358 and 357); it does not appear why.

* This is, no doubt, a mistake for Vangeyas which the Vayu Purana reads
(xlv. 122), and Vangas which the Matsya mentions (cxiii. 44). The Vangas

or Vangeyas were the people of Vanga or Banga, the original of the modern
Bengal. Vanga was a distinct country in early times and is frequently
mentioned, though the references to it very rarely convey any definite
information. It lay beyond Anga, to the south-east; and was connected
with Kalinga, for the Angas, Vangas and Kalingas aro vonstantly linked
together ad people closely allied by race and position, (e. g., Drona-P., lxx. 2436).
And the Vangas are said to have been so called after an eponymous king
Vanga who was Anga’s and Kalinga’s brother (see last note). Vanga comprised
the northern portion of Western and Central Bengal, i. e., the modern districts
of Birbhum, Moorshedabad, Bardwan and Nuddea. Its capital in early times
does not appear to be mentioned. In later times the name was extended over
the whole of Central Bengal, for the Raghu Varnša describes the Vangas as
dwelling in the islands of the Ganges delta, warring chiefly in boats, and
transplanting their rice seedlings into the fields just as at the present day
(iv. 36, 37). In those early times the upper part of the delta consisted of
numeroug islands separated by large rivers, and the southern part could not
have been formed.

+ The Vayu Purina reads Jfdladas (xlv. 122) which appears. preferable,
and this may. mean the people of the modern district of Maldah, in which the
old cities of Gaup and Pandua are situated, while the town Maldnh itself
is old (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., XV. 77). Tho Muladas are mention-
ed as an eastern people in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P., xxix. 1081-2; and also
Drona-P., vii. 183), but withont data enough to say where they were.

t The Vayu Purana reads Mūlu-vartinah (xlv. 122). The M.-Bh. mentions
the Mūna-varjakas (Bhishma-P.
to be the people meant here.
either “ people who live deco
"are devoid of decoram” acco


» ix. 857) and they appear from the context
The name seems intended to carry a meaning,
rously ” according to the text, or “ people who
rding to tho last word. Does it refer to a
wild tribe in a state of nature? Or does Mūna-vartiku (Maina-vartin) mean
Min-bham (Mūna-bhūmi) a district in West Bengal? ‘he 'Jūlavdnukus
mentioned in the Bhishmu-P. list (ix, 367) belong to a different group
altogether.


COUNTRIES ANB RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 327


the Brahmottaras, * the, Pravijayas,¢ the Bhargavas, ł


* The Matsya Purana reads Suhmottaras (cxiii. 44), which is preferable.
This means the “people north of Suhma.” Sūhma was a well-known
country. It was generally classed with Pundra (e. g, M.-Bh., Adi-P., cxiii.
4458) and both of them are declared to be closely allied to Anga, Vanga and
Kalinga by being derived from five eponymous kings of those namrs who
woro brothers (M.-Bh., Adi-P., civ. 4217-21; Hari-Varnša, xxxi. 1684-93).
Suhma was near the sea (Sabhi-P , xxix. 1099; and Raghu-V., iv. 34 and 35)
and Dima-lipta (Támra-lipta, the modern Tamluk, see next verse) is said
to be within its borders in the Daša-kumira-c'arita (Story of Mitra-gupta).
Suhma therefore corresponded with the modern districts of Midnapur and
Bankura and perhaps also Purulia and Manbhum in West Bengal. Suhmotta-
ra would be the tract north of that, aud was probably the same a8 Pra-auhma
(Sabhé-P., xxix. 1090). The Mahyuttaras of the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 358)
geem to be the same people under an error in the spelling.

The reading Suhmottardh, however, is hardly satisfactory in omitting tho
Suhmas and referring indefinitely to the people north of them, and I would
suggest that the proper reading should be Suhmotkaldh, “the Suhmas and
Utkalas.’? The Utkalas were well-known (though not I believe mentioned
often in the M.-Bh.), and were a rude tribe of very early origin, for they do
not appear to have had any close affinities with the races croand them, and
the Hari-VamSa throws their origin back to the fabulous timo of Ili (x. 631-2).
Their territory reached on the east the R. Kapisé (Raghu-V., iv. 38),
which Lassen identifies with the modern Subarna-rekhé near the northern
boundary of Orissa (Ind. Alt., Map), but which I propose to identify with
the R. Cossye in Midnapore (see page 301 note +); and on tho west they -
touched the Mekalas, for the two people are coupled together in the M.-Bh*
(Bhishma-P., ix. 318; see also Drona-P., iv. 122, and Karņo-P., xxii. 882) and
Rāmiy. (Kishk.-K., xli. 14), and the Mekalas were tho inhabitants of the
Mekala hills, i. e., the hills bounding Chhattisgarh on the west and north.
Northward dwelt the Pundras and southward the Kalingas. Henco Utkalu
comprised the southern portion of Chuta Nagpur, tho northorn Tributary
States of Orissa and the Balasore district. Various derivations have been
suggested of the namo Utkala, but I would only draw attention to some of


the above passages where Utkala and Mekala are placed together as if thoir
Sce also in verse 58.


names possessed something in common
but T have not found


+ The Matgya Puriņa reads the same (cxiii. 44),
them mentioned olsewhore They appear from the context to be the same as
the Prdvrisheyas of the ” uishma-P. list (ix. 358)

t These aro mentivned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 358), and were perhaps


an off-lying branch of the Bhargava race in the East; sco note to verse 85.


328 CANTO LVII.


44 the Jiieya-mallakas, * and the Prūg-jyotisbas, + and


The Hari-Vamša mentions a prince called Bhdrga or Bhargava, who founded
Bhrigu-bhimi or Bhārga-bhūmi; and as he was a grandson of Divod
of Benares, his country may perhaps have been in the Eastern regio
1587 and 1597; and xxxii. 1753). The Bhishma-P. list names also Bhd
(loc. cit.).

* The Vūyu Puriņa reads Geyamarthakas (xlv. 123), and the Matsya
Geyamdlavas (cxiii. 44), and the Bhishma-P. list omits the corresponding
name (see ix. 358). None of these names are in the dictionary,
not met any of them elsewhere.


ása king
n (xxix,
7gas here


and I have


+ Prag-jyotisha was a famous kingdom in early times and is often men.
tioned in the M.-Bh. The references to it, however, are rather perplexing,


for in some passages it is called a Mlec'o'ha kingdom ruled over by king


Bhagadatta, who is always spoken of in respectful and even eulogistic terms


(e. g., Sabhū-P., xxv. 1000-1; and 1. 1834 ; Udyoga-P., clxvi. 5804 ; arid Karņa-
P., v. 104-5), and in other passages it is called a Dénava or Asura kingdom
ruled over by the demons Naraka and Muru (Vana-P., xii. 488; Udyoga-P.,
xlvii. 1887-92; Hari-V., cxxi. 6791-9; cxxii. 6873, etc.; and clxxiv. 9790; and
Annotations to Kishk.-K., xliii. in Gorresio's Rémayana); while in some other
passages the allusions seem mixed (e. g., Sabhi-P., xiii. 578-80, which seems
to call Bhagadatta a Yavana; and as to this, see id. 1.18346). The second
class of passages occur, I believe, only in descriptions of Krishna’s exploits ;
they are spoilt by hyperbolical laudation and are probably later than the
first class. Prag-jyotisha was placed in the N orth region (Sabhé-P., xxv.
1000; and Vana-P., ccliii. 15240-2), but was also considered to be in the East
asin the text here. North of it Seemingly lay tracts called Antar-giri,


Vahir-giri and Upa-giri (Sabhi-P., xxv. 1000—xxyi 1012) which appear to be


the lower slopes of the Himalayas and the Tera‘. ; and it was close to the


mountains for Bhagadatta is called Saililaya (Stri-P., xxiii. 644). It bordered
on the Kirātas and C'inas for they formed his retinue (Sabha-P., xxv. 1002;
Udyoga-P., xviii. 584-5). He also drew his troops from among the people
who dwelt in the marshy regions near the sea, Sdgardmipa (Sabhi-P., xxv.
1002; xxxiii. 1268-9; and Karna-P., y. 104-5), and it is even said he dwelt at
the Eastern Ocean (Udyoga-P., iii. 74); these marshy regions can only be the
alluvial tracts and islands near the months of the Ganges and Brahma-putra

se data indicate that Prég-jyotisha comprised
the whole of North Bengal proper. The Raghu Varna places it seemingly
beyond the Brahma-pntra (iy. 81); but Kilidésa was a little uncertain in
distant geography. Its capital was called Prég-jyotisha also. Although
the people were mlec'c'has, the Rūmāyaņa ascribes the founding of this
kingdom to Amūrta-rūjas, one of the four Sons of a great king KuSa (Adi-K.,


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 329


the Madras, * and the Videhas,+ and the Tamra-


xxxv. 1-6). Amūrta-rayas, as the name is generally written in the M.-Bh., is
mentioned there simply as father of the famous king Gaya (e. g., Vana-P.,
xov. 8528-39; and Drona-P., lxvi. 2334, &c).

% This seems an impossible name here (see verse 36). The Vayu Puriņa
reads Mundas instead (xlv. 123) which is permissible. The Mundas area
large Dravidian tribe in Chuta Nagpur (Risley’s Tribes and Castes of Bengal,
IL. 101), and are named in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., lvi. 2410).

The Matsya Purána however reads Pundras instead (oxiii. 45) and the Bhish-
ma-P. list also mentions them in this region (ix. 358). This is the best reading,
for the Pundras were held to be closely allied to the Angas, Vangas and
Suhmas (see page 325 note f, page 326 note * and page 327 note *), and
should rightly be placed here along with those races, rather than in the South
according to verse 45, The name occurs in various forms, Pundraka (Sabhi-P.,
iv. 119), Pauņdra, (Kdi-P., olxxxvii. 7020), Paundraka (Adi-P., clxxxvi. 6992;
Sabhé-P., xxxiii. 1270) and Paundrika (Sabht-P., li. 1872). They appear to be
used often as if equivalent (e. g., Sabha-P., xiii. 584), and yet a distinction
seems to be made between Pundras and Paundras for they are separately
mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 358 and 365); and Pundras, Puņdra-
kas and Pauņdrikas are all mentioned in one passage (Sabhd-P., li. 1872-4).
All, however, appear to have composed one people, and they were nota
barbarous nation. From the arrangements of names and descriptions given
in various passages (Adi-P., cxiii. 4453; Sobha-P,, xiii. 684; xxix. 1091-7 ;
Vana-P., li. 1988; A$vamedh.-P., Ixxxii. 2464-5) it appears the Pundras had
the Káśis on their north, the Angas, Vangas and Suhmas on their north-east
and east; and the Odras on their south-east ; hence their territory correspond-
ed to the modern Chuta Nagpur with the exception of its southern portions.
Their bounds on the south were no doubt the land of the Utkalas (see page
327 note *), In one passage (Adi-P., lxvii. 2679) it is stated an ancient
king Balina reigned over both Panndra and Matsya; this suggests that their
territory extended to near the R. Chumbal anciently (see page 307 note * ),
and tends to part them from the Angas, Vangas, &o.

+ Videha was a famous country in early times. Cunningham says it
appears to have comprised the northern portion of North Behar from the
R. Gandak to the R. Kanšiki or Kosi (Arch. Surv. Repts., XVI. 84 and map);
but its western boundary was the Sadi-nira (see page 294 note f), and it
seems Videha extended from the Rapti to the Kosi. Northwards it extended
close to the Himalayas, and on the south it was bounded by 2 kingdom, the
capital of which was Vaišūli (Raméy., Kdi-K., xlvi. 10-11; and xlviii. 21-25),
or the modern Besarh which is about 27 miles north of Patna (Arch. Surv.
Repts., I. 55; and XVI. 6 and 34). The capital was Mithild (Rīmūy., Adi-K.,


42


830 CANTO LVIL
līptakas, * the Mallas, f the Magadhas,t the Go.


xlix. 916; and M.-Bh., Santi-P., ccoxxvii. 12233-8), and this name often
designated the country itsolf, especially in the Rimžyaņa. The people were
called Videhas (or Videgha, ‘as the earlier form was, see Sata-P, Brāh. I. iy,
14), and also Mithilas(Vana-P., ccliii. 15243). Its kings, who wero often highly
educated (Santi-P., cccxxvii. 12215-25), are generally called Janaka, which
seems to have been the ordinary royal title (Vana-P., cxxxiii. 10637 ). Cun-
ningham says the capital was Janakpur, which is now a small town just within
the Nepal border, north of where the Mozufferpur and Darbhanga districts
meet (Arch. Surv. Repts., XVI. 34 and map), but I have not met this name
in Sanskrit works, ?

* Or Tūmra-liptas. The country and people are often mentioned in the
M.-Bh., and both forms of the name are used (Adi-P., clxxxvi. 6993; Sabhā-P.,
xxix. 1098; and Drona-P., ixx. 2496). The name was modified into
Tāma-liptaka which the Vayu Purina reads (xlv. 123), and Tūmaslipta
(which occurs in canto lviii. verse 14), and Dāma-lipta (see Story of
Mitra-gupta in the Daša-kumira-0'arita), and corrupted into the modern
Tamluk. The town Tamluk is in the Midnapur district near the mouth
of the Rupnarayan River. It used tobe a famous port during the middle
ages of Indian history. The country Tūmra-liptaka corresponded therefore
to the eastern part of the present district of Midnapur. j

+ The Vayu Puriņa reads Alas (xlv. 123). This people appear to be the
Malés (properly Máls) and Mál Pahdriyas, two Dravidian tribes which now
inhabit the Réjmahall and Rimgarh hills in Western Bengal (Bisley's Tribes
and Castes of Bengal, II. 51 and 66). The Matsya Puriņa reads Sdlvas (cxiii.
45) erroneonsly.

tOr Magadhas. Magadha comprised the present districts of Gaya and
Patna. It was a famous kingdom from the earliest” times. The Ramayana
Bays it was founded by Vasu one of the four sons of a great king Kuša
(Adi-K., xxxv. 1-9); and the M.-Bh. says it was established by Vrihad-ratha,
who was son of Vasu king of C'edi (Adi-P., Ixiii. 2361-5; aud Hari-V., xxxii.
1805), but who is also called an "Anga (Sūnti-P., xxix. 921-31.) One appears
to be an eastern account and the other a western account, but there may
be truth in both accounta for there was an interval of eight or twelve genera-
tions between the two poriods spoken of. Both agree that Giri-vraja was
made tho capital by the founder of the Kingdom, the former says by Vasu
(loc. cit.), and the latter says by Vrihad-ratha ( Hari-V., cxvii. 6598 ; Sabha-P.,
xx. 798-800). Cunningham has identified Giri-vraja with the modern Giryok
on the Panchnna river about 36 miles north-east of Gaya (Arch. Surv. Repts.,
I. 16 and plate iii), Rūja-griha appears to have been another name of the
capital (Adi-P., cxiii, 4451-2; and ASvamedh.-P., Ixxxii. 2435-63), but Cun-


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 331


mantas, * are known as the peoples ın the Hast: t
45 Now the other peoples who dwell in the Southern Region f
are the Pundras,§ and Kevalas,|| and Go-langulas{ also,


ningham identifies it with the modern Raj-gir about 6 miles west of Giryek
(Arch. Surv. Repts., I. 20 and plate iii). The oldest name of this country is
said to have been Kikata, which occurs in Rig-Veda III. 63.14 (Muir’s Sansk.
Texts, II. 362, 363).

* The Vayu Purina reads Govindas (xlv. 123); and the Matsya Goarddhas
(oxiii. 45); and the latter people are mentioned in canto lviii. verse 28, but
are placed in the South. I have not met with an Eastern people of any of
these names elsewhere.

+ Tho Kūrma Purina adds Kdma-rūpa (xlvii. 38), the modern Kamrup or
Gauhati in Assam. It is mentioned in the Raghu-Varhša (iv. 84), but not,
I believe, in the Réméyana nor Mahi-Bhūrata.”

+ Dakshinépatha; this generally means South India below the Vindhyg
Range, and a line from Amuara-kantaka to the north of Orissa.

§ This seems to be erroneous, for the Pundras were not properly in the
South, and they have been noticed in their appropriate place in the East
(see page 329 note *). The Vayu Purana reads Pdņdyas instead (xlv. 124)
and soalso the Matsya (oxiii. 46), and this is, no doubt, the proper reading,
for othe: wise this nation, which was the most famous and best known in the
South, would be omitted from this list. Pindya is often. mentioned in the
M.-Bh.; but not in the Ramiy., except in the geographical canto (Kishk. K.
xli. 15 and 25) which is probably an addition tothe original poem. It
comprised the modern districts of Madura and Tinnevelly. The capital
was Mathura, the modern Madura. The Pandyas belong to the. Dravidian
family, but the Hari-Varnša makes them, or more probably the royal house,
descendants of the Paurava race; it says Pandya, Kerala, Kola and C’ola
were four brothers and gave origin to the four peoples of those names

(xxxii. 1832-6).

|| This is, no doubt, a mistake for Keralas, which the Vayu (xlv. 124) and
Matsya (cxiii. 46) Purāņas read ; and the Bhishma-P. list. twice (ix. 852 and
865 ; though the first mention is probably a mistake). They were a forest-
tribe (Sabhi-P., xxx. 1174-5) and are placed on the west side by the Raghu-
Varnša (iv. 63-54). They are said to be descended from an eponymous
king Kerala, and to be closely allied to the Pandyas, O’olas, &o. in the Hari-
Vaxnéa (xxxii. 1886). They appear to have occupied the whole of the west
coast from Calicut to Cape Comorin.

q The Cow-tails;” a pure fancy, stories of tailed races being common
all over the world. It may correspond to Gonarddhas in csato lviii, verse 23;
but the Matsya Puriņa reads C'olas and Kulyas (oxiii: 46), and the Vaya


332 CANTO LVII.


46 the Sailishas,* and Miushikas,t the Kusumas,t the


O'aulyas and Kulyas (xlv. 124); and the proper reading should, no doubt, be
C'olas and Kolas. The Hari-Varnša makes these two tribes closely allied to
the Pāņdyas and Keralas (see the last two notes).

C'ola was a kingdom in early times (Sabh4-P., li. 1891-3) andis often
mentioned in the M.-Bh. (e. g., Vana-P., li. 1988; and Sabhé-P., xxx, 1174,
where C’odra is, no doubt, a mistake for O’ola; also Bhishma-P., ix. 867; and
Drona-P. xi. 398). The Hari-Varhša says king Sagara degraded them (xiv.
784). C'ola comprised the modern districts of Tanjore, Trichinopoly,
Pudukota and South Arcot,

The Kolas are scarcely ever mentioned ; yet they appear to be referred
to in Sabha-P., xxx. 1171, and ASvamedh.-P., Ixxxiii. 2476-7. Their position
is uncertain. Are they to be identified with the Koruvas or Kurrus, who area
vagrant tribe in Madras (Madras Census of 1891, Report, p. 304),

* Canto lviii, verse 20 mentions the Sailikas; and the Viyu Puriņa
(xlv. 125) and Matsya (cxiii. 47) read Setukus. I have not found any of
these names elsewhere, but Saila occurs in Vana-P., ccliii. 15250, perhaps as
the name of a country near Pandya in the extreme south, so that Sailikas
might mean its people. Does Setuka refer to Rima's setu or Adam’s bridge
and mean the people who live close to it ?

+ The Bhishma-P. list mentions these people in the same connexion
(ix. 366), and another Sonthern people called Mushakas twice (ix. 866 and
871). Canto lviii mentions instead of them the Rishikas in the South (verse
27), and the Mrishikas in the South-east (verse 16): I have not fonnd the,
latter name elsewhere, but the Rishikas appear to have been well-known,
there being one peopleof that name in the North (Sabhé-P., xxvi. 1033-6 ;
Rámáy., Kishk-K., xliv. 13; and Matsya Purána cxx. 53) and another in tho
South (Kishk-K., xli. 16; and Hari-V., cxix. 6724-6). The Matsya Puráņa
reads Sútikas (cxiii. 47) which appears to be erroneous.

f. Canto lviii omits this people and names Kumuda hill (verse 26). The
Vayu Puráņa reads Kumanas (xlv. 125), and the Matsya Kupathas (cxiii. 47).
I have not found any of these names elsewhere: Probably the reading
should be Kurumbas or Kurubas. The ancient Kurumbas or Pallayas occupied
a territory which comprised the modern districts of Madras, Chingloput,
North and South Arcot, Salem and the south-east portion of Mysore, with
Kūūc'i, the modern Conjeveram, for their capital, and their power attained
its zenith about the 7th cent, A, D., or perhaps a century or two later
After their overthrow they were scattered far and wide and are numerous
now in most of tho districts south of the R. Kistna in the middle and


eastern parts of the Madras Presidency and in Mysore (Madras Census of
1891, Report, pp. 259 and 289),


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 333
Nama-vasakas,* the Mahā-rishtras,* Mahishakast and Ka-


* This is, no doubt, the same as the Vana-vdsakas of che Bhishma-P. list
(ix. 866), with which the Vayu Purdņa agrees in reading Vana-vdsikds (xlv.
125). As this name simply means “ Forest-dwellers,” it may include several
races, who inhabited the great Southern forests; or it may denote the
people of the kingdom called Vana-vdsin, which was founded by Sarasa in
the Dekhan (Hari-V., xev. 6213 and 5231-3). Perhaps they may be identified
with the Banjšris or Lambidis, who are the great travelling traders of South
India, and who are supposed to be descendants of Balin and Sugriva the
Vánara kings in the Rimayana (Madras Census of 1891, Report, pp. 186
and 279). The Matsya Puriņa reads Vaji-vdsikas (oxiii: 47), which seems
erroneous.

+ The people of Mahh-rdshtra, the modern Mahrattas, whom canto lviii
also considers to be in the South (verse 28). The nameis a late one as
I have not fonnd it in the Mahi-Bhtrata or Rdmiyaņa.. It was a large
kingdom in Hiuen Thsang’s time in the 7th cent. A. D., and Cunningham
makes it comprise nearly the western half of the Dekhan between the 16th
and 20th parallels of latitude, with its capitalat Kalyūni (Ano. Geog. of
India, I. 553).

The Matsya Puriņa reads Nava-rdshtras (oxiii. 47), but not well, for this
country and people are mentioned in the M-Bh. as one of the kingdoms near
the Kurus, and as situated in the south-west of Madhya-deSa or onthe
borders of Rajputana (Sabhé-P., xxx. 1110; and Virita-P., i. 11-12); and
the Hari-Varnia derives them from an eponymous king Nava, making him
and the progenitors of the Yaudheyas, Ambashthas and Sivis (which were
tribes in or near the Panjab) all sons of king Ušinara (xxxi. 1674-8).
Nava-rishtra is therefore out of place here.

t So also in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 866), or Jfdhishikas as the Matsya
Puriņa reads (cxiii. 47). These people are, no doubt, the same as the Madhish-
makas (XSvamedh.-P., Ixxxiii, 2475-7), that is, the people of Mahish-matt.
Méhish-mati was an ancient and famous city (Sabhā-P., xxx. 1125-63) and
was situated on the R. Narmadé, at a place where the Vindhyas and the
Riksha Mts. (the Satpura range) contract the valley (Hari-V., xcv. 5218, to).
Muc'ukunda was its founder according to that passage, and Mahish-mat
according to another (id., xxxiii. 1846-7). Their descendant wasthe great
Arjuna Kértavirya (ibid., 1850-xxxiv. 1890). Māhish-mati is identified with
the modern Maheswar on the Narmadé inthe Imp. Gaz. of India (Vol. X,
p. 329), but this hardly agrees with the notices in Sanskrit writings ; for
Maheswar must have lain within the ancient Avanti (sce verse 52), and
Avanti was held to be sometimes in tho South and sometimes in the West,
whereas Māhish-mati is never, I believe, placed anywhere but in the South.


334 CANTO LVIT.
47 lingas* on all sides,t Abhiras,f and Vaisikyas,§ Adhakyas,|


A more easterly position, such as Mandhit4 or near there, seems better,
At the time of the great war its king was Nila and his people were called
Liléyndhas (Udyoga-P., xviii. 592-3) or Nilāyudhas (Bhishma-P., lvi. 2414),
Its people were afterwards declared to have become degraded because of the
extinction of sacred rites; tc. (AnuSas.-P., xxxiii. 2102-4; Muir’s Sanskrit
Texts, I. 177). A Mahishikt, which seems to be a river, is mentioned in the
Ramfy. in this region (Kishk.-K., xli. 16.)

* Or Kdlingas. Kalinga was an ancient kingdom, its kings were famous
(Adi-P., lxvii. 2701), and its princesses married into the Aryan royal families
(e. g., Kdi-P., xcv. 8774-5, & $780; and Santi-P., iv). Its people were closely
allied to the Angas and Vangas, and the three nations are often linked together
(e. g, Kdi-P., cexv.7820; and Drona-P., lxx. 2436), and this connexion is
emphasized by the allegation that these three aud also the Suhmas and
Pundras were descended from five eponymous brothers (see page 325 note f).
Kalinga comprised allthe Eastern coast between the Utkalas on the north
(Raghu-V., iv. 88) and the Telingas or Telngus on the south. The R.
Vaitarani (the modern Byturni) flowed through it, and the Mahendra Mts.
(the Eastern Ghats) were within its southern limits (Adi-P., coxv. 7820-24;
and Raghu-V., iv. 38—43). Kalinga therefore comprised the modern province
of Orissa and the district of Ganjam and probably also that of Vizagapatam-
The Matsya Puršņa makes Kalinga extend as far west as the Amara-kantaka
hiils (clxxxY. 12), but Kalinga there is, no doubt, an error for Kosala. Certain
Kalingas have been mentioned in verse 37 above. s


+ Sarvašah. This seems to be rather a stereotyped phrase. The Matsya
Puráņa also reads the same (cxiii. 47). ~Piirvagah would be a preferable
reading, for the Kalingas occupied a iarge part of the Eastern coast and
do not appear to have inhabited any other part of the Dekha

ft These may have been an off-lying branch of this aboriginal race (seo
note to verse 35). The Vayu Purana reads Abhfras here (xlv. 126). The
Matsya Puriņa reads Kárúshus (oxiii. 48); they are the same as the Kartishas
mentioned in verga 58; they come in their proper position there and are out
of place here,

§ This isnot in the ‘dictionary. For saha vaisikyd read either one word
or saha vaišikyair. The Viyu (xlv. 126) and Matsya (cxiii. 48) Puriņas
read Eshtkas or Aishtkas ; but I have not fonnd any of these names elsewhere.

|| I have not met this name elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. The
Vayu Purāņa (xlv.126) and the Matsya (oxiii. 48) read A {avyas, and this
may mean either “forest-dwellers,” or more probably “ the people of Atavt,”


which is mentioned a3 a city in the Dekhan, but without any data to identify
it (Sabhi-P., xxx. 1176).


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA, 885


and the Savaras,* the Pulindas,* the Vindhya-
mauleyas,t the people of Vidarbha$ and the Danda-


* The Savaras are an aboriginal tribe, according to some Dravidian, and
according to others Kolarian. They are mentioned rarely in the M.-Bh.
(Sénti-P., lxv. 2429; olxviii. 6294-6803 ; olxxiii. 6415; and covii. 7559-61)
and Rámáy. (Adi-K., i. 59; Aranya-K., lxxvii. 6-32; &o). They are represent-
ed in these passages as dwelling in Central India and the Dekhan, as being
wicked Dasyus, and as practising evil customs. They are still found scattered
abont in those parts and also towards Orissa, under the names Sabar, Saur,
Suir, &c, In the Madras Presidency they are found ohiefly in the Ganjam
and Vizagapatam districts (Madras Census of 1891, Report, p. 254.) “ The
Savars beliove their original condition to have been that of a wandering tribe,
roaming through the hills of Orissa and Chota Nagpur, living on the fruits
of the forest and acknowledging the rule of no recognized ohief.” (Risley’s


. Castes and Tribes of Bengal, II. 241-246); and this belief agrees, if we


extend their range, with the earliest notices of them. See also Cunningham,
Arch. Surv. Repts., XVII and XX. i

+ These people are mentioned again in verse 50 as being also in the
West, and there appears to have been a Northern branch of them in the
Himalayas (gee page 316 note +). This Southern branch seems from the
M.-Bh. to haye occupied the middle portion of the Dekhan (Sabhé-P., xxx. 1120; -
and Bhishma-P., ix. 869; and Ramay., Kishk.-K., xli.17), and extended
eastward where they had a great city (Sabha-P., xxviii. 1068). . They were
an aboriginal tribe, for they were mlec'c'has (Vana-P., clxxxviii. 12838—40) ;
they became out-castes from not seeing brihmans (Anu$ts.-P.; xxxiii. 2104-5) 3
they are called wicked and are said to have practised evil customs (Santi-P.,
covii. 7559-61). The Véyu Puriņa reads Pulindras (xlv. 126) erroneously.

Ī The Vāyu Purana reads Vindhya-mtltkas (xlv. 126), which is synonymous, .
“those who dwell at the foot of the Vindhya mountains,” or “the aborigines
of the Vindhya mountains.” I have not met this- name as describing any
particular people, and taken in its general meaning it would include the
races mentioned in verses 53-55 below: but perhaps it may be read as an
adjective to “ Pulindas.” The -Matsya Purana reads Vindhya-pushikas (oxiii.
48), which seems erroneous. . R

§ Vidarbha was one of the most anoient and renowned. kingdoms in, the
Dekhan (Vana-P., xovi. and xcvii). It comprised the valley of the Payoshņi,
the modern Purna and the middle portion of the Tapti, (see page 299 note t
and Vana-P., oxx. 10289-90), and corresponded tothe western part of the
modern Berar and the valley-country west of that. It is said to have been
founded by a king Vidarbha who built-a city called Vidarbh& (Hari-V., oxvii.
6588 and 6605-8; and Vana-P., Ixxii), which seems to have been the same


336 CANTO LVII.
48  kas,* the Paurikas,t and the Maulikas,t the Aémakas,§


as Kundina the capital (Vana-P. lxxii: and Hari-V., civ. 5800-7; oxviii,

6661-2). » Its most famous king was Bhishmaka, who held the title * king
of the Dekhan” (id., oxvii. 6590-1). The people were Bhojas (Udyoga-P.,

xlvii. 1881) or perhaps only the royal family was so called (id., olvii. 5350-1,
Sabha-P., xiii. 585-8), and so also in the Raghu-Varnša with reference to a
period many generations anterior (vi. 59 and 69 ; and vii). The name Bhoja
seems to have more than one application, for the Bhojas together with the
Andhakas and Vrishņis belonged to the Yādava race (Hari-V., xciv. 6181-
5204), and the name appears to have been applied also in a much wider sense
to Kshattriyas descended from Yayati (Sabhā-P., xiii. 566-71).

* The Daņdakas are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Sabht-P., xxx. 1169) and
were the inhabitants of the forest region called Dandakdranya. Dandaka
originally was the name of the immense forest, where Rima went in banish
ment, and which is described in the Rámáy. as covering the whole of Central
India from Bundelkhand on the north to southward of the Godaveri (Journal,
R. A. 8., 1894, p. 241); but as this forest was gradually cleared away by the
spread of the Aryar colonies, its limits diminished till at last Dandaka
denoted only the country around the sources of the Godaveri and lower part
of the Tapti (M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxx. 1169; Vana-P., lxxxv. 8183-4). It could
only have been at this stage that its inhabitants conld well have been
described by the name Dandakas, and itis no doubt the people of that
moderate area who are meant here. To account for the name the Hari-
Vaīnša has provided an eponymous king Dandaka, who made Dandakéranya
(x. 637-9).

+ The people of Purikš. This may be either the famous town Puri in
Orissa, or the town Purikdé which Muo’ukunda is said to have built on the
northern slope of the Riksha Mts. iu the kingdom of Méhish-mati (Hari-V.,
xoy. 5220-8) ; but the latter seems more probable, judging from the context.
For Mahish-mati, see page 333 note f. The Vayu Purfņa reads Paunikas,
(xlv. 127); is this to be connected with Poonah, south-cast of Bombay? I
have not met it elsewhere.

+ The Vāyu Purina reads Maunikas (xlv. 127); and Mauleyas are men-
tioned in Sabhi-P., li. 1871; but I have not found any of these names
elsewhere.

§ This as a people is not in the dictionary. The Viyu Puriņa reads
Asmakas (xlv. 127), but ASmaka seems to be the proper form. These people
are mentioned in the Ramay. (Kishk.-K., xli. 17) and M.-Bh. (Droņa-P.,
xxxvii. 1605-8) ; and are placed in the middle of India by canto lviii. verse
47, They may have been the descendants of A$maka, who was the son of
king Kalmasha-pida Saudésa’s queen Madayanti by Vasishtha (Adi-P., oxxii.


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 337


Bhoga-vardhanas,* Naishikas,+ Kuntalas,t Andhas,$ Udbhi-
49 das, || Vana-dūrakasT; these ** are the peoples of the countries
of the Southern region. tf


4736-7; and olxxvii. 6777-91), and who founded the town Paudanya (ibid.,
6791). A queen Asmaki is mentioned in the Lunar line (id., xov. 3766).

* I have not found this name elsewhere. Perhaps it may be connected with
the Southern Utsava-sanketas (Bhishma-P., ix. 968; andsee page 319 note +).

+ This is not in the dictionary. It much resembles the Nédsikyas of
canto lviii. verse 24, who are, no doubt, the people of Nasik, north-east of
Bombay ; but they seem to be intended by Ndsikydvas in verse 51. Naisha-
dhas can hardly be meant, for they are named in verse 54 and were not in
South India. The Vayu Purana reads Nairnikas (xlv. 127) which somewhat
resembles the Nairritas of the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 959).

t A people of this name have been mentioned in verse 32, as dwelling
in Madhya-deša. The Kuntalas here were in the Dekhan and are the same
as those mentioned in Bhishma-P., ix.. 367, and Karna-P., xx. 779. It
appears Kuntala lay in the region between Belgaum and Bellary (Arch. Sarv.
of W. India, No. 5 by J. F. Fleet, p. 6; and No. 10 by J. Burgess, p. 72 note). -

$ The Vāyu Purana reads Andhras (xlv. 127), which is, no doubt, right.
Andhas ure mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Udyoga-P., xviii. 586; and Bhishma. P.
x. 857), but mistakenly for Andhakas and Andhras respectively. The An-
dhras or Andhras were a rude race in early times (Sabha-P., iv. 119 ; xxx, 1175;
xxxiii. 1270; and Vana-P., li. 1989); but they established a kingdom during
the third and second centuries B. C. Andhra was a kingdom also in Hiuen
Thsang’s time in the 7th century A.D., and comprised the oastern portion
of the Nizam's territories, with its capital at Warangal, according to Cun-
ningham (Anc. Geog. of India). Another capital was Dhenukakata, which

` is Dharanikota near Amaravati on the Kistna (Arch. Sary. of W. India, No. 10
by J. Burgess, p. $2). Andhra is said to be probably the same as Telinga
(ibid., p. 72 note; and dictionary), and is taken to be the Sanskrit name for
Telugu inthe Madras Census Report. Telugu is the speech of the region
extending from a parallel of latitude a little north of Madras northward us
far as Ichapur in Ganjam; it does not penetrate into Mysore nor the western
limits of Anantapur and Bellary, but is spoken by many of the inhabitants
of the Nizam’s Dominions and the Central Provinces (Report, p. 188).

il This is not in the dictionary and I have not met with it elsewhere.

T "Wood-splitters'” Tho Viyu Purana reads Nalakdlikas (xlv. 127), other
forms of which are Nalakdnanas and Nabhakdnanas (diot.).

** The Kūrma Purfņa adds Magadhas (xlvii. 38) mistakenly; they are
mentioned in their proper place in verse 44.

tt For Dakshindtyds read Dakshindyds? The Matsya Puriņa keeps pace

43


338 CANTO LVII.


Hear from me the names of the Western peoples. The
Sūryārakas,* the Kālibalas,* and the Durgas,t and the
50 Anikatas,§ and the Pulindas,|| and the Suminas,J the


with the text as far asthe “Dandakas” and then jumps at once, withont
any intimation, to the Western peoples beginning with the “ Kuliyas” who
correspond to the “ Pulindas ” of verse 50.

* This is obviously. a mistake for Surpdrakas, which the Viyu Puriņa
reads (xlv. 128). Súrpáraka or Surpéraka (both forms seem correct, though
the dictionary gives only the latter) was the country in the West where
Rama Jamadagnya dwelt (Vana-P., lxxxv. 8185); though it is also placed in
the South (Sabh4-P., xxx. 1169; and Vana-P., lxxxviii. 8337), because it was
near the Southern sea in the Western region (Santi-P., xlix. 1778-82). It
bordered on the sea near Prabhdsa (Vana-P., oxviii. 10221-7), which is the
modern Somnath in the peninsula of Kūthiāwār; it included the country
around the mouth of the Narmadé (Anušās.-P., xxv. 1736), and the mouth of
that river was so specially connected with Ráma that it was called Jāmad-
agnya (Matsya Purana, cxciii, 93-34). He built the city Sūrpšraka there
(Hari-V., xovi. 6300), and Dr. Burgess has identified it with the small modern
town Supara near Bassein, north of Bombay. The country Surpiraka there-
fore comprised the littoral tract from about Bassein to about the R. Narmadé.
(Arch. Surv. of W. India, No. 10 p. 31). The proper reading in Rimūy.
Kishk.-K., xliii. 6, should, no doubt, be “the Sūrpirakas also” instead of
“ the extensive towns” (Gorresio’s Edition, Annotations).

+ This is not in the dictionary. The Vāyu Purine reads Kolavanas (xlv.
128), but I have not found either name elsewhere. Perhaps this is to be
connected with Kalwan, a town adšut 37 miles north of Nasik (whioh is
mentioned in page 339, note ||).

1 This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere;
but the Durgalas are mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 359). Perhaps


this is to be connected with Dūngar-pur, a town and state about 90 miles
north-cast of Ahmedabad.


§ Or Anikatas, or O’anikatas; neither is in the dictionary. The Vaya
Porana reads Kdlttakas (xlv. 128); but I have not found these words else-
where. These names suggest Calicut, but that is too far south to be admis-
gible here in the Western region. f

|| See note to verse 47 above. This branch would be among the hills
gouth-west of Malwa or the southern portion of the Aravalli hills probably
The Vayu Purana reads Puleyas (xlv. 129), and the Matsya Kultyas (oxiii.
49); but I have not met with either name elsewhere.

q This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purāņa reads Surdlas (xlv. 129),
and the Matsya Sirdlas (oxiii. 49); but I have not found any of these words


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 339


Rūpapas,* and the Svapadas,t and the Kurumins,+ and
51 all the Kathaksharas,§ and the. others who are called Ná-
sikyavas, || and the others who live ou the north bank of the
Narmadā,S the Bhiru-kaččhas,** and the Maheyas,t+ and


elsewhere. Aro these two names to be identified with Israel * There was an
ancient Jewish colony, the modern Beni-Israel, on the Bombay coast before
the 2nd cent. A. D. (Hunter’s Indian Empire, p. 234).

* Tho Vayu (xlv: 129), and the Matsya (cxiii. 49) Parāņas read Rúpasas.
I have not met either name elsewhere. The Bhishma-P. list mentions Rūpa-
vdhikas (ix. 351).

+ This as the name of a people is not in the dictionary; but Sva-pac'a
“ dog-cooking,” (= Sva-pdka, which would not suit the metre) occurs, as the
name of a degraded tribe (Manu, x. 19 and 51). Tri-Sanknu is said to have
associated with the Sva-pikas, when discarded by his father (Hari-V., xii.
721-3). The Viyu Purana (xlv. 129) and the Matsya (cxiii. 49) read Tapa-
gas, which resembles the Tūpasāšramas placed in the south region by canto
lviii. verse 27, which might mean the descendants of ascetics.

+ This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purāņa reads Turasitas (xlv.
129), but I have not met either name elsewhere. The Matsya reads Tuittirikas
(oxiii. 49), which resembles the ittiras mentioned in Bhishma-P., 1. 2084
but there are no data to identify them.

§ This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purdna reads Paraksharas (xlv.
129), andthe Matsya Kdraskaras (oxiii. 49). The Pdrašavas of canto lviii
verse 81 appear to be the same peoplē. I have not met with any of these
names elsewhere, except Kūraskarss in Sabha-P., xlix. 1804, but the Pūraša-
vas might mean a tribe which olaimed descent from Para$u-Rima

|| This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purāņa reads “ Nūsikyas and
others” (xlv. 180); this agrees with the Ndsikyus of onnto lviii, verse 24
except that the latter are placed in the South. The Nasikyas are, no doubt,
the people of Nasik, which is an ancient and sacred city north-east of
Bombay. The Matsya Puriņa reads “and others who are called Vasikas”
(oxiii. 60), but I have not met this name elsewhere.

T The Vāyu Purana (xlv. 180) and the Matsya (oxiii. 50) say “within the
Narmada.”

** Or Bhūru-kac'c'has as the Matsya Purana reads (oxiii. 50). These are, no
doubt, the same as the Bhrigu-kac'c'has of canto lviii. verse 21. The word is
the Greek Barngaza and survives in the modern Bharuch or Broach, a large
town near the month of the Narmadé (Ano. Geog. of India). The Vāyu
Poréna reads Bhdnu-kac'c'hras (xlv. 180) erroneously. None of these names
ocour I believe in the Rámáyana or Mahé-Bhérata.


+t These are, no doubt, the people who dwelt along the R. Mahi (see page


840 CANTO LYII.


52 the Sdrasvatas* also, and the Kāsmīras,* and tlie Su-rish-
fras,f and the Avantyas,§ and the Arbudas|| also. These
are the Western peoples.

53 Hear the inhabitants of the Vindhya Mountains. The


294, note §) north of Baroda. The Mdhikas of the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 354)
are no doubt the same.

* So also the Matsya Puriņa (cxiii. 50). “The people who dwell along
the R. Saras-vati,” which is, no doubt, the small river of that name that flows
into the sea at Prabhāsa, the modern Somnath, in the peninsula of Káthiáwár
(Vana-P., Ixxxii. 5002-4; and Salya-P., xxxvi. 2048-51). They are not the
same as the Sdrasvatas of canto lviii. verse 7, who were in Madhya-deéa,
The Vāyu Puriņa reads instead ‘‘Sahasas and Sāšvatas'”” (xlv. 180); I have
not found either name elsewhere, but the Sásikas of the Bhishma-P. list
(ix. 354) are, no doubt, the same as the second of these.

+ This name is altogether out of place here, and the Kūšmiras have been
mentioned in their proper position in verse 41. The Vayu Purina reads
Kac'c'hvíyas instead (xlv. 131) and the Matsya Kac'c'hikas (cxiii. 51), which
indicate the correct reading. They are the people of Kac'c'ha (see canto lviii.

_ Verse 28) the modern Kaohh or Kutch.

1 Su-réshtra is a country frequently mentioned in the M.-Bh., but the
references seldom convey any definite information. It included the penin-
sula of Kūthiāwār and the country around the G. of Cambay—that is, not
quite all the modern territory called Gujarat (Vana-P., Ixxxviii. 8344-9). It
is very rarely alluded to inthe Rámáy. (see once in Adi-K., xii. 23). The
old name survives in the town Surat near the month of the Tapti.

§ This form is not given in the dictionary; read A’vantydé for Avantydé?
They are the people of Avanti; see note to verse 55 where the Avantis are
mentioned again, and more appropriately, for canto lviii. verse 22 places
them in the Tortoise's right side, t.e., the South: but they were considered
to be in both regions.

The Vāyu Purana (xlv. 131) and the Matsya (cxiii. 51) read A'nartas, which
is perhaps better, as they are placed by canto lviii. verse 30 in the Tortoise’s
right hind-foot. Anarta was the country which had for its capital Dvaraké
or Dvāra-vati or Ku$a-sthali, the modern Dwarka on the sea-shore at the
extreme west of the peninsula of Kathidwar (Sfnti-P., cccxli. 12955; Hari-V.,
Oxiii. 6265-6). It was Kyishna’s special kingdom, but it was founded long
before (Hari-V., x. 642-9; and xciv. 5163-9).

|| The people of Arbuda, the modern Mt. Abu near the south end of the
Aravalli hills. z

S] For Vindha-nivdsina road Vindhya-nivdsinah; see verse 55. Vindhy2 is
used here in its general and wider meaning, as denoting the whole mountain-


COUNTRIES AND RACES NEAR THR-VINDHYA MOUNTAINS. 341


Sarajas,* and Karūshas,f and the Keralas,f and Utkalas,$


chain from Gujarat eastwards, and not in the precise sense given it in verses
21-23, because the Naishadhas, Avantis and other western people are includ-
ed in this group.

* I have not met with this name elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary.
The Vayu Purana (xlv. 132) and the Matsya (oxiii. 52) read Mdlavas, which
is no doubt correct. Malava is the modern Malwa; and the people are
generally mentigned in the M.-Bh. as a tribe rather than as a settled nation
(e.g., Sabha-P., xxxiii. 1270 ; li. 1871; and Vana-P , ccliii. 15256). Mūlava does
not appear to have been so extensive however as Malwa and, as this passage
indicates, denoted rather the upper portion of that region bordering on the
Vindhyas; west of Avanti.

+ The name is also written Kdrusha, Kdrtsha and Kdrushaka. This people
constituted a powerful nation under king Danta-vakra in the Pandavas’ time
(Sabhž-P., xiii. 575-7; and Hari-V., xci. 4963) ; but they seem to have con-
sisted of several tribes (Udyoga-P., iii. 81) and were not looked upon as closely
allied to the races around them, for their origin is carried directly back to
an eponymous ancestor Karúsha, a son of Manu Vaivasvata, in the Hari-
Varnša (x. 614; and xi. 658). Tho position of KarGsha is indicated by the.
following allusions. Itis linked with C'edi and with Kasi (Adi-P., oxxiii. 4796;
Bhishma-P., ix. 348; liv. 2242; lvi. 2415; oxvii. 5446; and Karņa-P., xxx,
1231), and with the Vatsyas or Vatsas (Drona-P., xi. 396; see page 807,
note*); it was not a very accessible country (Sabha-P., li. 1864); and
here it is said to rest on the Vindhyas. Moreover Danta-vakra acknow-
ledged Jarásandha, king of Magadha (see page 330 note ft) as his suzerain
(Sabha-P., xiii. 575-7; and Hari-V., xoi. 4963). Karūsha therefore was a
hilly country, south of Káśi and Vatsa, between C’edi and Magadha; that is,
it comprised the hilly country of which Rewa is the centre, from about the
R. Ken on the west as far as the confines of Behar on the east. I have dis-
cussed Karisha in a paper on ‘Ancient Cédi, Matsya and Kariga’”’ in tho
Bengal Asiatic Bociety's Journal, 1895, Part I. p. 249.

t This must be incorrect, for the Keralas were a well-known people in the
Sonth; see note to Kevalas in verse 45. The Vayu Puriņa (xlv. 132) and
Matsya (cxiii. 52) read Mekalas, which is no doubt right. They are men-
tioned in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 948; and li. 2103) and occupied the
Mekala hills and the hilly country around. The Mekala hills are the hills
in which the R. Sone rises (R&may., Kishk.-K., xl. 20), and which bound
Chhattisgarh on the west and north. These people are often coupled, as here,
With the Utkalus.

§ See page 327, note *. Utkala had a wide extension and falls within this
group as well as within the Eastern group.


342 CANTO LVII.


the Uttamarņas,* and the Dašārņas,+ the Bhojyas,t ang
54 the Kiskindhakas,§ the Toéalas,|| and the Kosalas, g


® The Uttamas are mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 348) and are no
doubt the same poople. The Matsya Purina reads Aundrdmdshas (oxiii. 52),
A people called’ Urddhva-karnas are mentioned in canto lviii. verse 16. I
have not, however, found any of these names elsewhere.

+ This people formed a well-known kingdom in early times ( Adi-P., exiii.
4449; Vana-P., lxix. 2707-8 ; and Udyoga-P., oxc.—cxciii), and inhabited the
country watered by the R. Dašūrņš, the modern Dasan, a tributary of the
Jumna. They are named thrice in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 348, 350 and 363),
which seems inexplicable. They are mentioned both in the Eastern and in
the Western regions in the accounts of Bhima’s and Nakula’s campaigns
(Sabhā-P., xxviii. 1063-5; and xxxi. 1189); the former of these allusions is
correct, but the latter seems to be an error. The capital was Vidiśá, see page
343, note t. 3

t Or better, Bhojas, as the Vayu (xlv. 182) and Matsya (oxiii. 52) Puranas
read. This name, as mentioned in page 335, note $, seems to have had
more than one application. Bhojas asa Yādava tribe dwelt in Krishņa's
kingdom in Su-rāshtra; and Bhojas inhabited Mrittikavati, which seems from
the various references to it to have been situated somewhere on the north-
eastern limits of the modern Gujarat (Vana-P., xiv. 629; xx. 791; oxvi.
10172-6; coliii. 15245; Manusala-P., vii. 244-5; and Hari-V., xxxvii. 1980-7;

and xxxviii. 2014). These may be the Bhojas mentioned in the text, inhabit-
ing the extreme western end of the Vindhya range.

§ Or better, Kishkindhakas, as the Matsya Furdņa reads (oxiii. 52). They
are no doubt the same as the Kaiskindhyas of canto lviii. verse 18; but they
cannot have any reference to Kishkindhyš in the Rimfy., for that country
lay far to the south of the Godavari (see Journal, R. A. S., 1894, pp. 255, &0.);
and is referred to in M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxx. 1122. The Kishkindhakas men-
tioned in the Hari-Varéa (xiv. 784) may be the people intended here, but
there appear to be no data to identify them.

|| The Matsya Purána reads Stofalas (oxiii. 68). They are not in the dio-
tionary, but Toshala and Tosala are given doubtfally. I have not however
found any of these names elsewhere,

S These are the people of Dakshina Kosala or Maht-Kosala, the modern
Chhattisgarh. In the Journal, R. A. S., 1894, p. 246, some reasons have peer
given for placing the Faūo'ipsaras lake, where Rama spent ten years of h18
exile, in this region. May one hazard the conjecture that it was in cons
quence of his long residence here, that a colony from North Kosala invaded
this region, established a kingdom here and gave their name to this country ?
The connexion was ancient (A$vamedh,-P., Ixxxii. 2464-5).


COUNTRIES AND RACES NEAR THE VINDHYA MOUNTAINS. 343


the Traipuras,* and the Vaidisas,t the Tumburas, f
and the Tumbulas,§ the Patus,|| and the Naishadhas, T


# The people of Tripuré, the modern Tewar, on the R. Narmadé. It was
a famous city (Sabha-P., xxx. 1164; Vana-P., ccliii. 15246) deriving its name
from a legend that the demons had a triple city .Tri-pura here, made of gold,
silver and iron, and Siva destroyed it at the intercession of the gods; this isa
fayourite subject with the poets (Karņa-P., xxxiii and xxxiv; and see
Aitareya-Brahm., I. iv. 23 and 24, for the story in an older form); see also
Cunningham’s Arch. Surv. Repts., VIII. 124; IX. 54-65; and, XXI. 23; but
his connexion of Tripuri with O'edi in early times is mistaken, see paper on
“Ancient Cadi, Matsya and Karūga” in Journal, Bengal Asiatic Society,
1895, Part I. p. 249.

+ For Vaidišas read Vaidisds. These are the people of Vidifd. It was a
famous town, the capital of the country Daśárņa, and situated on the R.
Vetra-vati, the modern Betwa, a little way east of Ujjain (Megha-D., i. 24,
25 and 28). It is probably to be identified with the modern Bhilsa, or rather
with Bes-nagar the ancient capital which is close to Bhilsa (Cunningham’s
Stupa of Bharhut, 132, &c). The Véyu Purana reads Vaidikas (xlv. 183),
which seems erroneous, though the VaidiSas are really included among the
Dašārņas in the last verse.

t These are mentioned as a wild aboriginal tribe who inhabited the slopes
of the Vindhya Mountains in the Hari-Varnša (v. 310-11). The Matsya
Puráņa reads Tumuras (oxiii. 53), and the Tumbumas (Bhishma-P., 1. 2084)
may be the same.

$ The Vāyu Purfņa reads Tumuras (xlv.188); see the last note. The
Matsya reads Tumbaras (oxiii. 53). This is no doubt a tribe closely allied to
the last.

|| This people seems to be the same as the Pafac'claras, who are mentioned
several times in the M.-Bh.; see page 309, note *. The Véyn Puriņa reads
Shafsuras (xlv. 133), and the Matsya Padgamas (exiii. 58); but I have not
met either of these names elsewhere.

{ The people of Nishadha; the Nishadhas, as the Vāyu Puršņa reads (xlv.
138). This country is chiefly known from the story of its king Nala (Vana-P.,
liii.-lxxix); otherwise it is rarely mentioned. The chief data for fixing its
position are Nala’s remarks to his wife when he is banished from his kingdom
(id., lxi. 2317-9); and, as stated in note t to page 299, it seems to me the
view which he describes could only be obtained completely from a position
on the Satpura Mountains about longitude 75° E. The text says also
Nishadha rested on the Vindhya Mountains. Hence it may be inferred that
Nishadha comprised the country south of the Vindhyas between long. 74° .
and 75°, with Avanti to the north-east and Vidarbha to the south-east. Its


344 CANTO LVII


550 Annajas, * and the Tushti-kšras,+ the Virahotr
Avantis.§ All these peoples dwell on the 8
Vindhya Mountains.


as, f and the
lopes of the


capital was probably in the Tapti valley ; Damayanti in Wandering from
it found her way north-eastward to O’edi (see note to C'edi in canto lviii,
verse 16).
* I have not met this name elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. The
Matsya Puršņa reads Aripas (oxiii. 54) which seems erroneous. The Vayu
Purana reads Antipas (xlv. 134) which is no doubt Correct. Anúpa means
“a country situated near water,” or “a marshy country.” It was applied to
various tracts near the sea, generally in the combination sdgardnipa, e.g., in
Bengal (Sabha-P., xxv. 1002; xxix. 1101; and xxxiii. 1268-9); in or near
the Pāņdya kingdom in the South (Udyoga-P., xviii. 578); in the north and
west of the peninsula of Kathiawar (Hari-V., cxiii. 6361-9 ; and cxiv.
6410-11); and on the western coast generally (Udyoga-P., iii. 81); but the
name was more specially applied to a tract on the west coast which consti-
tuted a kingdom in the Pandavas’ time ( Sabha-P., iv. 123). The only country
which rests on the Vindhyas and borders on the sea is the tract on the east
of the G. of Cambay, north of the Narmada, and this no doubt was Anūpa..
It is also indicated that Su-rashtra, Āntpa and Anarta were contiguous coun-
tries, and that Anipa lay beyond and south of Su-réshtra (Hari-V., xciv. 5142-
80). When the kings of Méhish-mat{ (see page 333, note t) were powerful,
the valley of the lower Narmadé and Anūpa would naturally fall under their
sway, and this no doubt explains why Kārtavirya is called “lord of Anūpa”
(Vana-P., oxvi. 10189-90), and king Nila, also (Bhishma-P., xoy. 4210).

+ I have not found this name elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary.
The reading should no doubt be Tundikeras as the Vēyu Puršņa reads (xlv.
184). A Tundikera king is mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Drona-P., xvii. 691),
and the Tuņdikeras (Karņa-P., v. 138); and the 'Tuņdikeras are said in
the Hari-Varnša to be a branch of the Hai ya race (xxxiv, 1895). There is
a town called Tendukhera a little north of the Narmadé at nearly long.
79° E.; and as this site suits the text, it may be presumed these people
occupied that position in the Narmadé valley. The Matsya Purina reads
Saundikeras (cxiii. 54), not quite correctly.

t The Véyu Purana (xlv. 134) and the Matsya (cxiii. 54) read Vttihotras
which is no doubt correct. Vitihotra was a femous Haihaya king, and the
Vitihotras were a branch of that race (Hari-V., xxxiv. 1895). They are
called Vitahotras in the M.-Bh. (Droņa-P., lxx. 2436). Being Haihayas, they
probably occupied a part of the upper Narmada valley.

§ They have been mentioned already in yerse 52. Avanti had the Nar-
mada flowing through it (Sabhā-P., xxx, 1114; and Vana-P , Ixxxix. 8354-8)


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN THE HIMALAYAS. 345


g6 Next I will tell thee also the names of the coun-
tries which rest against the Mountains.* The Niharas, t
and the Hamsa-margas,{ the Kurus,§ the Gurgaņas, ||


and was on the lower portion of that river, for it is placed in the South in
the first of these passages, and in the West in the second passage and in
verse 52. It appears to have beon bounded by the Riksha Mountains
(Satpura range) on the south (Vana-P., Ixi. 2317), but its limits on the north
are not clear. Its capital, though not mentioned in the M.-Bh., was Ujjayini
or Vi$ālā, the modern Ujjain, in later times (Megha-D., i. 31). Avanti there-
fore comprised the region of the sources of the Chambal and the country
south-westward as far as the Satpura range. Two brothers Vinda and Anu-
vinda are often named as the kings of Avanti in the M.-Bh. (Udyoga-P., olxv.
6753; Droņa-P., xcix. 3682-92; and Karna-P., xiii. 498-9), but they were
also Kaikeyas and led Kaikeya troops (ibid., 492-524). May it be inferred a
branch of the Kaikeyas had invaded and conquered Avanti?

* Parvatdšrayin. These mountains are it seems only the Himalaya range.
This group repeats many of the tribes mentioned in verses 40—42.

+ Lhave not met this name elsewhere. Are these the modern Newars,
who inhabit the great valley of Nepal and its vicinity, and who were the
owners of the country prior to the Gurkha invasion (Journal, Beng. As. Socy.,
Vol. LXIII, Part I, 218, 214 and 217). The Vayu Puráņa reads Nigarharas
(xlv. 135); but I have not found it elsewhere. The Matsya reads Nirdhdras
(cxiii. 55) which seems erroneous.

t See page 323 note +. The Matsya Purina reads Barvagas (oxiii. 65)
which seems erroneous.

§ These are probably the Uttara or Northern Kurus, for the Kurus of
Madhya-de$a could not properly be described as dwelling among mountains.
They seem to have been the stock from which the Kurus of Madhya-defa
separated off, for the period when Phrita-rfshtra and Piņdu were born is
described as a golden age, in which both branches of the Kurus engaged im
happy rivalry (Adi-P., cix. 4387-46); but the wistful recollections of their
ancient home idealized it afterwards into a blissful land, where fancy gave
itself free scope (Rámáy., Kishk.-K., xliv. 82-115). They seem to have


occupied the uppermost valleys of the Indus near its sources, with Kailisa


lying beyond (Vana-P, cxīv. 11025-35); and fervid imagination also placed
them close to Mount Meru on its north side (Bhishma-P., vi. 207-8; and vii.
254), orinthe region Hari-varshs, and declared men could not enter their
sacred land (Sabhé-P., xxvii. 1054-8). They are described as living in primi-
tive happiness, and women had the utmost freedom there (oxxii. 4719-23;
and Ramfy., loc. cit.).

|| This is not in the dictionary and I have not mot it elsewhere.


44


Are these


346 CANTO LYII.


57 the Khasas,* and the Kunta-pravaranas, + the
Urnas,t the Dārvas,$ the Sakritrakas, || the Tri.


people the modern Gurungs, an important tribe of Tatar race, who dwell now
throughout Nepal, but whose territory was formerly the country about
Lamzung, Ghandrung and Siklis, west of the great valley of Nepal (Journal,
Bengal Asiatic Society, Vol. LXIII. Part I. 213, 217 and 223-229, Risley's
Castes and Tribes of Bengal, I. 304)? The Vayu Puriņa reads Tanganas here
(xlv. 185), after having named them previously (ibid., 120); see verse 41.
The Matsya reads A-pathas (cxiii. 55), which seems erroneous.

* The Khasas or Khašas are generally mentioned as a half-civilized tribe
Outside India, along with Sakas, Daradas, &c. (Sabha-P., li. 1859; Drona-P.,
xi. 399; and oxxi. 4846-7). They are said to have been defeated and de-
graded by Sagara (Hari-V., xiv. 784), and were considered mlec'c'has (id., xoy.
6440-1; see also Muir's Sansk. Texts, IL. 482). The Khasas in the text,
however, may perhaps be identified with the Khas, who were formerly a small
clan but have developed into the predominant military order of the kingdom
of Nepal through intermarriages with bréhmans’ (Journal, Bengal Asiatio
Society, Vol. LXIII. Part I. 217-223). See canto lviii. verse 6.

+ I have not found this name elsewhere. The Vūyu Puriņa reads Kuša
instead of Kunta (xlv. 186), which does not seem satisfactory. The proper
reading should no doubt be Karna-prdvaranas, “those who cover themselves
with their ears,” a people mentioned several times in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P.,
li. 1875; and Bhishma-P., li. 2103). They are placed in the South in the
story of Sahadeva’s conquests (Sabhi-P , XXX. 1170) and among the Kiritas
in the Eastern region in the Rimīy. (Kishk -K. xl. 29); but it seems per
missible to identify them with the Ulikas, for a story is told about an Ulūka
named Prāvdra-karņa (Vana-P, cxoviii. 13334). The Ulúkas dwelt in the
Himalayas (ibid.), and formed a kingdom in the Pāņdavas' time ( Udyoga-P.,
clix. and clx), but it seems impossible to fix their position more definitely than
somewhere in Nepal (Sabhā-P., xxvi. 1014-20). The word Karņa-privaraņa
is also used as an adjective, for Hanūmān saw female Rakshasas in Lanká
“ fhree-eared and pin-eared, long-eared, ear-less, and one-eyed and one-eared,
and haying their ears asa covering” (Rimūy., Sund.-K., xvii. 24); and it
was an ancient belief that there were people with immense ears which covered
their bodies (Plin., iv. 18; and vii. 2; Mandoville’s "Travels,
Matsya P. mentions Kutha-prévaranas and Kar na-prdvarancs (cxx. 56 and 58).

t This people have been already mentioned in verge 42,

§ Theso appear to be the same as the Darvas mentioned in verse 42; seo
Cunningham's Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 15; and XIV. 145.

|| This is not in the dictionary ;


chap. xix). The


but it seems to bo tho same as Sakrid-grahas
or Bakrid-grāhas, who are said to bea terriblo mleo'o'ha, tribo in the North


PRAISE OF INDIA. 347


gartas,* and the Gālavas,t the Kirdtas,t and the Tāmasas.$
58 And in this Bhérata is established the law of the four ages,
the Krita, Tretā and the two others. Such is this country
59 Bharata, constituted with a four-fold conformation. || On its
south and west and east is the great ocean; the Himavat
range stretches along on its north, like the string of a bow. J
60 Then this country Bharata is filled with every kind of seed,
O brihman. It has the supremacy of Brahmá, the lordship
of the Ruler of the Immortals, the divinity of the gods, and


(Bhishma-P., ix. 373). There appear to be no data to fix their position unless
they may be connected with the Sakrin-nandd, which seems to be a river in
the east of Nepal (Vana-P., Ixxxiv. 8137). The text might also be read “and
the Kritrakas,” but I have found no such name elsewhere.

* Or Traigartas. Trigarta was considered to be in the Northern region
(Sabhā-P., xxvi. 1026) and also in the Western (id., xxxi. 1189). It is generally
mentioned in connexion with the Sindhus, Madras and other Panjab nations
(id. li. 1870; Vana-P., eclxiv. 15593-9; cclxx. 15743; Bhishma-P., xviii. 688 ;
cxviii. 5495; cxx. 5649; Drona-P., vii. 183; and also Hari-V., xci. 4965-70). It
was near the Kurus, for the Pandavas when burnt out of Vérandvata visited
the Trigartas and other contiguous nations (Adi-P., clvi 6084-7); and also
near Matsya and Silva, for these two kingdoms had often raided into Trigarta
(Virdte-P., xxx). From these indications it appears that Trigarta must have
touched the Panjab on the west, and the. Kurus on the south-east, and been
close to Matsya (see page 307 note *) and Sflva (see note to canto lviii. verse
6) on the south; hence it must have comprised the country from Amballa and
Pattiala to the R. Bias, ie., the Jalandhar doab and the country south-east
of that. Cunningham includes Kangra also (Arch. Surv. Repts., IL 16; and
XIV. 116 and 117; and Buddh. Cave Temples, p. 93). At the time of the great
war Prasthaln belonged to Trigarta (see note on page 321), and so brought
the Trigarta territories close to Matsya and Silva.

+ These people, no doubt, claimed to be the descendants of the rishi Gilava
(Hari-V., xxvii. 1463-7; and xxxii. 1767-76), who was a famous son of Visvū-


` mitra (Anušis.-P., iv. 249-259 ; Udyoga-P., cv-exviii; and see cantos XX and


XXI above), or took their namo from him; see similarly the Atreyas and


Bharadvūjas of verse 39.

f See note to verse 40.

§ Theso have been already mentioned in verse 41.

{| C’atuh-samsthdna-samsthitam.

q ‘his implies that tho Himavat range included also the Sulaiman Moun-
tains along the west of the Panjab. The simile must refer to a drawn bow,
with the string angular in the middle.


348 CANTO LVIII.


61 the mortal nature of men.* Jt has various kinds of fwila
animals, cattle and aquatic animals st and all creeping things
likewise. And from it are produced} all immovable things,

62 together with things good or bad. No other land of action

exists among the worlds, O brāhman.


Even among the gods,
63 O saintly brahman, this is ever in truth§ the wish—« Oh,


that we shall become men on the earth, when we fall from
our divine condition! A man indeed does actions that the
G4 gods and demons cannot do!” Those who are involved in the
fetters of such action, who are eager to proclaim their own
actions, || and who are possessed of a small


portion of happi-
mess perform no action at all,


Canto LVIII.


Mérkandeya continuing represents India as resting upon Vishnu in
the form of a tortoise looking eastward, and distributes the
various countries and peoples accordingly over the several parts
of his body, together with the corresponding lunar constellations.

He gives an astrological application to this arrangement and

enjoins the performance of religious rites to avoid calamity. He


also distributes the constellations of the Zodiac over the Tortoise’s
body.


Kranshtuki $ spoke
1 Adorable Sir! Thou hast duly declared Bhérata to me, its
2 rivers, mountains, countries, and the people who inhabit it.


* Marutas tathd seems incorrect, Read instead martyaté tathd ?

t Mriga-patv-apsaro-yonis. The meaning of “aquatic animal” ig given to
ap-sara but not to ap-saras in the dictionary,

t For pra-ydti read pra-jatih ?

§ For sadd esha read sadaivaisha ? -

i| This seems rather meaningless. For sva-karma-khydpanotsukaih the MS.
reads sva-karma-kshapanonmukhaih, “who are averse to diminishing the stock


of their actions;” but kshapanotsukaih seems Preferable, “who are eager to
diminish the stock of their actions.”


4 For Kroshktukir road Kraushtukir,


POSITION OF VISHNU AS TORTOISE IN INDIA. 349


But thou didst previously make mention of the Tortoise, who
is the adorable Vishnu, in Bhirata; I desire to hear fully
about his position.

3 What position does he, the god Janārdana, occupy in his
form of the Tortoise? And how are weal and’ woe indicated
thereby to mankind according to the position of his face and
of his feet? Expound all that about him,


Markandeya spoke


4 With bis face looking eastwards the adorable Tortoise-formed
god takes his position, when he approaches this nine-portioned

5 country Bhārata, O brāhman. The constellations are arrang-
ed all about him in nine divisions, and the countries * also,
O brāhman. Hear duly from me which they are.

6 The Veda-mantras,t the Vimiņdavyas, the Sālvas,$


5 The arrangement of the countries is very far from correct; and this
canto cannot be compared with the last canto for accuracy. To make the
shape of India conform to that of a Tortoise lying ontspread and facing
eastwards is an absurd fancy and a difficult problem.

+ This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere.
Does it mean “those who observe the Vedas and the Mantras especially ”
or has it any reference to Brahmavarta?

t I have not found this elsewhere and itis not in the dictionary. Mdņda-
vyas are mentioned in verse 38.

§ Or Sdlveyas as they were also called (Vana-P. colxiii. 15576-82). The
Sālvas are often mentioned in the M.-Bh. They were near the Kurus
(Viréta-P. i. 11-12) and the Trigartas (id.,xxx); and in the beautiful story
of Satya-vat and Savitri, he was a Sélva prince and she a Madra princess
(Vana-P. coxcii, &c.). Other indications of Salva are given in the allusions
to Krishņa/s conquest of it, but the story is marred because the people are
called Daityas and Dānavas, and Saubha which seems to haye been the
capital is described as a city and as situated in the air, and also as able to
move about freely (Vana-P. xiv-Xxii; Udyoga-P. xlvii. 1886; and Droņa-P.
xi. 395). The Silva king attacked Dvira-vati, and Krishna in retaliation
killed him ond destroyed Saubha at the gulf of the sea (ibid.), which can be
none other than the Rann of Kachh. From these indications it appears
Sālva was the country along the western side of the Aravalli hills. Saubha
is incapable of being determined. Silva seems to have contained another
city called Mdrttikdvata (or Mrittikd-vatt ?), which is probably the same as
the Mrittiké-vati mentioned in page 342, notet (Vana-P. xiv. 629; and


850 CANTO LVIII.


and the Nipas,* and the Sakas,t and the Ujji.


xx.791). The Hari-Vathfa says king Sagara degraded the Silvas (xiv. 784),
_ but this is a late fable for the Silva king was one of the leading monarchs in

Krishņa’s time (id , oviii. 6029) and was brother of Sišu-pila king of O'edi (Va.
na-P. xiv. 620-7); and other allnsions shew that Sālva was a famous kingdom
before that (Udyoga-P. clxxiii and clxxiv; and Anučis.-P. oxxxvii. 6267); be-
Bides which, Satya-vat and Savitri rank with the noblest characters in ancient
Indian story. The weird legend of Vyushitdsva’s queen no doubt means her
sons became Silvas and did not originate the race (Adi-P. cxxi. 4695-4714),
as in the case of the Madras (page 315, note f).

* The Nipas began with king Nipa of the Paurava race, who established
his dynasty in Kaimpilya, the capital of Southern Péiic’dla, about 12 or
15 generations anterior to the Pindavas; the dynasty flourished in king
Brahma-datta who was contemporary with their fifth ancestor Pratipa, and
it was destroyed in Bhishma’s time (Hari-V., xx. 1060-73; M-Bh., Adi-P.
oxxxvili. 5512-3; and Matsya-P. xlix. 52 and 53) in the person of J anamejaya,
nicknamed Durbuddhi, who after exterminating his kinsmen was himself
killed by Ugréyudha (Udyoga-P. lxxiii. 2729; Hari-V., xx. 1071-2; and
Matsya-P. xlix. 59). Kūmpilya is the modern Kampil on the old Ganges
between Budaon and Farokhabad (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., I. 255).
Prishata, who is said to have been the last king’s grandson but was a
Fūūo'ila with a different ancestry, obtained the kingdom'and handed down a
new dynasty to his son Drupada (Hari-V., xx. 1082-1115 ; and xxxii. 1778-93).
The Nipas who survived are mentioned in the M.Bh. as an inferior people
(Sabha-P. xlix. 1804 ; and 1. 1844).

t The Sakas were originally an outside race and are mentioned often in
the M-Bh. They were considered to be mlec'c'has (Vana-P. clxxxviii. 12838-
9), and were classed generally with Yavanas, but also with Kambojas, Pah-
lavas, Tukhūras and Khašas (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1199; 1. 1850; Udyoga-P. iii.
78; xviii. 590; Droņa-P. xi. 399; xx. 798; cxxi. 4818; Siinti-P. lxv. 2429;
and Vana-P. li. 1990; and also Rūmūy., Kishk. K. xliv. 13). Their home
therefore lay to the north-west, and they are generally identified with the
Soythians (Lat. Sac»). They penetrated into India by invasions, and 2
branch is mentioned in the M-Bh. as in the Eastern region, apparently in
Behar (Sabhi-P, xxix. 1088; and li. 1872; see also Rimiy., Kishk. K. xl. 21).
Buddha Sūkya-muni is considered to have been of Saka race. Their inroads
continued through many centuries, and were resisted by various kings; and
they are mentioned in the text as haying established themselves in Madhya-
defa. The Hari-Vaméa makes them the descendants of Narishya one of
Manu Vaivasyata’s sous (x. 614 and 641); another account says they were
Kshattriyas and became degraded from haying no brahmans (M-Bh., Anušis.-


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN MADEYA-DES'A, 351


hānas,* my child, the Ghosha-sankhyas,t and the
7 Khašas,$ the Sarasvatas,|| the Matsyas, T the Sūrasenas,**


P. xxxiii. 2103; and Manu x. 43-44). The Rimiy. has an absurd fable about
their creation (Adi-K. lvi. 3; see page 314 note X),

# Ujjihdna is giveu in the dictionary as the name of a region, but have
not met it anywhere. Perhaps itis to be identified with the town Urjihdnd,
which was situated south-east of Vārana-sthala, which is the same as Hasti-
napura, or near it (Rūmūy., Ayodh. K. lxxiii. 8-10); and in that direotion
there is now a town called Ujhani about 11 miles south-west of Budaon.

t Vatsa; but it would be better to read Vatsd, “the Vatsas;” see page
807, note. *

t This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere.
It may mean “those who are reckoned among Ghoshas or herdsmen,” and be
an adjective to Khasas.

§ Or Khasus. They were an outside people on the north, as mentioned in
page 346 note.* In one passage they are placed between Meru and Mandara
near the R. Sailod& (Sabhi-P. li. 1858-9), that is somewhere in Western
Thibet; according to the Matsya Purdna the R. Sailodnkū rises at Mt. Aruna
which is west of Kailisa and flows into the Western Sea (cxx. 19-23). Khaša
has been connected with Kashgar. The KhaSas also made inroads into India,
for they are classed among the Panjab nations in a passage in the M-Bh.,
which shews its later age by its tone (Karna-P. xliy. 2070), and they are
mentioned in the text hero as settled in Madhya-doša. Mūnu says they were
`- Kshattriyas and became degraded by the loss of sacred rites and the absence
of brahmans (x. 43-44).

|| “Those who live along the Saras-vati,” that is, the sacred river north of
Kuru-kshetra. They are not the samo as the people named in canto lvii.
verse 51.

T Seo page 307 note *.

** Sūrasena lay immediately south of Indra-prastha or Delhi (Sabhé-P.,
xxx. 1105-6), and comprised the country around Mathuré, the modern Muttra
(Hari-V., ly. 8093-8102; and xci. 4973) to the cast of Matsya (Virdta-P., v.
144-5) ; and it extended apparently from the Chambal to about 50 miles north
of Muttra (see Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., XX. 2). The Sūrasenas be-
longed to the Yadava and Huihaya raco, for Mathura tho capital is special-
ly called the capital of the Yādavas, and tho kings who reigned there be-
longed to that race (Hari-V., lvii. 3180-83; Ixxix. 4124-34; xo. 4904; cxiv.
6387 ; and Xxxviil. 2024 and 2027) „ A king named Sūrasena, a son of Arjuna
Kartavirya, is mentioned (id., xxxiv. 1892), who is, no doubt, intended as the
eponymous ancestor of this people, for Arjuna who vanquished Ravana was
slightly anterior to Rima, and the Hari-Vaméa says Sūrasena occupied this


352 CANTO LVIII.


and the people of Mathurā,* the Dharmaranyas,+ the
Jyotishikas, f the Gaura-grivas, $ the Gudas ||
8 the Agmakas,Q the Vaidehakas,** and the


and
Paii-


country after Satru-ghna’s time (id., lv. 3102); sce next note. The Sūrasenas
constituted a powerful kingdom shortly before the Pandavas’ time, and Krish-
na killed Karsa, who was one of the chief monarchs of that age, broke up the
sovereignty and hetook himself to Anarta. In later times SGrasena pre-
sumably regained importance, for it gave its nome to Sanraseni one of the
chief Prikrits. 4
* Mathurš was the capital of Súrasona as mentioned in the last note, and is
the modern Muttra on the R. Jumua (Hari-V., lv. 8060-61). The Hari-Varša
says that Madhu, king of the Daityas and Dūnavas, and his son Lavana reign-
ed at Madhu-pura and Madhu-vana (lv. 3061-3); and during Rama’s reign
Satru-ghna killed Lavaņa, cut down Madhn-vana and built Mathura on its site
(lv. 3083-96; and xcv. 5243-7) ; and after the death of Ráma and his brothers
Bhima of the Yidava race according to one passage (id., xev. 5243-7) took the
city and established it in his own family ; and Súrasena (see the last note)
according to another passage occupied the country around (id., lv. 3102). It
is said Bhima’s son Andhaka was reigning in Mathuré while Kuša and Lava
reigned in Ayodhya (id., xcv. 5247-8). These passages seem to make a mark-
ed distinotion between the population in the country and tlie dynasty in the
oity.

+ Dharmáraņya was the name of a wood near Gayá (Vana-P. lxxxiv.
8063-4; Anuśás.-P. xxv. 1744; and clxv. 7655; with Vana-P. lxxxvii.
8304-8).

f This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere;
but Buchanan Hamilton says there was a class of brahmang in Behar, called
Jausi, the vulgar pronunciation of Jyotish (Vol. I. p. 156).

§ These are stated in the dictionary as in the text to be a people in
Madhya-deša; but I have not met the name elsewhere. The word may however
be an adjective, ‘“yellow-necked,” and qualify Gudas and Ašmakas which
are joined together in a compound.

|| These are stated in the dictionary as in the text to be a people in
Madhya-deša, but I have not found the name elsewhere. Probably it is to
be connected with the country Gauda which Cunningham says was formerly
the southern part of North Kosala, i.e. the southern portion of the
tract between tho Ghogra and Rapti rivers (Arch. Surv. Repts. I. 327). The
town Gaur in the Maldah district in Behar, which was once the capital of
the Bengal kingdom, is too far east to be admissible here.

T See page 336, note §.

*% The people of Videha, see page 329, note fe


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN MADHYA-DES'A 853


c'ālas,* the Sanketas,+ the Kankast and Mārutas,$ the


* Paūc'šla or Paiio’dla was a large country, comprising the territory on both
banks of the Ganges, and bounded on the north by Sub-Himalayan tribes, on
the east by the same tribes and Kosala, on the sonth by Sūrasena, the junc-
tion of the Jumna and Chambal, and Kūnya-kubja (Adi-P., cxxxyiii. 6512-3
and Virita-P., v. 144), and on the west by the Kurus and Sūrasenas (Sabhā-P.,
xxviii. 1061; and Bhishma-P., ix. 846). The Pdūc'ilas originated in the de-
scendants of Ajamidha by his wife Nili, though the M.-Bh. (Adi-P., xciv.
8722-3) and Hari-Vamša (xxxii. 1776-80, with which agrees the Matsya
Purana, xlix. 43-4 and 1. 1-4) differ in the number and names of the descen-
dants. These passages from the Hari-Varnša and Matsya Purana date their
rise about eight or nine generations prior to the Pandavas, and the passage
from the M.-Bh. seems to point toa much: earlier kingdom. The country
being large was divided into tivo kingdoms, the Ganges being the dividing line
(Adi-P., cxxxviii. 5509-16); to the north was North Pañc’ála or Ahi-c’c’hatra,
with its capital at Ahi-c'c'hatrā, the modern Ahichhatr, 18 miles west of
Bareilly and 7 north of Aonla (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., I. 255-7);
and to the south was South Paūc'ils, with its capital at Kimpilya, the
modern Kampil, on the old Ganges between Budaon and Fa «khabad (ibid.
255). Tho Sriūjayās, or descondants of Sriūjaya, who are often mentioned
in the M.-Bh. (e.g., Adi-P., cxxxviii. 6476; and Drona-P., xxi 883, 895 and 915)
appear to have reigned iu North Paiic’dla, and the Nipas in. South Paūc'ila
Bee page 350 note *); on the destruction of tho litter, Prishata of the former
dynasty united the two kingdoms, bnt Drona conquered his son Drupada and
re-established the two kingdoms, keeping North Paiic4ila himself, and restor-
ing the South to Drupada who then reigned in Kímpilya and Makandi (Adi-P.
exxxviii; Hari-V., xx. 1060-1115).

+ Putting aside the Utsava-sanketas (see page 319 note +), the only instance
where I have met this name is in the M.-Bh. (Sénti-P., clxxiv.6514) where it is
introduced apparently as the name of a town; but there is nothing to indicate
where it was, and it is not so given in the dictionary. Probably however the
reading hero and there should be Sdketa, that is, Ayodhya and its people.
Otherwise they are not mentioned in this group where they should be, and
they can hardly be intended by the KoSalas in verso 14.

t These are montioned in the M.-Bh. only as an outside race, along with the
Tukhiras, Sakas, Pahlavns, &c. (Sabhi-P., 1. 1850; and Siinti-P., Ixy. 2429)
Their being mentioned here in the middle of India suggests that they must
have invaded and settled there. It may bo noticed also that Yudhishthirn
took the name Kanka during his disguised residence at Virdta'sCourt (Virita-P.
vii, 224),

§ T have met no people of this name elsewhere. Perhaps the reading


45


354 CANTO LVII.


Kaéla-kotisas,* and Pāshaņdas,f and the inhabitants of
9 the Pāripātra mountains, the Kapingalas, § Kururvāhyas, |


should be Mdlavas, the people of Malwa (see page 341 note *) ; they are men:
tioned in verse 45 below, but their more appropriate position is here,

* I have not met this name elsewhere, but it may mean the people of
Kūla-kott, which is mentioned in the M.-Bh. as a place of pilgrimage (Vana-P,,
xcv. 8513), and which appears from the context to be between the Ganges and
the Bāhudā (the Ram-ganga or perhaps the Gurra east of it; see page 291
note § §). Kofi-tfrtha mentioned in the Matsya Purana (cv. 44) seems to be
the same. Moreover Kala-koti may be the same as Kdla-ktļa, which is allud-
ed to occasionally (Sabha-P., xxv. 997; Udyoga-P., xviii. 596-601; and perhaps
Adi-P., cxix. 4637), and for which the second passage indicates a similar posi-
tion.

+ “Heretics;” applied to Jains nnd Buddhists.
of this name.

t See page 286 note tf.


I have met with no people


§ I have not met this name elsewhere. A river called Kapiiijald is men-
tioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 334), but without any data to identify
it. Two other readings may be suggested Kdlingakas, i.e.. Kalingas (see
page 316, note +) ; or better perhaps Kdlanjaras, the inhabitants of Kalinjar, an
ancient'and celebrated hill and fort 93 miles south of Banda in Bundelkhand;
it is mentioned only as a tirtha in the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., lxxxv. 8198-8200;
Ixxxvii. 8317; and Annfas.-P , xxv. 1721-2),

|| This reading appears to be wrong, but it is not easy to suggest another
entirely satisfactory. It is clear, however, that the Kurus are one of the races
meant. Vdhyas are said to be a people in the dictionary.

The Kuras occupied the country from the Sivis and Sub-Himalayan tribes
on the north to Matsya, Siirasena and South Paiic'ala on the south, and between

North Paūc'ila on the east and Maru-bhimi (the Rajputana desert) on the
west. Their territory appears to have been divided into three parts, Karu-
kshetra, the Kurus and Kurn-jāngala (Adi-P., cix. 4337-40). Kuru-kshetrs,
‘the cultivated land of the Kurus, comprised the whole tract on the west of
the Jumna and included the sacred region between the Saras-vati and
Drishad-vati (Vana-P., lxxxiii 5071-8 and 7073-6; Ramay., Ayodh -K., lxx. 12;
and Megha-D., i. 49-50); it is said to have obtained this name because it yas
raised to honour, pra-krishfa, by Kuru (Salya-P., liv. 3009) ; the Bari-V., in xx=¥-
1800, inverts the course of history, and this explanation was afterwards CON”
fused and altered into that of his ploughing it (e g., Mateya-P., 1.20-22). Kura-
jéngala, ‘the waste land of the Kurus,’ was the eastern part of their territory
and appears to have comprised the tract between the Ganges and North
Paño’ála (Rāmfy., Ayodh.-K., Ixrall ; and M.-Bh., Sabhé-P., xix. 793-4). Tbe


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN MADHYA-DES'A 355


and the Udumbara people,* and the Gajahvayas+—these are
in the middlet of the Tortoise as he lies within the water.

10 To these people, who dwell in his middle, the three con-
stellations, Krittiké, Rohini and Saumya,§ reveal|| weal and
woe, O brahman.


middle region between the Ganges and Jumna scems to have been called simply
the Kurus’ countfy. The capital was Hastinapura (see notet below), and
Khiņdava-prastha or Indra-prastha, the modern Delhi, was a second capital
founded by the Pandavas/Adi-P., covii. 7568-94). Kuru was the eleventh an-
cestor of the Pandavas (id , xciv. 8738-51; and xcv. 3791-3820; and Hari-V.,
xxxii. 1799-1800).

* Udumbara is Kac’hh or Kutch according to Lassen (Ind. Alt, Map) and
Cunningham (Arch. Surv. Repts , XIV. 115 und 135), and their identification
may apply to the Audumbaras mentioned in Sabhd-P., li. 1869; but the
Udumbaras here are placed in Madhya-de I have not met with the name
elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. Certain descendants of Visva-
mitra were called Audumbaras (Hari-V., xxvii. 1466); and there was & river
Udumbard-vatt in the South (id., clxvāii. 9511).

+ The people of Hastina-para or Hastind-pura, the capital of the Kurus
(see pago 354 note ||), which is situated on the old bed of the Ganges, 22 miles
north-vast of Meernt; lat. 29” 9’ N., long. 78° 3'E. Itis said to have been
founded by king Hastin who was the fourth ancestor of Kuru (Adi-P., xcv.
9787-92; and Hari-V., xx. 1053-4); but he is omitted from the genealogy
in Adi-P., xciv. 3714-89 and Hari-V., xxxii. 1754-6 and 1795-9. By a play on
the meaning of the word hastin, ‘elephant,’ the city was also called Hastina-
pura (Ašrama-vis.-P., xvii. 508 and xxxvi. 1010’, Gaja-pura (dict.), Gajūhvayā
(Udyoga-P., clxxvi. 6071), Gaja-sihvayn (Adi-P., oxiii. 4441 and 4460), Naga-
pura (ibid, 4461-2), Nigdhva (dīot.), Nign-sithvaya (Adi-P., exxxi. 5146)
Vūraņihvaya (Aš$ramn-vds.-P., xxxix. 1098), and Vérana-sihvaya (dict.). It
seems probable, however, that the derivation from ‘elephant’ is the real ono,
because of the numerous freely-coined synonyms with that meaning, and
because there was another town Viraņivata among the Kurus not far from
Histina-pura (Adi-P., cxlii, with the description of the Pandavas’ subsequent -
and clvi. 6084-7), and also a place called Varana-sthala


movements, cxlix.-cli.,
‘alas (Rámíáy., Ayodh.-K., lxxiii. 8) which was


among the Kurus or North Pafic
perhaps the same as Hdstins-pura (see page 351, note *).

f Madhye in verse 7.

$ This does not appear to be the name of any nukshstra, but seems to
mean Mriga-Siras or Agrahayani, which follows Rohini and precedes Ardié


(verse 15 and note). -
| Vi-pdé{aka; not in the dictionary.


356 CANTO LVIII.


1] The hills* Vyisha-dhvaja,t and Añjana, t
akhya,§ and Manavic’ala,|| Sūrpa-karņa,$ Vyighra-
12 Kharmaka,t+ and Karvatagana;tt these
people of Mithila,


Jamby
Mukha,t+


hills,§§ the
||| the Subhras, and the Vadana-


* Girayo in verse 12; see note $$ below.


+ I have not met with this name anywhere else, and it is not in the dic-


jonary as the name of a hill. Is it tc be identified with Baidyanath, near
Deogarh in the Santal Parganas, where there is said to be one of the twelve
2ldest lingas of Siva (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Deogarh) ?

t This may be the mountain from which Sugriva summoned his vassal
monkeys (Ramay., Kishk.-K., xxxvii. 5), and also the mountain called Aijand-
sha, mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Anu$ās.-P., olxy. 7658) ; but there are no data
x0 identify it.


§ Jambu-mat is given inthe dictionary as the namo of a mountain, but I
have not met with either name elsewhere.


| This is mentioned in the dictionary, but I have not found


it anywhere
alse.


T Or, no doubt, Súrpa-karna, but I have not met with either as the name of
+ mountain, nor is it given in the dictionary.

** I have not met with this as the name of a mountain elsewhere, nor is it
n the dictionary. On hill Udaya-giri near Bhabaneswar, about 20 miles
iouth of Cuttack, are a number of rock-cut caves,


and one is sculptured in
"he form of a tiger's open mouth, and is known by


the name Vydghra-mukha;
san this be the hill intended here? It would be somewhat out of.placs
aere, but the grouping in this canto is far from perfect.

tt I have not found this name elsewhere,
t to be connected with the Kharak-pur hills
Jistrictin Behar? A people called Karbukas
tāmūy. (Kishk. K. xl, 29).

ff This is not in the dictionary,
iis no doubt to be connected with
ientioned in conjunction with


nor is it inthe dictionary. Is
in the south of the Monghyr
are mentioned in the Bust in the


and I have not met with it elsewhere; but
the country or town Karva(d, which is


Témra-lipta and Suhma in the west of Bengal
M.-Bh., Subhā-P., xxix, 1098-9). See Karbukas in the last note.

§§ The two lines of verse 12 must, it seems, beinverted, so as to bring the
ord girayo next to the mountains nūmed in verse 11: otherwise the word is
1eaningless.


III] For Mithilā, see page 329 notet; bnt the people of Videha have been
entioned already in verse 8 as situated in Madhya-de$a.


AT I have not met this name elsewhere, nor is it in the dictionary ns the


ume of a people. Probably the reading should be Suhmas ; Bee p. 327 note +,
he Sumbhas ( Rámáy., Kishk.-K., xl. 25) are no doubt the same.


COUNTRIES, HILLS AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA 357


dantnras,* and the C'andrešvaras + also, and the Khagas, t
13 and the Magadhas, § the Prag-jyotishas, || and the Lauhityas,J
the cannibals who dwell on the sea-const;** the hills
Parnotkata,tt Bhadra-gaura,tt and Udaya-giri ;§§
14 and the Kaégayas,|!|| the Mekhalāmushtas,TT the Tama-


* This is in the dictionary as tra name of a people, but I have not met with
it elsewhere. It may mean “shdwing their long teeth when spoaking;” but
here it is no doubt the name of a people as stated in the dictionary.

+ I have not found this elsewhere nor is it in the dictionary as the uame of
a people. A people called C'andra-vatsas are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Udyoga-
P., lxxiii. 2732).

§ See page 346 note * and page 351 note §. Here a branch of these peoplo
is placed iu the East of India.

t See page 330 note j.

|| See page 328 note t.

q The people of Lauhitya (M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxix. 1100 ; and li. 1864) which
was the country on the banks of the R. Lohita, or Lauhitya (Sabha-P., ix.
374; Rámáy., Kishk.-K., xl. 26; and Raghu-V., iv. 81 or Lohitré (Bhishma-P.,
ix. 343), and probably also Lohita-gangš (Hati-V., oxxii. 6873-6), the modern
Brahma-putra. The mention of ‘Lokita in Subhd-P., xxvi. 1025 and Lauhitya
in Anu$ūs.-P., xxv. 1732 appears to have a different application ; and a place
Lohitya is mentioned in Ramay , Ayodh.-K., lxxiii. 13, as sitaated between the
Ganges and Go-mati. Visva-mitra had certain descendauts called Lolitas
(Hari-V., xxvii. 1465) or Lauhitas (id., xxxii. 1771) who may have been the
children of his grandson Lauhi (id., xxvii. 1474)

#8 Sdmudrdhk purushddakdļ ; that is, on the const of the Bay of Bengal which
was the Eastern Ocean. They are mentioned in the Riméy. (Kishk.-K., xl.
30).

++ This is mentioned in the dictionary, but I have not found it elsewhere.

ff This is in the dictionary, but I have not found it elsewhere.

§§ There are several hills of this name ; that intended here is no doubt the
hill near Réja-griha, or Rajgir. Its ancient name Cunningham says was
Rishi-giri (Arch. Surv. Repts., I. 21 and vlate iii), which is mentioned in the
M.-Bh. (Sabba-P., xx. 798-800).

[| This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. ‘The
proper reading is probubly Kūšayo, “ the Kasis,” the people of Benares (sec
page 308 note t). ‘hey area little out of place here, and should fall within
the former group (verses 6-9), but ure not mentioned there, and therefore
come in here probably, for the groupiug in this canto is fur from perfect.

ST This is not in the dictionary, and I have uot found it elsewhere. The
first part of the word is no doubt a mistuke for Mekala or Mekuld, for the


358 CANTO LVIII.


liptas,* the Eka-pūdapas,f the Vardhamānas,ķ
the KoSalas§ are situated in the Tortoise’s face,

15 The three constellations Raudra, || Punar-vasu, and Pushya
are situated in its face.


and


Now these are the countries which are situated in
16 the Tortoise’s right fore foot: listen while I mention them,
O Kraushtuki.|| The Kalingas,** the Bangas,tt and the


Mekalas and Mekala hills are not mentioned in any other group in this
canto and may be intended here, though considerably out of their proper
position (see page 341 notet). There was also a town or river called Mekald,
which (if a river) was distinct from the Narmadā; but it appears to have
been more on the western side (Hari-V., xxxvii. 1983) and therefore less
admissible in this passage. I would suggest that the second part of the
word should be Pundrds, “the Puņdras” (see page 329 note*). The text
Mekhald-mushtds however might mean “ those who have been robbed of the
triple zone’ worn by the first three classes (see Manu, ii. 42) and might
then be an adjective qualifying Kašiyas.

* Or Tāmra-liptakas ; see page 330 note *,

+ * People who have only one tree;” but perhaps the reading should be
Eka-pddakds, “people who have only one foot”? It was a common belief
that such people existed, see M.-Bh., Sabhá-P , 1. 1838 (where they are placed
īn the South) and Pliny, vii. 2; andit lasted down to modern times, see
Mandeville's Travels, chap. XIV. See Eka-pddas in verse 51.

f The people of Vardhnmūna, the modern Bardhwan (commonly Burd-
wan) in West Bengal. It is not mentioned in the Raméy., nor M.-Bh., but is
& comparatively old town.

§ This can hardly refer to Kosnla, or Ondh (see page 808 note f) for, if so,
this people would have been placed along with the people of Mithilā and
Magadhn in verse 12; whereas here the Kosalas are sepnrated off from those
nations by the insertion of three hills in verse 13, and are grouped with the
Mekhalamushtas, Tāmra-liptas and Vardhamģnas. Kosala here must therefore
mean Dakshina Kosala hich is mentioned in canto lvii, verse 54, as lying on
the slope of the Vindhya mountains (see page 342 note T), and especially the
north and eust portions of it, for the southern part is placed appropriately in
the right fore foot in verse 16,


|| This appears incorrect. Read Raudri (fem), anamo for the coustel-
lation Ardra.


T For Kroshtuke read Kraush{uke.
## See page 334 note*,
+t See page 326 note*,


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 359


Jatharas,* the Košalas,f and the Myishikas,t and the C'edis,$


# They are mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 350) but with no data
to identify thoir territory. Here they are joined in one compound with
Kalingas and Bangus.

+ The peovle of Dakshina or Southern Kosala; eee page 342 note T ; the
south portion is especially meant, see verse 14,

t See page 332 note tf.

§ Thore is no mention of a people call-d C’edis in the Enstern region in -
the older poems; but Canningliam repeatedly placesa C’edi race in Clihattia-
garh (Arch. Surv. Repts., IX. 54-57 ; nnd XVII. 24), yet in ancient times it
was not so. C’edi was then one of the countries near the Kurus (M.-Bh.,
Virita-P.,i. 11-12; Udyoga-P., lxxi 2594-5). It is placed in the Eustern
region in the account of Bhima’s conquests there (Sabha-P., xxviii. 1069-74)
and also in the South region in the description of Arjunn's following the
sacrificial horse (ASva-medh.-P, lxxxiii. 2466-9); and it is also mentioned
along with the Dašūrņas (see page 342 note +) and Pulindas (see puge 335
note f) in the former passage. O’edi bordered on the Jumm, for king Vasu
when hunting ina forest sent a messxge home to kis queon across that
river, and the forest could not have been far from his territory (Adi-P.,
Ixiii. 2373—87). C'edi, moreover, is often linked with Matsya ond Karúsha
(e.g, Bhishma-P., ix. 348; liv. 2242; and Karņa-P., xxx. 1231; see page 307
- note * and page 341 note +), and with Kasi and Karúsha (e.g., Adi-P., cxxiii.
4796; and Bhishma-P., oxvii. 5446). It was closely associated with Mutsya
and must have touched it, for an ancient king Sahaja roigned over both
(Udyoga-P , lxxiii. 2782); and it seems probable that king Vasn’s son
Mntsya became king of Matsya (Adi-P., xiii. 2371-93; and Huri-V, xxxii.
1801-6). From these indicutions it appears C’edi comprised the conntry
south of the Jamna, from the R. Chambal on the north-west to near C'itra-
kúta on the south-east; aud on the south it was bounded by the platesn of
Malwa and the hills of Bundelkhand.

Its capital was Sukti-matt or Sukti-sdhvayd, (Vann-P., xxii. 898; and ASva-
medh.-P., Ixxxiii 2466-7) and was situated on the R. Sukti-matt, whichis said to
break through the Kolšhalu hills (Adi-P., Ixiii. 2367-70; see page 286 note §).
This river rises in the Vindhya Range, and must be east of the R. Dašūrņā,
which is the most westerly river that risos in that range (compare notes +andt
on page 286); it is probably the modern R. Ken, for which I have found no
Sanskrit name. Hence the Kolāhula hills were probably those between Panna
and Bijawar in Bundelkhand, und the capital Sukti-mati was probably near


the modern town Banda. The kingdom of C'edi seems to have been fonnded as


an offshoot by the Yadavas of Vidarbha ( Matsya- Purana, xlik. 4-7; and xliv. 14
and 28-38) ; and after it had lasted throngh some 20 or 25 reigna, Vasu Upari-


360 CANTO LVIIT,


and the Urdhva-karnas,* the Matsyas+ and others who
17 dwell on the Vindhya mountains,+ the Vidarbhas, § and
the Nūrikelas ||, the Dharma-dvipasY, and the Elikas,++
the Vyāghra-grivas,tt the Maha-grivas,tt the bearded
18 Traipuras,§§ the Kaiskindhyas,|||| and the Haima-kitas 5,
the Nishadhas,*** the Kataka-sthalasttt, the Daésarnas,ttt
the naked Hārikas,$$$ the Nishadas,|||||| the Kākuli-


c'ara, who was a Kaurava of the Paurava race, invaded it from the north some
nine generations anterior to the Pandavas, and conqnering it established his
own dynasty in it (id , 1. 20-50), which lasted till after their time. Fora full
discussion see Jourwal, Bengal As. Socy., 1895, Part 1., p. 249.

* “ Those who have erect ears;”” bat I have not met this name elsewhere,
and it is not, probably, the name of any people.

+ This seems wholly out of place here: see page 307 note*.

ft These mountains are also out of place here; they die away in Behar,
that is, in the region ocenpied by the Tortoise's head.

§ These are absolutely out of place here; see page 335 note §.

|| Nārikels is given in the dictionary as the namo of an island, but'I have
not met with any people of any such name elsewhere.

T I have not met with this name any where olse.

** Or Ailikas. Neither name is in tho dictionary, and I have not found
them elsewhere. A river Eld ig mentioned as situated in the Dekhan (Hari-
V., clxviii. 9512), but without data to identify it.

tt "Having necks like tigers” ; perhups an epithet to Traipuras,

Tt “ Large-necked” ; perhaps algo nn epithet to Traipnras.

§§ The people of Tripura, see page 343 note*; but they are quite out of
place here.

[il These seem to be the same as the Kiskindhakas ; Bee page 342 note $.
AT The people of Heman-kūta. I have fonnd mention of only one Hems-
kuta: it was a mountain or group of mountains in the Himalayas in tho
western part of Nepal (M.-Bh., Vana.-P., cx. 9968-87); but thut does not
seem appropriate here,

*** See page 343 note. These people are altogether out of place here.

ttt The people of Kataka, the modern Cuttack in Orissa. This isa modern
name and is mentioned in the Dnša-kumāra-c'arita (Story of Soma-datta).
The name given to it by the Brahmans was Vdrdņust in emulation with
Benares.

ttt See page 342 note+. These people are altogether ont place here.

§§§ This name is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere.

[| The Nishūdas were nn aboriginal race ana are described ns very bluok,
dwartish und short-limbed, with large mouth, jaws and ears, with pendent


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA, 361


19 lakas,* and the Parņa-śavaras,ł—these all are in the right
fore foot.
The three constellations A-śleshá, and Paitryat
20 and the First Phalgunis have their station in the
right fore foot.


nose, red eyes and copper coloured hair, and with a protuberant belly. Their
name is fancifully derived from the command wishéda, “sit down,” given to the
first of them who was created. (Hari-V., v. 306-10; and Mairs
Sansk. Texts, II. 428.) They were specially a forest people, and were
scattered all over Northern and Central India. The earliest references shew,
they occupied the forest tracts throughont North India. In Rūmas time
they held tho country all around Praydga and apparently southwards also
(Journal, R. A. S., 1895, page 237); butin the Pandavas’ time they occupied the
high lands of Malwa and Central India (M.-Bh., Sabht-P., xxix. 1085; xxx.
1109 and 1170; and ASvamedh.-P., Ixxxiii. 2472-5) and still formed a kingdom
(Udyoga-P., iii. 84; and xlvii. 1884). It would seem that, as the Aryans
extended their conquests, the Nishidas wero partly driven back into the
hills and forests of Contral India, and were partly subjugated and absorbed
among the lowest clusses of the population as appears from cnsual allusions
(Rémay., A’di-K., ii. 12; and M.-Bh., A’di-P., cxlviii; and Vana-P., Cxxx.
10538-9). They are also mentioned as being pearl-divers and seamen in
anisland which seems to be on the west coast (Hari-V., xov. 5214 and
5233-9). They were looked upon as very degraded in luter times, but at
first their position was not despicable, for Ráma and Guha king of the
Nishddas met as friends on eqnal terms (Ayodh.-K., xlvi. 20; xlvii, 9-12; and
xci. 3); and it seems Krishņa's aunt Sruta-dová marricd the king of the
Nishidas (Bari-V., xxxv. 1930 and 1937-8).

% I have not found this name clsewhere, nor is it in tho dictionary. Per-
haps it is to be connected with Sri-kikula, the modern Sreewacolum, & town
19 miles west of Masulipatam. It was founded by king Sumati of the Sāta-
vāhanas or Andhras, and was their first capital (Arch. Surv. of S. India
by R. Sewell, I. 55; and Report on Amaravati, pp. 3 and 4).

+ These were a tribe of Savaras (sce page 835 note*) who lived upon leaves ;
hence their name according to the dictionary ; but a forest tribe would hardly
live solely on leaves. Might it not more properly mean “tho Savaras who
wear leaves”? A girdle of leaves was the ordinary olothing of moat of
the aboriginal tribes; see Dalton’s Ethnology, passim. ‘They appear to be
the modern Pdņs, a very low aboriginal caste, common in Orissa and the
Eastern Circars.

t This must mean Maghd,
Phalguņi —a menniug not in the diotionary.


46


which comes between A-Geshé and Pūrva-


362 CANTO LVITI.


Lankā,* and the Kalajinas,t the Snilikas and the
21 Nīkntas,$ and those who inhabit the Mahendra |) ana
Malaya Mountains and the hill Durdura,*%


> and those
who dwell in the Karkotaka forest,+t the Bhrigu.


22 kac’c’has,t{ and the Konkanas,§§ and the Sarvas [ll] and the
Abhiras$4 who dwell on the banks of the river Veņi,***


% Ravana’s capital in Ceylon.

+ This is given in the dictionary as the name of a people and analysed
thus—kdla-ajina, “ those who wear black antelope skins;” but I have not
found the name elsewhere.

t Perhaps the same as the S’ailzizhas in canto lvii, verse 46.

§ This name is not in the dictionary, ‘and I have not met it elsewhere.

|| See page 284, note ++ and page 305, note $; yet these may be the mount-
ains at C. Comorin, see Journal, R. A. S. 1891, p. 261.

T See page 285 note*.

%* See page 287 notet.

ff Karkotaka was tho name of the Naga king whom Nala saved from a
forest fire (M.-Bh., Vana-P., lxvi); where that happencd is not clear, but
probably it was somewhere in the middle or eastern part of the Satpuru
range (see page 343 note S); can that region be intended here? Karkotaka is
algo stated in tho dictionary to be the name of a barbarous tribe of low origin,
bat I have not met with them elsewhore. Perhaps this word, however,
may be connected with the modern Kariģ, a town in the Satara District,
near which are many Buddhist caves. Its ancient name was Karahdkada
or Karahdkaļa according to inscriptions (Arch. Surv. of W. India by J.
Burgess, Memo. No. 10, page 16, and Cunningham's Stopa of Bharhut
pp- 131, 135 and 136), and it seems to be the same as Karahdļaka men-
tioned in the M.-Bh. (Sabhū-P., xxx. 1173) and spoken of there as heretical,
pdshaņda, no donbt because it was a Buddhist Banctuary as evidenced by
its caves. See also Matsya P., xliii, 29 about Karkotaka.

ff See page 339 noto**

$$ Or, more correctly, Konkaņas. They arethe inhabitants of the modern
Konkan, the Marithi-speuking lowland strip between the Western Ghats
and the sea, from abont Bombay southward to Goa. Tho Hari-Varnša s43
king Sagara degraded these people (xiv. 784).

ll] These people are not mentioned in the dictionary and I have pot met
with them elsewhere, Perhaps tho reading shonld bo the Surpas, i.c., “ the
Nagas,” or tho S'aravas who are named in M.-Bbh. (Bhishma-P., 1. 2084,
unless this be a mistuke for Savaras.)

gg Seo page 312 notef.

### This is no doubt the samo as J’enyd, the name of two riyers in the


VOUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 363


the Avantis,* the Dasa-puras,t and the Akanin{ people,
23 the Maha-rashtras§, and Karnatas||, the Gonarddhas T,
C'itra-kūtakas**, the O’olastt, and the Kolagirasf{f,


Dekhan ; see canto lvii, verses 24 and 26. Either river is admissible in this
passage, but the Wain-ganga is meant more probably, because it flows
throngh territory occupied by aboriginal tribes.

* See page 310 note § and page 844 note §.

+ Or, better, Ddša-puras, the people of DaSa-pnra. This was the capital
of king Ranti-deva (Megha-D., I. 46-48), and seems from the context there
to have been situated on or near the R. Chambal in its lower portion. But
the two accounts of Ranti-deva (M.-Bh., Drona-P., lxvii; and Santi-P., xxix.
1013-22) describe him as exercising boundless hospitality chiefly with animal
food, and fancifully explain the origin of the river, C’arman-vati, as the
juices from the piles of the hides of the slaughtered animals; this suggests
that he reigned along the upper portion of the river.

t Or A’kanin. Neither ig in the dictionary, and I have not found them
elsewhere.

§ See page 333 note t.

|| The Canarese. Karņūta properly comprises tho south-west portion of
the Nizam’s Dominions, and all tho country west of that as far as the Wes-
tern Ghats, and south of that as far as the Nilgiris. It did not include any
part of the country below the Ghats, but its application has been greatly
distorted by the Mohammedans and English. The name is probably derived
from two Dravidian words meaning “ bluck country,” because of the “ black
cotton-soil?’ of the plateau of the Sonthern Dekhan (Caldwell, Grammar
of the Dravidian Languages, 34 and 35; and Hunter's Imp. Gaz. of
India, Art. Karnātik). The Karņttakas nre mentioned in the Bhishma-P.
list (ix. 366).

T Go-narda is given in the dictionary as the name of a people in the De-
khan, but I have not found either form elsewhere. Gon is said to have had
a large number of names in ancient times ; but this does not appear to have
been one of them (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Goa).

*® The people of O'itra-kūta ; it appenrs to hay
(comprising the modern mount Chitrakvt) extondin
bad to about Panna near the R. Ken (sev Journal, R.
these people are very much out of place here.

tt See page 331 note T.

tt This name does not seem to be conn
tioned in verse 25. Tho Kolagiras are no
who are placed in South India in the descripti
sacrificial horse (ASva-medh.-P., Ixxxiii. 2475-1);


e been the range of hills
g from south of Allaha-
A. S., 1894, p. 289); but


ected with the Kolas who are men-
doubt the same as the Kolvagieyns,
on of Arjuna’s following the-
and they would presum-


364. CANTO LVIIL:


the people who wear matted hair* in Kranfic’a-


dvipa,+
24 the people who dwell by the Kaveri and on


Mount


ably be the inhabitants of Kolagiri, which is placed in South India in tho
account of Sahadeva’s conquests there, and which Appears to have been an
extensive region for the whole of it is spoken of (Sabhā-P., xxx. 1171). Kola.
giri may mean “the hills belonging to the Kols,” but the Kols seem to be
intended by the Kolas in verse 25. Kolagira may be compared with Kodagu,
the ancient name of Coorg, which means ‘steep mountains’ (Imp. Gaz. of
India, Art. Coorg), and might therofore have led to the modification of the
final part of the name to agree with the Sanskrit giri: but see pago 366 note t.
The name Kolagira somewhat resembles the Goldngulas of canto lvii, verso
45; and Golingula might be a corruption of Kodungalir, which is the
modern town Cranganore, 18 miles north of Cochin. It had a good harbour
in early times, and was a capital town in the 4th century A.D. Syrian Chris-
tians were established there before the 9th century, and the Jews had a
settlement there which was probably still earlier. It is considered of great
sanctity by both Christians and Hindus (Imp. Gaz, of India, Art. Ko-
dungalar), i

* Jatd-dhara; the dictionary gives it asa proper name. Jatā also means
"long tresses of hair twisted or braided together, and coiled in a knot over
the head so as to project liken horn from the forehead, or at other times
allowed to fall carelessly over the back and shoulders,”

+ This was no donbt the county of which Krauiic'a-pura was the capital,
for drfpa appears to have had the Meaning of “land enclosed between
two rivers,” the modern doab; cf, Sdkala-dvfpa, the doab in which Sákala
(see pago 315 note f) was situated, and the Seven dutpas all in North India
(Snbhi-P., xxv. 998-9), The Hari-Varnša says Sūrasa, ono of Yadu's sons,
founded Krauic'n-pura in the South region in a district where the soil was
copper-coloured and champaka and aśoka trees abounded, and his country
was known as Vana-visi or Vena-vāsin (xov. 5213 and 5231-3); and
also that that town was near tho Sahya Mts. and was situated appa-
rently south of a river Khatvingi and north of Gomanta hill (xovi. 5325—40).
lf Gomanta was the modern Goa, these indications- agree fairly well with
the Krauūc'ālaya forest mentioned in the Rāmūy. (Araņ.-K., Ixxiv. 7), which
appears to have been situated between the Godavari and Bhima rivers
(Journal, R, A. S., 1894, page 250). But the town Bana-vdsi or Banawasi,
which was a city of note in early times, is in the North Kanara district, on
tho R. Warda (tributary of the Tungabhadra), 14 miles from Sirsi, in lat.
14° 33’ N., long. 75° 5’ E. (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Banavasi; Arch.
Surv. of W. India, No. 10, pp. 60 note and 100); and this is sonth of
Goa. This was the country of the Vana-vigakas (sce pago 333 noto *).


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 365


Rishyamika, * and those who are callet” Nasikyas,t and
those who wander by the borders of the Sankha and
Suktif and other hills and of the Vaidūrya mcuntains, §
25 and the Vāric'aras, || the Kolas, $ those who inhabit
C'armapatta, ** the Gana-vahyas, tt the Paras, t{ those who
96 have their dwellings in Krishņā-dvipa,$$ and the peoples
who live by the Sūrya hill|||] and the Kumuda hill, f


# See page 289 note j.

+ These are, no doubt, the people of Nasik; see page 339 note ||.

t The text is Sunkha-sukty-ddi-vaiddrya-$aila, which may be so rendered
as to make Sankha and Sukti two of the hills which compose the Vaidūrya
chain. I have not met with them elsewhere, and neither is in the dictionary
as the name of a hill. Sakti can hardly'be an error for the Sukti-mat range
(see page 306 note §).

§ This is the Satpura range, for the Pandavas in their pilgrimage went
from Vidarbha and the R. Payoshni (the Purna and Tapti, see page 299
note f), ncross these mountains, to the R. Narmadi (Vana-P., cxx. and
oxxi). This range was placed in the Southern region (ibid., lxxxviii. 8343),
and also apparently, as Vaidūrya-šikhara, in the Western region (ibid.,
Ixxxix. 8359-61); and in the former of these two pnssages it is called
mani-maya.

|| I have not found this name elsewhere, nor is it in tho dictionary.

T See page 331 note T, but the passages cited there with reference to this
people appear to refer to the Kolagiras; sec pnge 363 notet. The Kols are
a collection of aboriginal tribes, who are said to havo dwelt in Behnr in
ancient times, but who now inhabit the mountainous districts and plateanx
of Chutia Nagpur and are to bo found to a smallor extent in the Tributary
States of Orissa and in some districts of the Central Provinces (Imp. Gaz.


of India, Art. Kol).
#% This is not in the dictionary and I have not met it elsewhere. Is it


to be identified with Salem in Madras?

++ I have not met this elsewhere. Does it refer to the Ganapati dynasty
which flourished on the castern coast during the 13th cent. A.D. ?

tt This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere.

§§ I have not met this namo elsewhero, but it obviously refers to the R.
Krishņā or Kistna, and probably means ono of the donbs (sec page 364
note +) beside that river, cither between the Kistna and Bhima or between
the Kistna and Tungabhadra.


illl I have not met this name olsewhere.
FF I have not found this namo elsewhere. Comparing the various readings,


366 CANTO LVIII.


the Aukhāvanas,* and the Pisikas,+ and tliose who are calleg
27  Karma-nayakas,{ and those who are called the Southern
Kaurushas,§ the Rishikas,|| the Tāpasišramas, J the
Rishabhas,** and the Simhalas,¢+ and those who inhabit


it seems to have some cornexion with the Kusumas of canto lvii vero 46;
gce page 332 note J.

* This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. Por-
haps itis to be connected with the Okhulakiyas mentioned in Arch. Surv. of
W. India, no. 10, pp. 34-35. S

t Or as the text may be read, Sapišikas. Pisika is in the dictionary, but I
have not met with either name elsewhere.

t I have not found this name elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary.
Perhaps the reading should be Kambu-ndyakas or Kombu-ndyakas, and mean
the people of Coorg. “According to tradition, Coorg was at this period
(16th century A.D. ?) divided into 12 kombus or districts, each ruled by an
independent chieftain, called a ndyak” (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Coorg).
The similarity of the names is very remarkable.

§ This name is not in the dictionary and I have not met with it elsewhere
Perhaps it should be Kdrushas (see page 341 note +), and the people intended
are a southern branch of that nation.

|| These are the people mentioned in the Rimdy. (Kishk -K., xli. 16) and
M.-Bh. (Karņa-P., viii. 237) and Hari-Vurnfn (cxix. 6724-6). There was also
a river called the Ķishikd (M.-Bh., Vana-P., xii. 493) which may be connected
with the same people. I have found no further data for fixing their position.
See page 332 uotet; the Mushikas mentioned there may perhaps be the
people dwelling on the R. Must, the tributary of the Kistna on which
Haidarabad stands (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Kistna).

T I have not met this name elsewhere nor is it in the dictionary. Perhaps —
it refers to the descendants of ascetics, see page 339 note t.

#¢ These are, no doubt, the inhubitants of Rishabha-parvata mentioned in
the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., Ixxxv. 8163-4) and placed there between Srf-parvate
and the, Kaveri. Sri-parvata is on the Kistna in the Karnul district (see
pge 290, notet). The Rishabha hills are therefore probably the southern
portion of the Eastern Ghats, but none of the ranges there appears to have
any name resembling this.

tt The people of Ceylon. They are named in the M.-Bh.; it is said the
Simhala king attended Yudhishthira’s Rája-súya sacrifice (Sabha-P., xxxiii.
1271. and Vana-P., li. 1989) ; and the Simhalas brought to him presents of
Japis lazuli, which is the essence of the sen (sumudra-sdra), and abundance of
pearls and elephants’ housings (Sabha-P., li. 1893-4). ‘They are also named
as fighting on the Kauravas’ sido in the great war (Drona-P., xx. 798):


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 867


28 Kāūc'i*, the Tilangns, f and the peoples who dwell in
Kniijara-dari f and Kac'c'ha, § and Timra-parņi, ||—such is
the Tortoise’s right flank.

29 And the constellations, the Last Phālguņis, Hasta and C'itrā
are in the Tortoise’s right flank.


This name is not I believe given to Ceylon in the Rámáy., but the name
Simhikad is given to a terrible female Rikshasa who dwelt in the middle of
the sea between India and Ceylon, and whom Hanūmūn killed as he leapt
across to the island (Kishk.-K., xli. 38 ; and Sund.-K., viii. 6-18).

* This is Kdiic's-puram or Kdūic't-varam, the modern Conjevaram, about
87 miles south-west of Madras. Itis not, I believe, mentioned in the
Rimiay. or M.-Bh., unless the Kdiie’yas who are named as fighting in the great
war (Karna-P., xii. 459) are the people of this town, but tho proper reading
there should probably be Kdsyas, the people of Kiši or Benares. Conjevaram,
nevertheless, is a place of special sanctity, and is one of the seven holy
cities of India. Hwen Thsang speaks of it in the 7th century A.D. as the
capital of Drévida. It was then a great Buddhist centre, but about the 8th
century began a Jain epoch, and that was succeeded by a period of Hindu
predominance (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Conjevaram).

+ This form is not in the dictionary; but it is no doubt the same as
Tailanga or Tri-linga, that is Telinga, the modern Telugu country. It coin-
cided more or less with the ancient kingdom of Andhra (see page 837 note $).
I have not found this name in any shape in the Rimdy. or M.-Bh.; Andhra
is the name which occurs in those books.

t This probably menns “the valleys of the Kuūjara hills,” and the re-
ference may be to mount Kuūjara, which is mentioned in the Rūmāy. as
situated in the South, but not in a clear manner (Kishk.-K., xli. 60). I have
not met the name elsewhere, but as this place is joined with Kao’c’ha in
one compound (see next note) it may mean part of the Travancore hills,
Kuiijara-dari is given in the dictionary as the name of a place.

§ This is Xochchi, the modorn Cochin, in Travancore. It is not I believe
1aentioned in the Rámáy. or M.-Bh., except once in the latter book in the
account of Sahadeya’s conquests in the South (Sabha-P., xxx, 1176). Both
Christians and Jews are said to have settled hore early in the Christian era,
and they were firmly established here by the 8th century.

|| This is the name of the modern river Chitter in the oxtrome Sonth
(sce page 803, note tt), and also of tho district near it. It appears, moreover,
to be the name of a hill in the extrerae South (Bhishma-P., vi. 252). It is
also the namo of a town in Ceylon, after which the name was extended to
the whole island (dictionary). The island seems to be meant by the words
Tdmrdhvaya dvtpa in tho M,-Bh. (Sabhá-P., xxx, 1172).


368 CANTO LYIII.


30  Andnext is the outer foot.* The Kimbojas,+ and Pah.
lavas, f and the Badavā-mukhas, § and the Sindhus || and San.
81 viras,4 the Anartas,** the Vanitā-mukhas, tt the Drāvaņas,tt
the Sargigas,§§ the Stidras, |||| the Karņa-prādheyas qq


* Vahya-pddas ; the right hind foot is meant as is stated expressly in
verse 38, but (because perhaps this word is vague) the names that follow are
sadly confused and belong to all regions in the west and north-west.

+ See page 818, note §; they are ont of place here.

f See page 314, note *; these also are out of place.

§ This should perhaps be connected with Badavd, a tirtha apparently in
Kashmir (M.-Bh., Vana-P., lxxxii. 5034-42). A river of the same name is
mentioned (id., coxxi. 14232), but that seems from its context to be rather in
South India. Badavá-mukha (which means ‘submarine fire’) may also mean
“having faces like mares”; and a people called Asvasmukhas are mentioned
in Matsya Purana, oxx. 58, as dwelling north of the Himalayas: see also
verse 43 below.

|| See page 815, note *; they are hardly in place here.

g See page 315, note t; these are out of place here.

## See page 840 note $. The name is derived from an eponymous king
Anarta, who was the son of Saryūti one of the sons of Manu Vaivasvata
(Hari-V., x. 618 and 642-9).

++ “Those who have faces like women.” I have not met this name else-
where. It seems, however, to be a proper name and not an adjective.

tt This as a name is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it else-
where. ;

§§ Or “and the Argigas or Argigas,” as the text may be read. These
names are not in the dictionary and I have not met with them elsewhere.
Perhaps the correct reading should be Sérydtas. They were a tribe, so-called
from their chief Saryáta the Manava, who settled down near where the rishi
C’yavana dwelt, and gave his daughter Su-kanyū to the rishi to appease his
wrath (Sata-P. Brāh., IV. i. 5). He is called Saryšti in the M.-Bh. (VYana-P.;
cxxi. 10312; and cxxii.) where the same story is told rather differently; and
also in the Hari-Varnša, where he is said to be a son of Manu and progenitor
of Anarta and the kings of Anarta (x. 613, and 642-9). From all these pàs-
sages it appears the Sfryātas were in the West, in Gujarat; and O'yavana 238
Bhargava is always placed in the West, near the mouths of the Narbada and
Tapti. But perhaps the most probable reading is Bhdrgavas ; they were in
the West (see page 310, note f).

|| See page 313 note $.

«JT This name is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere.
It can have nothing to do with Karna one of the heroes of the M.-Bh., for he


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 369


and Varvaras,* the Kiratas,t the Páradas,ł the
32 Pāņdyas$ and the Pārašavas,|| the Kalas,’ the
Dhūrtakas,** the Haimagirikas,tt the Sindhu-kilaka-


reigned in Anga in the East. Prddheya means a descendant of Prádhá, one
of Daksha’s daughters, and that ulso-is inadmissible. It suggests Radheya,
which was a metronymic of Karna, bub that is equally unsuitable. It seems
therefore the words must be taken as x whole forming one name, and then it
suggests comparison with Karņa-prdvdru which would be the same as Karna-
pravarana (see page 346, note t).

* See page 319, note *: This word is compounded with the preceding
name; it hardly seems to be in place here.

+ See pago 322, note ||; they seem to be out of place here, unless any
Kiratas inhabited the sonthern part of the Aravalli hills or the extreme
western part of the Vindhya mountains, and that seems improbable. See
also Adhama-kairdtus in verse 44 below, and Kirdtas are mentioned again in
verse 50.

t See page 317, note *; they seem to be ont of place here.

§ These people are out of place here; see page 331, note §; they should
be properly in the right flank.

|| L have not met this name elsewhere; but, no doubt, it denotes some
people, who claimed dešcent from Parašu-Rsma and who would therefore be
somewhere on the western coast between Bombay and the Narmadt; seo —
page 810, note ¢. It is said there was a dynasty of Pūrašuva kings after the
grent Paurava line came to an end (Matsya Puriņa, l 73-76) but it does not
appear where.

{| This is not in the dictionary, and I have not met it elsewhere. It sug-
gests a connexion with the Kdlibalas of canto lyii, verse 49; but Kala also
means, “emitting a low or inurticulate sound,” and it was un old fable that
a people existed, who could not speak articulately, but hissed like serpents,
see Mandoville's ‘I'ravels, chap. xviii. and xix. Kala occurs again in
verse 36,

## I have not found this elsewhere as the name of a people. The word
however means “a rogue” and may be an adjective to Haima-girikas.

+t The people of Hema-giri. This is not given as the name of a place in
the dictionary, but it may be a synonym for Homa-ktiļa or Hema-šringa. It
is said in the M.-Bh. the latter is the portion of Himavat from which the
Ganges issued formerly (Adi-P , clxx. 6454-5), and Hiranya-fringa is probably
the same (Bhishma-P., vi. 237). Hema-kéta was near the rivers Nandd and
Aptra-nandā and between the sources of the Ganges and Knušiki (Vana-P,,
cx, 9968-87); and it is alluded to in other passages but they are not clear

(e.g., id., clxxxix, 12917; Bhishma-P., vi. 198, 202, 236 and 246). ‘Tho last of


47


370 CANTO LVIII.


vairatas, * the Sanrasltras,¢ and the Daradas,t and the
33 Drāvidas,$ the Mahirņavas || —these peoples are situated in
the right hind foot.


And the Svātis,T Viśákhá and Maitra*% are the three
corresponding constellations.
34 The hills Mani-megha,tt and Kshurādri,tf and Khaūjana,$$


these passages says the Guhyakas dwell on Homa-kata. The Matsya Purana
rays Hema-Sringa is south-east of Kaildsa, and the R. Lauhitya, or Brahma-
putra, rises at its foot (cxx. 10-12); and that two rivers rise in Hema-kūta
which flow into the eastern and western seas (ibid., 64-5).

* This seems to be erroneons, yet it is not easy to suggest an amendment.
The first part, no doubt, refers to the R. Sindhu and the Sindhu people but the
latter part appears unintelligible. Perhaps the reading should be Sindhu-
kila-suvtrakdh or Sindhavdé c'a suvtrakdh meaning the Sindhus and the
Suyiras (see page 315, notes * and +); but these two people have been men-
tioned already in verse 30.

+ The people of Surdshtra; see page 340, note fÍ. R

t See page 318, note |]. They are quite out of place here.

§ The Drāvidas are often alluded to in the M.-Bh. (e.g., Sabha-P , xxxiii.
1271; Vana-P,, li. 1988; Karna-P., xii. 454; &c.), but arenot mentioned in the
Rāmāy., I believe, except in the geographical canto (xli. 18). They are
sometimes closely connected with the Pindyas (Sabha-P., xxx. 1174), but the
name was applied in a general way to denote the southern branches of the races
row classed as Dravidian, and it is the same as Tamil (Caldwell’s Grammar of
the Dravidian Languages, pp. 12-15). Their territory included the sea const
in early times (Vana-P., cxviii. 10217). Itis also said they were kshattriyas
and became degraded from the absence of brahmans and the extinction of
sacred rites (Anušts,-P., xxxiii. 2104-5; Manu, x. 48-44).

| I havo not met this name elsewhere. It means “dwelling by tho
ocean,” and is probably an epithet of Drūvidas, for they bordered on the sea
as mentioned in the last note,

4 ‘The plural seems peculiar,

ë Or Anu-radhi.

+t I have not met this elsewhere. It may be the same as Mt. Mani-mat
(Drona-P., Ixxx. 2843); which appears to be also intended in Vana-P., Ixxxii.
£048, und if so wonld denote the range of hills enclosing Kashmir on the
south, according to the context. It may also be the same as the “jewelled
mountain 8u-megha” mentioned in the Rāmūy. (Kishk.-K., xliii. 40).

tt This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere.

§§ This is not in dictionary as the name of a mountain, and I have
not found it elsewhere.


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 871


and Asta-giri;* the Apardntika people, f and Haihayas, f


® This does not appear to be the name of any particular mountains,
but rather denoted in a vague way mountains in the west behind which the
sun sets. It is mentioned in the Rámáy. as Asta-giri (Kishk.-K., xxxvii. 22),
and as Asta-parvata (id., xliii. 54).

+ Seo note to Aparintas, page 313, note +. This half line Apardntikd
Haihaydšc'u is a syllable too long; it would be better to read either Apardntd
or omit the c'a.

f The Haihayas were a famous race, the descendants of an eponymous
king Hnihaya, who is said to have been a grandson or great-grandson of
Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati (Hari-V., xxxiii. 1843-4; and Matsya Puriņa,
xliii. 4-8. Yaduis said to have been king of the north-east region(Hari-V., xxx.
1604, 1618), but the references to the enrliest movements of the Haihayas
are hardly consistent. Mahish-mat, who was fourth in descent from Hai-
haya, is said to have founded tho city Mahish-mati on the Narmada (see page
933, note t; and id., xxxiii. 1846-7), and his son Bhadra-Srenya is said to
have reigned in Káśi or Benares, which the Vitahavya branch of the Hai-
hayas had previously conquered from its king HaryaSva, but Haryaš$vn's
grandson Divodisa defeated them and regained his capital (M.-Bh., Anušis.-
P., xxx. 1949-62; Hari-V., xxix. 1541-6; and xxxii. 1736-40). The great
king Arjuna Kirtavirya, who was ninth in descent (Huri-V., xxxiii. 1850-90 ;
and Matsya P., xliii. 13—45), reigned in Anūpa and on the Narmada and had
the great conflict with Rima Jūmadagnya, which ended in the overthrow of
the Haihayas (M.-Bh., Vana-P., cxvi. 10189—exvii. 10204; and Sūnti-P,,
xlix. 1750-70; and pages 333 note *, and 344 note *). The Haihayas and
Talajanghas in alliance with Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas and Pahlavas are
said to have driven Bihu king of Ayodhya out of his realm, but his son
Sagara drove them out and recovered the kingdom (Yana-P., cvi. 8831-2 ;
and Hari-V., xiii 760 —xiv. 783).

The Haihaya race comprised the following tribes, Vitihotras (or Vita-
havyas?), Sūryitas, Bhojas, Avantis, Taundikeras (or Kundikeras), and
Télajanghas; the Bharatas, Sujatyas and Yūdavas are added, and the
Sūrasenas, Xnartas and C'edis also appenr to have sprang from them (Hari-V.,
xxxiv. 1892-6; and Mntsya-P., xliii, 46-49). Comparing the territories
occupied by these tribes, it appears the Hnihaya race dominated nearly all
the region south of the Jumna and Aravalli hills as far as the valley of the
Tapti inclusive of Gujarat in ancient times (see pages 338 note f, 335 note §,
840 note $, 342 note f, 844 all the notes, 351 note 4, 352 note *, and 368
note §§); and Cunningham says that two great Haihayn States in later
times had their capitals at Manipur in Muhé Kosuļa (or Chhattisgarh) and at
Tripura (or Tewar) on the Narbada (Arch. Surv. Repts., IX. 54-57).


272 ? : CANTO LVIII. .


85 the Sāntikas,* Viprašastakas, + the Kokankanas, +


Pāiic'a-
dakas,§ the Vamanas,|| and the Avaras,J the Tāraksh


uras, *#*

* I have not met this elsewhere, and it is not iñ the dictionary as the namo
ofa people. It may be the same as the Saģilas (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P., ix, 954;
perhaps the Su$akasin Vana-P., ccliii. 15257 are the same) ; or the reading may
be Stikalas, the people of Sfkala, the capital of Madra (see page 315, note, t).

t This is not in the dictionary and I have not met it elsewhere.
to be a proper name and not an adjective. :

t This isnot in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere.
the reading should be Kokanadas, n people in’ the north-west classed. with
the Trigartas and “Darvas (M-Bh, Sabhi-P., xxvi. 1026), or Kokarakas who


It appears
Perhaps


seem to be the same ( Bhishma-P,; ix. 369), | ;

§ This is given in the ‘dictionary as the name of a people, but I have not:
met it elsewhere. Perhaps n.bvtter reading would be Paxc'odakas or Pajic’a--
nadas, “the people living’ beside the R. Paiic’anada,” which appears to be

„ the single strenm formed by the confluence of the five rivers of the Panjab
(M.-Bh., Vana-P., lxxxii. 5025 ;. Bhishmo-P., lvi. 2406; and dictionary); bat
this name seems to be also applied to the five rivers collectively (Vana-P.,
Cexxi 14229), and to the country watered by those five rivers (Sabha-P.,
xxxi. 1193; Udyoga-P., iii 82; and xviii. 596-601; Karņa-P., xlv. 2100 and
2110; &o.; Hari-V., xcii. 5018; and Rimiy., Kishk.-K., xliii. 21), and to the
inkabitants of it ( Bhishma-P., lvi 2406; and Karņa-P., xlv. 2086): see also
Lassen's map (Ind. Alt ). ; i :
|| This is given in the dictionary as the name of a people, but I have not
found it elsewhere. Perhaps a better rending yronld be Vdnavns, who are
mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., ix. 362), or Vandyavas. Thore was a
district called Vandyw or Vandi,u, which appears to have been situated in the
north-west, and which was famons for its breed of horses (M.-Bh., Bhishma-
P., xci. 3974; Droņa-P., oxxi 4831; Karna-P » Vii 200; and Rimūy., Adi-K.,
vi 24). It appears to be the modern Bunnnin the north-westof the Panjab:

T This is not given as the name of a people, nnd the word means, “low,”
and “western.” This name mny be compared with Aparas, a people men-
tioned in the Raméy. (Kishk.-K., xliii- 23); and see page 813, notet and
Aparintikas in verse 34. But a better reading for the text hy-avards is
perhaps Varvards; see pnge 319, note * and page 369, note *,

«* This is not in the dictionary, and I have not met with it elsewhere ; but
Térakshati and Tārakshiti are given as the name of a district to'the west of
Madhya-defa. There was also a- kingdom called Turushka in later times
(Arch. Surv. of W. India, Memo. No. 10, P-7).. The Toroshkas are the
Turks, and their’ country Turkestan.. A people called Tarkshyas are men-

tioned in M.-Bh., Eabhé-P., li, 1871. : :


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 373


the Angatakas,* the Sarkaras,t+ the Sšlma- -vesmakna, Í
"86 the Guru-svaras,$ the Phalgnņakas, || and. the people who
dwell ` by the river Veņu-mnti „S aud the Phalgu-
Jukas, ** the Ghoras,f+ and the Guruhas, ff and the


* I have not fonnd this elsewhere, and itis not in the dictionary. A
place called Anga-loka is assigned to the west in the Rams fy. (Kishk.-K., xliii.
8). and .Angas and Anga-lokyas are mentioned to the north of India in the
Matsya Purana (cxx. 44 and 45).

+ This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. A
river Sérkardvartd is mentioned (Bhāgavata Parāņa-V., xix. 17), but appears
to be inthe south. A great honse-holder and theologian Jana Sārkarikshya
is alluded to (C'hūndogya-Up.-V.,'xi. 1). Perhaps the reading may be Stikalaa,
the people of Sékala the capital of Madra (see page 815, note 1).

f This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere.
It suggests šdla-vefmakas, “ those who live in houses with spacious rooms,”
and'it may be an adjective to Snrkaras.. Perhaps we should read Sdlvas as the
first part of the word (see page 349, note $) but, if so, the latter part seems
unrecognizable.

§ I have not met with this elsewhere,.and it- is not in the dictionary.
It may be an adjective, “ deep-voiced,” describing the Phalguņakas. Per-
haps the reading should be Gurjaras They appear to have been settled in
the Panjab or Upper Sindh, and to have been driven out by the Bélas about
500 A.D., and pushed gradually southward, till at length they occupied the
country around the peninsula of Kathiawar, thence called Gujarat after
them (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., II G4~72). Or perhaps the reading
might be Gurusthala; a river Guru-nadfis mentioned in the west region, but
withont data to identify it (Hari-V., olxviii. 9516-8).

|| Or better, Ph algunakas. I have not met with it elsewhere. A similar name
Phalgulukas occurs just below. :

S This is not in the diotionary, and I have not met with it elsewhere. It
occurs again inverse 89. A people called Veņikas are mentioned in the M.-Bh,
(Bhishma-P., li. 2097), :

** This resembles Phalganakas above. I have not found it elsewhere.
A mountain called Pkena-giri or Phala-giri is mentioned in the Rémy. as
situated in the west near the month of the Indus ( Kishk,-K,, xliii. 18-17, and
Annotations).

tt These are no donbt the same as the Ghorakas mentioned in the M.-Bh.,
"Sabhi-P., li 1870; but I have not found any data to fix.their position.

T I have not met this “elsewhere, bnt it is stated in the dictionary to be
the name of a poople in Madhya-deSa, and the word is also written Guduha,
Gulaha and Guluha.


374 CANTO LVIII.


Kalas,” the Ekekxhanas,t the Vaji-kegas, t the Dirgha-
37 grivas,$ and the C'ūlikas,|| and the Ašva-kešas, T these
peoples are situated in the Tortoise's tail.
38 And so situated also are the three constellations Aindra, *#
Mila, and Parva Ashadha.
The Māņdavyas,tt and C'aņdakhāras,tt and Ašvakšlanatas,$$


* This has occurred before in verse 31.

+ "The one-eyed.” It was on old belief that such people existed. “Moen
with only one eye in their forehead” are mentioned in the M.-Bh. ( Sabhā-P,,
1. 1837); the Cyclopes are famous in Greek and Latin literature ;anda
one-eyed race is spoken of as dwelling somewhere in the Indian Ocean by
Mandeville (Travels, Chap XIX).

t “Those who have hair or manes, like horses.” I have met no such name
elsewhere, except that the synonymous name Asva-keéas occurs in the next
line of this verse. Neither is it in the dictionary.

§ “The long-necks.” I have met no such name elsewhere.

|| This name is the same as the O’ulikas mentioned in canto lvii verse 40,
but the position does not quite agree; these are in the west and the others
in the north. A people Vindha-c’ulakas are named in the Bhishma-P. list
(ix. 969) and appear to be in the north. A dynasty of kings called C”ūlikas
is said to have reigned after the great Paurava line came to an end (Matsya
Purana, 1. 78—76).

S] “Those who have hair, or manes, like horses.” It is the sume as
Vaji-kefas mentioned above.

#¢ For Aindra-mūlam read Aindram mtilam.* Aindraisthe same as Jyeshthé.

+t They are mentioned again in verse 46. They may be a tribe which
claimed descent from the rishi J/dndavya, to whom Janaka king of Videha
is said to have sung a song (M.-Bh., Santi-P., colxxvii), and whose hermitage
is alluded to, as situated somewhere perhaps between Ondh and North Behar
(Udyoga-P., clxxxvii. 7355); but Mandavya-pura is said in the dictionary to be
situated on the R. Godavari. A people called Mandikas ure mentioned in the
M.-Bh. (Vana-P., ccliii. 15243). The Vimandavyas are named in verse 6 above.

tt I have not met this name elsewhere, nor is it in the dictionary; but
it suggests Kandahar, and the position agrees. A people O'arma-khaņdikas
are mentioned in canto lvii. verse 36.

§§ This seems a compound. The first part appears to be the Ašvakas;
they are mentioned in the M.-Bh.(Bhishma-P., ix. 851), and are placed in
the north-west and identified with the Aspasii and Assakani by Lassen (Ind.
Alt., Map). The latter part however is very doubtful. A people Lalitthas
are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Drona-P., xvii. 692) and appear from the oon-
text to have been a north-western race.


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-WEST INDIA. 375


39 and the Kunyataladahas,* the Stri-vāhyas,f and the Bá-
likas, and the Nri-simhas$ who dwell on the Venu-
40 mati||, and the other people who dwell in Valiva $, and the
Dharma-baddhas,** the Alūkas,tt the people who occupy


9 This appears to mean the same people as the Kunyukdguņas of the
Bhishma-P. list (ix. 860). It seems to bea compound, but the component
names are very uncertain. The latter part may be Ludakas; they are mentioned
in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., 1. 2083), though there are no data to identify
them; but Zaģaha is given in the dictionary as the nume of a people. As
regards the first part Kuņapa and Kunaha are giver in the dictionary as the
name of a people; and Kulatthas are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P.,
ix. 373) nnd Matsya Purana (cxx. 44) as a people to the north of India. A
country Kohika is placed in the west in the Ramdy., and Koltta seems to
be another name for it (Kishk.-£., xliii. 8, and Annotations). A country
Kultta is also mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Karna-P., xii. 475 and 485).

t+ I have not met this elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary. It may
perhaps mean “those who live apart from women;” but the reading is
more probably Strf-rdjya. This was the name of a country and people,
mentioned in the M -Bh. and situated apparently north of the Himalayas,
near the Hūņas and Tanganas (Vana-P., li. 1991; and Jánti-P., iv. 114),
Strt-loka is mentioned apparently as a place north-west of India in an
alternative reading to Rūmūy., Kishk.-K., xliii. 20 (Gorresio's Edition, Anno-
tations). j

t This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The
reading should probably be Báhlikas or Vahlikas, see page 311, note *,

§ “The men-lions.’ I have not met this elsewhere, and it is not in the
dictionary os the name of a people.

|| This is not in the dictionary and I have not found any river of this
name in the north-west. It hns been mentioned in verse 36 abova.

G Valdva-stha; this might also be read as Vala + avasthd. I have not met
either word elsewhere. A town or river Buldkd is mentioned in the M.-Bh,
as situated in North India (Annéés.-P., xxv. 1706).

9% “Those who are firmly attached to the Law”; or perhaps Dharma-
buddha, “ those who are enlightened in the law.’ It seems to be an ad-
jective rather than a proper name, and may quulify Alūkas. I have not met
with it elsewhere as a proper name, and the nearest resemblance to it is
Bdhu-bddha of the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 862); see page 817, note $. The
Madhumattas of the same list (ix. 860).are probably the same people.

++ This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The
people intended are no doubt the Ulikas, and the text shonld read tatholtkd
instead of tathdl4kd. For the Ulūkas see page 346, note f.


374 CANTO LVIII.


Kalas,* the Ekekshanas,+ the Vaji-kegas,t the Dirgha-


a+


37 grivas,§ and the C'ūlikas,|| and the Ašva-kešas, J these
peoples are situated in the Tortoise’s tail.
38 And so situated also are the three constellations Aindra, **
Múla, and Pūrvā Ashāģhā.
The Miņdavyas,tt and C’andakharas,tt and Asvakdlanatas,§§


* This has occurred before in verse 31.

t “The one-eyed.” It was un old belief that such people existed. “Men
with only one eye in their forehead” are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Sabht-P.,
1. 1837); the Cyclopes are famous in Greek and Latin literature ;anda
one-eyed race is spoken of as dwelling somewhere in the Indian Ocean by
Mandeville (Travels, Chap XIX).

t “Those who have hair or manes, like horses.” I have met no such name
elsewhere, except that the synonymous name Afva-kešas occurs in the next
line of this verse. Neither is it in the dictionary.

§ “The long-necks.” I have met no such name elsewhere.

|| This name is the same as the O’ulikas mentioned in canto lvii verse 40,
but the position does not quite agree; these are in the west and the othera
in the north. A people Vindha-c’ulakas are named in the Bhishma-P. list
(ix. 369) and appear to be in the north. A dynasty of kings called C’dlikas
is said to have reigned after the great Paurava line came to an end (Matsya
Purana, 1. 73-76).

T “Those who have hair, or manes, like horses.” It is the sume as

Vaji-keéas mentioned above.

© For Aindra-mtlam read Aindram múlam." Aindra isthe same as Jyeshthā.

+t They are mentioned again in verse 46. They may be a tribe which
claimed descent from the pishi J/dņdavya, to whom Janaka king of Videha
is said to have sung a song (M.-Bh., Santi-P., colxxvii), and whose hermitage
is alluded to, as situated somewhere perhaps between Ondh and North Behar
(Udyoga-P., cixxxvii. 7355); but Mandavya-pura is said in the dictionary to be
situated on the R. Godavari. A people called Mandikas ure mentioned in the
M.-Bh. (Vans-P., ccliii, 15243). The Vimšņdavyas are named in verse 6 above.

tt I have not met this name elsewhere, nor is it in the dictionary; but
it suggests Kandahar, and the position agrees. A people O'arma-khaņdikas
are mentioned in canto lvii. verse 36.

§§ This seems a compound. The first part appears to be the Afvakas;
they are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 851), and are placed in
the north-west and identified with the Aspasii and Assakani by Lassen (Ind.
Alt, Map). The latter part however is very doubtful. A people Lalitthas
are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Droņa-P., xvii. 692) and appear from the oon-
text to have been a north-western race.


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-WEST INDIA. 375,


39 and the Kunyatāladahas, * the Stri-vahyas,+ and the Bá-
likas, and the Nri-simhas$ who dwell on the Venu-
40 mati||, and the other people who dwell in Valiva $, and the
Dharma-baddhas,** the Alikas,t+ the people who occupy


® This appears to mean the same people as the Kunyukdguyas of the
Bhishma-P. list (ix. 360). It seems to be a compound, but the component
names are very uncertain. The latter part may be Ludakas; they are mentioned
in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., 1, 2083), though there are no data to identify
them; but Zaģaha is given in the dictionary as the name of a people. As
regards the first part Kuņapa and Kunaha are giver in the dictionary as the
name of a people; and Kulatthas are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P.,
ix. 373) nnd Matsya Purana (cxx. 44) as a people to the north of India. A
country Kolúka is placed in the west in the Rāmūy., and Kolūta seems to
be another name for it (Kishk.-K., xliii. 8, and Annotations). A country
Kultta is also mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Karna-P., xii. 475 and 485),

+ I have not met this elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary. It may
perhaps mean “those who live apart from women;” but the reading is
more probably Strt-rdéjya. This was the name of a country and people,
mentioned in the M -Bh. and situated apparently north of the Himalayas,
near the Hūņas and Tangaņas (Vana-P., li. 1991; and Sénti-P., iv. 114),
Strt-loka is mentioned apparently as a place north-west of India in an
alternative reading to Rámáy., Kishk.-K., xliii. 20 (Gorresio's Edition, Anno-
tations). z

t This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The
reading should probably be Bdhlikas or Vahlikas, see page 311, note *,

§ “The men-lions”” I have not met this elsewhere, and it is not in the
dictionary as the name of a people.

|| This is not in the dictionary and I have not found any river of this
name in the north-west. It hns been mentioned in verse 36 abova.

S Valdva-stha; this might also be read as Vala + avasthd. I have not met
either word elsewliere. A town or river Buldkd is mentioned in the M.-Bh.
as situated in North India (Anuéés.-P., xxv. 1706).

9% “Those who are firmly attached to the Law”; or perhaps Dharma-
buddha, “ those who are enlightened in the law.” It seems to be an ad-
jective rather than a proper name, and may guulify Alūkas. I have not met
with it elsewhere as a proper name, and the nearest resemblance to it is
Bdhu-bddha of the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 362); see page 317, note§. ‘The
Madhumattas of the same list (ix. 860) are probably the same people.

tt This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The
people intended are no doubt the Ulúkas, and the text shonld read tatholtkd
instead of tathdl4kd, For the Ulūkas see page 346, note ft.


376 CANTO LVII.


Uru-karma *—these peoples are in the Tortvise’s left hind +
foot. t


41 Where also Ashidha and Sravand and Dhanishthé are
situated.


The mountains Kailāsa, § and Hima-vat, Dhanush-mat, || and
42 Vaosu-mat,$ the Krauīdas,** and the Kurus tt and Vakas,tt+


* I have not met this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. It is per-
haps to be connected with the Urnas; see page 824, note +. A people called
Urdamarus are placed in the north in the Matsya Puriņa (cxx. 48).

+ For pargve read pasc'e?

t This verse closes with the word dhdgure; itis not in the dictionary and
seems to be erroneous. Shonld the reading be bhdsure, * brilliant,” an epithet
to Ashédha and Sravuņi ? :

§ This monntain is of course constantly mentioned throughont Sanskrit
literature. and the references indicate'that it was on the north of the middle
portion of the Himalaya range. The name is given in modern maps to the
range of mountains-which is situated immediately north of the Manasa lakes,
and in which the Indus rises. ž i

|| This is given in the dictionary, but. I have not met with it elsewhere.
It may perhaps refer to Himavat; see canto lvii yerse 59, where the. range is
compared to a bow in ghape, : ;

T I have not found this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary as tho


name of a hill. Itmay perhaps mean “ abounding in wealth” and qualify
Himavat. :


** These are no doubt the people who - dwelt near the Kraufic’a group of


mountains. This group is called the son of Maināka, which is called the sou
of Himavat, and therefore appears to have been a portion of the Mnindka
mountains in the great Himavat mountain system (Hari-V., xviii. 941-2). It
is mentioned in the Rāmūy. as having lake Ménasa on its summit with Mai-
naka lying beyond (Kishk.-K., xliv. 32.37 ); but in the Megha-Diite Krauiic’a
is placed south of that lake, and there is said to be a pass through it leading
to the lake (I. 58 and 59 with commentary). T
the valley of the source of the Sarin or Ghogra,,
wonld therefore be the portion of the Himal
extreme north-west.


he pass must apparently be
and the Kraufic’a mountains
aya chain bounding Nepal at the


ft These must be the Uttara Kurus, see page 845, note $. The Kurus in
Madhya-deSa have been mentioned in verse 9 above,

ff These are mentioned in the dictionary, but I have not found them
elsewhere. A people called Varvas are alluded to in the Matsya Puriņa
(cxx. 47).


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 377


and the people who are called Kshudra-vinas,* the Rasdlayas,t
and the Kaikeyas, t the Bhoga-prasthas,$ and the Y4munaz, ||


æ “Those who have small lntes”” This is not in the dictionary and I have
not met with-it elsewhere. A people called Kshudrakas are mentioned in the
M.-Bh. (Karņa-P., v. 137); they lived in north India and are generally named
in conjunction with the Mālavas (Sabhž-P., li. 1871; Bhishma-P., li. 2106;
Ixxxviii. 8853; Droņa-P , lxx. 2435), and are said to be the Greek Ozydraci.

+ I have not found this elsewhere, It may mean “those who dwell near
the river Rasá” which is mentioned in the Rig-V. (x. 75,6). Ihave met
with no other allusion to it, but Dr. Muir thinks it is probably are affluent of
the Indus (Sansk. Texts, II. 856 and 357).

t See page 317 note ||.

§ I have not met with this word elsewhere, though it is given in the
dictionary as the name of a people. Perhaps the reading should be Bhoja-
prastha, 88 a synonym of Bhoja-nagara, which is mentioned in the M.-Bh. as
the capital of king U$inara or Ushinara, father of king Sivi (Udyoga-P., oxvii),
both of whom’ were famous monarchs and are often alluded to in the M.-Bh.
(e.g., Vana-P., oxxxi. 10582-94; oxcvi. 13274; Drona-P., lviii; and Sénti-P.,
xxix. 932-7). According to the genealogies given (Hari-V., xxxi. 1674-9 ;
and Matsya Purana, xlviii. 15-21) various ‘Panjab races claimed descent
from U$inara, but the name USinaras was especially appropriated to the
descendants’ of Sivi (Vana-P., oxxxi. 10582). The U$ināras are alluded to:
occasionally: (e.g., Karna-P., v. 187; Aitar. Bréh., viii. 8, 14; and Kaushtt.-
Up.,iv.1), but Sivi or Sibi is the name, which is generally used in the
M.-Bh. From these passages and others (e.g. Sabha-P., xxxi. 1189; li. 1870;
* Vanu-P, oxciv. 13249-55; colxv; colxx. 15718 and 15748; Bhishma-P,, xviii,
688-90 ; and li. 2104) it appears the Sivis wore grouped with the Trigartas,
Madras, and other Panjab nations on one side and with the Kurus, Sūirasenas
"and Matsyus on the other side, that is, with all the nations which surrounded -
Brahmayarta ; and that their territory was near the Jumna and close to Tri-
vishtapa or Tri-pishtapa which was part of Brahmivarta (Vana-P., oxxx.

10566 —oxxxi. 10595; with lxxxiii. 6054-5 and 7078-8 ; and page 290, note I).
The Sivis or U$inaras therefore appear to have possessed the country.
at the upper part of the Sarasvati, Drishad-vati and Jumna, from Soha-


th the Ambasbthas to the north-west, (see page 879
adation which the brahmans


because of the absence of


ranpur to Pattiala ; wi
note f). In later times they shared the degr
pronounced on the nations of the north-west
brahmans among them '(Anuššs.-P., xxxiii. 2103).

|| These are mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 858) and were the
poople who inhabited the Yámuna hills. The Péndavas in returning from
their visit beyond the Himalayas came to the Yámuna hills, and then to


48


378 CANTO LVIII.


43 the Antar-dvipas,* and the Trigartas,¢ the Agnijyas,t the
Sārdana peoples,§ the Ašva-mukhas || also, the Praptas, J
44 the long-haired C'ividas,** the Daserakas,t+ the Vata.
dhšnas,žjž and the Sava-dhanas, $$ the Pushkalas, |||


the Sarasvati (Vana-P., clxxvii. 12346-62). The hosts collected on the
Kauravas’ side before the grent war overspread all the country from Paño’a-
nada (the Panjab) to Ahic'o'hatra (see page 353. note *) inclnding the
Yamuna hills (Udyoga-P., xviii. 596-601). Hence it appears these hills were
the portion of the Himilayas, in which the Jumna
which separate it from the Sutlej.


* Dvipa in this connexion cannot mean any island, and must menn a dodb
(see page 364, note +). ‘Ihe Antar-dvipas then would menn "those
who dwell within the donbs.” I have not met with this word elsewhere,
and here it is prokably an adjective to the Trigartas,
appropriate.

t See page 374, note *.


t I have not found this elsewhere, and ‘it ıs not in the dictionary,
The proper reading should no doubt be Agneyas. They are mentioned in the
M.-Bh. (Vana-P., coliii. 15266). A pishi or man called Agneyn Su-daršana
ig spoken of who dwelt in Kuru-kshetra, (AnnSis.-P., ii. 102-172); and tho,
Agneya Salya-kirtana is alluded to in the same region (Rimiy., Ayodh.-K.,
Ixxiii. 3). It seems probable therefore that the Agneyas were a small tribe
inhabiting the northern part of Kuru-kshetra.

§ Or perhaps “and the Ardana peoples.”
name elsewhere, nor are they in the dictionary.

|] These are mentioned in the Matsya Purana (cxx. 58).
name Badavd-mukhas occurs in verse 80 above.
was an old belief thera-were people who had h
(Pliny, vi. 20; Mandeville's Travels, chap. xviii)

T I have not found this elsewhere. It may perhaps mean the people called
Vadhras or Badhnas in the Bhishma-P. list (ix, 363).

##s This is not in the dictionary, but C’ivuka or C'ibuka is given. I have not
however met any of these names elsewhere. The word c’tpifa means “ flat-
nosed.”

tt See page 321, note *,

Tt See page 312, note *,

§§ This is not in the dictionary, and I have not fonnd it elsewhere. It


seems to be formed on the samo plan as Véfa-dhéna and Ydtu-dhdna. It may
perhaps mean “those who place their dead in
rather to be a name.


||| See page 320, note f.


has its sources, and


to whom it is very


I have not met with either


The synonymous
It may be noted here that it
eads like dogs, Oynocephali


receptucles,” yet it seems


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 379


and Adhama Kairātas,* and those who are settled
45 in Taksha-sila,t the Ambalas,{ the Milavas,$ the
Madras,|| the Veņukas, and the Vadantikas,** the
46 Pingalas,tt the Mana-kalahas,t{ the Hūņas,$$ and the


* The basest or rudest races of Kiritas; see page 322, note ||.

+ The Greek Taxila. It is mentioned in the M.-Bh. The name is generally
connected with Takehaka king of the Nagas; it is said he killed Arjunu'8
grandson king Parikshit according to & curse ; and that king's son Jannmejuya
invaded Taksha-Silé and conquered it (Adi-P., iii. 682-3 and 832-4; xl-xliv;
and xlix. 1954; 1.1991). It appears however to have been named from the


Takkas, whose capital it was, and Cunningham has identified it near the


modern Shah-dheri ‘or Dheri Shahan in the Panjab. It was a large and
famous city and the Takkas held all the country around (Arch. Sarv. Repts.,
II. 6, 11], 112; XIV. 8). It appears to have contained a great Buddhist uni-
versity also.

t These would be the people of Ambila. This name is a late one. It may
probably be derived from the old Ambashtha, the name ofa people often men-
tioned in the M.-Bh. They are said to have been descendants of king Uši:
nara and to have been closely relited to the Sivis; see page 377, note §
(Hari-V., xxxi. 1674-9; Matsya Purana, xlviii. 15-21). ‘They were in the
north-west and are generally mentioned along with north-western nations
especinlly the Sivis and Trigartas (M.-Bh., Sabhf-P,, xxxi. 1189; Bhishma-P.,
xviii. 688-90; cxviii. 5486 ; oxx. 6649; and Droņa-P., vii. 183). It seems,
very probable therefore that they occupied the country between Ambala,
and the Sntlej with the Sivis on their east and south and the Trigattas on
their north-west.

§ See page 341, note *; but they are quite out of place here.

|| See page 329, note *,

S This is not in the dictionary,
people called Venikas are mentioned ‘in M.

#® I have not met with this elsewhere.

+t These people are mentioned in the Rimfy., as situated in the West
(Kishk.-K., xliii. 28, alternative reading; Gorresio’s Edition, Annotations).
A river Piūjald is included in the Bhishmn-P, list (ix. 825). But perhaps
Pingala is an adjective here, ‘Jight brown,” and gnalifies Hūņas; for the
Huns appear to have been a light-complexioned people; see note §§ below.

tt I have not met this as ^ name elsewhere. It may be an adjective,
* quarrelsome through pride,” and qualify the Hūņas.

§§ The Huns. They are mentioned as an outside people to the north along
with O'inos, &o., (Vana-P., li. 1991; Bhishmn-P., ix. 373; and Santi-P.,
ocoxxvii. 12229), but are not often alluded to at first. In the Raghu-Varnša


and I have not found it elsowhere. A
-Bh., Bhishma-P., li. 2097.


380 CANTO LYIIJ,


Kohalakas,* the Mandavyas,+ the Bhiti-yuvakas,t tho
Sātakas,$ the Hema-tirakas, || the Yašo-matyas, T: and the
47 Gūndhāras,** the Khara-sigara-ragis,¢+ the Yaudheyas, t+
` and the Disameyas,$$ the Rajanyas,|}| and the S yaémakas, J


they are placed on the. northernmost part of the Indns, and the commentator
calls then Mujjunapaddkhydh kshuttriydh. (iv. 67-68). They appear to have


been of a light complexion, for their womeu are pictured as having made


their cheeks pale red (pūtula) by beating them in grief (ibid.). For the
Ephthalites or White flung, see Crnuinghnm’s Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 75-79,
All the valley:of the Upper Sntlej is called Hundes.. A people called Hdra-
hūņas are also alluded to in the M.-Bh. -as an outside people to the north-
west (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1194;. and 1. 1844). `,

* I have not found | this elsewhere, but it seems to be the same as the
Kokarakas (Biishma-P,, ix. 369) and Kokanudas (Sabhi-P., zxvi. 1026), both
of whom appear to have, been a tribe to the north of the Punjab.

t See page 374, note +f. :

t I have not met this elsewhere: Perhaps it should be conneoted with Bhúti-
‘Taya, which was a place in the north of the Punjab (Karna-P., xliv: 2062-3).

§ I have not found this elsewhere. : -

|| This is not in the dictionary aud I have not met with it elsewhere.

T I have not found this elsew
on a river Yašo-mati.

** See page 314, note j. : i

ft I have not met this elsewhere and it-is not in the dictionary. Certain
Khara-patha countries. are alluded to in the Matsya Puriņa (oxx. 56); but
the name in the text should probably be split up into two names.

tt These people are generally mentioned along with the Trigartas, Madras
and otber Panjab nations (Sabha-P., li. 1870; and Karna-P., y. 197), and the
epithet adri-ja, “ mountaineer,” seems to be applied to them (Drona-P., clxi.
7208). ‘They are said to have been descended from king U$inura, like the
Sivis and Ambashthus (Hari-V., xxxi. 1674-8). Ihave not found any thing


more to indicate their position, but j udging from the portions of the Panjab
occupied by other nations the Yaudhe


yas may perhaps be placed north of

the Madras néar Lahore.

§§ Or Ddsamtyas, os they were also called (Sabbi-P., 1. 1825). They were
a people in the Panjab; they are called ont-castes and are denounced in the
Karna-P. of the M.-Bh. like the other Panjab nations (xliv. 2064-6, and 2069;
and xly. 2090), but I have found no data to fix their position.

Ill Rdzanya means a “kehattriya”’ or “noble,” but here it seems to be the
name of a people. I have not found it as such elsewhere.

GT I have not met with this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary»


here; it seems to mean a people who live


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-EAST INDIA. _ 381


and the Kshema-dhūrtas* have taken up their position in
- thé Tortoise’s left flank.
48 And there is the constellation Vāruņa,* there the two
` constellations of Praushtha-padaf.
And the kingdom of the Yenas$ and Kinnaras, ||
the country Pragupala, and the country Kic'aka,**


"4 I have not found this elsewhere. A king of Kulita named Kshema-
dhirti is mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Karna-P., xii. 475, čc.).
+ Or Sata-bhishaj. : ;
+ They are Púrva-bhádrą-padá and Uttara-bhádra-padá.
§ The word Yena must be a mistake, and the name meant should, no doubt,
be joined with Kinnara-rdjyam. The proper reading may be either Yauna-


” kinnara-rdjyam, or better perhaps, C'dna-kinnara rdjyam. For C'inas, see


page 319; note f. Yauna appears to be an abbreviated form of Yavana and
is rarely met with (see M.-Bh., Sánti-P., covii, 7560); the Yavanas wero in
the north-west; see page 314, note §, yet they are mentioned again in verse 62.

|| The Kinnaras are said in the dictionary to be mythical beings with o


_ human figure andthe head of a horse; such creatures have been already


alluded to, see Badavi-mukhas in verse 30, and Ašva-mukhas in verse 43.


` They were placed on Mount Gandhs-midana (Vans-P., cxliii. 10964-8),


on Mount Mandara (Droņa-P., lxxx. 2848-52), and generally in the central
region of the Himalayas (Ragbu-V., iv. 78); and they are probably meant
by the Kinkaras in Réméy., Kishk.-K., xliv. 18. The Kinnaras were to
some extent identified with the Kimpurushas, though both are mentioned
separately in the Matsya-Purana, cxx. 48-49. It is stated in the diction-
ary that this occurred in later times, but the chief of the Kimpurushas is
said in the M-Bh. to have dwelt at Gandha-mfdana (Udyoga-P., clvii.
5852) which wes the Kinnaras' territory. The Kimpurushas are described
as forming a kingdom in the Piņdavas” time and owning the country beyond
Svete-parvata (Sabhé-P,, xxvii. 1038-9; Hari-V., xcii. 5013-5; and xcix:
5493-5). They are alluded to as being men of an inferior type (Aitar. Brah.,
II. i. 8), and as being forest-men (Santi-P., clxix), and also as skilled


_ in the use of the bow (Udyoga-P., olvii. 5352).


{ This is; no doubt, a mistake for Patu-pdla which is stated to be the name
of a country and people to the north-east of Madhya-deSa (dict.). They
are mentioned along with Kirdtas and Tanganas and are placed among the


“lower Himalayan ranges in the Rūmiy. (Kishk.-K., xliv. 20). Another


reading in that passage is Paméapdlas (see Annotations).

** The text is sa-kfe'akam. This seems to be the region of the reeds or
bamboos called kfc’akas; they are said to line the banks of the R. Sailodé
in the North (Réméy., Kishk.-K., xliv. 76-79; M.-Bb., Sabbé-P., lī. 1858-9 ;


382 CANTO LVIII.


49 and the country of Kāšmira,* and the people of Abhi-
sara,t the Davadas,f and the Tvanganas,§ the Kulatas I
50 the Vana-rashtrakas,9 the Sairishthas,** the Brahma.


and Raghu-V., iv. 73). It is not clear where this country was. The
R. Sailoda is placed between Meru and Mandara in the passage from the
M.-Bh., and the Kfiasas, Pāradas and Tanganas dwelt near it. The R, Snilo-
daka is said to rise at the foot of Mount Arana, west of Kailasa, in the Matsya
Puriņa (cxx. 22-23).

A people called Kic’akas are mentioned in. the M.-Bh., as being near the
Matsyas, Trigartas and Pāūc'ilas, i.e., in Madhya-deSa (Adi-P., clvi. 6084—7),
and Kfo'aka was the name of the general of Virita king of Mutsya ( Viritn-
P., xiv. 876-7). The dictionary states that they were a tribe of the Kekayas
(see page 317, note ||) nnd that Ekan-c'akrā was one of their towns; but
Eka-c’akré seems rather to have been in Madhya-deša (Adi-P., clvii. 6104-9;
clx. 6207; clxiv. 6306; and Van-P., xi. 388—415), and Arrah in Behar claims
to be that town. Perhaps there may be some confusion with Kikata, the old
name of Behar, in this.

* Kaémtrakam rashtram; it is called Kd$mtraka-mandala (M.-Bh., Vana-P.,
cxxx. 10545-6; and AnnSis.-P., xxv. 1695); see page 323, note f. It is quite
out of place here.

+ This was a country in the north of the Panjab and its capital was
Abhisdré (M.-Bh., Sabhi-P., xxvi. 1027; and Bhishma-P., ix. 361). It is not
often mentioned (Karna-P., xiv. 540-1; and see also perhaps Drona-P., xciii.
3379-80), unless the Abhishdhas or Abhtshūhas are the same people (Bhishma-
P., xviii. 688; cxviii. 5485; Droņa-P., clxi. 7207). But Abhisūra is quite ovt
of place here in the north-eastern region.

f Thisisnot in the dictionary. I have met with it elsewhere only in
Hari-Varnša, xcix. 5503-4, but there it is a mistake for Darada; compare
xcii. 5022-8, and xci. 4966-70. The Daradas are out of place here; see page
318, note, ||. They are mentioned in verse 32 also.

§ No doubt a mistake for Tanganas, see page 323, note §.

|| This is not in the dictionary, but a people called Kulati are mentioned
there. I have not found it elsewhere. The word resembles Kulúta (Karna-
P , xii. 475 and 485) and Koldtu and Kolúka (Rimiy., Kishk.-K., xliii. 8, and
Annotations) which seem to be the modern Kulu near the source of the
R. Bias, but it is ont of place here. A similar name Kurwtas is mentioned
in verse 51.

q This is mentioned in the dictionary, but I have not found it elsewhere-
Vana-rishtra as “the country of forests” would apply well to the densely
wooded tracts of Assam.

## | have not met with this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary- A


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-EAST INDIA. 383


purakas,* and the Vana-vahyakas,+ the Kirātasj and
Kausgikas§ and Anandas, || the Pahlava$ and Lolana** peo-
51 ples, the Dārvādas,*t and the Marakas, {t and the Kurutas, §§
the Anna-dārakas,|||| the Eka-pūdas, 4 the Khašas,***


the Ghoshas,ttt the Svarga-bhaumanavadyakas, fj


place called Sairtshaka is mentioned, but it was west of Delhi (M.-Bh.,
Sabha-P., xxxi. 1187-8).

* This is mentioned in the dictionary, and Brahma-pura is said to be the
name of a peak in the Himilayas, but I have not met either name elsewhere.

+ This is in the dictionary but I have not found it elsewhere.

t See page 322, note ||; and canto lvii, verse 8.

§ These would be the people dwelling on the banks of the R. Kau$iki or
Kosi (see page 292, note **).

|| This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. The
text should no doubt read Nandd separate from Kirdta-kaušikd, and the people
are the Nandus, those who live on the banks of the rivers Nandž and
Apara-nandé, which are often mentioned as situated in the North between
the Ganges and Kaušiki or Kosi, and near the R. Bihudi and Mt. Hemakita
(M.-Bh, Adi-P., coxv. 7818-9; Vana-P., Ixxxvii. 8323; cx. 9968-87; and
Drona-P , liv. 2092).

T Seo page 314, note *. They are altogether out of place hero.

*% This is given in the dictionary, but 1 have not met with it elsewhere.

++ This seems to be a mistake; it seems the reading shonld be either
Didrvidyd, “the Dirvas and others,” or Ddrvd ddmarakdš. For tho Darvas see
puge 324, note j. -

tt Or perhaps Démarakas as suggested in the last note. Maraka is given
in the dictionary but I have not found it elsewhere. It suggests Muru and
Naraka, the names of two Dfnava or Asura chiefs in Pr&g-jyotisha whom
Krishna conquered (M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xiii. 578; Vana-P., xii. 488 ; Udyoga-
P , xlvii. 1887-92 ; oxxix. 4403-9 ; clvii. 5353-8 ; Santi-P., ceexli 12954-6; and
Hari-V., cxxi. 6791 —cxxiii. 6921). Prig-jyotisha was the North of Bengal,
see page 328, note t.

§§ Thisis not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. Is it
to be connected with the R. Karatoy4, the modern Kuratee (see page 292,
note tł)? a

II] This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere,

TT “The men with only one foot,” see page 358, note t.

*%% They are mentioned above in verse 6; see also page 346 note +,

ttt I have not met with these elsewhere. The Ghosha-sankhyas are men-
tioned in verse 6 abore.

ttt This seems to be a compound name, but it is not in the dictionary and


384 ā CANTO LVIII.


52 -and the Hingas,* and the Yavanas,t and those who are
called C'ira-prāvaraņas, f the Tri-netras, § and the Pauravas, Il
53 and the Gandharvas,§ O brahman. These people are
situated in the Tortoise’s north-east foot.
And the three constellations, the Revatis,** Asvi-daivatyat+
54 and Yāmya,ff are declared to be situated in that foot and tend
to the complete development-of actions, §3 O best of munis.
i And these very constellations are situated in these plnces,||||


I have not found any thing like it elsewhere: - As an adjective it might mean,
“ faultless as Svarga and the planet Mars,” but that seems inappropriate.

* I have not met with this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary.

f The Yavanas were in the North-west, see page 314, note §, and also
canto lvii, verse 8; but they seem to have spread widely and here they are
mentioned in the North-east.

+ “Those who wear bark. clothing.” T have not met with it elsewhere
as the name of a people.

§ “The three-eyed people.” It was believed there were such people, see
M -Bh., Sabhā-P., 1.1837.

|| The Paurava race was descended from Piru, one of Yaytti's sons (M.-Bh.,
Kdi-P., lxxxv. 3533-4; and xcv. 3762-4) who is said to have got Madhya-deSa
(Hari-V., xxx. 1604-and 1619); and the Pauravas spread in various direc-
tions. A Paurava kingdom is placed in the North region, in the account of
Arjuna’s conquests there (Sabha-P., xxvi; 1022-5) and that may be the nation
intended here. ‘There were also Pauravas elsewhere (eg. Stnti-P., xlix.
1790-2; and Adi-P., clxxxvi. 6995; but Sabha-P., xxx. 1164 is probably 8

mistake).

« The Gandharvas were fabled to be heavenly musicians, but they are also
spoken of ns a people dwelling beyond lake Mūnasa, and it is said Arjuna
conqnered them and bronght back a tribute of fine roan horses (tittirt-
kulmdsha) from their country (Sabha-P., xxvii. 1041-8). It is said the Gan-
dharvas are more powerful by night (Adi-P., clxx. 6504). It is also fabled _
that the gods obtained Soma from them because they lust after women
(Aitar. Brah., I. v. 27); and they were said to possess or inspire people (id.
V. v. 29; and Brih. Aran. Up., III. iii. 1 and vii. 1).

** For Revatydé read Revatyaé; the plural is sometimes used.

tt Or Ašvini.

tt Or Bharaņi.

§§ Pdkdya. :

| There do not appear to be any particular reasons why the lunar cone
stellations are assigned to the respective portions of the Tortoise’s body-


`


55


56


57


58


59


60


61


62


63


ASTROLOGICAL APPLICATIONS. 385


O bréhman. These places, which have been mentioned in
order, undergo calamity* when ther. their constellations are
occulted,} and gain ascendancy,t O bhrāhman,$ along with
the planets which are favourably situated. Of whichever con-
stellation whichever planet is lord, both the constellation and
the corresponding country are dominated by it ;|| at its ascend-
ancy T good fortune accrues to that country, O best of munis-
Singly all countries are alike; fear or prosperity** comes
to people according as either arises out of the particular
constellation and planet, O brāhman. The thought, that man-
kind are in a common predicament with their own particular
constellations when these are unfavourable, inspires fear.
Along with the particular planets there arises from their
occultations an unfavourable influence which discourages exer-
tion. Likewise the development of the conditions may be
favourable; and so when the planets are badly situated it tends
to produce slight benefit to men and to themselves with the
wise who are learned in geography.tt When the particular
planet is badly situated, f} men even of sacred merit have fear
for their goods or cattle-pen, their dependants, friends or
children or wife. Now men of little merit feel fear in their
souls, very sinful men feel it everywhere indeed, but the
sinless never in a single place. Man experiences good or evil,
which may arise from community of region, place and people,
or which may arise from having a common king, or which
may arise peculiarly from himself, §§ or which may arise
from community of constellation and planet. And mutual
preservation is produced by the non-malignity |||| of the pla-


* Pidyante. + Pldd.

t Abhy-udaya. § For vipram read vipra.

|| The text is tad-bhdvito bhayam; but it seems better to take the whole as
one word.

Ç Utkarsha, #® Sobhana, “ brightening up.”


+t These verses seem rather obsoure.

tt For du-sthe read duh-sthe.

§§ For dtsajam read dtma-jam.

|1| For grahddausthyena read grahddauļsthyena.


49


386


64


65


66


67


68


69


70


71


72


73


74


CANTO LVIII.


nets; and loss of good ts produced by the evil results which
spring from these very planets, O lordly brāhman,

I have described to thee what is the position of the Tortoise
among the constellations. But this community of countries
is inauspicious and also auspicious. Therefore a wise man,
knowing the constellation of his particular country and the
occultation of the planets, should perform a propitiatory rite
for himself and observe the popular rumours, O best of men.
Bad impulses* both of the gods and of the Daityas and other
demons descend from the sky upon the earth; they have been
called by sacred writings ' popular rumours” in the world.
So a wise man should perform that proptižatory rite; he
should not discard the popular rumours. By reason of them
the decay of corrupt traditional doctrineļ befits men. Those
rumours may effect the rise of good and the casting off of sins,
also the forsaking of wisdom,$ O brāhman; they cause the
loss of goods and other property. Therefore a wise man, being
devoted to propitiatory rites and taking an interest in the
popular rumours, should have the popular rumours proclaimed
and the propitiatory rites performed at the occultations of
planets; and he should practise fastings devoid of malice, the
praise-worthy laudation of funeral monuments and other
objects of veneration, prayer, the homa oblation, and liberality
and ablution ; he should eschew anger and other passions. And
a learned man should be devoid of malice and shew bene-
volence towards all created things; he should discard evil
speech and also outrageous words. And aman should perform
the worship of the planets at all occultations. Thus all terri-
ble things which result from the planets and constellations
are without exception pacified with regard to self-subdued
men.

This Tortoise described by me in India isin truth the
adorable lord Náráyaņa, whose soul is inconceivable, and D
whom everything is established. In it all the gods have their


* Daurhridáh; the dictionary gives this word only as neuter.
+ Loka-váda. t Dushtégama, § Prajñá-háni.


75


76


77


78


79


80


81


1


ARRANGEMENT OF THE ZODIAC. 387


station, each resorting to his own constellation. Thus, in its
middle are Agni, the Earth, and the Moon, O brāhman. In
its middle are Aries and the next two constellations ;* in its
mouth are Gemini and the next constellation; and in the
south-east foot Cancer and Leo are situated; and in its
side are placed the three signs of the zodiac, Leo, Virgo
and Libra: and both Libra and Scorpio are in its south-
west foot; and at its hinder partt is stationed Sagittarius
along with Scorpio; and in its north-west foot are the
three signs Sagittarius and the next two; and Aquarius and *
Pisces have resorted to its northern side; Pisces and Aries
are placed in its north-east foot, O brahman.

The countries are placed in the Tortoise, and the constella-
tions in these countries, O brāhman, and the signs of the zodiac
in the constellations, the planets in the signs of the zodiac.
Therefore one should indicate calamity to 2 country when
its particular planets and constellations are occulted. In that
event one should bathe and give alms and perform the homa
oblation and the rest of the ritual.

This very foct of Vishnu, which is in the midst of the
planets, is Brahma.


Canto LIX.


—


Description of the Barth continued.


Mérkandeya tells of the continents Bhadrasva and Ketumala,
and the country of the Northern Kurus, and describes their
mountains, rivers and people.

Markandeya spoke

Thus then have I declared this continent Bharata accurately,

O muni, and the Krita, Tretā, and Dvāpara, and Kali ages


2 which are the four ages.$ And now indeed there is a fourfold


* Taurus and Gemini; the signs of the Zodiac o
stations,


verlap in the different
+ Prishthe; but puc'c'he would be better.


t For graha-rdšishv read grahd rdéishu ?
§ For tathd-tishya-c'atushthayam read tathd tishya-c’atushfayam.


388


10


11


12


13


14


CANTO LIX.


classification* in these ages, O bráhman. Four, three and
two hundreds and one hundred of autumns men liye herein
the Krita, Tretá and two other ages respectively, O bráhman,

Hear from me of the continent Bhadráśva, which is situated
east of the magnificent eastern mountain Deva-kūta.

Both Sveta-parna, and Nila, and the lofty mountain Saivala,
Kauraiija, Parņa-šālāgra—these indeed are the five mountain
ranges. There are many small mountains besides, which ae
offshoots of those ranges; the countries there are distinguished
by them, they are of various shapes and occur in thousands.
Moreover they are like white water-lilies and are auspicious
with their pure summits. Such-like and diverse also aro
other hills by hundreds and thousands. The S ita, the
Sankhavati, the Bhadra, and the O’akravarté and many other
rivers spread abroad there, bearing down volumes of cold
water. In this country mankind are Iustrous as shells and
like pure gold;+ they associate with the celestials; they are
holy; their lives last a thousand years; neither inferior nor
superior exists among them; they are all of equal appear-
ance; they are endowed naturally with patience and the
seven other good qualities.

And there the god Janšrdana has a horse's head and four
arms; with head, chest, penis, feet and forearms resembling a
horse's, and he has three eyes. And thus the objects of sense
are perceptible by him, the lord of the world.

Now hear from me about the continent Ketumāla which
is on the west.

Visila, Kambala, Krishna, Jayanta, Hari-parvata, Visoka,
and Vardhamšna—these seven are the mountain ranges.
There are other hills by thousands, among which a multitude
of people dwell. Those people dwell there in hundreds, the
Maulist huge in stature, the Sakas, Potas and Karambhakas,§


O’atur-varnyo,  masc. abstract noun.


+ Sankha-Suddha-hema-sama-prabhéh,

ft This and the following words seem to be the names of people; moun-
tains and rivers in these continents ure named, and it seems most natural
and reasonable to take these words as names, :

§ Sikapotakarambhakdļ ; or perhaps “ S'ákas, Potakas and Rambhakas.


15


16


17


18


19


20


25


27


KETUMALA AND THE NORTHERN KURUS. 389


and those who are distinguished by their thumbs,* who drink
of the great rivers, the Vankshu, the Syāmā, the Svakambala,
the Amoghi, the Kamini, the Syimā, and of others in
thousands. And here life is equal to the above-mentioned
lives in Bhadrésva. And here the adorable Hari wears a
boar’s shape and resembles a boar in feet, face, chest, back and
flanks. And the lunar constellations are beautiful in that
country which enjoys three constellations only. Such is this
continent of Ketumāla, which I have described to thee, O best
of munis.

Next I will tell thee of the Northern Kurus; hearken to
me now.

There the trees yield sweet fruit, they bear blossoms and
fruit in constant succession; and they produce garments and
ornaments inside their fruits; verily they bestow all one’s
desire; they yield fruit according to all one’s desire. The
ground abounds with precious stones; the air is fragrant and
always delightful. Mankind are born there, when they quit
the world of the gods. They are born in pairs; the pairs abide
an equal time, and are as fond of each other as cakravākas.
Their stay there is fourteen and a half thousands of years
indeed. And O’andra-kénta is the chief of the mountains,
and Sūrya-kānta is the next; they are the two mountain
ranges in that continent. And in the midst thereof the great
river Bhadra-som4 flows through the earth with a volume of
sacred and pure water. And there are other rivers by thou-
sands in that northern continent; and some flow with milk
and others flow with ghee. And there are lakes of ‘curdled
milk there, and others lieamong the various hills. And fruits
of various kinds, which taste rather like amrita, are produced
by hundreds and thousands in the woods in those continents.
And there the adorable Vishnu has his head turned to the
east and wears a fish's shape. And the lunar constellations
are divided} into nine parts, three and three, and the regions
of the sky are divided into nine parts, O best of munis.


* Angula-pramukhdé.
+ For vibhakto read vibhaktir ?


390
28


29


8


CANTO LX,


And in the ocean are the islands C’andra-dvipa, and next
Bhadra-dvipa; and there also within the ocean ig the famous
island Puņya, O great muni,

Thus I have described this northern continent of
O brāhman. Hearken while I tell thee of Kim-purush
the other continents.


Kuru,
a and


Canto LX.


The description of the Earth concluded.


Markandeya briefly describes the continents, Kim-purusha
Hari-varsha, Ildvrita, Ramyaka and Hiran-maya, and their
inhabitants.

Markandeya spoke :

I will tell thee, O brāhman, what the continent Kim-
purusha is; where men with real bodies live ten thousand
years; where men and women are indeed free from sickness
and free from sorrow, and there the fig-tree* is called shanda;
it grows very high, it is like a grove.t Those men are always
drinking the juice of its frnit; and the women are born with
lasting youthfulness and are fragrant as the lotus.f

Next to Kim-purusha is mentioned Hari-varsha. There
mankind are born of the appearance of gold; they all de-
scend there from the world of the gods, and are shaped like
the gods in all respects. In Hari-varsha all the men quaff
fine sugar-cane juice; neither old age afflicts them there, nor
do they suffer from decay at all; and they live in truth for
the whole of their time free from sickness.

I have mentioned Ilávrita, which is in the middle, the
continent of Meru. The sun does not burn there, nor do men
suffer from decay; and they donot grasp at selfish gains.§


% Plaksha, + Nandanopamaļ.

t Utpala-gandhikdh; this word, neuter, also means a species of sandal of
the colour of brass and very fragrant,

§ Labhante ndtma-labhan c'a; it seems impossible to take these words with
ratmayat c’andra-stiryayok.


10


11


12


13


14


15


ILAVRITA, RAMYAKA AND HIRAŅ-MAYA, 391


The rays of the moon and the sun, of the constellations and
planets there are the sublime lustre of Meru. Mankind are
born there bright as the lotus flower, fragrant as the lotus
flower; they feed on the juice of the jambu fruit; and
their eyes are as wide as the lotus leaf. And their life
there lasts for thirteen thousand years. There is a saucer-
shaped expanse in the middle of Meru* in Ilāvrita; therein
is the great mountain Meru; thus is made known Ilavrita.

Next I will tell of the continent Ramyaka ; hearken thereto.
And there the green-leaved Indian fig-treet is the lofty tree.
And the people there pass their time drinking the juice of its
fruit. There the men who eat its fruit live for ten thousand
years; they are pre-eminent for sexual pleasures and are
pure; they are free from old age and ill odours.

And north of that is the continent famed by name as
Hiran-maya; where the river Hiran-vati gleams with abun-
dant lotuses. Mankind there are born with great strength,
full of vigour, with large bodies, eminently good, wealthy and
benign of look.


Canto LXI.
The Story of the Brahman in the Svdroc'isha
Manvantara.


Mdrkaņdeya begins the relation of the Svdroc'isha Manvan-
tara—A young brūkman, by virtue of a magic ointment applied
to his feat, visits the Himdlaya mountains in half a day—The
scenery there described — He wishes to return home, but the magic
ointment has been dissolved by the snow, and he loses his way—
The Apsaras Varithint meets him, and falling in love with him
begs him for his love—He refuses all her entreaties, and at
length appeals to the garhapatya fire to help him homeward.


Kraushtuki spoke :
Thou hast duly related what thou wast asked, O great muni,


# For meru-madhye read meru-madhya.
+ Nyag-rodha, Fious indica.


392


10


11


CANTO LXI.


namely, the constitution of the earth, ocean, &e., their dimen.
sions, also the planets and their dimensions, and the constitu-
tion of the constellations, and the bhúr-loka and the other
worlds, and all the Lower Regions. And thou hast declared
the Sváyambhuva Manvantara to me, O muni. NextI wish
to hear about the Manvantaras which succeeded that, the
deities who ruled over the Manvantaras, the rishis, and the
kings who were their sons.


Markandeya spoke :

I have made known to thee the Manvantara which is
called Sviyambhuva. Now next to that hear about another
which is named after Svārodisha.*

There lived a certain bréhman eminent among the dvijas
in the town Aruņāspada on the bank of the Varuné; and he
surpassed the Asvins * in beauty of form. He was gentle
in disposition, upright in conduct, he had studied all the
Vedas and Vedaigas; always gracious to guests, he was
the refuge of all persons who arrived at night. Now he
had this intention, “I will see the earth which has most
charming forests and gardens, and is embellished with many a
town.”

Now a certain guest once arrived at his abode, who was
acquainted with the powers of various medicinal herbs, and
skilled in the magic art. Now being requested by the former,
whose mind was purified by faith, he described to him both
countries and charming towns, forests, rivers,f and moun-
tains, and holy sanctuaries. Then the former filled with
astonishment said to that best of bréhmans, “In that thou
hast seen many countries thou art not worn with excessive
toil, thou art not very old in life, nor hast thou long passed
thy youth ; how dost thou roam the earth in a short time,
O brāhman ? ”


* For svaroc'ishākhyam read sudroc'ishikhyam ?

+ Aty-afvinau, “one who surpasses the two ASyins;’ see Prof. Sir
M. Monier-Williams’ Grammar, rule 126 i.

t For nadyah read nadth.


12


13
14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


DESCRIPTION OF THE HIMALAYAS. 398


The brāhman spoka:


By the power of spells and medicinal herbs my course is
rendered free, O bréhman; verily I travel a thousand yojanas
in half a day.


Markandeya spoke :


Then the brāhman made him this answer in return with due
respect, believing * the word of that wise brahman, “ Ador-
able Sir, give me the favour that comes from the power of
spells; I have an intense desire to see this earth.” And
that brāhman of exalted intellect gave him an ointment
for the feet; and offered careful counsel} regarding the
region which the other mentioned.

Now the brāhman, with his feet anointed by the other,
went to see the Hima-vat range, where many a cascade
pours down, O best of dvijas, for he thought, “Since I can
indeed travel a thousand yojanas in half a day; I will cer-
tainly return in the other half of it.” He reached the top
of Hima-vat, not much fatigued in body, O brahman, Then
he roamed about there over the surface of the snowy moun-
tain. Now the ointment on his feet, which was extracted
from the choicest medicinal herbs, became washed off by the
melting snow which accumulated on his feet. Thereupon
he grew slack in his walk, as he wandered about hither and
thither. He saw the peaks of the snowy range which most
fascinate the mind. Gazing at those peaks which are loved
of the Siddhas and Gandharvas, and where the Kin-naras
disport themselves, which are delightful here and there for
play and pastime among the gods and other heavenly beings,
and which were thronged with hundreds of bevies of heavenly
Apsarases, the brākman, whose hair stood erect with delight,
was not satiated, O muni. Filled with rapture he gazed
at the mighty mountain range Hima-vat, which in one place

captivated him with the fall of the broken water from a


® For $rad-dhadhdno read érad-dadhdéno,


t Abhi-mantrayāmdsa ; this meaning is not given to the verb in the
diotionary. + For dindddhana read dindrādhena,


50


394 CANTO LXI.


torrent, and which in another place was made resonant with
24 the cries of peacocks as they danced, and which was thronged
here and there with pied-crested cuckoos,* lapwings ong
other pretty birds, and with cock-koils and humming bees
25 which captivated the ear, and which was fanned by breezes
perfumed with scents from trees that were in full blossom,
26 And after viewing the mighty mountain Hima-vat as it
thus was, the young brahman resolved to go homewards,
27 intending to see it again the next day. Now he had lost the
ointment from his feet, his step was slow by reason of his
28 long walking, he pondered “What is this? I have acted
unwisely, if the ointment is destroyed, having dissolved off
me by the melted snow; and this mountain is very difficult
29 of access, and it is a long distance that I have come here. I
shall suffer loss in my rites. How shall I kindle a fire and do
my dutiful homage and all else that is needful? I have fallen
30 into a terrible strait, * This is charming! that is charming !’—
with my sight so engrossed on this fine mountain, I shall not
31 be satiated even in hundreds of years. The melodious talk-of
the Kin-naras ravishes my ears all around, and my nose eagerly
32 seeks the scents from the trees that are in full blossom, and
the breeze is delightful to the touch, and the fruits are full of
juice, and the charming lakes forcibly captivate the mind.
33 In these circumstances then if I may chance to see some
ascetic, he may point out the road for me to go homeward.”
Markandeya spoke :
34 The brāhman, reflecting so, wandered yet on the snowy
mountain; having lost the efficacy of the medicinal herbs
35 from his feet, he sank into intense fatigue. And Vartthini
saw him, that goodly muni, as he was wandering; she a
choice Apsaras, of high station, the daughter of Mili, and
36 beauteous in shape. As soon as she saw him Varuthini


* O'dtaka ; see page 29 note +.

+ Mauleyā. The dictionary gives Mauleya as the name of a people, but that
meaning seems inappropriate here, Aga patronymio Mauleyf would appear
more correct. See verse 46 below.


37


38


39


40


4)


42
43


4d


45


46


417


48


49


A BRAHMAN AND AN APSARAS. 395


felt her heart drawn towards that noble bréhman by love,
in truth she was immediately filled with affection. She
thought, “ Who then is this, of most fascinating appearance ?
My birth may reach its reward if he do not despise me. How
handsome his shape! How graceful his gait! How deep his
gazo! Where is there his equal on the earth? I have seen
the gods and the Daityas, the Siddhas, the Gandharvas and
the Négas; how is it there is not even one who rivals this
high-souled man in figure? If he should fall in love with
mo as I have fallen in love with him, the store of merit
which he has acquired may be attainable by mo here. If he
should cast a really loving glance on me to-day, then there
would be no other woman in the three worlds, who has
gained more merit than I.”
Markandeya spoke :

So reflecting the heavenly maiden, who was sick for love,
showed herself in very lovely form. Now on seeing her,
gracefully-formed Vartūthini, the young bráhman approached
with deference and spoke this word—‘ Who art thou, (0)
maiden bright as the lotus-cup ? Or on whom dost thou
attend? Iam a bráhman, I have come here from the city
Aruņāspada. The ointment on my feet, by the power of
which I came here, has perished being dissolved by the
melting snow here, O maiden of fascinating glance!”

Vartthini spoke : :

I am the daughter of Mīli, of high station; I am well-
known by name as Varūthinf. I roam here at all times
indeed on this charming mountain. Being such I am com-


pelled by the sight of thee, O bráhman, to declare my love.


Do thou enjoin me what I must do, I am now submissive


to thee.”
The brāhman spoke :
O benign sweet-smiler, tell me the means whereby I may


go to my own home. Loss is befalling us in all our actions,
and grievous loss pefalls a brākman in the perpetual and


396


50


51


52


53


54
55


56


57


58


59


CANTO LXI.


secasional ceremonies. Therefore, O lady, do thou deliver mo
from the Himalaya mountains. Absence from home is never
commended in brāhmans. I have not sinned, O timid one;
it was my curiosity to see other countries, All actions and
the perpetual and occasional ceremonies are accomplished by
a bréhman when he stays at home; so they are lost if he
dwells away from home. Such as thou art, why should
I say much. Do then, O illustrious lady, so that I may see
my own abode ere the sun sets.


Varūthini spoke :


Speak not so, illustrious Sir; let not that day come for me,
in Which abandoning me thou shalt resort to thy own abode!
Ah! since heaven is not more charming, O young brahman,
then abandoning the gods’ abode we will stay here. Sport-
ing with me on this beloved snowy mountain, thou thyself,
O my beloved, wilt not remember thy mortal kinsmen. Seized
and rendered submissive by love, E- too will give thee here
garlands, garments, ornaments, loving joys,* and dainty food
and ungūents. Charming is the song of the Kin-naras,
accompanied with the strains of the lute and flute; the
breeze brings gladness to the body ; there is warm food, the
water is pure. Longed for by the mind is the bed, fragrant is
the ointment. While thou remainest here, illustrious Sir,
what more wilt thou have in thine own house? While thou


. remainest here, never will old age light on thee. This is the


60


61


62


land of the thirty gods; it gives fullness to youth!” Having
spoken thus, the lotus-eyed maiden, full of affection, exclaim-
ing sweetly “ Be thou gracious!” suddenly embraced him
in the eagerness of her mind.


The brahman spoke:


Touch me not; go to some other man who is like thyself,
O worthless one ! I have been wooed in one way, thou indeed
approachest me in a very different way. The oblation to
the gods, offered evening and morning, sustains the eternal


* Bhoksha, not in the dictionary ; read bhoga?


63


66


67


68


69


70


* Vistarant, not in tho dictionary.


A BRABMAN AND AN APSARAS. 397


worlds; the whole of these three worlds is established on the
oblation to the gods, O foolish one!


Varūthini spoke :

Am I not dear to thee, O brdhman? Is not the moun-
tain charming? Leaving aside the Gandharvas, the Kin-
naras and the others, whom dost thou desire? Surely, Sir,
thou shalt go away from here to thy own abode without
doubt; enjoy with me for a very little while the delights
that are hard to be won.


The brāhman spoke:

I continually desire the gārhapatya and the two other
fires ; the fire-place is charming to me; my dear wife is the
goddess who diffuses herself about me.*

Varūthini spoke :

Compassion, O bréhman, is the foremost of the eight good
qualities of the soul; why dost thou not display it towards
me, O cherisher of truth and righteousness? Forsaken by
thee, I do not live; and I am fullof affection for thee ;
I say not this falsely ; be gracious, O gladdener of thy family !


The brāhman spoke:


If thou art in truth full of affection, and dost not speak to
me out of mere politeness, then tell me the means by which


I may go to my own home,
Varūthini spoke:
Surely, Sir, thou shalt go away from here to thy own abode


without doubt ; enjoy with me for a very little while the
delights that are hard to be won !


The brāhmun spoke:
Striving after delights is not at all commended in bréhmans,
O Vartthini ; + such striving in bréhmans tends to weariness m
this world, and yields no fruit after death.


+ For Varithint read Varūthini.


398


71


72


73


74:


75


76


77


78


79


1
2


CANTO LXII.


Varūthin! spoke:

Tf thou savest me who am at the point of death, thou wilt
have the fruit of merit itself in the next world, and delights
in another life; and thus the two things will procure thee
prosperity in this world; if thou dost refuse, I shall die and
thou wilt incur sin.


The brahman spoke :

My spiritual preceptors have told me that one should not
covet another’s wife; therefore I long not for thee; bewail
thy love or be thou withered !

Markandeya spoke:

Having spoken thus, the illustrious bréhman, self-controlled
and pure, touched water and prostrating himself addressed
the gārhapatya fire with this muttered prayer,—‘O adorable
Gārhapatya fire! thou art the source of all rites; from thee
and thee alone come the dhavaniya fire and the dakshiņa

re! By the nourishment given by thee the gods subsiet
who cause the rain, the crops and other benefits ; by the crops,
and them alone, the whole world subsists. Thus this world
subsists through thee—by this truth I adjure thee that I may
see my home to-day, ere sets the sun! By this truth I adjure
thee that I may behold the sun to-day while I sitin my
house, so that I may not neglect the Vedic rites at the propor
time! “And that, as the thought of and the longing for
another’s goods and another’s wife have never occurred to
me, 80 this virtue may be perfected in me!”


Canto LXII.


About the Svároc'isha Manvantara.

The young bréhman ts succoured by Agni and returns home—
A Gandharva Kali sees Variithint disconsolate and in the guse
of the bráhman gains her love.

Markandeya spoke :

Now as the young bréhman thus spoke, the Garhapaty®

Fire in sooth appeared at hand upon his body ; and with i


THE DISCONSOLATE APSARAS. 399


gurmounting him, he stood amid a circle of light, and illu-
3 mined that place asif he were Agni in bodily form, Now
vehement love seized upon the heavenly maiden as she beheld
4 the brihman, who stood there in so glorious a form. Then
the young bréhman,* surmounted by that Fire, immediately
5 started to go as before; and he departed in haste while the
slender-shaped heavenly maiden gazed after him as far as
6 her eye could reach, her throat quivering with sighs. Then
in one moment from that time the brihman reached his own
abode and performed all the rites as he had mentioned.
7 Now she, the beauteous in every limb, remained with soul
and mind clinging fast to him, and passed the remainder of the
8 day and also the night in almost ceaseless sighing. And
the faultlessly-shaped maiden sighing and crying “Ah! Ah!”
continually, reproached herself, “ O luckless one that Tam!”
9 though her eyes were fascinating. Neither in sport, nor in
food, nor yet on delightsome forest, nor on the charming
10 glens did she then fix her joy. She turned her desire to-
wards a pair of billing čakravūkas. Forsaken by him the
finely-shaped maiden reproached her own youthful woman-
ll hood, “How happened it + that I came to this mountain,
forcibly attracted by evil fate? And how happened it that
12 he, such a man as that, crossed the range of my eye? If
that grand man shall not come to me to-day, verily the intoler-
13 able fire of my love for him will consume me away. The song
of the cock-koil which was so delightful, this self samo song
when disunited | from him is burning enough, as it were,
to me to-day.”


Markandeya spoke :


14 Thus she poured forth her words, O br4hman, § absorbed in
love, and her passion for him grew every moment then.


* For dija-nandanak read dvija-nandanah. + Kya.
f Rend in preference héndm for hinam, to agree with mdm ? ;
se words seem meaning-


§ The text reads, Jagdma muni-sattamam ; but the
less from the context, Jagdda muni-sattama scom preferable,
ventured to adopt them in the translation.


and I have


400 CANTO LXII.


15 Now 9 Gandharva named Kali was enamoured of her, and
16 had been rejected by her before. He beheld her in that
condition. Then he pondered, *' Why now is this Vartthini
who moves as gracefully as an elephant, faded by the hot
17 blastof sighing on this mountain? Has she been wounded
by some muni’s curse, or has any one treated her with dis.
honour, since she keeps on bedewing her face copiously with
18 tears?” Then Kali through curiosity meditated on that
matter full long, and perceived the truth by the power of
19 concentrated thought. Comprehending that matter of the
muni,* Kali pondered again, “I have well accomplished this,
20 by reason of fortunate actions done before. Though often
entreated by me who love her, she, this very maiden, rejected
21 me; to-day I shall gain her. Sheis in love with a human
being; by virtue of that fact she shall all-unsuspectingly
bestow her love on me while I assume his shape. Why
then do I delay ? ”
Markandeya spoke:
22 Thereupon heassumed that brahman’s shape by his inherent
power, and moved to where sits Varūthini disconsolate.
23 Seeing him, a little wide grew the eyes of the finely-shaped
maiden. In her slender form she approached him and ex-
24 claimed “Be kind!” again and again; “Bereft of thee I
shall assuredly abandon my life; thereby thou wilt incur
very sore unrighteousness, and thy sacred ceremonies will
25 come to ruin. Joining with me in this charming glen
among the great glens, thou wilt certainly acquire right-
26 eousness by saving me, Life verily has some remnant t for
me, O wise bréhman! Sarely thou hast returned for that
reason, and bringest gladness to my heart.”
Kali spoke:
27 What am I doing? My ceremonies suffer harm while I
linger here. Dost thon tell me such a tale as this, O slender-


# Or better perhaps, for Muneh read Mune, “ O Muni.”
+ For advašesham read c’dvasesham ? Ava-Sesha may apparently be neuter
sometimes.


28


29


30


31


MARRIAGE OF THE APSARAS WITH A GANDHARVA, 401
waisted maiden P Therefore I am fallen into a strait, Thon
must do* what I say, and not otherwise, if there is to be
union between me and thee, lady, to-day.

Varūthini spoke:

Be kind! What thou sayest, that I will do for thee without
falsehood—I say this without fear—whatever I must do now
for thy sake.

Kali spoke:

Thou must not gaze on me while we meet in union in the
wood to-day; thou must close thine eyes, O lady with beauti-
ful brows, the while thou dost unite with me.

Varūthini spoke :

So be it as ’t is good to thee! As thou wishest, so let it be!

Truly I must remain submissive to thee now in every way.


Canto LXIIJ.


About the Svdroo'isha Manvantara. j
The Apsaras Variithint had by the Gandharva Kalia son who
was named Sva-roo'ts—He delivered a maiden Mano-ramé and her
father the Vidyd-dhara Indtvara from a curse—and married her.


Markandeya spoke:

Then with her he sported on mountain tops, which
charmed the heart. with their blossoming forests, and midst
charming lakes, and in pleasant glens, and on sand-banks in
the rivers, and in other delightsome places, with merry
heart, O brāhman. With eyes closed fast during their em-
braces, she thought by reason of his ardour that his form was
that of the young bréhman surmounted with fire. Then after a
time she conceived a child, O best of munis; tt took its form
from the Gandharva’s energy and her dwelling in thought on


* For karoshi read kurushva ?


o1


402


CANTO LXIII.


5 the brāhman. Then he having soothed Varūthini in her
pregnant condition departed, still assuming the brāhmans
shape; she gave him a loving dismissal.

6 The child was born a boy, with a splendour like the blazing
orb of light, illuminating all the regions of the sky with his

7 own lustre like the sun. Because he shines with his own
lustre,* like the sun, the boy became therefore famed by the

8 appropriate name Sva-rodis. And the noble boy grew day
by day in age and witha multitude of good qualities, just

9 as the new moon increases with its daily increments; he
acquired skill in archery, and learnt the Vedas in due order
and the sciences; then the noble boy entered on the period
of early manhood.

10 Once upon a time, while he who was fascinating in his
ways was roaming on Mount Mandara, he saw a lonely

ll maiden helpless with fearon the mountain’s slope. Seeing
him, at once she uttered the words “Save me!” “ Fear not!”
he exclaimed to her whose eyes were flooded with fear;

12 “Why is this?” said the high-souled youth in heroic speech,
Thereupon she gaye him this account, in words broken by
her palpitating breath.

The maiden spoke:

I3 1 am indeed the daughter of the Vidydé-dhara Indivara,
Mano-ram4 by name ; I was born of Maru-dhanvan's daughter.

14 Vibh4-vari daughter of the Vidyd-dhara Mandūra was my
friend, and Kalā-vati, the muni Péra’s daughter, was MY other

15 friend. With them I went to Kaildsa's lofty + slope. There

- I saw a certain muni; exceedingly thin was his face through

16 his austerities, wasted was his neck through hunger, vigour”
less was he, deep sunk were the pupils of his eyes. laughed

17 at him, and then he grew enraged and cursed me, in a very
infirm voice and with his shoot-like lower lip somewhat
quiveringt—“ Since thou hast laughed at me, O ignoble and

18 bad ascetic maiden, a Rákshasa shall therefore overcome hee
# Bva-roc'ibhir. ¢ For attamam read uttamam.


yah ?
t For kiūc'it-kalpitddhura-pallavak read kiñc'it-kampitádhara-pallava%


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


80


81


© Ati-karshitah ; or, “thon art not greatly attracted by austeri


MANO-RAMA’S STORY. 403


in no long time indeed.” But when the curse was pro-
nounced, my two friends upbraided the muni— Fie!
through thy want of forbearance, done is thy bréhman-hvod,
done all thine austerities ! Thou- art violated through thy
wrathfulness, thou art not greatly worn out * through aus-
terities. The dwelling-place of forbearance ig verily brah-
man-hood ; the controlling of wrath is the performance of
austerities.” Hearing this the sage of mēasureless glory
oursed both of them also,—*' Leprosy in the limbs shall light
on one of you, and consumption on the other,” Exactly as
he said, it befell them both immediately.

So on my track also a mightly Rikshasa is approaching.
Dost thou not hear his loud roar, as he thunders forth, even
close at hand? To-day is the third dev that he gvits not my
back. Now out of all the multitude of weapons I ‘give thee
the weapon which strikes to the hetirt; save me from this
Rikshasa, O high-minded youth! Rudra, who wields the
bow Pināka, himself gave it to Svayambhuva originally ;
Svāyambhuva gave it to Vašishtha the chief of the Siddhag ;
he moreover gave it to C‘itré4yudha, my mother's father;
he again, as father-in-law, himself gave it to my father as
a wedding gift. 1, though a maiden, learnt, O hero! from my
father how to use this Heart of all weapons, which destroys
every foe. This is it, take it quickly, the essence of all
weapons, then slay this vile-souled Rdkshasa who has come


into conflict with sacred spell.t


Markandeya spoke :

“Yea!” then quoth he, and she sprinkling water on it
give him the Heart of weapons together with the spell for
stopping its secret virtue.

Īn this interval appeared that Rakshasa, Theon- with apall-
ing aspect, and roaring with a loud roar, he came hastily on.
He looked at that demon who was exclaiming—'' Overpowered
by me, to what dost thou resort for deliverance ? Come


ties”


t Brahma-samágatam.,


37


39


40


CANTO LXIII.


speedily to me ! What good is tt to delay thy being devoured ?”


Seeing him at hand, Sva-rodis thought, “Let him seize her,
so will the great muni’s word become true with regard to her.”.
The Rakshasa approaching with haste seized the maiden of
beauteous waist, as she was piteously bewailing, “Save me,
Save me!” Then Sva-rodis enraged looked at the active and
most terrible weapon, and plunging it into that Rākshasa
looked on it with unwinking eyes. Vanquished thereby * the
night-stalking demon then quitted her and said—* Be gracious !
let the weapon be kept in peace, and hearken! I have been
delivered by thee, O most glorious hero! from a very grievous
curse, which was inflicted by wise and exceedingly fierce
Brahma-mitra. It is a benefit (none other greater can I
receive from thee, O illustrious hero !), whereby I have been
delivered from a great and most sore curse.”


Sva-ročis spoke :
Why wert thou cursed formerly by the high-souled muni


* Brahme-mitra, and what kind of curse was imprecated on thee ?


44


The Rākshasa spoke :


The brāhman Brahma-mitra had mastered the thirteen
sections of the Atharva Veda, and had just studied the Ayur-
veda which is divided into eight parts. AndI was well
known by the name Indivara ; I was the father of this maiden.
I was the son of the swordsman Nala-nébha king of the
Vidyā-dharas. And at first I besonght the muni Brahma-
mitra, “ Deign, adorable Sir!+ to communicate to me the
whole of the Ayur-veda.” But though entreated often by me
who remained bent with respect, he did not bestow on me the
science of the Ayur-veda, O hero: then indeed I gained the
science of the Ayur-veda, as he was communicating it to his
disciples, by rendering myself invisiblet, O sinless man. §
Now when the science was gained after a space of eight


# For taddbhibhttah read tadabhibhitah ? 4

+ For bhagavdn read bhagavan ? Or, for arhasi read arhuti ?
t For antardhdya-gena read antardīina-gena ?

§ For anadha read anagha,


45


46


47


48


49


50


öl


52


53


54


55


56


57


THE GANDHARVA INDfVARA'S STORY, 405


months, I gave way to excessive and repeated fits of langhter
out of my great delight. Recognizing me by the laughter,
the muni, enraged and with quivering neck spoke thus to
me in harsh words—‘ Since thou in invisible form, like a
Raksbasa, * hast snatched the science from me, O evil-minded
one, and despising me hast indulged in laughter; therefore
thou shalt be assuredly cast out as a terrible Rakshasa by-
my curse, O wicked one, after seven nights.” On his utter-
ing this, I propitiated him by prostrating myself before him
and by other acts of deference; the brahman with his mind
immediately softened, said to me again—‘ What I have
uttered will assuredly come to pass, O Gandharva ;- it can not
happen otherwise; but after becoming a Rakshasa, thou
shalt regain thy own form, when with memory dead and in
anger thou shalt wish to devour thy ownchild. Thou shalt
be turned into a night-stalking demon; when smarting with
the fire of thy child’s weapon, thou shalt again obtain thy
own consciousness, and recover thy own body, and likewise thy
own station in the Gandharva world.” Since such I am and
since I have been delivered by thee, O illustrious hero, from
this most fearful demon-condition, therefore perform my re-
quest. This maiden give I thee as wife, accept her; and
take, O high-minded man, the whole of the Ayur-veda with
its eight parts, which I acquired from beside that muni.


_ Markandeya spoke :

Having so spoken he, gleaming in heavenly raiment, be-
decked with garlands and ornaments, and bearing his pris-
tine heavenly body, bestowed the science. After bestowing
the science, he next proceeded to give his daughter. Then
the maiden spoke to her father who had regained his own form,
“ Although love + has sprung up exceedingly with me, even at
first sight, for this high-souled man, who is especially my
benefactor, O father; yet this maiden is my friend and that one al-
so, they ate afflicted with pain for my sake ; hence Ido not desire


* For rūkshasenaiva.rond rékahaseneva ? Ho was a Gandharvs then.


+ For anardgo read anurdgo ?


406
58


59


60


61


62


63


64


65


CANTO LXTIII,


to gratify myself in delights with this man. Such baseness
cannot be displayed even by men; how shall a woman like me
behave so with things pleasing to her disposition. Since such
Tam and since those two maidens are afflicted with pain for
my sake, O father, I will likewise remain in their pain,
with the fire of their grief.”


burnt


Sva-roéis spoke:


By the favour of the Ayur-veda I will make thy two friends


fresh again, removing thy great grief, O maiden with benuti.
ful waist.


Markandeya spoke:


Then Sva-ročis married that beauteous-eyed maiden, whom
her father himself gave, according to the rites on that moun-
tain. And having comforted * the proud maiden then given
away, the Gandharva departed’ then to his own city by a
heavenly course.

And then Sva-roc'is also, accompanied by the slender maiden,
went to that garden, where the pair of maidens dwelt speech-
less and diseased + through that curse. Then unconquered
Sva-ročis, knowing their condition accurately, brought them
both back to a healthy body by means of medicines and po-
tions which cure disease. Then the two maidens, moat re-
‘splendent, freed from disease, beautiful, rendered that moun-


tain more luminous f than the regions of thesky by their own
beauty.


Canto LXIV


at


About the Svdroc'isha Manvantara.


Vibhd-vart and Kald-vatt then tell Sva-roc'is their story,—and
he marries them both. re


* For abhi-idntyu read abhi-6dntvya ?


t Agaddturam ; compound adjective from a-gada and dtura.
1 Uj-jyoti; not in the dictionary, a


THE SPEECH OF THE MAIDENS TO SVA-ROC'IS. 407


Markandeya spoke:


1 Now the maiden, being thus freed from her disease and
filled with joy, spoke thus * to Sva-rodis—“ Hear my word,

2 Olord. I am the daughter of the Vidyā-dhara Mandira,
famed by name as Vibha-vari.t O my benefactor, I offer thee

3 my very self, do thou accept me. And I will give thee
knowledge, by which the utterances of all created things shall
become manifest to thee. Be thou favourably inclined!”


Markandeya spoke:

4 So be it!” said Sva-ročis, wise in righteousness. And then

the second maiden spoke these words—
5 A youthful brahma-čārin was my father, by name Pāra,
a brahmarshi, exceedingly illustrious, thoroughly learned in
6 the Vedas and Vedāūgas. Formerly in a spring-time, which
was charming by reason of the songs of the male koils,
an Apsaras known as Puñjiká-staná approached near him,
7 Then the noble muni was moved so that he could not but
speak of love. By their union I was born of her on this great
8 mountain. My mother abandoned me, a girl, all alone, in this
desolate forest on the earth’s.surface, which swarms with
9 snakes and wild beasts, and went away. Since then being
nourished daily by the moon's increasing phases, wliich cause
10 wane to wax againj, I have grown up, O best'of men. Hence
Kala-vati§ is the name which my high-souled father gave me
11 when he took me. My high-souled father, when solicited by a
Gandharva, did not give me who am beautiful of face || in
marriuge to him then, hence he was cursed J by Ali** the foe of


* For uvdc'eda read uvác'edam ?

t “The resplendent.”

f Kaldbhir varddhantfbhir ava-kshayam. The allusion appears to be to the
waxing of the moon after its waning.

§ “ Possessing the digits of the moon.”

|| For subhdnand read éubhdnand ?

4] For saptas rend šaptas. .

## Or, Ali, as the text may be read. This name is not in the diotionūry,
and I have not met with it elsewhere. Ai may however be taken RA an


408
12


18


14


15
16


17


18


19


1


CANTO LXIV,


the gods and perished*, I was about to destroy myself they
from excessive despair. Sambhu's wife Sati who is true to
her promises prevented me, by saying, ‘ Grieve not, beauteong.
browed maiden; thou shalt have an illustrious h


usband by
name Sva-rodis, and thy son by him shall be a Manu. And
all the Nidhist shall submissively obey thy command, and


shall give thee wealth recording to thy desire, O beauteoug
one! Take, my child, the knowledge by the power of which
thou shalt succeed; this knowledge is called Padmini, it ig
greatly worshipped by Mahš-padma” So spake to me
Daksha’s daughter Sati, who is devoted to truth. Thon art
Sva-ročis in sooth—the goddess will not speak amiss. I now
offer that knowledge and myself in my true form to thee who
hast given me life; do thou receive them with favour
beaming from thy face on me.”


Markandeya spoke:
“So be it!” said heto the maiden Kala-vati. The loving
glances of Vibhā-vari and Kald-vati urged him on to joy;
and he, lustrous as the immortals, then took the hands of both


in marriage, while heavenly musical instruments sounded
out and the Apsarases danced.


Canto LXV.


About the Svdroc'isha Manvantara.
Sva-roc'is lived in pleasure with his wives till aroused by a
conversation between two birds, and by a deer’s remarks.
- Markandeya spoke:


Then he, lustrous as the immortals, accompanied by his
wives, lived in pleasure on that high mountain where were


adjective meaning “idle, worthless ”, and the text rendered “ by a worthless
foe of the gods”, but this cannot refer to the Gandharva.

* This passage seems erroneous. Gandharvena cannot be taken with
pitrd (see verse 5) nor with devdrind,

+ See canto lxviii,


10


11


13


14


15


16


` is desired by these women,


HAPPINESS IN WEDDED LIFE. 409


charming woods and. cascades. The Nidhis,* being subject
through the knowledge Padmini, brought gems for every kind
of enjoyment, sweets and melodies, garlands, raiment,
ornaments, richly scented unguent, most brilliant golden
seats according to his desire, golden things (illustrious Sir!),
pots and vessels, and also beds of divers kinds arrayed with
heavenly coverings. Thus accompanied by them, he lived in
pleasure at his own liking on that fine mountain, perfumed
with heavenly odours and other fragrunce, and illuminated
with his lustre. And they enjoyed supreme delight, for that
they were with him, sporting on that high mountain even as
in Svarga.

A grey lag-gooset said to a hen-éakra-véka who was in
some water, being moved to desire at the dalliance and union
between him and those two wives—' Happy is this man,
exceeding merit has he, who in the heyday of youth enjoys
eagerly-desired delights with these darling wives. Young
men are worthy of praise, their wives are not of exceeding


‘beauty ; few are the wives and husbands of exceeding beauty


in the world! A man dearly longs for the women he loves ;
a woman desires to obtain a lover; most rare is it to find a
wedded pair rich in mutual affection. Happy is this man
whom his darlings long for; these women are indeed very
dear to him; verily, it is among the happy that mutual
affection exists!” Hearing this speech uttered by the grey
lag-goose, the hen-Gakra-vāka scarcely surprised in mind
spoke to her— “This man is not happy, because modesty
springs not from proximity with other women; he is enjoy-
ing one or other of the women, his mind does not dwell on


all of them. Since the heart’s affection has only one basis,


my friend, how then will this man be affectionato to several
wives? These women are not beloved by their husband, nor
is this husband beloved by them; these women are only just
an amusement as any other attendant might be. And if he
why then does he not quit his


* Soe canto lxviii. + Kala-hamet ; see page 80 note §.


52


-410


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


CANTO LXY,


life? He embraces some loved woman, the while he is in the
thoughts of some other loving woman. He is bartered at
the price of the bestowal of knowledge, as if he were a ser-
vant. Because of the excitements,* affection verily exists not
equally towards many women. O grey lag-goose! my hus-
band is happy, and I indeed am happy; he, for his mind is
fixed steadfastly on me alone, and I, for mine ison him
alone.”


MarMaudeya spoke :


Sva-ročis the unconguered, understanding the speech of
all living creatures, on hearing this was ashamed and pon-
dered, “it is indeed true, without any falsehood.”

After a hundred years had passed from that time, while
sporting on the great mountain, while sporting with his wives
around him, he saw a buck in front of him, with very glossy
and plump limbs, playing among a herd of does, and surrounded
with does shaped like he was, which were in the rutting time.t
The buck then said to the does who were sniffing with out-
stretched nostrils, “O ye charming does, one should behave with-
out bashfulness; but Iam not Sya-roéis, nor am I like him in
disposition, O pretty-eyed does! Many have no modesty; do
ye, who are such, go to him. Now as one female who follows
after many males isa laughing-stock among mankind, just
so is one male, who is gazed on by many females with lustful
glances. He suffers loss from day to day in his deeds of
righteousness ; and he is always attached to some other wife,
and addicted to other loves. Do ye love some other, who is
like that, who has that disposition, who turns away from the
future world; it will be well for you; I am not a rival of
Sva-ročis.”


* Pravartato,
t Ydsitddhih ; this appears to refer to the rntting season.


,


HE THREE SONS OF SVA-ROC'1S. 411


Canto LXVI.


——


About the Svdroc'isha Manvantara.


Sva-roc'is had three sons whom he settled in separate king-
doms, Vijaya ina city Vijaya in Kdma-rūpa, Meru-nanda in
Nanda-vatt in the North, and Prabhdva in Tāla in the South.—
One day he met the goddess of a forest, and had by her a son
Dyuti-mat Svdroc'isha, who became a Manu.—Sva-roc'is, being
again admonished by a conversation between two ducks, gives
himself up to a religious life and dies.

Markandeya spoke :
Thus were those does discarded by the buck. Sva-rocis,
2 hearing it, thought how he must have fallen; and he set
his mind on quitting those his wives, O best of munis, spoken
of as he had been by the hen-éakra-véka and the buck, and

3 despised as he was for his animal behaviour.* Yet on again

meeting with them, his love increased. Casting aside those

4 disparaging speeches he sported for six hundred years. But

while performing the works of righteousness without hind-
rance to righteousness, wise Sva-ročis continues to enjoy

_ the pleasures of sense with those wives.

B And then three sons wero born to Sva-roćis, Vijaya, and

6 Meru-nanda, and mighty Prabhāva; and Indivara’s daughter

Mano-ramé gave birth to Vijaya, Vibhd-vari to Meru-nanda,

7 and Kalé-vati to Prabhiva. And by the power of the

knowledge named Padmini,* which accomplishes all pleasures,

8 hetheir father built three cities for them. Now he gave a

noble city named Vijaya on a hill in Kāma-rūpaf in the

9 Eastern region to his son Vijaya at first; and he made

Mern-nanda’s city the famous one in the north, called Nanda-


+


* Mriga-c'aryd.

+ Sec canto lxviii.

t The western portion of Assam.
the Himalayas in the North, or in tho Garo and Khasia hills on the South ;


neither goems a likely situation for an ancient Hindu capital.


A town ona hill thore can only be in


412 |


10


11


12


13


l4


15


16


17


18


19


CANTO LXVI.


vati,* which is begirt with lofty ramparts and walls;


29 , and he
made Kalé-vati’s son Prabhiva to dwell in the famous city
Tāla* which is situated in the Southern region. Having


thus settled his sons in their cities, he, the manly hero, sported
with those his wives in charming highlands.

_ Now once upon a time he went to the forest for sport With
bow in hand. Seeing a boar a long distance off, he drew
his bow; and then a certain doe approached him and said,
«At me let the arrow be shot; show me this favour,” again
and again; “What need hast thou to slay him now? lay me
low quickly; an arrow discharged by thee will free me from
suffering.”


Sva-roćis spoke :


I do not perceive thy body to be diseased. What then is the
reason that thou wouldest quit thy life ?


The doe spoke :


Without him on whom, though his heart is devoted to
other females, my mind has fixed her seat, I must die; what
other remedy is there in this life ?


Sva-roģis spoke :

Who would not love thee, timid one? Or with whom art
thou in love, that failing to gain him thou resolvest to quit
thy life P

The doe spoke:
It is thee I desire; be welfare thine! Thou hast captivated


my heart. HenceI choose death, let the arrow be dis-
charged at me.


Sva-roéis spoke :
Thou art a doe with eyes always in motion; I beara


* This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elaewhere. Perhaps
it may be connected with the river Nandd, and the people Nandus, 800 7
page 383 note ||.

t Or Parantāla; neither seems to be in the dictionary, nor haye I found
any reference to them elsewhere,


20


21
22


23


24


25
26


BIRTH OF MANU SVĀROC'ISHA. 418


human form; how shall there be union between such as me
and thee ?


The doe spoke:


If thy mind has any regard for me, do thon embrace me;
or if thou dost think good, I will do as thou desirest. I
shall be supremely honoured by thee, Sir, such as thou art.


Markandeya spoke:

Sva-ročis then embraced the doe; and as soon as he em-
braced her, she assumed a heavenly body. Then filled with
astonishment said he, ‘‘ Who art thou?” And she told him
this story in words rendered slow by love and modesty.—
“Ihave been besought by the gods, I the goddess of this
forest, with the demand that ‘Verily a Manu must be begotten
of me by thee” O magnanimous man! Beget that son, who
shall guard the terrestrial world, of me who am full of
love. I speak to thee according to the gods” * behest!”


Markandeya spoke :

Forthwith he begat in her a son marked with every aus-
picious mark, full of energy like unto himself. And as soon
as he was born, heavenly instruments of music sounded forth,
the Gandharva princes sang, and bands of Apsarases danced ;
the celestial elephants bedewed him with drops of water,
and the rishis rich in austerities and the gods scattered also
a shower of flowersaround. Beholding his splendour his father
himself bestowed on him the name Dyuti-mat, since the
regions of. the sky were illuminated by his splendour. The
boy named Dyuti-mat possessed grent strength and valour ;
since he was son of Sva-ročis, he became known us Svāročisha.

Sva-ročis also once, while roaming by a charming mountain
cascade, saw a duck attended by his mate. He said then to
his mate, who was full of continuous longings, — “ Restrain
thyself, I have played with thee full long. What dost thou need
with pleasures at all times? Old age has fallen on us, the


* For davdndm rond devdndm,


414


83


36


37


-38


39


40


41


42


CANTO LXVI.


time to relinquish them has come to me and thec also, O
water-roamer ! ”


The female duck replied:


What time is unfit for pleasures ? The world isall composed
of pleasures. Brūhmans with souls subdued perform sacri-
fices in order to get pleasures. Moreover people of discri-
mination, being eager for pleasures experienced and not yet
experienced, both give alms and perform the full round of
righteous acts. Why then dost thou not wish for pleasures ?
Pleasure is the reward of effort among men who have dis-
crimination and among brute animals, how much more among
those who have subdued their souls ?


k The duck spoke:


The mind of those who are not attached to pleasures is
with the Supreme Soul. And when will it be so among those
who have contracted attachments towards relatives? Orea-
tures perish when attached to son, friend and wife, just as
aged wild elephants when sunk in lake or mire or sea. Or
dost thou not see, lady, how Svn-ročdis, in whom attachments
have grown up and who has been devoted to his lusts
from his boyhood, has sunk in the watery mire of affection P
Sva-ročis' mind was exceedingly sunk in his wives in his
youth, now in his sons and grandsons; whence will it obtain
deliverance ? I am not the equal of Sva-rodis, nor am I one
to be distressed by females, O water-ronmer! I possess also
discrimination in pleasures, and I have desisted ther ron now,


Mārkaņdeyn spoke:


Sva-roéis hearing this speech from a bird felt disturbed in
mind; taking his wives he departed to another grove to prat-
tise austerities. After performing severe austerities there
with his wives, he, lofty in mind, reached the pure worlds
with every stain removed.


SVAROC’ISHA’S MANVANTARA. 415


Canto LXVII.


The Story of Svdroc'isha concluded.


Mérkandeya mentions the gods, rishis and kings in the Svdroc'isha
Manvantara.
Markandeya spoke :

1 Then the adorable god made the Prajapati named Svaro-
čisha Dyuti-mat a Manu. Listen to his Manv-antdra; who

2 were the gods during that period, who were the munis and
their sons, who were the princes, listen while I tell of them,
O Kraushtuki.

3 The gods in that period were the Pārāvatas and also the
Tushitas. O brāhman; and in Svāročisha's period the

4 Indra was famed as Vipas-čit. Urja, Tamba and Prana,
Dattoli and Rishabha, Nisčara and C drva-virat were the seven

5 rishis in that period. And seven sons had that high souled
Manu, C’aitra, Kim-purusha, &o., very valiant, guardians of

6 theearth. So long as his Manv-ontara lasted, all this earth
was enjoyed among the outspreadings of his family. That
was the second Manv-antara.

7 Now the man who hears of Sva-roéis’ deeds and Svéro-
éisha’s birth, and believes them, is delivered from his sins.


Canto LXVIII.


A description of the Nidhis.* i
Márkandeya tells of the knowledge called Padmini, of the
eight Nidhis connected with it, and of the influences which they
exercise over men.
Kraushtuki spoke:
1 Adorable Sir! thou hast related it all fully to me, both
Sva-roéis’ deeds and Svaroéisha’s birth. Now tell me at


$ ea or
“These are demi-goda who proside over and influence men’s propousitics,


pursuits, pleasures, tastes, če.


416
2


3


14


15


CANTO LXVIII.


length about the knowledge named Padmini which compasses
all pleasures, and about the Nidhis who are allied thereto,
and about the nature of the eight Nidhis who exist, and the
composition of their wealth. I desire to hear it expounded
by thee thoroughly, O guru!


Markandeya spoke :


The knowledge which is named Padmini has Lakshmi for
its deity, and the Nidhis for its supporters. Listen while I
tell thee of it. The Nidhis therein are Padma and Mahé-
padma, and Makara, and Kaééhapa, Mukunda and Nandaka,
Nila, and Sankha is the eighth Nidhi. These live in real
good-fortune* ; verily perfection springs from them. These
eight Nidhis indeed have been proclaimed to thee, O Kraush-
tukit. By means of the gods’ favour and by attendance on
good men a man’s wealth is always watched over by them,
O muni. Listen while I tell thee what their nature is like.

First, the Nidhi named Padma belongs, O brahman, to
Maya,t to his son, and to the sons and grandsons of his son
perpetually. And a man dominated thereby may become the
perfection of politeness, since this Nidhi is supported by good-
ness, yields great enjoyment and is sincere. And he amasses
immense quantities of gold, silver, copper and other metals,
aud buys and sells them; he also makes sacrifices, and be-
stows the sacred fee ; and he causes a palace to be built and
temples for the gods, applying his mind thereto.

And another Nidhi who is supported by goodness is
known as Maha-padma. He has goodness for his chief quality.
And a man dominated thereby amasses rubies and other gems,
pearls and coral, and buys and sells them; and he gives to
those whose disposition is towards religious devotion, and
has dwellings constructed for them ; and he himself develops
into that disposition, And from him are born others of simi-


* Or, prosperity; satydm riddhau.


t


Tava kroshtuke ; this violates the metre ; read instead kraushļuke tava ?


f Maya was an Asura, the great artificer of the Dánavas, and constracted
a magnificent Court for the Pūņdavas; see Mah4-Bhérata, Sabht-P.,
i and iii,


16
17
18
19
20


21
22


23
24
25


26


DESCRIPTION OF THE NIDHIS. 417


lar disposition in the descent of sons and grandsons, This
Nidhi comes only from prior good-fortune *, and does not depart
for seven generations,

The Nidhi who is composed of darkness+ is named
Makara. And a man on whom he looksf is indeed born
characterized chiefly by ignorance, though good in disposi-
tion. He gathers together arrows, swords, spears and. bows,
and shields and rope, and attains to friendship with kings ;
and he gives to kings who occupy themselves with heroic
deeds, and to those whom they esteem; and he finds plea-
sure in buying and selling weapons and in nothing else.
This Nidhi belongs to a man singly, and does not descend to
his progery. Such aman may meet§ death for the sake of
wealth at the hands of robbers and also in battle.

And the-man on whom the Nidhi, who zs called Kaééhapa,
casts his eye is dominated by ignorance, because that Nidhi
is characterized by darkness; and he performs all the rules
of lifeļ| along with men who have acquired merit, and makes
all those rules consist in mere acts; he confides in no one.
Just as a tortoise draws all its limbs in, so drawing in all his
thoughts while unharmed he remains with diffuse mind.
He gives not nor does’ he enjoy, being afraid of destruction
thereby; he makes his resting-place on the earth. That
Nidhi also is limited to men singly.

And another Nidhi, who is named Mukunda, is composed
of the quality of pnssion.** The man on whom he looks be-
comes of the same quality, O brahman. He gathers together
lutes,- flutes and drums, and any musical instrument of per-
cussion; he bestows wealth on singers and dancers, and on
minstrels, bards, sycophants and those who are skilled in


* For pirudrddha-mdtrah the Bombay Edition reads purvarddhi-mdtraļ,


which I have adopted.
ft Or ignorance; támasa.


t Ava-lokita ; frequently used-in this canto.
§ For savraje read sa vrajet ?


“|| Vyavakāra.


4 Ayata-mdnasah; or better dyatta-mdnasah “ with submissive mind” ?
_** Rajas.


53


418 CANTO LXVHI,


27 drama; he bestows pleasures on them da


enjoys life along with those companions, O brāhman ; anā he
finds no delight in women of loose character, nor with other

28 folk of that kind. He forms a single union, the man to whom
this Nidhi resorts. _


And composed of passion and darkness is another great
29 Nidhi called Nauda. The man on whom he looks attains to


eminent firmness.* He gathers together all kinds of miner-
als and precious stones and trade-wares,t grain and other
_ articles, and also buys and sells the same ;


he is the support
31 of his:own family and of each visitor and guest; he does not


brook disrespectful language although
O great muni!


y and night, and


it be very slight,
and when praised he entertains strong.affec-
tion and proffers it; and whatever object of desire he wants,
he has recourse to tenderness to obtain it. He has many
wives, who are prolific and very beautiful to his delight, And
the Nidhi Nanda passes down to seven generations, and when
strongly developed passes on to the next descendant with an
eighth portion, O best of men! and he bestows length of
life on all men. Nanda verily provides support to kinsmen
indeed, and to those guests who have arrived from afar; and
he is not held in honour in the next world ; affection does
not belong to him, but is born among those who dwell together;
he causes laxity among those who were former friends, and
affection with others.

Moreover the great Nidhi who contains goodness and
passion is termed Ļila. A man united with him may become
of that disposition. He leads a man to collect clothing, cotton
cloth, grain and other finit and flowers, also pearls, coral,
and shells, and small shells and other similar things, timber
and other materials and whatever else is produced in water,
39 O muni; he leads him to buy and sell other things. In

nothing else does his mind delight; and he constructs ponds


33


34


85


86


87


38


* Or solidity: stambha.

t For puņya-dhūnyddikasya read panya-dhdnyddikasya ? Se

t For sa-lla-safijnas read sa Ula-saijiias? He is also called Néla in ver
above and verse 41 below.


40


41


43


44


45


46


DESCRIPTION OF THE NIDHIS. 419


and tanks and places for pleasure; and such a man makes
embankments across rivers and plants trees ; and after
enjoying unguents, flowers and other objects of delight he is
born again. And this Nidhi named Nila persists for three
generations.

And composed of passion and darkness is another Nidhi
who is named Snūkha. And the man who is lord of this
Nidhi is led by him to possess the same qualities, O bréhman,
He exists in a man singly, and does not pass on to another
generation. Listen, O Kraushtuki, to the character of a mau
who possesses the Nidhi Saūkha. Iż is when quite alone that
he enjoys food and clothing such as he himself has made;
his family eat wretched food and wear no bright clothing;
he makes no gift to friend, wife, brother, son, daughter-in-
law and other relatives. Always intent on his own nourish-
ment is the man who possesses Saikha.

Thus these Nidhis have been described, the deities of wealth
among men. Whien their looks are blended, the blended
Nidhis produce results according to their natures, just as each
nature described above springs indeed from the aspect of a
particular Nidhi. And in sovereignty over them all sits
Lakshmi, who ts this knowledge called Padmini of the dvijas.


Canto LXIX.


About the Auttána* Manv-untara.

King Utiama banished his queen to a forest because of her
persistent unloving behaviour.—A bréhman whose wife had been
carried off invokes the king’s help to recover her.—The king in
searching for her reaches a muni's hermitage, and is censured
by the muni for his conduct to the queen.

Kraushtuki spoke:
1. O brāhman, thou hast described to me the Svarodisha


* This should be Auttoma; see canto liii, verse 7, und lxxii, verse 39. It
seems to be a mistake caused by the fact that Uttama was son of (ttanu-pdda,
fee verse 3, It occursin the next canto, bnt is corrected in canto lxxi.


420


10


12


13


14


CANTO LXIX.


mauy-antara at length and also the eight Nidhis, whom I
asked about. Thou didst tell me of the Svāyambhuva many.
antara before that. Tell me of the third many-antara, which
is named after Uttama,*
Markandeya spoke:

There was a son of Uttāna-pāda named Uttama, son of
Su-rudi,t famous, great in strength and valour, and righteous
of soul, and magnanimous, a monarch rich in valour. Excell-
ing all created beings he shone in valour like the sun. He
was the same both to foe and friend, to his city and to his
son, being one who understood righteousness ; and he was like
Yamato the wicked, and like Soma to the good, O great muni!
A knower of righteousness, Uttdna-pāda's son Uttama
married a maiden of Babhru’s race named Bahulh, as supreme
Indra married famous Sa¢i. His mind was always exceedingly
affectionate to her, O noble brdhman,{ just as is the moon's
mind which has fixed its abode in Rohini. Verily his mind
felt no attachment to any other object; in sleep also that
King’s mind rested on her. And the king at the very sight
of her, who was most beautiful in every limb, was continually
touch'ng her body, and at the touch of her body he became
one with her. $ The king's words, although kindly, caused
annoyance to her ears, and she deemed his special respect as
humiliation from him. She contemned a garland when given
by him, and his beautiful ornaments ;-.and she arose as if
pained in body when he drank the choice nectar of her lips;
and only a moment did the king hold her by the hand when
he enjoyed her. She ate very little food, O brábman, and
that with no great delight. Thus she was not favourable to
the magnanimous king who was favourable to her; yet move
abundant and excessive love did the king show.

Now once the king, when engaged in drinking, respectfully


* Auttama would be preferable, as he was the Manu, see canto Ixxii, vers?
89 ; read then kathayauttama-saiijūstam for kathayottama-satījītitam ?

+ Or Su-ruc’t, a feminine name.

t For dvija-varyd read dvija-varya 7

§ Tan-mayā.


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


25


26


KING UTTAMA BANISHED HIS QUEEN. 421


caused that wilful queen to hold a drinking cup which
had been cleansed with wine, he being then surrounded with
accomplished attendants * who were melodious in their singing,
and who were assiduously singing and chanting while kings
looked on; but she does not wish to take that cup, turning
her face away from it, in the sight of the kings. Thereat
the king was enraged. Breathing hard like a serpent, when
set at nought by his dear queen, as if a husband not dear
to her, he called the door-keeper and said,—‘‘ O door-keeper !
Take this lady of evil heart toa desolate forest and abandon
her forthwith! Deliberate thou not on this my command!”
Markandeya spoke:

Thereupon the door-keeper, deeming the king’s word was
not to be questioned, mounted the beautiful-browed lady in a
chariot and left her in a forest. And she, when abandoned
thus by the king in the forest and being away from his sight,.
held he had done her the greatest favour. And king Autta-
na-padi, with soul and mind burning with the anguish of love
for her, took no other wife. He remembered her who was
beauteous in every limb, day and night bereft of ease, and
ruled his kingdom, governin g his people righteously.

While he ruled his people, as a father his own children,
a certain brihman suffering in mind arrived and spoke
thus—

The brāhman spoke :

O Mahé4-vaja! in grievous suffering am I; hearken while I
speak. Men’s deliverance from pain comes from no where
but the king! Some one carried off my wife by night while
I slept, without unlocking the house door. Deign to bring
her back to me.

The king spoke:

Knowest thou not, O brahman, who carried her off or
where has she been taken? With whom shall I stvive in
fight? or whence shall I bring her back ?


* Vdra-mukhyaih; the dictionary gives only the fen, vara-mukhyd, “a


royal courtezan.”


29


30


31


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


CANTO LXIX.


The bréhman spoke :

While I slept just as I was, with the door fastened, O king,
why and by whom my wife was carried off—this thon, Sir,
knowest. Thou art our guardian, O king, whose due is the
levy of a sixth part of our wealth.* Therefore men sleep
at night, freed from anxiety about justice.


The king spoke :
Thave not seen thy wife. Tell me what is she like in
body, and what is her age; and of what disposition is the
brahman lady ?


The brahman spoke :

Sharp-eyed is she, very tall, short-armed, thin-faced,
ungainly inform, O king. I defame her not by this description;
very harsh in speech, and ungentle is she in disposition,
O king—thus I have described my wife ; she is a do-nothing,
unpleasant in look, and she has slightly passed early woman-
hood, O king. Such is my wife in form ; true is this I have
spoken.

The king spoke :

Enough hast thou had of her, O brāhman. I will give
thee another wife. An excellent wife tends to one’s happiness,
such aone as that is verily a source of pain. Bodily beanty
consists in healthfulness,+ O brāhman, its cause is a noble
disposition. She who has neither beauty nor good disposition
should be abandoned for that very reason.

The brāhmān spoke :

“A wife must be guarded,” O king—such is our highest
divine teaching.: When a wife is guarded, the offspring is guar-
ded. For the Soul f is born in her, hence she must be guarded,
Oking. When the offspring is guarded, the Soul is guarded.
When she is not guarded, there will arise confusion among
the castes; that will hurl one’s forefathers down from
Svarga, O king. AndI may have loss of righteousness from


* For shaddgdddnu read shud-bhdgdddna? See verse 39. i
+ There is a play on words here, kalydnf, “ an excellent (wife),” and kaly’,
‘in healthfulness.”” t Or, one’s self; dimd,


39


40


46


KING UTTAMA SEEKS A LOST RRAHMAN WOMAN, 423


day to-day, while I remain wifeless; and that, through the
destruction of the perpetual ceremonies, will tend to my down-
fall. And in her will be my offspring, O king. She will
give thee the sixth part; she will be a cause of righteousness.
For that reason I have declared this to thee. Bring back my
wife who has been carried off, my lord, since your honour is
placed supreme for our protection.
Markandeya spoke :

The king, on hearing him so speak, took thought, and
mounted his great chariot which was furnished with every
useful requisite. Hither and thither he wandered over the
earth with that brdhmax, and saw a fine hermitage of ascetics
in a large forest ; and alighting there he entered and saw a
muni, seated on a silken cushion, and blazing as it were with
splendour. Seeing the king arrived, he rose in haste, and
welcoming him with full respect commanded his disciple to
bring the arghya offering. His disciple said to him quietly
—‘' Why should the arghya be given to him, O muni? Think
well of it and command me, for I carry out thy command.”
Then the brahman being acquainted with the king’s history,


__with self-possession did him respect in conversation and by


47


49


50


öl


giving him a seat.
The rishi spoke :

Why hast thou come here, Sir; and what dost thou wish
to do? I know thee, O king, to be Uttdna-pāda's son Uttama.

The king spoke:

A brāhman's wife was carried off from his house by some
one whose person is unknown, O muni: to seek her I have
come here. Deign,adorable Sir, in compassion to tell me, who
have reached thy honae and am prostrate before thee, what


"T ask thee!


The rishi spoke :
Ask me, O king, without fear what thou must ask. I will
tell thee truthfully if I ought to tell it thee.
The king spoke :
Why is the arghya offering kept back, which thou wast pre-


424


52
53
54,


_55


56


57


58


59


6U


61


CANTO LXIX.


pared to give me on first seeing „me on my arr


ival at thy
house, O muni?


The rishi spoke: `

When through agitation at the sight of thee,
manded this disciple to give it, then I was cautioned by him,
Through my favour he knows the future in this world, ag
I know both the past and the present thoroughly. When he
said, “Consider and give thy order,” then I also knew it;
hence I did not give thee the arghya according to precept,
Truly O king, thou art worthy of the arghya and thou belongest
to the race of Svéyambhuva; nevertheless we deem thee
Uttama not fit for the arghya.


O king, I com.


: The king spoke:

What then have I done, O brāhman, whether wittingly or
unwittingly, that arriving after a long time I am not worthy
of the arghya from thee ?

The riski spoke :

Hast thou forgotten, both that thou didst abandon thy
wife in the forest, and that along with her thou didst abandon.
all thy righteousness, O king. Through neglect of religious
acts a man becomes unfit to be touched by his adherents, like
one on whom ordure and urine have been showered; * thou
hast neglected an act of permanent observance. Just as
a complaisant wife must bear with her husband: though
he be of bad disposition, so a wife although of bad dispo-
sition must be cherished by her husband, O king. Ungracious
indeed was that brāhman's wife who was carried off; never-
theless he, being a lover of righteousness, very much excels f
thee, O king. Thon establishest other men in their proper
ways of righteousness when they swerve therefrom, O king.
What other person will establish thee when thou swervest
from thy righteousness ?


* YVdrshikt, a noun, not given in the diotionary; it must apparently. mean
“a shower.” Ā 7:

t Ud-ydti-tardm. The only meanings assigned to ud-ydéin the dictionary
are, “ to go up or ont, to rise, originate,” —


KING UTTAMA FINDS THE BRAHMAN WOMAN. 425


Markandeya spoke:
62 - A gazing-stock was the king when thus addressed by the


wise rishi; and saying “So be it!” he enquired about the
63 brāhmans wife who -had been carried of—“ Adorable Sir,


-- who has taken away the brdhman’s wife, or where is she?
Thou Sir knowest unerringly the past and the future in
this world.”

The pishi spoke:
64 A Rakshasa named Valaka, son of Adri, has captured her,
and thou shall see her now in Utpalavataka forest, O king.
65 Go, unite the brāhman with his wife quickly. Let him not
become a seat of sin as thon art day after day.


Canto LXX,


About the Auttdna * Manv-antara


King Uttama finds'the brākmavs wife in the forest and ts
courteously received by the Rékshasa, who says he carried her
off in order to impair the brdhman’s religious merit.—At the
king's request the Rdkshasa consumes her evil disposition and
restores her to her husband.

Markandeya spoke:
1 Then the king prostrated himself before the great muni,
and mounted his chariot, and went to the forest Utpalāvata
2 mentioned by him. And the king saw t the bréhman’s wife,
in appearance such as her husband described her, cating the
3 fruit. of the bel tree; and asked—“ How didst thou come to


* This should be Auttama, see page 419, note *.

+ For daddréa read dadaréa.

t Sit-phala, the fruit of the bilva or milua tree, Ægle marmelos, and also the
tree itself. It is a pretty large tree, 2 native of the mountninons parts of
the East coast, and also found in the low lands; its” frnit is considered
“ nutritious, warm, cathartio; in taste delicious; in fragrance exquisite ”—
Roxburgh's Flora Indica, vol II. 579-80. See page 25 note *; but I have
made an error there in assigning the name bel-phul to this tree. Bel-phtil
is the name of the double Arabian jasmine, Jasminum Zambac, Roxb. (I. 88)
or J, Sambac, Oliver.: This jasmine is a shrub with delightfully fragrant white


-54


426


10


12


13


CANTO LXX.


this forest, lady? tell me plainly; art thon the wife of
Su-sarman Vaisali ? *
The brāhman woman spoke :

I am daughter of the brihman Ati-rātra, who dwells in the
forest, and wife of Viśála’s son whose name thou hast uttered:
Being such, I was carried off by the evil-minded Rikshasa
Valaka, while asleep at the extremity of my house, and parted
from my brothers and mother. May that Rūkshasa become
ashes, by whom I have been parted thus from my mother,
brothers and other relatives! Here I remain in great affliction.
Bringing me to this very dense forest he has cast me off.
I know not what is the reason he neither has intercourse with
me nor devours me.

The king spoke:
Perchance thou knowest, where has the Rakshasa gone
after leaving thee? I have been sent here by thy husband
indeed, O brāhman lady.


The brāhman woman spoke:

iThe night-stalking demox stands at the edge of this very

forest. Enter and see him, Sir, if thou dost not fear him.
Markandeya spoke : ,

"Then he entered by the path that she showed, and saw the
Rākshasa attended by his retinue. Then the Rékshasa hurry-
ing, the moment he saw him, touching the earth with his
head from afar indeed, approached his feet.


The Rakshasa spoke :

Thou hast done me great favour in that thou hast come
to my abode here. Give me thy command. What shall I do,
such as [ um here? I dwell within thy country. Accept thou
this arghya offering, and let this seat be placed for thee. We
are servants,.thou, Sir, art master ; command me firmly.


flowers, and is in common cultivation. Its Sanskrit name is mallikd, and algo
saptald ; and bel-phúl is the common modern name both for the flower and
for the plant itself. It has numerous other vernacular names, and Roxburgh
says bela is one of them, but this seems doubtful,

# Son of Viséla ; see next verse,


14


18


19


20


21


22


23


24,


* There appears to be a mista
of kritam eva tvayd ? or else sarv!
--unless krita-vén is understood in the second half o
- + Dvijah seems preferable to dvija.
“$ Vaikalyam, “impaired or mutil


KING UTTAMA CONVERSES WITH A RAKSHASA, 427


The king spoke:

Thou hast done everything, even every rite due to a guest. *
Why hast thou brought the brūhman's wife here, O night-
stalker ? She is not comely ; there are others comely, if thou
didst carry her off for a wife: if to devour her, why hast thou
not eaten her? Tell me this.


The Rakshasa spoke :

We do not feed on men; such are other Rikshasas. But we
eat the fruit that springs from a good deed, O king; and we
consume the natural disposition of men and women, being
treated with disrespect, and yet honoured; we are not eaters
of living creatures. When we have eaten the patience of
men, they become enraged; and when we have eaten their
evil nature, they also become virtuous. We have Rākshasis
who are fascinating, rivalling the Apsarases in beauty, (0)
king, while they are witk us, how should we delight in
the females of mankind ?

The king spoke :

If she is not for sensual enjoyment nor for food, O night-
roamer, why then didst thou enter the brāhman's house and
carry her off ?

The Rakshasa spoke:

That excellent brāhman, learned in spells, keeps on expelling
me, when I go to sacrifice after sacrifice, by uttering spells that
destroy Rikshasas, O king. By reason of his spelle and ex-
pulsive rites we were a-hungered ; where shall we go? that
bréhmant is the priest at every sacrifice, Therefore we
inflicted this damagef on him; without a wife » man becomes
unfit to perform sacrifices.

Markandeya spoke :

At his announcement of the high-minded bréhman’s im-

ko in this line, read kritavdn eva tvam instead


á evdtithi-kriydh for sarudm evdtithi-kriydm ?
f the line.


ated condition.”


428


25


26


27


28


32


33


34


CANTO LXX.


paired condition the king became exceeding]
thinking * While ho speaks of the brihman's impaired condi.
tion, it is me indeed he censures. That best of munis also
said I was unworthy of the argha offering. As the Rūkshasa
also has spoken to me of that brāhman's impaired condition, I


being in like plight am placed in a great strait, because I
am wifeless.”


y dejected then,


Markandeya’ spoke :
While he thus thought, O muni, the Rakshasa spoke again
to the king, bowing in obeisance and placing his hands to-
gether respectfrlly—O king, favour with thy command


me, thy servant, prostrate before thee *, a dweller within thy
realm.”


The king spoke :

Since thou hast said, O night-roamer—“ We feed on a per-
son's disposition,” hear then from me what deed we solicit.
Do thou consume this bráhman woman’s evil disposition this
day; since she will have her evil disposition eaten by thee,
she may then become good in behaviour. Take her to his
house whose wife she is, O night-roamer. When this is done,
thou hast done all for me who am come as a guest to thy


-house.


Markandeya spoke :

Thereupon the Rakshasa, entering within her though his
own faculty of illusion, devoured her evil disposition by his
own power at the king’s command. Being rid entirely of
that very violent evil disposition that brāhmān's wife said
to the king—“ By the maturing of the fruit of my own


_ actions I was separated from that magnanimous man, my


35


36


husband ; this night-roaming demon was the cause thereof.
He is not in fault, nor that magnanimous man, my husband;
mine in truth was the fault, no one else's. A good deed is
verily enjoyed. In some former life I separated myself from
some husband ; that same separation+ has been encountered


* For tram rend tram ?
t Or perhaps dosha, “fault,” shonld be understood.


37


38


39


4


THE BRAHMAN WOMAN RESTORED TO HER HUSBAND. 429


again even by me.* What fault ts there in this magnanim-
ous man?”
The Rakshasa spoke :

J will cause her to reach her husband’s house at thy com-
mand, my lord. Enjoin me whatever else should be done for
thee, O king!

The king spoke:

When this is done, thou hast done all forme, O night-
roamer. And thou must come, O hero, at the time of action
when I recall thee to mind. t

Markandeya spoke :

“So be it!” then guoth the Rakshasa,- and taking the
bráhman woman conveyed her, purified then by the removal
of her evil disposition, to her husband’s house.


Canto LXXI.


About the Auttama Manv-antara.

King Uttama visits the rishi, learns his queen has been taken
to Pdtéla by a Ndga king, who then curses his daughter for
hiding the queen from him—and he is also told his unhappy
married life was caused by adverse planetary influence.

Markandeya spoke:

Now the king, after despatching the woman to her husband’s
house, sighed and thought, “ What good deed may there be
in this? The high-minded muni declared I was wretched
because of my unfitness for the arghya offering ; and this
night-roaming demon spoke of ‘impaired condition’ with
reference to the brāhman. Being such, what shall I do,
for I abandoned her, my wife? Or shall I enquire of that
best of munis who has the eye of knowledge Ine

Thus pondered the king, and mounting the chariot went
where dwelt the great muni, righteous in soul, who knew the


: 5 three periods of time. And descending from the chariot he


* Or perhaps for maydpy-upagatak we should rend mayy-dpy-wpagatah ?
+ For c'ate rend tvayd, in order to make œ pronoun agreeing with
smritena ? See canta lxxii, verses 16 and 16.


430


1


10


11


12


13


14


l5


16


CANTO LXXT.


approached and- prostrated himself before that muni, and
related how happened his meeting with the Rákshasa, ang
his interview with the bráhman woman, and the removal of
her evil disposition,* and her despatch to her husband’s
house, and what was his business in coming back.

The rishi spoke :

I knew this before, which thou hast done, O king, and
the whole of thy business in coming back to me. Ask me
here “ what must I do?” with anxious mind; and since
thou art come, Ū king, lwar what thou must do, A wife
is a potent cause of righteousness, wealth and love among
men; and in particular one who forsakes her has in sooth
abandoned righteousness. A wifeless man, O king, is not
fit for his own works, be he brāhman or kshatriya, vaigya or
even šūdra, O king. No brilliant deed didst thou do, Sir,
when thou didst abandon thy wife; for as women must not
forsake a husband, so men must not forsake a wife.

The king spoke :

Adorable Sir, what shall I do, such as I am? It was the
maturing of my actions, that I abandoned her because she
was not favourably disposed to me while I was favourable
to her Whatever one does, that one endures with one’s
mind burning, even that with one’s inmost soul terrified at
the pain of separation thereby, adorable Sir. But now I know
not where she when abandoned in the forest has gone, or
whether she has been devoured by lions, tigers and night-
roaming beasts in the forest.

The rishi spoke :

She has not been devoured by lions or tigers or night-
roaming beasts, O king, but she is now in Rasātala with un-
blemished character,

The king spoke :

Who conveyed her to Pūtāla ? How dwells she there
uncorrupted ? Most wonderful is this, O brāhman; deign to
tell me of it as it happened.


* For doļ-stlydpagamar read dauh-stlydpagamar ?


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


PLANETARY INFLUENCES AGAINST KING UTTAMA. 431


The pishi spoke:

In Pátála is a Naga king and he is famed as Kapotaka.
He saw her when abandoned by thee she was wandering
in the great forest. Enamoured of her then he declared his
object and carried the beautiful young queen to Pātāla, O
king. Now that wise Naga king has a beautiful-browed
daughter named Nanda, O king, and a charming wife. That
daughter saw thy beautiful queen, and thinking, “ this bright
lady will become a rival wife to my mother,” brought her to
her own house and concealed her in the women’s apartments.
But Nandā, when entreated, continually refuses to answer the
king ; then the father cursed her his daughter that she should
become dumb. Thus did he curse his daughter; and; she,
thy wife, remains there, O king, carried off by that Naga king,
detained by his daughter, and still chaste. ac

Markandeya spoke : fh i

Rejoicing greatly thereat, the king asked the eminent
bráhman * what was the reason of his ill-fortune with regard
to his darling wife. i

The king spoke:

‘Adorable Sir! I meet with the utmost affection froth. all
the world, what then is the reason, why my own wife is not
very tender? On the one hand I dearly long for her even
beyond my own life, O great muni, and on the other she
is ill-disposed towards me. Say, what is the reason, (0)
bráhman,

The rishi spoke : .

When thou didst take her hand in marriage, the Sun and
Mars and Saturn looked on thee, and Venus and Jupiter
looked on thy wife. At that moment the moon was favour-
able to thee, and Mercury to her. Those two groups of
planets are mutually hostile; hence they have been exceed-
ingly adverse to thee, O king. Go then; attended by thy


# Tho text reads dvija-varjyam. But dvija-varyam, which the Bombay edition
reads, is much better and I have adopted it; see rdja-varyya in canto Ixxii,
verse 2, The translation of the text would be “ putting aside brūhmans.”


432


29


CANTO LXXII.


wife, rule the earth in thy righteousness,


and Perform
every rite that pertains to righteousness !


Markandeya spoke :
At this exhortation king Uttama prostrated himself before
the muni, and then mounting his chariot went to his own city.


Canto LXXII.


About the Auttama Manv-antara.


The brdhman performs a sacrifice which turns the queen's
heart to the king, and the Rékshasa brings her-back from Pātdla—
The brāhman frees the Ndya princess from the curse, and she
coming to thank the king promises him a son who shall be a
Manu— Accordingly a onis born who was the Manu Auttama.

; Markandeya spoke :
"Then arriving at his city, the king saw the joyful brāhman
accompaniéd by his wife also who was sweet-dispositigned.


The brihman spoke:
O noble king, successful am I inasmuch as righteousness
has been preserved by thee, who art wise in righteousness
here and who bringest back my wife.


The king spoke :
Successful art thou, O bráhman, because thou observest thy
own laws of righteousness. Iamin a strait, who have no
wife at home, O brāhman. Š


The brāhman spoke: :
O king, if she, thy gueen, has indeed been devoured by wild


‘unger thou didst not preserve righteousness.


The king spoke:
„My darling wife is not devoured by wild beasts; indeed
she is alive, with character unblemished. How shall I act
in this matter P


o


10


11
12


13


KING UTTAMA REGAINS HIS QUERN. 433


The bréhman spoke:

If thy wife lives and has not gone astray, why then dost thou

commit a sin which will render thee wifeless in another birth ?
The king spoke:

In sooth, although she were brouglit back, she is ever
opposed to me, O brihman, she would tend to unhappiness, not
to happiness; enough! her friendship is-not at all towards
me. Do thon so strive for me that she may become submis-
sive unto me.

The brāhman spoke:

The Vara sacrifice* is beneficial for mutual affection
between thee and her. I will perform the Mitra-vinda t
sacrifice which those perform who wish for friends; for it
produces affection between two persons who love not each
other; it creates t the warmest § affection between wife and
husband, O king. I will perform that sacrifice for thee,
Fetch thy beautiful-hrowed wife from wherever she is now,
O king; she shall feel the warmest love for thee!

Markandeya spoke:

Thus adnionished, the king then collected all the materials
requisite, and the brāhman performed that sacrifice. Seven
times then the brāhman performed the saerifice in repetition
in order to procure for the king his wife. When the great
muni deemed that he had aroused friendliness within her to-
wards her husband, then he, the bréhman, addressed the


14 king—“ Fetch her, O king, who is dear to thee, close to thy
soul; enjoy al? enjoyments with her, and offer sacrifices,
being duly respected.”

Markandeya spoke:

15 Thus exhorted by the brihman the king a-wondoring then

recalled to mind the very valiant, truthful, night-roaming
* Vareshļi. t“ Friend-finding.”


t Sañ-janant: not in the dictionary. Saf


-janana is given only as a


neuter noun.
§ Param: anu-rdgam or some similar non-feminine noun mnst be understood ;


unless we rend parám to agree with prfti as in the next verse.


55


434
16


17
18


19


CANTO_LXXTI,


Rákshusa.* And he, the Rdishasa, being remembere
approached the king at once then, and prostrating himself
before the great muni exclaimed, * What shall I do?”

Thoreupon, after the king had declared the matter fully, he
went to Pātāla and brought the queen back. And she, when
brought back, gazed on her husband then with exceeding love
and said “ Be gracious!” again and again, while filled vith
joy. Thereat the king embraced the stately lady impetnonsly


amd said—* Darling, I am indeed well pleased ! why dost thou


20


21


22


25


26


keep on repeating that ? ”


The queen spoke :
If thy mind is inclined with favour to me, O king, then I
make thee this request; do thou do it as an honour to me,


The king spoke :
Speak out fearlessly whatever thou desirest from me, lady.
Thou. shalt certainly obtain it, timid one! I am all docile
towards thee and not otherwise,


The queen spoke :

‘On my account the Naga cursed his danghter who is my
friend; he said “Thou shalt become dum b,” and she became
dumb. ‘If thou, Sir, canst for love of me devise a remedy for
her to cure her deprivation of speech, then what wilt thou
not have done for me ?


__ Markandeya spoke :
Then said the king to the bréhman— “What kindt of
ceremony is there for this, in order to dispel her dumb-
ness?” And he replied to the king :—


l The bráhman spoke :

O king, I will perform a sacrifice to Saras-vati at thy word.
Let this thy wife discharge her debt of gratitude by stimula-
ting tle power of speech in that friend.

Markandeya spoke:
The brāhman performed the sacrifice to Saras-vati on her


* See canto lxx, verse 38.
+ For kidrišt read kidrifi ?


27


28


29


30


31
32


33
34
35


36


37


38


* Seo canto lxxv, verse 18. Gargn was t
dant of Bharad-vája and Angiras (sce M.~
various other persons.

t For mamdghund read mamādhund ?

§ Auttama.


TIE BIRTH OF MANU AUTTAMA. 435


behalf, and uttered the hymns addressed to Saras-vati, with
composed mind.

Thereupon Gayga* spoke to the maiden, who had recovered `
her speech, in Rasátalá— “This most difficult benefit has
been effected by thy friend’s husband.”

Having gained this information Nanda sped in haste to the
city. Then the Nága’s daughter, embracing her friend the
queen and praising the king with auspicious words again and
again, spoke sweetly, she, the Naga maiden placing herself
upon a seat,—

“ By this benefit, that thou, O noble hero, hast done me
now,t my heart is drawn out. Listen to what I tell thee.
Thou shalt have a son great in-valour, O king; he shall


-wield the discus unresisted on this earth. He shall be skilled


in the principles of all the useful sciences, devoted to the
practice of righteousness, in truth a Manu, the wise lord of
a many-antara.”

Markandeya spoke :

Having thus bestowed a boon on him, the Naga king’s
daughter then closely embraced her friend and departed to
Patala, O muni.

While the king lived in pleasure there along with her and
ruled his subjects, a very long time passed by. Then the son
was born of her to the high-souled king, like the lovely full-
orbed moon at the period of full-moon. At the birth of that
high-souled child all the people rejoiced, heavenly drums
sounded forth, and a shower of flowers fell.

Seeing that his body would be lovely and his disposition
also, and reflecting that he was the son of Uttama, § the assem-
bled munis gave him a name saying, “ He is born in an ex-
cellent|| family and at an excellent time in it; he has excel-
lent limbs ; hence he shall be Auttama,”


he mame of an old pishi, a descen
Bh., Salya-P. liii); and nlso o


t The Artha-Satras.
|| Uttama.


436


39


40


41
42


CANTO LXXIII.


Mirkandeya spoke :


So he was Uttama’s son and was famed as Auttama by


name. He was a Manu, possessing the majesty of such:
’


hearken to me, O Bhiguri. *

He who listens constantly to the entire story of Uttama
and also the birth of Uttama,* never experiences enmity;
nor shall the man who listens to it or reads it ever incur
separation from his loved wife or sons or kinsmen. Hearken
while I tell thee, © brahman, about his many-antara,
and hear who was the Indra in it and who were the gods
and rishis.


Canto LXXIII.


End of the Auttama Manv-antara.


Mérkandeya names the gods of the Auttama Manv-antara and

their lord, and mentions the kings and rishis.
Markandeya spoke :

Listen while I speak of the gods, the Indra, the rishis, the
kings in this third manv-antara of the Prajā-pati Auttama.

Thus the first group of gods was the Sva-dhámans, t who
acted according to their name; and another also, the second
group of the thirty gods, was the Satyikhyas. $ Now the
gods in the third group were the Sivdkhyas, || O best of
munis: now they were auspicious by nature; they are de-
clared to have destroyed sin. And the fourth group of the
gods therein was the Pratardanākhyas, $ O best of munis,
in the period of Auttama Manu. And the gods in the fifth
group therein were the Vasa-vartins,** O brdhman; now


* Bhdgure; see canto Iviii, verse 40, note f. It is said to be a patronymic
of Kraushtukt,

f But Auttama seems preferable: read c'aivauttamasya for c'avvottamasya ?

t “ Deities who reside in their own dwellings. ”

§ "Named after trath,” or “named as true.”

|| “Named as auspicious.”

« "Named Pratardanas.”

** “Those who are obedient to another's will.” This half line has a 571!2-
ble too much,


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


AUTTAMA’S MANV-ANTARA. 437


all of them indeed had natures corresponding to their
names, O great muni. And these five groups of gods are
reported to have fed of the sacrifices All the groups were
twelve in the many-antara which appertained to that best
of Manus. Their lord* was illustrious ; may he become the
spiritual preceptor in the three worlds! Having offered a
hundred sacrifices, he was verily named Su-sūnti.t Now
a song, which is embellished with the words composing
his name in order to avert portents emanating from him, is
sung by men on the earth even to this day,— “ Sweetly serene
is the kindly ruler of the gods, he bestows sweet serenity.” He
is attended by the Sivas and Sutyasļ and other groups of
gods and also by the Vaša-vartins.$ Without birth|| was
he, absolutely pure, supernatural.

Very powerful and valiant were that Manu’s sons, renowned,
like unto the thirty gods. The descendants of his sons ruled
over the earth as kings during the manv-antara of that
Manu of supreme splendour. Of his four ages were reckoned
in truth seventy-one and a half, of the ages called Ķrita,
Tretā und so on, which I have declared in the account of
the Age. By the innate splendour of the austerities of that
most excellent high-souled Manu his seven sons became the
seven rishis in that period.

This third manv-antara I have declared to thee. Now the
fourth is called the period of Manu Témasa, who born of an
animal’s womb illuminated the world with his fame; hearken
to the birth of that Manu, as I tell thee, O brahman. And
the exploits of all those Manus transcend the cognizance


of the-senses ; and the birth of the high-souled Manus is to be


known as such, and their majesty also.


* Indro.

+ “ Sweetly serene.”

+ See verses 2 and 3 above.

§ For vaša-vartinaķ read vaéa-vartinaih ?
|| Aja; or “a leader. ”

For amúnám read amtsham ?


438


8


9


CANTO LXXIV:


Canto LXXIV.


About the Témasa Manv-antara.


King Sva-rdshtra being driven from his kingdom by enemies
became an -ascetic, and met his deceased queen in the shape of a
doe during a great flood.— He begot a son by her who became the
Manu Tūmasa.— The gods, rishis and kings of that manv-


are named.


antara


Márkaņdeya spoke :

There lived on the earth a famous king, by name Sva-
rashtra, valiant, an offerer of many sacrifices, wise, invincible
in battles. The sun being invoked by his ministers gave
him a very long life; and he had a hundred happy wives,


'O bréhman. The wives of that long-lived king were not


yery long-lived, O muni; and in time his servants, ministers
and people came to their end. And he, being bereft * of his
wives aud his servants who were his eqnals in age, was
dejected in mind and dwindled in vigour day and night.
A neighbouring king named Vi-marda ousted him then from
his kingdom, failing as he was in vigour, deprived of his
devoted adherents, greatly afflicted. And being ousted t
from his kingdom, he went toa forest, despairing in mind,
and taking up his abode on a sandbank in the Vitasti,
illustrious as he was, he practised austerities. Undergoing
the five fires in the hot season,t exposing himself naked to
the showers § in the rainy season, and lying in water in
the cold season, he lived abstaining from food, strict in bis
devout rites. i

Afterwards there occurred, while he practised his austerilies,
a great flood day after day in the rainy season, with the
clouds pouring down rain incessantly. The east could not be


* For yukto read tyakto (see verse 5)? The Bombay edition reads mukto.
+ For cyutam read c'yutah ?
t Four fires around and the sun ovcr-hend; see Manu vi. 23.


§ For obhratkashdsikak read alhrdvakdšikuh, which is the word in Munu


vi. 23.


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17
18


19


20


21


* Myigl-vdkyam seems prefe


KING SVA-RASHTRA MEETS A DOE. - 439


distinguished, nor the south, nor the west, nor the north ;
everything looked as if besmeared with darkness, The king,
forced then in the excessive flood to seek the river bank,
could not reach it although seeking it, being carried away
by the exceedingly furious current. Now the king, after
being carried a long way by the swollen water, chanced upon
a Rauha doe in the water and seized her by her tail. . Borne
along by that flood he passed over the surface of the land
hither and thither in the darkness ; at length he reached a
bank. Crossing an expanse of mud, which was extremely
hard to be crossed, the king being drawn along by her still,
gained another charming forest. The Rauha doe dragged
the illustrious king along in the darkness there, while he
clung to her tail, enfeebled throughout his nervous system.
And he experienced an intense pleasure which arose from
touching her, as he wandered continually in the darkness,
with his mind drawn out in love to her, Perceiving that
the king was enamoured of her, and was engrossed in touch-
ing her back, the doe verily spoke to him within that
forest: —

“Why dost thou touch my back with trembling hand ?
Quite otherwiso has this affair turned out, O king. To no
unsuitable object has thy mind gone forth ; not unapproach-
able am I to thee, O king; but this Lola creates an obstacle
to my union with thee.”

Markandeya spoke :

And the king, on hearing the doe say thus, was aroused to
curiosity and spoke thus to the Rauha doe.

“Tell me, who art thou? How dost thon, a doe, speak
language” like human beings
creates an obstacle to my union wi

The doe spoke : -

I was formerly thy ‘darling Utpalšvāti, O king, thy

wife, thy gueen above a hundred others, Dridha-dhanvan’s


daughter.


? And who is this Lola who
th thee?”


rable as two words and not n compound.


440


22


23
24
25


26


27


33


34


CANTO LXXIV.


The king spoke :

What deed then didst thou do,* that thou hast reac

animal condition? And true to thy husban

righteousness, such as thou wert, how hast thou
like this ?'


hed thig
d, devoted to


The doe spoke :
_ While a girl in my father’s home I went with MY com-
panions to a wood to play, and saw a deer united with a
doe. - Then approaching close I struck the doe, Frightened
by me she fled away, and then the deer enraged said to me,
“Silly girl! why art thou so insane? Fie on this thy evil
disposition, by which thou hast rendered this period of
impregnation fruitless for me!” Frightened then at hearing
him speaking language as of a human being, I said to him—
* Who art thou who hast renched this animal condition ? ”
Thereupon he replied —“ I am gon of the rishi Nirvriti-éakshus,
by name Su-tapas, but being -enamoured of this doe I became
a deer, and followed her in love, and she longed for me in
this wood. Thou hast parted us, O naughty girl, therefore
I inflict a curse on thee.” And I said—‘“ Knowing thee not,
I have sinned, O muni; be gracious ! deign not Sir to casta
curseon me.” And go addressed, the muni gave me this
reply, O king,—T do not inflict a curse on thee, if I may
give myself to thee.” And I said —*I am not a doe, nor
of deer-like form ; in this wood thon wilt find another doe;
meanwhile let thy feeling towards me be repressed.” When
thus addressed he exclaimed, his eyes red with anger, and
his lower lip quivering—“ ‘No doe am 1’ saidst thou!
thou shalt become a doe, O silly girl.” Then exceedingly
agitated I fell prostrate before the highly-enraged muni,
who had resumed his own form, and exclaimed “Be
gracious.” again and again; “a girl is unskilled in words,


`- hence L spoke as I did; assuredly women who have no


35


father choose a husband themselves ; and since I have a
father, how can I choose, O best of munis, or do wrong F


* For kintu ydvat Ēritam réud kim tvayd vui krita ?


36


41


42


48


44,


47


48


BIRTH OF MANU TAMABA. 441


at thy feet I bow, be gracious, my lord!” While thus I lay
prostrate, exclaiming repeatedly, “Be gracious! be gracious,”
O high-minded king, that lordly muni spoke—‘ My uttered’
word never goes amiss. After thy death thou shalt become a
doe in this very wood in thy next birth; and in the doe-
condition thou shalt conceive within thee the muni Siddha-
virya’s mighty-armed son named Lola, O proud lady; and
when the embryo is conceived within thee, thon shalt re-
member thy former life; regaining thy memory, tiiou
shalt also utter human language. After his birth thou shalt
be freed from the doe-condition and be honoured by thy
husband ; thou shalt attain to the worlds which * are un-
attainable by those who commit sin, And he, Lola, mighty
in valour, shall indeed strike down his father’s foes, and
conquer the whole earth and then become a Manu.”

Incurring this curse I died and reached this brute con-
dition,t and through thy touch that embryo has come into
being in my womb. Hence I say—To no unsuitable object
has thy mind gone forth in coming to me, nor am I unap-
proachable;{ but this Lola who is conceived within me
creates an obstacle.

Markandeya spoke: -

Being thus addressed the king also. experienced intense
joy then, thinking, “ My son will conquer my enemies and be-
come a Manu on the earth.”

Afterwards the doe brought forth that son marked with
the auspicious marks; and at his birth all created things
rejoiced, and especially the king. At the birtl of that
mighty son the doe was freed from the curse and attained
to the sublime worlds. Then all the rishis assembled, O
best of munis, and perceiving the future prosperity of that
high-souled child gave him a name—' He was born of his
mother while she existed as an ignorant an.mal,§ and the


* For ya read ye.

+ For ttryaktvam read tiryaktvam.

t For agamyo read agamyd ? seo verse 18..
§ Támastm bhajamdndydrīv yonim.


56


442


49


50


ol
52


53


od


55


96


57
58
59


60


CANTO LXXIV,


world was enveloped in darkness,* hence he shall be Tamaga,”
Then Tāmasa was brought up by the father in the forest,
When he reached the age of inteiligence he spoke thus to his
father, O best of munis,—* Who art thou, dear father ?
and how am I thy son? and who was my mother? and why
hast thou come kere? Tell me this truly.”

Markandeya spoke:

Thereupon his father, the large-armed king, narrated to
his son how he was ousted from his kingdom and altsdther
events, And on hearing all that, he invoked the sun and
obtained celestial weapons together with the spells that
controlled them in their completeness. Having mastered
the use of the weapons he vanquished those enemies, and
bringing them near his father released them, when they were
permitted by the father to depart, observing thus his own
righteousness. And his father, after seeing his son's face
happy, quitted his body and attained to the worlds, which he
had won for his own by austerities and sacrifices.

He having conquered the whole earth as king by the name
Tamasa, became a Manu by name Témasa. Hear about his
many-antara: who were the gods, who was the ruler,t and who
was the lord of the gods, and who were the rishis, and who
were that Manu's sons, the guardians of the world.

The Satyas and next the Su-dhis, the Su-ripas, and the
Haris, these were the classes of gods therein, seven and
twenty in number, O muni. And Sikhi Indra, mighty, great
in vilonr, distinguished by a hundred sacrifices, became the
lord of those gods. Jyotir-dhaman, Prithu, Kavya, C'aitra,
Agni, and Valaka, and also Pivara, these seven, were the
seven yishis, O brāhmān. And Nara, Kshānti, and Santa,
Dánta, Jinu, Jaūgha and others were ‘l'émasa’s sons, very
mighty kings,


* Tamnsd,
t For yat-patir revd tat-patir, according to the Bombay edition.


il


12


STORY OF THE RISHI RITA-VAC’. 443


Canto LXXV.


Raivata's Manv-antara.


The rishi Rita-vdc’ had a son who was bad because born under
the constellation Revati, and the rishi made the constellation
fall with his curse.—A daughter was born therefrom whom the
rishi Pramuc'a adopted and named Rerati.— King Durgama
visited Pramuc'a and married Revati, and the constellation was
restored to its place at t he marriage. —They had a sm, the Manu
Raivata.— The gods, rishis and kings in his period are named.

Markandeya spoke:

Moreover the fifth Manu was the famous one named
Raivata. Listen! I tell thee fully about his birth.

There was an illustrious and famous rishi named Rita-vid.
To that high-souled rishi who had no sop a son was born at
the termination of the constellation Revati. He performed
the birth ceremony and all other rites for that-son according
to the ordinances, and also the investiture with the sacred
thread and other ceremonies. And he was of bad disposition,
O muni. And even from his son’s very birth the pishi, that
lordly muni, became afflicted with a lingering disease; his
mother suffered extreme pain, being attacked with leprosy
and other diseases. And his father in his affliction pondered —
“ Why is this?” And that his son also, being exceedingly
wicked in mind, took another muni’s son’s wife whom ho met.

Then dejected in mind Ritn-vdč spoke thus—“ Better is it
for men to have no son than a bad son ! A bad son is always
causing trouble to bis father’s and mother’s heart; and casts
downwards his ancestors who dwell in Svarga. He benefits
not his friends, he satisfies not his. ancestors, he causes suf-

fering to his parents—fie on the birth of that son who
commits evil deeds! Happy are they whose sons are com-
mended by all the world, who benefit others, who are peaceful,
who are devoted to good work! Uneasy and dull, averse to
the next world, tending towards hell and not towards beatitude
is our life which depends on our s0n. A bad son brings


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


CANTO LXXY.


misery on his friends and joy to his adversaries, and he
assuredly brings untimely old age on his pareuts.”


Markandeya spoke:

With his thoughts thus burning through the conduct of
his exceedingly perverse son, the muni questioned Garga *
as to what had happened.

Ķita-vāč spoke:

Keeping my religious vows strictly I learned the Vedag
formerly according to precept; after acquiring the Vedas
I married a wife according to precept. Along with my wife,
the rites to be performed, those enjoined by revealed religion,
those enjoined by tradition, the oblations made in fire with
the exclamation vashat, I have never failed to perform to the full
unto this day, O great muni. Following the ordinances


‘prescribed concerning conception, without gratifying + my lust


and in order to have a son, I begot this son, I who fear the
hell named Put, O muni. Is it through his own fault or
through my fault, that this son has been born, bringing


‘suffering op us and causing grief to his kinsmen by his


bad disposition, O muni ?
` Garga spoke:

O best of munis, this thy son was born at the termination
of the constellation Revati; therefore ke causes thee suffering
since he was born at an eyil time. ‘This is no transgression
by thee nor yet by his mother, nor by thy family; but
the termination of Revati befell as the cause of his bad
disposition.

Rita-vaé spoke :

Because this my only son’s bad disposition sprang from the

termination of Revati, let that Revati therefore fall quickly !


Markandeya spoke :
When he uttered this curse, the constellation Revati verily
fell, while all the world beheld with minds pervaded with 88-


* See canto lxxii, verse 27.
+ For unurundhyatd read anurudhyatd,


22


23


32


33


35


BIRTH OF REVATI FROM THE CONSTELLATION. 445


tonisument. And the constellation Revati, falling on and
around the mountain Kumuda, suddenly illuminated* its
woods, ravines and cascades. And the mountain Kumuda,
by reason of her down-fall, became famous as Raivataka,t
a mountain exceedingly charming through the whole earth.
But the beauty of that constellation became the lake Panka-
jini;f therefrom a maiden was born then exceedingly
brilliant in form. The muni Pramuéa saw her who was
born from Revati’s beauty, and so gave her a name, the name
Revati, O Bhaguri. And illustrious Pramuéa nourished her,
who had been born near his hermitage, in that same land,
Now seeing the maiden grown to the bloom of youth, and
beautifully formed, the muni bethought--‘ Who may be
her husband ?'” While he thus pondered a long time passed
by, O muni; nor did the great muni light upon a bridegroom
equal to her, At length the muni Pramuéa entered his room
where the sacred fire burned, toask Agni about a bridegroom
for her. Agni replied to the guestioner,—'* Great in strength,
great in valonr, kind of speech, fond of righteousness, the
king named Durgama shall assuredly be her husband.”
Markandeya spoke:

And immediately there reached his hermitage, O muni, in
the course of hunting that wise king Durgama, who was
sprung from Priya-vrata’s lineage, great in strength and
prowess, Vikrama-šila”s son, born of Kālindi's womb. The
king entered the hermitage and, not seeing the rishi, hailed
the slender maiden with the word “ Dear!” and asked :—

The king spoke:

Whither has he gone from this hermitage, the adorable
lordly muni? I wish to pay him my affection here. Tell him
so, O bright maiden!

Markandeya spoke: A

The brāhman, who was in the room where the sacred fire


* For bhdshaydmdsa read bhdsayamisa.
+ See page 289 note * 2
Y Or,“ a lake of Jotuses.””


446


42


48


44


45


46


47


CANTO LXXV.


burned, heard that his speech and the hailing her as « Dear!»
and came out in haste. The munisaw high-souled king Durga.
ma, bearing the royal insignia, bowing respectfully before him.
Now on seeing him he spoke at once to his disciple Gautama
— “Gautama! bring quickly the argha offering for this king,
At length he has come alone after a long time, this king andi
in particular my son-in-law ; I deem him worthy of the argha,”
Markandeya spoke :

Thereat the king pondered on the reason for his using the
term son-in-law and understood it not ; therefore keeping
silence the king accepted the argha, When the king had
taken a seat and accepted the argha, the brāhman, the great
muni, addressed him a welcome —* I trust thou farest well
in thy home, in thy treasury, and army, in thy friends, in
thy servants and ministers, and in thy own self whereon
rests every thing, O king of mighty arm! And thy wife fares
well; since she is indeed at hand, I ask not therefore about
her, but I hope thy other wives fare well!”

The king spoke: `

Through thy favour I have no ill-fortune any where, O
strict observer of vows; and my curiosity is aroused, what
wife have I here, O muni ?

The rishi spoke:

Most noble Revati, beautiful even through the three worlds,
is thy wife of exquisite figure; dost thou not know her, O
king ?

The king spoke:

My lord! Su-bhadrā, Sénta’s daughter, Kaveri’s daughter,
and Su-játá born in Su-rdshtra, and Varitha’s daughter
Kadamba, Vipāthā, and Nandini —zhese I know as my wives,
O brāhman ; they remain at my home. I know not Revati,
adorable Sir; who then is she ?

The rishi spoke:

She is this maiden of beautiful complexion, whom thon
didst address just now as “Dear!” Hast thou forgotten,
O king? Worthy of praise is this lady of thy house !


48


49
50


öl


52
53


54


55


56


57


58


KING DURGAMA MARRIES REVATI- 417


The king spoke:

In truth I said so, but no improper feeling had I, O muni.
Deign not to be angry with me for this, I beseech thee,
Sir!

The pishi spoke :

Thou speakest truly, O king; no improper ‘fecling hadst
thou. Thou didst utter this word, being impelled by Agni,
O king. I asked Agni, “ Who shall be her husband?” O
king; and he replied that thou thyself, Sir, shouldst verily
be her bridegroom this day. Take her then; I give thee
the maiden, O king, and thou didst hail her as “ Dear!”
How dost thou decide ?


Mūrksņdeya spoke:

At his address the king then kept silence; and the rishi
prepared to perform her wedding ceremony. The maiden
spoke a little thing to her father who was prepared for the
marriage, her countenance bent downward with respect—
“ Jf thou lovest me, dear father, deign to give nie a favour;
perform then my marriage in the constellation Revati, since
I have won thy favour.”


The rishi spoke:
Fair maiden! the constellation Revati is not declared to be


one that unites with the moon. The constellations appro-
priate to thy marriage are others, O beautiful-browed !


The maiden spoke :


Dear father! without that constellation the time appears


to me unprofitable. How may the marriage of such as me


take place at an unprofitable time p
The pishi spoke :

Theo famous ascetic named Rita-váć was enraged against
Revati; in his anger he caused the constellation to fall down.
And I have promised thee as wife to this king, O maiden
with intoxicating eyes ; and if thou desirest not the marriage,
we have fallen into a strait !


448


59


60


61


62


63


64


65


66


67


CANTO LXXV.


The maiden spoke :

Dear father ! Why did that muni Rita-vaé perform aug.
terities in that fashion? Have I nought to do with thee ag
father? Am I the daughter of an unworthy brāhman ?

The rishi spoke:

Thou art not the daughter of an unworthy brāhman, nor of
an ascetic, O maiden. Thou art daughter to me who am
striving to make other gods.*


The maiden spoke :
If my father is a practiser of austerities, why then does
he not raise this constellation to the sky and perform my
wedding under the constellation ?


The rishi spoke :

Be it so! prosperity be thine, fair maiden ; be thon affec-
tionate ! I raise the constellatiomRevati to the moon’s path-
way for thy sake.

Markandeya spoke :

Then by the power of his austerities the great muni placed
the constellation Revati as before in conjunction with the
moon, O brāhman. And full of affection he celebrated his
daughter’s marriage accompanied with sacred texts according
to rule, and said to his son-in-law again, “Tell me, O king,
what shell-I give thee as a wedding gift? I-will give even
that which is hard to be obtained, for irresistible are my
austerities.” . ;
The king spoke:

‘Of Manu Svšyambhuva's lineage ¢ I am sprung, O muni.
I choose as gift a son who shall reign over a manv-antura
through thy favour.


The rishi spoke :
This thy wish shall be fulfilled. As a Manu thy son shall


enjoy the whole earth, and shall be wise in righteousness,
O king.


* Devdn ; this seems erroneous, but the Bombay edition reads the same.
+ For santato read santatau ?


68
69


70
71
72
73
74


75


76


* For riterrend rite with the Bombny edition.
+ The Bombay edition adds a verso within brackets.
hear or read the snblime story
all sins and attains to tho world thut is caruestly de


RAIVATA’S MANV-ANTARA. 449


Markandeya spoke :

Then taking her the king went to his own city. From him
was born of Revatia son, the Manu Raivata, possessed of
all righteousness, unconquered by mankind, who understood
the meaning of every sacred book, wlio knew the Vedas, the
sciences and the books of practical arts.

Hear most composedly, O brahman, about the gods, the
munis, the lord of the gods and the kings in his many-antara,
as I mention them. The gods therein were the Su-medhases.
And the kings were Vaikuntha and Amitābha, fourteen and
fourteen, O brāhman. And now the Jord of those very four
classes of gods was named Vibhu, who was the regarder of
a hundred sacrifices, O king. Hiranya-loman, Veda-sri, and
also Urddhva-bābu, Veda-bihu, and Su-dhāman and the
great muni Parjanya, and illustrious Vasishtba who was
thoroughly versed in the Vedas and Vedanta—tkese were
the seven rishis also in Manu Raivata's period. Bala-bandha
mighty in valour, and also Su-yashtavya, and Satyaka and
others were Manu Raivata’s sons.

Now these are the Manus down to Raivata, whom I have
told thee about; they were indeed connected with Svayam-
bhuva, except * Manu Svaroéisha.t i


Canto LXXVI.


The Sixth Manv-antara-

O'ékshusha when an infant was taken by a hag from his
parents and changed for the son of king Vi-krdnta, and was
brought wp as a prince.— On reaching boyhood he revealed iz
fraud, and abandoning his princely state became an asceltc.
— Brahmá made him the sixth Manu.—The deities, yishis and


kings of his period are mentioned.


«He who may
of these Manus continunlly, is delivered from


sired.”


57


450 CANTO UXXVI.


Markandeya spoke :
1 Thus I have narrated these tivo manv-antaras to thec.
Hear about this sixth period, that of the Manu C'ūkshusha,
2 In another birth he was born from the eyet of the supreme
deity, hence in this birth also he retained the condition t of
3 C'ākshusha, O brāhman.$ His mother repeatedly makes him
prattle|| as he lies in her lap after his birth, and embraces
4 him lovingly and then again makes him prattle.g Being
indeed born with a recollection of his previous existences, he
5 laughed as he lay on his mother’s lap. His mother said to
him angrily then—' I am frightened ; what is this, my child,
that there is laughter in thy mouth? Thou art born with
"premature intelligence. Perhaps thou seest something
bright!”
The son spoke :
6 Dost thou not see, a cat in front wishes to devour me?
And another, the hag who seizes newly-born children, ** has
7 vanished. And since thon, lady, looking on me lovingly in
thy affection for thy son, dost keep on making me prattle and
8 dost embrace me much, while thy hair rises up and thine
eyes are suffused with tears springing from love, therefore
9 I chanced to laugh. Rear also the reason of it, The cat
intent on its own object looks en me who am attached to
thee; and the other also, the hag who seizes newly-horn
10 children, has vanished. Just as these two, with hearts solici-
tous for their own self-interest,F* were busy over me, even


* For tava read tathé? The Bombay edition reads mayá.

+ C'akshushaR. f Or “appellation.”

§ The Bombay edition inserts an explanatory verse here—'' Bhadré, wife of
the high-sonled royal rishi An-amitra, gave birth to a son, who was very wiser
pure, who remembered his former lives, a very sovereign.” See verse 27.

| Ul-ldpya, U?-lap is not given as a verb in the dictionary ; ul-lápa is
given as a nonn meaning “ calling ont in a loud voice; change of voico in
grief, sickness, &c.;”? but those Meanings seem inadmissible here. See
ul-ldpana in canto xxy, verse 10.

«T Ul-Idpayati. ** Jdta-hdriņf; see canto li, verse 102.

tt For snigdha-hridayé rend snigdha-hridaye to agree With ete pra-vritte, 0%
the Bombay edition reads,


11


12


13


28


% This seems n little involved,


t
t


THE CHILDHOOD OF MANU C'4AKSHUSHA. 451


so thou appearest to mo to be engaged in thy own self-iu-
terest. But the cat and the hag who seizes newly-born
children aimed at enjoying me; thou on the other hand de-
sirest to obtain good results from me which shall be enjoyed
gradually. Thou dost not know me who I am, nor the benefit
that I have conferred. Our meeting is for no very long time,
a period of five and seven days. Nevertheless thou lovest
and embracest me excessively with tears in thine eyes;
sincerely thou callest me “dear child” and “ lovely darling.”


The mother spoke :

«Yt is not for the sake of a benefit that I embrace thee
lovingly, my darling, nor shall I be deprived of thee, if this
shall be for thy pleasure.* I have now relinquished any
gelf-interest-which shall accrue to me from thee.”

So saying she left him and went out of the lying-in house.
The hag Jata-harini then seized him when left, his body and
external organs of sense being apathetic, his heart and soul
pure. Having seized the boy she placed him then as a new-
born child on the bed of king Vi-kranta’s wife, and took his
new-born son and carried him{ to another house, and tak-
ing a son from that house she, Jita-hāriņi, in regular courso
devoured this third child. Now carrying children off in succes-
sion she devours the third child, totally devoid of pity; but
she makes a substitution thus with the other two day after day.

And then king Vi-kranta performed the purificatory rites,
which appertain to a prince, for that very son; and as father
king Vi-krūnta gave him the name Ananda according to rule,
being himself filled with intense joy. Now when as a youth
he had donned the sacred thread, his spiritual guide ordered
him—“ Approach before thy mather respectfully and salute
her!” Hearing that his guru’s speech, he smiled and spoke
thus—“ Which of my mothers shall I praise, her who gave
me birth or her who has nourished me ? ”


but both cditions read aliko,


For tatto read tvatto.


For tvam read tam? bub Doth editions read (vam.


452


24,


25


31


82


85


CANTO LXXV1.


The gurn spoke :
Not the latter, indeed! Thy mother who bore thee; noble
youth, is -Rutha’s daughter, Vi-krānta's chiof queen, Haiminj


. by name.


Ananda spoke:
She is the mother of C'aitra, who dwells in the village
Višāla, as son of the leading brāhman Bodha, and who was
born of her. I come from elsewhere.


The guru spoke:
Whence art thou? tell mē, O Ananda. What O'aitra again
dost thou mention ? It appears to be a great difficulty. Where
wast thou born? What dost thou say of this ?


Ananda spoke:

I was born in a kshatriya king's house of his wife Giri-
bhadrš, O bréhman. The hag that steals new-born children
took me; she left me here, and taking Haimini’s son also
carried him. further to the house of the leading brābman
Bodha, and devoured the brāhman Bodha’s son. Haitnini’s son
has been consecrated with the sanctifying rites of a brahman
there. I have been consecrated here by thee as guru, illus-
trious Sir. I must obey thy command: which mother shall
I approach, O guru ?

"The guru spoke:

Extremely intricate, my child, is this great difficulty that
has befallen. I understand it not at all, for my wits are
wandering as it were through enchantment.


Ananda, spoke :

What case of enchantment is there here, while the world
is thus constituted ? Who is whose son, O brihman rishi?
Or who is not whose kinsman ? Beginning from his birth,
whatever man enters into connexions, the others who are
connected with him are made to pass away by death, O


` bréhman. Moreover when he is born here, whatever con-


nexion-he has with kinsmen, that also ceases with the. end-
ing of his body. This is the entire process. Hence I 527;
“Who is nota kinsman to one who dwells in this worldly


36


37


38


39


40


41


42


43


45


46


--Being thus exhorted by Brahmá,


c/AKSHUSHA APPOINTED TO RE A MANU. 458


existenco P Or who is a kinsman for ever?” Is thy mind
bewildered ? I have had two fathers indecd in this very
birth, and two mothers; is it wonderful that i should be
otherwise in the recurring birth of the body? Being such, I


‘will practise austerities. "Do thou bring here C’aitra, who is
indeed the son of this king, from the village Viséla.


i Markandeya spoke:
* Thereupon the king was astonished with his wives and”.
kinsmen; withdrawing his feoling of ownership from that
boy, he permitted him to depart to the forest. Fetching his
son C'aitra he made him worthy of the kingdom,. after
honouring the brābman who brought him up in the belief
that he was his son. 5

And he, Ananda, a mere boy, practised austerities in the
great forest, in order to consume away his actions which
were adversaries in the path to final emancipation, And.
to him then as he practised austerities spoke the divine
Prajā-pati —*' Why art thou performing severe austerities
my child? tell me tha He

Ananda spoke:

Desirous of purity of soul I perform austerities, adorable
lord! setting my face towards consuming the actions which
tend to fetter me.


Brahmá spoke :
‘He who is lord over consumed actions is fit for final emanci-
pation, not he who engages in action. Hence Sir! thon shalt


obtain final emancipation, yhen thou hast the lordship of
Thou must be tho sixth Manu; go; do accor-


goodness.
f austerities for thee! When thou hast


dingly! Enough 0
done that, thou shalt obtain final emancipation.

Markandeya spoke :
he then the high-minded
80 be it!” and went directing himself to that
ceased indeed from austerities. Turning him
tics Brahmá addressed him as C’akshusha ;


replied,
puvsnit, He
away from nusteri


454.


47
48
“49
50


51
52
53


54


55


56


57


CANTO LXXVI.


formerly he was known by that name; he became famous ag
Manu C’ikshusha.

He married Vidarbha, daughter of king Ugra, and begot
by her sons celebrated for valour. è

Hear, O bráhman, who were the gods of the period, while
he reigned over the manv-antara ; and who were the rishis,
and who was the Indra, and who were his sons. The gods
therein were named Aryas; they formed one group of eight
persons; it was composed of those who had done famous
deeds, who partook of the oblations at the sacrifice, O brah-


„man, of those who were famous for strength and valour,


who were hardly to be gazed at because of their halo of
splendour. And the second class of gods was called Prasi-
tas, consisting of eight persons. There was another class
of gods also called Bhavyas, consisting of just eight persons ;
and a fourth class therein was called Yūtha-gas, which also
consisted of eight persons. There were, moreover, other
gods called Lekha in a fifth class also in that manv-antara,
O brāhman ; those so named fed indeed on amrita. And
the Indra was Mano-java, who offered a hundred sacrifices
and became their lord; he was reckoned the eater of a por-
tion of the sacrifices. And Su-medhas, and Vi-rajas, Havish-
mat, Un-nata, Madhu, Ati-ndman, and Sahishnu were the
seven rishis. Manu C'ikshusha's sons, chief of whom were
Uri,* Purn, and Sata-dyumna, very great in strength, were
the kings of the carth,

Thus I have narrated to thee the sixth many-antara, O
brāhman, both the birth and the exploits of high-souled
C'ākshusha. He who subsists at the present time is named
Manu Vaivasvata; hear from me about the gods and other
chief personages in his, the seventh, period.


* For Urt road Uru,


10


STORY OF THE SUN AND HIS WIFE SANJNA. 405


Canto LXXVII.


The Vaivasvata Manv-antara. ;

The Sun married Tvashtri’s daughter Saijid, and their child-
ren were Manu Vaivasvata and Yama— Markandeya narrates,
how the Sun’s splendour was pared down by Tvashtri-because she
could not endure tt.

Markandeya spoke :

The Sun Mārtaņda's wife was Vigva-karman’s illustrious
daughter, by name Sañjñá. The Sun begot of her a son, &
Manu, of celebrated fame, learned in many sciences; since
he was Vivasvat's son, he was called Vaivasvata in sooth.

And Sañjñá used to shut her eyes when the Sun gazed on
her, and the Sun in anger thereat spoke sharply to Saūjīā —
« Because thou dost always imprison thine eyes when thou
seest me, O silly one, thou shalt therefore give birth to Yama,
the imprisoner* of mankind.”

Markandeya spoke:

Thereupon the goddess, unnerved by fear, became wild-
eyed, and the Sun secing her agitated glances addressed her
again —“ Since thine eye-sight has become agitated, f now
that thou hast seen me, thou shalt therefore give birth to a
daughter, the river Vi-lola.” £

Markandeya spoke:

Hence through that her nusband’s curse Yama verily was
born of her, and also Yamuné this famous and very great
river. And it was with pain that Saūjūt, the noble lady,
endured the Sun's splendour; and then unable to bear the
splendour she fell into thought—“ What am Itodo? Where
am I to go? Where shall I go that I may find ense? And
how shall the Sun, my husband, control his wrath?” So
pondering in many ways; the Praja-pati’s illustrious daughter


* A play on the words sam-yama, yama and sam-yamana.


+ Vi-lolita.
+ This means the Yamuna, sec the next verse. This name 18 not giver


in the dictionary and 1 huyo not mot with it elsewhere.


456


ll
12


13
14
15


16


„17


CANTO LXXVII.


then thought much of actually taking refuge with her father,
Thereupon the famous lady having resolved to go to her
father’s house fashioned her body, that the Sun loved, in
shadow-form, and addressed her shadow-self—“ Remain thou
here in the Sun’s house even as I; and behave thon becom.
ingly to the children even as tothe Sun And though ques.
tioned say nothing of this my going away ; say always this,
‘I am she indeed, Saūjūd by name.’ ”
The Shadow-Saūjūš spoke :

“O lady, I will obey thy order and will so declare, as far
as suffering my hair to be seized and as far as undergoing
curses ; it is performed indeed as far as drawing curses down
upon myself.”

The goddess*, receiving this assurance, then went to her
father's abode. She saw Tvashtri there cleansed fiom stain
by means of austerities. And being honoured by him, Vigva-
karman, with much respect, she remained in her father’s
house some time, unreproached. Then her father-spoke to
the beautiful lady, his daughter, when she had dwelt there


„not very long, after praising her and prefacing his speech


18


19


20


21


-with love and much respect —
* “Now while I have been seeing thee my child, the days


"though very many may be reckoned as equal to half a mo-


ment; nevertheless righteousness suffers loss. Dwelling a
Jong time among kinsmen brings no good repute to women ;
kinsmen hold a woman’s proper residence is in her husband’s
house. Such art thou, and thou art mated to a husband, the
Sun, the lord of the three worlds; deign not my daughter
to dwell a long time in thy father’s house. Being such, go
thou to thy husband’s home. I am pleased ; thou hast been


„horoūred by me. Thon must come again to see me, my


22


beautiful one.”


Markandeya spoke :
Thus was she admonished by her father then, and she
agreeing saluted her father respectfully and went to the


* For duri read devi,


27


29


30


31


32


33
34
35


36


YAMA 8 UNFILTAL BEHAVIOUR. 457


Northern Kurus, O muni, disliking the Snn's heat, afraid of
his splendour; and there she practised austerities, changed
into a mare's shape.

The lord of day thinking the shadow-form was Saiijiid, begot
of that other two sons and a charming daughter. Now the
Shadow-Safijiié was very affectionate to the other children
just as to her own; Saūjūš did not use to show special atten-
tion to her daughter and iwo sons daily by caresses * and
other marks of pleasure. Manu accepted that affection from
her; Yama did not bear it patiently from her, and indeed he
lifted his foot in anger to kick her, but, again moved with
forbearance towards her, did not strike it against her body.
Thereupon, O brākman, the Shadow-Saūjūš in anger cursed
Yama, her upper lip quivering slightly, and her delicate
hand shaking—“ Because thou spurnest me, thy father’s
wife, disrespectfully with thy foot, this thy foot shall there-
fore fall this very day to the earth.”

Markandeya spoke :

Yama, terrified on hearing the curse that his mother had
pronounced on him, went to his father and falling prostrate
before him spoke :—

Yama spoke:

O father, this great marvel was never seen by any one,
that a mother casting love away imprecates a curse on her
son. She is not mother to me in the same way as Manu calls
her his mother; no mother would abandon her good qualities
even towards sons devoid of good qualities.

Markandeya spoke:

Hearing this speech from Yama, the adorable Dispeller of
darkness called the Shadow-Saūjūā and asked her—‘' Where
has she gone? ” And she answered—“I am Tvashtri's daughter
Saūjūs, O god of fire, thy wits; through thee these children
were begotren of me.” Now when, as Vivasvat was thus
guestionīng her repeatedly, she did not speak further, the Sun
enraged thereat prepared to curse her. Thereupon she told


® For nalinddi road ldlanddi, with the Bombay edition.
58


458


87


38


39


40


4]


42


CANTO LXXVIII.


the Sun what had happened, and the
went to Tvashtri’s abode.

He then paid honour to the Sun, the god hononred by the
three worlds, who had visited his honse, with sublime faith,
Visva-krit on being asked about Saiijilé, then told hin—
"She came indeed here to my house, saying she had been
verily sent by thee.” And the Sun, collecting bis ming in
meditation, perceived her in mare’s shape practising austeri.
ties among the Northern Kurus, and the Sun understood the
purpose of her austerities, namely, ‘ May my husband become
mild in body, beautiful in form” “ Pare down my splendour
now” quoth the Sun also to Sañjñá’s father Višva-karman,
O brāhman. And Vi$va-karman thereupon pared down the


splendour of the year-revolying Sun, and obtains the praises
of the gods.


god knowing the trntn


Canto LXXVIII.
The Birth of Vaivasvata in the Sdvarņika Manv-antara.*
Mérkandeya relates Row the gods praised the Sun, what be-
came of the splendour pared off from the Sun, and how the Sun
regained his wife—He mentions the positions assigned to the
Sun’s children.


Markandeya spoke: š
Then the gods and the devjarshis assembling praised ar
words the Sun, who is worthy of being praised by the entire
three worlds.


The gods spoke: ee

“ Adoration to thee who hast the nature of the Rigs,
adoration to thee who hast the nature of the S4man ! adoration
to thee whose form has the nature of the Yajus! to thee
hast the glory of the Samans! Adoration to thee who er
become the sole domain of knowledge, to the cleanser °
darkness ! to thee who hast the nature: of pure light! to the


ivasvātā
* This title is a mistake as the santo shews. It should be the Vaivas
manv-antara,


10


11


12


13


14


HYMN TO THE BUN. 459


purified, to the stainless Soul! Adoration to the most excel-
lent, to the desirable one! to the utmost one, to the supreme
Soul! Adoration to thee whose nature pervades the entire
universe, to the embodiment of Soul!” (This fine delight-
some eulogy must be heard by men with faith. Having become
a disciple and having given also the guru his fee one may hear
it rapt in meditation. It must not be heard by those who
have become empty-handed. Now may this become fruitful!)
« Adoration to the being who is the universal cause, to
the goal* of men of wise intellect! Adoration to thee
who hast the nature of the sun, who hast the nature of
the brilliant Soul! Adoration to thee, the illuminator, and
adoration to the maker of day! And adoration to the causer
of night, to the maker of twilight and moon-light! Thou
art this universe, thou art the adorable! With thee, as thou
revolvest above the world, the entire egg of Brahma, devoid
of intelligence,t with everything moveable and immoveable,
turns round! This universe when touched by thy rays
comes to life, pure! Water and other objects are cleansed
by contact with thy rays! Oblations, alms-giving and the
other deeds which compose righteousness tend to no benefit
so long as this world has no contact with thy rays! All
these Ric’es verily are thine ; these Yajushes on the other hand
are thine also; and all the Simans drop from thy body! Since
thou are composed of the Rio’, O lord of the world, and thou
indeed art composed. of the Yajus, and composed also of
the Sáman, therefore, O lord, thou art composed of the
three! Thou verily art Brahma’s form; thou art the
highest and the lowest also | Moreover thou art material and
non-material ; thou art minute and yet thou dost exist in
massive shape! Thou hast the form of Time, composed of
moments, kāshthas and other divisions: of time, yet subject
to decay! Be gracious! Of thine own will mitigate the


innate splendour of thy form!”


* Nishthdyai.
+ Or, illusory ; a-viddha.


460


19


21
22


"24


26


` 28


29


CANTO LXXVIII.


Márkandeya spoko:

Being extolled thus by the gods and devarshis, the im.
perishable globe of splendour shed his splendour then,
That portion of the Sun's splendour which was composed of
the Ric’ became the earth, and of that portion composed of
the Yajus was made the sky, and that portion composed of
the Saman became heaven.* Of the fifteen shreds of his
splendour which were pared off by Tvashķri, the high-souled
Tvashtri verily made Sarva’s ¢ trident, the discus of Vishņu
and the Vasus, the very terrible weapon of Sankara, and
Agni’s spear and Kuvera's paiki; and all the force Wes.pong
of the others who are the gods’ foes, and of the Yakshas and
Vidyadharas—those Višva-krit made. And therefore the
adorable lord bears only a sixteenth part. His splendour
was pared off by Visva-karman into fifteen parts.

Then assuming a horse's form the-Sun went to the Northern
Kurus, and saw Sañjñá there disguised in mare’s shape. And |
she, seeing him approaching and afraid of æ strange male,
went towards him face to face, intent on guarding her rear.
And thereupon as the two met there and joined their noses,
two sons issued from the mare’s mouth, Nasatya and Dasra;
and at the termination of the flow of semen Revanta was
born, bearing sword, shield and armour, mounted on horse-
back, furnished with arrows and quiver. Then the Sun dis-
Played his own peerless form, and she gazing upon his true
form felt a keen joy ; and the Sun, the robber of the waters,
brought home this his loving wife Saūjūs restored to her
own shape.

Her eldest son then became Vaivasvata Manu; and her
second son Yama became the righteous-eyed judge because
of the curse. His father himself made an end of the curse
by saying—“ Insects taking flesh t from his foot shall fall to
the carth.” And because he is righteous of eye, impartial


* Svurga.
+ Siva's. sis


f For tritfyo mdm samdddya, which is erroneons, the Bombay €
reads krimayo mdmsum dddya which is intelligible ;
both editions read in the next line must then be changed to pat


but patishyatiti whioh


ishyantiti.


30


81


32


33


34


35


THE SUN'S SONS AND THE VAIVASVATA MANY-ANTARA. 461


to friend and foe, therefore the Dispeller of darkness ap-
pointed him over the southern region.* And Yamuna be-
came the river which flows from the recesses of mount
Kalinda. The Ašvins were made the gods’ physicians. by
their high-souled father. And Revanta also was appointed
king of the Guhyakas. Hear also from me the places assign-
ed to the Shadow-Safijiia’s sons. The eldest son of the
Shadow-Saūjīā was equal to Manu the eldest-born; hence
this son of the Sun obtained the title Savarnika. He also
shall be a Manu when Bali shall become Indra. He was
appointed by his father as the planet Saturn among the
planets. The third of them, the daughter named Tapati,
had a son Kuru, king of men, by king Sambarana.t

Thus I describe the geventh period, that of Manu Vaivas-
vata, his sons, the kings, the rishis, the gods and thé king of
the gods. ‘


Canto LXXIX.


The praise of Vaivasvata in the Sdvarņika Manv-antara.f


Markandeya names the deities, munis and kings of the Vat-
vasvata Manv-antara.
Markandeya spoke :
"The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sédhyas, the
Viéve-devas, the Maruts, the Bhrigus, and the Angirases are
the eight whereof the classes of gods are traditionally held


to be composed. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras are to
be known as Kagyapa’s Sons; and the Sidhyas, the Vasus,§


© Yamye.

+ She married the Paurava king Sambarana and was the twelfth ances-
tress of the Pandavas; see Mahf-Bhirata, Adi-P. xciv. 3738-9; xov. 3791;
and clxxi. 6521—olxxiii. 6616.

f This is a mistaken title as the canto shows.

§ This seems a mistake for Maxnts; for vasavo read maruto? But both


editions read alike.


462 OANTO LXXIX.


3 the Visve-devas are the three groups of Dharma's sons, Now
the Bhrigu class of gods are the sons of Bhrigu, an
Aūgirases are the sons of Aūgiras. And it is the Present
creation. Maric’a is to be known as the lord at present,

4 And the Indra is named Ūrjjasvin, high-souled, the cone
sumer of a share of the sacrifices. New all those lords of

5 the thirty gods, who have passed away, and who have
not yet come, and who reign now, aro to be known as having
equal chavacteristics—all indeed are thousand-eyed, wielders.

6 of the thunder-bolt, smiters asunder of cities; all are
bestowers of gifts, pre-eminent, bearers of crests, walking
like elephants; they are all receivers of a hundred sacrifices,

7 dominating created things with their splendour, Possessing
the good qualities of sovereignty with righteousness and
other pure actions, masters of the past, the future and the
present.

8 Hear also about this triple world, O bréhman. Bhir-loka
is traditionally held to be this earth; antariksha is held to
be the sky,* and svarga is called heavent—such is spoken
of as the triple-world.

9 And Atri and Vašishtha and tho great rishi Kāšyapa, and

10 Gautama, Bharadvāja and Visvā-mitra Kausika, and also
the adorable son of the high-souled Ric’ika, namely Jamad-
agni—these seven are thus the munis in the present period.

11 = Ikshvéku,t and Nabhaga,§ and Dhrishta-šarmiti,|| and


d the


© Divah; read divam, neuter ?

t Divya.

t Ikshvāku was the eldest son of Manu Vaivasvata, He got Madhya-
deša and was the ancestor of several dynasties, the chief of which was the
Solar dynasty that reigned in Ayodhyā (Hari-Varna, x: 634, and xi. 661-85
M.-Bh., Sabhā-P. xiii. 568-9 ; Rimfy., Adi-K. lxxii. and Ayodh.-K. cxix).

§ Or Nábhága. He was father or ancestor of famous king Amburishs
(Hari-V., x. 613 and 641; M.—Bh., Droņa-P. lxiv; Sānti-P. xxix. 993-7, and
coxxxiv. 8597 ; and Anusūs.-P. cxxxvii. 6252), ‘

|| This is given as a single name, but should bo two; thus for Dhrishfa-
farmdtir read Dhrishtah Sarydtir, “ Dhrishta and Saryfti” according to be
Bombay edition. Dhyishta or Dhyishnu was ancesior of tho De
kshattriyas (Hari-V., x. 618 and 642). Sarmáti should be Saryūti 0


THE SAVARNIKA MANV-ANTARA, 463


12 famous Narishyanta,* Nabhagat and Dishta,t and Kurtisha,$
and Prushadhrn,|| world renowned Vasu-mat{—these are
the nine celebrated sons of Manu Vaivasvata.

13 Ihave declared this Vaivasvata period to thee, O brāliman.
When he hears and reads this, 2 man forthwith is freed from
all sins and gains great merit, O best of munis.


Ganto LXXX.


The Sdvarnaka Manv-antara,
Mérkamdeya names the rishis, gods and kings of that period.
Kraushtuki** spoke :
1 Thou hast told mett about these seven Manus, Svayambhuva
and the rest, the gods, the kings and munis which ruled in


2 their periods. Tell me, O great muni, of the seven other
Manus which shall follow in this kalpa, and the gods and


Saryátə ; ho dwelt in the conntry around the Gulf of Cambay, and founded
a dynasty which reigned in Anarta (Hari-V., x. 619 and 642-9; M.-Bh.,
Vano-P. oxxi. 10312, and cxxii; Anuśás.—P. xxx. 1945; Sata-p Brah. iv. 1.
6; and page 368 note §§).

* Or Narishya; he is said to have been the progenitor of the Sakas
(Hari-V., x. 614 and 641).

+ This and the noxt name should apparontly be read as one, viz., for
Nūibhago dishķa rend Nabhagddishta, or better, Ndbhdgdrishta, Ho is said
to have had two sons, who were vaigyas and became brahmans (Hari-V., x.
614, nnd xi. 658).

t See the preceding note.

§ This should he Kartishn as the Bombay edition reads. He was the
progenitor of the Karitshas, who were reckoned as kshattriyas (Hari-V., x.
614, and xi. 658) ; they occupied the country of which Kewa is the centre,
ge page 341 note t.

Or better, Prishadhra as the Bombay edition reads; it is said he was
cursed by his guru and became o sádra (Hari-V., x. 614, and xi. 659).

€ He must be the same as Prārhšu (Hari-V., x. 614), but I have found
no clear allusions to him elsewhere.

9% Wor Kroshtukir read Kraushtukir.

tt Tvayd wouldbebetterthan mayá ; the Bombay reading mama is prefernble,


464 CANTO LXXX,


other rulers, whoever they may be, who shall characte


periods. ii”
Markandeya spoke :

3 Ihave told thee about Sāvarņi also who was the gon of the
Shadow-Saijiid ; equal to his eldest brother Manu, he shall

4 be the eighth Manu. Rāma,* Vyása and Galava,+ Dipti-mat,t
and Kripa,$ Rishyasringa,|| and Droņif were** the Seven
rishis jt of that meriad.

5 And the Suta-pas and Amitablins and Mukhyas shall be
the gods in three divisions; and each group of these three
is said f} to be composed of twenty, and to have the three

6 good qualities. Tapa and Tapas,§§ and Sakra, Dyuti, Jyotis,
Prabhi-kara, Prabhāsa, Dayita, Gharma, Tejas, Rašmi,|[|[

7 Vakratu, and so forth are the Suta-pas, the twenty-fold


9 Jūmadagnya.

t The name of a son of Vi$vā-mitra, and a famous rishi; sea M.-Bh,
AnuSés.—P. iv. 249-59; Hari—V. xxvii. 1460-63, xxxii. 1767-76, and xi: 724-9.
A story of him is told in cantos xx and xxi ante; and n long story in M.-Bh.,
Udyoga-P. cv. and cxiii-oxviii. He is also referred to in Santi-P. celxrxix;,
but the Galava mentioned in Hari—V. xx. 1047-50 belonged to a later period
and was probably a descendant.

Y I have not met with this name elsewhere as the name of a pishi,
nor is it as such in tho dictionary.

§ The name of one of Dhrita-rāshtra's councillors, a well-known figure
īn the Mahā-Bhārata. He was son or descendant of Sarad-vat.

|| The name of a famous yishi, who was brought up in seclusion ing
forest; he pnt an end toa long drought in Anga during king Loma-péda’s
reign, and by sacrifice: obtained four sons for king DaSn-ratha of Ayodhya;
see Ramay., Adi-K. viii. 7—ix. 69; x—xiv and xvii and xviii; M.—Bh., Vana-P.
cx. 9991—cxiii. 10094; Sānti-P. coxxxiv. 8609; and Anušis.—P. cxxxvii. 6269.

S This is not the namo of any rishi, and the name should apparently be
Drona or his son Drauņi ASvatthiman. Both are leading figures in the
Mahā-Bhārata.

*%* Abhavan; the past for the future.

ff All these names are the names of past rishis, and this many-antars, the
Savarnika, is still future; see canto liii. verses 7 and 8.

ft For kathitd$ read kathitag ?

§§ Tapas tapaš c'a; the two words must be different, it seems; and tapa

neuter, is supported by the following jyotis, neuter.
II Or Tejo-raéms, as one name.


THE SĀVARŅIKA MANY-ANTARA. 465


group of gods. Prabhu, Vibhu, Vibhāsa and others are like-
8 wise another group of twenty. Hear also from me the third
group of Amita gods ; Dama, Danta, Rita, Soma, and Vinta
9 andthe rest are the group of twenty. And these shall be
celebrated as Mukhya* gods, rulers of the manv-antara—
they are verily the sons of Maric’a and of the Praja-pati
10 Káśyapa, and they shall be in the future during Savarna
Manu's period. Now the lord of them, O muni, shall be Bali
11 Vairoc'ani, the Daitya who dwells in Patala at present, bound
by a compact.f
And Virajas, and Arvavira, Nirmoha, Satya-vāc', Kriti,
Vishnu and others, the sons of Sāvarņa Manu, shall be
kings.


Canto LXXXI.


Commencement of the Devi-Mahdtmya.
The slaughter of Madhu and Kattabha
in the account of the Sūvarņika Manv-antara.
King Su-ratha being defeated and driven from his kingdom took
- refuge in the forest with a muni— He met a vaisya who had been
driven from his home by his relatives, and both asked the muni about
the selfish feelings which still possessed them.—He ascribes those feel-
ings to the goddess Mahd-mdyd or Great Illusion, and relates how -
Brahmá lauded the goddess at the end of a former kalpa in order to
seek deliverance from the demons Madhu and Kaitabhu, and how
Vishnu awaking slew the demons.


Om! Reverence to O’andika.
Markandeya spoke:
Stirya’s son Sāvarņi is he who is called the eighth Manu.
2 Hear about his birth, as I tell it at full length, how by
reason of the authority of the Great Illusion { that illustrious


9 “Principal,” “ chief.” + Samaya-bandhanak ; or “ bound for a season.”


f Mahd-māyā.
59


466


10


11


12


13
14


15


# Koldvidhvarnsinah. This is an adjective in the nom. plural, agreein


CANTO LXXXI,


son of the Sun, Sāvarņi, became the king of the eighth
manv-antara,

In times ago in the Svūrocisha period, a king named Su.
ratha, sprung of the race of C'aitra, reigned over the whole
earth. „And while he guarded his subjects duly as if they
were his own children, there arose hostile kings, who did
not destroy the Kolas.* He the bearer of 2 very powerful
sceptre had war with them, and was defeated in war by
them, inferior though they were, those non-destroyers of the
Kolas. "Then coming to his own city he reigned as king over
his own country. That illustrious king was attacked then by
those powerful enemies. His powerful and corrupt ministers,
who were evil-disposed to a weak person, thereupon robbed
him of treasury and army even there in his own city. Hence
the king deprived of his sovereignty departed alone on horse-
back to a dense forest under the pretence of hunting. There
he saw the hermitage of the noble dvija Medhas, inhabited
by wild animals which were peaceful, graced by the muni’s
disciples; and he dwelt there some time, honoured by the
muni. And roaming hither and thither in that fine hermi-
tage of the muni, he fell into thought there then, his mind
being distraught by selfishness, egotistical —*' Lost indeed
is the city which I guarded formerly. Whether it is guarded
righteously or not by those my servants of wicked ‘conduct,
I know not. My chief wavr-elephant, always ardent, has passed
into the power of my foes; what pleasures will he obtain?
They who were my constant followers now assuredly pay
court to other kings with favour, riches and food. The
treasure which I amassed with great difficulty will go to
waste through those men, addicted to unbecoming expendi-
ture, who are squandering it continually.” These and other
matters the king thought of continually.


g with


bhúpáh, and not a gen. cnse ; and it is also a single compound, as appears from
the next verse. Besides various fanciful explanations, the commentator
renders kola as fúkara, and the whole word as *' Yavanas.” It seems plain
that the Kolas mean aboriginal races, the Kols, and the whole word denotes
some enemies who were in alliance with the Kolas.


16


17


22


23


24


25


26


27
28


KING SU-RATHA AND THE DESOLATE VAIŠYA, 467


Near the bráhman’s hermitage there he saw a solitary
vaiśya, and asked him, “ Ho! who art thou? and what is the
reason of thy coming here? Why appearest thou as if full
of sorrow, as if afflicted in mind?” Hearing this speech of
the king, which was uttered in friendly mood, the vaišya,
bowing respectfully, replied to the king, “I am a RT
Samádhi by name, born in a family of wealthy folk, aud haye
been cast out by my sons and wife, who are wicked through
greed for wealth. And bereft of riches, wife and sons, taking
my wealth I have come to the forest, unhappy and cast out
by my trusted kinsmen. In this state I know not what is
the behaviour of my sons as regards prosperity or adversity,
nor of my family nor of my wife. Here I dwell. Is welfare
theirs at home now or ill-luck? How are they ? Are my
sons living good or evil lives ? ”


The king spoke:

Why dost thou, Sir, fix thy mental affection on those
covetous folk, thy sons, wife and others, who have cast thee
out from thy wealth ?

The vaišya spoke :

This very thought has occurred to me, just as thou hast
uttered it, Sir. What can Ido? My mind does not enter-
tain implacability ; and my mind, which bears affection as of a
master to his family, is affectionate to those very persons,
who have abandoned affection for a father and driven me
out in their greed for riches. I do not comprehend, although
I know it, O high-minded Sir, how it is that the mind is prone
to love even towards worthless kinsmen. On their account


my sighs flow and distress of mind arises. What can Ido


since my mind is not relentless to those unloving relatives ?


Markandeya spoke:

Thereupon they hoth, the vaigya named Samadhi and the
noble king approached the muni, O brihman, and having
both observed the etiquette worthy of him, as was proper,
they sat down and held various discourse, the vaigya and the


king.


468 CANTO LXXXI.


The king spoke:
29 Adorable Sir! I desire to ask thee one thin
since it tends to afflict my mind without p
80 siveness of my intellect. I have a selfish
kingdom, even with regard to all the requisites of regal
administration, although I know what it is, yet like one who
81 isignorant; how is this, O est of munis? And this man
has been set at nought and cast off by his children, wife and
servants ; and when forsaken by his family he is nevertheless
32 exceedingly full of affection towards them. Thus he and I
also are both excessively unhappy ; our minds are drawn by
selfish thoughts to this matter, even though we perceive the
33 faults in it, How happens this then, illustrious Sir, that we
are deluded although aware of tt, and that this state of delu-
sion besets me and him, who are each blind in respect of
discrimination ?


g; tell me that ;
roducing submis-
feeling for my


The rishi spoke:


34 Every animal has this knowledge in objects cognizable by
the senses and an object of sense reaches it thus in divers ways,

35 illustrious Sir! Some living beings are blind by day, and
others are blind at night; some living beings can see equally

36 well by day and at night. Mankind know what is true, but
not they alone indeed; because cattle, birds, wild ‘animals

37 and other creatures all certainly know it; and men have * the
same knowledge which those wild animals and birds have,
„and equally both wild animals and birds have the other know-

38 ledge which those men have. Though they have such know-
ledge, look at these birds, which, though distressed by hunger
themselves, are yet because of that same delusion assiduous in

39° dropping grains into the beaks of their young ones. Human
beings are full of longings towards their children, O hero; do
they not pass from greed for self unto mutual benefaction ; t


* The Bombay edition reads na instead of c'a, “men haye not the same
knowledge, &o.” l :

+ This is very noteworthy. The ‘altruistic virtues are here said to have
been evolved out of the parental virtues,


40


41


44


45


46


47


48


49


50


MAHÁ-MÁYÁ, THE GODDESS GREAT ILLUSION. 469


dost thou not perceive this? Nevertheless they are hurled
into the whirlpool of selfishness which zs the pit of delusion ;
through the power of the Great Illusion* they make worldly
existence permanent.t Marvel not then at this. This is the
contemplation-sleep of the lord of the world, and the Great
Illusion that comes from Hari; by it the world is completely
deluded. Verily she, the adorable goddess, Great Illusion,
forcibly drawing the minds even of those who know, presents
them to delusion. By her is created this whole universel
both moveable and immoveable ; she it is who when propitious
bestows boons on men with a view to their final emancipation,
She is Knowledge supreme; she is the eternal cause of final
emancipation, and the cause of the bondage of worldly
existence ; she indeed is the queen over all lords.
The king spoke :

Adorable Sir! Who then is that goddess whom thou stylest
Mahá-máyá ? How was she born, and what is her sphere of
action, O brāhman? And what is her disposition, and what
is her nature, and whence did she originate, the goddess—all
that I wish to hear from thee, O thou most learnod in sacred
knowledge!

The rishi spoke:

She exists eternally, embodied as the world. By her this
universe was stretched forth. Nevertheless her origin is in
many ways; hear it from me. When she reveals herself
in order to accomplish the purposes of the gods, tt is then
said inthe world that she is born; she is also named the
Eternal One.{ While the adorable lord Vishnu, stretching
Sesha out, wooed the sleep of contemplation at the end of
the kalpa, when the universe was converted into absolute
ocean, then two terrible Asuras named Madhu and Kaitabha,§


* Mahá-máyá.
+ For Sarnsdra-sthiti-kdriņah the Bombay edition reads Samsdra-sthiti-
kdriņd, “they are hurled, &o., through the power of the Great Illusion which


makes worldly existence permanent.’
t Nitya, § See Hari-Varnša, ocii. 13562-81.


470


53


54


55


56


57


58


CANTO LXXXI.


springing from the root of Vishnu’s ear, sought to sla
Brahmá. Brahma the Prajā-pati stood on th 7


e lotus that grew
from Vishnu’s navel; and seeing those tw


o fierce Asurag
and sleeping Jandrdana, and standing with heart solely thereon


intent, in order to awaken Hari, extolled that Sleep of con.
templation which had made its dwelling in Hari’s eyes— the
lord of splendour extolled Vishnu’s Sleep, which is Queen of the
universe, the supporter of the world, the cause of permanence
and dissolution, full of reverence, incomparable.*


Brahmá spoke:


Thou art Svāhi, thou art Syadha; thou indeed art Vashat-
kara, thou hast sound for thy soul;+ thou art the nectar
of the gods, the two eternal letters,t thou existest having
the three-fold mātris for thy soul; § thou existest half a
mātrā in duration yet eternal; thou indeed canst not be
uttered specifically; thou art || the Sdvitri, thou art the
divine mother** sublime. By thee indeed everything is main-
tained, by thee this world is created, by thee+t itis pro-
tected, O goddess! and thou dost always consume it at the
end. At its emanation thou didst take the form of creation»
and in protecting it thou hast the form of permanence, and
at the end of this world thou wilt have the form of con-
traction, O thou who containest the world! Thou art the


* The Bombay edition introduces staumi and some changes in the second
line, and reads this verse as the beginning of Brahma’s invocation.

+ Or, “thou hast heaven for thy soul,” svardtmikd. The meaning “sound”
seems preferable, as it agrees with the rest of the verse.

f Om? The commentary overlooks this expression, akshare nitye.


§


“The three prosodial measures’? The expression tridhāmdtrdtmikd,


is also divided by the commentator into tri-dhdmd trdtmikd, “ thou hast T
three mansions, (i.e, the three worlds, the three Vedas, the threc chie
deities, &c.), thou hast the preserver (Vishņu) for thy soul.” j

|| For sá team the Bombay edition reads sandhyd, “ the twilight.

q The Gayatri verse. be

** Mor devi janant the Bombay edition reads Veda-janani, “tle mother
the Veda.”


tt


For tvayetat read tvayaitat,


ODE TO MATIA-MAYA. 471


Great Knowledge, the Great Iltusion, the Great Vigour, the
Great Memory, and the Great Delusion,* the Lady, the Great
59 Goddess, the Great Demon.t And thou art the original
source $ of the universe, the exciting cause of the three
qualities ; thou art the Night of the world’s destruction, the
60 Great Night, and the Night of delusion, terrible! Thou art
Good Fortune, thou art Queen, thou art Modesty ; thou art
Intelligence characterized by perception; thou art Shame,
Nourishment, and Content:ment, Tranquillity and Patience
6) also. Thou art terrible, armed with sword, with spear, with
club, and with discus, with conch, with bow, and having as
62 weapons arrows, slings § and an iron mace. Thou art gentle,
yea more than gentle, exceedingly beautiful to those who are
wholly gentle; thou art indeed beyond the highest and the
63 lowest, Queen supreme ! And whatever or wherever a thing
is, whether good or bad, thou art the energy which all that
possesses, O thou who art the soul of everything. Can I
54 extol thee more than this? || By thee, who art such, he
indeed, who created the world, who protects the world, who
consumes the world, is brought under the dominion of sleep.
65 Who is able here to extol thee? Since Vishnu, I and Siva
have been made by thee. to assume bodies, who then may be
66 powerful enough to extol thee? Being such, do thou, O
goddess, lauded thus, bewitch these two unassailable Asuras,
67 Madhu and Kaitabha, with thy exalted powers, and let the
imperishable master of the world be lightly brought back to
consciousness, and let him rouse up his intelligence to slay


these two great Asuras l


* Or rather, “thou hast the great delusion,” Mahd-molhd.

+ Mahdswt. The Bombay edition reads Mahešvari, “the Great Queen.”

+ Prakriti.

§ Bhušuņdi. After explaining this word as a contraction of bhuja-gatru-
mundi, “she who cuts off enemies with her arms,” the commentator says it


Ayer: “o sling” Tho diotionary 6AE ibis “a kind of weapon


(perhaps a kind of fire-arms).” ;
|| Mayá as in the Bombay edition is preferable to iadd. A
{| For gajatpátátti rend jagat páty atti according to the Bombay edition ;


pee yerse 56.


72


73


74


75


76


77


* The Bombay edition makes this sentence the second line of a new V


CANTO LXXXI.


The pishi spoke :

Then the goddess of darkness, extolled thus by the Creator
there in order to awaken Vishnu to slay Madhu and Kaitabha,
issued forth from his eyes, mouth, nose, arms and heart and
breast, and stood in the sight of Brahmá whose birth ig
inscrutable; and Janārdana, master of the world, being
quitted by her, rose up from his couch in the universal ocean ;
and he saw those two then, Madhu and Kaitabha, evil of sonl,
excelling in heroism and prowess, red-eyed through anger,
fully prepared to devour Brahmá. Thereupon the adorable
lord Hari rose up and fought with those two, striking them
with his arms, for five thousands of years. And they, exceed-
ingly frenzied with their power, deluded by the Great Illu-
sion, exclaimed to Keśava, “ Choose a buon from us!”


The god spoke:


Be ye both now content with me; ye must both be slain
by me! What needis there of any other boon here? Thus
much indeed is my choice.


The rishi spoke :

Gazing then at the entire world which was nothing but
water, those two, who had been thus tricked, spoke to the
adorable lotus-eyed god,— Slay us where the earth is not
overwhelmed with water.” *


The rishi spoke :

“ Be itso” said the adorable wielder of the conch, discus
and club, and cutting + them with his discus clove them both
asunder, heads and buttocks.

Thus was she born when praised by Brahma himself. Now
listen again, I tell thee of this goddess’ majesty.


erase


and reads as the first line of ib—Prftau svas tava yuddhena éldghyas ay
mrityur dvayoh, “ We are plensed at the battle with thee; thon art worthy 0:
praise as Death to us!”

+ For kritud read krittud ?


VICTORY OF THE ASURAS OVER THE GODS. 4713”


Canto LXXXII.


—


The Devi-mahatmya.
Slaughter of the army of the Asura Mahisha.


The gods were defeated in a great battle formerly by the Asuras and
driven from heaven, and the Asura Mahisha became supreme.—All
the gods gave forth their special energies, which combined and formed
the goddess Olandikd.—They gave her their weapons, and she fought
with and destroyed the Asuras.

—————
The rishi spoke:

Of yore there was a fight for a full hundred years between

the gods * and Asuras, when Mahisha was lord of the Asuras

2 and Indra lord of the gods; in it the army of the gods was
vanquished by the Asuras who excelled in valour, and the
Asura Mahisha after conquering all the gods became the

3 Indra. Then the vanquished gods, placing the Praja-pati
Brahmá at their head, went where abode Siva and Vishnu.

4 The thirty gods described to them accurately what had
happened, the full story of the gods’ discomfiture which

5 had been wrought by the Asura Mahisha,—“ He, Mahisha, in

his own person domineers over the jurisdictions of the
Sun, Indra, Agni, Vayu and the Moon, of Yama and Varuna

6 and of the other gods. Cast out by that evil-souled Mnhishe

from Svargs all the hosts of the gods wander on the earth

7 like mortals. Ft has ow been related to you both, all that

has been wrought by the foe of the Immortals, and we have
sought you both as X refuge; let his destruction be devised!”


8 Having thus heard the words of the gods, Vishnu was


wroth and Siva also; both their faces became furrowed with


9 frowns. Then issued forth great energy t from the mouth
of Vishnu who was full of intense anger, and from the
10 mouths of Brahmá and Siva; and from the bodies of Indra
® For Davdsuram read Devdsuram. t Tejas.


60


474 CANTO LXXXII.


and the other gods went forth a ver great energy ; and it
11 all amalgamated. The gods beheld the mass of intense
energy there like a burning mountain, pervading the other
12 regions of the sky with its blaze; and that unparalleled
energy born of the bodies of all the gods, which pervaded
the three worlds with its light, gathering into one became
13 a female. By what was Siva's energy her face was deve.
loped, and by Yama’s energy grew her hair, and her arms
14 by Vishņu's energy, by the Moon’s her twin breasts ; and
her waist came into being by Indra's energy, and by Varuna’s
15 her legs and thighs, by the Harth’s energy her hips, by
Brahmi’s energy her feet, her toes by the Sun’s energy, and
by the Vasus’ energy her hands and fingers, and by Kuvera’s
16 her nose; and her teeth grew by the Praja-pati’s energy,
17 and three eyes were developed by Agni’s energy ; and her
eyebrows were the energy of the two twilights, and her ears
Vayu’s energy; and the coming into being of the energies of
the other gods became the auspicious goddess.
18 Then gazing at her, who had sprung from the combined
energies of all the gods, the Immortals who were afflicted by
19 Mahisha felt a keen joy.* The bearer of the bow Pindka
drawing a trident forth from his own trident gave it to her;
and Krishna gave a discus pulling it out of his own discus;
20 and Varuna gave her a conch, Agni a spear, Máruta gave a
21 bowand a quiver filled with arrows.f Indra lord of the
Immortals gave a thunder-bolt pulling it ont of his own
thunder-holt ; the Thousand-eyed gave her a bell from his
22 elephant Airžvata. Yama gave a rod from his own rod of
Fate, and the lord of the waters a noose; and the Prajā-pati
gave her a necklace of beads, Brahmá an earthen water-pot;
23 the Sun bestowed his own rays on all the pores of her skin,
and Destiny f gave her a sword and a spotless shicld ;


* The Bombay odition ingorts a verse here. “Then the gods gavo ber also
their own several weapons; wishing for victory they shouted aloud to the
victorious goddess ‘Conquer ! conquer !? ”

t For vdna-piirne read vadna-piirnd ?

t Or Time, Kāla,


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32
33


34


35


36


37


38


ORIGIN OF THE GODDESS C'AŅPIKĀ. 475


and the Ocean of milk a spotless necklace of pearls and also
a pair of undecaying garments. And a celestial crest-jewel, 8
pair of ear-rings, and bracelets, and a brilliant half-moon
ornament, and armlets over all her arms, and also a pair of
bright anclets, a necklet of the finest make, and rings and
gems on all her fingers — these Vigva-karman gave to her, and
also a brightly polished axe, weapons of many shapes and also
armour that conld not be pierced. And Ocean gave her a
garland of fadeless lotus-flowers for her head and another for
her breast, and a very brilliant lotus-flower besides. Himavat
gave her a lion to ride on and gems of various kinds. Kuvera
gave a drinking cup full of wine. And Sesha, the lord of all
the serpents, who supports this earth, gave her a serpent-
necklace adorned with large gems. Honoured by other gods
also with gifts of ornaments * and weapons, the goddess
uttered a loud roar blended with a horse-laugh again and
again. The whole welkin was filled with her terrible roar.
By that penetrating and exceedingly great rour a great echo
arose, nll the worlds shook and the seas trembled, the earth
quaked and all the mountains moved. And “ Conquer thou !”
exclaimed the gods with joy to her who rode on the lion
and the munis extolled her as they bowed their bodies in
faith.

Seeing all the three worlds greatly agitated, the foes of the
Immortals uniting all their armies rose up together, with up-
lifted weapons. “ Ha! what is this?” exclaimed the Asura
Mahisha in wrath, and rushed surrounded by all the Asuras
towards that roar. Then he saw the goddess, pervading the
three worlds + with her light, causing the earth to bow at the
touch of her feet, grazing the firmament with her crest,
shaking the whole of Pūtāla with the twang of her bow-string,
standing pervading the sky all around with her thousand
arms. Then began 2 battle between the goddess and the


# For bhashaņair read bhūshaņair.
+ For vydpta-loka-trajum read vydpta-loka-traydm, with the Bombay
edition; otherwise this word, read as a neuter noun, separatos devfm from the


feminine adjectives which follow.


476 CANTO LXXXII.


89 enemies of the gods, in which every region of the sky was.
illumined with the weapons and arms hurled in abundance
And the Asura Mahisha’s general, the great Asura named
40 G'ikshura, fought with her; and the Asura C’amara attended by
his cavalry fought along with others. The great Asura
41 named Udagra with six myriads of chariots Sought ; and
Mahā-hanu with a thousand myriads gave battle ; and the
42 great Asura Asi-loman with fifty millions; with six hundred
myriads Vaskala fought in the battle; Ugra-dargana + with
43 many troops of thousands of elephants and horses, and sur-
rounded with ten million chariots fought in that battle; and
44 the Asura named Vidala fought in the battle there, surround-
ed with fifty myriads of myriads of chariots. And other
45 great Asuras in myriads, surrounded with chariots, elephants
and horses, fought with the goldess in that battle there. Now
46 the Asura Mahisha was surrounded with thousands of ten
million times ten millions of chariots and elephants and horses
in the battle there. With iron maces and javelins, with spears
47 and clubs, with swords, with axes and halberds they fought
in the battle against the goddess. And some hurled spears,
48 and others nooses, but they assailed the goddess with blows
from their swords in order to slay her.
And then the goddess O’andika clove, as it were in merest
49 play, those weapons and arms by raining forth her own
weapons and arms. The goddess betrayed no exertion in her
50 countenance, while the gods and rishis were praising her. The
queenly goddess hurled her weapons and arms at the Asuras’
bodies. The lion also that bore the goddess, enraged and
51 with ruffled mane, stalked among the armies of Asuras, like
fire through the forests. And the deep breaths, which
52 Ambiká fighting in the battle breathed forth, came into real
being at once as troops by hundreds and thousands. These
fought with axes, with javelins, and swords and halberds,
53 destroying the Asura bands, being invigorated by the god-


ef ice
* Instead of pari-váritah I take the reading of the Bombay edition se
daršana as a proper nime. The Calcutta text contains no name as 8 N
native in this line or the next,


THE GODDESS ELAUGHTERS THE ASURA ARMIES, 477


dess’ energy. And of these bands some raised a din with
54 large drums, and others with conchs, and others besides with
drums, in that great battle-festival. Then the goddess with
55 her trident, her club, with showers of spears, and with her
sword and other weapons slaughtered the great Asuras in
56 hundreds, and laid others low who were bewitched with the
ringing of her bell; and binding other Asuras with her noose
dragged them on the ground. And others again, cloven in
57 twain by sharp slashes of her sword and crushed* by blows
with her mace, lie on the ground; and some grievously
58 battered by her club vomited forth blood. Some were felled
to the ground, pierced in the breast by her trident. Some
being closely massed together were cut in pieces+ by the
59 torrent of her arrows in the battle-field. Following the manner
of an army,f the afflicters of the thirty gode gave up the
ghost; some with their arms cut off, and others with severed
60 necks; their heads fell from others, others were torn asunder
in the middle; a1.1 other great Asuras fell to the earth with
61 legs clean cut off; some were cloven by the goddess into two
parts, with a single arm and eye and foot to each part; and
others fell and rose again, although with head cut off.
62 Headless corpses, still grasping the finest weapons, fought
with the goddess; and others danced there in the battle,
keeping time to the strains of the musical instruments.
63 Corpses, with heads severed, still held swords and spears and
lances § in their hands; and other great Asuras were shouting
64 to the goddess, “Stand! stand !” || With the prostrate chariots,
elephants and horses and Asuras the earth became impassable


# Vi-pothita; vi-puth is not in the dictionary.

+ For kritdļ read krittah ?

f Sendnukdriņah ; but the commentator translates it, “fighting in the
rear of the army.” The Bombay edition reads saildnukdrinah, “ who resem-
bled mountains.”

§ For ushfi read rishķi.

|| The Bombay edition adds a line to this verso, “ whilo from their mangled
limbs flowed streams of blood (rudhiraugha-viluptanyah) in that appalling
battle.”


478 CANTO LXXXIII.


65 where that great battle took place. And large riverg formed
of torrents of blood straightway flowed along there amidst
the armies of Asuras, aud among the elephants, Asuras and
horses.

66 Thus Ambiká brought that great army of the Asuras to
utter destructionin a moment, even as fire utterly consumes

67 a huge pile of grass and timber. And the lion, with quivering
mane, stalked on roaring aloud.* While he prowled + as it
were for lives out of the bodies of the foes of the Immortals,

68 the battle was fought there between those troops of the
goddess and the Asuras, so that the gods in heaven sending
down showers of flowers gratified į her.§


Canto LXXXIII. 3


The Devt-mdhdtmya.


The slaying of the Asura Mahisha.


The description of the battle is continued—The goddess slew the
Asura chiefs in single combat and finully the Asura Mahisha.


The pishi spoke:
1 Now the great Asura, the general C'ikshura, seeing that
army being slaughtered, advanced in wrath to fight with
2 Ambika. The Asura rained a shower of arrows on the god-
dess in the battle, as a cloud deluyes mount Meru’s summit
8 with a shower of rain. The goddess, cutting asunder the
masses of his arrows then as it were in play, smote his horses
4 with her arrows and their charioteer ; and split his bow forth-
with and his banner raised high aloft; and with swift


* The Bombny edition repeats here the second line of verse 50.
+ Yi-c'invati, the loc. case, with simhe understood.

1 Or “lauded, ” according to another reading.

§ For eshdm read enám.


14


15


16


17


18
19


THE GODDESS SLAYS THE ASURA CHIFFS. 479


missiles pierced his limbs as he stood with shattered bow.
His bow shattered, his chariot useless, his horses killed, his
chavioteer slain, the Asura armed with sword and shield
rushed at the goddess. With the utmost celerity he smote
the lion on the head with his sharp-edged sword, and struck
the goddess also on her left arm. His sword shivered to
pieces as it touched her arm (O prince). Thereon red-eyed
with anger, he grasped his pike, and he, the great Asura,
flung it at Bhadra-kāli, as it were the Sun’s orb blazing
brightly with its splendour from out the sky. Seeing that
pike falling on her, the goddess hurled her pike, and it
shattered that pike into a hundred fragments and the great
Asura also.

When he, Mahisha’s very valiant general, was slain,
C'āmara, the afflicter of the thirty gods, advanced mounted
on an elephant; and he also hurled his spear at the goddess.
Down to the ground Ambika quickly struck it, assailed with
a contemptuous hoot and rendered lustre-less. Seeing his
spear broken and fallen, O’émara filled with rage flung a pike;
and that she split with her arrows. Then the lion leaping
up fastened on to the hollow of the elephant’s forehead, and
fought in close combat aloft with that foe of the thirty gods ;
but both then fell, as they were fighting, from the elephant
to the ground. They fought closely locked together with
most terrible blows. Then quickly springing up to the sky,
and descending, the lion severed C'4mara's head with a blow
from his paw. ;

And Udagra was slain in battle by the goddess with stones,
trees and other things, and Karála also was stricken down
by her teeth and fists and feet.* And the goddess enraged
ground Ud-dhata to powder with blows from her ciub; and
killed Vaskala with a dart, Tamra and Andhnka with arrows.
And the supreme three-eyed goddess slew Ugrasya and Ugra-
virya and Mahé-hanu also with her trident. With her sword
she struck Viddla’s head clean down from his body. She


® Danta-mushti-talaif; or, according to the commentatorfwith the lower


parts of her ivory sword-hilt.”


480 CANTO LXXXIII.


despatched both Dur-dhara and Dur-mukha to Yama’, abode
with her arrows.*
20 Now, as his army was beiug thus destroyed utterly, the
Asura Mahisha in his own buffalo-shape terrified her troops
21 Some he lail low by a blow from his muzzle, and others Ls
stamping with his hooves, and others because they were lashed
22 with his tail and gashed with his horns, and others again by
his impetuous rush, his bellowing and his wheeling career,
and others by the blast of his breath—thus he laid them low
23 on the face of the earth. Having laid low the van of her
army, the Asura rushed to attack the great goddess’ lion.
24. Thereat Ambika displayed her wrath. And he, great in
valour, pounding the surface of the earth with his hooves in
his rage, tossed the mountains aloft+ with his horns and
25 bellowed. Crushed by his impetuous wheelings the earth
crumbled to pieces; and the sen lashed by his tail overflowed
26 inevery direction; and the clouds pierced by his swaying
horns were rent to fragments; mountains fell in hundreds
from the sky, being cast down by the blast of his breath.
27 C’andiké looked on the great Asura, as swollen with rage he
rushed on, and gave a way to her wrath then in order to slay
28 him. She flung her noose full over him, and bound the great
Asura fast. And he quitted his buffalo shape when held
29 boundin the great battle, and then became a lion suddenly.
While Ambik4 is cutting off his head he took the appearance
30 ofa man with scymitar in hand. Straightway the goddess
with her arrows swiftly pierced the man together with his
seymitav and shield. Then hé became a huge elephant, and
31 tugged at her great lion with his trunk and roared, but the
goddess cut off his trunk with her sword as he made his tugs.


* The Bombay edition inserts four lines here. “And she, who is the Night
of Fate, laid Kala low with her rod of Fate. She belabonred peade
with very fierce blows from her scymitar. She clove Asi-loman indeed wi i
her sword in the battle-festival. Her troops, her lion and the goddess herse
raised alond the battle-cry of victory along with those battle-festivals.”

+ Uédaih, which the Bombay edition reads, is preferable to uc’e’an,
mountains,” :


“ high


36


37


38


39


40


41


e


THE GODDESS SLAYS THE ASURA MAHISHA, „481


Next the great Asura assumed his buffalo shape again, and


` go shook the three worlds with all thatis moveable and im-


moveable therein. Enraged thereat C’andika, the mother of
the world, quaffed a sublime beverage again and again,* and
laughed as her eyes gleamed ruddy. And the Asura roared
out, puffed up with his strength and valour and frenzy, and
hurled mountains against C’andika with his horns. Aud she,
shivering to atoms with showers of arrows those mountains
that he hurled, spoke to him in confused words, while her
mouth was rendered ruddier by-the mead that she had drunk.


The goddess spoke :


Roar, roar on thy brief moment, O fool, the while I quaff
this mead! The gods shall soon roar, when I shall slay thee
even here.

Exclaiming thus she leaped upwards and sat herself on that
great Asura, and kicked him onthe neck with her foot and
struck him with her spear. And thereupon he, being assailed
by her foot, half issued forth+ from his own mouth in sooth,
being completely encompassed by the goddess’ valour. That
great Asura being thus’ attacked half issued forth indeed.
The goddess struck off his head with her great sword and
laid him low. ¢

Then perished all that Daitya army with great lamentation.
And all the hosts of the gods rose to the highest ‘exultation.
The gods and the great heavenly rishis poured forth praises
to the goddess, the Gandharva chiefs burst into song and the


bevies of Apsarases into dances.


See canto Ixxxii, verse 29.


+ For evdti the Bombuy edition reads evasid.


t The Bombay edition inserts two verses here.


“hus the Asura named


Mahisha was destroyed by the goddess along with his army and his bands of
friends, after he had bewitched the three worlds. When Mahisha was slain,
all created things in tho three worlds then uttered the shout ‘ Conquer thou !*
along with gods and Asuras aud men,”


61


482 CANTO LXXXIV.


Canto LXXXIV,


The Devi-māhdimya.
The Slaying of the Asura Muhisha concluded.


The gods poured forth their praises to O'aņdikd on her victory—And
she gave them the boon that she would always befriend them, if
they recalled her to mind in calamities.


The rishi spoke : *


1 When that most valiant evil-souled army of the gods’ foes
was vanquished by the goddess, Sakra and the hosts of other
gods poured forth their praises to her with their voices,
reverently bending down their necks* and shoulders, while
their bodies looked handsome because their hair stood erect
with exultation.

2 The goddess, who stretched out this world by her power,

Whose body comprises the entire powers of all the hosts
of gods,

Her, Ambik4, worthy of worship by all gods and great
rishis,

We bow beforet in faith; may she ordain blessings for us!

8 May she, whose peerless majesty and power Ananta

Adorable, Brahmá and Hara cannot in sooth declare,
May she, O’andika, to protect the entire world
And to destroy the fear of evil turn her mind !

4 Her, who is Good-Fortune herself in the dwellings of men

of good deeds, Ill-Fortune


* The Bombay edition inserts a preliminary verse here—“ Thep all m
hosts of gods with Indra at their head began to sing the praise of ši
goddess, when the Asura Mahisha was slain.’ This is tautological %
guperfluons. i

+ For -$iro-dhardmsd read -Sirodhardmsa ag in the Bombay edition. Pe

t Natdļ sma; so again in verse 4. This seems & peculiar use ©
particle sma, Similarly pra-ņati% sma in canto Ixxxv; verse 7.


* For kula-jana-prabhasya read kula-jana-prabhavasya,


VJ >
HYMN TO C'AŅDIKA. 483


In those of men of sinful souls; who ts Intelligence in the
hearts of the prudent,

Who is Faith in those of the good, and Modesty in that of
the high-born man ;*

Her, even thee, we bow before; protect the universe,
O goddess !

Can we describet+ this thy thought-transcending form ?

Or thy abundant surpassing valour that destroyed the
Asuras ?

Or thy surpassing feats which were displayed in battles

Among all the hosts of Asuras, gods and others, O goddess ?

Thou art the cause of all the worlds! Though character-
ized by the three qualities, by faults§

Thou art not known! Even by Hari, Hara and the other
gods thou art incomprehensible !

Thou art the resort of all; thou art this entire world which,
is composed of parts!

Thou verily art sublime original Nature || untransformed !

Thou, whose complete divinity by means of utterance

Finds satisfaction in all sacrifices, O goddess, T

Art verily Svāhā, and givest satisfaction to the Pitri-hosts !

Hence thou art in truth declared by men to be Svadha
also.

Thou art she, who effects final emancipation, and performs
great thought-transcending penances !

Thou studiest** with thy organs, which are the essence of
strength, tT well-restrained !


with the Bombay


edition.
+ Kim varnaydma.
f For tavdti ydni
eguivalent.
§ For doshair the Bombay edition reads devair,
|| Prakriti.
« The Bombay edition reads plurals.
** Abhy-asyase; atmane-pada, which seems rare.
tt Sattva-sdraik of the Bombay edition is preferable to tattva-sérath.


which is inferior.


the Bombay edition reads tavddbhutdni, which is


10


ll


12


CANTO LXXXIV.


With munis, who seek final emancipation and who ha
shed all their faults, ve


Thou art The Knowledge, adorable, subline in sooth, Q
goddess !

Sound is thy soul! thou art the repository of the most
spotless rič and yajus hymns,

And of the simans, which have the charming-worded textg
of the Ud-githa!

Thou as goddess art the triple Vedu, the adorable, and for
the existence and production

Of all the worlds art active ; thou art the supreme destroyer
of their pains !*

Thou art Mental Vigour,t O goddess! thou hast compre-
hended the essence of ull the Scriptures !

Thou art Durga; the boat to cross the difficult ocean of
existence ; devoid of attachments !

Thou art Sri, who has planted her dominion alone in the
heart of Kaitabha’s foe !

Thou indeed art Gauri, who has fixed her dweling in the
moon-crested god !

Slightly-smiling, spotless, resembling the full moon’s

Orb, beautiful as the choicest gold, and lovely was thy
face!

Yet 't was very marvellous that, being swayed by anger,

The Asura Mabisha suddenly smote thy, face when he
saw it.

But after seeing thy wrathful face, O goddess, terrible with
its frowns,

And sheeny in hue like the rising moon, that Mahisha


Did not forthwith yield up his life, *t was passing wonder-
ful!


* This half verse admits of more than one translation. I have adopted
from the commentary what seems the most natural meaning. Vdrttd dk
obscure ; the commentary explains it as vrittánta-rúpá, " having the fong 4
events” or “having the form of history ;'” or as krishi-go-rakshddi-vritt)
“ following the occupations of cultivation, cattle-rearing and such like.”

+ Medhd.


13


14


15


16


17


HYMN TO C'AŅDIKA. 485


For who can live after beholding the King of.Death en-
raged P


. Be gracious, O goddess, as supreme lady, to life !


When enraged thou dost forthwith destroy whole families !

Known at this very moment is this, that here is brought .
to its end

The Asura Mahisha’s most extensive might!

Esteemed are they among the nations, theirs are riches,

Theirs are glories, and. their sum of righteousness*
perishes not,

Happy are they indeed, and they possess devoted children,
servants and wives,

On whom thou, well-pleased, dost always bestow prosperity,
O lady! i

All righteous actions ever indeed, O goddess,

With utmost respect the man of good deeds daily performs,

And gains heaven thereafter by thy favour, O lady.

Dost thou not by himt bestow rewards even on the three
worlds, O goddess ?

Thou, O Durgi, when called to mind, dost remove terror
from every creature !

Thou, when called to mind by those in health, dost bestow
a mind extremely bright!

What goddess but thou, O dispeller of poverty, pain and
fear,

Has ever benevolent thoughts in order to work benefits to
all?

By these slain foes the world attains to happiness; thus
let these

Forsooth practise sin so as to descend to hell for long !§


* Or bandhu-vargah, “whole body of kinsfolk,” according to the Bombay
edition. ‘

+ Tena, or “therefore.” :

t Or wpaitu, “ may it attain,” according to the Bombay edition.

§ This appears to be one meaning given in the commentary; another,
which seems to be preferred, is to read náma narakdya as na dma-narakdya,
“ Tet these not practice sin so as to descend to the Hell of Disease for long!”


486 CANTO LXXXIV.


HESS death in battle let them proceed to heaven”
Thinking thus, thou dost assuredly destroy the enemie
O goddess ! 8,
18 Having indeed seen them, why dost thou not, O lady
reduce to ashes )
All the Asuras, since thou directest thy weapons against
the foes ?
‘Let even enemies, purified by dying in arms, attain in
sooth to the bright worlds ’—
Such is thy most kindly intention towards even them.
19 And though, neither by the sharp flashes* of abundant
light from thy scymitar,
Nor by the copious lustre of thy spear-point, the eyes of
the Asuras
Were destroyed ; yet, as they gazed upon thy countenance
Which bore a portion of the radiant moon, this very thing
happened.
20 Thy disposition, O goddess, subdues the conduct of men
of evil conduct ;
And this thy form surpasses thought and rivalry by others;
And thy valour vanquishes those who have robbed the gods
of their prowess ;
Thou hast as it weret manifested pity thus even on
enemies !
21 To what my this thy prowess be compared ?
And whereto thy form most charming, which strikes fear
among foes ?
Compassion in mind and relentlessness in battle are seen
In thee, O goddess, who bestowest boons even on the three
worlds! f


22 Through the destruction of the foes, these three worlds
entire j
Have been saved by thee. Having slain them in the battle
front
* Visphurana; not in the dictionary. . i bsy
+ Or prakafitaiva, “ thou hast indeed manifested,” as ln the Bom


edition.


HYMN TO C/ANDIKA. 487


Thou hast led even those hosts of foes to heaven, and
dispelled the fear
Which beset us from the frenzied foes of the gods.
Reverence to thee!
23 With thy spear protect us, O goddess !
Protect us with thy sword also, O Ambika!
By the clanging of thy bell protect us,
And by the twanging of the thong of thy bow!
24 In the east guard us, and in the west ;
O C'aņdiki, guard us in the south
By the brandishing of thy spear,
And also in the north, O goddess !
25 Whatever gentle forms of thee wander about in the three
worlds,
And whatever exceedingly terrible forms wander, by means
of them guard us and tho earth!
26 Thy sword and spear and club, and whatever other weapons,
O Ambika,
Rest in thy pliant hand, with them guard us on every side !
The rishi spoke :
27 Thus was she, the Upholder of the worlds, hymned by the
gods, and they paid honour to her with celestial flowers that
blossomed in Nandana, and with perfumes and unguents.


28 Moreover all the thirty gods in faith censed her with heavenly
incenses. Benignly sweet in countenance she spoke to all


the prostrate gods.
The goddess spoke :
29 Choose, ye thirty all! whatever ye desire of me, for I grant
it with pleasure, being highly honoured by these bymns.*
The gods spoke:


30 Thou, O adorable Indy, hast accomplished all, nought
remains undone, in that this Asura Mahisha, our foe has


* Tle Bombay edition inserts another verse here—“ ‘And whatever else
must be done, I do not deem it difficult.’ Hearing this speech from the
goddess, those heaven-dwellers made answer.”


488
31


32


33


34


35


36


The


CANTO LXXXV.


been slain. Yet if thou must grant us a boon, O godde
great! whenever we call thee, call thee to mind, do tā
away with our direst calamities! And whatever mote
shall praise thee with these hymns, O lady of Spotless conn.
tenance, to prosper him in wealth and wife and other bless.
ings by means of riches, success and power do thou incline
always, O Ambika, who art propitious to us!
The rishi spoke :

Being thus propitiated by the gods for the good of the
world and on their own behalf, “ Be it so ! ” said she, Bhadra-
kāli ; and vanished from their sight, O king.

Thus I have narrated this, O king, how the goddess came into
being of yore from out of the gods’ bodies, she who desires the
good of all the three worlds. And again she came into existence
having the body of Gauri, just as she did before, in order
to slay the wicked Daityas and Sumbha and Nigumbha, and
to preserve the worlds, as benefactress of the gods. Hearken


then to what I have declared to thee. I have truly told it
thee.


Canto LXXXV.


The Devi-máhátmya.
The goddess’ conversation with the Asurw’s messenger.


Asuras Sumbha and Nisumbha conquered the gods and drove
them from heaven.—The gods invoked C'aņdikd at Himavat in 4
hymn, appealing to her by all her attributes to help them.—P árvalí
came there and O'andiká sprang forth from her body.—Lhe
servants of Sumbha and Nišumbha saw her and extolled her
perfect beauty to Sumbha.—He sent a messenger to invite her fo
marry hin.—She explained that by a vow she could marry no one
who did not conquer her in fight.
The pishi spoke : tā
Of yore the Asuras Sumbha and Nigumbha, trusting 1


THE GODS INVOKE c/ANDIKS 489


their pride and strength, robbed Sači's lord of the three
2 worlds* and of his portions of the sacrifices; they both
usurped. likewise the sun’s dignity and the moon’s dominion,
3 and Kuvera's and Yama's and Varuna’s; and they both
exercised Wayu’s authority and Agni’s sphere of action.t
Thereby the gods were scattered, deprived of their sover-
4 eignties and put to rout. The thirty gods, bereft of their
dominion and set at nought by those two great Asuras, all
5 recall to mind that never-vanguished goddess,—* Thou didst
grant us the boon,{ ‘As ye when in calamities shall call me to
mind,§ that very moment will I put an end to all your direst
6- calamities.” Making this resolve the gods went to Hima-
vat, lord among mountains, and there raised their hymn to
the goddess, who is Vishnu’s illusive power. ||


The gods spoke :


7 Reverence to the goddess, to the great goddess !
To her who is auspicious reverence perpetually l
Reyerence to Prakriti the good ! ; ;
Submissive we fall prostrate before her ! T

8 Reverence to her who is terrible, to her who is constant !
To Gauri, to Dhátrí reverence, yea reverence !
And to the Moon-light,** to her who has the moon’s form,
To her who is happy, reverence continually !


æ For traikokyam read trailokyam.
+ The Bombay edition inserts a line here—
anyesham c'ádhikárán sah svayam evadhitishthati
and reads the first three words with the preceding words, but does not
explain the last four in its commentary. I would suggest that the line


should run thus —
anyeshūm adhikdrdméc'a svayam evddhitashthatuh


“ and they themselves dominated the lordships of the other gods.”
t See canto Ixxxiv, verse 31.
§ Smritdkhildh, i.e., smritd, and akhildļ agreeing with paramdpadah.
|| Vishnu-mdyd. s
€ Pranatah sma tām ; sma is used here with a past participle.
se Jyotendyat.


62


490 CANTO LXXXV.


9 Falling prostrate, to her who is propitious, to Prosperity, r
To Perfection let us pay t reverence, yea reverence !
To Nirriti,f to the goddess of Good-Fortune of kings, -
To thee, Sarvani, reverence, yea reverence!

10 To Durga, to her who is a further shore difficult to be

reached, §
To her who is essential, to her who works all things, |}
And to Fame also, to her who is blue-black,T
To her who is smoke-dark reverence continually !

11 Before her who is at once most gentle and most harsh
We fall prostrate ; to her reverence, yea reverence !
Reverence to her who is the foundation of the world!
To the goddess who is Action reverence, yea reverence !

12 . To the goddess who among all created things
Is called Vishnu’s illusive power,

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !

13 To the goddess who among all created beings
Bears the name Consciousness,**

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !

14 To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm tt} with the form of Intellect, tt
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !


# For Vridvyai read Vriddhyai. But the Bombay edition reads mridvyds,
“ to her who is gentle.”

+ Kurmo; the Bombay edition reads Ktirmyat, ** to the female Tortoise.”

t “Dissolution.”

§ Durga-pardyai.

|| Sarva-kdriņyat ; this violates the metre. The Bombay edition reads
better, sarva-kdriņi, “ O thou who workest all things!”

4 Krishndyat.

st O’etand.

tt Samethité; or “abides” The commontary explains it 85 samyak
sthitá.

tt Buddhi-rúpeņa,


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


HYMN TO C/ANDIKA


To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Sleep,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Hunger,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence,
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Shadow,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Energy,*
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Thirst,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Patience,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Speciality,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence!
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Modesty,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings


# Sakti-ripena.


+ Játi. The commentary explains it as nityaikdnugata


aneka-samavdyint.


491.


-pratyaya-hetur


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


CANTO LXXXV.


Stands firm with the form of Peaceableness,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Faith,
Reverence to her, yea, reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Loveliness,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Good-Fortune,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! *
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Activity,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Memory,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings
Stands firm with the form of Mercy,
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence! t
To the goddess who among all created beings


Stands firm with the form of Contentment,


Reverence to her, yea reverence to her !
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !
To the goddess who among all created beings


; R dess
* The Bombay edition inserts here a similar verse, invoking the god
in the form of Steadfastness (dhriti). T
+ After this verse and after verse 30 the Bombay edition inserts


similar verses, invoking the goddess in the form of Good Policy


(ntti) and


Nourishment 'puehfi) respectively.


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


HYMN TO C'AŅDIKĀ 493


Stands firm with the form of Mother,

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!

Reverence to her, reverence, yew reverence !

To the goddess who among all created beings

Stands firm with the form of Error,

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !

To her who both governs the organs of sense

Of created beings, and rules among all

Created beings perpetually,—to her

The goddess of Pervasiveness reverence, yea reverence !

To her who exists pervading this entire

World with the form of Thinking Mind,

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her!

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence !

Praised by the gods afore-time because of eagerly-desired
protection,

And waited upon by the lord of the gods many days,

May she, the goddess, the origin of brightness, accomplish
for us

Bright things, yea good things, and ward off calamities!

And she, who is both reverenced as queen by us gods,

Who are tormented now by the arrogant Daityas,

And whom we called to mind as we bow our bodies in faith,*

She this very moment destroys + all our calamities !


The rishi spoke :
While the gods were thus engaged in offering hymns and
other reverential acts, Parvati came there to bathe in the water


of the Ganges, O prince. She, the beautiful-browed, said to
those gods,—'* Whom do ye, lords, hymn here?” And spring-


* Bhakti-vinamra-mūrttibhi must be taken with asmdbhir, though it is
ill-placed as the verse stands. It would be better to read the second half of
the verse thus—


Yá c'a smritd bhakti-vinamra-mirttibhih
Sarudpadas tat-kshaņam eva hanti nah.


+ Hantu, “ may she destroy,” would be better than hanti.


494,


39


40


41


42


43


44


45


46


47


48


49


50


51


CANTO LXXXV,


ing forth from the treasure-house of her body the AUSPiciong
goddess spoke—* For me this hymn is uttered b

bled gods, who have been set at nought by the Daitya
Sumbha and routed in battle by Nisumbha.” Becauss
Ambikā issued forth from the treasure-house* of Parvati's
body, she is therefore named in song as Kaushiki+
among all the worlds. Now after she had issued forth, the
other also, even Pārvati, became Krishna; she is celebrated
as Kāliki; she fixed her abode on Mount Hima-vat.

Thereafter C’anda, and Munda, the two servants of Sumbha
and Nisumbha, saw Ambika displaying her sublime and most
captivating form ; and both spake out unto Sumbha ;—

“ What woman then, most surpassingly captivating, dwells
here, illuminating Mount Hima-vat, O great king? Such
sublime beauty was never in sooth seen by anyone anywhere;
let it be ascertained if she is any goddess, and let her be taken
possession of, O lord of the Asuras. A gem among women,
surpassingly beautiful in body, illuminating the regions of
the sky with her lustre, there she is then, O lord of the
Daityas; deign, Sir, to look at her. Moreover, whatever
gems, precious stones, elephants, horses and other valuable
things indeed exist in the three worlds, O lord, all those
display their splendour at this present time in thy house.
Airāvata, gem among elephants, has been captured from
Purandara; and this Párijáta tree and also the horse Uééaih-
Sravas. Here stands the heavenly chariot yoked with swans
in thy court-yard ; it has been brought here, the wonderful
chariot composed of gems, which belonged to Brahma.
Here is the Nidhi Mahā-padma,f captured from the Lord
of wealth. And the Ocean gave a garland made of filaments
and of undying lotus flowers. In thy house stands Varuna 8
umbrella, which streams with gold. And here is the Oe
chariot that belonged to Praja-pati formerly. Thou, 0 lore,


y the assem.


* Kosha; but koša is better.
+ Kauéikt is better. The derivation is of course absurd.
t See canto Ixviii, verse 12.


52


53


54


55


56


57


58


59


60


61


62


ŚUMBHA’S MESSAGE TO C’ANDIKA 495


hast carried off Death’s power which is named Utkranti-da.*
The noose of the Ocean-king is in thy brother’s possession.
And Nišumbha has every kind of gem which is produced
in the sea, Agni also gave thee two garments which are
purified by fire. Thus, O lord of the Daityas, all gems
have been captured by thee; why dost thou not seize this
auspicious lady, this gem of womankind ?”


The rishi spoke:


Sumbha, on hearing this speech then from C'aņda and
Munda, sent the great Asura Su-griva as messenger to the
goddess, saying—* Go and address her thus and thus
according to my words, and lightly conduct the matter so that
she may come to me of her own good pleasure.” He went to
where the goddess sat on a very bright spot in tho mountain
and spoke gently with mellifluous voice.


The messenger spoke :


O goddess! Sumbha, lord of the Daityas, is supreme lord,
over the three worlds. A messenger am I, sent by him; to
thy presence here I have come. Hearken to what he has
said, whose command is never resisted among all beings of
divine origin, and who has vanquished every foe of the
Daityas—* Mine are all the three worlds; obedient to my
authority are the gode, I eht every portion of the sacrifices
separately. The choicest gems in the three worlds are alto-
gether under my power; and so aro the finest elephants and
the chariot of the lord of the gods, since I have captured
them. That gem among horses, named Uééaih-sravasa, which
came forth at the churning of the sea of milk, was presented
to me by the immortals who prostrated themselves before me.
And whatever other created things in the shape of gems
existed among the gods, Gandharvas and Nagas, they were
presented even to me, O brilliant lady. I esteem thee
O goddess, to be the gem of womankind in the world ; do


# «Giving an exit,” “ granting departure.”


496


64


65


66


67


68


69


70


71


72


73


74


CANTO LXXXV,


thou, who art such, approach unto me, since I nm


s an enj
of gems. Either to me, or to my younger brother Bo


S : Nisuinbha
of wide-reaching prowess, approach thou, O lady of quick
side-glances, since thou art in truth a gem. Supreme


dominion beyond compare thou shalt gain by wedding me
Understand and consider this, and come unto wedlock with
me!” i


The rishi spoke:


Thus accosted the goddess, smiling deeply within herself
she, Durga the adorable and good, who supports this world,
sang this reply then,


The goddess spoke :


Truly hast thou spoken; nought hast thou uttered falsely
herein. Sovereign of the three worlds is Sumbha, and like
unto him is Nigumbha also! But how can that which has
been promised concerning this myself be fulfilled falsely?
Hearken, what vow I made formerly by reason of my small
understanding at that time,—* He who vanquishes me in fight,
who forces my pride from me, and who is my match in
strength in the world, he shall be my husband.’ Let Sumbha
come here then, or Nisumbha the great Asura; let him
vanquish me—what need of delay here? and let him lightly
take my hand in marriage !


The messenger spoke:


Proua art thon! Talk not so before me, O goddess!
What male in the three worlds may stand front to front with
Sumbha and Nišumbha? Ail the gods verily stand not face
to face with even the other Daityas in battle, O goddess ;
how much less canst thou so stand, a woman single-handed !
With Sumbha and those other Daityas, against whom Indra
and all the other gods stood not in battle, how shalt thou,
a woman, venture face to face? Do thou, being such, to
whom I have in sooth delivered my message, go near unto
Sumbha and Nigambha; let it not be that thou shalt go with


C/ANDIKA’S MESSAGE TO SUMBHA. 497


thy dignity shattered in that thou wilt be dragged thither by
thy hair!


The goddess spoke :


75 So strong as this is Sumbha! and so exceedingly heroic is
Nigumbha! What can I do, since there stands my ill-con-

76 sidered promise of long ago? Go thou thyself; make known
respectfully to the lord of the Asuras all this that I have said
to thee, and let him do whatever is fitting.


Canto LXXXVI.


The Devi-mdhātmya :


The slaying of Sumbha and Nigwmbha’s general Dhumra-loc'ana.

Sumbha despatched his general Dhiimra-loc'ana and an’ army to
capture the goddess and she destroyed them.—He then despatched
O'anda and Munda with another army.


The rishi spoke :
1 The messenger, on hearing this speech from the goddess,
was filled with indignation, and approaching related it fully
9 tothe Daitya king. The Asura monarch then, after hearing
that report from his messenger, was wroth and commanded
Dhimra-logana, a chieftain of the Daityas ;—
3 «Ho! Dhūmra-lodana, haste thee together with thy army ;
fetch by force that shrew, who will be unnerved when dragged.
4, along by her hair. Or if any man besides stands up to offer
her deliverance, let him be slain, be he an Immortal, a Yaksha


or a Gandharva forsoot PH
The pishi spoke :

5 Thereupon at his command the Daitya Dhūmra-ločana went
6 forthwith quickly, accompanied by sixty thousand Asuras. On

seeing the goddess stationed on the snowy mountain, he cried

aloud to her there—‘“ Come forward to the presence of Sumbha
7 and Nigumbha; if thou wilt not, lady, approach my lord with

63


498


20


CANTO LXXXVI.


affection now, I will here take thee by force, who wilt be
nerved since thou shalt be dragged along by thy hair!” a


The goddess spoke :


Sent by the king of the Daityas, mighty thyself, and accom-
panied by an army, thou dost thus take me by force—then


what can I do unto thee?
The rishi spoke :


At this reply the Asura Dhūmra-ločana rushed towards her,
Then Ambika with a mere roar reduced him to ashes. And
the great army of Asuras enraged poured on Ambikā a shower
both of sharp arrows and of javelins and axes. The lion that
carried* the goddess, shaking his mane in anger and uttering a
most terrific roar, fell on the army of Asuras; he slaughtered
some Asuras with a blow from his fore-paw, and others
with his mouth, and others, very great Asuras, by striking
them with his hind foot.t The lion with his claws tore out
the entrails of some, and struck their heads off with a cuiff-like
blow. And he severed arms and heads from others, and
shaking his mane drank the blood that flowed from the entrails}
of others. In a moment all that army was brought to destruc-
tion by the high-spirited lion, who bore the goddess and who
was enraged exceedingly.

When he heard that that Asura Dhūmra-ločana was slain
by the goddess, and all his army besides was destroyed by the
goddess’ lion, Sumbha, the lord of the Daityas, fell into &
rage and his lip guivered greatly, and he commanded the ai
mighty Asuras C'aņda and Munda,—“ Ho, O'aņda! Ho, Munda i
take with you a multitude of troops and go there ; and going
there bring her here speedily, dragging her by her hair ta
binding her; if ye have a doubt of that, then let her be slain
outright in fight by all the Asuras brandishing all thew
weapons. When that shrew is slain and her lion striken downs
seize her, Ambiké, bind her and bring her quickly!”


* Tu vdhanah in the Bombay edition is better than sva-vahanak.
+ C'araņena of the Bombay edition is better than c/ddharena.
T For kaushthad read koshthād.


KALE DESTROYS THE ASURAS. 499


Canro LXXXVII.


The Deri-máhálmya.
The slaying of O'aņda and Munda.


The goddess Kali destroyed the second Asura army and also the
generals C’anda and Munda—C'andika gave Kéli as a reward the


name O'dmundd.


10


11


12


* For khat{dnga read khatvanga here


The rishi spoke:

Then at his command the Daityas, led by C'aņda and
Munda, and arrayed in the four-fold order of an army, march-
ed with weapons uplifted. Soon they saw the goddess, slightly
smiling, seated upon the lion, on a huge golden peak of the
majestic mountain. On seeing her some of them made a
strenuous effort to capture her, and others approached her
holding their bows bent and their swords drawn.

Thereat Ambiki uttered her wrath aloud against those foes,
and her countenance then grew dark as ink in her wrath. Out
from the surface of her forehead, which was rugged with
frowns, issued suddenly Kálí of the terrible countenance,
armed with a sword and noose, bearing a many-coloured
skull-topped staff,* decorated with a garland of skulls, clad in
a tiger’s skin, very appalling because of her emaciated flesh,
exceedingly wide of mouth, lolling out her tongue terribly,
haying deep-sunk reddish eyes, and filling the regions of the
sky with her roars. She fell upon the great Asuras impetuous-
ly, dealing slaughter among the host, and devoured that army
of the gods’ foes there. Taking up the elephants with one
band she flung them into her mouth, together with their rear-
men and drivers and their warrior-riders and bells. Flingmg
likewise warrior with his horses, and chariot with its driver
into her mouth, she ground them most frightfully with her
he hair, and another by the neck;


teeth. She seized one by t
and she kicked another with her foot, and crushed another


against her breast. And she seized with her mouth the -


and again in verse 14,


500


13


14:


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


„and cronched them up with her teeth in h


CANTO LXXXVII.

weapons and the great arms which those Asuras abandoned,
on fury, She
Pirited Asuras;
i were slain with
ith her skull-topped staff, and
other Asuras met their death being wounded with the edge of
her teeth.

Seeing all that host of Asuras laid low in a
C’anda rushed against her, Kálí, who was exceedingly appal.
ling. Munda the great Asura covered her, the terrible-eyed
goddess, with very terrible showers of arrows and with dis.
cuses hurled in thousands. Those discuses seemed to he
penetrating her countenance in multitudes, like as very many
solar orbs might penetrate the body of a thunder-cloud,
Thereat Kāli, who was roaring frightfully, laughed terribly
with excessive fury, showing the gleam of her unsightly teeth
within her dreadful mouth. And the goddess, mounting upon
her great lion, rushed at C’anda, and seizing him by his hair
struck off his head with her sword. And Munda also rushed
at her when he saw C’anda laid low; him also she felled to the
ground, stricken with her scymitar in her fury. Then the army,
so much as escaped unslain, seeing O'anda laid low and most
valiant Munda also, seized with panic fled in all directions.

And Kálí, holding C’anda’s head and Munda also, approached
C’andiké and said, her voice mingled with passionate loud
laughter—* Here I have brought thee C’anda and Munda, two
great beasts; thon thyself shalt slay Sumbha and Nisumbba
in the battle-sacrifice. ”


crushed all that host of mighty and high-s
and devoured some and battered others ; some
her sword, some were struck w


moment,


The rishi spoke :

Thereon, seeing those two great Asuras C'aņda and ee
brought to her, auspicious O'aņdikā spoke to Kálí this w! |
speech,* “ Because thou hast seized both C’anda and me 4
and brought them, thou, O goddess, shalt therefore be fam
jn the world by the name C'ámundá !”


* Lalitam vac'ah; a bon mot.


ŠUMBHA GOES FORTH AGAINST C'AŅDIKA. 501


Canto LXXXVIII.


The Devi-máhátmya.
The slaying of Rakta-vija.

Sumbha sent forth all his armies against C'aņdiki—To help her the
Energies (Saktis) of the gods took bodily shape—O'andikd despatched
Siva to offer terms of peace to Sumbha, but the Asura hosts attacked
her and the battle began—O'andikd’s fight with the great Asura
Rakta-vija is described—He was killed.


The rishi spoke :

1 After both the Daitya C’anda was slain and Munda was laid
low, and many soldiers were destroyed, the lord of the Asuras,

2 majestic Sumbha, with mind overcome by wrath, gave com-

3 mand then to array all the Daitya hosts,—* Now let the
eighty-six Daityas, upraising their weapons, march forth with
all their forces; let the eighty-four Kambts* march forth

4 surrounded by their own forces ; let the fifty Asura families
who excel in valour go forth; let the hundred families of

5 Dhaumrast go forth at my command. Let the Kilakas,f the
Daurhritas,§ the Mauryas,|| and the Kélakeyas,q—let these
Asuras, hastening at my command, march forth ready for
battle.”

6 After issuing these commands Sumbha, the lord of the
Asuras, who ruled with fear, went forth, attended by many


% Kambi means a thief or plunderer. The commentary says Kambis are a


class of Daityas.
+ “ The descendants of Dhūmra.” Dhúmras is the reading in the Bombay


edition. They are a class of Daityas.

f A group of Dinuvas. ;

$ The Bombay edition reads Daurhridas, «€ the descendants of Durhrid.”

|| The descendants of Mura.” Mura or Muru is referred to generally in
connexion with Pragjyotisha; 6.9.» Mahé-Bhérata, Sabha-P., xiii. 578; Vans-
P., xii. 488; and Udyoga-P., xlvii. 1887-92: Hari-V., oxxi. 6791-6801.


q A group of Dānavas. They are mentioned in the Mahf-Bhirata, Sabhā-


P, ty. 118; Udyoga-P., olvii. 5379 : and Vana-P., c. 8691.


X


N


t


502


10


11


12


18


14


15


16


17


18


CANTO LXXXVII.


thousands of great soldiers. C'aņdikā, seeing that most
terrible army ai hand, filled the space between the earth and
the frmament with the twanging of her bow-string. Thereon
her lion roared exceedingly loud, O king; and Ambika
augmented* those roars with the clanging of her bell. Kali,
filling the regions of the sky with the noise from her bow-
string, from her lion and from her bell, and expanding her
mouth wide with her terrific roars, bad the predominance.
On hearing that roar which filled the four regions of the sky,
the Daitya armies enraged} surrounded the goddess’ lion and
Kali.

At this moment, O king, in order to destroy the gods’ foes,
and for the well-being of the lion-like Immortals, there issued
forth endowed with excessive vigour and strength the
Energies$ from the bodies of Brahmā, Siva, Guha and Vishnu
and of Indra also, and went in the forms of those gods to
C’andiké, Whatever was the form of each god, and what-
ever his ornaments and vehicle, in that very appearance his
Energy advanced to fight with the Asuras. In the front of a
heavenly car drawn by swans advanced Brahméa’s Energy, bear-
ing a rosary of seeds and an earthen water-pot; she is called
Brahméni. Mahegvara’s Energy, seated on a bull, grasping a
fine trident, and wearing a girdle of large snakes, arrived,
adorned with a digit of the moon. And Kumāra's Energy,
Ambikā, with spear in hand and riding on a choice peacock,
advanced in Guha’s shape to attack the Daityas. Likewise
Vishnu’s Energy, seated upon Garuda, advanced with conch,
discus, club, bow and scymitar in hand. The Energy of Hari,
who assumes the peerless form of a sacrificial boar, she also


* For c'opavrihayat read c'dpy avrirhhayat as in the Bombay edition.
t Jigye; ji ia here used by itself in the Atmane-pada. The commentary


gives * vanquished the enemies ”


as an alternative translation. It mentions


jajūe as an alternative reading, which means then “ expanded her mouth
wide with her terrific roars.”


$ For sa-roshair the Bombay edition reads $araughair “with multitudes of
arrows.”


§ Saktayah,


19


20


21


22


2°


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


THE ENERGIES OF THE GODS JOIN THE FIGHT. 503


advanced assuming a hog-like form. Nri-simha's Energy
assuming a body like Nri-simha's arrived there, adorned with
a cluster of constellations hurled down by the tossing of his
mane. Likewise Indra’s Hnergy, with thunder-bolt in hand,
seated upon the lord of elephants and having a thousand eyes,
arrived; as ds Sakra, such indeed was she. Then those
Energies of the gods surrounded Siva. He said to C’andiké,
“ Let the Asuras be slain forthwith through my good-will.”

Thereupon from the goddess’ body there came forth
C andika’s Energy, most terrific, exceedingly fierce, howling
like a hundred jackals. And she the unconquered said to
Siva, who was smoke-coloured and had matted locks, “ Be
thou, my lord, a messenger to the presence of Sumbha and
Nigumbha. Say unto the two overweening Danavas, Sumbha
and Nigumbha, and to whatever other Dānavas are assembled
there to do battle—‘ Let Indra obtain the three worlds,
let the gods be the enjoyers of the oblations; go ye to Pātāla
if ye wish to live. Yetif through pride in your strength ye
are longing for battle, come ye on then! let my jackals be
glutted with your flesh.’” Because the goddess appointed
Siva himself to be ambassador,* she has hence attained fame
as Siva-dūti in this world.

Those gréat Asuras however, on hearing.the goddess’ speech
fully announced, were filled with indignation and went wheret
KatySyanit stood: Then, at the very first, the arrogant and
indignant foes of the Immortals in front poured on the god-
dess showers of arrows, javelins and spears. And gracefully
she clove those arrows, darts, discuses and axes, which were
hurled,§ with large arrows shot from her resounding Low.||
And in front of her stalked Kálí then, tearing the foes asunder


# For daityena read dūtyena as in the Bombay edition, or perhaps dautyena
‘with the rank of ambassador.”

+ Yatra as in the Bombay edition is better than yatak.

f A name of C’andiks.

§ For pratihdn read prahitan,

Il Dhmdta-dhanur-muktair ; the commentary explains dhmdta as maurvt»
tam-kdrena sabditam, “ resonant with the twanging of the bow string.”


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


39


CANTO LXXXVIII.


with the onset of her darts and crushing them with her skull-
topped staf.* And Brahmāņi caused .the foes to lose their
courage by casting water on them from her earthen pot, and
weakened their vigour, by whatever way she ran. Mahes-
wara’s Energy slew Daityas with her trident, and Vishņu's
Energy with her discus, and Kumšra's Energy, very wrathful,
slew them with ber javelin. Torn to pieces by the down-
rush of the thunder-bolt hurled by Indra’s Energy, Daityas and
Dinavas fell on the earth in hundreds, pouring out streams
of blood. Shattered by the hog-embodied Energy with blows
from her snout, wounded in their breasts by the points of her
tushes, and torn by her discus, demons fell down. And Nri-
simha’s Energy roamed about in the battle, devouring other
great Asuras who were torn by her claws, as she filled the
intermediate region of the sky with her roaring.t Asuras,
demoralized by Siva-duti with her violent lond laughs, fell
down on the earth; she then devoured those fallen ones,
Seeing the enraged band of Motherst crushing the great
Asuras thus by various means, the troops of the gods’ foes
perished.

Rakta-vija, a great Asura, seeing the Daityas, who were
hard-pressed by the band of Mothers, intent on fleeing, strode
forward to fight in wrath. When from his body there falls
to the ground a drop of blood, at that moment starts up from
the earth an Asura of his stature. He, a great Asura, with
club in hand fought with Indra’s Energy, and Indra’s Energy
then struck Rakta-vija with her thunder-bolt; blood flowed
quickly from him when wounded by the thunder-bolt. There-
upon stood up together fresh combatants, like him in body,
like him in valour; for as many blood-drops fell from his
body, so many men came into being, like him in courage,
strength and valour. And those men also who sprang from
his blood fought there with the Mothers in a combat, dreadful
because of the sweep of their very sharp weapons. And again


* For khat{dnga read khatudiga,


+ Ndddptrna-dig-untard. The reading of the Calcutta e
dig-ambarā is hardly satisfactory.


dition ndddpūirņa-


+ Malri-gaņa; i.c., the Energies.


46


47


48


49


54


59


* For yodhai read yo V
+ For Rakta-vindok read Rakta-v


THE SLAYING OF THE ASURA RAKTA-VĪJA. 505


when his head was wounded by the fall of her thunder-bolt,
his blood poured forth; therefrom were born men by thou-
sands. And Vishnu’s Energy struck at this foe with her discus
in the battle. Indras Energy beat that lord of the Asuras
with her club. The world was filled by the thousands of
great Asuras, who were his equals, and who sprang from the
blood that flowed from him when cloven by the discus of
Vishnu’s Energy. Kumira’s Energy struck the great Asura
Rakta-vija with her spear, and Varāha's Energy also struck
him with her sword, and Mahešvara's Energy with her trident.
And the Daitya Rakta-vija, that great Asura, filled full of
wrath, struck every one of ile Mothers in turn with his club.
By the stream of blood, which fell on the earth from him
when he received many wounds from the spears, darts and
other weapons, Asuras came verily* ‘into being in hundreds.
And those Asuras who sprang from that Asura’s blood pervaded
the whole world; thereat the gods fell into the utmost terror.
Seeing the gods dejected, C'aņdika spoke with haste ; she said
to Kāli, “O C’émunda! stretch out thy mouth wide: with this
mouth do thou quickly take in the great Asuras, which are
the drops of blood, that have come into being out of Rakta-
vijat at the descent of my weapon on him. Roam about in
the battle, devouring the great Asuras who sprang from him ;
so shall this Daitya with his blood ebbing away meet destruc-
tion. These fierce demons are being devoured by thee and at
others will be produced.”

us, the goddess next smote him with
her dart. Kāli swallowed Rakta-vija’s blood with her mouth.
Then he struck C'aņdikš with his club there; and the blow of
his club caused her no pain, even the slightest, but from his
stricken body blood flowed copiously, and from whatever
direction it came, C'imuņdā takes it then with her mouth. The
great Asuras, who sprang up from the flow of blood in her
mouth, C'ámuņdá both devoured them and quaffed his blood.
The goddess smote Rakta-vija with her dart, her thunder-bolt,


the same time no
Having enjoined her th


ai as in the Bombay edition.
fjāt, us in the Bombay cditiox.


64


506 CANTO LXXXIX,


60 arrows, swords and spears, when C'āmuņdā drank up his blood.


Stricken with that multitude of weapons, he fell on the earth’s

61 surface, and the great Asura Rakta-vija became blood-less,
O king. Thereat the thirty gods gained joy unparalleled,
O king. The band of Mothers which sprang from them
broke into a dance, being intoxicated with blood.


Canto LXXXIX.


The Devi-máhátmya.
The slaying of Nisumbha.


Nisumbha attacked the goddess O'aņdikd and was worsted in single
combat.—Sumbha came to his help, but the goddess foiled him,
and slew Nisumbha—Numbers of the Asuras were destroyed.


The king spoke:
1 Wonderful is this that thou, Sir, hast related to me,
the majesty of the goddess’ exploits in connexion with
2 the slaying of Rakta-vija; and I wish to hear further what
deed did Sumbha do after Rakta-vija was killed, and what
the very irascible Niéumbha did.


The rishi spoke:


3 After Rakta-vija was slain and other demons were killed
in the fight, the Asura Sumbha gave way to unbounded wrath,
4 and Nigumbha also. Pouring out his indignation at behold-
ing his great army being slaughtered, Nišumbha then rushed
5 forward with the flower of the Asura army. In front of him
and behind and on both sides great Asuras, biting their lips
6 and enraged, advanced to slay the goddess. Ynmbha also went
forward, mighty in valour, surrounded with his own troops,
to slay O’andika in his rage, after engaging in battle with
7 the Mothers. Then occurred a desperate combat between
the goddess and Sumbha and Nigumbha, who both, like two


10


11


12


13


14:


15


16


17
18


19


20


21


c/ANDIKA FIGHTS WITH SUMBHA AND NISUMBHA. 507


thunder-clouds, rained a most tempestuous shower of arrows
on her. C/andiké with multitudes of arrows quickly split
the arrows shot by them, and smote the two Asura lords on
their limbs with ner numerous weapons.

Nisumbha grasping a sharp scymitar and glittering shield
struck the lion, the noble beast that bore the goddess, on the
head. When her animal was struck, the goddess quickly
clove Nigsumbha’s superb sword with a horse-shoe-shaped
arrow, and also his shield on which eight moons were pour-
trayed. When his shield was cloven and his sword too, the
Asura hurled his spear ; and that his missile also, as it came
towards her, she split in two with her discus. Then Nišum-
bha, the Dānava, puffed up with wrath, seized a dart; and
that also, when it came, the goddess shattered with a blow of
her fist. And then aiming* his club he flung it against
C’andika, yet that was shivered by the goddess’ trident and
became ashes. As that lordly Daitya then advanced with
battle-axe in hand, the goddess struck him with a multi-
tude of arrows and laid him low on the ground.

When his brother Nigumbha, who was terrible in prowess,
fell to the ground, Sumbha in utmost fury strode forward to
slay Ambika. And he, standing in his chariot, appeared to
fill the entire sky with his eight arms, which were lifted far
on high grasping his superb weapons.

Beholding him approaching, the goddess sounded her
conch, and made her bow also give forth from its string a
note which was exceedingly hard to endure. And she filled
all regions with the clanging of her bell, which caused
the vigour of all the Daitya hosts to die away. Then her
lion filled the heaven, the earth and the ten regions of the


with loud roars, which checked the copious flow of


sky j ;
ns’ rutting elephants, Kali


the exudation from the demo
springing upward then struck the heaven and the earth with


both her hands; the boom thereof drowned those previous
sounds. Siva-dutit uttered a loud inauspicious laugh. At


® Avidhya. The Bombay edition reads dddya, “taking.”
+ I. e, C'andikā ; see canto Ixxxviii, verse 27.


I


508


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


81


32


33


34


35


36


CANTO LXXXIX.


those sounds the Asuras trembled; * Sumbha gave way
to utmost rage. When Ambika cried out “ Stand, O evil-
souled ! stand!” the gods who had taken their stations in the
air then called to her, “ Be thon victorious !”

The spear flaming most terribly, which Sumbha approaching
hurled, that, gleaming like a mass of fire as itcame along, was
driven aside by a great fire-brand, The vault between the
three worlds reverberated with Sumbha's lion-like roaring, but
the dreadful sound of the slaughter among his soldiers sur-
passed that, O king. The goddess split the arrows shot by
Sumbha, and Sumbha the arrows that she discharged, each
with her and his sharp arrows in hundreds and thousands.
C’andiké enraged thereat smote him with a dart. Wounded
therewith he fell in a faint to the ground.

Thereupon Nišumbha, regaining consciousness, seized his bow
again and struck the goddess, and Kali and the lion with
arrows. And the Danava lord, that son of Diti, putting forth
a myriad arms, again covered C’andiké with a myriad discuses.f
The goddess then enraged, she, Durga who destroys the afflic-
tions of adversity, split those discuses and those arrows with
her own arrows. Then Nigumbha seizing his club rushed
impetuously at O’andika to slay her outright, with the Daitya
host surrounding him. As he was just falling upon her,
C’andika swiftly clove his club with her sharp-edged scymi-
tar. And he took hold of a dart. C’andika with a dart
hurled swiftly pierced Nisumbha, the afflicter of the Immor-
tals, in the heart, as he approached with dart in hand.
When he was pierced by the dart, ont of his heart issued
ca gees of great strength and great valour, exclaiming
see a a He stepped forth, the goddess laughing aloud
se tē tee He a head with her scymitar ; thereupon he
Pet CA those Asuras mu necks he had
voured the others ae E E ee recat de

» Some great Asuras perished, being


5 , ;
For Asurdstreshu read Asurds tresuh as in the Bombay edition


+ lent “i
t For c'akrdyudhena read c'ukriyutenu as in the Bombay edition


37


38


39


C'AŅDIKA'S COMBAT WITH SUMBHA. 509


pierced through by the spear held by Kumara’s Energy;
others were driven back by the water purified by the spell
uttered by Brahma’s Energy; and others fell, pierced by the
trident wielded by Siva’s Energy; some were pounded to
dust on the ground by blows from the snout of Varáha’s
Energy; some Danavas were out to pieces by the discus
hurled by Vishnu’s Energy ; and others again by the thunder-
bolt discharged from the fingers of Indra’s Energy. Some
Asuras perished outright, some perished by reason of the
great battle, and others were devoured by Kali, Siva-dūti
and the lion.


Canto XC.


The Devi-mahdtmya.


The slaying of Sumbha.


Ambikå absorbed all the other goddesses, and fighting with Sumbha


in single combat, killed him.—The universe was then filled
with joy.
The rishi spoke :
Seeing his brother Nisumbha slain, who was dear to him
as his life, and his army being slaughtered, Sumbha in
wrath spoke thus—' O Durgt, who art tainted with the


arrogance of strength, bring not thy pride here, thou who,
trusting in the strength of the other goddesses, dost fight in


exceeding haughtiness ! ”
The goddess spoke :
Alone verily am I in the world here; what other goddess


is there besides me? See, vile one! that these goddesses, who
have their divine power from me, are entering into me


indeed.
Then all those goddesses, Brahmūņi and the others, became


absorbed into the goddess’ breasts ; Ambikdé then remained


alone indeed.


510


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


E7


„ready to slay Ambiká.


OANTO XC.


The goddess spoke :


Whereas I existed* with my divine power in many forms
here—that has been drawn in by me, truly alone I stand
now. Be thou steadfast in combat !


The rishi spoke:

Thereupon commenced a battle between them both, the
goddess and Sumbha, while all the gods and the Asuras
looked on—a battle without quarter. With showers of arrows,
with sharp weapons and also with pitiless missiles both
engaged anew in a combat which set all the world in fear,
And the lord of the Daityas broke the heavenly missiles,
which Ambika discharged in hundreds, with weapons that
parried them. And the supreme goddess in merest play
broke the heavenly missiles that he discharged, with fierce
shonts, ejaculations and other sounds. Then the Asura
covered the goddess with hundreds of arrows, and the god-
dess enraged thereat split his bow also with her arrows.
And when his bow was split the lord of the Daityas took
up his spear, The goddess split it,as he held it in his
hand, with a discus. Next the supreme monarch of the
Daityas, seizing his scymitar and sun-like shield, on which
a hundred moons were pourtrayed, rushed at the goddesst
at that monent. Just as he was falling upon her, C/andika
hastily split his scymitar with sharp arrows shot from her
bow, and his shield also which was spotless as the sun’s rays.
With his steeds wounded, with his bow split, without a
charioteer, the Daitya then} grasped his terrible mace, being
As he was falling upon her, she clove
his mace with sharp arrows; nevertheless raising bis fist
he rushed swiftly at her. The lordly Daitya brought his
fist down on the goddess’ heart, and the goddess also smote
him on his breast with her palm. Wounded by the blow of


` # For yadd sthitd read yad dsthitd as in the Bombay edition
ý For deví read devtm, The Bombay edition reads tary hantum
t For sadá read tadā.


18


19


20


21


27


C'ANDIKA SLAYS gUMBHA. 611


her palm the Daitya king fell suddenly on the earth; and
again indeed he rose up, and Springing upward he seized
the goddess and mounted on high into the sky. There also
O’andiké, being without any support, fought with him. The
Daitya and C'aņdikā then fought at first with each other in
the sky in a close combat, which wrought dismay among the
Siddhas and munis; after carrying on the close combat for a
very long time with him, Ambiké lifted him up then and
whirled him around and flung him on the earth. When flung
thus he touched the earth, he raised his fist hastily and
rushed, evil of soul as he was, with the wish to kill C'aņdikā.
Seeing him, the lord of all the Daitya folk, approaching,
the goddess then pierced him in the breast with a dart and
felled him down on the earth. Shattered by the point
of the goddess’ dart he fell lifeless on the ground, shaking
the whole earth and its seas, islands and mountains,

When that evil-souled demon was slain, the universe
became placid, the earth regained perfect well-being, and the
sky grew pure. Portent-clouds, which were full of flame
before, became tranquil, and the rivers kept within their
channels, when he was stricken down there. All the bands
of gods then grew exceedingly joyful in mind, when he was
slain; the Gandharvas sang out sweetly, and ‘others of
them sounded their instruments, and the bevies of Apsarases
danced; ‘and favourable breezes blew, very brilliant grew the
sun, and the tranquil sacred fires blazed freely, and tranquil
became the strange sounds that had occurred in the regions
of the sky.


Canto XCI,


The Devi-mahdtmya.
The Eulogy of the Goddess.


The gods offered a hymn of praise to the goddess.—She granted them


the boon that she will always become incarnate and deliver the
world whenever tt ts oppressed by demons.


512 CANTO XCI.


The rishi spoke :

1 When the great lord of the Asuras was slain there by the
goddess, Indra and the other gods led by Agni offered praise
to her, Katydyani, because they had gained their desire ;*
and their faces shone forth, and their hopes became mani-
fest.t

2 “O goddess, who removest the sufferings of thy suppliants,

be gracious !

Be gracious, O mother of the whole world !

Be gracious, O queen of the universe! safeguard the
universe !

Thou, O goddess, art queen of ull that is moveable and
immoveable!

3 Thou alone hast become the support of the world,

Because thou dost subsist in the form of the earth !
By thee, who existest in the form of water, all
This universe is filled, O thou inviolable in thy valour !

4 Thou art Vishnu’s energy, boundless in thy valour;

Thou art the germ of the universe, thou art Illusion
sublime !

All this world has been bewitched, O goddess ;

Thou indeed when attainedf art the cause of final emanci-
pation from existence on the earth !

5 Al sciences are portions of thee, O goddess;

So are all females without exception in tho worlds$ !
By thee alone, as mother, this world has been filled !


What praise can there be for thee ? Thou art beyond praise,
the sublimest expression|| !


# For ish{a-lambhdd read ishta-ldbhdd with the Bombay edition,
+ The Bombay edition reads vikdši-vaktrābja-vikdšitd$dh, which means
much the same, :
t Prapannd; but prasannd, “well-pleased,” in the Bombay edition is
better.
§ The Bombay edition reads—
striyah samastah sakalam jagac’ c'a.
“ So are all females, and so is the whole world.”
| Parokliļ ; oy “ the expression of the subline,”


10


1l


12


HYMN TO C'AŅPIKA. 513


When as being the goddess, who constitutes every created
thing, .

And who bestows Svarga and final emancipation from
existence,

Thou are praised—for thy praise again

What sublime words can be sufficient ?

O thou, who abidest under the form of Intelligence

In the heart of every living creature ;

O goddess, who bestowest Svarga and final emancipation
from existence,

O Nārāyaņi, reverence be to thee!

Thou in the form of minutes, moments and other portions
of time,

Dost bring results to pass;

O thou who art mighty in the death of the universe,

O Narayani, reverence be to thee!

O thou who art beneficent with every happiness,

O lady auspicious, who accomplishest every petition,

O giver of refuge, O Tryambaki, O brilliant one,

O Nārūyaņi, reverence be to thee!

O eternal goddess, who constitutest the energy

Of creation, permanence and destruction,

O thou abode of good gualities, who consistest, of good

qualities,

O Nardyani, reverence be to thee !*

O thou who ridest in a heavenly car yoked with swans,

Who assumest the form of Brahmant,+

O goddess who sprinklest kuša-grass-steeped water,

O Nūrāyaņi, reverence be to thee!

O thou who holdest a trident, the moon and a serpent,


* The Bombay edition inserts a verse here—


O thou who art the Supreme Way for the salvation

OF those that seek refuge, of the woe-begone and of the afflicted,
O goddess who takest suffering away from every one,

O Narayani, reverence be to thee!


+ The Energy (Sakti, fem.) of Bralimaé. The swan is his vehicle,
t Tho Commentary translales ksharikd as kshepana-kdrini or d-cektvt,


65


514 CANTO XCI.


Who art borne ona huge bull,
With the natural character of Mahesvari,*
O Nérayani, reverence be to thee!

13 O thou who art attended by the peacock and cock,
Who bearest a great spear, O sinless one;
O thou who takest thy station in Kaumari’st form,
O Narayani, reverence be to thee!

14 O thou who holdest as thy finest weapons
A conch, discus, club, and the bow Sūrūga,
Be gracious, O thou who hast Vaishnavi’st form;
O Nūrāyaņi, reverence be to thee!

15 O thou who graspest a huge formidable discus,
Who hast uplifted. the earth with thy tushes,
O auspicious one, who hast a hog-like form,§
O Nārāyaņi, reverence be to thee!

16 O thou who in the fierce man-lion|| form
Didst put forth thy efforts to slay the Daityas,


O thou who art connected with the deliverance of the
three worlds,


O Nāršyaņi, reverence be to thee !


O thou who hast a diadem and a great thunderbolt,
Who art dazzling with a thousand eyes,

And who tookest away Vyitra’s life-breath, O Aindri Jay
O Nārāyaņi, reverence be to thee!

18 O thou who with the nature of Siva-dūtif+


17


* The Energy (fakti) of Mahešvara or Siva, The trident, moon and ser-
pent are his emblems and ornaments, and the bull is his vehicle. :
t The Energy of Kumtra or Kārttikeya. The peacock is his vehicle, and
the cock is an attendant of his parents, Siva and Pirvati.
t The Energy of Vishnu. The conch, discus, club and bow are his
weapons.
§ The Energy of Vishnu in hie incarnation as a boar,
|| The Energy of Vishnn in his incarnation as a lion
Another reading is Trailokya-tréna- ite, “
mā ibn of the iise AT ziņa < kads
## The Energy (éakti) of Indra, the slayer of,
ornament, the thunder-bolt his weapon,
4+ See canto Izxxvii, verse 25,


-headed man.


Vritra. The dindem is his
and he has a thousand eyes,


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


HYMN TO C'AŅDIKA,


Slewest the mighty hosts of the Daityas,

O thou of terrible form, of loud shrieks,

O Nārāyaņi, reverence be to thee!

O thou who hast a face formidable with tushes,
Who art decorated with a garland of heads,
O C'āmuņdā, who grindest shaven heads,

O Nardyani, reverence be to thee!

O Lakshmi, Modesty, Wide-Knowledge !

O Faith, Nourishment, Svadhā, Immoveable!
O Great-Night, Great-Illusion !*

O Náráyaņí, reverence be to thee!

O Mental-Vigour, Sarasvati, Choice One!

O Welfare, Wife of Babhru,* Dark One!

O Self-controlled Queen, be thou gracious!
O Nūrāyaņi, reverence be to thee !f

O thou who hast the nature of all, Queen of all!
O thou who possessest the might of all!
From terrors save us, O goddess!

O goddess Durga, reverence be to thee!
Kindly is this thy countenance,

Which is adorned with three eyes ;

May it guard us from all created things !

O Kātyāyani, reverence be to thee !
Formidable with flames, exceedingly sharp,
Destroying the Asuras without quarter,

May thy trident guard us from fear!

O Bhadra-kali, reverence be to thee!

Thy bell, that fills the world with its ringing
And destroys the glories of the Daityas,
May thy bell guard us, O goddess,


% The Calcutta edition reads “ Wide-knowledge ” again here.


t Ie., Siva.
f The Bombay edition inserts a verse here—


O thon, the limit of whose hands and feet is everywhore,


Whose eyes and head and month are everywhere,
Whose ears and nose are everywhere 5
O Náráyaņí, reverence be to thee!


516


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


CANTO XCI.


Even us like children from sins!

Besmirched with the blood and fat of the Asuras

As with mire, gleaming with rays,

May thy scymitar be for our welfare !

O C'aņdikā, to thee we bow!

Thou destroyst all sicknesses, when gratified ;

But when wrathful destroyest all longed-for desires.

No calamity befalls men who have sought unto thee!

They who have sought unto thee become verily a refuge
themselves !

This slaughter that thou hast now wrought

On the great Asuras who hate righteousness, O goddess,

By multiplying thy body in many forms,—

O Ambika, what other goddess achieves that ?

In the sciences, in the scriptures, which need the lamp of
discrimination,

And in the ancient sayings, who but thon

Within the pit of selfishness, wherein is exceeding great
darkness,

Causes this universe to whirl about most grievously ?

Wherever dwell Rakshasas and virulently-poisonous Nágas,

Wherever foes exist, wherever the powers of the Dasyus,

And where flaming fire appears amid the ocean

There abiding thou dost safeguard the na !

O queen of the universe, thou safeguardest the universe !

Thou hast the nature of the universe, for thou upholdest
the universe,

Thou art the lady worthy to be praised by the lord of the
universe. They are

The refuge of the universe, who bow in faith before thee!

O ii be gracious! Protect us wholly from fear of

Perpetually, as thow hast at this i
by the slaughter of the as al ij


And bring thou quickly to rest the sins of all the worlds


* For vathā sura-badhdd read yathdsura-badhdd


33


34


41


42


C AŅDIKA GIVES THE GODS A BOON. 517


And the great calamities which have sprung from the
maturing of portents !

To us who are prostrate be thou gracious,

O goddess, who takest away affliction from the universe !

O thou worthy of praise from the dwellers in the thrce
worlds,

Bestow thou boons on the worlds!”


The goddess spoke :

I am ready to bestow a boon. O ye hosts of gods, choose
whatever boon ye desire in your mind; I grant it as a thing
that benefits the worlds.

The gods spoke:

O queen of all, complete thou* thus indeed the pacification
of every trouble of the three worlds, and the destruction of
our enemies,

The goddess spoke:

When the twenty-eighth age has arrived, in the Vaivasvata
Manv-antara, two other great Asuras shall be born, Sumbha
and Nigumbha. Then born as the offspring of Yaśodá’s womb
in the cowherd Nanda’s house, and dwelling on the Vindhya
mountains, I will destroy them both. And again becoming
incarnate in a very terrible form on the face of the earth, I
will slay the Vaiprac'ittat Danavas ; and when I devour those
fierce and great Vaiprac'itta Asuras, my teeth shall become
red like the flowers of the pomegranate. Hence the gods
in Svarga and men in the world of mortals praising me shall
always talk of me as “ Red-toothed.” t

And again after a period of a hundred years during which
rain and water shall fail, praised by the munis I shall ve
born, but not womb-begotten, on the earth, Then because
T shall behold the munis with a hundred eyes, mankind shall
therefore celebrate me as “ Huudred-eyed.”$


* For tvathd read tvayd.

+ The descendants of Viprac’itti.
1 Rakta-dantikd.

§ Satdksht.


518 CANTO XCII.


43 Next, O ye gods, I shall support* the whole world with the
life-sustaining vegetables, which shall grow out of my own

44 body, during a period of heavy rain. I shall gain fame on
the earth then as Sākambhari;+ and in that very period I
shall slay the great Asura named Durgama.

45 And again when taking a terrible form on mount Himavat I
shall destroy Rakshasas for the sake of delivering the munis,

46 all the munis bowing their bodies reverently shall laud me
then; hence my name “ The terrible goddess ” shall become
celebrated.

47 When Arunaksha§ shall work great trouble in the three
worlds, I shall take a bee-like form, the form of innumerable

48 bees, and shall slay the great Asura for the welfare of the
three worlds, and folk shall then extol me everyone as
Bhramari.||

+9 Thus whenever trouble shall arise caused by the Danavas,


at each such time I shall become incarnate and accomplish
the foes’ destruction.


Canto XCII.


The Devi-mūhdimya.


The slaying of Sumbha and Nišumbha concluded.


The goddess descants on the merits of this poem and the beneficent
results of reading and listening to it.—The gods regained their


rights and the Daityas departed to Pūtūla.—Her attributes and
beneficence are extolled.


9 T.e. nourish.

+ * Herb-bearing” or “ Herb-nourishing,”

1 Bhima Devt.

§ Or Arundkhya in the Bombay edition ;
shall work, &c.”

|| The bee-like goddess,”


“When the Asura named Aruna


10


11


12


13


EULOGY OF THE DEV{-MAHATMYA. 519


The goddess spoke :


And whoever with mind composed shall praise me constant-
ly with these hymns, I will quiet down every trouble for him
assuredly. And those who shall celebrate the destruction of
Madhu and Kaitabha, the slaughter of the Asura Mahisha,
and the slaying of Sumbha and Nigumbha likewise; and
those also who shall listen* in faith to this poem of my
sublime majesty on the eighth day of the lunar fortnight, on
the fourteenth and on the ninth, with intent mind, to them
shall happen no wrong-doing whatever, nor calamities that
arise from wrong-doing, nor poverty, nor indeed deprivation of
their desires:r Never shall he experience fear from enemies,
from robbers, nor from kings, nor from weapon or fire or
water-flood, Hence this poem of my majesty must be read
by men of composed minds and listened to by them always
with faith, for it is the supreme course of blessings. Now
may this poem of my majesty quell all kinds of calamities,
which arise from grievous pestilence,t and the three-fold
portent. Where this poem is duly read constantly at my
sanctuary, I will never forsake that place, and there my
presence is fixed. At the offering of the bali, and during
worship, in the ceremonies with fire, and at a great festival,
all this story of my exploits must verily be proclaimed and
listened to. I will accept with kindliness both the bali
worship that is paid, and the oblation by fire that is offered, by
him who understands or him who understands not. And at
the great annual worship that is performed in autumn time,
the man, who listens filled with faith to this poem of my
majesty, shall assuredly through my favour be delivered from
every trouble, and be blessed with riches, grain and children.
From listening to this poem of my majesty moreover come
splendid issues and prowess in battles, and a man becomes


* The Bombay edition reads stoshyanti, “ shall celebrate in song.”
+ Ishta-viyojana; or “separation from loved ones.” Viyojana is not in the
dictionary,


+ Mahd-mdrt; or ** cholera.”


520 CANTO XGII.


14 fearless.* When men listen to this poem of my majesty,
enemies pass to destruction, and prosperity accrues and their
15 family rejoices. Let a man listen to this poem of my majesty
everywhere, at a ceremony for securing tranquillity, and after
seeing an ill-dream and when planets are greatly eclipsed.
16 Thereby portents turn into calm, and also dreadful eclipses of
the planets, and also an ill-dream which men have seen; and
17 a sweet dream appears, It produces peacefulness in children
who have been possessed by the demon that seizes children,t and
it is the best promoter of friendship among men when union
18 is dissolved; it is the most potent diminisher of the power
of all men of ill livelihood; verily through reading it, comes
19 the destruction of Rakshasas, goblins and Piśáćas. All this
poem of my majesty brings a man near unto me. And by
means of cattle, flowers, arghya offerings and incenses, and
20 by the finest perfumes and lamps, by feasts given to brahmans,
by oblations, by sprinkled water day and night, and by
various other objects of enjoyment, by gifts yearly—the
21 favour which comes by such means, such favour is won from me
when this story of my noble exploits is once heard. When
22 heard it takes away sins and confers perfect health. This
celebration of me preserves created beings from future births,
even this story of my exploits in battles, the annibilation of
23 the wicked Daityas. When it is heard, no fear, that is
caused by enmity, springs upamong men. And the hymns
which ye have composed, and those composed by brahman
24 yishis, and those composed by Brahmá bestow a splendid
mind. He who is surrounded by a raging fire in a forest


* The text as it stands is incorrect, for pardkrama is masc., and parakra-
mam, acc., has no verb. I have read therefore pardkramaé c'a for pardkra-
mam c'a. The Bombay edition reads tathotpattth prithak šubhdh pardkra-
mamé c'a, and the commentary translates the verse thus—“From haere to
this poem of my majesty, and to my splendid diverse appearances in the
forms of the Energies, and to my feats of prowess in battles,
fearless.”

t Balu-graha; see canto li.


$ Or gatim, “course” or “issue.”


a man becomes


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


33


34


35


36


THE DEMONS WERE BANISHED TO PATĀLA, 521


or on 2 lonesome road, or who is encompassed by robbers in
a desolate spot, or who is captured by enemies, or who is
prowled after by a lion or tiger or by wild elephants in a
forest, or who is under: the command of an enraged king,
or who is sentenced to death, or who has fallen into bonds,
or who is whirled around by the wind, or who stands in a
ship in the wide sea, or, who is in the most dreadful battle
with weapons falling upon him, or who is afflicted with pain
amidst all kinds of terrible troubles—such a man on calling
to mind this story of my exploits is delivered from his strait.
Through my power lions and other dangerous beasts, robbers
and enemies, from a distance indeed, flee from him who calls
to mind this story of my exploits.


The rishi spoke :


Having spoken thus the adorable C'aņdikd, who is fierce in
prowess, vanished there, while the gods were gazing indeed
on her. The gods also relieved from fear, their foes being
slain, all resumed their own dominions as before, participating
in their shares of sacrifices.

And the Daityas—when Sumbha, that most fierce foe of
the gods, who brought ruin on the world and who was peerless
in prowess, had been slain by the goddess in fight, and
Nisumbha also great in valour was slain—all came to Patala..

Thus that adorable goddess, although everlasting, yet
taking birth again and again, accomplishes the safeguarding
of the world, O king. By her this universe is bewitched ; she
verily gives birth to the universe. And when besought, she
bestows knowledge; when gratified, she bestows prosperity.
All this egg of Brahmá, O king, is pervaded by her, who ts
Mahákálí at Mihākšla,* and who has the nature of the Great
Destroying Goddess.t She indeed is Mahd-māri at the fated
time; she indeed is creation, the Unborn ; she indeed the Eternal
gives stability to created beings at their fated time. Sheindeed


* A shrine sacred to Siva at Ujjain; see Roghu-Varnša, vi. 82-34; and
Megha-Dūta i. 34. :
+ Mahd-mart ; see verse 7 above.


66


522


37


CANTO XCII.


is Lakshmi, bestowing prosperity on the houses of men while
she abides with them; and she indeed when she is absent
becomes the goddess of IN Fortune™ unto their destruction.
When hymned and worshipped with flowers, and with incense,
perfumes and other offerings, she bestows wealth and sons, and
a mind brilliant in righteousness.


—


CANTO XCIII.


The Devi-máhátmya (concluded).


After hearing this poem, king Su-ratha and the vaišya practised


austerities and worshipped the goddess—C0'aņdikū appeared to
them and gave the king the boon that he should be Manu Sdvarns .
in a future life, and bestowed knowledge on the vaišya.

The yishi spoke:

E have now related to thee, O king, this sublime poem the
Devi-mahitmya. Such majestic power has the goddess, by
whom this worldis upheld. Moreover knowledge is conferred
by her who is the adorable Vishnu’s Illusive power. By her
thou and this vai$ya and other men of discrimination, and
celebrated men are bewitched; and others shall become
bewitched. Go unto her, the supreme queen, as to a place of
refuge, O great king. She indeed, when propitiated by men,


bestows enjoyment, Svarga and final emancipation from
existence,


Markandeya, spoke:

Having heard this bis speech, king Su-ratha fell prostrate
before the illustrious yishi who performed severe penances,
and being down-cast by his excessive regard for self and
by the deprivation of his kingdom, went forthwith to per-
form austerities; and the vaišya, O great muni, in order to
get a vision of Amba, took up his station on a sand-bank


* A-lakshmt.


10


11


12


13


14,


15


16


17


WHO SHALL BE THE MANU SAVARNI, 523


in a river; and the vaigya practised austerities, muttering the
sublime hymn to the goddess. They both made an earthen
image of the goddess on that sand-bank, and paid worship
to it with flowers, incense, fire and libations of water. Ab-
staining from food, restricting their food, concentrating their
minds on her, keeping their thoughts composed, they both
offered the bali offering also sprinkled with blood drawn
from their own limbs. When they continued with subdued
souls to propitiate her thus for three years, C’andiké, who
upholds the world, well-pleased spoke in visible shape.


The goddess spoke :

What thon dost solicit, O king, and thou O rejoicer of thy

family, receive ye all that from me; well-pleased I bestow it.
Markandeya spoke :

Then the king chose a kingdom that should not perish in
another life, and in this life his own kingdom wherein the
power of his enemies should .be destroyed by force. Then
the vaigya also, whose mind was down-cast, chose know-
ledge,—to be wise, knowing ‘what ts mine,’ and ‘what I
am,’—knowledge that causes the downfall of worldly attach-
ments.

The goddess spoke:

O king, thou shalt obtain thine own kingdom in a very few
days, after slaying thine enemies; it shall be steadfast for
thee there; and when dead thon shalt gain another life from
the god Vivasvat, and shalt be a Manu on earth, by name
Sávarņika, And O excellent vaigya, I bestow on thee the
boon which thou hast besought of me; knowledge shall be
thine unto full perfection.

Markandeya spoke: S

Having thus given them both the boon that cach desired,
the goddess vanished forthwith, while extolled by them
both in faith.

Having thus gained the boon from the goddess, Su-ratha
the noble kshattriya shall obtain a new birth through the
Sun, and shall be the Manu Sávarņi.


524


CANTO XCIV,


Canto XCIV.


The Rauc'ya and future Manv-antaras.


Mérkandeya mentions briefly the succeeding Manus, the ninth to the


10


11


12


thirteenth, and declares what shall be the names of the gods, rishis
and kings in their several periods.
Markandeya spoke :

I have duly declared unto thee this account of the Sūvarņika
Many-antara, and also the Devi-m4hdtmya which tells of the
slaughter of the Asura Mahisha. And the origins of the
Mothers also which were from the goddess in the great battle,
and the origin as well as the life of the goddess C’amundé4, and
the majesty of Siva-dūti, the slaying of Sumbha and Nigum-
bha, and the killing of Rakta-vija—all this has been narrated
to thee.

Now hear O noble muni, of the next Manu Sģvarņika. And
Daksha’s son shall be Sāvarņa, who will be the ninth Manu.
I tell thee about that Mann, and who shall be the gods, the
munis and the kings in his period. The Paras and the Mari¢is
and the Bhargas and the Su-dharmans shall be the gods ; these
shall be in threes; they shall be twelve groups in all; now
their lord* shall be Sahasriksha, great in power. He, who is
at present Agni's six-faced son Karttikeya, shall be the Indra,
by name Adbhuta, in that Mann’s period. Medhatithi, Vasu,
Satya, Jyotish-mat and Dyuti-mat, Sabala another,
vahana another—these shall be the seven rishis.
Varha-ketu, Paūda-hasta, Nir-amaya, Prithu-$ravas, and
Arčish-mat, Bhūri-dyumna, Vrihad-bhaya—these shall be tho
royal sons of that son of Daksha, yea the kings.

Now hear,O bréhman, about the next Manv-antara, that of the
tenth Manu. And in the tenth Manv-antara of the wise son of
Brahm, the Sukhāsfnas and the N iruddhas shall be the gods,
with three classes each, according to tradition; they indeed


and Havya-
Dhrishta-ketu,


* Indra,


ACCOUNT OF THE FUTURE MANUS. 525


shall be the gods, a hundred in number, in the period of that
future Manu. As there shall be a hundred sons* of his,

13 so shall there be a hundred gods then. And Santi shall be the
Indra, endowed with all Indra’s good qualities. Hear thou

14 who shall indeed be the seven rishis then; Apo-mūrtti and
Havish-mat, Su-kritin and Satya, Nābhūga and A-pratima,

15 and Vāšishtha the seventh. And Su-kshetra and Uttamaujas
and valiant Bhūmi-sena, and Satdnika, Vrishabha and An-

16 amitra, Jayad-ratha, Bhuri-dyumna, and Su-parvan—these
shall be that Manu’s sons.

17 Hear about the period of Dharma’s son Sdavarna. The
Vihaū-gamas, and the Kāma-gas and the Nirmdna-ratis shall
be the gods of three kinds; each shall be a group of thirty.

18 Now the Nirmiņa-ratis shall be those who preside over the
months, seasons and days; and the Vihan-gamas shall ba
those who preside over the nights;f the groups of Kama-gas

19 shall be those who preside over the moments.$ Their Indra
shall be named Vrisha, celebrated for valour. And Havish-

20 mat, and Varishtha, and another rishi$ Aruņi, and Nis-éara
and An-agha, and another great muni Vishti, and Agni-deva
the seventh,—these shall be the seven rishis in that period.

21 Sarvatra-ga and Su-šarman, Devšnika, Purtidvaha, Hema-
dhanvan, and Dridhāyu shall be the sons of that Manu, yea
the kings.

22 When the twelfth Manv-antara of Rudra's son, the Manu
named Sdvarna, shall have arrived, who shall be the gods

23 and munis,—hear about them. The Su-dharmans, the Su-
manases, the Haritas and the Rohitas and the Su-varnas


* Vor prdņindriv read putrdņūm as in the Bombay edition.

+ Both the Calcutta and Bombay editions read ratrayo 'tha, which
is the plural of rdtri; but this word should apparently be analogous to
maulutrtta in formation, and be an adjective derived from rdtri. Perhaps
the reading should be rdtrakds tu instead.

t This seems to be the meaning intended by the word mauhdrttāh ; but
the only meaning given in the dictionary is “ astrologer.”

§ Both editions read rishļir, but it can hardly be right, for it would be a
proper name, and the number would then exceed seven, It seoms to bea
mistake for rishir.


526 CANTO XCV.


shall be the gods therein; these five shall be ten-fold groups.
94 Now their Indra shall be known as Rita-dhiman, great in
power, endowed with all Indra’s good qualities. Hear from
25 me the seven rishis also—Dyuti, Tapas-vin, Su-tapas, Tapo-
murtti, Tapo-nidhi, and Tapo-rati another, and Tapo-dhriti
26 the seventh. Deva-vat, and Upa-deva, Deva-sreshtha, Vidū-
ratha, Mitra-vat, and Mitra-vinda, shall be the sons of that
Manu, yea the kings.
27 Listen while I tell thee of the Manu’s sons and of the
seven rishis and of the kings in the turn of the thirteenth
28 Manu named Raučya. The gods therein shall be the Su-
dharmans, the Su-karmans, and-the Su-sarmans the others;
29 all these verily shall be the gods, O best of munis. Their
Indra shall be Divas-pati, great in power, great in valour.
30 Now hear while I tell thee of the seven rishis who shall be
then—Dhriti-mat, and A-vyaya, Tattva-daršin, Nir-utsuka,
Nir-moha, and Su-tapas another, and Nish-prakampa the
31 seventh. C'itra-sena and Vi-čitra, Nayati, Nir-bhaya, Dridha,
Su-netra, and Kshatra-buddhi, and Su-vrata shall be the sons
of that Manu.


Canto XCV.


The Story of Ruc'i.


A Prajd-pati named Ruc'i Jormerly lived in solitary discomfort— His
forefathers appeared to him and urged him to marry—He demur-
red and they insisted on the importance of marriage.

Markandeya spoke :
1 A Prajā-pati Rudi, who was devoid of self, free from pride,
fearless and moderate in sleeping, formerly roamed this earth.
2 Seeing that he was destitute of fire, had no habitation, that
he ate but once a day, had no hermitage, and was cut off from
all attachments, his ancestors spoke to him, the muni.
The Pitris spoke :

3 > Dear son, wherefore hast thou not done the sacred deed of

taking a wife, since that is the cause of gaining Svarga and


10


1].


12


13


RUC'I AND HIS ANCESTORS. 527


final emancipation from existence? without that there is
bondage perpetually. A house-holder by paying worship to
all the gods and the Pitris likewise, to rishis and guests, gains
the heavenly worlds. He apportions the gods their share by
uttering 'svāhā” aloud, the Pitris by uttering ‘ svadhā” aloud,
created beings and other guests by the giving of food. Being
such a negligent one, thou dost incur bondage by reason of
the debt due to the gods, bondage by reason of the debt due
to us also, bondage unto men and created beings day by day,
by not begetting sons, by not satisfying the gods and Pitris.
And how, by not fulfilling these duties through folly, dost thou
hope to go the good way? We think affliction, one affliction
after another, may be for thee in this world, O son; hell
likewise when thou art dead, and affliction in sooth in another
birth.
Ruči spoke :

Wedlock tends to excessive suffering, and is a downward
course toward sin; hence I took no wife hitherto. Control which
is gained over one’s self, this is effected by firm suppression ;* it
is the cause of final emancipation from existence ; that emanci-
pation verily comes not from wedlock. That the soul, though
besmirched with the mire of selfishness, be washed clean day
by day by those who have no family ties with the waters of
thought—better verily is this! The soul, which is marked.
with the mire of actions that have developed during many
existences, must be washed clean with the waters of good.
perceptions by wise men who keep their bodily organs under
control.

The Pitris spoke :

Fitting it is that those who have their organs under control
should cleanse their soul; but does this path, wherein thou
wendest, O son, tend to final emancipation from existence ?+


* Ni-yantraņa; a word not in the dictionary.

+ I take kintu as kim tu interrogatively ; but the Bombay edition reads
lepdya for mokshdya aud kintu thon would mean simply * but”—* but this
path, wherein, &c., tends to defilement,”


528 CANTO XCY.


14 Moreover evil is driven away by means of disinterested* gifts,
and by results and enjoyments which are good or ill according

15 toformer actions. Thus no bondage befalls him who acts
with a tender heart, and such action being disinterested tends

16 not to bondage. Thus a former action done, which consists of
merit and demerit, is diminished day and night by enjoyments
which consist of pleasure and pain, O son, among mankind.

17 Thus wise men cleanse their soul and guard it from bonds ;
thus, on the other hand, indiscrimination, which is the mire
of sin, does not lay hold of it.


Ruéi spoke :
18 Itis declared in the Veda, ignorance is the path of action,


O my forefathers. How then do ye, sirs, despatch me on the
path of action ?


The Pitris spoke :


19 Ignorance in very truth is thist action thou mentionest—this
maxim is not erroneous ; nevertheless action is the cause un-

20 doubtedly of full acquisition of knowledge. On that view the
restraint, which bad men observe because they do not perform
what is enjoined, should tend ultimately to final emancipation
from existence; on the contrary it produces a downward

21 course. But thou thinkest, O son, ‘I will cleanse my soul’; yet
thou art burnt up by sins which arise from not performing what

22 is enjoined. Even Ignorance exists for the benefit of men,
just as poison does ; although it is different, it docs notin truth
tend to bondage§ by reason of the means which are put into

23 practice. Therefore, O son, do thou take a wife according to
precept; let not thy birth be unprofitable by thy not observ-
ing the business of ordinary life fully.


* An-abhisandhita : abhi-sandhita is not in the dictionary,

+ For evait read evaitat.

t The Bombay edition reads ndsau instead of so "nte,
‘ does not tend to final emancipation.”

§ The Bombay edition reads bandhdydnyd yato hi sd, “because it is
different, it tends in truth to bondage.” Or if anyd yato bo read as ono word
a-nydyato, it would mean “ because of iniquity it tends in truth to bondage.”


and the meaning is


RUC'I PROPITIATES BRAHMA, 529


Ruéi spoke :
24 I am now aged; who will bestow a wife on me, O my fore-
fathers ? Moreover it is hard for a poor man to take a wife.
The Pitris spoke :
25 Our downfall will assuredly come to pass, O son, and so also
will thy downward course ; thou dost not welcome our speech.
Markandeya spoke :


26 Having spoken tlus, the Pitris suddenly vanished from
sight while he beheld them, O best of munis, just as lights
when blown by the wind.


Canro XCVI.


The story of Ruc'i (continued).


Perturbed by his forefathers’ admonition Ruc'i offered worship to
Brahmé, and Brahmd promised he should gain his desire with
the Pitris’ help—Ruc'i poured forth therefore a long hymn and
prayer to the Pitris.

Markandeya spoke :
1 The brābman rishi Ruc'i, being greatly agitated in mind at
that his forefathers’ counsel, wandered about the earth, desir-
2 ous to find a maiden. Failing to obtain a maiden he, illu-
minated by the fire of his forefathers’ counsel, fell into deep
3 thought, while his mind was exceedingly agitated—‘ What
can I do? Where am Í going? How am I to take a wife?
May that come to pass quickly, which will effect my fore-
4, fathers’ advancement!” While the high-souled muni pon-
dered thus, a thought occurred to kim— I will propitiate
5 lotus-born Brahma with austerities.” Thereupon he per-
formed austerities to Brahma for a hundred celestial years,
and for the purpose of propitiating him engaged then in the
6 utmost self-mortification. Brahma the forefather of the
worlds thereupon showed himself and said to him—“Iam


67


530


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


CANTO XCVI.


well-pleased, declare thy earnest wish.” He fell prostrate
then before Brahma, who is the origin of the world, and declared
what he wished earnestly to do according to the counsel of his
forefathers. And Brahmá hearing his earnest wish spoke
to the brahman Ruči,


Brahmá spoke:


Thou shalt be a Prajé-pati; thou shalt create human folk.
After creating human folk, O brāhman, and begetting sons
and performing ceremonies, thou shalt then, after thy domi-
nion shall be taken away, attain perfect felicity. Being such,
do thou take a wife as enjoined by thy forefathers ; and after
reflecting on this desire, perform worship to the Pitris;
those Pitris indeed being gratified shall bestow on thee


the wife and sons desired. When satisfied what may thy
ancestors not bestow ?


Markandeya spoke :

The yishi* on hearing this speech from Brahmá, whose
birth is inserutable, performed worship to the Pitris on
a distant sand-bank in a river, and also gratified the
Pitris, O bréliman, with these praises, respectfully, with
single mind, subduing his body, and bending his neck in
faith.


Ruc'i spoke:

I pay reverence unto the Pitris who dwell as presiding
deities in the śráddha ; and whom even the gods verily delight
with invocations concluding with the word svadhi at the
Srāddha. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom maharshis,
who desire to obtain enjoyment and final emancipation from
existence, delight with mental šrāddhas and with faith in
Svarga. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom the Siddhas


delight with all kinds of incomparable heavenly offerings at the


Srdddhas in Svarga. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom the


Gubyakas also, who earnestly desire boundless sublime pros-


* For risher read rishir ?


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24,


25


26


27


RUC'T8 HYMN TO TIE PITĶIS. 591


perily because they are absorbed therein,* honour with faith.
I pay reverence unto the Pitris, who are always honoured by
mortals on the earth, and who grant unto men to attain unto
the desired worlds by means of faith at the šrāddhas. I pay
reverence unto the Pitris, who are always honoured by
brihmans on the earth, and who grant generative power for
the obtaining of what they éarnestly desire and long for. I pay
reverence unto the Pitris, whom indeed forest-dwelling ascetics,
who are restrained in their diet and whose stains have been
washed away by austerities, delight with šrāddhas performed
in the forests. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom
brāhmans, who practise the vow of perpetual celibate student-
ship and who have subdued their souls, delight with intense
meditation continually. I pay reverence unto the Pitris,
whom as being bestowers of benefits in the three worlds princes
delight with srāddhas and all kinds of food-oblations accord-
ing to precept. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom
vaigyas, who take pleasure in their own occupations, honour
with flowers, incense, food and water continually on the earth.
I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom as famed by the name
Su-kšlint $ūdras also in faith always delight with šrāddhas in
this world. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom as feeding
on the svadhé great Asuras, who have forsaken deceit and
arrogance, always delight with šrāddhas in Pātāla. I pay
reverence unto the Pitris, whom Nagas, who wish to obtain
their desires, honour with sréddhas and all kinds of enjoy-
ments according to precept in Rasdtala. I pay reverence
unto the Pitris, whom the Serpents,t who possess spells,
enjoyments and good fortune, always delight there indeed
with $rāddhas according to precept. I pay reverence unto
the Pitris, who dwell visibly both in the world of the gods
and in the atmosphere, and who are worthy of worship by
gods and other beings on the face of the earth. May they


* Tan-maya-tvena ; referring to wealth, because they are the attendants of
Kuvera the god of wealth, and guardians of his treasures?
+ A class of Pitris regarded as the especial Pitris of Sūdras.


1 Sarpath.


582


29


30


31


32


33


35


36


CANTO XCVI.


receive my offering. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, who
have become united with the Supreme Soul, who yet in bodily
form dwell verily in a heavenly car, and to whom as effecting
deliverance from affliction the noblest yogius offer sacrifice
with minds cleansed from defilement. I pay reverence unto
the Pitris, who also in bodily form in heaven feed on the
svadhā for the purpose of bestowing desirable benefits, and
who are powerful to bestow all desired objects and who grant
deliverance to those who have no engrossing interests. May
all the Pitris be delighted herein, who signify desires to those
who wish for them, namely, godhead, Indra’s status, or what
is more than this, and also sons, cattle, might and houses of
their very own! May the Pitris, who always dwell in the
moon’s rays, in the sun’s orb and in a white heavenly car, be
delighted herein with food and water, with perfumes and
other odours; may they obtain nourishment herefrom! And
may the Pitris, who have satisfaction from the clarified butter
in the oblation to Agni, who dwelling in the bodies of brah-
mans feed on the same, and who reach intense delight by the
offering of the pinda, be satisfied herein with food and water !
May they, who have been greatly pleased by the chief
maharshis with rhinoceros-flesh and with dark sesamum seeds,
which attract the minds of celestial beings and are much
desired by the gods, and with the herb Ocimum sanctum,
reach intense delight herein! And may all poems which are
exceedingly coveted be for them, who are honoured by the
Immortals! May they then be present here at the flowers,
perfumes, food and enjoyments which I have procured! May
they, my forefathers,* who receive honour day by day, who
should be worshipped on earth at the end of the month and
on the eighth day, and who should be worshipped at the
end “of the year and at its beginning,+ obtain satisfaction
herein! May they, who as being luminous as th


e full moo
are worthy of worship from brāhmans, ga


and who as having


# Or, “ The Pitris,”
+ Abhyudaye ; or “the rising of the sun”?
t Kumudendu-bhdso,


37


38


39


40


41


45


RUC’I’s HYMN TO THE PITRIS. 533


the hue of the rising sun are worthy of worship from
kshattriyas, and who as bestowers of gold are worthy of
worship from vaišyas, and who as resembling the indigo plant*
are worthy of worship from sūdva folk, may they all reach
delight with my offering of flowers, perfumes, incense, food,
water and other gifts and with the fire-oblation also! Before
them, the Pitris, I am ever prostrate. May they, who eat
of the food-oblations, those splendid sacrifices, which have
been previously offered to the gods for the sake of exceeding
delight, and who when delighted become creators of welfare
for us, be delighted herein! I am prostrate before them.
May they, who expel} Rakshasas, goblins and fierce Asuras,
yea, what is unpropitious to people, and who are the most
ancient of gods, and who are worthy of worship by the lord
of the Immortals, be delighted herein! I am prostrate before
them, May the Agni-shvattat Pztris, the Barhi-shad§ Pitris,
the Ajya-pal| Pitris and the Soma-pa || Pitris attain delight
in this graddha! I have delighted the Pitris, May the bands
of Agni-shvdtta Pitris protect the eastern region for me!
And may the Pitris who are known as Barhi-shads protect
the southern region! May the Ajya-pa Pitris likewise protect
the western region, and the Soma-pā Pitris the northern
region from Rakshasas, goblins and Pisaéas, and indeed from
harm inflicted by Asuras! And may their ruler Yama safe-
guard me everywhere! The Visva, Visva-bhuj, Aradhya,
Dharma, Dhanya, Subhšnana, Bhūti-da, Bhūti-krit and Bhūti
are nine classes which exist among the Pitris. The Kalyana,
Kalyata-kartyi, Kalya, Kalyataráśraya, Kalyatá-hetu and An-
agha—these six, they are known as classes of Pitris also.


% Nili-nibhdh. This is obsoure.

+ Nir-ndéayantas, As a verb this is not given in the dictionary.

f The spirits of those who on earth neglected the sacrificial fire. See
Manu III. 195 and 199.

§ See Manu III. 196 and 199.

|| Those who were the sons of Pulastya and the ancestors of the vaišya
order. See Manu III. 198. -


| Those especially who were the progenitors of the brāhmans. See-Manu


III, 197 and 198.


534
46


47


48


CANTO XCVII.


The Vara, Varenya, Vara-da, Pushti-da and Tushti-da, Višva-
patri and Dhatri—these seven indeed are also classes. The
Mahat, Mahitman, Mahita, Mahima-vat and Mahā-bala—these
five moreover are classes of Pitris, being destroyers of sin.
Sukha-da, and Dhana-da also, Dharma-da and Bhūti-da*
besides-—such also is likewise called a four-fold class of Pitris.
There are thus thirty-one classes of Pitris, who pervade the
entire world. Delighted with me, may they be satisfied and
ever grant me what is beneficial.


Canto XCVII.


The bestowal of a boon by the Pitris in the Rauc'ya Manv-antara.


A body of light appeared in the sky, and Ruc'i offered a hymn to all


the deities and Pitris—The Pitris appeared, and to enable him
to be a Prajd-pati granted him the boon of a wife—They com-
mend the hymn offered to them and declare its manifold efficacy.


Markandeya spoke:

Now while he offered praises thus, a lofty pile of light
appeared suddenly, suffusing the sky. When he saw that
very great light, which remained stationary encompassing tho
world, Ruci sank to the earth on his knees and sang this
hymn.

Ruc'i spoke:

I pay reverencet ever to those Pitris, who are honoured,

incorporeal,f luminously splendid, who are rapt in meditation,


* This word occurs twice, in verses 44 and 47. The Bombay edition reads
the same. It seems to follow the Calcutta edition rather closely after the
Devi-māhātmya.

+ Namasydmi. It is used with the object in the genitive here and in verse
6; in the accusative in verses 4, 5, 7, 10 aud 11 ; and in the dative in verses
8and9. The construction with the accusative is the only one mentioned in
the dictionary.


t The Bombay edition reads A-miritdndm c'a múrttánám, “


who are incor-


poreal and who are corporeal.”


13


14


15


RUČ'I PRAISES THE PITRIS. 585.


and who possess supernatural sight. And I pay reverence to
those granters of men’s desires, who are the leaders of Indra
and the other gods, and of Daksha and Māric'a, of the seven
rishis and of other sages. I pay reverence to all the Pitris of
Manu and the other chief munis, and of the sun and moon,
among the waters and in the sea. With conjoint hands I
pay reverence likewise to the constellations and planets, to
wind and fire and the sky, and to heaven and earth. And with
conjoint hands I pay reverence to the devarshis’ progenitors
unto whom reverence is paid by all the worlds, who are always
givers of what is imperishable. With conjoint hands I pay
reverence always tothe Praji-pati* Kasyapa, to Somat and to
Varuna, and to the princes of religious devotion. Reverence
to the seven classes of Pitris moreover in the seven worlds!
I pay reverence to self-existent Brahmá who is contemplation-
eycd. I pay reverenee to the Somādhāra and Yoga-múrtti-
dhara classes of Pitris, and to Soma the father of the worlds.
I pay reverence moreover to the other Pitris who have the
form of fire,$ because this universe is entirely composed of
Agniand Soma. Now these who dwell in this light, and who
have the bodies of the moon, sun and fire,|| and whose true na-
ture is the world, and whose true nature is Brahmé{—to all
those Pitris, practisers of religious devotion, I pay reverence
with subdued mind, reverence, yea reverence. May they, the
consumers of the svadhi, be gracious unto me !


Markandeya syoke:
Being thus praised by him, O best of munis, those Pitris


issued forth with their splendour, illuminating the ten regions
of the sky; and he beheld them standing in front then,


* For Prajé-patek read Praja-pate ?
+ Or, “ the moon.” ‘Soma ? seems to bo played upon in its various mean-


ings in these verses.
t Or, “ Reverence to the seven classes of Pifris and to the seven worlds!”


§ ‘ Agni’ is also played upon in its different meanings.
|| “Soma, Sūrya and Agni.”
g Or, “Brahman.”


536 CANTO XCVII.


adorned with the flowers, perfumes and unguents which he
16 had presented unto them.. Falling prostrate again in faith,
again indeed joining his hands, full of respect he exclaimed,
separately to each of them, “ Reverence to thee!” “ Reverence
17 tothee!” Well-pleased the Pitris thereupon said to him, the
best of munis, “Choose thou a boon.” To them he spoke,
bending his neck respectfully.


Ruci spoke :
18 Brahma has commanded me now to be the maker of a new


creation. In such capacity I desire to obtain a wife, who shall
be happy, of heavenly kind, prolific.


The Pitris spoke :


19 Here verily for thee let a wife be produced forthwith who
shall be most fascinating, and by her thon shalt have a, son,
20 a Manu supreme, the ruler of a Many-antara, wise, charac-
terized by thy very own name, being called Raučya from
21 thee, O Ruči; he shall attain fame in the three worlds. He
shall also have many sons, great in strength and prowess,
22 great of soul, guardians of the earth, And thou, becoming
8 Prajš-pati, shalt create people of the fom classes ; and
when thy dominion shall come to an end and thou shalt be
Wise in righteousness, thou shalt thereafter attain perfect
felicity.
23 And whatever man shall gratify us with this hymn
in faith, we being gratified will give him enjoyments and
24 sublime spiritual knowledge, perfect bodily health, and wealth,
and sons, grandsons and other descendants ;* because verily
those who desire blessings must constantly praise us with this
20 hymn. And he who shall recite this hymn, which causes. us
pleasure, with faith at a šrāddha, standing the while in front


* The Bombay edition inserts a verse and a half here—
[the foregoing blessings] assuredly and whatever else is ea
Therefore men who continually desire sacred recompenses in
the imperishable gratification of the Pitris—s
a hymn,”


‘We will give
rnestly desired.
the world and
uch men must praise us with


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


36


THE MERITS OF THE HYMN TO THE PITRIS. 537


of the brihmans as they feast, that srūddha, shall un-
doubtedly become ours imperishably, because of our pleasure
in heaving the hymn when a man makes close approach unto us.
Although a šrāddha be performed without a brāhman learned.
in the Veda, although it may be vitiated by means of wealth
which has been gained unjustly, or although it be performed
in any other defective manner, or although moreover it be
performed with blemished offerings unfit for a šrāddha, or
be performed also at a wrong time or in a wrong place, or
yet be unaccompanied by the proper ordinances, or af it is
performed by men without faith or in reliance on deceit—
nevertheless such a Sraddha shall be to our delight because
this hymn is uttered thereat. Wherever this hymn which
brings us happiness is recited at a srāddha, there delight
accrues unto us, lasting for twelve years. This hymn recited
in the winter yields delight for twelve years ; and this beauti-
ful hymn recited in the dewy season yields delight for twice
that number of years; when recited at a $rāddha ceremony in
the spring it tends to delight us for sixteen years; and this
hymn recited in the hot season causes delight for sixteen years
indeed. When a śráddha although performed imperfectly is
consummated with this hymn in the rainy season, imperish-
able delight accrues unto us, O Ruéi. When recited at the
time of a gréddha even in the autumn season, it yields us
delight with men which lasts for fifteen years. And in whose-
soever house this hymn remains constantly in written form,
there shall we be present when a $rāddha is performed.
Therefore standing at a śráddha in front of the feasting
bréhmans, O illustrious Sir! thou must hear this hymn which


supplies nourishment unto us.*


* The Bombay edition adds—' Having spoken thus, his ancestors (Pitris)
departed to heaven, O best of munis.”


68


538


CANTO XCVIII.


Canto XCVIII.


The marriage of Mdlint and the conclusion of the Rauc'ya Man-


antara.


Ruc'i matried an Apsaras named Málini, and had by her a son, the


10


Manu Rauc'ya, who will be. the ruler of a manv-antara.
Markandeya spoke :


Thereupon from the midst of that river uprose an exqui-
site Apsaras, charming, slender-shaped, named Pramloéé.
And she spoke to high-souled Ruči in very sweet accents,
bowing courteously towards him, she, beautiful-browed Pram-
loćá, verily a choice Apsaras.

“A maiden of exceeding bodily beauty is my daughter, O
best of ascetics; she was begotten by Varuna’s high-souled
son Pushkara, Take her whon I give her, a maiden of exgni-
site complexion, to be thy wife; a Manu of great intellect
shall be born of her as son to thee!”


Markandeya spoke :

When he replied, “ So be it,” to her, she fetched up from
out that water then a shapely maiden named Mālini ; and on
that sand-bank in the river Rudi, best of munis, after sum-
moning the great munis together, took her hand in marriage
according to the ordinances. Of her was born to him a son,
great in valour, great in intellect; he was named Ranéya
after his father’s name; he was famous on this earth. And
in his manv-antara who will be the gods and the seven rishis
and his sons and the kings, they have been duly told to ities:
Increase of righteousness, and perfect health, and the growth
of riches, grain and children—this without doubt is for men
in this many-antara, which thou hast heard about. š

After hearing of both the praise of the Pitris and the
classes of the Pitris also, a man obtains all Ta desires
through their favour, O great muni,


THE STORY OF BHÚTI AND SANTI. 539


Canto XCIX.


——


Eulogy of Agni and fire.


There was formerly a very irascible muni named Bhūti, to whom


10


everything was subservient—He left his hermitage once and put
his disciple Sdnti in charge—The sacred fire went out, and Sante
in consternation offered up a long prayer and eulogy to Agni.


Markandeya spoke:


Hear next thereafter about the birth of Bhautya, and
about the gods, the yishis, his sons and the kings of the
earth in his period.

There was a disciple of Angiras, by name Bhūti, very
irascible, a muni who used to invoke bitter curses for a small
matter, and who spoke harshly on the occasion of a trans-
gression. At his hermitage Matarigvan blew not very
fiercely, the sun caused no excessive heat, nor Parjanya
excessive mud, nor did the moon even when full cause
excessive cold with its rays, through fear verily of that
irascible and very glorious muni. And the seasons, aban-
doning their course, produced flowers and fruit at all times
on the trees that grew in his hermitage according to his
command. And the waters that flowed near his hermitage
glided on according to his pleasure, and when taken into
his water-pot were frightened at that high-souled muni. He
was impatient of excessive trouble and was exceedingly
irascible, O brahman.

And that illustrious muni having no son set his mind on
austerities. Desiring a sOn, restricting his food, exposing
himself to cold, wind and fire, he fixed his mind on austeri-
ties indeed with the resolve, “I will practice austerities.”
The moon did not tend to make him very cold, nor the sun
to make him very hot, nor did Matarisvan blow on him
severely, 0 great muni, And Bhūti, best of munis, being


540


11


12


CANTO XCIX.


greatly pained by the couples of opposite causes? did not
obtain that desire and so ceased from his austerities.

His brother was Su-varčas. Being invited by him to a
sacrifice and being desirous of going, Bhúti said to his high-
minded disciple named Şánti, who was calm, who had the
measure of religious knowledge,t who was well-behaved,
always zealous in the gurn’s business, observant of good
customs, noble, an excellent muni.


Bhūti spoke:


13 I shall go to the sacrifice of my brother Su-varčas, O
Santi, being summoned by him, and do thou listen to what

14 thou must do here. Thou must keep watch over the fire in
my hermitage thus and thus diligently, so that the fire may
not become extinguished.

Markandeya spoke:

15 Having given this command and receiving the answer
“Yea” from his disciple Sdnti, the guru went to that his bro-
ther's sacrifice, being summoned thereto by his younger brother.

16 And while Santi is fetching fuel, flowers, fruit and other things
from the forest for that high-souled guru's maintenance, and is

17 performing other business,. being faithfully obedient to his
guru, the fire which was the root of his welfaret died out

18 during that interval. Seeing the fire had died out, Santi,
sorely distressed and afraid of Bhūti, fell, though of great
intellect, into manifold anxiety, thinking—

19 “What amI to do? or how will the guru's return be?
I must accomplish something now; what, when done, would

20 beagood thing done? If my guru sees this extinguished
fire occupying the hearth, he will assuredly devote me at

21 once because of it to some grievous calamity. If I kindle
another fire here in the fire-place, then he who sees everything

22 visibly§ will of a surety turn me into ashes. As such Iam
sinful on account of the wrath and curse of that guru. I do

Heat and cold; and so on, t Bhúti


4 Aksha-pratima; a difficult word. § Agui


-Parigrahah ; a pun on the words.


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31
32


33


34


HYMN TO AGNI. 541


not grieve so much for myself as for the sin committed against
the guru. The guru on seeing the fire extinguished will
certainly curse me, or Agni will be angry. That brahman is
truly of such immense power! With what fitness will not he,
under whose command the gods live in terror of his majestic
power, assail me who have committed sin!”

Markandeya spoke:

After pondering thus in many ways, being always afraid of
that guru he, best of intelligent munis, sought refuge with
Agni. Controlling his mind then he offered a hymn to the
seven fires; and with thoughts intent on them he joined his
hands and knelt down on the ground.

Santi spoke:

Om! Reverence to the high-souled perfecter of all created
things, to him who has one, two and five side-altars at the
rāja-sūya sacrifice, to the six-sonled god! Reverence to the very
brilliant one, who gives their functions* to all the gods, to
him who has Sukra's form! Thou bestowest permanence
on all the worlds. Thou art the mouth'of all the gods! The
oblation that is taken by thee, O adorable one,t cheers all the
gods! All the gods have their life-breath in thee! The obla-
tion sacrificed in thee turns into a fiery{ cloud; and after-
wards the modification which it undergoes in the form of
water, by that comes the growth of all herbs, O wind-chario-
teered god. Upon all the herbs animals live in happiness. Men
perform sacrifices among the herbs also which thou hast crea-
ted. With sacrifices also gods and Daityas and Rakshasas like-.
wise are fattened, O Purifier ; those sacrifices have thee for their
support, O Fire. Hence thou art the origin of everything; and
thou, O Fire, art composed of everything. The gods, Danavas,
Yakshas, Daityas, Gandharvas and Rikshasas, men, cattle,


* Or “means of subsistence.”

+ Instead of tvaydttum bhagavdn havik, the Bombay edition reads tvayat-
jam bhagavan havih, which I have adopted.

t Anala-megha in the Bombay edition is preferable to amala-megha “®


pure cloud.”


542 CANTO XOKK.


35 trees, deer, birds and reptiles are all fattened and nourished
up by thee, O Fire. From thee indeed they take their birth,
and in thee likewise they meet their dissolution at the end.

36 Thou, O god, createst the waters, thou again indeed con-
sumest them, and by thee they are rendered wholesome to be

37 the source of nourishment for breathing beings. Thou abidest
among the gods under the form of glowing light* among
the Siddhas with loveliness, among Nagas under the
form of poison, among birds under the form of wind:

38 Among mankind thou art anger; among birds, deer and
other animals thou art silliness ;+ thou art stability among
trees; thou art hardness with reference to the earth;

39 thou art fluidity in water, O adorable god; and thou
hast the form of swiftness in the wind; thou moreover,
O Fire, with thy faculty of permeation abidest as soul in the

40 sky.t Thou, O Fire, who art the end of all created beings,
movest about safe-guarding them. Wise men style thee one ;

41 again they style thee three-fold.$ Having fashioned thee in
eight ways, they fashioned the original sacrificeļ|. Supreme

42 rishis say this universe was created by thee. Without thee

verily the whole world would perish at once, O Fire. A twice-

born man proceeds on the course which is ordained by bis own
actions, when he has paid worship to thee with oblations to
the gods, oblations to deceased ancestors and other offerings
after uttering the words svadhā and sváhá. Living beings
have in truth the innate power of modification, O thou who
* Tejo-ripena.
+ Mohak.


t The Bombay edition reads nabhasi tva vyavasthitah instead, “ thou
abidest in the sky,” omitting “as soul.” l

§ The three kinds of sacrificial fire, gárhapatya, áhavaníya and dakshina.

|| The Bombay edition reads instead yajnu-véham akalpayan, “having


fashioned thee in eight ways they fashioned (or esteemed) thee to be him who
conveys the sacrifice to the gods.”


43


| Pariņdmātma-vtryā. The Bombay edition reads -vfrydņi, a plural neuter
instead of a singnlar feminine noun; but it means the pao: If pariņāmu,
“ alteration,” “modification,” means “adaptation,” this passage is a remark-
able anticipation of modern scientific generalization,


45


46


47


48


49


50


51


52


53


54


9


HYMN TO AGNI. 543


art honoured by the Immortals. Flames issuing from thee,
moreover,* burn up all created things. O most brilliant
Jāta-vedas,* thine verily is this creation of the universe !
Thine are the Vedic ceremonial and the world which consists
of all created things. Reverence to thee, O yellow-eyed
Fire! Reverence be to thee, O consumer of oblations! O
Purifier, reverence be to thee now; reverence to thee, O
bearer of oblations to the gods.ž — Thou verily art the maturer
of the universe by reason of thy maturing§ things that are
eaten and drunk. Thou art the maturer of the crops; and
thou art the nourisher of the world. Thou verily art cloud,
thou art wind, thou art seed that produces the crops. Thou
indeed hast been, and shalt be, dad art for the nourishing of
all created things. Thon art light among all created things ;
thou art the illuminating Sun. Thou art day, thou also art
night; and thou art both the twilights. Thou hast golden
semen, O Fire; thou art the cause of the production of
gold; and thou hast gold within thy bosom ; || thou hast
lustre like unto gold! Thou art a muhūrtta, and thou a
kshana; thou art a truti and thou a lava; T thou existest
in the form of kalds, kāshthās, nimeshas and other periods of
time, O lord of the world. Thou art all this universe. Thou
art Destiny, which consists in continuous change.

Thy tongue which is called Kálí brings about the conclusion
at the fated time, O lord; by %t** preserve us from fear, from
sins and from the great terror of this world! Thy tongue,
which is named Karālitt is the cause of the great dissolution
of the world; by it preserve us from sins and from the great
terror of this world! And thy tongue which is called Mano-


* Tyatto, “ from thee,” would seem preferable to tato, “ moreover.”

+ A name of Agni.

t The Bombay edition inserts a line here—“ Thou indeed art the purifier
of the universe because of thy purification of all existing things.”

§ Pdcaka and pdc’ana ; the metaphor is from “ cooking ” with fire.


|| Hiranya-garbhas.

«7 Various measures of time.

*% Instend of bhaydt, “from fear,” the Bombay edition reads tayá, “by it.”
+t “ Formidable.”


56


57


58:


59


60


61


62


a
Au Zion - S -. R St
jav4* is characterized bysthe quality. of lightness ; by it pre- `
serve us from, sips afd from the great terror. of this world! Thy
tongue which is eglfedeSvAahitit ecompļishes their desire
for created beings bit preserve us from sins and from the
great terror Fis, world! ‘: h¥--tongue. -which is called `
Sa-dhūmra, arnd@eanses sickness am oie breathing* beings,
by it ores us from Sins S ak the yj great terror
of this wold 1 Ānčēthy. tongv$ whith is called Sphulin-
gini,$ because it is 8 ogether™ shapely by it preserve us
from sins and ‘trom 6 @reat teļror of this world! And .
thy tongu@*which is galled Višvāsaļdā|| bestows blessings
on breathing beifigs ; by it presērve ‘us from sins and from
the great terr of this world l FO yellow-eyed, red-necked,
black-pathe ‘|. comgumer of oblon save me from all faults ;
deliver me here’from worldly - exigtence! Be gracious, O
seyen-flamed Fire, Ọ Krišānu, O bearer of the oblations to
the gods! ‘Thou art proclaimed by the eight names of Agni,
Pāvaka, Sul@@,and the rest. O Agni, O thon who didst
spring up fFore- all created beings, O Vibhi-vasu, be gra-
cious, O thou art called the Carrier of the oblations to the
gods, O apr whom I extol! :
Thou art Figfimperishable, thou hast inconceivable beauty,
thou prosperest greatly, thou art hard to be endured,** ex- `
ceedingly ardent: or thy surpassing valour, which is changeless


and teguible, vanquishes him who injures all the worlds.tt


% “Swift as thought.”
+ “Very red” g
ft “Smoky-coloured.”
§ “ Having sparks of fire.”
|| For visud sadá read viévdsa-dd; “bestowi ”,
edition reads visva-srijd, “creating the as casa


|| Krishna-vartman “‘black-pathed” of the Bombay edition is better than
krishna-varna ‘“black-hued” of the Caloutta edition


#* For dush-prahaso read dush-prasaho as in the Bombay edition


++ This passage appears to be corrupt. It runs thus in the Calcutta
edition ;—


Tvam a-vyayam bhimam a-éesha-lokam
Samtrtako hanty athavati-viryam.


b


Wa HI IN TO AGNI. S a 545


; 63 Thon: art fie Te being,* thāt dwellsin the


lotus-heart of every” being, unendījig, worthy of praise.
By i thee was stretched wt ~thiGurm vèrse which comprises what
* is ‘moveable: and i RCA < Jéonsùmer of oblations, thou


- 64 art one in m ny fe orms höre!” -Thonygre ūndecayirg; thou


‘art the earth git its mountain’ ants forests ; thou art the
sky that hglds the moon andthe sun ; thowx rt everything
that exists daily 5 and. the š fe submarine fire that
is held within the Dosor of th rent thou standest with
65 "superhumftn power mSthy* h@nd. oe Thou art always, :
worshipped ag the Consumer oP oblations’ at the great
sacrifice, by great rishis who are devdësd to gelf-rd3traint; ‘and
when extolled thou drinkest the soma at the sacrifice, and
eatest the oblations also, that are offered infire with the ex-


Ss
66 clamation vashat, for thy well-being Thougart longed for||


continually by Seaham „ber9 the sake,b recompense ;
and”thou art sung of in all thes edan - For thy sake
brūhmans, who are zealously d uced to roroi study the
67 ealste at all times. Thou art Brahm#@ho is devoted to
sacrificing, and also Vishnu, goblin-r ing Siva, Indra lord of
the gods, Aryaman, and pi Varuna, * Both the


which a seems unintelligible, The Bombay e —
Tavd-vyayam bhimam a-šesha-loka-
Savardhakasi. hanty athavdtt-vtryam.
and I have followed it except as regards the word sa-vardhakam which seems


” incorrect, By comparing the two versions it may be conjectured that the


proper reading should be sam-mardakam, or sam-indhakam or some suoh word,
and I have ventured to translate it by the general phrase, “ who injures.”
* Or “goodness,” sativa. The Bombay edition reads tattva, ‘essential


truth.”
+ For -pundartkas tvam the Bombay edition LE -puņdartka- em, which


. seems preferable.


t Ahar-divdkhilam.
$ Or, ‘in my ray of light,” kare. The Bombay edition has a wholly
different reading: here ;—
Bhavdn vibhuh pivati paydmsi pavaka.
“Thou as lord drinkest.the waters, O Fire !”
|| Fhyase; but the reading in the Bombay edition ijyase, “ thou art sacri-


ficed unto,” is better.


69


546 _ CANTO C.


sun and moon and all the gods and Asuras’ gratifying thee
68 with oblations obtain from thee much-prized rewards. Every-
thing, though corrupted with grave malady to the utmost
degree, becomes pure when touched by thy flames. Of ablu-
tions the most excellent by far is that which is performed with
ashes ; therefore munis wait upon thee pre-eminently at even-
69 ing* Be gracions, O Fire, who art named the Pure! Be
gracious, O* Air, who art unsullied and exceedingly brilliant!
Be gracious‘unto me now, Q/purifying Fire who comest from
lightning !t Be gracious, O Gonsumer of oblations! Protect
40 thou me! With the auspicious form that is thine, O Fire, and
with tite seven flames that are thine—when praised by us protect
us therewith, O god, even as a father protects the son whom he
has begotten!”


= ~- Canto C


——


The Fourteen Manv-antaras concluded.


Agni pleased with the hymn granted Sénti two boons ; namely, the fire
was re-kindled ; and Bhiiti obtained a son who will be the Manu
Bhautya, and became gentle to all.—Agni also blessed the hymn.
— The gods, rishis and kings in the Bhautya manv-antara are
named.—The merits obtained by hearing about the manv-antaras
are proclaimed.


Markandeya spoke :
1 Being thus hymned by him the adorable Fire thereupon
appeared before him there, encircled with a halo of flame,
2 Omuni. And the god who abounds in light, pleased { indeed


% The Bombay edition inserts a short verse here:— After doing that,
people, who have easy self-control, by means of real faith gain heaven whioh
is sung of by multitudes.”

_t For vaidyutddya the Bombay edition reads vaidyutdbha, “who hast a
lightning-like splendour.” 4
t For prfta-stotrena read prttah stotreņa ?


10


11


12


STORY OF BHŪTI AND SANTI. 547


with that hymn, O brāhman, spoke with a voice as deep as
a thunder-cloud’s to Santi who fell prostrate before him.


Agni spoke:
Well pleased am I with thee, O brahman, for the praise


which thou hast offered in faith, I grant thee a boon; choose
what thou desirest.


Sānti spoke :

O adorable god, I have accomplished my object inasmuch
as I see thee in bodily shape; nevertheless deign to hear me
who bow to thee in faith. My guru has gone from the
hermitage to his brother’s sacrifice, O god, and when he shall
return to the hermitage may he see the sacrificial altar*
with thee for its master. The sacrificial altar that has been
forsaken by thee through my transgression, O Fire, may the
bréhman see that now presided over by thee as before! And
if thou shewest me grace in any other way, O god, then let
my guru who is sonless obtain a distinguished son. And as
my guru will display friendliness to his son, so may his mind
become gentle towards to all beings. And whoever shall
praise thee + with this hymn, whereby thou art pleased with
me, O changeless god, mayest thou whom I have propitiated
bestow a boon on him !

Markandeya spoke :

On hearing this his speech, Agni, being highly conciliated .
with the hymn and with his devotion to his guru, spoke to
that best of brāhmans.

Agni spoke :

Tnasmuch as thou hast asked, O brāhman, for two boons
on thy guru's behalf and not for thyself, therefore I am
exceedingly pleased with thee, O great muni. All this shall


* For dhishtyam read dhishņyam as in the Bombay edition, Kere and in


the next verse and


verse 21. In the next verse dhishnya is treated as a neater


nonn, but the dictionary gives dhishnya, maso. only, this meaning.
+ For pasyatdm read yaé c'a tvām with the Bombay edition.


548


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


"21
22
23


24


25


CANTO C.


happen to thy guru which thou hast prayed for—he shall be
friendly to all beings and shall have a son. The son shall
be the lord of a manv-antara, by name Bhautya, great in
strength, great in valour, great in knowledge, O thou who
praisest thy guru.*

And whoever with composed mind shall praise me with
this hymn, all his desire shall come to pass and he shall
have merit. At sacrifices, on festival days, at places of
pilgrimage, at sacrifices, at oblations to the gods, and at
ceremonies let a man read this sublime hymn, which yields
nourishment to me, to attain unto righteousness. This
sublime hymn, which yields pleasure to me, when heard once,
O brāhman, shall without doubt destroy sin committed by
day and night. This hymn when heard shall at once quell
the faults and other defects that attend improper oblations
and times, and the faults which are committed by unworthy
men also who have made such mistakes. This hymn of praise
to me, when heard by mortals at full-moon, at new-moon and
on other sacred festivals, shall destroy sin.

Markandeya spoke :

Having spoken thus, adorable Agni became invisible forth-
with, while he indeed looked on, O muni, just as the flame
upon a lamp expires. And when Agni had departed, Santi,
with mind fully satisfied and with the hair of his body stand-
ing erect with gladness, entered the guru’s hermitage.
There he saw the fire blazing brightly on the guru’s sacrificial
altar as before; thereat he felt an intense joy.

At this moment the guru also of that high-souled disciple
returned from his younger brother’s sacrifice to his own
hermitage; and before him the disciple paid respectful
salutation to his feet. And the guru, after accepting the seat
and Vo offered, said to him then—*'My son, I feel
exceeding loving-kindness to thee and to other creatures also.
I know not what this is; if thou knowest, my so», tell this
quickly unto me.” Thereupon the brihman Santi declares


* Guru-stava. This is better than reading it gurus tava,


26


27


28


29


30


81


32
33


34


35


36


37


38


THE MANU BHAUTYA’S MANV-ANTARA. 549


all that, namely, the extinction of the fire and the other
incidents, to his teacher truly, O great muni. On hearing it
the guru with eyes moist through affection embraced him,
and gave the disciple the Vedas and Angas and Updngas,
O great muni.

A son was born to Bhúti, the Manu named Bhautya. Hear
from me of the gods, rishis and kings in his manv-antara,
namely, those who shall belong to that future Manu, while
I declare them at length; and who shall be the lord of the
gods in the time of that Manu famous for his deeds. Both
the C'škshushas and the Kanishthas, the Pavitras and the
Bhrājiras, and the Dhérdvyikas—these shall be the five
classes of gods according to tradition. Sudi shall be the
Indra of those gods then, great in strength, great in valour,
endowed with all an Indra’s qualities, And Agnidhra, and
Agni-bihu, Suči and Mukta, Madhava, Sukra and Ajita—
these seven shall be the rishis then according to tradition.
Guru, Gabhira, and Bradhna, Bharata and Anugraha, and
Strim4nin * and Pratira, Vishnu and Saūktandana,t Tejas-
vin and Subala—these shall be the Manu Bhautya’s sons. I
have declared this fourteenth manv-antara to thee.

After hearing of the manv-anteras thus in order, O best of
munis, a man obtains merit, and 2 diminished succession:
By listening to the first manv-antara % man obtains
righteousness. By listening to Svāročisha's period he
gains all his desires. He obtains wealth from listening to
Auttami's story, and acquires knowledge in hearing the story
of Témasa; and when Raivata is heard about, he finds
intelligence and a handsome wife. Perfect health accrues
to men when C'4kshusha is heard of, and strength when
Vaivasvata is heard of, and virtuous soņs and grandsons
when the Sun’s son S4varņika is heard of. A man obtains
greatness of soul when Brahma-Sdvarna ts heard of, a bright
intellect when Dharma-Sivarnika ts heard of, victory when


* Srimfnin in the Bombay edition is better.
+ San-krandana in the Bombay edition.
t Of future births ?


550 CANTO CI.


39 Rudra-Sávarņika is heard of. A man becomes the chief of his
kindred and is endowed with good qualities, when Daksha-
Sávarņika is heard of; he makes his enemies’ power small *

40 after hearing of Raučya, O best of men. He acquires the
favour of the gods when the Bhautya many-antara is heard
of, and also obtains the sacred fire and sons endowed with

41 good qualities. And whoever listens to all the many-antaras
in regular order, O best of munis, hearken to his supreme

42 rā, also. After hearing of the gods, rishis, Indras, Manus,
their sons the kings, and their genealogies therein, he is

43 delivered from all his sins. And the other gods, rishis,
Indras and kings who rule over those manv-antaras are
pleased with him, and when pleased they bestow a bright

44, intellect. Having obtained then a bright intellect and having
performed a splendid deed, he attains a splendid course as long

45 as the fourteen Indras continuet May all the seasons be
salubrious; may all the planets be benign! Assuredly they
are so, when he has listened to the ordinance of the manv-
antaras in their order.


Canto CI.


—


The Announcement of the Genealogies.


Mérkandeya alludes to the famous races of kings and begins an
account of the creation.—Brahmd created Daksha, and Daksha’s
daughter Aditi bore to Kašyapa a son Martanda, who was the
Sun incarnate.—Markandeya tells of the Mundane Egg and
Brahma’s birth from it,—and expounds the word ** Om.”

Kraushtukif spoke :
1 Adorable Sir, thou hast duly expounded the ordinance of
the manv-antaras, and I have ascertained it from thee
* Ni-tdtayati; not in dictionary.
+ For c'atur-daša% read c'atur-daša with tho Bombay edition.
+ The discourse goes back to Canto lxxx, and Kraushtuki, who has disap-


peared during the Devi-mahaétmya and the concluding account of the Manv-
antaras, re-appears here with the genealogical portion of tho Purána,


THE BEGINNING OF THE CREATION BY BRAHMA. 551


2 gradually and at length. As I wish to hear of the complete
genealogy of the kings of the earth, beginning from Brahma
and the other progenitors, O hest of dvijas, do thou declare
it to me duly, adorable Sir.

Markandeya spoke :

3 Listen, my son, to the origin of all the kings and their
exploits, taking for the commencement the Prajū-pati who is

4 the source of this present world, for this his progeny is
adorned with kings, who celebrated many sacrifices, who
were victorious in battle, who were wise in righteousness,

5 who were numbered by hundreds. And by hearing of the
exploits of these high-souled kings and their manifestations*

6 a man is delivered from all sins. The race, in which arose
Manu and Ikshviku, An-aranya,t Bhagiratha and other
kings in hundreds, who all protected their territories well,

7 were wise in righteousness, performed sacrifices, were heroic
and understood thoroughly the sublimest matters—when one
hears about that race, a man is delivered from a multitude

8 of sins. Hear then about this race wherefrom thousands.
of subordinate lines of kings were separated off like subsidiary
stems from a banyan tree.

9 The Prajd-pati Brahma, being desirous of yore of creating
various peoples, created Daksha from his right thumb, O

10 best of dvijas; and the adorable lord Brahmá who causes
the birth of the worlds, and who is the supreme maker of
the worlds, created a wife for him from his left thumb.

11 Resplendent Aditi was born as a daughter to that Daksha,

12 and of her Kašyapa begot divine Martanda,§ who has the
nature of Brahmi,|| who bestows boons on all the worlds,


© Utpattayaé c'a; the Bombay edition reads the same. This isthe nomin.,
and is inadmissible; read instead utpattts c'aiva ?

+ This is the reading of the Bombay edition and is right. The Calcutta
edition reads Raņavanya ; this name is given in the diotionary, but I have
not met with it elsewhere.

t Angushthad dakshindd daksham; a play on the word. § J.e., the Sun.

|| The Bombay edition also reads Brahma sva-rūpam; bat_read Brahma-
svarúpam instead P


552 CANTO CI.


and who constitutes the beginning, the middle and the end
in the operations of the creation, continuance and termination

13 of the world; from whom proceeded this universe and in whom
everything subsists, O dvija; and whose nature this world

14 with its gods, Asuras and men possesses; who constitutes
everything, who's the soul of all, the Supreme Soul, eternal.
The Sun took birth in Aditi, after she had first propitiated
him.


Kraushtuki spoke:


l5 Adorable Sir, I desire to hear what is the Sun’s nature and :
what is the cause why he, the earliest god, became Ķašyapa's

16 son; and how he was propitiated by divine Aditi and Kašyapa;
and what he, the divine Sun, said when propitiated by her;

17 and what truly was his majestic power when he became
incarnate, O best of munis. I wish to hear it in its fulness
duly related, Sir, by thee.


Markandeya spoke :


18 Clear sublime Knowledge, Light, Luminosity eternal and
free, Perfect Isolation,* Understanding, Visible Manifesta-

19 tion,f Freedom of will, and Comprehension,t and Intelli-
gence, and Perception, Memory and Discernment—these are

20 the forms of that luminous Form here. Hearken also,
illustrious sir, while I tell thee at length what thou hast
asked, how the Sun became manifest,

21 In this world, destitute of light, obscure,


enveloped with darkness all around, a
22 into existence,


which was
single huge egg came
an imperishable most potent cause.§ It split
open; within it stood the adorable fore-father, lotus-born

Brahmá himself, who is the créator of the worlds, the lord.
23 Out of his mouth issued the great word “Om,


” O great muni;
and then the Bhūr, after that the Bhuy


as,|| and imme-


* Kaivalyam,
I Sam-vid.


|| These and the following words appear to mean both the utterances
themselves and also the worlds that go by the same names, the Bhūr-loka


t Avir-bhith ; & word not in the dictionary.
§ See Mann I, 5, Gc.


THE CREATION OF THE WORLDS AND VEDAS. 553


94 diately thereafter the Svar.* These three mystic words
therefore express the essential property of the Sun. Now
from this essential property indicated by “Om” comes the

25 subtle sublime form of the Sun. Next there issued the gross
Mahar-loka, then the grosser Jana-loka, then the Tapo-loka,
then the Satya-loka;—these are the seven-fold substantial

26 forms. His permanent forms exist and do not exist, inasmuch
as they assuredly come into existence in innate disposition
and in feeling.t

27 The word “Om” which I have uttered, O brāhman, which
has a beginning and an end, which is sublime, subtle, form-
less, most sublime, permanent—that is the Supreme Spirit,
yea his body.


Canto CII.


The Majesty of the Sun.


Mérkandeya says that from Brahmé’s mouths issued the four Vedas
and explains their peculiar qualities and transcendent merits—
The gods and the Vedas are but manifestations of the Sun.


Markandeya spoke :

1 Now when that egg split open, out of the anterior mouth
of Brahmá whose origin is inscrutable, O muni, came forth
2 first the Rió hymns, at once resplendent as the flowers of
the China rose,t glorious in form, but disconnected,§ and
divided into separate portions, and therefore bearing the
and the Bhuvar-loka; and the meaning seems to be that, as he uttered each

mystic word, the corresponding world came into existence.


* The Svar-loka.
+ Svabhdva-bhdvayor bháva yato gac'c'hanti saméayam. The Bombay


edition reads the same, but it seems obscure. I have ventured to read
gac'c'hyanty a-samsayam instead.

t Javā; Hibiscus rosa Sinensis. The flowers are very large and of a
brilliant crimson-scarlet colour, very conspicuous.

§ Not in the order in which they are now arranged. For tejo-rúpánta-
samhatáh the Bombay edition reads tejo-rúpá hy a-samhatéh, which I have


adopted,
70


554 CANTO OII.


3 form of passion.* Out of his right mouth issued the Yajus
hymns, unimpeded, coloured like the colour of gold, and
4 disconnected. Out of the posterior mouth of the lord
Brahmá, who is the highest of all, were revealed the Saman
5 hymns, and the C’handas hymns. And the entire Atharvanf
then, resplendent as a mass of black pigment or a cluster
of bees,—that which has a nature as terrible as possible,
which contains the magical rites and the rites for removing
6 calamities,—became manifest out of the Creator’s left mouth ;
it is composed chiefly of pleasure, goodness and darkness,§
and has the essential properties of gentleness and harshness.
7 The Rid hymns have the quality of passion; and goodness
is the quality|| of the Yajus hymns, O muni; the Siman
hymns have the quality of darkness ; darkness and goodness
8 exist in the Atharvan hymns. These emanations, blazing
indeed with unrivalled glory, obtained each a separate station
almost at first.$
9 hat then was the original glory which is declared** by
uttering the word “Om.” The glory which comes from the
essential nature thereof—that, having encompassed it com-
10 pletely, remains fixed. As is the glory which consists of the
Yajus, such is that of the Sāmans, O great muni; they have
11 grown into one in resorting to a supreme glory. Rites for
the removal of calamities, and rites for promoting growth
and magical rites also—these three things gained unionff
with the three Vedas, the Rió and the two others, O brāhman.


* Rajo-ripa-vahas.

+ Atharvdnam, neut. nomin. The meaning given in the dictionary is “the
work, i.e., ritual of the Atharva-Veda,” but here it must mean the Atharva-
Veda itself. This Veda receives marked praise here.

t Ydvad-ghora-svartipum tad,

§ Sukha-sattva-tamah-prdyam ; sukha is peculiar in this connexion.


|| For guņd read guno? It is remarkable that a higher quality is given to
the Yajur-Veda here than to the Rig-Veda,


4] Púrvam iva.

#* Abhi-šabdyate; abhi-šabd as a verb is not in the dictionary.

tt Layam agamat. The reference seems to be to the Atharva-Veda ; see
verse 5 where these rites are said to be part of that Veda, This passage then


THE MERITS AND GLORY OF THE VEDAS. 555


12 This universe became most stainless then through the sudden
destruction of darkness, and was to be developed horizontally,

18 upwards and downwards, O brahman rishi. That excellent
glory of the C’handas became then an orb, and grew into

14 oneness with the supreme glory, O brāhman. Since it
obtained the name of Aditya at the very beginning, it became
also the essentially unchanging cause of this universe, O

A illustrious Sir.

15 The triple Veda, which is named the Rié, Yajus and Saman,
gives warmth in the morning and at mid-day and in the

16 afternoon also, The Rid hymns give warmth in the forenoon,
and the Yajus hymns truly at mid-day, and the Séman
hymns give warmth truly in the afternoon, O best of munis.

17 Rites for the removal of calamities are deposited* in the
Rié hymns in the forenoon, rites for promoting internal
growth in the Yajus hymns at mid-day, and magical rites

18 lastly in the Saman at evening. Magical rites moreover
should be performed at mid-day and in the afternoon equally,
but the particular ceremonies for the Pitris should be per-
formed with the S4man in the afternoon.

19 In the creation of the world is manifested Brahma, who is
composed of the Rió hymns; in its permanencet Vishnu
who is composed of the Yajus hymns; and Siva, who is
composed of the Siman, at the dissolution; therefore its

90 sound is impure.t Thus the adorable Sun, whose self is
the Veda, who abides in the Veda and whose self is Vedic

21 knowledge, is called the Supreme Soul.§ And he, the
eternal, who is the cause of creation,|| permanence and.
dissolution, on taking recourse to passion, goodness and the


refers to the changes by which that work gained rank as a Veda. But these
words may also mean « became blended with the three Vedas;” see verse 17


below.

* Vinyastam.

+ For sthito read sthitau as in the Bombay edition.

+ Manu says the sonnd of the Sima-Veda is in a measnre impure
because itis sacred to the Pitris (IV. 124).

$ Parah purushah.

|| For svarga- read sarga- as in the Bombay edition.


556 CANTO OIII.


other qualities, acquires the names of Brahmá, Vishnu and
the other gods.
22 Now ever to be praised by the gods is he whose body is
the Veda,
Yet who has no body, who was in the beginning, who is
embodied in all mortals ;
Who is the Light that is the refuge of the universe, who
has righteousness that passes knowledge,
Who is to be attained unto in the Vedanta, supreme
beyond things that are sublime !


—


Canro CIII.


——


Hymn to the Sun.


Brahmá, finding the Sun’s glory too great for creation, offered a hymn
to the Sun.—The Sun contracted his glory, and Brahmá accom-
plished the creation.


Mārkandeya spoke:


1 Now when the egg was being heated by his glory above

and beneath, the lotus-born Forefather, being desirous ‘of
2 creating, pondered— My creation although accomplished

will assuredly pass to destruction through the intense glory*
of the Sun, who is the cause of creation, dissolution and per-
manence, great of soul. Breathing beings will all be bereft
of breath, the waters will dry up through his glory, and
without water there will be no creation of this universe.”
Pondering thus the adorable Brahmá, Forefather of the


world, becoming intent thereon, composed a hymn to the
adorable Sun.


Brahmá spoke :
5 Ipay reverence to thee of whom everything consists
Here, and who consistest of everything ;
Whose body is the universe, who art the


sublime Light
Whereon religious devotees meditate $


* Abhi-tejasah; a word not in the dictionary.


HYMN TO THE SUN. 557


6 Who art composed of the Ri¢ hymns, who art the reposi-
tory of the Yajus hymns,

And who art the origin of the Saman hymns ; whose power
passes thought ;

Who consistest of the three Vedas;* who art half a short
syllable as touching grossness,t

Whose nature is sublime, who art worthy of the fullness of
good gualities.f

7 To thee,§ the cause of all, who art to be known as
supremely worthy of praise,||

The supreme Light that was at the beginning, not in the
form of fire;

And who art gross by reason that thy spirit is in the gods
—to thee I pay reverence,

The shining one, who wast in the beginning, the sublimest
beyond the sublime!

8 Thine is the primeval power, in that urged on thereby

T achieve this creation, which is in the forms of water,
earth, wind and fire,

Which has those elements, the gods and other beings for
its objects, and which is complete with the word “Om”
and other sounds—

Not at my own wish; and that I effect its continuance and
dissolution in the self-same manner.


© For trayt-mayt read trayt-mayo as in the Bombay edition.

+ Sthilatayérdha-mdtrd ; this seems obscure.

t Guna-pdra-yogyah. This may be taken in several ways; “ who art adapted
to the fullest measure of a swppliant’s good qualities,’ or “who art worthy
of religious devotion by reason of the fullness of thy good gnalities,” or
« who art worthy of religious devotion with the fullness of a suppliant's good
qualities.”

§ For tam read tvdm as in the Bombay edition.

|| The Bombay edition reads, but not so well, paramam c'a vedyam, “and
who art to be known as the sublimest one.”

<q The Bombay edition reads instead, ddyam param jyotir a-vedya-ripam,
“the supreme Light that was in the beginning, whose form passes kņow-


ledge.”


558


10


11


12


14


15


CANTO CIV.


Thou verily art fire. By reason of thy drying up of the

water thou achievest*

The creation of the earth and the primeval completion of

the worlds.

Thou indeed, O lord, pervadest the very form of the sky.

Thou in five ways protectest all this world.

They who know the Supreme Soul sacrifice with sacrifices

to thee,

Who hast the nature of Vishnu, who consistest of all

sacrifices, O Sun!

And self-subdued ascetics, who curb their souls and

thoughts, meditate

On thee, the lord of all, the supremest, while they desire

final emancipation from existence for themselves.

Reverence to thee, whose form is divine ;

To thee, whose form is sacrifice, be reverence ;

Yea to thee who in thy very nature art the Supreme Spirit,

Who art meditated upon by religious devotees !

Contract thy glory, since the abundance of thy glory

Tends to obstruct creation, O lord, and I am ready to begin

creation !
Markandeya spoke :

Being praised thus by the Creator Brahmá, the Sun
contracted his supreme glory and retained but very little.
And the lotus-born god accomplished the creation of the
world. Thus in those intervals of the former kalpas
illustrious Brahma created indeed, as before, the gods,
Asuras and other beings, and mortals, cattle and other
animals, trees and shrubs and the hells, O great muni.


Canto CLV.


Praise of the Sun.


Brahmá finished the creation —He had a son Maric, who had a son


* For karomi, “I achieve,” the Bombay edition reads karoshi, which
I have adopted as preferable.


CREATION OF THE GODS, MANKIND, ANIMALS, &C. 559


Kasyapa—Kasyapa married Daksha’s thirteen daughters, and
begot by them the gods, demons, mankind, animals, birds, $c.—
The gods were subdued by the demons, and Aditi offered a hymn
to the Sun, imploring his help.


Markandeya spoke:


1 Having created this world, Brahma then separated off the

castes, the brāhman's four periods of life, the seas, the

2 mountains, and the islands even as before. The adorable

lotus-born god fixed the forms and abodes of the gods,

Daityas, Nagas and other beings, as before, according to the
Vedas* indeed.

3 Brahma had a son, who was famed as Mariči ; his son was

4 Kagyapa, namely Káśyapa by name.t Daksha”s thirteen

daughters were his wives, O brāhman ; and they had many

children who were the gods, Daityas, Nagas and the rest.

5 Aditi gave birth to the gods who rule over the three worlds,

Diti to the Daityas, and Danu to the fierce Danavas whose

6 prowess is wide-reaching. And Vinaté bore Garuda and

Aruna; Khasi the Yakshas and Rākshasas indeed; and

7 Kadru bore the Nagas; Muni bore the Gandharvas ; from

Krodhā were born the Kulyas; and from Rishtā the bevies

of Apsarases ; and Irá bore Airāvata and other elephants, O

8 dvija; and Támrá bore daughters of whom Syeni was the

chief, O dvija, from all of whom were born the hawks,

9 vultures, parrots and other birds; from Iá were born the

trees; from Pradhi. the various kinds of aquatic animals.

This is the progeny which was begotten of Aditi by Kasyapa.§

10 And by her sons and daughters’ sons, by her sons’ sons and


* For devebhyas the Bombay edition reads Vedebhyas, which is preferable.


+ Kdéyapo náma ndmatah; the Bombay edition agrees, but this can hardly
be right. KéSyapa would be name of KaSyapn’s descendants.

t For Pradhdydspatasam gandhk read Pradhdyd yddasdm ganah as in the
Bombay edition.

§ Kašyapa's wives and childron
e.g., Maha-Bhérata, Adi-p., xvi, Ixy. and lxvi;


sre given differently in other authorities,
Karma Purfņa xviii; Agni


Purana xix.


560


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


CANTO CIV.


daughters’ grandsons* and other descendants this world was
overspread, yea by the offspring of those males and those:
females, O muni.

The chief of those sons of Kašyapa are the hosts of gods.
Now these hosts are characterized by goodness, by passion
and by ignorance, O muni. Brahma, the chief of those
learned in sacred lore, the highest of all, the Praja-pati, made
the gods participators in the sacrifices, and rulers over the
three worlds. The hostile Daityas and Danavas and Rākshasas
combining harassed them, and a very terrible war occurred
between them. Now the deities were vanquished for a
thousand divine years, and the powerful Daityasand Danavas
were victorious, O brahman. Then Aditi, seeing her sous
cast out and robbed of the three worlds by the Daityas and
Danavas, O best of munis, and deprived of their shares of
sacrifices, was exceedingly afflicted with grief, and made the
utmost efforts to propitiate the Sun. Concentrating her
mind thereon, restricting her food, observing the utmost self-
repression, she hymned the Sun, the ball of light that dwells
in the sky.

Aditi spoke :

Reverence to thee who hast a sublime subtle golden body,
O splendour of those who have splendour, O lord, O reposi-
tory of splendours, O eternal one! And the ardent form
which thou hast who drawest up the waters for the benefit
of the worlds, O lord of the heavenly cattle, to that I bow
reverently! The most ardent form which thou hast, who
bearest the nectar that composes the moon to take it back
during the space of bight months, to that I bow reverently !
The well-fattenedt form which thou hast, who verily dis-
chargest all that same nectar to produce rain, to that thy
cloud-form be reverence, O Sun! And that lght-giving
form of thine, which tends to mature the whole kingdom
of plants that are produced through the pouring forth of


% Dauhitrika, a word not in the dictionary.
+ A-pydyaka ; a word not in the dictionary.


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31
32


33


HYMN TO THE SUN. 561


water, to that* I bow reverently! And that form of thine
which, when there is excessive cold by reason of the pouring
forth of snow and other causes, tends to nourish the crops
of that winter season—to the passing over of that thy form
be reverence! And that form of thine, which is not very
ardent and which is not very cold, and is mild in the season
of spring, to that be reverence, O divine Sun, yea reverence !
And thy other form, which fattens both all the gods and the
pitris, to that which causes the ripening of the crops be
revenence! That one form of thine which, being composed
of nectar for the vivification of plants, is guaifed by the
gods and pitris, to that, which is the soul of the moon, be
reverence! That form of thine which, consisting of the
universe, is combined with Agni and Soma these two forms
of the Sun,*f to that, the soul of which is the good quali-
ties,t be reverence! That form of thine which, named the
three-fold Veda by reason of the unity of the Rič, Yajus and
Sāma Vedas, gives heat to this aniverse, to that be reverence,
O luminous one! That thy form.moreover, which transcends
that former one, which is enunciated by uttering the word
* Om,” and which is subtle, endless and stainless, reverence
be to that, the soul of which is Truth! So
Markandeya spoke : S

In this manner the goddess, self-restrained, abstaining
from food, offered praise day and night, desirous of propitiat-
ing the Sun, O muni.

A long time thereafter the adorable Sun rendered himself
visible to her, Daksha’s daughter, in the sky, O best of
dvijas. Sie beheld a huge mass of glory, dwelling in the
sky and stationed on the earth, full of light, most difficult
to be gazed at because of its halo of flame. Seeing him then,
the goddess became bold to the utmost and spoke—


* For tam read tan?
+ The Bombay edition reads dpydya-diha-ripdbhydm, “two forms of


fatness and conflagration.” 3
t Gundtmane in the Bombay edition is better than gaņātmane,


71


562 CANTO CIV.


“ Be gracious to me! I can not gaze on thee, O lord of the
34 heavenly cattle. Since I while fasting have beheld thee, at
frst standing in the sky and most difficult to be gazed upon,
85 and afterwards as brilliant and burning, even so I behold
thee here on earth a globe of glory. Be gracious; may I see
thy form, O maker of day! O thou lord, who hast compas-
sion on thy believers, I believe; protect my sons!
36 Thou, the Creator, createst this universe ;
Exerting thyself thou protectest it to make it permanent ;
In thee everything passes to its dissolution at the end.
Thou art it.
Besides thee verily there is no other way of existence in all
the world!
37 Thou art Brahmá and Hari! thou bearest the name Aja!*
Thou art Indra,
The lord of wealth Kuvera, the lord of the pitris Yama,
the lord of the-waters+ Varuna, the wind Vayu !
Thou art the Moon, Agni, the lord of the sky, the sup-
porter of the earth,f the Ocean!


What praise must be given to thee who art the splendour of
all souls and forms ?


88 O lord of sacrifice, brāhmans devoted to their own
ceremonies, day by day,
Praising thee with manifold words, offer sacrifice to thee.
Meditating on thee with firmly restrained minds 7
And absorbed in religious devotion mortals§ attain unto
the sublimest condition.


39 Thou warmest, thou maturest the universe; thou protectest
it, thou turnest it to ashes.


* Either “the unborn one,” or “the driver, mover, instigator.”

t Ambu-patiļ violates the metre; read ap-pati% as in the Bombay edition.

1 Gagana-patih maht-dharo; this is the reading of the Bombay edition.
The Caloutta reading gagana-maht-dharo makes the verse two syllables
short.

§ Martydh, the reading of the Bombay edition. The Calcutta edition


reads instead yoga-mūrtyd, “ by means of the body which belongs to religions
devotion ;” but this violates the metre,


THE SUN REVEALS HIMSELF TO ADITI. 563


Thou makest it manifest, thou makest it sound forth* with
thy rays which are pregnant with water.

Thou createst it again also in unerring manifestations.

Thou art reverenced by mortal beings that move, but art
unapproachable by workers of iniquity.+


Canto CV.


The Birth of Mūrttaņdu.


The Sun revealed himself to Aditi and became her son as Mérttanda—
This name ts explained—Maritanda destroyed the demons and
restored the gods to their sovereign positions.

Markandeya spoke:

Thereupon from out of that his own glory the Sun re-
vealed himself; the lord, the Sun, appeared then, like unto
glowing copper. And the luminous one spoke, O muni, unto
the goddess, who fell prostrate when she beheld him—
“ Choose from me the coveted boon that thou desirest.” And
she, lying prostrate with her head on the ground and pressing
the earth with her knees, answered the Sun who present in
his very person offered her a boon :—

“ O god! be gracious; the three worlds have beer snatched§
from my sons, and the shares in sacrifices also, by both the
Daityas and the Dānavas who excel them in strength. Do
thou, O lord of the heavenly cattle, bestow on me favour for


S Hrddayasi in both editions, The meaning is no doubt “to shout for


joy;” see the Bible, Psalm lxv. 9-13.

+ Tho Bombay edition reads the second half of this verse very differ.
ently— Thou the lotus-born god oreatest it; thou who art named the
Unwavering one protectest it, and thou destroyest it at the end of the age.
Thon alone art awful in form!”

t For ddir bhúto read dvir-bhūto, as in the Bombay edition,


§ For kritam read hritam,


564 CANTO CV.


that purpose; with a portion of thyself enter thou into brother-
6 hood with them and destroy their enemies. In order that my
sons may again partake of the shares of the sacrifices, O lord,
7 and may-become rulers of the three worlds, O Sun, do thou
then most graciously show compassion* on my sons, O Sun,
who removest the afflictions of suppliants; thou art called the
Author of permanence.”


Markandeya spoke:


8 Thereupon the adorable lord, the Sun, the robber of the
waters, spoke unto prostrate Aditi, O bréhman, while his
9 countenance was benign with favourt— Taking birth in thy
womb with all my thousand portions, I will speedily destroy

the foes of thy sons, O Aditi, in security.” f
-10 Having spoken thus the adorable Sun vanished from her
sight; and she ceased from her austerities, having gained all
Jl her desire. Thereupon the Sun’s ray called Sausumna§ from
out of his thousand rays|| became incarnate in the womb of
12 the mother of the gods, O brahman. And she, with her
mind composed, performed the arduous čāndrāyaņa penance
and other austerities. Being pure she conceived him, knowing
13 that the embryo was a heavenly one, O brāhman. Then
spoke Kašyapa to her with words somewhat confused through
14 anger,—‘ Why dost thou destroy the egg in thy womb by
continual fasting?” Ard she said to him,—* Seest thou
this egg within my womb, O wrathful man? It has


not been destroyed; it shall be for the death of our
adversaries.”


* For anukampa read anukampdm.

+ For prasddam sumukho read prasdda-sumukho, `

f For nir-vritah read nir-vyitah.

§ This is the reading of both tho editions, but itis not in the dictionary.
Su-shumņu is the name of one of the Sun’s seven principal rays, that which is
supposed to supply heat to the moon. The reading here should therefore
presumably be Su-shumna or Saushwmna,

|| For raémi-sahasram read raémi-sahasrdt as in the Bombay edition

q See Manu vi, 20,


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


MARTTANDA DESTROYS THE ASURAS. 565


Markandeya spoke :


Having spoken so she, who is the path of the gods,*
in anger at her husband’s words, gave birth to the child then
which blazed brilliantly with glory. Kašyapa, on seeing the
child which shone like the rising sun, fell prostrate and
praised it respectfully with ancient Rié hymns, Being
so praised, he revealed himself from out the fotal egg, having
a lustre like unto the petal of a lotus-flower, pervading the
regions of the sky with his glory. Moreover a voice deep
as a thunder-cloud's, addressingt Kašyapa, best of munis,
from the air, spoke, issuing from no corporeal being—
“ Whereas thou, O muni, hast spoken of this egg as des-
troyed{ to thee, therefore, O muni, this thy son shall be
called Marttanda. And he as’ lord shall exercise the Sun’s
sway on the earth; and he shall slay the Asuras, the foes
who have carried off the shares of the sacrifices.”

The gods hearing this speech from heaven assembled
together, and experienced unparalleled joy; and the Dānavas
were bereft of their vigour. Thereupon Indra challenged
the Daityas to battle; and the Dānavas filled with joy
encountered the gods. Terrible was the battle of the gods
with the Asuras, wherein all the regions between the worlds
were rendered brilliant with the light from the arms and
weapons. In that battle the adorable Mārttaņda looked at
those great Asuras, and being burnt up by his splendour they
were reduced to ashes. Thereupon all the dwellers in
heaven experienced unparalleled joy, and praised Mārttaņda
the source of splendour and also Aditi; moreover they re-
gained their own spheres of dominion and their shares of the
sacrifices as before; and the adorable Mārttaņda also exer-
cised his own dominion. Like unto @ rounded ball of fire
with rays shooting out both downward and upward like a
globular flower-head of the kadamba, the Sun assumed a
body that did not flash over-poweringly.


* This is the Bombay reading, surdraņi4. The Calcutta reading


surdvanih seems incorrect. j
+ For dbhdsya read dbhūshya ? t Méritam andam,


566


CANTO CVI.


Canto CVI.


The paring down of the Sun’s body.


The Sun married Visva-karman’s daughter Kañjñá and had three


children by her, Manu Vaivasvata, Yama and Yamund— Satijīd
could not endure the Sun’s glory and leaving her shadow C'hdyd
departed—O'hayé-Sanjid took her place and had three children
by the Sun—She cursed Yama for unfilial conduct, but the Sun
minimised the curse and perceived the deception.—The Sun
visited Visva-karman and the latter placing the Sun on his
wheel pared down his glory—The world was thrown into chaos
as the Sun was whirled around—The gods and celestial beings
hymned the Sun.
Markandeya spoke :

Now the Prajā-pati Visva-karman, after falling prostrate
and propitiating him, gave his daughter named Saūjūd to
the Sun, Vivasvat.* Manu Vaivasvata was begotten by
Vivasvat of her then, and his nature has been already indeed
declared particularly.t He, Vivasvat, lord of the heavenly
cattle, begot three children of her, two most illustrious sons
and a daughter Yamuna, O muni. Manu Vaivasvata was the
eldest, the god who presides over Sraddhas, the Prajā-pati ;
then were born Yama and Yamias twins. With the exceed-
ing splendour that Marttanda Vivasvat possessed, he scorched
the three worlds and the moveable and immoveable things
therein very grievously. But Sañjñá saw Vivasvat's globe-like
form and, being impatient of his great splendour, gazed at
her own shadow O’hdyé and spoke :—


Sajid spoke:


Fare thee well! I will go to my father’s very own abode.
Yet thou must stay here without change at my command, O


* See Canto Ixxvii. The same story is repeated here.
+ See Canto lxxviii, verse 27, and Canto Ixxix,


10


11
12


13
14
15


16


17


18


19


SAÑJÑA LEAVES HER HUSBAND THE SUN. 567


fair one ; and thou must show honour to these two boys for
me and to this daughter who is of noble rank; and thou must
not declare this at all to the god.


C’haya the Shadow spoke:

“Unto enduring the seizing of my hair, unto undergoing
curses, O goddess, I will never declare thy intention ; go where
thou wishest.”

Being addressed thus by O’hayé, Safijūi went to her
father’s dwelling; and there she, the beautiful of eyes,
abode some time in her father’s house. Her father told her
again and again to go to her husband, Then turning herself
into a mare she departed to the Northern Kurus, O bréhman.
There, like a chaste wife, she practised austerities, fasting,
O great muni.

When Sañjñá had gone to her father, C’haya, assiduous to
Safījītd's command, and assuming her form, waited on the
Sun; and the adorable Sun begat of her, he thinking it was
of Sañjñá, two sons in addition and a daughter. The first-
born of the two sons was equal to the eldest son Manu;
hence he was called Savarni, O best of dvijas. And the
other, who was the second son, became the planet Saturn.
And the daughter who was Tapati, her king Samvarana
chose in marriage.*

Now as queen Saiijiié used to behave to those her own sons,
0'hdyd did not behave to those eldest born sons with such
affection. Manu suffered that conduct in her, and Yama did
not suffer it in her. Now being sorely distressed when his
father’s wife used to beseech him frequently, he Yama, by
reason of both anger and childishness and indeed by the
force of predestination, threatened O'háyá-Sañjñá with his
foot, O muni, and thereupon the Shadow-Saijia,t full of
resentment, cursed Yama severely.


* See Mahs-Bhirata, Adi-p. xciv. 3788, xcv. 3791 ; and olxxi-clxxiii where


it is described how Sambarana while hunting mot her, fell in love with her
aud gained her at length after propitiating the Sun. Her son was Kuru, the
progenitor of the Kauravas.


+ This must be C'hdyd-Satījūd ; but both editions read Sañjñá.


968


20


21


22


23


24,


25


26


27


28


29


30


CANTO CVI.
C'hāyā spoke :


* Since thou threatenest thy father’s wife, a venerable
lady, with thy foot, thy very foot shall therefore assuredly
drop down.”

Now Yama was deeply afflicted in mind at that curse, and
he, righteous of soul, along with Manu made it all known
to his father.


Yama spoke:


O lord, our mother behaves not with equal affection towards
us all; leaving us aside who are the elder, she wishes to foster
the two younger. I lifted my foot against her, but did not let
it fall on her body; whether it was through childishness or
through foolishness, do thou, Sir, deign to pardon it. I have
been cursed, dear father, by my mother in her anger. Since
Iam her son, verily therefore I revere her, my mother, (O best
of ascetics). Even towards unworthy sons a mother is not:
wanting in good feelings, O father; how shall a mother say
this out—“ May thy foot drop down, O son!” Think, O
adorable* lord of the heavenly cattle, of some way so that
through thy favour thismy foot may not drop down now by
reason of my mother’s curse.


The Sun spoke:


Without doubt, my son, this curse must take effect here,
since anger entered into thee, who art wise in righteousness
and who speakest truth. For all curses indeed a remedy
assuredly exists; yet nowhere is there that which can turn a
curse away from those who are cursed by a mother, This
thy mother’s word then cannot be made false ; I will however
devise something as a favour for thee, because of my love for
thee my son. Insects taking some flesh from thy foot shall go
forth to the earth;+ her word is thus made true, and thou
shalt be saved,


* For bhagavdn read bhagavan as in the Bombay edition,
+ See Canto Ixxviii, verse 28,


31


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


39
40


41


42


THE SUN DISCOVERS HIS WIFE'S DECEPTION. 569


Mārkaņdeya spoke:

Now the Sun said to C'hāyā,—' Why among thy sons,
who are guite egual, dost thou show more affection to one?
Assuredly thou art not Sañjñá the mother of these; thou art
some one else come in her stead; for how could a mother curse
one son even among worthless children ?”


Markandeya spoke :


And she avoiding that question gave no answer to the Sun.
And he concentrating his soul fell into abstract thought* and
perceived the truth. O’hayd-Saiijid saw the lord of heaven
was ready to curse her, and trembling with fear declared to
him what had happened, O brihman. Now the Sun, enraged at
hearing that, went then to his father-in-law. And he paid
honour fittingly to the Maker of day, and being strictly
religious he pacified him who wished to burn him up in his
wrath.

Visva-karman spoke :


Permeated with surpassing glory is this thy form which
is so hardly endurable; hence Saūijīā, unable to endure it,
practises austerities in the forest in sooth, Thou shalt now
see her, Sir, thy own wife, beautiful in her behaviour, prac-
tising most arduous austerities in the forest on account of
thy too glorious form. I remember Brahma’s word: if it
please thee, my lord, I will restrain thy beloved form, O lord
of heaven.

Markandeya spoke :

Inasmuch as the Sun’s form was formerly spherical, so the
adorable Sun said to Tvashtri, “ Be it so!” And Visva-
karman, being permitted by the Sun in S4ka-dvipa, mounted
the Sun on his wheel and set to work to pare down his glory.
While the Sun, which was the centre of all the worlds, was
whirling round, the earth with its oceans, mountains and


forests mounted up to the sky, and the whole heavens with


the moon, planets and stars went downward, and were tossed


* For muktas read yuktas as in the Bombay edition,


72


570 CANTO CVI.


43 together and confused, O illustrious brāhman. And all
creatures also were scattered about with the waters out of
the ocean ;* lofty hills were shattered to pieces, their sum-

44 mits and roots were torn asunder. The supports of the pole,
all the asterisms,t O best of munis, with their bands and

45 foundations splitting, went downwards in thousands. Hurled
away by the wind caused by the swift whirling, great
clouds wandering about with terrible thunder crumbled to

46 pieces all around. The earth, the air and the nether regions,
rolled about by the Sun’s whirling, uttered their voices ;

47 there was exceeding chaos then, O best of munis. While all
the worlds were whirling round, O brāhman, the divine
rishis and the gods with Brahmá sang praises to the Sun :—

48 “Thou art the most ancient god among the gods; this is
known from thy nature. At the periods of creation, conti-
nuance and dissolution thou existest with a triple division.

49 Hail to thee, O lord of the world, thou producer of warmth,
rain and snow! Have pleasure in the peace of the worlds,
O god of gods, O Maker of the day!”

50 And Indra approaching the god, as he was being pared
down, praised him,—* Be victorious, O god who pervadest

51 the world! Be victorious, O lord of all the worlds!” And
the seven rishis next, with Vasishtha and Atri at their head,
praised the Sun with various hymns, exclaiming * Hail!

52 hail!” And the Bšlikhilyas then, filled with joy, praised the
Sun with the noblest and most ancient Rié hymns enunciated

53 in the Veda, as he was being pared down—* Thou, O master,
art final emancipation from existence to those who strive
after emancipation ; thou art worthy to be contemplated as
the supreme one by those who engage in contemplation!
Thou art the way for all created beings, even for those who

54 are occupied with ritual.t May there be a blessing for the
* This is the reading of the Bombay

abdhitah, instead of arc'ishak.

t For dhishtyani read dhishnydni,


t Karma-kdnde ; the department of the Veda which relates to ceremonial
acts and sacrificial rites,


edition which is preferable,


55


56


57


58


59


60


61


62


63


64


ténais’, “ with protracted tones.”


ALL HEAVENLY BEINGS WORSHIP THE SUN. 571


people, O lord of the gods! May there be a blessing for us,
O lord of the worlds! May there ever be a blessing for us in
what is two-footed! And may there be a blessing for us in
what is four-footed !”

Then the bands of Vidyadharas and the Yakshas, Rakshasas
and Nagas joining their hands reverently all fell prostrate
with their heads before the Sun, and uttered words such as
these, giving joy to his mind and ears,—'May thy glory become
endurable to created beings, O thon who causest created
beings to exist!” Next Háhá and Huhu, Narada and Tumburu,
who were skilful in music, and who were accomplished in the
three musical scales based on the shadja, madhyama and
gāndhāra notes,* began to sing in joy-giving accents to the
Sun both with modulations + and various divisions of time,f


with combinations.§ And Viśvác'í and Ghritadi, Urvaši and


` Tilottamá, Menaké and Saha-janyé and Rambhi,|| the choicest


among the Apsarases, danced whilst the Sun, the lord of the
worlds, was being pared down, the while they displayed J
many dramatic actions replete with amorous and coquettish
gestures and dalliance. Then were caused to give forth their
music there flutes and Intes, and other musical pipes, drums
and kettle-drums, tabours, large drums and double drums, the
drums of the gods and conchs in hundreds and thousands.
And every place was rendered loudly resonant by the


Gandharvas who were singing, and the bevies of Apsarases


who were dancing, and with the sounds of trumpets and


musical instruments.
Then all the gods, joining their hands reverently, and


bowing their bodies in faith, prostrated themselves before
the Thousand-rayed god as he was being pared down. In


* See page 130, note t
+ Mūrc'hand; 800 page 131, note *. S
+ Tdla; see page 191, notes f and ||. But the Bombay edition reads
aih as in the Bombay editiou.

hd c'a.

but read kurvatyo instead ?


$ Sa-prayogai ; or samprayog
|| For Rambhds'c'a read Ramb
§ Hoth editions read kurvanto,


- 572 CANTO CVII.


that resounding noise, where all the gods were gathered
together, Vis$va-karman then gradually diminished hig
glory.

65 After hearing thus of the paring down of the body of the
Sun, who is the cause of the cold, rainy and hot seasons,
-and who is praised by Vishnu on the lotus seat of Siva, one
goes* to the Sun’s world at the close of life.


Canro CVII.


Hymn to the Sun.


Visva-karman praises the Sun, while he is reducing the Suns
splendour.
Markandeya spoke :

1 While the Sun was being pared down, the Praja-pati Viśva.
karman then uttered this hymn, wherewith his hair stood
erect with joy,* to the Sun.

2 “To the Sun, who is compassionate for the welfare of those
who fall prostrate before him, who is great of soul, who has
seven equally swift horses, who has great glory, who awakens
the beds of lotuses, who splits asunderf the covering of the

3 veil of darkness, be reverence! To him who works merit
through the superabundance of fire, who gives many objects
of desire, who reclines amid beams of radiant fire, who brings

4 welfare to all the world, be reverence! To the Sun, who is
without birth§, the cause of the three worlds, the soul of
created beings, the lord of the heavenly cattle, the bull,
highest among those who are greatly compassionate, the home

5 whence the eye originated,|| be reverence! To the Sun, who

* For vajati read vrajati.

+ Udbhite-pulaka-stotram; both editions read the same, but udbhita-

pulakak stotram would seem preferable.

t Ava-pdfine; a word not in the dictionary.

§ Ajdya; or “who is the driver, the instigator,”

|| O’akshuh-prabhavdlaydya ; or “the pre-eminent abode of the eye,”


HYMN TO THE SUN. ~ 573


is maintained by knowledge, who is the inmost soul,* the
foundation of the world, desirer of the world’s welfare, the
gelf-existent, the eye of all the worlds, highest among the
6 gods, boundless in glory, be reverence! Thou, for a monent
the crest jewel of the day-spring mountain}, the honoured
messengert of the hosts of gods to the world, thou, whose
body consists of a thousand wide-spreading rays of light,
7 shinest on the world, driving away the darknesses. By
reason of thy intoxication from drinking up like spirituous
liquor the darkness of the world, thy body has acquired a
deep red hue,§ O Sun, so that thou shinest exceedingly with
8 masses of light that calls the three worlds into life. Mount-
ing thy equally proportioned chariot that sways about grace-
fully and is widely pleasing||, with horses that are ever
unweariedī, O adorable god, thou coursest the broad world
9 for our good.** O Sun, thou purifier of the three worlds,
protect me, who am devoted to thy parrot-hued steeds, and
who am most purett through the dust of thy feet, and who am


* Wor jiidna-bhiténtardtmane (the third syllable of which violates the


metre, the Variéa-sthavila) the Bombay edition reads jūdna-bhrite *ntaratmane,


which I have adopted.
+ For udaydc'ala-mauli-mdline (the last word of which violates the metre,


the Sumukht) the Bombay edition reads udaydc'ala-mauli-maņih, which I


have adopted.

+ Sura-gana-mahita-
mahita violates the metre;
Perhaps the word should bo manya.

§ For vilohita-vigrahat (which


edition reads vilohita-vigrahatd, which is correct.
both editions read the same, but it


I would suggest as an amendment
“that sways about pleasingly, moving


hito; both editions read the same, but the word
it ahould consist of a long and a short syllable.


violates the metre in the last word) tho


Bombay
|| C'dru-vikampitam uru-ruc'iram ;
violates the metre, the Bumukht.
Ruc'ira-vikampitam irdhva-c'aram,
on high.”
q For akhila-hayair,
the Bombay edition.
#%* O'arasi jagad-dhitdya vitatam ;
violates the metre, the Sumukht.
words, c'arasi hitdya jagad vitatam.
++ Instead of -pavitra-talam I take the


which violates the metro, read akhinna-hayair with


both editions read the same, but it
The metre is satisfied by altering the


Bombay reading -pavitra tamam:


574


10


CANTO CVIII.


prostrate before thee, O thou who art kind to folk that bow
to thee! Thus to the Sun, who exists as the procreator of all
the worlds, who is the sole cause of the glory that calls the


three worlds into life,* who exists as the lamp of all the


worlds—to thee, O choicest of the thirty gods, I ever prostrate
myself !”t


Canto CVIII.


—_—


The Majesty of the Sun.


From the glory pared off from the Sun, Visva-karman made the


gods’ weapons.—The Sun found his wife among the Northern
Kurus and begat of her the Ašvins and Revanta.—The stations
allotted to the Suns offspring are declared.

Markandeya spoke :

While he was thus hymning the Sun Visva-karman kept
intact in spherical shape the sixteenth part of the glory of
the lord of heayen; and when fifteen parts of his glory
had been pared away, the Sun’s body was exceedingly beauti-
ful and charming then. And with the splendour that was
pared away from him was fashioned Vishnu’s discus ; and
Siva’s trident, and Kuvera’s palki, the rod of the lord of
the dead, and the spear of the gods’ general. And Viéva-
karman made the brilliant weapons of the other gods with
the Sun’s splendour for the quelling of their foes. He
whose splendour had been thus pared down shone with no


excessive splendour. Mūrttaņda retained a body rosplendeni
in every limb.


Instead of Tri-bhuvana-pávana-dháma-bhútam, which violates the
metre, the Pushpitdgrd, I have taken the Bombay reading Tri-bhuvana-
bhdvana-dhdma-hetwm ekam.

+ The Calcutta reading Devam pranato 'smi Vifva-karmdņam violates the
metre, and is incorrect because it is Visva-karman who is speaking. I have
followed the Bombay reading Tridafa-vara pranato ?smi sarvadū tudm, In-
stead of these last two words Vifva-karmd might well be read.


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


THE SUN’S OFFSPRING. 575.


Concentrating his thoughts he beheld his wife in the form
of a mare, unassailable by all created beings by reason of her
austerities and self-repression. And going to the Northern
Kurus, the Sun became a horse and appronched her. And
she, beholding him approaching, because of her fear of a,
strange male, went face to face with him, being intent on
guarding her rear. And thereupon they joined their noses,
when they both met there, and his glory passed from the
Sun’s two nostrils* into the mare. Two gods were begotten
there, the two Ašvins, who are the two best physicians,
namely Nasatya and Dasra, the sons who issued forth from
the mare’st mouth ; these two are indeed the sons of Mārt-
tanda while he bore a horse’s form. And at the termination
of the flow of his semen was born Revanta, holding a sword
and bow, clad in armour, riding on horseback, and carrying
arrows and a quiver.

Then the Sun revealed his own unsullied form. She
perceiving his form was mild felt a joy; and the Sun, the
robber of the waters, led to his own home this his wife
Sañjñá, changed again into her own form and full of love.

After that he who was her first-born son became Manu
Vaivasvata,

And the second was “ Yama”j because of the curse, and
he was “ The Righteous-eyed ” because of his father’s favour.
Now he was called Yama as having been greatly afflicted in
mind by that curse; and since righteousness delights him,
he is known therefore as the “King of righteousness,”
‘Worms taking flesh from thy foot shall fall to the earth —
so saying his father himself put§ an end to this curse. And
because he.is righteous-eyed, he is impartial to the good and
the evil. Therefore the Dispeller of darkness appointed him
to the southern region; his adorable father gave to him the


* Ndsikdbhydm, Ndsikd liero has its original meaning.

+ The Caloutta edition reads afva-vakirdd and the. Bombay aévi-vaktrdd ;
read however aéva-vaktrad ?

t “ Restraint, check.”

§ For c'ukte read c'akre.


576 CANTO CVIII.


19 duty of protecting the world, O brāhman, and the lordship
over the pitris.
And the Sun, being well-satisfied, made Yamuna the river
which flows from the recesses of mount Kalinda.
20 The two Ašvins were made the gods’ physicians by their
high-souled father.
And Revanta was appointed to the lordship over the
21 Guhyakas; and even thus spoke the adorable god then who
is acknowledged by the world,—*' Thou shalt indeed be
22 worthy of worship by the entire world, my child; and
- mortals, who shall call thee to mind amid the terrors of
forests and other lonely places, of great conflagrations, of
enemies and robbers, shall be delivered out of great-calamity.
23 Comfort, intelligence, happiness, kingship, perfect health,
fame, exalted position—these, when worshipped and well-
satisfied, thou shalt bestow on men.”
24 And Cháyá-Sañjňá’s son Sévarna was of very great fame;
he will be the eighth Manu, by name Sāvarņaka, in a future
25 time. At present, indeed, this lord performs terrible austeri-
ties on Meru's summit. His krother became the planet Saturn
26 according to the Sun's command.* Ndw the Sun’s daughter,
who was younger than they, O brétman, became that
best of rivers, the Yamuna, which cleanses the world.$
27 Now I will speak fully of Manu Vaivasvata, who was the
illustrious eldest son, and to whom belongs this present
28 creation. He, who may either hear or read of this, the
origin of the gods who are the offspring ‘of Vivasvat, and
29 of the Sun’s majesty, may obtain deliverance when he falls
into calamity and may gain great fame. This story of the
majesty of the primeval god, the high-souled Mérttanda,
when listened to, quells the sin that has been committed
by day or night.


e See Canto cvi, verse 15. In Canto lxxviii, verse 33 he and his elder
brother are not distinguished clearly.

t This is a mistake, see verse 19 above. She was Tapati, see Canto
Ixxviii, verse 34, and Cauto cvi, verse 16,


KING RAJYAVARDHANA'S REIGN, 577


Canto CIX,


Praise of the Sun.


Markandeya tells the story of king Rajya-vardhana.—After the king


had veigned many years, his queen sorrowed over finding agrey
hair in his head—He comforted her and resolved to depart to the
forest—His vassals and subjects tried to dissuade him and in
vain—They performed many austerities in order to propitiate
the Sun and went to Kdma-ripa and continued their worship
—At length the Sun appeared to them in bodily shape.


Kraushtuki spoke :

Adorable Sir! thou hast well declared the birth of the Sun’s
offspring, the majesty of the priméval god and his nature
at very full length. Nevertheless I desire, O best of munis,
to hear more about the Sun’s majesty comprehensively ; deign
therefore with favour to tell me of it.

Markandeya spoke :

Be it heard then! I tell thee of the majesty of the primeval
god, Vivasvat, what he did formerly when worshipped by
mankind.

There was a famous king, Dama’s son, named Rūjya-var-
dhana ;* he, lord of the earth, kept the earth well protected.
Now the realm, being protected by that high-souled monarch
in righteousness, increased day by day in people and wealth, O
brahman. And joyous and thriving exceedingly were all the
subordinate kings on the earth without exception, while he
was king; and so also were his people, both town and country
folk. No portent visited them, nor sickness, nor the fear that
comes from serpents, nor was there fear of drought there,
while Dama’s son was king. And hé offered up great sacri-
fices, and gave gifts to those who asked; he enjoyed even the


* He is mentioned in the Vishnu Pur. IV.i. Dama was son of Narishyanta
and grandson of the great Marutta. The story of these three kings is told
in cantos oxxix to oxxxvi below, and the Purána ends abruptly with Dama.


R$jya-vardhana is called Réshtra-vardhana in the Vayu Puréna,
3


578


20


21


22


23


24


CANTO CIX.


pleasures of sense without hindrance to true righteousness,
While he ruled the kingdom thus and protected his people
duly, seven thousand years passed away as if a single day.
Now the daughter of Vidūratha, king of the South, was his
queen, Mānini by name and high-spirited* indeed. One day
she, the fine-browed noble lady, shed tears when his head had
not been dressed with ointment, in the sight of the king's
folk. When her tear-drops fell on the king’s body, he saw
Mānini was of tearful countenance then and questioned her.
In sooth beholding her weeping and shedding tears silently,
Rājya-vardhana asked Mānini, “ Why is this?” But she,
being prudent, when questioned by her husband, replied then,
“Tt is nothing.” The king questioned her again.t And after
the king had questioned her often, she, the slender-waisted
lady, showed him a grey hair growing among his abundant
locks. “Look at this, O king; is this a cause of vexation to
me, most luckless that I am ?” And the king langhed thereat.
With a smile quoth he to his wife—while listened all the
kings and citizens, and the kings who were assembled there—
“Away with grief, O wide-eyed lady! thou must not weep,
pretty one! Birth, growth, decline of life and other changes
befall all living beings. I have studied all the Vedas ; I have
offered sacrifices by thousands ; I have given alms to brah-
mans ; and I have begotten gons, O lady of finest countenance ;
I have enjoyed along with thee pleagures which are very
hardly attainable by mortals; and I have protected the earth
well; I have borne myself ably in battles; I have laughed
with my beloved friends; and Ihaye sported in the heart
of the woods. What else is there which I have not done,
that thou art frightened at grey hairs, O lady? Let my hair
become grey; let wrinkles come to me, O beauteous one ; let
my body pass into weakness; for I have been successful, O
Manini! Because thou hast shown me a grey hair on my
head, O lady, here then I take medical treatment therefor
through resorting to the forest. First in childhood there ts


* Mdnint.
+ For bhúpah read bhiyah.


26


27


30


91


32


33


34
35


36


37


THE KING'S NOBEENESS IN OLD AGE. 579


childhood’s action ; similarly there zs action which 7s natural
in youth ; and also such as is fitting in early manhood; in old
age there is resort to the forest. Since those who lived before
me did so, lady, and also those who lived before them,
I see no reason whatever then for thee to shed tears. Away
with thy vexation! Does not the sight of this grey hair
cause me elevation? Weep not; it is futile.”
Markandeya spoke :

Then the kings and citizens who were in his presence did
him reverence, and the kings addressed Rajya-vardhana, with
conciliatory words, O great yishi :—

“Tt is not for thee to weep with this thy wife, O king; it is
we who must weep here, or rather all living beings: Since
thou, O master, speakest the word indicating that thou wilt
dwell in the forest, life falls therefore from us who have been
tenderly cherished by thee, O king. We will all go, O king,
if thou goest to the forest. All the inhabitants of the earth
will thereby suffer loss in all their ceremonies without doubt,
when thou, O master, shalt take up thy abode in the forest ;
and if that loss tends to injure righteousness, let that course
be discarded. Seven thousand years this earth has been
guarded by thee; have regard, O king, to the great merit that
has accrned therefrom! The austerities, which thou, O great
king, wilt perform while dwelling in the forest, are not worth*
the sixteenth part of this thy guardianship over the earth!”

The king spoke :

“ Seven thousand years I have protected this earth; now
this my time has come to dwell in the forest. I have begotten
children. Now that I have seen my children and their de-
scendants, Death truly will not allow me a very few days.
Understand, O citizens, that this grey hair on my head has
become a messenger from ignoble Death, who is very sharp
inhis actions, Being such, I will place my son in my kingdom,
ard abandon worldly pleasures, and will, as a dweller in the
forest, perform austerities until Yama’s troops arrive for me.”


* For ndrhanti read ndrhati ¢


580


38


39


40


42


45


47


49


50


CANTO CIX.


` Markandeya spoke:

Being desirous of departing to the forest the king then en-
quired of the astrologers about the best days and moments for
anointing his son in the kingdom. And on hearing the king’s
speech they became confused in mind ; they who were skilled
in the scriptures knew not the day nor moment nor the hours.*
And the astrologers spoke to the king with voices inarticulate
with tears ;—“ Our various knowledge has perished after that
we have heard this thy speech, O king.”

Then people came in a multitude both from other cities and
also from dependent countries, and next from that city.
Springing up, O muni, the most eminent brāhmans, their heads
quivering with emotion, addressed the king who desired to
depart to the forest;—‘ Be gracious! Protect us, O king,
as we have been protected a long time past. The whole world
will sink down, when thou, O king, hast betaken thyself to
the forest. Do thou then so act, O king, that the world sink
not, And while we, such as we are, live our very short time, O
hero, we desire not to see the regal throne deprived of thee, O
lord,”


Markandeya spoke :


Thus both they and other dvijas heading the citizens, and
kings, dependants and ministers appealed to him, and appealed
again and again; but when he does not withdraw his deter-
mination to take wp his abode in the forest, and returns them
the answer, “ Death will not suffer it,” both his ministers and
dependants, and the citizens, and the aged men and the dvijas,
assembled together and took counsel, “ What must be done
here?” While they took counsel, O brāhman, this reso-
lution developed there among those who were devotedly attached
to that most righteous king—* Giving ourselves over absolutely
to deep meditation, we will with composed minds propitiate
the Sun with austerities and beseech him for this king’s life.’
Being all resolved alike there on that object, some of them paid
adoration to the Sun with their own bodies, by presenting to


% Hord (the Greek word) ; or “the rising of the zodiacal signs.”


öl


52


53


54


55
56


57


58


59


60


61


62


63


{INVOCATION TO THE SUN. 581


him the argha offering and presents and other oblations in due
course; others gratified the Sun by maintaining silonce, and
others by repeating the Rió, Yajus and Siman hymns; and
other dvijas abstaining from food and lying down on river sand-
banks, wearied with austerities, made propitiation of the Sun ;
and others, applying themselves to the oblation to Fire, day
and night repeated hymns composed to the Sun; others cast-
ing their eyes on the Sun remained standing there. Even
thus, applying themselves to those several rites, did they work
in manifold ways with exceeding determination in order to
propitiate the Sun.

Now while they were striving thus to propitiate the Sun, a
Gandharva named Su-dáman came near and spoke thus—“ If
ye desire, O dvijas, to propitiate the Sun, let this then be done,
whereby the Sun will become well-pleased. Therefore—there
is a forest named Guru-vigdla, frequented by the Siddhas, in
very mountainous K4ma-ripa—go there verily in haste.
There perform your propitiation of the Sun with minds com-
pletely composed ; the Siddhas’ friendly region is there ; there
ye shall obtain all your desires.”


Markandeya spoke :

On hearing this his speech, those dvijas went to that forest
and beheld the sacred and beautiful shrine of the Sun there,
Those brāhmans and men of other castes, diminishing their food,
and being indefatigable, O bréhman, offered worship there en-
riched with incense, flowers and oblations ; and with composed
minds, celebrating his worship with flowers, ungnents and
other gifts, with incense, perfumes and other fragrance also,
with prayers, sacrificial oblations, food, lamps and other offer-
ings, those dvijas gratified the Sun, O brāhman.


The brāhmans spoke:

Let us approach the Sun as our refuge, the god who in splen-
dour surpasses gods, Dānavas and Yakshas, the planets, and
the heavenly. bodies; the lord of gods, whv dwelling also
in the sky makes everything around brilliant, and penetrates
the earth and the atmosphere with his rays; even him who has


582 CANTO CIX.


the names Aditya, Bhaskara, Bhanu, Savitri, Divākara, Pūshan
65 and Aryamaai, Svar-bhānu ;* him who has flaming rays, who is
the fire which shall destroy the universe at the end of the four
ages, difficult to be gazed at, who persists to the end of the
final dissolution ; the lord of yogins, and the néver-ending one ;
66 who is red, yellow, white and black; him who dwells in the
oblation made to Fire by rishis, ard among the gods of sacri-
fice ; imperishable, sublime, secret, who is the supreme gate to
67 final emancipation from existence; and who traverses the sky
with hymns in the form of horses which are yoked together at
his rising and setting ; who is always intent on circumimbulating
68 Meru reverently, And we have sought unto the light-giver,
who %s not true and yet true, who zs a sacred multiform place
of pilgrimage, who is the permanence of the universe, and is be-
69 yond thought; him who is Brahma, who is Siva, who is Vishnu,
who is Prajā-pati; who ts the wind,+ the atmosphere and water,
70 the earth and its mountains and oceans ; who ts the planets, the
constéllations, the moon and other heavenly bodies, trees bear-
ing blossom and fruit, other trees and herbs ; who sets in mo-
tion righteousness and untighteousness,” among created
beings, those which are manifest and those which are
71 not manifest. Brahmf's body, and Siva's, and Vishņuws
is the body, of thee, the Sun, whose special nature is three-fold
72 indeed. May the Sun be graciors! May the Sun, of whom, as
lord without beginning, all this wo:ld composes the body, and
who is the the life of the worlds—may he be gracioug to us!
73 May the Srn, whose firstj form is luminous and can hardly be
gazed upon because of its circle of splendour, and whose second
74 feim is the gentle lunar orb—may he be gracious to us! And
may the Sun, from those two forms of whom this universe has


been fashioned consisting of Agni and Soma—may he, the god,
be gracious to us !


# Asā name of the Snn, not in the dictionary,

t Vayc

t Far eku-hhdsvatam read ekam bhūšvaram * The Bombay editien reads
ekam akeharam “whose first form is imperishable.”


75


76


77


78


THE SUN GRANTS SHE KING LONG LIFE, 583


Markandeya spoke :

While they are thus entirely worshipping him with praise
and faith, the adorable Sun became pleased after three months,
O bréhman. Thereupon issuing from his orb, with the same
splendour as his disk possesses, the Sun, who is hardly to be
gazed at, descended and displayed himself to them. Those
bréhman folk bowing in faith then prostrated themselves
before the Sun, who is without beginning, as he manifested
himself in bodily shape, while they quivered with thrills of
awe ; exclaiming “ Reverence, reverence be to thee, the thousand-
rayed one! Thon art the cause of everything—brilliant every
whit. Thou art to be invoked against harmful assault, being
the site of all sacrifices ; and to be meditated upon by those
skilled in religious devotion. Be thou gracious!”


Canto OX.
The Majesty of the Sun, concluded.


King Réjya-vardhana’s subjects besought of the Sun that the king


might reign ten thousand years more, and the Sun granted it—
But the king, distressed that the boon did not include all his
family and subjects, went and propitiated the Sun, and at length
gained his desire—This story is commented on and its merits dre


extolled.
Markandeya spoke:


Well-pleased then, the adorable Sun said to all the populace
— Choose, O ye dvijas and other people, what ye have wished
to obtain from me!”

Thereupon those brāhmans and other people gazing in fear
on the fiery-rayed Sun, as he stood before them, prostrated
themselves and said, O brāhman :—

The people spoke :

Prostrating themselves they said then to the lord of the
world who proffered them a boon—' O adorable Dispeller of
darkness, if thou art pleased with our faith, then let our king


584


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


CANTO CX.


live* ten thousand years, free from sickness, victorious over

his enemies, rich in his treasury, and with firmly-enduring

youth! May Rājya-vardhana live ten thousand years!”
Markandeya spoke :

“So be it!” said the Sun to the populace, and became too
dazzling for sight, O great muni. And they, having gained
the boon and joyous thereat, assembled about the king. And
having gained the boon completely from the thousand-rayed
god, O brahman, they made known to the king how it. had
happened.

On hearing that, his queen Mānini rejoiced, O brāhman ; and
the king pondered a long while and said nothing to the people.
Thereupon she Mānini, whose mind was filled with joy, ex-
claimed to the king her husband —“ How fortunate! Prosper,
O king, with long life!” Thus did Mānini courteously salute
her husband in her delight, but the king said nothing, his mind
being numbed with thought, O brāhman. She addressed her
husband again, as he was rapt in thought with counten-
ance bent downwards,— Why dost thou not give way to joy in
this supreme moment of exaltation, O king? Thou shalt live
free from sickness, with firmly-enduring youth, ten thousand
years from to-day. Why nevertheless dost thou not rejoice P
But declare thou the reason, why thou hast thy mind drawn
away by thought, even when a supreme moment of exaltation
has been reached, O king ? ”

The king spoke:

How has a moment of exaltation come, O lady, and why dost
thou courteously salute me? When thousands of afflictions
are incurred, is courteous salutation wished for? + I shall
live alone ten thousand years, but not thou; when calamity
befalls thee, shall I not have affliction? When I see sons,
grandsons, and great-grandsons and other beloved relatives
dead, will my affliction indeed be small ? And when my most
faithful servants are dead, and when my circle of friends is


# Jivatém ; &tmane-pada; and again in this verse,
t For sabhdjanayishyate read sabhdjanam ishyate as in the Bombay edition,


17


18


19


27


28


THR KINGS DISTRESS AT A LONG SOLITARY LIFE. 585


dead, there will then be boundless affliction for me continual-
ly, O lady. They who with emaciated bodies, constantly
attached to * righteousness, have performed austerities for my
sake, they shall die, and I who enjoy the benefit shall live—this
is censurable! + This, such as it ts, is a calamity that has be-
fallen me, O lady of beautiful hips ; if is not a moment of exalt-
ation. How again ts it thou dost not think in that thou dost
courteously salute me now ?
Mānini spoke :

O great king, as thou hast said, so indeed zt zs ; herein there
is no doubt. I and the citizens in our affection for thee did
not perceive this mistake. Since it has gone so, consider what
should be done in this matter, O lord of men. What the ador-
able Sun has said in his graciousness shall not be otherwise.


The king spoke :

It is a benefit that my citizens and servants have done to
me out of affection; how shall I taste enjoyments, without
discharging my obligation to them? I then in this position
will go with subdued mind to the mountain from to-day and
will practise austerities, abstaining from food, resolved to pro-
pitiate the Sun. Since I shall live in firmly-enduring youth
free from sickness ten thousand years through that god’s favour
therefore, if the adorable Sun grants us this favour, that all
my people, my servants, and thou and my children, sons,
grandsons and great-grandsons, and my friends shall also live,
O lovely-faced one—then I shall continue in the kingdom and
shall taste enjoyments with delight. If the Sun does not do
this, then, O Mānini, I will practise austerities on the moun-
tain there, abstaining from food until my life perish.

Markandeya spoke :

Being thus addressed by him, she said to the king then, “ Be
itso!” And she also went with him to that mountain. The
king going with his queen to the sanctuary there engaged in


* Ni-san-tata, not in the dictionary.


+ Dhik-kara, not in the dictionary»
+ The Bombay editicn inserts two lines


here doubtfally.
74


586 CANTO CX.


worshipping the Sun, being assiduous in his service, O brahman,
29 and becoming emaciated through want of food ; and she, just
as that king did, practised severe austerities likewise, endur-
30 ing cold, Wind and the sun’s heat. While he was worshipping
the Sun and practising great austerities, when a year and
part of the next year had passed, the Maker of the day was
31 pleased then and granted him, O dvija, a boon according to
his desire for the sake of all his dependants, citizens and other
subjects, and his sons, O excellent brāhman.
32 On gaining the boon, the king going to his city ruled his
33 kingdom in joyousness, protecting his people righteously ; and
he offered many sacrifices, gave away gifts day and night, and
in company with Manini indulged in enjoyments, being wise in
84 righteousness. He rejoiced* with his sons, grandsons and other
descendants, with his dependants and citizenst for ten thousand
years ; he remained continuously youthful.
35 A Bhargava named Pramati, after seeing that his exploit, sang
this song while his heart was drawn out with astonishment,—
36 "Lo, the power of faith in the Sun, in that king Rijya-var-
dhana has been born for the increase of life of his own people
as well as of himself! ”
37 Thus I have related to thee, O brahman, what thou didst
ask me, namely, the majesty of the lord? Aditya Vivasvat, the
38 god who was in the beginning. The man who, after
hearing the whole of that story of the Sun’s sublime majesty
with the brāhmans, reads it also during the space of seven
39 nights, is delivered from his sins.$ And the intelligent
man, who may hold this fast, becomes free from sickness,
possessed of riches and opulent; and is born again a man of
40 great understanding in a great family of wise men.|| And


* For samuditah read sa muditaļ.

+ Pauttrath in the text; but read probably pauraiļ, which I have ndopted.

t Vibho; but vibho% seems preferable and I have adopted it. The Bom-
bay edition reads dditah, “ what thou didst ask me from the first.”

§ Or “reads it also, is delivered from the sins which he has committed
during seven nights ” as the Bombay edition reads,

|| The Bombay edition inserts here, though doubtfully— And he truly


THE SUN'S MAJESTY. 587


miserable are they who are smitten herein by the Sun, O best
of munis.* The repetition of cach of these verses during three

41 twilights destroys sin. And in whatever sanctuary of the Sun
all this poem of his majesty is recited, there the adorable Sun

42 withdraws not his presence. Therefore thou, O brāhman, who
desirest to gain great merit, must retain this poem of the Sun's

43 sublime majesty in thy mind and must mutter it over. Verily
he who makes a gift of a milch cow with gilded horns and
most handsome body, and the man who self-possessed listens
to this poem for three days—equal are the merit and reward
of them both, O brahman !+


Canto CXI.


—


The guide to the genealogies.


Manu"had seven sons, whose names are mentioned—and also a child,

who was born as a daughter named Ild, and afterwards became

a man by name Su-dywmna—This child as Tlé had a son Purú-

ravas, who reigned at Pratishthdna, and as Su-dyumna had three
sons.

Markandeya spoke :

1 Such power has the adorable Sun, who is without beginning

and without end, concerning whose majesty thou, O Kraush-

2 tuki, dost ask me in faith. He is the Supreme Soul among

religious devotees who meditate deeply on the dissolution of

heir intellects: f he is the Conscious Soul among those who


who after hearing of this exploit sacrifices with great sacrifices replete with
boons and fees, gains honour as his reward.”

* The Bombay edition rends differently—* And the verses which were
herein addressod [read abhihitd for abhihatd ?] to the Sun, O best of munis,
the repetition of each of these verses during three twilights destroys sin.”

+ For dvijdgryam rend dvijdgrya. ome

t This is the best meaning that I can get out of the text—Paramafma sa
yam, which is the reading in the Calcutta, Bombay


yoyindm yuñjatám cetasam la c UBS
rrigenda alters it to yoganam


and Poona editions, though the last in its co


588 i CANTO CXI.


apply the Sāūkhya doctrine to the knowledge of spirit; and
he is the Lord of sacrifice among those who are sacrificers : *
8 while Vishnu, Siva and Brahmá each supports the Sun’s
supremacy.
Manu was his son, a solver of doubts in all matters, the ruler
4 of a manv-antara, whose is the seventh period, O brāhman.
Ikshvūku, Nabhaga and Rishta—who were great in strength
5 and prowess—and Narishyanta, Nabhdga, Pūshadhra and
Dhrishta ;f these were that Manu’s sons, each the guardian of
6 aseparate kingdom. All were celebrated in fame, all had the
utmost skill in arms and weapons.
Seeking yet again for a son who should be more distinguished,
7 Manu, best of the skilful ones, offered a sacrifice to Mitra
and Varuna ; in which sacrifice moreover when the offering was
perversely made through the improper conductt of the priest,


and then sa yogdndm must be read as one word sa-yogdndm. But the text
is no doubt corrupt; yogtndm should be vogindm, and yuñjatám should per-
haps be yuijdndndm, though both Parasmai-pada and Atmane-pada have the
meaning “to meditate deeply.” Mahimahopidhyāya Hara Prasfd Sastri
suggests also that layak would be better than layam and would translate
thus, “He is the Supreme Soul to those who are successful in meditation
[i.e., the Vedāntists]; he is that in which the minds of those who are en-
gaged in meditation, but who ure not yet successful, are absorbed ” [i.e., the
Saguna Brahman of the Vedantists],

* Yajūešo yajvindm api; but yajvandm must be read for yajvindm, and
Mahāmahopādhyāya Hara Prasid Yástrí gives it the meaning “ to those who
consider sacrifices to be the means leading to beatitude” [ie the
Mimasnsists].

+ Only seven sons are mentioned here. "The number is generally given as
ten. There is much diversity regarding the names of all of them except
Ikshvéku, Narishyanta, and Dhrishta. Other names omitted are Sarytti,
Karūsha, Vena, and Prāmšu. See Wilson's Vishnu Purána, book IV, chap-
teri, notes. The second and third names Nabhaga and Rishta are sometimes
given as a single name, Nibhūgadishta in the Veda and Nébhanedishtha in the
Aitareya Brāhmaņa; and the last-named book Says—he was given to sacred
study, his brothers deprived him of his share in the paternal property, and re-
ferred him to their father, aud by his father's advice he helped the Angirasas
in their sacrificial session and obtained grent wealth (V. ii, 14).

t For édpahryite read čdpuhute, as in the Poona edition, The verb apa-hw is


MANU'S DESCENDANTS. 589


8 O great muni, a daughter was born to Manu named Ila, slen-
der of waist. On seeing that daughter born there, Manu
9 offered praise to Mitra and Varuna then and spoke this word,
—‘ When I made made the sacrifice with the prayer, * Through
10 your favour may I obtain a distinguished son,’ a daughter was
born to me who am wise. If ye being gracious grant me a
11 boon, then let this my daughter, through the favour of you
both, become a son endowed with surpassing virtues! ” And
when these two gods in sooth said, “Be it so!” that same
12 daughter Ili became forthwith a son famed by the name
Su-dyumna.
And afterwards that wise son of Manu, while roving the
13 forest a-hunting, was turned into a woman through the wrath
of the god;* in which condition Soma’s son Budha begat of
14 her a son named Pururavas,t who was a mighty universal
monarch. When that son was born, Su-dyumna again per-
15 formed a great horse-sacrifice and regained a man’s nature and
became a. king.
Su-dyumna during his manhood had three sons, Utkala,t
16 Vinaya$ and Gaya,|| who were most valiant, given to sacrific-
ing, great in bodily strength. Now those three sons, who
17 were born to him during his manhood, enjoyed this earth %
while governing their minds in righteousness.


not in the dictionary. The Poona commentary explains apahute apačārāt by
viparita-havane vyatyaydt.

* The Hari-V. narrates only one change, namely, from womanhood (after
she had given birth to Purūravas) to manhood (x. 615-37).

+ Properly Purtravas, as in verde 17.

ft From whom were descended the Utkalas, see note * on canto Īvii, verse
43, and also verse 53, pP- 327 and 341 ante; all the authorities agree about
this.

§ He is also called Vinata, Vinntáśva, and Haritésva by different authorities.
He was king of the East according to the Matsya Pur., and king of the West


according to the Hari-V. (x. 631-2) and Vayu Par. K
|| He gave his name to the city Gaya, as all the authorities agree; and he


was king of the East as the Hari-V. says (X. 631-2).
The Bhigavata Pur. says wrongly all three sons were rulers of the South,


Dakshinapatha,


590 CANTO CXti.


But Purtravas, who was born of that monarch Su-dywmna
18 during his womanhood, got no share of the earth, because he
was Budha's son. Thereupon at Vasishtha’s word Pratish-
thána,* an excellent city, was given to him; he became king

in that exceedingly charming city.


Garo CXII.


The Story of Pushadhra.


Manws soù Pushadhra while hunting accidentally killed a brāhman's
cow—The bralman’s son fell into a rage and cursed him—The
bréhman reproved his son for his passionate conduct, but the curse
could not be altered and Pushadhra became a Sidra.


Markandeya spoke:
1 Manu’s son who was named Pūshadhra + went a-hunting to
a forest. While walking about in that dense lonely foresi he
2 lighted upon no deer at all, he was scorched by the sun’s rays,
and his body was seized with hunger, thirst and heat as he
3 walked hither and thither. Then he saw there a beautiful
cow which yielded milk for sacrifice, belonging to a brihman
who maintained the sacrificial fire, half the body of which was
4 hidden among creepers.$ Thinking she was a gayāl, he shot
her with an arrow, and she fell to the earth, pierced to the heart
5 with the arrow. Thereupon the sacrificial priest’s son Tapo-
rati,§ who was a religious student, on seeing his father’s sacri-
6 ficial cow stricken down cursed him ; and sent forward his son


* Manu gave this city to Su-dyumna who was excluded from the paternal
dominions because he had been a female, and Su-dyumna gave it to Pururavas.
It was situated on the north bank of the Ganges at its junction with the
Yamuné (Tari-V., xxvi. 1371 ond 1411-2),

+ This name is generally written Prishadhra, which is the correct form.

t This is the reading of the Poona edition, latdntar-deha-hanndrdhdm ; the
toxt of the Caleuttn edition is erroneous. The Bombay edition reads less pro-
perly lutdntar-deha-6hinndrdhām.

§ I have not found this name elsewhere.


PUSHADHRA IS CURSED NY A BRAHMAN, 591


named Vābhravya* who tended the cow. Then, O muni, his
7 mental feelings were overcome by wrath and resentment, and he
fell into a rage, while his eyes rolled and were blurred with drops
of perspiration that trickled down. The king Pūshadhra seeing
8 that muni’s son enraged said,—“ Be graci~us, wherefore dost
thou give way to anger like a sidra. No kshatriya, no
vaisya f in truth indulges so in wrath as thou dost like a
ūdra, thou who art born in the noble family of a brahman.”


Markandeya spoke :

When that son of a pre-eminent bráhmant was upbraided
thus by the king, he cursed the evil-souled king, saying : “ Thou
10 shalt become § a śúdra indeed! Whatever sacred lore thou

hast learnt from thy gurws month shall waste away, because


o


thou hast hurt this my guru's sacrificial cow.”

11 When cursed thus the king became angry, yet he was tor-
mented greatly by that curse. He took water up in his hand,

12 intent on cursing the other in retaliation, O bráhman. That
brāhman also gave way to wrath in order to destroy the king.
His father approached him hastily and forbad him in sooth,
saying—

13 “My son, enough, more than enough, of wrath which
does not counteract hostility ! || Verily calmness is beneficial
to the twice-born in things of this world and of the next

14 world. Anger destroys austerities; and the angry man falls
away from long life; the angry man’s knowledge melts away,


® This isa patronymic from Vabhru or Babhru Viśvámitra had æ son
Vabhru from whom was descended the family of the Vabhrus (Maha-Bh.,
iv. 249-259 ; Hari-V., xxvii. 1463-67; but see Aitar. Bréh. VII. iii.


AnuSas.-p., l i ,
18); and Saunaka had a pupil named Vabhru (Wilson's Vishņn-P.—edit. F.
fter Manu’s time seems out of


Hall—III. vi.) ; but the name Vabhravya soon a


place.

+ The Poona edition gives th
the Caloutta edition wrongly puts the accusatives.

t Maulinah ; = sreshthaeya according to the commentator. This meaning


is not in the diotionary.
§ For bhavishyati read bhavishyast.
|| For kopendydti-uairind read kovendprativairiņd as in the Poona edition.


e right reading, a kshatriyo na vá vaisya ;


592


15


16


17


18


19


20


22


23


24


25


CANTO CXII.


and the angry man fails of his object also. There is no right-
eousness in the man of angry disposition; and the passionate
man obtains not his object; nor among those whose minds are
possessed by wrath is the obtaining of their wishes enough for
happiness. If the king has killed this cow with his full know-
ledge, it is right for one, who perceives what is for his own
benefit, to extend pardon here. Or if he has slain this my
cow in ignorance, how then is he worthy of a curse, since his
mind was not evil? Whatever man, while seeking his own
good, harasses another—merciful men should shew pardon to
that man in the knowledge that he is benighted.* If wise
men inflict punishment for what is done by a man in ignorance,
I esteem him more than the wise men; better are the men
who are ignorant. + Invoke thou no curse now on this king,
my son; by her own action indeed this cow has fallen in a
painful death.”
Markandeya spoke:

Pūshadhra also, prostrating himself with bowed neck be-
fore the muni’s son, exclaimed aloud, ** Be gracious!” and** She
was slain by me in ignorance, for I thought she was a gayál ;
a cow must not be killed ; through ignorance, O muni, I slew


1»


thy sacrificial cow. Be thou also gracious to me, O muni


The rishi's son spoke :

Since my birth, O king, I have uttered nothing in vain,
and my anger this day can never be altered, illustrious sir.
Therefore I cannot make this curse otherwise, O king; but
the second curse which was prepared for thee is averted.

The father then took the son who had spoken thus and went
to his own hermitage. And Pūshadhra in sooth became a
sadra,


* Or, “to that man whose understanding is foolish.”
+ Tam appears to be the right reading; but read tad instead of tam? ‘then
better than the wise are, in my opinion, the men who are ignorant.”


NARHAGA LOVED A VAT&YA MAIDEX. 593


Caxto CXIII.


Nabhiga’s exploits.

Karusha's descendants were the Kérushas—Dishta’s son was Nūbhūga ;
Nūbhūga wanted to marry a vaisya maiden—Her father referred
the matter to the king Dishta, and the king consulted the rishis—
They declared the prince might marry her, provided he first
married a kshatriya maiden—He spurned that and took her—
The king tried to vanquish him by force, but was caused by a
brāhman to desist, on the ground that the prince had degenerated
into a vatšīja.

Markandeya spoke :

1 Karusha’s sons were the Kārushas,* who were kshatriyas
and warriors. Now they were seven hundred valiant men ;
and from them descended others in thousands.

2 Now Dishta’st son was Ndbhūga;+ he continued in the
bloom of youthfulness. He saw a most surpassingly charm-

3 ing vaigya maiden. As soon as he beheld her, the prince was
stricken in mind with love; he became absorbed in sighs and

4 reproaches. He went to her father and asked for the vaisya.
maiden in marriage; and then to the prince, whose mental

5 feelings were under the dominion of the god of love, spoke
her father—to the king’s son spoke he, joining his hands respect-
fully, being afraid of the prince's father, this speech as he

6 bowed with deference, O bréhman— Nobles of thy class are
the enjoyers of the earth: dependants are we, paying tax to


* See note $ to canto lvii, verse 58, p. 341 ante.
+ This Dishta must be the Rishta mentioned in canto oxii, verse 4. The


nanie is given variously as Nedishtha, Dishta, and Arishta. The Hari-Vaméa
says two of his sons though vaisyas became brahmans (xi. 658); and the
Bhigavata Pur. says two of his sons, though kshatriyas obtained bréhman-
hood (IX. ii. 17).

t N&bhiiga ond his descendan
Puranas agree generally that he
ants and their exploits form the remain
other kings afterwards of tho same name.


75


ts are named in Vishnu Pur, IV. i. The
was degraded to be a vaisya. His descend-
der of this Purana. There were


504 i CANTO CXTTI.


you. Why dost thou earnestly desire connexion with us who
are not thy equals ? ”


The prince spoke :
7 Equality of the human body is wrought by love, folly and
other feelings. So indeed the human body is endowed with
8 those very feelings at the appropriate time,* and thus in truth
those feelings also come into existence for its benefit. And
different feelings, different persons exist when folk exist of
9 separate castes. Moreover, other feelings alsot that are in-
appropriate become proper according to season, and likewise
appropriate feelings become inappropriate ; for propriety de-
10 pends upon season. As the body is fattened by food and other
things that are longed for, so that same body when usedt with
11 due regard to season is well regulated.§ Do thou accordingly
bestow this thy highly esteemed daughter on me; otherwise
calamity will be beheld in my body.


The vaigya spoke :
12 We are under another’s authority, and thou art under an-
other’s authority, namely the king’s. When he thy father
permits thee, take thou hey; I will give her.


The prince spoke :
13 Those who treat gurus|| with respect should consult their
guus in all things that must be done ; but not in such things
as this, things which are not to be done, ** do the words of


* Or, “season.”

+ For anydn api read anydny api, as in the Poona edition,

t Bhuktam. ‘The Poona edition reads bhútam 3 and the meaning would be
“that same body when so constituted with due regard to season is well
regulated.”

§ Pari$ishyate, I take this as the passive of pari-$ds; but pari-sds is not
in the dictionary.

|| Venerable persons, parents or spiritual preceptors.

g] For guruvo read guravo here and in the next verse.

** For the text fdrifeshu u-kdryeshu it seems tdrifeshu kdryeshu would
be better—" but not in such businesses ns this do the words Of gurus have
scope.”


MARRIAGE BETWEEN KSHATRIYAS AND VAIBYAS. 595


14 gurus have scope. What has Love's conversation to do with
listening to gurus? This is incompatible. In other things
men should consult their gurus.


The vaišya spoke :

15 Such, even this, is Love’s talk! I, I here, will ask the guru,
thine, the suitor’s. My talk is not based on the speech of
love.

Markandeya spoke :

16 When addressed thus the prince became silent. And he,
the vaisya, related to that prince’s father all that the prince

17 thought. Thereupon his father summoned, before him the
chief dvijas, Ričika* and the other brahmans, and the prince ;
and he made known the matter as it had been announced to

18 him; and after making it known he, being so situated 2x the
matter, said to the munis,—'' The best of dvijas deignt to
declare what ought to be done.”


The rishis spoke:
19 O prince, if thou hast love for this vaisya’s child, then let
this ordinance of righteousnessj verily be observed, but Yet it
20 be observed in the order enjoined bylaw. Marriage was enjoined
for princes in the first place with the daughter of one who had
been royally anointed. Be it so now first in thy case; and im-
mediately afterwards this mazden also shall become thy wife.


® A famous pishi, son of Bhrigu and father by Satya-vati of Jamadagni;
see Mahd-Bh., Sūnti-p. xlix. 1716-21; Hari.-V., xxvii. 1423.63, and xxxii.
1761-76; and Vishnu Pur. IV. vii. He married Satya-vati, daughter of Gadhi
king of Kāny-kubja, by giving a present of a tlionsand horses for her (Maha-
Bh., Vana-p. cxv. 10144-158, and Udyoga-p. cxviii. 4005-7). Though Satya-
vati is connected with the R. Kaušiki (the R. Kosi, see canto lvii, verse
18, note **) in the passages cited above from the Hari V. and Vishnu Pur.,
yet Ridika is gencrally connected with the west coast around tlie Gulf of
Cambay (see Maha-Bh., Vana-p. oxvlii. 10221-27 and the two other passages
last cited above), and Dynti-mat king of Silva (see canto lviii, verse 6;
note §) gave his kingdom to Ķidika (Mahé-Bh., Santi-p. coxxxiv. 8607, and
Anuššs-p» cxxxvii. 6267).

+ For arhanti read arhantu ?

t ILe, marriage.


“Let the best of dvijas deign, &c.”


596 CANTO CXIII,


21 In this way no wickedness will attach* to thee when thou en-
joyest her thus; otherwise it does accrue: thy high rank comes
from marriage with exalted maidens.

Markandeya spoke :

22 When admonished thus, he flung aside altogether that
speech of those high-souled munis; and going outside he

23 seized her, and raising his sword aloft exclaimed,—* I have
carried off the vaisya’s daughter by the Rakshasa form of
marriage ; let him who has power here rescue her!”

24 Then the vaisya seeing his daughter seized, O brihman,
hastened to that prznce's father for help, exclaiming “ Save

25 her!” His father enraged thereat gave command to his great
army—' Let him be slain; let wicked Nābhiga who violates

26 righteousness be slain!” Thereon that army fought indeed
with the king’s son ; it was laid low then in great numbers by

27 him, who was skilled in weapons, with his weapon. The king,
on hearing that the army was slain by the prince, went forth

28 himself indeed to fight, surrounded by his army, In the
battle then which took place between the king and his son, the
father excelled the prince in weapons and arms.

29 Thereupon a wandering Muni suddenly approached from
out the air and spoke back to the king ;—

30 “ Cease from combat. O illustrious sir, thy high-souled son
is in the right here; moreover fighting between thee and a

31 vaisyat is not according to righteousness, O king. A brāh-
man who marries wives among all the castes, provided that
he marries first a brāhman woman, incurs no injury in his

32 brahman-hood. Likewise a kshatriya who marries first a
kshatriya’s daughter, incurs no harm af he marries wives from
lower castes; and therefore, O king, these other wives§ fall not


* Bhavitd in the Poona edition is better than bhavati,
+ The Calcutta edition reads utkrishtābālikām haran ;


the Poona reading
is utkrishtábála sarvadd,


and the Bombay reading utkrishtdbdlakd-naydt.
From these readings it would seem the correct reading should be utkrishta-
bdlikd-nuydt, and I have adopted this.

t Explained in verses 35 and 36 below.


§ Le, daughters of vaifyas and šūdras, as the commentator explaine:


NABHAGA MARRIED THE VAISYA MAIDEN. 597


33 from their own righteousness. Thus a vaišya, who marries first
a vaišya woman and afterwards a girl born from a sūdra
family, is not excluded from the vaišya family. The law is

34 thus declared in order. Brahmans, kshatriyas, vaiéyas, who
do not first marry women of the same caste,* fall by marrying

35 women of other castes, O king. Whatever excluded woman
a man marries after neglecting union in his own caste, of that

36’ woman's caste let him indeedt become a participator. This
thy son, who is such, has fallen to vaigya-hood; he is of
wretched understanding. He has no right to combat with

37 thee a kshatriya. We do not acknowledge this to be a reason
for combat, O royal. scion ; and since this shall -be so, desist
thou from the business of battle !”


Canto CXIV.


Ndbhaga's exploits.

Ndbhdga married the vaisya maiden and became a vuitya—He had a
son Bhanandana, who with the help of the risht Nipa conquered
the earth and offered the sovereignty to his father Nabhaga—
Ndbhdga declined it as he was a cuisya, and his wife Su-prabha
then explained to him, that she was not really of vaisya descent,
but the daughter of king Su-deva who became a vaisya under the
riski Pramati’s curse, because he would not rescue Pramalt's wife


from his own friend Nala.
Markandeya spoke :
1 The king thereupon desisted from battle with his son; and
2 he indeed, that king's son, married that vaišya maiden. He
became a vaišya thereby. Starting up he spoke to the king,—
« O king, let it be declared to me what I must do.”


č For sa-vurnd- read sva-varnd- ? but the meaning would be the sane.
i ruu-bháy asin the Poona


+ For no ’pi tud-vastu-bhág reud £0 pi tud-vu
edition,


598 CANTO CXIV.


The king spoke:

3 Let Babhravya* and the other ascetics, who are engaged in
the superintendence of righteousness, declare what is the occu-
pation for this man for the end of righteousness—do thou act
accordingly.

Markandeya spoke :

4 Then those munis seated in the council announced that for
him the tending of cattle and cultivation and trade should be

5 the highest righteousness. And the king's son complied with
what was declared by those expounders of righteousness to be
righteousness for him who had fallen from his own sphere of
righteousness.

6 A son was born to him afterwards, who was famed by the

name Bhanandana.¢ Being sent by his mother who said, “ Be

a keeper of cattle, my son,” he went forth ; and when enjoined

thus by his mother, he prostrated himself before his mother

and went to the royal rishi Nipat who had resorted to mount

8 Himavat; and approaching him Bhanandana held his feet

according to rule, and prostrating himself before this royal
rishi spoke :

9 “ Adorable sir, verily Ihave been commanded by my mother

thus, ‘Be thou a keeper of cattle'$ ; and yet I must protect

10 the earth ; how can there be assent to her ? Verily I must

protect the earth,|] when it may be appropriated] by men.

11 This my earth is assailed by powerful heirs. Shew me how

I may gain the earth through thy favour, O lord ; I will carry
out thy command ; I am prostrate before thee.”


* See note * page 501.

t Or Bhalandana according to the Vishnu Pur, LY. i.

t This was apparently Nipa of the Pauraya race, who was king of Kám-
pilya. He had a hundred sons who were all styled Nipas. His dynasty lasted
till Ugrayudha killed all the Nipas just before the Pandavas’ time; see
Hari-V., xx. 1040, 1060-73,1082-86 ; Matsya Pur. xlix. 52-59,

§ Go-pūla,

|| Gauķ pdlaniyd, There a double pun here with go, “cattle” and “ the
earth,” and the verb pál, “to tend” and to protect,”

j There is also a play on the words sut-karana, “ assent,” in verse ) and
stt-krita, “appropriated,” here,


~T


12
13


14


15


16


17


18


19


22


RHANANDANA GATXS THE KINGDOM. 599


Markandeya spoke :

The royal rishi Nipa then gave to high-souled Bhananda
a complete set of weapons, O brahman. After acquiring skill
in the weapons he went to bis paternal uncle's sons, Vasurāta,
and the other sons, O dvija; he was so commanded by that
high-souled rishi. He demanded half of the kingdom as be-
fitted his father and paternal grandfather ; and they said,— A
vaigya’s son thou art; how shalt thou enjoy the earth ? DA
battle then occurred between Bhananda who. was. skilled in
weapons and those his kinsmen Vasuráta and the rest, who were
angry and showered weapons on kim; but vanquishing them
all when their troops had been shattered with his weapons,
he, wise in righteousness, took the earth away from them by
righteous combat. After vanquishing his foes, he next pre-
sented all the earth and the sovereignty to his father; and his
father did not accept it, and in front of his wife made an-
swer to the son then.


Nábhága spoke:
O Bhananda, this kingdom is thine; let it which was ruled
by thy ancestors be ruled by thee.


The king spoke :*

I did not rule the kingdom ; I was not devoid of the capacity
for it + formerly; but preferring a vaisya’s condition I obeyed
my father’s command to that effect. Because I showed want
of affection for my father in that I wedded a vaisya maiden, I
did not become a king, who enjoys the sacred worlds until the
subyersion of the, world has arrived. j If disregarding his
command again I rule over the earth, there is verily no final
emancipation from existence for me thereafter. even during
hundreds of kalpas. Nor indeed is it fit that I, who have my


‘This heading is superfluous; it is still Nábhága who speaks.


+ Ndsdmarthya-yutah. The commentator explains it by ati-sámarthya-yuto
pi, “I did not rule the kingdom, although I possessed exceptional capacity


formerly.” i
t For ydvad-dhūta-samplavaļ the Bombay and Poona editions read ydvad-


dbhūta-samplavam. Au avyayi-bhava compound is preferable.


600 CANTO CXIV.


own pride, should enjoy the kingdom which thou hast won by
thy arm, when I have no desire for it, like any weakling. *
23 Rule thou the kingdom thyself the while, or relinquish it to
thy heirs. For me it is good to keep my father’s command
and not to rule the earth.
Markandeya spoke :
24° Laughing thereat his wife, the lady Su-prabhi by name,
made answer to her husband, “ O king, take the mighty king-
25 dom. Thou art no vaišya, nor indeed was I born of a vaisya
family, O king; thou art a kshatriya and I also was born of a
26 family of kshatriyas. Formerly there was a famous king Sn-
deva ł by name, and his friend was king Dhdmrdéva’s son
27 Nala.? Accompanied by his friend he went to the wood Amra-
vana, § he to sport with his wives in the month of spring, O
28 king. Accompanied by those wives and attended by that friend
29 he enjoyed many kinds of drinks and food then. Afterwards
he saw the extremely fascinating and royally born wife of
30 Cyavana’s son Pramati || on the bank of a tank. His friend
Nala, who was intoxicated and not in his right mind, laid hold
of her, the while she cried out “ Save me, Save me!” even as
31 the king looked on. Her husband Pramati, on hearing her
32 cry, at once came up hastily exclaiming ' What is it?” Then


* For durbalasyeha read durbalasyeva, as in the Poona edition.

t The most famous king of this name appears to have been Su-deva of
the Kasis who had a great contest with the Vitahavyas, and was father of
Divodasa (Maht-Bh., Annśás.-p. xxx, 1950-54); but this story pays no regard
to chronology.

t There were many kitigs of this name, but none of them (as far as I have
found) son of Dhūmrššva, One of the kings of Vaiāli was Dhūmrišva
(Vishnu Pur. LY. i.)

§ I have not fonnd any wood of thig name in western India where this story
is laid; but Āmra-vana may mean simply “a grove of mangoes.”

|| Cyavana was a famous rishi, son of Bhrigu. He married Sukanyi
daughter of Manu’s son Saryāti, and by her had a son Pramati. Pramati
married Ghrité¢i; see Maha-Bh., Adi-p. v. 870 and 871, and viii. 939, 940;
and Vana-p. oxxii: algo Sata-patha Brāh, IV, 5; Aitar,-Bréh. VIII. iv. 21).

Cyavanu’s region was in the west near the month of the R. Narmada, see
Mah&-Bh., Vanasp. Ixxxix 8864, 8364 and 8365 ; cii. 8797-40 and oxxi. 10312,


33


36


PRAMATI S CURSE ON SU-DEVA AND NALA. 601


he saw king Su-deva standing there, and his wife in the
grasp of Nala, who was very much out of his senses. Pramati
spoke to the king then,—

“ Make this man quiet! And thon art the ruler; thou, Sir,
art the king; and this Nala is a bad man, O king.”

Markandeya spoke :

On hearing that distressed rishi’s appeal, Su-deva deterred
by'reason of Nala's high position replied,—‘ I am a vaišya;
seek someone else, a kshatriya, in order to rescue her.” Then
Pramati enraged, burning forth as it were with splendour,
made answer to the king who said “ I am a vaišya.”

Pramati spoke :

Be it so! thou, Sir, art a vaigya.* A kshatriya is so named
because he guards one from injury. t Kshatriyas hold the
weapon in order that there may be no cry of distress. Thou
being such art no kshatriya ; verily thou shalt be a vaišya of
base family.


Canto CXV.


—


Su-prabhé continues her story to Naébhaga—That Pramati reduced


W


Nala to ashes, and, on Su-deva’s imploring pardon, mitigated the
curse on Su-deva, with the promise that he should regain his
kshatriya-hood—Also that she had been the daughter of the royal
rishi Su-ratha, and had been cursed by Agastya to be born a
vaišya womun temporarily.
Markandeya spoke :

After imprecating the curse on him then, Pramati, the
descendant of Bhrigu, enraged and burning up, asit were, the
three worlds by reason of his wrath, spoke to Nala, O dvija —
< Inasmuch as thou, Sir, intoxicated with lust, forcibly seizest
my wife here in my hermitage, become thou therefor ashes


* For vaisya read vaišyaļ as in the Poona edition.


+ Kshatriyah kshata-rakshandt.
24.


For a different derivation; see canto cxxij.


78


60
3


12


18
14


15


* For yad uktavdme tvam,


CANTO CXV.


forthwith.” And then immediately as he uttered that speech,
Nala, consumed by the fire that sprang from the risht’s body,
became forthwith a heap of ashes.

On seeing that rishi’s power then.Su-deva sobered thereat,
bending himself in reverence, said thus—“ Grant pardon !
grant pardon! Let that which I have spoken,* adorable sir,
a thing disordered by reason of intoxication through drinking
spirituous liquor, be pardoned; be thou gracious ; let this
curse be turned aside!” Being thus propitiated by him, Pra-
mati, the descendant of Bhrigu, whose anger had passed off
when Nala was burnt up, replied with mind devoid of strong
feeling ;—“The word which Ihave uttered shall not be otherwise;
nevertheless being gracious I will do thee a supreme favour.
Thou, sir, shalt be a vaigya by race—of this there can be no
doubt ; thou, a kshatriya, shalt be a vaisya soon in the very
next birth, When a kshatriya’s son shall seize thy daughter
by force, thou being seized by one of thy own race shalt then
become + a kshatriya again, O vaišya.” Thus that Su-deva
as a vaisya became my father, O king.

Hear also, illustrious sir, all the story t who I am. There
was of yore a royal rishi named Su-ratha on mount Gandha-
mādana, who practised austerities, restricted his food, aban-
doned worldly associations, and abode in the forest. On his
seeing then a mainā § fallen from a hawk’s beak to the
ground, compassion Sprang up within that high-souled pishi,
and he swooned therewith ; then when the swoon passed off, I
was produced from his body, and seeing me he took me with
a loving mind. “ Because she has been born from me, while I
was Overcome with compassion, she shall therefore be known by
the name Kripi-vati ” ||so said he, my lord. Thereafter
growing up in his hermitage, I used to wander day and night


read yad uktavdms tudm as in the Poona edition,


and the commentator says aham must be understood.
+ For bhavishyati read bhavishyasi,
f For tvat-sarvam read tat sarvat.
§ Súriká, a bird,
|| “Full of compassion,”


ea


AGASTYA’S CURSE ON KRIPA-VATI. 603


through the woods also with my girl-companions of the same
16 age. Then the muni Agastya’s brother, who was known as
Agastya,* while seeking for forest-products in the forest,
17 was angered by my girl-companions and cursed me ; and I said
—“ No offence have I committed against thee, O best of dvijas ;
why because of an offence by other girls hast thou cursed me ?”


The rishi spoke :

18 “ By reason of contact with the bad even that which is not
bad becomes bad, just as a jar containing the five substances
obtained from cows t becomes spoilt if a drop of spirituous

19 liquor falls into it. Since thou hast fallen prostrate and pro-
pitinted me by declaring ‘I am not bad,’ hear therefore whatļ

20 favourl will do to thee, O maiden. When, being born in a
vaigya family, thou shalt admonish thy husband § to wnder-
take kingly rule, thou shalt then fully recover the remembrance

21 of this existence ; and thou shalt resume thy kshatriya caste
along with thy husband and shalt obtain heavenly pleasures.
Go now, let fear depart from thee !”

22 Thus was I cursed formerly by that great rishi, O king of
kings; and my father was thus cursed by Pramati formerly.

23 So thou art not a vaigya, O king; nor was my father a vaisya ;
nor indeed am I; || how dost thou, who art not degraded,
become degraded in marrying me who am not degraded ?


*# Or Agastya.

+ Milk, cheese, butter, urine and dung.

t For friņuydt read érinu yat, as in the Poona edition.

§ Tvam putram, “ thou shalt admonish thy son, &.,” is the reading in the
Caloutta and Poona editions, but the latter in its Corrigenda alters it to sva-


patim, and I have followed this,
|| Na tvam ht is the reading in the editions, but is incorrect. I venture


' toamend it to na tv-aham, and have translated it necordiugly. Another emend-


ation is to rend sa for na, and then the meaning of these and the following


“ How indeed dost thou, who art such and who art unde-
ho am undegraded ?”


words would be—
graded, become degraded in marrying me W


604


CANTO CXVI.


4 Canto OXVI.


The Exploits of Bhananda and Vatsa-pri.


Ndbhāga declined the kingdom and Bhanandana became king— He had


a son Vatsa-pri—A Daitya king Kujrimbha, who had a magic
club called Sunanda, opened a great hole near king Vidtratha's
city and carried the princess Muddvati down to Pdtdla—Her
brothers failed to rescue her and were made captive—Vatsa-pri
killed the Daitya, after she destroyed the club’s magic power, and
rescued her and her brothers— She was named Sunandé after the
club, and Vatsa-pri married her.


Markandeya spoke :

On hearing this herspeech and his son’s, the king, wise in
righteousness, addressed his wife and son again,—” Inasmuch
as I relinquished the kingdom at my father’s command, I will
not take it again; why dost thou, O wife, draw out my soul
with vain words ? Standing fast in my duties as vaisya I will
pay thee taxes, my son. Enjoy thou the whole kingdom, or
rēlinguish it if thou wishest.”

Being addressed thus by his father, prince Bhanandana *
then governed the kingdom in righteousness and in like wise
married a wife. Unrepulsed was his discus in the earth, O
bréhman, and his mind was not set upon unrighteousness, All
kings were in subjection to him. He performed a sacrifice ac-
cording to precept; he rules the earth well. He in sooth was
the only lord ; his commands pervaded the earth,

A son was born to him, namely Vatsa-pri by name, who, a
high-souled king, surpassed his father with the multitude of
his good qualities. And his wife was Saunandé, daughter of
Vidūratha, who was devoted to her husband, an illustrious


woman. He gained her by his valour in slaying the Daitya
king Kujrimbha,t the enemy of Indra,


* Or Bhalandana according to Vishnu Pur. IV. i. where his descendants are
given.

+ The Calcutta text reads Kujumbha here and in verse 9, incorrectly ; see
verse 16.


THE DEMON KUJRIMBHA AND HIS CLUB SUNANDA. 605


Kraushtuki spoke :


9 Adorable six, how did he gain her through the destruction of
Kujrimbha ? Tell me this story with benignant mind.


Markandeya spoke :
10 There was a king named Vidūratha * whose fame was cele-
brated in the earth. Two sons were born to him, Su-niti and
11 Su-mati. Now Vidūratha went to the forest once upon a time
to hunt. He beheld a very great pit, as it were the earth’s
12 mouth thrust up. On seeing it he pondered, “What is this
dreadful thing? I trow tt zs a hole down to Pātšla: it has
13 not belonged to the earth a long while.” While thinking thus,
he saw in a lonely wood there an ascetic brahman named Su-
14 vrata approaching, and the king being astonished asked him,
—«“ What is this? It ts very deep and displays the earth’s
belly which is situated within.”


The rishi spoke :
15 “ Knowest thon it not, O king? for thcu art deemed by me
to have spies as thine eyes. t A king ought to know everything
16 that passes on the face of the earth. A very valiant fierce
Dšnava dwells in Rasdtala; because he makes the earth to
17 yawn, j he is therefore called Ku-jrimbha. Whatever has been
produced, whether produced on the earth or in heaven, is
wrought by him, O king ; how is it then that thou dost not
18 know him, Sir? That wicked-souled demon carried off the
club named Su-nanda, which Tvashtri fashioned of yore; there-
19 with heslays his enemies in battle. Hidden within Patéla that
Asura cleaves this earth with it, and makes doors of eit for
20 all the Asuras; with that weapon, the club Su-nanda, the
earth has been pierced in this spot. How shalt thou, Sir, enjoy


* The story shows that this king’s capital was near the river Nirvindhya
which was apparently in the Mālwn region (see verses 27 and 33). There
were several kings of this name, but I have found none who had two sons


of the names mentioned.
+ For vdg-arthas, which the Caloutta and Bombay editions have, read cūrdk-


shas as in the Poona edition.
T Trimbhayatt.


606
21


22


23


29


30


31


32


33


CANTO CXVI.


this earth unless thou conquerest him? That fierce, mighty
adversary of the gods, armed with the club, destroys sacrifices
and fattens up the Daityas. If thou slayest this foe, whose
sphere is in Pátála, thou shalt thereby become lord of all the
earth, the supreme monarch. That mighty demon’s club is
called Saunanda by men-folk; and the wise moreover speak of
it* as partly strong and partly weak ; yet when touched by a
woman it loses its power on that day,t O king ; on the following
day it issues forth with its power regained. That demon of
evil ways does not know then the majestic power of the club,
nor the defect which comes at the touch of a woman’s fingers,
that is, the collapse of its power.

“Thus I have declared to thee, O king, the might of that
evil-souled Dānava and of his club. As I have spoken, so do
thou comport thyself. This hole which he has made in the
earth is near thy city, O king; why art thou foolishly ¢ un-
concerned about it, Sir? ”

Now when that rishi had spoken thus and departed, the
king went to his city and took counsel with his ministers who
were skilled in counsel within his city. He made known to
the ministers all that story as he had heard it, both the majestic
power of the club and also the waning of its power. Now his
daughter Muda-vati, who was by his side, heard that counsel
which the king was taking with his ministers.

But some days afterwards, the Daitya Kujrimbha carried off
that maiden, who was possessed of energy, from a grove, while
she was accompanied by her maiden-friends. On hearing
that, the king’s eyes were distraught with anger, and he said
to his two sons, “ Hasten quickly ye two who are well acquaint-
ed with the forests: there is a hole on the bank of-the Nir-vin-


dha ; § go ye down thereby to Rasatala and slay him who with
most evil mind has carried Mudā-vati off,”


# For tam read tad as in the Poona edition.

+ On the day on which it is touched, spar$a-dine (comment. )

t For yathé read vrithd as in the Poona edition.

§ Or Nirvindhyd, as in the Poona edition, which is the preferable form ;
gee canto lvii, verse 24, note f.


41


42


4,4,


45


46


VATSAPRE GOES TO RESCUE MUDAVATĪ. 607


Markandeya spoke :

Thereupon those two sons of his, following on the steps of that
demon, reached that hole and in excessive wrath fought with
Kujrimbha with the atd of their own army. Then occurred a
very terrible combat between them with maces, swords, spears,
javelins, and axes and arrows without intermission. After it
that Daitya, who possessed the might of illusive power, bound
those two princes in battle after slaying all their soldiers.

On hearing of that, the king spoke thus to all his soldiers,
“T have fallen into utter misery, now that my sons are in
bonds, (O bes of munis); whoever shall slay that Daitya
and shall set my daughter there free, I will bestow even her,
the large-eyed maiden, on him.” Even thus the desperate
king made a proclamation in his city then in order to obtain
the deliverance of his sons and daughter from bondage, O
muni.

Bhanandana’s son Vatsa-pri then heard cf that promise in
sooth, which was proclaimed abroad—he, possessed of strength,
skilled in weapons, endowed with heroism. And arriving there
he saluted this noblest of kings, and bowing with deference
spoke to him who was his own father’s peerless friend ;—“ Com-
mand me in sooth speedily ; I will deliver thy two sons and
also thy daughter, after slaying that Daitya through thy very
glory.”

Markandeya spoke :

Embracing him joyfully, who was his dear friend’s son, the
king said:

« Go thou to full success,* my dear son. My dear son shall


stand in my place, if he performs the precept thus. Do this


quickly, my dear son, if thy mind is resolute.”


Markandeya spoke :

Then armed with scymitar and bow, having a leathern bow-
guard and finger-protector bound on him, the Lerija prince
went in haste to Patila by that hole. The prince made
his bow-string twang with an exceedingly vehement sound


® For samsiddhai rend samsiddhyai, ^8 corrected in the Poona edition,


608


53


54


55


56


57


58


59


60


CANTO CXVI.


then, wherewith the whole of Pátála was filled throughout,
Hearing the sound of the bow-string, the Danava king, Ku-
jrimbha came forward then in excessive wrath, attended by his
army. Then occurred a battle between him and the king's
gon, one with his army against the other with his army, mighty
against mighty. When the Danava had fought with him for
three days, he was filled with rage in his soul and rushed
to get his club. Worshipped with perfumes, garlands and in-
cense, itstands in the private apartments, O illustrious sir ; for
it had been fashioned by the Prajé-pati.* Mudā-vati, who
knew well the secret of the club’s majestic power, bowing her
neck very low, touched the noble club then. Until the great
demon grasps the club again, till then the beautiful maiden
touched it many times under pretence of paying reverence
to it. Going back then the king of the demons fought
with the club. Vainly fell the blows of the club on those
enemies. But inasmuch as the supreme weapon, the club
Saunanda, had lost its power, O muni, the Daitya fought
with his weapons and arms against his foe in the battle.
With his arms and weapons the demon was not the
prince’s equal, and that, his might with the club, had been
dissipated by the maiden.t Conquering then the Dénava’s
weapons and arms, the king’s son forthwith forced him from
his chariot; and then the demon grasping his shield and scy-
mitar rushed at him again. The prince felled that enemy of
the lord of the thirty gods, as he rushed forwards violently in-
cited and displaying his rage,—felled him to the earth with his
weapon of fire which gleamed like the Fire that burns up the
world finally. That foe of the thirty gods was wounded griev-
ously in the heart by the fiery weapon and quitted his body.
And forthwith there was high festival among the huge snakes
within the confines of Rasitala.

Then fell a shower of flowers upon the king’s son; the
Gandharva lords sang forth, the gods’ instruments of music
sounded out. And the prince, after slaying that demon, set free


* See verse 18.
+ For buddhyd rend tanvyd ns in the Poona edition,


61
62


63


64


66


67


68


69


70


7l


72


* Read yoshit as part of the compound yoshit-karatala-


VATSAPR{ RESCUED AND MARRIED SUNANDĀ. 609


the king’s two sons and the slender-shaped maiden Mudž-vati.
And the king of the serpents, Ananta who is named Sesha,
took that club, when that Kujrimbha was slain ; and he, Sesha.
lord of all the serpents, was satisfied with her; he rich in aus-
terities had meditated with glee upon the course of Mudé-
vati’s mind. Because the most beautiful mazden had repeated-
ly touched the club Sunanda, knowing the power of the
touch of a woman's palm* cn it, therefore the serpent
king in his joy gave Muda-vati then the name Su-nands,
derived from the quality of the club Saunanda, O dvija.

And the prince brought her in company with her two bro-
thers to their father’s presence quickly, and bowing down
spoke to him thus—‘ Here are brought thy two sons, dear
father, and here zs brought Mudé-vati according to thy com-
mand ; what else I must do, declare thou that. ”


Markandeya spoke :

Thereat the king’s heart was filled with gladness, and he
exclaimed aloud, “ Well done! well done!” and “Splendid !
my dear son, my dear son! I am honoured by the thirty gods,
my dear son, for three reasons—in that I have both gained thee
for my son-in-law, and that the foe has been stricken down, and
that my children have come unharmed to me here again ; there-
fore take her hand now on this auspicious day—I have said it;
make my word true—that thou, O prince, be joined in joy
with my daughter Mudé-vati, a maiden of lovely form.”


The prince spoke :


I must obey thy command, dear father ; what thou sayest I
will do. Thou verily knowest, dear father, that in this matter


we are in trutl: unchanged.
Mārkaņdeya spoke:
Then the great king performed the series of marriage rites
for them both, for his daughter Mudé-vati and Bhanandana’s


sparéa- &o., and not


separately as in the Calcutta edition.


77


610
73


74
75


76


CANTO CXVII.


gon. Thereafter Vatsa-pri in his early manhood sported with
her in charming regions and in palaces and on hill-tops.

As time passed on, his father Bhanandana grew old and
departed to the forest ; Vatsa-pri himself became king. He
offered up sacrifices continually, while protecting his people
with righteousness. Now the people, being protected by that
high-souled monarch as if they were his children, prospered ;
and in his realm there was no confusion among the castes ;
and no one felt any fear of robbers, rogues or villains, nor any
fear of calamities, while he ruled as king.


Canto CXVII*


—


Khanitra’s exploits.


Vatsa-pri was succeeded by his son Pramsu, and Prdīnšu by his son


Prajūti.—Prajdti had five sons, of whom Khanitra succeeded
him—Khanitra’s special prayer is given—He made his "four bro-
thers subordinate kings—The minister of one of them subdued
the other brothers and tried to gain the supreme power for his
master through magic performed by the family priests of all fowr
brothers—The magic produced a female deity which destroyed the
four priests and the minister.


Markandeya spoke :

To him, Vatsa-pri, were born of Su-nanda twelve sons,
Primégu, Pradira and Sūra, Su-čakra, Vikrama, Krama, Balin,
Balaka, and Čaņda and Pračaņda, Su-vikrama and Sva-rūpa—
all princes of great parts, most victorious in battle.

The eldest of them, Prārnšu, who was great in valour, was
king ; these others were subordinate to his authority like de-
pendants. At his sacrifice the eartht justified her name by
reason of the many multitudes of things, which she gave away


* The Calcutta edition makes a mistake in the numbering. It omits oxvii,
calls this Canto cxviii, and continues the mistaken numbering to the end.
+ Vasun-dhard, “container of wealth,”


12


14


15


16


KHANITRA’S VIRTUES AND PRAYER. 611


to the twice-born and which she parted with to the inferior
castes. While he duly protected his people as if his own be-
gotten children, the sacrifices then, which he performed with
the accumulation of wealth that lay in his treasury, were hun-
dreds of thousands; their number is not reckoned by ten
thousand or such a figure, nor by ten millions, nor by a thousand
billion or such a figure, O muni.

Pra-jūti* was bis son; at whose sacrifice Indra, gaining
unparalled gratification along with the gods who partake of
shares of sacrifices, the chiefest of the mighty,t smote nine
nineties} of valiant Dānavas and Bala and Jambha noblest of
Asuras, and smote other very valiant foes of the gods.

Prajāti had five sons, of whom Khanitra was chief, O muni.
Of them Khanitra became king; he was celebrated for his
personal feats of prowess. He was a pacific, truth-speaking
hero; he delighted in doing good to all living creatures; he
took delight in his own sphere of righteousness constantly ; he
waited upon the aged, he was. well versed in the Vedas, he
was eloquent, endowed with modesty, yet skilled in weapons
and no boaster. He was the beloved of all people continually ;
he uttered this prayer day and night ;—

‘Let all created things rejoice, let them be affectionate
even in solitary places! May there be welfare for all created
things, and may they be free from affliction ! May created
things experience no bodily sickness nor any mental diseases !
May all created things cherish friendliness to every living
being! May there be bliss for all the twice-born ; may they have
mutual lovingkindness! May all castes ‘have full prosperity,
and may all deeds attain perfect accomplishment! May the
worlds be propitious to all created things! May your mind
always be propitious! Desireye at all times what is good for-your
son even as for yourselves! Similarly be ye benevolent in mind


* He is called Prajāni in the Vishnu Par. (IV.i.) and Pramati in the
Bhagavata Pur. He seems to be the same as Prasandhi in the genealogy in
Mahi-Bh,, ASvam.-p. iii. 65.

+ That is, Indra.

1 Dasddhikdshtasattm, comment,


612 CANTO CXVII.


17 to all created things! This is unbounded good for you. More-
over who sins against whom, that he causes any harm to any

18 one besotted in mind? To him assuredly * comes that result,
that which accrues to the doer thereof. Sothinking, ho! let the

19 people be informed of their dutiest toall,t lest ye wise people
shall undergo secular sin.§ May there ever be bliss on the

20 earth for him, who loves me now; and may even he, who hates
me, see good things in this world!’

21 Such was that king’s son Khanitra in disposition; he was
endowed with every good quality; he possessed good fortune,
his eyes were like a lotus-leaf. He appointed those his four

22 brothers to separate kingdoms out of affection, and he himself
enjoyed this earth bounded by the seas; thus he placed Sauri over

23 the east region, Mudāvasuļ|over the south, Sunaya over the
western region, and Mahā-ratha over the northern. They and

24 that king had separate families of brdhmans as purohitas, and
also munis, who descended in a regular lineage of ministers.
Sauri's purohita wasabrahman S Su-hotra by name who sprang

25 from the family of Atri; Udavasn’s was Kusāvartta, who was
born of the lineage of Gautama; a Kāšyapa by name Pra-mati

26 was Sunaya’s purohita; Vasishtha was purohitato king Maha-
ratha. Those four kings indeed enjoyed their own kingdoms,

27 and Khanitra was their over-lord, being over-lord of all the
earth. King Khanitra was always kindly to those his four

28 brothers and to all his people as to his own sons.

One day Sauri was addressed by his minister Visva-vedin—

29 “O king, we have somewhat to say unto thee in private. He,
who possesses all this earth, to whom all kings are in subjec-

30 tion, is the king, and so will be his son and his grandsons and
thereafter his descendants. These others, his brothers, are


* For nytinam read ntinam as in the Poona edition.

+ The Poona edition reads hita-buddhayah, and the menning would thon be
“ be friendly-minded.”

t Or, ‘in all things.’

§ Laukikam pápam.

|| Or better Uddvasu, as in the Poona edition and in verse 25.


Family priest. For dvijd4 read dvijah asin the Poona edition.


A PLOT AGAINST KHANITRA, 613


81 kings of very small * territories; and his son is smaller than
he;t and his grandsons will be of smaller make. Degenerat-
32 ing in time from individual to individual, his descendants will
become dependant on agriculture for their living, Oking. Thy
brother, bestowing affection and poweronhis brothers, yet makes
33 no division of the patrimony. What affection will he have,
O king, for the two more distant, his brothers’ sons§? His
mind will be more distant with regard to their two sons, O
34 king. By what thing that is to be done will his son be endowed
with affection ? Or if a king is satisfied by anything whatsoever,
35 yet to what end then do kings entertain ministers?|| The
whole kingdom is enjoyed by me while I remain thy minister.
36 Dostthou retain that to no purpose,{ if it gives** satisfaction P
Sovereignty accomplishes what should be done; an instru-
37 ment is desired by one who operates. And the acquirement
of sovereignty+t is what thou must accomplish; thou art the
worker, we are the instrument. Do thou, being such, rule
the kingdom that belonged to thy father and grandfather by
means of us, the instruments. We shall not bestow benefits


on thee in another world.


The king spoke:
38 Inasmuch as the eldest brother is king (O monarch), and
we are his younger brothers, he therefore enjoys the earth
39 and we enjoy small portions of the earth. Now we are five


* For kalpa-vishayddhipah read svalpa-vishuyddhipah as in the Poona
edition.

+ Tat-putraé čūlpakas tasmūt, referring to each of the brothers; but a plural
reading would be preferable, “their sons are smaller than they.”

+ Uddhdram. The Poona edition reads hhrdtu% sneha-baldrpinah, and the
“ Thy brother makes no division of the patrimony for


meaning would then be
4 ” though arpa and arpin are not in


a brother who bestows affection and power :
the dictionary. ;
§ For snehakah th
|| For mantra-parigraha
q For sukhddhārayase re
*% For kurute the Poona edition
tt For rdjya-lubdha$ read vdjya-


ə Poona edition rends better snehah kah.
x the Poona edition rends better mantri-parigrahah.


ad mudhd dharayase as in the Poona edition.
rends kurushe.
lambha$ asin the Poona. edition,


614


40


41


42


45


46


47


48


49


50


CANTO CXVII.


brothers, and there is but one earth, O high-minded sir, hence
how can there be entire sovereignty over it separately for ws ?


Visva-vedin spoke :

Be this so here!* If there is but one earth, O king, do thon
thyself take possession of it; do thou Sir, as eldest brother,
rule the earth. Be thou the absolute ruler, exercising entire
sovereignty, unto all. And the ministers whom they have enter-
tained strive for themt as I strive for thee.


The king spoke :

Since the eldest, the king, esteems us affectionately like
sons, how shall I display against him a selfishness that relates
to the world ?

Visva-vedin spoke :

When seated in the kingdom, thou mayest do worship as
the eldest with new kingly honours. What is this position
of youngest and eldest? Sovereignty is for men who want it.


Markandeya spoke:

And on the king’s assenting, “So be it,” O best of men,
Visva-vedin the minister brought his brothers into subjection
to him then, and brought their purohitas into subjection to him-
self in ceremonies performed for the removal of obstacles and
other rites. Next he employed them in spells directed against
Khanitra, and severed his faithful adherents by conciliation,
gifts and other means; and he exerted the utmost efforts in
repelling punishment from his own folk. And while the four
purohitas were performing an exceedingly arduous magical
incantation day by day, there was produced a four-fold female
deity} which was very formidable, had a, large mouth, was ex-
ceedingly terrible to behold, held a large pike raised aloft, was
lofty and was exceedingly pitiless. It came to the place then
where king Khanitra was, and it was cast out by that un-
blemished king's store of merit. The four-fold female deity


# For bhadms tatra read bhavaty atra as in the Bombay edition.
t Teshdm; the commentator explains thus, bhrdirtņdrh kdrya-vishaye.
t Krityd-éatushfaya.


5l


THE PLOTTERS WERE DESTROYED IGNOMINIOUSLY. 615


fell on those evil-souled purohitas of his brother kings, and on
Visva-vedin indeed. Then were burnt up by that female
deity, who assailed them, those purohitas and Vigva-vedin the
minister who gave evil counsel to Sauri.


Canto CXVIII.*


Khanitra’s exploits concluded.


Khanitra, on hearing of the destruction of the family priests, lamented


and took the blame on himself—He resigned the kingtlom to his
son Kshupa, departed to the forest, and died there in sanctity.


Thereupon there was great dismay in all the world, in-
asmuch as those purohitas dwelling in separate cities perished
at the same time. Khanitra heard then that his brothers’ puro-
hitas had reached their death, and that his brother’s minister
Višva-vedin also had been burnt up. Khanitra the great king
was extremely surprised, wondering “ What is this?” O best
of munis; and knew not the cause. ‘Then the king asked
Vasishtha who’ had come to his palace, what the reason was
why those, the minister and purohitas of his brothers, had
perished. When questioned by him the great muni related
then how it had happened, what Sauri’s minister had said
and what Sauri had replied to him, and what he, that evil
minister, had performed as a means of producing dissension
among the brothers and what the purohitas had done; for what
reason they, the purohitas who were absolutely compassionate
even to an enemy, had perished, while injuring that sinless
king. On hearing that, the king reproached himself exceed-
ingly then, exclaiming, “ Alas! Iam sore stricken!” in Vasish-


tha’s presence, O dvija.


The king spoke:


9 “Fie on me, who am of unholy composition, of scanty good-


® Canto oxix in the Calontta edition.


616


10


11


12


13


14


15
16


17


18


19


20


21


CANTO CXVIII.


fortune, destitute of splendour! Sin which is utterly contemn.
ed by all the worlds has been committed by me through the
fault of fate. That is the reason why those four brāhmans
have perished: what other man besides me will there be more
sinful on the earth? If I were not a man here on the earth,
they, my brothers’ purohitas, would not have perished then.
Fie on the kingdom! fie too on my birth in the family of great
kings—I who have become the cause of the destruction of the
brāhmans! They, my brothers’ sacrificing priests, met their
end while working at their masters’ object; tio wicked
men were they; I am wicked in causing their destruction.
What am I to do? Where am I to go? Noone verily is a
sinner on the earth but I who have become the cause of the
brahmans’ destruction.”

Thus grieving in heart, king Khanitra being desirous of
departing to the forest anointed his son to the throne. After
anointing his son who was named Kshupa to the kingdom,
the king departed to the forest, along with his three wives, to
perform austerities. (Going there he, best of kings, being well-
versed in the ordinances concerning vāna-prasthas, performed
austerities three hundred and fifty years. Now, when his
body had become emaciated through austerities, the noble
king, having restrained all the organs of sense, guitted his life
while dwelling in the forest, O chief of brahmans. He went
then to the sacred worlds which yield every desire and are
undecaying, which are to be gained by kings by means of
horse-sacrifices and other sacrifices. And those his three wives
guitted their life at the very same time with him, and gained
the same world* along with him indeed, their. most high-
souled lord.

This is the story of Khanitra’s exploits; when heard, it


destroys stains; and it destroys the stains of those who read it,
illustrious sir. Hear next about Kshupa.


* For vápuh samdlokyam renq avdpuh stļokyum ag in the Poona edition,


KSHUPA WAS A GREAT SACRIFICER, 617


Canto CXIX.*


Vivimsa’s exploits.

Kshupa emulated a more ancient king of the same name and enriched
the brédhmans—He was succeeded by his son Vira; and Vira by
his son Vivirnša whose was a prosperous reign.

Markandeya spoke :
1 Now Khanitra’s son Kshupa on receiving the kingdom pro-
tected his people, while delighting them in righteousness, even


2 as his father had done. That king was by disposition liberal
of gifts, and a sacrificer of sacrifices ; he was just alike both to
foe and friend in the path of the administration of justice and
so forth.

3 One day the king, while at his own residence, O muni, was


addressed by his bards,—“ As was king Kshupa of yore, so art
4 thou,sir.”+ Of yore there was a king Kshupa,t Brahméa’s son ;
as had been the exploits of this king, such that one indeed en-
deavoured to achieve.
The king spoke:
5  Iwish to hear of the exploits of the most high-souled Kshupa.
Tf such can be accomplished by me, I will perform them.


The bards spoke :


6 That king made cattle-keeping brahmans § multitudes of


yore, O king ; and with the tribute of the sixth portion that


high-souled king performed a sacrifice on the earth.


# Canto cxx in the Caloutta edition.

t For tathdbhavat read tathd bhavdn as in the Poona edition.

t It must apparently be this Kshupa to whom reference is made in the
Mah&-Bh. (Sénti-p. clxvi. 6164-65 and 6192-93) where it is said that after the
sword was fashioned Manu gave it to Kshupa for the protection of the people,


and Ikshvāku got it from Kshups.
cura again in verses 10 and 12. It does


§ Go-bréhmanan. The compound oc
“cattle and bréhmans,” for this meaning hardly suits the


curs twice in the singular in verse 12. In that
-brdhmandh, plural, but both editions


not seem to mean
verb used, and the compound oc
verse the Poona edition varies in reading go
agree in reading go-brdhmandya, singular.


78


618


10


11


12


18
14


15
16


17


18


19


CANTO CXIX.


The king spoke :

Who like me will follow those high-souled kings? Never.
theless, may he be strenuous after the exploits of those kings
of exalted exploits! Hear then the promise which I now
make—I will imitate the great king Kshupa’s exploits. I
will perform sacrifices three and three on the present and
future* gathering of the harvests on the earth which has four
streams—this promise I have made. And the tribute which
cattle-keeping brāhmans gave to that king of yore, the very
same I will restore to the brāhmans and the cattle.


Markandeya spoke :


Having thus pledged his word, Kshupa performed it accord-
ingly. He, best of sacrificers, offered three sacrifices on the
appearance of the crops. And the very tribute which a cattle-
keeping brāhman gave to kings before, of that same quantity
gave he other wealth to the cattle-keeping brāhman.

He had a son, Vira,f of his wife Pramaths, a blameless
prince, by whose majesty and valour kings were brought into
subjection. And his dear wife was a Vidarbha princess named
Nandini; he, the lord, begat a son Vivimšaf of her.

While Vivimša was ruling the earth, as a king of great vi-
gour, the earth became densely populated with men. Par-
janya rained in due season, and the earth abounded with
harvests, and the harvests were most fruitful, and the fruits
were full of juice, and the juices gave nourishment, yet the
nourishment caused no outrageous behaviour; nor did the
stores of riches become causes of debauchery among men.
His enemies were cowed by his energy, O greatmuni. The
people, who were all a band of friends, desire good health ; the
citizens desire mirth. After performing very many sacrifices,


* Sasydpdte gatdgate ; = fasya-préptau játáyám ajátáyám vd (comment.)

t This king is called Virhša in the Vishnu Par. (IV. i). Between Kshupa
and Vima a king Ikshvāku is inserted in the genealogy given in Maha-Bh.
ASvam =p. iii. 65-68.

t The Vishnu Par calls him Vivirhša, or VivimSati (IV. i).


KHANINETRA WAS AN EXTRAORDINARY SACRIFICER. 619


after protecting the earth well, he met his death in battle and
departed hence to the world of Indra.*


Canto CXX. +


Khantnetra’s exploits.


Viviméa was. succeeded by his son Khantnetra, who was a great sacri-
ficer—Being son-less'he went hunting to kill a deer for a sacrifice,
and two deer came, one having no offspring and the other many—
Each pressed his claim to be killed, but the king refused to kill
either.

Markandeya spoke :
1 His son was Khaninetra, great in strength and prowess, at
whose sacrifices sang the Gandharvas, filled with astonishment,
2 thus—“ Like unto Khaninetra there will be no other sacrificer
on earth.” After completing ten thousand sacrifices, he gave
the earth with its seas away. And he it was who, after giving
away all the earth to high-souled bréhmans, acquired wealth

through austerities fully performed, and lavished that also ;t

4 and after obtaining unparalleled increase of riches from that

most noble giver, brahmans accepted no donation from any

other king, O brdhman:—he it was who sacrificed sixty-seven
thousand and sixty-seven hundred and sixty-seven sacrifices
with abundance of largesse.

6 That monarch being son-less engaged in a hunt with the

desire of obtaining flesh for a sacrifice to the pitris in order to

7 obtain a son, O great muni. He rode on his horse, away from `

his troops, absolutely alone in a great forest, having his
leathern bow-guard and finger-protector bound on him, and

8 carrying arrows, sword and bow. A deer issuing out of a dense


ow


‘ox


* For éatru-lokam read fakra-lokam, as in the Poona edition.
+ Canto cxxi in the Calcutta edition.

t The Poona edition reads dsddydmoéayat sddhikena for dsddya moéayet
sddhitena, “ acquired wealth through austerities and lavished that together


with more besides » (ko$a-stha-dravyeņa saha),


620


10


11


12


13


14,


15


16


17


18


19


CANTO CXX.


forest from another side said to the horse that carried him—
* Accomplish thy object by killing me.”


The king spoke:


Other deer on seeing me flee in great terror; how is zt that
thou wishest to yield thyself as a gift to death ?


The deer spoke:


I have no son, O great king; vain is the purpose of my
existence; while wandering about I do not perceive the use of
maintaining my life here.


Markandeya spoke:

Now another deer approached the king and said in the
presence of that first deer—“ Enough of this, O king; slay me,
perform thy rite with my flesh. As thou mayest thus
succeed in thy object, so will that also be beneficial to me.
Thou, O great king, desirest to sacrifice to thy pitris in order
to obtain a son; how wilt thon gain thy earnest wish by means
of the flesh of this other son-less deer? As is the rite that is to
be performed, such zs the thing one should offer. Knowledge
of the odours of sweetly-odorous things is not ascertained by
means of ill-odorous things.


The king spoke:
This other deer has declared to me that the reason of his
indifference to worldly desires is his son-lessness : tell thou me


what is the reason of thy indifference to worldly desires in
thy abandonment of life.


The deer spoke:

Many are my sons, O king; many are my daughters also ;
in the miseries of my anxieties for whom I dwell as amid the
flames of a raging conflagration. O king, this most weakly
deer-tribe is to be mastered by every one, and I have excessive
self-interest in those my children—therefore I am distressed.
I am in fear of men, lions, tigers, wolves, and other ravenous
beasts, but not of a feeble animal, nor of all good creatures, nor
even of a dog or jackal, my lord. Being such, I desire most


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


80


* This is the reading of the Bomb
of the Calcutta reading prdpta-samabhyasam,


KHANINETRA’S ENCOUNTER WITH TWO DEER. 621


earnestly for the sake of my kindred, that all this earth may
be free for once from the fear of men, lions, and other beasts.
Some animals, cows, goats, sheep, horses and. such like, feed
on grass; for their thriving I wish those beasts sent to de-
struction. After those beasts then have departed and my off-
spring remain separate, anxious thoughts occur by hundreds
to me whose mind is enveloped by self-interest, such as—‘ Has
a son of mine while browsing in the forest encountered a
crafty trap, or a thunderbolt, or a noose? or'has he fallen
into the power of a man, or lion or other dangerous creature ?
What condition has this one reached? what condition have
those sons of mine reached, who while actually grazing
have now gone to the very great forest?’ On seeing
that those my sons have reached my presence,* O king,
I, panting somewhat, wish for night however as security
At dawn I desire day earnestly as security, and when
the sun has set I desire again the night earnestly : when
will there be safety at every time? This I have declared
to thee, O king, is the cause of my anxiety. Be gracious
to me therefore—let this thy arrow be discharged at me!
That is the cause why pierced by hundreds of sufferings I
thus forsake even my life; hearken thou as I speak, O king!
Named ‘The Sun-less’ are the worlds, to which those who kill
themselves go; but cattle that are suitable for sacrifice attain
thus to exalted stations,t O lord. Agni was a domestic animal}
the lord of the waters was 2 domestic animal ; and
gained exalted stations and reached his
§ Shew me this pity then, and conduct
n; and thou shalt obtain the earnestly


formerly ;
so was the Sun, who
culmination in sacrifice.
me to an exalted positio
desired wish of thy soul by gaining a son.

ay edition praptan mamdbhydéam ; instead
which seems incorrect; samá-


bhyása is not in the dictionary.
t Uttama-lokāu (comment:)


+ Pašu.
§ Or “and the Sun gai


ned exalted stations and reached his culmination


in sacrifice.’


622 CANTO CXXI.


The first deer spoke:


3l O supreme king, this deer must not be killed ; he is happy
as a kind doer, who has many sons; I must be killed who have
Bek ko The second deer spoke :

32 Happy in truth art thou, sir deer, being such a one for whom
suffering exists ina single body! He who has many bodies has

33 manifold sufferings. Butformerly when I was single, the suf-
fering that arises from the body consisted then in my regard
for myself; that become doubled when there was a wife.

34 When children were born, then as many as they were, so many

35 sites in my body did my sufferings find in sooth. Hast not
thou, sir, been successful, for whom existence has not tended
to excessive suffering ? My offspring are for suffering in this

86 world, and will be of opposite qualities in the next world. Since
I do that for the preservation and nourishment of my children,
and am anxious about that,my birth will therefore certainly be
in hell.*

The king spoke:

37 I know not, O deer, whether he who has offspring is happy
in this world, or he who has no son; and this undertaking of

38 mine in order ‘to obtain a son makes my mind vacillate. Of-
spring verily tend then to cause suffering both in this world
and in the other world; nevertheless, debts come upon those

39 who have no son—so have I heard. I being such will strive
to obtain a son, without the slaughter of breathing beings, O
deer, even with very arduous austerities, as did a king of yore.


Canto CXXI.+


Karandhama’s exploits.
Khaninetra propitiated Indra and obtained the gift of a son, Ba-


* The Poona edition reads instead ¢intaydmi éa sambhitim tena me narako


dhruvam, “and am anxious about my offspring (sambhiti = santati, comment.)
therefore hell is certainly destined for me, ”


+ Canto cxxii in the Calcutta edition,


b
KHANINETRA HAD A SON KARANDHAMA. 623


lésva—King Balūšva was besieged by his rebellious vassal kings
and was delivered by an army which issued from his hands that
shook with distress—Hence he was named Karandhama.


Markandeya spoke :


1 Thereupon the king went to the sin-destroying river Go-
mati,* and, practising self-restraint, gratified the god Puran-

2 dara there. And assiduously practising severe austerities,
subduing his voice, body and mind, and controlling himself,

3 the king gratified Indra in order to obtain a son. The ad-
orable Indra, lord of the gods, was gratified with his praise,

4 austerities and faith, and said to him, O great muni,— “ By
reason of these austerities, faith and praise uttered by thee,
I am well satisfied with thee, O king ; choose a boon, sir!”


The king spoke:
5 May I who am son-less obtain a son, who shall be chief among
all who bear arms, and always unrepulsed in his sover-
eignty,t a doer of righteousness, & knower of righteousness,


and skilful.
Markandeya spoke:


6 And when Indra said to him, “Be it so 1” the king gained


his desire. The king returned to his own city to protect his
7 people. As he was performing sacrifice there, as he was duly
protecting his people, a son was born to him then through
8 Indra's favour, O brāhman. The king, bis father, gave him
thename Balžšva,f and caused the son to acquire skill in every
9 kind of weapon. “When his father died, O brāhman, he stood


* See p- 291, note tt.
+ For édbhydhataisvaryo read ēdvyd
+ He was also called Suvaréas ( Muha-Bh., ASvam.-p. 1. 72-79) and


Balakáśva or Subališva; but his most famous name was Karandhama which


d inverse 21, and in the above-mentioned passage of
or Ati-vibhūti is sometimes inserted


hataigvaryo as in the Poona edition.


is fancifully explaine
the Mah4-Bhérata. A king Vibhūti ;
between Khanínetra and this king. This famous Karandhama must be dis-


tinguished from another king of the same name, who was fourth in descent
from Yayati’s son Turvosu (Huri-V., xxxii. 1829-31; and Matsya Pur.


xlviii. 1, 2.)


624 : CANTO CXXI.


as king in the supreme sovereignty.* Balésva brought all
10 kings on the earth into subjection; and the king after first
taking away their choicest property, + made all the kings pay
him tribute ; and he protected his people.
11 Nowall those kingsas claimants werefurious against him ; and
at all times they neither rose up before him nor paid him tribute.
12 They stood up then in their own countries; disregarding con-
tentment asthe chief good, those kings seized that king’s terri-
13 tory. That king held fast his own kingdom by force,$ O muni,
and made his stand in his own city. Many kings besieged him.
14 Kings, very great in valour, possessing military apparatus and
riches, assembled then and besieged that king in that city.
15 Now the king was enraged at that siege of his city, but, having
very little treasure and a small army, fell into the utmost
16 distress. Beholding no succour though possessing an army,
O best of dvijas, he put his hands before his face and sighed
17 in mental suffering. Then compacted together|| by the breath
from his mouth, which issued through the interstice between
his hands, there went forth] in hundreds warriors accom-
18 panied by chariots, elephants and horses. Thereby in a
moment all that city of that king was pervaded by a host of
forces, choice by reason of their extreme strength, O muni.
19 Surrounded then by that exceeding great host of forces, the
king sallied forth from that city and conquered those foes.
20 And after vanquishing them the king, having great good for-
tune, brought them into subjection and made them pay tri-
21 bute again as before, illustrious sir, Because from his agi-
* The Mah4-Bh. says Khaninetra was deposed by his subjects (ASvam.-p.
iii, 70-72.)
+ Sára- -grahana-piirvakam ; sdra = šreshtha-vastu ( comment.)
t Vyulthiték. The root vy-ut-thd is given only in the causl form in the
dictionary.
§ For prithivtse baldn the Poona edition reads vrithivtéo ’baldn; prithivtšo
baldn appears therefore to be the correct reading.
|| Samdhatdļ appears to be the reading, but hardly yields a suitable mean-
ing ; samdhitdh, “ put into order,” “arrayed” would be preferable.
g For hasta-viravdn read hasta-vivardm, and for ni-jagmuh read nir-jagmuķ
ag in the Poona edition.


RALASVA GOT THE NAME KARANDHAMA. 625


tated hands was produced an army which burnt up his
22 foes, Balāšva is thence called Karandhama.* He was right-
eous of soul and great of soul; he was benevolent toall living
creatures. King Karandhama was celebrated in the three
23 worlds. And Power, which is denounced by Righteousness
itself approaching the king, who had undergone intense suffer-
ing, granted him the destruction of his enemies.t


Canto CXXiI.t


Avtkshita’s exploits.

Karandhama had a son Avikshita, who was so called because benign
planets looked upon his birth—Avikshita was a great prince; he
was chosen by many princesses and he also carried off others at their
svayam-varas—He carried off Vaisélint princess of Vidisa, and
other kings arrayed themselves against him.


Markandeya spoke :
1 Virya-éandra’s§ beautiful-browed daughter was named Vira ;
she was noble in her vows. She chose the great king Karan-
2 dhama for her husband at her svayam-vara. That valiant king
of kings begat of her a son named Avikshita,|| who attained
3 fame on the face of the earth. When that son was born,


č The derivation given here is from karayor dhutayor, but this is insuffi-
cient; the root dhmd would support this fanciful explanation better than dhu


or dhū.

+The verse seems involved. The P
reads sampréptam paramdm drtim for sam
fornripah ; and the commentator says bala:
the object.

f Canto cxxiii in the Calcutta edition.


§ I have not found this king elsewhere.
|| He is called Avikshit and Avikshi in various passages in the foilowing


cantos (see canto cxxx, verse 22); see also Mah&-Bh., ASvam,-p. iii, 80-85,
and Vishnu Pur. IV. i. In the former of these passages he is also called
Kérandhama, is highly extolled as 8 great king, and is said to have reigned at
the beginning of the Tret Age with Angiras as his priest.


79


oons edition has been followed. It
prāptasya parám drtim, and nripam
m is the subject and ari-vindfanam


626


10


11


12


CANTO CXXII.


the king asked the astrologers who could read fate—* I trust
my son ts born under an excellent constellation, at an excellent
conjuncture? And I trust that benignant planets have looked
upon my son’s birth; I trust it did not pass into the path of
view of evil planets ?”

When addressed thus by him, the astrologers spake then to
the king—‘“ When the moment, the constellation and the con-
juncture have been excellent, thy son has been born to be great
in valour, great in his parts, great in strength. O great king, thy
son shall be a great king. The planet Jupiter, preceptor of the
gods, has looked on him, and Venus which is the seventh;
and the Moon the fourth planet has looked upon this thy son;
and Soma’s son Mercury also, which is stationed at the edge,
has guarded him. The Sun has not looked on him ; nor has Mars
or Saturn lopked on thy son, O great king. Happy is this thy
son! he will be endowed with all good fortune and prosperity.”


Markandeya spoke :

On hearing this the astrologers’ speech, the king was filled
with gladness in his mind, and going then to his own abode he
said—

“ The preceptor of the gods has looked on him, and so has
Soma’s son Mercury. The Sun has not looked on him, nor
has the Sun's son* nor Mars. Thisword ‘ Has looked upon ’ t


that ye, sirs, have uttered often,—celebrated by reason of it
his name shall be Avikshita.”


Markandeya spoke :
His son Avikshita learnt the whole of the Vedas and Vedšū-


gas. He acquired too from Kaņva's son perfect skill in every
weapon. The prince surpassed both the Physicians of the


gods in figure, Vāčas-pati in intellect, the Moon in loveliness,


the Sun in splendour, the Ocean in steadfastness, and the
Earth in endurance, full of valour as he was.


In heroism no
one was the equal of that high-souled prince,


* Arka-stnu.
+ Avaikshata from the root ava+tksh,


16


17


18


19


20


22


23


24


26


* Or Nibha. a

+ For čaivam ndbhinandunti read čainam nd
edition.

+ The adjective of Vidišd, a town,

§ For lalandm read vaītčandm as in

|| Kshatriyo yah kshata-trdnam karoti.
Raghu-Vatsu ii. 53.

q For du read vah with the


AVEKSHITA CARRIED OFF PRINCESS VAIŠALINI. 627


At her svayam-vara Hema-dharma’s daughterVarš chose him
for her husband ; so also did Šudeva's daughter Gauri, Balin’s
daughter Su-bhadrā, Vira’s daughter Lilavati, Vira-bhadra's
daughter Anibhā,* Bhima’s daughter Mānya-vati, Dambha’s
daughter Kumud-vati. And those maidens who, awaiting the
precise moment at their svayam-varas, did not approve him,t
even them the hero prince took by force. Driving off all the
kings and the fathers and families of those princesses and trust-
ing in his own valour, the mighty prince was indeed proud of
his strength.

Now one day he seized Vaiśáliní of the beautiful teeth,
daughter of the Vaidigat king Visala, as she was waiting for
the proper moment at her svayam-vara; after vanquishing
all the kings he seized her by force, because in her own free
fancy she chose him not, O brihman-rishi, just as, proud of
his strength, he had seized other princesses. Then all those
kings, being repeatedly driven off by that haughty prince
and being sorely dejected, spoke to one another, all throng-

ing together, —

“Fie on the birth of you kings, who being endowed with
strength submit to this defrauding deed § at the hands of
a single man, and who are many, of the same caste + A
kshatriya ds he who delivers from injury|| a man, who is being
killed by ferocious men; that is the name of such a one; for
in vain verily do others bear that name ! Of you, sirs, who,
though born of kshatriya lineage, cannot save even your own
selves from injury at the hands of this scoundrel, what.is


ke? Let the praise, which is poured forth


your resolution li
ralds, be true—let it


to you $ by bards and minstrels and he


bhyanandanta as in the Poona


aap. 343, note t.
the Bombay edition.
This fanciful derivation is also in


For a diffcrent derivatiou, sce ante, canto cxiv, 36.


Bombay edition


628 CANTO CXXIII.


not be in vain—O heroes, by reason of the destruction of your
27 foes! Let not this story vainly spread itself about by messen-
gers belonging to other regions,* O kings! Ye all rely on your
manhood, ye are sprung from exalted families. Who fears
28 not death? Who is immortal without battling? With these
thoughts ye whose profession is arms must not abandon your
manhood.”
29 On hearing this the kings were ūlled with openly displayed
wrath; all spoke at once to one another and rose up with
30 their weapons. Some mounted chariots, some elephants and
others horses; others overpowered with wrath advanced on
foot against him.


Canto CXXIII.+


Avikshita’s exploits.
The kings had u great buttle with Avtkshitu und conquered and


captured him.—The svayam-vara was re-opened, but the princess
would not choose any husband, and the wedding was postponed.
Markandeya spoke :

1 Thus were prepared for battle those kings and princes, who
had been beaten off repeatedly and yet were not destroyed} at
that'time. Then began a terrible battle between him and them,
between the prince single-handed and many kings and noble
3 princes, O muni. In great ferocity they fought, assailing him
with their swords, spears, clubs, arrows, and hands; and he
fought with them all. The prince mighty and skilled in wea-
pons pierced them with hundreds of fierce arrows; and they


bo


nS


* The Calcutta edition reads ¢aratdrm sá vrithaivaisha bhúpaś ēdrair dig-
antaraih ; the Bombay edition ¢aratam sá tathainaishd bhitpd$ čūrair dig-antare ;
and the Poona edition éaratdm md vrithaivaisha bhúpa-śabdo dig-antare. The
first is incorrect; the second is sound whether it reads dig-antare or dig-antar-
aih, and the third is also good. Comparing these, the best reading appears to
be éaratdm md vrithaivaishd búpáś édrair dig-anturaih, aud I have taken this.

+ Canto cxxiv in the Calcutta edition,
t For a-vikshitdh read a-vi-kshitdķ us in the Bombay edition.


’
AVIKSHITA WAS ATTACKED BY MANY KINGS. 629


ð pierced him with sharp arrows. He cut off the arm of one,
and the neck of another; and pierced another in the heart,
6 and smote another in the breast. He cut off the trunk of ah
elephant and the head of a horse, and wounded the horses of
the chariot of these foes,* and the driver of the chariot of
7 another. And he split in two with his own arrows his enemies’
arrows which were falling on him, and in his agility cracked
S the seymitar of another and the bow of another. One prince
perished when his armour was torn away by the prince, and
another who was on foot being wounded by Avikshita quitted

the battle.
9 When that cntire band of kings was thus thrown into con-
fusion, seven hundred warriors stood forth resolute unto death,
10 who were nobly born, in the flower of their age, heroic, valiant,
and modest, after all the army was defeated und was in a panic of
11 flight. Now the king's son coming to close quarters with those
kings fought in righteously-conducted determined combat.t
12 Deeply angered by this and that foe, he, great in his strength,


* For tathdnyeshdm read rathusyaishdm, which the Bombay edition seems to
mean by ruthusyeslīdīīte

+ Dharma-yuddha, “ battle according to the (kshatriyas’) code of Right.”
It appears to mean a battle according to the fair rules of war, fought out to
the end till one or other combatant is completely vanquished or slain. Thus
Bhishme suid to Karna—" If this most terrible enmity cannot be relinquished,
1 give permission, O Karna; fight thou with the desire to gain heaven. With-
out pussion, with impetuosity subdued, do the deed of a king in sooth, to the
utmost of thy power, with thy full effort, conducting thyself according to tho
„Thou shalt gain from Dhanaūjaya the worlds which
are won by the righteousness of kshatriyas (kshutra-dhurma). Fight without
arrogante, relying on thy strength aud valour, for there is nought better for a
kshatriya than righteously conducted battle” (dharmya yuddha: M.-Bh.,
Bhishma-p. oxxiv. 5851-4). Again, Somardatta said to Sétyaki,— How is it
that thon, O Sittvata, hast forsaken the righteousness of kshatviyas, which
was seen of old by the high-souled gods, und delightest in the righteousness of
us? At one who has turned to flee, nt one in distress, ut one who has laid
ut one who begs for quurter—how indced did a Wise man, who
ighteousness of kshatriyus, cver strike at such u one in battle ?”
‘The matter is summed up by Kurņu thus —"* This, we


cunduct of good men .


Dusy
down his arnis,

delights in the r:
(Droņu p. clvi. 678V-1).


630 CANTO CXXIII.


set himself to cleave asunder their harness and armour * also;
13 and enraged thereat, O great muni, those princes forsaking
the code of Rightt all together fought with him, who continued
to fight according to the code of Right, while their faces were
14 wet with drops of perspiration. One pierced him with multi-
tudes of arrows, another split his bow, another splitting his
15 banner with arrows, laid it low on the ground. Moreover,
others smote his horses, and others broke his chariot, and others
besides smotet his back with blows of their clubs and with
16 arrows. When his bow was split, the king’s son enraged then
grasped his sword and shield, but thatalso another struck down.§
17 When his sword and shield were broken, he best of club-wield-
ers grasped his club; and another, like a dexterous man, split
18 it with a sharp curved-headed arrow. The kings, turning
their faces away from righteously conducted combat, surround-
ed him and pierced him, some with a thousand arrows, some
19 with a hundred. He fell exhausted on the earth, one torment-
ed by many ; and those illustrious princes then bound him.
20 Having captured that king's son by unrighteousness they
21 all in company with king Višāla entered the Vaidiša city, glad
and merry, taking the king’s son bound. And the maiden,
who was holding her svayam-vara, was placed by that king in
22 front of them; and was asked by her father again and again,
and likewise by the family priest,—* Take by the hand as thy
23 bridegroom him who among these kings pleases thee.” When
the high-spirited maiden chose not any of themasher bridegroom,
O muni, the king enquired of the astrologer then concerning
24 her marriage,—‘ Tell me the most distinguished day for the


wedding ; such a battle as this which has occurred to-day im-
poses an obstacle.”


have heurd, is a kshatriya’s chiefest righteousness (dharma), that he lie, slain
in battle, highly honoured by the good.” (Karņa-p. xl. 1858-9).
© Viééhinna-yantra-kavagan in the Calcutta and Bombay editions; but
the Poona edition reads viééhinna-patra-kavaédn * their vehicles and armour.”
+ Dharmam utsrijya.
t For alddayat read uldduyan with the Bombay cdition.
§ For anyena palayal read «nyo nv apátayal as in the Bombuy edition.


26


27


VAIŠĀLINI REFUSED TO MARRY ANY PRINCE, 631


Markandeya spoke :

When asked thus by the king, the astrologer reflected there-
on and perceiving the real truth spoke with troubled mind*
to the king,—“ There will be, O king, other days here, charac-
terized by excellent conjunctures, auspicious, and after no long
delay. Thou shalt perform the weddingt when they have
arrived, O bestower of honour. Enough of this day, wherein a
great obstacle has presented itself, O noble Sir!”


Canto CXXIV.{


——


Avikshīta's exploits.


Avtkshita’s mother Virá roused up his father and allied kings to rescue


3


4


Avikshita, and they defeated Višila and his confederates—
Avikshita was set free, but refused to marry the princess as she
had seen him overpowered, although she praised him and his
father entreated him—She vowed to marry no one else, and
departed to the forest and wore herself away with austerities—
The gods in compassion sent a messenger to her and promised that
she should have a son who should be a universal monarch—She
then regained her health.
Markandeya spoke:

Karandhama heard then that his son had been captured ; and
his wife Viré and other kings also heard it. On hearing that
his son had been: captured unrighteously, the king pondered
a long time in company with the neighbouring§ kings, O
great muni. Some of the kings said, — “ All those kings should
be slain, who- banding themselves all together captured him
single-handed unrighteously in fight.” “Let the army be
made ready ; why sit the others still? Let wicked Vis&la be


* For dur-mand read dur-mandh.
+ The Caloutta text is karishyati vivdhdrtham, and the Bombay text karish-


yasi vivāha tvam ;


the proper reading should then be karishyasi vivdham


tvam. i
+ Canto cxxv in the Calcutta edition.
§ For samastaih read samantaih with the Bombay edition.


632


5


11


12


14


15


16


# For mahikshitath the Bombay edition reads ahav


CANTO CXXIV.


slain!” said others who were assembled there. And others
said, —“ Righteousness was first discarded in this affair by
Avikshit,* who acting unjustly forcibly seized the princess who
did not desire him. In all svayam-varas then he has reduced
all the princes to ruin at once; when they combined, he was
subdued.”

On hearing this their speech Vira, mother of a hero, daugh-
ter of a race of heroes, and wife of a hero, rejoiced and spoke
in view of her husband and of the other kings,— “ A noble
deed, O kings, has my son who feasts on noble deeds done, in
that vanquishing all the kings he seized the maiden by force.
While fighting for that object single-handed he was capturedt+
unrighteously. Even that I reckon entails no deteridration
on my son in battle. For this in truth is manliness, that a
man under the influence of passion{ recks not so of good poli-
cy, just as a lion when attacking vecks not. Many maidens$
presented for their svayam-vara have been seized by my son
in full sight of exceedingly proud kings. What comparison
is there between birth in a kshatriya family and entreaty
which is used by the feeble ? By force verily a kshatriya takes
things to himself in the presence’of the mighty. On the other
hand do not weaklings, being bound with iron chains, pass
into subjection? Do kings imbued with righteousness, who do
daring deeds, pass thereinto? Away then with weak-minded-
ness! Praiseworthy in sooth is his captivity! Let there be
the down-rush of your weapons among bodies and heads!
After ye have actually taken from the kings their territory,
sons and other wealth, then the objects aimed at by your
valour, even their wives,|| have become matters of import-


ikshita ; the correct read-


ing seems to be avtkshitd and this I have adopted,
t For yuddha read baddha with the Bombay edition.
t Amarsha-vatūm in the Bombny edition is better than adharma-vaéan.


§ Both editions read kanyakd ; but the plural kanyakāļ is required by the
adject. bahvyo.


|| For bharydédrya-nimitténi read bháryá virya


-nimittdni as in the Bombay


edition.


KARANDHAMA RESCUED AVIKSHITA. 633


ance.* Hasten then quickly to battle; mount ye the chariots ;
17 make ready the elephants and horses without delay, and also
the charioteers.* What think ye of battling with many kings ?
18 Deeds have occurred, indeed, enough to satisfy a warrior ina
small battle. Who finds not strength when amongst petty
19 kings and other petty men that inspire no fear? For in sooth,
O muni, the man who, after prevailing so as to slay my son’s
foest which have all pervaded the world, is self-controlled,
he shines forth§ a hero, just as the sun after prevailing over
the darknesses.”
Markandeya spoke:
20 Thus was king Karandhama aroused to boldness by this his
wife. He set his army in array to slay his son’s foes, O muni.
9] Then occurred a conflict between him whose son had been cap-
22 tured and all those kings and Viséla, O great muni. Three
days lasted the battle then between king Karandhama and
93 the kings who followed Vigéla’s lead. When all that confederacy
of kings was almost defeated,|| Viséla with arghya offering in
24 hand approached Karandhama then. And that king highly
honoured Karandhama with kindly feeling. On his son being
25 set free, Tf he abode there that night in happiness. And when


* Or, “the objects of your wives and spiritual guides then attained to im-
portance,” The Bombay edition reads differently in verse 15 and the first
half of verse 16;—'' For you also, who, by accomplishing the slaughter of
your foes and by taking away in sooth the territory, sons and other wealth
of the kings, stood foremost, a wife became then of exceeding importance
as being the sum of the objects of your valour.” But neither text seems
satisfactory, and the future appears to be intended rather than the past.

+ For sa-sdrathim read sa-sdrathi as in the Poona edition (corrigenda .

+ The Bombny edition reads differently, thus,—“ Who finds not strongth
auhen amongst petty kings and other petty men, that inspire no fear in one who
has renlly displayed his prowess against foes? For in sooth the man who,
after prevailing over all those men which have pervaded the world, was
gelf-controlled, shone forth, &c.”

§ Vyaroéata + iti. The past tense does not seem happy, and the iti ig wrong.
Viroéate ča is the reading of the Poona edition (corrigenda), and is preferable.


|| For pardjaya-prayam read pardjita-prdyam as in the Poona edition (cor-


rigenda.
q For viyukte read vimukt


80


e as in the Poona edition (corrigenda)


634 ÇANTO CXXIV.


Viéála taking the maiden came near, Avikshit spoke before
his father touching the marriage, O brihman rishi :—
26 “O king, I will not take this maiden, nor any other woman,
in whose very sight I have been vanquished by adversaries in
27 fight. Bestow her on some one else, and let her choose some one
else, who is unscathed in fame and valour and has not been
28 subjected to indignity by adversaries. Since I have been van-
quished by adversaries just as this weak girl might be, what
manhood have I here ? there is no difference between her and
29 me. Self-reliance is the quality of men; a girl is always
dependant on others. Of what kind is the manhood of that
30 man who is even dependant on others? How shall I, who am
such, show her again the face which she has often seen, I who
have been worsted to the ground in her presence by adverse
kings?”
31 When hehad thus spoken, the king spoke to the maiden,—
“Thou hast heard, dear child, the speech of this high-souled
32 prince as he has been speaking. Choose another as thy hus-
band in whom thy mind delights, O beauteous one. We bestow
perfume * ca whomsoever thou dost honour.f Adopt one of
these two very courses, O sweet-faced one!”


The maiden spoke :


88 Vanquished he has been by many together, yet they dealt not
absolutely honourably in the fight which brought loss to his
34 fame and valour, O king. Since he set himself single-handed
to battle with many, like a lion with elephants, he has mani-
35 fested thereby the highest heroism. It zs not only that he
stood fast in the battle, but also that they were all defeated.
36 He displayed prowess also abundantly by his efforts. All the
kings have by unrighteousness conguered him, who is endued
with heroism and Prowess and who observed righteous combat ;

S Várm; or g, dwelling,” or « clothing.”
f For ddritah rond ddritiļ with the B


same sense.
For yat teng read yatnena, as in the Bombay edition.


38


41


42


44:


45


46


47


LA
AVIKSHITA REFUSED TO MARRY VAIŚÁLINÍ. 685


what fame ts there herein? And itis certainly not for mere
beauty that I have become desirous of him, O father! His
heroism, prowess and fortitude captivate my mind. What
need then of much speaking? Do thou make entreaty to this
most excellent king on my behalf; no other shall be my hus-
band.

Viśála spoke :

O prince! my daughter has pronounced this splendid declara-
tion, and there lives not on the earth a royal youth, who is thus
indeed thy peer. Thy heroism cannot be gainsaid, and thy
prowess is surpassing ; purify my family, O warrior, by marry-
ing my daughter !

The prince spoke:

I will not take her nor any other woman, O king, for in my

inmost self my intellect is womanish, O lord of men.


Markandeya spoke :
Then spoke Karandhama,—‘ O son, take thou this beauteous-
browed daughter of Visala ; she is deeply enamoured of thee.”


The prince spoke :
No infringement of thy command have I ever committed
before, O lord ; command mein such wise, dear father, a8 I may


obey thy command.
Markandeya spoke :
g so exceedingly determined in his sen


Since the prince wa
timents, Viśála also troubled in mind spoke to his daughter.*
even from this object :


_« Turn back thy mind, my daugbter,
choose some other as thy husband; there are many princes here.”


The maiden spoke :
A boon I choose, dear father! If this prince wants me not, 110
other than a course of religious austerities shall be my husband
in this life!
Markandeya spoke :


Then king Karandhama stayed there three days joyously


e For satdm rend sutám.


636
48


49


50


50


56


Or
~T


58


59


60


CANTO CXXIV.


with Viśála and returned to his own city. Avikshita also, after
being soothed by his own father and the other kings and by
precepts of ancient times, returned to his city.

That maiden also went to the forest, being set free by her
relatives, and practised austerities, abstaining from food and
adhering to utter passionlessness. Now when abstaining from
food she had dwelt there three months, she reached the deepest
distress, being emacıated, in the lowest condition and prostrat-
ed.* The maiden was weakened in energy, extremely thin in
body, even ready to die. The princess then made up her mind
to quit the body. Thereupon the gods, perceiving that she
had made up her mind to abandon herself, assembled and des»
patched the gods’ messenger to her. Approaching the maiden
he said :—

“I am a messenger, O princess, sent to thee by the thirty
gods; hearken to what must be done! Thou, O lady, must not
forsake thy body which is exceedingly difficult to be obtained.
Thou, O fortunate one, shalt become the mother of a universal
monarch; and along with thy son, who shall have slain his
foes and whose command shall be unresisted, thou, O illustrious
lady, shalt long tnjoy the earth and its seven continents. He
must kill the enemy Taru-jit in the presence of the gods, and
Aya and cruel Sanku, and then establish the people in right-
eousness. All the four castes must be fully safeguarded accord-
ing to their respective rules of righteousness; he must slay
the robbers, the mleččhas and others who work wickedness.
He must sacrifice with manifold sacrifices replete with gifts


and largesse, and with horse-sacrifices and other sacrifices 81x
thousand in number, O noble lady.”


Markandeya spoke:


Seeing that messenger of the gods, stationed in the air, ad-
orned with heavenly gariands and unguents, the weakened
princess then said this,—“ Truly thou hast come from Svarga,
a messenger of the gods without doubt; nevertheless how


* Kyiéddhuma-nisantaté ; ni-ean-tata om ni-san-tan, not in the dictionary.


THE PRINCESS TURNED TO AN ASCETIC LIFE. 637


61 shall I have euch a son without a husband? ‘No one but
Avikshita shall be my husband in this life,—this I vowed

62 in my father’s presence. And me he wants not, though he
was admonished by my father and his sire Karandhama, and
though he was entreated by me also in seemly wise.”


The gods’ messenger spoke :
63 What need of this further speaking, O illustrious lady! A
son shall be born to thee. Abandon not thyself unright-
64 eously! Remain in this very forest and nourish up thy emaci-
ated body. Through the power of austerities all this shall be
well for thee.
Markandeya spoke :
65 After speaking thus, the messenger of the gods went away
as he had come. And the beautiful-browed lady nourished
up her body day by day.


Canto CXXV.*


Avtkshita’s exploits.

Avtkshita’s mother induced him to engage in the ‘ What-want-ye ? °
penance, in which he declared he would bestow on any one who
asked whatever he wanted—His father Karandhama, being en-
treated by his ministers, pressed Avikshita to forgo his religious


continence and beget a son—Avtkshita though very loth was


obliged to promise compliance.


Markandeya spoke :
l Now Avikshita’s mother Vira, mother of 2 hero, called her
son Avikshita on a sacred day and said :—
“ My son, permitted by thy high-souled father, I will engage


in a fast; tt ts this difficult penance, the ‘ What-want-ye ? °t


2


# Canto oxxvi, in the Calcutta edition.
t Kim-iééhakah, «Whatever one wants Iwill give.”
one binds one’s self to satisfy the wish of any applicant (commente)


A penance in which


638


10


11


12


CANTO CXXV.


And it depends* on thy father, and must be achieved by
thee and by me also. When thou hast consented, my son,
I will then give my endeavours thereto. I will give thee
half the riches from thy father’s great treasury ; thy riches
depend on thy father, and I have his permission. To be
achieved through affliction is the part of the penance that


depends upon me ; it will indeed be a noble thing. If, on


the other hand, any part of it may be achievable by thee
through strength and prowess, that will indeed be unachievable
by thee otherwise, or will be achievable with difficulty.
Tf then thou givest me a promise, my son, I also will pledge
thee here the very same thing. Tell me what thou thinkest.”


Avikshita spoke :

Riches depend on my father ; I indeed have no ownership
therein.t I will perform what can be accomplished by my
body, as thou hast said, even the ‘ What-want-ye? * penance,
O mother—cease then from anxiety and distresst—if it
has been approved for me by the king, my father, the master
of the riches.

Markandeya spoke :

Then the queen applied herself wholly to that penance. She
performed the worship of the king of kings§ as directed,
with self subdued, and the worship of all the Nidhis|l and of
the band of Nidhi-guardians and of Lakshmi, with profound
faith, with voice, body and mind restrained.

Now this king Karandhama dwelt in his house jn a 8e-
questered part. As he sat there, his ministers, learned in
the books of Good Policy, addressed him.


The ministers spoke :


O king, this thy time of life has reached its decline, while


* Ayattas.

+ For mam asi tvam read mat-sudmitvart as in the Bombay editiou.

+ Or “cease then, mother, from anxiety and distress with regard to the
t What-want-ye’ penance.” (comment.)

§ Kuvers (comment.)

|| See canto Ixviii.


AVIKSHITA PERFORMED THE ~ WHAT-WANT-YE’ PENANCE, 639


thou art ruling the earth. Thy only son Avikshit has for-

13 sworn possession of his wives; and he has no son. When
he shall reach thy condition,* O king, thy territory will

14 assuredly pass to thy enemies then. There will be ruin to
thy family, and ruin to the cakes and water offered to the
pitris ; thou wilt have this great dread of enemiest with

15 loss of sacrifices. Contrive therefore, O king, so that thy
son shall again steadfastly apply his mind so as to benefit
the pitris ! ;

Markandeya spoke :

16 At this moment the king heard the sound of Vird’s family
priest speaking to some petitioner ;—

17 «Who wishes for what, that is hard to be achieved ?
Who must achieve what ?’—this ‘ What-want-ye P?’ penance
Karandhama’s queen is intent upon !”

18 Now prince Avikshit also heard the priest’s speech and
replied to all the petitioners who were assembled at the

19 king's gate ;—'Let him speak out, for whom I must ac-
complish anything with my body ; my illustrious mother

90 is intent upon the * What-want-ye ?* penance. Let all peti-
tioners hear me. I have promised then ; what want ye?
here I give it, while the ‘ What-want-ye ?’ penance is being
performed !”

Markandeya spoke :

21 Thereupon the king, on hearing this speech that fell from
his son’s mouth, springing up said to his son,—I have a
petition ; grant it me ye

Avikshit spoke :

22 Tell me, dear father, what I must give to your highness ;
I must do it for thee, whether it be difficult, or readily accom-
plishable, or truly hard to be accomplished !


i ife ; nīshthdm = antam (comment.)
* [.e., the decline of life ; nishtham=an kr
+ a "7i.bhayatīt ; this is the Bombay reading. The Calcuttn edition reads
whioh is incorrect ; virava is masc., and a Vedic word. The


S ili “thon wilt have this great breach with loss


Poon: edition reads te vivarom,


of sacrifices.”


640


23


24


25


26


27


29
30


31


32


a 1
"te


Eee Gimo cxxv.
Kira nhefkirg spake -

If thou salā ito thy word, and thou grantest the ‘ What-
want-ye ?’ bpon, show me then the face of a grandson lying
upon my lap‘

4 <  Avikshit spoke:

I am thy only son, and religious continence is my lot, O

king ; no son have J, how can I show thee a grandson’s face ?


The king spoke :

Thy religious continence tends to sin, if thou holdest to this.
Therefore deliver thou thy own self and show me a
grandson !

Avikshit spoke :


Any other thing that may be arduous,* O great king, com-
mand me that. Intercourse with women has been eschewed
by me, with passionlessness—let it be so still !


; The king spoke:

Thow in sooth hast seen victory over enemies who were
fighting against thee with numbers ; yet, there if thou. hast
recourse to passionlessness, then thou art unwise. Yet what
need have we of more talking ? Abandon thy religious con-
tinence. At thy mother’s desire show thou me a grandson's
face !

Mārkaņdeyu spoke :

When the king, though accosted by the son in many words,
makes no other request, the son then spoke again;—* By
granting thee the ‘ What-want-ye ?’ boon, I am in a strait,
dear father. I will therefore without shame wed a wife
again. He, who in a woman’s sight has heen vanquished
and has fallen to the face of the earth, shall further be that
woman’s husband—this is exceedingly hard, dear ‘father.
Nevertheless what am I to do here, who have passed under
the power of Truth’s fetters ? I will do as thou hast said ;
do thou enjoy thy prevailing in this matter ! ”


For visham asmdn read vishamam syán ag in the Bombay edition,


"at «a SCRE
4 4

b
»


AVĪKSHIT RESCUED THE PRINCESS FROM A DEMON. 641


~


Canto CXXVI.*


ZR


Artkshita’s exploits, s
Avikshit while hunting found a Daitya had seized a maiden who called
herself his (Avikshit's) wife—He killed the Daitya—ghe gods
appeared and offered him a boon—He asked for a son, and they
said he should have a son, who would be a universal monarch, by
her —She then explained to him she was king Viséla’s daughter,
and told him her history. i


Márkaņdeya spoke :
1 The prince went hunting in the forest one day, piercing deer
and wild boars and tigers and other beasts and elephants.
2 Suddenly he heard the cry,- “Save me! Save me!” from a
woman who was screaming aloud very often ina voice in-
3 articulate through terror. The prince exclaiming, “ Fear not !
fear not!” urged his horse in haste thither whence the sound
4 proceeded. And the maiden then cried out, for seized by
Danu's son Dridha-keša in the lonely forest was she, a high-
spirited lady :—
5 “I belong to Karandhama’s son and I am Avikshit's wife ;
a villain is carrying off into a thicket me, the wife of the
6 wise king. I, wife of him, before whom all the kings with
the Gandharvas and Guhyakas could not stand, am carried
7 off! I here, wife of him, Karandhama’s son, whose wrath
is like that of Death, whose prowess is like Indra’s, am carried


ff ! 1
5 Markandeya spoke :


8 On hearing this, the king’s son, bearer of the bow, re-


flected,—
9 “ What is this ? Have I a wife here in the forest ? She is
surely an illusion produced by the wicked Rakshasas who
inhabit the forest. Howevert I have certainly come ; I will


1,
ascertain the whole cause.”


* Canto oxxvii in the Calcuttn edition.
+ Atha-vd,
81


642


10


11


12


13


14


15


CANTO CXXVI.


Markandeya spoke :

Hastening on then he beheld a surpassingly fascinating
maiden alone in the forest, adorned with every kind of orna-
ment, seized by Danu’s son Dridha-keša who bore a staff, and
screaming out pitifully “Save me ! save me!” again and
again. “Fear not!” said he to her, and exclaiming “ Thou
art slain! ” to him, he satd—

“ What wicked man exercises rule over this earth while
Karandhama is king here,* before whose majesty all kings
bow down to the earth ?”

Seeing him at hand then, grasping his choice bow, the
slender-limbed maiden exclaimed more than once—‘ Save
me!” and—

* Here I am carried off! Iam king Karandhama’s daughter-
in-law and Avikshit’s wife. I am carried off by this wicked
demon in the forest,—I who belong to a master—as if I belong
to no master.”

Markandeya spoke :

Thereupon Avikshit considered the speech so uttered,—

“How in truth is she my wife? or how zs she my dear father’s


16} danghter-in-law ? However I will set her free, the slender


17


18


19


20


maiden; I will find that out afterwards. Kshatriyas bear
arms for the sake of delivering the afflicted.”

Then the angry hero addressed that most evil-minded
Danava,—" Release her and depart while alive; otherwise
thou shalt not live!” Quitting her then the Džnava raised
his staff aloft and rushed at him; and he also, the prince,
poured a shower of arrows on him. The Džnava, filled
with exceeding frenzy, warded them off with a multitude
of arrows, and hurled his staff that was studded with a
hundred spikes at the prince. The prince split it then, as it
was rushing onwards, with arrows. And he, the Dénava, grasp-
ing aloft a tree that was near, stood firmly in the battle and


* Or, “ Who is this wicked mon, while Karandhama rules this earth as
king here, &c.”


+ The Calcutta edition numbers this verse 15 also, and numbers all the
following verses incorrectly.


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


® For kdrmukam ujjhitaiļ res
+ For uñgitá read ujjhitá with
t Vetasa-patra,
but appenrs to denote 8 weap
and would seem to mean som
§ For yāvatt read yáćatí as
| For nrisumsánár read ny


THE GODS PROMISED AVÍKSHIT A SON. 643


then hurled that tree at the prince who was discharging clouds
of arrows. And he shattered it into small fragments with
crescent-headed arrows shot from his bow.* And the
Dānava next flung a piece of rock at the prince, and it fell
vainly on the ground, for he avoidedt it by agility.
Whatever the enraged Dānava flung at the prince, each
thing the king’s son playfully split with multitudes of arrows.
Then, his staff being shattered and all his weapons shattered,
he raised his fist in anger and rushed upon the prince.
Karandhama’s son struck off his head with a two-edged sword,f
as he was in the act of falling upon him, and felled him to the
very ground.

When that Džnava, the evil doer, was slain, all the gods
exclaimed to Karandhama’s son, “ Well done, well done!”
The gods said to the prince then, “ Choose thee a boon!”
and he replied by reason of his desire to benefit his father,
“ I choose a son, great in valour.”


The gods spoke :
Verily thou shalt have a son, who shall be a universal monarch


great in valour, by this very maiden in sooth whom thou,


O sinless one, hast delivered !


The prince spoke :
Being bound to my father by a bond of truthfulness 1 wish
but having been vanquished by the kings in fight
I have discarded wedlock. And I have abandoned king
Višāla's daughter, who wanted§ me, and she has for my
sake abandoned union with any man but me. How then
after discarding her, Viśála’s daughter, shall I with cruel
soul|] marry another woman now P
d kdrmuka-močitaih as in the Bombay edition,
the Bombay edition.
a “reed-lenf ” on ( gane-leaf.” It is not in the dictionary,
on shaped like the leaf of a reed or of a cane,
ething like a narrow double-edged sword.
in the Poona edition.
ifasnsdtmd as in the Poona edition.


for a son,


644


32


33


34


35


36


41


42


43


CANTO CXXVI.


The gods spoke :


This very maiden is indeed thy wife, whom thou dost always
extol, even Viśála’s beautiful-browed daughter, who has
devoted herself to austerities for thy sake. Of her shall
be born to thee a son who shall be a hero, an embellisher of
the seven continents,* a sacrificer of a thousand sacrifices,
a universal monarch.


Markandeya spoke :

After announcing this to Karandhama’s son the gods
departed, O brihman ; and he then addressed her who was
his wife—‘ Say, timid one, what now is this ?” And she
told him this story :—

* When thou, sir, didst forsake me, I forsook my kins-
folk and came away to the forest in despair. There I wished
to quit this body which became almost wasted away with
austerities, O hero, but a messenger of the gods came to me
and prevented me, saying— Thou shalt also have a son,
8. universal monarch great in valour, who shall please the
gods and slay the demons.’ By this command from the gods
that messenger of the gods prevented me. I did not abandon
my body, having my thoughts fixed on union with thee. And
the day before yesterday, O illustrious one, I went to Ganga-
hradat to bathe, and as I went down into the water, I was drag-
ged away by a certain old Naga. He took me then to Rasiatala,
and there in frontļ of me stood Nagas and Naga wives
and youths in thousands ; they approached and offered me
praise, and some others paid me worship; and the Naga
women besought me respectfully,—' Do thou shew favour
to us all; thou must turn aside thy son,§ who will seek to
slay us who shall have incurred offence. The Nagas will


# Or “islands” or “ do-abs,” dvfpa.


+ This is also mentioned as a sacred place of pilgrimage in the Mnhf-Bh.,
Vana-p. Ixxxiii, 7046-49, and AnuSés.-p. xxv. 1720-21.

+ For puram read purak, as in the Poona edition.

§ The son which should be born to her in the future, named Marutta. See
canto cxxx, verses 11-14, .


44


45
46


47


AVIKSIIT MARRIED THE PRINCESS, 645


commit offence against thy son ; for that reason thou must
turn him aside; let this favour be done!’ And when I
said, * Be it so,’ they decorated me with divine ornaments
from Pātāla and with choicest flowers odorous and fragrant.
And that Naga brought me back to this world, as lovely
as I was before, as beautiful in form as before. Seeing me
so beautiful and adorned with every kind of ornament, this
most evil-minded Dridha-keša ' seized me in the desire to
carry me off. By the strength of thy arm, O prince, I
have been rescued ; therefore be gracious, O mighty-armed
one; receive me! Equal to thee lives no other prince in
the world ; I speak the truth.”


Canto CXXVII.*


Avikshita’s exploits.


Avtkshit agreed to marry the rescued maiden—The Gandharvas


appeared then, and one of them expluined she was his daughter
and had been born as king Visdla’s daughter Bhdvint because
of Agastya’s curse—They were married and lived in the Gan-
dharvas' world—She gave birth to a son there—All the celestial
beings came to the boy's birth-ceremony, and because of the
blessings invoked for him from the Maruts he was called Marutta.


Markandeya spoke :

On hearing this her speech, he remembered his father’s
fine speech which the king had uttered upon the apis re-
garding the “ What-want-ye ” penance, and prince Avikshit re-
plied to the maiden, he with mind full of love to the maiden
who had also abandoned all enjoyments for his sake,—
* When I forsook thee, O slender one, I was vanquished


by my enemies. I have now mett thee here after conquering


the foes ; what shall I do ?”


© Canto oxxviii in the Oalontta edition.


+ For samprdpto res


d samprdptd ns in the Poona edition.


646


4


10


11


12


13


CANTO CXXVII.


The maiden spoke :


Take thou my hand in wedlock in this charming forest.
May the union of a loving maiden and a lover be fraught
with merit !

The prince spoke :

Be it so; may welfare be thine! Destiny itself is the
cause here. Otherwise how have thou and I met together
here ?*

Markandeya spoke :

At this moment, O muni, the Gandharva Tunaya arrived,
accompanied by the fairest Apsarases and surrounded by
other Gandharvas.

The Gandharva spoke :

O prince, this high-spirited maiden is my daughter, by
name Bhamini. By reason of Agastya’s curse she became
Vistla's daughter. It was Agastya who was angered with
her as she was playing in a child’s manner, so he cursed
her then, saying, “Thou shalt become a woman!”+ And we
appeased him by saying, “She is a child and cannot
reflect ; do thou show favour for the offence against thee,
O brāhman rishi.” Being appeased by us the great muni
said this—“I passed a lenient curse on her, because I
considered she is buta child ; it cannot indeed be altered.”
By reason of that curse by Agastya my daughter was born
in Visala’s house as this beautiful fine-browed maiden, called
by the name Bhāvini. Therefore I have come on this
account ; take this princess who is my daughter in marriage ;
of her thou shalt have a son, a universal monarch.


Markandeya spoke :
Uttering the words “ Be it so!” the prince then took herf


* Anyatra tram aham ča samdgatah ; the Poona edition reads atra tvam
aham Gaiva samdgatak, These can hardly be correct; read atra tvam aham
čaiva samdgatau ?

+ That is, of human race, The Gandharvas were semi-celestial.

f For tathety uktveti tasydtha rend tathety uktvd tatas tasydh as in the
Poona edition.


BIRTH OF MARUTTA 647


hand according to the ordinance, and Tumburn* offered
14 up the sacrifice there. The gods and Gandharvas sang forth,
and bevies of Apsarases danced, the clouds dropped down
15 flowers, and the heavenly instruments sounded forth,t as
the prince united in marriage with her, who became the
instrument for the agent of the deliverance of the whole
world.
16 Then they went everyone with that high-souled muni to the
Gandharvas’ world, and she and the prince went also, O muni.
17 Prince Avikshit took his joy in company with Bhāvini, and she
obtained the riches of enjoyment together with him there.
18 Sometimes he sports with that slender one in a charming grove
19 near the city; sometimes on a low hill;f sometimes on a sand-
bank brightened by geese and sārasa cranes in a river ; some-
times near the mansion and in the very resplendent palace.
20 In other charming pleasure-grounds he sported in company
with the slender bride, and she with that high-souled prince.
21 Munis, Gandharvas and Kinnaras offered them both food and
unguents, clothing, and the choicest garlands, beverages and
other gifts there.
92 And when the hero sported with Bhavini in the hardly
accessible world of the Gandharvas, the bright bride gave
93 birth to a son. When he was born, who would be great in
valour, a tiger among men, the Gandharvas perceiving what
24 he would accomplish held a great festival ; and some of them
sang, and others beat drums and kettle-drums and double
drums, and others played on flutes, Intes and other musical
95 instruments; and many bevies of Apsarases also danced
there ; the clouds showered down flowers while they rumbled
26 with gentle sound. Now while that medley of sounds so con-


e A muni, see verse 26. He may be the person mentioned in ae a
Bh., whose happy conjugal life with his wife Rambhé was famous (U a

on 8975). There was & Gandhorva of this name (Sabhé-p. Ji. 1831),
K tt: Vishnu Pur. a5 4 friend of Nala Gandanodaka-dundubhi,
ae K AEK ; this root asa verb ıs not in the dictionary.

ii ; not in the dictionary. The Poona edition reads vara-


parvate, “ on & choice hill.”


648 CANTO CXXVII.


tinued, the muni Tumburu, who was remembered by Tunaya,*
27 approachedt and performed the birth-ceremonies. All the
gods assembled, and the pure divine rishis ; and from Pitila
28 came the Naga lords, Sesha, Vūsuki, and Takshaka ; and
there came also the chiefs of the gods and Asuras, of the
Yakshas and Guhyakas, O brihman, and all the Windst
29 also. Then the Gandharvas’ great city was thronged with
those who had come, all the rishis, gods, Dānavas and Nagas
30 and the munis. Tumburu then performed the birth-cere-
mony and other rites, and performed the rite, which is pre-
ceded by praises, to secure good fortune on behalf of that boy,
saying—
31 “As a universal monarch, great in valour, mighty of arm,
great in strength, exercise thou sovereignty over the entire
32 earth a long time. May Indra and all these other world-
guardians and the rishis bestow bliss and foe-destroying
33 valour on thee, O hero! May the wind§ tend to what is
auspicious for thee, even the east wind that blows no dust!
May the south wind which is clean and unflagging tend to
34 gentleness for thee ! May the west wind bestow heroism
on thee, the noblest heraism on thee! And may the north
wind likewise confer on thee excellent strength also!”
35 At the end of this rite to secure good fortune a voice
spake, issuing from no earthly body,—
“ Because the preceptor uttered this phrase * Marut-tava’ ||
36 repeatedly, hence this boy shall be famed on earth as
* Marutta ;” and because kings shall pass into subjection to
37 his commands on the earth, this boy as a hero shall stand on


* Tumburu had solemnized the parents’ wedding, see verse 13, Tunaya
is the Gandharva of verse 6. The Poona edition read
smrito, “who was remembered with affection,”

t For játa-játa-karmákaron read "bhetya játa-karmákaron as in the Poona
edition.


8 instead pranayena


1 Váyu in the plural ; they are mentioned here because of the invocation
which comes afterwards, in which they are called Marut.

§ Marut, with tava or te added here and in the following sentences.

|| “ May the wind for thee ;” tho words used in the preceding invocations.


39


AVIKSHIT PRESENTED HIS SON TO HIS FATHER. 649


the head* of all kings. Asa universal monarch, great in valour,
he shall assail kings and shall unobstructed enjoy the earth
which contains seven continents. He shall be chief among
kings who offer sacrifices. His shall be the supremacy among
kings by reason of valour and heroism.”


Markandeya spoke :
On hearing this speech uttered by some one from among


the dwellers in heaven, all were gratified, the brāhmans and
Gandharvas also and his mother and father,


Canto CXXVIII.+


—


Marutta’s exploits.


Avikshit returned and presented his son to his father Karandhama,


and there was great rejoicing—The boy grew up, learned in sacred
lore and skilful with all weapons—Karandhama resigned the
kingdom, but Avikshit refused tt because of the shame of his
former captivity—Marutta was made king, and Karandhamu


retired to the forest.


Markandeya spoke :

Then the prince, taking that beloved son and followed by
his wifef and the brūhmans and Gandharvas, went to his
city. Reaching his father’s palace he extolled his father’s feet
with respect ; and so did his slender-limbed wife, the bashful
princess. And the prince holding his infant son addressed
king Karandhama, who was seated on the throne of justice in
the midst of kings,— Behold this face of thy grandson who
rests in my lap, as I promised formerly to thee for my mother’s
sake at the ‘ What-want-ye ?' vow.” So saying he laid that
son then on his father's lap, and related to him everything as


* Or “at the head.”
+ Canto cxxix in the Calcutta edition.


+ For padi
8


bhydm read patnyd, as in the Poona edition.


650


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


* For 'rdhyddind read 'rghyddind,


CANTO CXXVIII,


it had occurred. The king embracing his grandson, while his
eyes were beclouded with tears of joy, felicitated himself again
and again in saying “ Fortunate am I!” Then he duly paid
honour to the assembled Gandharvas with the arghya offering
and other presents,* forgetting other needs by reason of his
joy.t

In the city then there was great rejoicing in the houses of the
citizens, who exclaimed—* A son has been born to our master!”
O great muni. In that glad and opulent city sportive cour-
tesans of the prettiest forms danced an exquisite dance to the
accompaniment of songs and musical instruments. And the
king with glad mind bestowed on the chief bráhmans both
gems and riches, catile, clothing und ornaments.

The boy grew thenceforward, as the moon wazes in its bright
fortnight. He was the source of pleasure to his parents, and
the desire of the people. He acquired the Vedas first from the
religious teachers, O muni, then skill in all kinds of weapons,
then complete knowledge of archery. When he had completed
his efforts in the use of the sword and bow, he next overcame
toil like a hero in learning the use of other weapons also.
Then he obtained weapons from Bhšrgava,f descendant of
Bhrigu,—bowing modestly and intent on pleasing his guru, O
brāhman. Accomplished in the use of weapons, skilled in
the Veda, thoroughly master of the knowledge of archery,
deeply versed in all sciences—none suck had there been before
him,

Viśála also, on hearing all this story of his daughter and of
the ability of his daughter's Son, rejoiced exceedingly in mind.

Now the king Karandhama had attained his wishes, in that he
had seen his son’s son and had offered many sacrifices, and had


88 in the Poona edition.


t The Poona edition amplifies this and, instead of the second line as in the
Calcutta edition, reads—“ Then he duly paid honour to the assembled Gan-


dharvas with the arghya offering and other presents joyfully,
them with propriety. He continues playing with his grandson,
other needs.”

t That is Sukra Ačfrya (comment.),


and dismissed
forgetful of


He was the preceptor of the Asuras


AVIKSHIT REFUSED TO BE KING. 651


18 bestowed gifts on those whoasked. He had performed all cere-
monies; he was united with his fellow-kings*; having safe-
guarded the earth righteously, he had conquered his enemies ;

19 he was endowed with strength and intelligence. Being desirous
of departing to the forest he addressed his son Avikshit—
“ My son, I am old, I am going to the forest, take over the

20 kingdom from me. I have done what ought to be done;
nothing remains but to anoint thee. Do thou who art highly
accomplished in thy opinions take the kingdom which I have

21 transfered to thee.” Being addressed thus, Avikshit the prince,
respectfully bowing down, said to his father who was desirous
of goingt to the forest to perform austerities,—

22 «T will not, dear father, do the safeguarding of the earth ;
shame departs not from my mind; do thou appoint some one

23 else to the kingdom. Since I when captured was delivered by
my dear father and not by my own valour, how much manliness

94 thenhave I? The earthis protected by real men. I who was
not sufficient to protect even myself, how shall I, being such,

25 protect the earth? Cast the kingdom on some one else. On
the same level as a womant is the man who is downright
injured§ by another. And my soul has been delivered from
delusion by thee, sir,|| who hast delivered me from bondage.
How shall I, being such, who am on the same level as a woman,


s kin ? „
Seat The father spoke :


26 Not distinct in sooth is the father from the son, nor the
* Sa-varnair, =mdudalika-nripath (comment.), ' with his provincial kings,”
“ with his vassal kings.” is
a as in tho Poons edition.


For yiyásus read yiyásu™, i a
I For mantr sa-dharmaķ read sa stré-sudhurmah, as in the Poona edition.


§ Ava-drulvyate ; the verb ava-drul is not = the dictionary, ; |
|| For átmá *mohaya bhavato the Poona Gaju zenas átmá *mohaé ću bha-
+. and the comment. 88Y8 amohdt= snehāt (which noema strange). The
ee 4 hen would be “ Sinoe I myself hove been delivered from bondage
= Tee at of eskon, how shall I &o” But I have ventured to read
i


átmá mohd6 ću bhuvulá.
q Nu bhinnd«; aecordiug
yifishlo na.


to tho comuient, this mcaus putra-nirtipita-bheda-


652 CANTO CXXVIII.


son from the father. Not delivered by any one else then wast
thou, who wast delivered by thy father.


The son spoke :


27 I cannot direct my heart in any other wise, O king. There
is exceeding shame in my heart—I, who was delivered by thee.

28 He who has been rescued by his father consumes the glory
acquired by his father; and let not the man, who is known by

29 reason of his father, exist in the family. Let mine be that
course, which is the course of those who have themselves
amassed riches, who have themselves attained to fame, who
have themselves come forth safe out of difficulties !


Markandeya spoke :


80 When he, although exhorted* often by his father, spoke
thus, O muni, the king then appointed hist son Marutta to

31 the kingdom. Receiving from his grandfather the sovereignty
as authorized by his father, he ruled well, inspiring gladness
among his friends.

32 And king Karandhama, taking Virá also, departed to the
forest to practise austerities with voice, body and mind re-

83 strained. After practising very arduous austerities there a
thousand years, the king quitted his body and gained the

34 worldt of Indra. His wife Virá then practised austerities
a hundred years longer, with her hair matted and her body

35 covered with dirt and mud, desirous of gaining the same
world as her high-souled lord who had reached Svarga, making
fruits and roots her food, dwelling in Bhargava’s hermitage,
encircled by wives of twice-born men, und sustained by the
devoted attendance of the twice-born.


* For yaddpy ukto read yadd prokto, as in the Poona edition. Avikshit is
mentioned in the Mah4-Bh., A$vam “p. iv. 80-85, but rarely elsewhere, His
name chiefly occurs in the patronymic form Avfkshita applied to Marutta.
There was another Avikshit, a son of Kuru, Adi-p. xciv. 3740,

f Tasya, i.e., Avikshit's,

Į For sa lokatám read sa-lokatdm,


—————


MARUTTA BECAME KING. 653


Canto CXXIX*


Marutta’s exploits.

Marutta reigned as a universal monarch—Samvarta was his priest—
Marutta was a great sacrificer, and a liberal benefactor to brdh-
mans—Some verses in his honour are, quoted—But the Nāgas
troubled the rishis grievously, and his grandmother Virá sent him
a message to administer justice and secure peace.


Kraushtuki spoke :


1 Adorable sir, thou hast fully narrated all this to me, namely,

Karandhama’s exploits and what were Avikshit’s exploits. I

2 wish to hear of the exploits of the high-souled king Marutta,t

Avikshit's son;f he is heard of because of his surpassing

3 featsas a universal monarch, of great parts, a warrior, a beloved

king, high-minded, wise in righteousness and a doer of right-
eousness, a real protector of the earth.
Markandeya spoke :


4 Receiving from his grandfather the kingdom with his
father’s consent, he protected it righteously, as a father protects


* Canto cxxx in the Calcutta edition. $ i
+ He is famed as & universal monarch (Mahā-Bh., Asvam.-p. 1v. 86-91 and


Vishnu Pur. LV. i), and it said he gained his supreme sovereignty through his
enon (riddhya ; Sabha-p. xiv. 650). He was one of the sixteen greatest
Be most famous kings of antiquity (Droņn-p. ly. 2170-88; Santi-p. xxix. 910-


17). He is gaid to have offered a sacrifice to the brēhman rishi Uširavijs at
the Jāmbu-nuda Inke in the Northern region (Udyoga-p- Cx. 3842-3), ma was
iged for his liberality in that he gave his daughter to Angiras (Santi-p.
Ai 8602; AnuSas.-p- oxxxvii. 6260), but more probably to Kīgirass, that
CCXXXIV. 3
age kings of the same name, ss Marutta, son of
K dhama aud fifth in descent from Yayšti's son Turvasu (Hari-V., xxxii.
oa 4; Visbņu Pur. IV. xvi) ; Marutta, fifth in descent from SaSa-vindu
ee DER 1972-75; Matsya Pur. xliv. 24; also Vayu and other Puranas;


a probably Mahé-Bh., Santi-p- xxix. 981); and one or two more of the same
and p


imi me. :
ie Susie itasya rend £ vikshitasya. Marutta’s father is generally spoken ot
] ite R Avikshit aud not as Avikshita, ‘The Poona edition reads Avaikshatasyu.
1ere 8


654 CANTO CXXIX.


5 his own begotten sons. He sacrificed very many sacrifices ap-
propriately, whereat most suitable fees were given away, as a king
whose mind took pleasure* in the commands of his sacrificing

6 priest and family priest. His discus was unresisted in the
seven continents ; and his course uninterruptedt in the sky, in

7 the lower regions, in the waters and elsewhere. He gained
riches thereby, being duly intent on his own rites, O brah-
man, and sacrificed with great sacrifices to Indra and the

8 other gods ;{ just as these other castes also, unwearied each in
its own business and possessing riches amassed thereby, per-

9 formed pious obligations and other rites. The earth while
under high-souled Marutta’s protection entered into rivalry
with the dwellers in the dwellings of the thirty gods,$ O best

10 of twice-born men. Not only were all kings of the earth sur-
passed by him, but even the king of the gods was surpassed by
him as a sacrificer with declarations|| of a hundred sacrifices.4,

11 Now his sacrificing priest was Angiras’ son Samvarta,**
who was Vrihaspati’s brother, high-souled, a treasure-house of


* Or, “ was subservient to”; ramya=va$ya (comment.).

+ For čdpy anavičēhinnd read édsya na viééhinnd, as in the Poona edition.

f The Vishnu Pur. says—he offered an unparalleled sacrifice, his utensils
were of gold, Indra was intoxicated with his libations of soma, and the brāh-
mans were enriched (IV.i). So also Mahš-Bh., Ašvam.-p. x. 275-92.

§ It is said in the Mahé-Bh., the earth brought forth fruit without plough-
ing und was garlanded with čaityas in his reign (Santi-p. xxix. 910-17).

|| Suta-yajiabhisandhibhih ; the Poona edition reads $ata-yajito pi Sumkitah.

4 The Maha-Bh. says he overcame Indra in rivalry and so incurred
Vrihaspati's opposition (Santi-p, xxix. 910-14),

** The Mahi-Bh. says Angiras was Avikshit's priest (Ašvam.-p. iv. 80-85).
Angiras had two sons, Vrihaspati and Samvarta, and there was rivalry be-
tween them, but Vrihaspati the elder got the pre-eminence and became
Indrs/s purohita. Marutta, in rivalry overcame Indra, and Vrihaspati who
desired Indra’s good repulsed Murutta, and declined to be his family priest.
Marutta then by Narada’s advice went to Vūršņasi (Benares) and secured
Samvarta as his priest (Droņa-p. lv. 2170-71; Sūnti-p. xxix. 910-15; and
ASvam.-p. iv. 86 to ix, 274), There was a great quarrel between Vrihaspati and
Samvarta in consequence (ibid., and Vāyu Pur.). The Aitaroya Brahmans says
Samvarta inaugurated Marutta with the Maldbhishcku ceremony, the great
inauguration ceremony of Indra (VIII, iv, 21),


MARUTTA’S GREAT FAME. 655


12 austerities. The golden mountain Yufijavat* is frequented by
the gods; he struck down its summit and carried it offt for

18 that king. The whole of that king’st territory, allotment$
and other property and palaces were made hrilliant, all golden,
by that priest at a sacrifice by means of austerities, O brah-

14 man. And in this connexion, those who are interested in Ma-
rutta’s exploits sing songs, while all rishis are carrying on their
study without intermission, thus—

15 “ Equal to Marutta never lived a sacrificer on the face of
the earth—at whose sacrifice his dwelling-house was cast and

16 also golden palaces as largesse, Indra was made intoxicated
with soma and twice-born bréhmans with gifts, and Indra and
other chiefs of the thirty gods became waiters to the bráh-

17 mans. At what king’s sacrifice was everything of gold aban-
doned, as at Marutta's sacrifice, by the twice-born bráhmans,

18 whose houses were stocked with gems ?|| And at his sacrifice
what gold in the shape of palaces and other things was cast as
largesse, that indeed the three other castes received ; therefrom
some of them gave similar gifts.” T

19 While thus he ruled the kingdom and protected his subjects
well, a certain ascetic came, O best of munis, and ssid to him

20 —“ Thy father’s mother, seeing the community of ascetics


č For Yuñjavat read Muñjavat, as in the Poona edition, It is a mountain
on the ridge of Himavat (Mahé-Bh., ASvam.-p. viii. 180). It seems to have
been also called Muijavate, and the summit Muiija-prishtha. It was visited
by Vasu-homa, king of Anga, and Ráma and Méndhétri (Sénti-p. oxxii. 4469-
75). It was a sacred place of pilgrimage (Kūrma Pur. II. xxxvii. 38). This
may be meant by Mujavant in Atharva-Veda I. xxv. 2.8. There a another
place of pilgrimage called Mufija-vata which was apparently in or near

-Bh., Vana-p. lxxxiii. 5092, and Ixxxv. 8210).


Kuru-kshetra (Mahé
+ For hritam the Poons edition reads krite, “he struck down its summit


for that king’s sake.”
t Yasya, i.e., Marutta’s.


Bhāga. ; w

: For ratna-ptrņa-grihe read vatna-piirna-grihair, 88 in the Poona edition.
q The Poons edition adds a verse here—The well-behaved folk, who had
their thonghts satisfied by what wns given away, also offered sacrifices there-


with in various places separately.”


656 CANTO CXXIX.


overwhelmed with poison by the Nagas who are raging with
frenzy, snith this to thee, O king :—

21 “Thy grandfather, after protecting the earth well, has de-

parted to heaven, and I am able to practise austerities here,

22 dwelling in Aurva's* hermitage. I, being such, perceive

disorganization while thou rulest the kingdom, such as was

not while thy grandfather and thy ancestors reigned, O

23 king. Assuredly thou art heedless or addicted to sensual

enjoyments, or thy senses are uncontrolled, in that thoa dost

not know the wicked and the good because they, thine organs, are

24 blind because thou hast no spies. Now the Nagas, who have come

up from Patéla possessed with frenzy, have bitten seven sons of

25 munis, and have defiled the tanks, and have defiled the clari-

fied butter offered in sacrifice with sweat, urine and ordure.

Tribute has long been given to the Nagas, thas fully indicating

26 an offence. These munis are able to reduce the Nagas to

ashes, but have no authority herein; thou indeed hast the

27 authority herein. Kings’ sons have the happiness that comes of

sensual enjoyments so long, O king, as the water of regal in-

28 auguration is not poured on their head. But when kings they

must think— What friends are there?’ ‘Who is an enemy ?’

* How great is my enemy’s strength?’ ‘Who am I?’ ‘Who

arein my minister's party?” Or, ‘Who are my vassal kings?’

29 ‘Hither such a one ie ill-disposed, or he has been alienated by

others; what is he like with regard to my adversaries also ?’

‘ Who is wholly a liege-man to me herein in the city or in the

* Aurvs was a famous pishi descended from Bhpigu. The Matsya Par.

says he was gon of Bhyigu's son Apnuvāna and was father of Jamadagni, and

that he established the gotras of the Bhfrgavas (cxciv. 14-29). It is said king

Sagara was brought up in his hermitage (Hari-V., xiii. 762-xiv. 795) and learnt

from him the Vedas and the use of arms (Vishnu Por, III. viii, and IV. iii)

The Mahá-Bh. says he was born when the Bhārgavas were almost exterminated

by the princes of Kartavirya’s race after Kartavirya’s denth, because they did

not restore at the demand of those princes the riches which they had amassed

as Kārtavirya's sacrificial priests; and it explains his name by saying he

was born from his mother’s thigh (Adi-p. clxxviii. 6802-15 and clxxix


6827),
+ For tendbhūd read te ndbhid.


30


81


32


34


35


38


39


MARUTTA WAS REOUIRED TO PUNISH THE NĀGAS. 657


country?’ He who puts his trust solely in deeds of right-
eousness is besotted. A king must take practical notice—' Who
behaves quite properly ?? ‘Who must be punished ?' ‘Who
must be protected ?’ Or, ‘What men must be regarded* by
me, who have to considert the person to be subdued, the place
and the time with regard to my condition of alliance or
disunion?’{ Further, a king should ward off unknown
spies by other spies. A king should set spies upon all his
ministers and other servants, In this and in other Ways &
king, whose mind is intent upon business, should constantly
spend day and night, but not be engrossed with sensual enjoy-
ments. The possession by kings of bodies is not for the sake
of sensual enjoyment, O king; it excites them to undertake
trouble§ in the work of protecting the earth and their own
righteousness. For a king who protects the earth and his own
righteousness well, there is great trouble in this world and
supreme undecaying happiness in heaven. Recognizing this
therefore, O king, discard sensual enjoyments and deign to
undertake trouble in this world for the protection of the earth.
The calamity, which originating from the Nagas has thus be-
fallen the rishis, while thou art reigning, O king, thou being
blind because thou hast no spies dost not even know it. What
need of saying more in this matter? Let punishment be inflicted
on him who is wicked ; protect thou the well-behaved, O king;
thou shalt gain the sixth part allowed thee as irrota by right-
eous law. By witholding protection thou shalt withont doubt
fully acquire all the sin that is committed by wicked men
through unruliness. Do what thou wishest ! ;

“TT have told thee all this that thy grandmother saith to thee,
Act, when things are £0, as pleases thee, O king.”


* Upekshyds ; or “ must be disregarded.”


+ For avekshatd read a
t For sanga-bheda-tayd da?
atra, ‘ who have to consider pl


vekshatim? “ Let a king consider, &.”
nya- the Poona edition reads mantra-bheda-bhaydd
Jaca and time in this matter by reason of fear lest


ivulged.”
my counsel should be divulg
: Or “it 18 meant for undertaking great trouble’?


——


89


658


CANTO CXXX,


Canto CXXX.*


——


Marutta’s exploits.


Marutta visited his grandmother's hermitage and set the Nagas’ world


co


qr


on fire—They implored his mother Bhivint’s protection according
to her old promise—She and Avtkshīt accepted their entreaties
and went to Marutta.


Markandeya spoke :

On hearing this speech from the ascetic, the king became
covered with shame. Exclaming, “ Fie on me, who am blind
because I have no spies,” he sighed and took his bow. He went
hastily then towards Aurva’s hermitage and made obeisance
to his father’s mother Vira with his head, and to the ascetics
as was proper; and they lauded him with blessings. And
seeing the seven sons,t the ascetics, bitten by the Nagas on
the ground, the king reproached himself repeatedly in front
of them, and said thus,—

* What I do now unto the wicked Nagas, who despise my
valour and who hate the brahmans, let all the world with the
gods, demons and mankind see that!”


Markandeya spoke :

So saying the king took his weapon Sarhvartakaļ in anger,
in order to destroy all the Nagas that roamed in Patdla
and on the earth. The Nagas’ world burst into flame then
suddenly all around; while it was being burnt by the glowing
power of the great weapon§, he hemmed itin. ‘Ah! Ah!
dear father’— Ah! mother!’— Ah! Ah! dear child’—such
cries arose then among the Néeas in that confusion caused by


* Canto-cxxxi in the Calcutta edition.

+ For sután read mritdn, “ the seven dend ascetica ” 7

$ Samvartaka, “the fire that will destroy every thing at the end of the
world.” The Calcutta edition reads Sad-vartaka.


§ For mahdms tu tejasé the Poona edition reads mahdstra-tejasd, which I
have followed,


10


11


19


* The promise was given in canto cxxvi,


dattaru
sbe had formerly given the
+ For abhyarditam read ab


t Sdyojyatm; & word no


THE NAGAS BESOUGHT BHAVINE FOR PROTECTION, 659


the weapon. Some with the ends of their tails burning, other
Nagas with their hoods burning, both seized their children and
m wives, and abandoned their ornaments and clothing.
Rūtu Pātāla they went for protection to Marutta's mother
Bhavini, who had formerly given them « promise of safety
then.* Approaching her all the Nagas, sick with terror,
prostrated themselves and spoke thus in broken accents,—

* Let that be remembered which was formerly declared by thee
to us. What we entreatedt formerly after prostrating our-
selves in Rasātala, the time for that has here arrived ; save us, O
mother of the hero! Let thy son be turned aside, O queen ;
let us retainž our lives. All the world of the Nagas is being
burnt by the fire from his weapon. For us, who are being
thus utterly burnt up by thy son, there is no other refuge but
thou; have mercy on us, O renowned lady !”

Markandeya spoke:

Hearing this their speech and remembering what she had
said at first, the good lady spoke this speech to her husband
with agitation,—

«T related to thee before indeed, what the Nagas in Patala
after making petition said to me with reference to my son.
They are these who have come in terror ; they are being burnt
by his splendour ; these sought refuge with me before and I
gave them a promise of safety. Those who have come to me
for refuge have approached thee for refuge, for I do not observe
a righteousness separate from thine. I have come to thee for
refuge. Therefore do thou turn aside our son Merutta by thy
word; when besought by me algo, he will assuredly proceed§


to quietness.”


verses 42-44, For the text yaya
tadabhayam a better reading would be yathd dattum tuyābhayam, “ since
m a promise of safety.” See verse 17.
hyarthitam, as in the Poona edition.
tin the dictionary. Sdyujyam is given there, and


this is the reading of the Poona edition.


§ Abhy-upa-ydsyate ;


this verb is not in the dictionary.


660


20


21


iS)
ts


25


CANTO CXXXI.


The king spoke :

Marutta has given way to wrath which has become fixed in
agreat crime. It will be hard, I think, to turn away the wrath
of him, thy son.

The Nagas spoke:

We have sought thy protection ; shew us favour, O king;

weapons are borne in order to save from pain him who is


wounded.
Markandeya spoke :


On hearing that speech of the Nagas who had become sup-
pliants for protection, and being entreated by his wife, most
famous Avikshi* spoke,—

“T go, lady, and will with haste speak to that thy son in order
to deliver the Nigas: those who have come for protection must
not be forsaken. If he, the king, does not draw back his
weapon at my word, then I will parry the weapon of that thy
son with my own weapons.”


Markandeya spoke:
Thereupon Avikshi, noblest of kshatriyas, took up his bow
and accompanied by his wife went in haste to Bhargava’s
hermitage.


Canto CXXXI.+
Marutta's exploits (concluded).


Avikshit called on Marutta to spare the Nagas, but Marutta insisting


1


on his duty refused—Avikshit proposed to fight with him, and


Marutta, though deprecating such combat, cgreed—The rishi,


intervened, the Nūgas restored the dead rishis to life, and all parted


LJ 9 Lg
affectionately—Marutta’s wives and successor are named.


Markandeya spoke :
Now he, Avikshit, on seeing his son there} grasping his choice


* Here and in verse 25 the text shortens the name to Avikshi, So also
iu canto cxxxi, verses 9, 11, and 17. See canto Cīxii, verse 2, note

+ Canto cxxxii in the Calcutta edition,

+ Tatra of the Bombuy edition is better than tasyah


os


or


10


11


# The text reads Avikshi her


b
AVIKSHIT FAVOURED THE NAGAS’ CAUSE. 661


bow, and sceing his son's bow and keen weapon filling all the
regions of the sky with its fiery light, belching forth a great
fame, illuminating all the surface of the earth, penetrating down
into Pātūla, unendurable, dreadful and terrifying, and actually
ready for use—he, seeing the king whose countenance was
wrinkled with frowns, said,—* Be not thou wrathful, O
Marutta; let thy weapon be drawn back.” More than once
so said he, lofty-minded Avtkshit, to him, the varying course
of whose colour speedily vanished in pallor. Listening to
his father’s speech and looking at him again and again, he,
still grasping bis bow, prostrated himself before his parents
with veneration and replied :—

“Most grievously have the Nagas offended me, O father.
While I rule this earth, they despising my might advanced to
the hermitage and bit seven youthful munis ; and the fire-offer-
ings of these rishis who dwell in the hermitage have been
defiled by the evil-behaved Ndgas, while I am reigning, O
king. Morever every one of the tanks has in truth been
defiled by them. This then is the reason; thou must say
nothing in their favour, O father. I am not to be turned aside
as regards the brihman-killing Nagas.”


Avikshi* spoke:

If these Négas haye slain bréhmans, they will go to hell when
dead. Let this my word be complied with ; desist from using
thy weapon.

i Marutta spoke :
I will not pardon these wicked offenders. Iin truth shall
0 te hell if I strive not to curb these sinners. Turn me not


pack, O father !
Avikshi spoke :


These Nagas have come to me for refuge. Because of the
veneration due to me draw back thy weapon. Enough of thy


wrath, O king !


o and in the following places See canto CXXii,


verse 2, note.


662 CANTO CXXXI.


Marutta spoke:


12 I will not pardon these wicked offenders. How shall il.
transgressing my own righteousness, comply with thy word?

13 By inflicting punishment on him who ought to be punished
and by protecting the well-behaved, a king gains the sacred
worlds and disregards the hells.


Markandeya spoke:

14 When the son thus repeatedly forbidden by his father
draws not back the weapon, he, the father, then spoke again,—

15 “Thou injurest these terrified Nagas who have come to me
for refuge, although thow art forbidden; I will therefore

16 employ a means to counteract thee. I also acquired skill in
weapons ; not thou alone art skilled in weapons on the earth ;
and how great will be thy manhood in my presence, O most
ill-behaved one F ”

17 Avikshi, the lordly muni, with eyes dusky-red through anger,

18 strung his bow and grasped the weapon of fate. Next he
fitted in his bow the noblest weapon of fate, which was
surrounded with fiery light, which could slaughter hosts of

19 foes, which had great vigour. Then made hot by the weapon
of conflagration,* quaked the whole heaven and earth with the


seas and mountains, O braéhman, when the weapon of fatet was
raised aloft.


Markandeya spoke :
20 Marutta also, seeing that weapon of fate made ready by his
father, spoke aloud,—
“This my weapon is raised aloft for the punishment of the
21 wicked—not to kill thee. Why dost thou, sir, discharge the
weapon of fate at me, thy son, who observe true righteous-
22 ness and who have ever indeed obeyed thy command? I
must protect my subjects fully, illustrious sir; why dost thou
thus prepare the weapon to kill me?”


Avikshi spoke :
23 We are determined to accomplish the rescue of him who


* Samvartd; see canto oxxx, verse 6,
+ Edldstiru,


24


27


29


30


31


33


34.


* For aparddhyah rend aparddht, s


CONTEST BETWEEN AV{KSHIT AND MARUTTA. 663


has come for refuge; thou art his assailant, thou shalt not be
let go alive by me. Hither slay thou me by the might of
thy weapon and then slay the wicked Nagas here; or I will
slay thee with my weapon and save the great Nagas. Fie on
the life of that man that shews no favour to one in pain, who
has come seeking for protection even though certainly belong-
ing to an enemy's party! A kshatriya am I; these terrified
Nágas have come to me for protection ; thou indeed art their
injurer ; why shouldest thou not be killed by me?


Marutta spoke:

Whoever tends to be an obstacle to the protection of the
subjects, whether he be a friend or even a kinsman or a father
or a spiritual preceptor, he must be killed by aking. I, being
such a king, will fight with thee ; be not thou angry, O father.
I must preserve my own righteousness, I have no anger
against thee.

Markandeya spoke:

Seeing those two determined to kill each other, Bhargava
and the other munis sprang up then and stood between them,
and said,— Thou must not discharge thy weapon against this
thy father ; nor must thou slay this thy son who is renowned


for his deeds.”
Marutta spoke:


I must as king slay the wicked and guard the good; and
these are wicked Nigas. What is my fault in this matter, O


ye twice-born ? ģ
Avikshi spoke:


I must rescue those who have come to me for refuge, and
b, i
this my son is an offender,* who kills those that have come


for refuge, O bréhmans.
The rishis spoke :
These Nagas whosv eyes are rolling about in terror say,


‘We will bring to life again those brāhmans who were bitten
by vicked Nagas.’ Enough then of combat! Be ye both


g in the Poona edition.


664.


36


37


38


39


42


45


46


CANTO CXXXI.


appeased, O noble kings! Ye both indeed, who are faithful to
your promises, are well acquainted with righteousness. M


Mārkaņģeya spoke:

Now Virá approaching her son said this,—'*' At my word
this thy son has tried to kill the Nagas. That is finished.
When the brāhmans live unmolested and the dead munis also
come to life again, the Nagas may be set free, since they have
sought thee for protection.”


Bhavini spoke:

I was formerly entreated by these denizens of Pātāla; for that
reason Ī commissioned this my husband in this matter. There-
fore has occurred this noble outcome, splendid, in both of them,
both in my husband and my son, in thy grandson and thy son.


Markandeya spoke :

Those Nagas then restored those brahmans to life both by
means of various divine herbs and by drawing out the poison.

The king then bowed at his parents’ feet ; and he, Avikshīt,
embracing Marutta affectionately spoke thus—‘ Be thou a de-
stroyer of thy enemies’ pride; long do thou protect the earth ;
be thou also merry with thy sons and grandsons ; and may they
not be haters of thee!”

Permitted* then by the- brāhmans' and by Virs to depart,
the two kings mounted the chariot together ; ; and Bhavini
went to her own city.

Vira also, best of those who maintain righteousness, after
performing very great austerities, gained the same world* as
her husband, she'an iflustrious wife, devoted to her lord.

Marntta also protected the earth fully in righteousness, and
having vanquished the six classes of enemies enjoyed enjoy-
ments as king. And his wife was Prabha-vati, the illustrious
daughter of the king of Vidarbha; and Suvira's daughter
Sauviri was also his wife; Su-keti, daughter of the M4gadha


* For anujūdto read anujfutau, as in the Poona edition,
+ For sd lokatdm read sa-lokatdm, as in the Poona edition,


MARUTTA’S WIVES AND SONS. 665


king Ketu-virya was his wife. Kekayi also, daughter of
47 Sindhu-virya king of Madra, and Kekaya’s daughter Sairan-
dhri, and Vapush-mati, daughter of the lord of Sindhu,* were
also his wives ; and Su-gobhand, daughter of the king of O'edi,
48 was his wife. And his sons by those queens became eighteen
kings, O brāhman. Chief among them and the eldest son was
Narishyanta.
49 Such in valour was Marutta, a great king, great in strength:
His discus was unopposed in the seven continents ; equal to
50 whom no other king ever lived or shall live. After hearing of
these exploits of that royal rishi, high-souled Marutta, who was
.51 endowed with goodness and prowess, and who was of boundless
vigour, and of his pre-eminent birth, O brāhman, a man is
freed from all offences.


———


Canto: CXXXII.t


—


Narishyanta’s exploits.

Marutta gave the kingdom to his son Narishyanta—Narishyanta resolv-
ed to do someļgreat deed and performed a great sacrifice at which
he enriched the bráhmans for life—Oonsequently he could not
induce any bréhmans to attend a second sacrifice except after great
dificulty—AU bráhmans then were themselves offering sacrifices,

Kraushtuki spoke :
l Adorable sir, thou hast narrated all Marutta’s exploits ; the
wish to hear completely about his descendants prevails in me,


# These names seem to be confused so as to be in impossible combinations,
dhu, Kekays and Madra were distinct eountries, see canto lvii, verses
ad Sairandhrt as in the Poona edition. The
t of verse 47 would rend better thus, by


for Sin!
36 ond 37. For Saurindhrt re


second line of verse 46 and the firs


osing the words,—
E F Sindhu-bhartur Vapush-matt,
Madra-rdjasya Sairandhri, Kekayasya ča Kekayt.
u Vapush-mati also daughter of Sindhu-virya 10
daughter of the king of Madra, and Kekayi daughter of
also his wives.”
+ Canto oxxxiii in


rd of Sindhu, Sairandhri
the king of Kekaya wer?


the Caloutta edition,


666


CANTO CXXXII.


2 I wish to hear of those among his descendants, as thou de-


12


13


14


15


16


scribest them, who were lords of the earth, worthy of sovereignty,
and endowed with valour, O great muni.
Markandeya spoke :

Marutta’s son was famed as Narishyanta*; he was the
eldest and indeed the best of the eighteen sons. And for
eighty-five thousands of years the lordly kshatriya Marutta
enjoyed the entire earth. After rul:ng the kingdom accord-
ing to his own righteousness, after offering peerless sacrifices,
he anointed his eldest son Narishyanta as king and departed to
the forest. With his mind concentrated on one idea the king
practised great austerities there. He ascended to the sky,
covering the heaven and earth with his glory, O brāhman.

His son Narishyanta, being wise, pondered thus, considering
how his father had acted and other kings also,—

“In my family my ancestors have been high-souled kings.
Offerers of sacrifices, they protected the earth righteously, being
powerful; and they were givers of riches; they turned not
back in battle. But who is able to imitate the exploits of
those high-souled kings? Yet the righteous deed which theyt
did with sacrifices and other offerings, that I wish to do; and
that is not feasible; what can I do? The earth is protected
according to righteousness; what virtne has the king in this ?
If he does not duly protect, a king 7s sinful and goes to hell.
If he has riches, a king must certainly offer great sacrifices,
and must bestow gifts; what is there wonderful herein? A
king is the refuge of those who are perishing. High birth
and shame and anger, dependance on hostile folk and one’s
own rules of righteousness ensure that there is no fleeing from
battle. As all this has been well achieved by my ancestors and
by my father Marutta, who now can do it so well? What
then shall I do, that has not been done by those ancestors, who
were sacrificers, choice men, gentle, and who turned not back


* He and his descendants are given in Vishnu Pur. IV. i. He must be dis-
tinguished from Narishyanta or Narishya one of the sons of Manu Vaivaavatn
see page 588.

+ For tena read tair yat as in the Bombay edition,


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24:


25


26


27


# For mahat-sangrama-samsa


grama-sammardeshv avisam


tions.
+ For drttijya-ka


NARISHYANTA WAS A GREAT SACRIFICER. 667


from battle, whose manliness did not fail in great battles and
conflicts* ? With whose deed shall I coming strive unappal-
ledly ? Moreover those kings, my ancestors, themselves
performed sacrifices unweariedly, butdid not have them per-
formed by others; I will do that.”


Markandeya sp ke

After deliberating thus the king performed a single sacrifice,
the like of which, made splendid by the lavishing of riches, no
one else had performed. Now after giving very great wealth
to the twice-born bréhmans, enough for life, the king further
gave them a hundred times as much food at the sacrifice, and
cattle, clothing, ornaments and granaries and other gifts.
Thus he intoxicated each one of them who dwelt in the earth.
Consequently when the king began a sacrifice again, he got no
twice-born bráhmans then to conduct it after the sacrifice had
been begun. Whatever bréhmans the king selects for the
business of sacrificial priesthood,t they said everyone to him,—

“« We have consecrated ourselves for a sacrifice elsewhere.
Choose thou some one else ; the riches which thou didst lavish
among us, there is no end thereof. Yet thou mayest give
wealth to others at thy sacrifices.”


Markandeya spoke :
And the lord of the whole earth obtained no bráhmans then
as sacrificial priests. He began then to give a gift on the
space outside the sacrificial altar. Neverthless they did not


accept it at all, having their houses full of wealth: In order
to give again to a twice-born bréhman he spoke thus, being de-
jected,— .

« Alas! it is very splendid that
d it is not splendid that this


anywhere in the earth: an di t
treasury is useless to one who does not sacrifice. No one


there is no poor bráhman


paurushūk read mahat-sun-


rgd visamudditu-
ay and Poona edi-


vddi-paurushāh as in the Bomb


ymani rend drtvijyu-kamuytu


668 CANTO CXXXIT,


undertakes sacrificial priesthood* ; all folk among the twice-
born are sacrificing, and do not assent when we are giving a


Markandeya spoke :

28  Prostrating himself then before some twice-born brāhmans
again and again in faith, he appointed them sacrificial priests
at his own sacrifice. They performed the great sacrifice.

29 And this was very surprising,—when that sacrifice offered by
the king took place, all folk of the twice-born on the earth

30 were offering sacrifices at that time; no one was present as a
spectator thereat. Some of the twice-born were having sacri-
fices offered, and some of them were themselves offering sacri-

81 fices. Whenever king Narishyanta sacrificed, people might
make a sacrifice on the earth entirely with the riches given by

32 that giver. Now in the eastern region there were more than
one hundred and eighty million sacrifices; in the west seventy

33 millionst in sooth ; in the south fourteen tens of millions ; and
in the north there were then fifty tens of millions of sacrifices
at one time, O brāhman muni, when Narishyanta was sacrificing.

34 Such, O bréhman, was Marutta’s son king Narishyanta of
yore, righteous in soul, famed for his strength and manliness.


Canto CXXXIII.t


Dama’s exploits.

Narishyanta was succeeded by his son Dama, an accomplished king—
Sumand daughter of the king of Dašdrņa chose him as her husband
at her svayam-vara—Three other princes tried to take her by force,
and Dama, after appealing to the assembled kings against their
conduct, was left in accordance with marriage rules to assert his
right by arms—He defeated those kings and married Sumand.

Markandeya spoke :
1 Narishyanta’s son was Dama,§ the tamer of the wicked and
* For drttijyam read drtvijyam.,
+ For kofyd read kotyo as in the Poona edition.
f Canto oxxxiv in the Calcutta edition,
§ He and his descendants are given in Vishnu Pur, IV, i.


DAMA’S BIRTH AND YOUTH. 669


of enemies; like Indra’s was his strength; compassion such
2 as a muni’s was his disposition. That very famous son was
born to that king of Indra-senš, a princess descended from
Babhru,* after abiding nine years in his mother’s womb.
3 Because while abiding in her womb he caused his mother to
acquire self-restraint, and because té was supposed, ‘ this prince
4. also will be self-restrained in disposition,’ therefore indeed his
family priest, who knew the three times,t gave Narishyanta’s
son the name ‘ Dama.’f
5 Now prince Dama learnt the knowledge of the bow entirely
6 from Vrisha-parvan, king of men ;§ and he learnt the use of all
kinds of weapons thoroughly from the noble Daitya Dun-
7 dubhiļļ who dwelt in Tapo-vana ‘| and he learnt the Vedas
and all the Vedéngas from Sakti ** and controlling himself
he learnt the practice of religious devotion from the royal rishi


Arshti-sheņatt.


# This may be Babhru or Vabhru, son of Druhyu, son of Yuytti (Hari-V.,
xxxii, 1837). There were other kings of the same name later, as Vabhru son
of Devavridha (Hori-V., xxxyiii. 2010-13, and Matsys Pur, xliv. 56), Babhru
son of Visva-garbha (Hari-V., xov. 5252), če.

+ The past, the present and the future.


ace Self-control.” i f
§ This would appear to be Vrisha-parvan, 2 famous king of the Dānavos


(Mshi-Bh., Adi-p. lxxxi, 3367-8, Sabhē-p.ii 58.60), whose daughter Sarmish-
thá married Yoysti (ibid., and Adi-p. xov. 8760-1, Udyoga-p- oxlviil. cosas ;
Hari V., xxx. 1600-3 ; and Vishņu Pur. 1V. x). There was a famous hermitage
called Vrisho-parvan’s hermitage near Mount Kailása in the ' Himálayas
(Mahá-Bh., Vana-p. clviii. 11541-3, clzxvii. 12340-44), but that: Yrisha pasran
appears to have been contemporary with the Pandavas, accordiug to the first
of these last two passages.
|| I have not found a Dai
4 This means & “ grove


tya of this name elsewhere.

where'nusterities are practised” ; but there appears

te have been a place of this name, for Yaytti retired there (Vishnu Par; IV. z);
#* This appears to be Vosishthn's son who ne called Sakti (Wilson’s

Vishnu Por.—edit. F. Hall—I. p. 8, and III, iii., pp. 35 aod 36) and, petter;

Saktri (Mahá-Bh., Xdi-p .clxxvii- 6757, ee 6792-4 A SRN cceli.) He

Sara" oc. cit.), see canto:CXXX1V. vers c
m se T as in the Poona edition. He is
Sid in the Mahi -Bh, os having a famous hermitage near Mount


670


11


12


18


14


16


17


CANTO CXXXIII.


Him, who was naturally high-souled, whe was accomplished
in arms and was great in strength, did Sumana, when placed*
at the. svayam-vara by her father, choose as her husband, she,
daughter of mighty Čāru-karman* king of Daśárņa,ł while
all the kings looked on, who had assembled there for her sake.
Now the Madra§ king's son Mahá-náda, who was great in
strength and prowess, was also deeply enamoured of her, and
so also were the son of Sankrandana king of Vidarbha,|| and
prince Vapush-mat, who bore a great bow and was of lofty
intellect. Now seeing that Dama, tamer of the wicked and of
enemies, was chosen by her,{] they took counsel thus with one
another there, being infatuated by love,—

“We will seize this beautifully-formed maiden from him by
force and go home. She shall be his among us, whom she,
the maiden of beautiful hips, shall take with the intention
that he shall be her husband according to the ordinance of the
svayam-vara—his wife she shall be, delivered over according
to righteousness by our wish. Yet if that maiden of intoxi-
cating eyes does not desire any of us, then she shall be his who
shall slay Dama.”

Markandeya spoke :

Having formed this resolve, those three princes seized that
most beautifully-formed maiden, as she attended by Dama’s
side. Thereupon some kings among them who were of his**
party cried out, and other kings shouted out on the other side ;


Gandha-mūdana in the Himiloyas (Vana-p. clviii. 11626-7, Salya-p. xli,
AnuSis.-p. xxv. 1741), and he is there made a contemporary of the Pandavas.
That Arshtishena or another of the same name was son of Sala (or Laŝa), who
was son of Su-hotra (Hari-V., xxix. 1518-20; see also the Vayu, Brahma and
Bhag. Puranas).

* Kritū; svayam-vare krite pitrd, “vt the svayam-vara arranged by her
father,” would seem better.

+ I have not found this name elsewhere,

t See canto Ivii, verse 53.

§ See p. 315, note j.

|| See canto Ivii, verse 47.

S For te ’tha ydtdvritam read te tayá tam vritam cs in the Poona edition.

*% Tut-pakshd, i.e., apparently * of Dama’s party.”


18


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


DAMA’S CONTEST Al SUMANA’S SYAYAMVARA. 671


some took a neutral position. Then Dama, looking at those
kings all around, made this appeal with full presence of mind,
O great muni.

Dama spoke:

“ Ho, ye kings! Since men say a svayam-vara is among the
duties of righteousness, ts it unrighteousness or righteousness
that these have seized her by force? If 7t zs unrighteousness,
it is no duty of mine that there shall be another wife for me;
or if zt is righteousness, then enough of the life which is
retained in an outrage by an enemy!”

Then king Čiru:dharman,* king of Dašārņa, making that
assemblage keep silence, spoke, O great muni,—' If this which
Dama has spoken depends on righteousness or unrighteousness,
O kings, declare zt then, so that mine and his righteousness be
not violated.”

Markandeya spoke :

Then certain kings addressed that king,—' With mutual
affection the Gandharva ceremony of marriage is ordained for
kshatriyas,t but it is not for vaisyas, śúdras or twice-born
bréhmans. And it has been effected by this thy daughter in
that she has preferred Dama. Thus according to righteous-
ness this thy daughter belongs to Dama, O king. He who
behaves otherwise, proceeds through infatuation as one licen-
tious in soul.”

And others, high-souled kings, who belonged to the party of
the hostile kings, spoke this speech to the king of Dašārņa, O
brāhman,—

* Why say they through infatuation that this Gandharva form
is the rule of righteousness for him who is kshatriya-born ?
But this is certainly not approved. There is another}
form also, the Rikshasa,$ for those who live by bearing


arms. Now whoever carries off this maiden by force after


* Or Gdru-karman in verse 9 above.


+ See Mann iii. 26 and 32.
t For na tvasha Sista nanyo


hi read na tv esha eva fūsto ’nyo, 88 in the


Poona edition.
§ See Manu iij, 26 and 33.


672


29


30


3l


32


33


34


35


39


*


CANTO CXXXIII.


slaying those who beset his path, his in truth she is by the
Rékshasa marriage, O kings. Of the two forms of marriage
this Rékshasa form is esteemed the more excellent here among
kshatriyas ; hence Mahénanda * and the other princes have


acted righteously.”
Markandeya spoke :


Then the kings, who had first addressed the assembled kings,
spoke again this speech dealing with the righteousness of their
caste as concerned with mutual affection ;—

“Tt is true the Rakshasa form also is commended as an
excellent ordinance for kshatriyas, but the maiden has approved
him, Dama, as her husband under her father’s authority.
Now she who is carried off by force by a man, who has killed
her father or kinsman—that is declared to be the Rakshasa
ordinance—provided she is living in the possession of no one else
as husband.t In this completion of the Gandharva form
here—since this maiden chose Dama in the sight of all the
kings—what Rākshasa marriage has there been here ? A
maiden when married certainly retains not her maidenhood,
and marriage creates a bond} on a maiden, O kings. These
particular princes, who are prepared to take her by force from
Dama, let them do so ‘then, if they are strong enough ; but
that is not good.”

Markandeya spoke :

Hearing that, Dama with eyes reddened with wrath strung
his bow and spoke this speech,—‘ If my own wife is carried
off by strong men before my eyes—what then 7s the value of
the existence of an impotent man as regards his family or his
two arms ? $ Fie on my weapons! fie on my-valour! fie on my
arrows! fie on my bow! fie on my useless birth in the family
of high-souled Marutta! If these powerful princes in their in-


Or Mahdndda, as in verse 10.


+ This is according to the comment., which makes ndnya-bhartri-kare
sthitá a clause qualifying the preceding words. The comment, explains
hatvd pitrs-sambaridham as “ severing her tie to her father.”

t Sambandhah ; =svdmitvam, “ ownership” (comment.),

§ For bhujámyám read bhujdbhyém, as in the Poona edition,


40


41


53


54


s Vetasa-patra.


DAMA’S BATTLE WITH THE KINGS. 673


fatuation take my wife and depart while I live, shame on my
useless possession of a bow!”

So exclaiming, mighty Dama, the tamer of great enemies,
then addressed all those other kings with Mahénanda at their
head,— Here stands the surpassingly bright maiden, pretty in
form, and with intoxicating eyes; what has he to do with life,
to whom this high-born maiden becomes not wife? Thinking
thus, O kings, so strive ye in combat that ye may by vanquish-
ing me proudly make her your wife.”

Having challenged them thus, he then discharged a shower
of arrows there, covering the kings therewith as a storm of rain
covers trees with darkness. Those heroic kings also discharged
arrows, pikes, spears and maces, and Dama playfully clove the
missiles used by them. They also clove the arrows shot by
him, and Narishyanta's son clove the multitudes of arrows

discharged by those kings, O muni. As the fight went on then
between Dama and the princes, Mahananda penetrated with
sword in hand where Dama was. Dama, seeing him advancing
with sword in hand in the great fight, discharged showers of
arrows as Indra pours out the rains. Mahsnanda immediately
then clove those his missiles, which composed meshes of arrows,
with his sword’ and avoided others. Mahananda, great in
valour, next mounted on Dama’s chariot in fury then and fought
with Dama. As Mahšnanda was’ fighting agilely in many
ways, Dama shot an arrow gleaming like the fire of fate info
his heart. Mahšnanda, with himself pierced as he was, pulled


out the arrow that had stuck in his heart, and then hurled
his glittering sword against Dama. And Dama dashed aside
this torch-like sword, which was falling on him, with a pike,
and cut Mahénanda’s head off with a double-edged sword.*
When Mahananda was killed, the kings in ® mass turned
backwards, but Vapush-mat, king of Kundina,t stood his
ground ; and full of strength, pride, and frenzy he fought
with Dama. He was son of a king of the Southern country


See canto oxxvi verse 24.


4 See p- 335, note S-


85


674 CANTO CXXXIV.


55 and was a habitual fighter.* As that. prince was fighting
fiercely, he, Dama, with a seymitert lightly clove both his
56 charioteer’s head aud his banner in the battle. His sword
being broken, that prince then seized his mace studded with
many spikes, and he, Dama, hastily split that also while it
57 was in his very hand. Whilst Vapush-mat is taking up
another choice weapon, during that interval Dama pierced
58 him with an arrow and laid him low on the ground. That
prince was laid low on the ground then, powerless in his limbs
59 and quivering, and ceased in his mind from fighting. After
gazing on bim as he lay so with no more thought of fighting,
Dama restraining himself$ abandoned him, and taking Sumaná
went forth with happy mind.
60 Then the king of Dašārņa filled with pleasure performed
the marriage of those two, of Dama and Sumani, according to
61 the ordinances. Dama wedded to his wife remained a short
time there in the city of the king of Dašārņa, and departed with
62 his wife to his own abode. And the king of Daširņa$ gave
him elephants, horses and chariots, cattle, horses, asses and
63 camels, and many slaves both female and male, clothing, orna-
ments, bows and other apparel, the choicest household utensils


of his own; and sent him away, replete also with those other
vessels,


CANTO CXXXIV.||


Dama’s exploits.


Dama returned home triumphant—Narishyanta transferred the king-
dom to him and retired with his queen Indra-send to the forest—


* Rana-goéarah.

t For kara-bdlam, which form is not in the dictionary, read kara-bdlena or
better kara-pdlena ?

+ He did not give him the coup de grace. Vapush-mat re-appenrs in the
next canto.

§ For Daédrnddhipateé ćásau read Datdrņddhiptis édsmai, as in the Poona
edition.

|| Canto exxxv in the Calcutta edition,


12


13


* Pranamya 50. ig the reading,


+ For vanap
t For vánaprasthum


re


DAMA CONQUERED THE KINGS AND WON SUMANA. 675


Wid hin dened tn oie ore Me K
punish the murderer. Lae DS E
Markandeya spoke :

Thus the prince gained her, Sumanā, as his wife, O most
great muni, and prostrated himself* at his father’s and
mother’s feet; and she, beautiful-browed Sumanā, bowed then
before her parents-in-law. And they were both welcomed then
with blessings by them both. And a great festival was held
in Narishyanta’s city itself, since Dama had both married a
wife and arrived from the city of the king of Dašārņa. On hear-
ing that he was thus connected by marriage with the lord of
Dašārņa and that the kings were defeated, king Narishyanta
rejoiced with his son. And Dama, son of the great king,
sported with Sumanā amidst choice gardens and woodland
spots, in palaces and on the summits of hills.

Now after a long time Sumand, daughter of the king of
Daššrņa, while sporting with Dama conceived a child. And
king Narishyanta, who had enjoyed enjoyments as lord of the
earth, reached his declining years, and anointing Dama to tho
kingdom departed to the forest; and his wife Indra-senā also


went as a female ascetic. He dwelt there according to the


ordinance of vāna-prasthas.t
Saūkrandana's son Vapush-mat, king of the Southern region,
wentto the forest to kill deer, with a small


He saw Narishyanta as an ascetic dirty
d his wife Indra-seni most extremely
«Who art thou, a bréh-
ra vaišya who has


most evil in conduct,
body of followers.
and mud-covered, an
weakened by austerities, and asked,—
a forest-wandering kshatriya, 0

stha stage? Tell me!” The king,
gaye him no answer at all then .


man, OT
reached the vana-pra
being under a rule of silence,
and Indra-senā told him all that truly.

Markandeya spoke :


And on knowing that that Narishyanta was his enemy’ 5


but pranandma would be better.


rasthu read tinaprastha.
read vanuprasthyam ?


676 CANTO CXXXIV,


father, Vapush-mat exclaiming “I have got him!” both
14 seized him angrily.by his matted locks and, while Indra-senā
bewailed “ Alas! Alas!” with sobbing voice, drew forth his
sword angrily and spoke this word,—
15 “T will seize the father of that Dama, who defeated me in
battle and who carried Sumand off from me ; let Dama protect
16 him! I will kill the father of that evil-minded man, who cast
off all the princes that had assembled for the maiden’s sake.
17 Let that Dama, who evil-souled naturally domineers in battles,
prevent it; such as I am here, I kill that foe’s father.”


Markandeya spoke :

18 So saying that king Vapush-mat, evil in conduct, cut off

19 his head also, while Indra-sené cried out. The muni folk and
other forest-dwellers then said to kim, ‘Shame! Shame!”
And after looking at him he, Vapush-mat, went from the
forest to his own city.

20 When that Vapush-mat had gone, she, Indra-senā, sighing
deeply despatched a Sidra ascetic to her son's presence,
saying,— `

21 “Go thou quickly and tell my son Dama my word. Thou
verily knowest what tidings of my husband are told here ;

22 nevertheless thou must tell my son, what I say in my very sore
affliction after having seen such an outrage* as this fallen on

23 the king ;— Thou art king, appointed by my lord—a protector
of the four stages of life. Is it fit that thon dost not safeguard

24 the ascetics Pt My lord Narishyanta was engaged in the
austerities of an ascetic; and there is no such lord for me who

25 bewail, while thou art such a lord. Vapush-mat dragged
him by the hair with violence and then killed him for no fault ;

26 thus thy king has attained to glory. In these circumstances


* Lafighand ; this word in,tho feminine gender is not in the diotionary. It
occurs again in verses 33 and 36.


+ For mad-bharttddhikrito read mud-bharirddhikrito ; for ki yuktam read
kim yuktam ; and for yan nirtkshasi read yan na rakshasi, as in the Poona
edition.

t This is according to the comment., with the Poona reading ndthe instead
of ndstt,


VAPUSH-MAT MURDERED NARISHYANTA. 677


do thou that whereby righteousness may not be violated—so do
27 thou! I must not* say more than this, for I am an ascetic. And
thy father was an aged ascetic unvitiated by any offence. Do
thou determine what should be done to that man who killed him.
28 Thou hast heroic ministers who can expound the meaning of all
the scriptures. Consider with them and do what ought to be
29 done in these circumstances. We ascetics have no authority
in this matter, O king. “Do thou this”—“do thou so”—
30 such is a king's speech.t As Vidtratha’st father was slain
by the Yavana, so has this king, the father of thee, my son,
31 been slain; thereby thy family has beendestroyed. The father
of the Asura king Jambha was bitten by Nagas, and that
king also destroyed the Nūgas who inhabited the whole of
32 Pātāla. Pardgara,§ when he heard that his father Saktil|
had been smitten by a Rakshasa, cast the whole race of
33 Rikshasas into the fire. Moreover a kshatriya cannot verily
endure the outrage which any other person makes against
his lineage; how much less will he endure the murder of his
34 father? It zs not this thy father who is slain, tt 7s not on him
that the weapon has been made to fall; zt zs thou who hast been
slain here I deem, tt is on thee that the weapon has been made
35 to fall. Who indeed fears this foe, that has laid his weapon


d gara na as in the Poona edition.
n reads bhúyo 'pi bhashitum for bhúpati-bháshitam, ‘Wo
O king, to say thus “ Do thou this,” or even


ə For ću naiva rea

+ The Poona editio
ascetics linve no authority here,
further * Do thou 80.”


+ This may be the Vidiratha mentioned above in canto cxvi, verse 10.


ki me name, but all later in time, and it does

EISA is ps R a Tarona; as Vidúratha son of Knru, of

E, (Maha-Bh. Kdi-p. XCV. 3791-5, Sūnti-p. xlix. 1790-97, and

the para R vid E son of Bhajamána ( Hari-V., xxxix. 2032, and

e ee vith J and another later Vidūraths (Huri-V., xcii. 5015-8, and
atsyn . .


pee wee a famous rishi, son of Saktri or Sakti, see canto cxxxiil,
artšara


v ) i rishņn vaipáyana (Maha-Bh.,

He w ather by Saty a-vati of K D i i

kā i a a 3801-2, and Sūnti-p. ccoli). But he is wholly out of time
i-p. Ix. , .


in this story-


A tim as in the Poona edition.
|| For pitart


Saktuu read pitaram Sak


678 CANTO CXXXV.


on simple forest-dwellers; let him not fear thee, my son, as king,
36 or let him fear thee.* Since this outrage has been directed
against thee, do thou take thorough measures therefore against
this Vapush-mat with his dependants, kinsmen and friends.’ ”
Markandeya spoke :
37 Dismissing him, Indra-dasa, to whom this message had been
communicated, the noble-spirited lady embracing her lord’s
body entered the funeral pyre.


Canto CXXXV.f


Dama’s exploits.
Dama bewails his father’s death and vows vengeance against the
murderer,
Markandeya spoke : f
1 At the tidings of his father’s death declared by that ascetic§
Dama blazed out with exceeding wrath, as fire is intensified||
2 with clarified butter. Now that steadfast king burning with
the fire of wrath, O great muni, crushed his hands together
and spoke out this speech ;—
3 “Like a master-less wretch my dear father has been slaugh-
tered, while I his son actually live, by a very cruel man who has
4 overwhelmed my family. Let not people utter the calumny]
that I, such as I am, condone this by reason of impotence. Iam
in authority to quell the unruly and to protect the well-behaved.
5 My father has been slain eyen by him—seeing that, my enemies


* This is the Poona and Bombay reading, putrasya md bibhetu for viprasya
marite tu; but both seem corrupt.

+ Canto cxxxvi in the Calcutta edition,

f The Bombay and Poona editions muke the story more precise by insert-
ing a verse here—“That Sadra ascetic us commanded by Indra-sené went
and relates to Dama his father’s death as narrated above.”

§ For samdkhydtam badham read samakhydte bađhe as in the Poona
edition.

||For uddhritah read uddhatah as in the Poona edition.

T For nydya-vddo jane tasyūpy read ndpuvddo janena sydd as in the Poona
edition.


DAMA VOWED VENGEANCE AGAINST VAPUSH-MAT. 679


live.* What is the good then of this much lamentation ?
6 And why again the cry, ‘ Alas! dear father!’ ? What should
be done by lamentation here, that I, such as I am, will do
here. When I give no gratification to my sire with the blood
that spurts from that Vapush-mat’s body, then I will enter the
7 fire! If no water-oblation be made to my dear slain father with
the blood of that king in fight, and if no feast be given duly
to twice-born brāhmans with flesh, then I will enter the fire!
8 If those who are named Asuras, gods, Yakshas, Gandharvas,
Vidyddharas, and Siddhas give him assistance, even them also
T, such as I am, possessed with fury will reduce to ashes with
9 multitudes of weapons. I will kill in battle that king of the
Southern country, who is cruel, very unrighteous} and un-
worthy of praise, and I will then enjoy the whole earth also ;
10 or failing to kill him I will enter the fire. I will forthwith
slay him, most evil-minded, who slaughtered an old man
among the ascetics,§ who dwells in the forest, is greatly
agitated at peaceful words, || accompanied as he ts by all his
kinsmen, friends, and army of foot-soldiers, elephants and
11 cavalry. Let all the assembled bands of my gods see the


* The Poons edition reads Pitara édpi nihatam drishtud jtvaty a-sattamah,
“and seeing my father slain, the evil man lives.”

+ Or read sankhye ‘vinipdtitasya, “to my dear father, who was alain poi in
battle, with that king's blood »? The Bombay and Poona editione omit the
second quarter-verse and read as the third quarter-verse kunyam pitus tasya F
piņģa-ddnath, « Let me with his blood make the water-oblation, and with his
flesh a fitting feast to brāhmans and the oblation of the funeral cake to that


father of mine ; if not, then I will enter the fire!” Tasya in the first quarter-
verso may


refer to pituh, but by position
tag-éhonitena 5 the result is extraordinary, but see vers


tasya mamsena corresponds to
es 34 to 36 on page


low. Kat
a A6 Poona edition reads nishthiram for nih-$ūram; and the comment.


ikam as atyantam A-
-mauninam
but both violute the metre.


dharmikam.
the Bombay and Poona editions read
Read tdpasa-vriddha-


explains d-dhdrm

§ For tdpasa-vriddha
pdpasa-vriddha-ghatinam ;
hatam ?
3 | The Poons edition reads the second
an vidagdham, íta forest-rogue,


ee but sddhu-vidhim is erroneous. The Bombay reading is similar.


quarter-verse thus—rana-sthagam
observing good ordinances,


cunning;


680 CANTO CXXXVI.


destruction that I, such as [ am, will verily make, taking my
bow, armed with a sword, and mounted in my chariot,

12 meeting my enemy’s might. Whoever shall be his comrade
to-day when he comes to battle with me again, I am prepared,
with my two arms as my soldiers, speedily to destroy his family

13 utterly.* If in this battle the king of the gods with
thunderbolt in hand, and the lord of the pitris too raising his ;
terrible sceptre wrathfully, and the lord of wealth, Varuna and
the Sun strive to safeguard him, I will nevertheless slaughter

l4 him with multitudes of choice sharp arrows. May the
vultures be satisfied this day with the flesh and blood of that
man, by whom was killed, while I the son am powerful, my dear
father, whose mind was subdued, who was without fault, who
dwelt in a small spot in the forest,t who ate only fruits that
had fallen, who was friendly to all beings !”


Canto CXXXVI.


Dama’s exploits—The slaying of Vapush-mat.t
Dama consulted his ministers and resolved to kill Vapush-mat—He
and Vupush-mat met with their armies, and he killed Vapush-mat
tn fight—He celebrated his father’s obsequies with Vapush-mat’s
jlesh and blood.
Mārkandeya spoke:
1 When Narishyanta’s son Dama uttered this vow, his eyes
rolled with anger and passion, while he covered his beard with
2 his hand. Euclaimtng “Alas! I am stricken!” he kept his
father in mind and reproached Fate; and he addressed all
those ministers ; he brought the family priest there.


* For tathaiva read tasydéu as in the Poona edition, or tasyaiva as in the
Bombay edition.

+ Kanandkhandalauko, or -ká as in the Bombay and Poona editions.

} This and the next cantos are the ending given in the Bombay and Poona
editions. The Calcutta edition gives a short ending, quite different, which is
printed at the end. This ending is printed as an Appendix to the latter edi-
tion, but the text there is very intorrect; and I have followed the text in the
former editions, noting only such variations as appear worthy of notice.


3


or


10


11


12


13


14 by his dependants.


DAMA’S EXPEDITION AGATNST VAPUSH-MAT, 681


Dama spoke:

Tell me what should be done in this matter, now that my
dear«father has reached the gods: abode. Ye, sirs, have heard
what that śúdra ascetic has said. That king was aged, an
ascetic, engaged in the vāna-prastha's vow, observing the rule
of silence, unarmed and dwelling with my mother Indra-send.
She who was associated with him told the exact account to
Vapush-mat. Thereupon the evil-souled foe, drawing his
scymitar and seizing my father’s matted locks with his left hand,
killed the world’s master as if he were a masterless churī.
And my mother, having actually commissioned me, was utter-
ing the word “Shame!” and, calling me feeble in lot and void
of good fortune, has entered the fire. Embracing him, Narish-
yanta, she has departed. to the abode of the thirty gods. I
being such will now do what my mother has said. And let
my army composed of elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry
be arranged. If I drive not away the enmity against my
father, if I kill not my father’s murderer and comply not with
my mother’s word, how can I endure to live hore ?

Markandeya spoke :

The ministers hearing his speech exclaimed “Alas! Alas!”
and did accordingly therefore, while distraught in mind. Ac-
companied by his dependants, army, and chariots, and by his
retinue, they, placing king Dama at their head and taking
the blessings of the brahman family priest who: knew the
three divisions of time, went forth. Breathing hard like the
Serpent king, Dama advanced against Vapush-mat, while
slaying the wardens on his boundaries and other neighbouring
princes, and hastening* towards the southern region.

Seeing him approaching, Vapush-mat was filled with pa-
sf and Sankrandana’s son Vapush-mat recognized Dama,
attended by his retinue, by his ministers, and

With unwavering mind he directed his
from his city he despatched a messenger to


tience
who had arrived


armies ; and issuing


Calcutta Appendix is better than tvard,


ran of the
* Tvaran 0 propriate, unless it means “was filled


t Marsha-púritah. This is hardly ap


with caution.”


86


682 CANTO CXXXVI.


15 announce,—' Come thou on more quickly! Narishyanta with
his wife awaits thee ! O thou of kshatriya caste, approach near
16 me! These sharp arrows discharged by my arm, which are
thirsting, shall pierce thy body in battle and drink thy
blood.”
17 But Dama, on hearing all that speech from the messenger,
went on hastily, remembering his previously uttered vow,
18 breathing hard like a serpent. And the man who boasted of
his army* was summoned to battle. And then there was an
exceedingly fierce combat between Dama and Vapush-mat.
19 And the armies fought, both chariot-rider against chariot-rider,
elephant-rider against elephant-rider,+ horseman against
horseman, O brahman rishi. That -battle was tumultuous,
20 while all the gods, Siddhas, Gandharvas, and Rakshasas looked
on. The earth quaked, O brahman, as Dama fought in that
21 battle. There was no elephant, no chariot-rider, no horse
which could endure his arrows. Next Vapush-mat’s general
22 fought with Dama, and Dama pierced him deeply in the heart
with an arrow at close-quarters. When he fell, his army-
verily was seized with a panic to flee.
23 Then spoke Dama, tamer of his foes, to their master thus,—
“ Where goest thou, wicked one, after having slaughtered my
24 father, who was am ascetic and weapon-less and practising
austerities ? Thou art a kshatriya; stay thou!” Then stay-
ing back he, Vapush-mat, attended by his younger brother
25 fought with Dama. Mounted in his chariot he fought in com-
pany with his sons, relations, and kinsmen. With the arrows
discharged from his bow the regions of the sky were then `
26 pervaded, and he filled Dama and his chariot with multitudes
of arrows quickly. And thereupon Dama in wrath excited by
27 his father’s murder split the arrows discharged by them § and


” Pumdn send-vikatthanah ; but Vapushmdn sainya-katthanah is suggested as
better, “ And Vapush-mat who boasted of his army was summoned to battle.”

+ Nāgind ; this meaning is not in the Dictionary,

{For the first tatah, tasya would be better.


§ Oidcheddstémé Shardms or si¢éheda tūm$ Čhardms; both readings are
admissible.


DAMA’S VENGEANCE ON VAPUSH-MAT. 688


z ee them aleg with other arrows. In that way he brought
own to Yama’s abode the seven sons, the relations and kins-
men and friends,* each with a single arrow, O dvija.

29 And Vapush-mat after his sons and kinsmen had been killed,
mounted in a chariot fought wrathfully with him in battle
with serpent-like arrows.t And Dama split those his arrows,

30 O great muni.j And those two fought together, being ex-
asperated, wishing to conquer each other, each one’s bow being
quickly split by the impetus of the other’sarrows. They both,

31 great in strength, grasping their swords, made play. § Dama,
reflecting for a moment on the king his father who had been

32 killed in the forest,|| seized Vapush-mat by the hair and attacked
him and felled him to the earth ; and with his foot on his neck,

33 raising his arm he exclaimed,—‘ Let all the gods, men, Ser-
pents and birds see the heart also of Vapush-mat, who is of

34 kshatriya caste, split open!” And so saying Dama tore open
his heart also, and desirous of drinking J was forbidden by the
gods from tasting the blood.

35 Then he offered the water-oblation to his dear father with
the very blood. Having discharged his debt to his father he

36 returned to his own house. And with Vapush-mat's flesh he
offered the cakes to his father, he feasted the bréhmans who
were sprung from families of Rakshasas.**

37 Such verily were the kings born of the Solar Race. Others
also were of fine intellect, heroic, sacrificers, learned in right-

38 eousness, deeply versed inthe Vedanta. And I am not able to

* Mitrdn; the masculine with this meaning is unusual.


+The Calcutta Appendix reads sa rathi vibudhopamah,
mbled a god ”—wbich probably would refer to Dama.
The Calcutta Appendix reads pratyu-


“ He, riding in his


chariot, rese
ta mahd-mune, a mere expletive.


iéa ha. ake
x Or “made feints.” The Calcutta Appendix rends gpilsttarkiia gaan udya-
nya čikrtdati Vapushmuti, “ While Vapush-mat raising the sword in his grasp
m d
i feint,” Dama, če.
aking play,” or “making 2 pi ta
sija iki, Appendix reads jūdtud pitaram ča sthitam vane,
l The Calcutta Appendix reads svátta-kámaćś for pdtu-kdmaé.


## An extraordinary statement.


684 CANTO CXXXVIT.


mention them fully.* By listening to their exploits a man is
delivered from sins.


Canto CXXXVII.


mms


Concluston.


The Birds close here the long discourse delivered by Mdrkaņdeya, and
Jaimini thanks them and departs.


The Birds spoke:

1 Having spoken thus, O Jaimineya,t the great muni Mār-
kaņdeya let the muni Kraushtuki depart, and performed the

2 mid-day ceremony. From him we also have heard what we

have declared to thee, O great muni. For this was perfected

by Him who is without beginning. { Spoken formerly by the

Self-existent One to the muni Markandeya was this which we

have uttered to thee. It is sacred, pure, and grants length of life ;

it bestows righteousness, love, wealth and final emancipation

4 from existence; it delivers immediately from all sin those who
read st, those who hear zt.

5 And the very four questions indeed, which thou didst put to
us at the very first—the conversation between the father and son,
and the creation by the Self-existent One, and the administra-

G tions § of the Manus, and the exploits of the kings, O muni,
this we have declared to thee. What now dost thou wish tu
hear? After hearing or reading || all these matters in assem-


cs


* Dama's descendants are given in the Vishnu Par, IV.i.
Rūjya-vardhana, who is the subject of cantos cix ond cx, above.

tHe and the Birds reappear from canto xlv. The text is Jaimineyam,
* Having spoken thus to Jaimineya;” but the Birds have been relating to
Jaimini what Markandeya had before told to Kraushtuki, and this reading is
insuitable unless Jaimineya be taken as Kraushtuki's patronymic; and that
t cannot be, for Kraushtuki's patronymic is said to have been Bhiguri, see
pp. 436 and 445. I have ventured therefore to read Jaimineya instead.


j.4nddi-siddham. The Calcutta Appendix reads animd-siddham, “ perfect
n minuteness.”


§ Sthiti; or “ positions,”
|| The Caloutta reading pafhitvá appears preferable to pafhute.


His son was


LIST OF THE EIGHTEEN PURANAS. 685


7 blies, a man discarding all sins may reach absorption into
Brahman at the end.*

Theret are eighteen Puranas which the Forefather spoke,

8 Now the seventh of them is to be known as the very famous
Markandeya Purána. They are the Brāhma, the Pidma, and

9 the Vaishnava, the Saiva and the Bhigavata, and also the Nāra-
diya besides, and the Mārkaņdeyaas seventh, the Agneya which
was declared the eighth, and the Bhavishya ninth, the Brahma-

10 vaivarta tenth, the Laiūga known as the eleventh, Vardha de-

11 clared the twelfth, the Skanda next as thirteenth, and the
Vamana fourteenth, and the Kaurma fifteenth, and the Matsya,
and the Garuda and next the Brahmanda.

12 He who may read the titles of the eighteen Puranas, who
repeats § them at the three periods of the day continually,
may obtain the result of a horse-sacrifice.

13 Both creation and secondary creation, genealogy and the
manvantaras and the exploits in the genealogies ‘constitute a
Purana with the five characteristics. ||

14 This Purana which contains the four questions is indēed of
the highest quality. Now when it is heard, sin committed in

15 hundreds of ten millions of ages perishes. Brahmanicide and
other sins, and other deeds that are vile, all those perish there-

16 by, like grass smitten by the blast. The merit that is gained
by making gifts at Pushkara{ accrues from hearing this
Purána ; and a man attains to a benefit superior to all iu Vedas

17 by completely acquiring this. A man IL morālūj, him who

may cause it to be heard, as he worships the divine Fore-


here introduces Jaimini’s reply which is at page


5 eudix
# The Calcutta Appev Purdņas as a soparate pro-


688; and puts what follows here regarding the

,

nouncement by Brahmá. ;
+ The Calcutta Appendix

the concluding two verses, in


puts all that follows down to verse 30, and also
to the mouth of Brahmá, and places it at the


d.
us sentence is omitted from the Calcutta Appendix.


ato read japate. :
i sakt, and the next are not in the Culoutta Appendix,


q See p. 306, note ll.


686


18


19


20


21


22


26


27


CANTO CXXXVII,


father, *with perfumes and flowers and with gifts of clothing
and with gratifications to brāhmans. And kings should give
according to their ability villages and other lands and car-
riages.t After hearing all this Puršņa, which is augmented
with the objects of the Veda und which is the sole abode of
the Dharma-gastras, a man may obtain every object.t After
hearing the entire Puršņa, let a wise man do full reverence to
Vyasa for the sake of the benefits of righteousness, wealth, love
and final emancipation from existence as therein declared. Let
him give his spiritual preceptor a cow, accompanied with gold,
clothing and ornaments. In order to gain the benefits that come
from hearing it let him gratify his spiritual preceptor with gifts.

He who, without paying reverence to the man who reads
the Purdņa out, hears a single verse, acquires no merit; verily
he is known as a Scripture-thief.§ Not him do the gods
gladden, nor the Pitris, with sons; and they desire not || the
graddha given by him nor the benefit gained by bathing at
sacred places of pilgrimage. He incurs the censure of a Scrip-
ture-thief in an assembly of good men. Wise men must not
listen to this scripture with contempt; but when this noble
scripture is contemned as it is being read by sages,4 the offender
becomes dumb; he is born as a fool in seven births.

Now he, who after hearing this seventh Purina may
further do reverence to it, being delivered from all sin verily
purifies his own family. The purified man goes without doubt
to Vishnu’s eternal world; never shall he falling therefrom
become a man again.** By the very hearing of this Purana
a man may obtain supreme union with the universal soul.


* The Calcutta Appendix reads érúyeta pūjayeč čhdstram, “let him hear
ond reverence this Sastra.”

+ The Calcutta Appendix rends instend—“ And he should give according
to his ability royal carrisges nnd other vehicles.”

+ This verse nnd the next two are not in the Calcutta Appendix.

§ Sdstra-éorah.

|| Ca neééhanti of the Calcutta Appendix is better than tatheééhanti.

q Sddhubhih. |

## The Calcutta Appendix reads—' Moreover until seven Manus are gone,


28


29


30


31


33


34


35


36


he may, after enjoying


very
* Su-jana of t
+ Sad-artho; or perhaps


+ Or “ posses


,


ENCOMIUM ON THIS PURANA, 687


No gift should be made to an atheist, to one fallen from
his caste, to a contemner of the Vedas, to one who contemns
religious preceptors and twice-born men, or moreover to one
who has broken his vows, to one who contemns his parents, to
one who contemns the Vedas, Yástras and other scriptures, or
to one who infringes the rules of good breeding, or indeed to
one who is passionate towards his caste-folk. To these men
certainly no gift must be made, even when one’s life is at its
last gasp.

If entirely through covetousness or infatuation or fear one
should read this Purána or cause it to be read, he may assured-
ly go to hell.

Markandeya spoke:

All this story is characterized by righteousness, and bestows
heaven and final emancipation from existence. Who hears it
or may read it, his earnest endeavour is achieved ; he is never
affected by the pain of mental or bodily sickness; he is deli-
vered from brahmanicide and other sins, there is no doubt
of this. Good men become his kindly * friends, affectionate
in mind. No enemies nor robbers will ever arise against him.
Aspiring to what is good, +t and eating savoury food, he
perishes not with famines; nr with sins touching others’
wives or others’ property, or with injury to others or with
such like crimes; and he is continually freed from many pains,
O best of dvijas. Success, affluence, memory. peace. good
fortune, nourishment, and contentment—may Aach of these
be his continually, who hears this story, O Peale tu The
man who hears the whole of this Markandeya Purina is not
to be lamented; nor is he indeed to be lamented who recites
this poetical work properly, O dvija. adone with perfec-
tion that is purified by knowledge of religious devotion,
and surrounded even in Svarga and the other worlds by Indra


delights according to his wishes, and after enjoying the


i ith the universal soul.”
in to supreme umon Wi
eee: he Calcutta Appendix is better than sva-jana.
“being in good circumstances Be


ing pare succesa.in the knowledge of religious devotion.”
gi


688


37


38


39


40


41


42


CANTO CXXXVII.


and other gods and other heavenly beings, he is always reverenced
in Svarga. And after hearing this Purana, which is replete
with knowledge and intelligence, being mounted in a choice
heavenly car he is magnified in Svarga.

And the number of the syllables in the Purdna has been
declared by him who is intelligent in exactitude. There are
of verses six thousands and eight hundreds also, thereto are
added eighty-nine verses and eleven—pronounced of yore by
the wise muni Markandeya.

Jaimini spoke:

Tn India there was not that which burst asunder my doubts,
O ye twice-born ;* ye, sirs, have accomplished that which no
one else now will ‘do. Ye have attained long life, are good,t
and are clever in knowledge and intelligence. And thus let
there be unerring intelligence in the application of the
Sankhya doctrine to the knowledge of spirit ! Let evil-minded-
ness that springs from pain wrought by a father's curse depart
from you!”j After speaking this much the muni went to
his own hermitage, pondering over the speech uttered by the
Birds, which was sublimely noble.


End of the Markandeya Purana.


* The Caloutta Appendix reads more blontly, “In India twice-born
brahmans have lost the power of bursting asunder perplexities and doubts.”


+ For santu of the Bombay and Poona editions read santah with the
Calcutta Appendix. :


1 Vyapaitu vah. See pages 18—16.


END OF THE PURANA. 689


DIFFERENT ENDING
according to the Calcutta Edition.
Canto CKXXVI.*


Conclusion.
The story of Dama breaks off—A high encomium is passed upon this
Purána.
Márkaņdeya spoke :
1 When king Dama had spoken thus, his father’s enemy fled.


“My father was an ascetic; and let any other man practise
great austerities fearlessly.” Dama said nothing to them when


he saw them intent on flight.
Markandeya spoke :¢
2 All this story is characterized by righteousness, and bestows
heaven and final emancipation from existence. Who hears
it &e.


* Canto cxxxvii in the Calcutta edition.
+ Here the narrative ends abruptly ; and what follows is the same 8
verses 31 to 37 on page G87 above. The Purána ends with them according to


the Calcutta edition.


87


690


INDEX.


Nore TO THE INDEX.


The system


that was in use formerly, yet has not bee V
Sanskrit words contained in this Index have been re-


to agreement with the system that is now
Society of Bengal and the Royal Asiatic
Sanskrit words are printed in the Roman character; all


literations of
vised and are brought in
approved by the Asiatic

Society.


of transliteration followed in this translation is one


been quite uniform. The trans-


other words are put in italics, whether vernacular or English, Latin
or Greek, and the spelling of vernacular words is generally that in


common use.


The locality of geographical names is indicated by the letters M
(Madhya-desa), C (Central India), and N., S.,E, W., NE., NW., SE,


and SW. which explain themselves.


Abbreviations used.


aps. Apsaras,
b. brahman.
bd. bird.
c. country.
cer. cereal,
cst. constellation, asterism.
d. demon (Daitya, Dānava, Asura,
Rāksasa).
dg. demi-god, celestial being.
dt, district.
dyn. dynasty.
f. family
fd. female demon.
for. forest.
. god.
De goblin.
gdh. gandharva.
gr. grass.
g goddess.
z. hill.
hb. herb.
el. island,


k. king.

kst. kgatriya.

l. lake.

m. man.

mt. mountain.

mis. mountain-range.
p. people.

pat. patronymic.
pfn. personification,
pl. place.

pr. prince.

pre. princess,


` pe. person.
| pt. plant.


q. queen.

T. river.

r8. TSi.

sf. sacrifice,

t. town, city.

ti. tirtha, place of pilgrimage.
tr. tree.

w. woman,


INDEX. 691
INDEX.
Abhi-jit cst. 170, Aila K. 146.
Abhiva p. NW, M. 812-814. Ailika ? p. SE. 360.
Aindra pl. 246


Abhira p. S. 334, 862.
Abhisaha p. NW ? 382.
Abhisāra 0. NW. 882.
Abhisārī t. NW. 882.
Abilvaka, pt. 25.

Abu mt. W: 289, 840.


Ācāra, see Custom.

Acridotheres bd. 49, 58.

Adhaka, -kī pt. 944, 245.

Adhakya p. S. 834.

Adhama-kairata p. N. 369, 379.

A-dharma pfn. 247, 250.

Adhraraka? p. E. 324.

Adi bd. 58. `

Aditi gs. 550-552, 559, 560, 563-565.

Aditya g. 168, 461, 555, 582, 586.

Adri d. 425.

Adrijā r. 296.

Zgle ir., see Bilva.

Aganosma pt., see Malati.

Agastya rs. 270, 298, 601-603, 645,
646.


Agastya rs. 603.
Ages, the Four,
347, 387, 437.
Āgneya p. N. 378.
0, 23, 152, 247, 249, 270,
387, 398, 399, 445, 447, 460, 478,
474, 489, 495, 512, 524, 582, 535,
599-548, 561, 562, 582, 621.


i r8, 442.
oA k. Gels
Agnījya? P. 1 i 270, 533.


Agnisvatte pi
E cst. 355.


32, 218, 224, 226,


P b

Aindra cat, 374.

Air 217, 221, 222.

Airavata eleph. 474, 494, 559,

Aigīka P p. S. 334.

Aja (=Sun) 562, 572.

Ajamidha k. 353.

Ajanta h. W. 288.

Ajaras rs. 269. .

Ajyapa piirs, 583.

Akanin p. C? 363.

Akesines r. NW. 291.

Akrimi, village, 242.

Alakananda y. N. 281.

Alarka, k. 93-109, 142-145, 148,
151, 155, 170, 171, 180, 186-190,
194, 198-202, 207, 210-216.

Alāvu pt. 118, 166.

Ali, Ali dg. 407.

Alimadra ? p. N. 322.

Allahabad t. 310.

Almond tr. 26.

Almora t. N. 288, 316.

Alms 203, 685-687.

Alstonia tr. 27.

AlūkaP p. NW. 375.

Alwar dt. M. 288, 307.


Amalaka tr. 25, 26.

Arna ra rae mt. O. 298, 331,
84.

Amaravali r. S. 304.

Amarāvatī t. S. 337.

Ambā, see Ambikā.

Ambala t. and p. N. 321, 347, 379.

Ambarīga k. 462.

dalas p. NW. 328, 333, 377-


380.

Ambhodhi d. 262.

Ambikā gs. 476-482, 487, 488, 494,
498, 502, 507—511, 516.

Ambuja pt. 29.

Ambupa f.d. 262.

Amita gods, 465.

Amitabha k. 449.


692


Amitabha gods, 464.
Amla tr. see Amalaka.
Amla-vetasa pt. 25.
Amoghā 7. NW. 389.
Amra ir. see Amrataka.
Amrataka tr. 28,


Amra-vana for. W.P? 600.
Amirtarajas k. 328.
Amirtarayas k. 829,
Anagha rs. 270.

Anala d. 262.

Anamitra k. 450.


Ananda k. and c. 278.
Ananda k. 451-458.
Ananda? p. NE. 383.


Anandini 7. 294,
Ananta g. 482.
Ananta (=Sesa), 609.
An-aranya k. 551,
Anarta k. 868.
Anarta c. and p. 289, 340, 344, 352,
368, 371, 463.
Anas bd. 30.
Anasūyā w, 91, 95-99, 249, 269.
Anāyus 146.
Andha? p. S. 337.
Andhaka p. W. 309, 824, 336, 337.
Andhaka k. 352,
Andhaka d. 479.
Andha-tāmisra hell, 152.
Andhra p. SE. 324, 337, 361, 367.
Andhravāka p. 324.
Andropogon yr. 79.
Aiga k. 825.
Aiga p. and c. E. 524—920, 534,
369, 464, 655.
Anga k? 116,
Anga? p. N. 379.
Anga-dhrs d. 257, 258, 263.
Anga-loka pl. W. 378.
Angataka?P p. W. 373.
Anger (Krodha), 15, 16, 250.
Angiras rs. 108, 246, 249, 269, 435,
462, 589, 625, 653, 654.
Angiras demi-gods, 461, 462.
Angirasa f. 588, 658.
Anibha prs. 627,
Anikata p. W. 338,
Anila d. 262.
Animadra p. N. 322.
Añjana mt. NW. 279.
Añjana mi. E. 856.


INDEX.


Aūjanābha mt. 356.
Annadāraka ? p. NE. 8883.
Annaja p. C. 844.
Anser bd. 30, 409, 410.
Ant, 147, 170, 206, 210.
Antaļ-šilā, -sirā r. E? 301.
Antar-dvipa p. N. 878.
Antar-giri di. N. 325, 328.
Antar-giri p. E. 325.
Antargirya p. E. 801, 824, 325.
Antelope 31, 164, 181.
Anthocephalus tr. 25.
Antra-šilā r. E? 801.
Antyāgirā? r. EP 301.
Anu cer. 165, 244, 245.
Anugraha, 228, 281.
Anuhrāda pr. 146.
Anumati pfn. 178.
Anūpa c. W. 344, 371.
Anuradha cst. 169, 370.
Anuvinda k. 345.
Apagā r. M. 298.
Apaga r. NW. 316.
Apakāra d. 267.
Apāna, vital air, 208.
Apara p. 318, 372.
Apara-cina p. NE. 319.
Apara-matsya p. M. 309.
Aparu-nandā r. N. 369, 383.
Aparanta p. W. 313, 371.
Aparāntika p. W. 371, 372.
Aparita p. NW. 313.
Apatha p. N. 346.
Apnnyana rs. 656.
Apratistha pl. 71, 73.
Apsaras, 2-8, 24, 68, 78. 286, 391,
393, 418, 427, 481, 511, 538, 559,
_ 571, 646, 647.
Apyayani, 70.
Arachmechthra bd. 80.
Arand r. C. 296.
Aratta c. and p. NW. 311.
Aravalli mis. 286, 289, 312, 338,
340, 349, 369.
Arbuda mt. W. 289, 340.
Arbuda p. W. 340.
Arcot dt. S. 332.
Ardana? p. N. 378.
Ardea bd, 58.
Ardeola bd. 59, 86.
Ardha-hārī f.d. 265.


Ārārā cst, 169, 358.
Argha, Arghya offering, 18, 38,


İNDEX.


$7, 156, 161, 162, 423-429, 446,


Argiga? p. W ? 368, [581, 633.
1-mardana pr. 143.

Arista k. see N abhagirista.

Āristanemi dg. 6. ki


Arjuna (Kārtavīrya) F. 101, 106- |
108, 310, 388, 314, tet 371, 656.
Arjuna (Pandava) k. 8, 23, 24,

316, 822, 359, 363, 379, 384, 629.
Arka-linga p. M. 308.
Arrah t. M. 382.
Arstisena k. and 7s. 669, 670.
Artha-karaka k. and c. 278.
Artocarpus ir. 25.
Arum pt. 178.
Aruna g. 559.
Aruna mt. N. 351, 382.
Aruna d. 518.
Aruņāksa d. 518.
Aruņāspada t. N. 392, 395.
Arundhatī star, 207.
Arūpa ? p. O P 344.
A-rūpā f.d. 267. 3
Arvavīra rs. 270.
Arya race, 290.
Arya, gods, 454,
Aryaman g. 153, 545, 582.
Asadha cst. 170, 374, 376.
Asiknī r. NW. 291.
Asi-loman d. 476, 480
Asi-patra for. 54, 71-74, 88.
Ašlesā est. 169, 361.
Ašmaka p. M. 352.
Ašmaka p. S. 386.
Ašmaka k. 336.
Asmaka, p. S. 386.
Ašmakī g. 387.
Ašoka tr. 25, 26, 364.
Asparagus pi. 165.
Aspasti p. NW. 374.
Āšrama 148-151, 246.
‘Ass, 83-85, 209, 235, 255.
Assakani p. NW. 374.
‘Assam, 882, 411.
Asta-giri mt. 37].
Asta-parvata mt. 971.
‘Asterisms, 168-
Astrologer, 580,
d. 2 3


581, 533, 546,
605, 611, 648,


693


Asvaka p. NW. 307, 374.

Asvakālanato p. NW. 374.

Ašva-keša p. W P 374.

Aśva-kūța p. M. 307.

Ašva-mukha p. W. and N. 368,
378, 381.
vataka p. M. 307.

Ašvatara k. 109, 125, 127, 130, 132,
185—139.

Asvattha tr. 277.

Ašvatthāman 0. 464.

Ašvinī cst. 170, 884.

Ašvins g. 22, 55, 109, 392, 460, 461,
574-576, 626.

Atavī t. S. 934.

Atavya p. S. 334.

Atharva Veda, 236, 404, 554.

Atharva p. M. 308.

Ati-nāman rs. 454.

Ati-rātra b. 426.

Atithi 153.

Ati-vibhūti x. 628.

Atom 128.

Atrai r. E. 320.

Atroya p. N. 320, 347.

Atreyī r. E. 320.

Atri rs. 95, 96, 99, 102, 151, 154,
246, 249, 269, 320, 462, 570, 621.

Atri p., see Atreya.

Atta-khandika? p. NW. 314.

Audumbara p. M.? 355.

Aukhāvana p. S. ? 866.

Auyņdrāmāsa p. M.? 842.


` Aupadha p. N. 322.


Aurangābād t. W. 288.

Aurva 7s. 656, 658.

Auttama, Manu and manyantara,
271, 419, 425, 429, 432, 435-437,
549.

Auttana, see Auttama.

Auttānapādi k. 421.

Avāhana offering, 156.

gs 08.

Avanti r. M. 295.

Avanti c. M. 295, 383, 340-345,
368, 371.

Avantya p 340.

Avara p. W. 372.

Avarņī r. M. 295.


Averrhoa tr. 24.
k. 625, 628, 631,
f 634-642, 645-


Aviksi
654, 658-664.


Aviksit,-ta


694 INDEX.


īksi „652. Bālhika p., see Vahlika.
aus Kw?) pr Bali offering, 151-158, 178, 253, 254,
erie ee 652, 658. 959-261 265, 519,
i Bali k. 146 (325).
ati gs. 269. āli ;
AZo dloa i 57,58, 908, 352,953,871. | Balika, p. NW.
Ayur-Veda, 404—406. Balin pr. 610.
Balin k. 833.
Babhru b. 591. Balina k. 329.
Babhru k. 669. Balkh c. N. 811.
Babhru (Siva) g. 515. Bālu-vāhinī r. M.? 298.
Babhru k. 420. „Bālyā ? pl. NW. 315.
Babhravya b. 591. Banas r. M. 286, 294.
Bābhravya, b. 598. Banavasi t. S. 364.
Bactriane c. N. 811. Banda t, M. 359.
Badām tr. 26. Bandelkhand dt. M. 288, 336, 354,
Badara tr. 27. 359.
Badava ti. NW. 368. Bandhana r. M.? 294.
Badavā r. S.P? 368. Banga p. see Vanga.
Badava-mukha p. N. 368, 378, 381. | Banjāri p. S. 833.
Badhna p. N. 378. Bankura dt. E. 327.
Bag, Baglā, bd. 58, 59. Bannu dt. NW. 372.
Balera tr. 26. Bansdharā r. SE. 805.
Bāhīka p. NW. 311, 313, 318. Banthawa h. E. 287.
Bāhlika p., see Vāhlīka. Banyan tr. 277, 501.
Bahu k. 371. i Baradā hills, W. 289.
Bāhubādha p. NW. 317, 375. Barākar r. E. 801.
Bahubhadra p. NW. 317. Barbara p. N. 819.
Bāhudā r. M. 291, 354, 383. Bardhwan t. and dt. 326, 359.
Bāhudā r. S. 291. Barhisad pitrs, 270, 535.
Bahula g. 420. Bark clothing, 35, 42, 150, 181.
Bāhya p. M.? 309. Barley 84, 155, 161, 162, 165, 181,
Baibhara h. M. 286. 208, 240, 244, 245.
Baidyanāth h. E. 287, 356. Baroda t. W. 340.
Baijnāth, see Baidyanath. Barugaza t. W. 389.
Bairat t. M. 288, 307. Barvara p. N. 319.
Bal bd. 58. Bassein t. W. 338.
Bakul tr. see Vakula. Bathan-i h. E. 287.
Bala d. 4, 611. Bauhinia tr. 27, 165.
Bala p. NW, 318, 373. Bean pt. 84.
Bala-bandhu k. 449. Bear, 208.
Bālabhadra p. NW. 317. Bees, 36, 147.
Bala-deva, see Bala-Rāma. Begun pt. 167.
Bāla-graha d. 520, Bel tr. 25, 425.
Balāka bd. 86. Bela pt. 426.
Balaka pr. 610. Belgaum t. S. £87.
Balaka r. C.? 300, 301. Bellary t. S. 337.
Balākā r. or t. N. 375. Bel-phūl pt., see Mallika.
Balakāšva k. 628. Benares t. 38, 46, 307, 308, 360, 367,
Bālakhilya rsts, 102, 270, 570. 371, 654; see Kāsī and Varanasi.
Bala-Rama k. 3, 19, 23, 24, 31. Bengal, 326, 328, 383. :
Balāšva k. 623-625, Beni-Israel p. W. 339.


Balasor dt. E. 327. Ber tr., see Jujube.


INDEX,


Berar c. 284, 286, 305.

Berari i M: 399.

Bes-nagar t. M. 343.

Betwa r. M. 295, 343.

Bhadra p. M. 309.

Bhadra r. S. 808.

Bhadra r. NE. 888.

Bhadra g. 450.

Bhadra-dvipa isl. S.? 390

Bhadra-gaura h. E. 857.

Bhadraka p. NW. 316.

Bhadra-kali gs. 479, 488, 515.

Bhadra-kara p. M. 309.

Bhādrapadā cst. 381.

Bhadra-soma r. N. 389.

Bhadra-srenya k. 371.

Bhadrasva k. and c. NE. 274, 276,
278, 280, 281, 387, 388.

Bhagadatta k. 8, 9, 319, 828.

Bhāgalpur t. and dt. E. 325, 326.

Bhagīratha k. 280, 281, 551.

Bhāguri pat. 436, 445, 684.

Bhajamana k. 677.

Bhallātaka tr. 25.

Bhāminī gdh. 646.

Bhananda-na k. 597-599, 604, 607-


610.
Bhanukacchra? p. W. 839.
Bharadvāja rs. 31, 810, 320, 495,
2


462.
Bharadvāja
Bhāradvāja \p „N. 820, 347.
Bharaņī cst. 170, 884.
Bharata k. Abe T
Bharata p. M. '
Bharata 0. 274, 278, 280, 282, 288,

947-349, 387, 688
Bhārga k. as
Bhārga p. E. vad.
Bhārgacbhūmi dt. E. 328.
Bhargava f. 310, 397, 368, 586, 650

652, 656, 660, 663.
Bhargava p. E. 327.
Bhargava k. 947,

t. W. 339.
Kurā Manu, 271, 599, 546-550,
Rhava g. 268, 269.
Bhava 78. 42+"
t. N. 278. 7
avis re, 645, 687, 058, 052 094
a k. 272, 278.


695


Bhilsa t. M. 295, 848.
peri (Pandava) k. 23, 322, 342,


Bhima (Yādava) k. 352.

Bhima k. 627.

Bhima dg. 268.

Bhima r. S. 289, 302, 364.

Bhīmā gs. 518.

Bhima-raksi r. S. 302.

Bhimaratha, -thī, r. S. 302.

Bhirukaccha p. W. 389.

Bhisma k. 9, 350, 629.

Bhīsmaka k. 336.

Bhoga-prastha p. N. 319, "77.

Bhoga-vardhana p. S. 337.

Bhoja f. 336, 342.

Bhoja p. W. 842, 371.

Bhoja-nagara t. NW. ? 377.

Bhoja-prastha? t. NW.? 377.

Bhojya p. C.? 342.

Bhopal dt. C. 286.

Bhramani gb. 257, 261, 266.

Bhrāmarī gs. 518.

Bhrgu rs. 19, 31, 68, 219, 224, 246,
249, 269, 810, 462, 595, 600-602,
650, 656.

Bhrgu demi-gods, 461, 462.

Bhrgu-bhūmi dt. E.? 328.

Bhrgu-kaccha P W. 339, 362.

Bhraga-raja bd. 28.

Bhubaneswar t. E. 35


356.
Bhar 201, 206, 218, 227, 229, 462,


552.
Bhita gb. 46, 47.
Bhati rs. 539, 540, 546, 548.
Bhitilaya pl. NW. 380.
Bhiti-yuvaka p. N. 380.
Bhuvas 206, 227, 261, 552.
Bias r. NW. 291, 292, 311, 315,
918, 321, 347, 382.
Bias r. M. 297.
Bignonia tr. 27.
Bihar o. 286, 325, 329, 382.


Bilva tr. 25, 425. f

6, 9-12, 16-21, 32,
, 55-65, 216-218, 684, 688.

Blue water-lily, 29, 30, 104, 115.

Boar, 85, 114,

184, 278, 389, 502-504, 514.


,


. .


Bodhi p. M. 309.
Body, 15, 23, 66-70, 190.


696


Bombaz tr. 82.

Borassus tr. 27.

Brahmā g. 5, 17, 20, 59, 61, 76, 95,
98, 99, 112, 127, 129, 158, 172,
178, 179, 206, 217-220, 223-238,
944-951, 256, 258, 268, 270, 277,
347, 387, 449, 453, 450, 465, 470-
474, 482, 494, 502, 509, 521, 524,
529, 580, 535, 536, 545, 550-562,
570, 582, 568, 685.

Brahma-cārin, 149, 160.

Brahma-datta k, 850.

Brahma-ksetra dt. 290.

Brahma-loka 89.

Brahma-mitra rs. 404.

Brahman g. 55, 92, 128, 129, 192,
193, 196, 199-202, 205, 206, 210,
213, 251, 585, 588, 685; sce Su-
preme Soul.

Brāhman-hood, 14, 48, 596.

Brahmāņī gs. 502, 504, 509, 518.

Brahmāņī 7. E. 301.

Brāhmanī r. E. 301.

Brahmanicide, 8, 19, 22, 28, 31, 57;
88, 616, 661, 685, 687.

Brahmam’s duties, 148.

Brahma-pura mt. N. 388.

Brahma-puraka p. NE. 882, 383.

Brahma-putra r. NE. 298, 328, 357,
370


Brahmarsi dt. M. 307.
Brahmāvarta dt. M. 290, 292, 349
577.

Brahminy Duck, 30.

Brahmottara y. E. 827.

Braj dt. M. 309.

Brinjal pt. 167.

Broach t. W. 339.

Buddha, 350.

Buddhi (Zntelligence), 190, 221, 249.
Buddhist, 354, 362, 367.

Budha dg. 269, 589, 590.

Budh Gaya t. M. 297.

Buffalo 47, 166-168, 255.

Bull, 255, 256.

Buphus bd. 59.

Burdwan, see Bardhwan.
Burning-ground, 88, 39, 46-48, 51,

58, 177, 197, 264.

But pt. 84.

Butea tr. 28.
Bytarni r. E. 800, 334,


Caccabis bd. 28, 29.


INDEX.


Gāhuka ? p. N. 324.

Caitra k. 415, 466.

Caitra rs. 442.

Caitra pr. 452, 458.

Caitraratha for. 278, 281.

Cajanus pt. 245.

Cakora dd. 28, 29.

Cakra-muiya mt. N. 278.

Cakravāka bd. 80 389, 899, 409
411.

Cukrāvartā 7. NE. 388.

Caksu r. N. 828.

Cāksusa, Manu and manvantara,
271, 449, 450, 453, 454, 549.

Caksusmati r. N. ? 298.

Calicut t. S. 331, 338.

Calimadra? p. N. 322.

Gulingapatam t. SE. 805.

Camara d. 476, 479.

Camel, 166, 209, 235, 258.

Campa k. 325.

Campa t. E. 325.

Campaka tr. 26, 326, 364. [524.

Camunda gs. 499, 505, 506, 515,

Cana pt. 84.

Canarese p. S. 363.

Canda d. 494, 495, 497-501.

Caņda pr. 610.

Candakhara p. NW. 374.

Caņdāla caste, 88, 44-47, 58, 54, 59,
68, 85, 87, 100, 104, 159, 182, 184,
257, 259, 266, 267.

Candanā r. M,? 294,

Candika qs. 465, 478, 476, 480-482,
487, 488, 499-511, 516, 521-523.

Candrabhaga r. NW. 291.

Candrabhāgā r. N.? 291.

Candra-dvipa ist. S. ? 390.

Candra-kānta mts. N. 389.

Candra-vatsa p. E.? 357.

Candrāyana penance, 564.

Candrešvara p. E. 957.

Canikata ? p. W. 338.

Canimadra? p. N. 322.

Canmbalism 357, 679, 683.

Oarissa tr. 25.

Carmakhaņdika p. N. 314, 374.

Curma-maņdala p. N. 314.

Carman-vati r. M. 294, 363.

Carma-patta t. S. 365.

Oarpophaga bd. 28.

Oarpopogon pt. 245.

Oarrot pt. 165.

Cāru-dharman k. 671,


INDEX,


Caru-karman hk. 670,

Cārvavīrat 78. 415,

Casarca bd., see Cakravaka.
res duties af, 148-151, 246, 594—


Oat, 49, 85, 184, 191, 450.
Cātaka bd. 29, 87, 394.
alai i p: N. 314.
atile, 74, 80, 88, 182, 23
587. 598. 5, 238, 255,
Caulya? p. S. 832.
Caurya (Theft) pfn. 265.
Cavery r. S. 803.
Cedi c. and p. M. 298, 341-344, 350,
359, 371, 665.
Cephalandra pt. 114.
Cereals, 165, 166, 244.
Ceylon 284, 288, 362, 366, 367.
Chakor bd. 28, 29.
Chambal r. M. 286, 295, 345, 351,
359, 368.
Chambeli, Chameli, see Malati.
Champa, Champak, tr., see Cam-


paka.
Chana pt. 84, 165.
Chandas, 554, 555.
Chatal: bd. sce Cataka.
Chāyā-Saūjūā gs. 456-461, 464,
566-569, 576.
Cheer pheasant, 29.
Chej doab NW. 315, 316.
Chenab r. NW. 291, 311, 318-316.
Chhattisgarh dt. O. 285, 327, 341,
942, 359, 371.
Chicacole t. SE. 305.
Ohick-pea pt. 84, 245.
Ohina, 319.
China cer., see Anu.
Olinā pt., see Jira.
China rose, see Javā.
Ohingleput dt. S. 332.
Ohitrakūt mt. M. 296, 363.
Chittar C > 304, 367.
Cholera, 519.
Christian, 364, 367. f
Chatia Nagpur dt. 286, 297,
329, 335, a
ibuka, p. N. 9/9.
Oier p ae
ķ "476, 478.
ANU 318, 319, 328, 379, 381.
Cer cer. dē
intā T. A $
Gīra-prāvaraņa? p. NE. 384.


327,


697.


'| Citra cst. 169, 367.


Citra-kūta, mt. M. 296, 359, 363.
Citra-kūtā r. M. 296.
Citra-kūtaka, p. S.P? 363,

Ottron tr. 25.

Citropala, Citrotpalā r. M.? 296.

Citrus tr. 25.

Civida p. N. 378.

Civilization, early, 238-246,

Civuka p. N. 378.

Coccystes bd. 29, 87, 394.

Cochin t. and dt. SW. 308, 367.

Cock, 147, 166, 184.

Oocoanut tr. 24, 69.

Codaka gb. 265.

Codra? p. S. 392.

Coiw gr. 245.

Cola k. 331.

Cola p. S. 287, 331, 332, 363.

Coleroon r. S. 303.

Combat 124, 629, 630, 673.

Comorin, cape, S. 285, 331.

Conjeveram t. S. 382, 367.

Conjugal life, 118, 119, 422, 424,
430, 488, 456.

Constellations, 168-173, 259, 278,
348, 349, 355, 358, 361, 367, 370,
374, 376, 381, 384-389, 443, 447,
585, 626.

Continents, 272-277.

Coorg dt. 364, 366.

Coot bd. 81.

Corpse, 44-50, 183, 181.

Cossye r. ©. 301, 827.

Covetousness, 15, 16.

Cranganore t. S. 364.

Creation, 217-225, 228-248, 268.

Creator, 10, 20, 47, 50, 51, 197.

Crime, see Sin.

Crocodile, 238.

Crocopus bd. 28, 86, 87.

Crops, care of, 259, 260, 264, 598.

Crow, 47, 72, 76, 89, 86, 147, 208,
258, 263.

Cuckoo 5, 7, 29, 85, 87, 147, 394.

Qumi bd. Pie

Cucurbita pt. |

Culika, Odlika p. N. 322, 323.

Gūlika p. W. 374.

Cūlika dyn. 374.


Cumin, Owmuvum pt. 25.
C


lew bd._85, 87.
Oxalate. (Acara), 2, 107, 170-189,


199, 251-268.


698


Outtack t. E. 360.

Cyavana 78. 219, 288, 310, 368, 600.
Oynocephali p. 378.

Oyperus gr. 245.


Dadima ir. 25.

Daitya p. and d.9, 10, 22, 28, 58,
100-105, 109, 112-123, 312, 349,
352, 386, 395, 465, 481, 488, 493-
öll, 514, 515, 518-521, 541, 559,
560, 563, 565, 604-608, 641, 669.

Dakint gb. 46.

Daksa A 219, 246-249, 269, 259,
36b, 408, 524, 535, 550, 551, 590,
561.

Daksiņā pfn. 247, 248.

Daksina Kosala, see Kosala, Dak-
gina.

Daksinapatha c. S. 331.

Dalbergia tr. 28.

Dālim tr. 25.

Dama k. 577, 668-689.

Dāmalipta t., see is

Damaraka? p. NE. 388.

Damayantī g. 844.

Damudā r. È. 301.

Danava p. and d. 10, 21, 23, 81,
101-100, 113-123, 138, 312, "328,
349, 852, 383, 416, 501-504, 507-
509, 517, 518, 541, 559, 560, 568,
565, 581, 605-608, 611, 642, 643,


Dancing, 3, 4, 251.
Danda pfn. 249.
Dandaka for. S. 336,
Dandaka p. S. 335, 336.
Dandaka k. 336.
Danta k. 442,
Dantākrsti d. 257, 262.
Danta-vakra k. 941.
Danu dgs. T iš 641, 642,
Das ii "RW.
ara šu, 312, 318-32
924, 346, 370, 3 5
Darada k. 311,
Darbha gr. 161, 162.
Dard p. NW. 811,
Dardistan c. NW. 311, 318.
Dardura mt. S. 287.
Darim, tr. 25.
Darkness (Tamas), see Qualities,


Darva, Dārva p. NW. 824, 7
2, 383.


Dārvāda ? p. NE. 383,


INDEX.


Darvī t. or r. N. 824.

Darvī-sankramana tī. N. 324.

Dašamālika p. NW. 817.

Dašamānika p. NW. 318.

Dāsameya, Dāsamīya p. NW. 880.

Dasan r. M. 296, 342.

Dašanāmaka p. NW. 318.

Daša-pura, t. M. 368.

Dāšapura p. M. 368.

Dāsapura ? p. M. 368.

Daša-ratha %. 464.

Dašārņa c. and p. M. 296, 342, 848,
359, 860, 670, 671, 674, 675.

Dašārņā t. M. 296, 298, 342.

Daseraka, Dāseraka p. N. 321, 378.

Dāśeraka p. N. 321.

Dasra g. 460, 575; see Asvins.

Dasyu p. 312-314, 317-320, 335,
516, 629.

Dattātreya rs. 98, 99-109, 187-198,
198, 202, 205, 207, 212, 218, 269.

Dattoli vs, 269.

Dattoli rs. 415.

Dauhitra, animal, 164.

Daurhrda, Daurhrta demons, 501.

Davada? p. NE. 382.

Day, 224-227.

Death g. 47, 51, 207-210, 250; see
Mrtyu.

Deeg 7. TN 292.

Delhi 1. 307, 351, 355,

Deogarh t. E. 356.

Dephul tr. 25.

Destiny, 474, 548, 646; see Fate.

Deva-dāru tr. 27.

Deva-kūta mts. N. 277, 388.

Deva-šaila mt. N. 278.

Devāvrdha k. 294, 669.

Devdār tr. 27.

Devikā r. N. 292,

Devikā 7, S. 292.

Devikā 1? 292.

Devī-māhātmya, 465—522, 524.

Dhak tr. 28.

Dhanaūjaya k., see Arjuna (Pāņ-
dava).

Dhanistha ost. 170, 376.

Dhanug-mat mt. N. 376.

Dhanvantari g. 153.
cīnas (mental abstraction), 194,


Dhāriņī a . 270.
Dharaņi-kota t. S. 387.
Dharitri deities, 178,


Dharma g. 9, 22, 23, 38, 44, 50


INDEX.


s


Druhya p. NW. 316.


m 5 ?
50-57, 90, 122, 246-249, 462, 595, Druhyu k. 816, 669.


Dharma, see Righteousness.


Dubdubi bd. 31.


Dharma-baddha p. NW. 375, Duck, 30.


Dharma-dvīpa p. W. 960.


Dud-Kosi r. E. 322.


Dharmiranya for. and p. M. 352, Duh
Dherme.sūstrs, 2, 19, $3, 39, 686. | Dumburin ign


Dhārsņaka f. 462.
Dhātaki k. 272.
Dhātr g. 10, 158, 269.


Dundubhi k. and c. 278.
Dundubhi d. 669.
Dungarpur t.. W. 388.


Dhātrī gs. 489. Durbā gr. 262.


Dhaumra demons, 501.
Dhautamilaka X. 819.
Dhenukakata i. S. 387.
Dheri Shahan t. NW. 379.
Dhrsņu k. 462.


Dur-buddhi %. 350.
Dur-dhara d. 480.
Durdura mt. S. 277, 362.
Durga p. W. 338.


Dhrsta k 462, 588. 509, 516.


Dhrta-rastra k. 345.
Dhrti-mut k. and c. 278.
Dhruva pr. 112.

Dhruva k. and c. 278.
Dhūmra-locana d. 497, 498.
Dhūmrāšva k., 600.
Dhūmravatī w. 269.
Dhūrtaka p. W. 369.
Dhūta-pāpā 7. M. 291.
Diospyros, various trees, 24-28,
Dipti-mat rs. 464.
Dirgha-griva p. NW. 374.
Dirgha-tamas rs. 320.


Durga r. E. P 801.

Durgala p. W. 338.

Durgama k. 445, 446.
Durgama d. 518.

Durjayanta mt. W. 288.
Dur-mukha d. 480.
Dururduda? mt. S. 287.
Durvāsas rs. 2, 5, 99, 100, 269.
Duryodhana k. 23, 24.
Dvaitavana for. M. 320.
Dvāpara age, 224, 226, 387, 388.
Dvārakā t. W. 24, 289, 340, 349.
Dvāravatī t., see Dvārakā.


Dissolution of the universe, 218, 219, Dvesanī gb. 261.


224, 227, 229.
Dista, see Nābhagādigta.
Diti gs. 102, 508, 559.
Diver Od. 31. m
Divodāsa k. 307, 328, 371, 600.


Dvīpa, doab, 364, 378.
Dwarka t. W. 340.
Dyuti-mat 78. 269.
Dyuti-mat k. 272, 278.
Dyuti-mat, Manu, 411-415.


699


Durgā gs. 484, 485, 490, 496, 508,


Doab 364, 378. Dyuti-mat k. 595.
ae i 16; 49, 73, 74, 84, 85, 153, | Barth, The, 218, 243-245, 271-280,
155, 166, 167, 175, 184, 251. 462, 474. i
eet Earth (element), 217, 221, 222.


Dolichos pt. 84, 165.
Drauni? rs. 464
Draupadi g.


Batung, rules of, 170-180.


ae 2, 37; see | Hbony tr. 24.
3, 20, 21, 32, 375 see | ies pt. 27.
Hdolius bd. 28.


Drāvaņa p. NW.? 368. idols bd. 28. 3 925, 450,
avid 370. gJs me, 217,
Dravida c. and p. S. 367, g na 606.
F k. 489. :
ire tae 1 641, 642, 645. Hg Eos dau
Dit ana, 207-211, 268. Bio 190 ist, 215
Droys b. 18, 17, 19 (6%. Kla-cakrā t. NW.? 382.


Droni 78. i
Droņī-mukhu, pl. 241. 354, 377. Ekopāda-ka p. NE. 358, 383.


Drsadvatī t. L.
Drupada k.


464. Eka-cakra t. M. 382


M. 290, 292, Ekapādapa ? p. NE. 358.


3, 19, 350, 358.


700


Eka-sroga mt. N. 279.
Ekeksana p. NW. 374.
Ekoddista sf. 185.

Ela r. S. 360.

Elements, 217, 220-222, 231, 557.
Elephant, 77, 235, 255, 206, 413,

414, 466, 474, 494, 559.
Elika p. SE. 360.
Emancipation from emistence, see
Final emancipation.

Emblica tr. 25, 26. :
Energies, goddesses, see Sakti.
Ephthalites p. N. 380.

Eraņdā? r, C. 296.

Erannoboas r. M. 295.

Ervum pt. 165.

Erythrina tr. 27, 494.

Eşīka p. S. 334.

Ether, 221, 222.

Eudynamis bd., see Kokila.
Eugenia tr. 277.

Eulabes bd. 49.


Fate, 18, 52-54, 70, 73, 83, 123, 127,
178, 258, 263, 474, 662, 680; see
Destiny.

Fennel pt. 244.

Ferozpur t. NW. 312, 321.

Pio trees, 38, 182, 192, 277, 390,


Fig, see Ficus.

Final emancipation from ewistence,
2, 64, 71, 72, 92, 128, 168, 189-
194, 198-202, 205, 206, 210-216,
265, 280, 283, 284, 453, 469, 512,
513, 527, 528, 570, 599, 687.

Fire (element), 222, 581, 582, 608.

Fires, sacred, 82, 128, 159, 160, 176,
178, 206, 391, 397—399.

Fla pt. 85.

Flesh-food, 164, 167, 168, 174, 175,
181, 182, 264, 267, 679, 683.

Flule, 396, 417, 571, 647.

Foetus, 62, 69, 70, 258, 259, 263-266.

Food (various), 180, 181.

Form (element), 217, 221, 229,

Forms, Divine; Indra’s, 21-28;
Visnu’s, 1, 20, 21; Brahmā's, 224,
225, 229.

Fortress, 240, 241.

Fowl, domestic, 181, 191.
Francolinus bd. 86.
Fruit, wonderful, 389.
Fulica bd. 81.


INDEX.


Gab ir. 25, 26.

Gabala p. NW. 314.

Gabhastimat c. 284.

Gadhi k. 57, 595.

Gajāhvaya t. and p. M. 355.

Gaja-pura t. M. 355.

Gaja-sāhvaya t. M. 355.

Gālava rs. 109, 112—114, 117, 847,
464.

Galava p. N. 347.

Gallinula bd. 80.

Gana dg. 47.

Ganapati dyn. 865.

Gana-vahya p. E. 365.

Gandak, see Gandaki.

Gandaki r. M. 292, 294, 329.

Gandhamādana mis. N. 277, 278,
281, 287, 310, 381, 602, 670.

Gandhamādana-gāminī ? 7. 805.

Ganda-pranta-rati gb. 257, 259, 263.

Gāndhāūra c. and p. NW. 814, 316,
818, 321, 380.

Gāndhārī, sound, 205.

Gāndhārī pi. 166.

Gāndhārikā pt. 166.

Gandharva dg. 55, 68, 78, 103, 113-
117, 121, 126, 138, 201, 207, 282,
235, 236, 279, 893-401, 405-408,
413, 481, 495, 497, 511, 541, 559,
571, 581, 608, 619, 641, 645-650,
679, 682.

Gandharva p. N. 384.

Gandharva c. 284.

Gandharva pl. 246.

Gāndharva c. 284.

Gāndharva marriage, 671, 672.

Gandholika pt. 166.

Ganga, see Ganges.

Ganga-chil, gāng-chil bd. 86.

Gangā-hrada J. M.? 644.

Ganges 6, 59, 183, 280-282, 290,

_ 303, 319, 320, 369, 493, 590.

tam t. and di, E. 284, 304, 3834-


Gantu-prastha ? mt. 288.

Garbhahan-tr gb. 257, 259, 264.

Garcinia tr. 28.

ee rs. 101-106, 435, 444.

Garhwal di. N. 29, 320.

Garlic, pt, 165.

Garo hills K. 306.

Garuda, bird, 6, 8, 112, 125, 502,
9


Gāthā, 235, 261.


INDEX,


Gatra rs, 270.
Gauda c. E. 352.
Gauhati i. NE. 306, 381.
Gaur t. E. 326, 352.
Gaura-grīva p. M. 352.
Gauri gs. 484, 488, 489.
Gauri prs. 627.
Gautama rs. 22, 462, 612.
Gautama b. 446.
Gavedhuka gr. 245.
Gaya (son of Vaivasvata) k. 589.
Gaya (son of Amūrturayas) k. 329.
Gaya t. M. 165, 168, 297, 306, 330,
352, 589.
Gayāl, bi. 164, 590, 592.
Geography, 271-384, 387-391.
Geyamālava p. E. 828.
Geyamarthaka p. E. 328.
Ghaggar r. N. 291.
Ghāts mts. E, and W. 284, 285.
Ghogra r. M. 376.
Ghora-ka p. W. 373.
Ghosa p. NE. 883.
Ghosa (village), 241, 242.
Ghosa-sankhya p. M. 851, 565.
Ghrtācī aps. 4, 571.
Ghrtācī w. 600.
Ghuna-kitaka, insect, 87.
Ginger, 166.
Giri-bbadrā g. 452.
Giri-vraja t. NW. 318.
Giri-vraja t. E. 830.
Girjuk t. NW. 318.
Girnar h. W. 288, 289.
Giryek t, I. 380.
Gou t. SW. 362-364.
Goat, 147, 164, IE a a
lins, 250-268, 583, 545.
das r, S. 284, 286, 302, 305,
310, 3o sal
Godha, reptile, 101.
Godhana mt. M.? 290.
Golangula p. S. 381, 364.
Gomal r. pe Bs
omanta mt. N. 20% |,
ās at i
3, 330, 331.
Gomarte Pig 196, 291, 306, 816,
628.
Gomati r. NW. 291.
Gonurda P: S. Giju, 308.
Gonarddha P "284, 286, 305.


w Bd i
rie ness (Sattva), se Qualities.


701


Goomti r. M. 291.
Goose, 30, 147, 409, 410.
Gopācala mt. M. 289.
Gopa-giri mt. M. 289.
Go-samp, reptile, 181.
Gotama rs. 31.
Gourd pt. 118.
Govardhana mt. M. 290, 310.
Govardhana ft. W. 810.
Govinda g. 112; see Visnu.
Govinda p. E. 331,
Gracula bd. 49.
Grahaka gb. 265.
Gram pt. 84, 165, 244.
Grama (village), 241, 242,
Grama (music), 151.
Grāmn-rāga (music), 130.
Grasshopper, 147.
Grebe bd. 31.
Greek, 284, 314.
Grhasthu, 149-156, 186.
Griijana pl. 165.
Guava tr, 25.
Guda p. M. 352.
Guduha y. M, 373.
Guha g. 502.
Guha k. 361.
Guhya dg. 178. |.
Guhyaka dg. 370, 461, 530, 576,
641, 648.
Gujarat c. W. 24, 28, 29, 286, 313,
338-342, 368, 378.
Gulaha, Guluha p. M. 378.
Gurgaņa p. N. 345.
Gurjara p. NW. 378.
Gurkha p. N. 845.
Guruha p. W. 378.
Guru-nadī r. W. 3798.
Gurung p. N. 346. z
Guru-sthala? p. NW. 373.
Guru-svara? p. NW. 878.
Gurn-visala for. E. 681.
Gwalior t. M. 289.


Haha dy. 571.

Haidarābād t S. 366.

Haihaya k. 371.

abani: p.M., C. and W. 99, 107,
944, 30l, a D

Haima mt. N. ēzē. i

Haimagirika p. NW. 363.

Haimakāța p. SE. 300.

Haimanta-giri mt. N.? 306.

Haiminī g. 452.


702


Hakra r. N. 291.
Hālār dt. W. 289.
Halayudha k. 9, 19, 24; see Bala-
Rama.
Hamsa bd. 30.
Harnsakāyana p. N. ? 323.
Hathsa-marga p. N. 823, 345.
Harnsa-nābha mt. N. 279.
Harnsa-pada p. N.? 328.
Hanta, 151, 152, 179.
Hanū-mat, monkey, 289, 346, 367.
Hara g. 482, 483.
Hara-bhisika p. NW. 317.
Hāra-hūņa p. NW. 317, 380.
Hāra-mūrtika p. NW. 817.
Hara-pirika p. NW. 317.
Hare, 164, 181, 235.
Hari g. 55, 91, 389, 469-472, 483,
502, 562.
Hari gods, 442.
Harika p. SE. 360.
Hari-parvata mts. NW. 388.
Hariscandra k. 32-61.
Harita k. and c. 273.
Harita bd. 28, 86, 87.
Haritaka tr. 26.
Haritasva k. 589.
Hari-varga c. N. 345, 390.
Harga-vardhana p. N. 319.
Hary-aéva k. 371.
Hasdu r. C. 295, 298.
Hasta cst. 169, 367.
Haste k. 855.
astinā-pura
a } t. M. 307, 351, 355.
Havih-samsthā sf. 128.
Havir-varsa k. and c. 278.
Havis-mat rs. 454,
Hawk, 182, 208, 263.
Haņu p. N, 322.
Hazaribagh dt. C. 285.
Hedysarum pt. 166, 245.
Hell, 7, 62, 68, 71-91, 101, 107, 149,
280, 485, 622, 661, 662, 687.
Hema-dharma k., 627.
Hema-giri? mt. W. 369.
Hema-ktita mts. N. 275-277,
Hema-kūta mt. N. 360, 369, 370,
983.
Hema-kūta mt. SE. 360.
Hema-šrīga mt. N. 369, 370.
Hema-taraka? p. N. 380.
Hemp pt. 245.
Herodias bd. 59.


INDEX,


Heron bd. 49, 58-61, 72, 85, 86.

Hestho r. ©, 295.

Hibiscus tr. 568.

Hima mt,=Himavat

Himālaya mis., see Himavat.

Hima-vat mis. 5, 28, 29, 127, 189,
249, 275—283, 287, 298, 345, 347,
369, 376, 391-396, 475, 488, 489,
494, 518, 598, 655, 669, 670.

Himsā,pfn. 250.

Hinga p. NE. 384.

Hiran-maya c. N. 890, 391.

Hiran-vati r. N. 391.

Hiranya k. and c. 278.

Hiraņya-bāhu 7. M. 295.

Hiranya-garbha g. 220, 226.

Hiranya-kašipu k. 146.

Hiranya-loman 7s. 449.

Hirauya-$rūga mt. N. P 869.

Hiranya-vaha r. M, 295.


886.
Honey-sucker bd. 80.
Hoopoe bd. 80.
Horn article, 87.
Horse, 182, 188, 285, 255, 278, 388,
457, 460, 567, 578, 575.
Horse-sacrifice, 41, 89, 616, 685.
House, ancient, 239-243.
Hrada? p. NW. 816,
Huhu dg. 571,
Hum p. 379.
Hūna p. N. 315, 375, 379.
Hum-des c. NW. 824, 380.
Hydaspes r. NW. 291.
Hydraotes r. NW. 291.
Hymns, see Gatha,
Hyphasis r. NW. 291, 292.


Ichnewmon, 210.

Iksu? r. N. 292.

Iksu r. E.P 304.

Iksuda r. E. 304.

Iksukā r. E. 904.

Iksulā r. E. 304.

Iksvaku k. 462, 551, 588, 617.
Iksvāku (son of Ksupa) k. 618.
Ila prs. 327, 587-589.

Ila demi-goddess, 559.

iešu k. and c. N. 278, 276, 277,


INDEX.


Illusion, see Maha-miya.
Impurities, 172-185.
Incarnations, 28 ; Indra's, 12-14,


23; Visņu's, 21; Daityas' 22, 23.


India, see Bhārata.

Indigo pt. 25.

Indigofera pt, 25.

Indivara pt. 29.

Indivara dg. 401-404, 411.

Indra g. 4, 8-15, 21-23, 38, 40, 50,
55-57, 68, 75, 90, 97, 102, 109,
129, 147, 158, 227, 276, 415, 420,
436, 437, 442, 454, 461, 462, 473,
474, 496, 502-505, 509, 512, 514,
524-526, 592, 535, 545, 549, 550,
562, 565, 570, 604, 611, 619, 628,
ii 648, 652-655, 669, 678, 680,


Indra-dasa m. 678.

Indra-dvīpa c. 283.

Ani peer be t. M. 807, 316, 351,
5


5.
Indra-senā g. 669, 674-678, 681.
Indus r. 291, 298, 312, 315, 318,
322, 324, 345, 376, 377, 380.
Infanticide, 32.
Inguda tr. 26.
Intelligence (Buddhi), 15, 16, 221,
281


Intozication, 24, 31, 133, 146, 600,


602.
Tra demi-g8. 559.
Irāvatī r. NW. 291, 916.
Tésana dg. 268.
Israel 889.


Jack tree, 25.

1, 46, 47, 58, 67, 85, 183, 208.
oe 0, 69, 71, 76, 83, 91, 107-
110, 127, 180-145, 186-190, 211.


imineya b. 684.
lata 1-4,17-21, 38, 62, 217,
919, 684, 685, 688.


703


Jamadagnya dt. W. 338.
Jambha d. 102, 108, 611, 677.
Jambu tr. 277, 391.

Jambi r. N. 278.
Jambu-dvīpa, 271-283.
Jambulā r. M.? 297.
Jambu-mat mt. 856.
Jambū-mūla c. N. 278.
Jambunada l. 658.
Jāmbūnada gold, 278.
Jambv-ākhya h. E. 356.
Janaka k. 330.

Janaka f. 75, 374.

Janakpur t. N. 330.
Jana-loka, 227, 229, 553.
Janamejaya k. 350.
Janamejaya k. 379.
Janardana, 2, 5, 19, 349, 388, 470,

472; see Krsna and Visņu.

Janasthana dt. 302.

Jangala p. M. 809.

Jāngala P p. N. 322.

Jangha k. 442.

Janu k. 442.

Jar and well-rope, 70—78, 91.
Jarāsandha k. 341.

Jaritāri b. 8.

Jartika p. NW. 318.

Jārudhi mt. N. 277, 279.
Jasmine pt. 27, 152.
Jasminum pt. 24-27, 152, 425, 426.
Jatādhara f p. S. 364.
Jāta-hāriņī gb. 266, 450, 451.
Jathara mts. N. 277.

Jati pt. 27, 152.

Jausi f. 352.

Javā tr. 553.

Jayadratha k. 315.

Jayanta mts. NW. 388.

Jew, 339, 364, 367.

Jhelam r. NW. 291, 315, 318, 324.
Jīmūta %. and c. 278.

Jira pt. 25.

Jivajiva-ka bd. 28, 87.
Jīvaūjīva bd. 28, 87.
Jneyamallaka 4: E. 328.
Johila r. O. 296.

Jonesia tr. D 36. 364.
Juguda p. N. 324.

Tajā tr. 27.

Jumna r. M.; see Yamuna.
Jumna r. E. 297.
Junagadh t. W. 288.
Jupiter, planet, 246, 431, 626.


704


Jyestha cst. 169, 374.
Jyestha-saman, 159.

Jyotīrathā, -thyā, r. C. 295, 296.
Jyotir-dhāman rs. 442.
Jyotisika p. M. 352.

Jyotis-mat k. 272, 278.


Kabul r. NW. 291, 314.

Kaccha dt. W. 308, 340.

Kaccha dt. S. 367.

Kacchapa dg. 416, 417.

Kacchika p. W. 340.

Kacchvīya p. W. 340.

Kachh dt. W. 312, 340, 349, 350.

Kadam tr., see Kadamba.

Kadamba tr. 25, 277, 505.

Kadambā g. 446.

Kadamba bd. 80.

Kadru demi-gs. 509.

Kadu pt. 118, 166.

Kāfiristān c. NW. 818, 321.

Kahlara pt. 30.

Kaikaya ».=Kaikeya.

Kaikeya k. 817

Kaikeya p.
382, 665.

Kaikeyī g. 76.


INDEX.


NW. 316-318, 345, 377,


Kailāsa mt. N. 6, 132, 277, 279,
287, 322, 345, 351, 870, 376, 382,


402, 669.
Kairāta p. N. 379.
Kaiskindhya p. C. 342, 360.


Kaitabha d. 465, 469-472, 484, 519.


Kāka-jangha gb. 266.

Kakulalaka p. SE. 360, 361.
Kala p. W. 369, 374.
Kāla, see Fate.

Kāla pt. 168.

Kāla d. 480.

Kalaha gb. 262.
Kala-hamsa bd. 30.
Kala-jihva gb. 262.
Kālājina p. C. ? 362.
Kālajosaka p. NW. 313.
Kālaka demons, 501.
Kālakeya demons, 501.
Kālakotī ti. M. 354. .
Kālakotisa p. M. 35-4.
Kālakūta tt. M.? 354.
Kalama pt. 84.
Kālaūjara p. M. 354.
Kala-saka pt. 164.
Kala-titar bd. 86.
Kālatoyaka p. NW. 312, 313.


Kalāvatī w. 402, 406-408, 411, 412.


Kalāya pt. 84.

Kali d. 257.

Kali dg. 398-401.

Kali age, 224, 226, 387, 888.
Kālī gs. 499-509.

Kālibala p. W. 338, 369.
Kalika gs. 494.

Kalinda mt. N. 461, 576.
Kālindī g. 445.


Kalinga c. and p. SE. 325—327, 333,


334, 358, 359.
Kalinga k. 325.
Kalinga P p. M. 308, 316,354.
Kalinga ? p. NW. 316.
Kalinga mt. N. 279.
Kālinga=Kalinga p. SE.
Kalingaka p. C. 354.
Kalinga-nagara t. M. 316.
Kaliūjar h. M. 354.

Kali Sindh r. M. 293.

Kalitaka p. W. 338.

Kalmāsapāda k. 336

Kalpa (Age), 228,
268


Kalpa (Tree), 239, 243.
Kalpa P pl. 315.
Kalwan t. W. 338.
Kalyani i. S. 289, 333.
Kāmā g. 115, 132, 249.
Kamala pt. 30.
Kamaranga tr. 24.


emer ape c. NE. 306, 331, 411,
1.


577, 5
Kama-sastra, 2.
Kambala k. 125, 180-133.
Kambala mts. NW..388.


Kamboja c. and p. NW. 311, 318,


319, 350, 368, 371.
Kamba demons, 501.
Kambunāyaka ? p. S. 366.
Kāminī 7. NW. 389.
Kampil t. M. 350, 358.
Kāmpilya t. M. 850, 353, 598.
Kāmrūp dt. NE. 331.
Kathsa k. 352.

Karhsavati ? r. E. 301.
Kanak-champa tr. 27.
Kanara dt. S. 864.

Kanauwj t. M. 292, 307.
Kaūcanāksī 7. M. 290, 806.
Kāīcī t. S. 332, 367.
Kajicipuram t. S. 367.
Kāūicivaram i. S.» 367.


"909, 235-238,


INDEX. 705
Kaiicys? p. S. 367. ` Karkaéa aps. 4.
Kandahar t. NW. 374. Karki r. N. 322.


Kandhara bd. 6-8.

Ka at. NW. 347.
Kanhar r. C. 297.
Kanka P- M. 353,
Kanka p. N. 358.

Kanka bd. 6, 7.
Kaikella tr. 25.
Kankola-tr. 25. ;
Kantakara? p. NW. 317.
Kāņthāl tr. 25.
Kanyakaguna?P p. NW. 375.
Kānyakubja t. M. 307, 353, 595.
Kaorhari r. C. 285.
Kapila rs. 120.

Kapila mt. N. 279.
Kāpila k. and c. 273.
Kapilendra mt. N. 279.
Kaņili r. NE. 306.
Kapingala p. M. 354.
Kapinjala r. 354.

Kapišā r. E. 301, 327.
Kapotaka, Naga k. 431.
Karabhā 7. E. 301.


Karamnasa r., M. 297.

Karamodā r. M. 296.

Karanda bd. 30.

Karandava bd. 30.

Karandhsma ‘k. 622-625, 631-644,


89


Karkotaka for. S. 862.

Karkotaka k. 362.

Karma, doctrine of, 10, 57, 62, 67-
71, 77, 78, 87-90, 198-238, 282, ©
283, 528, 592.

Karma-nāšā r. M. 287, 296.

Karma-nāyaka p. S. 366.

Karma-nodā P r. M. 296.

Karņa k. 368, 369, 629.

Karnapradheya p. W. 368.

Karna-pravarana p. N. 346, 369.

Karnata c. and p. S. 363.

Karnataka p. S. 363.

Karnavati r. M. 297.

Karnikara tr. 27. —

Karnul dt. S. 366.

Kartavirya k., see Arjuna.

Karttikeya g. 524, 574.

Karu mt. 290.

Karissa k. 341. A

Karūga k. 463, 588, 593.

Karūga ) p. C. 309, 334, 341, 359,

Kārūsa 366, 463, 598.

Kārugaka p.=Kārūga.

Karvatā c. or t. E. 356.

Karvata-ka (town), 241.

Karvataéana h. E. 356.

aya P p. E. 357.

Kaseruka p. N. 321.

Kaserukmāt c. 283.

Kaéerumat, Kašerūmat c. 283.

Kasetu c. 283.

Kashgar c. N. 918.

Kaa t. M. (= Benares), 187-190,
207, 211-216, 308, 929, 341, 357,
359, 967, 371, 600.

Kāši p. M. 357, 367.

Kāšikā r. 305.

Kāsmīra c. and p. NW. 312, 318,
919, 322, 323, 340, 370, 382.

Kasta-harana-parvata? pl. E. 325.

Kāšya p. M. 367.

Kasyapa dg. 178, 461, 535, 550-552,
559-565.

Kāšyapa rs. and f. 462, 465, 612.

Kataka t. SE. 360.

Kataka-sthala p. SE. 360.

Katamala r. S. 303.

Kathrei p. NW. 313.

Kathakgara p. W. 339

Kathi p. . 313. [344, 373.

Kathiawar dt. W. 313, 338, 840,


706


Kātyāyanī gs. 503, 512, 515.

Kauraīja mt. NE. 888.

Kaurava pat., race, 6-9, 28, 24, 37,
360, 378, 567.

Kaurusa p. S. 366.

Kaušāmba c. M. 807.

Kaušāmbi t. M. 307.

Kaušika pat. 84, 37, 48, 44, 50, 6],
93, 462.

Kaušika p. NE. 383.

Kaušikā r.=Kaušikī.

Kanšikī r. NE. 292, 293, 329, 369,
383, 595.

Kaušikī gs. 494.

Kaveri r. 285, 290, 303, 864, 366.

Kaveri g. 446.

Kavya rs. 442.

Kawa Kol mis. E. 286.

Kāyana? r. M. 297.

Kekaya p.=Kaikeya.

Kekaya k. 665.

Kekayī g. 665.

Ken r. M. 288, 297, 341, 359.

Keora, shrub, 26.

Kerala k. 331.

Kerala p. S. 331, 332.

Kerala p. C. 341.

Kerra bd. 30.

Kešava g. 472; see Visnu.

Ketakī pt. 7, 26.

Ketu mi. 290.

Ketumāla k. and c. NW. 274-278,
282, 387-389.

Ketumat k. and c. 273.

Ketu-virya k. 665.

Kevala? p. S. 381.

Khambu p. N. 322.

Khāydava-prastha t. M, 855

Khandesh di. W. 288.

Khaninetra k. 619—624.

Khanitra k. 610-617.

Khaiijana h. NW. 370.

Kharaicpur hills B. 356.

Kharapatha c. N. 380.

Kharasāgararāši P p. N. 380.

Kharmaka h. E. 356.

Khas p. N. 346.


Khaša p. N. 346, aD, 351, 357, 383.


Khasa p. N. 346,
Khasā demi-gs. 559.
Khasi hills E. 306.
Khas-khas gr. 79.
Khatvangi r. S. 364.
Khetaka (town), 241.


INDEX


Khichree, 168, 174.

Khyati w. 249, 269.

Kicaka c. NE. 381.

Kicaka p. M. 382.

Kicaka m. 382.

Kīkata c. E. 331, 382.

Kimpurusa k. and c. N. 278, 274,
282, 381, 390.

Kimpurusa k. 415.

Kiméuka ir. 28.

King, his.duties, 144-148, 157, 656,
657, 666.

King-crow bd. 28.

Kinkara? p. N. 381.

Kinnara p. N. and E. 116, 117, 236,
279, 381, 393-397, 647.

Kirānti p. N. 322.

Kirata p. and c., N. and E. 284,
307, 316, 322, 323, 328, 346, 347,
369, 379, 381, 383.

Kirati p. N. 322.

Kisadya p. M. 307.

Kisasna p. M. 307.

Kisasta p. M. 307.

Kiskindhaka p. C. 342, 360.

Kiskindhyā c. S. 342.

Kisina r. S. 302, 303, 365.

Kite bd. 86.

Kiyān r. M. 297.

Kiyul r. E. 285.

Kochchi t. S. 367.

Kodagu dt. S. 364.

Kodo cer. 244..

Kodungalūr t. S. 364.

Kohalaka p. N. 380.

Koil bd., see Kokila.

Kokanada p. NW. 372, 380.

Kokanada pt. 30.

Kokankana p. NW. 372.

Kokaraka p. NW. 372, 380.

Kokila bd. 28, 394, 399, 407.

Kol p. C. 364, 365, 466.

Kola k. 331.

Kola p. C. 331, 332, 363, 365.

Kola p. 466.

Kolagira p. S. 363, 365.

Kolagiri dt. S. 364.

Kolāhala mt. C. 286, 359.

Kolavana 7. W. 338.

Kolla h. M. 290.

Kolūka, Kolūta c. N. 375, 382.

Kolvagireya p. S. 363.

Kombunāyaka ? p. S. 366.

Koiic-bak bd, 86,


707


INDEX.


Konkan dt. S. 362.

Konkana p. S. 362.

Konva mi. 290.

Kophēn r. NW. 291.

Kora mt. 290.

Koradiisa cer. 244.

Korava, tribe S. 332.

Kosala, Daksina or Mahā-, c. C.
299, 308, 334, 342, 358, 359, 371.

Kosala, Uttara, c. M. 294, 308, 342,
352, 353, 358.

Kosala i. M. 57.

Kosam t. M. 307.

Kosi r. NE. 292, 329, 383, 595.

Kovidāra tr. 27, 165.

Krakara bd. 86.

Krama pr. 610.

Kratu rs. 246, 249, 270.

Kraniica mt. N. 288, 376.

Krauiica p. N. 376.

Krauūca-dvīpa 272-275.

Krauiica-dvipa dt. S. 364.

Krauūcālaya for. S. 364.

Krauiica-pura t. S. 364.

Kraustuki b. 217, and passim 224-
237, 268-283,.348, 358, 391, 415-
419, 436, 463, 550, 552, 587, 653,
665, 684.

Kravyāda, caste, 182.

Krodhā demi-gs. 559.

Krpa 7s. 464.

Krpā r. 806.

Krpāvatī prs. 602.

Krsņa k. and g. 23, 24, 50, 55, 808,
328, 340, 342, 349—352, 361, 388,
474.

Krsna mt. N. 279.

Krsna mis. NW. 388.

Krsna Dvaipāyana rs. 677.

Krsņā r. S. 290, 302, 365, 366.

Krsna gs. 490, 494.

Krsņā g. (=Draupadī) 3, 19, 23.

Krsnā-dvīpa dt. S. 365.

Krsna-vena r. C. 300.

Krta Age, 224, 226, 272, 347, 387,
388, 437.

Krtamālā r. S. 303.

Krtasmara mt. NW.? 290.

Krtavīrya k. 101, 106.

Krti k. 39.

Krtraka? p. N. 347.

Krttika cst. 169, 355.

Krtyā r. 306.

Krumu r. NW. 298.


Ksamā w. 249, 270.

Sami k. eee anh

KsatodaraP p. N. a

Ksatriya Satta: 36, 317-319, 323,
336, 350, 351, 370, 380, 594-596,
671, 672.

Ksatriya virtue, 124, 144, 145, 148,
188, 212, 246, 442, 591, 596—601,
627-634, 642, 668, 671, 672, 677.

Ksemadhirta? p. N. 381.

Ksemadhiarti k. 381.

Ksemaka k. and c. 273.

Ksetra-jiia, 220, 223; see Purusa.

Ksipra r. W. ? 299.

Ksipra r. 306.

Ksudraka p. M. 377.

Ksudravīņa? p. N. 377.

Ksupa (son of Brahma) k. 617, 618.

Ksupa (son of Khanitra) k. 615—
618


Ksurādri h. NW. 370.
Kubha r. NW. 291.
Kuca-hara gb. 266.
Kuhu r. NW.? 291.
Kuhaka p. N. 824.
Kuhu p. NW. 324.
Kuhuka ? p. N. 324.
Kujrmbha d. 604-609.
Kukkuta mt. N. 279.
Kuksi prs. 272.
Kul ir. 27.
Kulata, Kulati p. NE. 382.
Kulattha pt. 84, 244, 245
Kulattha p. N. 375.
Kulinda p. N. 316, 317, 323.
Kuliūga p. N.? 316
Kulīra mt. N. 278.
Kulīya p. W. 338.
Kulu di. N. 316, 382.
Kulūta c. N. 375, 381, 382.
Kulya p. N. 307.
Kulya p. S. 331, 332.
Kulya (semi-divine race P) 559
Kumana p. S. 332.
Kumaon dt. N. 29, 286, 320.
Kumara k. and c. 273.
Kumāra g. 502-505, 509, 514.
Kumāra dg. 232.
Kumari r. C. 285.
Kumārī 7. 305.
K pt. 29.

umuda mt. W.P 332. 36
Kumud-vati r. E. P 301 va
Kumud-vatī prs. 627.


708


Kuna? p. NW-? 315.
Kunaha? p- NW.? 375.
Kunapa p- NW.? 375.
Kundala w. 113, 116-118, 120.
Kundikera? p. C.? 371.
Kundina t. C. 336, 673.


Kuntals p. M. 308.

Kuntala p. W.? 308.
Kuntapravarana p. N. 346.
Kaunti bd. 6.

Kuntī g. 28.

Kuntila dt. M. 308.
Kunyatāladaha ? p. NW. 375.
Kūpā r. 306.


g 507, 652,


Kuru f. ., see Kaurava.

Kuru p. M. 308, 309, 333, 345-349,
= 359, 377.

Kuru, Uttara (Northern), p. N-282,
p 376, 387-390, 457460, 567,


Kuruba p. S. 332.
Kuru-jāūgala dt. M. 309, 354.
T as di. M. 8,293, 307,354,


Kuša K. 328, 330.

uša gr. 31, 67, 118, 1 258.
Kuša-dvīpa, 272-275. z
Kušala k. and c. 273.
Knéa-sthali t. (=Dvaraka), 289.


Kusuma p. S..332, 366.


INDEX»


Kita-saila mt. 290.

Kutch dt. W., see Kachh.

Kuthaprāvaraņa p. N. 346.

Kuvalaya pt. 29.

Kuvalaya, horse, 109, 113.

Kuvalayasva k. 109-127, 133-142,
145, 186.

Kuvera g. 6-10, 460, 474, 475, 489,
494, 531, 562, 574, 638, 680.

Kyak partridge, 86.


| Ladaha p. NW. 375.


Ladaka? p. NW. 375.
Lagenaria, pt. 118.
Lag-Goose, 30, 409, 410-
Lajja? r. M? 297.


| Lakuca ir. 25.
| Laksmī gs. (=Srī), 101105, 249,


255, 269, 416, 419, 515, 522, 638.
Lalittha p. NW. 374.


| Lambādt p. S. 333.
| Lambage p. NW. 321.


Lambana k- and c- 273.
Lamghān dt. NW. 321.
Lampāka c. NW. 321.
Lāmūlīnī r. E. 305.
Langali r. E.? 305.
Lāūgūlīnī r. E- 305.
Lanius bd. 28.

Lanka t. S. 346, 362.
Lapis lazuli, 366.
Lapwing bd. 394.


Lavaņna k. 352.

Laya (musīc), 131.

Lekha gods, 454.

Lentil pt. 165.

PEREA pitrs, 157, 158.


eprosy, 449.
= (element), 128, 129, 217, 221,


Lika d. 266, 267.

Lila dg. 418 (=Nīla).
Lilajam r. M. 297.
Lilavati prs. 627.
Lilayudha p. W. 334.
Limbu p. N. 322.


INDEX.


Lizard, 181, 210.

Locust, 8. l

Lohinī 7. NE. 293.

Lohita r. NE. 293, 357.

Lohīta pl? 357.

Lohita f. 357.

Lohitya pl. M. 357.

Lohityā 7. NE. 357.

Loka, see World.

Lokāloka mis. 275.

Loka-pāla dg. 55, 277.

Lola k. 439, 441.

Lolana p . NE. 383.

Toma gāda ki 325, 464.

Lopāmudrā prs. 293.

Tous, 4 18, 24, 29, 30, 97, 147

Lotus Water-lily, pt. 29.

Love, 2,15, 115, 119, 170-172, 185,
188, 198, ‘215, "264, 430, 467.

Love-god, see Kama.

Lūsatī 7. 305.

Inte, 132, 135, 396, 417, 571, 647.


Madālasā g. 114, 115, 118-126, 133,
136-145, 148, 151, 155, 157, 160,
164, 168-171, 180, 181, 186-188,


Madgu bd. 31, 85, 86.
p- E. 324.
Madhu mt. N.-279.
Madhu k. 352.
Madhu 7s. 454.
Madhu d. 465, 469-472, 519.


"ada ders Poe 333, 345, 351-


Maina c. and p. NW. 311, 315-317,
347-350, 372, 373, 377-380, 665,


Madrale k. 311, 315.
Madraka p.—Madra.
Madres a
Mādrī g. 23.
Madura t. and di. S. 331.
c. and M. 308, 330,
337, 341, 357, 3


709


Mā p. M. 330, 664.

Maghā cst. 168, 169.

Magic, 79, 201, 392-395, 554, 555,
614.

Magician, 174.

Mahā-bhadra l. N. 278, 282.

Mahā-bhadra mi. N. 279.

Mahā-deva g. 268.

Mahā-druma k. and c. 273.

Mahā-gaurī r. E.? 301.

Mahā-grīva p. SE. 360.

Mahā-hanu d. ./6, 479.

Mahā-kāla i. C. 521.

Mahā-kālī gs. 521.

Mahā-Kosala c. 308, 342, 371.

Mahā-mārī, disease, 519, 521.

Maha-Maya gs. 465, 469, 515.

Mahā-nada 7. SE. 295, 298.

Maha-nada pr. 670, 672.

Maha-nadi r. SE. 284-286, 295—
298, 300, 305.

Mahānands pr. 672, 673.

Mahā-nīla mt. N. 278.

Mahā-padma dg. 408, 416, 494.

Mahā-rāstra c. and p. W. 333, 363.

Mahā-ratha k. 612.

Mahā-raurava hell, 54, 71, 72.

Mahar-loka, 227, 558.

Mahārnava p. W. 370.

Mahā-šaīla mt. N. 279.

Mahat, 217, 220-223, 231.

Mahati r. W. 294.

Mahāvīta k. 272.

Mahendra mis. E. 284-286, 305,
334, 362.

Mahešvara g. 504, 505, 514.

Maheswar t. C. 333.


Mahindra mis. SE. 284.
Mahisa d. 473—487, m 524.
S. 333.


Mahigika p. S. 333.
Mahisiki r.? C. 334.

Māhismaka, p . C. 333.

Mahismat k 333, 371.

arā i. C. 310 333, 336, 344,


710


Maināka mt. W. 288.
Maināka mt. S. 288.
Maināka-prabha ? r. C. 288.
Maitra cst. 370.

Mākandī t. M. 353.

Makara dg. 416, 417.
Makarī r. M.? 298.
Makrunā r. M.? 298.
Maksanā r. M.? 298.

Mal p. E. 330.

Malada p. E. 326.

Malada p. E. 326.

Malaja p. M. 309, 325.
Malaka p. M. 308.

Malati pt. 27, 152.

Malava p. M. 341, 354, 377, 379.
Malavanaka p. C.? 326.
Malavartin p. H. 326.
Malaya mts. S. 285, 287, 304, 362.
Malda dt. E. 326.

Mālē p. E. 330.

Malignant spirits, 250-268.
Malika? p. NW. 318.
Malini t. E. 325.

Malini aps. 538.

Malla p. E. 330.

Malli p. 318.

Mallika pt. 24, 25, 425, 426.
Mallikārjuna temple, S. 290.
Mal Pahariya p. E. 330.
Manoa c. 286, 312, 338, 341, 354,


Manaka, 178.
Manakalaha? p. N. 379.
Manpa Hind), 221.
ānasa 1. N. 278, 281, 288,
376, 384. se
Ménasa k. and c. 273.
Manasvinī w. 269.
Mānavācala h. E. 356.
Manavarjaka p. E. 326.
Mānavartika p. E. 326.
Manbhim dt. E. 326, 327.
Mandagā 7. 305.
Manda-gāminī r. 305.
Mandākmī r. N. 296, 298.
Mandākinī 7. S. 302.
Manda-pāla b. 8.
Mandar tr. 27, 494.
Mandara mis. N. 277-280, 310, 316,
322, 351, 381, 382, 402.


INDEX.


Mandara mt. E. 287.
Mandāra tr. 27.

Mandāra dg. 402, 407.
Manda-vahini r. 305, 306.
Māņdavya m. 91, 94, 97.
Māndavya p. NW. 849, 374, 380.
Mandavya rs. 374.
Maudavya-pura t. S. 374.
Mandhātā t. C. 334.
Māndhātr k. 655.
Mandika p. NW. ? 374.
Mango tr. 24, 197.
Manijala r. C. 302.
Manimat mt. NW. 370.
Mani-megha h. NW.? 370.
Maningā r. C.P 802.
Māninī g. 578, 584-586.
Manipur t. C. 371.
Mani-šaila mt. M. 278.
Manīvaka k. and c. 278.
Maiijirā r. S. 289, 302.
Manjula r. M.? 297.


„Mān-kachu pt. 178.


Mankind, Primeval, 231-247.

Man-lion incarnation, 21, 503, 504.

Mano-java g. 454.

Mano-rama r. M. 290, 306.

Mano-rama demi-gs. 401, 402, 411.

Manus, The, 226, 227, 271, 408,
411-415, 432, 485-437, 441, 449,
455, 461-465, 585, 549, 550, 684,
686. See Svayambhuva, Svāro-
Cīga, Auttama, Tamasa, Raivata,
Caksusa, Vaivasvata, Sāvarņi,
Raucya, and Bhautya.

Manuga k. and c. 273.

Manvantaras, The, 218, 224, 227
271, 549, 550, 685.

Mānya-vatī prs. 627.

Maraka? p. NE. 383.

Marathi ? r. S. 302.

Mārīca dg.? 462, 465, 585.

Marīci rs. 246, 249, 269, 558, 559.

Markandeya rs. 1-7, 11, 16-19,
and passim 217-287, 247, 256,
268-283, 348, 349, 387, 391-467,
522-689.

Markandeya Purana, 219, 684-688.

Markataka pt. 165, 245.

Markati? pi. 245,

Marking-nut tree, 25.

nn Gis E 149, 155, 166,
» 240, 177, 252, 526, 527,

670-672. ee


INDEX.


Mars, planet, 431, 626.

Mārtanda g. 455, 550, 551, 563-566
574—576.

Mārttikāvata t. W. 349.

Maru-dhanvan dg. 402.

Maru-bhūmi c. W. 354.

Marut g. 55, 461, 645, 648.

Māruta pl. 246.

Maruta p. M. 353.

Māruta g. 474.

Moralta k. 146, 644-649, 652-656,

Marutta k. 653.

Māsa pi. 84, 85, 165, 244.

Māsh-kalāy pt.84.

Masūra pt. 165, 244.

Mātarišvan g. 100, 589.

Māthara ? p. NW 317.

Mathura i. M. 21, 307, 351, 352.

Mathura i. S. 331.

Matra 128, 194, 205, 470.

Matsya k. 859.

Matsya c. and p. 307, 329, 347, 351,
354, 359, 360, 377, 382.

Matta gb. 264.

Matter (element), 221.

Mauleya p. S. ? 336.

Mauli? p. NW. 388.

Maulika p. S. 336.

Maunika p. S. 336.

Maurya demons, 501.

Maya d. 416.

-Māyā gs. 250; see Maha-Maya.

Mayūra mt. N. 279.

Mazims, see Custom.

Measures of length, 240; af time,
226-228.

Meat, 164, 167, 168, 174, 175.

Medhas b. 466.

Medhatithi %. 272, 273.

Medhāvin k. and c. 273.

Megha-parvata mt. N. 279.

Mekala hills C. 288, 327, 341.

Mekala c. and p. C. 327, 341, 357.

Mekalā t. or r. C.? 358.

Mekhalāmusta ? p. E. 357, 358.

Menā demi-gs. 269.

Menā ps. 270.

Mena aps. 287.

Menukā aps. 4, 8, 571.

Merchant, see Trade.

Mercury, planet, 431, 626; see


Budha.
Meru mt. 22, 228, 244, 269, 275-


711


282, 345, 351, 390, 391, 478, 576,
582


Meru-nanda %. 411. F

Metempsychosis, see Transmigra-
tion.

Metres, 235, 236.

Michelia tr. 26, 326, 364.

Micitā r. M. 292.

Midnapur dt. E. 801, 827, 330.

Mimusops tr. 26.

Mind, 190, 221.

Mithila p. M. 330.

Mithilā t. and c. M. 829, 356, 358.

Mitra g. 588, 589.

Mitra-vindā sf. 433.

Mleccha p. 290, 312, 318, 817-320,
328, 335, 346, 350, 636.

Modāgiri pl. E. 324.

Mohammedans, 284.

Mohanu r. C. 297.

Mohanī gb. 264.

Moksa-šāstra, 2.

Momordica pt. 114.

Monghyr t. and di. E. 324, 325,
356.


Monkey, 49, 84, 208, 235.

Monkey-jack tr. 25.

Moon, planet and g., 147, 280, 431,
447, 448, 478, 474, 562, 626,

Moon-worship, 80, 178, 264.

Morning-siar, 207.

Mosquito, 72, Ge.

Mothers, goddesses, 504-506, 524;
see Šakti.

Mountains, 275-289, 356, 357, 862
370, 376.

Mrga-širas cst. 355.

Mrkanda dg. 269.

Mrsika p. SH. 332, 359.

Mrttikāvatī t. W. 342, 849.

Mrtyu pfn. 247, 250, 263.

Mucukunda k. 338, 336.

Mudakara p. E. 324.

Mudavasu? k. (=Udavasn).

Mudavati prs. 604-609.

Mudga pt. 84, 165, 244,

Mudga-giri pl. E. 324.

Mudgala p. E.? 325.

Mudgalapuri t. E. 924.

Mudgalāšrama t. E. 324.

Mug pt. 84.


?


'Mug-kalāy pt. 84,


Mujavant pi. N.? 655,
Muka p. C. 309,


712


Mukhya gods, 464, 465. ;

Mukti ao Final emancipation.

Mukti-matī r. C. 298.

Mukutā r. M.? 298.

Mukunda dg. 416, 417.

Mūla cst. 170, 374.

Mule, 285.

Mūli dg. 394, 395.

Mali r. SH. 305.

Mūlinī r. SE. 305.

Munda p. C. 329.

Munda d. 494—501.

Mungīr t. E. 324, 825.

Muni k. and c. 278.

Muni demi-gs. 559.

Muūja gr. 192.

Muiija-pretha mt. N. 655.

Muijavat mt. N. 655.

Mniijavata ti. M. 655.

Muūjāvata mi. N. 655.

Mura, see Muru.

Mūrchanā (music), 181.

Murshidabad dt. E. 326.

Muru k. 328, 388, 501.

Mūgaka p. 8, 332.

Musi r. S, 366.

Music, 100, 107, 109, 190-132, 185,
138, 251, 571.

Mūsika p. S. 332, 366.

Musk-rat, 87.

. Mustard Be 84, 162, 165, 181, 258-

261, 2


Muttra t. M. 307, 351, 852.
Myna bd., see Maina,
Myrobalan tr. 25, 26.
Mysore c. 8. 286, 382.
Nābhaga ) (son of Manu Vaivas-
Nābhāga vata) k. 462, 588.
Nabhaga (son g Manu Naion
ERTA vata); see Nabha
Nabhaga ādieta. RDAS
Nee (son of Rista) pr. 593-


Nabhagadista

Nabhakānana p. S. 337

Nābhānedistha k. 588,

Nabhi k. 271, 278, 274.

Nāciketa 159.

Nadia, dt. E. 326.

Naga, race, 7, 55, 109-111, 115-117,
125, 127, 180-140, 201, (292, 234),
238, 279, 288, 362, 379, 395, 429-


598.


INDEX.


435, 495, 516, 531, 542, 559, 571,
644, 645, 648, 653, 657—664, 677.


Naga-giri mt. C.P 288.

Nāgāhva, Naga-pura | t. M. 355.
Nāga-sāhvaya

Nagpur t. C. 288.

Naimisa for. M. 306.

Nairnika p. S. 337.

Nairrta p. S. ? 337.

Naisadha p: W. 337, 341, 348.
Naisika p. S. 337.

Naiwal r. N. 291.

Nakula k. 312, 322, 342.

Nala k. 299, 343, 362.

Nala pr. 597, 600-602.

Nala candanodaka-dundubhi ? pr.


647.
Nalakālika p. S. 337.
Nalakanana p. S. 337.
WNala-nabha, dg. 404.
Naldrug t. 8. 289.


Nalina tr. 25.

Nalinī pt. 30.
Nāmavāsaka p. S. 333.
Nanda p. N. 383, 412.
Nanda m. 517.


Nanda r. N. 369, 383, 412.
Nanda-ka dg. 416, 418.
Nandana pl. 4, 487.
Nandana for..N. 278, 281.
Nanda-vatī t. N. 411.
Nāndīmukha pitrs, 155, 179.
Nandinī g. 446.

Nandinī g. 618.

Nara 2.


Nara, waters, 20, 229. `-
Narada ra. 4, 571, 654.
Naraka k. 328, 383.
Naraka 47-49, 54, 57, 69-72, 158,
247, 250 ; see Hell, [504,
Nara-simha incarnation, 21, 503,
Narayana g. 2, 20, 55, 228, 229,
wo 280, 386.
arayani gs. 513-515.
Narikela re SE. 360.
Nārikela tsl. 360.
Narikhorsum dt. N. 324.
Narigya k, 350, 463.
arisyanta (son of Manu Vaivas-
nāt k. Ai Kas) ene abel
arisyanta (son of Marutta) k. 577,
665-668, 673-676. 680-60.


INDEX.


Narmada (Nerbudda) 7. C. and W.
19, 286, 296, 298, 333, 338, 339,
343, 344, 365, 368, 371, 600.

Nāsatya g. 460, 575 ; see Asvins.

Nasik t. W. 289, 337, 339, 365.

Nāsikya p. W. 837, 339, 365.

Nāsikyāva P p. W. 387, 339.

Nature (Prakrti), 192, 193, 196,
224, 225, 231, 232.

Nauclea ir. 25, "277, 565.

Nava k. 333.

Nava-rāstra c. and p. M. 388.

Nebu tr. 25.

Nedistha, see Nabhanedistha.

Nelumbium pt.. 29, 90, 147; see


Lotus

Nepal c. N. 316, 321, 322, 345-347,
360, 376.

Nerbudda r.; see Narmada.

Newar p. N. "345.

Nibha f, prs. 627.

Nicitā 7 M. 292.

Nidhi dg. 408, 409, 415-419, 494,


638.
Nigarhara ? p. N. 345.
Nighna gb. 264.
Nightshade pt. 166.
Nīhāra p. N. 345.
Nikata p. S. 362.
Nikrntana, hell, 71, 72.
Nils mts. N. 275-279, 388.
Nīla k. 334, 344.
Nīla dg. 416, 419.
Nīlāyudha p. W.-334.
Nilgiri mts. S. 285, 363.
Nīlī g. 353.
Nilotpala pt. 29, 30, 104.
Nīpa k. 350, 598.
Nīpa 7s. 597-599.
Nīpa p. 350, 353, 598.
Nīpa tr. see "Kadamba.
Nirāhāra P p. N. 345.
Niraya, hell, 68, 70.
Nirbandhya r. C. 299.
Nirbindhyā 7. C. 299.
Nir-marsti d. 257.
Nirrti gs. 250, 268, 490.
Nirvindhyā r. C. 999, 605, 606.
Nirvindhya 7. 8. 299.
Nirvira r. M, 292.
Nirvrti-caksus rs. 440.
Nigada p. C. 360, 361.
Nissdha c. and p. W. 300, 348,


an


713


Nigadha mts. N, 275-277.

Nisadha mt. NW. 278.

Nisadha r. W.P 300.

Nigadhāvatī 7. W.? 300.

Nišcara rs. 415.

Nifšcīrā r. M. 292.

Niécita r. M. 292.

Nispava pt. 86, 165, 244.

Nišumbha d. 488, 494497, 500,
503, 506-509, 517-521, 524.

Nisvīrā r. M. 292.

Nitya-naimittika sf. 95.

Nīvāra cer. 165.

Nivara r. M. 292,

Niveša, 318.

Niyati gs..269.

Niyojika gb. 257, 259, 264

Nrsiīha + p NW. 375.

Napi *. MP P 5

Nymphea pt. 29, 30.


Ocy aa x. 164, 532.

mun p

Odra p. and c. E. 329.

Oghs-vati 7. w 200, 306.
Okhalakiya p.

On, 128, 185, 3305, 206, 550-554,


557,
Omens, S71) 263.
Onion of sen (nariya), 15, 16.
pam. of sense (indriya),

E. 284, 301, 327. 334, 335,

Caan 361, "365.
Ortygornis bd. % ms
Osmotreron bd. 28

einia tr. 28.

Owl, 72, 263.
Ozalis pt. 25.
Ozus r. NW. 292, 324.
Ozydraci p. N. 377.


Padma, dg. 416.

Padma maha-kalpa, 228
Padmavata. c. W. 289.

Padminī pt. 30. .

Fadmint, , science, 408—411, 415, 416,


Pahlava p. W. 314, 320, 353,
368, 371, 383. mg


714
Pahoj r. W. 299.


Pairi r. C. 285

Paisuni r. M. 297.

Paitrya cst..861.

Paka-samstha sf. 128.

Palāņdu pt. 165.

Palash tr. 28.

Palašinī r. 306.

Pallava? p. N. 314.

Pallava p. S. 382.

Palmyra palm, tr. 27.

Pārna-pāla ? p. NE. 881.

Pan p. SE. 361.

Panasa tr, 25.

Pajicadaka p. NW. 372.
Paūcajana ? dt. NW. 212.

Paūcāla c. and p. M. 308, 809, 350-
Pāicāla p.,=Paūcāla.

Paīicana r. M. 380.

sals c. and p. NW. 312, 372,


Paūcāpsaras l. O.P 842.

Paūca-šaila mt. N. 279.

Pancodaka ? p. NW. 372.

Pandanus, shrub, 26.

Pandara mi. M. ? 288.

Pandava f. 6-9, 19-24, 841, 344-
m 350, 865, 377, 416, 461, 669,


Pāņdaveya pr. 31, 97.
Pandhawa mt. M. ? 287.

Pāņdu k. 3, 19, 20, 37, 146, 345.
Pandua t. E. 326.

Pandua h. M. 288.

Pandura mt. N. 279.

Pāndura mt. M.? 288.


Pandya p. S. 287, 804, 381,
344 870. aku)"


Pandya? p. W. 369.

Romom TE E 203, 244.
añja 8, 321, 324, 3338

e E bo
aūkaja, er, 80.

Paūkajinī J. W. 445.

Pankini r. M. ? 298.

Para p. S. 365.

Para period, 224, 228,

Parā r. M. 295.

Pāra rs. 402, 407.

Para r. M. 295, 299.

Parag p. NW. 312, 817, 319, 369,


2.
Parakgara p. We 889,


INDEX.


Parāšara rs. 669, 677.

Pārašava p. W. 339, 369.

Pārašava f. 369.

Parašu-Rāma rs. 310, 338, 339, 369,
871, 464.

Para-tangana p. N. 328.

Pārāvata tr. 25.

Pārāvata gods, 415.

Pārbati r. M. 295, 299.

Pārijāta tr. 27, 494.

Pariksit k. 379.

Paripatra mis. M. 285, 286, 295,


354,

Paripatra mts. N. 277, 279.

Parita p. NW. 317.

Parivarta-ka gb. 257, 258, 268.

Pāriyātra mts. M.;=Pāripātra.

Parjanya g. 178, 589, 618.

Parjanya rs. 449.

Parņā r. M. 294.

Parņāsā r. M. 294.

Parna-salagra mt. NE. 388.

Parņa-šavara p. SE. 361.

Parrot, 28, 87.

Parsaroni r. M. 297.

Partridge, 28, 86.

Pārul ir. 27.

Pārvaņa $rāddha 157.

Parvata rs. 269.

Parvati gs. 290, 488, 498, 494.

Parwan r. M. 299.

Pāsaņda p. M. 354.

Pāšinī r. 806.

Paspalum cer. 244.

Passion (rāga), 15, 16.

Passion (rajas), see Qualities.

Pašu-pāla c. NE. 381.

Pasu-pati dg. 268.

Pataccara p. M, 809, 348.

Patala tr. 27.

Pātāla, world, 47, 55, 60, 110-115,
119, 120, 125, 182-187, 429-435,
465, 475, 508, 518, 521, 531, 604—
608, 645, 648, 656-661, 664, 677.

aigu d. 109, 1138-116, 119-


Pātandhama mt. M. P 287
Patangaka mt. N. 279.
Pathar mts. M. 286.
Patna t. and dt. M. 380.
Pattiāla dt. N. 321, 347.
Patu p. C. 343.
Paudanya t. O.P 387.
Pauņdra-4, and c, E, 329,


INDEX.


Paundraka, Paundrika p. E. 829.

Paunika p. W.? 336.

Paurava, race, 831, 850, 360, 369,
374, 884, 461, 598, 677.

Paurava? p. NE. 384.

Paurika p. S. 336.

Paurņamāsa rs. 269.

Pauskala cer. 165.

Pāvaka dg. 270.

Pāvamāna dg. 270.

Pāvanī 7. NĒ. 328.

Payolli? r. C.P 299.

Payognī r. W. 299, 335, 865.

Payosņī r. M. 299.

Pea, 84, 86, 244, 245.

Peacock, 87, 147, 260, 394.

Pearl, 304, 366, 475.

Peepul, see Pipal.

Pelican, 30.

Pelicanus, bd. 30.

Pen-ganga r. C. 299.

Penner r. S. 303.

Perdix bd. 28, 86.

Peri r. S. 304.

Persia, 814.

Peyārā tr. 25.

Phala-giri mt. W. 378.

Phalgu r. M. 297.

Phalguluka p. W. 373.

Phalgunaka p. W. 378.

Phalgunī cst. 169, 361, 367.

Phaseolus pt. 84.

Phasianus bd. 29.

Phena-giri mt. W. 373.

Pheasant, 28, 29.

Phyllanthus tr. 25, 26.

Physician, 160, 180, 261.

Pīdika p. N. 322.

Pig, see Boar.

Pigeon, 28, 84, 86, 87, 208, 263.

Pina? p. N. 319.

Pināka, bow, 408, 474.

Pinākā? r. S. 308.

Pinda, cake, 144, 155-158, 162, 167,
179, 183, 255, 532, 688.

Piņda-mūlaka pt. 165.

Pingāksa bd. 3.

Pingala mt. N. 279.

Pingala p. NW. 379.

Pinjalā r. 379.

Piūjara mt. N. 279.

Pinus tr. 27.

Pipal tr..98, 277.

Pipāthaka mt. N. 279.


715


Pipīlika, ant, 86.

Pipīrā, large ant, 86-

Pippala tr. 38, 277.

Pippalā r. M. 297.

Pippalisroni r. M. 297 `

Piprā, large ant, 86.

Pipyalasroni r. M. 297.

Pišāca d. 46, 47, 158, 207 282 236,
238, 308, 520, 583.

Pišsācikā r. M. 297.

Pigika p. S. 366.

Pisuna gb. 263.

Pitrs, 14, 75, 79, 80, 85, 88, 96, 119,
128, 133, 135, 144, 150-172, 176-
183, 218, 232, 238, 286, 247, 249,
253, 254, 270, 272, 483, 526-538,
555, 561, 576, 619, 620, 639, 680,
686: their 31 classes, 533—580.

Pitrsomā r. SE. 304.

Pivara rs..442.

Pīvarī g. 76.

Eisiša dyīpa 272-275.

Plaksavatarana ti. N..127.

Planet, 168, 259, 278, 385-387, 431,
535, 581, 626.

Plantain tr. 25,

Plava bd. 30.

Podiceps bd. 31.

Pole-star, 112, 207.

Polyandry, 3, 19, 21, 23.

Pomegranate tr. 25.

Ponani r. S. 304.

Poona t. W. 336.

Porcupine, 49, 181.

Pota-ka p. NW. 388

Potter's wheel, 72.

Prabhakara rs. 320.

Prabhāsa ti. W. 338, 340.

Prabhāva k. 411, 412.

Prabhā-vatī g. 664.

Pracanda d. 266, 267.

Pracanda pr. 610.

Pracira pr. 610.

Pracodika gb. 264.

Pradha demi-gs. 369, 559.

Pradhana, 217, 220, 225.

Pradheya p. W. 368, 369.

Pradyumna g. 21.

Prāgjyotisa, P» c. and t. NE. 319,
328, 357, 383, 501.

Prajani k. 611.

Prajapati, 22, 70, 96, 99, 152, 153,
178, 179, 219, 233, 284, 238, 248,
258, 272, 278, 415, 436, 458, 455,


716


465, 470, 479, 474, 494, 526, 534—
596, 551, 560, 566, 572, 582, 608,
685.


Prājāpatya pl. 246.

Presti E 610, 611.

Praja-vati g. 272.

Prākara k. and c. 278.

Prākara k. and c. 273.

S dear wu 267.

Prakrt, 3

Prakrti, oy, 920-295, 228, 231,


232,

Pralolu a ‘bd. 6.

Pramatha g. 618.

Pramati rs. 686, 597, 600—608.

Pramati k. 611.

Pramati b. 612.

Pramattā gd. 264.

Pramloca aps. 538.

Praméu (son of Manu Vaivasvata)
k. 463, 588

Prāršu (son of Vatsapri) k. 610.

Pramuca 7s. 443, 445.

Prāņa (oial lair), 203.

Prana dg. 2

Prana rs. as.

Pranayama, 194-196.

Pranhita r. 8. 300, 302.


Pratardana ods, 436.
ae A Barasvatī r. 31.


Pratisth nee
t t. M. 93, 587, 590.
āhara, 196.


aana E. ? 327.
Prayāga t. M. 310, 361.


Iti w. 269.
Priyalaukika P fig fi
yangu cer.


INDEX.


Priya-vrata, 247, gee 271-274. 445.

Prosaka p. N.-320

Prsadhra X, 463, 68 508,

Prsata k. 350, 353.

Prihā g.23;.see Kunti.

Prthu 7s. 449.

Prusadhru, see Prsadhra.

Psidium ir.25.

Pterospermum ir. 27.

Pudukota dt. S. 332.

Kaka; tribe, 47-50, 68, 85, 87,
15


Pulaha 7s. 246, 249, 270, 274.

Pulastya rs. 246, 249, 269, 533.

Puleya p. W.. 338.

Pulinda p. N. 315, 316, 321-323.

Pulinda p. C. 317.

Būlīnāā >. S. 335, 359.

Pulinda p. W. 338.

Pulse, 84 86, 165, 244, 245.

Punarvasu. cst. 169, 358.

Puudarīka pt. 29; see Lotus.

Pundra k. 325.

Pundra p. and c. E. 327, 329, 381,
334, 358.


Pundraka p. E. 329.

Tumon tr. 25.
ūjikā-stanā aps. 407.

Punnāga tr. 2 a


ed r. W. 289, 299, 335, 365.
Pargodats k E h. E. 357.


itka ķā

pee Ee 167, 587, 589.
urusa,

Pūgadhra, see Prsadhra.

Bugan (Sum), ši j

Puskala p. N. 320, 321, l 378.

Puskalāvatī i. NW. 3


Puskara ż. and V: 306, 685.
Pugkara ys. ? 548.


INDEX.


Puskara-dvīpa, 272, 275.
Puskara-mālīn m. 116.
Puskarāvatī t. NW. 321.
Puspa mi. 288.
Puspaja r. S. 288, 303.
Puspa-jati r. S. 304.
Puspaka mt. N. 279.
Puspa-vahini r. S. 304.
Puspa-vati r. S. 304.
Puspa-vati ti. E. 304.
Puspa-veni r. S. P 304.
Pusya cst. 169, 358.
Put, hell, 444.


Gratis (guna), 3-6, 16, 19-21,
220, 221, 4, 025, 229-239, 247,


251.
Querquedula bd. 30.
Quince tr. 25, 425.


Raddhakataks p. NW. 317.

Radheya? f. 369.

Raghu k. 304.

Rat pt. 84,

Raivata mt. W. 289, (445).

Raivata for. W.? 23, 24.

Raīvata, Manu and manvantara,
271, 443, 449, 549.

Raivataka mt. W.? 445.

Raja-grha t. NW. 318.

Raja-grha t. M. 286, 330, 357.

Rāja-māga pt. 165.

Rājanya p: N. 380.

Rajas rs. 270.

Rāja-šaila mt. N. 279.

stas sf. 34, 35, 39, 58, 61, 366,


Raja-syamaka, cer. 165-

Rājgir t. M. 331, 357.

Rājmahall hills, E. 325, 330.

Rajputana c. W. 286, 333, 354.

Rajya-vardhana k. 577-579,. 583—
586, 684.

Rāksasa d. 6-8, 42, 47, 84, 89, 162,
166, 201, 232-238, 255, 258, 279,
346, 367, 402-405, 425—484, 516-
520, 533, 541, 559, 571, 64l, 677,
682, 683.

Rākgasa marriage, 596, 671, 672.

Rakta-kanchan tr. 27, 165.

Rakta-vīja d. oe 504-506, 524.


Raktotpala
e A ki k. 309, 351, 352,


717


Bims ra = see Parasu-


Rams a (balsij) see Bala-Rāmas.
Rama p. NW. ? 317.

Ramana p. NW. ? 317.

Ramata p. NW. 317.

Ramatha p. NW. 317.

Rambhā w. 647.

Rambhaka? p. NW. 388.

Rām-gaīgā r. M. 292, 354.

Eamgarh c. C. 296.

Rāmgarh h. E. 330.

Ramyaka c. N. 390, 391.

Ranavanya ? k. 551.

Rangeya P p. E. 326.

Ranksu ? r. N. 292.

Rantideva k. 363.

Rapti r. M. 294, 329.

Rasa r. NW. 377.

Rasālaya p. N. 377.

Rasātala, world, 109, 110, 115, 133,
430, 435, 531, 605—608, 644, 659.

Rāstra-vardhana k. 577.

Rat, 85, z, 184, 210.

Rati gs. 1 14.

Ratnadhāra ? p. N. 320.

Ratna-vahini r. M.? 298.

Ratnavat mt. N. 279.

Rātrī r M.? 298.

Raucya, Manu and manvantare
271, 524, 526, 536—538, 550.

Raudrs d.? 32.

Raudrāšva k. 320.

p Head cst. 358.

| Raurava, hell, 54, 62, 68, 72, 87.

Ravana d. k. 362.

Raven, 81, 208.

Ravi r. NW. 291, 292, 313-318.

Re hymns, 20, 64, 458-460, 484,
553-557, 561, 565, 570, 581. i

Rcīka rs. 310, 462, 595.

Rddhi w. 247, 248.

Rddhi demi-gs. 248.

Rechna doab, NW. 315.

Religion, 119, 120, 124, ja
nl 179. 170-173,
ious devotion oga), 92,

190-207, 210, ms ae 204,
Rer r. C. 296, 297.
Rest-house, 81.
Reur r. C. 296.


Revanta dg. 460, 461, 575, 576.


718


Revatī cst. 170, 384, 443-448.
Revatī g. 24
Revatī g.


443-449,
Revenue, 422, 423, 598, 617, 618, 657.


Rewa dt. O. 297, 341.

Rg-Veda, 152, 206; see Re hymns.

Rhinoceros, 164, 168, 181, 582.

Rice, 84, 165, 244, 245.

Riches, see Wealth.

Righteousness (Dharma), 21, 86,
39, 41, 58, 54, 66, 88, 96, 108, 124,
138, 144, 148, 170-172, 185, 187,
198, 215, 264, 278, 282, 400, 422,
494, 480, 442, 459, 575, 578, 595-
598, 629, 630, 657, 671, 672.

Rista k. 588, 598.

Rista demi-gs. 559.

Rksa mis. C. 285, 286, 298-802, 336,


345.
Rocana mt. 288.
Rohi rs. 294.
Rohini cst. 169, 355.
Rohini demi-gs. 269, 420.
Rohita k. and c. 278.
Rohitāsya pr. 42, 51, 58.
Rope and jar at the well, 70, 71.
Rottleria tr. 26.
Rsabha k. 271, 274.
Rsabha P mis. N. 275, 277.
Rsabha h. S. 366.
Rsabha p. S. 366.
Rsabha rs. 415.
Rsabhā r. C P? 300.
Rsi-giri? h. M. 357.
Reika p. N. 332.
Rsika p. S. 332, 366.
Rsikā r. S. 366.
Rsīkā r. 305.
Reikulya r. E. 285, 304.
Rsikulyā r. 805.
Rsis, Seven, 22, 226, 246, 270.
Rsyamūka mt. S. 289, 365.
Rsyašrīga rs. 464.
Rta-dhvaja k.; see Kuvalayāšva.
Rta-vāc rs. 443, 444, 447, 448.
Rtu-hārikā gb. 257, 261, 266.
Rtukulyā ? r. SE. 804.
Rtu-mālā r. S. 303.
Rtvij, 160, 178.


INDEX.


Rucaka mt. N. 279.

Ruci dg. 247, 248.

Ruci rs. 526-538.

Rudra g. 10, 55, 168, 225, 232, 246,
247, 268, 269, 408, 461, 525.

Rules, various, 170-185.

Rumex pt. 25. |

Ripa r. 306.

Rūpapa p. W. 389.

Rūpasa p. W. 389.

Rūpavāhika p. W.? 389.

Ripnarain r. E. 300, 301, 330.

Ruru, deer, 164, 211.

Rutha k. 452.


Sabala rs. 270.

Sabandhana r. M? 294.

Sabar p. C. and S. 335.

Sabara ps. 18.

Sabindu mt. N. 278.

Saccarum gr. 192.

Sacī gs. 4, 90, 102, 420, 489.

Sacrifices, 170, 203, 433, 434, 621;
see Sraddha, &c.

Sad-acara, see Custom.

Sadānīrā r. W. 294.


Sadānīrā r. M. 294, 329.


Sadānīrā-mayā r. M.P 294.

Sadātīrā r. M.? 294.

Sadhya dg. 55, 461.

Sagara k. 314, 317—320, 832, 346,
350, 362, 371, 656.

Sāgarānūpa c. E. 328, 344.

Saha-deva k. 346, 964, 367.

Sahaja k. 359.

Sahajanyā aps. 571.

Sahasa P p. W. 340.

Sahasrāksa g. 524.

Sahasra-patra pt. 80.

Sahasra-sikhara mt. N. 279.

Sahigņu rs. 270.

Sahisņu rs. 454.

di kas kinsman, 157, 184, 185,


Sahya mts, 285, 289, 303, 310.
Saila c. S. 332.

Sailika p. S, 332, 362.
Sailoda r. N. 351, 381, 382.
Sailodaka r. N. 351, 382.
Sailūga p. S. 332, 362.
Saindhava p. NW. 815.
Sainika ? p. N. 322.
Sairandhrī g. 665.

Sairigaka pl. M. 883.


INDEX.


Sairistha? p. NE. 382.

Saivala mt. N. 388.

Saivya g. 35, 38, 47-52.

Saka p. NW. 314-320, 346, 353,
371, 463.

Saka p. M. 350.

Saka p. NW. 388.

Sākabhava k. and c. 273.

Sāka-dvīpa, 272-275, 569.

Sakala t. NW. 816, 364, 372, 373.

Sākala-dvīpa dt. NW. 364.

Sākambharī gs. 518.

Sāketa t. M. 353.

Sākhā, 129.

Sākhā-nagaraka, city, 241, 242.

Sakra g. 482, 503.

Sakrdgrāha p. N. 346.

Sakrdgrāha p. N. 346.

Sakri r. E. 285, 286, 298.

Sakrn-nandā r. NE. 347.

Sakrtraka p. N. 346.

Sari gs. 129, 501-509, 512-514,
5


Sakti, Saktri rs. 669, 677.
-Sakuli 7. E. P 285, 298.

Sakuni gb. 257, 258, 268.
Sākya-muni, 350.

Sal tr. 27.

Sala pr. 670.

Sala tr. 27.

Salem t. and dt. S. 332, 365.
Salik bd. 58.

Sālmali tr. 82, 147.
Salmali-dvipa, 272-275.
Salmavesmaka p. W. 373.

Salt, 166, 175, 182.

Salva c.and p. W. 309, 315, 347-

350, 373, 595.

Sālveya p.; see Salva.

Salya k. 311.

Salya-kīrtana pl. ? M. 378.
Samādhi m. 467.

Sāman hymns, 20, 64, 295, 236,

458—460, 484, 554-557, 561, 581.

Samana, (vital air) 203.
Samanodaka, 157 ; see Sahodaka»
Samarkand c. 314.

Sāma-Veda, 152, 206, 235.
Sambara d. 10, 139.

Sambarana, see Satnvarana.
Sambhu g. 408.

Sambhūti w. 249, 269.

Samīka rs. 6, 9, 11, 17.

Sampāti bd. 6.


719


Sarnrāj prs. 272.

Samīla mt. N. 279.

Sarhvaraņa k. 461, 567.

Sarnvarta rs. 653, 654.

Sarnvarta-ka, weapon, 658, 662.

Sana pt. 245.

Sanandini 7. M. 294.

Sanatkumāra, 232.

Sanda tr. 390.

Sangala t. NW. 316.

Sañjňā gs. 455-460, 566-569, 575.

Sankalana, 7.

Sankalpa pfn. 246, 247.

Sankara g. 460.

Sanketa ? p. M. 353.

Sankha h. S. 365.

Sankha dg. 416, 419.

Sankha-ktta mt. N. 279, 282.

Sankhāvatī r. NE. 388.

Sankhya, 129, 231, 588, 688.

Sankrandana k. 670, 675, 681.

Sanku d. 686.

Sannati w. 249, 270.

Santa k. 442.

Santa k. 446.

Santal Parganas dt. 825, 356.

Santanu k. 9.

Santi b. 539-541, 546-548.

Santika p. NW. 372.

Sānumat mt. N. 279.

Sānumat mt. .N 279.

Sapinda 156-158, 184,-185, 255.

Sapišika P p. S. 366.

Saptalā pt.=Mallika.

Sapta-parņa tr. 27.

Sarabha (beast), 49.

Saraca tr. see Ašoka.

Saradvat ps. 464.

Saraja p. C. 341.

Sarali bd. 58.

Sarasa k. 888, 364.

Sarasa bd. 647.

Sarasi-ja pt. 30.

Sarasvata p. M. 340, 351.

Seryrata p. W. 840.
arasvatī gs. 2, 17, 18, 125-

a 434, 435, Sis. tl?
arasvati x. M. 28, 127, 290,
812, 320, 351, 354, 377, 378. ag

Sarasvati r. W. 340.

šai oes r. 81.
arasvati (other rivers

Sarava i S.? 362. ) 290, 306.

Saravā P 7.. SE. 305,


720


Sarāvatī r. SE.P 305.
Sarayū r. M. 323, 376.
Erosoa pp. Si ae
ārgiga? p. W. 300.
Sarike t bd. 49, 58, 84.
Sarisa pt. 84.
Sarju r. M. 376.
Sarkara p. NW..373.
Sarkaraksya b. 373.
Sārkarāvartā r. S. ? 373.
Sarmāti, see Saryāti.
Sarmisthā g. 669.
Sariga, bow, 109, 514.


Sāisks p. W.? 340, 372.
Sastras, Wicked, 79, 252.
Sasurasa mt. 288.
Saévata p. W. 340.
Sasya-han-tr ge. 257, 250, 264.
Satabalā r. E.? 301.
Sata-bhieaj cst. 170, 381.
Satadru r. NW. 291, 316.
Sata-dyumna k. 454.
Sātaka p. N. 380.
Satamālā r. S. 303.
Satamūlī pt. 165.
Sata-patha ? dt? M. 309.
Satara dt. W. 362,
Sata-rūpā, 247, 248.
Sata-srngin mt. N. 279.
Sata-vahana p. SE, 361.
Sati gs. 269, 408.
vielā r. M, 294.

ātpura mis. C. 286

a, , 287, 299, 343,
Satru-ghna pr. 352.
ui 109-113, 117, 119, 135
Satru-mardana pr. 142
Satsura P- C. 349. ig
Sāttvata f. 629.


INDEX.


Saturn, planet, 491,461, 567, 576,


626.
Satya gods, 486, 487, 442.
Satyaka k. 449.
Satyākhya gods, 436, 437.
Sātyaki pr. 629.
Satya-loka, 558.
Satya-vat pr. 349, 350.
Satya-vatī g. 677.
Satya-vatī prs. 595.
Saubhs.t. W. 349.
Saudāsa k. 336.
Saumya c. 284.
Saumyā cst. 355.
Saunaka 7s. 591.
Saunanda, club, 606—609.
Saunandā g. 604.
Saundikera? p. C. 344.
Saur p. C..and S. 335.
Saurastra.p. W. 370.
Sauri pat. 31.
Sauri k. (son of Prajāti), 612, 615.
Sauvira p. and c. 315, 368.
Sauviri g. 664.
Savadhāna ? p. N. 378.
Savana k. 279.
Savara p. C. and 8. 319, 335, 361,


Savarna-ke, Manus and manvan-
taras, 524, 525, 549, 550.

Savarni-ka, Manu and manvan-
tara, 458, 461, 463-466, 522-524,
549, 567, 576.

Savitr (Sun), 282, 582.

Savitr d. 262.


Sāvitra for. N. 278, 282.


Savitri pre. 349, 350.

Savitri, hymn, 470.

Scythians, 350.

Scorpion rp.\72, 81, 85.
Screw-pine, shrub, 26.

Self, see Soul.

Self-existent, The, 225; see Supreme


Being.

Self-repression, 194-200.

Selye r. E. 300.

Semecar tr. 25.

Seemul tr. 82, 147, 191.

Senses; see Organs of Sense.

Seonath r. C. .

Ser. , The, 232, 234, 581, 577,

1, 683 ; see Naga.

Sega (Serpent) k. 1, 21, 469, 475, .

609, 648, 681.


721


INDEX.


Sesamum pt. and seed, 84, 86, 156,
162-168; 181, 224, 244, 245, 260,
261, 532.

Setuka p. S. 332.

Shadow-Sahjia gs. 456-461, 464,
566-569, 576.

Shāhābād di. M. 309.

Shāh-dheri t. NW. 379.

Sheep, 164, 166, 285.

Shieldrake bd. 80 ; see Cakravāka.

Shorea tr. 27.

Shrike bd. 28.

Sibi p. NW. 377.

Siddha dg. 55, 58, 78, 229, 398,
ee 408, 511, 580, 542, 581, 679,


Siddha-virya k. and rs. 441.

Sighra r. C.P 299.

Sighroda r. C. 299.

Sikhara mt. N. 279, 281.

Sikhi g. 442.

Silavatī ? Silāvatī P r. E. 300.

Silk, 86, 423.

Silk-cotton tree, see Seemul.

Stlk-worm, 86

Sirhala p. S. 366.

Simhikā d. 367.

Simla t. N. 316.

Sin (particular), 78-88.

Sinapis pt. 84.

Sindh c. W. 318, 315, 373.

Sindh r. M. 293.

Sindh-sagar doab, NW. 315.

Sindhu 7. NW. 290, 370.

Sindhu 7. M. 298.

Sindhu p. and c. W. 815, 347, 368,
370, 665.

Sindhu M aj P p. W.369,
370. 5

Sindhūttama ti. M. 298.

Sindhūttama ti. W. 298.

Sindhu-vīrya k. 665.

Sinibahu r. E. 300.

Sinibālī r. E. 300.

Siprā r. N. 285.

Siprā r. C. 299.

Sirāla p. W. 388.

Sirmour dt. N. 320.

Sirsa dt. N. 321.

Sišira k. and c. 278.

Sisiraksa mt. N. 279.

Sisu-pāla kķ. 350.

Sita r. NE. 281, 388.

Sitambuja pt. 30.


91


Sitanta mt. N. 278-281

Sitartta mt. N. 278.

Siterajā r. M.P 297.

salu r Pa i

Sitoda 7. N. 5

Siva g. 5, 17, 32, 38, 55, 98-100,

112; 125, 132, 133, 178, 206, 219,
294, 225, 249, 258, 262, 280, 281,
343, 356, 460, 471-474, 501-508,
509, 515, 521, 545, 555, 572, 574,
582, 588.

Siva k. and c. 273.

Siva r. 299.

Siva-dūtī gs. 508, 504, 507—509,
514, 524.

Sivi k. 377.

Sivi p. NW. 333, 354, 377-380.

Sivākhya gods, 486, 437.

Skanda g. 269.

Slavery, 42-45, 328, 674.


Smell (element), 217, 221, 222.


Smrti w. 249, 269.

Smrti-harika gb. 257, 261, 266.

Snake, 76, 85.

Snataka, 178.

Snowy Mountains, see Himavat.

Social rules, 170-184.

Solanum pt. 166, 167.

Solar Race, dyn. 48, 45, 683.

Soma (Moon), g. 153, 162, 420, 535,
561, 582, 589, 626.

Soma rs. 99, 269.

Soma, juice, 259, 262, 545, 655.

Soma r. N. 282.

Soma-datta pr. 629.

Soma-pā pitrs, 533.

Soma-pa gb. 262.

Soma-samstha sf. 128.

Somesvarz r. NE. 306.

Somnath t. W. 388, 340.

Sona r. a and M. 286, 288, 295,

Sone r.=Sona.

Sorrel pt. 25.

Soul, 15, 142, 148, 150, 187, 190-
194, 200, 206, 211, 220-225, 422
459, 527, 542, 587. :

Sora (element), 217, 220-222,

ats bd. 6, 28, 210.

‘pirituous liquor, 32, 83 86
108, 106, 107, 136, 260, 573 600;
608 ; see Intoxication. ‘ i


* Spondias tr. 24.


722 e


Sprite, 250-268, 533, 545.
Srāddha, 79, 83, 133, 151, 154-171,
181, 185, 199, 203, 264, 266, 530,
531, 536, 537, 566, 686.
Sravana cst. 170, 376.
Sreewacolum t. SE. 361.
Srī gs. 249, 269, 290, 484; see
Laksmi.
Srī-kākula-ż. SE. 361.
Srī-parvata mi. S. 290, 366.
S'rīphal tr. 25, 425.
Srī-šaila=Srī-parvata.
Srngavat mis. N. 277.
Srīgavat mts. N. 279.
Srūgin rs. 12.
Srngin mts. N. 275, 276.
Srūjaya k. 353.
Srajaya f. 358.
Sruta-deva q. 361.
Stanapa p. N. 821.
Stanayosika p. N.? 321.
Star-worship 80.
Sterna bd. 86.
Stošala p. C. 342.
Stri-loka pl. NW. 375.
Stri-rajya c. and p. N. 375.
Stri-vahya p. NW. 375.
Su-bahu pr. 142, 148, 187-190,
207, 212215.
Su-bāhu X. 322, 328.
Subalāšva k. 623.
Subarņa-rekhā r. E. 301, 327.
Subhā r. C. 302.
Subhadrā g. 446.
Subhadrā prs. 627,
Subhra? p. E. 356.
Su-cakra pr. 610.
Suci dg. 270.
Sūcī-mukha bd. 80.
Sudāman dg. 581.
Su-daršana, rs. 378.
Su-deva k. 597, 600-602,
Su-deva k. 600.
Su-deva k. 627.
Sudhāman rs. 449.
Sudhī gods, 442.
Kūdra, caste 85. 116. 123, 183. 918.
581, 591. 671. 676: their dulies.
sadra p. W
ūdra p. W. and NW. 312-
se A 314,


Sudrakæ p. NW. 314.
Su-dyumna k. 587-590.
Sugar-cane, 175. <


INDEX.


Su-grīva, monkey k. 289, 388, 356.

Su-griva d. 495.

Suhma k. 825.

Suhma p. E. 327, 329, 334, 356.

Suhmottara p. E. 327.

Su-hotra b. 612.

Su-hotra k. 670.

Suicide, 621.

Suir p. C. 335.

Sujaraka p. E. 324.

Sujātā g. 446.

Sujātya p. M. or W. 371.

Sukālin pitrs, 681.

Sukaņkavat mt N. 278.

Su-kanyā prs. 868, 600.

Su-kešī g. 664.

Sukhodaya k. and c. 278.

Sukra dg. 58, 269, 650.

Sukra (=Agni), 541, 544.

Sukrsa rs. 11, 12.

Sukta rs. 270.

Sukti h. S. 365.

Suktimat mts. 284, 285, 306.

Suktimatī r. M. 285, 297.

Suktīmatī i. M. 298, 359.

Sukti-sāhvayā t. M. 359.

Su-kumara k. and c. 278.

Su-kumārī 7. 305.

Sukutya p. 307.

Sulaiman mts. W. 347.

Sūlakāra p. N. 321.

Stlika p. N. 328.

Sumahā-drumā r. M. ? 296.

Sumanā g. 670, 674—676.

Su-mati b. 62, 69, 74, 76; see Jada.

Su-mati k. 274.

Su-mati X. 361.

Su-mati pr. 605.

Sumbha d. 116, 488, 494-500, 508,
506-510, 517—521, 524.

Sumbha p. E. ? 356.

Sumedhas gods, 449.

Sumedhas 7s. 454.

Su-megha mt. W.? 370.

Sumerujā r. M.? 297.

Sumina p. W. 388.

Su-mukha bd. 8.

Sun (Sūrya dc.) g. 147, 178, 280,
431, 455-461, 465, 466, 473, 474,
522, 585, 548, 550-553, 560—567,
580-588, 621, 626, 680.

Sunanda, club, 604, 609.

Su-nandā g. 604, 609, 611.

Su-naya k. F12,


INDEX.


Suni? r. M. 297.

Su-nīti pr. 605.

Sunuwār p. N. 321.

Sun-worship, 80, 178,

Supara t. W. 388.

Su-parsva bd. 6.

Suparéva mts. N. 277, 282.

Su-patra bd. 3.

Su-prabhā 7. N. 290, 306.

Su-prabha 2. 597, 600, 601.

Supratika, elephant, 9.

Suprayoga r. S. 308.

Supreme Being or Soul or Spirit,
55, 63-65, 92, 198, 201-206, 210,
216, 217, 229, 414, 459, 532, 552-
555, 558, 570, 587, 588, 687; see
Brahman.

Sūra k. 24.

Sura r. M.? 295.

Sūra? p. NW. 318.

Sūra (son of Vatsaprī) pr. 610.

Surabhi dg. 116, 117.

Surahādrumā 7. M.? 296.

Suraksa nž. N. 279, 281.

Surāla p. W. 338.

Surasa mt. N. 279.

Surasā r. M.? 296.

Sūrasena k. 351.

Sūrasena c. and p. M. 307, 309,
351-354, 371, 377.

Surāstra c. and p. W. 288, 309,
340, 342, 344, 370, 446.

Surat t. W. 340.

Su-ratha k. and c. 278.

Su-ratha k. 465, 466, 522, 528

Su-ratha %. 601, 602.

Surathā r. M. 296.

Su-renu r. M. 290, 306.

Sūrpakarņa h. E. 356.

Sorparaka c, t. and p. W. 289,
338.


Sursooty, see Sarasvati r. M.
Su-ruci g. 420.

Su-rūpa gods, 442.

Sūrya, see Sun.

Sūrya h. S. 365.

Surya ? r. M.? 295.
Sūrya-kānta mis. N. 389.
Sūryāraka ? see Sūrpāraka.
Strya-vaméa dyn. 808.
Su-santi Manu ;=Auttama.
Susarasa mt. 288.
Su-sarman k. 321.
Su-sarman b. 426.


728


Su-šobhanā g. 665.

Sūta, 28, 31.

Sutapa gods, 464. *

Su-tapas rs. 270.

Su-tapas b. 440.

Sūta-visaya dt. E. 826.

Sūtika ? p. S. 332.

Sutlej r. NW. 291, 292, 311, 312,
316, 324, 878-880.

Sūtpalāvatī r. S. 804.

Su-varcas rs. 540.

Su-varcas k. 623.

Suveņā r. C. 300.

Su-vikrama pr. 610.

Suvīra k. 311, 815.

Suvīra p. NW. 370.

Suvira k. 664.

Su-vrata rs. 605.

Su-yastavya k. 449.

Svadha, 94, 151, 152, 163, 178, 249,
269, 270, 470, 483, 515, 527, 580-
592, 542.

Svadhāman gods, 436.

Svaha, 94, 151, 152, 162, 249, 269,
270, 470, 483, 527, 542.

Svakambalā r. NW. 389.

Svapaca p. W.? 389.

Svāpada p. W. 389.

Svapāka p. W.? 339.

Svar, 71, 206, 218, 227, 553.

Svara, 130.

Svarakgu mt. N. 281.

Svaraksu r. N. 281.

Svarasa mi. 288.

Sva-rāstra X. 438.

Svar-bhānu (Sun), 582.

Svarga 36-41, 50, 57-61, 69-71,
75-78, 88-90, 147, 152, 168, 169,
279, 280, 283, 284, 310, 409, 443,
460, 462, 473, 513, 530, 652, 687,
688. (883.

Svarga-bhaumānavadyaka? p.NE.

Svarna-srngin mt. N. 279.

Sva-rocis ps. 401-415.

Svurocisa, Manu and manvantara,
271, 391, 392, 398, 401, 406, 408
411-415, 449, 466, 549. :

Sva-rūpa pr. 610.

Svastika posture, 195.

ijas, cst. 169, 370.
vayam-bhū g., see Self-existent.

Sve anne Manu als LA
vantara, 247, 248, 270- ‘
424, 448, 449, 549, as AO,


”


724 jr.


Svaydtn hari a gb. 257, 260, 265.
Sveta k. and c. 278.

Sveta mts: N. 275, 276. *
Sveta-giri mt. N. 287, 381.
Sveta-parņa mt. NE. 388.
Sveta-parvata, see Svetagīri.
Svetodara mt. N. 279

Syāmā cer. 165.

Syāmā r. NW. 389.

Syāmā r. NW. 389.

Syāmaka p. N. 380.
Syāmāka cer. 165, 245.

Syeni demi-gs. 509.


Tailanga p. S. 367.

Taittirika p. W. 389.

Takka p. NW. 379.

Taksaka d. k. 379, 648.
Taksa-sila t. NW. 379.

Tala tr. 27.

Tala (music), 131.

Tāla t. S. 411, 412.

Talagāna? p. N. 821.
Talajangha p. M. 371.

Tāla-ketu d. 121, 122, 125.
Tamah-pracchādaka gb. 265.
Tamāla tr. 28.

Tamalipta-ka p. E. 380, 357, 358.
Tamarasa pt. 80.

Tamas, hell, 71, 72, 152. :
Tamasā r. M. 296, 298.

Tāmasa mt. N. 278.

Tamasa. Manu and manvantara,

271, 487, 488, 442, 549.

Tamasa p. N. 328, 347.

Tamasi 7 M. 296.

Tamba rs. 415.

Tamil p. S. 370.

Tāmisra, hell, 152.

Tamluk t. E. 301, 327, 330.
Tamra d. 479.

Tamra, demi-gs. 559.
Tāmrāhvaya-dvīpa c. 367.
Tamraka mt. N. 279.
Tamralipta-ka c. and t. E. 301

329, 380. i

Tamraparna c. 284.

Tāmraparnī r. S. 308, 367.
Tamraparni ? r. SE. 305.
'Tāmraparņī t. and isl. S. 367,
Tāmraparnī h. S. 367.
Tamraparni dt. S. 367.
‘Tamravarna c. 284.
Tanapa p. N. 321.


INDEX.


Tanaya p. N. P 321.

Tene. p. N. 316, 817, 322, 328,
346, 375, 381, 382.

Taīijor dt. S. 332.

Tankana p. N. 823.

Tan-matra, 231.

Tapasa p. W. 339.

Tāpasāšrama p. S. 339, 366.

Tapat? g. 461, 567, 576.

Tapi r. C. and W. 299.

Tapo-loka, 558.

Tapo-rati b. 590.

Tapo-vana for. 669.

Tapta-kumbha, hell, 71, 74, 83.

Tapti r. C. and W. 285, 286, 299,
335, 336, 840, 344, 365, 368,

Tāraksati, Tāraksiti, dt. W. 872.

Tāraksura p. NW. ? 372.

Tarksi bd. 6, 8.

Tārksya p. NW. ? 372.

Taru-jit d. 663.

Taste (element), 217, 221, 222.

Tauņdikera ? p. C.? 871.

Taxilu t. NW. 379.

Teal bd. 30.

Teesta r. NE. 293.

Telingac.and p. SE. 334, 337, 367.

Telugu p. S. 334,337, 367.

Tendukhera t. C. 344,

Tephrodornis bd. 28.

Terminalia tr. 26.

Tern bd. 86.


-Tetrao bd. 28.


Tewar t. C. 343, 371.
Thami p. N. 322.
Thibet c. 319, 323.
Thunder-bolt, 2, 75.
Til pt. 84.
Tila pt. 84; see Sesamum.
Tilanga ? p. N. 308.
Tilanga p. S. 367.
Tilottamā aps. 4, 571.
Time, measures of, 224-228, 458
543, 580.
Tindaka, tr. 24, 25.
Tindu-ka tr. 24, 26.
Tinnevelly dt. S. 331.
Tippera hills, E. 306,
Titir bd. 86.
Tittira p. 339.
Tittiri bd. 86.
Tochari p. N. 320.
Todya (music), 132.
Tomara p. N. 323.


INDEX.


Tons r. M. 296. ;

Tortoise, 30,- 49, 84, 85,181, 195,
278, 348, 349, 355, 358, 367, 374,

„376, 381, 384-387, 417.

Tortures, 48, 49, 66-68, 72-90.

Tošala p. C. 342.

Touch (element), 217, 221, 222.

Towns, 240-242.

Toya r. C.301.

Trade, 101, 108, 214.

Traigarta p. N. 347.

Traipura p. C. 343, 360.

Transmigration, 3, 5, 8-18, 38, 48-
50, 54, 66-71, 77-88, 91, 158, 280.

Travancore dt. S. 367.

Treta age, 32, 224, 226, 235, 239,
248, 272, 347, 387, 388, 437.

Tribhaga 7.- E. 304.

Trichinopoly dt. S. 332.

Tridivā r. C. 298.

'Tridivā x. E. 305.

Tridivācalā r. E. 305.

Trigarta c. N. 321, 324, 346-849,
372, 377-382.

Trih-srotasī r. NE. ? 293.

Trilinga c. and p. SE. 367.

Tri-netra p. NE. 384,

Tripistapa di. M. 290.

Tripura t. C. 343, 360, 371.

Trisāmā 7. SE. 304, 305.

Trisanku k. 339.

Tri-sikha mt. NW. 281.

Tri-srotas r. NE. ? 298.

Tri-suparna hynins, 160.

Tritiya r. E.? 298.

Triyāmā r. SE. 304.

Truthfulness, 14, 15, 35, 39, 41, 66,
68, 88, 122, 151, 568, 640.

Trumpet-flower tr. 20.

Tryambaka gs. 518.

Tukhāra p. N. 320, 350, 353.

Tulsi pt. 164.

Tumba pt. 118.

Tumbara p. C. 348.

Tumbhadra r, S. 808

Tumbula p. C. 343.

'Tumbuma p. C. 343.

Tumbura p. C. 348.

Tumburu 7s. 12, (118), 571, 647,
648.


Tumura p. C. 343.
Tunaya gdh. 646, 648.
Tundikera p. C. 344.
Tunga r. S. 808.


Tunga-bl


Tungana


iadrā 7. S. 308%
p. N. 323. 6


Tunga-prastha mt. 288.


Turasita


p. W. 339.


Turdus bd. 49, 58.
Turk p. 372.
Turkestan c. N. 324, 372.


Turmeric


pi. 165.


Turuska p. W. 372.
Turvasu k. 628, 653.
Tusūra p. N. 319, 320.


Tusita go


ds, 415.


Tustikāra ? p. C. 344.
Tvangana p. NE. 382. ;
21, 22, 120, 455-460, 569,


Tvastr g.
605.


Uccaih-sravas, horse, 494, 495.


Udagra d. 476, 479.
Udana, air, 66, 204.
Udāra cer. 244.


Udāvasu


k. 612.


Udaya-giri h. M. 357.


Udaya-gi
Udbhida
Udbhida
Uddhata
Udgitha,


ri h. E. 356.
k. and c. 273.
p. S. 337..

d. 479.

484.


Udumbara p. M. 355.


Udumbara c. W. 355.


Udumbara tr. 182, 192, 255.
Udumbarāvatī r. S. 355.


Ugra dg.


268.


Ugra k. 454.
Ugra-darsana d. 476, 480.


Ugrasya


d. 479.


Ugra-vīrya d. 479.
Ugrāyudha k. 350, 598.


Ujhani t.
Ujjain t.


M. 351.
C. 295, 345, 521.


Ujjayanta mt. W. 288.
Ujjayini t. C. 295, 345.
Ujjihana p. M. 350, 351.
Ukti gb..257, 258, 262.
Ulūka p. N, 346, 375.
Umā gs. 132, 269.
Umbilical cord, 70.


Unmattā


gb. 264.


ne rs. 454.
pa-giri dt. N. 325, 328.
Upanisad, 259. 2
Upaniveša, 318.


paplava,


Upupa bd


sv ra, l. M. 3 «
8 A 07


a


726


Urdamaru p. N. 376.
„Ūrdhva-bāhu rs. 270, 449.
Ūrdhva-karņa p. SE. 342, 360.
Ūrja rs. 415.
Ūrjā w. 249, 270.
Ūrjasvin g. 462.
Urjihānā t. M. 351.
Urna p. and c. N. 324, 346, 376.
Ura, Uru, k. 454.
Urukarma? pl. N. 376.
Urvašī aps. and g. 4, 571.
Ušanas dg. 9, 10, 58.
USinara k. 383, 377-380.
Ušīnara p. M. 877.
Ušīra gr. 79.
Usira-vija rs. 653.
Usna k. and c. 278.
Utkala k. 589.
Utkala p. and c. E. 299, 327. 329,
334, 341, a ;
Utpala pt. 29.
Utpalā r. S. 304.
Utpalāvata-ka for. 425.
Utpalāvatī r. S. 304.
Utpalāvatī q. 439.
Utsarga oblation, 151, 158,
Utsava-saūketa p. N., W. and S.
319, 337.
Uttama p. C. ? 342.
Uttama k. 419, 420, 423-425, 429,
432, 435, 436.
Uttamarna p. O. 342.
gs k. 247,248, 419, 420,


Uttānapāla. k. 112.


Vābhravya pat., see Bābhra fa
Veblen cp net. yee
Vacaspati dg. 626.
Vadana-dantura p. E. 356, 357,
Vadantika ? p. N. 379,
Vadhadhana? p. NW. 812,
Vadhra p. N. 378.

Vahirgira p. E, 325.

Vahir-giri p. E. 325,

Vahir-giri dt. NE. 825, 328,
Vahlika ķ. 311.

Vahlika p. NW. 811, 815, 375,
Vāhya ? p. M. 354,

Vāhyā r. S. 308.

Vāhyatodara? p. N. 320.
Vaibhāra mt. M. 286.


INDEX,


Vaibhrāja for. N. 278, 281.

Vaibhrāja mt. M. 286,

Vaidehaka p. M. 352.

Vaidika ? p. C. 343.

Vaidiša p. M. 343, 627, 630.

Vaidūrya mt. W. and C. 279, 287,
299, 365.

Vaidyanatha h. E. 287.

Vaidyuta k. and c. 278.

Vaidyuta mt. 287.

Vaigai r. S. 304.

Vaihāra mt. M. 286.

Vaikārika, 221.

Vaikuntha k. 449.

Vaiņava k. and c. 273,

Vainī r. S. 308.

Vaippar r. 804.

Vaipracitta pat. d. 517.

Vairāta c. M. 288, 307.

Vairocani d. 465.

Vaišāli pat. 426.

Vaišālī t. M. 329, 600.

Vaišālinī prs. 625, 627.

Vaisikya p. S. 334.

Vaisņava sect, 108.

Vaišya caste, 74, 318, 671; its
duties, &c., 148, 591, 594, 597.

Vaitaraņī r. E. 300, 334.

Vaitariņī, fabulous r. 54.

Vaivasvata, Manu and manvan-
tara, 271, 341, 350, 368, 454-
463, 517, 549, 551, 566, 568, 575,
576, 587—590, (600), 617, 666.

Vaji-kesa p. NW. 374.

Vāļivāsika ? p. S. 383.

Vajra-ketu d. 115.

Vaka bd. 58,

Vaka p. N. 876.

Vaksu r. NW. 292, 324,

Vakula tr. 26.

Vala? pl. NW. 375.

Valaka rs, 442,

Valaka d. 425, 426.

Valāva ? pl. NW. 375.

Vamana p. NW. 372.

Vamana incarnation, 21.

Vamsa-dhara 7. SE. 305.

Varhsa-dharini r. SE. 305. `

Vathéa-kara r. SE. 305.

Vathéa-vara r. SE. 305.

Vanadāraka p. S. 337.

Venepreatha, 149, 150, 216, 616,

, 681.


Vana-rastra-ka ? p. andc, NE. 382.


INDEX.


Vanava p. NW. ? 372.

Vanavahyaka p. NE. 388.

Vanavāsaka p. S. 338, 364.

Vanavāsi, c. S. 333.

Vanavāsika p. S. 333.

Vanavāsin c. S. 333, 364.

Sa Vānāyu, c. and p. NW.
72.


Vanga k. 825, 326.
Vanga p. and c. E. 324-329, 334.
Vangeya p.= Vanga.
Vanitā-mukha p. W. 368.
Vaūjukā r. M. 297.
Vaiijula tr. 28.

Vaūjulā r. M”297.
Vaūjulā r. S. 302, 308.
Vanksu r. NW. 292, 389.
Vapantī ? r. C. 295.
Vapu aps. 1, 2, 5-8.
Vapus-mat k. 272, 273.

Vapus-mat pr. 670, 673-683.

Vapus-matī g. 665.

Vara sf. 438.

Vara prs. 627.

Varada r. C. 300.

Varadā r. S. 308.

Varāha incarnation, 21.

Varāha g. 505, 509.

Vārāha kalpa, 228.

Varāhādri mt. N. 279.

Vāraņāhvaya t. M. 355.

Varana-sahvaya t, M. 355.

Vārāņasī (Benares) t. M. 308, 654

Varanasi t. E. 360.

Varana-sthala t. M. 351. 355.

Varanavata t. M. 347, 355.

Vardhamana mts. NW. 388.

Vardhamāna p. E. 358.

Vāri-cara p. S. 365.

Varmavat (town), 242.

Varna r. S. 805.

Varnasa r. M. 286, 294.

Vārtāki pt. 167.

Vartula pt. 84.

Varuna g. 10, 122, 125, 158, 478,
474 489, 494, 535, 588, 545, 562, |
588, 589, 621, 680.

Varuņā 7. N. 392.

Varuna c. 284.

Varuna cst. 381

Varunoda ue 278, 381.
arūtha k. :

Veria aps. 391, 394-402.


Varva p. N. 376.


727


Varvara p. NW., NE. and S. 319,
369, 372.

Vasat, 151, 152, 444, 470, 540.

Vasati (village), 242.

Vasa-vartin gods, 486, 437.

Vāsika p. W. 339.

Vasistha rs. 59, 246, 249, 270, 289,
314, 886, 462, 570, 590, 615.

Vasistha rs. 449.

Vasistha dg. 403.

Vāsistha pat. b. 612.

Vāskala d. 476, 479.

Vasu g. 129, 168, 460, 461, 474.

Vasu k. (of Cedi), 330, 359.

Vasu k. (of Magadha), 330.

Vasudeva k. and g. 8, 19-21, 55.

Vasu-dhara mt. N. 279.

Vasu-homa k. 655.

Vasuki, Naga k. 648.

Vasu-mat k. 463.

Vasu-mat P? mt. N. 876.

Vasurāta pr. 599.

Vašya k. and c. 278.

Vašyatā ? r. S. 302.

Vātadhāna k. 312.

Vātadhāna p. NW. 312, 378.

Vātā-rūpā gb. 267.

Vātasvana mt. 277,

Vatsa k. 307.

Vatsa c. and p. M. 307, 341, 351,

Vatsa-prī k. 604, 607, 610.

Vatsarī ? r. S. 302. |

Vātsya c. and p. M. 307, 341.

Vayu (Wind) g. 6, 10, 22, 23, 147,
178, 478, 474, 489, 562, 582, 648.

Veda-bāhu rs. 449.

Vedamali r. S. 303.

Veda-mantra p. M. 349.

Vedānta 129, 683.

Veda, 558-557, 685-687.

Vedasinī r. M. 293.

Veda-siras rs. 269.

Veda-smrtā, -ti, r. M. 298.

Veda-sri rs. 449.

Veda-trayī? r. M. 295,

Veda-vati r. N. 293.

Veda-vati 7. S. 303.

Vedi-pālā r. G.? 300,

Vegetables, 165, 166, 244, 245

Vega-vahini r. M.? 298. i

Vena k. 146, 320, 588. —

Veņā.r. S. 300.

Vena r., see Ve


Veni r. 8. 362," Veņyā.


728


Venika p. W.? 378,

Venna 7. S. 308.

Veņu mt. N. 278.

Venugradha pt. 245.

Veņuka p. N. 379.

Veņu-mātī r. W. 373.

Venu-mati r. NW.? 375.

Venus, planet, 9, 207, 431, 626.

Venva r. N. 286, 294

Venvā r. N.? 294.

Venva r. W. 289.

Venva r. S. 294, 300.

Venyā r. C. 300, 362.

Venya 7. S. 308, 362.

Vesnapasa P r. C.? 300.

Vetala gb. 46, 47.

Vetasini 7. M. 298.

Vetra-vatī r. M. 295, 343.

Vetra-vatī'r. W. 295.

Vibhāvarī demi-gs. 402, 406—408,
411.

Vibhītaka tr. 26.

Vibodha dd. 3.

Vībhu g. 449.

Vibhūti k. 623.

Vicia pt. 165.

Vici-kaka bd. 86.

Vidala d. 476, 479.

Vidarbha c. C. 76, 293, 299, 335,
348, 359, 360, 365, 618, 664, 670.

Vidarbha k. 335. ;

Vidarbha t. C. 335.

Vidarbha g. 454.

Videgha pr. 380.

Videha c. and p. M. 75, 294, 329,
830, 352, 356, 374. x

Vidhātr g. 10, 153, 154, 269.

ae t. M. 295, 342, 343, 625,

Vidiéa 7. M. 295.

Vidūratha k. 578.

Vidūratha k. 604, 605, 677.

Vidūratha k. 677.

Vi-dvegani gb. 257, 261, 267,

Vidyā (Science), 128.

Vidyadhara dg. 115, 279, 401-404,

eel bg pr, 679.
īdyud-rūjā. d. 6-8.

Vighnarāt tg? 32.

Vigna pt”165.

Vīja-hāriņī yb. 257, 261, 267.

Vijalpā gb.‘262.

„Vījāpahāriņī gb. 261.

Vīja-pūtaka tr. 25.


INDEX


Vijaya k. 411.

Vijaya t. NE. 411.

Vikāra 228, 231, 232.

Vikrama pr. 610. .

Vikrama-šīla k. 445.

Vikrānta pr. 140-143.

Vikrūnta hk. 449-452.

Vikrti gs. 263.

Village, ancient, 242.

Vilolā r. M. 455 (=Yamunā)

Vimalā r. N. 305. 5

Vimalā r. E.? 305.

Vimalodā r. N. 305, 806.

Vimalodakā r. N.?P 290, 306.

Vimaudavya p. M. 349.

Vimarda k. 488.

Vimba pt. 114.

Virnša k. 618. <

Vina r. S.? 308.

Vinašana t. M. 290, 310, 312.

Vinata k. 589.

Vinatā demi-gs. 559.

Vinatāśva hk. 589.

Vinaya k. 589.

Vinda k. 345.

Vindhaculaka p. N. 874.

Vindhya mts. C. 8, 11, 12, 17, 19,
285, 286, 298, 299, 310, 331, 340-
344, 360, 517, s

Vindhya:mauleya p. C. 335.

Vindhya-milika p. C. 385.

Vindhya-pūsika ? p. C. 835.

Vindhyavat m. 116.

Vinnā 7. C. 300.

Vipāšā r. N. 292.

Vipasa r. C. 297.

Vipašcit g. 415.

Vipašcit %. 75, 76, 83.

Vipāthā g. 446,

Vipracitti d. 21; 102, 517.

Viprasastaka p. W. 372.

Viprāgika pt. 165.

Vipula mts. N. 277, 281.

Vipulasvat rs. 12,

Vīra k. 618,

Vira k. 627


i


INDEX.


Vīrajas rs: 454.

Vīrankgrā r. 297.

Virāta k. 853, 382.

Vira-vati r. 297.

Virodhinī gb. 257, 260, 265.

Virtue (see Righteousness), 2, 14, 34,
36, 468.

Virūpa gb. 263.

Virya-candra k. 625.

Vīrya-hārī gb. 265.

Visakha cst: 169, 370.

Višākha-vat mi. N. 279.

Visāla mis. NW. 388.

Visala 6. 426.

Višāla k. 627, 630-636, 641-646,
650.

Visala, village, 452, 453.

Visala r. E. 290, 297, 306.


` Višālā t. M. 345.


> Vrata-ghni r.


o


Višālā r. C. 297.

Visnu g. 1, 2, 10, 17, 20, 21, 40, 70,
98-102, 106, 108, 112, 130, 206,
219, 224, 225, 278, 290, 348, 849,
387, 389, 460, 465, 469-474, 489,
490, 502--505, 509, 512, 514, 522,
045, 555-558, 572, 574, 582, 588,
686. ;


Visoka mis. NW. 388.
Višvācī ups. 571.
. Visva-garbha k. 669.
Visva-karman (=Tvastr) g. 455-
460, 475, 566, 569. 572, 574.
Visva-krt g.=Visva-karman.
Visva-mala r. H. ? 301.
Viśvāmitra rs. 32-47, 50, 55-60,
309, 314, 347, 357, 462, 464, 591.
Višvūvasu d. 113, 115.
Višva-vedin m. 612-615.
Visve Devās. goda, 32, 37, 153-
ae 161, 163, 168, 178, 258, 461,
462.


Vītahavya f. 871, 600.

Vītahotra p. C. 344. -

Vital airs, 66, 197, 202-204.

Vitasta r. N. 291, 438.

Vītihotra k. 344.

Vītihotra p. C. 344, 871.

Vivasvat (Sun) g. 455, 457, 528,
566, 576, 577, 586.

Vivirnša, -Sati, k. 618, 619.

Vizugapatam t. SE. 334, 335.

Vraja dt. and ». M. 308.

- P 293.

Vrhad-ruthu k. 330.


729


Vrhaspati 10, 50, 101, 102, 109.

Vrhaspati rs. 654.

Vrīhi cer. 165.

Vrji dt. M. 309.

Vrka k. 309.

Vrka p. M. 309.

Vrsabha mi. N. 279-282.

Vrga-dhvaja h. E. 356.

Vrsaparvan k. 669.

Vrsavat mt. N. 278.

Vrsni p. W. 336.

Vrtra d. 4, 22, 514.

Vrtra-ghnī r. M. P 293.

Vulture bd. 46, 53, 72, 74, 85, 208,
263, 680. aj

Vyāghra-grīva p. SE. 360.

Vyaghra-mukha h. E. 356.

Vyāna (vital air), 204.

Vyafijana-harika gb. 266.

Vyasa rs. 2, 18, 20, 464, 677, 686.

Vyusitasva k. 816, 350.


Wages, 48, 46-50.

Wain-ganga r. C. 300, 305, 363.

Warangal t. S. 337.

Warda r. S. 300, 364.

Water (element), 217, 221, 222.

Water-fowl, 30.

Water-lily, 29, 30, 104, 115.

Wealth (Artha), 2, 119, 128, 170-
172. 185, 187, 198, 252, 264, 430.

Well-rope and jar, 70—73, 91.

Wheat, 84, 165, 181, 244, 245.

Wind, see Vayu.

Wine, 421. *

Wolf 72, 82, 85.

Wood-necker bd. 28.

Wool, 40. i

Worlds (Loka), 20, 22, 55, 57, 71,
89, 95, 96, 102, 103, 110, 111, 116,
124, 128, 144, 151, 201, 206, 218,
228, 225, 227, 229, 246, 397, 462,
574, 662.


Xanthochymus tr. 28,


Ap SIF,
Yādava race, 309, gars TA
352, 359, 371. < S DA
Yadu k. 26, 364, ee
Yajiia pfn. 247, : eS


Yajur- Veda, 1526206 S:
Yajus hymns, 64, a
554-557, 561, 5 h,
a)


Yak bt. 166,
Sedat


+ = > > V. ii
i o <r Ñ
730 <> \ 4 INDEX. S
- $ ny PO
"Yākhā p. N. 322. Yati (music), 182. > EÈ
Yaksa dg. 46, 115, 232, 284, 296, Yātudhāna gb. 262. 7 & dr
O48, 272, 279, 460, 497, 541, 559, | Yaudheya p. NW. 333, 38%
574, 581, 648, 679. Yauna p. (=Yavana), 381,-; .
*Yaksgīna, 179. Yavana p. NW. 284, 31, 3149318,


Yama g. 7, 10, 28, 48, 50, 66-68,
71-77, 80-88, 88-90, 147, 153,
162, 209, 215, 263, 420, 455, 457,
460, 473, 474, 489, 593, 562, 566-
568, 574, 575, 579, 680, 683.

Yāma gods, 248.

Yamī demi-gs. 566.

Yamuna r. M. 121, 122, 125, 291,
377, 378, 455, 461, 566, 576, 590.

Yāmīūna hills N. 377, 378.

Yamuna p. N. 377.

Yamya cst, 384.

Yašodā g: 517.

Yašomatī ? r. N. 380.

Yašomatya p. N. 380.


2 gi au


319, 328, 350, 371, 377,884, 466,


677. : *er
Yayāti k. 316, 336, 371, 88dy


658, 669, n


kā:
Year, 224-228, 271. ra oy


Yena? p. NE. 381:


„Yoga, 91, 92, 100, 193.0.
Yojana, 240, 275-277, 28%


Yudhisthira k. 9, 28, 353, 366,
Yuga, 226. >i eT
Yufjavat ? mt. N. 655.
Yūthaga gods, 454. 9
Zizyphus tr. 27: 2
Zodiac, 169, 348, 387, 580.
A
a TO,
hg
a
©
Aa 3 r


©


658,


t


K


AK:
kā: i
K;


is


"S: Rae Seen
