Main Currents in American Thought, Vol. 1: The Colonial Mind (Vernon Louis Parrington, 1927)
==========================================================
The Pulitzer-winning history of American ideas: liberalism vs. conservatism from the colonies. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (colonialmind0000unse).

<  937 
V\! f 


MAIN  CURRENTS  IN  AMERICAN  THOUGHT 


AN  INTERPRETATION  OF  AMERICAN  LITERATURE 
FROM  THE  BEGINNINGS  TO  1920 


BY 

VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 

PROFESSOR  OF  ENGLISH  IN  THE 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WASHINGTON 


VOLUME  I  *  l620-l800 
THE  COLONIAL  MIND 

VOLUME  II  1800-1860 
THE  ROMANTIC  REVOLUTION  IN  AMERICA 

VOLUME  III  ♦>  I860-I92O 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICAL  REALISM  IN  AMERICA 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


1620-I 800 

4 


L- 


BY 

VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 

PROFESSOR  OF  ENGLISH  IN  THE 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WASHINGTON 


NEW  YORK 

HARCOURT,  BRACE  AND  COMPANY 

1927 


COPYRIGHT,  I927,  BY 
HARCOURT,  BRACE  AND  COMPANY,  INC, 


SET  UP  AND  ELECTROTYPED  BY  T.  MOREY  &  SON 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A. 


TO  THE  MEMORY 


OF 

J.  ALLEN  SMITH 

SCHOLAR  TEACHER  DEMOCRAT  GENTLEMAN 


Omnium  Amicus  erat 
qui 

Justiciam  amant. 


FOREWORD 


It  is  with  a  certain  feeling  of  temerity  that  I  offer  the  present 
study  of  a  field  of  American  letters  which  has  been  pretty  largely 
neglected.  That  feeling  springs  from  no  sense  of  the  slightness  of 
the  materials  treated  of,  or  their  remoteness  from  present-day 
interests.  To  one  who  has  dwelt  for  any  length  of  time  amidst 
the  polemics  of  colonial  debate,  a  conviction  of  the  greatness  of 
the  issues  and  the  intellectual  honesty  and  masculine  vigor  of  the 
disputants,  comes  home  with  compelling  force.  The  subjects 
with  which  they  dealt  are  old-fashioned  only  in  manner  and  dress; 
at  heart  they  were  much  the  same  themes  with  which  we  are 
engaged,  and  with  which  our  children  will  be  engaged  after  us. 
The  feeling  springs  rather  from  a  sense  of  the  complexity  and 
many-sidedness  of  the  materials,  with  their  ramifications  into 
theology  and  politics  and  economics,  and  with  backgrounds  that 
conduct  to  remote  origins  in  European  systems  of  thought;  and 
it  is  quickened  by  the  realization  that  the  interpretation  here 
offered,  runs  in  many  points  counter  to  that  frequently  given. 
The  point  of  view  from  which  I  have  endeavored  to  evaluate  the 
materials,  is  liberal  rather  than  conservative,  Jeffersonian  rather 
than  Federalistic;  and  very  likely  in  my  search  I  have  found  what 
I  went  forth  to  find,  as  others  have  discovered  what  they  were 
seeking.  Unfortunately  the  mens  aequa  et  clara  is  the  rarest  of 
attributes,  and  dead  partisanships  have  a  disconcerting  way  of 
coming  to  life  again  in  the  pages  of  their  historians.  That  the 
vigorous  passions  and  prejudices  of  the  times  I  have  dealt  with 
may  have  found  an  echo  in  my  judgments  is,  perhaps,  to  be  ex¬ 
pected;  whether  they  have  distorted  my  interpretation  and 
vitiated  my  analysis  is  not  for  me  to  determine. 

Of  the  present  volume  portions  of  Book  One  have  already 
appeared  in  a  much  abbreviated  form  in  the  Cambridge  History 
of  American  Literature,  and  certain  passages  of  Book  Three 
have  appeared  in  Selections  from  the  Connecticut  Wits,  of  the 
American  Authors  Series;  and  I  am  indebted  to  the  courtesy 
of  G.  P.  Putnam’s  Sons  and  of  Harcourt,  Brace  and  Company 
for  the  privilege  of  reprinting  them  here.  My  obligations 


11 


FOREWORD 


to  many  students  are  too  great  to  be  adequately  acknowledged  in 
a  few  words;  they  appear  at  large  in  the  footnotes.  I  find  myself 
especially  indebted  to  the  critical  historians  who  for  the  past  score 
of  years  have  been  working  with  such  fruitful  results  in  the  Revolu¬ 
tionary  and  Constitutional  periods  of  our  development.  Without 
the  assistance  of  their  searching  investigations  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  understanding  those  complex  times  would  have  proved 
insuperable.  To  the  sane  and  acute  scholarship  of  my  friend  and 
colleague,  Prof.  Edward  McMahon,  and  to  the  generous  counsel 
and  encouragement  of  the  late  Prof.  J.  Allen  Smith,  I  am  under 
particular  obligations;  but  in  those  instances  in  which  I  may 
unwittingly  have  gone  astray,  the  fault  is  mine.  In  a  study  deal¬ 
ing  with  so  long  a  period  of  time  and  with  such  diverse  and  difficult 
fields,  I  can  scarcely  hope  to  have  escaped  the  many  traps  laid  for 
the  unwary.  Perhaps  I  should  add  that  the  seeming  neglect,  in 
the  present  volume,  of  southern  backgrounds,  has  resulted  from 
the  desire  to  postpone  the  detailed  consideration  of  the  mind  of 
the  South  to  a  later  volume. 


Seattle ,  January  i,  1926 


V.  L.  P. 


INTRODUCTION 


I  have  undertaken  to  give  some  account  of  the  genesis  and 
development  in  American  letters  of  certain  germinal  ideas  that 
have  come  to  be  reckoned  traditionally  American — how  they  came 
into  being  here,  how  they  were  opposed,  and  what  influence  they 
have  exerted  in  determining  the  form  and  scope  of  our  character¬ 
istic  ideals  and  institutions.  In  pursuing  such  a  task,  I  have  chosen 
to  follow  the  broad  path  of  our  political,  economic,  and  social 
development,  rather  than  the  narrower  belletristic;  and  the  main 
divisions  of  the  study  have  been  fixed  by  forces  that  are  anterior 
to  literary  schools  and  movements,  creating  the  body  of  ideas 
from  which  literary  culture  eventually  springs.  The  present 
volume  carries  the  account  from  early  beginnings  in  Puritan  New 
England  to  the  triumph  of  Jefferson  and  back-country  agrarianism. 
Volume  II  concerns  itself  with  the  creative  influence  in  America 
of  French  romantic  theories,  the  rise  of  capitalism,  and  the  transi¬ 
tion  from  an  agricultural  to  an  industrial  order;  and  Volume  III 
will  concern  itself  with  the  beginnings  of  dissatisfaction  with  the 
regnant  middle  class,  and  the  several  movements  of  criticism 
inspired  by  its  reputed  shortcomings. 

Such  a  study  will  necessarily  deal  much  with  intellectual  back¬ 
grounds,  and  especially  with  those  diverse  systems  of  European 
thought  that  from  generation  to  generation  have  domesticated 
themselves  in  America,  and  through  cross-fertilization  with  native 
aspirations  and  indigenous  growths,  have  resulted  in  a  body  of 
ideals  that  we  reckon  definitively  American.  In  broad  outline 
those  germinal  contributions  were  the  bequests  successively  of 
English  Independency,  of  French  romantic  theory,  of  the  indus¬ 
trial  revolution  and  laissez  faire,  of  nineteenth-century  science, 
and  of  Continental  theories  of  collectivism.  Transplanted  to 
American  soil,  these  vigorous  seedlings  from  old-world  nurseries 
took  root  and  flourished  in  such  spots  as  proved  congenial,  stim¬ 
ulating  American  thought,  suggesting  programs  for  fresh  Uto¬ 
pian  ventures,  providing  an  intellectual  sanction  for  new  experi¬ 
ments  in  government.  Profoundly  liberalizing  in  their  influence, 
they  gave  impulse  and  form  to  our  native  idealisms,  and  contrib- 

iii 


IV 


INTRODUCTION 


uted  largely  to  the  outcome  of  our  social  experience.  The  child 
of  two  continents,  America  can  be  explained  in  its  significant 
traits  by  neither  alone. 

In  the  present  volume,  I  have  examined  with  some  care  the 
bequests  of  seventeenth  and  eighteenth-century  Europe  to  the 
colonial  settlements,  and  in  particular  the  transplanting  to  Amer¬ 
ica  of  old-world  liberalisms.  In  the  main  those  liberalisms  derived 
from  two  primary  sources,  English  Independency  and  French 
romantic  theory,  supplemented  by  certain  contributions  from 
English  Whiggery.  From  the  first  came  the  revolutionary  doctrine 
of  natural  rights,  clarified  by  a  notable  succession  of  thinkers  from 
Roger  Williams  to  John  Locke,  a  doctrine  that  destroyed  the 
philosophical  sanction  of  divine  right,  substituted  for  the  tradi¬ 
tional  absolutism  the  conception  of  a  democratic  church  in  a  dem¬ 
ocratic  state,  and  found  exemplification  in  the  commonwealths 
of  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut.  But  unfortunately  the  liberal 
doctrine  of  natural  rights  was  entangled  in  New  England  with  an 
absolutist  theology  that  conceived  of  human  nature  as  inherently 
evil,  that  postulated  a  divine  sovereignty  absolute  and  arbitrary, 
and  projected  caste  divisions  into  eternity — a  body  of  dogmas 
that  it  needed  two  hundred  years’  experience  in  America  to  dis¬ 
integrate.  From  this  clash  between  a  liberal  political  philosophy 
and  a  reactionary  theology,  between  English  Independency  and 
English  Presbyterianism,  sprang  the  broad  features  of  the  struggle 
that  largely  determined  the  course  of  development  in  early  New 
England,  with  which  Book  One  is  concerned. 

Book  Two  deals  with  new  beginnings  from  the  raw  materials 
of  European  immigrants,  in  other  colonies  than  New  England, 
who  came  hither  singly  and  unorganized,  and  took  immediate 
imprint  from  the  new  environment,  creating  during  the  eighteenth 
century  the  great  body  of  yeomanry  that  was  to  determine  in 
large  measure  the  fate  of  America  for  a  hundred  years  or  more. 
It  was  to  these  scattered  and  undistinguished  colonials  that  French 
romantic  theory  was  brought  by  a  group  of  intellectuals  in  the 
later  years  of  the  century,  a  philosophy  so  congenial  to  a  decentral¬ 
ized  society  that  it  seemed  to  provide  an  authoritative  sanction 
for  the  clarifying  ideals  of  a  republican  order,  based  on  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  local  home  rule,  toward  which  colonial  experience  was 
driving.  Exploring  the  equalitarian  premises  of  the  doctrine  of 
natural  rights,  it  amplified  the  emerging  democratic  theory  by 


INTRODUCTION 


v 


substituting  for  the  Puritan  conception  of  human  nature  as  vicious, 
the  conception  of  human  nature  as  potentially  excellent  and 
capable  of  indefinite  development.  It  asserted  that  the  present 
evils  of  society  are  the  consequence  of  vicious  institutions  rather 
than  of  depraved  human  nature;  and  that  as  free  men  and  equals 
it  is  the  right  and  duty  of  citizens  to  re-create  social  and  political 
institutions  to  the  end  that  they  shall  further  social  justice,  en¬ 
couraging  the  good  in  men  rather  than  perverting  them  to  evil. 
Romantic  theory  went  further  and  provided  a  new  economics  and 
a  new  sociology.  Since  the  great  desideratum  is  man  in  a  state 
of  nature,  it  follows,  according  to  the  Physiocratic  school,  that 
the  farmer  is  the  ideal  citizen,  and  agriculture  the  common  and 
single  source  of  wealth;  and  that  in  consequence  the  state  should 
hold  the  tillers  of  the  soil  in  special  regard,  shaping  the  public 
policy  with  a  primary  view  to  their  interests.  And  since  social 
custom  is  anterior  to  statutory  laws,  since  the  individual  precedes 
the  state,  government  must  be  circumscribed  in  its  powers  and 
scope  by  common  agreement,  and  held  strictly  to  its  sole  concern, 
the  care  of  the  social  well-being.  The  political  state,  rightly  con¬ 
ceived,  must  be  reckoned  no  other  than  a  great  public-service 
corporation,  with  government  as  its  responsible  agent. 

But  while  French  romantic  theory  was  spreading  widely  through 
the  backwoods  of  America,  providing  an  intellectual  justification 
for  the  native  agrarianism,  another  philosophy,  derived  from 
English  liberalism  of  the  later  eighteenth  century,  was  taking 
possession  of  the  commercial  towns.  Realistic  and  material  rather 
than  romantic  and  Utopian,  it  was  implicitly  hostile  to  all  the 
major  premises  and  ideals  of  the  French  school.  It  conceived  of 
human  nature  neither  as  good  nor  bad,  but  as  acquisitive;  and 
it  proposed  to  erect  a  new  social  and  political  philosophy  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  needs  of  a  capitalistic  order.  It  was  concerned  with 
exploitation  and  the  rights  of  trade,  rather  than  with  justice  and 
the  rights  of  man.  Its  aspirations  were  expressed  in  the  principle 
of  laissez  faire,  and  in  elaborating  this  cardinal  doctrine  it  reduced 
the  citizen  to  the  narrow  dimensions  of  the  economic  man,  con¬ 
cerned  only  with  buying  in  the  cheapest  market  and  selling  in  the 
dearest.  It  would  reduce  the  political  state  to  the  role  of  police¬ 
man,  to  keep  the  peace.  With  humanitarian  and  social  interests, 
the  state  must  not  intermeddle — such  functions  lie  outside  its 
legitimate  sphere.  An  expression  of  the  aspirations  of  trading  and 


VI 


INTRODUCTION 


speculating  classes,  it  professed  to  believe  that  economic  law — 
by  which  term  it  glorified  the  spontaneous  play  of  the  acquisitive 
instinct — was  competent  to  regulate  men  in  society,  and  that  if 
freedom  of  trade  were  achieved,  all  lesser  and  secondary  freedoms 
would  follow. 

In  the  light  of  such  over-seas  bequests  to  the  American  venture, 
the  choice  of  materials  for  the  present  volume  is  predetermined. 
The  line  of  liberalism  in  colonial  America  runs  through  Roger 
Williams,  Benjamin  Franklin,  and  Thomas  Jefferson.  The  first 
transported  to  the  new  world  the  plentiful  liberalisms  of  a  great 
movement  and  a  great  century;  the  second  gathered  up  the  sum 
of  native  liberalisms  that  had  emerged  spontaneously  from  a 
decentralized  society;  and  the  third  enriched  these  native  liberal¬ 
isms  with  borrowings  from  the  late  seventeenth-century  natural- 
rights  school  and  from  French  romantic  theory,  engrafting  them 
upon  the  vigorous  American  stock.  Over  against  these  protago¬ 
nists  of  liberalism  must  be  set  the  complementary  figures  of  John 
Cotton,  Jonathan  Edwards,  and  Alexander  Hamilton,  men  whose 
grandiose  dreams  envisaged  different  ends  for  America  and  who 
followed  different  paths.  The  Carolinian  Seeker  and  the  Jacobean 
theocrat,  the  colonial  democrat  and  the  colonial  Calvinist,  the 
Physiocratic  republican  and  the  capitalistic  financier,  embody 
in  concrete  form  the  diverse  tendencies  of  primitive  America; 
and  around  these  major  figures  lesser  ones  will  group  themselves, 
parties  to  the  great  struggle  of  those  early  years,  the  eventual 
outcome  of  which  was  the  rejection  of  the  principles  of  monarchy 
and  aristocracy,  and  the  venturing  upon  an  experiment  in  repub¬ 
licanism  continental  in  scope. 

That  our  colonial  literature  seems  to  many  readers  meager  and 
uninteresting,  that  it  is  commonly  squeezed  into  the  skimpiest  of 
chapters  in  our  handbooks  of  American  literature,  is  due,  I  think, 
to  an  exaggerated  regard  for  esthetic  values.  Our  literary  histo¬ 
rians  have  labored  under  too  heavy  a  handicap  of  the  genteel 
tradition — to  borrow  Professor  Santayana’s  happy  phrase — to 
enter  sympathetically  into  a  world  of  masculine  intellects  and 
material  struggles.  They  have  sought  daintier  fare  than  polemics, 
and  in  consequence  mediocre  verse  has  obscured  political  specula¬ 
tion,  and  poetasters  have  shouldered  aside  vigorous  creative 
thinkers.  The  colonial  period  is  meager  and  lean  only  to  those 
whose  “disedged  appetites”  find  no  savor  in  old-fashioned  beef 


INTRODUCTION 


vxi 


and  puddings.  The  seventeenth  century  in  America  as  well  as 
in  England  was  a  saeculum  theologicum,  and  the  eighteenth  century 
was  a  saeculum  politicum.  No  other  path  leads  so  directly  and 
intimately  into  the  heart  of  those  old  days  as  the  thorny  path  of 
their  theological  and  political  controversies;  and  if  one  will  reso¬ 
lutely  pick  his  way  amongst  the  thorns,  he  will  have  his  reward 
in  coming  close  to  the  men  who  debated  earnestly  over  the  plans 
and  specifications  of  the  Utopia  that  was  to  be  erected  in  the  free 
spaces  of  America,  and  who  however  wanting  they  may  have  been 
in  the  lesser  arts,  were  no  mean  architects  and  craftsmen  for  the 
business  at  Mnd.  The  foundations  of  a  later  America  were  laid 
in  vigorous  polemics,  and  the  rough  stone  was  plentifully  mortared 
with  idealism.  To  enter  once  more  into  the  spirit  of  those  fine  old 
idealisms,  and  to  learn  that  the  promise  of  the  future  has  lain 
always  in  the  keeping  of  liberal  minds  that  were  never  discouraged 
from  their  dreams,  ^  scarcely  a  profitless  undertaking,  nor  without 
meaning  to  those  who  like  Merlin  pursue  the  light  of  their  hopes 
where  it  flickers  above  the  treacherous  marshlands. 

e 

•r 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Introduction:  The  theme  stated;  part  played  by  European  intellec¬ 
tual  movements;  influence  in  colonial  America  of  old-world  liberal¬ 
isms — English  Independency,  French  romantic  theory;  incoming 
of  a  diverse  philosophy— English  laissez  faire;  significance  of  theol¬ 
ogy  and  politics  in  colonial  America . iii 

BOOK  I:  LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

New  England  a  product  of  old-world  custom  and  institutions,  modi¬ 
fied  by  new-world  environment.  Emergence  of  two  classes:  yeo¬ 
manry,  gentry;  and  two  ideals:  Puritan  and  Yankee  ....  3 

Part  I 

The  Puritan  Heritage — 1620-1660 
I.  English  Backgrounds 

I.  Carolinian  liberalism  an  attempt  to  create  a  new  social 
system  to  replace  the  feudal,  resulting  in  the  doctrine  of 
natural  rights,  democracy,  and  equalitarianism.  The 
result  of  changing  economics.  Puritanism  primarily 
middle-class.  Types  of  church  polity — monarchical, 
aristocratic,  democratic.  Separatism  the  left  wing  of 

Puritanism .  5 

II.  Diverse  theologies  of  Luther  and  Calvin.  Reactionary 
nature  of  Calvinism:  established  in  absolutism — univer¬ 
sality  of  moral  law,  determinism,  reprobation — denial 
of  natural  rights . 11 

II.  The  Transplanting  of  Ideas 

I.  The  settlement  of  New  England  came  in  the  middle 
period  of  the  Puritan  movement.  Pilgrim  and  Puritan.  16 
11.  The  Puritan  Presbyterian:  Social  station — aristocratic, 
yet  with  middle-class  ambitions.  Hostility  to  ideal  of 
Separatism.  Sanctions  of  the  oligarchy,  of  the  theoc¬ 
racy.  A  Utopian  venture . 17 

ill.  Certain  Mistakes:  The  Plymouth  covenant-principle — 
stages  in  the  nullification  of  the  Separatist  principle:  the 
fellowship  of  the  churches;  statutes  erecting  a  state 
church;  the  climax  reached  in  the  Cambridge  Platform. 

The  adoption  of  a  freehold  tenure  of  land.  Webster’s 
interpretation . *  .....  22 


IX 


X 


CONTENTS 


III.  The  Chief  Stewards  of  Theocracy 

i.  Master  John  Cotton — Priest:  Representative  of  priestly 
stewardship.  Scholar  and  intellectual.  Doctrine  of  an 
ethica  laristocracy  and  carnal  liberty.  A  scripturist, 
seeking  to  check  the  drift  towards  democracy.  His 
Model  of  Moses  his  Judicials.  Rejection  of  natural 
rights,  of  hereditary  aristocracy.  The  Way  of  the 
Congregational  Churches  Cleared.  Debate  with  Roger 
Williams — freedom  to  follow  the  law  of  God 

II.  John  Winthrop — Magistrate:  Lay  representative  of 
theocracy.  A  cultivated  gentleman.  Reasons  for  re¬ 
moval.  Influence  of  the  Bible.  His  leadership;  concep¬ 
tion  of  magistracy  ennobled  by  Puritanism.  Implied 
absolutism — political  philosophy.  Struggle  with  the 
deputies;  distrust  of  democracy.  Absolute  authority  of 
law — the  Little  Speech.  Liberty  to  the  good,  just,  and 
honest.  Consequences . 

IV.  The  Contributions  of  Independency 

i.  The  clash  between  Presbyterianism  and  Independ¬ 
ency — the  right  of  individual  freedom.  Liberal  lead¬ 
ers — Hooker,  Williams.  Two  commonwealths — Con¬ 
necticut,  Rhode  Island . 

ii.  Thomas  Hooker — Puritan  Liberal:  A  moderate. 

Sprung  from  low  social  origins.  As  a  preacher  in  Eng¬ 
land;  removal  to  Hartford.  Democratic  order  of  the 
commonwealth  due  to  Hooker.  His  Survey  of  the  Summe 
of  Church  Discipline . 

hi.  Roger  Williams — Seeker:  Embodiment  of  radical  In¬ 
dependency,  and  forerunner  of  later  generations.  A  pro¬ 
vocative  figure.  Stages  in  his  intellectual  development. 
A  mystic  and  Christian  democrat,  concerned  with  a  new 
social  order.  His  political  theory:  the  compact  theory 
and  theocratic  absolutism;  conception  of  the  state — of 
government;  the  compact  a  constitution,  government 
an  agent,  and  the  end  the  common  well-being.  Theory 
of  toleration.  A  great  political  thinker.  The  constitu¬ 
tion  of  Rhode  Island  . , . 

V.  Other  Dreamers  in  Israel 

i.  Nathaniel  Ward — Elizabethan  Puritan:  A  Puritan  wit 
and  belated  Euphuist.  The  Simple  Cobler  of  Agga- 
wamm — a  mingling  of  satire  and  politics.  A  constitu¬ 
tionalist,  pleading  for  a  written  compact  to  delimit 
prerogative  and  popular  rights.  His  body  of  law. 

ii.  John  Eliot — A  Theocratic  Utopia:  The  Christian  Com¬ 

monwealth.  Ordered  to  be  suppressed.  His  plan  of  a 
Christian  state.  A  rigid  social  order . 


PAGE 


27 


38 


Si 


S3 


62 


76 


81 


CONTENTS 


xi 


Part  II 

The  Twilight  of  the  Oligarchy — 1660-1720  page 

The  spread  of  provincialism  and  the  consequences.  Formalism  in 
the  church;  superstition.  The  psychology  of  the  Salem  outbreak. 

The  muddling  of  the  oligarchy  and  the  end . 85 

I.  Samuel  Sewall — Yankee — First  representative  of  the 
new  order.  The  Sewall  of  tradition;  the  real  Sewall: 
middle-class,  governed  by  a  prudential  morality.  Un- 
creative,  conservative,  conventional.  The  other  side — 
generous,  kindly,  the  first  embodiment  of  village 


friendliness . 88 

II.  The  Mather  Dynasty 

1.  Difficulties  involved  in  attempting  an  estimate.  Cer¬ 
tain  Harvard  contributions . 98 


11.  Increase  Mather:  An  arch  conservative,  bred  by  a  con¬ 
servative  environment.  His  sympathy  for  the  Genevan 
system;  attempts  to  strengthen  discipline;  steps  in  his 
Presbyterianizing.  Intolerant — his  biographer  quoted. 
Unread  in  political  theory — dictatorial.  As  agent  at  the 
English  court.  His  bitterness.  Not  a  great  Puritan — 
compared  with  Samuel  Hopkins.  His  Illustrious  Provi¬ 
dences — not  scientific.  The  last  of  the  New  England 

Presbyterians . 99 

in.  Cotton  Mather:  Victim  of  a  provincial  environment. 
Subject  for  a  psychologist.  His  egoism;  his  quarrels. 

The  Diary.  His  venture  into  politics.  A  natural  Tory. 

His  writings:  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World;  the  Mag¬ 
nolia.  The  futility  of  his  dream . 106 

III.  Stirrings  of  Liberalism 

I.  John  Wise — Village  Democrat:  Before  Dudley;  at 

Quebec.  Character — a  liberal.  His  Vindication  of  the 
New  England  Churches — based  on  the  doctrine  of 
natural  rights.  Defense  of  democratic  Congregational¬ 
ism  against  the  movement  to  Presbyterianize.  Com¬ 
ment  of  Cotton  Mather.  His  contribution  to  the  paper- 
money  controversy.  His  later  influence  .  .  .  .  118 

II.  Social  Drifts:  Economic  forces — a  chasm  opening  be¬ 

tween  old  England  and  New  England.  The  village  and 
Toryism:  Joseph  Dudley  and  the  carters.  First 
newspapers:  News-Letter;  New-England  Courant;  New- 
England  Weekly  Journal . 125 


CONTENTS 


xii 


BOOK  II:  THE  COLONIAL  MIND  page 

The  middle  eighteenth  century  undistinguished,  yet  it  created  the 
individualism  that  was  the  source  of  a  new  democratic  psy¬ 
chology  . . 

Part  I 

The  Mind  in  the  Making — 1720-1763 

I.  Colonial  Backgrounds 

I.  New  Stock:  Economic  motive  of  immigration.  The 

Scotch-Irish  influx;  indented  servants — the  Germans; 
diary  of  John  Harrower . 133 

II.  The  Frontier — Lubberland:  Journal  of  Madam  Knight 

— frontier  leveling,  poverty.  History  of  the  Dividing 
Line,  Col.  William  Byrd — the  backcounty,  lubberland, 
impatient  of  law . 137 

ill.  The  Frontier — Land  of  Promise:  Letters  of  Crevecoeur: 

A  French  Physiocrat;  his  travels  in  America;  first  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  influence  of  the  frontier  in  economic 
terms — Ubi  panis  ibi  patria;  a  new  type;  influence  of 
the  middle  settlements,  the  frontier.  More  Letters: 
Crevecoeur  the  Loyalist — dislike  of  American  Whiggery.  1 40 

II.  The  Anachronism  of  Jonathan  Edwards 

I.  Backgrounds:  Decay  of  Calvinism;  beginnings  of  ra¬ 

tionalism.  A  free  environment  and  the  dogmas  of  total 
depravity  and  election.  The  major  question  of  deter¬ 
minism  . 148 

II.  Edwards  a  Puritan  mystic.  Sought  to  establish  theol¬ 
ogy  in  philosophy.  Idealistic  philosophy.  Desire  to 
magnify  God — interpreted  in  terms  of  will.  Defended 
threatened  dogmas.  On  the  Freedom  of  the  Will — the 
triumph  of  the  theologian.  Narrative  of  the  Surprizing 
Works  of  God  and  the  psychology  of  conversion.  The 
Great  Awakening.  Father  of  later  Congregationalism. 

The  tragedy  of  his  position . 152 

III.  Benjamin  Franklin — Our  First  Ambassador — A  Dem¬ 
ocrat  in  an  aristocratic  world.  A  free  soul;  product  of 
environment.  Compared  with  Defoe.  His  rise.  Enters 
politics.  Agent  in  England.  Corruption  of  English 
politics.  A  sociologist;  our  first  economist.  Economic 
theories:  A  Modest  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Necessity 
of  a  Paper  Currency.  Labor  the  measure  of  value. 
Accepted  Physiocratic  views:  laissez  faire,  agrarianism. 
Distrust  of  industrialism.  Principles  of  Trade.  Political 
views:  imperial  federation,  Whiggery.  In  the  Constitu¬ 
tional  Convention — a  unicameral  system.  A  child  of 
the  eighteenth  century . 164 


CONTENTS 


xui 


Part  II 

The  Awakening  of  the  American  Mind — 1763-1783 

I.  Imperial  Sovereignty  and  Home  Rule  page 

I.  Background  Facts:  Causes  of  the  Revolution  obscure. 

Home  rule  and  imperial  centralization.  Native  liberal¬ 
ism.  Three  areas  and  three  diverse  interests.  The  im¬ 
perial  problem.  Grievances  of  merchants,  planters, 
yeomanry . 179 

II.  Argument  and  Propaganda:  American  case  based  on 

the  British  Constitution;  on  natural  rights.  Theories  of 
representation,  English  and  colonial.  Powers  of  Parlia¬ 
ment.  Natural  rights  and  Locke — reasons  for  his 
appeal . 186 

in.  Certain  Social  Consequences:  Emergence  of  repub¬ 
licanism.  Attitude .  of  upper  class.  Expulsion  of 
Loyalists.  Influence  on  American  culture.  Rise  of 

middle  class;  political  centralization . 190 

II.  The  Mind  of  the  American  Tory 

I.  Thomas  Hutchinson — Royal  Governor:  The  House  of 

Hutchinson.  Character  and  intellectual  attainments. 
Insincerity  of  the  Tory  philosophy.  Situation  on  his 
accession  to  the  governorship.  Prerogative  and  democ¬ 
racy.  Proposals  for  remodeling  Massachusetts  govern¬ 
ment.  The  Town  Meeting.  Affair  of  the  letters.  The 
problem  of  sovereignty.  Government  by  ministerial  in¬ 
structions.  Comment  on  his  enemies.  His  failure  .  .  .  194 

II.  Daniel  Leonard — Tory  Lawyer:  Character.  Massachu- 
settensis.  A  follower  of  Hobbes — the  leviathan  state. 

The  sin  of  rebellion  and  the  law  of  treason.  Groundless¬ 
ness  of  American  sedition — the  virus  of  republicanism. 

On  the  right  of  revolution . 207 

in.  Jonathan  Boucher — Tory  Priest:  Character.  A  View 
of  the  Causes  and  Consequences  of  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion.  Influence  of  Filmer’s  Patriarcha.  Doctrine  of 
obedience.  Evil  effects  of  republicanism.  Government 
a  divine  institution — the  patriarchal  nature  of  kingship. 

An  extreme  Tory . 214 

III.  John  Dickinson — The  Mind  of  the  American  Whig — A 
moderate — spokesman  of  the  colonial  Whigs.  Essence 
of  Whiggery — the  rule  of  property.  His  social  position; 
conception  of  political  stewardship.  A  constitutional 
lawyer.  Accepted  parliamentary  sovereignty,  right  to 
regulate  trade.  Taxation  and  Whiggery — a  tax  and  an 
imposition.  Not  a  republican.  His  Two  Letters  on  the 
Tea  Tax.  In  the  Constitutional  Convention.  Letters  of 
Fabius.  His  views  old-fashioned . 219 


xiv 


CONTENTS 

IV.  Samuel  Adams— The  Mind  of  the  American  Democrat  page 
— An  agitator  and  practical  politician.  Member  of  the 
opposition.  Advocate  of  home  rule.  Understood  the 
ways  of  Tory  government.  Master  of  political  theory. 

Three  lines  of  argument:  natural  rights,  constitutional 
rights,  the  charter  compact.  Influence  of  Locke,  of 
Coke.  Reliance  on  public  opinion.  Use  of  publicity, 
organization,  town  meetings.  Newspaper  articles. 
Motive  of  attacks  on  royal  officials.  Faith  in  the 
people.  A  democrat.  The  cost  in  reputation  ...  233 

V.  Literary  Echoes 

I.  The  Whig  Satirists 

1.  John  Trumbull:  A  lover  of  belles  lettres  drawn  into 
the  strife.  M’Fingal.  The  note  of  humor.  A 
potential  intellectual;  a  moderate  liberal.  An  echo 

of  Connecticut  opinion . 248 

2.  Francis  Hopkinson,  Esq.:  The  state  of  Philadelphia 

culture.  A  dilettante.  A  potential  Tory  turned 
Whig.  The  New  Roof;  Objections  to  the  Proposed 
Plan  of  a  Federal  Government.  A  Federalist  .  .  252 

II.  The  Tory  Satirists 

1.  Jonathan  Odell:  A  bitter  nature.  His  satires — an 

embodiment  of  class  prejudice.  The  American 
Times.  Estimate  of  Whig  leaders . 255 

2.  Samuel  Peters:  His  curious  ambition.  His  History 

of  Connecticut.  Explanation  of  the  cause  of  the 
Revolution — ministerial  neglect.  The  cure — estab¬ 
lishment  of  a  colonial  aristocracy . 259 

BOOK  III:  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

Part  I 

The  Agrarian  Defeat — 1783-1787 

I.  Agrarianism  and  Capitalism 

I.  Background  of  Ideas — English  and  French  contribu¬ 

tions.  The  struggle  between  political  realists  and 
humanitarian  liberals.  Influence  of  English  middle 
class.  Puritan  ethics  of  work  and  capitalism.  Attitude 
towards  current  liberalisms — the  state.  Influence  of 
Harrington,  Locke,  Adam  Smith.  The  new  individual¬ 
ism.  Rousseau  and  French  humanitarianism — decen¬ 
tralization  and  the  paternalistic  state.  Reasons  why 
English  influence  prevailed .  267 

II.  The  Political  Situation:  Party  alignments.  Weakness 
of  agrarians.  The  composite  group  of  Federalists. 
Odium  attaching  to  democracy — confused  with  Popu- 


CONTENTS 


XV 


PAGE 

lism.  Shays’s  Rebellion.  Reaction  from  natural  rights 
to  economic  realism.  The  return  to  seventeenth-cen¬ 
tury  republicanism  . 273 

II.  The  Great  Debate — Inadequate  theory  of  republicanism. 
Earlier  English  liberalism  undemocratic.  Democratic 
theory  undeveloped.  First  debate:  republicanism  and 
the  majority  rule — Madison’s  view;  the  Whig  doctrine 
of  property  rule.  Second  debate:  opposition  to  checks 
on  majority  will.  The  Federalist — its  repute,  the  aug¬ 
mented  state,  theory  of  faction,  economic  basis  of 
government.  Letters  of  R.  H.  Lee — analysis  of  economic 
conditions,  the  Constitution  undemocratic.  Emergence 
of  parties . 279 

III.  Political  Thinkers — The  English  Group 

I.  Alexander  Hamilton-^-The  Leviathan  State:  Represen¬ 
tative  of  conservative  interests.  A  master  of  finance, 
administrator  rather  than  thinker.  Inadequate  intel¬ 
lectual  equipment.  A  political  realist:  men  are  swayed 
by  self-interest;  the  rule  of  the  strong.  Undemocratic. 

The  doctrine  of  vox  justiciae.  His  plan  of  government — 
the  fallacy  of  his  argument.  As  a  statesman:  necessity 
of  allying  the  wealthy  with  government:  position  on 
funding,  taxation,  the  tariff,  the  industrial  revolution. 
Statesman  of  the  rising  capitalism . 292 

II.  John  Adams — Realist:  Compared  with  Dr.  Johnson — 

apostle  of  common  sense.  Shift  from  earlier  position. 
Intellectual  qualities.  His  early  constitutionalism — a 
federated  British  empire.  A  Defense  of  the  Constitution 
of  Government,  and  Discourses  on  Davila.  Opposition 
aroused  by  latter.  His  political  philosophy:  theory  of 
human  nature,  doctrine  of  rivalry,  the  class  struggle, 
natural  aristocracy.  Foolishness  of  French  doctrines  of 
equality  and  fraternity.  Faction  the  weakness  of  de¬ 
mocracy — the  end  anarchy  or  absolutism.  The  fact  of 
property  rule.  Hence  need  for  system  of  checks  and 
balances.  Sources  of  his  philosophy — Harrington. 
Hostility  to  Hamilton.  A  notable  political  thinker  .  .  307 

Part  II 

Political  Democracy  Gets  under  Way — 1787-1800 

I.  The  Impact  of  the  French  Revolution — Stirred  party 
passions  afresh.  Popularized  democracy  in  America  and 
provided  a  body  of  philosophy:  doctrines  of  the  major¬ 
ity  will,  expediency,  local  self-government.  Later  party 
divisions.  Democratic  clubs.  The  odium  theologicum. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Paine’s  Rights  of  Man  and  J.  Q.  Adams’s  Publicola.  The 
shift  of  positions . 321 

II.  Political  Thinkers — The  French  Group 

I.  Tom  Paine — Republican  Pamphleteer:  An  interna¬ 
tionalist.  Odium  attaching  to  his  name.  A  social  ineffi¬ 
cient.  Common  Sense — appeal  to  expediency;  attack  on 
monarchy  and  the  British  Constitution.  Political 
philosophy:  doctrine  of  continuous  compact,  of  the  res 
publica.  The  Rights  of  Man— -a  reply  to  Burke’s  theory 
of  civil  contract  and  the  expediency  of  aristocratic  rule. 

The  business  of  the  revolution.  Agrarian  Justice:  civili¬ 
zation  and  poverty;  relation  to  Babeuf;  theory  of  un¬ 
earned  increment;  a  tax  proposal.  Decline  and  Fall  of 
the  English  System  of  Finance — an  attack  on  funding.  A 
pacifist.  Sources  of  his  philosophy.  His  position  in 
contemporary  American  opinion . 327 

II.  Thomas  Jefferson — Agrarian  Democrat:  Position.  His 
inconsistencies  due  to  a  slowly  clarifying  philosophy. 

An  intellectual,  holding  to  American  experience.  Chief 
doctrines:  the  social  compact,  the  res  publica,  the  dimin¬ 
ished  state — a  philosophy  of  decentralization.  Belief 
in  the  excellence  of  an  agrarian  economy — a  Physiocrat; 
fear  of  cities  and  industrialism.  Suspicious  of  appeal  to 
past  experience:  the  evils  of  the  past  due  to  leviathan 
state;  consolidation  would  repeat  those  evils  in  America. 
Excellence  of  home  rule;  the  majority  will.  Fear  of 
judicial  encroachment,  the  Common  Law.  Class  rule 
serves  class  interests.  Faith  in  the  common  people. 


The  industrial  revolution  and  a  new  centralization  .  .  342 

III.  The  War  of  Belles  Lettres 

1.  The  Federalist  Group . 357 


1.  The  Hartford  Wits:  Arch  conservatives.  Sources 

of  Connecticut  Federalism — Calvinism  and  bus¬ 
iness.  The  Connecticut  fear  of  democracy.  Mem¬ 
bers  of  the  group.  Theodore  Dwight.  Timothy 
Dwight — his  contemporary  reputation,  likeness  to 
Increase  Mather,  a  clerical  Federalist.  His  literary 
work . 337 

2.  The  Anarchiad:  Political  writings  of  the  Wits. 

Character  of  Lemuel  Hopkins.  The  theme  of  the 
work — an  attack  on  populism  and  democracy  .  .  363 

II.  The  French  Group .  .  .  367 

1.  Philip  Freneau — Poet  of  Two  Revolutions:  A  revo¬ 
lutionary  volunteer — effect  on  his  reputation.  A 
radical  advocate  of  all  liberal  movements.  Effect 
on  his  poetic  career.  Spirit  of  his  satire — attack  on 


CONTENTS 


XVII 


PAGE 

England.  His  desire  to  strip  colonial  loyalties  from 
the  American.  Influence  on  Freneau  of  the  French 
Revolution.  The  National  Gazette — a  leader  of  anti- 
Federalism.  The  consequences.  His  growing  rep¬ 
utation  . 368 

2.  Joel  Barlow — Jacobin:  Early  career:  his  experience 
abroad  and  his  adoption  of  Jacobin  views.  Cost  to 
his  reputation.  Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders:  the 
doctrine  of  res  publica;  social  responsibility  for  the 
individual.  Letter  to  the  National  Convention  of 
France ,  and  the  machinery  of  a  democratic  state. 

The  Columhiad — a  republican  poem . 382 

3.  Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge — Free-Lance  Dem¬ 

ocrat:  An  independent  critic  of  the  shortcomings 
of  democracy.  Modern  Chivalry — a  frontier  book, 
a  satire  of  current  manners.  Democracy  must  not 
be  sacrificed  to  selfish  individualism — the  folly  of 
the  political  climber  and  of  the  electorate.  A 
notable  book . 390 


Conclusion . 397 

Bibliography . 399 

Index  .  .  .  4°S 


BOOK  ONE:  LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


BOOK  ONE 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

Common  report  has  long  made  out  Puritan  New  England  to  have 
been  the  native  seat  and  germinal  source  of  such  ideals  and  institu¬ 
tions  as  have  come  to  be  regarded  as  traditionally  American.  Any 
critical  study  of  the  American  mind,  therefore,  may  conveniently 
seek  its  beginnings  in  the  colonies  clustered  about  Massachusetts 
Bay,  and  will  inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  pronounced  singularity 
of  temper  and  purpose  that  marked  off  the  New  England  settle¬ 
ments  from  those  to  the  south,  creating  a  distinctive  New  England 
character,  and  disciplining  it  for  later  conquests  that  were  to  set 
a  stamp  on  American  life.  The  course  of  its  somewhat  singular 
development  would  seem  from  the  first  to  have  been  determined 
by  an  interweaving  of  idealism  and  economics — by  the  substantial 
body  of  thought  and  customs  and  institutions  brought  from  the 
old  home,  slowly  modified  by  new  ways  of  life  developing  under 
the  silent  pressure  of  a  freer  environment.  Of  these  new  ways, 
the  first  in  creative  influence  was  probably  the  freehold  tenure  of 
landholdings,  put  in  effect  at  the  beginning  and  retained  un¬ 
modified  for  generations;  and  the  second  was  the  development  of  a 
mercantile  spirit  that  resulted  from  the  sterility  of  the  Massa¬ 
chusetts  soil,  which  encouraged  the  ambitious  to  seek  wealth  in 
more  profitable  ways  than  tilling  barren  acres.  From  these 
sources  emerged  the  two  chief  classes  of  New  England:  the  yeo¬ 
manry,  a  body  of  democratic  freeholders  who  constituted  the 
rank  and  file  of  the  people,  and  the  gentry,  a  group  of  capable 
merchants  who  dominated  the  commonwealth  from  early  days  to 
the  rise  of  industrialism.  And  it  was  the  interweaving  of  the  aims 
and  purposes  of  these  acquisitive  yeomen  and  gentry — harmonious 
for  the  most  part  on  the  surface,  yet  driving  in  different  direc¬ 
tions — with  the  ideal  of  a  theocracy  and  the  inhibitions  of 
Puritan  dogma,  that  constitutes  the  pattern  of  life  to  be  dealt 
with  here.  The  Puritan  and  the  Yankee  were  the  two  halves 
of  the  New  England  whole,  and  to  overlook  or  underestimate 

3 


4 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


the  contributions  of  either  to  the  common  life  is  grossly  to  mis¬ 
interpret  the  spirit  and  character  of  primitive  New  England. 
The  Puritan  was  a  contribution  of  the  old  world,  created  by 
the  rugged  idealism  of  the  English  Reformation;  the  Yankee 
was  a  product  of  native  conditions,  created  by  a  practical 
economics. 


I 


PART  ONE:  THE  PURITAN  HERITAGE 

1620-1660 


CHAPTER  I 

ENGLISH  BACKGROUNDS 

1 

The  body  of  thought  brought  to  America  by  the  immigrant 
Puritans,  and  which  gave  a  special  cast  to  the  New  England  mind, 
may  be  summed  in  a  phrase  as  Carolinian  liberalism.  It  was  the 
confused  bequest  of  a  hundred  years  of  English  idealism,  struggling 
with  the  knotty  problems  of  a  complex  society  in  transition  from 
the  old  static  feudal  order  to  the  modem  capitalistic;  and  it  took  a 
particular  form  and  received  a  narrow  ideology  from  the  current 
ecclesiastical  disputes  concerning  the  nature  and  governance  of 
the  true  church.  It  was  exclusively  a  product  of  the  Reformation, 
unleavened  by  the  spirit  of  the  Renaissance.  But  though  English 
Puritanism  was  wholly  theological  in  its  immediate  origins,  it 
gathered  about  it  in  the  century  and  a  half  of  its  militant  career 
all  the  forces  of  unrest  fermenting  in  England.  Economics  and 
politics  joined  hands  with  theology;  the  center  of  gravity  of  the 
total  movement  tended  to  sink  lower  in  the  social  scale;  and  in 
the  end  all  England  was  involved  in  the  great  struggle. 

In  its  deeper  purpose  Puritanism  was  a  frank  challenge  of  the 
traditional  social  solidarity  of  English  institutional  life  by  an  emer¬ 
gent  individualism,  and  far-reaching  social  readjustments  fol¬ 
lowed  inevitably  in  its  train.  If  the  evolution  of  modern  society 
is  conceived  of  as  falling  into  two  broad  phases,  the  disintegration 
of  a  corporate  feudal  order  into  unregimented  individual  members 
of  society,  and  the  struggles  of  those  free  individuals  to  regroup 
themselves  in  new  social  commonwealths,  the  historical  significance 
of  English  Puritanism  may  perhaps  become  clear:  it  was  one  of 
the  disruptive  forces  that  disintegrated  the  traditional  solidarity 
of  church  and  state  by  creating  a  revolutionary  philosophy  of 
individual  rights  that  purposed  to  free  the  individual,  both  as 
Christian  and  subject,  from  subjection  to  a  fixed  corporate  status. 

S 


6 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


The  sixteenth  century  had  announced  the  great  doctrine  of  the 
priesthood  of  all  believers,  and  the  seventeenth  century  was 
engaged  in  adapting  the  forms  of  social  and  political  institutions 
to  that  revolutionary  principle.  It  was  concerned  to  discover  a 
new  system  of  social  organization  that  should  adjust  equitably 
the  rights  of  the  individual  to  the  needs  of  the  political  state  and 
to  society.  To  that  end  the  whole  theory  of  the  origin  and  func¬ 
tions  of  the  political  state  must  come  in  for  review,  and  a  new  con¬ 
ception  of  the  rights  of  the  individual  subject-citizen  must  be 
evolved. 

This  is  the  sufficient  explanation  of  the  close  interweaving  of 
theology  and  politics  that  marked  the  broadening  movement  of 
English  Puritanism.  Unless  one  keeps  in  mind  the  social  forces 
that  found  it  convenient  to  array  themselves  in  Puritan  garb,  the 
clear  meaning  of  it  all  will  be  lost  in  the  fogs  of  Biblical  disputation, 
and  some  of  the  ablest  men  the  English  race  has  ever  bred  will  be 
reduced  to  crabbed  theologians  involved  in  tenuous  subtleties 
and  disputing  endlessly  over  absurd  dogmas.  But  tenacious  dis¬ 
putants  though  they  certainly  were,  pursuing  their  subtleties 
into  the  last  refuge  and  cranny  of  logic,  those  Puritan  dogmatists 
were  very  far  from  being  vain  practitioners  of  eccentricity.  It  is 
the  manner  and  dress  and  not  the  matter  of  their  argument  that 
is  strange;  and  if  we  will  resolutely  translate  the  old  phrases  into 
modern  equivalents,  if  we  will  put  aside  the  theology  and  fasten 
attention  on  the  politics  and  the  economics  of  the  struggle,  we  shall 
have  less  difficulty  in  discovering  that  the  new  principle  for  which 
those  old  Puritans  were  groping  was  the  later  familiar  doctrine  of 
natural  rights;  and  the  final  end  and  outcome  of  their  concern  for 
a  more  equitable  relation  of  the  individual  to  society,  was  the 
principle  of  a  democratic  commonwealth,  established  in  the  con¬ 
ception  of  political  equalitarianism.  Here  are  liberalisms  in  plenty 
to  reward  the  search  for  the  inner  core  of  Puritanism.  There  was 
gunpowder  packed  away  in  Luther’s  doctrine  of  the  priesthood  of 
all  believers,  and  the  explosion  that  resulted  made  tremendous 
breaches  in  the  walls  of  a  seemingly  impregnable  feudalism.  An 
intellectual  like  Roger  Williams,  who  had  thought  his  way  reso¬ 
lutely  to  the  logical  outcome  of  the  reforming  principles,  could  not 
fail  to  be  reckoned  a  firebrand  by  his  generation.  The  doctrine  of 
“thorough”  was  dangerously  revolutionary. 

If  the  economics  of  England  had  not  been  in  a  state  of  flux  dur- 


ENGLISH  BACKGROUNDS 


7 


ing  the  century  following  the  accession  of  Elizabeth,  the  Puritan 
movement  would  not  have  moved  forward  by  successive  stages 
to  the  explosion  of  the  Civil  War.  But  because,  as  later  in  France, 
a  rising  economic  order  was  restive  under  the  restrictions  of  an 
outworn  order,  the  Puritan  protest  found  capable  allies  at  hand, 
and  supported  by  the  money  and  arms  of  the  commercial  interests, 
it  passed  under  the  control  of  the  latter  and  set  about  the  great 
business  of  making  England  over  in  accordance  with  the  new 
plans  and  specifications.  On  the  whole  it  is  no  mistake  to  regard 
the  Puritan  revolution  as  primarily  a  rebellion  of  the  capable 
middle  class,  whose  growing  trade  interests  demanded  a  larger 
measure  of  freedom  than  a  paternal  king  and  a  landed  aristocracy 
were  willing  to  grant;  and  its  significant  contributions  to  the 
modem  world  were  the  two  systems  it  did  so  much  to  further:  the 
system  of  capitalism  and  the  system  of  parliamentary  government. 
From  the  Puritan  conception  of  the  stewardship  of  talents  came 
a  new  ethic  of  work  that  provided  a  sanction  for  middle-class 
exploitation,  by  supplanting  the  medieval  principle  of  production 
for  consumption  with  the  capitalistic  principle  of  production  for 
profit;  and  from  the  conception  of  the  dignity  of  the  individual 
came  the  sanction  for  the  self-pride  of  the  merchant  that  sustained 
him  in  his  encounters  with  a  domineering  aristocracy.  A  prosper¬ 
ous  merchant  who  accounted  himself  a  son  of  God  and  who  was 
persuaded  that  he  was  fighting  for  a  freer  England  was  no  mean  foe 
to  be  awed  by  the  rustlings  of  a  Cavalier.  The  London  burgesses 
were  the  backbone  of  Puritanism  in  the  days  before  the  movement 
passed  into  the  extremer  form  of  Independency  and  was  taken 
over  by  the  sectarian  radicals;  and  the  Presbyterian  middle-phase 
of  Puritanism  spread  widely  amongst  the  middle  class  throughout 
central  and  southern  England.  But  in  unloosing  the  traditional 
social  bonds  Puritanism  awakened  aspirations  that  in  the  end 
proved  hostile  to  the  middle-class  program.  It  created  bitter 
partisan  divisions;  it  set  the  social  underling  and  the  aristocrat 
apart  from  the  middle-class  core,  and  created  those  major  political 
parties  that  have  since  carried  on  the  parliamentary  struggle. 
Inevitably  it  sharpened  class  alignments,  and  the  reactions  of 
those  alignments  vitally  affected  the  development  of  New  England. 
The  struggles  in  Massachusetts  can  scarcely  be  understood  unless 
they  are  set  against  the  greater  struggles  then  going  forward  in 
England. 


8 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


The  three  parties  that  emerged  from  the  theological  disputes, 
Anglican,  Presbyterian,  and  Independent,  followed,  in  the  main, 
broad  social  cleavages  and  corresponded  roughly  to  the  later 
political  divisions  of  Tory,  Whig,  and  Democrat.  The  first  stoutly 
upheld  the  absolutist  principle  in  church  and  state.  It  stood  for 
Bishop  and  King.  Numbering  probably  a  large  majority  of  the 
English  people,  and  led  by'  the  hereditary  masters  of  England,  it 
was  dominated  by  the  feudal  spirit  of  corporate  unity.  It  believed 
that  social  order,  the  loyal  subjection  of  subject  to  ruler,  was 
possible  only  through  a  coalescence  of  church  and  state.  The 
subject-citizen  was  born  into  the  one  as  he  was  born  into  the  other, 
and  owed  allegiance  both  to  his  spiritual  and  temporal  overlords. 
Authority,  whether  in  church  or  state,  was  of  divine  origin,  and 
Bishop  and  King  were  the  Lord’s  anointed,  answerable  for  their 
stewardship  only  to  God.  The  second  party  was  a  compromise 
between  aristocracy  and  democracy.  It  substituted  the  principle 
of  elective  stewardship  for  divine  right.  Rejecting  the  absolutism 
of  the  hierarchy,  it  turned  to  the  system  newly  brought  over  from 
Geneva,  a  system  that  retained  the  principle  of  a  state  church, 
but  which  yielded  control  of  the  parish  to  the  eldership,  a  select 
body  of  the  best  and  wisest  chosen  by  the  laity,  with  final  authority 
in  doctrine  and  discipline  vested  in  the  synod.  It  drew  its  support 
largely  from  the  London  burgesses,  but  with  a  considerable  follow¬ 
ing  of  country  gentlemen.  As  the  party  developed  it  tended  to 
merge  with  the  nascent  capitalism,  restricted  the  doctrine  of  nat¬ 
ural  rights  to  property  rights,  and  prepared  the  way  for  the  later 
Whiggery  of  Pitt,  or  capitalistic  imperialism.  The  third  party 
was  more  or  less  consciously  democratic  in  spirit  and  purpose, 
the  expression  of  the  newly-awakened  aspirations  of  the  social 
underling.  Numbers  of  rebellious  individualists  appeared  who 
wanted  to  be  ruled  neither  by  bishop  nor  elder,  but  who'  preferred 
to  club  with  the  like-minded  and  set  up  an  independent  church 
on  a  local,  self-governing  basis.  They  took  literally  the  command 
of  Paul,  “Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  saith 
the  Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing.”  That  only  was  the 
true  church,  they  asserted,  which  withdrew  from  all  communion 
with  sinners  and  rejected  the  authority  of  a  sinful  state;  and  so 
they  called  themselves  Separatists. 

Separatism,  quite  evidently,  was  the  extreme  left  wing  of  the 
total  Puritan  movement,  concerned  to  explore  all  the  logical 


ENGLISH  BACKGROUNDS 


9 


deductions  from  the  revolutionary  premise  of  the  Reformation. 
It  was  the  final  expression  of  the  disintegrating  gospel  of  individual¬ 
ism  implicit  in  the  doctrine  of  the  priesthood  of  all  believers.  Its 
unworldly  sincerity  was  as  uncompromising  as  its  unworldly  scrip- 
turism.  Not  finding  sanction  for  them  in  the  Bible,  it  rejected 
the  established  ecclesiastical  authorities,  and  laid  rude  hands  on 
the  garments  of  Mother  Church.  Counsels  of  social  expediency 
were  accounted  as  dust  in  the  balance  against  the  explicit  com¬ 
mandment  of  the  Lord  to  separate  from  the  sins  of  the  world;  and 
clinging  to  the  text  of  the  Scripture  the  Separatist  was  led  straight 
to  the  conception  of  a  Christian  democracy.  If  the  true  church 
was  a  Congregation  of  the  Saints,  and  if  the  Saints  were  equal 
in  the  sight  of  God,  why  should  not  the  principle  of  equality  pre¬ 
vail  in  the  rule  of  the  congregation  ?  And  if  it  were  a  brotherhood 
in  Christ,  owning  allegiance  to  the  King  of  Kings,  by  what  Scrip¬ 
tural  right  did  profane  authorities  exercise  control  over  the  tender 
consciences  of  the  brethren?  The  autonomy  of  the  congregation 
was  a  fruitful  conception,  certain  to  appeal  to  vigorous  natures; 
and  out  of  the  loins  of  Separatism  came  a  numerous  and  often 
ungainly  progeny  that  greatly  scandalized  the  conservative 
Carolinian:  Anabaptist,  Digger,  Fifth-Monarchy  man,  Quaker, 
Seeker,  Congregationalist — to  name  only  a  few — each  following 
his  particular  path  to  his  divinely  sanctioned  Utopia,  regardless 
of  social  ties,  denying  the  worth  of  social  conformity.  Imperious 
individualists,  the  Separatists  were  certain  to  prove  an  offense  to 
all  respectable  folk,  who  demanded  in  the  name  of  common  sense 
that  they  be  put  down. 

It  was  the  doctrines  of  Separatism,  quite  as  much  as  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  the  independency  of  the  congregation,  that  aroused  the 
fierce  antagonism  of  Presbyterians  equally  with  Anglicans.  In 
the  main  those  doctrines  did  not  derive  from  John  Calvin;  they 
go  back  rather  to  Wittenberg  than  to  Geneva,  to  the  principles 
of  Luther  and  certain  German  sects.  The  Anabaptist  and  the 
Digger,  clearly,  were  of  German  descent  and  of  somewhat  ancient 
lineage,  offspring  of  late  medieval  communism  and  other  primitive 
enthusiasms.  The  Quaker  was  a  mystic,  sprung  from  the  New 
Testament,  who  denied  the  Scriptural  validity  of  a  Hebraized 
Calvinism  and  a  hireling  priesthood,  and  accepted  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  the  sole  guide  to  his  feet.  The  Seeker,  on  the  other  hand,  who 
may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  the  completest  expression  of  Puritan 


10 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


radicalism,  was  an  open-minded  questioner  who  professed  to  have 
found  no  satisfactory  answer  to  his  inquiry  concerning  the  nature 
of  the  true  church,  and  was  awaiting  further  light.  The  Seekers 
were  individuals  rather  than  a  sect,  few  in  numbers  yet  greatly 
influential,  men  like  Roger  Williams,  Sir  Harry  Vane,  Cromwell, 
and  perhaps  Milton,  outstanding  figures  of  a  great  age,  who 
embodied  the  final  results  of  Puritan  idealism  before  it  was  sub¬ 
merged  by  the  Restoration. 

During  the  long  years  of  rule  by  divine  right  under  the  first 
Stuarts,  the  Anglicans  held  the  Puritan  unrest  in  strict  control. 
Nevertheless  a  hundred  years  of  debate  and  changing  economic 
conditions  had  rendered  the  attempt  to  erect  in  England  a  counter¬ 
part  of  the  French  centralized  state,  no  better  than  an  anachro¬ 
nism.  The  Presbyterian  opposition  grew  rapidly  in  numbers  and 
prestige,  and  the  early  years  of  the  Long  Parliament  marked  the 
culmination  of  Presbyterian  power.  The  bishops  were  overthrown 
and  the  elders  were  in  a  fair  way  to  seize  control  of  England.  But 
unfortunately  for  Presbyterian  hopes,  the  radical  sects  thrown  up 
out  of  the  war  clashed  with  the  moderates  and  finally  broke  with 
them;  whereupon  followed  the  “root  and  branch”  revolution 
that  had  been  long  preparing.  The  left-wing  Independents  secured 
control  of  the  army  and  set  about  the  work  of  erecting  a  govern¬ 
ment  that  should  be  a  real  commonwealth  of  free  citizens.  The 
voice  of  the  underling,  for  the  first  time  in  English  history,  was 
listened  to  in  the  national  councils,  for  the  excellent  reason  that 
his  sword  was  drawn  to  enforce  his  demands.  But  they  were  too 
small  a  minority  to  leaven  the  sodden  mass  of  a  people  long  subject 
to  absolutist  rule.  The  psychology  of  custom  was  against  them. 
They  could  strike  down  their  armed  enemies  in  the  field,  but  they 
could  not  liberate  the  minds  of  men  unfit  to  be  free.  Militant 
Puritanism  was  overthrown  and  its  idealisms  became  the  jest  of 
every  drunken  tapster  in  London.  But  fortunately,  not  before 
its  political  principles,  long  obscured  by  theology,  were  sufficiently 
clarified  to  be  laid  open  to  the  common  understanding  of  English¬ 
men.  Out  of  the  debates  around  the  camp  fires  of  the  army  had 
come  a  new  philosophy  that  rested  on  the  principle  that  the  in¬ 
dividual,  both  as  Christian  and  citizen,  derives  from  nature  cer¬ 
tain  inalienable  rights  which  every  church  and  every  state  is 
bound  to  respect.  This  far-reaching  doctrine  of  natural  rights,  to 
the  formulation  of  which  many  thinkers  had  contributed  and 


ENGLISH  BACKGROUNDS 


II 


which  received  later  its  classic  form  from  the  pen  of  Locke,  was 
the  suggestive  contribution  of  Puritanism  to  political  theory, 
with  the  aid  of  which  later  liberals  were  to  carry  forward  the 
struggle. 


II 

The  far-reaching  liberalisms  implicit  in  the  rejection  of  a  hie¬ 
rarchical  organization  of  the  church  were  to  discover  no  allies 
in  the  major  premises  of  the  system  of  theology  accepted  generally 
by  the  English  Puritans,  and  by  them  transported  to  New  England. 
Calvinism  was  no  friend  of  equalitarianism.  It  was  rooted  too 
deeply  in  the  Old  Testament  for  that,  was  too  rigidly  aristocratic. 
It  saw  too  little  good  in  human  nature  to  trust  the  multitude  of 
the  unregenerate;  and  this  lack  of  faith  was  to  entail  grave  con¬ 
sequences  upon  the  development  of  New  England.  That  the 
immigrant  Puritans  brought  in  their  intellectual  luggage  the 
system  of  Calvin  rather  than  of  Luther  must  be  reckoned  a  mis¬ 
fortune,  out  of  which  flowed  many  of  the  bickerings  and  much  of 
the  intolerance  that  left  a  stain  on  the  pages  of  early  New  England 
history. 

Two  divergent  sy  stems  of  theology,  it  will  be  remembered,  were 
spreading  through  northern  Europe  during  the  years  of  the 
Reformation,  systems  that  inevitably  differentiated  in  consequence 
of  certain  variations  of  emphasis  in  the  teachings  of  Luther  and 
Calvin.  Both  thinkers  accepted  the  adequacy  of  the  Scriptures 
to  all  temporal  needs,  but  Luther  was  at  once  more  mystical  and 
more  practical  than  Calvin,  deriving  his  inspiration  chiefly  from 
the  New  Testament,  discovering  the  creative  source  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  life  in  the  spiritual  union  of  the  soul  with  Christ,  and  inclining 
to  tolerance  of  differences  of  opinion  amongst  believers;  whereas 
Calvin  was  ardently  Hebraic,  exalting  righteousness  above  love, 
seeking  the  law  in  the  Old  Testament  and  laying  emphasis  on  an 
authoritarian  system.  The  one  was  implicitly  individualistic, 
the  other  hierarchical  in  creative  influence.  The  teachings  of 
Luther,  erected  on  the  major  principle  of  justification  by  faith, 
conducted  straight  to  political  liberty,  and  he  refused  to  com¬ 
promise  or  turn  away  from  pursuing  the  direct  path.  If  one 
accepts  the  doctrine  of  the  priesthood  of  all  believers,  one  can 
scarcely  refrain  from  following  Luther  in  his  conception  of  Chris¬ 
tian  liberty.  If  the  mystical  union  of  the  soul  with  Christ  has 


12 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


superseded  all  lesser  loyalties  by  a  higher  and  more  sacred,  the 
enjoyment  of  spiritual  freedom  must  be  reckoned  the  inalienable 
right  of  every  child  of  God.  Neither  the  political  state  nor  the 
official  hierarchy  can  justly  coerce  the  individual  conscience. 
“One  thing  and  one  thing  only,”  said  Luther  in  his  Treatise  on 
Christian  Liberty,  “is  necessary  for  Christian  life,  righteousness 
and  liberty.”  And  from  this  he  deduced  the  conclusion  that 
“neither  pope  nor  bishop  nor  any  other  man  has  the  right  to 
impose  a  single  syllable  of  law  upon  a  Christian  man  without  his 
consent;  and  if  he  does,  it  is  done  in  the  spirit  of  tyranny.”  1 
Clearly,  this  is  the  spirit  of  uncompromising  individualism  that 
would  eventually  espouse  the  principle  of  democracy  in  church 
and  state;  and  it  was  their  native  sympathy  with  such  liberalism 
that  led  the  radical  Separatists  to  turn  more  naturally  to  Luther 
than  to  Calvin.  Many  of  the  differences  that  set  Roger  Williams 
so  greatly  apart  from  the  New  England  brethren  must  be  traced 
to  the  Lutheran  origins  of  his  thinking. 

There  was  scant  room  in  the  rigid  system  of  John  Calvin  for 
such  Christian  liberty.  The  Genevan  thinker  was  a  logician 
rather  than  a  philosopher,  a  rigorous  system-maker  and  dog¬ 
matist  who  knotted  every  argument  and  tied  every  strand  securely 
into  its  fellow,  till  there  was  no  escape  from  the  net  unless  one 
broke  through  the  mesh.  To  the  formalist  who  demanded  an 
exact  system,  and  to  the  timid  who  feared  free  speculation,  the 
logical  consistency  of  Calvinism  made  irresistible  appeal;  and 
this  perhaps  suffices  to  explain  its  extraordinary  hold  on  the  rank 
and  file  of  middle-class  English  Presbyterians.  More  original 
minds  might  break  with  it — men  like  Richard  Hooker  and  Roger 
Williams  and  Vane  and  Milton — but  academic  thinkers  and 
schoolmen,  men  whom  the  free  spaces  of  thought  frightened  and 
who  felt  safe  only  behind  secure  fences,  theologians  like  John 
Cotton  and  his  fellows,  made  a  virtue  of  necessity  and  fell  to 
declaiming  on  the  excellence  of  those  chains  wherewith  they  were 
bound.  How  narrow  and  cold  was  their  prison  they  seem  never 
to  have  realized;  but  that  fact  only  aggravated  the  misfortunes 
that  New  England  was  to  suffer  from  the  spiritual  guidance  of 
such  teachers.  In  seeking  for  an  explanation  of  the  unhappy 
union  of  a  reactionary  theology  and  a  revolutionary  political  theory, 

1  See  “The  Babylonian  Captivity,”  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  233  (Philadelphia, 
1915). 


ENGLISH  BACKGROUNDS 


13 


Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  suggested  in  Poganuc  People  that  the 
Puritan  immigrants  were  the  children  of  two  different  centuries; 
that  from  the  sixteenth  century  they  got  their  theology,  and  from 
the  seventeenth  their  politics,  with  the  result  that  an  older  absolut¬ 
ist  dogma  snuggled  down  side  by  side  in  their  minds  with  a  later 
democratic  conception  of  the  state  and  society.  In  England  the 
potential  hostility  between  Calvinist  dogma  and  individual  free¬ 
dom  was  perceived  by  the  more  liberal  Separatists,  but  in  America 
it  was  not  till  the  rise  of  the  Revolutionary  disputes  of  the  next 
century  that  Calvinism  was  discovered  to  be  the  foe  of  democratic 
liberalism  and  was  finally  rejected.  It  is  a  fruitful  suggestion, 
and  in  its  major  contention  that  the  liberalisms  implicit  in  the 
Puritan  revolution  were  ill  served  by  a  reactionary  theology,  it 
is  certainly  in  harmony  with  the  facts. 

That  Calvinism  in  its  primary  assumptions  was  a  composite 
of  oriental  despotism  and  sixteenth-century  monarchism,  modified 
by  the  medieval  conception  of  a  city-state,  is  clear  enough  today 
to  anyone  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  translate  dogma  into  polit¬ 
ical  terms.  In  recasting  the  framework  of  the  old  theology, 
Calvin  accepted  as  a  sovereign  conception  the  idea  of  God  as 
arbitrary  and  absolute  will — an  august  Rex  regum  whose  authority 
is  universal  and  unconditioned;  and  this  conception  he  invested 
with  Hebraic  borrowings  from  the  Old  Testament.  The  principle 
of  absolutism,  indeed,  he  could  scarcely  have  escaped.  It  came 
down  to  him  through  the  Roman  Empire  and  the  Roman  Church, 
from  the  ancient  oriental  despotisms,  and  it  was  interwoven  with 
all  the  institutions  and  social  forms  against  which  the  Reformation 
was  a  protest.  But  unhappily,  instead  of  questioning  the  principle, 
he  provided  a  new  sanction  for  it  and  broadened  its  sway,  by 
investing  it  with  divine  authority  and  erecting  upon  it  a  whole 
cosmology.  That  the  ancient  Hebrew  thinkers,  in  seeking  to 
give  concrete  form  to  their  speculations  on  the  nature  of  Jehovah, 
should  have  made  use  of  the  political  ideas  of  primitive  Israel, 
that  they  should  have  used  all  the  wealth  of  oriental  imagery  in 
describing  the  regal  attributes  of  their  God,  was  inevitable.  They 
knew  only  oriental  potentates,  and  so  Jehovah  became  a  greater 
Ptolemy,  with  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  Angels  and  Principalities 
and  Powers,  duly  ranked  about  the  heavenly  throne.  So  saturated 
with  monarchical  and  caste  ideas  is  the  Old  Testament,  that  it  is 
almost  impossible  today  to  put  the  old  phrasing  out  of  mind,  and 


14 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


we  talk  as  naturally  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  as  did  the  men  of 
that  older  world  who  knew  no  other  political  phraseology.  Calvin 
rejected  the  individualism  of  Luther  and  followed  in  the  footsteps 
of  older  thinkers  like  Duns  Scotus.  The  monarchical  principle  was 
everywhere  gaining  ground  in  Europe.  He  had  a  lawyer’s  love  of 
law,  and  law  reposed  in  the  absolute  will  of  the  prince.  Hebraize 
this  fact,  erect  a  cosmology  upon  it,  and  we  have  the  vital  prin¬ 
ciple  of  Calvinism. 

From  this  cosmic  absolutism,  that  conceived  of  God  as  the 
stable  Will  sustaining  the  universe,  binding  together  what  other¬ 
wise  would  fly  asunder,  two  important  corollaries  were  derived: 
the  universality  of  the  moral  law,  and  the  necessity  of  divine 
judgment.  From  the  former  flowed  that  curious  association  of 
God’s  will  with  natural  causes  which  induced  Cotton  Mather, 
when  suffering  from  toothache,  to  inquire  what  sin  he  had  com¬ 
mitted  with  his  teeth,  and  which  left  no  free  spaces  or  non-moral 
impulses  in  the  lives  of  men.  From  the  latter  flowed  the  doctrine 
of  theological  determinism.  If  time  is  embedded  in  the  eternity 
of  God’s  mind,  if  to  Him  past  and  future  are  here  and  now,  fore¬ 
knowledge  is  an  inevitable  divine  attribute,  and  predestination  is 
only  a  finite  way  of  expressing  God’s  understanding  of  how  human 
fate  works  itself  out.  Ally  this  doctrine  of  determinism  with  the 
Biblical  account  of  the  fall  of  man,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  elect 
becomes  the  theological  complement  of  the  class  prejudices  of  the 
times.  Bred  up  in  the  current  aristocratic  contempt  for  the  sodden 
mass  of  the  people.  Calvinist  theologians  easily  came  to  regard 
them  as  stupid,  sensual,  veritable  children  of  Adam,  bom  to  sin 
and  heirs  of  damnation.  Only  the  elect  shall  be  saved.  That  there 
was  a  remnant  in  Israel  whom  God  had  chosen,  Isaiah  had  long 
before  pointed  out;  and  the  doctrine  of  the  remnant  was  confirmed 
for  Calvinism  by  the  sinful  herd  whose  daily  actions  testified  to 
their  lost  estate. 

According  to  such  a  theology,  the  individual  clearly  is  in  no 
effective  sense  a  free  soul.  There  is  no  room  for  the  conception  of 
human  perfectibility.  The  heritage  of  natural  freedom  was  long 
since  cast  away  by  the  common  forefather;  and  because  of  the 
pre-natal  sin  which  this  act  entailed  on  all  mankind,  the  natural 
man  is  shut  away  eternally  from  communion  with  God.  He  is  no 
better  than  an  oriental  serf  at  the  mercy  of  a  Sovereign  Will  that 
is  implacable,  inscrutable,  the  ruler  of  a  universe  predetermined 


ENGLISH  BACKGROUNDS 


15 


in  all  its  parts  and  members  from  the  foundation  of  the  earth. 
Except  for  the  saving  grace  of  divine  election,  which  no  human 
righteousness  can  purchase,  all  must  go  down  to  the  everlasting 
damnation  that  awaits  the  sons  of  Adam.  In  the  eyes  of  such  a 
philosophy  it  is  sheer  impertinence  to  talk  of  the  dignity  and  worth 
of  the  individual  soul.  Men  are  no  other  than  the  worms  of  the 
dust.  The  boon  of  eternal  life  is  not  included  in  God’s  enumeration 
of  natural  rights;  it  is  a  special  grant  from  the  Lord  of  the  universe 
who  is  pleased  to  smile  on  whom  he  is  pleased  to  smile.  In  the 
hard  words  of  Paul,  “Therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  whom  he  will 
have  mercy,  and  whom  he  will  he  hardeneth.”  And  those  on 
whom  he  hath  had  mercy  are  his  Saints,  and  they  are  gathered 
into  his  church,  as  the  free  city-states  had  risen  out  of  the  muck 
of  medieval  despotism.  They  are  the  stewards  of  his  righteousness 
and  are  called  to  the  great  work  of  rulership  on  earth  that  God’s 
will  may  be  done  and  righteousness  may  prevail  over  iniquity. 

It  was  an  ambitious  program,  and  so  long  as  the  Presbyterian 
party  maintained  its  ascendency  in  England  it  endeavored  to 
thrust  its  Calvinism  down  every  throat,  no  matter  how  unwelcome; 
but  with  the  passing  of  power  from  its  hands,  and  the  growth  of  a 
common-sense  spirit  of  toleration,  Calvinistic  dogma  lost  its  author¬ 
ity  and  the  minds  of  Englishmen  turned  to  more  humane  philos¬ 
ophies.  In  New  England,  on  the  other  hand,  by  virtue  of  a  rigid 
suppression  of  free  inquiry,  Calvinism  long  lingered  out  a  harsh 
existence,  grotesque  and  illiberal  to  the  last.  In  banishing  the 
Antinomians  and  Separatists  and  Quakers,  the  Massachusetts 
magistrates  cast  out  the  spirit  of  liberalism  from  the  household 
of  the  Saints. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  IDEAS 


i 

The  Great  Migration,  it  will  be  remembered,  fell  in  the  time  of 
the  Laudean  reaction,  when  the  Presbyterian  Utopia  seemed 
remote  and  the  hopes  of  the  Puritan  dreamers  were  fallen  low. 
The  Boston  leaders  quitted  England  ten  years  before  Charles 
summoned  the  Long  Parliament,  and  twelve  before  the  royal 
standard  was  unfurled  at  Nottingham.  The  armed  struggle  for 
supremacy  was  far  below  the  horizon,  and  the  outlandish  philos¬ 
ophies  that  later  sectaries  were  to  propagate  so  diligently  were  as 
yet  little  known  in  the  land.  The  generous  grain  of  liberal  thought 
was  still  in  the  milk,  its  fruitful  doctrines  unripened.  The  immi¬ 
grant  gentlemen  who  came  to  Massachusetts  Bay  were  Puritan 
Anglicans  who  professed  a  hearty  love  for  the  mother  church  and 
were  no  friends  to  the  principle  of  Separatism.  They  were  poten¬ 
tial  Presbyterians  who  rejected  alike  the  Arminianism  of  Laud 
and  the  autocracy  of  the  bishops.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  as  strict  Calvinists,  trained  in  the  ordinances  as  well  as  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  French  theologian,  they  came  hither  with  the 
conscious  purpose  of  setting  up  the  complete  Genevan  discipline 
in  the  new  world.  If  such  was  their  plan — and  certainly  before 
their  coming  over  they  seem  not  to  have  entertained  any  thoughts 
of  Separatism — it  received  a  check  from  the  Plymouth  influence 
and  the  Puritan  experiment  was  turned  aside  from  the  path  of  its 
natural  development. 

It  was  a  somewhat  curious  misadventure  that  was  to  entail 
unforeseen  consequences.  Except  in  matters  of  doctrine  Pilgrim 
and  Puritan  consorted  ill  together.  Their  social  antecedents  were 
as  unlike  as  their  views  on  political  and  religious  institutions.  The 
intellectual  leaders  of  Plymouth — whatever  may  be  said  of  the 
London  adventurers  who  joined  the  Holland  group — had  been 
nurtured  in  Elizabethan  radicalism.  They  were  Brownist-Sepa- 
ratists  of  plebeian  origins,  who  had  arrived  at  their  conception  of 
the  true  church  from  a  close  study  of  Biblical  texts,  with  perhaps 


17 


THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  IDEAS 

some  admixture  of  Anabaptist  influence,  nearly  a  generation  before 
the  Stuarts  came  with  their  divine-right  theory.  During  their 
years  on  the  continent  they  lived  remote  from  the  current  of 
events  in  England,  and  under  the  guidance  of  the  tolerant  Robin¬ 
son  they  had  been  disciplined  in  the  theory  and  practice  of  primi¬ 
tive  Congregationalism.  On  their  removal  to  America  they 
brought  with  them  a  consciously  democratic  church  order,  that 
met  their  simple  needs  and  had  taken  shape  from  the  experience 
of  daily  life.  This  democratic  model  of  church  government  was 
spontaneously  supplemented  by  the  plantation  covenant  of  civil 
government  drawn  up  aboard  ship,  which  was  to  serve  as  the 
organic  law  of  the  new  commonwealth.  Two  cardinal  principles — 
which  at  bottom  were  one — thus  found  their  way  to  New  England 
in  the  Mayflower:  the  principle  of  a  democratic- church  and  the 
principle  of  a  democratic  state.  When  ten  years  later  the  Boston 
leaders  were  faced  with  the  problem  of  erecting  a  social  order,  they 
accepted  the  Plymouth  model  of  Congregationalism,  but  rejected 
the  plantation  covenant.  They  saw  no  need  for  the  latter  as  they 
were  already  provided  with  an  organic  law.  The  charter  which 
Winthrop  was  insistent  upon  bringing  with  them  out  of  England 
was  asserted  to  be  the  constitution  of  the  commonwealth  and, 
meticulously  interpreted,  was  to  determine  largely  the  form  and 
scope  of  the  new  political  state.  It  was  construed  to  grant  a  legal 
sanction  to  government;  but  as  the  charter  of  a  Carolinian  trading 
company  it  quite  naturally  restricted  authority  to  the  managing 
heads,  and  granted  powers  to  its  directors  that  were  useful  in 
managing  trade  ventures  but  might  easily  become  intolerable  if 
interpreted  as  the  organic  law  of  a  commonwealth.  With  such 
enlargement  of  powers  the  directors  of  the  corporation  would 
constitute  a  political  oligarchy.  There  was  a  striking  difference, 
certainly,  between  the  covenant  of  Plymouth  and  the  charter-con¬ 
stitution  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  a  political  philosopher  could 
readily  enough  have  foreseen  the  course  that  events  would  take  in 
the  Puritan  commonwealth,  given  the  men  and  the  ideals  in  control. 

II 

THE  PURITAN  PRESBYTERIAN 

To  make  clear  what  was  involved  in  the  attempt  to  adapt  the 
Plymouth  model  of  church  government  to  the  charter  common¬ 
wealth,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  somewhat  particularly  the  body 


18 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


of  prejudice  and  principle  brought  to  the  new  world  aboard  the 
Lady  Arbella,  as  the  Puritan  contribution  to  New  England.  The 
capable  leaders  who  created  the  early  institutions  of  Massachusetts 
Bay  colony  were  Jacobean  Englishmen  of  middle  station,  half¬ 
way  between  the  aristocrat  and  the  burgess,  with  certain  salient 
characteristics  of  both.  Fashioned  by  a  caste  society,  they  trans¬ 
ported  to  the  little  commonwealth  an  abundant  heritage  of  class 
prejudice.  They  aspired  to  be  reckoned  gentlemen  and  to  live 
in  the  new  world  as  they  had  lived  in  the  old,  in  a  half  feudal  state, 
surrounded  by  many  servants  and  with  numerous  dependents. 
They  honored  rank,  were  sticklers  for  precedence,  respected 
class  distinctions,  demanded  the  hereditary  rights  of  the  gentry. 
They  had  been  bred  up  in  a  static  order  where  gentlemen  ruled 
and  the  people  obeyed,  and  they  could  not  think  in  terms  of  the 
Plymouth  plantation  covenant,  subscribed  by  all  heads  of  families. 
To  the  modern  reader  of  his  journal  there  is  something  almost 
childish  in  Winthrop’s  insistence  on  public  deference  to  his  official 
position  and  his  grief  when  the  halberd-beareN  refused  to  provide 
the  usual  formality  to  his  little  progresses.  But  if  they  aspired 
to  be  rated  as  gentlemen,  there  was  much  at§o,of  the  burgess 
nature  in  them.  They  were  potential  capitalists,  eager  to  accu¬ 
mulate  ample  landholdings,  keen  to  drive  a  bargain,  given  to  trade 
and  with  as  sharp  an  eye  to  the  main  chance  as  any  London  mer¬ 
chant.  The  community  of  goods  that  marked  the  early  days  of 
Plymouth  they  disliked  so  greatly  as  to  account  it  almost  sinful. 
In  the  infancy  of  the  settlement  they  entered  upon  an  active  mer¬ 
cantile  life,  building  their  ships  for  the  West  Indian  trade,  joining 
in  the  fisheries  off  the  Newfoundland  coast,  venturing  far  in  pur¬ 
suit  of  gain.  Active,  capable  men,  excellent  administrators  rather 
than  speculative  thinkers,  stewards  of  the  public  interests  as  well 
as  their  own,  they  would  take  it  ill  to  have  their  matured  plans 
interfered  with  by  busybodies  and  incompetents.  Their  own 
counsel  sufficed  them  and  they  wanted  no  help  from  outsiders. 

Endow  such  men  with  religious  zeal;  let  them  regard  themselves 
as  particular  repositories  of  righteousness;  give  them  a  free  hand 
to  work  out  their  program  unhampered  by  rival  policies;  pro¬ 
vide  them  with  a  handbook  elaborated  in  complete  detail  by  a 
master  system-maker;  and  the  result  was  certain.  Their  Utopia 
must  be  a  close-knit  church-state,  with  authority  reserved  to  the 
aristocracy  of  Christian  talent.  It  is  needless  to.  inquire  whether 


THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  IDEAS 


19 


a  definite  conception  of  a  theocracy  was  in  their  minds  before  their 
coming  over;  some  such  order  was  clearly  implicit  in  their  religious 
fervor,  their  Hebraic  theology,  their  Genevan  discipline,  their 
aristocratic  prejudices.  They  might  nominally  accept  the  Plym¬ 
outh  model  of  church-government,  but  they  would  meddle  with 
democracy  in  church  and  state  no  more  than  necessity  compelled. 
Circumstances,  as  well  as  their  own  promptings,  would  counsel 
quite  an  opposite  course.  They  were  engaged  in  a  difficult  and 
perilous  undertaking,  begirt  by  wilderness  enemies,  and  fearful  of 
hostile  interference  by  the  home  authorities.  If  the  venture  were 
to  survive,  a  drift  towards  centralization  of  power  was  as  natural 
as  it  was  inevitable.  The  common  security  would  not  suffer  any 
dispersion  of  forces  or  domestic  bickerings  over  authority.  Dis¬ 
satisfied  members  must  be  held  in  subjection  and  dangerous 
swarmings  from  the  mother-hive  must  be  prevented.  The  principle 
of  Separatism  was  too  disruptive  to  insure  cohesive  solidarity; 
the  parts  must  be  welded  into  a  protective  whole;  and  for  such 
business  what  ideal  was  more  efficient  than  a  theocracy  with 
Jehovah  substituted  for  King  Charles — not  openly  and  seditiously, 
but  quietly,  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  The  historian  need  not 
wander  far  in  search  of  the  origin  of  the  theocratic  principle;  it  is 
to  be  found  in  the  self-interest  of  the  lay  and  clerical  leaders. 
Ambitious  men  could  not  have  devised  a  fitter  means  to  weld 
together  the  two  groups  of  magistrates  and  ministers,  and  endow 
their  charter  prerogatives  with  divine  sanction.  The  Stuarts  were 
bunglers  at  the  business  in  comparison  with  Winthrop  and  Cotton. 
But  if  they  worked  the  metal  to  such  shape  as  they  chose  we  must 
not  forget  that  it  had  been  well  heated  in  the  smithy  of  John  Calvin. 
Overlook  that  fact  and  the  theocracy  becomes  incredible. 

There  are  perhaps  sufficient  grounds  to  assume  that  some  plan 
of  minority  control  was  worked  out  before  the  migration  took 
place.  The  preliminary  discussions  in  England  had  been  long  and 
the  terms  of  the  charter  were  carefully  seen  to.  By  its  provisions 
the  right  of  franchise  rested  with  the  freemen  of  the  corporation, 
in  number  about  a  hundred  and  ten.  Of  the  total  body  of  freemen 
it  was  known  that  only  a  small  group  would  undertake  the  venture; 
probably  fewer  than  a  score  came  over  with  the  emigrants,  and 
through  removals  and  death  the  number  was  speedily  reduced  to 
about  a  dozen.  This  handful  of  freemen  constituted  the  court, 
and  chose  the  governor,  deputy  governor,  and  the  assistants  or 


20 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


magistrates.  These  latter  were  to  number  eighteen  according  to 
the  charter  provision;  but  with  more  offices  than  eligible  candi¬ 
dates,  the  number  was  necessarily  reduced,  and  six  assistants  with 
the  governor  came  to  be  reckoned  a  quorum  of  the  court  with 
sovereign  powers.1  It  was  a  patriarchal  undertaking,  and  to 
Carolinian  gentlemen  there  was  nothing  unusual  or  unjust  in  a 
handful  of  leaders  exercising  plenary  powers  over  the  lives  and 
fortunes  of  two  thousand  members  of  the  commonwealth.  If  the 
charter  could  not  have  been  construed  as  granting  such  powers,  it 
is  reasonable  to  assume  that  they  would  not  have  entered  upon 
the  business.  The  lay  leaders  were  practical  men.  They  had 
ventured  their  estates  in  the  hope  of  bettering  their  condition, 
both  spiritual  and  material,  and  with  their  personal  fortunes  at 
stake  they  were  in  no  mind  to  intrust  the  fate  of  the  undertaking 
to  other  hands  than  their  own.  They  loved  power  quite  as  much 
as  did  the  ungodly,  and  accounting  themselves  God’s  stewards 
they  reckoned  it  sin  not  to  use  it  in  his  name.  As  Puritans  they 
would  not  keep  a  weather  eye  on  the  majority  will.  God  did  not 
speak  in  the  Scriptures  through  majority  votes;  his  chosen  were  a 
minority,  the  remnant  in  Israel. 

A  further  sanction  was  at  hand.  If  these  Hebraized  Englishmen 
created  a  close  corporation  and  ruled  magisterially,  if  the  order 
in  the  new  church-state  was  inquisitorial  and  stern,  it  was  in  strict 
conformity  with  the  teachings  and  example  of  Calvin.  Men  deeply 
read  in  the  Institutes,  familiar  with  the  Genevan  Ordinances  and 
the  practices  of  the  Consistory,  were  not  likely  to  discover  in  them 
any  lessons  in  democratic  toleration.  Righteousness  may  be  fear¬ 
fully  relentless,  and  John  Calvin  had  been  a  tyrant  on  principle. 
Iron-willed  and  masterful,  he  had  risen  to  power  in  the  turbulent 
city-state  of  Geneva  in  sixteenth-century  fashion.  A  few  splotches 
of  blood  on  the  white  garments  of  the  Church  did  not  greatly 
trouble  him.  He  was  never  squeamish  about  ways  and  means  of 
furthering  the  Lord’s  work.  He  violated  the  right  of  refuge  to 
bring  to  the  stake  the  pantheistic  Unitarian  Servetus,  and  he 
thanked  God  when  the  bungling  of  the  executioner  prolonged  the 
sufferings  of  certain  others  of  his  victims.  The  Genevan  discipline 
was  rigorous,  and  the  clerical  inquisitors  were  more  relentless  than 
the  lay.  The  tyrannies  that  have  been  freely  charged  upon  the 
New  England  oligarchy  are  easily  explained  in  the  light  of  the 
1  See  James  Truslow  Adams,  The  Founding  of  New  England,  Chapter  VI. 


THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  IDEAS 


21 


Calvinistic  Ordinances.  There  were  no  whippings  or  banishments 
or  hangings  in  early  Pennsylvania  where  Quaker  and  Lutheran 
dwelt  together  in  peace  if  not  in  fellowship.  But  they  were  New 
Testament  men  and  not  out  of  the  Old,  like  the  Saints  in  Massa¬ 
chusetts  Bay.  They  worshiped  a  God  of  love  rather  than  a  God 
of  wrath. 

Granted  the  conception  on  which  the  theocratic  experiment 
went  forward,  namely,  that  Jehovah  was  the  sole  lawgiver  and 
the  Bible  the  sufficient  statute-book;  granted  also  that  these 
priests  and  magistrates  were  stewards  of  God’s  will;  and  the 
centralization  of  power  in  the  commonwealth  becomes  invested 
with  a  higher  sanction  than  the  terms  of  the  charter.  It  was  an 
oligarchy  of  Christian  grace.  The  minister  was  the  trained  and 
consecrated  interpreter  of  the  divine  law,  and  the  magistrate  was 
its  trained  and  consecrated  administrator;  and  both  were  chosen 
by  free  election  of  the  Saints.  If  unfortunately  the  Saints  were 
few  and  the  sinners  many,  was  not  that  a  special  reason  for  safe¬ 
guarding  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  from  the  touch  of  profane  hands? 
Hence  all  legislative  experiments  by  annually  elected  deputies, 
no  matter  how  exactly  those  experiments  might  fall  in  with  the 
wishes  of  the  majority,  were  sternly  frowned  upon  or  skillfully 
nullified.  Not  only  were  such  popular  enactments,  it  was  held, 
too  often  prompted  by  the  carnal  desires  of  the  natural  man,  but 
they  were  no  better  than  an  insult  to  God,  as  implying  the  insuffi¬ 
ciency  of  the  Scriptures  to  every  temporal  need.  Unregenerate 
and  sinful  men  must  have  no  share  in  God’s  work.  The  Saints 
must  not  have  their  hands  tied  by  majority  votes.  This  explains, 
quite  as  much  as  mere  love  of  power,  the  persistent  hostility  of 
the  leaders  to  every  democratic  tendency.  Such  institutions  as 
grew  up  spontaneously  out  of  the  necessities  of  the  situation,  were 
sharply  hedged  about  by  restrictions.  The  town  meeting,  which 
was  extra-legal  under  the  charter,  was  safeguarded  by  limiting 
the  right  of  voting  to  freemen,  except  in  a  few  trivial  matters;  and 
the  more  popular  deputies,  who  inclined  to  become  self-willed, 
were  forced  to  accept  the  principle  of  magisterial  veto  on  their 
actions.  When  a  law  was  passed,  it  was  purposely  left  vague  as 
to  penalties,  in  order  to  give  a  free  hand  to  the  judges  to  punish 
as  they  wished;  and  it  was  not  till  1641,  after  much  insistence 
from  the  representatives  of  the  people,  that  Ward’s  Body  of 
Liberties  was  finally  adopted. 


22 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


Later  critics  of  Puritanism  discover  in  the  theocratic  experiment 
of  Massachusetts  Bay  a  preposterous  attempt  to  turn  back  the 
pages  of  history,  and  refashion  Englishmen  after  an  ungainly  He¬ 
braic  pattern.  But  to  the  leaders  of  that  experiment  it  seemed 
rather  a  Utopian  venture  to  create  in  the  new  world  a  nobler  social 
order  than  elsewhere  existed.  Whether  such  a  society  was  either 
possible  or  desirable,  has  long  since  become  only  an  academic 
question;  what  is  more  suggestive  is  the  fact  that  in  spite  of  some 
bitterness  on  the  part  of  a  small  minority,  the  stewardship  of  an 
oligarchy  remained  the  accepted  principle  of  government  in 
Massachusetts  Bay  until  the  vacating  of  the  charter  in  1684. 
That  it  lingered  out  so  long  a  life  is  a  testimony  to  the  skillful 
opportunism  of  the  leaders.  They  early  adopted  a  strategic 
policy  which  the  British  ministry  foolishly  refused  to  adopt  a 
hundred  years  later;  they  cautiously  undermined  any  potential 
disaffection  by  admitting  the  wealthiest  and  most  influential  to 
the  rights  of  freemen,  thus  allying  the  ambitious  and  capable 
members  of  society  with  the  ruling  group,  and  laying  the  foun¬ 
dations  of  a  provincial  aristocracy,  which  in  the  course  of  time 
would  secularize  the  government  and  substitute  an  economic  for  a 
theocratic  basis  of  authority.  The  loss  of  the  charter  only  has¬ 
tened  what  in  the  nature  of  things  must  have  come  about  eventually. 

hi 

CERTAIN  MISTAKES 

Skillful  as  were  the  theocratic  rulers  and  logical  as  was  their 
course,  it  seems  plain  in  the  light  of  later  developments  that  they 
fell  into  certain  grave  mistakes  at  the  very  beginning  of  their 
work  that  were  to  hamper  them  seriously  in  after  days.  Those 
mistakes  were  the  adoption  of  the  covenant-principle  of  church 
organization  borrowed  from  Plymouth,  that  started  the  new 
churches  on  the  road  to  Congregationalism,  and  the  granting 
of  the  land  in  fee-simple  to  non-freemen,  that  was  to  create  an 
independent  yeomanry.  Of  the  two  the  second  was  far  graver, 
for  it  threw  the  economics  of  the  developing  commonwealth  on 
the  side  of  local  home  rule  and  provided  a  substantial  foundation 
for  the  erection  of  a  democratic  opposition  to  the  oligarchy.  If 
the  plantation  system  of  Virginia,  or  the  Patroon  system  of  New 
York,  had  been  adopted,  the  covenanted  church  would  naturally 


23 


THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  IDEAS 

have  followed  the  path  of  Genevan  Presbyterianism  in  harmony 
with  the  desires  of  the  leaders,  and  the  democratic  opposition 
both  in  church  and  state  must  have  been  starved  into  submission. 
But  with  the  system  of  small  holdings  and  the  development  of  a 
vigorous  yeomanry,  the  eventual  development  of  Congregational¬ 
ism  into  a  federated  group  of  self-governing  churches  was  pre¬ 
determined  more  rigidly  than  by  any  logic  of  John  Calvin.  The 
defeat  of  the  Presbyterian  program  of  the  theocrats  was  implicit 
in  a  decentralized  land  system. 

The  decision  of  the  Salem  church  in  1629  to  adopt  the  Plymouth 
model,  and  the  acceptance  of  that  decision  by  later  churches  in 
Massachusetts  Bay,  has  been  abundantly  commented  upon,  but 
the  significance  of  it  has  been  somewhat  inadequately  explored.2 
Very  likely  it  was  a  deep  hatred  of  episcopal  rule  that  opened  the 
mind  of  Endicott  and  his  fellows  to  the  reasoning  of  Dr.  Fuller  of 
Plymouth,  and  persuaded  them  to  take  this  first  step  towards 
Separatism;  nevertheless  as  disciples  of  Calvin,  desirous  of  es¬ 
tablishing  a  Bible  commonwealth,  they  must  soon  discover  that  a 
system  centrifugal  in  tendency  and  decentralizing  in  spirit,  unless 
closely  restrained,  was  certain  to  lead  them  far  from  the  Canaan 
of  their  hopes.  Separatism  was  the  negation  of  a  state  church, 
and  the  rule  of  the  congregation  was  the  negation  of  an  official 
creed  and  ecclesiastical  unity.  If  Congregationalism  were  suffered 
to  develop  its  democratic  potentialities,  the  leaders  must  even¬ 
tually  find  themselves  in  like  position  with  Laud,  with  schismatics 
disturbing  the  orthodox  harmony  and  rending  the  church  from 
within.  The  authorities  early  began  to  feel,  what  the  Anglican 
Lechford  pointed  out  in  1641,  that  the  system  was  dangerously 
democratic,  and  the  principle  of  centralizing  conformity  was  set 
to  work.  The  spirit  of  Calvin’s  Consistory  was  invoked.  Under 
the  guise  of  brotherly  counsel,  or  church  fellowship,  the  principle 
of  consociation  was  developed,  a  principle  that  opened  a  convenient 
door  to  official  coercion.  Brotherly  counsel  that  comes  armed 
with  the  weapon  of  excommunication,  that  points  its  argument 
with  the  threat  of  banishment  or  hanging,  is  certainly  not  the 
pure  spirit  of  Christian  fellowship  that  Congregational  historians 
have  chosen  to  see  in  the  principle  of  consociation.  The  most 
ardent  apologist  has  hard  work  in  discovering  the  democratic 

2  See  Williston  Walker,  A  History  of  the  Congregational  Churches  in  the  United 
States,  Chapter  IV. 


24 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


principle  of  Congregationalism  in  the  theocratic  application  of 
the  methods  of  the  Genevan  Consistory.  The  early  churches  of 
the  theocracy  were  Presbyterian  in  spirit  and  rule,  in  spite  of  the 
official  promulgation  of  the  covenant-principle  in  the  Cambridge 
Platform.  Certainly  real  Separatists  like  Roger  Williams,  who 
suffered  from  too  much  brotherly  counsel  and  did  not  want  a 
Christian  fellowship  imposed  by  magistrates,  were  under  no 
illusions  in  regard  to  the  coercive  spirit  that  lay  behind  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  consociation. 

More  open  and  above  board  were  the  successive  statutes  that 
effectively  nullified  the  principle  of  Separatism  by  erecting  an 
official  state  church.  The  law  of  1631,  restricting  the  franchise 
to  church  members,  and  the  law  of  1635,  making  attendance  at 
church  compulsory  on  all,  were  followed  in  1636  by  a  law  requiring 
the  approval  of  the  magistrates  and  elders  before  a  new  church 
could  be  set  up,  and  in  1638  by  the  institution  of  a  system  of  state 
support  for  the  ministry.  The  principle  of  the  covenant  was  being 
pretty  effectively  whittled  away.  Equally  Presbyterian  was  the 
movement  for  the  establishment  of  a  definitive  state  creed.  In 
consequence  of  the  Antinomian  schism  effected  by  the  eloquent 
tongue  of  Mistress  Anne  Hutchinson,  the  first  general  synod  was 
convened  at  Newtown  in  1637,  which  sat  for  four  and  twenty  days 
and  drew  up  a  list  of  eighty-two  heretical  opinions,  “some  blas¬ 
phemous,  others  erroneous,  and  all  unsafe,”  together  with  “nine 
unwholesome  expressions,”  which  were  alleged  to  be  disturbing 
the  peace  of  the  community.  Whereupon  the  synod  broke  up, 
the  members  congratulating  themselves  “that  matters  had  been 
carried  on  so  peaceably  and  concluded  so  comfortably  in  all  love.” 
How  much  Christian  love  was  awakened  by  such  brotherly  coun¬ 
sels  in  the  heart  of  Mistress  Hutchinson,  who  was  banished  and 
later  slain  by  the  Indians,  is  not  revealed,  but  her  sin  was  made  of 
record  as  a  warning  to  other  schismatics.  It  was  this:  “He  hath 
let  me  distinguish  between  the  voice  of  my  beloved  and  the  voice  of 
Moses,”  which  being  interpreted,  meant  an  appeal  from  the  Old 
Testament  to  the  New,  from  Mosaic  authority  to  the  inner  light. 

With  the  promulgation  of  the  Cambridge  Platform  by  the  synod 
of  1646-47,  and  the  acceptance  of  the  Westminster  Confession  of 
Faith,  the  work  of  creating  the  organism  and  creed  of  an  author¬ 
itative  state-church  was  completed.  According  to  Williston 
Walker,  the  Cambridge  Platform  “pictures  with  great  clearness 


25 


THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  IDEAS 

the  abiding  principles  of  Congregationalism” — the  covenant 
origin  of  the  local  church,  the  autonomy  of  the  congregation,  the 
sole  authority  of  the  Bible,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  churches.3 
But  it  needs  the  sharp  eyes  of  an  apologetic  historian  to  discover 
the  spirit  of  democratic  Congregationalism  in  a  discipline  that 
sanctions  the  power  of  the  state  to  intervene  in  ecclesiastical 
matters  and  requires  the  magistrate  to  enforce  uniformity  in 
creed  and  worship.  “Idolatry,  Blasphemy,  Heresy,  Venting 
corrupt  and  pernicious  opinions,  are  to  be  restrayned  and  punished 
by  civil  authority,”  the  Platform  states.  “If  any  church  one  or 
more  shall  grow  schismaticall,  rending  it  self  from  the  communion 
of  other  churches,  or  shall  walke  incorrigibly  or  obstinately  in  any 
corrupt  way  of  their  own,  contrary  to  the  rule  of  the  word;  in 
such  case,  the  Magistrate  is  to  put  forth  his  coercive  power,  as  the 
matter  shall  require.”  If  such  be  Congregationalism,  how  greatly 
have  the  later  churches  departed  from  the  primitive  faith!  To 
the  layman,  wanting  in  insight,  it  would  seem  rather  to  be  stark 
Calvinism,  that  reveals  how  completely  the  coercive  spirit  of  the 
Ordinances  and  Consistory  of  the  French  theologian  had  come  to 
dominate  the  theocratic  mind  of  New  England.  The  reluctant 
adoption  of  the  Cambridge  Platform  by  the  suspicious  deputies 
was  the  grim  prelude  to  Baptist  whippings  and  Quaker  baitings, 
and  the  setting-in  of  the  dark  days  of  militant  intolerance.  “Your¬ 
selves  pretend  liberty  of  conscience,”  wrote  Roger  Williams  in  1670, 
“but  alas!  it  is  but  self,  the  great  god  self,  only  to  yourselves.”4 

But  while  the  covenant  principle  was  thus  being  effectively 
whittled  away  by  the  theocratic  leaders,  another  principle,  like¬ 
wise  of  Plymouth  origin,  was  silently  working  to  the  overthrow 
of  the  theocratic  power.  Following  the  example  of  the  Pilgrims 
the  several  towns  apportioned  their  lands  in  fee  to  their  members; 
and  if  so  acute  a  political  thinker  as  Daniel  Webster  is  to  be 
trusted,  it  was  from  the  creative  influence  of  freehold  tenure  that 
the  political  institutions  of  New  England  became  later  democra¬ 
tized.  As  a  disciple  of  James  Harrington,  accepting  the  doctrine 
of  economic  determinism  as  it  had  been  elaborated  in  the  Oceana, 
Webster  traced  the  spontaneous  rise  of  republicanism  in  New 
England  to  the  wide  diffusion  of  property;  and  in  the  light  of  his 
economic  interpretation  the  harsh  intolerance  of  the  Cambridge 


3  Ibid.,  p.  162.  .  . 

4  N arragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  VI,  p.  1 33 • 


26 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


Platform  is  seen  to  be  only  the  aberration  of  a  passing  bigotry. 
In  his  anniversary  speech  at  Plymouth  he  said : 

Their  situation  demanded  a  parceling  out  and  division  of  the  lands,  and 
it  may  be  fairly  said,  that  this  necessary  act  fixed  the  future  frame  and 
form  of  their  government.  The  character  of  their  political  institutions  was 
determined  by  the  fundamental  laws  respecting  property.  .  .  .  The 
property  was  all  freehold  .  .  '.  alienation  of  the  land  was  every  way 
facilitated,  even  to  the  subjecting  of  it  to  every  species  of  debt.  The 
establishment  of  public  registries,  and  the  simplicity  of  our  forms  of  con¬ 
veyance,  have  greatly  facilitated  the  change  of  real  estate  from  one 
proprietor  to  another.  The  consequence  of  all  these  causes  has  been,  a 
great  subdivision  of  the  soil,  and  a  great  equality  of  condition;  the  true 
basis,  most  certainly,  of  a  popular  government.  “If  the  people,”  says 
Harrington,  “hold  three  parts  in  four  of  the  territory,  it  is  plain  there  can 
neither  be  any  single  person  nor  nobility  able  to  dispute  the  government 
with  them;  in  this  case,  therefore,  except  force  be  interposed,  they  govern 
themselves.”  5 

With  such  a  clue  it  is  easier  to  understand  how  the  liberalisms 
implicit  in  Plymouth  Congregationalism — its  theory  of  compact 
in  church  and  state — should  find  support  from  an  independent 
yeomanry  and  eventually  rise  against  the  oligarchical  rule.  The 
new  world  would  ultimately  throw  off  the  old-world  repressions 
and  explore  the  reaches  of  those  generous  idealisms  that  were  the 
bequest  of  English  Separatism.  The  fathers  were  engaged  in 
an  impossible  undertaking.  Sanctuaries  were  close  at  hand  for 
all  dissenters  from  the  theocracy,  in  Connecticut  for  the  Congre- 
gationalists,  in  Rhode  Island  for  the  Separatists,  along  the  Maine 
frontier  for  the  rebellious  individualist.  Seated  securely  in  these 
regions  beyond  the  reach  of  the  Massachusetts  magistrates,  the 
diverse  liberalisms  that  were  being  stifled  by  the  oligarchy  pros¬ 
pered  and  brought  forth  after  their  kind.  Differentiation  in  the 
provinces  was  the  natural  counterpart  of  coercive  conformity  at 
the  capital;  and  from  very  early  days  New  England  divided  into 
three  diverse  groups  journeying  to  their  Utopias  by  different  roads. 
Massachusetts  Bay,  Connecticut,  and  Rhode  Island,  were  variant 
answers  to  the  question  of  what  might  be  expected  to  result  from 
the  domestication  in  a  free  environment  of  the  inchoate  idealisms 
of  English  Puritanism.  How  they  differentiated  themselves  from 
the  norm,  and  why,  will  perhaps  become  clearer  from  an  examina¬ 
tion  of  the  diverse  philosophies  of  their  intellectual  leaders. 

6  Works,  Vol.  I,  pp.  35-36. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  CHIEF  STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


i 

MASTER  JOHN  COTTON 
Priest 

The  most  authoritative  representative  in  New  England  of  the 
ideal  of  priestly  stewardship  was  the  excellent  John  Cotton,  first 
teacher  to  the  church  at  Boston.  While  pastor  of  the  church  of 
St.  Botolph,  in  old  Boston,  he  had  dreamed  of  a  Utopia  of  the 
Saints,  unharassed  by  tyrannous  prelates;  and  while  sweetening 
his  mouth'  with  a  morsel  of  Calvin,  as  he  was  fond  of  doing,  no 
doubt  he  turned  over  in  his  mind  the  plans  and  specifications  of 
that  Utopia.  “When  God  wrappes  us  in  his  ordinances,”  he  said 
in  his  sermon  to  Winthrop’s  company  on  the  eve  of  its  departure 
from  England,  “and  warmes  us  with  the  life  and  power  of  them  as 
with  wings,  there  is  the  land  of  Promise.”  Left  behind  by  the 
departing  brethren,  he  lingered  for  a  while  in  an  England  that  was 
every  day  becoming  colder  for  such  as  dreamed  of  other  Canaans 
than  Laud’s,  until  urged  by  many  invitations,  at  the  age  of  forty- 
six  he  followed  overseas  to  devote  his  remaining  life  to  the  great 
work  being  done  there.  For  more  than  a  score  of  years  he  labored 
faithfully,  and  the  New  England  which  the  emigrant  generation 
bequeathed  to  its  sons  bore  upon  it  the  marks  of  John  Cotton’s 
shaping  hand  more  clearly  than  those  of  any  other  minister. 

It  is  not  easy  today  to  judge  fairly  the  life  and  work  of  John 
Cotton.  No  adequate  biography  has  been  written,  and  his  dreams 
and  aspirations  lie  forgotten  in  the  grave  of  lost  causes  and  for¬ 
saken  faiths.  But  to  the  Boston  freemen  of  his  own  day,  Master 
John  Cotton  was  a  very  great  man.  Of  excellent  family  and  sound 
university  training,  he  was  both  a  notable  theologian  and  a  courte¬ 
ous  gentleman.  “Twelve  hours  in  a  day  he  commonly  studied, 
and  would  call  that  a  scholar  s  day,”  his  grandson  reported  of  him. 
From  the  hour  when  he  entered  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  at 
the  age  of  thirteen,  to  his  death  in  1652,  he  was  a  bookman,  and  in 
sheer  bulk  of  acquisition  probably  no  man  of  his  time  outdid  him. 

27 


28 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


In  Cotton  Mather’s  judgment  he  was  “a  most  universal  scholar, 
and  a  living  system  of  the  liberal  arts,  and  a  walking  library.”  His 
intellectual  equipment  was  so  highly  regarded  that  many  excellent 
persons  “believed  that  God  would  not  suffer  Mr.  Cotton  to  err”; 
and  that  “if  ever  there  be  any  considerable  blow  given  to  the 
Devil’s  kingdom,”  Master  Cotton  was  the  man  for  the  business. 
No  other  New  England  champion  was  so  renowned  for  “beating 
out  the  truth  in  controversie”;  and  when  he  turned  to  the  work  of 
answering  Roger  Williams,  the  latter  exclaimed:  “I  rejoice  it  hath 
pleased  [God]  to  appoint  so  able,  and  excellent,  and  conscionable 
an  Instrument  to  bolt  the  Truth  to  the  bran.”  But  though  he  was 
bred  in  Elizabethan  days  and  entered  college  in  the  year  when 
Shakespeare’s  Henry  IV  and  Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  his  Humour 
first  appeared  on  the  stage,  there  is  no  touch  of  Renaissance 
splendor  in  his  crabbed  style  and  ascetic  reasoning.  That  was 
early  washed  out  of  him  by  the  rising  tide  of  Hebraism  which  was 
slowly  submerging  the  England  of  poets  and  playwrights. 

But  however  much  he  loved  cloistered  scholarship,  the  imme¬ 
diate  source  of  his  great  influence  was  the  spoken  rather  than  the 
written  word.  By  the  universal  testimony  of  his  generation  he 
was  “a  soul-melting  preacher,”  whose  reasoned  eloquence  swayed 
congregations  trained  to  solid  argumentative  discourse.  When 
he  ascended  the  pulpit  on  Sundays  and  lecture  days,  he  spoke  as  a 
prophet  in  Israel;  and  on  occasions  of  public  ceremonial,  or  when 
dissensions  arose  touching  the  polity  of  church  or  state,  he  was 
summoned  by  the  magistrates  to  convince  with  his  logic  and 
persuade  with  his  eloquence.  The  strong-minded  Anne  Hutchin¬ 
son  was  but  one  of  many  who  chose  exile  in  New  England  rather 
than  lose  the  edification  of  Mr.  Cotton’s  preaching.  Good  men 
were  drawn  to  him  by  his  sweetness  of  temper,  and  evil  men  were 
overawed  by  his  venerable  aspect.  He  seems  to  have  been  an 
altogether  lovable  person,  with  white  hair  framing  a  face  that 
must  have  been  nobly  chiseled,  gentle-voiced,  courteous,  tactful, 
by  nature  “a  tolerant  man”  who  placidly  bore  with  a  dissentient 
and  gladly  discovered  a  friend  in  an  antagonist.  If  his  quiet 
yielding  before  opposition  suggests  that  he  may  have  been  given 
to  opportunism,  or  his  fondness  for  intellectual  subtleties  drew 
from  his  grandson  the  comment  “a  most  excellent  casuist,”  we 
must  not  too  hastily  conclude  that  he  served  the  cause  of  truth 
less  devotedly  than  the  cause  of  party. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


29 


For  a  score  of  years  before  his  coming  over,  his  position  in  the 
rising  Puritan  party  had  been  honorable.  Few  among  the  dissent¬ 
ing  ministers  were  better  known,  none  more  esteemed.  He  had 
shone  as  an  intellectual  light  at  the  university,  he  had  long  been 
pastor  of  one  of  the  loveliest  churches  in  England,  he  counted 
among  his  friends  some  of  the  ablest  contemporary  Englishmen. 
To  Cromwell  he  was  one  “whom  I  love  and  honour  in  the  Lord”; 
to  Lord  Say  and  Sele,  to  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  the  Earl  of  Lincoln, 
and  a  notable  company  of  Puritan  gentlemen,  he  was  a  trusted 
friend  and  lieutenant;  to  thousands  of  the  substantial  burgesses 
who  were  drawing  together  to  form  the  new  Puritan- Whig  party, 
he  was  “a  fixed  and  conscionable  light.”  That  such  a  leader  should 
have  been  received  with  thanksgiving  by  the  Boston  congregation 
was  to  be  expected;  that  he  should  have  taken  high  place  at  once 
among  the  members  of  the  Massachusetts  oligarchy  was  equally 
to  be  expected.  Thenceforth  his  busy  career  was  no  more  than  a 
reflection  of  the  ambitions  of  the  theocracy. 

Unfortunately  his  daily  contact  with  narrow-minded  and  intoler¬ 
ant  men  gave  an  unhappy  bias  to  his  later  career.  Cotton  seems 
to  have  been  something  of  a  Puritan  intellectual,  with  an  open- 
minded  curiosity  that  made  him  receptive  to  new  ideas  and  tempted 
him  to  play  with  doctrines  that  were  intolerable  to  his  bigoted 
associates.  It  was  possibly  this  native  sympathy  with  free  specula¬ 
tion  that  drew  him  into  the  camp  of  Mistress  Hutchinson  with 
her  doctrine  of  the  inner  light.  When  the  schism  became  serious, 
dividing  the  commonwealth  into  warring  camps,  Cotton  seems 
to  have  become  frightened  and  broke  with  the  Boston  Antinomians. 
In  this  matter  he  came  near  to  being  a  shuffler.  The  Hutchinson 
trial  with  its  resulting  banishments  was  the  turning  point  of  his 
career  in  America  as  it  was  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  early  New 
England.  He  was  not  a  man  to  persecute  and  harry,  nor  was  he 
one  to  stand  in  isolated  opposition  to  associates  whom  he  respected, 
and  he  allowed  himself  to  be  coerced  by  narrower-minded  men 
like  Endicott  and  Dudley.  After  1637  the  better  nature  of  John 
Cotton  was  submerged  by  the  rising  intolerance,  and  “the  most 
tolerant,  as  he  was  the  ablest  of  the  Massachusetts  divines,”  was 
brought  so  low  as  to  defend  the  meanest  and  crudest  acts  of  the 
oligarchy.  He  descended  to  disgraceful  casuistry  in  defense  of  the 
first  whippings  of  the  Quakers,  and  he  urged  the  death  penalty 
upon  King  Philip’s  son  and  the  enslavement  of  the  remnant  of 


30 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


Philip’s  tribe,  against  the  plea  of  John  Eliot  that  “to  sell  soules  for 
mony  seemeth  to  me  a  dangerous  merchandize.”  The  sins  of  the 
oligarchy  rest  in  large  measure  on  the  head  of  John  Cotton,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  most  recent  historian  of  New  England  must 
stand: 

With  a  broader  mind  and  wider  vision  than  any  of  the  other  clergy 
of  the  colony,  he  had  not  the  courage  to  stand  alone,  beyond  a  certain 
point,  against  their  unanimity  in  intolerance.  The  higher  promptings  of 
his  nature  were  crushed  by  the  united  voice  of  the  priesthood,  as  Win- 
throp’s  had  been  so  short  a  time  before,  and  the  noblest  of  the  colony’s 
leaders,  lay  and  clerical,  from  that  time  tended  to  sink  to  the  lower  level 
of  their  fellows.1 

An  apologist — and  whoever  has  felt  the  charm  of  John  Cotton’s 
personality  easily  becomes  an  apologist — will  perhaps  find  some 
grounds  of  excuse  for  his  later  conduct.  He  was  in  an  unhappy 
position.  He  was  ill  at  ease  in  his  mind,  and  his  frequent  tacking 
in  the  face  of  adverse  winds  was  characteristic  of  the  intellectual 
who  sees  all  sides  of  a  question.  He  heartily  approved  of  the 
theocratic  ends  that  his  associates  were  seeking,  and  his  influential 
position  made  him  the  defender  of  acts  which  his  better  nature 
must  have  disapproved.  The  historian,  however,  will  seek  a  more 
adequate  explanation  in  the  roots  of  his  environment.  The  ideal¬ 
ism  of  John  Cotton  was  the  fruit  of  his  training,  and  his  theocratic 
dreams  were  conditioned  by  the  facts  that  he  was  both  a  Calvinist 
and  a  Carolinian  gentleman.  The  fusion  of  these  two  influences 
resulted  in  the  unique  political  theory  of  an  ethical  aristocracy, 
consecrated  to  moral  stewardship  in  the  state.  A  lifelong  student 
of  Calvin’s  Institutes,  he  found  there  a  system  of  social  organization 
that  responded  to  every  demand  of  the  theologian  and  the  aristo¬ 
crat.  The  very  texture  and  pattern  of  Cotton’s  political  philosophy 
is  exemplified  in  such  a  passage  as  this,  over  which  he  must  have 
brooded  much: 

When  these  three  forms  of  government  of  which  philosophers  treat,  are 
considered  in  themselves,  I,  for  my  part,  am  far  from  denying  that  the 
form  which  greatly  surpasses  the  other  is  aristocracy,  either  pure  or 
modified  by  popular  government;  not  indeed  in  itself,  but  because  it  very 
rarely  happens  that  kings  so  rule  themselves  as  never  to  dissent  from  what 
is  just  and  right,  or  are  possessed  of  so  much  acuteness  and  prudence  as 
always  to  see  correctly.  Owing  therefore  to  the  vices  or  defects  of  men, 
it  is  safer  and  more  tolerable  when  several  bear  rule,  that  they  may  thus 

l  James  Truslow  Adams,  The  Founding  of  New  England,  p.  170. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


31 


mutually  assist,  instruct,  and  admonish  each  other,  and  should  any  be 
disposed  to  go  too  far,  the  others  are  censors  and  masters  to  curb  his 
excess.  This  has  already  been  proved  by  experience,  and  confirmed  also 
by  the  authority  of  the  Lord  himself,  when  he  established  an  aristocracy 
bordering  on  popular  government  among  the  Israelites,  keeping  them 
under  that  as  the  best  form,  until  He  exhibited  an  image  of  the  Messiah 
in  David.2 

As  a  Carolinian  gentleman,  this  was  as  far  as  Cotton  would  go 
on  the  path  of  liberalism.  The  elders  were  responsible  to  God  for 
the  spiritual  well-being  of  the  people,  and  the  state  must  aid  and 
not  hinder  them  in  their  leadership.  The  doctrine  of  unlimited 
popular  sovereignty  was  for  him  no  other  than  a  thistle  in  the 
garden  of  the  Lord.  The  desire  for  liberty  he  regarded  as  the 
sinful  prompting  of  the  natural  man,  a  denial  of  the  righteous 
authority  of  God’s  chosen  rulers.  If  democracy  were  indeed  the 
best  form  of  government,  was  it  not  strange  that  divine  wisdom 
should  have  failed  to  discover  the  fact?  In  the  history  of  the 
chosen  people  nowhere  does  God  approve  the  democratic  as  the 
best  form,  but  the  theocratic;  was  He  now  to  be  set  right  by  sinful 
men  who  courted  popularity  by  appealing  to  the  selfishness  of 
depraved  hearts?  To  the  scripturist  the  logic  of  his  argument 
was  convincing: 

It  is  better  that  the  commonwealth  be  fashioned  to  the  setting  forth  of 
God’s  house,  which  is  his  church:  than  to  accommodate  the  church  frame  to 
the  civill  state.  Democracy,  I  do  not  conceyve  that  ever  God  did  ordeyne 
as  a  fit  government  eyther  for  church  or  commonwealth.  If  the  people  be 
governors,  who  shall  be  governed?  As  for  monarchy,  and  aristocracy, 
they  are  both  of  them  clearely  approoved,  and  directed  in  scripture,  yet 
so  as  referreth  the  soveraigntie  to  himselfe,  and  setteth  up  Theocracy  in 
both,  as  the  best  forme  of  government  in  the  commonwealth,  as  well  as 
in  the  church.3 

If  John  Cotton,  like  other  Carolinian  gentlemen,  was  a  con¬ 
firmed  aristocrat,  he  was  at  the  same  time  a  social  revolutionary, 
who  would  substitute  an  aristocracy  of  the  Saints  for  the  landed 
aristocracy,  and  refashion  society  upon  ethical  rather  than  eco¬ 
nomic  lines.  At  what  time  the  ideal  of  a  Presbyterian  Bible  com¬ 
monwealth  took  shape  in  his  mind,  it  is  impossible  to  determine; 
but  it  was  a  natural  outcome  of  his  most  cherished  beliefs.  A 

2  Institutes,  Book  IV,  Chapter  XX,  Paragraph  8. 

3  “Letter  to  Lord  Say  and  Sele,”  in  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay 
Colony,  Vol.  I,  p.  497. 


32 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

devout  scripturist,  he  accepted  the  Bible  as  a  rule  of  universal 
application,  perfect  and  final.  The  sufficiency  of  the  Scriptures 
to  all  social  needs  was  axiomatic  with  him;  “the  more  any  law 
smells  of  man  the  more  unprofitable,”  he  asserted  in  his  draft  of 
laws  offered  for  acceptance  by  the  commonwealth;  and  at  another 
time  he  exclaimed,  “  Scripturae  plenitudinem  adoro.”  He  chose 
exile  rather  than  yield  to  what  he  regarded  as  the  unscriptural 
practices  of  Laud,  and  now  that  he  was  come  to  a  new  land  where 
a  fresh  beginning  was  to  be  made,  was  it  not  his  Christian  duty  to 
“endeavour  after  a  theocracy,  as  near  as  might  be,  to  that  which 
was  the  glory  of  Israel,  the  ‘peculiar  people’”?  The  old  Common 
Law  must  be  superseded  by  the  Mosaic  dispensation;  the  citizen 
of  the  commonwealth  must  become  the  subject  of  Jehovah;  the 
sovereignty  of  temporal  authorities  must  serve  the  higher  sov¬ 
ereignty  of  God. 

Holding  to  such  views  the  duty  devolving  upon  him  was  plain: 
to  assist  the  magistrates  in  checking  the  dangerous  drift  towards 
a  democratic  organization  of  church  and  state,  which  the  new 
environment  encouraged;  and  to  defend  the  theocratic  ideal 
against  all  critics.  The  first  he  sought  to  accomplish  by  creating 
a  more  perfect  theocratic  machinery.  As  we  catch  glimpses  of 
him  moving  tactfully  back  and  forth  through  the  brisk  little 
scenes,  he  seems  always  to  have  a  finger  in  some  magisterial 
affair.  Three  months  after  his  arrival  in  Boston  he  preached  a 
sermon,  the  purport  of  which  Winthrop  noted  in  his  Journal: 

After  much  deliberation  and  serious  advice  the  Lord  directed  the 
teacher  Mr.  Cotton,  to  make  clear  by  the  scripture,  that  the  minister’s 
maintenance,  as  well  as  all  other  charges  of  the  church,  should  be  defrayed 
out  of  a  stock,  or  treasury,  which  was  to  be  raised  out  of  the  weekly  con¬ 
tribution:  which  accordingly  was  agreed  upon.4 

In  his  first  election  sermon,  preached  in  the  May  following,  he 
joined  issue  with  the  democratic  spirit  of  the  deputies,  by  support¬ 
ing  a  principle  which  was  flagrantly  oligarchical: 

That  a  magistrate  ought  not  to  be  turned  into  the  condition  of  a  private 
man  without  just  cause,  &  to  be  publicly  convict,  no  more  than  the 
magistrates  may  turn  a  private  man  out  of  his  freehold,  etc.,  without  like 
public  trial,  etc.4a 

Unrebuffed  by  the  rejection  of  this  curious  doctrine  of  the 
freehold  tenure  of  magistrates,  Cotton  made  a  more  ambitious 
4  Vol.  I,  p.  116.  4a  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  125. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


33 


attempt  to  theocratize  the  state,  when  at  the  October  court  of 
1636,  in  response  to  the  persistent  pressure  for  a  fundamental  law, 
he  presented  his  code  for  adoption  by  the  commonwealth,  the 
scriptural  origin  of  which  is  revealed  in  the  title,  “Model  of  Moses 
his  Judicials.”  Cotton  Mather  tells  of  this  venture  in  constitution 
making,  in  the  following  glowing  but  inaccurate  words: 

On  Mr.  Cotton’s  arrival  he  found  the  whole  country  in  a  perplexed  &  a 
divided  state,  as  to  their  civill  constitution.  ...  It  was  then  requested  of 
Mr.  Cotton  that  he  would,  from  the  laws  wherewith  God  governed  his 
ancient  people,  form  an  abstract  of  such  as  were  of  a  moral  and  a  lasting 
equity;  which  he  performed  as  acceptably  as  judiciously.  But  inasmuch 
as  very  much  of  an  Athenian  democracy  was  in  the  mould  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  by  the  royal  charter.  .  .  .  Mr.  Cotton  effectually  recommended 
it  unto  them  that  none  should  be  electors,  nor  elected  therein,  except  such 
as  were  visible  subjects  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  personally  confederated 
in  our  churches.  In  these,  and  many  other  ways,  he  propounded  unto 
them  an  endeavour  after  a  theocracy,  as  near  as  might  be,  to  that  which 
was  the  glory  of  Israel,  the  “peculiar  people.”  6 

Cotton’s  code  was  rejected  in  favor  of  one,  somewhat  less 
Hebraic,  prepared  by  Nathaniel  Ward,  but  he  continued  to  be  the 
chief  guide  and  mentor  to  the  magistrates  in  political  as  well  as 
theological  matters,  and  his  theocratic  philosophy  determined  in 
large  measure  the  policy  of  the  oligarchy.  To  found  an  Hebraic 
state  in  which  political  rights  should  be  subordinate  to  religious 
conformity,  in  which  the  magistrates  should  be  chosen  from  a 
narrow  group,  with  authority  beyond  the  reach  of  the  popular 
will,  and  with  the  ministers  serving  as  court  of  last  resort  to  inter¬ 
pret  the  divine  law  to  the  citizen-subjects  of  Jehovah — this  was 
the  great  ambition  of  John  Cotton;  and  the  untiring  zeal  and 
learned  scriptural  authority  which  he  dedicated  to  that  ambition 
justify  us  in  regarding  him  as  the  greatest  of  the  New  England 
theocrats.  In  the  categories  of  the  Puritan  philosophy  of  ethical 
stewardship  there  was  no  recognition  of  the  profane  doctrine  of 
natural  rights.  Freedom  was  the  prerogative  of  righteousness; 
the  well-being  of  society  required  that  the  sinner  should  remain 
subject  to  the  Saint.  Nowhere  does  he  lay  down  this  principle 
more  unmistakably  than  in  an  important  state  paper: 

5  Magnolia ,  Vol.  I,  p.  265.  Compare  with  this  Cotton’s  own  words:  “The  law, 
which  your  Lordship  instanceth  (in  that  none  shall  be  chosen  to  magistracy  amongst 
us,  but  a  church  member)  was  made  and  enacted  before  I  came  into  the  country; 
but  I  have  hitherto  wanted  sufficient  light  to  plead  against  it”  (Hutchinson, 
History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony,  Vol.  I,  p.  498). 


34 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

Now  if  it  be  a  divine  truth,  that  none  are  to  be  trusted  with  public 
permanent  authority  but  godly  men,  who  are  fit  materials  for  church 
membership,  then  from  the  same  grounds  it  will  appear,  that  none  are  so 
fit  to  be  trusted  with  the  liberties  of  the  commonwealth  as  church  members. 
For,  the  liberties  of  this  commonwealth  are  such,  as  require  men  of  faithful 
integrity  to  God  and  the  state,  to  preserve  the  same.  .  .  .  Now  .  .  . 
these  liberties  are  such  as  carry  along  much  power  with  them,  either  to 
establish  or  subvert  the  commonwealth,  and  therewith  the  church,  which 
power,  if  it  be  committed  to  men  according  to  their  godliness  .  .  .  then, 
in  case  worldly  men  should  prove  the  major  part,  as  soon  they  might  do, 
they  would  readily  set  over  us  magistrates  like  themselves,  such  as  might 
.  .  .  turn  the  edge  of  all  authority  and  laws  against  the  church  and  the 
members  thereof,  the  maintenance  of  whose  peace  is  the  chief  end  which 
God  aimed  at  in  the  institution  of  magistracy.6 

This,  quite  evidently,  is  the  negation  of  democracy,  and  it  has 
been  freely  charged  against  his  reputation  by  later  critics.  But  in 
fairness  it  must  be  added,  that  it  is  equally  the  negation  of  the 
principle  of  hereditary  aristocracy;  and  to  reject  the  latter  was  a 
severer  test  of  his  integrity  than  to  deny  the  former.  He  wanted 
neither  a  democracy  nor  an  aristocracy  to  control  the  church-state. 
“Hereditary  honors  both  nature  and  scripture  doth  acknowledge,” 
he  argued  cautiously  in  reply  to  “Certain  Proposals  made  by 
Lord  Say,  Lord  Brooke,  and  other  Persons  of  quality,  as  conditions 
of  their  removing  to  New-England.”  “Two  distinct  ranks  we 
willingly  acknowledge  .  .  .  the  one  of  them  called  Princes,  or 
Nobles,  or  Elders  (amongst  whom  gentlemen  have  their  place), 
the  other  the  people.”  To  the  former  he  willingly  accorded  the 
right  of  rulership  so  long  as  they  were  of  approved  godliness, 
faithful  to  their  stewardship.  But  “if  God  should  not  delight  to 
furnish  some  of  their  posterity  with  gifts  fit  for  magistracy,  we 
should  expose  them  rather  to  reproach  and  prejudice,  and  the 
commonwealth  with  them,  than  exalt  them  to  honor,  if  we  should 
call  them  forth,  when  God  doth  not,  to  public  authority.”  It 
must  be  set  down  in  John  Cotton’s  accounts  that  he  discouraged 
the  transplanting  of  English  aristocracy  to  the  soil  of  Massachu¬ 
setts. 

There  remains  to  consider  how  he  conducted  himself  in  another 
weighty  matter  that  was  laid  upon  his  shoulders — the  defense 
of  the  New  England  polity  against  old-world  critics.  Congre¬ 
gationalism  had  been  somewhat  caustically  handled  by  the  English 

6  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony ,  Vol.  I,  Appendix  2. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


35 


Presbyterians,  as  smacking  both  of  democracy  and  Separatism; 
and  John  Cotton  was  called  to  justify  to  them  the  apparent  in¬ 
novations.  His  most  notable  work  in  this  field  was  his  celebrated 
volume,  The  Way  of  the  Congregational  Churches  Cleared,  a  treatise 
crammed,  in  the  language  of  a  contemporary  admirer,  with  “most 
practical  Soul-searching,  Soul-saving,  and  Soul-solacing  Divinitie”; 
“not  Magisterially  laid  down,  but  friendly  debated  by  Scripture, 
and  argumentatively  disputed  out  to  the  utmost  inch  of  Ground.” 
Into  the  subtleties  of  this  learned  work  we  need  not  enter;  its 
main  thesis  alone  need  detain  us,  and  that  thesis  was  an  implied 
denial  of  the  democratic  tendencies  of  the  “New  England  way.” 
Cotton  was  greatly  concerned  over  the  charge  of  Joseph  Baillie, 
a  vigorous  Scotch  Presbyterian,  that  Congregationalism  was  only 
a  different  form  of  lower-class  -Brownism,  “a  native  branch  of 
Anabaptism”;  and  that  in  resting  ecclesiastical  sovereignty  upon 
“the  particular,  visible  Church  of  the  Congregation,”  it  was  Sep¬ 
aratist  in  principle  as  well  as  in  practice.  The  charge  was  true, 
but  John  Cotton  was  too  thoroughly  a  Jacobean  gentleman  to 
concede  it;  dishonor  would  come  upon  the  New  England  churches, 
he  believed,  if  it  were  conceded.  So  he  was  driven  to  casuistry: 
“Nomarvall,  if  Independents  take  it  ill  to  bee  called  Brownists.  .  .  . 
He  separated  from  Churches  and  Saints:  we,  onely  from  the 
world,  and  that  which  is  of  the  world”;  and  then  to  a  categorical 
denial,  “for  New  England  there  is  no  such  church  of  the  Separation 
at  all  that  I  know  of.”  7  From  this  it  was  a  natural  step  to  a  down¬ 
right  rejection  of  the  democratic  principle  of  Congregationalism: 

Neither  is  it  the  Scope  of  my  whole  Book,  to  give  the  people  a  share  in 
the  Government  of  the  Church.  .  .  .  Nay,  further,  there  be  that  blame 
the  Book  for  the  other  Extreme,  That  it  placeth  the  Government  of  the 
Church  not  at  all  in  the  hands  of  the  People,  but  of  the  Presbyterie.8 

The  same  note  of  disingenuous  casuistry  runs  through  his  well- 
known  controversy  with  Roger  Williams  over  the  question  of 
toleration.  In  seeking  to  parry  the  thrust  that  the  Saints,  after 
quitting  England  to  escape  persecution,  had  themselves  turned 
persecutors,  he  argued:  “There  is  a  vast  difference  between  men’s 
inventions  and  God’s  institutions;  we  fled  from  men’s  inventions, 
to  which  we  else  should  have  been  compelled;  we  compel  none  to 
men’s  inventions.”  From  which  it  followed,  that  “if  the  worship 

7  See  N arragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  II,  p.  203. 

8  Ibid.,  Part  II,  p.  15- 


36 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


be  lawful  in  itself,  the  magistrate  compelling  him  to  come  to  it, 
compelleth  him  not  to  sin,  but  the  sin  is  in  his  own  will  that  needs 
to  be  compelled  to  a  Christian  duty.”9  The  brethren  of  Massachu¬ 
setts  were  not  singular  in  believing  that  they  were  very  near  to 
God  and  privy  to  His  will;  nor  were  the  dissenters  to  their  policy 
singular  in  their  skepticism  concerning  such  infallibility;  and  when 
skepticism  blows  its  cold  breath  upon  it,  the  logic  of  John  Cotton 
turns  to  ashes.  Not  freedom  to  follow  the  ways  of  sin,  but  freedom 
to  follow  the  law  of  God  as  he  expounded  that  law — such  was 
Cotton’s  restriction  upon  the  “natural  liberties”  of  the  subject  of 
Jehovah.  Let  there  be  freedom  of  conscience  if  it  be  under  no 
error,  but  not  otherwise;  for  if  freedom  be  permitted  to  sinful  error, 
how  shall  the  will  of  God  and  John  Cotton  prevail  upon  earth? 

After  the  battle  has  been  fought  and  lost  it  is  easy  to  see  the 
strategic  mistakes;  but  it  is  not  so  easy  to  keep  one’s  head  in  the 
thick  of  the  struggle.  As  John  Cotton  looked  overseas  at  the 
social  revolution  then  threatening  to  submerge,  not  only  Pres¬ 
byterianism,  but  the  very  social  order  in  which  he  had  been  nur¬ 
tured;  as  he  considered  the  logical  implications  of  the  strange, 
heretical  doctrines  that  were  bandied  about  in  pamphlet  and 
sermon,  he  was  put  almost  in  a  panic.  The  solid  foundations  of 
church  and  state  were  threatened  by  mischievous  men,  not  only 
in  England  but  in  the  new  Canaan  which  had  cost  so  much  in 
prayer  and  sacrifice;  should  he  keep  silent  while,  in  the  name  of 
toleration,  the  gunpowder  was  being  put  in  place  for  the  work  of 
destruction  ?  Even  today  we  can  feel  the  anxious  concern  of  John 
Cotton’s  mind  in  such  a  vibrant  passage  as  this: 

I  confesse  we  .  .  .  have  cause  to  admire,  and  adore  the  wisdome,  and 
dreadfull  Justice  of  God  herein,  That  seeing  Mr.  Williams  hath  been  now 
as  a  branch  cut  off  from  the  Church  of  Salem  these  many  yeares,  he  should 
bring  forth  no  spirituall  good  fruit:  and  that  in  such  a  season,  when  the 
Spirit  of  Error  is  let  loose  to  deceive  so  many  thousand  soules  of  our 
English  Nation:  So  that  now  their  hearts  are  become  as  Tinder,  ready  to 
catch  and  kindle  at  every  sparke  of  false  light.  Even  so,  O  Father,  because 
thy  good  pleasure  is  such,  to  let  loose  this  Spirit  of  Error  in  the  mouth  of 
this  Backslider,  in  the  very  houre  and  power  of  darknesse:  for  these  are 
the  dayes  of  vengeance:  when  the  Antinomians  deny  the  whole  law;  the 
Anti-sabbatarians  deny  the  Morality  of  the  fourth  Commandement;  the 
Papists  deny  the  Negative  part  of  the  second  Commandement.  It  is  a 

9  See  Hutchinson,  Papers,  Vol.  II,  pp.  131  ff.;  quoted  in  Adams,  Founding  of 
New  England,  p.  261. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


37 


wofull  opportunitie  that  God  hath  left  Mr.  Williams  to,  now  to  step 
in.  .  .  .  For,  take  away  (as  Mr.  Williams  doth)  all  instituted  worship 
of  God,  as  Churches,  Pastors,  Teachers,  Elders,  Deacons,  Members, 
Publick  Ministery  of  the  Word,  Covenant,  Seales  of  the  Covenant  (Bap- 
tisme,  and  the  Lords  Supper),  the  Censures  of  the  Church,  and  the  like, 
what  is  then  left  of  all  the  institutions,  and  Ordinances  of  God,  which 
the  Lord  established  in  the  second  Commandement,  against  the  Institu¬ 
tions,  Images  and  Inventions  of  men  in  his  worship.10 

How  easy  it  is  for  good  men,  in  presence  of  the  new  and  strange, 
to  draw  back  in  timid  reaction;  and  failing  to  understand,  or 
fearing  for  their  prestige,  to  charge  upon  the  new  and  strange  a 
host  of  evils  that  exist  only  in  their  panic  imaginations!  In  this 
great  matter  of  toleration  of  conscience,  it  is  quite  clear  today  that 
the  eyes  of  the  troubled  theocrat,  “so  piercing  and  heavenly  (in 
other  and  precious  Truths  of  God)” — as  Roger  Williams  ac¬ 
knowledged — were  for  the  moment  sadly  “over-clouded  and 
bloud-shotten.”  For  this  the  age  was  more  to  blame  than  the  man. 
It  was  no  fault  of  John  Cotton’s  that  he  was  the  child  of  a  genera¬ 
tion  reared  under  the  shadow  of  absolutism,  fearful  of  underling 
aggression,  unable  to  comprehend  the  excellence  inhering  in  the 
democratic  faith.  He  reasoned  according  to  his  light;  and  if  he 
rather  too  easily  persuaded  himself  that  the  light  which  shined  to 
him  was  the  single  divine  light,  he  proved  himself  thereby  an 
orthodox  Puritan  if  not  a  catholic  thinker.  It  is  a  pity  that  the 
priest  in  his  later  years  overcame  the  intellectual,  nevertheless 
the  epitaph  carved  on  his  headstone  does  no  violence  to  truth: 

JOHANNES  COTTONUS 

Cujus  Ultima  Laus  est, 

Quod  fuerit  inter  Nov- Anglos  Primus. 

To  have  been  accounted  by  his  fellows  first  among  the  notable 
company  of  Puritan  emigrants  was  no  slight  testimony  to  the 
sterling  qualities  of  Master  John  Cotton. 

10  “Master  John  Cottons  Answer  to  Master  Roger  Williams,”  in  Narragansett 
Club  Publications,  Vol.  II,  pp.  22-23. 


38 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


n 

JOHN  WINTHROP 
Magistrate 

If  John  Cotton  embodied  the  ideal  and  polity  of  the  theocratic 
ministry,  John  Winthrop  represented  the  ideal  and  polity  of  the 
theocratic  magistracy.  Rulership  in  the  new  church-state,  while 
nominally  the  function  of  lay  officers,  in  reality  was  quite  as  much 
ecclesiastical  as  political.  The  civil  authorities  were  chosen  by  a 
narrow  body  of  orthodox  electors  with  a  single  view  to  theocratic 
ends.  To  the  traditional  conception  of  magistracy,  in  which  the 
gentlemen  of  the  Migration  had  been  reared,  was  now  added  a 
special  function,  the  care  of  the  church,  “the  maintenance  of  whose 
peace,”  John  Cotton  asserted,  “is  the  chief  end  which  God  aimed 
at  in  the  institution  of  magistracy.”  The  career  of  John  Win¬ 
throp  in  Massachusetts  must  be  judged,  therefore,  from  this  two¬ 
fold  point  of  view.  He  was  not  exclusively,  or  chiefly,  a  civil 
governor,  but  a  magistrate-elder;  and  his  political  conduct  was 
determined  by  this  dual  character  of  his  office.  Unless  one  keeps 
in  mind  the  theocratic  framework  of  the  early  Massachusetts 
commonwealth,  one  cannot  understand  the  limitations  of  his 
authority,  or  judge  his  conduct  intelligently. 

John  Winthrop  was  a  skillful  executive  upon  whose  shoulders 
largely  rested  the  success  or  failure  of  the  undertaking  during  the 
difficult  early  years.  But  he  was  very  much  more  than  that;  he 
was  a  Puritan  steward  of  temporal  affairs,  who  accepted  his  stew¬ 
ardship  as  a  sacred  duty  lying  upon  his  conscience.  A  cultivated 
gentleman,  “browghte  Up  amonge  boockes  &  learned  men,”  with 
a  tender  and  sympathetic  nature — inclining  overmuch  to  mildness, 
as  he  confessed  apologetically — by  every  right  he  belongs  with 
that  notable  group  of  Puritans,  with  Eliot  and  Vane  and  Hutchin¬ 
son  and  Milton,  in  whom  the  moral  earnestness  of  Hebraism  was 
tempered  to  humaner  issues  by  a  generous  culture.  There  was  in 
him  not  a  little  fruitful  sap  of  Elizabethan  poetry  to  quicken  his 
thought,  lifting  him  out  of  the  petty  world  of  Jacobean  lawyer 
and  landed  gentleman,  and  opening  his  eyes  to  a  vision  of  the 
future  significance  of  the  great  venture  to  which  he  dedicated  his 
later  years.  Grave  and  dignified,  he  looks  out  at  us  from  his 
portrait  with  a  certain  stoic  calm  not  untouched  with  sadness, 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


39 


as  if  this  life  had  proved  a  serious  business,  filled  with  responsibili¬ 
ties  and  weighty  matters,  and  darkened  by  sorrow  and  disappoint¬ 
ment.  The  pagan  joie  de  vivre  of  Elizabethan  times  is  gone,  and 
in  its  stead  is  a  serious  intelligence  that  must  grapple  with  realities 
and  shape  them  to  its  will. 

He  had  lived  amply  in  England  before  his  removal,  with  much 
that  was  feudal  lingering  in  the  habits  of  his  patriarchal  house¬ 
hold;  and  in  the  little  village  of  Boston  he  kept  twenty  male  serv¬ 
ants,  some  of  them  heads  of  families.  A  decay  of  fortune  had 
come  upon  him  during  his  last  years  on  the  family  estate,  and  the 
hope  of  recouping  his  losses  may  have  been  an  additional  reason 
for  venturing  to  remove  to  the  new  world.  In  his  Considerations 
for  J.  W.  he  explains  that  “he  cannot  live  in  the  same  place  and 
calling  (as  before)  and  so,  if  he  should  refuse  this  opportunity, 
that  talent  which  God  hath  bestowed  upon  him  for  publick  service  were 
like  to  be  buried.”  Something  to  the  same  purpose  is  suggested  in 
another  passage,  which  touches  upon  the  economic  disturbances 
of  the  time,  with  the  attendant  extravagance  and  ostentation  of 
the  new  rich: 

This  Land  growes  weary  of  her  Inhabitants.  .  .  .  We  are  growne  to 
that  height  of  Intemperance  in  all  excesse  of  Riott,  as  noe  man’s  estate 
allmost  will  suffice  to  keepe  saile  with  his  aequalls.  .  .  .  The  ffountains 
of  Learning  &  Religion  are  soe  corrupted  as — men  straine  at  knatts  & 
swallowe  camells,  use  all  severity  for  mainetaynance  of  cappes  &  other 
accomplyments,  but  suffer  all  ruffianlike  fashions  &  disorder  to  passe 
uncontrolled.11 

Writing  to  his  wife  Margaret  in  1629,  he  gave  expression  to  appre¬ 
hensions  that  were  very  likely  quickened  by  his  own  failure  to 
keep  pace  with  his  neighbors: 

My  dear  wife,  I  am  veryly  persuaded,  God  will  bringe  some  heavye 
Affliction  upon  this  lande  &  that  speedylye.  .  .  .  The  Lorde  hath  admon¬ 
ished,  threatened,  corrected,  &  astonished  us,  yet  we  growe  worse  &  worse, 
so  as  his  Spirit  will  not  always  strive  with  us,  we  must  needs  give  way  to 
his  furye  at  last.12 

But  material  considerations  alone  scarcely  suffice  to  explain 
the  motives  of  one  who  wrote:  “It  were  happy  for  many  if  their 
parents  had  left  them  only  such  a  legacy  as  our  modern  spirit  of 
poetry  makes  his  motto,  Ut  nec  habeant,  nec  care  ant,  nec  curent.” 

11  Life  and  Letters  of  John  Winthrop,  Vol.  I,  p.  3 10> 

12  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  296. 


40 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

Such  consolation — that  the  Christian  should  possess  nothing, 
desire  nothing,  trouble  about  nothing — may  have  been  only  the 
refuge  of  the  stoic  from  the  impending  loss  of  material  possessions; 
but  the  conscious  discipline  in  ascetic  Hebraism  which  was  to 
change  the  Jacobean  gentleman  into  a  militant  Puritan  had 
already  created  a  temper  to  which  such  stoic  abnegation  must 
appeal.  Winthrop’s  diary,  running  from  his  fourteenth  to  his 
thirty-second  year,  is  a  homely  record  in  self-discipline,  not  unlike 
Bunyan’s  Grace  Abounding.  It  is  introspective  and  tediously 
moralizing,  but  it  reveals  how  long  and  arduous  was  the  training 
before  he  felt  confident  that  he  was  “improved  in  all  the  points  of 
experimental  Godliness.” 

But  Winthrop  was  the  child  of  a  great  age  before  he  was  born 
into  the  fellowship  of  the  Saints;  and  when  we  come  upon  the 
natural  man  beneath  the  theological  wrappings,  we  discover  a 
many-sided,  rich  and  sympathetic  human  nature.  He  had  gone 
to  school  to  the  English  Bible,  and  the  noble  Hebrew  poetry  stirred 
the  poetic  imagination  that  was  his  Elizabethan  birthright. 
Like  so  many  of  his  fellow  Puritans  he  delighted  in  the  Book  of 
Canticles,  and  the  rich  oriental  imagery  flowed  easily  from  his 
pen.  In  one  of  his  last  letters  before  he  quitted  the  old  home, 
he  took  leave  of  a  friend  in  these  words: 

It  is  time  to  conclude,  but  I  know  not  how  to  leave  you,  yet  since  I 
must,  I  will  put  my  beloved  into  his  arms,  who  loves  him  best,  &  is  a 
faithful  keeper  of  all  that  is  committed  to  him.  Now,  Thou,  the  hope  of 
Israel,  and  the  sure  help  of  all  that  come  to  thee,  knit  the  hearts  of  thy 
servants  to  thyself  in  faith  and  purity.  Draw  us  with  the  sweetness  of 
thine  odours,  that  we  may  run  after  thee — Allure  us,  and  speak  kindly  to 
thy  servants,  that  thou  mayest  possess  us  as  thine  own,  in  the  kindness  of 
youth,  and  the  love  of  marriage — Seal  us  up,  by  that  holy  spirit  of  promise, 
that  we  may  not  fear  to  trust  in  thee — Carry  us  into  thy  garden,  that  we 
may  eat  and  be  filled  with  those  pleasures,  which  the  world  knows  not — ■ 
Let  us  hear  that  sweet  voice  of  thine,  my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled — ■ 
Spread  thy  skirt  over  us,  and  cover  our  deformity — Make  us  sick  with 
thy  love — Let  us  sleep  in  thine  arms,  and  awake  in  thy  kingdom — The 
souls  of  thy  servants,  thus  united  to  thee,  make  us  one  in  the  bonds  of 
brotherly  affection — let  not  distance  weaken  it,  nor  time  waste  it,  nor 
changes  dissolve  it,  nor  self-love  eat  it  out;  but  when  all  means  of  other 
communion  shall  fail,  let  us  delight  to  pray  for  each  other:  and  so  let  thy 
unworthy  servant  prosper  in  the  love  of  his  friends,  as  he  truly  loves  thy 
good  servants  .  .  .  and  wishes  true  happiness  to  them  and  to  all  theirs — 
Amen.13 

13  Life  and  Letters,  Vol.  I,  pp.  397-398. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


41 


When  his  heart  was  touched  Winthrop’s  tenderness  flowed  out 
in  a  wealth  of  affectionate  sympathy,  that  lends  a  rich  and  lovely 
cadence  to  his  English  prose.  To  a  sister  who  had  suffered  the 
loss  of  her  husband,  he  wrote: 

Go  on  cheerfully  (my  good  sister),  let  experience  add  more  confidence 
still  to  your  patience.  Peace  shall  come.  There  will  be  a  bed  to  rest  in, 
large  and  easy  enough  for  you  both.  It  is  preparing  in  the  lodging  ap¬ 
pointed  for  you  in  your  Father’s  house.  He  that  vouchsafed  to  wipe  the 
sweat  from  his  disciple’s  feet,  will  not  disdain  to  wipe  the  tears  from  those 
tender  affectionate  eyes.  Because  you  have  been  one  of  his  mourners  in 
the  house  of  tribulation,  you  shall  drink  of  the  cup  of  joy,  and  be  clothed 
with  the  garment  of  gladness,  in  the  kingdom  of  his  glory.  The  former 
things,  and  evil,  will  soon  be  passed;  but  the  good  to  come  shall  neither 
end  nor  change.14 

At  another  time,  writing  to  his  son  of  the  death  of  his  father, 
Adam  Winthrop,  he  said: 

He  hath  finished  his  course;  and  is  gathered  to  his  people  in  peace,  as 
the  ripe  corn  into  the  barn.  He  thought  long  for  the  day  of  his  dissolution 
and  welcomed  it  most  gladly.  Thus  is  he  gone  before;  and  we  must  go 
after  in  our  time:  This  advantage  he  hath  of  us — he  shall  not  see  the  evil 
which  we  may  meet  with  ere  we  go  hence.  Happy  those  who  stand  in 
good  terms  with  God  and  their  own  conscience:  they  shall  not  fear  evil 
tidings;  and  in  all  changes  they  shall  be  the  same.16 

A  lovable  man  was  John  Winthrop,  richly  endowed  and  ad¬ 
mirably  disciplined,  gracious  in  manner,  persuasive  in  speech, 
generous  in  action — in  all  England  there  could  scarcely  have  been 
found  a  leader  better  equipped  for  the  work  in  hand,  when  at  the 
age  of  forty-three  he  became  head  of  the  emigrant  church-state, 
which  by  reason  of  its  charter  and  the  removal  of  the  corporation  to 
New  England,  was  become  effectively  an  independent  common¬ 
wealth,  free  to  shape  its  domestic  polity  as  seemed  best.  During  the 
score  of  years  that  remained  to  him,  he  was  the  guiding  spirit  of 
the  Massachusetts  settlements,  impressing  his  will  upon  others  by 
sheer  force  of  character.  It  was  inevitable  that  in  so  strange  and 
unprecedented  an  experiment,  undertaken  in  an  environment  so 
unfamiliar,  serious  and  often  bitter  divisions  would  arise  touching 
the  fundamental  principles  of  government.  In  the  frequent  dis¬ 
cussions  Winthrop  bore  a  leading  part;  he  marshaled  his  argu¬ 
ments  with  the  skill  of  a  lawyer;  he  separated  the  broad  principle 
14  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  288.  15  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  179. 


42 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


from  the  special  circumstance;  and  in  the  end  he  usually  carried 
the  assent  of  his  fellow  counselors  to  his  proposals.  His  social 
and  political  philosophy,  in  consequence,  greatly  influenced  the 
development  of  Massachusetts  Bay  during  the  early  years  when 
its  institutions  and  polity  were  taking  shape,  and  throws  much 
light  on  the  spirit  and  purpose  of  that  development. 

Winthrop’s  political  bias  was  unconsciously  shaped  by  his 
experience,  of  which  the  determining  fact  was  the  principle  and 
practice  of  Jacobean  magistracy.  As  an  English  squire  he  had 
long  served  as  magistrate,  and  this  experience  he  brought  to  New 
England  as  a  legacy  from  an  autocratic  past.  In  that  old  world 
the  magistrate  exercised  a  patriarchal  police  power  well-nigh 
absolute,  sanctioned  by  ancient  custom,  upheld  by  the  church, 
and  acquiesced  in  by  subjects  well  trained  in  subordination. 
Transported  to  New  England  and  adapted  to  theocratic  ends,  the 
principle  of  magistracy  was  both  augmented  in  power  and  ennobled 
in  conception.  To  the  police  power  over  things  temporal  was 
added  a  police  power  over  things  spiritual.  In  the  Bible  common¬ 
wealth  the  legislative  function  was  regarded  as  of  minor  impor¬ 
tance.  The  law  being  already  set  down  in  the  Scriptures,  the  chief 
authority  in  the  commonwealth  naturally  rested  with  the  magis¬ 
trates  who  were  responsible  for  its  strict  fulfillment.  As  stewards 
intrusted  with  a  divine  stewardship,  they  exercised  absolute  legis¬ 
lative  and  judicial  powers;  in  their  councils  the  ministers  were 
summoned  to  participate,  but  no  others.  It  was  the  duty  of 
the  magistrates  to  debate  and  determine,  and  the  duty  of  the 
people  to  obey. 

To  a  modem  this  is  no  other  than  sheer  absolutism,  but  it  was 
deeply  embedded  in  Calvinistic  theory  and  practice,  and  was 
justified  by  the  Puritan  principle  of  special  talents.  God  calls 
to  the  post  of  duty  those  best  fitted  to  serve.  As  a  devout  follower 
of  Calvin,  Winthrop  must  have  often  pondered  upon  the  passages 
in  the  Institutes  which  set  forth  the  nature  of  magistracy  and  the 
duties  of  the  magistrate,  and  in  particular  this:  “If  they  remember 
that  they  are  the  vicegerents  of  God,  it  behooves  them  to  watch 
with  all  care,  diligence,  and  industry,  that  they  may  exhibit  a 
kind  of  image  of  the  Divine  Providence,  guardianship,  goodness, 
benevolence,  and  justice.”  16  To  a  devout  Jacobean  like  Winthrop, 
this  patriarchal  conception  of  stewardship  would  appear  as  a 
16  Book  IV,  Chapter  XX,  Paragraph  6. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


43 


noble  ideal,  worthy  of  a  Christian.  The  potential  absolutism 
implied  would  scarcely  trouble  one  who  had  grown  up  in  a  society 
where  absolute  authority  was  interwoven  with  everyday  life. 
The  Christian  magistrate  was  still  a  magistrate,  but  with  the 
great  difference  that  his  hands  must  be  kept  clean  and  his  con¬ 
science  clear.  This  nobler  spirit  of  Calvinistic  stewardship  is 
revealed  in  Winthrop’s  Modell  of  Christian  Charity,  written  on 
shipboard  during  the  voyage  out.  A  sense  of  profound  responsi¬ 
bility  devolving  upon  the  leaders  imparts  dignity  to  the  thought: 
they  must  bear  and  forbear,  knitting  themselves  together  in  a 
common  purpose,  and  seeing  that  “the  care  of  the  public”  should 
“oversway  all  private  interests.”  And  this  “care  of  the  public,” 
remained  in  theory  if  not  always  in  practice,  the  guiding  principle 
of  Winthrop’s  official  activities. 

The  bearing  of  this  doctrine  of  magistracy  upon  the  early  move¬ 
ment  of  democracy  in  Massachusetts  is  not  far  to  seek.  If  magis¬ 
tracy  was  a  duty  laid  upon  those  of  fit  talents,  they  would  serve 
God  ill  who  should  turn  a  willing  ear  to  popular  protests  against 
magisterial  policy.  On  this  point  Winthrop  was  adamant.  He 
would  have  no  meddling  on  the  part  of  those  who  had  not  been 
called.  When  it  was  attempted  to  bring  him  to  account  before  the 
congregation  for  an  unpopular  judicial  decision,  he  denied  the 
competency  of  the  congregation  in  such  matters,  and  then  as  he 
often  did  in  cases  of  doubt,  he  made  a  “little  book”  in  which  he 
elaborated  the  thesis,  “That  a  Church  hath  not  Power  to  call  any 
Civill  Magistrate  to  give  Account  of  his  Juditiall  proceedings  in 
any  Court  of  Civill  Justice:  and  what  the  Church  may  doe  in 
such  Causes.”  17  The  shoemaker  should  stick  to  his  last,  Winthrop 
believed,  and  he  would  suffer  no  interference  by  the  congregation 
with  his  duties  as  magistrate.  On  another  occasion  when  difficul¬ 
ties  had  arisen  in  certain  negotiations  with  the  Connecticut  settle¬ 
ments,  he  noted  in  his  journal: 

These  and  the  like  miscarriages  in  point  of  correspondency  were  con¬ 
ceived  to  arise  from  these  two  errors  in  their  government:  I.  They  chose 
divers  scores  men,  who  had  no  learning  nor  judgment  which  might  fit 
them  for  those  affairs,  though  otherwise  men  holy  and  religious.  2.  By 
occasion  hereof,  the  main  burden  for  managing  of  state  business  fell  upon 
one  or  other  of  their  ministers,  (as  the  phrase  and  style  of  these  letters  will 
clearly  discover),  who,  though  they  were  men  of  singular  wisdom  and 

17  The  heads  of  argument  are  given  in  Life  and  Letters,  Vol.  II,  pp.  211-214. 


44 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


godliness,  yet  stepping  out  of  their  course,  their  actions  wanted  that 
blessing  which  otherwise  might  have  been  expected.18 

The  political  philosophy  which  underlay  Winthrop’s  theory 
and  practice  of  magistracy,  was  a  Puritan  modification  of  the 
commonly  accepted  English  theory  of  a  “mixt  aristocratic.”  He 
had  been  trained  in  the  law  but  was  little  given  to  speculative 
thought.  There  is  evidence  that  he  read  somewhat  in  the  fast 
accumulating  political  literature  of  the  times,  but  little  indication 
that  his  reading  modified  his  theory  or  influenced  his  conduct. 
He  was  an  administrator  rather  than  a  philosopher,  and  from  the 
fragmentary  records  that  have  survived  it  is  difficult  to  piece 
together  a  consistent  political  theory.  As  a  magistrate  under  the 
dominance  of  the  English  Common  Law,  he  seems  to  have  accepted 
the  constitutional  theory  of  Coke,  who  sought  to  interpose  the 
customary  and  ancient  law  of  the  land  between  the  growing 
absolutism  of  the  Crown,  and  the  increasing  importunity  of  the 
Commons,  with  sovereignty  inhering  in  the  judiciary.  As  a 
Puritan,  however,  he  superimposed  the  law  of  Moses  on  the  law 
of  the  land,  and  by  ignoring  the  King  on  the  one  hand,  and  denying 
power  to  the  representatives  of  the  people  on  the  other,  he  created 
the  framework  of  a  magisterial  theocracy. 

The  two  chief  sources  to  which  we  must  turn  for  his  political 
views,  in  addition  to  his  letters  and  journals,  are:  A  Replye  to  the 
Answ:  Made  to  the  Discourse  about  the  Neg:  Vote,  and  Arbitrary 
Governmt  Described:  &  the  Governmt  of  the  Massachusetts  Vindi¬ 
cated  from  that  Aspersion,  both  of  which  have  been  preserved  in 
the  form  of  heads  of  argument.19  The  principle  that  underlies  these 
skeleton  arguments  is  the  theory  of  a  state  held  static  by  exact 
constitutional  arrangements.  King  and  people  represent  the  great 
supplementary  functions  of  constitutional  government,  sovereignty 
and  liberty;  both  are  necessary  in  a  well  ordered  society,  and  neither 
may  encroach  upon  the  other.  This  Winthrop  regarded  as  the  vital 
principle  of  the  English  constitution,  which  had  been  embodied  in 
the  government  of  Massachusetts. 

The  Government  of  the  Massachusetts  consists  of  Magistrates  &  Free¬ 
men:  in  the  one  is  placed  the  Auth’ye,  in  the  other  the  Lib’tye  of  the 
Com:  W:  either  hath  power  to  Acte,  both  alone,  &  both  togither,  yet  by  a 
distinct  power,  the  one  of  Lib’tye,  the  other  of  Auth’ye:  the  Freemen 

18  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  236. 

19  Both  are  given  in  the  appendix  to  Vol.  II  of  the  Life  and  Letters. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


45 


Acte  alone  in  all  occurrences  out  of  Court:  &  both  Acte  togither  in  the 
Gen’ll  Court:  yet  all  limited  by  certaine  Rules,  bothe  in  the  greater  & 
smaller  affaires:  so  as  the  Governm’t  is  Regular  in  a  mixt  Aristocratie, 
&  no  wayes  Arbitrary.20 

In  settled  times  and  places  this  nice  balance  between  sovereignty 
and  liberty  is  maintained  by  use  and  wont;  but  in  periods  of 
disturbance,  such  as  then  existed  in  England,  and  in  new  experi¬ 
ments,  such  as  marked  the  setting  up  of  the  commonwealth  of 
Massachusetts,  there  was  certain  to  be  much  pulling  and  straining 
between  these  antagonistic  principles;  and  his  refusal  to  accept 
this  fact,  and  his  stubborn  insistence  on  transferring  to  New 
England  the  old  English  static  order,  brought  on  Winthrop’s  head 
many  of  the  difficulties  that  greatly  troubled  his  administration. 
Both  in  the  old  world  and- the  new,  the  principle  of  liberty  was 
encroaching  on  feudal  authority.  With  the  rise  of  the  middle 
class,  many  Englishmen,  and  particularly  the  colonial  New  Eng¬ 
landers,  were  fast  outgrowing  the  old  paternalisms,  and  coming 
to  regard  them  as  no  other  than  tyranny.  The  freemen  of  the 
Massachusetts  towns  were  restive  under  the  strict  rule  of  the 
magistrate-elders,  and  a  growing  party  of  democratic  deputies 
was  eager  to  try  its  hand  at  government.  All  such  democratic 
pretensions  Winthrop  held  in  contempt,  although  he  was  at  pains 
to  deny  the  arbitrary  nature  of  magisterial  rule. 

Some  of  the  deputies  had  seriously  conceived,  that  the  magistrates 
affected  an  arbitrary  government.  .  .  .  For  prevention  whereof  they 
judged  it  not  unlawful  to  use  even  extrema  remedia,  as  if  salus  populi 
had  been  now  the  transcendent  rule  to  walk  by,  and  that  magistracy  must 
be  no  other,  in  effect,  than  a  ministerial  office,  and  all  authority,  both 
legislative,  consultative,  and  judicial,  must  be  exercised  by  the  people  in 
their  body  representative.21 

If  government  were  regular  it  could  not  be  arbitrary — this  was 
Winthrop’s  brief  reply  to  the  deputies.  In  his  arguments  he 
deliberately  avoided  the  difficult  question  of  sovereignty;  in  part, 
no  doubt,  because  of  the  delicate  situation  resulting  from  fear  of 
royal  interference,  but  chiefly  because  he  was  unwilling  to  bring 
into  jeopardy  the  unlimited  powers  of  magistracy.  That  he 
denied  sovereignty  to  the  people  is  abundantly  clear  from  his 
actions,  as  well  as  from  specific  comment.  By  the  law  of  the 
corporation,  namely,  the  written  terms  of  the  charter,  authority 
20  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  P-  454-  21  Journal,  Vol.  II,  p.  240. 


46 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


was  vested  in  a  limited  body  of  freemen;  and  he  saw  no  reason  in 
expediency  or  otherwise  to  extend  that  authority.  Thus  he 
argued,  “it  is  well  proved  &  concluded  by  a  late  Juditious  writer, 
in  a  booke  newly  come  over,  intituled  an  Answ:  to  Dr  Feme, 
that  thoughe  all  Lawes,  that  are  sup’structive,  may  be  altered 
by  the  representative  bodye  of  the  Comrw:  yet  they  have  not 
power  to  alter  anythinge  w’ch  is  fundamental.”  22  What  delimita¬ 
tions  were  to  be  drawn  between  “superstructive”  and  “funda¬ 
mental,”  he  was  not  careful  to  make  clear;  but  it  is  certain  that  he 
regarded  as  fundamental  not  only  the  charter  terms  and  the 
British  constitution  but  the  will  of  God.  Doubtful  as  this  last 
may  seem  to  students  of  political  science,  and  difficult  to  de¬ 
termine,  it  was  neither  doubtful  nor  difficult  to  Winthrop  and 
his  fellow  magistrates  and  ministers.  The  Mosaic  law  was  spe¬ 
cific.  Back  of  the  citizen-legislator  was  the  subject  of  Jehovah, 
and  he  was  politically  free  only  to  do  the  will  of  God.  There 
must  be  divine  sanction  for  all  human  law;  lacking  such  sanc¬ 
tion  all  majority  votes  and  legislative  enactments  were  null  and 
void.  Sovereignty  inheres  finally  in  God,  and  it  is  by  his  funda¬ 
mental  law  that  all  superstructive  laws  and  institutions  must  be 
judged. 

In  theocratic  philosophy,  therefore,  the  magistrate  became  no 
other  than  God’s  vicegerent,  with  authority  beyond  popular 
limitation  or  control.  No  English  squire  presumed  to  exercise 
the  magisterial  powers  which  Winthrop  and  his  associates  quietly 
usurped.  Among  other  innovations  they  early  claimed  the  right 
of  veto  on  the  acts  of  the  deputies,  and  in  reply  to  the  dissatis¬ 
faction  voiced  at  such  arbitrary  encroachment,  Winthrop  argued 
that  the  magisterial  veto  was  no  infringement  on  the  liberties  of 
the  people,  but  was  a  means  to  “preserve  them,  if  by  any  occasion 
they  should  be  in  danger:  I  cannot  liken  it  better  to  anythinge 
than  the  brake  of  a  windmill:  w’ch  hathe  no  power,  to  move  the 
runninge  worke:  but  it  is  of  speciall  use,  to  stoppe  any  violent 
motion,  w’ch  in  some  extraordinary  tempest  might  endanger  the 
wholl  fabricke.”  23  The  convenient  weapon  of  divine  sanction 
Winthrop  did  not  scruple  to  use  at  need.  Thus  when  a  petition 
was  presented  for  the  repeal  of  a  law  which  arbitrarily  decreased 
the  number  of  deputies,  he  denied  the  lawfulness  of  the  procedure: 

22  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  438. 

23  Discourse  about  the  Neg:  Vote ,  Life  and  Letters,  Vol,  IL  p.  434. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY  47 

When  the  people  have  chosen  men  to  be  their  rulers,  now  to  combine 
together  ...  in  a  public  petition  to  have  an  order  repealed  .  .  .  savors 
of  resisting  an  ordinance  of  God.  For  the  people,  having  deputed  others, 
have  no  right  to  make  or  alter  laws  themselves,  but  are  to  be  subject.24 

The  old  English  right  of  petition,  in  short,  was  not  a  right  in  theo¬ 
cratic  Massachusetts,  and  any  unauthorized  joining  together  of 
citizens  for  political  purposes  was  a  conspiracy  against  the  will  of 
God.  The  practical  result  of  this  doctrine  of  magisterial  vicege- 
rency  was  that  a  small  group  of  freemen  set  up  an  unlimited  oligar¬ 
chy  over  some  four  or  five  thousand  of  their  fellow  Englishmen, 
even  going  so  far  as  to  advance  the  novel  doctrine  of  a  freehold 
tenure  of  power. 

Winthrop’s  extreme  jealousy  of  popular  power  cannot  be  ex¬ 
plained  away  by  the  doctrine  of  stewardship.  Hooker  of  Hartford 
had  no  such  distrust  of  the  people,  but  he  was  not  a  gentleman, 
like  Winthrop,  and  had  not  grown  up  with  an  aristocratic  contempt 
for  democracy.  The  preposterousness  of  democratic  aspiration 
was  a  stock  jest  among  English  gentlemen,  and  in  seeking  to 
refute  the  arguments  of  the  deputies  for  greater  popular  power 
Winthrop  did  little  more  than  give  a  Hebraic  twist  to  his  aristo¬ 
cratic  prejudices: 

Where  the  chief  Ordinary  power  &  administration  thereof  is  in  the 
people,  there  is  a  Democratie  .  .  .  the  Deputies  are  the  Democraticall 
p’te  of  o’r  Governm’t.  Now  if  we  should  change  from  a  mixt  Aristocratic 
to  a  meere  Democratie:  first  we  should  have  no  warr’nt  in  scripture  for  it: 
there  was  no  such  Governm’t  in  Israeli.  2:  we  should  heerby  voluntaryly 
abase  o’rselves,  &  deprive  o’rselves  of  that  dignitye,  w’ch  the  providence 
of  God  hath  putt  upon  us:  w’ch  is  a  manifest  breach  of  the  5th  Com’t:  for  a 
Democratie  is,  among  most  Civill  nations  accounted  the  meanest  &  worst 
of  all  formes  of  Governm’t:  &  therefore  in  writers,  it  is  branded  w’th 
Reproachfull  Epithets  as  Bellua  multoru  capitu,  a  monster,  &c:  &  His- 
toryes  doe  recorde,  that  it  hath  been  allwayes  of  least  continuance  & 
fullest  of  trouble.25 

In  an  often  quoted  letter  to  Thomas  Hooker,  then  engaged  in 
erecting  a  democratic  commonwealth  in  Connecticut,  Winthrop 
diplomatically  moderated  his  terms  and  put  the  aristocratic  doc¬ 
trine  in  more  attractive  form.  “I  expostulated  about  the  un¬ 
warrantableness  &  unsafeness  of  referring  all  matter  of  counsel 
or  judicature  to  the  body  of  the  people,  quia  the  best  is  always  the 
least,  &  of  that  best  part  the  wiser  part  is  always  the  lesser.”  26 

24  Journal .  26  Life  and  Letters ,  VqI.  II,  P-  430.  26  Ibid.,  Vol,  II,  p.  237, 


48 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


But  he  must  have  agreed  heartily  with  another  English  gentleman, 
who  writing  to  Winthrop  under  date  of  July  9,  1640,  remarked 
pithily: 

I  say  agayne  noe  wise  man  shoud  be  soe  folish  as  to  live  whear  every 
man  is  master,  &  masters  must  not  correct  theyr  servants:  Where  wise 
men  propound  &  fooles  determine,  as  it  was  sayde  of  the  citties  of  Greece. 27 

As  the  responsible  steward  of  God’s  plan  for  New  England,  Win¬ 
throp  would  not  flatter  the  people  by  pretending  to  the  doctrine 
of  vox  populi,  vox  dei.  The  multitude  he  regarded  as  factious, 
overswayed  by  expediency  and  self-interest,  incapable  of  governing 
wisely.  Law,  by  its  nature,  was  ethical,  the  expression  of  God’s 
absolute  and  just  will;  and  this  law,  the  magistrates  were  called 
of  God  to  enforce. 

From  this  conception  of  the  absolute  nature  of  law,  came  the 
famous  discussion  of  liberty  and  authority,  known  as  the  “little 
speech,”  which  is  the  most  highly  praised  of  Winthrop’s  utterances. 
In  a  certain  police-court  matter  that  had  loosed  the  class  prejudices 
of  all  parties,  he  had  held  against  the  popular  feeling,  and  was 
impeached  before  the  general  court.  Upon  his  acquittal  he  rose 
and  addressed  the  court  in  words  which  he  afterwards  set  down 
in  his  journal.  No  other  episode  in  his  varied  career  reveals  so 
well  the  admirable  poise  of  the  man — the  dignity,  the  self-control, 
the  fair-mindedness,  despite  an  attack  that  hurt  him  to  the  quick. 

For  the  other  point  concerning  liberty,  I  observe  a  great  mistake  in  the 
country  about  that.  There  is  a  twofold  liberty,  natural  (I  mean  as  our 
nature  is  now  corrupt)  and  civil  or  federal.  The  first  is  common  to  man 
with  beasts  and  other  creatures.  By  this,  man,  as  he  stands  in  relation 
to  man  simply,  hath  liberty  to  do  what  he  lists;  it  is  a  liberty  to  evil  as 
well  as  to  good.  This  liberty  is  incompatible  and  inconsistent  with 
authority,  and  cannot  endure  the  least  restraint  of  the  most  just  authority. 
The  exercise  and  maintaining  of  this  liberty  makes  men  grow  more  evil, 
and  in  time  to  be  worse  than  brute  beasts:  omnes  sumus  licentia  deteriores. 
This  is  that  great  enemy  of  truth  and  peace,  that  wild  beast,  which  all  the 
ordinances  of  God  are  bent  against,  to  restrain  and  subdue  it.  The  other 
kind  of  liberty  I  call  civil  or  federal;  and  it  may  also  be  termed  moral,  in 
reference  to  the  covenant  between  God  and  man,  in  the  moral  law,  and 
the  politic  covenants  and  constitutions  amongst  men  themselves.  This 
liberty  is  the  proper  end  and  object  of  authority,  and  cannot  subsist 
without  it;  and  it  is  a  liberty  to  that  only  which  is  good,  just,  and  honest. 
This  liberty  you  are  to  stand  for,  with  the  hazard  (not  only  of  your  goods, 

27  Letter  of  Lord  Say  and  Sele,  in  ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  426. 


STEWARDS  OF  THEOCRACY 


49 


but)  of  your  lives,  if  need  be.  Whatsoever  crosseth  this,  is  not  authority, 
but  a  distemper  thereof.  This  liberty  is  maintained  and  exercised  in  a 
subjection  to  authority;  it  is  of  the  same  kind  of  liberty  wherewith  Christ 
hath  made  us  free.  .  .  .  On  the  other  side,  ye  know  who  they  are  that 
complain  of  this  yoke  and  say,  let  us  break  their  bands,  etc.,  we  will  not 
have  this  man  to  rule  over  us.  Even  so,  brethren,  it  will  be  between  you 
and  your  magistrates.  If  you  stand  for  your  natural  corrupt  liberties, 
and  will  do  what  is  good  in  your  own  eyes,  you  will  not  endure  the  least 
weight  of  authority,  but  will  murmur,  and  oppose,  and  be  always  striving 
to  shake  off  that  yoke;  and  if  you  will  be  satisfied  to  enjoy  such  civil  and 
lawful  liberties,  such  as  Christ  allows  you,  then  will  you  quietly  and  cheer¬ 
fully  submit  unto  that  authority  which  is  set  over  you,  in  all  the  adminis¬ 
trations  of  it,  for  your  good.  Wherein,  if  we  fail  at  any  time,  we  hope  we 
shall  be  willing  (by  God’s  assistance)  to  hearken  to  good  advice  from 
any  of  you,  or  in  any  other  way  of  God;  so  shall  your  liberties  be  preserved, 
in  upholding  the  honor  and  power  of  authority  amongst  you.28 

The  doctrine  of  aristocratic  stewardship  has  never  been  more 
skillfully  presented.  It  is  John  Cotton’s  reply  to  Roger  Williams, 
translated  into  political  terms;  the  philosophy  of  natural  rights 
whittled  down  to  a  covenant  between  God  and  man.  It  rests  on 
the  assumption  of  an  absolute  law,  superior  to  expediency.  But 
may  not  honest  men  disagree  as  to  what  constitutes  the  good,  just, 
and  honest?  and  may  not  godly  authority  imperceptibly  slide  over 
into  plain  tyranny?  Although  the  Saints  may  have  professed 
themselves  satisfied  with  Winthrop’s  doctrine,  the  pages  of  early 
Massachusetts  history  bear  ample  record  of  the  dissatisfaction 
of  the  sinners.  Most  of  the  difficulties  experienced  by  Winthrop 
in  his  administration  of  the  commonwealth  had  their  root  in  this 
assumption  of  arbitrary  power,  the  immediate  outcome  of  which 
was  a  spontaneous  development  of  incipient  democracy.  How 
far  such  an  assumption  of  divine  custodianship  may  lead  a  generous 
man  from  the  path  of  justice,  appears  in  his  summing  up  of  the 
case  against  Mistress  Anne  Hutchinson,  who  because  she  insisted 
upon  her  own  interpretation  of  the  good,  just,  and  honest,  was 
adjudged  “A  woman  not  only  difficult  in  her  opinions,  but  also  of 
an  intemperate  spirit.”  “The  ground  work  of  her  revelations  is 
the  immediate  revelation  of  the  spirit,  and  not  by  the  ministry  of 
the  Lord  .  .  .  and  this  hath  been  the  ground  of  all  these  tumults 
and  troubles;  and  I  would  that  those  were  all  cut  off  that  trouble 
us.”  The  kernel  of  the  offense  for  which  Mistress  Hutchinson  was 
banished,  is  then  laid  bare:  “We  see  not  that  any  should  have 
28  History  of  New  England,  Vol.  II,  pp.  279-282. 


50 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


authority  to  set  up  any  other  exercise  beside  what  authority  hath 
already  set  up.”  29 

In  this  arbitrary  judgment  of  Winthrop’s — the  natural  fruit  of 
the  tree  of  theocratic  stewardship — the  ‘Tittle  speech”  discovers 
its  suitable  commentary.  Urged  on  by  his  bigoted  associates, 
the  kind-hearted  governor  descended  to  their  level,  and  began 
the  unhappy  business  of  playing  the  tyrant  under  pretense  of 
scourging  God’s  enemies.  The  lords-brethren  served  notice  upon 
all  dissenters  that  henceforth  there  must  be  no  dissent  in  New 
England.  The  admirable  courage  of  Mistress  Hutchinson  availed 
no  more  against  the  magisterial  interpretation  of  the  good,  just, 
and  honest,  than  the  boldness  of  Roger  Williams  before  her;  or 
later,  the  zeal  of  the  Baptists  who  were  sent  away  by  Endicott; 
or  later  still,  the  piety  of  the  Quakers,  who  were  whipped  at  the 
cart-tail  and  hanged,  men  and  women  both.  The  policy  of  the 
political  stewardship  of  the  best  and  wisest  never  had  fuller  trial, 
with  abler  or  more  conscientious  agents,  than  in  Massachusetts 
Bay;  and  its  failure  was  complete.  Such  progress  as  Massachusetts 
made  towards  freedom  and  tolerance  was  gained  in  the  teeth  of 
theocratic  opposition;  New  England  democracy  owes  no  debt  to 
her  godly  magistrates. 

Bred  up  in  a  half-feudal  world,  the  leaders  of  the  Migration 
remained  patriarchal  in  their  social  philosophy,  unable  to  adapt 
old  prejudices  to  new  conditions.  Human  motives  are  curiously 
mixed,  human  actions  rarely  consistent;  and  if  the  shortcomings 
of  John  Winthrop  show  blacker  by  contrast  with  the  excellence  of 
the  ideal  which  he  professed,  the  fault  must  be  charged  against 
his  time  and  associates  and  not  against  his  manly,  generous  nature. 
Most  English  gentlemen  of  his  day  were  steeped  in  a  sodden  Tory¬ 
ism,  yet  he  earnestly  desired  to  be  a  faithful  steward  of  church  and 
state.  If  as  a  gentleman  he  held  firmly  to  the  privilege  of  ruler- 
ship,  as  a  Christian  he  endeavored  to  rule  honorably  and  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord.  If  he  followed  the  beaten  path  and  tried  to  shape 
the  great  experiment  by  the  traditional  principles  of  his  class;  if 
his  zeal  at  times  led  him  into  indisputable  tyrannies;  it  was  because 
he  was  led  away  from  the  light,  not  because  he  sought  selfish  ends. 
Godliness  has  its  own  special  temptations,  and  it  would  be  un¬ 
generous  to  bear  ill-will  against  so  lovable  a  man. 

29  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony,  Vol.  II,  pp.  482-520, 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


i 

Other  ideals  than  those  of  Winthrop  and  Cotton,  fruitful  or 
feculent  according  to  the  special  bias  of  whoever  judges  them, 
came  out  of  England  in  the  teeming  days  of  the  Puritan  revolution 
to  agitate  the  little  settlements.  A  Hebraized  theocracy  could  not 
satisfy  the  aspirations  of  advanced  English  liberals  who  were 
exploring  all  the  avenues  to  freedom,  and  who,  now  that  the  old 
feudal  bonds  were  loosening,  were  projecting  a  more  generous 
basis  for  the  reorganization  of  society.  The  democratic  elements 
were  beginning  to  make  their  voices  heard  in  England;  the  doctrine 
of  the  priesthood  of  all  believers  was  bearing  fruit  in  the  minds  of 
obscure  Independents;  and  the  eventual  outcome  would  be  the 
shouldering  aside  of  a  snug  Presbyterian  order,  and  the  clarifica¬ 
tion  of  a  program  for  a  democratic  commonwealth.  In  those 
excellent  words  commonweal  and  commonwealth — words  much 
on  men’s  tongues  in  the  creative  later  years  of  the  Puritan  revolu¬ 
tion — was  fittingly  summed  up  the  political  ideal  of  Independency. 
English  liberalism  had  come  to  believe  that  social  conformity, 
established  in  the  practice  of  coercion,  with  its  monarchical  state 
and  hierarchical  church,  must  give  way  to  an  order  founded  in  good 
will,  that  conceived  of  the  political  state  as  a  public-service  corpora¬ 
tion,  concerned  solely  with  the  res  publica,  or  public  thing,  careful 
of  the  well-being  of  all,  allowing  special  rights  or  grants  to  none. 
The  state,  it  was  coming  to  be  argued  freely,  rightly  understood, 
was  no  other  than  society  organized  to  further  the  great  end  of  the 
commonweal;  no  longer  must  it  remain  a  private  preserve  for 
gentlemen  to  hunt  over. 

But  before  that  should  come  about  a  great  battle  must  be 
fought,  in  New  England  as  well  as  in  old  England.  The  principle 
of  individual  freedom  must  first  be  established  securely  in  the 
public  mind,  and  to  that  business  the  party  of  Independents 
devoted  its  energies.  In  the  theory  and  practice  of  Independency 
two  fundamental  rights  were  implied:  the  right  of  the  individual 

51 


52 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


to  determine  his  own  belief,  uncoerced  by  external  authority;  and 
the  right  to  join  freely  with  his  fellows  in  the  institutional  expres¬ 
sion  and  spread  of  such  belief.  In  order  to  realize  the  first,  it  was 
a  necessary  preliminary  to  establish  the  right  of  free  inquiry  on  a 
firm  constitutional  basis — the  principle  that  the  state  shall  safe¬ 
guard  the  citizen  in  the  exercise  of  such  right,  and  not  hinder  or 
thwart  him;  and  in  order  to  realize  the  second,  it  was  necessary 
to  establish  in  social  practice  a  much  more  fiercely  disputed  prin¬ 
ciple,  namely,  the  right  to  proselytize,  to  spread  one’s  views  freely, 
to  endeavor  to  make  them  prevail  over  contrary  views.  Cer¬ 
tainly  neither  right  would  be  freely  granted;  they  must  be  won 
in  the  teeth  of  supposedly  divine  sanctions  to  conformity.  How¬ 
ever  intimately  the  two  are  related,  it  is  over  the  second  that  the 
long  fierce  battle  has  been  waged  in  modem  history.  Liberalism 
faces  no  severer  test  than  in  its  attitude  towards  the  right  of  un¬ 
popular  minority  propaganda.  The  broad  principle  of  toleration 
of  differences,  so  vital  to  a  democratic  society,  searches  out  and 
lays  bare  every  insincerity  of  liberal  professions.  The  will  to 
power  is  so  universal  in  appeal,  it  is  so  quick  to  attack  every 
threatening  nonconformity,  that  no  other  social  right  has  traveled 
so  arduous  a  road,  or  lags  so  far  in  the  rear  of  the  liberal  advance. 
The  principle  of  religious  toleration  that  was  involved  in  the 
movement  of  Independency  was  the  ecclesiastical  form  of  a  struggle, 
which,  shifting  later  to  the  field  of  politics  and  then  to  economics, 
is  still  raging  about  us.  The  long  battle  is  still  far  from  being  won. 
In  few  countries  today  do  more  than  a  small  minority  regard  the 
principle  of  toleration  otherwise  than  as  a  social  luxury  to  be 
indulged  in  only  when  times  are  settled. 

It  was  in  the  nature  of  things  that  a  clash  should  soon  come 
in  Massachusetts  Bay.  There  Independency  would  certainly  be 
looked  upon  as  no  better  than  a  weed  from  the  devil’s  wilderness, 
and  in  the  name  of  God  and  the  theocracy  it  would  be  trampled 
under  foot.  Liberalism  and  the  Cambridge  Platform  would  no 
more  mix  than  oil  and  water.  But  the  more  immediate  and 
narrower  question  of  religious  toleration  was  only  incidental  to 
the  broader  divergencies  that  lay  in  antagonistic  principles  of 
church  and  state,  and  that  brought  on  the  clash.  A  general  en¬ 
gagement  was  preparing  between  the  principles  of  Presbyterian¬ 
ism  and  Independency,  and  the  real  issue  at  stake  was  the  future 
form  of  society  in  New  England — whether  it  was  to  be  aristocratic 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


53 


or  democratic.  The  free  environment  was  a  strong  stimulus  to 
idealists  who  looked  upon  the  new  field  as  a  heaven-sent  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  their  own  special  Utopias  to  take  root,  and  who  would 
bitterly  resent  any  intrusion  by  a  rival.  Commonwealth  building 
is  a  great  adventure,  and  the  Independents  with  their  carefully 
elaborated  plans  would  not  sit  quietly  by  and  permit  the  Saints 
to  preempt  the  land  for  their  inhospitable  theocracy  without  a 
struggle.  In  such  a  contest  the  more  liberal  party  was  fortunate  in 
its  leaders.  Thomas  Hooker  and  Roger  Williams  were  men  of 
creative  ability,  of  inflexible  purpose,  of  fine  idealism,  the  ablest 
amongst  the  entire  group  of  Puritan  immigrants,  in  whom  the  great 
principles  of  Independency  found  worthy  stewards;  and  the  long 
struggle  they  carried  on,  each  in  his  own  way,  with  the  theocratic 
leaders  of  Massachusetts  was  to  affect  profoundly  the  later  develop¬ 
ment  of  New  England.  In  the  end  the  Presbyterianism  of  Boston 
was  to  surrender  to  the  Congregationalism  of  Hartford.  From 
Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island,  it  must  be  recalled,  rather  than 
from  the  Bay  colony,  came  those  democratic  principles  and  institu¬ 
tions  that  were  to  spread  widely  in  later  years,  and  create  the  New 
England  that  after  generations  have  liked  to  remember. 

II 

THOMAS  HOOKER 
Puritan  Liberal 

Among  the  Englishmen  who  came  to  Massachusetts  were  some 
to  whom  the  “New  England  way”  seemed  to  promise  a  demo¬ 
cratic  organization  of  the  church,  and  who  looked  with  disapproval 
upon  the  Presbyterizing  policy  of  the  oligarchy.  Of  this  number 
the  congregations  of  Newtown,  Dorchester,  and  Watertown  were 
noteworthy  for  the  quiet  determination  with  which  they  seceded 
from  the  theocratic  commonwealth,  and  set  up  for  themselves 
in  the  Connecticut  wilderness.  Their  leaders  were  liberals  who 
believed  that  everything  should  be  done  decently  and  in  order, 
but  who  were  determined  that  the  outcome  of  such  decent  order¬ 
liness  should  be  a  free  church  in  a  free  state;  and  so  while  Roger 
Williams  was  engaged  in  erecting  the  democracy  of  Rhode  Island, 
Thomas  Hooker  was  as  busily  engaged  in  erecting  the  democracy 
of  Hartford. 


54 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


Concerning  the  “grave  and  judicious  Hooker”  surprisingly 
little  is  known,  in  spite  of  the  important  work  that  he  did  and  the 
influence  that  he  wielded  during  a  masterful  life.  He  was  evidently 
a  man  regardless  of  fame,  who  took  small  pains  to  publish  his 
virtues  for  the  edification  of  posterity;  what  record  he  left  behind 
bears  evidence  of  being  the  expression  of  a  man  to  whom  desire  for 
celebrity  was  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  needs  of  his  Master’s 
work.  Unlike  his  fellow  ministers  he  was  not  much  given  to  mak¬ 
ing  books.  The  works  that  bore  the  name  of  Thomas  Hooker  on 
the  title-page  were  put  through  the  press  usually  by  other  hands 
than  his,  and  were  taken  from  shorthand  notes.  His  great  contri¬ 
bution,  A  Survey  of  the  Summe  of  Church  Discipline,  published 
anonymously  and  in  an  imperfect  form,  was  written  against  his 
will  in  consequence  of  his  having  been  drafted  for  the  service  by  his 
fellow  ministers.  In  removing  from  Newtown  he  cut  himself  off 
from  the  group  of  diarists  who  diligently  recorded  the  happenings 
of  the  day,  and  so  failed  of  being  portrayed  and  praised  by  divers 
busy  pens.  Lacking  exacter  information,  we  are  forced  to  rely 
mainly  upon  such  hearsay  reports  as  have  come  down  to  us,  pieced 
out  by  Puritan  tradition;  and  these  reports  make  Thomas  Hooker 
to  have  been  a  strong  and  resourceful  man,  a  better  democrat  than 
his  fellow  ministers,  the  father  of  New  England  Congregationalism 
as  it  later  came  to  be  when  the  Presbyterianizing  tendency  was 
checked — a  practical  leader  who  rejected  equally  the  reactionary 
theocracy  of  John  Cotton,  and  the  leveling  radicalism  of  Roger 
Williams. 

For  the  pronounced  democratic  sympathies  of  this  “light  of  the 
western  churches” — a  sympathy  quite  unusual  in  his  day  and 
world — some  grounds  will  be  discovered  in  his  commonplace 
origin.  Unlike  John  Cotton,  who  had  a  “descent  from  honourable 
progenitors,”  Hooker  was  sprung  from  a  plain  yeoman  family 
that  had  made  no  stir  in  the  world.  His  native  hamlet,  Marfield 
in  Leicestershire,  numbered  no  more  than  six  houses,  tucked  away 
in  a  secluded  countryside.  His  schooling  was  got  by  the  aid  of 
scholarships:  at  Market-Bosworth  and  later  at  Cambridge,  where 
he  entered  as  sizar,  which  meant  among  other  things  that  he  was 
waiter  on  tables  in  the  Hall.  When  he  was  settled  in  a  forty- 
pound  living  at  Esher,  in  Surrey,  he  married  a  “waiting-woman” 
to  the  wife  of  his  patron;  and  when  he  died,  after  a  laborious  life 
spent  in  the  cause  of  righteousness,  he  left  an  estate  appraised  at 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


55 


846  pounds,  15  shillings,  exclusive  of  his  books,  more  than  half 
of  which  modest  sum  was  represented  by  the  Hartford  homestead.1 
Which  scanty  information  is  sufficient  to  tell  us  that  Thomas 
Hooker  was  a  simple  man  in  worldly  ambitions  as  well  as  in  origin, 
not  given  to  climbing  or  feathering  his  own  nest,  with  none  of  the 
great  associates  or  aristocratic  ties  of  Winthrop  and  Ward  and 
Cotton,  a  churchman  more  inclined  to  the  ways  of  Independency 
than  to  Presbyterianism. 

In  his  professional  work  he  was  rather  the  pastor  than  the 
teacher,  caring  more  for  experimental  religion  than  for  theological 
disputation.  He  was  an  embodiment  of  the  moral  fervor  of  the 
Reformation  that  protested  against  the  scandal  of  “dumb  priests.” 
He  seems  to  have  been  the  most  stimulating  preacher  of  early  New 
England,  and  it  was  as  a  lecturer  that  he  had  made  a  name  for 
himself  before  he  was  driven  from  his  English  charge  by  Laud. 
The  lecturer  was  a  characteristic  Puritan  innovation,  much  hated 
by  the  Anglicans.  Translated  into  a  modem  equivalent,  it  meant 
an  agitator  who  used  the  pulpit  to  spread  the  new  gospel  of  free 
judgment  in  religious  matters,  and  other  gospels  displeasing  to 
absolutism.  That  such  men  were  not  liked  by  Charles  and  his 
Archbishop  goes  without  saying;  they  were  “the  people’s  creatures” 
— a  certain  Tory  churchman  complained  to  the  King — and  “blew 
the  bellows  of  their  sedition.”  Such  being  the  case  it  seemed  but 
common  prudence  to  muzzle  them,  and  as  early  as  1622  James  laid 
down  an  orthodox  program,  forbidding  any  of  lesser  rank  than 
“a  bishop  or  dean  [to]  presume  to  preach  in  any  popular  auditory 
on  the  deep  points  of  predestination,  election,  reprobation,  or  of 
the  universality,  efficacy,  irresistibility  of  God’s  grace,”  and  re¬ 
stricting  Sunday  afternoon  sermons  to  such  innocuous  themes  as 
the  “Catechism,  Creed,  or  Ten  Commandments.” 2  It  was  an 
endeavor  to  stop  men’s  thinking  by  putting  the  crown  of  martyr¬ 
dom  on  the  lovers  of  truth.  To  forbid  the  Puritan  to  talk  of  such 
things,  to  shut  up  the  Word  of  God  from  him,  was  to  blow  the 
bellows  of  his  sedition  indeed. 

That  Thomas  Hooker  was  not  a  man  to  be  muzzled  must  have 
been  clear  to  all  who  knew  his  stubborn  English  will.  In  his 
homely  vigor  he  was  not  unlike  Hugh  Latimer,  direct  and  vigorous 
in  speech  and  action,  not  easily  turned  aside  from  the  path  of  duty, 

1  See  Walker,  Thomas  Hooker,  Preacher,  Founder,  Democrat. 

2  Ibid.,  pp.  40-44. 


56 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


possessing  much  of  the  old  bishop’s  courage  in  dealing  with  great 
men  and  their  follies.  He  knew  a  fool  and  a  tyrant  in  high  places, 
and  was  bold  to  call  them  by  their  true  names.  “  He  was  a  person,” 
said  Cotton  Mather,  “who  while  doing  his  Master’s  work,  would 
put  a  king  in  his  pocket.”  He  was  the  more  dangerous  because 
he  had  put  his  own  temper  under  strict  governance — “For  though 
he  were  a  man  of  cholerick  disposition,  and  had  a  mighty  vigour 
and  fervour  of  spirit  .  .  .  yet  he  had  ordinarily  as  much  govern¬ 
ment  of  his  choler  as  a  man  has  of  a  mastiff  dog  in  a  chain;  he  ‘could 
let  out  his  dog,  and  pull  in  his  dog,  as  he  pleased.’” 

So  ardent  a  temperament,  joined  to  remarkable  powers  of 
oratory,  gave  to  Thomas  Hooker  very  unusual  popular  influence, 
some  measure  of  which  is  revealed  in  a  letter  of  a  certain  sycophant 
of  the  court  party,  who  wrote  to  Laud’s  tool,  Chancellor  Duck, 
under  date  of  May  20,  1629,  as  follows: 

All  men’s  eares  are  now  filled  with  ye  obstreperous  clamours  of  his 
followers  against  my  Lord  ...  as  a  man  endeavouring  to  suppress  good 
preaching  and  advance  Popery.  All  would  be  here  very  calme  and  quiet 
if  he  [Hooker]  might  depart.  ...  If  he  be  suspended  its  the  resolution  of 
his  friends  and  himselfe  to  settle  his  abode  in  Essex,  and  maintenance  is 
promised  him  in  plentifull  manner  for  the  fruition  of  his  private  conference, 
which  hath  already  more  impeached  the  peace  of  our  church  than  his 
publique  ministry.  His  genius  will  still  haunte  all  the  pulpits  in  ye  coun¬ 
try,  where  any  of  his  scholers  may  be  admitted  to  preach.  .  .  .  There  be 
divers  young  ministers  about  us  .  .  .  that  spend  their  time  in  conference 
with  him;  and  return  home  and  preach  what  he  hath  brewed.  .  .  .  Our 
people’s  pallats  grow  so  out  of  tast  yt  noe  food  contents  them  but  of  Mr. 
Hooker’s  dressing.  I  have  lived  in  Essex  to  see  many  changes,  and 
have  seene  the  people  idolizing  many  new  ministers  and  lecturers,  but 
this  man  surpasses  them  all  for  learning  and  some  other  considerable 
partes  and  .  .  .  gains  more  and  far  greater  followers  than  all  before 
him.  ...  If  my  Lord  tender  his  owne  future  peace  ...  let  him  connive 
at  Mr.  Hooker’s  departure.3 

Clearly  the  England  of  Laud  with  its  pursuivants  and  tattling 
tongues  of  “dumb  ministers” — who  might  well  be  jealous  of  his 
eloquence — was  no  fit  place  for  the  activities  of  Thomas  Hooker. 
Even  though  he  should  be  suspended,  he  would  still  be  reckoned 
dangerous  to  prerogative  with  his  private  conferences  and  his 
following  of  young  ministers.  So  he  was  driven  overseas  into 
Holland,  whence  after  a  few  years’  experience  with  the  Archbishop’s 
spies,  and  dislike  of  the  Presbyterian  system  there  practiced,  he 

3  Ibid.,  pp.  45-46. 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


57 


set  forth  for  America  where  he  arrived  on  the  same  boat  with  John 
Cotton  and  Samuel  Stone,  and  was  inducted  as  pastor  of  the  church 
at  Newtown  which  had  been  awaiting  his  coming  over.  Shortly 
thereafter  began  the  open  dissatisfaction  of  the  Cambridge  con¬ 
gregation  with  the  policy  of  the  oligarchy,  which  resulted  three 
years  later  in  the  removal  of  Hooker  and  his  church  to  Hartford. 
The  causes  of  this  removal — an  event  that  profoundly  agitated 
the  colony — have  been  much  discussed,  but  they  have  never  been 
cleared  of  what  may  have  been  an  intentional  vagueness.  Possibly, 
as  Hubbard  suggests,  there  were  jealousies  between  Hooker  and 
Cotton,  Winthrop,  and  Haynes,  which  it  would  have  been  un¬ 
seemly  to  expose  in  open  court;4  but  the  likelier  explanation  would 
seem  to  lie  in  the  incompatibility  of  political  views,  which  at 
bottom  was  a  division  on  the  question  of  aristocracy  or  democracy 
in  church  and  state.  The  Cambridge  men  seem  to  have  disliked 
the  oligarchic  rule  of  the  magistrates;  they  doubtless  sympathized 
with  the  popular  party  and  may  have  encouraged  the  counter 
aggressions  of  the  deputies,  whose  assertiveness  fills  so  much  space 
in  Winthrop’s  journal  and  betokens  his  concern.  It  is  likely  that 
there  was  more  dissatisfaction  than  got  into  journals,  either  private 
or  official;  and  it  is  equally  likely  that  Thomas  Hooker  was  a  prime 
force  in  quickening  the  democatic  unrest.  “After  Mr.  Hooker’s 
coming  over,”  said  Hubbard  in  an  often  quoted  passage,  “it  was 
observed  that  many  of  the  freemen  grew  to  be  very  jealous  of  their 
liberties.”  Nevertheless,  Hooker  was  not  a  contentious  person, 
to  spread  a  clamor  through  the  commonwealth  and  endanger  the 
success  of  the  plantation.  He  believed  that  “Time,  Place,  Outward 
Decency  and  Comelinesse”  were  desirable  in  the  management  of 
public  affairs;  and  so  instead  of  descending  to  sharp  dispute  with 
men  whom  he  respected  and  loved  even  though  he  disagreed  with 
them  in  political  views,  he  chose  to  remove  quietly  out  of  their 
jurisdiction,  making  as  little  cause  for  embroilment  as  possible. 

After  all,  the  most  illuminating  commentary  upon  the  causes 
of  the  removal  is  the  spirit  of  the  institutions  set  up  in  the  new 

4  The  testimony  of  Roger  Williams  seems  to  imply  as  much:  “Mr.  Haynes, 
Governor  of  Connecticut,  though  he  pronounced  sentence  of  my  long  banishment 
against  me,  at  Cambridge,  then  Newtown,  yet  said  to  me  ...  ‘I  think,  Mr. 
Williams,  I  must  now  confess  to  you,  that  the  most  wise  God  hath  provided  and 
cut  out  this  part  of  His  world  for  a  refuge  and  receptacle  for  all  sorts  of  consciences. 
I  am  now  under  a  cloud,  and  my  brother  Hooker,  with  the  Bay,  as  you  have  been, 
we  have  removed  from  them  thus  far,  and  yet  they  are  not  satisfied.’”  ( Letter  to 
Major  Mason  [1670],  in  N arraganseit  Club  Publications,  Vol.  VI,  p.  133  ff.) 


58 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


settlement.  While  we  need  not  go  so  far  as  to  assert,  with  the 
historians  of  Connecticut,  that  “the  birthplace  of  American 
democracy  is  Hartford,”  we  must  recognize  in  the  Fundamental 
Orders  adopted  by  the  General  Assembly,  January  14,  1639,  a 
plan  of  popular  government  so  broadly  democratic  as  to  entitle 
it  to  be  called  “the  first  written  constitution  of  modern  democ¬ 
racy.”  5  Concerning  the  important  part  played  by  Hooker  in 
this  work  there  can  be  no  doubt.  His  influence  was  commanding, 
and  the  sneer  of  old  Samuel  Peters — “Hooker  reigned  twelve 
years  high-priest  over  Hertford” — scarcely  overstates  the  fact. 
And  this  great  influence  was  thrown  persistently  in  favor  of  demo¬ 
cratic  procedure  in  church  and  state.  He  definitely  rejected  the 
Boston  practice  of  magisterial  autocracy.  In  opposition  to  Win- 
throp,  who  asserted,  “Whatsoever  sentence  the  magistrate  gives, 
the  judgment  is  the  Lord’s,  though  he  do  it  not  by  any  rule  pre¬ 
scribed  by  civil  authority,”  Hooker  argued: 

That  in  the  matter  which  is  referred  to  the  judge,  the  sentence  should 
lie  in  his  breast,  or  be  left  to  his  discretion,  according  to  which  he  should 
go,  I  am  afraid  it  is  a  course  which  wants  both  safety  and  warrant.  I 
must  confess,  I  ever  looked  at  it  as  a  way  which  leads  directly  to  tyranny, 
and  so  to  confusion,  and  must  plainly  profess,  if  it  was  in  my  liberty,  I 
should  choose  neither  to  live  nor  leave  my  posterity  under  such  a  govern¬ 
ment.6 

At  another  time,  replying  to  Winthrop’s  justification  of  oligarchic 
rule  on  the  ground  that  “the  best  part  is  always  the  least,  and  of 
that  best  part  the  wiser  is  always  the  lesser,”  Hooker  frankly 
rested  his  case  for  democracy  on  the  good  sense  of  the  people  as  a 
whole: 

It  is  also  a  truth  that  counsel  should  be  sought  from  counsellors;  but  the 
question  yet  is,  who  should  those  be.  Reserving  smaller  matters  which 
fall  in  occasionally  in  common  course,  to  a  lower  counsel,  in  matters  of 
greater  importance  which  concerns  the  common  good,  a  general  counsel 
chosen  by  all,  I  conceive,  under  favour,  most  suitable  to  rule  and  most 
safe  for  relief  of  the  whole.7 

Before  the  General  Court,  on  May  31,  1638,  eight  months  before 
the  Fundamental  Orders  were  adopted,  Hooker  preached  a  re¬ 
markable  sermon  on  popular  sovereignty.  Taking  for  his  text 

6  Borgeaud,  The  Rise  of  Modern  Democracy,  p.  123. 

6  Quoted  in  J.  T.  Adams,  The  Founding  of  New  England,  p.  194. 

7  Walker,  Thomas  Hooker,  etc.,  p.  122. 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


59 


Deut.  1:13 — the  passage  on  which  John  Eliot  later  erected  his 
fantastic  Utopia — he  elaborated  the  thesis  that  “the  foundation 
of  authority  is  laid,  firstly,  in  the  free  consent  of  the  people,”  and 
therefore  that  “the  choice  of  public  magistrates  belongs  unto 
the  people  by  God’s  own  allowance,”  and  “they  who  have  the 
power  to  appoint  officers  and  magistrates,  it  is  in  their  power  also, 
to  set  the  bounds  and  limitations  of  the  power  and  place  unto 
which  they  call  them.”  8  This  was  Hooker’s  reply  to  the  oligarchic 
policy  of  the  Bay  in  limiting  the  number  of  freemen  in  order  to 
maintain  the  supremacy  of  the  magistrates;  and  it  throws  light 
on  the  comment  written  out  of  England  in  the  spring  of  1636,  to 
John  Wilson,  that  “there  is  great  division  of  judgment  in  matters 
of  religion  amongst  good  ministers  &  people  which  moved  Mr. 
Hoker  to  remove”;  and  that' “you  are  so  strict  in  admission  of 
members  to  your  church,  that  more  than  halfe  are  out  of  your 
church  in  all  your  congregations,  &  that  Mr.  Hoker  befor  he 
went  away  preached  against  yt  (as  one  reports  who  hard  him).”  9 
In  the  new  commonwealth  there  was  neither  a  property  qualifica¬ 
tion  nor  a  religious  test  limiting  the  right  of  franchise;  the  admission 
of  freemen  was  reckoned  a  political  matter  and  left  to  the  several 
township  democracies.  The  reaction  against  the  oligarchic  policy 
of  Massachusetts  Bay  carried  far. 

If  we  had  Hooker’s  sermon  in  full  we  should  know  much  more 
about  his  political  theory;  yet  even  from  the  meager  and  tantaliz¬ 
ing  notes  that  have  been  preserved,  we  can  deduce  fairly  certainly 
the  major  principles  of  his  philosophy.  Three  creative  ideas  seem 
to  have  determined  his  thinking:  the  compact  theory  of  the  state, 
the  doctrine  of  popular  sovereignty,  and  the  conception  of  the 
state  as  a  public-service  corporation,  strictly  responsible  to  the 
will  of  the  majority — ideas  that  Roger  Williams  elaborated  in 
detail  and  during  many  years  of  service  reduced  to  a  working 
system  in  the  commonwealth  of  Rhode  Island.  That  Hooker 
should  have  grasped  so  firmly  the  essentials  of  the  new  democratic 
theory  will  surprise  no  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  political 
speculations  of  English  Independency.  They  were  all  implicit 
in  the  new  theory  of  church  and  state  that  such  thinkers  as  Williams 
and  Vane  and  Milton  were  clarifying,  and  since  the  days  of  Robert 
Browne  they  had  been  familiar  in  one  form  or  another  to  the  young 
Puritan  radicals  at  the  universities.  The  compact  idea,  which  held 
8  Ibid.,  p.  125.  *  Ibid.,  p.  88. 


60 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


in  solution  the  doctrine  of  natural  rights,  had  established  itself 
firmly  in  New  England  with  the  coming  of  the  Pilgrims.  The 
Mayflower  compact  and  the  church  covenant  provided  the  basis 
for  the  social  organization  of  Plymouth;  and  the  covenant  idea 
had  taken  so  strong  a  hold  on  the  popular  mind  of  Massachusetts 
Bay  that  the  astute  leaders  of  the  oligarchy  were  quick  to  see  the 
advantage  of  investing  the  charter,  in  the  popular  imagination, 
with  the  sanctity  of  the  compact  idea;  and  by  a  subtle  process  of 
idealizing,  they  transmuted  the  charter  of  a  trading  company 
into  a  fundamental  organic  law,  that  was  reckoned  an  adequate 
written  constitution  to  safeguard  the  rights  of  the  people.  It  was  a 
clever  political  move,  but  it  seems  not  to  have  satisfied  Thomas 
Hooker,  who  was  too  liberal  in  his  views  to  accept  the  shadow  for 
the  substance.  As  a  left-wing  Independent  he  would  have  a  real 
compact,  and  a  popular  fundamental  law  to  safeguard  the  liberties 
of  the  people;  and  he  saw  to  it  that  the  new  commonwealth  was 
broadly  based  on  the  common  will,  rather  than  narrowly  on  the 
rule  of  the  gentry.  The  democractic  order  of  Connecticut  was 
English  Independency  transplanted  to  the  new  world. 

To  Hooker  New  England  Congregationalism  owes  as  great  a 
debt  as  does  New  England  democracy.  The  last  great  work  he 
undertook  was  a  defense  of  the  New  England  way  against  the 
criticism  of  the  English  Presbyterians.  He  was  to  prove  a  powerful 
advocate,  for  not  only  was  he  intellectually  equipped  to  write  a 
knotty  book  in  answer  to  other  knotty  books,  but  unlike  Cotton 
and  Davenport  and  Mather,  he  was  wholly  in  sympathy  with 
Congregationalism,  and  had  no  mind  to  conceal  or  equivocate 
concerning  its  democratic  tendencies.  He  would  write  no  apology, 
but  a  frank  and  vigorous  defense.  His  church  polity,  as  elaborated 
in  his  Survey  of  the  Summe  of  Church  Discipline,  is  professedly 
Hebraic.  “ Ecclesiastical  Policy,”  he  asserts  baldly,  “is  a  skill  of 
ordering  the  affairs  of  Christ’s  house,  according  to  the  pattern  of 
his  word,”  and  he  then  proceeds  to  postulate  the  principle  of 
absolutism  by  accepting  a  divine  sovereign  will.  But  this  divine 
sovereignty  was  a  blow  struck  at  all  temporal  absolutisms,  for  it 
spoke  through  no  vicegerent  of  pope,  bishop,  presbytery  or  magis¬ 
trate,  but  only  through  the  voice  of  the  individual  subject.  It 
is  the  priesthood  of  all  believers.  “The  Supreme  and  Monarchic  all 
power  resides  onely  in  our  Saviour,  can  onely  be  given  and  at¬ 
tributed  to  him,  and  to  none  other.”  There  remained,  then,  the 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


61 


difficult  business  of  determining  how  the  sovereign  will  of  Christ 
is  to  be  wrought  on  earth,  and  into  this  Hooker  delved  with  such 
convincing  thoroughness  that,  in  his  own  words,  “no  man  that 
hath  supped  on  Logick,  hath  a  forehead  to  gainsay”  his  conclusions. 
He  was  bold  in  innovation — “a  cause  is  not  the  lesse  true,  because 
of  late  discovered”;  but  after  quieting  “the  stomachs  of  such, 
whose  expectations  are  not  answered  in  any  opinion,  unless  it 
be  moldy  with  age,”  he  proceeds  to  explain  the  true  nature  of 
church  organization  thus: 

But  whether  all  Ecclesiasticall  power  be  impaled,  impropriated,  and 
rightly  taken  in  to  the  Presbytery  alone:  Or  that  the  people  of  the  Partic¬ 
ular  Churches  should  come  in  for  a  share,  according  to  their  places  and 
proportions;  This  is  left  as  the  subject  of  the  inquiry  of  this  age,  and  that 
which  occasions  great  thought  of  heart  of  all  hands:  Great  thoughts  of 
hearts  in  the  Presbytery,  as  being  very  loth  to  part  with  that  so  chief 
privilege,  and  of  which  they  have  taken  possession  so  many  years.  Great 
Thoughts  of  heart  amongst  the  Churches,  how  they  may  clear  their 
right,  and  claim  it  in  such  pious  sobriety  and  moderation,  as  becomes  the 
Saints:  being  unwilling  to  loose  their  cause  and  comfort,  meerly  upon  a 
nihil  dicit:  or  forever  to  be  deprived  of  so  precious  a  legacy,  as  they  con¬ 
ceive  this  is,  though  it  hath  been  withheld  from  them,  by  the  tyranny  of 
the  Pope,  and  prescription  of  times.  Nor  can  they  conceive  it  lesse,  then  a 
heedlesse  betraying  of  their  speciall  liberties,  and  not  selling  but  casting 
away  their  inheritance,  and  right,  by  a  careless  silence,  when  the  course  of 
providence,  as  the  juncture  of  times  now  present  themselves,  allows  them 
a  writt  Ad  melius  inquirendum.  .  .  .  These  are  the  times  when  people 
shall  be  fitted  for  such  priviledges,  fit  I  say  to  obtain  them,  and  fit  to  use 
them.  .  .  .  And  whereas  it  hath  been  charged  upon  the  people,  that 
through  their  ignorance  and  unskilfulnesse,  they  are  not  able  to  wield  such 
priviledges,  and  therefore  not  fit  to  share  in  any  such  power,  The  Lord 
hath  promised:  To  take  away  the  vail  from  all  faces  in  the  mountain,  the 
weak  shall  be  as  David,  and  David  as  an  Angel  of  God.10 

The  church  of  Visible  Saints  confederating  together  to  walk  in  the 
fellowship  of  the  faith  ...  is  Totum  essentiale.  .  .  .  Election  of  the 
People  rightly  ordered  by  the  rule  of  Christ,  gives  the  essentials  to  an 
Officer,  or  leaves  the  impression  of  a  true  outward  Call,  and  so  an  Office- 
power  upon  a  Pastor  .  .  .  there  is  a  communicating  of  Power  by  Voluntary 
Subjection  when,  though  there  be  no  Office-power,  formaliter  in  the  people, 
yet  they  willingly  yeelding  themselves  to  be  ruled  by  another,  desiring  and 
calling  of  him  to  take  that  rule;  he  accepting  of  what  they  yeeld,  possessing 
that  right  which  they  put  upon  him,  by  free  consent;  hence  ariseth  this 
Relation  and  authority  of  Office-rule.11 

10  Survey  of  the  Surnme  of  Church  Discipline,  Introduction. 

11  Ibid.,  Part  II,  pp.  66, 72. 


62 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

It  is  crabbed  prose,  not  altogether  worthy  of  a  man  who  kept 
the  thorns  crackling  under  the  pot  when  he  stood  face  to  face  with 
his  congregation,  and  though  we  may  feel  inclined  to  accept  the 
challenge  of  a  certain  old  Puritan,  and  “lay  a  caveat  against  the 
author’s  sweet  and  solid  handling”  of  his  matter,  we  shall  be  little 
inclined  to  lay  a  caveat  against  his  doctrine.  Here  is  no  casuistry 
like  John  Cotton’s,  denying  Congregationalism  while  ostensibly 
defending  it;  but  a  frank  acceptance  of  the  supreme  power  of  the 
people.  “The  Lord  hath  promised  to  take  away  the  veil  from  all 
faces” — in  this  faith  Thomas  Hooker  walked  all  his  days,  and 
what  he  could  himself  do  to  remove  the  veil  from  the  faces  of  the 
common  people,  he  did  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord,  thereby  proving 
his  right  to  be  remembered  among  the  early  stewards  of  our  Ameri¬ 
can  democracy. 

ill 

ROGER  WILLIAMS 
Seeker 

The  gods,  it  would  seem,  were  pleased  to  have  their  jest  with 
Roger  Williams  by  sending  him  to  earth  before  his  time.  In  manner 
and  speech  a  seventeenth-century  Puritan  controversialist,  in 
intellectual  interests  he  was  contemporary  with  successive  genera¬ 
tions  of  prophets  from  his  own  days  to  ours.  His  hospitable  mind 
anticipated  a  surprising  number  of  the  idealisms  of  the  future. 
As  a  transcendental  mystic  he  was  a  forerunner  of  Emerson  and 
the  Concord  school,  discovering  an  indwelling  God  of  love  in  a 
world  of  material  things;  as  a  speculative  Seeker  he  was  a  fore¬ 
runner  of  Channing  and  the  Unitarians,  discovering  the  hope  of  a 
more  liberal  society  in  the  practice  of  the  open  mind;  as  a  political 
philosopher  he  was  a  forerunner  of  Paine  and  the  French  romantic 
school,  discovering  the  end  of  government  in  concern  for  the  res 
publica,  and  the  cohesive  social  tie  in  the  principle  of  good  will. 
Democrat  and  Christian,  the  generation  to  which  he  belongs  is 
not  yet  born,  and  all  his  life  he  remained  a  stranger  amongst  men. 
Things  natural  and  right  to  John  Cotton  were  no  better  than  an¬ 
achronisms  to  him.  He  lived  and  dreamed  in  a  future  he  was  not 
to  see,  impatient  to  bring  to  men  a  heaven  they  were  unready  for. 
And  because  they  were  unready  they  could  not  understand  the 
grounds  of  his  hope,  and  not  understanding  they  were  puzzled 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


63 


and  angry  and  cast  him  out  to  dream  his  dreams  in  the  wilderness. 
There  was  abundant  reason  for  his  banishment.  A  child  of  light, 
he  came  bringing  not  peace  but  the  sword.  A  humane  and  liberal 
spirit,  he  was  groping  for  a  social  order  more  generous  than  any 
theocracy — that  should  satisfy  the  aspirations  of  men  for  a  catholic 
fellowship,  greater  than  sect  or  church,  village  or  nation,  embracing 
all  races  and  creeds,  bringing  together  the  sundered  societies  of 
men  in  a  common  spirit  of  good  will. 

Roger  Williams  was  the  most  provocative  figure  thrown  upon 
the  Massachusetts  shores  by  the  upheaval  in  England,  the  one 
original  thinker  amongst  a  number  of  capable  social  architects. 
An  intellectual  barometer,  fluctuating  with  every  change  in  the 
rising  storm  of  revolution,  he  came  transporting  hither  the  new  and 
disturbant  doctrines  of  the  Leveler,  loosing  wild  foxes  with  fire¬ 
brands  to  ravage  the  snug  fields  of  the  Presbyterian  Utopia.  He 
was  the  “first  rebel  against  the  divine  church-order  established  in 
the  wilderness,”  as  Cotton  Mather  rightly  reported.  But  he  was 
very  much  more  than  that;  he  was  a  rebel  against  all  the  stupidities 
that  interposed  a  barrier  betwixt  men  and  the  fellowship  of  their 
dreams.  Those  who  found  such  stupidities  serviceable  to  their 
ends,  naturally  disliked  Roger  Williams  and  believed  they  were 
serving  God  by  undoing  his  work.  There  is  a  naive  passage  in  the 
Magnalia  that  suggests  how  incomprehensible  to  the  theocratic 
mind  was  this  stormy  petrel  that  came  out  of  England  to  flutter 
and  clamor  about  Boston  and  Salem,  until  he  was  driven  forth  to 
find  such  resting  place  as  he  might,  there  to  bring  forth  after  his 
kind. 

In  the  year  1654,  a  certain  windmill  in  the  Low  Countries,  whirling 
round  with  extraordinary  violence,  by  reason  of  a  violent  storm  then 
blowing,  the  stone  at  length  by  its  rapid  motion  became  so  intensely  hot 
as  to  fire  the  mill,  from  whence  the  flames,  being  dispersed  by  the  high 
winds,  did  set  a  whole  Town  on  fire.  But  I  can  tell  my  reader  that,  above 
twenty  years  before  this,  there  was  a  whole  country  in  America  like  to  be 
set  on  fire  by  the  rapid  motion  of  a  Windmill  in  the  head  of  one  particular 
man.  12 

And  John  Cotton,  worsted  in  his  bout  with  his  brilliant  antagonist, 
and  perhaps  frightened  at  the  latter’s  free  speculation,  found  such 
satisfaction  as  he  could  in  epithets.  Roger  Williams  was  an  “evill- 
worker”;  his  “head  runneth  round”;  “it  would  weary  a  sober 

12  Magnalia,  Vol.  II,  p.  495. 


64 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


minde  to  pursue  such  windy  fancies,”  such  “offensive  and  dis- 
turbant  doctrines”;  when  “a  man  is  delivered  up  to  Satan  .  .  . 
no  marvell  if  he  cast  forth  fire-brands,  and  arrows,  and  mortall- 
things”;  “it  is  such  a  transcendent  light,  as  putteth  out  all  the 
lights  in  the  world  besides.” 

The  open  facts  of  Roger  Williams’  life  are  known  to  everybody. 
Born  in  the  year  1603, 13  he  became  a  protege  of  the  great  Coke,  was 
educated  at  Cambridge,  and  destined  for  the  law,  but  forsook  it 
for  the  ministry.  He  was  well  advanced  in  his  studies  and  coming 
to  conclusions  that  must  have  disturbed  his  conservative  friends, 
at  the  time  of  the  Great  Migration.  Beginning  as  an  Anglican, 
then  turning  Separatist,  then  Baptist,  and  finally  Seeker,14  he  is 
perhaps  more  adequately  described  as  a  Puritan  intellectual  who 
became  a  Christian  freethinker,  more  concerned  with  social  com¬ 
monwealths  than  with  theological  dogmas.  He  passed  rapidly 
through  successive  phases  of  current  thought  to  end  as  a  Leveler. 
Before  quitting  England  he  had  embraced  the  principle  of  Separa¬ 
tism,  and  on  his  first  coming  over  he  refused  the  teachership  of  the 
Boston  church — the  position  given  to  Cotton  two  years  later — 
because  it  had  not  broken  wholly  with  Anglicanism.  He  went  to 
the  more  liberal  Salem,  where  his  inconvenient  questioning  of  land 
titles  and  his  views  on  the  charter  brought  him  into  conflict  with 
the  Boston  authorities.  Refusing  to  be  silenced  he  was  banished 
and  made  his  way  to  Rhode  Island — “sorely  tossed  for  one  fourteen 
weeks,  in  a  bitter  winter  season,  not  knowing  what  bread  or  bed 
did  mean” — there  to  found  a  commonwealth  on  democratic  princi¬ 
ples. 

Yet  how  inadequately  do  such  meager  facts  reveal  the  deeper 
sources  of  his  militancy!  He  lived  in  the  realm  of  ideas,  of  inquiry 
and  discussion;  and  his  actions  were  creatively  determined  by 
principles  the  bases  of  which  he  examined  with  critical  insight. 
Instead  of  being  a  weather  vane,  blown  about  by  every  wind  of 
doctrine,  he  was  an  adventurous  pioneer,  surveying  the  new  fields 

13  For  the  date,  see  Rhode  Island  Historical  Society,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  156;  N arragansett 
Club  Publications,  Vol.  VI,  p.  599. 

14  The  Seekers  were  thus  described  by  a  contemporary  English  pen:  “Many  have 
wrangled  so  long  about  the  Church  that  at  last  they  have  quite  lost  it,  and  go 
under  the  name  of  Expecters  and  Seekers,  and  do  deny  that  there  is  any  Church,  or 
any  true  minister,  or  any  ordinances;  some  of  them  affirm  the  Church  to  be  in  the 
wilderness,  and  they  are  seeking  for  it  there;  others  say  that  it  is  in  the  smoke  of  the 
Temple,  and  that  they  are  groping  for  it  there — where  I  leave  them  praying  to 
God.”  (Paget,  Heresiography;  quoted  in  Masson,  Life  of  Milton,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  153.) 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


65 


of  thought  laid  open  by  the  Reformation,  and  marking  out  the 
several  spheres  of  church  and  state  in  the  ordering  of  a  true  com¬ 
monwealth.  He  was  the  incarnation  of  Protestant  individualism, 
seeking  new  social  ties  to  take  the  place  of  those  that  were  loosen¬ 
ing;  and  as  a  child  of  a  great  age  of  political  speculation  his  religion 
issued  in  political  theory  rather  than  in  theological  dogma.  Like 
other  Separatist-Levelers  he  had  penetrated  to  the  foundations  of 
the  New  Testament  and  had  taken  to  heart  the  revolutionary  ideals 
that  underlie  its  teachings.  It  was  the  spirit  of  love  that  served 
as  teacher  to  him;  love  that  exalted  the  meanest  to  equality  with 
the  highest  in  the  divine  republic  of  Jesus,  and  gave  an  exalted 
sanction  to  the  conception  of  a  Christian  commonwealth.  He 
regarded  his  fellow  men  literally  as  the  children  of  God  and  brothers 
in  Christ;  and  from  this  primary  conception  of  the  fatherhood  of 
God  and  the  brotherhood  of  man,  he  deduced  his  political  philoso¬ 
phy.  Like  Channing  two  hundred  years  later,  he  sought  to  adjust 
his  social  program  to  the  determining  fact  that  human  worth 
knows  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  rank  nor  caste;  and  following  the 
example  of  his  Master  he  went  forth  into  a  hostile  world,  seeking 
to  make  it  over. 

With  this  spirit  of  Christian  fellowship,  warm  and  human  and 
lovable,  repudiating  all  coercion,  there  was  joined  an  eager  mysti¬ 
cism — a  yearning  for  intimate  personal  union  with  Christ  as 
symbolized  in  the  parable  of  the  vine  and  the  branches,  a  union  as 
close  as  that  of  the  bride  and  her  husband.  Running  through 
his  writings  is  a  recurrent  echo  of  the  Hebrew  love-song  that  Puritan 
thought  suffused  with  a  glowing  mysticism:  “I  am  my  beloved’s 
and  my  beloved  is  mine:  he  feedeth  among  the  lilies.  ...  I 
will  rise  now,  and  go  about  the  city  in  the  streets,  and  in  the  broad 
ways  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth.”  But  when  he  went 
out  into  the  broad  ways  of  Carolinian  England,  seeking  the  rose  of 
Sharon  and  the  lily  of  the  valley,  he  discovered  only  abominations. 
The  lover  was  tempted  by  false  kisses;  the  Golden  Image  was  set 
up  in  the  high  places,  and  the  voice  of  authority  commanded  to 
bow  down  to  it.  And  so  as  a  Christian  mystic  Roger  Williams 
became  a  Separatist,  and  set  his  mind  upon  the  new  world  as  a 
land  where  the  lover  might  dwell  with  his  bride.  Yet  upon  his 
arrival  there  he  found  the  churches  still  “implicitly  National,” 
and  “yet  asleep  in  respect  of  abundant  ignorance  and  negligence, 
and  consequently  grosse  abominations  and  pollutions  of  Worship, 


66  LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

in  which  the  choicest  servants  of  God,  and  most  faithfull  Witnesses 
of  many  truths  have  lived  in  more  or  lesse,  yea  in  maine  and 
fundamental  points,  ever  since  the  Apostasie.”  Which  “abom¬ 
inations  and  pollutions  of  Worship,”  he  now  proposed  to  sweep 
away  altogether.15  It  was  not  an  easy  program,  nor  one 
entered  upon  lightly.  Better  than  most,  Roger  Williams  under¬ 
stood  how  closely  interwoven  were  the  threads  of  church  and 
state.  Separatism,  with  its  necessary  corollary  of  toleration, 
could  not  be  unraveled  from  Carolinian  society  without  loosening 
the  whole  social  fabric.  It  was  a  political  question  even  more  than 
ecclesiastical;  and  it  could  justify  itself  only  in  the  light  of  a  total 
political  philosophy.  No  other  man  in  New  England  compre¬ 
hended  so  fully  the  difficulties  involved  in  the  problem,  as  Roger 
Williams,  or  examined  them  so  thoroughly;  and  out  of  his  long 
speculations  emerged  a  theory  of  the  commonwealth  that  must  be 
reckoned  the  richest  contribution  of  Puritanism  to  American 
political  thought. 

The  just  renown  of  Roger  Williams  has  too  long  been  obscured 
by  ecclesiastical  historians,  who  in  emphasizing  his  defense  of  the 
principle  of  toleration  have  overlooked  the  fact  that  religious 
toleration  was  only  a  necessary  deduction  from  the  major  prin¬ 
ciples  of  his  political  theory,  and  that  he  was  concerned  with  mat¬ 
ters  far  more  fundamental  than  the  negative  virtue  of  non-inter¬ 
ference  in  the  domain  of  individual  faith.  He  was  primarily  a 
political  philosopher  rather  than  a  theologian — one  of  the  acutest 
and  most  searching  of  his  generation  of  Englishmen,  the  teacher 
of  Vane  and  Cromwell  and  Milton,  a  forerunner  of  Locke  and  the 
natural-rights  school,  one  of  the  notable  democratic  thinkers  that 
the  English  race  has  produced.  Much  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  the 
problem  of  discovering  a  new  basis  for  social  reorganization,  and 
his  intellectual  progress  was  marked  by  an  abundant  wreckage  of 

16  The  Biblical  authority  for  Separatism  Williams  found  in  both  general  and 
specific  injunctions.  The  former,  in  the  second  commandment,  in  the  third  chapter 
of  Daniel,  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  chapters  of  Revelation — the  “wine  of 
her  fornication”  being  the  ceremonial  and  ordinances  of  the  English  church — and 
in  the  Song  of  Solomon.  The  latter  were:  Revelation,  18:4:  “And  I  heard  another 
voice  from  heaven,  saying,  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of 
her  sins.  .  .  .”;  Isaiah,  53  :i  1:  “  Depart  ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  thence,  touch 
not  the  unclean  thing;  go  ye  out  in  the  midst  of  her;  be  ye  clean,  that  bear  the 
vessels  of  the  Lord”;  II  Corinthians,  6:17:  “Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them, 
and  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing;  and  I  will 
receive  you.”  On  these  texts  he  based  his  argument  with  Cotton  for  the  total 
separation  of  the  New  England  churches.  (See  N arragansett  Club  Publications , 
Vol.  I,  p.  300.) 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


67 


obsolete  theory  and  hoary  fiction  that  strewed  his  path.  He  was  a 
social  innovator  on  principle,  and  he  left  no  system  unchallenged; 
each  must  justify  itself  in  reason  and  expediency  or  be  put  aside. 
Broadly  the  development  of  his  thought  falls  into  three  stages:  the 
substitution  of  the  compact  theory  of  the  state  for  the  divine- 
right  theory;  the  rejection  of  the  suppositious  compact  of  the  earlier 
school  and  the  fictitious  abstract  state — still  postulated  by  many 
thinkers — and  the  substitution  of  a  realistic  conception  of  the 
political  state  as  the  sovereign  repository  of  the  social  will,  and 
the  government — or  agent  of  the  state — as  the  practical  instrument 
of  society  to  efFect  its  desired  ends;  and  finally,  the  difficult  problem 
of  creating  the  necessary  machinery  of  a  democratic  common¬ 
wealth,  as  the  exigencies  of  the  Rhode  Island  experiment  required. 
Throughout,  the  inspiration  of  his  thinking  was  social  rather  than 
narrowly  political  or  theological,  and  the  creative  source  would 
seem  to  have  been  the  middle  ages  with  their  fruitful  principle 
of  men  in  a  given  society  enrolling  themselves  voluntarily  as 
members  of  bodies  corporate,  finding  in  such  corporate  ties  a 
sufficient  and  all-embracing  social  bond.16 

In  his  substitution  of  the  compact  theory  for  divine  right, 
Williams  was  brought  face  to  face  with  the  fundamental  assump¬ 
tion  of  the  Massachusetts  theocracy,  based  on  numerous  passages 
of  Scripture,  that  the  political  state  is  established  and  sanctioned 
by  the  God  of  the  Hebrews— an  assumption  that  was  freely  used 
to  justify  the  engrossing  of  authority  by  the  magistracy.  As  a 
theologian  he  critically  examined  the  Scriptural  authorities,  and 
while  conceding  the  divine  source  of  government  in  general,  he  was 
careful  to  cut  away  all  autocratic  deductions  from  the  Pauline 
assertion  that  “the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God.”  “Gov¬ 
ernment  and  order  in  families,  towns,  etc.,  is  an  ordinance  of  the 
Most  High,  Rom.  13,  for  the  peace  and  good  of  mankind”  17  he  ad¬ 
mitted;  but  he  agreed  with  Richard  Hooker  in  discovering  this 
order  of  government  to  be  no  other  than  natural  law.  The  state 
is  divine  in  origin  because  it  is  natural,  and  what  is  natural  is  of 
God.  The  Hebraic  commonwealth  had  been  established  imme¬ 
diately  in  an  ordinance  of  Jehovah,  but  Christ  and  his  disciples 


16  For  much  of  the  material  made  use  of  here,  I  am  indebted  to  The  Political 

Theory  of  Roger  Williams,  a  dissertation  by  Dr.  James  E.  Ernst  of  the  University  of 
Washington.  . 

17  “Letter  to  the  Town  Clerk  of  Providence,  in  Narragansett  Club  Publications, 

Vol.  VI,  p.  401. 


68 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

regarded  the  state  and  God  as  distinct  authorities,  not  to  be 
confused — “Render,  therefore,  unto  Caesar  the  things  which  are 
Caesar’s;  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God’s.”  The  conclu¬ 
sion  at  which  he  arrived,  then,  from  the  merging  of  divine  ordi¬ 
nances  and  natural  law,  was  expressed  in  a  doctrine  that  sets 
apart  the  individual  citizen  in  all  his  spiritual  and  intellectual 
rights,  from  the  subject  of  the  commonwealth,  and  provides  the 
basis  for  his  principle  of  toleration.  “A  Civill  Government  is  an 
ordinance  of  God,  to  conserve  the  Civill  peace  of  the  people,  so 
farre  as  concerns  their  Bodies  and  Goods,”  and  no  farther.18  From 
this  position  he  never  retreated. 

Every  lawful  Magistrate  whether  succeeding  or  elective,  is  not  only  the 
Minister  of  God,  but  the  Minister  or  servant  of  the  people  also  (what 
people  or  nation  soever  they  be  all  the  world  over),  and  that  Minister  or 
Magistrate  goes  beyond  his  commission  who  intermeddles  with  that  which 
cannot  be  given  him  in  commission  from  the  people.  .  .  .19 

Having  thus  reduced  the  divine-right  field  within  narrow  limits 
and  translated  it  into  an  abstraction,  he  preempts  all  the  ground 
of  practical  politics  for  his  compact  theory.  In  accord  with  a  long 
line  of  liberal  thinkers  running  back  through  Richard  Hooker  to 
Augustine  and  the  earlier  Roman  school,  he  accepted  the  major 
deductions  from  the  compact  theory  of  the  state:  that  government 
is  a  man-made  institution,  that  it  rests  on  consent,  and  that  it  is 
founded  on  the  assumed  equality  of  the  subjects.  He  had  only  to 
translate  these  abstractions  into  concrete  terms,  and  apply  them 
realistically,  to  create  a  new  and  vital  theory.  The  covenant  idea 
of  church  organization  had  long  been  familiar  to  Separatists.  To 
this  the  Pilgrims  had  added  the  Mayflower  compact  and  Thomas 
Hooker  had  drawn  up  the  Connecticut  compact.  Government 
resting  on  consent  and  authorized  by  written  agreement  was  then 
no  untried  novelty  when  Roger  Williams  began  his  long  specula¬ 
tions  on  the  nature  and  functions  of  the  political  state.  With 
Hobbes  he  traced  the  origin  of  the  state  to  social  necessity.  The 
condition  of  nature  is  a  condition  of  anarchy — a  war  of  all  against 
all;  and  for  mutual  protection  the  state  takes  its  rise.  “The  World 
otherwise  would  be  like  a  sea,  wherein  Men,  like  Fishes,  would 
hunt  and  devoure  each  other,  and  the  greater  devour  the  lesse.”20 

ls.“The  Bloudy  Tenent,”  in  N arragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  349. 

19  “The  Bloudy  Tenent  Yet  More  Bloody,”  in  N arragansett  Club  Publications, 
Vol.  IV,  p.  187. 

20  “The  Bloudy  Tenent,”  in  N arragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  398. 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


69 


But  unlike  the  fiction  assumed  by  Hobbes  and  Locke,  this  was  no 
suppositious  contract  between  ruler  and  ruled  in  prehistoric  times, 
but  present  and  actual,  entered  into  between  the  several  members 
of  a  free  community  for  their  common  governance;  nor  on  the  other 
hand,  like  Burke’s  irrevocable  compact,  was  it  an  unyielding 
constitution  or  fundamental  law;  but  flexible,  responsive  to  chang¬ 
ing  conditions,  continually  modified  to  meet  present  needs.  It  is 
no  other  than  a  mutual  agreement,  arrived  at  frankly  by  discus¬ 
sion  and  compromise,  to  live  together  in  a  political  union,  organiz¬ 
ing  the  life  of  the  commonwealth  in  accordance  with  nature, 
reason,  justice,  and  expediency. 

From  this  conception  of  the  flexible  nature  of  compact  law  came 
the  sharp  delimitation  between  state  and  government  that  he  was 
at  pains  to  make  clear,  and  that  constitutes  a  significant  phase  of 
his  theory.  Having  rejected  in  his  thinking  the  fictitious  abstract 
state,  the  repository  of  an  equally  fictitious  abstract  sovereignty,  he 
located  sovereignty  in  the  total  body  of  citizens  embraced  within  the 
community  consciousness,  acting  in  a  political  capacity.  The  state 
is  society  organized,  government  is  the  state  functioning — it  is  the 
political  machinery  devised  by  the  sovereign  people  to  effect  definite 
ends.  And  since  the  single  end  and  purpose  for  which  the  body 
of  citizens  erect  the  state  is  the  furtherance  of  the  communal  well¬ 
being,  the  government  becomes  a  convenient  instrument  to  serve 
the  common  weal,  responsible  to  the  sovereign  people  and  strictly 
limited  by  the  terms  of  the  social  agreement.  “The  Sovereign 
power  of  all  civill  Authority,”  he  asserted,  “is  founded  in  the  con¬ 
sent  of  the  People  that  every  Commonwealth  hath  radically  and 
fundamentally.  The  very  Common-weales,  Bodies  of  People  .  .  . 
have  fundamentally  in  themselves  the  Root  of  Power,  to  set  up 
what  Government  and  Governors  they  shall  agree  upon.”  21  Since 
governments  are  but  “Derivatives  and  Agents  immediately 
derived  and  employed  as  eyes  and  hands  and  instruments,”  the 
state  or  sovereign  people  can  make  their  “own  severall  Lawes  and 
Agreements  .  .  .  according  to  their  severall  Natures,  Dispositions 
and  Constitutions,  and  their  Common  peace  and  wellfare.”  22 
Final  appeal  is  to  “the  Bar  of  the  People  or  Commonweal,  where 
all  may  personally  meet,  as  in  some  Commonweales  of  small 
number,  or  in  greater  by  their  Representatives” — a  system  that 

21  See  N arragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  214,  355,  3 66. 

22  “The  Bloudy  Tenent  Yet  More  Bloody,”  in  ibid.,  Vol.  IV,  p.  487. 


70 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


suits  with  the  “Nature,  Conditions  and  circumstances  of  the 
People,”  according  to  the  “Circumstances  of  time  and  place.”  23 
In  a  well-known  passage  he  puts  the  matter  more  compactly,  thus: 

From  this  Grant  I  infer  .  .  .  that  the  Soveraigne,  originall,  and  founda¬ 
tion  of  civil l  power  lies  in  the  People.  .  .  .  And  if  so,  that  a  People  may 
erect  and  establish  what  forme  .of  Government  seemes  to  them  most  meete 
for  their  civ  ill  condition:  It  is  evident  that  such  Governments  as  are  by  them 
erected  and  established,  have  no  more  power,  nor  for  no  longer  time,  then 
the  civill  power  or  people  consenting  and  agreeing  shall  betrust  them  with. 
This  is  cleere  not  only  in  Reason,  but  in  the  experience  of  all  commonweales, 
where  the  people  are  not  deprived  of  their  naturall  freedom  by  the  power  of 
Tyrants.24 

The  state,  then,  is  society  working  consciously  through  expe¬ 
rience  and  reason,  to  secure  for  the  individual  citizen  the  largest 
measure  of  freedom  and  well-being.  It  is  armed  with  a  potential 
power  of  coercion,  but  only  to  secure  justice.  In  such  a  state 
government  can  subsist  only  by  making  proselytes  to  sound 
reason,  by  compromise  and  arbitration,  and  not  by  force.  But  if 
sovereignty  inheres  in  the  majority  will,  what  securities  remain  for 
individual  and  minority  rights?  What  fields  lie  apart  from  the 
inquisition  of  the  majority,  and  by  what  agencies  shall  the  engross¬ 
ing  of  power  be  thwarted?  The  replies  to  such  questions,  so  fun¬ 
damental  to  every  democratic  program,  he  discovers  in  a  variety 
of  principles;  to  the  former  in  an  adaptation  of  the  spirit  of  medie¬ 
val  society  that  restricted  political  functions  by  social  usage,  and 
to  the  latter  by  the  application  of  local  home  rule,  the  initiative 
and  the  referendum,  and  the  recall.  In  the  large  field  he  ascribes 
to  social  custom,  he  was  a  follower  of  Luther  and  a  forerunner  of 
French  romantic  thinkers.  His  creative  conception  was  an  adapta¬ 
tion  of  the  medieval  theory  of  the  corporation,  or  group  of  persons 
voluntarily  joining  for  specific  purposes  under  the  law;  and  this 
idea  he  applies  to  the  vexed  question  of  the  relation  of  church  and 
state.  The  legal  status  of  the  church,  he  argued,  is  identical  with 
that  of  a  trading  company;  it  is  a  corporate  body  with  corporate 
rights,  and  the  several  members  enjoy  all  the  freedoms  and  priv¬ 
ileges  that  inhere  in  them  by  law  and  nature  in  their  civil  capacity. 
The  character  of  its  membership  and  the  content  of  its  creed  are 
of  no  different  concern  to  the  civil  magistrates  than  those  of  any 

23 “The  Bloudy  Tenent,”  in  ibid,.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  248. 

24  Ibid.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  248. 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


71 


other  corporation.  “The  state  religion  of  the  world,”  he  asserted, 
“is  a  Politic  invention  of  men  to  maintain  the  civil  state.”  25 
Elaborated  at  greater  length,  his  thesis  is  this: 

The  Church  or  company  of  worshippers  (whether  true  or  false)  is  like 
unto  a  .  .  .  Corporation,  Society,  or  Company  ...  in  London;  which 
Companies  may  hold  their  Courts,  keep  their  Records,  hold  disputations; 
and  in  matters  concerning  their  Societie,  may  dissent,  divide,  breake  into 
Schismes  and  Factions,  sue  and  implead  each  other  at  the  Law,  yea  wholly 
breake  up  and  dissolve  into  pieces  and  nothing,  and  yet  the  peace  of  the 
Citie  not  be  in  the  least  measure  impaired  or  disturbed;  because  the 
essence  or  being  of  the  Citie,  and  so  the  well-being  and  peace  thereof  is 
essentially  distinct  from  those  particular  Societies;  the  Citie-Courts,  Citie- 
Lawes,  Citie-punishments  distinct  from  theirs.  The  Citie  was  before  them, 
and  stands  absolute  and  intire,  when  such  a  Corporation  or  Societie  is 
taken  down.26 

Having  thus  effectively  secularized  the  church  on  its  institutional 
side,  he  laid  down  twelve  theses,  of  which  these  reach  to  the  heart 
of  the  matter: 

(i)  God  requireth  not  an  uniformity  of  Religion  to  be  inacted  and  in- 
forced  in  any  civil l  state;  which  inforced  uniformity  (sooner  or  later)  is  the 
greatest  occasion  of  civ  ill  Warre,  ravishing  of  conscience,  persecution  of 
Christ  Jesus  in  his  servants,  and  of  the  hypocrisie  and  destruction  of  mil¬ 
lions  of  souls.  (2)  It  is  the  will  and  command  of  God,  that  ...  a  per¬ 
mission  of  the  most  Paganish,  Jewish,  Turkish,  or  Antichristian  con¬ 
sciences  and  worships,  bee  granted  to  all  men  in  all  Nations  and  Countries: 
and  they  are  onely  to  bee  fought  against  with  that  Sword  which  is  onely 
(in  Soule  matters)  able  to  conquer,  to  wit,  the  Sword  of  Gods  Spirit,  the 
Word  of  God.  (3)  True  civility  and  Christianity  may  both  flourish  in  a  state 
or  Kingdome,  notwithstanding  the  permission  of  divers  and  contrary  con¬ 
sciences,  either  of  Jew  or  Gentile.21 

Abhorrent  as  such  doctrine  was  to  the  Massachusetts  theocrats, 
Roger  Williams  did  not  cease  to  press  it  home  to  their  minds  and 
consciences.  “I  know  and  am  persuaded,”  he  wrote  Winthrop  on 
July  21,  1637,  “that  your  misguidings  are  great  and  lamentable, 
and  the  further  you  pass  in  your  way,  the  further  you  wander, 
and  the  end  of  one  vexation  will  be  but  the  beginning  of  another, 
till  conscience  be  permitted  (though  erroneous)  to  be  free  amongst 
you.”  28  It  was  not  toleration  in  the  narrow  sense  of  benevolent 

25  “The  Bloudy  Tenent  Yet  More  Bloody,”  in  ibid.,  Vol.  IV,  p.  222. 

26  “The  Bloudy  Tenent,”  in  ibid.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  76- 

27  Preface  to  “The  Bloudy  Tenent,”  in  ibid.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  3. 

23  Narragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  VI,  p.  5** 


72 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


non-interference  by  an  authority  that  refrained  from  exercising 
its  reserved  right,  that  Roger  Williams  was  interested  in;  it  was 
rather  religious  liberty  as  a  fundamental  right,  that  had  never 
been  surrendered  to  the  civil  power,  that  lay  beyond  its  juris¬ 
diction  and  was  in  no  way  answerable  to  it,  that  he  upheld  in  his 
great  work  The  Bloudy  Tenent  of  Persecution  for  Cause  of  Con¬ 
science;  and  the  long  dispute  with  John  Cotton  was,  in  its  deeper 
significance,  a  dispute  between  two  schools  of  political  theory  and 
two  experiments  in  commonwealth  building.  In  that  notable 
debate  aristocracy  and  democracy  joined  issues,  and  the  vital 
question  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  individual  citizen  in  the 
political  state  for  the  first  time  was  critically  examined  in  America. 

From  the  foregoing  analysis  of  his  political  theory  it  should  be 
clear  that  Roger  Williams  was  a  confirmed  individualist  who  car¬ 
ried  to  its  logical  conclusion  the  Reformation  principle  of  the  right 
of  private  inquiry.  Only  Vane  and  Milton  of  his  generation  of 
Englishmen  went  so  far  along  that  path.  He  had  seen  the  liber¬ 
alisms  involved  in  Luther’s  premises  submerged  by  the  rising 
nationalism  which  ambitious  princes  found  useful  for  selfish  ends; 
and  he  had  seen  the  policy  of  the  Massachusetts  magistrates  driv¬ 
ing  boldly  in  the  same  direction.  That  Rhode  Island  should  not 
repeat  the  old  unhappy  mistake  of  coercive  absolutism,  was  a 
matter  therefore  of  vital  concern  to  him.  A  great  experiment  in 
democracy  was  to  be  tried,  and  to  that  experiment  he  devoted  his 
life.  Into  the  form  and  structure  of  the  new  commonwealth  went 
the  best  thought  of  English  Independency.  It  was  founded  on  the 
principles  of  “liberty  and  equality,  both  in  land  and  govern¬ 
ment,”  29  and  established  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  people.  That 
government  should  not  engross  its  powers,  the  compact  entered 
into  provided  for  frequent  elections,  a  single-chambered  legis¬ 
lature,  joint  and  individual  initiative  of  laws,  compulsory  ref¬ 
erendum,  the  right  of  recall  of  all  laws  including  the  constitution, 
and ,  appeal  to  arbitration.  A  rigid  constitution,  augmenting 
in  authority  with  age  and  veneration,  Roger  Williams  feared  as 
acutely  as  did  Paine  or  Jefferson.  To  vest  sovereignty  in  the 
courts  through  the  right  of  review  and  interpretation  was  re¬ 
pugnant  to  his  whole  political  theory.  The  fundamental  law  could 
be  interpreted  only  by  the  power  that  created  it  originally,  namely, 

29  “Letter  to  the  Town  of  Providence,”  in  N arragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol. 
VI,  p.  263. 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


73 


the  sovereign  people  acting  in  a  political  capacity.  Within  the 
larger  framework  of  the  state  the  several  towns  retained  the  right 
of  home  rule  in  local  matters.  They  were  corporations,  erected 
like  the  church  in  the  spirit  of  medieval  corporate  law,  competent 
to  rule  themselves,  yet  not  infringing  on  the  sovereignty  that 
granted  them  their  powers.  In  short,  to  adapt  the  words  of  a 
modern  student,  the  state  of  Rhode  Island  as  erected  by  Roger 
Williams  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  his  political  philos¬ 
ophy,  was  “nothing  so  much  as  a  great  public-service  corpora¬ 
tion.”  30  Or,  as  another  student  has  put  it,  “If  democracy  .  .  . 
in  its  ultimate  meaning  be  held  to  imply  not  only  a  government 
in  which  the  preponderant  share  of  power  resides  in  the  hands  of 
the  people,  but  a  society  based  on  the  principles  of  political  and 
religious  freedom,  Rhode  Island  beyond  any  other  of  the  American 
Colonies  is  entitled  to  be  called  democratic.”  31 

It  was  a  hazardous  experiment  to  undertake  in  an  age  when  the 
ark  of  the  democratic  covenant  found  few  places  of  refuge.  Its 
friends  were  only  a  handful  and  its  enemies  many  and  powerful, 
and  had  it  not  been  for  a  group  of  defenders  in  Parliament,  the 
Rhode  Island  venture  would  have  been  brought  to  a  speedy  end. 
English  Independency  saved  for  America  what  English  Presbyte¬ 
rianism  would  have  destroyed.  To  Sir  Harry  Vane  Rhode  Island 
owes  a  debt  of  gratitude  second  only  to  that  due  Roger  Williams. 
But  though  its  godly  neighbors  were  not  permitted  to  destroy 
Rhode  Island,  they  were  free  to  slander  and  spread  evil  reports, 
and  so  thoroughly  did  they  do  their  work  that  for  upwards  of  two 
hundred  years  the  little  commonwealth  was  commonly  spoken  of  in 
such  terms  as  Rogues  Island  and  the  State  of  Confusion;  not  indeed, 
till  it  left  off  following  agrarian  and  Populistic  gods,  till  it  had 
ceased  to  be  democratic,  did  it  become  wholly  respectable.  It 
was  not  so  much  the  reputed  turbulence  of  Rhode  Island  that  was 
disapproved  by  the  Boston  magistrates;  but  rather  the  disturb¬ 
ing  example  of  a  colony  at  their  very  doors,  which,  in  denying 
the  right  of  the  godly  to  police  society,  gave  encouragement  to 
evil-disposed  persons  in  their  own  sober  commonwealth.  Every 
democracy,  they  believed,  was  so  notoriously  mad  and  lawless — 
as  both  sacred  and  profane  authorities  had  sufficiently  demon¬ 
strated — that  the  Boston  oligarchy  never  forgave  Parliament  for 

30  Duguit,  Law  in  the  Modern  State,  p.  51.  , 

31  Gooch,  History  of  Democratic  Ideas,  p.  8o. 


74 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


refusing  them  permission  to  establish  a  mandatory  over  their 
self-willed  neighbors. 

It  was  to  prevent  such  meddling  that  Roger  Williams  had  been 
at  pains  to  secure  a  Parliamentary  charter;  and  he  saw  to  it  that 
the  charter  terms  should  not  restrict  the  democratic  liberties. 
His  faith  in  the  sobriety  and  good  sense  of  the  people  of  Rhode 
Island  was  never  shaken.  In  spite  of  many  difficulties  that  grew 
out  of  the  sharp  individualism  of  vigorous  characters,  the  colony 
proved  to  be  a  good  place  to  dwell  for  those  who  were  content  to 
share  the  common  rights  and  privileges.  In  a  letter  to  Vane, 
written  in  1654,  the  founder  apologizes  for  some  of  the  things 
reported  of  them,  but  the  apology  does  not  detract  from  the  just 
pride  with  which  he  contemplated  the  solid  achievements  of  the 
Rhode  Island  experiment: 

Possibly  a  sweet  cup  hath  rendered  many  of  us  wanton.  We  have  long 
drunk  of  the  cup  of  as  great  liberties  as  any  people  we  can  hear  of  under  the 
whole  heaven.  We  have  not  only  been  long  free  (together  with  all  New 
England)  from  the  iron  yolk  of  wolfish  bishops,  and  their  popish  cer¬ 
emonies  .  .  .  but  we  have  sitten  quiet  and  dry  from  the  streams  of  blood 
spilt  by  that  war  in  our  native  Country.  We  have  not  felt  the  new  chains 
of  Presbyterian  tyrants,  nor  in  this  colony  have  we  been  consumed  with 
the  over-zealous  fire  of  the  (so  called)  godly  Christian  magistrates.  Sir, 
we  have  not  known  what  an  excise  means;  we  have  almost  forgotten  what 
tithes  are,  yea,  or  taxes  either,  to  church  or  commonwealth.  We  could 
name  other  special  privileges,  ingredients  of  our  sweet  cup,  which  your 
great  wisdom  knows  to  be  very  powerful  (except  more  than  ordinary 
watchfulness)  to  render  the  best  of  men  wanton  and  forgetful.32 

England  gave  her  best  when  she  sent  us  Roger  Williams.  A 
great  thinker  and  a  bold  innovator,  the  repository  of  the  generous 
liberalisms  of  a  vigorous  age,  he  brought  with  him  the  fine  wheat  of 
long  years  of  English  tillage  to  sow  in  the  American  wilderness. 
How  much  America  owes  to  him  is  perhaps,  after  all  the  inter¬ 
vening  years,  not  adequately  realized;  the  shadow  of  Massachu¬ 
setts  Bay  still  too  much  obscures  the  large  proportions  of  one  who 
was  certainly  the  most  generous,  most  open-minded,  most  lovable, 
of  the  Puritan  emigrants — the  truest  Christian  amongst  many  who 
sincerely  desired  to  be  Christian.  He  believed  in  men  and  in  their 
native  justice,  and  he  spent  his  life  freely  in  the  cause  of  humanity. 
Neither  race  nor  creed  sundered  him  from  his  fellows;  the  Indian  was 
his  brother  equally  with  the  Englishman.  He  was  a  Leveler  be- 
32  Narragansett  Club  Publications,  Vol.  VI,  p.  268. 


CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  INDEPENDENCY 


75 


cause  he  was  convinced  that  society  with  its  caste  institutions  dealt 
unjustly  with  the  common  man;  he  was  a  democrat  because  he 
believed  that  the  end  and  object  of  the  political  state  was  the 
common  well-being;  he  was  an  iconoclast  because  he  was  convinced 
that  the  time  had  come  when  a  new  social  order  must  be  erected 
on  the  decay  of  the  old.  “  Liber avi  animam  meam,”  he  said  with 
just  pride;  ‘‘I  have  not  hid  within  my  breast  my  souls  belief.” 
“It  was  more  than  forty  years  after  his  exile  that  he  lived  here,” 
wrote  Cotton  Mather,  “and  in  many  thinges  acquitted  himself  so 
laudably,  that  many  juditious  persons  judged  him  to  have  the  root 
of  the  matter  in  him,  during  the  long  winter  of  this  retirement.” 
Since  those  words  were  written  increasing  numbers  of  “juditious 
persons”  have  come  to  agree  with  the  reluctant  judgment  of  Cot¬ 
ton  Mather,  and  are  verily  persuaded  that  Master  Roger  Williams 
“had  the  root  of  the  matter  in  him.”  In  his  own  day  he  was  ac¬ 
counted  an  enemy  of  society,  and  the  commonwealth  of  Mass¬ 
achusetts  has  never  rescinded  the  decree  of  banishment  issued 
against  him;  yet  like  so  many  unshackled  thinkers,  he  was  a 
seeker  after  a  better  order,  friend  to  a  nobler  and  more  humane 
society.  If  he  transported  to  America  the  democratic  aspirations 
of  English  Independency,  it  is  perhaps  well  to  recall  the  price  that 
was  exacted  of  him  for  his  service : 

Let  the  reader  fancy  him  in  1640,  a  man  of  thirty-four,  of  bold  and  stout 
jaws,  but  with  the  richest  and  softest  eyes,  gazing  out  over  the  Bay  of  his 
dwelling,  a  spiritual  Crusoe,  the  excommunicated  even  of  Hugh  Peters, 
and  the  most  extreme  and  outcast  soul  in  all  America.33 

33  Masson,  Life  of  Milton,  Vol.  II,  p.  563. 


CHAPTER  V 

OTHER  DREAMERS  IN  ISRAEL 


i 

NATHANIEL  WARD 

Elizabethan  Puritan 

The  most  caustic  pen  of  early  New  England  was  wielded  by  the 
lawyer-minister  and  wit,  Nathaniel  Ward  of  Ipswich,  author  of 
the  crotchety  little  book,  The  Simple  Cohler  of  Aggawam,  and  chief 
compiler  of  the  celebrated  Body  of  Liberties.  He  is  a  strange 
figure  to  encounter  in  the  raw  little  settlements.  To  come  into  his 
presence  is  to  feel  oneself  carried  back  to  an  earlier  age,  when  the 
courtly  wits  were  weaving  their  silken  terms  into  gorgeous  tap¬ 
estries.  Bom  about  the  year  1578,  he  was  only  five  years  younger 
than  Ben  Jonson.  Highly  educated  and  intimate  with  the  best 
society  of  England  and  the  continent,  he  was  well  advanced  in 
middle  life  when  he  set  foot  in  the  new  world,  and  in  his  late  sixties 
when  he  wrote  The  Simple  Cobler.  Far  more  strikingly  than  any 
of  his  emigrant  brethren  he  belonged  in  taste  and  temperament  to 
the  later  Elizabethan  world,  which  lingered  on  into  the  reigns  of 
James  and  Charles,  zealously  cultivating  its  quaint  garden  of 
letters,  playing  with  inkhom  terms,  and  easing  its  cares  with  clever 
conceits.  Faithful  disciple  of  Calvin  though  he  was,  he  was  some¬ 
thing  of  a  courtier  as  well,  with  a  rich  sap  of  intelligence,  which, 
fermented  by  much  thought  and  travel  in  many  lands,  made  him 
the  raciest  of  wits,  and  doubtless  the  most  delightful  of  com¬ 
panions  over  a  respectable  Puritan  bottle.  “I  have  only  Two 
comforts  to  Live  upon,”  Increase  Mather  reported  him  as  saying. 
“The  one  is  in  the  Perfections  of  Christ;  The  other  is  in  The  Imper¬ 
fections  of  all  Christians.” 

The  Simple  Cobler  of  Aggawam  is  certainly  the  brightest  bit  of 
Renaissance  English  penned  in  America — an  Elizabethan  clipped 
garden  set  down  in  a  wilderness  of  theology.  It  deserves  to  be  far 
better  known  than  it  is,  not  only  for  its  “convenient  condiments” 
of  speech  that  will  tickle  the  palate  of  an  epicure,  but  for  its  quaint 

76 


OTHER  DREAMERS  IN  ISRAEL 


77 


exposition  of  the  muddled  state  of  England  in  the  year  1645.  Like 
a  belated  Euphuist,  Nathaniel  Ward  delighted  in  fantastic  words. 

If  I  affect  termes  [he  confessed,  by  way  of  apology]  it  is  my  feeblenesse; 
my  friends  that  know  me,  thinke  I  doe  not:  I  confesse,  I  see  I  have  here 
and  there  taken  a  few  finish  stitches,  which  may  haply  please  a  few  Velvet 
eares;  but  I  cannot  now  well  pull  them  out,  unlesse  I  should  seame-rend 
all.  It  seems  it  is  a  fashion  with  you  to  sugar  your  papers  with  Carnation 
phrases,  and  spangle  your  speeches  with  new  quodled  words.  ...  I 
honour  them  with  my  heart,  that  can  expresse  more  than  ordinary  matter 
in  ordinary  words;  it  is  a  pleasing  eloquence;  them  more,  that  study  wisely 
and  soberly  to  inhance  their  native  language.  .  .  .  Affected  termes  are 
unaffecting  things  to  solid  hearers;  yet  I  hold  him  prudent,  that  in  these 
fastidious  times,  will  helpe  disedged  appetites  with  convenient  condi¬ 
ments,  and  bangled  ears,  with  pretty  quicke  pluckes.1 

The  casual  reader  is  chiefly ‘impressed  by  the  quaint  satire  of  the 
book,  with  its  caustic  comment  on  women’s  fashions — the  “foole- 
fangles”  of  “nugiperous  Gentledames,”  who  “transclout”  them¬ 
selves  into  “gant  bar-geese,  ill-shapen-shotten-shell-fish”;  and  it 
is  such  bits  that  are  commonly  picked  out  for  reprinting  in  the 
anthologies.  But  the  real  significance  of  the  work  lies  elsewhere. 
The  Simple  Cohler  is  an  old  man’s  plea  for  accommodation  of  differ¬ 
ences.  It  is  bitter  with  intolerance  of  toleration;  it  is  tom  between 
an  old  loyalty  to  King  Charles  whom  Ward  knew  and  loved— “my 
long  Idolatry  towards  you,”  as  he  confesses  sadly — and  a  new 
loyalty  to  Parliament;  and  it  is  sobered  by  a  strong  concern  over 
the  desperate  condition  of  England,  which  required  looking  to 
speedily,  he  believed,  if  the  realm  were  not  to  be  tom  past  all 
mending.  On  both  sides  there  was  abundant  “misprision  of 
Treason,”  which  properly  considered,  he  held  to  be  no  other  than 
a  “misprision  of  Reason”;  and  it  was  in  the  hope  of  summoning 
reason  back  to  the  national  councils  that  the  Cobbler  offered  his 
humble  suggestions  for  the  consideration  of  Englishmen. 

Ward  had  been  a  lawyer  before  he  turned  to  the  ministry,  and 
he  seems  to  have  impressed  himself  upon  his  fellow  emigrants 
chiefly  as  a  “subtile  statesman.”  In  his  own  way  he  was  a  political 
philosopher,  little  given  like  Roger  Williams  to  exploring  theory 
and  examining  principles,  but  applying  rather  a  shrewd  common 
sense  to  the  problems  of  the  times.  He  was  convinced  that  old 
ways  no  longer  sufficed;  that  prerogative  and  liberty  could  not 
much  longer  strain  and  pull  against  each  other  without  rending  the 
1  The  Simple  Cohler,  edition  of  1843,  pp.  89-90. 


78 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


whole  fabric  of  the  commonwealth;  and  the  kernel  of  the  book  lies 
in  a  new  theory  of  constitutional  government  for  England  which  he 
offers  as  a  convenient  way  out  of  the  difficulties.  Ward  recognized 
that  new  interests  were  challenging  the  long  sway  of  King  and 
Tories;  and  as  the  antagonisms  of  rival  interests  strengthened,  the 
insufficiency  of  the  traditional  use  and  wont  to  maintain  a  due 
balance  of  power  was  daily  becoming  more  apparent.  Hence  had 
resulted  confusion,  and  out  of  the  confusion,  civil  war.  From 
these  patent  facts  Ward  had  convinced  himself  that  there  must 
be  an  overhauling  of  the  fundamental  law  of  England:  the  twilight 
zones  must  be  explored  and  charted;  the  several  rights  and  priv¬ 
ileges  of  King,  Lords,  and  Commons,  must  be  sharply  delimited; 
and  thus  every  party  in  the  government  be  brought  to  understand 
the  exact  bounds  of  its  sphere.  Neither  King  nor  Commons  would 
then  encroach  upon  the  other,  and  royal  prerogative  and  popular 
will  no  longer  dwell  at  sword’s  point  with  each  other.  What  was 
needed,  in  short,  was  a  written  constitution,  carefully  arrived  at 
by  common  consent,  the  terms  of  which  should  be  just  to  all. 
Hitherto  God  “hath  taken  order,  that  ill  prerogatives,  gotten  by 
the  Sword,  should  in  time  be  fetched  home  by  the  Dagger,  if 
nothing  else  will  doe  it:  Yet  I  trust  there  is  both  day  and  means 
to  intervent  this  bargaine.” 

To  preserve  a  just  balance  between  rival  interests  in  the  state, 
and  to  hold  all  parties  to  their  responsibility  to  God,  were  then  the 
two  problems  to  which  Nathaniel  Ward  addressed  himself,  and  the 
manner  and  terms  of  his  argument  are  sufficiently  revealed  in  the 
following  passages: 

Authority  must  have  power  to  make  and  keep  people  honest;  People, 
honesty  to  obey  Authority;  both  a  Joynt-Councell  to  keep  both  safe. 
Morall  Lawes,  Royall  Prerogatives,  Popular  Liberties,  are  not  of  Mans 
making  or  giving,  but  Gods:  Man  is  but  to  measure  them  out  by  Gods 
Rule:  which  if  mans  wisdome  cannot  reach,  Mans  experience  must  mend: 
And  these  Essentialls,  must  not  be  Ephorized  or  Tribuned  by  one  or  a  few 
Mens  discretion,  but  lineally  sanctioned  by  Supreame  Councels.  In 
pro-re-nascent  occurrences,  which  cannot  be  foreseen;  Diets,  Parliaments, 
Senates,  or  accountable  Commissions,  must  have  power  to  consult  and 
execute  against  intersilient  dangers  and  flagitious  crimes  prohibited  by 
the  light  of  Nature:  yet  it  were  good  if  States  would  let  People  know  so 
much  beforehand,  by  some  safe  woven  manifesto,  that  grosse  Delinquents 
may  tell  no  tales  of  Anchors  and  Buoyes,  nor  palliate  their  presumptions 
with  pretense  of  ignorance.  I  know  no  difference  in  these  Essentialls, 
between  Monarchies,  Aristocracies,  or  Democracies,  ,  ,  ,  And  in  all,  the 


OTHER  DREAMERS  IN  ISRAEL 


79 


best  Standard  to  measure  Prerogatives,  is  the  Ploughstaffe;  to  measure 
Liberties,  the  Scepter:  if  the  tearms  were  a  little  altered  into  Loyall 
Prerogatives  and  Royall  Liberties,  then  we  should  be  sure  to  have  Royall 
Kings  and  Loyall  Subjects.  .  .  . 

He  is  a  good  King  that  undoes  not  his  Subjects  by  any  one  of  his  un¬ 
limited  Prerogatives:  and  they  are  a  good  People,  that  undoe  not  their 
Prince,  by  any  one  of  their  unbounded  Liberties,  be  they  the  very  least. 
I  am  sure  either  may,  and  I  am  sure  neither  would  be  trusted,  how  good 
soever.  Stories  tell  us  in  effect,  though  nor  in  termes,  that  over-risen 
Kings,  have  been  the  next  evills  to  the  world,  unto  fallen  Angels;  and  that 
over-franchised  people,  are  devills  with  smooth  snaffles  in  their  mouthes. 
A  King  that  lives  by  Law,  lives  by  love:  and  he  that  lives  above  Law,  shall 
live  under  hatred  doe  what  he  can.  Slavery  and  knavery  goe  as  seldome 
asunder,  as  Tyranny  and  Cruelty.  I  have  a  long  while  thought  it  very 
possible,  in  a  time  of  Peace  .  .  .  for  disert  Statesmen,  to  cut  an  exquisite 
thred  between  Kings  Prerogatives,  and  Subjects  Liberties  of  all  sorts,  so 
as  Caesar  might  have  his  due,  and- People  their  share,  without  such  sharpe 
disputes.  Good  Casuists  would  case  it,  and  case  it,  part  it,  and  part  it; 
now  it,  and  then  it,  punctually.2 

Nathaniel  Ward  was  no  democrat  like  Hooker  and  therefore  no 
Congregationalist.  “I  am  neither  Presbyterian,  nor  plebsbyterian, 
but  an  Interpendent,”  he  said  of  himself.  But  his  “Interpend¬ 
ency”  would  seem  to  have  been  only  an  individualistic  form  of 
Presbyterianism.  For  the  radical  Sectaries  who  were  rising  out 
of  the  turmoil  of  revolution,  he  had  the  contempt  of  a  thorough¬ 
bred  Jacobean  gentleman;  and  for  their  newfangled  notion  of 
religious  toleration  and  their  fetish  of  popular  liberties — founded 
and  nourished  he  believed  in  sentimentalism — he  would  substitute 
the  solid  reality  of  absolute  truth,  the  faithful  friend  and  coadjutor 
of  which  he  professed  himself  to  be.  “Justice  and  Equity  were 
before  time,  and  will  be  after  it”;  and  he  regarded  it  as  folly 
to  try  to  circumvent  them.  He  would  have  no  great  altering  of 
the  fundamental  arrangements  of  society,  such  as  Independents 
like  Roger  Williams  were  seeking.  The  solidarity  of  church  and 
state  was  an  anciently  accepted  principle,  far  safer  to  trust  in,  he 
believed,  than  the  vagaries  of  unhistorical  sects. 

Experience  will  teach  Churches  and  Christians,  that  it  is  farre  better  to 
live  in  a  State  united,  though  a  little  Corrupt,  then  in  a  State,  whereof 
some  Part  is  incorrupt,  and  all  the  rest  divided.  .  .  .  The  Scripture 
saith,  there  is  nothing  makes  free  but  Truth,  and  Truth  saith,  there  is  no 
Truth  but  One.  ...  He  that  is  willing  to  tolerate  any  Religion,  or 
discrepant  way  of  Religion,  besides  his  own,  unlesse  it  be  in  matters 

2  Ibid.,  pp.  54-55-  ' 


80 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

meerly  indifferent,  either  doubts  of  his  own,  or  is  not  sincere  in  it.  .  •  . 
He  that  is  willing  to  tolerate  any  unsound  opinion,  that  his  own  may  also 
be  tolerated,  though  never  so  sound,  will  for  a  need  hang  Gods  Bible  at  the 
Devils  girdle.3 

As  an  honest  Christian  and  a  loyal  subject  he  would  honor  both 
the  divine  and  temporal  authorities;  nevertheless,  in  order  that 
the  law  of  God  and  the  law  of  the  land  might  be  known  of  all  and 
march  together,  he  would  have  the  exact  terms  of  the  constitution 
written  out  by  “disert  statesmen”  in  time  of  peace,  and  published 
broadly,  in  Massachusetts  as  well  as  in  England.  And  so  when 
he  was  commissioned  to  draw  up  a  body  of  liberties  for  the  new 
commonwealth,  he  found  the  task  congenial.  As  a  lawyer  he 
seems  to  have  been  concerned  at  the  non-legal  methods  of  the 
magistrates  in  dispensing  judgment,  so  repugnant  to  the  spirit 
of  the  Common  Law;  and  in  the  election  sermon  of  1641,  that  he 
was  invited  to  preach,  he  “advanced  several  things  that  savored 
more  of  liberty,  than  some  of  the  magistrates  were  prepared  to 
approve.”  4  But  it  was  the  lawyer  protesting  against  court 
methods  that  spoke  out,  not  the  liberal  concerned  with  broader 
liberties.  In  a  letter  to  Winthrop,  December  22,  1639,  dealing  with 
the  body  of  laws,  he  questioned,  “Whether  it  will  not  be  of  ill 
consequence  to  send  the  Court  business  to  the  common  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  Freemen,”  adding: 

I  fear  it  will  too  much  exauctorate  the  power  of  that  Court  to  prostrate 
matters  in  that  manner,  I  suspect  both  Commonwealth  and  Churches 
have  discended  to  lowe  already.  I  see  the  spirits  of  the  people  runne 
high,  and  what  they  gett  they  hould.  They  may  not  be  denyed  their 
proper  and  lawfull  liberties,  but  a  question  whether  it  be  of  God  to  interest 
the  inferiour  sort  in  that  which  should  be  reserved  inter  optimates  penes 
quos  est  sancire  leges  [t.  e.  to  the  aristocracy  with  whom  rests  the  power  to 
establish  the  law].6 

The  celebrated  Body  of  Liberties  was  presented  three  years  after 
The  Simple  Cobler  was  written,  and  in  spite  of  his  frankly  aristo¬ 
cratic  bias,  Nathaniel  Ward  did  a  real  service  to  Massachusetts 
by  incorporating  into  the  law  of  the  commonwealth  many  of  the 
old  English  safeguards  of  person  and  property,  in  some  instances 
advancing  beyond  current  English  practice.  Yet  true  to  his 
Hebraic  leanings,  and  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  theocracy, 

3  Ibid,.,  pp.  8,  10.  4  Ibid.,  Introduction. 

6  Dean,  Memoir  of  the  Rev,  Nathaniel  Ward,  pp.  56-57, 


OTHER  DREAMERS  IN  ISRAEL  81 

he  added  certain  brutalities  drawn  from  the  Mosaic  code  that 
were  soon  to  drop  away. 

There  is  something  refreshing  in  the  extraordinary  frankness  of 
this  old  Puritan  of  the  days  of  Elizabeth.  He  was  no  demagogue, 
but  a  stout  upholder  of  authority,  who  accepted  the  rule  of  caste 
and  the  law  of  an  eye  for  an  eye.  The  militant  severity  of  his 
judgments,  and  the  caustic  wit  of  his  comments,  suggest  somewhat 
startlingly  how  long  and  bitter  would  be  the  struggle  in  New 
England  before  the  spirit  of  liberalism  should  find  wide  accept¬ 
ance  there.  Gentlemen  of  the  immigrant  generation  were  set  in 
their  ways,  and  none  more  inflexibly  than  Nathaniel  Ward.  He  was 
too  old  to  adjust  himself  to  new  conditions,  a  fact  which  he  recog¬ 
nized  by  returning  to  England  to  die,  leaving  behind  as  a  warning 
certain  pithy  quatrains  of  which  this  is  one: 

The  upper  world  shall  Rule, 

While  Stars  will  run  their  race: 

The  nether  world  obey 

While  People  keep  their  place. 

II 

JOHN  ELIOT 
A  Theocratic  Utopia 

At  the  session  of  the  General  Court  holden  at  Boston,  May  22, 
1661,  it  was  ordered: 

This  Court  taking  notice  of  a  booke  entituled  Christian  Commonwealth, 
written  ...  by  Mr.  John  Eliot  of  Roxbury  in  New  England,  which  .  .  . 
is  justly  offensive  and  in  speciall  relating  to  kingly  Gouvernment  in  Eng¬ 
land,  the  which  the  said  Mr.  Eliot  hath  also  freely  and  fully  acknowledged 
to  this  Court.  It  is  therefore  ordered  by  this  Court  and  the  Authority 
thereof,  that  the  said  Booke  be  totally  suppressed  and  the  Authors  ac¬ 
knowledgement  recorded;  and  that  all  persons  whatsoever  in  this  jurisdic¬ 
tion  that  have  any  of  the  said  Bookes  in  theire  Custody  shall  on  theire 
perrills  within  fowerteene  dayes  after  publication  hereof  either  cancel  or 
deface  or  deliver  them  unto  the  next  Magistrate  or  to  the  Secretary, 
whereby  all  farther  divulment  and  improovement  of  the  said  offensive 
Booke  may  be  prevented.6 

The  little  book  over  which  such  a  pother  was  made  by  the  New 
England  magistrates  in  the  days  when  they  were  under  the  censo¬ 
rious  eye  of  the  newly  restored  Stuart  government  was  the  single 

5  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Publications,  Vol.  IX,  Third  Series,  p.  128. 


82 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


venture  in  the  field  of  political  speculation  by  the  excellent  John 
Eliot,  apostle  to  the  Indians.  It  was  a  slender  volume,  written 
about  1650,  although  not  printed  till  1659;  but  within  the  narrow 
compass  of  twenty-one  pages  this  dreamer  in  Israel  has  sketched 
the  outlines  of  an  ideal  Christian  commonwealth.  It  was  a  day 
and  a  world  of  idealists,  and  so  John  Eliot  paused  in  the  midst  of 
his  missionary  labors  to  fashion  a  brick  for  the  building  of  that 
temple  which  the  Puritans  of  the  Protectorate  were  dreaming  of. 
The  idols  had  been  broken  by  the  hammer  of  Cromwell;  the  malev¬ 
olent  powers  of  this  world  were  brought  low;  it  remained  now  only 
for  the  people  of  God  to  enter  into  a  solemn  covenant  to  establish  a 
commonwealth  after  the  true  divine  model.  That  no  mistake 
should  be  made  in  so  important  a  matter,  John  Eliot  was  moved 
to  send  out  of  the  American  wilderness  the  plan  of  a  Christian 
Utopia,  sanctioned  by  the  Mosaic  example  and  buttressed  at 
every  point  by  chapter  and  verse,  which  he  offered  to  the  godly 
Puritans  of  England  as  a  suitable  guide  to  their  feet. 

Naked  theocracy  is  nowhere  else  so  uncompromisingly  de¬ 
lineated  as  in  the  pages  of  The  Christian  Commonwealth.  At  the 
basis  of  Eliot’s  political  speculations  were  the  two  germinal  con¬ 
ceptions  which  animated  his  theocratic  brethren  generally:  the 
conception  that  Christ  is  King  of  Kings  before  whom  all  earthly 
authority  must  bow,  and  the  conception  that  the  Scripture  alone 
reveals  the  law  of  God.  So  long  as  the  Stuarts  were  ruling  at  St. 
James’s  speculative  theocrats  found  it  expedient  to  gloss  their 
principles  with  nice  distinctions  between  temporal  and  spiritual 
overlords;  but  with  monarchy  overthrown,  they  came  out  boldly 
and  urged  the  English  people  to  put  away  all  profane  institutions. 
“ Scripturae  plentitudinem  adoro ,”  John  Cotton  had  exclaimed; 
and  to  the  same  purpose  John  Eliot  laid  down  the  thesis: 

There  is  undoubtedly  a  forme  of  civil  Government  instituted  by  God 
himself  in  the  holy  Scriptures;  whereby  any  Nation  may  enjoy  all  the 
ends  and  effects  of  Government  in  the  best  manner,  were  they  but  per- 
swaded  to  make  trial  of  it.  We  should  derogate  from  the  sufficiency  and 
perfection  of  the  Scriptures,  if  we  should  deny  it. 

The  prayers,  the  expectation,  and  faith  of  the  Saints  in  the  Prophecies 
and  Promises  of  holy  Scripture,  are  daily  sounding  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord, 
for  the  downfall  of  Anti-christ,  and  with  him  all  humane  Powers,  Polities, 
Dominions,  and  Governments;  and  in  the  room  thereof,  we  wait  for  the 
coming  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  by  his  Divine  Wisdom, 
Power,  Government  and  Laws,  given  us  ...  in  the  holy  Scriptures,  will 


OTHER  DREAMERS  IN  ISRAEL 


83 


reign  over  all  the  Nations  of  the  earth  in  his  due  time:  I  mean  the  Lord 
Jesus  will  bring  down  all  people,  to  be  ruled  by  the  Institutions,  Laws,  and 
Directions  of  the  Word  of  God,  not  only  in  Church-Government  and 
Administrations,  but  also  in  the  Government  and  Administration  of  all 
affairs  in  the  Common  wealth.  And  then  Christ  reigneth,  when  all  things 
among  men,  are  done  by  the  direction  of  the  word  of  his  mouth:  his 
Kingdom  is  then  come  amongst  us,  when  his  will  is  done  on  earth,  as  it  is 
done  in  heaven,  where  no  Humane  or  Angelical  Policy  or  Wisdom  doth 
guide  anything,  but  all  is  done  by  Divine  direction  (Ps.  103:20);  and  so  it 
shall  be  on  earth,  when  and  where  Christ  reigneth. 

Much  is  spoken  of  the  rightful  Heir  of  the  Crown  of  England,  and  of  the 
unjustice  of  casting  out  the  right  Heir;  but  Christ  is  the  onely  right  Heir  of 
the  Crown  of  England  (Ps.  2:8)  and  of  all  other  Nations  also  (Rev.  11:15). 

That  which  the  Lord  now  calleth  England  to  attend  is  not  to  search 
humane  Politics  and  Platformes  of  Government,  contrived  by  the  wisdom 
of  man;  but  as  the  Lord  hath  carried  on  their  works  for  them,  so  they 
ought  to  go  unto  the  Lord,  and  enquire  at  the  Word  of  his  mouth,  what 
Platforme  of  Government  he  hath  therein  commanded  and  prescribed. 

From  his  Scriptural  premises  Eliot  deduced  a  system  of  govern¬ 
ment  that  is  altogether  remarkable,  not  only  for  its  rejection  of 
the  Separatist  theory  of  natural  rights,  but  for  its  naive  simplicity. 
Since  the  law  has  been  declared  once  for  all,  perfect  and  final, 
there  is  no  need  for  a  legislative  branch  of  government;  and  since 
Christ  is  sole  ruler  and  king,  there  is  no  place  for  a  profane  head  of 
the  state;  it  remains  only  for  the  Christian  theorist  to  provide  a 
competent  magisterial  system  to  hear  causes  and  adjudicate  dif¬ 
ferences.  Society  is  concerned  wholly  with  duties  and  not  at  all 
with  rights;  government,  therefore,  begins  and  ends  with  the 
magistrate.  In  order  to  secure  a  suitable  magistracy,  Eliot  pro¬ 
posed  to  divide  society  into  groups  of  tens,  fifties,  hundreds  and 
thousands,  each  of  which  should  choose  its  rulers,  who  in  turn 
should  choose  their  representatives  to  the  higher  councils;  and  so 
there  was  evolved  an  ascending  series  of  magistrates  until  the 
supreme  council  of  the  nation  was  reached,  the  decisions  of  which 
should  be  final. 

The  duties  of  all  the  Rulers  of  the  civil  part  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ, 
are  as  followeth:  ...  to  govern  the  people  in  the  orderly  and  seasonable 
practice  of  all  the  Commanders  of  God,  in  actions  liable  to  Political 
observations  whether  of  piety  and  love  to  God,  or  of  justice  and  love  to 
man  with  peace. 

Far  removed  as  The  Christian  Commonwealth  was  from  the 
democratic  political  theory  of  the  Army  radicals,  or  the  practical 


84 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


constitutionalism  of  Nathaniel  Ward,  it  was  the  logical  culmina¬ 
tion  of  all  theocratic  programs.  The  ideal  of  social  unity,  of 
relentless  conformity,  according  to  which  the  rebel  is  a  social  out¬ 
cast  to  be  silenced  at  any  cost,  dominates  this  godly  Utopia  as 
mercilessly  as  it  dominated  the  policy  of  Laud.  In  setting  up  King 
Jesus  for  King  Charles,  there  was  to  be  no  easing  of  the  yoke  upon 
rebellious  spirits;  and  in  binding  society  upon  the  letter  of  the 
Scripture  there  was  to  be  no  consideration  for  the  aspirations  of 
the  unregenerate.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  consider  what  the  Saints 
would  have  made  of  New  England  if  their  will  had  prevailed. 
Curious  as  this  little  work  is — testifying  rather  to  the  sincerity  of 
Eliot’s  Hebraism  than  to  his  political  intelligence  or  his  knowledge 
of  men — it  is  characteristic  of  the  idealist  who  consecrated  his  life 
to  the  Indian  mission.  How  little  disturbed  he  was  by  the  per¬ 
versities  and  limitations  of  everyday  fact,  is  revealed  in  the  policy 
which  he  laid  down  for  his  Indian  converts: 

And  this  Vow  I  did  solemnly  make  unto  the  Lord  concerning  them; 
that  they  being  a  people  without  any  forme  of  Government  and  now  to 
chuse;  I  would  endeavour  with  all  my  might,  to  bring  them  to  embrace 
such  Government,  both  civil  and  Ecclesiastical,  as  the  Lord  hath  com¬ 
manded  in  the  holy  Scriptures;  and  to  deduce  all  their  Lawes  from  the 
holy  Scriptures,  that  so  they  may  be  the  Lord’s  people,  ruled  by  him  alone 
in  all  things. 

Which  vow,  considering  the  state  of  the  Indian  tribes  to  whom  it 
was  to  apply,  may  serve  to  throw  light  upon  the  reason  for  the 
scant  success  of  the  Saints  in  their  dealings  with  the  red-men. 


PART  TWO:  THE  TWILIGHT  OF  THE  OLIGARCHY 

1660-1720 


It  is  not  pleasant  to  linger  in  the  drab  later  years  of  a  century 
that  in  its  prime  had  known  able  men  and  accomplished  notable 
things.  A  world  that  accepted  Michael  Wigglesworth  for  its 
poet,  and  accounted  Cotton  Mather  its  most  distinguished  man  of 
letters,  had  certainty  backslidden  in  the  ways  of  culture.  The 
final  harvest  of  the  theocracy  must  be  reckoned  somewhat  scanty. 
English  Independency  had  been  the  robust  and  rebellious  child 
of  a  great  age;  New  England  Puritanism  was  the  stunted  offspring 
of  a  petty  environment.  With  the  passing  of  the  emigrant  genera¬ 
tion,  a  narrow  provincialism  settled  upon  the  commonwealth  of 
Massachusetts  Bay.  Not  a  single  notable  book  appeared;  scarcely 
a  single  generous  figure  emerged  from  the  primitive  background. 
A  thin  soil  and  the  law  of  Moses  created  a  capable  but  ungainly 
race,  prosaic  and  niggardly.  Their  very  speech  lost  much  of  the 
native  English  beauty  that  had  come  down  from  medieval  times. 
The  clean  and  expressive  idiom  that  Bunyan  caught  from  the 
lips  of  English  villagers,  with  its  echoes  of  a  more  spontaneous  life 
before  the  Puritan  middle  class  had  substituted  asceticism  for 
beauty,  grew  thinner  and  more  meager,  its  bright  homespun  dyes 
subdued  to  a  dun  butternut.  The  town  records  which  in  the  first 
years  had  been  set  down  in  dignified  and  adequate  phrase  became 
increasingly  crabbed  and  illiterate,  laboriously  composed  by  plain 
men  to  whom  spelling  had  become  a  lost  art.  The  horizons  of 
life  in  New  England  were  contracting  to  a  narrow  round  of  chores 
and  sermons.  “When  I  first  saw  the  Lieut.  Governor,”  Sewall 
remarked  of  Stoughton,  “He  was  Carting  Ears  of  Corn  from  the 
Uper  Barn.”  The  picture  suggests  the  pastoral  note,  but  it  suggests 
much  else  as  well. 

Against  this  incursion  of  the  provincial  the  church  was  the 
single  force  to  be  counted  on  to  do  battle.  The  ministers  did  their 
best,  but  it  needed  abler  men  than  were  available  to  counteract 
the  growing  formalism  of  the  times.  They  might  lament  that 
their  admonitions  fell  on  unheeding  ears,  that  they  preached  in 

85 


86 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


vain  to  a  “sermon-proof,  gospel-glutted  generation”;  but  the 
blame  must  attach  in  part  to  the  formalism  of  their  appeals.  The 
straw  was  over-threshed.  The  common  provincialism  infected 
the  pulpit  as  well  as  the  pew,  and  the  creative  vigor  of  the  ministry 
steadily  declined.  The  ground  was  being  prepared  for  superstition 
and  bigotry.  As  the  belief  spread  through  the  New  England  vil¬ 
lages  that  the  end  of  the  world  would  fall  on  the  end  of  the  century, 
men’s  thoughts  naturally  ran  much  on  the  demonology  that  is  a 
logical  consequence  of  the  Hebraic  dualism,  and  the  most  intelli¬ 
gent  saw  no  reason  to  doubt  that  “the  Evening  Wolves  will  be 
much  abroad,  when  we  are  near  the  Evening  of  the  World.”  The 
psychology  was  being  prepared  for  the  witch-mania  of  Salem,  and 
Cotton  Mather  was  only  echoing  the  common  belief  when  he 
cried,  “An  Army  of  Devils  is  horribly  broke  in  upon  the  place 
which  is  the  Centre,  and  after  a  sort,  the  First-born  of  our  English 
Settlements.”  1  In  this  matter,  as  in  so  many  others,  the  ministers 
were  no  better  than  their  congregations;  they  were  blind  leaders 
of  the  blind,  and  they  lent  their  sanction  to  the  intolerance  of  the 
mass  judgment.  In  an  environment  so  stifling,  with  every  un¬ 
familiar  idea  likely  to  be  seized  upon  as  evidence  of  the  devil’s 
wiles,  there  was  no  room  for  free  speculation.  A  generation  under 
the  terror  of  witchcraft  was  given  over  to  stark  reaction.  The 
Salem  outbreak  was  the  logical  outcome  of  the  long  policy  of 
repression,  that  had  hanged  Quakers  and  destroyed  independent 
thought,  in  its  attempt  to  imprison  the  natural  man  in  a  strait- 
jacket  of  Puritan  righteousness.  Emotions  long  repressed  some¬ 
times  find  sinister  outlets,  and  the  witchcraft  madness  was  only  a 
dramatic  aftermath  of  a  generation  of  repressions  and  inhibitions.2 

It  was  during  these  unhappy  years  that  power  finally  slipped 
from  the  hands  of  the  oligarchy.  With  the  charter  gone,  a  Royal 
Governor  presiding  over  the  Council,  and  a  property  qualification 
instead  of  a  religious  test  for  suffrage,  the  old  order  was  broken  past 
mending.  The  members  of  the  oligarchy  still  hoped  against  hope, 
and  under  the  governorship  of  Phips  they  made  heroic  attempts  to 
bolster  up  the  cause;  but  the  Quebec  expedition  was  so  badly  mud¬ 
dled  as  to  bring  the  commonwealth  to  the  verge  of  ruin,  and  the 
Governor  and  Council  wrote  to  England  that  God  had  “spit  in  our 

1  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  p.  14. 

2  See  Lucien  Price,  “Witchcraft,  Then  and  Now,”  in  The  Nation,  Vol.  CXV,  No. 
2987. 


TWILIGHT  OF  THE  OLIGARCHY 


87 


faces.”3  Whether  or  not  that  was  a  correct  analysis  of  the  divine 
reaction  to  the  Quebec  fiasco  is  of  no  importance  today;  a  good  many 
New  Englanders,  it  would  seem,  doubted  it,  and  under  the  pressure 
of  high  taxes,  a  depreciated  currency  and  a  great  debt,  they  made 
their  dissatisfaction  heard  at  the  royal  court.  When  the  English 
government  at  last  “resolved  to  settle  the  Countrey,”  the  end  of 
the  oligarchy  was  come.  The  cautious  amongst  them  were  for 
throwing  the  whole  responsibility  on  the  Lord:  “the  foundations 
being  gone,  what  can  the  righteous  do?”  argued  Judge  Sewall  with 
shrewd  worldly-wisdom.  But  the  ministers  would  make  no  com¬ 
promise  with  Baal.  The  tongues  of  false  prophets  might  seduce 
the  people,  but  they  stood  for  the  old  order,  fighting  a  losing  fight 
with  righteous  zeal.  On  June  I,  1702,  Sewall  noted  in  his  diary 
that  he  had  “much  adoe  to  persuade  Mr.  Willard  to  dine  with 
me,”  the  pastor  being  in  a  sulk  because  the  civil  representatives 
had  taken  precedence  over  the  ministers  in  the  procession  for 
proclaiming  Queen  Anne.  But  in  the  end  even  “good  Mr.  Wil¬ 
lard”  was  forced  to  acknowledge  that  his  loyalty  was  given  to  a 
lost  cause. 

3  J.  T.  Adams,  The  Founding  of  New  England,  p.  442. 


CHAPTER  I 
SAMUEL  SEWALL 
Yankee 

By  good  fortune  an  intimate  record  of  daily  life  in  old  New 
England  has  been  preserved  in  abundant  detail.  The  diary  of 
Samuel  Sewall  not  only  narrates  the  homely  activities  of  Boston 
in  the  evening  of  the  theocracy,  antiquis  moribus,  prisca  fide,  but 
it  unconsciously  reveals  the  transformation  of  the  English  Puritan 
into  the  New  England  Yankee.  The  sober  Boston  citizens  who 
on  the  Sabbath  droned  Windsor  and  York  tunes,  and  took  notes 
of  long  sermons,  on  week-days  plied  their  gospel  of  thrift  with 
notable  success.  They  loved  the  meetinghouse  as  their  fathers 
had  loved  it,  but  they  were  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  tradesmen, 
and  true  to  their  English  instincts  they  set  about  erecting  a  provin¬ 
cial  mercantile  society,  dominated  by  the  ideals  of  the  little  capital¬ 
ist.  Of  this  rising  world  of  mercantilism,  Samuel  Sewall  was  a 
worthy  representative.  A  Puritan  magistrate  and  village  capitalist, 
he  made  full  use  of  his  opportunities  to  worship  God,  to  thrive  and 
to  rise.  As  the  older  ideal  of  theocratic  stewardship  is  revealed  in 
the  career  of  John  Winthrop,  the  newer  practice  of  incipient 
capitalism  is  revealed  in  the  life  of  Samuel  Sewall. 

The  Diary  is  a  fascinating  book,  with  its  petty  gossip  interwoven 
with  matters  of  public  concern,  and  its  brisk  activities  set  in  a 
black  border  of  innumerable  funerals:  the  one  among  all  the  books 
of  the  time  that  is  still  quick  with  life  after  these  two  hundred 
years  and  more.  In  its  meager  entries  we  can  trace  the  change 
that  was  coming  to  Massachusetts  in  the  transition  from  a  theoc¬ 
racy  to  a  royal  colony;  and  we  can  feel  the  strong  emotions  which 
that  change  aroused.  The  dry  facts  of  history  take  on  flesh  and 
blood;  forgotten  names  become  living  men  walking  the  streets  of 
Boston  or  arguing  in  the  Council  Chamber;  Samuel  Sewall  him¬ 
self  becomes  more  real  to  us  than  our  own  contemporaries.  He 
was  the  veritable  embodiment  of  his  serious,  prudential  Massachu¬ 
setts,  reflecting  its  changing  fortunes  with  painstaking  fidelity. 
In  that  petty  world  of  conventional  piety  and  shrewd  self-interest, 

88 


SAMUEL  SEWALL 


89 


the  kind-hearted  Judge  bustled  about,  a  sermon  in  one  hand  to 
soothe  the  doubts  of  the  troubled,  and  a  bit  of  chocolate  in  the 
other  to  comfort  the  bedridden— as  honest  and  friendly  and  prosaic 
a  soul  as  Massachusetts  ever  bred.  If  one  wishes  to  understand  the 
first  native  New  England  generation,  one  cannot  do  better  than 
linger  over  the  daily  jottings  of  this  lawyer-tradesman,  who  knew 
his  Calvin  far  better  than  his  Coke,  and  who  while  busily  adding 
new  acres  to  his  holdings  strove  to  keep  the  younger  generation 
uncontaminated  by  wigs  and  revels  and  other  godless  things,  by 
the  sweet  ravishment  of  the  psalms,  in  the  singing  of  which  the 
voice  of  the  Judge  was  lifted  up  with  pathetic  earnestness. 

For  many  years  after  his  death  fame  dealt  more  than  generously 
with  Samuel  Sewall.  The  prosperity  that  came  to  him  during  his 
earthly  pilgrimage  long  provided  for  his  memory,  and  made  of 
him  a  greater  figure  than  either  nature  or  good  fortune  created. 
Who  does  not  know  Whittier’s  tribute? 

Stately  and  slow,  with  thoughtful  air, 

His  black  cap  hiding  his  whitened  hair. 

Walks  the  Judge  of  the  Great  Assise, 

Samuel  Sewall,  the  good  and  wise. 

His  face  with  lines  of  firmness  wrought. 

He  wears  the  look  of  a  man  unbought. 

Who  swears  to  his  hurt  and  changes  not; 

Yet  touched  and  softened  nevertheless 
With  the  grace  of  Christian  gentleness; 

The  face  that  a  child  would  climb  to  kiss; 

True  and  tender  and  brave  and  just, 

That  man  might  honor  and  woman  trust. 

And  a  hundred  and  forty-eight  years  after  the  cold  January  day 
when  all  that  was  mortal  of  him  was  “honorably  Inter’d”  in  the 
Sewall  tomb  whither  so  many  of  his  family  had  gone  before,1 
a  brilliant  student  of  early  American  letters  gave  fresh  currency 
to  the  stately  Sewall  of  tradition.  “He  was  a  man  built,  every 
way,  after  a  large  pattern.  By  his  great  wealth,  his  great  offices, 
his  learning,  his  strong  sense,  his  wit,  his  warm  human  sympathy, 
his  fearlessness,  his  magnanimity,  he  was  a  visible  potentate 
among  men  in  those  days.”  2 

That  was  before  the  diary  was  published  and  the  lay  figure  of 

1  Two  of  his  three  wives  and  eleven  of  his  fourteen  children  he  had  buried. 

2  Tyler,  History  of  American  Literature  during  the  Colonial  Period,  Chapter  XIII, 

Part  IV.  » 


90 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


tradition  vanished  in  presence  of  the  real  man.  We  know  Samuel 
Sewall  now  and  see  him  as  he  was.  That  he  was  a  great  man  it  is 
impossible  to  make  out;  but  that  he  was  a  small  man  by  no  means 
follows.  Behind  the  formal  trappings  of  magistrate  and  councilor, 
we  discover  a  capable,  middle-class  soul,  honest,  simple-hearted, 
serving  himself  yet  not  unmindful  of  his  fellow  townsmen,  an 
excellent  neighbor  and  citizen,  to  whom  the  strongest  appeal  of 
life  was  the  economic.  Like  those  kindred  spirits,  Defoe  and 
Franklin,  the  dominant  inspiration  of  his  life  was  prudential,  as 
befitted  the  descendant  of  generations  of  tradesmen.  “Mr.  Henry 
Sewall,  my  great  Grandfather,”  wrote  the  Judge  in  old  age,  “was 
a  Linen  Draper  in  the  City  of  Coventry  in  Great  Britain.  He 
acquired  a  great  Estate,  was  a  prudent  Man,  and  was  more  than 
once  chosen  Mayor  of  the  City.”  3  In  turning  Puritan  the  English 
burgess  did  not  change  his  nature,  and  Samuel  Sewall  was  true  to 
his  breeding  in  fashioning  his  life  upon  that  of  his  great  grand¬ 
father.  To  acquire  wealth  and  honors,  to  occupy  a  dignified  posi¬ 
tion  among  his  fellows,  was  the  dominant  ambition  of  his  life. 
With  excellent  thrift  he  fixed  his  young  affections  upon  the  only 
child  of  a  wealthy  merchant,  the  richest  heiress  in  the  colony;  no 
penniless  “waiting-woman,”  for  Samuel  Sewall,  such  as  had  con¬ 
tented  the  unworldly  Thomas  Hooker.  He  understood  how  de¬ 
sirable  it  is  to  put  money  in  one’s  purse;  so  he  made  a  great 
alliance  and  proved  himself  a  shrewd  husbandman  as  well  as  a 
kind  husband.4  From  commerce  and  land  speculation  and  money 
lending  and  the  perquisites  of  many  offices,  he  accumulated 
steadily  until  his  wealth  entitled  him  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the 
first  citizens  of  Massachusetts.  He  did  not  forget  his  prudence 
even  in  his  generosities,  but  set  down  carefully  in  his  diary  what 
his  benefactions  cost,  that  there  might  be  no  mistake  when  he 
came  to  make  his  reckoning  with  the  Lord.  He  knew  his  rights 
and  upheld  them  stoutly;  and  in  the  petty  quarrels  and  litigations 
in  which  he  found  himself  involved,  he  stuck  to  the  letter  of  the 
law  and  usually  won  his  point.  He  did  not  misuse  his  official 
position  to  feather  his  own  nest,  but  what  might  be  got  legally 
from  public  office  he  took  care  to  get. 

With  abundant  wealth  the  path  of  preferment  was  easy  to  him. 

3  Diary,  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  Fifth  Series,  Vol.  I,  p.  xi. 

_  4  Compare  his  haggling  over  the  terms  of  settlement  upon  a  later  proposed  mar¬ 
riage;  see  Diary,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  205. 


SAMUEL  SEWALL 


91 


From  his  election  to  the  privileges  of  a  freeman  in  1678,  at  the  age 
of  twenty-six,  to  the  end  of  a  long  life,  he  was  continuously  engaged 
in  public  affairs.  He  sought  office  and  was  not  backward  in  push¬ 
ing  his  claims  upon  a  desirable  post;  5  and  by  careful  attention  to 
business  rather  than  by  exceptional  parts,  he  rose  to  a  place  of 
very  great  influence  in  the  commonwealth.  Like  a  competent 
man  of  affairs,  he  was  prompt  in  meeting  engagements — “am, 
I  think,  the  most  constant  attender  of  Councils,”  he  remarked  of 
himself  approvingly.  He  carried  out  to  the  letter  the  early  advice 
given  him:  “Mr.  Reyner  .  .  .  Advised  me  not  to  keep  overmuch 
within,  but  goe  among  men,  and  that  thereby  I  should  advantage 
myself.”  6  Capable,  industrious,  public-spirited,  he  led  a  busy 
and  useful  life  that  justified  more  than  commonly  the  responsibili¬ 
ties  which  came  to  him.  His.  qualities  might  be  middle-class,  but 
they  were  sterling  and  worthy  of  honor.  It  was  a  fortunate  star 
that  led  him  out  of  Tory  England,  where  he  would  never  have 
been  more  than  a  prosperous  tradesman,  to  the  new  world  where 
kindred  spirits  were  erecting  a  commonwealth  after  his  own  heart.7 

Nevertheless  with  all  his  excellent  qualities  Samuel  Sewall  was 
not  a  great  or  original  nature.  The  evidence  is  convincing  that 
he  was  a  capable  executive  and  administrator  rather  than  a  creative 
thinker  or  forceful  leader;  a  Puritan  embodiment  of  Defoe’s  mer¬ 
chant  ideal;  an  example  of  the  man  who  rises  to  civic  honors  by 
simple  business  virtues.  He  was  at  home  in  the  narrow  round  of 
routine,  but  for  bold  speculation  he  reveals  the  incapacity  of  the 
practical  soul.  His  intellectual  interests  were  few;  his  ready  curios¬ 
ity  was  that  of  the  uncreative  mind,  concerning  itself  with  persons 


5  See  Diary,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  168. 

6  Diary,  Vol.  I,  p.  32. 

7  The  following  is  part  of  an  obituary  notice  by  his  son: 

In  1684,  He  was  chosen  a  Magistrate  of  the  Massachusetts  Colony.  ...  In 
1692,  He  was  appointed  by  King  William  and  Queen  Mary  in  their  Royal  Charter, 
one  of  the  first  Council  for  their  Majesties  in  this  Province,  into  which  He  was 
annually  chosen  and  sat  till  1725,  when  He  resign’d  his  Election,  having  outlived 
all  the  others  nominated  in  that  Fundamental  Constitution.  In  1692  He  was  made 
one  of  the  Judges,  and  in  1718,  Chief  Justice  of  our  Superior  Courts  of  Judicature 
thro’  the  Province,  in  which  He  sat  till  1728,  when  his  Infirmities  growing  on  Him, 
He  resign’d  that  Place  also.  In  1715,  He  was  made  Judge  of  Probates  for  this 
County  of  Suffolk,  and  continued  in  that  Office  till  1728,  when  He  laid  it  down;  it 
being  the  last  Publick  Post  wherein  He  served  and  honoured  his  Country.  Diary, 
Vol.  Ill,  pp.  409-410.  In  addition  to  the  above,  he  was  at  times  an  overseer  of 
Harvard  College,  censor  of  the  press,  and  captain  of  the  Ancient  and  Honourable 
Artillery  Company;  a  frequent  moderator  of  Boston  town  meeting,  member  of 
innumerable  committees  on  church,  parish  and  commonwealth  matters,  and  ad¬ 
viser  at  large  to  whoever  was  in  difficulties. 


92 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


and  happenings  rather  than  with  ideas.  To  say  that  Sewall 
possessed  either  an  economic  or  political  philosophy  would  be  too 
generous  an  interpretation  of  his  opinions.  The  views  which  he 
upheld  vigorously  were  little  more  than  prejudices.  Of  the  several 
economic  questions  which  engaged  the  attention  of  the  Council 
during  his  years  of  service,  the  most  insistent  was  the  question  of 
issuing  bills  of  credit  to  supplement  the  scanty  currency.  There 
was  the  usual  class  alignment,  the  wealthy  opposing  the  issues, 
and  the  poor  generally  favoring  them.  The  position  of  Sewall  was 
clear.  He  vigorously  opposed  every  issue,  from  the  conviction 
that  the  only  honest  money  was  hard  money,  even  going  so  far  as 
to  prefer  barter  to  bills.8  Nowhere  does  he  reveal  any  intelligent 
grasp  of  the  economics  of  the  problem,  nor  was  he  aware  that  his 
judgment  might  have  been  influenced  by  his  private  interests  as 
a  money  lender. 

In  his  political  views  he  was  equally  unconcerned  with  broad 
principles.  He  seems  to  have  been  wholly  unread  in  political  theory, 
and  like  his  fellow  magistrates  he  never  examined  fundamentals. 
He  accepted  without  question  the  right  of  the  godly  to  police 
society,  and  he  would  have  no  meddling  with  affairs  of  state  by 
tavern  and  fireside  politicians.  As  a  member  of  the  oligarchy 
he  naturally  approved  oligarchic  rule.  Although  he  would  turn  to 
the  democracy  for  support  against  the  Lords  of  Trade,  when  the 
latter  were  moving  to  overturn  the  theocracy,  he  put  no  trust  in 
the  political  wisdom  of  the  common  people.  He  was  as  magis¬ 
terial  as  John  Winthrop  in  his  belief  in  the  principle  of  the  steward¬ 
ship  of  the  elders.  Stability  of  government  was  the  prime  essential; 
there  must  be  no  criticism  of  government  by  private  individuals 
or  by  newspapers.  On  an  occasion  when  Dudley’s  administration 
had  been  sharply  attacked  in  a  London  paper,  a  copy  of  which  had 
been  brought  over  and  talked  about,  there  was  a  great  pother  in 
Council.  Although  Sewall  was  not  willing  to  defend  Dudley,  he 
was  troubled. 

At  last  the  Council  voted,  it  tended  to  the  disturbance  of  the  Govern¬ 
ment.  Lt.  Govr.  and  Council  order’d  me  to  Reprimand  Mr.  Dum- 
mer.  ...  I  told  him  how  intolerable  it  was  for  privat  persons  to  print 
Reflections  and  Censures  on  the  highest  Acts  of  Government.  .  .  .  Twas 
ill  done  of  them  who  printed  it  in  London,  and  twas  ill  done  by  them  that 
carried  it  on  here.9 

8  See  Diary,  Vol.  II,  p.  366;  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  87  and  345. 

9  Diary,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  84-85. 


SAMUEL  SEWALL 


93 


His  characteristic  attitude  then  comes  out  in  the  phrase:  “I  said 
...  I  was  for  upholding  Government  whether  in  or  out  of  it.” 
Samuel  Sewall  was  no  rebel  against  authority.  But  if  he  was 
firm  in  support  of  the  de  facto  government,  he  was  insistent  that 
it  should  be  honest.  He  protested  to  Governor  Dudley  against 
padding  the  muster  pay-rolls  10  and  he  dissented  strongly  against 
introducing  the  current  English  practice  of  buying  commissions 
in  the  army.11  The  scandalous  corruption  of  English  politics  must 
not  be  permitted  to  sully  the  government  of  Massachusetts. 

Sewall  enjoyed  in  his  lifetime  the  repute  of  a  scholar.  He  was 
Latinist  enough  to  justify  his  Harvard  degree  of  Master  of  Arts; 
he  read  a  good  deal,  and  wrote  and  published  books.  But  he  seems 
to  have  cared  nothing  for  pure  literature,  and  was  unacquainted 
with  the  English  classics.  His  intellectual  interest  was  in  things 
either  occult  or  inconsequential.  Biblical  prophecy  was  his  fa¬ 
vorite  study,  and  his  most  ambitious  work,  Phaenomena  Quaedam 
Apocalyptic  a,  essayed  to  prove  that  America  was  to  be  the  final 
“rendezvous  of  Gog  and  Magog.”  Although  long  a  magistrate 
and  judge  of  the  highest  court,  he  was  not  a  lawyer.  He  received 
no  preliminary  training  in  the  law,  and  there  are  few  indications 
in  the  Diary  that  he  read  the  literature  of  the  profession.  His 
indifference  seems  to  have  given  concern  to  his  friends,  for  on 
January  13,  1696,  four  years  after  he  had  been  chosen  judge,  he 
noted: 

When  were  there  at  first,  Mr.  Danforth  bad  me  look  on  the  Cup¬ 
board’s  head  for  a  book;  I  told  him  I  saw  there  a  Law-book,  Wingate  on 
the  Common  Law.  He  said  he  would  lend  it  me,  I  should  speak  to  Amsden 
to  call  for  it;  and  if  he  died,  he  would  give  it  me.  Again  when  took  leave 
after  prayer,  He  said  he  lent  me  that  Book  not  to  wrap  up  but  to  read,  and 
if  misliked  it,  should  tell  him  of  it.12 

Primitive  New  England  did  not  take  kindly  to  lawyers,  and  in 
administering  a  patriarchal  justice  by  rule  of  thumb,  Sewall  was 
like  other  New  England  magistrates.  Neither  did  it  take  kindly 
to  the  spirit  of  free  speculation,  and  in  his  potterings  over  occult¬ 
isms  he  was  confessing  the  sterility  of  intellectual  interests. 

If  the  kind-hearted  Judge  lacked  capacity  for  bold  and  liberal 
thought,  he  lacked  capacity  as  well  for  emotional  fervor.  He  was 
quite  without  imagination.  Despite  his  honest  concern  for  his 
soul,  and  his  sincere  desire  for  the  advancement  of  God’s  kingdom 

m  Diary,  Vol.  II,  p.  228.  11  Ibid.,  p.  214.  12  Diary,  Vol.  I,  p.  419. 


94 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


in  New  England,  Sewall  did  not  possess  a  deeply  religious  nature. 
In  his  religious  life  he  was  the  same  prudent,  plodding  soul,  that 
stowed  away  in  his  strong-box  deeds  to  ample  possessions  during 
his  pilgrimage  through  this  vale  of  tears.  The  natural  man  was 
strong  in  his  two  hundred  and  odd  pounds  of  flesh,  and  the  re¬ 
ligious  mysticism  that  lurked  in  the  heart  of  primitive  Puritanism 
found  no  response  in  his  phlegmatic  soul.  He  was  no  Seeker,  like 
Roger  Williams,  to  be  driven  by  a  passionate  fervor  along  untried 
paths;  nor  was  he  a  philosopher,  like  John  Wise,  to  concern  him¬ 
self  with  broad  ecclesiastical  principles.  Instead,  there  is  more 
than  a  hint  of  the  tradesman’s  conception  of  religion — one  has 
only  to  understand  the  profitableness  of  salvation  to  be  led  to 
invest  in  it.  His  religion  must  be  orthodox;  no  untried  methods  or 
gambler’s  chances;  a  good  business  man  will  scrutinize  title-deeds 
with  due  care,  and  the  title-deeds  to  salvation  are  of  the  first  im¬ 
portance.  How  characteristic  are  the  following  entries  in  the  diary: 

Sabbath,  March  2d.  I  Pray’d  in  the  Family,  that  might  have  an  interest 
in  God,  Signed,  Sealed  and  Delivered,  and  that  all  that  tended  to  make  it 
sure,  might  be  perfected. 

Febr.  6.  [1718]  This  morning  .  .  .  I  had  a  sweet  and  very  affectionat 
Meditation  Concerning  the  Lord  Jesus;  Nothing  was  to  be  objected  against 
his  Person,  Parentage,  Relations,  Estate,  House,  Home!  Why  did  I  not 
resolutely,  presently  close  with  Him!  And  I  cry’d  mightily  to  God  that 
He  would  help  me  so  to  doe! 

23.  5.  [1721]  Mr.  Prince  preaches  the  Lecture,  from  Gen.  22.  18  ...  A 
very  seasonable  Discourse.  One  Fly  was  discovered  in  his  Ointment:  He 
asserted  that  the  1000.  years  Rev.  20.  stood  for  Three  Hundred  and  Sixty 
Thousand  years;  taking  every  day  of  the  1000.  years  for  a  year:  as  365. 
days  i.e.  years.  Apage  has  nugas!  [“Away  with  this  nonsense!”]  13 

No  higher  criticism  for  Samuel  Sewall.  If  we  quibble  over  the  plain 
words  of  Scripture,  how  shall  we  be  certain  of  the  terms  of  the 
contract  ? 

A  man  so  cautious  by  nature,  and  with  so  large  a  stake  in  the 
existing  order,  could  not  fail  to  be  a  conservative,  content  with  a 
world  that  justified  itself  by  the  prosperity  which  it  brought  him, 
and  which  it  would  bring  to  others,  he  doubted  not,  if  they  gov¬ 
erned  their  conduct  with  equal  prudence.  He  desired  no  innova¬ 
tions  in  church  or  state;  established  forms  answered  his  needs  and 
filled  the  measure  of  his  ideal.  The  existing  system  was  approved 
by  all  the  respectable  people  of  the  community;  there  was  every- 
13  Diary,  Vol.  I,  p.  312;  Vol.  Ill,  p.  165;  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  281-282. 


SAMUEL  SEWALL 


95 


thing  to  gain  in  upholding  it,  and  likelihood  of  loss  in  suffering 
power  to  pass  into  the  hands  of  a  royal  governor  or  of  the  ignorant 
poor.  And  so,  determined  by  complex  motives,  by  habit,  by  class 
ties,  by  economic  interest,  and  by  honest  liking,  Samuel  Sewall 
went  with  the  stream  of  conventional  orthodoxy,  strong  for  the 
old  theocratic  principles,  seeing  no  need  for  readjustments  to 
meet  changing  conditions.  The  true  principles  of  church  and 
state  had  been  laid  down  by  the  fathers,  to  which  the  common 
acceptance  by  the  best  people  gave  final  sanction. 

It  is  characteristic  of  the  prosperous  bourgeoisie,  and  the  old 
Judge  walked  the  streets  of  Boston,  or  sat  in  his  pew,  or  took  his 
place  on  the  bench,  as  stubborn  and  unimaginative  a  conservative 
as  any  of  his  fellows.  If  his  persistent  opposition  to  change,  whether 
in  the  matter  of  wigs,  or  Christmas  keeping,  or  creed,  or  politics, 
was  due  in  part  to  a  phlegmatic  love  of  use  and  wont,  it  was 
prompted  also  by  an  instinctive  fear  of  innovation.  The  world 
doubtless  is  imperfect,  but  it  answers  to  God’s  will  and  we  under¬ 
stand  its  ways  and  can  draw  our  contracts  with  open  eyes. 
Whereas  change,  however  desirable  it  may  seem  theoretically,  en¬ 
tails  too  many  disturbing  uncertainties.  Very  likely  it  was  this 
subconscious  concern  for  his  material  interests  that  so  often  made 
the  simple-minded  Judge  an  unintelligent  opponent  of  all  popular 
movements  looking  to  a  freer  and  more  liberal  society.  When  his 
native  kindliness  was  touched  he  spoke  out  frankly.  His  anti¬ 
slavery  tract  ( The  Selling  of  Joseph),  slight  in  extent  and  some¬ 
what  overpraised  by  historians,  was  not  only  much  in  advance 
of  his  time,  but  it  contains  one  sentence  that  should  not  be  for¬ 
gotten,  “There  is  no  proportion  between  twenty  pieces  of  silver 
and  liberty.”  Equally  significant  was  his  stand  against  capital 
punishment  for  counterfeiting.14  Such  acts  as  the  following  must 
also  be  set  down  to  his  credit:  “I  essay’d  June  22  [1716],  to  pre¬ 
vent  Indians  and  Negros  being  Rated  with  Horses  and  Hogs;  but 
could  not  prevail.”  16  His  native  sense  of  justice  was  as  strong  as 
his  kindliness.  Who  does  not  know  of  his  confession  in  regard 
to  the  witchcraft  persecutions — an  act  that  set  all  Boston  tongues 
wagging.  When  he  was  convinced  that  he  had  made  a  grievous 
and  sorrowful  mistake,  he  rose  in  the  congregation  while  the 
minister  read  his  public  acknowledgment  of  that  mistake,  and  his 
repentance  for  his  share  in  the  unhappy  business.  Thereafter 
14  See  Diary,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  277.  '  16  Ibid.,  p.  87. 


96 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


in  commemoration  he  kept  an  annual  day  of  prayer  and  fasting. 
We  can  forgive  him  much  for  that  honest  and  manly  act. 

To  the  end  of  his  life  Sewall  refused  to  go  forward  with  the 
changing  times,  and  his  voluntary  assumption  of  the  office  of 
praefectura  morum  laid  him  under  a  heavy  responsibility  to  see 
that  the  primitive  ways  were  upheld.  He  was  magisterial  in  re¬ 
buke  and  few  transgressors  of  the  strict  New  England  code  es¬ 
caped  a  censure.  One  would  like  to  have  James  Franklin’s  private 
opinion  of  the  sharp-eyed  old  Judge.  To  Franklin  and  other 
members  of  the  Hell-fire  Club — young  fellows  keenly  interested 
in  domesticating  the  new  wit  literature  in  homespun  Boston, 
openly  skeptical,  inclining  to  Arianism  and  even  to  deism — he 
must  have  seemed  a  prosy  old  reactionary,  upholding  a  decadent 
orthodoxy  and  an  obsolete  social  order.  No  doubt  many  a  sharp 
jibe  was  aimed  at  his  back,  for  there  were  many  to  whom  the 
older  ways  began  to  seem  preposterous.  It  may  very  well  have 
been  that  those  who  committed  a  certain  prank  which  Sewall 
records  may  have  had  him  in  mind. 

Aug.  3.  [1717]  .  .  .  ’Tis  sad  it  should  be  so,  but  a  virulent  Libel  was 
starch’d  on  the  Three  Doors  of  the  Meeting  House,  containing  the  follow¬ 
ing  Words: 

TO  ALL  TRUE-HEARTED  CHRISTIANS 
Good  people,  within  this  House,  this  very  day, 

A  Canting  Crew  will  meet  to  fast,  and  pray. 

Just  as  a  miser  fasts  with  greedy  mind  to  spare; 

So  the  glutton  fasts,  to  eat  a  greater  share. 

But  the  sower-headed  Presbyterians  fast  to  seem  more  holy. 

And  their  Canting  Ministers  to  punish  sinfull  foley.18 

Happily  there  is  another  and  pleasanter  side  to  the  character  of 
Samuel  Sewall,  and  one  that  looked  forward  to  the  future  instead 
of  backward  to  the  past.  Despite  the  harshness  of  the  Puritan 
creed  and  the  bigotry  of  Puritan  rule,  the  fields  and  meadows  of 
New  England,  that  sent  a  breath  of  the  countryside  through  the 
crooked  streets  of  Boston,  were  a  wholesome  influence  in  the  lives 
of  men  and  women.  Magistrate  and  money-lender  though  he  was, 
Samuel  Sewall  was  a  countryman  and  farmer  also,  a  judge  of 
milch  cows  and  fat  porkers  as  well  as  criminals,  a  lover  of  robins 
and  flowers  and  fruitful  orchards,  one  who  sat  his  horse  well,  and 
when  on  circuit  often  drew  up  at  a  rail-fence  to  discuss  the  crops 

16  Diary ,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  116-117.  Note  the  use  of  the  word  Presbyterian  in  these 
lines. 


SAMUEL  SEWALL 


97 


with  some  gossipy  farmer.  Above  all,  a  lover  of  men,  the  most 
neighborly  soul  in  the  world,  mingling  freely  with  all  classes,  and 
although  quite  properly  proud  of  a  visit  from  the  Governor  or  other 
great  person,  never  above  chatting  with  the  carpenter,  or  doing  a 
kindness  to  an  old  nurse.  It  was  the  friendly  heart  of  the  man  that 
prompted  so  many  little  errands  of  helpfulness;  and  if  sermons 
and  tracts  and  good  advice  flowed  from  him  like  a  spring  freshet, 
if  he  was  magisterial  in  petty  rebuke,  such  little  oddities  of  the 
man  and  the  time  did  not  detract  from  his  sympathy  or  lessen 
his  helpfulness.  Men  stood  in  awe  of  Cotton  Mather,  and  children 
must  have  run  from  him,  but  neither  awe  nor  fear  threw  their 
shadow  across  Sewall’s  path.  We  can  make  too  much  of  the 
countless  funerals  that  dot  his  pages,  with  their  thrifty  reckoning 
of  gloves  and  scarfs  and  rings  that  were  the  queer  perquisites 
of  pallbearers.  It  was  not  an  unwholesome  world  despite  the 
smell  of  mortality  that  exudes  from  the  old  records,  or  the  terrors 
of  little  children  smitten  with  the  fear  of  hell;  and  the  homely 
round  of  Samuel  Sewall’s  activities  was  very  far  from  unwholesome. 

It  was  his  neighborliness  that  made  him  so  representative  of 
the  leveling  tendencies  of  a  provincial  village  life — an  easy  com¬ 
radeship  with  men  of  all  conditions,  unknown  to  the  rigid  class 
divisions  of  the  old  world.  Going  one  day  to  visit  the  Jews’  burial 
place  at  Mile-End,  while  on  a  visit  to  London,  he  invited  the 
sexton  to  a  pot  of  beer  and  a  quiet  chat,  remarking  in  friendly 
fashion,  “wisht  might  meet  in  Heaven:  He  answered,  and  drink  a 
Glass  of  Beer  together,  which  we  were  then  doing.”  17  His  English 
friends  would  scarcely  have  understood  that  homely  little  scene, 
so  natural  to  the  colonial.  Sewall  is  the  first  Yankee  who  reveals 
the  native  kindliness  of  the  New  England  village.  He  was  zealous 
to  do  good  and  to  deal  generously  with  others,  because  he  had  been 
generously  dealt  by.  Growing  more  human  with  the  ripening  years, 
yet  instinctively  conservative,  stubbornly  intent  on  managing 
his  own  affairs  in  his  own  way  and  by  his  own  agents,  provincial 
to  the  core  and  strong  in  local  pride,  he  reveals  the  special  bent 
of  the  New  England  character,  as  it  unconsciously  differentiated 
itself  from  its  English  original.  Not  American  as  yet  like  Franklin, 
and  no  longer  wholly  English  like  Winthrop,  far  from  democratic 
and  yet  no  Tory,  he  was  the  progenitor  of  a  practical  race  that  was 
to  spread  the  gospel  of  economic  individualism  across  the  continent. 

17  Diary ,  Vol.  I,  p.  301. 


CHAPTER  II 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 

i 

For  one  who  is  not  a  loving  student  of  the  unamiable  bickerings 
that  clutter  the  records  of  early  New  England,  and  who  does  not 
read  them  by  the  gentle  light  of  filial  loyalty,  it  would  seem  pre¬ 
sumptuous  to  venture  into  the  thorny  fields  tilled  by  the  Mathers. 
He  is  certain  to  get  well  scratched,  and  not  at  all  certain  to  return 
with  any  fruit  gathered.  The  rancors  of  dead  partisanships  beset 
him  on  every  side,  and  the  gossip  of  old  wives’  tales  fills  his  ears. 
He  will  encounter  many  a  slanderous  hearsay,  and  the  authentic 
documents  to  which  he  would  naturally  turn  are  often  inaccessible, 
and  always  inhospitable.  The  countless  tracts,  for  the  most  part 
inconsequential,  that  issued  in  an  unbroken  stream  from  the  tire¬ 
less  Mather  pens,  consuming  all  the  italics  in  the  printer’s  case, 
constitute  a  veritable  chevaux-de-frise  to  protect  their  authors’ 
literary  reputations  from  any  Philistine  attack;  and  behind  that 
bristling  barricade  they  have  long  bidden  defiance  to  casual  in¬ 
vasion.  Only  a  siege  can  reduce  their  stronghold  and  bring  them 
forth  into  the  clear  light  of  day. 

Two  generations  of  Harvard  scholarship  have  essayed  the  under¬ 
taking,  but  there  is  still  wanting  the  detached  critic  who  will  set 
the  Mathers  against  an  adequate  historical  background,  and  ap¬ 
praise  them  objectively  in  relation  to  their  times.  The  Harvard 
contributions  are  excellent  in  their  way,  but  a  consciousness  of 
dealing  with  Harvard  worthies  would  seem  to  have  laid  the  writers 
under  certain  inhibitions.  Exposition  too  easily  slides  into  apol¬ 
ogetics.  The  latest  study  1  is  a  somewhat  meticulous  defense. 
It  is  an  extraordinarily  painstaking  document,  that  has  added  to 
our  knowledge  of  Increase  Mather’s  life  and  work,  but  it  was  un¬ 
happily  conceived  in  the  dark  of  the  moon,  a  season  congenial  to 
strange  quirks  of  fancy.  Some  tangle  it  has  cleared  away,  but 
fresh  obstacles  have  been  added  by  the  intrusion  of  a  thesis  to 
be  defended.  In  consequence,  the  interpretation  of  motives  is 

1  Kenneth  B.  Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  1925. 

98 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


99 


colored  by  special  pleading,  and  the  very  necessary  inquiry  into 
the  sources  of  those  virulent  antagonisms  that  sprang  up  full-armed 
in  the  minister’s  every  footprint  is  put  aside  as  ungermane  to  a 
biography.  It  is  an  unfortunate  assumption  for  it  puts  aside  much 
th^t  is  crucial.  The  rehabilitation  becomes  too  easy  and  complete. 
It  proves  too  much.  It  would  have  us  believe  that  in  spite  of  all 
the  smoke  that  gathered  about  Increase  Mather’s  militant  pil¬ 
grimage  through  life,  there  was  never  any  lire  of  his  kindling;  that 
in  spite  of  all  the  puddles  through  which  the  priestly  politician 
splashed  to  reach  his  ends,  no  spot  or  stain  ever  smutched  his 
gown.  The  contention  may  be  sound,  but  it  puts  credulity  to  the 
strain,  and  unless  one  has  something  of  a  Mather  stomach  for 
marvels,  one  is  likely  to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of  doubt. 

II 

The  Mathers  were  a  singularly  provocative  family,  capable, 
ambitious,  certain  to  have  a  finger  in  every  pie  baking  in  the 
theocratic  oven.  From  the  emigrant  Richard  with  the  great  voice, 
chief  architect  of  the  Cambridge  Platform,  to  the  provincial 
Cotton,  the  family  combativeness  and  love  of  publicity  put  their 
marks  on  New  England  history.  Of  the  three  generations,  cer¬ 
tainly  Increase  Mather  was  the  most  generously  endowed  with 
capacity  for  leadership;  an  able  man,  practical  and  assertive,  liking 
to  be  in  the  forefront  of  affairs,  not  wanting  his  light  hidden  under  a 
bushel.  An  arch-conservative,  he  justified  his  ways  to  his  con¬ 
science  by  the  excellence  of  the  heritage  he  strove  to  conserve. 
A  formalist,  he  satisfied  his  intellectual  curiosity  by  extolling  the 
sufficiency  of  the  creed  of  the  fathers.  He  closed  the  windows  of 
his  mind  against  the  winds  of  new  doctrine,  and  bounded  the 
fields  of  speculative  inquiry  by  orthodox  fences.  He  was  of  the 
succession  of  John  Cotton  rather  than  Thomas  Hooker,  a  priestly 
theocrat,  though  never  a  shuffler  like  Cotton,  less  troubled  by  free 
inquiry,  less  by  the  intellectual.  All  his  life  he  was  inhibited  from 
bold  speculation  by  his  personal  loyalties  and  interests.  As  a 
beneficiary  of  things  as  they  were,  certain  to  lose  in  prestige  and 
power  with  any  relaxing  of  the  theocracy,  it  would  be  asking  too 
much  of  human  nature  to  expect  him  to  question  the  sufficiency 
of  the  established  system  of  which  he  was  the  most  distinguished 
representative.  Not  to  have  approved  it  would  have  been  to 
repudiate  his  habitual  way  of  thinking,  his  deepest  prejudices,  his 


100 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


strongest  convictions.  He  had  been  molded  and  shaped  by  the 
theocracy;  it  was  the  very  marrow  of  his  bones;  as  well  demand 
that  pig  iron  turn  molten  again  after  it  comes  from  the  matrix. 
The  ore  of  which  he  was  fashioned  was  excellent,  but  once  molded 
it  was  rigid;  there  would  be  no  return  to  fluidity.  And  so  deter¬ 
mined  by  every  impact  of  environment,  by  every  appeal  of  loyalty, 
and  by  a  very  natural  ambition,  Increase  Mather  became  a  stout 
upholder  of  the  traditional  order,  a  staunch  old  Puritan  Tory  of  the 
theocratic  line.  How  could  any  promptings  of  liberalism  find 
nourishment  in  such  a  mind  ?  2  Why  should  one  expect  to  find 
in  the  works  of  such  a  man  the  seeds  of  new  systems  of  thought  or 
more  generous  institutions?  He  was  the  outstanding  figure  of 
the  theocracy  in  the  days  of  its  overthrow,  but  intellectually  he 
was  not  worthy  to  unloose  the  shoe-strings  of  Roger  Williams. 

In  his  professional  capacity,  Increase  Mather  was  the  priest 
rather  than  the  theologian,  a  pastor  of  the  flock,  an  expounder  of 
the  creed,  rather  than  a  seeker  after  new  light.  As  a  minister 
his  mind  was  circumscribed  by  the  thinking  of  John  Calvin.  He 
learned  nothing  from  Luther,  and  was  bitterly  hostile  to  those 
phases  of  Independency  that  embodied  the  more  generous  Lutheran 
principles.  No  man  was  by  temperament  better  fitted  to  embrace 
the  coercive  spirit  of  the  Genevan  discipline.  Strong-willed  and 
ascetic,  he  discovered  in  discipline  the  chief  end  for  which  the 
children  of  Adam  are  created.  A  profound  admirer  of  the  close- 
knit  Genevan  system,  he  was  a  Presbyterian  in  spirit,  a  man  after 
Calvin’s  own  heart,  who  clung  to  the  old  coercions  in  an  age  that 
was  seeking  to  throw  them  off-.  If  he  counseled  innovation  it  was 
in  the  way  of  strengthening  ministerial  authority,  never  in  the  way 
of  liberalizing  either  creed  or  practice.  It  was  the  Congregational¬ 
ism  of  the  Cambridge  Platform,  and  not  that  of  early  Plymouth, 
that  he  upheld;  and  to  strengthen  that  order  he  turned  earnestly 
to  the  practical  work  of  Presbyterianizing.  He  was  the  prime 
mover  in  summoning  the  synod  of  1679-80,  requested  by  the  Court 
to  consider  amongst  other  things  what  “may  appeare  necessary 
for  the  preventing  schismes,  haeresies,  prophaneness,  &  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  the  churches  in  one  faith  &  order  of  the  gospell,”  3  and 
the  chief  suggestions  of  the  body,  of  which  he  was  the  conspicuous 
leader,  were  a  return  to  a  stricter  discipline,  and  a  strengthening 

2  Compare  Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  pp.  394-395. 

3  Quoted  in  W.  Walker,  A  History  of  Congregational  Churches,  etc.,  p.  187. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


101 


of  the  passage  in  the  Savoy  Confession  of  faith — adopted  by  the 
synod — by  borrowings  from  the  Westminster  Confession,  which 
“more  positively  set  forth  the  authority  of  the  state  in  doctrinal 
questions.”  4 

In  1691,  while  in  London,  Mather  had  been  active  in  the  work 
of  uniting  the  Presbyterian  and  Congregational  churches  of 
England,  under  articles  that  would  seem  to  have  been  more  Presby¬ 
terian  than  Congregational;  and  in  1705,  following  the  curiously 
spiteful  controversy  over  the  Brattle  Street  Church  he  joined 
vigorously  in  the  proposed  work  of  rejuvenating  the  New  England 
system  by  engrafting  further  shoots  from  the  Presbyterian  stock. 
One  of  these  grafts  from  the  London  agreement — the  principle  of 
licensing  ministerial  candidates  by  the  association  of  ministers, 
thereby  effectively  preventing  the  intrusion  of  undesired  members 
— established  itself  on  the  Congregational  system;  but  another — 
the  principle  of  associational  control  of  the  several  churches — was 
blighted  by  the  attack  of  John  Wise.5  What  this  desired  consoli¬ 
dation  of  power  in  the  hands  of  the  ministers  implied,  is  suggested 
by  the  terms  of  the  Cambridge  Platform,  which  asserted  that 
“the  work  &  duty  of  the  people  is  expressed  in  the  phrase  of  obey¬ 
ing  their  Elders,”  and  that  they  may  not  “speak  in  church,  before 
they  have  leave  from  the  elders:  nor  continue  so  doing,  when 
they  require  silence,  nor  may  they  oppose  nor  contradict  the 
judgment  or  sentence  of  the  Elders,  without  sufficient  &  weighty 
cause.”  6  Recalling  that  the  elders  of  a  church  had  been  reduced 
in  number  to  the  single  minister,  one  may  perhaps  venture  to 
suggest  that  a  man  ardently  working  to  strengthen  the  hands  of 
the  ministerial  oligarchy  by  further  Presbyterianizing  was  no 
friend  to  Separatist-Congregationalism,  nor  one  in  whom  the 
spirit  of  humility  would  work  any  lessening  of  the  authority  of 
the  Lord’s  stewards.7 

In  his  conception  of  toleration  Mather  followed  naturally  in 
the  footsteps  of  John  Cotton.  He  would  tolerate  all  views  that 

4  Ibid.,  p.  190.  His  biographer  has  overlooked  the  significance  of  this.  See 

Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  p.  15 1. 

6  His  biographer  has  somewhat  slurred  his  account  of  the  “Proposals.”  See 
p.  282.  But  his  justification  is  worth  noting:  “If  the  original  brand  of  Puritan 
piety  was  worth  saving,  and  Mather  believed  it  was,  an  oligarchic  church  govern¬ 
ment  was  the  only  means  of  securing  it  in  an  age  when  men  were  inclined  to  change 
their  religious  ideas  as  they  changed  their  thought  on  other  affairs.” 

6  W.  Walker,  A  History  of  the  Congregational  Churches,  etc.,  p.  205. 

7  Compare  Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  pp.  361-363. 


102 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


were  not  in  error,  but  his  criteria  of  truth  were  so  far  from  catholic 
as  to  lead  him  into  constant  and  vehement  attack  upon  other 
sects.  As  a  responsible  leader  he  was  careful  to  clothe  his  attacks 
with  generous  professions;  but  he  never  stepped  forward  to  uphold 
the  right  of  free  thought,  or  to  dissuade  his  brethren  from  heresy¬ 
baiting.  His  biographer  is  greatly  impressed  by  the  minister’s 
professions,  and  takes  them  at  somewhat  more  than  face  value, 
forgetting  the  ancient  saying  that  by  the  fruits  of  men’s  lives  they 
shall  be  known.  Casuistry  is  useful  for  purposes  of  defense,  and  a 
skillful  apologist  can  explain  away  much;  but  the  spirit  of  tolera¬ 
tion  revealed  in  the  following  passages  was  certainly  no  child  of 
liberalism: 

The  “Anabaptists”  had  given  trouble  in  New  England.  They  had 
installed  as  minister  a  man  excommunicated  from  the  Congregational 
church,  and,  when  their  meeting-house  was  closed  to  them,  they  per¬ 
sisted  in  assembling  publicly  before  its  barred  doors  rather  than  worship 
unmolested  in  a  private  house,  To  Mather  these  were  attacks  upon  the 
true  faith,  and  manifest  disturbances  of  the  civil  peace.  Naturally  there 
is  some  acidity  in  his  strictures  on  the  “  blasted  Error”  of  “  Antipedobap- 
tism.”  .  .  .  He  denounces  Baptists  roundly  enough,  points  to  their 
kinship  with  the  turbulent  Anabaptists  in  Europe,  and  writes:  “Are  they 
not  generally  of  a  bad  Spirit?  Bitter  enemies  to  the  Lords  most  eminent 
Servants?  yea,  to  the  faithfull  Ambassadors,  spitting  the  cruel  venome  of 
Asps  against  them.” 

He  then  concludes:  “Nor  is  the  modern  reader  likely  to  disagree” 
with  the  apology  by  President  Oakes,  who  wrote  in  an  introduction 
to  Mather’s  screed: 

It  is  sufficiently  known  to  those  that  know  the  Author,  that  he  is  none 
of  the  Ishmaels  of  the  times,  that  have  their  hand  against  every  man 
and  love  to  be  taking  a  Dog  by  the  Ears  ...  or  to  be  dabling  in  the 
waters  of  strife.  .  .  .  They  that  know  his  Doctrine  and  manner  of  life, 
cannot  but  know  that  the  life  of  his  Spirit  is  in  the  things  of  practical 
Divinity,  and  the  great  Design  of  his  ministry  is  to  promote  the  power  and 
practice  of  piety  in  the  greatest  instances.  ...  I  dare  undertake  ...  his 
design  ...  is  not  to  traduce  .  .  .  those  that  are  otherwise  minded,  or 
expose  them  to  severities  &  sufferings  on  the  bare  account  of  their 
opinion.8 

From  these  curious  passages  the  unsympathetic  realist  is  likely 
to  draw  the  conclusions  that  the  spirit  of  mutual  admiration  came 
to  early  birth  in  New  England,  and  that  it  makes  a  vast  difference 

8  Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  pp.  138-139. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


103 


whose  ox  is  gored.  Something  of  the  same  casuistry  is  employed 
to  explain  away  Increase  Mather’s  unhappy  part  in  the  witch¬ 
craft  mess.9  The  whole  matter  is  involved  and  rendered  difficult 
by  guilty  consciences  and  the  need  to  save  reputations,  and  per¬ 
haps  the  facts  are  not  to  be  got  at;  yet  it  is  only  another  instance 
to  show  how  quickly  candor  flies  out  at  the  window  when  a  Mather 
comes  in  at  the  door.  One  may  make  much  or  little  of  the  son’s 
statement  that  Increase  grew  more  tolerant  in  his  later  years;  it 
would  seem  at  best  to  have  been  only  the  difference  between  black 
and  dark  gray.  A  dominating  man  does  not  take  kindly  to  differ¬ 
ences  of  counsel.  Increase  Mather  was  a  stout  upholder  of  the 
law  and  order  in  the  shaping  of  which  he  had  a  hand,  but  he  looked 
with  no  friendly  eye  on  the  architects  of  a  different  order;  and  the 
bitterness  of  his  later  years  was  the  natural  consequence  of  a 
strong,  proud,  ambitious  man,  thwarted  in  his  dearest  projects. 

If  he  contributed  nothing  to  a  more  liberal  theology  or  church 
organization,  it  is  idle  to  expect  him  to  have  contributed  to  political 
speculation.  As  a  leader  of  the  theocracy  he  meddled  much  in 
practical  politics,  but  it  would  seem  that  he  was  quite  unread  in 
the  political  philosophers  and  wholly  ignorant  of  major  principles. 
The  great  English  liberals  of  Commonwealth  times  and  later  left 
him  untouched.  He  bought  and  read  many  books,  but  almost 
none  of  a  political  nature.10  Hobbes,  Harrington,  Sidney,  Milton, 
Filmer,  Locke,  were  as  much  out  of  his  intellectual  ken  as  were 
the  speculations  of  Roger  Williams.  Interest  in  political  theory 
had  ceased  in  Massachusetts  with  the  banishment  of  the  great 
Independent,  and  the  principles  of  liberal  thinkers  like  Harrington 
and  Milton  would  have  awakened  little  sympathy  in  so  stalwart  a 
theocrat  as  Increase  Mather.  He  was  a  practical  man,  an  ad¬ 
ministrator  and  mentor,  a  stern  castigator  morum  to  the  common¬ 
wealth,  and  as  a  college  president  he  had  been  trained  in  a  school 
little  notable  for  its  sympathetic  consideration  of  the  views  of  sub¬ 
ordinates.  He  got  on  ill  with  his  Harvard  tutors,  and  one  of  the 
unseemliest  squabbles  of  his  later  years  grew  out  of  the  bitterness 
sowed  between  a  “strong”  administrator  and  his  teaching  staff.11 
A  man  accounted  less  pious,  concerned  with  ends  more  patently 
worldly,  might  well  be  reckoned  dictatorial  and  domineering;  but 

9  See  pp.  294-295,  where  he  seeks  unsuccessfully  to  refute  the  position  taken  by 
J.  T.  Adams. 

10  See  Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  pp.  125-127.  t 

11  “The  Brattle-Street  Church  Controversy,”  for  which  see  ibid.,  pp.  258  IF. 


104 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


Puritan  righteousness,  perhaps,  is  not  to  be  judged  by  profane 
standards,  nor  the  same  severity  of  judgment  applied  to  politicians 
laboring  in  the  theocratic  vineyard,  that  is  applied  to  the  common 
breed. 

Perhaps  the  happiest  years  of  Increase  Mather’s  arduous  life 
were  those  spent  in  London  as  agent  of  the  theocratic  party  to 
secure  such  terms  as  he  could  for  the  settlement  of  New  England. 
It  was  a  congenial  task  and  a  congenial  field.  His  love  of  di¬ 
plomacy  and  his  fondness  for  England  were  both  gratified.  He 
mingled  there  on  terms  of  equality  with  the  intellectual  leaders 
of  English  Nonconformity,  and  matched  his  wit  with  men  high 
in  station.  He  proved  himself  a  skillful  manager,  but  the  threads 
were  too  tangled  for  any  Puritan  diplomat  to  smoothe  out,  and 
he  fell  short  of  his  hopes.  The  terms  of  the  charter  as  finally 
drafted  satisfied  few  of  the  Boston  theocrats,  and  his  nomination 
of  Sir  William  Phipps  for  Governor  was  certainly  ill-judged.  Sir 
William  had  been  converted  to  the  true  faith  by  Increase  him¬ 
self  and  was  reckoned  by  him  a  chosen  vessel  of  the  Lord;  but  he 
turned  out  to  be  no  better  than  a  cracked  pot,  and  with  the  coming 
of  Dudley  the  political  influence  of  Increase  Mather  was  finally 
broken.  He  was  maneuvered  out  of  his  position  as  president  of 
Harvard  and  later  suffered  the  mortification  of  seeing  the  post 
fall  into  the  hands  of  Leverett,  the  old  tutor  now  become  an  influ¬ 
ential  politician,  with  whom  he  had  been  bitterly  at  outs.  “  Doubt¬ 
less  there  is  not  any  government  in  the  world,”  he  wrote,  “that 
has  been  laid  under  greater  obligations  by  a  greater  man  than  this 
government  has  been  by  me.  Nevertheless  I  have  received  more 
discouragement  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  by  those  in  government, 
than  by  all  the  men  in  the  world  besides.  Let  not  my  children 
put  too  much  confidence  in  men.”  12  It  is  not  pleasant  to  be 
ousted  from  one’s  position  by  politicians,  and  if  one  is  certain  that 
the  slight  intended  for  the  servant  falls  on  the  Master,  it  is  scarcely 
to  be  borne.  If  waves  of  black  pessimism  swept  over  him  in  those 
unhappy  later  years  when  his  ambitions  were  hopelessly  frus¬ 
trated,  there  was  provocation  enough.  He  had  outlived  his  age 
and  the  ablest  of  the  native-born  theocrats  had  become  a  byword 
and  a  mocking  amongst  the  profane  of  Boston. 

Not  a  great  man,  as  the  world  reckons  greatness,  Increase 
Mather  may  scarcely  be  accounted  a  great  Puritan.  As  a  theo- 

12  Ibid.,  pp.  373—4,  note. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


105 


logian  he  was  wanting  in  speculative  vigor,  and  as  a  pastor  he  was 
wanting  in  self-denying  love.  It  is  not  necessary  to  set  him  over 
against  Roger  Williams  or  Jonathan  Edwards  or  William  Ellery 
Channing,  to  reveal  his  intellectual  and  spiritual  shortcomings. 
One  has  only  to  place  him  beside  so  rugged  and  honest  a  Puritan 
as  Samuel  Hopkins,  who  in  true  Christian  humility,  utterly  re¬ 
gardless  of  his  own  fame,  gave  his  life  to  theology  and  the  care  of 
the  poor  and  the  outcast,  to  realize  how  conventional  a  soul  was 
Increase  Mather,  how  incurious  intellectually,  how  ambitious 
and  self-seeking.  Men  loved  Samuel  Hopkins  even  though  they 
might  vigorously  reject  his  doctrine,  as  they  loved  Roger  Williams 
and  Ellery  Channing;  but  few  seem  to  have  loved  Increase  Mather. 
One  might  respect  his  abilities,  but  he  was  too  austerely  forbidding 
to  like,  too  overbearing  to  awaken  the  spirit  of  good  will.  Ideas  in 
the  abstract  held  no  interest  for  him.  His  biographer  has  happily 
recalled  Mather’s  forgotten  interest  in  scientific  inquiry,  and  for 
this  slight  relief  from  the  intolerable  drab  of  his  life-story  one  may 
be  grateful.  Yet  one  must  not  build  too  high  on  an  insubstantial 
foundation.  In  the  England  that  Mather  loved,  and  toward 
which  he  was  strongly  drawn — hoping  that  opportunity  would 
offer  for  a  pulpit  there — pottering  over  natural  philosophy  had 
become  a  mark  of  distinction,  and  a  man  so  envious  of  repute 
would  have  wished  to  approve  himself  to  those  whom  he  admired. 
Though  he  lived  in  Boston  he  would  not  have  it  thought  that  he 
was  provincial. 

Of  the  miscellaneous  literary  output  that  flowed  from  his  pen 
in  an  abundant  stream,  little  need  be  said.  It  is  of  concern  only 
to  minute  historians  of  the  local.  That  he  was  master  of  an  excel¬ 
lent  prose  style,  clear  and  straightforward,  is  sufficiently  evident;  if 
his  matter  had  been  so  good,  his  legitimate  fame  would  have  been 
far  greater.  The  work  on  which  his  reputation  largely  rests  is 
An  Essay  for  the  Recording  of  Illustrious  Providences,  printed  at 
Boston  and  London  in  1684,  and  twice  reissued  in  the  nineteenth 
century  under  the  title  Remarkable  Providences.  It  is  an  amusing 
book  of  old  wives’  tales,  not  singular  at  all  for  the  times,  but 
characteristic  rather;  an  expression  of  the  naivete  that  crops  out 
in  Winthrop’s  History  of  New  England,  and  other  writings  of  the 
emigrant  generation,  but  now  become  a  fashion  amongst  the 
lesser  lights  of  the  Royal  Academy  and  English  Nonconformists. 
It  suited  to  a  nicety  the  Mather  love,  of  marvels,  and  Increase 


106 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


constituted  himself  a  generous  repository  of  all  the  chimney- 
corner  tales  of  the  countryside.  To  call  such  a  book  “a  scientific 
and  historical  recording  of  phenomena  observed  in  New  Eng¬ 
land,”  as  his  biographer  has  done,  is  to  gall  the  back  of  a  thesis 
with  hard  riding.13  In  one  chapter  only  does  Mather  suggest 
the  spirit  of  scientific  inquiry;  four  out  of  the  twelve  deal  with 
witchcraft  and  kindred  topics;  and  the  rest  are  made  up  of  such 
instances  of  divine  providence  as  great  fish  jumping  out  of  the  sea 
into  the  boats  of  starving  sailors  adrift,  of  the  freaks  played  by 
lightning  and  tornadoes,  and  of  God’s  punishments  on  wicked 
Quakers.  At  the  time  it  was  a  harmless  enough  book,  but  in  the 
light  of  after  developments  it  was  scarcely  so  harmless.  The 
emphasis  laid  upon  witchcraft  was  an  unfortunate,  if  unconsidered, 
influence  in  preparing  the  psychology  of  New  England  for  the 
Salem  outbreak,  and  the  minister  later  reaped  a  bitter  harvest 
from  it. 

“Not  many  years  ago,”  he  wrote  in  the  preface  to  Illustrious 
Providences,  “I  lost  (and  that’s  an  afflictive  loss  indeed!)  several 
moneths  from  study  by  sickness.  Let  every  God-fearing  reader 
joyn  with  me  in  prayer,  that  I  may  be  enabled  to  redeem  the  time, 
and  (in  all  ways  wherein  I  am  capable)  to  serve  my  generation.” 
That  Increase  Mather  sincerely  desired  to  serve  his  generation 
according  to  his  lights,  none  may  deny.  His  labors  were  appalling, 
his  reputation  was  great,  and  when  he  died  the  light  of  the  old 
churches  went  out.  The  spirit  of  Presbyterianism  went  to  its 
grave  in  New  England,  and  not  till  a  hundred  years  later  did  the 
new  light — which  was  no  other  than  primitive  English  Inde¬ 
pendency — shine  out  in  the  life  and  work  of  William  Ellery  Chan- 
ning.  After  two  centuries  Unitarianism  recovered  for  the  Mass¬ 
achusetts  churches  the  spirit  of  early  Separatism  that  had  been 
lost  since  the  days  of  the  Cambridge  Platform.  Channing  finally 
uprooted  the  vine  that  Increase  Mather  had  so  laboriously  tended. 

ill 

Of  the  unpopularity  that  gathered  about  the  name  of  Mather 
after  the  fall  of  the  theocracy,  the  larger  portion  fell  to  the  lot  of 
the  son,  the  eccentricities  of  whose  character  made  him  peculiarly 
vulnerable  to  attack.  In  his  youth  the  spoiled  child  of  Boston, 
in  middle  life  he  was  petulant  and  irritable,  inclined  to  sulk  when 

13  Ibid.,  p.  170. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


107 


his  will  was  crossed.  In  the  career  of  no  other  New  England 
Puritan  is  the  inquisitorial  pettiness  of  the  Genevan  system  of 
theology  and  discipline  revealed  so  disagreeably.  The  heroic  quali¬ 
ties  of  an  earlier  age  had  atrophied  in  an  atmosphere  of  formal¬ 
ism,  and  Boston  Calvinism  of  the  year  1690  had  become  a  grotesque 
caricature  of  a  system  that  in  its  vigor  had  defied  the  power  of 
Rome  and  laid  kingdoms  at  its  feet.  Embodied  in  Cotton  Mather 
it  was  garrulous,  meddlesome,  scolding,  an  echo  of  dead  voices, 
a  shadow  of  forgotten  realities.  The  common  provincialism  had 
laid  its  blight  upon  it.  The  horizons  of  the  New  England  imagina¬ 
tion  grew  narrow,  and  Puritan  anthropomorphism  unconsciously 
reduced  the  God  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  to  the  compass  of  a 
village  priest,  clothed  in  stock  and  gown,  and  endowed  with  the 
intellect  of  a  parish  beadle.  In  the  egocentric  universe  wherein 
Cotton  Mather  lived  and  labored  the  cosmos  had  shrunk  to  the 
narrow  bounds  of  a  Puritan  commonwealth,  whereof  Boston  was 
the  capital  and  the  prosperity  of  the  North  Church  the  special 
and  particular  object  of  divine  concern.  The  mind  of  Increase 
Mather  had  been  enlarged  by  contact  with  English  life;  the  mind 
of  the  son  was  dwarfed  by  a  village  world. 

Cotton  Mather  is  an  attractive  subject  for  the  psychoanalyst. 
Intensely  emotional,  high-strung  and  nervous,  he  was  oversexed 
and  overwrought,  subject  to  ecstatic  exaltations  and,  especially 
during  his  celibate  years,  given  to  seeing  visions.  In  the  carefully 
edited  Diary  which  he  left  for  the  edification  of  his  natural  and 
spiritual  children,  at  the  beginning  of  his  twenty-third  year,  is  an 
apologetic  entry — “Cum.  Relego,  Scripsisse  Pudet!” — that  Pro¬ 
fessor  Wendell  has  put  into  English  thus: 

A  strange  and  memorable  thing.  After  outpourings  of  prayer,  with 
the  utmost  fervor  and  fasting,  there  appeared  an  Angel,  whose  face  shone 
like  the  noonday  sun.  His  features  were  as  those  of  a  man,  and  beardless; 
his  head  was  encircled  by  a  splendid  tiara;  on  his  shoulders  were  wings; 
his  garments  were  white  and  shining;  his  robe  reached  to  his  ankles;  and 
about  his  loins  was  a  belt  not  unlike  the  girdles  of  the  peoples  of  the  East. 
And  this  Angel  said  that  he  was  sent  by  the  Lord  Jesus  to  bear  a  clear 
answer  to  the  prayers  of  a  certain  youth,  and  to  bear  back  his  words  in 
reply.  Many  things  this  Angel  said  which  it  is  not  fit  should  be  set  down 
here.  But  among  other  things  not  to  be  forgotten  he  declared  that  the 
fate  of  this  youth  should  be  to  find  full  expression  for  what  in  him  was 
best;  .  .  .  And  in  particular  this  Angel  spoke  of  the  influence  his  branches 
should  have,  and  of  the  books  this  youth  should  write  and  publish,  not 
only  in  America  but  in  Europe.  And  he  added  certain  special  prophecies 


108 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

of  the  great  works  this  youth  should  do  for  the  Church  of  Christ  in  the 
revolutions  that  are  now  at  hand.  Lord  Jesus!  What  is  the  meaning  of 
this  marvel?  From  the  wiles  of  the  Devil,  I  beseech  thee,  deliver  and 
defend  Thy  most  unworthy  servant.14 

The  passage  throws  a  good  deal  of  light  on  the  psychology  of 
Cotton  Mather.  Such  visions  were  clearly  the  result  of  abnormal 
stimuli,  acting  on  a  neurotic -temperament.  From  both  sides  of 
his  family  he  inherited  a  tense  nervous  system  that  was  aggra¬ 
vated  by  precocity  and  an  unnatural  regimen.  The  inevitable 
result  was  a  hothouse  plant  of  Puritan  forcing.  His  religious 
exaltation  flowered  from  the  root  of  egoism.  His  vanity  was 
cosmic.  He  esteemed  himself  a  beacon  set  on  a  hill,  a  divine  torch 
which  the  very  hand  of  God  had  lighted.  The  success  or  failure  of 
God’s  plan  for  New  England,  he  believed,  rested  on  his  shoulders; 
and  with  such  heavy  responsibilities  devolved  upon  him  he  was 
driven,  hot-haste,  by  the  prick  of  urgency.  The  king’s  business 
requireth  haste.  The  work  of  the  Lord  cannot  wait  upon  slug¬ 
gards.  “O  then  To  work  as  fast  as  you  can,”  he  wrote  in  The 
Magnolia ,  “and  of  soul-work  and  church-work  as  much  as  ever 
you  can.  Say  to  all  Hindrances.  .  .  ‘You’ll  excuse  me  if  I  ask 
you  to  be  short  with  me,  for  my  work  is  great  and  my  time  is  but 
little.’”  And  so  with  an  amazing  activity  that  was  little  short  of 
neurosis,  he  gave  himself  over  to  the  great  business  of  managing 
the  affairs  of  New  England  in  accordance  with  God’s  will. 

In  undertaking  so  difficult  a  job,  he  frequently  came  into  con¬ 
flict  with  other  interpreters  of  God’s  plan  for  New  England,  and 
partisan  venom  gathered  about  him  wherever  he  passed.  Tact 
was  never  a  Mather  virtue,  and  Cotton  made  two  enemies  to  his 
father’s  one.  His  quarrels  trod  on  each  other’s  heels,  and  a  down¬ 
right  vindictiveness  breathes  through  his  private  records  of  them. 
He  railed  at  whoever  disagreed  with  him,  and  imputed  silly  or 
malignant  motives.  The  pages  of  his  diary  are  filled  with  epithets 
that  he  flung  privately  at  his  enemies;  one  marvels  that  so  many 
in  the  little  town  of  Boston  could  be  singled  out  as  “strangely  and 
fiercely  possessed  of  the  Devil.”  Robert  Calef,  whose  More 
Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World  was  an  inconvenient  reply  to  his 
Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  was  set  down  as  “a  very  wicked 
sort  of  a  Sadducee  in  this  Town,  raking  together  a  crue  of  Libels 
.  .  .  an  abominable  Bundle  of  Lies,  written  on  purpose,  with  a 
14  Cotton  Mather,  Puritan  Priest,  p.  64. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


109 


Quil  under  a  special  Energy  and  Management  of  Satan,  to  damnify 
my  precious  Opportunities  of  Glorifying  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ.”  15 
When  an  anti-Mather  group  of  Cambridge  men  set  up  the  Brattle 
Street  Church,  and  invited  Benjamin  Colman,  who  had  received 
Presbyterian  ordination  in  England,  by  way  of  reply  to  the  Mather 
group,  to  become  their  pastor,  Cotton  wrote  in  his  diary: 

A  Company  of  Head-strong  Men  in  the  Town,  the  cheef  of  whom,  are 
full  of  malignity  to  the  Holy  Waye  of  our  Churches,  have  built  in  this 
Town,  another  Meeting-house.  To  delude  many  better-meaning  Men 
in  their  own  Company,  and  the  Churches  in  the  Neighbourhood,  they 
past  a  Vote  .  .  .  that  they  would  not  vary  from  the  Practice  of  these 
Churches,  except  in  one  little  Particular.  .  .  .  But  a  young  Man,  born 
and  bred  here,  and  hence  gone  for  England,  is  now  returned  hither,  at 
their  Invitation,  equip’d  with  an  Ordination,  to  qualify  him,  for  all  that  is 
intended. 

On  his  “returning  and  arriving  here,  these  fallacious  People” 
gave  themselves  over,  in  short,  to  “Their  violent  and  impetuous 
Lusts,  to  carry  on  the  Apostasy,”  and  Cotton  Mather  prayed  God 
to  make  him  an  instrument  to  defeat  the  “Designs  that  Satan  may 
have  in  the  Enterprise.”  16  Similar  passages  of  extravagant  abuse 
of  men  so  wicked  as  to  disagree  with  him  flowed  from  his  pen  in 
copious  abundance.  Although  he  constantly  prayed  that  his 
daily  life  might  be  “a  trembling  walk  with  God,”  he  was  clearly 
a  difficult  fellow  to  get  on  with;  and  in  the  opinion  of  many  he  was 
justly  described  by  a  contemporary,  as  a  “malecontent  priest,” 
consumed  with  an  “Hereditary  rancour”  that  made  him  “ever¬ 
lastingly  opposite”  to  every  will  but  his  own. 

The  diary  of  Cotton  Mather  is  a  treasure-trove  to  the  abnormal 
psychologist.  The  thing  would  be  inconceivable  if  the  record  were 
not  in  print.  What  a  crooked  and  diseased  mind  lay  back  of  those 
eyes  that  were  forever  spying  out  occasions  to  magnify  self!  He 
grovels  in  proud  self-abasement.  He  distorts  the  most  obvious 
reality.  His  mind  is  clogged  with  the  strangest  miscellany  of 
truth  and  marvel.  He  labors  to  acquire  the  possessions  of  a 
scholar,  but  he  listens  to  old  wives’  tales  with  greedy  avidity.  In 
all  his  mental  processes  the  solidest  fact  falls  into  fantastic  perspec¬ 
tive.  He  was  earnest  to  do  good,  he  labored  to  put  into  effect 
hundreds  of  “Good  devices,”  but  he  walked  always  in  his  own 
shadow.  His  egoism  blots  out  charity  and  even  the  divine  mercy. 

15  Diary ,  YqI,  I,  p.  271.  16  Ibid.,  pp.  325-326. 


110 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

Consider  his  account  of  an  “execution  sermon  ”  preached  to  a  name¬ 
less  girl  condemned  for  killing  her  natural  child,  and  the  light  it 
throws  on  both  minister  and  congregation: 

The  Execution  of  the  miserable  Malefactor,  was  ordered  for  to  have 
been  the  last  Week,  upon  the  Lecture  of  another.  I  wondred  then  what 
would  become  of  my  Particular  Faith,  of  her  condition  being  so  ordered  in 
the  Providence  of  God,  that  it  should  furnish  me,  with  a  special  Oppor¬ 
tunity  to  glorify  Him.  While  I  was  entirely  resigning  to  the  wisdome  of 
Heaven  all  such  Matters,  the  Judges,  wholly  without  my  seeking,  altered 
and  allow’d  her  Execution  to  fall  on  the  Day  of  my  Lecture.  The  General 
Court  then  sitting,  ordered  the  Lecture  to  bee  held  in  a  larger  and  a 
stronger  House,  than  that  old  one,  where  ’tis  usually  kept.  For  my  own 
part,  I  was  weak,  and  faint,  and  spent;  but  I  humbly  gave  myself  up  to 
the  Spirit  of  my  Heavenly  Lord  and  Hee  assured  mee,  that  Hee  would 
send  His  good  Angel  to  strengthen  mee.  The  greatest  Assembly,  ever  in 
this  Countrey  preach’d  unto,  was  now  come  together;  It  may  bee  four  or 
five  thousand  Souls.  I  could  not  gett  unto  the  Pulpit,  but  by  climbing 
over  Pues  and  Heads:  and  there  the  Spirit  of  my  dearest  Lord  came  upon 
mee.  I  preached  with  a  more  than  ordinary  Assistance,  and  enlarged,  and 
uttered  the  most  awakening  Things,  for  near  two  hours  together.  My 
Strength  and  Voice  failed  not;  but  when  it  was  near  failing,  a  silent  Look 
to  Heaven  strangely  renew’d  it.  In  the  whole  I  found  Prayer  answered 
and  Hope  exceeded,  and  Faith  encouraged,  and  the  Lord  using  mee,  the 
vilest  in  all  that  great  Assembly,  to  glorify  Him.  Oh!  what  shall  I  render 
to  the  Lord ! 17 

Straightway  thereafter,  he  rendered  the  Lord  another  character¬ 
istic  service.  No  sooner  was  the  girl  hanged — for  whose  safe¬ 
keeping  no  good  angel  seems  to  have  been  available  after  the 
minister  had  bespoken  his — than  he  hastened  to  the  printer  to 
arrange  for  printing  the  sermon,  and  “annexed  thereunto,  an 
History  of  Criminals  executed  in  this  Land,  and  effectually,  an 
Account  of  their  dying  Speeches,  and  of  my  own  Discourses  with 
them  in  their  last  Hours.  ...  I  entitled  the  Book,  pillars  of 
salt.”  Clearly  this  was  the  time  to  peddle  his  wares,  when  all 
Boston  was  talking  of  the  great  event;  and  with  a  nose  for  publicity 
as  keen  as  Defoe’s,  he  flung  together  a  jumble  of  material,  and 
trusted  to  its  timeliness  to  sell.  Some  such  origin,  no  doubt, 
accounts  for  a  good  many  of  the  small  library  of  titles  that  bore 
his  name,  an  output  that  seems  to  have  justified  the  angelic 
prophecy  of  “the  books  this  youth  should  write  and  publish.” 
With  a  very  lust  for  printer’s  ink,  he  padded  his  bibliography  like 


17  Diary,  Vol.  I,  p.  279. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


111 


a  college  professor  seeking  promotion;  but  in  spite  of  all  the  prayers 
poured  out  in  behalf  of  them,  they  would  seem  for  the  most  part 
to  have  been  little  more  than  tuppenny  tracts,  stuffed  with  a  sod¬ 
den  morality,  that  not  even  an  angel  could  make  literature  of. 

Holding  so  strong  a  conviction  of  apostleship,  Cotton  Mather 
would  certainly  play  the  politician,  and  quite  as  certainly  blunder 
and  go  wrong.  Far  more  than  his  father  he  was  a  bookman,  who 
believed  that  all  knowledge  was  shut  up  between  pigskin  covers. 
He  was  as  lacking  in  worldly  wisdom  as  a  child,  and  in  his  ecstatic 
contemplation  of  the  marvels  wrought  by  God  in  primitive  New 
England  he  never  discovered  that  that  older  world  had  passed 
away.  Another  age  was  rising,  with  other  ideals  than  ecclesias¬ 
tical,  which  the  three  thousand  books  in  his  library  told  him 
nothing  about.  He  was  an  anachronism  in  his  own  day.  Living 
in  an  earlier  age,  when  the  hierarchy  was  in  its  prime,  he  would 
have  been  carried  far  on  the  tide  of  theocratic  prestige;  a  genera¬ 
tion  later,  when  lay-power  had  definitely  superseded  clerical,  he 
would  have  taken  his  place  as  a  stout  defender  of  Tory  ways.  But 
at  the  moment  when  a  critical  realignment  of  parties  was  under 
way  in  Massachusetts;  when  the  villagers  were  becoming  democ¬ 
ratized  and  the  gentry  toryized;  when  even  the  clergy  were 
dividing — Cotton  Mather  was  a  general  without  an  army.  He 
was  a  primitive  Puritan  in  a  Boston  that  was  fast  becoming 
Yankee,  and  his  love  for  the  theocracy  grew  stronger  with  every 
defeat. 

The  judgment  of  after  times  finds  little  in  his  political  activities 
to  approve  and  much  to  condemn.  After  all  allowances  are  made 
the  fact  remains  that  he  was  a  leader  of  reaction;  and  no  protesta¬ 
tions  can  obscure  the  motive  of  personal  ambition.  His  own 
prestige  was  involved  with  that  of  the  theocracy.  It  was  due  to 
the  traditional  authority  of  the  ministry  that  he  enjoyed  the 
distinction  of  being  a  “Person,  whom  the  Eye  and  the  Talk  of  the 
People  is  very  much  upon,”  and  any  lessening  of  that  authority 
would  hurt  him  cruelly  in  his  vanity.  This  remains  the  sufficient 
explanation  of  his  varied  political  activities  in  the  course  of  which 
he  trimmed  his  sails  to  different  winds.  He  first  essayed  a  frontal 
attack  on  the  secular  power,  but  suffering  a  personal  slight,  he 
shifted  and  struck  in  the  dark  at  an  exposed  flank;  and  finally, 
receiving  only  further  mortification,  he  made  overtures  of  peace 
and  found  his  way  back  to  the  tables  of  the  great.  It  was  against 


112 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

the  administration  of  the  wily  and  unscrupulous  Dudley  that  he 
waged  his  bitterest  warfare.  Failing  to  make  headway  by  open 
hostility,  he  seized  upon  a  current  trade  scandal,  poured  out  his 
grievances  in  an  anonymous  pamphlet  sent  to  London  to  be 
published,  and  awaited  the  result.  It  was  a  slashing  attack,  done 
in  the  tone  of  a  lover  of  the  ancient  rights  and  privileges  of  New 
England,  and  it  must  have  cut  Dudley  to  the  quick.  A  quotation 
or  two  will  suffice  to  reveal  the  nature  of  the  charges: 

But,  when  the  President  [Dudley]  was  pleased,  out  of  an  Active  and 
Passive  Principle,  to  tell  our  Countreymen,  in  open  Council,  That  the 
People  in  New-England  were  all  Slaves;  and  that  the  only  Difference  between 
Them  and  Slaves,  was  their  not  being  Bought  and  Sold:  And  that  they  must 
not  think  the  Privileges  of  Englishmen  would  follow  them  to  the  end  of  the 
World.  I  say,  when  the  People  heard  this,  they  lookt  upon  themselves 
in  a  manner  Lost.  .  .  . 

All  the  People  here  are  Bought  and  Sold,  betwixt  the  Governour  and  his 
son  Paul.  .  .  . 

This  is  the  Third  Time  that  he  has  been  Trusted  with  Power  from  the 
Crown  in  America,  and  he  has  constantly  Abus’d  it,  to  the  Dishonour  of 
the  Government,  and  almost  Ruin  of  the  People  he  was  sent  to  Govern.18 

There  was  enough  truth  in  the  charges  to  make  them  serious, 
but  the  spleen  was  quite  too  evident.  The  author  was  at  once  dis¬ 
covered  and  Cotton  Mather  suffered  a  vigorous  counter-attack 
that  damaged  a  reputation  already  undermined.  Perhaps  even 
worse  was  the  social  slight  put  upon  him  by  those  in  government. 
What  it  cost  him  to  be  left  out  of  the  invitations  of  the  great  he 
reveals  in  the  Diary: 

2  d.  7m.  [September]  Friday.  [1709]  The  other  Ministers  of  the  Neigh¬ 
bourhood,  are  this  Day  feasting  with  our  wicked  Governour;  I  have,  by 
my  provoking  Plainness  and  Freedom,  in  telling  this  Ahab  of  his  wicked¬ 
ness,  procured  myself  to  be  left  out  of  his  Invitations.  I  rejoiced  in  my 
Liberty  from  the  Temptations,  with  which  they  were  encumbred,  while 
they  were  eating  of  his  Dainties  and  durst  not  reprove  him.  And,  con¬ 
sidering  the  Power  and  Malice  of  my  Enemies,  I  thought  it  proper  of  me, 
to  be  this  day  Fasting,  in  Secret,  before  the  Lord. 

Ten  years  later  there  is  a  different  story  to  tell.  The  minister 
has  left  the  opposition  bench  and  gone  over  to  the  government.  A 
note  in  Sewall’s  diary  tells  the  tale: 

18  A  Memorial  of  the  Present  Deplorable  State  of  New-England  ...  by  the  Male- 
Administration  of  their  Present  Governour,  foseph  Dudley,  Esq.,  and  his  Son  Paul, 
London,  1707,  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  Fifth  Series,  Vol.  VI. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


113 


March,  12.  [1718/19]  Dr.  Cotton  Mather  prays  again  [in  Council]. 
Preaches  the  Lecture  from  Prov.  29:  18.  no  Vision.  [ Where  there  is  no 
vision,  the  people  perish:  hut  he  that  keepeth  the  law,  happy  is  he.]  The 
Govr.,  Lt.  Govr.,  Mr.  Dudley,  Mr.  Belcher  press’d  hard  that  there  might 
be  an  order  of  the  Govr.  and  Council  to  print  it.  Col.  Tailor,  Clark, 
Davenport,  Sewall  and  others  opposed  it.  For  my  part,  the  Dr.  spake  so 
much  of  his  visions  of  Convulsion  and  Mutiny,  mentioning  our  being  a 
dependent  Government,  and  the  Danger  of  Parliamentary  Resentments: 
that  I  was  afraid  the  printing  of  it  might  be  an  Invitation  to  the  Parliament 
to  take  away  our  Charter.  Govr.  would  have  it  put  to  the  vote:  but  when 
he  saw  how  hardly  it  went, caused  the  Secretary  to  break  off  in  the  midst.19 

Here  is  a  party  alignment  that  tells  its  own  story,  and  it  needs  no 
very  lively  imagination  to  fill  out  the  meager  note  and  reenact  the 
little  drama.  The  minister,  eager  to  make  overtures  of  peace, 
falls  into  the  Tory  note,  talks  about  mob-rule  and  the  sinfulness 
of  popular  unrest,  calls  upon  authority  to  maintain  law  and  order, 
and  hints  at  the  expediency  of  preserving  due  colonial  subservience 
in  view  of  possible  resentments  on  the  part  of  certain  great  men 
in  England.  Sewall,  as  a  “true  New-England  man,”  squirms 
somewhat  under  the  implications,  but  the  little  group  of  Tories 
are  loud  in  praise.  Such  a  sermon,  from  so  eminent  a  servant  of 
God,  would  aid  wonderfully  in  strengthening  the  spirit  of  loyalty 
to  the  crown,  and  it  must  be  printed  and  circulated  amongst  the 
people.  But  the  opposition  proved  too  spirited,  and  the  manu¬ 
script  was  not  dispatched  to  the  printer,  no  doubt  to  Cotton 
Mather’s  chagrin. 

It  was  easy  for  so  reactionary  a  nature  to  slide  over  into  the 
Tory.  There  was  not  a  grain  of  liberalism  in  his  make-up.  His 
antipathy  to  all  popular  movements  was  deep-rooted,  for  he  knew 
no  other  political  philosophy  than  that  of  the  obsolete  theocracy 
in  which  he  had  grown  up.  He  was  a  bourgeois  soul  who  loved 
respectability  and  was  jealous  of  his  social  position;  no  fraterniz¬ 
ing  with  the  poor  and  outcast  for  him,  no  profitless  excursions  into 
the  realms  of  Utopian  justice.  Though  he  might  play  to  popular 
prejudices  to  serve  his  political  ends,  he  had  scant  regard  for 
popular  rights.  The  highest  privilege  of  the  New  England  people, 
he  believed,  was  the  privilege  of  being  ruled  by  the  godly.  His 
real  attitude  towards  the  plain  people  is  revealed  in  a  note  by  his 
son,  that  refers  to  the  days  following  the  overturn  of  the  Andros 
government: 

19  Vol.  II,  p.  214.  ' 


114 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

Upon  Discoursing  with  him  of  the  Affairs  he  has  told  me  that  he  always 
pressed  Peace  and  Love  and  Submission  unto  a  legal  Government,  tho  he 
suffered  from  some  tumultuous  People,  by  doing  so;  and  upon  the  whole, 
has  asserted  unto  me  his  Innocency  and  Freedom  from  all  known  Iniquity 
in  that  time,  but  declared  his  Resolution,  from  the  View  he  had  of  the 
fickle  Humors  of  the  Populace,  that  he  would  chuse  to  be  concern’d  with 
them  as  little  as  possible  for  the  future.20 

As  he  grew  older  and  the  shadow  of  failure  fell  across  his  life, 
his  bitterness  towards  a  people  that  had  rejected  his  admonitions 
is  revealed  on  many  a  page  of  his  diary.  It  was  a  “silly  people,” 
a  “foolish  people,”  “insignificant  lice” — “The  cursed  clamour 
of  a  people  strangely  and  fiercely  possessed  of  the  Devil” — “My 
aged  father  laies  to  heart  the  withdrawal  of  a  vain,  proud,  foolish 
people  from  him  in  his  age” — “It  is  the  Hour  of  .  .  .  Darkness 
on  this  Despicable  Town.”  He  could  not  easily  forgive  those  who 
had  wounded  his  love  of  power  and  lust  of  adulation,  and  he  was 
too  aloof  from  the  daily  life  of  men  to  understand  the  political 
and  social  movements  of  the  times,  too  self-centered  to  understand 
his  fellow  villagers.  He  possessed  none  of  the  sympathetic  friend¬ 
liness  that  made  Samuel  Sewall  a  natural  confidant  to  every  one 
in  trouble.  He  loved  the  people  when  they  honored  and  obeyed 
him,  but  when  they  hearkened  to  other  counsels  he  would  fall  to 
scolding  like  a  fishwife.  Doubtless  he  was  sincere  in  thinking  he 
would  gladly  die  to  save  his  people  from  their  sins,  but  he  had  no 
mind  to  neighbor  with  them  or  humor  their  wicked  love  of  power. 
He  immured  himself  so  closely  within  the  walls  of  the  old  theo¬ 
cratic  temple  that  he  never  took  the  trouble  to  examine  the 
groundsills,  and  when  the  rotten  timbers  gave  way  and  the  struc¬ 
ture  came  tumbling  about  his  ears,  he  was  caught  unprepared 
and  went  down  in  its  ruins. 

Happily  most  of  the  printed  output  of  Cotton  Mather  has 
fallen  into  the  oblivion  it  deserved.  It  is  barren  of  ideas,  and 
marred  by  pedantic  mannerisms  that  submerge  the  frequent 
felicities  of  phrase — old-fashioned  on  the  day  it  came  from  the 
press.  “In  his  Style,  indeed,”  wrote  his  friend  Thomas  Prince, 
“he  was  something  singular,  and  not  so  agreeable  to  the  Gust  of 
the  Age.  But  like  his  manner  of  speaking,  it  was  very  emphatical.  ” 
Yet  he  possessed  very  considerable  gifts  and  under  happier  cir¬ 
cumstances  he  might  have  had  a  notable  literary  career;  but  he 

20  Wendell,  Cotton  Mather,  etc.,  p.  82. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


115 


was  the  victim  of  a  provincial  environment.  He  was  the  most 
widely  read  man  of  his  generation  in  America,  and  one  of  the  few 
who  followed  sympathetically  the  current  scientific  movement  in 
England.  Like  old  Increase  he  dabbled  in  science;  he  was  proud 
of  his  membership  in  the  Royal  Society,  to  which  he  forwarded 
his  characteristic  Curios  a  Americana — a  hodgepodge  of  those 
marvels  in  which  his  generation  delighted.  It  was  from  an  Eng¬ 
lish  source  that  he  got  the  idea  of  inoculation  for  smallpox,  which 
he  urged  upon  Boston  so  insistently  that  a  war  of  scurrilous 
pamphlets  broke  out.  He  made  use  of  the  method  in  his  own 
family,  incurring  thereby  much  stupid  abuse  and  at  least  one 
attack  of  violence.  It  was  an  intelligent  and  courageous  experi¬ 
ment,  that  is  not  to  be  forgotten  in  casting  up  the  accounts  of 
Cotton  Mather. 

Of  his  major  works  two  only  call  for  brief  consideration:  the 
celebrated  Magnalia  Christi  Americana;  or,  The  Ecclesiastical 
History  of  New  England ;  and  the  less  known  Wonders  of  the  In¬ 
visible  World.  The  latter  is  suggestive  for  the  light  it  throws  on 
the  psychology  of  the  witchcraft  mania.  The  fantastic  devil-fear, 
which  bit  so  deeply  into  the  imagination  of  Puritan  New  England, 
has  already  been  commented  on.  In  that  common  seventeenth- 
century  delusion,  Cotton  Mather  not  only  ran  with  the  mob,  but 
he  came  near  to  outdistancing  the  most  credulous.  His  speech 
and  writings  dripped  with  devil-talk.  The  grotesqueries  that 
marked  the  current  marvel-tales  crop  out  nakedly  in  his  writings. 
“I  have  set  myself,”  he  wrote  in  the  Diary,  “to  countermine  the 
whole  Plot  of  the  Devil,  against  New-England,  in  every  branch 
of  it,  as  far  as  one  of  my  darkness  can  comprehend  such  a  Work 
of  Darkness.”  His  conviction  of  the  malignant  activities  of 
Satan  was  so  vivid,  that  in  delivering  a  carefully  prepared  sermon 
on  the  Wiles  of  the  Divil,  he  was  fain,  he  tells  us,  to  pause  and  lift 
up  his  eyes  and  cry  “unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  would 
rate  off  Satan,”  who  “all  the  Time  of  my  Prayer  before  the 
Lecture”  had  “horribly  buffeted  me” — by  inflicting  on  the 
fasting  priest  certain  qualms  of  the  stomach.  How  tremendous 
he  conceived  to  be  the  battle  over  a  human  soul,  he  describes  thus: 

The  Wilderness  through  which  we  are  passing  to  the  Promised  Land  is 
all  over  fill’d  with  Fiery  flying  serpents.  But,  blessed  be  God,  none  of 
them  have  hitherto  so  fastned  upon  us  as  to  confound  us  utterly!  All  our 
way  to  Heaven  lies  by  Dens  of  Lions  and  the  Mounts  of  Leopards;  there  are 


116 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 

incredible  Droves  of  Devils  in  our  way.  .  .  .  We  are  poor  travellers  in  a 
world  which  is  as  well  the  Devil’s  Field,  as  the  Devil’s  Gaol;  a  world  in 
which  every  Nook  whereof,  the  Devil  is  encamped  with  Bands  of  Robbers 
to  pester  all  that  have  their  Faces  looking  Zionward.21 

In  the  light  of  Mather’s  logic,  “That  there  is  a  Devil,  is  a  thing 
Doubted  by  none  but  such  as  are  under  the  influence  of  the 
Devil,”  and  “God  indeed  has  the  Devil  in  a  Chain,  but  has  horribly 
lengthened  out  the  Chain,”  his  private  comment  on  the  work — 
“that  reviled  book” — becomes  comprehensible. 

The  Magnolia  is  a  far  more  important  work,  the  repository  of  a 
vast  miscellany  of  information  concerning  early  New  England 
that  his  pious  zeal  saved  from  oblivion.  It  is  the  magnum  opus 
of  the  Massachusetts  theocracy,  the  best  and  sincerest  work  that 
Cotton  Mather  did.  The  theme  with  which  it  deals,  and  about 
which  he  accumulates  marvels  and  special  providences  together 
with  historical  facts,  was  the  thing  which  next  to  his  own  fame  lay 
nearest  his  heart — the  glory  of  that  theocracy  which  men  whom 
he  accounted  foolish  and  wicked  were  seeking  to  destroy.  The 
purpose  of  the  book  has  nowhere  been  better  stated  than  by 
Professor  Wendell: 

Its  true  motive  was  to  excite  so  enthusiastic  a  sympathy  with  the  ideals 
of  the  Puritan  fathers  that,  whatever  fate  might  befall  the  civil  govern¬ 
ment,  their  ancestral  seminary  of  learning  should  remain  true  to  its 
colours.  .  .  .  The  time  was  come,  Cotton  Mather  thought,  when  the 
history  of  these  three  generations  might  be  critically  examined;  if  this 
examination  should  result  in  showing  that  there  had  lived  in  New  England 
an  unprecedented  proportion  of  men  and  women  and  children  whose 
earthly  existence  had  given  signs  that  they  were  among  the  elect,  then  his 
book  might  go  far  to  prove  that  the  pristine  policy  of  New  England  had 
been  especially  favoured  of  the  Lord.  For  surely  the  Lord  would  choose 
His  elect  most  eagerly  in  places  where  life  was  conducted  most  according 
to  His  will.22 

When  old  Increase  was  near  the  end  of  his  many  years,  a  friend 
wrote  to  ask  if  he  were  still  in  the  land  of  the  living.  “No,  Tell  him 
I  am  going  to  it,”  he  said  to  his  son;  “this  Poor  World  is  the  land 
of  the  Dying.”  The  bitter  words  were  sober  truth.  The  New 
England  of  the  dreams  of  Increase  and  Cotton  Mather  was  sick 
to  death  from  morbid  introspection  and  ascetic  inhibitions;  no 
lancet  or  purge  known  to  the  Puritan  pharmacopeia  could  save  it. 

21  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  p.  63. 

22  Literary  History  of  America ,  pp.  48-49. 


THE  MATHER  DYNASTY 


117 


Though  father  and  son  walked  the  streets  of  Boston  at  noonday, 
they  were  only  twilight  figures,  communing  with  ghosts,  building 
with  shadows.  They  were  not  unlike  a  certain  mad  woman  that 
Sewall  tells  of,  who  went  crying  about  the  town,  “  My  child  is 
dead  within  me.”  The  child  of  Cotton  Mather’s  hopes  had  long 
been  dead  within  him,  only  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  acknowl¬ 
edge  it.  The  fruit  of  the  vine  planted  by  the  fathers  was  still 
sweet  to  him,  and  when  other  men  complained  of  its  bitterness, 
and  fell  to  gathering  from  other  vines,  he  could  only  rail  at  their 
perversity.  He  would  not  believe  that  the  grapes  were  indeed 
bitter  and  the  vine  blighted;  that  the  old  vineyard  must  be  re¬ 
plowed  and  planted  to  fresh  stock.  All  his  life  he  had  set 
marvels  above  realities  and  in  the  end  his  wonder-working  prov¬ 
idence  failed  him.  Prayers  could  not  bring  back  a  dead  past; 
passionate  conjurations  could  not  strike  the  living  waters  from 
the  cold  granite  of  Puritan  formalism.  A  New  England  flagellant, 
a  Puritan  Brother  of  the  Cross,  he  sought  comfort  in  fasts  and 
vigils  and  spiritual  castigations,  and — it  is  pleasant  to  learn — • 
in  ways  far  more  natural  and  wholesome.  Incredible  as  it  may 
seem,  the  following  record  is  authentic,  and  it  falls  like  a  shaft  of 
warm  sunshine  across  the  path  of  the  morbid  priest:  “Augt,  15. 
[1716].  .  .  .  Now  about  Dr.  C.  Mather  Fishing  in  Spy-pond,  falls 
into  the  Water,  the  boat  being  ticklish,  but  receives  no  hurt.”  23 
The  restless  minister  who  had  fished  overmuch  in  troubled  waters, 
sometimes,  it  would  appear,  ventured  for  perch  in  Spy  Pond. 

23  Sewall,  Diary,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  98. 


CHAPTER  III 

STIRRINGS  OF  LIBERALISM 


i 

JOHN  WISE 
Village  Democrat 

In  the  days  when  Sir  Edmund  Andros  was  seeking  to  fasten  upon 
Massachusetts  Bay  the  principles  and  practice  of  Stuart  preroga¬ 
tive,  an  event  occurred  that  greatly  stirred  New  England.  Taxes 
having  been  arbitrarily  assessed  in  Council,  the  several  towns  were 
bidden  appoint  commissioners  to  collect  them.  When  the  order 
reached  Ipswich,  John  Wise,  minister  of  the  second  church,  gathered 
the  chief  members  of  his  flock  together,  and  it  was  agreed  by  them 
to  choose  no  such  commissioner  at  the  town  meeting — “We  have 
a  good  God,  and  a  good  king,  and  shall  do  well  to  stand  for  our 
privileges,”  the  minister  is  reported  to  have  argued.  Soon  there¬ 
after  John  Wise  was  summoned  before  a  star-chamber  court  on  the 
charge  of  sedition.  Upon  his  plea  of  colonial  privilege,  the  presi¬ 
dent  of  the  court,  Dudley,  is  said  to  have  retorted,  “You  shall 
have  no  more  privileges  left  you  than  not  to  be  sold  for  slaves.” 
“Do  you  believe,”  demanded  Andros,  “Joe  and  Tom  may  tell 
the  King  what  money  he  may  have?”  “Do  not  think,”  put  in 
another  judge,  “the  laws  of  England  follow  you  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.”  Thereupon  with  five  others,  John  Wise  was  thrown  into 
Boston  jail,  where  he  lay  one  and  twenty  days,  and  whence  he 
was  released  only  after  payment  of  fifty  pounds,  giving  bond  in  a 
thousand  pounds  for  good  behavior,  and  suffering  suspension 
from  the  ministry.  “The  evidence  in  the  case,”  he  remarked 
afterward,  “as  to  the  substance  of  it,  was  that  we  too  boldly 
endeavored  to  persuade  ourselves  we  were  Englishmen,  and 
under  privileges.1  The  year  following,  Andros  having  been  driven 
out,  John  Wise  brought  suit  against  Dudley  for  having  denied 
him  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus .2 

1  A  similar  plea  had  failed  Dr.  Church  when  he  offended  the  oligarchy  twenty 
years  before,  who  quite  as  arbitrarily  had  fined  him  six  hundred  pounds. 

2  See  the  account  in  Palfrey,  History  of  Massachusetts,  Vol.  II,  Book  XII,  p.  327; 

118 


STIRRINGS  OF  LIBERALISM 


119 


Two  years  later  Wise  served  as  chaplain  in  the  ill-managed 
Quebec  expedition  under  Sir  William  Phipps.  He  bore  himself 
well  both  in  council  and  on  the  field;  went  ashore  with  the  storm¬ 
ing  party;  and  if  he  had  succeeded  in  his  efforts  to  instil  some  of 
his  own  force  into  the  leaders,  the  grand  exploit  might  not  have 
dwindled  to  such  an  unhappy  ending.  In  a  long  account  which 
he  sent  to  Increase  Mather,  then  in  London,  he  did  not  mince 
matters,  or  attempt  to  throw  on  the  Lord’s  shoulders  blame  that 
belonged  elsewhere,  but  charged  the  fiasco  to  the  cowardice  of 
Major  Walley,  in  command  of  the  assaulting  troops.3  Clearly  the 
Ipswich  minister  was  a  fighting  as  well  as  a  praying  parson,  whom 
Cromwell  would  have  delighted  in. 

Posterity  has  been  too  negligent  of  John  Wise  hitherto.  Although 
possessed  of  the  keenest  mind  and  most  trenchant  pen  of  his 
generation  of  New  Englanders,  he  was  uninfected  by  the  itch  of 
publicity  that  attacked  so  many  of  his  fellow  ministers,  and  so 
failed  to  challenge  the  attention  of  later  times.  Called  to  serve 
in  an  outlying  portion  of  the  Master’s  vineyard  he  discovered  little 
opportunity  there  and  less  inclination  to  magnify  his  own  im¬ 
portance.  He  was  too  honest  to  persuade  himself  that  God’s  fame 
was  bound  up  with  his  own,  and  he  was  never  forward  to  push 
his  claims  to  priority  in  righteousness.  Nevertheless  what  little  we 
know  of  him  is  to  his  credit.  An  independent  man,  powerful  of 
body,  vigorous  of  intellect,  direct  and  outspoken  in  debate,  he 
seems  to  have  understood  the  plain  people  whom  he  served,  and 
he  sympathized  heartily  with  the  democratic  ideals  then  taking 
form  in  the  New  England  villages.  Such  liberalism  as  emerged 
from  the  simplicity  of  village  life  found  intelligent  response  in  his 
sympathies,  and  he  dedicated  his  keen  mind  and  wide  reading  to 
the  business  of  providing  it  with  a  philosophical  justification. 
Some  explanation  of  his  democratic  leanings  may  be  discovered  in 
his  antecedents.  His  father  was  a  self-made  man  who  had  come 
over  to  Roxbury  as  an  indented  servant — most  menial  of  stations 
in  that  aristocratic  old  Boston  world.  He  must  have  been  of  sound 

and  in  Wise,  Vindication  of  the  Government  of  the  New  England  Churches,  Introduc¬ 
tion.  The  current  Tory  interpretation  of  the  common  law  of  sedition  was  severe. 
“In  1679,  at  the  trial  of  Henry  Carr  [Care],  indicted  for  some  passages  in  a  weekly 
paper,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  Scroggs  declared  it  criminal  at  Common  Law  to 
‘write  on  the  subject  of  government,  whether  in  terms  of  praise  or  censure,  it  is  not 
material;  for  no  man  has  a  right  to  say  anything  of  government’”  (State  Trials, 
VII,  929;  quoted  in  Schuyler,  The  Liberty  of  the  Press  in  the  American  Colonies,  etc.) 

8  See  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Proceedings,  Second  Series,  Vol.  XV, 
pp.  283-296. 


120 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


and  rugged  stock,  for  in  addition  to  a  magnificent  physique  he 
endowed  his  son  with  manly  independence  and  democratic  self- 
respect,  which  stood  the  latter  in  good  stead  when,  after  having 
made  his  way  through  Harvard  College,  he  came  to  speak  for  the 
people  against  the  tax  program  of  Andros,  the  reactionary 
ambitions  of  the  Presbyterians,  and  the  schemes  of  the  hard- 
money  men.  In  John  Wise,  Cotton  Mather  was  to  encounter  an 
antagonist  who  was  more  than  a  match  for  him. 

With  the  final  overthrow  of  the  theocracy  and  the  lessening  of 
the  political  power  of  the  clergy,  a  critical  period  in  the  development 
of  the  church  was  reached,  and  with  it  a  renewal  of  the  old  conflict 
between  the  Presbyterian  and  Congregational  principles.  In  the 
year  1705,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Mathers,  the  Presbyterian 
party,  which  numbered  among  its  adherents  most  of  the  ministers 
of  the  larger  churches,  put  forth  a  series  of  “Proposals,”  looking 
to  a  closer  union  of  the  churches,  and  greater  control  of  the  separate 
congregations  by  the  ministerial  association.  This  was  a  challenge 
to  the  Congregationalists  which  John  Wise  could  not  overlook. 
The  question  touched  the  fundamentals  of  church  organization, 
and  when  by  way  of  preparation  he  turned  to  examine  critically 
the  work  of  the  fathers,  he  found  in  it  quite  another  meaning  than 
Cotton  Mather  found.  It  was  as  a  liberal  that  he  went  back 
to  the  past,  seeking  to  recover  the  original  Congregational  principle, 
which,  since  the  conservative  triumph  in  the  Cambridge  Platform 
of  1648,  had  been  obscured.  When  he  was  quite  ready,  he  published 
in  1710,  his  Churches  Quarrel  Espoused,  reissued  five  years  later; 
and  in  1717,  his  Vindication  of  the  Government  of  the  New  England 
Churches ,  reissued  together  with  the  earlier  work  in  1772,  and 
again  in  i860.  The  two  works  were  a  democratic  counterblast 
to  the  Presbyterian  propaganda,  and  they  stirred  the  mind  of 
New  England  profoundly.  What  Edwards  did  later  for  the  doc¬ 
trinal  side  of  Congregationalism,  John  Wise  did  for  the  institu¬ 
tional.  His  exposition  of  the  Congregational  principle  was  so 
luminous  and  convincing  that  it  soon  came  to  be  regarded  as 
authoritative,  and  more  than  a  hundred  years  after  the  Vindica¬ 
tion  appeared  the  Chief  Justice  of  Massachusetts  cited  it  in  support 
of  a  judicial  decision. 

The  significance  of  John  Wise  in  the  history  of  democratic 
America  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  followed  “an  unbeaten  path,” 
justifying  the  principle  of  Congregationalism  by  analogy  from 


STIRRINGS  OF  LIBERALISM 


121 


civil  polity.  Seemingly  alone  amongst  the  New  England  clergy 
of  his  day,  he  had  grounded  himself  in  political  theory;  and  the 
doctrine  upon  which  he  erected  his  argument  was  the  theory  of 
natural  rights,  derived  from  a  study  of  Pufendorf’s  De  Jure  Naturae 
et  Gentium,  published  in  1672.  Locke  and  the  other  writers  of  the 
English  natural-rights  school  he  seems  not  to  have  been  acquainted 
with;  but  Pufendorf  he  had  read  closely,  and  he  discharged  the 
new  theory  against  his  opponents  with  telling  effect.  This  was  the 
first  effective  reply  in  America  to  the  old  theocratic  sneer  that  if 
the  democratic  form  of  government  were  indeed  divinely  sanc¬ 
tioned,  was  it  not  strange  that  God  had  overlooked  it  in  providing 
a  government  for  his  chosen  people?  Wise  was  the  first  New 
England  minister  to  break  with  the  literal  Hebraism  of  the  old 
school;  like  Roger  Williams  he  was  willing  to  make  use  of  profane 
philosophies,  basing  his  argument  upon  an  appeal  to  history,  a 
method  which  baffled  the  narrow  Hebraists,  putting  them  in  a 
quandary. 

After  examining  the  three  regular  forms  of  civil  government, 
and  showing  how  each  is  related  to  “the  many  ennobling  immuni¬ 
ties”  of  the  subject,  Wise  turned  to  the  real  business  in  hand,  which 
was  to  inquire  “whether  any  of  the  aforesaid  species  of  regular, 
unmixed  governments,  can  with  any  good  show  of  reason  be 
predicable  of  the  church  of  Christ  on  earth”;  whether  the  monar¬ 
chical  form  as  exhibited  in  papacy  and  episcopacy,  the  aristocratic 
form  as  exhibited  in  Presbyterianism,  or  the  democratic  form  as 
exhibited  in  Congregationalism,  is  nearest  the  divine  model  as 
revealed  in  Scripture  and  the  law  of  nature? 

The  gross  inadequacy  of  the  monarchical  principle  appears  to 
him  so  certain  that  he  concludes  his  argument  with  the  comment 
“that  God  and  wise  nature  were  never  propitious  to  the  birth  of 
this  monster.”  The  inadequacy  of  the  aristocratic  principle  seems 
to  him  equally  clear.  The  principle  of  stewardship,  ideal  though 
it  may  appear  in  theory,  did  not  seem  to  work  in  practice,  and  he 
put  his  finger  shrewdly  upon  the  weakness  of  oligarchical  rule  in 
Massachusetts.  Government  by  a  “select  company  of  choice 
persons”  might  be  justified,  if — 

we  could  be  assured  they  would  make  the  Scripture,  and  not  their  private 
will  the  rule  of  their  personal  and  ministerial  actions;  .  .  .  but  considering 
how  great  an  interest  is  embarked,  and  how  frail  a  bottom  we  trust,  though 
we  should  rely  upon  the  best  of  men,  especially  if  we  remember  what  is  in 


122 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


the  hearts  of  good  men  (namely,  much  ignorance,  abundance  of  small 
ends,  many  times  cloaked  with  a  high  pretense  in  religion;  pride  skulking 
and  often  breeding  revenge  upon  a  small  affront,  and  blown  up  by  a  pre¬ 
tended  zeal,  yet  really  and  truly  by  nothing  more  divine  than  interest  or 
ill  nature),  and  also  considering  how  very  uncertain  we  are  of  the  real 
goodness  of  those  we  esteem  good  men  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  how  Christianity, 
by  the  aforesaid  principle,  had  been  peeled,  robbed  and  spoiled  already,  it 
cannot  consist  with  the  light  of  nature  to  venture  again  upon  such  perils, 
especially  if  we  can  find  a  safer  way  home.  ...  In  a  word  an  aristocracy 
is  a  dangerous  constitution  in  the  church  of  Christ.4 

This  “safer  way  home,”  as  he  then  proceeded  to  point  out,  lay 
in  following  the  broad  path  of  democracy: 

But  to  abbreviate,  it  seems  most  agreeable  with  the  light  of  nature,  that 
if  there  be  any  of  the  regular  forms  of  government  settled  in  the  church  of 
God,  it  must  needs  be  ...  a  democracy.  This  is  the  form  of  government 
which  the  light  of  nature  does  highly  value,  and  often  directs  to  as  most 
agreeable  to  the  just  and  natural  prerogatives  of  human  beings.  .  .  . 
It  is  certainly  a  great  truth,  namely,  that  man’s  original  liberty  after  it  is 
resigned  .  .  .  ought  to  be  cherished  in  all  wise  governments;  or  otherwise 
a  man  in  making  himself  a  subject,  he  alters  himself  from  a  freeman  into  a 
slave,  which  to  do  is  repugnant  to  the  law  of  nature.  Also  the  natural 
equality  of  men  amongst  men  must  be  duly  favoured;  in  that  govern¬ 
ment  was  never  established  by  God  or  nature,  to  give  one  man  a  preroga¬ 
tive  to  insult  over  another.  .  .  .  Honor  all  men.  The  end  of  all  good 
government  is  to  cultivate  humanity,  and  promote  the  happiness  of  all, 
and  the  good  of  every  man  in  his  rights,  his  life,  liberty,  estate,  honor,  etc., 
without  injury  or  abuse  to  any.5 

From  which  he  concludes  that — 

...  a  democracy  in  church  or  state,  is  a  very  honorable  and  regular 
government  according  to  the  dictates  of  right  reason,  And,  therefore  .  .  . 
That  these  churches  of  New  England,  in  their  ancient  constitution  of 
church  order,  it  being  a  democracy,  are  manifestly  justified  and  defended 
by  the  law  and  light  of  nature.6 

A  vigorous  thinker  was  John  Wise,  with  a  shrewd  knowledge 
of  men  and  their  selfishness.  He  would  rule  himself,  well  or  ill, 
and  would  have  others  do  likewise.  Stewards  in  church  and 
state,  he  would  have  none  of.  “  Brethren,”  he  exclaimed,  “ye  have 
been  called  unto  liberty,  therefore  Hold  your  hold  brethren!  .  .  . 
pull  up  well  upon  the  oars,  you  have  a  rich  cargo,  and  I  hope  we 
shall  escape  shipwreck  .  .  .  daylight  and  good  piloting  will  secure 
all.”  7  “There  is  strong  and  sharp  reasoning”  in  his  pages,  more 

4  Vindication ,  edition  of  i860,  pp.  50-53.  5  Ibid.,  pp.  54-55. 

6  Ibid.,  p.  60. 

7  The  Churches  Quarrel  Espoused,  p.  116. 


STIRRINGS  OF  LIBERALISM 


123 


solid  meat  in  his  two  volumes  than  in  all  Cotton  Mather’s  muddled 
effusions.  Like  a  good  Englishman  and  a  good  Yankee  he  hated 
arbitrary  power  as  he  hated  the  devil.  “The  very  name  of  an 
arbitrary  government  is  ready  to  put  an  Englishman’s  blood  into 
a  fermentation;  but  when  it  comes  and  shakes  its  whip  over  their 
ears,  and  tells  them  it  is  their  master,  it  makes  them  stark  mad.”  8 

Naturally  so  vigorous  an  advocate  of  democracy  in  the  church 
was  disliked  by  the  gentlemen  whose  ambitions  he  thwarted. 
Such  plebeian  views  were  incomprehensible  to  Cotton  Mather. 
When  The  Churches  Quarrel  Espoused  was  reprinted  in  1713, 
prefaced  with  a  commendatory  letter  signed  by  two  well-known 
clergymen,  the  latter  wrote  to  a  friend: 

...  A  furious  Man,  called  John  Wise,9  of  whom,  I  could  wish  he  had, 
Cor  bonum,  while  we  are  all  sensible,  he  wants,  Caput  bene  regulatum,  has 
lately  published  a  foolish  Libel,  against  some  of  us,  for  presbyterianizing 
too  much  in  our  Care  to  repair  some  Deficiencies  in  our  Churches.  And 
some  of  our  People,  who  are  not  only  tenacious  of  their  Liberties,  but  also 
more  suspicious  than  they  have  cause  to  be  of  a  Design  in  their  pastors  to 
make  abridgments  of  them;  they  are  too  much  led  into  Temptation,  by 
such  Invectives.  But  the  Impression  is  not  so  great  as  our  grand  Adver¬ 
sary  doubtless  hoped  for.10 

Two  years  later,  when  the  Vindication  was  published,  the  sulky 
theocrat  noted  in  his  diary: 

25  [May.  1717]  G[ood]  Dfevice].  Should  not  I  take  into  Consideration 
what  may  be  done  for  the  Service  of  the  Ministry  and  Religion  and  the 
Churches,  throughout  the  Land,  that  the  Poison  of  Wise’s  cursed  Libel 
may  have  an  Antidote?  11 

Cotton  Mather  was  unable  to  discover  an  antidote,  and  the 
poison  of  Wise’s  democratic  philosophy  was  to  prove  of  surprising 
vitality.  As  late  as  1772,  when  his  two  works  were  reprinted  on 
subscription,  no  fewer  than  1133  copies  were  taken.  That  the 
argument  of  Wise  was  not  without  influence  in  the  struggle  then 
developing  seems  reasonable;  but  that  it  greatly  influenced  the 
thinking  of  the  revolutionary  leaders,  as  Professor  Tyler  supposes, 
is  scarcely  probable.  The  argument  from  natural  rights  was  well 
known  in  1772,  and  it  was  to  Locke  and  not  to  Wise  that  men  like 
Samuel  Adams  turned  for  help.  Nevertheless,  in  denying  to  him 

8  Ibid.,  p.  209. 

9  A  gratuitous  insult,  as  Wise  was  well  known. 

10  “Letter  to  Robert  Wodrow,  September  17,  1715:”  Diary ,  in  Massachusetts 
Historical  Collections,  Seventh  Series,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  327. 

11  Ibid.,  p.  450. 


124 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


wide  influence  in  the  later  period  we  are  neither  detracting  from 
the  honor  that  is  rightly  his  as  the  first  colonial  to  justify  village 
democracy  by  an  appeal  to  political  philosophy,  nor  lessening  the 
repute  in  which  he  should  be  held  by  Americans  as  the  early  de¬ 
fender  of  local  self-rule. 

The  instinctive  sympathy  of  John  Wise  with  the  plain  people 
among  whom  he  lived  led  him  to  stand  with  them  in  another  matter 
that  touched  the  interests  of  the  farming  class.  The  currency  ques¬ 
tion  had  thrust  its  provocative  demands  into  political  councils,  and 
sharply  divided  the  electorate.  City  men  like  Samuel  Sewall 
were  jealous  to  maintain  the  English  metallic  currency,  partly 
through  custom  and  partly  because  its  scarcity  augmented  its 
value;  whereas  the  plain  people  of  Ipswich,  like  so  many  country 
people,  no  doubt  were  impressed  with  the  desirability  of  a  land- 
script  currency.  Into  this  mighty  controversy  entered  John  Wise, 
who  in  the  year  1721,  under  the  pen  name  of  Amicus  Patriae,  is 
reputed  to  have  been  the  author  of  a  book  entitled,  A  Word  of 
Comfort  to  a  Melancholy  Country.  Or  the  Bank  of  Credit  .  .  .  fairly 
defended  by  a  Discovery  of  the  Great  Benefit,  accruing  by  it  to  the  whole 
Province,  etc.  Humbly  dedicated  to  the  Merchants  in  Boston.  It 
was  “a  well-managed  and  witty  plea  for  paper  money  and  ‘infla¬ 
tion.’”  With  the  economics  of  the  problem  that  he  was  delving 
into,  we  are  not  concerned;  many  heads  have  wrestled  with  it 
since;  we  are  concerned  rather  to  point  out  that  the  democratic 
John  Wise  was  on  the  same  side  with  the  democratic  Franklin,  in 
espousing  paper  currency. 

After  all,  the  significant  thing  that  emerges  from  the  life  and 
work  of  John  Wise,  is  the  unerring  directness  with  which  he  seized 
upon  the  core  of  primitive  Congregationalism,  and  the  breadth 
and  vigor  with  which  he  defended  it.  After  a  spirited  contest 
lasting  three-quarters  of  a  century,  theocratic  Puritanism  yielded 
to  ecclesiastical  democracy.  For  two  generations  it  had  remained 
doubtful  which  way  the  church  would  incline.  Dominated  by 
gentlemen,  it  was  warped  towards  Presbyterianism;  but  inter¬ 
preted  by  commoners,  it  leaned  towards  Congregationalism.  The 
son  of  a  plebeian,  Wise  inclined  to  sympathize  with  the  spirit  of 
radical  Separatism,  bred  of  the  democratic  aspirations  of  Jacobean 
underlings;  and  this  radical  Separatism  he  found  justified  by  the 
new  political  philosophy,  as  well  as  by  facts  of  the  New  England 
village  world.  The  struggle  for  ecclesiastical  democracy  was  a 


STIRRINGS  OF  LIBERALISM 


125 


forerunner  of  the  struggle  for  political  democracy  which  was  to  be 
the  business  of  the  next  century;  and  in  founding  his  ecclesiasticism 
upon  the  doctrine  of  natural  rights,  John  Wise  was  an  early  witness 
to  the  new  order  of  thought. 


ii 

SOCIAL  DRIFTS 

Great  changes,  whether  liberal  or  otherwise  as  the  future  might 
determine,  were  to  come  to  Massachusetts  from  the  new  order 
with  its  Charter  provision  establishing  a  property  qualification  for 
suffrage.  The  venture  in  idealism  was  over  and  economic  deter¬ 
minism  reasserted  its  sway.  New  England  was  to  swing  back  into 
the  broad  current  of  English  political  development.  Following 
the  Revolution  of  1688  a  new  theory  of  the  political  state  was 
rising  in  England — the  theory-  that  the  state  originated  in  private 
property  and  exists  primarily  for  the  protection  of  property;  and 
this  conception,  thrust  upon  New  England,  was  to  cut  sharply 
across  the  cleavages  of  the  old  order  and  create  new  ones.  It 
substituted  the  dominance  of  wealth  for  the  stewardship  of  right¬ 
eousness;  the  stake-in-society  principle  for  the  Mosaic  code.  It 
set  a  premium  upon  acquisitiveness  and  subordinated  the  Puritan 
to  the  Yankee.  It  prepared  the  way  for  class  alignments  which 
must  grow  sharper  with  the  increase  of  wealth,  and  would  even¬ 
tually  produce  a  Tory  group  with  natural  longings  for  titles  and 
a  colonial  aristocracy.  How  powerful  this  mercantile-Tory  element 
was  to  become  would  depend  upon  the  counter  strength  of  the 
rising  democratic  group,  with  its  freehold  tenure  of  land,  its 
town  meeting,  its  Congregational  church,  and  its  distrust  of 
aristocratic  orders. 

For  the  present,  the  world  of  John  Wise  was  the  real  New 
England,  thrifty,  parsimonious,  intensely  local,  driving  straight 
towards  a  homespun  democracy.  The  older  fashioned  New  Eng¬ 
lander,  whatever  his  social  position,  did  not  take  kindly  to  Toryism; 
and  when  it  made  its  appearance  in  the  train  of  the  royal  officials, 
swaggering  somewhat  and  a  bit  insolent,  it  seemed  to  the  colonial 
both  alien  and  wicked.  English  Tory  and  Puritan  Yankee  frankly 
disliked  each  other;  their  ideals  were  incompatible,  their  manners 
unlike.  A  cloud  of  suspicion  surrounded  the  English  official  as 
he  walked  the  streets  of  Boston:  suspicion  of  the  hated  church 
which  he  promptly  set  up,  though  not  much  given  to  worship; 


126 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


suspicion  of  his  political  motives  and  the  overseas  authority  which 
he  represented.  In  a  vague  way  the  New  Englanders  were  con¬ 
vinced  that  he  constituted  a  menace  to  their  most  cherished 
rights  and  privileges;  that  he  was  secretly  bent  on  undermining 
the  traditional  liberties.  And  the  English  gentleman,  with  his 
casual  old-world  arrogance,  unwittingly  aggravated  the  common 
suspicion. 

How  great  was  the  chasm  that  separated  the  two  worlds  is 
sharply  revealed  by  an  episode  in  the  career  of  Joseph  Dudley, 
son  of  the  emigrant,  who  was  made  royal  governor  in  1702.  Dudley 
had  lived  much  in  England,  had  sat  in  Parliament,  and  had  imbibed 
prerogative  notions  of  government.  He  little  relished  the  homely 
ways  of  New  England  and  he  bore  himself  somewhat  haughtily. 
One  December  day  in  1705,  as  he  was  driving  along  a  country  road 
with  high  snowdrifts  on  each  side,  he  met  with  two  loads  of  wood. 
The  chariot  coming  to  a  stop,  Dudley  thrust  his  head  out  of  the 
window  and  bade  the  carters  turn  aside  and  make  way  for  him; 
but  they  were  inclined  to  argue  the  matter  in  view  of  the  drifts. 
Words  were  multiplied,  and  one  of  the  carters  cried — to  quote 
Sewall — “I  am  as  good  flesh  and  blood  as  you  .  .  .  you  may  goe 
out  of  the  way.”  In  a  rage  the  governor  drew  his  sword  and  struck 
at  the  fellow,  who  snatched  the  sword  away  and  broke  it.  “You 
lie,  you  dog;  you  lie,  you  devill!”  cried  Dudley,  beside  himself. 
“Such  words  don’t  become  a  Christian,”  retorted  the  carter.  “A 
Christian,  you  dog!”  cried  Dudley;  “a  Christian,  you  devill!  I 
was  a  Christian  before  you  were  born!”  and  he  snatched  the 
carter’s  whip  and  lashed  him  roundly.  “Being  in  a  great  passion: 
threatn’d  to  send  those  that  affronted  him  to  England.”  He  arrested 
both  carters  and  threw  them  into  jail,  whence  they  were  released 
by  the  help  of  Sewall,  who  took  their  side  though  connected  with 
Dudley  through  marriage.  They  were  of  good  yeoman  families, 
yet  the  matter  hung  on  for  nearly  a  year  before  they  were  dis¬ 
charged  from  their  bonds.12 

Village  New  England  was  becoming  surprisingly  independent 
in  spirit  when  plain  countrymen  stood  upon  their  rights  against 
the  Governor — “nor  did  they  once  in  the  Govrs  .  .  .  sight  pull 
of  their  hatts,”  as  Dudley  took  pains  to  inform  the  Queen’s  justices. 
Three  generations  in  America  were  having  their  effect  in  the 
creation  of  a  homespun  democracy.  “Mr.  Dudley’s  principles, 

12  The  account  with  affidavits  is  given  in  Sewall,  Diary ,  Vol.  II,  pp.  144-147. 


STIRRINGS  OF  LIBERALISM 


127 


in  government,  were  too  high  for  the  Massachusetts  people,” 
commented  a  later  Tory,  whose  own  principles  were  high: 

He  found  it  difficult  to  maintain  what  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  just 
prerogative  of  the  crown,  and  at  the  same  time  to  recover  and  preserve 
the  esteem  of  the  country.  The  government  had  been  so  popular  [*.  e. 
democratic]  under  the  old  charter,  that  the  exercise  of  the  powers  reserved 
to  the  crown  by  the  new  charter  was  submitted  to  with  reluctance.13 

If  “the  prejudices  against  him  were  great,”  some  explanation  is 
found  in  a  letter  written  by  his  son,  Attorney-General  Paul  Dudley, 
to  an  English  friend,  which  came  to  the  hands  of  Cotton  Mather 
and  was  published  by  him: 

I  refer  you  to  Mr.  —  for  an  Account  of  everything,  especially  about  the 
Government,  and  the  Colledge;  both  which,  are  Discoursed  of  here,  in 
Chimney  Corners,  and  Private  Meetings,  as  confidently  as  can  be.  .  .  . 
This  Country  will  never  be  worth  Living  in,  for  Lawyers  and  Gentlemen, 
till  the  Charter  is  Taken  Away.  My  Father  and  I  sometimes  Talk  of  the 
Queen’s  Establishing  a  Court  of  Chancery  in  this  Country;  I  have  Writ 
about  it,  to  Mr.  Blathwayt:  If  the  Matter  should  Succeed,  you  might  get 
some  Place  worth  your  Return;  of  which  I  should  be  very  Glad.14 

If  New  England  had  grown  restive  under  the  theocratic  oligarchy, 
it  had  no  intention  of  being  toryized  by  English  placemen. 

It  was  during  these  troubled  years  that  a  new  force  made  its 
appearance  in  Massachusetts  which  Sewall  noted:  “Sept.  25 
[1690].  A  printed  sheet  entituled  publick  Occurrences  comes 
out,  which  gives  much  distaste  because  not  Licensed.  ...”  A 
week  later  he  added:  “Print  of  the  Governour  and  Council  comes 
out  shewing  their  disallowance  of  the  Public  Occurrences”;  and 
the  next  day,  “Mr.  Mather  writes  a  very  sharp  letter  about  it.” 
This  was  Increase  Mather,  who  would  tolerate  no  such  lawlessness 
of  the  press,  which  must  be  kept  as  a  private  preserve  for  the  or¬ 
thodox  party.  Against  the  Mather  conservatism  it  was  impossible 
to  make  headway,  and  the  little  sheet  did  not  come  to  a  second 
issue.  Not  till  fourteen  years  later  did  Sewall  set  down  a  similar 
note:  “April  24  [1704].  I  went  to  Cambridge.  ...  I  gave  Mr. 
Willard  the  first  News-Letter  that  ever  was  carried  over  the  River. 
He  shew’d  it  to  the  Fellows.”  So  began  in  America,  at  first  un¬ 
lawfully,  and  then  with  due  propriety,  the  work  of  making  and 
publishing  newspapers.  For  seventy-two  years  thereafter,  the 

13  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony,  Vol.  II,  p.  148. 

14  Sewall,  Diary,  Vol.’ll,  Introduction,  p.  109. 


128 


LIBERALISM  AND  PURITANISM 


News-Letter  was  published  continuously,  justifying  in  all  its  utter¬ 
ances  the  confidence  of  Boston  conservatism,  espousing  naturally 
the  Tory  side  in  the  pre-Revolutionary  quarrels,  and  coming  to  a 
sudden  end  on  the  evacuation  of  Boston  by  General  Gage. 

On  December  14,  1719,  the  Boston  Gazette  entered  the  field  as  a 
competitor  for  conservative  readers,  and  two  years  later,  August 
17,  1721,  the  New  England  Courant  appeared,  the  first  organ  of  the 
opposition.  It  was  edited  by  James  Franklin,  who  possessed 
much  of  the  Franklin  independence,  untempered  by  the  prudence 
of  Benjamin;  and  he  set  himself  incautiously  to  the  business  of 
assailing  the  strait-laced  authorities  of  Boston.  He  got  together  a 
group  of  brisk  young  men,  known  as  the  Hell-fire  Club,  who  flung 
their  vivacious  satires  at  the  Mathers  with  such  effect  as  to 
lead  Cotton  Mather  to  undertake  the  following  “Good  Device”: 

Warnings  are  to  be  given  unto  the  wicked  Printer,  and  his  Accomplices, 
who  every  week  publish  a  vile  Paper  to  lessen  and  blacken  the  Ministers 
of  the  Town,  and  render  their  Ministry  ineffectual.  A  Wickedness  never 
parad’d  any  where  upon  the  Face  of  the  Earth.13 

Although  his  prayers  could  not  convert  the  wicked  journalists, 
his  warnings  availed  with  the  magistrates,  who  took  means  to  put 
a  stop  to  such  disrespect.  Twice  Franklin  was  arraigned  for 
contempt,  and  once  he  spent  four  weeks  in  the  common  jail.  By 
way  of  counterblast  to  so  disreputable  a  sheet,  the  New  England 
Weekly  Journal  appeared  on  March  20,  1727,  an  eminently  respect¬ 
able  sheet,  edited  by  Mather  Byles  and  with  such  notable  con¬ 
tributors  as  the  Reverend  Thomas  Prince.  But  with  the  coming 
of  the  Journal  with  its  staff  of  writers  who  modeled  their  style 
upon  the  Augustan  wits,  we  are  in  the  mid-current  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  that  was  to  enlarge  the  influence  of  the  public  press  far 
beyond  what  could  have  been  foreseen  from  its  small  beginnings. 
It  was  to  penetrate  the  inland  villages  and  slowly  wear  away  their 
insularity  of  temper  and  outlook,  bringing  fresh  ideas  to  minds 
that  had  long  stagnated.  On  the  whole  it  was  not  a  liberal  press, 
but  its  final  effect  was  profoundly  liberalizing. 

16  Diary,  Vol.  II,  p.  663. 


BOOK  TWO:  THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


BOOK  TWO 

THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


The  undistinguished  years  of  the  early  and  middle  eighteenth 
century,  rude  and  drab  in  their  insularity,  were  the  creative  spring¬ 
time  of  democratic  America — plebeian  years  that  sowed  what 
after  times  were  to  reap.  The  forgotten  men  and  women  of  those 
silent  decades  wrote  little,  debated  little,  very  likely  thought 
little;  they  were  plain  workmen  with  whom  ideas  counted  for  less 
than  the  day’s  work.  The  stir  of  achievement  filled  the  land, 
daily  penetrating  farther  into  the  backwoods  and  bringing  new 
farmlands  under  the  plow.  The  stern  demands  of  necessity 
held  men  in  their  grip,  narrowing  the  horizon  of  their  minds,  and 
obscuring  the  vision  of  their  larger  accomplishment.  Along  the 
Appalachian  watershed  a  vast  drama,  magnificent  in  the  breadth 
and  sweep  of  its  movement,  was  being  enacted  by  players  un¬ 
conscious  of  their  parts.  Not  until  long  after  they  had  gone  to 
their  graves  were  the  broad  lines  of  that  drama  revealed.  Today 
it  is  plain  that  those  unremembered  years  were  engaged  in  clearing 
away  encumbrances  more  significant  than  the  great  oaks  and 
maples  of  the  virgin  wilderness:  they  were  uprooting  ancient 
habits  of  thought,  destroying  social  customs  that  had  grown  old 
and  dignified  in  class-ridden  Europe.  A  new  psychology  was 
being  created  by  the  wide  spaces  that  was  to  be  enormously  signifi¬ 
cant  when  it  came  to  self-consciousness.  If  this  middle  eighteenth 
century  wrote  little  literature,  it  created  and  spread  among  a 
vigorous  people  something  of  far  greater  importance  to  America, 
the  psychology  of  democratic  individualism. 

From  this  determining  influence — too  little  recognized  by  later 
generations — the  creative  outlines  of  our  history  have  taken  shape. 
American  ideals  and  institutions  emerged  in  large  part  from  the 
silent  revolution  which  during  the  middle  eighteenth  century 
differentiated  the  American  from  the  transplanted  colonial;  a 
change  that  resulted  from  an  amalgam  of  the  older  English  stock 
with  other  races,  and  the  subjection  of  this  new  product  on  a 
great  scale  to  the  influence  of  diffused  landholding.  From  these 

131 


132 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


two  major  facts  of  a  new  race  and  a  free  environment  came  the 
social  and  political  philosophy  of  older  America,  to  which  we  have 
traditionally  applied  the  term  democratic,  and  which  uncon¬ 
sciously  wove  itself  into  our  daily  intercourse  and  ways  of 
thinking. 


PART  ONE:  THE  MIND  IN  THE  MAKING 

1720-1763 


CHAPTER  I 

COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 
1 

NEW  STOCK 

Immigration  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  almost  wholly 
economic  in  motive.  The  reports  of  free  land  and  free  opportunity 
in  America  penetrated  to  remote  hamlets  of  Great  Britain,  and 
more  slowly  to  the  continent,  and  drew  hither  a  rude  influx  of  the 
dispossessed  and  disinherited  of  Europe.  From  the  hopeless  pov¬ 
erty  of  great  masses  of  old-world  laborers,  increasing  numbers 
sought  escape  through  emigration,  accepting  the  hardships  and 
uncertainties  of  the  migration  in  the  hope  of  bettering  themselves 
ultimately.  A  host  of  English  nondescripts — broken  men,  bond 
servants,  “gaol  birds,”  the  lees  and  settlings  of  the  old  world — 
came  overseas,  voluntarily  or  under  duress,  in  numbers  running 
into  the  hundred  thousands,  and  shared  with  German  peasants 
from  the  Palatine,  or  Scotch-lrish  from  Ulster,  the  back-breaking 
labor  of  subduing  the  wilderness.  About  these  unfortunate  men 
and  women  no  romance  has  gathered;  tradition  and  history  have 
not  remembered  their  names  or  glorified  their  deeds;  yet  their 
blood  runs  in  the  veins  of  most  Americans  today  of  the  older 
stock,  and  their  contribution  to  our  common  heritage  was  great 
and  lasting. 

Of  the  different  racial  strains  that  mingled  their  blood  with 
the  earlier  English — Irish,  Huguenot-French,  German,  Scotch- 
lrish — the  last  was  by  far  the  most  important.  Not  since  1630, 
when  the  Lady  Ariella  and  her  companion  vessels  brought  the  Puri¬ 
tans  to  Massachusetts  Bay,  had  there  been  an  event  so  momentous 
to  America  as  the  arrival  in  1718  of  some  four  thousand  Scotch- 
lrish  from  Ulster,  the  vanguard  of  an  army  which  by  the  time  of 
the  Revolution  had  risen  to  approximately  two  hundred  thousand, 
or  more  than  twelve  times  the  number  of  English  who  settled 

133 


134 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


Massachusetts.  They  were  desperately  poor;  the  available  lands 
near  the  coast  were  already  preempted;  so  armed  with  axes,  their 
seed  potatoes,  and  the  newly  invented  rifle,  they  plunged  into  the 
backwoods  to  become  our  great  pioneering  race.  Scattered  thinly 
through  a  long  frontier,  they  constituted  the  outposts  and  buffer 
settlements  of  civilization.  .  A  vigorous  breed,  hardy,  assertive, 
individualistic,  thrifty,  trained  in  the  democracy  of  the  Scottish 
kirk,  they  were  the  material  out  of  which  later  Jacksonian  de¬ 
mocracy  was  to  be  fashioned,  the  creators  of  that  “western  type 
which  in  politics  and  industry  became  ultimately  the  American 
type.”  1 

Next  to  the  Scotch-Irish,  who  for  the  most  part  were  free  peas¬ 
ants,  the  most  important  addition  to  eighteenth-century  America 
were  the  indented  servants.  Mostly  from  England,  Scotland, 
Ireland,  and  Germany,  they  represented  all  trades  and  some  of  the 
professions.  The  white  slavers  of  the  times  were  well  organized 
and  plied  a  brisk  trade  with  satisfactory  profits;  and  in  conse¬ 
quence,  a  steady  stream  of  indented  servants  poured  into  America 
to  turn  the  wheels  of  colonial  industry.  In  his  history  of  the  German 
redemptioners,  Diffenderfer  has  printed  a  number  of  newspaper 
advertisements  which  throw  a  curious  light  upon  the  traffic: 
here  are  two : 

From  the  American  Weekly  Mercury,  February  18,  1729: 

Lately  arrived  from  London,  a  parcel  of  very  likely  English  servants,  men 
and  women,  several  of  the  men  Tradesmen;  to  be  sold  reasonable  and 
Time  allowed  for  payment.  By  Charles  Read  of  Philadelphia,  or  Capt. 
John  Ball,  on  board  his  ship,  at  Anthony  Millkinson  s  Wharf. 

From  the  same  for  May  22,  1729,  announcements  of  two  ships: 

There  is  just  arrived  from  Scotland,  a  parcel  of  choice  Scotch  Servants; 
Taylors,  Weavers,  Shoemakers  and  ploughmen,  some  for  five  and  others 
for  seven  years;  Imported  by  James  Coults,  etc. 

Just  arrived  from  London  in  the  ship  Providence,  Capt.  Jonathan  Clarke,  a 
parcel  of  very  likely  servants,  most  Tradesmen,  to  be  sold  on  reasonable 
Terms. 

The  several  nationalities  were  appraised  and  rated  by  careful 
merchants  and  the  fittest  import  seasons  considered.2  The  “best 

1  See  Commons,  Races  and  Immigrants  in  America,  p.  37. 

2  Sometimes  the  profits  were  unexpectedly  great,  as  is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  a 
certain  George  Martin,  who  contracted  with  a  shipmaster  to  transport  himself,  his 
wife,  and  five  children  to  America  for  fifty-four  pounds.  He  paid  down  $16,  but 
died  on  the  passage.  On  the  arrival  of  the  vessel  in  port,  the  captain  foreclosed  on 
the  contract,  sold  the  widow  for  twenty-two  pounds,  the  three  eldest  sons  at  thirty 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


135 


time  for  Servants  is  about  the  month  of  May,”  one  merchant 

“  wrote  to  his  agent  in  Ireland;  and  another  warned,  “Irish  servants 
will  be  very  dull,  such  numbers  have  already  arrived  from  Different 
parts  &  many  more  expected,  that  I  believe  it  will  be  overdone, 
especially  as  several  Dutch  vessels  are  expected  here,  which  will 
always  command  the  Market.”  3 

In  the  middle  colonies,  particularly  Pennsylvania,  the  greater 
number  of  servants  came  from  the  Rhine  country.  Deceived  by 
swindling  agents,  thousands  of  German  peasants,  eager  to  get 
away  from  their  war-harried  and  plundered  homes,  sold  them¬ 
selves  into  servitude  to  pay  their  passage  to  America.  For  the 
better  part  of  a  century  these  German  redemptioners  thronged  the 
ports  of  Philadelphia  and  Baltimore,  as  the  following  news  items 
testify: 

From  Der  Hoch  Deutsche  Pennsylvanische  Bericht,  August  1 6,  1750: 

Six  ships  with  Irish  servants  have  arrived  at  Philadelphia,  and  two  ships 
with  German  Newcomers.  Some  say  18  more  on  their  way  here;  others 
say  24  and  still  others  10,000  persons. 

From  the  same,  December  16,  1750: 

Capt.  Hasselwood  has  arrived  from  Holland  with  the  latest  ship  that 
brought  Germans.  It  is  the  fourteenth  that  has  come  laden  with  Germans 
this  year.  4,317  have  registered  in  the  Court  House.  .  .  .  Besides  these, 
1,000  servants  and  passengers  arrived  from  Ireland  and  England.4 

Of  the  human  side  of  this  widespread  traffic  some  little  idea  may 
be  got  from  the  diary  of  a  certain  John  Harrower,  a  man  of  modest 
education  who  became  an  articled  schoolmaster  to  a  Virginia 
family  in  the  year  1774.  Following  are  some  entries: 

^  Wednesday,  26th.  [January,  1774.]  This  day  I  being  reduced  to  the 
last  shilling  was  obliged  to  engage  to  go  to  Virginia  for  four  years,  as  a 
schoolmaster  for  Bedd,  Board,  washing  and  five  pounds  during  the  whole 
time.  I  have  also  wrote  my  wife  this  day  a  particular  Acct  of  everything 
that  has  happened  to  me  since  I  left  her  until  this  date.  .  .  . 

Munday  31st  ...  It  is  surprising  to  see  the  No.  of  good  tradesmen 
of  all  kinds,  th’t  come  on  b’d  every  day  .  .  .  while  the  Clerk  was  filling 
up  the  Indentures  the  doctor  search’d  every  serv’t  to  see  that  they  were 
sound  .  .  .  seventy-five  were  Intend  [indented]  to  Capt  Bowres  for  four 
Years.  .  .  . 

pounds  each,  and  the  two  youngest,  who  were  under  five  years  of  age,  he  sold  for 
ten  pounds,  realizing  one  hundred  and  twenty-two  pounds  on  a  debt  under  fifty- 
one  pounds.  (Dififenderfer,  The  German  Immigrants  into  Pennsylvania,  p.  268). 

3  Ibid.,  p.  229.  t  ' 

4  Ibid.,  Part  II,  “The  Redemptioners,”  p.  209. 


136 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


Munday  7th  ...  at  4  pm  put  a  servant  ashore  extreamly  bade  in  a 
fever,  and  then  got  under  saile  for  Virginia  with  seventy  Servants  on 
board  all  indented  to  serve  four  yeares  there  at  their  different  Occupa¬ 
tions.  .  .  . 

Munday,  May  2nd.  ...  At  2  pm  the  Capt  carried  five  servts  ashore  to 
Hampton  in  order  to  sell  their  Indentures,  But  returned  again  at  Midnight 
with[out]  selling  any  more  but  one  Boat  Builder.  .  .  . 

Freiday,  6th  ...  at  Hobshole  there  was  five  Glasgow  ships  and  an 
English  Brigantine  lying,  at  2  pm  we  passed  by  Leedstown  on  our  Star 
board  hand  where  there  was  a  ship  from  London  lying  with  convicts.  .  .  . 
Wednesday,  nth.  ...  At  10  A  M  Both  Coopers  and  the  Barber  from 
our  Mace  [mess]  went  ashore  upon  tryall.  At  night  one  Daniel  Turner  a 
servt  returned  onb’d  from  Liberty  so  Drunk  that  he  abused  the  Capt  and 
Chief  Mate  and  Boatswan  to  a  verry  high  degree,  which  made  him  to  be 
horse  whipt,  put  in  Irons  and  thumb  screwed,  on  houre  afterward  he  was 
unthumbscrewed,  taken  out  of  the  Irons,  but  then  he  was  hand  cuffed, 
and  gagged  all  night.  .  .  . 

Munday,  16th.  This  day  severalls  came  on  b’d  to  purchase  servts  Indent¬ 
ures  and  among  them  there  was  two  soul  drivers,  they  are  Men  who 
made  it  their  business  to  go  on  b’d  all  ships  who  have  in  either  Servants  or 
Convicts  and  buy  sometimes  the  whole  and  sometimes  a  parcell  of  them 
as  they  can  agree,  and  then  they  drive  them  through  the  Country  like  a 
parcell  of  Sheep  until  they  can  sell  them  to  advantage,  but  all  went  away 
without  buying  any.  .  .  . 

k  Munday,  23  rd  [May]  ...  at  same  time  all  the  rest  of  the  servants  were 
ordered  ashore  to  a  tent  at  Fredericksbg  and  several  of  their  indentures 
were  then  sold,  about  4  pm  I  was  brought  to  Colonel  Daingerfleld,  when 
we  immediately  agreed  and  my  Indenture  for  four  years  was  then  de¬ 
livered  him  and  he  was  to  send  for  me  the  next  day.5 

In  some  such  fashion,  year  after  year,  thousands  of  immigrants 
were  transported  to  America,  there  to  mingle  their  blood  with 
that  of  the  earlier  comers.  They  came  as  social  derelicts,  were 
greeted  by  the  awaiting  “soul-drivers,”  found  masters,  worked  and 
got  on,  or  lost  heart  and  slipped  away  into  the  tempting  back- 
country  whither  so  many  broken  men  went  in  search  of  refuge. 
They  were  a  plebeian  lot,  and  they  endured  the  common  fate  of 
the  underling.  Very  likely  they  transmitted  to  their  children  a 
bitter  hostility  to  the  ways  of  an  aristocratic  society,  the  residuum 
of  old  grievances,  and  this  slowly  accumulating  animus  was  even¬ 
tually  to  count  heavily  with  lower-class  colonials  in  favor  of  a 
more  democratic  order  in  the  new  world. 

6  For  the  entire  diary,  see  American  Historical  Review,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  65-107. 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


137 


ii 

THE  FRONTIER 
Lubberland 

The  frontier,  which  exercised  so  creative  an  influence  in  shaping 
American  character  and  institutions,  was  regarded  in  very  different 
lights  by  the  gentleman  and  the  commoner.  To  the  former  it  was  no 
other  than  lubberland,  the  abode  of  rude  leveling,  the  temptation  to 
gross  social  laxity.  It  drew  away  servants  who  were  needed,  and 
kept  the  price  of  real  estate  low;  and  such  very  different  persons 
as  Cotton  Mather  and  John  Dickinson  agreed  in  desiring  to  stop 
the  constant  drain  into  the  backcountry,  and  keep  settlers  in  the 
older  portions.  Descriptions  .of  the  frontier  indited  by  aristocratic 
pens  convey  an  idea  very  different  from  later  democratic  concep¬ 
tions,  and  paint  the  ancestors  of  later  Jacksonians  in  unlovely  colors. 

Among  the  earliest  of  these  records  is  The  Private  Journal  kept 
by  Madam  Knight  on  a  Journey  from  Boston  to  New  York  in  the 
Year  1704.  Madam  Knight  was  a  sprightly  and  intelligent  woman, 
keeper  of  a  dame’s  school  in  Boston,  who  set  down  in  the  journal 
some  of  the  odd  things  that  came  under  her  sharp  eyes  on  her 
venturesome  trip  on  horseback.  As  she  drew  away  from  the 
older  settlements,  signs  of  relaxing  social  convention  multiplied 
with  the  worsening  of  the  road.  Connecticut,  which  had  always 
been  too  democratic  to  suit  the  Boston  taste,  she  found  “a  little 
too  much  Independant  in  their  principalis.”  It  was  not  careful 
to  uphold  proper  social  distinctions,  but  inclined  to  a  free  and  easy 
leveling  altogether  offensive: 

.  .  .  They  Generally  lived  very  well  and  comfortable  in  their  famelies. 
But  too  Indulgent  (especially  ye  farmers)  to  their  slaves:  suffering  too 
great  familiarity  from  them,  permitting  ym  to  sit  at  Table  and  eat  with 
them  (as  they  say  to  save  time),  and  into  the  dish  goes  the  black  hoof  as 
freely  as  the  white  hand.  They  told  me  that  there  was  a  farmer  lived 
nere  the  Town  where  I  lodged  who  had  some  difference  with  his  slave, 
concerning  something  the  master  had  promised  him  and  did  not  punctually 
perform;  wch  caused  some  hard  words  between  them;  But  at  length  they 
put  the  matter  to  Arbitration  and  Bound  themselves  to  stand  to  the 
award  of  such  as  they  named — wch  done,  the  Arbitrators  Having  heard 
the  Allegations  of  both  parties,  Order  the  master  to  pay  40s  to  black  face, 
and  acknowledge  his  fault.  And  so  the  matter  ended;  the  poor  master 
very  honestly  standing  to  the  award.6 

* 

6  The  Private  Journal,  etc.,  p.  40. 


138 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


In  the  unsettled  country  strange  figures  with  rude  decivilized 
ways  made  their  appearance.  Here  is  a  description  of  one  such 
product  of  the  wilderness: 

I  had  scarce  done  thinking,  when  an  Indian-like  Animal  come  to  the 
door,  on  a  creature  very  much  like  himselfe,  in  mien  and  feature,  as  well  as 
Ragged  cloathing;  and  having  ’litt,  makes  an  Awkerd  Scratch  with  his 
Indian  shoo,  and  a  Nodd,  sitts  on  ye  block,  fumbles  out  his  black  Junk 
[salt  meat?],  dipps  it  in  ye  ashes,  and  presents  it  piping  hott  to  his  muschee- 
to’s  (?),  and  fell  to  sucking  like  a  calf,  without  speaking,  for  near  a  quarter 
of  an  hower.  At  length  the  old  man  said  how  do’s  Sarah  do?  who  I  under¬ 
stood  was  the  wretches  wife,  and  Daughter  to  ye  old  man.7 

She  thus  describes  a  squatter’s  hut  in  the  backwoods: 

This  little  Hutt  was  one  of  the  wretchedest  I  ever  saw  a  habitation  for 
human  creatures.  It  was  suported  with  shores  enclosed  with  Clapboards, 
laid  on  Lengthways,  and  so  much  asunder,  that  the  Light  come  throu’ 
everywhere;  the  doore  tyed  on  with  a  cord  in  ye  place  of  hinges;  The 
floor  the  bear  earth;  no  windows  but  such  as  the  thin  covering  afforded, 
nor  any  furniture  but  a  Bedd  with  a  glass  Bottle  hanging  at  ye  head  on’t; 
an  earthan  cupp,  a  small  pewter  bason,  A  Bord  with  sticks  to  stand  on, 
instead  of  a  table,  and  a  block  or  two  in  ye  corner  instead  of  chairs.  The 
family  were  the  old  man,  his  wife  and  two  children;  all  and  every  part 
being  the  picture  of  poverty.  Notwithstanding  both  the  Hutt  and  its 
Inhabitance  were  very  clean  and  tydee.8 

As  Madam  Knight  meditated  upon  the  causes  of  such  poverty,  she 
came  to  a  characteristic  Boston  conclusion: 

We  may  Observe  here  the  great  necessity  and  benefitt  both  of  Educa¬ 
tion  and  Conversation:  for  these  people  have  as  Large  a  portion  of  mother 
witt,  and  sometimes  Larger,  than  those  who  have  bin  brought  up  in 
Citties;  but  for  want  of  emprovements,  Render  themselves  almost  Ridic- 
ulos,  as  above!.9 

It  is  in  the  chatty  narrative  of  Colonel  William  Byrd  of  Virginia,10 
that  we  find  the  earliest  detailed  description  of  the  fringe  of  squat¬ 
ter  settlements.  Colonel  Byrd  was  the  first  gentleman  of  Virginia, 
a  man  of  old-world  education  and  some  literary  taste,11  polished 
manners,  and  a  vast  number  of  acres  of  choice  land  which  he  had  ac¬ 
quired  and  held  largely  tax-free,  by  means  well  understood  among  Vir- 

7  Ibid..,  pp.  29-30.  8  Ibid.,  p.  28.  9  Ibid.,  p.  45. 

10  “The  History  of  the  Dividing  Line,”  in  The  Writings  of  Colonel  William  Byrd 
of  Westover  in  Virginia,  Esquire,  New  York,  1901. 

II  At  his  death  his  library  contained  some  four  thousand  volumes,  “the  largest 
private  library  in  the  English-speaking  colonies,”  according  to  his  biographer. 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


139 


ginia  gentlemen.12  Among  the  several  capacities  in  which  he  served 
the  commonwealth  in  return  for  his  many  acres,  was  to  act  as  a 
member  of  a  joint  commission  which  in  the  year  1728  ran  a  bound¬ 
ary  line  between  Virginia  and  North  Carolina.  As  he  sat  his  horse 
in  the  capacity  of  overseer,  he  observed  many  amusing  things 
which  he  jotted  down  in  his  journal. 

The  backcountry,  it  would  seem,  had  already  developed  the 
free  and  easy  ways  of  a  squatter  world,  shiftless,  lubberly,  inde¬ 
pendent,  but  animated  by  hostility  towards  the  aristocratic  Old 
Dominion,  from  which  many  of  the  settlers  had  come.  North 
Carolina  had  long  been  a  place  of  refuge  for  debtors,  criminals, 
and  runaway  servants,  who  used  their  legs  to  even  the  score  with 
a  caste  system;  and  Colonel  Byrd  regarded  the  lazy  crew  with 
amused  contempt: 

Surely  there  is  no  place  in  the  World  where  the  Inhabitants  live  with  less 
Labour  than  in  N  Carolina.  It  approaches  nearer  to  the  Description  of 
Lubberland  than  any  other,  by  the  great  felicity  of  the  Climate,  the 
easiness  of  raising  Provisions,  and  the  Slothfulness  of  the  People.  Indian 
corn  is  of  so  great  increase,  that  a  little  Pains  will  Subsist  a  very  large 
Family  with  Bread,  and  then  they  may  have  meat  without  any  Pains  at 
all,  by  the  Help  of  the  Low  Grounds,  and  the  great  Variety  of  Mast  that 
grows  on  the  High-land.  The  Men,  for  their  parts,  just  like  the  Indians, 
impose  all  the  Work  upon  the  poor  Women.  They  make  their  Wives  rise 
out  of  their  Beds  early  in  the  Morning,  at  the  same  time  that  they  lye  and 
Snore,  till  the  Sun  has  run  one  third  of  his  course,  and  disperst  all  the 
unwholesome  Damps.  Then,  after  Stretching  and  Yawning  for  half  an 
Hour,  they  light  their  Pipes,  and,  under  the  Protection  of  a  cloud  of 
Smoak,  venture  out  into  the  open  Air;  tho’  if  it  happens  to  be  never  so 
little  cold,  they  quickly  return  Shivering  into  the  Chimney  corner.  When 
the  weather  is  mild,  they  stand  leaning  with  both  their  arms  upon  the 
corn-field  fence,  and  gravely  consider  whether  they  had  best  go  and  take  a 
Small  Heat  at  the  Hough;  but  generally  find  reasons  to  put  off  till  another 
time.  Thus  they  loiter  away  their  Lives,  like  Solomon’s  Sluggard,  with 
their  Arms  across,  and  at  the  Winding  up  of  the  Year  Scarcely  have  Bread 
to  Eat.  To  speak  the  Truth,  tis  a  thorough  Aversion  to  Labor  that  makes 
People  file  off  to  N  Carolina,  where  Plenty  and  a  Warm  Sun  confirm  them 
in  their  Disposition  to  Laziness  for  their  whole  Lives.13 

One  thing  Colonel  Byrd  noted  everywhere:  the  lazy  lubbers 
wanted  chiefly  to  be  let  alone;  they  dreaded  the  possibility  of 
falling  within  the  Virginia  line;  they  were  content  in  their  Eden, 

12  His  father  died  possessed  of  26,231  acres.  He  himself  owned  at  his  death  “no 
less  than  179,440  acres  of  the  best  land  in  Virginia.” 

13  Op.  cit.,  pp.  75-76. 


140 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


and  had  no  wish  to  exchange  their  freedom  for  the  stricter  rule 
of  the  Old  Dominion  : 

Wherever  we  passed  we  constantly  found  the  Borderers  laid  it  to  Heart 
if  their  Land  was  taken  into  Virginia;  they  chose  rather  belong  to  Carolina, 
where  they  pay  no  Tribute,  either  to  God  or  to  Caesar.  .  .  .  Another 
reason  was,  that  the  Government  there  is  so  Loose,  and  the  Laws  so 
feebly  executed,  that,  like  those  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Sydon  formerly, 
every  one  does  just  what  seems  good  in  his  own  Eyes.  .  .  .  Besides,  there 
might  have  been  some  Danger,  perhaps,  in  venturing  to  be  so  rigorous, 
for  fear  of  undergoing  the  Fate  of  an  honest  Justice  in  Corotuck  Precinct. 
This  bold  Magistrate,  it  seems,  taking  upon  to  order  a  fellow  to  the 
Stocks,  for  being  disorderly  in  his  Drink,  was,  for  his  intemperate  zeal, 
carry’d  thither  himself,  and  narrowly  escap’d  being  whipp’t  by  the  Rabble 
into  the  Bargain.14 

They  are  rarely  guilty  of  Flattering  or  making  any  Court  to  their  govern- 
ours,  but  treat  them  with  all  the  Excesses  of  Freedom  and  Familiarity. 
They  are  of  Opinion  their  rulers  woul’d  be  apt  to  grow  insolent,  if  they 
grew  Rich,  and  for  that  reason  they  take  care  to  keep  them  poorer,  and 
more  dependent,  if  possible,  than  the  Saints  of  New  England  used  to  do 
their  Governours.15 

To  the  student  of  colonial  politics  such  glimpses  are  suggestive. 
They  reveal  how  early  was  the  popular  distrust  of  magistrates  and 
government;  and  they  serve  to  explain  the  most  striking  character¬ 
istic  of  Revolutionary  political  practice — the  movement  to  mini¬ 
mize  the  power  of  the  judiciary  and  the  executive,  and  magnify 
the  power  of  the  legislature;  to  keep  authority  within  the  control 
of  the  local  democracies.  “Every  one  does  just  what  seems  good 
in  his  own  Eyes” — in  this  attitude  of  social  laissez  faire  that  throve 
on  a  diet  of  corn  pone  and  salt  pork  was  the  origin  of  the  coonskin 
democracy  of  Old  Hickory  that  was  to  bring  eventual  disaster  to 
the  plans  of  gentlemen. 


HI 

THE  FRONTIER 
Land  of  Promise 

Quite  another  picture  of  the  frontier  was  likely  to  be  painted  by 
the  eighteenth-century  democrat.  In  the  well-known  Letters 
of  Crevecceur,  and  in  the  recently  published  More  Letters  from  an 
American  Farmer, 16  is  an  analysis  of  frontier  life  and  its  creative 

u  Ibid.,  p.  87.  15  Ibid.,  p.  81. 

w  Published  under  the  title  of  Sketches  of  Eighteenth  Century  America  by  the  Yale 
University  Press,  1925. 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


141 


influence  upon  the  emerging  American  character,  far  more  sym¬ 
pathetic  and  thoughtful  than  the  casual  narratives  of  Madam 
Knight  and  Colonel  Byrd.  The  author  was  a  cultivated  Norman- 
French  gentleman,  who  about  the  year  1759  or  1760  entered  the 
English  colonies  from  Canada,  was  a  surveyor  for  a  time  near 
Albany,  a  resident  of  Pennsylvania  and  of  Ulster  County  in  the 
province  of  New  York,  eventually  acquired  a  farm  of  120  acres 
in  Orange  County  which  he  named  “Pine  Hill,”  married  Mehetable 
Tippet  of  Yonkers,  and  became  a  competent  tiller  of  the  soil  as 
well  as  a  lover  of  country  life.  In  disposition  he  was  active  and 
energetic,  curious  concerning  the  ways  of  nature  and  society.  In 
Canada  he  had  joined  the  army  as  lieutenant  under  Montcalm 
and  was  sent  on  a  map-making  expedition  to  the  wilderness  be¬ 
yond  the  Great  Lakes,  and  traveled  from  Detroit  as  far  south  as 
the  Ohio  River.  After  quitting  Canada  following  the  fall  of  Que¬ 
bec,  he  traveled  from  Nova  Scotia  through  the  English  colonies 
to  the  extreme  south,  and  perhaps  visited  Bermuda  and  Jamaica, 
noting  keenly  the  country  and  the  manners  of  the  people.  Per¬ 
haps  no  other  man  before  the  Revolution  was  so  intimately  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  French  and  English  colonies  as  a  whole,  with 
their  near  background  of  frontier  and  the  great  wilderness  beyond, 
as  this  French  American;  and  it  was  from  long  and  intimate  con¬ 
tact  with  the  realities  of  colonial  life  that  he  wrote  those  comments 
that  have  preserved  his  name  to  the  present. 

The  Revolution  broke  in  upon  his  peaceful  life  with  disastrous 
consequences.  He  took  no  part  in  the  preliminary  disputes,  and 
was  under  grave  suspicion  by  his  neighbors  in  Orange  County  and 
by  the  British.  He  was  thrown  into  prison  in  New  York  by  his 
Majesty’s  officers,  where  his  health  was  undermined  and  he  was 
reduced  to  extreme  straits.  Finally  permitted  to  sail  for  Europe 
without  his  family,  he  was  shipwrecked  off  the  coast  of  Ireland, 
but  reached  London  where  he  disposed  of  his  manuscripts,  and 
eventually  got  over  to  France  in  August,  1781.  After  the  peace  he 
returned  to  America  to  find  his  wife  dead,  his  children  scattered, 
and  his  farmhouse  burnt.  For  a  time  he  was  French  consul  at 
New  York,  where  he  interested  himself  in  establishing  a  packet 
service  between  France  and  America,  and  in  the  improvement  of 
agricultural  methods,  amongst  other  ways  by  the  establishment 
of  botanical  gardens.  He  was  a  scientific  farmer,  introducing 
the  system  of  cover  crops  into  America  and  endeavoring  to  intro- 


142 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


duce  potato  culture  into  France.  He  was  a  corresponding  member 
of  the  Academie  des  Sciences  and  the  Royal  Agricultural  Society  of 
Paris,  and  a  member  of  the  Societe  d’Agriculture,  Sciences,  et  Arts 
de  Meaux,  and  of  the  Societe  d’Agriculture  de  Caen.  In  1790  he 
returned  to  F  ranee  where  hediedin  1813. 

Underneath  the  discursive  chat  of  his  letters  is  the  firm  fabric  of 
economic  fact.  In  the  background  of  his  thinking  Crevecoeur  was 
quite  definitely  Physiocratic,  in  his  warm  humanitarianism  as  well 
as  in  his  agrarian  bias.  As  the  kindly  Frenchman  studied  the  ways 
of  colonial  society  and  contemplated  the  future,  he  asked  himself 
the  question,  what  was  the  American  as  he  was  perceptibly  differ¬ 
entiating  from  his  European  ancestors?  That  a  new  race  was 
emerging  in  this  new  country,  he  was  convinced;  and  that  it  was 
not  in  consequence  chiefly  of  a  new  mixture  of  blood — although 
that  was  not  without  its  influence — he  likewise  believed.  A  more 
potent  influence  was  at  work  and  that  influence  was  environment. 
Crevecoeur  was  something  of  an  economic  determinist  who  sought 
to  explain  laws,  customs,  institutions — the  pattern  of  the  social 
web — by  an  inquiry  into  economic  factors.  Mann  ist  was  er  isst. 
“Men  are  like  plants;  the  goodness  and  flavor  of  the  fruit  proceeds 
from  the  peculiar  soil  and  exposition  in  which  they  grow.  We  are 
nothing  but  what  we  derive  from  the  air  we  breathe,  the  climate 
we  inhabit,  the  government  we  obey,  the  system  of  religion  we 
profess,  and  the  mode  of  our  employment.”  17  Transplanted  from 
the  meager  opportunities  of  the  old  world  to  the  rich  soil  and  ample 
spaces  of  America,  the  European  undergoes  a  subtle  transforma¬ 
tion. 

The  rich  stay  in  Europe,  it  is  only  the  middling  and  the  poor  that 
emigrate.  In  this  great  American  asylum,  the  poor  of  Europe  have  by 
some  means  met  together,  and  in  consequence  of  various  causes;  to  what 
purpose  should  they  ask  one  another,  what  countrymen  they  are?  Alas, 
two  thirds  of  them  had  no  country.  Can  a  wretch  who  wanders  about, 
who  works  and  starves  .  .  .  can  that  man  call  England  or  any  other 
kingdom  his  country?  A  country  that  had  no  bread  for  him,  whose  fields 
procured  him  no  harvest,  who  met  nothing  but  the  frowns  of  the  rich,  the 
severity  of  the  laws,  with  jails  and  punishments;  who  owned  not  a  single 
foot  of  the  extensive  surface  of  this  planet?  No!  urged  by  a  variety  of 
motives,  here  they  came.  Every  thing  tended  to  regenerate  them;  new 
laws,  a  new  mode  of  living, a  new  social  system;  here  they  are  become  men: 
in  Europe  they  were  as  so  many  useless  plants,  wanting  vegetable  mould, 

17  Letters  .  .  .,  in  edition  of  1904,  p.  56. 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


143 


and  refreshing  showers;  they  withered  and  were  mowed  down  by  want, 
hunger,  and  war:  but  now  by  the  power  of  transplantation,  like  all  other 
plants,  they  have  taken  root  and  flourished!  Formerly  they  were  not 
numbered  in  any  civil  list  of  their  country,  except  in  those  of  the  poor; 
here  they  rank  as  citizens.  By  what  invisible  power  has  this  surprizing 
metamorphosis  been  performed?  By  that  of  the  laws  of  their  indus¬ 
try  ...  his  country  is  now  that  which  gives  him  land,  bread,  protection, 
and  consequence:  Ubi  panis  ibi  p atria,  is  a  motto  of  all  emigrants.  .  .  . 
Here  the  rewards  of  his  industry  follow  with  equal  steps  in  the  progress  of 
his  labor;  his  labor  is  founded  on  the  basis  of  nature,  self-interest;  can  it 
want  a  stronger  allurement? 13 

From  economic  individualism  in  presence  of  unexploited  natural 
resources,  he  deduces  the  natural  emergence  of  a  new  American 
psychology  that  differentiates  the  colonial  from  the  European 
peasant.  If  “from  involuntary  idleness,  servile  dependence, 
penury,  and  useless  labor,”  the  emigrant  “has  passed  to  toils  of 
a  very  different  nature,  rewarded  by  ample  subsistence”;  if  he  has 
left  off  being  a  peasant  and  become  a  free-holder  and  citizen;  will 
not  this  man  “entertain  new  ideas,  and  form  new  opinions”? 
He  possesses  a  stake  in  society;  his  horizons  broaden,  his  ambitions 
quicken;  this  is  his  country. 

An  European,  when  he  first  arrives,  seems  limited  in  his  intentions,  as 
well  as  in  his  views;  but  he  very  suddenly  alters  his  scale  ...  he  no 
sooner  breathes  our  air  than  he  forms  new  schemes,  and  embarks  in 
designs  he  never  would  have  thought  of  in  his  own  country.  There  the 
plenitude  of  society  confines  many  useful  ideas,  and  often  extinguishes 
the  most  laudable  schemes  which  here  ripen  into  maturity.19 

He  begins  to  feel  the  effects  of  a  sort  of  resurrection;  hitherto  he  had  not 
lived,  but  simply  vegetated;  he  now  feels  himself  a  man,  because  he  is 
treated  as  such;  the  laws  of  his  own  country  had  overlooked  him  in  his 
insignificancy;  the  laws  of  this  cover  him  with  their  mantle.  Judge  what 
an  alteration  there  must  arise  in  the  mind  and  thoughts  of  this  man;  he 
begins  to  forget  his  former  servitude  and  dependence,  his  heart  invol¬ 
untarily  swells  and  glows;  this  first  swell  inspires  him  with  those  new 
thoughts  which  constitute  an  American.  .  .  .  From  nothing  to  start  into 
being,  to  become  a  free  man,  invested  with  lands,  to  which  every  municipal 
blessing  is  annexed!  What  a  change  indeed!  It  is  in  consequence  of  that 
change  that  he  becomes  an  American.20 

He  is  an  American,  who  leaving  behind  him  all  his  ancient  prejudices 
and  manners,  receives  new  ones  from  the  mode  of  life  he  has  embraced,  the 
new  government  he  obeys,  and  the  new  rank  he  holds.  He  becomes  an 
American  by  being  received  in  the  broad  la.p  of  our  great  Alma  Mater. 

18  Ibid.,  pp.  52-55.  19  Ibid.,  p.  76.  20  Ibid.,  pp.  77,  79. 


144 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


Here  individuals  of  all  nations  are  melted  into  a  new  race  of  men,  whose 
labors  and  posterity  will  one  day  cause  great  changes  in  the  world.21 

Having  convinced  himself  that  economic  relaxation  was  the 
creative  force  in  determining  American  institutions  and  psychology, 
he  was  led  to  examine  the  working  of  that  force  in  diverse  portions 
of  America.  It  is  neither  in  the  older  seacoast  world,  nor  along 
the  extreme  frontier  that  he  discovers  his  representative  America; 
but  in  the  broad  stretches  of  clearings,  the  vigorous  backcountry 
or  “middle-settlements,”  where  agriculture  was  followed  soberly 
and  effectively.  “Some  few  towns  excepted,  we  are  all  tillers  of 
the  soil,”  he  pointed  out;  and  it  is  the  farmer  of  the  middle  region 
of  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  with  his  broad  acres  in  prosperous 
cultivation,  his  economic  independence,  and  his  manly  vigor,  that 
he  most  delights  to  dwell  upon: 

Europe  has  no  such  class  of  men;  the  early  knowledge  they  acquire, 
the  early  bargains  they  make,  give  them  a  great  degree  of  sagacity.  As 
freemen,  they  will  be  litigious;  pride  and  obstinacy  are  often  the  cause  of 
lawsuits;  the  nature  of  our  laws  and  governments  may  be  another.  As 
citizens  it  is  easy  to  imagine,  that  they  will  carefully  read  the  newspapers, 
enter  into  every  political  disquisition,  freely  blame  or  censure  governors 
and  others.  As  farmers,  they  will  be  careful  and  anxious  to  get  as  much  as 
they  can,  because  what  they  get  is  theirs.  ...  As  Christians,  religion  curbs 
them  not  in  their  opinions;  the  laws  inspect  our  actions;  our  thoughts  are 
left  to  God.  Industry,  good  living,  selfishness,  litigiousness,  country  poli¬ 
tics,  the  pride  of  freemen,  religious  indifference,  are  their  characteristics.22 

The  thinly  settled  backwoods  with  their  restless  squatter 
population,  Crevecceur  regards  as  the  rough  vanguard  of  the 
westward-moving  settlements.  It  is  here,  he  points  out,  that  the 
forces  of  leveling  are  strongest,  that  the  last  remnants  of  old-world 
distinctions  and  privileges  are  stript  away,  that  the  idea  of  indi¬ 
vidual  freedom  carries  furthest,  sometimes  to  social  disaster.  “He 
who  would  wish  to  see  America  in  its  proper  light,”  he  says,  “and 
have  a  true  idea  of  its  feeble  beginnings  and  barbarous  rudiments, 
must  visit  our  extended  line  of  frontiers  where  the  last  settlers 
dwell.” 

Now  we  arrive  near  the  great  woods,  near  the  last  inhabited  districts; 
there  men  seem  to  be  placed  .  .  .  beyond  the  reach  of  government,  which 
in  some  measure  leaves  them  to  themselves  ...  as  they  were  driven 
there  by  misfortune,  necessity  of  beginnings,  desire  of  acquiring  large 
tracts  of  land,  idleness,  frequent  want  of  economy,  ancient  debts;  the  re- 

21  Ibid.,  pp.  54—55-  22  Ibid.,  pp.  57-58. 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


145 


union  of  such  people  does  not  afford  a  very  pleasing  spectacle.  .  .  .  The 
few  magistrates  they  have,  are  in  general  little  better  than  the  rest;  they 
are  often  in  a  perfect  state  of  war;  that  of  man  against  man,  sometimes 
decided  by  blows,  sometimes  by  means  of  law  .  .  .  men  are  wholly  left 
dependent  upon  their  native  tempers,  and  on  the  spur  of  uncertain  in¬ 
dustry,  which  often  fails  when  not  sanctified  by  the  efficacy  of  a  few  moral 
rules.  There,  remote  from  the  power  of  example,  and  check  of  shame, 
many  families  exhibit  the  most  hideous  parts  of  our  society.  They  are  a 
kind  of  forlorn  hope,  preceding  by  ten  or  twelve  years  the  more  respectable 
army  of  veterans  which  come  after  them.  In  that  space,  prosperity  will 
polish  some,  vice  and  law  will  drive  off  the  rest,  who  uniting  with  others 
like  themselves  will  recede  still  farther;  making  room  for  more  industrious 
people,  who  will  finish  their  improvements,  convert  the  loghouse  into  a 
convenient  habitation,  and  rejoicing  that  the  first  heavy  labors  are  fin¬ 
ished,  will  change  in  a  few  years  that  hitherto  barbarous  country  into  a 
fine,  fertile,  well  regulated  district.  Such  is  our  progress,  such  is  the  march 
of  the  Europeans  toward  the  interior  parts  of  this  continent.  In  all  society 
there  are  off-casts;  this  impure  part  serves  as  our  precursors  or  pioneers.23 

Crevecoeur’s  chattiness  and  bucolic  love  of  nature  may  easily 
obscure  for  the  casual  reader,  the  solid  economic  core  of  the 
Letters.  The  story  of  Andrew,  the  Hebridean,  with  its  note  of 
idyllic  simplicity,  reads  like  a  tale  out  of  the  French  romantics; 
yet  in  its  broad  outline  it  is  the  story  of  many  an  immigrant  who 
penetrated  to  the  hospitable  backcountry,  took  land,  and  pros¬ 
pered.  The  strong  coloring  of  the  description  is  only  partly  French; 
in  part  it  is  a  reflection  of  the  spontaneous  optimism  that  was 
working  like  leaven  in  colonial  society.  It  is  the  old-fashioned 
phrasing  rather  than  the  matter  that  makes  the  Letters  seem  ob¬ 
solete  to  modern  readers.  Change  the  wording,  soften  the  bucolic 
enthusiasm,  and  the  sober  American  of  earlier  generations,  as  he 
observed  the  arrival  of  the  strong-armed  peasant  from  the  north 
of  Europe,  would  have  discovered  nothing  strange  in  such  a  senti¬ 
ment  as  this: 

After  a  foreigner  from  any  part  of  Europe  is  arrived,  and  become  a 
citizen;  let  him  devoutly  listen  to  the  voice  of  our  great  parent,  which 
says  to  him,  “Welcome  to  my  shores,  distressed  European;  bless  the  hour 
in  which  thou  didst  see  my  verdant  fields,  my  fair  navigable  rivers,  and 
my  green  mountains! — If  thou  wilt  work,  I  have  bread  for  thee;  if  thou 
wilt  be  honest,  sober,  and  industrious,  I  have  greater  rewards  to  bestow 
on  thee — ease  and  independence.  I  will  give  thee  fields  to  feed  and 
clothe  thee;  a  comfortable  fire-side  to  sit  by.  ...  I  shall  endow  thee 
besides  with  the  immunities  of  a  freeman.  ...  Go  thou,  and  work  and 
till;  thou  shalt  prosper,  provided  thou  be  just,  grateful,  and  industrious.24 

23  Ibid.,  pp.  58-60.  24  Ibid.,  pp.  90-91. 


146 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


Andrew  the  Hebridean  is  a  portrait  painted  by  a  Physiocratic 
humanitarian,  but  the  idealism  that  would  build  peace  and  content 
on  honest  foundations,  and  would  deny  them  to  none,  not  even 
the  poorest  if  they  proved  worthy,  found  frequent  justification  in 
the  prosaic  experience  of  colonial  America.  If  many  an  immigrant 
found  “soul-drivers”  awaiting  them,  many  others  like  Andrew 
found  a  more  hospitable  reception. 

Across  the  peaceful  scenes  depicted  in  the  Letters  soon  fell  the 
dark  shadow  of  civil  war,  and  Crevecceur’s  content  was  rudely 
broken  in  upon.  As  a  French  humanitarian  he  loathed  war  and 
all  its  works,  and  every  instinct  and  argument  counseled  him  to 
stand  apart  from  the  strife  that  seemed  to  him  so  meaningless. 
He  liked  peace  and  orderly  ways  and  he  could  not  work  himself 
into  a  passion  over  the  supposed  wrongs  of  a  people  who  seemed 
to  him  blessed  above  all  others  on  this  troubled  earth.  As  a  philo¬ 
sophical  farmer  he  held  the  politician  in  contempt  and  refused  to 
take  seriously  abstract  theories  of  statecraft.  The  citizen  who 
stuck  to  his  plow  was  happier,  he  believed,  than  the  citizen 
who  talked  noisily  of  his  wrongs,  and  was  eager  to  overset  things. 
The  rough  leveling  of  the  frontier  he  had  found  distasteful,  and  as 
he  watched  the  development  of  the  Revolutionary  disputes,  he 
seems  to  have  discovered  in  the  Whig  program  an  irruption  of 
the  tumultuous  frontier  leveling  that  threatened  to  sweep  away 
the  common  peace  and  well-being.  The  source  of  the  unrest  he 
traced  to  New  England,  the  feculent  wellspring  of  all  the  hypocri¬ 
sies;  it  was  inspired,  he  was  convinced,  by  a  selfish  demagoguery 
and  led  by  unprincipled  mobsters.  In  so  far  as  he  held  parti¬ 
san  sympathies,  they  inclined  to  the  Loyalist  side.  His  education 
in  England  and  his  breeding  as  a  gentleman,  drew  him  towards 
the  Loyalist  gentry  with  whom  he  associated  in  Orange  County, 
and  repelled  him  from  the  noisy  ardor  of  the  plebeian  patriots. 
Yet  in  spirit  he  stood  resolutely  aloof,  although  his  sympathies 
were  cruelly  hurt  by  the  sufferings  that  fell  under  his  observation. 
In  certain  letters  only  recently  published  ( Sketches  of  Eighteenth 
Century  America),  he  narrates  the  misfortunes  that  befell  innocent 
men  and  women  from  the  bitterness  of  civil  strife,25  and  draws  a 
picture  of  the  lawlessness  and  greed  of  patriot  committeemen,  and 
the  intolerance  of  the  mob  spirit,  that  is  not  pleasant  to  contem- 

25  See,  e.  g.,  “The  Man  of  Sorrows,”  “The  Wyoming  Massacre,”  “The  History  of 
Mrs.  B.,”  “The  Frontier  Woman.” 


COLONIAL  BACKGROUNDS 


147 


plate.26  Bitterness  rarely  exudes  from  his  pen,  but  when  he  con¬ 
siders  the  ways  of  Whig  politicians  he  now  and  then  indulges  in  a 
passage  that  reveals  his  loathing  of  the  mercenary  spirit  that  he 
discovers  in  the  new  patriotism.  In  the  conclusion  of  “  The  Amer¬ 
ican  Belisarius  ”  he  gives  vent  to  his  anger  against  those  who 
outrage  common  morality;  if  it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  this  is  a 
moral  universe,  he  says  ironically: 

I’d  worship  the  demon  of  the  times,  trample  on  every  law,  break  every 
duty,  neglect  every  bond,  overlook  every  obligation  to  which  no  punish¬ 
ment  was  annexed.  I’d  set  myself  calumniating  my  rich  neighbors.  I’d 
call  all  passive,  inoffensive  men  by  the  name  of  inimical.  I’d  plunder  or 
detain  the  entrusted  deposits.  I’d  trade  on  public  moneys,  though  con¬ 
trary  to  my  oath.  Oath !  Chaff  for  good  Whigs,  and  only  fit  to  bind  a  few 
conscientious  Royalists!  I’d  build  my  new  fortune  on  the  depreciation 
of  the  money.  I’d  inform  against  every  man  who  would  make  any  differ¬ 
ence  betwixt  it  and  silver,  whilst  I,  secure  from  any  discovery  or  suspicion 
by  my  good  name,  would  privately  exchange  ten  for  one.  I’d  pocket  the 
fines  of  poor  militiamen  extracted  from  their  heart’s  blood.  I’d  become 
obdurate,  merciless,  and  unjust.  I’d  grow  rich,  “fas  vel  nefas.”  I’d  send 
others  a-fighting,  whilst  I  stayed  at  home  to  trade  and  to  rule.  I’d  become 
a  clamorous  American,  a  modern  Whig,  and  offer  every  night  incense  to  the 
god  Arimanes.27 

A  lover  of  peace  and  good  will,  a  humanitarian  concerned  only 
with  justice  and  the  common  well-being,  seeking  new  ways  to 
enlarge  the  returns  of  agriculture,  devoid  of  petty  ambition  and 
local  prejudice,  a  friend  of  man,  Hector  St.  John  de  Crevecoeur 
was  an  embodiment  of  the  generous  spirit  of  French  revolutionary 
thought,  a  man  whom  Jefferson  would  have  liked  for  a  neighbor. 
His  sketchy  and  discursive  writings  may  not  be  notable  literature, 
but  we  could  ill  spare  them  from  the  library  of  eighteenth-century 
America. 

26  See,  e.  g.,  “The  American  Belisarius”  and  “Landscapes.” 

27  Sketches  of  Eighteenth  Century  America,  p.  249. 


* 

CHAPTER  II 

THE  ANACHRONISM  OF  JONATHAN  EDWARDS 

i 

Before  an  adequate  democratic  philosophy  could  arise  in  this 
world  of  pragmatic  individualism,  the  traditional  system  of  New 
England  theology  must  be  put  away,  and  a  new  conception  of  man 
and  of  his  duty  and  destiny  in  the  world  must  take  its  place.  For 
the  moment  Calvinism  was  strengthened  by  the  coming  of  the 
Scotch-Irish  who  spread  the  familiar  dogmas  along  the  frontier, 
remote  from  attack  by  old-world  rationalism;  nevertheless  those 
dogmas  carried  within  them  the  seeds  of  slow  decay.  The  world 
that  had  created  them  lay  in  a  forgotten  past.  The  five  points  of 
Calvinism,  postulated  on  a  God  of  wrath,  were  no  longer  living 
principles  answering  to  common  experience;  they  were  become  no 
other  than  ghosts  that  walked  on  the  Sabbath  to  terrify  the  timid. 
An  intellectual  Aufklarung  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the 
creation  of  a  fruitful  social  philosophy.  Theology  must  be  made 
to  square  with  actuality,  or  yield  control  of  men’s  minds  to  more 
stimulating  things. 

But  unfortunately  there  was  no  vigorous  attack  but  only  a 
tedious  decay.  The  old  was  too  deeply  entrenched  to  be  routed, 
and  stricken  with  palsy  it  lingered  out  a  morose  old  age.  For 
years  New  England  stewed  in  its  petty  provincialism,  untouched 
by  the  brisk  debates  that  stirred  the  old  world.  No  vigorous 
disputant  challenged  its  orthodoxy.  In  the  year  1726  Cotton 
Mather  wrote,  “I  cannot  learn,  That  among  all  the  Pastors  of 
Two  Hundred  Churches,  there  is  one  Arminian;  much  less  an 
Arian,  or  a  Gentilist.”  1  Nevertheless  rationalism  was  in  the  air, 
and  although  it  might  be  excluded  from  the  minister’s  study,  it 
spread  its  subtle  infection  through  the  mass  of  the  people.  The 
backwash  of  English  deism  reached  the  shores  of  New  England, 
and  by  the  decade  of  the  forties  a  movement  of  liberalism  seems 
to  have  got  under  way.  The  word  Arminian  sprinkles  more  freely 

1  Quoted  in  Walker,  History  of  the  Congregational  Churches  in  the  United  States , 
p.  216. 


148 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  149 

the  pages  of  controversial  literature,  indicating  the  nature  of  the 
attack  being  directed  against  Calvinism.  Dogma  was  face  to  face 
with  rationalism. 

A  critical  movement  had  long  been  developing  in  England,  under¬ 
mining  there  the  foundations  of  Calvinism;  and  in  this  work  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  Anglican  clergy  had  aided.  Hooker  had  been  a  ration¬ 
alist  and  the  influence  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity  was  thrown  in 
favor  of  an  appeal  to  reason  and  to  history.  He  rejected  a  literal 
Hebraism  for  a  more  philosophical  interpretation  of  the  Scripture. 
“The  Light  of  naturall  understanding,  wit  and  reason,  is  from 
God,”  he  argued;  “he  it  is  which  thereby  doth  illuminate  every 
man  entring  into  the  World.  He  is  the  Author  of  all  that  we  think 
or  do  by  vertue  of  that  light  which  himselfe  hath  given.”  2  Be¬ 
cause  of  this  rationalizing  tendency  the  Anglican  clergy,  before 
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  had  passed  from  the  Calvin- 
istic  to  the  Arminian  position.  The  fundamental  dogma  of  Ar- 
minianism  was  the  doctrine  of  the  freedom  of  the  will — that  the 
elect  of  God  are  not  pre-chosen,  but  a  righteous  life  and  good  works 
will  bring  men  into  the  way  of  salvation.  Destructive  of  the 
whole  Calvinistic  system  as  such  doctrine  was— striking  at  the 
taproot  of  determinism — Arminianism  carried  a  social  significance 
greater  than  its  theological  import:  it  was  an  expression  of  the 
ideal  of  individual  responsibility  that  emerged  from  the  decay  of 
the  feudal  system.  The  first  reformers  had  asserted  the  right  to 
individual  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures;  the  Arminians  threw 
upon  the  individual  the  whole  responsibility,  bidding  him  assert 
his  will  and  achieve  his  own  salvation. 

English  rationalism  was  carried  further  by  a  notable  group  of 
thinkers,  including  Milton  and  Locke,  who  rapidly  passed  from 
Arminianism  to  Arianism,  and  thence  to  Deism.  By  the  beginning 
of  the  eighteenth  century  English  Presbyterianism,  which  had 
clung  to  Calvinism  long  after  the  defection  of  the  Anglicans,  was 
undermined  by  the  growing  rationalism  and  finally  passed  over 
into  Unitarianism.  Calvinism  had  lost  the  battle  in  the  old  world 
and  ceased  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  intellectual  life  of 
England.  In  the  face  of  this  steady  drift  away  from  the  conception 
of  a  divine  Will  that  dwarfed  the  human  will  and  held  it  fixed  in 
the  mesh  of  the  divine  purpose,  towards  the  conception  of  the 
responsibility  of  the  individual  and  the  significance  of  the  moral 
2  Ecclesiasticall  Politie,  sixth  edition,  Book  III,  p.  io. 


150 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


code  in  the  work  of  salvation,  the  New  England  Calvinists  found 
their  work  cut  out  for  them.  A  critical  spirit  was  stirring,  an  in¬ 
cipient  rationalism  was  beginning  to  ask  questions;  orthodoxy 
for  the  first  time  was  on  the  defensive,  and  ill  equipped  for  the 
pending  battle. 

But  Calvinism  had  fallen  into  the  clutch  of  forces  greater  and 
more  revolutionary  than  either  minister  or  congregation  realized. 
To  preach  with  convincing  force  one  must  appeal  to  the  common 
experience;  dogma  must  seem  to  square  with  the  evident  facts  of 
life;  it  must  appear  to  be  the  inevitable  and  sufficient  explanation 
of  the  mysteries  and  perplexities  that  beset  men  in  the  world  of 
reality.  When  it  ceases  to  be  a  reasonable  working  hypothesis 
in  the  light  of  common  experience,  it  is  no  longer  a  controlling 
influence  in  men’s  lives.  And  this  was  the  unhappy  predicament 
in  which  Calvinism  now  found  itself.  Take,  for  example,  the 
doctrine  of  total  depravity.  In  the  corrupt  worlds  of  Augustine 
and  John  Calvin  such  a  doctrine  must  have  seemed  a  reasonable 
explanation  of  the  common  brutality;  an  evil  society  must  spring 
from  the  evil  heart  of  man.  But  in  the  village  world  of  New  Eng¬ 
land  the  doctrine  had  lost  its  social  sanction.  When  in  moments 
of  calm  sense  these  provincial  Calvinists  asked  themselves  if  the 
human  heart  were  in  truth  utterly  depraved,  if  they  themselves 
and  their  neighbors  were  such  vipers  and  worms  as  they  professed 
to  be,  the  conviction  must  have  grown  upon  them  that  such  pro¬ 
fessions  were  untrue.  The  everyday  life  of  the  New  England 
village  was  animated  by  rugged  virtues — by  kindliness  toward 
neighbors  and  faithfulness  to  a  strict  ethical  code,  rather  than  by 
hatred  to  God  and  man,  or  brutal  wallowing  in  sin.  In  short, 
these  villagers  knew  that  they  were  very  far  from  a  bad  lot;  and 
when  they  pondered  on  this  fact  they  must  have  discovered  in¬ 
creasing  difficulty  in  reconciling  Sunday  dogma  and  week-day 
experience.  Although  they  repeated  the  familiar  creed,  the 
sanction  for  that  creed  was  gone;  it  was  the  voice  of  dogma  that 
spoke,  and  not  the  voice  of  reason  and  experience.3 

Such  is  the  explanation,  as  well,  of  the  decay  of  another  of  the 
cardinal  points  of  Calvinism — the  dogma  of  special  election.  In 
an  aristocratic  society  it  is  natural  to  believe  that  God  has  set 
men  apart  in  classes;  but  as  the  leveling  process  tended  to  strip 
away  social  distinctions,  the  new  individualism  undermined  the 
3  See  Wendell,  Literary  History  of  America,  p.  89. 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  151 

older  class  psychology.  When  the  common  man  has  freed  himself 
from  political  absolutism,  he  will  become  dissatisfied  with  theo¬ 
logical  absolutism.  The  right  to  achieve  salvation  is  a  natural 
corollary  to  the  right  to  win  social  distinction;  that  one’s  future 
status  lay  wholly  beyond  the  reach  of  one’s  will,  that  it  rested  in 
the  hands  of  an  arbitrary  God  who  gave  or  withheld  salvation  at 
pleasure,  was  a  conception  that  ill  accorded  with  the  nascent  ideal 
of  democracy.  When  that  ideal  should  be  sufficiently  clarified, 
the  dogma  of  the  elect  of  God,  like  the  aristocratic  conception  of 
the  king’s  favorite,  would  be  quietly  put  away  in  the  potter’s  field. 

As  the  century  advanced,  the  growing  dissatisfaction  with 
Calvinism  received  fresh  impetus  from  the  new  social  philosophy 
of  France.  The  teaching  of  Rousseau  that  in  a  state  of  nature 
men  were  good,  that  they  are  still  sound  at  heart,  and  that  the 
evils  of  civilization  have  resulted  from  a  perversion  of  the  social 
contract,  would  appeal  to  men  whose  experience  was  daily  teach¬ 
ing  them  the  falseness  of  the  traditional  dogmas;  and  the  ideal  of 
equality  would  come  home  with  special  meaning  to  men  bred  up 
in  villages  and  on  the  frontier.  Such  doctrines  were  fundamentally 
hostile  to  the  spirit  of  Calvinism:  not  only  did  Rousseau  set  the 
doctrine  of  human  perfectibility  over  against  the  dogma  of  total 
depravity,  but  he  quickened  the  passion  of  revolt  against  every 
form  of  arbitrary  authority,  theological  as  well  as  political  and 
social.  Although  the  provincial  colonial  might  not  come  in  im¬ 
mediate  contact  with  such  speculative  philosophy,  in  the  long  run 
he  could  not  escape  being  influenced  by  it,  and  that  influence 
would  count  against  a  decadent  theology  that  held  men’s  minds 
in  its  tenacious  rigor  mortis. 

The  crux  of  the  question,  it  came  finally  to  be  seen  by  the  apol¬ 
ogists  of  the  old  order,  lay  in  the  fundamental  problem  of  deter¬ 
minism.  Was  the  will  of  man  effectively  free,  or  was  it  held  in 
strict  subjection  to  the  stable  will  of  God?  According  as  the 
decision  went  touching  this  question,  would  stand  or  fall  the 
entire  metaphysical  structure  of  Calvinism.  To  this  problem, 
therefore,  the  best  minds  among  the  ministers  directed  their 
thought;  and  the  historical  position  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  greatest 
of  the  defenders  of  Calvinism,  is  revealed  in  its  true  perspective 
when  his  labors  are  studied  in  the  light  of  this  vital  question. 


152 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


ii 

Never  had  the  traditional  theology  been  so  sorely  in  need  of  a 
champion  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  quarter  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century;  and  such  a  champion  God  raised  up — many 
devout  Calvinists  believed— in  the  person  of  Jonathan  Edwards. 
Armed  at  all  points— a  theologian  equipped  with  the  keenest 
dialectics,  a  metaphysician  endowed  with  a  brilliantly  speculative 
mind,  a  psychologist  competent  to  deal  with  the  subtlest  phenom¬ 
ena  of  the  sick  soul — here  was  a  man  who  might  be  counted  on 
to  justify  the  ancient  dogmas  to  the  troubled  churches  of  New 
England. 

The  offspring  of  four  generations  of  religious  enthusiasts,  by 
every  right  of  heredity  and  training  the  child  of  Puritanism, 
Jonathan  Edwards  was  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  royal  line  of 
Puritan  mystics.  As  a  young  man  he  felt  himself  to  be  living  in 
the  very  presence  of  God;  he  was  conscious  of  the  divine  life  flow¬ 
ing  through  and  around  him,  making  him  one  with  the  Godhood; 
and  he  was  filled  with  yearning  for  personal  union  with  the  divine 
love  in  Christ.  His  intellectual  and  spiritual  life  was  molded  by 
a  God-consciousness  as  passionate  as  that  of  Spinoza;  and  it  is 
this  fact  of  a  lifelong  devotion  to  the  God-idea  that  furnishes  the 
clue  to  an  understanding  of  his  later  development.  Not  content 
that  God  had  marked  him  for  His  own,  he  must  build  a  phil¬ 
osophical  universe  about  the  Godhood,  justifying  his  mysticism 
by  a  metaphysical  idealism.  He  must  examine  critically  the 
foundations  of  his  creed  and  establish  his  theology  upon  philosophy. 
No  obscurity  must  remain  unprobed,  no  link  in  the  chain  of  rea¬ 
soning  escape  challenge:  he  must  base  the  five  points  of  Calvinism 
upon  a  metaphysics  that  should  relate  them  to  a  universal  system 
of  thought,  giving  them  a  cosmic  as  well  as  a  Biblical  sanction.  It 
was  a  great  ambition,  likely  to  prove  too  difficult  even  for  the 
remarkable  powers  of  Edwards;  and  if  in  pursuit  of  new  arguments 
for  old  doctrines,  he  found  himself  inclosed  in  a  mesh  of  subtleties, 
if  his  theology  and  metaphysics  were  never  quite  reconciled,  blame 
must  be  laid  upon  the  difficulty  of  the  undertaking  rather  than  on 
the  incapacity  of  the  thinker.  To  one  cardinal  principle  Edwards 
was  faithful — the  conception  of  the  majesty  and  sufficiency  of 
God;  and  this  polar  idea  provides  the  clue  to  both  his  philosophical 
and  theological  systems. 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  153 

Yet  with  this  as  a  guide  there  is  much  that  remains  perplexing. 
There  are  inconsistencies  in  his  thought  as  there  were  in  his  pas¬ 
toral  life;  and  we  shall  understand  his  position  only  when  we 
recognize  the  contrary  tendencies  which  confused  him,  as  the 
inevitable  consequences  of  a  system  of  thought  that  was  at  once 
reactionary  and  progressive,  the  outcome  of  certain  latent  in¬ 
consistencies  too  antagonistic  for  any  thinker  to  reconcile.  As  the 
defender  of  the  traditional  theology,  setting  his  face  against  the 
developing  experience  of  his  generation,  and  as  a  rigid  disciplina¬ 
rian,  reverting  to  the  older  Separatist  conception  of  a  church  of  the 
elect,  and  rejecting  the  “whole  way  covenant”  of  his  grandfather 
Stoddard,  he  may  perhaps  appear  in  the  light  of  a  reactionary. 
But  as  the  expounder  of  philosophic  idealism  he  was  looking  for¬ 
ward  to  Emerson;  and  as  th'e  advocate  of  the  new  revivalistic 
methods,  exalting  the  experience  of  conversion  as  the  central  fact 
of  the  Christian  life,  and  assisting  the  forces  that  were  drawing 
church  and  state  apart,  he  was  a  pronounced  revolutionist,  the 
schismatic  leader  of  the  New  Lights  and  the  father  of  later  Con¬ 
gregationalism.  That  Edwards  was  aware  of  certain  inconsis¬ 
tencies  is  fairly  evident;  that  he  was  puzzled,  hesitated,  and 
stopped  halfway  in  his  labors,  is  evident  too,  unless  we  believe, 
with  Mrs.  Stowe,  that  certain  of  bis  speculations  were  too  daring 
to  put  into  print.  The  chains  that  bound  him  were  too  strong 
to  be  broken;  the  contradictions  that  lay  at  the  root  of  the  Cal- 
vinistic  system  could  be  eradicated  only  by  grubbing  up  the  whole, 
and  for  that  the  time  had  not  yet  come. 

In  his  early  years,  before  his  conversion  turned  him  aside  from 
his  true  path,  setting  the  apologetics  of  the  theologian  above  the 
speculations  of  the  philosopher,  Edwards  gave  promise  of  becoming 
a  strikingly  creative  thinker.  Following  the  native  bent  of  his 
genius,  he  plunged  into  the  study  of  metaphysics  with  such  fruit¬ 
ful  results  that  it  seemed  likely  that  New  England  Puritanism  was 
at  last  to  come  to  flower;  that  the  mystical  perception  of  the  divine 
love,  which  had  steeped  the  early  Puritan  thought  in  emotion  and 
quickened  it  to  poetry,  was  now  to  create  a  system  of  philosophy 
which,  like  transcendentalism  in  the  next  century,  should  ad¬ 
equately  express  the  aspirations  of  the  New  England  mind.  There 
is  no  more  interesting  phase  in  the  early  history  of  Edwards  than 
the  transition  from  religious  mysticism  to  philosophical  idealism. 
The  yearning  for  the  knitting  of  the  soul  to  Christ,  as  expressed 


154 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


in  the  imagery  of  the  Sortg  of  Songs,  burgeoned  into  a  larger  ideal¬ 
ism  that  translated  the  Rose  of  Sharon  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valley 
into  an  all-pervasive  spirit  of  divine  life.  In  certain  moods  it  is 
the  mystic  who  cries,  “My  soul  breaketh  for  the  longing  it  hath; 
my  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord,  more  than  they  who  watch  for  the 
morning.  ” 

He  was  reading  one  day  the  words  of  Scripture  [says  Allen,  paraphrasing 
Edwards’  diary],  “Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the 
only  wise  God,  be  honor  and  glory  forever,  Amen,”  when  there  came  to 
him  for  the  first  time  a  sort  of  inward,  sweet  delight  in  God  and  divine 
things.  A  sense  of  the  divine  glory  was,  as  it  were,  diffused  through  him. 
He  thought  how  happy  he  should  be  if  he  might  be  rapt  up  to  God  in 
Heaven,  swallowed  up  in  him  forever.  He  began  to  have  an  inward, 
sweet  sense  of  Christ  and  the  work  of  redemption.  The  Book  of  Canticles 
attracted  him  as  a  fit  expression  for  his  mood.  It  seemed  to  him  as  if  he 
were  in  a  kind  of  vision,  alone  in  the  mountains  or  some  solitary  wilderness, 
conversing  sweetly  with  Christ  and  wrapt  and  swallowed  up  in  God.  .  .  . 
God’s  Excellency,  his  wisdom,  his  purity  and  love,  seemed  to  appear  in 
everything — in  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars;  in  clouds  and  blue  sky;  in  the 
grass,  flowers,  trees;  in  the  water  and  all  nature,  which  used  greatly  to 
fix  my  mind.4 

In  other  moods  the  intellect  gains  ascendency  over  the  emotions, 
and  it  is  the  idealistic  metaphysician  who  speaks.  With  a  searching 
curiosity  that  impelled  him  to  ask  what  lies  behind  the  outward 
semblance  of  things,  binding  them  into  a  coherent  whole  and 
imparting  to  the  world  of  experience  a  compelling  unity,  he  came 
early  to  an  interpretation  distinctly  Berkeleyan.  From  what 
source  he  derived  it  has  been  much  debated  and  remains  un¬ 
answered;  nevertheless  it  is  clear  that  it  is  closely  related  to  his 
religious  mysticism.  When  he  inquired  what  lies  back  of  the  out¬ 
ward  semblance,  what  is  the  thing  in  itself  behind  attributes  and 
qualities,  the  existence  of  which  is  implicit  in  our  perception  of 
time  and  space,  but  which  cannot  be  resolved  into  the  things 
perceived,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  have  interpreted  this 
Ding  an  sich  in  terms  of  God.  “Men  are  wont  to  content  them¬ 
selves  by  saying  merely  that  it  is  something;  but  that  something 
is  He  in  whom  all  things  consist.”5  The  world  of  sensation  thus 
translates  itself  into  a  world  of  ideas;  and  this  world  of  ideas,  the 
expression  of  the  divine  mind,  is  the  only  reality.  The  more 
important  of  his  early  generalizations  are  given  by  Allen  in  some 
4  Jonathan  Edwards,  p.  25.  5  p.  13. 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  155 

extracts  from  his  notes  on  the  “Mind”:  “Bodies  have  no  existence 
of  their  own.”  “All  existence  is  mental;  the  existence  of  all  things 
is  ideal.”  “The  brain  exists  only  mentally,  or  .in  idea.”  “Instead 
of  matter  being  the  only  proper  substance,  and  more  substantial 
than  anything  else  because  it  is  hard  and  solid,  yet  it  is  truly 
nothing  at  all,  strictly  and  in  itself  considered.”  “The  universe 
exists  nowhere  but  in  the  divine  mind.”  “Space  is  necessary, 
eternal,  infinite,  and  omnipresent.  But  I  had  as  good  speak  plain. 
I  have  already  said  as  much  as  that  space  is  God.”  “And  indeed 
the  secret  lies  here, — that  which  truly  is  the  substance  of  all  bodies 
is  the  infinitely  exact  and  precise  and  perfectly  stable  Idea  in  God’s 
mind,  together  with  His  stable  will  that  the  same  shall  gradually 
be  communicated  to  us,  and  to  other  minds,  according  to  certain 
fixed  and  exact  established  methods  and  laws;  or,  in  somewhat 
different  language,  the  infinitely  exact,  precise,  Divine  Idea, 
together  with  the  answerable,  perfectly  exact,  precise,  and  stable 
will,  with  respect  to  correspondent  communications  to  created 
minds  and  effects  on  their  minds.”6 

Edwards  had  come  to  such  conclusions  before  the  normal 
unfolding  of  his  mind  was  interrupted  by  his  conversion.  From  the 
first  a  strong  bias  toward  theology  had  tended  to  warp  his  interest 
in  the  purely  metaphysical,  and  with  the  quickening  of  an  active 
religious  experience,  he  turned  to  examine  the  dogmas  which 
expressed  his  faith.  The  call  of  the  churches  in  distress  came  to 
him,  and  he  made  ready  his  logic  to  do  battle  with  the  enemy. 
Against  the  twin  tendencies  that  were  undermining  the  foundations 
of  Calvinism — Arminianism  with  its  humanistic  emphasis  and 
deism  with  its  mechanistic — the  deepest  instincts  of  Edwards 
protested.  The  profound  God-consciousness  that  filled  him  was 
stirred  by  what  seemed  an  infidel  attack  upon  the  divine  glory  and 
sufficiency;  the  mystic  and  idealist  was  aroused  to  protest  against 
a  theology  that  conceived  of  religion  as  consisting  of  benevolence 
toward  men  rather  than  in  union  with  God;  and  against  a  philos¬ 
ophy  that  in  constructing  a  mechanical  system  was  de-personalizing 
God  into  a  vague  First  Cause,  and  bowing  him  politely  out  of  the 
universe.  In  so  great  a  crisis  his  duty  seemed  clear — to  vindicate, 
not  the  ways  of  God,  but  God  himself  to  men;  to  assert  the  glory 

6  For  an  examination  of  the  philosophy  of  Edwards,  see  Adam  Leroy  Jones, 
“Early  American  Philosophers,”  in  Columbia  University  Contributions  to  Phi¬ 
losophy,  Psychology  and  Education,  Vol.  II,  No.  4,  Chapter  4. 


156 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


and  sufficiency  of  God  even  to  the  extent  of  minifying  the  capac¬ 
ities  and  potentialities  of  man. 

The  basis  of  his  defense  was  already  provided  in  his  metaphysics, 
the  conception  of  the  divine  idea  existent  in  God’s  mind  and 
expressed  in  His  stable  will.  The  needs  of  his  polemics,  however, 
thrust  into  relief  the  secondary  rather  than  the  primary  element 
in  his  philosophy,  exalting  the  doctrine  of  the  divine  will  to  the 
obscuring  of  the  divine  idea.  How  this  came  about  is  sufficiently 
clear  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  in  explaining  the  existence  of  evil, 
Calvinism  fell  back  on  determinism:  the  dogma  of  election  could 
be  fitted  to  the  conception  of  a  precise  and  stable  will  of  God.  The 
long  feud  between  Arminianism  and  Calvinism  resulted  from  em¬ 
phasis  laid  upon  different  attributes  of  the  Godhood.  Shall  God 
be  interpreted  in  terms  of  will  or  love?  If  He  is  the  sovereign  ruler 
of  the  universe,  He  is  also  the  common  father;  and  that  which 
broadly  divides  later  theological  systems  from  earlier  is  the  shift 
from  the  former  interpretation  to  the  latter.  The  strategic  weak¬ 
ness  of  Edwards’s  position  lay  in  his  assumption  of  the  divine 
sovereignty  as  a  cardinal  postulate. 

But  in  adhering  to  the  doctrine  of  predetermined  election  by 
the  sovereign  will  of  God,  Edwards  did  unconscious  violence  to 
the  instincts  of  the  mystic,  that  throughout  his  earlier  speculations 
— and  in  much  of  his  later,  as  well — impelled  him  to  glorify  the 
love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  sweetness  of  spiritual  communion 
with  Him.  The  practical  necessities  of  the  preacher,  called  upon 
to  uphold  the  dogma  of  election  in  face  of  growing  disbelief,  seem 
to  have  forced  him  to  such  a  position;  but  once  having  entered 
upon  the  train  of  speculation  opened  by  the  question  of  divine 
polity  involved  in  “His  having  mercy  on  whom  He  will  have 
mercy,  while  whom  He  will,  He  hardeneth,”  he  came  somewhat 
reluctantly  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  God’s  sovereignty  as  the 
cardinal  principle  of  his  theology,  the  creative  source  of  his  think¬ 
ing.  Thereafter  he  followed  a  path  that  led  back  to  an  absolutist 
past,  rather  than  forward  to  a  more  liberal  future.  He  had  broken 
wholly  with  the  social  tendencies  of  his  age  and  world.7 

7  For  a  statement  of  the  doctrine,  see  Sermon  XXXIV,  “God’s  Sovereignty,”  in 
Works,  New  York,  1847,  Vol.  IV,  p.  548. 

Edwards  unconsciously  admits  that  the  doctrine  of  sovereignty  was  reactionary. 
“From  my  childhood  up,  my  mind  had  been  full  of  objections  against  the  doctrine 
of  God’s  sovereignty,  in  choosing  whom  He  would  to  eternal  life,  and  rejecting 
whom  He  pleased,  leaving  them  eternally  to  perish  and  be  everlastingly  tormented 
in  hell.”  Later  he  came  to  regard  such  repugnance  as  the  sinful  expression  of  the 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  157 

The  philosophical  conception  of  divine  sovereignty  was  too 
abstract  to  concern  the  New  England  laity;  it  was  rather  against 
the  dependent  dogmas  of  election  and  total  depravity  that  the 
revolt  was  rising.  And  in  defense  of  these  threatened  dogmas 
Edwards  put  forth  his  best  strength.  The  crux  of  the  matter, 
obviously,  lay  in  the  difficult  question  of  the  power  of  will.  The 
entire  structure  of  Calvinistic  theology  had  been  erected  upon  the 
assumption  of  determinism;  and  it  must  stand  or  fall  according  as 
the  argument  should  justify  or  fail  to  justify  that  hypothesis.  If 
the  human  will  is  effectively  free  to  choose  between  good  and  evil, 
the  dogma  of  the  elect  must  go  down  with  the  dogma  of  predestina¬ 
tion;  and  the  teachings  of  the  Arminians — tending,  as  they  seemed 
to  the  Calvinist,  to  abase  the  creator  in  exalting  the  creature,  and 
minifying  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  magnifying  the  excellence 
of  man — would  be  in  a  way  to  prevail.  Around  this  crucial  point 
the  battle  had  long  raged,  and  it  was  with  full  realization  of  the 
critical  nature  of  the  problem  that  Edwards  resolved  to  penetrate 
to  the  root  of  the  matter,  and  by  subjecting  the  question  of  deter¬ 
minism  to  exact  analysis,  rout  the  enemies  of  Calvinism  from  the 
inmost  keep  of  their  stronghold.  His  celebrated  work  On  the 
Freedom  of  the  Will,  written  in  1754,  not  only  was  his  most  impor¬ 
tant  contribution  to  theology,  but  it  was  the  last  great  defense  of 
the  conservatism  that  was  stifling  the  intellectual  life  of  New 
England. 

The  argument  of  this  knotty  book  rests  on  a  psychological  rather 
than  a  metaphysical  basis.  Compressed  into  the  briefest  terms 
it  runs  thus:  will  is  subject  to  desire,  and  desire  follows  what 
seems  to  us  good;  hence  the  determining  impulse  is  to  be  sought  in 
the  impulse  to  seek  the  apparent  good.  The  ethical  import  of 
such  an  argument  will  turn,  of  course,  upon  the  character  of  the 
good  which  the  natural  man  may  be  expected  to  desire.  To 
Rousseau  with  his  benevolent  interpretation  of  human  nature 
nothing  is  to  be  feared  from  the  subjection  of  will  to  desire.  Nor 
to  the  younger  Edwards,  feeling  his  way  along  the  path  of  tran- 

natural  man.  As  he  saw  further,  his  mind  “apprehended  the  justice  and  reasonable¬ 
ness  of  .  .  .  God’s  absolute  sovereignty  and  justice  with  respect  to  salvation  .  .  . 
as  much  as  of  anything  that  I  see  with  my  eyes;  at  least  it  is  so  at  times.  But  I 
have  often,  since  that  first  conviction,  had  quite  another  sense  of  God’s  sovereignty 
than  I  had  then.  I  have  often  had  not  only  a  conviction,  but  a  delightful  convic¬ 
tion.  The  doctrine  has  very  often  appeared  exceedingly  pleasant,  bright,  and 
sweet.  .  .  .  But  my  first  conviction  was  not  so.”  Quoted  in  Allen,  Jonathan 
Edwards,  pp.  37-38. 


158 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


scendentalism,  rediscovering  the  doctrine  of  the  inner  light,  was 
such  subjection  to  be  feared.  In  a  remarkable  sermon  published 
in  1734,  he  had  expounded  the  thesis,  “That  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  a  Spiritual  and  Divine  Light,  immediately  imparted  to  the 
Soul  by  God,  of  a  different  nature  from  any  that  is  obtained  by 
natural  means.”  8  The  divine  splendor  which  the  idealist  had 
seen  diffused  through  the  material  world  the  theologian  was  now 
merging  with  the  regenerative  life  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  “  acts 
in  the  mind  of  a  saint  as  an  in-dwelling  vital  principle.”  It  is 
“a  kind  of  emanation  of  God’s  beauty,  and  is  related  to  God  as 
the  light  is  to  the  sun”;  it  is  a  new  vision  by  means  of  which  one 
may  “see  the  beauty  and  loveliness  of  spiritual  things.”  In  such 
a  reinterpretation  of  the  Quaker  doctrine — so  harshly  condemned 
by  the  earlier  Puritans — Edwards  entered  upon  a  train  of  thought 
that  threatened  to  disrupt  the  entire  Calvinistic  system.  He  was 
at  the  dividing  of  the  ways;  he  must  abandon  transcendentalism 
or  the  dogma  of  total  depravity. 

Instead  he  sought  refuge  in  compromise,  endeavoring  to  rec¬ 
oncile  what  was  incompatible.  Herein  lay  the  tragedy  of  Edwards’s 
intellectual  life;  the  theologian  triumphed  over  the  philosopher, 
circumscribing  his  powers  to  ignoble  ends.  The  field  of  efficiency 
allotted  by  the  later  theologian  to  this  “in-dwelling  vital  principle,” 
was  no  longer  coextensive  with  the  universe,  but  was  narrowed 
to  the  little  world  of  the  elect.  In  the  primal  state  of  man,  Edwards 
argued,  before  the  sin  of  Adam  had  destroyed  the  harmony  between 
creature  and  creator,  the  light  which  flowed  from  God  as  from  a 
sun  shone  freely  upon  His  universe,  filling  its  remotest  parts  with 
the  divine  plenitude;  but  with  the  fall  the  harmony  was  destroyed, 
the  sun  was  hidden,  and  only  stray  beams  broke  through  the 
rifts  to  shine  upon  those  whom  God  willed  them  to  shine  upon;  all 
else  in  creation  was  given  over  to  eternal  darkness.  And  if  the 
natural  man,  thus  cast  into  sudden  darkness  “as  light  ceases  in  a 
room  when  the  candle  is  withdrawn,”  is  a  being  whose  will  is 
impotent  to  his  salvation,  it  follows  that  he  will  now  be  impelled 
as  inevitably  towards  evil  as  before  he  was  impelled  towards  good. 
Every  instinct  of  a  nature  corrupt  and  compact  of  sin,  and  with 
no  wish  to  exchange  darkness  for  light — having  no  eyes  for  the 
divine  glory — drives  him  to  a  blind  and  consuming  hatred  of  God. 
He  is  become  as  a  loathsome  “viper,  hissing  and  spitting  poison 
8  Sermon  XXVII,  in  Works,  Vol.  IV,  p.  438. 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  159 

at  God,”  the  outcast  and  pariah  of  the  universe.  There  is  no 
drawing  back  from  the  conclusion  involved  in  the  argument;  the 
Edwardean  logic  moves  forward  by  regular  steps.  The  punish¬ 
ment  meted  out  to  sin  is  to  be  measured  by  the  excellence  of  which 
the  sin  is  a  denial.  God  is  of  infinite  excellence,  and  denial  of  His 
excellence  is  therefore  infinitely  sinful  and  merits  infinite  punish¬ 
ment.  As  a  perfectly  just  judge  God  could  not  decree  otherwise; 
because  of  the  infinite  heinousness  of  his  sin,  the  natural  man  must 
receive  the  doom  of  eternal  damnation.9 

Under  the  rod  of  such  logic — grotesque,  abortive,  unseasoned 
by  any  saving  knowledge  of  human  nature — Edwards  preached 
that  remarkable  series  of  imprecatory  sermons  that  sank  deep 
into  the  memory  of  New  England,  and  for  which  it  has  never 
forgiven  him.10  Unfortunate  as  those  sermons  were  in  darkening 
the  fame  of  an  acute  thinker,  disastrous  as  they  were  in  providing 
a  sanction  for  other  men  to  terrify  the  imaginations  of  ill-balanced 
persons,  we  cannot  regret  that  Edwards  devoted  his  logic  to  an 
assiduous  stoking  of  the  fires  of  hell.  The  theology  of  Calvin  lay 
like  a  heavy  weight  upon  the  soul  of  New  England,  and  there  could 
be  no  surer  way  to  bring  it  into  disrepute,  than  to  thrust  into  naked 
relief  the  brutal  grotesqueries  of  those  dogmas  that  professed  thus 
to  explain  the  dark  mysteries  which  lie  upon  the  horizons  of  life. 
For  a  long  while  yet  they  were  to  harass  the  imagination  of  New 
England,  but  the  end  already  could  be  foreseen.  Once  the  horrors 
that  lay  in  the  background  of  Calvinism  were  disclosed  to  common 
view,  the  system  was  doomed.  It  might  still  wear  the  semblance 
of  life;  it  might  still  remain  as  an  evil  genius  to  darken  the  con¬ 
science  of  men  and  women;  but  its  authoritative  appeal  was  gone. 
In  this  necessary  work  of  freeing  the  spirit  of  New  England,  no 

9  See  Sermon  IX,  in  Works,  Vol.  IV,  p.  226.  The  argument  is  unfolded  in  the 
following  propositions:  “Every  crime  or  fault  deserves  a  greater  or  less  punishment, 
according  as  the  crime  is  greater  or  less.”  “A  crime  is  more  or  less  heinous,  accord¬ 
ing  as  we  are  under  greater  or  less  obligations  to  the  contrary.”  “Our  obligations 
to  love,  honor,  and  obey  any  being,  is  in  proportion  to  its  loveliness,  honorableness, 
and  authority.”  “But  God  is  a  being  infinitely  lovely,  because  he  hath  infinite 
excellence  and  beauty.”  “So  that  sin  against  God,  being  a  violation  of  infinite 
obligations,  must  be  a  crime  infinitely  heinous,  and  so  deserving  of  infinite  punish- 
merit 99 

10  See  in  particular  Sermon  XI,  “The  Eternity  of  Hell  Torments”;  Sermon  XII, 
“When  the  Wicked  shall  have  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  Sin,  wrath  will  come 
upon  them  to  the  uttermost”;  Sermon  XIII,  “The  End  of  the  Wicked  contem¬ 
plated  by  the  Righteous;  or,  The  Torments  of  the  Wicked  in  Hell,  no  occasion  of 
grief  to  the  Saints  in  Heaven”;  Sermon  XV,  “Sinners  in  the  Hands  of  an  Angry 
God,”  in  Works,  Vol.  IV. 


160 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


other  thinker  played  so  large  or  so  unconscious  a  part  as  Jonathan 
Edwards;  and  it  was  the  notorious  minatory  sermons — the  trans¬ 
lation  into  vivid  images  of  the  generalized  dogmas — that  awakened 
the  popular  mind  to  an  understanding  of  the  conclusions  involved 
in  the  premises. 

While  Edwards  was  thus  hastening  the  decay  of  Calvinism  with 
his  lurid  painting  of  “the  landscape  of  hell,”  in  another  phase  of 
his  work  he  was  engaged  in  awakening  an  interest  in  religion  among 
the  slothful  churches.  He  had  long  been  interested  in  the  phenom¬ 
ena  of  conversion,  and  as  the  great  revival  of  the  forties,  led  by 
Whitfield,  spread  from  England  to  the  colonies,  he  joined  eagerly 
in  the  work.  In  consequence  of  an  earlier  revival  in  his  parish  of 
Northampton,  his  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  little  under¬ 
stood  psychology  of  the  awakening  soul,  and  with  the  detachment 
of  the  scientist  he  set  himself  to  study  the  problem.  The  terrors 
aroused  by  his  minatory  sermons  provided  his  clinical  laboratory 
with  numerous  cases  of  abnormal  emotionalism.  Day  after  day 
he  probed  and  analyzed  and  compared,  until  as  a  result  of  his 
close  studies  in  vivisection,  he  became  a  specialist  in  the  theory 
of  conversion,  commanding  the  eager  attention  of  a  generation 
that  had  come  to  look  upon  this  as  the  central  fact  of  Christian 
experience.  It  is  not  easy  today  to  be  sympathetic  with  this  phase 
of  Edwards’s  work;  it  belongs  equally  with  his  dogmas  to  a  world 
of  thought  that  is  no  longer  ours.  The  repulsive  records  as  they 
are  set  down  in  his  Narrative  of  the  Surprizing  Works  of  God,  marked 
by  evidence  of  pathological  states  of  mind  not  far  removed  from 
insanity,  no  longer  seem  a  testimony  to  God’s  beneficent  presence; 
the  spiritual  writhings  which  this  gentle-natured  student  watched 
with  such  fascination,  appear  rather  to  be  cases  for  the  alienist  to 
prescribe  for.  But  to  Edwards  the  terrors  of  a  five-year-old  girl 
were  not  pathological;  they  were  the  soul-labors  of  the  spiritual 
rebirth,  the  visible  signs  of  the  supreme  miracle  of  the  universe, 
filling  him  with  wonder  and  awe  at  God’s  infinite  mercy;  and  like  a 
modem  psychologist  he  was  at  enormous  pains  to  chart  the  suc¬ 
cessive  steps  in  the  miraculous  transformation.11 

11  According  to  Edwards  there  were  four  regular  stages:  (i)  the  first  stirrings, 
when  the  sinner  is  brought  under  conviction  that  he  is  lost;  (2)  the  realization  of 
God’s  justice,  that  he  merits  damnation;  (3)  the  breaking  in  of  the  light,  the  first 
“gracious  discoveries”  of  God’s  mercies;  (4)  peace  after  the  storm,1  the  joy  of 
assurance  of  salvation.  For  a  fuller  statement,  see  Allen,  Jonathan  Edwards , 
pp.  133-160. 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  161 

Other  and  greater  consequences  were  to  flow  from  the  new  re¬ 
vivalism.  The  Great  Awakening  was  the  single  movement  that 
stirred  the  colonial  heart  deeply  during  three  generations.  It 
reveals,  among  other  things,  that  America  was  still  living  in  the 
world  of  the  seventeenth  century:  that  the  upper  class  was  not 
yet  rationalized,  nor  the  middle  class  commercialized.  Theology 
was  still  of  greater  popular  interest  than  politics.  In  its  chief 
phenomena  the  Great  Awakening  was  a  return  to  an  earlier  age — 
to  those  unbalanced  enthusiasms  of  the  Puritan  upheaval.  It 
was  essentially  a  mass  movement.  Its  use  of  hypnotic  suggestion, 
its  lurid  terrorism,  its  outcries  and  hysterical  possessions,  reveal 
like  the  Ranters  of  a  hundred  years  before  the  phenomena  of  mob 
psychology,  and  it  made  appeal  to  the  ill-educated,  the  isolated, 
the  neurotic,  to  the  many  natural  victims  of  hypnotic  excitation 
bred  by  the  monotony  and  austerity  of  village  life.  Its  after  effects 
were  revolutionary,  for  the  quickening  of  religious  emotionalism 
marked  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  Puritan  formalism. 

The  bitter  quarrel  among  the  churches  which  followed  as  an 
aftermath  was  more  than  a  theological  dispute;  it  was  a  sign  of 
the  breaking  up  of  the  traditional  parish  system.  The  hierarchy 
had  long  before  lost  its  authority,  but  in  their  several  parishes  the 
ministers  still  enjoyed  patriarchal  power.  The  tragic  dismissal 
of  Edwards  from  his  parish  was  an  unprecedented  revolt  against 
that  authority.  But  greater  changes  were  to  follow.  After  the 
Great  Awakening  itinerant  preachers  made  their  appearance,  who 
presumed  to  enter  any  parish  without  the  consent  of  the  minister, 
and  preach  such  doctrines  as  they  would.  They  were  non-con¬ 
forming  free  lances,  hostile  to  the  established  church,  whose  stock- 
in-trade  was  the  new  emotionalism.  Under  their  leadership,  Sep¬ 
aratist  congregations  were  gathered  that  were  not  only  an  offense 
to  the  regular  establishment  but  a  challenge  to  its  authority. 
Hundreds  left  the  old  congregations  and  flocked  to  the  Baptists 
and  Methodists,  and  naturally  they  would  make  trouble  over 
paying  taxes  to  support  a  church  they  had  repudiated.  In  short, 
a  little  revolution  was  under  way  that  was  to  end  in  the  complete 
disintegration  of  the  parish  system. 

By  a  curious  irony  of  fate,  Jonathan  Edwards,  reactionary 
Calvinist  and  philosophical  recluse,  became  the  intellectual  leader 
of  the  revolutionaries.  His  insistence  upon  conversion  as  the  sole 
ground  of  admission  to  communion  was  the  final  blow  that  de- 


162 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


stroyed  the  old  theocratic  system  which  the  Mathers  had  labored 
to  uphold.  Church  and  state  were  effectively  cut  asunder  by  such 
a  test.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Edwards  was  concerned  about 
the  political  or  social  consequences  that  must  result  from  the 
abandonment  of  the  traditional  “Half-way  Covenant.”  It  was  a 
question  of  doctrine  with  him,  involving  only  matters  of  church 
discipline.  Although  he  was  accused  of  being  a  Separatist,  and  of 
seeking  to  disintegrate  the  parish  system,  he  had  no  thought  of 
attacking  a  parochial  order  that  he  held  in  high  esteem.  He  was 
unconcerned  that  his  teachings  led  straight  to  the  old  Separatist 
conclusion  that  it  is  the  church  mystical  which  Christ  established, 
and  not  the  church  visible.  Nevertheless  he  became  the  creator 
of  the  new  Congregationalism,  which  in  accepting  the  democratic 
principles  elaborated  by  John  Wise  and  establishing  the  local 
church  as  an  autonomous  unit,  effectively  nullified  the  Presbyterian 
tendencies  of  the  old  order. 

As  one  follows  the  laborious  career  of  this  great  thinker,  a  sense 
of  the  tragic  failure  of  his  life  deepens.  The  burdens  that  he 
assumed  were  beyond  the  strength  of  any  man.  Beginning  as  a 
mystic,  brooding  on  the  all-pervasive  spirit  of  sweetness  and  light 
diffused  through  the  universe,  with  its  promise  of  spiritual  emanci¬ 
pation;  then  turning  to  an  archaic  theology  and  giving  over  his 
middle  years  to  the  work  of  minifying  the  excellence  of  man  in 
order  to  exalt  the  sovereignty  of  God;  and  finally  settling  back 
upon  the  mystical  doctrine  of  conversion — such  a  life  leaves  one 
with  a  feeling  of  futility,  a  sense  of  great  powers  baffled  and  wasted, 
a  spiritual  tragedy  enacted  within  the  narrow  walls  of  a  minister’s 
study.  There  was  both  pathos  and  irony  in  the  fate  of  Jonathan 
Edwards,  removed  from  the  familiar  places  where  for  twenty  years 
he  had  labored,  the  tie  with  his  congregation  broken,  and  sent  to 
the  frontier  mission  at  Stockbridge  to  preach  to  a  band  of  Indians 
and  to  speculate  on  the  unfreedom  of  the  human  will.  The  greatest 
mind  of  New  England  had  become  an  anachronism  in  a  world  that 
bred  Benjamin  Franklin.  If  he  had  been  an  Anglican  like  Bishop 
Berkeley,  if  he  had  mingled  with  the  leaders  of  thought  in  London 
instead  of  remaining  isolated  in  Massachusetts,  he  must  have  made 
a  name  for  himself  not  unworthy  to  be  matched  with  that  of  the 
great  bishop  whom  he  so  much  resembled.  The  intellectual  powers 
were  his,  but  the  inspiration  was  lacking;  like  Cotton  Mather 
before  him,  he  was  the  unconscious  victim  of  a  decadent  ideal  and 


JONATHAN  EDWARDS  163 

a  petty  environment.  Cut  off  from  fruitful  intercourse  with  other 
thinkers,  drawn  away  from  the  stimulating  field  of  philosophy  into 
the  arid  realm  of  theology,  it  was  his  fate  to  devote  his  noble  gifts 
to  the  thankless  task  of  re-imprisoning  the  mind  of  New  England 
within  a  system  from  which  his  nature  and  his  powers  summoned 
him  to  unshackle  it.  He  was  called  to  be  a  transcendental  eman¬ 
cipator,  but  he  remained  a  Calvinist. 


CHAPTER  III 
BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN 
Our  First  Ambassador 

There  was  a  singularly  dramatic  fitness  in  the  life  and  career  of 
Benjamin  Franklin.  America  has  never  been  more  worthily  repre¬ 
sented  at  old-world  capitals  than  by  this  unpretentious  commoner, 
drawn  from  the  stock  of  the  plain  people.  A  plebeian  in  an  aris¬ 
tocratic  age,  he  was  nevertheless,  by  common  consent,  first  among 
colonial  Americans  in  qualities  of  mind  and  heart.  A  wit  and 
philosopher,  rich  in  learning,  charming  in  manners,  ripe  in  the 
wisdom  of  this  world,  resourceful  in  dealing  with  men  and  events, 
he  was  one  of  the  most  delightful  as  he  was  one  of  the  greatest 
men  produced  by  the  English  race  in  the  eighteenth  century. 

“Figure  to  yourself,”  he  wrote  in  his  seventy-second  year,  “an 
old  man,  with  gray  hair  appearing  under  a  marten  fur  cap,  among 
the  powdered  heads  of  Paris.  It  is  this  odd  figure  that  salutes 
you,  with  handfuls  of  blessings.”  An  odd  figure  indeed  in  such  a 
setting,  but  a  figure  that  captured  the  imagination  of  Paris,  as  it 
has  since  captured  the  imagination  of  America;  so  novel  as  to  seem 
romantic — a  charming  rustic  philosopher  who  might  have  stepped 
out  of  the  pages  of  Rousseau.  And  so  the  French  aristocracy 
patronized  le  bon  homme,  and  laughed  with  him  at  the  affectations 
of  this  preposterous  world,  and  made  much  of  him  for  the  zest 
that  it  discovered  in  a  novel  sensation.  It  was  the  same  odd 
figure  that  had  stood  at  the  bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  and 
matched  his  intelligence  against  that  of  celebrated  English  law¬ 
yers;  the  same  figure  that  had  been  called  in  council  by  the  great 
Pitt — who  thought  himself  too  great  to  learn  anything  even  from 
Franklin;  that  had  been  lashed  by  the  scurrilous  tongue  of  Wedder- 
burn;  that  had  seen  a  thousand  bribes  dangled  before  him  by  Lord 
Howe  and  other  gentlemen — a  figure  that  seems  strangely  out  of 
place  in  that  old-fashioned  Tory  world,  with  its  narrow  sympa¬ 
thies  and  narrower  intelligence.  And  yet  considered  in  the  light 
of  social  revolutions,  what  other  figure  in  eighteenth-century 

164 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  165 

Europe  or  America  is  so  dramatically  significant?  The  figure  of 
the  self-made  democrat,  with  some  three  millions  of  his  fellows 
at  his  back,  and  countless  other  millions  to  come,  who  was  entering 
on  a  world-wide  struggle  for  political  mastery,  the  end  o/  which  no 
one  can  yet  foresee?  His  presence  in  the  councils  of  gentlemen  was 
a  tacit  denial  of  their  hitherto  unquestioned  right  of  supremacy. 
It  was  a  rare  personal  triumph;  but  it  was  far  more  significant  than 
that,  it  was  the  triumph  of  a  rising  class  and  a  new  social  ideal. 

Although  Franklin’s  origins,  whether  Boston  or  Philadelphia, 
were  narrowly  provincial,  his  mind  from  early  youth  to  extreme 
old  age  was  curiously  open  and  free,  and  to  such  a  mind  the  in¬ 
tellectual  wealth  of  the  world  lies  open  and  free.  From  that 
wealth  he  helped  himself  generously,  to  such  good  effect  that  he 
early  became  an  intellectual  cosmopolitan,  at  ease  with  the  best 
intellects  and  at  home  among  the  diverse  speculative  interests  of 
the  eighteenth  century:  the  sane  and  witty  embodiment  of  its 
rationalism,  its  emancipation  from  authority,  its  growing  concern 
for  social  justice,  its  hopeful  pursuit  of  new  political  and  economic 
philosophies,  its  tempered  optimism  that  trusted  intelligence  to 
set  the  world  right.  No  other  man  in  America  and  few  in  Europe 
had  so  completely  freed  themselves  from  the  prejudice  of  custom. 
The  Calvinism  in  which  he  was  bred  left  not  the  slightest  trace 
upon  him;  and  the  middle-class  world  from  which  he  emerged  did 
not  narrow  his  mind  to  its  petty  horizons.  He  was  a  free  man  who 
went  his  own  way  with  imperturbable  good  will  and  unbiased 
intelligence;  our  first  social  philosopher,  the  first  ambassador  of 
American  democracy  to  the  courts  of  Europe. 

Fortune  was  kind  to  Franklin  in  many  ways:  kind  in  that  it 
did  not  visit  upon  him  the  fate  that  befell  his  elder  brother  Ebe- 
nezer,  of  whom  Sewall  noted,  “Ebenezer  Franklin  of  the  South 
Church,  a  male-infant  of  16  months  old,  was  drowned  in  a  Tub 
of  Suds,  Febr.  5,  1702/3”;  kind  also  in  that  it  set  him  in  a  land 
where  opportunity  waited  upon  enterprise,  and  where  thousands 
of  kindred  spirits  were  erecting  a  society  that  honored  such  qual¬ 
ities  as  he  possessed.  In  England  he  must  have  remained  middle- 
class,  shut  in  by  a  wall  of  prejudice;  but  in  colonial  America  he 
found  a  congenial  environment.  Like  Samuel  Sewall,  he  swam 
easily  in  the  main  current  of  colonial  life,  won  increasing  honors, 
until — as  he  naively  remarked — he  came  more  than  once  to  stand 
before  kings.  How  fortunate  he  was  is  revealed  by  contrast  with 


166  THE  COLONIAL  MIND 

the  career  of  his  great  English  counterpart  and  fellow  spirit, 
Daniel  Defoe,  whose  Essay  on  Projects — a  classic  document  of  the 
rising  middle  class — might  well  have  been  Franklin’s  first  text¬ 
book. 

The  earliest  literary  representative  of  the  English  middle  class, 
Defoe  preached  the  same  gospel  of  social  betterment.  With  his 
head  full  of  projects  for  the  advancement  of  trade  and  the  material 
well-being  of  his  fellows,  he  preached  the  new  gospel  of  practical 
efficiency  to  a  generation  of  wits,  going  so  far  as  to  assert  that  the 
ideal  statesman  should  be  sought,  not  among  gentlemen  but  among 
merchants,  whose  training  in  business  affairs  had  made  them 
shrewd  judges  of  men  and  capable  in  dealing  with  practical  mat¬ 
ters.  But  the  London  of  Queen  Anne  was  not  a  place  in  which  to 
rise  by  preaching  efficiency.  Defoe’s  day  had  not  yet  come  in 
England,  and  in  spite  of  great  abilities  and  arduous  labors  he  re¬ 
mained  a  Grub  Street  hack,  the  servant  and  not  the  counselor 
of  aristocratic  politicians.  Instead  of  coming  to  stand  before 
kings — like  the  more  fortunate  Franklin — he  stood  often  before 
constables;  instead  of  cracking  his  joke  and  his  bottle  at  Will’s 
Coffee  House,  he  was  forced  to  study  the  ways  of  the  unpros- 
perous  at  Bridewell.  But  if  he  failed  in  his  ambition  to  get  on, 
he  found  a  certain  solace  in  the  vicarious  realization  of  his  ideal. 
Robinson  Crusoe,  the  practically  efficient  man  making  himself 
master  of  his  environment,  was  the  dream  of  Daniel  Defoe;  Frank¬ 
lin  was  the  visible,  new-world  embodiment  of  that  dream. 

It  was  Franklin’s  supreme  capacity  for  doing  well  the  things 
which  his  fellow  Americans  held  in  esteem,  that  enabled  him  to  rise 
out  of  obscurity  to  a  position  of  leadership.  Before  he  should  be 
intrusted  with  the  confidence  of  his  fellow  citizens,  he  must  prove 
himself  worthy  of  such  confidence,  and  even  in  colonial  America 
the  task  was  far  from  easy.  In  the  wealthier  communities  society 
was  exclusive  and  select — nowhere  more  so  than  in  Philadelphia — 
and  it  could  not  be  expected  to  view  with  approval  the  advance¬ 
ment  of  a  printer-tradesman,  especially  if  he  were  a  member  of  the 
plebeian  anti-Proprietary  party.  It  was  an  evidence  of  Franklin’s 
discretion  that  he  removed  from  Boston,  where  neither  his  father’s 
chandlery  shop,  nor  his  brother’s  baiting  of  the  ruling  gentry, 
would  serve  his  purpose.  In  Philadelphia,  free  from  family  en¬ 
tanglements,  he  bent  himself  to  the  task  of  securing  a  competence, 
understanding  how  easily  the  wheel  turns  on  a  well-greased  axle; 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  167 

and  by  the  time  he  had  come  to  his  early  forties  he  had  kept  his 
shop  so  well  that  henceforth  it  would  keep  him.  He  was  ready  to 
do  his  real  work  in  the  world;  and  in  the  choice  of  that  work  he 
revealed  the  curious  flair  for  the  timely  that  was  so  characteristic. 
His  extraordinary  successes  in  the  field  of  civic  betterments  gained 
him  the  good  will  of  the  commonalty,  and  his  experiments  in 
natural  philosophy  won  the  approbation  of  the  gentry.  Interest 
in  scientific  inquiry,  particularly  in  physics,  had  spread  widely  in 
England  since  the  founding  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  to  be  an 
authority  on  magnetism  was  as  evident  a  mark  of  breeding  in 
Georgian  England  as  discriminating  judgment  in  the  matter  of 
manuscripts  and  mistresses  had  been  a  sign  of  culture  among 
Florentine  cinquecentists.  In  establishing  a  reputation  as  a  natural 
philosopher,  therefore,  Franklin  not  only  was  acquiring  dignity 
at  home,  but  he  was  providing  himself  with  a  sure  passport  to 
European  favor.  And  it  was  the  seal  of  European  approval  that 
finally  won  for  Franklin  the  grudging  recognition  of  the  first 
families  of  Philadelphia.  A  few  held  out  against  him  and  to  the 
day  of  his  death  regarded  him  with  disapproval;  but  in  the  end 
his  personal  charm  prevailed  with  all  but  a  handful  of  elderly 
Tory  ladies.  So  delightful  a  wit  and  so  useful  a  citizen  could  not 
be  dismissed  as  a  pushing  tradesman. 

Franklin  first  entered  politics  as  a  member  of  the  popular  party, 
then  engaged  in  a  bitter  struggle  with  the  Proprietors  over  tax 
matters,  defense  of  the  frontier,  and  other  questions  of  acute 
popular  concern.  There  was  the  usual  colonial  alignment  between 
the  backcountry  yeomanry  and  the  town  gentry;  between  the 
agrarian  and  mercantile  interests;  and  the  dispute  had  reached  a 
point  where  the  yeomanry  determined  to  appeal  to  the  King  to 
convert  the  commonwealth  into  a  Crown  Colony.  As  one  of  the 
leaders  of  the  popular  party,  Franklin  was  singled  out  for  attack. 
A  bitter  election  went  against  him,  and  he  lost  his  seat  in  the 
Assembly,  only  to  be  chosen  Colonial  Agent  to  England,  there  to 
begin  his  long  diplomatic  career.  Probably  no  other  attack 
which  Franklin  suffered  was  so  coarse  or  vindictive  as  this  assault 
by  the  Proprietary  party,  led  by  the  first  gentlemen  of  Philadel¬ 
phia,  John  Dickinson  among  them.  Unpleasant  as  the  experience 
was,  it  proved  of  service  to  Franklin,  for  it  taught  him  how  quickly 
the  hornets  would  be  about  the  ears  of  anyone  who  disturbed  the 
nest  of  official  perquisites;  and  this  was  worth  knowing  to  a  colo- 


168 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


nial  diplomat  on  his  first  mission  to  a  court  and  parliament  where 
yellow  jackets  were  uncommonly  abundant.1 

He  was  nearly  threescore  when  he  set  out  on  his  diplomatic 
mission,  which  beginning  modestly  as  temporary  agent  of  the  anti- 
Proprietary  party  of  Pennsylvania,  was  to  broaden  immensely 
as  the  American  difficulties  increased,  until  he  became  in  the  eyes 
of  all  the  world  the  spokesman  of  the  colonial  cause;  first  at  London 
to  King,  Parliament,  and  people,  and  later  at  Paris  to  all  Europe. 
It  was  a  mission  of  discussion  and  argument,  curiously  illuminating 
to  a  colonial  bred  in  a  simple,  decentralized  world.  Before  he  went 
abroad  Franklin  had  been  a  democrat  by  temperament  and  environ¬ 
ment;  when  he  returned  he  was  a  democrat  by  conviction,  con¬ 
firmed  in  his  preference  for  government  immediately  responsible 
to  the  majority  will.  Centralized  Tory  governments  had  taught 
him  the  excellence  of  town-meeting  ways.  At  London  he  dis¬ 
covered  widespread  political  corruption.  It  was  a  world  flyblown 
with  the  vices  of  irresponsible  power.  The  letters  of  Franklin  are 
full  of  the  scandal  of  bribe-taking  and  pension-mongering,  of  gross 
parliamentary  jobbery.  The  elections  of  1768  were  a  debauch, 
the  brisk  bidding  of  Indian  nabobs  sending  the  market  price  of 
parliamentary  seats  up  to  four  thousand  pounds.  “It  is  thought,” 
he  wrote  on  March  13,  “that  near  two  millions  will  be  spent  on 
this  election;  but  those,  who  understand  figures  and  act  by  compu¬ 
tation,  say  the  crown  has  two  millions  in  places  and  pensions  to 
dispose  of,  and  it  is  well  worth  while  to  engage  in  such  a  seven 
years  lottery,  though  all  that  have  tickets  should  not  get  prizes.”  2 
To  expect  such  a  government  to  be  swayed  by  appeals  to  justice 
or  abstract  rights  was  plain  folly,  Franklin  very  quickly  learned. 

lc‘You  know,”  wrote  Franklin  to  his  wife  on  the  eve  of  his  departure, “that  I 
have  many  enemies  .  .  .  and  very  bitter  ones;  and  you  must  expect  their  enmity 
will  extend  in  some  degree  to  you.”  He  was  forced  to  slip  away  and  get  secretly  on 
board  the  vessel.  His  activities  were  reproved  thus  by  a  certain  Tory  lady: 

Oh!  had  he  been  wise  to  pursue 
The  track  for  his  talents  designed. 

What  a  tribute  of  praise  had  been  due 
To  the  teacher  and  friend  of  mankind. 

But  to  covet  political  fame 
Was  in  him  a  degrading  ambition, 

The  spark  that  from  Lucifer  came. 

And  kindled  the  blaze  of  sedition. 

(In  Works,  Vol.  VII,  p.  267.) 

In  Sargent’s  Loyal  Verses  of  Joseph  Stansbury  and  Doctor  Jonathan  Odell,  these 
verses  are  attributed  to  a  less  likely  source. 

2  Works,  Vol.  VII,  p.  398. 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  169 

The  colonial  goose  was  there  to  be  plucked,  and  gentlemen  who 
gained  their  livelihood  by  skillful  plucking  would  not  easily  be 
denied.  “To  get  a  larger  field  on  which  to  fatten  a  herd  of  worth¬ 
less  parasites,  is  all  that  is  regarded,”  wrote  the  celebrated  London 
physician,  Dr.  Fothergill,  to  Franklin.3  Even  war  with  the  colonies 
might  not  seem  undesirable  to  some,  for  “an  auditor  of  the  exche¬ 
quer  has  sixpence  in  the  pound,  or  a  fortieth  part,  of  all  the  public 
money  expended  by  the  nation,  so  that,  when  a  war  costs  forty 
millions,  one  million  is  paid  to  him.”4 

It  was  a  bitter  experience  for  one  who  had  grown  up  in  respect 
for  England  and  veneration  for  English  traditions.  Franklin  was 
not  a  man  of  divided  loyalties,  and  his  love  of  the  old  home  was 
deep  and  sincere.  He  had  many  warm  friends  there,  and  the  idea 
of  American  separation  from  the  empire  was  profoundly  repugnant 
to  him.  It  was  not  till  he  was  convinced  beyond  hope  that  America 
could  expect  from  the  English  government  nothing  but  ignoble 
dependence  that  he  accepted  the  idea  of  independence.  Again 
and  again  he  complained  bitterly  of  “the  extreme  corruption 
prevalent  among  all  orders  of  men  in  this  rotten  old  state.”  5 
“I  wish  all  the  friends  of  liberty  and  of  man  would  quit  that  sink 
of  corruption,  and  leave  it  to  its  fate.”  “I  do  not  expect  that  your 
new  Parliament  will  be  either  wiser  or  honester  than  the  last.  All 
projects  to  procure  an  honest  one,  by  place  bills,  etc.,  appear  to 
me  vain  and  impracticable.  The  true  cure,  I  imagine,  is  to  be 
found  in  rendering  all  places  unprofitable,  and  the  King  too  poor 
to  give  bribes  and  pensions.  Till  this  is  done,  which  can  only  be 
by  a  revolution  (and  I  think  you  have  not  virtue  enough  left  to 
procure  one),  your  nation  will  always  be  plundered,  and  obliged 
to  pay  by  taxes  the  plunderers  for  plundering  and  ruining.  Liberty 

s  Ibid.,  Vol.  V,  p.  8l. 

4  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  428.  A  good  deal  of  light  is  thrown  upon  the  ways  of  the 
ministry  in  Franklin’s  account,  Negotiations  in  London.  _  See  in  particular  pp.  37, 
68,  76  of  Vol.  V,  where  Lord  Hyde  and  Lord  Howe  exhibit  special  solicitude  for  his 
advancement.  His  letters  tell  of  successive  attempts  to  approach  him,  and  among 
his  works  is  a  little  skit  in  which  he  speaks  of  himself  thus:  “Your  correspondent 
Brittannicus  inveighs  violently  against  Dr.  Franklin,  for  his  ingratitude  to  the 
ministry  of  this  nation,  who  have  conferred  upon  him  so  many  favors.  They  gave 
him  the  post-office  of  America;  they  made  his  son  a  governor;  and  they  offered  him  a 
post  of  five  hundred  a  year  in  the  salt-office,  if  he  would  relinquish  the  interests  of 
his  country;  but  he  has  had  the  wickedness  to  continue  true  to  it,  and  is  as  much  an 
American  as  ever.  As  it  is  a  settled  point  in  government  here,  that  every  man  has 
his  price,  it  is  plain  they  are  bunglers  in  their  business,  and  have  not  given  him 
enough.”  {Works,  Vol.  IV,  pp.  534_535-) 

G  Ibid.,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  146. 


170  THE  COLONIAL  MIND 

and  virtue  therefore  join  in  the  call,  come  out  of  her,  my  peo¬ 
ple!”6  “The  people  of  England  ...  are  just  and  generous,” 
wrote  his  friend  David  Hartley,  member  of  Parliament,  “and, 
if  it  were  put  to  the  sense  of  the  people  of  England,  you  would 
not  be  left  in  any  doubt  whether  it  was  want  of  will,  or  want  of  power, 
to  do  you  justice.  You  know  the  blot  of  our  constitution,  by 
which,  to  our  disgrace,  and  to  your  misfortune,  a  corrupt  ministry, 
sheltered  by  Parliamentary  influence,  are  out  of  our  immediate 
control.  A  day  of  account  may  come,  when  the  justice  of  the 
nation  may  prevail;  and  if  it  comes  not  too  late,  it  may  prove  a 
day  of  reconciliation  and  cordial  reunion  between  us  and  America.”7 
He  is  blind  indeed  who  cannot  see  in  such  experience  the  explana¬ 
tion  of  Franklin’s  later  efforts  in  Pennsylvania  and  in  the  consti¬ 
tutional  convention  to  keep  government  in  America  responsive  to 
the  will  of  the  people. 

During  the  long  years  of  his  ambassadorship,  so  rich  in  intellec¬ 
tual  opportunity,  F ranklin  was  intimately  concerned  with  economics 
and  politics,  and  he  found  in  them  subjects  congenial  to  his  talents. 
By  temperament  he  was  what  we  should  call  today  a  sociologist. 
He  cared  little  for  abstract  reasoning,  but  much  for  social  better¬ 
ment;  and  this  led  him  to  examine  critically  current  economic 
theory  in  the  light  of  present  fact.  All  his  life  economics  was  a 
major  interest  with  him,  and  his  several  contributions  entitle  him 
to  be  regarded  as  our  first  important  economist,  the  only  one 
indeed  before  the  nineteenth  century.  His  chief  guides  in  this 
little  explored  field  seem  to  have  been  Sir  William  Petty,  the 
statistician  of  the  Restoration  period,  in  his  younger  days,  and  the 
French  Physiocrats  in  later  years.  He  was  the  first  American  to 
abandon  the  traditional  mercantile  school — a  generation  before 
other  American  thinkers  had  repudiated  it;  and  he  was  the  first  to 
ally  himself  with  the  rising  school  of  laissezfaire. 

In  the  year  1729,  when  he  was  just  turned  twenty-three,  Franklin 
entered  the  field  of  economics  with  a  pamphlet  entitled  A  Modest 
Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Necessity  of  a  Paper  Currency.  It  is 
a  curiously  suggestive  work,  not  only  for  the  light  which  it  sheds 
on  his  economic  views,  but  on  his  social  and  political  sympathies. 
It  marks  his  early  alignment  with  the  agrarian  party,  to  which  he 
adhered  to  the  end  of  his  life.  From  the  days  when  Samuel  Sewall 
first  confronted  the  question  of  land-banks  in  the  Massachusetts 
6  Ibid.,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  215,  503.  7  Ibid.,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  177. 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  171 

legislature  till  the  British  government  forbade  all  issues  of  bills 
of  credit,  the  currency  question  was  bitterly  debated  in  the  several 
colonies.  It  was  primarily  a  class  issue,  in  which  the  town  mer¬ 
chants  and  money  lenders  found  themselves  outvoted  by  the 
agrarian  debtors  and  small  men.  Little  light  had  come  from  those 
debates  on  the  nature  of  money  and  its  social  functions;  but  much 
heat  had  been  engendered  over  the  supposed  question  of  honest 
versus  dishonest  money.  With  this  cheap  fallacy  Franklin  was 
not  concerned;  but  he  was  greatly  concerned  in  this  and  in  later 
papers  in  expounding  the  quantitative  theory  of  money,  the 
nature  of  credit,  and  the  important  fact,  overlooked  by  the  hard- 
money  men,  that  gold  and  silver  are  themselves  commodities, 
fluctuating  in  value  with  supply  and  demand.  This  first  pamphlet, 
Franklin  afterward  remarked,  “was  well  received  by  the  common 
people  in  general;  but  the  rich  men  disliked  it,  for  it  increased  and 
strengthened  the  clamor  for  more  money;  and,  they  happening 
to  have  no  writers  among  them  that  were  able  to  answer  it,  their 
opposition  slackened,  and  the  point  was  carried  by  a  majority  in 
the  House.”  8 

By  much  the  most  interesting  idea  in  the  pamphlet,  however, 
is  the  elaboration  of  the  labor  theory  of  value.  Commenting  on 
this,  McMaster  says  in  his  Life  of  Franklin: 

Bad  as  were  his  notions  of  political  economy,  his  pamphlet  contained 
one  great  truth, — the  truth  that  labor  is  the  measure  of  value.  Whether 
he  discovered,  or,  as  is  not  unlikely,  borrowed  it,  he  was  the  first  openly 
to  assert  it;  and  his  it  remained  till,  forty-seven  years  later,  Adam  Smith 
adopted  it  and  reaffirmed  it  in  “The  Wealth  of  Nations.”  9 

Unfortunately  the  biographer’s  knowledge  of  the  history  of  eco¬ 
nomic  thought  was  as  faulty  as,  in  his  judgment,  were  Franklin’s 
economic  principles.  In  his  Treatise  of  Taxes ,  written  in  1662, 
Sir  William  Petty— whom  Franklin  in  many  ways  greatly  re¬ 
sembled— clearly  elaborated  the  principle  of  labor-value; 10  it 
was  restated  by  Vauban  in  1707,  in  his  Projet  Tune  disme  Royale, 
by  Hume  in  1752,  and  later  by  the  Physiocrats;  and  when  Adam 
Smith  wrote  it  was  pretty  widely  known.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  where  Franklin  got  it.  The  similarity  between  his  work 
and  that  of  Sir  William  Petty  is  too  evident  to  escape  comment. 
But  that  does  not  lessen  the  significance  of  the  fact  that  a  self- 

8  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  254.  ®  P-  64. 

10  See  Economic  Writings  of  Sir  W.  Petty,  Cambridge  Press,  Vol.  1,  pp.  43-51* 


172 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


trained  provincial  of  three  and  twenty  should  have  read  Petty’s 
work,  seized  upon  the  salient  idea  and  turned  it  to  effective  use, 
years  before  economic  students  generally  were  acquainted  with  it. 
All  his  life  Franklin  took  up  ideas  like  a  sponge,  and  what  he  took 
he  incorporated  with  the  solid  results  of  his  own  observations. 

During  his  stay  in  England  Franklin  came  in  close  contact 
with  the  body  of  Physiocratic  writings,  which  seem  to  have  greatly 
stimulated  his  interest  in  economic  thought.  The  school  was  at 
the  height  of  its  influence  between  the  years  1763  and  1772,  and 
had  pretty  well  undermined  the  position  of  the  mercantilists.  They 
were  the  founders  of  modern  social  science  and  their  teachings 
contained  in  germ  the  liberal  doctrine  of  economics  in  its  entirety. 
In  their  emphasis  upon  free  trade  and  laissez-faire  competition,  on 
the  police  theory  of  the  state,  on  property,  security,  liberty,  on 
the  natural  laws  of  association  and  self-interest,  and  especially 
in  their  emphasis  on  land  as  the  sole  source  of  wealth,  they  pre¬ 
sented  a  system  of  economics  that  fitted  American  conditions  as 
Franklin  understood  those  conditions.  In  one  important  point — 
their  acceptance  of  an  absolute  prince — Franklin  broke  with 
them  wholly;  but  their  preference  for  agriculture  over  manu¬ 
facturing  and  commerce  accorded  with  his  deepest  convictions. 
America  was  notably  happy  and  contented  in  comparison  with 
Europe,  and  America  would  remain  happy  and  contented,  he 
believed,  so  long  as  land  was  abundant  and  her  farmers  remained 
freeholders.  The  new  middle-class  gospel  of  industrialism  he 
profoundly  distrusted.  He  shared  Goldsmith’s  concern  over  the 
destruction  of  the  English  peasantry  and  the  creation  of  a  degraded 
proletariat.  Manufacture  and  trade  developed  only  where  free 
land  was  inadequate  or  the  peasants  were  dispossessed;  industrial¬ 
ism  sprang  from  the  national  poverty  and  was  nourished  by  it. 
W riting  in  1 760  he  said : 

Unprejudiced  men  well  know,  that  all  the  penal  and  prohibitory  laws 
that  were  ever  thought  on  will  not  be  sufficient  to  prevent  manufactures 
in  a  country,  whose  inhabitants  surpass  the  number  that  can  subsist  by 
the  husbandry  of  it.  .  .  .  Manufactures  are  founded  in  poverty.  It  is  the 
number  of  poor  without  land  in  a  country,  and  who  must  work  for  others 
at  low  wages  or  starve,  that  enables  undertakers  to  carry  on  a  manufac¬ 
ture,  and  afford  it  cheap  enough  to  prevent  the  importation  of  the  same 
kind  from  abroad,  and  to  bear  the  expense  of  its  own  exportation.  But 
no  man,  who  can  have  a  piece  of  land  of  his  own,  sufficient  by  his  labor  to 
subsist  his  family  in  plenty,  is  poor  enough  to  be  a  manufacturer,  and  work 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  173 

for  a  master.  Hence  while  there  is  land  enough  in  America  for  our  people, 
there  can  never  be  manufactures  to  any  amount  or  value.11 

Nine  years  later,  in  his  Positions  to  be  Examined,  concerning  National 
Wealth,  he  stated  the  Physiocratic  theory  thus: 

There  seem  to  be  but  three  ways  for  a  nation  to  acquire  wealth.  The 
first  is  by  war,  as  the  Romans  did,  in  plundering  their  conquered  neighbors. 
This  is  robbery.  The  second  by  commerce,  which  is  generally  cheating. 
The  third  by  agriculture,  the  only  honest  way,  wherein  man  receives  a 
real  increase  of  the  seed  thrown  into  the  ground,  in  a  kind  of  continual 
miracle,  wrought  by  the  hand  of  God  in  his  favor.12 

Franklin’s  prejudice  against  trade  somewhat  lessened  in  after 
years,  as  he  considered  the  economic  need  of  free  exchange  of 
commodities.  In  1774,  two  years  before  the  publication  of  The 
Wealth  of  Nations,  he  collaborated  with  George  Whately  in  writing 
a  pamphlet  entitled  Principles  of  Trade,  that  suggests  Adam 
Smith.  Franklin  was  acquainted  with  Smith,  had  visited  him, 
and  doubtless  had  discussed  with  him  the  theory  of  laissez  faire, 
division  of  labor,  use  of  machinery,  and  other  principles  of  the 
new  school,  but  no  mention  of  him  is  made.13  The  central  doctrine 
is  thus  elaborated: 

Perhaps,  in  general,  it  would  be  better  if  government  meddled  no  farther 
with  trade,  than  to  protect  it,  and  let  it  take  its  course.  Most  of  the 
statutes,  or  acts,  edicts,  arrets,  and  placarts  of  parliaments,  princes,  and 
states,  for  regulating,  directing,  or  restraining  of  trade,  have,  we  think, 
been  either  political  blunders,  or  jobs  obtained  by  artful  men  for  private 
advantage,  under  pretense  of  public  good.  When  Colbert  assembled  some 
wise  old  merchants  of  France,  and  desired  their  advice  and  opinion,  how 
he  could  best  serve  and  promote  commerce,  their  answer,  after  consulta¬ 
tion,  was,  in  three  words  only,  Laissez-nous  faire:  “Let  us  alone.”  It  is 
said  by  a  very  solid  writer  of  the  same  nation,  that  he  is  well  advanced  in 
the  science  of  politics,  who  knows  the  full  force  of  that  maxim,  Pas  trop 
gouverner:  “Not  to  govern  too  much.”  Which,  perhaps,  would  be  of  more 
use  when  applied  to  trade,  than  in  any  other  public  concern.  It  were 
therefore  to  be  wished,  that  commerce  was  as  free  between  all  the  nations 
of  the  world,  as  it  is  between  the  several  counties  of  England;  so  would  all, 
by  mutual  communication,  obtain  more  enjoyments.  Those  counties  do 
not  ruin  one  another  by  trade;  neither  would  the  nations.  No  nation  was 
ever  ruined  by  trade,  even  seemingly  the  most  disadvantageous.14 

As  a  colonial,  long  familiar  with  the  injustice  of  Navigation 
Laws,  Boards  of  Trade,  and  other  restrictions  in  favor  of  British 
tradesmen,  Franklin  agreed  with  Adam  Smith  on  the  principle 
11  Works,  Vol.  IV,  p.  19-  '  12  hhid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  376. 

13  Ibid,,  Vd,  |I,  p.  438-  14  lhid">  VoL  P-  401- 


174  THE  COLONIAL  MIND 

of  free  trade;  but  with  later  developments  of  the  laissez-faire 
school — its  fetish  of  the  economic  man  and  its  iron  law  of  wages — 
he  would  not  have  agreed.  Plugson  of  Undershot  was  no  hero 
of  his,  and  the  social  system  which  Plugson  was  creating  would 
have  seemed  to  him  as  vicious  as  the  old  system  with  its  “bad, 
wasteful,  plundering  governments,  and  their  mad  destructive 
wars.”  In  his  later  speculations  he  was  rather  the  social  philos¬ 
opher  than  the  economist,  puzzled  at  the  irrationality  of  society 
that  chooses  to  make  a  pigsty  of  the  world,  instead  of  the  garden 
that  it  might  be  if  men  would  but  use  the  sense  that  God  has  given 
them.  “The  happiness  of  individuals  is  evidently  the  ultimate 
end  of  political  society,”18  he  believed,  and  a  starvation  wage- 
system  was  the  surest  way  of  destroying  that  happiness.16  In 
one  of  the  most  delightful  letters  that  he  ever  wrote,  Franklin 
commented  on  the  ways  of  men  thus: 

It  is  wonderful  how  preposterously  the  affairs  of  this  world  are  managed. 
Naturally  one  would  imagine,  that  the  interests  of  a  few  individuals  should 
give  way  to  general  interest;  but  individuals  manage  their  affairs  with  so 
much  more  application,  industry,  and  address,  than  the  public  do  theirs, 
that  general  interest  most  commonly  gives  way  to  particular.  We  assem¬ 
ble  parliaments  and  councils,  to  have  the  benefit  of  their  collected  wisdom; 
but  we  necessarily  have,  at  the  same  time,  the  inconvenience  of  their 
collected  passions,  prejudices,  and  private  interests.  By  the  help  of  these, 
artful  men  overpower  their  wisdom  and  dupe  its  possessors;  and  if  we  may 
judge  by  the  acts,  arrets,  and  edicts,  all  the  world  over,  for  regulating  com¬ 
merce,  an  assembly  of  great  men  is  the  greatest  fool  upon  earth?.  .  .  . 

What  occasions  then  so  much  want  and  misery?  It  is  the  employment 
of  men  and  women  in  works,  that  produce  neither  the  necessaries  nor 
conveniences  of  life,  who,  with  those  who  do  nothing,  consume  necessaries 
raised  by  the  laborious.  .  .  .  Look  round  the  world,  and  see  the  millions 
employed  in  doing  nothing,  or  in  something  that  amounts  to  nothing,  when 
the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life  are  in  question.  What  is  the  bulk 
of  commerce,  for  which  we  fight  and  destroy  each  other,  but  the  toil  of 
millions  for  superfluities,  to  the  great  hazard  and  loss  of  many  lives?  .  .  . 
It  has  been  computed  by  some  political  arithmetician,  that,  if  every  man 
and  woman  would  work  for  four  hours  each  day  on  something  useful,  that 
labor  would  produce  sufficient  to  procure  all  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of 
life,  want  and  misery  would  be  banished  out  of  the  world,  and  the  rest  of 
the  twenty-four  hours  might  be  leisure  and  happiness.17 

But  the  immediate  problem  of  Franklin  as  representative  of  the 
colonies  at  St.  James’s,  was  political — how  to  reconcile  the  antag- 

16  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  323. 

16  See  “Reflections  on  the  Augmentation  of  Wages,  etc.,”  in  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  436. 

17  “On  Luxury,  Idleness,  and  Industry,”  in  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  448-451. 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  175 

onistic  ambitions  of  the  sundered  bodies  of  Englishmen;  and  the 
solution  which  he  set  forth  with  admirable  clearness,  bears  the 
impress  of  a  mind  intent  upon  the  reality  behind  parchment  pre¬ 
tense.  While  lawyers  were  befogging  the  issue  with  legal  quibble, 
and  politicians  were  proving  the  unconstitutionality  of  the  forces 
stirring  in  eighteenth-century  America,  Franklin  was  more  con¬ 
cerned  with  adjusting  imperial  policy  to  existing  fact.  On  one  side 
were  the  colonies,  in  which  the  practice  of  local  self-government 
had  taken  deep  root;  whether  the  practice  was  sanctioned  by  their 
charters  or  the  British  constitution  was  beside  the  question.  On 
the  other  side  was  the  British  parliament,  serving  as  a  legislative 
body  for  its  proper  constituency,  the  people  of  the  British  Isles. 
Over  both  colonies  and  parliament,  providing  an  effective  but 
ungalling  tie  to  bind  the  parts  together,  was  the  King,  to  whom 
both  paid  willing  allegiance.  So  long  as  England  was  content  to 
maintain  the  status  quo ,  the  colonies,  Franklin  believed,  would 
remain  loyal  to  the  empire;  but  if  the  ministry  persisted  in  its 
program  of  extending  parliamentary  sovereignty  over  the  colonies, 
the  outcome  must  be  one  of  two  things,  federation  or  separation. 

To  the  principle  of  federation  Franklin  was  an  early  and  faithful 
friend.  The  conception  of  a  federal  union  of  the  several  colonies 
was  slowly  spreading  in  America,  and  no  other  colonial  had  done 
so  much  to  further  it;  in  his  well-known  Plan  of  Union  he  had 
sketched  the  outlines  of  a  federal  constitution;  what  was  more 
natural,  therefore,  than  for  him  to  think  in  terms  of  a  Federated 
British  Empire,  as  a  statesmanlike  solution  of  the  present  per¬ 
plexities.  The  plan  involved  two  problems:  first,  an  inquiry  into 
the  nature  and  constitution  of  an  imperial  parliament,  and  second, 
provision  for  an  equitable  representation  of  the  several  divisions 
of  the  empire.  The  present  difficulties  had  arisen  out  of  the  ambi¬ 
tion  of  the  British  parliament  to  assume  sovereignty  over  the 
colonial  legislatures,  thereby  reducing  them  to  a  dependent  status; 
those  difficulties  would  be  settled  only  by  constitutional  recogni¬ 
tion  of  local  rights  and  local  sovereignties.  “The  British  state,” 
he  argued,  “is  only  the  Island  of  Great  Britain,”  and  if  by  reason 
of  familiarity  with  local  needs,  “the  British  legislature”  is  “the 
only  proper  judge  of  what  concerns  the  welfare  of  that  state,”  why 
does  the  principle  not  hold  for  the  several  colonial  legislatures? 

Here  appears  the  excellency  of  the  invention  of  colony  government,  by 
separate,  independent  legislatures.  By  this  means,  the  remotest  parts  of  a 


176 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 

great  empire  may  be  as  well  governed  as  the  centre;  misrule,  oppressions  of 
proconsuls,  and  discontents  and  rebellions  thence  arising,  prevented.  By 
this  means,  the  power  of  a  king  may  be  extended  without  inconvenience 
over  territories  of  any  dimensions,  how  great  soever.  America  was  thus 
happily  governed  in  all  its  different  and  remote  settlements,  by  the  crown 
and  their  own  Assemblies,  till  the  new  politics  took  place,  of  governing  it 
by  one  Parliament,  which  have  not  succeeded  and  never  will.18 

In  this  dream  of  a  British  Empire  Franklin  was  far  in  advance 
of  his  time.  On  both  sides  of  the  ocean  selfish  and  unimaginative 
men  stood  ready  to  thwart  all  such  proposals;  little  Englanders 
and  little  colonials  in  vast  numbers  were  concerned  with  more 
immediate  and  personal  interests  than  those  of  the  English  race. 
Nevertheless  Franklin  was  convinced  that  the  gods,  if  not  the 
Tories,  were  on  the  side  of  the  colonies.  The  enormous  increase 
in  material  strength  that  the  years  were  swiftly  bringing  to  America 
was  an  augury  of  good  hope;  the  legitimate  demands  of  America 
would  be  granted  when  America  had  grown  too  strong  to  be 
denied,  which  must  be  shortly.  In  the  meantime  it  was  the  duty 
of  Englishmen,  British  and  colonial  alike,  to  endeavor  “with  un¬ 
feigned  and  unwearying  zeal  to  preserve  from  breaking  that  fine 
and  noble  China  vase,  the  British  empire.”  It  was  the  traditional 
policy  of  “protract  and  grow  strong” — a  wise  and  sane  policy — 
and  Franklin  clung  to  it  until  he  was  convinced  of  its  utter  futility. 
One  other  choice  remained — separation;  and  he  made  that  choice 
sadly,  understanding  better  than  most  what  it  involved. 

The  years  which  followed  were  filled  to  the  brim  for  Franklin 
as  well  as  for  America.  Ideals  changed  and  principles  clarified 
swiftly;  but  his  social  philosophy  was  founded  on  too  wide  and 
sobering  an  experience  with  men  and  governments,  to  sway  with 
every  gusty  passion  of  the  times.  He  had  been  a  democrat  from 
his  youth  up  and  in  those  critical  first  days  of  independence,  when 
the  forces  of  agrarianism  were  taking  possession  of  state  govern¬ 
ments,  he  threw  in  his  lot  with  them,  and  joined  heartily  in  the 
stimulating  work  of  providing  a  democratic  constitution  for 
Pennsylvania.  During  the  later  years  of  reaction  following  the 
peace,  when  so  many  Revolutionary  leaders  endeavored  to  stay 
the  agrarian  movement  and  undo  its  work,  he  saw  no  cause  to 
lose  faith  in  government  immediately  responsive  to  the  majority 
will.  He  was  a  forerunner  of  Jefferson,  like  him  firm  in  the  con- 

18  Works,  Vol.  IV,  p.  282.  For  Franklin’s  views  op  American  representation  in 
Parliament,  see  Vol,  VII,  pp.  315,  329, 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN  177 

viction  that  government  was  good  in  the  measure  that  it  remained 
close  to  the  people.  He  sat  in  the  Constitutional  Convention  as 
one  of  the  few  democrats,  and  although  he  was  unable  to  make 
headway  against  the  aristocratic  majority,  he  was  quite  uncon¬ 
vinced  by  their  rhetoric.  For  years  he  had  been  an  advocate  of 
unrestricted  manhood  suffrage,  annual  parliaments,19  and  a  single¬ 
chamber  legislature;  and  when  he  heard  eloquent  young  lawyers 
argue  that  a  single-chamber  legislature,  responsive  to  a  democratic 
electorate,  must  lead  to  mob  legislation,  and  that  good  government 
required  a  carefully  calculated  system  of  checks  and  balances, 
he  remarked : 

It  appears  to  me  .  .  .  like  putting  one  horse  before  a  cart  and  the 
other  behind  it,  and  whipping  them  both.  If  the  horses  are  of  equal 
strength,  the  wheels  of  the  cart,  like  the  wheels  of  government,  will  stand 
still;  and  if  the  horses  are  strong  enough  the  cart  will  be  torn  to  pieces.20 

When  in  1790  it  was  proposed  to  substitute  a  bicameral  system 
for  the  single-chamber  in  Pennsylvania,  Franklin  came  to  the 
defense  of  the  simpler,  more  democratic  form,  with  a  vivacity  little 
staled  by  years: 

Has  not  the  famous  political  fable  of  the  snake,  with  two  heads  and  one 
body,  some  useful  instruction  contained  in  it?  She  was  going  to  a  brook 
to  drink,  and  in  her  way  was  to  pass  through  a  hedge,  a  twig  of  which 
opposed  her  direct  course;  one  head  chose  to  go  on  the  right  side  of  the 
twig,  the  other  on  the  left;  so  that  time  was  spent  in  the  contest,  and  before 
the  decision  was  completed,  the  poor  snake  died  with  thirst.21 

Both  his  economic  principles  and  his  views  on  government  have 
been  condemned  by  Federalistic  critics  as  tainted  with  populism. 
They  both  sprang  from  the  same  root  of  agrarian  democracy. 
Whether  Franklin  or  his  critics  more  adequately  represented  the 
larger  interests  of  eighteenth-century  America  is  beside  the  present 
question;  it  is  enough  to  note  that  all  such  criticism  is  leveled 
primarily  at  Franklin’s  democratic  philosophy  as  a  thing  in  itself 
undesirable,  if  not  dangerous. 

Franklin  may  often  have  been  wrong,  but  he  was  never  arrogant, 
never  dogmatic.  He  was  too  wise  and  too  generous  for  that.  In 
the  midst  of  prosperity  he  never  forgot  the  unprosperous.  All  his 

19  See  the  pamphlet  indorsed  Some  Good  Whig  Principles,  of  the  probable  date  of 
1768-69,  in  Works,  Vol.  II. 

20  Works  of  Thomas  Paine,  edited  by  Moncure  D.  Conway,  Vol.  IV,  p.  465. 

21  In  “Queries  and  Remarks  Respecting  Alterations  in  the  Constitution  of 
Pennsylvania,”  in  Works,  Vol.  V,  p.  167. 


178 


THE  COLONIAL  MIND 


life  his  sympathy  went  out  to  whoever  suffered  in  person  or  fortune 
from  the  injustice  of  society:  to  the  debtor  who  found  himself 
pinched  by  the  shrinking  supply  of  currency;  to  the  black  slave 
who  suffered  the  most  elementary  of  wrongs;  to  impressed  seamen; 
to  the  weak  and  wretched  of  earth.  He  was  a  part  of  that  emerging 
humanitarian  movement  which,  during  the  last  half  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century,  was  creating  a  new  sense  of  social  responsibility. 
True  to  his  Physiocratic  convictions,  Franklin  was  social-minded. 
He  was  concerned  not  with  property  or  class  interests,  but  with 
the  common  welfare;  and  in  his  quick  sympathy  for  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men,  in  his  conviction  that  he  must  use  his  talents 
to  make  this  world  better  and  not  exploit  it,  he  reveals  the  breadth 
and  generosity  of  his  nature.  Reason  and  work,  in  his  pragmatic 
philosophy,  are  the  faithful  handmaids  of  progress,  of  which  war, 
whether  public  or  private,  is  the  utter  negation.  After  long  years 
of  thought  he  rendered  a  judgment  which  later  experience  has 
not  reversed, — “there  is  no  good  war  and  no  bad  peace.” 

It  is  to  little  purpose  that  certain  shortcomings  of  Franklin 
are  dwelt  upon.  “There  is  a  flower  of  religion,  a  flower  of  honor, 
a  flower  of  chivalry,  that  you  must  not  require  of  Franklin,”  said 
Sainte-Beuve;  a  judgment  that  is  quite  true  and  quite  obvious. 
A  man  who  is  less  concerned  with  the  golden  pavements  of  the 
City  of  God  than  that  the  cobblestones  on  Chestnut  Street  in 
Philadelphia  should  be  well  and  evenly  laid,  who  troubles  less 
to  save  his  soul  from  burning  hereafter  than  to  protect  his  neigh¬ 
bors’  houses  by  organizing  an  efficient  fire-company,  who  is  less 
regardful  of  the  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land  than  of  a  new- 
model  street  lamp  to  light  the  steps  of  the  belated  wayfarer — such 
a  man,  obviously,  does  not  reveal  the  full  measure  of  human  as¬ 
piration.  Franklin  ended  as  he  began,  the  child  of  a  century 
marked  by  sharp  spiritual  limitations.  What  was  best  in  that 
century  he  made  his  own.  In  his  modesty,  his  willingness  to 
compromise,  his  openmindedness,  his  clear  and  luminous  under¬ 
standing,  his  charity — above  all,  in  his  desire  to  subdue  the  ugly 
facts  of  society  to  some  more  rational  scheme  of  things — he  proved 
himself  a  great  and  useful  man,  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  useful 
whom  America  has  produced. 


PART  TWO:  THE  AWAKENING  OF  THE 
AMERICAN  MIND 
1763-1783 


CHAPTER  I 

IMPERIAL  SOVEREIGNTY  AND  HOME  RULE 

1 

BACKGROUND  FACTS 

The  American  Revolution  remains  after  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years  somewhat  of  a  puzzle  to  historians.  Much  careful  investi¬ 
gation  has  been  done  in  the  last  two  decades,  but  we  still  know 
too  little  to  speak  confidently  or  with  a  sense  of  finality.  The  appeal 
to  arms  would  seem  to  have  been  brought  about  by  a  minority  of 
the  American  people,  directed  by  a  small  group  of  skillful  leaders, 
who  like  Indian  scouts,  covered  their  tracks  so  cleverly  that  only 
the  keenest  trailers  can  now  follow  their  course  and  understand 
their  strategy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  philosophy  of  revolution 
is  familiar  to  us.  Revolutions  are  born  of  an  abnormal  state  of 
mind,  sensitized  by  an  accumulated  body  of  experience.  They 
are  psychological  explosions,  resulting  from  irritations  commonly 
economic  in  origin,  and  they  are  conditioned  in  their  programs 
by  the  stock  of  knowledge  and  aspiration  peculiar  to  their  time 
and  place.  Two  determining  facts,  then,  would  seem  to  lie  at  the 
root  of  the  American  Revolution:  the  American  psychology  which 
shaped  the  colonial  outlook,  and  the  peculiar  situation  of  the 
British  Empire  at  the  close  of  the  French  and  Indian  war.1 

In  old  age  John  Adams  “hazarded  an  opinion,  that  the  true 
history  of  the  American  revolution  could  not  be  recovered,”  for 
“the  revolution  was  effected  before  the  war  commenced.  The 
revolution  was  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  people.”  2  Accepting 
Adams’s  thesis  of  a  change  in  American  psychology,  we  may  hazard 
a  further  opinion  that  the  revolution  resulted  from  the  emergence 

1  An  excellent  short  statement  of  the  causes  of  the  American  Revolution  is  given 
by  A.  M.  Schlesinger  in  New  Viewpoints  in  American  History,  Chapter  VII.  Com¬ 
pare  C.  H.  Van  Tyne,  The  Causes  of  the  War  of  Independence. 

2  Letter  to  Mr.  Niles,  January  14,  1818. 

179 


180 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


in  the  two  countries  of  divergent  interpretations  of  the  theory  and 
practice  of  sovereignty,  which  may  be  sufficiently  distinguished  by 
the  terms  local  home  rule  and  imperial  centralization.  In  the 
beginning  it  was  a  clash  of  jurisdiction  between  colonial  self- 
government  and  absentee  paternalism;  but  later  it  developed  into 
an  open  challenge  of  the  monarchical  principle.  A  popular  will  to 
self-rule  had  long  been  developing  in  America,  and  when  the  out¬ 
break  of  hostilities  clarified  its  latent  objective,  it  speedily  asserted 
a  conscious  republican  purpose.  To  many  of  the  early  supporters 
of  the  colonial  protest,  this  republican  outcome  was  unforeseen 
and  deeply  regretted;  but  it  was  implicit  in  the  whole  history  of 
colonial  development,  and  must  ultimately  stand  sharply  revealed, 
once  its  aspirations  were  balked. 

If  the  crisis  was  precipitated  almost  casually  by  the  program 
of  parliamentary  regulation,  the  long  drift  towards  alienation  was 
far  from  casual.  An  American  mind  had  been  created  by  the 
silent  pressure  of  environment.  A  large  measure  of  economic 
freedom  had  developed  an  American  liberalism,  frankly  and 
vigorously  individualistic.  It  was  not  consciously  democratic,  or 
even  republican.  There  were  few  avowed  democrats  in  the  stolid 
mass  of  colonial  provincialism;  a  busy  and  commonplace  routine 
offered  little  opportunity  for  revolutionary  appeal  to  a  people 
grown  lethargic  from  economic  abundance.  Of  social  unrest,  the 
common  fuel  of  revolutionary  fires,  there  was  practically  none; 
and  but  for  a  blundering  ministerial  imperialism  that  challenged 
this  nascent  liberalism,  throwing  over  it  the  mantle  of  patriotism, 
the  colonies  would  have  written  a  very  different  history.  Once 
the  crisis  was  precipitated,  however,  and  it  became  clear  that 
imperial  centralization  was  encroaching  upon  local  rights,  the 
liberal  impulses  in  the  background  of  the  American  mind  assumed 
a  militant  form  and  purpose. 

The  existence  of  this  native  liberalism  had  been  stupidly  over¬ 
looked  and  ignored  by  responsible  statesmen.  With  the  exception 
of  Franklin,  colonial  spokesmen  were  commonly  members  of  the 
aristocratic  group,  among  whom  the  Tory  philosophy  was  spread¬ 
ing  fast.  Gentlemen  in  Boston,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and 
Charleston  fashioned  their  manners  upon  the  polite  world  of  St. 
James’s  and  caught  the  Tory  ways  in  politics  as  naturally  as  the 
London  style  in  wigs.  They  associated  with  the  royal  officials, 
traveled  in  England,  corresponded  with  members  of  Parliament, 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


181 


advised  in  all  matters  of  colonial  policy,  and  proved  themselves 
the  most  shortsighted  of  counselors.  Upon  their  heads  rest  in 
part  the  blunders  of  the  ministry.  In  failing  to  understand  the 
native  liberalism  of  America,  they  not  only  shared  responsibility 
for  an  unwise  policy,  but  they  hastened  their  own  destruction. 
Samuel  Adams  could  not  have  played  so  effectively  upon  the 
popular  prejudices  if  the  Hutchinsons  and  Olivers  had  not  brought 
the  Tory  ways  into  wide  disrepute  by  their  arrogance. 

Colonial  liberalism,  on  the  other  hand,  was  not  so  simple  and 
homogeneous  as  we  long  believed.  It  was  rather  a  somewhat 
vague  composite  of  the  aspirations  of  three  diverse  geographical 
areas,  with  different  economic  interests,  social  ways,  and  political 
ideals.  The  middle  and  northern  coast  region,  with  its  mercantile 
cities,  was  a  distinct  area;  the  tidewater  region  from  Maryland  to 
Georgia,  with  its  plantation  economy,  constituted  another;  and 
the  indefinite  backcountry  beyond  the  older  settlements,  stretch¬ 
ing  from  Maine  southward  along  the  Alleghany  watershed,  con¬ 
stituted  a  third.  The  first  was  dominated  by  a  merchant  group — 
wholesale  importers  and  exporters — wealthy  and  conservative, 
but  with  a  great  majority  of  the  population — small  tradesmen, 
mechanics  and  yeomen — far  more  democratic  than  the  leaders. 
The  second  was  controlled  by  the  aristocratic  planters,  whose 
leadership  during  the  crises  of  the  dispute  with  England  was 
rejected  by  an  economically  strong  but  socially  inferior  body  of 
factors  or  alien  middlemen.  The  third  was  composed  of  thousands 
of  small  freeholders,  largely  Scotch-Irish  and  German,  who 
acknowledged  no  leadership,  were  unconsciously  democratic  in 
their  ways,  suspicious  of  the  seacoast  aristocracy,  wedded  to  an 
agrarian  philosophy.  The  merchant  group  was  liberal  only  to  the 
extent  that  liberalism  meant  profit:  their  commercial  relations 
with  England  constituted  them  the  closest  tie  between  the  two 
countries,  and  their  timid  love  of  established  ways  made  them 
naturally  conservative  rather  than  revolutionary.  The  planter 
group  possessed  the  traditional  independence  of  English  gentle¬ 
men:  they  would  tolerate  no  outside  dictation  in  matters  con¬ 
cerning  their  own  parishes,  and  their  burdensome  debts  to  English 
merchants  cooled  the  ardor  of  their  loyalty  to  Great  Britain.  The 
frontier  agrarians,  on  the  other  hand,  were  pronounced  liberals 
by  environment  and  training  to  whom  English  ties  were  at  the 
strongest  only  sentimental.  They  were  republican  in  temper,  and 


182 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


becoming  class  conscious  during  the  ten  years  of  debate,  they  grew 
rapidly  in  power  and  finally  turned  America  against  England.  A 
recent  historian  has  thus  characterized  the  change  of  temper  which 
brought  these  agrarians  to  the  front  as  the  fighting  strength  of 
the  republicans: 

A  new  class,  formed  within  .a  decade,  growing  rapidly  in  numbers,  was 
rising  to  power.  In  Pennsylvania,  as  in  a  number  of  other  colonies,  it  con¬ 
sisted  of  small  farmers  in  the  back  country,  Scotch-Irish  and  German 
immigrants,  reenforced  by  the  voteless  laborers  and  artisans  of  Philadel¬ 
phia  or  other  seaboard  cities.  .  .  .  For  over  a  decade  this  rising  democracy 
had  struggled  for  power  against  the  little  seaboard  aristocracy  of  wealth 
and  accepted  social  leadership.  .  .  .  The  colonial  masses  could  no  longer 
be  controlled  by  reverence  for  the  high-born.  The  Quaker  merchants  of 
Philadelphia,  the  holders  of  manors  on  the  Hudson,  the  tobacco  and  rice 
planters  of  Virginia  and  South  Carolina,  and  even  the  great  merchants, 
clergy,  and  professional  men  of  New  England,  could  no  longer  rule  without 
question  their  social  inferiors.  .  .  .  Thus,  in  1774,  came  the  climax  in  the 
struggle  between  rich  and  poor,  East  and  West,  those  with  a  vote  and 
those  who  were  voteless,  between  privilege  and  the  welfare  of  the  common 
man.  The  two  classes  might  work  in  harmony  or  might  clash  on  the 
question  of  resistance  to  Great  Britain,  but  they  were  pretty  sure  to  be  in 
opposition  on  the  issue  of  individual  rights.  A  merchant  .  .  .  might 
welcome  the  support  of  the  mechanics  and  small  shopkeepers  against  a 
grievous  tax  by  the  British  Government,  but  the  price,  a  right  to  vote  and 
to  hold  office,  he  was  sure  to  resent,  and  he  grew  more  and  more  alarmed  as 
the  pressure  became  more  insistent.3 

From  the  imperial  point  of  view  there  were  the  soundest  reasons 
why,  following  the  Treaty  of  Paris  in  1763,  Parliament  should 
have  desired  to  set  about  reorganizing  the  far-spread  British 
Empire.  Within  a  few  years  vast  territories  had  been  added  to 
the  crown,  and  if  the  scattered  parts  were  to  be  gathered  into  a 
cohesive  and  powerful  whole  there  was  need  of  a  definite  policy 
of  coordination  and  integration.  The  American  colonies  were 
only  a  small  part  of  the  total  empire,  and  it  was  generally  agreed 
among  English  statesmen  that  the  old  policy  of  “salutary  neglect” 
could  no  longer  serve  imperial  interests.  If  the  Whig  imperialists 
under  the  leadership  of  Pitt  had  been  put  in  charge  of  imperial 
reconstruction,  the  outcome  very  likely  would  have  been  peaceful. 
But  unfortunately  for  the  empire  the  colonial  problem  became 
embroiled  with  English  domestic  politics.  The  purpose  of  the 
King  was  to  set  up  a  personal  autocracy  with  Tory  help,  over- 

3  Van  Tyne,  Causes  of  the  War  of  Independence,  pp.  424-426. 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


183 


throw  the  rule  of  the  Whig  families,  eliminate  from  the  ministry 
the  more  intelligent  Old  Whig  leaders— Pitt,  Camden,  Barre, 
Burke,  Shelburne — and  bring  in  a  narrow-minded  group  who 
held  to  the  obsolete  mercantilist  theory  of  colonial  dependency. 
The  immediate  outcome  was  the  inauguration  of  a  policy  that  ran 
counter  to  the  economic  interests  of  the  three  major  colonial 
regions  and  aroused  the  hostility  of  important  colonial  groups. 
Every  successive  enactment  was  a  greater  blunder,  until  the 
crowning  stupidity  of  the  tea  monopoly — which  used  colonial 
interests  as  a  pawn  in  a  game  of  the  East  India  Company — threw 
the  colonial  fat  into  the  fire. 

The  grievances  of  the  merchants  resulting  from  the  regulatory 
trade  acts  were  real  and  serious.  However  the  ministry  might 
justify  those  acts  before  Parliament,  their  effects  were  disastrous 
to  substantial  colonial  interests,  and  to  American  eyes  seemed 
designed  to  bring  colonial  trade  into  further  subjection  to  English 
merchants.  The  attempt  to  suppress  the  widespread  practice 
of  smuggling  was  ill  advised  even  though  logical,  for  it  aroused  the 
consuming  public  as  well  as  the  middlemen,  and  gave  popular 
backing  to  the  protests  of  the  merchants.  The  total  political 
result  was  to  align  against  Parliament  the  most  influential  groups 
in  the  trading  towns — the  wealthy  importers  and  the  professional 
classes — and  provided  opportunity  to  the  radicals  to  spread  their 
propaganda  under  cover  of  respectable  leadership.  The  move¬ 
ment  of  resistance  thus  set  on  foot  by  the  class-conscious  mer¬ 
chants  eventually  slipped  from  their  control  and  passed  into  the 
hands  of  the  Sons  of  Liberty,  who  drove  faster  and  farther  than 
conservative  business  men  would  willingly  follow;  yet  these  latter 
soon  found  themselves  coerced  by  tumultuous  forces  which  they 
had  unwittingly  loosed.  In  consequence  there  came  a  time  of 
divided  counsels,  and  when  independence  was  finally  declared 
large  numbers  of  the  wealthiest  and  most  dignified  merchants 
turned  Loyalist  and  threw  in  their  lot  with  the  King.  More  than 
two  hundred  quitted  Boston  on  its  evacuation  by  General  Gage. 
Others  stood  apart  as  neutrals  till  the  war  was  over,  and  then 
drew  together  in  a  compact  organization  to  stem  the  tide  of  post¬ 
war  agrarianism  and  assist  in  setting  up  a  federal  government 
after  their  liking.4 

4  For  an  admirable  study,  see  A.  M.  Schlesinger,  The  Colonial  Merchants  and  the 
American  Revolution:  1763-1776. 


184 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


The  grievances  of  the  plantation  group  were  less  obvious  but 
none  the  less  real.  Probably  more  critical  than  taxation  or  the 
debts  owed  to  English  merchants,  was  the  question  of  the  western 
lands.  The  Quebec  Act  stirred  the  South  as  the  tea  monopoly 
stirred  Boston  and  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  Involved  in 
that  act  were  certain  long  accepted  colonial  rights  of  domain, 
on  the  strength  of  which  vast  speculation  in  backcountry  lands 
had  been  engaged  in  by  English  and  colonial  land  companies  and 
individuals.5  The  question  was  extraordinarily  complicated, 
involving  the  rights  of  the  Indians,  the  ambition  of  the  Hudson 
Bay  Company  to  retain  the  western  wilderness  as  a  vast  fur 
preserve,  the  rights  of  Catholics  in  the  French  settlements,  the 
rights  of  the  imperial  treasury  to  income  from  the  sale  of  the  lands, 
the  rights  of  soldiers  of  the  French  wars  to  lands  granted  by 
colonial  legislatures,  the  rights  of  frontiersmen  to  free  settlement 
and  exploitation,  as  well  as  specific  grants  to  several  colonies, 
in  particular  Massachusetts,  Connecticut  and  Virginia.  From 
this  mass  of  conflicting  interests,  all  eager  to  exploit  an  incal¬ 
culably  rich  domain,  little  hope  of  satisfactory  solution  offered, 
and  a  wiser  ministry  would  have  kept  hands  off.  But  an  ill- 
considered  Parliamentary  enactment  cut  the  knot  in  a  way  to 
arouse  the  quick  and  keen  resentment  of  America.  Whatever  may 
be  said  for  the  solution,  one  thing  is  clear;  it  set  aside  by  arbitrary 
statute  cherished  rights  which  Virginian  gentlemen,  with  their 
eyes  on  rich  plantations  to  the  West,  deeply  resented.  It  was  a 
matter  of  vital  concern  to  colonies  like  Virginia  that  they  should 
control  their  wilderness  frontier.  The  Quebec  Act  not  only 
alienated  thousands  of  western  colonials,  but  it  provided  them 
with  influential  leaders  like  Washington  and  Robert  Morris.  It 
was  more  fuel  to  the  radical  bonfire. 

In  the  end  the  fortunes  of  the  revolutionary  movement  rested 
with  the  yeomanry,  and  this  yeomanry  with  its  agrarian  outlook 
and  republican  sympathies,  was  in  a  mood  to  respond  to  radical 
appeal.  That  the  farmer  was  induced  to  take  down  his  squirrel 
rifle  and  fight  King  George  was  made  possible  by  a  number  of 
irritations — his  deep-rooted  prejudice  against  aristocracy,  his 
instinctive  dislike  of  crown  officials,  his  inveterate  localism  that 

6  This  important  subject  has  been  examined  by  C.  W.  Alvord,  The  Mississippi 
V alley  in  British  Policies;  C.  A.  Beard,  An  Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion;  C.  H.  Van  Tyne,  The  Causes  of  the  War  of  Independence. 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


185 


resented  alien  interference — as  well  as  by  substantial  class  interests. 
In  every  colony  the  party  of  incipient  populism  had  been  .checked 
and  thwarted  by  royal  officials;  and  it  was  this  mass  of  populistic 
discontent,  seeing  itself  in  danger  of  being  totally  crushed,  and  its 
interests  ignored,  that  provided  the  rank  and  file  of  armed  opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  King.  Already  Parliament  had  brought  acute  financial 
distress  to  the  colonies  by  forbidding  the  emission  of  bills  of  credit; 
and  other  attacks  on  popular  policies  followed.  The  strength 
of  the  popular  opposition  to  royal  programs  had  lain  heretofore 
in  the  legislative  control  of  the  purse;  by  threatening  to  withhold 
salaries,  the  democratic  legislatures  had  been  able  to  coerce  the 
royal  governor  and  the  judges,  and  keep  them  somewhat  respon¬ 
sive  to  the  popular  will.  To  the  Tories  such  coercion  was  proof 
that  the  democratic  claws  -needed  cutting,  and  one  of  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  the  Stamp  Act  was  the  providing  of  a  fund  to  pay  the 
royal  officials  out  of  the  royal  chest.  It  was  a  skillful  plan,  but  it 
overreached  itself.  Party  alignment  had  become  too  sharp, 
agrarian  suspicions  had  grown  too  sensitive,  for  the  plan  to  suc¬ 
ceed.  The  immediate,  fatal  result  was  the  accession  of  a  numer¬ 
ous  body  of  fighting  men  to  the  other  malcontents. 

The  American  Revolution  was  one  of  the  first  fruits  of  a  short¬ 
sighted  imperialism.  A  generous  policy  of  imperial  federation 
would  have  returned  incredible  revenues  to  Great  Britain;  but  the 
Tory  ministry  was  not  intelligent  enough  to  let  sleeping  dogs  lie. 
A  sentimental  attachment  had  kept  America  loyal.  So  long  as 
his  customary  and  traditional  rights  remained  undisturbed,  the 
colonial  would  throw  up  his  cap  for  King  George;  but  if  he  were 
driven  to  choose  between  loyalty  and  self-interest,  between  senti¬ 
ment  and  profit,  the  choice  was  certain.  If  the  heavy  debts 
which  the  foolish  wars  of  Pitt  had  bequeathed  to  the  Empire  had 
not  seemed  to  offer  a  justification,  the  Tory  blunderers  would  not 
have  forced  the  issue;  but  once  it  was  joined,  vast  numbers  of 
Americans  came  to  believe  that  the  development  of  their  country 
had  reached  a  point  where  it  would  be  hampered  by  further  over¬ 
seas  regulation;  that  America  must  be  free  to  exploit  her  resources 
to  her  exclusive  advantage;  and  that  such  economic  freedom  would 
be  possible  only  with  political  independence.  It  was  the  ill  luck  of 
the  ministry  to  present  the  question  so  concretely  that  the  colonial 
radicals  were  given  an  opportunity  to  awaken  the  latent  forces  of 
American  liberalism  and  turn  them  against  English  sovereignty. 


186 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


A  militant  nationalistic  psychology  resulted  from  a  widespread 
propaganda,  and  the  last  ties  with  England  were  broken. 

ii 

ARGUMENT  AND  PROPAGANDA 

We  understand  the  ways  of  propaganda  today  better  than  our 
fathers  understood  them,  and  the  official  pronouncements  of 
diplomats  and  statesmen  we  have  grown  somewhat  skeptical  of. 
Historians  of  the  American  Revolution  have  paid  rather  too 
exclusive  attention  to  formal  speeches  and  state  papers,  forgetting 
that  those  speeches  and  papers  too  often  served  the  purpose  of 
obscuring  and  evading  the  real  issues.  The  ten  years  of  dreary 
debate  preceding  the  clash  of  arms,  during  which  theory  and 
precedent  were  examined  by  partisan  lawyers,  did  little  more  than 
serve  party  purposes  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  investing 
immediate  interests  with  nationalistic  or  imperialistic  idealism. 
Honest  men  talked  themselves  into  a  passion,  but  they  took 
good  care  that  their  cause  should  appear  dressed  to  advantage. 

On  the  American  side  the  argument  fell  into  two  broad  divi¬ 
sions:  an  attempt  to  justify  the  colonial  position  by  appeal  to  the 
British  constitution,  and  when  that  failed  by  an  appeal  to  the 
extra-legal  doctrine  of  natural  right.  To  understand  the  obscure 
constitutional  wrangle,  it  must  be  recalled  that  important  changes 
in  English  constitutional  practice  had  taken  place  since  the 
colonies  were  founded.  Parliamentary  sovereignty  had  super¬ 
seded  royal  sovereignty,  or  in  other  words,  the  sovereignty  of 
property  had  superseded  divine  right  autocracy;  and  this  in  turn 
was  undergoing  change  in  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century — the  sovereignty  of  landed  property  was  challenged  by 
the  rising  capitalism.  The  Revolution  of  1688  had  established  the 
general  principle  that  the  state  can  take  no  property  in  the  form 
of  taxes  or  levies  without  the  consent  of  the  owner,  given  by 
himself  or  by  his  representative  sitting  in  Parliament.  But  in 
current  practice  the  system  of  representation  had  become  so 
misshapen  that  a  new  theory  had  arisen  to  give  constitutional 
sanction  to  existing  methods.  Refusal  to  reapportion  representa¬ 
tion  had  resulted  in  the  notorious  rotten-borough  system,  control 
of  which  boroughs  was  too  valuable  an  asset  to  the  ruling  oligarchy 
to  be  surrendered.  To  justify  the  scandal  a  new  theory  of  virtual 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


187 


representation  was  developed — a  theory  upon  which  turned  much 
of  the  early  revolutionary  debate.  In  brief  the  theory  asserted 
that  as  Parliament  speaks  for  the  total  body  of  Englishmen,  it 
makes  no  practical  difference  who  elects  them,  where  they  live, 
who  they  are,  or  what  interests  they  represent.  Within  the  halls 
of  Parliament  they  can  be  trusted  to  think  and  legislate  for  the 
nation  as  a  whole.  The  essential  constitutional  principle  requires 
only  that  there  shall  be  a  respectable  body  chosen  from  among 
the  commons  of  England,  in  whose  hands  shall  rest  the  custody  of 
the  purse,  and  who  shall  serve  as  a  check  upon  the  royal  preroga¬ 
tive.  Such  was  the  parliamentary  situation  in  1763,  and  when 
appeal  was  made  by  the  colonials  to  the  principle  of  no  taxation 
without  representation,  it  was  answered  by  appeal  to  the  theory 
of  virtual  representation. 

American  constitutional  practice,  on  the  other  hand,  had 
developed  in  a  contrary  direction.  Quite  as  consciously  as  Parlia¬ 
ment,  the  several  colonial  legislatures  rested  on  the  principle  of 
property  rights,  but  a  different  system  of  representation  had 
developed.  By  easy  logic  a  geographical  theory  had  emerged,  by 
the  terms  of  which  a  legislator  must  be  a  freeman  of  the  district 
rather  than  of  the  realm,  that  he  should  hold  power  for  a  short 
period  and  frequently  submit  his  conduct  to  the  scrutiny  of  the 
electors,  and  that  a  district  should  bear  a  just  per  capita  relation  to 
the  total  population.  The  doctrine  of  virtual  representation  was 
alien  to  colonial  theory,  although  in  fact  it  might  be  applied  to 
the  large  body  of  disfranchised  non-property-holders.  The  broad 
difference,  then,  in  the  legislative  practice  of  the  two  countries 
lay  in  the  important  distinction  between  local,  numerical  repre¬ 
sentation,  and  a  grotesque  system  of  borough  jobbing.  Both 
systems  rested  on  a  narrow  suffrage,  although  the  colonial  basis 
was  very  much  broader.  The  difference  was  without  significance 
so  long  as  the  traditional  relations  between  America  and  England 
continued;  but  when  Parliament  proposed  to  extend  the  theory  of 
virtual  representation  to  the  colonies,  and  treat  Massachusetts 
and  Virginia  as  on  a  constitutional  footing  with  Birmingham  and 
Manchester,  the  difference  became  acute.  No  American  colony 
was  willing  to  become  the  pawn  of  parliamentary  placemen,  at  the 
mercy  of  parliamentary  jobbery. 

The  debate  over  this  vital  question  was  involved  in  obscurities 
by  reason  of  the  vagueness  of  the  British  constitution.  If  an 


188 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


unwritten  constitution  be  no  other  than  established  practice — 
and  it  is  true  of  the  English  constitution  in  spite  of  the  body  of 
principles  existing  in  such  pronouncements  as  Magna  Charta,  the 
settlement  of  1689,  and  the  Common  Law— then  the  current 
practice  of  Parliament  must  be  accepted  as  constitutional.  This 
was  the  fatal  weakness  of  the  colonial  argument,  as  it  was  the 
weakness  of  Pitt  and  other  defenders  of  America  in  Parliament. 
When  Pitt  exclaimed  with  characteristic  grandiloquence,  “I  come 
not  here  armed  at  all  points  with  law  cases  and  acts  of  Parliament, 
with  the  statute-book  doubled  down  in  dog-ears,  to  defend  the 
cause  of  liberty,”  he  abandoned  the  legal  ground  to  appeal  to  the 
sense  of  justice  and  right  of  Englishmen.  But  the  question  could 
not  so  easily  be  transferred  from  the  domain  of  constitutional  law. 
For  upwards  of  a  hundred  years  Parliament  had  been  sovereign, 
and  for  the  colonials  now  to  deny  its  sovereignty  meant  one  of 
two  things:  either  to  go  back  to  the  obsolete  principle  of  divine 
right,  or  to  postulate  an  extra-parliamentary  body  of  constitu¬ 
tional  law,  unknown  to  English  practice.  A  sovereignty  inhering 
neither  in  King  nor  Parliament,  but  in  a  super-constitution,  was  a 
conception  that  had  been  played  with  by  Coke  in  an  endeavor  to 
exalt  the  Common  Law,  and  hinted  at  by  later  Whig  statesmen, 
but  which  had  never  established  itself  in  practice.  The  colonials 
recognized  the  dilemma  and  made  half-hearted  attempts  to  evade 
it.  John  Adams  and  Franklin  endeavored  to  argue  that  as  the 
colonial  charters  were  from  the  crown,  and  antedated  the  rise  of 
Parliament,  Americans  owed  allegiance  to  the  King  and  not  to 
Parliament,  and  hence  parliamentary  pretentions  to  sovereignty 
over  America  were  only  a  new  form  of  unconstitutional  preroga¬ 
tive.  But  the  argument  was  taken  seriously  by  neither  side,  and 
was  soon  put  away.6 

It  finally  became  clear  to  American  leaders  that  if  their  cause 
were  to  make  headway,  appeal  must  be  made  to  broader  principles. 
Their  case  must  rest  on  philosophical  rather  than  on  legal  grounds. 
This  suffices  to  explain  the  shift  from  constitutionalism  to  abstract 
rights,  which  marked  the  middle  period  of  the  debate.  By  1773 
it  had  become  evident  to  thoughtful  observers  that  the  cause  of 
American  liberalism  must  fail,  or  become  revolutionary  in  pur¬ 
pose  and  intent,  and  to  become  such  it  must  seek  justification  in 

6  For  an  excellent  discussion  of  the  constitutional  questions  involved,  see  C.  H. 
Van  Tyne,  The  Causes  of  the  JV ar  of  Independence,  Chapters  VIII  and  IX. 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


189 


extra-constitutional  principles.  And  this  justification  it  discovered 
in  the  writings  of  English  liberals  of  the  seventeenth  century — in 
Sidney  and  Milton,  and  above  all  in  Locke.  The  influence  of 
Locke  had  long  been  paramount  in  English  political  speculation. 
He  had  been  the  apologist  and  defender  of  the  settlement  of  1689; 
the  principles  which  he  expounded  lay  at  the  base  of  the  dynastic 
rights  of  the  reigning  house,  and  were  nominally  accepted  by  all 
the  parliamentary  leaders.  The  relations  between  natural  rights 
and  parliamentary  sovereignty  had  not  wholly  clarified,  and  in 
the  background  of  English  constitutional  thought  still  lingered 
a  vague  notion  of  certain  natural  rights  above  the  constitution, 
and  limiting  parliamentary  statutes.  Thinkers  as  different  as 
Blackstone  and  Camden  subscribed  to  such  doctrine,  but  it  daily 
became  more  tenuous  in  the  face  of  a  growing  acceptance  of  un¬ 
limited  parliamentary  sovereignty.7 

In  turning  to  Locke,  therefore,  the  colonial  debaters  went  back 
a  century  and  picked  up  the  argument  of  liberalism  as  it  existed 
before  it  had  been  nullified  by  later  English  practice.  They 
occupied  a  position  similar  to  that  defended  by  him  a  hundred 
years  before;  they  were  combating  the  same  arbitrary  rule  that 
had  brought  on  the  Revolution  of  1688.  He  had  laid  down  the 
basic  principle  of  revolution  in  the  doctrine  of  certain  natural  rights 
of  the  subject  which  no  state  may  subvert  without  peril  to  the 
original  compact;  he  had  asserted  that  taxation  without  representa¬ 
tion  constituted  such  subversive  tyranny;  and  he  gave  high  sanction 
to  the  right  and  duty  of  resistance  to  an  encroaching  sovereignty. 
The  noble  words,  “Chains  are  but  an  ill  wearing  how  much  soever 
we  gild  or  polish  them,”  uttered  a  note  of  defiance  to  arbitrary 
power  which  struck  a  responsive  chord  in  the  breast  of  the  colonial 
liberal.  In  short,  Locke’s  two  Treatises  on  Civil  Government, 
aimed  at  Sir  Robert  Filmer’s  absurd  Patriarcha,  were  turned  against 
Parliament  and  became  the  textbook  of  the  American  Revolution. 

The  ground  had  been  well  prepared.  The  argument  of  Locke 
went  home  with  such  convincing  force  to  the  colonial  liberal  be¬ 
cause  it  embodied  conclusions  towards  which  America  had  long 
been  moving.  It  was  an  eloquent  confirmation  of  native  expe¬ 
rience,  a  sober  justification  of  the  psychology  of  individualism. 
The  self-governing  state  had  so  long  been  an  established  fact  in 
colonial  life  as  to  have  assumed  the  complexion  of  a  natural 
7  For  this  see  Van  Tyne,  ibid.,  pp.  234-238. 


190 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


right.  The  political  compact  had  taken  form  in  American  political 
thought,  a  generation  before  Locke  gave  currency  to  the  theory, 
and  Jefferson  was  expressing  native  conclusions  drawn  from 
American  experience  when  he  argued  that  “governments  derive 
their  just  powers  from  the  consent  of  the  governed,”  and  that 
“all  men  are  created  equal,  that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator 
with  certain  unalienable  Rights,  that  amongst  these  are  Life, 
Liberty  and  the  pursuit  of  Happiness.”  It  is  not  true  to  assert 
that  Jefferson  was  only  reciting  Locke,  with  modifications  derived 
from  the  French  humanitarians.  It  is  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that 
he  made  use  of  old-world  philosophy  to  express  and  justify  certain 
native  tendencies  then  seeking  adequate  statement. 

To  such  an  experience,  armed  with  such  a  philosophy,  there 
must  come  eventually  the  conviction  that  both  monarchy  and 
aristocracy  were  irrational;  that  the  ambitions  of  a  coercive  alien 
sovereignty  were  fraught  with  danger  to  the  rights  of  the  American 
citizen.  The  resurgent  absolutism  of  Stuart  times,  with  its  doctrine 
of  the  omnicompetent  state,  which  the  King  was  reviving  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Parliament,  was  broken  by  the  stubborn 
colonial  resistance.  Absolutism  under  whatever  form  was  doomed 
in  America,  however  slowly  it  might  linger  out  its  life.  Jonathan 
Boucher  might  seek  to  revive  Sir  Robert  Filmer,  and  preach  to 
Americans  the  dogma  of  divine  right  through  royal  primogeniture 
from  Adam,  and  other  colonial  Tories  might  applaud;  but  they 
were  fast  becoming  anachronisms.  The  Revolution  was  to  over¬ 
throw  for  Americans  the  principle  of  the  absolutist  state,  and 
substitute  a  modified  sovereignty,  circumscribed  by  the  utilitarian 
test  of  its  relation  to  the  common  well-being  of  its  citizens.  For 
the  first  time  in  modern  history  it  was  discovered  that  “the  true 
meaning  of  sovereignty,”  as  a  recent  student  has  put  it,  is  to  be 
sought  “not  in  the  coercive  power  possessed  by  its  instrument 
[the  state,]  but  in  the  fused  good-will  for  which  it  stands.”  8 

in 

CERTAIN  SOCIAL  CONSEQUENCES 

The  swift  crystallization  of  colonial  sentiment  in  favor  of  re¬ 
publicanism,  as  the  crisis  developed,  produced  the  American 
revolution  of  which  John  Adams  wrote.  The  long  leveling  process 

8  H.  J.  Laski,  The  Problem,  of  Sovereignty,  p.  12;  see  also  Appendices  A  and  B. 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


191 


of  a  hundred  and  forty  years,  with  its  psychology  of  decentraliza¬ 
tion,  fruited  naturally  in  a  new  political  philosophy  fitted  to  new- 
world  conditions.  Monarchy,  with  its  social  appanage  of  aris¬ 
tocracy,  was  a  caste  institution  wholly  unsuited  to  an  unregimented 
America.  The  war  brought  this  revolutionary  fact  home  to  the 
consciousness  of  thousands  of  colonials;  and  the  liberalism  that 
before  had  been  vaguely  instinctive  quickly  became  eager  and 
militant.  The  old  order  was  passing;  the  day  of  the  Tory  in 
America  was  over  for  the  present;  the  republican  was  henceforth 
to  be  master  of  the  new  world.  Out  of  this  primary  revolution  were 
to  come  other  revolutions,  social  and  economic,  made  possible  by 
the  new  republican  freedom. 

The  swift  rise  of  a  political  philosophy  traditionally  regarded  as 
mean  and  traitorous  was  inexplicable  to  Tory  gentlemen,  and 
aroused  a  fierce  retaliatory  opposition.  A  social  war  of  the  classes, 
bitter,  vindictive,  followed  upon  hostilities  against  England.  The 
arrogance  of  the  gentry  during  those  brisk  days  when  the  new 
spirit  was  rising  is  scarcely  comprehensible  to  later  Americans 
unused  to  such  frankness.  The  republicans  were  scorned  by  the 
superior  classes  as  unprincipled  sedition-mongers,  plotting  treason 
against  the  King  and  society.  If  commoners  flocked  to  town- 
meetings  and  outvoted  the  gentlemen,  the  latter  were  outraged 
at  the  presumption  of  the  “mobsters”  in  flouting  their  betters. 
For  the  plain  people  to  take  things  into  their  own  hands  was  no 
other  than  anarchy.  The  familiar  records  of  the  day  are  filled 
with  such  aristocratic  jests  as  this: 

Down  at  night  a  bricklayer  or  carpenter  lies. 

Next  sun  a  Lycurgus,  a  Solon  doth  rise.9 

“The  dirty  mob  was  all  about  me  as  I  drove  into  town,”  said 
Mistress  Peggy  Hutchinson,  as  she  looked  out  on  turbulent  Boston 
from  her  father’s  chariot;  and  her  feminine  contempt  for  the 
common  people  was  an  echo  of  the  universal  Tory  contempt  for 
republican  mechanics  and  farmers.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  vulgar, 
as  loyal  subjects,  to  pay  taxes  and  not  lay  them;  to  obey  the  law 
and  not  make  it.  By  far  the  most  important  consequence  of  the 
Revolution  was  the  striking  down  of  this  mounting  aristocratic 
spirit  that  was  making  rapid  headway  with  the  increase  of  wealth. 
It  sifted  the  American  people  as  the  migrations  of  the  seventeenth 
9  Moore,  Diary  of  the  Revolution,  Vol.  II,  p.  22. 


192 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


century  had  sifted  the  English  people,  keeping  the  republicans  at 
home  and  sending  forth  the  Tories,  weakening  the  influence  of 
the  conservatives  and  increasing  the  influence  of  the  liberals.  Few 
experiences  in  our  history  have  proved  so  momentous  in  results 
as  this  shift  of  power  and  change  in  personnel  that  resulted  from 
the  great  schism.  A  middle-class  America  was  to  rise  on  the  ruins 
of  the  colonial  aristocracy. 

The  unfortunate  Loyalists  were  victims  of  their  own  blindness. 
They  did  not  rightly  estimate  the  driving  power  of  the  liberal 
forces  released  by  the  struggle,  and  failing  to  understand,  they 
staked  everything  on  the  issue,  and  lost,  and  were  driven  rudely 
out  of  the  land  by  the  plebeian  republicans  whom  they  despised. 
The  disruption  of  colonial  society  resulting  from  the  expulsion  of 
the  Loyalists  was  far  graver  than  we  commonly  assume.  Ship¬ 
loads  of  excellent  gentlemen,  and  among  them  the  most  cultivated 
minds  in  America,  were  driven  from  their  firesides  and  sent  forth 
to  seek  new  homes,  whether  in  “Hell,  Hull  or  Halifax”  mattered 
little  to  the  victors.  Upward  of  forty  thousand  sought  refuge  in 
Canada;  thousands  more  went  to  the  Bahamas;  and  still  other 
thousands  returned  to  the  old  home.  “There  will  scarcely  be  a 
village  in  England  without  some  American  dust  in  it,  I  believe,  by 
the  time  we  are  all  at  rest,”  wrote  the  Loyalist  Dutchman,  Peter 
Van  Schaak.  Much  suffering  was  endured  and  much  bitterness 
engendered,  and  if  for  years  the  dominant  temper  in  Canada  was 
fiercely  hostile  to  the  United  States,  the  mood  is  traceable  to  the 
expatriated  gentlemen  who  transmitted  to  their  children  a  grudge 
against  the  victorious  republicans.  It  was  an  unhappy  business, 
but  it  was  scarcely  avoidable  once  appeal  was  made  to  the  sword. 
There  was  no  longer  place  in  America  for  the  foolish  dream  of  a 
colonial  aristocracy. 

The  change  of  temper  that  came  over  American  society  with 
the  loss  of  the  Loyalists,  was  immense  and  far-reaching.  For  the 
first  time  the  middle  class  was  free  to  create  a  civilization  after 
its  own  ideals.  In  rising  to  leadership  it  brought  another  spirit 
into  every  phase  of  life.  Dignity  and  culture  henceforth  were  to 
count  for  less  and  assertiveness  for  more.  Ways  became  less  lei¬ 
surely,  the  social  temper  less  urbane.  The  charm  of  the  older 
aristocracy  disappeared  along  with  its  indisputable  evils.  Al¬ 
though  a  few  of  the  older  wits  like  Mather  Byles  lingered  on  bitterly, 
and  others  like  Gouverneur  Morris  accepted  the  situation  phil- 


IMPERIALISM  AND  HOME  RULE 


193 


osophically,  they  belonged  to  the  past.  A  franker  evaluation  of 
success  in  terms  of  money  began  to  obscure  the  older  personal  and 
family  distinction.  New  men  brought  new  ways  and  a  vulgar 
clamor  of  politics  went  hand  in  hand  with  business  expansion. 
The  demagogue  and  the  speculator  discovered  a  fruitful  field  for 
their  activities.  The  new  capitalism  lay  on  the  horizon  of  republi¬ 
can  America,  and  the  middle  class  was  eager  to  hasten  its  develop¬ 
ment.  But  a  new  economic  order  required  a  new  political  state, 
and  as  a  necessary  preliminary,  the  spirit  of  nationalism  began  that 
slow  encroachment  upon  local  frontiers  which  was  to  modify  pro¬ 
foundly  the  common  psychology.  Americanism  superseded  colo¬ 
nialism,  and  with  the  new  loyalty  there  developed  a  conception 
of  federal  sovereignty,  overriding  all  local  authorities,  checking 
the  movement  of  particularism,  binding  the  separate  common¬ 
wealths  in  a  consolidating  union.  This  marked  the  turning  point 
in  American  development;  the  checking  of  the  long  movement  of 
decentralization  and  the  beginning  of  a  counter  movement  of 
centralization — the  most  revolutionary  change  in  three  hundred 
years  of  American  experience.  The  history  of  the  rise  of  the  coer¬ 
cive  state  in  America,  with  the  ultimate  arrest  of  all  centrifugal 
tendencies,  was  implicit  in  that  momentous  counter  movement. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  MIND  OF  THE  AMERICAN  TORY 

So  nearly  forgotten  by  later  generations  is  the  American  Tory  of 
Revolutionary  times  that  it  will  be  well  to  examine  the  genus  with 
some  care;  for  only  by  understanding  the  great  authority  inhering 
in  his  traditional  leadership  can  we  measure  his  power  to  thwart 
the  ambitions  of  the  republicans.  In  numbers  the  Tories  were  a 
very  small  minority;  unendowed  with  wealth  and  position  they 
would  have  been  negligible;  but  as  members  of  the  local  gentry 
they  enjoyed  great  prestige  which  was  highly  serviceable  to  the 
royal  cause.  Although  native  born  they  aped  the  English  aristoc¬ 
racy,  and  reproduced  on  a  less  magnificent  scale  the  manners  of 
the  English  landed  families.  Less  arrogant  than  their  old-world 
models,  certainly  much  less  corrupt  in  their  politics,  they  exuded 
the  same  aristocratic  prejudices  and  the  same  narrow  sympathies. 
Their  most  cherished  dream  was  the  institution  of  an  American 
nobility,  with  the  seal  of  royal  favor  set  upon  their  social  preten¬ 
sions.  They  were  the  embodiment  of  the  aristocratic  eighteenth 
century,  in  a  world  instinctively  hostile  to  all  aristocracies.  Out 
of  a  numerous  company  of  distinguished  Tories,  three  will  serve 
for  consideration — Thomas  Hutchinson,  Royal  Governor,  Daniel 
Leonard,  lawyer,  and  Jonathan  Boucher,  minister. 

I 

THOMAS  HUTCHINSON 
Royal  Governor 

The  career  of  the  last  royal  governor  of  Massachusetts  affords 
a  suggestive  study  in  the  relation  of  material  prosperity  to  political 
principles.  Descended  in  the  fourth  generation  from  the  Anti- 
nomian  enthusiast,  Mistress  Anne  Hutchinson,  whom  all  the 
authorities  of  Boston  could  neither  terrify  nor  silence,  but  who 
suffered  contumely  and  exile  rather  than  submit  her  will  to  official 
censors,  Thomas  Hutchinson  reveals  in  his  stiff  conservatism  the 
common  change  that  follows  upon  economic  well-being.  The  House 

194 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


195 


of  Hutchinson  had  long  since  abandoned  all  unprofitable  radical¬ 
isms  and  had  taken  to  the  safer  business  of  acquiring  property 
and  respectability;  in  which  work  it  had  by  God’s  blessing  greatly 
prospered,  until  it  came  to  be  reckoned  the  first  house  in  the 
province.  With  growing  wealth  political  honors  multiplied.  The 
grandfather  of  the  governor  had  been  the  first  Chief  Justice  of  the 
Common  Pleas,  Commander  of  the  Forces,  Assistant,  and  Coun¬ 
cilor;  and  at  his  death  in  1717  he  was  as  eminent  a  citizen  as  Chief 
Justice  Sewall,  the  diarist.  The  governor’s  father,  Thomas  Hutch¬ 
inson,  Sr.,  devoted  more  attention  to  his  calling  of  merchant 
than  to  politics,  nevertheless  he  sat  in  the  Council  for  twenty-five 
years,  and  was  a  colonel  in  the  provincial  militia.  With  the  advent 
of  Thomas  Hutchinson  upon  the  scene,  the  respectability  of  the 
house  was  assured,  abundant  wealth  had  been  accumulated,  and 
the  path  of  political  preferment  was  open.  The  little  colony  was 
eager  to  confer  honors  on  so  promising  a  son.  He  was  ambitious 
and  thrifty,  and  he  coveted  the  distinction  and  the  material 
rewards  which  officeholding  brought.  No  Boston  gentleman  of 
his  day  had  a  sharper  eye  for  the  main  chance.  He  added  office 
to  office,  and  at  one  and  the  same  time  he  was  Member  of  the 
Council,  Judge  of  Probate,  Chief  Justice,  and  Lieutenant  Gover¬ 
nor;  and  such  other  offices  as  he  could  not  himself  possess  he 
maneuvered  to  get  into  the  hands  of  his  sons,  and  brothers-in-law, 
and  dependents.  One  of  those  brothers-in-law,  Samuel  Mather, 
son  of  Cotton  Mather,  who  refused  to  follow  his  kinsman  into  the 
Tory  camp,  called  him  “an  avaritious  man”;  and  avaricious  of 
power,  even  more  than  of  money,  he  certainly  was. 

With  his  abundant  offices  and  honors,  there  was  every  tempta¬ 
tion  to  conservatism.  Unless  there  was  hidden  in  him  some  linger¬ 
ing  idealism,  some  seed  of  the  ancestral  radicalism  to  sprout  and 
grow  into  discontent,  Thomas  Hutchinson  was  marked  for  a 
reactionary.  And  unhappily  in  his  conventional  soul  there  was 
not  the  faintest  spark  of  idealism.  The  enthusiasm  of  Mistress 
Anne  was  washed  clean  out  of  the  Hutchinson  blood,  leaving  only 
the  native  stubbornness;  which  stubbornness,  dominating  a 
character  cold,  formal,  arrogant,  dogmatic,  unimaginative,  self- 
righteous,  was  finally  to  play  havoc  with  Thomas  Hutchinson’s 
good  fortune.  The  son  of  a  merchant,  he  was  a  careful,  methodical 
soul,  who  studied  how  to  save  and  invest;  in  a  later  generation  he 
would  have  been  a  great  banker,  but  in  his  own  he  preferred  to 


196 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 
invest  in  politics.  How  suggestive  of  Yankee  thrift  is  such  an 
entry  as  this: 

All  the  time  he  was  at  College  he  carried  on  a  little  trade  by  sending 
ventures  in  his  father’s  vessels,  &  kept  a  little  paper  Journal  &  leger,  & 
enterd  in  it  every  dinner,  supper,  breakfast,  &  every  article  of  expense, 
even  of  a  shilling;  which  practice  soon  became  pleasant;  &  he  found  it  of 
great  use  all  his  life.  .  .  .  Before  he  came  of  age,  he  had,  by  adventuring 
to  sea  from  two  or  three  quintalls  [hundredweight]  of  fish,  given  him  by  his 
father,  when  about  12  years  old,  acquired  four  or  five  hundred  pounds 
sterling.1 

After  a  number  of  years  in  his  father’s  countinghouse,  learning 
the  ways  of  eighteenth-century  trade,  he  abandoned  the  mercantile 
career  and  entered  politics  at  the  age  of  six-and-twenty.  From 
May  31,  1737,  when  he  first  took  his  place  in  the  House  of  Deputies 
as  one  of  the  “Boston  Seat,”  to  June  1,  1774,  when  he  quitted 
his  country  home  at  Milton  to  take  ship  for  London  and  exile,  he 
was  a  power  in  the  political  life  of  Massachusetts,  reaching  even¬ 
tually  the  highest  station.  During  that  long  period  of  thirty-seven 
years  he  was  a  spokesman  of  the  New  England  gentry,  always  on 
the  side  of  government,  never  in  the  opposition.  That  he  ever 
critically  examined  the  foundations  of  his  political  creed,  there  is 
nothing  in  the  printed  record  to  indicate.  He  had  some  of  the 
tastes  of  the  book-lover  and  scholar.  He  was  deeply  interested  in 
the  Puritan  past,  and  his  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  was  based 
on  a  wide  knowledge  of  manuscript  sources  which  he  had  been 
at  great  pains  to  collect.  But  in  spite  of  a  praiseworthy  care  for 
accuracy  and  impartiality,  he  lacked  the  creative  imagination  to 
reconstruct  the  past.  He  had  pretty  much  freed  his  mind  from 
religious  bigotry,  but  he  could  not  rid  himself  of  a  narrow  partisan¬ 
ship,  and  his  treatment  of  the  agrarian  movement  was  grossly 
unfair.  His  shortcomings  as  a  political  thinker  were  more  striking. 
His  knowledge  of  the  political  classics  was  of  the  slightest.  When 
Samuel  Adams  made  use  of  the  natural-rights  theory,  Hutchinson’s 
comment  would  indicate  that  he  had  no  acquaintance  with  the 
theory  and  had  not  even  read  Locke.2  He  was  little  given  to 
intellectual  interests,  and  ill  at  ease  in  dealing  with  general  princi¬ 
ples.  He  possessed  the  mental  qualities  of  a  lawyer  rather  than  a 
speculative  thinker,  and  his  long  immersion  in  office  contracted  a 
mind  naturally  sterile  to  the  routine  habits  of  an  administrator. 

1  Diary  and  Letters ,  Vol.  I,  pp.  46-48. 

2  See  Hosmer,  Life  of  Samuel  Adams,  p.  259. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


197 


He  hardened  early,  and  thereafter  he  was  incapable  of  changing 
his  views  or  liberalizing  his  sympathies.  Consistency  he  erected 
into  a  fetish  and  once  he  had  taken  a  position  he  would  not  budge 
from  it.  He  did  not  understand  the  liberal  America  that  was 
rising  about  him — neither  the  economic  forces  that  were  creating 
it  nor  the  spokesmen  who  represented  it;  and  he  saw  no  reason 
for  change.  The  House  of  Hutchinson  had  prospered  under  existing 
conditions,  and  other  houses  would  prosper  likewise,  he  believed, 
if  they  were  equally  honest  and  diligent.  So  he  went  his  tactless, 
unintelligent  way,  barking  his  shins  on  every  liberal  tendency  of 
the  times,  and  hating  the  men  who  gave  him  trouble. 

Hutchinson,  in  short,  was  a  complete  Tory,  and  if  we  would 
understand  him  and  his  class,  we  must  first  take  into  account  the 
current  Tory  philosophy.  Compressed  into  a  sentence  it  was  the 
expression  of  the  will-to-power  of  the  wealthy.  Its  motive  was 
economic  class  interest,  and  its  object  the  exploitation  of  society 
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  state.  Stated  thus,  the  philos¬ 
ophy  does  not  appear  to  advantage;  it  lays  itself  open  to  unpleasant 
criticism  by  those  who  are  not  its  beneficiaries.  In  consequence, 
much  ingenuity  in  tailoring  was  necessary  to  provide  it  with  gar¬ 
ments  to  cover  its  nakedness.  Embroidered  with  patriotism, 
loyalty,  law  and  order,  it  made  a  very  respectable  appearance; 
and  when  it  put  on  the  stately  robe  of  the  British  Constitution, 
it  was  enormously  impressive.  The  Tory  theory  of  the  British 
Constitution  may  well  be  regarded  as  a  masterpiece  of  the  gentle 
art  of  tailoring.  Government  by  king,  lords,  and  commons  it 
asserted,  approximated  the  ideal  of  a  “mixt  government,”  em¬ 
bracing  the  total  wisdom  of  the  realm,  ruling  in  the  interests  of  all, 
avoiding  the  evils  of  class  domination,  and  chastising  the  refractory 
only  for  the  common  good.  Gentlemen  might  well  praise  the 
“glorious  British  Constitution.”  It  was  their  little  jest  at  the 
expense  of  the  English  people,  who  were  content  to  be  exploited 
by  them. 

In  this  game  of  political  pretense  Hutchinson  willingly  shared. 
He  knew  that  Parliament  did  not  represent  the  English  people; 
that  it  was  controlled  by  a  group  of  landed  gentlemen  with  mer¬ 
cenaries  in  their  pay;  and  yet  in  reply  to  repeated  charges  he 
revealed  no  hint  of  the  truth,  but  reiterated  the  familiar  Tory 
interpretation  in  the  face  of  shrewd  enemies  who  knew  that  he 
was  insincere.  In  private  among  other  gentlemen,  Hutchinson 


198 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

was  frank  enough.  He  knew  what  was  at  stake  in  America — 
whether  political  control  should  remain  in  the  hands  of  “gentlemen 
of  principle  and  property,”  with  the  assistance  of  English  Tories, 
or  whether  it  should  pass  into  the  hands  of  the  majority.  And 
so  while  declaiming  against  mobs,  and  preaching  loyalty  to  the  best 
of  kings,  he  secretly  busied  himself  with  influential  persons  in 
devising  methods  to  frustrate  the  Whig  ambitions.  Moreover 
in  dealing  with  his  enemies  he  was  a  thorough  realist.  In  his 
comment  on  American  Whigs  and  their  political  methods,  he  set 
down  many  a  shrewd  and  just  estimate  of  their  actions  and  motives. 
But  in  defense  of  the  English  ministry  he  refused  to  face  reality. 
He  quibbled  and  misrepresented  and  denied,  stooping  to  dirty 
politics  to  hold  his  party  together  and  strengthen  it. 

At  the  moment  when  Hutchinson  assumed  the  duties  of  gov¬ 
ernor  the  situation  was  tense.  Bernard  had  muddled  things  sadly, 
and  “the  rage  against  him  became,  at  length,  so  violent,  that 
it  was  judged  necessary  to  recall  him,”  3  and  he  slipped  oflF  to 
England  to  receive  a  baronetcy  and  a  pension.  But  he  had  brought 
the  commonwealth  to  the  parting  of  the  ways,  and  Hutchinson 
found  himself  in  a  difficult  position.  The  roots  of  the  trouble  are 
laid  bare  in  the  following  affidavit  of  Bernard : 

In  the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  when  civil  authority  was  reduced 
so  low  as  to  have  nothing  left  but  the  form  of  a  government,  and  scarce 
even  that,  an  enquiry  into  the  causes  of  so  great  a  weakness  in  the  govern¬ 
ing  power  was  unavoidable;  and  there  was  no  entering  upon  such  an 
enquiry,  without  observing  upon  the  ill  effects  of  that  part  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  that  government,  whereby  the  appointment  of  the  Council  is  left 
to  the  people,  to  be  made  by  annual  election;  and  yet  the  Royal  Governor, 
in  all  Acts  of  prerogative,  is  subject  to  the  controul  of  the  Democraticall 
Council.  This  solecism  in  policy  has  been  as  hurtful  in  practice  as  it  is 
absurd  in  theory,  and  it  is  the  true  cause  of  the  extreme  imbecility  of  the 
power  of  the  crown  in  this  government,  at  times  when  the  exertion  of  it  is 
most  wanted.  This  is  not  an  observation  of  a  new  date;  it  is  of  many  years 
standing;  .  .  .  ever  since  he  has  felt  the  effects  which  the  popular  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  Council  has  had  upon  the  Royalty  of  the  government, 
which  is  above  three  years  ago;  within  which  time,  he  has  seen  the  King 
deprived  of  the  service  of  every  man  at  the  Council  Board,  who  has 
resolution  enough  to  disapprove  the  opposition  to  the  authority  of  the 
King  and  the  Parliament,  and  their  supremacy  over  the  American  Colonies. 
This,  and  this  only,  is  the  foundation  of  the  charge  of  their  endeavouring  to 
overthrow  the  charter;  whereas  his  real  desire  has  been,  that  the  charter 
should  have  a  more  durable  stability,  by  means  of  a  necessary  alteration, 

3  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  255. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


199 


without  which,  he  is  persuaded  it  cannot  have  a  much  longer  duration;  as 
the  abuse  of  the  appointment  of  the  Council  now  prevailing,  must  oblige 
the  Parliament  to  interfere  sooner  or  later.4 

The  more  thoughtfully  one  considers  this  frank  statement  the 
more  clearly  it  appears  what  grounds  for  party  dissension  lay  in 
the  “solecism”  of  a  constitution  whereby  the  “Royal  Governor, 
in  ail  Acts  of  prerogative,”  was  “subject  to  the  controul  of  the 
Democraticall  Council.”  It  would  not  be  easy  to  patch  up  a 
working  compromise  between  an  absentee  prerogative  and  the  local 
democratic  will;  one  or  the  other  must  be  sovereign;  and  because 
the  terms  of  the  charter  enabled  the  democracy  to  nullify  the 
prerogative,  Bernard  concluded  that  the  charter  must  be  revised 
and  the  abuse  corrected.  In  this  Hutchinson  agreed,  and  from  the 
imperial  point  of  view  not  without  reason.  “By  an  unfortunate 
mistake,”  he  wrote  in  apology  to  Gage,  “soon  after  the  charter,  a 
law  passed  which  made  every  town  in  the  Province  a  corporation 
perfectly  democratic.”  With  every  passing  year  the  mistake  was 
becoming  more  unfortunate,  and  the  vital  problem  before  govern¬ 
ment,  in  the  opinion  of  Hutchinson,  was  how  to  correct  this  un¬ 
fortunate  mistake,  together  with  other  like  mistakes,  with  such 
happy  skill  as  to  check  the  democratic  branch  without  arousing 
popular  resentment.  On  this  reef  Hutchinson  foundered. 

As  early  as  1764  the  meddlesome  Bernard  had  proposed  to  the 
home  government  a  complete  remodeling  of  colonial  governments 
on  the  English  Tory  plan;  and  by  way  of  suggestion  he  forwarded 
some  proposals  looking  to  the  eventual  consolidation  of  the  several 
colonies  under  a  single  royal  government,  the  erection  of  a  house 
of  lords  as  a  balance  to  the  popular  party  and  a  comprehensive 
tax  policy.  It  was  one  of  numerous  suggestions  then  being  made 
for  incorporating  America  into  the  British  Empire,  and  extending 
the  imperial  power  over  the  continent.  Bernard’s  bias  is  suffi¬ 
ciently  revealed  in  the  following: 

86.  There  is  no  government  in  America  at  present,  whose  powers  are 
properly  balanced;  there  not  being  in  any  of  them,  a  real  and  distinct 
third  legislative  power  mediating  between  the  king  and  the  people,  which 
is  the  peculiar  excellence  of  the  British  constitution. 

87.  The  want  of  such  a  third  legislative  power,  adds  weight  to  the  pop¬ 
ular,  and  lightens  the  royal  scale;  so  as  to  destroy  the  balance  between 
the  royal  and  popular  powers. 

4  “Answer  of  Bernard  to  the  Petition  of  the  House  of  Representatives  to  the 
King,”  in  Works  of  Samuel  Adams,  Vol.  I,  pp.  365-36?- 


200 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


88.  Although  America  is  not  now  .  .  .  ripe  enough  for  an  hereditary 
nobility;  yet  it  is  now  capable  of  a  nobility  for  life. 

89.  A  nobility  appointed  by  the  king  for  life,  and  made  independent, 
would  probably  give  strength  and  stability  to  the  American  governments, 
as  effectually  as  an  hereditary  nobility  does  to  that  of  Great  Britain.5 6 

It  is  not  known  to  what  extent  Hutchinson  indorsed  so  ambitious 
and  comprehensive  a  plan.  For  years  he  had  been  Bernard’s 
understudy,  and  supported  him  in  all  his  policies;  but  being  cautious 
by  nature  and  attached  to  local  custom,  he  probably  would  have 
rejected  the  plan  of  continental  consolidation  unless  his  personal 
ambition  had  been  enlisted.  Hosmer’s  attempt  to  clear  his  skirts  6 
is  not  convincing.  Recalling  that  Hutchinson  yielded  invariably 
to  royal  or  ministerial  suggestions,  no  matter  how  contrary  to  local 
custom,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  he  would  have  objected 
to  any  coercive  program,  which  provided  adequately  for  the 
colonial  Tories. 

In  another  matter  that  touched  the  political  life  of  Massachusetts 
to  the  quick,  Hutchinson  was  deeply  engaged.  The  source  of  the 
power  of  the  popular  party  lay  in  the  democratic  town  meeting. 
In  earlier  days  the  Tories  had  made  no  objection  to  it,  for  it  was 
amenable  to  control  by  the  “better  sort  of  people.”  But  under 
the  skillful  politics  of  Samuel  Adams  and  his  fellows,  it  had  become 
the  chief  instrument  of  opposition,  and  Hutchinson  was  determined 
to  cut  its  claws.  On  so  delicate  a  matter,  however,  it  was  only 
to  the  ministry  that  he  could  speak  frankly;  he  must  not  appear 
to  be  laying  a  plot  against  an  institution  so  long  established  as  a 
part  of  the  political  machinery  of  the  commonwealth.  Under 
date  ofMarch  26,  1770,  he  wrote  to  the  secretary  of  Lord  Hillsboro: 

There  is  a  Town  Meeting,  no  sort  of  regard  being  had  to  any  qualifica¬ 
tion  of  voters,  but  all  the  inferior  people  meet  together;  and  at  a  late  meet¬ 
ing  the  inhabitants  of  other  towns  who  happened  to  be  in  town,  mixed 
with  them.  ...  It  is  in  other  words  being  under  the  government  of  the 
mob.  This  has  given  the  lower  part  of  the  people  such  a  sense  of  their 
importance  that  a  gentleman  does  not  meet  with  what  used  to  be  com¬ 
mon  civility,  and  we  are  sinking  into  perfect  barbarism.  ...  If  this 
town  could  be  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  Province,  the  infection  has 
not  taken  such  strong  hold  of  the  parts  remote  from  it.  The  spirit  of 
anarchy  which  prevails  in  Boston  is  more  than  I  am  able  to  cope  with.7 

5  Quoted  in  John  Adams,  Novanglus,  Second  Letter. 

6  See  his  Life  of  Thomas  Hutchinson. 

7  Quoted  in  ibid.,  p.  189. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


201 


Writing  to  Hillsboro  on  April  19,  1771,  he  complained: 

In  these  votes  and  in  most  of  the  public  proceedings  of  the  town  of 
Boston,  persons  of  the  best  character  and  estate  have  little  or  no  concern. 
They  decline  attending  Town  Meetings  where  they  are  sure  to  be  out¬ 
voted  by  men  of  the  lowest  order.3 

A  month  later,  writing  to  his  old  crony,  ex-Governor  Bernard,  he 
suggested  a  remedy  which  in  one  form  or  another  he  was  constantly 
holding  before  the  ministry,  as  an  inducement  to  act: 

The  town  of  Boston  is  the  source  from  whence  all  the  other  parts  of  the 
Province  derive  more  or  less  troubled  water.  When  you  consider  what  is 
called  its  constitution,  your  good  sense  will  determine  immediately  that 
it  never  can  be  otherwise  for  a  long  time  together,  whilst  the  majority 
which  conducts  all  affairs,  if  met  together  upon  another  occasion,  would 
be  properly  called  a  mob,  and  are  persons  of  such  rank  and  circumstance 
as  in  all  communities  constitute  a  mob,  there  being  no  sort  of  regulation  of 
voters  in  practice;  and  as  these  will  always  be  most  in  number,  men  of 
weight  and  value,  although  they  wish  to  suppress  them,  cannot  be  in¬ 
duced  to  attempt  to  do  it  for  fear  not  only  of  being  outvoted,  but  affronted 
and  insulted.  Call  such  an  assembly  what  you  will,  it  is  really  no  sort  of 
government,  not  even  a  democracy,  at  best  a  corruption  of  it.  There  is  no 
hope  of  a  cure  by  any  legislative  but  among  ourselves  [i.e.,  ministerial 
supporters]  to  compel  the  town  to  be  a  corporation.1’  The  people  will  not 
seek  it,  because  every  one  is  sensible  his  importance  will  be  lessened.  If 
ever  a  remedy  is  found,  it  must  be  by  compelling  them  to  swallow  it,  and 
that  by  an  exterior  power, — the  Parliament.10 

In  such  advice — the  destruction  of  the  democratic  machinery 
by  an  “exterior  power”  in  order  that  control  of  government 
should  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  the  popular  will— we  may  discover 
ample  grounds  for  democratic  dissatisfaction  with  the  governor. 
Hutchinson  believed  that  when  matters  of  state  were  settled  by 
gentlemen  over  their  wine,  good  government  resulted;  but  when 
discussed  by  common  people  over  their  cider,  the  door  was  thrown 
wide  open  to  anarchy.  His  particular  bete  noire  was  the  mob,  by 
which  name  he  designated  any  gathering  that  had  not  received  his 
gracious  permission  to  assemble.  It  was  his  shortsighted  will¬ 
ingness  to  arm  himself  with  external  authority  against  his  fellow 
countrymen,  that  filled  the  years  of  his  administration  with  so 
much  bitterness.  The  more  he  lost  ground,  the  more  anxiously  he 

8  Ibid..,  p.  206. 

9  Hutchinson  assumes  the  act  of  incorporation  will  lay  restrictions  upon  the 
right  of  suffrage  and  the  powers  of  the  town  meeting. 

10  Ibid.,  pp.  206-207.  , 


202 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


pleaded  for  help  from  the  ministry.  When  certain  of  his  private 
letters  came  to  the  hands  of  Franklin  and  were  sent  home,  Hutch¬ 
inson  was  put  in  a  rage.  He  had  long  been  fearful  of  such  a 
diplomatic  leak  and  urged  secrecy,  for  if  his  private  correspondence 
should  become  public,  he  explained,  “I  have  no  security  against 
the  rage  of  the  people.”  11  Much  ink  was  used  by  his  friends  in 
declaiming  against  the  infamy  of  making  public  a  gentleman’s 
private  letters,  and  Hutchinson  characterized  it  as  an  “affrontery” 
such  as  “was  never  known  before.”  That  such  private  corre¬ 
spondence  was  in  effect  official  correspondence,  in  that  it  aimed  at 
shaping  parliamentary  policy  towards  Massachusetts,  was  ignored 
by  these  outraged  gentlemen.  Diplomats  who  plan  privately 
rarely  like  to  be  read  publicly,  especially  when  the  public  reads 
how  it  is  being  bought  and  sold. 

Very  likely  the  Assembly  overstated  the  case  in  declaring  that 
“there  has  been,  for  many  years  past,  measures  contemplated, 
and  a  plan  formed,  by  a  set  of  men,  bom  and  educated  among  us, 
to  raise  their  own  fortunes,  and  advance  themselves  to  posts  of 
honor  and  profit,  not  only  to  the  destruction  of  the  charter  and 
constitution  of  this  province,  but  at  the  expense  of  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  the  American  colonies.”  12  Hutchinson  was  too  cautious 
and  too  conservative  to  seek  any  revolutionary  end;  at  the  same 
time  he  was  too  yielding  to  make  a  stand  against  any  encroachment 
that  had  legal  sanction.  From  his  narrow  mind  no  help  could 
be  expected  touching  the  great  matter  of  imperial  federation.  In 
seeking  a  way  out  of  the  difficulties  in  which  the  British  Empire 
was  daily  becoming  entangled,  the  royal  governor  could  discover 
no  wiser  plan  than  the  abridgment  of  fundamental  privileges  which 
a  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  slow  growth  had  made  the  peculiar 
possession  of  the  colonies.  The  unhappy  conclusion  towards 
which  the  American  Tories  were  drifting  he  set  forth  in  words  which 
were  to  become  the  most  notorious  he  ever  penned. 

I  never  think  of  the  measures  necessary  for  the  peace  and  good  order  of 
the  colonies  without  pain.  There  must  be  an  abridgment  of  what  are 
called  English  liberties.  I  relieve  myself  by  considering  that  in  a  remove 
from  a  state  of  nature  to  the  most  perfect  state  of  government,  there  must 
be  a  great  restraint  of  natural  liberty.  I  doubt  whether  it  is  possible  to 
project  a  system  of  government  in  which  a  colony  3000  miles  distant  from 
the  parent  state  shall  enjoy  all  the  liberty  of  the  parent  state.  I  am  cer- 

II  Ibid.,  p.  199. 

12  Resolves  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  June  16,  1773. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


203 


tain  I  have  never  yet  seen  the  projection.  I  wish  the  good  of  the  colony 
when  I  wish  to  see  some  further  restraint  of  liberty  rather  than  the  con¬ 
nexion  with  the  parent  state  should  be  broken;  for  I  am  sure  such  a  breach 
must  prove  the  ruin  of  the  colony.13 

Later  writers,  forgetful  of  Hutchinson’s  self-seeking  record  and  of 
his  Tory  philosophy,  have  inclined  to  leniency  in  judging  him  for 
his  stand  on  this  crucial  point.  But  in  spite  of  his  wig  and  scarlet 
broadcloth  robes  he  was  only  an  unintelligent  politician,  who 
served  the  hand  that  fed  him.  No  better  commentary  could  be 
asked  than  is  found  in  the  caustic  remark  of  the  keenest  English¬ 
man  of  his  day  on  the  ministerial  policy.  In  a  letter  of  April,  1777, 
Horace  Walpole  asked,  “What  politicians  are  those  who  have 
preferred  the  empty  name  of  sovereignty  to  that  of  alliance,  and 
forced  subsidies  to  the  golden  ocean  of  commerce?”  Hutchinson 
was  stubborn  rather  than  wise.  He  would  make  no  compromise 
in  the  matter  of  sovereignty;  there  could  be  no  lawful  will  but  the 
will  of  Parliament.  “I  know  of  no  line  that  can  be  drawn  between 
the  supreme  authority  of  Parliament  and  the  total  independence 
of  the  colonies,”  he  replied  to  the  Assembly,  when  it  was  struggling 
with  the  idea  of  federation.14  When  the  Council  and  House  were 
outlining  a  plan  of  imperial  union,  and  seeking  to  demonstrate  that 
the  “subordinate  authorities”  of  the  colonies  were  sovereign  within 
their  fields,  and  “that,  in  fact,  two  such  powers  do  subsist  together, 
and  are  not  incompatible”;  the  governor  with  patient  finality  ex¬ 
plained  to  them  the  true  “nature  of  supreme  power,” 

.  .  .  and  urged,  as  an  undeniable  principle,  that  such  a  power  is  essential 
in  all  governments,  and  that  another  power,  with  the  name  of  subordinate, 
and  with  a  right  to  withstand  or  control  the  supreme  in  particulars,  is 
an  absurdity— for  it  so  far  ceases  to  be  subordinate,  and  becomes  itself 
supreme;  that  no  sensible  writer  upon  government  ever  denied  what  he 
asserted;  and  whilst  the  council  continued  to  hold,  that  two  supreme 
powers  were  compatible,  it  would  be  to  no  purpose  to  reason  upon  the  other 
parts  of  their  message  to  him,  or  to  deny  what  they  adduced  from  a  prin¬ 
ciple  so  contrary  to  reason.15 

Hutchinson’s  position  as  the  King’s  representative  soon  became 
so  difficult  that  a  wiser  man  would  have  resigned.  He  was  con¬ 
strained  to  be  the  executive  of  a  policy  of  government  by  ministerial 

13  Ibid.,  p.  436.  Compare  the  view  of  Van  Tyne,  The  Causes  of  the  War  of  In¬ 
dependence,  p.  85. 

14  Speech  of  January  6,  1773  - 

16  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  381-382. 


204 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

instructions.  Again  and  again  he  vetoed  a  measure,  or  dissolved 
the  legislature,  or  took  action  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  charter; 
and  the  sole  justification  which  he  pleaded  was  a  secret  letter  of 
instructions,  the  terms  of  which  he  refused  to  make  public,  and  the 
object  of  which  must  be  judged  by  his  acts.  “So  long  as  he  con¬ 
tinued  commander-in-chief,”  he  replied  to  the  House  in  one  of 
their  perennial  wranglings,  “he  should  think  himself  bound  to 
conform  to  every  signification  of  his  majesty’s  pleasure.”  To  the 
denunciations  of  the  popular  party  he  remained  outwardly  in¬ 
different,  strong  in  the  supposed  integrity  of  his  official  purpose. 
In  time,  he  believed,  the  evil  spoken  of  him  by  ambitious  men 
would  be  forgotten,  and  his  course  would  find  vindication.  The 
words  of  Bernard  might  well  have  been  his: 

He  denies,  that  the  opinion  of  the  whole  people  of  that  Province  can 
now  be  taken  and  ascertained,  labouring  as  it  does  at  present,  under  the 
baneful  influence  of  a  desperate  faction,  who  by  raising  groundless  fears 
and  jealousies,  by  deluding  one  part  of  the  people,  and  by  intimidating 
the  other  part,  has  destroyed  all  real  freedom,  not  only  of  action,  but  even 
of  sentiment  and  opinion.  But  the  Respondent  doubts  not  but  that  his 
Administration  has  been  approved  by  the  generalty  of  the  best  and  most 
respectable  men  of  the  Province.16 

In  spite  of  Hutchinson’s  endeavors  to  build  up  a  prerogative 
party  the  drift  of  public  opinion  went  steadily  against  him  until 
he  was  convinced  that  he  stood  almost  alone.  “He  was  not  sure 
of  support  from  any  one  person  in  authority,”  he  commented 
stoically,  in  telling  of  the  tea  troubles.  The  Council,  the  Assembly, 
the  very  constables  were  against  him.  Yet  he  went  his  way 
obstinately;  he  would  fulfill  to  the  last  word  the  instructions  of 
his  superiors.  The  ministry  might  be  unwise,  but  better  the  legal 
folly  of  Parliament  than  the  madness  of  the  democracy.  To  en¬ 
croach  upon  the  royal  prerogative,  Hutchinson  believed  was  to 
endanger  the  nice  balance  of  the  constitution.  He  was  convinced 
that  “the  present  easy,  happy  model  of  government”  was  as  near 
perfect  as  the  ingenuity  of  Englishmen  could  devise;  that  the 
welfare  of  America  was  dependent  upon  a  proper  subordination 
of  the  colonies  to  the  mother  country;  and  that  the  popular  party 
was  plotting  treason  against  their  country  and  their  king.  The 
third  volume  of  his  history  is  a  long  argument  to  demonstrate  the 


16  Answer  of  Bernard  to  the  Petition  of  the  House  of  Representatives. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


205 


wisdom  of  his  own  and  Bernard’s  administrations.  The  liberal 
governor,  Thomas  Pownall,  Hutchinson  disliked,  partly  because 
of  his  easy  familiar  ways,  but  chiefly  because  he  was  not  a  pre¬ 
rogative  man.17  But  if  Pownall  had  been  in  Hutchinson’s  place, 
the  history  of  the  relations  of  Massachusetts  and  England  would 
have  run  very  differently. 

It  was  his  ingrained  snobbery  which,  more  than  anything  else, 
brought  about  his  undoing.  The  aristocratic  governor  never 
differed  with  a  lord,  and  rarely  agreed  with  a  commoner.  It  was 
intolerable  to  him  that  common  fellows  should  dispute  his  reason¬ 
ing  or  sit  in  judgment  upon  his  official  acts.  It  was  their  duty  as 
loyal  subjects  to  obey  without  question  the  mandates  of  the  King’s 
appointed  spokesmen;  and  when  town-meeting  resolutions,  put 
through  by  mechanics  and  petty  tradesmen,  criticised  his  conduct, 
or  refused  to  accept  the  decision  of  the  supreme  court  that  the 
“Boston  massacre”  was  not  legally  a  “massacre,”  he  saw  in  such 
acts  only  the  madness  of  the  mobocracy.  That  the  people  should 
suspect  the  probity  of  his  majesty’s  judges  was  painful  to  him. 
As  partisan  bitterness  increased,  he  became  acutely  suspicious 
of  all  who  disagreed  with  him,  and  shut  his  mind  against  every 
argument.  The  debates  and  resolves  in  House  and  Council 
“abounded  with  duplicity  and  inconclusive  reasonings.”  “The 
disingenuity  and  low  craft,  which  appeared  in  so  many  of  the 
messages,  resolves,  and  other  publick  instruments,”  he  commented, 
descended  “to  the  level  and  vulgarity  of  a  common  newspaper 
essay.”  18  To  the  leaders  of  the  popular  party,  the  group  of  keen 
debaters  and  parliamentarians  who  kept  him  constantly  on  the 
defense,  he  attributed  an  artful  malignancy.  The  fathers  of  the 
Revolution  do  not  appear  to  advantage  in  the  pages  of  his  history. 
The  Otises  had  gone  over  to  the  opposition  because  the  father 
had  been  disappointed  on  the  occasion  of  Hutchinson’s  elevation 
to  the  coveted  chief-justiceship.  John  Hancock’s  “ruling  passion 
was  a  fondness  for  popular  applause.  .  .  .  His  natural  powers 
were  moderate,  and  had  been  very  little  improved  by  study.” 
John  Adams  was  a  man  whose  “ambition  was  without  bounds.  .  .  . 
He  could  not  look  with  complacency  upon  any  man  who  was  in 
possession  of  more  wealth,  more  honours,  or  more  knowledge  than 
himself,”  and  he  went  over  to  the  opposition  because  of  a  slight 

17  For  Hutchinson’s  statement  of  the  Tory  case,  see  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  352—355. 

18  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  399. 


206 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


upon  him  by  refusal  of  a  place  on  the  bench.  For  Samuel  Adams, 
his  most  relentless  enemy,  Hutchinson’s  hatred  was  boundless. 
He  had  defaulted  as  collector  of  taxes  and  for  equivalent  of  his 
arrears  of  public  money  he  had  set  up  as  defender  of  the  public 
liberties,  and  he  “made  more  converts  by  calumniating  gov¬ 
ernors,  and  other  servants  of  the  crown,  than  by  strength  of 
reasoning.”  His  main  business  in  life  was  “robbing  men  of  their 
characters.” 

It  is  unlikely  that  time  will  bring  any  vindication’  of  the  later 
career  of  Thomas  Hutchinson.  He  was  a  stiff-necked  official  of 
scrupulous  principle,  whose  principles  were  grossly  reactionary. 
He  was  sincerely  attached  to  the  great  ideal  of  imperial  unity, 
but  he  conceived  of  that  unity  as  embodied  in  the  coercive  sov¬ 
ereignty  of  the  crown  and  parliament,  with  Tory  gentlemen  as 
exclusive  administrators.  Samuel  Adams  was  not  unjust  in  de¬ 
claring,  “It  has  been  his  principle  from  a  boy  that  mankind  are 
to  be  governed  by  the  discerning  few;  and  it  has  ever  since  been 
his  ambition  to  be  the  hero  of  the  few.”  Courteous  and  conscien¬ 
tious,  with  very  considerable  administrative  ability,  it  was  his  mis¬ 
fortune  to  defend  a  social  philosophy  alien  to  the  rough  individ¬ 
ualism  of  his  fellow  countrymen.  He  would  think  only  in  terms 
of  imperial  centralization,  and  they  would  think  only  in  terms  of 
local  home  rule.  He  conceived  of  the  political  state  as  a  private 
preserve  for  gentlemen  to  hunt  over,  and  they  conceived  of  it  as 
a  free  hunting-ground  for  all.  He  never  understood  the  assertive, 
capitalistic  America  that  was  rising  about  him,  and  in  joining 
issue  with  it  he  destroyed  himself.  “If  we  were  not  mad,”  he 
lamented,  “I  have  no  doubt  we  might  enjoy  all  that  liberty  which 
can  subsist  with  a  state  of  government.”  It  was  the  complaint 
of  the  Tory  upon  a  democracy  that  preferred  self-rule  to  the 
blessings  of  a  trusteeship,  which,  like  a  lawyers’  squabble,  con¬ 
sumed  the  estate  in  fees.  Quite  evidently  the  “mobility,”  in  the 
days  of  Thomas  Hutchinson,  was  running  into  madness,  for  it 
demanded  greater  liberty  than  was  compatible  with  a  “state  of 
government”  sanctioned  by  crown  officials — a  fact  which  the 
royal  governor  grieved  over  but  was  helpless  to  restrain. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


207 


ii 

DANIEL  LEONARD 
Tory  Lawyer 

Probably  the  most  finished  prose  writer,  certainly  one  of  the 
most  cultivated  minds,  among  the  notable  group  of  American 
Loyalists,  was  a  young  man  of  excellent  family,  who  if  events  had 
turned  out  otherwise  would  have  made  a  much  greater  name  for 
himself.  Daniel  Leonard  was  a  Harvard  graduate  and  a  member 
of  the  Boston  bar,  an  effective  speaker,  of  some  weight  in  common¬ 
wealth  politics,  and  aligned  with  Hutchinson,  Sewall,  and  the 
crown  party.  In  temperament  and  taste  he  seems  to  have  been 
conspicuously  aristocratic.  He  delighted  in  fine  clothes  and  set 
up  his  coach  and  pair  to  drive  from  his  countryseat  to  Boston — 
a  gesture  of  opulence  that  excited  the  laughter  of  sober  people, 
and  led  Mercy  Warren  to  introduce  him  into  her  comedy,  The 
Group,  under  the  name  of  Beau  Trumps.  According  to  John 
Adams,  who  was  a  decided  gossip,  it  was  this  cavalier  love  of  dis¬ 
play  that  led  to  his  political  undoing,  overcoming  his  native 
sympathy  with  the  party  of  revolution. 

He  wore  a  broad  gold  lace  round  the  rim  of  his  hat,  he  made  his  cloak 
glitter  with  laces  still  broader,  he  had  set  up  his  chariot  and  pair  and  con¬ 
stantly  traveled  in  it  from  Taunton  to  Boston.  This  made  the  world  stare — 
it  was  a  novelty.  Not  another  lawyer  in  the  province,  attorney  or  bar¬ 
rister,  of  whatever  age,  reputation,  rank,  or  station,  presumed  to  ride  in  a 
coach  or  chariot.  The  discerning  ones  soon  perceived  that  wealth  and 
power  must  have  charms  to  a  heart  that  delighted  in  so  much  finery,  and 
indulged  in  such  unusual  expense.  Such  marks  could  not  escape  the 
vigilant  eyes  of  the  two  arch-tempters,  Hutchinson  and  Sewall,  who  had 
more  art,  insinuation,  and  address,  than  all  the  rest  of  their  party.19 

Under  the  pen  name  of  “Massachusettensis,”  Leonard  pub¬ 
lished  a  series  of  weekly  letters  addressed  to  “the  Inhabitants  of 
the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,”  running  from  December  12, 
1774,  to  April  3,  1775,  a  fortnight  before  the  affair  at  Lexington. 
They  were  begun  soon  after  the  adjournment  of  the  Continental 
Congress,  and  may  be  taken  as  the  final  statement  of  the  Tory 
argument.  They  were  exceedingly  skillful  partisan  pamphlets, 
adapted  with  great  adroitness  to  current  prejudices  and  old 
loyalties.  Their  main  appeal  was  to  the  psychology  of  the  colonial, 

19  Works,  Vol.  X,  pp.  194-191;;  quoted  in  Ty\ex,, Literary  History  of  the  American 
Revolution,  Vol.  I,  Chapter  XVI. 


208 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


and  if  the  springs  of  that  psychology  had  not  been  sapped  by  the 
rising  liberalism,  the  appeal  would  have  been  extraordinarily 
persuasive.  Probably  the  King’s  cause  was  never  presented  more 
convincingly,  and  the  American  Tories  were  delighted  with  the 
letters.  “On  my  return  from  Congress,”  said  John  Adams,  “I 
found  the  Massachusetts  Gazette  teeming  with  political  specula¬ 
tions,  and  Massachusettensis  shining  like  the  moon  among  the 
lesser  stars.”  20  He  at  once  replied  to  them  under  the  pen  name 
“Novanglus,”  beginning  with  a  slashing  attack  in  which  the 
seventeenth-century  republicans  are  called  in  to  refute  Leonard, 
and  then  reciting  some  plain  facts  about  the  British  government 
and  its  American  spokesman,  which  somewhat  tarnished  the 
latter’s  eulogies.  But  he  soon  strayed  off  into  abstract  disquisi¬ 
tion,  and  the  controversy  was  brought  to  an  abrupt  end  with  the 
news  from  Lexington. 

As  in  most  Loyalist  pamphlets,  Leonard’s  appeal  was  primarily 
to  the  law  and  the  constitution,  and  it  is  tagged  with  references 
to  statutes  like  a  proper  lawyer’s  brief.  But  underlying  the 
argument  is  a  political  philosophy  which  fairly  represents  the 
current  Tory  theory.  The  immediate  purpose  of  the  Letters  was 
to  make  the  rebellious  spirit  of  the  colonial  Whigs  toward  their 
lawful  sovereign  appear  both  wricked  and  groundless,  dangerous 
to  the  peace  and  well-being  of  society  and  inspired  by  the  personal 
ambitions  of  demagogues.  This  major  purpose  involved  him  in 
two  main  arguments:  first,  on  the  heinousness  of  rebellion  in 
general;  and  second,  on  the  special  heinousness  of  the  Whig  leaders. 
Leonard’s  political  philosophy  is  implied  rather  than  elaborated. 
With  other  American  Loyalists  he  evaded  broad  principles;  never¬ 
theless  his  total  argument  rests  on  a  philosophical  foundation  too 
well  known  to  be  glossed  over.  He  derived  immediately  from 
Hobbes,  and  he  follows  the  Leviathan  in  his  exaltation  of  the 
sovereign  state.  Men  in  a  state  of  nature,  he  argued,  live  in  a 
condition  of  anarchy,  with  the  hand  of  all  against  all.  Amid  such 
chaos  civilization  is  impossible,  and  the  common  need  of  security 
for  person  and  property  impelled  men  to  erect  the  coercive  state 
as  an  instrument  of  social  protection.  It  first  arose  and  has  since 
been  maintained  from  the  necessity  of  holding  in  check  the  spirit 
of  anarchy  which  continually  threatens  from  the  ambitions  of 
designing  men.  This  is  the  great  danger  that  lies  always  in 
20  Preface  to  Novanglus  and  Massachusettensis,  1819. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


209 


wait,  ready  to  destroy  society.  Government  is  a  guarantee  of 
the  protection  of  the  weak  against  the  strong,  and  every  friend 
of  law  and  order  must  enlist  his  loyalty  on  the  side  of  the  lawful 
prince  against  all  who  would  foment  rebellion;  for  rebellion  is  the 
mischief-maker  that  unlooses  all  the  evils  of  Pandora’s  box. 

This  was  no  more  than  the  familiar  stock-in-trade  of  the  Tory, 
nevertheless  Leonard  becomes  quite  terrifying  in  describing  the 
evils  of  sedition: 

Rebellion  is  the  most  atrocious  offence,  that  can  be  perpetrated  by  man, 
save  those  which  are  committed  more  immediately  against  the  supreme 
Governor  of  the  Universe,  who  is  the  avenger  of  his  own  cause.  It  dis¬ 
solves  the  social  band,  annihilates  the  security  resulting  from  law  and 
government;  introduces  fraud,  violence,  rapine,  murder,  sacrilege,  and  the 
long  train  of  evils,  that  riot,  uncontrouled,  in  a  state  of  nature.  Allegiance 
and  protection  are  reciprocal.  The  subject  is  bound  by  the  compact  to 
yield  obedience  to  government,  and  in  return,  is  entitled  to  protection 
from  it;  thus  the  poor  are  protected  against  the  rich;  the  weak  against 
the  strong;  the  individual  against  the  many;  and  this  protection  is  guar¬ 
anteed  to  each  member,  by  the  whole  community.  But  when  government 
is  laid  prostrate,  a  state  of  war,  of  all  against  all,  commences;  might  over¬ 
comes  right;  innocence  itself  has  no  security,  unless  the  individual  seques¬ 
ters  himself  from  his  fellowmen,  inhabits  his  own  cave,  and  seeks  his  own 
prey.  This  is  what  is  called  a  state  of  nature.21 

The  “seeds  of  sedition”  having  been  sown,  they  spring  up  and 
bring  forth  fruits  of  death;  the  “people  are  led  to  sacrifice  real 
liberty  to  licentiousness,  which  gradually  ripens  into  rebellion  and 
civil  war.” 

And  what  is  still  more  to  be  lamented,  the  generality  of  the  people,  who 
are  thus  made  the  dupes  of  artifice,  and  the  mere  stilts  of  ambition,  are 
sure  to  be  losers  in  the  end.  The  best  they  can  expect,  is  to  be  thrown 
neglected  by,  when  they  are  no  longer  wanted;  but  they  are  seldom  so 
happy;  if  they  are  subdued,  confiscation  of  estate  and  ignominious  death 
are  their  portion;  if  they  conquer,  their  own  army  is  often  turned  upon 
them,  to  subjugate  them  to  a  more  tyrannical  government  than  that  they 
rebelled  against.22 

Leonard  then  proceeds  to  supplement  the  Hobbesian  argument 
by  an  elaborate  appeal  to  the  history  of  English  law,  and  discovers 
ample  sanction  in  a  recital  of  a  long  list  of  statutory  enactments 
and  court  decisions  against  the  evil  of  sedition.  As  treason  is  the 
gravest  social  crime,  so  it  has  always  been  visited  with  the  severest 
punishments.  He  states  the  history  of  legislation  against  treason, 

21  Letter  of  February  6,  1775,  in  Novanglus  and  Massachusettensis,  pp.  187-188. 

22  Ibid.,  pp.  IS2-IS3- 


210 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


and  points  out  how  the  statutes  have  been  construed  to  reach  so 
far  as  to  embrace  the  gathering  of  private  men  in  a  warlike  manner, 
with  a  design  to  redress  public  grievances  or  to  better  their  economic 
condition.  He  makes  a  parade  of  the  brutal  laws  of  feudal  times, 
and  the  decisions  of  Tudor  and  Stuart  judges,  justifying  those 
pronouncements  as  a  necessary  defense  of  society  against  sedition- 
mongers  and  their  subversive  ambitions.  By  a  natural  transition 
he  brings  the  argument  home  to  his  American  readers.  The  aims 
and  methods  of  the  Whigs,  he  contends,  constitute  a  clear  violation 
of  the  law  of  treason.  They  are  playing  with  the  gallows,  with 
their  Committees  of  Correspondence — “the  foulest,  subtlest,  and 
most  venomous  serpent  that  ever  issued  from  the  eggs  of  sedition,” 
and  the  imperative  need  of  the  hour  was  to  put  a  stop  to  all  treason¬ 
able  thought  and  action. 

I  saw  the  small  seed  of  sedition,  when  it  was  implanted;  it  was,  as  a 
grain  of  mustard.  I  have  watched  the  plant  until  it  has  become  a  great 
tree;  the  vilest  reptiles  that  crawl  upon  the  earth,  are  concealed  at  the 
root;  the  foulest  birds  of  the  air  rest  upon  its  branches.  I  now  would 
induce  you  to  go  to  work  immediately  with  axes  and  hatchets,  and  cut  it 
down,  for  a  twofold  reason;  because  it  is  a  pest  to  society,  and  lest  it  be 
felled  suddenly  by  a  stronger  arm  and  crush  thousands  in  the  fall.23 

From  the  first  major  proposition,  that  all  sedition  is  heinous, 
Leonard  passed  to  his  second,  that  the  sedition  of  the  American 
Whigs  was  peculiarly  wicked,  for  it  was  grounded  in  no  injustice  on 
the  part  of  England.  If  loyalty  is  the  highest  social  virtue,  that 
loyalty  might  justly  be  claimed  by  Great  Britain  as  her  due.  “Has 
she  not  been  a  nursing  mother  to  us,  from  the  days  of  our  infancy 
to  this  time?  Has  she  not  been  indulgent  almost  to  a  fault?” 
The  Whigs,  he  asserted  broadly,  have  been  patching  together  their 
supposed  grievances  out  of  cloth  that  never  came  from  an  English 
loom.  It  is  the  shoddiest  of  homespun,  mean,  and  shameful. 

We  had  always  considered  ourselves,  as  a  part  of  the  British  empire,  and 
the  parliament,  as  the  supreme  legislature  of  the  whole.  Acts  of  parlia¬ 
ment  for  regulating  our  internal  policy  were  familiar.  We  had  paid  postage 
agreeable  to  act  of  parliament,  .  .  .  duties  imposed  for  regulating  trade, 
and  even  for  raising  a  revenue  to  the  crown  without  questioning  the  right, 
though  we  closely  adverted  to  the  rate  or  quantum.  We  knew  that  in  all 
those  acts  of  government,  the  good  of  the  whole  had  been  consulted,  and 
whenever  through  want  of  information  any  thing  grievous  had  been 
ordained,  we  were  sure  of  obtaining  redress  by  a  proper  representation  of 

23  Letter  of  January  2,  in  ibid.,  p.  159. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


211 


it.  We  were  happy  in  our  subordination;  but  in  an  evil  hour,  under  the 
influence  of  a  malignant  planet,  the  design  was  formed  of  opposing  the 
stamp-act,  by  a  denial  of  the  right  of  parliament  to  make  it.24 

Our  patriots  exclaim,  “that  humble  and  reasonable  petitions  from  the 
representatives  of  the  people  have  been  frequently  treated  with  con¬ 
tempt.”  This  is  as  virulent  a  libel  upon  his  majesty’s  government,  as 
falsehood  and  ingenuity  combined  could  fabricate.  Our  humble  and 
reasonable  petitions  have  not  only  been  ever  graciously  received,  when 
the  established  mode  of  exhibiting  them  has  been  observed,  but  generally 
granted.  Applications  of  a  different  kind,  have  been  treated  with  neglect, 
though  not  always  with  the  contempt  they  deserved.  These  either 
originated  in  illegal  assemblies,  and  could  not  be  received  without  implic¬ 
itly  countenancing  such  enormities,  or  contained  such  matter,  and  were 
conceived  in  such  terms,  as  to  be  at  once  an  insult  to  his  majesty,  and  a 
libel  on  his  government.  Instead  of  being  decent  remonstrances  against 
real  grievances,  or  prayers  for  their  removal,  they  were  insidious  attempts 
to  wrest  from  the  crown,  or  the  supreme  legislature,  their  inherent,  un¬ 
alienable  prerogatives  or  rights.25 

The  prerogative  might  not  be  argued,  according  to  Leonard, 
nor  the  sovereignty  of  parliament  discussed,  for  any  such  comment 
was  “an  insult  to  his  majesty,  and  a  libel  on  his  government.” 
The  illegal  Continental  Congress  had  done  both  and  thereby 
proved  itself  seditious. 

The  prince,  or  sovereign,  as  some  writers  call  the  supreme  authority  of  a 
state,  is  sufficiently  ample  and  extensive  to  provide  a  remedy  for  every 
wrong,  in  all  possible  emergencies  and  contingencies;  and  consequently  a 
power,  that  is  not  derived  from  such  authority,  springing  up  in  a  state, 
must  encroach  upon  it,  and  in  proportion  as  the  usurpation  enlarges  itself, 
the  rightful  prince  must  be  diminished;  indeed,  they  cannot  long  subsist 
together,  but  must  continually  militate,  till  one  or  the  other  be  destroyed.25 

The  true  animus  of  the  Whig  attack  upon  the  nice  balance  of 
the  British  constitution  Leonard  professed  to  discover  in  a  danger¬ 
ous  republican  ambition.  From  the  beginning  there  had  been  an 
excess  of  the  democratic  element  in  the  charters  and  practice  of 
many  of  the  colonies;  and  this  overbalance  must  in  the  end  be 
rectified. 

Our  council  boards  are  as  destitute  of  the  constitutional  authority  of  the 
house  of  lords,  as  their  several  members  are  of  the  noble  independence,  and 
splendid  appendages  of  peerage.  The  house  of  peers  is  the  bulwark  of  the 

24  Letter  of  December  19,  in  ibid.,  p.  147. 

26  Letter  of  March  27,  in  ibid.,  pp.  217-218.  ( 

26  Ibid.,  p.  219. 


212  THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

British  constitution,  and  through  successive  ages,  has  withstood  the 
shocks  of  monarchy,  and  the  sappings  of  democracy,  and  the  constitu¬ 
tion  gained  strength  by  the  conflict.27 

Lacking  a  peerage,  which  Leonard  regrets,  but  which  will  come 
with  time,  American  political  practice  is  less  stable  than  the 
English,  more  exposed  to  “the  sappings  of  democracy”;  but  neces¬ 
sary  steps  have  already  been  taken  to  stabilize  it.  The  hands  of 
the  royal  governor  and  judges  have  been  strengthened  against  the 
democratic  House,  and  “town  meetings  are  restrained  to  prevent 
their  passing  traitorous  resolves.”  The  ideal  towards  which  Amer¬ 
ica  must  travel  as  fast  as  circumstance  and  the  colonial  temper 
will  permit,  is  the  wise  balance  of  the  English  government,  with 
local  powers  vested  in  colonial  lords  and  commons,  supervised  by 
the  King  and  the  Imperial  Parliament.  In  the  midst  of  these 
present  agitations,  wickedly  fomented  by  Whig  smugglers — “a 
smuggler  and  a  whig  are  cousin  germans,  the  offspring  of  two 
sisters,  avarice  and  ambition” — it  should  be  remembered  that 
“the  terms  whig  and  tory  have  been  adopted  according  to  the 
arbitrary  use  of  them  in  this  province,  but  they  rather  ought  to  be 
reversed;  an  American  tory  is  a  supporter  of  our  excellent  con¬ 
stitution,  and  an  American  whig  a  subverter  of  it.”  To  bring  these 
American  subverters  of  the  glorious  British  constitution  to  a  sense 
of  their  obligations,  Leonard  refers  them  to  the  words  of  James 
Otis  written  ten  years  before: 

It  is  a  maxim,  that  the  king  can  do  no  wrong;  and  every  good  subject  is 
bound  to  believe  his  king  is  not  inclined  to  do  any.  We  are  blessed  with  a 
prince  who  has  given  abundant  demonstrations,  that  in  all  his  actions,  he 
studies  the  good  of  his  people,  and  the  true  glory  of  his  crown,  which  are 
inseparable.  It  would  therefore  be  the  highest  degree  of  impudence  and 
disloyalty,  to  imagine  that  the  king,  at  the  head  of  his  parliament,  could 
have  any  but  the  most  pure  and  perfect  intentions  of  justice,  goodness  and 
truth,  that  human  nature  is  capable  of.  All  this  I  say  and  believe  of  the 
king  and  parliament,  in  all  their  acts;  even  in  that  which  so  nearly  affects 
the  interests  of  the  colonists;  and  that  a  most  perfect  and  ready  obedience 
is  to  be  yielded  to  it  while  it  remains  in  force.  The  power  of  parliament  is 
uncontroulable  but  by  themselves,  and  we  must  obey.  They  can  only 
repeal  their  own  acts.  There  would  be  an  end  of  all  government,  if  one 
or  a  number  of  subjects,  or  subordinate  provinces  should  take  upon  them 
so  far  to  judge  of  the  justice  of  an  act  of  parliament,  as  to  refuse  obedience 
to  it.  If  there  was  nothing  else  to  restrain  such  a  step,  prudence  ought 
to  do  it,  for  forcibly  resisting  the  parliament  and  the  king’s  laws  is  high 

27  Letter  of  January  9,  in  ibid.,  p.  171. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


213 


treason.  Therefore  let  the  parliament  lay  what  burdens  they  please  on 
us,  we  must,  it  is  our  duty  to  submit  and  patiently  bear  them,  till  they 
will  be  pleased  to  relieve  us.23 

The  argument  comes  back  finally  to  a  threat;  sovereignty  rests 
not  on  good  will  but  on  coercion.  The  insincerity  and  unreality  of 
the  Tory  appeal  are  only  too  patent.  Those  old  pleaders  were 
true  to  their  breeding  and  their  interests,  for  they  regarded  fact  as 
little  as  a  modern  diplomat.  They  ignored  or  denied  open  and 
plain  evidence.  Nowhere,  perhaps,  does  the  weakness  of  Leonard’s 
argument  become  more  evident  than  in  his  refusal  to  admit  the 
theoretical  right  of  revolution.  He  professed  allegiance  to  a  king 
whose  claim  to  the  crown  rested  on  revolution,  and  was  justified 
by  the  apostle  of  Whiggery,  Locke.  But  nowhere  does  he  refer 
to  Locke,  and  not  until  he  was  prodded  by  John  Adams,  who 
insisted  that  the  Whig  principles  were  “the  principles  of  Aristotle 
and  Plato,  of  Livy  and  Cicero,  and  Sydney,  Harrington  and 
Locke,”  did  he  concede  that  any  other  interpretation  of  revolution 
than  the  Hobbesian,  was  justifiable.  In  his  last  paper,  of  April  3, 
1775,  he  replied  to  Adams  thus: 

I  hold  the  rights  of  the  people  as  sacred,  and  revere  the  principles,  that 
have  established  the  succession  to  the  imperial  crown  of  Great  Britain,  in 
the  line  of  the  illustrious  house  of  Brunswick;  but  that  the  difficulty  lies  in 
applying  them  to  the  cause  of  the  whigs  .  .  .  for  admitting  that  the 
collective  body  of  the  people,  that  are  subject  to  the  British  empire,  have 
an  inherent  right  to  change  their  form  of  government,  or  race  of  kings, 
it  does  not  follow,  that  the  inhabitants  of  a  single  province,  or  of  a  number 
of  provinces,  or  any  given  part  under  a  majority  of  the  whole  empire,  have 
such  a  right.  By  admitting  that  the  less  may  rule  or  sequester  themselves 
from  the  greater,  we  unhinge  all  government.29 

By  such  logic  does  he  whittle  away  the  doctrine  of  the  right 
of  revolution.  As  a  lawyer  Daniel  Leonard  discovered  a  distinction 
between  the  Continental  Congress  of  1774  and  the  Revolutionary 
Convention  of  1689,  which  rendered  the  former  treasonable  and 
the  latter  glorious.  But  the  rising  liberalism  of  America  could  see 
no  such  nice  distinction,  and  a  year  later  the  brilliant  young 
lawyer  was  forced  to  withdraw  to  Halifax.  He  was  rewarded  by  a 
grateful  King  with  the  post  of  chief  justice  of  Bermuda,  lived  to 
be  nearly  ninety,  and  died  in  London  in  1829,  one  of  the  last  of 
the  exiled  Loyalists. 

28  Letter  of  January  23,  in  ibid.,  p.  181.  *  29  Ibid.,  p.  225. 


214 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


in 

JONATHAN  BOUCHER 
Tory  Priest 

The  extremest  expression  of  American  Toryism  came  not  un¬ 
fittingly  from  an  Anglican  priest.  The  English  church  has  always 
been  the  mother  of  loyalty,  and  Jonathan  Boucher  of  Virginia 
and  Maryland  was  the  spiritual  son  of  a  notable  line  of  bishops  and 
priests  who  upheld  the  royal  prerogative  through  evil  times  and 
good,  throwing  the  august  sanction  of  religion  about  the  monar¬ 
chical  state.  A  fearless,  capable,  outspoken  man  was  this  English- 
born  southerner,  taking  counsel  of  his  own  thought,  not  over- 
tolerant  of  those  who  differed  with  him,  holding  himself  in  loco 
parentis  to  his  parishioners,  and  exacting  obedience  from  them. 
He  was  another  Increase  Mather,  with  the  same  love  of  domination, 
the  same  directness  of  purpose  and  strength  of  will.  A  man  of 
conspicuous  parts  and  equally  conspicuous  position:  not  only  a 
clergyman,  but  a  gentleman  of  affairs,  owner  of  a  large  plantation 
and  many  slaves,  concerned  with  public  business  and  a  volunteer 
statesman:  a  sort  of  unofficial  adviser  and  secretary  to  draft  pro¬ 
vincial  laws.  Above  all  of  independent  mind.  He  would  truckle 
to  no  man,  and  he  subjected  the  opinions  of  his  neighbors  to  the 
same  scrutiny  that  he  gave  his  own.  For  the  popular  orator  and 
the  demagogue  he  had  frank  contempt,  and  mass  prejudices  and 
mob  power  held  no  terrors  for  him. 

There  was  both  courage  and  futility  in  his  free,  outspoken  career. 
He  refused  to  be  intimidated  or  turned  aside  by  popular  disfavor. 
“For  more  than  six  months  I  preached,  when  I  did  preach,  with  a 
pair  of  loaded  pistols  lying  on  the  cushions;  having  given  notice 
that  if  any  one  attempted,  what  had  long  been  threatened,  to  drag 
me  out  of  the  pulpit,  I  should  think  myself  justified  in  repelling 
violence  by  violence.”  One  day  he  promptly  knocked  down  a 
burly  blacksmith  who  had  been  set  on  him,  but  there  came  a  time 
when  his  church  was  filled  with  armed  men,  and  his  friends,  fearing 
for  his  life,  held  him  back  forcibly  from  mounting  the  pulpit.  That 
episode  marked  the  end  of  his  career  in  America.  He  had  plainly 
become  obsolete,  and  he  was  driven  home  to  his  native  England. 
There  as  an  old  man,  he  published  in  1797  thirteen  sermons, 
preached  in  America  between  1763  and  1775,  with  an  historical 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


215 


preface,  under  the  title,  A  View  of  the  Causes  and  Consequences  of 
the  American  Revolution,  and  dedicated  to  his  old  neighbor  and 
friend,  General  Washington. 

The  political  philosophy  of  Jonathan  Boucher,  as  elaborated  in 
these  discourses,  is  frank  and  unequivocal.  It  is  the  voice  of 
seventeenth-century  Cavalier  England,  speaking  to  an  alien  people, 
bred  up  in  another  philosophy  of  government.  Church  and  state, 
the  Bible  and  the  British  constitution,  the  divine  authority  of 
God  and  the  divine  authority  of  the  status  quo,  have  got  themselves 
curiously  fused — and  confused — in  the  mind  of  this  disciple  of 
Laud.  It  was  the  result  not  of  ignorance  but  of  conviction.  When 
the  revolutionary  movement  began  to  make  a  stir  about  him,  the 
parish  priest  took  the  situation  seriously  and  set  about  preparing 
himself  to  cope  with  it.  Before  then  he  had  been  no  student  of 
political  theory,  but  now  he  turned  to  his  books.  “With  sincerity 
in  my  heart,  and  my  Bible  in  my  hand,”  he  said,  “I  sat  down  to 
explore  the  truth  ...  to  read  and  study  what  had  been  collected 
and  laid  down  on  the  subject  of  government  by  writers  .  .  .  who 
got  their  materials  .  .  .  from  the  only  pure  sources  of  information, 
the  law  of  God,  and  the  law  of  the  land.”30  The  restriction  in  his 
choice  of  writers  is  suggestive  of  his  bias;  it  eliminated  at  one 
stroke  the  main  body  of  political  speculation,  not  only  the  English 
thinkers  of  the  preceding  century,  but  the  continental  followers 
of  the  natural-rights  school.  Actually,  however,  Boucher  did  not 
limit  himself  so  narrowly,  for  he  refers  frequently  to  Locke,  and 
he  was  fairly  familiar  with  the  main  doctrines  of  the  revolutionary 
philosophy.  But  his  most  cherished  discovery  was  Sir  Robert 
Filmer’s  Patriarcha,  and  having  digested  Filmer’s  quaint  theory, 
thenceforth  he  remained  a  confirmed  patriarchist.  The  absurd 
jumble  of  Hebraic  precedent  and  Tory  prejudice  which  Filmer  had 
laboriously  put  together  and  which  Locke  had  knocked  to  pieces, 
was  wholly  convincing  to  this  belated  advocate  of  divine  right, 
who  proceeded  to  wipe  the  dust  off  the  precious  volume  and  ex¬ 
pound  its  doctrines  to  an  amazed  congregation. 

The  single  and  sacred  duty  of  the  subject,  Jonathan  Boucher 
was  convinced,  is  faithful  obedience  to  the  powers  that  are  set 
over  him.  Those  powers  derive  from  God  and  are  instituted  for 
the  subject’s  good.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  unpardonable  sin 
is  rebellion  against  lawfully  constituted  authority.  “The  doctrine 
30  A  View  of  the  Causes,  etc.,  p,  591. 


216 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

of  obedience  for  conscience  sake,”  he  asserted,  is  .  .  .  the  great 
cornerstone  of  all  good  government.  31  With  Daniel  Leonard  he 
makes  much  of  it,  but  he  appeals  rather  to  the  sanctions  of  religion 
than  to  the  law. 

Obedience  to  Government  is  every  man’s  duty,  because  it  is  every  man’s 
interest;  but  it  is  particularly  incumbent  on  Christians,  because  ...  it 
is  enjoined  by  the  positive  commands  of  God.  ...  If  the  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  under  which  the  good  providence  of  God  has  been  pleased  to  place  us 
be  mild  and  free,  it  is  our  duty  to  enjoy  it  with  gratitude  and  with  thankful¬ 
ness.  .  .  .  If  it  be  less  indulgent  and  less  liberal  than  in  reason  it  ought  to 
be,  still  it  is  our  duty  not  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  community,  by  becom¬ 
ing  refractory  and  rebellious  subjects,  and  resisting  the  ordinances  of  God.32 

Those  great  and  good  men,  who,  like  wise  master-builders,  have  from 
time  to  time  so  fitly  framed  together  our  glorious  Constitution,  well  knew 
that  other  sure  foundation  no  man  could  lay  than  .  .  .  obedience,  not 
only  for  wrath,  but  for  conscience  sake.33 

Because  this  spirit  of  obedience  was  openly  flouted  in  America, 
where  every  influence  made  for  rough  individual  liberty,  Jonathan 
Boucher  feared  for  the  future.  Loose  principles  were  abroad, 
notions  of  popular  sovereignty  under  the  majority  will,  that  must 
give  “rise  to  a  low  and  unworthy  opinion  of  government,”  unless 
the  people  were  recalled  to  their  duty.  Particularly  dangerous,  he 
thought,  was  “that  loose  notion  respecting  government,  which 
has  long  been  disseminated  among  the  people  at  large  with  in¬ 
credible  industry,  namely,  that  all  government  is  the  mere  creature 
of  the  people,  and  may  therefore  be  tampered  with,  altered,  new- 
modelled,  set  up  or  pulled  down,  just  as  tumultuous  crowds  of  the 
most  disorderly  persons  in  the  community  (who  on  such  occasions 
are  always  so  forward  to  call  themselves  the  people)  may  happen  in 
some  giddy  moments  of  overheated  ardour  to  determine.”  34 

The  unhappy  results  of  such  evil  principles  Boucher  saw  spread 
through  America.  With  the  insidious  undermining  of  respect  for 
law  and  government,  the  vicious  conception  of  republicanism  made 
its  appearance.  “Everything  in  America  had  a  republican  aspect,” 
he  commented  in  after  years;  and  he  agreed  with  Bernard  that 
“the  splitting  America  into  many  small  governments  weakened 
the  governing  power,  and  strengthened  that  of  the  people.”  35 
If  Parliament  had  been  wise  enough  to  consolidate  government  in 

31  Ibid.,  p.  309.  32  Ibid.,  pp.  507-508.  33  Ibid.,  p.  306. 

34  Ibid.,  p.  313.  36  Ibid.,  p.  xliv. 


THE  AMERICAN  TORY 


217 


America,  drawing  it  to  a  single  head,  and  investing  it  with  dignity 
and  authority,  the  country  would  not  have  become,  like  revolu¬ 
tionary  France,  “a  mean  and  odious  republic.”  As  a  minister  and 
a  loyal  British  subject,  Jonathan  Boucher  would  not  seduce  the 
American  people  “by  any  flowery  panegyrics  on  liberty.  Such 
panegyrics  are  the  productions  of  ancient  heathens  and  modern 
patriots:  nothing  of  the  kind  is  to  be  met  with  in  the  Bible,  nor  in 
the  Statute  Book.  The  word  liberty,  as  meaning  civil  liberty, 
does  not,  I  believe,  occur  in  all  the  Scriptures.”  36 

To  respect  the  laws,  is  to  respect  liberty  in  the  only  rational  sense  in 
which  the  term  can  be  used;  for  liberty  consists  in  subserviency  to  law. 
“Where  there  is  no  law,”  says  Mr.  Locke,  “there  is  no  freedom.”  .  .  . 
True  liberty,  then,  is  a  liberty  to  do  everything  that  is  right,  and  the  being 
restrained  from  doing  anything  that  is  wrong.37 

The  evils  which  flow  from  disrespect  for  authority  carry  much 
further  than  the  unsettling  of  the  political  status  quo;  they  end  by 
overturning  the  entire  social  order.  If  any  group  or  class  rejects 
the  divine  plan  according  to  which  God  has  set  each  in  its  due 
place,  society  as  a  whole  is  involved  in  strife  that  may  lapse  into 
anarchy.  It  was  an  unhappy  scene,  prophesying  an  unhappier 
future,  that  the  minister  beheld  in  contemporary  America. 

There  never  was  a  time  when  a  whole  people  were  so  little  governed  by 
settled  good  principles.  .  .  .  Both  employers  and  the  employed,  much 
to  their  mutual  shame  and  inconvenience,  no  longer  live  together  with 
anything  like  attachment  and  cordiality  on  either  side;  and  the  laboring 
classes,  instead  of  regarding  the  rich  as  their  guardians,  patrons,  and 
benefactors,  now  look  on  them  as  so  many  overgrown  colossuses  whom  it 
is  no  demerit  in  them  to  wrong.  A  still  more  general  .  .  .  topic  of 
complaint  is,  that  the  lower  classes,  instead  of  being  industrious,  frugal, 
and  orderly  (virtues  so  peculiarly  becoming  their  station  in  life)  are 
become  idle,  improvident,  and  dissolute.38 

With  social  morality  thus  dangerously  undermined,  the  Americans 
were  a  natural  prey  to  demagogues,  who  filled  the  land  with  their 
clamor  of  patriotism  and  liberty.  The  situation  in  Virginia  was 
peculiarly  dangerous  by  reason  of  long-standing  debts  to  English 
merchants  which  the  planters  were  unable  to  pay;  they  found 
themselves  in  consequence,  impaled  on  the  horns  of  an  unhappy 
dilemma,  “to  be  loyal  and  be  ruined,  or  to  rebel  and  be  damned.”  39 

Instructed  by  the  colonial  troubles,  Jonathan  Boucher  elaborated 

36  Ibid.,  p.  504.  37  Ibid.,  pp.  509  and  511. 

38  Ibid.,  p.  309.  39  Ibid.,  Preface,  p.  xlii. 


218 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


a  theory  of  the  true  origin  and  purpose  of  government,  a  theory 
taken  straight  out  of  Filmer,  which  he  expands  thus: 

As  soon  as  there  were  some  to  be  governed,  there  were  also  some  to 
govern.  .  .  .  The  first  father  was  the  first  king:  and  ...  it  was  thus 
that  all  government  originated,  and  monarchy  is  the  most  ancient  form.40 

The  glory  of  God  is  much  concerned,  that  there  should  be  good  govern¬ 
ment  in  the  world:  it  is,  therefore,  the  uniform  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures, 
that  it  is  under  the  deputation  and  authority  of  God  alone  that  kings 
reign  and  princes  decree  justice.  Kings  and  princes  (which  are  only  other 
words  for  supreme  magistrates)  were  doubtless  created  and  appointed, 
not  so  much  for  their  own  sakes,  as  for  the  sake  of  the  people  committed 
to  their  charge:  yet  they  are  not,  therefore,  the  creatures  of  the  people. 
So  far  from  deriving  their  authority  from  any  supposed  consent  or  suf¬ 
frage  of  men,  they  receive  their  commission  from  Heaven;  they  receive 
it  from  God,  the  source  and  original  of  all  power.41- 

Instituted  by  God  and  functioning  under  divine  sanction,  govern¬ 
ment  becomes,  therefore,  a  divine  instrument,  for  the  security  of 
which  He  is  greatly  concerned:  “Everything  our  blessed  Lord 
either  said  or  did,  pointedly  tended  to  discourage  the  disturbing  a 
settled  government.”  “Unless  we  are  good  subjects,  we  cannot  be 
good  Christians.”  Jesus  “thought  it  would  be  better,  both  for 
Judea  in  particular,  and  for  the  world  in  general,  that  .  .  .  the 
people  should  not  be  distracted  by  a  revolution,  and  .  .  .  that 
there  should  be  no  precedent  to  which  revolutionists  might  appeal.” 
“The  only  very  intolerable  grievance  in  government  is,  when  men 
allow  themselves  to  disturb  and  destroy  the  peace  of  the  world, 
by  vain  attempts  to  render  that  perfect,  which  the  laws  of  our 
nature  have  ordained  to  be  imperfect.”  “To  suffer  nobly  indicates 
more  greatness  of  mind  than  can  be  shown  by  acting  valiantly.”42 

Jonathan  Boucher  was  the  high  Tory  of  the  Tory  cause  in 
America.  He  refused  to  strike  his  flag  to  the  pirate  craft  of  re¬ 
publicanism;  he  would  not  truckle  to  newfangled  notions;  but 
stood  up  stoutly  to  be  counted  for  God  and  the  King.  In  laying 
bare  the  heart  of  Toryism,  he  unwittingly  gave  aid  and  comfort 
to  the  detested  cause  of  liberalism.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that 
such  militant  loyalty  to  the  outworn  doctrine  of  passive  submission 
was  a  real  disservice  to  the  ministry,  for  it  revealed  the  prerogative 
in  a  light  peculiarly  offensive  to  American  prejudices.  What  a 
godsend  to  the  liberals  was  such  doctrine  on  the  lips  of  so  eminent 
a  divine! 

40  Ibid.,  p.  525.  44  Ibid.,  p.  534.  42  Ibid.,  pp.  535,  538,  542,  543. 


CHAPTER  III 

JOHN  DICKINSON 

The  Mind  of  the  American  Whig 

For  many  colonials  it  was  a  hard  and  bitter  choice  that  was 
thrust  upon  them  by  the  political  situation.  They  had  no  wish 
to  choose  between  loyalty  to  the  British  Empire  and  love  for 
their  native  land.  So  long  as  the  quarrel  remained  a  legal  dispute 
over  parliamentary  encroachments,  colonial  sentiment  was  fairly 
united  in  opposition  to  the  ministerial  policy;  differences  of  opinion 
arose  over  methods  of  defense,  rather  than  the  need  of  it.  The 
threatened  loss  of  home  rule  drew  together  radical  and  conserva¬ 
tive.  Although  Governor  Hutchinson  asserted  that  the  feeling 
against  England  «was  the  work  of  a  small  populistic  element — “in 
Massachusetts  Bay  the  exception  to  the  constitutional  authority 
of  Parliament  was  first  taken,  and  principally  supported,  by  men 
who  were  before  discontented”  1 — it  is  clear  that  the  active  Tory 
party  numbered  at  first  few  more,  than  the  royal  officials  and  their 
beneficiaries.  But  when  it  came  to  the  point  of  severing  colonial 
relations  with  the  mother  country,  comparatively  few  among  the 
upper  classes  in  the  northern  and  middle  colonies  went  with  the 
party  of  independence.  The  moderate  men,  the  conciliationists, 
were  crushed  between  the  two  extremes,  and  the  Tory  party  was 
greatly  increased  in  numbers  and  influence. 

Of  this  moderate  party  of  conciliationists,  the  outstanding  figure 
during  the  years  of  tedious  debate  was  John  Dickinson,  of  Phila¬ 
delphia.  His  Letters  from  a  Pennsylvania  Farmer,  published  be¬ 
tween  December  2,  1767,  and  February  15,  1768,  created  con¬ 
siderable  stir  both  in  America  and  England,  and  if  Hutchinson 
may  be  trusted,  they  “formed  a  temporary  political  creed  for  the 
colonies.”  Later  he  was  chief  draftsman  of  a  notable  series  of 
state  papers:  the  Declaration  of  Rights  of  the  Stamp  Act  Congress; 
the  two  Petitions  to  the  King  and  the  Address  to  the  Inhabitants 
of  Quebec  of  the  first  Continental  Congress;  and  finally  the  Articles 

1  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay t  Vol.  Ill,  p.  257. 

219 


220 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


of  Confederation.  Professor  Tyler  has  fastened  upon  him  the 
title  of  “penman  of  the  Revolution”;  but  a  juster  title,  and  more 
in  accord  with  the  facts,  would  be  “spokesman  of  the  Colonial 
Whigs.”  From  his  first  entrance  into  public  life  to  the  adoption 
of  the  Constitution,  Dickinson  was  a  consistent  advocate  of  the 
political  philosophy  of  which  John  Pym  was  the  early  representa¬ 
tive,  Locke  the  philosophical  defender,  and  Pitt  the  parliamentary 
advocate — a  philosophy  which  he  accepted  as  the  final  embodiment 
of  the  long  struggle  for  English  freedom. 

English  Whiggery  has  been  fortunate  in  its  advocates.  It  has 
been  expounded  with  great  fervor  and  glossed  with  much  eloquence. 
Its  ends  have  been  so  persistently  proclaimed  as  at  one  with  the 
cause  of  human  liberty,  that  in  the  mind  of  English-speaking  people 
it  early  became  synonymous  with  English  liberalism.  In  so  far 
as  it  represented  a  protest  against  divine  right,  such  an  interpreta¬ 
tion  was  historically  just.  It  was  the  expression  of  a  rising  class, 
and  every  rising  class  in  its  ostensible  program  professes  to  be 
liberal.  But  in  the  outcome  Whiggery  proved  to  be  very  different 
from  generic  liberalism.  Examined  critically  the  program  of 
Whiggery  is  seen  to  have  been  compounded  of  substantial  eco¬ 
nomic  interests.  Although  the  Whig  party  created  the  modem 
House  of  Commons  and  ministerial  government,  and  wrote  into  the 
British  constitution  the  principle  of  no  taxation  without  represen¬ 
tation,  back  of  such  revolutionary  changes  was  a  middle-class, 
property  theory  of  society.  It  laid  down  as  the  first  principle  of 
political  science  the  dogma  that  government  is  instituted  for  the 
protection  of  property;  and  it  advanced  by  inevitable  stages  to 
the  position  that  government  should  use  its  powers  to  extend  the 
field  of  profitable  operations  and  safeguard  exploitation,  the 
natural  outcome  of  which  was  a  policy  of  imperialism.  On  the 
pretense  of  furthering  human  liberty  it  carried  the  British  flag 
and  British  goods  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  great  Pitt,  grand¬ 
son  of  the  unscrupulous  exploiter  of  India,  completed  the  work 
begun  by  John  Pym  more  than  a  century  before;  the  American 
Revolution  was  the  natural  sequence  of  an  imperialistic  policy 
begun  by  Cromwell’s  Navigation  Act,  which,  aimed  immediately 
at  the  Dutch  carriers,  put  the  power  of  the  government  behind 
British  shipping  to  the  disadvantage  of  American  competitors. 

The  philosophy  of  Whiggery  had  spread  widely  in  America 
before  the  Revolution  and  numbered  among  its  advocates  probably 


221 


I 

JOHN  DICKINSON 

the  great  majority  of  thoughtful  Americans.  Of  these  John 
Dickinson  became  the  best  known,  although  he  was  certainly  not 
the  ablest — less  able,  indeed,  than  his  fellow  Marylander,  Daniel 
Dulany.  Of  Quaker  extraction,  Dickinson  was  a  country  gentle¬ 
man  who  inherited  broad  acres,  an  honorable  name,  and  high 
social  position.  His  dignified  standing  was  further  assured  by  his 
marriage  with  the  only  surviving  child  of  Isaac  Norris,  long  Speaker 
of  the  Pennsylvania  Assembly,  and  the  most  influential  amongst 
a  little  group  of  wealthy  merchants  who  had  long  ruled  the  com¬ 
monwealth  in  patriarchal  fashion.  By  his  wife  he  came  into 
possession  of  Fairhill,  a  country  place  of  several  hundred  acres  on 
the  outskirts  of  Philadelphia,  one  of  the  show  places  of  the  city, 
of  which  the  mansion  with  its  stately  fagade,  its  waxed  floors  and 
red-cedar  wainscoting,  its  books  and  paintings  and  statuary, 
its  setting  of  gardens  and  fishponds  and  conservatories,  was  vastly 
impressive  to  a  world  that  loved  dignified  display. 

With  such  advantages  of  wealth  and  position  he  could  hardly 
fail  to  get  on  in  his  profession,  and  within  a  short  time  after  his 
return  from  the  Inns  of  Court  at  London,  where  he  had  his  training 
in  the  law,  he  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Philadelphia  bar  and 
was  soon  deep  in  commonwealth  politics.  He  was  a  gentleman  in  a 
society  of  gentlemen  and  preferment  came  easily  to  him.  His 
natural  parts  were  respectable,  he  had  improved  himself  by  con¬ 
siderable  reading  in  history  and  politics,  he  possessed  a  cultivated 
pen  and  some  facility  in  debate.  He  understood  commercial  prob¬ 
lems,  could  talk  trade,  was  ready  with  statistics  of  imports  and 
exports,  and  was  an  advocate  of  the  paper  money  which  Philadel¬ 
phia  merchants  had  discovered  to  be  a  stimulus  to  business. 
Among  his  intimate  friends  were  Robert  Morris,  Thomas  Willing, 
and  George  Clymer,  representatives  of  the  younger  generation  of 
Philadelphians,  whose  speculative  enterprises  were  not  approved 
by  their  conservative  elders.  And  so  by  consequence  he  became 
the  spokesman  of  the  mercantile  interests  in  their  remonstrance 
against  the  ministerial  policies. 

But  Dickinson  was  more  than  a  legal  adviser  to  clients  who 
were  in  trade.  As  lawyer  and  statesman  he  was  true  to  the  best 
traditions  of  the  English  law  and  the  British  constitution,  faithful 
to  what  he  conceived  to  be  the  larger  interests  of  the  British  Empire. 
In  all  his  public  acts  he  was  animated  by  a  scrupulous  sense  of 
duty,  swerving  no  whit  from  the  line  of  conduct  marked  out  by 


222 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


his  principles  in  spite  of  the  clamor  of  opposition.  From  first  to 
last  he  seems  to  have  been  guided  by  a  fine  sense  of  responsible 
stewardship  that  came  to  him  from  his  English  heritage.  Cer¬ 
tainly  the  dignity  of  John  Dickinson  and  the  integrity  of  his  politi¬ 
cal  career  suffer  little  by  contrast  with  certain  popular  represen¬ 
tatives  who  governed  their  conduct  by  expediency  rather  than 
principle.  The  great  ideal  of-  imperial  unity  possessed  him  com¬ 
pletely,  and  he  would  do  nothing  to  bring  it  into  jeopardy.  He 
sacrificed  his  great  influence  with  the  radicals  by  his  refusal  to  go 
with  the  majority  for  independence;  he  would  not  assist  in  dis¬ 
rupting  the  British  Empire  even  though  he  could  not  preserve  it. 
The  refusal  was  difficult  and  it  destroyed  his  popularity  in  a 
moment.  He  withdrew  from  active  participation  in  political  affairs, 
and  for  years  afterwards,  to  the  eyes  of  former  associates,  his  con¬ 
duct  seemed  to  have  been  pusillanimous. 

By  temperament  and  breeding  Dickinson  was  a  conservative, 
and  this  native  bias  was  emphasized  by  his  English  training  in 
the  law.  The  lawyers  of  the  middle  and  southern  colonies  were 
far  better  trained  than  those  of  New  England.  Many  were  from 
the  Inns  of  Court,  where  they  had  steeped  themselves  in  the  Com¬ 
mon  Law  and  had  imbibed  profound  respect  for  the  orderly  pro¬ 
cesses  of  English  legal  procedure.  They  found  intellectual  satis¬ 
faction  in  tracing  the  evolution  of  constitutional  practice,  and 
their  methods  of  thought  were  too  strictly  legal  to  suffer  them  to 
stray  into  the  domain  of  extra-legal  political  speculation.  Their 
appeal  was  to  the  law  and  the  constitution;  never  to  abstract 
principles.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  revolutionary  leaders  of  New 
England — and  Virginians  like  Jefferson  and  Patrick  Henry — were 
poorer  lawyers  they  were  better  political  scientists,  for  their  legal 
training  had  been  too  casual  and  too  scanty  to  contract  their  minds 
to  statutes  and  precedents.  Jefferson  and  John  Adams  were  alike 
in  this  respect;  their  interests  were  speculative  rather  than  legal; 
and  they  wrote  more  convincingly  when  defending  the  principles 
of  Locke  than  in  expounding  Coke. 

But  John  Dickinson  remained  always  the  lawyer.  The  English 
political  thinkers  of  the  seventeenth  century  scarcely  touched  the 
fringe  of  his  mind.  In  consequence  his  writings  are  a  long  con¬ 
stitutional  argument.  He  rarely  refers  to  political  authorities. 
The  philosophy  of  Locke — whom  he  had  read — is  largely  ignored, 
and  Hume — “this  great  man  whose  political  speculations  are  so 


223 


JOHN  DICKINSON 

much  admired”— is  quoted  only  in  support  of  a  constitutional 
interpretation.  “The  constitutional  modes  of  relief  are  those  I 
wish  to  see  pursued  on  the  present  occasion,”  he  insisted  in  reply 
to  the  natural-rights  advocates,  and  the  attitude  is  eloquent  of  the 
man.  This  scrupulous  legalism  he  carried  to  such  lengths  that 
when  the  new  constitution  for  Pennsylvania  was  adopted  he 
refused  to  take  office  under  it  because  he  doubted  the  legality  of 
the  convention  that  framed  it. 

With  such  temperament  and  training  Dickinson  would  seem 
to  have  had  the  making  of  an  excellent  Tory  in  him.  What  cause 
had  he  to  quarrel  with  Great  Britain,  and  why  should  he  have 
risked  his  lot  with  the  party  of  protest?  It  was  not  because  he 
denied  the  ministerial  theory  of  parliamentary  sovereignty  in 
America,  for  he  acknowledged  both  the  fact  and  the  necessity  for 
such  sovereignty: 

He,  who  considers  these  provinces  as  states  distinct  from  the  British 
Empire,  has  very  slender  notions  of  justice,  or  of  their  interests.  We  are 
but  parts  of  a  whole  and  therefore  there  must  exist  a  power  somewhere 
to  preside,  and  preserve  the  connection  in  due  order.  This  power  is 
lodged  in  the  parliament;  and  we  are  as  much  dependent  on  Great-Britain 
as  a  perfectly  free  people  can  be  on  another.2 

Nor  was  it  because  of  old  trade  grievances — shipping  restrictions, 
the  spying  of  customs  officers,  prohibitions  laid  on  manufactures, 
and  the  like.  He  accepted  without  challenge  the  English  mer¬ 
cantile  view  of  the  economic  relations  of  colonies  to  the  mother 
country,  and  he  professed  to  see  in  existing  trade  regulations  only 
the  incidental  and  necessary  burdens  of  a  system  both  salutary  and 
just;  he  had  no  protest  to  urge  against  the  principle  of  the  Naviga¬ 
tion  Acts. 

Colonies  have  been  settled  by  the  nations  of  Europe  for  the  purposes  of 
trade.  These  purposes  were  to  be  attained,  by  the  colonies  raising  for 
their  mother  country  those  things  which  she  did  not  produce  herself; 
and  by  supplying  themselves  from  her  with  things  they  wanted.  These 
were  the  national  objects,  in  the  commencement  of  our  colonies,  and  have 
been  uniformly  so  in  their  promotion.  .  .  .  The  parent  country,  with 
undeviating  prudence  and  virtue,  attentive  to  the  first  principles  of  coloni¬ 
zation,  drew  to  herself  the  benefits  she  might  reasonably  expect,  and 
preserved  to  her  children  the  blessings,  on  which  those  benefits  were 
founded.  She  made  laws,  obliging  her  colonies  to  carry  to  her  all  those 
products  which  she  wanted  for  her  own  use;  and  all  those  raw  materials 

2  “Farmer’s  Letters,”  in  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  312. 


224 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

which  she  chose  herself  to  work  up.  Besides  this  restriction,  she  forbad 
them  to  procure  manufactures  from  any  other  part  of  the  globe,  or  even 
the  products  of  European  countries,  which  alone  could  rival  her,  without 
first  being  brought  to  her.  In  short,  by  a  variety  of  laws,  she  regulated 
their  trade  in  such  a  manner  as  she  thought  most  conducive  to  their  mutual 
advantage,  and  her  own  welfare.3 

Not  only  did  Dickinson  concede  to  the  mother  country  the 
right  to  regulate  the  entire  system  of  colonial  trade  and  industry 
to  the  primary  advantage  of  British  merchants,  even  going  so  far 
as  to  justify  it  by  a  false  historical  explanation  of  the  rise  of  the 
colonies;  not  only  did  he  profess  to  believe  that  such  regulation 
had  been  exercised  in  a  spirit  of  unselfish  concern  for  the  well-being 
of  the  empire;  but  he  professed  a  faith  in  the  King  and  the  English 
people  that  suggests  Hutchinson  and  Bernard.  Consider  such 
naive  adulation  as  the  following: 

We  have  an  excellent  prince,  in  whose  good  dispositions  towards  us  we 
may  confide.  We  have  a  generous,  sensible  and  humane  nation,  to  whom 
we  may  apply.  They  may  be  deceived.  They  may,  by  artful  men,  be 
provoked  to  anger  against  us.  I  cannot  believe  they  will  be  cruel  or  unjust; 
or  that  their  anger  will  be  implacable.  Let  us  behave  like  dutiful  children, 
who  have  received  unmerited  blows  from  a  beloved  parent.  Let  us  com¬ 
plain  to  our  parent;  but  let  our  complaints  speak  at  the  same  time  the 
language  of  affliction  and  veneration.4 

With  so  much  conceded,  what  ground  of  serious  quarrel  remained  ? 
What  was  there  to  justify  an  American  protest  against  the  parlia¬ 
mentary  program?  Nothing  less  than  the  vital  principle  of 
taxation.  In  this  matter  the  ministerial  policy  overrode  the  funda¬ 
mental  tenet  of  Whiggery.  The  situation  was  critical,  for  if  the 
Tories  denied  the  validity  of  the  Whiggish  principle  in  dealing 
with  the  colonies,  they  might  deny  it  at  home  and  the  old  battle 
of  1 688  must  be  fought  over.  The  right  of  control  of  the  public 
purse  by  a  chamber  in  which  the  property  owners  were  represented, 
and  which  they  would  dominate,  was  a  principle  too  vital  to  be 
yielded,  and  the  English  Whigs  in  Parliament,  led  by  Pitt  and 
Camden,  took  vigorous  issue  with  the  ministerial  tax  proposals. 
To  American  Whigs  the  proposed  innovation  was  a  calamity.  To 
suffer  control  of  the  American  purse  to  pass  out  of  their  hands 
into  those  of  a  group  beyond  their  reach  meant  a  return  to  a  system 
of  Tory  spoliation;  it  meant  that  property  and  the  rule  of  property 

3  Ibid.,  p.  33 7.  4  Ibid.,  p.  327. 


225 


JOHN  DICKINSON 

in  America  were  threatened.  To  the  colonial  Whig  the  constitu¬ 
tional  representative  chamber  could  be  no  other  than  the  assembly 
of  the  commonwealth  of  which  he  was  a  taxpayer.  The  English 
Parliament  was  alien  if  not  hostile  to  his  interests;  and  if  the 
right  of  imposing  taxes  upon  the  colonies  were  held  to  lie  in  this 
overseas  body,  the  colonials  would  find  themselves  in  the  identi¬ 
cal  position  of  their  ancestors  of  the  days  of  King  Charles.  No 
longer  masters  of  their  property,  they  would  not  be  a  free 
people. 

All  this  John  Dickinson  understood  perfectly,  and  as  a  large 
property  owner  he  hastened  to  the  defense  of  the  principle  of  self- 
taxation.  He  proposed  to  show  that  the  policy  of  the  ministry, 
in  advancing  the  new  tax  program,  was  a  usurpation  of  power 
and  a  violation  of  the  constitutional  rights  of  American  property 
owners;  and  that  as  such  it  should  be  resisted  on  constitutional 
grounds.  This  is  the  burden  of  the  celebrated  Letters  from  a 
Pennsylvania  Farmer.  In  arguing  their  case  the  American  de¬ 
baters  were  embarrassed  by  a  long  series  of  precedents  which  seemed 
to  prove  that  Parliament  possessed  sovereignty  over  the  colonies; 
that  such  sovereignty  had  in  fact  been  repeatedly  acknowledged; 
and  that  a  hundred  years  of  fiscal  legislation,  unchallenged  hereto¬ 
fore,  had  clearly  established  the  parliamentary  right  of  taxation. 
To  this  difficult  point  Dickinson  directed  his  argument.  The 
real  point  at  issue,  he  contended,  lay  in  the  fundamental  distinction 
between  a  tax  and  an  imposition;  Parliament  possessed  the  con¬ 
stitutional  right  to  impose  the  latter,  but  not  the  former.  An 
imposition,  he  pointed  out,  is  a  fiscal  arrangement  made  by  the 
proper  representatives,  primarily  “for  the  regulation  of  trade,” 
and  with  a  view  to  the  general  interests  of  the  whole;  whereas  a 
tax  is  a  “gift  of  the  people  to  the  crown,  to  be  employed  for  public 
uses.”  The  one  is  regulatory  in  intent,  imposed  in  a  paternal 
spirit;  and  though  the  result  may  lessen  or  increase  the  opportunity 
of  the  individual  or  the  community  to  acquire  property,  it  does 
not  take  away  what  has  already  been  got;  whereas  a  tax  reaches 
into  the  pocket  of  the  individual  and  takes  from  him  what  belongs 
to  him  alone.  Unless  the  subject  “give  and  grant  of  his  own 
free  will,”  such  a  tax  had  long  been  held  unconstitutional.  Of 
necessity,  every  tax  must  be  internal,  and  since  by  their  charter 
governments  the  colonies  were  granted  the  right  to  impose  “in¬ 
ternal  taxes,”  Parliament  has  no  right  to  impose  them. 


226 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


A  “tax”  means  an  imposition  to  raise  money.  Such  persons  therefore 
as  speak  of  internal  and  external  “taxes,”  I  pray  may  pardon  me,  if  I 
object  to  that  expression,  as  applied  to  the  privileges  and  interests  of 
these  colonies.  There  may  be  internal  and  external  impositions,  founded 
on  different  principles,  and  having  different  tendencies ,  every  “tax”  being 
an  imposition,  tho’  every  imposition  is  not  a  “tax.”  But  all  taxes  are 
founded  on  the  same  principles',  and  have  the  same  tendency.  External 
impositions,  for  the  regulation  of  .our  trade,  do  not  “grant  to  his  Majesty 
the  property  of  the  colonies.”  They  only  prevent  the  colonies  acquiring 
property,  in  things  not  necessary,  in  a  manner  judged  to  be  injurious  to 
the  welfare  of  the  whole  empire.  But  the  last  statute  respecting  us, 
“grants  to  his  Majesty  the  property  of  the  colonies,”  by  laying  duties  on 
the  manufactures  of  Great-Britain  which  they  must  take,  and  which  she 
settled  on  them,  on  purpose  that  they  should  take.  What  tax  can  be 
more  internal  than  this?  Here  is  money  drawn,  without  their  consent, 
from  a  society,  who  have  constantly  enjoyed  a  constitutional  mode  of 
raising  all  money  among  themselves.5 

This  line  of  argument  was  not  original  with  Dickinson.  It  had 
earlier  been  elaborated  by  Daniel  Dulany  of  Maryland,  in  an  able 
pamphlet, 6  which  had  provided  argument  to  Pitt  for  his  speech 
on  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act. 7  Dickinson  in  turn  quoted  from 
Pitt’s  speech  in  support  of  his  position.8  How  intimate  was  the 
connection  between  English  and  American  Whigs,  and  how  like 
was  their  reasoning,  is  made  clear  from  a  passage  of  a  later  speech 
by  Pitt  which  Dickinson  quoted  in  the  preface  to  a  collected  edition 
of  his  works  issued  in  iBoi  : 

This  universal  opposition  to  your  arbitrary  system  of  taxation,  might 
have  been  foreseen;  it  was  obvious  from  the  nature  of  things,  and  from 
the  nature  of  man,  and  above  all  ..  .  from  the  spirit  of  whiggism  flourish¬ 
ing  in  America.  The  spirit  which  now  pervades  America,  is  the  same  which 
formerly  opposed  loans,  benevolences,  and  ship-money  in  this  country; 
is  the  same  spirit  which  roused  all  England  to  action  at  the  revolution,  and 
which  established  at  a  remote  era,  your  liberties,  on  the  basis  of  that  grand 
fundamental  maxim  of  the  constitution,  that  no  subject  of  England  shall 
be  taxed,  but  by  his  own  consent.  To  maintain  this  principle,  is  the 
common  cause  of  the  whigs,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  and  on  this. 
It  is  liberty  to  liberty  engaged.  In  this  great  cause  they  are  immoveably 
allied.  It  is  the  alliance  of  God  and  nature,  immutable,  eternal,  fixed  as 
the  firmament  of  heaven.  As  an  Englishman,  I  recognize  to  the  Americans, 
their  supreme  unalterable  right  of  property.  As  an  American,  I  would 

6  Ibid.,  pp.  332-333- 

6  Considerations  on  the  Propriety  of  Imposing  Taxes  in  the  British  Colonies,  for  the 
Purpose  of  Raising  a  Revenue  by  Act  of  Parliament. 

7  See  Tyler,  Literary  History  of  the  American  Revolution,  Vol.  I,  p.  in. 

8  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  320. 


227 


JOHN  DICKINSON 

equally  recognize  to  England,  her  supreme  right  of  regulating  commerce 
and  navigation.  This  distinction  is  involved  in  the  abstract  nature  of 
things;  property  is  private,  individual,  absolute:  the  touch  of  another 
annihilates  it.  Trade  is  an  extended  and  complicated  consideration;  it 
reaches  as  far  as  ships  can  sail,  or  winds  can  blow;  it  is  a  vast  and  various 
machine.  To  regulate  the  numberless  movements  of  its  several  parts,  and 
combine  them  into  one  harmonious  effect,  for  the  good  of  the  whole, 
requires  the  superintending  wisdom  and  energy  of  the  supreme  power  of 
the  empire.  On  this  grand  practical  distinction,  then,  let  us  rest:  taxation 
is  theirs,  commercial  regulation  is  ours.  As  to  metaphysical  refinements, 
attempting  to  shew,  that  the  Americans  are  equally  free  from  legislative 
controul,  and  commercial  restraint,  as  from  taxation,  for  the  purpose  of 
revenue,  I  pronounce  them  futile,  frivolous,  and  groundless.9 

How  characteristic  of  Pitt  is  the  shrewd  purpose,  covered  over 
with  pretentious  rhetoric,  to  seize  the  imperialistic  substance  of 
trade  control  for  the  London  "merchants,  and  graciously  yield  in 
the  name  of  liberty,  the  shadow  of  taxation! 

Discussion  of  abstract  rights  interested  Dickinson  no  more  than 
it  did  Pitt;  but  he  cared  greatly  for  English  liberty,  by  which  he 
meant  the  rights  of  propertied  gentlemen  recognized  by  the  British 
constitution,  for  which  his  ancestors  had  struggled.  He  had  no 
wish  to  enlarge  those  rights,  for  he  believed  they  were  adequate  to 
the  well-being  of  Englishmen.  No  thought  of  a  republican  form  of 
government  crossed  his  mind.  He  had  no  sympathy  with  democ¬ 
racy;  he  believed  in  a  “mixed  government”  as  exemplified  in 
the  British  system;  and  while  he  was  not  an  outspoken  advocate 
of  an  American  peerage,  he  would  have  approved  of  its  institution. 
Like  so  many  upper-class  Americans,  he  was  English  as  well  as 
colonial;  he  could  not  conceive  that  the  heritage  of  England  to 
her  sons  was  circumscribed  by  geographical  lines,  and  he  habitually 
thought  and  spoke  in  terms  of  the  British  Empire,  and  never  in 
local  terms.  What  he  most  feared  was  a  misunderstanding  that 
would  widen  into  rupture.  There  is  more  than  a  hint  of  the  doctrine 
of  passive  resistance  in  his  counsel  of  moderation: 

The  cause  of  liberty  is  a  cause  of  too  much  dignity  to  be  sullied  by  tur¬ 
bulence  and  tumult.  It  ought  to  be  maintained  in  a  manner  suitable  to 
her  nature.  Those  who  engage  in  it,  should  breathe  a  sedate,  yet  fervent 
spirit,  animating  them  to  actions  of  prudence,  justice,  modesty,  bravery, 
humanity,  and  magnanimity.  ...  I  hope,  my  dear  countrymen,  that  you 
will,  in  every  colony,  be  on  your  guard  against  those,  who  may  at  any  time 
endeavour  to  stir  you  up,  under  pretense  of  patriotism,  to  any  measures 

9  Ibid.,  pp.  xv-xvii.  ; 


228 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


disrespectful  to  our  Sovereign  and  our  mother  country.  Hot,  rash,  dis¬ 
orderly  proceedings,  injure  the  reputation  of  a  people,  as  to  wisdom,  valour, 
and  virtue,  without  procuring  them  the  least  benefit.  I  pray  god,  that  he 
may  be  pleased  to  inspire  you  and  your  posterity,  to  the  latest  ages,  with  a 
spirit  of  which  I  have  an  idea,  that  I  find  a  difficulty  to  express.  To  ex¬ 
press  it  in  the  best  manner  I  can,  I  mean  a  spirit,  that  shall  so  guide  you, 
that  it  will  be  impossible  to  determine  whether  an  American  s  character  is 
most  distinguishable,  for  its  loyalty  to  his  Sovereign,  his  duty  to  his  mother 
country,  his  love  of  freedom,  or  his  affection  for  his  native  soil.10 

In  these  earlier  years  of  the  controversy  Dickinson  seems  to 
have  remained  placidly  unaware  of  the  sordid  realities  of  parlia¬ 
mentary  huckstering,  the  details  of  which  Franklin  was  daily 
noting  in  his  letters.  He  seems  honestly  to  have  believed  in  the 
justice  and  good  intentions  of  the  King  and  his  ministers,  and  he 
felt  little  sympathy  for  the  New  England  malcontents.  But  as 
the  debate  dragged  on,  and  the  English  politicians  in  whose  recti¬ 
tude  he  had  professed  confidence,  clearly  were  playing  into  the 
hands  of  British  trading  interests,  going  so  far  as  to  seek  to  bolster 
up  the  falling  fortunes  of  the  East  India  Company  at  the  expense 
of  colonial  merchants,  he  was  impelled  to  speak  with  plebeian 
warmth.  His  Two  Letters  on  the  Tea  Tax,  written  in  November, 
1773,  are  as  vigorous  in  denunciation  as  Samuel  Adams  could 
have  penned. 

Five  Ships,  loaded  with  tea,  on  their  Way  to  America,  and  this  with  a 
View  not  only  to  enforce  the  Revenue  Act,  but  to  establish  a  Monopoly  for  the 
East-India  Company,  who  have  espoused  the  Cause  of  the  Ministry;  and 
hope  to  repair  their  broken  Fortunes  by  the  Ruin  of  American  freedom  and 
Liberty!  No  Wonder  the  Minds  of  the  People  are  exasperated  ...  to  a 
degree  of  Madness.  .  .  .  Pray  have  you  heard,  whether  they  and  the 
Ministers  have  not  made  a  Property  of  us,  and  whether  we,  our  wives  and 
children,  together,  with  the  hard  earned  fruits  of  our  labour,  are 
not  made  over  to  this  almost  bankrupt  Company,  to  augment  their  Stock, 
and  to  repair  their  ruined  Fortunes?  Justice  seems  to  have  forsaken  the 
old  World.  .  .  .  The  Rights  of  free  States  and  Cities  are  swallowed  up  in 
Power.  Subjects  are  considered  as  Property.  .  .  .  Are  we  ...  to  be 
given  up  to  the  Disposal  of  the  East-India  Company?  .  ...  Their  con¬ 

duct  in  Asia,  for  some  Years  past,  has  given  ample  Proof,  how  little  they 
regard  the  Laws  of  Nations,  the  Rights,  Liberties,  or  Lives  of  Men.  They 
have  levied  War,  excited  Rebellions,  dethroned  lawful  Princes,  and 
sacrificed  Millions  for  the  Sake  of  Gain  .  .  .  hackneyed  as  they  are  in 
Murders,  Rapine,  and  Cruelty,  [they]  would  sacrifice  the  Lives  of  Thou¬ 
sands  to  preserve  their  Trash,  and  enforce  their  measures.11 

10  “Farmer’s  Letters,”  in  Works,  Vol.  I,  pp.  324-325. 

11  Works,  Vol.  I,  pp.  459-461. 


229 


JOHN  DICKINSON 

The  ideal  of  a  beneficent  British  Empire,  extending  English 
freedom  through  the  world,  appealed  to  the  imagination  of  Dickin¬ 
son;  but  the  reality  of  British  imperialism,  “hackneyed  in  murders, 
rapine  and  cruelty,”  seeking  to  extend  its  exploitation  to  America, 
striking  at  the  trade  interests  of  Philadelphia  and  his  merchant 
friends,  was  enough  to  disturb  his  legal  calm.  What  fate  awaited 
American  rights  and  liberties  if  the  London  imperialists  were 
permitted  to  prey  upon  them,  he  began  to  comprehend.  The 
bones  would  be  picked  clean,  and  America  would  become  another 
India.  It  was  the  deepening  fear  of  such  a  possibility  that  sapped 
Dickinson’s  loyalty,  and  reconciled  him  to  independence  after 
the  thing  was  done. 

The  later  years  of  Dickinson  were  happier  than  those  of  the 
middle  period.  The  conservative  reaction  that  set  in  with  the 
conclusion  of  peace  carried  the  emerging  party  of  nationalism 
back  to  the  position  of  Whiggery,  which  Dickinson  had  tenaciously 
occupied.  The  leaders  of  that  party  were  coming  to  agree  on  the 
necessity  for  a  closer  alignment  in  defense  of  property  rule,  and 
they  gladly  accepted  Dickinson  as  an  ally  and  co-worker.  He  was 
chosen  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  Convention,  and  there 
found  a  congenial  audience  for  the  exposition  of  his  political 
principles.  In  the  debates  he  spoke  as  a  high  Federalist  who  would 
like  to  go  further  toward  the  model  of  the  British  system  than 
the  state  of  the  public  mind  rendered  expedient.  A  strong  and 
stable  government,  he  believed,  depended  upon  a  just  balance  of 
king,  lords,  and  commons. 

A  limited  monarchy  he  considered  as  one  of  the  best  governments  in  the 
world.  He  was  not  certain  that  the  same  blessings  were  derivable  from 
any  other  form.  It  was  certain  that  equal  blessings  had  never  yet  been 
derived  from  any  of  the  republican  forms.  A  limited  monarchy,  however, 
was  out  of  the  question.  The  spirit  of  the  times,  the  state  of  our  affairs, 
forbade  the  experiment,  if  it  were  desirable.  Was  it  possible,  moreover,  in 
the  nature  of  things,  to  introduce  it,  even  if  these  objects  were  less  in¬ 
superable?  A  house  of  nobles  was  essential  to  such  a  government.  Could 
these  be  created  by  a  breath,  or  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen?  No.  They  were 
the  growth  of  ages,  and  could  only  arise  under  a  complication  of  circum¬ 
stances  none  of  which  existed  in  this  country.  But,  though  a  form  the 
most  perfect,  perhaps,  in  itself,  be  unattainable,  we  must  not  despair.18 

Granted  the  necessity  of  a  republican  form  of  government,  the 
question  so  vital  to  Whiggery  remained,  how  could  property  secure 
12  Elliot's  Debates,  Vol.  V,  p.148. 


230 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

and  maintain  a  commanding  position  in  the  government?  The 
reply  was  obvious;  it  must  be  through  limitation  of  suffrage  rights. 
If  the  vote  could  be  restricted  to  property  holders,  even  though 
small  freeholders  were  included,  the  common  rights  of  property 
would  be  secure. 

Mr.  Dickinson  had  a  very  different  idea  of  the  tendency  of  vesting  the 
rights  of  suffrage  in  the  freeholders  of  the  Country.  He  considered  them 
as  the  best  guardians  of  liberty;  And  the  restriction  of  the  right  to  them  as 
a  necessary  defence  agst.  the  dangerous  influence  of  those  multitudes 
without  property  &  without  principle,  with  which  our  country  like  all 
others,  will  in  time  abound.13 

A  further  safeguard  offered  in  the  proper  constitution  of  the 
Senate.  As  a  representative  of  a  small  state,  Dickinson  was 
concerned  that  the  several  states  should  enjoy  a  parity  of  power 
in  the  upper  house,  as  he  was  concerned  that  the  Senate  should 
provide  a  safeguard  for  property  interests.  It  must  be  rendered 
secure  from  factional  unrest  and  democratic  aggression.  He  was 
very  likely  at  one  with  his  friend  George  Clymer,  in  holding  that  “a 
representative  of  the  people  is  appointed  to  think  for  and  not  with 
his  constituents”;  and  to  the  end  that  the  right  persons  should  be 
chosen  to  do  the  national  thinking,  he  laid  down  the  principle 
that,  “In  the  formation  of  the  Senate,  we  ought  to  carry  it  through 
such  a  refining  process  as  will  assimilate  it  as  nearly  as  may  be  to 
the  House  of  Lords  in  England.”  14  Such  expressions  throw 
sufficient  light  upon  Dickinson’s  opinions  of  democratic  govern¬ 
ment,  but  they  do  not  prepare  us  for  a  curious  inconsistency  that 
marked  his  last  years,  namely,  his  friendship  for  Jefferson  and 
his  sympathy  with  the  Jeffersonian  program.  The  reasons  for 
this  strange  shift  are  not  clear,  but  it  is  generally  attributed  to 
his  fear  of  consolidation  that  might  end  in  subordinating  the  small 
states  to  the  greater  ones.  It  certainly  was  not  due  to  any  sym¬ 
pathy  with  agrarianism. 

Dickinson  was  in  no  sense  a  serious  political  thinker.  He  was  a 
cultivated  lawyer  who  defended  with  skill  and  grace  a  ready-made 
philosophy,  unconcerned  about  the  social  significance  of  that 
philosophy.  Scarcely  anywhere  else  in  his  writings  does  he  show 
to  such  poor  advantage  as  in  the  nine  Letters  of  Fabius  written 
in  defense  of  the  Constitution  during  the  great  debate.  There  is 


13  Ibid. 


14  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  163. 


231 


JOHN  DICKINSON 

in  them  not  a  single  illuminating  comment.  His  most  anxious 
concern  is  shown  in  his  reply  to  George  Mason’s  direct  charge,  that 
the  “government  will  commence  in  a  moderate  aristocracy;  it  is 
at  present  impossible  to  foresee  whether  it  will,  in  its  operation, 
produce  a  monarchy,  or  a  corrupt  oppressive  aristocracy.”  15 
After  searching  the  records  of  the  past  he  concludes  that  “the 
uniform  tenor  of  history  .  .  .  holds  up  the  licentiousness  of  the 
people,  and  turbulent  temper  of  some  of  the  states,  as  the  only  causes 
to  be  dreaded,  not  the  conspiracies  of  federal  officers.”  16  The 
argument  had  been  somewhat  staled  by  Federalistic  repetition, 
but  Dickinson  soberly  accepted  it  as  sound  historical  interpreta¬ 
tion.  His  cleverest  defense  he  found  in  an  appeal  to  the  analogy  of 
the  British  constitution,  which  has  only  one  democratic  branch, 
and  that  “diseased”  by  inadequate  representation,  to  withstand 
the  power  and  influence  of  king  and  lords;  if  English  liberty  has 
been  thus  safeguarded,  what  danger  can  threaten  America  with 
“a  constitution  and  government,  every  branch  of  which  is  so 
extremely  popular”?17 

However  greatly  the  writings  of  Dickinson,  from  the  Farmer’s 
Letters  to  the  Letters  of  Fabius,  may  have  appealed  to  Whiggish 
lawyers,  it  is  inconceivable  that  they  should  have  appealed  to  the 
rank  and  file  of  Americans.  As  an  eighteenth-century  gentleman 
he  little  understood  the  spirit  of  liberalism  that  was  stirring  in 
many  minds;  he  did  not  sympathize  with  the  turbulent  forces  that 
were  driving  towards  a  different  social  order;  and  in  consequence 
his  technical  arguments  seem  today  curiously  old-fashioned. 
Franklin’s  common  sense  kept  him  a  realist;  but  Dickinson’s  loy¬ 
alty  made  him  an  idealist,  incapable  of  understanding  current  eco¬ 
nomic  forces  either  in  England  or  America.  The  colonial  was  so 
ingrained  in  his  habits  of  thought  that  it  was  hard  for  him  to  be¬ 
come  an  American.  So  long  as  it  was  politic  to  profess  loyalty  to 
England  while  remonstrating  against  ministerial  policies,  John 
Dickinson  was  the  man  for  the  business.  But  when  it  became 
necessary  to  throw  aside  the  mask  of  loyal  professions,  to  stand 
up  and  fight,  he  was  thrust  aside  to  make  room  for  more  vigorous 
spokesmen.  No  doubt  there  were  desirable  things  which  the  radi¬ 
cals  overlooked;  no  doubt  the  ideal  of  imperial  unity,  of  a  world¬ 
wide  federation  of  the  several  bodies  of  Englishmen,  possessed  a 

16  Quoted  in  Ford,  Pamphlets  on  the  Constitution,  p.  332. 

16  Ibid..,  p.  200.  17  Ibid.,  p.  212. 


232 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

grandeur  which  ardent  patriots  held  too  cheap.  But  that  ideal 
did  not  prevail,  despite  Dickinson’s  earnest  endeavors;  and  in 
the  new  order  which  arose  he  probably  never  felt  quite  at  home, 
or  was  free  from  a  lingering  regret.  He  belonged  still  in  that 
older  world  in  which  he  was  bred. 


CHAPTER  IV 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 

The  Mind  of  the  American  Democrat 

In  the  history  of  the  rise  of  political  democracy  in  America 
Samuel  Adams  occupies  a  distinguished  place.  He  was  by  no 
means  the  first  American  to  espouse  the  democratic  cause,  but  he 
was  the  first  to  conceive  the  party  machinery  to  establish  it  in 
practice.  The  single  purpose  of  his  life  was  the  organization  of 
the  rank  and  file  to  take  over  control  of  the  political  state.  He  was 
the  instrument  of  a  changing  world  that  was  to  transfer  sovereignty 
from  the  aristocratic  minority  to  the  democratic  majority.  Politi¬ 
cal  sovereignty  inheres  potentially  in  the  mass  will  of  the  people; 
but  if  that  will  is  restrained  from  exercising  its  strength  by  an 
undemocratic  psychology,  it  remains  powerless  in  presence  of 
an  organized  minority.  The  America  in  which  Samuel  Adams 
labored  was  ripe  to  throw  off  the  inhibitions  of  the  popular  will; 
and  it  was  his  perception  of  that  fact,  and  the  tenacity  and  skill 
with  v/hich  he  cajoled  the  mass  to  “make  a  push  for  perfect  political 
liberty,”  that  made  him  an  outstanding  figure  in  our  history.  In 
his  hands  the  majority  will  became  in  reality  the  sovereign  will. 
But  before  he  could  wield  it  he  must  create  it;  and  before  he  could 
create  it  he  must  understand  the  mass  mind.  He  must  turn  popular 
prejudice  to  his  own  purpose;  he  must  guide  the  popular  resentment 
at  grievances  into  the  way  of  revolution;  he  must  urge  the  slow 
moving  mass  forward  until  it  stood  on  the  threshold  of  independ¬ 
ence,  beyond  which  lay  the  ultimate  goal  of  his  ambitions,  the 
democratic  state.  And  so,  in  pursuit  of  his  life  purpose,  Samuel 
Adams  became  a  master  political  strategist,  the  first  of  our  great 
popular  leaders. 

The  modern  term,  professional  agitator,  most  adequately  charac¬ 
terizes  him.  He  was  an  intriguing  rebel  against  every  ambition 
of  the  regnant  order.  He  hated  every  sort  of  aristocratic  privilege, 
whether  in  the  form  of  overseas  prerogative  or  in  the  later  guise  of 
native  Federalism;  it  must  be  swept  away  and  a  new,  democratic 
order  take  its  place.  In  the  pursuit  of  this  great  end  he  daily  coun- 

233 


234 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


seled  treason  and  made  rebellion  his  business.  Loyalty  to  the 
government  de  facto  was  no  virtue  in  his  political  ethics;  he  was  not 
frightened  into  conformity  by  the  stigma  attaching  to  the  term 
rebel.  America  was  founded  in  rebellion,  he  well  knew,  and  it 
should  continue  in  rebellion  till  every  false  loyalty  was  cast  off  and 
concern  for  the  common  well-being  accepted  as  the  single  loyalty 
worthy  of  respect.  “What  has  commonly  been  called  rebellion 
in  the  people,”  he  commented  wisely,  “has  often  been  nothing  else 
but  a  manly  and  glorious  struggle  in  opposition  to  the  lawless  power 
of  rebellious  Kings  and  Princes.”  1  He  was  the  outstanding  ex¬ 
ample  in  his  day  of  the  militant  idealist  to  whom  the  dissemination 
of  unrest  was  a  matter  of  principle.  No  cause  goes  forward  without 
its  leaders,  and  democratic  America  owes  Samuel  Adams  a  debt 
which  it  has  too  grudgingly  acknowledged. 

He  was  born  and  grew  up  in  an  atmosphere  of  politics.  His 
father  was  a  prosperous,  well-read  gentleman  who  found  politics 
a  pleasant  avocation;  he  established  the  Caucus  Club  for  political 
discussion,  and  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  popular  party 
that  opposed  the  Tory  group,  gathered  about  the  royal  officials. 
Its  personnel  can  only  be  guessed  at,  but  it  was  probably  composed 
of  small  merchants,  with  a  following  of  mechanics  and  other  un¬ 
important  folk.  It  seems  to  have  been  greatly  interested  in 
currency  reform,  and  the  elder  Adams  was  one  of  the  principal  or¬ 
ganizers  and  stockholders  of  the  Land  Bank,  a  project  for  increas¬ 
ing  the  money  of  the  commonwealth.  The  institution  was  roughly 
liquidated  by  government  decree  at  the  instigation  of  commercial 
rivals  interested  in  “tight  money”;  the  father  lost  heavily  and  the 
son  was  pretty  much  ruined  by  later  attempts  at  arbitrary  col¬ 
lection  on  his  stock.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  petty  and  altogether 
sordid  move  on  the  part  of  government,  in  which  Hutchinson 
played  an  important  part.  With  the  loss  of  his  money  Samuel 
Adams,  Jr.,  settled  down  to  a  meager,  somewhat  precarious  ex¬ 
istence,  preferring  politics  to  profits,  and  began  that  long,  arduous 
career  which  resulted  so  momentously  for  America. 

He  had  taken  his  two  degrees  at  Harvard  in  the  expectation  of 
becoming  a  minister;  but  while  an  undergraduate  he  was  more 
interested  in  the  political  classics  than  in  theology,  and  he  rejected 
the  ministry  for  the  law.  But  a  brief  experience  with  Coke  sufficed, 
and  he  turned  to  more  congenial  fields.  With  a  group  of  like- 

1  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  269. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 


235 


minded  young  men  he  founded  in  1748  The  Public  Advertiser , 
a  weekly  magazine  of  politics.  In  the  essays  which  as  a  young 
man  of  twenty-six  he  wrote  for  that  paper,  he  expounded  a  political 
creed  frankly  liberal.  He  began  as  he  ended,  anti-Tory  and  pro- 
democratic.  From  then  till  the  beginning  of  the  tax  troubles  he 
was  a  tireless  contributor  to  the  newspapers,  and  except  during 
the  administration  of  the  liberal  Pownall,  always  in  the  opposition. 
Hutchinson  stated  the  exact  truth  when  he  said,  “He  was  for 
near  twenty  years  a  writer  against  government  in  the  public 
newspapers.”  The  need  was  urgent,  for  during  those  years  the 
government  of  Massachusetts  was  being  subtly  changed.  With 
increasing  prosperity,  ways  of  thinking,  like  styles  of  dress,  were 
becoming  more  like  those  of  St.  James’s.  Ambitious  young  men 
were  drawn  into  the  circle  of  the  ruling  group  and  caught  with 
the  bait  of  preferment.  An  aristocracy  was  emerging  that  wanted 
only  titles  to  make  ready  to  set  up  a  House  of  Lords.  Quite 
plainly  it  was  time  for  the  liberals  to  arouse  the  rank  and  file  of 
the  people  to  the  danger,  and  this  became  the  daily  business  of 
Samuel  Adams. 

The  evidence  available  is  insufficient  to  explain  the  motives 
which  impelled  him  to  take  up  and  carry  forward  so  difficult  and 
thankless  a  work.  The  cost  in  personal  ease  and  the  good  opinion 
of  respectable  people  was  great,  the  peril  certain,  and  the  reward 
dubious.  Not  lightly  will  a  serious  man  compromise  with  treason; 
to  talk  republicanism  was  not  profitable  in  Tory  New  England; 
and  Samuel  Adams,  no  more  than  another,  was  anxious  to  come  to 
close  acquaintance  with  the  hangman.  What  secret  motives 
inspired  the  heart  of  this  ascetic  Puritan — “he  eats  little,  drinks 
little,  sleeps  little,  thinks  much,”  said  the  Loyalist  Galloway,  half 
sneeringly,  half  out  of  respect — we  can  only  guess  at.  Very  likely 
there  was  an  old  grudge  at  a  government  that  had  ruined  him; 
very  likely  love  of  power  stimulated  his  hatred  of  the  ruling  clique; 
very  likely  his  close  association  with  tradesmen  colored  his  resent¬ 
ment  at  overseas  regulation,  for  better  than  most,  he  knew  that 
the  American  goose  was  reserved  for  English  plucking.  Never¬ 
theless  the  more  intimately  one  comes  to  know  Samuel  Adams 
the  more  inadequate  seem  all  cynical  and  sordid  interpretations 
of  his  strange  career.  He  was  no  self-seeking  politician,  but  a 
man  of  vision.  He  believed  ardently  in  the  principle  of  local 
home  rule.  Love  of  the  New  England  town-meeting  democracy 


236 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


was  bred  in  his  bones.  More  clearly  than  others  he  saw  the  danger 
of  erecting  a  governing  class  irresponsive  to  the  popular  will. 
He  was,  in  short,  the  embodiment  of  the  rising  spirit  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century  that  found  expression  in  individualism,  that  ex¬ 
alted  liberty  and  hated  tyranny — a  spirit  that  had  for  its  ultimate 
purpose  the  reduction  of  the  powers  of  the  political  state. 

His  critical  study  of  the  methods  of  Tory  politicians  early 
stripped  from  government  the  last  vestige  of  glamor  so  appealing 
to  the  ignorant.  Adams  understood  too  perfectly  the  secret 
springs  and  backstairs  intrigues  that  determined  governmental 
policies,  to  be  taken  in  by  appeal  to  his  loyalty.  English  politics 
was  a  sordid  business,  conducted  by  professional  traders,  to  whom 
loyalty  and  patriotism  were  no  more  than  gestures  to  gull  the 
simple.  Quite  as  well  as  Franklin,  Adams  understood  its  ways. 
He  had  watched  the  steady  unfolding  of  the  ministerial  program: 
how  it  was  proposed  to  free  the  royal  governor  and  judges  from 
popular  restraint  by  the  payment  of  salaries  from  the  royal  chest; 
to  change  the  charter  in  the  interest  of  prerogative  by  vesting  the 
nomination  of  the  councilors  in  the  governor;  to  disarm  the 
democracy  by  destroying  the  town  meeting  as  a  political  instru¬ 
ment;  in  short  to  substitute  government  by  ministerial  instructions 
for  government  by  the  people.  As  he  watched  the  calculated 
encroachments  upon  the  historical  rights  of  the  commonwealth — 
rights  that  were  sanctioned  by  a  hundred  and  forty  years  of 
exercise,  and  were  now  in  danger  from  carelessness — he  would 
have  been  faithless  to  his  duty  if  he  had  not  sought  to  arouse  the 
people  of  Massachusetts  to  the  danger.  There  was  no  idle  rhetoric 
in  the  words,  “No  time  can  better  be  employed  than  in  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  the  rights  derived  from  the  British  constitution  .... 
No  treasure  can  be  better  expended,  than  in  securing  that  true 
old  English  liberty,  which  gives  a  relish  to  every  other  enjoyment.”2 

In  the  fulfillment  of  this  purpose  to  defend  the  democratic 
rights  of  Massachusetts,  Adams  became  no  mean  master  of  political 
theory.  In  the  works  of  no  other  writer  is  the  total  body  of  Revolu¬ 
tionary  thought  so  adequately  revealed.  He  was  deeply  read  in 
the  political  classics,  and  all  the  great  names — Hooker  and  Grotius, 
Pufendorf  and  Vattel,  Coke  and  Blackstone,  Locke  and  Milton 
and  Sidney  and  Hume  and  Montesquieu — are  spread  largely 
through  his  pages  to  buttress  his  argument.  In  spite  of  the  elusive 

2  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  348. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 


237 


“meanders  and  windings”  of  his  thought,  veering  and  tacking  as 
the  winds  blew,  three  broad  lines  of  defense  are  clearly  discernible. 
He  rested  his  case  on  an  appeal  to  the  natural  rights  of  man,  to 
the  particular  rights  and  privileges  of  the  British  subject  under 
the  constitution,  and  to  the  express  terms  of  the  compact  between 
the  crown  and  its  emigrant  subjects  laid  down  in  the  several 
colonial  charters.  Inasmuch  as  the  American  cause  was  to  be 
argued  before  an  old-world  court,  it  was  common  prudence  to 
seek  to  justify  the  seeming  innovations  of  American  institutional 
development,  by  old-world  precedent  and  authority.  If  he  could 
base  the  American  grievance  on  the  Whig  doctrine  of  representa¬ 
tion,  he  might  rally  the  English  Whigs  to  the  American  cause. 
This  was  sound  constitutionalism,  and  Adams  was  too  shrewd  not 
to  profess  the  highest  respect  for  the  glorious  British  constitution. 
“You  know  there  is  a  charm  in  the  word  ‘constitutional,’  ”  he 
slyly  suggested  to  a  fellow  colonial;  and  such  respect,  not  to  say 
veneration,  he  trumpeted  to  the  world,  until  it  may  well  have 
seemed  that  he  did  protest  too  much. 

In  his  first  line  of  defense  Adams  was  on  familiar  ground,  and 
he  was  supported  by  the  authority  of  Locke,  whose  opinions  were 
sacred  in  the  eyes  of  English  Whigs.  What  use  he  made  of  him  is 
evident;  “the  immortal  Locke,”  he  calls  him  at  one  time,  and  at 
another,  “one  of  the  greatest  men  that  ever  wrote.”  He  had 
been  a  disciple  of  Locke  since  his  first  interest  in  political 
theory,  and  he  thought  and  spoke  habitually  in  terms  of  the 
natural-rights  school.  It  is  sometimes  asserted  that  the  appeal 
to  natural  rights  was  made  only  after  the  breakdown  of  the 
colonial  argument  drawn  from  constitutional  practice.3  But  as 
early  as  1765  Adams  based  his  argument  on  Locke  in  assuming 
the  economic  origin  of  government,  and  the  inevitable  connec¬ 
tion  between  property  and  parliamentary  representation.4  How 
heavily  he  leaned  on  the  natural-rights  school  appears  again 
and  again;  particularly  in  a  brilliant  series  of  articles,  signed 
“Candidus,”  written  in  1771,  where  he  paraphrases  the  Second 
Treatise  on  Government: 


3  Hutchinson  seems  to  justify  such  a  view  from  a  passage  written  in  1770:  “The 
leaders  here  seem  to  acknowledge  that  their  cause  is  not  to  be  defended  on  con¬ 
stitutional  principles,  and  Adams  now  gives  out  that  there  is  no  need  of  it;  they  are 
upon  better  ground;  all  men  have  a  natural  right  to  change  a  bad  constitution  for  a 
better,  whenever  they  have  it  in  their  power.”  (Hosmer,  Life  of  Samuel  Adams, 
p.  259-) 

4  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  1 35- 


238 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


Mr.  Locke  has  often  been  quoted  in  the  present  dispute  .  .  .  and  very 
much  to  our  purpose.  His  reasoning  is  so  forcible,  that  no  one  has  ever 
attempted  to  confute  it.  He  holds  that  “the  preservation  of  property  is 
the  end  of  government,  and  that  for  which  men  enter  into  society.  It 
therefore  necessarily  supposes  and  requires  that  the  people  should  have 
property,  without  which  they  must  be  suppos’d  to  lose  that  by  entering 
into  society,  which  was  the  end  for  which  they  enter’d  into  it;  too  gross  an 
absurdity  for  any  man  to  own.  Men  therefore  in  society  having  property , 
they  have  such  right  to  the  goods,  which  by  the  law  of  the  community  are 
theirs,  that  no  body  hath  the  right  to  take  any  part  of  their  subsistence 
from  them  without  their  consent:  Without  this,  they  could  have  no  prop¬ 
erty  at  all.  For  I  truly  can  have  no  property  in  that  which  another  can 
by  right  take  from  me  when  he  pleases,  against  my  consent.  Hence,  says 
he,  it  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  the  supreme  power  of  any  commonwealth 
can  dispose  of  the  estates  of  the  subject  arbitrarily,  or  take  any  part  of 
them  at  pleasure.  The  prince  or  senate  can  never  have  a  power  to  take  to 
themselves  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  subjects’  property  without  their 
own  consent;  for  this  would  be  in  effect  to  have  no  property  at  all.” — This 
is  the  reasoning  of  that  great  and  good  man.  And  is  not  our  own  case 
exactly  described  by  him?  6 

This  was  excellent  doctrine  in  the  eyes  of  the  English  Whigs, 
and  it  explains  in  part  the  support  which  Pitt  and  Camden  lent 
to  the  colonial  cause.  But  in  his  second  line  of  defense,  namely, 
that  the  English  constitution  was  a  fundamental  charter  of  the 
natural  rights  of  the  subject,  and  that  a  statute  which  disregarded 
those  natural  rights  was  null  and  void,  Adams  was  on  less  tenable 
ground.  Every  attempt  to  establish  such  a  principle,  whether  that 
fundamental  law  be  conceived  of  as  the  “law  of  God  and  nature,” 
special  compacts  like  the  Magna  Charta,  or  the  Common  Law, 
has  met  with  failure  in  English  constitutional  practice.  Neverthe¬ 
less  Adams  made  use  of  the  argument,  derived,  very  likely,  from 
Coke. 

Magna  Charta  itself  is  in  substance  but  a  constrained  Declaration  or 
proclamation,  and  promulgation  in  the  name  of  King,  Lords,  and  Com¬ 
mons,  of  the  sense  the  latter  had  of  their  original,  inherent,  indefeazible 
natural  Rights,  as  also  those  of  free  Citizens  equally  perdurable  with  the 
other.  That  great  author,  that  great  jurist,  and  even  that  Court  writer 
Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  holds  that  this  recognition  was  justly  obtained  of 
King  John  sword  in  hand:  and  peradventure  it  must  be  one  day  sword  in 
hand  again  rescued  and  preserved  from  total  destruction.6 

[Magna  Charta]  is  affirm’d  by  Lord  Coke  to  be  declaratory  of  the 
principal  grounds  of  the  fundamental  laws  and  liberties  of  England.  “  It  is 

6  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  299. 

6  “The  Rights  of  the  Colonists,”  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  pp.  355-356. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS  239 

called  Charta  Libertatum  Regni,  the  Charter  of  the  Liberties  of  the  kingdom, 
upon  great  reason  .  .  .  because  liberos  facit,  it  makes  and.  preserves  the 
people  free.”  ...  If  then  according  to  Lord  Coke,  Magna  Charta  is 
declaratory  of  the  principal  grounds  of  the  fundamental  laws  and  liberties 
of  the  people,  and  Vatel  is  right  in  his  opinion,  that  the  supreme  legislature 
cannot  change  the  constitution,  I  think  it  follows,  whether  Lord  Coke  has 
expressly  asserted  it  or  not,  that  an  act  of  parliament  made  against  Magna 
Charta  in  violation  of  its  essential  parts,  is  void.7 

Adams  was  probably  fully  aware  of  the  weakness  of  the  argu¬ 
ment.  The  well  known  attempt  of  Coke  to  establish  a  body  of 
super-parliamentary  law  that  sanctioned  the  annulling  of  a  statute 
had  been  a  total  failure.  Parliament  had  refused  to  yield  sov¬ 
ereignty  to  the  lawyers.  The  Tories  were  on  stronger  ground  in 
asserting  Hume’s  doctrine  that  “the  only  rule  of  government 
is  the  established  practice  of  the  age,  upon  maxims  universally 
assented  to”;  and  the  established  practice  was  sufficient  reply 
to  the  argument  that  “it  is  the  glory  of  the  British  constitution 
that  it  hath  its  foundations  in  the  law  of  God  and  nature.”  More¬ 
over  the  doctrine  of  virtual  representation  was  at  hand  to  cover 
any  discrepancy  between  natural  rights  and  existing  practice; 
the  argument  from  Locke  was  met  by  a  legal  refinement  which 
held  that  as  the  charter  of  Massachusetts  was  as  of  the  manor  of 
East  Greenwich,  the  freemen  of  Boston  were  personally  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  parliamentary  member  from  that  borough. 

When  Adams  fell  back  upon  his  third  line  of  defense,  the  appeal 
to  the  colonial  charter,  he  broke  with  the  English  Whigs  com¬ 
pletely.  The  royal  charters,  by  authority  of  which  the  colonies 
had  been  founded  and  governed  hitherto,  were  exalted  by  him 
into  a  secondary  fundamental  law,  subordinate  to  the  English 
constitution,  but  with  authority  beyond  an  act  of  parliament. 
This  organic  law  of  the  charter  was  “the  only  medium  of  their 
political  connection  with  the  Mother  State,”  he  argued,  and  as 
sacred  to  Americans  “as Magna  Charta  is  to  the  People  of  Britain, 
as  it  contains  a  Declaration  of  all  their  Rights  founded  in  natural 
Justice.”  8 

Thus  we  see  that  Whatever  Governmt  in  general  may  be  founded  in, 
Ours  was  manifestly  founded  in  Compact.  ...  By  this  Charter,  we  have 
an  exclusive  Right  to  make  Laws  for  our  own  internal  Government  & 
Taxation:  And  indeed  if  the  Inhabitants  here  are  British  Subjects  .  .  . 
it  seems  necessary  that  they  should  exercise  this  Power  themselves;  for 

7  “Candidus,”  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  pp.  325-326.  8  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  28. 


240  THE  AMERICAN  MIND 

they  are  not  represented  in  the  British  Parliamt  &  their  great  Distance 
renders  it  impracticable:  It  is  very  probable  that  all  the  subordinate 
legislative  Powers  in  America,  were  constituted  upon  the  Apprehension 
of  this  Impracticability.9 

After  all,  the  futility  of  argument  as  a  colonial  defense  against 
Grenville  or  Townshend  was  evident  to  so  shrewd  a  student  of 
political  realism  as  Samuel  Adams.  If  the  colonies  were  to  preserve 
their  traditional  liberties,  more  effective  means  must  be  found  than 
appeal  to  justice  or  colonial  use  and  wont.  Force  must  be  used, 
and  that  force — short  of  armed  rebellion — could  be  only  an  aroused 
public  opinion.  It  was  like  to  prove  a  difficult  business,  this 
arousing  of  an  effective  public  opinion,  and  not  wanting  in  danger; 
but  neither  difficulty  nor  danger  would  deter  a  calculating  enthu¬ 
siast  like  Adams  from  undertaking  it.  He  was  ready  to  devote  his 
life  to  the  work  of  creating  and  guiding  a  popular  interest  in  polit¬ 
ical  measures. 

The  means  which  he  made  use  of  were  as  novel  as  they  were 
repugnant  to  the  Tory  statecraft.  He  was  the  first  American  to 
understand  the  power  of  publicity,  and  not  the  least  of  his  services 
to  democracy  was  his  attack  upon  the  principle  of  secret  govern¬ 
ment.  Affairs  of  state  had  always  been  guarded  jealously  from 
public  knowledge,  on  the  theory  long  before  stated  by  Sir  Robert 
Filmer  that  the  subject  must  “have  nothing  to  do  to  meddle  with 
mysteries  of  state,  such  arcana  imperii,  or  cabinet  councils,  the 
vulgar  may  not  pry  into.”  Adams  now  proposed  to  lay  them  open 
to  common  inspection.  He  insisted  that  questions  of  governmental 
policy  be  taken  out  of  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  secret  councils, 
and  transferred  to  Faneuil  Hall  where  the  freemen  of  Boston  might 
examine  them,  and  where  the  “Cause  of  Liberty”  might  “be 
warmly  espoused  and  ably  vindicated.”  Here  was  a  revolutionary 
proposal  indeed,  with  its  demand  for  public  discussion  and  a 
popular  referendum;  and  naturally  it  gave  offense  to  the  crown 
officials.  It  meant  the  vulgarization  of  government.  It  was  a 
disturbing  thought  to  such  men  that  government  might  come  to 
be  regarded  as  the  common  concern  of  the  tax-paying  public; 
that  the  town  meeting  might  fall  under  the  control  of  the  plebeian 
mass  and  crowd  in  with  its  demands  upon  the  aristocratic  Council. 
How  could  gentlemen  deliberate  freely  and  determine  wisely,  with 
demagogues  sitting  in  judgment  on  every  word  and  vote?  So 

9  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  29. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 


241 


disturbing  to  gentlemen  was  any  criticism  that  one  of  Hutchinson’s 
followers  went  so  far  as  to  charge  Adams  with  “Indecency  in 
‘undertaking  to  answer  a  Governor’s  Message,”’  to  which  he 
replied : 

I  know  very  well  that  it  has  been  handed  as  a  political  Creed  of  late, 
that  the  Reasoning  of  the  People  without  Doors  is  not  to  be  regarded — 
But  every  ‘"transient  Person”  has  a  Right  publickly  to  animadvert  upon 
whatever  is  publickly  advanc’d  by  any  Man,  and  I  am  resolv’d  to  exercise 
that  Right,  when  I  please,  without  asking  any  Man’s  Leave.10 

Effective  organization  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  people  was  the 
business  at  hand.  It  was  a  new  problem  and  there  was  need  of 
new  methods.  The  Caucus  Club,  founded  by  his  father,  served  as 
a  training  school  for  the  leaders;  there  the  policies  were  deter¬ 
mined  upon  for  the  town  meeting  and  the  assembly,  and  there  the 
plans  for  a  continental  union  were  laid  in  Non-Importation  Agree¬ 
ments,  organization  of  Committees  of  Correspondence,  and  the 
like.  The  program  there  agreed  upon  Adams  made  it  his  busi¬ 
ness  to  put  through  the  town  meeting,  as  the  first  step.  When 
he  faced  his  fellow  Bostonians  in  Faneuil  Hall  he  relied  upon  the 
influence  which  long  years  of  familiar  intercourse  with  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men  had  won  for  him,  and  many  a  Boston  freeman 
went  to  the  meeting  ready  to  vote  for  “whatever  the  old  man 
wanted.”  Behind  the  imposing  figure  of  John  Hancock,  or  the 
eloquence  of  John  Adams,  was  certain  to  be  the  directing  mind  of 
the  “master  of  the  puppets,”  as  Hutchinson  sneeringly  called 
Samuel  Adams. 

His  hours  of  triumph  in  Boston  town  meeting  or  in  the  assembly 
were  preceded  by  an  incredible  amount  of  labor  with  the  pen  as 
well  as  with  the  tongue,  for  this  master  politician  was  the  journal¬ 
ist  as  well  as  the  organizer  of  the  New  England  revolution.  The 
public  opinion  on  which  he  depended  was  daily  being  made  in 
chimney  corners  and  tavern  talk,  and  he  proposed  to  mold  it 
through  the  agency  of  a  party  press.  No  other  pen  in  Boston  was 
so  busy  as  his.  “There  is  Sam  Adams  writing  against  the  Tories,” 
his  fellow  townsmen  are  said  to  have  remarked  when  they  saw  his 
familiar  candle  burning  long  into  the  night.  When  he  was  away  in 
attendance  on  the  Continental  Congress  he  reproached  his  friends 
at  home  for  neglecting  the  work  of  publicity.  “Your  presses  have 
been  too  long  silent.  What  were  your  Committees  of  Ccrre- 
10  “A  Chatterer,”  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  pp.  45-46. 


242 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


spondence  about?  I  hear  nothing  of  circular  Letters — of  joynt 
Committees  &c.  Such  Methods  have  in  times  past  raised  the 
Spirits  of  the  people — drawn  off  their  Attention  from  picking  up 
Pins,  &  directed  their  Views  to  great  objects.”  11 

With  such  neglect  Samuel  Adams  could  not  be  charged.  As  clerk 
of  the  inevitable  Committee  of  Grievances  appointed  by  the  Boston 
town  meeting  in  accordance  with  his  prearranged  plan,  he  wrote 
those  plain-spoken  papers  that  stirred  the  wrath  of  Tory  gentle¬ 
men;  as  clerk  of  the  assembly  he  was  the  chief  author  of  successive 
state  papers,  which  under  guise  of  replying  to  the  prerogative 
principles  of  Bernard  and  Hutchinson,  set  forth  in  masterly  fashion 
the  whole  theory  of  colonial  rights;  and  as  Chairman  of  the  Com¬ 
mittee  of  Correspondence  he  appealed  to  his  fellow  Americans  of 
every  colony.  Yet  his  official  writings  constitute  only  a  minor 
part  of  his  total  work.  His  letters  were  innumerable  and  his 
newspaper  articles  crowded  the  desk  of  every  friendly  editor.  The 
labors  undergone  and  the  energy  consumed  were  enormous.  It 
was  no  holiday  task  to  create  and  guide  a  public  opinion  that  was 
so  constantly  falling  into  apathy. 

Running  through  the  third  volume  of  Hutchinson’s  History  of 
Massachusetts  Bay  is  a  note  of  indignant  protest  at  “the  machina¬ 
tions  of  selfish  and  designing  men”  who  at  the  precise  time  when 
the  feeling  between  the  two  countries  was  friendliest,  and  an 
amicable  settlement  of  differences  seemed  likeliest,  were  assiduous 
to  breed  fresh  discord  and  frustrate  the  hopes  of  peace.  That  he 
had  Adams  chiefly  in  mind  there  can  be  little  doubt.  During  the 
“calm  interval”  of  the  summer  of ’71,  when,  according  to  Hutchin¬ 
son,  “the  province  was  more  free  from  real  evils”  than  for  years, 
and  when  “to  keep  up  a  spirit  of  discontent,  recourse  was  had, 
either  to  evils  merely  imaginary,  or  to  such  as  were  at  a  distance, 
and  feared  rather  than  felt,”  12  Adams  wrote  the  ablest  of  his 
many  able  newspaper  articles.13  In  no  other  phase  of  his  work  is 
the  craft  of  the  man  so  evident  as  in  these  anonymous  newspaper 
discussions.  There  was  cunning  as  well  as  caution  in  his  method. 
Changing  his  style  with  every  fresh  quill  and  every  new  pen  name, 
putting  forth  an  idea  for  the  sake  of  denying  it,  then  examining 
its  merits  cautiously,  and  finally  advocating  it  boldly,  he  created 

11  Works,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  289. 

12  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  349. 

13  See  in  particular  the  “Candidus”  articles  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  in  which  he  elabor 
rated  his  views  on  government  by  ministerial  instructions. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 


243 


like  Falstaff  a  host  of  patriots  out  of  a  single  Bostonian  in  brown 
homespun,  making  it  appear  that  many  were  troubled  over  evils 
that  were  visible  only  to  him.  On  occasion  his  style  possesses  the 
light  touch,  the  leisurely  detail,  the  easy  pleasantry  of  a  Spectator 
essay;  14  again,  there  is  a  note  of  biting  irony  and  studied  insult;  15 
and  again,  there  is  dignified  discussion  in  which  Adams  argues 
dispassionately  with  his  countrymen,  or  pleads  with  them  to 
stand  together  in  defense  of  the  common  welfare.  But  in  whatever 
vein  or  under  whatever  disguise  he  wrote,  the  conclusion  of  every 
argument  was  the  implied  suggestion,  how  much  better  it  would 
be  if  the  American  people  were  to  take  into  their  own  hands  the 
management  of  their  affairs. 

But  before  the  colonial  could  be  induced  to  strike  for  govern¬ 
mental  control,  the  old  psychology  of  subserviency  to  the  ruling 
class  must  be  uprooted;  and  an  effective  means  to  that  end  was 
to  lay  bare  the  selfish  motives  of  the  aristocracy.  To  stimulate 
what  we  call  today  class  consciousness  was  a  necessary  preliminary 
to  a  democratic  psychology;  and  to  this  task  Adams  devoted  every 
energy.  The  ways  of  the  iconoclast  are  rarely  lovely,  and  the 
breaking  of  idols  is  certain  to  wound  sensitive  souls.  There  was 
abundant,  justification  for  the  charge  of  Hutchinson  that  “robbing 
men  of  their  characters”  was  the  “patriotic  business”  of  Samuel 
Adams;  but  he  missed  the  point  in  attributing  to  him  the  motive, 
Gubernatorum  vituperatio  populo  placet.  The  respect  that  attached 
to  Bernard  and  Hutchinson  by  virtue  of  their  official  positions 
was  a  powerful  ally  of  ministerial  authority;  their  words  carried 
weight  beyond  the  sanction  of  their  logic;  for  the  good  of  America 
their  power  must  be  destroyed.  Doubtless  Adams  was  ungenerous 
in  attack;  certainly  he  was  vindictive  in  his  hates;  but  the  cold 
record  as  we  read  it  today  justifies  one  in  the  belief  that  the  men 
whom  he  attacked  were  tools  of  the  ministry,  and  must  be  struck 
down  if  the  rights  of  Massachusetts  were  to  be  preserved.  And 
it  was  due  to  the  bitter  denunciations  of  Adams  that  Thomas 
Hutchinson  was  driven  from  his  native  land  and  forced  to  take 
refuge  in  England,  the  best  hated  man  in  all  the  colonies. 

But  it  was  not  enough  to  pull  down  the  courtly  Hutchinson, 
for  behind  the  governor  was  a  group  of  lawyers  and  judges,  equally 


14  See  “Puritan”  articles,  in  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  201  et  seq. 

15  See  “Candidus,”  in  Vol.  II,  p.  246;  “Chatterer,”  in  Vol.  II,  pp.  3S»  39>  43! 
“Layman,”  in  Vol.  I,  p.  322. 


244 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


subservient  to  prerogative,  adepts  in  the  art  of  interpreting  away 
rights  by  due  process  of  law.  It  became  part  of  the  day’s  work, 
therefore,  to  lay  open  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  courts  to  common 
inspection;  to  create  a  public  opinion  to  review  judicial  decisions 
when  those  decisions  were  political  rather  than  legal.  It  was  a 
startling  innovation  for  a  private  citizen  to  assert  in  the  public 
press  that  “ state-lazuyers ,  attorneys  and  sollicitors  general,  & 
persons  advanced  to  the  highest  stations  in  the  courts  of  law, 
prostitute  the  honor  of  the  profession,  become  tools  of  ministers ,  and 
employ  their  talents  for  explaining  away ,  if  possible,  the  Rights 
of  a  kingdom.”  Never  before  had  the  integrity  of  the  colonial 
courts  been  openly  attacked  and  the  motives  of  the  judiciary  im¬ 
pugned.  But  it  was  far  more  startling  for  Adams  to  lay  down  the 
thesis,  that  in  matters  which  concern  the  general  welfare,  the  let¬ 
ter  of  the  law  is  not  to  be  considered  final,  and  “the  opinions  .  .  . 
and  determinations  of  the  greatest  Sages  and  Judges  of  the  law  in 
the  Exchequer  Chamber,  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  decisive 
or  binding  .  .  .  any  further,  than  they  are  consonant  to  natural 
reason.”  16  If  Franklin  was  concerned  to  create  a  new  economics 
in  harmony  with  democratic  needs,  Samuel  Adams  was  concerned 
to  democratize  the  New  England  law.  He  was  dissatisfied  with  a 
legal  system  created  by  a  Tory  past,  and  that  had  lately  received 
a  fresh  Tory  impress  at  the  hands  of  Blackstone.  Such  a  body  of 
law  could  not  answer  the  needs  of  a  free  people;  it  must  be  reshaped 
to  conform  to  new  needs.  And  the  conclusion  towards  which  his 
thinking  pointed  was  the  principle  of  a  referendum  of  judicial 
decisions,  for  how  otherwise  could  it  be  determined  whether  a 
given  decision  were  “consonant  to  natural  reason”? 

Samuel  Adams  was  little  given  to  striking  at  the  air,  and  he  set 
himself  to  the  work  of  cutting  the  claws  of  the  more  obnoxious 
judges  with  the  same  cool  skill  that  marked  his  baiting  of  the 
governor.  Certain  of  them  who  held  plural  offices  he  maneuvered 
out  of  the  Council,  on  the  ground  that  they  ought  not  to  exercise 
both  legislative  and  judicial  functions;  and  when  Bernard  pro¬ 
tested  that  they  had  been  members  of  the  Council  for  years  and 
by  reason  of  “their  knowledge  of  the  public  business,  were  almost 
necessary  to  the  body,”  he  replied  that  they  were  to  be  released 
“from  the  cares  and  perplexities  of  politics  ...  to  make  further 
advances  in  the  knowledge  of  the  law” — which  thrust,  in  view  of 

16  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  436. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 


245 


the  notorious  fact  that  few  of  them  had  been  trained  in  the  law, 
but  had  risen  to  the  bench  through  political  influence,  must  be 
reckoned  a  palpable  hit.17  Others  beyond  his  immediate  reach 
found  their  characters  assailed  and  their  motives  aspersed,  until 
popular  respect  for  them  was  destroyed;  and  the  unlucky  judges 
who  accepted  payment  from  the  royal  chest  found  such  a  hue  and 
cry  raised  against  them  that  they  were  driven  to  make  choice 
between  the  royal  guineas  or  answering  to  the  mob — a  rude  but 
effective  way  of  stimulating  their  loyalty  to  the  commonwealth. 
In  short,  this  “master  of  the  puppets,”  measuring  the  power  of 
the  judges  and  fearing  their  prerogative  bias,  did  not  scruple  over 
ways  and  means  of  rendering  them  more  responsive  to  the  popular 
will,  which  in  the  eyes  of  the  best  people  of  Boston  was  no  less 
than  incendiary. 

The  work  of  Samuel  Adams  Was  largely  done  before  the  word 
democrat  was  given  vogue  by  the  French  Revolution,  and  he 
cautiously  refrained  from  using  it;  nevertheless  he  was  probably 
the  most  thoroughgoing  democrat  of  his  generation  of  Americans. 
He  was  wholly  persuaded  that  the  sovereign  people  have  a  right 
to  change  their  fundamental  law,  together  with  the  interpretation 
and  administration  of  it,  whenever  they  desire;  and  that  pending 
such  change  it  was  well  to  nullify  an  act  of  prerogative  subversive 
of  their  interests.  “We  contend,  that  the  People  &  their  Repre¬ 
sentatives  have  a  Right  to  withstand  the  abusive  Exercise  of  a 
legal  &  constitutional  Prerogative  of  the  Crown,”  he  argued  in 
reply  to  Hutchinson;  “whenever  instructions  cannot  be  complyed 
with,  without  injuring  the  people,  they  cease  to  be  binding.”  18 
From  the  necessary  corollary,  that  the  people  are  competent  to 
judge  of  their  own  good  and  manage  their  own  affairs,  Adams  did 
not  shrink.  Stated  thus  in  general  terms,  the  theory  possessed  no 
novelty.  The  sovereignty  of  the  people  had  long  been  a  staple 
of  Whiggish  theory;  but  Adams  gave  to  the  doctrine  democratic 
significance.  The  people,  in  his  philosophy,  were  something  more 
than  the  wealthy  and  cultured  minority  to  whom  the  Whigs 
appealed;  they  were  the  mass  of  men — the  yeoman,  the  trades¬ 
man,  the  mechanic — all  that  multitude  of  homespun  folk  who  had 
hitherto  been  mere  pawns  in  the  political  game.  Such  a  passage  as 
this,  written  four  years  before  Lexington,  reads  like  Tom  Paine 
and  his  doctrine  of  the  res  publica: 

17  Works ,  Vol.  I,  p  8o. 


18  Works,  Yol.  II,  pp.  22,  26. 


246 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


The  multitude  I  am  speaking  of,  is  the  body  of  the  people — no  contempti¬ 
ble  multitude — for  whose  sake  government  is  instituted;  or  rather,  who 
have  themselves  erected  it,  solely  for  their  own  good — -to  whom  even 
kings  and  all  in  subordination  to  them,  are  strictly  speaking,  servants  and 
not  masters.  .  .  .  Philanthrop  [Jonathan  Sewall]  I  think,  speaks  some¬ 
what  unintelligently,  when  he  tells  us  that  the  well  being  and  happiness 
of  the  whole  depends  upon  subordination ;  as  if  mankind  submitted  to 
government  for  the  sake  of  being  subordinate.  .  .  .  Mankind  have  en¬ 
tered  into  political  societies,  rather  for  the  sake  of  restoring  equality.  .  .  . 
I  am  not  of  levelling  principles:  But  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  constitution 
of  civil  government  which  admits  equality  in  the  most  extensive  degree, 
consistent  with  the  true  design  of  government,  is  the  best.19 

Accepting  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  Adams  was  led  to  a 
pure  democracy,  based  on  the  town  meeting.  He  rejected  every 
form  of  “mixt  government,”  whether  in  the  form  of  king,  lords 
and  commons,  or  in  the  form  of  constitutional  checks  and  bal¬ 
ances.  That  sober  men  should  profess  to  prefer  the  dominion  of 
the  few  to  the  rule  of  all,  he  could  not  understand.  “I  find  every¬ 
where  some  Men,  who  are  afraid  of  a  free  Government,”  he  said 
in  1776,  “lest  it  be  perverted,  and  made  Use  of  as  a  Cloke  for 
Licenciousness.  The  fear  of  the  Peoples  abusing  their  Liberty  is 
made  an  Argument  against  their  having  the  Enjoyment  of  it;  as 
if  anything  were  so  much  to  be  dreaded  by  Mankind  as  Slavery.”20 
Democracy  he  believed  was  inevitable,  for  “in  these  times  of 
Light  and  Liberty,  every  man  chusesto  see  and  judge  for  himself.”21 
He  was  quite  untroubled  by  any  fear  of  the  tyranny  of  the  mass; 
he  was  a  good  enough  historian  to  know  that  it  is  always  the 
minority  and  not  the  mass  that  creates  tyranny.  Though  Toryism 
might  infect  the  government  circles,  and  aristocracy  appeal  to 
the  wealthy  and  ambitious,  the  great  body  of  Massachusetts 
people  were  democratic,  and  he  looked  forward  hopefully  to  a  new 
political  order,  created  by  the  popular  mind.  It  came  more  quickly 
than  he  had  expected,  once  the  old  inhibitions  were  removed. 
“New  Govts  are  now  erecting  in  the  several  American  states 
under  the  Authority  of  the  People,”  he  wrote  soon  after  Inde¬ 
pendence.  “Monarchy  seems  to  be  generally  exploded.  And  it 
is  not  a  little  surprising  to  me  that  the  Aristocratick  Spirit,  which 
appeard  to  have  taken  deep  Root  in  some  of  them,  now  gives 
place  to  that  of  Democracy.”  22 

During  the  difficult  after-years  of  reconstruction  Adams  re- 

19  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  150.  20  Works,  Vol.  Ill,  p,  244. 

21  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  39.  22  Ibid.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  305. 


SAMUEL  ADAMS 


247 


mained  true  to  his  democratic  principles.  As  he  had  earlier  resisted 
the  encroachments  of  monarchical  centralization,  he  later  fought 
against  Federalistic  consolidation.  He  distrusted  the  Constitution 
as  an  undemocratic  instrument,  fearing  a  centralized  authority 
removed  from  immediate  control;  and  he  joined  heartily  in  the 
work  of  securing  a  Bill  of  Rights.  He  welcomed  the  French 
Revolution  and  followed  closely  the  developing  democratic  philos¬ 
ophy  which  that  great  upheaval  did  so  much  to  clarify  and  dis¬ 
seminate.  He  remained  an  unrepentant  Jacobin  during  those 
acrimonious  years  when  the  Federalists  were  filling  the  air  with 
their  anti-Jacobin  fustian.  He  had  heard  gentlemen  rant  before 
and  was  probably  amused  when,  as  Governor,  he  attended  Harvard 
Commencement  and  listened  to  young  Robert  Treat  Paine  fulmi¬ 
nate  against  the  red  atheism  of  France  and  its  American  spawn. 
Although  a  kinsman  of  John  Adams  and  warm  friend,  he  wel¬ 
comed  the  election  of  Jefferson  as  a  return  to  democratic  principles 
after  an  unhappy  period  of  “prejudice  and  passion,”  although  he 
warned  him,  “you  must  depend  upon  being  hated  .  .  .  because 
they  hate  your  principles.”  The  last  letter  in  the  collected  edition 
of  his  works,  addressed  to  his  old  friend  Tom  Paine,  November  30, 
1802,  is  an  appeal  for  democratic  unity;  and  the  words  with  which 
it  concludes — - felix  qui  cautus — embody  the  principle  of  his  amazing 
political  strategy.  In  playing  for  great  stakes  it  is  well  to  be  wary. 

His  anti-Federalism,  aggravated  by  his  frank  advocacy  of 
Jacobin  principles,  cost  him  heavily  in  after  days,  and  like  Philip 
Freneau  his  just  fame  was  long  obscured  by  partisan  spleen. 
Although  he  retained  his  hold  on  the  affections  of  the  Massachu¬ 
setts  electorate,  and  was  annually  chosen  Governor  until  the 
infirmities  of  age  determined  his  withdrawal  from  public  affairs, 
he  was  silently  dropped  from  the  roll  of  American  patriots  whose 
deeds  were  celebrated  in  current  panegyrics.  His  manuscripts 
were  scattered  after  his  death,  and  he  was  in  the  way  of  being 
forgotten  till  Bancroft,  in  the  next  century,  gave  fresh  currency 
to  his  earlier  reputation.  Since  then  the  figure  of  Samuel  Adams 
has  grown  steadily  larger,  although  he  still  awaits  a  biographer 
who  will  set  him  in  his  due  place  in  the  history  of  American  liber¬ 
alism. 


CHAPTER  V 
LITERARY  ECHOES 

The  Revolutionary  upheaval  produced  no  polite  literature  in 
any  respects  comparable  to  its  utilitarian  prose.  The  expiring 
wit  literature  of  England  was  an  exotic  that  refused  to  be  natural¬ 
ized,  and  the  times  were  unpropitious  for  the  creation  of  a  native 
poetry.  An  occasional  dilettante  like  Mather  Byles  aspired  to 
be  a  wit,  but  the  reputation  of  the  clever  Bostonian  owed  more 
to  his  tongue  than  to  his  pen,  and  he  is  dimly  remembered  for 
the  letter  that  he  received  from  the  great  Mr.  Pope,  rather  than 
for  notable  verse.  Nevertheless  in  the  early  seventies  pure  litera¬ 
ture  was  beginning  to  make  a  perceptible  stir  in  New  England. 
Clever  young  men  in  the  colleges  were  turning  moderns  and  making 
ready  to  wage  a  new  battle  of  the  books.  They  preferred  the 
refinements  of  verse  to  the  didacticism  of  sermons;  they  were 
discovering  the  charm  of  playful  satire;  and  they  found  in  the 
currently  fashionable  tetrameter  a  brisk  vehicle  for  their  attacks 
on  academic  dullness.  They  admired  Churchill,  then  at  the 
height  of  his  brief  fame,  but  they  were  restrained  by  a  decent 
modesty  and  dared  not  go  his  length  in  brutal  frankness.  It  was 
from  these  young  men,  amateurs  in  verse  writing  and  amateurs 
likewise  in  politics,  that  the  American  cause  mainly  recruited 
its  literary  defenders.  They  might  be  flaming  Whigs  but  they 
were  also  well-bred  young  gentlemen  who  studied  the  amenities 
and  sought  to  unite  patriotism  with  good  form. 

i 

THE  WHIG  SATIRISTS 

1.  John  Trumbull 

There  was  the  best  of  Yankee  blood  in  the  veins  of  John  Trum¬ 
bull.  Among  his  kinsmen  were  the  Reverend  Benjamin  Trumbull, 
historian  of  Connecticut,  Governor  Jonathan  Trumbull — Washing¬ 
ton’s  “Brother  Jonathan” — and  John  Trumbull  the  painter. 
On  his  mother’s  side  he  was  descended  from  the  vigorous  Solomon 

248 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


249 


Stoddard,  grandfather  of  Jonathan  Edwards.  His  father  was  a 
scholarly  minister,  long  a  trustee  of  Yale  College,  at  which  school 
the  son  spent  seven  years  as  undergraduate  and  tutor.  He  was  a 
precocious  youth  with  a  strong  love  of  polite  letters,  and  a  praise¬ 
worthy  desire  to  achieve  literary  distinction.  Greek  and  Latin 
had  been  the  toys  of  his  childhood  and  when  he  was  seven  years 
of  age  he  passed  the  entrance  examination  to  college.  During  the 
period  of  his  tutorship  he  joined  with  Timothy  Dwight  and  Joseph 
Howe  in  the  work  of  overhauling  the  stale  curriculum,  supple¬ 
menting  Lilly’s  Grammar  and  Calvin’s  Institutes  with  Pope  and 
Churchill.  Like  other  aspiring  youths  of  the  day  he  dabbled  in 
Spectator  papers,  practiced  his  couplets,  and  eventually  produced 
The  Progress  of  Dulness ,  the  cleverest  bit  of  academic  verse  till 
then  produced  in  America.  At  heart  Trumbull  was  thoroughly 
academic,  and  nothing  woQld  have  suited  his  temperament  better 
than  the  life  of  a  Yale  professor;  but  the  prospects  proving  un¬ 
favorable,  he  began  to  mingle  Blackstone  with  the  poets  in  prepara¬ 
tion  for  his  future  profession. 

He  was  thus  engaged  during  the  middle  years  of  the  long  dispute 
with  England,  the  bitter  wranglings  of  which  seem  to  have  disturbed 
him  little  in  his  quiet  retreat.  But  in  1773  he  resigned  his  tutor¬ 
ship  to  prepare  himself  further  in  the  law.  Removing  to  Boston 
he  entered  the  office  of  John  Adams,  then  rising  to  prominence  as 
a  spokesman  of  the  popular  party;  and  he  took  lodgings  in  the 
house  of  Caleb  Cushing,  Speaker  of  the  Massachusetts  Assembly. 
Placed  thus  at  the  storm  center  of  provincial  politics,  he  was  soon 
infected  with  the  Whig  dissatisfactions  and  joined  himself  to  the 
patriotic  party.  When  Adams  went  to  Philadelphia  to  sit  in  the 
Continental  Congress,  Trumbull  withdrew  to  Hartford,  where  he 
established  himself.  Before  quitting  Boston  he  had  published  an 
Elegy  on  the  Times,  a  political  tract  that  seemed  to  Adams  so 
useful  to  the  cause  that  he  marked  the  young  poet  for  future 
service,  and  the  year  following  he  encouraged  the  writing  of  M’ Fin- 
gal,  the  first  part  of  which  appeared  in  1775.  So  great  was  the 
prestige  it  met  with  that  Trumbull  tinkered  with  it  for  seven 
years,  publishing  it  finally  in  its  completed  form  in  1782.  The 
law  seems  to  have  been  a  jealous  mistress  then  as  now,  and  his 
dreams  of  further  literary  work  were  inadequately  realized.  He 
is  believed  to  have  had  a  hand  in  The  Anarchiad,  and  he  wrote  some 
minor  poems;  but  he  soon  drifted  into  politics,  went  on  the  bench, 


250 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


finally  removed  to  Detroit  in  1825,  and  died  there  in  1831,  at 
the  age  of  eighty-one.  He  had  outlived  his  Revolutionary  genera¬ 
tion,  long  outlived  his  literary  ambitions,  and  was  pretty  much 
forgotten  before  he  died.  His  collected  works,  published  in  1820, 
proved  a  losing  venture  for  the  printer.  America  in  1820  was 
turning  romantic,  and  few,  it  seems,  cared  to  invest  in  two  volumes 
of  echoes. 

Trumbull’s  reputation  rests  exclusively  on  M’Fingal.  It  was  so 
popular  in  its  time  that  more  than  thirty  pirated  editions  were 
issued.  It  was  broadcasted  by  “news-papers,  hawkers,  pedlars, 
and  petty  chapmen,”  and  it  served  its  partisan  purpose.  The 
author  was  complimented  by  the  Marquis  de  Chastellux  on 
fulfilling  all  the  conditions  of  burlesque  poetry  as  approved  since 
the  days  of  Homer;  but  in  spite  of  the  indisputable  cleverness  of 
some  of  the  lines,  it  is  not  a  great  work.  In  its  final  form  it  is 
spun  out  to  extreme  length,  and  pretty  much  swamped  by  the 
elaborate  machinery  on  which  the  poet  visibly  prided  himself. 
Even  in  the  thick  of  attack  Trumbull  did  not  forget  his  academic 
reading,  but  he  explains  his  allusions  with  meticulous  care.  He 
seems,  indeed,  rather  more  concerned  about  the  laws  of  the  mock 
epic  than  the  threatened  rights  of  America.  The  Scotch  Tory 
hero  is  a  figure  so  unlike  the  real  Tory — the  Olivers  and  Leonards 
and  Hutchinsons,  with  their  love  of  power  and  dignified  display — 
that  the  caricature  loses  much  in  historical  veracity.  Trumbull’s 
patriotism  was  well  bred  and  unmarked  by  fierce  partisanship. 
His  refined  tastes  were  an  ill  equipment  for  the  turmoil  of  revolu¬ 
tion.  The  ways  of  the  radical  were  not  lovely  in  his  eyes;  the  Sons 
of  Liberty  with  their  tar-pots  and  feather-beds  were  too  often 
rough  fellows,  and  although  they  provided  him  with  comic  material 
to  set  off  the  blunderings  of  the  Squire,  they  probably  seemed  to 
him  little  better  than  tools  of  demagogues.  Very  often  this  tousle- 
headed  democracy  behaved  like  a  mob,  and  Trumbull  in  his  tie- 
wig  did  not  approve  of  mobs. 

The  more  thoughtfully  one  reads  M’Fingal,  throwing  upon  it 
the  light  of  the  total  career  of  its  author,  the  more  clearly  one 
perceives  that  John  Trumbull  was  not  a  rebellious  soul.  In  the 
year  1773,  while  projecting  some  fresh  ventures  in  the  Spectator 
vein,  “he  congratulated  himself  on  the  fact  ‘that  the  ferment  of 
politics’  was,  as  he  supposed,  ‘pretty  much  subsided,’  and  that  at 
last  the  country  was  to  enjoy  a  ‘mild  interval  from  the  struggles 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


251 


of  patriotism  and  self-interest,  from  noise  and  confusion,  Wilkes 
and  liberty.’”  He  had  then  no  wish  for  embroilment  in  civil  war, 
no  dreams  of  political  independence.  All  his  life  he  seems  to  have 
suffered  from  ill  health,  which  probably  sapped  his  militancy  and 
lessened  his  pugnacity.  From  this  temperamental  calmness  came 
a  certain  detachment  that  allowed  his  partisanship  to  remain 
cooler  than  the  hot  passions  of  the  times  commonly  suffered. 
He  could  permit  himself  the  luxury  of  a  laugh  at  the  current 
absurdities;  and  it  is  this  light-heartedness  that  made  M’Fingal 
so  immediately  effective.  The  rollicking  burlesque  of  the  Tory 
argument,  the  telling  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  the  Tory  logic,  must 
have  tickled  the  ears  of  every  Whig  and  provoked  many  a  laugh 
in  obscure  chimney-seats.  Laughter  is  a  keen  weapon,  and  Trum¬ 
bull’s  gayety  laid  open  weak  spots  in  the  Tory  armor  that  were 
proof  against  Freneau’s  invective.  It  was  a  rare  note  in  those 
acrimonious  times,  and  one  likes  Trumbull  the  better  for  minding 
his  manners  and  engaging  in  the  duel  like  a  gentleman.  After  all, 
this  son  of  Yale  had  certain  characteristics  of  the  intellectual, 
and  if  his  environment  had  been  favorable  and  the  law  had  not 
claimed  him,  very  likely  he  would  have  given  a  better  account  of 
the  talents  that  were  certainly  his.  He  wrote  with  ease  if 
not  with  finish,  and  he  possessed  the  requisite  qualities  of  a  man 
of  letters.  A  lovable  man  he  seems  to  have  been,  but  somewhat 
easy-going,  too  lightly  turned  away  from  his  purpose;  and  in 
consequence  his  later  life  failed  to  realize  the  expectations  of  his 
early  years. 

That  he  was  not  a  Loyalist  was  probably  due  in  large  measure 
to  environment  and  his  family  connections.  Considering  his 
temperament,  it  is  not  easy  to  discover  any  logical  reason  why  he 
should  have  turned  Whig.  He  had  never  suffered  in  his  own  for¬ 
tune  from  existing  arrangements;  he  was  not  a  political  idealist 
to  throw  the  glamor  of  republicanism  about  the  struggle;  he  had 
not  subjected  the  colonial  question  to  critical  analysis.  He  was  an 
academic  dilettante,  unconcerned  with  political  principles,  little 
more  than  an  echo  of  the  Connecticut  gentry  in  such  matters;  and 
if  he  espoused  the  Whig  cause  it  is  a  pretty  good  indication  that 
Yale  College  was  indoctrinated  in  Whig  principles.  An  echo  he 
remained  throughout  his  life.  When  later  he  became  a  Federalist 
and  enjoyed  some  of  the  emoluments  of  party  victory,  and  when 
later  still  democracy  lifted  up  its  head  in  Connecticut,  wearing  the 


252 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


French  cockade,  and  bringing  down  upon  it  the  wrath  of  all  re¬ 
spectable  people,  he  reflected  faithfully  the  views  of  his  class. 
John  Trumbull  was  a  moderate  liberal,  but  no  leveler,  no  democrat, 
no  friend  to  Jeffersonian  heresies.  Democracy  he  detested  heartily, 
and  he  joined  with  the  other  Hartford  Wits  to  draw  its  portrait  in 
unflattering  terms.  As  a  Connecticut  gentleman  he  was  insistent 
on  the  supremacy  of  the  tie-wig- in  government  as  well  as  in  society; 
he  would  scarcely  have  been  a  Connecticut  gentleman  had  he 
thought  otherwise. 

2.  Francis  Hopkinson,  Esq. 

If  the  career  of  Trumbull  indicates  that  Whiggery  existed  among 
the  young  collegians  of  Connecticut,  the  career  of  Francis  Hop¬ 
kinson  suggests  that  the  culture  of  Philadelphia,  the  great  center 
of  fashion  and  wit,  was  Whiggish  also.  That  it  should  have  been 
so  is  the  more  noteworthy,  for  the  Quaker  spirit  of  Philadelphia 
was  far  less  militant  than  the  Puritan  spirit  of  Boston;  more 
peaceful,  if  not  more  conservative.  The  city  had  long  been  domi¬ 
nated  by  a  group  of  sober  merchants  who  detested  the  leveling 
tendencies  of  New  England.  But  the  domination  of  these  older 
men  was  passing;  a  younger  generation,  more  aggressive  in  trade 
and  speculation,  was  rising  to  power;  and  that  Philadelphia  finally 
went  with  the  Whigs  was  due  to  the  influence  of  these  younger 
merchants.  When  it  became  clear  that  the  commercial  interests 
of  men  like  Robert  Morris  and  George  Clymer  were  disadvantaged 
by  the  connection  with  England,  the  ardor  of  patriotism  grew 
stronger,  and  talk  of  independence  became  common.  No  sooner 
had  business  come  out  for  independence  than  culture  swung  over; 
the  wit  which  would  gladly  have  remained  loyal  applauded  the 
comments  of  the  countinghouse,  and  the  newspaper  essay  reflected 
the  new  patriotic  sentiments. 

Chief  among  the  Philadelphia  wits  was  Francis  Hopkinson, 
Esq.,  a  charmingly  versatile  dilettante,  who  to  the  vocation  of 
the  law  and  the  bench  of  admiralty,  joined  the  polite  avocations 
of  painting,  music,  natural  philosophy,  and  literature.  He  was 
indisputably  clever,  full  of  innumerable  sprightly  enthusiasms, 
and  master  of  cultivated  speech  and  manners.  Of  his  skill  in 
painting  and  music  we  cannot  judge,  but  of  his  literary  accom¬ 
plishments  the  record  has  been  preserved.  Life  seems  to  have 
been  an  agreeable  experience  to  him,  and  if  his  dainty  enthusiasms 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


253 


were  a  marvel  to  John  Adams,1  it  would  indicate  that  society  in 
Philadelphia  in  1775  was  far  more  refined  than  in  provincial  Boston. 

Plopkinson  possessed  ample  means  to  gratify  his  polite  tastes, 
and  had  long  moved  in  the  most  exclusive  circles.  The  son  of  an 
eminent  lawyer,  he  had  received  the  best  education  available  in 
the  colonies,  after  which  he  went  abroad  to  acquire  old-world 
polish.  Some  fourteen  months  were  spent  in  England,  where,  as 
a  near  kinsman  of  the  Bishop  of  Worcester,  he  frequented  the 
best  English  society,  made  the  acquaintance  of  eminent  men,  and 
even  enjoyed  the  distinction  of  dining  with  my  Lord  North.  On 
his  return  he  prudently  fell  in  love  with  an  heiress  of  the  Bordens, 
of  Bordentown,  and  turned  Jerseyman  the  better  to  administer 
his  wife’s  estates.  He  entered  the  law,  and  doubtless  at  the  solici¬ 
tation  of  his  kinsman  the.  Bishop,  he  became  a  beneficiary  of 
ministerial  patronage:  receiving  appointment  in  1772  to  a  sinecure 
post  as  collector  of  customs  at  Newcastle,  and  two  years  later 
being  made  mandamus  councilor  for  New  Jersey — a  somewhat 
hazardous  post,  considering  the  nature  of  the  office  and  the  temper 
of  the  people.  Already  in  Massachusetts  certain  gentlemen  had 
learned  that  the  compliment  of  royal  recognition  might  cost  too 
dear  a  price.  That  Hopkinson  should  have  been  tendered  such  an 
appointment  as  late  as  1774,  shows  that  he  was  regarded  by  the 
ministry  as  good  Tory  material. 

During  the  anxious  months  of  1774,  when  intelligent  Americans 
were  trying  to  forecast  the  outcome  of  the  growing  radicalism  of 
the  colonial  temper,  Hopkinson  must  have  done  some  serious 
thinking;  with  the  result  that  when  in  September  the  Continental 
Congress  assembled  in  Philadelphia,  he  offered  to  the  members  as 
his  contribution  to  the  discussion  a  clever  little  allegory  wherein 
the  whole  question  at  issue  between  England  and  the  colonies  was 
sketched  with  a  light  touch  that  is  an  agreeable  relief  from  the 
arguments  of  the  official  debaters.  In  A  Pretty  Story  Hopkinson 
is  frankly  pro-colonial,  and  offers  his  wit  to  the  service  of  his 
country.  It  is  not  a  great  work,  but  it  shows  that  he  had  definitely 
put  aside  the  ministerial  temptation — probably  to  the  disgust  of 
the  good  Bishop — and  had  gone  over  to  the  Whigs.  Two  years 
later  he  took  a  seat  in  the  Congress,  and  within  a  week  voted  for 
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  aligning  himself  against  the 
conservative  group  led  by  his  fellow  townsman,  John  Dickinson. 

1  See  Familiar  Letters  of  John  and  Abigail  Adams,  p.  217. 


254 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


What  impelled  Hopkinson  to  so  momentous  a  shift  in  political 
opinion  can  be  explained  by  no  records  that  have  been  preserved, 
and  must  remain  a  matter  of  conjecture.  Even  less  than  Trumbull 
was  he  revolutionary  in  temper.  His  Whiggery  was  probably 
commercial  in  origin,  a  reflection  of  the  economic  interests  of 
the  merchant  class  with  which  he  mingled.  That  he  went  so  far 
as  to  attack  the  aristocratic  spirit  of  the  English  government — 
its  debauching  of  public  servants  and  its  sordid  motives — may 
have  been  due  quite  as  much  to  a  refined  integrity  as  to  partisan 
advantage;  but  for  an  aristocrat  to  attack  the  aristocratic  principle 
of  government  was  unusual  as  it  was  dangerous  for  his  class. 
But  though  he  turned  Whig  he  was  no  agrarian  to  substitute 
the  majority  will  for  the  royal  prerogative;  and  when  the  war 
was  over  and  political  re-alignment  was  under  way,  Hopkinson 
went  with  his  group,  became  a  stout  Federalist,  defended  the 
Constitution,  and  enjoyed  his  share  of  the  party  emoluments. 
His  wit  was  unembittered  by  the  acrimonious  disputes  of  Jacobin 
days,  and  his  partisanship  retained  its  note  of  casual  sprightliness 
through  the  dogdays  of  the  nineties. 

His  chief  contributions  to  the  debate  over  the  Constitution 
were  The  New  Roof  and  Objections  to  the  Proposed  Plan  of  a  Federal 
Government  for  the  United  States,  on  Genuine  Principles.  They 
are  delightfully  clever,  but  the  cleverness  cannot  conceal  a  good- 
natured  contempt  for  the  democratic  underling  and  all  his  ways. 
The  attitude  of  aristocratic  superiority  is  the  more  striking  for 
its  easy  bearing.  The  first  is  an  implied  eulogy  of  James  Wilson, 
Scotch  lawyer  of  Philadelphia,  who  as  master-architect  finds 
his  plans  for  erecting  a  splendid  roof  over  a  “certain  Mansion- 
house”  violently  opposed  by  Margery,  a  slattern  midwife,  for 
no  better  reason  than  that  “in  the  construction  of  the  new  roof, 
her  apartments  would  be  considerably  lessened.”  Margery,  of 
course,  is  agrarian  democracy,  and  to  further  her  interests  she 
incites  three  worthless  servants  to  testify  that  the  old  leaky  roof 
is  better  than  the  one  proposed.  Naturally  their  flimsy  argu¬ 
ments  are  laughed  out  of  court,  and  the  wisdom  of  the  architect 
is  apparent  to  all  except  a  “half-crazy  fellow”  2  who  filled  the 
air  with  his  “fustian,”  making  himself  a  general  nuisance  to  the 
disgust  of  all  respectable  people. 

In  the  second  of  the  two  works,  Hopkinson  gives  freer  rein  to 
2  “Philadelphiensis,”  one  of  the  anti-Federalist  pamphleteers. 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


255 


his  polite  fancy,  figuring  the  opposition  to  the  Constitution  under 
the  form  of  a  Wheelbarrow  Society  at  the  city  gaol.  Within  those 
walled  precincts,  he  suggests,  the  most  advanced  advocates  of 
natural  liberty  may  be  found,  and  there  the  monstrous  crime  of 
the  Constitution  is  most  eloquently  exposed.  How  foolish  is 
this  America  that  persists  in  believing  what  able  lawyers  and  rep¬ 
utable  gentlemen  say  of  the  merits  of  the  document,  and  refuses 
to  intrust  the  making  of  a  fundamental  law  to  such  true  liegemen 
of  democracy  as  these  knights  of  the  chain-gang!  It  is  all  very 
witty,  and  provokes  its  laugh,  and  serves  its  purpose  of  heaping 
on  the  head  of  the  opposition  the  class  prejudice  that  was  indignant 
at  the  insolence  of  plebeians  in  holding  contrary  views  on  a  subject 
quite  beyond  their  comprehension.  But  times  change,  and  the 
sprightliest  wit  may  lose  its  savor.  Those  old  Federalist  skits 
are  as  dead  today  as  the  marvelous  pageant  got  up  by  Hopkinson 
to  celebrate  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution,  an  affair  which 
greatly  pleased  the  amiable  little  gentleman,  a  detailed  account  of 
which  he  prepared  for  the  definitive  edition  of  his  works,  where 
it  may  be  read  by  the  curious. 

If  Francis  Hopkinson  is  no  very  important  figure  in  our  literary 
history,  he  is  not  without  significance  as  a  representative  of  our 
colonial  culture  that  deliberately  chose  to  be  Whig  rather  than 
Tory.  He  risked  much  and  he  was  amply  rewarded.  For  years 
he  sat  on  the  bench  of  the  Court  of  Admiralty,  sparkled  at  dinners, 
and  was  a  respected  and  influential  member  of  a  genteel  society. 
If  the  recompense  for  his  services  during  the  perilous  days  was 
greater  than  fell  to  the  lot  of  a  democrat  like  Philip  Freneau,  who 
will  wonder?  Like  rewards  like,  and  the  days  of  democratic 
rewards  were  not  yet  come  in  America. 

n 

THE  TORY  SATIRISTS 

1.  Jonathan  Odell 

Amongst  the  occasional  writers  who  dedicated  extemporized 
couplets  to  the  defense  of  Toryism  in  America,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  to  whom  belongs  the  primacy.  Jonathan  Odell  was  easily 
first  as  a  purveyor  of  virulent  Loyalist  rhyme.  Of  the  sternest 
Puritan  ancestry,  Odell  was  educated  in  medicine,  and  saw  service 
in  the  West  Indies  as  surgeon  to  his  Majesty’s  forces.  Turning 


256 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


Anglican  he  was  ordained  priest  in  London,  and  came  home  to  his 
native  colonies  as  a  missionary,  to  further  the  cause  of  episcopacy. 
Busily  engaged  with  parochial  duties,  he  chose  to  remain  aloof 
from  all  political  disputes,  and  during  the  early  months  of  the  war 
he  refrained  from  taking  sides.  Unfortunately,  however,  he  made 
acquaintances  among  some  captive  British  officers,  for  whom  he 
wrote  a  song  in  honor  of  the  King’s  birthday,  which  was  sung  with 
much  drinking  of  wine  on  June  4,  1 776,  the  news  of  which  getting 
abroad  stirred  the  Whig  partisans  to  anger.  Soon  thereafter 
matters  grew  too  warm  for  Odell  to  remain  longer  neutral;  he 
suffered  certain  humiliating  personal  experiences  and  was  driven  to 
seek  refuge  within  the  British  lines.  Thenceforth  none  was  more 
ardent  in  the  royal  cause.  He  busied  himself  with  innumerable 
intrigues  to  undermine  the  Whig  strength,  amongst  others  serving 
as  a  go-between  in  the  unlucky  Andre-Amold  affair.  He  remained 
implacable  to  the  end,  and  not  until  the  last  Redcoat  was  with¬ 
drawn  from  the  independent  states,  did  he  leave  off  urging  repri¬ 
sals.  When  it  was  all  over  he  withdrew  sullenly  to  Nova  Scotia, 
was  amply  rewarded  by  his  King,  and  sat  down  to  nourish  to  the 
end  of  a  long  life  the  most  virulent  hatred  of  all  Whigs  and  repub¬ 
licans.  “Toryissimus,”  Professor  Tyler  calls  him,  borrowing 
Sir  Walter’s  word;  and  the  term  hits  to  a  nicety  the  bitter  arrogant 
nature  which  so  closely  resembled  in  its  essentials  the  “proud 
prelate  Laud,”  from  whom  his  ancestors  had  fled  a  hundred  and 
fifty  years  before. 

A  vigorous  man  was  Jonathan  Odell,  strong,  capable,  uncom¬ 
promising,  possessing  a  clear  intellect  and  a  heart  little  touched 
by  Christian  charity — a  stern  Hebraist  who  would  sweep  away 
with  the  besom  of  wrath  all  the  enemies  of  his  God  and  his  King. 
He  felt  no  hesitation  in  making  out  the  list  of  the  proscribed:  the 
enemies  of  the  King  were  ipso  facto  the  enemies  of  God — rebels 
who  were  daily  signing  their  own  death  warrants  in  overt  acts  of 
treason.  Watching  the  seditious  crew  of  “Congress  men”  seducing 
the  colonials  into  unnatural  rebellion  against  the  best  of  kings  and 
fathers,  he  took  it  to  be  his  Christian  duty  to  lay  the  rod  of  correc¬ 
tion  upon  their  shoulders.  If  they  would  not  be  warned  they 
must  be  hanged.  Not  content  with  active  intrigue,  he  pressed  his 
pen  into  service,  and  during  the  year  1779  he  wrote  four  pieces 
which  for  bitterness  of  satire  outdid  Freneau  at  his  frankest. 
Freneau  was  bitter  and  brutal  in  all  conscience,  but  he  was  never 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


257 


nasty;  there  were  infamies  of  personal  insult  that  he  would  not 
stoop  to,  vulgarities  of  innuendo  that  he  was  not  guilty  of.  If  he 
studied  the  art  of  Churchill,  he  stopped  short  of  Churchill’s  gross¬ 
ness.  But  Odell  the  priest  was  unhampered  by  scruple;  the  mean¬ 
est  gossip  found  a  place  in  his  “acrid  rhyme.”  No  Christian 
charity  spread  its  mantle  over  the  shortcomings  of  his  enemies, 
no  Christian  forgiveness  found  lodgment  in  his  unforgiving  heart. 
He  was  a  son  of  the  Old  Testament  and  he  girded  up  his  righteous¬ 
ness  with  prayer. 

Ask  I  too  much  ?  then  grant  me  for  a  time 
Some  deleterious  pow’rs  of  acrid  rhyme: 

Some  ars’nic  verse,  to  poison  with  the  pen 
These  rats,  who  nestle  in  the  Lion’s  den!  3 

The  four  satires  which  embody  his  holy  wrath  and  which  were 
little  calculated  to  spread  sweetness  and  light  in  a  world  sorely  in 
need  of  them,  are  The  Word  of  Congress,  The  Congratulation,  The 
Feu  de  Joie,  and  The  American  Times — all  written,  probably,  in 
the  last  months  of  the  year  1779.  Of  these  the  first  and  the  last 
are  the  most  suggestive  in  their  denunciation.  The  spirit  which 
prompted  him  to  turn  to  satire  is  given  in  the  preface  to  the  1780 
edition  of  The  American  Times. 

The  masters  of  Reason  have  decided,  that  when  doctrines  and  practices 
have  been  fairly  examined,  and  proved  to  be  contrary  to  Truth,  and 
injurious  to  Society,  then  and  not  before  may  Ridicule  be  lawfully  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  Service  of  Virtue.  This  is  exactly  the  case  of  the  grand 
American  Rebellion;  it  has  been  weighed  in  the  balance,  and  found  want¬ 
ing:  able  writers  have  exposed  its  principles,  its  conduct,  and  its  final 
aim.  Reason  has  done  her  part,  and  therefore  this  is  the  legitimate 
moment  for  Satire.  Accordingly  the  following  Piece  is  offered  to  the  Pub¬ 
lic.  What  it  is  found  to  want  of  Genius,  the  Author  cannot  supply; 
what  it  may  want  of  Correction,  he  hopes  the  candor  of  the  Public  will 
excuse  on  account  of  the  fugitive  nature  of  the  subject:  next  year  the 
publication  would  be  too  late;  for  in  all  probability  there  will  then  be 
no  Congress  existing. 

When  we  examine  the  work  of  Odell  to  discover  the  deeper 
springs  of  his  thought,  we  come  upon  naked  class  prejudice,  un¬ 
diluted  Toryism.  His  social  philosophy  is  erected  upon  that 
unstable  foundation;  the  actions  of  men  are  judged  solely  by  that 
light.  Of  any  valid  or  reasoned  philosophy,  social  or  political, 
he  was  as  wanting  as  a  child.  Of  any  real  understanding  of  his 

3  Loyalist  Poetry,  p.  55. 


258 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


fellow  Americans  who  had  espoused  the  Whig  cause,  he  was  as 
lacking  as  General  Clinton,  whose  “warfare,”  Odell  asserted,  “was 
the  war  of  God.”  The  colonial  grievances  which  other  Tories 
acknowledged  to  have  some  foundation,  Odell  casually  ignored. 
There  was  no  cause  in  heaven  or  earth  for  colonial  disloyalty,  he 
was  convinced,  except  Whiggish  perversity,  and  for  such  perversity 
there  must  be  due  punishment — the  rope.  In  his  mind’s  eye  he 
sees  the  “impious  crew,”  one  after  another  silenced  by  the  halter. 
There  must  be  no  ill-judged  mercy;  the  best  of  the  rebels  must 
swing  with  the  worst,  for  they  are  all  sedition-mongers,  all  attainted 
traitors.  From  his  vast  ignorance  Odell  derived  an  equally  vast 
confidence  in  the  ultimate  triumph  of  truth.  There  is  a  note  of 
finality  in  his  judgments  that  amazes,  an  infallibility  that  amuses. 
The  Reverend  Jonathan  frankly  acknowledges  himself  to  be  the 
boon  companion  of  Reason,  the  favored  suitor  of  Truth — from 
them  only  has  he  taken  instruction  and  in  their  name  he  professes 
to  speak.  Whereas  the  Whigs  are  poor  fellows  who  have  held 
commerce  with  neither. 

Odell  is  careful  of  his  workmanship  and  organizes  his  materials 
with  an  eye  to  climax.  The  American  Times  is  formally  divided 
into  three  parts.  The  poem  opens  with  a  summoning  of  the  in¬ 
fernal  crew  of  sedition  and  the  abuse  of  them  severally,  rising  to  a 
rhetorical  conclusion  in  an  address  to  Washington;  then  the  leering 
portrait  of  the  mother  of  all  mischiefs,  Democracy,  is  painted; 
finally  comes  a  pure  and  lofty  strain  which  summons  Reason  to 
decide  in  the  great  cause.  Taxation,  Independence,  are  haled 
before  her  august  throne  and  there  condemned,  and  the  whole 
concludes  with  a  vision  of  Britannia’s  guardian  angel  bearing  a  two- 
edged  sword  and  proclaiming: 

At  length  the  day  of  Vengeance  is  at  hand: 

The  exterminating  Angel  takes  his  stand: 

Hear  the  last  summons,  rebels,  and  relent: 

Yet  but  a  moment  is  there  to  repent. 

Lo!  the  great  Searcher  ready  at  the  door. 

Who  means  decisively  to  purge  the  floor: 

Yes,  the  wise  Sifter  now  prepares  the  fan 
To  separate  the  meal  from  useless  bran. 

Down  to  the  centre  from  his  burning  ire 
Ye  foes  of  goodness  and  of  truth,  retire: 

And  ye,  who  now  lie  humbled  in  the  dust, 

Shall  raise  your  heads,  ye  loyal  and  ye  just; 


LITERARY  ECHOES  259 

Th’  approving  sentence  of  your  Sov’reign  gain. 

And  shine  refulgent  as  the  starry  train. 

Then,  when  eternal  justice  is  appeas’d; 

When  with  due  vengeance  heav’n  and  earth  are  pleas’d; 
America,  from  dire  pollution  clear’d, 

Shall  flourish  yet  again,  belov’d,  rever’d: 

In  duty’s  lap  her  growing  sons  be  nurs’d, 

And  her  last  days  be  happier  than  her  first.4 

Into  this  framework  Odell  has  fitted  a  surprising  number  of 
personal  attacks.  His  ink  blots  out  the  good  name  of  every  Whig 
on  whom  it  drips.  To  the  present  generation  it  furnishes  food  for 
wonder  to  see  what  a  paltry  appearance  the  fathers  make  in  the 
verse  of  this  plain-speaking  Tory.  Jefferson,  Paine,  Morris,  Adams, 
Washington,  and  a  host  of  others,  are  shallow  creatures,  in  the 
judgment  of  Odell,  bereft  of  reason,  void  of  honor,  the  very  scum 
of  the  revolutionary  pot;  whereas  Clinton  and  Gage,  Hutchinson 
and  Galloway,  are  holy  instruments  in  the  hand  of  God  to  cleanse 
the  land  of  pollution.  The  attack  is  rankly  and  grossly  partisan, 
with  no  saving  grace  of  humor  or  humanity.  The  alpha  and  omega 
of  Odell’s  political  faith  was  loyalty  to  the  crown,  and  the  bank¬ 
ruptcy  of  such  a  creed  in  revolutionary  America  is  nowhere  thrust 
into  harsher  relief  than  in  the  bitter  verses  of  this  bitter  heart. 
Empty  Jonathan  Odell  of  prejudice,  class  interest,  passion  for 
the  prerogative,  with  their  corollary  of  praise  for  an  unmanly 
truckling  to  the  King,  and  nothing  remains,  the  empty  sack  col¬ 
lapses.  It  was  a  hardship  that  he  should  have  been  driven  out  of 
his  native  country  upon  the  failure  of  the  King’s  cause,  but  what 
could  be  done  with  a  fellow  who  insisted  that  his  empty  sack  was 
stuffed  with  all  the  virtues?  He  was  harshly  intolerant  in  his 
Toryism,  and  he  encountered  a  victorious  republican  harshness. 

2.  Samuel  Peters 

It  is  amusing  to  turn  from  the  implacable  Odell  to  the  menda¬ 
cious  Peters,  only  to  meet  with  another  tale  of  abortive  missionary 
zeal.  The  Anglican  clergy  played  a  conspicuous  part  during  the 
Revolutionary  troubles — a  part  that  in  many  cases  inspired  small 
regard  for  the  establishment  in  the  minds  of  a  dissenting  laity. 
Not  in  vain  did  the  church  teach  loyalty  to  authority,  for  while 
the  British  Empire  was  breaking  asunder,  the  Anglican  ministers 
were  visible  pillars  of  prerogative  and  with  pen  and  voice  lent 

4  Loyalist  Poetry,  p.  36. 


260 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


effective  aid  to  the  royal  cause.  Sometimes  their  ardor  outran 
their  intelligence,  their  devotion  betrayed  their  discretion;  never¬ 
theless  their  zeal  contributed  notably  to  the  number  and  quality 
of  the  Loyalist  writings. 

For  some  inconceivable  reason  Samuel  Peters  was  seized  with  a 
desire  to  plant  the  Anglican  church  in  Congregational  Connecti¬ 
cut — surely  the  strangest  of  desires  and  the  strangest  of  men  to 
undertake  such  a  work.  To  uplift  the  banner  of  episcopacy  in  a 
commonwealth  that  for  over  a  hundred  years  had  been  militantly 
Separatist,  that  did  not  want  bishops  and  would  not  have  them — 
here  was  missionary  zeal  that  a  plain  man  understands  with  diffi¬ 
culty.  To  have  made  headway  at  all  there  was  need  of  apostolic 
fervor  and  an  ingratiating  tact;  and  Samuel  Peters  possessed 
neither.  He  was  a  gentleman  who  preened  himself  on  his  quality, 
exuding  in  speech  and  action  a  pride  of  caste  that  led  him  to  speak 
of  the  American  farmers  as  peasants — the  only  native  Loyalist 
who  thus  aped  the  English.  His  abilities  were  far  from  mean, 
but  his  better  qualities  were  corroded  by  overweening  conceit. 
Possessed  of  all  the  arrogance  of  a  lord  and  all  the  ostentation  of  a 
brewer,  he  was  scarcely  the  man  to  serve  the  Connecticut  laity 
with  due  Christian  humility.  He  pointed  out  the  truth  authorita¬ 
tively  and  then  took  it  as  a  personal  affront  if  his  hearers  failed  to 
agree  with  him.  And  so,  after  explaining  to  the  Congregationalists 
of  Connecticut  the  infallible  truth  of  the  Anglican  way,  and  being 
ready  to  minister  to  them  according  to  that  way,  he  fell  into  a  pet 
when  they  refused  to  turn  churchmen.  The  more  he  argued  the 
more  he  got  himself  disliked,  and  when  his  tactless  loyalism  brought 
down  the  Sons  of  Liberty  upon  him  and  he  was  driven  to  Boston — 
whence  he  sailed  for  England  where  he  survived  for  thirty-one 
years — he  took  a  spirited  revenge  by  writing  his  History  of  Con¬ 
necticut,  a  work  that  solaced  the  early  years  of  expatriation,  and 
provided  material  for  many  an  after  argument. 

It  is  an  amazingly  provocative  book,  over  which  the  sons  of 
Connecticut  have  disputed  acrimoniously  for  a  hundred  years 
without  coming  to  agreement.  Fortunately  those  disputes  are  of 
far  less  concern  today  than  the  political  philosophy  tucked  away 
in  the  pages  of  the  History;  the  scandal  is  far  less  interesting  than 
the  shrewd  comment  on  the  causes  of  the  American  Revolution. 
Samuel  Peters  was  a  high  Tory  with  the  virtue  of  frankness,  which 
defeat  had  made  the  more  open.  From  his  secure  refuge  in  England 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


261 


he  looked  back  upon  the  revolutionary  upheaval,  and  his  analysis 
of  causes  is  the  more  suggestive  from  the  fact  that  he  had  nothing 
to  gain  from  truckling  to  popular  opinion.  His  judgments  are 
interesting  even  when  he  exaggerates.  The  colonial  Tory  is  no 
longer  serving  immediate  partisan  ends,  but  after  the  battle  has 
been  fought  and  lost  he  takes  a  grim  pleasure  in  pointing  out  to 
the  English  government  its  costly  blunders.  Affairs  went  ill  in 
America,  not  because  of  too  much  Toryism  on  the  part  of  govern¬ 
ment,  but  because  of  too  little  and  too  late  applied.  The  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  origin  and  spread  of  unrest  in  America,  Peters  regarded 
as  very  simple.  The  tap-root  of  the  disaffection  was  republicanism, 
which  through  the  criminal  negligence  of  government  was  not 
severed  in  the  days  when  the  plant  was  small,  but  which  was  suf¬ 
fered  to  grow  till  the  tree  could  not  be  pulled  up  or  destroyed. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  the  British  government,  in  the  last  century,  did 
not  expect  New-England  to  remain  under  their  authority;  nor  did  the 
New-Englanders  consider  themselves  as  subjects,  but  allies,  of  Great 
Britain.  It  seems  that  England’s  intent  was  to  afford  an  asylum  to  the 
republicans  who  had  been  a  scourge  to  the  British  constitution;  and  so,  to 
encourage  that  restless  party  to  emigrate,  republican  charters  were 
granted,  and  privileges  and  promises  given  them  far  beyond  what  an 
Englishman  in  England  is  entitled  to.  The  emigrants  were  empowered  to 
make  laws,  in  church  and  state,  agreeable  to  their  own  will  and  pleasure, 
without  the  King’s  approbation.5 

From  the  first  they  have  uniformly  declared,  in  church  and  state,  that 
America  is  a  new  world,  subject  to  the  people  residing  in  it;  and  that  none 
but  enemies  to  the  country  would  appeal  from  their  courts  to  the  King  in 
Council.  They  never  have  prayed  for  any  earthly  king  by  name.  They 
always  called  themselves  republicans  and  enemies  to  kingly  govern¬ 
ment.  .  .  .  They  hate  the  idea  of  a  parliament.  .  .  .  They  never  have 
admitted  one  law  of  England  to  be  in  force  among  them,  till  passed  by 
their  assemblies.  .  .  .  They  hold  Jesus  to  be  their  only  King,  whom  if 
they  love  and  obey,  they  will  not  submit,  because  they  have  not  submitted 
to  the  laws  of  the  King  of  England.8 

The  natural  fruits  of  this  pernicious  root  of  republicanism  were 
the  colonial  hostility  to  the  monarchical  and  aristocratic  elements 
of  the  British  constitution,  together  with  all  the  domestic  tur¬ 
bulence  and  lawlessness  which  have  marked  the  history  of  New 
England  from  the  first.  If  gentlemen  wished  an  object  lesson  in 
republicanism,  none  better  than  Connecticut  could  be  had;  there 
6  A  General  History  of  Connecticut,  Appendix,  p.  374.  8  Ibid.,  p.  290. 


262 


THE  AMERICAN  MIND 


from  the  earliest  days,  “republicanism,  schisms,  and  persecutions,” 
have  gone  hand  in  hand;  and  it  was  to  make  this  clear  to  the  world 
that  Samuel  Peters  took  the  trouble  to  write  his  History. 

In  the  course  of  this  work,  my  readers  must  necessarily  have  observed, 
in  some  degree,  the  ill  effects  of  the  democratical  constitution  of  Con¬ 
necticut.  I  would  wish  them  to  imagine,  for  I  feel  myself  unable  ad¬ 
equately  to  describe,  the  confusion,  turbulence,  and  convulsion,  arising  in 
a  province,  where  not  only  every  civil  officer,  from  the  Governor  to  the 
constable,  but  also  every  minister,  is  appointed  as  well  as  paid  by  the 
people,  and  faction  and  superstition  are  established.  The  clergy,  lawyers, 
and  merchants  or  traders,  are  the  three  efficient  parties  which  guide  the 
helm  of  government.  .  .  .  En  rabies  vulgi — I  must  beg  leave  to  refer  my 
readers  to  their  own  reflections  upon  such  a  system  of  government  as  I 
have  here  sketched  out.7 

That  such  a  people  would  respect  the  King’s  laws  at  a  late  day, 
when  those  laws  lessened  their  profits,  was  foolish  to  expect.  There 
had  been  much  complaint  from  ministerial  gentlemen  in  respect 
to  colonial  smuggling;  but  how  idle  was  it  to  complain  of  the  natural 
consequences  of  ministerial  laxness  chronic  for  a  hundred  years! 

Smuggling  is  rivetted  in  the  constitutions  and  practice  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Connecticut  .  .  .  and  their  province  is  a  storehouse  for  the  smugglers 
of  the  neighboring  colonies.  They  conscientiously  study  to  cheat  the 
King  of  those  duties,  which,  they  say,  God  and  nature  never  intended 
should  be  paid.  From  the  governor  down  to  the  tithing-man,  who  are 
sworn  to  support  the  laws,  they  will  aid  smugglers,  resist  collectors,  and 
mob  informers.8 

In  contemplating  these  open  and  notorious  facts,  which  every 
member  of  government  must  have  known,  Samuel  Peters  came 
very  near  anger  at  the  gross  stupidity  of  the  ministerial  policy. 
The  way  to  have  met  these  difficulties  was  plain — the  itch  of 
democracy  should  have  been  cured  with  the  salve  of  aristocracy. 
The  natural  leaders  in  the  several  colonies  should  have  been  taken 
care  of  by  a  judicious  distribution  of  titles  of  nobility. 

The  people  of  New-England  are  rightly  stiled  republicans:  but  a  distinc¬ 
tion  should  be  made  between  the  learned  and  unlearned,  the  rich  and  poor. 
The  latter  form  a  great  majority;  the  minority,  therefore,  are  obliged  to 
wear  the  livery  of  the  majority,  in  order  to  secure  their  election  into 
office.  Those  very  republican  gentlemen  are  ambitious,  fond  of  the  power 
of  governing,  and  grudge  no  money  nor  pains  to  obtain  an  annual  office. 
What  would  they  not  give  for  a  dignity  depending  not  on  the  fickle  will 
of  a  multitude,  but  on  the  steady  reason  and  generosity  of  a  King?9 

7  Ibid.,  pp.  282-285.  8  Ibid.,  p.  520.  9  Ibid.,  p.  377. 


LITERARY  ECHOES 


263 


There  was  shrewd,  unclerical  wisdom  in  the  comment  of  Samuel 
Peters.  If  the  gentlemen  of  England  had  founded  their  colonial 
policy  on  the  principle  of  sharing  the  emoluments  of  rank  and 
power  with  ambitious  gentlemen  in  America,  there  might  well 
have  been  quite  another  story  to  tell.  But  because  they  begrudged 
the  small  rewards,  because  they  would  have  the  shadow  as  well  as 
the  substance,  they  lost  everything.  An  outcome  so  untoward 
and  so  stupid  hurt  Samuel  Peters  to  the  quick;  but  it  was  not  his 
fault,  and  he  doubtless  found  a  crumb  of  malicious  satisfaction  in 
pointing  out  the  ministerial  stupidity  after  the  mischief  was  done. 


BOOK  THREE:  LIBERALISM  AND  THE 
CONSTITUTION 

1783-1800 


PART  ONE:  THE  AGRARIAN  DEFEAT 

1783-1787 


CHAPTER  I 

AGRARIANISM  AND  CAPITALISM 
1 

THE  BACKGROUND  OF  IDEAS 

English  and  French  Contributions 

With  the  close  of  the  war  the  question  of  the  times  was  the 
urgent  problem  of  the  form  and  control  of  the  new  political  state 
to  be  erected:  whether  it  should  be  the  coercive  sovereign  of  the 
whole,  or  should  share  its  sovereignty  with  the  several  states. 
Although  the  problem  was  political,  the  forces  that  were  driving 
to  a  solution  were  economic,  and  were  commonly  recognized  as 
such.  Agrarian  and  mercantile  interests  opposed  each  other 
openly  and  shaped  their  political  programs  in  accordance  with 
their  special  needs.  Not  until  French  romanticism  popularized 
the  doctrine  of  social  equalitarianism  was  there  any  serious  ques¬ 
tioning  of  the  principle  of  the  economic  basis  of  politics.  The 
fact  of  property  rule  was  challenged  in  America  no  more  than  in 
England,  and  the  laws  of  suffrage  in  the  several  states  were  founded 
on  that  principle.  The  new  state,  therefore,  took  its  shape  from 
men  who  were  political  realists,  deeply  read  in  the  republican 
literature  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  inspired  by  the  ideals 
of  the  rising  English  middle  class.  The  opponents  of  the  new 
state,  on  the  other  hand,  were  economic  liberals  who  rejected 
English  middle-class  ideals,  and  inclined  increasingly  to  the 
humanitarian  theory  of  the  French  thinkers,  though  with  an  eye 
always  upon  American  conditions.  The  struggle  between  these 
two  schools  of  thought  determined  the  final  outcome  of  a  long  and 
acrimonious  contest. 

The  English  middle  class  had  received  its  creative  bent  from 
seventeenth-century  Puritanism.  That  vast  movement  survived 
political  defeat  and  effected  a  silent  revolution  in  English  character 
that  projected  its  ideals  far  into  the  future.  It  permeated  the 

267 


268 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

rising  tradesman  class,  stimulated  its  ambition,  and  gave  it  an 
ethics  precisely  fitted  to  its  needs.  In  inculcating  the  doctrine 
of  a  sacred  calling  to  work,  it  substituted  the  modern  attitude 
towards  production  for  the  medieval.  It  rejected  the  older  con¬ 
ception  of  work  for  the  sake  of  a  livelihood,  of  production  for 
consumption,  and  substituted  the  ideal  of  work  for  its  own  sake, 
of  production  for  the  sake  of  profit.  It  implicitly  condemned  the 
leisurely,  play-loving  and  pleasure-taking  activities  of  medieval 
England,  and  substituted  a  drab  ideal  of  laborious  gain,  that 
measured  life  in  terms  of  material  prosperity  and  exalted  the 
business  of  acquisition  as  the  rational  end  of  life.  In  the  sanction 
of  such  an  ethics,  wealth  became  the  first  object  of  social  desire; 
and  this  ideal,  that  answered  the  ambitions  of  the  rising  middle 
class,  was  preached  under  the  authority  of  religion.  To  labor 
diligently  in  the  vocation  to  which  one  is  called  of  God,  it  was 
believed,  was  to  labor  under  the  great  Taskmaster’s  eye,  and  in 
the  confident  hope  of  eternal  reward. 

No  conceivable  discipline  was  better  calculated  to  breed  a  utili¬ 
tarian  race  and  create  a  nation  of  tradesmen.  The  immediate 
result  was  the  emergence  of  a  middle-class,  unimaginative,  labo¬ 
rious,  prudential,  who  devoutly  believed  that  the  right  to  rise  in 
the  world,  to  pursue  economic  well-being  in  a  competitive  society, 
was  the  most  sacred  of  human  rights;  that  those  who  were  faithful 
in  little  things,  God  would  make  rulers  over  great  things.  To 
scant  one’s  service,  whether  to  God  or  one’s  master,  was  the 
cardinal  sin;  work,  thrift,  self-denial,  were  the  cardinal  virtues. 
This  amazing  revolution  in  the  ethics  of  work  laid  the  basis  upon 
which  modern  England  was  to  rise;  it  carried  in  its  loins  the  indus¬ 
trial  revolution.  The  rise  of  the  new  ethics  coincided  historically 
with  the  final  disintegration  of  the  craft  guilds,  and  the  emergence 
of  the  great  trading  companies.  It  provided  a  desirable  sanction 
for  the  modern  principle  of  exploitation,  and  the  development  of 
the  middleman  system  of  distribution;  and  these  conceptions 
the  Puritanized  English  commercial  class  seized  upon  eagerly, 
and  in  capable  fashion  set  about  the  work  of  creating  the  system 
of  modern  capitalism. 

Every  rising  group  is  jealous  of  its  interests  and  active  in  assert¬ 
ing  them.  It  joins  forces  with  whatever  movements  of  current 
liberalism  promise  to  further  its  purpose,  but  it  will  see  to  it  that 
the  wider  movement  shall  serve  its  narrower  ends.  The  commer- 


AGRARIANISM  AND  CAPITALISM 


269 


cial  class  gathered  strength  swiftly  during  the  early  seventeenth 
century,  and  with  the  gentry  formed  the  backbone  of  discontent 
with  the  strong  rule  of  Strafford.  London  was  growing  fast, 
“the  abode  of  smoke,  disease  and  democracy,”  as  a  contempo¬ 
rary  gentleman  phrased  it;  and  the  London  burgesses  supported 
Parliament  heartily.  The  new  money-economy  wanted  to  be 
free  from  governmental  restrictions  and  exactions,  and  the  simplest 
way  seemed  to  lie  in  asserting  parliamentary  sovereignty.  That 
hope  was  frustrated  after  1660  when  control  of  Parliament  passed 
into  the  hands  of  the  landed  gentry.  The  aristocracy  was  too 
strong  for  the  middle  class,  and  the  latter  was  forced  to  buy  its 
privileges  in  the  open  parliamentary  market.  Not  until  the 
intellectual  liberalism  of  the  later  eighteenth  century  clarified  its 
conception  of  the  minimized  state,  did  the  money  economy  rise  to 
fresh  political  consciousness,  and  then  it  joined  heartily  with  the 
new  liberalism  in  an  attack  upon  the  centralized  powers  of  the 
political  state. 

The  philosophy  of  this  new  liberalism  was  derived  largely  from 
two  notable  thinkers  of  the  preceding  century,  Harrington  and 
Locke,  supplemented  later  by  Adam  Smith.  The  influence  of  the 
Oceana  upon  later  thinkers  was  profound.  In  grasping  and  apply¬ 
ing  the  principle  of  the  economic  interpretation  of  history  Harring¬ 
ton  laid  the  foundation  of  modern  political  theory.  The  true 
source  of  political  power,  he  asserted,  is  economic  power — “empire 
follows  the  balance  of  property.”  The  form  of  government  in  a 
given  country,  whether  monarchical,  aristocratic,  or  democratic, 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  economic  determinism,  depends 
upon  the  ownership  of  land,  whether  vested  largely  in  one,  in  a 
minority,  or  in  many.  This  primary  economic  power  is  modified, 
however,  by  the  presence  in  every  society  of  a  natural  aristocracy; 
the  authority  of  character  and  ability  imposes  a  natural  leadership 
on  those  less  capable,  and  disturbs  the  simple  economics  of  the 
situation.  Because  of  the  resulting  clash  of  interests,  political 
stability  can  be  secured  only  by  a  judiciously  calculated  system 
of  checks;  and  the  system  which  Harrington  elaborated  provided 
for  a  bicameral  legislature — the  aristocratic  branch  proposing  and 
debating,  and  the  democratic  branch  resolving — rotation  in  office, 
and  the  ballot,  to  the  end  that  there  should  be  a  government  of  laws 
and  not  of  men.  His  ideal  was  rulership  by  the  best  and  wisest  un¬ 
der  well-considered  laws,  circumscribed  by  a  written  constitution. 


270 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


Locke  followed  Harrington  in  founding  his  political  theory 
upon  economics,  but  he  gave  to  it  a  characteristically  middle-class 
interpretation.  Harrington  had  been  primarily  concerned  with  a 
land  economy;  Locke  was  to  become  unconsciously  a  spokesman 
of  a  money  economy.  The  persistent  problem  of  that  economy 
was  the  security  of  private  property  against  sequestration,  and  the 
ultimate  effect  of  Locke’s  teachings  was  to  secure  and  strengthen 
the  rights  of  property  in  the  state.  In  basing  his  doctrine  of 
property  ownership  upon  labor,  he  prepared  the  way  for  a  con¬ 
ception  of  economic  power  dissociated  from  land.  In  the  universal 
communism  which  marks  the  state  of  nature,  he  argued,  private 
property  rights  result  from  labor  bestowed,  and  are  ethically 
and  socially  valid.  But  in  such  a  state  of  nature,  the  possession 
and  enjoyment  of  property  thus  detached  from  the  communal 
whole  are  at  constant  hazards.  “The  great  and  chief  end,  there¬ 
fore,  of  men  uniting  into  commonwealths  and  putting  themselves 
under  government,  is  the  preservation  of  their  property.”  1  If 
such  was  the  original  purpose  for  which  government  was  instituted 
among  men,  it  follows  that  government  must  regard  property 
rights  with  particular  tenderness;  for  if  the  state  prove  untrust¬ 
worthy,  the  original  compact  upon  which  it  was  erected  is  dis¬ 
solved,  and  society  returns  to  a  state  of  nature.  Locke  therefore 
went  far  in  asserting  the  inviolable  rights  of  property,  laying  it 
down  as  a  guiding  principle  that  the  sovereign  in  time  of  war  may 
lawfully  enforce  conscription  upon  the  bodies  and  lives  of  his 
subjects,  but  not  upon  their  property.  “The  supreme  power 
cannot  take  from  any  man  any  part  of  his  property  without  his 
own  consent,”  for  “to  invade  the  fundamental  law  of  property” 
is  to  subvert  “the  end  of  government.”  2  In  thus  asserting  the 
sacredness  of  property,  Locke  laid  the  foundation  of  the  new 
philosophy  of  capitalism. 

As  English  capitalism  grew  stronger  it  began  to  envisage  more 
critically  the  fundamental  problem  of  the  powers  and  functions 
of  the  political  state.  A  state  controlled  by  the  landed  interests, 
given  to  imposing  vexatious  restrictions  upon  trade,  could  not 
answer  its  needs;  freedom  rather  than  regulation  was  requisite  to 
healthy  development.  From  the  Physiocratic  teachings  had  come 
the  new  conception  that  economic  well-being  cannot  be  imposed 
from  above  by  governmental  paternalism,  but  results  from  un- 

1  Second  Treatise  on  Civil  Government,  Chapter  IX.  2  Ibid.,  Chapter  XI. 


AGRARIANISM  AND  CAPITALISM 


271 


trammeled  individual  enterprise.  The  great  concern  of  govern¬ 
ment  should  be  to  assist  and  not  hamper  industry  and  trade; 
political  policies  should  follow  and  serve  commercial  interests. 
Thus  was  provided  the  background  from  which  emerged  The 
Wealth  of  Nations,  the  declaration  of  independence  of  modern 
capitalism.  Adam  Smith  completed  the  work  of  Locke,  and  gave 
definite  form  to  the  middle-class  liberalism  of  eighteenth-century 
England,  a  liberalism  that  in  the  pursuit  of  commercial  freedom 
found  it  desirable  to  limit  the  powers  of  the  state.  The  Tory 
state  had  been  centralized  and  paternal,  the  capitalistic  state 
was  to  be  reduced  to  the  position  of  umpire  between  competitors. 
The  net  results,  thus,  of  two  hundred  years  of  English  middle-class 
struggle  to  free  its  economic  ambitions  from  governmental  restric¬ 
tions  was  the  conception  of  the  social,  political,  and  economic  suffi¬ 
ciency  of  laissez  faire.  “  Let  alone  ”  had  been  erected  into  a  fetish. 

In  France,  on  the  other  hand,  the  economic  interpretation  of 
history  dominated  political  thinking  far  less  than  in  England, 
and  the  liberal  movement  owed  more  to  a  group  of  intellectuals 
than  to  the  middle  class.  The  French  leaders  were  a  remarkable 
group,  far  removed  in  temper  from  Harrington  and  Locke  and 
Adam  Smith.  The  Physiocrats  were  agrarians  and  the  romantics 
were  humanitarians.  They  followed  the  path  of  logic  to  broad 
principles.  As  leadership  passed  from  Montesquieu  to  Rousseau, 
French  liberalism  abandoned  the  cautious  historical  appeal,  and 
turned  to  generalization  that  carried  far  beyond  liberalism.  The 
Rousseau  school  became  advanced  radicals,  aiming  at  the  regenera¬ 
tion  of  society  as  a  whole,  seeking  political  justice  by  a  universal 
appeal  to  reason.  This  explains  the  breadth  and  suggestiveness 
of  their  thinking,  as  well  as  the  smallness  of  their  immediate 
achievement.  In  seeking  much  they  overreached  accomplishment, 
for  they  had  behind  them  no  disciplined,  class-conscious  group, 
pursuing  definite  ends.  But  in  outrunning  their  own  time,  they  be¬ 
came  leaders  of  later  times;  and  the  unfulfilled  program  of 
Rousseau  carried  over  to  become  the  inspiration  of  later  human- 
itarianism. 

The  creative  impulse  of  French  romantic  philosophy  was  a 
passionate  social  idealism.  A  disciple  of  Locke,  Rousseau  went 
further  than  his  master  and  translated  politics  and  economics  into 
sociology.  That  a  juster,  more  wholesome  social  order  should 
take  the  place  of  the  existing  obsolete  system;  that  reason  and  not 


272  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

interests  should  determine  social  institutions;  that  the  ultimate 
ends  to  be  sought  were  universal  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity — • 
such  in  brief  were  the  main  conceptions  of  his  philosophy.  “  Regard 
for  the  general  good”  must  be  accepted  as  the  sole  test  of  laws  and 
institutions.  He  attacked  the  problem  by  way  of  psychology, 
essaying  a  revaluation  of  human  nature.  Incalculable  harm  had 
been  done,  and  grave  mistakes  made,  Rousseau  believed,  by 
the  old  slanderous  interpretation;  to  assume  that  every  man  is  a 
knave,  governed  solely  by  self-interest,  was  an  assumption  contrary 
to  fact.  It  was  a  generalization  deduced  from  certain  acquired 
characteristics.  If  in  a  competitive  society  men  prove  to  be  selfish, 
ambitious  of  power  and  distinction,  brutal  in  seeking  egoistic  ends, 
the  blame  attaches  to  a  vicious  social  system  that  has  debased 
them  from  their  natural  state.  In  a  state  of  nature  men  are  kindly, 
rational,  sociable;  but  in  society  the  great  rewards  fall  to  the  self- 
seeking.  A  ruthless  social  order  is  forever  perverting  the  natural 
man;  whereas  if  social  rewards  were  bestowed  on  the  social- 
minded,  the  innate  sense  of  justice  would  speedily  modify  and  con¬ 
trol  the  impulse  to  egoism.  The  solution  of  the  vexing  social 
problem,  Rousseau  concluded,  lay  in  a  return  to  a  state  of  nature, 
where  under  the  determining  influence  of  wholesome  environment 
the  individual  should  develop  naturally,  unperverted  by  false 
standards  and  unjust  rewards. 

French  radicalism,  then,  was  driving  in  the  same  direction  with 
English  liberalism,  but  it  went  much  further.  Both  desired  a 
loosening  of  the  machinery  of  centralized  power  as  represented  by 
the  political  state;  but  whereas  English  liberalism  protested  against 
a  paternalism  that  diminished  its  profits,  French  radicalism  struck 
at  the  principle  of  centralization.  Political  institutions  it  regarded 
as  artificial  agencies  for  the  purposes  of  exploitation — the  state 
was  little  more  than  a  tax  machine;  whereas  the  living  source  and 
wellspring  of  every  true  civilization  is  social  custom,  voluntary 
association,  free  exchange.  The  root  of  French  radicalism  was 
anarchistic,  and  its  ideal  was  an  agrarian  society  of  free-holders. 
It  would  sweep  away  the  long  accumulated  mass  of  prescriptive 
rights,  the  dead  hand  of  the  past,  and  encourage  free  men  to  create 
a  new  society  that  should  have  as  its  sole  end  and  justification, 
the  common  well-being.  A  pronounced  individualism  charac¬ 
terized  both  movements,  French  and  English;  but  in  the  one  case 
it  was  humanitarian,  appealing  to  reason  and  seeking  social  justice. 


AGRARIANISM  AND  CAPITALISM 


273 


in  the  other  it  was  self-seeking,  founded  on  the  right  of  exploita¬ 
tion,  and  looking  toward  capitalism. 

During  the  period  with  which  we  are  concerned,  American 
thought,  become  militantly  self-conscious  but  still  vague  and 
inchoate  touching  any  ultimate  program,  drew  inspiration  from 
both  sources;  but  the  deeper,  controlling  influence  came  finally  to 
be  English  rather  than  French.  The  common  doctrine  of  decen¬ 
tralization  fitted  American  conditions,  but  to  many  Americans 
decentralization,  whether  social  or  political,  had  proved  unde¬ 
sirable.  The  common  doctrine  of  liberty  accorded  with  the  pas¬ 
sions  released  by  the  Revolution,  but  the  French  humanitarian 
conceptions  of  equality  and  fraternity  found  little  response  in  a 
middle-class,  competitive  world.  On  the  contrary,  the  English 
doctrine  of  economic  individualism  made  universal  appeal.  In 
presence  of  vast,  unpreempted  resources,  the  right  of  every  man  to 
preempt  and  exploit  what  he  would,  was  synonymous  with  indi¬ 
vidual  liberty.  Any  government  which  should  endeavor  to  limit 
such  exploitation  would  be  bitterly  assailed;  and  if  the  small 
man  were  free  to  enjoy  his  petty  privilege,  the  greater  interests 
might  preempt  unchallenged.  The  total  influence  of  old-world 
liberalism  upon  the  America  of  post-war  days  was,  therefore,  favor¬ 
able  to  capitalistic  development  and  hostile  to  social  democracy. 
Until  the  early  years  of  the  nineties  the  democratic  spirit  of  French 
radicalism  was  little  understood  in  America,  and  the  field  remained 
free  to  the  English  middle-class  philosophy,  which  appealed  equally 
to  the  agrarian  and  the  capitalistic  groups. 

ir 

THE  POLITICAL  SITUATION 

Against  this  background  of  ideas,  the  political  tactics  of  the 
year  1787  are  sufficiently  comprehensible.  Two  major  problems 
had  been  settled  by  the  war,  namely,  that  henceforth  the  exploita¬ 
tion  of  America  was  to  remain  the  prerogative  of  Americans,  and 
that  in  the  new  country  there  was  no  place  for  a  king  or  a  titled 
aristocracy.  But  with  these  preliminaries  settled,  the  problem 
remained  to  determine  the  form  and  powers  of  a  national  govern¬ 
ment.  Should  that  government  be  entrusted  with  coercive  sov¬ 
ereignty,  or  should  it  remain  the  titular  head  of  confederated 
sovereign  commonwealths?  The  latter  solution  had  been  ac- 


274  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

cepted  during  the  period  of  war,  and  in  proposing  abolition  of  the 
Articles  of  Confederation  and  the  substitution  of  a  new  instrument, 
the  burden  of  proof  fell  upon  the  advocates  of  the  new.  How  the 
problem  was  met  and  the  solution  achieved  by  a  skillful  minority 
in  face  of  a  hostile  majority  is  a  suggestive  lesson  in  political 
strategy.  It  is  a  classic  example  of  the  relation  of  economics  to 
politics;  of  the  struggle  between  greater  property  and  smaller 
property  for  control  of  the  state. 

The  strategic  position  of  the  large  property  interests  in  the  year 
1787  was  favorable  to  a  bold  stroke.  In  the  northern  and  middle 
states  the  controlling  influence  was  wielded  by  a  powerful  money 
group  that  had  been  slowly  rising  during  pre-Revolutionary  days, 
and  had  greatly  increased  its  resources  and  augmented  its  prestige 
as  a  result  of  war  financing  and  speculation  in  currency  and  lands. 
They  at  once  assumed  the  leadership  which  before  had  belonged 
to  the  gentry.  Like  all  eighteenth-century  realists  they  exhibited 
a  frank  property-consciousness  that  determined  all  their  moves. 
With  them  affiliated  such  members  of  the  older  gentry  as  remained, 
the  professional  classes,  ambitious  Revolutionary  officers  who 
had  set  up  the  militant  Order  of  the  Cincinnati,  together  with  a 
numerous  body  of  the  disappointed  and  the  disaffected;  the  net 
result  of  which  was  a  close  working  alliance  of  property  and  cul¬ 
ture  for  the  purpose  of  erecting  a  centralized  state  with  coercive 
powers.  They  were  powerfully  aided  by  two  outstanding  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  eighteenth-century  mind:  an  aristocratic  psychol¬ 
ogy  which  was  deeply  ingrained  in  the  colonial  through  the  long 
unchallenged  rule  of  the  gentry;  and  the  universal  belief  in  the 
stake-in-society  theory  of  government,  evidenced  by  the  general 
disfranchisement  of  non-property-holders.  Property  had  always 
ruled  in  America,  openly  and  without  apology,  and  the  money 
group  could  count  on  a  spontaneous  response  to  its  demand  that 
property  should  reorganize  the  feeble  central  government  and 
set  up  one  more  to  its  liking.  In  the  South  this  reorganization 
was  unnecessary,  for  the  planter  aristocracy,  in  siding  with  the 
Revolution,  remained  masters  of  their  society,  and  the  money 
group  had  not  risen  to  challenge  their  supremacy.  It  remained 
only  for  the  northern  interests  to  join  forces  with  the  planters 
to  bring  the  great  property  interests  of  the  country  under  one 
banner. 

The  status  of  the  small  property  holders,  on  the  other  hand,  was 


AGRARIANISM  AND  CAPITALISM 


275 


much  less  happy.  They  were  in  possession  of  many  of  the  state 
governments,  and  were  strongly  wedded  to  the  Articles  of  Con¬ 
federation;  but  they  were  deep  in  populism  and  their  agrarian 
measures  offered  rallying  points  for  a  powerful  opposition.  They 
lacked  disciplined  cohesion  and  were  wanting  in  a  broad  pro¬ 
gram.  The  militant  mood  of  Revolutionary  days  had  given 
place  to  suspicion  and  disillusion,  and  their  fighting  strength  was 
greatly  weakened.  They  were  suffering  the  fate  of  all  post-war 
governments.  The  widespread  depression  was  attributed  to 
populist  policies,  and  all  the  evils  from  which  the  country  was 
suffering  were  laid  at  the  doors  of  agrarian  legislatures.  Under 
such  conditions  the  political  strategy  of  the  money  group  was 
predetermined.  The  issue  was  ready-made.  Astute  politicians 
like  Hamilton  seized  the  opportunity  and  crystallized  the  dis¬ 
content  by  the  ingenious  argument  that  the  trouble  was  too  much 
agrarianism,  that  agrarianism  resulted  from  too  much  democracy, 
and  that  the  inevitable  end  of  too  much  democracy  was  universal 
anarchy.  The  root  of  all  the  troubles,  it  was  asserted,  was  the 
pernicious  slackness  of  the  Articles  of  Confederation  which  pre¬ 
vented  a  vigorous  administration.  There  could  be  no  prosperity 
until  a  competent  national  government  was  set  up  on  a  sub¬ 
stantial  basis. 

The  inevitable  consequence  was  that  the  ideal  of  popular  demo¬ 
cratic  rule  received  a  sharp  setback.  The  aristocratic  prejudices 
of  the  colonial  mind  were  given  a  more  militant  bias  by  skillful 
propaganda.  Democracy  was  pictured  as  no  other  than  mob  rule, 
and  its  ultimate  purpose  the  denial  of  all  property  rights.  Pop¬ 
ulistic  measures  were  fiercely  denounced  as  the  natural  fruit  of 
democratic  control;  all  America  was  in  danger  of  following  the 
destructive  example  of  New  Hampshire  and  Rhode  Island.  “Look 
at  the  Legislature  of  Rhode  Island,”  exclaimed  a  speaker  in  the 
New  York  Constitutional  Convention,  “what  is  it  but  the  perfect 
picture  of  a  mob!”  The  virus  of  democracy  was  a  poison  that 
destroyed  the  character  of  the  people  as  well  as  government; 
was  not  the  fate  of  Rhode  Island  a  warning  to  the  rest  of  the 
country?  Here  is  a  picture  of  that  commonwealth,  drawn  by  an 
English  gentleman  before  agrarianism  had  done  its  worst. 

The  government  of  this  province  is  entirely  democratical,  every  officer, 
except  the  collector  of  the  customs,  being  appointed  .  .  .  either  imme¬ 
diately  by  the  people,  or  by  the  general  assembly.  .  .  .  The  character  of 


276 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


the  Rhode  Islanders  is  by  no  means  engaging,  or  amiable,  a  circumstance 
principally  owing  to  their  form  of  government.  Their  men  in  power,  from 
the  highest  to  the  lowest,  are  dependent  upon  the  people,  and  frequently 
act  without  that  strict  regard  to  probity  and  honour,  which  ought  in¬ 
variably  to  influence  and  direct  mankind.  The  private  people  are  cunning, 
deceitful,  and  selfish:  they  live  almost  entirely  by  unfair  and  illicit  trading. 
Their  magistrates  are  partisan  and  corrupt:  and  it  is  folly  to  expect  justice 
in  their  courts  of  judicature;  for  he  who  has  the  greatest  purse  is  generally 
found  to  have  the  fairest  cause.  ...  It  is  needless,  after  this,  to  observe 
that  it  is  in  a  very  declining  state.3 

“Under  the  Articles  of  Confederation,”  comments  a  recent 
student,  “populism  had  a  free  hand,  for  majorities  in  the  state 
legislatures  were  omnipotent.  Any  one  who  reads  the  economic 
history  of  the  time  will  see  why  the  solid  conservative  interests 
of  the  country  were  weary  of  the  talk  about  the  ‘rights  of  the 
people,’  and  were  bent  upon  establishing  firm  guarantees  for  the 
rights  of  property.”  4  The  money-economy  had  made  up  its  mind 
that  such  government  as  that  of  Rhode  Island  could  not  longer 
be  tolerated.  An  example  must  be  made  of  such  hotbeds  of 
anarchy;  if  reason  would  not  be  listened  to,  force  must  be  used. 
An  ardent  Federalist,  Judge  Dana  of  Massachusetts,  offered  a 
possible  solution: 

This  state  [Rhode  Island]  will  not  choose  delegates  to  the  convention, 
nor  order  on  their  delegates  to  Congress.  I  hope  they  will  not,  as  their 
neglect  will  give  grounds  to  strike  it  out  of  the  union,  and  divide  its  ter¬ 
ritory  between  their  neighbors.  .  .  .  According  to  my  best  observation, 
such  a  division  of  this  state  would  meet  the  best  approbation  of  the  com¬ 
mercial  part  of  it,  though  they  are  afraid  to  take  any  open  measures  in  the 
present  state  of  things,  to  bring  it  about.  Their  interest  must  dictate 
such  a  measure;  they  never  can  be  secure  under  the  present  form  of  govern¬ 
ment,  but  will  always  labor  under  the  greatest  mischief  any  people  can 
suffer,  that  of  being  ruled  by  the  most  ignorant  and  unprincipled  of  their 
fellow  citizens.  This  state  is  too  insignificant  to  have  a  place  on  an  equal 
footing  with  any  of  the  others  in  the  Union,  unless  it  be  Delaware.  There¬ 
fore  a  bold  politician  would  seize  upon  the  occasion  their  abominable  anti- 
federal  conduct  presents,  for  annihilating  them  as  a  separate  member  of 
the  Union.6 

“It  is  fortunate,”  wrote  General  Varnum  to  Washington,  con¬ 
firming  Judge  Dana’s  analysis  of  the  economic  divisions  of  Rhode 

3  Burnaby,  Travels  through  the  Middle  Settlements  in  North  America  in  the  Years 
1759  and  1760. 

4  Beard,  The  Supreme  Court  and  the  Constitution. 

6  Austin,  Life  of  Elbridge  Gerry ?  Vol.  II,  pp.  66-67. 


AGRARIANISM  AND  CAPITALISM 


277 


Island,  “that  the  wealth  and  resources  of  this  state  are  chiefly 
in  possession  of  the  well  affected,  and  they  are  entirely  devoted  to 
the  public  good.” 

It  was  Shays’s  Rebellion,  that  militant  outbreak  of  populism  that 
set  all  western  Massachusetts  in  uproar,  and  spread  to  the  very 
outskirts  of  Boston,  which  crystallized  the  anti-democratic  senti¬ 
ment,  and  aroused  the  commercial  group  to  decisive  action.  With 
its  armed  attack  upon  lawyers  and  courts,  its  intimidation  of  legis¬ 
lators,  its  appeal  for  the  repudiation  of  debts,  it  provided  the 
object  lesson  in  democratic  anarchy  which  the  “friends  of  law  and 
order”  greatly  needed.  The  revolt  was  put  down,  but  the  fear  of 
democracy  remained  and  called  aloud  for  stronger  government. 
“We  see  the  situation  we  are  in,”  exclaimed  a  Boston  member  in 
the  Massachusetts  Constitutional  Convention.  “We  are  verging 
toward  destruction,  and  every  one  must  be  sensible  of  it.”  Shays 
had  failed,  but  with  political  power  in  the  hands  of  agrarian  legis¬ 
latures,  friendly  to  debtors,  what  dangers  must  not  the  future 
hold  in  store?  Was  it  not  the  patriotic  duty  of  the  sober  conserva¬ 
tors  of  society  to  set  up  betimes  a  strong  constitutional  defense, 
before  the  rights  of  property  were  swept  away  by  the  fierce  tide  of 
democracy?  Writing  to  Washington  under  date  of  October  23, 
1786,  General  Knox  argued: 

On  the  very  first  impression  of  faction  and  licentiousness,  the  fine 
theoretic  government  of  Massachusetts  has  given  way,  and  its  laws  are 
trampled  under  foot.  .  .  .  Their  creed  is,  that  the  property  of  the  United 
States  has  been  protected  from  the  confiscation  of  Britain  by  the  joint 
exertions  of  all,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  the  common  property  of  all.  .  .  . 
This  dreadful  situation,  for  which  our  government  have  made  no  adequate 
provision,  has  alarmed  every  man  of  principle  and  property  in  New  Eng¬ 
land.  They  start  as  from  a  dream,  and  ask  what  can  have  been  the  cause 
of  this  delusion?  What  is  to  give  us  security  against  the  violence  of  law¬ 
less  men?  Our  government  must  be  braced,  changed,  or  altered  to  secure 
our  lives  and  property.  We  imagined  that  the  mildness  of  our  govern¬ 
ment  and  the  wishes  of  the  people  were  so  correspondent  that  we  were 
not  as  other  nations,  requiring  brutal  force  to  support  the  laws.  But 
we  find  we  are  men — actual  men,  possessing  all  the  turbulent  passions 
belonging  to  that  animal,  and  that  we  must  have  a  government  proper  and 
adequate  for  him.  The  people  of  Massachusetts  ...  are  far  advanced  in 
this  doctrine,  and  the  men  of  property  and  the  men  of  station  and  prin¬ 
ciple  there,  are  determined  to  establish  and  protect  them  in  their  lawful 
pursuits.  .  .  .  Something  is  wanting  and  something  must  be  done.6 

6  Brooks,  Henry  Knox,  pp.  194-195. 


278 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


During  these  years  of  unrest  the  problem  of  a  new  fundamental 
law  was  carefully  studied  by  the  anti-agrarian  leaders  and  solu¬ 
tions  suggested.  A  remarkable  change  had  come  over  their  think¬ 
ing.  They  discarded  the  revolutionary  doctrines  that  had  served 
their  need  in  the  debate  with  England.  They  were  done  with 
natural  rights  and  romantic  interpretations  of  politics  and  were 
turned  realists.  They  parted  company  with  English  liberalism 
in  its  desire  for  a  diminished  state.  Their  economic  interests  were 
suffering  from  the  lack  of  a  strong  centralized  government,  and 
they  were  in  a  mood  to  agree  with  earlier  realists  who  held  that 
men  are  animals  with  turbulent  passions,  and  require  a  govern¬ 
ment  “proper  and  adequate”  for  animals;  and  in  view  of  local 
agrarian  majorities,  a  proper  and  adequate  government  could 
not  be  had  without  a  strong  centralized  state.  The  solution,  they 
were  convinced,  lay  in  a  return  to  some  form  of  seventeenth- 
century  republicanism,  possibly  modeled  after  Harrington,  but 
with  further  checks  upon  the  power  of  the  democratic  branch  of 
the  legislature,  and  a  stronger  executive.  Hobbes  with  his  levia¬ 
than  monarchy  had  gone  too  far,  but  he  had,  at  least,  understood 
the  need  of  a  strong  state;  and  a  strong  state,  subservient  to  their 
interests,  the  business  and  landed  groups  were  determined  to  set 
up  as  a  barrier  against  a  threatening  agrarianism. 

The  great  obstacle  to  such  a  program  was  the  political  power 
of  the  farmers,  bred  up  in  the  traditional  practice  of  home  rule, 
jealous  of  local  rights,  and  content  with  the  Articles  of  Confedera¬ 
tion.  These  home  rulers  would  not  take  kindly  to  any  suggestion 
of  a  centralized  state,  even  though  it  should  be  republican  in  form. 
The  thing  must  be  done  skillfully,  if  it  were  to  succeed.  To  nullify 
where  they  could  not  override  the  political  power  of  the  agrarians, 
therefore,  became  the  practical  problem  of  the  money-economy. 
The  fear  aroused  by  Shays’s  Rebellion  provided  the  strategic 
opportunity,  and  the  best  brains  of  the  country  suggested  the 
method.  The  struggle  had  begun  which  was  to  provide  a  new 
fundamental  law  for  the  United  States. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  GREAT  DEBATE 

When  one  considers  the  bulk  of  commentary  that  has  grown 
up  about  the  Constitution,  it  is  surprising  how  little  abstract 
political  speculation  accompanied  its  making  and  adoption.  It 
was  the  first  response  to  the  current  liberal  demand  for  written 
constitutions  as  a  safeguard  against  tyranny,  but  it  was  aimed 
at  the  encroachments  of  agrarian  majorities  rather  than  at  Tory 
minorities.  It  was  the  work  of  able  lawyers  and  men  of  affairs 
confronting  a  definite  situation,  rather  than  of  political  philoso¬ 
phers;  and  it  was  accompanied  by  none  of  that  searching  examina¬ 
tion  of  fundamental  rights  and  principles  which  made  the  earlier 
Puritan  and  later  French  debate  over  constitutional  principles 
so  rich  in  creative  speculation.  Not  a  single  political  thinker 
comparable  to  the  great  English  and  French  philosophers  emerged 
from  the  struggle.  The  debate  drew  freely  upon  the  materials 
supplied  by  those  thinkers,  but  it  added  little  that  was  new. 

The  Constitution  was  a  venture  in  republicanism,  on  a  scale 
and  under  conditions  without  historical  precedent.  It  was  in¬ 
evitable,  therefore,  that  the  debate  should  concern  itself  greatly 
with  the  nature  of  republicanism  and  its  adaptability  to  American 
conditions.  As  the  argument  developed,  two  major  questions 
assumed  critical  importance:  the  question  of  the  powers  of  the 
Federal  state,  and  the  question  of  the  sovereign  rights  of  the 
majority;  and  in  dealing  with  both  the  debaters  were  on  ground 
inadequately  surveyed.  Of  definite  republican  theory  little  was 
available  except  the  writings  of  a  small  group  of  seventeenth-cen¬ 
tury  republicans.  Of  democratic  theory,  on  the  other  hand,  even 
less  was  available.  American  democratic  aspiration  had  far  outrun 
old-world  liberalism,  and  had  produced  no  independent  speculation 
of  its  own.  French  democratic  theory  still  awaited  the  rise  of 
Jacobinism  to  clarify  its  principles.  The  party  of  Commonwealth 
Levelers,  to  be  sure,  with  their  doctrines  of  a  “paramount  law,” 
manhood  suffrage,  and  annual  parliaments,  offered  much  that 
might  have  proved  suggestive;  but  the  literature  of  the  Levelers 

279 


280  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

was  buried  too  deep  under  Tory  obloquy  to  be  resurrected,  and 
nowhere  else  was  to  be  found  any  considerable  body  of  democratic 
theory.  It  was  inevitable,  therefore,  that  the  debaters  should 
go  back  to  the  English  liberals  of  the  preceding  century. 

Consider  for  a  moment  the  authorities  bandied  to  and  fro  in 
the  great  debate.  With  such  exceptions  as  Machiavelli,  Vattel, 
Pufendorf,  Montesquieu,  they  were  the  well-known  English 
theorists,  Hobbes,  Harrington,  Milton,  Sidney,  Halifax,  Hume, 
and  Blackstone.  Unhappily  for  the  democrats  every  one  of  these 
great  names  counted  against  their  aspirations.  Hobbes  was  a 
state  absolutist  whose  Leviathan  provided  sharp  weapons  for  those 
who  wished  to  tone  the  government  high;  Hume  was  a  Tory  who 
accepted  the  traditional  interpretation  of  human  nature  in  the 
light  of  which  democracy  was  the  open  door  to  anarchy;  Black- 
stone  was  a  Tory  lawyer,  who  interpreted  the  British  constitution 
by  a  narrow  legalism  that  was  obsolete  before  the  Commentaries 
came  from  the  press.  Harrington,  Milton,  and  perhaps  Sidney, 
were  republicans  of  strong  aristocratic  bias,  and  Halifax  and 
Locke — the  latter  by  much  the  most  influential  of  all — were 
constitutional  monarchists.1  Every  one  of  these  great  authorities 
either  distrusted  or  violently  condemned  democracy,  yet  they 
provided  the  major  body  of  theory  made  use  of  by  the  Federalists. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  slowly  accumulating  democratic  theory 
was  unknown  to  the  members  of  the  convention.  In  1761  Robert 
Wallace  had  advanced  an  Owenite  theory  of  property,  attacking 
the  principle  of  economic  individualism  as  responsible  for  the 
current  evils  of  government  by  landed  property;  but  his  book, 
V arious  Prospects,  made  no  ripple  on  the  placid  waters  of  English 
liberalism.2  In  1768  Joseph  Priestley,  a  thinker  who  later  was  to 
exercise  great  influence  in  America,  who  lived  here  for  a  number  of 
years  and  was  intimate  with  Jefferson,  published  his  essay,  First 
Principles  of  Government,  a  work  embodying  the  first  English 
interpretation  of  the  perfectibility  of  man,  the  rule  of  reason,  the 
theory  of  the  diminished  state,  and  the  Benthamite  principle  of 
utilitarianism  or  expediency  in  statecraft,  which  struck  at  the 
principle  of  coercive  sovereignty.  But  the  ideas  of  Priestley  were 
probably  little  known  in  America  in  1787,  and  his  influence  was 

1  These  English  liberals  have  been  often  regarded  as  democrats.  Thus  Merriam 
says  of  Locke,  “He  was  the  most  famous  of  seventeenth  century  democratic  think¬ 
ers.”  American  Political  Theories,  p.  90. 

2  See  Laski,  Political  Thought  from  Locke  to  Bentham,  p.  188. 


THE  GREAT  DEBATE 


281 


undermined  further  by  a  theological  attack  which  sought  to 
fasten  upon  him  the  stigma  of  atheism.  In  short,  in  this  war  of 
ideas  the  democrats  were  provided  with  little  ammunition  and 
fought  at  a  great  disadvantage.  If  the  debate  had  taken  place 
five  years  later,  after  the  French  Revolution  had  provided  new 
democratic  theory,  the  disparity  of  intellectual  equipment  would 
have  been  far  less  marked. 

One  other  fact  must  be  kept  in  mind,  namely,  that  the  great 
debate  was  in  reality  two  debates,  one  carried  on  in  the  quiet  of  the 
convention  hall,  the  other  in  the  open.  Each  interprets  the  other, 
and  taken  together  they  reveal  the  conflict  of  forces  and  ideas 
that  determined  the  form  of  the  Constitution.  In  the  privacy  of 
the  convention  the  speakers  were  free  to  express  their  views  frankly, 
and  in  consequence  a  loose  rein  was  given  to  the  play  of  ideas; 
fundamental  principles  were  examined  critically  and  economic 
motives  and  class  interests  openly  acknowledged.  But  in  arguing 
the  case  before  the  generality  of  voters  without  doors  a  more 
cautious  approach  was  necessary;  arguments  must  be  tempered 
to  well-known  prejudices,  and  circumspection  must  take  the 
place  of  frankness.  In  the  earlier  debate,  among  innumerable 
lesser  problems,  two  main  questions  dominated  the  argument: 
the  question  of  the  form  of  the  centralized  state — whether  it 
should  be  aristocratic  or  republican;  and  if  republican — as  was 
inevitable — the  question  of  what  should  be  done  about  the  majority 
will — how  representation  should  be  so  refined  as  to  guarantee 
stability  to  the  government  and  security  to  the  minority.  In 
the  second  debate  the  appeal  was  to  expediency  rather  than  to 
principles,  and  turned  on  three  chief  points:  the  need  of  adoption 
in  view  of  the  desperate  condition  of  the  country;  the  adaptation 
of  the  proposed  republican  form  to  the  vast  extent  of  territory 
and  diversity  of  interests;  and  the  necessity  of  providing  checks 
upon  political  parties  if  anarchy  were  to  be  avoided. 

In  the  convention  the  need  of  a  strong  state,  with  powers  beyond 
local  legislatures,  was  not  so  much  debated  as  assumed.  By 
common  consent  it  was  agreed  that  the  present  lack  of  a  centralized, 
coercive  sovereignty,  was  the  source  of  all  current  evils.  How 
many  members  preferred  monarchy  to  republicanism,  in  principle, 
it  is  impossible  to  determine;  but  they  all  realized  the  inexpediency 
of  attempting  to  set  it  up;  even  Hamilton  yielded  to  the  logic 
of  Colonel  Mason’s  argument:  “Notwithstanding  the  oppression 


282 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


and  injustice  experienced  among  us  from  democracy,  the  genius 
of  the  people  is  in  favor  of  it,  and  the  genius  of  the  people  must 
be  consulted.”  Accepting  then  the  principle  of  republicanism  as 
a  compromise  between  the  extremes  of  monarchy  and  democracy, 
the  practical  problem  remained  of  erecting  a  system  that  should 
secure  the  minority  against  the  aggressions  of  political  faction. 
If  the  danger  lay  in  an  uncontrolled  majority  will,  the  way  of 
safety  lay  in  imposing  restraints  upon  that  will.  In  elaborating  a 
system  of  checks  and  balances  the  members  of  the  convention  were 
influenced  by  the  practical  considerations  of  economic  determinism 
more  than  by  the  theories  of  Montesquieu.  They  were  realists 
who  followed  the  teachings  of  the  greatest  political  thinkers  from 
Aristotle  to  Locke  in  asserting  that  the  problem  of  government 
lay  in  arranging  a  stable  balance  between  the  economic  interests 
of  the  major  classes.  The  revolutionary  conception  of  equalita- 
rianism,  that  asserted  the  rights  of  man  apart  from  property  and 
superior  to  property,  did  not  enter  into  their  thinking  as  a  workable 
hypothesis.  The  very  conditions  of  the  unsettled  times  were  an 
argument  against  it.  Property,  they  argued,  is  the  stabilizing 
force  in  society;  it  is  conservative  and  cautious;  having  everything 
to  lose  by  social  upheavals,  it  is  a  restraining  force  upon  factional 
unrest.  The  propertyless,  on  the  other  hand,  having  nothing  to 
lose,  easily  become  the  victims  of  demagogues  and  embroil  society 
with  foolish  experiments.  The  republican  experiment  might  work 
in  America  because  property  was  widely  distributed,  but  in  the 
course  of  time  a  propertyless  majority  would  arise,  whose  fickle 
and  subversive  will  must  be  held  in  check.  The  problem,  therefore, 
was  to  provide  in  time  against  such  an  eventuality.  Certain 
members  of  the  convention  did  not  go  so  far  in  their  fear  of  the 
propertyless,  but  relied  upon  the  ability  of  property  to  protect 
itself  by  extra-legal  means.  “Give  the  votes  to  people  who  have 
no  property,”  argued  Gouvemeur  Morris,  “and  they  will  sell  them 
to  the  rich,  who  will  be  able  to  buy  them.”  3  But  the  more  general 
view  was  expressed  by  Madison: 

The  landed  interest,  at  present,  is  prevalent,  but  in  process  of  time  .  .  . 
when  the  number  of  landholders  shall  be  comparatively  small  .  .  .  will 
not  the  landed  interests  be  overbalanced  in  future  elections?  and,  unless 
wisely  provided  against,  what  will  become  of  our  government?  In  Eng¬ 
land,  at  this  day,  if  elections  were  open  to  all  classes  of  people,  the  property 

3  Elliot’s  Debates,  Vol.  I,  p.  386. 


THE  GREAT  DEBATE 


283 


of  landed  proprietors  would  be  insecure.  An  agrarian  law  would  take 
place.  If  these  observations  be  just,  our  government  ought  to  secure  the 
permanent  interests  of  the  country  against  innovation.  Landholders 
ought  to  have  a  share  in  the  government,  to  support  these  invaluable 
interests,  and  to  balance  and  check  the  other.  They  ought  to  be  so  con¬ 
stituted  as  to  protect  the  minority  of  the  opulent  against  the  majority.4 

This  conception  of  the  natural  sovereignty  of  the  landed  interest 
with  its  stake-in-society  theory  of  political  rights,  America  in¬ 
herited  from  England;  and  although  the  new  Constitution  pro¬ 
fessed  to  rest  on  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  the  men  who 
framed  it  refused  to  interpret  the  term,  sovereignty  of  the  people, 
in  an  equalitarian  sense.  They  did  not  profess  to  be,  in  the  words 
of  John  Quincy  Adams,  “slavish  adorers  of  our  sovereign  lords 
the  people.”  Every  principle  of  their  social  and  political  philos¬ 
ophy  taught  them  the  desirability  of  limiting  the  majority  will 
in  order  that  the  wiser  minority  will  might  rule.  Paul  Leicester 
Ford  has  asserted  that  “the  Federal  compact  was  the  first  deliberate 
attempt  and  assent  of  a  majority  to  tie  its  own  hands;  to  give  to 
the  minority  guarantees  of  fair  and  equal  treatment,  without 
which  democratic  government  is  well-nigh  impossible,  save  when 
developed  along  the  lines  of  socialism.”  5  Such  partisan  mis¬ 
interpretation  of  plain  historical  fact  is  characteristic  of  our 
Federalist  historians.  If  the  hands  of  the  disfranchised  majority 
were  tied  by  the  voting  minority,  it  is  a  bit  absurd  to  attribute  the 
resulting  guarantees  to  an  altruistic  sense  of  justice,  deliberately 
expressed  by  the  former.  Very  possibly  in  a  world  so  aristocratic 
as  was  America  in  1787,  no  other  course  would  have  succeeded; 
but  there  is  not  a  single  historical  fact  to  justify  so  naive  an  in¬ 
terpretation,  and  the  bitter  partisan  warfare  which  followed  is 
sufficient  to  disprove  it. 

We  are  too  prone  to  forget  the  wide  popular  disfavor  with  which 
the  new  Constitution  was  received.  No  sooner  did  the  second 
debate  open  than  it  became  evident  that  the  majority  opinion 
held  quite  a  different  conception  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people 
than  was  expressed  by  the  convention.  It  had  no  desire  to  tie 
its  own  hands;  it  did  not  take  kindly  to  the  proposal  to  transfer 
power  from  the  several  states  to  the  Federal  government.  The 
villagers  and  small  men  were  afraid  of  the  new  instrument;  they 
asserted  that  it  had  been  prepared  by  aristocrats  and  moneyed 

4  Ibid.,  Voi.  I,  pp.  449-450.  6  The  Federalist,  Introduction,  p.  viii. 


284  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

men,  and  they  repudiated  the  stake-in-society  principle.  “The 
Constitution,”  said  General  Thompson  in  the  Massachusetts 
Convention,  “and  the  reasons  which  induced  gentlemen  to  frame 
it,  ought  to  have  been  sent  to  the  several  towns  to  be  considered 
by  them.  My  town  considered  it  seven  hours,  and  after  this 
there  was  not  one  in  favor  of  it.”  In  Rhode  Island,  where  it  was 
thus  submitted,  it  was  rejected  “by  a  very  great  majority.”  The 
state  of  mind  of  the  agrarian  majority  was  thus  expressed  by 
Amos  Singletary,  of  Sutton,  Massachusetts: 

These  lawyers,  and  men  of  learning,  and  moneyed  men,  that  talk  so 
finely,  and  gloss  over  matters  so  smoothly,  to  make  us,  poor  illiterate 
people,  swallow  down  the  pill,  expect  to  get  into  Congress  themselves; 
they  expect  to  be  the  managers  of  this  Constitution,  and  get  all  the  power 
and  all  the  money  into  their  own  hands,  and  then  they  will  swallow  up  all 
us  little  folks,  like  the  great  leviathan.6 

Among  the  host  of  pamphlets  and  newspaper  articles  that 
quickly  appeared,  The  Federalist  written  by  Hamilton  and  Madison 
with  some  help  from  Jay,  and  Letters  from  the  Federal  Farmer  to 
the  Republican,  by  Richard  Henry  Lee,  fairly  adequately  present 
the  opposing  arguments.  By  common  consent  The  Federalist 
was  at  once  accepted  by  its  party  as  an  unanswerable  defense  of 
the  Constitution;  and  its  fame  has  grown  greater  with  the  passing 
years.  No  other  work  on  political  theory  in  the  American  library 
has  been  rated  so  high,  or  been  more  frequently  cited.  From  the 
mass  of  contemporary  pamphlets  it  emerges  like  a  colossus.  It 
“has  been  seriously  and  reverently  called  the  Bible  of  Republican¬ 
ism,”  says  a  legal  historian,  which  “for  comprehensiveness  of 
design,  strength,  clearness,  and  simplicity  .  .  .  has  no  parallel 
among  the  writings  of  men,  not  even  excepting  or  overlooking 
those  of  Montesquieu  and  Aristotle,”  7;  and  a  literary  historian 
pronounces  authoritatively,  “it  is  so  wisely  thoughtful  that  one 
may  almost  declare  it  the  permanent  basis  of  sound  thinking 
concerning  American  constitutional  law.”  8 

The  Federalist  was  the  work  of  able  lawyers,  with  whom  was 
joined  a  notable  political  thinker.  In  very  large  part  it  is  of 
interest  only  to  students  of  early  constitutional  theory  and  practice. 
It  was  designed  as  a  frankly  partisan  argument  to  appeal  to  an 

6  Quoted  in  Harding,  The  Federal  Constitution  in  Massachusetts. 

7  Carson,  History  of  the  Supreme  Court,  quoted  by  Ford,  The  Federalist,  p.  xxix. 

8  Wendell,  Literary  History  of  America,  p.  n8. 


THE  GREAT  DEBATE 


285 


influential  group  in  New  York,  many  members  of  which  had 
followed  George  Clinton  and  Robert  Yates  in  opposition  to  the 
Constitution.  On  the  political  side  it  develops  four  main  theses: 
the  necessity  for  taking  effective  action  in  view  of  the  self-confessed 
failure  of  the  Articles  of  Confederation;  the  urgent  need  of  a 
sovereign,  unitary  state,  to  avoid  the  horrors  which  must  follow 
from  “the  political  monster  of  an  imperium  in  imperio”  ;  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  providing  that  justice  shall  prevail  over  the  majority  will; 
and  the  adaptability  of  the  republican  form  to  a  great  extent  of 
territory  and  divergent  interests.  Of  these  the  second  and  third 
lay  bare  the  heart  of  Federalist  political  theory;  and  in  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  them  there  is  no  shrinking  from  the  conclusions  of  the 
earlier  debate,  although  the  tone  is  conciliatory. 

The  argument  for  a  unitary,  sovereign  state,  developed  by 
Hamilton,  and  the  argument  for  justice,  developed  by  Madison, 
rest  upon  the  same  basis  and  are  regarded  as  the  twin  problems 
of  government.  The  true  sanction  of  government  is  found,  not 
in  good  will,  as  Bentham  and  later  democratic  thinkers  have  urged, 
but  in  coercion; 9  and  coercion  is  accepted  as  necessary  because 
of  universal  selfishness.  “Why  has  government  been  instituted 
at  all?  Because  the  passions  of  men  will  not  conform  to  the 
dictates  of  reason  and  justice,  without  restraint.”  10  Granted 
coercive  sovereignty,  government  must  guarantee  justice  to  all; 
and  justice  demands  that  the  majority  shall  suffer  needful  restraint 
equally  with  the  minority.  The  great  and  insidious  danger  to 
good  government  has  always  been  faction,  the  argument  runs, 
and  a  chief  merit  of  the  Constitution  lay  in  its  provisions  to  lessen 
the  disasters  of  factional  ambition.  “Complaints  are  everywhere 
heard  from  our  most  considerate  and  virtuous  citizens,  equally 
the  friends  of  public  and  private  faith,  and  of  public  and  personal 
liberty,  that  our  governments  are  too  unstable,  that  the  public 
good  is  disregarded  in  the  conflict  of  rival  parties,  and  that  measures 
are  too  often  decided,  not  according  to  the  rules  of  justice  and 
the  rights  of  the  minor  party,  but  by  the  superior  force  of  an 
interested  and  overbearing  majority.”  11 

No  theory  is  more  representative  of  the  time  than  the  theory 
of  faction.  It  was  a  first  line  of  defense  thrown  up  against  the 
advancing  democratic  movement.  The  term  had  long  served 
conveniently  to  stigmatize  any  popular  unrest,  the  “factious 
9  Number  15.  10  Ibid.  *  11  Number  10. 


286  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

multitude”  having  been  held  synonymous  in  earlier  usage  with 
mob;  but  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  word  was  applied 
generally  to  political  parties.  In  a  world  moving  inevitably 
towards  manhood  suffrage,  a  sharp  alignment  of  parties  with 
definite  platforms  was  greatly  feared  by  the  minority,  for  the 
organization  of  the  rank  and  file  of  voters  must  end  in  majority 
control.  An  honest  appeal  to  the  people  was  the  last  thing  desired 
by  the  Federalists,  and  the  democratic  machinery  of  recalls  and 
referendums  and  rotation  in  office,  which  had  developed  during 
the  war,  was  stigmatized  as  factional  devices  which  in  the  end 
must  destroy  good  government.  “As  every  appeal  to  the  people 
would  carry  an  implication  of  some  defect  in  the  government,” 
argued  Madison,12  “frequent  appeals  would  in  a  great  measure 
deprive  the  government  of  that  veneration  which  time  bestows 
on  everything,  and  without  which  the  wisest  and  freest  govern¬ 
ments  would  not  possess  the  requisite  stability.”  “The  danger 
of  disturbing  the  public  tranquillity  by  interesting  too  strongly 
the  public  passions  is  a  still  more  serious  objection  against  a 
frequent  reference  of  constitutional  questions  to  the  decisions  of 
the  whole  society.” 

In  the  remarkable  tenth  number,  which  compresses  within  a 
few  pages  pretty  much  the  whole  Federalist  theory  of  political 
science,  Madison  has  explained  the  Federalist  objections  to  political 
parties  and  party  government. 

By  a  faction,  I  understand  a  number  of  citizens,  whether  amounting  to  a 
majority  or  minority  of  the  whole,  who  are  united  and  actuated  by  some 
common  impulse  of  passion,  or  of  interest,  adverse  to  the  rights  of  other 
citizens,  or  to  the  permanent  and  aggregate  interests  of  the  commu¬ 
nity.  ...  If  a  faction  consists  of  less  than  a  majority,  relief  is  supplied 
by  the  republican  principle,  which  enables  the  majority  to  defeat  its  sinister 
views,  by  regular  vote.  .  .  .  When  a  majority  is  included  in  a  faction, 
the  form  of  popular  government,  on  the  other  hand,  enables  it  to  sacrifice 
to  its  ruling  passion  or  interest,  both  the  public  good  and  the  rights  of 
other  citizens.  To  secure  the  public  good  and  private  rights,  against  the 
danger  of  such  a  faction,  is  then  the  great  object  to  which  our  inquiries 
are  directed.  ...  By  what  means  is  this  great  object  attainable?  Ev¬ 
idently  by  one  of  two  only.  Either  the  existence  of  the  same  passion  or 
interest  in  a  majority  at  the  same  time  must  be  prevented;  or  the  majority, 
having  such  coexistent  passion  or  interest,  must  be  rendered  by  their 
number  and  local  situations,  unable  to  concert  and  carry  into  effect 
schemes  of  oppression.  If  the  impulse  and  the  opportunity  be  suffered  to 

12  Number  49. 


THE  GREAT  DEBATE  287 

coincide,  we  well  know,  that  neither  moral  nor  religious  motives  can  be 
relied  on  as  an  adequate  control. 

In  full  agreement  with  the  greater  political  thinkers  of  the  past, 
Madison  then  traces  political  parties  to  economic  sources.  Since 
in  every  society  the  diversity  of  economic  groups  creates  diversity 
of  political  programs,  party  divisions  and  party  alignments  are 
inevitable  in  the  ordinary  course  of  events.  The  unequal  dis¬ 
tribution  of  property  is  the  realistic  basis  of  all  politics,  and  the 
“ sentiments  and  views  which  arise  from  the  possession  of  different 
degrees  and  kinds  of  property  form  the  stuff  of  so-called  ‘political 
psychology.’”  13 

The  diversity  in  the  faculties  of  men,  from  which  the  rights  of  property 
originate,  is  ...  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  a  uniformity  of  interests. 
The  protection  of  these  faculties  is  the  first  object  of  government.  From 
the  protection  of  different  and  unequal  faculties  of  acquiring  property, 
the  possession  of  different  degrees  and  kinds  of  property  immediately 
results;  and  from  the  influence  of  these  on  the  sentiments  and  views  of  the 
respective  proprietors,  ensues  a  division  of  the  society  into  different 
interests  and  parties. 

The  latent  causes  of  faction  are  thus  sown  in  the  nature  of  man;  and  we 
see  them  everywhere  brought  into  different  degrees  of  activity,  according 
to  the  different  circumstances  of  civil  society.  A  zeal  for  different  opin¬ 
ions  .  .  .  [has]  divided  mankind  into  parties,  inflamed  them  with  mutual 
animosity,  and  rendered  them  much  more  disposed  to  vex  and  oppress 
each  other  than  to  co-operate  for  their  common  good.  .  .  .  But  the  most 
common  and  durable  source  of  factions  has  been  the  various  and  unequal 
distribution  of  property.  Those  who  hold  and  those  who  are  without 
property  have  ever  formed  distinct  interests  of  society.  Those  who 
are  creditors,  and  those  who  are  debtors,  fall  under  a  like  discrimination. 
A  landed  interest,  a  manufacturing  interest,  a  mercantile  interest,  a 
moneyed  interest,  with  many  lesser  interests,  grow  up  of  necessity  in 
civilized  nations,  and  divide  them  into  different  classes  actuated  by 
different  sentiments  and  views.  The  regulation  of  these  various  and 
interfering  interests,  forms  the  principal  task  of  modern  legislation,  and 
involves  the  spirit  of  party  and  faction  in  the  necessary  and  ordinary 
operations  of  the  government. 

As  a  means  of  securing  a  necessary  balance  between  rival  inter¬ 
ests,  Madison  approved  a  republican  rather  than  a  democratic 
form  of  government: 

The  two  great  points  of  difference,  between  a  democracy  and  a  republic, 
are,  first,  the  delegation  of  the  government,  in  the  latter,  to  a  small  num¬ 
ber  of  citizens  elected  by  the  rest;  secondly,  the  greater  number  of  citizens, 
13  Beard,  The  Economic  Basis  of  Politics,  pp.  29-32. 


288 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


and  greater  sphere  of  country,  over  which  the  latter  may  be  extended. 
The  effect  of  the  first  difference  is,  on  the  one  hand,  to  refine  or  enlarge 
the  public  views,  by  passing  them  through  the  medium  of  a  chosen  body  of 
citizens,  whose  wisdom  may  best  discern  the  true  interests  of  their  coun¬ 
try,  and  whose  patriotism  and  love  of  justice,  will  be  least  likely  to  sac¬ 
rifice  it  to  temporary  or  partial  considerations.  Under  such  a  regulation, 
it  may  well  happen,  that  the  public  voice,  pronounced  by  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  people,  will  be  more  consonant  to  the  public  good,  than  if 
pronounced  by  the  people  therhselves,  convened  for  the  purpose.  .  .  . 
The  other  point  of  difference  is,  the  greater  number  of  citizens,  and  extent 
of  territory,  which  may  be  brought  within  the  compass  of  republican,  than 
of  democratic  government;  and  it  is  this  circumstance  principally  which 
renders  factious  combinations  less  to  be  dreaded  in  the  former,  than  in 
the  latter.  .  .  .  Extend  the  sphere,  and  you  take  in  a  greater  variety  of 
parties  and  interests;  you  make  it  less  probable  that  a  majority  of  the 
whole  will  have  a  common  motive  to  invade  the  rights  of  other  citizens; 
or  if  such  a  common  motive  exists,  it  will  be  more  difficult  for  all  who 
feel  it  to  discover  their  strength,  and  act  in  unison  with  each  other.14 

In  such  argument  Madison  was  adapting  to  his  purpose  the  views 
of  Milton  and  other  seventeenth-century  republicans,  to  whom 
in  the  dangerous  days  when  the  Puritan  Commonwealth  was 
breaking  up,  the  “noise  and  shouting  of  the  rude  multitude,”  the 
drunken  ribaldry  of  the  London  rabble,  was  prophetic  of  “new 
injunctions  to  manacle  the  native  libertie  of  mankinde.”  But 
it  has  long  since  become  a  commonplace  of  political  observation 
that  the  minority  and  not  the  majority  is  the  more  dangerous  to 
the  common  well-being,  for  it  is  the  minority  that  most  frequently 
uses  government  to  its  own  ends. 

The  contrast  in  temper  and  argument  between  The  Federalist 
and  Richard  Henry  Lee’s  Letters  from  the  Federal  Farmer ,15  is 
striking.  The  calmness  and  fair-mindedness  of  the  work  persuade 
one  that  it  ill  deserves  the  name  partisan;  it  comes  near  to  being  a 
frank  and  disinterested  examination  of  the  proposed  instrument  of 
government.  Its  sharpest  strictures  are  tempered  by  ready  ac¬ 
knowledgment  of  excellent  features.  The  burden  of  Lee’s  accusa¬ 
tion  is  that  the  instrument  is  undemocratic;  that  it  must  result 
in  placing  the  majority  under  control  of  the  minority;  and  that 
it  in  no  wise  reflects  the  sober  judgment  of  the  body  of  the  people. 
He  is  more  restrained  than  Elbridge  Gerry,  who  asserted  that  it 

14  Number  io. 

15  The  full  title  is:  Observations  leading  to  a  fair  examination  of  the  system  of  govern¬ 
ment,  -proposed  by  the  late  Convention;  and  to  several  essential  and  necessary  alterations 
in  it.  In  a  number  of  Letters  from  the  Federal  Farmer  to  the  Republican.  Reprinted 
in  Ford’s  pamphlets. 


THE  GREAT  DEBATE 


289 


was  the  outcome  of  a  conspiracy  hatched  in  secret,  a  work  of 
“such  motley  mixture,  that  its  enemies  cannot  trace  a  feature  of 
Democratic  or  Republican  extract.”  But  the  Farmer’s  restraint 
adds  weight  to  the  serious  charges  which  he  brings  against  the 
instrument,  and  the  unseemly  haste  of  its  advocates  in  urging  its 
speedy  adoption.  It  was  not  to  destroy  the  work  of  the  Conven¬ 
tion  that  he  pleaded  for  delay;  but  that  it  should  receive  full  and 
fair  consideration,  and  be  disposed  of  as  its  merits  or  defects 
should  warrant. 

His  first  concern  is  that  the  Constitution  should  not  be  adopted 
with  the  inconsiderate  haste  for  which  The  Federalist  was  pressing. 
“The  first  principal  question  that  occurs,  is,  Whether,  considering 
our  situation,  we  ought  to  precipitate  the  adoption  of  the  proposed 
Constitution?”  Hamilton  had  made  much  of  the  desperate  state 
of  affairs  that  admitted  of  no  delay;  Lee  replied  by  denying,  with 
Franklin  and  other  competent  observers,  that  the  present  state 
was  desperate.  Matters  were  improving  daily,  peace  was  restor¬ 
ing  the  ravages  of  war. 

I  know  uneasy  men,  who  with  very  much  to  precipitate,  do  not  admit 
all  these  facts;  but  they  are  facts  well  known  to  all  men  who  are  thoroughly 
informed  in  the  affairs  of  this  country.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted, 
that  our  federal  system  is  defective,  and  that  some  of  the  state  govern¬ 
ments  are  not  well  administered;  but  .  .  .  we  impute  to  the  defects  in 
our  governments  many  evils  and  embarrassments  which  are  most  clearly 
the  result  of  the  late  war.  .  .  .  When  we  want  a  man  to  change  his  condi¬ 
tion,  we  describe  it  as  wretched,  miserable,  and  despised;  and  we  draw  a 
pleasing  picture  of  that  which  we  would  have  him  assume.  ...  It  is  too 
often  the  case  in  political  concerns  that  men  state  facts  not  as  they  are, 
but  as  they  wish  them  to  be.  .  .  .  Men  who  feel  easy  in  their  circum¬ 
stances,  and  such  as  are  not  sanguine  in  their  expectations  relative  to  the 
consequences  of  the  proposed  change,  will  remain  quiet  under  the  existing 
governments.  Many  commercial  and  monied  men,  who  are  uneasy,  not 
without  just  cause,  ought  to  be  respected;  and  by  no  means,  unreasonably 
disappointed  in  their  expectations  and  hopes.  ...  It  is  natural  for  men, 
who  wish  to  hasten  the  adoption  of  a  measure,  to  tell  us,  now  is  the  crisis — 
now  is  the  critical  moment  which  must  be  seized  or  all  will  be  lost;  and  to 
shut  the  door  against  free  enquiry,  whenever  conscious  the  thing  pre¬ 
sented  has  defects  in  it,  which  time  and  investigation  will  probably  dis¬ 
cover.  ...  If  it  is  true,  what  has  been  so  often  said,  that  the  people  of 
this  country  cannot  change  their  constitution  for  the  worse,  I  presume  it 
still  behoves  them  to  endeavor  deliberately  to  change  it  for  the  better. 

Granted  that  experience  has  demonstrated  the  need  of  revising 
the  Articles  of  Confederation  in  certain  essential  points,  Lee  main- 


290  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

tains  that  the  enemies  of  democracy  have  been  making  undue 
capital  out  of  the  shortcomings  of  an  emergency  government,  in 
the  hope  of  subverting  the  democratic  state  governments  and 
substituting  a  more  aristocratic  form. 

The  confederation  was  formed  when  great  confidence  was  placed  in  the 
voluntary  exertions  of  individuals,  and  of  the  respective  states;  and  the 
framers  of  it,  to  guard  against  usurpation,  so  limited,  and  checked  the 
powers,  that,  in  many  respects,  they  are  inadequate  to  the  exigencies  of 
the  union.  .  .  .  During  the  war,  the  general  confusion,  and  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  paper  money,  infused  in  the  minds  of  people  vague  ideas  respecting 
government  and  credit.  We  expected  too  much  from  the  return  of  peace, 
and  of  course  we  have  been  disappointed.  Our  governments  have  been 
new  and  unsettled;  and  several  legislatures,  by  making  tender,  suspension, 
and  paper  money  laws,  have  given  just  cause  of  uneasiness  to  creditors. 
By  these  and  other  causes,  several  orders  of  men  in  the  community  have 
been  prepared  by  degrees,  for  a  change  of  government;  and  this  very  abuse 
of  power  in  the  legislatures,  which  in  some  cases  has  been  charged  upon  the 
democratic  part  of  the  community,  has  furnished  aristocratical  men  with 
those  very  weapons,  and  those  very  means,  with  which,  in  great  measure, 
they  are  rapidly  effecting  their  favourite  object. 

The  methods  by  which  the  convention  was  brought  together 
at  a  time  when  the  “idea  of  destroying  ultimately,  the  state 
government,  and  forming  one  consolidated  system,  could  not 
have  been  admitted,”  is  traced  briefly  with  penetrating  comment, 
and  the  unfortunate  decision  of  some  excellent  republicans  to 
take  no  part  in  the  work  is  regretted : 

Here  the  favorable  moment  for  changing  the  government  was  evidently 
discerned  by  a  few  men,  who  seized  it  with  address.  .  .  .  Tho’  they  chose 
men  principally  connected  with  commerce  and  the  judicial  departments, 
yet  they  appointed  many  good  republican  characters — had  they  all  at¬ 
tended  we  should  see,  I  am  persuaded,  a  better  system  presented.  The 
non-attendance  of  eight  or  nine  men,  who  were  appointed  members  of 
the  convention,  I  shall  ever  consider  as  a  very  unfortunate  event  to  the 
United  States. — Had  they  attended,  I  am  pretty  clear  that  the  results  .  .  . 
would  not  have  had  that  strong  tendency  to  aristocracy  now  discernible  in 
every  part  of  the  plan  .  .  .  the  young  visionary  men,  and  the  consolidat¬ 
ing  aristocracy,  would  have  been  more  restrained  than  they  have  been. 

Lee  frankly  concedes  that  the  instrument  possesses  many  excellent 
features,  but  he  considers  it  greatly  vitiated  by  the  “want  of  that 
one  important  factor  in  a  free  government,  a  representation  of 
the  people.”  “Because  we  have  sometimes  abused  democracy, 
I  am  not  among  those  who  think  a  democratic  branch  a  nuisance.” 


THE  GREAT  DEBATE 


291 


“Every  man  of  reflection  must  see,  that  the  change  now  proposed, 
is  a  transfer  of  power  from  the  many  to  the  few.”  The  present 
agitation  may  be  traced  to  its  source  in  “two  very  unprincipled 
parties,”  between  whom  stand  the  great  mass  of  honest  and  sub¬ 
stantial  people: 

One  party  is  composed  of  little  insurgents,  men  in  debt,  who  want  no 
law,  and  who  want  a  share  of  the  property  of  others;  these  are  called 
levellers,  Shaysites,  &c.  The  other  party  is  composed  of  a  few,  but  more 
dangerous  men,  with  their  servile  dependents;  these  avariciously  grasp 
at  all  power  and  property;  you  may  discover  in  all  the  actions  of  these 
men,  an  evident  dislike  to  free  and  equal  government,  and  they  go  sys¬ 
tematically  to  work  to  change,  essentially,  the  forms  of  government  in 
this  country;  these  are  called  aristocrats,  m — ites,  &c.  Between  these 
two  parties  is  the  weight  of  the  community:  the  men  of  middling  property, 
men  not  in  debt  on  the  one  hand,  and  men,  on  the  other,  content  with 
republican  governments,  and  not  aiming  at  immense  fortunes,  offices  and 
power.  In  1786,  the  little  insurgents,  the  levellers,  came  forth,  invaded 
the  rights  of  others,  and  attempted  to  establish  governments  according  to 
their  wills.  Their  movements  evidently  gave  encouragement  to  the  other 
party,  which,  in  1787,  has  taken  the  political  field,  and  with  its  fashionable 
dependents,  and  the  tongue  and  the  pen,  is  endeavouring  to  establish  in  a 
great  haste,  a  politer  kind  of  government.  These  two  parties  .  .  .  are 
really  insignificant,  compared  with  the  solid,  free,  and  independent  part 
of  the  community. 

Calm  voices  such  as  Lee’s  were  few  in  those  strident  days,  and 
the  Federalists  fairly  overwhelmed  the  silent  majority  with  clam¬ 
orous  argument.  Polite  culture  and  professional  learning  joined 
forces  to  write  down  the  agrarians.  The  Hartford  Wits  dedicated 
smart  couplets  to  the  cause;  Francis  Hopkinson  made  merry 
over  their  ways;  Noah  Webster  confuted  them  with  his  economic 
interpretation  of  politics;  lawyer-scholars  like  James  Wilson  and 
John  Dickinson  exposed  their  heresies;  solid  business  men  like 
Peletiah  Webster  contributed  after  the  measure  of  their  intelligence. 
In  their  ardor  the  Federalists  went  further.  “What  can  be  the 
views  of  those  gentlemen  in  Boston,”  asked  Lee  pertinently, 
“who  countenanced  the  printers  in  shutting  up  the  press  against 
a  fair  and  free  investigation?”  From  the  strident  debate  emerged 
not  only  the  Constitution,  but  political  parties,  no  longer  to  be 
spoken  of  as  factions,  but  eventually  to  be  accepted  as  necessary 
agencies  in  republican  government;  and  to  understand  their  rival 
policies  we  must  turn  to  examine  the  political  philosophies  of  the 
outstanding  leaders. 


CHAPTER  III 
POLITICAL  THINKERS 
The  English  Group 

Of  this  great  age  of  American  political  thought,  two  important 
characteristics  emerge:  it  was  overwhelmingly  English  in  its 
antecedents;  and  it  was  already  differentiating  its  program  from 
that  of  contemporary  English  liberalism.  Nearly  all  the  out¬ 
standing  men — Jefferson,  Adams,  Washington,  Wilson,  Mason, 
Madison,  Gouvemeur  Morris — were  of  the  older  liberal  tradition, 
and  with  some  notable  exceptions,  of  the  school  of  Pitt.  Contem¬ 
porary  English  liberals  such  as  Priestley,  Bentham,  and  Godwin 
numbered  few  adherents  among  the  leaders  of  American  thought. 
Economic  conditions  in  America  already  were  imposing  conclusions 
that  pointed  in  a  direction  other  than  that  which  English  liberalism 
was  traveling.  The  doctrine  of  the  diminished  state,  which  was 
making  persistent  headway  among  English  liberals,  could  make  no 
appeal  to  men  who  desired  an  augmented  state;  and  liberalism  as  a 
policy  was  in  ill  repute  at  a  time  when  men  believed  thay  were 
suffering  from  too  much  liberalism.  American  political  thought, 
therefore,  followed  an  independent  path,  and  in  spite  of  its  English 
origin  came  to  conclusions  that  differentiated  it  broadly  from  the 
old-world  theory. 

i 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON 
The  Leviathan  State 

Of  the  disciplined  forces  that  put  to  rout  the  disorganized  party 
of  agrarianism,  the  intellectual  leader  was  Alexander  Hamilton, 
the  brilliant  Anglo-French  West  Indian,  then  just  entered  upon 
his  thirties.  A  man  of  quite  remarkable  ability,  a  lucid  thinker,  a 
great  lawyer,  a  skillful  executive,  a  masterly  organizer,  a  statesman 
of  broad  comprehension  and  inflexible  purpose,  he  originated  and 
directed  the  main  policies  of  the  Federalist  group,  and  brought 
them  to  successful  issue.  For  this  work  he  was  singularly  well 

292 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


293 


equipped,  for  in  addition  to  great  qualities  of  mind  and  persuasive 
ways  he  was  free  to  work  unhampered  by  the  narrow  localisms 
and  sectional  prejudices  that  hampered  native  Americans.  He 
was  rather  English  than  American,  with  a  certain  detachment  that 
refused  to  permit  his  large  plans  to  be  thwarted  by  minor,  vexatious 
details,  or  the  perversity  of  stupid  men.  He  was  like  the  elder 
Pitt  in  the  magnificence  of  his  imperial  outlook. 

Such  a  man  would  think  in  terms  of  the  nation  rather  than  of 
the  state.  He  would  agree  with  Paine  that  the  continental  belt 
must  be  more  securely  buckled.  The  jealousies  and  rivalries  that 
obstructed  the  creation  of  a  centralized  Federal  government 
found  no  sympathy  with  him.  He  was  annoyed  beyond  all  patience 
with  the  dissensions  of  local  home  rule.  In  his  political  philosophy 
there  was  no  place  for  “the  political  monster  of  an  imperium  in 
imperio” ;  he  would  destroy  all  lesser  sovereignties  and  reduce  the 
several  commonwealths  to  a  parish  status.  For  town-meeting 
democracies  and  agrarian  legislatures  he  had  frank  contempt. 
The  American  villager  and  farmer  he  never  knew  and  never  under¬ 
stood;  his  America  was  the  America  of  landed  gentlemen  and 
wealthy  merchants  and  prosperous  professional  men,  the  classes 
that  were  most  bitterly  anti-agrarian.  And  it  was  in  association 
with  this  group  of  conservative  representatives  of  business  and 
society  that  he  took  his  place  as  directing  head  in  the  work  of 
reorganizing  the  loose  confederation  into  a  strong  and  cohesive 
union.  When  that  work  was  accomplished  his  influence  was 
commanding,  and  for  a  dozen  years  he  directed  the  major  policies 
of  the  Federalist  party.  His  strategic  position  as  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  enabled  him  to  stamp  his  principles  so  deeply  upon 
the  national  economy  that  in  all  the  intervening  years  since  he 
quitted  his  post  they  have  not  been  permanently  altered.  That 
we  still  follow  the  broad  principles  of  Hamilton  in  our  financial 
policy  is  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the  perspicacity  of  his  mind 
and  his  understanding  of  the  economic  forces  that  control  modem 
society.  And  hence,  because  the  Hamiltonian  principles  lie  at 
the  core  of  the  problem  which  has  proved  so  difficult  of  solution 
by  modem  liberalism,  the  life  and  work  of  Hamilton  are  of  particu¬ 
lar  significance  in  our  democratic  development. 

Hamilton  was  our  first  great  master  of  modem  finance,  of  that 
finespun  web  of  credit  which  holds  together  our  industrial  life; 
and  because  his  policies  opened  opportunities  of  profit  to  some  and 


294 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

entailed  loss  upon  others,  they  have  been  debated  with  an  acrimony 
such  as  few  programs  have  endured.  About  the  figure  of  the 
brilliant  Federalist  the  myth-makers  have  industriously  woven  their 
tales,  distorting  the  man  into  either  a  demigod  or  a  monster.  The 
individual  has  been  merged  in  the  system  which  he  created,  and 
later  interpretation  has  been  shot  through  with  partisan  feeling; 
political  and  economic  prejudice  has  proved  too  strong  for  dis¬ 
interested  estimate.  Any  rational  judgment  of  Hamilton  is 
dependent  upon  an  interpretation  of  the  historical  background 
that  determined  his  career,  and  in  particular  of  the  state  of  post- 
Revolutionary  economics;  and  over  such  vexing  questions  partisans 
have  wrangled  interminably.  Thus  Sumner,  in  his  life  of  Hamilton, 
asserts  dogmatically  that  Federalism  was  no  other  than  the  forces 
of  law  and  order  at  war  with  the  turbulent,  anarchistic  forces 
unloosed  by  the  Revolution,  and  that  the  putting  down  of  the 
scheme  of  repudiation  was  the  necessary  preliminary  to  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  a  great  nation.  In  the  light  of  such  an  interpretation, 
Hamilton  the  far-seeing,  courageous  and  honest  master  of  finance, 
was  the  savior  of  nationality,  the  one  supreme  figure  rising  above 
an  envious  group  of  lesser  men.  But,  as  has  been  sufficiently 
pointed  out  in  preceding  chapters,  the  historical  facts  are  suscep¬ 
tible  of  quite  other  interpretation;  and  as  our  knowledge  of  the 
economic  struggle  then  going  on  becomes  more  adequate,  the 
falsity  of  such  an  explanation  becomes  patent.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  concede  that  the  crux  of  the  political  problem  in  1787  was 
economic — the  struggle  waging  between  farmer  and  business 
groups  for  control  of  government — then  the  position  of  Hamilton 
becomes  clear;  he  was  the  spokesman  of  the  business  economy. 
He  thought  in  terms  of  nationality  and  espoused  the  economics 
of  capitalism,  because  he  discovered  in  them  potentialities  con¬ 
genial  to  his  imperialistic  mind. 

The  career  of  Hamilton  followed  logically  from  the  determining 
facts  of  temperament  and  experience.  He  came  to  New  York  an 
alien,  without'  position  or  influence,  ambitious  to  make  a  name  and 
stir  in  the  world;  and  in  the  America  of  his  day  there  could  be 
little  doubt  what  doors  opened  widest  to  preferment.  He  made 
friends  easily,  and  with  his  aristocratic  tastes  he  preferred  the 
rich  and  distinguished  to  plebeians.  Endowed  with  charming 
manners  and  brilliant  parts,  he  fascinated  all  whom  he  met;  before 
he  was  of  age  he  was  intimate  with  all  the  Whig  leaders,  civil  and 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


295 


military,  on  Washington’s  staff  and  elsewhere,  lending  his  brains 
to  the  solution  of  knotty  problems,  prodding  stupider  minds  with 
illuminating  suggestions,  proving  himself  the  clearest  thinker  in 
whatever  group  he  found  himself.  It  was  by  sheer  force  of  intellect 
that  he  gained  distinction.  Singularly  precocious,  he  matured 
early;  before  his  twenty-fifth  year  he  seems  to  have  developed 
every  main  principle  of  his  political  and  economic  philosophy,  and 
thereafter  he  never  hesitated  or  swerved  from  his  path.  He  was 
tireless  in  propaganda,  urging  on  the  proposed  Constitutional  con¬ 
vention,  discussing  with  Robert  Morris  his  favorite  project  of  a  na¬ 
tional  bank,  outlining  various  systems  of  funding,  advocating  tariffs 
as  an  aid  to  domestic  manufacture,  and  sketching  the  plan  of  a 
political  and  economic  system  under  which  native  commercialism 
could  go  forward.  His  reputation  as  an  acute  and  trustworthy 
financial  adviser  was  well  established  with  influential  men  north 
and  south,  when  the  new  government  was  set  up,  and  Washington 
turned  to  him  naturally  for  the  Treasury  post,  to  guide  financial 
policies  during  the  difficult  days  immediately  ahead.  But  so  able 
a  man  could  not  be  restricted  within  a  single  portfolio,  and  during 
the  larger  part  of  Washington’s  two  administrations  Hamilton’s 
was  the  directing  mind  and  chief  influence.  He  regarded  himself 
as  Prime  Minister  and  rode  roughshod  over  his  colleagues.  Major 
policies  such  as  that  of  no  entangling  alliances  must  receive  his 
careful  scrutiny  and  approval  before  they  were  announced;  and 
in  consequence  more  credit  belongs  to  Hamilton  for  the  success 
of  those  first  administrations  than  is  commonly  recognized. 

But  when  we  turn  from  the  administrator  and  statesman  to  the 
creative  thinker,  there  is  another  story  to  tell.  The  quickness  of 
his  perceptions,  the  largeness  of  his  plans  and  efficacy  of  his 
methods — his  clear  brilliancy  of  understanding  and  execution — 
are  enormously  impressive;  but  they  cannot  conceal  certain  in¬ 
tellectual  shortcomings.  There  was  a  lack  of  subtlety  in  the  swift 
working  of  his  mind,  of  shades  and  nuances  in  the  background  of 
his  thought,  that  implied  a  lack  of  depth  and  richness  in  his  intel¬ 
lectual  accumulation.  Something  hard,  almost  brutal  lurks  in  his 
thought — a  note  of  intellectual  arrogance,  of  cynical  contempt. 
He  was  utterly  devoid  of  sentiment,  and  without  a  shred  of  ideal¬ 
ism,  unless  a  certain  grandiose  quality  in  his  conceptions  be  ac¬ 
counted  idealism.  His  absorbing  interest  in  the  rising  system  of 
credit  and  finance,  his  cool  unconcern  for  the  social  consequences 


296  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

of  his  policies,  reveal  his  weakness.  In  spite  of  his  brilliancy 
Hamilton  was  circumscribed  by  the  limitations  of  the  practical  man. 

In  consequence  of  such  limitations  Hamilton  was  not  a  political 
philosopher  in  the  large  meaning  of  the  term.  In  knowledge  of 
history  he  does  not  compare  with  John  Adams;  and  as  an  open- 
minded  student  of  politics  he  is  immensely  inferior  to  Jefferson. 
Outside  the  domain  of  the  law,  his  knowledge  does  not  always 
keep  pace  with  his  argument.  He  reasons  adroitly  from  given 
premises,  but  he  rarely  pauses  to  examine  the  validity  of  those 
premises.  The  fundamentals  of  political  theory  he  seems  never 
to  have  questioned,  and  he  lays  down  a  major  principle  with  the 
easy  finality  of  a  dogmatist.  Compare  his  views  on  any  important 
political  principle  with  those  of  the  greater  thinkers  of  his  time, 
and  they  are  likely  to  prove  factional  if  not  reactionary.  The  two 
tests  of  eighteenth-century  liberalism  were  the  doctrine  of  individ¬ 
ualism,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  minimized  state;  and  Hamilton 
rejected  both:  the  former  in  its  larger  social  bearing,  and  the  latter 
wholly.  He  was  not  even  abreast  of  seventeenth-century  liberalism, 
for  that  was  strongly  republican,  and  Hamilton  detested  repub¬ 
licanism  only  a  little  less  than  democracy.  Harrington  and  Locke 
were  no  masters  of  his;  much  less  were  Bentham  or  Priestley  or 
Godwin.  He  called  the  French  revolutionary  writers  “fanatics 
in  political  science”;  to  what  extent  he  read  them  does  not  appear. 
The  thinkers  to  whom  he  owed  most  seem  to  have  been  Hume, 
from  whom  he  may  have  derived  his  cynical  psychology,  and 
Hobbes  whose  absolute  state  was  so  congenial  to  his  temperament. 
But  political  theory  he  subordinated  to  economic  theory.  He  was 
much  interested  in  economics.  With  the  Physiocratic  school  and  its 
agrarian  and  sociological  bias  he  could  have  no  sympathy,  but 
with  the  rising  English  school  that  resulted  from  the  development 
of  the  industrial  revolution,  he  found  himself  in  hearty  accord. 
Capitalism  with  its  credit  system,  its  banks  and  debt-funding 
and  money  manipulation,  was  wholly  congenial  to  his  masterful 
temperament.  He  read  Adam  Smith  with  eagerness  and  The 
W ealth  of  Nations  was  a  source  book  for  many  of  his  state  papers. 
To  create  in  America  an  English  system  of  finance,  and  an  English 
system  of  industrialism,  seemed  to  him  the  surest  means  to  the 
great  end  he  had  in  view;  a  centralizing  capitalism  would  be  more 
than  a  match  for  a  decentralizing  agrarianism,  and  the  power  of 
the  state  would  augment  with  the  increase  of  liquid  wealth. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


297 


But  granted  that  he  lacked  the  Intellectual  qualities  of  the 
philosopher,  it  does  not  follow  that  his  significance  diminishes. 
On  the  contrary  his  very  independence  of  contemporary  European 
theory  enlarged  his  serviceableness  to  party.  He  was  free  to 
employ  his  intelligence  on  the  practical  difficulties  of  a  new  and 
unprecedented  situation.  English  liberalism  did  not  answer  the 
needs  of  Federalism,  if  indeed  it  could  answer  the  needs  of  the 
country  at  large.  The  time  had  come  to  decide  whether  the  long 
movement  of  decentralization  should  go  further,  and  confirm  the 
future  government  as  a  loose  confederacy  of  powerful  states,  or 
whether  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  check  that  movement  and 
establish  a  counter  tendency  towards  centralized,  organized  con¬ 
trol.  If  the  former,  it  meant  surrendering  the  country  to  a  demo¬ 
cratic  laissez  faire,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  history  of  political 
laissez  faire  as  it  had  developed  in  America,  that  justified  the 
principle  to  Hamilton.  It  had  culminated  in  agrarianism  with 
legislative  majorities  riding  down  all  obstacles,  denying  the  validity 
of  any  check  upon  its  will,  constitutional,  legal  or  ethical.  The 
property  interests  of  the  minority  had  been  rendered  insecure. 
There  had  been  altogether  too  much  laissez  faire-,  what  was  needed 
was  sharp  control  of  legislative  majorities;  the  will  of  the  majority 
must  be  held  within  due  metes  and  bounds.  Even  in  the  economic 
world  the  principle  of  laissez  faire  no  longer  satisfied  the  needs  of 
the  situation.  Parliamentary  enactments  had  aided  British  inter¬ 
ests  in  their  exploitation  of  America  before  the  war;  it  was  only 
common  sense  for  an  American  government  to  assist  American 
business.  The  new  capitalism  that  was  rising  stood  in  need  of 
governmental  subsidies.  Business  was  languishing;  infant  in¬ 
dustries  could  not  compete  on  even  terms  with  the  powerful 
British  manufacturing  interests,  long  established  and  with  ample 
capital.  From  a  realistic  contemplation  of  these  facts  Hamilton 
deduced  the  guiding  principle  that  has  since  been  followed,  namely, 
that  governmental  interference  with  economic  laws  is  desirable 
when  it  aids  business,  but  intolerable  and  unsound  when  it  aims 
at  business  regulation  or  control,  or  when  it  assists  agriculture  or 
labor. 

Throughout  his  career  Hamilton  was  surprisingly  consistent. 
His  mind  hardened  early  as  it  matured  early,  and  he  never  saw 
cause  to  challenge  the  principles  which  he  first  espoused.  He  was 
what  a  friendly  critic  would  call  a  political  realist,  and  an  enemy 


298 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

would  pronounce  a  cynic.  With  the  practical  man’s  contempt  for 
theorists  and  idealists,  he  took  his  stand  on  current  fact.  He 
looked  to  the  past  for  guidance,  trusting  to  the  wisdom  of  experi¬ 
ence;  those  principles  which  have  worked  satisfactorily  heretofore 
may  be  expected  to  work  satisfactorily  in  the  future.  Whoever 
aspires  to  become  a  sane  political  leader  must  remember  that  his 
business  is  not  to  construct  Utopias,  but  to  govern  men;  and  if  he 
would  succeed  in  that  difficult  undertaking  he  must  be  wise  in  the 
knowledge  of  human  nature.  At  the  basis  of  Hamilton’s  political 
philosophy  was  the  traditional  Tory  psychology.  Failure  to  under¬ 
stand  human  nature,  he  believed,  was  the  fatal  weakness  of  all 
democratic  theorists;  they  put  into  men’s  breeches  altruistic 
beings  fitted  only  for  a  Utopian  existence.  But  when  we  consider 
men  as  they  are,  we  discover  that  they  are  little  other  than  beasts, 
who  if  unrestrained  will  turn  every  garden  into  a  pigsty.  Every¬ 
where  men  are  impelled  by  the  primitive  lust  of  aggression,  and  the 
political  philosopher  must  adjust  his  system  to  this  unhappy  fact. 
He  must  not  suffer  the  charge  of  cynicism  to  emasculate  his  philos¬ 
ophy;  “the  goodness  of  government  consists  in  a  vigorous  execu¬ 
tion,”  rather  than  in  amiable  intentions;  it  is  the  business  of  the 
practical  man  and  not  of  the  theorist. 

It  needs  no  very  extensive  reading  in  Hamilton  to  discover  ample 
justification  for  such  an  interpretation  of  his  political  philosophy; 
the  evidence  lies  scattered  broadly  through  his  pages.  At  the  pre¬ 
cocious  age  of  seventeen  he  laid  down  the  thesis,  “A  vast  majority 
of  mankind  is  entirely  biassed  by  motives  of  self-interest”;  and  as 
political  systems  are  determined  by  the  raw  material  of  the  mass 
of  the  people,  they  must  be  conditioned  by  such  egoism.  A  year 
later  he  discovered  in  Hume  the  central  principle  of  his  philosophy: 

Political  writers,  says  a  celebrated  author,  have  established  it  as  a  maxim, 
that,  in  contriving  any  system  of  government,  and  fixing  the  several  checks 
and  controls  of  the  constitution,  every  man  ought  to  be  supposed  a  knave ; 
and  to  have  no  other  end,  in  all  his  actions,  but  private  interest.  By  this 
interest  we  must  govern  him;  and,  by  means  of  it,  make  him  co-operate  to 
public  good,  notwithstanding  his  insatiable  avarice  and  ambition.  With¬ 
out  this,  we  shall  in  vain  boast  of  the  advantages  of  any  constitution A 

At  the  age  of  twenty-seven  he  reiterated  the  doctrine,  “The  safest 
reliance  of  every  government,  is  on  men’s  interests.  This  is  a 
principle  of  human  nature,  on  which  all  political  speculation,  to 

1  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  51. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


299 


be  just,  must  be  founded.”  2  Obviously  this  was  not  a  pose  of 
youthful  cynicism,  but  a  sober  judgment  confirmed  by  observation 
and  experience. 

Accepting  self-interest  as  the  mainspring  of  human  ambition, 
Hamilton  accepted  equally  the  principle  of  class  domination. 
From  his  reading  of  history  he  discovered  that  the  strong  overcome 
the  weak,  and  as  they  grasp  power  they  coalesce  into  a  master 
group.  This  master  group  will  dominate,  he  believed,  not  only  to 
further  its  interests,  but  to  prevent  the  spread  of  anarchy  which 
threatens  every  society  split  into  factions  and  at  the  mercy  of 
rival  ambitions.  In  early  days  the  master  group  was  a  military 
order,  later  it  became  a  landed  aristocracy,  in  modern  times  it  is 
commercial;  but  always  its  power  rests  on  property.  “That 
power  which  holds  the  purse-strings  absolutely,  must  rule,”  he 
stated  unequivocally.  The  economic  masters  of  society  of  neces¬ 
sity  become  the  political  masters.  It  is  unthinkable  that  govern¬ 
ment  should  not  reflect  the  wishes  of  property,  that  it  should  be 
permanently  hostile  to  the  greater  economic  interests;  such  hos¬ 
tility  must  destroy  it,  for  no  man  or  group  of  men  will  be  ruled  by 
those  whom  they  can  buy  and  sell.  And  in  destroying  itself 
it  will  give  place  to  another  government,  more  wisely  responsive 
to  the  master  group;  for  even  a  democratic  people  soon  learns  that 
any  government  is  better  than  a  condition  of  anarchy,  and  a  com¬ 
mercial  people  understands  that  a  government  which  serves  the 
interests  of  men  of  property,  serves  the  interests  of  all,  for  if  capital 
will  not  invest  how  shall  labor  find  employment?  And  if  the 
economic  masters  do  not  organize  society  efficiently,  how  shall  the 
common  people  escape  ruin  ? 

Such  are  the  fundamental  principles  which  lie  at  the  base  of 
Hamilton’s  philosophy.  He  was  in  accord  with  John  Adams  and 
James  Madison  and  Noah  Webster,  in  asserting  the  economic 
basis  of  government,  with  its  corollary  of  the  class  struggle.  He 
not  only  accepted  the  rule  of  property  as  inevitable,  but  as  desir¬ 
able.  As  an  aristocrat  he  deliberately  allied  himself  with  the 
wealthy.  That  men  divide  into  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  wise 
and  the  foolish,  he  regarded  as  a  commonplace  too  evident  to  re¬ 
quire  argument.  The  explanation  is  to  be  sought  in  human  nature 
and  human  capacities.  For  the  common  people,  about  whom 
Jefferson  concerned  himself  with  what  seemed  to  Hamilton  sheer 

2  Ibid.,  p.  298. 


300  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

demagoguery,  he  felt  only  contempt.  Their  virtues  and  capacities 
he  had  no  faith  in.  “I  am  not  much  attached  to  the  majesty  of  the 
multitude,”  he  said  during  the  debate  over  the  Constitution,  “and 
waive  all  pretensions  (founded  on  such  conduct)  to  their  counte¬ 
nance.”  His  notorious  comment — which  the  American  democrat 
has  never  forgiven  him,  “The  people! — the  people  is  a  great 
beast!” — was  characteristically  frank.  Hamilton  was  no  dem¬ 
agogue  and  nothing  was  plainer  to  his  logic  than  the  proposition 
that  if  the  people  possessed  the  capacity  to  rule,  their  weight  of 
numbers  would  give  them  easy  mastery;  whereas  their  yielding 
to  the  domination  of  the  gifted  few  proves  their  incapacity.  A 
wise  statesman,  therefore,  will  consider  the  people  no  further  than 
to  determine  how  government  may  be  least  disturbed  by  their 
factional  discontent,  and  kept  free  to  pursue  a  logical  program. 
Under  a  republican  form  good  government  is  difficult  to  maintain, 
but  not  impossible.  The  people  are  easily  deceived  and  turned 
aside  from  their  purpose;  like  children  they  are  diverted  by  toys; 
but  if  they  become  unruly  they  must  be  punished.  Too  much  is  at 
stake  in  government  for  them  to  be  permitted  to  muddle  policies. 

It  is  sufficiently  clear  that  in  tastes  and  convictions  Hamilton 
was  a  high  Tory.  The  past  to  which  he  appealed  was  a  Tory  past, 
the  psychology  which  he  accepted  was  a  Tory  psychology,  the  law 
and  order  which  he  desired  was  a  Tory  law  and  order.  His  phi¬ 
losophy  was  not  liked  by  republican  America,  and  he  knew  that  it 
was  not  liked.  Practical  business  men  accepted  both  his  premises 
and  conclusions,  but  republicans  under  the  spell  of  revolutionary 
idealism,  and  agrarians  suffering  in  their  pocketbooks,  would 
oppose  them  vigorously.  He  was  at  pains,  therefore,  as  a  practical 
statesman,  to  dress  his  views  in  a  garb  more  seemly  to  plebeian 
prejudices,  and  like  earlier  Tories  he  paraded  an  ethical  justifica¬ 
tion  for  his  Toryism.  The  current  Federalist  dogma  of  the  divine 
right  of  justice — vox  justiciae  vox  dei — was  at  hand  to  serve  his 
purpose  and  he  made  free  use  of  it.  But  no  ethical  gilding  could 
quite  conceal  a  certain  ruthlessness  of  purpose;  in  practice  justice 
became  synonymous  with  expediency,  and  expediency  was  cu¬ 
riously  like  sheer  Tory  will  to  power. 

In  certain  of  his  principles  Hamilton  was  a  follower  of  Hobbes. 
His  philosophy  conducted  logically  to  the  leviathan  state,  highly 
centralized,  coercive,  efficient.  But  he  was  no  idealist  to  exalt  the 
state  as  the  divine  repository  of  authority,  an  enduring  entity  apart 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


301 


from  the  individual  citizen  and  above  him.  He  regarded  the  state 
as  a  highly  useful  instrument,  which  in  the  name  of  law  and  order 
would  serve  the  interests  of  the  powerful,  and  restrain  the  turbu¬ 
lence  of  the  disinherited.  For  in  every  government  founded  on 
coercion  rather  than  good  will,  the  perennial  unrest  of  those  who 
are  coerced  is  a  grave  menace;  in  the  end  the  exploited  will  turn 
fiercely  upon  the  exploiters.  In  such  governments,  therefore,  self- 
interest  requires  that  social  unrest  shall  be  covered  with  opprobium 
and  put  down  by  the  police  power;  and  the  sufficient  test  of  a 
strong  state  lies  in  its  ability  to  protect  the  privileges  of  the  minor¬ 
ity  against  the  anarchy  of  the  majority.  In  his  eloquent  declama¬ 
tion  against  anarchy  Hamilton  was  a  conspicuous  disciple  of  the 
law  and  order  school.  From  the  grave  difficulties  of  post-Revolu- 
tionary  times  with  their  agrarian  programs,  he  created  a  parti¬ 
san  argument  for  a  leviathan  state,  which  fell  upon  willing  ears; 
and  in  the  Constitutional  convention,  which,  more  than  any  other 
man,  he  was  instrumental  in  assembling,  he  was  the  outstanding 
advocate  of  the  coercive  state. 

In  his  plan  of  government  presented  to  the  Convention,  the 
principle  of  centralized  power  was  carried  further  than  most  would 
go,  and  his  supporting  speeches  expressed  doctrines  that  startled 
certain  of  his  hearers.  He  was  frankly  a  monarchist,  and  he  urged 
the  monarchical  principle  with  Hobbesian  logic.  “The  principle 
chiefly  intended  to  be  established  is  this — that  there  must  be  a 
permanent  will.”  “There  ought  to  be  a  principle  in  government 
capable  of  resisting  the  popular  current.” 

Gentlemen  say  we  need  to  be  rescued  from  the  democracy.  But  what 
[are]  the  means  proposed?  A  democratic  assembly  is  to  be  checked  by  a 
democratic  senate,  and  both  these  by  a  democratic  chief  magistrate.  The 
end  will  not  be  answered,  the  means  will  not  be  equal  to  the  object.  It  will, 
therefore,  be  feeble  and  inefficient.3 

The  only  effective  way  of  keeping  democratic  factionalism  within 
bounds,  Hamilton  was  convinced,  lay  in  the  erection  of  a  powerful 
chief  magistrate,  who  “ought  to  be  hereditary,  and  to  have  so 
much  power,  that  it  will  not  be  his  interest  to  risk  much  to  acquire 
more,”  and  who  would  therefore  stand  “above  corruption.”  Fail¬ 
ing  to  secure  the  acceptance  of  the  monarchical  principle,  he 
devoted  himself  to  the  business  of  providing  all  possible  checks 
upon  the  power  of  the  democracy.  He  “acknowledged  himself 

s  Brief  of  speech  submitting  his  plan  of  Constitution,  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  415. 


302  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

not  to  think  favorably  of  republican  government;  but  he  addressed 
his  remarks  to  those  who  did  think  favorably  of  it,  in  order  to 
prevail  on  them  to  tone  their  government  as  high  as  possible.”  4 
His  argument  was  characteristic: 

All  communities  divide  themselves  into  the  few  and  the  many.  The 
first  are  the  rich  and  well  born,  the  other  the  mass  of  the  people.  The 
voice  of  the  people  has  been  said  to  be  the  voice  of  God;  and,  however 
generally  this  maxim  has  been  quoted  and  believed,  it  is  not  true  to  fact. 
The  people  are  turbulent  and  changing;  they  seldom  judge  or  determine 
right.  Give,  therefore,  to  the  first  class  a  distinct,  permanent  share  in  the 
government.  They  will  check  the  unsteadiness  of  the  second;  and  as  they 
cannot  receive  any  advantage  by  a  change,  they  therefore  will  ever  main¬ 
tain  good  government.  Can  a  democratic  assembly,  who  annually  revolve 
in  the  mass  of  the  people,  be  supposed  steadily  to  pursue  the  public  good? 
Nothing  but  a  permanent  body  can  check  the  imprudence  of  democracy. 
Their  turbulent  and  uncontrollable  disposition  requires  checks.5 

The  argument  scarcely  needs  refuting  today,  although  curiously 
enough,  it  was  rarely  questioned  by  eighteenth-century  gentlemen. 
It  was  the  stock  in  trade  of  the  Federalists,  nevertheless  Hamilton 
was  too  acute  a  thinker  not  to  see  its  fallacy.  It  denied  the  funda¬ 
mental  premise  of  his  political  philosophy.  If  men  are  actuated 
by  self-interest,  how  does  it  come  about  that  this  sovereign  motive 
abdicates  its  rule  among  the  rich  and  well  born?  Is  there  a  magic 
in  property  that  regenerates  human  nature?  Do  the  wealthy 
betray  no  desire  for  greater  power?  Do  the  strong  and  powerful 
care  more  for  good  government  than  for  class  interests  ?  Hamilton 
was  fond  of  appealing  to  the  teaching  of  experience;  but  he  had  read 
history  to  little  purpose  if  he  believed  such  notions.  How  merci¬ 
lessly  he  would  have  exposed  the  fallacy  in  the  mouth  of  Jefferson ! 
It  was  a  class  appeal,  and  he  knew  that  it  was  a  class  appeal,  just 
as  he  knew  that  success  knows  no  ethics.  He  was  confronted  by  a 
situation  in  practical  politics,  and  in  playing  ignobly  upon  selfish 
fears  he  was  seeking  to  force  the  convention  towards  the  English 
model.  He  had  no  confidence  in  the  Constitution  as  finally  adopted, 
and  spoke  in  contemptuous  terms  of  its  weakness;  whereas  for 
the  British  constitution  he  had  only  praise,  going  so  far,  according 
to  Jefferson,  as  to  defend  the  notorious  corruption  of  parliament 
on  the  ground  of  expediency:  “purge  it  of  its  corruption” — 
Jefferson  reports  him  as  saying — “and  give  to  its  popular  branch 
equality  of  representation,  and  it  would  become  an  impracticable 
4  Elliot’s  Debates,  Vol.  V,  p.  244.  6  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  422. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


303 


government;  as  it  stands  at  present,  with  all  its  supposed  defects, 
it  is  the  most  perfect  government  which  ever  existed.”  6  The 
argument  savors  of  cynicism,  but  it  is  in  keeping  with  his  philos¬ 
ophy;  the  British  constitution  owed  its  excellence  to  the  fact  that 
in  the  name  of  the  people  it  yielded  control  of  the  state  to  the 
landed  aristocracy. 

It  was  as  a  statesman  that  the  brilliant  qualities  of  Hamilton 
showed  to  fullest  advantage.  In  developing  his  policies  as  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury  he  applied  his  favorite  principle,  that  government 
and  property  must  join  in  a  close  working  alliance.  The  new 
government  would  remain  weak  and  ineffective  so  long  as  it  was 
hostile  to  capital;  but  let  it  show  itself  friendly  to  capital,  and 
capital  would  make  haste  to  uphold  the  hands  of  government. 
Confidence  was  necessary  to  both,  and  it  was  a  plant  of  slow  growth, 
sensitive  to  cold  winds.  The  key  to  the  problem  lay  in  the  public 
finance,  and  the  key  to  a  strong  system  of  finance  lay  in  a  great 
national  bank.  This,  Hamilton’s  dearest  project,  was  inspired 
by  the  example  of  the  Bank  of  England.  No  other  institution 
would  so  surely  link  the  great  merchants  to  government,  he  pointed 
out,  for  by  being  made  partners  in  the  undertaking  they  would 
share  both  the  responsibility  and  the  profits.  It  was  notorious 
that  during  the  Revolution  men  of  wealth  had  forced  down  the 
continental  currency  for  speculative  purposes;  was  it  not  as  certain 
that  they  would  support  an  issue  in  which  they  were  interested? 
The  private  resources  of  wealthy  citizens  would  thus  become  an 
asset  of  government,  for  the  bank  would  link  “the  interest  of  the 
State  in  an  intimate  connection  with  those  of  the  rich  individuals 
belonging  to  it.”  “The  men  of  property  in  America  are  enlightened 
about  their  own  interest,  and  would  easily  be  brought  to  see  the 
advantage  of  a  good  plan.”  Hence  would  arise  stability  and  vigor 
of  government. 

Moreover,  the  bank  would  be  of  immense  service  in  the  pressing 
business  of  the  public  debt.  In  regard  to  this  difficult  matter 
Hamilton  was  early  convinced  that  only  one  solution  was  possible: 
all  outstanding  obligations,  state  and  national,  must  be  assumed 
by  the  Federal  government  at  face  value,  and  funded.  Anything 
short  of  that  would  amount  to  repudiation  of  a  lawful  contract, 
entered  into  in  good  faith  by  the  purchaser;  and  such  repudiation 
would  destroy  in  the  minds  of  the  wealthy  the  confidence  in  the 
6  Works  of  Jefferson,  Ford  edition,  Vol.  I,  p.  165. 


304  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

integrity  of  the  new  government  that  was  vital  to  its  success. 
It  was  true  that  speculators  would  reap  great  and  unearned  profits; 
but  the  speculators  for  the  most  part  were  the  principal  men  of 
property  whose  support  was  so  essential  that  any  terms  were 
justifiable,  and  nothing  would  bind  them  so  closely  to  the  govern¬ 
ment  as  the  knowledge  that  it  would  deal  generously  with  them. 
It  was  true  also  that  thousands  of  small  men  would  lose  by  such  a 
transaction;  but  under  any  existing  social  economy  the  small 
man  was  at  a  disadvantage,  and  the  present  state  of  affairs  was 
not  such  as  to  justify  Utopian  measures.  To  alienate  the  rich  and 
powerful  in  order  to  conciliate  the  poor  and  inconsequential 
seemed  to  him  sheer  folly.  The  argument  of  expediency  must 
prevail  over  abstract  justice;  the  government  must  make  terms 
with  those  in  whose  hands  lay  the  success  or  failure  of  the  venture. 

His  report  on  the  public  credit,  of  January  14,  1790,  is  one  of 
the  significant  documents  in  the  history  of  American  finance.  It 
is  the  first  elaboration  by  an  American  statesman  of  the  new 
system  of  capitalization  and  credit  developed  in  eighteenth-century 
England,  and  it  laid  a  broad  foundation  for  later  capitalistic 
development.  To  less  daring  financiers  of  the  time  the  public 
debt  was  no  more  than  a  heavy  obligation  to  be  met;  but  to  Hamil¬ 
ton  it  offered  an  opportunity  for  revivifying  the  whole  financial 
life  of  the  nation.  Let  the  debts  be  consolidated  and  capitalized 
by  a  proper  system  of  funding,  and  the  augmented  credit  would 
multiply  capital,  lower  the  rate  of  interest,  increase  land  values,  and 
extend  its  benefits  through  all  lines  of  industry  and  commerce. 
It  was  a  bold  plan  and  it  encountered  bitter  opposition,  which 
was  not  lessened  by  the  heavy  taxation  that  it  called  for.  In 
his  tax  proposals  Hamilton  revealed  his  political  philosophy  so 
nakedly  as  almost  to  prove  his  undoing.  His  doctrine  of  the 
blessing  of  a  national  debt  smacked  rather  too  strongly  of  English 
Toryism  for  the  American  stomach. 

A  national  debt,  if  it  be  not  excessive,  will  be  to  us  a  national  blessing. 
It  will  be  a  powerful  cement  to  our  Union.  It  will  also  create  a  necessity  for 
keeping  up  taxation  to  a  degree  which,  without  being  oppressive,  will  be  a 
spur  to  industry.  .  .  .  It  were  otherwise  to  be  feared  our  popular  maxims 
would  incline  us  to  too  great  parsimony  and  indulgence.  We  labor  less 
now  than  any  civilized  nation  of  Europe;  and  a  habit  of  labor  in  the 
people,  is  as  essential  to  the  health  and  vigor  of  their  minds  and  bodies, 
as  it  is  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  the  State.7 

7  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  257. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


305 


A  further  struggle  was  encountered  over  the  proposals  of  an 
internal  revenue  and  a  tariff.  In  his  advocacy  of  the  former 
Hamilton  encountered  the  vigorous  opposition  of  the  backcountry. 
The  total  lack  of  adequate  means  of  transportation  rendered  the 
problem  of  a  grain  market  a  chronic  difficulty  to  the  frontier 
farmers.  The  most  convenient  solution  lay  in  distilling,  and  so 
whisky  had  become  the  chief  commodity  of  the  farmer  that  was 
transportable  and  brought  a  cash  price.  In  placing  a  tax  upon 
distilled  liquors,  therefore,  Hamilton  struck  so  directly  at  the 
economic  interests  of  thousands  of  backwoodsmen,  as  to  bring  a 
rebellion  upon  the  new  administration.  He  knew  what  he  was 
doing,  but  he  calculated  that  it  was  safer  to  incur  the  enmity  of 
fanners  than  of  financiers;  nevertheless  the  fierceness  of  the 
opposition  surprised  him,  and  aroused  all  the  ruthlessness  that 
lay  in  the  background  of  his  nature.  He  called  for  the  strong  arm 
of  the  military  and  when  the  rising  was  put  down,  he  was  angered 
at  Washington’s  leniency  in  refusing  to  hang  the  convicted  leaders. 
In  his  advocacy  of  a  tariff  he  was  on  safer  ground,  for  he  was 
proposing  a  solution  of  the  difficult  situation  confronting  the 
manufacturers.  Something  must  be  done  to  revive  industry  so 
long  stagnant.  The  old  colonial  machinery  had  been  destroyed 
and  new  machinery  must  be  provided.  Industrial  independence 
must  follow  political  independence;  and  the  easiest  way  lay  in 
providing  a  tariff  barrier  behind  which  the  infant  industries  of 
America  might  grow  and  become  sufficient  for  domestic  needs. 

In  his  notable  report  on  manufactures,  submitted  on  December 
5,  1791,  Hamilton  showed  his  characteristic  intelligence  in  his 
grasp  of  the  principles  of  the  industrial  revolution.  Certainly 
no  other  man  in  America  saw  so  clearly  the  significance  of  the 
change  that  was  taking  place  in  English  industrialism,  and  what 
tremendous  reservoirs  of  wealth  the  new  order  laid  open  to  the 
country  that  tapped  them.  The  productive  possibilities  that  lay 
in  the  division  of  labor,  factory  organization,  the  substitution  of 
the  machine  for  the  tool,  appealed  to  his  materialistic  imagination, 
and  he  threw  himself  heart  and  soul  into  the  cause  of  industrial 
development  in  America.  He  accepted  frankly  the  principle  of 
exploitation.  He  was  convinced  that  the  interests  of  the  manu¬ 
facturers  were  one  with  the  national  interests,  and  he  proposed 
to  put  the  paternal  power  of  the  government  behind  them.  With 
the  larger  social  effects — the  consequences'  to  the  working  classes, 


306 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


congestion  of  population,  the  certainty  of  a  labor  problem — he 
concerned  himself  no  more  than  did  contemporary  English  states¬ 
men.  He  was  contemptuous  of  Jefferson’s  concern  over  such 
things.  He  had  no  Physiocratic  leanings  towards  agriculture; 
material  greatness  alone  appealed  to  him;  and  he  contemplated 
with  satisfaction  the  increase  in  national  wealth  that  would  accrue 
from  levying  toll  upon  the  weak  and  helpless. 

Besides  this  advantage  of  occasional  employment  to  classes  having 
different  occupations,  there  is  another,  of  a  nature  allied  to  it,  and  of  a 
similar  tendency.  This  is  the  employment  of  persons  who  would  other¬ 
wise  be  idle,  and  in  many  cases,  a  burthen  on  the  community,  either  from 
bias  of  temper,  habit,  infirmity  of  body,  or  some  other  cause,  indisposing  or 
disqualifying  them  for  the  toils  of  the  country.  It  is  worthy  of  particular 
remark,  that,  in  general,  women  and  children  are  rendered  more  useful, 
and  the  latter  more  early  useful,  by  manufacturing  establishments,  than 
they  would  otherwise  be.  Of  the  number  of  persons  employed  in  the 
cotton  manufactories  of  Great  Britain,  it  is  computed  that  four-sevenths, 
nearly,  are  women  and  children;  of  whom  the  greatest  proportion  are 
children,  and  many  of  them  of  a  tender  age.3 

If  the  material  power  and  splendor  of  the  state  be  the  great  end 
of  statesmanship — as  Hamilton  believed — no  just  complaint  can 
be  lodged  against  such  a  policy;  but  if  the  well-being  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  citizen  be  the  chief  end— as  Jefferson  maintained — a  very 
different  judgment  must  be  returned. 

Although  the  fame  of  Hamilton  has  been  most  closely  associated 
with  the  principle  of  constitutional  centralization,  his  truer  sig¬ 
nificance  is  to  be  found  in  his  relation  to  the  early  developments 
of  our  modern  capitalistic  order.  In  his  understanding  of  credit 
finance  and  the  factory  economy,  he  grasped  the  meaning  of  the 
economic  revolution  which  was  to  transform  America  from  an 
agrarian  to  an  industrial  country;  and  in  urging  the  government  to 
further  such  development,  he  blazed  the  path  that  America  has 
since  followed.  “A  very  great  man,”  Woodrow  Wilson  has  called 
him,  “but  not  a  great  American.”  In  the  larger  historical  meaning 
of  the  term,  in  its  democratic  implications,  that  judgment  is  true; 
but  in  the  light  of  our  industrial  history,  with  its  corporate  develop¬ 
ment  and  governmental  subsidies,  it  does  not  seem  so  true.  As 
the  creative  organizer  of  a  political  state  answering  the  needs  of  a 
capitalistic  order — a  state  destined  to  grow  stronger  as  imperial¬ 
istic  ambitions  mount — he  seems  the  most  modem  and  the  most 

8  Works ,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  207-208. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


307 


American  of  our  eighteenth-century  leaders,  one  to  whom  our 
industrialism  owes  a  very  great  debt,  but  from  whom  our  demo¬ 
cratic  liberalism  has  received  nothing. 

ii 

JOHN  ADAMS 
Realist 

Midway  between  Hamilton  and  Jefferson  stands  John  Adams, 
the  most  painstaking  student  of  government  and  the  most  widely 
read  in  political  history,  of  his  generation  of  Americans.  The 
noble  art  of  government  was  a  lifelong  passion  with  him — the 
sublimest  subject,  in  his  opinion,  which  a  free  citizen  could  study. 
Solid,  pragmatic,  unimaginative,  he  was  an  admirable  represen¬ 
tative  of  the  later  eighteenth  century  with  its  vigorous  under¬ 
standing,  its  distrust  of  idealisms,  its  contempt  for  social  theory. 
He  was  the  political  counterpart  of  Dr.  Johnson.  To  a  generation 
sniveling  over  the  sorrows  of  life  and  seeking  panaceas  in  Rousseau 
sentimentalisms,  the  English  Tory  proffered  the  consolation  of 
the  realist.  Things  are  bad  enough,  heaven  knows;  poverty, 
injustice,  disease,  death,  are  evils  which  no  optimism  can  shut 
its  eyes  to.  But  what  can  be  done?  The  malady  of  human  nature 
is  a  disease  beyond  the  reach  of  romantic  plasters.  No  quack 
remedies  will  cure  ills  that  lie  too  deep  for  laws  or  kings — they 
only  aggravate  the  trouble.  Be  sensible  therefore.  Endure  like 
men  what  cannot  be  cured.  Stop  sniveling  and  make  the  best  of 
things  as  they  are. 

The  analogy  between  these  two  vigorous  exponents  of  common 
sense  is  too  obvious  to  miss.  For  years  the  chief  business  of  John 
Adams  was  to  bring  home  to  Americans  the  lesson  in  realism  which 
Samuel  Johnson  was  urging  upon  his  countrymen.  The  mischief 
of  romantic  idealisms  was  spreading  widely  in  America,  dissemi¬ 
nated  by  propagandists  like  Tom  Paine  and  theorists  like  Jefferson; 
there  was  high  need  that  the  people  be  brought  back  to  sober 
reality.  This  duty  he  took  upon  himself.  He  was  an  uncompromis¬ 
ing  realist  who  refused  to  be  duped  by  fine  dreams  or  humanitarian 
panaceas;  he  was  much  given  to  throwing  cold  water  on  the  hope 
of  social  regeneration  through  political  agencies.  And  the  reward 
which  he  gained  for  his  voluntary  labors  was  a  personal  unpopu¬ 
larity  beyond  that  of  any  other  statesman  of  the  time.  He  was 


308  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

charged  with  apostacy  from  his  earlier  democratic  faith,  and  the 
charge  had  sufficient  foundation,  unfortunately,  to  make  it  credible 
if  one  wished  to  believe  it. 

During  the  revolutionary  struggle  he  had  been  a  member  of 
the  left  wing;  during  the  early  struggles  under  the  Constitution 
he  was  a  member  of  the  right  wing.  The  young  man  had  been  a 
stalwart  defender  of  human  rights,  the  old  man  was  a  stalwart 
defender  of  property  rights;  and  this  shift  of  position  was  fatal 
to  his  reputation  with  the  rising  democratic  party.  The  French 
Revolution  marked  the  critical  turning  point  in  his  intellectual 
development.  As  a  politician  he  was  well-nigh  ruined  by  it;  but  as 
a  political  thinker  he  owed  it  much.  Before  that  vast  upheaval 
came  to  challenge  his  somewhat  conventional  mind,  he  was  a 
hard-working  lawyer-politician,  with  a  liking  for  legalistic  con¬ 
stitutional  theory;  but  as  the  Revolution  went  forward,  he  was 
forced  into  uncompromising  reaction.  While  ardent  young  Amer¬ 
icans  were  becoming  pro-French,  he  became  pro-British;  while 
they  were  accepting  the  new  leveling  principles,  he  searched 
history  to  prove  how  inevitable  are  social  distinctions  and  economic 
classes;  while  they  looked  hopefully  forward  to  a  democratic 
future,  he  gathered  his  materials  for  an  interpretation  of  political 
forces  that  revealed  aristocracy  as  the  dominant  factor  in  every 
society.  Both  Adams  and  his  critics  were  products  of  the  French 
upheaval,  but  facing  in  different  directions;  naturally,  the  antag¬ 
onism  between  them  became  sharp  and  bitter. 

The  severest  critic  cannot  deny  to  John  Adams  excellent  qualities 
of  mind  and  heart.  A  sound  lawyer,  a  capable  statesman,  a 
vigorous  thinker  and  courageous  debater,  he  fought  his  way 
from  obscurity  to  high  position  and  many  honors,  and  in  every 
responsibility  he  acquitted  himself  in  a  fashion  altogether  worthy 
of  the  notable  Adams  posterity.  A  stubborn  intellectual  inde¬ 
pendence  and  a  vigorous  assertiveness  were  his  distinguishing 
characteristics.  He  revealed  to  the  full  the  Adams  trait  of  going 
its  own  way  and  coming  to  its  own  conclusions.  He  was  never  the 
victim  of  mob  psychology,  and  he  was  never  careful  of  occasion  or 
circumstance  in  speaking  out  his  convictions.  America  has  had 
too  few  independent  minds,  and  much  of  Adams’s  unpopularity 
was  the  result  of  his  refusal  to  hunt  with  the  pack.  Unfortunately 
his  admirable  qualities  were  offset  by  a  blundering  tactlessness  and 
a  colossal  vanity  that  brought  many  troubles  upon  his  head.  He 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


309 


loved  to  be  in  the  public  eye  and  he  studied  the  little  arts  of 
self-advertising.  In  his  youthful  diary  he  set  down  these  char¬ 
acteristic  words:  “Reputation  ought  to  be  a  perpetual  subject  of 
my  thoughts,  and  aim  of  my  behavior.  How  shall  I  spread  an 
opinion  of  myself  as  a  lawyer  of  distinguished  genius,  learning, 
and  virtue?”  Self-confident,  domineering,  and  jealously  suspi¬ 
cious — always  on  the  lookout  lest  some  honor  due  him  should  fall 
to  another — he  struggled  through  a  career  strewn  with  animosities 
and  heartburnings  that  a  nicer  tact  and  a  more  generous  nature 
would  have  avoided.  He  was  his  own  worst  enemy.  He  did  not 
spare  himself  in  public  service,  but  he  demanded  strict  payment 
and  was  inclined  to  haggle  over  the  terms;  in  consequence  his 
later  days  were  embittered  and  his  fame  was  less  than  he  deserved. 

Our  present  concern,  however,  is  with  the  political  scientist 
and  not  with  the  politician;  with  the  theories  of  government  that 
occupied  so  much  of  his  thought,  rather  than  with  the  policies  of 
the  statesman.  He  wrote  voluminously,  heavily,  with  no  grace 
of  style  or  savor  of  wit,  and  the  long  row  of  his  collected  writings 
may  well  appall  the  reader  who  proposes  to  make  his  acquaintance. 
Ponderous  treatises  are  supplemented  by  lesser  works  and  flanked 
by  innumerable  letters;  his  industry  was  prodigious  and  no  one 
will  wonder  at  his  exclamation,  “My  hand  is  impatient  of  the  pen 
and  longs  to  throw  it  down.”  His  important  work  divides  broadly 
into  two  main  divisions:  his  contribution  to  the  colonial  debate 
with  England,  and  his  elaborate  system  of  government  formu¬ 
lated  during  the  years  of  French  revolutionary  debate.  A  brief 
consideration  will  suffice  for  the  first,  but  the  second  requires  more 
careful  examination. 

In  his  contributions  to  the  colonial  debate  Adams  concerned 
himself  mainly  with  questions  of  constitutional  law.  He  placed 
little  reliance  on  the  appeal  to  natural  rights,  and  showed  scant 
respect  for  “popular  talk  and  those  democratical  principles  which 
have  done  so  much  mischief  in  this  country.”  9  The  American 
cause,  he  believed,  should  be  based  on  constitutional  principles, 
but  those  principles  required  restatement  in  the  light  of  existing 
fact.  They  must  be  rescued  from  the  narrow  interpretation  of 
little  Englanders  and  adapted  to  meet  the  pressing  needs  of  imperial 
federation.  The  English  people  were  not  all  residents  of  the  British 
Isles,  and  a  constitutional  practice  suited  to  compact  groups  in  a 
9  “Autobiography,”  in  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  310. 


310  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

common  environment,  was  ill  adapted  to  the  needs  of  widely 
sundered  bodies  of  British  subjects.  Into  this  difficult  and  mo¬ 
mentous  business  of  imperial  federation,  Adams  plunged  earnestly 
in  an  endeavor  to  chart  the  unexplored  field.  That  the  problem 
was  the  gravest  then  confronting  Englishmen  is  abundantly 
evident  today;  that  it  received  grossly  inadequate  consideration 
on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  is  equally  clear.  In  this  field  John 
Adams  was  a  pioneer  and  his  work  possesses  still  some  historical 
interest.  This  fact,  too  frequently  overlooked,  has  been  em¬ 
phasized  by  a  recent  student,  who  has  summarized  the  final  results 
of  Adams’s  thinking  in  the  following  theses:  that  the  empire  was 
an  association  of  equals,  each  with  independent  legislative  powers; 
that  the  British  constitution  was  the  fundamental  law  of  the 
empire,  defining  the  relationship  of  the  constituent  parts;  and 
that  it  was  the  function  of  the  judiciary  to  disallow  a  legislative 
act  of  any  of  the  several  legislatures  which  did  not  comport  with 
the  fundamental  law,  or  which  attempted  to  impose  the  will  of 
one  of  the  partners  in  violation  of  the  fundamental  understanding 
and  its  guarantee.10 

Such,  in  compressed  form,  was  Adams’s  elaboration  and  justifi¬ 
cation  of  the  dogma  of  Otis,  that  an  act  against  the  constitution 
was  void.  In  its  relation  to  current  English  constitutional  practice 
it  was  at  once  revolutionary  and  reactionary.  It  implied  a  double 
attack  upon  parliamentary  sovereignty,  first  in  limiting  its  powers 
by  a  super-parliamentary  constitution,  and  then  in  subjecting  its 
acts  to  judicial  review.  The  final  result  would  be  the  transfer  of 
sovereignty  from  the  legislature  to  the  judiciary.  The  idea  had 
been  toyed  with  by  English  lawyers,  but  never  seriously  considered; 
it  was  alien  to  the  whole  theory  and  history  of  parliamentary 
development.  English  landed  gentlemen  have  never  been  minded 
to  grant  the  veto  power  to  the  judiciary,  but  have  persistently 
retained  sovereignty  in  the  legislature.  Nevertheless  in  such 
early  speculation  is  found  the  germ  of  our  later  practice,  as  it 
finally  developed  through  the  decisions  of  Chief  Justice  Marshall. 

In  the  works  of  his  later  period,  such  as  A  Defence  of  the  Con¬ 
stitution  of  Government  of  the  United  States  of  America  and  Dis¬ 
courses  on  Davila,  Adams  emerged  from  the  narrow  field  of  con¬ 
stitutional  law  and  elaborated  a  theory  of  government  based  on 

10  R.  G.  Adams,  Political  Ideas  of  the  American  Revolution,  Trinity  College  Press, 
1922,  pp.  92-93. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


311 


wide  reading  and  long  observation.  It  was  by  way  of  reply  to 
the  French  thinkers,  and  it  contributed  in  large  measure  to  the 
partisan  passions  of  the  time.  Unfortunate  circumstances  attended 
the  publication  of  the  works.  The  Defence  of  the  Constitution 
appeared  at  the  moment  when  newspaper  accounts  of  the  absurd 
dress  in  which  he  appeared  at  the  Court  of  St.  James’s  were  pro¬ 
voking  republican  jests;  and  the  Discourses  on  Davila  came  out 
in  the  Gazette  of  the  United  States,  when  the  country  was  buzzing 
about  his  childish  fondness  for  titles  and  ceremonies.  It  was 
impolitic  for  Adams  to  publish  in  the  Gazette,  a  virulently  Federal¬ 
ists  sheet  and  anathema  to  all  liberals.  His  unpopular  theories 
could  not  fail  to  arouse  republican  antagonism  when  set  over 
against  such  seeming  commentary  as  this: 

Take  away  thrones  and  crowns  from  among  men  and  there  will  soon  he  an 
end  of  all  dominion  and  justice.  There  must  be  some  adventitious  prop¬ 
erties  infused  into  the  government  to  give  it  energy  and  spirit,  or  the 
selfish,  turbulent  passions  of  men  can  never  be  controlled.  This  has 
occasioned  that  artificial  splendor  and  dignity  that  are  to  be  found  in  the 
courts  of  many  nations.  The  people  of  the  United  States  may  probably 
be  induced  to  regard  and  obey  the  laws  without  requiring  the  experiment 
of  courts  and  titled  monarchs.  In  proportion  as  we  become  populous  and 
wealthy  must  the  tone  of  the  government  be  strengthened.11 

The  unfortunate  effect  of  Davila  upon  a  highly  wrought  public 
opinion  Adams  himself  records:  “the  rage  and  fury  of  the  Jacobini¬ 
cal  journals  against  these  discourses,  increased  as  they  proceeded, 
intimidated  the  printer,  John  Fenno,  and  convinced  me,  that  to 
proceed  would  do  more  hurt  than  good.  I  therefore  broke  off 
abruptly.”12  But  the  mischief  to  his  reputation  had  been  done; 
henceforth  Adams  was  popularly  regarded  as  anti-republican. 
Debating  the  nature  of  aristocracy  in  the  New  York  Constitutional 
Convention,  one  of  the  speakers  said,  “I  would  refer  the  gentleman 
for  a  definition  of  it  to  the  Hon.  John  Adams,  one  of  our  natural 
aristocrats.”  Madison  went  so  far  as  to  charge  that  he  was  se¬ 
cretly  a  monarchist.  The  charge  was  absurd,  as  any  examination 
of  his  political  theory  will  convince.  “It  is  a  fixed  principle  with 
me,”  he  wrote  to  Samuel  Adams  in  1790,  “that  all  good  government 
is  and  must  be  republican.”  But  that  he  advocated  a  system  of 
government  hostile  to  agrarianism,  that  he  was  bitterly  antagonistic 

11  Gazette  of  the  United  Slates,  March,  1790;  quoted  in  Forman,  “The  Political 
Activities  of  Philip  Freneau,”  in  Johns  Hopkins  Studies  in  History  and  Political 
Science,  XX,  Nos.  9-10. 

12  Works,  Vol,  VI,  p.  272,  note.  ; 


312  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

to  French  Jacobinism  and  all  its  works,  is  apparent  to  the  most 
casual  reader.  He  was  a  realist  of  the  seventeenth-century  school 
of  English  republicanism,  attacking  what  he  regarded  as  the  delir¬ 
ium  of  democracy,  appealing  to  experience  in  answer  to  abstract 
theory. 

Adams  erected  his  political  system  upon  what  he  called  “self- 
evident  truths.”  He  went  to  the  root  of  the  matter  and  directed 
his  inquiry  into  the  validity  of  the  humanitarian  psychology  which 
asserted  that  men  are  good  by  nature,  and  may  be  trusted  to  deal 
justly  with  their  fellows.  He  appealed  to  the  whole  unhappy 
record  of  past  misrule  to  disprove  the  thesis.  Instead  of  discover¬ 
ing  in  the  average  man  a  kindly,  rational  being — as  Jefferson  pro¬ 
fessed  to  discover — Adams  found  quite  the  contrary;  and  he 
summoned  a  host  of  historians  and  philosophers  to  witness  that 
Machiavelli  was  right  in  his  contention  that  “those  who  have 
written  on  civil  government  lay  it  down  as  a  first  principle  .  .  . 
that  whoever  would  found  a  state,  and  make  proper  laws  for  the 
government  of  it,  must  presume  that  all  men  are  bad  by  nature; 
that  they  will  not  fail  to  show  that  natural  depravity  of  heart 
whenever  they  have  a  fair  opportunity.”13  In  further  substantia¬ 
tion  of  this  fact  he  examined  the  history  of  governments  past  and 
present,  and  he  found  everywhere  testimony  to  the  truth  that 
the  mass  of  men  are  naturally  indolent,  selfish,  given  to  luxury, 
shortsighted,  jealous,  tending  to  faction  and  all  mischievous 
intrigue.  Never  does  he  find  them  given  to  virtue,  choosing  wis¬ 
dom,  seeking  justice.  They  cannot  endure  that  others  should  be 
superior  in  virtue,  or  rank,  or  power;  but  driven  by  ambition 
they  strive  to  pull  down  their  superiors  in  order  themselves  to 
rise.  The  men  in  any  society  who  possess  sufficient  virtue  to  set 
justice  above  self-interest,  are  few  and  count  for  little  in  the  scale 
against  the  selfish  many.14 

This  Calvinistic  doctrine  that  “human  nature  is  not  fit  to  be 
trusted,”  and  that  “men  are  never  good  but  through  necessity,” 
being  accepted — and  John  Adams  was  as  clearly  satisfied  of  its 
truth  as  “of  any  demonstration  of  Euclid” — he  proceeded  to 
translate  it  into  political  terms,  and  examine  the  bearing  of  it 
upon  systems  of  government.  At  once  a  second  fallacy  of  the 
humanitarian  school  emerged — men  are  impelled  not  by  ideals 

13  Works,  Vol.  IV,  p.  408. 

14  See  “Defence  of  the  Constitution,  etc.,”  in  Works,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  9,  57,  97. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


313 


but  by  needs,  not  by  reason,  as  Godwin  argued,  but  by  the  desire 
for  goods.  In  a  social  state  the  natural  selfishness  of  human  nature 
impels  to  economic  aggression.  Underneath  the  turbulent  unrest 
which  threatens  every  government  is  economic  ambition.  This 
is  the  rock  on  which  all  schemes  of  social  justice  founder — a  rock 
which  every  sound  political  thinker  will  chart  and  recognize  as  a 
danger  reef.  Economics  and  biology  provide  the  major  social 
drives.  “That  the  first  want  of  every  man  is  his  dinner  and  the 
second  want  his  girl  were  truths  well  known  .  .  .  long  before 
the  great  philosopher  Malthus  arose  to  think  he  enlightened  the 
world  by  his  discovery.”15  The  supposed  liberty  of  a  democratic 
state  proves  in  practice  to  be  no  other  than  anarchy,  running 
swiftly  into  license  and  ending  in  tyranny.  All  human  societies 
are  rooted  in  exploitation,  the  bitter  fruit  of  which  is  domestic 
warfare. 

The  universal  social  state  is  one  of  ruthless  class  struggle, 
wherein  the  strong  conquer  the  weak — this  is  the  third  deduction 
from  the  premises  which  Adams  laid  down.  It  cannot  be  otherwise, 
he  argued,  from  the  natural  inequality  of  men.  The  rude  mass 
being  shiftless,  ignorant,  spendthrift,  they  are  at  the  mercy  of 
the  strong,  ambitious,  and  capable,  who  exploit  them  freely. 
Hence  in  every  society  emerges  the  division  between  patricians  and 
plebeians,  developing  into  caste  as  the  social  order  grows  complex. 
The  self-interest  of  the  patricians  teaches  them  the  need  of  class 
solidarity,  and  with  intelligent  solidarity  the  few  easily  seize 
control  of  the  state  and  use  it  to  their  ends.  Hence  arises  an  aristoc¬ 
racy  or  oligarchy,  which  maintains  its  power  through  control  of 
the  economic  resources  of  society.  Control  of  property  means 
control  of  men;  for  sovereignty  inheres  in  economics.  In  presence 
of  this  historical  fact  it  is  foolish  to  declaim  about  natural  rights; 
there  are  no  rights  except  such  as  are  won  either  by  property  or  the 
sword. 

That  there  should  long  exist  a  society  without  a  property  aristoc¬ 
racy  Adams  regarded  as  inconceivable.  The  French  democrats 
with  their  talk  of  equality  and  fraternity  were  mischievous  vision¬ 
aries.  “Every  democracy  .  .  .  has  an  aristocracy  in  it  as  distinct 
as  that  of  Rome,  France,  England.”  In  older  societies  the  aristoc¬ 
racy  maintained  supremacy  through  possession  of  the  land.  In 
America  the  vast  extent  of  territory  and  the  wide  diffusion  of  land- 
15  Letter  to  John  Taylor,  in  Works,  V ol.  VI,  p.  516. 


314 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


holding  presented  the  most  favorable  opportunity  in  history  for 
democratic  development  if  such  were  possible;  nevertheless  the 
evidences  of  an  aristocracy  developing  here  were  too  patent  to 
miss.  The  abundance  of  economic  resources,  Adams  pointed  out, 
was  an  invitation  to  gigantic  exploitation,  the  logical  outcome  of 
which  must  be  the  emergence  of  a  master  group,  richer  and  more 
powerful  than  the  world  has  ever  known.  The  power  of  economic 
appeal  was  nullified  in  America  by  no  special  providence. 

Paper  wealth  has  been  a  source  of  aristocracy  in  this  country,  as  well 
as  landed  wealth,  with  a  vengeance.  Witness  the  immense  fortunes  made 
per  saltum  by  aristocratical  speculations,  both  in  land  and  paper.  .  .  . 
But,  sir,  land  and  paper  are  not  the  only  source  of  aristocracy.  There  are 
master  shipwrights,  housewrights,  masons,  &c.  &c.,  who  have  each  of  them 
from  twenty  to  a  hundred  families  in  their  employment,  and  can  carry  a 
posse  to  the  polls  when  they  will.  These  are  not  only  aristocrats,  but  a 
species  of  feudal  barons.  .  .  . 

Should  a  planter  in  Virginia  sell  his  clarissimum  et  illustrissimum  et 
celeberricum  locum  with  his  thousand  negroes,  to  a  merchant,  would  not  the 
merchant  gain  the  aristocratical  influence  which  the  planter  lost  by  his 
transfer?  Run  down,  sir,  through  all  the  ranks  of  society  .  .  .  from  the 
first  planter  and  the  first  merchant  to  the  hog  driver,  the  whiskey  dram- 
seller,  or  the  Scottish  peddler,  and  consider,  whether  the  alienation  of 
lands,  wharves,  stores,  pike  stock,  or  even  lottery  tickets,  does  not  transfer 
the  aristocracy  as  well  as  the  property.18 

Believe — as  John  Adams  believed  regarding  the  funding  opera¬ 
tions — that  “paper  wealth  is  the  madness  of  the  many  for  the 
profit  of  the  few,” 17  it  is  nevertheless  a  modern  illustration  of  the 
old  truth  that  the  few  do  profit  from  the  madness  of  the  many, 
and  by  reason  of  such  profit  set  themselves  up  as  masters.  If  then 
the  historian  cannot  escape  the  conclusion  that  political  systems 
and  social  classes  rest  upon  economic  foundations,  this  fundamental 
fact  must  preside  over  the  speculations  of  the  political  philosopher. 
Democracy  is  out  of  the  question,  even  if  it  were  desirable.  The 
great  and  sole  object  of  political  science  must  be  the  preservation 
of  liberty — the  right  of  every  individual  to  life,  freedom,  property, 
in  an  aristocratic  society — and  the  frustration  of  the  universal 
drive  of  self-interest  which  leads  on  the  one  hand  to  tyranny,  and 
on  the  other  to  anarchy.  Between  these  two  poles  of  tyranny  and 
anarchy,  of  oligarchy  and  democracy,  every  society  oscillates;  to 
prevent  such  oscillation  and  discover  some  mean  between  the 
extremes  must  be  the  business  of  the  political  philosopher.  The 
16  Ibid.,  pp.  508-509.  11  Ibid.,  p.  508. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


315 


pregnant  fallacy  of  the  French  school,  Adams  insisted,  lay  in  its 
doctrines  of  equality  and  fraternity.  The  meanest  underling  does 
not  desire  equality;  men  kiss  the  feet  above  them  and  trample  on 
the  fingers  beneath.  That  the  people  love  a  lord  is  a  sign  of  their 
abundant  folly.  Should  the  democrats  abolish  the  principle  of 
hereditary  rank  by  law,  it  would  still  remain  in  fact;  for  the  prop¬ 
erty  basis  on  which  it  rests  is  transmitted  legally  from  father  to 
son,  and  each  successive  generation  gains  an  adventitious  advan¬ 
tage  from  its  substantial  heritage  as  well  as  from  the  historical 
splendor  of  the  family  name.  On  this  rock  every  attempt  at  a 
democracy  has  foundered. 

If  these  words  are  true,  no  well  ordered  commonwealth  ever  existed;  for 
we  read  of  none  without  a  nobility,  no,  not  one,  that  I  can  recollect,  with¬ 
out  a  hereditary  nobility;  ...  It  would  be  an  improvement  in  the  affairs 
of  society,  probably,  if  the  hereditary  legal  descent  could  be  avoided;  and 
this  experiment  the  Americans  have  tried.  But  in  this  case  a  nobility 
must  and  will  exist,  though  without  the  name,  as  really  as  in  countries 
where  it  is  hereditary.18 

The  mortal  weakness  of  democracy,  Adams  agreed  with  Madison 
and  the  Federalists  generally,  lay  in  faction,  a  disease  which  in  the 
nature  of  the  case  he  regarded  as  incurable.  The  use  of  party  power 
other  than  justly  was  factional,  and  because  the  mass  of  men  do  not 
set  justice  above  present  interest,  the  unbridled  rule  of  the  majority 
drives  straight  towards  mass  tyranny.  Despoiled  by  the  superior 
ability  of  the  aristocracy,  the  exploited  plebeians  fight  back  blindly; 
and  where  the  constitution  of  government  permits  them  to  band 
together  in  a  political  party,  they  override  the  rights  of  the  minor¬ 
ity  as  ruthlessly  as  the  latter  before  had  denied  the  rights  of  the 
majority.  Aristocratic  exploitation  leads  to  democratic  leveling; 
and  the  resultant  anarchy  is  but  prelude  to  the  rise  of  another 
aristocracy  to  repeat  the  unhappy  process. 

The  passions  and  desires  of  the  majority  of  the  representatives  being  in 
their  nature  insatiable  and  unlimited  by  any  thing  within  their  own 
breasts,  and  having  nothing  to  control  them  without,  will  crave  more  and 
more  indulgence,  and,  as  they  have  the  power,  they  will  have  the 
gratification.19 

If  you  give  more  than  a  share  in  the  sovereignty  to  the  democrats,  that 
is,  if  you  give  them  the  command  or  preponderance  in  the  sovereignty, 

18  “Defence  of  the  Constitution,  etc.,”  in  Works ,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  124-125. 

19  Ibid.,  p.  64.  ' 


316 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


that  is,  the  legislature,  they  will  vote  all  property  out  of  the  hands  of  you 
aristocrats,  and  if  they  let  you  escape  with  your  lives,  it  will  be  more 
humanity,  consideration,  and  generosity  than  any  triumphant  democracy 
ever  displayed  since  the  creation.  And  what  will  follow?  The  aristocracy 
among  the  democrats  will  take  your  places,  and  treat  their  fellows  as 
severely  and  sternly  as  you  have  treated  them.20 

The  end  of  every  democratic  experiment,  Adams  pointed  out, 
has  been  the  man  on  horseback.  So  inevitably  does  democracy 
culminate  in  despotism,  that  “in  reality,  the  word  democracy 
signifies  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  nation  of  people  without 
any  government  at  all,  and  before  any  constitution  is  instituted.”  21 
“Democracy  never  has  been  and  never  can  be  so  desirable  as  aris¬ 
tocracy  or  monarchy,  but  while  it  lasts,  is  more  bloody  than  either. 
Remember,  democracy  never  lasts  long.  It  soon  wastes,  exhausts, 
and  murders  itself.  There  never  was  a  democracy  that  did  not 
commit  suicide.”  “The  proposition  that  the  people  are  the  best 
keepers  of  their  own  liberties  is  not  true.  They  are  the  worst 
conceivable,  they  are  no  keepers  at  all;  they  can  neither  judge, 
act,  think,  or  will,  as  a  political  body.  Individuals  have  conquered 
themselves;  nations  and  large  bodies  never.”  22 

Having  thus  examined  the  major  doctrines  of  the  French  demo¬ 
cratic  school,  namely,  that  men  are  good  by  nature,  that  the  social 
end  is  liberty,  equality,  fraternity,  and  that  social  well-being  will 
result  from  an  appeal  to  reason,  Adams  had  cleared  the  problem 
of  what  he  regarded  as  misconceptions,  and  was  ready  to  lay  out 
a  system  of  government  which  should  demonstrate  his  skill  in 
political  architecture.  The  determining  factor  in  laying  down  the 
main  lines  was  sufficiently  clear.  Since  property  lies  at  the  root 
of  the  problem  of  government,  the  business  of  devising  a  just  and 
stable  system  of  government  resolves  itself  into  the  question,  What 
shall  be  done  about  property?  As  an  orthodox  Whig  Adams 
found  part  of  his  answer  ready  to  hand.  With  Locke  he  believed 
that  property  rights  are  sacred,  and  that  it  is  a  chief  business  of 
government  to  protect  private  property  against  unjust  expropria¬ 
tion.  The  security  of  property  may  be  taken  as  the  measure  of 
the  stability  of  government.  “The  moment  the  idea  is  admitted 
into  society,  that  property  is  not  as  sacred  as  the  laws  of  God,  and 
that  there  is  not  a  force  of  law  and  public  justice  to  protect  it, 

20  “Letter  to  John  Taylor,”  in  Works,  Vol.  VI,  p.  516. 

21  Works,  Vol.  VI,  p.  211. 

22  See  “Defence  of  the  Constitution,  etc.,”  and  in  particular  Vol.  IV  of  Works. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


317 


anarchy  and  tyranny  commence.”23  “The  very  name  of  a  re¬ 
public  implies,  that  the  property  of  the  people  should  be  repre¬ 
sented  in  the  legislature,  and  decide  the  rule  of  justice,”  he  argued, 
quoting  Cicero.24  Moreover,  the  futility  of  any  other  arrangement 
was  axiomatic  in  his  philosophy.  If  property  is  not  granted 
representation,  it  will  usurp  it;  if  attacked,  it  will  know  how  to 
defend  itself;  and  the  end  will  be  the  setting  up  of  an  oligarchy  on 
the  ruins  of  the  republic.  But  if  Adams  agreed  with  Hamilton 
that  the  state  should  deal  tenderly  with  the  rights  and  interests  of 
property,  he  refused  to  go  with  the  latter  in  his  sole  concern  for 
the  wealthy.  Greater  property  interests  must  be  held  in  due 
balance  with  the  smaller,  for  if  unchecked  the  strong  will  drive 
on  to  ruthless  exploitation  of  the  weak,  and  society  will  be  en¬ 
dangered  from  the  top  as  in  a  democracy  it  is  endangered  from 
the  bottom.  It  was  this  desire  for  a  mean  between  oligarchy  or 
monarchy  on  the  one  hand,  and  democracy  on  the  other,  that  de¬ 
termined  his  choice  of  a  republican  form  of  government. 

The  difficult  problem  of  property-power  in  the  state,  Adams 
was  convinced,  could  be  solved  justly  and  permanently  only  by 
a  judicious  system  of  balanced  interests.  Subjected,  as  every 
government  must  be,  to  a  persistent  stress  of  rival  interests,  it 
must  be  constructed  with  calculated  nicety,  or  the  structure  would 
fall  of  its  own  weight;  and  the  sole  principle,  he  believed,  is  that 
of  the  Gothic  arch — the  principle  of  thrust  and  counter-thrust. 
Provide  in  such  manner  that  the  selfishness  of  one  group  in  society 
shall  be  neutralized  by  the  counter  selfishness  of  other  groups, 
let  the  buttress  support  the  arch  at  its  weakest  point,  and  upon 
such  an  equilibrium  of  counterforces  great  vaults  and  noble  towers 
may  be  erected.  It  is  the  apotheosis  of  the  system  of  checks  and 
balances. 

It  is  agreed  that  “the  end  of  all  government  is  the  good  and  ease  of  the 
people,  in  a  secure  enjoyment  of  their  rights,  without  oppression”;  but  it 
must  be  remembered,  that  the  rich  are  people  as  well  as  the  poor;  that  they 
have  rights  as  well  as  others;  that  they  have  as  clear  and  as  sacred  a  right 
to  their  large  property  as  others  have  to  theirs  which  is  smaller;  that 
oppression  to  them  is  as  possible  and  as  wicked  as  to  others.  The  rich, 
therefore,  ought  to  have  an  effectual  barrier  in  the  constitution  against 
being  robbed,  plundered,  and  murdered,  as  well  as  the  poor;  and  this  can 
never  be  without  an  independent  senate.  The  poor  should  have  a  bulwark 

23  “Defence  of  the  Constitution,  etc.,”  in  Works ,  Vol.  VI,  p.  9. 

24  Works,  Vol.  IV,  p.  295. 


318  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

against  the  same  dangers  and  oppressions;  and  this  can  never  be  without 
a  house  of  representatives  of  the  people.  But  neither  the  rich  nor  the  poor 
can  be  defended  by  their  respective  guardians  in  the  constitution,  without 
an  executive  power,  vested  with  a  negative,  equal  to  either,  to  hold  the 
balance  even  between  them,  and  decide  when  they  cannot  agree.25 

Such  in  brief  was  the  master  principle  of  that  system  of  mixed 
government  which  John  Ad-ams  advocated  so  persistently  in  the 
teeth  of  the  popular  demand  for  a  simpler,  more  responsive  form. 
It  based  itself  frankly  upon  the  dogma  of  the  class  struggle;  it 
provided  each  class — as  he  recognized  them  in  his  simple  social 
analysis — with  a  legislative  arm  with  which  to  defend  itself;  and 
it  set  as  arbiter  between  them  an  executive,  carefully  selected,  who 
was  supposed  to  represent  that  abstract  tertium  quid,  the  public. 
The  keynote  is  struck  in  a  line  from  Pope  set  on  the  title-page  of 
the  Defence — “ All  Nature’s  difference  keeps  all  Nature’s  peace.” 
That  Adams  greatly  admired  his  handiwork  is  beyond  doubt;  that 
he  was  intellectually  honest  with  himself  is  very  likely  true;  but 
that  there  is  a  note  of  disingenuousness,  a  failure  to  take  into  ac¬ 
count  his  pronounced  bias  towards  property  interest,  is  certain. 
There  was  ample  ground  for  the  popular  dislike  of  his  theory. 
This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  upon  an  examination  of  the  system 
of  checks  and  balances,  nor  to  insist  that  any  such  system  becomes 
in  practice  an  impossibility.  It  is  more  to  the  point  to  remark 
upon  certain  fallacies  in  his  theory  which  Adams  himself  must 
have  seen  if  his  mind  had  been  quite  free  from  bias. 

Adams’s  intelligent  analysis  of  social  forces  should  have  saved 
him  from  the  major  fallacy  of  the  doctrine  of  checks  and  balances. 
In  imposing  the  doctrine  of  a  separation  of  powers  upon  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  property  power,  he  effectively  denied  the  validity  of  the 
latter.  Assuming  for  the  sake  of  the  argument  that  the  Senate 
will  represent  property,  what  reason  justified  the  assumption  that 
the  House  would  represent  the  small  men,  or  that  the  President 
would  speak  for  the  whole?  If  property  is  sovereign,  as  Adams 
maintained — “Harrington  has  shown  that  power  always  follows 
property.  This  I  believe  to  be  as  infallible  a  maxim  in  politics, 
as  that  action  and  reaction  are  equal,  is  in  mechanics”  26 — will 
it  not  rule  the  House  equally  with  the  Senate?  above  all,  will  it 
not  control  so  important  an  officer  as  the  President?  The  theory 

26  “A  Defence  of  the  Constitution,  etc.,’’  in  Works,  Vol.  VI,  p.  65. 

25  Works,  Vol.  IX,  p.  376. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


319 


that  the  President  represents  an  abstract  public  is  a  disingenuous 
political  fiction;  in  the  light  of  Adams’s  theory  of  economic  deter¬ 
minism  it  is  a  gross  absurdity.  Moreover,  Adams  invalidated  his 
entire  system  by  refusing  to  provide  the  necessary  machinery  by 
which  the  House  could  represent  the  small  man.  In  denying  man¬ 
hood  suffrage,  he  eliminated  the  proletarian  and  the  renter  from 
the  political  equation,  and  left  them  without  political  power;  in 
his  definition  the  small  man  was  the  freeholder,  the  representative 
of  the  middle  class.  The  House,  therefore,  equally  with  the  Senate, 
was  the  mouthpiece  of  property  interests;  the  former  more  likely 
to  be  representative  of  land,  the  latter  of  capital. 

Where  did  Adams  get  the  major  ideas  of  his  political  philosophy  ?27 
An  omnivorous  reader,  he  gathered  from  many  sources,  and  his 
memory  was  a  well-stocked  storehouse  of  fact  and  theory.  As  a 
young  man  he  was  disciple  of  Locke  and  the  natural-rights  school, 
but  as  he  grew  older  he  abandoned  the  natural-rights  theory.  His 
interpretation  of  human  nature  he  took  over  from  Machiavelli, 
Hobbes  and  Hume,  discovering  in  their  psychology  of  self-interest 
and  emulation — often  mean  but  many  times  admirable — a  con¬ 
ception  in  harmony  with  the  Calvinism  of  his  early  training.  He 
owed  much  to  Bolingbroke,  whom  he  read  five  times,  but  to  James 
Harrington,  the  Commonwealth  intellectual,  he  turned  with  a 
zest  of  discovery  so  great  that  he  may  not  unjustly  be  called  one 
of  Harrington’s  disciples.  From  the  Oceana  he  drew  so  abundantly 
that  the  most  casual  student  of  political  theory  must  remark  his 
indebtedness.  Many  of  the  major  doctrines  of  Adams,  which  by 
dint  of  iteration  have  become  associated  with  his  name,  were  taken 
straight  out  of  Harrington:  such  as  the  doctrine  of  a  natural 
aristocracy;  the  economic  basis  of  sovereignty,  discovered  in  the 
close  relation  of  property  to  power;  the  necessity  of  effecting  a 
balance  between  rival  interests,  with  the  ideal  state  rendered 
static  by  a  nice  balance  of  governmental  machinery;  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  government  by  laws  and  not  by  men;  and  finally,  the  his¬ 
torical  method  of  approach,  the  cautious  appeal  to  past  experience. 
Since  Harrington’s  time  many  of  these  ideas  had  been  restated: 
the  defense  of  property  rights  by  Locke;  the  principle  of  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  powers  and  the  historical  method  by  Montesquieu;  the 
psychology  of  emulation  by  Hume  and  Robert  Wallace,  the  latter 

27  For  a  detailed  examination  of  the  sources  of  his  philosophy,  see  the  excellent 
discussion  in  C.  M.  Walsh,  The  Political  Science  of  John  Adams,  Chapters  XV,  XVI. 


320  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

of  whom  is  another  Adams  in  his  thesis,  “Lust  of  power  sets  man 
against  his  neighbor  to  the  profit  of  the  rich.”  But  in  spite  of  these 
later  reinterpretations  and  his  own  additions,  John  Adams  re¬ 
mained  essentially  a  seventeenth-century  republican,  preferring 
with  Milton  the  rule  of  the  aristocracy  to  that  of  plebeians,  and 
hating  all  Jacobin  radicalisms  as  the  spawn  of  a  dangerous  romanti¬ 
cism  that  disregarded  the  plain  teachings  of  history  and  the  admo¬ 
nitions  of  common  sense. 

Though  Adams  was  fiercely  assailed  as  an  advocate  of  class 
government,  he  was  far  less  hostile  to  agrarianism  than  was  Ham¬ 
ilton.  He  was  no  believer  in  unchecked  government  by  wealth. 
His  honest  realism  taught  him  the  sophistry  of  Hamilton’s  assump¬ 
tion  that  gentlemen  of  property  are  equally  gentlemen  of  principle, 
and  that  wealth  voluntarily  abdicates  selfish  interest.  He  feared 
the  aggressions  of  the  rich  as  much  as  the  turbulence  of  the  poor. 
The  bulk  of  his  property  was  in  land,  and  his  sympathies  were 
enlisted  on  the  side  of  a  law-abiding  agrarianism,  rather  than  on 
the  side  of  a  speculative  capitalism.28  He  would  put  down  vigor¬ 
ously  all  such  leveling  as  was  implied  in  Shays’s  program,  and 
the  repudiations  of  Rhode  Island;  but  he  would  not  permit  the 
powerful  to  exploit  the  poor  through  the  instrumentality  of  govern¬ 
ment.  This  may  explain  in  part  his  hostility  to  Hamilton  and  his 
partial  sympathy  with  Jefferson.  He  stood  between  the  two  rival 
economies,  arguing  for  a  system  of  government  that  should  be 
neither  agrarian  nor  capitalistic,  but  should  maintain  a  static 
mean;  and  in  consequence  he  pleased  nobody.  His  four  years  in 
the  presidency  disrupted  the  Federalist  party,  and  prepared  the 
way  for  the  triumph  of  Jefferson.  Though  tactless  and  blundering 
in  dealing  with  trimming  politicians,  he  was  an  honest  and  coura¬ 
geous  man,  and  his  many  sterling  qualities  merit  a  larger  recogni¬ 
tion  than  has  been  accorded  them  by  a  grudging  posterity.  In 
spite  of  his  dogmatisms  and  inconsistencies  he  remains  the  most 
notable  political  thinker — with  the  possible  exception  of  John  C. 
Calhoun — among  American  statesmen. 

28  See  Beard,  The  Economic  Origins  of  Jeffersonian  Democracy,  p.  317. 


PART  TWO:  POLITICAL  DEMOCRACY 
GETS  UNDER  WAY 

1787  - 1800 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  IMPACT  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

The  dramatic  impact  of  the  French  Revolution  upon  a  situation 
which  for  months  had  been  overwrought  entailed  disturbing 
consequences.  Within  a  week  after  the  setting  up  of  the  new 
government  there  began  that  long  series  of  events  in  France  which 
carried  far  and  gave  birth  to  extraordinary  hopes  and  fears;  and 
throughout  the  remaining  years  of  the  century  the  French  move¬ 
ment  exercised  a  determining  influence  upon  American  parties 
and  issues.  In  the  words  of  Colonel  Higginson,  it  “drew  a  red-hot 
ploughshare  through  the  history  of  America  as  well  as  through 
that  of  France.  It  not  merely  divided  parties,  but  molded  them; 
gave  them  their  demarcations,  their  watchwords  and  their  bitter¬ 
ness.  The  home  issues  were  for  a  time  subordinate,  collateral; 
the  real  party  lines  were  established  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlan¬ 
tic.”  1  The  stirring  of  political  passions  afresh  resulted  in  greatly 
clarifying  political  philosophies,  and  in  rendering  more  exact, 
political  alignments  that  before  had  been  vague  and  inchoate. 

The  creative  influence  of  the  French  Revolution  upon  the 
western  world  resulted  from  the  enormous  impetus  which  it 
gave  to  the  movement  to  democratize  American  life  and  institu¬ 
tions.  In  no  other  country  to  which  the  sparks  of  revolution 
drifted  was  there  such  quantity  of  combustible  material  ready 
for  the  torch;  and  in  setting  afire  this  native  material  the  French 
upheaval  put  a  stop  to  the  aristocratic  reaction  which  had  carried 
everything  before  it  during  the  previous  decade.  It  spread  widely 
the  spirit  of  leveling,  and  destroyed  the  last  hope  of  the  “monarchy 
men.”  But  it  did  more — it  gave  a  wide  and  popular  currency  to 

1  Quoted  in  Hazen,  “Contemporary  American  Opinion  of  the  French  Revolution,” 
in  Johns  Hopkins  University  Studies  in  History  and  Political  Science,  Extra  Vol. 
XVI.  The  material  in  this  excellent  study  has  been  used  freely  in  the  present 
chapter. 


321 


322 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


the  ideal  of  democracy.  Before  the  French  Revolution  the  Amer¬ 
ican  mind  had  been  curiously  sensitive  over  the  term  democrat; 
even  Samuel  Adams  had  been  driven  by  expediency  to  reject  the 
word,  and,  amongst  the  radicals,  few  had  the  boldness  to  avow 
themselves  democrats.  By  common  consent  the  term  had  been 
covered  with  opprobrium;  democracy  was  no  other  than  a  bellua 
multorum  capitum,  the  hydra-headed  monster  of  earlier  Tories, 
licentious,  irreligious,  the  very  spawn  of  anarchy.  But  now  the 
old  conceptions  were  rapidly  swept  away,  and  democracy  was 
accepted  by  liberals  as  the  ultimate  form  of  political  organization, 
to  which  the  American  experiment  was  to  be  dedicated. 

In  thus  imparting  social  idealism  to  political  speculation,  the 
Revolution  not  only  elevated  the  democratic  ideal,  but  it  provided 
a  body  of  philosophy,  the  lack  of  which  had  so  seriously  handi¬ 
capped  the  democrats  during  the  great  debate.  And  this  new 
philosophy  gained  extraordinarily  wide  currency  in  America  under 
the  stimulus  of  revolutionary  enthusiasm.  It  made  direct  appeal 
to  the  vast  majority  who  still  remained  among  the  political  dis¬ 
inherited;  it  aroused  them  to  political  consciousness  and  intensified 
the  class  alignment  that  followed.  The  country  divided  sharply 
between  left  and  right,  and  political  discussion  became  more  in¬ 
tense  as  the  French  movement  developed.  The  English  declara¬ 
tion  of  war  upon  France  produced  a  crisis  in  America,  and  sharp¬ 
ened  the  party  cleavage.  The  Federalists  went  with  Great  Britain 
and  turned  fiercely  upon  the  democratic  movement,  assailing  it 
with  increasing  venom.  The  democrats,  on  the  other  hand,  be¬ 
came  French  partisans,  and  denounced  all  aristocrats  with  true 
republican  fervor,  becoming  more  radical  as  French  Jacobinism 
developed.  Never  before  had  political  passion  risen  to  such  heights 
in  America,  not  even  during  the  early  days  of  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion;  and  never  before  had  political  ideas  taken  such  hold  upon 
the  common  people.  Out  of  this  increasing  ferment  emerged  cer¬ 
tain  consequences  of  vast  significance  to  the  democratic  move¬ 
ment:  not  only  was  an  effective  barrier  erected  against  the  further 
spread  of  aristocratic  Federalism,  but  certain  of  its  most  charac¬ 
teristic  doctrines  disintegrated  and  disappeared.  The  current 
dogma  of  faction  gave  way  to  a  more  democratic  interpretation 
of  the  majority  will;  the  doctrine  of  the  ethical  absolute — the  vox 
justiciae,  vox  dei — quietly  yielded  to  the  more  practical  conception 
of  expediency;  and  the  lately  resurrected  ideal  of  an  augmented 


THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 


323 


state  received  a  temporary  check,  the  majority  preferring  to  in¬ 
trust  power  to  local  bodies  rather  than  to  a  central  authority. 

At  the  beginning  the  sympathy  of  America  as  a  whole  went 
heartily  with  the  revolutionary  movement  in  France.  The  ad¬ 
herence  of  Lafayette  justified  the  cause  to  the  most  conservative. 
But  with  the  advent  of  the  Girondists  to  power  a  division  in  Ameri¬ 
can  sentiment  appeared :  Hamilton,  John  Adams,  and  other  extreme 
Federalists  drew  back  in  disapproval;  and  with  the  rise  of  the 
Jacobins,  party  cleavage  became  sharp  and  bitter.  All  over 
America  the  liberals  organized  democratic  clubs,  instituted  com¬ 
mittees  of  correspondence,  and  actively  forwarded  the  new  leveling 
principles.  The  attack  on  ceremonial  and  titles  of  address  in 
Congress,  of  which  Maclay  has  left  record  in  his  Journal,  was 
only  a  skirmish  in  the  general  war  levied  upon  social  distinctions.2 
It  was  to  these  democratic  societies  that  Citizen  Genet  made  ap¬ 
peal;  they  rallied  about  him,  toasted  the  French  principles,  and 
assured  him  of  the  warm  support  of  the  American  people.  The 
recall  of  Genet  was  a  blow  to  the  American  Jacobins,  and  they 
retaliated  by  direct  appeals  to  the  people  to  repudiate  the  act  of 
the  administration.  Stung  by  their  criticism  of  his  policy  of  neu¬ 
trality,  Washington  denounced  them  as  “certain  self-created  so¬ 
cieties”  that  offensively  “assumed  the  tone  of  condemnation” 
of  governmental  policies;  and  went  so  far  as  to  imply  that  such 
criticism  was  seditious.  It  was  ill-advised  for  it  was  like  a  torch 
to  dry  leaves.  The  Federalists  fell  upon  the  democrats  with  gusto. 
They  denounced  the  infidel  French  mobocracy  and  its  American 
offspring.  They  declaimed  against  “secret  organizations,”  im¬ 
puting  to  them  every  evil  known  to  Satan:  the  democratic  clubs 
were  called  “demoniacal  clubs,”  “nurseries  of  sedition,”  “hotbeds 
of  atheism,”  “spawn  of  faction”;  and  common  decency  required 
that  they  be  put  down  with  a  strong  hand.  In  short  the  most 
eminent  Federalists  joined  heartily  in  the  silly  work  of  turning 
the  country  into  a  bedlam. 

A  characteristic  odium,  theologicum  quickly  gathered  about  the 
movement  and  extended  to  the  whole  democratic  philosophy. 
Well-meaning  but  ignorant  gentlemen  saw  in  Jacobinism  only 
atheism  and  immorality.  John  Adams  professed  not  to  know 
“what  to  make  of  a  republic  of  thirty  million  atheists,”  and  he 
attributed  the  unhappy  result  to  the  “encyclopedists  and  econo- 
2  For  an  amusing  account  see  Hazen,  ibid.,  pp.  209-219. 


324  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

mists,  Diderot  and  D’Alembert,  Voltaire  and  Rousseau,”  with  their 
mad  doctrines  of  the  “equality  of  persons  and  property.”  But 
the  more  violently  such  men  protested,  the  more  insidiously  “the 
infidel  and  irreligious  spirit”  spread  through  the  land.  It  found 
its  way  into  such  strongholds  of  orthodoxy  as  Harvard  College, 
to  the  scandal  of  the  respectable;  and  as  a  counterblast  to  Paine’s 
Age  of  Reason,  a  copy  of  Watson’s  Apology  for  the  Bible  was  pre¬ 
sented  to  every  Harvard  undergraduate,  with  what  results  in  god¬ 
liness  no  record  remains  to  tell.  On  both  sides  there  was  more 
heat  than  light,  more  passion  than  reason,  and  in  consequence 
such  a  tremendous  hue  and  cry  was  worked  up  that  the  noise 
carried  to  the  farthest  outposts  of  settlement,  and  brought  home 
to  the  most  sluggish  some  realization  of  the  significance  of  the 
world-wide  movement  of  democracy  then  under  way,  and  left 
few  quite  indifferent  to  the  import  of  the  tricolor  cockade.  It 
was  the  first  great  popularization  of  democratic  ideals  in  America 
and  when  the  hubbub  finally  subsided  it  was  apparent  to  all  that 
democracy  had  made  a  definite  and  stable  advance,  from  which 
it  must  move  forward  to  still  other  vantage  points.  Only  a  few 
unregenerate  aristocrats  shared  with  Gouverneur  Morris  his 
reasons  for  joy  at  the  final  overthrow  of  Napoleon:  “’Tis  done, 
the  long  agony  is  over.  The  Bourbons  are  restored.  France 
reposes  in  the  arms  of  her  legitimate  prince”;  or  who  agreed  with 
Robert  Treat  Paine  in  calling  the  democratic  movement  of  the 
nineties  “the  melancholy  record  of  our  national  degradation.” 
The  Federalists  still  hated  Jefferson  and  his  “revolution  of  1800,” 
but  a  triumphant  agrarianism  had  broken  them  and  their  power 
for  the  time  being. 

So  tremendous  a  movement  naturally  developed  its  literature 
of  propaganda  in  America  as  elsewhere.  In  the  main  this  was 
little  more  than  an  echo  of  the  old-world  debate,  and,  in  particular, 
of  the  controversy  between  Burke  and  Paine  which  deeply  stirred 
the  entire  English  reading-public.  Among  the  innumerable 
pamphlets,  four  works  may  be  regarded  as  representative:  Paine’s 
Rights  of  Man,  Barlow’s  Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders,  John  Adams’s 
Discourses  on  Davila,  and  John  Quincy  Adams’s  Publicola;  and  of 
these  we  need  here  concern  ourselves  only  with  The  Rights  of 
Man  and  Publicola,  which  clearly  reveal  the  divergent  political 
philosophies  of  the  two  parties.  The  chief  point  of  difference  is 
the  familiar  issue,  so  acrimoniously  dealt  with  during  the  debate 


THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 


325 


over  the  Constitution,  the  question  of  minority  rights  as  opposed 
to  the  majority  will.  Paine  had  made  wide  appeal  with  his  argu¬ 
ment  of  social  expediency  against  Burke’s  doctrine  of  pre-contract. 
His  celebrated  dictum,  “That  which  a  whole  nation  chuses  to  do, 
it  has  a  right  to  do,”  if  granted,  must  destroy  the  reasoning  not 
of  Burke  alone,  but  of  American  Federalism,  for  it  rested  on  an 
interpretation  of  sovereignty  that  was  vital  to  the  question.  To 
Paine  sovereignty  was  necessarily  inherent  in  the  present  majority 
will;  to  assume  that  it  rested  elsewhere,  whether  in  crown  or 
judiciary  or  past  generations,  was  to  deny  the  fundamental  tenet 
of  democracy.  There  can  be  no  trusteeship  superior  to  the  sover¬ 
eign  people,  he  asserted — no  constitution  beyond  their  rightful 
power  to  alter  or  destroy. 

It  was  against  this  doctrine  of  the  present  sovereignty  of  the 
majority  will  that  eleven  articles  signed  Publicola,  and  appearing 
in  the  Columbian  Centinel  of  Boston  from  June  8  to  July  27,  1791, 
were  directed.  They  were  from  the  pen  of  John  Quincy  Adams, 
then  in  his  early  twenties  and  lately  admitted  to  practice  at  the 
Boston  bar.  Written  with  considerable  skill,  they  were  at  once 
accepted  as  the  most  effective  reply  offered  to  Paine’s  argument; 
but  they  have  lost  their  appeal  today  and  seem  rather  slight  and 
tenuous  essays  in  Federalistic  legalism.  The  outstanding  note  is 
concern  for  minority  rights.  To  permit  the  majority  will  to  func¬ 
tion  unchecked  seemed  to  this  young  lawyer  to  open  wide  the 
door  to  tyranny.  It  is  justified  by  no  political  philosophy,  he 
argued,  certainly  not  by  the  doctrine  of  natural  rights.  If  all  men 
are  endowed  by  their  creator  with  certain  inalienable  rights,  it 
follows  that  such  rights  must  suffer  abridgment  from  no  power, 
whether  monarchical  or  democratic.  Power  may  override  those 
rights  temporarily,  but  power  and  rights  are  not  synonymous  terms. 
The  gist  of  Adams’s  argument  is  thus  set  down : 

This  principle,  that  a  whole  nation  has  a  right  to  do  whatever  it  pleases, 
cannot  in  any  sense  whatever  be  admitted  as  true.  The  eternal  and 
immutable  laws  of  justice  and  of  morality  are  paramount  to  all  human 
legislation.  The  violation  of  those  laws  is  certainly  within  the  power,  but 
it  is  not  among  the  rights  of  nations.  The  power  of  a  nation  is  the  collected 
power  of  all  the  individuals  which  compose  it.  .  .  .  If,  therefore,  a 
majority  .  .  .  are  bound  by  no  law  human  or  divine,  and  have  no  other 
rule  but  their  sovereign  will  and  pleasure  to  direct  them,  what  possible 
security  can  any  citizen  of  the  nation  have  for  the  protection  of  his  un¬ 
alienable  rights?  The  principles  of  liberty  must  still  be  the  sport  of  ar- 


326  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

bitrary  power,  and  the  hideous  form  of  despotism  must  lay  aside  the 
diadem  and  the  scepter,  only  to  assume  the  party-colored  garments  of 
democracy.3 

Concerning  the  repository  of  the  “eternal  and  immutable  laws 
of  justice  and  morality,”  which  are  paramount  to  all  human 
legislation,  Adams  is  as  vague  as  other  Federalists;  but  he  seems 
to  imply  that  it  is  the  body  of  English  Common  law,  and  that 
abstract  justice  is  somehow  interwoven  with  the  British  constitu¬ 
tion.  In  otherwords,  his  argument  conducts  straight  to  the  familiar 
doctrine  of  vox  justiciae,  vox  dei,  with  its  implied  sovereignty  of 
the  judiciary.  In  this,  with  other  thinkers  of  the  abstract  justice 
school,  Adams  was  upholding  the  principle  of  judicial  trusteeship 
in  opposition  to  the  democratic  principle  of  the  majority  will. 
The  distinction  reveals  exactly  the  different  positions  of  the  two 
parties:  the  democrats  accepted  the  principle  of  utilitarian  ex¬ 
pediency;  the  Federalists  espoused  the  doctrine  of  the  ethical 
absolute  as  the  final  law.  To  a  generation  still  strict  in  religious 
professions,  the  doctrine  of  the  ethical  absolute  made  strong  appeal; 
but  the  democrats  attacked  it  so  sharply  that  it  survived  only  by 
skillfully  metamorphosing  itself  into  judicial  sanctions. 

The  final  outcome  of  the  long  acrimonious  discussion  of  funda¬ 
mental  principles  was  a  curious  reversal  of  positions:  whereas  the 
democrats  were  charged  with  being  political  and  social  romantics, 
appealing  to  a  false  psychology  and  following  abstract  theory,  they 
were  in  fact  idealists  who  pointed  to  the  sordid  facts  of  economic 
and  social  reality,  in  justification  of  new  programs.  No  change 
could  make  things  worse.  The  Federalists,  on  the  other  hand, 
finding  the  appeal  to  realism  making  against  them,  and  fearful 
of  the  majority  that  was  discontented  with  the  status  quo,  took 
their  stand  upon  abstract  principle  that  was  cousin  german  to  a 
rigid  legalism.  It  was  a  significant  impasse  to  which  they  were 
brought  by  the  exigencies  of  the  political  struggle. 

3  The  Writings  of  John  Quincy  Adams,  edited  by  W.  C.  Ford,  Vol.  I,  pp.  70-71. 


CHAPTER  II 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 
The  French  Group 

The  change  which  came  over  political  thought  in  America  in 
consequence  of  the  rise  of  French  Jacobin  philosophy  is  not  in¬ 
adequately  revealed  in  the  writings  of  two  men,  quite  dissimilar 
in  antecedents  and  training,  but  alike  in  fundamental  purpose — 
Thomas  Paine  and  Thomas  Jefferson.  Both  were  speculative 
thinkers,  profoundly  in  sympathy  with  French  revolutionary 
ideals:  but  the  former  was  detached  from  local  patriotisms  and 
national  interests,  a  delegate  atjarge  in  the  cause  of  human  rights, 
concerned  with  spreading  the  gospel  of  freedom  in  all  lands;  the 
latter  remained  wholly  American,  and  while  a  keenly  interested 
spectator  of  the  French  upheaval,  he  was  primarily  concerned  to 
discover  principles  that  would  apply  to  native  conditions  and 
further  the  cause  of  American  democracy.  Paine  therefore  became 
the  popular  disseminator  of  the  philosophy  of  republicanism,  and 
Jefferson,  the  practical  statesman  embodying  it  in  political  pro¬ 
grams.  Warm  friends,  their  influence  became  closely  inter¬ 
woven  during  the  years  when  agrarian  democracy  was  gathering 
its  strength  to  strike  down  the  rule  of  Federalism. 

i 

TOM  PAINE 
Republican  Pamphleteer 

No  more  striking  figure  emerges  from  the  times  than  the  figure 
of  the  Thetford  Quaker.  English  in  birth  and  rearing,  in  middle 
life  Paine  came  to  embody  the  republican  spirit  of  the  American 
revolution;  and  that  spirit  he  made  it  his  after  business  to  carry 
overseas  and  spread  among  the  discontented  of  all  lands.  He  was 
the  first  modern  internationalist,  at  home  wherever  rights  were  to 
be  won  or  wrongs  corrected.  “My  country  is  the  world,”  he 
asserted  proudly,  “to  do  good,  my  religion.”  Throughout  his 
later  life  he  was  a  fearless  skirmisher  on  the  outposts  of  democracy 

327 


328 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

— another  “Free  born  John”  Lilburne,  seeking  to  complete  the 
great  work  begun  and  thwarted  in  an  earlier  century;  and  his 
career  remains  a  stirring  record  of  a  time  when  revolution  threat¬ 
ened  to  sweep  away  the  power  and  privilege  of  all  kings  and  aristoc¬ 
racies.  Naturally  his  zeal  cost  him  dear  in  reputation.  The 
passions  of  all  who  feared  the  loss  of  sinecures  gathered  about  his 
head,  and  he  became  the  victim  of  an  odium  theologicum  et  politicum, 
without  parallel  in  our  history.  The  Tories  hunted  him  in  packs, 
and  their  execration  and  vituperation  outran  all  decency.  In 
London  clubs  it  became  the  fashion  for  gentlemen  to  wear  TP 
nails  in  their  boot-heels  to  witness  how  they  trampled  on  his  base 
principles.  He  was  proscribed  and  banished,  and  his  books  burnt 
by  the  hangman.  He  was  regarded  as  worse  than  a  common  felon 
and  outlaw,  because  more  dangerous.  In  America  gentlemen 
echoed  the  common  detestation — to  be  a  Paine-hater  was  a  badge 
of  respectability.  “The  filthy  Tom  Paine,”  John  Adams  called 
him,  and  the  phrase  stuck  like  a  burr  to  his  reputation.  But 
“reason,  like  time,”  as  Paine  remarked  “will  make  its  own  way,” 
and  the  years  are  bringing  a  larger  measure  of  justice  to  him. 

Like  Hamilton,  Paine  was  an  alien,  but  endowed  with  a  heritage 
quite  unlike  that  of  the  brilliant  boy  from  the  West  Indies.  When 
he  landed  in  Philadelphia  in  the  second  week  in  December,  1774,1 
he  was  in  his  thirty-seventh  year,  and  had  seemingly  made  ship¬ 
wreck  of  his  life.  He  had  been  schooled  in  misfortune  and  was 
marked  as  a  social  inefficient.  A  broken  staymaker  and  tobacco¬ 
nist,  he  had  twice  been  removed  from  the  office  of  petty  exciseman 
for  what  today  would  be  called  unionizing  activity.  He  had 
separated  from  his  wife,  and  his  mean  and  petty  environment 
seemed  to  offer  no  hope  of  a  decent  living.  One  stroke  of  good 
fortune  had  come  to  him,  when  as  a  delegate  from  his  union  on 
some  business  with  Parliament,  he  made  the  acquaintance  of 
Franklin,  who  was  taken  with  “those  wonderful  eyes  of  his,”  and 
advised  America  as  a  likely  place  for  getting  on.  So  provided  with 
little  more  than  Franklin’s  letter  of  introduction,  he  set  sail  for 
new  worlds,  cherishing  the  unmilitant  plan  of  setting  up  in  Phila¬ 
delphia  a  seminary  of  polite  learning  for  young  ladies.  But  the 
times  proved  unpropitious  for  such  a  venture.  He  found  himself 
in  a  world  hesitating  fearfully  on  the  brink  of  revolution,  the  elec- 

1  For  the  date  of  his  arrival,  see  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Proceedings, 
Vol.  XLIII,  p.  246. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


329 


trie  atmosphere  of  which  he  found  strangely  congenial.  He  at  once 
threw  himself  whole-heartedly  into  the  colonial  dispute,  quickly 
seized  the  main  points,  mastered  the  arguments,  and  thirteen 
months  after  his  arrival  published  Common  Sense,  a  pamphlet  that 
was  to  spread  his  name  and  fame  throughout  America. 

The  amazing  influence  of  Common  Sense  on  a  public  opinion 
long  befogged  by  legal  quibble  flowed  from  its  direct  and  skillful 
appeal  to  material  interests.  For  the  first  time  in  a  tedious, 
inconsequential  debate,  it  was  openly  asserted  that  governmental 
policies  rest  on  economic  foundations;  that  the  question  of  Ameri¬ 
can  independence  was  only  a  question  of  expediency,  and  must 
be  determined  in  the  light  of  economic  advantage.  Government 
is  no  more  than  a  utility,  and  that  policy  which  was  most  likely 
to  secure  freedom  and  security  “with  the  least  expense  and  greatest 
benefit,”  must  be  preferred.  The  point  at  issue  before  the  Ameri¬ 
can  people,  therefore,  was  whether  a  more  useful  arrangement 
would  result  from  continuing  the  old  connection  with  England,  or 
from  setting  up  for  themselves;  and  it  must  be  decided,  not  in 
the  court  room  or  council  chambers,  but  in  the  countinghouse 
and  market  place,  in  the  field  and  shop,  v/herever  plain  Americans 
were  making  a  living.  Let  the  common  people  consult  their  own 
needs,  and  determine  the  case  without  regard  to  legal  or  constitu¬ 
tional  precedents.  It  was  a  simple  matter  to  be  judged  in  the 
light  of  common  sense  and  their  particular  interests. 

To  further  clear  thinking  on  this  fundamental  matter  Paine 
commented  on  the  economic  consequences  to  America  of  the 
English  connection.  Throughout  colonial  history,  he  asserted 
with  some  disregard  to  fact,  dependence  had  resulted  in  disad¬ 
vantage  to  America;  England  had  systematically  exploited  the 
colonies  and  hampered  development.  Whatever  prosperity  had 
been  won  heretofore,  had  been  won  in  spite  of  English  hostility 
and  interference;  the  peculiar  economic  position  of  the  colonies 
had  proved  their  best  reliance  in  the  past,  and  would  prove  still 
more  advantageous  in  the  future,  if  America  were  free  from  jealous, 
paternal  restrictions.  What  reason  was  there  to  expect  generous 
treatment  from  a  power  that  had  never  shown  generosity  in 
past  dealings?  How  skillful  was  the  appeal  to  colonial  self-interest 
is  revealed  in  such  passages  as  these: 

We  are  already  greater  than  the  King  wishes  us  to  be,  and  will  he  not- 
hereafter  endeavour  to  make  us  less?  To  bring  the  matter  to  one  point, 


330 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

Is  the  power  who  is  jealous  of  our  prosperity,  a  proper  power  to  govern 
us?  Whoever  says  No,  to  this  question,  is  an  Independent,  for  independ¬ 
ency  means  no  more  than  this,  whether  we  shall  make  our  own  laws,  or, 
whether  the  King,  the  greatest  enemy  this  continent  hath,  or  can  have, 
shall  tell  us  there  shall  be  no  laws  but  such  as  I  like. 

America  would  have  flourished  as  much,  and  probably  much  more,  had 
no  European  power  taken  any  notice  of  her.  The  commerce  by  which  she 
hath  enriched  herself  are  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  will  always  have  a 
market  while  eating  is  the  custom  of  Europe.  As  Europe  is  our  market  for 
trade  we  ought  to  form  no  partial  connection  with  any  part  of  it.  It  is  the 
true  interest  of  America  to  steer  clear  of  European  contentions,  which  she 
never  can  do  while  by  her  dependence  on  Britain  she  is  made  the  make¬ 
weight  in  the  scale  of  British  politics. 

Our  corn  will  fetch  its  price  in  any  market  in  Europe,  and  our  imported 
goods  must  be  paid  for  buy  them  where  we  will.  .  .  .  ’Tis  as  great  folly 
to  pay  a  Bunker-hill  price  for  law  as  for  land. 

But  Paine  well  knew  that  self-interest  may  be  so  clouded  by 
prejudice  as  not  to  see  the  way  its  nose  is  pointing.  Though  the 
colonial  talked  of  his  grievances,  he  remained  colonial  in  psychology, 
held  in  unconscious  subjection  to  English  traditions.  He  was  in 
the  clutch  of  outworn  loyalties — loyalty  to  the  crown  and  loyalty  to 
the  British  constitution;  and  to  this  difficult  problem  Paine  ad¬ 
dressed  himself  with  great  skill.  To  a  republican,  as  Paine  seems 
to  have  been  from  his  landing  in  America,  the  odium  which  George 
III  had  incurred  was  a  heaven-sent  opportunity.  In  order  to 
strike  at  the  monarchical  principle,  it  was  only  necessary  to  point 
out  that  the  folly  of  the  King  was  the  best  commentary  upon  the 
foolishness  of  hereditary  monarchy.  The  boldness  and  audacity 
of  Paine’s  attack  on  the  king-principle  must  have  added  greatly  to 
the  popularity  of  Common  Sense  along  the  frontier.  It  was  the 
first  clear,  far-carrying  appeal  for  republicanism  addressed  to 
American  ears.  How  successful  it  was,  how  ruthlessly  it  stripped 
away  the  divinity  that  doth  hedge  a  king,  laying  bare  the  stupidity 
of  the  king-cult,  is  suggested  by  the  remarkable  change  in  the 
American  attitude  towards  monarchy  that  a  few  months  brought 
about.  After  the  appearance  of  Common  Sense,  middle  and  lower 
class  Americans  shed  their  colonial  loyalties  like  a  last  year’s 
garment,  and  thenceforth  they  regarded  the  pretentions  of  kings 
as  little  better  than  flummery.  King  George’s  disgraced  exciseman 
had  his  revenge;  he  had  thrust  his  royal  master  out  of  the  colonial 
affection  and  destroyed  the  monarchical  principle  in  America. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


331 


A  more  difficult  task  remained,  that  of  instituting  “an  inquiry 
into  the  constitutional  errors  of  the  English  form  of  government,” 
in  order  to  prove  what  gains  would  result  if  America  took  herself 
out  of  the  English  system.  Here  Paine  faced,  single-handed,  a 
solid  phalanx  of  lawyers.  He  was  the  first  pamphleteer  to  ques¬ 
tion  the  excellence  of  a  constitution  that  was  proclaimed  by  Ameri¬ 
can  Tories  as  the  wonder  of  the  world  and  the  envy  of  other  nations. 
In  the  acrimonious  disputes  between  1765  and  1775,  this  was  the 
single  point  on  which  all  professed  to  agree.  A  vast  deal  of  lauda¬ 
tion  had  been  uttered;  innumerable  legal  pamphlets  had  been 
written;  and  no  colonial  had  had  the  temerity  to  question  the 
adequacy  of  the  British  constitution  to  colonial  needs.  And  now 
came  this  republican,  with  penetrating  comment  on  its  origin  and 
working,  to  disturb  the  common  complacency  by  pointing  out  how 
ill  fitted  it  was  to  answer  the- needs  of  America.  It  was  a  telling 
attack,  made  with  skill  and  shrewd  insight;  and  it  had  a  great 
part  in  arousing  a  bitter  antagonism  to  the  English  system  in  the 
minds  of  the  American  yeomanry. 

Paine  was  not  a  constitutional  historian,  but  he  had  a  keen  eye 
for  realities.  The  fundamental  fallacy  of  the  English  system,  he 
asserted,  lay  in  the  so-called  “mixt  aristocracy,”  which  was  pre¬ 
sumed  to  gather  the  wisdom  of  the  realm  in  council  with  the  king, 
but  which  was  no  more  than  a  convenient  arrangement  for  dividing 
the  spoils.  The  House  of  Commons  had  grown  out  of  the  struggles 
of  feudal  barons  against  the  king.  It  presumed  to  speak  for  the 
common  people,  but  the  rights  of  the  people  were  thus  recognized 
only  to  be  thwarted  by  the  old  tyrannies.  The  “Republican 
materials,  in  the  persons  of  the  Commons,  on  whose  virtue  depends 
the  freedom  of  England,”  were  held  in  check  by  the  “remains  of 
aristocratical  tyranny  in  the  person  of  the  Peers,”  and  further 
restrained  by  the  “remains  of  Monarchical  tyranny  in  the  person 
of  the  King.”  From  the  play  of  these  elements  arose  the  system  of 
checks  and  balances  which  placed  control  in  the  hands  of  landed 
property.  It  was  based  on  the  assumption  that  “the  King  is  not  to 
be  trusted  without  being  looked  after,”  and  that  “the  Commons, 
by  being  appointed  for  that  purpose,  are  either  wiser  or  more 
worthy  of  confidence  than  the  Crown.”  But  in  spite  of  the  sup¬ 
posed  balance  “the  provision  is  unequal  to  the  task,”  for  the  Crown, 
as  the  dispenser  of  places  and  pensions,  is  more  than  a  match  for 
Commons  in  the  game  of  politics. 


332  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

The  will  of  the  king  is  as  much  the  law  of  the  land  in  Britain  as  in  France, 
with  this  difference,  that  instead  of  proceeding  directly  from  his  mouth,  it  is 
handed  to  the  people  under  the  formidable  shape  of  an  act  of  parliament. 
For  the  fate  of  Charles  the  First  hath  only  made  kings  more  subtle — not 
more  just. 

This  was  but  the  beginning  of  a  long  assault  on  the  British  con¬ 
stitution  which  was  to  engage  him  much  in  after  life.  Common 
Sense  was  a  pronouncement  of  the  new  philosophy  of  republicanism 
that  was  taking  firm  hold  of  the  American  mind,  and  which  the 
French  Revolution  was  to  spread  so  widely.  It  was  a  notable 
contribution,  of  which  Paine  to  the  end  of  his  life  was  justly  proud. 

As  he  came  to  America  almost  casually,  with  no  conscious 
revolutionary  intent,  so  in  the  critical  year  1787  he  returned  to 
Europe  with  the  peaceful  intention  of  perfecting  an  iron  bridge 
on  which  he  was  engaged.  True  to  his  Quaker  breeding  he  was 
more  interested  in  the  arts  of  peace  than  of  war,  but  again  circum¬ 
stance  was  too  much  for  him.  Before  he  had  completed  his  bridge, 
delegates  from  France  came  to  invite  him  to  a  seat  in  the  National 
Assembly.  A  new  day  was  rising  there;  the  constitution  of  a 
freer  order  was  being  constructed,  and  so  competent  a  workman 
could  not  be  spared.  In  the  thick  of  that  eager  world  of  constitu¬ 
tion-making,  Paine  finally  clarified  his  political  philosophy  and 
gave  it  wide  currency.  He  became  the  pamphleteer  of  revolution 
to  the  English-speaking  world,  to  Philadelphia  and  New  York 
equally  with  London.  Yet  he  was  never  an  extremist;  he  was  a 
Girondist  rather  than  a  Jacobin,  and  when  the  Girondists  were 
overthrown  and  a  dictatorship  set  up,  he  remained  a  constitutional¬ 
ist.  By  the  Jacobin  radicals  he  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  reaction¬ 
ary  from  his  willingness  to  retain  monarchy  in  France;  but  Paine 
was  a  practical  Englishman  with  a  shrewd  judgment  of  what  was 
politically  possible,  and  he  refused  to  outrun  reasonable  expecta¬ 
tions  of  accomplishment. 

It  was  the  simplicity  and  clarity  of  his  political  philosophy  that 
made  its  appeal  so  widely  effective.  His  thinking  turned  on  the 
two  fundamental  questions,  the  source  of  government  and  the 
purpose  for  which  it  is  instituted  among  men;  and  the  major 
premise  on  which  he  reared  his  logic  was  the  thesis  that  sovereignty 
inheres  in  the  majority  will.  At  the  basis  of  his  philosophy  was 
the  natural-rights  theory,  but  given  a  fresh  significance  and  vitality 
by  the  assertion  of  the  doctrine  of  continuous  reaffirmation  of 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


333 


the  social  compact.  Instead  of  deriving  the  sovereign  state  from 
a  fictitious  compact,  presumably  entered  into  in  a  remote  past, 
he  derived  it — as  Roger  Williams  had  done  a  century  and  half 
before — from  a  continuous  compact  reaffirmed  by  each  generation. 
With  the  birth  of  each  individual  appear  fresh  rights  which  no 
pre-contract  can  justly  circumscribe  or  nullify;  ancestral  arrange¬ 
ments  are  valid  only  to  the  extent  that  they  are  acceptable  to  the 
living.  Hence  it  follows,  first,  that  the  general  body  of  the  people 
may  at  any  time  remake  the  fundamental  law,  and  bring  it  into 
accord  with  present  desire;  and  second,  that  there  can  be  no  law 
superior  to  this  popular  will  expressed  through  the  majority.  His 
most  celebrated  dictum — “That  which  a  nation  chuses  to  do  it 
has  a  right  to  do” — a  dictum  that  aroused  a  bitterer  hostility 
than  any  other  of  his  pronouncements — was  the  logical  expression 
of  his  republicanism  that  differentiated  between  the  sovereign 
people  and  their  agency,  the  government;  and  this  in  turn  he 
justified  by  a  celebrated  saying  out  of  Swift,  “Government  is  a 
plain  thing,  and  fitted  to  the  capacity  of  many  heads.”  Like 
Jefferson,  he  would  not  have  government  kept  from  the  people, 
the  agent  domineer  over  the  principal. 

The  purpose  of  government  Paine  discovered  in  the  Benthamite 
principle  of  expediency.  If  a  diffused  well-being  results  from  the 
policies  of  government,  such  government  is  justified;  but  if  the  tax- 
levies  are  wasted  in  unsocial  ways,  if  unjust  impositions  are  levied, 
if  exploitation  or  tyranny  results,  such  government  is  not  justified. 
The  agent  has  cheated  the  principal,  and  must  be  called  to 
account.  The  final  test  of  every  government  Paine  found  in  its 
concern  for  the  “ res  publica,  the  public  affairs,  or  the  public  good”; 
any  government  that  “does  not  make  the  res  publica  its  whole  and 
sole  object,  is  not  a  good  government.”  In  its  most  obvious  phase, 
concern  for  the  res  publica  means  concern  for  the  national  economy, 
and  this  in  turn  conditions  the  taxes  that  shall  be  levied  and  the 
ends  for  which  they  shall  be  spent — whether  upon  the  arts  of  peace 
or  war.  A  beneficent  government  has  no  need  of  standing  armies 
and  navies,  or  an  inquisitorial  police;  it  is  established  in  the  hearts 
of  the  people  and  rests  securely  on  the  common  good  will.  It  is  the 
injustice  of  government  that  creates  armies  to  defend  the  earnings 
of  injustice.  But  every  wise  government  will  respect  its  limita¬ 
tions.  As  a  child  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Paine  hated  the 
leviathan  state  as  a  monster  created  by  a  minority  to  serve  the 


334  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

ends  of  tyranny.  The  political  state  he  accepted  as  a  present 
necessity,  but  he  would  not  have  its  prestige  magnified  and  the 
temptation  to  tyranny  increased  by  the  cult  of  nationalism.  “  Gov¬ 
ernment  is  no  farther  necessary,”  he  believed,  “than  to  supply  the 
few  cases  to  which  society  and  civilization  are  not  conveniently 
competent.”  At  best  it  is  an  artificial  thing. 

Formal  government  makes  but  a  small  part  of  civilized  life;  and  when 
even  the  best  that  human  wisdom  can  devise  is  established,  it  is  a  thing 
more  in  name  and  idea  than  in  fact.  .  .  .  The  more  perfect  civilization  is, 
the  less  occasion  has  it  for  government,  because  the  more  does  it  regulate 
its  own  affairs,  and  govern  itself.  ...  All  the  great  laws  of  society  are 
laws  of  nature.2 

The  maturest  elaboration  of  Paine’s  political  philosophy  is  found 
in  The  Rights  of  Man.  This  extraordinary  work,  the  most  influen¬ 
tial  English  contribution  to  the  revolutionary  movement,  was  an 
examination  of  the  English  constitution  in  the  light  of  what  Paine 
held  were  the  true  source  and  ends  of  government.  It  is  a  brilliant 
reply  to  Burke,  who  rested  his  interpretation  of  the  English  con¬ 
stitution  on  the  legal  ground  of  the  common  law  of  contract. 
Following  the  Revolution  of  1688,  Burke  had  argued,  the  English 
people  through  their  legal  representatives,  entered  into  a  solemn 
contract,  binding  “themselves,  their  heirs,  and  posterities  for¬ 
ever,”  to  certain  express  terms;  and  neither  in  law  nor  in  equity 
were  they,  of  whatever  generation,  free  to  change  those  terms 
except  by  the  consent  of  both  parties  to  the  contract.  This  was 
an  elaboration  of  the  theory  of  government  tacitly  held  by  the 
Old  Whigs,  which  derived  government  from  a  perpetual  civil 
contract  as  opposed  to  the  radical  doctrine  of  a  revocable  social 
contract;  and  in  attacking  it  Paine  allied  himself  with  such  thinkers 
as  Price,  Priestley,  Franklin  and  Rousseau.3  He  pointed  out  the 
absurdity  of  carrying  over  the  law  of  private  property  into  the 
high  realm  of  political  principle — to  seek  to  impose  the  dead  past 
upon  the  living  sovereignty.  If  sovereignty  inhered  in  the  English 
people  in  1688,  it  must  inhere  in  the  English  people  in  1793,  unless 
it  had  been  violently  wrested  from  them;  no  parchment  terms  of 
another  age  can  bind  that  sovereignty  other  than  voluntarily. 
Over  against  Burke’s  theory  of  a  single,  static  contract,  Paine  set 

2  Rights  of  Man,  Part  II,  pp.  407,  408. 

3  For  an  excellent  discussion  of  this,  see  C.  M.  Walsh,  The  Political  Science  of 
John  Adams,  pp.  203-226. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


335 


the  doctrine  of  the  reaffirmation  of  natural  rights.  Any  genera¬ 
tion — as  the  generation  of  1688 — is  competent  to  deal  with  its 
affairs  as  it  sees  fit,  but  it  cannot  barter  away  the  rights  of  those 
unborn;  such  a  contract  on  the  face  of  it  is  null  and  void. 

Every  age  and  generation  must  be  free  to  act  for  itself  in  all  cases  as 
the  ages  and  generations  which  preceded  it.  The  vanity  and  presumption 
of  governing  beyond  the  grave  is  the  most  ridiculous  and  insolent  of  all 
tyrannies.  .  .  .  Every  generation  is,  and  must  be,  competent  to  all  the 
purposes  which  its  occasions  require.  It  is  the  living,  and  not  the  dead, 
that  are  to  be  accommodated.4 

Burke’s  defense  fares  even  worse  when  the  argument  is  examined 
in  the  light  of  expediency.  Illogical  as  the  English  system  must 
appear  to  the  political  philosopher,  can  it  plead  the  justification 
that  it  works;  that  it  does  well  the  things  it  is  paid  to  do;  that  it 
makes  the  res  publica  its  main'  concern?  The  reply  to  such  ques¬ 
tions,  Paine  believed,  should  be  sought  in  the  condition  of  the 
national  economy;  more  particularly  by  an  examination  of  the 
account-books  of  the  exchequer.  The  English  people  paid  annually 
seventeen  millions  sterling  for  the  maintenance  of  government, 
and  what  did  they  get  in  return?  Nine  millions  of  the  total  went 
to  pay  interest  on  old  wars,  which  in  the  budget  was  known  as  the 
funded  debt;  of  the  remaining  eight  millions  the  larger  part  was 
spent  in  new  wars  and  sinecure  pensions;  whereas  the  real  needs 
of  England — the  true  res  publica — were  shamelessly  neglected. 
The  English  people  got  little  for  their  money  except  new  debts  to 
justify  new  taxes.  The  poor  were  even  taxed  for  the  benefit  of  the 
great.  Thus  my  Lord  Onslow,  who  was  particularly  zealous  in 
the  business  of  proscribing  Paine  as  “the  common  enemy  of  us 
all,”  drew  four  thousand  pounds  from  the  royal  chest  in  sinecures, 
which  made  him  “the  principal  pauper  of  the  neighbourhood,  and 
occasioning  a  greater  expense  than  the  poor,  the  aged,  and  the 
infirm,  for  ten  miles  around.”  5  Government  on  the  hereditary 
principle  of  Burke  did  not  appear  to  advantage  in  the  light  of  such 
facts. 

The  injustice  of  aristocratic  government,  Paine  believed,  was 
fast  bringing  it  to  its  “rotting  time”  in  England.  “The  opinions 
of  men  with  respect  to  government  are  changing  fast  in  all  coun¬ 
tries;  the  enormous  expense  of  governments  has  provoked  the 

4  The  Rights  of  Man,  Part  I,  p.  278. 

6  “Letter  to  Lord  Onslow,”  in  Works,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  36. 


336 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

people  to  think,  by  making  them  feel.”  Englishmen  must  soon 
throw  aside  the  outworn  monarchical  system  and  set  up  a  republic. 
Economics  was  on  the  side  of  revolution.  The  great  work  of 
revising  fundamental  laws  was  the  pressing  business  of  the  time. 
If  this  could  be  done  peacefully,  by  means  of  a  national  conven¬ 
tion,  it  were  well;  if  not,  it  would  come  by  means  of  an  uprising  of 
the  people.  It  was  no  lawyer’s  business  to  be  determined  by  the 
law  of  private  property,  but  a  practical  matter  of  determining  the 
real  will  of  the  nation  and  putting  it  into  execution.  The  judgment 
of  the  people  must  be  recorded,  and  the  judgment  of  the  people 
could  be  had  only  through  an  adequate  system  of  representation 
based  on  free  publicity.  “I  do  not  believe  that  the  people  of  Eng¬ 
land  have  ever  been  fairly  and  candidly  dealt  by,”  Paine  declared. 
Henceforth  they  must  be  taken  into  full  confidence.  There  must 
be  no  more  arcana  imperii — “Nations  can  have  no  secrets;  and  the 
secrets  of  courts,  like  those  of  individuals,  are  always  their  defects.”6 

One  of  the  great  advantages  of  the  American  Revolution  has  been, 
that  it  has  led  to  a  discovery  of  the  principles,  and  laid  open  the  imposi¬ 
tion  of  governments.  All  the  revolutions  till  then  had  worked  within  the 
atmosphere  of  a  court,  and  never  on  the  grand  floor  of  a  nation.  The 
parties  were  always  of  the  class  of  courtiers.  ...  In  all  cases  they  took 
care  to  represent  government  as  a  thing  made  up  of  mysteries,  which 
only  themselves  understood;  and  they  hid  from  the  understanding  of 
the  nation  the  only  thing  that  was  beneficial  to  know,  namely,  That 
government  is  nothing  more  than  a  national  association  acting  on  the  principles 
of  a  society.’’ 

For  the  follies  of  government  the  people  pay  the  bill — it  was  this 
elementary  lesson  in  public  economics  that  Paine  sought  to  impress 
upon  the  popular  mind;  and  they  would  still  be  cheated  and 
plundered  by  gentlemen  who  prospered  in  cozening,  until  they  took 
matters  into  their  own  hands.  He  had  no  fear  of  popular  govern¬ 
ment.  He  believed  in  the  essential  fairness  of  men  and  their 
capacity  to  deal  wisely  with  the  problems  of  society  if  the  necessary 
information  were  set  before  them.  “As  far  as  my  experience  in 
public  life  extends,  I  have  ever  observed  that  the  great  mass  of 
people  are  always  just,  both  in  their  intentions  and  their  object; 
but  the  true  method  of  attaining  such  purpose  does  not  always 
appear  at  once,”  8  he  argued  before  the  French  Assembly;  and  the 

6  Rights  of  Man,  Part  II,  p.  428. 

7  Ibid.,  pp.  410-411. 

8  Conway,  Life  of  Paine,  Vol.  II,  p.  4. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


337 


words  express  his  settled  conviction.  Those  who  fear  the  people 
usually  have  very  good  reasons.  Heretofore  politics  had  been 
jealously  guarded  from  free  discussion;  but  now  that  the  common 
people  were  coming  to  understand  that  government  is  justified 
only  by  its  measure  of  service,  the  beginning  of  a  new  age  was  at 
hand. 

The  ripest  product  of  Paine’s  speculations  on  the  relation  of 
government  to  the  individual,  is  Agrarian  Justice,  a  work  too  little 
known  to  modern  readers.  It  is  a  slender  tract,  written  in  the 
winter  of  1795-96,  although  not  published  till  a  year  later;  and  it 
was  an  answer  to  a  sermon  by  Watson,  Bishop  of  LlandafF,9  entitled 
The  Wisdom  and  Goodness  of  God  in  having  made  both  Rich  and  Poor. 
In  this  remarkable  essay,  Paine  advanced  from  political  to  social 
theory,  pushing  his  thought  into  the  unexplored  realm  of  economic 
justice.  The  prime  impulse  of  his  speculation  is  found  in  the  con¬ 
trast  between  the  augmenting  poverty  of  Europe  and  the  ideal  of 
equality;  a  contrast  which  in  France  had  lately  produced  a  prole¬ 
tarian  revolt  under  Babeuf,  and  which  in  England  was  harshly 
aggravated  by  the  brutal  inclosure  movement  of  the  last  forty 
years  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  question  which  he  considers 
lies  at  the  heart  of  our  social  problem,  namely,  whether  civilization 
is  competent  to  cure  the  disease  of  poverty  which  everywhere  it 
disseminates? 

The  question  emerged  naturally  from  the  development  of 
Paine’s  thinking.  It  was  implied  in  his  major  principle  of  the 
res  publica,  and  the  solution  must  lie  in  the  problem  of  the  relation 
of  government  to  social  well-being.  But  in  prescribing  means  to 
end,  he  parted  company  from  Babeuf.10  The  latter  was  a  Com¬ 
munist  who  approached  the  problem  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
proletarian  who  had  been  disappointed  of  the  promised  equality; 
whereas  Paine,  like  Jefferson,  was  essentially  a  Physiocratic  agra¬ 
rian.  His  long  residence  in  America  had  confirmed  him  in  the 
belief  that  land  monopoly  was  the  root  of  economic  inequality; 
and  his  observations  of  the  evictions  then  going  on  in  England, 
uprooting  the  peasants  and  sending  them  to  industrial  centers  to 
become  wage-workers,  strengthened  his  conviction.  The  land 
problem  must  be  solved  if  civilization  were  to  be  worth  its  cost, 

9  Author  of  An  Apology  for  the  Bible  (a  reply  to  Paine’s  Age  of  Reason),  which  was 
distributed  among  Harvard  undergraduates.  See  above,  page  324. 

10  For  the  program  of  Babeuf,  see  R.  W.  Postgate,  Revolution  from  1789  to 
1906,  pp.  24,  54-60. 


338 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


and  the  technique  of  the  solution,  he  believed,  must  be  worked  out 
by  the  state.  With  his  usual  directness  Paine  went  to  the  heart 
of  the  problem: 

The  first  principle  of  civilization  ought  to  have  been,  and  ought  still 
to  be,  that  the  condition  of  every  person  born  into  the  world,  after  a 
state  of  civilization  commences,  ought  not  to  be  worse  than  if  he  had 
been  born  before  that  period.  But  the  fact  is,  that  the  condition  of  mil¬ 
lions,  in  every  country  in  Europe,  is  far  worse  than  if  they  had  been  born 
before  civilization  began,  or  had  been  born  among  the  Indians  of  North- 
America  at  the  present  day.11 

It  is  not  charity  but  a  right,  not  bounty  but  justice,  that  I  am  pleading 
for.  The  present  state  of  civilization  is  as  odious  as  it  is  unjust.  It  is 
absolutely  the  opposite  of  what  it  should  be.12.  .  .  .  The  contrast  of 
affluence  and  wretchedness  ...  is  like  dead  and  living  bodies  chained 
together.13 

It  is  the  practice  of  what  has  unjustly  obtained  the  name  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  ...  to  make  some  provision  for  persons  becoming  poor  and  wretched 
only  at  the  time  they  become  so.  Would  it  not,  even  as  a  matter  of 
economy,  be  far  better  to  adopt  means  to  prevent  their  becoming  poor?  14 

The  crux  of  the  problem,  Paine  proceeds  to  point  out,  lies  in  the 
principle  of  private  property;  whether  property  rights  are  sacredly 
individual — as  Locke  had  asserted — or  are  limited  by  social  needs. 
In  reply  to  this  searching  question  Paine  laid  down  the  principle 
of  social  values,  a  theory  curiously  modern  and  profoundly  sug¬ 
gestive,  which  makes  Agrarian  Justice  read  like  a  chapter  out  of 
Progress  and  Poverty.  The  principle  is  so  broad,  as  Paine  states  it, 
that  it  applies  equally  to  a  capitalistic  and  an  agrarian  order. 

Personal  property  is  the  effect  of  society;  and  it  is  as  impossible  for  an 
individual  to  acquire  personal  property  without  the  aid  of  society,  as  it  is 
for  him  to  make  land  originally.  .  .  .  All  accumulation,  therefore,  of 
personal  property,  beyond  what  a  man’s  own  hands  produce,  is  derived 
to  him  by  living  in  society;  and  he  owes  on  every  principle  of  justice,  of 
gratitude,  and  of  civilization,  a  part  of  that  accumulation  back  again  to 
society  from  whence  the  whole  came  ...  if  we  examine  the  case  minutely 
it  will  be  found  that  the  accumulation  of  personal  property  is,  in  many 
instances,  the  effect  of  paying  too  little  for  the  labor  that  produced  it;  and 
the  consequence  of  which  is,  that  the  working  hand  perishes  in  old  age, 
and  the  employer  abounds  in  affluence.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible  to 
proportion  exactly  the  price  of  labor  to  the  profits  it  produces;  and  it 

11  Works,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  329. 

12  This  and  the  preceding  sentence  were  expunged  from  all  early  editions  by  the 
censor. 

13  Ibid..,  p.  337.  14  Ibid.,  p.  338. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


339 


will  also  be  said,  as  an  apology  for  the  injustice,  that  were  a  workman  to 
receive  an  increase  of  wages  daily  he  would  not  save  it  against  old  age, 
nor  be  much  better  for  it  in  the  interim.  Make,  then,  society  the  treasurer 
to  guard  it  for  him  in  a  common  fund;  for  it  is  no  reason,  that  because  he 
might  not  make  a  good  use  of  it  for  himself,  another  should  take  it.16 

It  is  the  value  of  the  improvement  only,  and  not  of  the  earth  itself,  that 
is  individual  property.  Every  proprietor,  therefore,  of  cultivated  land, 
owes  to  the  community  a  ground-rent  .  .  .  for  the  land  which  he  holds; 
and  it  is  from  this  ground-rent  that  the  fund  proposed  in  this  plan  is  to 
issue.16 

Having  thus  pointed  out  an  equitable  source  of  social  income — 
the  returning  to  society  what  society  has  created — Paine  proposed 
to  deal  with  the  problem  of  poverty  by  means  of  a  ten  per  cent 
inheritance  tax  to  provide  a  fund  for  the  endowment  of  the  young 
and  the  pensioning  of  the  old.  It  was  an  early  form  of  the  state 
insurance  idea.  In  his  own  thinking  Paine  doubtless  went  much 
farther  than  this,  but  the  practical  difficulty  of  separating  the 
social  moiety  from  the  private  right  inclined  him  to  favor  an 
inheritance  tax  as  the  simplest  and  best  plan;  that  it  would  lead 
to  greater  things  as  the  social  intelligence  quickened,  he  very  likely 
believed.  To  bring  men  to  realize  that  society  is  responsible  for 
poverty,  and  that  its  total  eradication  must  be  regarded  as  the 
first  object  of  civilization,  was  his  prime  purpose.  He  was  seeking 
to  awaken  the  social  conscience  of  his  generation — a  generation 
sorely  in  need  of  idealism  to  offset  its  love  of  profits.  Agrarian 
Justice  was  a  contribution  to  the  slowly  developing  humanitarian 
sentiment,  and  it  made  appeal  to  minds  already  aroused  by  the 
revolutionary  movement.  The  republican  clubs  that  were  spring¬ 
ing  up  in  England  and  America  reflected  the  new  social  thought, 
and  the  most  radical  became  the  most  humanitarian.  As  early 
as  1791,  in  an  address  signed  by  Horne  Tooke,  one  of  Paine’s 
English  lieutenants,  it  was  declared: 

We  are  oppressed  with  a  heavy  national  debt,  a  burthen  of  taxes,  an 
expensive  administration  of  government,  beyond  those  of  any  people  in  the 
world.  We  have  also  a  very  numerous  poor;  and  we  hold  that  the  moral 
obligation  of  providing  for  old  age,  helpless  infancy,  and  poverty,  is  far 
superior  to  that  of  supplying  the  invented  wants  of  courtly  extravagance, 
ambition,  and  intrigue.17 

16  Ibid.,  p.  340.  16  Ibid.,  p.  329. 

17  Address  and  Declaration  of  the  Friends  of  Universal  Peace  and  Liberty,  quoted  in 
Conway,  Life  of  Paine,  Vol.  I,  p.  316. 


340 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


The  more  critically  one  follows  the  thought  of  Paine  the  more 
evident  it  becomes  that  the  master  passion  of  his  later  years  was 
concern  for  a  new  social  economy.  The  well-being  of  society 
became  an  engrossing  interest  with  him;  and  his  zeal  for  political 
revolution  was  predicated  on  the  belief  that  popular  control  of 
the  political  state  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  a  juster  social 
economy.  Nothing  was  to  be  expected  from  the  old  aristocratic 
order.  His  main  attack,  therefore,  was  directed  against  the 
monarchical  system,  but  now  and  then  he  paused  to  level  a  thrust 
at  the  rising  system  of  capitalism.  If  he  hated  King  George  and 
the  Tories,  he  hated  the  younger  Pitt  and  the  imperialists  even 
more.  Over  against  Agrarian  Justice  should  be  set  his  pamphlet 
entitled  The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  English  System  of  Finance , 
written  in  1796,  a  skillful  attack  upon  the  new  funding  system. 
Paine  could  not  foresee,  of  course,  the  enormous  expansion  of  credit 
that  was  to  accompany  the  industrial  revolution,  but  in  his  com¬ 
mentary  on  the  quantitative  theory  of  money,  and  the  social  con¬ 
sequences  of  inflation,  he  unconsciously  foretold  later  conditions. 
War  he  regarded  as  the  great  waster,  the  fruitful  mother  of  social 
misery.  With  his  Quaker  training  he  was  dedicated  to  pacifism, 
and  he  spent  his  life  warring  against  war,  and  disease,  and  poverty, 
and  injustice,  and  ignorance,  and  unreason;  but  no  other  war 
would  he  sanction.  For  those  futile  wars  bred  of  the  ambitions 
of  courts  and  monarchs,  and  which  for  all  their  cost  in  blood  and 
money  served  no  social  purpose,  he  would  substitute  arbitration. 
“War  is  the  Pharo-table  of  governments,  and  nations  the  dupes 
of  the  game,”  he  declared  18 — whereas  arbitration  is  an  appeal 
to  reason  which  alone  should  adjudicate  and  determine  between 
nations. 

It  would  be  idle  to  attempt  to  trace  to  their  sources  the  major 
ideas  of  his  philosophy.  Probably  Paine  did  not  know  where  he 
got  them.  He  was  not  a  student  like  John  Adams,  familiar  with 
all  the  political  philosophers;  rather  he  was  an  epitome  of  a  world 
in  revolution.  He  absorbed  ideas  like  a  sponge.  He  was  so  wholly 
a  child  of  his  age  that  the  intellectual  processes  of  the  age  were  no 
other  than  his  own.  But  he  was  very  much  more  than  an  echo; 
he  possessed  that  rarest  of  gifts,  an  original  mind.  He  looked  at 
the  world  through  no  eyes  than  his  own.  There  is  a  curious  remark 
in  an  early  pamphlet  which  admirably  expresses  his  method: 

18  Rights  of  Man,  Part  II,  p.  413. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


341 


“When  precedents  fail  to  assist  us,  we  must  return  to  the  first 
principles  of  things  for  information,  and  think,  as  if  we  were  the 
first  men  that  thought.”  19  It  was  his  remarkable  ability  to  think 
from  first  principles  that  gave  such  freshness  and  vigor  to  his  pen. 
He  drew  largely  from  French  thought,  but  at  bottom  he  remained 
English.  If  he  was  Gallic  in  his  psychology  of  human  nature  and 
his  passionate  humanitarianism,  he  was  English  in  his  practical 
political  sense  and  insistence  on  the  economic  sources  of  political 
action.  In  his  political  theory  he  was  curiously  like  Roger  Williams. 
A  thoroughgoing  idealist  in  aim,  generous  and  unsparing  in 
service  to  humanity,  he  was  a  confirmed  realist  in  the  handling 
of  facts.  He  refused  to  be  duped  by  imposing  appearances  or 
great  reputations,  but  spoke  out  unpleasant  truths  which  gentle¬ 
men  wished  to  keep  hidden.  Clear  and  direct  in  expression,  he 
seasoned  his  writings  with  homely  figures  and  a  frequent  audacity 
of  phrase  that  made  wide  appeal.  He  was  probably  the  greatest 
pamphleteer  that  the  English  race  has  produced-  and  one  of  its 
great  idealists. 

During  his  residence  abroad  Paine  habitually  thought  and  spoke 
of  himself  as  an  American.  He  conceived  it  to  be  his  mission  to 
disseminate  throughout  Europe  the  beneficent  principles  of  the 
American  Revolution;  yet  nowhere  was  he  hated  more  virulently 
than  in  America.  To  the  animosity  which  his  political  principles 
excited  among  Federalists  was  added  the  detestation  of  the  ortho¬ 
dox  for  the  deism  of  the  Age  of  Reason.  The  ministers  outdid  the 
politicians  in  virulent  attack  upon  his  reputation,  until  the  generous 
Quaker,  the  friend  of  humanity  and  citizen  of  the  world,  was 
shrunk  and  distorted  into  “the  infidel  Tom  Paine.”  It  was  a 
strange  reward  for  a  life  spent  in  the  service  of  mankind.  Like  all 
idealists  he  made  the  mistake  of  underestimating  the  defensive 
strength  of  vested  interests,  and  their  skill  in  arousing  the  mob 
prejudice.  His  thousands  of  followers  among  the  disfranchised 
poor  could  not  protect  his  reputation  against  the  attacks  of  the 
rich  and  powerful.  Although  reason  may  “make  its  own  way,” 
it  makes  its  way  with  wearisome  slowness  and  at  unreasonable 
cost.  How  tremendous  were  the  obstacles  that  liberalism  con¬ 
fronted  in  post-revolutionary  America  is  revealed  with  sufficient 
clearness  in  the  odium  visited  upon  our  great  republican  pam¬ 
phleteer. 


19  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  155. 


342 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


ii 

THOMAS  JEFFERSON 

Agrarian  Democrat 

The  years  following  the  great  defeat  were  disastrous  to  the  party 
of  agrarian  democracy.  Under  the  brilliant  leadership  of  Hamilton 
the  Federalists  went  forward  confidently,  gaining  daily  a  firmer 
grip  on  the  machinery  of  government,  and  establishing  their 
principles  in  far-reaching  legislative  enactments.  Their  appeal  to 
the  wealthy  classes,  to  those  who  made  themselves  audible  above 
the  clamor,  was  electrical.  Hamilton  was  the  hero  of  the  hour, 
and  the  effusive  approval  that  augmented  with  every  added 
profit  to  the  money  brokers,  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  country 
was  enthusiastically  behind  the  Federalist  policy.  To  what 
despondency  the  democrats  were  reduced  is  revealed  in  Maclay’s 
Journal,  with  its  caustic  comment  on  political  measures  and 
motives.  But  the  tide  was  already  at  the  turn.  The  ideas  let 
loose  by  the  French  Revolution  were  running  swiftly  through 
America,  awakening  a  militant  spirit  in  the  democracy.  Antagon¬ 
ism  to  the  aristocratic  arrogance  of  Federalism,  and  disgust  at  its 
coercive  measures,  were  mounting  fast.  If  that  inchoate  dis¬ 
content  were  organized  and  directed  by  a  skillful  leader,  it  might 
prove  strong  enough  to  thrust  the  Hamiltonian  party  from  power. 
To  that  work  Thomas  Jefferson  devoted  himself  with  immense 
tact  and  untiring  patience.  A  master  of  political  strategy,  he 
spun  his  webs  far  and  wide,  quietly  awaiting  the  time  when  the 
bumbling  Federalist  bees  should  range  too  carelessly  in  search 
of  their  honey.  Accepted  at  once  as  the  leader  of  agrarian  America, 
he  was  to  prove  in  the  course  of  a  long  life  the  most  original  and 
native  of  the  political  leaders  of  the  time. 

Despite  the  mass  of  comment  that  has  gathered  about  Jefferson, 
the  full  reach  and  significance  of  his  political  philosophy  remains 
too  little  understood.  Uncritical  praise  and  censure  have  obscured 
or  distorted  his  purpose,  and  allied  his  principles  with  narrow  and 
temporary  ends.  Detraction  will  not  let  him  alone.  The  hostility 
of  his  enemies,  as  a  recent  biographer  has  remarked,  has  frequently 
taken  “  the  peculiar  form  of  editing  his  works  or  writing  his  life.”  20 
For  this  distortion  there  is,  perhaps,  more  than  usual  excuse. 
Certainly  Jefferson  is  the  most  elusive  of  our  great  political  leaders. 

20  Francis  W.  Hirst,  Life  and  Letters  of  Thomas  Jeferson,  p.  266. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


343 


Apparently  inconsistent,  changing  his  program  with  the  chang¬ 
ing  times,  he  seemed  to  his  enemies  devoid  of  principle,  a  shallow 
demagogue  who  incited  the  mob  in  order  to  dupe  the  people. 
One  of  the  most  bitterly  hated  and  greatly  loved  men  in  the  day 
when  love  and  hate  were  intense,  he  was  the  spokesman  of  the  new 
order  at  a  time  of  transition  from  a  dependent  monarchical  state, 
to  an  independent  republican  state.  Back  of  the  figure  of  Jefferson, 
with  his  aristocratic  head  set  on  a  plebeian  frame,  was  the  philos¬ 
ophy  of  a  new  age  and  a  new  people — an  age  and  a  people  not  yet 
come  to  the  consistency  of  maturity,  but  feeling  a  way  through 
experiment  to  solid  achievement.  Far  more  completely  than  any 
other  American  of  his  generation  he  embodied  the  idealisms  of  the 
great  revolution — its  faith  in  human  nature,  its  economic  individ¬ 
ualism,  its  conviction  that  here  in  America,  through  the  instru¬ 
mentality  of  political  democracy,  the  lot  of  the  common  man 
should  somehow  be  made  better. 

From  the  distinguished  group  of  contemporary  political  thinkers 
Jefferson  emerges  as  the  preeminent  intellectual,  widely  read, 
familiar  with  ideas,  at  home  in  the  field  of  speculation,  a  critical 
observer  of  men  and  manners.  All  his  life  he  was  a  student,  and 
his  devotion  to  his  books,  running  often  to  fifteen  hours  a  day, 
recalls  the  heroic  zeal  of  Puritan  scholars.  He  was  trained  in  the 
law,  but  he  was  too  much  the  intellectual,  too  curious  about  all 
sorts  of  things,  to  remain  a  lawyer.  For  such  a  man  the  appeal  of 
political  speculation  was  irresistible,  and  early  in  life  he  began  a 
wide  reading  in  the  political  classics  that  far  outweighed  Coke  and 
Blackstone  in  creative  influence  on  his  mind.  He  was  equally  at 
home  with  the  English  liberals  of  the  seventeenth  century  and  the 
French  liberals  of  the  eighteenth;  and  if  he  came  eventually  to 
set  the  French  school  above  the  English,  it  was  because  he  found 
in  the  back-to-nature  philosophy,  with  its  corollary  of  an  agrarian 
economics  and  its  emphasis  on  social  well-being,  a  philosophy  more 
consonant  with  Virginian  experience  and  his  own  temperament 
than  Locke’s  philosophy  of  property.  But  he  was  very  far  from 
being  a  narrow  French  partisan,  as  has  been  often  charged;  rather 
he  judged  old-world  theory  in  the  light  of  its  applicability  to 
existing  American  conditions,  and  restrained  his  love  of  speculation 
by  immediate  practical  considerations.  The  man  of  affairs  kept 
a  watchful  eye  on  the  philosopher  in  his  study. 

In  the  major  doctrines  of  his  political  philosophy  Jefferson  was 


344  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

an  amalgam  of  English  and  French  liberalisms,  supplemented  by 
the  conscious  influence  of  the  American  frontier.  That  fusion 
early  took  place  in  his  mind.  The  first  bill  that  he  introduced 
into  the  Virginia  Assembly,  at  the  age  of  twenty-six,  was  a  bill  to 
permit  slave-owners  to  manumit  their  slaves;  and  his  first  published 
pamphlet,  issued  in  1774, 21  rejected  the  legal  reasoning  of  John 
Dickinson  and  Daniel  Dulaney — supporting  the  parliamentary 
right  to  impose  external  taxation — and  took  its  stand  on  the 
doctrine  of  natural  right  to  local  self-government  and  freedom  of 
trade.  When  two  years  later  he  drafted  the  Declaration  of  Inde¬ 
pendence  the  fusion  was  complete.  The  strong  influence  of  French 
humanitarianism  is  revealed  in  the  passage  on  slavery  that  was 
stricken  out  on  the  floor  of  Congress,  and  more  significantly  in  the 
change  in  the  familiar  phrasing  of  the  several  natural  rights. 
Samuel  Adams  and  other  followers  of  Locke  had  been  content  with 
the  classical  enumeration  of  life,  liberty,  and  property;  but  in 
Jefferson’s  hands  the  English  doctrine  was  given  a  revolutionary 
shift.  The  substitution  of  “pursuit  of  happiness”  for  “property” 
marks  a  complete  break  with  the  Whiggish  doctrine  of  property 
rights  that  Locke  had  bequeathed  to  the  English  middle  class,  and 
the  substitution  of  a  broader  sociological  conception;  and  it  was 
this  substitution  that  gave  to  the  document  the  note  of  idealism 
which  was  to  make  its  appeal  so  perennially  human  and  vital. 
The  words  were  far  more  than  a  political  gesture  to  draw  popular 
support;  they  were  an  embodiment  of  Jefferson’s  deepest  convic¬ 
tions,  and  his  total  life  thenceforward  was  given  over  to  the  work 
of  providing  such  political  machinery  for  America  as  should 
guarantee  for  all  the  enjoyment  of  those  inalienable  rights.  If 
the  fact  that  he  set  the  pursuit  of  happiness  above  abstract  property 
rights  is  to  be  taken  as  proof  that  Jefferson  was  an  impractical 
French  theorist,  the  critic  may  take  what  comfort  he  can  from  his 
deduction. 

That  Jefferson  was  an  idealist  was  singularly  fortunate  for 
America;  there  was  need  of  idealism  to  leaven  the  materialistic 
realism  of  the  times.  It  was  a  critical  period  and  he  came  at  the 
turn  of  a  long  running  tide.  He  watched  the  beginnings  of  the 
political  shift  in  America  from  isolated  colonial  commonwealths  to  a 
unitary  sovereign  state;  and  his  wide  reading  and  close  observa¬ 
tion  had  convinced  him  that  the  impending  change  was  fraught 
21  A  Summary  View  of  the  Rights  of  British  America,  Williamsburg. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


345 


with  momentous  issues  for  the  common  man.  He  had  meditated 
much  on  the  social  results  of  the  slow  oscillations  in  western 
civilization  between  social  decentralization  and  centralization, 
with  their  contrasting  political  and  economic  structures;  and  he 
understood  how  the  movement  from  simplicity  to  complexity — 
from  freedom  to  regimentation — creates  a  psychology  and  an 
institutionalism  that  conducts  straight  to  the  leviathan  state, 
controlled  by  a  ruling  caste,  serving  the  demands  of  exploitation, 
heedless  of  the  well-being  of  the  regimented  mass.  This  great 
lesson  in  social  drifts  he  brought  home  to  America.  There  had 
been  created  here  the  psychology  and  institutions  of  a  decentralized 
society,  with  a  corresponding  exaltation  of  the  individual  and  the 
breakdown  of  caste.  In  the  broad  spaces  of  America  the  old-world 
coercive  state  had  dwindled  to  a  mere  police  arrangement  for 
parochial  duties;  the  free- citizen  refused  to  be  regimented;  the 
several  communities  insisted  on  managing  their  affairs  by  their 
own  agents.  Such  was  the  natural  consequence  of  free  economics; 
but  with  the  turning  of  the  tide  would  not  the  drift  towards  cen¬ 
tralization  nullify  the  results  of  earlier  American  experience  and 
repeat  here  the  unhappy  history  of  European  peoples  ? 

To  the  philosophic  mind  of  Jefferson,  such  a  question  was  not 
academic,  but  urgent  and  vital.  He  had  been  bred  in  that  older 
world,  he  believed  passionately  in  the  excellence  of  its  virtues, 
and  his  political  and  social  philosophy  was  determined  by  that 
experience.  He  sprang  from  a  society  deep-rooted  in  an  agrarian 
economy,  and  he  wished  to  preserve  that  society.  Born  on  the 
Virginia  frontier,  he  had  never  seen  a  hamlet  so  large  as  twenty 
houses  before  his  eighteenth  year;  his  neighbors  and  associates 
were  capable  and  vigorous  frontier  democrats,  who  managed  the 
affairs  of  local  government  with  the  same  homespun  skill  that 
went  to  their  farming.  “It  is  not  difficult,”  remarks  an  acute 
critic,  “to  see  how  the  great  principle  of  Jefferson’s  life — absolute 
faith  in  democracy — came  to  him.  He  was  the  product  of  the 
first  West  in  American  history;  he  grew  up  with  men  who  ruled 
their  country  well,  who  fought  the  Indians  valiantly  ....  Jef¬ 
ferson  loved  his  backwoods  neighbors,  and  he,  in  turn,  was  loved 
by  them.”  22  This  early  conviction  of  the  excellence  of  a  freehold 
order  was  confirmed  by  later  experience;  wide  observation  and 
much  travel  convinced  him  that  no  other  people  was  so  favored 
32  Dodd,  Statesmen  of  the  Old  South,  p.  23. 


346 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


by  circumstance  as  the  American,  or  so  vigorously  self-reliant. 
That  such  well-being  resulted  from  a  plastic  economics,  he  regarded 
as  self-evident;  and  from  this  economic  freedom  came  political 
freedom.  In  his  European  travels  he  saw  everywhere  want  and 
wretchedness  dwelling  in  the  shadow  of  the  aristocratic  state,  and 
he  could  not  dissociate  the  two.  Political  tyranny  was  the  out¬ 
ward  and  visible  sign  of  greater  tyrannies  that  ran  down  to  the 
very  roots  of  society;  the  leviathan  state  was  the  convenient 
instrument  through  which  those  tyrannies  took  their  heavy  toll 
of  the  common  well-being.  America  was  a  land  of  free  men;  it 
was  exploited  neither  by  an  aristocracy  nor  a  plutocracy.  Surely 
there  could  be  no  greater  or  nobler  ambition  for  an  American  than 
to  assist  in  preserving  his  country  from  the  misery  that  must 
attend  a  change  from  the  present  happy  condition  of  democratic 
industry,  to  the  serfdom  of  the  European  wage-taker  and  peasant. 

To  a  mind  imbued  with  such  conceptions  the  appeal  of  the 
Physiocratic  theory  of  social  economics  would  be  irresistible. 
The  ground  was  prepared  for  the  sowing  of  the  seeds  of  the  liberal 
French  thought.  With  its  emphasis  laid  upon  agriculture,  its 
doctrine  of  the  produit  net,  its  principle  of  laissez  faire,  and  its 
social  concern,  the  Physiocratic  theory  accorded  exactly  with  his 
familiar  experience,  and  it  must  have  seemed  to  Jefferson  that  it 
was  little  other  than  a  deduction  from  the  open  facts  of  American 
life.  He  had  read  much  in  the  works  of  the  Physiocratic  group, 
and  was  intimately  acquainted  with  DuPont  de  Nemours;  and 
the  major  principles  of  the  school  sank  deep  into  his  mind  and 
creatively  determined  his  thinking,  with  the  result  that  Jeffersonian 
democracy  as  it  spread  through  Virginia  and  west  along  the  fron¬ 
tier  assumed  a  pronounced  Physiocratic  bias.  The  sharp  struggle 
between  Jefferson  and  Hamilton  must  be  reckoned,  in  part  at 
least,  a  conflict  between  the  rival  principles  of  Quesnay  and  Adam 
Smith,  between  an  agrarian  and  a  capitalistic  economy.  Much  as 
Jefferson  feared  the  ambitions  of  an  aristocracy,  he  feared  quite 
as  much  the  creation  of  a  proletariat.  As  he  looked  into  the  future 
he  saw  great  cities  rising  to  breed  their  Roman  mobs,  duped  and 
exploited  by  demagogues,  the  convenient  tools  of  autocracy;  and 
counting  the  cost  in  social  well-being,  he  set  his  face  like  flint 
against  the  rising  capitalism.  A  free  yeomanry  he  regarded  as  the 
backbone  of  every  great  people,  the  producers  of  the  real  wealth, 
the  guardians  of  manly  independence;  and  the  number  of  factory 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


347 


workers  measured  for  him  the  extent  of  social  disease.  It  is  this 
Physiocratic  conception  that  explains  his  bitter  hostility  to  pro¬ 
tective  tariffs,  national  banks,  funding  manipulations,  the  machin¬ 
ery  of  credit,  and  all  the  agencies  of  capitalism  which  Hamilton 
was  skillfully  erecting  in  America.  Not  to  have  hated  such  things 
Jefferson  must  first  have  emptied  his  mind  of  the  teachings  of 
experience  and  the  lessons  of  the  social  philosophers. 

In  the  Notes  on  Virginia  there  is  a  well-known  passage  that 
amplifies  his  favorite  thesis  that  a  sound  American  economy  was 
an  agrarian  economy: 

The  political  economists  of  Europe  have  established  it  as  a  principle, 
that  every  State  should  endeavor  to  manufacture  for  itself;  and  this 
principle,  like  many  others,  we  transfer  to  America.  .  .  .  But  we  have  an 
immensity  of  land  courting  the  industry  of  the  husbandman.  Is  it  best 
then  that  all  our  citizens  should  be  employed  in  its  improvement,  or  that 
one  half  should  be  called  off  from  that  to  exercise  manufactures  and 
handicraft  arts  for  the  other?  Those  who  labor  in  the  earth  are  the  chosen 
people  of  God,  if  ever  he  had  a  chosen  people,  whose  breasts  he  has  made 
his  peculiar  deposit  for  substantial  and  genuine  virtue.  It  is  the  focus  in 
which  he  keeps  alive  that  sacred  fire,  which  otherwise  might  escape  from 
the  face  of  the  earth.  Corruption  of  morals  in  the  mass  of  cultivators  is  a 
phenomenon  of  which  no  age  nor  nation  has  furnished  an  example.  It  is 
the  mark  set  on  those,  who  not  looking  up  to  heaven,  to  their  own  soil  and 
industry,  as  does  the  husbandman,  for  their  subsistence,  depend  for  it 
on  casualties  and  caprice  of  customers.  Dependence  begets  subservience 
and  venality,  suffocates  the  germ  of  virtue,  and  prepares  fit  tools  for  the 
designs  of  ambition.  .  .  .  Generally  speaking  the  proportion  which  the 
aggregate  of  the  other  classes  of  citizens  bears  in  any  state  to  that  of  its 
husbandmen,  is  the  proportion  of  its  unsound  to  its  healthy  parts,  and  is  a 
good  enough  barometer  whereby  to  measure  its  degree  of  corruption. 
While  we  have  land  to  labor  then,  let  us  never  wish  to  see  our  citizens 
occupied  at  a  work-bench,  or  twirling  a  distaff  ...  for  the  general 
operations  of  manufacture,  let  our  work-shops  remain  in  Europe.  It  is 
better  to  carry  provisions  and  materials  to  work-men  there,  than  bring 
them  to  the  provisions  and  materials,  and  with  them  their  manners  and 
principles.  .  .  .  The  mobs  of  great  cities  add  just  so  much  to  the  support 
of  pure  government,  as  sores  do  to  the  strength  of  the  human  body.  It  is 
the  manners  and  spirit  of  a  people  which  preserve  a  republic  in  vigor.  A 
degeneracy  in  these  is  a  canker  which  soon  eats  to  the  heart  of  its  laws  and 
constitution.23 

Such  was  his  attitude  in  1782,  an  attitude  identical  with  Frank¬ 
lin’s.  Thirty-four  years  later  he  had  modified  his  views  of  indus¬ 
trialism.  The  bitter  experience  of  the  Napoleonic  wars,  with  the 
23  Writings,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  268-269. 


348  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

hardships  and  losses  visited  upon  neutral  shipping,  had  convinced 
him  of  the  need  of  domestic  manufactures,  and  he  was  then  deeply 
interested  in  improved  machinery,  new  methods,  original  ven¬ 
tures.  “We  must  now  place  the  manufacturer  by  the  side  of  the 
agriculturist,”  he  conceded,  or  remain  in  economic  dependence. 
But  how  much  further  the  country  should  be  industrialized, 
whether  it  “shall  be  proposed  to  go  beyond  our  own  supply”  to 
compete  in  foreign  markets,  was  not  yet  clear  to  him;  the  problem 
remained  still  to  be  determined  whether  “the  surplus  labor” 
would  be  “most  beneficially  employed  in  the  culture  of  the  earth, 
or  in  the  fabrications  of  art.”  24  In  such  commentary  Jefferson 
failed  to  measure  the  thrust  of  economic  determinism  that  drives 
every  people  to  go  through  with  the  industrial  revolution,  once  it 
is  begun;  but  if  we  recall  the  primary  principle  of  his  political 
philosophy,  that  the  “care  of  human  life  and  happiness,  and  not 
their  destruction,  is  the  first  and  only  legitimate  object  of  good 
government,”  we  may  perhaps  judge  what  would  have  been  his 
attitude  towards  a  centralized  industrialism.  He  would  have 
judged  its  desirability,  not  by  the  balance  sheet  of  corporate  busi¬ 
ness,  but  by  the  social  ledger.  As  a  social  economist  he  could  not 
think  in  terms  of  the  economic  man,  nor  simplify  human  beings  to 
labor  commodity,  nor  reduce  the  social  tie  to  the  cash  nexus.  It 
is  inconceivable  that  he  should  have  shared  Hamilton’s  satisfaction 
at  the  contemplation  of  women  and  children— and  many  of  the 
latter  “of  tender  age” — wasting  away  in  the  mills;  he  was  too 
social-minded  for  that,  too  much  an  idealist,  too  human  in  short. 
Though  necessity  might  force  him  away  from  a  simple  agrarian 
economy,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  would  become  partisan  to  a 
centralizing  industrialism,  with  control  vested  in  banking  credit. 

It  is  a  common  charge  that  Jefferson  was  consumed  with  suspi¬ 
cion,  and  it  is  set  down  against  him  as  the  mark  of  a  mean  and 
ungenerous  nature.  That  in  later  years  he  was  suspicious  of  fair- 
spoken  advocates  and  plausible  programs  was  as  true  of  Jeffer¬ 
son  as  of  Sam  Adams;  he  had  learned  like  the  Boston  democrat 
the  virtue  of  the  saying,  felix  qui  cautus,  and  with  so  much  at  stake 
he  would  practice  caution.  He  feared  many  things,  for  he  was 
acutely  aware  of  the  incapacity  of  the  heedless  majority  to  defend 
itself  against  an  able  and  instructed  minority.  As  a  child  of  an 
aristocratic  age  he  fell  into  the  mistake  of  visualizing  that  minority 

24  Ibid.,  Vol.  X,  p.  8. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


349 


in  the  guise  of  a  landed  gentry,  rather  than  in  the  guise  of  plutoc¬ 
racy;  but  in  his  quick  fear  of  a  minority  he  had  all  history  as 
counselor.  When  he  took  his  seat  in  Washington’s  cabinet  his 
suspicions  of  the  Hamiltonian  program  were  quickly  aroused. 
He  believed  that  a  monarchy  was  aimed  at,  and  if  that  proved 
unattainable,  then  a  highly  centralized  state  designed  to  hold  in 
check  the  democratic  tendencies.  His  line  of  reasoning  may  be 
summarized  thus:  In  consequence  of  the  republican  enthusiasm 
of  the  early  years  of  the  Revolution,  democratic  reorganization 
of  the  several  state  governments  had  been  successfully  achieved. 
Very  great  progress  towards  democracy  had  been  made.  Certain 
legislative  acts  of  agrarian  assemblies  were  now  being  turned 
against  democracy,  to  invalidate  it  as  a  working  system  of  govern¬ 
ment.  But  if  agrarian  majorities  had  used  their  power  to  enact 
laws  beneficial  to  their  interests,  they  were  only  applying  a  lesson 
learned  from  long  experience  with  aristocratic  legislatures.  Such 
acts  were  no  serious  indictment  of  the  democratic  principle,  and 
to  make  partisan  use  of  them  to  justify  curtailing  the  powers  of 
the  majority,  was  a  betrayal  of  popular  rights.  And  this,  Jefferson 
believed,  was  the  deliberate  purpose  of  the  Federalist  leaders. 
Unable  to  stem  the  popular  tide  in  the  several  commonwealths, 
the  wealthy  minority  had  devised  a  plan  to  superimpose  upon  the 
sovereign  commonwealths  a  centralized  federal  government,  so 
hedged  about  as  to  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  local  majorities,  and 
hence  able  to  override  and  nullify  the  democratic  will.  Once 
safely  established,  this  federal  government  would  gather  fresh 
powers  into  its  hands,  until  there  emerged  a  rigorous  machine, 
modeled  after  the  British  system,  and  as  little  regardful  of  the  com¬ 
mon  interests.  If  this  were  not  the  Federalist  purpose,  why  all 
the  praise  of  the  British  system  as  the  ripe  product  of  experience, 
exactly  adapted  to  the  political  genius  of  the  English  race? 

In  the  matter  of  appeal  to  past  experience,  which  provided  the 
staple  of  Federalist  argument,  Jefferson  discovered  fresh  grounds 
of  fear.  The  past  he  looked  upon  as  evil,  and  the  record  of  experi¬ 
ence  was  a  tale  of  injustice  and  bitter  wrong.  He  would  not  have 
America  follow  the  trodden  paths,  for  whither  they  led  he  knew 
too  well.  He  would  countenance  no  entangling  alliances  with 
old-world  upper-class  systems  of  statecraft,  for  such  systems  would 
reproduce  in  America  the  evils  it  should  be  the  chief  business  of 
America  to  prevent.  There  must  be  erected  here  no  counterpart 


350  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

of  the  European  state;  there  must  be  no  king,  no  aristocracy,  no 
plutocracy;  but  a  new  democratic  organization  of  government,  in 
which  the  welfare  of  the  whole  people  should  be  the  sole  concern. 

When  I  left  Congress  in  ’ 76  [he  wrote  as  an  old  man]  it  was  in  the  per¬ 
suasion  that  our  whole  code  must  be  revised,  adapted  to  our  republican 
form  of  government,  and  now  that  we  had  no  negatives  of  Councils, 
Governors  and  Kings  to  restrain  us  from  doing  right,  that  it  should  be 
corrected  in  all  its  parts  with  a  single  eye  to  reason  and  the  good  of  those 
for  whose  government  it  was  planned.26 

Not  past  experience  but  present  need  should  instruct  America 
in  drawing  the  plans  of  a  new  system  of  government  and  a  new 
code  of  law.  In  analyzing  the  evils  of  European  systems  Jefferson 
came  to  certain  conclusions  that  dominated  all  his  later  thinking, 
and  that  may  be  phrased  thus:  The  political  state  tends  inevitably 
to  self-aggrandizement,  the  logical  outcome  of  which  is  a  political 
leviathan,  too  big  and  too  complex  for  popular  control.  With 
sovereign  powers  vested  in  the  hands  of  governmental  agents, 
those  agents  lie  under  a  constant  temptation  to  corruption  and 
tyranny,  and  in  the  end  they  align  the  powers  of  the  state  on  the 
side  of  the  most  ambitious  and  capable.  The  greater  the  power  of 
government,  the  ampler  its  revenues,  the  more  energetic  its  admin¬ 
istration,  the  more  dangerous  it  may  become  to  the  rights  of  men; 
for  where  the  prize  is  greatest,  men  struggle  most  ruthlessly,  and 
what  prize  could  be  greater  than  the  privilege  of  exploiting  society 
in  the  name  of  the  state?  History  knows  no  objective  more  tempt¬ 
ing  to  the  will  to  power,  than  the  control  of  the  absolute  state.  A 
government  adequately  socialized,  intent  solely  upon  furthering 
the  common  well-being,  Jefferson  would  have  been  unanxious 
about.  But  such  governments  existed  only  in  the  dreams  of  Sir 
Thomas  More  and  the  Utopians;  he  could  discover  none  such 
either  in  the  past  or  present.  Everywhere  strong  governments 
were  little  more  than  efficient  tax-machines  to  support  armies  and 
provide  subsidies  and  places  for  the  minority.  Against  such  forces 
of  corruption  the  people  struggle  in  vain. 

If  such  was  the  common  testimony  of  old-world  experience — and 
no  man  who  knew  the  inner  workings  of  government  there  would 
deny  it — what  reason  was  there  to  expect  that  like  causes  would 
work  unlike  results  in  America?  To  what  purpose  was  the  talk  of 
strong  government  encouraged  amongst  the  holders  of  the  public 
26  “Autobiography,”  in  Writings,  Vol.  I,  p.  57. 


POLITICAL  THINKERS 


351 


debt?  To  what  end  had  lobbyists  for  the  funding  bill  invaded  the 
floor  of  Congress?  It  was  idle  to  expect  in  America  a  nullification 
of  the  law,  that  where  power  sits  within,  corruption  waits  without. 
The  love  of  power  is  universal.  Most  men  are  potential  autocrats, 
the  strong  and  capable  may  become  actual  autocrats.  No  man  is 
good  enough,  no  group  of  men,  to  be  trusted  with  unrestrained 
powers — in  America  any  more  than  in  Europe.  A  centralized 
government  in  control  of  the  tax-machine,  and  secure  from  popular 
restraint,  would  undo  the  results  of  the  Revolutionary  War.  The 
movement  to  consolidate  power,  Jefferson  asserted,  was  “but 
Toryism  in  disguise.”  “The  generalizing  and  concentrating  all 
cares  and  powers  into  one  body  .  .  .  has  destroyed  the  liberty 
and  the  rights  of  men  in  every  government  which  has  ever  existed 
under  the  sun.” 

Our  country  is  too  large  to  have  all  its  affairs  directed  by  a  single  govern¬ 
ment.  Public  servants  at  such  a  distance,  and  from  under  the  eye  of  their 
constituents,  must,  from  the  circumstance  of  distance,  be  unable  to 
administer  and  overlook  all  the  details  necessary  for  the  good  government 
of  the  citizens;  and  the  same  circumstance,  by  rendering  detection  im¬ 
possible  to  their  constituents,  will  invite  the  public  agents  to  corruption, 
plunder  and  waste.26 

The  practice  of  local  home  rule  had  grown  up  in  America  in 
response  to  native  conditions;  it  had  resulted  from  democratic 
needs;  and  Jefferson  was  too  thoroughly  American,  too  instinc¬ 
tively  democratic,  to  overlook  the  significance  of  local  sovereignties 
in  a  democratic  philosophy.  From  the  sharp  contrast  between 
American  and  European  practice  he  deduced  a  cardinal  principle, 
namely,  that  good  government  springs  from  a  common  interest 
in  public  affairs,  and  that  such  common  interest  is  possible  only 
when  the  field  of  activities  is  circumscribed.  Set  government 
apart  from  the  people,  or  above  them,  and  public  interest  is  lost 
in  a  sense  of  futility.  The  danger  of  an  encroaching  tyranny  by  a 
superimposed  sovereignty,  is  made  easy  by  the  public  lethargy 
in  respect  to  distant  and  unfamiliar  things,  and  establishes  itself 
through  the  psychology  of  custom.  Jefferson  was  never  greatly 
concerned  about  stable  government;  he  was  very  much  more 
concerned  about  responsive  government — that  it  should  faithfully 
serve  the  majority  will.  He  made  no  god  of  the  political  state. 
He  had  no  conventional  reverence  for  established  law  and  or- 

26  Writings,  Vol.  VII,  p.  451. 


352 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


der;  he  inquired  rather  what  sort  of  law  and  order  he  was  asked 
to  accept,  was  it  just  or  unjust.  Changing  conditions  make  an¬ 
cient  good  uncouth,  and  established  institutions  tend  to  fall 
into  dry-rot,  or  to  become  tyrannical.  Men  are  more  impor¬ 
tant  than  constitutions,  and  the  public  well-being  is  more  sacred 
than  statutes.  An  occasional  revolution,  he  commented  grimly 
apropos  of  the  hue  and  cry  over  Shays’s  Rebellion,  is  salutary;  if  it 
does  not  come  of  itself  it  might  well  be  brought  about.  Progress 
in  government  results  from  experiment;  and  it  is  easier  and  safer 
to  experiment  on  a  small  scale  than  on  a  great.  Inertia  increases 
with  size,  and  the  more  consolidated  the  government,  the  more 
unyielding  it  becomes.  The  longest  delayed  revolutions  are  the 
gravest. 

In  asserting  the  principle  of  the  majority  will,  Jefferson  like 
other  democratic  thinkers  of  the  time,  found  himself  countered 
by  the  argument  of  abstract  justice.  Vehement  denunciation  had 
greeted  Paine’s  doctrine  that  what  a  nation  chooses  to  do,  it  has 
a  right  to  do.  There  can  be  no  rights,  it  was  confidently  asserted, 
superior  to  the  right.  The  people  may  legislate,  but  it  remains  to 
determine  the  validity  of  statutes  in  the  light  of  justice;  that  which 
is  unjust  is  ipso  facto  null  and  void.  It  was  Coke’s  doctrine  of 
judicial  review,  set  up  in  America  after  its  repudiation  in  England, 
and  Jefferson’s  hostility  to  it  was  bitter.  As  an  intellectual  he  had 
none  of  the  lawyer’s  complacency  with  legal  principles,  or  conceit 
of  the  law’s  sufficiency;  and  as  a  democrat  he  would  not  yield 
sovereignty  into  the  hands  of  the  judiciary.  He  had  no  veneration 
for  the  Common  Law  of  England:  it  had  grown  up  by  slow  accre¬ 
tions  during  centuries  of  absolutism;  how  should  it  be  expected  to 
answer  the  needs  of  a  freer  age?  It  must  be  purged  of  outworn 
elements,  imbued  with  democratic  sympathies.  The  Revolution 
had  been  fought  in  defense  of  rights  that  are  broader  and  more 
human  than  legal  principles;  and  to  hand  over  those  rights  to  be 
interpreted  away  by  lawyers,  seemed  to  him  moonstruck  madness. 
It  was  the  law  of  Blackstone  rather  than  of  Coke  that  he  feared 
most — that  “elegant”  canonization  of  the  malign  influences  of 
Tory  reaction,  and  that  was  so  cried  up  by  the  smatterers  and 
“ephemeral  insects  of  the  law”  in  America;  whereas  Coke  “was  as 
good  a  Whig  as  ever  wrote” : 

Blackstone  and  Hume  have  made  tories  of  all  England,  and  are  making 
tories  of  those  young  Americans  whose  native  feelings  of  independence  do 


POLITICAL  THINKERS  353 

not  place  them  above  the  wily  sophistries  of  a  Hume  or  a  Blackstone. 
These  two  books,  and  especially  the  former  [Blackstone],  have  done  more 
towards  the  suppression  of  the  liberties  of  man,  than  all  the  million  of  men 
in  arms  of  Bonaparte,  and  the  millions  of  human  lives  with  the  sacrifice 
of  which  he  will  stand  loaded  before  the  judgment  seat  of  his  Maker.27 

As  Jefferson  grew  older  his  fear  of  judicial  encroachment  on 
the  popular  will  became  acute,  but  it  shifted  from  distrust  of 
the  Common  Law  to  concern  over  the  Supreme  Court.  A  strong 
and  outspoken  hatred  of  the  Federal  judiciary  runs  through  all 
his  later  writings,  and  he  lost  no  opportunity  to  popularize  the 
thesis — “It  is  a  misnomer  to  call  a  government  republican,  in 
which  a  branch  of  the  supreme  power  is  independent  of  the  nation.” 

The  great  object  of  my  fear  is  the  Federal  Judiciary.  That  body,  like 
gravity,  ever  acting,  with  noiseless  foot,  and  unalarming  advance,  gaining 
ground  step  by  step,  and  holding  what  it  gains,  is  engulfing  insidiously  the 
special  governments  into  the  jaws  of  that  which  feeds  them.28 

It  is  a  very  dangerous  doctrine  to  consider  the  judges  as  the  ultimate 
arbiters  of  all  constitutional  questions.  It  is  one  which  would  place  us 
under  the  despotism  of  an  oligarchy.  .  .  .  The  Constitution  has  erected 
no  such  single  tribunal,  knowing  that  to  whatever  hands  confided,  with 
the  corruptions  of  time  and  party,  its  members  would  become  despots.29 

As  Jefferson  watched  Chief  Justice  John  Marshall  gathering  all 
things  within  the  purview  of  the  Federal  judiciary,  preparing 
future  strongholds  by  the  skillful  use  of  obiter  dicta ,  legislating  by 
means  of  judicial  interpretation,  nullifying  the  will  of  the  majority, 
and  with  the  power  of  repeal  made  nugatory  by  the  complexity 
of  the  process,  he  saw  clearly  what  the  outcome  would  be.  Surely 
that  was  no  democracy  where  judge-made  laws  were  enforced  by 
bench  warrants,  and  where  the  sovereign  power  lay  beyond  the 
immediate  reach  of  the  popular  will.  The  government  that  he 
desired  would  not  rest  on  the  legal  fiction  of  an  abstract  justice 
above  statutes  and  constitutions,  whereof  a  group  of  judicial 
gentlemen  were  the  repositories  and  guardians.  It  would  be 
like  Paine’s,  “a  plain  thing,  and  fitted  to  the  capacity  of  many 
heads”;  forr “where  the  law  of  the  majority  ceases  to  be  acknowl¬ 
edged,  there  government  ends;  the  law  of  the  strongest  takes  its 
place.” 

Granted  the  truth  of  Jefferson’s  premises  that  power  tends  to 
contract  to  the  hands  of  a  few,  and  that  all  government  of  the  few 

27  Ibid.,  Vol.  VI,  p.  335-  28  Ibid.,  Vol.  X,  p.  189. 


29  Ibid.,  Vol.  X,  p.  160. 


354 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


is  vicious,  then  democracy  is  the  only  form  of  government  under 
which  an  approximation  to  justice  can  be  realized.  A  class  will 
serve  class  interests.  Government  by  an  aristocracy  is  government 
in  the  interest  of  the  aristocracy.  For  the  staple  argument  of  the 
Federalists,  that  gentlemen  of  principle  and  property  alone  may 
be  intrusted  with  affairs  of  state,  Jefferson  had  a  quiet  contempt. 
“I  have  never  observed  men’s  honesty  to  increase  with  their 
riches,”  he  remarked.  On  the  contrary,  he  regarded  the  “better 
sort  of  people”  as  a  chief  hindrance  to  the  spread  of  social  justice. 
The  past  had  been  evil  because  the  past  had  been  exploited  by 
gentlemen  of  principle  and  property.  They  had  kept  government 
away  from  the  people,  and  with  their  secret  councils  and  secret 
diplomacy  they  had  plundered  the  taxpayers  and  drenched 
nations  in  blood.  Their  selfish  rivalries  everywhere  exacted  a 
heavy  toll  of  society  and  left  behind  a  trail  of  poverty  and  wretch¬ 
edness.  The  future  would  be  better  in  the  degree  that  mastery 
passed  into  common  hands. 

From  the  conclusions  of  his  democratic  premise  he  did  not 
shrink.  If  it  were  indeed  true  that  the  people  were  beasts,  then 
the  democratic  government  of  the  future  would  be  a  bestial  govern¬ 
ment — and  even  that  might  be  better  than  the  old  arrangement 
of  masters  and  slaves.  But  the  American  people  whom  Jefferson 
trusted  were  very  far  from  beasts;  he  was  convinced  that  they  were 
honest  and  well-meaning;  and  if  government  were  brought  close 
to  them,  kept  responsive  to  their  will,  a  new  and  beneficent  chapter 
in  human  history  would  open.  The  populistic  laws  passed  by  the 
legislatures  of  Rhode  Island  and  New  Hampshire,  about  which  such 
an  uproar  was  raised  by  fearful  creditors,  and  which  were  urged  as 
an  argument  against  popular  government,  gave  him  no  concern. 
He  understood  the  ways  of  propaganda,  and  he  never  accepted 
judgment  of  the  American  people  from  the  mouths  of  their  enemies. 
The  cure  for  the  evils  of  democracy,  he  believed,  was  more  democ¬ 
racy.  The  whole  are  far  less  likely  to  be  unjust  than  the  few;  and 
if  sovereignty  does  not  rest  in  the  majority  will,  where  shall  it 
lodge  ? 

Hume,  the  great  apostle  of  toryism,  says  “the  Commons  established  a 
principle,  which  is  noble  in  itself,  and  seems  specious  [t.  e.  pleasing],  but  is 
belied  by  all  history  and  experience,  that  the  people  are  the  origin  of  all  just 
power.”  And  where  else  will  this  degenerate  son  of  science,  this  traitor  to 
his  fellow  men,  find  the  origin  of  just  power,  if  not  in  the  majority  of 


POLITICAL  THINKERS  355 

the  society?  Will  it  be  in  the  minority?  Or  in  the  individual  of  that 
minority?  30 

The  America  of  Jefferson’s  day  was  a  simple  world,  with  a 
simple  domestic  economy.  More  than  ninety  per  cent  were 
plain  country  folk,  farmers  and  villagers,  largely  freeholders, 
managing  their  local  affairs  in  the  traditional  way.  There  were 
no  great  extremes  of  poverty  and  wealth,  no  closely  organized 
class  groups.  With  its  sharp  restrictions  on  suffrage  and  the 
prestige  accorded  the  gentry,  it  was  still  far  from  a  political  de¬ 
mocracy;  but  it  was  hastening  towards  a  more  democratic  order. 
Remote  from  the  cesspools  of  European  diplomacy,  and  not  yet 
acquainted  with  imperialism,  it  had  no  need  for  a  leviathan  state. 
Economic  conditions  sanctioned  a  laissez-faire  government,  simple 
and  unambitious.  In  such  a  world  the  well-known  words  of 
Jefferson’s  first  inaugural  address,  justified  themselves  to  all  who 
did  not  seek  to  use  the  state  for  personal  advantage. 

A  wise  and  frugal  government,  which  shall  restrain  men  from  injuring 
one  another,  which  shall  leave  them  otherwise  free  to  regulate  their  own 
pursuits  of  industry  and  improvement,  and  shall  not  take  from  the  mouth 
of  labor  the  bread  it  has  earned.  This  is  the  sum  of  good  government, 
and  this  is  necessary  to  close  the  circle  of  our  felicities. 

In  one  significant  direction  he  would  extend  the  scope  of  govern¬ 
ment — the  encouragement  of  education.  An  intelligent  people 
is  necessary  to  a  democracy;  free  schools  are  a  sign  of  a  free  society. 
Tyranny  thrives  on  ignorance  and  superstition,  and  every  ex¬ 
ploiting  group  fears  popular  education.  Free  himself  in  thought 
and  action,  believing  in  the  unshackled  commerce  of  ideas,  hating 
all  censorships,  Jefferson  accounted  the  founding  of  the  University 
of  Virginia  his  largest  contribution  to  the  well-being  of  his  native 
commonwealth. 

To  all  who  profess  faith  in  the  democratic  ideal  Jefferson  is  a 
perennial  inspiration.  A  free  soul,  he  loved  freedom  enough  to 
deny  it  to  none;  an  idealist,  he  believed  that  the  welfare  of  the 
whole,  and  not  the  prosperity  of  any  group,  is  the  single  end  of 
government.  He  was  our  first  great  leader  to  erect  a  political 
philosophy  native  to  the  economics  and  experience  of  America,  as 
he  was  the  first  to  break  consciously  with  the  past.  His  life  was 
dedicated  to  the  service  of  freedom,  and  later  generations  may  well 
recall  his  words,  “I  have  sworn  upon  the  altar  of  God  eternal 

30  Ibid.,  Vol.  VII,  p.  356. 


356 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


hostility  against  every  form  of  tyranny  over  the  mind  of  man.” 
Europe  made  Jefferson  wholly  American.  From  his  studies  in 
France  he  came  to  see  that  where  men  enjoy  free  access  to  the 
sources  of  subsistence,  government  is  likely  to  be  simple  and 
honest,  and  society  free  and  content;  but  where  a  policy  of 
preemption  has  run  its  course,  the  function  of  government  is 
seduced  from  its  social  purpose  to  perpetuate  the  inequalities 
which  spring  from  the  progressive  monopolization  of  natural 
resources,  with  augmenting  corruption  and  injustice.  To  preserve 
government  in  America  from  such  degradation,  to  keep  the  natural 
resources  open  to  all,  were  the  prime  desire  and  object  of  his  life. 
That  such  an  effort  was  foredoomed  to  failure,  in  presence  of 
imperious  forces  that  shape  society  beyond  the  capacity  of  political 
means  to  change  or  prevent,  cannot  detract  from  the  nobility  of 
his  ideal,  or  the  inspiration  of  his  life.  Among  the  greater  thinkers 
of  the  constitutional  period  Jefferson  remains  by  far  the  most 
vital  and  suggestive,  the  one  to  whom  later  generations  may  return 
most  hopefully. 


CHAPTER  III 


THE  WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 

To  turn  from  the  field  of  political  theory  to  the  realm  of  polite 
literature  is  not  to  quit  the  partisan  battle-ground.  The  long 
struggle  between  Federalist  and  Democrat  was  too  bitter  and 
absorbing,  too  sharp  in  its  alignment,  not  to  conscript  gentlemen 
of  culture  equally  with  politicians.  Every  available  quill  was 
called  to  the  colors,  and  a  civil  war  of  belles  lettres  broke  out,  that 
exceeded  in  animosity  any  other  known  to  our  literary  history. 
Attack  and  counter-attack  were  slashing  and  acrimonious.  Gentle¬ 
men  forgot  their  manners  and  indulged  fiercely  in  tall  language. 
Satire  ran  about  the  streets  seeking  new  victims  to  impale;  slander 
lay  in  wait  for  every  passer-by.  The  crudest  lies  found  willing 
listeners  and  sober  ministers  turned  from  writing  sermons  to 
enshrine  pothouse  tales  in  heroic  couplets.  In  this  virulent  battle 
the  Federalists,  on  the  whole,  had  the  better  of  it,  for  they  were 
greater  masters  of  invective  and  flayed  their  victims  less  clumsily; 
but  the  Democrats  made  up  in  ardor  what  they  lacked  in  skill, 
and  the  blows  that  fell  on  carefully  tied  wigs  must  have  hurt  cruelly. 
As  poetry  those  old  satires  may  seem  to  us  feeble  enough,  but  as 
historical  documents  they  are  eloquent.  The  passion  of  a  world 
in  revolution,  the  hopes  and  fears  of  our  forefathers  as  they  watched 
the  great  fires  consuming  the  world  in  which  they  had  grown  up, 
still  survive  in  those  stinging  lines,  as  a  reminder  to  later  genera¬ 
tions  of  the  rough  and  inhospitable  way  that  democratic  America 
has  traveled  in  its  onward  course. 

i 

THE  FEDERALIST  GROUP 

1.  The  Hartford  Wits 

What  Federalism  was  capable  of  in  the  way  of  polite  letters  is 
sufficiently  revealed  in  the  work  of  a  coterie  of  poetasters  who  are 
known  in  our  literary  histories  as  the  Hartford  Wits.  The  title 
of  the  group  suggests  their  literary  antecedents.  They  were  the 

357 


358  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

representatives  of  a  literary  mode  that  had  slowly  percolated 
through  the  crust  of  Puritan  provincialism  and  imparted  a  certain 
sprightliness  to  a  dour  temper.  They  were  the  literary  old-guard 
of  the  expiring  eighteenth  century,  suspicious  of  all  innovation, 
contemptuous  of  every  idealistic  program.  They  stood  stoutly 
by  the  customary  and  familiar.  The  nineteenth  century  was 
knocking  at  their  door,  but  they  would  not  open  to  it.  And  as 
they  saw  that  new  century  coming  in  the  guise  of  revolution, 
exciting  to  unheard-of  innovations  in  the  fields  of  politics  and 
economics  and  religion  and  letters,  giving  rise  to  Jacobin  Clubs 
and  Jeffersonian  democracy,  they  set  themselves  seriously  to  the 
work  of  barring  its  progress  through  their  own  little  world.  They 
conveniently  associated  the  economic  unrest  of  post-war  days, 
that  gave  birth  to  a  strange  progeny  in  Rhode  Island  and  New 
Hampshire  and  Massachusetts,  with  the  contamination  of  French 
atheism,  charged  all  unrest  to  the  account  of  democracy,  and 
hastened  to  put  it  down  in  the  name  of  law  and  righteousness. 
They  hated  new  ways  with  the  virtuous  hatred  of  the  well-to-do, 
and  dreamed  of  a  future  America  as  like  the  past  as  one  generation 
of  oysters  is  like  another. 

There  is  a  certain  historical  fitness  in  the  fact  that  the  Wits 
should  have  arisen  in  Connecticut  and  been  the  intellectual  children 
of  Yale.  For  generations  the  snug  little  commonwealth  had  been 
the  home  of  a  tenacious  conservatism,  that  clung  to  old  ways  and 
guarded  the  institutions  of  the  fathers  with  pious  zeal.  Nowhere 
else  in  New  England  did  the  ruling  hierarchy  maintain  so  glacial  a 
grip  on  society.  The  Revolution  of  ’76  had  only  ruffled  the  surface 
on  Connecticut  life;  it  left  the  social  structure  quite  unchanged. 
The  church  retained  its  unquestioned  control  of  the  machinery  of 
the  commonwealth;  and  the  church  was  dominated  by  a  clerical 
aristocracy,  hand  in  glove  with  a  mercantile  aristocracy.  Fresh 
currents  of  thought  that  were  stirring  the  pulpits  of  eastern  Mas¬ 
sachusetts— suggestions  of  an  Arianism  that  was  to  lead  to  the 
Unitarian  schism — did  not  reach  so  far  as  New  Haven,  and  Yale 
was  content  to  remain  the  bulwark  of  an  obsolete  Calvinism.  In 
such  a  soil  Federalism  would  flourish  like  Jonah’s  gourd;  and  it 
exuded  a  special  odor  of  sanctity  from  the  Calvinism  in  which  it 
was  rooted.  To  stout  Federalists  like  Timothy  Dwight,  the  current 
dogma  of  total  depravity  sufficed  to  disprove  the  validity  of  all 
democratic  aspiration.  It  was  a  presumption  little  short  of  blasphe- 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


359 


mous  to  assert  that  sinners  are  competent  to  manage  the  temporal 
affairs  of  society.  The  doctrine  of  equalitarianism  was  a  particular 
stench  in  the  nostrils  of  the  aristocratic  clergy,  who  disliked  all 
leveling.  The  Irish  immigrants  seem  to  have  been  the  most 
offensive  equalitarians.  A  New  England  gentleman,  traveling  in 
Pennsylvania  in  the  nineties,  wrote  home:  “I  have  seen  many, 
very  many  Irishmen,  and  with  a  few  exceptions,  they  are  .  .  .  the 
most  God-provoking  Democrats  on  this  side  of  Hell.”  And  in 
1798  Harrison  Gray  Otis  wrote:  “If  some  means  are  not  adopted 
to  prevent  the  indiscriminate  admission  of  wild  Irishmen  and 
others  to  the  right  of  suffrage,  there  will  soon  be  an  end  to  liberty 
&  property.”  1  To  prevent,  if  possible,  such  an  unhappy  outcome, 
the  upper  classes  of  New  England  fell  to  organizing  and  drilling 
all  the  elements  of  conservatism  for  a  vigorous  defense.  They 
wrote  and  spoke  and  preached,  till  the  mind  of  respectable  New 
England  was  saturated  with  prejudice.  The  democratic  principle 
was  converted  into  a  bogey  to  frighten  the  simple.  Such  a  hideous 
misshapen  imp  of  darkness,  such  a  vile  hag  of  anarchy  had  never 
before  been  painted  for  the  imagination  of  honest  Yankees  to 
shudder  at;  and  if  democracy  seemed  to  them  a  wild  and  fearsome 
thing  making  ready  to  destroy  their  venerated  social  order,  they 
only  believed  what  the  minister  preached  on  the  Sabbath  and  the 
squire  asserted  on  week  days.  The  plebeian  democrat,  very  likely 
in  debt,  was  quite  overwhelmed  by  the  organized  forces  of  village 
respectability. 

In  this  great  work  of  saving  the  commonwealth  of  Connecticut 
from  the  pollutions  of  democracy  the  Hartford  Wits  were  compe¬ 
tent  laborers.  The  more  important  members  of  the  group  were 
John  Trumbull,  Timothy  Dwight,  Joel  Barlow,  Lemuel  Hopkins, 
David  Humphreys,  Richard  Alsop,  and  Theodore  Dwight.  To 
these  may  be  added  the  names  of  Dr.  Elihu  Hubbard  Smith  and 
Dr.  Mason  F.  Cogswell,  who  were  friends  and  occasional  col¬ 
laborators.  Nearly  all  were  Yale  men  with  a  pronounced  Yale 
predilection  for  Calvinism  and  Federalism,  admirable  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  oligarchical  upper  class  of  the  provincial  Connecticut 
society.  Timothy  Dwight,  grandson  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  was  a 
minister  and  president  of  Yale;  Hopkins,  Smith  and  Cogswell 
were  physicians  of  high  professional  standing;  Trumbull  and 
Theodore  Dwight  were  lawyers;  Barlow  and  Humphreys  found 
1  Quoted  by  Samuel  Eliot  Morison  in  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  Vol.  I,  p.  107. 


360 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


their  way  into  the  diplomatic  field,  and  Alsop  was  a  merchant. 
They  were  all  comfortably  well  off  and  several  were  wealthy. 
Alsop  was  one  of  the  few  millionaires  of  the  time;  Barlow  acquired 
a  fortune  in  France;  and  Humphreys  late  in  life  established  a 
textile  industry  incorporated  for  half  a  million.  Hot  Federalists, 
they  found  in  Washington,  Governor  Trumbull,  and  Fisher  Ames, 
their  political  mentors  and  guides.  The  most  active  of  the  group 
politically,  was  Theodore  Dwight,  who  with  his  cousin  Timothy 
was  a  director  of  the  Eagle  Bank,  a  Federalist  institution,  and 
bitterly  opposed  to  the  chartering  of  Republican  banks.  When 
one  of  the  latter  applied  to  the  legislature  for  a  charter  he  denounced 
it  as  a  “child  of  intrigue  and  the  mother  of  Discord.”  He  was  deep 
in  the  Hartford  Convention,  serving  as  its  secretary  and  later  as 
its  historian.  He  denounced  Jeffersonian  republicanism  as  seeking 
to  “discredit  the  ministry,  decry  religion,  and  destroy  public 
worship,”  and  as  he  saw  it  spreading  through  New  England  he 
attributed  to  it  the  certain  decay  of  morality  and  the  impending 
break-up  of  family  ties,  exclaiming  with  somewhat  extreme  vivac¬ 
ity:  “The  outlaws  of  Europe,  the  fugitives  from  the  pillory  and 
the  gallows,  have  undertaken  to  assist  our  own  abandoned  citi¬ 
zens,  in  the  pleasing  work  of  destroying  Connecticut.  .  .  .  Can 
imagination  paint  anything  more  dreadful  on  this  side  of  hell!” 

Later  generations  remember  best  the  massive  character  of 
Timothy  Dwight,  a  man  endowed  with  all  the  Connecticut  virtues 
and  walking  amongst  his  fellows  with  magnificent  confidence  in 
his  powers.  A  great  preacher,  an  authoritative  theologian,  a 
distinguished  administrator — “every  inch  a  college  president” — 
a  ready  counselor  on  any  knotty  point  be  it  in  law  or  politics  or 
finance  or  agriculture  or  belles  lettres,  a  born  leader  of  men,  and 
by  way  of  recreation  an  inditer  of  Hebraic  epics  and  huge  didactic 
poems  and  ample  Connecticut  pastorals,  a  confirmed  traveler 
observing  the  manner  of  life  in  many  commonwealths  and  pre¬ 
serving  his  observations  in  solid  volumes — he  was  a  man  to  compel 
the  admiration  of  his  fellows  and  put  his  stamp  upon  his  age.  So 
vast  was  the  contemporary  reputation  of  Timothy  Dwight,  and  so 
many-sided,  it  may  seem  ironical  that  time  should  have  shrunk  him 
to  the  narrow  compass  of  a  paragraph  in  our  literary  history.  And 
yet  the  more  curiously  one  considers  the  work  of  the  great  president 
of  Yale,  the  more  insistent  become  one’s  doubts  concerning  the 
fineness  of  this  nugget  of  Connecticut  gold.  It  shows  very  sus- 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


361 


picious  signs  of  tarnish.  His  commanding  presence  and  authori¬ 
tative  manner,  his  sonorous  eloquence,  his  forwardness  in  defense 
of  what  few  doubted,  his  vehement  threshing  of  straw  long  since 
reduced  to  chaff,  his  prodigious  labors,  his  abundant  printing,  no 
longer  seem  so  authentic  a  seal  of  greatness  as  they  seemed  to  his 
open-mouthed  contemporaries;  and  one  suspects  that  he  impressed 
his  fellow  citizens  by  the  completeness  with  which  he  measured  up 
to  every  Connecticut  ideal,  rather  than  by  the  creative  vigor  of 
his  mind.  The  great  Timothy,  in  short,  seems  to  a  later  generation 
to  have  been  little  more  than  a  walking  repository  of  the  venerable 
Connecticut  status  quo. 

The  intellectual  inquisitiveness  that  gave  birth  to  disintegrating 
theory  in  the  mind  of  his  grandfather  Jonathan  Edwards,  and  made 
him  a  profoundly  revolutionary  influence  in  his  time,  was  wholly 
lacking  in  the  grandson.  The  latter  refused  to  follow  the  question¬ 
ing  intellect  into  unsurveyed  fields.  He  would  not  meddle  with 
change.  His  mind  was  closed  as  tight  as  his  study  windows  in 
January.  He  read  widely  in  the  fields  of  rationalism,  but  he  read 
only  to  refute.  Now  and  then  to  be  sure,  certain  generous  prompt¬ 
ings  visited  him:  he  spoke  out  against  slavery;  he  encouraged  the 
higher  education  of  women.  But  from  such  temptations  to  become 
a  living  voice  he  turned  away  to  follow  the  main-traveled  road  of 
Connecticut  prejudice.  His  eyes  were  fixed  lovingly  upon  the  past, 
and  his  fondest  dreams  for  his  native  commonwealth  hovered  about 
the  ideal  of  a  church-state  which  John  Cotton  had  labored  to 
establish  and  Increase  Mather  to  preserve.  It  is  with  those  capable 
theocrats  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  rather  than  with  Thomas  Hooker 
of  Hartford,  that  he  is  to  be  associated.  Two  men  could  scarcely 
be  more  alike  than  Timothy  Dwight  and  Increase  Mather;  their 
careers  ran  in  similar  lines;  each  was  the  unmitered  pope  of  his 
generation,  and  each  owed  his  extraordinary  influence  to  the  same 
sterling  qualities.  As  ecclesiastical  politicians  they  drew  no  line 
between  religious  and  secular  affairs,  but  were  prompt  with  a  hand 
in  every  affair  of  the  commonwealth.  They  spoke  and  wrote  with 
unquestioned  authority.  They  regarded  the  minister  as  the 
responsible  leader  of  society  who  must  not  suffer  his  flock  to  be 
led  astray.  The  church  was  the  guardian  of  morality,  and  the 
state  was  its  secular  arm.  The  true  faith  must  not  be  put  in 
jeopardy  by  unfaith.  To  Timothy  Dwight  infidelity  and  democ¬ 
racy  went  hand  in  hand,  and  to  suffer  the  commonwealth  to  fall 


362 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


under  the  control  of  the  godless  meant  the  end  of  all  morality  and 
religion.  To  uphold  the  established  order — of  which  he  was  a 
distinguished  member — was  for  him  the  first  of  Christian  duties. 
A  stalwart  Federalist,  he  was  a  good  hater  of  all  Jacobins.  His 
detestation  of  Jefferson  was  virulent  and  he  swallowed  the  nastiest 
tales  about  the  great  Virginian  without  a  qualm,  never  doubting 
their  authenticity.  It  was  sometimes  hinted  that  he  was  too  much 
the  aristocrat  to  feel  the  warmest  sympathy  for  the  unprosperous, 
and  there  seems  to  have  been  ground  for  the  suspicion.  The 
unprosperous  were  likely  to  be  infected  with  Jeffersonian  heresies, 
and  as  he  watched  them  being  drawn  off  to  the  York-state  frontier, 
he  rejoiced  that  their  voting  power  was  no  longer  to  be  feared. 
Such  restless  spirits,  he  pointed  out,  “are  impatient  of  the  re¬ 
straints  of  law,  religion,  and  morality;  grumble  about  the  taxes, 
by  which  Rulers,  Ministers,  and  Schoolmasters  are  supported.  .  .  . 
We  have  many  troubles  even  now;  but  we  should  have  many  more, 
if  this  body  of  foresters  had  remained  at  home.”  2  If  the  dis¬ 
affected  did  not  like  the  way  the  Congregational-Federalist  party 
managed  the  good  state  of  Connecticut,  it  were  a  godsend  if  they 
should  remove  beyond  its  boundaries. 

But  it  is  with  the  literary  work  of  Timothy  Dwight  that  we  are 
more  immediately  concerned,  and  in  all  his  abundant  output, 
totaling  fourteen  volumes  and  perhaps  as  much  more  in  manu¬ 
script,  the  same  solid  qualities  are  revealed.  It  is  the  occasional 
work  of  a  man  wanting  humor,  playfulness,  grace,  lacking  subtlety 
and  creative  suggestiveness,  but  with  a  shrewd  common  sense,  a 
great  vigor,  and  a  certain  grandiose  imagination.  A  sonorous 
declaimer,  he  dearly  loved  combat  and  the  shock  of  marshaled 
argument.  He  went  out  of  his  way  to  invite  majestic  effects. 
In  The  Conquest  of  Canaan  he  described  so  many  thunderstorms 
that  Trumbull  suggested  he  ought  to  furnish  a  lightning  rod  with 
the  poem.  Such  a  man  could  not  move  easily  in  narrow  spaces. 
An  epic  was  none  too  slight  to  contain  his  exuberant  rhetoric.  His 
ready  versification,  one  often  feels,  runs  like  a  water  pipe  with 
the  faucet  off;  the  words  flow  in  an  unbroken  stream  with  never 
a  pause  to  pick  or  choose.  Yet  even  in  his  amazing  copiousness 
there  is  vigor;  a  well-stocked  mind  is  pouring  out  the  gatherings 
of  years.  When  he  pauses  to  give  advice — as  he  was  fond  of  doing — 
his  abundant  sense  is  worth  listening  to;  the  homely  wisdom  of 

2  Travels,  Vol.  II,  p.  458. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


363 


his  talk  to  the  farmer*  in  the  sixth  part  of  Greenfield  Hill  is  not 
unlike  Franklin.  As  a  satirist  he  belongs  to  the  Churchill  school; 
he  is  downright,  abusive,  often  violent,  quite  lacking  the  lightness 
of  touch  and  the  easy  gayety  that  runs  so  pleasantly  through 
M’Fingal.  His  Triumph  of  Infidelity  is  solid  old-fashioned  pulpit¬ 
thumping.  The  spirit  of  toleration  was  withheld  from  him  by  his 
fairy  godmother,  and  he  knew  no  other  way  of  dealing  with  those 
who  persisted  in  disagreement  after  their  mistakes  had  been 
pointed  out,  than  the  cudgel.  In  this  tremendous  poem  he  lays 
about  him  vigorously.  On  Hume  and  Voltaire  and  Priestley,  and 
all  their  followers,  his  blows  fall  smartly.  Bloody  crowns  ought 
to  be  plentiful,  but — though  he  does  not  seem  to  know  it — the 
blows  fall  on  straw  men  and  none  proves  mortal.  On  the  whole 
one  prefers  him  in  the  pastoral  mood  when  he  lays  aside  his  minis¬ 
terial  gown,  and  (dreenfield,  Hilly  unless  one  excepts  the  Travels 
in  New  England  and  Nrw  York ,  remains  his  most  attractive  work. 
Yet  even  that  is  sadly  in  need  of  winnowing.  A  great  college 
president  Timothy  Dwight  may  very  well  have  been;  he  was 
worshiped  by  his  admirers  only  this  side  idolatry;  but  a  great 
thinker,  a  steadfast  friend  of  truth  in  whatever  garb  it  might 
appear,  a  generous  kindly  soul  loving  even  publicans  and  sinners, 
regardful  of  others  and  forgetful  of  self,  he  assuredly  was  not. 

2.  “The  As apxhiad ” 

Most  of  the  political  satire  of  the  Wits  was  done  in  collaboration, 
and  consists  of  occasional  sketches  contributed  to  newspapers — 
with  explanatory  comments  and  notes — dealing  with  matters  of 
current  interest.  Of  the  major  v/orks  thus  produced,  The  Anarchiad , 
The  Echo,  and  The  Political  Greenhouse,  the  first  will  suffice  to 
reveal  the  political  sympathies  of  the  Hartford  group.  The  Anar¬ 
chiad  is  a  mock  epic  designed  to  counteract  the  populistic  tenden¬ 
cies  of  post-war  times.  It  was  published  in  The  New  Haven  Gazette 
between  October  2 A,  1786,  and  September  13,  1787.  In  1861  it 
was  resurrected  from  a  long  sleep  by  Luther  G.  Riggs,  and  re¬ 
issued  with  an  introduction  and  notes.  “This  fearless  satire,” 
according  to  the  editor,  “is  supposed  to  have  exerted  great  and 
beneficial  influence  upon  the  public  mind,  and  to  have  tended  in  no 
small  degree  to  check  the  leaders  of  insubordination  and  infidel 
philosophy”;  and  it  must  be  regarded  as  “  a  nationd  Poem,  battling 
nobly  for  the  right  universal,  for  the  majesty  of  law,  and  for  the 


364 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


Federal  government.”  The  idea  was  got  from  a  contemporary 
English  screed  entitled  The  Rolliad,  one  of  the  numerous  political 
satires  of  which  the  late  eighteenth  century  was  so  fond.  Probably 
most  of  the  members  of  the  group  had  a  hand  in  it,  but  the  acrid 
quality  of  its  comment  owes  more  to  Hopkins  than  to  the  others. 

For  such  work  the  angular  Connecticut  physician  was  admirably 
fitted.  The  son  of  a  Waterbury  farmer,  Dr.  Lemuel  Hopkins 
was  the  most  picturesque  member  of  the  Hartford  Wits,  the  most 
characteristically  Yankee.  -Brought  up  at  the  plow-tail,  he 
received  nevertheless  an  excellent  education,  and  because  of  a 
hereditary  predisposition  to  consumption  turned  to  the  medical 
profession.  After  serving  his  apprenticeship  at  Wallingford  he 
entered  upon  his  practice  at  Litchfield  in  1776.  During  the  Revolu¬ 
tion  he  served  for  a  short  time  as  a  volunteer,  but  soon  returned 
to  his  lancet  and  medicine  case.  In  1784  he  removed  to  Hartford 
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.  In  person  he  was  tall, 
lean,  stooping,  rawboned,  with  coarse  features  and  large  brilliant 
eyes.  His  uncouth  appearance  and  eccentricity  of  manner  made 
him  a  striking  figure,  and  his  caustic  wit  rendered  him  a  redoubt¬ 
able  antagonist.  As  a  physician  he  stood  at  the  head  of  the  Con¬ 
necticut  profession.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Medical 
Society  of  Connecticut,  and  as  a  frequent  contributor  to  pro¬ 
fessional  literature  he  exerted  a  wide  influence  on  the  current 
practice. 

The  eccentric  doctor  seems  to  have  been  as  honest  as  he  was 
outspoken.  He  was  uncompromising  in  his  warfare  on  all  quacks, 
both  medical  and  political.  For  a  time  as  a  young  man  he  was  a 
disciple  of  French  infidel  philosophy,  but  he  cured  his  mental 
indisposition  by  a  severe  Biblical  regimen,  and  having  restored 
himself  to  the  robust  health  of  Calvinistic  Christianity,  he  devoted 
himself  to  the  work  of  curing  others.  He  became  in  consequence  a 
specialist  in  the  treatment  of  the  ravages  caused  by  the  bacillus 
gallicus.  For  every  sort  of  humbug  he  had  a  hearty  contempt, 
and  any  political  nostrum  not  listed  in  the  Federalistic  materia 
medica  he  regarded  as  arrant  quackery.  He  thought  no  better 
of  old  wives’  remedies  in  government  than  in  medicine,  and  when 
the  Rhode  Island  legislature  passed  its  paper-money  act  in  1785, 
and  six  months  later  Shays’s  Rebellion  broke  out,  and  mobs  were 
besieging  the  legislature  of  New  Hampshire,  he  proposed  to  speak 
plainly  to  the  good  people  of  Connecticut  on  the  follies  of  popular 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


365 


delusions.  This  would  seem  to  have  been  the  origin  of  The  Anar- 
chiad .  It  sprang  from  the  indignation  of  Dr.  Hopkins,  when,  to 
quote  from  the  poem, 

In  visions  fair,  the  scenes  of  fate  unroll. 

And  Massachusetts  opens  on  my  soul. 

There  Chaos,  Anarch  old,  asserts  his  sway, 

And  mobs  in  myriads  blacken  all  the  way. 

The  sardonic  temper  of  Dr.  Hopkins  fitted  him  for  virulent 
satire,  and  in  this  bitterest  of  the  productions  of  the  Wits,  the 
reins  were  on  the  neck  of  the  muse.  Scarcely  another  New  England 
satire  reflects  so  sharply  the  class  consciousness  that  underlay  the 
bitter  struggle  between  agrarianism  and  capitalism.  It  is  a  slash¬ 
ing  attack  upon  agrarian  economics  and  democratic  liberalism, 
a  versified  echo  of  the  anger  of  creditors  who  were  fighting  the 
measures  of  populistic  legislatures.  The  staple  of  the  satire  is 
the  wickedness  of  all  paper-money  issues,  with  the  State  of  Rhode 
Island  as  the  chief  of  agrarian  sinners.  About  this  main  theme  is 
gathered  a  miscellany  of  Federalist  shibboleths— the  godlessness 
of  Shays  and  his  crew,  the  seditious  spirit  of  all  who  oppose  the 
new  Constitution,  the  demagoguery  of  democratic  politicians — and 
the  satire  rises  to  a  patriotic  crescendo  in  declaiming  against  the 
folly  of  the  democratic  ideal.  So  tremendous  a  work,  however, 
cannot  be  adequately  described;  the  lines  must  speak  for  them¬ 
selves.  The  following  bits  may  serve  in  lieu  of  the  whole,  the 
first  of  which  is  a  comment  on  Rhode  Island,  the  pariah  of  States: 

Hail!  realm  of  rogues,  renown’d  for  fraud  and  guile, 

All  hail!  ye  knav’ries  of  yon  little  isle. 

There  prowls  the  rascal,  cloth’d  with  legal  pow’r. 

To  snare  the  orphan,  and  the  poor  devour; 

The  crafty  knave  his  creditor  besets 
And  advertising  paper  pays  his  debts; 

Bankrupts  their  creditors  with  rage  pursue. 

No  stop,  no  mercy  from  the  debtor  crew. 

Arm’d  with  new  tests,  the  licens’d  villain  bold, 

Presents  his  bills,  and  robs  them  of  their  gold; 

Their  ears,  though  rogues  and  counterfeiters  lose, 

No  legal  robber  fears  the  gallows  noose. 

Look  through  the  State,  the  unhallow’d  ground  appears 
A  pen  of  dragons,  and  a  cave  of  bears; 

A  nest  of  vipers,  mix’d  with  adders  foul; 

The  screeching  night-bird,  and  the  greater  owl: 

For  now,  unrighteousness,  a  deluge  wide, 


366 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


Pours  round  the  land  an  overwhelming  tide; 

And  dark  injustice,  wrapp’d  in  paper  sheets, 

Rolls  a  dread  torrent  through  the  wasted  streets; 

While  net  of  law  th’  unwary  fry  draws  in 
To  damning  deeds,  and  scarce  they  know  they  sin. 

New  paper  struck,  new  tests,  new  tenders  made, 

Insult  mankind,  and  help  the  thriving  trade. 

Each  weekly  print  new  lists  of  cheats  proclaims, 

Proud  to  enroll  their  knav’ries  and  their  names; 

The  wiser  race,  the  snares  of  law  to  shun, 

Like  Lot  from  Sodom,  from  Rhode  Island  run.  .  .  ,3 

Nor  less  abhorr’d,  the  certain  woe  that  waits 
The  giddy  rage  of  democratic  States, 

Whose  pop’lar  breath,  high-blown  in  restless  tide, 

No  laws  can  temper,  and  no  reason  guide: 

An  equal  sway,  their  mind  indignant  spurns; 

To  wanton  sway,  the  bliss  of  freedom  turns; 

Led  by  wild  demagogues,  the  factious  crowd, 

Mean,  fierce,  imperious,  insolent  and  loud, 

Nor  fame,  nor  wealth,  nor  power,  nor  system  draws — 
They  see  no  object,  and  perceive  no  cause; 

But  feel,  by  turns,  in  one  disastrous  hour, 

Th’  extremes  of  license,  and  th’  extremes  of  power.  .  .  .* 

Will  this  vain  scheme  bid  restless  factions  cease, 

Check  foreign  wars,  or  fix  internal  peace? 

Call  public  credit  from  her  grave  to  rise, 

Or  gain  in  grandeur  what  they  lose  in  size?  .  .  . 

But  know,  ye  favor’d  race,  one  potent  head 

Must  rule  your  States,  and  strike  your  foes  with  dread. 

The  finance  regulate,  the  trade  control, 

Live  through  the  empire,  and  accord  the  whole. 

Ere  death  invades,  the  night’s  deep  curtain  falls. 
Through  ruin’d  realms  the  voice  of  union  calls;  .  .  . 

On  you  she  calls!  attend  the  warning  cry; 

Ye  live  united,  or  divided  die!  4 

But  chief  the  race  allured  by  fleeting  fame, 

Who  seek  on  earth  the  politicians  name; 

Auspicious  race!  whom  folly  joys  to  bless, 

And  wealth  and  honor  crown  with  glad  success; 

Formed,  like  balloons,  by  emptiness  to  rise 
On  pop’lar  gales,  to  waft  them  through  the  skies  .  .  . 
See,  from  the  shades,  on  tiny  pinions  swell 
And  rise,  the  young  democracy  of  hell! 

Before  their  face  the  powers  of  Congress  fade, 

And  public  credit  sinks,  an  empty  shade; 

3  Number  III. 


4  Number  X. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


367 


Wild  severance  rages,  wars  intestine  spread, 

Their  boasted  union  hides  her  dying  head; 

The  forms  of  government  in  ruin  hurl’d, 

Reluctant  empire  quits  the  western  world.6 

Amid  such  democratic  welter  and  mortal  confusion  the  sole 
hope  of  safety  lies  in  Federalism,  and  the  sapient  leader  who 
shall  bring  order  out  of  the  wild  misrule  is  thus  greeted: 

Ardent  and  bold,  the  smiling  land  to  save, 

In  council  sapient  as  in  action  brave, 

I  fear’d  young  Hamilton’s  unshaken  soul, 

And  saw  his  arm  our  wayward  host  control;  .  .  . 

Fire  in  his  eye,  and  thunder  on  his  tongue.6 

Other  work  the  Hartford  Wits  did,  but  none  which  need  detain 
us.  Soon  changes  and  removals  broke  up  the  coterie,  and  they 
went  diverse  ways  to  diverse  rewards:  Timothy  Dwight  to  safe¬ 
guard  Yale  undergraduates  in  New  Haven,  Humphreys  to  the 
American  legation  at  Paris,  Trumbull  to  the  Michigan  frontier, 
and  Barlow  to  his  notable  career  in  Europe.  But  happily  not 
before  they  had  contributed  their  portion  of  sweetness  and  light 
to  the  great  debate.  The  Wits  were  no  skulkers  in  presence  of 
“insubordination  and  infidel  philosophy,”  when  their  economic 
interests  were  touched. 


ii 

THE  FRENCH  GROUP 

The  Wits  were  not  devoid  of  cleverness,  but  they  were  wanting 
in  ideas.  They  were  partisans  rather  than  intellectuals.  In  the 
role  of  self-appointed  custodians  of  Federalist  moralities  they 
were  rather  tedious  fellows,  who  substituted  fustian  for  creative 
thought,  and  blew  up  their  verses  with  flatulent  rhetoric.  They 
sealed  the  windows  of  their  minds  against  the  disturbing  winds 
of  doctrine  that  were  blowing  briskly;  they  inspected  the  family 
tree  of  every  new  idea  to  determine  its  respectability.  An  occa¬ 
sional  fresh  idea  is  necessary  to  keep  one  from  falling  into  staleness 
and  mediocrity;  but  the  Wits  chose  to  remain  too  ignorant  to  be 
interesting,  and  it  is  a  relief  to  turn  from  them  to  the  more  stimu¬ 
lating  company  of  the  French  partisans.  Here  at  least  there  was 
intellectual  sincerity:  a  genuine  desire  to  understand  what  was 
6  Number  XI,  6  Number  IX, 


368  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

going  on  in  the  larger  world  of  thought;  to  use  what  brains  God 
had  given  them  to  better  the  lot  of  the  American  people.  Philip 
Freneau,  Joel  Barlow,  and  Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge  were  not 
intellectual  giants,  but  they  represent  the  best  intelligence  then 
being  devoted  to  literature  in  America,  and  their  work  retains  a 
suggestiveness  today  far  beyond  that  of  the  Hartford  Wits. 

1.  Philip  Freneau 
Poet  of  Two  Revolutions 

It  is  fitting  that  our  first  outstanding  poet  should  have  been  a 
liberal.  The  idealist  has  always  seen  deeper  into  the  spirit  of 
America  than  the  realist,  and  been  less  complacent  with  halfway 
achievement.  And  it  is  equally  fitting  that  his  idealism  should 
have  got  him  into  trouble  with  the  dominant  group  of  his  genera¬ 
tion.  Philip  Freneau  was  a  volunteer  in  two  revolutions,  a  color- 
sergeant  carrying  the  newly  unfurled  flag  of  democracy  in  the 
thick  of  civil  strife.  He  was  a  lifelong  rebel,  whose  rebellions 
turned  out  to  be  patriotic  or  seditious  as  they  went  with  or  against 
the  purpose  of  the  victorious  party.  In  the  Revolution  of  ’76  he 
fought  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  John  Adams  and  Hamilton  and 
Washington,  and  his  services  were  accorded  high  praise.  His 
poems  inspired  patriotic  enthusiasm,  greatly  aided  the  national 
cause,  and  won  wide  approval.  But  in  the  Revolution  of  ’93  he 
parted  company  with  Adams  and  Hamilton  and  Washington. 
When  the  old  leaders  turned  back  in  fear  at  the  unloosing  of 
democratic  aspirations,  he  went  forward  to  new  battles.  He  served 
the  cause  of  ’93  with  the  same  ardor  that  had  inspired  his  pen  in 
’76.  It  was  not  a  new  cause  in  his  eyes,  but  the  old;  not  a  differ¬ 
ent  war,  as  Federalists  asserted,  but  other  battles  of  the  same  war — 
the  never  ceasing  struggle  for  human  freedom. 

In  thus  breaking  with  the  party  of  Federalism  and  casting  his 
lot  with  the  democratic  Jacobins,  Freneau  contracted  a  serious 
mesalliance  that  destroyed  his  good  name.  Thereafter  he  was 
marked  as  a  vulgar  democrat,  a  disseminator  of  insubordination 
and  infidelity,  an  evil  influence  among  a  respectable,  God-fearing 
people.  The  further  he  went  in  his  new  crusade,  the  lower  he  sank 
in  decent  opinion,  until  the  poet  of  the  American  Revolution  came 
to  be  regarded  as  the  hireling  mouthpiece  of  Jefferson,  a  writer 
of  wretched  and  insolent  doggerel,  an  incendiary  journalist — a 
mean  and  paltry  figure  beside  the  stately  forms  of  the  Fathers  of 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


369 


the  Constitution.  Gentlemen  exhausted  the  resources  of  ample 
vocabularies  to  express  their  detestation  of  his  leveling  ways.  To 
Timothy  Dwight  he  was  “A  mere  incendiary,  or  rather  ...  a 
despicable  tool  of  bigger  incendiaries,  and  his  paper  ...  a  public 
nuisance.”  To  the  gentle-natured  Irving  he  was  “A  barking  cur,” 
and  to  Washington,  whose  words  were  accorded  a  quasi-royal 
respect,  he  was  “That  rascal  Freneau”:  rather  loose  expressions, 
certainly,  for  cultivated  gentlemen  to  apply  to  another  cultivated 
gentleman,  the  friend  of  Madison  and  Brackenridge.  It  is  evident 
that  Freneau  and  the  great  Federalist  leaders  disagreed  somewhat 
violently  in  their  interpretations  of  the  purpose  and  scope  of  the 
new  venture  in  republicanism. 

The  source  of  their  disagreement  lay  in  divergencies  of  social 
philosophy  too  great  to  be  bridged.  In  his  republicanism  Freneau 
had  gone  far  in  advance  of"  the  Federalists.  He  was  a  democrat 
while  they  remained  aristocrats.  He  had  rid  himself  of  a  host  of 
outworn  prejudices,  the  heritage  of  an  obsolete  past,  which  held 
them  in  bondage.  He  had  read  more  clearly  the  meaning  of  the 
great  movement  of  decentralization  that  was  shaping  a  new  psy¬ 
chology,  and  must  lead  eventually  to  democratic  individualism. 
He  had  no  wish  to  stay  or  thwart  that  development;  he 
accepted  it  wholly  with  all  its  implications.  He  had  freed  his 
mind  from  the  thralldom  of  caste;  he  was  impelled  by  no  egoistic 
desire  to  impose  his  will  upon  others;  he  was  wholly  free  from  the 
lust  of  economic  aggression,  either  for  himself  or  for  his  class.  He 
was  an  idealist  who  cared  only  for  the  res  publica ,  the  common 
well-being,  and  he  desired  chiefly  that  the  new  American  govern¬ 
ment  should  serve  the  needs  of  a  free  people.  There  was  no  envy 
in  the  soul  of  Freneau,  and  no  self-seeking.  He  was  the  friend 
of  civilization  rather  than  the  advocate  of  particular  forms  of 
government.  He  put  his  trust  in  local  self-rule  rather  than  in  a 
coercive  state.  Like  Paine  he  distrusted  all  centralizing  power. 
Like  Franklin  he  regarded  the  every-day  world  of  business  and 
politics  as  a  preposterous  arrangement,  unconcerned  with  justice; 
and  he  took  it  on  himself  to  do  what  he  could  to  make  it  over.  All 
his  life  he  was  an  unmuzzled  advocate  of  whatever  new  movements 
gave  promise  of  lessening  the  old  tyrannies.  In  championing  the 
cause  of  democracy,  he  championed  a  score  of  lesser  causesrUni- 
tarianism,  deism,  antislavery,  Americanism  in  education:  thereby 
bringing  down  on  his  head  the  resentment  of  all  the  conservatisms, 


370 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

religious,  political,  economic,  social,  then  prospering  in  America. 
Nevertheless  he  went  his  way  through  a  sordid  world  of  politicians 
and  speculators,  feeding  upon  whatever  shreds  of  beauty  he  met 
with,  a  dreamer  and  an  idealist  sneered  at  by  exploiters,  a  spirit 
touched  to  finer  issues  than  his  generation  cared  for. 

The  chief  desire  of  Freneau’s  life  was  to  be  a  poet,  and  if  the 
country  had  not  been  turmoiled  by  revolution,  doubtless  he  would 
have  been  content  to  “live  unpromoted  and  write  poems.”  But 
revolution  and  not  poetry  was  the  serious  business  of  the  age,  and 
he  chose  to  have  a  hand  in  that  business.  Many  later  critics  have 
lamented  his  choice.  They  regret  that  he  did  not  turn  aside  from 
the  battle-ground  to  wander  in  pastoral  fields;  that  he  was  not 
content  with  the  nodes  coenaeque  deum  where  the  minstrel’s  song 
is  sufficient  passport  to  hospitality.  It  is  a  nice  question  of  literary 
ethics.  The  raw  material  of  poetry  was  in  Philip  Freneau;  there 
was  need  only  of  calm  years  to  master  his  art  and  clarify  the  vague 
romanticism  of  his  nature.  He  had  only  to  stand  apart  from  the 
turmoil,  refusing  to  soil  his  hands  with  politics,  and  cultivate  his 
faculty  for  verse,  to  have  made  himself  the  indisputable  founder 
of  American  poetry.  He  was  endowed  with  a  romantic  imagination 
and  love  of  natural  beauty,  a  generation  before  the  romantic  re¬ 
vival,  and  he  might  well  have  become  a  notable  contributor  to 
that  revival. 

But  he  refused  to  stand  apart.  He  would  not  hire  a  substitute 
to  defend  the  cause  of  freedom.  There  was  rough  work  to  be  done, 
and  the  democrats  were  too  few  to  spare  so  competent  a  workman. 
So  when  poetry  proved  unequal  to  the  task  he  turned  journalist, 
and  set  to  work  in  a  field  unclaimed  by  the  muses.  It  was  an 
immense  sacrifice,  bringing  disaster  to  all  hope  of  contemporary 
fame,  and  tarnishing  his  reputation  in  after  years.  His  place 
in  American  letters  was  fixed  by  a  Federalist  verdict,  and  he  has 
since  remained  obscure  and  neglected  by  all,  save  an  occasional 
historian  who  dips  into  a  few  poems,  regrets  that  the  smell  of  revo¬ 
lution  is  so  rank,  and  dismisses  him  with  the  comment  that  Camp¬ 
bell  and  Scott  did  him  the  honor  to  appropriate  a  figure  of  speech 
without  acknowledgment.  Only  within  recent  years  has  a  col¬ 
lected  edition  of  his  poems  been  accessible,  and  his  prose  writings 
still  remain  buried  in  newspaper  files.  In  consequence  the  literary 
critics  have  echoed  the  political  critics,  and  given  new  life  to  the 
old  partisanship.  Thus  Professor  Wendell  remarks  that  *‘a.  con- 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


371 


siderable  part  of  his  poetry  .  .  .  consists  of  rather  reckless  satire, 
not  conspicuously  better  or  worse  than  much  other  satire  of  the 
period.”  7  Even  Professor  Tyler,  usually  so  generous  in  sympathy 
for  our  early  writers,  dismisses  Freneau  with  these  words: 

The  poor  old  man,  thus  found  dead  on  the  lonely  New  Jersey  moor,  had 
undoubtedly  some  sweetness  in  his  heart;  but  he  permitted  very  little  of 
it  to  work  its  way  down  to  the  tip  of  his  pen.  With  that  pitiless  pen  of  his 
he  had  fought  many  a  fierce  fight  in  his  day.  .  .  .  He  was  the  poet  of 
hatred,  rather  than  of  love.  .  .  .  Among  all  his  verses,  the  reader  finds 
scarcely  one  lyric  of  patriotic  enthusiasm,  nor  many  lines  to  thrill  the 
hearts  of  the  Revolutionists  by  any  touch  of  loving  devotion  to  their 
cause,  but  everywhere  lines  hot  and  rank  with  sarcasm  and  invective 
against  the  enemy.  .  .  .  Like  Odell,  Freneau  was  a  good  hater;  his  was 
the  wrathful  muse;  his  chosen  warfare  was  grim,  unsparing,  deadly.  He 
was  the  satirical  gladiator  on  behalf  of  the  Revolution,  even  as  Odell  was 
the  satirical  gladiator  in  opposition  to  it.8 

Such  commentary  is  neither  discriminating  nor  just.  That  the 
ways  of  Freneau  were  often  ruthless  it  needs  only  a  casual  reading 
of  his  satire  to  perceive;  that  he  was  a  good  hater  is  quite  as  appar¬ 
ent;  but  that  the  deeper  springs  of  his  nature  were  bitter  is  not 
true.  He  was  no  satirist  like  Churchill  to  love  filth  and  delight  in 
venom.  It  was  an  age  of  partisan  ruthlessness,  and  if  Freneau 
was  a  fierce  partisan  it  was  because  the  new  hope  then  whispering 
to  liberals  was  in  danger  of  being  stifled  by  selfish  men  who  feared 
it.  The  vision  of  a  free  republic  arising  on  the  ruins  of  colonial 
monarchy  had  taken  possession  of  his  imagination;  a  republic 
admirable  in  justice  and  righteous  in  all  its  ways.  That  vision,  he 
believed,  might  be  realized  if  the  republicans  stood  firm  in  its 
defense.  A  thousand  perils  beset  it.  The  lingering  colonial  tradi¬ 
tions — the  ties  of  old  custom — were  powerful  advocates  of  the  old 
inequality;  the  greed  of  profit  and  power — the  ambitions  of  a 
monied  aristocracy— were  equally  powerful  advocates  of  new 
tyrannies.  Not  only  must  George  III  and  his  Tory  supporters 
be  driven  from  the  land,  but  the  work  thus  begun  must  be  carried 
through.  An  army  of  domestic  enemies  must  be  dealt  with — a 
formidable  aristocracy  of  wealth  and  family.  Naturally  it  would 
be  no  holiday  task.  The  King  had  no  mind  to  be  driven  out  of 
his  American  dominions,  and  the  Federalists  had  no  mind  to 
surrender  control  of  the  new  American  state.  And  so  no  choice 

7  Literary  History  of  America,  p.  300. 

8  Literary  History  of  the  American  Revolution,  Vol.  I,  p.  172. 


372 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


remained  to  the  republicans  but  to  make  the  advocates  of  mon¬ 
archy  and  aristocracy  appear  so  hateful  in  the  eyes  of  the  people 
that  they  would  rise  and  destroy  them. 

In  times  of  profound  upheaval  the  demands  of  partisanship  are 
stern  and  exacting.  The  gray-goose  quill  may  serve  the  cause  of 
peace,  but  the  porcupine  quill  stings  and  rankles  more;  and  if 
Freneau  was  given  to  using  the  latter  it  was  because  he  cared 
greatly  for  the  ends  to  be  achieved.  “How  oft  has  rugged  nature 
charged  my  pen  with  gall,”  he  lamented  late  in  life  as  he  contem¬ 
plated  the  enemies  he  had  made.  Sensitive  and  proud,  he  had  a 
Gallic  impetuosity  of  onset.  If  he  plundered  the  broadsides  of 
their  store  of  abuse  and  ransacked  the  dictionaries  of  their  wealth 
of  scurrility,  it  was  not  because  he  loved  abuse  and  scurrilities. 
If  like  Sam  Adams,  he  was  given  to  robbing  men  of  their  char¬ 
acters,  it  was  due  to  no  personal  or  selfish  motives;  those  great 
ones  whom  he  lampooned  so  fiercely,  he  believed  were  enemies  of 
the  new  order.  If  “his  chosen  warfare  was  grim,  unsparing, 
deadly,”  as  Professor  Tyler  asserts,  it  was  because  he  was  fighting 
for  a  great  ideal  against  men  who  were  equally  grim,  unsparing, 
deadly.  Unembittered  laughter  had  little  opportunity  to  try  its 
sanative  qualities  in  that  long  warfare  of  bushwhackers. 

During  the  last  quarter  of  the  century  the  writings  of  Freneau 
in  verse  and  prose  constitute  an  abstract  and  brief  chronicle  of 
the  times.  If  they  seem  old-fashioned  to  us  today,  they  were  quite 
new-fashioned  to  the  men  who  first  read  them.  The  early  satires, 
printed  in  1775  must  have  fallen  upon  American  ears  with  almost 
startling  effect.  A  revolutionary  change  had  come  over  Freneau; 
he  had  broken  wholly  with  the  colonial  temper  and  turned  national¬ 
ist  a  year  before  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  When  he 
graduated  from  Princeton  College  in  the  summer  of  1771,  he  wrote 
in  collaboration  with  Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge  a  commencement 
poem  entitled  The  Rising  Glory  of  America,  in  which  the  youthful 
collegians,  bred  up  in  a  hotbed  of  Whiggery,  were  as  British  as 
Pitt  himself.  The  new  English  imperialism  fairly  rioted  in  the 
swelling  couplets.  The  poem  is  a  prophecy  of  the  time  when  the 
British  flag  should  wave  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  over  a 
contented  people,  who  “warm  in  liberty  and  freedom’s  cause,” 
gloried  in  the  name  of  Briton.  Agriculture  and  commerce  are  duly 
celebrated  as  the  twin  pillars  of  American  prosperity,  and  the 
pages  of  colonial  history  are  combed  for  great  names  and  heroic 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


373 


deeds.  On  the  roll  of  American  heroes  Braddock,  Sir  William 
Johnson,  and  Whitefield  are  the  most  conspicuous.  Oddly  enough 
Washington’s  valor  at  the  time  of  Braddock’s  defeat  was  unknown 
to  these  collegians  in  1771,  but  was  afterwards  discovered  and 
inserted  in  later  editions.  Following  independence  Freneau  revised 
the  poem  and  the  changed  circumstances  played  havoc  with  the 
colonial  text.  Braddock  was  silently  expunged  together  with 
“Britannia’s  warlike  troops,  Choice  spirits  of  her  isle.”  “False 
Gallia’s  sons”  becomes  “Gallia’s  hostile  sons.”  A  notable  tribute 
to  English  generosity  seemed  incongruous  to  Freneau  after  his 
experience  on  the  prison  ship  and  was  deleted.  He  no  longer  felt 
that 

The  British  epithet  is  merciful, 

And  we  the  sons  of  Britain  learn  like  them 
To  conquer  and  to  spare. 

What  happened  to  Freneau  during  the  years  following  his 
graduation  is  uncertain,  but  in  July,  1775,  he  appeared  in  New 
York  City  with  his  pockets  stulfed  with  another  sort  of  verse, 
which  he  scattered  among  the  print-shops,  the  rebellious  spirit 
of  which  may  be  judged  from  the  prayer, 

Libera  Nos,  Domine. — Deliver  us,  O  Lord,  not  only  from  British  depend¬ 
ence,  but 

From  the  scoundrel,  Lord  North,  who  would  bind  us  in  chains, 

From  a  royal  king  Log,  with  his  tooth-full  of  brains, 

Who  dreams,  and  is  certain  (when  taking  a  nap) 

He  has  conquered  our  lands,  as  they  lay  on  his  map. 

From  a  kingdom  that  bullies,  and  hectors,  and  swears. 

We  send  up  to  heaven  our  wishes  and  prayers 
That  we,  disunited,  may  freemen  be  still, 

And  Britain  go  on — to  be  damned  if  she  will.9 

The  colonial  slipped  easily  from  Freneau  and  left  him  wholly 
American.  And  with  the  colonial  psychology  there  slipped  from 
him  also  the  useless  impedimenta  of  old-world  social  and  political 
philosophies.  How  far  he  advanced  towards  the  democratic 
conception  of  society,  during  those  first  rebellious  years,  is  not 
clear;  but  he  had  set  his  foot  on  a  path  that  must  conduct  him 
far  if  he  did  not  turn  back.  And  it  is  certain  that  he  never  turned 
back.  His  declaration  of  independence  from  King  George  was 
the  first  of  many  such  declarations  of  independence — for  himself 

9  Poems,  Pattee  edition,  Vol.  I,  p.  141. 

> 


374 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


and  his  fellow  Americans.  Thereafter  his  serious  business  was  the 
work  of  stripping  from  the  colonial  every  loyalty  which  still 
bound  him  to  England.  He  supplemented  the  work  of  Paine  in 
teaching  men  whose  fathers  were  English  that  they  were  of  another 
nation;  that  they  could  no  longer  remain  both  English  and  Ameri¬ 
can,  but  must  make  choice  between  the  two  allegiances.  Year 
after  year  he  stirred  the  troubled  waters,  arousing  the  spirit  of 
nationalism  by  attacking  everything  pro-British.  His  attacks  on 
the  English  generals,  the  Tories,  the  royalist  printers,  were  but 
means  to  the  great  end  of  uprooting  the  traditional  dependence 
on  England  and  quickening  the  new  national  psychology. 

The  second  stimulus  to  Freneau’s  revolutionary  ardor  came 
from  the  French  uprising.  Later  in  the  summer  of  1775  he  had 
quitted  New  York  and  sailed  for  the  West  Indies.  He  spent  two 
years  on  the  Island  of  Santa  Cruz,  then  and  later  engaging  in  sea 
voyages  about  the  islands  and  along  the  American  coast.  They 
were  creative  years,  when  removed  equally  from  the  distractions 
of  war  and  the  utilitarianism  of  America,  he  was  free  to  cultivate 
the  romantic  strain  of  poetry  that  was  strong  in  him.  Then 
followed  unhappier  days.  A  period  of  stagnation  had  come  to 
him  during  the  years  of  post-war  reaction;  and  if  fresh  fuel  had 
not  been  brought  from  overseas  to  kindle  anew  his  social  en¬ 
thusiasms,  it  is  likely  that  he  would  have  drifted  into  a  stale  and 
unprofitable  old  age.  The  spirit  of  romantic  poetry  was  deadened 
by  an  unsympathetic  environment,  but  with  the  democratic  hope 
rising  in  France  came  a  fresh  call  to  arms.  He  discovered  a  larger 
and  nobler  interpretation  of  his  republican  creed,  that  was  to 
transform  it  into  French  Jacobinism  and  arm  it  for  a  new  leveling 
crusade.  If  he  could  not  be  a  poet  to  America  he  would  enlist  in 
the  army  of  democracy.  Not  only  must  the  new  government  be 
made  French-democratic  instead  of  English- Whig,  but  all  dis¬ 
tinctions  of  rank  must  be  swept  away,  together  with  every  tyran¬ 
nical  dogma  of  church  and  state.  In  short  there  must  be  a  social 
house-cleaning,  the  limits  of  which  were  to  be  determined  only 
by  reason  and  the  common  democratic  good.  So  Freneau  en¬ 
thusiastically  joined  with  Paine  and  Jefferson  in  the  partisan 
labor  of  spreading  the  new  faith. 

His  literary  activity  during  this  second  period  was  remarkable. 
Songs  and  odes  and  satires  came  from  his  ready  pen  in  unending 
stream,  eager,  cutting,  vibrant  with  feeling.  It  requires  an  inti- 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


375 


mate  knowledge  of  the  times  to  make  out  the  identity  of  every 
figure  at  which  he  shoots  his  arrows,  but  it  needs  no  very  intimate 
knowledge  to  measure  the  intensity  of  his  partisanship.  The 
democratic  hopes  and  fears  of  those  vibrant  days  find  reflection 
in  many  an  acrid  verse.  He  was  at  one  with  Jefferson  in  his 
concern  at  the  monarchical  reaction. 

In  ten  short  years,  of  freedom  weary  grown 
The  State,  Republic,  sickens  for  a  throne. 

The  man  who  attached  to  the  pen  name  of  Peter  Slender  the 
letters  O.  S.  M. — One  of  the  Swinish  Multitude — would  not  fail 
to  take  the  part  of  the  private  soldier  neglected  by  the  state: 

Sold  are  those  arms  which  once  on  Britons  blazed, 

When,  flushed  with  conquest,  to  the  charge  they  came; 

That  power  repelled,  and  Freedom’s  fabrick  raised, 

She  leaves  her  soldier — famine  and  a  name!  10 

Nor  would  he  fail  to  capitalize  the  aristocratic  contempt  of  the 
Federalists  for  that  same  swinish  multitude. 

Lodge  where  you  must,  drink  small-beer  where  you  can, 

But  eat  no  roast  pig,  if  no  Federal  man.  .  .  . 

Your  mouth  was  made  for  rye  or  barley  bread; 

What  claims  have  you  to  halls  of  state, 

Whose  business  is  to  stand  and  wait, 

Subservient  to  command? 

What  right  have  you  to  white-bread,  superfine, 

Who  were  by  nature  destin’d  for  “ a  swine” — 

As  said  good  Edmund  Burke, 

The  drudge  of  Britain’s  dirty  work, 

Whose  mighty  pamphlets  rous’d  the  royal  band! 11 

During  the  tumultuous  year  of  ’93  Freneau  issued  a  series  of 
Probationary  Odes  by  Jonathan  Pindar,  Esq.,  which  reflect  sharply 
the  partisan  passions  aroused  by  the  French  Revolution.  They 
were  lampoons  directed  at  members  of  government  who  were  in 
the  democratic  black-book,  chiefly  John  Adams,  Knox,  and  Hamil¬ 
ton.  The  introductory  poem  was  addressed  To  all  the  Great  Folks 
in  a  Lump;  the  second.  To  Atlas,  was  an  attack  on  Hamilton;  the 
third,  To  A  Select  Body  of  Great  Men,  was  a  lampoon  of  the 
Senate;  and  the  fourth,  To  a  Would  Be  Great  Man,  was  addressed 
to  Freneau’s  particular  bete  noire,  John  Adams.  This  last,  apropos 

10  The  American  Soldier.  11  To  Duncan  Doolittle. 


376 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

of  Davila,  will  serve  to  show  the  popular  reception  which  that 
unfortunate  work  received. 

Daddy  Vice,  Daddy  Vice, 

One  may  see  in  a  trice 
The  drift  of  your  fine  publication. 

As  sure  as  a  gun 
The  thing  was  just  done 
To  secure  you  a  pretty  high  station. 

When  you  tell  us  of  kings 
And  such  pretty  things 
Good  mercy!  how  brilliant  your  page  is! 

So  bright  is  each  line 
I  vow  you’ll  shine 

Like — a  glow  worm  to  all  future  ages. 

On  Davila’s  page 
Your  discourses  so  sage 
Democratical  numskulls  bepuzzle, 

With  arguments  tough 
As  white  leather  or  buff, 

The  republican  Bull  Dogs  to  muzzle. 

’Tis  labor  in  vain. 

Your  senses  to  strain, 

Our  brains  any  longer  to  muddle; 

Like  Colossus  you  stride 
O’er  our  noddles  so  wide 
We  look  up  like  frogs  in  a  puddle. 

If  Freneau’s  hatred  of  the  men  who  opposed  the  democratic 
movement  was  immeasurable,  his  enthusiasm  for  the  new  age  of 
reason  that  he  believed  was  rising  was  as  boundless.  His  pages 
during  those  years  of  Jacobin  radicalism  are  dotted  thick  with 
odes  to  liberty  and  addresses  to  republicans;  probably  more  fully 
than  any  other  pages  they  reflect  the  spirit  that  in  England  and 
America  was  forming  Tom  Paine  clubs,  and  projecting  innumerable 
programs  of  social  reform.  A  new  social  conscience  was  stirring 
in  Freneau,  broadening  immensely  the  horizon  of  his  thought;  and 
if  he  counted  rather  too  confidently  on  the  appeal  to  reason  to 
bring  the  golden  age,  he  proved  himself  thereby  a  true  child  of  his 
generation.  In  such  lines  as  these  one  discovers  the  spirit  that 
moved  Godwin  to  write  Political  J ustice. 

How  can  we  call  those  systems  just 
Which  bid  the  few,  the  proud,  the  first. 

Possess  all  earthly  good; 


377 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 

While  millions  robbed  of  all  that’s  dear 
In  silence  shed  the  ceaseless  tear. 

And  leaches  suck  their  blood.  .  .  . 

Let  laws  revive,  by  heaven  designed, 

To  tame  the  tiger  in  the  mind 
And  drive  from  human  hearts 
That  love  of  wealth,  that  love  of  sway. 

Which  leads  the  world  too  much  astray, 

Which  points  envenomed  darts: 

And  men  will  rise  from  what  they  are; 

Sublimer,  and  superior,  far, 

Than  Solon  guessed,  or  Plato  saw; 

All  will  be  just,  all  will  be  good — 

That  harmony,  “not  understood,” 

Will  reign  the  general  law. 

For,  in  our  race,  deranged,  bereft, 

The  parting  god  some  vestige  left 
Of  worth  before  possessed; 

Which  full,  which  fair,  which  perfect  shone, 

When  love  and  peace,  in  concord  sown, 

Ruled,  and  inspired  each  breast.12 

In  quite  another  vein,  that  reveals  Freneau’s  unusual  mastery 
of  colloquial  prose,  is  the  following  passage,  impersonating  Robert 
Slender,  the  country  philosopher. 

Mr.  Editor, 

Having  heard  that  there  was  a  tavern  at  about  the  distance  of  a  mile  or 
so  from  my  favorite  country  spot,  where  now  and  then  a  few  neighbors 
meet  to  spit,  smoke  segars,  drink  apple  whiskey,  cider  or  cider-royal,  and 
read  the  news — a  few  evenings  ago,  I  put  on  my  best  coat,  combed  out 
my  wig,  put  my  spectacles  in  my  pocket,  and  a  quarter  dollar — This 
I  thought  was  right;  for  although  Mrs.  Slender  told  me  eleven-pence  was 
enough,  says  I,  I’ll  e’en  take  the  quarter  dollar,  for  a  man  always  feels 
himself  of  more  consequence  when  he  has  got  good  money  in  his  pocket — 
so  out  I  walks  with  a  good  stout  stick  in  my  hand,  which  I  always  make  a 
point  to  carry  with  me,  lest  the  dogs  should  make  rather  freer  with  my 
legs  than  I  could  wish.  But  I  had  not  gone  more  than  half  the  way,  when, 
bv  making  a  false  step,  I  splash’d  my  stocking  from  the  knee  to  the  ancle. 
Odds  my  heart,  said  I,  see  what  a  hand  I  have  made  of  my  stocking;  I’ll 
be  bail,  added  I,  I’ll  hear  of  this  in  both  sides  of  my  head — but  it  can’t 
now  be  helped — this,  and  a  thousand  worse  accidents,  which  daily  happen, 
are  all  occasioned  by  public  neglect,  and  the  misapplication  of  the  public’s 
money — Had  I,  said  I,  (talking  to  myself  all  the  while)  the  disposal  of 
but  half  the  income  of  the  United  States,  I  could  at  least  so  order  matters, 
12  On  False  Systems  of  Government. 


378  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

that  a  man  might  walk  to  his  next  neighbor’s  without  splashing  his  stock¬ 
ings  or  being  in  danger  of  breaking  his  legs  in  ruts,  holes,  gutts,  and 
gullies.  I  do  not  know,  says  I  to  myself,  as  I  moralized  on  my  splash’d 
stocking,  but  money  might  with  more  profit  be  laid  out  in  repairing  the 
roads,  than  in  marine  establishments,  supporting  a  standing  army,  useless 
embassies,  exorbitant  salaries,  given  to  many  flashy  fellows  that  are  no 
honor  to  us,  or  to  themselves,  and  chartering  whole  ships  to  carry  a  single 
man  to  another  nation — Odds  my  life,  continued  I,  what  a  number  of 
difficulties  a  man  labors  under,  who  has  never  read  further  than  Lilly’s 
grammar,  and  has  but  a  poor  brain — had  I  been  favored  with  a  good 
education,  I  could  no  doubt  readily  see  the  great  usefulness  of  all  these 
measures  of  government,  that  now  appear  to  me  so  unaccountable — I  could 
then,  said  I,  still  talking  to  myself,  see  the  reason  why  the  old  patriots, 
whose  blood  flowed  so  freely  in  purchasing  our  independence,  are  cast 
aside,  like  a  broken  pitcher,  (as  the  Scripture  says)  and  why  the  old  tories 
and  active  refugees  are  advanced  to  places  of  power,  honor  and  trust.13 

In  another  writer  so  whimsical  a  note  would  have  no  other 
purpose  than  to  fill  a  Spectator  paper.  But  the  garrulous  Robert 
Slender  is  Freneau  in  quieter  vein,  pursuing  his  old  purpose.  As  a 
social  philosopher  his  opinions  are  oddly  like  those  of  Tom  Paine. 
In  commenting  on  the  government’s  use  of  the  people’s  money 
he  was  seeking  to  awaken  interest  in  the  social  possibilities  of 
government:  that  government  would  better  serve  the  res  publica 
through  internal  improvements,  than  by  creating  armies  and 
navies  and  providing  posts  and  pensions  for  great  men.  This  was 
a  fashion  of  thought  which  Paine  had  done  much  to  spread,  and 
in  the  midst  of  a  pompous  Federalism,  when  gentlemen  professed 
to  believe  that  government  could  acquire  reverence  in  the  people’s 
eyes  only  by  being  hedged  about  with  ceremonial,  Robert  Slender’s 
cogitations  were  very  much  to  the  point.  If  government  were 
truly  democratized,  if  it  concerned  itself  with  realities,  serving  the 
people  in  the  homely  affairs  and  common  needs  of  everyday  life, 
there  would  be  no  need  of  aristocratic  ceremonial.  Like  Paine, 
Freneau  was  an  idealist,  with  his  head  full  of  ideas  which  to  practi¬ 
cal  men  were  only  silly  French  notions;  and  yet  the  idealist,  in 
this  matter  of  the  res  publica,  was  the  true  realist. 

For  all  his  Jacobinism  Freneau  might  have  been  spared  some 
of  the  odium  that  gathered  about  his  head  if  he  had  not  turned 
partisan  journalist  and  put  himself  in  the  thick  of  the  fight.  In  the 
eighteenth  century  the  newspaper  editor  had  not  yet  wholly  risen 

13  Letters  on  V arious  Interesting  and  Important  Subjects,  etc.,  by  Robert  Slender, 
1799;  quoted  by  Pattee,  Introduction  to  Poems  of  Philip  Freneau. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


379 


from  the  rank  of  mechanic;  he  was  still  a  master-printer,  with 
hands  much  too  ink-stained  to  pass  himself  off  as  a  gentleman, 
and  with  financial  resources  too  limited  to  be  intellectually  in¬ 
dependent.  If  his  paper  were  largely  literary  he  made  no  powerful 
enemies,  but  let  him  enter  politics  or  seek  to  mold  public  opinion 
on  important  matters,  and  he  was  likely  to  meet  the  fate  of  John 
Mein,  outspoken  editor  of  the  Boston  Chronicle,  who  was  destroyed 
for  exposing  the  weakness  of  the  merchants’  non-importation 
policy.14  Freneau  had  had  considerable  experience  in  newspaper 
work  at  times  when  his  sea  life  had  grown  irksome,  but  he  took  no 
active  part  in  politics  until  the  fall  of  1791,  when  he  set  up  the 
National  Gazette  in  Philadelphia,  and  began  that  tumultuous 
career  lasting  two  years  which  brought  so  much  abuse  upon  him. 

The  detailed  story  of  his  connection  with  the  Gazette  is  given  in 
an  admirable  study,16  and  need  not  be  recounted  further  than  to 
bring  into  relief  the  bare  essentials.  Soon  after  the  formation 
of  the  new  government  Hamilton  had  provided  himself  with  a 
newspaper,  The  United  States  Gazette,  that  was  an  effective  advocate 
of  all  Hamiltonian  policies.  The  editor,  John  Fenno,  seems  to 
have  been  a  vigorous  fellow,  into  whose  hands  Hamilton  threw 
much  of  the  public  printing,  and  whose  debts  he  paid  when  they 
became  pressing.  Alarmed  at  the  influence  wielded  by  the  news¬ 
paper,  Jefferson  and  Madison  approached  Freneau,  who  had  been 
contemplating  a  new  venture,  with  the  suggestion  that  he  set  up  a 
rival  democratic  paper.  To  encourage  him  Jefferson  gave  Freneau 
a  small  post  as  translator  in  the  State  Department,  worth  $250 
a  year.  The  National  Gazette  was  thereupon  established,  and  for 
two  years  a  war  between  the  hostile  papers  went  on  fiercely.  If 
the  United  States  Gazette  lauded  the  virtues  of  the  English  govern¬ 
ment,  extolled  the  wisdom  of  Hamilton  and  abhorred  all  Jacobins, 
the  National  Gazette  retorted  in  kind,  attacking  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  and  applauding  the  growing  Jacobite  spirit  that 
struck  at  every  form  of  aristocracy.  It  became  the  common 
clearing  house  for  democratic  propaganda,  and  Freneau’s  influence 
spread  so  widely  that  he  may  justly  be  regarded  as  “the  leading 
editor  in  America”  during  those  critical  years. 

It  is  quite  evident  today  that  “the  chief  business  of  the  Gazette 


14  See  A.  M.  Schlesinger,  The  Colonial  Merchants  and  the  American  Revolution, 
Chapter  IV.  ,  .  .  ... 

16  Forman,  “The  Political  Activities  of  Philip  Freneau,”  in  Johns  Hopkins  Studies 
in  History  and  Political  Science,  Vol.  XX. 


380 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


was  to  destroy  Hamilton.”  Probably  more  largely  than  any  other 
writer,  Freneau  awakened  a  popular  distrust  of  Federalist  men 
and  measures,  which  a  few  years  later  was  to  break  the  party. 
Jefferson’s  often-quoted  remark,  “His  paper  has  saved  our  Con¬ 
stitution  which  was  fast  galloping  into  monarchy,  and  has  been 
checked  by  no  one  means  so  powerfully  as  by  that  paper,”  is 
somewhat  extravagant;  nevertheless  the  universal  detestation 
in  which  Freneau  was  held  by  all  Federalists  is  sufficient  testimony 
to  his  influence.  Washington  was  greatly  ruffled  and  wanted  to 
remove  him  from  his  petty  post  in  the  State  Department,  but 
Jefferson  would  not  consent.  It  seems  that  Washington  felt  no 
ill-will  toward  John  Fenno,  who  drew  six  times  the  sum  from  the 
public  treasury  that  Freneau  received.  But  Fenno  was  no  demo¬ 
crat,  “hostile  to  garter,  ribbon,  crown,  and  star;”  Fenno  was  no  un¬ 
sparing  critic  who  would  attack  even  Washington  if  he  lent  himself 
to  undemocratic  ends;  whereas  Freneau  was  plain-spoken,  and  no 
gentleman  likes  plain  speaking  from  subordinates. 

All  this  was  a.  hundred  years  ago  and  more.  The  inditers  of 
those  partisan  scurrilities,  Democrat  and  Federalist  alike,  have 
long  since  ceased  their  bickerings.  Words  which  once  stung  like 
a  whiplash  have  become  only  echoes  of  dead  passions.  As  the 
struggles  of  those  tumultuous  years  fall  into  truer  perspective,  the 
figure  of  Philip  Freneau  takes  on  larger  and  nobler  proportions. 
The  cloud  of  calumny  that  long  obscured  his  virtues  is  dissipating, 
and  we  discover  in  him  an  eager  child  of  an  age  of  democratic 
aspiration,  the  friend  and  advocate  of  social  justice.  Like  Paine 
and  Jefferson  and  Franklin,  he  was  a  notable  American,  who  gave 
himself  unselfishly  to  the  work  of  furthering  the  common  well-being. 
“It  was  a  long  and  stormy  life,”  says  Forman,  “and  it  was  lived 
for  human  rights  and  human  freedom” — 

Still  on  the  people’s,  still  on  Freedom’s  side; 

Still  in  the  cause  of  man  severely  true. 

After  all,  the  poet  in  Freneau  was  deeper  than  the  partisan. 
Despite  his  conviction  that  a  sordid  America  cared  nothing  for 
poetry — that  “an  age  employed  in  edging  steel  can  no  poetic 
raptures  feel” — his  love  of  beauty  was  never  killed  nor  the  spring 
of  poetic  creation  dried  up.  In  moments  of  release  from  cares  he 
found  solace  in  the  poetry  that  welled  up  from  the  unembittered 
depths  of  a  rich  and  generous  nature.  The  portrait  drawn  by 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


381 


Professor  Tyler  depicts  one  side  of  Freneau;  the  following  lines, 
from  a  very  late  poem,  reveal  another: 

The  world  has  wrangled  half  an  age. 

And  we  again  in  war  engage. 

While  this  sweet,  sequestr’d  rill 
Murmurs  through  the  valley  still.  .  .  . 

But,  with  all  your  quiet  flow, 

Do  you  not  some  quarrels  know! 

Lately,  angry,  how  you  ran! 

All  at  war — and  much  like  man. 

When  the  shower  of  waters  fell, 

How  you  raged,  and  what  a  swell! 

All  your  banks  you  overflow’d, 

Scarcely  knew  your  own  abode! 

How  you  battled  with  the  rock! 

Gave  my  willows  such  a  shock 
As  to  menace,  by  its  fall, 

Underwood  and  bushes,  all: 

Now  you  are  again  at  peace: 

Time  will  come  when  that  will  cease; 

Such  the  human  passions  are; 

—-You  again  will  war  declare. 

Emblem,  thou,  of  restless  man; 

What  a  sketch  of  nature’s  plan! 

Now  at  peace,  and  now  at  war, 

Now  you  murmur,  now  you  roar; 

Muddy  now,  and  limpid  next. 

Now  with  icy  shackles  vext — 

What  a  likeness  here  we  find! 

What  a  picture  of  mankind! 18 

This  was  the  valedictory  of  Philip  Freneau, 
and  turbulent,  cast  in  a  bitter  and  turbulent 
some  grains  of  comfort  in  the  contemplation 
exercise  of  the  poet’s  craft.  Through  it  all  his  heart  remained 
clean  and  his  hands  unstained.  If  he  was  not  a  great  poet  whom 
all  the  critics  praise,  he  loved  beauty  and  served  it  in  a  careless 
world  among  an  indifferent  people,  and  it  ill  becomes  America  to 
forget  his  contribution  or  deny  him  some  portion  of  the  honor 
that  has  fallen  generously  to  others  no  more  deserving. 

10  The  Brook  of  the  Valley. 


His  life  was  bitter 
age;  yet  he  found 
of  nature  and  the 


382 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

2.  Joel  Barlow 
Jacobin 

That  he  should  have  long  associated  with  the  Hartford  Wits 
and  collaborated  with  them  in  defense  of  Connecticut  Federalism 
must  have  seemed  to  Joel  Barlow  in  after  years  the  choicest  bit 
of  comedy  in  his  varied  career.  His  subsequent  adventures  led 
him  far  from  the  strait  path  of  Yale  orthodoxy.  In  those  ripe 
later  years  life  had  pretty  well  emptied  him  of  all  dogmatisms  and 
taught  him  the  virtue  of  catholic  sympathies.  He  had  become 
acquainted  with  diverse  philosophies  and  had  observed  the  ways 
of  alien  societies,  and  from  such  contacts  the  horizons  of  his  mind 
had  broadened  and  his  character  mellowed.  It  was  a  long  road 
that  he  traveled  from  New  Haven  to  his  Washington  salon.  Bom 
a  Connecticut  Yankee,  he  accepted  in  his  youth  all  the  Connecticut 
conventions,  and  graduated  from  Yale  with  as  complete  a  stock 
of  respectable  opinions  as  his  classmate  Noah  Webster.  An  ener¬ 
getic  capable  fellow,  he  wanted  to  get  on  in  life.  He  wanted  to  be 
rich  and  famous,  and  he  tried  many  roads  that  promised  to  lead 
to  that  desirable  goal — law,  politics,  journalism,  poetry,  psalmody, 
speculation.  Needing  a  job  he  volunteered  soon  after  graduation 
as  chaplain  in  the  army.  He  had  not  prepared  for  the  ministry 
and  while  preaching  somewhat  indifferently  to  ragged  soldiers  he 
dreamed  of  poetic  fame,  and  devoted  more  time  to  his  couplets 
than  to  pious  meditation.  His  abilities  discovering  no  more 
profitable  field  for  exercise  than  writing  verse,  he  was  pretty  much 
at  a  stand  till  chance  sent  him  abroad  as  agent  for  one  of  the 
speculative  land-companies  that  were  springing  up  like  mushrooms 
in  post-war  America.  There  he  found  his  opportunity.  In  France, 
where  he  established  his  headquarters,  he  entered  a  world  of 
thought  vastly  different  from  that  of  prim  little  Hartford.  It 
was  an  extraordinarily  stimulating  experience  into  which  he  threw 
himself  with  zest.  Seventeen  years,  from  1788  to  1805,  he  spent 
abroad  on  that  first  visit,  and  those  years  changed  the  provin¬ 
cial  Yankee  into  one  of  the  most  cosmopolitan  Americans  of 
his  generation.  From  a  member  of  the  Hartford  Wits,  ar¬ 
dent  in  defense  of  the  traditional  Connecticut  order,  he  had 
become  a  citizen  of  the  world,  outspoken  in  defense  of  the  rights 
of  man. 

It  was  this  later  Barlow,  completely  new-outfitted  by  French 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


383 


romantic  tailors,  that  after  years  remember  and  that  early  friends 
could  not  forgive.  In  adopting  the  Jacobin  mode  and  setting 
himself  to  the  serious  business  of  political  thinking,  he  invited  the 
caustic  criticism  of  his  former  associates;  yet  nothing  in  his  life  was 
more  creditable  or  marks  him  more  definitely  as  an  openminded, 
intelligent  man.  He  was  as  receptive  to  new  ideas  as  Timothy 
Dwight  was  impervious.  He  plunged  boldly  into  the  maelstrom 
of  speculation  then  boiling  in  Europe.  He  moved  in  the  society  of 
the  intellectuals,  inquired  into  the  latest  political  and  social 
theories,  turned  humanitarian,  reexamined  his  Calvinistic  theology 
in  the  light  of  current  deism,  and  became  one  of  the  free  democratic 
thinkers  swarming  in  every  European  capital.  He  was  equally 
at  home  in  London  and  Paris,  passing  long  periods  of  time  in  both 
cities.  An  active  member  of  the  Constitutional  Society  of  London, 
he  was  intimate  with  Joseph  Priestley,  Horne  Tooke,  and  Tom 
Paine,  sympathized  with  every  liberal  movement,  and  offered 
his  pen  to  the  cause  of  a  freer  England.  His  Advice  to  the  Privileged 
Orders  was  eulogized  by  Fox  on  the  floor  of  Commons,  and  the 
Pitt  ministry  was  moved  to  suppress  the  work  and  proscribe  the 
author.  Thereupon  Barlow  went  into  hiding.  There  seems  to 
have  been  considerable  provocation  for  the  government’s  action. 
“It  is  safe  to  say,”  remarks  his  biographer,  “that  no  political  work 
of  the  day  created  so  wide  an  interest  or  was  so  extensively  read.” 
With  Paine  and  Barlow  both  loose  in  England  there  was  need  of 
the  government  looking  to  its  fences. 

In  1793  he  was  made  a  citizen  of  France.  His  French  career 
was  not  unlike  Paine’s,  whom  he  resembled  in  many  ways.  He 
had  much  of  the  latter’s  genius  for  publicity  and  skill  in  propa¬ 
ganda,  and  his  career  was  a  great  stimulus  to  radicals  at  home. 
He  was  not  too  busy  to  serve  his  country  in  a  diplomatic  way. 
He  risked  his  life  to  aid  American  prisoners  in  Africa  and  by  his 
skill  and  address  eventually  freed  them — an  achievement  that 
few  men  could  have  gone  through  with  successfully.  In  the  mean¬ 
time  he  had  not  neglected  his  private  affairs.  He  made  a  fortune 
in  the  French  funds,  which  he  increased  by  able  merchandising. 
He  had  come  to  his  goal  by  distant  roads,  and  on  his  return  to 
America  in  1805  he  took  up  his  abode  at  Washington,  creating  a 
delightful  countryseat  on  the  outskirts  of  the  raw  little  capital 
where  he  maintained  a  salon  for  American  liberals.  He  seems  to 
have  felt  no  inclinations  towards  Connecticut;  the  old  ties  were 


384  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

broken  now  for  good,  the  French  Jacobin  could  not  fit  into  the 
rigid  grooves  of  Hartford  Federalism.  Six  years  later  he  was 
impressed  a  second  time  into  the  diplomatic  service,  was  sent  to 
France  on  a  difficult  mission,  followed  Napoleon,  then  on  the 
Russian  campaign,  was  caught  in  the  break-up  of  the  grand  army, 
suffered  exposure,  contracted  pneumonia,  and  died  in  a  village 
near  Cracow  in  Poland — a.  fate  which  many  honest  Federalists 
regarded  as  amply  merited  by  his  vicious  principles. 

The  later  reputation  of  Barlow  has  been  far  less  than  his  serv¬ 
ices  warranted  or  his  solid  merits  deserved.  His  admirable  prose 
writings  have  been  forgotten  and  the  Columbiad  returns  always 
to  plague  him.  The  common  detraction  of  all  Jacobins  and  demo¬ 
crats  fell  heavily  on  so  conspicuous  a  head.  “It  is  simply  impossi¬ 
ble,”  says  his  biographer,  “for  the  historian  of  Federal  proclivities 
and  environment  to  do  justice  to  the  great  leaders  of  Republican¬ 
ism  in  America.”  Barlow  was  forced  to  pay  a  heavy  price  for 
his  intellectual  independence.  Detraction  was  always  lying  in 
wait  for  him.  John  Adams,  who  had  suffered  many  a  sharp  thrust 
from  him,  wrote  to  Washington,  “Tom  Paine  is  not  a  more  worth¬ 
less  fellow.”  Of  the  Yale  dislike  Barlow  was  well  aware,  for  he 
once  confessed  that  he  would  have  presented  the  school  with  some 
needed  chemical  apparatus  but  he  “supposed  that,  coming  from 
him,  the  college  authorities  would  make  a  bonfire  of  them  in  the 
college  yard.”17  Yet  it  is  hard  for  a  later  generation  to  discover 
wherein  lay  the  viciousness  of  his  life  or  principles.  A  warm¬ 
hearted  humanitarian,  he  was  concerned  always  for  the  common 
well-being.  The  two  major  passions  of  his  life  were  freedom 
and  education.  During  the  last  years  at  Washington  he  was  ar¬ 
dently  promoting  a  plan  for  a  great  national  university  at  the 
seat  of  government,  and  had  he  lived  ten  years  longer  his  wide 
influence  would  probably  have  accomplished  it.  His  sins 
would  seem  to  have  been  no  other  than  an  open  break  with 
the  Calvinism  and  Federalism  of  the  Connecticut  oligarchy — 
somewhat  slender  grounds  on  which  to  pillory  him  as  an  infidel 
and  a  scalawag. 

The  social  foundation  of  Barlow’s  political  philosophy  is  lucidly 
presented  in  the  Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders,  a  work  that  deserves 
a  place  beside  Paine’s  Rights  of  Man  as  a  great  document  of  the 
times.  It  does  too  much  credit  to  American  letters  to  be  suffered 

17  Purcell,  Connecticut  in  Transition,  p.  27. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


385 


to  lie  buried  with  a  dead  partisanship.  It  is  warm  with  the  humani¬ 
tarian  enthusiasm  that  had  come  down  as  a  rich  heritage  from 
the  Physiocratic  school  of  social  thinkers.  Two  suggestive  ideas 
lie  at  the  base  of  his  speculations:  the  doctrine  of  the  res  publica, 
and  the  doctrine  of  social  responsibility  for  individual  well-being. 
The  former,  given  wide  currency  by  the  Rights  of  Man,  resulted 
from  the  imposition  of  social  conscience  on  abstract  political 
theory,  out  of  which  was  derived  a  new  conception  of  the  duties 
and  functions  of  the  political  state— the  conception  that  the  state 
must  be  the  responsible  agent  of  society  as  a  whole  rather  than  the 
tool  of  a  class,  and  that  its  true  concern  is  the  public  thing,  safe¬ 
guarding  the  social  heritage  as  a  common  asset  held  in  trust  for 
succeeding  generations;  the  latter  resulted  from  the  inquiry  into 
the  relations  of  the  political  state  to  the  individual  citizen — its 
responsibility  as  the  social  agent,  for  the  social  waste  of  wrecked 
lives  and  thwarted  happiness,  a  waste  that  a  rational  social  order 
would  greatly  lessen  if  not  eradicate.  Barlow  flatly  denied  that 
the  primary  function  of  the  state  is  the  protection  of  property 
interests;  its  true  end  lies  in  securing  justice.  But  justice  without 
equal  opportunity  is  a  mockery;  and  equal  opportunity  is  impossible 
unless  the  individual  citizen  shall  be  equipped  to  live  on  equal 
terms  with  his  fellows.  Hence  the  fine  flower  of  political  justice 
is  discovered  in  education;  in  that  generous  provision  for  the 
young  and  the  weak  that  shall  equip  them  to  become  free  members 
of  the  commonwealth.  Like  Paine’s  Agrarian  Justice,  the  Advice 
to  the  Privileged  Orders  is  an  extraordinarily  modern  work,  far  more 
comprehensible  today  than  when  it  was  written.  That  the  “State 
has  no  right  to  punish  a  man,  to  whom  it  has  given  no  previous 
instruction,”  and  that  “She  ought  not  only  to  instruct  him  in  the 
artificial  laws  by  which  property  is  secured,  but  in  the  artificial 
industry  by  which  it  is  obtained,”  are  doctrines  that  seem  far 
less  preposterous  to  us  than  they  seemed  to  Timothy  Dwight. 
The  president  of  Yale  College  was  greatly  troubled  over  Calvinistic 
sin;  Joel  Barlow  was  greatly  troubled  over  social  injustice;  in  that 
difference  is  measured  the  distance  the  latter  had  traveled  in 
company  with  the  French  Jacobins. 

The  root  of  his  political  thinking  is  the  doctrine  of  equalitarian- 
ism.  “Only  admit,”  he  says,  “the  original,  unalterable  truth, 
that  all  men  are  equal  in  their  rights,  and  the  foundation  of  everything 
is  laid.”  Accepting  the  romantic  doctrine  that  human  nature  is 


386 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

excellent  in  its  plastic  state,  and  capable  of  infinite  development, 
he  is  untroubled  by  the  fact  of  human  selfishness.  He  sees  no  bogey 
in  democracy  to  frighten  timid  souls,  no  specter  of  anarchy  in  the 
rule  of  the  people. 

They  say  mankind  are  wicked  and  rapacious,  and  “it  must  be  that 
offences  will  come.”  This  reason  applies  to  individuals;  but  not  to  nations 
deliberately  speaking  a  national  voice.  I  hope  I  shall  not  be  understood 
to  mean,  that  the  nature  of  man  is  totally  changed  by  living  in  a  free 
republic.  I  allow  that  it  is  still  interested  men  and  passionate  men,  that 
direct  the  affairs  of  the  world.  But  in  national  assemblies,  passion  is 
lost  in  deliberation,  and  interest  balances  interest;  till  the  good  of  the 
whole  community  combines  the  general  will. 

If  government  be  founded  on  the  vices  of  mankind,  its  business  is  to 
restrain  those  vices  in  all,  rather  than  to  foster  them  in  a  few.18 

It  was  his  sensitive  social  conscience  that  brought  him  to  revolt 
against  all  class  government.  He  had  seen  the  naked  sordidness  of 
such  governments  in  Europe,  and  he  watched  with  concern  the 
beginnings  of  like  government  in  America.  The  significance  of  the 
Hamiltonian  program  could  not  escape  so  shrewd  an  observer 
as  Barlow;  he  was  too  much  a  realist  to  take  political  professions 
at  face  value.  “I  see,”  he  wrote,  “immense  fortunes  made  by  our 
funding  legislators  out  of  the  public  funds  which  they  funded  for 
themselves.”  Politics  for  profit  was  a  sorry  spectacle  to  him,  and 
he  occupied  his  mind  much  with  the  problem  of  erecting  the  machin¬ 
ery  of  an  adequate  democratic  state  that  should  be  faithful  to  its 
stewardship  as  agent  of  the  whole. 

It  was  this  difficult  problem  with  which  he  dealt  in  his  Letter  to 
the  National  Convention  of  France.  In  this  suggestive  work  two 
ideas  determined  his  thinking:  the  doctrine  of  the  sovereignty  of 
the  majority  will,  and  the  doctrine  of  government  as  a  social  agent. 
In  both  he  returned  to  the  position  of  Roger  Williams  a  hundred 
and  fifty  years  before.  The  sovereignty  of  the  majority  will  he 
conceives  to  be  continuous  and  immediately  effective;  it  cannot 
be  held  in  check  by  a  rigid  constitutionalism,  for  as  Paine  had 
pointed  out,  such  constitutionalism  is  no  other  than  government 
from  the  grave.  He  proposed  therefore,  that  the  fundamental 
law  be  amendable  by  legislative  enactment,  one  legislative  body 
proposing  and  the  next  determining,  under  full  publicity.  As  a 
guarantee  that  such  action  should  express  the  popular  will,  that 
18  Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders,  pp.  66,  70. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


387 


love  of  power  on  the  part  of  the  agent  should  not  defeat  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  society,  he  held  that  there  must  be  annual  elections.  Rep¬ 
resentatives  should  be  periodicalljr  excluded  from  candidacy, 
and  other  representatives  fresh  from  the  people  sent  up,  for  “power 
always  was  and  always  must  be  a  dangerous  thing.”  The  principle 
of  recall  he  regarded  as  indispensable  in  a  democratic  government, 
for  it  “will  tend  to  maintain  a  proper  relation  between  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  and  the  people,  and  a  due  dependence  of  the  former  upon 
the  latter.  Besides,  when  a  man  has  lost  the  confidence  of  his 
fellow  citizens  ...  he  is  no  longer  their  representative;  and 
when  he  ceases  to  be  their’s,  he  cannot  in  any  sense  be  the  repre¬ 
sentative  of  the  nation.”  The  fundamental  principle  of  state-craft 
Barlow  states  thus:  “Every  individual  ought  to  be  rendered  as 
independent  of  every  other  individual  as  possible;  and  at  the  same 
time  as  dependent  as  possible  on  the  whole  community.”  The 
familiar  romantic  doctrine  of  the  diminished  state  is  implicit  in  all 
his  reasoning.  Like  Paine  he  would  do  away  utterly  with  the  old 
mystery  of  government  under  which  ambitious  men  cloak  their 
will  to  power;  “for  whatever  there  is  in  the  art  of  government, 
whether  legislative  or  executive,  above  the  capacities  of  the  ordi¬ 
nary  class  of  what  are  called  well-informed  men,  is  superfluous  and 
destructive  and  ought  to  be  laid  aside.” 

A  thoroughgoing  radical  in  economics  and  politics,  Barlow  was 
no  innovator  in  polite  literature.  He  had  pulled  himself  out  of 
many  a  Connecticut  provincialism,  but  he  stuck  fast  in  the  bog  of 
provincial  poetry.  It  has  long  been  the  fashion  to  make  merry 
over  The  Columbiad,  and  there  is  only  too  patent  a  reason  for  it. 
To  criticize  it  is  a  work  of  supererogation.  The  appeal  of  “the 
grand  style”  seems  to  have  been  too  much  for  him.  Some  explana¬ 
tion  doubtless  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  he  was  working  over 
an  earlier  poem  done  in  the  days  of  an  ebullient  patriotism.  It 
was  a  mistake  to  return  to  it,  for  the  heroic  note  in  the  vein  of  a 
political  pamphleteer  must  play  havoc  with  it.  What  he  now 
attempted,  in  the  light  of  his  long  European  experience,  was  to 
embody  in  the  narrative  suitable  political  ideas,  transforming 
The  Vision  of  Columbus  into  an  epic  glorifying  the  great  repub¬ 
lican  experiment.  His  purpose  is  set  forth  in  the  preface. 

[The]  real  object  of  the  poem  is  to  inculcate  the  love  of  national  liberty, 
and  to  discountenance  the  deleterious  passion  for  violence  and  war;  to 
show  that  on  the  basis  of  republican  principle  all  good  morals,  as  well  as 


388 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


good  government  and  hopes  of  permanent  peace,  must  be  founded;  and 
to  convince  the  student  in  political  science,  that  the  theoretical  question 
of  the  future  advancement  of  human  society,  till  states  as  well  as  individ¬ 
uals  arrive  at  universal  civilization,  is  held  in  dispute  and  still  unsettled 
only  because  we  have  had  too  little  experience  of  organized  liberty  in  the 
government  of  nations,  to  have  well  considered  its  effects. 

The  humanitarian  note  is  strong.  War,  slavery,  monarchy, 
injustice,  the  tyranny  resulting  from  political  inequality,  and  a 
host  of  other  evils,  social  and  political,  are  assailed  in  vigorous 
declamation.  It  may  not  be  good  poetry  but  the  sentiments  are 
those  of  an  enlightened  and  generous  man.  The  conclusion  rises 
to  a  vision  of  a  golden  age  of  international  commerce  and  universal 
peace,  when  “earth,  garden’d  all,  a  tenfold  burden  brings,”  and 
the  sundered  nations  shall  draw  together,  and — 

.  .  .  cloth’d  majestic  in  the  robes  of  state, 

Moved  by  one  voice,  in  general  congress  meet 
The  legates  of  all  empires. 

In  that  future  time  science  will  have  learned  “with  her  own  glance 
to  ken  the  total  God,”  and  philosophy  will  “expand  the  selfish  to 
the  social  flame.”  Of  the  political  ideas  incorporated  in  the  mas¬ 
sive  work  some  suggestion  may  be  got  from  the  following  lines: 

Ah,  would  you  not  be  slaves,  with  lords  and  kings, 

Then  be  not  Masters;  there  the  danger  springs. 

The  whole  crude  system  that  torments  this  earth. 

Of  rank,  privation,  privilege  of  birth, 

False  honor,  fraud,  corruption,  civil  jars. 

The  rage  of  conquest  and  the  curse  of  wars, 

Pandora’s  total  shower,  all  ills  combined 
That  erst  o’erwhelmed  and  still  distress  mankind, 

Boxt  up  secure  in  your  deliberate  hand, 

Wait  your  behest  to  fix  or  fly  this  land. 

Equality  of  right  is  nature’s  plan; 

And  following  nature  is  the  march  of  man. 

Whene’er  he  deviates  in  the  least  degree, 

When,  free  himself,  he  would  be  more  than  free. 

The  baseless  column,  rear’d  to  bear  his  trust, 

Falls  as  he  mounts  and  whelms  him  in  the  dust.  .  .  . 

Too  much  of  Europe,  here  transplanted  o’er. 

Nursed  feudal  feelings  on  your  tented  shore, 

Brought  sable  sires  from  Afric,  call’d  it  gain. 

And  urged  your  sires  to  forge  the  fatal  chain.  .  .  . 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


389 


Restore  their  souls  to  men,  give  earth  repose. 

And  save  your  sons  from  slavery,  wars  and  woes. 

Based  on  its  rock  of  right  your  empire  lies, 

On  walls  of  wisdom  let  the  fabric  rise; 

Preserve  your  principles,  their  force  unfold, 

Let  nations  prove  them  and  let  kings  behold. 

Equality,  your  first  firm-grounded  stand; 

Then  free  election;  then  your  federal  band: 

This  holy  Triad  should  forever  shine 
The  great  compendium  of  all  rights  divine, 

Creed  of  all  schools,  whence  youths  by  millions  draw 
Their  themes  of  right,  their  decalogues  of  law; 

Till  men  shall  wonder  (in  these  codes  inured) 

How  wars  were  made,  how  tyrants  were  endured.19 

Diverse  politics  incline  to  diverse  literary  judgments,  and  the 
critics  are  not  yet  done  with  Joel  Barlow.  If  he  was  not  a  great 
poet  or  a  great  political  thinker,  he  was  at  least  capable,  open- 
minded,  generous,  with  a  sensitive  social  conscience — certainly 
the  most  stimulating  and  original  of  the  literary  group  that  fore¬ 
gathered  in  Hartford.  Injustice  has  long  been  done  him  by  over¬ 
looking  his  picturesque  career,  and  his  services  to  America,  and 
restricting  his  introduction  to  posterity  to  a  few  lines  from  Hasty 
Pudding.  To  make  a  mush  of  so  honest  a  thinker,  to  ignore  his 
very  considerable  contributions  to  the  cause  of  democracy,  is  to 
impose  too  heavy  a  penalty  for  his  defection  from  Connecticut 
respectability.  He  suffered  quite  enough  in  his  lifetime.  In  the 
thick  of  his  revolutionary  struggles  abroad  his  wife  begged  him 
“to  go  home  and  be  respectable”;  but  it  was  not  in  the  ardent 
nature  of  Joel  Barlow  to  listen  to  such  counsel  of  timidity.  He  was 
in  too  deep  to  go  back,  and  so  while  Timothy  Dwight  was  gathering 
laurels  from  every  bush  in  Connecticut,  this  apostle  of  humanita- 
rianism,  this  apostate  from  Calvinistic  Federalism,  was  content 
to  remain  a  byword  and  a  shaking  of  the  head  in  the  villages  of  his 
native  commonwealth.  For  all  which,  perhaps,  the  Washington 
salon  and  the  intimate  association  with  Jefferson  may  have  served 
as  recompense.  Better  society  could  not  be  found  even  in  Hartford. 

15  Book  VIII. 


390 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


3.  Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge 
Free-Lance  Democrat 

In  taking  leave  of  this  disturbant  time  when  new  social  theories 
were  bringing  confusion  to  weak  understandings,  one  cannot  do 
better  than  to  dip  into  the  wittiest  and  most  readable  sketch  pro¬ 
duced  by  that  vigorous  generation,  as  well  as  one  of  the  sanest. 
Modern  Chivalry  was  the  single  noteworthy  contribution  to  Amer¬ 
ican  letters  by  Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge,  a  western  Pennsylva¬ 
nian  of  Scotch  birth,  and  a  graduate  of  Princeton  in  the  class  with 
Freneau  and  Madison.  With  the  former  he  had  practised  his 
couplets,  collaborating  in  writing  the  commencement  poem. 
The  Rising  Glory  of  America.  After  leaving  college  he  tried  his 
hand  at  the  usual  things  open  to  young  graduates,  was  tutor  in 
the  college,  taught  in  an  academy,  studied  divinity,  served  as 
chaplain  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  later  read  law.  He  re¬ 
moved  eventually  to  the  frontier  town  of  Pittsburgh,  was  active 
in  Republican  politics,  became  an  ardent  pro-French  sympathizer, 
and  finally  went  upon  the  supreme  bench  of  Pennsylvania.  He 
wrote  for  his  own  amusement  and  tried  his  hand  at  various  kinds 
of  polite  literature,  producing  a  masque,  a  poetic  drama  on  Bunker 
Hill,  prose  essays,  some  sermons,  and  turned  at  last  to  satire.  For 
this  he  was  admirably  equipped;  he  possessed  a  keen,  well-bal¬ 
anced  mind,  a  prose  style  delightfully  colloquial  and  a  wit  pleas¬ 
antly  caustic. 

Brackenridge  is  a  refreshing  person  to  come  upon  after  one  is 
satiated  with  the  heroic.  A  free-lance  critic,  independent  in 
thought  and  act,  he  was  no  vociferous  party  or  class  advocate 
given  to  enlisting  God  on  his  side.  Federalist  and  Republican 
alike  might  lose  their  heads  and  indulge  in  unseemly  clamor,  but 
Brackenridge  with  good  Scotch  judgment  refused  to  howl  with  the 
pack.  A  stout  and  unrepentant  democrat,  he  was  no  visionary 
to  shut  his  eyes  to  unpleasant  facts  lest  they  disturb  his  faith. 
As  he  considered  the  turbulent  confusions  of  an  America  in  rough 
process  of  democratization,  he  saw  the  evils  as  clearly  as  the  hope, 
and  it  amused  him  to  satirize  those  evils  after  the  manner  of  Don 
Quixote.  Modern  Chivalry  has  proved  somewhat  of  a  puzzle  to 
later  critics  who  have  not  cleared  their  minds  of  the  old  cobwebs  of 
Federalist  criticism.  Thus  a  literary  historian  has  suggested  that 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


391 


it  is  “a  half-hidden  satire  on  democracy”20  and  he  inclines  to 
number  it  among  the  literary  ram’s  horns  that  were  blown  against 
the  walls  of  the  democratic  Jericho.  But  such  an  interpretation 
certainly  misses  the  point.  Brackenridge  had  become  a  thorough 
Westerner  with  a  fresh  point  of  view.  Among  the  stump  fields  of 
his  Pennsylvania  circuit  he  was  equally  removed  from  the  cynicism 
of  Hamilton  and  the  romanticism  of  Barlow.  He  saw  all  about 
him  a  rough  and  tumble  democracy,  living  a  vigorous  and  capable 
if  not  lovely  life.  As  a  democrat  he  accepted  the  fact  of  political 
equality  and  approved  of  it;  the  thing  was  there  and  needed  no 
justification  or  defense.  Some  of  its  ways  were  foolish,  many  of 
its  purposes  were  shortsighted;  it  amused  him  therefore  to  sharpen 
his  pen  against  certain  of  its  absurdities  and  essay  the  remedial 
effects  of  unembittered  laughter.  He  was  a  realist  concerned  with 
realities. 

Modern  Chivalry  is  our  first  backcountry  book.  It  is  redolent 
of  stump-lands  and  their  rude  leveling  ways,  and  for  years  it  was 
immensely  popular  along  the  western  frontier.  It  is  a  satire  aimed 
primarily  at  backwoods  shortcomings,  but  with  an  eye  that  kept 
turning  towards  the  older  settlements  to  scrutinize  their  equal 
shortcomings.  Its  main  theme  is  concerned  with  certain  weak¬ 
nesses  of  popular  sovereignty  already  unpleasantly  evident  as  a 
result  of  the  extension  of  suffrage;  and  in  particular  with  the  un¬ 
seemly  office-hunting  zeal  of  coonskin  candidates.  The  preposter¬ 
ous  spectacle  of  a  pushing  fellow  with  no  qualifications  setting 
himself  up  for  high  office  was  to  become  more  frequent  with  the 
later  rise  of  Jacksonian  democracy;  but  already  there  was  abundant 
justification  for  the  satire  of  Brackenridge.  The  records  of  the 
time  are  loud  in  criticism  of  the  demagoguery  that  resulted  from 
the  sudden  shift  of  leadership  in  consequence  of  the  social  upheaval 
following  the  Revolutionary  War.  The  old  leaders  of  the  aristo¬ 
cratic  tradition  had  fled  or  had  fallen  into  disfavor,  and  new  men, 
too  often  of  small  capacity  and  less  breeding,  had  pushed  into  the 
seats  of  authority.  With  the  triumph  of  Jefferson  this  transfer  of 
power  went  forward  briskly  to  the  scandal  of  all  aristocrats.  The 
lust  of  office  spread  like  the  plague,  and  demagogues  caught  the 
popular  ear,  none  too  nice  to  distinguish  between  sense  and  fustian. 
Irving  brushed  against  the  democratic  weakness  in  his  brief 
venture  into  politics,  and  vented  his  spleen  in  Rip  Van  Winkle. 

20  Cairns,  History  of  American  Literature ,  p.  147. 


392 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 


It  is  this  which  Brackenridge  deals  with  primarily  in  Modern 
Chivalry,  the  first  part  of  which  was  published  in  1792  and  the 
second  in  1805.  The  general  leveling  of  offices,  he  pointed  out, 
was  not  democracy,  but  the  abuse  and  ruin  of  democracy.  Amer¬ 
ica  was  engaged  in  a  great  and  noble  experiment;  the  success  of 
that  experiment  depended  upon  an  honest  and  intelligent  electo¬ 
rate;  it  must  not  be  brought  to  failure  by  demagogues  through  the 
incapacity  of  the  voter. 

Brackenridge  had  come  in  later  years  to  be  a  pacifist.  He  had 
had  his  fill  of  revolutions  and  armed  revolts.  As  a  principal  arbi¬ 
trator  during  the  tumult  of  the  Whisky  Insurrection,  he  had  come 
to  fear  popular  lawlessness;  and  as  a  friend  of  the  French  Revolu¬ 
tion  he  was  concerned  at  the  methods  of  the  Jacobin  leaders. 
Commenting  on  the  Whisky  Insurrection  he  said  in  later  years: 

I  saw  before  me  anarchy,  a  shock  to  the  government,  a  revolution 
impregnated  with  the  Jacobin  principles  of  France.  .  .  .  Let  no  man 
suppose  I  coveted  a  revolution;  I  had  seen  the  evils  of  one  already  in  the 
American;  and  I  had  read  the  evils  of  another,  the  French.  My  imagina¬ 
tion  presented  the  evils  of  the  last  strongly  to  my  view,  and  brought  them 
so  close  to  a  possible  experience  at  home,  that  during  the  whole  period  of 
the  insurrection,  I  could  scarcely  bear  to  cast  my  eye  on  a  paragraph  of 
French  news.21 

A  reasonable  and  intelligent  democracy,  holding  steadily  to  the 
purpose  of  the  common  good,  was  his  cherished  ideal.  He  was 
not  a  political  philosopher  interested  in  general  principles.  His 
purpose  was  to  satirize  manners,  not  to  speculate  on  causes;  and 
in  the  days  of  triumphant  republicanism  the  most  conspicuous 
target  was  offered  by  the  tousled  head  of  the  demagogue,  “the 
courtier  of  democracy.”  In  the  preface  to  the  1846  edition,  the 
editor  thus  summarizes  the  political  views  of  Brackenridge: 

An  enlightened  democracy  was  looked  upon  by  him  as  the  true  nobility. 
He  considered  the  true  democrat  as  the  true  gentleman,  who  ought  to  feel  a 
stain  on  his  fair  reputation,  “as  a  wound.”  He  maintained  “that  democ¬ 
racy  is  not  in  its  nature  coarse,  and  vulgar,  or  destitute  of  high  integrity 
and  honor.”  The  aim  and  end  of  his  writings  was  to  raise  the  standard  of 
democracy,  and  to  elevate  “the  noble  of  nature”  to  the  same  level  with 
any  other  noble,  in  those  qualities  which  constitute  true  nobility.  The 
noble  of  nature,  in  his  opinion,  ought  not  to  yield  to  the  noble  of  aristocracy 
or  monarchy,  in  strict  integrity,  in  liberal  and  benevolent  feelings,  in 
propriety  of  manners  and  general  intelligence. 

21  Modern  Chivalry,  edition  of  1846,  p.  170. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


393 


The  work  is  a  string  of  adventures,  interspersed  with  miscel¬ 
laneous  discussion,  of  Captain  John  Farrago — who  is  evidently 
Brackenridge  himself — and  his  bog-trotting  servant  Teague 
O’Regan.  The  Captain  is  an  intelligent  person,  well  read  in  the 
literature  of  the  times,  and  “a  good  deal  disposed  to  subscribe  to 
the  elementary  principles”  of  Paine’s  Rights  of  Man.  He  can 
summarize  neatly  the  arguments  on  both  sides  of  the  political 
questions  of  the  day,  but  he  retains  the  open  mind  and  cautious 
judgment  of  the  independent.  He  is  a  free-lance  critic,  democratic 
in  sympathies  but  unsparing  in  exposure  of  absurdity.  His  hits 
fall  right  and  left,  on  the  country  yokel,  the  city  speculator,  mem¬ 
bers  of  Congress,  the  institution  of  slavery.  He  is  greatly  con¬ 
cerned  to  preserve  his  servant  from  the  temptations  of  ambition 
which  assail  him  in  the  backwoods  as  well  as  in  Philadelphia.  The 
career  of  Teague  O’Regan  is  a  broad  satire  on  the  mounting  ambi¬ 
tion  of  old-world  peasants  to  push  their  way  up.  That  the  under¬ 
ling  should  rise  in  a  democratic  country  was  well;  but  that  he 
should  be  in  unseemly  haste  to  scramble  into  positions  beyond  his 
capacities,  that  in  pushing  his  private  fortunes  he  should  bring 
ridicule  upon  the  democratic  experiment,  was  not  well.  Teague 
O’Regan’s  desire  to  scramble  discovered  quite  too  fertile  a  field  for 
his  own  or  the  country’s  good.  He  is  nearly  sent  to  Congress  by  a 
backwoods  constituency,  listens  to  other  seductive  appeals,  and 
in  the  end  is  sent  by  President  Washington  to  the  West  as  a  revenue 
officer,  where  he  falls  into  the  untender  hands  of  the  whisky  rioters, 
and  finds  his  Irish  beauty  marred  by  a  coat  of  tar  and  feathers. 

It  is  in  his  burlesque  of  electorate  methods  that  Brackenridge 
hits  most  sharply  at  the  current  tendencies  of  republicanism.  The 
ways  of  the  backwoods  he  caricatures  by  describing  a  contest 
between  an  honest  deacon  and  an  ignorant  Scotch-Irishman, 
which  he  came  upon  in  his  peregrinations. 

When  they  looked  upon  the  one,  they  felt  an  inclination  to  promote 
him.  But  when,  again,  on  the  other  hand,  they  saw  two  kegs  which  they 
knew  to  be  replenished  with  a  very  cheering  liquor,  they  seemed  to  be 
inclined  in  favor  of  the  other.  The  candidates  were  called  upon  to  address 
the  people,  and  the  grave  person  mounted  the  stump  of  a  tree,  many  of 
them  standing  round,  as  the  place  was  a  new  clearing.  His  harangue  was 
listened  to  by  some  of  the  older  and  more  sedate,  and  one  man,  hard  of 
hearing,  seemed  to  make  great  effort  to  catch  the  sounds.  As  soon  as  the 
man  of  the  two  kegs  took  a  stump,  he  was  surrounded  by  an  eager  crowd. — 
“Frinds,”  said  he,  in  the  native  Scotch-Irish,  “I’m  a  good  dimicrat,  and 


394 


LIBERALISM  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION 

hates  the  Brattish — I’m  an  elder  of  the  meetin’,  forby,  and  has  been 
overseer  of  the  roads  for  three  years: — An’  ye  all  know,  that  my  mammy 
was  kilt  o’  the  Ingens— now  all  ye  that’s  in  my  favor,  come  forit  an’ 
drenk.”  Appetite,  or  rather  thirst,  prevailed,  and  the  voters  gave  their 
votes  to  the  man  with  the  two  kegs.22 

If  whisky  decided  elections  in  the  backcountry,  business  con¬ 
trolled  them  in  the  city.  The  following  is  almost  modern  in  its 
caricature: 

The  candidates  were  all  remarkably  pot-bellied;  and  waddled  in  their 
gait.  The  captain  inquiring  what  were  the  pretensions  of  these  men  to  be 
elected;  he  was  told,  that  they  had  all  stock  in  the  funds,  and  lived  in 
brick  buildings;  and  some  of  them  entertained  fifty  people  at  a  time,  and 
ate  and  drank  abundantly;  and  living  an  easy  life,  and  pampering  their 
appetites,  they  had  swollen  to  this  size. 

“It  is  a  strange  thing,”  said  the  captain,  “that  in  the  country,  in  my 
route,  they  would  elect  no  one  but  a  weaver  or  a  whisky-distiller;  and  here 
none  but  fat  squabs,  that  guzzle  wine,  and  smoke  segars.”  .  .  .  “No, 
faith”  (said  his  friend),  “there  is  na  danger  of  Teague  here,  unless  he  had 
his  scores  o’  shares  in  the  bank,  and  was  in  league  with  the  brokers,  and 
had  a  brick  house  at  his  hurdies,  or  a  ship  or  twa  on  the  stocks  ...  all 
is  now  lost  in  substantial  interest,  and  the  funds  command  everything.”23 

That  there  might  be  no  mistake  as  to  the  meaning  of  his  satire 
Brackenridge  set  down  at  the  end  an  explicit  statement  of  his 
purpose. 

As  already  hinted  by  some  things  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  captain,  I 
could  make  it  a  principal  matter  to  form  the  heart  of  a  republican  govern¬ 
ment.  And  in  order  to  this,  keep  out  all  that  nourishes  ambition,  the 
poison  of  public  virtue.  ...  In  the  American  republics,  we  retain  yet  a 
great  deal  of  the  spirit  of  monarchy.  The  people  are  not  aware  of  the 
phraseology  itself,  in  some  instances.  .  .  .  The  first  lesson  I  would  give  to 
a  son  of  mine  would  be  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  public  business,  but 
as  a  duty  to  his  country.  To  consider  service  in  civil  life,  no  more  to  be 
desired  than  service  in  the  military.  .  .  .  Those  who  say  to  them,  vox 
populi  vox  dei,  offer  up  an  incense  to  flattery,  as  impious  as  the  worshippers 
of  the  Caesars.  They  should  be  warned  to  beware  of  flatterers,  whose 
object  is  not  to  serve  them,  but  themselves.  The  demagogue  in  a  democ¬ 
racy,  and  the  courtier  in  a  monarchy,  are  identical.  They  are  the  same, 
plying  the  same  arts  in  different  situations.  ...  I  shall  have  accomplished 
something  by  this  book,  if  it  shall  keep  some  honest  man  from  lessening  his 
respectability  by  pushing  himself  into  public  trusts  for  which  he  is  not 
qualified;  or  when  pushed  into  public  station,  if  it  shall  contribute  to  keep 
him  honest  by  teaching  him  the  folly  of  ambition,  and  farther  advance¬ 
ment.  .  .  .  This  is  in  great  part,  the  moral  of  this  book;  if  it  should  be  at 
all  necessary  to  give  a  hint  of  it. 

22  Ibid.,  p.  105. 


23  Ibid.,  pp.  127-128. 


WAR  OF  BELLES  LETTRES 


395 


One  may  do  a  worse  service  to  democracy  than  to  point  out  its 
faults.  Brackenridge  was  no  truckler  either  to  King  George  or  to 
his  neighbors.  Living  in  the  midst  of  a  coonskin  democracy,  he 
refused  to  believe  that  there  was  any  particular  virtue  in  coonskin. 
It  is  not  the  cap  but  what  is  under  it  that  signifies.  He  was  a 
vigorous  individualist,  a  confirmed  democrat,  a  friend  of  all  honest 
liberalisms,  a  man  who  honored  his  own  counsels  and  went  his 
own  way.  We  could  better  spare  more  pretentious  books  from  the 
library  of  our  early  literature  than  these  clever  satires  that  preserve 
for  us  some  of  the  homely  ways  of  a  time  when  American  institu¬ 
tions  were  still  in  the  making. 


k 


CONCLUSION 


With  the  triumph  of  Jefferson  in  the  great  struggle  of  1800,  the 
first  democratic  battle  had  been  won  at  the  polls,  but  victory- 
remained  still  in  doubt.  The  new  liberalism  was  in  the  saddle, 
but  how  long  it  would  keep  its  seat,  or  whither  it  would  drive,  no 
one  could  foresee.  The  aristocratic  eighteenth  century  was  still 
in  secure  possession  of  all  the  vantage  points  of  polite  culture.  It 
still  held  the  positions  of  honor  and  emolument  and  dictated  the 
ways  of  society.  The  tie-wig  and  smallclothes  had  not  yet  been 
put  to  rout  by  homespun  and  coonskin,  and  were  laying  plans 
to  make  good  the  first  defeat.  Polite  letters  were  still  content  with 
the  old  wit  ideal,  still  enamored  of  the  couplet,  still  in  love  with 
caustic  satire,  still  transfixing  democracy  with  its  sharp  quills. 
The  nineteenth  century  with  its  cargo  of  romanticisms  had  not  yet 
crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  while  Napoleon  was  strewing  Europe 
with  the  wrecks  of  old  empires,  America  was  still  dwelling  in  the 
twilight  of  a  century  that  was  loath  to  be  gone. 

The  account  in  the  American  ledger  was  complex  and  not  easily 
cast  up,  yet  Jefferson  might  well  have  regarded  with  satisfaction 
the  results  of  two  hundred  years  of  new-world  experience.  The 
drift  was  all  in  the  direction  he  was  facing.  The  age  of  theology 
was  gone,  the  age  of  political  speculation  was  passing,  the  age  of 
constitution  building  was  over.  Disintegration  had  come  upon 
every  system  of  caste  brought  hither  from  the  old  world;  the  free 
economics  of  a  decentralized  society  had  proved  a  sufficient  sol¬ 
vent  to  destroy  the  principle  of  monarchy  and  of  aristocracy,  and 
prepare  the  American  mind  for  a  venture  in  republicanism.  Over¬ 
seas  liberalisms  had  flourished  in  the  soil  that  proved  inhospitable 
to  overseas  conservatisms;  and  it  was  these  European  liberalisms 
that  provided  the  mold  into  which  ran  the  fluid  experience  of 
America  to  assume  substantial  form.  That  the  venture  in  repub¬ 
licanism  would  inure  to  the  benefit  of  agrarian  America — to  the 
producers  on  their  scattered  farms — Jefferson  seems  never  to  have 
doubted;  and  the  ready  naturalization  of  the  philosophy  of  equali- 
tarianism  in  the  backwoods  settlements  might  well  have  seemed 

397 


398 


CONCLUSION 


to  justify  his  hopes.  Nevertheless  new  forces  were  preparing  that 
were  to  bring  about  momentous  changes  in  nineteenth-century 
America.  Capitalism  with  its  banks  and  credit  and  elastic  cur¬ 
rency  and  its  psychology  of  speculation,  and  industrialism  with 
its  technique  of  factory  production,  were  already  at  work  prepar¬ 
ing  a  different  pattern  of  life  for  America,  a  pattern  wholly  unlike 
that  of  the  simpler  agrarianism  with  its  domestic  economy,  which 
Jefferson  represented.  A  new  romanticism  of  the  middle  class  was 
eventually  to  shoulder  aside  the  aspirations  of  gentleman  and 
farmer  alike,  and  refashion  America  after  its  own  ideal.  What 
was  implied  in  that  momentous  change  provides  the  theme  for 
another  study,  and  cannot  be  entered  upon  here. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Only  the  more  important  titles  dealt  with  in  the  present  study  are  listed  here¬ 
under,  together  with  selected  biographical  and  critical  material.  The  invaluable 
bibliographies  in  the  Cambridge  History  of  American  Literature,  four  vols.,  New  York, 
1917-22,  cover  most  of  the  writers  considered,  and  the  reader  is  referred  to  them 
for  detailed  material. 


BOOK  I:  PART  I 

I.  English  Backgrounds:  For  the  broader  European  movements,  see  Pre¬ 
served  Smith,  The  Age  of  the  Reformation  (New  York,  1920).  For  English 
movements,  see  David  Masson,  Life  of  Milton  (6  vols.,  London,  1859-80). 
The  important  ideas  of  Luther  will  be  found  in  An  Open  Letter  to  the  Chris¬ 
tian  Nobility  of  the  German  Nation  Concerning  the  Reform  of  the  Christian 
State  (1520);  The  Babylonian  Captivity  of  the  Church  (1520);  A  Treatise  on 
Christian  Liberty  (1520).  For  discussion,  see  L.  H.  Waring,  The  Political 
Theories  of  Martin  Luther  (New  York  and  London,  1910).  For  Calvin,  see 
Williston  Walker,  John  Calvin,  The  Organiser  of  Reformed  Protestantism 
(New  York  and  London,  1906;  with  bibliographical  note). 

II.  The  Transplanting  of  Ideas:  For  political  history  see  James  Truslow 
Adams,  The  Founding  of  New  England  (Boston,  1921).  For  literary  history 
consult  the  invaluable  work  of  Moses  Coit  Tyler,  A  History  of  American 
Literature,  1607-1765  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1878).  Histories  of  Congrega¬ 
tionalism  will  be  found  in  Henry  M.  Dexter,  The  Congregationalism  of  the 
Last  Three  Hundred  Years  as  Seen  in  Its  Literature  (New  York,  1880;  with 
full  bibliography);  Williston  Walker,  A  History  of  the  Congregational 
Churches  in  the  United  States  (New  York,  1900);  also  W.  Walker,  Creeds 
and  Platforms  of  Congregationalism  (New  York,  1893). 

III.  John  Cotton:  Little  of  Cotton’s  work  has  been  reprinted.  A  Reply  to  Mr. 

Williams  His  Examination  was  reissued  in  N arragansett  Club  Pub.,  Vol.  II, 
pp.  1-240.  His  most  important  work  is  The  Way  of  the  Congregational 
Churches  Cleared  (London,  1648). 

No  life  has  been  written.  See  Cotton  Mather’s  Magnalia;  W.  Walker’s  Ten 
New  England  Leaders  (New  York,  1901);  A.  Young,  John  Cotton’s  Life  and 
Letters.  Chronicles  of  the  First  Planters,  etc.  (Boston,  1846). 

John  Winthrof:  Journal  .  .  .  (Hartford,  1790);  as  The  History  of  New 
England  .  .  .  edited  by  J.  Savage  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1825-26,  1853);  edited 
by  J.  K.  Hosmer  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1908). 

See  R.  C.  Winthrop,  Life  and  Letters  of  John  Winthrop  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1863, 
1866,  1869,  1895).  J.  Twitched,  John  Winthrop,  First  Governor  of  Massa¬ 
chusetts  (New  York,  1892). 

IV.  Thomas  Hooker:  His  works  have  not  been  reprinted.  The  Survey  of  the 

Summe  of  Church-Discipline  .  .  .  was  published  in  London  in  1648. 
Contemporary  notes  of  his  Sermon  before  the  General  Court  on  May  31, 1638, 
were  printed  with  comment  by  J.  Hammond  Trumbull,  in  Conn.  Hist.  Soc. 
Col.,  Vol.  I,  No.  19. 

For  his  life,  see  G.  L.  Walker,  Thomas  Hooker,  Preacher,  Founder,  Democrat 
(New  York,  1891;  with  bibliography  by  J.  H.  Trumbull). 

399 


400 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Roger  Williams:  The  Works  of  Roger  Williams.  Edited  by  members  of  the 
Narragansett  Club  (6  vols.,  Providence,  1866-1874). 

No  satisfactory  life  has  been  written.  The  best  is  Oscar  S.  Straus,  Roger 
Williams,  the  Pioneer  of  Religious  Liberty  (New  York,  1894).  See  also 
Edmund  J.  Carpenter,  Roger  Williams;  A  Study  of  the  Life,  Times  and 
Character  of  a  Political  Pioneer  (New  York,  1909;  Grafton  Hist.  Series). 

BOOK  I:  PART  II 

I.  Samuel  Sewall:  Diary  (printed  in  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Col.,  Series  5,  Vols.  5-7). 

No  life  has  been  written. 

II.  Increase  Mather:  The  extensive  bibliography  is  confused,  and  a  definitive 
list  is  being  prepared  by  T.  J.  Holmes  and  G.  P.  Winship.  Few  works 
have  been  reprinted,  and  about  the  only  available  title  is  Illustrious  Prov¬ 
idences  (Boston  and  London,  1684;  London,  1687);  under  title  of  Remarkable 
Providences  (London,  1856,  1890). 

The  authoritative  life  is  by  Kenneth  B.  Murdock,  Increase  Mather,  The  Fore¬ 
most  American  Puritan  (Harvard  University  Press.  1925 ;  with  bibliography). 
See  also  Williston  Walker,  Ten  New  England  Leaders  (New  York,  1901). 

Cotton  Mather:  The  bibliography  is  enormous,  but  few  titles  are  available. 
The  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World  (Boston,  1693)  has  been  twice  reprinted: 
with  title,  Salem  Witchcraft  .  .  .  and  notes  by  S.  P.  Fowler  (Cambridge, 
1861);  and  with  I.  Mather’s  Account  of  the  Tryals  of  the  New-England 
Witches  (Library  of  Old  Authors,  London,  1862).  The  Bostonian  Ebenezer, 
Boston,  1698,  was  reprinted  in  Old  South  Leaflets,  Boston,  1896.  The 
Magnalia  Christi  Americana,  London,  1702,  was  reissued  (2  vols.,  Hartford 
and  New  Haven,  1820);  and  the  same  with  notes  by  T.  Robbins,  and 
translations  of  foreign  quotations  by  L.  F.  Robinson,  and  a  life  by  S.  G. 
Drake  (Hartford,  1853).  The  Essays  to  Do  Good  has  been  reprinted  ten 
times,  the  latest  editions  London,  1842,  and  Boston,  1843.  The  most 
available  text  is  Selections  from  Cotton  Mather,  edited  with  introduction, 
by  K.  B.  Murdock  (New  York,  1926;  American  Authors  Series). 

The  best  life  is  by  Barrett  Wendell,  Cotton  Mather,  Puritan  Priest  (New  York, 
1891;  Harvard  University  Press,  1925).  See  also  A.  P.  Marvin,  The  Life 
and  Times  of  Cotton  Mather  (Boston,  1892). 

III.  John  Wise:  The  Churches  Quarrel  Espoused  .  .  .  (Boston,  1710,  1715,  1745, 
1772);  reissued  with  the  Vindication,  with  introduction  by  J.  S.  Clark 
(Boston,  i860).  A  Vindication  of  the  Government  of  the  New-England 
Churches.  Drawn  from  Antiquity;  the  Light  of  Nature;  Holy  Scripture  .  .  . 
(Boston,  1717,  1772);  reissued  with  the  preceding  title  (Boston,  i860). 

No  life  of  Wise  has  been  written. 

BOOK  II:  PART  I 

I.  Colonial  Backgrounds:  See  Herbert  L.  Osgood,  The  American  Colonies  in 
the  Eighteenth  Century  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1924). 

New  Stock:  See  John  R.  Commons,  Races  and  Immigrants  in  America  (New 
York,  1902,  1920).  F.  R.  Diffenderfer,  The  German  Immigrants  into 
Pennsylvania  .  .  .  (New  York,  1900).  The  Diary  of  John  Narrower  (Amer. 
Hist.  Review,  Vol.  VI,  p.  65). 

The  Frontier — Lubberland:  The  Journal  of  Sarah  Kemble  Knight  (New 
York,  1825;  Albany,  1865;  Norwich,  Conn.,  1901). 

William  Byrd:  Westover  Manuscripts:  containing  the  History  of  the  Dividing 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


401 


Line  ...  A  Journey  to  the  Land  of  Eden  .  .  .  (Petersburg,  Va.,  1841); 
reissued  under  title.  The  History  of  the  Dividing  Line  (edited  by  T.  H. 
Wynne;  2  vols.,  Richmond,  1866).  Also  The  Writings  of  “  Colonel  William 
Byrd  of  Westover  in  Virginia,  Esq.”  Edited  by  J.  S.  Bassett  (New  York, 
1901). 

The  Frontier — Land  of  Promise:  Letters  from  an  American  Farmer  .  .  . 
(London,  1782;  with  note  by  W.  P.  Trent  and  introduction  by  Ludwig 
Lewisohn,  New  York,  1904).  More  “ Letters  from  an  American  Farmer,” 
edited  with  introductions  by  H.  L.  Bourdin,  R.  G.  Gabriel,  and  S.  T. 
Williams,  and  issued  under  the  title,  Sketches  of  Eighteenth  Century  America 
(New  Haven,  1925). 

For  the  life  of  Crevecoeur,  see  Julia  Post  Mitchell,  St.  Jean  de  Cr'evecceur  (Col. 
Univ.  Studies  in  English  and  Comp.  Lit.,  New  York,  1916). 

II.  Jonathan  Edwards:  Works  (8  vols.,  Leeds,  1806-11).  Works,  edited  by 

S.  E.  Dwight  (10  vols.,  New  York,  1829,  1830).  Works  (10  vols.,  Edin¬ 
burgh,  1847).  Numerous  other  editions  and  many  reprints. 

The  best  life  is  by  V.  G.  Allen,  Jonathan  Edwards  (Boston,  1889,  1890; 
with  bibliography).  See  also  Woodbridge  Riley,  American  Thought  (New 
York,  1915). 

III.  Benjamin  Franklin:  The  best  edition  of  his  works  is  that  edited  by  J. 
Bigelow  (10  vols.,  New  York,  1889).  The  Autobiography  was  first  printed 
complete  by  J.  Bigelow,  New  York,  1874.  The  latest  reprint  is  in  the 
American  Authors  Series,  edited  with  introduction  by  Percy  H.  Boynton 
(New  York,  1926). 

Of  the  several  lives,  see  James  Parton,  Life  and  Times  of  Benjamin  Franklin 
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1864),  J.  B.  McMaster,  Benjamin  Franklin  as  a  Man  of 
Letters  (Boston,  1887);  J.  T.  Morse,  Benjamin  Franklin  (American  States¬ 
men  Series,  Boston,  1889).  See  also  W.  A.  Wetzel,  Benjamin  Franklin  as  an 
Economist  ( Johns  Hopkins  Studies  in  Hist,  and  Pol.  Science,  Thirteenth 
Series,  Vol.  IX,  pp.  421-476).  A  recent  life:  Phillips  Russell,  Benjamin 
Franklin:  The  First  Civilized  Ameiican  (New  York,  1926). 

BOOK  II:  PART  II 

I.  Imperial  Sovereignty  and  Home  Rule:  For  the  literature  of  the  Revolu¬ 

tionary  period,  see  the  invaluable  Literary  History  of  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion,  by  Moses  Coit  Tyler  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1897;  with  annotated  bibli¬ 
ography).  For  the  political  phases,  see  C.  H.  Van  Tyne,  The  Causes  of  the 
War  of  Independence  .  .  .  (Boston  and  New  York,  1922);  A.  M.  Schles- 
inger,  The  Colonial  Merchants  and  the  American  Revolution,  1763-1776 
(New  York,  1918);  J.  T.  Adams,  Revolutionary  New  England,  1691-1776 
(Boston,  1923). 

II.  Thomas  Hutchinson:  The  History  of  Massachusetts  (3  vols.,  Boston  and 

London,  1764-1767-1828;  Vols.  I  and  II,  Boston,  1795).  Diary  and  Letters 
of  Thomas  Hutchinson  .  .  .,  edited  by  P.  0.  Hutchinson  (2  vols.,  Boston, 
1884-1886).  J.  K.  Hosmer,  Life  of  Thomas  Hutchinson  (Boston,  1896). 
Daniel  Leonard:  Massachusettensis  (London,  1776);  reissued  with  Nov- 
anglus  by  John  Adams,  and  ascribed  on  the  title  page  to  Jonathan  Sewall 
(Boston,  1819). 

Jonathan  Boucher:  A  View  of  the  Causes  and  Consequences  of  the  American 
Revolution  (London,  1797). 

III.  John  Dickinson:  Political  Writings  (2  vols.,  Wilmington,  1801).  Writings, 

edited  by  P.  L.  Ford  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1895). 


402  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

See  C.  J.  Stille,  The  Life  and  Times  of  John  Dickinson  (Philadelphia,  1891). 

IV.  Samuel  Adams:  Writings,  edited  by  H.  A.  Cushing  (4  vols..  New  York, 
1904-08). 

See  J.  K.  Hosmer,  Samuel  Adams  (Boston,  1884);  revised  edition  (1898, 
American  Statesmen  Series).  W.  V.  Wells,  The  Life  and  Public  Services  of 
Samuel  Adams  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1865). 

V.  John  Trumbull:  Poetical  Works  (2  vols.,  Hartford,  1820).  The  Progress  of 
Dulness  (New  Haven,  1772-73).  An  Elegy  on  the  Times  (Boston,  1774;  New 
Haven,  1775)-  M’Fingal  (printed  in  parts  from  1775  to  1782,  and  much  re¬ 
vised;  first  published  entire,  Hartford,  1782;  numerous  contemporary 
editions).  The  Progress  of  Dulness  and  M’Fingal  are  reprinted  in  The 
Connecticut  Wits,  edited  with  introduction  and  bibliography  by  Vernon  L. 
Parrington  (New  York,  1926,  American  Authors  Series). 

No  life  of  Trumbull  has  been  written. 

Francis  Hopkinson:  Miscellaneous  Essays  and  Occasional  Writings  (2  vols., 
Philadelphia,  1792).  George  Hastings,  Life  and  Works  of  Francis  Hopkin¬ 
son  (University  of  Chicago  Press,  1926). 

Jonathan  Odell:  The  Loyal  Verses  of  Joseph  Stansbury  and  Doctor  Jonathan 
Odell,  edited  by  Winthrop  Sargent  (Albany,  i860). 

Samuel  Peters:  A  General  History  of  Connecticut  ...  to  which  is  added  an 
Appendix,  wherein  New  and  True  Sources  of  the  Present  Rebellion  are  pointed 
out  ...  By  a  Gentleman  of  the  Province  (London,  1781;  New  Haven,  1829; 
New  York,  1877). 


BOOK  III:  PART  I 

I.  Agrarianism  and  Capitalism:  A  vivid  account  of  the  party  struggles  of 

the  time  is  given  in  Claude  G.  Bowers,  Jefferson  and  Hamilton  (Boston, 
1925,  with  full  bibliography.  For  political  theory,  see  Harold  J.  Laski, 
Political  Thought  in  England  from  Locke  to  Bentham  (New  York,  1920). 
Charles  E.  Merriam,  A  History  of  American  Political  Theories  (New  York, 
1903).  A  dramatic  account  of  Shays’s  Rebellion  is  given  in  Edward 
Bellamy,  The  Duke  of  Stockbridge  (New  York,  1901). 

II.  The  Great  Debate:  The  bibliography  is  extensive.  See  J.  Elliot,  Debates  in 

the  Several  State  Conventions  on  the  Adoption  of  the  Federal  Constitution  .  .  . 
(4  vols.,  Washington,  1827,  1836;  5  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1906).  Max 
Farrand,  Records  of  the  Federal  Convention  of  1787  (3  vols.,  New  Haven, 
1911).  S.  B.  Harding,  The  Contest  over  the  Ratification  of  the  Federal  Con¬ 
stitution  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts  (New  York,  1896).  Charles  A.  Beard, 
An  Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  (New 
York,  1913).  The  Federalist,  numerous  editions;  the  best  are  those  edited 
by  H.  C.  Lodge  (New  York,  1886)  and  by  P.  L.  Ford  (New  York,  1898). 
Richard  Henry  Lee,  Observations  leading  to  a  fair  examination  of  the  system 
of  government  ...  In  a  number  of  Letters  from  the  Federal  Farmer  to  the 
Republican  (reprinted  in  Pamphlets  on  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States, 
1787-1788,  edited  by  P.  L.  Ford,  Brooklyn,  1888). 

III.  Alexander  Hamilton:  Works,  Comprising  his  Correspondence,  edited  by 
J.  C.  Hamilton  (7  vols.,  New  York,  1850-51).  Works,  edited  by  H.  C. 
Lodge  (10  vols.,  New  York,  1885). 

There  are  numerous  lives.  See  J.  C.  Hamilton,  The  Life  of  Alexander  Hamilton 
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1834).  H.  C.  Lodge,  Alexander  Hamilton  (Boston, 
1882,  1898).  J.  T.  Morse,  The  Life  of  Alexander  Hamilton  (2  vols.,  Boston, 
1876).  See  also  Gertrude  Atherton,  The  Conqueror  (New  York  and  London, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


403 


1902).  A.  H.  Vanderberg,  The  Greatest  American,  Alexander  Hamilton  .  .  . 
with  a  Symposium  of  Opinions  by  Distinguished  Americans  (New  York  and 
London,  1922).  F.  S.  Oliver,  Alexander  Hamilton:  An  Essay  on  the  Amer¬ 
ican  Union  (New  York,  1907) — an  English  view. 

John  Adams:  Works  .  .  .  with  a  Life  of  the  Author,  edited  by  C.  F.  Adams 
(10  vols.,  Boston,  1850-56). 

See  J.  Q.  Adams  and  C.  F.  Adams,  The  Life  of  John  Adams  (2  vols.,  Philadel¬ 
phia,  1871).  J.  T.  Morse,  Jr.,  John  Adams  (Boston,  1884,  1898).  Letters 
of  Mrs.  Adams,  the  Wife  of  John  Adams,  edited  by  C.  F.  Adams  (2  vols., 
Boston,  1840).  C.  M.  Walsh,  The  Political  Science  of  John  Adams  (New 
York,  1915). 


BOOK  III:  PART  II 

I.  The  Impact  of  the  French  Revolution:  Abundant  material  will  be  found 
in  Charles  D.  Hazen,  Contemporary  American  Opinion  of  the  French  Revolu¬ 
tion  (Baltimore,  1897,  Johns  Hopkins  Studies  in  Hist,  and  Pol.  Science, 
Extra  Vol.  16).  See  also  The  Journal  of  William  Maclay,  edited  by  E.  S. 
Maclay  (New  York,  1890).  For  Publicola,  see  John  Q.  Adams,  Writ¬ 
ings  .  .  .,  edited  by  Worthington  C.  Ford  (7  vols.,  New  York,  1913-17). 

II.  Tom  Paine:  Writings  .  .  .,  edited  by  Moncure  D.  Conway  (4  vols.,  New 
York,  1894-99).  Moncure  D.  Conway,  Life  of  Thomas  Paine  .  .  .  To 
which  is  added  a  Sketch  of  Paine  by  William  Cobbett  ...  (2  vols.,  New  York 
and  London,  1892). 

Thomas  Jefferson:  Writings,  edited  by  H.  A.  Washington  (9  vols.,  Washing¬ 
ton,  1853-54).  The  Works  of  Thomas  Jefferson  (with  Anas  and  Autobiog¬ 
raphy),  edited  by  P.  L.  Ford  (12  vols.,  New  York,  1904-05). 

Numerous  lives,  many  of  which  are  wholly  unreliable.  The  official  biography 
was  written  by  Henry  S.  Randall,  The  Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson  (3  vols., 
Philadelphia,  1858,  1871).  Of  later  studies  the  following  are  excellent: 
David  S.  Muzzey,  Thomas  Jefferson  (New  York,  1919);  Francis  W. 
Hirst,  Life  and  Letters  of  Thomas  Jefferson  (New  York,  1926) — an  English 
view;  and  Albert  Jay  Nock,  Jefferson  (New  York,  1926).  See  also  Sarah 
N.  Randolph,  The  Domestic  Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson  (New  York,  1871)  and 
Thomas  E.  Watson,  The  Life  and  Times  of  Thomas  Jefferson  (New  York, 
1903). 

III.  The  Federalist  Group:  For  backgrounds  of  the  Hartford  wits,  see  Richard 
J.  Purcell,  Connecticut  in  Transition:  1775-1818  (Washington,  1918). 
William  A.  Robinson,  Jeffersonian  Democracy  in  New  England  (New  Haven, 
1916).  Samuel  E.  Morison,  Life  and  Letters  of  Harrison  Gray  Otis  (2  vols., 
Boston,  1913).  For  criticism,  see  F.  Sheldon,  “Pleiades  of  Connecticut” 
(Atlantic  Monthly,  Vol.  XV).  Mrs.  Annie  R.  Marble,  Heralds  of  American 
Literature  (Chicago,  1907).  Moses  Coit  Tyler,  Three  Men  of  Letters  (New 
York,  1895) — Dwight  and  Barlow.  The  writings  of  the  Wits  have  long  been 
out  of  print.  The  most  available  text  is  The  Connecticut  Wits,  edited  with 
introduction  and  bibliographies,  by  Vernon  L.  Parrington  (New  York, 
1926,  American  Authors  Series),  which  reprints  large  portions  of  Trumbull, 
Timothy  Dwight,  Barlow,  Humphreys,  The  Anarchiad,  and  portions  of 
The  Echo. 

Timothy  Dwight:  The  most  important  titles  are  The  Conquest  of  Ca¬ 
naan  .  .  .  (Hartford,  1785).  The  Triumph  of  Infidelity  .  .  .  (1788). 
Greenfield  Hill  .  .  .  (1794).  Travels  in  New  England  and  New  York:  1796- 
1815  (4  vols.,  New  Haven,  1821-22;  London,  1823). 


404 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


See  W.  B.  Sprague,  Life  of  Timothy  Dwight  (Sparks  Lib.  Amer.  Biog.,  Second 
Series,  Vol.  IV,  Boston,  1845). 

The  French  Group:  Philip  Freneau:  Poems,  edited  for  the  Princeton 
Hist.  Assoc,  by  Fred  L.  Pattee  (3  vols.,  Princeton,  1902-07).  Victor  H. 
Paltsits,  A  Bibliography  of  the  Separate  and  Collected  Works  of  Philip 
Freneau,  together  with  an  Account  of  his  Newspapers  (New  York,  1903). 
Mary  S.  Austin,  Philip  Freneau,  Poet  of  the  Revolution  (New  York,  1901). 
S.  E.  Forman,  The  Political  Activities  of  Philip  Freneau  (Baltimore,  1902, 
Johns  Hopkins  Studies  in  Hist,  and  Pol.  Science,  Series  XX,  No.  9-10). 
Mrs.  Annie  R.  Marble,  Heralds  of  American  Literature  (Chicago,  1907). 

Joel  Barlow:  His  works  are  out  of  print,  but  portions  will  be  found  in  The 
Connecticut  Wits  (New  York,  1926).  The  important  titles  are:  The  Vision 
of  Columbus  .  .  .  (Hartford,  1787;  London,  1787).  A  Letter  to  the  N ational 
Convention  of  France  .  .  .  (London,  1792).  Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders 
in  the  Several  States  of  Europe  .  .  .  (London,  1792,  1796).  The  Conspiracy 
of  Kings  .  .  .  (London,  1792).  The  Hasty  Pudding  .  .  .  (New  York, 
1796;  Salem,  1799;  Stockbridge,  1799).  The  Columbiad  (Philadelphia, 
1807;  London,  1809). 

Charles  Burr  Todd,  Life  and  Letters  of  Joel  Barlow  (New  York,  1886).  See 
also  Tyler,  Three  Men  of  Letters  (New  York,  1895),  and  Marble,  Heralds  of 
American  Literature  (Chicago,  1907). 

Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge:  Modern  Chivalry:  Containing  the  Adventures  of 
Captain  John  Farrago,  and  Teague  O’ Regan,  his  servant  ...  (2  vols., 
Philadelphia,  1792;  Vol.  3,  Pittsburgh,  1793;  Vol.  4,  Philadelphia,  179 7). 
These  four  volumes  constitute  Part  I.  Part  II  was  issued  in  two  volumes, 
Philadelphia,  1804-05.  Many  revisions  and  changes  of  the  text  followed. 
The  complete  work  was  issued  in  four  volumes  (Philadelphia,  1815),  the 
fourth  volume  containing  new  material.  Another  complete  edition  was 
issued  in  two  volumes  (Pittsburgh,  1819).  For  detailed  information  see 
Cambridge  History  of  American  Literature  (Vol.  I,  p.  526). 

An  account  of  Brackenridge  and  in  particular  of  his  experience  during 
the  Whiskey  Rebellion,  in  a  memoir  by  H.  M.  Brackenridge,  prefaces 
the  edition  of  1846  and  later  editions.  No  life  of  Brackenridge  has  been 
written.  His  fugitive  writings  in  verse,  drama,  and  prose  are  numerous 
but  inaccessible.  Some  comment  on  Brackenridge  is  given  in  Henry 
Adams,  Life  of  Albert  Gallatin  (Philadelphia,  1879). 


INDEX 


Adams,  James  Truslow,  20  n,  30  n,  36  n, 
58  n,  87  n,  103  n 

- ,  John,  179,  188,  190,  200  n,  205, 

207,  208,  213,  222,  241,  247,  249, 
253.  259,  292,  296,  299,  307-320, 
323,  324,  328,  340,  368,  375,  384 

- ,  John  Quincy,  283,  324,  325-326 

- ,  R.  G.,  310  n 

- ,  Samuel,  123,  181,  196,  200,  206, 

228,  233-247,  3 1 1,  322,  344,  348, 
372 

- ,  Samuel,  Sr.,  234 

Address  and  Declaration  of  the  Friends  of 
Universal  Peace  and  Liberty,  339  n 
Address  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Quebec,  219 
Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders  in  the 
Several  States  of  Europe,  324,  383, 
384-386,  38 6  n 
Age  of  Reason,  The,  324,  341 
Agrarian  Justice,  337-339.  3 8S 
Allen,  V.  G.,  154,  157  n,  160  n 
Alsop,  Richard,  359,  360 
Alvord,  C.  W.,  184  n 
American  Belisarius ,  The,  147,  147  n 
American  Historical  Review,  The,  13  6n 
American  Political  Theories,  280  n 
American  Soldier,  The,  375  n 
American  Times,  The,  257-259 
American  Weekly  Mercury,  The,  134 
Ames,  Fisher,  360 
Anarchiad,  The,  249,  363-367 
Andre,  Major  John,  256 
Andros,  Sir  Edmund,  118 
Anne,  Queen,  87,  166 
Answer  of  Bernard  to  the  Petition  of  the 
House  of  Representatives  to  the  King, 
199  n,  204  n 

Apology  for  the  Bible,  An,  324,  337  n 
Arbitrary  Government  Described:  13  the 
Government  of  the  Massachusetts 
Vindicated  from  that  Aspersion,  44 
Aristotle,  213,  282,  284 
Arnold,  Benedict,  256 
Autobiography  of  John  Adams,  309  n 
Autobiography  of  Thomas  Jefferson, 
35°  n 


Augustine,  Saint,  68,  150 
Austin,  James  Trecothick,  276  n 

Babeuf,  Francois  Noel,  337 
Babylonian  Captivity,  The,  12  n 
Baillie,  Joseph,  35 
Ball,  Captain  John,  134 
Bancroft,  George,  247 
Barlow,  Joel,  324,  359,  360,  367,  368, 
382-389,  391 
Barre,  Isaac,  183 

Beard,  Charles  A.,  184  n,  276  n,  287  n, 
320  n 

Belcher,  Mr.,  113 
Bentham,  Jeremy,  285,  292,  296 
Berkeley,  Bishop,  162 
Bernard,  Governor,  198,  199,  200,  201, 
204,  205,  216,  224,  242,  243>  244 
Blackstone,  Lord,  189,  236,  238,  244, 
249,  280,  343,  352,  353 
Blathwayt,  Mr.,  127 
Bloudy  Tenent  of  Persecution  for  Cause 
of  Conscience,  The,  68  n,  70  n,  71  n, 
72 

Bloudy  Tenent  Yet  more  Bloody,  The, 
68  n,  69  n,  71  n 
Body  of  Liberties,  21,  76,  80 
Bolingbroke,  Henry  Saint  John,  Lord, 
319 

Borgeaud,  Charles,  58  n 
Boston  Chronicle,  The,  379 
Boston  Gazette,  The,  128 
Boucher,  Rev.  Jonathan,  190,  194,  214- 
218 

Bowres,  Captain,  135 
Brackenridge,  Hugh  Henry,  368,  369, 
372,  390-395 

Braddock,  General  Edward,  373 
Brook  of  the  Valley,  The,  381  n 
Brooke,  Lord,  34 
Brooks,  Noah,  277  n 
Browne,  Robert,  59 
Bunyan,  John,  40,  85 
Burke,  Edmund,  69,  183,  324,  325,  334, 
335.  375 

Burnaby,  Rev.  Andrew,  276  n 

405 


406 


INDEX 


Byles,  Rev.  Mather,  128,  192,  248 
Byrd,  Colonel  William,  138-140,  141 

Cairns,  William  B.,  391  n 
Calef,  Robert,  108 
Calhoun,  John  C.,  320 
Calvin,  John,  9,  11,  12-15,  20,  23, 
27,  30,  42,  76,  89,  100,  150,  159, 
249 

Camden,  Charles  Pratt,  Earl  of,  183, 
189,  224,  238 
Campbell,  Thomas,  370 
Candidus,  237,  239  n,  242  n,  243  n 
Canticles,  40,  65,  66  n,  154 
Care,  Henry,  119  n 
Carson,  Hampton  Lawrence,  284  n 
Causes  of  the  War  of  Independence,  The, 
179  n,  182  n,  184  n,  188  n,  189  «, 
203  n 

Channing,  William  Ellery,  62,  65,  105, 
106 

Charles  I,  King,  16,  19,  55,  76,  77,  84, 
225 

Chastellux,  Marquis  de,  250 
Chatterer,  A,  241  n,  243  n 
Christian  Commonwealth,  The,  81-84 
Church,  Dr.,  ii8» 

Churchill,  Charles,  248,  249,  257,  363, 
37i 

Churches  Quarrel  Espoused,  The,  120, 
122  n,  123 
Cicero,  213,  317 
Clark,  Mr.,  113 

Clarke,  Captain  Jonathan,  134 
Clymer,  George,  221,  230,  252 
Clinton,  George,  285 

- ,  Sir  Henry,  258,  259 

Cogswell,  Dr.  Mason  F.,  359 
Coke,  Sir  Edward,  44,  64,  89,  188,  222, 
234,  236,  238,  239,  343,  352 
Colbert,  Jean  Baptiste,  173 
Colman,  Rev.  Benjamin,  109 
Colonial  Merchants  and  the  American 
Revolution,  The,  183  n,  379  n 
Columbia  University  Contributions  to 
Philosophy,  Psychology  and  Educa¬ 
tion,  155  n 

Columbiad,  The,  384,  387-389 
Columbian  Centinel,  The,  325 
Commentaries  (Blackstone),  280 
Common  Sense,  329-332 
Commons,  John  R.,  134  n 
Congratulation,  The,  257 


Connecticut  in  Transition:  1775-1818, 
384  n 

Conquest  of  Canaan,  The,  362 
Considerations  for  J.  W.,  39 
Considerations  on  the  Propriety  of  Im¬ 
posing  Taxes  in  the  British  Colonies, 
for  the  Purpose  of  Raising  Revenue 
by  an  Act  of  Parliament,  226  n 
Contemporary  American  Opinion  of  the 
French  Revolution,  321  n,  323  n 
Conway,  Moncure  D.,  1 77  n,  336  n, 
339  n 

Corinthians,  Second  Epistle  to  the,  66  n 
Cotton,  Rev.  John,  vi,  19,  27-37,  38> 
49>  5L  54,  55,  57,  60,  62,  63,  64,  72, 
82,  99,  101,  361 

Cotton  Mather,  Puritan  Priest,  108  n, 
1 14  n 

Coults,  James,  134 

Crevecceur,  Hector  St.  John  de,  140-147 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  10,  29,  66,  82,  220 
Crusoe,  Robinson,  166 
Curiosa  Americana,  115 
Cushing,  Caleb,  249 

Daingerfield,  Colonel,  136 
D’Alembert,  Jean  le  Rond,  324 
Dana,  Judge,  276 
Danforth,  Mr.,  93 
Daniel,  Book  of,  66  n 
Davenport,  Rev.  John,  60 

- ,  Mr.,  1 13 

David,  King,  31 
Dean,  John  Ward,  80  n 
Declaration  of  Rights  of  the  Stamp  Act 
Congress,  219 

Decline  and  Fall  of  the  English  System  of 
Finance,  The,  340 

Defence  of  the  Constitution  of  Government 
of  the  United  States  of  America,  A, 
310,  311,  3i2«,  315  n,  316 n,  317 n, 
318  n 

Defoe,  Daniel,  90,  91,  no,  166 
De  Jure  Naturae  et  Gentium,  121 
Diary  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  154 
Diary  of  John  H arrow er,  135-136 
Diary  of  Cotton  Mather,  107,  109,  109  n, 
lion,  112,  123,  123  n,  128  n 
Diary  of  Samuel  Sewall,  88,  90  n,  91  n, 
92  n,  93, 93  n,  94  n,  95  n,  96  n,  97  n, 
113  n,  126  n,  127  n 

Diary  and  Letters  of  Thomas  Hutchinson, 
196  n 


INDEX 


407 


Diary  of  the  Revolution,  191  n 
Dickinson,  John,  137,  167,  219-232, 
253,  291,  344 
Diderot,  Denis,  324 
Diffenderfer,  F.  R.,  134,  135  n 
Discourses  on  Davila,  310,  3x1,  324,  3  76 
Dodd,  William  Edward,  345  n 
Don  Quixote,  390 
Duck,  Chancellor,  56 
Dudley,  Joseph,  29 

- ,  Governor  Joseph,  92,  93,  104,  112, 

1 13,  1 18,  126-127 

- ,  Paul,  1 12,  127 

Duguit,  Leon,  73  n 

Dulaney,  Daniel,  221,  226,  344 

Dummer,  Mr.,  92 

Duns  Scotus,  14 

Dwight,  Theodore,  359,  360 

- ,  Rev.  Timothy,  249,  358,  359,  360- 

363,  367>  369,  383.  385,  389 

Early  American  Philosophers,  155  n 
Ecclesiasticall  Politie,  149,  149  n 
Echo,  The,  363 

Economic  Basis  of  Politics,  The,  287  n 
Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  An,  184  n 

Economic  Origins  of  Jeffersonian  De¬ 
mocracy,  The,  320  n 
Economic  Writings  of  Sir  William  Petty, 
The,  171  n 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  vi,  105,  120,  15 1, 
152-163,  249,  359,  361 
Elegy  on  the  Times,  An,  249 
Elizabeth,  Queen,  7 
Eliot,  Rev.  John,  30,  59,  81-84 
- -,  Sir  John,  38 

Elliot’s  Debates,  229  n,  230  n,  282  n, 
283  n,  302  n 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  62,  153 
End  of  the  Wicked  Contemplated  by  the 
Righteous,  The;  or,  The  Torments 
of  the  Wicked  in  Hell,  no  Occasion 
of  Grief  to  the  Saints  in  Heaven, 
1 59  n 

Endicott,  Roger,  23,  29,  5° 

Epistle  to  the  Romans,  67 
Ernst,  Dr.  James  E.,  67  n 
Essay  of  Projects,  An,  1 66 
Essay  for  the  Recording  of  Illustrious 
Providences,  Ah,  105,  106 
Eternity  of  Hell  Torments,  The,  159  n 
Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  28 


False  Systems  of  Government,  On,  377  n 
Familiar  Letters  of  John  and  Abigail 
Adams,  253  n 

Federal  Constitution  in  Massachusetts, 
The,  284  n 

Federalist,  The,  283  n,  284-288,  289 
Fenno,  John,  311,  379,  380 
Feme,  Dr.,  46 
Feu  de  Joie,  The,  257 
Filmer,  Sir  Robert,  103,  189,  190,  215, 
218,  240 

First  Principles  of  Government,  280 
Ford,  Paul  Leicester,  231  n,  283,  284  n 

- ,  Worthington  C.,  326  n 

Forman,  S.  E.,  311  n,  379  n,  380 
Fothergill,  Dr.,  169 
Founding  of  New  England,  The,  20  n, 
30  n,  36  n,  58  n,  87  n 
Fox,  Charles  James,  383 
Franklin,  Benjamin,  vi,  90,  97,  124, 128, 
162,  164-178,  180,  188,  202,  236, 
244,  328,  334,  347,  363,  369,  380 

- ,  Ebenezer,  165 

- ,  James,  96,  128,  166 

- ,  Josiah,  166 

- ,  Mrs.,  168  n 

Freedom  of  the  Will,  On  the,  157 
Freneau,  Philip,  247,  251,  255,  256,  368- 
381,  390 

Frontier  Woman,  The,  146  n 
Fuller,  Dr.,  of  Plymouth,  23 

Gage,  General  Thomas,  128,  183,  199, 
259 

Galloway,  Joseph,  235,  259 
Gazette  of  the  United  States,  The,  311, 
311  n 

General  History  of  Connecticut,  A,  260- 
262 

Genesis,  Book  of,  94 
Genet,  Citizen,  323 
George  III,  King,  182,  183,  184,  185, 
190,  228,  256,  259,  330,  340,  371, 
373,  395 

German  Immigrants  into  Pennsylvania, 
The,  134,  134  n 
Gerry,  Elbridge,  288 
God’s  Sovereignty,  156  n 
Godwin,  William,  292,  296,  313,  376 
Goldsmith,  Oliver,  172 
Gooch,  George  Peabody,  73  n 
Grace  Abounding,  40 
Greenfield  Hill,  363 


408 


INDEX 


Grenville,  George,  240 
Grotius,  Hugo,  236 
Group,  The,  207 

Halifax,  Marquis  of,  280 
Hamilton,  Alexander,  vi,  275,  281,  284, 
285,  289,  292-307,  317  n,  320,  323, 
328,  342,  346,  347,  348,  367,  368, 

375,  380,  391 
Hancock,  John,  205,  241 
Harding,  Samuel  Bannister,  284  n 
Harrington,  James,  25,  26,  103,  213, 
269,  270,  278,  280,  296,  318,  319 
Harrison  Gray  Otis,  359  n 
Harrower,  John,  135-136 
Hartford  Wits,  The,  291,  357-367,  368 
Hartley,  David,  170 
Hasselwood,  Captain,  135 
Hasty  Pudding,  The,  389 
Haynes,  Governor,  57,  57  n 
Hazen,  Charles  D.,  321  n,  323  n 
Henry  the  Fourth,  28 
Henry  Knox,  277  n 
Henry,  Patrick,  222 
Heresiography,  64  n 
Higginson,  Thomas  Wentworth,  321 
Hirst,  Francis  W.,  342  n 
History  of  American  Literature,  A,  391  n 
History  of  American  Literature  during 
the  Colonial  Period,  A,  89  n 
History  of  the  Congregational  Churches 
in  the  United  States,  A,  23  n,  25  n, 
100  n,  101  n,  148  n 

History  of  English  Democratic  Ideas  in 
the  Seventeenth  Century,  A,  73  n 
History  of  the  Dividing  Line,  The,  138  n, 
139-140 

History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony, 
3 1  33  n,  34  n>  5°  «>  127  n,  196, 

198  n,  203  n,  205  n,  219  n,  242, 
242  n 

History  of  Mrs.  B.,  The,  146  n 
History  of  New  England,  A.,  118  n 
History  of  New  England  (Winthrop), 
49  «,  105 

History  of  the  Supreme  Court,  284  n 
Hobbes,  Thomas,  68,  69,  103,  208,  278, 
280,  296,  300,  319 
Hillsboro,  Lord,  200,  201 
Hoch  Deutsche  Pennsylvanische  Bericht, 
Der,  135 
Homer,  250 

Hooker,  Richard,  12,  67,  68,  149,  236 


- ,  Thomas,  47,  53-62,  68,  79,  90,  99, 

361 

Hopkins,  Dr.  Lemuel,  359,  364-365 

- ,  Rev.  Samuel,  105 

Hopkinson,  Francis,  252-255,  291 
Hosmer,  J.  K.,  196  n,  200,  237  n 
Howe,  Joseph,  249 

- ,  Sir  William,  164 

Hubbard,  Rev.  William,  57 
Hume,  David,  171,  222,  236,  239,  280, 
296,  298,  319,  352,  353,  354,  363 
Humphreys,  David,  359,  360,  367 
Hutchinson,  Mistress  Anne,  24,  28,  29, 
49,  50,  194,  195 

- ,  Mistress  Peggy,  191 

- ,  Colonel  John,  38 

- ,  Thomas,  Sr.,  195 

- ,  Governor  Thomas,  31  n,  33  n, 

50  n,  127  n,  181,  194-206,  207,  219, 
224,  234,  235,  237  n,  241,  242,  243, 
245 >  250,  259 
Hutchinson  Papers,  36  n 

Increase  Mather,  the  Foremost  American 
Puritan,  98  n,  100  n,  iox  n,  103  n, 
104  n,  106  n 

Institutes  of  Calvin,  20,  30,  3 1  n,  42  n, 
249 

Irving,  Washington,  369,  391 
Isaiah,  14,  66  n 

James  I,  King,  55,  76 
Jay,  John,  284 

Jefferson,  Thomas,  iii,  vi,  72,  147,  176, 
190,  222,  230,  247,  259,  280,  292, 
296,  299,  302,  306,  307,  312,  320, 
324.  32 7,  333.  337,  342-356,  362, 
368,  374,  375,  379,  380,  389,  391, 
397,  398 

Johns  Hopkins  Studies  in  History  and 
Political  Science,  311  n,  321  n,  3  79  n 
Johnson,  Dr.  Samuel,  307 

- ,  Sir  William,  373 

Jonathan  Edwards,  154  n,  157,  160  n 
Jones,  Adam  Leroy,  155  n 
Jonson,  Ben,  28,  76 
Journal  of  William  Maclay,  323,  342 
Journal  (Winthrop),  32,  45  n,  47  n 

Knight,  Madam  Sarah,  137-138,  141 
Knox,  General  Henry,  277,  375 

Lafayette,  Marquis  de,  323 


INDEX 


409 


Landscapes,  147  n 

Laski,  Harold  J.,  190  n,  280  n 

Latimer,  Hugh,  55 

Laud,  Archbishop,  23,  27,  32,  55,  56, 
84,  215,  256 

Law  in  the  Modern  State,  73  n 
Layman,  243  n 
Lechford,  Thomas,  23 
Lee,  Richard  Henry,  284,  288-291 
Leonard,  Daniel,  194,  207-213,  216,  250 
Letter  to  Lord  Onslow,  335  n 
Letter  of  Lord  Say  and  Sele,  48  n 
Letter  to  Lord  Say  and  Sele,  3 1  n 
Letter  to  Major  Mason,  5  7  « 

Letter  to  the  National  Convention  of 
France,  386-387 
Letter  to  Mr.  Niles,  179  n 
Letter  to  John  Taylor,  313  n,  31 6n 
Letter  to  Robert  Wodrow,  123  n 
Letter  to  the  Town  Clerk  of  Providence, 
67  n,  72  n 

Letters  from  an  American  Farmer,  140, 
142  n,  143  n,  144  n,  145,  145  n,  146 
Letters  of  Fabius,  230,  231 
Letters  from  the  Federal  Farmer  to  the 
Republican,  284,  288-291 
Letters  from  a  Pennsylvania  Farmer,  219, 
223  n,  224  n,  225,  226  n,  228  n 
Letters  on  Various  Interesting  and  Im¬ 
portant  Subjects,  378  n 
Leviathan,  The,  209,  280 
Libera  Nos,  Domine,  373 
Liberty  of  the  Press  in  the  American 
Colonies,  The,  1 19  n 
Life  and  Letters  of  Thomas  Jefferson, 
342  n 

Life  and  Letters  of  John  IVinthrop,  39  n, 
40  n,  41  n,  43  n,  44  n,  4 $n,  4 6n,  4 7« 
Life  of  Samuel  Adams,  ig6n,  237  n 
Life  of  Franklin,  171 
Life  of  Elbridge  Gerry,  276  n 
Life  of  Thomas  Hutchinson,  200  n,  201  n, 
202  n,  203  n 

Life  of  Milton,  64  n,  75  n 
Life  of  Thomas  Paine,  336  n,  339  n 
Lilburne,  “Free-born”  John,  328 
Lilly’s  Grammar,  249,  378 
Lincoln,  Earl  of,  29 
Literary  History  of  America,  A,  116  n, 
150  n,  284  n,  371  n 

Literary  History  of  the  American  Revo¬ 
lution,  A,  207  n,  226  n,  37m 
Livy,  213 


Locke,  John,  iv,  66,  6g%  103,  121,  123, 
149,  189,  190,  196/213,  215,  217, 
220,  222,  236,  237,  238,  239,  269, 
270,  271,  282,  296,  316,  319,  338, 
343.  344 

Loyal  Verses  of  Joseph  Stansbury  and 
Dr.  Jonathan  Odell ,  The,  168  n, 
257  n,  259  n 

Luther,  Martin,  6,  9,  11-12,  70,  72,  100 
Luxury,  Idleness  and  Industry,  On,  174  n 

Machiavelli,  280,  312,  319 
Maclay,  Senator  William,  323,  342 
M’Fingal,  249,  250-251,  363 
McMaster,  John  Bach,  171 
Madison,  James,  282,  284,  285^  286, 
287,  288,  292,  299,  3 11,  315,  369, 
379.  390 

Magnalia  Christi  Americana,  33  n,  63, 
63  n,  108,  1 15,  1 16 
Malthus,  Thomas  Robert,  313 
Man  of  Sorrows,  The,  146  n 
Marshall,  Chief  Justice  John,  310,  353 
Martin,  George,  134  n 
Mary,  Queen,  91  n 
Mason,  George,  231,  281,  292 
Massachusettensis,  207-213 
Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collec¬ 
tions,  81  n,  90  n,  1 12  n,  123  n 
Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Pro¬ 
ceedings,  1 19  n,  328  n 
Masson,  David,  64  n,  75  n 
Master  John  Cotton’s  Answer  to  Master 
Roger  Williams,  37  n 
Mather,  Cotton,  14,  27,  28,  33,  56,  63, 
75,85,86,97, 99, 106-117, 120, 123, 
127,  128,  137,  148,  162:,  195 

- ,  Increase,  76,  98,  99-106,  114,  119, 

127,  214,  361 

- ,  Richard,  60,  99 

- ,  Samuel,  195 

Mather  Dynasty,  The,  98-117 
Mathers,  The,  98,  120,  128,  162 
Mein,  John,  379 

Memoirs  of  Rev.  Nathaniel  Ward,  80  n 
Memorial  of  the  Present  Deplorable  State 
of  New  England  ...  by  the  Male- 
Administration  of  their  Present  Gov¬ 
ernor,  Joseph  Dudley,  Esq.  and  his 
Son  Paul,  A,  112  n 
Merriam,  Charles  E.,  280  n 
Milton,  John,  10,  12,  38,  59,  66,  72,  103, 
149,  189,  236,  280,  288,  320 


INDEX 


410 

Mississippi  Valley  in  British  Politics, 
The,  184  n 

Model  of  Moses  His  Judicials,  33 
Modell  of  Christian  Chanty,  43 
Modern  Chivalry,  390-394 
Modest  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Ne¬ 
cessity  of  a  Paper  Currency,  A,  170 
Montcalm,  Marquis  de,  141 
Montesquieu,  Baron,  236,  271,  280,  282, 
284,  319 

Moore,  Frank,  191  n 
More,  Sir  Thomas,  350 
More  Letters  from  an  American  Farmer, 
140 

More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  108 
Morison,  Samuel  Eliot,  359  n 
Morris,  Gouverneur,  192,  282,  292,  324 

- ,  Robert,  184,  221,  252,  259,  295 

Murdock,  Kenneth  B.,  98  n,  100  n, 
101  n,  103  n,  104  n,  106  n 

Napoleon,  324,  353,  384,  397 
N arragansett  Club  Publications,  25  n, 
35  n>  37  «,  57  n>  64  n,  66  n,  67  n, 
68  n,  69  n,  71  n,  72  n,  74  n 
Narrative  of  the  Surprizing  Works  of 
God,  A,  160 
Nation,  The,  86  n 
National  Gazette,  The,  379 
Negotations  in  London,  169  n 
Nemours,  DuPont  de,  346 
New  England  C our  ant,  The,  128 
New  England  Weekly  Journal,  The,  128 
New  Haven  Gazette,  The,  363 
New  Roof,  The,  254 
New  View  Points  in  American  History, 
179  n 

News-Letter,  127-128 
Norris,  Isaac,  221 
Notes  on  Virginia,  347 
North,  Frederick  Lord,  253,  373 
Novanglus,  200  n 

Novanglus  and  Massachusettensis,  208  n 

Oakes,  President,  102 
Objections  to  the  Proposed  Plan  of  a 
Federal  Government  for  the  United 
States  on  Genuine  Principles,  254- 
255 

Oceana,  25,  269,  319 

Odell,  Rev.  Jonathan,  255-259,  371 

Olivers,  The,  250 

Onslow,  Lord,  335 


Otis,  Harrison  Gray,  359 
- ,  James,  205,  212,  310 

Paget  ( also  Pagit  or  Pagitt),  Rev. 
Ephraim,  64  n 

Paine,  Robert  Treat,  247,  324 

- ,  Tom,  62,  72,  245,  247,  259,  293, 

307,  324,  325,  327-34L  352,  353, 
369,  374,  376,  378,  380,  383,  384, 
385,  386,  387,  393 
Palfrey,  John  Gorham,  118  n 
Pamphlets  on  the  Constitution,  231  n 
Patriarcha,  189,  215 
Pattee,  Fred  L.,  373  n,  378  n 
Paul,  Saint,  8,  15,  67 
Peters,  Rev.  Hugh,  75 

- ,  Rev.  Samuel,  58 

- ,  Rev.  Samuel  (of  Connecticut), 

259-263 

Petition  to  the  King,  219 

Petty,  Sir  William,  170,  171,  172 

Phaenomena  Quaedam  Apocalyptica,  93 

Philadelphiensis,  254  n 

Philip,  King,  29,  30 

Phips,  Governor  William,  86,  104,  119 

Pillars  of  Salt,  no 

Pitt,  William,  8, 164,  182,  183,  185,  188, 
220,  224,  226,  227,  238,  292,  293, 
372 

- ,  William  (the  younger),  340,  385 

Plato,  213 

Plugson  of  Undershot,  174 
Poems  of  Philip  Freneau,  273  n,  378  n 
Poganuc  People,  13 

Political  Activities  of  Philip  Freneau, 
The,  3 11  n,  379  n 
Political  Greenhouse,  The,  363 
Political  Ideas  of  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion,  The,  310  n 
Political  Justice,  376 
Political  Science  of  John  Adams,  The, 
3i9  n,  334  n 

Political  Theory  of  Roger  Williams,  The, 
67  n 

Political  Thought  from  Locke  to  Bentham, 
280  n 

Pope,  Alexander,  248,  249,  318 
Positions  to  be  Examined  concerning 
National  Wealth,  173 
Postgate,  R.  W.,  33 7  n 
Pownall,  Governor  Thomas,  205,  235 
Pretty  Story,  A,  253 
Price,  Lucien,  86  n 


INDEX 


Price,  Richard,  334 

Priestley,  Joseph,  280,  292,  296,  334, 

363,  383 

Prince,  Rev.  Thomas,  94,  114,  128 
Principles  of  Trade,  173 
Private  Journal  Kept  by  Madam  Knight 
on  a  Journey  from  Boston  to  New 
York  in  the  year  1704,  The,  137-138 
Probationary  Odes  by  Jonathan  Pindar, 
Esq.,  375 

Problem  of  Sovereignty,  The,  190  n 
Progress  and  Poverty,  338 
Progress  of  Dulness,  The,  249 
Projet  d’une  Disme  Royale,  171 
Proverbs,  113 
Psalms,  83 
Ptolemy,  13 

Public  Advertiser,  The,  235 
Public k  Occurrences,  127 
Publicola,  324,  325-326 
Pufendorf,  Baron,  121,  236,  280 
Purcell,  Richard  J.,  38471 
Puritan,  243  n 
Pym,  John,  220 

Queries  and  Remarks  Respecting  Altera¬ 
tions  in  the  Constitution  of  Penn¬ 
sylvania,  177  n 
Quesnay,  Francois,  346 

Races  and  Immigrants  in  America,  134  n 
Read,  Charles,  134 

Reflections  on  the  Augmentation  of  Wages, 
174  n 

Rem.arkable  Providences,  105 
Reply e  to  the  Answ:  Made  to  the  Discourse 
about  the  N eg:  Vote,  A,  44, 46  n 
Resolves  of  the  House  of  Representatives 
of  Massachusetts  Bay,  202  n 
Revelation,  Book  of  the,  66  n,  83,  94 
Revolution  from  1789-1906,  337  n 
Reyner,  Mr.,  91 

Rhode  Island  Historical  Society  Publica¬ 
tions,  64  n 

Riggs,  Luther  G.,  363 
Rights  of  the  Colonists,  The,  238  n 
Rights  of  Man,  The,  324,  3  3  4-3  3  7>  34° 
384)  38s,  393 

Rise  of  Modern  Democracy,  The,  58  n 
Rising  Glory  of  America,  The,  372,  390 
Rip  Van  Winkle,  391 
Robinson,  Rev.  John,  17 
Rolliad,  The,  364 


411 

Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  154,  164,  271, 
272,  324,  334 

Sainte-Beuve,  178 

Santayana,  George,  vi 

Sargent,  Winthrop,  168  n 

Say  and  Sele,  Lord,  29,  34 

Schlesinger,  A.  M.,  179  n,  183  n,  379  n 

Schuyler,  Livingston  Rowe,  11971 

Scroggs,  Lord  Chief  Justice,  1197: 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  256,  370 

Selling  of  Joseph,  The,  95 

Sermon  IX,  159  n 

Sermon  XXVII,  1587? 

Sermon  XXXIV,  156  71 
Sewall,  Henry,  90 

- ,  Jonathan,  207,  246 

- ,  Samuel,  85,  87,  88-97,  H3>  ”4» 

11777,  124,  126,  127,  165,  170,  195 
Shays,  Daniel,  277,  278,  320,  352,  364, 

365 

Shakespeare,  28 
Shelburne,  Earl  of,  183 
Sidney,  Algernon,  103,  189,  213,  236,  280 
Simple  Cobler  of  Aggawamm,  The,  76-80 
Singletary,  Amos,  284 
Sinners  in  the  Hands  of  an  Angry  God, 
15977 

Sketches  of  Eighteenth  Century  America, 
140  77,  146,  147  77 

Smith,  Adam,  171, 173,269, 271,296,346 

- ,  Dr.  Elihu  Hubbard,  359 

Solomon’s  Song.  See  Canticles 
Some  Good  Whig  Principles,  177  77 
Song  of  Songs.  See  Canticles 
Speech  of  January  6, 1773  (Hutchinson), 
203  77 

Spinoza,  152 
State  Trials,  1 19  77 
Statesmen  of  the  Old  South,  345  n 
Stoddard,  Rev.  Solomon,  153,  249 
Stone,  Rev.  Samuel,  57 
Stoughton,  Lieut.  Governor,  85 
Stowe,  Harriet  Beecher,  13,  153 
Strafford,  Earl  of,  269 
Summary  View  of  the  Rights  of  British 
America,  A,  244  n 
Sumner,  William  Graham,  294 
Supreme  Court  and  the  Constitution,  The, 
276  77 

Survey  of  the  Summe  of  Church  Disci¬ 
pline,  A,  54,  60-62 
Swift,  Jonathan,  333 


412 


INDEX 


Tailor,  Colonel,  113 
Thomas  Hooker,  Preacher,  Founder, 
Democrat,  55  n,  58  n,  59  n 
Thompson,  General,  284 
Tippet,  Mehetabel,  141 
To  all  the  Great  Folks  in  a  Lump,  375 
To  all  True-hearted  Christians,  96 
To  Atlas,  375 
To  Duncan  Doolittle,  375  n 
Tooke,  Home,  339,  383 
To  a  Select  Body  of  Great  Men,  375 
Townshend,  Charles  Viscount,  240 
To  a  Would  Be  Great  Man,  375 
Travels  in  New  England  and  New  York , 
1796-1815,  362  n,  363 
Travels  through  the  Middle  Settlements 
in  North  America  in  the  Years  1759 
and  1760,  276  n 
Treatise  on  Christian  Liberty,  12 
Treatise  on  Taxes,  171 
Treatises  on  Civil  Government,  Two,  189, 
237,  270  n 

Two  Letters  on  the  Tea  Tax,  228 
Triumph  of  Infidelity,  The,  363 
Trumbull,  Rev.  Benjamin,  248 

- ,  John,  248-252,  254,  359,  362 

- ,  John  (the  painter),  248 

- ,  Governor  Jonathan,  248,  360 

Tyler,  Moses  Coit,  89  n,  123,  207  n,  220, 
226  n,  256,  371,  372,  381 

United  States  Gazette,  The,  379 

Vane,  Sir  Harry,  10,  12,  38,  59,  66,  72, 
73,  74 

Van  Schaak,  Peter,  192 
Van  Tyne,  C.  H.,  179  n,  182  n,  184  n, 
188  n,  189  n,  203  n 
Various  Prospects,  280 
Varnum,  General,  276 
Vattel,  Emrich  von,  236,  239,  280 
Vauban,  Sebastien  de,  171 
View  of  the  Causes  and  Consequences  of 
the  American  Revolution,  A,  215-218 
V indication  of  the  Government  of  the  New 
England  Churches,  A,  119  m,  120, 
122  n,  123 

Vision  of  Columbus,  The,  387 
Voltaire,  324,  363 

Walker,  G.  L.,  55  n,  56  n,  58  n,  59  n 

- ,  Williston,  23  n,  24,  100  n,  101  n, 

148  n 


Wallace,  Robert,  280,  319 
Walley,  Major,  119 
Walpole,  Horace,  203 
Walsh,  C.  M.,  319  n,  334  n 
Ward,  Nathaniel,  21,  33,  55,  76-81,  84 
Warren,  Mrs.  Mercy,  207 
Warwick,  Earl  of,  29 
Washington,  George,  184,  258,  259,  276, 
2 77,  292,  295,  305,  323,  349,  360, 
368,  369,  380,  393 

Watson,  Bishop,  of  Llandaff,  324,  337 
Way  of  the  Congregational  Churches 
Cleared,  The,  35 

Wealth  of  Nations,  The,  171,  173,  271, 
296 

Webster,  Daniel,  25 

- ,  Noah,  291,  299,  382 

- ,  Peletiah,  291 

Wedderburn,  Alexander,  164 
Wendell,  Barrett,  107, 114  n,  116,  150  n, 
284  n,  370 

Whately,  George,  173 
When  the  Wicked  shall  have  Filled  up  the 
Measure  of  their  Sins,  Wrath  will 
come  upon  them  to  the  Uttermost, 
159  n 

Whitfield,  Rev.  George,  160,  373 
Whittier,  John  G.,  89 
Wigglesworth,  Rev.  Michael,  85 
Wilkes,  John,  251 
Willard,  Rev.  Samuel,  87 
William  III,  King,  91  n 
Williams,  Roger,  iv,  vi,  6, 10,  12,  24,  25, 
28,  35,  36,  37>  49,  So,  S3,  54,  57 
59,  62-75,  77,  79,  94,  100, 103,  105, 
121,  333,  341,  386 
Willing,  Thomas,  221 
Wilson,  James,  254,  291,  292 

- ,  Rev.  John,  59 

- ,  Woodrow,  306 

Wingate  on  the  Common  Law,  93 
Winthrop,  Adam,  41 

- ,  John,  17,  18,  19,  30,  32,  38-50,  51, 

SS,  57,  58,  71,  80,  88,  92,  97,  105 
— — ,  Margaret,  39 

Wisdom  and  Goodness  of  God,  In  having 
Made  both  Rich  and  Poor,  The,  337 
Wise,  Rev.  John,  94,  101,  118-125, 
162 

Witchcraft,  Then  and  Now,  86  n 
Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  The , 
86  n,  108,  115-116,  ii6m 
Worcester,  Bishop  of,  253 


INDEX 


413 


Word  of  Comfort  to  a  Melancholy  Coun¬ 
try,  A;  Or  the  Bank  of  Credit,  124 
Word  of  Congress,  The,  257 
Works  of  John  Adams,  207  n,  309  n, 
3ii  n,  312  n,  313  n,  314  n,  315  w, 
316  n,  317  n,  318  n 

Works  of  Samuel  Adams,  199  n,  234  n, 
236  n,  237  n,  238  n,  239  n,  240  n, 
241  n,  242  n,  244  n,  245  n,  246  n 
Works  of  John  Dickinson,  226  n,  227  n, 
228  w 

Works  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  156  n, 
158  n,  159  n 

Works  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  168  n, 
169  n,  170  n,  171  n,  173  n,  174  n, 
176  n,  177  n 


Works  of  Alexander  Hamilton,  298  n, 
301  n,  304  n,  306  n 
Works  of  Martin  Luther,  12  n 
Works  of  Thomas  Paine,  177  n,  335  n, 
338  n,  339  n,  341  n 
Works  of  Daniel  Webster,  26  n 
Writings  of  John  Quincy  Adams, 
326  n 

Writings  of  Col.  William  Byrd  of  West- 
over  in  Virginia,  Esq.,  The,  138  n 
Writings  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  303  n, 
34 7  n,  348  n,  350  n,  351  n,  353  «, 
355  n 

Wyoming  Massacre,  The,  146  n 
Yates,  Robert,  285 


MARYGROVE  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 


E7 


E017cicJ  1 


Date  Due 


MAR  2  4 ’5 

1  |E  1 2  ’6! 

) 

in-  10’Sf; 

FE  2  3  '6! 

> 

SEP  1  l’S 

DE  1 4  ’B5 

JE  2 '67 

SEP  2  1  '5a 

A  24  '69 

.  N 

m-  ••  "ee 

SE  2  2’99 

t  ftf5t 

FEE 

2 1  ?fip? 

ttf  ^ 

0CT121U 

MAY  1 6  'SI 

.1 1  * 

OC  1 8  '63 

ON  E  W 

;-0 

1 

.P 

S 

BY  8  ‘64 

HY30  ‘64 

0C7  “ 

810.9 

V2U 

v.l 


tKmrrocAf  Cq 


