Main Currents in American Thought, Vol. 3: The Beginnings of Critical Realism (Vernon Louis Parrington, 1930)
==========================================================
Completes Parrington: realism's revolt against the genteel tradition. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (maincurrentsinam0003parr).

Main  Currents 
in  American 
Thought 


Beginnings  of 
Realism  in 

erica:  1860-1920 

Vernon  Louis  Farrington 


PS 

88 


cd  3£a)&m^l3o^  31023 


nunc  cocnosco  ex  parte 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/maincurrentsinam0003parr 


Trent  University  Library 

PETERBOROUGH,  C^T. 


THE 

BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICAL 
REALISM  IN  AMERICA 


The  Beginnings  of 
Critical  Realism  in  America 

1860-1920 

VERNON  L.  PARRINGTON 

volume  three  of  Main  Currents  in  American  Thought 


A  Harbinger  Book 
HARCOURT,  BRACE  &  WORLD,  INC. 
NEW  YORK  AND  BURLINGAME 


v.  2 


Copyright  1930  by  Harcourt,  Brace  &  World,  Inc. 

®  1 958  by  Vernon  L.  Parrington,  Jr.,  Louise  P.  Tucker,  Elizabeth  P.  Thomas 

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book  may  be 
reproduced  in  any  form  or  by  any  mechanical  means, 
including  mimeograph  and  tape  recorder,  without 
permission  in  writing  from  the  publisher. 

F  G  H  I  J 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  56-58467 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


SCHOLAR 

TO  THE  MEMORY 

OF 

J.  ALLEN  SMITH 

TEACHER  DEMOCRAT  GENTLEMAN 

Omnium.  Amicus  erat 
qui 

Justiciam  ament. 

197' 


4 


■» 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


The  sudden  death  of  Professor  Vernon  Louis  Parrington  in  Eng¬ 
land,  June  1 6,  1929,  cut  tragically  short  his  labors  on  the  last  vol¬ 
ume  of  Main  Currents  in  American  Thought.  Of  this  third  volume 
approximately  the  first  half  had  been  completed,  which,  together 
with  the  outline  of  the  work  and  some  scattered  essays  in  sections 
otherwise  undeveloped,  constitutes  all  that  the  author  left.  Un¬ 
finished  it  is,  yet  no  completion  by  another  can  be  justified.  That 
anyone  could  duplicate  his  felicity  of  style,  so  unobtrusively 
individual,  so  sensitively  adjusted  to  the  freighted  thought,  is 
hardly  to  be  hoped  for;  and  more  important,  that  another  scholar 
could  accurately  reproduce  his  interpretation  is  an  assumption  not 
to  be  warranted.  The  decision  to  publish  the  author’s  incomplete 
work  is  a  tribute  to  his  brilliance. 

Nevertheless  it  is  possible  to  know  Professor  Parrington’s  chief 
intentions,  particularly  when  one  understands,  as  his  associates  did, 
his  principles  for  organizing  materials  and  his  standards  of  value. 
Students  as  well  as  associates  first  of  all  noticed  beneath  the  rich¬ 
ness  and  complexity  of  his  thought  a  constancy  of  purpose  as  clear 
as  the  treatment  of  mass  in  a  Gothic  cathedral.  Indeed  it  was 
through  a  delight  in  architecture  pursued  as  a  hobby  for  many 
years  that  Parrington  expressed  this  desire  for  a  unity,  balanced, 
harmonious,  and  properly  proportioned. 

This  architectonic  feeling,  abundantly  illustrated  in  his  writing 
habits,  was  carried  over  not  only  into  his  classroom  procedure  and 
conversation,  but  also  into  his  varied  interests.  Painting  as  well 
as  architecture  had  long  intrigued  him.  Though  few  people  knew  it, 
he  wrote  poetry  distinguished  for  restraint  in  expression  and  clarity 
of  form;  while  in  conversation  he  persistently  sought  the  appro¬ 
priate  phrase,  spiced  it  with  wit,  salted  it  with  homely  realism;  for 
no  gentleman  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  more  conscious  of  the 
charms  of  good  discourse. 

Professor  Parrington’s  classroom  procedure  had  a  reputation 
that  attracted  students  not  much  interested  in  literature  and  which 
appealed  to  all  ranges  of  intellect.  The  source  of  that  popularity 


VI 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


was  the  personality  of  the  teacher,  together  with  his  gift  for  pre¬ 
senting  ideas  and  evoking  a  response.  By  means  of  a  Socratic  cross- 
examination  Parrington  made  the  student  discover  his  intellectual 
deficiencies;  while  the  class,  to  its  astonishment  and  delight,  found 
the  quest  for  truth  both  elusive  and  exciting.  Surprise  and  satisfied 
expectation  kept  the  easily  bored  from  sinking  into  apathy,  for 
there  was  no  telling  from  day  to  day  just  what  Professor  Parrington 
was  going  to  do.  He  paired  every  occasion  with  a  fitting  response; 
yet  this  flexibility  did  not  degenerate  into  an  aimless  drifting,  since 
he  persistently  simplified  his  main  objectives  and  concentrated  the 
material  to  be  studied,  while  expressing  its  meaning  through  a 
significant  symbol  or  a  telling  phrase.  His  classes  in  the  eighteenth 
century,  for  example,  were  given  the  concept  of  harmony,  balance, 
and  proportion.  They  found  it  in  architecture,  they  saw  it  in  dress, 
they  heard  it  in  conversation,  they  watched  it  work  out  in  the 
heroic  couplet,  they  pursued  it  in  Addison,  Pope,  and  Swift;  in 
short,  they  analyzed  the  whole  social  structure  of  the  age  and  dis¬ 
covered  it  everywhere.  A  germinal  idea,  Parrington  liked  to  call 
it,  while  he  held  it  before  the  class  like  a  many-faceted  crystal, 
slowly  turning  it  around  and  around  so  the  student  could  see  every 
face.  As  a  result  no  student  who  had  taken  the  course  ever  forgot 
the  significance  of  this  architectonic  trilogy. 

In  writing  habits  there  was  a  similar  all-encompassing  purpose. 
He  habitually  began  with  his  thesis — a  phrase,  a  sentence,  or  a 
revealing  figure.  This  was  examined  and  stripped  of  its  implications 
as  one  would  peel  an  onion  layer  by  layer.  So  imperious  was  the 
habit  of  this  procedure  that  his  ability  to  write  would  be  blocked 
until  he  had  in  mind  a  perfectly  crystallized  concept  expressible  at 
the  maximum  in  one  sentence.  An  example  of  this  occurred  shortly 
before  he  left  on  his  trip  to  England.  He  had  been  working  on  the 
period  that  Mark  Twain  had  labeled  the  “Gilded  Age,”  but  found 
the  title  inadequate  to  his  idea,  and,  as  a  result,  his  writing  did  not 
get  on.  Another  day  some  weeks  later  there  was  an  obvious  satis¬ 
faction  expressed  in  his  bearing  and  an  exceptionally  pronounced 
twinkle  in  his  eye.  “I  have  found  the  phrase,”  ke  said;  “I  will 
call  it  The  Great  Barbecue.”  Similarly,  the  three  volumes  of  this 
work  began  in  a  single  paragraph  which  by  progressive  unfoldings 
he  expanded  to  its  present  scope. 

After  having  made  a  provisional  outline,  with  each  section  con¬ 
densed  into  a  single  sentence,  he  began  writing,  completing  a  unit 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


vii 

here  or  there  as  circumstance  and  mood  directed.  When  it  was 
completed  the  process  of  readjustment  began.  Each  portion  was 
inspected  for  its  length,  which  had  to  be  fitted  to  its  relative  impor¬ 
tance;  an  emphasis  here  was  shifted  to  balance  an  emphasis  there; 
the  mood  of  one  part  was  altered  to  make  it  harmonize  with 
the  mood  of  its  neighbor.  As  many  as  twelve  times  he  rewrote  a 
single  section  in  this  complex  and  delicate  effort  for  harmonious 
adjustment.  Finally,  he  made  from  this  his  finished  outline. 

Knowing  Professor  Parrington’s  methods  one  can  now  under¬ 
stand  the  problem  he  faced  and  the  solution  he  found  when  bent 
on  the  task  of  writing  a  history  of  American  literature.  Although 
he  was  by  nature  partial  to  the  claims  of  aesthetics,  yet  it  was 
obvious  to  him  that  such  an  approach  was  foredoomed  to  failure. 
All  too  few  of  the  American  writers  would  deserve  treatment  on  any 
aesthetic  test,  while  many  who  were  undeniably  significant  could 
not  possibly  be  left  out  even  though  inferior  artistically.  Moreover, 
one  only  had  to  look  at  the  numerous  attempts  already  made  to 
see  the  failure  of  the  belletristic  interpretation.  What  were  these 
histories  of  American  literature?  Sprawling  lists  of  names  arranged 
in  a  fashion  that  gave  little  save  conventionalized  data  and  some 
dubious  evaluations.  Already  there  was  a  widespread  demand 
for  a  new  interpretation  growing  out  of  these  past  failures. 

Professor  Parrington  found  the  first  step  to  a  solution  when  he 
remembered  the  day  he  opened  Taine’s  Histoire  de  la  litter ature 
anglaise.  It  had  come  as  a  new  and  inspiring  discovery  to  find  a 
method  that  envisaged  the  literature  of  a  people  as  the  inevitable 
outgrowth  of  their  racial  peculiarities,  environment,  and  epoch.  It 
is  true  that  the  claim  set  up  byTaine,  that  his  method  was  scientific 
and  could  account  for  every  phenomenon,  proved  to  be  unfounded; 
but  nevertheless  his  work  was  epoch-making;  it  gave  a  unity  and  a 
significance  never  before  attained,  and  this  was  what  attracted 
Parrington.  Nothing  less  unifying  than  Taine’s  method  was 
thinkable. 

A  second  source  of  inspiration  came  from  a  close  friend  and 
colleague,  J.  Allen  Smith,  another  pioneer  figure,  who  applied  to 
the  abstract  theorizings  of  political  science  the  economic  realities 
that  underlie  and  determine  them.  The  method  was  so  fruitful  of 
results  that  it  quickly  spread  to  a  group  of  American  political 
scientists,  from  whose  findings  much  of  Parrington’s  significant 
work  received  its  first  flattering  confirmation.  Under  such  a  stimu- 


vm 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


Ius  Parrington  was  quick  to  realize  the  fruitfulness  of  economic 
determinism  when  applied  even  to  literature. 

A  third  idea  completed  the  synthesis.  When  he  envisaged  Ameri¬ 
can  literature  as  American  thought,  the  trammel  of  the  belletristic 
was  broken  and  he  was  free  to  reevaluate  American  writers,  to 
follow  the  trail  of  their  work  wherever  it  led;  for  at  last  he  had 
found  a  method  true  to  facts,  yet  one  which  would  satisfy  his 
insatiable  demand  for  a  significant  unity,  balanced,  harmonious, 
and  properly  proportioned.  The  economic  forces  imprint  their 
mark  upon  political,  social,  and  religious  institutions;  literature 
expresses  the  result  in  its  thought  content. 

But  a  technique,  though  vitally  necessary,  is  not  the  end  of  the 
story.  There  still  remains,  even  for  the  most  impartial  scholar,  the 
final  and,  be  it  admitted,  inescapable  evaluation.  Parrington  was 
too  honest  with  himself  to  dodge  the  issue;  he  made  his  choice  and 
abided  the  result.  In  the  foreword  to  the  first  volume  he  made  his 
confession:  “The  point  of  view  from  which  I  have  endeavored  to 
evaluate  the  materials  is  liberal  rather  than  conservative,  Jeffer¬ 
sonian  rather  than  Federalistic;  and  very  likely  in  my  search  I 
have  found  what  I  went  forth  to  find,  as  others  have  discovered 
what  they  were  seeking.  Unfortunately  the  mens  aequa  et  clara  is 
the  rarest  of  attributes,  and  dead  partisanships  h^.ve  a  disconcerting 
way  of  coming  to  life  again  in  the  pages  of  their  historians.  That 
the  vigorous  passions  and  prejudices  of  the  time  I  have  dealt  with 
may  have  found  an  echo  in  my  judgments  is,  perhaps,  to  be  ex¬ 
pected;  whether  they  have  distorted  my  interpretation  and  vitiated 
my  analysis  is  not  for  me  to  determine.” 

Professor  Parrington’s  Main  Currents  in  American  Thought  has, 
then,  for  its  subject  the  adventures  of  American  liberalism.  To 
anyone  alive  to  the  issue  an  adventurous  story  it  is,  as  becomes 
more  apparent  when  the  author’s  own  liberalism  is  completely 
understood.  Those  sections  where  his  sympathies  are  kindled, 
where  he  stamps  his  seal  of  enthusiastic  admiration,  provide  the 
clue  which  his  treatment  of  Roger  Williams,  Benjamin  Franklin, 
Tom  Paine,  Jefferson,  Emerson,  Thoreau,  Channing,  and  Theodore 
Parker  assuredly  verifies.  All  of  his  latent  enthusiasms  burst  into 
bloom  until,  as  in  his  essay  on  Roger  Williams,  nothing  less  than 
the  cadence  and  passion  of  the  Song  of  Solomon  would  express  it. 
“Running  through  his  writings  is  a  recurrent  echo  of  the  Hebrew 
love-song  that  Puritan  thought  suffused  with  glowing  mysticism: 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


IX 


'I  am  my  beloved’s  and  my  beloved  is  mine:  he  feedeth  among  the 
lilies.  .  .  .  I  will  arise  now,  and  go  about  the  city  in  the  streets,  and 
in  the  broad  ways  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth.’  But 
when  he  went  into  the  broad  ways  of  Carolinian  England,  seeking 
the  rose  of  Sharon  and  the  lily  of  the  valley,  he  discovered  only 
abominations.  The  lover  was  tempted  by  false  kisses;  the  Golden 
Image  was  set  up  in  the  high  places,  and  the  voice  of  authority 
commanded  to  bow  down  to  it.  And  so  as  a  Christian  mystic  Roger 
Williams  became  a  Separatist,  and  set  his  mind  upon  the  new 
world  where  the  lover  might  dwell  with  his  bride.”1 

The  liberalism  of  Parrington  had  this  great  virtue,  which  all  too 
many  creeds  lack:  it  was  built  on  an  obligation  first  to  examine  and 
understand  all  points  of  view  before  exercising  the  right  to  condemn 
them.  Although  he  disliked  the  personalities  and  groaned  at  the 
dreary  pages  of  men  like  Cotton  Mather,  yet  he  was  not  satisfied 
until  he  got  at  their  marrow.  And  again  there  was  an  abiding  sense 
of  the  humane  in  Parrington  before  which  all  abstractions,  general¬ 
izations,  and  logical  systems  had  to  pass  in  review.  He  feared  above 
all,  as  did  the  sensitive  Jefferson,  the  cancer  of  power.  “Man,” 
he  used  to  say,  “has  never  proved  himself  worthy  of  an  unre¬ 
strained  control  of  his  fellows,  nor  has  any  special  group  of  men  ever 
been  dominant  without  injustice  to  others.”  Combined  with  this 
love  of  freedom  was  an  urbanity  and  a  sense  of  personal  integrity 
not  subject  to  the  interference  of  outside  forces  in  convention  or 
mob — an  integrity  which  so  impressed  everyone  having  contact 
with  the  man,  that  he  has  been  often  called  an  aristocrat.  Parring¬ 
ton  would  not  have  objected  to  the  label,  nor  have  seen  it  as 
contradictory  to  the  principles  of  liberalism,  since  in  his  opinion 
only  liberalism  expressing  itself  in  a  democratic  society  provides 
for  the  free  exercise  of  personal  rights.  Elevating  oneself  by  rid¬ 
ing  on  the  shoulders  of  others,  a  common  device  of  the  pseudo¬ 
aristocrat,  was  to  him  but  a  vulgar  gymnastic  performance. 

When  he  described  Jefferson  “with  his  aristocratic  head  set  on  a 
plebeian  frame”2  he  was  unconsciously  describing  himself,  for 
there  was  a  deep  love  of  the  soil  in  Parrington.  One  saw  it,  sur¬ 
prisingly,  in  his  hands.  T  hey  were  thick  and  sturdy,  blunted  at  the 
ends  as  if  from  too  much  delving  into  the  black  loam  of  his  flower 
garden,  where  roses,  peonies,  and  crocuses  were  cherished  com¬ 
panions,  and  the  delight  of  his  leisure  hours.  He  secretly  suspected 
1  Vol.  I,  p.  65.  2  Ibid.,  p.  343. 


X 


VERNON  LOUIS  FARRINGTON 


the  apartment  dweller  as  any  true  farmer  would;  and  though  there 
was  a  twinkle  in  his  eye  when  he  called  New  York  a  Babylon  or 
spoke  of  its  corrupting  influence  on  scholar  and  artist,  yet  there  was 
a  meaning  implied  more  serious  than  the  jest. 

It  was  Parrington’s  hope  to  vindicate  this  liberalism  “stem¬ 
ming,”  as  he  said,  “from  the  fruitful  loins  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury.”  As  he  diagnosed  it,  that  era  had  two  creative  currents  of 
thought:  a  hopeful,  vigorous  liberalism,  together  with  a  sturdy 
realism  which  did  not  balk  at  men’s  selfishness  or  deny  the  eco¬ 
nomic  basis  of  social  forces.  Unfortunately  the  nineteenth-century 
liberal  attended  only  to  hopes  and  neglected  the  realism,  while  the 
swelling  forces  of  industrialism  accepted  the  economic  realities 
but  cynically  brutalized  them.  Failure  was  the  inevitable  result; 
the  liberals  despair  while  Babbitt,  regnant,  infests  the  country  with 
his  blustering  agents.  In  the  unfinished  section  of  this  last  volume 
it  was  Parrington’s  purpose  to  show  this  parlous  state  of  twentieth- 
century  America,  to  discern  the  hopeful  gleam  in  the  darkness,  and 
to  uncover  the  hidden  forces  working  for  a  more  stable  and  just 
society.  Parrington’s  point  of  view  then,  was  that  of  a  staunch 
and  kindly  liberalism,  the  motif  in  the  three  volumes,  the  theme 
never  absent  from  a  page  of  the  whole  composition.  It  is  a  liberal¬ 
ism  not  to  be  found  in  any  program  yet  formulated  by  political 
party  or  economic  sect;  it  is  rather  a  generous  idealism  that  can 
envisage  a  future  richer  in  values,  more  humane  in  distribution  of 
favors  than  any  known  past.  Wise  to  the  ways  of  man,  such  a  liber¬ 
alism  refuses  confinement  in  the  strait-jacket  of  any  set  formula, 
yet  escapes  the  emasculation  awaiting  mere  enthusiasm;  for  it  can 
separate  foes  from  friends  and  recognize  the  point  where  compro¬ 
mise  means  surrender. 

If  my  analysis  thus  far  is  to  any  purpose  it  will  suggest  what 
these  main  objectives  that  Parrington  never  completed  were  to 
have  been.  The  unfinished  Book  Two  was  to  chronicle  three  parties 
of  revolt  against  the  plutocracy  born  of  the  Gilded  Age.  Of  these 
rebellions  the  first  was  engendered  on  the  Middle  Border,  where 
the  farmers,  beset  by  hard  times,  struck  out  against  the  source  of 
their  ills.  As  the  agrarians  diagnosed  the  situation,  these  economic 
maladjustments  were  brought  on  by  a  currency  manipulated  for 
the  benefit  of  creditors,  and  further  enhanced  by  capitalistic  con¬ 
trol  of  the  political  machine.  One  of  the  last  of  Parrington’s  com¬ 
pleted  units  deals  with  the  economic  phase  of  the  revolt;  the  next 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON  xi 

section  was  to  record  the  farmer’s  effort  to  democratize  the  govern¬ 
ment.  Through  pressure  of  third-party  movements  the  farmers 
tried  to  inject  such  reforms  as  the  initiative  and  referendum,  the 
recall,  the  direct  primary,  and  the  income  tax;  until,  seduced  by 
Bryan’s  oratory,  they  joined  with  the  Democrats  in  an  attack  upon 
the  intrenchments  of  capitalism.  As  Parrington  saw  it,  these 
agrarian  descendants  of  Jefferson,  lacking  the  intellectual  leader¬ 
ship  which  the  South  had  contributed  in  earlier  days,  at  a  tactical 
disadvantage,  and  already  a  minority  economic  group,  were  fated 
to  lose  their  last  great  uprising. 

Also  out  of  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  came  a  literature  of  the 
Middle  Border.  Such  writers  as  Edward  Eggleston  and  E.  W.  Howe 
had  already  initiated  a  realism  that  revealed  the  drabness  of  fron¬ 
tier  life  and  suggested  its  smoldering  discontent,  although  the  pas¬ 
toral  note  fathered  by  the  genial  and  romantic  James  Whitcomb 
Riley  did  not  lack  its  prose  children.  Notably  did  Meredith  Nichol¬ 
son,  William  Allen  White,  and  Booth  Tarkington3  portray  the  vil¬ 
lage  neighborliness,  its  wholesomeness,  its  spirit  of  democracy,  until 
they  cast  such  a  fog  of  sentiment  over  the  scene  as  to  blur  all  the 
realities.  But  the  true  spirit  of  Populism  is  represented  in  the  im¬ 
passioned  work  of  Hamlin  Garland,  whose  “admirable  realism  and 
passionate  democracy”  Parrington  depicts  in  a  chapter  that  he 
completed. 

The  second  chorus  of  dissent  came  from  the  very  citadels  of 
plutocracy,  for  the  wage-earners,  unable  to  escape  slavery  by  flight 
to  an  unshackled  frontier  that  no  longer  existed,  were  brought  to 
bay.  The  doctrine  of  class  war,  which  had  been  ignored  since  the 
eighteenth  century,  was  revived  by  the  German  socialists  and  given 
an  added  plausibility  by  the  employers’  unscrupulous  use  of  in¬ 
junction,  black  list,  and  lockout.  T.  V.  Powderly,  who  found  a 
solution  to  the  labor  problem  in  syndicalism,  organized  the  Knights 
of  Labor.  Although  this  union  had  a  promising  inception,  it  was 
soon  wrecked,  while  the  craft  unionism  recommended  by  Samuel 
Gompers  forged  to  the  front  because  of  its  middle-class  ideology 
and  spirit  of  compromise.  On  the  other  hand  the  left  wing  of  the 
labor  cause  embraced  various  brands  of  socialism.  The  tragic 
flare-up  of  the  Haymarket  riot,  which  resulted  in  a  “red  ”  scare  and 
persecution  of  the  humane  Governor  Altgeld,  served  Parrington  as 
a  dramatic  illustration  of  the  obloquy  that  descended  upon  the 
3  See  Addenda  for  notes  on  these  men. 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


xn 

leaders  of  socialism,  Daniel  De  Leon,  Eugene  V.  Debs,  and  Victor 
Berger.  Needless  to  say,  Parrington  had  planned  a  vindication  of 
them  born  of  his  desire  to  see  more  justice  in  the  world. 

There  were  echoes  of  this  proletarian  strife  manifested  in  the 
world  of  letters.  Certain  writers  following  Edward  Bellamy  joined 
the  quest  for  a  socialistic  Utopia.  Parrington  had  completed  his 
passage  on  Bellamy,  but  of  the  party  formed  to  agitate  for  princi¬ 
ples  advanced  in  Looking  Backward  and  of  the  other  writers  of  Uto¬ 
pian  novels,  such  as  Tourgee,  he  left  no  treatment.  A  second  set  of 
writers  were  grouped  together  by  reason  of  their  common  concern 
over  the  darkening  future  of  American  civilization.  Edwin  Mark¬ 
ham,  his  humanitarian  sympathies  aroused,  penned  an  indictment 
of  wage  exploitation  in  his  “The  Man  with  the  Hoe”  that  caused 
no  little  concern  in  its  day  and  spurred  defenders  of  the  existing 
economic  system  to  offer  liberal  prizes  for  an  equally  convincing 
reply.  The  emergence  of  naturalism,  seen  in  Stephen  Crane4  and 
Frank  Norris,4  was  also  a  response  to  the  darkening  social  outlook. 
Parrington  defined  naturalism  as  “a  pessimistic  realism  that  sets 
man  in  a  mechanical  world.”  He  traced  this  pessimistic  determin¬ 
ism  to  the  machine  industrialism  so  overwhelming  in  its  power  as 
to  impress  man  with  his  own  impotence,  to  the  centralization  of 
wealth,  which  causes  a  caste  regimentation  of  society,  and  finally 
to  the  great  city,  which  reduces  the  inhabitant  to  an  infinitesimal 
unit  of  a  vast  beehive.  Other  writers,  equally  oppressed  by  this 
state  of  affairs,  concentrated  on  the  phenomena  of  the  city.  It  was 
here  that  Parrington  intended  to  discuss  Henry  B.  Fuller,  Harold 
Frederic,  Robert  Grant,  and  Edith  Wharton.5 

The  third  party  of  revolt  was  a  hesitant  one — the  South,  still 
convalescing  from  the  Civil  War  and  further  weakened  by  divisions 
in  its  counsels.  I  hough  burdened  by  parochial  creeds,  weakened 
by  lack  of  intellectual  leadership,  the  agrarian  South,  largely  ple¬ 
beian,  joined  the  Middle  Border  in  its  uprising.  The  middle-class 
South,  represented  by  Henry  W.  Grady,  proposed  a  surrender  to 
the  Yankee  principle  of  industrial  exploitation,  while  the  remnant 
of  the  old  aristocracy  resisted  the  new  and  clung  to  the  traditions 
of  the  past.  Thomas  Nelson  Page,  Joel  Chandler  Harris,  Mary 
Murfree,  and  George  Washington  Cable  attended  to  these  roman¬ 
tic  traditions  of  the  plantation,  the  negro,  the  mountaineer,  and 

4  See  Addenda  for  lecture  notes  on  these  writers. 

6  See  Addenda  for  brief  notes  on  these  writers. 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


xiii 

the  creole;  while  Sidney  Lanier  5  became  the  poet  of  southern 
landscape  and  sunrise.  Far  more  significant  in  Parrington’s  eye 
was  the  rebirth  of  a  southern  intelligentsia  represented  in  letters 
by  Ellen  Glasgow,  W.  W.  Woodward,  the  debunker,  and  James 
Branch  Cabell,6  the  ironic  romanticist.  Professor  Parrington,  who 
had  been  among  the  first  to  appreciate  Cabell,  admired  the  com¬ 
petence  of  his  style  and  the  effectiveness  of  his  ironic  commentary 
on  American  civilization. 

Book  Three  was  to  present  the  movement  of  liberalism  from 
1903  to  1917,  and  the  reaction  to  it  following  the  war.  Parrington 
called  this  period  of  liberalism  the  “great  stock-taking  venture.” 
These  liberals  announced  that  the  democratic  hopes  of  earlier  days 
had  not  been  fulfilled,  that  the  Constitution  is  not  a  democratic 
instrument  nor  was  it  intended  to  be,  and  that  while  Americans 
were  professing  to  create  a  democracy,  they  had  been  creating  in 
fact  a  plutocracy.  They  then  determined  upon  a  new  program 
based  on  their  discovery  of  the  relations  between  economics  and 
politics.  Such  relations  made  necessary  the  control  of  property 
by  the  collective  will,  and  to  that  end  they  endeavored  to  squeeze 
the  Hamiltonian  state  into  a  Jeffersonian  mold.7 

The  muckrakers  of  1903  to  1910  attacked  the  plutocracy  where 
its  joints  creaked.  In  effect  this  group  of  writers  from  Henry  D. 
Lloyd  to  Charles  Edward  Russell,  Gustavus  Meyers,  and  A.  M. 
Simons  popularized  economics  and  made  the  liberals  conscious  of 
what  was  going  on  behind  the  closed  doors  of  the  directors’  meet¬ 
ings.  On  the  other  hand,  the  movement  of  Progressivism,  engaged 
in  the  hopeless  task  of  directing  the  political  machinery  to  demo¬ 
cratic  ends,  was  typified  by  Robert  LaFollette,  1  heodore  Roosevelt, 
and  Woodrow  Wilson.  Only  one,  LaFollette,  remained  true  to 
the  colors;  the  other  two  compromised,  then  surrendered,  and  the 
hopes  of  liberalism  went  down  in  a  tragic  debacle. 

In  the  realm  of  letters  this  liberalism  found  expression  in  three 
major  groups  of  writers.  A  set  of  intellectuals  turned  critical  began 
to  scrutinize  the  economic,  political,  and  social  institutions  of 
America.  Of  these  critics  Parrington  considered  Randolph  Bourne 
and  Charles  A.  Beard  8  the  most  important.  Another  set  turned 

6  See  Addenda  for  brief  notes  on  these  writers. 

6  See  Addenda  for  magazine  article  on  Cabell. 

7  “A  Chapter  in  American  Liberalism,”  which  is  included  in  the  Addenda,  deals 
with  this  subject,  with  the  muckraking  movement,  and  with  post-war  realism. 

8  See  Addenda,  “A  Chapter  in  American  Liberalism.” 


XIV 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


to  fiction,  shifting  their  point  of  view  from  liberalism  to  radicalism, 
from  politics  to  economics.  Winston  Churchill 9  had  discovered 
the  emptiness  of  the  profit  motive  with  its  resultant  destruction 
of  beauty,  freedom,  and  creative  craftsmanship.  Similarly  Robert 
Herrick  9  became  a  pathologist  of  the  city,  investigated  its  ethics, 
and  then  rebelled  at  the  predatory  egoism  which  ruled  its  life  to 
the  destruction  of  all  ethical  integrity.  At  his  best  Jack  London 
wrote  of  the  revolution,  though  later  selling  out  to  bigger  and  bet¬ 
ter  royalties;  while  Upton  Sinclair  became  the  revolutionary  sleuth 
spying  upon  the  indecencies  of  the  capitalist  system.  Perhaps  these 
novelists  were  too  seriously  engaged  in  social  criticism  and  reform 
propaganda  to  become  great  craftsmen,  yet  they  were  to  Parring- 
ton  important  writers,  because  they  were  in  touch  with  deep  cur¬ 
rents  of  American  thought. 

Still  a  third  set  of  writers  turned  to  a  realistic  technique  appropri¬ 
ate  to  the  times,  yet  avoided  the  weakness  inherent  in  direct  propa¬ 
ganda.  The  poets  Masters,11  Sandburg,  Frost,  and  Robinson, 
Parrington  chose  for  consideration  as  realists  with  an  art,  an  un¬ 
derlying  criticism  of  conditions,  and  a  philosophy  that  set  them 
above  the  other  poets  of  the  time.  For  the  same  reasons  he  had 
planned  a  section  on  Huneker.  Theodore  Dreiser,12  because  of 
his  massive  documentation,  his  deterministic  philosophy,  and  his 
sense  of  the  inevitable  tragedy  inherent  in  life,  Parrington  labeled 
a  modern,  meaning  by  this  that  Dreiser  most  adequately  and  most 
thoroughly  represented  modern  America. 

The  last  section  of  the  book  was  to  be  a  consideration  of  the 
post-war  reaction  to  the  liberalism  of  the  preceding  period.  The 
economic  democracy  which  liberals  had  marked  for  their  goal  was 
now  attacked  by  the  younger  intellectuals.  H.  L.  Mencken  turned 
to  farce  and  burlesque  for  methods  adequate  to  express  his  con¬ 
tempt  of  American  democracy.  Biologists  pointed  to  the  inescap¬ 
able  laws  of  heredity  as  a  refutation  of  the  liberals’  hopes  for  social 
improvement;  while  some  psychologists,  discovering  morons,  ruled 
out  all  equalitarian  Utopias.  Parrington  could  find  little  sympathy 
in  his  heart  for  a  return  to  the  spirit  of  aristocracy.  This  nar¬ 
row,  doctrinaire  biology,  denied  by  the  more  careful  biologists  and 

9  See  “The  Problem  Novel  and  the  Diversion  from  Naturalism,”  in  the  Ad¬ 
denda. 

10  See  Addenda  for  notes  on  London. 

11  See  Addenda,  “Ole  Rolvaag’s  Giants  in  the  Earth  ” 

12  See  Addenda  for  lecture  notes  on  Dreiser. 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


xv 


the  behaviorists  who  assert  that  environment  is  determining,  can¬ 
not  rule  out  all  environmental  changes.  As  long  as  the  milieu  is 
an  effective  force  in  molding  the  organism,  room  is  left  for  social 
betterment  by  social- readjustments.  A  disputed  psychology  deal¬ 
ing  in  primitive  sex  drives,  gland  secretions,  and  intelligence  scores 
is  no  more  conclusive  on  the  subject. 

The  attack  on  industrialism  is  nearer  to  the  heart  of  Parrington’s 
ideals,  because  it  proved  to  him  that  liberalism  is  not  by  any  means 
dead.  Such  a  comprehensive  movement  enlisting  first-class  minds 
— intellectuals,  poets,  novelists,  dramatists — revealed  clearly  to 
him  the  increasing  criticism  of  a  dehumanized  economics,  and  such 
criticism  proceeds  from  an  implicit  liberalism. 

The  attack  on  the  middle  class  is  seen  best  in  Zona  Gale,13 
Evelyn  Scott,  and  particularly  in  Sinclair  Lewis,14  whom  Parring- 
ton  rated  the  chief  of  our  younger  satirists.  This  satire  is  a  search¬ 
ing  criticism  of  the  bourgeois  ideals  and  habitat,  its  tyrannical 
herd-mind,  its  povery-stricken  materialism.  By  its  nature  this 
satire  clearly  suggests  a  set  of  new  ideals  which  grow  out  of  a  free 
individualism  rather  than  a  political  or  economic  socialism.  The 
emphasis  is  shifted  by  implication  from  externalities  to  things  of 
the  spirit.  This  is  more  clearly  seen  in  the  new  philosophies  just 
now  arising,  which  deny  the  finality  of  economic  law,  turn  in  poli¬ 
tics  to  the  ideal  of  a  decentralized  state,  and  in  science  to  new 
syntheses  emphasizing  the  pragmatic  and  relative  aspects  of  scien¬ 
tific  law. 

The  latest  literary  fashions  that  Parrington  intended  to  consider 
embody  a  psychological  emphasis  seen  in  the  impressionism  of 
biography,  in  the  brutal  but  frank  pacifism  of  war  novels,13  and 
most  significantly  of  all  in  the  impressionism  and  expressionism  of 
Sherwood  Anderson.14  Parrington  felt  that  there  were  rich  poten¬ 
tialities  latent  in  these  new  methods  although  the  writers  of  the 
new  school  were  themselves  painfully  at  sea.  In  technique  as  well 
as  in  direct  statement  there  was  to  be  seen,  though  obscurely,  a 
renewed  emphasis  upon  individual  integrity,  the  necessity  for  cre¬ 
ative  expression,  and  the  reaffirmation  of  what  some  may  choose 
to  call  spiritual  values. 

In  effect  he  believed  that  all  is  not  lost.  Through  the  influence 
of  science  we  are  recovering  the  neglected  realism  of  the  past;  we 

u  See  Addenda  for  brief  notes. 

14  See  Addenda,  “  Sherwood  Anderson:  a  Psychological  Naturalist.” 


XVI 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


are  not  only  reaffirming  it  but  making  its  acquaintance  more  in¬ 
timately  than  ever  before.  Weld  that  science  to  enlightened  and 
humane  aspirations  (Parrington  believed  that  there  was  nothing 
in  the  findings  of  science  that  prevented  the  union)  and  a  revivified 
liberalism  will  make  the  world  a  fit  place  to  live  in.  It  is  by  no 
means  an  easy  program,  for  it  requires  knowledge  of  fact,  and 
ability  to  carry  knowledge  into  the  sphere  of  effective  action.  It  is 
made  doubly  difficult  by  the  untimely  death  of  one  of  its  chief  pro¬ 
ponents,  yet  in  the  young  men  and  women  whom  he  liked  to  have 
around  him  there  must  be,  however  obscurely,  a  feeling  and  a 
groping  for  the  way  out.  They  will  be  guided  and  inspired  by  such 
utterance  as  Parrington’s  diagnosis  of  Sinclair  Lewis,  where  he 
quarries  out  a  vein  of  his  own  enduring  liberalism. 

“Some  lingering  faith  in  our  poor  human  nature  he  still  clings 
to.  In  the  great  American  mass  that  human  nature  is  certainly 
foolish  and  unlovely  enough.  It  is  too  often  blown  up  with  flatu¬ 
lence,  corroded  with  lust,  on  familiar  terms  with  chicanery  and 
lying;  it  openly  delights  in  hocus  pocus  and  discovers  its  miracle- 
workers  in  Comstocks  and  Aimee  Semple  McPhersons.  But  for  all 
its  pitiful  flabbiness  human  nature  is  not  wholly  bad,  nor  is  man 
so  helpless  a  creature  of  circumstance  as  the  cynics  would  have  us 
believe.  There  are  other  and  greater  gods  than  Mumbo  Jumbo 
worshiped  in  America,  worthier  things  than  hocus  pocus;  and  in 
rare  moments  even  Babbitt  dimly  perceives  that  the  feet  of  his 
idol  are  clay.  There  are  Martin  Arrowsmiths  as  well  as  Elmer 
Gantrys,  and  human  nature,  if  it  will,  can  pull  itself  out  of  the  trap. 
Bad  social  machinery  makes  bad  men.  Put  the  banker  in  the  scul¬ 
lery  instead  of  the  drawing-room;  exalt  the  test-tube  and  deflate 
the  cash  register;  rid  society  of  the  dictatorship  of  the  middle  class; 
and  the  artist  and  the  scientist  will  erect  in  America  a  civilization 
that  may  become,  what  civilization  was  in  earlier  days,  a  thing  to 
be  respected.  For  all  his  modernity  and  disillusion  learned  from 
Pullman-car  philosophers,  Sinclair  Lewis  is  still  an  echo  of  Jean 
Jacques  and  the  golden  hopes  of  the  Enlightenment — thin  and 
far-off,  no  doubt,  but  still  an  authentic  echo.” 

1  hin  and  far-off,  no  doubt,”  is  this  contemporary  liberalism, 
yet  Parrington  found  hints  of  it  in  the  midst  of  the  war  fiasco  that 
culminated  in  reaction  and  despair.  Death  did  not  grant  him  the 
opportunity  to  show  what  he  found,  but  the  young  men  who  learned 
from  him  the  love  of  sound  craftsmanship,  who  were  inspired  by 


VERNON  LOUIS  PARRINGTON 


xvu 


his  enlightened  dreams,  will  some  day  complete  the  monument. 
In  the  meantime  Vernon  Louis  Parrington  would  like  to  be  held 
in  memory  as  he  held  his  friend,  J.  Allen  Smith — as  a  “scholar, 
teacher,  democrat,  gentleman.” 

E.  H.  Eby 

University  of  Washington 
Seattle,  Washington 
March,  ipjo 


FOREWORD 


With  the  present  volume  I  bring  to  a  close  my  studies  in  the 
main  currents  in  American  thought.  The  broad  drifts  of  American 
opinion,  as  I  interpret  that  opinion,  should  now  be  sufficiently 
clear.  The  volume  immediately  preceding  the  present  one  dealt 
with  the  romantic  revolution  in  America — one  of  the  most  stimu¬ 
lating  experiences  the  American  mind  has  undergone — which  was 
traced  to  twin  forces:  the  influence  upon  an  expansive  generation 
of  French  romantic  thought,  and  the  spirit  of  robust  individualism 
resulting  from  a  fluid  economics;  and  the  creative  result  was  the 
spontaneous  emergence  in  America  of  a  buoyant  spirit  of  hopeful¬ 
ness  that  expressed  itself  in  democratic  programs  and  faith  in  a 
benevolent  progress.  The  present  volume  deals  with, the  slow  decay 
of  this  romantic  optimism  in  more  thoughtful  minds,  and  the  cause 
of  that  decay  is  traced  to  three  sources:  the  stratifying  of  economics 
under  the  pressure  of  centralization^  the  rise  of  a  mechanistic 
science;  and  the  emergence  of  a  spirit  of  skepticism  which,  under 
the  pressure  of  industrialism,  the  teachings  of  the  physical  sciences, 
and  the  lessons  of  European  intellectuals,  is  resulting  in  the  ques¬ 
tioning  of  the  ideal  of  democracy  as  it  has  been  commonly  held 
hitherto,  and  the  spread  of  a  spirit  of  pessimism.  The  custodianship 
of  America  by  the  middle  class  has  brought  unsuspected  conse¬ 
quences  in  its  train. 

Thus  after  three  hundred  years’  experience  we  have  returned, 
intellectually,  to  the  point  from  which  we  set  out,  and  the  old 
philosophy  brought  to  the  new  world  from  the  compact  societies  of 
Europe,  with  its  doctrine  of  determinism  and  its  mood  of  pessi¬ 
mism,  has  come  back  in  changed  form  to  color  the  thinking  of  our 
generation.  Emersonian  optimism,  that  was  the  fullest  expression 
of  the  romantic  faith,  is  giving  way  to  Dreiserian  pessimism,  and 
the  traditional  doctrine  of  progress  is  being  subjected  to  analysis 
by  a  growing  skepticism.  Our  intellectual  history  thus  conceived 
falls  into  three  broad  phases:  Calvinistic  pessimism,  romantic 
optimism,  and  mechanistic  pessimism.  Between  the  first  and  the 
last  lies  the  America  of  yesterday  that  shaped  the  American  mind 


xix 


XX 


FOREWORD 


and  American  institutions;  and  with  the  submergence  of  that 
native  world  we  are  in  the  way  of  repeating  here  the  familiar  his¬ 
tory  of  Europe,  with  its  coercive  regimentations  reproduced  on  a 
larger  scale  and  in  more  mechanical  fashion.  Once  more  a  gloomy 
philosophy  stands  on  the  threshold  of  the  American  mind.  Whether 
it  will  enter  and  take  possession  of  the  household,  no  one  can  pre¬ 
dict  as  yet.  This  much  nevertheless  is  clear:  an  industrialized  so¬ 
ciety  is  reshaping  the  psychology  fashioned  by  an  agrarian  world; 
the  passion  for  liberty  is  lessening  and  the  individual,  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  creature  comforts,  is  being  dwarfed;  the  drift  of  centraliza¬ 
tion  is  shaping  its  inevitable  tyrannies  to  bind  us  with.  Whether 
the  quick  concern  for  human  rights,  that  was  the  noble  bequest  of 
our  fathers  who  had  drunk  of  the  waters  of  French  romantic  faith, 
will  be  carried  over  into  the  future,  to  unhorse  the  machine  that 
now  rides  men  and  to  leaven  the  sodden  mass  that  is  industrial 
America,  is  a  question  to  which  the  gods  as  yet  have  given  no 
answer.  Yet  it  is  not  without  hope  that  intelligent  America  is  in 
revolt.  The  artist  is  in  revolt,  the  intellectual  is  in  revolt,  the  con¬ 
science  of  America  is  in  revolt. 


It  ought  not  to  be  necessary  to  add  that  in  these  volumes  I  have 
not  essayed  to  write  a  history  of  American  literature — that  rather 
difficult  task  for  which  no  scholar  is  as  yet  equipped.  But  I  have 
suffered  so  many  gentle  reproofs  for  failing  to  do  what  I  did  not  set 
out  to  do,  that  it  may  be  well  to  repeat  what  I  said  in  the  Foreword 
to  Volume  I,  that  I  have  been  concerned  in  the  present  study  with 
the  total  pattern  of  American  thought — the  broad  drift  of  major 
ideas — and  not  with  vagrant  currents  or  casual  variations.  In  par¬ 
ticular  I  have  been  repeatedly  taken  to  task  for  a  seeming  slight 
put  upon  certain  of  our  artists,  and  it  has  been  inferred  that  I 
slighted  them  because  I  chose  to  ignore  whatever  did  not  fit  into 
a  rigid  scheme  of  economic  determinism.  Let  me  say  in  rebuttal 
that  I  hold  no  brief  for  a  rigid  scheme  of  economic  determinism. 
I  recognize  the  rich  culture  potentialities  that  inhere  in  individual 
variation  from  type,  and  I  realize  that  the  arts  are  likely  to  receive 
their  noblest  gifts  from  men  who  should  be  classed  biologically  as 
cultural  sports  or  variations  from  the  cultural  type.  But  in  such 
a  study  as  I  have  undertaken,  individual  variation  is  significant 
not  for  its  own  sake,  but  rather  for  the  help  it  may  offer  in  deter- 


FOREWORD 


XXI 


mining  the  type.  After  due  consideration  I  see  no  cause  to  apolo¬ 
gize  for  my  treatment  of  Poe,  for  example,  if  indeed  I  have  done 
so.  I  am  content  to  have  placed  him  historically  and  culturally  in 
relation  to  the  whole,  leaving  the  fascinating  problem  of  his  varia¬ 
tion  from  type  to  those  who  deal  with  such  problems. 

V.  L.  P. 


INTRODUCTION  * 


In  the  second  volume  of  my  studies  I  laid  down  the  thesis  that 
at  the  beginning  of  our  national  existence  two  rival  philosophies 
contended  for  supremacy  in  America:  the  humanitarian  philosophy 
of  the  French  Enlightenment,  based  on  the  conception  of  human 
perfectibility  and  postulating  as  its  objective  an  equalitarian  de¬ 
mocracy  in  which  the  political  state  should  function  as  the  servant 
to  the  common  well-being;  and  the  English  philosophy  of  laissez 
faire,  based  on  the  assumed  universality  of  the  acquisitive  instinct 
and  postulating  a  social  order  answering  the  needs  of  an  abstract 
“economic  man,”  in  which  the  state  should  function  in  the  in¬ 
terests  of  trade.  And  I  pointed  out  further,  with  adequate  backing 
up,  I  hope,  that  the  first  of  these  antagonistic  philosophies  was 
accepted  by  the  agrarian  leaders  of  America  and  found  issue  in 
the  Jeffersonian  program;  that  the  second  came  to  dominate  the 
thinking  of  the  mercantile,  capitalistic  America  and  took  form  in 
Hamiltonian  Federalism.  Unfortunately  this  logical  alignment  of 
diverse  economic  groups  was  obscured  by  the  needs  of  practical 
politics,  and  in  passing  through  the  explosive  Jacksonian  revolu¬ 
tion  both  philosophies  underwent  subtle  changes.  Jacksonianism 
imposed  upon  America  the  ideal  of  democracy  to  which  all  must 
thereafter  do  lip  service,  but  it  lost  its  realistic  basis  in  a  Physio- 
cratic  economics  and  wandered  in  a  fog  of  political  equalitarianism; 
and  the  Whiggery  that  issued  from  Federalism  turned  to  the  work 
of  converting  the  democratic  state  into  the  servant  of  property 
interests.  Both  political  parties  contented  themselves  with  an 
egoistic  individualism  that  took  no  account  of  social  ends,  forgetful 
of  the  humanitarian  spirit  that  underlay  the  earlier  democratic 
program.  The  finer  spirit  of  the  Enlightenment  was  lost,  and  in 
consequence  the  major  parties  chose  to  follow  the  economic  inter¬ 
ests  of  master  groups,  heedless  of  all  humanitarian  issues. 

*  The  Introduction,  as  will  be  readily  seen  by  the  reader,  is  not  complete,  yet  it 
undoubtedly  contains  the  gist  of  what  Professor  Parrington  intended  to  include  in 
it.  He  wrote  several  forms  of  some  parts,  from  which  the  Introduction  as  it  stands 
has  been  pieced  together  in  logical  order.  It  is  probable  that  the  last  words  he  wrote 
were  the  significant  closing  words  here — “  to  summon  forth  the  potential  intelligence 
o't  the  younger  generation.” — Publisher. 

xxiii 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


But  the  spirit  awakened  by  the  earlier  democratic  enthusiasm 
could  not  be  kept  in  political  strait-jackets.  The  Jacksonian 
revolution  overflowed  all  narrow  party  dikes,  expressing  itself  in 
diverse  humanitarian  and  reform  movements  and  quickening  the 
minds  of  ardent  Americans  with  larger  democratic  aspirations.  The 
noble  idealism  of  successive  third  parties  that  have  sprung  up 
reasserted  the  democratic  principles  flouted  by  the  major  parties. 
The  Locofoco  movement,  the  Free-soil  Party,  the  early  Republican 
Party,  the  Greenback  Party,  the  Populist  Party,  the  Progressive 
Party,  have  had  a  common  objective,  namely  to  carry  further  the 
movement  inaugurated  by  the  Jeffersonians  to  make  of  America  a 
land  of  democratic  equality  and  opportunity — to  make  government 
in  America  serve  man  rather  than  property.  The  third-party 
movements  have  always  been  democratic  movements,  and  though 
they  have  failed  in  their  immediate  objectives  they  have  served 
the  purpose  of  reminding  the  major  parties — oftentimes  rudely — 
that  America  presumes  to  be  a  democratic  country.  Thus  inter¬ 
preted  the  history  of  the  political  struggle  in  America  since  1790 
falls  into  three  broad  phases:  the  Jeffersonian  movement  that 
asserted  the  ideal  of  political  democracy;  the  Jacksonian  movement 
that  established  it  crudely  in  practice;  and  the  successive  third- 
party  movements  that  attempted  to  regain  such  ground  as  had  been 
lost,  to  extend  the  field,  and  to  perfect  the  machinery  of  democratic 
government. 

As  a  result  of  the  long  struggle  the  abstract  principle  of  democ¬ 
racy — during  the  period  under  consideration — was  firmly  estab¬ 
lished  in  the  popular  mind;  but  as  it  fell  under  the  successive 
custodianship  of  different  economic  groups  it  came  to  receive 
strangely  diverse  interpretations.  Interpreted  by  the  coonskin 
Jacksonians  it  meant  political  equalitarianism;  by  the  slave  econ¬ 
omy  it  meant  a  Greek  democracy;  by  the  industrial  economy  it 
meant  the  right  of  exploitation.  It  has  changed  service  with  each 
new  master.  Always  the  principles  of  Jeffersonianism — of  democ¬ 
racy  as  a  humane  social  order,  serving  the  common  well-being — 
have  been  lost  out  of  the  reckoning,  and  except  in  so  far  as  the 
tendency  has  been  checked  by  the  third-party  threat,  democratic 
professions  have  been  only  a  thin  cover  under  which  the  old  class 
warfare  has  gone  forward  vigorously.  In  the  decades  immediately 
following  the  Civil  War  democracy  passed  under  the  custodianship 
of  the  middle  class,  who  were  busily  engaged  in  creating  a  plutoc- 


INTRODUCTION 


XXV 


racy,  and  the  major  ideas  of  the  earlier  movement  took  on  a 
characteristic  middle-class  coloring.  The  idea  of  a  beneficent  prog¬ 
ress,  which  was  the  flower  of  the  doctrine  of  human  perfectibility, 
came  to  be  interpreted  as  material  expansion  with  constantly  aug¬ 
menting  profits;  and  the  idea  of  democracy  came  to  be  interpreted 
as  the  right  to  use  the  government  of  the  whole  for  the  benefit  of 
the  few. 

•  •••••• 

Considered  historically  perhaps  the  chief  contribution  of  the 
Progressive  movement  to  the  democratic  cause  is  to  be  found  in  its 
discovery  of  the  fundamentally  undemocratic  nature  of  the  federal 
Constitution.  That  so  obvious  a  fact  so  long  escaped  recognition 
was  due  to  political  causes  easily  understood.  For  a  century  the 
Constitution  had  been  a  symbol  of  national  unity,  a  cohesive  force 
amidst  the  drift  of  expansion,  a  counter  influence  to  the  dis¬ 
integrations  of  states-rights  particularisms;  and  as  such  it  had 
appealed  to  the  national  loyalties  of  men  in  every  commonwealth. 
To  criticize  it  was  reckoned  disloyal.  The  long  process  of  inter¬ 
pretation  had  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  lawyers  and  had  been 
wholly  legalistic  and  antiquarian.  In  all  this  earlier  commentary — 
except  for  a  small  group  of  left-wing  Abolitionists  who  repudiated 
the  entire  instrument — no  question  as  to  the  democratic  spirit  of 
the  Constitution  was  raised,  no  doubts  as  to  its  sufficiency  as  a 
fundamental  democratic  law  were  suggested.  The  class  divisions 
that  presided  at  its  making  were  ignored,  and  the  aristocratic  spirit 
of  its  creators  was  forgotten.  But  with  the  rising  revolt  against  the 
custodianship  of  government  by  financial  and  industrial  interests 
came  a  new  critical  interest  in  the  fundamental  law.  Discovering 
that  its  hands  were  tied  the  democracy  began  to  question  the 
reason  for  the  bonds  that  constrained  its  movements.  The  latent 
distrust  was  quickened  by  what  was  regarded  by  many  as  judicial 
usurpations  of  power,  such  as  the  act  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
declaring  unconstitutional  the  federal  income-tax  law,  and  the 
question  of  the  desirability  of  an  eighteenth-century  document  that 
by  its  complexity  unduly  impeded  the  functioning  of  the  demo¬ 
cratic  will,  was  thrust  into  the  foreground  of  political  debate.  It 
was  the  struggle  of  1789  over  again. 

The  new  school  of  criticism  was  historical  rather  than  legalistic. 
It  was  concerned  primarily  with  origins — and  it  must  take  into 
account  the  political  theories  and  class  interests  of  the  eighteenth' 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


century  gentlemen  who  framed  the  document.  It  refused  to  look 
upon  the  Fathers  as  supermen,  devoted  unselfishly  to  high  patriotic 
duty,  but  chose  to  regard  them  as  capable  statesmen,  saturated 
with  aristocratic  prejudices,  who  fearful  of  losing  control  of  the 
new  venture  in  republicanism,  took  care  to  shape  an  instrument 
that  threw  sharp  restrictions  about  the  majority  will. 


The  theme  of  the  present  volume  is  the  industrialization  of 
America  under  the  leadership  of  the  middle  class,  and  the  con¬ 
sequent  rise  of  a  critical  attitude  towards  the  ideals  and  handiwork 
of  that  class.  It  concerns  itself  primarily  with  the  spirit  of  realism 
that  under  the  constrictions  of  industrialism  and  with  the  spread  of 
scientific  modes  of  thought  emerged  to  question  the  ardent  ro¬ 
manticisms  of  an  earlier  age,  and  bring  under  doubt  the  excellence 
of  a  social  order  created  by  the  Industrial  Revolution. 

The  field  to  be  traversed  is  thus  predetermined.  The  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  our  literature  since  i860  must  be  fitted  into  the  broad  lines 
of  our  national  experience  and  will  follow  the  main  divisions  of 
development. 

I.  The  conquest  of  America  by  the  middle  class  and  its  custodian¬ 
ship  of  democracy.  The  philosophy  of  the  middle  class. 

II.  The  challenge  of  that  overlordship  by: 

1.  The  older  democratic  agrarianism  as  expressed  chiefly  in 

the  third-party  movements. 

2.  The  new  proletarian  philosophy  that  came  likewise  out  of 

the  ferment  of  the  French  Revolution,  but  that  trav¬ 
eled  a  different  course — through  Europe  and  the  ear¬ 
lier  continental  Industrial  Revolution,  and  thence  to 
America. 

III.  The  intellectual  revolution  brought  about  by  science  with 

the  results: 

1.  The  recovery  of  a  spirit  of  realism. 

2.  The  appropriation  of  science  by  the  middle  class. 

IV.  The  rise  of  a  detached  criticism  by  the  younger  intellectuals. 

In  dealing  with  this  material  it  will  be  necessary  to  follow  sec¬ 
tional  lines  in  the  earlier  decades  until  the  encompassing  movement 
of  centralization  finally  obliterated  them  and  produced  a  common 
national  spirit  and  purpose. 

In  the  welter  that  is  present-day  America  militant  philosophies 


INTRODUCTION 


xxvn 


with  their  clear-cut  programs  and  assured  faiths  are  wanting,  and 
many  feel,  as  Matthew  Arnold  felt  fourscore  years  ago,  that  they 
are  dwelling  between  worlds,  one  dead,  the  other  powerless  to  be 
born.  The  old  buoyant  psychology  is  gone  and  in  the  breakdown 
and  disintegration  of  the  traditional  individualism  no  new  philoso¬ 
phies  are  rising.  Builders  of  Utopias  are  out  of  a  job.  Political  and 
economic  theory  is  in  charge  of  paymasters  and  is  content  with  the 
drab  rim  of  the  familiar  landscape.  Retainer-fees  have  blotted  out 
for  it  the  lovelier  horizons  that  earlier  thinkers  contemplated. 
Academic  political  scientists  and  economists  have  largely  joined 
the  Swiss  guards,  and  abdicated  the  high  prerogative  of  speculative 
thought.  It  is  the  men  of  letters — poets  and  essayists  and  novelists 
and  dramatists,  the  eager  young  intellectuals  of  a  drab  generation — 
who  embody  the  mind  of  present-day  America;  not  the  professional 
custodians  of  official  views.  They  at  least  decline  to  block  the  path 
to  the  Promised  Land  with  retainer-fees;  they  at  least  are  free  souls, 
and  in  the  measure  of  their  abilities,  free  thinkers.  It  is  to  them 
therefore  that  one  must  turn  to  discover  the  intellectual  currents  of 
later  America — to  their  aspirations  as  well  as  to  their  criticisms. 
Literature  at  last  has  become  the  authentic  voice  of  this  great 
shapeless  America  that  means  so  much  to  western  civilization.  Not 
theologians  any  longer,  nor  political  philosophers,  nor  industrial 
masters,  nor  bankers,  are  the  spokesmen  of  this  vibrant  life  of  a 
continent,  but  the  intellectuals,  the  dreamers,  the  critics,  the 
historians,  the  men  of  letters,  in  short;  and  to  them  one  may  turn 
hopefully  for  a  revelation  of  American  life. 

The  period  dealt  with  in  the  present  study  marks  the  complete 
triumph  of  the  middle  class  and  the  final  defeat  of  the  traditional 
agrarianism.  The  disintegration  of  the  earlier  romanticisms,  both 
native  and  imported,  has  run  its  course.  The  philosophy  of  Jeffer¬ 
son  and  John  Taylor,  with  its  physiocratic  bias,  its  antipathy  to 
a  money  economy,  its  love  of  local  autonomy,  has  been  buried  in 
the  potter’s  field. 


Amidst  all  the  turmoil  and  vague  subconscious  tendencies,  cer¬ 
tain  ideas  slowly  clarified:  first,  that  the  earlier  democratic  aspira¬ 
tions  had  somehow  failed,  that  an  equalitarian  philosophy  adapted 
to  frontier  conditions  could  not  easily  be  carried  over  into  a  cen¬ 
tralizing  and  stratifying  America  and  was  doomed  to  eventual 


XXV111 


INTRODUCTION 


defeat;  second,  that  even  in  the  supposed  heyday  of  our  democracy, 
we  had  never  achieved  a  democracy,  but  rather  a  careless  individ¬ 
ualism  that  left  society  at  the  mercy  of  a  rapacious  middle  class; 
third,  that  we  must  take  our  bearings  afresh  and  set  forth  on  a 
different  path  to  the  goal.  As  these  convictions  slowly  rose  into 
consciousness,  a  quick  suspicion  of  our  earlier  philosophies  arose 
to  trouble  us.  With  the  growing  realism  of  the  times  came  a  belief 
that  our  French  romantic  theories  were  mainly  at  fault  and  we 
must  somehow  go  back  to  the  rationalistic  eighteenth  century  and 
start  once  more  to  recreate  a  democratic  philosophy.  The  crux  of 
the  matter  seemed  to  lie  in  the  romantic  conception  of  human 
nature.  Rousseau  and  Godwin  were  the  false  prophets  who  led  us 
astray,  and  we  must  return  to  the  solid  realism  of  John  Locke.  In 
the  light  of  a  realistic  psychology,  with  its  discovery  of  morons,  and 
its  study  of  mob  tendencies,  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  take  seri¬ 
ously  that  attractive  figment  of  the  romantic  imagination — man 
in  the  state  of  nature,  perfectible  by  following  the  light  of  reason, 
seeking  justice.  Morons  do  not  fit  nicely  into  the  older  theory — 
they  jar  one’s  faith  in  human  perfectibility.  In  the  light  of  intelli¬ 
gence  tests  perhaps  the  whole  romantic  theory  of  democracy  was 
only  a  will-o’-the-wisp.  With  the  very  foundations  of  our  traditional 
philosophy  turning  to  quicksand  under  our  feet,  no  wonder  we 
are  bedeviled  by  doubts  and.  uncertainties.  Utopias  no  longer 
seem  so  near  at  hand  as  they  did;  plans  and  specifications  of  the 
ideal  commonwealth  no  longer  seem  simple  matters  to  be  drawn 
by  any  competent  social  carpenter.  Our  jauntiness  is  gone,  specu¬ 
lation  is  less  important  than  investigation,  and  in  the  spirit  of 
sober  realism  we  are  setting  about  the  serious  business  of  thinking. 

In  this  thinking  two  major  forces  are  at  hand:  economics  and 
psychology.  In  our  economic  realism  we  are  returning  to  the  spirit 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  adapting  the  determinism  that 
marked  political  thought  from  Harrington  and  John  Adams  to 
Webster  and  Calhoun;  but  we  are  equipped  with  a  psychological 
knowledge  that  those  earlier  thinkers  lacked.  Wedding  the  new 
psychology  to  the  older  economic  determinism,  we  may  hope  in 
a  spirit  of  sober  realism  to  make  some  progress  in  our  thinking. 

Yet  not  too  hastily  should  we  abandon  our  earlier  faith:  the 
eighteenth-century  conception  of  environment  as  a  creative  influ¬ 
ence  in  determining  character  is  a  vital  idea  not  yet  adequately 
explored.  Even  morons  may  be  traced  back  to  adenoids  or  diets 


INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


of  salt  pork  and  whisky  or  to  later  machine  labor,  and  aristocracies 
are  still  seen  to  be  economic.  And  aristocratic  albinos  may  well 
breed  mobs  and  morons.  Jefferson  was  not  as  foolish  as  many  of 
his  disciples  have  been,  and  Jeffersonian  democracy  still  offers 
hope.  Education  begins  to  fail — except  education  to  individualize 
and  to  summon  forth  the  potential  intelligence  of  the  younger 
generation. 


CONTENTS  * 


PAGE 

Introduction:  The  Great  Revolution . xxiii 

I.  [A  New  America  in  the  Making:  Rise  of  capitalistic  indus¬ 
trialism  submerging  the  older  agrarianism,  the  Enlight¬ 
enment,  the  Jacksonian  frontier] 

II.  [Aristocracy  Dead:  The  principle  of  democracy  accepted,  yet 
driving  toward  a  plutocracy.  A  middle-class,  urban 
civilization] 

III.  [Cleavages:  Western  agrarianism;  Eastern  capitalism.  The 

South  confused,  bitter,  hesitant.  Expansion  of  the  frontier 
and  the  cities.  The  swift  extension  of  the  psychology  of 
the  city] 

IV.  [Changing  Patterns  of  Thought:  (i)  From  the  frontier  came 

the  doctrine  of  preemption,  exploitation,  progress;  (2) 

From  the  impact  of  science  came  the  dissipation  of  the 
Enlightenment  and  a  spirit  of  realism;  (3)  From  Euro¬ 
pean  proletarian  philosophies  came  a  new  social  theory] 

V.  [Certain  Drifts:  to  unity,  to  realism,  to  criticism] 

BOOK  I:  CHANGING  AMERICA 

Changes  in  traditional  economies  after  the  Civil  War.  The  rise  of 
American  industrialism  and  the  conquest  of  nature  by  science. 

The  age  of  the  middle  class.  The  last  flare-up  of  the  spirit  of  the 
frontier .  3 


Part  I 

The  Gilded  Age 

I.  The  American  Scene .  7 

I.  Free  America:  Half  a  continent  awaiting  preemption;  new 
raw  materials — oil,  steel,  copper,  coal.  A  new  technique 
of  exploitation — capital,  transportation,  machinery.  Phi¬ 
losophy  embraced  in  three  ideals:  preemption,  exploita¬ 
tion,  progress .  7 

♦This  is  given  rrr  full,  as  Professor  Parrington  left  it,  with  those  parts  not  com¬ 
pleted  by  him  in  brackets.  Some  revision  has  been  made  for  the  parts  he  completed, 
but  notes  have  been  added  to  the  text  to  show  his  original  intention.  For  some  of  the 
bracketed  headings  after  Part  II  of  Book  II  some  material  is  given  in  the  Addenda 
from  other  work  of  Parrington’s. — Publisher. 


xxxi 


xxxii 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


II.  Figures  of  Earth:  The  flowering  of  Jacksonian  frontier 

spirit,  simplified  to  the  acquisitive  instinct;  a  crude,  dy¬ 
namic  energy .  10 

III.  Politics  and  the  Fairy  Godmother:  The  struggle  within 

the  Republican  Party;  the  gospel  of  Whiggery  and  the 
triumph  of  the  American  System,  Henry  Clay  ....  17 

IV.  The  Great  Barbecue:  How  capitalism  and  agrarianism 

fared — the  Homestead  Act  and  railway  grants.  The  shift 
from  governmental  to  private  control . 23 

V.  Folk  Heroes . 2 6 

1.  General  Grant . 27 

2.  Jay  Cooke . 31 

3.  Charles  A.  Dana . 43 

II.  The  Culture  of  the  Seventies:  With  the  decay  of  aristo¬ 
cratic  controls,  a  loss  of  unity.  Three  strands:  aristocratic, 
romantic,  frontier . 48 

I.  New  England  in  Decay:  The  Genteel  Tradition  and  the 
drift  away . 50 

1.  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  and  the  Genteel  ....  54 

2.  The  New  England  Scene:  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps; 

Harriet  Beecher  Stowe;  Sarah  Orne  Jewett;  Mary 

Wilkins  Freeman . 60 

II.  The  Afterglow  of  the  Enlightenment — Walt  Whitman  .  69 

III.  The  Backwash  of  the  Frontier — Mark  Twain  ....  86 

III.  Changing  Theory:  An  agricultural  people  changing  to  an 
urbanized  people.  The  railways  hasten  economic  develop¬ 
ment  . 102 

I.  Winds  of  Economic  Theory:  The  conscription  of  econom¬ 
ics:  The  business  man  comes  to  the  front . 103 

1.  Henry  C.  Carey . 105 

2.  Francis  A.  Walker . ill 

II.  The  Conscription  of  Political  Theory:  The  democratic 

and  plutocratic  trends.  Development  of  the  democratic 
principle  vs.  the  cult  of  the  Constitution.  New  conception 
of  the  political  state . 1 17 

1.  Theodore  Woolsey . 120 

2.  [John  W.  Burgess] . 124 

III.  [The  New  Ally:  The  courts:  the  police  power  and  the  four¬ 

teenth  amendment;  the  injunction] 

IV.  [Buttressing  the  Democratic  Theory] 

1.  A  Democratic  Economics — Henry  George  ....  125 

2.  [Supplementing  the  Democratic  Political  Theory — 

Henry  D.  Lloyd] 


CONTENTS 


XXXlll 


IV.  The  Beginnings  of  Criticism:  The  pessimists  skeptical  of 
democracy,  the  optimists  calling  for  reform  of  the  spoils 
system.  No  competent  critics  of  industrialism  .  . 

I.  The  New  England  Conscience  and  Capitalism — Wendell 

Phillips . 

II.  Morality  and  Politics — George  William  Curtis  .... 

III.  English  Liberalism  and  Politics — Edwin  Lawrence  Godkin 

and  the  Nation . . 

IV.  Fiction  Considers  the  State  of  the  Country . 

1.  The  Political  Novel:  The  Gilded  Age;  Democracy;  An 

American  Politician . 

2.  [The  Economic  Novel:  The  Bread-winners]  .  .  .  . 

3.  The  Beginnings  of  the  Sociological  Novel:  H.  H. 

Boyesen . 


Part  II 

New  Patterns  of  Thought 

I.  Disintegration  and  Reintegration:  Two  forces  creating 
a  new  ideology,  science  and  the  machine.  The  decay  of 
the  older  theological,  political  mind,  and  the  emergence 
of  an  urban  mind . 

I.  The  Victorian  Mood — A  genial  optimism . 

1.  Sociology  and  the  Enlightenment:  Condorcet, 

Comte,  and  the  gospel  of  progress . 

2.  Biology  and  the  Enlightenment:  Spencer  and  the 

philosophy  of  anarchism . 

3.  The  End  of  the  Hopes  of  the  Enlightenment  .  .  . 

11.  The  School  of  Spencer — John  Fiske . 

II.  The  Skepticism  of  the  House  of  Adams:  The  flower  of  the 
sturdy  New  England  character.  They  fail  to  adjust  to 

the  Gilded  Age . 

I.  Charles  Francis  Adams — The  Business  Failure  .  .  .  . 

II.  Henry  Adams — Intellectual . 

in.  Brooks  Adams — Rebel . 

III.  Victorian  Realism:  In  the  eighties  realism  begins  to  excite 
interest  and  the  movement  gets  under  way,  though  the 
American  taste  is  still  romantic.  The  psychology  of  the 

dispersion  marking  America . 

I. [William  James  and  Pragmatism] 

II.  Henry  James  and  the  Nostalgia  of  Culture . 

III.  William  Dean  Howells  and  the  Realism  of  the  Common¬ 
place  . 


page 

137 

140 

147 

154 

168 

169 
173 

179 


189 

193 

194 

197 

202 

203 

212 

213 

214 
227 


2  37 

239 

241 


XXXIV 


CONTENTS 


BOOK  TWO:  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW:  STORM  CLOUDS 


Part  I 


The  Middle  Border  Rises 


PAGE 


I.  The  Plight  of  the  Farmer . 259 

1.  Democratic  Reactions  to  Plutocracy:  The  Middle  Border 
suffers.  Two  moods:  Buoyancy,  depression — the  farmer 

deflated.  The  economic  problem . 259 

II.  The  Farmer  Considers  Politics:  His  intellectual  equip¬ 
ment — homespun  theories  derided  by  the  schools.  The 
movement  of  organization:  The  Grange,  The  Alliance, 


Populism.  The  flare-up  of  the  nineties — the  doctrine  of 
more  corn  and  less  hell . 263 

III.  The  Greenback  Move’ment:  The  laissez-faire  theory  aban¬ 
doned  by  English  economists.  American  spokesmen:  John 
Sherman,  David  A.  Wells,  Eleazar  Lord.  Diverse  theories 
of  money — the  intrinsic-value  theory  and  the  quantitative 
theory.  The  money  question  a  heritage  of  the  Civil  War — 

a  debtor  class  and  an  appreciating  standard  of  value  .  .  266 

IV.  Greenbackism  and  Peter  Cooper . 276 

v.  [Bi-metallism:  A  heritage  of  Jacksonian  democracy:  Ig¬ 
natius  Donnelly,  “Coin”  Harvey] 


II.  The  Democracy  of  the  Age  of  Innocence  ....  283 

I.  Capitalistic  Encroachments:  Due  to  inadequate  demo¬ 
cratic  machinery.  The  movement  to  democratize  govern¬ 
ment.  Plutocracy  content  with  the  machine  which  it  con¬ 
trolled;  hence  radical  proposals  must  issue  from  the 
discontented.  After  1870,  with  few  exceptions,  popular 
democratic  thinking  done  west  of  the  Allegheny  Mountains  283 

II.  Third-party  Movements.  A  summary  of  democratic  pro¬ 
posals  of  previous  movements . 285 

III.  [  1  he  Populistic  Program:  Income  tax;  the  initiative  and 
referendum;  the  recall;  direct  primary;  Australian  ballot; 
popular  election  of  Senators;  sub-treasuries;  proportional 
representation] 

iv.  [William  Jennings  Bryan  and  the  Last  Battle] 

III.  Literature  and  the  Middle  Border . 288 

I.  [Edward  Eggleston  and  Frontier  Realism] 

II.  [Whitcomb  Riley  and  Folk  Romance] 

in.  Hamlin  Garland  and  the  Middle  Border.  Joseph  Kirkland, 

Harold  Frederic . 288 


CONTENTS  xxxv 

Part  II 

Proletarian  Hopes  page 

I.  [Plutocracy  and  the  Workingman:  Disruption  of  industry 

— strikes  and  lockouts  in  the  Gilded  Age.  Bitterness  of 
conflict.  The  discovery  of  the  injunction] 

I.  [Industrialism  and  the  American  theory  of  freedom:  Rise  of 

labor  unions.  Passing  of  the  frontier.  Incoming  of  German 
Socialists  and  the  recovery  of  the  doctrine  of  class  war 
lost  since  the  eighteenth  century] 

II.  [The  first  solution — Syndicalism:  T.  V.  Powderly  and  the 
Knights  of  Labor] 

III.  [The  second  solution— craft  unionism:  Gompers  and  the 
A.  F.  of  L.  A  middle-class  solution] 

II.  [The  Rise  of  the  Left] 

I.  [The  Menace  of  Socialism:  The  Haymarket  riot;  Governor 
Altgeld  ] 

ii.  [Leaders  of  the  Left:  Daniel  De  Leon;  Eugene  Debs;  Victor 


Berger] 

III.  The  Quest  of  Utopia . 301 

1.  Edward  Bellamy  and  Looking  Backward . 302 


I.  [After  Bellamy:  “Nationalism”;  Tourgee’s  Murvale  East¬ 
man ] 

IV.  [The  Darkening  Skies  of  Letters:  The  clouds  gathering 
on  the  “gay”  horizon  of  American  optimism.  Changes  in 
the  temper  of  scientific  thought  point  to  determinism. 

A  gloomier  realism  on  the  way,  coming  first  from  the 

West] . 3i£ 

I.  [Edwin  Markham  and  “The  Man  with  a  Hoe”] 

II.  [The  Rise  of  Naturalism:  Stephen  Crane;  Frank  Norris1 II. III.] 

III.  [Fiction  Discovers  the  City] 

Part  III 

The  Hesitant  South 

I.  [Two  Worlds:  The  aristocratic  clinging  to  the  romance  of 
the  past;  the  plebeian  agrarian  joining  with  the  Middle 
Border  in  its  protest  against  plutocracy.  Tom  A.  Watson. 

The  beginnings  of  industrialism  that  proposed  to  exploit 
the  cotton  and  iron  of  the  South] 

II.  [The  Romance  of  the  Past:  Thomas  Nelson  Page  and  the 
plantation  tradition;  Joel  Chandler  Harris  and  the  ro- 

1  See  “Naturalism  in  American  Fiction,”  in  the  Addenda — lecture  notes  including 
Crane  and  Norris. 


xxxvi 


CONTENTS 


mance  of  the  negro;  Mary  Murfree  and  the  romance  of 
the  mountaineer;  George  Washington  Cable  and  the 
romance  of  the  creole] 

III.  [Sidney  Lanier— the  poet  of  the  South  2] 

IV.  [Henry  W.  Grady  and  the  Surrender  to  the  Middle 

Class  ] 

V.  [The  Southern  Intellectual:  Jdmes  Branch  Cabell; 3 

Ellen  Glasgow;  W  W.  Woodward  ] 


BOOK  THREE:  THE  NEW  AMERICA 
Part  I 

The  Rise  of  Liberalism  4 

I.  [Movements  of  Liberalism:  Three  periods:  1790-1912; 
1820-1860;  1903-1917.  Since  1870  three  attitudes  towards 
democracy:  (1)  It  has  been  achieved  but  the  machine 
needs  closer  attention — civil  service  reform;  (2)  It  has 
not  been  achieved  because  of  the  Constitution,  but  it  must 
be  achieved  through  remodeling  political  machinery;  (3) 
No  intelligent  person  desires  it  to  be  achieved.  The  move¬ 
ment  of  liberalism  (1903-1917)  a  great  stock-taking 
venture] 

I.  [Discoveries] 

1.  [That  the  democratic  program  has  not  been  fulfilled] 

2.  [  That  the  Constitution  is  not  a  democratic  instru¬ 

ment,  and  was  not  intended  to  be — the  clash  be¬ 
tween  the  Declaration  and  the  Constitution  ] 

3.  [  1  hat  while  professing  to  create  a  democracy  we  have 

been  erecting  a  plutocracy] 

II.  [Conclusions] 

1.  [  The  rediscovery  of  the  relations  between  economics 

and  politics] 

2.  [  1  he  necessity  of  subjecting  property  to  the  collective 
will] 

3.  [d  o  that  end  the  need  of  democratizing  the  machinery 
of  government — political  Progressivism.  The  ap¬ 
plication  of  the  Hamiltonian  state  to  the  Jeffersonian 
program  ] 

*  See  Addenda  for  lecture  notes  on  Lanier. 

*  See  Addenda  for  magazine  article  on  Cabell. 

4  See  “A  Chapter  in  American  Liberalism.”  the  last  of  the  Addenda. 


CONTENTS  x: 

II.  [Liberalism  and  the  Journalists:  The  Muckraking  Move¬ 
ment  5] 

I.  [The  Origins  in  the  Nineties — Henry  D.  Lloyd’s  Wealth 

vs.  Commonwealth  ] 

II.  [The  Gathering  Clan:  Lawson’s  Frenzied  Finance;  Ida 
Tarbell;  Ray  Stannard  Baker;  McClure's,  The  American, 
Hampton  s ] 

III.  [The  Left  Wing] 

1.  [Lincoln  Steffens,  The  Shame  of  the  Cities ] 

2.  [Charles  Edward  Russell,  The  Stories  of  Great  Rail¬ 
roads  ] 

3.  [Gustavus  Myers,  Great  American  Fortunes ] 

4.  [A.  M.  Simons,  Social  Forces  in  American  History  ] 

III.  [Liberalism  and  Politics:  The  Movement  of  Progressivism] 

1.  [Robert  La  Follette — The  State  and  Industry] 

11.  [Theodore  Roosevelt — Middle-Class  Liberal] 

III.  [Woodrow Wilson] 


Part  II 

Liberalism  and  Letters 

I.  [Liberalism  and  the  Intellectuals:  The  movement  be¬ 
comes  critical] 

1.  [Walter  E.  Weyl — Radical] 

II.  [Thorstein  Veblen — Social  Economist] 

III.  [Charles  A.  Beard — Political  Scientist5] 
iv.  [Herbert  Croly — Political  Critic] 

v.  [The  Younger  Intellectuals:  Randolph  Bourne,  Van  Wyck 
Brooks,  Waldo  Frank] 

II.  [Liberalism  and  Fiction:  A  shift  from  liberalism  to  radical¬ 
ism — from  politics  to  economics] 

1.  [Winston  Churchill:  From  romance  to  syndicalism6] 

11.  [Robert  Herrick:  Academic  radical6] 
hi.  [Jack  London:  Revolutionist7] 

IV.  [Upton  Sinclair:  Social  detective7] 

III.  [Liberalism  and  Realism] 

I.  [The  Poets  and  Realism:  Masters,  Sandburg,  Frost,  Robin 
son] 

II.  [The  Essay — Huneker] 
in.  [Theodore  Dreiser — A  Modern8] 

6  See  Ibid.  . 

6  See  Addenda,  “The  Problem  Novel  and  the  Diversion  from  Naturalism. 

7  See  Addenda  for  brief  notes. 

8  See  Addenda  for  notes  of  lecture  on  Dreiser. 


xxxviii  CONTENTS 

Part  III 
Reaction 

I.  [The  War  and  Liberalism:  The  reaction  developed  a  many- 

sided  attack  on  the  liberalisms  of  the  preceding  period. 
The  older  intellectuals  had  abandoned  French  equalitarian 
democracy,  but  set  as  their  goal  economic  democracy; 
the  younger  intellectuals  attacked  the  principle  of  de¬ 
mocracy,  the  ideal  of  industrialism,  the  culture  of  the 
middle  class] 

II.  [The  Attack  on  Democracy:  A  return  to  the  eighteenth 

century  spirit  of  aristocracy.  Purveyors  of  current  dis¬ 
gusts] 

I.  [Philosophical:  H.  L.  Mencken — a  Nietzschean  critic.  A 
cynic  who  grows  witty  over  American  failure] 

II.  [Biological:  The  falsity  of  the  perfectionist  philosophy  de¬ 
rived  from  Locke.  Not  environment  but  heredity — the 
isolated  germ  existence  before  birth] 

III.  [Psychological:  The  discovery  of  morons.  Primitive  drives 
— sex,  hunger — keep  men  children.  Nevertheless  behav¬ 
iorism  a  denial  of  the  aristocracy  of  the  biological  argu¬ 
ment,  holding  with  Locke  that  environment  is  determin¬ 
ing] 

III.  [The  Attack  on  Industrialism:  A  comprehensive  move¬ 

ment  that  enlists  first-class  minds — intellectuals,  poets, 
novelists,  dramatists] 

IV.  [The  Attack  on  the  Middle  Class:  Sinclair  Lewis; 9  Zona 

Gale; 10  Evelyn  Scott] 

V.  [New  Philosophies] 

i.  [Economics:  Denial  of  the  finality  of  economic  law:  A  prag¬ 
matic  view — Mitchell] 

II.  [Political  Theory:  A  decline  of  the  program  of  industrial 

democracy] 

III.  [Science:  A  rejection  of  the  law  of  causality  and  a  weaken¬ 
ing  of  the  authority  of  science] 

VI.  [New  Literary  Fashions] 

I.  [In  fiction,  impressionism  and  expressionism — Sherwood 
Anderson  10] 

II.  [In  biography:  The  impressionism  of  psychography] 
in.  [In  war  fiction:  10  A  brutal  realism  and  frank  pacifism] 

*  See  Addenda  for  reprint  of  pamphlet  on  Lewis. 

10  See  Addenda  for  brief  notes. 


CONTENTS 


XXX IX 


PAGE 

Addenda . 323 

Naturalism  in  American  Fiction . 323 

1.  Stephen  Crane .  328 

2.  Frank  Norris . 329 

“McTeague” . 330 

“Vandover  and  the  Brute” . 332 

“The  Octopus” . 332 

Sidney  Lanier . . . 334 

The  Incomparable  Mr.  Cabell . 335 

The  Problem  Novel  and  the  Diversion  from  Naturalism  .  .  .  346 

Jack  London:  The  Novelist  of  the  Proletariat . 352 

Upton  Sinclair . 353 

Theodore  Dreiser:  Chief  of  American  Naturalists . 354 

Sinclair  Lewis:  Our  Own  Diogenes . 360 

Sherwood  Anderson:  A  Psychological  Naturalist . 370 

A  New  Romance . 372 

1917-1924 . 373 

I.  The  Small  Town  in  Fiction . 373 

William  Allen  White:  A  Son  of  the  Middle  Border  .  .  374 

Booth  Tarkington:  The  Dean  of  American  Middle-Class 

Letters . 375 

Dorothy  Canfield  (Fisher) . 3 75 

II.  The  Realistic  Small  Town  and  the  New  Naturalism  .  .  376 

Zona  Gale — The  Transition  from  Romance  to  Realism  .  377 

Donn  Byrne . 377 

Robert  Nathan . 378 

Joseph  Hergesheimer:  A  Sophisticated  Romantic  .  .  .  379 

III.  Certain  Other  Writers . 381 

Edith  Wharton — The  Genteel  Tradition  and  the  New 

Plutocracy . 381 

Willa  Cather:  Epics  of  Women . 382 

IV.  Some  War  Books . 384 

John  Dos  Passos . 384 

E.  E.  Cummings . 385 

Thomas  Boyd . 385 

Laurence  Stallings . 385 

V.  Youth  in  Revolt — Certain  Purveyors  of  the  Hectic  .  .  .  385 

F.  Scott  Fitzgerald . 386 

Stephen  Vincent  Benet  and  Floyd  Dell . 386 

Ben  Hecht . 386 

Ole  Rolvaag’s  Giants  in  the  Earth . 387 

The  Short  Story . 397 

A  Chapter  in  American  Liberalism . 401 

Bibliography . 4*5 

Index . 421 


BOOK  ONE:  CHANGING  AMERICA 


BOOK  ONE 


CHANGING  AMERICA 

When  America  laid  aside  its  arms  after  Appomattox  and  turned 
back  to  the  pursuits  of  peace  it  was  well  advanced  toward  the  goal 
set  by  Alexander  Hamilton  three-quarters  of  a  century  before.  The 
great  obstacle  that  had  withheld  its  feet  hitherto  had  been  swept 
from  its  path.  A  slave  economy  could  never  again  thwart  the 
ambitions  of  the  capitalistic  economy.  The  jealous  particularism 
that  for  a  generation  had  obstructed  the  inevitable  drift  toward  a 
coalescing  national  unity  had  gone  down  in  defeat.  The  agrarian 
South  was  no  longer  master  in  the  councils  of  government;  the 
shaping  of  the  future  had  fallen  to  other  hands  and  the  unfolding 
of  the  new  order  could  go  forward  without  southern  let  or  hindrance. 

Other  obstacles  were  falling  away  of  themselves.  North  as  well 
as  South,  the  traditional  domestic  economy  was  already  a  thing  of 
the  past.  An  easier  way  to  wealth,  and  one  enormously  more  profit¬ 
able,  had  been  discovered.  The  future  lay  in  the  hands  of  the  ma¬ 
chine  that  was  already  dispossessing  the  tool.  In  the  hurry  of  the 
war  years  the  potentialities  of  the  factory  system  had  been  ex¬ 
plored  and  the  ready  resources  of  liquid  capital  had  been  greatly 
augmented.  From  the  smoke  of  the  great  conflict  an  America  had 
emerged  unlike  any  the  earlier  generations  had  known.  An  ambi¬ 
tious  industrialism  stood  on  the  threshold  of  a  continental  expan¬ 
sion  that  was  to  transfer  sovereignty  in  America  from  a  landed  and 
mercantile  aristocracy  to  the  capable  hands  of  a  new  race  of  cap¬ 
tains  of  industry.  Only  the  western  farmers,  newly  settled  in  the 
Middle  Border  and  spreading  the  psychology  of  the  frontier 
through  the  vast  prairie  spaces  of  a  greater  Inland  Empire,  re¬ 
mained  as  a  last  stumbling-block.  Other  battles  with  agrarianism 
must  be  fought  before  capitalism  assumed  undisputed  mastery  of 
America;  but  with  the  eventual  overthrow  of  the  agrarian  hosts  in 
their  last  stronghold  the  path  would  lie  broad  and  straight  to  the 
goal  of  an  encompassing  industrialism,  with  politicians  and  political 
parties  its  willing  servants.  There  would  be  no  more  dissensions 
in  the  household.  With  southern  Jeffersonians  and  western  agra- 

3 


4 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


rians  no  longer  sitting  as  watch  clogs  to  the  Constitution,  the  politi¬ 
cal  state  would  be  refashioned  to  serve  a  new  age,  and  the  old  dream 
of  a  coalescing  national  economy  become- a  reality.  The  American 
System  was  in  the  way  of  complete  establishment. 

Other  changes  impended,  and  greater.  The  enthronement  of  the 
machine  was  only  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  the  revolution  in 
thought  that  came  with  the  rise  of  science.  As  a  new  cosmos  un¬ 
folded  before  the  inquisitive  eyes  of  scientists  the  old  metaphysical 
speculations  became  as  obsolete  as  the  old  household  economy. 
A  new  spirit  of  realism  was  abroad,  probing  and  questioning  the 
material  world,  pushing  the  realm  of  exact  knowledge  into  the 
earlier  regions  of  faith.  The  conquest  of  nature  was  the  great 
business  of  the  day,  and  as  that  conquest  went  forward  trium¬ 
phantly  the  solid  fruits  of  the  new  mastery  were  gathered  by  in¬ 
dustrialism.  Science  and  the  machine  were  the  twin  instruments 
for  creating  a  new  civilization,  of  which  the  technologist  and  the 
industrialist  were  the  high  priests.  The  transcendental  theologian 
was  soon  to  be  as  extinct  as  the  passenger  pigeon. 

With  the  substitution  of  the  captain  of  industry  for  the  planta¬ 
tion  master  as  the  custodian  of  society,  the  age  of  aristocracy  was 
at  an  end  and  the  age  of  the  middle  class  was  established.  A  new 
culture,  created  by  the  machine  and  answering  the  needs  of  capi¬ 
talism,  was  to  dispossess  the  old  culture  with  its  lingering  concern 
for  distinction  and  its  love  of  standards — a  culture  that  should 
eventually  suffice  the  needs  of  a  brisk  city  world  of  machine  activi¬ 
ties.  But  that  would  take  time.  In  the  meanwhile — in  the  confused 
interregnum  between  reigns — America  would  be  little  more  than  a 
welter  of  crude  energy,  a  raw  unlovely  society  where  the  strife  of 
competition  with  its  prodigal  waste  testified  to  the  shortcomings 
of  an  age  in  process  of  transition.  The  spirit  of  the  frontier  was  to 
flare  up  in  a  huge  buccaneering  orgy.  Having  swept  across  the 
continent  to  the  Pacific  coast  like  a  visitation  of  locusts,  the  fron¬ 
tier  spirit  turned  back  upon  its  course  to  conquer  the  East,  infect¬ 
ing  the  new  industrialism  with  a  crude  individualism,  fouling  the 
halls  of  Congress,  despoiling  the  public  domain,  and  indulging  in 
a  huge  national  barbecue.  It  submerged  the  arts  and  created  a 
new  literature.  For  a  time  it  carried  all  things  before  it,  until 
running  full  tilt  into  science  and  the  machine,  its  triumphant  prog¬ 
ress  was  stopped  and  America,  rejecting  individualism,  began  the 
work  of  standardization  and  mechanization.  It  is  this  world  in 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


5 


transition  from  an  aristocratic  to  a  middle-class  order,  turmoiled 
by  the  last  flare-up  of  the  frontier  spirit,  shifting  from  a  robust 
individualism  to  a  colorless  standardization,  which  the  chapters 
that  follow  must  deal  with.  A  confused  and  turbulent  scene,  but 
not  without  its  fascination  to  the  American  who  would  understand 
his  special  heritage — perhaps  the  most  characteristically  native, 
the  most  American,  in  our  total  history. 


PART  ONE:  THE  GILDED  AGE 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 

i 

FREE  AMERICA 

The  pot  was  boiling  briskly  in  America  in  the  tumultuous  post-war 
years.  The  country  had  definitely  entered  upon  its  freedom  and 
was  settling  its  disordered  household  to  suit  its  democratic  taste. 
Everywhere  new  ways  were  feverishly  at  work  transforming  the 
countryside.  In  the  South  another  order  was  rising  uncertainly 
on  the  ruins  of  the  plantation  system;  in  the  East  an  expanding 
factory  economy  was  weaving  a  different  pattern  of  industrial  life; 
in  the  Middle  Border  a  recrudescent  agriculture  was  arising  from 
the  application  of  the  machine  to  the  rich  prairie  soil.  All  over  the 
land  a  spider  web  of  iron  rails  was  being  spun  that  was  to  draw  the 
remotest  outposts  into  the  common  whole  and  bind  the  nation 
together  with  steel  bands.  Nevertheless  two  diverse  worlds  lay  on 
the  map  of  continental  America.  Facing  in  opposite  directions  and 
holding  different  faiths,  they  would  not  travel  together  easily  or 
take  comfort  from  the  yoke  that  joined  them.  Agricultural  America, 
behind  which  lay  two  and  a  half  centuries  of  experience,  was  a 
decentralized  world,  democratic,  individualistic,  suspicious;  in¬ 
dustrial  America,  behind  which  lay  only  half  a  dozen  decades  of 
bustling  experiment,  was  a  centralizing  world,  capitalistic,  feudal, 
ambitious.  The  one  was  a  decaying  order,  the  other  a  rising,  and 
between  them  would  be  friction  till  one  or  the  other  had  become 
master. 

Continental  America  was  still  half  frontier  and  half  settled 
country.  A  thin  line  of  homesteads  had  been  thrust  westward  till 
the  outposts  reached  well  into  the  Middle  Border — an  uncertain 
thread  running  through  eastern  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  Kansas, 
overleaping  the  Indian  Territory  and  then  running  west  into  Texas 
— approximately  halfway  between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific. 
Behind  these  outposts  was  still  much  unoccupied  land,  and  beyond 
stretched  the  unfenced  prairies  till  they  merged  in  the  sagebrush 

7 


8 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


plains,  gray  and  waste,  that  stretched  to  the  foothills  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  Beyond  the  mountains  were  other  stretches  of  plains 
and  deserts,  vast  and  forbidding  in  their  alkali  blight,  to  the  wooded 
coast  ranges  and  the  Pacific  Ocean.  In  all  this  immense  territory 
were  only  scattered  settlements — at  Denver,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Sacramento,  San  Francisco,  Portland,  Seattle,  and  elsewhere — 
tiny  outposts  in  the  wilderness,  with  scattered  hamlets,  mining 
camps,  and  isolated  homesteads  lost  in  the  great  expanse.  On  the 
prairies  from  Mexico  to  Canada — across  which  rumbled  great  herds 
of  bufFalo — roved  powerful  tribes  of  hostile  Indians  who  fretted 
against  the  forward  thrust  of  settlement  and  disputed  the  right  of 
possession.  The  urgent  business  of  the  times  was  the  subduing  of 
this  wild  region,  wresting  it  from  Indians  and  bufFalo  and  wilder¬ 
ness;  and  the  forty  years  that  lay  between  the  California  Gold 
Rush  of  ’49  and  the  Oklahoma  Land  Rush  of  ’89  saw  the  greatest 
wave  of  pioneer  expansion— the  swiftest  and  most  reckless — in  all 
our  pioneer  experience.  Expansion  on  so  vast  a  scale  necessitated 
building,  and  the  seventies  became  the  railway  age,  bonding  the 
future  to  break  down  present  barriers  of  isolation,  and  opening  new 
territories  for  later  exploitation.  The  reflux  of  the  great  movement 
swept  back  upon  the  Atlantic  coast  and  gave  to  life  there  a  fresh 
note  of  spontaneous  vigor,  of  which  the  Gilded  Age  vcas  the  in¬ 
evitable  expression. 

It  was  this  energetic  East,  with  its  accumulations  of  liquid 
capital  awaiting  investment  and  its  factories  turning  out  the 
materials  needed  to  push  the  settlements  westward,  that  profited 
most  from  the  conquest  of  the  far  West.  The  impulsion  from  the 
frontier  did  much  to  drive  forward  the  industrial  revolution.  The 
war  that  brought  devastation  to  the  South  had  been  more  friendly 
to  northern  interests.  In  gathering  the  scattered  rills  of  capital 
into  central  reservoirs  at  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  and  in 
expanding  the  factory  system  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  armies,  it 
had  opened  to  capitalism  its  first  clear  view  of  the  Promised  Land. 
The  bankers  had  come  into  control  of  the  liquid  wealth  of  the 
nation,  and  the  industrialists  had  learned  to  use  the  machine  for 
production;  the  time  was  ripe  for  exploitation  on  a  scale  un¬ 
dreamed-of  a  generation  before.  Up  till  then  the  potential  resources 
of  the  continent  had  not  even  been  surveyed.  Earlier  pioneers  had 
only  scratched  the  surface — felling  trees,  making  crops,  building 
pygmy  watermills,  smelting  a  little  iron.  Mineral  wealth  had  been 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


9 


scarcely  touched.  Tools  had  been  lacking  to  develop  it,  capital  had 
been  lacking,  transportation  lacking,  technical  methods  lacking, 
markets  lacking. 

In  the  years  following  the  war,  exploitation  for  the  first  time 
was  provided  with  adequate  resources  and  a  competent  technique, 
and  busy  prospectors  were  daily  uncovering  new  sources  of  wealth. 
The  coal  and  od  of  Pennsylvania  and  Ohio,  the  copper  and  iron  ore 
of  upper  Michigan,  the  gold  and  silver,  lumber  and  fisheries,  of  the 
Pacific  Coast,  provided  limitless  raw  materials  for  the  rising  in¬ 
dustrialism.  The  Bessemer  process  quickly  turned  an  age  of  iron 
into  an  age  of  steel  and  created  the  great  rolling  mills  of  Pittsburgh 
from  which  issued  the  rails  for  expanding  railways.  The  reaper  and 
binder,  the  sulky  plow  and  the  threshing  machine,  created  a  large- 
scale  agriculture  on  the  fertile  prairies.  Wild  grass-lands  provided 
grazing  for  immense  herds  of  cattle  and  sheep;  the  development  of 
the  corn-belt  enormously  increased  the  supply  of  hogs;  and  with 
railways  at  hand  the  Middle  Border  poured  into  Omaha  and  Kan¬ 
sas  City  and  Chicago  an  endless  stream  of  produce.  As  the  line  of 
the  frontier  pushed  westward  new  towns  were  built,  thousands  of 
homesteads  were  filed  on,  and  the  speculator  and  promoter  hovered 
over  the  prairies  like  buzzards  seeking  their  carrion.  With  rising 
land-values  money  was  to  be  made  out  of  unearned  increment,  and 
the  creation  of  booms  was  a  profitable  industry.  The  times  were 
stirring  and  it  was  a  shiftless  fellow  who  did  not  make  his  pile.  If 
he  had  been  too  late  to  file  on  desirable  acres  he  had  only  to  find  a 
careless  homesteader  who  had  failed  in  some  legal  technicality  and 
“jump  his  claim.”  Good  bottom  land  could  be  had  even  by  late¬ 
comers  if  they  were  sharp  at  the  game. 

This  bustling  America  of  1870  accounted  itself  a  democratic 
world.  A  free  people  had  put  away  all  aristocratic  privileges  and 
conscious  of  its  power  went  forth  to  possess  the  last  frontier.  Its  so¬ 
cial  philosophy,  which  it  found  adequate  to  its  needs,  was  summed 
up  in  three  words — preemption,  exploitation,  progress.  Its  im¬ 
mediate  and  pressing  business  was  to  dispossess  the  government 
of  its  rich  holdings.  Lands  in  the  possession  of  the  government  were 
so  much  idle  waste,  untaxed  and  profitless;  in  private  hands  they 
would  be  developed.  They  would  provide  work,  pay  taxes,  support 
schools,  enrich  the  community.  Preemption  meant  exploitation 
and  exploitation  meant  progress.  It  was  a  simple  philosophy  and  it 
suited  the  simple  individualism  of  the  times.  The  Gilded  Age  knew 


10 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


nothing  of  the  Enlightenment;  it  recognized  only  the  acquisitive 
instinct.  That  much  at  least  the  frontier  had  taught  the  great 
American  democracy;  and  in  applying  to  the  resources  of  a  conti¬ 
nent  the  lesson  it  had  been  so  well  taught  the  Gilded  Age  wrote  a 
profoundly  characteristic  chapter  of  American  history. 

ii 

FIGURES  OF  EARTH 

In  a  moment  of  special  irritation  Edwin  Lawrence  Godkin  called 
the  civilization  of  the  seventies  a  chromo  civilization.  Mark  Twain, 
with  his  slack  western  standards,  was  equally  severe.  As  he  con¬ 
templated  the  slovenly  reality  beneath  the  gaudy  exterior  he 
dubbed  it  the  Gilded  Age.  Other  critics  with  a  gift  for  pungent 
phrase  have  flung  their  gibes  at  the  ways  of  a  picturesque  and  un¬ 
couth  generation.  There  is  reason  in  plenty  for  such  caustic  com¬ 
ment.  Heedless,  irreverent,  unlovely,  cultivating  huge  beards,  shod 
in  polished  top-boots — the  last  refinement  of  the  farmer’s  cowhides 
— wearing  linen  dickeys  over  hickory  shirts,  moving  through  pools 
of  tobacco  juice,  erupting  in  shoddy  and  grotesque  architecture, 
cluttering  its  homes  with  ungainly  walnut  chairs  and  marble-topped 
tables  and  heavy  lambrequins,  the  decade  of  the  seventies  was 
only  too  plainly  mired  and  floundering  in  a  bog  of  bad  taste.  A 
world  of  triumphant  and  unabashed  vulgarity  without  its  like  in 
our  history,  it  was  not  aware  of  its  plight,  but  accounted  its  man¬ 
ners  genteel  and  boasted  of  ways  that  were  a  parody  on  sober  good 
sense. 

Yet  just  as  such  comments  are,  they  do  not  reach  quite  to  the 
heart  of  the  age.  They  emphasize  rather  the  excrescences,  the 
casual  lapses,  of  a  generation  that  underneath  its  crudities  and 
vulgarities  was  boldly  adventurous  and  creative — a  generation  in 
which  the  democratic  freedoms  of  America,  as  those  freedoms  had 
taken  shape  during  a  drab  frontier  experience,  came  at  last  to 
spontaneous  and  vivid  expression.  If  its  cultural  wealth  was  less 
than  it  thought,  if  in  its  exuberance  it  was  engaged  somewhat  too 
boisterously  in  stamping  its  own  plebeian  image  on  the  work  of  its 
hands,  it  was  only  natural  to  a  society  that  for  the  first  time  found 
its  opportunities  equal  to  its  desires,  a  youthful  society  that 
accounted  the  world  its  oyster  and  wanted  no  restrictions  laid  on 
its  will.  It  was  the  ripe  fruit  of  Jacksonian  leveling,  and  if  it  ran  to 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


11 


a  grotesque  individualism — if  in  its  self-confidence  it  was  heedless 
of  the  smiles  of  older  societies — it  was  nevertheless  by  reason  of  its 
uncouthness  the  most  picturesque  generation  in  our  history;  and 
for  those  who  love  to  watch  human  nature  disporting  itself  with 
naive  abandon,  running  amuck  through  all  the  conventions,  no 
other  age  provides  so  fascinating  a  spectacle. 

When  the  cannon  at  last  had  ceased  their  destruction  it  was  a 
strange  new  America  that  looked  out  confidently  on  the  scene. 
Something  had  been  released  by  the  upheavals  of  half  a  century, 
something  strong  and  assertive  that  was  prepared  to  take  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  continent.  It  did  not  issue  from  the  loins  of  war.  Its 
origins  must  be  sought  elsewhere,  further  back  in  time.  It  had  been 
cradled  in  the  vast  changes  that  since  1815  had  been  reshaping 
America:  in  the  break-up  of  the  old  domestic  economy  that  kept 
life  mean  and  drab,  in  the  noisy  enthusiasms  of  the  new  coonskin 
democracy,  in  the  romanticisms  of  the  California  gold  rush,  in  the 
boisterous  freedoms  discovered  by  the  forties  and  fifties.  It  had 
come  to  manhood  in  the  battles  of  a  tremendous  war,  and  as  it 
now  surveyed  the  continent,  discovering  potential  wealth  before 
unknown,  it  demanded  only  freedom  and  opportunity — a  fair 
race  and  no  favors.  Everywhere  was  a  welling-up  of  primitive 
pagan  desires  after  long  repressions — to  grow  rich,  to  grasp  power, 
to  be  strong  and  masterful  and  lay  the  world  at  its  feet.  It  was  a 
violent  reaction  from  the  narrow  poverty  of  frontier  life  and  the 
narrow  inhibitions  of  backwoods  religion.  It  had  had  enough  of 
skimpy,  meager  ways,  of  scrubbing  along  hoping  for  something  to 
turn  up.  It  would  go  out  and  turn  it  up.  It  was  consumed  with  a 
great  hunger  for  abundance,  for  the  good  things  of  life,  for  wealth. 
It  was  frankly  materialistic  and  if  material  goods  could  be  wrested 
from  society  it  would  lay  its  hands  heartily  to  the  work.  Freedom 
and  opportunity,  to  acquire,  to  possess,  to  enjoy — for  that  it  would 
sell  its  soul. 

Society  of  a  sudden  was  become  fluid.  With  the  sweeping-away 
of  the  last  aristocratic  restraints  the  potentialities  of  the  common 
man  found  release  for  self-assertion.  Strange  figures,  sprung  from 
obscure  origins,  thrust  themselves  everywhere  upon  the  scene.  In 
the  reaction  from  the  mean  and  skimpy,  a  passionate  will  to  power 
was  issuing  from  unexpected  sources,  undisciplined,  confused  in 
ethical  values,  but  endowed  with  immense  vitality.  Individualism 
was  being  simplified  to  the  acquisitive  instinct.  These  new  Ameri- 


12 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


cans  were  primitive  souls,  ruthless,  predatory,  capable;  single- 
minded  men;  rogues  and  rascals  often,  but  never  feeble,  never 
hindered  by  petty  scruple,  never  given  to  puling  or  whining — the 
raw  materials  of  a  race  of  capitalistic  buccaneers.  Out  of  the  drab 
mass  of  common  plebeian  life  had  come  this  vital  energy  that 
erupted  in  amazing  abundance  and  in  strange  forms.  The  new 
freedoms  meant  diverse  things  to  different  men  and  each  like  Jur¬ 
gen  followed  after  his  own  wishes  and  his  own  desires.  Pirate  and 
priest  issued  from  the  common  source  and  played  their  parts  with 
the  same  picturesqueness.  The  romantic  age  of  Captain  Kidd 
was  come  again,  and  the  black  flag  and  the  gospel  banner  were 
both  in  lockers  to  be  flown  as  the  needs  of  the  cruise  determined. 
With  all  coercive  restrictions  put  away  the  democratic  genius  of 
America  was  setting  out  on  the  road  of  manifest  destiny. 

Analyze  the  most  talked-of  men  of  the  age  and  one  is  likely  to 
find  a  splendid  audacity  coupled  with  an  immense  wastefulness. 
A  note  of  tough-mindedness  marks  them.  They  had  stout  nippers. 
They  fought  their  way  encased  in  rhinoceros  hides.  There  was  the 
Wall  Street  crowd — Daniel  Drew,  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  Jim 
Fisk,  Jay  Gould,  Russell  Sage — blackguards  for  the  most  part, 
railway  wreckers,  cheaters  and  swindlers,  but  picturesque  in  their 
rascality.  There  was  the  numerous  tribe  of  politicians — Boss 
Tweed,  Fernando  Wood,  G.  Oakey  Hall,  Senator  Pomeroy,  Sena¬ 
tor  Cameron,  Roscoe  Conkling,  James  G.  Blaine — blackguards 
also  for  the  most  part,  looting  city  treasuries,  buying  and  selling 
legislative  votes  like  railway  stock,  but  picturesque  in  their  audac¬ 
ity.  There  were  the  professional  keepers  of  the  public  morals — 
Anthony  Comstock,  John  B.  Gough,  Dwight  L.  Moody,  Henry 
Ward  Beecher,  T.  De  Witt  Talmage — ardent  proselytizers,  un¬ 
intellectual,  men  of  one  idea,  but  fiery  in  zeal  and  eloquent  in 
description  of  the  particular  heaven  each  wanted  to  people  wfith 
his  fellow  Americans.  And  springing  up  like  mushrooms  after  a 
rain  was  the  goodly  company  of  cranks — Virginia  Woodhull  and 
Tennessee  Claflin,  “Citizen”  George  Francis  Train,  Henry  Bergh, 
Ben  Butler,  Ignatius  Donnelly,  Bob  Ingersoll,  Henry  George — 
picturesque  figures  with  a  flair  for  publicity  who  tilled  their  special 
fields  with  splendid  gestures.  And  finally  there  was  Barnum  the 
Showman,  growing  rich  on  the  profession  of  humbuggery,  a  vulgar 
greasy  genius,  pure  brass  without  any  gilding,  yet  in  picturesque 
and  capable  effrontery  the  very  embodiment  of  the  age.  A  marvel- 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


13 


ous  company,  vital  with  the  untamed  energy  of  a  new  land.  In 
the  presence  of  such  men  one  begins  to  understand  what  Walt 
Whitman  meant  by  his  talk  of  the  elemental. 

Created  by  a  primitive  world  that  knew  not  the  machine,  they 
were  marked  by  the  rough  homeliness  of  their  origins.  Whether 
wizened  or  fat  they  were  never  insignificant  or  commonplace.  On 
the  whole  one  prefers  them  fat,  and  for  solid  bulk  what  generation 
has  outdone  them?  There  was  Revivalist  Moody,  bearded  and 
neckless,  with  his  two  hundred  and  eighty  pounds  of  Adam’s 
flesh,  every  ounce  of  which  “belonged  to  God.’’  There  was  the 
lyric  Sankey,  afflicted  with  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  pounds  of 
human  frailty,  yet  looking  as  smug  as  a  banker  and  singing  “There 
were  ninety  and  nine”  divinely  through  mutton-chop  whiskers. 
There  was  Boss  Tweed,  phlegmatic  and  mighty,  overawing  rebel¬ 
lious  gangsters  at  the  City  Hall  with  his  two  hundred  and  forty 
pounds  of  pugnacious  rascality.  There  was  John  Fiske,  a  philo¬ 
sophic  hippopotamus,  warming  the  chill  waters  of  Spencerian  sci¬ 
ence  with  his  prodigious  bulk.  There  was  Ben  Butler,  oily  and  puffy 
and  wheezy,  like  Falstaff  larding  the  lean  earth  as  he  walked  along, 
who  yearly  added  more  flesh  to  the  scant  ninety-seven  pounds  he 
carried  away  from  Waterville  College.  And  there  was  Jim  Fisk, 
dressed  like  a  bartender,  huge  in  nerve  as  in  bulk,  driving  with  the 
dashing  Josie  Mansfield  down  Broadway — prince  of  vulgarians,, 
who  jovially  proclaimed,  “I  worship  in  the  Synagogue  of  the 
Libertines,”  and  who  on  the  failure  of  the  Erie  coup  announced 
cheerfully,  “Nothing  is  lost  save  honor!” 

Impressive  as  are  the  fat  kine  of  Egypt,  the  lean  kine  scarcely 
suffer  by  contrast.  There  were  giants  of  puny  physique  in  those 
days.  There  was  Uncle  Dan’l  Drew,  thin  as  a  dried  herring,  yet  a 
builder  of  churches  and  founder  of  Drew  Theological  Seminary, 
who  pilfered  and  cheated  his  way  to  wealth  with  tobacco  juice 
drooling  from  his  mouth.  There  was  Jay  Gould,  a  lone-hand  gam¬ 
bler,  a  dynamo  in  a  tubercular  body,  who  openly  invested  in  the 
devil’s  tenements  as  likely  to  pay  better  dividends,  and  went  home 
to  potter  lovingly  amongst  his  exotic  flowers.  And  there  was  Oakey 
Hall,  clubman  and  playwright,  small,  elegant,  and  unscrupulous; 
and  Victoria  Woodhuil  who  stirred  up  the  Beecher  case,  a  wisp  of  a 
woman  who  enraged  all  the  frumpy  blue-stockings  by  the  smart¬ 
ness  of  her  toilet  and  the  perfection  of  her  manners;  and  little 
Libby  Tilton  with  her  tiny  wistful  face  and  great  eyes  that  looked 


14 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


out  wonderingly  at  the  world — eyes  that  were  to  go  blind  with 
weeping  before  the  candle  of  her  life  went  out.  It  was  such  men 
and  women,  individual  and  colorful,  that  Whitman  and  Mark 
Twain  mingled  with,  and  that  Herman  Melville — colossal  and 
dynamic  beyond  them  all — looked  out  upon  sardonically  from  his 
tomb  in  the  Custom  House  where  he  was  consuming  his  own  heart. 

They  were  thrown  upas  it  were  casually  out  of  the  huge  caldron  of 
energy  that  was  America.  All  over  the  land  were  thousands  like 
them,  self-made  men  quick  to  lay  hands  on  opportunity  if  it 
knocked  at  the  door,  ready  to  seek  it  out  if  it  were  slow  in  knocking, 
recognizing  no  limitations  to  their  powers,  discouraged  by  no 
shortcomings  in  their  training.  When  Moody  set  out  to  bring  the 
world  to  his  Protestant  God  he  was  an  illiterate  shoe  salesman  who 
stumbled  over  the  hard  words  of  his  King  James  Bible.  Anthony 
Comstock,  the  roundsman  of  the  Lord,  was  a  salesman  in  a  dry- 
goods  shop,  and  as  careless  of  his  spelling  as  he  was  careful  of  his 
neighbors’  morals.  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  who  built  up  the 
greatest  fortune  of  the  time,  was  a  Brooklyn  ferryman,  hard-fisted 
and  tough  as  a  burr-oak,  who  in  a  lifetime  of  over  eighty  years  read 
only  one  book,  Pilgrim's  Progress,  and  that  after  he  was  seventy. 
Daniel  Drew  was  a  shyster  cattle-drover,  whose  arid  emotions 
found  outlet  in  periodic  conversions  and  backslidings,  and  who  got 
on  in  this  vale  of  tears  by  salting  his  cattle  and  increasing  his — and 
the  Lord’s — wealth  with  every  pound  of  water  in  their  bellies — 
from  which  cleverness  is  said  to  have  come  the  Wall  Street  phrase, 
“stock-watering.”  Jim  Fisk  was  the  son  of  a  Yankee  peddler,  who, 
disdaining  the  unambitious  ways  of  his  father,  set  up  for  himself 
in  a  cart  gilded  like  a  circus-wagon  and  drove  about  the  country¬ 
side  with  jingling  bells.  After  he  had  made  his  pile  in  Wall  Street 
he  set  up  his  own  opera  house  and  proposed  to  rival  the  Medici  as  a 
patron  of  the  arts — and  especially  of  the  artists  if  they  were  of  the 
right  sex.  A  surprising  number  of  them — Moody,  Beecher,  Bar- 
num,  Fisk,  Comstock,  Ben  Butler — came  from  New  England;  Jay 
Gould  was  of  Connecticut  ancestry;  but  Oakey  Hall  was  a  southern 
gentleman;  Fernando  Wood,  with  the  face  of  an  Apollo  and  the 
wit  of  an  Irishman,  was  the  son  of  a  Philadelphia  cigar-maker  and 
much  of  his  early  income  was  drawn  from  sailors’  groggeries  along 
the  waterfront;  Tweed  was  a  stolid  New  Yorker,  and  Drew  was  a 
Yoik  State  country  boy. 

What  was  happening  in  New  York  was  symptomatic  of  the 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


15 


nation.  If  the  temple  of  Plutus  was  building  in  Wall  Street,  his 
devotees  were  everywhere.  In  Chicago,  rising  higgledy-piggledy 
from  the  ashes  of  the  great  fire,  Phil  Armour  and  Nelson  Morris 
were  laying  out  stockyards  and  drawing  the  cattle  and  sheep  and 
hogs  from  remote  prairie  farms  to  their  slaughter-houses.  In 
Cleveland,  Mark  Hanna  was  erecting  his  smelters  and  turning  the 
iron  ore  of  Michigan  into  dollars,  while  John  D.  Rockefeller  was 
squeezing  the  small  fry  out  of  the  petroleum  business  and  creating 
the  Standard  Oil  monopoly.  In  Pittsburgh,  Andrew  Carnegie  was 
applying  the  Bessemer  process  to  steel-making  and  laying  the 
foundations  of  the  later  steel  trust.  In  Minneapolis,  C.  C.  Wash¬ 
burn  and  Charles  A.  Pillsbury  were  applying  new  methods  to 
milling  and  turning  the  northern  wheat  into  flour  to  ship  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth.  In  San  Francisco,  Leland  Stanford  and  Collis  P. 
Huntington  were  amassing  huge  fortunes  out  of  the  Southern 
Pacific  Railway  and  bringing  the  commonwealth  of  California  to 
their  feet.  Everywhere  were  boom-town  and  real-estate  promoters, 
the  lust  of  speculation,  the  hankering  after  quick  and  easy  wealth. 

In  the  great  spaces  from  Kansas  City  to  Sacramento  the  frontier 
spirit  was  in  the  gaudiest  bloom.  The  experiences  of  three  centuries 
of  expansion  were  being  crowded  into  as  many  decades.  In  the 
fifties  the  highway  of  the  frontier  had  run  up  and  down  the  Mis¬ 
sissippi  River  and  the  golden  age  of  steamboating  had  brought  a 
motley  life  to  Saint  Louis;  in  the  seventies  the  frontier  had  passed 
far  beyond  and  was  pushing  through  the  Rocky  Mountains,  re¬ 
peating  as  it  went  the  old  frontier  story  of  swagger  and  slovenliness, 
of  boundless  hope  and  heroic  endurance — a  story  deeply  marked 
with  violence  and  crime  and  heart-breaking  failure.  Thousands  of 
veterans  from  the  disbanded  armies,  northern  and  southern  alike, 
flocked  to  the  West  to  seek  their  fortunes,  and  daily  life  there  soon 
took  on  a  drab  note  from  the  alkali  of  the  plains;  yet  through  the 
drabness  ran  a  boisterous  humor  that  exalted  lying  to  a  fine  art— 
a  humor  that  goes  back  to  Davy  Crockett  and  the  Ohio  flatboat- 
men.  Mark  Twain’s  Roughing  It  is  the  epic  of  this  frontier  of  the 
Pony  Express,  as  Life  on  the  Mississippi  is  the  epic  of  the  preceding 
generation. 

The  huge  wastefulness  of  the  frontier  was  everywhere,  East  and 
West.  The  Gilded  Age  heeded  somewhat  too  literally  the  Biblical 
injunction  to  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  but  was  busily 
intent  on  squandering  the  resources  of  the  continent.  All  things 


16 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


were  held  cheap,  and  human  life  cheapest  of  all.  Wild  Bill  Hickok 
with  forty  notches  on  his  gun  and  a  row  of  graves  to  his  credit  in 
Boot  Hill  Cemetery,  and  Jesse  James,  most  picturesque  of  des¬ 
peradoes,  levying  toll  with  his  six-shooter  on  the  bankers  who  were 
desecrating  the  free  spirit  of  the  plains  with  their  two  per  cent,  a 
month,  are  familiar  heroes  in  Wild  West  tales;  but  the  real  plains¬ 
man  of  the  Gilded  Age,  the  picturesque  embodiment  of  the  last 
frontier,  was  Captain  Carver,  the  faultless  horseman  and  faultless 
shot,  engaged  in  his  celebrated  buffalo  hunt  for  the  championship 
of  the  prairies.  Wagering  that  he  could  kill  more  buffalo  in  a  day 
than  any  rival  hero  of  the  chase,  he  rode  forth  with  his  Indian 
marker  and  dropping  the  miles  behind  him  he  left  an  endless  trail 
of  dead  beasts  properly  tagged,  winning  handsomely  when  his 
rival’s  horse  fell  dead  from  exhaustion.  It  was  magnificent.  Davy 
Crockett’s  hundred  and  five  bears  in  a  season  was  but  ’prentice 
work  compared  with  Captain  Carver’s  professional  skill.  It  is 
small  wonder  that  he  became  a  hero  of  the  day  and  his  rifle,  turned 
now  to  the  circus  business  of  breaking  glass  balls  thrown  from  his 
running  horse,  achieved  a  fame  far  greater  than  Davy’s  Betsy. 
With  his  bold  mustaches,  his  long  black  hair  flying  in  the  wind,  his 
sombrero  and  chaps  and  top-boots,  he  was  a  figure  matched  only  by 
Buffalo  Bill,  the  last  of  the  great  plainsmen. 

Captain  Carver  was  picturesque,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  the 
thousands  of  lesser  Carvers  engaged  in  the  same  slaughter,  market- 
hunters  who  discovered  a  new  industry  in  buffalo-killing?  At  the 
close  of  the  Civil  War  the  number  on  the  western  plains  was  es¬ 
timated  at  fifteen  millions.  With  the  building  of  the  Union  Pacific 
Railroad  they  were  cut  asunder  into  two  vast  herds,  and  upon  these 
herds  fell  the  hunters  with  the  new  breech-loading  rifles,  shooting 
for  the  hide  market  that  paid  sixty-five  cents  for  a  bull’s  hide  and  a 
dollar  and  fifteen  cents  for  a  cow’s.  During  the  four  years  from  1871 
to  1874  nearly  a  million  head  a  year  were  slain  from  the  southern 
herd  alone,  their  skins  ripped  off  and  the  carcasses  left  for  the 
coyotes  and  buzzards.  By  the  end  of  the  hunting-season  of  1875 
the  vast  southern  herd  had  been  wiped  out,  and  with  the  building 
of  the  Northern  Pacific  in  1880  the  smaller  northern  herd  soon  suf¬ 
fered  the  same  fate.  1  he  buffalo  were  gone  with  the  hostile  Indians 
— Sioux  and  Blackfeet  and  Cheyennes  and  a  dozen  other  tribes.1 

1  See  Allan  Nevins,  “The  Taming  of  the  West,”  in  The  Emergence  of  Modern 
Am.erica. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


17 


It  was  the  last  dramatic  episode  of  the  American  frontier,  and  it 
wrote  a  fitting  climax  to  three  centuries  of  wasteful  conquest. 
But  the  prairies  were  tamed,  and  Wild  Bill  Hickok  and  Captain 
Carver  and  Buffalo  Bill  Cody  had  become  romantic  figures  to 
enthrall  the  imagination  of  later  generations.2 

It  was  an  abundant  harvest  of  those  freedoms  that  America  had 
long  been  struggling  to  achieve,  and  it  was  making  ready  the 
ground  for  later  harvests  that  would  be  less  to  its  liking.  Freedom 
had  become  individualism,  and  individualism  had  become  the 
inalienable  right  to  preempt,  to  exploit,  to  squander.  Gone  were 
the  old  ideals  along  with  the  old  restraints.  The  idealism  of  the 
forties,  the  romanticism  of  the  fifties — all  the  heritage  of  Jefferso- 
nianism  and  the  French  Enlightenment — were  put  thoughtlessly 
away,  and  with  no  social  conscience,  no  concern  for  civilization,  no 
heed  for  the  future  of  the  democracy  it  talked  so  much  about,  the 
Gilded  Age  threw  itself  into  the  business  of  money-getting.  From 
the  sober  restraints  of  aristocracy,  the  old  inhibitions  of  Puritanism, 
the  niggardliness  of  an  exacting  domestic  economy,  it  swung  far 
back  in  reaction,  and  with  the  discovery  of  limitless  opportunities 
for  exploitation  it  allowed  itself  to  get  drunk.  Figures  of  earth,  they 
followed  after  their  own  dreams.  Some  were  builders  with  gran¬ 
diose  plans  in  their  pockets;  others  were  wreckers  with  no  plans  at 
all.  It  was  an  anarchistic  world  of  strong,  capable  men,  selfish, 
unenlightened,  amoral — an  excellent  example  of  what  human 
nature  will  do  with  undisciplined  freedom.  In  the  Gilded  Age 
freedom  was  the  freedom  of  buccaneers  preying  on  the  argosies  of 
Spain. 

iii 

POLITICS  AND  THE  FAIRY  GODMOTHER 

Certainly  the  Gilded  Age  would  have  resented  such  an  interpre¬ 
tation  of  its  brisk  activities.  In  the  welter  of  change  that  resulted 
from  the  application  of  the  machine  to  the  raw  materials  of  a 
continent,  it  chose  rather  to  see  the  spirit  of  progress  to  which  the 
temper  of  the  American  people  was  so  responsive.  Freedom,  it  was 

2  It  is  the  same  story  in  the  matter  of  the  passenger  pigeon.  In  early  days  the  flights 
of  these  birds  ran  to  untold  millions.  The  last  great  nesting  was  at  Petoskey,  Mich¬ 
igan,  in  1878,  covering  a  strip  forty  miles  long  and  from  three  to  ten  miles  wide. 
Upon  the  nests  fell  the  market-hunters  and  a  million  and  a  half  squabs  were  shipped 
to  New  York  by  rail,  besides  the  thousands  wasted.  Within  a  generation  the  passen¬ 
ger  pigeon  had  become  extinct.  See  W.  B.  Mershon,  Outdoor  Life  and  Recreation, 
February,  1929,  p.  26  ff. 


18 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


convinced,  was  justifying  itself  by  its  works.  The  eighteenth 
century  had  been  static,  the  nineteenth  century  was  progressive. 
It  was  adaptable,  quick  to  change  its  ways  and  its  tools,  ready  to 
accept  whatever  proved  advantageous — pragmatic,  opportunist. 
It  was  not  stifled  by  the  dead  hand  of  :ustom  but  was  free  to  adapt 
means  to  ends.  It  accepted  progress  as  it  accepted  democracy, 
without  questioning  the  sufficiency  of  either.  The  conception 
accorded  naturally  with  a  frontier  psychology.  Complete  opportu¬ 
nism  is  possible  only  amongst  a  people  that  is  shallow-rooted,  that 
lives  in  a  fluid  society,  scantily  institutionalized,  with  few  vested 
interests.  In  a  young  society  it  is  easy,  in  a  maturing  society  it 
becomes  increasingly  difficult. 

Dazzled  by  the  results  of  the  new  technique  of  exploitation 
applied  on  a  grand  scale  to  unpreempted  opportunities,  it  is  no 
wonder  the  Gilded  Age  thought  well  of  its  labors  and  confused  the 
pattern  of  life  it  was  weaving  with  the  pattern  of  a  rational  civiliza¬ 
tion.  It  had  drunk  in  the  idea  of  progress  with  its  mother’s  milk. 
It  was  an  inevitable  frontier  interpretation  of  the  swift  changes 
resulting  from  a  fluid  economics  and  a  fluid  society  in  process  of 
settling  into  static  ways.  It  served  conveniently  to  describe  the 
changes  from  the  simplicities  of  social  beginnings  to  the  complexi¬ 
ties  of  a  later  order.  It  was  made  use  of  following  the  War  of  1812 
to  explain  the  stir  resulting  from  the  westward  expansion  and  the 
great  increase  in  immigration;  but  it  was  given  vastly  greater 
significance  by  the  social  unsettlements  that  came  with  the  in¬ 
dustrial  revolution.  With  the  realization  of  the  dramatic  changes 
in  manner  of  living — the  added  conveniences  of  life,  release  from 
the  laborious  round  of  the  domestic  economy,  ease  of  transporta¬ 
tion — that  resulted  from  the  machine  order,  it  was  inevitable  that 
the  idea  of  progress  should  have  been  on  every  man’s  tongue.  The 
increase  of  wealth  visible  to  all  was  in  itself  a  sufficient  sign  of 
progress,  and  as  the  novelty  of  the  industrial  change  wore  off  and 
the  economy  of  America  was  more  completely  industrialized,  it 
was  this  augmenting  wealth  that  symbolized  it. 

In  such  fashion  the  excellent  ideal  of  progress  that  issued  from 
the  social  enthusiasms  of  the  Enlightenment  was  taken  in  charge 
by  the  Gilded  Age  and  transformed  into  a  handmaid  of  capitalism. 
Its  duties  were  narrowed  to  the  single  end  of  serving  profits  and  its 
accomplishments  came  to  be  exactly  measured  by  bank  clearings. 
It  was  unfortunate  but  inevitable.  The  idea  was  too  seductive  to 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


19 


the  American  mentality  not  to  be  seized  upon  and  made  to  serve 
a  rising  order.  Exploitation  was  the  business  of  the  times  and  how 
better  could  exploitation  throw  about  its  activities  the  sanction 
of  idealism  than  by  wedding  them  to  progress?  It  is  a  misfortune 
that  America  has  never  subjected  the  abstract  idea  of  progress  to 
critical  examination.  Content  with  the  frontier  and  capitalistic 
interpretations  it  has  confused  change  with  betterment,  and  when 
a  great  idealist  of  the  Gilded  Age  demonstrated  to  America  that 
it  was  misled  and  pointed  out  that  the  path  of  progress  it  was 
following  was  the  highway  to  poverty,  he  was  hooted  from  the 
market-place. 

Having  thus  thrown  the  mantle  of  progress  about  the  Gold  Dust 
twins,  the  Gilded  Age  was  ready  to  bring  the  political  forces  of 
America  into  harmony  with  the  program  of  preemption  and  ex¬ 
ploitation.  The  situation  could  hardly  have  been  more  to  its  liking. 
Post-war  America  was  wholly  lacking  in  political  philosophies, 
wholly  opportunist.  The  old  party  cleavage  between  agriculture 
and  industry  had  been  obscured  and  the  logic  of  party  alignment 
destroyed  by  the  struggle  over  slavery.  Democrat  and  Whig  no 
longer  faced  each  other  conscious  of  the  different  ends  they  sought. 
The  great  party  of  Jefferson  and  Jackson  was  prostrate,  borne 
down  by  the  odium  of  slavery  and  secession.  In  the  North  elements 
of  both  had  been  drawn  into  a  motley  war  party,  momentarily 
fused  by  the  bitterness  of  conflict,  but  lacking  any  common  pro¬ 
gram,  certain  indeed  to  split  on  fundamental  economic  issues.  The 
Whig  Republican  was  still  Hamiltonian  paternalistic,  and  the 
Democrat  Republican  was  still  Jeffersonian  laissez  faire,  and  until 
it  was  determined  which  wing  should  control  the  party  councils 
there  would  be  only  confusion.  The  politicians  were  fertile  in  com¬ 
promises,  but  in  nominating  Lincoln  and  Johnson  the  party  ven¬ 
tured  to  get  astride  two  horses  that  would  not  run  together.  To 
attempt  to  make  yoke-fellows  of  democratic  leveling  and  capital¬ 
istic  paternalism  was  prophetic  of  rifts  and  schisms  that  only  the 
passions  of  Reconstruction  days  could  hold  in  check. 

In  1865  the  Republican  party  was  no  other  than  a  war  machine 
that  had  accomplished  its  purpose.  It  was  a  political  mongrel, 
without  logical  cohesion,  and  it  seemed  doomed  to  break  up  as  the 
Whig  party  had  broken  up  and  the  Federalist  party  had  broken 
up.  But  fate  was  now  on  the  side  of  the  Whigs  as  it  had  not  been 
earlier.  The  democratic  forces  had  lost  strength  from  the  war,  and 


20 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


democratic  principles  were  in  ill  repute.  I  he  drift  to  centralization, 
the  enormous  development  of  capitalism,  the  spirit  of  exploitation, 
were  prophetic  of  a  changing  temper  that  was  preparing  to  exalt 
the  doctrine  of  manifest  destiny  which  the  Whig  party  stood  spon¬ 
sor  for.  The  middle  class  was  in  the  saddle  and  it  was  time  to  bring 
the  political  state  under  its  control.  The  practical  problem  of  the 
moment  was  to  transform  the  mongrel  Republican  party  into  a 
strong  cohesive  instrument,  and  to  accomplish  that  it  was  neces¬ 
sary  to  hold  the  loyalty  of  its  Democratic  voters  amongst  the 
farmers  and  working-classes  whilst  putting  into  effect  its  Whig 
program. 

Under  normal  conditions  the  thing  would  have  been  impossible, 
but  the  times  were  wrought  up  and  blindly  passionate  and  the 
politicians  skillful.  The  revolt  of  Andrew  Johnson  came  near  to 
bringing  the  party  on  the  rocks;  but  the  undisciplined  Jacksonians 
were  overthrown  by  the  appeal  to  the  Bloody  Flag  and  put  to 
flight  by  the  nomination  of  General  Grant  for  the  presidency.  The 
rebellion  of  the  Independent  Republicans  under  Horace  Greeley 
in  1872  was  brought  to  nothing  by  the  skillful  use  of  Grant’s  mili¬ 
tary  prestige,  and  the  party  passed  definitely  under  the  control 
of  capitalism,  and  became  such  an  instrument  for  exploitation  as 
Henry  Clay  dreamed  of  but  could  not  perfect.  Under  the  nominal 
leadership  of  the  easy-going  Grant  a  loose  rein  was  given  to  Whig- 
gish  ambitions  and  the  Republican  pa<rty  became  a  political  in¬ 
strument  worthy  of  the  Gilded  Age. 

The  triumph  of  Whiggery  was  possible  because  the  spirit  of  the 
Gilded  Age  was  Whiggish.  The  picturesque  embodiment  of  the 
multitude  of  voters  who  hurrahed  for  Grant  and  the  Grand  Old 
Party  was  a  figure  who  had  grown  his  first  beard  in  the  ebullient 
days  before  Secession.  Colonel  Beriah  Sellers,  with  his  genial 
optimism  and  easy  political  ethics,  was  an  epitome  of  the  political 
hopes  of  the  Gilded  Age.  With  a  Micawber-like  faith  in  his  country 
and  his  government,  eager  to  realize  on  his  expansive  dreams  and 
looking  to  the  national  treasury  to  scatter  its  fructifying  millions 
in  the  neighborhood  of  his  speculative  holdings,  he  was  no  other 
than  Uncle  Sam  in  the  boisterous  days  following  Appomattox. 
The  hopes  that  floated  up  out  of  his  dreams  were  the  hopes  of 
millions  who  cast  their  votes  for  Republican  Congressmen  who  in 
return  were  expected  to  cast  their  votes  for  huge  governmental 
appropriations  that  would  insure  prosperity’s  reaching  certain 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


21 


post-office  addresses.  Citizens  had  saved  the  government  in  the 
trying  days  that  were  past;  it  was  only  fair  in  return  that  govern¬ 
ment  should  aid  the  patriotic  citizen  in  the  necessary  work  of 
developing  national  resources.  It  was  paternalism  as  understood 
by  speculators  and  subsidy-hunters,  but  was  it  not  a  part  of  the 
great  American  System  that  was  to  make  the  country  rich  and 
self-sufficient?  The  American  System  had  been  talked  of  for  forty 
years;  it  had  slowly  got  on  its  feet  in  pre-war  days  despite  the  stub¬ 
born  planter  opposition;  now  at  last  it  had  fairly  come  into  its 
own.  The  time  was  ripe  for  the  Republican  party  to  become  a  fairy 
godmother  to  the  millions  of  Beriah  Sellerses  throughout  the  North 
and  West. 

It  is  plain  as  a  pikestaff  why  the  spirit  of  Whiggery  should  have 
taken  riotous  possession  of  the  Gilded  Age.  With  its  booming  in¬ 
dustrial  cities  America  in  1870  was  fast  becoming  capitalistic,  and 
in  every  capitalistic  society  Whiggery  springs  up  as  naturally  as 
pigweed  in  a  garden.  However  attractive  the  disguises  it  may 
assume,  it  is  in  essence  the  logical  creed  of  the  profit  philosophy. 
It  is  the  expression  in  politics  of  the  acquisitive  instinct  and  it 
assumes  as  the  greatest  good  the  shaping  of  public  policy  to  pro¬ 
mote  private  interests.  It  asserts  that  it  is  a  duty  of  the  state  to 
help  its  citizens  to  make  money,  and  it  conceives  of  the  political 
state  as  a  useful  instrument  for  effective  exploitation.  How  other¬ 
wise?  The  public  good  cannot  be  served  apart  from  business  in¬ 
terests,  for  business  interests  are  the  public  good  and  in  serving 
business  the  state  is  serving  society.  Everybody’s  eggs  are  in  the 
basket  and  they  must  not  be  broken.  For  a  capitalistic  society 
Whiggery  is  the  only  rational  politics,  for  it  exalts  the  profit-mo¬ 
tive  as  the  sole  object  of  parliamentary  concern.  Government 
has  only  to  wave  its  wand  and  fairy  gifts  descend  upon  business 
like  the  golden  sands  of  Pactolus.  It  graciously  bestows  its  tariffs 
and  subsidies,  and  streams  of  wealth  flow  into  private  wells. 

But  unhappily  there  is  a  fly  in  the  Whiggish  honey.  In  a  com¬ 
petitive  order,  government  is  forced  to  make  its  choices.  It  cannot 
serve  both  Peter  and  Paul.  If  it  gives  with  one  hand  it  must  take 
away  with  the  other.  And  so  the  persuasive  ideal  of  paternalism 
in  the  common  interest  degenerates  in  practice  into  legalized  favor¬ 
itism.  Governmental  gifts  go  to  the  largest  investments.  Lesser 
interests  are  sacrificed  to  greater  interests  and  Whiggery  comes 
finally  to  serve  the  lords  of  the  earth  without  whose  good  will  the 


22  CHANGING  AMERICA 

wheels  of  business  will  not  turn.  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given. 
If  the  few  do  not  prosper  the  many  will  starve,  and  if  the  many 
have  bread  who  would  begrudge  the  few  their  abundance?  In 
Whiggery  is  the  fulfillment  of  the  Scriptures. 

Henry  Clay  had  been  a  prophetic  figure  pointing  the  way  Amer¬ 
ica  was  to  travel;  but  he  came  a  generation  too  soon.  A  son  of 
the  Gilded  Age,  he  was  doomed  to  live  in  a  world  of  Jacksonian 
democracy.  But  the  spirit  of  Henry  Clay  survived  his  death  and 
,iis  followers  were  everywhere  in  the  land.  The  plain  citizen  who 
wanted  a  slice  of  the  rich  prairie  land  of  Iowa  or  Kansas,  with  a 
railway  convenient  to  his  homestead,  had  learned  to  look  to  the 
government  for  a  gift,  and  if  he  got  his  quarter-section  and  his 
transportation  he  was  careless  about  what  the  other  fellow  got. 
A  little  more  or  less  could  make  no  difference  to  a  country  inex¬ 
haustible  in  resources.  America  belonged  to  the  American  people 
and  not  to  the  government,  and  resources  in  private  hands  paid 
taxes  and  increased  the  national  wealth.  In  his  favorite  newspaper, 
the  New  York  Tribune,  he  read  daily  appeals  for  the  adoption  of 
a  patriotic  national  economy,  by  means  of  which  an  infant  indus¬ 
trialism,  made  prosperous  by  a  protective  tariff,  would  provide 
a  home  market  for  the  produce  of  the  farmer  and  render  the 
country  self-sufficient.  Money  would  thus  be  put  in  every¬ 
body’s  pocket.  Protection  was  not  robbing  Peter  to  pay  Paul, 
but  paying  both  Peter  and  Paul  out  of  the  augmented  wealth  of 
the  whole. 

The  seductive  arguments  that  Horace  Greeley  disseminated 
amongst  the  plain  people,  Henry  Carey  purveyed  to  more  intelli¬ 
gent  ears.  The  most  distinguished  American  economist  of  the 
time,  Carey  had  abandoned  his  earlier  laissez-faire  position,  and 
having  convinced  himself  that  only  through  a  close-knit  national 
economy  could  the  country  develop  a  well-rounded  economic  pro¬ 
gram,  he  had  become  the  most  ardent  of  protectionists.  During  the 
fifties  and  later  he  was  tireless  in  popularizing  the  doctrine  of  a 
natural  harmony  of  interests  between  agriculture  and  manufac¬ 
turing,  and  to  a  generation  expanding  rapidly  in  both  fields  his 
able  presentation  made  great  appeal.  It  was  but  a  step  from  pro¬ 
tectionism  to  governmental  subsidies.  Beriah  Sellers  and  Henry 
Clay  had  come  to  be  justified  by  the  political  economists.  (Note 
that  amongst  Carey’s  converts  were  such  different  idealists  as 
Wendell  Phdlips  and  Peter  Cooper.) 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


23 


IV 

THE  GREAT  BARBECUE 

Horace  Greeley  and  Henry  Carey  were  only  straws  in  the  wind 
that  during  the  Gilded  Age  was  blowing  the  doctrine  of  paternalism 
about  the  land.  A  Colonel  Sellers  was  to  be  found  at  every  fireside 
talking  the  same  blowsy  doctrine.  Infectious  in  their  optimism, 
naive  in  their  faith  that  something  would  be  turned  up  for  them  by 
the  government  if  they  made  known  their  wants,  they  were  hoping 
for  dollars  to  be  put  in  their  pockets  by  a  generous  administration 
at  Washington.  Congress  had  rich  gifts  to  bestow — in  lands, 
tariffs,  subsidies,  favors  of  all  sorts;  and  when  influential  citizens 
made  their  wishes  known  to  the  reigning  statesmen,  the  sympa¬ 
thetic  politicians  were  quick  to  turn  the  government  into  the  fairy 
godmother  the  voters  wanted  it  to  be.  A  huge  barbecue  was  spread 
to  which  all  presumably  were  invited.  Not  quite  all,  to  be  sure; 
inconspicuous  persons,  those  who  were  at  home  on  the  farm  or  at 
work  in  the  mills  and  offices,  were  overlooked;  a  good  many  indeed 
out  of  the  total  number  of  the  American  people.  But  all  the  im¬ 
portant  persons,  leading  bankers  and  promoters  and  business  men, 
received  invitations.  There  wasn’t  room  for  everybody  and  these 
were  presumed  to  represent  the  whole.  It  was  a  splendid  feast. 
If  the  waiters  saw  to  it  that  the  choicest  portions  were  served  to 
favored  guests,  they  were  not  unmindful  of  their  numerous  home- 
spun  constituency  and  they  loudly  proclaimed  the  fine  democratic 
principle  that  what  belongs  to  the  people  should  be  enjoyed  by 
the  people — not  with  petty  bureaucratic  restrictions,  not  as  a  social 
body,  but  as  individuals,  each  free  citizen  using  what  came  to 
hand  for  his  own  private  ends,  with  no  questions  asked. 

It  was  sound  Gilded  Age  doctrine.  To  a  frontier  people  what  was 
more  democratic  than  a  barbecue,  and  to  a  paternalistic  age  what 
was  more  fitting  than  that  the  state  should  provide  the  beeves  for 
roasting.  Let  all  come  and  help  themselves.  As  a  result  the  feast 
was  Gargantuan  in  its  rough  plenty.  The  abundance  was  what  was 
to  be  expected  of  a  generous  people.  More  food,  to  be  sure,  was 
spoiled  than  was  eaten,  and  the  revelry  was  a  bit  unseemly;  but  it 
was  a  fine  spree  in  the  name  of  the  people,  and  the  invitations  had 
been  written  years  before  by  Henry  Clay.  But  unfortunately  what 
was  intended  to  be  jovially  democratic  was  marred  by  displays  of 
plebeian  temper.  Suspicious  commoners  with  better  eyes  than 


24 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


manners  discovered  the  favoritism  of  the  waiters  and  drew  atten« 
tion  to  the  difference  between  their  own  meager  helpings  and  the 
heaped-up  plates  of  more  favored  guests.  It  appeared  indeed  that 
there  was  gross  discrimination  in  the  service;  that  the  farmers’ 
pickings  from  the  Homestead  Act  were  scanty  in  comparison  with 
the  speculators’  pickings  from  the  railway  land-grants.  The  Credit 
Mobilier  scandal  and  the  Whisky  Ring  scandal  and  divers  other 
scandals  came  near  to  breaking  up  the  feast,  and  the  genial  host — 
who  was  no  other  than  the  hero  of  Appomattox — came  in  for  some 
sharp  criticism.  But  after  the  more  careless  ones  who  were  caught 
with  their  fingers  where  they  didn’t  belong,  had  been  thrust  from 
the  table,  the  eating  and  drinking  went  on  again  till  only  the  great 
carcasses  were  left.  Then  at  last  came  the  reckoning.  When  the 
bill  was  sent  in  to  the  American  people  the  farmers  discovered  that 
they  had  been  put  off  with  the  giblets  while  the  capitalists  were 
consuming  the  turkey.  They  learned  that  they  were  no  match  at  a 
barbecue  for  more  voracious  guests,  and  as  they  went  home  un¬ 
satisfied,  a  sullen  anger  burned  in  their  hearts  that  was  to  express 
itself  later  in  fierce  agrarian  revolts. 

What  reason  there  was  for  such  anger,  how  differently  rich  and 
poor  fared  at  the  democratic  feast,  is  suggested  by  the  contrast 
between  the  Homestead  Act  and  the  Union  Pacific  land-grant. 
Both  were  war-time  measures  and  both  had  emerged  from  the 
agitations  of  earlier  decades.  By  the  terms  of  the  former  the  home¬ 
steader  got  his  hundred  and  sixty  acres  at  the  price  of  $1.25  an 
acre;  by  the  terms  of  the  latter  the  promoters  got  a  vast  empire  for 
nothing.  It  was  absurd,  of  course,  but  what  would  you  have?  The 
people  wanted  the  railway  built  and  Collis  P.  Huntington  was 
willing  to  build  it  on  his  own  terms.  The  government  was  too 
generous  to  haggle  with  public-spirited  citizens,  and  too  Whiggish 
to  want  to  discourage  individual  enterprise.  Ever  since  the  cession 
of  California  there  had  been  much  talk  of  a  continental  railway 
to  tie  the  country  together.  In  the  first  years  the  talk  in  Congress 
had  all  been  of  a  great  national  venture;  the  road  must  be  built  by 
the  nation  to  serve  the  common  interests  of  the  American  people. 
But  unfortunately  sectional  jealousies  prevented  any  agreement  as 
to  the  route  the  survey  lines  were  to  run,  and  the  rising  capitalism 
was  becoming  powerful  enough  to  bring  into  disfavor  any  engage¬ 
ment  of  the  government  in  a  work  that  promised  great  rewards. 
Under  its  guidance  political  opinion  was  skillfully  turned  into  the 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


25 


channel  of  private  enterprise.  The  public  domain  backed  by  the 
public  credit,  it  was  agreed,  must  pay  for  the  road,  but  the  govern¬ 
ment  must  not  seek  to  control  the  enterprise  or  look  to  profit  from 
it  directly;  the  national  reward  would  come  indirectly  from  the 
opening-up  of  vast  new  territories. 

The  definite  shift  in  policy  came  about  the  year  1855.  In  1837 
Stephen  A.  Douglas  had  been  the  driving  force  behind  the  state 
enterprise  of  building  the  Illinois  Central  Railway.  In  1853  he 
proposed  that  the  Pacific  Railroad  should  be  built  by  private 
enterprise.  With  the  change  promptly  came  a  request  for  a  pa¬ 
triotic  land-grant.  The  government  was  expected  to  provide  the 
road,  it  appeared,  but  private  enterprise  was  to  own  it  and  manage 
it  in  the  interest  of  speculators  rather  than  the  public.  For  old- 
fashioned  souls  like  Thomas  A.  Benton,  who  still  remembered  the 
Jeffersonian  concern  for  the  common  well-being,  it  was  a  bitter 
mess  to  swallow. 

I  would  have  preferred  [he  said]  that  Congress  should  have  made  the 
road,  as  a  national  work,  on  a  scale  commensurate  with  its  grandeur  and 
let  out  the  use  of  it  to  companies,  who  would  fetch  and  carry  on  the  best 
terms  for  the  people  and  the  government.  But  that  hope  has  vanished 
.  .  .  a  private  company  has  become  the  resource  and  the  preference.  I 
embrace  it  as  such,  utterly  scouting  all  plans  for  making  private  roads  at 
national  expense,  of  paying  for  the  use  of  roads  built  with  our  land  and 
money,  of  bargaining  with  corporations  or  individuals  for  the  use  of  what 
we  give  them.3 

With  this  speech  the  old  Jeffersonianism  pulled  down  its  flag  and 
the  new  Whiggery  ran  up  its  black  banner.  The  Gilded  Age  had 
begun  and  Old  Bullion  Benton  had  outlived  his  time.  In  the 
tumultuous  decades  that  followed  there  was  to  be  no  bargaining 
with  corporations  for  the  use  of  what  the  public  gave;  they  took 
what  thev  wanted  and  no  impertinent  questions  were  asked.  The 
hungriest  will  get  the  most  at  the  barbecue.  A  careless  wastefulness 
when  the  supply  is  unlimited  is  perhaps  natural  enough.  There 
were  hard-headed  men  in  the  world  of  Beriah  Sellers  who  knew 
how  easy  it  was  to  overreach  the  simple,  and  it  was  they  who  got 
most  from  the  common  pot.  We  may  call  them  buccaneers  if  we 
choose,  and  speak  of  the  great  barbecue  as  a  democratic  debauch. 
But  why  single  out  a  few,  when  all  were  drunk?  Whisky  was 
plentiful  at  barbecues,  and  if  too  liberal  potations  brought  the 

’Quoted  in  J.  P.  Davis,  The  Union  Pacific  Railway,  pp.  67-68. 


26 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Gilded  Age  to  the  grossest  extravagancies,  if  when  it  cast  up 
accounts  it  found  its  patrimony  gone,  it  was  only  repeating  the 
experience  of  a  certain  man  who  went  down  to  Jericho.  To  create 
a  social  civilization  requires  sober  heads,  and  in  this  carousal  of 
economic  romanticism  sober  heads  were  few — the  good  Samaritan 
was  busy  elsewhere. 

The  doctrine  of  preemption  and  exploitation  was  reaping  its 
harvest.  The  frontier  spirit  was  having  its  splurge,  and  progress  was 
already  turning  its  face  in  another  direction.  Within  the  next  half- 
century  this  picturesque  America  with  its  heritage  of  crude  energy 
— greedy,  lawless,  capable — was  to  be  transformed  into  a  vast  uni¬ 
form  middle-class  land,  dedicated  to  capitalism  and  creating  the 
greatest  machine-order  known  to  history.  A  scattered  agricultural 
people,  steeped  in  particularistic  jealousies  and  suspicious  of  cen¬ 
tralization,  was  to  be  transformed  into  an  urbanized  factory  people, 
rootless,  migratory,  drawn  to  the  job  as  by  a  magnet.  It  was  to 
come  about  the  more  easily  because  the  American  farmer  had  never 
been  a  land-loving  peasant,  rooted  to  the  soil  and  thriving  only  in 
daily  contact  with  familiar  acres.  He  had  long  been  half  middle- 
class,  accounting  unearned  increment  the  most  profitable  crop,  and 
buying  and  selling  land  as  if  it  were  calico.  And  in  consequence  the 
vigorous  individualism  that  had  sprung  from  frontier  conditions 
decayed  with  the  passing  of  the  frontier,  and  those  who  had  lost  in 
the  gamble  of  preemption  and  exploitation  were  added  to  the  grow¬ 
ing  multitude  of  the  proletariat.  It  was  from  such  materials,  sup¬ 
plemented  by  a  vast  influx  of  immigrants,  that  was  fashioned  the 
America  we  know  today  with  its  standardized  life,  its  machine 
culture,  its  mass  psychology — an  America  to  which  Jefferson  and 
Jackson  and  Lincoln  would  be  strangers. 

v 

FOLK  HEROES 

Perhaps  one  cannot  penetrate  more  directly  to  the  heart  of  the 
Gilded  Age  than  in  taking  account  of  certain  of  its  heroes,  figures 
of  earth  whom  it  accounted  great  in  its  generation,  and  to  whom  its 
admiration  flowed  out  in  unstinted  measure.  It  is  our  own  secret 
desires  we  attribute  to  our  gods,  and  if  from  the  muck  of  the  times 
a  queer  lot  of  heroes  was  singled  out,  if  an  undisciplined  generation 
rioting  in  its  new  freedoms  chose  to  honor  men  who  had  scrambled 


27 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 

upward  in  uncouth  ways,  it  only  suggests  that  such  figures  were  a 
composite  picture  of  the  secret  desires  of  an  age  vastly  concerned 
with  getting  on.  From  a  host  of  striking  personalities  two  must 
suffice  to  suggest  the  spirit  of  the  times,  authentic  folk-heroes  of  the 
Gilded  Age,  fashioned  out  of  the  commonest  stuff  and  realizing 
such  greatness  as  multitudes  of  Americans  were  then  dreaming  of; 
and  over  against  them  a  third  figure,  a  mordant  intellectual,  who 
sardonically  swam  with  the  stream  of  tendency  and  in  serving  all 
the  gods  of  the  Gilded  Age  gained  for  himself  a  brilliant  career. 

i 

GENERAL  GRANT 

Greatest  of  all  the  heroes  of  the  age  was  the  victor  of  Appomat¬ 
tox.  His  fame  was  in  all  men’s  mouths,  and  his  reputation  was  sub¬ 
stantial  enough  to  withstand  the  attacks  of  enemies  and  the  gross 
shortcomings  of  his  own  character.  It  was  not  for  any  singular  or 
remarkable  qualities  of  mind  or  personality  that  General  Grant  was 
taken  to  the  heart  of  his  generation,  but  rather  because  he  was  so 
completely  a  product  of  the  times,  so  strikingly  an  embodiment  of 
its  virtues  and  weaknesses.  In  his  spectacular  career  were  the  sharp 
contrasts  that  appealed  to  a  plebeian  people  wanting  in  fine  and 
discriminating  standards  of  appraisal.  He  had  come  up  from  the 
people  and  the  marks  of  his  origins — the  slovenly  manners  and 
uncritical  force  of  frontier  folk-ways — were  stamped  on  him  as  in¬ 
delibly  as  they  were  stamped  on  his  fellow  soldiers  who  proclaimed 
his  greatness.  To  a  later  generation  he  seems  an  odd  and  unaccount¬ 
able  figure  for  the  high  role  of  national  hero,  yet  he  was  as  native 
and  homespun  as  Lincoln,  like  him  sprung  from  the  common  stock 
and  learning  his  lessons  from  harsh  experience,  a  figure  blown  to 
huge  dimensions  by  the  passions  of  civil  war.  A  generation  that 
discovered  something  praiseworthy  in  the  “smartness”  of  Jim 
Fisk,  in  the  burly  acquisitiveness  of  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  or  in 
the  clever  humbuggery  of  Barnum  the  Showman,  certainly  would 
judge  with  no  very  critical  eyes  the  claims  to  greatness  of  a  grim 
leader  of  armies  who  succeeded  where  so  many  before  had  failed. 

General  Grant  was  no  conventional  military  hero.  It  was  not 
the  gold  stars  on  his  epaulets  that  dazzled  his  generation.  The 
people  of  the  North  had  seen  too  many  gold  stars  rise  and  set  on 
the  military  horizon,  they  had  been  stricken  too  sorely  by  the  bitter 


28 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


struggle,  to  be  caught  by  military  popinjays.  They  had  gone 
through  the  fire  and  any  hero  of  theirs  must  himself  have  passed 
through  the  fire.  It  was  something  veracious  in  the  man,  something 
solid  and  unyielding  in  the  soldier,  something  plain  as  an  old  shoe 
in  the  field  marshal  of  bloody  battles,  that  caught  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  the  North  and  made  Grant  a  hero — this  together  with  a 
certain  gift  of  pungent  phrase,  befitting  the  leader  of  democratic 
hosts,  that  served  to  spread  his  fame  amongst  the  common  peo¬ 
ple.  Vicksburg  did  much  for  his  reputation,  but  the  demand  for 
“unconditional  surrender,”  sent  to  a  Confederate  leader,  did  far 
more.  The  words  fixed  his  character  in  the  popular  mind.  Here  at 
last  was  a  fighting  man  who  instead  of  planning  how  to  fall  back, 
as  other  generals  did,  thought  only  of  going  ahead;  so  the  popular 
judgment  shut  its  eyes  to  his  dull  plebeian  character  and  set  a 
wreath  on  his  brows.  It  rested  there  somewhat  grotesquely.  In 
spite  of  a  deep  unconscious  integrity  and  a  stubborn  will  that  drove 
him  forward  along  whatever  path  his  feet  were  set  on,  he  was  the 
least  imposing  of  military  heroes.  Short,  stooped,  lumpish  in  mind 
and  body,  unintellectual  and  unimaginative,  devoid  of  ideas  and 
with  no  tongue  to  express  the  incoherent  emotions  that  surged  dully 
in  his  heart,  he  was  a  commonplace  fellow  that  no  gold  braid  could 
set  off.  He  hated  war  and  disliked  soldiering,  yet  accepting  life 
with  a  stolid  fatalism  he  fought  his  bloody  way  to  ultimate  victory. 

Graduated  from  West  Point  after  four  sterile  years  of  drill,  quite 
uneducated  and  unread  even  in  his  profession,  he  served  for  a  time 
at  different  army  posts,  went  through  the  Mexican  War — which  he 
looked  upon  as  a  stupid  imperialistic  debauch — as  quartermaster 
without  gaining  distinction,  and  eventually,  oppressed  by  the 
eventless  routine  of  garrison  life,  he  fell  into  the  habit  of  solitary 
drinking  and  was  dismissed  from  the  service.  Misfortune  that  it 
seemed,  it  was  his  making.  Only  as  a  volunteer  could  he  have  risen 
so  quickly  to  high  command;  as  a  captain  or  major  in  the  regular 
army  he  would  have  been  detailed  as  drill-master  to  the  raw  troops 
and  have  had  no  chance.  Nevertheless  hard  times  came  with  his 
dismissal.  Indolent  by  nature  and  inclined  to  drift,  he  was  as 
incompetent  a  man  in  practical  affairs  as  one  could  find  in  a  frontier 
township.  But  with  a  wife  and  children  to  support  he  must  turn  his 
hand  to  something,  so  he  tried  his  luck  at  farming,  selling  real 
estate,  and  various  odd  jobs,  yet  all  the  time  growing  poorer  and 
seedier,  till  the  war  came  and  picking  him  up  flung  him  to  mountain 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


29 


heights  of  popularity  and  reputation.  Thereafter  till  his  death  he 
was  accounted  the  greatest  American  of  his  generation.  No  ac¬ 
cumulating  evidence  of  his  well-meaning  but  witless  incapacity  in 
civic  and  political  affairs  could  pluck  from  his  brows  the  wreath 
that  had  been  thrust  upon  him. 

In  his  spectacular  career  Grant  was  an  embodiment  of  the  dreams 
of  all  the  Benah  Sellerses  of  the  Gilded  Age.  He  was  a  materialistic 
hero  of  a  materialistic  generation.  He  was  dazzled  by  wealth  and 
power,  and  after  years  of  bitter  poverty  he  sat  down  in  the  lap  of 
luxury  with  huge  content.  He  took  what  the  gods  sent,  and  if  houses 
and  fast  horses  and  wines  and  cigars  were  showered  upon  him  he 
accepted  them  as  a  child  would  accept  gifts  from  a  fairy  godmother. 
He  had  had  enough  of  skimping  meanness;  with  his  generation  he 
wanted  to  slough  off  the  drabness  of  the  frontier;  he  wanted  the 
good  things  of  life  that  had  so  long  been  denied  him,  and  he  was  not 
scrupulous  about  looking  a  gift  horse  in  the  mouth.  He  sought  out 
the  company  of  rich  men.  He  was  never  happier  than  when  enjoy¬ 
ing  the  luxury  of  Jay  Cooke's  mansion  in  Philadelphia  or  riding 
with  A.  T.  Stewart  in  Central  Park.  As  he  grew  fat  and  stodgy  the 
vulgar  side  of  his  plebeian  nature  was  thrown  into  sharper  relief. 
He  accepted  gifts  with  both  hands,  and  he  seems  never  to  have 
suspected  the  price  that  would  be  exacted  of  the  President  for  the 
presents  to  the  General.  He  never  realized  how  great  a  bill  was  sent 
to  the  American  people  for  the  wine  he  drank  or  the  cigars  he 
smoked  with  his  wealthy  hosts;  yet  if  the  wine  had  been  molten 
gold  and  the  cigars  platinum  they  would  have  been  far  cheaper. 
In  return  for  a  few  boxes  of  choice  Havanas,  Jay  Cooke  laid  his 
hands  on  millions  of  western  lands  for  the  Northern  Pacific  Rail¬ 
way.  It  was  the  way  of  the  Gilded  Age,  and  Grant  was  only  doing 
what  all  his  friends  and  associates  were  doing.  If  he  accepted  a 
fifty-thousand-dollar  house  in  Philadelphia,  his  comrade  General 
Sherman  accepted  a  hundred-thousand-dollar  house  at  Washing¬ 
ton.  Such  gifts  were  not  bribes;  they  were  open  and  aboveboard;  it 
was  the  free  and  easy  way  of  the  times.  What  the  age  was  careless 
about  is  the  fact  that  it  is  hard  to  refuse  a  reasonable  request  from 
one’s  fairy  godmother,  and  what  the  General  never  understood  is 
that  if  one  is  President  such  a  godmother  is  certain  to  be  a  very 
dangerous  member  of  the  family. 

There  was  far  too  much  of  that  sort  of  thing  all  about  him  for 
Grant  to  serve  as  President  with  credit  to  himself  or  profit  to  the 


30 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


country.  Honest  himself,  he  was  the  source  of  more  dishonesty  in 
others  than  any  other  American  President.  His  eight  years  in  the 
White  House  marked  the  lowest  depths — in  domestic  affairs  at 
least — to  which  any  American  administration  has  fallen.  They 
were  little  better  than  a  national  disgrace.  All  the  festering  evils 
of  post-war  times  came  to  a  head  and  pock-marked  the  body 
politic  from  head  to  foot.  Scandal  and  corruption  whispered  all 
about  him,  the  hands  of  his  closest  advisers  were  dirty;  yet  he 
stubbornly  refused  to  hear  the  whispers  or  see  the  dirt.  In  judging 
men  and  policies  he  was  no  more  than  a  child.  He  could  never 
distinguish  between  an  honest  man  and  a  rascal.  He  was  loyal  to 
his  friends  and  open-handedness  he  regarded  as  a  mark  of  friend¬ 
ship.  In  the  end  it  turned  out  that  like  the  thieves  of  Jericho  his 
blatant  followers  despoiled  him  of  pretty  nearly  everything. 

In  what  must  pass  for  his  political  views  Grant  was  as  naively 
uninformed  as  a  Wyoming  cowboy.  Utterly  wanting  in  knowledge 
of  political  principles,  he  was  a  fit  leader  for  the  organized  mob 
that  called  itself  the  Republican  party,  whose  chief  objective  was 
the  raiding  of  the  treasure-box  of  which  it  was  the  responsible 
guardian.  He  had  been  nominally  a  Democrat  and  the  first  vote 
he  cast  for  President  he  cast  for  Buchanan.  After  Lincoln’s  death 
he  turned  naturally  to  President  Johnson  and  was  one  of  his  sup¬ 
porters  till  the  wily  Radical  group  got  his  ear  and  carried  him  over 
to  the  rival  camp.  They  wanted  his  reputation  to  hide  under,  and 
they  took  possession  of  it  with  no  great  credit  to  the  General’s  repu¬ 
tation.  Thereafter  he  was  a  Republican  of  the  Whig  wing.  It 
was  where  he  belonged.  He  was  swayed  politically  by  his  emotional 
reactions  and  it  was  natural  for  him  to  drift  into  the  opulent  camp 
of  money  and  power.  His  frontier  democracy  sloughed  away  and 
with  his  generation  he  went  over  easily  to  a  buccaneer  capitalism. 
No  social  conscience  obtruded  itself  to  give  him  trouble.  His  mil¬ 
lionaire  friends  were  Whig  Republicans  and  with  his  respect  for 
rich  men,  his  admiration  for  material  success,  he  found  himself  in 
congenial  company  amongst  the  Whig  group.  About  the  only 
political  policy  he  ever  interested  himself  in  was  the  policy  of  a 
protective  tariff,  and  his  Whig  associates  took  care  that  his  interest 
did  not  wane.  Yet  so  completely  did  the  naive  General  reflect  the 
spirit  of  the  Gilded  Age  that  his  noisy  followers,  conspiring  to  con¬ 
fuse  in  the  public  mind  southern  reconstruction  and  capitalistic 
expansion,  and  hiding  a  precious  set  of  rascals  in  the  folds  of  the 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


31 


bloody  flag,  came  near  to  making  him  President  for  a  third  term. 
The  General  was  bitterly  disappointed  at  their  failure,  and  the 
General’s  wife,  who  liked  to  live  in  the  White  House,  was  even 
more  disappointed.  To  millions  of  Americans  Grant  was  an  au¬ 
thentic  hero,  to  Mark  Twain  he  was  a  very  great  man,  and  to  Jay 
Cooke  he  was  a  pawn  to  be  used  in  the  noble  strategy  of  fortune¬ 
seeking.  What  a  comedy  it  all  seems  now — yet  one  that  leaves  an 
unpleasant  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Yet  to  dismiss  the  stolid  General  thus  is  scarcely  to  do  justice 
to  the  substantial  core  of  the  man.  There  remains  the  work 
written  in  pain  during  his  last  days,  the  two  volumes  of  Memoirs 
that  in  their  plain  directness — as  uninspired,  says  a  late  biographer, 
as  “a  bale  of  hay” —  laid  bare  his  honest  simplicity  and  rugged 
meagerness.  No  blackguard  and  no  charlatan  could  have  written 
such  pages.  If  General  Grant  was  not  the  great  man  so  many 
thought,  he  was  a  native  growth  from  American  soil,  endowed  like 
his  age  with  a  dogged  will  and  a  plodding  energy,  and  he  gave  his 
country  what  he  had.  Though  the  branches  of  the  tree  were  un¬ 
gainly  and  offered  too  hospitable  shelter  to  unseemly  birds  of  the 
night,  the  gnarly  trunk  was  sound  at  the  heart. 

2 

JAY  COOKE 

Another  hero  of  the  times  likewise  was  flung  up  as  it  were  casu¬ 
ally  out  of  obscurity  and  reaped  an  amazing  harvest  from  the 
gigantic  struggle.  In  those  difficult  years  the  name  of  Jay  Cooke — 
“the  financier  of  the  Civil  War,”  as  his  biographer  calls  him — 
became  as  familiar  to  the  people  of  the  North  as  the  names  of 
Grant  and  Lincoln,  and  was  often  joined  with  theirs  as  that  of  one 
of  the  saviors  of  the  Union.  He  was  the  first  great  American  banker, 
and  good  fortune  sent  him  into  the  world  at  a  moment  when  his 
skill  in  brokerage  found  opportunity  for  free  play.  The  war  was 
as  great  a  godsend  to  Jay  Cooke  as  it  was  to  Grant,  for  alone 
amongst  our  money-lenders  he  realized  the  problems  and  foresaw 
the  profits  in  a  popular  system  of  war  financing.  He  was  a  pioneer 
in  exploring  all  the  potentialities  of  the  banker’s  trade,  and  in  his 
dramatic  exploitation  of  salesmanship  and  his  skillful  manipulation 
of  money  and  credit  he  marked  out  the  highway  our  later  financiers 
have  traveled.  Jay  Cooke  occupies  too  significant  a  place  in  the 


32 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


history  of  American  capitalism  to  be  overlooked  in  casting  up  the 
accounts  of  the  Gilded  Age. 

Of  Yankee-Puritan  stock,  he  was  born  in  the  frontier  hamlet 
of  Sandusky,  Ohio,  when  the  Western  Reserve  was  at  the  beginning 
of  its  development.  His  father  was  a  country  lawyer  of  Federalist- 
Whig  affinities,  proficient  in  high-flown  western  oratory,  who  liked 
to  be  much  in  the  neighborhood  eye.  He  was  a  pushing,  self- 
confident  fellow,  highly  patriotic,  soberly  moral,  fearing  God  and 
loving  his  country,  who  felt  that  the  government  he  supported 
so  heartily  should  serve  him  and  his  town  with  equal  heartiness. 
His  readiness  in  florid  speech  won  him  a  single  term  in  Congress, 
and  he  used  his  position  as  a  heaven-sent  opportunity  to  promote 
a  government  road  from  Sandusky — which  it  seems  was  not 
prospering  as  its  inhabitants  had  expected  it  would — deep  into 
the  Indian  country.  'It  was  a  good  Clay-Whig  scheme  of  internal 
improvement;  it  would  open  up  a  rich  timber  country,  and  be 
highly  profitable  to  the  real-estate  promoters  of  Sandusky.  Cradled 
thus  in  speculation  and  faith  in  a  benevolent  government,  his  three 
sons  grew  up  native  Whigs,  with  vigorous  Puritan-Yankee  minds, 
who  found  no  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  interests  of  God  and 
Mammon.  Eager  to  get  on  “the  right  side  of  fortune,”  they  went 
into  the  three  professions  of  banking,  journalism,  and  the  law. 
The  eldest,  Pitt,  found  the  law  little  to  his  liking;  the  youngest, 
Henry,  labored  diligently  at  journalism,  at  Sandusky  and  later 
at  Columbus,  where  he  was  part  owner  of  the  Ohio  State  Journal 
and  “boss”  of  young  William  Dean  Howells,  who  was  likewise 
seeking  to  rise  through  the  medium  of  journalism.  It  was  the 
family  itch  for  politics  that  took  him  to  Columbus,  and  although 
the  venture  was  financially  unsuccessful  it  brought  him  influential 
connections.  He  was  useful  to  Governor  Salmon  P.  Chase,  after¬ 
wards  to  be  Lincoln’s  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  to  John  Sher¬ 
man,  who  was  later  to  become  a  great  influence  on  financial  policies 
at  Washington.  His  reward  came  in  the  shape  of  an  appointment 
to  do  the  government  binding,  reputed  to  be  worth  $25,000 — a 
commission  that  allowed  him.  to  unload  his  paper  on  some  investors 
who  speedily  lost  the  $20,000  they  put  into  it. 

Henry  Cooke’s  Whiggery  was  justifying  itself,  yet  to  both  Pitt 
and  Henry  it  soon  became  clear  that  Jay  had  hit  upon  the  true 
road  to  wealth.  At  twelve  years  of  age  he  had  begun  his  career  in 
his  father  s  store  at  Sandusky,  and  with  characteristic  enterprise 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


33 


he  put  in  some  side  lines  and  became  “quite  a  capitalist.”  At 
fourteen  he  ventured  so  far  as  St.  Louis  to  help  in  a  general  store, 
and  at  the  age  of  seventeen  he  went  to  Philadelphia  and  took  a 
place  in  a  broker-banker’s  office.  That  was  in  1839,  a  golden  time 
for  brokers,  when  every  business  man  must  keep  a  sharp  eye  on 
the  table  of  banknote  discounts  and  see  to  it  that  bad  paper  was 
worked  off.  Into  this  world  of  discounts  and  premiums  the  young 
clerk  plunged  with  immense  zest.  “The  business  I  am  engaged  in 
is  of  the  most  respectable  kind  and  the  house  is  the  first  in  the 
city,”  4  he  wrote  to  Pitt  Cooke.  “He  was  ambitious,  industrious, 
and  faithful  to  each  day’s  duties,”  his  biographer  reports  of  him. 
His  quick  mind  ran  to  calculations  and  his  slender  sensitive  fingers 
seemed  made  for  telling  money.  He  was  soon  the  admiration  of 
the  office,  an  expert  in  detecting  counterfeits,  a  walking  table  of 
“wild-cat”  currency,  with  a  genius  for  smelling  out  possible  com¬ 
missions.  Every  art  of  extracting  profits  from  note-shaving,  gold- 
juggling,  delayed  payments,  and  other  devices  known  to  the  world 
of  brokerage,  he  speedily  made  himself  master  of.  When  he  reached 
his  majority  he  was  entered  a  member  of  the  firm,  and  before  he 
was  thirty  he  aided  his  partners — “noble”  fellows  he  called  them, 
of  honest  Puritan  extraction— in  squeezing  huge  commissions  out 
of  the  financing  of  the  Mexican  War.  “It  was  a  grand  time  for 
brokers  and  private  banking,”  he  remarked;  and  late  in  life  he 
wrote  glowingly  of  his  cleverness  in  twice  overreaching  the  Secre¬ 
tary  of  the  Treasury.  It  was  quite  legal  and  the  patriotic  banker 
was  vastly  pleased  to  report,  “So  we  victimized  him  again.”  5 
He  was  the  brains  of  the  company  and  under  his  guidance  the  busi¬ 
ness  piled  up  profits  at  an  astonishing  rate.  During  the  panic  of 
1854  he  wrote:  “We  use  our  money  at  1  1/2  to  3  per  cent,  per 
month  from  day  to  day  and  frequently  it  pays  1/8  to  1/4  a  day. 
We  have  done  a  noble  business  since  1st  of  January;  profits  up  to 
1st  July  #135,000.”  6  On  the  reorganization  of  the  firm  in  1858 
he  withdrew,  and  three  years  later,  on  January  1,  1861,  he  opened 
the  doors  of  what  was  soon  to  become  the  greatest  banking-house 
in  America,  Jay  Cooke  and  Company  of  Philadelphia. 

He  was  then  in  his  fortieth  year  and  his  private  fortune  he  reck¬ 
oned  at  #150,000.  But  with  the  breaking-out  of  the  war,  oppor- 

4  E.  P.  Oberholtzer,  Jay  Cooke,  Financier  of  the  Civil  War,  Vol.  I,  p.  5?.. 

6  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  pp.  81  and  83. 

8  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  85. 


34 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


tunity  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  new  bank.  Ardently  patriotic, 
Jay  Cooke  was  anxious  to  do  his  bit  for  the  cause,  but  he  seems 
never  to  have  thought  of  going  to  the  front.  He  came  of  fighting 
Revolutionary  stock,  but  love  of  the  battlefield  had  died  out  of 
the  family.  His  father  had  been  drafted  for  the  War  of  1812,  but 
hired  a  substitute  who  was  unfortunate  enough  to  be  killed,  and 
none  of  the  three  sons  got  nearer  the  front  than  the  Treasury 
Department  at  Washington.  It  was  there  that  the  battles  of  the 
Cooke  brothers  were  fought.  Henry  Cooke  went  to  Washington 
to  attend  the  inauguration  of  the  new  administration,  and  twenty- 
one  days  later  Jay  Cooke  modestly  proposed  a  plan  for  mobilizing 
the  resources  of  the  firm  in  defense  of  the  country.  On  March  25, 
he  wrote  to  his  brother: 

What  we  wish  to  do  with  the  Treasury  is  to  have  the  Department  al¬ 
low  us  to  make  the  frequent  transfers  that  are  made  from  point  to  point 
instead  of  giving  the  business  to  Adams  and  Company  [Express].  We  can 
make  those  transfers  and  the  Department  when  flush  can  give  us  30,  60, 
90  or  120  days  time,  as  it  is  no  loss  to  them,  and  the  interest  in  the  mean¬ 
time  would  be  clear  profit  and  to  be  divided.7 

When  the  magnitude  of  the  task  in  which  the  country  was  en¬ 
gaged  became  clear  to  him  he  was  no  longer  content  with  a  single 
banking-house  at  Philadelphia.  A  branch  at  Washington  under 
the  shadow  of  the  Treasury  was  highly  desirable,  and  Henry  Cooke 
was  the  man  for  the  business.  A  born  lobbyist,  a  close  friend  of 
John  Sherman — who  was  looking  out  for  a  profitable  opening  in 
some  war  business  for  a  brother — and  of  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
Chase,  he  let  no  grass  grow  under  his  feet.  The  war  loans  had  not 
been  taken  freely  and  in  July,  Jay  Cooke  wrote  to  Chase  suggesting 
a  close  alliance  between  the  Treasury  and  two  Philadelphia  firms, 
Jay  Cooke  and  Company  and  Drexel  and  Company. 

We  would  wish  to  make  our  business  mostly  out  of  the  Treasury  opera¬ 
tions  and  we  feel  sure  that  we  could  by  having  a  proper  understanding 
with  yourself  greatly  help  you  in  the  management  of  your  vast  negotia¬ 
tions.  ...  We  could  not  be  expected  to  leave  our  comfortable  homes  and 
positions  here  without  some  great  inducement  and  we  state  frankly  that 
we  would,  if  we  succeeded,  expect  a  fair  commission  from  the  Treasury 
in  some  shape  for  our  labor  and  talent.  If  you  feel  disposed  to  say  to  us 
.  .  .  that  you  will  give  us  the  management  of  the  loans  to  be  issued  by 
the  government  during  the  war,  allowing  us  a  fair  commission  on  them, 

.  .  .  we  are  ready  to  throw  ourselves  into  the  matter  heartily.  .  .  ,8 

7  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  pp.  132-133.  8  See  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  pp.  143-144. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


35 


It  was  quite  an  amazing  proposal  and  one  that  Secretary  Chase 
dared  not  accept.  Bankers  and  brokers  in  New  York  and  Boston 
would  scarcely  approve  a  monopoly  of  loan-commissions  granted  to 
two  Philadelphia  houses.  But  Jay  Cooke  would  not  acknowledge 
defeat.  He  cultivated  the  acquaintance  of  the  Secretary,  lent  him 
money,  entertained  his  family,  presented  him  with  gifts,  and  gave 
him  sound  advice.  He  took  the  harassed  servant  of  the  people  to 
his  warm  and  generous  heart  and  was  vigilant  in  keeping  him  out  of 
the  clutches  of  Copperhead  profiteers.  His  opportunity  came  in 
October,  1861,  when  in  competition  with  other  brokers  he  under¬ 
took  the  sale  of  a  new  bond-series.  His  success  was  so  great  that  he 
won  the  complete  confidence  of  Secretary  Chase,  and  it  was  only  a 
matter  of  time  when  he  should  secure  his  coveted  monopoly.  In 
February,  1862,  he  opened  the  branch  house  at  Washington,  im¬ 
mediately  opposite  the  Treasury  building,  and  Henry  Cooke  soon 
made  its  offices  an  indispensable  club  for  Congressmen  and  govern¬ 
ment  employees.  He  was  charmingly  cordial  and  during  the  next 
ten  years  he  knew  everybody  and  every  political  move  at  the 
Capital.  With  the  same  bland  and  deacon-like  appearance  as  his 
brother,  he  was  master  of  the  art  of  ingratiating  himself  into  the 
confidence  of  influential  men,  and  successive  Secretaries  of  the 
Treasury — Chase  and  Fessenden  and  McCulloch — were  easily  in¬ 
duced  to  look  with  partial  eye  upon  the  firm  of  Jay  Cooke  and 
Company.  When  Grant  returned  to  Washington  after  the  war  he 
was  soon  like  a  brother  to  Henry  Cooke,  and  when  the  General  had 
tasted  the  quality  of  cigars  kept  for  his  use  at  Jay  Cooke’s  Phila¬ 
delphia  home,  his  heart  warmed  to  the  kindly  banker. 

Meanwhile  the  firm  was  discovering  innumerable  ways  to  help 
win  the  war;  amongst  others  Henry  Cooke  put  through  a  congres¬ 
sional  franchise  for  a  street  railway  at  Washington,  and  the  new 
cars  were  soon  carrying  citizens  and  soldiers  to  and  fro,  to  their 
great  content  and  the  company’s  great  profit.  He  was  hourly  in  and 
out  of  the  Treasury  and  he  knew  as  much  about  the  government 
business  as  the  Secretary.  The  interests  of  the  firm  extended  with 
amazing  rapidity;  other  banks  came  under  their  control  and  their 
agents  were  everywhere.  Their  later  successes  in  selling  bonds  were 
a  revelation  to  older-fashioned  brokers.  On  the  day  that  Richmond 
fell  the  “financier  of  the  Civil  War”  marked  out  the  lines  of  a  pre¬ 
tentious  country  house  that  was  to  cost  a  million  dollars  and  to  be¬ 
come  a  show  place  of  America,  where  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury, 


36 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Presidents,  and  great  men  from  every  walk  of  life  were  to  find  a  wel¬ 
come  release  from  their  cares.  “As  rich  as  Jay  Cooke”  had  become 
a  common  saying  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific.  The  gigantic 
war  had  been  no  ill  wind  to  the  money-teller  of  1861. 

In  certain  aspects  Jay  Cooke  may  be  reckoned  the  first  modern 
American.  He  was  the  first  to  understand  the  psychology  of  mass 
salesmanship.  It  was  his  fertile  brain  that  created  the  syndicate 
and  conceived  and  executed  the  modern  American  “drive.”  Under 
his  bland  deacon-like  exterior  was  the  mind  of  a  realist.  He  assumed 
that  every  man  has  his  price,  but  he  knew  that  few  men  like  to 
acknowledge  the  fact  even  to  themselves;  so  he  was  at  immense 
pains  to  cover  our  poor  human  nakedness  with  generous  profes¬ 
sions.  If  he  were  to  lure  dollars  from  old  stockings  in  remote  chim¬ 
ney-corners  he  must  “sell”  patriotism  to  his  fellow  Americans;  and 
to  do  that  successfully  he  must  manufacture  a  militant  public 
opinion.  The  soldier  at  the  front,  he  announced  in  a  flood  of  ad¬ 
vertisements,  must  be  supported  at  the  rear.  It  was  every  loyal 
American’s  war,  and  patriotism  demanded  that  idle  dollars — in 
greenbacks — should  be  lent  to  the  boys  in  blue,  and  a  grateful 
government  would  return  them,  both  principal  and  interest,  in 
gold.  To  induce  slacker  dollars  to  become  fighting  dollars  he  placed 
his  agents  in  every  neighborhood,  in  newspaper  offices,  in  banks,  in 
pulpits — patriotic  forerunners  of  the  “one-minute  men”  of  later 
drives.  They  also  served  their  country,  he  pointed  out,  who  sold 
government  bonds  on  commission.  He  subsidized  the  press  with  a 
lavish  hand,  not  only  the  metropolitan  dailies  but  the  obscurest 
country  weeklies.  He  employed  an  army  of  hack-writers  to  pre¬ 
pare  syndicated  matter  and  he  scattered  paying  copy  broadcast. 
His  “hired  friends”  were  everywhere.  In  a  hundred  delicate  ways 
he  showed  his  appreciation  of  patriotic  cooperation  in  the  bond- 
sales — gifts  of  trout  caught  with  his  own  hand,  baskets  of  fruit  from 
his  own  garden.  He  bought  the  pressings  of  whole  vineyards  and 
cases  of  wine  flowed  in  an  endless  stream  to  strategic  publicity- 
points.  Rival  brokers  hinted  that  he  was  debauching  the  press,  but 
the  army  of  greenbacks  marching  to  the  front  was  his  reply.  It  all 
cost  a  pretty  penny,  but  the  government  was  liberal  with  commis¬ 
sions  and  when  all  expenses  were  deducted  perhaps  two  millions 
of  profits  remained  in  the  vaults  of  the  firm,  to  be  added  to  the 
many  other  millions  which  the  prestige  of  the  government  agency 
with  its  free  advertising  brought  in  its  train. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


37 


With  such  prestige  and  with  the  greatest  fluid  resources  as  yet 
accumulated  by  any  American,  it  was  inevitable  that  the  Roths¬ 
child  of  the  North  should  play  a  bold  part  in  the  speculations  of 
the  Gilded  Age.  Jay  Cooke  vastly  enjoyed  the  game  and  it  was 
idle  to  expect  him  to  sit  back  quietly  when  others  were  playing 
for  high  stakes.  In  those  halcyon  days  promoters  were  as  thick  as 
flies  about  a  dead  carcass;  wild-cat  railroads  had  succeeded  wild¬ 
cat  banks  as  short-cuts  to  wealth;  and  in  an  unlucky  moment  Jay 
Cooke  was  tempted.  He  had  expected  to  be  made  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  by  President  Grant,  but  failing  of  appointment  in 
spite  of  countless  boxes  of  twenty-five-cent  cigars  provided  for  the 
General’s  pleasure,  he  determined  to  back  the  Northern  Pacific 
Railway  enterprise.  The  company  had  been  chartered  in  July, 
1864,  receiving  a  congressional  grant  of  12,800  acres  of  public  land 
for  every  mile  of  track  laid  in  the  states,  and  double  that  amount 
in  the  territories.  As  the  proposed  line  would  run  almost  entirely 
through  territories  the  grand  total  was  reckoned  at  47,360,000 
acres.9  Early  land-sales  were  at  the  rate  of  $6  an  acre.  At  such 
valuation  the  prospective  value  of  the  grant  through  the  terri¬ 
tories  was  $153,600  for  every  mile  of  track,  yet  in  portions  of  an 
earlier  line  absorbed  by  the  company  the  road  had  been  built  for 
$8,225  a  miR,  and  a  stretch  of  112  miles  at  the  rate  of  $9,500. 10 
To  be  sure  there  were  great  stretches  of  unsalable  land,  but  in 
compensation  the  company  was  free  to  run  its  surveys  so  as  to 
embrace  choice  mineral  deposits,  virgin  timber,  water-power,  and 
town  sites. 

As  Jay  Cooke  contemplated  the  possibilities  his  buoyant  tem¬ 
perament  took  fire,  and  he  dreamed  of  empire-building.  He  quickly 
rationalized  the  project  into  a  great  patriotic  undertaking  that 
would  carry  the  blessings  of  civilization  to  the  farthest  Northwest. 
He  would  lay  open  to  the  poor  man  the  rich  wheat  lands  of  the 
Dakotas,  the  mineral  wealth  of  the  Rockies,  the  vast  timber  re¬ 
sources  of  the  Puget  Sound  territory.  He  would  annex  western 
Canada  by  benevolent  absorption.  It  was  a  dream  worthy  of  the 
Gilded  Age  and  Jay  Cooke  was  chief  amongst  the  Beriah  Sellerses 
of  the  day.  He  threw  himself  into  the  project  with  boundless  op¬ 
timism,  and  proved  again  his  right  to  be  called  a  great  financier. 
He  proposed  to  sell  the  Northern  Pacific  as  he  had  sold  govern- 

9  See  Ibid..,  Vol.  II,  pp.  97-98. 

10  C.  E.  Russell,  Stories  of  Great  Railroads,  p.  19. 


38 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ment  bonds.  He  had  learned  that  to  catch  the  little  fish  he  must 
first  catch  the  big  fish,  for  the  shilling  is  timid  till  the  pound  shows 
the  way.  He  must  create  confidence,  cost  what  it  would,  and  to 
that  end  he  opened  a  huge  pool  and  created  a  special  syndicate. 
Stocks,  jobs,  cash,  influence,  were  distributed  judiciously  where 
they  would  do  good.  In  the  language  of  stock-jobbing  much 
“sweetening”  was  used.11  And  there  was  need  of  much  “sweeten¬ 
ing,”  for  the  times  were  inauspicious.  Jay  Cooke  drove  the  pub¬ 
licity  work  with  his  old  vigor,  but  sales  were  slow,  and  as  the  great 
patriotic  venture  showed  signs  of  lagging  he  turned  for  help  to  a 
sympathetic  government. 

His  engineer  had  made  a  careful  estimate  of  the  prospective  cost 
of  the  road,  which  including  rolling-stock,  terminals,  a  branch  line 
to  Portland,  and  interest  on  bonds  during  the  construction,  came 
to  $42,638  a  mile  for  the  entire  line.12  But  the  financier  was  not 
satisfied  “with  the  magnificent  property  the  government  has  given 
us,  and  made  ready  to  buy  from  Congress  a  revision  of  the  terms 
of  the  charter,  which  amongst  other  things  would  widen  the  land- 
grant  belt  through  the  territories  to  120  miles,  convey  a  second 
right-of-way  zone  from  the  Rocky  Mountains  to  the  Pacific,  and 
permit  the  company  to  hypothecate  the  whole  before  the  terms  of 
the  contract  were  fulfilled.  It  was  an  audacious  proposal  even  to 
a  generation  used  to  audacious  proposals.  There  was  bitter  opposi¬ 
tion,  for  the  rumblings  of  the  Credit  M obilier  scandal  were  already 
disturbing  the  halls  of  Congress;  but  his  lobbyists  used  “the 
company’s  money  freely”  to  bring  in  the  common  breed  of  Con¬ 
gressmen,  and  the  Cooke  brothers  employed  their  well-practiced 
skill  to  take  care  of  such  important  persons  as  Speaker  Blaine  of 
the  House,  Vice-President  Colfax  of  the  Senate,  and  President 
Grant.  The  matter  was  handled  with  great  delicacy  in  the  case 
of  the  latter— “the  glorious  honest  man,”  the  banker  called  him. 
“He  sent  a  fishing-rod  and  creel  to  the  President’s  little  son  Jesse, 
for  which  he  was  duly  thanked  in  a  childish  hand.”  He  invited 


11  The  list  of  his  “beneficiaries,”  some  of  whom  were  drawn  in  delicately  and  some 

realistically,  included,  according  to  his  biographer,  Vice-President  Colfax,  Speaker 
Blaine  and  James  A.  Garfield  ot  the  House,  Governor  Rutherford  B.  Hayes  of  Ohio 
and  Governor  Geary  of  Pennsylvania,  General  Horace  Porter,  President  Grant's 
Pf^ar  Tutarf\vcn|  t0rs  J°mn  Sherma">  William  Windom,  and  Ben  Wade,  Dele- 
H,  nr  JU  ‘)eR°f  YaS,hl"ffon  1  er"t0ry’  P,ayard  Tayl°r-  Amongst  the  papers  were 
,he  7>'W'  ,h‘  F”»< 

12  See  Oberholtzer,  Vol.  II,  p.  154. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


39 


the  General  to  a  day’s  fishing-trip,  and  together  the  heroes  whipped 
the  trout  stream  in  the  most  charming  comradeship.  “It  may  be 
thought,’’  remarks  his  biographer,  “that  such  machinations  were 
unbecoming  in  a  man  of  Mr.  Cooke’s  moral  dimensions.”  13  But 
surely  delicate  “machinations”  were  not  unbecoming  to  such 
“moral  dimensions.”  “We  let  the  other  side  do  most  of  the  talk¬ 
ing,”  wrote  the  deacon-like  Henry  Cooke,  who  kept  the  Sabbath 
as  strictly  as  his  brother,  “and  we  do  the  voting.”  The  President’s 
cabinet  was  bitterly  divided  on  the  issue,  but  wheels  turn  on  well- 
greased  axles  and  delicate  attentions  have  their  reward.  The  bill 
was  signed  and  the  building  of  the  Northwest  empire  could  go 
forward. 

Unfortunately,  however,  black  days  were  pressing  hard  on  the 
great  success.  The  money  of  the  company  ran  in  fructifying 
streams  through  Europe  and  America  but  the  expected  crop  was 
short.  Thirty  papers  were  subsidized  in  Germany;  agents  lived  in 
ducal  palaces;  commissions,  stocks,  bonuses,  were  plowed  in  for 
manure;  but  the  crop  of  bond-sales  was  still  scanty.  Ugly  rumors 
were  abroad.  There  was  talk  of  a  congressional  investigation,  and 
wdien  General  Banks  offered  a  resolution  of  inquiry  Jay  Cooke  was 
hurt  to  the  quick.  An  investigation  he  regarded  as  no  other  than 
persecution  of  legitimate  business,  and  he  wrote  to  his  brother: 
“He  ought  to  be  expelled  from  Congress  for  such  outrageous  at¬ 
tacks  upon  the  great  interests  of  the  country.  ...  If  I  get  at  him 
I  will  give  him  a  piece  of  my  mind,  and  no  mistake,  for  his  im¬ 
pertinence  and  foolishness.”14  Then  the  Credit  Mobilier  scandal 
broke  and  in  a  panic  he  wrote  to  Henry  Cooke  denouncing  the  pro¬ 
posal  to  stop  payment  on  the  interest-coupons  of  the  Union  Pacific. 

Now  I  want  you  to  go  to  the  Attorney  General  at  once  and  tell  him  how 
wrong  this  whole  procedure  is.  This  whole  persecution  of  the  Union 
Pacific  is  nonsense,  and  is  damaging  our  credit  abroad.  If  the  government 
sets  the  example  of  enjoining  the  payment  of  interest  coupons,  who  will 
buy  a  bond  abroad?  The  whole  thing  is  wrong,  ill  advised  and  scandalous. 
.  .  .  Williams  ought  to  make  a  public  apology  for  such  an  attack  and 
instruct  the  lawyers  to  desist  from  anything  of  the  kind.  The  bonds  are 
long  since  in  the  hands  of  innocent  holders,  and,  if  they  were  not,  they 
could  never  reach  them  in  this  way.  Some  wily  speculators  have  put  the 
idea  into  the  heads  of  the  government  lawyers  and  they,  without  knowing 
anything  of  its  effect  upon  business,  have  made  this  attack.  It  will  damage 
us  hundreds  of  millions  unless  withdrawn  at  once.  No  man  of  sense 

14  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  322. 


13  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  176. 


40 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


would  buy  a  railroad  bond  or  anything  else  in  this  country  if  such  legal 
proceedings  are  to  be  permitted  under  the  sanction  of  the  highest  officer 
of  the  government.15 

Jay  Cooke’s  ethics  were  simple.  Whatever  helped  bond-sales  was 
patriotic  and  right;  whatever  hurt  them  was  wicked  and  immoral. 
Let  government  take  care  of  business  and  business  will  take  care 
of  the  country.  That  the  newspapers  could  not  see  this  great 
truth,  but  often  indulged  in  wild  demagoguery,  was  painful  to  one 
who  had  been  generous  to  them.  “It  is  too  bad,”  he  wrote  of  a 
certain  attack,  “that  these  newspapers  are  permitted  by  the  law 
thus  to  interfere  with  great  public  works.”16  But  the  black  days 
were  at  hand.  The  Credit  Mobilier  scandal  was  a  whirlwind  reaped 
from  the  sowings  of  the  Gilded  Age.  With  the  outbreak  of  the 
Franco-Prussian  war  bond-sales  stopped  short  in  Europe  and  the 
firm  of  Jay  Cooke  and  Company  was  broken.  September  18,  1873, 
the  New  York  house  suspended  payment;  the  house  of  cards  tum¬ 
bled  to  pieces;  and  a  panic  swept  the  country.  The  crash  was  as 
spectacular  as  the  rise;  it  had  been  built  on  credit  and  when  credit 
was  shaken  it  fell. 

Because  he  had  amassed  a  great  fortune  Jay  Cooke  was  regarded 
by  his  fellow  Americans  as  an  intelligent  man  whose  opinions  were 
entitled  to  heedful  consideration.  A  national  figure  in  finance  must 
become  a  national  figure  in  the  public  councils;  and  this  added 
function  he  assumed  with  the' utmost  seriousness.  As  the  power 
behind  the  United  States  Treasury  he  regarded  himself  as  re¬ 
sponsible  for  the  program  of  the  Treasury;  and  he  made  use  of  his 
immense  publicity-machine  to  shape  public  opinion  in  regard  to 
taxation,  funding,  and  the  currency.  His  “views”  of  those  ques¬ 
tions  were  as  simple  as  a  child’s  primer.  In  brief  they  were:  no 
taxes  for  the  extinction  of  the  debt;  consolidate  the  debt  and  fund 
it  in  a  form  attractive  to  capital;  retire  the  greenbacks  and  return 
at  once  to  specie  payments.  Like  others  who  had  made  money  out 
of  the  war  he  did  not  take  kindly  to  the  idea  of  returning  a  part  of 
it  in  taxes  to  pay  off  a  debt  that  was  highly  profitable  to  him  as  a 
broker  and  banker.  The  men  of  ’65  had  fought  and  suffered  to 
secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  their  posterity,  and  it  was  only 
fair  that  posterity  should  help  pay  the  bills.  To  popularize  this 
pregnant  thought  he  subsidized  a  pamphlet  contributed  by  one  of 
his  hack-writers,  entitled  Our  National  Debt  a  National  Blessing; 

18  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  409.  is  ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  411. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


41 


but  the  Hamiltonian  argument  overshot  the  mark  and  aroused 
bitter  opposition.  In  this  as  in  his  attitude  towards  currency- 
contraction  and  funding  he  was  thinking  exclusively  in  terms  of 
the  money-lender.  Very  likely  he  was  probably  not  so  much  self- 
seeking  as  ignorant.  Intellectually  he  was  poverty-stricken  and 
outside  the  narrow  realm  of  brokerage  and  banking  he  was  only  a 
child.  He  read  nothing,  thought  little  and  was  unconcerned  with 
social  or  economic  principles.  His  business  life  was  regulated  by  a 
set  of  ready-made  formulas,  in  which  ideas  played  no  part.  Wil¬ 
liam  Cullen  Bryant  rightly  judged  him  in  the  following  comment: 

We  counsel  Mr.  Jay  Cooke  in  all  good  will,  not  to  abandon  his  proper 
vocation  of  dealing  in  stocks  and  government  securities,  for  the  sake  of 
giving  lectures  on  political  economy — a  subject  which  he  does  not  under¬ 
stand.  We  do  not  say  that  he  might  not  understand  it  if  he  had  given  it 
his  attention,  but  that  he  has  evidently  never  done,  and  knows  no  more 
of  the  matter  than  Red  Jacket  knew  of  Greek.  We  advise  all  who  have  any 
money  to  invest  to  take  Mr.  Jay  Cooke’s  seven-thirty  bonds,  and  eschew 
his  political  economy.  His  seven-thirties  are  first  rate,  his  political  econ¬ 
omy  is  a  tissue  of  mistakes.17 

Any  program  that  lay  outside  the  bounds  of  his  formulas  he 
regarded  as  dangerous  radicalism,  and  any  policy  that  threatened 
to  reduce  his  commissions  he  regarded  as  unchristian.  He  bitterly 
disliked  Secretary  Boutwell  of  the  Treasury,  who  rejected  his 
guidance,  and  he  wrote  to  his  brother: 

I  observe  .  .  .  that  Boutwell  is  to  leave  the  Treasury.  I  think  that  if 
he  does  not  propose  to  do  any  better  than  he  has  in  the  past  it  will  be  a 
grand  move  for  Grant  to  put  some  more  practical  person  in  his  place. 
A  man  who  has  no  more  breadth  of  thought  .  .  .  and  no  more  spunk  than 
to  let  the  country  drift  along  without  even  an  attempt  at  funding  the  debt, 
and  who  insists  upon  keeping  up  an  enormous  taxation  for  the  foolish 
object  of  paying  off  rapidly  a  debt  that  no  one  wants  paid  off,  excepting 
gradually,  it  will  be  a  great  benefit  to  have  replaced  by  some  one  who 
will  take  an  opposite  course.18 

A  month  later  one  of  the  causes  of  the  hostility  was  suggested  by  a 
member  of  the  firm: 

All  of  our  transactions  with  Boutwell  have  shown  conclusively  that  he 
will  never  permit  one  dollar  to  be  made  out  of  the  business  of  the  I  reasury, 
if  he  can  possibly  prevent  it.  With  all  his  friendly  feelings  I  cannot  re¬ 
member  a  single  dollar  that  we  have  made  directly  or  indirectly  out  of 
his  administration  of  the  Treasury,  .  .  -19 

17  Ibid.,  Vol.  1,  pp.  643-644-  18  Ibid->  Vo1-  n>  PP-  267-268. 

19  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  269. 


42 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Against  the  Greenback  movement  his  hostility  was  bitter.  He 
regarded  it  as  an  attempt  to  repudiate  the  “plighted  faith”  of  the 
nation,  and  in  1867  he  issued  a  pamphlet,  written  to  order,  aimed 
at  combating  the  movement.  In  the  opinion  of  a  subsidized  ad¬ 
mirer  it  was  “able,  unanswerable  and  timely,”  calculated  to  do 
immense  good  in  a  country  where  universal  suffrage  encourages  the 
“attempts  of  demagogues  to  excite  the  poor  against  the  rich,  labor 
against  capital,  and  all  who  haven’t  money  against  the  banks  who 
have  it.”  20  How  deeply  the  members  of  the  firm  felt  in  presence  of 
any  threat  to  the  money  interests  is  suggested  in  a  letter  from 
Henry  Cooke  of  October  12,  1867. 

You  know  how  I  have  felt  for  a  long  time  past  in  regard  to  the  course 
of  the  ultra  infidelic  radicals  like  Wade,  Sumner,  Stevens,  et  id  omne  genus. 
T.  hey  were  dragging  the  Republican  party  into  all  sorts  of  isms  and  ex¬ 
tremes.  Their  policy  was  one  of  bitterness,  hate,  and  wild  agrarianism 
without  a  single  Christian  principle  to  give  it  consistency,  except  the  sole 
idea  of  universal  suffrage.  .  .  .  These  reckless  demagogues  have  had  their 
day  and  the  time  has  come  for  wiser  counsels.  With  Wade  uttering  agrarian 
doctrines  in  Kansas  and  fanning  the  flame  of  vulgar  preiudices,  trying 
to  array  labor  against  capital  and  pandering  to  the  basest  passions;  with 
Butler  urging  wholesale  conscription  throughout  the  South  and  wholesale 
repudiation  throughout  the  North  so  far  as  the  national  debt  is  con¬ 
cerned;  with  Stevens  joining  hands  with  the  traitor  Vallandigham  and 
advocating  the  idea  of  a  flood  of  irredeemable  paper  money  sufficient  in 
volume  to  drown  the  whole  country;  with  Pomeroy  and  Wade  and  Sprague 
and  a  host  of  others  clamoring  for  the  unsexing  of  woman  and  putting  the 
ballot  in  her  hand  .  .  .  what  wonder  it  is  that  the  accumulated  load  was 
too  heavy  for  any  party  to  carry  and  that  it  broke  down  under  it? 21 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  spectacular  career  of  Jay  Cooke 
quite  dazzled  his  contemporary  fellow  citizens.  Nothing  like  it  had 
before  appeared  in  America.  The  greatest  salesman  that  the  rising 
middle  class  had  yet  produced,  a  financier  who  understood  the 
psychology  of  mass  appeal,  a  propagandist  of  truly  heroic  propor¬ 
tions,  he  was  reckoned  no  other  than  a  magician  by  all  the  lesser 
money-grabbers  of  the  Gilded  Age.  From  nothing  he  built  up  a 
vast  fortune.  Scrupulous  in  all  religious  duties,  a  kind  husband, 
a  generous  friend,  benevolent  in  all  worthy  charities,  simple  and 
democratic  in  his  tastes,  ardently  patriotic,  uncreative  and  unin- 
tellectual,  he  exemplified  all  the  substantial  middle-class  virtues 
of  a  people  newly  given  to  the  worship  of  a  sterile  money  economy. 

20  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  56  note.  21  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  28. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


43 


To  call  him  a  vulgarian  and  the  chronicle  of  his  life  nauseous  would 
scarcely  be  charitable.  The  record  of  his  days  has  been  laid  before 
us,  naked  and  mean,  by  his  biographer,  who  has  done  his  best  to 
construct  a  hero  from  the  poor  materials.  No  doubt  he  was  a  hero 
of  his  generation — and  perhaps  of  ours  also. 

3 

CHARLES  A.  DANA 

If  General  Grant  and  Jay  Cooke  were  naive  heroes,  ignorant 
as  the  generation  that  delighted  to  honor  them,  Charles  A.  Dana, 
the  journalist  of  the  Gilded  Age,  was  a  disillusioned  intellectual 
who  after  immersing  himself  in  the  golden  dreams  of  the  forties, 
put  away  all  Utopian  hopes  and  made  use  of  his  brains  to  serve 
himself.  Disappointed  with  idealism,  he  turned  materialist  and 
dedicated  to  capitalistic  exploitation  the  abilities  that  before  had 
been  given  to  a  venture  in  cooperative  living.  A  brilliant  fellow, 
playing  the  new  game  in  Gilded  Age  fashion  and  winning  a  brilliant 
success,  he  was  a  conspicuous  victim  of  the  bankruptcy  of  idealism 
that  is  the  price  of  all  wars,  and  his  later  triumph  as  editor  of  the 
New  York  Sun  only  served  to  measure  the  greatness  of  his  fall. 
The  career  of  Dana  is  a  cynical  commentary  on  the  changing  spirit 
of  America  from  the  days  of  Brook  Farm  to  the  days  of  Mark 
Hanna. 

A  child  of  the  Puritan  frontier,  Dana  early  crossed  over  into  New 
York  State  and  became  a  shop-boy  in  the  backwoods  village  of 
Buffalo  at  a  time  when  the  Indian  trade  was  important  enough  to 
justify  him  in  learning  Algonquin.  In  these  early  manhood  days 
he  was  living  in  the  midst  of  the  coonskin  democracy,  and  falling 
in  with  the  frontier  spirit  he  became  an  ardent  Jacksonian.  He 
was  eager  for  an  education  and  quitting  Buffalo  he  went  to  Har¬ 
vard,  but  his  eyes  failing  him  after  two  years,  he  joined  the  Brook 
Farm  community  where  he  speedily  became  one  of  the  chief  coun¬ 
selors,  and  was  deeply  concerned  for  the  success  of  the  experiment. 
In  those  generous  years  he  was  a  militant  idealist,  widely  read  in 
socialist  literature  and  warmly  espousing  associationism  as  a  cure 
for  the  evils  of  competition.  Upon  quitting  Brook  Farm  after  the 
burning  of  the  Phalanstery  he  joined  Greeley  and  for  fifteen  years 
was  one  of  the  directing  minds  on  the  Tribune.  In  1848  he  went 
abroad  as  foreign  correspondent,  saw  much  of  the  revolutions  of 


44 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


that  great  year,  studied  the  temper  of  the  French  and  German 
people,  analyzed  the  popular  leaders  and  programs  with  singular 
acuteness,  and  found  his  sympathies  warmly  enlisted  in  the  cause 
of  the  lower  classes.  He  was  then  thirty-nine,  and  his  active  mind 
had  gathered  up  all  the  diverse  radicalisms — Jacksonian,  Utopian, 
European  proletarian — of  his  revolutionary  generation.  Shrewdly 
observant  and  with  a  sensitive  social  conscience,  he  was  amply 
equipped  to  become  such  another  critic  of  the  Industrial  Revolu¬ 
tion  as  England  had  bred  from  its  bitter  experience. 

But  the  war  intervened,  and  after  the  war  a  dun  twilight  gath¬ 
ered  about  the  hopes  of  the  forties.  Few  generous  enthusiasms 
survived  those  years  of  struggle  and  Dana  in  his  editorial  rooms 
underwent  successive  changes  of  heart.  The  realist  slowly  dis¬ 
possessed  the  idealist  and  then  the  cynic  swallowed  up  the  realist. 
The  last  forty  years  of  his  life  were  spent  undoing  the  work  of  his 
earlier  years.  His  political  philosophy  went  to  pieces  and  the  policy 
of  the  Sun  became  a  mere  hodge-podge  of  jingo  programs,  an  irra¬ 
tional  bundle  of  personal  prejudices  and  private  interests.  His 
reaction  from  associationism  carried  him  over  to  a  stark  and 
ruthless  individualism.  He  saw  all  about  him  the  strong  and  ca¬ 
pable  as  the  masters  of  the  earth,  with  social  justice  an  outcast  and 
mendicant  begging  from  house  to  house.  The  millennium  to  which 
belongs  the  ideal  of  social  democracy  which  he  had  earlier  served, 
he  could  no  longer  make  out  from  any  present  bend  in  the  road, 
and  putting  away  his  faith  he  went  with  the  masters.  The  reaction 
began  during  the  Tribune  days  with  his  espousal  of  the  American 
System — the  first  outcropping  of  the  middle-class  qualities  of  his 
mind — and  thereafter  he  drifted  steadily  to  the  right  and  the 
Dismal  Swamp  of  exploitation.  With  augmenting  wealth  and  the 
sense  of  power  that  came  from  the  great  success  of  the  Sun  he 
became  the  apologist  and  defender  of  capitalism,  phrasing  with 
clever  vivacity  all  the  sophistries  of  Gilded  Age  argument.  Pro¬ 
fessing  to  be  a  Democrat,  he  made  much  of  states  rights  and  gov¬ 
ernmental  laissez  faire.  He  would  countenance  no  interference 
with  the  principle  of  free  competition,  but  would  reduce  the  gov¬ 
ernment  to  the  role  of  policeman  to  keep  the  peace.  He  professed 
to  believe  that  the  dry  bones  of  Manchesterism  were  a  living 
democratic  faith.  He  ridiculed  the  proposal  for  pure-food  legisla¬ 
tion,  civil  service  reform,  the  control  of  monopolies,  professing 
to  see  in  every  such  move  the  insidious  beginnings  of  an  un-Ameri- 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


45 


can  bureaucracy.  No  social  pretext  justified  in  his  eyes  the  regula¬ 
tion  of  business  enterprise.  Centralization  of  economic  power  he 
accepted  as  in  the  nature  of  things,  and  the  popular  denunciation 
of  trusts  he  called  “the  greatest  humbug  of  the  hour.”  His  argu¬ 
ment  was  simple  and  to  the  Gilded  Age  wholly  satisfactory. 

The  objects  of  trade  being  to  buy  as  cheap  as  possible,  to  sell  as  dear  as 
possible,  and  to  get  control  of  the  market  as  far  as  possible,  the  formation 
fot  these  purposes  of  these  gigantic  and  widely  extended  partnerships  is 
just  as  natural  and  regular  as  the  partnership  of  two  shoemakers  or  of 
two  blacksmiths.22 

Thus  far  Dana  must  be  reckoned  a  belated  disciple  of  the 
Manchester  school.  The  days  of  transcendental  and  Utopian 
idealism  were  past  and  he  knew  it.  The  Gilded  Age  had  traveled 
far  from  such  naive  enthusiasrps  and  it  was  time  to  face  reality. 
But  his  realism  was  only  a  gesture  to  cover  his  surrender  to  capital¬ 
ism.  It  was  not  honest.  When  his  principle  of  individualism  trod 
on  his  own  toes  he  threw  it  aside  with  no  compunctions.  He  was 
a  laissez-faire  Democrat  only  when  a  free  field  favored  business, 
but  when  business  desired  government  assistance  he  made  no 
scruple  to  turn  Whig.  Accepting  the  principle  of  private  exploita¬ 
tion  under  the  drive  of  the  acquisitive  instinct,  and  content  with 
the  social  ethics  of  Captain  Kidd,  he  would  weaken  government 
or  strengthen  government  as  business  profits  dictated.  In  these 
later  years  he  became  cynically  class-conscious,  while  professing 
to  deny  the  existence  of  classes.  He  would  disarm  the  government 
as  against  the  capitalist,  but  he  would  triple-arm  it  against  the 
farmer  and  workingman.  He  was  shrill  in  his  demands  for  a  high 
protective  tariff  for  the  manufacturers,  huge  grants  of  public  lands 
for  speculative  railway  companies,  and  a  monetary  system  in  the 
control  of  the  bankers.  But  for  the  economic  demands  of  the  wes¬ 
tern  farmers  he  had  only  contempt— the  agrarians  were  flying  in  the 
face  of  economic  law  as  economic  law  was  understood  by  the  high 
priests  of  capitalism.  When  he  talked  about  honest  money  he 
laid  his  brains  on  the  shelf.  He  would  have  no  other  money  than 
the  gold  standard,  and  to  achieve  that  object  he  never  suffered 
candor  to  weaken  his  plea.  He  bitterly  opposed  the  income  tax 
and  when  the  Democratic  platform  of  1896  suggested  the  reorgan¬ 
ization  of  the  Supreme  Court  to  reverse  the  decision  on  its  con- 

22  See  James  Harrison  Wilson,  The  Life  of  Charles  A .  Dana ,  p.  479* 


46 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


stitutionality,  he  turned  demagogue  and  indulged  in  talk  about 
“the  destruction  of  the  independence  of  the  judiciary.”  When  it 
was  proposed  that  the  railways  be  nationalized  he  protested  that 
he  could  not  “imagine  anything  more  absurd,  unpatriotic,  and 
dangerous” — on  the  assumption  no  doubt  that  railways  existed 
to  pay  dividends  on  their  stock.  “Still  more  alarming”  to  him 
was  the  “clearly  implied  approval  of  lawless  violence  contained 
in  the  denunciation  of  what  is  denominated  in  the  [Democratic] 
platform  ‘government  by  injunction.’  Veiled  in  the  language  of 
moderation,  the  wild  light  of  anarchy  shines  through.”  23  He 
urged  upon  government  the  necessity  of  holding  the  labor  unions 
in  strict  control,  he  was  eloquent  in  defense  of  the  individual 
laborer’s  sacred  right  of  “free  contract,”  and  he  was  loud  in  ap¬ 
plause  of  President  Cleveland’s  lawless  suppression  of  the  Pull¬ 
man  strike.  When  it  came  to  Bryan  and  Populism  he  lost  his 
head  and  became  quite  maudlin. 

Dana  was  no  fool  to  be  deceived  by  his  own  insincerity.  On  the 
contrary  he  was  highly  intelligent  and  knew  perfectly  well  what 
he  was  about.  Having  gone  over  to  capitalism,  he  would  fight  its 
battles  with  whatever  weapons  came  to  hand,  and  like  a  son  of 
New  England  he  would  cover  his  breast  with  a  shield  of  morality. 
He  became  the  chief  journalistic  exponent  of  the  “lawless  vio¬ 
lence”  he  was  fond  of  attributing  to  other  social  classes.  He  turned 
into  a  flaming  jingo  imperialist,  talked  patriotically  about  “ade¬ 
quate”  coast  defenses,  demanded  a  great  navy,  and  was  the  loud¬ 
est  spokesman  of  the  blowsy  doctrine  of  “Manifest  Destiny.”  He 
was  always  peering  through  his  glasses  to  discover  some  fresh 
territory  to  annex — Haiti,  Cuba,  Mexico — and  so  late  as  1887 
he  was  still  calling  for  the  annexation  of  Canada.  Naturally  he 
approved  President  Cleveland’s  Venezuelan  proclamation  and  he 
probably  would  have  enjoyed  a  tussle  with  the  British  lion.  In 
his  morality  he  was  quite  as  truculent  as  in  his  patriotism  and  in 
his  advocacy  of  capitalism.  Perhaps  it  was  a  salve  to  a  conscience 
that  could  not  have  been  easy.  He  hated  political  corruption  and 
he  attacked  the  sordid  looting  that  marked  President  Grant’s 
administration  with  gusto.  He  took  sardonic  delight  in  giving  the 
widest  publicity  to  the  classic  corruptionist  phrase  of  the  day — 
“He  understands  addition,  division,  and  silence.”  He  erected  into 
a  fetish  the  cry  “Turn  the  rascals  out!”  yet  while  helping  to  pry 

**  See  Ibid.,  p.  491. 


THE  AMERICAN  SCENE 


47 


loose  one  set  of  rascals  from  their  spoils  he  was  busily  providing 
another  set  with  his  demand  for  subsidies  and  tariffs.  It  was  a 
situation  that  must  have  amused  the  cynical  Dana.  He  had  long 
since  left  off  worrying  about  the  damned  human  race.  It  was  more 
sensible  to  pile  up  one’s  plate  at  the  barbecue  and  send  the  bill  to 
the  American  people.  He  had  made  a  huge  success  and  what  mat¬ 
tered  it  if  his  old  Brook  Farm  associates,  Ripley  and  Curtis,  no 
longer  spoke  to  him  when  they  met? 


CHAPTER  II 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

It  was  in  the  seventies  that  good  taste  reached  its  lowest  ebb. 
Not  only  in  America,  but  in  England  as  well,  where  rebels  like 
William  Morris  were  contemptuously  rejecting  a  machine  civiliza¬ 
tion.  A  veritable  debacle  of  the  arts  was  in  process,  the  lesser  as 
well  as  the  greater,  in  New  York  and  Boston  as  well  as  in  Chicago 
and  San  Francisco,  from  which  literature  could  not  wholly  escape; 
and  that  debacle  was  an  expression  of  profound  changes  taking 
place  at  the  bases  of  society.  The  dignified  culture  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  that  hitherto  had  been  a  conserving  and  creative  influence 
throughout  the  Jeffersonian  revolution,  was  at  last  breaking  up. 
The  disruptive  forces  that  swept  out  of  the  great  West,  bringing 
the  frontier  spirit  to  every  threshold,  and  the  factory  economy  that 
displaced  the  wares  of  the  craftsman  with  the  products  of  the 
machine,  were  destroying  that  earlier  culture  and  providing  no 
adequate  substitute.  Distinction  of  manners  and  dress  was  gone, 
dignity  and  repose  were  gone,  traditional  standards  were  gone;  and 
in  their  stead  a  bumptious  restlessness,  a  straining  for  originality 
and  individuality  that  exuded  in  a  shoddy  and  meaningless  gro¬ 
tesque.  It  was  not  without  justification  that  Godkin  contemptu¬ 
ously  applied  the  phrase,  “a  chromo  civilization,”  to  the  works  of 
that  singular  generation  dwelling  between  worlds,  the  one  dead,  the 
other  seeming  powerless  to  be  born. 

How  much  was  lost  in  the  break-up  of  the  excellent  culture  of  the 
eighteenth  century  the  children  of  the  seventies  neither  knew  nor 
cared.  Generations  of  growth  had  gone  to  its  shaping.  It  had  been 
formed  by  the  needs  of  men  and  women  conscious  of  the  ties  that 
linked  them  with  the  past.  It  was  bound  back  upon  the  rich  cul¬ 
tural  life  of  medieval  times,  and  in  the  aristocratic  eighteenth 
century  it  had  come  to  flower  in  forms  of  fine  distinction  and 
dignity.  Touch  that  century  on  any  side— dress,  architecture,  furni¬ 
ture,  manners,  letters  and  the  same  note  of  refinement,  of  grace, 
of  balanced  harmonious  form,  is  everywhere  evident.  The  culture 
of  the  times  of  the  Coffee  House  Wits  was  all  of  a  piece,  held  to- 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


49 


gether  by  an  inner  pervasive  unity.  The  formality  of  the  wig  and 
the  heroic  couplet  was  symbolic  of  a  generation  that  loved  dignity, 
and  the  refinement  of  the  Chippendale  sideboard,  wrought  in 
slender  Honduras  mahogany,  was  the  expression  of  a  society  that 
cultivated  the  graces  of  life.  But  when  the  tie-wig  and  smallclothes 
disappeared  before  the  social  revolutions  of  the  end  of  the  century, 
when  the  gentleman  was  pushed  from  his  place  by  the  banker  and 
manufacturer,  and  broadcloth  gave  way  to  tweeds,  the  culture  of 
the  eighteenth  century  was  doomed;  and  until  another  culture 
should  impose  its  standards  upon  society  and  reestablish  an  inner 
spiritual  unity,  there  would  be  only  the  welter  of  an  unlovely  tran¬ 
sition. 

In  no  other  field  is  the  sprawling  formlessness  of  the  seventies 
more  grotesquely  suggested  than  in  its  architecture  and  in  interior 
decoration,  which  is  a  lesser  form  of  architecture.  Upon  the  build¬ 
ings  of  the  times  the  hallmark  of  the  Gilded  Age  is  stamped  in 
gaudy  colors.  By  the  end  of  the  thirties  the  fine  traditions  of 
colonial  craftsmanship  were  gone  and  the  builders  set  forth  on  a 
foolish  quest  for  historical  styles.  Revivals  followed  on  each  other’s 
heels  The  Greek  revival  and  the  Gothic  revival  marked  the  suc¬ 
cessive  decline  of  the  noble  art  of  building,  until  at  last,  turning 
away  from  the  past,  architecture  erupted  in  what  it  conceived  to  be 
a  new  American  style,  the  expression  of  a  free  democratic  people, 
but  which  later  generations  reckon  a  sign  and  proof  of  cultural 
bankruptcy.  It  was  the  golden  age  of  the  jig  saw,  of  the  brownstone 
front,  of  the  veranda  that  ran  about  the  house  like  a  spider  web,  of 
the  mansard  roof,  the  cupola,  the  house  of  stilts.  Flamboyant  lines 
and  meaningless  detail  destroyed  the  structural  unity  of  the  whole; 
tawdry  decoration  supplanted  beauty  of  materials  and  a  fine  balance 
of  masses.  A  stuffy  and  fussy  riot  of  fancy,  restrained  by  no  feeling 
for  structural  lines,  supplied  the  lack  of  creative  imagination,  and 
architecture  sank  to  the  level  of  the  jerry-builder.  Bad  taste  could 
go  no  further. 

With  this  decay  of  aristocratic  culture  and  the  attendant  dis¬ 
integration  of  the  earlier  cultural  unity,  three  diverse  strands  of 
cultural  impulse  remained,  each  of  an  individual  fabric  that  could 
not  easily  be  woven  into  a  harmonious  pattern:  a  decadent  fed¬ 
eralists  culture  that  occupied  the  seats  of  authority  in  New  Eng¬ 
land  and  wherever  New  England  opinion  was  respected;  the  body 
of  social  aspiration  that  had  come  from  the  French  Enlighten- 


50 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ment,  from  which  individual  dreamers  still  drew  nourishment;  and 
the  vigorous  individualism  of  the  frontier  that  bit  so  deeply  into 
the  psychology  of  the  age.  Behind  these  diverse  impulses  lay  still 
another  that  would  eventually  shoulder  them  aside  and  provide  the 
pattern  for  the  America  that  was  rising — the  culture  of  an  urban¬ 
ized  and  mechanized  society  that  in  its  vast  warrens  of  business 
was  creating  the  psychology  and  manners  of  a  standardized, 
middle-class  world  of  salesmanship. 

i 

NEW  ENGLAND  IN  DECAY 

In  one  spot  in  America,  at  least,  the  disruption  of  the  fine  old 
aristocratic  culture  would  not  be  suffered  without  a  protest.  Brah¬ 
min  New  England  would  cling  to  its  traditional  standards  though 
all  the  rest  of  America  should  go  whoring  after  strange  gods.  The 
welter  of  the  seventies  it  looked  upon  with  undisguised  contempt. 
It  would  not  follow  the  way  that  other  portions  of  the  country  were 
hastening.  It  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  bumptious  frontier 
spirit  that  recognized  no  obligations  to  the  past — for  the  excellent 
reason  that  it  had  no  past.  It  had  had  its  fill  of  the  visionary  En¬ 
lightenment  that  had  come  to  logical  fruit  in  the  vagaries  of  Tho- 
reau  and  the  grotesque  vaporings  of  Alcott.  It  had  had  more  than 
its  fill  of  the  strident  causes  that  spawned  like  mushrooms  in  the 
rank  soil  of  French  romanticism.  Emerson  it  could  forgive,  for 
Emerson  was  a  Brahmin,  but  it  quietly  ignored  his  philosophic 
anarchism  and  chose  to  dwell  on  pleasanter  aspects  of  his  teaching. 
Wendell  Phillips  it  regarded  as  a  common  nuisance,  but  Edmund 
Quincy  it  forgave,  for  after  a  season  of  vagrant  wanderings  he 
returned  to  the  placid  ways  of  his  ancestral  Brahminism.  Of  all 
these  things,  whether  frontier  or  Utopian  or  what  not,  it  had  had 
enough,  and  so  it  turned  back  lovingly  to  the  culture  of  earlier 
times  and  drew  comfort  from  a  dignified  federalism — enriched  now 
by  a  mellow  Harvard  scholarship  that  was  on  intimate  terms  with 
Dante  and  Chaucer  and  Cervantes  and  Shakespeare — a  Federalism 
that  fitted  the  dignified  Brahmin  genius  as  comfortably  as  an  old 
shoe. 

It  was  an  excellent  heritage — that  old  culture.  Never  richly 
creative,  never  endowed  with  a  fleshly  paganism,  it  possessed 
nevertheless  a  solidity  got  from  long  wrestling  with  the  eternities, 
a  pleasantly  acrid  flavor  got  from  crotchety  old  books,  and  a  sober 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


51 


morality  got  from  much  contemplation  of  the  sinfulness  of  the 
children  of  Adam.  It  was  as  native  to  New  England  as  Boston 
brown  bread,  and  it  issued  in  self-respecting  and  dignified  charac¬ 
ter.  Underneath  all  transcendental  and  other  eruptions  it  had  lain 
unmoved  like  the  granite  foundations  of  the  New  England  fields; 
and  now  after  those  eruptions  had  subsided  it  provided  the  solid 
footing  on  which  the  later  culture  might  rear  its  chaste  temples. 
But  unhappily  the  building  days  of  New  England  were  over. 
Matters  were  going  ill  there.  Emigration  to  the  West  was  draining 
the  vitality  from  farm  and  village,  and  in  Boston  disastrous  changes 
were  under  way.  The  familiar  places  where  Sam  Adams  and  Josiah 
Quincy  had  dwelt  with  their  fellows  were  being  invaded  by  im¬ 
migrants  who  brought  with  them  another  faith  and  discordant 
manners.  The  Roman  Catholic  church  grew  strong  as  the  Old 
North  declined;  the  Irish  brogue  displaced  the  Yankee  on  Boston 
Common;  Faneuil  Hall  was  given  over  to  alien  fishmongers.  The 
Brahmin  remnant  was  absorbed  in  banking  and  brokerage  and  rail¬ 
way  investments.  It  still  held  the  Boston  purse  but  it  was  fast 
losing  the  Boston  vote.  The  capital  of  the  Puritan  fathers  was 
being  destroyed  by  the  Industrial  Revolution  that  their  descend¬ 
ants  had  set  on  foot.  New  England  was  visibly  falling  into  decay 
and  the  years  of  its  intellectual  leadership  in  America  were  num¬ 
bered. 

The  days  of  high  thinking  were  over  and  the  familiar  home  of 
humanitarian  causes  was  inhabited  by  other  tenants.  All  that 
remained  of  the  golden  forties  was  the  quiet  atmosphere  of  good 
breeding.  Unitarianism,  that  Theodore  Parker  had  kept  open- 
minded  and  militant,  settled  into  a  staid  and  respectable  or¬ 
thodoxy,  its  pale  negations  sufficing  to  soothe  its  placid  congrega¬ 
tions.  Transcendentalism,  that  had  thrown  a  lovely  mist  about  the 
lean  New  England  character,  was  evaporating  in  the  rising  sun  of 
science;  and  the  ardor  of  reform,  that  had  burned  fiercely  in  the 
Puritan  heart,  subsided  into  a  well-bred  interest  in  negro  schools 
and  foreign  missions.  The  Abolition  leaders  laid  aside  their  pens, 
convinced  that  the  last  injustice  had  been  removed  from  American 
society.  Their  work  was  done  and  they  turned  unwilling  ears  to 
calls  for  new  crusades.  The  New  England  conscience  was  tired. 
It  had  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  a  long  day  and  was  glad  to  be 
released  from  its  cares  to  set  up  monuments  to  its  sacred  dead  and 
to  write  the  chronicles  of  its  past.  New  England  lost  interest  in 


52 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ideas  and  turned  away  from  creative  intellectual  life  to  catalogue 
its  libraries  and  revere  the  men  who  had  written  those  libraries. 
The  Enlightenment  was  over  in  Boston  and  the  stir  of  reform 
passed  to  New  York  and  the  West,  where  Amelia  Bloomer  and  Eliz¬ 
abeth  Cady  Stanton  carried  forward  the  great  crusades  for  tem¬ 
perance  and  women’s  rights,  and  Henry  George  was  preaching  the 
gospel  of  a  new  social  economics.  Whatever  militants  existed  in 
New  England  were  not  likely  to  be  Brahmins  and  their  labors  did 
not  roil  the  quiet  waters.  Clamorous  distractions  no  longer  dis¬ 
turbed  the  calm  of  Federalists  culture,  and  Cambridge  and  the 
Back  Bay  quietly  appropriated  the  literary  earnings  of  Concord 
and  lived  pleasantly  on  its  revenues. 

The  inevitable  fruit  of  such  thin  soil  was  the  genteel  tradition, 
the  excellence  of  which  in  the  seventies  New  England  maintained 
in  the  face  of  all  frontier  leveling  and  romantic  liberalisms — a 
timid  and  uncreative  culture  that  lays  its  inhibitions  on  every  gen¬ 
eration  that  is  content  to  live  upon  the  past.  It  was  a  penalty  for 
backsliding.  The  men  of  the  preceding  generation  had  got  their 
cheeses  made — and  excellent  cheeses  they  were,  with  a  fine  native 
flavor.  But  the  transcendental  cow  had  gone  dry  and  with  no 
fresh  cows  coming  in  the  Brahmins  of  the  seventies  were  hard  put 
to  it  to  live  an  adequate  intellectual  life.  Translations  and  medieval 
scholarship  were  no  better  than  remainder  biscuit  after  voyage. 
Ever  since  Lowell  put  away  his  youthful  radicalisms  and  turned 
bookman,  Brahmin  culture  had  been  undernourished.  The  story 
of  intellectual  New  England  after  1870  is  little  more  than  a  repeti¬ 
tion  of  the  story  of  New  England  after  1790 — a  resurgence  of  the 
traditional  I  orvism  that  assumed  an  unquestioned  custodianship 
of  all  matters  intellectual. 

That  was  her  own  business,  of  course,  and  it  would  have  been  of 
no  great  concern  to  the  rest  of  the  country  if  New  England  had 
not  set  up  a  cultural  dictatorship  over  American  letters.  It  was 
not  content  to  follow  its  own  path  to  sterility,  but  was  bent  on 
^ragging  the  country  with  it.  Boston  taste  determined  American 
literary  standards,  and  Boston  taste  rejected  most  of  the  new 
movements  then  getting  under  way.  Stoddard  and  Stedman  in 
New  ^  01k,  Boker  in  Philadelphia,  and  Aldrich  in  Boston,  stoutly 
upheld  the  genteel  tradition,  of  which  the  Atlantic  Monthly  was 
the  authoritative  spokesman.  Great  figures  from  the  past— Emer¬ 
son,  Longfellow,  Lowell.  Whittier,  Holmes,  Motley,  Parkman — 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


53 


still  walked  the  streets  of  Boston,  and  their  extraordinary  reputa¬ 
tions  were  little  less  than  tyrannous  in  the  inhibitions  they  laid 
on  younger  men.  It  is  incomprehensible  today,  the  authority  of 
these  great  reputations.  Young  William  Winter  walking  twenty 
miles  to  stand  in  the  moonlight  at  Craigie  House  gate  and  view 
reverently  the  silent  walls  within  which  the  great  Longfellow  was 
sleeping;  Mark  Twain  in  the  fullness  of  his  powers  abashed  and 
put  out  of  countenance  at  his  temerity  in  speaking  humorously  of 
Emerson  and  Longfellow  and  Holmes  at  the  Atlantic  dinner — one 
understands  such  things  with  difficulty  now  that  those  reputations 
have  so  much  bated  and  dwindled.  Yet  to  the  generation  of  the 
seventies  the  inhibitions  of  the  genteel  tradition  were  all-powerful, 
and  the  little  Boston  group  set  themselves  up  as  a  court  of  final 
jurisdiction  over  American  letters.  New  England  parochialism  had 
become  a  nation-wide  nuisance. 

The  genteel  tradition,  as  Professor  Santayana  has  pointed  out, 
had  long  been  a  disease  in  New  England.  Some  of  the  finest  minds 
of  the  Renaissance — Emerson  and  Hawthorne  in  particular — had 
suffered  from  it;  their  mental  processes  “had  all  a  certain  starved 
and  abstract  quality,”  a  lack  of  the  rich  paganism  that  endows  life 
and  art  with  sensuous  beauty. 

They  could  not  retail  the  genteel  tradition  [he  goes  on];  they  were  too 
keen,  too  perceptive,  and  too  independent  for  that.  But  life  offered 
them  little  digestible  material,  nor  were  they  naturally  voracious.  They 
were  fastidious,  and  under  the  circumstances  they  were  starved.  .  .  . 
Therefore  the  genius  of .  .  .  Hawthorne,  and  even  of  Emerson,  was  em¬ 
ployed  in  a  sort  of  inner  play,  or  digestion  of  vacancy.  It  was  a  refined 
labor,  but  was  in  danger  of  being  morbid,  or  tinkling,  or  self-indulgent. 
It  was  a  play  of  intra-mental  rhymes.  Their  mind  was  like  an  old  music- 
box,  full  of  tender  echoes  and  quaint  fancies.  These  fancies  expressed 
their  personal  genius  sincerely,  as  dreams  may;  but  they  were  arbitrary 
fancies  in  comparison  with  what  a  real  observer  would  have  said  in  the 
premises.  Their  manner,  in  a  word,  was  subjective.  In  their  own  persons 
they  escaped  the  mediocrity  of  the  genteel  tradition,  but  they  supplied 
nothing  to  supplant  it  in  other  minds.1 

If  the  thin  pale  atmosphere  in  which  the  genteel  tradition  throve 
starved  the  minds  of  greater  men  in  a  more  vigorous  age,  it  would 
play  havoc  with  smaller  men  in  an  imitative  age.  After  Emerson 
and  Hawthorne  came  Stedman  and  Stoddard  and  Aldrich,  upon 

1  The  Genteel  Tradition  in  American  Philosophy,  University  of  California  Chron¬ 
icle,  Vol.  XIII,  Number  4. 


54 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


whose  studiously  correct  pages  the  genteel  tradition  laid  a  hand 
of  death.  In  the  seventies  it  had  become  the  refuge  of  a  stale 
mentality,  emptied  of  all  ideals  save  beauty,  and  that  beauty  be¬ 
come  cold  and  anemic.  Its  taboos  were  no  more  than  cushions  for 
tired  or  lazy  minds.  The  idea  of  morality — with  its  corollary  of 
reticence — and  the  idea  of  excellence  were  well  enough  in  the  ab¬ 
stract,  but  become  empty  conventions,  cut  off  from  reality,  they 
were  little  more  than  a  refuge  for  respectability,  a  barricade  against 
the  intrusion  of  the  unpleasant.  In  compressing  literature  within  the 
rigid  bounds  of  a  genteel  morality  and  a  genteel  excellence.  New 
England  was  in  a  way  of  falsifying  it.  Highways  are  easy  traveling, 
but  the  artist  who  will  not  venture  from  them  misses  much.  In  the 
seventies  and  eighties  the  incurious  Boston  mentality  missed  pretty 
much  everything  vital  and  significant  in  American  life,  and  the 
more  daring  children  of  Boston — men  like  Henry  Adams  and,  shall 
we  add,  Henry  James — sought  congenial  atmosphere  elsewhere. 

i 

THOMAS  BAILEY  ALDRICH  AND  THE  GENTEEL 

In  the  expansive  days  of  Walt  Whitman  and  Mark  Twain  the 
official  custodian  of  the  genteel  in  letters  was  Thomas  Bailey 
Aldrich,  who  as  editor  of  the  Atlantic  from  1881  to  1890  sturdily 
combated  all  literary  leveling.  Sitting  in  the  high  seat  of  Boston 
authority  he  would  countenance  none  of  the  “Josh  Billingsgate” 
corruptions  of  the  English  language  that  he  professed  to  believe 
were  sullying  the  purity  of  American  literary  taste.  A  Portsmouth, 
New  Hampshire,  boy,  early  transplanted  to  New  York  City,  he 
lisped  in  numbers  before  he  learned  to  think.  At  the  age  of  nine¬ 
teen  he  published  a  volume  of  poems  entitled  The  Bells,  A  Collec¬ 
tion  of  Chimes,  the  tintillations  of  which  were  little  more  than 
faint  echoes  of  Keats,  Chatterton,  Tennyson,  Poe,  Bryant,  Willis, 
and  Longfellow;  and  to  the  end  of  his  life  his  state  of  ideal  felicity 
was  to  be  “loaded  to  the  muzzle  with  lyrics  and  sonnets”  where¬ 
with  to  do  execution  on  all  purveyors  of  realism  with  its  “miasmatic 
breath  blown  from  the  slums.”  Transplanted  to  Boston  from  the 
Bohemian  world  of  Pfaff’s  restaurant  where  Willis  held  court,  he 
settled  down  into  the  staid  atmosphere  of  the  Back  Bay  with 
immense  content,  d  hough  he  was  fond  of  calling  himself  only 
Boston-plated  he  was  soon  as  completely  Bostonian  as  the  Autocrat 
himself.  Intellectually  and  esthetically  he  had  been  Cambridge 


55 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

bred,  and  the  influence  of  Longfellow,  Lowell,  and  Holmes  deter¬ 
mined  his  every  literary  endeavor.  Like  the  returned  prodigal  he 
wandered  no  more  but  was  satisfied  to  feast  on  the  dainties  of 
Back  Bay  culture.  He  immersed  himself  in  the  genteel.  His  one 
ambition  as  editor  of  the  Atlantic  was  to  keep  it  as  Lowell  wished 
it  kept,  do  the  end  of  his  life  he  remained  completely  insulated 
against  the  creative  forces  of  the  times,  and  in  the  year  that 
Stephen  Crane  was  writing  Maggie  he  published  The  Sisters’ 
Tragedy.  He  would  have  been  shocked  by  Maggie ,  if  he  had  read 
it,  as  a  later  generation  wonders  at  The  Sisters’  Tragedy. 

It  is  easy  to  see  why  Aldrich  should  have  been  taken  to  Boston’s 
heart.  His  refined  and  delicate  technique  more  than  compensated 
for  an  intellectual  sterility  that  seems  never  to  have  been  apparent 
to  his  ardent  admirers.  Witty,  charming  in  manners,  in  love  with 
art  and  devoted  to  a  painstaking  craftsmanship,  he  was  a  hollow 
reed  through  which  blew  into  flawless  form  the  refinements  of  his 
world  and  group.  Good  taste  found  nothing  to  offend  in  his  scanty 
pages.  If  he  worshiped  at  the  altar  of  beauty,  beauty  to  him  was 
always  a  chaste  goddess,  severe  and  pale  and  slight.  A  blowsy  god¬ 
dess  like  Whitman’s,  or  a  slattern  like  Mark  Twain’s,  he  would  have 
none  of.  As  a  youthful  poet,  to  be  sure,  he  sometimes  hinted  that 
she  had  red  cheeks  and  plump  breasts  and  rounded  limbs,  but  on  his 
removal  to  Boston  he  discovered  that  she  was  quite  Beacon  Street 
with  her  slender  form  and  modest  reserve — no  Greek  but  a  lovely 
Puritan  maiden;  and  the  mature  Aldrich  came  to  prefer  her  chaste 
reticence  to  the  freer  ways  the  younger  generation  liked.  They  were 
destroying  beauty — this  younger  generation — with  their  vulgar  real¬ 
ism,  besmirching  the  goddess  with  their  vulgarities.  In  an  interlude 
entitled  “Realism”  he  gave  voice  to  the  following  pastoral  lament: 

Romance  beside  his  unstrung  lute 
Lies  stricken  mute. 

The  old-time  fire,  the  antique  grace, 

You  will  not  find  them  anywhere. 

To-day  we  breathe  a  commonplace. 

Polemic,  scientific  air: 

We  strip  Illusion  of  her  veil; 

We  vivisect  the  nightingale 
To  probe  the  secret  of  his  note. 

The  Muse  in  alien  ways  remote 
Goes  wandering.2 

2  Poetical  Works ,  Vol.  I,  p.  45. 


56 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


And  in  a  dramatic  monologue,  quite  evidently  suggested  by 
The  Grammarian  s  Funeral ,  he  voiced  the  following  protest  against 
an  age  enslaved  to  realism: 

A  twilight  poet,  groping  quite  alone, 

Belated,  in  a  sphere  where  every  nest 
Is  emptied  of  its  music  and  its  wings. 

Not  great  his  gift;  yet  we  can  poorly  spare 
Even  his  slight  perfection  in  an  age 
Of  limping  triolets  and  tame  rondeaux. 

He  had  at  least  ideals,  though  unreached. 

And  heard,  far  off,  immortal  harmonies, 

Such  as  fall  coldly  on  our  ear  to-day. 

The  mighty  Zolaistic  Movement  now 

Engrosses  us — a  miasmatic  breath 

Blown  from  the  slums.  We  paint  life  as  it  is. 

The  hideous  side  of  it,  with  careful  pains, 

Making  a  god  of  the  dull  Commonplace. 

For  have  we  not  the  old  gods  overthrown 
And  set  up  strangest  idols?  We  would  clip 
Imagination’s  wing  and  kill  delight, 

Our  sole  art  being  to  leave  nothing  out 

That  renders  art  offensive.  Not  for  us 

Madonnas  leaning  from  their  starry  thrones 

Ineffable,  nor  any  heaven-wrought  dream 

Of  sculptor  or  of  poet;  we  prefer 

Such  nightmare  visions,  as  in  morbid  brains 

Take  form  and  substance,  thoughts  that  taint  the  air 

And  make  all  life  unlovely.  Will  it  last? 

Beauty  alone  endures  from  age  to  age, 

From  age  to  age  endures,  handmaid  of  God.3 

It  was  not  the  realists  alone,  he  thought,  who  were  fouling  their 
own  nests,  but  all  who  turned  aside  from  the  narrow  path  of 
Victorianism  to  explore  new  ways.  Whitman  he  regarded  as  a 
charlatan  whose  mannerisms  were  a  “hollow  affectation”  rep¬ 
resenting  “neither  the  man  nor  the  time.”  Riley’s  formal  verse 
he  preferred  to  his  dialect  poems — “The  English  language  is 
too  rich  and  sacred  a  thing  to  be  mutilated  and  vulgarized,”  he 
wrote,  overlooking  the  Bigloiv  P apers.  He  held  Kipling’s  cockney- 
isms  in  contempt  and  said  he  would  not  have  opened  the  pages  of 
the  Atlantic  even  to  the  “Recessional.”  Lanier  he  thought  a  less 
significant  figure  than  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  and  of  Poe  he  re¬ 
marked  that  if  he  had  been  an  exemplary,  conventional,  tax- 

3  “At  the  Funeral  of  a  Minor  Poet,”  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  94. 


57 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

oppressed  citizen,  like  Longfellow,  his  few  poems,  as  striking  as 
they  are,  would  not  have  made  so  great  a  stir.”4  In  such  literary 
judgments  the  arch-conservative  is  engaged  in  defending  the 
genteel  tradition  against  every  assault,  convinced  that  the  portals 
of  creative  literature  open  into  the  past  and  that  in  following  in 
the  footsteps  of  the  dead  we  shall  come  upon  a  living  world.  The 
sterility  of  his  own  refined  craftsmanship  is  perhaps  sufficient 
commentary  upon  his  faith. 

When  in  later  years  he  turned  to  prose  his  work  revealed  the  same 
negative  qualities.  His  prose  style  is  finished,  clean,  and  thin,  want¬ 
ing  in  homely  idiom  and  a  rich  suggestiveness.  The  water  trickled 
gently  from  the  spring  of  his  invention,  cool  and  unroiled,  but  never 
abundant.  The  dignity  that  results  from  a  strong  nature  held  in 
restraint,  he  never  achieved.  There  were  no  depths  in  him.  He 
waited  patiently  for  his  vessel  to  fill  and  measured  it  out  carefully. 
As  a  short-story  writer  he  gained  a  surprising  repute,  and  admirers 
like  Sarah  Orne  Jewett  were  never  tired  of  praising  the  sprightliness 
of  his  humor.  Nevertheless  his  most  celebrated  story  scarcely  ex¬ 
plains  today  the  immense  stir  it  made.  Marjorie  Daw  is  a  clever 
jeu  d’esprit  but  a  bit  thin  and  artificial,  too  consciously  written 
backwards  from  its  surprise  ending.  Other  distillings  of  his  wit 
and  wisdom,  done  in  the  sententious  manner  and  gathered  up  in 
Ponkapog  Papers ,  are  slight  in  content,  and  the  effervescence  is  long 
since  gone  out  of  them.  The  Story  of  a  Bad  Boy,  with  its  pleasant 
recollections  of  his  Portsmouth  youth,  remains  his  most  important 
work  in  prose  and  deserves  much  of  the  praise  that  has  been  lavished 
upon  it;  but  set  over  against  Huckleberry  Finn  its  shortcomings  are 
evident. 

It  is  absurd,  of  course,  to  expect  an  aesthete  to  concern  himself 
with  ideas,  or  to  care  greatly  about  what  goes  on  outside  his  ivory 
tower.  The  rumblings  of  the  vulgar  world  beat  ineffectually  against 
the  gate  behind  which  he  sits  and  dreams.  For  years  the  editor  of 
the  Atlantic  was  scarcely  conscious  of  his  complete  aloofness  from 
the  world  of  reality,  and  he  wrote  in  some  surprise  to  Hamilton 
Wright  Mabie,  in  1897: 

I  like  to  have  you  say  that  I  have  always  cared  more  for  the  integrity 
of  my  work  than  for  any  chance  popularity.  And  what  you  say  of  my 
4‘ aloofness”  as  being  ‘‘due  in  part  to  a  lack  of  quick  sympathies  with 
contemporary  experience”  (though  I  had  never  before  thought  of  it)  shows 

4  Ferris  Greenslet,  Life  of  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich,  p.  215. 


58 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


true  insight.  To  be  sure,  such  verse  as  “Elmwood,”  “Wendell  Phillips,” 
“Unguarded  Gates”  and  the  “Shaw  Memorial  Ode”  would  seem  some¬ 
what  to  condition  the  statement;  but  the  mood  of  these  poems  is  not 
habitual  with  me,  not  characteristic.  They  did,  however,  grow  out  of 
strong  conviction.6 

Yet  though  he  spoke  rarely  on  social  themes,  during  the  long 
years  in  Boston  most  of  the  Back  Bay  prejudices  seemed  to  have 
seeped  into  his  mind  and  when  the  “strong  convictions,”  to  which 
he  refers,  found  utterance  they  proved  to  be  Brahmin  convictions. 
In  the  vigorous  poem  “Unguarded  Gates” — a  poem  tense,  out¬ 
spoken,  almost  unique  in  its  deliberate  declamation — he  sallied 
forth  from  his  ivory  tower  to  speak  to  the  American  people  on  the 
dangers  of  uncontrolled  immigration,  a  subject  that  Boston  Brah¬ 
mins  had  been  talking  about  since  the  days  of  Harrison  Gray  Otis. 

Wide  open  and  unguarded  stand  our  gates, 

And  through  them  presses  a  wild  motley  throng — 

Men  from  the  Volga  and  the  Tartar  steppes, 

Featureless  figures  from  the  Hoang-Ho, 

Malayan,  Scythian,  Teuton,  Kelt,  and  Slav, 

Flying  the  Old  World’s  poverty  and  scorn; 

These  bringing  with  them  unknown  gods  and  rites, 

Those,  tiger  passions,  here  to  stretch  their  claws. 

In  street  and  alley  what  strange  tongues  are  loud, 

Accents  of  menace  alien  to  our  air, 

Voices  that  once  the  Tower  of  Babel  knew! 

O  Liberty,  white  Goddess!  is  it  well 
To  leave  the  gates  unguarded?  On  thy  breast 
Fold  Sorrow’s  children,  soothe  the  hurts  of  fate, 

Lift  the  down-trodden,  but  with  hand  of  steel 
Stay  those  who  to  thy  sacred  portals  come 
To  waste  the  gifts  of  freedom.  Have  a  care 
Lest  from  thy  brow  the  clustered  stars  be  torn 
And  trampled  in  the  dust.  For  so  of  old 
The  thronging  Goth  and  Vandal  trampled  Rome, 

And  where  the  temples  of  the  Caesars  stood 
The  lean  wolf  unmolested  made  her  lair.6 

What  emotions  lay  back  of  the  measured  words  of  the  poem,  and 
how  deeply  they  were  colored  by  the  social  passions  of  the  times,  he 
tells  in  a  letter  to  George  E.  Woodberry,  written  May  14,  1892: 

I  went  home  and  wrote  a  misanthropic  poem  called  “Unguarded  Gates” 

,  .  .  in  which  I  mildly  protest  against  America  becoming  the  cesspool  of 
6  Ibid.,  d.  200.  •  Poetical  Works,  Vol.  II,  p.  72. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES  59 

Europe.  I’m  much  too  late,  however.  I  looked  in  on  an  anarchist  meeting 
the  other  night  .  .  .  and  heard  such  things  spoken  by  our  “feller  citizens” 
as  made  my  cheek  burn.  These  brutes  are  the  spawn  and  natural  result 
of  the  French  Revolution;  they  don’t  want  any  government  at  all,  they 
want  the  earth”  .  .  .  and  chaos.  My  Americanism  goes  clean  beyond 
yours.  I  believe  in  America  for  the  Americans;  I  believe  in  the  widest 
freedom  and  the  narrowest  license,  and  I  hold  that  jail-birds,  professional 
murderers,  amateur  lepers  .  .  .  and  human  gorillas  generally  should  be 
closely  questioned  at  our  Gates.  Or  the  “sifting”  that  was  done  of  old 
will  have  to  be  done  over  again.  ...  A  certain  Arabian  writer,  called 
Rudyard  Kipling,  described  exactly  the  government  of  every  city  and 
town  in  the  .  .  .  United  States  when  he  described  that  of  New  York  as 
being  “a  despotism  of  the  alien,  by  the  alien,  for  the  alien,  tempered  with 
occasional  insurrections  of  decent  folk!”  7 

Two  years  later  he  again  gave  private  expression  to  one  of  his 
rare  judgments  on  matters  political  and  social: 

When  not  otherwise  engaged  I  sit  and  smoke,  and  smile  at  the  present 
administration  [President  Cleveland’s],  .  .  .  The  best  kind  of  Democracy 
(as  per  sample)  is  no  better  than  the  worst  kind  of  Republicanism.  The 
Income  Tax  is  the  deformed  child  of  Coxey  and  his  brother  scalawags. 
I  vote  for  McKinley.  We  shall  have  bloody  work  in  this  country  some  of 
these  days,  when  the  lazy  canaille  get  organized.  They  are  the  spawn  of 
Santerre  and  Fouquier-Tinville.  In  about  twenty  years  we  shall  bring 
out  an  American  edition  (illustrated  with  cuts)  of  the  beautiful  French 
Revolution.8 

And  again  in  1899: 

Personally  I  must  confess  that  I  have  never  been  very  deeply  impressed 
by  the  administrative  abilities  of  what  we  call  the  lower  classes.  The 
Reign  of  Terror  in  France  is  a  fair  illustration  of  the  kind  of  government 
which  the  masses  give  us  when  they  get  the  happy  opportunity.9 

The  literary  conservative,  it  appears,  was  no  better  than  a  social 
and  political  Tory.  He  has  traveled  back  a  hundred  years  and 
speaks  again  the  very  language  of  Robert  Treat  Paine.  Canaille  is 
not  a  nice  word  to  apply  to  American  workingmen,  and  the  French 
Revolution  has  never  been  well  thought  of  by  the  children  of  the 
ancien  regime.  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  was  a  cultivated  gentle¬ 
man,  on  the  pleasantest  terms  with  the  Muse  of  Beacon  Street. 
Twice  he  traveled  around  the  world;  innumerable  summers  he 
spent  in  Europe;  yet  of  many  things  that  concern  men  greatly  he 
was  very,  very  ignorant.  Of  the  American  people  beyond  the 

7  Ferris  Greenslet,  Life  of  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich,  pp.  168-169. 

8  Ibid.,  p.  176.  9  Ibid.,  p.  205. 


60 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Hudson  River,  he  knew  nothing.  Of  social  economics  he  knew 
nothing.  Fearful  lest  his  art  should  get  a  smutch  from  the  streets, 
he  withdrew  within  his  tower,  where  perhaps  it  is  well  to  leave  him. 
Yet  it  is  odd  to  recall  that  he  was  once  regarded  as  a  significant 
literary  figure  and  that  intelligent  people  listened  to  him  seriously. 

2 

THE  NEW  ENGLAND  SCENE 

In  fields  less  distinguished  than  poetry  and  the  essay  the  sway 
of  the  genteel  was  neither  so  magisterial  nor  so  repressive.  As 
fiction  somewhat  tardily  encroached  upon  the  older  literary  pre¬ 
serves  of  New  England  it  brought  with  it  a  fresher  and  more 
realistic  spirit  that  was  eventually  to  deny  the  validity  of  the  tra¬ 
ditional  standards.  The  group  of  fiction  writers  that  arose  in  the 
seventies  and  eighties  to  chronicle  the  life  of  New  England,  was 
greatly  concerned  with  the  decay  of  the  old  New  England  world, 
and  with  the  causes  of  that  decay.  As  it  set  down  with  loving 
fidelity  the  characteristics  of  an  earlier  order  it  could  not  fail  to 
consider  the  unloveliness  of  the  new  world  that  was  rising  on  the 
decay  of  the  old — the  alien  industrial  towns  with  their  polyglot 
workers  that  were  flourishing  as  the  native  villages  and  quiet 
countryside  declined.  New  England  fiction,  therefore,  came  to 
embody  two  main  features,  chronicle  and  criticism.  It  gathered 
up  such  picturesque  bits  of  the  past  as  time  and  change  had  left, 
and  it  questioned  with  some  anxiety  the  ways  of  an  industrialism 
that  was  destroying  what  it  loved.  It  was  not  Boston  fiction,  but 
up-country  fiction,  given  to  exploring  quiet  villages  and  decaying 
towns;  and  in  both  its  chronicles  and  its  criticisms  the  spirit  of 
realism  became  more  searching  as  the  years  passed. 

In  its  own  fashion  such  fiction  would  finally  be  brought  into 
service  to  the  social  conscience  and  issue  as  sociological  studies. 
As  the  evils  of  sweated  labor  under  the  factory  system  were  brought 
home  to  the  common  knowledge,  one  would  suppose  that  New 
England  would  have  been  the  first  to  conscript  the  novel  to  arouse 
the  public  conscience.  1  here  had  been  anxious  discussion  amongst 
the  Concord  intellectuals  on  the  evils  of  industrialism,  and  in  the 
early  forties  the  talk  had  turned  upon  associatiomsm  as  the  like¬ 
liest  cure;  but  though  from  such  discussions  came  Brook  Farm  and 
other  Utopian  ventures,  no  fiction  resulted.  It  was  elsewhere,  in 


61 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

the  Pennsylvania  iron  district  where  exploitation  was  harsher  and 
more  brutal  than  in  the  textile  mills,  that  fiction  first  turned  to 
consider  the  ways  of  industrialism.  In  1861  Rebecca  Harding 
contributed  to  the  Atlantic  a  story  entitled  “Life  in  the  Iron  Mills,” 
that  was  stark  and  fierce  in  its  drab  realism.10  Nevertheless  ten 
years  were  to  pass  before  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  published  The 
Silent  Partner  (1871),  a  dithyrambic  plea  for  justice  for  the  mill- 
hands. 

If  this  was  not  the  first  New  England  novel  of  industrialism  it 
was  certainly  one  of  the  earliest.  In  conception,  temper,  and  tech¬ 
nique  it  belongs  to  the  emotional  fifties,  and  is  almost  primitive  in 
comparison  with  Rebecca  Harding’s  work.  Underlain  with  reli¬ 
gion,  it  is  sticky  with  sentiment.  Although  Miss  Phelps  professed 
to  base  her  work  on  the  Reports  of  the  Massachusetts  Bureau  of 
Statistics  of  Labor,  to  which  she  says  she  was  “deeply  in  debt  for 
the  ribs”  of  her  story,  the  result  is  more  a  tract  than  a  study. 
There  is  no  realistic  grasp  of  the  materials.  She  was  grieved  that 
the  mill-masters  should  reveal  so  little  Christian  understanding 
of  the  hard  lot  of  the  hands  and  so  little  sympathy  with  their 
poverty.  “I  believe,”  she  said,  “that  a  wide-spread  ignorance 
exists  among  us  regarding  the  abuses  of  our  factory  system,  more 
especially,  but  not  exclusively,  as  exhibited  in  many  of  the  coun¬ 
try  mills.”  “Had  Christian  ingenuity  been  generally  synonymous 
with  the  conduct  of  manufacturing  corporations,  I  should  have 
found  no  occasion  for  the  waiting  of  this  book.”  11  It  was  to  lessen 
such  ignorance  and  encourage  Christian  sympathy  between  the 
classes  that  she  offered  her  study. 

The  book  is  a  closet  study  done  with  more  unction  than  skill.  It 
is  the  work  of  an  emotional  woman  who  lived  in  a  world  of  senti¬ 
ment  rather  than  reality.  Miss  Phelps  was  an  Andover  Brahmin, 
highly  sensitive,  whose  deeply  religious  nature  was  ruffled  by 
every  vagrant  wind.  She  was  tremulous  in  her  eager  desire  to 
lessen  the  injustice  of  men.  The  Silent  Partner  is  a  story  of  a  young 
woman  brought  up  in  luxury,  daughter  of  a  manufacturer,  who 
on  her  father’s  death  wishes  to  join  in  the  management  of  the 
factory,  but  on  being  politely  rejected  by  her  partners  she  engages 
in  personnel  work  amongst  her  employees.  There  she  comes  upon 

10  Fred  Lewis  Pattee,  The  Development  of  the  American  Short  Story,  pp.  171-172, 
See  the  entire  chapter  for  a  discussion  of  early  realism  in  the  Atlantic. 

11  Preface,  p.  5. 


62 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


poverty  as  a  sordid  fact,  and  that  discovery  works  a  moral  change 
in  her  life.  She  is  overwhelmed  by  it  and  cannot  understand  why 
the  conscience  of  the  world  is  not  overwhelmed.  “Sometimes  I  do 
not  see,”  she  exclaimed,  “what  else  there  can  be  to  talk  about  in 
such  a  world  as  this!  I’ve  stepped  into  it,  as  we  have  stepped  out 
into  this  storm.  It  has  wrapped  me  in.  .  .  12  Of  the  complexity 

of  the  problem  she  is  wholly  ignorant.  Surely  there  must  be  some 
road  that  leads  to  justice — justice  based  on  understanding  and 
Christian  kindliness;  and  the  working  girl  whom  she  singles  out  for 
heroine  becomes  in  the  end  a  street  preacher  to  the  textile  workers, 
after  refusing  to  marry  and  bring  children  into  a  world  of  factory 
toil.  The  Silent  Partner  is  an  emotional  Puritan  document  that 
was  out  of  date  when  it  came  from  the  press. 

While  Miss  Phelps  was  thus  summoning  the  New  England 
conscience  to  cleanse  the  textile  mills,  her  Brahmin  sisters  were 
little  inclined  to  engage  in  such  thankless  labors,  but  preferred  to 
gather  up  and  preserve  such  fragments  of  the  homely  traditional 
New  England  as  had  not  been  swept  away  in  the  engulfing  stream 
of  industrialism.  Female  writers,  from  the  days  of  Mrs.  Sarah 
Wentworth  Morton,  had  long  been  busy  in  New  England  but  never 
had  they  written  so  well  or  so  understandingly  as  in  the  days  of 
the  New  England  decline.  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe,  Elizabeth 
Stuart  Phelps,  Harriet  Prescott  Spofford,  Rose  Terry  Cooke, 
Mary  Wilkins  Freeman,  and  Alice  Brown  were  not  great  writers, 
but  they  essayed  to  be  faithful  recorders  of  what  came  under  their 
eyes.  It  was  the  earlier  New  England  that  quickened  their  imagi¬ 
nations,  the  rugged  Yankee  character  that  had  taken  form  under  a 
homely  domestic  economy.  They  had  no  liking  for  the  New  Eng¬ 
land  that  was  rising  in  the  shadow  of  the  mills;  the  cleavages  of 
race  and  religion  that  were  sundering  the  old  homogeneous  society 
were  bitterly  distasteful  to  them.  The  Irish,  the  French-Canadians, 
the  masses  of  raw  immigrants  that  were  swept  into  the  hoppers  of 
the  mills,  were  unwelcome  gobbets  to  the  Brahmin  stomach.  And 
so  these  recorders  of  the  New  England  decline  turned  away  from 
the  sordid  industrial  scene,  and  it  was  not  till  thirty  years  later  that 
Mary  Wilkins  Freeman,  in  The  Portion  of  Labor  (iqoi),  essayed 
to  do  more  adequately  what  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  had  first 
sketched. 

From  Catherine  Sedgwick  to  Mrs.  Freeman  the  note  shifted 

12  Chapter  VIII,  p.  183. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


63 


from  the  moralistic  to  the  sentimental,  then  to  the  idyllic,  then  to 
the  realistic;  and  the  successive  changes  are  sufficiently  marked 
by  three  writers,  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe,  Sarah  Orne  Jewett,  and 
Mary  Wilkins  Freeman.  Seeking  their  materials  remote  from 
Boston,  amidst  the  old  native  stock  pottering  through  the  tra¬ 
ditional  round  of  life,  they  discovered  a  wprld  of  angular  figures 
that  had  grown  knotty  and  gnarly  from  a  harsh  climate  and  a 
meager  soil.  The  stoic  repressions  that  were  a  heritage  from  Puri¬ 
tan  ancestors  had  bred  a  hard  race  that  any  twist  of  circumstance 
was  likely  to  turn  into  grotesques.  Calvinists  have  always  at  hand 
a  providential  justification  of  any  freakish  outcome  to  men’s 
struggles,  and  in  piously  denying  freedom  of  the  will  they  often 
put  the  seal  of  God’s  approval  on  their  own  willfulness.  Mrs. 
Freeman’s  Pembroke  is  not  unlike  JVinesburg,  Ohio,  as  a  record  of 
abortive  lives;  and  Sarah  Orne  Jewett,  in  spite  of  a  Brahmin  tem¬ 
perament  that  chose  to  see  the  idyllic  rather  than  the  grotesque, 
could  not  overlook  what  New  England  provided  so  abundantly. 
In  A  Country  Doctor  a  visitor  in  the  village  of  Oldsfield  thus  ana¬ 
lyzed  the  New  England  character: 

.  .  .  for  intense,  self-centred,  smouldering  volcanoes  of  humanity,  New 
England  cannot  be  matched  the  world  over.  It’s  like  the  regions  in  Ice¬ 
land  that  are  full  of  geysers.  I  don’t  know  whether  it  is  the  inheritance 
from  those  people  who  broke  away  from  the  old  countries,  and  who  ought 
to  be  matched  to  tremendous  circumstances  of  life,  but  now  and  then 
there  comes  an  amazingly  explosive  and  uncontrollable  temperament 
that  goes  all  to  pieces  from  its  own  conservation  and  accumulation  of 
force.  By  and  by  you  will  all  be  blown  up, — you  quiet  descendants  of  the 
Pilgrims  and  Puritans,  and  have  let  off  your  superfluous  wickedness  like 
blizzards;  and  when  the  blizzards  of  each  family  have  spent  themselves 
you  will  grow  dull  and  sober,  and  all  on  a  level,  and  be  free  from  the 
troubles  of  a  transition  state.  Now,  you’re  neither  a  new  country  nor  an 
old  one.  You  ought  to  see  something  of  the  older  civilizations  to  under¬ 
stand  what  peace  of  mind  is.  Unless  some  importation  of  explosive  ma¬ 
terial  from  the  westward  stirs  them  up,  one  century  is  made  the  pattern 
for  the  next.13 

They  deal  wholly  with  the  past — these  chronicles  of  a  decaying 
New  England — concerning  themselves  with  a  “primitive  and 
Biblical  people”  who  dwelt  in  quiet  inland  towns  or  about  the 
lonely  shores  of  the  Maine  coast;  yet  always  under  the  shadow  of 
the  meeting-house,  with  few  defenses  betwixt  them  and  the  eter 

13  Chapter  IX,  p.  ioo. 


64 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


nities.  The  age  had  traveled  far  beyond  them  and  they  were  left 
pottering  about  in  their  narrow  Hebraic  world,  unaware  that 
science  and  industrialism  were  undermining  the  foundations  on 
which  village  and  meeting-house  rested.  “In  that  handful  of 
houses,”  said  old  Captain  Littlepage  in  The  Country  of  the  Pointed 
Firs ,  “they  fancy  that  they  comprehend  the  universe.”  But  if 
they  understood  God’s  plan  of  redemption  they  knew  nothing  of 
the  ways  of  capitalism.  A  certain  romantic  quaintness  colors  the 
realism  of  these  country  tales  and  imparts  a  note  of  the  idyllic. 
Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  first  discovered  the  literary  possibilities  of 
decaying  New  England,  and  in  Old-Town  Folks,  Poganuc  People, 
and  The  Minister  s  Wooing,  she  turned  back  to  the  days  of  its 
prime  and  sketched  the  scene  with  a  loving  hand.  But  it  was 
rather  in  The  Pearl  of  Orr’s  Island,  especially  the  first  part  before 
the  heavy  moralism  that  was  always  entrapping  her  art  had  closed 
upon  the  tale,  that  she  revealed  its  possibilities  to  later  writers. 
In  a  letter  of  July  5,  1889,  Sarah  Orne  Jewett  suggests  the  source  of 
her  own  more  finished  work: 

I  have  been  reading  the  beginning  of  The  Pearl  of  Or/s  Island  and  finding 
it  just  as  clear  and  perfectly  original  and  strong  as  it  seemed  to  me  in  my 
thirteenth  or  fourteenth  year,  when  I  read  it  first.  I  never  shall  forget 
the  exquisite  flavor  and  reality  that  it  gave  me.  ...  It  is  classical — 
historical  anything  you  like  to  say,  if  you  can  give  it  high  praise  enough.14 

But  Miss  Jewett  desired  a  more  adequate  realism  and  so  she 
turned  curiously  to  consider  the  technique  of  the  great  continental 
realists  of  the  eighties.  She  read  Zola  and  Flaubert,  Tolstoi  and 
Turgenev,  and  oddly  enough  was  persuaded  that  she  had  long 
been  trying  to  do  what  Tolstoi  was  doing.  In  a  letter  of  1888  she 
wrote : 

That  story  of  Tolstoi’s  was  such  an  excitement  that  I  did  not  sleep  until 
almost  morning.  What  a  wonderful  thing  it  is!  .  .  .  It  startled  me  be¬ 
cause  I  was  dimly  feeling  the  same  kind  of  motive  (not  the  same  plan)  in 
writing  the  Gray  Man.”.  .  .  I  have  felt  something  of  what  Tolstoi  has 
been  doing  all  the  way  along.  I  can  tell  you  half  a  dozen  stories  where 
I  tried  to  say  it,  “Lady  Terry,”  “Beyond  the  Toll-Gate,”  and  this  “Gray 
Man.  Now  and  then  it  came  clearer  to  me.  I  never  felt  the  soul  of  Tol¬ 
stoi  s  work  until  last  night  .  .  .  but  now  I  know  what  he  means,  and  I 

know  that  I  can  dare  to  keep  at  the  work  I  sometimes  have  despaired 
about.  .  .  ,16 

14  Letters  of  Sarah  Orv.e  Jewett,  pp.  46-47. 


16  Ibid.,  pp.  38-39. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


65 


Yet  to  later  readers  the  tie  that  drew  her  to  Tolstoi  seems  the 
thinnest  of  gossamers.  The  roots  of  her  character — and  of  her  art — 
went  down  too  deep  into  Brahmin  soil,  she  was  too  completely 
under  the  critical  sway  of  Lowell  and  Fields  and  Aldrich,  for  her 
to  turn  naturalist.  Her  realism- — if  one  may  use  the  word — was 
as  dainty  and  refined  as  her  own  manners — bleached  out  to  a  fine 
maidenly  purity.  In  The  Country  of  the  Pointed  Firs — a  story  that 
Willa  Gather  would  destine  for  immortality  in  the  select  company 
of  Huckleberry  Finn  and  The  Scarlet  Letter — she  discovers  an  innate 
gentility,  or  at  least  gentleness,  in  the  simple  fisherfolk  of  the 
Maine  village,  and  she  suggests  as  its  source  a  primitive  environ¬ 
ment  supplemented  by  an  encompassing  religion.  Nowhere  does 
she  paint  in  the  smutch  of  vulgarity,  for  in  these  eddies  of  New 
England  life  she  discovers  no  vulgarity  either  of  mind  or  manners. 
But  in  the  cities  it  is  different.  There  she  found  evidence  in  plenty 
of  what  she  called  the  “cheap  side  of  life,”  and  she  attributed  it 
to  the  increasing  material  well-being  of  the  country.  Of  the  new 
middle  class  she  held  a  low  opinion — 

Their  grandparents  or  even  their  own  parents  went  hungry  and  ill 
clothed,  and  it  will  take  some  time  for  these  people  to  have  their  fling,  to 
eat  all  they  want  and  to  wear  fine  raiment,  and  flaunt  authority.  They 
must  get  to  a  state,  and  by  slow  stages  too,  where  there  is  going  to  be 
something  fit  for  education.  .  .  .  The  trouble  is  to  us  old-fashioned  New 
Englanders  that  “the  cheap  streak”  so  often  spods  what  there  is  of  good 
inheritance,  and  the  wrong  side  of  our  great  material  prosperity  is  seen 
almost  everywhere.16 

There  spoke  the  Brahmin.  That  this  “cheap  streak”  should 
have  spread  so  far  through  American  life,  that  the  vulgar  middle 
class  should  have  taken  over  the  rule  of  the  country,  gave  her 
concern.  To  one  brought  up  on  Carlyle  and  Lowell  and  Arnold 
the  ways  of  the  plutocracy  were  abhorrent,  and  she  clung  the  more 
tenaciously  to  the  land  of  her  memories,  where  the  gentry  ruled, 
where  the  plain  people  respected  themselves  and  their  betters, 
and  where  vulgar  display  was  unknown.  “I  think  as  Mr.  Arnold 
does,”  she  wrote  in  1884,  “and  as  Mr.  Lowell  did,  that  the  mistake 
of  our  time  is  in  being  governed  by  the  ignorant  mass  of  opinion, 
instead  of  by  thinkers  and  men  who  know  something.”  17  1  hough 
she  disliked  and  distrusted  the  America  that  was  submerging  the 
old  landmarks,  she  was  as  ignorant  as  her  Maine  fisherfolk  of  the 

17  Ibid.,  p.  23. 


16  Ibid.,  pp.  186-187. 


66 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


social  forces  that  were  blotting  out  the  world  of  her  fathers,  and 
she  clung  with  pathetic  futility  to  such  fragments  of  the  old  order 
as  remained.  Like  Lowell  in  his  later  years  her  heart  was  given  to 
a  Brahmin  democracy  where  gentlemen  ruled  and  where  “the 
best  traditions  of  culture  and  manners,  from  some  divine  inborn 
instinct  toward  what  is  simplest  and  purest,”  were  held  in  uni¬ 
versal  respect. 

What  Miss  Jewett  with  her  love  of  the  idyllic  did  not  see — the 
grim  and  stark  ugliness  that  resulted  from  the  long  Puritan  re¬ 
pression — Mary  Wilkins  Freeman  was  to  make  the  very  warp  of 
her  work.  She  did  not  come  of  Brahmin  stock.  Bred  up  in  the 
narrow  village  world  of  New  England,  she  was  a  part  of  that 
world  and  she  knew  it  as  Miss  Jewett  could  not.  The  decay  of  a 
social  order  was  all  about  her  in  her  youth.  The  more  ambitious 
were  drifting  to  the  cities  or  to  the  new  West,  and  those  who  re¬ 
mained  were  deeply  marked  by  the  constricting  round  of  duties. 
Catastrophe  seems  always  to  be  lying  in  wait  for  the  characters 
that  fill  her  meager  pages.  They  are  either  timid  and  querulous, 
or  fiercely  “sot,”  yet  in  either  case  happiness  has  a  way  of  slipping 
through  their  fingers.  There  was  too  little  of  the  wine  of  paganism 
in  their  veins  for  them  to  enjoy  what  life  offers.  They  held  them¬ 
selves  in  with  too  tight  a  rein.  The  New  England  conventions 
were  always  building  higher  the  dams  of  their  emotions  until  they 
broke  and  the  roily  waters  rushed  out  in  a  wasting  flood.  Potential 
disaster  peeps  out  of  every  page  of  her  stories.  Pembroke  is  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  collection  of  mean  and  petty  and  tragic  lives,  besotted 
with  stubborn  willfulness,  without  grace  or  comeliness,  extracting 
no  pleasant  flavors  from  the  crushed  grapes  of  life.  In  that  narrow 
world  daily  existence  demands  an  unending  struggle  and  the 
pinching  meanness  breeds  miserly  instincts  and  dour  ways.  A 
Humble  Romance  is  a  stark  bit  of  sordid  futility,  and  in  many 
another  of  her  short  stories  Mrs.  Freeman  etched  in  the  familiar 
scene  with  a  mordant  pen.  Drawn  with  realistic  strokes  the  picture 
of  New  England  in  decay  is  not  so  lovely  as  Miss  Jewett  found  it 
to  be. 

Realizing  poignantly  what  was  happening  in  the  home  of  Puri¬ 
tanism,  Mrs.  Freeman  turned  eventually  to  deal  with  the  problem 
of  industrialism  that  was  subduing  New  England  to  its  will. 
The  Portion  of  Labor  picks  up  the  theme  where  it  had  been  dropped 
a  generation  before  by  Miss  Phelps,  and  attempts  in  realistic  man* 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


67 


ner  to  portray  the  life  of  the  New  England  villager  in  the  shoe 
factory.  It  is  a  tract  rather  than  a  story,  and  it  finds  no  difficulty 
in  reconciling  industrialism  with  morality.  It  revives  the  old 
Puritan  ethics  of  work — preached  by  Richard  Baxter  to  his  Kidder¬ 
minster  weavers  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  before;  it  discovers 
in  discipline  of  character  the  great  end  of  life;  and  it  accepts  the 
factory  as  a  necessary  instrument  of  civilization.  It  is  the  Cinder¬ 
ella  story  of  a  village  girl  who,  refusing  a  chance  to  be  sent  to 
Vassar,  enters  a  shoe  factory,  becomes  a  proletarian  leader,  en¬ 
gineers  a  strike,  gains  a  wider  vision  of  the  function  of  labor, 
accepts  the  principle  of  exploitation,  and  is  rewarded  by  marriage 
into  the  exploiting  class.  In  her  girlhood  she  was  a  radical  in  an 
untaught  way,  and  from  her  valedictory  essay  at  the  High  School 
Commencement  to  her  organization  of  the  factory  workers  she 
boldly  attacked  the  factory  owners.  With  the  machine  itself  she 
had  no  quarrel.  This  is  how  she  felt  when  she  took  her  place  for 
the  first  time  in  the  mill: 

Scared  she  was  not;  she  was  fairly  exultant.  All  at  once  she  entered 
a  vast  room  in  which  eager  men  were  already  at  the  machines  with  frantic 
zeal,  as  if  they  were  driving  labor  herself.  When  she  felt  the  vibration 
of  the  floor  under  her  feet,  when  she  saw  people  spring  to  their  stations 
of  toil,  as  if  springing  to  guns  in  a  battle,  she  realized  the  might  and  gran¬ 
deur  of  it  all.  Suddenly  it  seemed  to  her  that  the  greatest  thing  in  the  whole 
world  was  work  and  that  this  was  one  of  the  greatest  forms  of  work — to 
cover  the  feet  of  progress  of  the  travellers  of  the  earth  from  the  cradle  to 
the  grave.  She  saw  that  these  great  factories,  and  the  strength  of  this 
army  of  the  sons  and  daughters  of  toil,  made  possible  the  advance  of 
civilization  itself,  which  cannot  go  barefoot.  She  realized  all  at  once  and 
forever  the  dignity  of  labor,  this  girl  of  the  people,  with  a  brain  which 
enabled  her  to  overlook  the  heads  of  the  rank  and  file  of  which  she  herself 
formed  a  part.  She  never  again,  whatever  her  regret  might  have  been  for 
another  life  for  which  she  was  better  fitted,  which  her  taste  preferred,  had 
any  sense  of  ignominy  in  this.  She  never  again  felt  that  she  was  too  good 
for  her  labor,  for  labor  had  revealed  itself  to  her  like  a  goddess  behind  a 
sordid  veil.18 

Nevertheless  she  is  ready  to  fight  for  control  of  the  machine — 
for  a  return  to  the  workers  of  a  larger  share  of  their  earnings;  but 
when  the  strike  fails  and  she  contemplates  the  misery  that  it  has 
spread  amongst  the  workers,  she  recants: 

Her  youthful  enthusiasm  carried  her  like  a  leaping-pole  to  conclusions 
beyond  her  years.  "I  wonder,  she  said  to  herself,  if,  after  all,  this 

18  Chapter  XXXV,  p.  350. 


68  CHANGING  AMERICA 

inequality  of  possessions  is  not  a  part  of  the  system  of  creation,  if  the 
righting  of  them  is  not  beyond  the  flaming  sword  of  the  Garden  of  Eden? 
I  wonder  if  the  one  who  tries  to  right  them  forcibly  is  not  meddling,  and 
usurping  the  part  of  the  Creator,  and  bringing  down  wrath  and  confusion 
not  only  upon  his  own  head,  but  upon  the  heads  of  others?  I  wonder  if 
it  is  wise,  in  order  to  establish  a  principle,  to  make  those  who  have  no  voice 
in  the  matter  suffer  for  it — the  helpless  women  and  children?”  .  .  .  She 
reflected,  as  she  had  so  many  times  before,  that  the  world  was  very  old — 
thousands  of  years  old — and  inequality  was  as  old  as  the  world.  Might 
it  not  even  be  a  condition  of  its  existence,  the  shifting  of  weights  which 
kept  it  to  its  path  in  the  scheme  of  the  universe?  19 

Mrs.  Freeman  wisely  chose  a  girl  in  her  teens  as  the  leader  in  a 
fierce  labor  battle,  for  Mrs.  Freeman’s  own  thinking  on  social 
questions  was  still  in  its  teens.  She  had  the  warmest  sympathy 
for  the  exploited  poor;  her  conscience  was  as  tender  as  Miss 
Phelps  s;  but  her  inadequate  knowledge  of  economics  served  her 
ill.  If  economic  inequality  is  necessary  to  keep  the  world  from 
flying  from  its  orbit,  it  serves  the  purpose  likewise  of  character 
development.  When  an  old  factory-hand  looks  back  upon  a  long 
life  of  futile  labor  he  thus  philosophizes: 

Andrew  quoted  again  from  the  old  King  of  Wisdom — “I  withheld  not 
my  heart  from  any  joy,  for  my  heart  rejoices  in  all  my  labor,  and  that 
was  my  portion  of  labor.”  Then  Andrew  thought  ...  of  all  the  toilsome 
lives  of  those  beside  him,  of  all  the  work  which  they  had  done  with  their 
poor,  knotted  hands,  of  the  tracks  which  they  had  worn  on  the  earth  to¬ 
wards  their  graves,  with  their  weary  feet,  and  suddenly  he  seemed  to  grasp 
a  new  and  further  meaning  for  that  verse  of  Ecclesiastes. 

He  seemed  to  see  that  labor  is  not  alone  for  itself,  nor  for  what  it  ac¬ 
complishes  of  the  tasks  of  the  world,  not  for  its  equivalent  in  silver  and 
gold,  not  even  for  the  end  of  human  happiness  and  love,  but  for  the  growth 
in  character  of  the  laborer. 

“That  is  the  portion  of  labor,”  he  said.20 

So  the  book  ends  on  a  Hebraic  note.  In  1901  when  Mrs.  Free¬ 
man  wrote  The  Portion  of  Labor  the  psychology  of  work  had  been 
pretty  well  explored.  For  years  William  Morris  had  been  preaching 
a  very  different  doctrine,  pagan  rather  than  Hebraic,  yet  Mrs. 
freeman  seems  to  have  been  acquainted  with  Morris  no  more 
than  was  Ellen  Brewster,  her  girlish  heroine.  Even  the  starkest 
New  England  realism  was  not  very  critical  of  the  industrialism 
that  was  destroying  the  traditional  New  England.  A  cynical  reader 

19  Chapter  LVII,  pp.  519-520. 


20  Ibid.,  p.  563. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


69 


might  perhaps  suggest  that  the  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the 
fact  that  the  Yankee  was  profiting  enormously  from  this  fouling 
of  the  Puritan  nest. 

n 

THE  AFTERGLOW  OF  THE  ENLIGHTENMENT— 
WALT  WHITMAN 

If  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  was  fast  disintegrating 
in  the  America  of  1870,  it  still  numbered  its  picturesque  followers 
who  sought  to  leaven  the  age  with  the  social  spirit  of  an  earlier 
generation.  It  was  a  noble  bequest — this  gift  of  the  French  think¬ 
ers — with  its  passion  for  liberty,  its  faith  in  man,  its  democratic 
program.  From  that  great  reservoir  had  come  pretty  much  all 
that  was  generously  idealistic  and  humanitarian  in  the  life  of  the 
two  preceding  generations.  Its  persuasive  idealism  had  woven 
itself  so  closely  into  the  fabric  of  national  thought  that  our  fathers 
had  come  to  believe  that  America  was  dedicated  in  a  very  special 
sense  to  the  principles  of  a  free  society.  The  democratic  movement 
returned  to  it  constantly  to  refresh  its  strength  and  take  new  bear¬ 
ings.  At  every  great  crisis  the  familiar  pronouncement  of  the  Dec¬ 
laration  of  Independence  had  been  confidently  appealed  to  in 
furtherance  of  social  justice.  And  now  in  the  days  of  an  acquisitive 
individualism,  when  idealism  was  begging  alms  in  the  market¬ 
place,  it  still  threw  flashes  of  romantic  splendor  on  the  crude 
American  scene.  Old  Peter  Cooper  still  dreamed  his  dreams  of 
social  justice  after  eighty  years  had  passed  over  his  head;  and 
Thaddeus  Stevens,  grown  crabbed  and  surly  from  bitter  struggles, 
mutely  testified  to  his  passionate  equalitarianism  on  the  day  of 
his  burial.  But  it  was  Walt  Whitman  in  his  den  at  Camden— 
culturally  and  in  the  things  of  the  spirit  countless  leagues  removed 
from  Boston — who  was  the  completest  embodiment  of  the  Enlight¬ 
enment — the  poet  and  prophet  of  a  democracy  that  the  America 
of  the  Gilded  Age  was  daily  betraying. 

In  his  somewhat  truculent  pose  of  democratic  undress  Whitman 
was  a  singular  figure  for  a  poet,  and  especially  an  American  poet. 
The  amplitude  and  frankness  and  sincerity  of  his  rich  nature  were 
an  affront  to  every  polite  convention  of  the  day.  Endowed  with 
abundant  sensuousness  and  catholic  sympathies,  he  took  impres¬ 
sions  as  sharply  as  wax  from  the  etcher’s  hand;  and  those  impres¬ 
sions  he  transcribed  with  the  careful  impartiality  of  the  modern 


70 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


expressionist.  His  sensitive  reactions  to  experience  were  emotional 
rather  than  intellectual.  A  pagan,  a  romantic,  a  transcendentalist, 
a  mystic — a  child  of  the  Enlightenment  yet  heeding  the  lessons  of 
science  and  regarding  himself  as  a  realist  who  honored  the  physical 
as  the  repository  of  the  spiritual — to  an  amazing  degree  he  was 
an  unconscious  embodiment  of  American  aspiration  in  the  days 
when  the  romantic  revolution  was  at  flood  tide.  His  buoyant 
nature  floated  easily  on  the  turbulent  stream  of  national  being, 
and  his  songs  were  defiant  chants  in  praise  of  life — strong,  abun¬ 
dant,  procreative — flowing  through  the  veins  of  America. 

Oracular  and  discursive,  Whitman  lived  and  moved  in  a  world 
of  sensuous  imagery.  His  imagination  was  Gothic  in  its  vast 
reaches.  Thronging  troops  of  pictures  passed  before  him,  vivid, 
vital,  transcripts  of  reality,  the  sharp  impress  of  some  experience 
or  fleeting  observation — his  own  and  no  one’s  else,  and  therefore 
authentic.  Delighting  in  the  cosmos  he  saw  reflecting  its  myriad 
phases  in  the  mirror  of  his  own  ego,  he  sank  into  experience  joy¬ 
ously  like  a  strong  swimmer  idling  in  the  salt  waves.  Borne  up  by 
the  caressing  waters,  repressing  nothing,  rejecting  nothing,  he 
found  life  good  in  all  its  manifestations.  As  an  Emersonian  he  was 
content  to  receive  his  sanctions  from  within,  and  as  he  yielded  to 
the  stimulus  of  the  environing  present  his  imagination  expanded, 
his  spirits  rose  to  earth’s  jubilee,  his  speech  fell  into  lyric  cadences, 
and  from  the  exalted  abandon  of  egoistic  experience  there  issued 
a  strong  rich  note  of  the  universal.  His  like  had  not  before  ap¬ 
peared  in  our  literature  for  the  reason  that  the  childlike  pagan 
had  not  before  appeared.  Emerson  with  his  serene  intelligence 
almost  disencumbered  of  the  flesh,  and  Hawthorne  with  his  des- 
sicating  skepticisms  that  left  him  afraid  of  sex,  were  the  fruits  of  a 
Hebraized  culture  that  Puritan  America  understood;  but  Walt 
Whitman  the  caresser  of  life,  the  lover  who  found  no  sweeter  fat 
than  stuck  to  his  own  bones,  was  incomprehensible,  and  not  being 
understood,  it  was  inevitable  that  he  should  be  inexorably  damned. 
The  most  deeply  religious  soul  that  American  literature  knows, 
the  friend  and  lover  of  all  the  world,  the  poet  of  the  democratic 
ideal  to  which,  presumably,  America  was  dedicated,  Whitman  was 
flung  into  outer  darkness  by  the  moral  custodians  of  an  age  that 
knew  morality  only  from  the  precepts  of  the  fathers. 

The  early  stages  of  Whitman’s  intellectual  development  are 
obscure,  but  that  in  his  twenties  he  caught  most  of  the  infections  of 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


71 


the  times,  literary,  political,  and  social,  is  clear  enough.  The  young 
printer-editor  in  frock  coat  and  tall  hat,  with  cane  and  boutonniere, 
who  often  joined  the  Bohemian  society  at  Pfaff’s  restaurant,  was  a 
callow  romantic,  practicing  the  conventional  literary  arts  of  the 
time,  writing  formal  verse,  spinning  romantic  tales,21  and  seeking 
to  approve  himself  a  reputable  litterateur.  But  the  passion  of 
reform  was  already  stirring  within  him  and  a  succession  of  causes — 
temperance,  anti-capital-punishment,  abolitionism— recruited  his 
pen.  As  a  child  of  Manhattan  and  of  the  Jacksonian  revolution  it 
was  inevitable  that  his  first  great  passion  should  have  been  politi¬ 
cal,  and  when  in  the  late  forties  he  found  a  suitable  vehicle  of 
expression  in  the  Brooklyn  Eagle,  his  native  Jeffersonianism  took 
stock  of  current  political  programs.  His  political  master  was  the 
radical  equalitarian  William  Leggett — whose  praises  in  after  life  he 
never  stinted — and  from  Leggett  and  the  Evening  Post,  supple¬ 
mented  by  Fanny  Wright  and  Tom  Paine  and  other  disreputable 
influences,  he  seems  to  have  got  the  first  clear  expression  of  the 
sweeping  democratic  postulates  on  which  later  he  was  to  erect  his 
philosophy.  The  times  were  stirring  everywhere  with  revolution 
and  on  Manhattan  Island  Locofocoism,  with  the  newfangled 
matches,  ten  years  before  had  started  its  little  local  bonfire  by 
way  of  preparation  for  a  general  conflagration  that  should  consume 
the  accumulated  mass  of  wrong  and  injustice.  The  ardent  young 
Whitman  was  deeply  infected  with  Locofoco  enthusiasm  and  his 
editorials  for  the  Eagle  were  the  pronouncements  of  an  extreme 
left-wing  Democrat,  as  became  a  disciple  of  Leggett. 

In  this  early  phase  of  his  democracy  he  fixed  his  hopes  on  the 
great  West  where,  he  believed,  a  freer  and  more  democratic  America 
was  taking  shape.  He  was  an  expansionist,  full  of  ardent  hopes,  an 
apostle  of  “manifest  destiny.”  In  such  lesser  matters  as  finance 
and  governmental  subsidies  he  was  a  good  Jacksonian,  following 
Old  Bullion  Benton  in  his  preference  for  hard  money  and  dislike  of 
shin-plasters.  He  was  opposed  to  the  bankers  and  monopolists.  He 
called  himself  a  “free-trader  by  instinct,”  and  so  late  as  1888  he 
said,  “I  object  to  the  tariff  primarily  because  it  is  not  humanita¬ 
rian — because  it  is  a  damnable  imposition  upon  the  masses.”22  But 
these  lesser  things  were  inconsequential  in  comparison  with  the 

21  See  Mabbott,  Short  Stories  by  Walt  Whitman,  Columbia  University  Press,  1927. 

22  For  his  late  views  see  Horace  Traubel,  With  Walt  Whitman  in  Camden,  Vol.  1, 
p.  99,  and  elsewhere. 


72 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


great  objective  towards  which  America  was  moving — the  ever- 
widening  freedom  of  men  in  society.  “  There  must  be,”  he  wrote  in 
those  early  years,  “continual  additions  to  our  great  experiment  of 
how  much  liberty  society  will  bear.”23  On  that  grand  theme  he  was 
never  tired  of  speaking.  With  Tom  Paine  he  believed  that  just 
government  was  a  simple  thing,  fitted  to  the  capacity  of  many 
heads;  it  is  made  complex  to  hide  its  dishonesty.  After  comment¬ 
ing  on  the  “once  derided,  but  now  widely  worshipped  doctrines 
which  Jefferson  and  the  glorious  Leggett  promulgated,”  he  went  on: 

.  .  .  this  one  single  rule,  rationally  construed  and  applied,  is  enough 
to  form  the  starting  point  of  all  that  is  necessary  in  government:  to  make 
no  more  laws  than  those  useful  for  preventing  a  man  or  body  of  men  from 
infringing  on  the  rights  of  other  men. 

And  again: 

There  is  not  a  greater  fallacy  on  earth  than  the  doctrine  of  force,  as 
applied  in  government.  .  .  .  Sensible  men  have  long  seen  that  the  best 
government  is  that  which  governs  least.24 

Such  comments,  of  course,  are  only  familiar  echoes  of  the  En¬ 
lightenment — echoes  that  run  through  all  the  thinking  of  the 
naturistic  school,  from  Godwin  and  Paine  to  Channing  and  Emer¬ 
son  and  Thoreau.  In  the  minds  of  the  children  of  the  Enlight¬ 
enment  the  creative  ideal  of  individualism  was  always  pointing 
toward  the  ultimate  end  of  philosophic  anarchism,  and  Whitman 
with  his  assured  faith  in  the  average  man  accepted  the  Godwinian 
political  theory  as  naturally  as  did  Thoreau.  What  other  politics, 
indeed,  was  possible  for  those  who  built  upon  the  postulates  of  the 
innate  excellence  of  human  nature  and  the  measureless  potentiali¬ 
ties  of  men  when  vicious  social  codes  have  been  swept  away  and 
the  plastic  clay  is  molded  by  a  kindly  environment?  The  perfect¬ 
ibility  of  man  was  no  romantic  dream  to  the  disciples  of  the  French 
school,  but  a  sober  statement  of  sociological  fact,  based  on  a 
rationalistic  psychology;  and  Whitman  was  convinced  that  he  was 
a  competent  realist  in  thus  envisaging  the  social  problem.  If  man’s 
instincts  are  trustworthy,  what  justification  is  there  for  narrow 
repressions  laid  on  his  freedom?  Hitherto  those  repressions  have 
only  maimed  and  distorted  him,  encouraging  his  baser  rather  than 
his  better  impulses;  and  before  he  can  realize  his  potentialities  he 

23  Cleveland  Rogers  and  John  Black,  The  Gathering  of  the  Forces,  Vol.  I,  p.  12. 

24  Vol.  I,  pp.  S3,  54,  57. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


73 


must  put  away  all  external  compulsions  and  learn  to  rely  solely 
upon  himself.  Hence  the  immediate  objective  of  the  democratic 
revolution  was  individual  freedom,  the  breaking  of  all  chains,  to  the 
end  that  free  men  may  create  a  society  worthy  of  them. 

So  it  was  as  a  revolutionary  that  Whitman  began  his  work;  and 
a  revolutionary  he  remained  to  the  end,  although  in  his  last  years 
he  chose  to  call  himself  an  evolutionist.  A  born  rebel,  he  was  al¬ 
ways  preaching  the  gospel  of  rebellion.  “  I  am  a  radical  of  radicals,” 
he  said  late  in  life,  ‘‘but  I  don’t  belong  to  any  school.”  25  It  was 
this  revolutionary  spirit  that  made  him  the  friend  of  all  rebellious 
souls  past  and  present.  ‘‘My  heart  is  with  all  you  rebels — all  of 
you,  today,  always,  wherever:  your  flag  is  my  flag,”  26  he  said  to 
a  Russian  anarchist;  and  it  was  this  sympathy  that  enabled  him 
to  understand  Fanny  Wright  and  Tom  Paine  and  Priestley,  who 
“have  never  had  justice  done  them.”  27  “The  future  belongs  to 
the  radical,”  and  so  Leaves  of  Grass — he  says  in  “Starting  from 
Paumanok” — “beat  the  gong  of  revolt.”  Conventional  law  and 
order  he  frankly  despised  and  those  individuals  who  sought  their 
own  law  and  followed  it  awoke  his  admiration.  Thoreau’s  “law¬ 
lessness”  delighted  him — “his  going  his  own  absolute  road  let 
hell  blaze  all  it  chooses.”  It  is  a  coward  and  a  poltroon  who  accepts 
his  law  from  others — as  true  of  communities  as  it  is  true  of  in¬ 
dividuals.  He  was  a  good  Jeffersonian  in  his  fear  of  Federalistic 
consolidation  that  must  put  an  end  to  local  rights  and  freedoms. 

To  the  States  or  any  one  of  them,  or  any  city  of  the  States, 

Resist  much,  obey  little, 

Once  unquestioning  obedience,  once  fully  enslaved, 

...  no  nation,  state,  city  of  this  earth,  ever  afterward  resumes 
its  liberty.28 

I  am  for  those  that  have  never  been  master’d, 

For  men  and  women  whose  tempers  have  never  been  master’d. 

For  those  whom  laws,  theories,  conventions  can  never  master.29 


This  is  the  spirit  of  the  radical  forties  when  men  were  prone  to 
repudiate  their  allegiance  to  the  political  state;  when  left-wing 
Abolitionists  were  dissolving  the  Union  by  resolutions;  and  tran- 


25  Traubel,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  215. 

26  Ibid..,  Vol.  I,  p.  65. 

27  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  pp.  79-8o.  ,  „  r  M  v 

28  Leaves  of  Grass ,  inclusive  edition  ed.  by  Emory  Halloway,  Carden  City,  IN.  i 
1927.  Hereafter  called  Leaves.  “To  the  States,  p.  8. 

29  Ibid.,  “  By  Blue  Ontario’s  Shore,”  p.  297, 11.  21-23. 


74 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


scendentalists  were  proclaiming  the  doctrine  of  nullification  of 
unrighteous  law.  It  had  come  out  of  the  Jacksonian  upheaval,  but 
it  was  daily  discovering  fresh  sanctions  as  the  anarchistic  premises 
of  the  Enlightenment  were  more  adequately  explored  and  the 
revolutionary  spirit  of  Europe  broke  in  upon  America.  During 
these  turbulent  years  Whitman’s  great  plan  was  in  gestation,  but 
before  Leaves  of  Grass  came  to  print  in  the  first  slender  edition  of 
1855  other  influences  had  been  at  wTork,  confirming  his  earlier 
views,  endowing  them  with  lyric  passion  and  expanding  them  into 
a  grandiose  whole.  Those  influences  would  seem  to  have  been  the 
fervid  emotionalism  of  the  fifties,  the  monistic  idealism  of  the 
transcendental  school,  and  the  emerging  scientific  movement.  On 
the  whole  perhaps  it  was  the  first,  with  its  vague  and  expansive 
Utopianism,  that  bit  most  deeply,  stimulating  his  rich  pagan  na¬ 
ture  to  unconventional  frankness  and  encouraging  him  to  throw  off 
the  inhibitions  of  a  Puritan  ethicism  that  held  American  thought 
in  narrow  bondage.  The  rude  and  ample  liberalisms  that  so 
shocked  his  early  readers  were  in  no  sense  peculiar  to  Whitman, 
despite  common  opinion,  but  the  expression  of  the  surging  emo¬ 
tionalism  of  the  times,  and  Leaves  of  Grass,  can  best  be  understood 
by  setting  its  frank  paganism  against  the  background  of  the  lush 
fifties. 

With  its  Calvinistic  antecedents — Scotch-Irish  and  Huguenot 
as  well  as  New  England  Puritan — America  had  always  been  un¬ 
friendly  to  a  pagan  evaluation  of  man’s  duties  and  destiny,  and 
the  revolutionary  movement  of  the  forties  had  been  kept  within 
sober  ethical  bounds.  John  Humphrey  Noyes  was  probably  the 
most  radical  American  of  the  times,  yet  the  Perfectionism  of  his 
earlier  years,  with  its  ascetic  religiosity,  bore  little  resemblance 
to  the  later  communism  of  the  Oneida  Community.  But  the 
liberalism  of  the  fifties  was  casting  off  all  Hebraic  restraints  and 
running  wild,  proclaiming  a  new  heaven  about  to  appear  on  the 
free  continent  of  America,  and  bidding  the  youth  of  the  land  live 
joyously  as  children  of  the  earth.  Paganism  for  the  first  time  lifted 
up  its  head  and  surveyed  the  American  scene— a  youthful  pagan¬ 
ism,  lusty  and  vigorous,  that  suggested  amazing  applications  of 
the  respectable  doctrines  of  freedom  and  individuality,  to  the 
scandal  of  older-fashioned  folk.  From  the  free  spaces  of  the  West, 
carried  on  the  tide  of  the  Gold  Rush,  had  come  a  spontaneous 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


75 


reaction  from  the  earlier  repressions.  Liberalism  was  passing  from 
the  political  to  the  social — a  free  welling-up  of  repressed  desires, 
a  vast  expansiveness.  Too  long  had  the  natural  human  emotions 
been  under  the  ban  of  asceticism;  too  long  had  a  God  of  wrath 
dispossessed  a  God  of  love.  Life  is  good  in  the  measure  that  it  is 
lived  fully,  and  to  live  fully  is  to  live  in  the  flesh  as  well  as  the 
spirit.  Emerson  the  prophet  of  the  earlier  decade  had  suffered 
from  an  extreme  unfleshliness;  Whitman  the  prophet  of  the  fifties 
would  recover  the  balance.  As  the  current  of  emotionalism  gath¬ 
ered  force  a  frank  joie  de  vivre  submerged  the  old  reticences;  candor, 
frankness,  a  very  lust  of  self-expression,  was  the  new  law  for  free 
men  and  women — a  glorification  of  the  physical  that  put  to  rout 
the  traditional  Hebraisms.  A  riotous  sentimentalism  ran  about 
the  land  until  it  seemed  to  timid  souls  as  if  liberty  were  quite 
running  away  with  decency.  Freedom  for  black  slaves  was  one 
thing,  but  freedom  for  women — the  loosening  of  social  conven¬ 
tion — suggested  terrifying  eventualities  like  free  love  and  the  dis¬ 
ruption  of  the  family.  They  would  countenance  no  such  immoral 
freedom  and  under  the  leadership  of  young  Anthony  Comstock 
the  forces  of  reticence  and  respectability  made  ready  to  do  battle 
with  the  new  liberalisms. 

It  was  not  alone  Walt  Whitman  who  threw  down  the  gage  to 
the  Comstockian  watchmen  in  the  gates.  The  apostle  of  the  new 
freedom,  the  high  priest  of  emotional  liberalism,  was  Henry  Ward 
Beecher,  lately  come  out  of  the  West,  who  from  the  pulpit  of 
Plymouth  Church  swept  his  thousands  of  idolizing  followers  along 
the  path  of  Utopian  emotionalism.  With  a  rich  amplitude  and 
golden  vagueness  of  metaphor  he  preached  the  new  gospel.  From 
his  lips  flowed  a  lyric  chant,  a  vast  paean,  a  very  shout  in  praise 
of  liberty  and  love,  of  godlike  man  and  a  manlike  God.  “Life — 
affirmative,  immediate,  in  a  highly  ornamented  Mayday  world — 
he  acknowledged  and  commemorated  life!”  30  He  bathed  in  a 
“perpetual  tropical  luxuriance  of  blessed  love.”  “I  never  knew 
how  to  worship  until  I  knew  how  to  love,”  he  cried;  “and  to  love 
I  must  have  something  .  .  .  that  touching  my  heart,  shall  not 
leave  the  chill  of  ice  but  the  warmth  of  summer.”  Like  a  good 
Emersonian  he  discarded  reason — the  discipline  of  the  ancestral 
Calvinism — to  follow  the  “secret  chords  of  feeling,”  the  “heart’s 
instincts,  whose  channels  you  may  appoint  but  whose  flowing  is 
30  Constance  Mayfield  Rourke,  Trumpets  of  Jubliee ,  p.  171. 


76 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


beyond  control.”  A  “magnificent  pagan” — so  Thoreau  called 
him — he  reveled  in  sensuous  beauty.  His  emotions  mounted  as 
he  contemplated  this  new  land,  this  new  people,  the  golden  future 
that  beckoned — with  all  shackles  broken,  dedicated  to  freedom, 
warm  and  palpitating  from  abundant  life — a  radiant  world  of 
lovely  women  and  manly  men.  He  dwelt  on  Pisgah  and  from  the 
heights  looked  out  on  a  divine  democracy.  “The  life  of  the  com¬ 
mon  people  is  the  best  part  of  the  world’s  life,”  he  exclaimed;  “the 
life  of  the  common  people  is  the  life  of  God.”  And  to  his  congrega¬ 
tion  intoxicated  with  his  rhetoric  he  shouted,  “Ye  are  gods!  You 
are  crystalline,  your  faces  are  radiant!”  31  And  the  end  and  out¬ 
come  envisaged  by  this  prophet  of  the  American  Idea  was  a  vaguely 
grandiose  fellowship,  not  of  the  Saints  alone,  but  of  all  the  throng¬ 
ing  children  of  men,  for  of  such  is  God’s  kingdom  of  this  world. 

As  such  lyric  chants  fell  on  Whitman’s  ears,  they  must  have 
quickened  the  ferment  of  thought  that  was  eventually  to  clarify 
for  him  the  ideal  of  democracy,  exalting  it  by  making  it  warm  and 
human  and  social.  The  old  Jacksonian  leveling  had  been  negative; 
its  freedoms  had  been  individual,  its  anarchism  selfish  and  un¬ 
social.  The  great  ideal  of  the  fellowship  had  been  lost  in  the 
scramble  for  rights.  Even  transcendental  democracy  had  nar¬ 
rowed  its  contacts.  The  hermit  Thoreau  in  his  cabin  at  Walden 
Pond  was  no  symbol  ol  a  generous-  democratic  future.  In  the 
struggle  for  liberty  and  equality  the  conception  of  fraternity  had 
been  denied  and  the  golden  trinity  of  the  Enlightenment  dismem¬ 
bered.  It  was  this  idea  of  fraternity,  made  human  and  hearty  by 
his  warm  love  of  men  and  women,  that  Whitman  got  from  the 
expansive  fifties  and  built  into  his  thinking.  The  conception  of 
solidarity,  then  entering  the  realm  of  proletarian  thought  through 
the  labors  of  hriedrich  Engels  and  Karl  Marx,  was  his  response  to 
the  new  times — a  response  that  infused  his  democratic  faith  with 
a  glowing  humanism.  Democracy  spiritualized  by  Channing  and 
Emerson  and  Parker  had  suffered  limitations  from  their  lingering 
Hebraisms  the  Puritan  passion  for  righteousness  had  imposed 
strict  ethical  bounds  on  the  democratic  will.  In  Thoreau  it 
had  been  subjected  to  caustic  skepticisms — the  transcendental 
individualist  quizzically  asked,  “What  is  your  people?”  and  re¬ 
fused  to  subject  himself  to  the  mass.  But  in  Whitman  all  limita¬ 
tions  and  skepticisms  were  swept  away  by  the  feeling  of  comrade- 

31  Ibid.,  p.  172. 


77 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

ship.  Flesh  is  kin  to  flesh,  and  out  of  the  great  reserves  of  life  is 
born  the  average  man  “with  his  excellent  good  manliness.”  Not 
in  distinction  but  in  oneness  with  the  whole  is  found  the  good  life, 
for  in  fellowship  is  love  and  in  the  whole  is  freedom;  and  love  and 
freedom  are  the  law  and  the  prophets.  The  disintegrations  of  the 
earlier  individualism  must  be  succeeded  by  a  new  integration; 
fear  and  hate  and  jealousy  and  pride  have  held  men  apart  hitherto, 
but  love  will  draw  them  together.  After  all  solidarity — the  children 
of  America  merging  in  the  fellowship,  sympathetic,  responsive, 
manlike  yet  divine,  of  which  the  poet  should  be  the  prophet  and 
literature  provide  the  sermons. 

It  wTas  a  noble  conception — washing  away  all  the  meanness  that 
befouled  Jacksonian  individualism — and  it  somewhat  slowly  found 
its  way  to  parity  with  his  first  master  conception,  the  universal 
ego,  and  settled  into  place  in  those  later  opening  lines  of  Leaves  of 
Grass: 

One’s-self  I  sing,  a  simple  separate  person, 

Yet  utter  the  word  Democratic,  the  word  En-Masse.32 

Then  came  the  war  to  strengthen  his  faith  in  the  common  man. 
As  he  watched  the  soldiers  marching,  fighting,  suffering,  he  was 
deeply  impressed  with  their  courage,  patience,  kindness,  manli¬ 
ness,  and  came  to  reverence  the  deep  wellspring  of  national  being 
from  which  issued  such  inexhaustible  waters.  It  was  not  the  few 
but  the  many  that  gave  him  hope.  “I  never  before  so  realized  the 
majesty  and  reality  of  the  American  people  en  masse,”  he  wrote 
of  some  regiments  returning  from  the  front.  “It  fell  upon  me  like 
a  great  awe.”  33  And  as  he  contemplated  this  fecund  people,  with 
its  sons  and  daughters  issuing  strong  and  wholesome  from  every 
part  of  the  land,  there  came  to  him  a  new  conception  of  unity— 
the  Union  that  Lincoln  loved — the  drawing  together  into  an  in¬ 
dissoluble  whole  of  the  far-flung  commonwealths — a  realization  of 
the  perfect  State  where  reign  liberty,  equality,  fraternity.  Solidar¬ 
ity  had  taken  on  a  political  complexion  but  its  life-blood  was  in 
the  veins  of  a  free  people. 

But  pagan  though  he  was  in  his  deeper  nature,  a  child  of  the 
emotional  fifties,  he  was  a  transcendentalist  also  and  his  democratic 
philosophy,  as  it  took  shape,  bears  unmistakable  marks  of  the  New 
England  school,  supplemented  perhaps  by  Quakerism.  His  well- 

32  Leaves,  “One’s-Self  I  Sing,”  p.  I,  11.  i-2. 

33  Autobiographia,  p.  73.  See  also  Democratic  Vistas,  p.  74. 


78 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


known  comment,  “I  was  simmering  and  simmering;  it  was  Emerson 
brought  me  to  boil,”  suggests  much,  and  in  particular  that  the 
Enlightenment  as  it  had  come  to  him  through  the  Jeffersonian 
heritage  was  supplemented  and  spiritualized  by  the  Enlightenment 
as  it  had  taken  special  form  in  passing  through  the  transcendental 
mind.  To  this  latter  source  must  be  traced  the  philosophic  monism 
that  served  to  draw  his  speculations  together — a  mystic  sense  of 
the  divine  oneness  of  life  that  took  his  major  postulates  in  golden 
hands  and  fused  them  into  a  single  spiritual  whole.  Thus  instructed 
the  ‘‘great  Idea,  the  idea  of  perfect  and  free  individuals,”  became 
curiously  Emersonian  in  all  its  amplifications.  There  is  the  same 
glorification  of  consciousness  and  will,  the  same  exaltation  of  the 
soul,  the  same  trust  in  the  buried  life  that  men  call  instinct,  the 
same  imperious  call  to  heed  the  voice  of  innate  Godhood;  and 
round  and  about  this  “perfect  and  free  individual”  is  a  mystical 
egocentric  universe  wherein  the  children  of  men  may  luxuriate  in 
their  divinity.  The  body  is  excellent  as  the  soul  is  excellent;  away, 
therefore,  with  all  shamefacedness — the  mean  secretiveness,  the 
putting  of  fingers  to  the  lips  in  presence  of  the  naked,  the  lies  in 
presence  of  open  palpable  fact!  For  if  this  be  indeed  God's  universe, 
and  He  is  in  and  through  it  all,  the  children  of  Adam  may  stand  in 
His  presence  unafraid  nay,  rather  with  pnde  in  their  own  ex¬ 
cellence.  “I  exist  as  I  am,  that  is  enough,”  for  “Divine  am  I 
inside  and  out,  and  I  make  holy  whatever  I  touch  or  am  touch’d 
from.” 

Whitman  not  only  accepted  Emerson  with  ungrudging  loyalty 
but  he  dwelt  much  with  Hegel  and  the  German  idealists,  and  with 
their  help  he  penetrated  curiously  to  the  core  of  things,  discovering 
there  an  inner  spiritual  reality  that  is  the  abiding  substance  behind 
the  external  manifestation.  He  had  come  upon  food  to  sustain  his 
faith  in  presence  of  the  mean  and  base  that  compassed  him  about, 
and  the  puzzling  contradictions  of  life  no  longer  troubled  him.  If 
man  be  perfectible,  if  he  be  indeed  a  child  of  God  though  still  in  his 
infancy,  how  glorious  must  be  the  future  toward  which  he  is  press¬ 
ing!  The  evil  will  pass  and  the  good  remain. 

Roaming  in  thought  over  the  Universe,  I  saw  the  little  that  is  Good 
steadily  hastening  towards  immortality, 

And  the  vast  all  that  is  call’d  Evil  I  saw  hastening  to  merge  itself  and 
become  lost  and  dead.34 

34  Leaves ,  “Roaming  in  Thought,”  p.  233. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


79 


When  he  turned  from  the  oracular  utterance  of  Leaves  of  Grass 
to  sober  exposition,  he  phrased  it  thus: 

There  is,  apart  from  mere  intellect  ...  a  wondrous  something  that 
realises  without  argument  ...  an  intuition  of  the  absolute  balance,  in 
time  and  space,  of  the  whole  of  this  multifarious,  mad  chaos  of  fraud, 
frivolity,  hoggishness — this  revel  of  fools,  and  incredible  make-believe 
and  general  unsettledness,  we  call  the  world;  a  soul-sight  of  that  divine 
clue  and  unseen  thread  which  holds  the  whole  congeries  of  things,  all 
history  and  time,  and  all  events  however  trivial,  however  momentous, 
like  a  leash’d  dog  in  the  hands  of  the  hunter.35 

To  discover  this  divine  clue  and  be  drawn  by  the  unseen  thread 
into  the  orbit  of  things,  to  suffer  the  Me — the  “human  identity  of 
understanding,  emotions,  spirit” — to  fuse  with  the  Not  Me — “the 
whole  of  the  material,  objective  universe  and  laws,  with  what  is 
behind  them  in  time  and  space ” — became  therefore  for  Whitman 
the  grand  objective  of  man’s  life  and  effort.  This  for  him  was  the 
sum  and  substance  of  religion,  which  was  no  other  than  the  binding 
of  the  individual  back  upon  the  whole.  “A  vast  similitude  interlocks 
all.”  And  so  from  his  conception  of  social  solidarity  he  went  for¬ 
ward  to  the  conception  of  spiritual  solidarity,  and  discovered  re¬ 
ligion  to  be  the  crown  and  glory  of  the  “American  Idea.”  Walt 
Whitman  and  America  were  to  be  the  prophets  of  religion.  “Easily 
at  home  in  a  natural  world  of  prodigious  brightness  and  scale, 
he  .  .  .  saw  ‘the  most  splendid  race  the  sun  ever  shone  upon,’  and 
was  urging  the  life  of  instinct  and  impulse.  Love  was  the  key — 
taking  form  and  in  ‘Starting  from  Paumanok’  he  asserted  his 
Love,  Democracy,  Religion — a  new  religion.”  36  His  message  was 
purpose. 

The  soul, 

Forever  and  forever— longer  than  soil  is  brown  and  solid — longer  than 
water  ebbs  and  flows. 

I  will  make  the  poems  of  materials,  for  I  think  they  are  to  be  the  most 
spiritual  poems, 

And  I  will  make  the  poems  of  my  body  and  of  mortality, 

For  I  think  I  shall  then  supply  myself  with  the  poems  of  my  soul  and  of 
immortality. 

I  will  make  a  song  for  these  States  that  no  one  State  may  under  any 
circumstances  be  subjected  to  another  State, 

36  “  Carlyle  from  the  Amencan  Point  of  View,”  in  Specimen  Days,  Prose  Works, 
dd.  174.-17=:.  36  Rourke,  op.  cit.,  p.  173. 


80  CHANGING  AMERICA 

I  will  sing  the  song  of  companionship, 


I  will  write  the  evangel-poem  of  comrades  and  of  love, 


I  am  the  credulous  man  of  qualities,  ages,  races, 
I  advance  from  the  people  in  their  own  spirit, 


I,  too,  following  many  and  follow’d  by  many,  inaugurate  a  religion,  .  .  „ 
••••••• 

Each  is  not  for  its  own  sake, 

I  say  the  whole  earth  and  all  the  stars  in  the  sky  are  for  religion’s  sake. 

I  say  no  man  has  ever  yet  been  half  devout  enough, 

None  has  ever  yet  adored  or  worship’d  half  enough, 

None  has  begun  to  think  how  divine  he  himself  is,  and  how  certain  the 
future  is. 

I  say  that  the  real  and  permanent  grandeur  of  these  States  must  be  their 
religion, 

Otherwise  there  is  no  real  and  permanent  grandeur; 


My  comrade! 

For  you  to  share  with  me  two  greatnesses,  and  a  third  one  rising  inclusive 
and  more  resplendent, 

The  greatness  of  Love  and  Democracy,  and  the  greatness  of  Religion.37 


But  this  new  religion  of  the  mystical  Whitman,  in  harmony 
with  post-transcendental  thought,  was  deeply  impregnated  with 
the  spirit  of  science.  He  was  in  the  very  fullness  of  his  powers  when 
the  conception  of  evolution  came  to  him  and  he  greeted  it  gladly, 
weaving  it  into  all  his  thinking  and  discovering  in  it  a  confirmation 
of  his  idealistic  philosophy.  It  was  the  evolution  of  Herbert 
Spencer,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  Whitman  accepted — teleo¬ 
logical,  buoyantly  optimistic,  dominated  by  the  conception  of 
progress,  shot  through  with  the  spirit  of  the  Enlightenment;  and 
such  an  evolution  was  a  confirmation  and  not  a  denial  of  his 
transcendental  premises.  It  supplemented  rather  than  contra¬ 
dicted  the  tenets  of  his  faith.  Like  Emerson  as  he  saw  the  bounds 
of  the  material  universe  slowly  pushed  back  by  science  he  dis¬ 
covered  amidst  the  constant  change  the  presence  of  growth, 
development,  the  natural  passage  from  the  simple  to  the  complex; 


v  Leaves,  “Starting  from  Paumanok,”  p.  14,  11.  22-26:  p.  ic,  11 
p.  i6,ll.  2,  5-1 1  ;p.  17,11.  7-io.  F 


1,  13.  19.  22-23; 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


81 


and  like  Theodore  Parker  he  felt  that  this  slow  unfolding  was  no 
other  than  the  unfolding  of  God,  making  Himself  evident  and 
unmistakable  to  man.  Evolution  was  God’s  great  plan.  “The  law 
over  all,  the  law  of  laws,  is  the  law  of  successions,”  he  was  per¬ 
suaded;  “for  what  is  the  present  after  all  but  a  growth  out  of  the 
past?”  But  noble  as  is  the  evidence  of  God’s  work  discoverable  by 
science,  the  soul  is  not  content  to  rest  with  such  evidence;  it  must 
seek  out  the  reality  behind  the  manifestation;  and  for  this  work 
the  poet  alone  is  fitted.  The  poet  must  complete  the  work  of  the 
scientist.  The  noble  “Passage  to  India”  is  a  lovely  chant  of 
human  progress,  the  adventurous  soul  conquering  the  earth;  but 
it  must  not  pause  there;  it  must  seek  God  through  the  universe 
until  it  finds  Him,  and  “Nature  and  Man  shall  be  disjoin’d  and 
diffused  no  more,”  and  “All  these  hearts  as  of  fretted  children 
shall  be  sooth’d.” 

Bathe  me  O  God  in  thee,  mounting  to  thee, 

I  and  my  soul  to  range  in  range  of  thee.38 

It  was  in  this  profoundly  religious  spirit  that  Whitman  accepted 
science,  built  it  into  his  poetry,  rested  confidently  upon  it;  and  it 
is  this  spirit  that  explains  his  formal  statement  in  the  “Song  of 
Myself.” 

I  accept  Reality  and  dare  not  question  it, 

Materialism  first  and  last  imbuing. 

Hurrah  for  positive  science!  long  live  exact  demonstration! 

Fetch  stonecrop  mixt  with  cedar  and  branches  of  lilac, 

This  is  the  lexicographer,  this  the  chemist,  this  made  a  grammar  of  the 
old  cartouches, 

These  mariners  put  the  ship  through  dangerous  unknown  seas, 

This  the  geologist,  this  works  with  the  scalpel,  and  this  is  the  mathema¬ 
tician. 

Gentlemen,  to  you  the  first  honors  always! 

Your  facts  are  useful,  and  yet  they  are  not  my  dwelling, 

I  but  enter  by  them  to  an  area  of  my  dwelling.39 

Equipped  with  such  a  philosophy  and  supported  by  such  a 
faith  Whitman  accepted  the  twin  duties  laid  upon  him:  to  make 
clear  to  America  her  present  failure  in  the  great  adventure  how 
far  she  had  fallen  short  hitherto  of  any  adequate  democratic 

39  Leaves,  p.  43, 11.  9-17- 


38  Leaves,  p.  349,  11.  18-19. 


82 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


reality;  and  to  mark  out  afresh  the  path  to  the  Canaan  of  demo¬ 
cratic  hopes — reviving  the  early  hopes  of  the  Enlightenment  and 
drawing  in  lovelier  colors  the  democratic  Utopia  dreamed  of  for  a 
hundred  years.  To  be  both  critic  and  prophet — that  he  conceived 
to  be  his  mission,  a  mission  that  he  was  faithful  to  for  upwards  of 
forty  years.  For  the  first  duty  he  was  admirably  equipped.  No 
other  knew  this  America  so  intimately  or  so  broadly — had  pene¬ 
trated  so  lovingly  to  the  common  heart  and  read  so  clearly  its 
secret  hopes  and  fears.  That  America  was  not  yet  a  democracy — 
was  very  far  indeed  from  a  democracy — that  it  was  a  somewhat 
shoddy  bourgeois  capitalistic  society  shot  through  with  cant  and 
hypocrisy  and  every  meanness,  he  saw  with  calm,  searching  eyes. 
No  contemporary  critic,  not  Godkin,  not  Emerson,  saw  more 
clearly  the  unlovely  reality  or  dealt  with  it  more  scathingly,  not 
only  in  Leaves  of  Grass  but  especially  in  his  prose  writings  and  in 
casual  talk.  Amongst  scores  of  such  passages  a  single  one  must 
serve  for  illustration. 

I  say  that  our  New  World  democracy,  however  great  a  success  in  up¬ 
lifting  the  masses  out  of  their  sloughs,  in  materialistic  development, 
products,  and  in  a  certain  highly-deceptive  superficial  popular  intellectu¬ 
ality,  is,  so  far,  an  almost  complete  failure  in  its  social  aspects,  and  in  really 
grand  religious,  moral,  literary,  and  esthetic  results.  .  .  .  Shift  and  turn 
the  combinations  of  the  statement  as  we  may,  the  problem  of  the  future 
of  America  is  in  certain  respects  as  dark  as  it  is  vast.  Pride,  competition, 
segregation,  vicious  wilfulness,  and  license  beyond  example,  brood  already 
upon  us.  Unwieldy  and  immense,  who  shall  hold  in  behemoth?  who  bridle 
leviathan?  Flaunt  it  as  we  choose,  athwart  and  over  the  roads  of  our 
progress  loom  huge  uncertainty,  and  dreadful  threatening  gloom.  It  is 
useless  to  deny  it:  Democracy  grows  rankly  up  the  thickest,  noxious,  dead¬ 
liest  plants  and  fruits  of  all — brings  worse  and  worse  invaders — needs 
newer,  larger,  stronger,  keener  compensations  and  compellers.  Our  lands 
embracing  so  much  .  .  .  hold  in  the  breast  that  flame  also,  capable  of  con¬ 
suming  themselves,  consuming  us  all.  .  .  .  Even  today,  amid  these  whirls, 
incredible  flippancy,  and  blind  fury  of  parties,  infidelity,  entire  lack  of 
first-rate  captains  and  leaders,  added  to  the  plentiful  meanness  and  vul¬ 
garity  of  the  ostensible  masses  that  problem,  the  labor  question,  begin¬ 
ning  to  open  like  a  yawning  gulf,  rapidly  widening  every  year — what 
prospect  have  we?  We  sail  a  dangerous  sea  of  seething  currents,  cross  and 
under-currents,  vortices, — all  so  dark  and  untried.40 

As  a  realist  Whitman  granted  the  worst  charges  of  the  critics  of 
democracy,  but  he  probed  deeper  and  brought  other  facts  to  light 
that  modified  the  equation.  It  was  the  difficult  question  the  old 
40  Democratic  Vistas,  Prose  Works,  pp.  254-255. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


83 


Federalists  had  posed  and  that  Carlyle  had  lately  revived — the 
question,  is  nol  this  meanness  inseparable  from  democracy?  is  not 
your  people  in  fact  a  great  beast,  requiring  the  lash  and  the  curb? 
It  was  the  crux  of  the  long  debate  over  democracy  and  to  it  Whit¬ 
man  gave  anxious  and  frequent  consideration.  In  fighting  the 
battle  of  179°  over  again,  like  Jefferson  he  rested  his  case  on 
the  native  integrity  and  measureless  potentiality  of  the  “bulk- 
people” — they  are  the  deep  soil  from  which  spring  the  abundant 
fruits  and  flowers  of  civilization.  Gentle-nurtured  folk  do  not 
understand  this — they  do  not  like  the  rank  qualities  of  vital  being. 
Matthew  Arnold  “always  gives  you  the  notion  that  he  hates  to 
touch  the  dirt — the  dirt  is  so  dirty!  But  everything  comes  out  of 
the  dirt — everything:  everything  comes  out  of  the  people  .  .  . 
not  university  people,  not  F.F.V.  people:  people,  people,  just 
people!”  In  the  rude,  vital,  natural  man  is  the  inexhaustible 
wellspring  of  good  and  evil;  “He’s  got  it  all  .  .  .  not  only  the 
cruel,  beastly,  hoggish,  cheating,  bedbug  qualities,  but  also  the 
spiritual — the  noble — the  high-born”;  41  in  “some  ways”  he  is  a 
“devil  of  a  fellow,”  but  he  is  not  “all  devil  or  even  chiefly  devil.”  42 
And  because  he  is  not  chiefly  devil  such  love  and  beauty  and  justice 
and  comradeship  as  there  is  in  the  world,  such  progress  in  civiliza¬ 
tion  as  has  been  made  hitherto,  have  been  possible — how  other¬ 
wise?  If  he  has  journeyed  thus  far  out  of  the  primeval  slime,  what 
bounds  shall  be  set  to  his  eventual  journeyings?  Why  put  out 
one’s  eyes  with  a  mere  handful  of  years? 

So  Whitman  projected  his  democratic  commonwealth  far  into 
the  future;  he  would  not  have  us  believe  that  it  had  been  realized 
here  in  America.  Political  democracy,  the  struggle  for  political 
rights  that  had  engaged  America  hitherto,  was  only  negative,  a 
necessary  preliminary  to  the  ultimate  reality.  “  I  submit,”  he  said, 
“that  the  fruition  of  democracy,  on  aught  like  a  grand  scale, 
resides  altogether  in  the  future,”  and  its  realization  depends  upon 
the  use  to  which  the  people  put  their  freedom.  If  from  it  emerges 
a  proud  and  self-conscious  individualism — “the  quality  of  Being, 
in  the  object’s  self,  according  to  its  own  central  idea  and  purpose, 
and  of  growing  therefrom  and  thereto — not  criticism  by  other 
standards,  and  adjustments  thereto” — then  democracy  on  a  grand 
scale  will  be  possible  and  the  self-reliant  citizen  will  take  his  place 
in  a  free  creative  society.  1  he  ideal  of  the  growing  man,  and  the 
41  Traubel,  op.  cit.,  Vol  I,  p.  174-  42  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  285. 


84 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ideal  of  the  perfect  State — broadly  social  rather  than  narrowly 
political — these  were  his  twin  ideals;  and  the  tie  that  is  to  bind 
men  together  in  spontaneous  solidarity  is  love.  How  characteristic 
is  his  sketch  of  the  perfect  city,  and  how  deeply  saturated  with 
the  Enlightenment!  There  is  wanting  only  a  physiocratic  eco¬ 
nomics  to  make  it  perfect. 

A  great  city  is  that  which  has  the  greatest  men  and  women, 


Where  the  city  stands  with  the  brawniest  breed  of  orators  and  bards, 
Where  the  city  stands  that  is  belov’d  by  these,  and  loves  them  in  return 
and  understands  them, 

Where  no  monuments  exist  to  heroes  but  in  the  common  words  and  deeds, 
Wh  ere  thrift  is  in  its  place,  and  prudence  is  in  its  place, 

Where  the  men  and  women  think  lightly  of  the  laws, 

Where  the  slave  ceases  and  the  master  of  slaves  ceases, 

Where  the  populace  rise  at  once  against  the  never-ending  audacity  of 
elected  persons, 


Where  outside  authority  enters  always  after  the  precedence  of  inside 
authority, 

Where  the  citizen  is  always  the  head  and  ideal,  and  President,  Mayor, 
Governor  and  what  not,  are  agents  for  pay. 

Where  children  are  taught  to  be  laws  to  themselves,  and  to  depend  on 
themselves, 

Where  equanimity  is  illustrated  in  affairs, 


Where  the  city  of  faithfulest  friends  stands, 

Where  the  city  of  the  cleanliness  of  the  sexes  stands, 

There  the  great  city  stands.43 

Individualism,  solidarity — on  such  strong  bases  he  erected  his 
ideal  democracy,  and  the  heaven-reaching  temple  will  be  overlaid 
with  the  rich  arts  and  graces  of  a  civilization  worthy  at  last  of  the 
name.  Such  was  the  Enlightenment  as  it  came  to  flower  in  the 
passionate  idealism  of  Walt  Whitman — a  dream  that  was  mocked 
and  flouted  and  nullified  by  the  Drews  and  Fisks  and  Goulds — 
the  “hoggish,  cheating,  bedbug  qualities”  of  a  generation  that 
scorned  him  for  a  beast.  Even  his  stout  faith  was  shaken  at  times 

43  Leaves,  “Song  of  the  Broad  Axe,”  p.  160, 11.  7,  14-20,  21-22;  p.  161, 11.  1-2,  6-7, 
10. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


85 


by  the  infidelities  of  the  Gilded  Age.  He  was  troubled  by  the  gap 
that  opened  between  the  free  individual  and  the  perfect  State. 
“I  seem  to  be  reaching  for  a  new  politics — -for  a  new  economy,”  he 
confessed  in  1888;  “T  don’t  quite  know  what,  but  for  something.”  44 
Although  he  protested,  “The  older  I  grow  .  .  .  the  more  I  am 
confirmed  in  my  optimism,  my  democracy,”  he  projected  his  hopes 
farther  into  the  future.  He  sympathized  with  the  socialists  but  he 
was  not  one  of  them.  His  revolutionary  ardor  abated  and  he 
preferred  in  later  years  to  call  himself  an  evolutionist.45  “Be 
radical — be  radical,”  he  said  to  Traubel,  “be  not  too  damned 
radical.”  46  With  his  catholic  sympathies  that  refused  all  bitter¬ 
ness  he  could  not  be  a  partisan — “after  the  best  the  partisan  will 
say  something  better  will  be  said  by  the  man.”  47 

So  in  the  twilight  of  the  romantic  revolution  Whitman  quietly 
slipped  away.  The  great  hopes  on  which  he  fed  have  been  belied 
by  after  events — so  his  critics  say;48  as  the  great  hopes  of  the 
Enlightenment  have  been  belied.  Certainly  in  this  welter  of 
today,  with  science  become  the  drab  and  slut  of  war  and  indus¬ 
trialism,  with  sterile  money-slaves  instead  of  men,  Whitman’s 
expansive  hopes  seem  grotesque  enough.  Democracy  may  indeed 
be  only  a  euphemism  for  the  rulership  of  fools.  Yet  in  a  time  of 
huge  infidelities,  in  the  dun  breakdown  and  disintegration  of  all 
faiths,  it  is  not  wholly  useless  to  recall  the  large  proportions  of 
Walt  Whitman,  his  tenderness,  his  heartiness,  his  faith,  his  hope. 
There  was  in  him  no  weak  evasion,  no  sniveling  over  the  shards  of 
the  goodly  vessel  broken  at  the  well,  but  even  when  “old,  alone, 
sick,  weak-down,  melted-worn  with  sweat,”  a  free  and  joyous 
acceptance  of  life. 

Thanks  in  old  age — thanks  ere  I  go, 

For  health,  the  midday  sun,  the  impalpable  air — for  life,  mere  life, 


For  all  my  days — not  those  of  peace  alone  the  days  of  war  the  same, 
For  gentle  words,  caresses,  gifts  from  foreign  lands, 

For  shelter,  wine  and  meat — for  sweet  appreciation, 


44  Traubel,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  101. 

45  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  pp.  193,  215. 

48  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  223. 

47  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  363.  .  .  .  1  r  1  j  o 

48  See  Norman  Foersrer.  American  Criticism ,  pp.  211-222;  Lucy  Lockwood  Ha v 
ard,  The  Frontier  in  American  Literature,  pp.  170-177. 


86 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


For  beings,  groups,  love,  deeds,  words,  books — for  colors,  forms, 

For  all  the  brave  strong  men — devoted,  hardy,  men — who’ve  forward 
sprung  in  freedom’s  help,  all  years,  all  lands, 

For  braver,  stronger,,  more  devoted  men — (a  special  laurel  ere  I  go,  to 
life’s  war’s  chosen  ones, 

The  cannoneers  of  song  and  thought — the  great  artillerists — the  foremost 
leaders,  captains  of  the  soul:) 

As  soldier  from  an  ended  war  return’d — As  traveler  out  of  myriads,  to  the 
long  procession  retrospective, 

.  hanks — joyful  thanks! — a  soldier’s,  traveler’s  thanks.49 

A  great  figure,  the  greatest  assuredly  in  our  literature — yet  per¬ 
haps  only  a  great  child — summing  up  and  transmitting  into  poetry 
all  the  passionate  aspirations  of  an  America  that  had  passed  through 
the  romantic  revolution,  the  poet  of  selfhood  and  the  prophet  of 
brotherhood,  the  virile  man  and  the  catholic  lover — how  shall 
Walt  Whitman  becomfe  dumb  or  cease  to  speak  to  men  unless  the 
children  of  those  who  are  now  half-devil  and  half-God  shall  prove  to 
be  wholly  devil — or  wholly  moron  ? 

hi 

THE  BACKWASH  OF  THE  FRONTIER— MARK  TWAIN 

As  Whitman  contemplated  the  feeble  literature  purveyed  by  the 
worshipers  of  the  genteel  he  asked  with  some  irritation:  “What  is 
the  reason  in  our  time,  our  lands,  that  we  see  no  fresh  local  courage, 
sanity,  of  our  own — the  Mississippi,  stalwart  Western  men,  real 
mental  and  physical  facts,  Southerners,  etc.,  in  the  body  of  our 
literature?”  That  was  in  1870  and  the  answer  was  at  hand  in  the 
person  of  Mark  Twain.  Here  at  last  was  an  authentic  American — 
a  native  writer  thinking  his  own  thoughts,  using  his  own  eyes, 
speaking  his  own  dialect — everything  European  fallen  away,  the 
last  shred  of  feudal  culture  gone,  local  and  western  yet  continental. 
A  strange  and  uncouth  figure  in  the  eyes  of  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich, 
yet  the  very  embodiment  of  the  turbulent  frontier  that  had  long 
been  shaping  a  native  psychology,  and  that  now  at  last  was  turning 
eastward  to  Americanize  the  Atlantic  seaboard.  Yet  in  spite  of  a 
rare  vein  of  humor,  the  outcropping  of  a  rich  and  whimsical  imagi¬ 
nation,  he  made  his  way  slowly  to  polite  recognition.  For  years  he 
was  regarded  by  authoritative  critics  as  little  more  than  a  buffoon, 
an  extravagant  fun-maker  with  a  broad  streak  of  western  coarse¬ 
ness;  and  it  was  not  till  near  the  end,  when  he  had  long  been  an  in 
49  Leaves,  “Thanks  in  Old  Age,”  p.  435. 


87 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

ternational  figure,  that  the  culture  of  the  East  accepted  him.  It  was 
Howells  then  who  pronounced  him  “the  sole,  the  incomparable,  the 
Lincoln  of  our  literature  .  .  .  the  very  marrow  of  Americanism.” 

Just  as  that  judgment  was  at  the  time,  it  needs  qualification  now. 
The  marrow  of  Americanism  is  not  the  same  substance  from  genera¬ 
tion  to  generation.  1  he  outer  environing  life  of  a  people  works  it¬ 
self  slowly  into  the  bones  and  brings  about  subtle  changes.  Mark 
Twain  was  indubitably  an  embodiment  of  three  centuries  of  Amer¬ 
ican  experience — frontier  centuries,  decentralized,  leveling,  individ¬ 
ualistic;  but  the  Americanism  that  issued  from  them  came  to  its 
flower  and  was  quickly  succeeded  by  another  kind  as  the  fields  of 
experience  were  re-plowed  by  industrialism  and  sowed  to  a  different 
grain.  Mark  Twain  was  the  child  of  a  frontier  past — as  Lincoln 
was,  as  the  Gilded  Age  was — and  the  America  of  today  could  no 
more  breed  him  than  it  could  breed  Lincoln,  or  Greeley,  or  Whit¬ 
man;  his  Americanism  was  the  reflection  of  an  environment  that  is 
no  longer  ours,  in  the  slack  folkways  of  the  frontier  that  we  have 
outgrown.  Child  of  the  Southwest  in  its  early  boom  days,  he  was 
cradled  in  profitless  schemes  and  nourished  on  dreams  of  vast  po¬ 
tential  wealth.  The  frontier  spirit  was  an  effervescence  in  his  blood 
and  golden  expectations  flung  their  mirage  over  the  drab  reality. 
As  a  boy  he  took  impress  from  a  kindly,  ignorant,  slave-holding, 
Calvinistic  village  world,  and  he  quitted  the  slattern  village  life  to 
plunge  into  the  picturesque  traffic  of  the  Mississippi  in  the  boom 
days  when  every  river  pilot  drove  his  boat  full  steam  ahead.  Then 
the  Far  West  of  silver  mines  and  the  Golden  Gate  took  him  in 
hand — a  gambling,  romantic,  optimistic  frontier,  feverish  with 
flush  times,  “a  beggar’s  revel  of  potential  millionaires  without  the 
price  of  a  square  meal.”  60  And  finally  this  buoyant,  irreverent 
adolescent  was  taken  in  hand  by  the  Far  East:  by  New  England 
respectability  in  the  persons  of  Olivia  Langdon  of  Elmira,  William 
Dean  Howells  of  Cambridge,  Twitchell  and  Warner  of  Hartford ;  and 
by  New  York  in  the  persons  of  Carnegie  and  Gilder  and  Whitelaw 
Reid  and  Henry  H.  Rogers,  to  be  made  over  into  a  man  of  the  world. 

Such  were  his  origins  and  his  scl  ''ling.  All  his  life  he  remained 
a  boy,  with  the  imitativeness  of  >  ->uth,  and  yet  with  something 
deep  within  him  that  cherished  its  own  integrity.  Quick  to  take 
color  from  his  environment  and  at  home  in  crowds,  he  lived  never¬ 
theless  in  the  solitude  of  his  own  heart.  Acutely  conscious  of  his 
60  Lucy  Lockwood  Hazard,  The  Frontier  in  American  Literature,  p.  223. 


88 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


rough  western  ways,  he  admired  the  culture  of  the  Langdons  and 
the  refined  art  of  Howells,  and  he  wanted  to  be  approved  by  them. 
A  kinsman  of  Beriah  Sellers,  he  delighted  in  the  great  barbecue 
and  wanted  to  carve  great  portions  for  himself,  to  heap  up  his 
plate  as  others  were  doing.  His  reactions  to  experience  were  always 
emotional.  He  was  not  a  Walt  Whitman  to  penetrate  curiously  to 
the  core  of  his  own  being  and  grow  thence  outwardly,  content  to 
wait  till  the  world  came  round  to  him.  He  loved  to  make  a  splurge, 
to  be  talked  of,  to  be  in  the  public  eye,  to  live  on  an  ample  scale; 
he  accepted  the  world’s  standards  and  wished  to  be  measured  by 
them.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  frontier.  Wanting  other  stand¬ 
ards,  the  frontier  measured  success  by  obvious  material  stand¬ 
ards.  Its  aggressive  individualism  was  never  spiritual  or  intel¬ 
lectual  or  cultural.  So  with  all  his  heritage  of  generations  of 
frontier  individualism  he  never  achieved  an  intellectual  or  spiritual 
unity,  an  untroubled  conscious  integrity,  as  Emerson  did  and 
Whitman  did.  He  never  was  at  home  in  the  world  of  catholic 
thought,  but  all  his  life  he  suffered  from  the  petty  inhibitions  of 
his  origins.  He  could  not  throw  off  the  frontier — its  psychology 
and  its  morality  were  too  deeply  intertwined  with  his  primitive 
self;  and  the  result  was  a  harassing  inner  conflict  that  left  him 
maimed. 

Yet  with  all  his  shortcomings — because  of  them  indeed — Mark 
Twain  is  an  immensely  significant  American  document.  He  is  a 
mirror  reflecting  the  muddy  cross-currents  of  American  life  as  the 
frontier  spirit  washed  in,  submerging  the  old  aristocratic  land¬ 
marks.  To  know  Mark  Twain  is  to  know  the  strange  and  puzzling 
contradictions  of  the  Gilded  Age.  With  unconscious  fidelity  he 
reveals  its  crudity,  its  want  of  knowledge,  discipline,  historical 
perspective;  its  intellectual  incapacity  to  deal  with  the  complexi¬ 
ties  of  a  world  passing  through  the  twin  revolutions  of  indus¬ 
trialism  and  science.  And  he  reflects  with  equal  fidelity  certain 
other  qualities  that  go  far  to  redeem  the  meanness:  a  great  creative 
power;  an  eager  idealism,  somewhat  vague  but  still  fine;  a  generous 
sympathy;  a  manly  independence  that  strove  to  think  honestly; 
a  passionate  hatred  of  wrong  and  injustice  and  an  honest  demo¬ 
cratic  respect  for  men  as  men.  A  significant  if  not  an  unsoiled  or 
heroic  document! 

1  hat  in  his  later  years  an  impassable  gulf  opened  between  Mark 
Twain  and  his  generation,  that  the  buoyant  humorist  of  the  sev- 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


89 


enties  ripened  into  the  bitter  satirist  of  the  nineties,  is  a  matter 
that  has  been  much  remarked  upon.  The  fact  is  clear  enough  but 
the  explanation  is  not  so  clear.  In  part  no  doubt — as  Van  Wyck 
Brooks  has  pointed  out — the  change  resulted  from  a  thwarting 
of  the  creative  artist  by  a  disastrous  surrender  to  the  ideals  of  the 
Gilded  Age;  in  part,  also,  it  was  the  inevitable  toll  exacted  by  the 
passing  years.  A  humane  and  generous  spirit  cannot  long  watch 
with  indifference  the  motley  human  caravan  hastening  to  eter¬ 
nity — cannot  find  food  for  laughter  alone  in  the  incredible  meanness 
and  folly  of  men  cheating  and  quarreling  in  a  wilderness  of  graves. 
Tenderness,  chivalry,  love  of  justice,  are  poor  bucklers  to  with¬ 
stand  the  blows  of  fate,  and  Mark  Twain  had  little  skill  in  defense. 
The  humorist  like  the  poet  is  sensitively  responsive  to  life  and  the 
scars  multiply  fast.  Endowed  with  a  nature  not  unlike  Swift’s 
in  its  fierce  rage  at  inhumanity,  not  unlike  Sir  Philip  Sidney’s  in 
its  romantic  chivalry,  he  was  not  a  stoic  to  endure  with  equanim¬ 
ity.  He  was  foredoomed  to  suffer  vicariously.  The  comment  he 
wrote  Howells  in  1899  throws  a  white  light  on  the  man.  “I  have 
been  reading  the  morning  paper,”  he  said.  “I  do  it  every  morn¬ 
ing — well  knowing  that  I  shall  find  in  it  the  usual  depravities  and 
basenesses  and  hypocrisies  and  cruelties  that  make  up  civilization, 
and  cause  me  to  put  in  the  rest  of  the  day  pleading  for  the  damna¬ 
tion  of  the  human  race.” 

Yet  granting  so  much,  and  granting  also  a  morbid  conscience 
that  harassed  him  with  self-condemnation — “What  a  man  sees  in 
the  human  race  is  merely  himself  in  the  deep  and  honest  privacy  of 
his  own  heart” — it  still  remains  true  that  the  bleakness  of  his  later 
years  was  due  in  part,  at  least,  to  the  insubstantial  dwelling  he  chose 
to  live  in.  The  architects  of  the  Gilded  Age  were  jerry-builders, 
and  Mark  Twain  found  his  jerry-built  house  a  poor  protection 
against  the  winter  winds.  It  was  perhaps  not  greatly  his  fault  that 
he  built  so  flimsily.  He  was  too  willing  to  be  caught  in  the  web  of 
material  things.  He  could  not  reach  out  for  companionship  with 
the  great  earth.  Hamlin  Garland  in  a  bleak  Dakota  shack  found 
help  and  comfort  in  the  philosophy  of  Taine,  but  Mark  Twain 
could  not  get  outside  his  own  skin.  He  could  not  break  a  path 
through  the  provincialism  of  his  environment.  He  was  held 
prisoner  to  his  own  thoughts  and  his  only  release  was  through  the 
window  of  imagination.  When  harassed  beyond  endurance  he 
sought  release  in  writing  that  hid  the  evidence  of  his  rebellion. 


90 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


What  would  Livy  say,  what  would  the  American  public  say,  if  they 
knew  he  had  come  to  deny  all  the  tribal  gods! 

There  is  no  more  pathetic  figure  in  American  literature  than 
Mark  Twain,  alone  and  solitary  amid  the  blatant  American  crowd, 
living  in  a  dreary  wash  of  speeches  and  banquets,  spinning  the 
threads  of  a  rebellious  philosophy  out  of  his  own  bowels,  unaware 
of  what  others  were  spinning,  regarding  himself  as  a  dangerous 
fellow  and  stowing  away  in  his  strong-box  intellectual  bombs  that 
he  thought  too  explosive  for  the  Gilded  Age  to  play  with.  In  his 
intellectual  isolation  he  could  not  take  the  measure  of  his  specula¬ 
tions  and  he  did  not  realize  how  common  were  such  conclusions — - 
that  his  own  generation  indeed,  under  the  tutelage  of  the  physical 
sciences,  was  fast  drifting  in  the  same  direction,  and  that  the  clouds 
of  pessimism  were  obscuring  for  many  the  brighter  horizons  of  an 
earlier  day.  If  he  had  known  Henry  Adams  as  intimately  as  he 
knew  Henry  H.  Rogers,  very  likely  his  eyes  would  have  been 
opened  to  many  things  that  would  have  done  him  good.  As  it  was 
he  knew  only  that  his  speculations  ran  counter  to  the  formal  creed 
of  his  middle-class  neighbors  and  friends.  To  deny  the  dogmas  of 
the  conventional  orthodoxy  and  in  the  face  of  a  smug  optimism  to 
assert  a  mechanistic  pessimism,  was  an  unpleasant  business  that  he 
would  have  avoided  if  he  could. 

But  he  couldn’t  avoid  it  wholly,  and  in  that  fact  is  to  be  found 
the  thread  that  runs  through  his  later  life,  giving  to  it  such  unity 
and  coherence  as  it  possessed.  It  is  this:  here  was  a  thoroughly 
honest  mind,  that  hated  all  sham  and  quackery  and  humbug,  and  a 
singularly  warm  heart,  that  hated  all  wrong  and  cruelty  and  in¬ 
justice;  and  this  honest  mind  and  chivalrous  heart,  deceived  and 
led  astray  by  the  mass  mores,  espoused  and  defended  such  frag¬ 
ments  of  ideals,  such  bits  of  truth,  as  he  came  upon  in  his  solitary 
brooding,  until  driven  from  one  stronghold  after  another  he  came 
to  doubt  the  adequacy  of  all  strongholds  and  took  refuge  in  a  black 
pessimism — God  is  a  malignant  being,  the  universe  is  a  machine, 
and  man  is  a  creature  of  determinism.  It  was  a  fierce  and  stark 
reaction  from  the  emotionalism  of  the  fifties — from  Beecher’s  God 
of  love  and  Whitman’s  religion  of  democracy.  His  earlier  loyalty 
to  half-gods  had  brought  him  at  last  to  deny  all  the  gods.  And  so  a 
maimed  giant,  stumbling  and  uncertain,  he  made  such  way  as  he 
could;  and  his  journeyings  wrung  from  him  many  a  fierce  comment 
that  his  generation  did  not  understand. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


91 


When  the  milk  of  western  humor  curdled  in  his  veins,  a  Mark 
Twain  emerged  who  was  a  puzzle  to  the  Gilded  Age.  A  humorist 
who  was  a  good  Republican  and  business  man,  the  Gilded  Age  could 
understand;  but  a  satirist  wbo  launched  his  shafts  at  sacred  things 
—at  evangelical  religion,  the  Republican  party,  the  government  at 
Washington,  the  damned  human  race  itself— it  could  not  under¬ 
stand.  The  professional  fun-maker  had  outgrown  his  audience. 
Expecting  the  familiar  exaggeration,  they  accounted  his  bitterest 
sally  a  characteristic  whimsy,  and  laughed  when  he  commented 
bitterly  on  “this  plodding  sad  pilgrimage,  this  pathetic  drift  be¬ 
tween  the  eternities,”  or  when  he  exclaimed,  “Everything  human 
is  pathetic.  The  secret  source  of  Humor  is  not  joy  but  sorrow. 
There  is  no  humor  in  heaven.”  But  the  significant  thing  is  that 
in  the  end  the  tyrannizing  mores  did  not  conquer,  they  did  not 
destroy  him  wholly;  but  such  convictions  as  he  had  hewn  from 
puzzling  experience,  however  bleak  or  repellent  they  might  be,  he 
clung  to  firmly,  desperately,  and  at  last  flung  them  in  the  face  of 
the  Gilded  Age  that  had  kept  him  prisoner. 

The  slow  drift  of  Mark  Twain’s  thought  from  humor  to  satire — 
it  smacks  of  Philistinism  to  call  it  progress  with  its  many  false 
alarums  and  excursions  and  its  huge  frontier  wastefulness — is 
plain  enough  to  anyone  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  chart  his 
course.  Roughly  it  falls  into  definite  stages:  the  swaggering  gayety 
of  western  youth  in  Innocents  Abroad  and  Roughing  It — the  mood 
of  flush  times,  down-grade  with  the  brakes  off;  then  a  gay  plunge 
into  satire  in  The  Gilded  Age;  then  the  West  recalled  in  middle 
life — Tom  Sawyer ,  Life  on  the  Mississippi,  Huckleberry  Finn — 
living  over  again  a  youth  that  is  gone;  then  an  excursion  into 
the  Middle  Ages — The  Prince  and  the  Pauper  and  A  Connecticut 
Yankee  in  King  Arthur  s  Court — a  romantic  flare-up  of  the  demo¬ 
cratic  passions  of  the  Enlightenment;  then  the  search  for  the  ideal 
in  Joan  of  Arc — the  dream  of  the  perfect  woman,  the  Domnei  of 
James  Branch  Cabell;  and  finally  The  Mysterious  Stranger  and 
What  is  Man? — a  fierce  satire  of  disillusion,  the  cry  of  an  idealist 
who  realizes  at  last  how  greatly  he  has  been  cheated  by  his  dreams, 

That  he  should  have  begun  by  burlesquing  life  was  itself  a 
broad  sign  of  his  frontier  origins.  Since  the  first  crossing  of  the 
Allegheny  Mountains  a  swaggering  extravagance  of  speech  had 
been  a  hallmark  of  the  Westerner.  In  part  this  swagger  was  an 
unconscious  defense-mechanism  against  the  drabness  of  frontier 


92 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


life;  and  in  part  it  was  the  spontaneous  expression  of  new  experi¬ 
ences  in  an  untrammeled  world,  the  spirit  of  wilderness-leveling. 
Its  procreative  source  would  seem  to  have  been  the  Ohio  River 
where  the  rough  flatboatmen  bequeathed  the  Mike  Fink  legend 
to  literature;  and  it  expanded  in  the  huge  Davy  Crockett  hoax — 
a  hoax  that  would  have  tickled  the  ribs  of  Mark  Twain  had  he 
traced  its  genesis  and  progress,  as  a  colossal  example  of  how  the 
damned  human  race  loves  to  be  humbugged.  It  developed  further 
in  Gus  Longstreet’s  Georgia  Scenes  with  its  grotesque  Ransy  Sniffle 
— sorriest  of  backwoods  heroes,  too  mean-spirited  to  ruffle  like 
Canebrake  Davy;  and  in  Joseph  Baldwin’s  Flush  Times  of  Ala¬ 
bama  and  Mississippi,  with  its  greasy  frontier  blackguard,  Colonel 
Simon  Suggs. 

This  earliest  backwoods  humor  had  been  done  in  realistic  colors 
and  bears  the  impress  of  authenticity.  But  the  school  that  suc¬ 
ceeded — John  Phoenix,  Artemus  Ward,  Petroleum  V.  Nasby — 
quickly  conventionalized  its  technique,  relying  on  burlesque,  tall 
lying,  distorted  spelling,  genial  philosophy.  The  picaresque  strain 
was  softened  and  perverted  by  deliberate  human-interest  touches — 
a  better  case  must  be  made  out  for  the  untutored  children  of  na¬ 
ture.  It  was  this  humor  that  Mark  Twain  inherited,  and  he  en¬ 
riched  it  with  a  wealth  dug  from  his  own  large  and  generous 
nature.  An  incorrigible  idealist,  as  all  great  humorists  must  be, 
he  recreated  some  of  the  earlier  types,  translating  Colonel  Simon 
Suggs  into  Colonel  Sellers,  and  Ransy  Sniffle  into  Huck  Finn.  It 
was  a  glorious  transformation,  but  the  result  lacked  something 
of  the  soiled  reality  of  the  earlier  blackguards.  Yet  underneath 
his  idealism  was  a  generous  deposit  of  the  common  mud  of  life. 
The  spirit  of  Mike  Fink  was  never  far  from  Mark  Twain.  It 
haunted  him  like  an  evil  genius,  refusing  to  be  exorcised  by  Olivia 
Clemens,  and  it  found  vent  in  sly  literary  sprees  that  begot  off¬ 
spring  to  be  handed  about  furtively  and  chuckled  over  by  the  sons 
of  Adam;  but  for  the  most  part  it  was  kept  in  strict  subjection  to 
the  proprieties  of  Elmira  and  Hartford. 

Roughing  It  and  7 he  Gilded  Age  are  brilliant  complementary 
pictures  of  the  gaudy  frontier  spirit  that  was  washing  in  upon  the 
staid  realm  of  the  genteel,  to  the  vast  concern  of  such  genteelists 
as  1  homas  Bailey  Aldrich.  I  he  former  is  a  buoyant  chronicle  of 
the  West  of  Captain  Carver  and  Wild  Bill  Hickok,  the  West  of 
the  Pony  Express,  the  Comstock  lode,  the  bad  man  and  the  lynch 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


93 


law;  a  land  of  young  men  in  red  flannel  shirts,  heavy  boots,  and 
six-shooters,  who  feared  neither  God  nor  the  devil.  Bret  Harte 
in  San  Francisco  first  realized  the  literary  possibilities  of  this 
picturesque  world,  and  his  tales  of  life  in  the  mining-camps  were 
received  with  a  shout  of  approval.  But  Bret  Harte  had  never  been 
a  miner.  He  was  not  realist  enough,  nor  honest  enough,  to  portray 
the  West  in  its  stark,  grotesque  reality.  He  was  only  a  literary 
middleman  who  skillfully  purveyed  such  wares  as  his  eastern 
readers  wanted.  In  consequence  he  coated  his  tales  with  a  senti¬ 
mental  picaresque — pandered  to  the  common  taste  by  discovering 
nuggets  of  pure  gold  in  the  dregs  and  outcasts  of  the  mining- 
camps.  But  Mark  Twain  was  too  honest  for  that.  He  had  been  a 
part  of  the  flush  times  and  had  seen  the  economic  process  work 
itself  out.  He  had  seen  the  grub-stake  prospector  succeeded  by 
the  wild-cat  speculator,  and  him  in  turn  followed  by  the  eastern 
capitalist.  He  had  seen  the  mining  frontier  become  a  thing  of  the 
past  in  a  single  decade,  with  the  Comstock  lode  in  the  hands  of 
competent  exploiters  and  the  pick-and-shovel  miners  plunging 
deeper  into  the  mountains  to  pursue  their  feverish  hopes.  From 
that  experience  he  had  learned  a  lesson  he  was  to  carry  East  with 
him.  “Because  we  judged  that  we  had  learned,”  he  said,  “the 
real  secret  of  success  in  silver  mining,  which  was,  not  to  mine  the 
silver  ourselves  by  the  sweat  of  our  brows  and  the  labor  of  our 
hands,  but  to  sell  the  ledges  to  the  dull  slaves  of  toil  and  let  them 
do  the  mining.”  51 

It  was  the  great  lesson  of  his  generation,  and  thus  instructed  he 
proposed  to  sell  his  brains  in  the  best  market.  Exploitation  was  the 
royal  road  to  wealth  and  he  was  eager  to  exploit  both  himself  and 
his  fellows.  Yet  not  all  of  Mark  Twain  was  thus  eager.  Deep  in  his 
heart  was  another  Mark  Twain,  the  artist,  the  chivalrous  lover  of 
justice,  the  simple  child  puzzled  at  life — and  this  Mark  Twain  was 
already  plotting  treason  against  the  exploiting  Mark  Iwain.  For 
the  first  time  this  deeper  self  got  out  of  hand  in  The  Gilded  Age.  As 
he  contemplated  the  common  scoundrelism  at  Washington  and 
elsewhere,  his  anger  exuded  in  scathing  satire.  He  hated  the  dirty 
thing,  yet  he  seems  never  to  have  realized  that  such  scoundrelism 
was  only  the  backwash  of  the  spirit  of  exploitation  and  that  he 
himself  was  riding  on  its  waves.  With  the  soap-bubble  dreams  of 
Colonel  Sellers  he  dealt  lovingly,  for  he  was  sketching  his  own 
61  Vol.  I,  Chapter  XXXIII,  p.  237. 


94 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


origins;  the  Colonel  and  the  Hawkinses  were  his  own  flesh  and 
blood  and  the  Tennessee  lands  were  an  old  investment  about  which 
the  family  dreams  of  wealth  had  been  woven  for  years.  He  delighted 
in  the  Colonel’s  childlike  faith  that  prosperity  only  awaited  a  vote 
of  Congress— with  adequate  appropriations,  of  course.  He  asked  no 
questions  about  unearned  increment;  to  question  that  would  have 
been  treason  to  the  frontier  philosophy.  So  into  Colonel  Sellers  he 
put  all  that  was  naive  and  lovable  in  the  Gilded  Age.  But  Senator 
Dillworthy  was  another  matter.  Hypocrite  and  corruptionist,  he 
was  laying  obscene  hands  on  sacred  things,  betraying  his  high  trust 
for  sordid  ends.  Mark  Twain  hated  graft — the  word  had  not  been 
coined  but  the  ugly  thing  was  there — and  with  the  innocence  of  his 
generation  he  damned  the  agent  and  overlooked  the  principal.  It 
was  not  his  fault.  The  economics  of  history  was  a  closed  book  to 
Americans  of  the  seventies,  and  even  Henry  Adams  in  his  analysis 
of  the  current  corruption  in  his  novel  Democracy  was  no  better  than 
a  mole  nosing  blindly  underground. 

He  had  opened  another  door  to  his  genius  and  discovered  the 
satirist.  There  lay  the  real  Mark  Twain.  But  the  wares  of  the 
satirist  were  not  in  demand  at  the  barbecue,  so  he  closed  the  door 
and  fell  to  purveying  what  the  public  wanted.  Tom  Sawyer  was  in 
part  a  malicious  thrust  at  the  Sunday  School  tale,  and  in  part  a 
whimsical  pronouncement  of  the  natural  rights  of  the  small  boy. 
But  it  is  in  Huckleberry  Finn — the  one  great  picaresque  tale  of  the 
frontier — that  the  western  philosophy  of  Mark  Twain,  a  philosophy 
that  derives  straight  from  the  old  naturistic  school,  crops  out  most 
sharply.  It  is  a  drama  of  the  struggle  between  the  individual  and 
the  village  mores,  set  in  a  loose  picturesque  framework,  and  ex¬ 
emplifying  the  familiar  thesis  that  the  stuff"  of  life  springs  strong 
and  wholesome  from  the  great  common  stock.  Huck  Finn  is  a 
child  of  nature  who  has  lived  close  to  the  simple  facts  of  life,  un¬ 
perverted  by  the  tyrannies  of  the  village  that  would  make  a  good 
boy  of  him.  He  had  got  his  schooling  from  the  unfenced  woods, 
from  the  great  river  that  swept  past  him  as  he  idly  fished,  from  the 
folk-tales  of  negroes  and  poor  whites,  from  queer  adventures  with 
Tom  Sawyer;  and  from  such  experiences  he  had  got  a  code  of 
natural  ethics.  Then  he  found  himself  on  the  raft  with  Jim  the 
runaway  nigger,  and  his  little  pagan  soul  felt  the  stirrings  of  the 
problem  of  right  and  wrong.  The  village  code  and  the  natural 
code  clashed  and  the  conflict  was  terrifying.  The  village  code 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES  95 

warned  him  that  hell  yawned  for  one  who  helped  a  slave  escape, 
and  the  human  code  warned  him  that  betrayal  was  a  blackguardly 
thing.  With  the  fear  of  hell  upon  him  he  wrote  to  Miss  Watson, 
and  then  his  sense  of  the  kindliness  of  Jim,  the  honest  humanity 
under  the  black  skin,  rose  up  in  fierce  protest. 

It  was  a  close  place.  I  took  [the  letter]  up,  and  held  it  in  my  hands. 
I  was  a-trembling,  because  I’d  got  to  decide,  forever,  betwixt  two  things, 
and  I  knowed  it.  I  studied  for  a  minute,  sort  of  holding  my  breath,  and 
then  says  to  myself: 

“All  right,  then,  I’ll  go  to  hell” — and  tore  it  up. 

It  was  awful  thoughts  and  awful  words,  but  they  was  said.  And  I  let 
them  stay  said;  and  never  thought  no  more  about  reforming.52 

It  was  a  triumph  over  the  sacred  tribal  law  of  conformity— the 
assertion  of  the  individual  will  in  opposition  to  society — and  it  re¬ 
veals  the  heart  of  Mark  Twain’s  philosophy.  The  rebel  Huck  is  no 
other  than  the  rebel  Mark  Twain  whose  wrath  was  quick  to  flame 
up  against  the  unrighteous  customs  and  laws  of  caste.  If  men  were 
only  honest  realists — that  is,  if  they  were  men  and  not  credulous 
fools — how  quickly  the  stables  might  be  cleansed  and  life  become 
decent  and  humane.  If  only  the  good  brains  could  be  segregated 
and  trained  in  a  real  “man-factory,”  the  history  of  civilization 
might  become  something  the  angels  need  not  weep  over  as  they 
read  it.  It  all  comes  back  to  an  honest  realism  that  in  accepting 
fact  will  clear  away  the  superstitious  fogs  in  which  men  have 
floundered  and  suffered  hitherto.  The  one  sacred  duty  laid  on 
every  rational  being  is  the  duty  of  rebellion  against  sham — to  deny 
the  divinity  of  clothes,  to  thrust  out  quack  kings  and  priests  and 
lords,  to  refuse  a  witless  loyalty  to  things.  This  creed  of  the  rebel 
is  written  all  through  Mark  Twain’s  later  work,  edging  his  satire 
and  lending  an  Emersonian  note  to  his  individualism.  In  such  a 
passage  as  this  it  emerges  sharply: 

You  see  my  kind  of  loyalty  was  loyalty  to  one’s  country,  not  to  its 
institutions  or  its  office-holders.  The  country  is  the  real  thing,  the  sub¬ 
stantial  thing,  the  eternal  thing;  it  is  the  thing  to  watch  over,  and  care  for, 
and  be  loyal  to;  institutions  are  extraneous,  they  are  its  mere  clothing, 
and  clothing  can  wear  out,  become  ragged,  cease  to  be  comfortable,  cease 
to  protect  the  body  from  winter,  disease,  death.  To  be  loyal  to  rags,  to 
shout  for  rags,  to  worship  rags — that  is  a  loyalty  to  unreason,  it  is  pure 
animal;  it  belongs  to  monarchy,  was  invented  by  monarchy;  let  monarchy 
teen  it.  I  was  from  Connecticut,  whose  Constitution  declares  “that  all 

62  Chanter  31. 


96 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


political  power  is  inherent  in  the  people,  and  all  free  governments  are 
founded  on  their  authority  and  instituted  for  their  benefit;  and  that  they 
have  at  all  times  an  undeniable  and  indefeasible  right  to  alter  their  form 
of  government  in  such  manner  as  they  may  think  expedient.” 

Under  that  gospel,  the  citizen  who  thinks  he  sees  that  the  common¬ 
wealth’s  political  clothes  are  worn  out,  and  yet  holds  his  peace  and  does 
not  agitate  for  a  new  suit,  is  disloyal;  he  is  a  traitor.  That  he  may  be  the 
only  one  who  thinks  he  sees  this  decay,  does  not  excuse  him;  it  is  his  duty 
to  agitate  anyway,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  others  to  vote  him  down  if  they 
do  not  see  the  matter  as  he  does.53 

In  the  Middle  Ages  clothes-worship  had  been  exalted  to  a  re¬ 
ligion,  he  believed,  and  he  turned  with  gusto  to  reply  to  the  aristo¬ 
cratic  romanticism  of  Sir  Walter,  who,  delighting  in  the  picturesque 
company  gathered  in  the  great  hall,  forgot  to  penetrate  to  the 
oubliettes — is  not  the  word  commentary  enough  on  the  ways  of 
the  seigneur? — where  nameless  wretches  were  rotting  under  the 
walls  of  the  castle.  He  had  small  patience  with  the  cult  of  medieval¬ 
ism  that  was  turning  such  men  as  Henry  Adams  and  William 
Morris  back  to  the  Middle  Ages  as  to  their  lost  home.  He  had  the 
frontier  contempt  for  medieval  ways,  and  for  the  ancien  regime 
that  was  the  last  rags  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  French  Revolution 
had  thrust  the  abomination  away  forever,  and  he  thanked  God 
for  that  “ever  memorable  and  blessed  Revolution,  which  swept 
a  thousand  years  of  .  .  .  villainy  away  in  one  swift  tidal  wave  of 
blood.”  He  had  no  tears  for  Marie  Antoinette.  What  was  the 
Terror  but  “a  settlement  of  that  hoary  debt  in  the  proportion  of 
half  a  drop  of  blood  for  each  hogshead  of  it  that  had  been  pressed 
by  slow  tortures  out  of  that  people  in  the  weary  stretch  of  ten 
centuries  of  wrong  and  shame  and  misery  the  like  of  which  was 
not  to  be  mated  but  in  hell  .  .  .  that  unspeakably  bitter  and  awful 
Terror  which  none  of  us  has  been  taught  to  see  in  its  vastness  or 
pity  as  it  deserves.”54  The  past  that  had  been  consumed  in  that 
fierce  conflagration  had  been  a  brutal,  tyrannical,  superstitious 
past,  and  not  till  king  and  priest  had  been  flung  out  on  the  dung- 
heap  did  the  people  walk  their  native  soil  as  free  men.  The  whole 
king  business  was  preposterous  to  him;  with  Freneau  he  cried, 
“Kings  are  the  choicest  curse  that  man  e’er  knew.”  The  battle 
against  medievalism  had  been  fought  and  won  and  why  go  maun¬ 
dering  back  over  past  battlefields,  when  other  battles  await?  55 

63  The  Connecticut  Yankee,  N.  Y.,  1917,  p.  107. 

64  Ibid.,  Chapter  XIII,  pp.  105-106. 

66  Cf.  Whitman’s  view,  The  Gathering  of  the  Forces,  Vol.  II,  pp.  284-286. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES  97 

Mark  Twain’s  passionate  republicanism  was  a  product  of  the 
Enlightenment  as  it  had  passed  into  the  psychology  of  western 
Americans,  and  it  retained  the  militant  idealism  of  Jeffersonian 
times.  It  is  shot  through  with  the  nature  philosophy.  In  The 
Prince  and  the  Pauper ,  the  heir  of  Offal  Court  and  the  heir  of  the 
Tudors  are  both  children  of  nature,  endowed  with  warm  hearts, 
generous  sympathies,  and  clever  wits.  Put  rags  on  the  prince 
and  robes  on  the  pauper  and  their  own  kin  cannot  tell  them  apart. 
The  latter,  indeed,  promises  to  make  the  better  king,  for  he  has 
suffered  the  lot  of  the  subject,  and  not  till  the  prince  has  put  on 
rags  does  he  come  to  know  his  people.  It  is  caste  that  breeds 
cruelty  and  w’rong;  the  brutalities  of  the  English  criminal  code 
were  deviltries  devised  by  king  and  nobles  to  safeguard  their 
stealings.  Only  when  the  laws  spring  from  the  people  are  they  just. 
“The  world  is  made  wrong,”  cried  the  young  king  when  he  was 
brought  out  of  prison  to  watch  the  burning  at  the  stake  of  two 
women  who  had  befriended  him — women  whose  only  crime  was 
that  of  being  Baptists — “the  world  is  made  wrong,  kings  should 
go  to  school  to  their  own  laws,  at  times,  and  so  learn  mercy.” 
And  this  great  lesson  of  mercy  is  exemplified  in  the  acts  of  the 
pauper  king,  who  during  his  brief  reign  tempers  the  harshness  of 
the  law  with  a  sense  of  justice  learned,  like  Huck  Finn’s,  from 
sharp  contact  with  reality. 

It  is  in  A  Connecticut  Yankee  in  King  Arthur  s  Court — a  curious 
medley,  half  philippic  and  half  farce — that  Mark  Twain’s  passion 
for  justice  rises  to  white  heat.  The  book  has  been  grossly  misunder¬ 
stood.  It  is  not  an  attack  on  chivalry — at  least  not  primarily; 
it  is  rather  an  attack  on  thirteen  centuries  of  reputed  Christian 
civilization  that  under  pretense  of  serving  God  has  enslaved  and 
despoiled  the  children  of  God.  The  keen  satire  is  given  point  and 
edge  by  the  long  tragic  perspective.  Thirteen  centuries  heavy  with 
sorrow  and  misery  and  frustrated  hopes — a  meaningless  succession 
of  foolish  and  futile  generations,  wandering  in  fogs  of  their  own 
brewing,  hagridden  by  superstitions,  deceived  and  exploited  by 
priest  and  noble,  with  no  will  to  be  free — here  is  a  perspective  to 
correct  our  callow  enthusiasms,  our  revolutionary  hopes!  Why 
indeed  should  we  expect  men  to  possess  the  will  to  freedom,  seeing 
that  each  generation  is  molded  after  the  likeness  of  the  past  and 
none  has  been  free?  There  is  change,  advance  and  recession,  but 
the  story  of  the  generations  is  no  more  than  a  “sad  drift  between 


98 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


the  eternities,”  without  purpose  or  meaning.  In  the  brain  of  the 
Connecticut  Yankee  are  secrets  hidden  from  the  children  of  King 
Arthur’s  time — a  curious  ability  to  use  the  forces  of  nature,  some 
glimmerings  of  social  justice.  But  to  what  purpose  have  Hartford 
and  the  nineteenth  century  used  their  knowledge?  It  is  a  world  of 
slaves  still  as  it  was  in  King  Arthur’s  day.  The  human  animal 
cannot  lift  himself  to  heaven  by  his  own  bootstraps,  and  heaven 
will  not  stoop  to  lift  him.  For  a  “clammy  atmosphere  of  reverence, 
respect,  deference,”  it  has  substituted  smartness,  vulgarity,  irrev¬ 
erence. 

As  one  slips  back  and  forth  between  the  two  worlds  the  satire 
takes  on  vaster  perspectives;  it  cuts  deep  into  all  civilizations,  for 
all  alike  are  sham,  all  have  issued  from  the  conquest  of  man’s  native 
intelligence  by  his  superstitions  that  are  too  useful  to  his  masters 
to  be  dissipated.  Clearly  in  Mark  Twain’s  philosophy  of  history 
the  hopes  of  the  Enlightenment  are  fading.  Passionately  dedicated 
to  the  program  of  the  Enlightenment — freedom,  individuality, 
humanitarianism,  democracy — his  faith  in  reason,  free  will, 
progress,  was  burning  low,  in  presence  of  the  historical  record. 
The  determinism  that  lurked  at  the  bottom  of  John  Locke’s 
psychology,  unperceived  by  the  French  idealists,  was  revealing 
itself  to  Mark  Twain  and  he  was  already  trimming  his  sails  to  the 
chill  winds  blowing  from  the  outer  spaces  of  a  mechanistic  cosmos. 

More  immediately  of  course  A  Connecticut  Yankee  is  an  at¬ 
tack  on  the  aristocratic  romanticism  of  Sir  Walter.  There  is  little 
loitering  in  the  great  hall — except  to  comment  on  the  coarseness 
of  the  knights  and  ladies — and  much  poking  about  in  unlovely 
secret  places  where  one  comes  upon  a  rare  collection  of  human 
animals  thrust  away  in  the  oubliettes  or  pigging  together  in  mean 
huts.  Few  chapters  in  American  literature  are  so  noble  in  their 
saeva  indignatio,  so  beautiful  in  their  stern  simplicity,  as  certain 
sketches  of  the  king’s  progress  through  his  realm — not  a  royal 
progress  but  a  peasant’s.  There  are  no  tears  in  them,  they  go  far 
beyond  that.  The  scene  in  the  smallpox  hut  where  the  wife  is  glad 
her  husband  and  daughters  are  dead — they  are  either  in  heaven  or 
hell,  it  makes  little  difference,  for  they  are  no  longer  in  Britain 
and  so  are  happy;  and  the  scene  of  the  young  mother  hanged  for 
stealing  a  piece  of  cloth  of  an  ell’s  length  or  so,  hanged  that  prop¬ 
erty  in  Britain  might  be  safe — such  pictures  reveal  how  far  he  had 
traveled  from  the  days  of  Roughing  It.  He  was  no  longer  a  good 


99 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 

Federalist-Whig  concerned  about  exploitation  and  the  safeguards 
of  property.  Although  he  voted  the  Republican  ticket  he  made 
merry  over  the  tariff  56  and  he  frankly  hated  the  dominant  Republi¬ 
can  property-consciousness.  Like  Lincoln  he  was  for  the  man  rather 
than  the  dollar  when  the  rights  of  the  two  clashed.  In  these  later 
years  he  was  steadily  drifting  to  the  left,  on  the  side  of  the  social 
underling,  sympathetic  with  those  who  do  the  work  of  the  world. 
“He  never  went  so  far  in  socialism,  as  I  have  gone,”  said  Howells, 
“if  he  went  that  way  at  all  .  .  .  but  from  the  first  he  had  a  lumi¬ 
nous  vision  of  organized  labor  as  the  only  present  help  for  working¬ 
men.  .  .  .  There  was  a  time  when  I  was  afraid  that  his  eyes  were 
a  little  holden  from  the  truth;  but  in  the  very  last  talk  I  heard 
from  him  I  found  that  I  was  wrong,  and  that  this  great  humorist 
was  as  great  a  humanist  as  ever.”  57 

It  is  good  for  an  American  to  read  A  Connecticut  Yankee — and 
Joan  of  Arc  as  well;  for  in  them  is  a  flame  that  sears  and  shrivels 
the  mean  property-consciousness  which  lays  a  blight  on  every 
civilization.  In  the  peasant  girl  of  Domremy,  the  rapt  mystic 
led  by  her  Voices,  Mark  Twain  found  his  ideal,  the  lily  that 
bloomed  out  of  the  muck  of  medieval  times;  and  as  he  contem¬ 
plated  her  life  and  work  he  was  lifted  to  the  plane  of  worship. 
She  had  waged  heroic  warfare  against  the  embattled  lies  and 
shams  and  treacheries  of  a  sordid  age,  and  that  she  should  have 
died  at  the  stake  was  inevitable.  What  other  reward  was  to  be 
expected  from  bishops  and  kings  and  suchlike  spawn  of  the  devil? 
Not  till  the  people  grow  to  manhood  can  any  savior  help  them, 
and  in  that  day  they  will  need  no  savior  but  themselves.  The 
Sieur  Louis  de  Conte  struggles  with  the  idea  confusedly. 

I  believe  that  some  day  it  will  be  found  out  that  peasants  are  people. 
Yes,  beings  in  a  great  many  respects  like  ourselves.  And  I  believe  that 
some  day  they  will  find  this  out,  too — and  then!  Well,  then  I  think  they 
will  rise  up  and  demand  to  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  the  race,  and  that  by 
consequence  there  will  be  trouble.  Whenever  one  sees  in  a  book  or  in  a 
king’s  proclamation  those  words  ‘the  nation,’  they  bring  before  us  the 
upper  classes;  only  those;  we  know  no  other  ‘nation;’  for  us  and  the  kings 
no  other  ‘nation’  exists.  But  from  the  day  I  saw  old  D’Arc  the  peasant 
acting  and  feeling  just  as  I  should  have  acted  and  felt  myself,  I  have  carried 
the  conviction  in  my  heart  that  our  peasants  are  not  merely  animals, 
beasts  of  burden  put  here  by  the  good  God  to  produce  food  and  comfort 
for  the  ‘nation,’  but  something  more  and  better.  You  look  incredulous 

67  W.  D.  Howells,  My  Mark  Twain,  p.  43. 


60  See  Chapter  33. 


100 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Well,  that  is  your  training;  it  is  the  training  of  everybody;  but  as  for  me, 
I  thank  that  incident  for  giving  me  a  better  light,  and  I  have  never  for¬ 
gotten  it.68 

No  Bayard  ever  did  his  devoir  more  knightly  to  his  lady  than 
Mark  Twain  to  Joan,  finding  in  the  noble  drama  of  her  life  the 
romance  he  had  not  found  at  Arthur’s  court.  The  knights  of  the 
Round  Table  were  “but  ghosts  fighting  in  the  fog,’’  but  Jeanne 
D’Arc  was  human  and  lovable  and  divine.  And  then  the  outlet 
through  which  his  idealism  had  found  release  slowly  closed  in,  and 
he  was  left  alone  with  his  comfortless  speculations.  What  profits 
it  to  rail  at  the  damned  human  race  when  man  has  about  as  much 
chance  for  happiness  as  a  blind  puppy  in  a  sack?  The  bitter  lot  of 
humanity  is  due  not  to  institutions  alone  or  chiefly,  it  is  a  part  of 
the  mad  plan  of  a  bleak  mechanical  universe.  For  Mark  Twain 
the  solid  earth  was  dissolving,  leaving  only  a  rack  behind.  It  is 
futile  to  lament.  A  sympathetic  heart,  indeed,  is  the  last  and  bit¬ 
terest  irony- — for  why  weep  over  an  evil  exhalation!  “ Life  itself 
is  only  a  vision,  a  dream  .  .  .  Nothing  exists  save  empty  space — 
and  you.” 

In  a  little  while  you  will  be  alone  in  shoreless  space,  to  wander  its  limit¬ 
less  solitudes  without  friend  or  comrade  forever — for  you  will  remain  a 
thought,  the  only  existent  thought,  and  by  your  nature  inextinguishable, 
indestructible.  But  I,  your  poor  servant,  have  revealed  you  to  yourself 
and  set  you  free.  Dream  other  dreams,  and  better.  Strange,  indeed,  that 
you  should  not  have  suspected  that  your  universe  and  its  contents  were 
only  dreams,  visions,  fiction!  Strange,  because  they  are  so  frankly  and 
hysterically  insane — like  all  dreams  .  .  .  the  silly  creations  of  an  imagina¬ 
tion  that  is  not  conscious  of  its  freaks — in  a  word  that  they  are  a  dream, 
and  you  the  maker  of  it.  .  .  ,59 

So,  like  Cabell,  Mark  Twain  asserts  that  man  must  build  within 
and  by  letting  his  dreams  flow  out  create  for  himself  such  shelter 
as  he  can  against  the  chill  of  the  eternal  void.  A  flea  on  the  epi¬ 
dermis  of  earth,  nevertheless  he  is  thought  and  thought  is  death¬ 
less.  To  such  a  conclusion  did  the  buoyant  youth  of  Roughing  It 
arrive  in  the  dun  twilight  years.  The  Mysterious  Stranger  is  only 
Tom  Sazvyer  retold  in  the  midnight  of  his  disillusion. 

What  an  ending  for  a  child  of  the  Gilded  Age!  In  his  youth  a 
complete  frontiersman,  with  vast  potential  wealth  within  him, 
he  hewed  and  hacked  at  his  genius,  working  the  easiest  veins, 

68  Joan  of  Arc ,  Chapter  37,  p.  290. 

69  The  Mysterious  Stranzer.  n.  131. 


THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  SEVENTIES 


101 


exploiting  the  most  accessible  resources,  wasting  much  to  cash  in 
on  a  little.  And  when  in  the  end  the  fool’s  gold  turned  to  ashes 
in  his  mouth,  as  a  frontiersman  still  he  pursued  his  way  alone, 
a  solitary  pioneer  exploring  the  universe,  seeking  a  homestead  in  an 
ironical  cosmos,  until  overwhelmed  by  the  intolerable  solitude  he 
made  mock  at  all  the  gods.  What  a  commentary  on  the  Gilded  Age! 


CHAPTER  III 
CHANGING  THEORY 


Unlike  as  were  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich,  Walt  Whitman,  and  Mark 
Twain,  they  belonged  equally  to  an  America  that  was  passing.  In 
consequence  of  the  silent  drift  towards  consolidation  new  philoso¬ 
phies  were  preparing  that  were  to  rephrase  the  familiar  American 
ideals  and  adapt  current  political  and  economic  theory  to  the  needs 
of  the  new  order.  For  a  decade  or  more  the  significance  of  that 
drift  was  obscured  by  the  last  great  wave  of  decentralization  that 
swept  across  the  prairie  commonwealths;  but  when  the  frontier  had 
been  pushed  to  the  Pacific  Northwest  and  the  free  lands  had  passed 
into  private  ownership,  the  movement  of  consolidation  gathered 
momentum  swiftly.  Primarily  economic  in  its  origins,  it  went 
forward  on  even  foot  with  the  industrial  revolution.  The  vast 
increase  in  population,  the  unprofitable  expansion  of  agriculture, 
the  augmenting  resources  of  liquid  capital,  the  new  potentialities 
revealed  by  industrialism,  were  all  engaged  in  the  work  of  trans¬ 
forming  a  scattered  agricultural  people  into  an  urbanized  industrial 
people. 

And  then  came  the  railways  to  hasten  a  movement  that  was 
implicit  in  the  nature  of  things.  Effective  nationality  in  America 
issued  more  immediately  from  fluid  communication  than  perhaps 
any  other  cause.  A  depressing  spirit  of  isolation — of  provincial 
aloofness — had  lain  like  a  heavy  weight  on  the  colonial  mind. 
The  barriers  of  distance  were  made  formidable  by  a  rugged  un¬ 
tamed  country,  and  to  open  up  free  communication  was  an  arduous 
undertaking.  Yet  easy  communication  must  be  provided  if  eco¬ 
nomic  development  were  to  go  forward.  In  the  early  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century  vast  plans  and  great  outlays  of  money  went 
into  the  work  of  linking  the  sundered  portions  of  the  country  by  a 
system  of  waterways.  The  Erie  canal,  the  great  lakes,  the  Ohio  and 
the  Mississippi,  were  creating  their  own  America,  picturesque  and 
individual,  when  the  process  of  differentiation  was  rudely  broken 
across  by  the  iron  rails  that  ran  East  and  West,  disregarding  nat¬ 
ural  barriers  and  breaking  down  traditional  frontiers.  It  was  the 

102 


CHANGING  THEORY 


103 


railways  that  tied  the  continent  effectively  together,  providing  the 
needed  transportation  to  make  possible  a  national  economic  system. 
With  the  laying  of  the  Union  Pacific  rails  in  the  late  sixties  the 
destiny  of  America  as  a  self-sufficient  economic  unity  was  fixed. 
Henceforth  for  an  indeterminate  period  the  drift  of  tendency 
would  be  from  the  outlying  frontiers  to  industrial  centers,  and 
with  that  drift  would  come  far-reaching  changes  in  the  daily  rou¬ 
tine  of  life.  The  machine  would  reach  into  the  remotest  villages  to 
disrupt  the  traditional  domestic  economy,  and  the  division  of  labor 
would  -  substitute  for  the  versatile  frontiersman  the  specialized 
factory-hand.  A  new  urban  psychology  would  displace  the  older 
agrarian,  and  with  the  new  psychology  would  come  other  philoso¬ 
phies  in  response  to  the  changing  realities. 

i 

WINDS  OF  ECONOMIC  THEORY 

So  profound  a  revolution  could  not  fail  to  dislocate  the  founda¬ 
tions  of  all  traditional  schools  of  thought.  Economic  and  political 
theory  were  both  thrown  out  of  their  earlier  beds  to  flow  in  new 
channels.  By  force  of  gravitation  the  main  stream  of  economic 
theory — like  the  main  stream  of  political  theory — poured  into  the 
broadening  channels  of  capitalism,  and  only  the  lesser  vagrant 
currents  followed  the  old  channels  of  agrarianism  or  the  new 
channels  of  proletarianism.  There  was  much  speculation  on  the 
disturbing  phenomena  of  the  great  change,  and  current  economic 
theory  was  slow  to  settle  into  the  conformities  of  a  school.  It 
divided  sharply,  not  only  between  the  advocates  of  capitalism 
and  agrarianism,  but  between  those  who  accepted  the  classical 
English  theory  and  those  who  believed  that  economic  conditions  in 
America  warranted  an  independent  American  school.  The  first 
group  of  professional  economists — Henry  C.  Carey,  Prancis  A. 
Walker,  David  A.  Wells — made  its  appearance,  and  a  very  con¬ 
siderable  group  of  amateurs— free-lance  economists  and  fireside 
theorists — contributed  to  the  speculation  of  the  times  in  the  meas¬ 
ure  of  their  intelligence.  These  latter  have  received  scant  atten¬ 
tion,  since  the  battle  went  against  them;  nevertheless  they  do  not 
deserve  to  be  forgotten,  for  most  often  they  were  an  expression  of 
the  social  conscience  of  the  times — a  homely  protest  against  the 
exploitation  of  farmer  and  workingman  by  the  rising  capitalism. 


104  CHANGING  AMERICA 

But  because  they  essayed  to  turn  the  course  of  “manifest  destiny” 
they  were  ignored  or  roughly  ridden  down,  and  only  one  of  them — 
Henry  George — is  still  widely  influential. 

In  the  primitive  early  days  of  America  economic  theory  had  been 
a  simple  homespun  product,  woven  on  fireside  looms,  and  following 
simple  domestic  patterns.  With  the  rise  of  industrialism  it  passed 
into  the  keeping  of  stockbrokers  and  textile  manufacturers  and  re¬ 
tail  merchants  who  were  looked  upon  as  authoritative  expounders 
of  the  new  science  of  wealth.  In  his  Elements  of  Political  Economy , 
first  published  in  1837  ajid  for  forty  years  a  standard  textbook  in 
American  colleges,  Francis  Wayland  accepted  this  view  and  offered 
an  apology  for  treating  of  the  subject  at  all.  “It  may  possibly  be 
urged,”  he  said,  “that  the  Author,  having  had  no  experience  in 
mercantile  business,  should  have  left  this  subject  to  be  treated  of  by 
practical  men.”  In  the  days  of  Henry  Clay  this  view  established 
itself  in  the  halls  of  Congress,  where  politicians  who  had  never 
heard  of  Ricardo  were  on  profitably  intimate  terms  with  Nick 
Biddle,  and  respected  the  interests  of  influential  constituents  far 
more  than  the  principles  of  Manchesterism.  With  the  appearance 
of  professional  economists  the  breach  between  economic  theory  and 
legislative  votes  widened  to  a  chasm.  Ignored  by  the  politicians 
except  in  so  far  as  their  views  fell  in  with  the  current  paternalism, 
the  economists  retreated  to  the  quiet  of  the  schools  and  there  spun 
their  webs  quite  harmlessly.  Youthful  undergraduates  were  fed  on 
a  modified  English  classical  theory  in  which  the  pessimism  of 
Ricardo  and  Malthus,  bred  of  the  bitter  dislocations  of  English 
industrial  life,  was  diluted  with  an  optimism  more  suited  to  the 
temper  of  the  new  world. 

The  academic  economists,  it  must  be  confessed,  were  in  an  un¬ 
happy  position,  not  unlike  that  of  the  earlier  Calvinists.  They  lived 
as  remote  from  the  realities  of  life  as  did  those  old  ministers. 
Trained  in  the  orthodox  English  school  they  felt  bound  to  defend 
laissez  faire,  yet  as  members  of  universities  dependent  on  wealthy 
patrons  they  could  not  well  offend  powerful  interests  that  wanted 
none  of  their  free-trade  theory.  On  the  whole  they  stuck  pretty 
manfully  to  their  guns,  and  from  Wayland  to  Sumner  they  upheld 
the  abstract  principle  of  free  competition;  but  what  they  could  do 
in  other  ways  to  appease  the  wrath  of  the  protectionists  they  did 
heartily,  and  the  steady  rapprochement  of  academic  economic 
theory  and  capitalism  was  foreordained  in  the  nature  of  things 


CHANGING  THEORY 


105 


academic.  Agrarian  and  proletarian  economics  were  granted  no 
hearing  in  the  colleges.  Other  schools  than  the  English  classical 
were  not  countenanced,  Henry  George  was  ridiculed  and  the  left- 
wing  European  economists — great  thinkers  like  Sismondi,  Saint- 
Simon,  Louis  Blanc,  Bastiat,  Proudhon,  Engels,  and  Karl  Marx — 
were  pretty  much  ignored  by  professors  of  economics  in  the  Amer¬ 
ica  of  the  Gilded  Age.  Something  of  the  intellectual  sterility  of  the 
genteel  tradition  descended  upon  our  academic  economists;  yet 
amongst  them  were  vigorous  and  capable  minds  that  must  not  be 
overlooked. 


i 

HENRY  C.  CAREY 

Henry  C.  Carey,  son  of  the  vigorous  Irish  Republican,  Matthew 
Carey,  who  made  The  American  Museum  one  of  the  ablest  of  the 
eighteenth-century  American  magazines,  may  perhaps  be  justly 
called  our  first  professional  economist.  The  eighty-six  years  of  his 
life  were  filled  with  enormous  labors  in  the  twin  fields  of  economics 
and  sociology.  He  did  his  own  thinking  from  a  basis  of  facts  that 
he  was  at  great  pains  to  gather  and  tabulate,  and  his  intellectual 
unfolding  followed  naturally  the  current  material  development  of 
the  mid-century.  His  statistics,  of  which  he  was  excessively  fond, 
no  doubt  were  as  unreliable  as  most  statistics  that  economists  love 
to  dabble  in,  and  like  other  purveyors  of  columned  figures  and  im¬ 
pressive  charts  he  certainly  leaned  too  heavily  on  his  knotty  staff; 
but  unlike  academic  economists  such  as  Francis  Wayland  he  tried 
to  keep  his  thinking  in  contact  with  reality  and  in  consequence  his 
studies  possess  a  solidity  that  is  still  impressive. 

Although  his  father  had  early  been  interested  in  Hamilton’s 
national  system  and  for  a  time  was  president  of  a  Philadelphia 
society  concerned  in  furthering  a  protective  tariff — for  which  the 
great  German  protectionist  List  published  a  number  of  letters  in 
1827 — Carey  began  as  a  follower  of  the  classical  school,  and  in  the 
thirties  he  published  a  treatise  on  political  economy  that  expounded 
the  Manchester  doctrine  of  free-trade.  But  under  the  stirring 
leadership  of  Henry  Clay  the  American  System  was  making  head¬ 
way  fast,  and  the  facts  of  American  expansion  impressed  him  as 
earlier  they  had  impressed  theyoung  List  on  his  visit  here.  Turning 
statistician,  he  soon  discovered,  as  he  believed,  certain  fallacies  in 
the  English  classical  school,  and  he  proceeded  to  examine  afresh 


106 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


the  Ricardian  theory  of  rent.  (The  change  came  in  1848.)  Accord¬ 
ing  to  this  most  celebrated  of  all  economic  doctrines  rent  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  difference  in  productivity  between  the  best  land, 
which  is  settled  first,  and  the  poorest,  which  social  need  later 
brings  under  cultivation;  and  hence  in  every  growing  community 
the  increment  of  rent  constantly  increases  ?at  the  expense  of  both 
labor  and  capital.  But  in  the  America  which  Carey  was  acquainted 
with,  and  where  the  story  of  social  development  was  being  swiftly 
recapitulated,  the  facts  seemed  to  him  to  prove  quite  otherwise. 
Here  the  poorer  lands  were  settled  first,  because  their  physical 
condition  made  them  more  easily  available,  and  only  later,  when 
social  pressure  increased  and  larger  means  were  available,  were 
the  rich  bottom-lands  cleared  and  the  marshes  drained. 

As  a  result  of  his  narrow  interpretation  of  Ricardo’s  doctrine 
of  social  fertility,  Carey  lost  faith  in  the  Ricardian  theory  and 
turned  frankly  to  the  American  scene  to  discover,  if  possible,  a 
more  adequate  explanation.  Soon  the  seeds  of  his  intense  nation¬ 
alism  were  bearing  their  fruit.  An  inherited  dislike  of  England  led 
him  to  fear  its  industrial  preeminence,  and  he  abandoned  the  ideal 
of  an  international  division  of  labor  for  the  ideal  of  independent 
nationality,  with  America  developing  its  individuality  through  the 
exploitation  of  its  own  resources.  Free-trade,  he  came  to  believe, 
is  international,  it  results  in  establishing  a  “single  factory  for  the 
whole  world,  whither  all  the  raw  produce  has  to  be  sent  whatever 
be  the  cost  of  transport”;  whereas  any  society  waxes  individual 
and  strong  in  the  measure  that  it  develops  variety  of  employment 
with  its  demand  for  mutual  help  and  service.  Only  through  such 
associations  can  man  develop  his  capacities  and  further  his  mastery 
of  nature.  His  patriotism  thus  became  involved  in  his  economics 
and  for  years  he  waged  a  relentless  warfare  against  Manchesterism. 
Not  only  were  the  English  doctrines  false  to  American  fact,  he 
pointed  out,  but  they  were  vicious  Tory  doctrines  which  if  fol¬ 
lowed  here  would  keep  America  poor  for  the  benefit  of  England. 
The  great  idea  which  came  finally  to  dominate  his  thinking  is 
suggested  by  the  title  of  a  pamphlet,  written  in  1852,  The  Harmony 
0]  Interests.  Agricultural ,  Manufacturing,  and  Commercial — a  work 
that  suggests  Frederic  Bastiat  s  Les  harmonies  economiques,  pub¬ 
lished  in  1850,  and  influenced  by  Carey’s  earlier  speculations.1 
It  was  an  age  much  given  to  discovering  harmonies  and  Carey  was 
1  See  Gide  and  Rist,  A  History  of  Economic  Doctrines,  pp.  282-284,  327—33 1. 


CHANGING  THEORY 


107 


not  behindhand  in  the  business.  In  the  introduction  he  traced  the 
ills  of  contemporary  economic  life  to  the  Manchester  theories  of 
rent  and  population — theories  which  had  thrown  their  black 
shadows  over  English  Parliamentary  programs  of  relief  and  per¬ 
verted  the  normal  unfolding  of  western  civilization.  In  conse¬ 
quence  the  “tendency  of  the  whole  British  system  of  political  econ¬ 
omy  is  the  production  of  discord  among  nations.”  2 

In  the  background  of  Carey’s  mind  was  a  Physiocratic  dislike 
of  the  sterile  middleman  which  sharpened  his  antagonism  to  an 
international  division  of  labor,  and  a  sensitive  social  conscience 
that  was  concerned  at  the  ruthless  exploitation  of  English  mill- 
hands.  An  ardent  believer  in  natural  liberty  and  convinced  of  its 
beneficence,  he  restricted  economic  freedom  within  national 
boundaries.  The  harmony  of  interests  is  local  and  not  interna¬ 
tional — the  tying  together  of  the  several  parts  of  the  whole.  Be¬ 
yond  the  national  boundaries  it  ceases.  The  pessimism  of  the 
English  school  with  its  iron  law  of  wages  and  its  Malthusian  law 
of  population  was  harshly  repugnant  to  his  buoyant  optimism. 
From  these  vicious  roots,  he  was  convinced,  sprang  the  principle 
of  isolation  and  differentiation — that  producer  and  consumer  must 
live  apart,  with  the  corollary  that  the  poor  must  seek  new  lands  in 
far  countries  to  supply  the  places  of  those  from  which  they  have 
been  thrust,  there  to  produce  agricultural  staples  to  exchange  for 
the  manufactured  goods  produced  in  thickly  settled  countries — a 
principle  that  taxes  both  producer  and  consumer  in  the  exact 
measure  of  transportation  tolls,  and  benefits  exclusively  the  sterile 
middleman.  Applied  to  America  the  policy  of  free-trade  must  keep 
this  country  dependent  upon  England — keep  it  agricultural  for  the 
benefit  of  British  merchants;  and  the  program  that  Carey  out¬ 
lined,  the  complete  sufficiency  of  which  he  never  doubted,  was  a 
return  to  the  policy  of  Adam  Smith,  to  that  “general  harmony  of 
interests”  that  must  result  from  bringing  the  farmer  and  artisan 
into  neighborhood  communities,  fashioning  the  raw  materials 
where  they  are  produced  and  consuming  the  farmer’s  produce 
where  it  is  grown.  Adam  Smith  “saw  well,”  says  Carey,  “that 
when  men  came  thus  together,  there  arose  a  general  harmony  of 
interests,  each  profiting  his  neighbor,  and  profiting  by  that  neigh¬ 
bor’s  success,  whereas  the  tendency  of  commercial  centralization 
was  toward  poverty  and  discord,  abroad  and  at  home.”3 

2  Miscellaneous  Works,  Prefare  to  Harmony  of  Interests.  3  Ibid. 


108 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


To  his  death  in  1879  Carey  was  the  most  distinguished  as  he  had 
been  the  most  tireless  advocate  of  a  system  of  protection  for 
American  manufactures.  He  was  one  of  the  most  pugnacious 
pamphleteers  of  a  pugnacious  generation.4  He  was  a  co-worker 
with  Horace  Greeley  in  the  labor  of  convincing  a  suspicious  people 
of  the  common  benefits  to  be  got  from  a  subsidy  to  a  class;  and 
their  joint  influence  gave  respectability  and  popularity  to  the 
appeals  of  business  men  and  politicians.  Between  1849  and  1857  he 
“was  the  virtual  editor  of  the  New  York  Tribune”  in  all  matters 
regarding  protection.  His  chief  antagonist  in  the  long  struggle  was 
William  Cullen  Bryant  and  the  Evening  Post;  and  he  made  frequent 
appeal  to  Bryant  to  meet  him  in  a  pamphlet  debate  that  should 
bring  before  the  public  both  sides  of  the  great  question  of  protec¬ 
tionism.  Bryant’s  refusal  did  not  lessen  his  ardor,  and  in  successive 
pamphlets  he  laid  before  the  American  people  a  well-rounded 
argument  for  tariff  subsidies  that  ranks  him  in  the  history  of  eco¬ 
nomic  thought  with  Friedrich  List,  the  great  German  apostle  of  a 
nationalist  economic  system.  American  manufacturers  owe  a 
heavy  debt  to  Henry  Carey. 

In  these  early  years  of  industrialism  the  manufacturer  was  still 
dependent  on  the  banker,  and  industrial  development  was  held 
back,  Carey  came  to  believe,  by  a  false  financial  policy  imposed 
on  the  county  by  the  bankers.  From  his  boundless  enthusiasm  for 
the  ideal  of  a  national  economy  sprang  likewise  his  unorthodox 
views  on  money  that  so  greatly  annoyed  his  fellow  economists. 
Individual  in  his  thinking  on  this  as  on  other  subjects,  he  espoused 
theories  that  to  dogmatic  bullionists  like  David  A.  Wells  seemed 
incendiary  at  a  time  (during  the  post-war  years)  when  so  many 
Americans  were  bitten  with  “money  heresies.”  On  this  theme  his 
patriotism  and  his  democratic  sympathies  ran  together.  He  was 
opposed  to  the  bullion  system  because  it  struck  at  nationalism. 
An  English  system,  devised  by  Lombard  Street,  did  not  answer  the 
needs  of  America.  The  price  of  gold  is  established  in  a  world  market 
and  the  flow  of  bullion  is  always  toward  the  great  centers  already 
glutted  with  money.  To  throw  the  money  of  the  world  into  a  com¬ 
mon  pool  was  to  subject  the  money  of  poorer  and  remoter  countries 
to  the  control  of  the  great  financial  capitals.  Free-trade  and  the 
gold  standard  were  the  twin  weapons  forged  by  England  for  world- 

4  All  told  he  published  at  his  own  print-shop  some  3000  pages  of  pamphlet  mate 
rial  of  his  own  writing.  ,, 


CHANGING  THEORY 


109 


wide  economic  conquest,  and  for  America  to  adopt  a  financial 
policy  that  held  her  subject  to  Lombard  Street,  seemed  to  Carey 
the  height  of  folly.  Gold  follows  the  balance  of  trade,  and  until 
America  had  built  up  an  adequate  domestic  economy  her  specie 
would  continue  to  drain  off,  leaving  too  scanty  a  supply  to  do  the 
necessary  work  of  society. 

The  solution,  he  believed,  lay  in  the  creation  of  an  independent 
national  currency;  and  an  efficient  national  currency,  he  held  with 
Bishop  Berkeley,  was  one  that  was  non-exportable,  that  remained 
at  home  to  do  the  day’s  work  instead  of  gadding  about.  To  pro¬ 
vide  such  a  medium  of  exchange  he  proposed  a  currency  founded 
on  the  national  credit — a  “national  system,”  he  argued,  “based 
entirely  on  the  credit  of  the  government  with  the  people,  and  not 
liable  to  interference  from  abroad.”  5  It  was  on  such  grounds  that 
Carey  supported  the  greenback  issues  and  favored  the  remoneti¬ 
zation  of  silver.  The  ideal  of  “societary  circulation,”  he  pointed 
out,  was  credit — “that  great  step  towards  civilization  which  con¬ 
sists  in  substituting  letters  of  credit  for  material  money”;  and  be¬ 
cause  “the  steady  and  regular  use  of  the  letter  of  credit  known  to 
the  world  as  the  ‘greenback,’  or  that  other  known  as  the  ‘national 
bank  note,’  ” 6  tended  to  wean  the  minds  of  men  from  dependence 
on  specie,  he  was  warm  in  their  favor. 

With  a  sound  national  system,  let  foreigners  take  our  gold  for  whatever 
balance  of  trade  they  can  impose  upon  us,  having  no  use  among  ourselves 
for  any  coin  money  except  what  we  can  retain  under  a  wholesome  foreign 
commerce. 

What  we  most  need  today  is  the  establishment  of  that  monetary  inde¬ 
pendence  which  results  from  maintaining  absolute  command  over  the 
machinery  of  exchange  used  within  our  borders,  leaving  to  the  gold  dollar 
the  performance  of  its  duty  of  arranging  for  the  settlement  of  balances 
throughout  the  world.7 

Carey’s  insistence  on  a  plentiful  supply  of  money  laid  him  under 
the  charge  of  being  an  advocate  of  “cheap  money,  and  therefore 
one  of  those  wicked  persons  known  as  “inflationists.  The  charge 
in  the  main  was  true.  He  was  pungent  in  his  contrast  between  the 
prosperity  of  war  times  when  an  abundant  currency  released  all 
the  energies  of  the  American  people,  and  the  stagnation  that 

6  Contraction  or  Expansion?  Repudiation  or  Resumption?  Letters  to  the  Hon.  Hugh 
M’Culloch,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Philadelphia,  1866,  p.  20. 

6  Jfyid  j  p.  22. 

7  Quoted  in  W.  Elder,  Memoir  of  Henry  C.  Carey,  p.  13  (Philadelphia,  1880.  With 
bibliography). 


110 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


followed  upon  contraction.  “Cheap  money — low  interest — en¬ 
abled  our  working  men  to  prosper,”  whereas  dear  money — high 
interest — was  bringing  distress  and  hardship.  Every  reduction 
in  the  amount  of  currency  decreases  the  purchasing  power  of  the 
people,  and  slows  down  the  circulatory  system.  The  attempt  to 
retire  the  greenbacks  he  regarded  as  a  class  attack  on  the  common 
welfare  of  the  country.  “To  that  end  the  greenback,  everywhere 
claimed  as  the  people’s  money,  has  by  those  in  high  places  been 
denounced,  small  as  is  the  quantity,  when  compared  with  the  real 
need  for  it.”  8  Paper  money  is  “democratic  in  its  tendencies,” 
passing  from  hand  to  hand  and  never  seeking  a  bank  vault  to 
hide  in. 

A  war  upon  what  is  called  “paper  money”  is  ...  a  war  upon  the  poor 
in  favor  of  the  rich;  and  that  the  war  being  made  upon  it  has  precisely  that 
effect  is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  the  western  farmer  is  now  being  so  im¬ 
poverished  by  reason  of  such  a  reduction  in  the  price  of  corn  and  oats 
that  the  former  is  being  used  as  fuel,  while  the  latter  sold  at  8  cents  a 
bushel,  [while]  houses  and  lots  in  the  neighborhood  of  Wall  Street  [are] 
commanding  .  .  .  prices  such  as  had  never  before  been  heard  of.9 

Considering  Carey’s  reputation  as  an  economist  and  his  wide 
influence,  such  doctrine,  in  the  eyes  of  all  “sound-money  men,” 
was  distinctly  pernicious.  He  was  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the 
apostles  of  inflation  and  repudiation,  and  he  suffered  many  a  sharp 
attack.  But  that  would  not  deter  a  warrior  grown  gray  in  battle, 
and  in  the  very  last  year  of  his  life  he  fell  upon  the  bullion  theory 
with  the  ardor  of  a  young  man.  He  would  not  suffer  the  bankers 
to  go  unrebuked  in  their  mad  attack  on  the  prosperity  of  the 
country;  he  would  not  be  silent  while  a  policy  of  contraction,  that 
so  early  as  1866  had  reduced  the  per  capita  circulation  to  $12.50 — 
according  to  his  statistics — was  still  in  full  swing  after  the  dis¬ 
astrous  lesson  of  1873.  He  had  much  in  common  with  Peter  Cooper, 
who  in  1876  took  up  the  battle  against  Wall  Street  for  a  “demo¬ 
cratic  monetary  system.  1  he  blood  of  the  two  old  men,  both  born 
m  the  last  decade  of  the  eighteenth  century,  had  not  grown  cold 
or  sluggish  with  long  years,  but  responded  ardently  to  the  great 
cause  of  democracy  that  had  inspired  their  youth.  That  Carey’s 
national  system  was  a  house  divided  against  itself— that  industry 
and  finance  were  engaged  in  a  mortal  combat  for  supremacy — he 

8  Shall  We  have  Peace?  Letters  to  President-elect  Grant,  p.  39. 

9  Contraction  or  Expansion?  etc.,  p.  20. 


CHANGING  THEORY 


111 


probably  never  quite  realized.  He  was  concerned  that  America 
should  be  free  to  create  and  enjoy  the  wealth  that  lay  in  the  poten¬ 
tialities  of  the  continent,  and  to  that  end  he  would  have  money 
serve  industry,  and  not  industry  money. 

2 

FRANCIS  A.  WALKER 

The  social  conscience  of  Carey  was  colored  with  an  optimism 
that  was  the  spontaneous  expression  of  a  generation  that  set  no 
limits  to  the  beneficent  development  of  American  industrialism. 
No  storm-clouds  had  yet  gathered  on  the  horizon;  no  hostile  sys¬ 
tems  challenged  the  sufficiency  of  capitalism.  But  a  change  was 
at  hand.  By  the  end  of  the  seventies  the  complacency  of  the 
Gilded  Age  was  disturbed  by  the  rise  of  pestilent  heresies  in  the 
shape  of  new  economic  dogmas.  The  surplus-value  theory  of  Marx 
and  the  unearned-increment  theory  of  Henry  George  were  spread¬ 
ing  widely  through  America,  to  the  unsettlement  of  susceptible 
minds;  and  the  Knights  of  Labor  were  preparing  to  launch  a  gen¬ 
eral  attack  against  the  whole  system  of  capitalistic  exploitation. 
Carey  had  sufficed  the  wants  of  his  simpler  day,  but  there  was  need 
of  a  new  champion  to  wield  the  sword  of  pure  Ricardian  doctrine 
against  these  later  heresies. 

Francis  A.  Walker,  son  of  the  economist  Amasa  Walker,  Brig¬ 
adier  General  in  the  Civil  War,  Professor  at  Sheffield  Scientific 
School  and  later  President  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology,  was  to  be  the  self-appointed  champion  of  industrial¬ 
ism,  the  official  economist  of  the  Gilded  Age,  and  forerunner  of  a 
long  line  of  academic  purveyors  of  economic  dogma.  As  the 
author  of  a  college  textbook  that  superseded  Francis  Wayland’s 
naive  Elements  of  Political  Economy — a  work  that  had  served 
innumerable  college  generations  as  a  quarry  of  economic  doctrine— 
he  elaborated  a  complete  system  of  economics  with  a  geniality 
that  went  far  to  popularize  the  “dismal  science”  with  vast  numbers 
of  undergraduates;  and  as  an  authoritative  apologist  for  entrepre¬ 
neur  profits  he  rendered  a  service  to  capitalism  that  quite  erased 
his  little  Ricardian  peccadillo  of  free-trade  prejudice.  There  runs 
through  his  solid  pages  the  confident  optimism  of  his  generation — 
an  optimism  that  discovers  in  the  heresies  of  socialism  and  single¬ 
tax  the  only  storm-clouds  on  the  fair  American  horizons.  He  saw 


112 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


no  reason  to  question  the  ultimate  good  of  industrialism,  or  to 
fear  any  deep-seated  clash  between  labor  and  capital.  He  carried 
water  easily  on  both  shoulders,  for  he  was  so  fortunate  as  to  have 
worked  out  to  his  complete  satisfaction,  a  magic  economic  formula 
that  should  return  both  to  master  and  workman  their  just  shares 
of  the  total  production.  In  the  light  of  his  exegesis  there  could  be 
no  Marxian  struggle  of  the  classes.  The  captain  of  industry 
must  no  longer  be  regarded  with  sour  aspect  as  a  parasite  upon 
labor,  but  as  a  fellow  worker,  the  creator  of  those  profits  which 
are  not  subtracted  for  his  benefit  from  the  portion  of  labor.  From 
Ricardo  to  Marx  the  economists  had  been  barking  up  the  wrong 
tree  in  their  analysis  of  the  rewards  of  the  entrepreneur. 

The  classical  school  of  the  Gilded  Age  was  in  like  position  with 
the  eighteenth-century  Calvinists;  they  must  either  abandon  their 
dogmas  or  reinterpret  them  to  meet  current  needs.  Walker  was  too 
good  a  Ricardian  to  abandon  them,  so  he  proposed  to  reinterpret 
them.  The  urgent  problems  to  which  he  addressed  himself  were 
the  sources  of  profits  and  of  wages;  and  the  examination  of  those 
problems  led  him  to  his  theory  of  the  function  of  the  entrepreneur 
and  to  a  rejection  of  the  classical  wage-fund  theory.  He  refused 
to  discard  his  suit  of  Ricardian  clothes  as  Carey  had  done.  They 
could  never  go  out  of  style,  he  believed,  so  long  as  honest  thinking 
was  respected.  He  accepted  most  of  the  Ricardian  dogmas  without 
question.  “Capital,”  he  asserted  soberly,  “arises  solely  from  sav¬ 
ing.  It  stands  always  for  self-denial  and  abstinence,”  and  interest 
is  the  “reward  of  abstinence.”  But  one  important  dogma,  the 
classical  wage-fund  theory,  he  insisted  on  stripping  away.  He  was 
too  genial  an  optimist  to  rest  content  with  the  bleak  conception 
that  the  margin  of  subsistence  circumscribes  the  rewards  of  labor, 
and  too  enlightened  an  apologist  of  industrialism  to  assert  that 
profits  are  the  leavings  of  wages.  ’  He  could  not  hope  to  erect 
a  theory  suitable  to  the  Gilded  Age  on  such  skimpy  hypotheses, 
and  he  scourged  them  from  the  temple  of  economic  law.  Wages, 
to  be  sure,  are  the  leavings  after  rent,  interest,  and  profits  have 
been  deducted  from  the  total  production;  but  vast  and  dangerous 
misconceptions  have  arisen  in  regard  to  the  portions  that  accrue 
to  these  several  partners,  and  in  particular  mischievous  perversions 
touching  the  share  of  profits.  This  was  the  crux  of  the  problem 
of  distribution  and  until  the  nature  of  profits  should  be  determined 
the  question  of  wages  would  remain  to  befuddle  weak  heads. 


CHANGING  THEORY 


113 


The  heart  of  Walker’s  doctrine,  therefore,  is  his  theory  of  prof¬ 
its.  He  proposed  to  show  that  according  to  the  true  law  of  profits 
this  flexible  increment  is  never  a  moiety  wrested  from  labor,  but  an 
additional  earning  of  management  that  justly  accrues  to  him  who 
creates  it.  The  doctrine  from  which  he  deduced  his  theory  of  the 
entrepreneur  was  the  Ricardian  theory  of  rent.  On  this  point 
Walker  was  the  most  loyal  of  Ricardians,  and  he  violently  attacked 
Carey  for  repudiating  the  classical  dogma.  In  a  word  “Ricardo’s 
doctrine  can  no  more  be  impugned  than  the  sun  in  the  heaven,”  he 
asserted,  “and  those  who  mouth  at  it  simply  show  that  they  do  not 
know  what  it  was  Ricardo  taught.”  10  What  was  needed  was  to 
understand  its  wide  implications  rather  than  to  seek  to  destroy  it — 
to  trace  in  all  its  reaches  the  doctrine  of  fertility  and  discover  how  in 
other  spheres  than  land  the  difference  between  fertile  and  unfertile 
measures  the  return  upon  economic  endeavor.  For  the  great  doc¬ 
trine  of  fertility,  Walker  pointed  out,  following  Mill,  is  capable  of 
expansion  to  cover  wider  fields  than  rent;  it  applies  equally  to 
management  and  labor;  it  broadens  out  into  a  comprehensive 
principle  that  exactly  measures  the  most  bitterly  disputed  of  the 
several  increments,  the  increment  of  profits. 

This  theory  of  fertility,  introduced  into  the  law  of  distribution, 
is  Walker’s  most  interesting  contribution  to  economic  speculation. 
By  it  he  supplemented  the  trinity  of  land,  capital,  and  labor — or  in 
terms  of  distribution,  of  rent,  interest,  and  wages — with  a  new 
entity — management  and  the  earnings  of  management.  The  argu¬ 
ment  is  highly  ingenious.  Assuming  a  no-profits  employer  at  the 
lowest  scale  of  the  entrepreneur  system,  by  analogy  from  the 
Ricardian  no-rent  grade  of  land,  he  asserted  that  similarly  “profits 
are  measured  upwards  from  the  level  of  the  no-profits  class  of  em¬ 
ployers,”  and  hence  “it  appears  that  the  gains  of  the  employer  are 
not  taken  from  the  earnings  of  the  laboring  class,  but  measure  the 
difference  in  production  between  the  commonplace  or  bad,  and  the 
able,  and  shrewd,  and  strong  management  of  business.”  11  Profits, 
then,  are  an  added  increment  of  management,  secured  by  foresight 
and  business  skill,  the  fruit  of  managerial  fertility;  and  since  they 
flow  solely  from  the  entrepreneur  they  belong  to  him  alone  and  no 
portion  may  be  justly  claimed  for  rent,  interest,  or  wages.  The 
complete  theory  he  states  thus: 

10  Land  and  its  Rent,  p.  108. 

11  Political  Economy,  pp.  242,  348- 


114 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Under  free  and  full  competition,  the  successful  employers  of  labour 
would  earn  a  remuneration  which  would  be  exactly  measured,  in  the  case 
of  each  man,  by  the  amount  of  wealth  which  he  could  produce,  with  a 
given  application  of  labour  and  capital,  over  and  above  what  would  be 
produced  by  employers  of  the  lowest  industrial,  or  no-profits,  grade, 
making  use  of  the  same  amounts  of  labour  and  capital,  just  as  rent  meas¬ 
ures  the  surplus  of  the  produce  of  the  better  lands  over  and  above  what 
would  be  produced  by  the  same  application  of  labour  and  capital  to  the 
least  productive  lands  which  contribute  to  the  supply  of  the  market, 
lands  which  themselves  bear  no  rent.12 


It  is  a  persuasive  argument  of  which  Walker  was  vastly  proud. 
The  germ  of  it  later  historians  of  economic  thought  have  traced  to 
Senior  and  John  Stuart  Mill,  who  had  suggested  the  idea  of  “differ¬ 
ential  rent,”  or  “rent  of  ability,”  which  is  the  reward  of  “all  pe¬ 
culiar  advantages  of  extraordinary  qualities  of  body  and  mind.”  13 
From  whatever  source  it  issued,  the  usefulness  of  such  doctrine  in 
the  days  of  an  expanding  industrialism,  and  the  ends  it  might  serve 
in  counteracting  proletarian  philosophies,  are  too  evident  to  need 
comment.  The  Marxian  dogma  of  surplus  value — that  profits  are 
stealings  from  wages — was  certainly  calculated  to  breed  dissatisfac¬ 
tion  in  weak  proletarian  heads.  Marx  was  a  good  Ricardian  in  his 
major  postulates  and  the  Ricardians  had  failed  to  analyze  ade¬ 
quately  the  true  sources  of  profits;  because  of  such  failure  the 
classical  school  had  underestimated  the  social  beneficence  of  the 
capitalistic  system.  Chained  to  the  iron  law  of  wages  the  school  had 
been  forced  to  envisage  a  bleak  future  with  labor  kept  always  at  the 
margin  of  subsistence.  From  this  pessimism  Walker  proposed  to  rid 
economic  theory,  by  showing  that  entrepreneur  profits  augment 
the  wage  fund  and  hence  that  the  entrepreneur  is  the  benefactor 
rather  than  the  exploiter  of  labor.  With  his  business  skill  the  cap¬ 
tain  of  industry,  like  the  inventor  of  a  new  machine,  lays  open  new 
sources  of  wealth  for  all,  and  if  he  gains  much  for  himself  he  gives 
more  to  society;  tor  every  improvement  in  business  methods  accrues 
in  the  end  to  society  as  a  whole,  for  the  new  technique  soon  becomes 
a  common  possession. 

The  validity  of  Walker’s  theory  of  profits  does  not  concern  us 
here,  it  is  a  matter  for  economists  to  determine.  To  one  who  is 
under  the  spell  of  no  doctrinaire  system  the  theory  seems  some- 


12  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  April,  1887. 
tory  of  Economic  Doctrine,  p.  eei. 

13  Ibid..,  p.  549. 


Quoted  in  Gide  and  Rist,  A  His • 


CHANGING  THEORY 


115 


what  too  neat  with  its  assumption  of  “free  and  full  competition”;14 
and  in  its  conscious  purpose  to  glorify  the  captain  of  industry  it  is 
freighted  rather  too  heavily  with  the  spirit  of  the  Gilded  Age.  It 
not  only  throws  the  door  wide  to  exploitation  but  it  invites  every¬ 
body  to  the  feast.  Yet  the  work  of  the  apologist  was  only  half  done. 
Having  established  to  his  satisfaction  the  law  of  profits,  Walker 
was  prepared  to  take  equally  high  ground  in  determining  the  incre¬ 
ment  that  falls  to  labor.  To  glorify  profits  and  at  the  same  time 
defend  the  pessimism  of  the  wage-fund  theory,  would  have  been 
foolish  tactics  in  presence  of  the  Marxian  surplus-value  theory; 
proletarian  discontent  must  be  dealt  with  and  Walker  was  prepared 
to  deal  with  it.  Having  ascertained  exactly  the  several  increments 
due  to  rent,  interest,  and  profits — which  in  his  system  are  rigidly 
determined  by  economic  law — he  confidently  assigned  all  the 
residual  increment  to  wages.  Labor  not  only  gets  all  it  earns,  he 
argued,  but  far  more,  since  what  does  not  fall  to  the  just  shares  of 
the  other  partners  falls  to  it — that  is  the  “whole  remaining  body  of 
wealth.”  If  it  be  recalled  that  the  total  social  fund  of  inventions, 
machinery,  trade  processes,  systems  of  transportation,  business 
methods,  are  alike  in  the  service  of  all  employers — the  no-profit 
entrepreneur  equally  with  the  high-profit — it  follows  that  the 
individual  employer  can  derive  from  such  social  wealth  no  modicum 
of  profit  above  and  beyond  what  his  individual  fertility  has  pro¬ 
duced.  Where  then  can  the  income  from  such  social  fund  flow 
except  to  wages?  “Every  invention  in  mechanics,  every  discovery 
in  the  chemical  art,  no  matter  by  whom  made,  inures  directly  and 
immediately”  to  the  benefit  of  labor.15  This,  to  be  sure,  on  the 
hypothesis  of  “full  and  free  competition,”  which  may  be  interfered 
with  by  various  means  but  which  in  the  long  run  prevails.  How  else 
shall  one  explain  the  constant  rise  in  the  wage-scale  that  has 
marked  the  Industrial  Revolution  and  that  has  gone  hand  in  hand 
with  vast  profits  to  the  entrepreneur  class? 

It  was  a  robust  optimism  that  could  lay  down  the  theory  that 
labor  is  “the  residual  claimant  to  the  product  of  industry.”  Al¬ 
though  Walker  prided  himself  on  his  discovery,  it  seems  to  have 
made  slight  impression  on  later  economic  thought.  Like  too  many 
members  of  the  classical  school  the  apologist  of  the  Gilded  Age 

14  For  a  critical  examination  see  Gide  and  Rist,  A  History  of  Economic  Doctrine \ 
pp.  551-558. 

15  Political  Economy ,  pp.  251-255. 


116 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


failed  to  keep  his  feet  on  the  plebeian  earth;  and  his  conclusions 
suggest  how  great  mischief  a  priori  reasoning  may  work  in  the 
speculations  of  academic  gentlemen.  A  moderate  dash  of  realism 
might  have  lessened  his  buoyant  optimism;  but  Walker  was  too 
warm  an  admirer  of  capitalism,  too  eager  to  assert  the  beneficence 
of  industrialism,  to  inquire  curiously  into  the  everyday  facts  of 
current  exploitation.  As  a  realistic  statistician  he  was  far  inferior 
to  Carey.  But  why  demand  a  plodding  realism  of  the  economist 
when  all  America  was  romantic?  If  the  economic  theory  of  General 
Walker  was  a  pleasant  blend  of  Ricardo  and  Colonel  Sellers,  would 
it  not  hit  the  taste  of  the  age  to  a  nicety?  Its  sturdy  optimism  was 
a  soothing  antidote  to  the  Jeremiads  of  the  Marxians  and  the 
shrill  demands  of  the  single-taxers.  The  Gold  Coast  of  America 
"Vlooked  to  its  official  economists  for  a  confutation  of  all  economic 
heresies,  and  who  was  so  well  equipped  for  that  business  as  a 
doughty  Colonel  Sellers  armed  with  a  sharp  Ricardian  sword? 

In  this  brisk  work  Walker  engaged  with  gusto.  In  his  onslaught 
upon  Marx  and  Henry  George  he  was  untroubled  by  doubt.  He 
first  demolished  the  structure  of  their  theory  and  then  impugned 
their  honesty.  His  condemnation  of  single-tax  is  bold  and  sweeping. 
There  is  a  bitter  asperity  in  his  denunciation  of  the  economic  here¬ 
sies  of  Progress  and  Poverty ,  and  he  dismisses  the  proposal  to  tax 
unearned  increment  with  the  comment,  “Every  honest  man  will 
resent  such  a  proposition  as  an  insult.”16  His  discussion  of  the 
economics  of  the  question  is  only  casual  and  he  hastens  back  to  the 
safe  haven  of  Ricardian  doctrine.1'  In  his  commentary  on  the 
Knights  of  Labor  he  is  somewhat  vindictive  for  a  well-bred  gentle¬ 
man.  He  charges  the  syndicalistic  attack  on  the  profits  system  to 
immigrant  foreigners,  asserts  that  the  law  of  profit  fertility  is  an 
insuperable  obstacle  to  any  proletarian  control  of  industry,  and 
finally  damns  it  as  un-American.  T  he  honest,  native  American 
knows  that  for  himself  and  his  children  the  way  is  open  clear  to 
the  top”;  his  “spirit  is  that  of  civility,  reciprocity  and  fair  play”; 
and  he  concludes: 

Had  it  been  left  to  our  native  population  alone,  not  one  of  those  violent 
and  reckless  attacks  upon  production  and  transportation,  which  have, 
within  the  past  two  or  three  years,  shocked  the  whole  industrial  system 
and  have  come  near  to  produce  a  general  crisis  of  trade,  would  ever  have 
taken  place.18 

16  Land  and  its  Rent,  Preface,  p.  vi.  a  pp.  I8i-l8-> 

18  Political  Economy,  p.  394. 


CHANGING  THEORY 


117 


Yet  in  spite  of  his  genial  optimism  he  discovered  specks  on  the 
fair  picture  of  society.  To  the  Ricardian  logic  the  stupidity  of  men 
is  a  constant  irritant;  if  only  men  were  rational  the  path  of  progress 
would  be  so  much  easier!  After  economic  law  has  been  demon¬ 
strated  with  the  finality  of  a  Euclidian  theorem,  it  is  disconcerting 
to  see  how  the  multitude  will  not  be  reasoned  with,  but  persist 
in  following  after  the  last  false  prophet  who  cries  in  the  market¬ 
place.  The  clamor  raised  by  single-tax  was  especially  annoying. 
“That  such  an  argument,”  he  remarked  a  bit  testily,  “should  for 
a  moment  have  imposed  upon  anybody,  is  enough  to  give  one  a 
new  conception  of  the  intellectual  capabilities  of  mankind.”  19 
Fortunate  it  is  for  society,  he  concludes,  that  while  man  proposes, 
economic  law  disposes.  False  prophets  will  have  their  little  day, 
but  from  their  secure  watch-tower  the  Ricardians  calmly  look  out 
upon  a  world  of  which  they  alone  hold  the  key.* 

ii 

THE  CONSCRIPTION  OF  POLITICAL  THEORY 

When  the  social  fabric  is  being  torn  rudely  across  by  a  changing 
economics,  political  theory  and  practice  will  suffer  from  the  at¬ 
tendant  confusions.  The  America  of  the  Gilded  Age  accounted 
itself  a  democracy  and  was  outwardly  content  to  make  use  of  the 
familiar  democratic  machinery;  but  until  it  was  determined 
whether  majority  or  minority  rule  should  prevail,  whether  the 
well-being  of  the  many  or  the  property  of  the  few  should  be  the 
chief  object  of  government,  there  would  be  no  serious  effort  to 
create  a  political  state  for  adequate  social  control.  In  the  mean¬ 
time  the  old  individualisms  would  range  the  land  seeking  what 
they  might  devour,  and  the  common  attitude  toward  the  political 
state  would  remain  one  of  good-natured  contempt.  A  shambling 
government,  corrupt  and  incompetent,  awakened  no  man  s  hope 
or  pride,  and  amidst  the  slovenly  anarchisms  of  the  times,  with  a 
crude  exploitation  in  the  saddle,  the  state  would  be  pretty  much 
ignored  except  when  its  services  might  prove  useful  to  such  ex¬ 
ploitation.  The  plutocracy  would  oppose  the  erection  of  a  vigorous 
state  until  such  time  as  it  felt  strong  enough  to  control  its  activities. 
The  principle  of  the  majority-will  held  grave  potentialities  that 

19  Ibid.,  p.  433.  .  .  ,  .  ,  .  ijr 

*  In  his  original  plan  Professor  Partington  included  a  third  subsection  on  W.  b. 

Sumner,  but  evidently  decided  against  its  inclusion. — Publisher. 


118 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


might  threaten  the  eventual  mastership  of  wealth,  and  until  the 
plutocracy  had  created  its  strongholds  within  the  framework  of 
the  democracy  it  would  bitterly  oppose  any  extension  of  democratic 
control. 

Broadly  two  great  movements  were  going  forward  side  by  side 
in  the  unconscious  drift  of  political  tendency — the  democratic  and 
the  plutocratic.  The  former,  drawn  chiefly  from  agrarian  and 
labor  elements  with  a  considerable  following  of  the  middle  and 
professional  classes,  was  determined  to  carry  forward  and  supple¬ 
ment  the  Jacksonian  movement.  It  was  honestly  concerned  for 
the  development  of  the  democratic  principle.  It  would  purify 
government  by  the  application  of  civil  service  reform,  it  would 
steadily  enlarge  the  bounds  of  social  control  of  economic  forces, 
and  it  would  strengthen  the  political  state  to  enable  it  to  cope  with 
corporate  wealth  and  constrain  the  ambitions  of  the  plutocracy 
into  conformity  with  democratic  ends.  To  such  a  democratic 
program  the  plutocracy  was  necessarily  opposed.  It  professed  the 
warmest  loyalty  to  the  abstract  principle  of  democracy  while 
bending  every  energy  to  emasculate  effective  democratic  control. 
The  problem  confronting  it  was  the  familiar  Federalistic  problem — 
how  to  protect  the  minority  from  the  majority  and  set  property 
interests  above  human  interests;  but  the  problem  had  been  im¬ 
mensely  complicated  by  the  strategic  advances  made  by  democ¬ 
racy.  The  democratic  principle  could  not  be  easily  thrust  aside, 
it  must  be  undermined*  And  so  while  awaiting  the  time  when  it 
should  be  strong  enough  to  set  up  boldly  its  mastery  of  society, 
plutocracy  took  refuge  in  two  principles,  the  superman  theory 
and  the  laissez-faire  theory,  both  of  which  it  asserted  to  be  demo¬ 
cratic,  the  very  essence  of  democracy.  The  former  was  “The  public 
be  damned”  theory,  which  held  that  the  economic  leaders  of  so¬ 
ciety  must  be  left  free  to  manage  their  properties  as  they  saw  fit; 
and  the  latter  was  the  familiar  doctrine  of  individual  initiative, 
that  looked  with  suspicion  on  any  interference  by  the  political 
state  with  economic  activity.  If  a  bureaucracy  may  stick  its  nose 
into  the  citizen  s  private  affairs  what  becomes  of  individual  lib¬ 
erty  ? 

But  the  plutocracy  was  building  its  real  defenses  elsewhere. 
Shrewdly  aware  of  the  potentialities  of  a  Constitution  that  had 
been  designed  for  the  protection  of  property  interests,  it  followed 
two  main  lines  of  development:  it  furthered  the  popular  develop- 


CHANGING  THEORY 


119 


ment  of  a  cult  of  the  Constitution  by  praising  the  excellence  of  a 
system  of  checks  and  balances,  and  spreading  the  view  that  to 
tamper  with  any  provisions  of  the  instrument  was  little  short  of 
sacrilege;  and  at  the  same  time  it  bent  every  energy  to  extend  the 
range  of  judicial  prerogative  and  bring  the  legislative  branch  under 
control  of  the  judiciary.  It  sought  extra-constitutional  indulgences 
that  were  dispensed  by  the  courts  in  the  name  of  the  police  power. 
The  way  had  been  prepared  by  Marbury  vs.  Madison  and  Dred 
Scott  vs.  Sanford,  and  during  the  Gilded  Age  a  broad  path  to  judi¬ 
cial  control  was  opened  by  the  elaboration  of  the  “due  process  of 
law”  principle  discovered  in  the  fourteenth  amendment.  With 
the  development  of  the  plutocracy  the  extension  of  the  doctrine  of 
judicial  review  went  forward  rapidly,  providing  an  impregnable 
defense  for  property  interests  that  promised  ill  for  the  principle  of 
democratic  control  in  the  interests  of  the  common  well-being.  The 
democracy  was  being  driven  from  the  inner  keep  of  the  castle. 

While  the  real  struggle  was  thus  going  on  in  the  court-room,  with 
the  outcome  in  the  hands  of  the  judges,  political  speculation  was 
playing  havoc  with  certain  of  our  oldest  and  most  cherished  doc¬ 
trines.  Pursuing  the  path  suggested  by  Webster  and  Francis 
Lieber,  it  turnejd  away  from  the  particularism  of  Calhoun  to  ex¬ 
plore  the  reaches  of  a  consolidating  nationalism.  The  inevitable 
drift  towards  unity — whether  democratic  or  plutocratic — was  daily 
gathering  momentum.  The  destruction  of  the  states-rights  pro¬ 
gram  and  party  had  cleared  the  ground  for  a  new  conception  of  the 
dignity  and  powers  of  the  political  state.  With  the  social  shift  from 
dispersion  to  centralization  the  federal  government  was  destined 
to  grow  in  authority;  and  political  theory  was  destined  to  follow 
the  same  course,  seeking  to  justify  in  principle  what  was  being  ac¬ 
complished  in  fact.  The  end  of  the  philosophy  of  dispersion  was  in 
sight.  The  tide  was  running  toward  an  exaltation  of  the  doctrine 
of  sovereignty,  with  the  consequent  exaltation  of  the  abstract 
political  state.  As  the  individual  coalesced  in  the  mass,  the  rights 
and  dignity  of  the  individual  would  lessen  in  the  presence  of  an  en¬ 
gulfing  sovereignty.  The  tradition  1  doctrine  of  natural  rights  was 
in  for  a  slashing  attack.  Centralization  must  destroy  the  shambling 
Jacksonian  structure  and  erect  in  its  place  a  grandiose  organic 
theory. 

During  the  Gilded  Age  a  number  of  systematic  studies  of  political 
theory  appeared,  amongst  which  the  most  significant  were,  Wool- 


120 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


sey’s  Political  Science,  or  the  State  (1877),  Bryce’s  The  American 
Commonwealth  (1888),  Woodrow  Wilson’s  The  State  (1889),  and 
Burgess’s  Political  Science  and  Constitutional  Law  (1891).  Of  these 
the  formal  studies  of  Woolsey  and  Burgess  may  serve  to  illustrate 
the  changing  thought  of  the  times.  Both  are  academic  reflections 
of  the  current  drift  of  tendency,  and  both  reveal  the  academic 
sympathy  with  the  master  movement  of  centralization.  The  work 
of  Woolsey  was  a  revision  of  classroom  notes  used  between  1846 
and  1871  and  strongly  colored  by  pre-war  views;  the  work  of  Bur¬ 
gess  was  the  first-fruits  eff  the  influence  of  German  speculation  on 
the  nature  of  the  leviathan  state. 

1 

THEODORE  WOOLSEY 

Theodore  Dwight  Woolsey,  professor  of  Greek  and  president  of 
Yale,  was  an  heir  in  direct  succession  of  Connecticut  Federalism. 
Nephew  of  Timothy  Dwight,  a  minister,  and  distinguished  member 
of  the  social  oligarchy  that  in  its  decadence  still  held  Connecticut 
opinion  in  a  strong  grip,  he  could  scarcely  escape  a  predilection  for 
the  moralistic  authoritative  dogmatisms  that  marked  the  old 
Connecticut  regime.  The  principle  of  coercive  authority  had  lain  at 
the  heart  of  the  political  theory  of  Timothy  Dwight,  and  Theodore 
Woolsey  was  true  to  his  Puritan  antecedents  in  asserting  the  su¬ 
premacy  of  authority  over  liberty.  The  only  important  element  in 
his  thinking  that  sets  him  apart  from  his  uncle  was  the  influence  of 
Francis  Lieber,  whose  conception  of  organic  growth  in  social  cus¬ 
tom  he  made  his  own,  and  whose  disciple  he  professed  to  be. 
Naturally  he  retained  the  old  Puritan  dislike  of  leveling — the 
traditional  Connecticut  distrust  of  democracy.  He  would  have  no 
weakening  of  authority,  no  Jacobean  license;  and  for  anarchism, 
socialism,  communism,  which  he  reckoned  the  nastiest  spawn  of 
Jacobinism,  his  abhorrence  was  what  one  would  expect  of  a  Con¬ 
necticut  Federalist.  The  two  ponderous  volumes  that  he  issued  in 
1877  are  learned  studies  that  bear  on  their  dun  pages  many  a  tell¬ 
tale  mark  of  earlier  times.  In  them  Theodore  Woolsey  was  renewing 
the  fight  against  an  infidel  philosophy  that  with  its  doctrine 
of  natural  rights  denied  the  authority  of  the  godly  to  police 
society. 

In  harmony  with  Lieber  and  Calhoun  he  rejected  the  romantic 


CHANGING  THEORY 


121 


doctrine  of  natural  rights,  and  substituted  a  composite  social- 
moralistic  conception,  that  from  John  Winthrop  and  Roger  Wil¬ 
liams  to  Channing  and  Emerson  had  colored  the  Puritan  thought 
of  New  England.  Natural  rights,  he  asserted,  are  those  which  be¬ 
long  to  man  by  reason  of  the  nature  God  has  endowed  him  with; 
and  the  state  is  a  moral  agent,  arising  out  of  custom,  to  secure  and 
guarantee  such  rights.  It  is  “as  truly  natural  as  rights  are,  and  as 
society  is”;  for  established  in  the  social  nature  of  man  it  is  the 
natural  repository  and  guardian  of  his  rights  in  a  social  order.  It  is 
an  expression  of  the  teleological  purpose  that  underlies  all  things. 
The  manner  in  which  Woolsey  elaborated  his  moralistic  theory  will 
be  evident  from  the  following  passages: 

The  considerations  that  men  exist  together  in  society,  that  they  have 
an  irresistible  impulse  towards  society,  that  their  perfection  of  soul  and 
of  outward  condition  can  be  secured  only  in  a  social  life,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  recognition  of  rights  and  obligation  alone  make  a  social  life 
a  tolerable  or  even  a  possible  thing,  and  that  wherever  men  reflect  on 
their  own  nature  they  admit  the  existence  of  certain  classes  of  rights 
and  shield  them  by  public  power,  show  a  divine  purpose  which  none  who 
believe  in  a  Creator  of  the  world  can  deny.  The  Creator  of  man,  having 
made  him  such  that  his  temporal,  moral,  and  spiritual  perfection  can  be 
found  only  in  society,  prepared  his  moral  feelings  for  the  life  for  which 
he  was  destined.  The  destination  for  society;  the  means  within  human 
nature  by  which  it  is  fulfilled;  the  means  by  which  the  individual  and  the 
community,  when  brought  into  society,  are  able  to  secure  the  good  and 
avoid  the  evils  possible  in  a  state  of  coexistence — these  form  a  complete, 
harmonious  whole,  which  manifest  comprehension  of  view  and  forethought. 
It  is  provided  in  our  nature,  when  it  is  not  perverted — that  is,  when  it 
does  not  swerve  from  the  true  idea  of  human  nature — that  we  shall  form 
societies  under  law.  A  state  of  society  is  a  state  of  nature,  and  the  only 
true  one. 

When  therefore  natural  rights  are  spoken  of,  we  can  accept  the  term, 
if  it  be  used  to  denote  such  rights  as  grow  out  of  our  nature,  and  may  be 
inferred  from  the  destination  to  which  it  points  us.  Another  and  a  heathen¬ 
ish  kind  of  sense  was  attached  to  the  words,  when  they  were  taken  to 
mean  the  rights,  or  rather  uncontrolled  liberties,  which  men  possessed 
in  a  state  of  human  nature  in  which  there  was  no  organized  society  or 
government.  .  .  .  [Such  a  theory]  contemplates  men  as  enjoying  certain 
powers  of  free  action  in  this  state  of  nature,  and  these  powers  must  serve 
for  a  foundation  of  their  state  as  members  of  society,  or  so  many  of  them 
as  it  cannot  be  shown  that  they  gave  up,  in  order  to  make  a  state  of  law 
and  order  possible.  In  other  words,  the  theory  of  the  derivation  of  these 
rights  from  a  state  of  nature  may  take  a  hypothetical  shape,  and  deduce 
rights  from  what  a  man  could  do  in  a  state  of  things  which  exists  only  in 
a  jural  fiction.  .  .  . 


122  CHANGING  AMERICA 

We  find  no  fault  with  the  objects  which  the  theories  had  in  view,  but 
with  the  want  of  conformity  to  truth.  It  must  be  pronounced,  in  the  first 
place,  contrary  to  fact,  that  such  a  state  of  nature  ever  existed.  Man  has 
always  been  under  law;  he  is  a  £<j)ov  ttoXltkov.  .  .  . 

Secondly,  if  it  could  be  shown  that  he  had  such  an  origin,  it  would  prove 
nothing.20 

Having  thus  established  both  society  and  the  state  in  the  nature 
of  man,  and  dismissed  the  romantic  interpretation  of  natural  rights 
as  heathenish,  Woolsey  turned  to  examine  the  true  sphere  and 
function  of  the  political  state.  He  rejected  in  the  main  the  laissez- 
faire  view  of  Mill  and  Spencer,  but  he  refused  to  go  so  far  as  Bur¬ 
gess.  He  will  have  no  omnicompetent  state.  A  just  mean  must  be 
laid  down  between  authority  and  liberty,  and  that  mean  he  discov¬ 
ered  in  the  dictum,  “The  sphere  of  the  state  .  .  .  may  reach  as  far 
as  the  nature  of  man  and  needs  of  man  and  of  men  reach  21  that 
is  to  say,  its  control  runs  far  beyond  mere  police  powers,  and  con¬ 
cerns  itself  not  only  with  material  ends  but  with  the  “intellectual 
and  aesthetic  wants  of  the  individual,  and  the  religious  and  moral 
nature  of  its  citizens.”  A  state  swollen  to  great  powers  he  regarded 
as  likely  to  swallow  up  liberty  in  paternalism,  and  a  state  immedi¬ 
ately  responsive  to  the  popular  will  is  certain  to  run  into  “extreme 
democracy.”  His  ideal  government  he  discovered  in  the  rule  of  the 
Connecticut  oligarchy,  under  which  a  homogeneous  people,  with 
simple  agrarian  habits,  disciplined  by  religion  and  responsive  to 
moral  leadership,  enjoyed  a  stable  government  administered  by 
proved  executives.  Unfortunately  with  the  nineteenth  century 
began  a  decline  in  American  government,  resulting  from  economic 
changes,  the  growth  of  cities,  lower-class  immigration,  and  the 
“gradual  reception  of  doctrines  of  political  rights,  which  belong  to 
extreme  democracy.”  Such  pernicious  doctrines,  in  his  judgment, 
were:  the  short  term  of  office,  popular  election  of  judges  to  hold  for 
a  fixed  period  instead  of  for  life,  the  debasement  of  the  representa¬ 
tive  system  by  subjecting  the  representative  to  his  constituents, 
and  the  spoils  system.22  In  a  later  study  he  added  two  other  evils: 
direct  legislation  through  the  initiative,  and  a  popular  referendum 
on  war  and  peace.23 

In  spite  of  an  imposing  display  of  classical  learning  these  two 
stout  volumes  reveal  a  childlike  ignorance  of  Realpolitik,  a  naive 

20  Political  Science,  Vol.  I,  pp.  23-21; 

21  Ibid.,  p.  216. 


22  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  141. 

"3  Communism  and  Socialism,  p.  232, 


CHANGING  THEORY 


123 


inability  to  grasp  the  significance  of  economic  groupings  that  under¬ 
lie  all  political  alignments.  Neither  as  minister  nor  as  college  pres¬ 
ident  did  Theodore  Woolsey  learn  anything  about  the  robust 
materialisms  which  any  realistic  political  theory  must  take  into 
great  account.  His  knowledge  of  ancient  Greek  institutions  no 
doubt  was  adequate,  but  his  knowledge  of  American  constitutional 
development  was  singularly  inadequate.  He  accepted  without 
question  the  argument  of  Story  and  Webster  that  the  phrase,  “We 
the  people,”  proves  the  original,  consolidating  intention  of  the 
document;  he  discussed  the  history  of  party  government  in  the 
United  States  without  touching  on  the  economic  alignment  of 
agrarianism  and  capitalism;  and  he  could  discover  only  one  thor¬ 
oughly  admirable  political  party — “the  upright  federal  party.” 
He  extols  the  Supreme  Court  as  the  triumph  of  the  American 
Constitution,  without  considering  the  desirability  of  a  judicial  veto 
on  legislative  enactments,  or  suggesting  a  potential  alignment  of  the 
judiciary  with  the  master  forces  of  a  generation.  The  moralistic 
bias  of  his  thought  is  perhaps  sufficiently  revealed  in  a  comment  on 
the  functions  of  the  judges.  “In  a  higher  sense,  they  are  not 
representatives  of  the  community  nor  of  its  chief  magistrates,  but 
of  justice  and  of  God.  .  .  .  They  are  in  fact  more  immediately 
servants  of  God  than  any  other  men  who  manage  the  affairs  of  a 
country,  because  expediency,  departure  from  law  or  from  the  con¬ 
stitution,  is  for  them  in  no  circumstance  a  thing  to  be  conceived 
of.”24  Mark  Twain,  it  would  seem,  was  not  the  only  humorist  of 
the  Gilded  Age. 

In  his  later  years  Woolsey  was  much  disturbed  by  the  spread 
of  collectivist  doctrine,  and  in  the  thick  of  the  economic  unrest 
of  the  times  he  felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  assist  in  stemming  the 
advance  of  such  doctrine.  In  his  great  work  on  political  theory, 
he,  demolished  the  communist-anarchist-socialist  arguments  in  a 
few  pages,  and  then  remarked  with  excellent  candor,  “There  is 
an  extensive  literature,  relating  to  the  subject  .  .  .  with  much  of 
which  I  am  not  familiar.”  Fearful  that  he  might  not  have  delivered 
a  death-blow,  after  further  reading  he  returned  to  the  attack 
three  years  later,  and  in  1880  published  a  volume  entitled  Com¬ 
munism  and  Socialism.  For  so  difficult  a  business  he  was  even 
then  inadequately  equipped.  He  did  not  realize  the  magnitude  of 
his  task.  Marx’s  Capital  could  not  be  undermined  in  ten  pages, 
24  Political  Science,  Vol.  II,  pp.  330-311. 


124 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


even  with  the  help  of  Cairnes,  Mill,  and  Ricardo,  and  a  political 
scientist  with  a  theological  background  was  scarcely  competent 
to  untie  the  close-knit  threads  of  the  Marxian  economics.  His 
exposition  in  consequence  is  incomplete  and  faulty;  it  largely  over¬ 
looks  the  Marxian  philosophy  of  history  and  ignores  the  doctrine 
of  economic  determinism.  What  troubles  him  most  is  the  lack 
of  religious  faith  amongst  socialists.  The  validity  of  a  theory  he 
is  satisfied  to  test  by  the  morality  of  the  theorist.  One  can  easily 
guess  that  President  Woolsey’s  opinions  had  turned  into  dogmatic 
conviction  before  a  page  of  the  literature  to  be  examined  had  come 
under  his  eyes.  Yet  that  so  shallow  a  book  should  have  issued  from 
an  academic  pen  will  surprise  no  one  who  is  aware  of  the  incredible 
number  of  shallow  books  that  actually  have  issued  from  academic 
pens.  Provocative  social  thinking  and  the  American  university 
seem  never  to  have  got  on  well  together. 

In  the  fact  that  Woolsey’s  speculations  on  the  nature  of  the 
state  were  accounted  significant  contributions  to  political  science 
by  his  generation  of  Americans,  the  historian  may  find  added 
confirmation  of  the  shallowness  of  the  Gilded  Age.  A  stale  Con¬ 
necticut  Calvinism,  molding  in  the  corner  of  the  cupboard,  is 
poor  food  to  nourish  thinking,  and  a  man  who  knows  nothing 
about  the  deeper  springs  of  political  struggle  is  singularly  un¬ 
qualified  to  elaborate  a  science  of  the  state.  Theodore  Woolsey’s 
weighty  volumes  were  a  dignified  attempt  to  rehabilitate  the  old 
Connecticut  Federalism  and  suit  it  to  the  taste  of  a  new  age.  But 
what  measure  of  political  intelligence  can  one  expect  of  a  people 
fed  on  pious  fictions  by  their  most  authoritative  expounder  of  the 
noble  art  of  government? 


JOHN  W.  BURGESS 

Woolsey  has  little  to  say  about  sovereignty.  The  speculations 
of  Austin  had  not  reached  his  quiet  study,  and  the  need  for  a 
coercive  state  in  harmony  with  a  centralizing  industrialism  was 
not  likely  to  be  realized  by  a  man  whose  eyes  were  turned  back 
fondly  to  a  simple  village  life.  It  was  left  for  a  younger  generation 
to  examine  the  problem  of  sovereignty,  and  to  that  business  John 
W.  Burgess  turned  with  zest.  A  thoroughgoing  Austinian,  a  disciple 
of  the  German  state-cult,  a  Hegelian,  he  would  seem  to  have  be$n 


CHANGING  THEORY 


125 


ill  fitted  to  interpret  the  functions  of  the  state  to  America.  And 
yet  by  virtue  of  his  European  detachment  he  saw  clearly  the  di¬ 
rection  in  which  America  * 


IV 

BUTTRESSING  THE  DEMOCRATIC  THEORY 

i 

A  DEMOCRATIC  ECONOMICS— HENRY  GEORGE 

While  the  academic  economists  were  thus  providing  a  new  body 
of  capitalistic  theory,  from  the  ranks  of  the  people  came  a  group 
that  was  bent  on  bringing  economic  principles  into  greater  con¬ 
formity  to  what  they  considered  democratic  needs.  The  economics 
of  bankers  and  manufacturers  they  regarded  as  a  selfish  class 
economics  and  they  proposed  to  democratize  the  body  of  economic 
thought  as  Tom  Paine  and  Jefferson  had  democratized  the  body 
of  political  thought.  Since  the  days  of  John  Taylor  such  amateur 
economists  had  been  plentiful  in  America,  and  in  the  post-war  days 
when  the  country  was  in  the  throes  of  the  Industrial  Revolution, 
they  sprang  up  at  every  cross-roads.  George  Henry  Evans, 
Horace  Greeley,  Peter  Cooper,  Parke  Godwin,  Wendell  Phillips, 
Albert  Brisbane,  Hinton  R.  Helper,  “Coin”  Harvey,  were  only 
a  few  out  of  the  many  who  in  their  own  way  were  seeking  in  eco¬ 
nomics  a  road  to  freedom.  They  were  not  formal  economists;  they 
were  little  read  in  the  history  of  economic  thought;  in  so  far  as 
they  may  be  accounted  a  school  they  were  mostly  the  unclaimed 
progeny  of  French  Physiocratic  theory  who  did  not  recognize  their 
own  father.  Yet  they  were  vastly  concerned  to  bring  economic 
theory  into  some  sort  of  realistic  contact  with  the  facts  of  American 
experience  and  the  ideals  of  democracy;  and  their  immediate  ob¬ 
jective  was  the  overthrow  of  current  Manchester  principles  and 
the  erection  in  their  stead  of  a  body  of  theory  based  on  the  needs 
of  the  producer  and  the  consumer  rather  than  the  middleman. 

Of  this  characteristic  native  group,  largely  ignored  by  our  formal 
historians,  by  far  the  ablest  and  most  influential  was  Henry  George, 
a  thinker  created  by  the  impact  of  frontier  economics  upon  a  mind 
singularly  sensitive  to  the  appeal  of  social  justice,  singularly  self- 

*  The  discussion  of  Burgess  was  not  completed  by  Professor  Parrington.  At  this 
point  he  planned  a  third  section.  “The  New  Ally:  the  courts:  the  police  power 
and  the  fourteenth  amendment;  the  injunction.”  None  of  this  section  was  written, 
but  he  has  dealt  with  these  subjects  passim. — Publisher. 


126 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


sufficient  in  its  logic.  He  remains  still  our  most  original  economist. 
Beyond  the  Ricardian  theory  of  rent,  with  its  corollary  of  unearned 
increment,  he  owed  little  to  Europe  and  nothing  to  academic 
American  economists.  From  the  first  he  was  a  free-lance,  returning 
to  the  origins  of  things — as  Tom  Paine  had  advised  long  before — 
and  thinking  “as  if  he  were  the  first  man  who  ever  thought.”  His 
major  doctrines  he  arrived  at  largely  independently,  ignorant  of 
the  fact  that  his  impot  unique  had  been  earlier  elaborated  by  the 
Physiocratic  school,  till  long  after  he  had  come  to  identical  conclu¬ 
sions.  His  matured  philosophy  was  the  outcome  of  the  meditations 
of  a  Jeffersonian  idealist  contemplating  the  divergence  between  the 
crude  facts  of  exploitation  all  about  him  and  the  eighteenth-century 
ideal  of  natural  justice;  and  he  became,  in  consequence,  the  voice  of 
idealistic  America  seeking  to  adjust  the  economics  of  a  rapidly 
changing  society  to  the  ends  of  democratic  well-being.  The  passion 
of  the  reformer  was  in  him,  but  wedded  to  the  critical  mind  of  the 
analyst;  and  this  accounts  for  the  wide  appeal  of  Progress  and 
Poverty  that  for  thousands  of  Americans  removed  economic  theory 
from  the  academic  closet  and  set  it  in  the  thick  of  political  conflict. 
Henry  George  humanized  the  dismal  science  and  brought  it  home 
to  the  common  interest.  With  his  extreme  simplification  no  doubt 
he  fell  into  the  same  error  the  classical  school  had  fallen  into  before 
him;  he  left  too  many  elements  out  of  his  equation;  but  he  succeeded 
in  the  same  way  they  had  succeeded — he  made  of  economic  theory 
a  weapon  to  use  in  the  struggle  between  the  exploiters  and  the  ex¬ 
ploited.  After  Progress  and  Poverty  the  social  economist  could 
cross  swords  with  the  Ricardians. 

Henry  George  is  readily  enough  explained  in  the  light  of  his 
environment.  He  was  intellectually  native  to  the  West,  but  it  was 
the  West  of  the  Gilded  Age  with  its  recollections  of  an  earlier 
agrarian  order.  Upon  the  gigantic  exploitation  of  post-war  times, 
carried  forward  in  the  name  of  progress,  he  threw  the  experience  of 
two  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  continental  expansion.  That  ex¬ 
perience  had  undergone  a  subtle  change  as  the  settlements  moved 
through  the  Inland  Empire,  a  change  marked  by  the  spirit  of 
capitalistic  expansion  with  its  crop  of  unearned  increment.  On  the 
frontier,  land  speculation  was  often  the  readiest  means  to  wealth. 
To  the  west  of  the  Allegheny  Mountains  land  had  long  been  the 
staple  commodity,  with  the  buying  and  selling  of  which  every  com¬ 
munity  was  deeply  concerned;  and  from  the  dramatic  repetition  of 


CHANGING  THEORY 


127 


that  experience  in  California,  Henry  George  clarified  the  principle 
upon  which  he  erected  his  social  philosophy,  namely,  that  a  fluid 
economics  begets  an  equalitarian  democracy  and  homespun  plenty, 
and  that  with  the  monopolization  of  natural  resources  a  static  econ¬ 
omy  succeeds,  with  its  attendant  caste  regimentation  and  aug¬ 
menting  exploitation.  In  the  days  when  he  was  meditating  his 
social  philosophy,  California  was  still  in  the  frontier  stage  of  de¬ 
velopment,  but  amidst  the  hurrying  changes  a  fluid  economics  was 
visibly  hardening  to  the  static,  with  a  swiftness  dramatic  enough  to 
impress  upon  him  the  significance  of  a  story  that  had  been  ob¬ 
scured  in  earlier  telling  by  the  slowness  of  the  denouement.  The 
vast  cupidity  of  business  in  preempting  the  virgin  resources  of 
California,  and  in  particular  the  technique  of  Leland  Stanford  and 
the  Central  Pacific  Railway  group,  provided  an  eloquent  object- 
lesson  that  set  him  to  examining  the  long  history  of  land-jobbing 
in  America  in  its  remoter  social  bearings.  From  such  inquiry 
emerged  the  cardinal  principles  of  an  economic  theory  that  must  be 
reckoned  the  ultimate  expression  of  a  school  of  thought  that  begin¬ 
ning  with  Quesnay  a  hundred  years  before,  and  first  interpreted  for 
America  by  John  Taylor  and  the  Jeffersonians,  was  finally  buried  in 
a  common  grave  with  the  kindred  doctrine  of  natural  rights. 

It  was  no  accident  that  his  mind  fastened  upon  land  monopoly  as 
the  deeper  source  of  social  injustice.  As  a  child  of  the  frontier  he 
thought  in  terms  of  land  as  naturally  as  the  money-broker  thinks 
in  terms  of  discounts.  His  psychology  was  that  of  the  producer 
rather  than  the  middleman.  Land,  wich  all  its  potential  wealth  of 
field  and  orchard  and  forest  and  stream,  with  its  unmeasured  re¬ 
sources  of  coal  and  iron  and  oil  and  timber,  was  the  fruitful  gift  of 
nature  to  man;  and  the  true  measure  of  social  well-being,  he  be¬ 
lieved,  is  the  measure  in  which  labor  is  free  to  use  such  natural 
resources  for  productive  purposes.  Land  monopoly  was  an  ancient 
evil  that  had  laid  its  blight  on  every  civilization.  The  expropriation 
of  natural  resources  was  the  origin  of  rent,  and  rent  was  a  social  tax 
parasitic  in  nature.  Unearned  increment  was  a  moiety  wrested 
from  the  producer,  that  waxed  ever  greater  with  the  increase  of 
production.  Henry  George  was  well  aware  how  deeply  rooted  in 
American  psychology  was  the  love  of  unearned  increment.  Since 
the  far-off  days  when  the  agent  of  the  Transylvania  Land  Company 
wrote  in  1775  that  the  Ohio  Valley  abounded  in  land-mongers,  the 
rage  for  expropriative  speculation  had  mounted  steadily;  and  the 


128 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


railway  land-grants  of  his  day  were  a  fitting  climax  to  a  policy  that 
in  every  generation  had  brought  forth  such  fruits  as  the  Yazoo 
frauds.  The  land  question  was  a  perennial  western  problem.  For 
years  Horace  Greeley  in  the  Tribune,  had  spread  amongst  the 
farmers  the  “Vote  Yourself  a  Farm”  propaganda.  The  protest  of 
the  small  western  settler  against  the  middleman  policy  of  the 
government  in  alienating  great  blocks  of  the  public  domain  to 
speculative  companies,  had  added  thousands  of  votes  to  the 
Republican  party,  and  the  result  was  the  Homestead  Act  of  1862. 
But  the  fruits  of  the  Act  were  partly  destroyed  by  huge  grants  to 
railway  promoters,  and  the  time  had  come,  George  believed,  when 
the  problem  must  be  envisaged  in  all  its  complexities  and  the 
American  people  brought  to  understand  how  great  were  the  stakes 
being  gambled  for. 

The  disease  had  so  long  been  endemic  in  America  that  the 
remedy  must  be  drastic.  No  patent  nostrums  would  serve.  The 
vividness  of  his  experience  in  the  West  had  thrown  into  sharp 
relief  his  earlier  experiences  in  the  East,  and  made  him  distrustful 
of  all  social  panaceas  that  hopeful  idealists  were  seeking  in  Europe. 
With  any  form  of  collectivistic  theory  he  would  have  nothing  to  do. 
Marxian  socialism  he  looked  upon  as  an  alien  philosophy,  inade¬ 
quate  in  its  diagnosis  and  at  fault  in  its  prescription.  The  ills  of 
America— perhaps  of  Europe  as  well — must  be  cured  by  another 
regimen.  Progress  and  Poverty  grew  out  of  his  experience  as  he 
watched  the  heedless  alienation  of  the  public  domain.  It  was  his 
reply  to  the  policy  of  preemption,  exploitation,  and  progress  of  the 
Gilded  Age.  Philadelphia-born,  he  early  suffered  in  his  personal 
fortune  from  the  periodic  hard  times  that  ran  so  disastrous  a  cycle 
in  the  days  when  America  was  in  thoughtless  transition  from  an 
agrarian  order  to  an  industrial.  His  scanty  schooling  came  to  an 
end  before  he  had  reached  his  fourteenth  year,  and  at  sixteen  he  saw 
no  better  opening  in  life  than  to  ship  before  the  mast  to  Australia. 
On  his  return  he  learned  to  set  type,  but  times  were  bad  and 
opportunity  declining  to  knock  at  his  door,  he  worked  his  way 
through  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  landing  in  San  F  rancisco  in  1858, 
on  his  way  to  Salem,  Oregon,  where  he  worked  for  a  time  in  a  shop. 
With  the  exhaustion  of  the  diggings  he  made  his  way  back  to  San 
Francisco,  and  began  a  long  series  of  restless  ventures  in  the  news¬ 
paper  field,  with  only  his  hands  for  capital — none  very  successful, 
none  quite  a  failure,  but  returning  him  useful  dividends  in  the  form 


CHANGING  THEORY 


129 


of  a  serviceable  prose  style.  At  twenty-two  he  plunged  into  an 
improvident  marriage  with  a  girl  of  eighteen,  and  the  next  dozen 
years  brought  many  privations  to  the  little  family. 

Fate  had  not  yet  taken  Henry  George  in  hand  to  lead  him  into 
his  life  work.  All  the  economics  he  then  knew  had  been  learned  in 
the  rough  and  tumble  ways  of  a  western  print-shop.  In  1869,  at 
the  age  of  thirty,  while  on  a  business  trip  to  New  York  City,  he 
was  confronted  by  the  contrast  between  wealth  and  poverty  there 
nakedly  exposed — so  unlike  what  he  had  known  at  San  Francisco. 
It  was  a  prod  to  his  social  conscience,  and  as  he  contemplated  the 
wretchedness  of  the  East  Side  he  registered  a  vow  to  explore  the 
hidden  causes  of  social  disease.  He  had  given  no  serious  thought  to 
economic  questions,  and  now  almost  casually  he  went  to  the  Phila¬ 
delphia  public  library  to  look  into  John  Stuart  Mill’s  Political  Econ¬ 
omy.  He  accepted  Mill’s  views  on  wages  without  critical  examina¬ 
tion,  and  wrote  his  first  important  article — on  the  Chinese  question 
in  California.  In  the  meantime  a  group  of  California  railway  pro¬ 
moters  had  been  buying  and  selling  legislators  in  their  work  of 
building  up  private  fortunes  out  of  a  public  monopoly;  and  it  was 
the  contemplation  of  wealth  acquired  by  such  methods,  together 
with  the  gamble  of  land  speculation  in  Oakland  in  consequence  of 
the  proposal  to  establish  there  the  western  terminal  of  the  conti¬ 
nental  railway,  that  clarified  for  Henry  George  the  great  principle 
he  was  to  expound  in  Progress  and  Poverty  ten  years  later. 

The  first  drift  in  his  intellectual  development  had  been  a  drift 
back  to  the  old  Jeffersonianism  from  which  the  country  was 
swiftly  moving.  As  an  editor  he  was  an  outspoken  Democrat  of 
the  primitive  school,  opposed  to  protectionism,  subsidies,  a  cen¬ 
tralizing  political  state,  and  the  corruption  that  follows  in  the  train 
of  paternalism  as  sickness  follows  infection.  In  a  pamphlet  written 
in  1870,  he  expounded  his  political  faith  thus: 

Railroad  subsidies,  like  protective  duties,  are  condemned  by  the  eco¬ 
nomic  principle  that  the  development  of  industry  should  be  left  free  to 
take  its  natural  direction.  They  are  condemned  by  the  political  principle 
that  government  should  be  reduced  to  its  minimum  that  it  becomes  more 
corrupt  and  more  tyrannical,  and  less  under  the  control  of  the  people, 
with  every  extension  of  its  powers  and  duties.  .  .  .  They  are  condemned 
by  the  experience  of  the  whole  country,  which  shows  that  they  have  in¬ 
variably  led  to  waste,  extravagance  and  rascality;  that  they  inevitably 
become  a  source  of  corruption  and  a  means  of  plundering  the  people.25 

26  George,  Life  of  Henry  George,  pp.  216-217. 


130 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Having  thus  indoctrinated  himself  in  the  Jeffersonian  liberalism 
with  its  foundations  laid  in  natural  rights  and  its  conception  of  a 
decentralized  society,  the  following  year,  at  the  age  of  thirty-two, 
he  sat  down  to  the  serious  elaboration  of  his  views.  Our  Land  and 
Land  Policy,  National  and  State,  was  an  explorative  pamphlet  that 
went  to  the  heart  of  the  problem  as  he  had  come  to  understand  it. 
The  kernel  of  the  work  is  the  question  of  the  relation  of  land  to 
labor,  of  rent  to  wages;  and  the  conclusion  to  which  it  led  was  the 
doctrine  of  the  social  ownership  of  socially  created  values,  which 
justice  requires  shall  return  to  society  in  the  form  of  an  equalized 
tax  that  shall  absorb  the  unearned  increment.  Around  this  funda¬ 
mental  doctrine  was  grouped  a  considerable  body  of  ideas  that  had 
been  expounded  by  earlier  liberals.  How  much  he  borrowed  and 
how  much  he  arrived  at  independently,  cannot  easily  be  deter¬ 
mined;  such  diverse  thinkers  as  James  Harrington,  Locke,  the 
Physiocrats,  Tom  Paine,  Karl  Marx,  John  Stuart  Mill,  William 
Ellery  Channmg,  might  well  have  contributed  to  this  provoca¬ 
tive  document,  if  George  had  been  acquainted  with  them.  Like 
Harrington  was  the  assumption  of  economic  determinism — that 
ownership  of  the  land  implies  the  rulership  of  society.  From  the 
School  of  Locke  came  the  conception  of  natural  rights,  but  in¬ 
terpreted  rather  in  terms  of  Tom  Paine  and  of  William  Ellery 
Channmg.  From  Mill  came  the  conception  of  unearned  increment; 
from  Marx  the  law  of  concentration;  and  from  the  Physiocrats 
the  conception  of  a  natural  order  and  the  doctrine  of  an  impot 
unique.  And  all  this  set  in  a  framework  of  American  economic 
history,  which  reveals  with  shrewd  insight  the  disastrous  tendency 
of  the  traditional  policy  of  land  alienation  in  great  blocks  to  mid¬ 
dle-men,  with  the  attendant  rise  of  rent. 

How  intimately  he  was  related  in  his  thinking  to  the  French 
liberals  of  the  eighteenth  century,  may  perhaps  be  sufficiently 

suggested  in  his  interpretation  of  the  doctrine  of  natural  rights _ 

a  doctrine  the  new  realistic  school  from  Calhoun  to  Woolsey  and 
Burgess  was  subjecting  to  critical  analysis.  By  uniting  the  in¬ 
dividualism  of  Locke’s  doctrine  of  property  with  the  Physiocratic 
doctrine  of  social  well-being,  he  gave  a  sharp  turn  to  the  conception 
that,  like  Jefferson  s,  set  it  widely  apart  from  the  exploitative 
interpretation  preferred  by  the  Hamiltonian  followers  of  Locke. 
The  gist  of  his  conception  is  thus  set  down: 


CHANGING  THEORY 


131 


Now  the  right  of  every  human  being  to  himself  is  the  foundation  of  the 
right  of  property.  That  which  a  man  produces  is  rightfully  his  own,  to 
keep,  to  sell,  to  give  or  to  bequeath,  and  upon  this  sure  title  alone  can 
ownership  of  anything  rightfully  rest.  But  man  has  also  another  right, 
declared  by  the  fact  of  his  existence— the  right  to  the  use  of  so  much  of 
the  free  gifts  of  nature  as  may  be  necessary  to  supply  all  the  wants  of 
that  existence,  and  which  he  may  use  without  interfering  with  the  equal 
rights  of  anyone  else;  and  to  this  he  has  a  title  as  against  all  the  world.26 

Much  of  Henry  George  is  compressed  within  these  few  lines, 
that  suggest  as  well  the  diverse  liaisons  of  his  thought.  In  his 
conception  of  the  right  of  every  man  to  himself  he  is  in  agreement 
with  William  Ellery  Channing,  who  used  the  argument  in  his 
attack  on  slavery,  and  with  Emerson,  Parker,  and  the  Tran¬ 
scendental  radicals  generally.  It  is  an  interpretation  of  natural 
rights  that  sprang  easily  from  the  Unitarian-Transcendental  con¬ 
ception  of  the  sacredness  of  the  individual,  and  that  was  given 
wide  currency  by  the  anti-slavery  propaganda.  From  his  deduc¬ 
tion  that  the  right  to  property  flows  from  the  right  to  self,  came 
his  theory  of  tax-equity  that  was  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  for¬ 
mulation  of  his  principle  of  taxation.  If  society  may  not  justly 
take  from  the  individual  what  the  individual  has  created,  it  must 
seek  its  revenues  elsewhere  than  in  a  personal-property  tax;  and 
where  should  it  look  if  not  to  those  values  which  society  has  cre¬ 
ated?  The  inalienable  right  of  the  individual  to  what  he  has  pro¬ 
duced  does  not  extend  to  the  appropriation  of  wealth  he  has  not 
produced,  and  a  sharp  line  is  drawn  between  the  rights  of  the 
individual  and  the  rights  of  society,  between  production  and  ex¬ 
ploitation.  Herein  lies  the  justification  of  the  single-tax— a  prin¬ 
ciple  derived  by  crossing  Locke  with  the  New  England  school. 

From  the  classical  economists  Henry  George  got  little.  He  had 
a  quiet  contempt  for  them  he  was  never  at  pains  to  conceal.  He 
was  convinced  that  they  had  distorted  the  whole  science  of  eco¬ 
nomics.  As  the  earlier  Tories  with  their  sacred  arcana  imperii 
had  done  with  political  government,  they  had  involved  economics 
in  abstract  theory,  removing  it  from  the  comprehension  of  the 
common  man.  At  the  best  they  had  dehumanized  it  to  the  status 
of  a  dismal  science,  with  their  postulate  of  an  economic  man  and 
their  pessimistic  outlook.  At  the  worst  they  had  shaped  it  into  a 
potent  weapon  for  the  exploiting  class,  who  gravely  invoked  eco¬ 
nomic  law — which  none  understood— to  justify  class  policies  of 

26  Ibid.,  p.  223. 


132  CHANGING  AMERICA 

state.  In  an  address  delivered  at  the  University  of  California, 
Henry  George  paid  his  respects  to  the  classical  school  in  these 
words: 

The  name  of  political  economy  has  been  constantly  invoked  against 
every  effort  of  the  working  classes  to  increase  their  wages  or  decrease  their 
hours  of  labour.  .  .  .  Take  the  best  and  most  extensively  circulated  text¬ 
books.  While  they  insist  upon  freedom  for  capital,  while  they  justify  on 
the  ground  of  utility  the  selfish  greed  that  seeks  to  pile  fortune  on  fortune, 
and  the  niggard  spirit  that  steels  the  heart  to  the  wail  of  distress,  what 
sign  of  substantial  promise  do  they  hold  out  to  the  working  man  save  that 
he  should  refrain  from  rearing  children?  .  . 

For  political  economy  thus  degraded  from  its  high  place  and  be¬ 
come  the  slut  of  private  interest,  Henry  George  proposed  to  do  what 
Tom  Paine  had  done  for  political  theory  a  hundred  years  before — 
he  would  transfer  it  from  the  closet  to  the  market-place  by  exposing 
the  shabby  arcana  imperii  and  bringing  it  within  the  comprehension 
of  common  men.  He  would  bring  home  to  the  popular  intelligence 
a  realization  of  the  dynamics  of  economic  law  and  its  bearing  upon 
social  well-being,  that  men  might  plot  a  fairer  course  for  society. 
This  was  the  deeper  purpose  of  Progress  and  Poverty — to  humanize 
and  democratize  political  economy,  that  it  might  serve  social  ends 
rather  than  class  exploitation.  The  Rights  of  Alan  and  Progress  and 
Poverty  may  be  reckoned  complementary  works,  applying  to  related 
fields  the  spirit  released  to  the  modern  world  by  the  great  thinkers 
of  Revolutionary  France.  The  foundations  on  which  they  both 
rest  is  the  eighteenth-century  conception  of  natural  law,  all-com¬ 
prehensive,  beneficent,  free,  enshrined  in  the  common  heart  of 
humanity,  and  conducting  to  the  ultimate  of  social  justice. 

As  a  necessary  preliminary  to  his  purpose,  Henry  George  was 
forced  to  clear  the  ground  of  old  growths.  Before  he  could  declare 
the  truth  he  must  uproot  certain  of  the  Malthusian  and  Ricardian 
heresies.  He  must  substitute  a  sociological  interpretation,  based  on 
historical  reality  in  western  civilization,  for  a  set  of  economic  ab¬ 
stractions,  based  on  the  political  and  economic  accidents  of  England 
in  post-Napoleonic  days.  1  he  Manchester  school,  it  must  be  re¬ 
membered,  was  an  embodiment  of  the  aspirations  of  the  rising 
middle  class;  it  was  a  philosophical  attack  upon  the  vexatious 
restrictions  laid  upon  capitalism  by  government  in  the  hands  of  the 
landed  aristocracy.  It  conceived  of  economic  principles  as  of  con- 

27  Ibid.,  p.  277. 


CHANGING  THEORY 


133 


cern  only  to  the  owning  classes,  and  its  theory  took  a  special  and 
narrow  form  from  the  current  struggle  between  the  landed  and 
capitalistic  interests.  In  a  Parliamentary  debate  over  the  corn  laws 
in  1814,  Alexander  Baring,  the  banker,  assumed  that  the  working 
classes  had  no  interest  at  stake.  To  argue  that  they  were  affected, 
he  said,  was  “altogether  ridiculous;  whether  wheat  was  130s.  or 
80s.,  the  laborer  could  only  expect  dry  bread  in  the  one  case  and 
dry  bread  in  the  other.”  28  In  Francis  Wayland’s  Elements  of 
Political  Economy,  published  in  1837,  a  similar  narrow  view  of  the 
field  of  economics  was  expressed.  That  an  adequate  political  econ¬ 
omy  must  be  social,  that  it  must  be  something  very  much  more 
than  a  merchant’s  vade  mecum,  or  handbook  of  profit  rules,  Henry 
George  grasped  as  clearly  as  Ruskin;  and  he  attacked  certain  of  the 
Manchester  principles  with  the  ardor  of  a  social  prophet.  Of  these 
the  classical  wage-fund  theory  seemed  to  him  the  most  vicious,  and 
he  was  at  vast  pains  to  prove  that  wages  are  drawn  from  the  produce 
of  labor  and  not  from  a  preexistent  capital-fund.  Having  estab¬ 
lished  this  to  his  satisfaction,  he  turned  to  consider  the  economic 
effects  of  monopolistic  expropriation  of  natural  resources,  and  dis¬ 
covered  the  explanation  of  the  augmenting  poverty  of  civilization 
in  the  shutting  out  of  labor  from  the  sources  of  subsistence,  that  is 
in  land  monopoly. 

The  argument  is  based  on  the  Ricardian  theory  of  rent.  Though 
George  rejected  the  classical  wage-fund  theory,  he  accepted  without 
qualification  the  classical  rent-theory,  and  discovered  the  kernel  of 
his  philosophy  in  the  doctrine  of  social  fertility.  If  rent  is  the 
difference  between  the  income-value  of  a  given  piece  of  land  and 
that  of  the  least  valuable  in  the  neighborhood,  it  measures  the 
difference  between  the  yields  per  acre  on  the  richest  and  the 
leanest  soil  with  a  like  outlay  of  labor  and  capital.  So  in  an  urban 
community  rent  arises  from  what  may  be  called  social  fertility— 
that  is,  from  a  monopoly-value  in  a  given  neighborhood.  Such  mo¬ 
nopoly-value  arises  from  strategic  location;  the  desirability  of  a 
given  tract  for  dwelling,  factory,  or  shop.  The  number  of  persons 
daily  passing  will  determine  the  rental  value  for  shop  purposes;  the 
the  accessibility  to  docks,  railways,  raw  material,  power,  markets, 
labor-surplus,  will  determine  its  rental  value  for  factory  purposes. 
In  every  such  case,  however,  it  is  society  and  not  the  individual 

28  Quoted  by  Wesley  Clair  Mitchell  in  The  Trend  of  Economics,  edited  by  R.  G 
Tugwell,  p.  5. 


134  CHANGING  AMERICA 

that  augments  rent,  and  this  unearned  increment  increases  with 
the  growth  of  the  community.  From  every  advance  of  civilization 
it  is  the  landlord  who  profits.  He  is  a  social  parasite,  the  nether 
millstone  between  which  and  material  progress  the  landless  laborer 
is  ground. 

In  every  direction,  the  direct  tendency  of  advancing  civilization  is  to 
increase  the  power  of  human  labour  to  satisfy  human  desires — to  extirpate 
poverty  and  to  banish  want  and  the  fear  of  want.  ...  But  Labour  can¬ 
not  reap  the  benefits  which  advancing  civilization  thus  brings,  because 
they  are  intercepted.  Land  being  necessary  to  labour,  and  being  reduced 
to  private  ownership,  every  increase  in  the  productive  power  of  labour  but 
increases  rent — the  price  that  labour  must  pay  for  the  opportunity  to 
utilise  its  power;  and  thus  all  the  advantages  gained  by  the  march  of 
progress  go  to  the  owners  of  land,  and  wages  do  not  increase.  .  .  29 

Labour  and  capital  are  but  different  forms  of  the  same  thing — human 
exertion.  Capital  is  produced  by  labour;  it  is,  in  fact,  but  labour  impressed 
upon  matter.  .  .  .  The  use  of  capital  in  production  is,  therefore,  but  a 
mode  of  labour.  .  .  .  Hence  the  principle  that,  under  circumstances  which 
permit  free  competition,  operates  to  bring  wages  to  a  common  standard 
and  profits  to  a  substantial  equality — the  principle  that  men  will  seek  to 
gratify  their  desires  with  the  least  exertion — operates  to  establish  and 
maintain  this  equilibrium  between  wages  and  interest.  .  .  .  And  this 
relation  fixed,  it  is  evident  that  interest  and  wages  must  rise  and  fall  to¬ 
gether,  and  that  interest  cannot  be  increased  without  increasing  wages, 
nor  wages  be  lowered  without  depressing  interest.30 

There  is  no  inherent  antagonism  between  labor  and  capital, 
Henry  George  was  early  convinced.  The  Marxians  with  their 
theory  of  a  class  war  were'mistaken  in  their  analysis.  It  is  rent  that 
is  the  true  source  of  social  injustice,  and  the  clash  of  interests  in 
society  lies  between  the  producer  and  the  parasitic  rent-collector. 
In  every  society  the  appropriation  of  measured  increment  has 
enslaved  the  ownerless.  In  all  civilizations,  from  ancient  Peru  to 
modern  Russia,  it  has  subjected  the  worker  to  exploitation.  Helot, 
villein,  serf,  are  only  different  names  for  a  common  slavery,  the 
profits  of  which  go  to  the  landlord.  In  modern  times  the  Industrial 
Revolution  has  changed  the  form  of  serfdom,  only  to  intensify  and 
embitter  it.  The  Manchester,  factory-hand  was  in  worse  plight 
than  the  medieval  villein  after  the  Black  Plague.  Dispossessed  of 
his  acres  by  the  enclosure  movement,  he  had  been  thrown  into  the 
hoppers  of  industrialism  and  ground  to  pieces.  He  was  helpless  in 

29  Progress  and  Poverty,  Book  IV,  Chapter  ±. 

30  Ibid.,  Book  III,  Chapter  5. 


CHANGING  THEORY  135 

the  hands  of  the  masters,  who  with  their  monopoly  ofland  and  the 
machine,  in  control  of  the  common  heritage  of  trade  processes,  raw 
materials,  transportation,  credit,  and  the  law-making  and  law- 
enforcing  machinery,  were  taking  from  labor  an  augmenting  toll  of 
its  production.  Hence  the  close  correlation  between  material  prog¬ 
ress  and  proletarian  poverty.  Hence  the  logical  outcome  of  the 
Industral  Revolution,  when  it  should  have  run  its  course,  was  the 
reduction  of  the  worker  to  the  level  of  a  slave,  compared  with  whose 
material  condition  the  status  of  the  southern  bond-slave  was  envia¬ 
ble.  The  southern  apologists  of  slavery  had  been  right;  the  negro 
on  the  plantation  enjoyed  advantages  denied  to  wage-labor  under 
industrialism.31 

Having  thus  analyzed  the  forces  at  work  in  modern  society,  and 
wedded  a  flamboyant  material  progress  to  a  slattern  poverty, 
Henry  George  proposed  his  sovereign  remedy — the  return  to  so¬ 
ciety  of  social  values,  hitherto  expropriated  by  means  of  the 
private  ownership  of  land,  and  the  removal  of  the  burden  of 
indirect  taxation  from  the  back  of  productive  labor.  The  Ricardian 
theory  of  rent,  interpreted  in  the  light  of  eighteenth-century 
laissez  faire — of  free  competition,  of  a  beneficent  natural  law,  of 
social  justice — conducted  to  unforeseen  social  issues.  If  labor  and 
capital  are  individual,  the  fruits  of  both  should  return  to  their 
producers.  Society  has  no  just  claim  on  what  society  has  not 
produced,  and  the  individual  has  no  just  claim  to  that  which  his 
labor  or  capital  has  not  produced.  Render  unto  Caesar  the  things 
that  are  Caesar’s,  and  to  the  individual  citizen  the  things  that  are 
his — such  to  Henry  George  was  the  sum  of  the  law  of  distribution. 
Land  monopoly  was  a  refined  denial  of  natural  rights.  “The  equal 
right  of  all  men  to  the  use  of  the  land  is  as  clear  as  their  equal  right 
to  breathe  the  air — it  is  a  right  proclaimed  by  the  fact  of  their 
existence.”32  Unearned  increment  was  the  shackles  wherewith 
labor  was  bound.  In  the  name  of  social  justice  strike  those  shackles 
from  the  limbs  of  men  and  progress  would  never  again  have  its 
ears  filled  with  the  wailings  of  poverty.  The  workman  would  once 
again  sing  at  his  work,  and  the  sunshine  of  well-being  fall  pleasantly 
on  the  land. 

A  brilliant  thinker,  with  a  passionate  sympathy  for  the  ex¬ 
ploited  of  earth,  this  knight-errant  from  out  the  newest  West 
ardently  believed  in  the  sufficiency  of  his  social  philosophy  to  all 
31  See  Ibid.,  Book  VII,  Chapter  2.  32  Ibid.,  Book  VII,  Chapter  I. 


136 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


needs.  In  him  the  French  Revolutionary  doctrine  came  to  its 
most  original  expression  in  America.  No  doubt,  like  his  progenitors, 
he  oversimplified  the  problem.  Society  is  more  complex  than  he 
esteemed  it;  individual  motives  are  more  complex.  It  is  perilous 
to  subordinate  psychology  to  abstract  theory;  the  ideal  of  justice 
is  always  running  afoul  of  immediate  and  narrow  interest.  Later 
academic  economists  have  dealt  sharply  with  Henry  George,  but 
what  have  they  done  to  justify  their  magisterial  tone?  The  science 
of  economics  is  still  cousin-german  to  philosophy  in  its  fondness  for 
spinning  tenuous  subtleties;  it  is  still  system-ridden,  still  too  much 
the  apologist  for  things  as  they  are.  From  its  servitude  to  a  class 
Henry  George  essayed  to  deliver  it.  In  fastening  upon  monopoly 
as  the  prime  source  of  social  injustice,  he  directed  attention  to  the 
origins  of  exploitative  capitalism.  He  did  more  than  any  other  man 
to  spread  through  America  a  knowledge  of  the  law  of  economic 
determinism.  He  opened  a  rich  vein  and  one  that  needs  further 
exploring.  The  suggestive  principle  of  unearned  increment  calls  for 
further  expansion  to  embrace  other  forms  than  rent,  to  fit  it  to  the 
needs  of  a  complex  society.  What  he  seems  not  to  have  seen  was 
the  wider  range  of  economic  determinism — that  changes  come  only 
when  the  existing  order  has  become  intolerable  to  great  classes, 
and  the  grip  of  use  and  wont  is  loosened  by  the  rebellions  born  of 
exigent  need.  “For  ever  the  fat  of  the  whole  foundation  hangeth 
to  the  priest’s  beard,”  asserted  a  quaint  Beggars’  Petition  in  appeal 
to  Henry  VIII  against  the  monasteries,  and  in  that  comment  were 
the  seeds  of  the  Reformation.  When  the  beards  are  few  to  which 
the  fat  hangs,  the  time  is  ripe  for  an  upheaval.  An  arch-idealist, 
Henry  George  would  hasten  the  change  by  appeal  to  reason.  Like 
Godwin  and  Tom  Paine  he  believed  that  reason  will  make  its  own 
way,  forgetting  that  reason  waits  upon  interest,  and  the  day  of  its 
freedom  is  long  delayed.  Yet  if  he  was  oversanguine,  why  account 
that  to  his  discredit?* 

The  discussion  of  Henry  D.  Lloyd,  planned  as  the  second  subsection,  was  not 
written. — Publisher. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 

For  many  thoughtful  Americans  the  welter  of  frontier  individual¬ 
ism  was  a  severe  trial  to  their  faith  in  American  institutions.  An 
ambitious  industrialism  colliding  with  a  shambling  Jacksonian 
democracy  was  forecasting  consequences  to  government  and  to 
society  that  intelligent  men  could  not  shut  their  eyes  to.  The 
America  of  Fisk  and  Gould,  of  Boss  Tweed  and  the  Credit  Mobilier 
scandal,  was  far  from  satisfying  the  requirements  of  any  rational 
civilization.  After  a  hundred  years  to  have  come  to  such  heroes,  to 
have  bogged  down  in  such  filth,  was  an  outcome  to  the  great 
experiment  that  one  could  not  contemplate  with  pride.  It  was  no 
time  to  be  silent.  No  people  was  ever  saved  by  dumb  preachers. 
The  present  generation  was  answerable  for  the  new  evils  that 
were  springing  from  the  graves  of  the  old,  and  intelligent  Americans 
must  not  lose  their  heads  in  the  thick  of  the  common  hurly-burly. 
So  amidst  the  ruck  and  clamor  of  the  times  a  tiny  note  of  criticism 
was  lifted  up,  timid  and  uncertain  at  first,  but  growing  more  con¬ 
fident  and  more  strident  as  the  decade  grew  older.  It  was  not 
searching  criticism.  Sooner  or  later  it  was  pretty  certain  to  run 
into  a  blind  alley  of  moral  indignation,  overlooking  the  major 
issues  and  leaving  the  vital  factors  of  the  problem  unconsidered. 
Yet  such  as  it  was — shallow  and  feeble  enough  often  to  excite 
wonder  in  a  later  generation — it  marks  the  rise  of  a  spirit  of  skepti¬ 
cism  towards  the  blowsy  doctrine  of  manifest  destiny  that  since 
the  fifties  had  been  blowing  about  the  land. 

The  determining  factors  in  the  situation  confronting  criticism 
were  political  and  economic,  and  the  immediate  problem  that 
pressed  for  solution  was  the  problem  whether  an  undisciplined 
people,  wedded  to  an  old-fashioned  agrarian  democracy,  could 
cope  with  an  ambitious  industrialism  that  was  quite  cynically 
buying  and  selling  the  political  state.  To  deal  with  that  problem 
most  of  the  critics  were  singularly  ill  equipped.  Two  generations  of 
constitutional  debate,  seasoned  with  a  dash  of  equalitarian  dogma, 
had  left  them  intellectually  lean  and  impoverished.  They  had 

137 


138 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


forgotten  the  sober  realism  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  never 
overlooked  the  intimate  ties  between  economics  and  politics,  and 
with  no  anchors  down  in  the  plebeian  mud  they  were  likely  to 
drift  helplessly  in  the  moral  squalls  they  were  always  blowing  up. 
The  more  distinguished  critics — those  who  commanded  the  most 
serious  attention — were  in  a  particularly  ilnfortunate  situation,  for 
not  only  were  they  uninstructed  idealists  with  no  understanding 
of  Realpolitik,  but  they  had  been  reared  in  the  classical  tradition 
and  their  minds  were  saturated  with  a  decadent  aristocratic  cul¬ 
ture.  To  many  of  them  the  present  evils  of  America  served  only  to 
quicken  an  inherited  skepticism  of  democracy.  How  can  society 
expect  to  function  adequately,  they  asked,  without  capable  and 
honest  leadership;  and  how  can  such  leadership  be  hoped  for  in  a 
rough  and  tumble  democracy  that  loves  the  noisiest  demagogue? 
Of  this  very  considerable  group  of  belated  Federalists  James  Rus¬ 
sell  Lowell  was  the  most  distinguished  representative.  In  the  mid¬ 
dle  seventies  he  had  come  to  believe  that  America  was  suffering  from 
too  much  democracy,  and  that  competent  government  could  be  had 
only  by  working  back  to  the  responsible  Federalism  of  earlier 
times,  with  leadership  reclaimed  by  the  better  elements  of  society. 
To  the  economics  of  the  problem — the  antagonistic  interests  of 
capitalist,  proletarian,  and  farmer,  with  their  struggles  to  control 
the  political  state — he  gave  no  serious  thought,  but  he  viewed  with 
instinctive  suspicion  the  mounting  ambitions  of  labor  and  he  fore¬ 
saw  only  evil  from  the  bitter  unrest  of  the  farmers. 

A  second  very  considerable  group,  of  which  George  William 
Curtis  may  be  taken  as  spokesman,  rejected  all  such  antiquated 
Federalistic  hopes  as  the  foolish  dreams  of  defeatists.  They  held 
fast  to  their  faith  in  democracy,  but  they  were  convinced  that 
more  adequate  democratic  machinery  must  be  provided.  The 
root  of  the  evil,  they  had  come  to  believe,  was  political  and  must 
be  sought  in  the  vicious  Jacksonian  spoils  system.  With  every 
change  of  administration  to  turn  over  the  country  to  hungry 
partisans  to  devour,  was  not  democracy  but  the  negation  of 
democracy?  Government  would  not  function  satisfactorily  until 
a  trained  civil  service  was  provided,  and  the  need  of  the  hour,  they 
pointed  out,  was  an  honest  civil  service  reform.  A  third  group, 
very  much  smaller  than  the  others,  of  which  Edwin  Lawrence 
Godkin  was  the  spokesman,  was  inclined  to  trace  the  plentiful 
evils  of  the  times  to  an  unwise  paternalism,  asserting  that  the  real 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


139 


source  of  the  common  political  scoundrelism  was  the  lauded  Amei 
ican  System  devised  by  Henry  Clay,  as  a  result  of  which  govern 
ment  was  seduced  from  its  proper  business  of  keeping  the  peace 
and  was  turned  into  a  fairy  godmother  to  shower  gifts  on  favored 
interests.  The  only  cure  for  the  evil  was  to  divorce  business 
and  politics  and  reestablish  in  practice  the  police  theory  of  gov¬ 
ernment. 

In  the  thinking  of  all  three  groups  little  consideration  was  given 
to  the  social  consequences  of  the  venture  on  which  America  had 
entered  with  the  vigor  of  thoughtless  youth.  Concerning  the  ul¬ 
timate  consequences  of  the  collision  between  a  shambling  democ¬ 
racy  and  an  ambitious  industrialism,  few  troubled  themselves 
greatly.  To  find  those  who  confronted  the  problem  frankly  and 
realistically,  one  must  search  out  obscure  men,  labor  leaders  for 
the  most  part,  or  declasse  radicals  like  Wendell  Phillips.  The 
middle-class  mind  refused  to  see  what  its  feet  were  stumbling  over. 
In  consequence  the  Gilded  Age  produced  no  critics  of  industrialism 
comparable  to  the  great  English  critics — Carlyle,  Kingsley,  Ruskin, 
Morris,  Tawney;  no  social  philosophers  like  the  great  continental 
expounders  of  proletarian  ideals — Marx,  Engels,  Bakunin,  Sorel; 
no  left-wing  economists  like  the  great  French  school — Louis  Blanc, 
Bastiat,  Proudhon.  The  genteel  culture  of  America  was  no  better 
than  bankrupt  in  presence  of  brutal  reality,  quite  unequipped  to 
interpret  the  sprawling  America  that  was  transforming  itself  be¬ 
fore  its  eyes  into  something  it  hated  but  did  not  understand.  The 
time  for  searching  criticism  had  not  come,  and  would  not  come 
until  the  Industrial  Revolution  had  created  in  America  a  prole¬ 
tariat  such  as  swarmed  in  the  English  black  country  and  amongst 
the  hovels  of  continental  cities.  Nevertheless  such  criticism  as 
there  was  must  be  taken  into  consideration,  and  for  our  present 
purpose  it  will  suffice  to  single  out  three  spokesmen— a  grizzled 
warrior  of  the  earlier  renaissance  who  had  the  courage  to  face  un¬ 
pleasant  fact,  and  two  critics  who  brought  to  bear  on  political 
themes  the  best  culture  of  the  time.  With  these  may  be  conven¬ 
iently  grouped  certain  novelists  who  more  or  less  casually  suffered 
their  pens  to  deal  with  social  problems. 


140 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


i 

THE  NEW  ENGLAND  CONSCIENCE  AND  CAPITALISM— 
WENDELL  PHILLIPS 

Social  criticism  was  by  no  means  a  new  thing  in  America.  For 
half  a  century  it  had  filled  all  ears  with  its  strident  clamors,  and 
from  it  had  issued  the  motley  group  of  reform  movements  that 
had  been  cheered  or  mocked  at  by  thousands.  From  Channing 
and  Cooper  down  to  Parke  Godwin  and  Horace  Greeley  it  had 
been  mustering  its  forces,  vivid  and  picturesque  figures  for  the 
most  part — men  and  women  like  Fanny  Wright,  George  Henry 
Evans,  and  Hinton  R.  Helper;  ardent  souls  who  beyond  the  dun 
horizon  discovered  a  golden  morrow  that  only  awaited  the  rising 
of  a  new  sun,  and  who  lectured  and  wrote  and  argued  till  pretty 
much  all  America  had  caught  something  of  their  contagious  en¬ 
thusiasm.  In  this  work  New  England  came  eventually  to  take 
the  lead,  and  the  golden  forties  were  a  time  when  in  many  an  ob¬ 
scure  Yankee  head  programs  of  reform  were  fermenting  like  a  vat 
of  malt.  But  unfortunately  an  excess  of  eagerness  wore  out  the 
first  enthusiasm,  and  when  the  shackles  had  been  loosened  from 
the  negro  bondmen  the  militancy  of  the  New  England  leadership 
subsided  and  the  tired  New  England  conscience  went  on  vacation. 

But  in  these  slothful  times  the  conscience  of  one  great  New 
Englander  was  not  tired,  though  he  gave  it  no  rest  while  life  lasted. 
Wendell  Phillips  was  a  soldier  of  Puritan  soul  who  did  not  lay 
down  his  arms  in  ’65,  but  for  nearly  a  score  of  years  warred  upon 
the  injustices  of  the  Gilded  Age  as  he  had  warred  before  upon  the 
obscenities  of  negro  slavery.  No  sooner  was  the  cause  of  abolition¬ 
ism  won  a  cause  to  which  he  had  sacrificed  much  in  ease  and  the 
good  opinion  of  Beacon  Street,  but  from  which  he  had  gained  more 
in  self-respect  and  the  decent  opinion  of  mankind — than  he  turned 
to  whatever  new  work  offered.  The  lovers  of  justice,  he  knew  very 
well,  can  indulge  themselves  in  no  vacations,  for  the  devil  is  on 
the  job  day  and  night,  and  while  the  assailants  sleep  he  is  at  work 
repairing  any  breaches  in  the  walls  of  his  citadel.  When  conscience 
is  tired  he  counts  on  gaining  his  greatest  victories. 

The  love  of  freedom  has  always  been  a  dangerous  possession  in 
Massachusetts,  given  to  exploding  in  unforeseen  moments  and  un¬ 
expected  places.  No  one  could  have  foretold — certainly  not  he 
himself — that  Wendell  Phillips  would  put  away  all  his  Brahmin 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


141 


loyalties  and  devote  forty-seven  years  to  an  unresting  attack  on  the 
diverse  Toryisms  from  which  he  and  his  class  had  hitherto  pros¬ 
pered.  Son  of  the  first  mayor  of  the  city  and  a  distinguished  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  Boston  gentry,  he  was  a  patrician  in  the  fullest  Boston 
sense.  All  the  loyalties  of  his  caste  summoned  him  to  uphold  the 
Brahmin  authorities,  but  something  deep  within  him,  a  loyalty  to 
other  and  higher  ideals,  held  him  back.  When  a  frock-coated  mob 
laid  its  hands  on  Garrison  to  lynch  him  for  abolition  propaganda, 
he  drew  back;  he  refused  to  follow  the  Mayor  and  the  Colonel  of 
his  regiment  and  other  gentlemen  if  they  betrayed  the  Boston  for 
which  their  grandfathers  had  fought.  An  instinctive  love  of  justice 
held  him  back.  A  fierce  indignation  flamed  up  within  him  at  the 
wrong  done  a  citizen  of  Massachusetts  for  exercising  his  natural 
right  of  free  speech,  and  in  that  wild  hour  he  discovered  that  he  was 
a  child  of  ’76  with  the  mentality  of  a  revolutionist.  His  conscience 
was  aroused  and  he  proceeded  to  put  it  in  the  safe  keeping  of  Ann 
Terry  Greene,  a  brilliant  young  woman  of  radical  mind,  who  quick¬ 
ened  his  sense  of  social  justice  as  Maria  White  was  to  quicken 
Lowell’s.  There  was  to  be  no  backsliding  in  his  case.  From  the 
December  day  in  1837  when  he  replied  to  Attorney-General 
Austin’s  slanders  of  the  Revolutionary  fathers  in  Faneuil  Hall,  to 
the  end  of  a  life  filled  with  enormous  labors — a  life  daily  stabbed  by 
Tory  hornets,  and  that  at  the  last  is  said  to  have  inspired  the  re¬ 
mark  of  Judge  Hoar  that  he  did  not  attend  the  funeral  of  Wendell 
Phillips  but  he  approved  of  it  1 — he  followed  his  conscience  into 
many  an  unpopular  cause  and  spoke  for  those  for  whom  few  were 
willing  to  speak. 

The  story  of  his  anti-slavery  labors  belongs  to  an  earlier  time  and 
need  not  be  recounted  here.  His  devotion  to  abolitionism  equaled 
Garrison’s  and  his  services  were  as  great.  It  is  rather  the  nineteen 
years  that  remained  to  him  after  Appomattox  that  are  of  present 
concern — what  later  battles  he  fought  and  how  he  bore  himself  in 
those  battles.  It  was  a  difficult  time  for  Puritan  liberalism,  face  to 
face  with  a  new  age  that  had  forgotten  the  old  liberalisms.  The 
Grand  Army  of  Abolitionism  had  disbanded  and  new  armies  of 
other  causes  had  not  yet  been  recruited.  Garrison  and  Edmund 
Quincy  and  Whittier  had  laid  aside  their  arms,  and  Lowell  had  long 
since  settled  back  into  a  comfortable  Brahminism;  the  long  struggle 
had  left  them  drained  of  their  energy.  But  for  Wendell  Phillips  the 
1  See  Charles  Edward  Russell,  The  Story  of  Wendell  Phillips,  p.  53. 


142 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


battle  was  not  over;  it  was  unending  and  he  was  enlisted  for  life. 
At  a  vast  meeting  that  marked  the  formal  close  of  the  abolition 
movement  he  took  leave  of  his  old  associates  with  these  words:  “We 
will  not  say  ‘Farewell,’  but  ‘all  hail.’  Welcome,  new  duties!  We 
sheathe  no  sword.  We  only  turn  the  front  of  the  army  upon  a  new 
foe.”  2  He  had  long  spoken  for  prohibition,  woman’s  rights,  the 
abolition  of  capital  punishment,  and  he  now  joined  heartily  with 
the  courageous  women  engaged  in  such  reform  work.  But  more 
provocative  business  was  at  hand,  and  more  dangerous — causes 
that  touched  the  northern  pocketbook  as  abolitionism  had  touched 
the  southern.  The  banker’s  exploitation  of  the  national  currency, 
and  the  manufacturer’s  exploitation  of  factory  labor — these  were 
issues  that  a  cautious  man  who  was  careful  of  his  good  name  would 
not  meddle  with.  But  Wendell  Phillips  was  never  cautious  and  his 
good  name  had  long  since  been  flung  to  the  wolves.  And  so  in  the 
evening  of  his  days,  with  a  courage  that  took  little  counsel  of  ex¬ 
pediency,  he  embarked  on  a  campaign  that  had  for  its  ultimate  ob¬ 
jective  the  impregnable  citadel  of  State  Street.  He  would  destroy 
capitalistic  exploitation  in  all  its  works.  It  was  as  hopeless  a  battle 
as  King  Arthur’s  “last,  dim,  weird  battle  of  the  west,”  and  entered 
upon  as  courageously. 

How  he  came  to  hold  the  heretical  views  on  money  and  labor 
that  he  expounded  from  the  lecture  platform  cannot  easily  be 
traced.  Perhaps  they  came  from  the  radical  fringe  that  envelops 
every  great  social  movement;  perhaps  they  were  the  inevitable 
expression  of  his  left-wing  temper.  A  man  who  had  fought  all 
Tory  programs  for  thirty  years  must  eventually  come  to  hate  the 
ways  of  capitalism,  and  so  confirmed  a  democrat  as  Wendell 
Phillips  would  be  certain  to  espouse  the  doctrine  of  thorough. 
One  who  had  passed  through  the  fires  of  abolition  nullification, 
who  had  spoken  of  the  Union  as  “built  i’  the  eclipse  and  rigged 
with  curses  dark,”  who  had  repudiated  his  citizenship  and  equaled 
Garrison  in  contempt  for  a  slave-protecting  Constitution,  would 
have  pretty  well  cleared  his  mind  of  conventional  respect  for 
capitalistic  law  and  order.  He  was  not  impressed  by  political 
cant.  He  had  taken  the  measure  of  existing  law  and  order  and  was 
casting  about  for  a  juster  law  and  a  more  generous  order. 

In  these  later  years,  as  a  program  of  social  reconstruction  took 
shape  in  his  mind,  he  was  coming  to  essential  agreement  with  the 
2  Quoted  in  Martyn,  Wendell  Phillips:  The  Agitator,  p.  372.  ,, 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


143 


program  of  socialism.  With  the  Marxians  he  based  his  thinking 
upon  economics,  and  his  final  objective  came  to  be  the  substitution 
of  cooperation  for  the  profit-motive.  As  ardently  as  Horace  Greeley 
he  asserted  the  rights  of  labor.  As  early  as  1860-1861  he  had  come 
to  recognize  a  similarity  in  the  economic  status  of  the  wage-slave 
and  the  bond-slave,  and  in  1865,  in  a  speech  on  the  eight-hour 
movement,  he  accepted  as  true  the  southern  thesis  that  in  western 
civilization  all  labor,  whether  bond  or  wage,  was  unfree,  held  in 
the  grip  of  a  master,  bought  and  sold  in  the  market;  3  and  now  that 
the  shackles  had  been  struck  from  the  negro,  it  remained  to  strike 
them  from  the  wage-earner.  To  turn  the  negro  from  a  bond-slave 
to  a  wage-slave  would  be  a  sorry  ending  of  abolitionism;  but  such 
must  be  the  inevitable  outcome,  he  believed,  unless  all  labor  should 
win  freedom.  The  question  of  the  hour  for  Wendell  Phillips  had 
become  the  question  of  the  relation  of  labor  and  capital. 

In  his  thinking  on  the  currency  question — a  question  that  be¬ 
came  acute  in  the  seventies — he  was  soon  caught  up  by  the  Green¬ 
back  movement.  It  may  have  been  that  his  contact  with  Thaddeus 
Stevens  helped  to  mold  his  views  on  the  money  question;  yet  that 
he  should  have  become  a  Greenbacker  was  foreordained.  He  had 
no  amiable  illusions  in  regard  to  State  Street.  As  a  tribune  of 
the  people  he  had  long  been  intimately  acquainted  with  its  ambi¬ 
tions,  and  he  would  not  turn  over  the  country  to  its  custodianship. 
He  would  have  no  bankers’  control  of  the  national  currency,  to 
augment  or  deflate  as  banking  profits  dictated.  His  democratic 
sympathies  recoiled  from  a  class  control  of  the  common  medium 
of  exchange,  and  in  1875  he  offered  a  drastic  solution  of  the  vexing 
question  that  brought  down  on  his  head  all  the  wrath  of  State 
Street.  His  plan  provided  for  three  things:  the  rejection  of  the 
national  banknote  system;  the  issue  of  honest  greenbacks,  secured 
by  the  wealth  of  the  country,  and  receivable  in  payment  for  all 
debts  public  and  private— not  dishonest  greenbacks  like  the  old, 
which  the  government  had  repudiated  at  issue  by  refusing  to  ac¬ 
cept  them  in  payment  of  custom  dues;  and  finally  the  retirement 
of  interest-bearing  bonds  and  the  return  to  a  cash  basis  for  gov¬ 
ernment  business.  How  deeply  he  felt  in  the  notorious  matter  of 
credit  manipulation  is  suggested  in  the  following  passage  with 
its  echoes  of  an  older  America  that  looked  with  suspicion  on  a 
consolidating  capitalism. 

3  See  Speeches ,  Second  Series,  p.  139. 


144 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Three  times  within  a  dozen  years,  [he  said]  capitalists  with  their  knives 
on  the  throat  of  the  Government,  have  compelled  it  to  cheat  its  largest 
creditor,  the  people;  whose  claim,  Burke  said,  was  the  most  sacred.  First, 
the  pledge  that  greenbacks  should  be  exchangeable  with  bonds  was  broken. 
Secondly,  debts  originally  payable  in  paper  .  .  .  were  made  payable  in 
gold.  Thirdly,  silver  was  demonetized,  and  gold  made  the  only  tender. 
A  thousand  millions  were  thus  stolen  from  the  people.4 

At  other  times  he  went  further.  Speaking  on  the  labor  question 
in  1872,  he  said: 

I  say,  let  the  debts  of  the  country  be  paid,  abolish  the  banks,  and  let 
the  government  lend  every  Illinois  farmer  (if  he  wants  it),  who  is  now 
borrowing  money  at  ten  per  cent.,  money  on  the  half-value  of  his  land  at 
three  per  cent.  The  same  policy  that  gave  a  million  acres  to  the  Pacific 
Railroad,  because  it  was  a  great  national  effort,  will  allow  of  our  lending 
Chicago  twenty  millions  of  money,  at  three  per  cent.,  to  rebuild  it.5 

When  we  get  into  power,  there  is  one  thing  we  mean  to  do.  If  a  man  owns 
a  single  house,  we  will  tax  him  one  hundred  dollars.  If  he  owns  ten  houses 
of  like  value,  we  won’t  tax  him  one  thousand  dollars,  but  two  thousand 
dollars.  .  .  .  We’ll  double  and  treble  and  quintuple  and  sextuple  and  in¬ 
crease  tenfold  the  taxes.  .  .  .  We’ll  crumple  up  wealth  by  making  it 
unprofitable  to  be  rich.  .  .  .  You  will  say,  “Is  that  just?”  My  friends, 
it  is  safe.  Man  is  more  valuable  than  money.  You  say,  “Then  capital 
will  go  to  Europe.”  Good  heavens,  let  it  go!  If  other  States  wish  to  make 
themselves  vassals  of  wealth,  so  will  not  we.  We  will  save  a  country  equal 
from  end  to  end.  Land,  private  property,  all  sorts  of  property,  shall  be 
so  dearly  taxed  that  it  shall  be  impossible  to  be  rich;  for  it  is  in  wealth, 
in  incorporated,  combining,  perpetuated  wealth,  that  the  danger  of  labor 
lies.6 

The  mad  wicked  ravings  of  a  demagogue,  such  talk  was  ac¬ 
counted  by  sober  financiers  of  Boston.  But  it  was  rather  the  talk 
of  an  honest  equalitarian  who  understood  how  incompatible  was 
property  rule  and  the  ideal  of  equality.  The  arch-enemy  of  a 
worthy  civilization,  Wendell  Phillips  had  become  convinced,  was 
private  capitalism  with  its  dehumanizing  profit-motive.  There 
could  be  no  adequate  civilization,  no  Christianity,  until  coopera¬ 
tion  had  displaced  competition,  and  men  were  become  equal  in 
economic  rights  as  they  were  in  franchise  rights.  At  a  Labor- 
Reform  Convention  held  at  Worcester  on  September  4,  1871,  reso¬ 
lutions  drafted  by  him  were  adopted— resolutions  that  reveal  “just 
where  Mr.  Phillips  stood  for  the  last  thirteen  years  of  his  life.” 

4  Quoted  in  Martyn,  op.  cit.,  pp.  412-413. 

5  Speeches,  Second  Series,  p.  176. 

6  Ibid..,  p.  167. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


145 


In  this  “full  body  of  faith,”  and  in  two  later  speeches — The  Founda¬ 
tion  of  the  Labor  Movement,  and  The  Labor  Question — the  man  who 
called  himself  “a  Jeffersonian  democrat  in  the  darkest  hour,” 
wrote  down  as  the  great  objective  of  the  labor  party  the  principle 
that  has  long  been  accepted  as  the  cardinal  plank  of  the  Socialist 
platform. 

We  affirm,  as  a  fundamental  principle,  that  labor,  the  creator  of  wealth, 
is  entitled  to  all  it  creates. 

Affirming  this,  we  avow  ourselves  willing  to  accept  the  final  results  of 
the  operation  of  a  principle  so  radical, — such  as  the  overthrow  of  the 
whole  profit-making  system,  the  extinction  of  all  monopolies,  the  abolition 
of  privileged  classes,  universal  education  and  fraternity,  perfect  freedom 
of  exchange,  and  .  .  .  the  final  obliteration  of  that  foul  stigma  upon  our 
so-called  Christian  civilization— the  poverty  of  the  masses.  .  .  .  Resolved, 
— That  we  declare  war  with  the  wages  system,  which  demoralizes  alike 
the  hirer  and  the  hired,  cheats  both,  and  enslaves  the  workingman;  war 
with  the  present  system  of  finance,  which  robs  labor,  and  gorges  capital, 
.  .  .  war  with  these  lavish  grants  of  the  public  lands  to  speculating  com¬ 
panies,  and  whenever  in  power,  we  pledge  ourselves  to  use  every  just  and 
legal  means  to  resume  all  such  grants  heretofore  made;  war  with  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  enriching  capitalists  by  the  creation  and  increase  of  public  interest- 
bearing  debts.  We  demand  that  every  facility,  and  all  encouragement, 
shall  be  given  by  law  to  co-operation  in  all  branches  of  industry  and  trade, 
and  that  the  same  aid  be  given  to  co-operative  efforts  that  has  heretofore 
been  given  to  railroads  and  other  enterprises.  .  .  .7 

When  he  was  about  to  take  the  platform  on  another  occasion 
his  wife  is  reported  to  have  said  to  him,  “Wendell,  don’t  shilly¬ 
shally!”  Certainly  in  this  pronouncement,  and  in  the  speeches 
supporting  it,  there  is  no  shilly-shallying.  He  will  have  no  halfway 
measures,  but  goes  straight  to  the  economic  core  of  the  problem. 
Pretty  much  all  of  Marxianism  is  there,  even  to  the  class  war. 
The  capitalists  had  whetted  their  swords  and  he  would  have  labor 
put  its  sword  likewise  to  the  grindstone.  If  the  war  were  cruel, 
where  did  labor  learn  it — “learned  it  of  capital,  learned  it  of  our 
enemies.”  In  a  world  of  economic  concentration  where  caste 
follows  property  accumulation  he  had  come  to  rest  his  hopes  on 
the  international  solidarity  of  labor.  The  cause  of  democratic 
justice  was  committed  to  the  keeping  of  the  workingman,  and  if 
he  were  defeated  in  his  hopes  the  future  was  black  indeed.  The 
American  Revolution  and  the  French  Revolution  had  prepared 
the  wav  gloriously  for  a  greater  event,  the  revolution  of  labor 

7  Ibid .,  pp.  I52-IS3- 


146 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


He  was  not  afraid  of  revolution.  In  America  he  hoped  the  battle 
would  be  fought  with  ballots,  but  if  it  must  come  to  bullets,  so 
be  it.  The  Paris  Commune  met  with  his  heartiest  approval:  “I 
have  not  a  word  to  utter — far  be  it  from  me! — against  the  grandest 
declaration  of  popular  indignation  which  Paris  wrote  on  the  pages 
of  history  in  fire  and  blood.  I  honor  Paris  as  the  vanguard  of  the 
Internationals  of  the  world.”  8  And  in  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  address, 
delivered  in  1 88 1  before  all  the  assembled  conservatisms  of  Boston, 
the  old  warrior  with  seventy  years  upon  his  head,  went  so  far  as 
to  defend  Russian  Nihilism. 

Nihilism  is  the  righteous  and  honorable  resistance  of  a  people  crushed 
under  an  iron  rule.  Nihilism  is  evidence  of  life  .  .  .  the  last  weapon  of 
victims  choked  and  manacled  beyond  all  other  resistance.  ...  I  honor 
Nihilism,  since  it  redeems  human  nature  from  the  suspicion  of  being  utterly 
vile,  made  up  only  of  heartless  oppressors  and  contented  slaves.  .  .  . 
This  is  the  only  view  an  American,  the  child  of  1620  and  1776,  can  take 
of  Nihilism.  Any  other  unsettles  and  perplexes  the  ethics  of  our  civiliza¬ 
tion.  Born  within  sight  of  Bunker  Hill,  in  a  commonwealth  which  adopts 
the  motto  of  Algernon  Sydney,  sub  libertate  quietem  (“accept  no  peace 
without  liberty”);  son  of  Harvard,  whose  first  pledge  was  “Truth”; 
citizen  of  a  republic  based  on  the  claim  that  no  government  is  rightful 
unless  resting  on  the  consent  of  the  people,  and  which  assumes  to  lead 
in  asserting  the  rights  of  humanity, — I  at  least  can  say  nothing  else  and 
nothing  less;  no,  not  if  every  tile  on  Cambridge  roofs  were  a  devil  hooting 
my  words!  9 

“It  was  a  delightful  discourse,”  said  one  gentleman,  “but  pre¬ 
posterous  from  beginning  to  end.”  The  doctrine  was  strange  to 
Harvard  ears — wicked  and  perverse.  And  strange  and  disconcert¬ 
ing  also  was  his  roll-call  of  great  and  noble  deeds  done  in  America 
in  which  Harvard  scholarship  had  had  no  part.  To  an  audience 
of  Brahmin  scholars  it  was  not  kind  to  say,  “The  greatest  things 
have  not  been  done  for  the  world  by  its  bookmen”;  nor  this,  “It 
is  not  the  masses  who  have  most  disgraced  our  political  annals. 
I  have  seen  many  mobs  ...  I  never  saw  or  heard  of  any  but  well- 
dressed  mobs,  assembled  and  countenanced,  if  not  always  led  in 
person,  by  respectability  and  what  called  itself  education.”  10  It 
was  a  curious  scene— that  gathering  in  a  Harvard  hall  listening  to  a 
son  of  Harvard  who  had  gone  to  school  to  other  teachers  than 
those  brought  up  on  Brahmin  culture.  The  liberalism  of  the  forties 
was  speaking  to  a  generation  that  was  concerned  about  other 
8  Ibid.,  p.  154.  9  See  Ibid.,  pp.  356-359.  10  See  Ibid.,  p.  347. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


147 


things  than  a  just  and  humane  civilization.  Wendell  Phillips  was 
hopelessly  old-fashioned  in  America  of  the  Gilded  Age — a  lone 
Puritan  in  a  land  of  Yankees.  He  used  to  speak  of  himself  grimly 
as  “that  Ishmael”;  his  home,  he  said,  was  the  sleeping-car  and 
his  only  friends  the  brakeman  and  the  porter.  He  spent  his  strength 
and  his  earnings  with  generous  prodigality,  and  when  he  died  the 
only  treasures  he  had  laid  up  were  in  heaven.  He  was  the  last 
survivor  of  the  great  age  of  Puritan  conscience,  and  the  words  he 
spoke  of  Theodore  Parker  may  well  stand  for  his  epitaph:  “The 
child  of  Puritanism  is  not  mere  Calvinism — it  is  the  loyalty  to 
justice  which  tramples  under  foot  the  wicked  laws  of  its  own 
epoch.” 

ii 

MORALITY  AND  POLITICS— GEORGE  WILLIAM  CURTIS 

A  child  of  Puritan  conscience  also  was  George  William  Curtis, 
like  Wendell  Phillips  sprung  from  the  Puritan  gentry,  but  unlike 
him  wanting  in  a  passionate  Hebraism  that  sought  justice  in  all 
the  byways  and  would  not  turn  aside  from  pursuing  it.  A  reformer 
but  never  a  radical,  he  was  a  gentleman  who  was  a  lifelong  friend 
of  civilization.  An  idealist,  he  refused  to  serve  the  gross  material¬ 
isms  that  swept  so  many  of  his  fellows  from  the  old  moorings,  but 
throughout  a  long  and  honorable  career  he  preserved  unshaken  his 
early  faith  in  republican  ideals  and  the  way  of  liberty.  As  an 
abolitionist  he  faced  hostile  audiences  with  admirable  poise,  and 
as  a  civil  service  reformer  he  fought  off  the  attacks  of  greasy  poli¬ 
ticians  with  quiet  contempt.  A  cultivated  gentleman,  high-bred  if 
not  heroic,  was  George  William  Curtis. 

Born  in  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  of  excellent  stock,  living  most 
of  his  life  in  New  York  City  whither  his  father  had  removed  to 
engage  in  the  banking  business,  he  was  brought  up  in  affluence  and 
spent  his  days  amidst  dignified  surroundings.  Broad-minded  and 
generous,  with  wide  sympathies  and  urbane  manners,  he  followed 
his  conscience  and  weighed  life  in  the  scales  of  Puritan  morality. 
He  was  no  friend  to  compromise  or  expediency,  yet  he  was  content 
to  serve  God  in  the  station  whereunto  he  had  been  called,  declining 
to  turn  rebel  and  become  an  outcast  and  pariah.  Endowed  with 
excellent  parts,  his  training  was  unusually  fortunate.  At  eighteen 
with  his  brother  Burrill  he  went  to  Brook  Farm,  where  he  spent  two 
profitable  years  in  an  atmosphere  he  found  stimulating.  After 


148 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


quitting  Brook  Farm  he  passed  the  better  part  of  two  years  at 
Concord  with  his  brother,  living  at  farmhouses,  helping  with  the 
crops,  and  for  a  time  indulging  in  an  experiment  not  unlike  Tho- 
reau’s  at  Walden  Pond.  Then  followed  four  years  overseas— from 
1846  to  1850 — rambling  about  the  continent,  sloughing  off  the 
provincial  asceticism  of  New  England,  and  practicing  his  pen  by 
means  of  letters  and  diaries.  On  his  return  he  drifted  into  journal¬ 
ism,  wrote  several  volumes  of  travel  essays  and  social  satire, 
caught  the  Lyceum  infection,  then  at  its  malignant  stage,  lectured 
voluminously  to  pay  off  an  unfortunate  debt,  wrote  for  Putnam's 
Magazine,  became  connected  with  Harper’s  JV eekly,  finally  settling 
into  the  Easy  Chair  of  Harper’s  Magazine,  from  which  comfortable 
seat  for  years  he  sent  forth  gracefully  pointed  comments  on  man¬ 
ners,  society,  politics,  life,  yet  more  and  more  turning  to  politics  as 
his  particular  field  and  serving  as  volunteer  political  mentor  and 
critic  to  the  Gilded  Age. 

Of  his  several  early  ventures  into  the  field  of  polite  letters  little 
need  be  said.  The  work  of  a  high-spirited  young  man,  they  were 
a  cross  between  Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  and  Thackeray  with  a 
suggestion  of  Disraeli.  He  took  his  place  naturally  as  a  member  of 
the  New  York  group  of  litterateurs  who  were  gaily  exploiting  the 
conventional  sentimentalism  of  the  fifties.  With  its  pose  of  clever 
sophistication  the  New  York  school  could  do  no  good  to  a  serious 
young  writer,  and  the  pretensions  of  the  new-rich  society  of  the 
town  were  a  cordial  invitation  to  go  wrong.  Nile  Notes  of  a  Hozuadji 
(1851),  written  before  the  young  traveler  had  caught  the  current 
note  of  social  satire,  was  a  conscious  correction  of  the  ascetic 
Puritanism  imbibed  at  Concord,  and  with  its  frank  delight  in  the 
sensuousness  of  the  East  it  gave  offense  to  the  professional  blue¬ 
stockings  of  the  time.  But  in  The  Potiphar  Papers  (1853)  he  turned 
to  satirize  New  York  society,  then  hastening  to  transform  itself 
from  a  staid  Knickerbocker  world  into  a  Gold  Coast  of  social 
climbers.  That  his  treatment  of  the  theme  should  have  been  a 
slighter  edition  of  lhackeray’s  t  anity  Fair — less  searching  and 
more  sentimental — might  be  guessed  even  if  we  did  not  know  how 
greatly  Curtis  loved  and  admired  the  English  satirist.  “He  seems 
to  be  the  one  of  all  authors  who  takes  life  precisely  as  he  finds  it,” 
he  wrote  of  him.  “If  he  finds  it  sad,  he  makes  it  sad:  if  gay, 
gay.  You  discover  in  him  the  flexible  adaptability  of  Horace, 
but  with  a  deep  and  consuming  sadness  which  the  Roman  never 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM  149 

knew,  and  which  in  the  Englishman  seems  to  be  almost  senti¬ 
mentality.11 

But  in  spite  of  their  excellent  model  these  sketches  do  not  now 
seem  so  sprightly  as  they  seemed  to  his  fellows  on  the  staff  of 
Putnam’s  Magazine.  Moralism  scented  with  patchouli  is  no  longer 
the  vogue,  and  they  have  long  since  been  laid  away  with  the  hoops 
and  crinoline  of  the  fifties.  His  most  important  venture  in  polite 
literature — if  indeed  even  that  deserves  the  name  important — was 
Prue  and  I  (1856),  written  in  a  golden  summer  when  his  pen  was 
dipped  into  the  inkwell  of  love  and  he  foresaw  the  years  of  his  life 
lengthening  out  in  the  most  intimate  of  companionships.  They  are 
charming  essays  in  contentment  that  teach  the  familiar  lesson  that 
the  only  abiding  riches  are  the  riches  of  mind  and  character.  The 
old  bookkeeper  in  black  coat  and  white  tie  who  voyages  to  the 
realms  of  romance  while  watching  from  the  Battery  outgoing  ships, 
has  discovered  the  vicarious  pleasure  of  the  imagination,  and  the 
Aurelia  of  his  dreams  is  Prue  as  she  was  in  her  youth,  and  both  are 
Anna  Shaw  to  whom  soon  after  he  was  married.  The  first  three 
sketches — “Dinner  Time,”  “My  Chateaux,”  and  “Sea  from  the 
Shore” — are  humorous  and  tender  fancies  in  the  graceful  Victorian 
manner;  but  “Titbottom’s  Spectacles”  is  Hawthorne-like  in  the 
tenuous  play  of  a  grotesquely  moralistic  fancy,  and  the  succeeding 
sketches  reveal  the  exhaustion  of  the  vein.  Later  he  tried  his  hand 
at  a  novel — Trumps — but  it  refused  to  turn  into  anything  but  a 
tract  and  in  the  early  sixties  he  settled  down  in  the  Easy  Chair 
which  he  had  first  occupied  as  early  as  1853. 

Thereafter  to  his  death  in  1892  his  work  followed  three  diverse 
lines.  For  thirty  years  he  was  essayist,  orator,  and  political  critic, 
to  a  generation  sorely  in  need  of  wise  and  urbane  counsel.  His 
audience  was  wide  and  his  influence  great,  and  to  his  work  he 
brought  the  weight  of  his  sane  and  just  character.  Not  a  great 
scholar  and  not  an  acute  critic,  he  was  an  enlightened  and  sensitive 
conscience,  and  to  the  bar  of  his  conscience  he  summoned  the 
parties  and  policies  of  a  heedless  and  selfish  generation.  From  the 
Easy  Chair  he  sent  forth  his  genial  comment  on  matters  of  current 
interest,  satisfying  his  love  of  creative  writing  by  the  grace  of  his 
talk,  and  recognizing  his  kinship  with  the  age  of  Queen  Ann  by 
adopting  the  words  of  The  Tatler,  “I  shall  from  time  to  time  Report 
and  Consider  all  Matters  of  what  Kind  soever  that  shall  occur  to 
11  Edward  Cary,  George  William  Curtis,  p.  78. 


150 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


me.”  But  such  work  at  the  best  is  ephemeral,  and  ephemeral  like¬ 
wise  were  the  polished  pronouncements  of  the  occasional  orator  on 
which  far  too  much,  time  and  labor  were  expended.  But  New  York 
City  must  have  its  spokesman  for  formal  occasions,  and  after 
Bryant’s  death  George  William  Curtis  was  summoned  with  in¬ 
creasing  frequency.  The  rich  context  of  his  speeches,  elaborated 
with  formal  dignity  and  embellished  with  literary  allusions,  hit  to 
a  nicety  the  taste  of  a  generation  that  still  delighted  in  oratory  and 
preferred  dignity  to  informality.  His  addresses  on  Charles  Sumner, 
Wendell  Phillips,  Bryant,  and  Lowell,  are  excellent  examples  of  a 
style  that  is  no  longer  the  fashion.  In  their  polished  sentences 
eulogy  is  tempered  with  criticism,  but  the  criticism  is  sympathetic 
and  refuses  to  render  judgments  that  may  strike  his  hearers  as 
severe.  It  would  be  ungracious  to  intrude  unpleasant  facts  on  dig¬ 
nified  occasions. 

But  his  most  significant  work  during  these  busy  years  lay  in  the 
field  of  political  criticism,  and  it  was  as  editor  of  Harper  s  Weekly, 
from  1863  to  his  death,  and  as  a  leader  in  the- movement  of  civil 
service  reform,  that  he  made  the  deepest  impress  on  the  age.  The 
Weekly,  with  Nast  as  cartoonist,  was  then  at  the  height  of  its 
popularity  and  influence,  and  by  means  of  its  editorial  page  Curtis 
was  able  to  marshal  a  very  considerable  following  for  whatever 
cause  or  party  he  espoused.  He  had  long  taken  part  in  practical 
politics,  was  active  in  caucuses  and  conventions,  was  much  on  the 
stump  and  kept  his  fingers  on  party  wires.  Yet  influential  as  he 
was — the  scholar  in  politics,  as  his  own  generation  loved  to  say — he 
was  never  a  serious  student  of  politics  in  the  broader  meaning.  He 
was  essentially  an  English  gentleman  politician,  with  a  fine  scorn 
of  mean  and  sordid  policies,  a  warm  love  of  country  but  an  equally 
warm  love  of  civilization,  devoted  to  the  cause  of  liberty,  a  friend  of 
justice,  yet  with  all  his  excellent  traits  an  inadequate  political  phi¬ 
losopher.  Like  Lowell’s  his  horizon  was  curiously  limited.  Abstract 
political  theory  did  not  interest  him  and  he  never  critically  examined 
diverse  systems  of  government.  Of  economics  he  was  as  ignorant 
as  his  generation.  Again  like  Lowell  the  single  standard  by  which  he 
judged  politics  was  the  moral  standard,  and  in  his  anxious  concern  for 
“good  government”  he  failed  to  probe  deeply  the  sources  of  “bad 
government.”  In  presence  of  the  vast  corruptions  of  the  Gilded 
Age  he  was  as  helpless  in  diagnosing  the  evil  as  Lowell  or  Norton. 

Such  helplessness  is  the  more  surprising  considering  what  rare 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


151 


opportunities  he  had  enjoyed  for  intelligent  understanding.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  impressionable  years  of  youth  he  daily  associated  with 
the  most  militant  group  of  intellectual  radicals  in  America  and 
heard  the  ideas  of  Saint-Simon  and  Fourier  and  Owen  eagerly 
canvassed.  Associationism  as  a  cure  for  the  evils  of  competition 
was  the  cardinal  doctrine  of  the  Brook  Farmists;  yet  his  individual¬ 
ism  passed  unaffected  through  all  such  discussions.  He  seems 
to  have  sympathized  with  the  skepticism  of  Hawthorne  rather 
than  the  faith  of  Ripley  and  Dana.  Writing  to  his  father  from 
Brook  Farm  he  fell  into  the  genial  transcendental  vein  and  gaily 
poked  fun  at  those  who  would  make  the  world  over. 

No  wise  man  is  long  a  reformer,  [he  wrote]  for  Wisdom  sees  plainly  that 
growth  is  steady,  sure,  and  neither  condemns  nor  rejects  what  is,  or  has 
been.  Reform  is  organized  distrust.  It  says  to  the  universe  fresh  from 
God’s  hand,  “You  are  a  miserable  business;  lo!  I  will  make  you  fairer!” 
and  so  deputes  some  Fourier  or  Robert  Owen  to  improve  the  bungling 
work  of  the  Creator.12 

It  was  as  a  transcendental  optimist  that  he  set  out  on  his  travels 
in  1846.  The  Europe  he  visited  at  the  age  of  twenty  was  seething 
with  discontent  that  was  to  flame  up  in  the  revolutionary  year  of 
’48,  yet  though  he  wandered  leisurely  through  Italy,  Hungary, 
Germany,  France,  and  was  at  Paris  during  the  great  overturn,  the 
evidence  that  his  biographer  has  gathered  indicates  that  he  was 
not  deeply  affected  by  the  experience.  Unlike  his  friend  Margaret 
Fuller,  who  was  a  passionate  volunteer  in  the  struggle  of  Mazzini 
at  Rome,  or  like  Dana,  who  followed  the  movement  closely  as 
foreign  correspondent,  he  felt  none  of  the  promptings  of  a  revolu¬ 
tionist.  A  romantic  sympathy  for  Kossuth  is  clearly  indicated, 
but  his  feelings  carried  him  little  further  than  that.  Even  in  Eng¬ 
land,  seething  as  it  was  with  the  proletarian  unrest  that  culminated 
in  the  great  Chartist  movement,  he  came  upon  little  to  quicken 
his  transcendental  pulse.  It  was  not  till  he  got  back  home  and 
found  himself  in  presence  of  negro  slavery  that  his  reforming 
ardor  took  fire  and  he  proposed  to  engage  in  the  business  of  “or¬ 
ganized  distrust.”  He  threw  himself  into  the  cause  with  enthusi¬ 
asm  and  spoke  from  many  an  abolition  platform.  Then  came  the 
war  and  during  those  passionate  years  he  was  swept  unconsciously 
along  the  path  of  consolidation,  emerging  from  the  fire  a  confirmed 
Hamiltonian  with  transcendental  democratic  leanings. 

12  See  Ibid.,  pp.  25-26. 


152  CHANGING  AMERICA 

Have  you  thought  [he  wrote  Charles  Eliot  Norton  in  1864]  what  a  vin¬ 
dication  this  war  is  of  Alexander  Hamilton?  I  wish  somebody  would  write 
his  life  as  it  ought  to  be  written,  for  surely  he  was  one  of  the  greatest 
of  our  great  men,  as  Jefferson  was  the  least  of  the  truly  great;  or  am  I 
wrong?  Hamilton  was  generous  and  sincere.  Was  Jefferson  either?  13 

Such  Hamiltonian  sympathies  suffice  to  explain  some  of  his 
votes  in  the  New  York  Constitutional  Convention  of  1867,  of 
which  he  was  a  member.  He  advocated  the  appointment  of  the 
attorney-general  and  certain  other  state  officers,  opposed  the 
principle  of  municipal  home  rule,  and  approved  the  extension  of 
the  authority  of  the  state  over  local  police  systems.  With  Tam¬ 
many  Hall  and  Boss  Tweed  before  his  eyes  it  was  perhaps  natural 
that  he  should  have  sought  in  the  power  of  the  up-state  voter 
some  external  control  over  the  city  machine.  But  in  spite  of  such 
obvious  leanings  towards  the  Whig  branch  of  the  Republican  party 
Curtis  was  never  a  Whig.  The  transcendentalism  he  had  imbibed 
at  Brook  Farm  remained  with  him  to  color  much  of  his  thinking 
and  restrain  him  from  an  uncritical  advocacy  of  capitalism.  He 
never  went  over  body  and  soul  to  the  new  gospel  of  exploitation. 
He  never  lent  a  willing  ear  to  the  seductive  appeals  of  the  American 
System.  He  early  became  a  free-trader  and  throughout  his  life 
was  opposed  to  all  tariffs  and  grants  and  subsidies.  Discovering 
in  the  principle  of  liberty  the  cardinal  principles  of  American 
democracy,  he  was  disposed  to  accept  a  wide  application  of  laissez 
faire;  yet  when  it  opened  the  door  to  extortion  he  was  willing  to 
curb  an  anti-social  individualism.  When  in  the  seventies  it  was 
proposed  by  the  western  farmers  that  a  national  railroad  should 
be  built  from  Chicago  to  the  Atlantic  seaboard,  Curtis  looked 
upon  the  proposal  with  sympathy  as  likely  to  rescue  the  farmer 
from  extortionate  tolls.14  Unlike  Dana  and  Godkin,  he  declined 
to  grow  bitter  and  lose  his  head  over  the  economic  proposals  of 
the  western  agrarians.  In  the  sharp  alignment  between  agrarianism 
and  capitalism  he  stood  in  the  main  outside  both  parties,  and  al¬ 
though  opposed  to  greenbackism  he  discussed  the  question  with 
moderation  and  good  sense — a  rare  thing  in  those  blatant  times. 

But  it  was  political  decency  rather  than  capitalistic  or  agrarian 
programs  that  he  was  chiefly  concerned  about.  He  looked  to  his 
conscience  as  guide  and  as  editor  of  Harper  s  Weekly  he  used  his 
influence  to  cleanse  America  of  the  corruption  he  abhorred.  Week 
13  See  Ibid.,  pp.  180-181.  14  See  Harper’s  Weekly,  Sept.  20,  1873. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


153 


after  week  he  appealed  to  the  American  voter  to  turn  rascals  out 
of  office  and  put  honest  men  in.  The  corrupt  political  machine 
was  the  source  of  the  evil,  and  the  machine  had  grown  powerful 
through  its  control  of  patronage.  There  would  be  vicious  govern¬ 
ment  so  long  as  politicians  could  create  a  machine  by  means  of 
the  spoils  system.  Two  remedies,  he  believed,  were  necessary  to 
cure  the  evil — independent  voting  and  civil  service  reform;  and 
to  the  spread  of  these  two  ideas  he  devoted  the  last  twenty  years 
of  his  life,  thereby  bringing  on  his  head  much  abuse  and  incurring 
eventually  a  break  with  the  Republican  party. 

His  troubles  began  with  his  proposal  of  independent  voting. 
To  that  party-ridden  generation  on  whom  the  passions  of  war 
had  fastened  a  tyrannical  machine,  the  scratching  of  the  party 
ticket  seemed  no  better  than  treason.  It  was  a  Copperhead  device 
to  undo  the  results  of  the  war  and  reestablish  the  rebel  leaders  at 
Washington,  and  it  needed  courage  to  advocate  it  publicly.  Curtis 
put  the  matter  fairly  in  a  speech  to  Independent  Republicans  at 
New  York  in  1880: 

The  first  powerful  and  conclusive  remedy  for  the  tyranny  of  the  ma¬ 
chine  ...  is  scratching.  The  word  has  become  a  sneer,  a  taunt,  a  bitter 
reproach,  but  the  test  of  the  power  and  effectiveness  of  the  remedy  is 
the  fury  with  which  it  is  assailed.  .  .  .  The  machine  denounces  scratchers 
as  lustily  as  Laud  denounced  the  Puritans,  or  George  III  the  rebellious 
Yankees,  or  slave-driving  Democrats  Republican  woolly  heads.  .  .  .  The 
scratcher  is  the  minute-man  of  politics.  He  is  always  in  light  marching 
order.  He  has  only  to  consult  his  own  knowledge  and  conscience,  and 
with  one  stroke  his  work  is  done.  Fortunately,  also,  his  stroke  may  be  as 
secret  as  his  ballot.  Those  who  do  not  choose  to  publish  the  fact  need  not 
be  known,  and  may  smile  serenely  at  the  blind  fury  of  those  whose  plots 
are  quietly  foiled.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  impotent  anger  with  which 
scratching  is  assailed.  It  cannot  be  reached.  .  .  .  Scratching  is  denounced 
as  dishonorable.  Oh,  no!  the  secret  ballot  is  not  dishonorable.  The  shot 
of  the  Middlesex  farmer  from  behind  a  tree  was  no  more  dishonorable  than 
the  immortal  volley  from  behind  the  breastworks  of  Bunker  Hill.15 

He  then  proceeded  to  lay  open  what  seemed  to  him  the  core  of 
the  problem: 

But  useful  as  scratching  is  as  a  corrective,  it  does  not  strike  at  the  heart 
of  the  machine,  and  it  is  therefore  only  a  corrective  and  not  a  radical 
remedy.  That  remedy  can  be  found  only  by  finding  the  source  of  the  power 
of  the  machine,  and  that  source  is  official  patronage.  It  is  the  command  of 
millions  of  the  public  money  spent  in  public  administration;  the  control 

16  Orations  and  Addresses,  “Machine  Politics  and  the  Remedy,”  Vol.  II,  pp.  157-159, 


154  CHANGING  AMERICA 

of  the  vast  labyrinth  of  place,  with  its  enormous  emoluments;  the  system 
which  makes  the  whole  Civil  Service,  to  the  least  detail  and  most  signifi¬ 
cant  position,  the  spoils  of  party  victory;  which  perverts  necessary  party 
organization  into  intolerable  party  despotism.  It  is  upon  this  that  the 
hierarchy  of  the  machine  is  erected.  Strike  at  this  system  strongly, 
steadily,  persistently,  and  you  shiver  the  machine  to  pieces.16 

Seeing  his  duty  clearly,  Curtis  did  not  spare  himself,  but  while 
most  of  his  fellows  were  seeking  fame  or  wealth  for  themselves  he 
gave  his  time  and  strength  without  stint  to  the  cause,  and  it  was 
due  to  his  efforts  more  than  to  those  of  any  other  man  that  a  re¬ 
form  in  the  civil  service  was  eventually  brought  about.  He  had 
to  fight  his  way  against  bitter  opposition.  It  was  charged  that 
he  was  seeking  to  create  in  America  an  undemocratic  bureaucracy. 
His  old  friend  Charles  A.  Dana — -from  whom  he  had  become 
estranged— was  quite  frank.  “Above  all  I  do  not  believe,”  he  said, 
“in  the  establishment  in  this  country  of  the  German  bureaucratic 
system,  with  its  permanent  staff  of  office-holders  who  are  not  re¬ 
sponsible  to  the  people,  and  whose  tenure  of  place  knows  no  varia¬ 
tion  and  no  end  except  the  end  of  life.”  17  But  it  was  the  politicians 
who  fought  most  bitterly,  and  when  to  civil  service  reform  he  added 
the  sin  of  bolting  the  party,  throwing  over  Blaine  and  supporting 
Cleveland,  he  was  subjected  to  plentiful  insults.  Nevertheless 
as  the  leader  of  the  Mugwumps,  preaching  to  a  party-ridden  gen¬ 
eration  the  gospel  of  independency,  he  did  his  country  a  real  service. 
He  could  not  foresee,  of  course,  how  easily  the  menace  of  the  in¬ 
dependent  voter  was  to  be  met;  how  through  the  control  of  both 
party  machines  and  both  nominees  by  the  political  bosses  the  in¬ 
dependent  would  have  only  the  choice  betwixt  tweedledum  and 
tweedledee,  and  in  disgust  would  largely  refrain  from  voting.  But 
the  open  and  crying  political  evils  of  the  Gilded  Age  he  saw  clearly, 
and  in  seeking  to  lessen  them  he  proved  himself  a  useful  citizen 
as  well  as  a  cultivated  American. 

hi 

ENGLISH  LIBERALISM  AND  POLITICS— GODKIN 
AND  “THE  NATION” 

The  severest  critic  of  the  Gilded  Age  was  Edwin  Lawrence  God- 
kin,  founder  of  the  Nation.  More  caustic  than  George  William 
Curtis,  equipped  with  a  complete  social  philosophy,  and  armed  with 

16  See  Ibid.,  p.  160.  17  J.  H.  Wilson,  The  Life  of  Charles  A.  Dana,  p.  \ 66. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


155 


perfect  self-assurance,  he  devoted  thirty-five  years  to  the  task  of 
instructing  America  in  the  principles  of  government  as  those 
principles  were  understood  by  John  Stuart  Mill.  He  was  at  once  an 
idealist  and  a  realist,  and  the  intellectual  history  of  the  critic  is 
revealed  in  the  shift  from  the  one  to  the  other.  To  Godkin  the 
English  liberal — who  had  studied  the  American  experiment  from 
overseas — as  to  Karl  Schurz  the  German  liberal,  America  was  the 
torchbearer  of  the  democratic  faith;  and  any  defection  from  the 
cause,  any  betrayal  of  that  faith,  was  a  desecration  of  the  temple  of 
liberalism  by  its  own  priesthood.  Liberalism,  he  was  persuaded,  was 
the  handmaid  of  civilization;  the  hope  of  any  rational  progress, 
rested  on  the  principle  of  free  inquiry  and  free  endeavor.  To  God- 
kin,  therefore,  and  to  Schurz  and  the  hundreds  of  European  liberals 
who  sought  refuge  here  following  the  debacle  of  the  revolutionary 
hopes  of  1848,  it  was  a  matter  of  deep  import  that  America  should 
remain  true  to  its  liberal  tradition,  trusting  freedom,  refusing  to 
repeat  the  unhappy  experience  of  a  Tory  Europe.  He  would  say 
to  America  what  John  Wise  had  said  nearly  two  centuries  before: 
“Ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty,  therefore  hold  your  hold, 
brethren!  Pull  up  well  upon  the  oars,  you  have  a  rich  cargo,  and  I 
hope  .  .  .  day-light  and  good  piloting  will  secure  all.”  But  he 
would  do  more  than  that;  he  would  pull  an  oar  himself;  and  with 
high  hopes,  at  the  age  of  twenty-five,  he  cast  in  his  lot  with  America 
to  serve  the  cause  in  whatever  ways  might  offer. 

Godkin  came  of  an  English  Protestant  strain  that  for  seven 
centuries  had  lived  in  County  Wexford,  at  the  extreme  southeastern 
point  of  Ireland.  He  was  neither  Scotch  like  the  men  of  Ulster,  nor 
Irish  like  his  neighbors  of  Kilkenny  and  Wicklow,  but  as  English  in 
blood  and  temperament  as  Jonathan  Swift.  Educated  at  Queen’s 
College,  Belfast,  he  studied  law  for  a  time  at  Lincoln’s  Inn,  went 
through  the  revolutionary  years  of  1848-1851  with  their  great 
hopes,  and  entered  the  field  of  journalism  as  correspondent  for  the 
London  Daily  News  during  the  Crimean  War.  In  1856  he  came  to 
America  with  the  intention  of  entering  the  law,  but  returned  to 
journalism.  During  the  Civil  War  he  was  correspondent  for  the 
Daily  News  of  London,  laboring  to  counteract  British  Tory  opinion 
that  ran  strongly  pro-South,  and  marshal  the  forces  of  English 
liberalism  on  the  side  of  the  North.  Three  months  after  Appomat¬ 
tox  he  founded  the  Nation  as  an  organ  of  criticism,  through  the 
columns  of  which  he  proposed  to  appeal  to  the  intelligence  and  the 


156  CHANGING  AMERICA 

conscience  of  America  in  support  of  the  principles  of  Victorian 
liberalism. 

For  this  excellent  work  of  criticism  Godkin  was  provided  with  a 
sound  equipment.  Endowed  with  a  vigorous  intellect,  he  kept  his 
mind  free  from  shifting  fogs  and  rarely  mistook  immediate  for 
ultimate  ends.  His  training  had  been  in  a  distinguished  tradition. 
His  father  was  a  Presbyterian  minister  and  journalist,  and  the 
strain  of  robust  dissent  that  contributed  so  richly  to  Victorian 
liberalism  came  to  him  as  a  birthright.  He  was  “brought  up,”  he 
said,  “in  the  Mill-Grote  school  of  radicals.”  “When  I  was  in  col¬ 
lege,”  he  wrote  in  later  years,  “I  and  the  young  men  of  my  ac¬ 
quaintance  were  Liberals,  in  the  English  sense.  John  Stuart  Mill 
was  our  prophet,  and  Grote  and  Bentham  were  our  daily  food.”  18 
Already  his  heart  was  overseas;  America  as  it  had  been  described 
by  de  Tocqueville  was  his  “promised  land,”  the  home  of  a  free 
democracy  on  which  his  hopes  for  civilization  were  fixed.  His  first 
book,  written  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-two,  was  a  history  of  the 
land  Kossuth  was  striving  to  set  free,  and  he  there  defined  the  word 
democrat  as  he  had  come  to  interpret  it — the  democrats,  he  said, 
are  “all  those  whose  hopes  and  sympathies  are  not  bound  up  in  a 
party  or  class,  but  look  for  the  welfare  and  progress  of  humanity  as 
the  goal  of  their  striving.”  19 

Thus  he  wrote  in  the  aftermath  of  the  revolutionary  years  of 
1848-1851.  But  the  glowing  idealism  of  the  young  radical  was  to 
suffer  discouragements  and  setbacks  from  the  experience  of  later 
years.  One  suspects  that  his  liberalism  never  possessed  the  whole  of 
him,  never  grew  from  within  out,  but  was  overlaid  on  a  nature 
fundamentally  aristocratic  that  at  heart  preferred  Tory  to  liberal 
ends.  Though  as  a  young  man  he  spred  his  canvas  to  the  winds  of 
liberalism,  he  was  always  a  little  distrustful  of  the  bellying  sails  and 
he  never  quite  liked  the  crew.  There  is  a  curious  suggestiveness  in 
his  changing  attitude  towards  England  and  English  society.  He 
had  quitted  the  old  world  out  of  dislike  for  it,  and  a  dozen  years 
later  he  declined  to  go  back  except  as  a  “last  extremity.”  “It  would 
be  going  back,”  he  said,  “into  an  atmosphere  that  I  detest  and  a 
social  system  that  I  have  hated  since  I  was  fourteen  years  old.”20 
At  the  bottom  of  this  repugnance  was  an  obstinate  pride.  He  was 
ambitious,  capable,  and  sensitive,  and  a  caste  society  that  refused 

18  Ogden,  Life  and  Letters  of  Edwin  Lawrence  Godkin,  Vol.  I,  p  1 1 

19  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  17.  20  Ibid  >  vol.  II,  p.  140. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


157 


to  open  its  doors  to  him  he  looked  upon  as  pernicious.  To  assert 
that  his  espousal  of  democracy  was  due  to  his  brusque  rejection  by 
a  more  distinguished  mistress,  is  a  severe  judgment,  yet  it  is  a 
judgment  that  his  friend  Henry  Holt  quite  frankly  implied.21 

He  had  come  to  America  in  the  hope  of  getting  on  in  the  world. 
He  had  a  strong  regard  for  social  position.  His  standards  were 
severe  and  his  sympathies  so  narrow  as  to  lay  him  open  to  the 
frequent  charge  of  snobbery.  He  would  mingle  in  none  but  good 
society,  and  it  was  easier  in  America  than  in  England  to  gain 
entrance  to  good  society.  Until  he  had  made  his  mark  he  would  not 
go  back;  but  when  as  a  distinguished  editor  he  ventured  to  return, 
and  found  himself  accepted  by  the  best  people,  his  hatred  for  the 
English  social  system  oozed  away,  and  the  eager  delight  he  ex¬ 
perienced  in  upper-class  society  was  an  unconscious  testimony  to 
the  value  he  had  set  upon  a  system  from  which  as  a  young  man  he 
had  been  excluded.  Godkin  was  too  English  to  make  himself  over 
into  an  American,  too  natively  aristocratic  to  be  a  democrat.  A 
disciple  of  John  Stuart  Mill,  he  lacked  the  complete  intellectual  in¬ 
tegrity  of  Mill  that  brushed  aside  all  caste  prejudices  and  personal 
ambitions,  as  he  lacked  his  vast  intellectual  accumulation.  God- 
kin’s  liberalism  was  founded  on  Mill,  but  it  was  never  quite  Mill. 

The  philosophy  to  which,  as  a  disciple  of  the  Bentham-Mill- 
Grote  school,  the  young  Godkin  gave  his  allegiance,  was  a  Utilita¬ 
rian  adaptation  of  laisse z  faire — the  doctrine  that  the  greatest 
happiness  of  the  greatest  number  is  the  ultimate  social  objective, 
and  that  such  objective  can  be  attained  only  through  the  complet- 
est  liberty  under  the  sway  of  reason  and  justice.  As  presented  by 
John  Stuart  Mill  it  was  a  singularly  persuasive  philosophy  that 
awakened  a  response  in  every  generous  mind.  Liberty,  he  insisted, 
is  the  thing  chiefly  to  be  desired,  for  where  men  are  free  they  will 
shape  social  organisms  to  their  needs.  Man  is  both  an  economic  and 
a  political  animal,  and  the  difficult  problem  of  the  political  philoso¬ 
pher  is  to  keep  the  one  from  trespassing  upon  the  rights  of  the  other. 
The  economic  man,  under  the  drive  of  the  acquisitive  instinct, 
regards  the  political  state  as  an  ally  in  the  present  business  of 
acquisition;  and  the  political  man  looks  upon  business  as  subject 
to  strict  regulation  and  control  in  the  interests  of  the  state.  To 
prevent  this  meddlesome  interference  of  each  with  the  other,  Mill 
laid  down  the  principle  of  liberty  in  terms  as  uncompromising  as 

21  Nation,  July  8,  1915,  p.  47. 


158 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


those  of  the  Physiocrats.  The  “sole  end,”  he  asserted,  “for  which 
mankind  are  warranted,  individually  or  collectively,  in  interfering 
with  the  liberty  of  action  of  any  of  their  number,  is  self-protec¬ 
tion,”  and  “the  only  purpose  for  which  power  can  be  rightfully 
exercised  over  any  member  of  a  civilized  community,  against  his 
will,  is  to  prevent  harm  to  others.  His  own  good,  either  physical 
or  moral,  is  not  a  sufficient  warrant.”  22 

From  this  excellent  school  the  young  Godkin  emerged  a  political 
theorist  of  no  mean  ability;  somewhat  too  dogmatic,  perhaps,  a  bit 
overconfident  of  the  finality  of  his  logic,  but  with  a  shrewd  dialec¬ 
tic,  quick  to  separate  reality  from  pretense,  severe  upon  all  flum¬ 
mery  and  buncombe.  That  his  philosophy  was  sharply  opposed  to 
the  current  tendencies  of  American  political  life  he  saw  clearly:  to 
Whiggery  with  its  ambitious  paternalisms;  to  centralization  with 
its  glorification  of  a  Bismarckian  state.  His  thought  was  erected 
on  a  foundation  of  laissez  faire,  and  he  sharply  differentiated 
economics  and  politics.  As  a  realist  he  recognized  differences  in 
individual  capacity,  but  he  was  keenly  suspicious  of  any  attempt  on 
the  part  of  government  to  compensate  for  such  differences.  Any 
interference  with  natural  law,  he  was  convinced,  entailed  greater 
evils  than  benefits.  Economic  competition  is  a  struggle  between 
individuals,  and  government  must  content  itself  with  its  proper 
role  of  policeman  to  keep  the  peace.  With  Mill  he  refused  to  recog¬ 
nize  the  state  as  a  separate  entity.  He  never  confused  the  person¬ 
nel  of  government  with  “what  is  called  ‘the  state’”;  and  as  he 
contemplated  the  honesty  and  capacity  of  the  several  members 
who  administered  government  in  a  given  commonwealth,  he  was 
disinclined  to  entrust  them  with  regulative  powers.  Disinterested 
honesty  and  capacity,  it  seemed,  too  rarely  got  into  office,  govern¬ 
ments  were  too  little  acquainted  with  common  morality,  to  justify 
hopes  of  equalizing  the  inequality  of  nature  by  political  means. 

To  the  sound  philosophical  equipment  brought  from  England 
Godkin  added  a  very  considerable  understanding  of  American 
political  history.  The  ten  years  spent  here  before  the  founding  of 
the  Nation,  had  been  employed  in  getting  at  home  upon  the  new 
scene.  He  had  carefully  checked  the  findings  of  de  Tocqueville  and 
was  convinced  that  the  French  critic  had  gone  far  astray  in  his 
interpretation  of  the  great  American  experiment.  In  his  analysis 
of  democratic  tendencies  he  had  fallen  into  the  fallacy  of  post  hoc 

22  On  Liberty,  Chapter  I.  „ 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


159 


ergo  propter  hoc ,  with  the  result  that  he  had  got  the  cart  before 
the  horse;  and  in  an  article  published  in  the  North  American  Review 
of  January,  1865,  Godkin  entered  the  lists  in  defense  of  America 
against  the  criticisms  of  English  Tories  founded  on  such  fallacies. 
In  its  emphasis  on  historical  realism  “Aristocratic  Opinions  of 
Democracy”  is  a  surprisingly  modern  study  that  might  almost 
have  been  written  by  one  of  our  younger  historians.  It  is  an  in¬ 
terpretation  of  our  political  development  in  terms  of  environment, 
and  it  traces  the  rise  of  democracy  to  the  leveling  influence  of 
decentralization.  For  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  he  pointed  out, 
old-world  habits  and  customs,  the  spirit  of  aristocracy,  prevailed 
in  the  closely  grouped  settlements  along  the  Atlantic  seaboard, 
where  physical  conditions  restrained  the  tendency  to  social  dis¬ 
ruption;  but  with  the  breaking  through  of  the  Appalachian  barrier, 
and  the  influx  of  new  waves  of  immigration,  the  conditions  were 
prepared  for  a  vast  movement  of  decentralization.  It  was  the  In¬ 
land  Empire  that  made  possible  the  democratic  revolution  in 
America.  “How  was  it,”  he  asks,  “that  that  democratic  tide, 
which  within  the  last  fifty  years,  has  overwhelmed  everything, 
during  the  previous  hundred  and  fifty  years  gave  so  few  signs  of 
rising?”  And  his  reply  to  the  question  antedates  Professor  Tur¬ 
ner’s  theory  of  the  frontier  by  thirty  years: 

If  we  inquire  what  are  those  phenomena  of  American  society  which  it 
is  generally  agreed  distinguish  it  from  that  of  older  countries,  we  shall 
find  .  .  .  that  by  far  the  larger  number  of  them  may  be  attributed  in  a 
great  measure  to  what,  for  want  of  a  better  name,  we  shall  call  “the  fron¬ 
tier  life”  led  by  a  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants,  and  to  the  influence 
of  this  portion  on  manners  and  legislation,  rather  than  to  political  institu¬ 
tions,  or  even  to  the  equality  of  conditions.  In  fact,  we  think  that  these 
phenomena,  and  particularly  those  of  them  which  excite  most  odium  in 
Europe,  instead  of  being  the  effect  of  democracy,  are  partly  its  cause,  and 
that  it  has  been  to  their  agency  more  than  aught  else,  that  the  democratic 
tide  in  America  has  owed  most  of  its  force  and  violence. 

The  agency  which,  in  our  opinion,  gave  democracy  its  first  great  im¬ 
pulse  in  the  United  States,  which  has  promoted  its  spread  ever  since,  and 
has  contributed  most  powerfully  to  the  production  of  those  phenomena  in 
American  society  which  hostile  critics  set  down  as  peculiarly  democratic, 
was  neither  the  origin  of  the  Colonists,  nor  the  circumstances  under  which 
they  came  to  the  country,  nor  their  religious  belief;  but  the  great  change 
in  the  distribution  of  the  population,  which  began  soon  after  the  Revolu¬ 
tion,  and  which  continues  its  operation  up  to  the  present  time.23 

23  “Aristocratic  Opinions  of  Democracy,”  in  Problems  of  Modern  Democracy, 
DD.  25-26,  30-ti. 


160 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Godkin  was  thirty-four  when  he  entered  upon  his  life  work  of 
pouring  a  stream  of  fresh  and  free  thought  upon  the  ways  of  the 
Gilded  Age.  It  was  somewhat  in  the  spirit  of  Matthew  Arnold 
that  he  interpreted  the  function  of  criticism.  “The  highest  al¬ 
legiance  of  every  man,’’  he  wrote  Norton  in  1865,  “is  due  to  lib¬ 
erty  and  civilization,  or  rather  civilization  and  liberty’’;  24  and 
the  creed  of  the  Nation,  which  Godkin  unconsciously  modified 
as  culture  dispossessed  liberty  in  his  affections,  may  be  summed 
up  in  the  words  democracy,  individualism,  morality,  culture,  to  the 
end  of  a  free  life  in  a  humane  and  well-ordered  society.  Through¬ 
out  the  Gilded  Age  this  transplanted  English  liberal  was  the  high 
priest  of  criticism  in  America.  His  caustic  intelligence  played 
ironically  about  the  current  shibboleths  and  fetishes,  reducing 
them  to  shreds  and  patches.  He  could  discover  little  that  was  good 
in  the  Gilded  Age,  in  its  tariffs  and  land  grants,  its  Credit  Mobilier 
and  other  scandals,  its  buccaneer  plutocracy,  its  undisciplined 
proletarianism,  its  bitter  agrarianism;  and  he  was  prompted  to  a 
severity  of  judgment  that  easier-going  natures  thought  harsh. 
Enemies  sprang  up  in  his  every  footprint;  but  too  much  was  at 
stake,  he  believed,  to  temper  his  criticism  to  flabby  minds,  and 
he  laid  about  him  with  what  he  considered  a  fine  impartiality. 

It  was  a  cold  plunge  into  a  dirty  pool,  and  a  nature  less  robust 
would  have  scrambled  out  quickly.  His  realism  was  a  profound 
discouragement  to  his  idealism,  and  his  native  aristocracy  of 
temperament  closed  his  mind  to  the  virtues  of  certain  homely 
American  liberalisms.  As  an  intellectual  he  distrusted  all  Jack¬ 
sonian  frontier  freedoms.  The  doctrine  of  liberty  did  not  appear 
to  advantage  in  the  garb  of  agrarians  and  proletarians;  Thaddeus 
Stevens  and  Terence  V.  Powderly  were  an  ungainlier  breed  of 
libertarians  than  Gladstone  and  Mill;  with  such  leadership  it 
seemed  to  Godkin  that  liberty  was  running  away  with  civilization 
and  a  smash-up  was  likely.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Nation,  there¬ 
fore,  to  arouse  the  culture  of  America  to  its  political  obligations, 
to  the  end  that  the  custodianship  of  liberty  should  be  taken  over 
by  the  intelligence  of  America.  It  proved  a  discouraging  job,  and 
slowly  on  the  horizon  of  his  mind  rose  the  shadow  of  the  doubt 
that  had  troubled  de  Tocqueville  and  Cooper  and  Fisher  Ames- 
must  a  democracy  prove  a  leveling  influence  that  destroys  a  fine 
individuality  and  a  generous  social  culture?  Careless  of  his  trus- 
24  Ogden,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  p.  48. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


161 


teeship,  was  not  the  American  democrat  throwing  his  heritage  to 
the  demagogue  and  the  spoilsman? 

As  he  watched  the  scrambling  heedlessness  of  the  times  his 
liberalism  oozed  away,  his  democratic  faith  lost  its  sanctions,  and 
he  slowly  drifted  to  the  right  and  the  dead-sea  of  pessimism.  The 
mass  was  too  powerful  in  America,  and  the  mass  was  shot  through 
with  the  spirit  of  selfish  leveling.  The  democracy  had  been  dis¬ 
torted  by  the  frontier,  and  the  sense  of  responsibility,  of  individual 
duty,  was  well-nigh  atrophied.  The  vulgar  West  threw  its  crudity 
upon  all  America.  “I  do  not  like  the  western  type  of  man,” 
Godkin  confessed  to  Norton;  and  to  another  friend  who  praised 
California,  he  wrote,  “No  scenery  or  climate  I  had  to  share  with 
western  people  would  charm  me.”  He  never  spared  his  mordant 
adjectives  in  commenting  privately  on  all  America  west  of  the 
Hudson  River.  In  his  gloomy  later  years  he  found  consolation  in 
Brahmin  culture.  For  years  he  lived  in  Cambridge,  and  in  the 
company  of  Lowell  and  Norton  he  felt  at  home.  Here  were  dem¬ 
ocratic  gentlemen  worthy  of  his  ideal.  If  all  America  were  only 
like  Cambridge  his  faith  in  a  cultivated  liberalism  would  be  jus¬ 
tified.  In  those  years  he  called  himself  “an  American  of  the 
vieille  roche ,”  which  being  interpreted,  meant  a  liberal  of  the 
Brahmin  school. 

The  immediate  problems  on  which  Godkin  was  called  to  pass 
judgment  brought  him  into  the  thick  of  the  struggles  of  the  Gilded 
Age.  As  an  editor  he  confronted  the  bitter  antagonisms  that 
sprang  from  the  rivalries  of  the  farmer,  the  wage-earner,  and  the 
industrial  capitalist.  Each  group  was  seeking  to  enlist  government 
on  its  side  and  use  the  political  state  for  special  and  narrow  ends. 
To  a  disciple  of  Mill  all  such  attempts  were  no  better  than  treason 
to  democracy,  and  when  such  treason  was  justified  by  what  he 
considered  specious  economic  theory  Godkin  s  hostility  was  edged 
with  acerbity.  All  the  trenchant  dogmas  of  his  philosophy — his 
police  theory  of  the  state,  his  Ricardian  laissez  faire,  his  individu¬ 
alism — rushed  to  the  attack  of  such  impudent  impostors.  With 
no  organized  forces  at  his  back  he  made  war  on  every  major 
group  in  America.  He  essayed  to  rally  the  scattered  minority  of 
the  intellectuals  and  overthrow  the  citadel  of  economic  power  by 
appeal  to  reason.  It  was  magnificent  but  it  was  scarcely  war.  The 
culture  of  the  Gilded  Age  was  undisciplined,  lacking  faith  and 
unnurtured  in  philosophy,  fastidious  rather  than  vigorous— the 


162 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


poorest  of  material  for  shock  troops.  It  applauded  every  clever 
thrust  of  its  captain,  but  preferred  to  keep  its  own  hands  unsoiled. 
In  consequence,  to  the  end  of  his  life  Godkin  was  a  leader  without 
a  following,  little  more  than  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness. 

For  the  rising  plutocracy  Godkin  felt  the  scorn  of  a  gentleman 
for  the  vulgar  new-rich.  Its  hands  were  dirty,  and  it  was  soiling 
all  American  life.  Its  gospel  of  Whiggery,  that  under  pretense  of 
furthering  prosperty  had  turned  Congress  into  an  auction  room, 
was  an  insult  to  his  Manchester  liberalism.  Just  as  surely  as  gov¬ 
ernment  meddles  with  subsidies  and  tariffs  and  grants,  he  pointed 
out,  will  it  be  defiled.  Men  are  but  indifferent  honest,  and  if  states¬ 
men  are  not  to  become  mere  political  hucksters  they  must  stand 
apart  from  the  temptations  of  business.  The  plea  for  a  national 
economy  had  brought  Congress  to  the  Credit  Mobilier  scandals,  and 
it  would  breed  other  scandals  so  long  as  it  was  heeded.  The  only 
cure  for  Whiggery  was  to  destroy  it.  In  a  scathing  leader  he  early 
paid  his  respects  to  theWhiggish  system  of  governmental  subsidies: 

The  remedy  is  simple.  The  Government  must  get  out  of  the  “protec¬ 
tive”  business  and  the  “subsidy”  business  and  the  “improvement”  and 
the  “development”  business.  It  must  let  trade,  and  commerce,  and 
manufactures,  and  steamboats,  and  railroads,  and  telegraphs  alone.  It 
cannot  touch  them  without  breeding  corruption.  We  care  nothing  about 
the  wonderful  stories  we  hear  about  what  can  be  achieved  in  the  way  of 
“promoting  industry”  by  all  these  canal  and  steamboat  and  railroad 
schemes.  Were  the  material  prospect  twice  as  tempting,  the  state  could 
not  profitably  meddle  with  them,  because  neither  it  nor  any  other  gov¬ 
ernment  in  the  world  can  command  the  virtue  necessary  to  carry  them  on. 
This  is  not  a  matter  of  speculation;  we  know  it  as  a  matter  of  experience. 
It  is  almost  as  much  as  this  Government  can  do  to  maintain  order  and 
administer  justice.  It  may  one  day  be  able  to  do  a  great  deal  more,  but  not 
until  a  great  change  has  occurred  in  the  social  condition  of  the  country. 
We  have  gone  far  enough,  heaven  knows,  on  the  road  of  “  protection  ”  and 
“promotion,”  and  have  found  at  every  step  that  it  leads  straight  to  the 
bottomless  pit;  that  for  every  hundred  dollars  voted  by  these  poor  men  to 
whom  we  pay  scanty  wages  for  passing  bills  at  Washington,  we  lessen,  and 
perceptibly  lessen,  the  stock  of  individual  honor,  of  self-respect,  and  of 
public  spirit,  of  a  loyalty  to  ideals,  to  which  far  more  than  to  any  triumphs 
of  material  industry,  we  must  look  for  continued  national  greatness.  We 
are  making  money  fast  enough  in  all  conscience;  what  needs  fostering  just 
now  is  honesty.25 

Godkin  found  it  exceedingly  difficult  to  foster  the  austere  hon¬ 
esty  that  he  desired  in  the  body  politic,  and  in  his  fury  at  the 

26  Nation,  January  30,  1873,  p.  68. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


163 


common  political  scoundrelism  he  came  to  ascribe  much  of  the 
virus  that  was  poisoning  America  to  the  party  of  western  agrarians. 
He  was  rapidly  drifting  to  the  right  and  the  defense  of  capitalism, 
and  as  the  agrarian  platform  was  slowly  built  up  of  successive 
planks — greenbacks,  free  silver,  subtreasuries,  railway  regulation, 
the  income  tax — he  turned  upon  it  all  the  batteries  of  his  wrath. 
Godkin  never  understood  the  American  farmer,  but  he  professed 
to  understand  economics  and  political  science,  and  the  agrarian 
platform  aroused  his  implacable  hostility.  In  his  frequent  dis¬ 
cussions  of  the  currency  question,  a  question  that  for  thirty  years 
was  a  subject  of  passionate  debate,  he  was  at  some  disadvantage. 
Intellectually  he  was  ill  equipped  to  deal  with  it.  Although  a 
Ricardian  he  failed  to  grasp  Ricardo’s  quantitative  principle  of 
money  or  the  function  of  paper  currency.  As  a  gold-standard 
advocate  he  accepted  the  English  monetary  system  as  it  was 
given  form  by  the  Parliamentary  Bank  Act  of  1844,  and  he  would 
have  no  tampering  with  it.  To  Godkin  money  was  a  measure  of 
value,  and  a  fluctuating  standard,  implied  in  the  quantitative 
theory,  was  as  immoral  as  a  fluctuating  yardstick.  The  use  of 
greenbacks — ’Tag  money” — he  reckoned  a  scheme  by  which  dis¬ 
honest  debtors  might  cheat  their  creditors.26  He  was  forced  to  re¬ 
gard  gold  and  silver  as  commodities,  fluctuating  in  price  with 
supply  and  demand;  but  he  looked  upon  them  as  possessing  a  stable 
natural  value  that  placed  them  beyond  political  manipulation. 
Any  attempt  to  disturb  this  natural  value  by  artificial  means  he 
called  dishonest.27  He  was  almost  indecent  in  the  vehemence  of 
his  adjectives  applied  to  the  “dishonest  money  men.”  He  called 
the  Greenbackers  “communists,”  28  and  speaking  of  the  Grangers, 
he  said,  “There  is  nothing  unnatural  or  deplorable  in  a  Granger 
turning  from  one  form  of  swindle  to  another.”  -9 

By  the  middle  nineties  it  was  hard  to  distinguish  Godkin’s  views 
on  the  agrarian  program  from  those  of  a  Wall  Street  banker.  In 
discussing  free  silver  he  abandoned  economic  principles  and  fell 
to  mouthing  like  any  newspaper  writer.  The  currency  question 
he  regarded  as  a  simple  question  of  public  morality.  There  was 
only  one  issue,  the  issue  between  honest  and  dishonest  money. 

26  See  “Public  Opinion  and  the  Currency,”  Ibid.,  February  27,  1873;  “The  Polit¬ 
ical  Situation  in  1896,”  in  Problems  of  Modern  Democracy. 

27  See  “On  Gold  and  Silver,”  Ibid.,  July  6,  1876. 

28  Ibid.,  May  25,  1876. 

29  Ibid.,  June  1,  1876. 


164 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


“The  demand  for  free-silver  coinage  is  a  demand  for  a  division  of 
property,”  30  he  said  in  the  early  days  of  the  campaign  of  1896, 
and  a  fortnight  later  he  took  extreme  ground: 

.  .  .  the  bold  and  wicked  scheme  of  repudiation  ...  is  presented  without 
a  blush  in  the  platform.  Upon  this  question  the  campaign  must  be  fought. 
If  the  party  of  repudiators  cannot  be  put  down,  the  republic  cannot  be 
preserved  and  is  not  worth  preserving.31 

Such  pronouncements  bear  none  of  the  earmarks  of  dispassionate 
criticism.  It  may  seem  severe  to  suggest  that  they  are  the  com¬ 
ments  of  a  very  ignorant  or  shallow  critic,  blinded  by  his  prejudices; 
yet  it  is  true.  The  equipment  of  Manchester  economics  with  which 
he  had  outfitted  himself  in  the  late  forties,  was  no  longer  adequate 
in  the  nineties;  yet  he  seems  not  to  have  been  aware  of  the  fact. 
The  mid-Victorian  still  regarded  himself  as  an  authority  on  all 
economic  questions,  although  he  seems  to  have  done  no  serious 
reading  in  economic  theory  for  half  a  century,  and  was  scarcely 
conscious  how  far  he  had  drifted  towards  the  right.  The  old  lib¬ 
eral  was  fighting  the  battles  of  capitalism  with  weapons  as  anti¬ 
quated  as  the  old  cap-and-ball  musket.  “The  great  trouble  with 
all  silverites  and  currency  lunatics,  North  and  South,”  he  said, 
“is  that,  when  monetary  crises  arise,  they  cannot  be  got  to  go  to 
the  right  quarter  for  information” — a  comment  that  one  might 
retort  upon  Godkm  himself.  The  intellectual  knew  far  less  about 
money  than  “Coin”  Harvey,  whom  he  would  have  laughed  at. 

1  he  same  drift  to  the  right  is  evident  in  the  pronouncements  on 
the  Populist  movement  of  the  times.  Writing  on  “The  Kansas 
Situation,”  when  the  farmers’  unrest  was  becoming  militant,  he 
remarked: 

Such  an  unexpected  outbreak  as  this  of  the  last  two  or  three  years 
shows  at  least  that  it  is  not  only  in  the  cities,  w’here  the  foreign-born 
swarm,  that  demagogues  may  thrive  and  the  doctrine  of  revolution  be 
preached.32 

The  ravings  ol  the  Farmers’  movement”  he  regarded  as  no  more 
than  a  “vague  and  visionary  discontent,”  that  was  seeking  political 
cures  for  its  economic  ills.  1  he  hard  times  from  which  the  West 
was  suffering  were  the  result  of  economic  law.  It  was  not  the  cur¬ 
rency  or  excessive  railway  rates  that  were  the  cause.  The  vast 

M  “The  ^ssue  t*le  Campaign,”  Ibid.,  July  2,  1896. 

31  “The  Platform  of  Revolution,”  Ibid.,  July  16,  1896 

32  Ibid.,  January  19,  1893. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


165 


extension  of  railway  systems  had  brought  under  cultivation  too 
many  acres,  and  the  reduction  of  transportation  costs  would  serve 
only  to  bring  additional  acres  under  cultivation,  thereby  increasing 
competition  and  forcing  prices  still  lower.  -High  railway  rates 
were  the  surest  safeguard  against  further  extension  of  an  industry 
much  overdeveloped;  and  for  state  legislatures  to  attempt  to  fix 
railway  tariffs  by  law — to  attempt  to  control  economic  forces  by 
statutes — was  sheer  folly.  In  discussing  the  celebrated  Illinois 
railway  legislation  Godkin  spoke  in  defense  of  the  roads: 

The  locomotive  is  coming  in  contact  with  the  framework  of  our  insti¬ 
tutions.  In  this  country  of  simple  government,  the  most  powerful  central¬ 
izing  force  wffiich  civilization  has  yet  produced  has  within  the  next  score 
years,  yet  to  assume  its  relation  to  that  political  machinery  which  is  to 
control  and  regulate  it.  .  .  .  The  corporations  of  course  contested  the 
validity  of  the  law.  If  the  legislature  could  establish  one  rate  at  which 
they  should  do  the  wTork  of  transportation,  it  could  establish  another. 
They  were  fighting  for  their  lives  and  property;  it  was  against  taxation 
without  representation.  .  .  .  An  arbitrary  power  is  claimed  in  the  su¬ 
preme  legislative  body  to  decide  on  the  reasonable  rates  of  the  cost  of 
private  services.  Just  as  three  hundred  years  ago  the  price  of  bread  and 
labor  was  regulated  by  act  of  Parliament,  so  now  the  cost  of  transporta¬ 
tion  is  to  be  fixed  by  a  jury  of  twelve  men.  .  .  .  Thus  far,  therefore,  the 
results  of  the  Illinois  railroad  war  must  be  regarded  as  rather  portentous 
than  satisfactory.33 

The  “watered-stock  hallucination,”  that  had  taken  possession  of 
the  agrarian  mind  and  aroused  such  bitterness,  he  dismissed  with 
a  curious  comment  that  did  no  great  credit  to  his  intelligence. 

There  is  .  .  .  one  difficulty  in  the  way,  which  is  the  difficulty  common 
to  many  of  the  proposed  reforms  in  railroad  management — the  practice 
alleged  has  absolutely  no  existence  except  in  the  heated  brain  of  the 
agitators  who  have  imagined  it.  There  are  no  roads  in  the  United  States 
on  which  any  attempt  has  been  made  to  increase  the  freight  earnings  in 
proportion  to  the  watered  stock  or  debt.34 

The  passions  aroused  by  the  campaign  of ’96  swept  Godkin  from 
his  moorings  and  left  him  adrift.  He  quickly  convinced  himself 
that  the  real  issue  at  stake  was  the  moral  integrity  of  the  nation. 
As  he  studied  the  platforms  and  leaders  he  found  little  comfort 
in  either.  For  McKinley  he  had  the  contempt  of  the  intellectual 
for  a  purveyor  of  heavy  platitudes,  and  he  flayed  him  in  a  two- 

33  Ibid.,  April  10,  1873. 

34  “The  Watered  Stock  Hallucination,”  Ibid.,  October  9,  1873. 


166 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


column  leader  with  his  old  skill.36  But  for  Bryan,  the  “boy  orator 
of  the  Platte,”  his  dislike  passed  the  bounds  of  decency;  and  for 
the  Chicago  convention  that  put  him  in  nomination — “the  roaring 
mob”  with  its  “Populistic,  anarchistic  platform” — his  contempt 
outran  his  command  of  invective. 

No  such  collection  of  inflammatory  and  reckless  men  ever  put  themselves 
on  exhibition  in  a  national  convention.  Beside  them  the  Populists  are 
lamb-like,  and  the  socialists  sucking  doves.  The  country  has  watched 
their  mad  proceedings  with  disgust  and  shuddering,  only  impatient  for 
the  coming  of  November  to  stamp  out  them  and  their  incendiary  doc¬ 
trines.37 

To  what  lengths  his  overheated  brain  carried  him  in  those  political 
dogdays,  how  starkly  reactionary  he  had  become,  is  suggested  by 
his  comment  on  the  plank  in  the  Democratic  platform  attacking 
the  scandal  of  injunctions: 

This  blow  at  the  courts  shows  how  true  are  the  instincts  of  the  revolu¬ 
tionaries.  They  know  their  most  formidable  enemies.  Judicial  decisions 
have  again  and  again  drawn  the  fangs  of  confiscatory  and  revolutionary 
legislation,  and  the  courts  have  come  more  and  more  to  stand  as  the  great 
bulwarks  of  property  and  personal  rights.37 

Godkin’s  last  years  were  not  happy.  The  wave  of  imperialism 
that  swept  over  England  and  America,  with  its  Boer  War  and 
Spanish  War,  brought  him  acute  concern.  The  world  that  he 
knew  was  slipping  from  its  moorings,  and  he  was  fearful  of  the 
seas  into  which  it  was  plunging.  The  conquest  of  the  Philippines 
seemed  to  him  a  badge  of  national  degradation.  Writing  in  No¬ 
vember,  1899,  he  said: 

We  are  dragging  wearily  in  the  old  way,  killing  half  a  dozen  Filipinos 
every  week,  and  continually  “near  the  end.”  The  folly  of  ignorance  and 
rascality  we  are  displaying  in  the  attempt  to  conquer  and  have  “subjects” 
would  disgrace  a  trades  union.38 

As  he  watched  the  tedious  process  of  subjugation  he  inclined  to 
attribute  to  Kipling  a  large  share  of  the  current  imperialism.  “I 
think  most  of  the  current  jingoism  on  both  sides  of  the  water  is 
due  to  him,”  he  wrote  a  few  weeks  later.  “He  is  the  poet  of  the 
barrack-room  cads,”  a  “most  pernicious,  vulgar  person”;  and  his 

36  “Prosperity’s  Advance  Orator,”  Ibid.,  June  18,  1896. 

36  “The  Chicago  Platform,”  Ibid.,  July  16,  1896. 

37  “The  Platform  of  Revolution,”  Ibid.,  July  23,  1896. 

“Ogden,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  238-239. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


167 


“White  Man’s  Burden,”  cabled  to  America  and  printed  on  the 
front  pages  of  the  newspapers  as  a  message  to  imperialist  America, 
must  have  rubbed  across  Godkin’s  raw  nerves.  The  pious  cant 
of  Kipling’s  imperialism  was  a  bitter  cup  for  a  disillusioned  liberal. 
The  Jubilee  with  its  fulsome  laudation  of  “fat,  useless  royalty,” 
was  fittingly  commemorated  by  this  noisy  poet  of  imperialism, 
and  Godkin  turned  away  from  it  all  in  disgust. 

But  turn  where  he  might  he  found  no  comfort.  His  old  dreams 
of  a  free  and  enlightened  democracy  rising  in  America,  were  dead. 
Victorian  liberalism  had  been  laid  away  in  the  grave  of  John  Stuart 
Mill,  and  only  its  ghost  was  walking  in  these  latter  times.  Godkin’s 
last  days  were  bitter,  and  the  gloom  that  was  settling  upon  him 
crept  into  his  letters.  It  is  a  malady  common  amongst  liberals,  and 
how  deeply  it  had  struck  in  is  revealed  in  such  passages  as  these: 

I  am  not  sanguine  about  the  future  of  democracy.  I  think  we  shall  have 
a  long  period  of  decline  .  .  .  and  then  a  recrudescence  under  some  other 
form  of  society.39 

I  do  not  know  what  the  future  of  our  modern  civilization  is  to  be.  But 
I  stumble  where  I  firmly  trod.40 

Things  look  very  black.  I  think  that  while  money-making  will  long 
continue  on  a  great  scale,  the  government  will  shortly  undergo  great 
changes  which  will  be  presided  over  not  by  men  of  light  and  learning,  but 
by  capitalists  and  adroit  politicians.41 

I  came  here  fifty  years  ago  with  high  and  fond  ideals  about  America. 
.  .  .  They  are  now  all  shattered,  and  I  have  apparently  to  look  elsewhere 
to  keep  even  moderate  hopes  about  the  human  race  alive.42 

The  idealist  is  prone  to  be  exigent  in  his  demands  upon  civiliza¬ 
tion.  He  marks  out  a  straight  path  to  the  goal  of  his  hopes,  and 
takes  it  greatly  to  heart  when  society  chooses  to  follow  other  ways 
to  other  ends.  Godkin’s  mind  was  keenly  critical,  but  his  sympa¬ 
thies  were  narrow  and  his  prejudices  great.  It  is  well  to  be  a  friend 
to  civilization,  but  it  is  foolish  to  set  up  as  a  custodian;  for  civiliza¬ 
tion,  like  Topsy,  will  shift  for  itself.  A  just  and  liberal  government 
is  an  excellent  ideal,  but  it  is  one  for  which  few  amongst  the  mass 
of  men  greatly  care;  and  because  America  chose  to  follow  its  own 
nose,  because  it  would  not  become  like  the  America  of  his  dreams, 
Godkin  allowed  his  heart  to  fill  with  bitterness.  It  is  true  that  his 
recompense  for  long  years  of  labor  was  scanty;  the  Gilded  Age 

41  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  243. 

42  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  237. 


38  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  199. 
40  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  217. 


168 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


was  not  to  be  frightened  from  its  fleshpots  by  his  warnings.  But 
long  ago  it  was  said,  “Wisdom  crieth  in  the  streets  and  no  man 
regardeth  her,”  and  why  should  Godkin  have  become  discouraged 
with  civilization  because  certain  blackguard  years  clove  to  their 
blackguardry,  instead  of  mounting  to  the  somewhat  arid  heights 
he  pointed  out?  One  must  choose  at  the  last  between  tolerance 
and  pessimism,  and  Godkin  chose  pessimism. 

It  is  difficult  today  to  understand  his  great  influence  with  cul¬ 
tivated  readers  of  his  generation.  In  part  perhaps  it  was  due  to 
his  crisp  assurance.  He  put  things  so  plumply,  he  wrote  so  bril¬ 
liantly,  that  his  readers  were  persuaded  he  must  think  as  neatly. 
Yet  his  trenchant  prose  style  cannot  hide  a  certain  slightness  of 
matter.  His  later  comments  tended  to  become  ever  thinner  and 
shriller — not  criticism  at  all,  but  the  sharp  expression  of  aging 
prejudice.  When  he  talked  about  the  tariff  he  had  Mill  at  his 
elbow;  but  when  he  talked  about  the  agrarian  or  the  proletarian 
movements  he  was  little  more  than  a  blue-jay  scolding  at  a  world 
he  disliked.  Unlike  his  great  master  he  did  not  go  forward  to  meet 
new  times;  he  did  not  reinterpret  Victorian  liberalism  in  the  light 
of  the  lessons  taught  by  the  Industrial  Revolution;  but  by  standing 
still  he  did  liberalism  a  real  disservice. 

IV 

FICTION  CONSIDERS  THE  STATE  OF  THE  COUNTRY 

It  was  only  a  question  of  time  before  the  novel  would  throw  off 
the  inhibitions  of  the  genteel  and  turn  to  consider  the  state  of  the 
country.  A  changing  social  order  would  not  fail  of  reflection  in  the 
pages  of  fiction,  and  as  the  novelists  fell  to  scrutinizing  the  familiar 
scene,  comparing  the  reality  with  the  patriotic  professions,  it  was 
certain  that  the  workings  of  democracy  would  come  in  for  sharp 
criticism.  In  the  last  decades  of  the  century  the  problem  novel 
spread  swiftly,  expanding  the  field  of  its  inquiry,  and  seeking  to 
understand  the  new  ways.  Making  its  first  essays  in  the  familiar 
field  of  the  political,  it  soon  turned  to  consider  the  economic  prob¬ 
lems  arising  out  of  the  new  industrialism,  espousing  either  capital¬ 
ism  or  labor  as  the  social  sympathies  of  the  author  might  deter¬ 
mine.  The  class  passions  of  the  times  found  a  reflection  in  its 
pages,  and  in  consequence  the  sociological  novel  became  increas¬ 
ingly  a  repository  of  the  social  ideas  of  a  perplexed  and  troubled 
generation. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


169 


i 

THE  POLITICAL  NOVEL 

Of  the  early  political  novels  three  are  of  sufficient  interest  to 
reward  attention:  The  Gilded  Age  (1873),  Democracy  (1881),  and 
An  American  Politician  (1884).  The  first,' written  by  Mark  Twain 
in  collaboration  with  Charles  Dudley  Warner,  is  a  satire  of  Gilded 
Age  ways  with  particular  attention  to  the  political  corruption  of 
General  Grant’s  administration.  The  fictional  disguise  is  slight. 
The  actual  Washington  is  presented  vividly  and  familiar  figures 
— Ben  Butler,  Oakes  Ames,  President  Grant,  Secretary  Boutwell 
— move  through  the  scene.  The  central  figure,  Senator  Dillworthy, 
was  modeled  upon  Senator  Pomeroy  of  Kansas,  who  had  recently 
lost  a  reelection  through  an  unlucky  exposure  of  an  attempt  to 
bribe  the  Kansas  legislature.  The  heroine,  Laura  Hawkins,  is  a 
western  lobbyist  who  in  order  to  put  through  a  congressional  steal 
under  pretense  of  providing  an  industrial  school  for  the  freedmen, 
twists  Congressmen  about  her  fingers,  turns  adventuress  and  ends 
in  tragedy.  Out  of  the  West  comes  the  spirit  of  corruption  that 
the  respectable  East  is  unable  to  withstand,  until  the  itch  of  specu¬ 
lation  infects  the  whole  country.  It  is  Colonel  Sellers  who  embodies 
the  slackness  of  frontier  political  morals,  that  in  turn  vitiates  his 
political  principles.  The  genial  Colonel  is  quite  frankly  a  Green- 
backer. 

The  country  is  getting  along  very  well,  [he  said]  hut  our  public  men 
are  too  timid.  What  we  want  is  more  money.  I’ve  told  Boutwell  so.  Talk 
of  basing  the  currency  on  gold;  you  might  as  well  base  it  on  pork.  Gold  is 
only  one  product.  Base  it  on  everything!  You’ve  got  to  do  something 
for  the  West.  How  am  I  to  move  my  crops?  We  must  have  improvements. 
Grant’s  got  the  idea.  We  want  a  canal  from  the  James  River  to  the  Mis¬ 
sissippi.  Government  ought  to  build  it.43 

The  analysis  is  not  penetrating.  The  real  sources  of  political 
corruption — the  rapacious  railway  lobbyists  that  camped  in 
brigades  about  the  capitol  building — are  passed  over,  and  attention 
is  fastened  on  small  steals — the  Knobs  University  bill  and  the 
Columbus  River  Navigation  scheme — that  do  not  touch  the  real 
rascals  of  the  day.  The  implication  is  unmistakable  that  the 
source  of  corruption  is  the  Jacksonian  West  with  its  heritage  of  the 
spoils  spirit.  The  Federalistic  East  is  victimized  by  the  rapacities 

43  Vol.  II,  Chapter  13,  p.  128. 


170 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


of  mid-western  politicians  with  their  religious  cant,  their  talk  of 
the  rights  of  the  people  and  the  greatness  of  the  plain  democracy. 
Senator  Dillworthy  is  fairly  unctuous  in  his  oily  Christian  spirit, 
and  Brother  Balaam  is  his  fellow.  The  portraits,  one  suspects, 
need  not  be  taken  seriously  as  pictures  of  the  chief  apostles  of 
preemption  and  exploitation.  To  have  sketched  the  real  leaders  of 
the  great  barbecue  might  have  involved  too  many  unpleasantries. 

Democracy,  written  seven  years  later,  is  an  inferior  book  in  every 
way,  less  penetrating,  less  amusing,  less  creative.  To  essay  to  pene¬ 
trate  the  dark  places  of  political  jobbery  through  the  eyes  of  a 
society  woman,  too  high-bred  to  turn  lobbyist  and  inveigle  secrets 
out  of  ambitious  politicians,  is  sufficiently  absurd,  yet  not  un¬ 
characteristic  of  the  Henry  Adams  whose  home  was  a  distinguished 
salon  and  who  in  pottering  about  the  political  world  of  Washington 
deceived  himself  in  thinking  he  had  his  finger  on  the  web  of  in¬ 
trigue.  It  is  an  amazing  book  for  such  a  man  to  write.  The  attitude 
is  that  of  the  kid-gloved  reformer  who  goes  in  for  civil  service  re¬ 
form,  and  who  views  the  uncultivated  West  as  the  source  of  all 
political  corruption.  The  hero,  Senator  Silas  Ratcliffe  of  Peoria, 
Illinois,  like  Senator  Dillworthy,  is  a  past  master  in  political 
organization  who  covers  his  dishonesty  with  religious  cant.  The 
economic  sources  of  political  corruption  are  ignored,  and  the 
evil  is  traced  to  the  principle  of  democracy.  Whatever  political 
convictions  are  in  the  book  are  expressed  by  Representative  Gore, 
a  civil  service  reformer  from  Massachusetts,  and  quite  evidently 
Henry  Adams  himself;  and  the  conclusion  is  thus  set  forth: 

“Do  you  yourself  think  democracy  the  best  government,  and  universal 
suffrage  a  success?” 

Mr.  Gore  saw  himself  pinned  to  the  wall,  and  he  turned  at  bay  with  al¬ 
most  the  energy  of  despair: 

“These  are  matters  about  which  I  rarely  talk  in  society.  .  .  .  But 
since  you  ask  for  my  political  creed,  you  shall  have  it.  I  only  condition 
that  it  shall  be  for  you  alone,  never  to  be  repeated  or  quoted  as  mine.  I 
believe  in  democracy.  I  accept  it.  I  will  faithfully  serve  and  defend  it. 

I  believe  in  it  because  it  appears  to  me  the  inevitable  consequence  of  what 
has  gone  before  it.  Democracy  asserts  the  fact  that  the  masses  are  now 
raised  to  a  higher  intelligence  than  formerly.  All  our  civilization  aims  at 
this  mark.  We  want  to  do  what  we  can  to  help  it.  I  myself  want  to  see 
the  result.  I  grant  it  is  an  experiment,  but  it  is  the  only  direction  society 
can  take  that  is  worth  its  taking;  the  only  conception  of  its  duty  large 
enough  to  satisfy  its  instincts;  the  only  result  that  is  worth  an  effort  or  a 
risk.  Every  other  step  is  backward,  and  I  do  not  want  to  repeat  the  past. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM  171 

I  am  glad  to  see  society  grapple  with  issues  in  which  no  one  can  afford  to 
be  neutral.” 

And  supposing  your  experiment  fails,”  said  Mrs.  Lee;  “suppose  so¬ 
ciety  destroys  itself  with  universal  suffrage,  corruption,  and  communism.” 

...  I  have  faith;  not  perhaps  in  the  old  dogmas,  but  in  the  new  ones. 
.  .  .  faith  in  science;  faith  in  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  Let  us  be  true  to 
our  time,  Mrs.  Lee!  If  our  age  is  to  be  beaten,  let  us  die  in  the  Fanks.  If  it 
is  to  be  victorious,  let  us  be  first  to  lead  the  column.  Anyway,  let  us  not  be 
skulkers  or  grumblers.  There!  have  I  repeated  my  catechism  correctly? 
You  would  have  it!  Now  oblige  me  by  forgetting  it.  I  should  lose  my 
character  at  home  if  it  got  out.”44 

And  the  conclusion  of  the  matter  is  thus  summed  up: 

“I  want  to  go  to  Egypt,”  said  Madelaine,  still  smiling  faintly;  “democ¬ 
racy  has  shaken  my  nerves  to  pieces.  Oh,  what  rest  it  would  be  to  live  in 
the  Great  Pyramid  and  look  out  forever  at  the  polar  star!” 

Not  a  hint  of  the  Industrial  Revolution;  not  a  hint  of  the  sordid 
Whiggery  that  was  fouling  American  politics;  not  a  suggestion  of 
any  creative  social  philosophy  on  which  to  establish  an  adequate 
theory  of  democracy.  A  dreary  place  at  best,  with  no  faith  in  hu¬ 
man  nature  and  no  trust  in  democratic  machinery,  but  only  a 
gentlemanly  belief  that  an  antiquated  Federalism  may  somehow 
pull  this  venture  in  republicanism  out  of  the  bog  in  which  Jackso- 
nianism  had  mired  it.  No  wonder  Henry  Adams  would  not  set  his 
name  on  the  title-page,  but  left  it  an  orphan  to  make  its  own  way 
in  the  world.  In  his  life  of  John  Hay,  William  Roscoe  Thayer  has 
explained  the  situation  thus: 

The  Adamses,  the  Hays,  and  Clarence  King  formed  an  inner  circle, 
which  somebody  named  “The  Five  of  Hearts,”  and  out  of  this  came,  in 
1882,  a  novel  entitled  Democracy,  a  strikingly  clever  satire  on  Washington 
society.  Its  authorship  was  at  once  attributed  to  them,  but  one  after  an¬ 
other  denied  it.  If  it  was  a  joint  product  no  individual  could  monopolize 
the  credit;  and  as  it  seems  to  have  been  read  chapter  by  chapter  to  the 
group,  and  discussed  by  them  all,  it  might  be  said,  technically,  to  be  a 
composite.  Clarence  King  is  still  commonly  regarded  as  its  author;  and 
there  are  many  supporters  of  Hay;  but  I  believe  that  only  Mr.  Adams 
possessed  the  substance,  and  style,  and  the  gift  of  Voltairean  raillery  which 
distinguish  it.45 

Mr.  Thayer  is  generous  in  his  praise. 

An  American  Politician  is  even  less  consequential  as  a  political 
study  than  Democracy.  Marion  Crawford  was  a  professional  ro- 

**  Chapter  4,  p.  78.  46  Vol.  II,  pp.  58-59. 


172 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


mancer  and  in  this  naive  venture  into  a  field  little  known  to  him  he 
carried  his  complete  romantic  kit.  The  political  theme  is  tied  about 
with  so  many  love  strands  as  almost  to  strangle  it.  The  hero,  John 
Harrington,  we  are  assured  is  a  very  remarkable  man,  a  Bostonian 
with  a  Mayflower  teapot  in  his  family  treasures,  an  idealist  of 
primitive  Puritan  intensity.  But  we  must  take  him  upon  hearsay. 
Nothing  that  he  does  or  says  suggests  his  greatness.  Politically  the 
book  is  reduced  to  a  little  glimpse  of  the  methods  of  selecting  a 
United  States  senator — an  Irish  ward  boss  with  twenty  votes  in  his 
belt,  a  gentlemanly  railway  attorney  who  handles  offal  skillfully 
with  a  handkerchief  at  his  nose — set  in  between  two  set  speeches  by 
the  hero.  The  rest  is  Newport  and  the  Back  Bay,  not  quite  stupid 
yet  with  no  distinction.  The  romancer  does  not  move  easily  in  an 
unfamiliar  field,  and  he  sends  his  hero  forth  to  battle  for  righteous¬ 
ness  with  small  intellectual  equipment.  His  speeches  are  heavily 
oratorical  and  his  political  philosophy  is  naive;  it  is  pretty  much 
George  William  Curtis,  the  sufficiency  of  civil  service  reform  and 
the  virtues  of  non-partisanship. 

The  unreality  of  the  book  is  furthered  by  a  conception  worthy  of 
Poe — a  mysterious  council  of  three  that  meets  in  London  and 
directs  political  movements  in  America.  We  are  dimly  aware  that 
the  council  is  both  ancient  and  honorable;  that  it  goes  back  his¬ 
torically  to  post-Revolutionary  days  and  is  self-perpetuating;  and 
its  uncanny  power  has  resulted  from  supreme  intelligence  supple¬ 
mented  by  exact  information  gathered  during  many  years.  In  its 
secret  archives  every  public  man  in  America  is  tagged  and  docketed; 
his  political  and  financial  affiliations  are  set  down  in  detail;  and  on 
the  basis  of  this  knowledge  the  cryptic  three  send  forth  instructions 
that  are  faithfully  carried  out.  1  he  danger  to  America  lies  in  sec¬ 
tionalism— North,  South,  and  West  struggling  for  supremacy  in 
the  national  councils;  and  upon  the  three  rests  the  self-imposed 
responsibility  of  saving  America  from  itself.  The  idea  is  sufficiently 
absurd,  as  the  book  is  absurd.  Crawford  was  a  cosmopolitan  who 
knew  little  about  American  political  conditions,  and  the  crisis  of  the 
novel  is  the  Hayes-Tilden  impasse  of  1876.  The  influence  of  the 
novel,  one  may  safely  assume,  was  negligible.* 


*  1,1  hls  original  scheme  Professor  Parrington  included  Tourgee’s  A  Fool’s  Errand. 
but  the  text  shows  that  he  decided  against  its  inclusion. — Publisher. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


173 


2 

THE  ECONOMIC  NOVEL 

The  theme  of  these  earlier  novels  was  politics  as  revealed  by  the 
Gilded  Age  ;  on  the  other  hand  The  Bread-winners  was  one  of  the 
early  economic  novels.  Like  Democracy  it  was  an  outcome  of  the 
discussions  of  the  vivacious  trio,  John  Hay,  Clarence  King,  and 
Henry  Adams.  Written  in  1882  by  Hay,  it  was  published  anony¬ 
mously  in  the  Century  Magazine  from  August,  1883,  to  January, 
1884.  Hay  never  publicly  acknowledged  the  authorship,  and  it  was 
not  until  the  edition  of  1915  appeared  with  an  introductory  note 
by  his  son,  that  his  name  appeared  on  the  title-page.  It  achieved  a 
notable  success — far  beyond  that  of  Democracy;  was  warmly 
praised  and  sharply  criticized;  was  replied  to  in  other  novels;  all  of 
which  goes  to  show  that  it  fanned  the  coals  that  were  smoldering 
in  the  industrial  life  of  the  day,  threatening  a  general  conflagration. 
It  was  the  first  recognition  on  the  part  of  literature  that  a  class 
struggle  impended  in  America— a  first  girding  of  the  loins  of  polite 
letters  to  put  down  the  menace  that  looked  out  from  the  under¬ 
world  of  the  proletariat;  and  as  such  it  assumes  importance  as  an 
historical  document  quite  beyond  its  significance  as  a  work  of  art. 

The  motive  of  The  Bread-winners  is  the  defense  of  property 
against  the  “dangerous  classes”;  its  immediate  theme  is  a  satire  of 
labor  unions.  In  an  introductory  note  to  the  later  edition,  Clarence 
Leonard  Hay  explicitly  denies  this.  “  The  Bread-winners ,”  he  says, 
“is  not  directed  against  organized  labor.  It  is  rather  a  protest 
against  the  disorganization  and  demoralization  of  labor  by  un¬ 
scrupulous  leaders  and  politicians  who,  in  the  guise  of  helping  the 
workingman,  use  his  earnings  to  enrich  themselves.”  He  then 
states  the  theme  thus: 

It  is  a  defense  of  the  right  of  an  individual  to  hold  property,  and  a 
plea  for  the  better  protection  of  that  property  by  law  and  order.  Civiliza¬ 
tion  rests  upon  law,  order,  and  obedience.  The  agitator  who  preaches 
that  obedience  to  lawful  authority  is  a  sin,  and  patriotism  an  illusion,  is 
more  dangerous  to  society  than  the  thief  who  breaks  in  at  night  and  robs 
the  householder. 

The  editor  thinks  well  of  the  American  workingmen.  At  heart 
they  are  sound;  their  motives  are  honest;  but  their  ignorance  of 
fundamental  economic  principles  too  easily  suffers  them  to  fall 
victim  to  unscrupulous  demagogues  whose  only  object  is  their 


174 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


exploitation.  To  prevent  such  “disorganization  and  demoralization 
of  labor,”  which  can  bring  only  suffering  and  failure  upon  men  ill 
prepared  to  endure  them,  is  therefore  the  patriotic  duty  of  the 
educated  classes.  The  proletariat  is  groping  blindly  for  leadership; 
it  is  stirring  uneasily;  if  the  educated  classes  do  not  offer  an  en¬ 
lightened  leadership,  the  laborer  will  follow  low  cunning  to  immoral 
ends  and  blind  leaders  of  the  blind  will  bring  irretrievable  disaster 
upon  civilization.  Selfish  appeal  will  kindle  envy  and  hate;  the 
rich  and  prosperous  will  go  down  before  brute  force;  the  rights  of 
property  will  be  destroyed;  law,  order,  and  obedience  will  give 
place  to  anarchy. 

Such,  briefly  developed,  is  Clarence  Hay’s  exposition  of  The 
Bread-winners;  and  the  exposition  seems  to  suggest  the  social  views 
of  John  Hay.  He  probably  had  no  antipathy  to  labor  unions  which 
are  guided  in  their  policy  by  “sound  economic  principles”  and 
right  “morality” — as  the  capitalist  understands  such  things.  But 
labor  unions  which  follow  their  own  leaders,  which  persist  in  think¬ 
ing  out  a  proletarian  economy,  which  are  bent  on  substituting  a 
social  morality  for  a  property  morality,  which  refuse  to  be  led  by 
the  “educated  classes,”  he  was  bitterly  hostile  to.  It  is  the  unrest 
furthered  by  rebellious  labor  unions  that  he  fears,  and  it  is  this 
that  gives  point  and  animus  to  his  satire.  That  The  Bread-winners 
was  conceived  in  a  spirit  of  beneficent  paternalism  towards  the 
proletariat,  the  present-day  reader  will  have  difficulty  in  discover¬ 
ing.  It  is  too  frank  in  defense  of  vested  interests,  it  looks  with  too 
stern  a  disfavor  upon  all  labor  leaders  who  refuse  to  accept  the 
finality  of  the  present  industrial  order,  it  exudes  too  strong  an 
odor  of  property-morality,  to  deceive  an  intelligent  reader.  Read 
today  it  is  clearly  a  partisan  defense  of  economic  individualism,  an 
attack  upon  the  rising  labor  movement,  a  grotesque  satire  smeared 
with  an  unctuous  morality— and  because  of  this,  a  perfect  expres¬ 
sion  of  the  spirit  of  upper-class  America  in  those  uneasy  eighties 
with  their  strikes  and  lockouts  and  Haymarket  riots. 

The  plot  of  the  book  is  slight— it  is  the  story  of  the  oily  machina¬ 
tions  of  Ananias  Offitt,  a  professional  agitator  who  lives  off  simple 
honest  workmen  whom  he  seduces,  organizes  a  secret  Brotherhood 
of  the  Breadwinners,  urges  on  riot  and  robbery  at  the  time  of  a 
great  strike,  is  checkmated  by  the  hero — a  cultivated  and  elegant 
clubman  by  the  name  of  Captain  Arthur  Famham— betrays  his 
tool,  and  in  the  end  is  murdered  by  him.  Fortunately  for  the  wel- 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


175 


fare  of  property  interests  there  are  “honest”  workmen,  men  like 
Leopold  Grosshammer,  who  rally  to  the  support  of  law  and  order 
and  eventually  break  the  strike.  The  love-story  is  provided  with 
two  heroines,  and  the  contrast  between  them  emphasizes  the  class 
line  which  property  draws.  The  upper-class  heroine  is  as  correct 
and  colorless  as  Cooper’s  Eve  Effingham:  the  lower-class  heroine 
is  as  vulgarly  handsome  and  as  brazen  as  “such  people”  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  be.  A  high-school  education  has  spoilt  her  for  the  factory 
or  domestic  service,  filling  her  empty  head  with  foolish  ambitions, 
but  it  could  not  make  a  lady  of  her. 

Hay  was  in  Cleveland  at  the  time  of  the  great  strike  in  1877,  and 
he  wTas  profoundly  disturbed  by  the  experience.  Writing  to  his 
father-in-law,  he  said : 

The  prospects  of  labor  and  capital  both  seem  gloomy  enough.  The  very 
devil  seems  to  have  entered  into  the  lower  classes  of  workingmen,  and 
there  are  plenty  of  scoundrels  to  encourage  them  to  all  lengths.  ...  I 
am  thankful  you  did  not  see  and  hear  what  took  place  during  the  strikes. 
You  were  saved  a  very  painful  experience  of  human  folly  and  weakness, 
as  well  as  crime.46 

The  crying  evils  of  a  buccaneer  industrialism  which  lay  behind  the 
strikes,  Hay  ignored  completely.  To  provide  his  idyllic  background 
of  contented  labor  before  it  is  seduced  by  demagogues,  he  goes  back 
to  a  decadent  domestic  economy.  His  “honest  and  contented 
workman”  is  a  carpenter  who  works  for  another  carpenter — not  a 
factory-hand  tending  a  machine;  and  when  the  demagogue  comes 
with  his  specious  appeal  he  is  triumphantly  refuted. 

“What  are  we,  anyhow?”  continued  the  greasy  apostle  of  labor.  “We 
are  slaves;  we  are  Roossian  scurfs.  We  work  as  many  hours  as  our  owners 
like;  we  take  what  pay  they  choose  to  give  us;  we  ask  their  permission 
to  live  and  breathe.” 

“Oh,  that’s  a  lie,”  Sleeny  interrupted,  with  unbroken  calmness.  “Old 
Saul  Matchin  and  me  come  to  an  agreement  about  time  and  pay,  and  both 
of  us  was  suited.  Ef  he’s  got  his  heel  onto  me,  I  don  t  feel  it. 

John  Hay  was  convinced  that  an  “educated  leadership”  alone 
could  save  American  democracy.  But  unfortunately — despite  his 
great  reputation  in  diplomacy  and  statesmanship — his  own  educa¬ 
tion  seems  to  have  been  faulty.  He  had  lately  risen  into  the  ex¬ 
ploiting  class,  and  he  accepted  the  ready-made  opinions  of  that 

«  William  Roscoe  Thayer,  Life  and  Letters  of  John  Hay,  Vol.  II,  pp.  5-6. 

47  Chapter  V 


176 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


class.  His  biographer  has  admirably  stated  his  position  during  the 
days  of  the  strike  riots  when  he  was  clarifying  his  views: 

Those  riots  of  1877  burnt  deep  into  Colonel  Hay’s  heart.  Like  the  rest 
of  the  world,  he  had  theorized  on  the  likelihood  of  war  between  Capital 
and  Labor;  but  he  had  reassured  himself  by  the  comfortable  assumption 
that  under  American  conditions — equal  opportunity  for  all,  high  wages, 
equal  laws,  and  the  ballot-box — -no  angry  laboring  class  could  grow  up. 
The  riots  blew  such  vaporing  away:  for  they  proved  that  the  angry  class 
already  existed,  that  the  ballot-box  instead  of  weakening  strengthened  it, 
and  that  not  only  the  politicians  of  both  parties  but  also  the  constituted 
authorities  would  avoid,  as  long  as  possible,  grappling  with  it. 

The  event  was  too  large  to  be  dismissed  as  an  outburst  of  temper: 
it  must  be  accepted  as  a  symptom,  a  portent.  Did  it  mean  that  a  cancer 
had  attacked  the  body  politic  and  would  spread  to  the  vital  organs?  Was 
Democracy  a  failure, — Democracy — for  more  than  a  century  the  dream 
of  the  down-trodden,  the  ideal  of  those  who  loved  mankind  and  believed 
in  its  perfectibility,  the  Utopia  which  good  men  predicted  should  somehow 
turn  out  to  be  a  reality?  Hay  had  sung  his  paean  to  liberty;  Hay  had 
throbbed  at  the  efforts  of  patriots  in  Spain  and  in  France  to  overthrow 
their  despots;  he  had  even  exulted  over  the  signs  of  democratization  in 
England.  Had  he  been  the  victim  of  mirage?  Was  Democracy  not  the 
final  goal  of  human  society,  but  only  a  half-way  stage  between  the  despot¬ 
ism  of  Autocracy  and  the  despotism  of  Socialism? 

These  questions  he  could  not  evade.  .  .  .  But  he  held,  as  did  many 
of  his  contemporaries,  that  the  assaults  on  Property  were  inspired  by  dema¬ 
gogues  who  used  as  their  tools  the  loafers,  the  criminals,  the  vicious, — 
Society’s  dregs  who  have  been  ready  at  all  times  to  rise  against  laws  and 
government.  That  you  have  property  is  proof  of  industry  and  foresight 
on  your  part  or  your  father’s;  that  you  have  nothing,  is  a  judgment'on 
your  laziness  and  vices,  or  on  your  improvidence.  The  world  is  a  moral 
world;  which  it  would  not  be  if  virtue  and  vice  received  the  same  rewards.48 


John  Hay,  it  must  be  recalled,  had  enjoyed  a  college  education 
through  the  aid  of  relatives,  he  had  been  taken  under  the  wing  of 
Lincoln  and  become  his  private  secretary,  he  had  been  thrust  for¬ 
ward  by  influential  politicians,  and  finally  he  had  married  wealth _ 

were  these  things  proofs  of  virtue  in  a  moral  world  that  rewards 
foresight  and  punishes  improvidence?  Or  were  they  rather  the 
marks  of  a  skillful  climber?  John  Hay  was  a  charming  and  culti¬ 
vated  gentleman,  but  he  was  also  a  child  of  the  Gilded  Age,  with 
the  materialisms  of  his  generation  in  his  blood.  The  young  man 
had  been  an  Abolitionist  and  a  political  radical;  the  old  man  was 
a  McKinley  conservative  whose  chief  claim  to  reputation  lay  in 

48  Thayer,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I.  pp.  6-7.  „ 


177 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 

the  “open-door”  policy  in  China.  The  beginnings  of  this  shift 
to  conservatism  seem  to  have  coincided  with  his  marriage  to  Miss 
Stone,  daughter  of  a  Cleveland  capitalist  whose  interests  were 
threatened  by  the  great  strike.  He  was  temperamentally  one  of 
John  Adams’s  “natural  aristocrats,”  and  having  gained  entree  into 
aristocratic  circles  he  took  the  coloring  of  his  new  environment. 
A  son  of  the  frontier,  he  became  a  man  of  the  world.  Prosperity 
was  necessary  to  him. 

Professing  a  deep  attachment  to  democratic  institutions  and 
hatred  of  all  monarchical  principles — in  Spain  and  France — John 
Hay  ceased  to  be  a  Lincoln  democrat,  and  took  his  place  amongst 
the  ruling  class,  accepting  the  principles  of  the  rising  plutocracy. 
The  Bread-zvinners  is  a  dramatization  of  the  Federalistic  principle 
that  government  exists  for  the  protection  of  property.  “Remem¬ 
bering  the  date  when  The  Bread-zvinners  was  written,”  says  his 
biographer,  “we  must  regard  it  as  the  first  important  polemic  in 
American  fiction  in  defense  of  Property.”  49  John  Hay  had  become 
a  thoroughgoing  Hamiltonian.  In  his  younger  days  his  sympathies 
had  gone  out  to  radical  republicans  everywhere,  and  he  watched 
the  rising  tide  of  liberalism  with  great  satisfaction.  In  his  first 
visits  to  Europe  he  followed  closely  the  liberal  movements.  He 
was  a  warm  admirer  of  Castelar,  eulogizing  him  as  one  of  the  heroic 
figures  of  modern  times.  In  a  lecture  in  1869  on  “The  Progress  of 
Democracy  in  Europe”  he  spoke  with  the  zeal  of  an  advanced 
liberal.  But  soon  thereafter  the  ardor  of  his  zeal  lessened.  On 
later  trips  to  Europe  he  did  not  display  a  like  sympathy  with  the 
program  of  the  Social  Democrats.  As  economic  unrest  crept  into 
politics,  as  strikes  and  boycotts  began  to  disturb  his  father-in-law’s 
business,  he  discovered  less  sympathy  for  revolutionary  move¬ 
ments.  Political  revolutions  sponsored  by  respectable  middle-class 
leaders,  were  one  thing;  economic  revolutions  sponsored  by  the 
proletariat  were  quite  another  thing.  A  democracy  that  breeds 
more  democracy  is  clearly  dangerous.  So  much  as  has  already 
been  accomplished  is  excellent,  of  course;  but  nothing  further  must 
be  attempted. 

There  is  sound  strategy  in  offensive  epithets.  And  so,  taking 
counsel  of  fear,  he  applied  to  the  current  economic  unrest  the  words 
most  offensive  to  polite  American  ears,  and  called  it  socialism, 
anarchism.  Without  pausing  to  weigh  the  demands  of  the  farmer 

49  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  15. 


178 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


and  the  workingman,  with  no  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  the 
great  proletarian  movement  then  going  forward  in  Europe,  he 
appealed  in  defense  of  property  to  the  specter  of  economic  leveling 
before  which  every  good  American  of  the  eighties  recoiled  in  hor¬ 
ror.  As  early  as  1869,  speaking  of  Castelar,  he  said:  “He  has  too 
much  sense  and  integrity  to  follow  the  lead  of  the  Socialist  fa¬ 
natics.”50  Commenting  on  the  unsettled  state  of  things  in  Paris  in 
1883,  he  wrote:  “The  laborers  have  had  the  mischief  put  into 
their  heads  by  trade-unions.”61  As  he  contemplated  the  agrarian 
unrest  of  the  seventies  and  later,  he  discovered  in  Greenbackism 
and  Populism  only  another  form  of  this  hateful  socialism.  It  was 
the  work  of  agitators  who  were  plain  rascals. 

He  was  greatly  disturbed  in  1875  at  the  state  of  politics,  “with 
half  the  Republicans  and  all  the  Democrats  inflationists  at  heart, 
and  carrying  on  a  campaign  on  the  bald  issue  whether  the  nation 
shall  be  a  liar  and  a  thief  or  not.”52  And  so  late  as  1900  he  exclaimed 
petulantly:  “This  last  month  of  Bryan,  roaring  out  his  desperate 
appeals  to  hate  and  envy,  is  having  its  effect  on  the  dangerous 
classes.  Nothing  so  monstrous  has  as  yet  been  seen  in  our  his¬ 
tory.”53  Unhappily  even  in  free  America  with  its  equal  opportunity, 
and  equal  laws,  there  had  come  to  be  “dangerous  classes” — rather 
a  good  many  of  them,  taking  the  populistic  farmers  and  discon¬ 
tented  wage-earners  into  the  account — -so  many,  indeed,  that  John 
Hay  grew  gloomy  over  the  outlook.  And  the  outlook  was  all  the 
gloomier  because  of  our  form  of  government;  for  is  not  the  ultimate 
test  of  our  democratic  institutions  the  test  of  whether  they  are 
adequate  to  protect  the  property  and  “civilization”  of  the  few 
against  the  “hate  and  envy”  of  the  discontented  many? 

lhat  The  Bread-winners  was  a  dishonest  book  Hay  certainly 
could  not  have  been  brought  to  believe;  nevertheless  a  Tory  who 
covers  his  Tory  purpose  with  a  mantle  of  democracy  can  scarcely 
be  reckoned  intellectually  sincere.  The  men  of  the  seventies  and 
eighties— cultivated  and  intelligent  gentlemen  like  Godkin  and 
Aldrich  and  Hay — were  little  more  than  demagogues  in  their  fus¬ 
tian  attacks  on  agrarian  Greenbackers  and  militant  labor  unions; 
they  feared  and  hated  them  too  much  to  understand  them,  and 
they  took  advantage  of  their  social  position  to  cry  them  down. 

I  he  educated  leadership  of  the  Gilded  Age  was  a  somewhat 


50  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  321. 
61  Ibid.,  p.  414. 


62  Ibid.,  p.  426. 

63  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  256. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


179 


sorry  thing;  it  was  ethically  bankrupt  while  appealing  to  high  moral 
standards.  The  best  of  such  leaders  were  second-rate  men— medio¬ 
cre  minds  cramped  by  a  selfish  environment,  imbued  with  no  more 
than  a  property-consciousness.  Of  such  a  world  John  Hay  in  his 
Bread-winners  was  a  distinguished  spokesman  and  representative.* 


3 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  THE  SOCIOLOGICAL  NOVEL 

It  was  in  the  nineties  that  the  sociological  novel  expanded  into  a 
great  movement  that  in  the  next  decade  and  a  half  was  to  engulf 
pretty  much  all  American  fiction  and  bring  it  into  service  to  the 
social  conscience.  Such  a  development  was  in  the  nature  of  things. 
The  artist  would  not  sit  forever  in  his  ivory  tower,  content  to  carve 
his  statuettes  while  the  country  without  was  turmoiled  with  rev¬ 
olution.  Sooner  or  later  he  would  venture  forth  and  once  he  had 
been  caught  up  in  the  swirl  his  art  would  take  new  forms  and  serve 
other  purposes  than  the  traditional  genteel.  Realism  was  in  the 
air,  the  realism  of  Zola  and  the  Russians,  and  from  such  a  realism 
would  come  in  America  a  more  critical  attitude  towards  the  social 
revolution  at  work  in  the  land. 

It  was  the  city  that  played  havoc  with  our  older  fictional  meth¬ 
ods,  as  it  played  havoc  with  our  traditional  social  philosophy. 
America  was  late  in  discovering  the  import  of  the  huge  Babbitt 
warrens  it  had  been  building  with  such  fierce  energy;  but  slowly  the 
realities  of  the  economic  city  rose  to  challenge  the  respectability  of 
the  romantic  city.  It  was  the  discovery  of  this  new  lair  of  business 
that  created  the  school  of  sociological  fiction.  1  he  older  city  of 
literature  had  been  a  polite  world  wherein  ladies  and  gentlemen 
drank  tea  and  made  love  and  talked  proper  scandal — a  pleasant 
background  of  clubs  and  drawing-rooms,  against  which  moved 
well-dressed  figures.  It  was  an  echo  of  I  hackeray — the  world  of 
the  West  End  and  Beacon  Street  and  Fifth  Avenue,  too  well-bred 
and  prosperous  to  recognize  slums  or  stockyards  or  stock-gambling. 
But  with  the  nineties  the  old  complacency  was  disturbed.  A  note 
of  unrest  crept  into  the  current  fiction.  As  the  proteges  of  Mr. 
Howells  looked  out  upon  their  world  in  search  of  reality,  they 
discovered  that  polite  society  was  being  undermined.  Too  many 

*  In  his  plan  Professor  Parrington  included  here  H.  F.  Keenan’s  The  Money 
Makers,  but  apparently  he  decided  against  its  inclusion. — Publisher. 


180 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


social  climbers  were  thrusting  themselves  forward;  too  much  vul¬ 
garity  was  displayed  by  the  new-rich.  The  social  primacy  of  the 
old  families  was  being  challenged  by  western  pork-packers.  Here 
was  a  rich  field  to  harvest.  Le  document  humain  was  the  latest  cry 
of  realism,  and  so  under  the  inspiration  of  M.  Paul  Bourget  a  new 
crop  of  realism  came  to  fruit — clever  studies  in  feminine  psychol¬ 
ogy — the  last  word  in  contemporary  reality.  The  social  climber 
was  analyzed  mercilessly,  her  shallow  and  silly  ambitions  revealed 
to  the  least  petty  maneuver;  her  blighting  influence  upon  an 
idealistic  husband  or  her  stimulus  to  a  money-grabbing  mate,  is 
traced  shrewdly.  Such  are  Boyesen’s  Mammon  of  Unrighteousness, 
Robert  Grant’s  Unleavened  Bread,  and  Edith  Wharton’s  House  of 
Mirth — studies  that  were  symptomatic  of  a  generation  disturbed  by 
the  consciousness  of  a  vulgar  plutocracy  rising  in  its  midst,  and  yet 
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  disease. 

Nevertheless  their  vogue  was  brief.  As  economic  unrest  rose 
more  menacingly  upon  the  horizon  of  the  new  century,  realism 
quickly  tired  of  its  Kate  Van  Schaaks  and  Selma  Whites  and  Lily 
Barts,  and  turned  away  to  prospect  for  a  richer  vein.  Psychology 
was  losing  its  fascination  and  social  analysis  was  supplying  a  new 
inspiration;  M.  Bourget  was  yielding  authority  to  Emile  Zola.  Even 
so  whole-hearted  a  romantic  as  Mary  Johnston  was  to  turn  from 
tales  like  To  Have  and  to  Hold  to  write  Id  agar,  a  novel  of  suffrage 
propaganda.  There  was  to  be  not  less  realism  but  more.  The 
change  may  be  summarized  in  the  word  background.  The  old 
individualism  had  unconsciously  insulated  its  hero  from  economic 
contacts;  he  moved  in  a  polite  environment  detached  from  the 
larger  play  of  social  forces.  An  individualism  so  wanting  in  sociolog¬ 
ical  verity  could  make  scant  appeal  to  the  new  spirit  of  sociology. 

I  hat  old  world  is  dead.  With  the  rise  of  the  philosophy  of  deter¬ 
minism  came  another  mood.  To  the  realism  of  environment  that 
conceived  of  the  individual  as  a  pawn  on  the  chessboard  of  society, 
M.  Zola  had  given  the  name  naturalism.  It  was  realism  wedded  to 
a  deterministic  sociology — the  first  reaction  of  a  generation  awaken¬ 
ing  to  the  subjugating  power  of  the  mass,  and  bent  on  studying  the 
resultant  phenomena  in  the  clear  light  of  science.  The  change  was 
no  less  than  revolutionary.  1  he  new  school  thought  in  terms  of 
group  and  class  and  movement,  rather  than  in  terms  of  individuals 
each  nursing  his  petty  hopes  and  fears.  The  individual  counts  for  so 
little  in  the  enveloping  stream  of  social  tendency.  Let  us  have  no 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


181 


more  shoddy  heroes,  foolish  little  egoisms  in  an  unreal  world;  but 
figures  of  men  and  women,  encompassed  by  the  great  stream,  car¬ 
ried  along  on  a  resistless  current.  If  they  prove  to  be  little  better 
than  puppets  the  novelist  is  not  to  blame,  but  society  that  reduces 
them  to  impotency.  So  the  emerging  school  abandoned  Howells 
and  James  and  followed  Frank  Norris  into  the  camp  of  the  natu¬ 
ralists.  Their  work  might  be  bad  art — as  the  critics  love  to  reiterate 
—but  it  was  the  honest  voice  of  a  generation  bewildered  and  adrift. 

The  discovery  of  environment  led  imperceptibly  to  another  dis¬ 
covery — the  economic  basis  of  society;  and  this  in  turn  led  to  the 
rejection  of  the  polite  city  of  older  literature.  Once  the  eyes  of  the 
novelist  opened  to  the  significance  of  the  economic,  the  world  of 
the  spenders  became  less  significant  than  the  world  of  the  makers, 
the  drones  became  less  interesting  than  the  workers.  If  a  novel 
were  to  be  true  to  American  life,  it  must  adjust  its  perspectives  to 
the  facts  of  the  great  American  game  of  money-chasing;  it  must 
shift  its  habitat  from  Fifth  Avenue  to  Wall  Street,  from  the  club 
to  the  factory.  So  the  business  man  entered  the  portals  of  fiction, 
no  longer  the  stock  figure  in  broadcloth  and  top-hat  who  discarded 
business  with  his  dirty  collar  in  order  to  shift  into  respectability; 
but  bringing  with  him  his  talk  of  deals  and  squeeze-outs,  playing 
the  great  game  of  exploitation  at  his  mahogany  desk — the  central, 
dominating  figure  in  a  capitalistic  world.  He  was  subjected  to 
acute  analysis — his  philosophy,  his  ethics,  the  machine  of  indus¬ 
trialism  he  was  creating,  the  intricate  system  of  exploitation  that 
he  had  elaborated,  the  jungle  city  that  was  his  lair  where  he 
fought  his  battles.  The  more  acutely  he  was  analyzed  the  clearer  it 
became  that  here  was  a  figure  greater  than  kings  or  presidents — a 
figure  that  had  taken  our  traditional  American  life  in  his  hands  and 
was  reshaping  it  to  his  ends;  and  that  if  realism  were  to  be  true  to  its 
ideal  it  must  paint  him  as  he  was  without  detraction  and  without 
glorification.  So  of  necessity  the  younger  novelists  turned  from 
polite  society  to  economics,  and  fell  to  dramatizing  the  life  of  the 
city  jungle  where  business  men  fought  their  fierce  battles. 

The  forerunner  of  the  new  school  was  a  Norwegian-American, 
Hjalmar  Hjorth  Boyesen.  An  essayist  and  philologist,  for  a  number 
of  years  professor  of  German  at  Columbia  University,  Boyesen 
began  publishing  as  early  as  1874,  and  thereafter  contributed  freely 
to  the  several  fields  of  the  essay,  poetry,  and  fiction;  but  it  was  not 
until  1891  that  he  opened  the  new  vein  of  realism  which  he  worked 


182 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


industriously  the  remaining  four  years  of  his  life,  the  life  brought  to 
a  premature  close  in  1895.  Three  novels  belong  to  this  last  phase  of 
his  work:  The  Mammon  of  Unrighteousness  (1891),  The  Golden  Calf 
(1892),  and  The  Social  Strugglers  (1893).  The  books  made  consider¬ 
able  stir  upon  their  publication,  for  they  were  the  nearest  approach 
to  the  Tolstoian  type  of  realism  which  till  then  had  appeared  in 
America.  They  contain  in  germ  many  of  the  ideas  which  the  later 
city  realists  were  to  amplify  and  develop;  but  these  ideas  were  still 
entangled  in  the  mesh  of  the  current  psychological  realism  and  their 
sociological  bearings  obscured.  In  consequence  they  largely  failed 
of  their  purpose,  and  within  a  decade  they  had  fallen  into  oblivion. 
They  are  of  interest  today  chiefly  as  historical  documents  of  the 
early  nineties. 

In  the  preface  to  The  Mammon  of  Unrighteousness  Boyesen  sets 
forth  his  purpose  thus: 

My  one  endeavor  in  this  book  has  been  to  depict  persons  and  conditions 
which  are  profoundly  and  typically  American.  I  have  disregarded  all  ro¬ 
mantic  traditions,  and  simply  asked  myself  in  every  instance,  not  whether 
it  was  amusing  but  whether  it  was  true  to  the  logic  of  reality — true  in 
color  and  tone  to  the  American  sky,  the  American  soil,  the  American  char¬ 
acter. 

This,  very  evidently,  is  the  realism  of  milieu — an  endeavor  to 
catch  the  reality  of  atmosphere;  and  as  such  it  is  of  no  great  sig¬ 
nificance.  In  his  choice  of  “types,”  moreover,  he  reflected  the  cur¬ 
rent  taste.  The  crude  self-made  millionaire  who  dimly  conscious 
of  failure  founds  a  university;  the  young  idealist  who  fails  because 
he  is  conscientious  and  the  young  realist  who  succeeds  because  he 
has  no  scruples  against  playing  the  game;  and  the  aristocratic 
climber  who  marries  to  further  her  social  ambitions — these  are  the 
stock  figures  of  the  realism  that  was  to  culminate  in  Robert  Grant’s 
Unleavened  Bread ,  nine  years  later.  But  in  the  delineation  of  the 
character  of  Horace  Larkin — the  hero  of  a  book  that  does  not 
realize  its  promise — the  note  of  the  new  realism  is  heard  distinctly 
for  the  first  time.  The  business  man  frankly  breaks  with  the  old 
ethics  and  erects  a  new  ethics  in  conformity  with  his  ambition;  and 
it  is  the  elaboration  of  the  ethics  of  the  Will  to  Power  that  justifies 
one  in  regarding  The  Mammon  of  Unrighteousness  as  a  first  study 
in  the  new  city  realism. 

Horace  Larkin,  like  Herrick  s  Van  Harrington,  is  a  Nietzschean 
who  learned  his  ethics  not  from  the  German  philosopher,  but  from 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 


183 


the  world  of  cut-throat  business.  It  is  the  flower  of  the  competitive 
system.  The  old  pretense  that  business  is  an  uplifting  and  civiliz¬ 
ing  agency — that  trade  breaks  down  barriers  and  carries  in  its 
shipments  the  gospel  of  fraternity  and  good  will — is  flung  out  on  the 
scrap  heap.  Horace  Larkin  is  no  smug  hypocrite.  He  faces  the 
facts  frankly;  he  will  not  deceive  others  any  more  than  himself. 

He  was  a  beast  of  prey,  asserting  his  right  of  survival;  nothing  more. 
If  he  succumbed  to  sentiment  (and  it  is  far  easier  to  succumb  to  it  than 
to  resist  it)  he  would  merely  be  eliminating  himself  from  the  battle  of 
existence  as  a  potent  and  considerable  force,  and  consigning  himself  to 
the  rear  ranks.  And  he  felt  in  every  fibre  of  his  being  that  he  was  bom 
for  leadership.54 

.  .  .  nobody  has  a  right  to  sacrifice  himself  to  anybody  else.  If  he  does 
he  simply  eliminates  himself  from  the  struggle  for  existence,  proves  his 
unfitness  to  survive.  It  is  natural  for  every  strong  man  to  try  to  make 
every  other  life  tributary  to  his  own;  but  the  man  who  consents  to  make 
his  life  tributary  to  somebody  else’s  is  from  Nature’s  point  of  view  a 
weak  man.  .  .  .  She  may  allow  him  to  exist  in  a  small  way;  but  what  is 
existence  without  predominance?  .  .  .  The  man  who  is  in  advance  of  the 
morality  of  his  age  is,  for  practical  purposes,  a  fool.  It  is  no  use  quarreling 
with  Fate;  and  in  the  United  States  the  average  man  is  the  Fate  that  rules 
us  and  determines  our  place  in  the  world.55 

“The  majority  of  our  politicians  are  a  low-lived  lot,  and  many  of  them 
corrupt.  But  they  have  the  courage  to  be  American — crudely  and  uncom¬ 
promisingly  American — and  that  is,  in  my  eyes,  a  virtue  which  is  not  to 
be  lightly  rated.” 

“And  may  I  ask,  Mr.  Larkin,  what  do  you  mean  by  being  American?” 

“Being  frankly,  ably,  enterprisingly  plebeian.  It  is  the  plebeian  after 
all,  who  shall  inherit  the  earth — ” 

“I  beg  your  pardon.  According  to  the  Bible  it  is  the  meek.” 

“I  must  differ  with  the  Bible,  then;  for  the  meek,  in  my  experience,  if 
they  inherit  anything,  never  manage  to  keep  it.  It  passes,  sooner  or  later, 
into  the  hands  of  the  strong,  the  self-assertive,  the  grasping.  But  these, 
as  you  will  admit,  are  plebeian  characteristics.  A  universally  prosperous, 
comfortable,  impudent,  and  enterprising  mob — that  is  the  goal  toward 
which  we  are  steering;  and  in  my  opinion  it  is  a  good  and  desirable  one.”  56 

This  is  a  note  that  is  to  be  heard  more  insistently  as  the  new 
realism  went  further  in  its  probing.  Armed  with  this  conviction 
Horace  Larkin  set  forth  as  a  conqueror,  and  it  only  adds  to  the 
dramatic  fitness  of  things  that  in  his  rise  he  came  across  a  will  to 
power  stronger,  cleverer,  than  his  own.  Kate  Van  Schaak  climbs 
upon  his  back  to  rise  with  him;  she  buys  him  with  her  money  and 
social  position,  and  having  made  the  deal  she  realizes  on  the  invest- 
*4  Chapter  XXXI.  66  Chapter  XXXVI.  66  Chapter  XXXIII. 


184  CHANGING  AMERICA 

ment.  She  is  mistress  henceforth,  and  the  Nietzschean  smiles  at  the 
irony  of  the  situation. 

In  the  third  work  Boyesen  fails  to  maintain  the  level  of  The 
Mammon  of  Unrighteousness.  Social  Strugglers  is  simpler,  more 
dramatic,  better  told.  It  carries  the  reader  forward  more  easily. 
But  it  belongs  with  such  novels  of  social  analysis  as  Charles  Dud¬ 
ley  Warner’s  The  Golden  House — mildly  critical  of  the  vulgarizing 
influence  of  the  new-rich,  mildly  sympathetic  with  the  slum  workers 
— rather  than  to  the  new  realism.  The  heroine — daughter  of  a  new- 
rich  family  that  has  come  to  New  York  to  climb  socially — awakens 
to  the  realization  of  parting  ways:  one  the  path  of  luxury  which  the 
four  hundred  travel,  the  other  the  path  of  service  which  leads  to 
the  slums  and  settlement  work.  It  is  a  sentimental  awakening,  not 
an  intellectual,  induced  by  the  hero,  who  on  the  fringe  of  the  four 
hundred  is  mildly  discontented  with  the  ways  of  luxury.  The 
vague  idealism  of  the  latter  has  been  stirred  by  the  Toynbee  Hall 
experiment  in  London,  and  the  persuasiveness  of  the  lover  rather 
than  the  conclusions  of  the  thinker  carries  Maud  Bulkley  away 
from  her  conventional  moorings. 

The  movement  of  the  book  is  little  clogged  with  sociological 
discussions;  there  is  too  little,  indeed,  to  justify  the  conclusion. 
Only  once  does  Philip  Warburton  lift  the  curtain  upon  the  idealism 
which  ostensibly  is  the  determining  factor  in  his  life. 

I  frankly  confess  that  I  am  something  of  a  red.  I  think  the  world  is 
out  of  gear,  and  I  can  perfectly  well  conceive  of  a  civilization  far  better 
than  ours,  without  yet  proposing  any  radical  amendment  to  human  na¬ 
ture.  .  .  .” 

There  was  to  Maud  something  so  wholly  unexpected  in  this  ebullition 
that  she  scarcely  knew  what  to  say.  She  had  never  philosophized  concern¬ 
ing  life  and  its  problems;  nay,  she  had  never  suspected  that  to  a  person 
who  had  money  enough,  and  the  access  to  good  society,  it  could  present 
any  problems  whatever.  She  knew  that  some  terribly  disreputable,  shaggy, 
and  wild-faced  foreigners  came  here  from  Europe  and  proposed  to  turn 
our^admirable  civilization  upside  down;  but  that  a  gentleman  of  Warbur¬ 
ton  s  culture  and  social  standing  could  sympathize  with  such  criminals 
had  never  occurred  to  her  as  a  remote  possibility. 

After  this  disturbing  introduction  Warburton  proceeds  to  dis¬ 
close  what  being  a  red  means  to  him  in  the  way  of  social  revolu¬ 
tions: 

u  y°U,  eTer  hearcl  a  London  experiment  known  as  Toynbee 

Hall:  he  asked.  ... 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM  185 

“Yes:  it’s  a  place  in  the  slums,  where  young  men  of  good  family  go  to 
live;  isn’t  that  it?” 

“Yes;  and,  do  you  know,  that  is  to  me  the  most  beautiful  modern  in¬ 
stance  of  a  real  desire  to  help  the  poor  and  helpless — to  lift  the  world  to  a 
higher  level.  It  is  what  I  should  like  to  do  myself — and  what  I  shall  hope 
some  day  to  do.  .  . 

“Then  you  really  think  it  a  misfortune  to  be  rich ?”  she  ejaculated.  .  .  . 

“Yes,  if  wealth  entails  the  loss  of  human  sympathies,  as  in  nine  cases 
out  of  ten  it  seems  to  do,  I  regard  it  as  a  misfortune.  If  it  means,  as  in 
this  country  it  seems  to  mean,  the  loss  of  vital  contact  with  humanity, 
the  contraction  of  one’s  mental  and  spiritual  horizon,  a  callous  insensibility 
to  social  wrongs  and  individual  sorrows,  a  brutal  induration  in  creature 
comforts  and  mere  animal  well-being,  the  loss  of  that  divine  discontent 
and  noble  aspiration  which  alone  makes  us  human — if  it  means  this  or 
any  part  of  it,  it  is  the  greatest  calamity  which  can  befall  a  man.  And  it 
is  because  Christ  foresaw  that  these  were  the  natural  effects  of  great 
wealth,  and  the  security  and  ease  which  it  engenders,  that  he  declared 
that  it  was  easier  for  a  camel  to  pass  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  than  foi 
a  rich  man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.”  57' 

That  is  all.  There  is  no  dramatic  justification  of  Warburton’s 
views;  they  are  without  motive  and  foundation.  Social  Stragglers 
does  not  advance  far  along  the  path  of  the  new  realism. 

As  the  years  drew  nearer  the  new  century,  the  business  man 
usurped  an  ever  larger  place  in  American  fiction;  the  romance  which 
had  been  sought  in  the  deeds  of  1776  was  now  discovered  in  the 
achievements  of  enterprise.  It  was  the  unconscious  testimony  of 
literature  to  the  hold  which  business  had  got  on  the  imagination  of 
Americans.  In  the  golden  days  of  the  “full  dinner-pail,  following 
the  great  victory  of  ’96,  the  Captain  of  Industry  reached  the  apogee 
of  his  fame.  The  voice  of  detraction  had  not  yet  been  lifted  against 
him;  the  muckraker  had  not  yet  set  forth  on  his  devastating  career. 
To  young  reporters  on  city  papers  looking  ambitiously  towards 
fiction  as  the  goal  of  success,  what  could  offer  greater  appeal  than 
the  unwritten  romance  of  Wall  Street  and  the  Stock  Exchange? 
They  had  described  it  for  the  daily  news  columns,  they  had  seen  it 
extolled  on  the  editorial  page,  why  not  dramatize  it  in  fiction? 
Here  was  the  real  interest  of  America— the  only  reality  that  signi¬ 
fied;  yet  the  novelists  had  stupidly  overlooked  it,  because  they 
lacked  the  journalist’s  sense  of  news  values,  his  flair. 

Of  the  abundant  crop  of  fiction  which  resulted  from  this  dis¬ 
covery,  no  more  characteristic  examples  need  be  sought  than  The 

67  Chapter  VII. 


186 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Short  Line  War  (1899)  and  Calumet  “K”  (1901),  written  in  col¬ 
laboration  by  Samuel  Merwin  and  H.  K.  Webster.  Their  popular 
success  was  immediate  and  maintained  surprisingly.  The  former 
ran  to  six  editions,  the  last  in  1909;  the  latter,  to  twelve  editions, 
the  last  so  late  as  1915.  They  are  brisk  stories,  all  action  stripped 
of  descriptive  superfluities,  with  plenty  of  newspaper  punch: 
dramatizations  of  hustle  and  bluff  and  the  tricks  of  a  cut-throat 
game.  Charlie  Bannon,  hero  of  Calumet  “K,”  is  the  boss  who  does 
things,  who  is  on  the  job,  who  takes  long  shots  and  “makes  good” 

a  “movie”  hero  of  efficiency.  He  has  no  time  nor  inclination  to 
think,  possesses  no  philosophy,  asks  no  questions  and  is  troubled  by 
no  doubts  or  scruples;  his  fertile  brain  and  cool  nerve  make  him  a 
first-class  fighting  man,  and  he  fights  as  the  good  soldier  should  on 
orders  from  above.  The  hero  of  The  Short  Line  War,  Jim  Weeks,  is 
another  Bannon  with  the  same  fertile  brain,  cool  nerve,  calm 
tenacity  of  purpose,  quick  decisiveness,  and  the  same  lack  of 
intellectual  interests.  In  war  it  is  sound  strategy  to  strike  quick 
and  hard;  and  the  Captain  of  Industry,  let  it  be  clearly  known,  is  a 
war  captain.  To  play  the  game  hard,  to  beat  the  other  fellow  by 
whatever  means  serve,  that  is  the  ideal  of  a  competitive  bourgeoisie: 
not  to  be  too  nice  about  the  law,  for  everybody  knows  that  the  law 
is  the  chief  weapon  of  the  strong;  not  to  cherish  foolish  idealisms, 
for  everybody  knows  that  success  alone  pays.  No  more  heartless, 
brutal,  anarchistic  books  could  be  conceived — a  mad  philosophy  for 
a  mad  world. 

The  broad  movement  towards  a  realistic  portrayal  of  the  eco¬ 
nomic  city  produced  its  eddies  and  minor  currents,  which  at  times 
brought  such  a  commotion  of  the  waters  as  to  appear  like  the  main 
current.  Such  was  the  flood  of  political  novels  which  came  with  the 
new  century  and  lasted  well  upwards  of  a  decade.  These  were  a  by¬ 
product  of  the  muckraking  movement— a  part  of  the  propaganda 
of  the  group  of  young  insurgents  within  the  Republican  party  who 
were  bent  on  rescuing  the  party  from  control  of  the  old  bosses,  and 
who  prepared  the  way  tor  the  more  significant  movement  of  Pro- 
gressivism  which  followed.  Such  studies  as  Francis  Churchill 
Williams’s/.  Devlin— Boss  (1901),  and  Elliott  Flower’s  The  Spoils¬ 
men  (1903),  were  early  examples;  and  Winston  Churchill’s  Coniston 
and  Mr.  Crewe’s  Career  were  probably  the  most  notable.  They  were 
journalistic  for  the  most  part,  exposes  of  the  “Boss”  and  the  evils 
of  the  political  machine.  1  he  “  Boss  ”  is  painted  in  various  guises,  as 


187 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CRITICISM 

brutal,  cunning,  thoroughly  vicious,  or  as  a  man  who  plays  the 
game  with  the  same  unsocial  conscience  that  marks  the  capitalist. 
Most  frequently  Lincoln  Steffens  is  followed  and  the  human  side  of 
the  “Boss”  is  “played  up”  equally  with  his  political  cunning.  It 
is  the  characteristic  journalistic  touch— a  bit  cheap  but  immensely 
effective.  As  the  movement  of  naturalism  gained  headway  it  be¬ 
came  increasingly  apparent  that  the  “Boss”  was  only  a  part  of  the 
“System,”  and  the  political  novel  merged  in  the  economic.  These 
brisk  studies  constitute,  however,  a  suggestive  episode  in  our  his¬ 
tory — the  literary  echo  of  our  political  history  between  the  years 
1900  and  1910. 

Little  in  the  way  of  social  analysis  was  to  be  expected  from  a 
group  of  clever  journalists.  They  were  reporters  of  fact,  trans¬ 
cribers  of  externals.  They  n  ote  the  social  unrest,  but  it  is  little  more 
than  an  undertone  of  the  chorus  of  prosperity — a  snarl  of  inconse¬ 
quential  criticism.  It  is  the  sting  of  a  troublesome  mosquito  that  is 
brushed  off  by  the  Captain  of  Industry  who  is  too  busy  with  big 
projects  to  bother  about  insects.  Such  is  Will  Payne’s  Mr.  Salt 
(1903) — a  sympathetic  study  of  a  coal-baron  who  is  caught  in  the 
panic  of  ’93  but  pulls  out  and  rises  higher.  To  provide  dramatic 
contrast  there  is  the  ineffective  idealist  who  is  growly  and  surly — 
“The  whole  thing  is  rotten — the  whole  business  scheme.  It’s  just 
a  gold  brick  game  operated  by  Salt  and  his  kind.  I’d  like  to  stick 
a  fuse  to  it  and  touch  it  off.”  58  It  is  feeble  enough — this  protest. 
The  rebel  joins  wildly  in  the  great  strike,  is  struck  down  by  the 
hand  of  the  law,  rebels  and  strikes  again  and  gets  nowhere.  Only 
a  bitter,  ineffective  hate  rankles  in  his  heart,  while  Salt  goes  on 
triumphantly  to  greater  power  and  a  sort  of  moral  regeneration 
through  love — a  regeneration  that  does  not  interfere  with  his  keep¬ 
ing  the  title-deeds  to  his  loot.  An  earlier  study — The  Money  Cap¬ 
tain  (1898) — seemed  to  give  promise  of  honester  work  than  this.  It 
is  the  story  of  a  struggle  between  a  corrupt  gas-magnate  and  an 
enterprising  editor  whose  expose  puts  the  magnate  afoul  of  the  law 
as  interpreted  by  the  magnate’s  judges,  and  who  is  saved  from 
disaster  by  the  timely  death  of  the  “duke.”  At  the  end  is  a  touch 
of  prophecy,  quite  startling  in  its  forecast.  These  money-kings  with 
their  strong  prehensile  fingers  are  the  spawn  of  a  common  plebeian 
America;  the  world  of  the  makers  is  vulgarly  democratic;  but  there 
follows  the  age  of  the  spenders,  and  that  shall  be  finely,  altruistically 

68  Chapter  IX. 


188 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


aristocratic.  The  death  of  the  hero  “expunged  from  his  fortune 
that  color  of  greedy  vulgarity  and  left  its  gold  untarnished.” 

Dexter,  for  all  his  success,  was  a  figure  in  the  common  democratic  fore¬ 
ground  of  business;  he  was  intimately  and  solely  of  the  great  everyday 
warp  and  woof  of  toil.  He  bore  all  his  fruit  at  once — when  he  died.  An 
heirship  was  required  to  give  the  fortune  value.  .  .  . 

In  a  way  it  was  fine  and  beautiful — all  that  huge  accumulation  of  pillage 
coming  to  the  white,  firm  hands  of  this  pretty,  amiable' capable,  good- 
hearted  woman.  The  sudden  substitution  of  her  graceful  and  gracious 
figure  for  the  swart  and  iron  figure  of  the  duke  was  like  an  apt  transforma¬ 
tion  scene,  prophetic  of  the  future.59 

These  earlier  books  are  mere  preliminary  sketches — first  studies 
in  economic  backgrounds,  hesitating  between  admiration  and 
censure— satisfied  to  exploit  the  “human  interest”  in  the  dour 
figure  of  the  money-grabber.  The  clever  newspaper  men  did  not 
know  enough  to  do  better,  more  realistic  work;  they  saw  the  daily 
activities  of  business  but  they  understood  little  of  economics,  less 
of  sociology.  And  the  new  realism  was  soon  to  yield  itself  captive 
to  sociology  to  inscribe  the  name  of  Zola  boldly  on  its  pennant 
and  go  forth  to  conquer.  It  was  Frank  Norris  who  wrote  the 
pronunciamiento  of  the  new  school,  boldly,  magnificently,  with 
immense  faith  in  the  finality  of  his  own  conclusions.  The  Responsi¬ 
bilities  of  the  Novelist  was  to  become  the  textbook  of  the  young 
naturalists. 


The  Money  Captain,  Chapter  22. 


PART  TWO:  NEW  PATTERNS  OF  THOUGHT 


CHAPTER  I 

DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 

The  figures  of  the  Gilded  Age,  colossal  yet  grotesque,  belonged 
to  an  America  that  was  passing.  Another  world  of  thought  and 
experience  was  rising  above  the  horizon — a  world  in  which  the 
divinities  were  science  and  the  machine — that  was  to  disintegrate 
the  traditional  society  of  the  dispersion  and  reshape  the  plastic 
materials  in  new  forms.  The  long  tide  that  for  two  centuries  and  a 
half  had  been  running  out  had  come  at  last  to  the  turn.  For  six 
generations  the  pattern  of  life  had  been  woven  by  the  impulse  of 
dispersion  that  in  scattering  men  along  a  wide  frontier  had  dis¬ 
integrated  the  philosophies  and  rejected  the  social  order  brought 
from  the  old  world,  transforming  America  into  such  a  society  of 
free  men  as  the  Enlightenment  had  dreamed  of — decentralized, 
individualistic,  democratic.  Dispersion,  disintegration,  individual¬ 
ism,  anarchism — such  was  the  inevitable  drift  under  the  compul¬ 
sions  of  a  fluid  economics  and  frontier  ways,  of  which  the  ultimate 
philosophical  expression  had  been  Thoreau  at  Walden  Pond,  dis¬ 
covering  in  his  bean  patch  the  same  anarchistic  principles  that 
Godwin  had  learned  of  the  French  naturists — of  which  the  prophet 
had  been  Walt  Whitman,  dreaming  amidst  the  formless  crowds  of 
Manhattan  his  generous  dreams  of  the  democratic  brotherhood — 
and  of  which  Jay  Gould  the  sordid  wrecker  in  Wall  Street  was  the 
prosaic  reality. 

Then  had  come  the  Industrial  Revolution  that  in  creating  great 
cities  and  in  drawing  men  from  the  plow  to  the  machine  was  to 
undo  in  a  few  brief  years  the  long  work  of  the  dispersion,  repudiate 
the  ideals  of  the  Enlightenment,  and  provide  a  new  pattern  for  a 
consolidating  urban  society.  Thenceforward  the  drift  was  increas¬ 
ingly  toward  concentration,  with  its  compulsions  to  reintegration 
and  conformity — the  imperious  subjection  of  the  individual  to  a 
standardizing  order,  the  stripping  away  of  the  slack  frontier  free¬ 
doms  in  the  routine  of  the  factory,  the  substitution  of  the  ideal  of 
plutocracy  for  the  ideal  of  Jacksonian  democracy.  And  this  rev¬ 
olutionary  work  of  the  machine  was  hastened  by  the  new  spirit 

189 


190 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


of  science  that  spread  silently  through  the  land,  effecting  a  revolu¬ 
tion  in  men’s  thinking  as  great  as  the  machine  was  effecting  in 
men’s  lives.  Provincial  America  had  been  theological-  and  political- 
minded;  but  with  the  staying  of  the  dispersion  and  the  creation  of 
an  urban  psychology,  the  ground  was  prepared  for  the  reception  of 
new  philosophies  that  came  from  the  contemplation  of  che  laws  of 
the  material  universe.  The  incoming  of  science  had  two  immediate 
results:  the  application  of  technology  to  industry  that  was  to 
further  the  Industrial  Revolution;  and  the  impact  on  speculative 
thought  of  the  newly  discovered  laws  of  science  that  was  to  create  a 
new  philosophy.  In  the  second  of  these  twin  influences  lay  an 
intellectual  revolution  that  was  to  disintegrate  the  old  theological 
cosmos,  push  far  back  the  boundaries  of  space  and  time,  reorient 
the  mind  towards  all  ultimate  problems,  and  bring  into  question 
all  the  traditional  faiths — political  and  social  as  well  as  theological 
and  philosophical.  Out  of  science  was  to  come  a  new  spirit  of 
criticism  and  realism  that  was  to  set  the  pattern  for  later  thought. 

The  story  of  disintegration  and  reintegration  is  a  striking 
chapter  in  American  life,  a  story  that  runs  through  two  genera¬ 
tions — the  generation  that  came  to  maturity  in  the  seventies,  and 
the  generation  that  came  to  maturity  in  the  nineties.  Between 
1870  and  1900  the  broad  movement  of  thought  passed  through 
two  sharply  differentiating  and  contradictory  phases:  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment,  and  the  final  re¬ 
jection  of  the  Enlightenment  in  consequence  of  a  more  rigid 
application  of  the  law  of  causality  in  the  light  of  a  mechanistic 
universe.  During  the  seventies  biological  evolution  was  inter¬ 
preted  in  the  light  of  earlier  philosophies  that  had  come  out  of 
the  eighteenth  century.  It  was  reckoned  a  fulfillment  and  justi¬ 
fication  of  the  ideals  of  the  Enlightenment,  sanctioning  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  progress  that  had  risen  from  the  conception  of  human 
perfectibility  by  a  teleological  conception  of  cosmic  progress, 
glorifying  the  ideal  of  democratic  individualism,  and  putting  the 
seal  of  scientific  approval  on  the  philosophy  of  anarchism  that 
had  been  the  flower  of  two  and  a  half  centuries  of  the  dispersion. 
And  then  in  the  nineties  the  clouds  drew  over  the  brilliant  Vic¬ 
torian  skies.  With  the  substitution  of  physics  for  biology  came 
a  more  somber  mood  that  was  to  put  away  the  genial  romanticism 
of  Victorian  evolution,  substitute  a  mechanistic  conception  for 
the  earlier  teleological  progress,  and  reshape  its  philosophy  in 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


191 


harmony  with  a  deterministic  pessimism  that  denied  purpose  or 
plan  in  the  changing  universe  of  matter.  It  was  an  unconscious 
return  to  the  dark  spirit  long  before  brought  hither  by  Puritanism 
from  the  complexities  of  English  society — the  spirit  that  dom¬ 
inated  Calvinistic  dogma  before  it  disintegrated  in  the  freedoms 
made  possible  by  the  great  dispersion. 

The  great  changes  came  swiftly  because  the  machine  had  made 
ready  the  sod.  Farmers  and  bankers  do  not  think  alike;  country 
and  town  create  different  psychologies.  A  simple,  decentralized 
America  had  been  content  with  theology  and  metaphysics,  and 
the  intellectual  history  of  New  England  for  two  hundred  and  forty 
years  is  not  greatly  skimped  by  being  compressed  into  three  words, 
Calvinism,  Unitarianism,  Transcendentalism.  What  was  true 
of  New  England  was  true  of  America  generally,  except  for  the 
lesser  influence  of  metaphysics.  So  long  as  society  was  mainly 
agricultural — and  in  those  portions  where  the  frontier  spirit  lin¬ 
gered  on  into  later  days — the  church  would  retain  its  dominant 
influence  and  theology  would  still  bound  men’s  thought.  But 
with  the  revolutions  in  economics  and  industry,  with  the  rise  of 
an  urban  society,  the  mind  of  America  was  making  ready  for  the 
reception  of  science  and  the  realism  that  was  eventually  to  spring 
from  science. 

Venturesome  pioneers  had  been  at  work  long  before,  digging 
about  under  the  thick  crust  of  theology.  Even  in  theocratic 
Massachusetts  Increase  and  Cotton  Mather  had  professed  a  zeal 
for  scientific  investigation,  and  the  latter  was  vastly  proud  of  his 
membership  in  the  Royal  Society.  In  the  eighteenth  century 
Franklin  and  Rittenhouse  and  William  Bartram  were  evidences 
of  a  new  spirit,  and  at  Yale  College  President  Ezra  Stiles  made  a 
small  beginning  of  scientific  study  that  was  swept  away  by  his 
successor  Timothy  Dwight.  In  the  early  decades  of  the  nineteenth 
century  an  interest  in  science  was  spreading  widely,  as  Sillimans 
Journal  witnesses.  Asa  Gray,  Le  Conte,  and  Agassiz  encouraged 
the  general  interest  in  geology,  and  in  the  sixties  and  seventies 
Lewis  H.  Morgan  turned  to  anthropology  and  R.  L.  Dugdale 
stimulated  sociology  by  his  significant  study  of  the  Jukes  family. 

Our  present  concern,  however,  is  not  with  the  contributions  of 
America  to  abstract  science,  but  rather  with  the  changing  mental 
attitude  that  resulted  from  familiarity  with  scientific  methods — 
the  shift  from  deductive  reasoning  to  inductive  investigation, 


192 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


with  the  consequent  breakdown  of  theology  and  the  slow  drift 
from  metaphysical  idealism  to  scientific  materialism;  and  such  a 
changing  attitude  concerns  us  because  of  its  enormous  influence 
on  the  fabric  of  our  later  thinking,  the  total  body  of  our  intellectual 
and  cultural  life.  Considered  in  this  light  the  intellectual  revolu¬ 
tion  that  resulted  when  the  mind  of  America,  long  shaped  by 
theological  dogmas,  turned  away  from  those  dogmas  to  consider 
the  new  universe  presented  by  science,  cannot  be  made  too  much 
of.  With  the  pushing  out  of  the  frontiers  of  space  and  time,  the 
discovery  of  a  vast  impersonal  cosmos  that  annihilated  the  petty 
egocentric  world  of  good  and  evil  postulated  by  the  theologians, 
the  substitution  of  universal  energy  for  a  beneficent  providence, 
the  conception  of  a  ceaseless  flux  and  flow  that  took  no  account 
of  teleological  ends,  the  assumption  of  universal  law  and  universal 
causality,  the  mind  of  America  quitted  its  quiet  theological  re¬ 
treats  and  set  forth  on  a  great  adventure  that  was  to  carry  far  and 
the  results  of  which  were  to  unsettle  what  before  had  been  sure. 

In  this  great  work  we  have  been  engaged  since  European  science 
first  rose  on  our  horizon  a  half-century  and  more  ago.  To  speak 
exactly,  it  is  not  so  much  science  that  has  taken  possession  of  the 
mind,  as  certain  postulates  of  science,  certain  philosophies  pre¬ 
sumably  derived  from  science  and  justified  by  science,  which  we 
have  felt  bound  to  incorporate  in  our  thinking  as  a  hundred  years 
before  the  conclusions  of  the  Enlightenment  had  been  incorporated. 
In  that  earlier  philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment  the  whole  drift 
had  been  towards  a  dissolvent  individualism,  a  disintegration  of 
the  earlier  integration.  In  the  new  interpretation  after  1870  the 
emphasis  came  to  rest  on  the  whole  rather  than  the  parts:  in 
sociology,  upon  the  historical  growth  of  human  societies;  in  biology, 
upon  the  evolution  of  the  higher  from  lower  forms.  The  individual, 
thus  conceived  of  socially  and  politically,  is  no  longer  an  isolated, 
self-determining  entity,  but  a  vehicle  through  which  is  carried  the 
stream  of  life,  with  a  past  behind  and  a  future  before.  He  is  a  por¬ 
tion  of  the  total  scheme  of  things,  tied  by  a  thousand  invisible 
threads  to  the  encompassing  whole.  From  the  parts  to  the  totality, 
from  freedom  to  determinism — such  has  been  the  drift  of  thought 
that  science  has  laid  upon  us  and  from  which  there  is  no  easy  es¬ 
cape. 

With  the  advent  of  such  a  conception  the  long  movement  towards 
philosophical  anarchism  was  brought  to  a  stop.  The  integrating 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


193 


principle  of  unity  must  eventually  shoulder  aside  the  disintegrating 
principle  of  individualism;  order  must  supersede  willfulness.  In  the 
outcome  a  conception  so  coercive  was  to  deny  all  the  aspirations  of 
our  traditional  social  philosophy,  surrendering  society  to  a  new 
regimentation  and  reducing  the  individual  to  an  impotent  victim 
of  things  as  they  are.  Out  of  it  was  to  spring  the  passionate  protests 
of  later  rebels  like  Theodore  Dreiser  and  Thorstein  Veblen.  Yet 
for  the  moment  the  rigid  determinism  of  the  premise  was  overlooked 
and  man  was  accepted  as  the  first-born  and  heir  of  God’s  benevo¬ 
lent  universe.  In  the  seventies  the  new  postulates  of  science  were 
looked  upon  as  no  other  than  fresh  sanctions  for  the  Comtean 
principle  of  continuity — of  evolution  from  lower  to  higher  in 
biology,  of  growth  and  progress  in  sociology.  It  was  this  middle 
ground  that  Herbert  Spencer  came  to  occupy  in  the  minds  of  his 
American  disciples — holding  to  the  older  individualism  with  its 
implications  of  anarchism,  yet  creating  a  cosmic  philosophy  that 
foreshadowed  the  eventual  dwarfing  of  the  individual. 

i 

THE  VICTORIAN  MOOD 

The  sturdy  optimism  that  was  a  genial  hallmark  of  the  Victorian, 
was  erected  on  more  substantial  foundations  than  a  middle-class 
prosperity  arising  out  of  the  Industrial  Revolution;  it  was  founded 
on  a  systematic  philosophy,  built  of  excellent  materials  and  laid  up 
with  nice  mortar-work,  to  which  many  hands  contributed  and  in 
the  finality  of  which  many  minds  believed.  Its  master  idea  was  the 
conception  of  growth,  a  conception  that  by  contrast  with  the  ideal 
of  the  static  of  earlier  times,  was  profoundlyrevolutionary.  Perhaps 
the  most  stimulating  suggestion  that  came  out  of  the  Enlighten¬ 
ment,  it  was  evolved  by  Turgot  in  France  and  by  Price  and  Priestley 
in  England,  from  the  psychology  of  John  Locke.  If  the  human 
mind  at  birth  is  an  empty  vessel,  wanting  in  innate  ideas  and  wait¬ 
ing  to  be  filled  by  sense  perceptions,  or  if— to  accept  the  familiar 
figure — it  is  a  clean  slate  on  which  the  finger  of  experience  writes 
what  it  will,  then  it  follows  from  the  philosophy  of  Locke  that  the 
shaping  of  the  individual  is  determined  by  the  environment  that 
cradles  him.  It  is  not  an  unfolding  from  within  but  a  molding  from 
without.  Hence  the  idea  of  growth,  and  hence  the  vast  preoccupa¬ 
tion  of  the  Enlightenment  with  sociology — or  the  science  of  environ- 


194 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ment — the  hand  of  the  sculptor  that  models  the  plastic  clay.  From 
such  a  conception  the  principle  of  progress  was  an  inevitable  de¬ 
duction. 


i 

SOCIOLOGY  AND  THE  ENLIGHTENMENT 

It  is  convenient,  if  not  quite  exact,  to  trace  the  rise  of  the  new 
gospel  to  Condorcet,  who  in  the  midst  of  the  Terror  and  whilst 
in  hiding  from  the  Jacobins,  wrote  his  stimulating  History  of  the 
Progress  of  the  Human  Mind  1 — a  work  that  was  early  reprinted 
in  America  and  profoundly  influenced  Jefferson,  who  professed  to 
find  its  principles  exemplified  in  the  history  of  his  native  Virginia. 
Condorcet  was  a  humane  and  liberal  spirit,  a  mathematician,  a 
physicist,  a  sociologist,  one  of  those  eager  Revolutionary  minds 
passionately  devoted  to  the  creation  of  a  more  generous  social 
order;  and  his  celebrated  work  deserves  a  distinguished  place  in 
the  history  of  social  thought.  He  begins  as  a  good  Lockean  with 
the  psychology  of  sense  perception,  on  which  he  erects  his  entire 
superstructure.  Here  is  his  opening  paragraph: 

Man  is  born  with  the  faculty  of  receiving  sensations;  of  perceiving  and 
distinguishing  the  simple  sensations  of  which  they  are  composed;  of  re¬ 
taining  them,  reproducing  them,  combining  them;  of  comparing  these 
combinations;  of  grasping  what  they  have  in  common  and  what  sets  them 
apart;  of  fixing  signs  on  all  such  objects  in  order  to  reproduce  them  more 
clearly  and  to  facilitate  new  combinations.2 

He  then  proceeds  to  trace  the  growth  of  the  scientific  attitude 
from  the  time  of  Bacon,  till  it  culminated  in  the  rise  of  social 
science,  with  the  new  politics  of  natural  rights  and  the  new  con¬ 
ception  of  man  as  perfectible.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  the 
philosophers  of  the  Enlightenment  were  speculative  dreamers  who 
created  a  fantastic  natural  man  that  flouted  the  sober  realism  of 
experience.  Such  a  notion  is  grossly  absurd.  Condorcet  was  im¬ 
mersed  in  the  scientific  spirit  of  his  age;  it  was  to  science  that  he 
looked  for  guidance  and  he  had  acquired  a  remarkable  under¬ 
standing  of  the  data  already  gathered  in  western  Europe.  When 
he  set  down  the  following  passages,  therefore,  he  was  writing  not 
as  a  speculative  dreamer,  but  as  a  sociologist  who  relied  solely  on 

1  The  F rench  title  is,  Esquisse  d  un  tableau  historique  des  progres  de  V esprit  hutnaitu 
See  Oeuvres,  Vol.  VI,  Paris,  1847. 

2  (Euvres,  Vol.  VI,  p.  11,  Paris,  1847. 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


195 


scientific  inquiry  to  find  a  way  out  of  the  social  mess  into  which 
western  civilization  was  plunged  by  the  selfish  stupidity  of  rulers 
who  were  hostile  to  scientific  truth. 

After  long  errors,  after  having  lost  their  way  in  incomplete  or  vague 
theories,  the  publicists  have  finally  come  to  recognize  the  true  rights  of 
man,  to  deduce  them  from  this  single  truth,  that  he  is  a  being  endowed 
with  sense  perceptions  (un  etre  sensible),  capable  of  shaping  a  train  of 
reasoning  ( capable  de  former  des  raisonne merits),  and  of  acquiring  moral 
ideas.3 

Finally,  we  have,  seen  a  new  doctrine  appear.  ...  It  is  that  of  the  in¬ 
definite  perfectibility  of  the  human  species,  a  doctrine  of  which  Turgot, 
Price  and  Priestly,  were  the  first  and  most  distinguished  apostles;  it  be¬ 
longs  to  the  tenth  epoch,  in  which  we  shall  develop  it  broadly.4 

In  such  passages  is  contained  the  kernel  of  Condorcet’s  philos¬ 
ophy,  the  grounds  of  that  hope  for  human  betterment  which 
awakened  his  generous  sympathies.  The  Esquisse  is  a  noble  con¬ 
tribution  to  the  work  which  the  heirs  of  the  Enlightenment,  from 
Turgot  to  Comte,  so  eagerly  and  hopefully  engaged  in — the  work 
of  tracing  scientifically  the  changes  of  the  past  in  order  to  fore¬ 
cast  the  path  of  the  future.  After  dividing  the  history  of  social 
evolution  into  nine  periods,  Condorcet  projects  the  outlines  of  the 
tenth  which  is  still  to  come. 

If  man  can  predict,  with  almost  complete  assurance,  the  phenomena  of 
which  he  knows  the  laws;  if,  while  they  are  still  unknown  in  him,  from 
the  experience  of  the  past  he  can  forecast,  with  much  probability,  the 
events  of  the  future;  why  should  one  regard  as  a  chimerical  undertaking 
the  attempt  to  trace  with  some  likeness  the  picture  of  the  future  destiny 
of  the  human  species,  in  accordance  with  the  facts  of  its  history  (d’apres 
les  resultats  de  son  histoire)?  The  sole  ground  of  faith  in  the  natural  sciences 
is  this  idea,  that  the  general  laws,  known  or  unknown,  that  rule  the 
phenomena  of  the  universe,  are  necessary  and  constant;  and  on  what 
grounds  would  this  principle  be  less  true  for  the  development  of  the  in¬ 
tellectual  and  moral  faculties  of  man,  than  for  the  other  operations  of 
nature?  Finally,  since  opinions  formed  from  the  experience  of  the  past, 
in  matters  of  the  same  kind,  are  the  sole  rule  of  conduct  for  the  wisest 
men,  why  should  one  deny  the  philosopher  the  right  to  rest  his  conjectures 
on  the  same  base,  provided  he  does  not  attribute  to  them  a  certainty  be¬ 
yond  that  which  springs  from  the  number,  the  constancy  and  the  exact¬ 
ness  of  his  observations? 

Our  hopes  for  the  future  state  of  the  human  species  may  be  reduced  to 
these  three  important  points:  the  destruction  of  inequality  between  na¬ 
tions;  the  progress  of  equality  amongst  a  common  people;  finally,  the 

3  Ibid.,  p.  1 76.  4  Ibid.,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  194-05- 


196 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


growth  of  man  towards  perfection  ( le  perfectionnement  reel  de  I’homme). 
May  not  all  nations  one  day  approach  the  state  of  civilization  to  which 
have  arrived  the  most  enlightened  peoples,  the  freest,  the  most  emanci¬ 
pated  from  prejudice,  such  as  the  French  and  the  Anglo-Americans?  The 
vast  distance  that  divides  these  peoples  from  the  servitude  of  nations 
subject  to  kings,  from  the  barbarism  of  African  tribes,  from  the  ignorance 
of  savages,  must  it  not  gradually  disappear?  5 

Condorcet  was  an  idealist,  and  the  grand  object  towards  which 
he  was  working  was  an  adequate  social  philosophy  that  should 
interpret  justly  the  evolution  of  civilization.  True  to  the  genius 
of  the  Enlightenment  he  believed  that  in  reason  and  in  the  moral 
sense  man  possessed  the  keys  to  his  own  progress — that  the  gen¬ 
eral  reason  under  the  guidance  of  humane  feeling  must  assure  a 
progressive  amelioration  of  life  that  will  eventuate  in  the  common 
well-being  of  men  in  a  rational  society.  The  age  of  the  Enlighten¬ 
ment,  he  believed,  had  “opened  new  paths  to  the  political  and 
moral  sciences,”  and  laid  bare  what  to  him  were  “the  true  prin¬ 
ciples  of  social  happiness.”  The  American  Federalists,  who  were 
prodigal  of  vituperative  rhetoric  in  assailing  all  French  theorists, 
might  have  read  the  pages  of  Condorcet  with  profit. 

The  idea  of  progress  with  its  corollary  of  a  philosophy  of  history, 
thus  elaborated  by  Condorcet,  was  taken  over  by  Saint-Simon, 
but  came  to  its  most  elaborate  expression  in  the  work  of  Auguste 
Comte.  The  grandiose  philosophy  of  history  to  which  Comte 
gave  the  name  of  Positivism,  was  an  attempt  to  formulate  the 
law  of  progress  in  civilization;  and  his  dynamic  sociology,  which 
emerged  naturally  from  his  conception  of  history,  was  an  attempt 
to  apply  that  law  to  society.  That  the  principle  of  progress  is  the 
law  of  nature  Comte  professed  to  discover  in  the  unity  of  all  nat¬ 
ural  processes  and  the  historical  unfolding  of  all  systems;  there 
are  no  breaks  and  no  fresh  beginnings,  but  everywhere  and  always, 
continuity.  From  this  principle  emerged  the  Comtean  law  of 
historical  evolution  with  its  three  phases:  the  theological,  the 
metaphysical,  and  the  scientific-industrial.  If  continuity  is  the 
law  of  nature,  such  continuity  presupposes  an  objective — pre¬ 
sumably  benevolent;  and  in  view  of  such  continuity  towards  a 
benevolent  objective,  it  is  only  logical  to  endeavor  to  dispose  the 
forces  of  society  in  harmony  with  the  teleological  purpose,  and 
through  the  application  of  positive  knowledge  hasten  the  advent 

6  Ibid.,  Dixieme  Epoque,  pp.  236-237.  „ 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION  197 

of  the  Golden  Age.  Hence  the  grand  science,  hitherto  neglected, 
is  sociology.  Earlier  generations  had  placed  the  Golden  Age  in  a 
dim  past;  Comtean  philosophy,  in  harmony  with  the  Enlighten¬ 
ment,  placed  it  in  the  future  as  the  ultimate  goal  of  an  evolving 
society.  To  forecast  the  lines  along  which  such  progress  will  move, 
to  read  the  future  as  a  child  of  the  past,  became  therefore  a  prime 
objective  of  the  new  school  of  history.  The  tracing  of  social  laws 
was  the  great  business  at  hand,  and  as  the  founder  of  a  new  social 
science  Comte  carried  further  and  systematized  the  work  begun 
by  the  Physiocrats.  Before  Comte  history  had  been  little  more 
than  chronicles,  without  pattern  or  meaning,  unconcerned  with 
the  sources  of  change  and  providing  no  basis  for  forecast;  after 
Comte  history  became  an  interpretation  and  a  philosophy. 

One  would  have  supposed  that  Positivism  would  have  appealed 
to  American  intellectuals,  as  it  appealed  to  liberal  English  thinkers 
like  Mill  and  Spencer.  Not  only  has  the  American  mind  taken 
kindly  to  sociology,  but  the  history  of  America,  as  Woodbridge 
Riley  has  pointed  out,  offers  too  pat  an  illustration  of  the  Comtean 
law  of  progress  to  be  overlooked.6  The  three  centuries  of  American 
existence — the  seventeenth  with  its  theocracy,  the  eighteenth  with 
its  abstract  theories  of  political  rights  and  its  faith  in  constitutions, 
and  the  nineteenth  with  its  industrialism  based  on  science — would 
seem  to  be  pages  out  of  the  Positivist  philosophy  of  history.  That 
Comte  made  so  slight  an  impression  on  the  mind  of  New  England 
was  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  current  influence  of  transcendentalism 
with  its  metaphysical  backgrounds.  Although  eager  young  intel¬ 
lectuals  like  John  Fiske  might  accept  it  while  awaiting  a  more 
adequate  evolutionary  philosophy,  the  country  was  not  yet  ripe 
for  Positivism.  When  that  time  came  it  was  Spencer  rather  than 
Comte  who  became  the  master  of  American  intellectuals — Spencer 
and  in  a  lesser  degree  John  Stuart  Mill.  Both  Spencer  and  Mill 
had  come  under  the  influence  of  the  French  sociological  school,  and 
it  was  through  their  writings  that  the  new  social  philosophy  pene¬ 
trated  America.7 

2 

BIOLOGY  AND  THE  ENLIGHTENMENT 

The  appeal  of  Spencer  to  the  generation  born  after  the  Civil 
War  was  extraordinary.  Ardent  young  minds,  for  whom  the  candles 

6  American  Thought,  p.  172,  New  York,  1915. 

7  Woodbridge  Riley,  American  Thought,  Chapter  XI. 


198  CHANGING  AMERICA 

of  theology  were  burnt  out  and  who  were  seeking  new  light  to  their 
feet,  were  drawn  to  him  irresistibly.  Young  rebels  who  had  thrown 
off  the  guidance  of  their  elders  and  were  bent  on  discovering  fresh 
paths  through  the  tangle  of  dead  faiths — independent  souls  like 
Hamlin  Garland  and  Jack  London  and  Theodore  Dreiser  who  were 
to  become  leaders  of  the  realistic  revolt  against  the  genteel  tradition 
in  life  and  letters  and  faith — went  to  school  to  him  to  prepare 
themselves  for  the  great  work  of  freeing  the  American  mind  from 
the  old  theological  inhibitions.  Young  men  in  colleges  no  longer 
read  Butler’s  Analogy,  as  their  fathers  had  done  before  the  war, 
but  turned  with  zest  to  Spencer’s  Data  of  Ethics  to  discover  a  more 
scientific  theory  of  conduct.  Everywhere  the  influence  of  the  great 
Victorian  penetrated,  and  wherever  that  influence  spread  the  old 
theological  prepossessions  disintegrated.  It  is  probably  no  exag¬ 
geration  to  say  that  Spencer  laid  out  the  broad  highway  over  which 
American  thought  traveled  in  the  later  years  of  the  century. 

If  the  supreme  excellence  of  Comte,  as  has  been  suggested  by 
Lester  F.  Ward,  was  his  insistence  on  the  ultimate  unity  of  all 
processes  of  nature,8  if  before  him  the  continuity  of  forces  had  been 
inadequately  understood,  his  intellectual  kinship  with  Spencer  can¬ 
not  fail  to  be  remarked.  The  latter’s  master  conception,  which  he 
arrived  at  independently  of  Darwin  and  which  life-long  he  applied 
systematically  to  the  several  fields  of  thought,  was  the  master 
creative  conception  of  the  nineteenth  century — the  conception  of 
pervasive  unity  and  organic  growth.  In  his  well-known  phrase  it 
was  the  law  of  continuous  development  from  the  homogeneous  to 
the  heterogeneous,  from  the  simple  to  the  complex;  and  this 
principle  he  found  exemplified  in  the  total  history  of  nature  and 
man.  Here  then  is  the  Comtean  law  of  continuity,  but  vastly 
strengthened  and  given  a  cosmic  significance  by  deductions  from 
the  new  science.  Lamarck  and  Darwin  laid  the  foundations  for 
Spencer’s  philosophy,  as  Condorcet  and  Saint-Simon  had  provided 
the  backgrounds  for  Comte.  Trained  thus  in  the  new  school  of 
biology,  Spencer  erected  his  synthetic  philosophy  upon  the  broad¬ 
est  foundations;  the  principle  of  organic  evolution  sufficed  to  ex¬ 
plain  for  him  not  only  the  history  of  civilization,  but  the  total 
history  of  life  in  a  physical  universe;  and  biology,  psychology., 
sociology,  politics,  ethics — all  the  congeries  of  ideals  and  institu¬ 
tions  and  bodies  of  knowledge  that  shape  civilization — were  but 

8  Ibid.,  p.  401.  ■» 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


199 


variant  expressions  of  the  development  from  the  homogeneous  to 
the  heterogeneous. 

1  he  final  effect  of  the  synthetic  philosophy  was  not  to  overset  but 
to  confirm  the  major  postulates  of  the  Enlightenment.  In  his  social 
theory  are  unforeseen  confirmations  of  the  glowing  hopes  of  Turgot 
and  Condorcet.  From  his  studies  in  biology  Spencer  had  come  to 
think  primardy  in  terms  of  the  individual,  and  only  secondarily  in 
terms  of  the  species  and  the  genus.  Now  variation  is  the  mark  of 
the  individual,  for  strictly  considered,  nature  knows  no  duplication 
of  life  forms,  but  always  and  everywhere  individual  differentiation; 
yet  since  likenesses  are  far  greater  and  more  cohesive  than  unlike¬ 
nesses,  the  instinct  of  gregariousness  impels  individuals  to  associate 
in  ever  larger  groups,  interacting  through  association  and  coopera¬ 
tion,  whence  arises  a  human  society  that  tends  continuously  to 
pass  from  the  simple  to  the  complex.  On  these  two  major  premises 
then — individual  variation  and  the  instinct  of  association — Spencer 
established  his  social  and  political  theory;  and  when  the  elaborate 
data  drawn  from  biology  and  ethnology  and  psychology  are  stripped 
away,  the  underlying  conceptions  reveal  a  curious  likeness  to 
the  master  principles  of  French  romantic  philosophy.  This  likeness 
becomes  more  striking  as  he  explores  the  fields  of  sociology  and 
politics;  and  his  final  deductions  tally  so  closely  with  earlier  theory 
as  to  warrant  a  disciple  of  Jefferson  in  becoming  a  disciple  of 
Spencer. 

There  is  no  break  between  Condorcet  and  the  synthetic  phi¬ 
losophy.  The  great  Victorian  completed  the  work  of  the  Enlighten¬ 
ment.  In  establishing  his  individualism  on  the  principle  of  biolog¬ 
ical  variation,  Spencer  was  only  restating  in  scientific  terms  the 
earlier  metaphysical  individualism;  in  establishing  his  psychology 
upon  an  unbroken  sequence  “from  the  simple  reflex  action  by  which 
an  infant  sucks,  up  to  the  elaborate  reasoning  of  the  adult  man,” 
with  its  corollary  of  continuously  expanding  powers,  he  was  re¬ 
building  on  the  foundation  of  Locke  a  fresh  argument  for  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  indefinite  development,  or  perfectibility;  in  establishing  his 
sociology  on  the  organic  principle  of  “natural  development,”  which 
shapes  the  individual  to  social  ends,  with  an  accruing  wealth  of 
individuation  that  is  the  final  objective  of  true  social  life,  he  justi¬ 
fied  the  French  enthusiasm  for  liberty  as  the  great  desideratum,  but 
liberty  enriched  and  augmented  by  association  in  a  free  society; 
and  finally,  in  establishing  his  ethics  on  the  principle  that  “increas- 


200 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ing  fullness  of  life  is  the  ‘end’  of  evolution,”  and  the  “highest  con¬ 
duct  is  that  which  conduces  to  the  greatest  length,  breadth,  and 
completeness  of  life” — that  the  ultimate  criterion  of  social  ethics  is 
justice  and  that  “every  man  is  free  to  do  that  which  he  wdls,  pro¬ 
vided  he  infringes  not  the  equal  freedom  of  any  other  man” — he 
rephrased  the  earlier  Godwinian  principle  that  rational  liberty 
under  the  reign  of  justice  is  the  ultimate  end  of  society.9 

That  Spencer’s  social  theory  should  have  been  shot  through  with 
older  ideals  is  not  surprising  when  one  considers  his  origins  and 
training.  Sprung  from  radical  nonconformist  stock,  a  congenital 
rebel,  extraordinarily  self-sufficient  and  coming  to  intellectual  ma¬ 
turity  in  the  tempestuous  forties  with  their  Benthamism,  their 
Chartism,  their  exigent  democracy,  he  was  molded  by  forces  that  in 
large  part  were  a  reembodiment  of  the  aspirations  nullified  by  the 
Napoleonic  wars  and  the  Tory  reaction,  and  now  come  again  to 
birth.  As  a  consequence  his  political  theory,  like  Mill’s,  was  deeply 
affected  by  the  revolutionary  heritage.  He  accepted  the  social 
contract  as  a  “theoretical,  though  not  a  historical,  basis  of  political 
authority  and  institutions”;10  the  doctrine  of  natural  rights,  which, 
with  Jefferson,  he  interpreted  in  terms  of  the  rights  to  life,  liberty, 
and  the  pursuit  of  happiness;  and  the  theory  of  a  constantly 
diminishing  political  state,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  ultimate 
form  of  society — as  in  Godwin’s  Political  Justice — will,  be  anar¬ 
chistic. 

At  least,  such  he  conceives  to  be  the  forecast  suggested  by  the 
law  of  social  evolution.  As  the  coercive  authority  of  the  political 
state  diminishes,  its  place  will  be  supplied  by  the  cohesive  force  of 
association,  until  voluntary  cooperation  extends  to  all  the  necessary 
functions  of  society;  and  since  the  state  tends  to  disappear  with  the 
growth  of  a  rational  society,  the  great  desideratum  is  an  adequate 
sociology  rather  than  a  political  theory.  The  net  result,  therefore, 
of  Spencer’s  wide  studies  was  a  fresh  justification,  based  on  the 
findings  of  Victorian  science,  of  the  master  principles  of  eighteenth- 
century  speculation;  its  individualism,  its  liberalism,  its  passion  for 
justice,  its  love  of  liberty  and  distrust  of  every  form  of  coercion. 
The  power  of  the  majority  must  be  curbed  equally  with  that  of  the 
minority  and  he  concluded  his  The  Man  versus  the  State  with  the 

8  For  a  brief  exposition  of  Spencer’s  major  ideas  see,  William  Henry  Hudson, 
“  Herbert  Spencer,”  in  Philosophies  Ancient  and  Modern ,  London,  1908. 

10  William  Archibald  Dunning,  A  History  of  Political  Theories  from  Rousseau  to 
Spencer,  New  York,  1920,  p.  400. 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


201 


well-known  words,  “The  function  of  Liberalism  in  the  past  was 
that  of  putting  a  limit  to  the  powers  of  kings.  The  function  of  true 
Liberalism  in  the  future  will  be  that  of  putting  a  limit  to  the  powers 
of  Parliament.”  In  the  scientific  speculations  of  the  great  Victorian 
the  aspirations  of  romantic  thought  came  to  fresh  vitality;  em¬ 
bodied  in  a  comprehensive  evolutionary  system  they  were  given  a 
fresh  currency.  Herbert  Spencer  completed  the  work  begun  by 
Locke  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  before,  and  his  Synthetic  Philos¬ 
ophy  brought  to  conclusion  the  greatest  intellectual  movement  of 
modern  times. 

As  the  young  intellectuals,  trained  in  the  school  of  Spencer, 
looked  out  on  the  universe  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  they  discovered,  amid  all  its  complexities  an  encompassing 
unity,  a  continuous  growth,  a  creative  purpose;  and  from  such 
assumptions  they  justified  the  theory  of  progress,  cosmic  in  scope 
and  plan,  that  opened  wide  the  doors  to  a  vaster  future.  If  in  the 
backgrounds  of  their  minds  lurked  the  conception  of  determinism, 
it  gave  them  no  concern,  for  a  benevolent  determinism  that  shapes 
all  things  to  a  divine  end,  is  no  monster  to  be  feared.  In  the  evolu¬ 
tionary  science  were  the  grounds  of  a  genial  optimism  that  nothing 
could  shake.  If  they  had  lost  something  of  the  jauntiness  of  the 
transcendental  faith  that  beheld  God  plowing  furrows  at  Brook 
Farm,  they  were  armed  with  a  scientific  faith  that  by  tapping  stones 
and  comparing  fishes  they  should  find  His  plan  in  an  evolving  series 
of  life  forms.  Browning’s  Fra  Lippo  was  a  good  Spencerian  in  his 
vigorous  pronouncement: 

This  world’s  no  blot  for  us, 

Nor  blank;  it  means  intensely,  and  means  good: 

To  find  its  meaning  is  my  meat  and  drink. 

That  progress  was  the  law  of  the  universe  was  held  to  be  axio¬ 
matic  by  the  new  evolutionary  school,  and  the  American  read  in  the 
new  philosophy  an  added  confirmation  of  a  prepossession  common 
to  all  Americans  since  Franklin  and  Jefferson,  and  become  the 
common  faith  after  the  War  of  1812.  In  sober  minds  it  led  to  a 
complete  reshaping  of  the  outlook  upon  life,  and  in  unbalanced 
minds  it  ran  not  in  all  sorts  of  blowsy  enthusiasms.  Freedom,  love, 
benevolence,  progress  towards  a  millennial  perfection — these  were 
the  clarion  notes  in  a  huge  symphony  in  praise  of  human  perfect¬ 
ibility  that  assaulted  American  ears  in  the  Gilded  Age.  Not  Henry 


202 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Ward  Beecher  alone  was  the  prophet  of  the  new  day.  In  the  early 
seventies  Mrs.  Victoria  Woodhull,  one  of  the  minor  prophetesses, 
established  a  paper  dedicated  to  the  high  end  of  “the  Universal 
Religion  of  the  Future  .  .  .  the  Universal  Home  .  .  .  the  Univer¬ 
sal  Science,  called  Universology,  based  on  the  discovery  and  demon¬ 
stration  of  Universal  Laws  .  .  .  and  an  accompanying  Philosophy 
of  Integralism” — the  “organ  of  the  most  advanced  thought  and 
Purpose  in  the  World  .  .  .  the  Organ  of  Cardinary  News  .  .  . 
News  of  the  Aspiration  and  Progression  of  Mankind  toward  Millen¬ 
nial  Perfection.”  11  By  contrast  with  such  rhythmic  enthusiasms 
the  familiar  lines  of  Tennyson  are  sober  prose. 

Yet  I  doubt  not  thro’  the  ages  one  increasing  purpose  runs, 

And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widen’d  with  the  process  of  the  suns. 

How  logically  to  young  intellectuals  of  the  seventies  it  all  followed 
from  the  premises!  If  man  is  a  rational  being,  potentially  excellent 
and  capable  of  indefinite  development,  the  idea  of  a  humane  and 
rational  progress  in  civilization  is  an  inevitable  deduction;  and  the 
evolutionist  above  all  men  was  certain  to  build  into  his  philosophy 
the  cardinal  idea  of  a  unified  progress,  but  given  a  cosmic  sweep, 
accepted  as  the  master  principle  in  all  fields  of  the  material  and  the 
spiritual.  It  was  the  law  of  life,  as  the  static  was  the  law  of  death. 
No  thinker  who  had  grasped  the  idea  of  organic  growth,  could  es¬ 
cape  its  larger  implications;  and  no  student  in  the  seventies  could 
think  seriously  without  coming  upon  it. 

3 

THE  END  OF  THE  HOPES  OF  THE  ENLIGHTENMENT 

Then  a  film  of  haze  slowly  gathered  upon  the  face  of  the  brilliant 
sun  and  the  light  of  men’s  hopes  grew  dimmer.  As  physics  en¬ 
croached  upon  the  interest  in  biology,  and  leadership  in  speculation 
based  on  scientific  findings  passed  from  Spencer  to  Ernst  Haeckel, 
young  Americans  of  the  next  generation  found  the  membership  of 
the  current  philosophical  trinity  changed  for  them,  and  instead  of 
unity,  growth,  purpose,  they  discovered  unity,  flux,  chance. 
Purpose  had  disappeared  from  the  grim  face  of  the  material  uni¬ 
verse,  and  they  found  themselves  in  the  coils  of  a  determinism  that 
was  more  likely  to  prove  malignant  than  benevolent.  The  idea  of 
11  Quoted  in  Constance  Mayfield  Rourke,  Trumpets  of  Jubilee,  p.  201. 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


203 


progress  slipped  quietly  from  their  minds,  and  in  its  stead  was 
only  a  meaningless  and  purposeless  flux  of  things.  But  unity 
remained  to  bind  the  individual  upon  the  whole  and  dwarf  him  to 
a  pin-point  in  a  vast  macrocosm.  The  intellectual  history  of  the  last 
quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century — in  America  as  well  as  elsewhere 
— in  its  teleological  aspects  is  the  history  of  the  shift  from  the  be¬ 
nevolent  evolutionism  of  Spencer  to  the  mechanistic  materialism  of 
Haeckel,  with  all  the  dislocations  and  readjustments  involved  in 
the  cataclysmic  change;  and  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams,  that 
curiously  suggestive  study  in  disillusion,  is  saturated  with  the 
pessimism  that  followed  upon  the  transition — a  pessimism  exuding 
from  the  contemplation  of  the  bleak  unity  of  a  mechanistic  uni¬ 
verse.  Of  the  earlier  period  before  hope  was  gone,  he  wrote  thus: 

For  the  young  men  whose  lives  were  cast  in  the  generation  between  1867 
and  1900,  Law  should  be  Evolution  from  lower  to  higher,  aggregation  of 
the  atom  in  the  mass,  concentration  of  multiplicity  in  unity,  compulsion 
of  anarchy  in  order;  and  he  would  force  himself  to  follow  wherever  it  led, 
though  he  should  sacrifice  five  thousand  millions  more  in  money,  and  a 
million  more  lives.12 

Was  there  purpose  in  it  all?  To  this  Adams  and  the  younger  men 
more  and  more  declined  to  make  answer.  Yet  this  much  is  clear, 
for  them  the  end  of  the  theological  age  had  .come,  and  the  end  also 
of  the  great  hopes  of  the  Enlightenment.  The  idea  of  progress  was 
given  over  henceforth  to  the  middle  class  to  become  the  plaything 
of  material  expansion. 

11 

THE  SCHOOL  OF  SPENCER— JOHN  FISKE 

Of  the  distinguished  group  that  labored  to  naturalize  in  America 
the  philosophy  of  evolution  John  Fiske  was  the  most  authoritative 
spokesman.  As  a  brilliant  popularizer  of  the  Synthetic  Philosophy, 
and  an  historian  who  applied  the  Comtean  law  of  continuity  to  the 
American  past,  he  brought  to  the  Gilded  Age  the  revolutionary 
influence  of  English  and  French  thought.  Deeply  immersed  in 
Victorian  speculation,  he  threw  over  his  acquisitions  the  genial 
mood  of  his  generation  and  infused  the  doctrines  of  evolutionary 
science  with  the  spirit  of  religion.  He  reveled  in  the  cosmic  philoso¬ 
phy  of  Herbert  Spencer,  but  within  the  material  cosmos  the  scien¬ 
tists  were  revealing,  controlling  its  eternal  flux,  he  perceived  a 
12  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams,  p.  232. 


204 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


directing  will  that  was  shaping  man’s  destiny  to  noble  ends.  New 
England  scholarship  had  served  God  for  too  many  generations  to 
put  aside  its  teleological  prepossessions,  and  John  Fiske  was  too 
completely  New  England  to  deny  his  spiritual  obligations.  The 
duty  laid  upon  his  conscience  was  plain.  It  was  not  enough  to  lay 
open  to  the  New  England  mind  the  wealth  of  evolutionary  science; 
he  must  justify  its  conclusions  by  binding  them  back  upon  the  old 
faith  and  discover  God  revealed  in  biology  as  before  he  had  been 
revealed  in  the  Bible.  And  so  in  the  heyday  of  Spencerian  in¬ 
fluence,  before  the  bleak  conception  of  a  mechanistic  universe  had 
risen  upon  the  horizon  of  men’s  thought  to  disperse  the  genial  glow 
of  optimism,  this  learned  son  of  Connecticut  was  the  prophet  in 
America  of  the  new  order  of  thought. 

John  Fiske  was  a  brilliant  Yankee  with  a  voracious  appetite  for 
ideas  and  a  passion  for  cosmic  syntheses.  In  certain  respects  he  was 
the  most  richly  endowed  of  the  young  students  of  his  generation  of 
Americans.  Intellectually  curious  and  acquisitive,  he  refused  to  be 
confined  by  orthodox  fences  but  ranged  far  in  pursuit  of  knowledge. 
The  pale  negations  of  the  current  New  England  theology,  on  which 
he  had  fed  in  his  youth,  soon  lost  their  savor,  and  following  his 
natural  impulses  he  sought  out  the  strongest  food  available.  While 
still  in  his  teens  he  had  absorbed  Emerson,  Theodore  Parker,  and 
other  New  England  radicals,  and  was  reaching  out  for  an  ampler 
diet.  That  was  in  the  late  fifties,  when  a  new  cosmos  was  taking 
shape  in  men’s  minds  and  old  faiths  were  disintegrating.  The 
several  rivulets  of  science — geology,  zoology,  chemistry,  physics — 
that  hitherto  had  followed  diverse  and  vagrant  courses,  were 
slowly  converging  and  making  ready  to  mingle  their  waters  in  a 
vast  common  stream.  Some  further  dredging  needed  to  be  done 
first,  and  on  that  great  job  Darwin  had  long  been  patiently  en¬ 
gaged.  It  was  a  time  of  high  hopes  and  young  John  fiske,  about 
to  enter  Harvard  College,  was  not  one  to  miss  the  significance  of  so 
great  an  awakening. 

Amidst  his  quiet  Connecticut  lanes  he  had  already  been  making 
his  own  discoveries.  Although  he  had  early  gone  through  a  form  of 
conversion  to  dogmatic  Calvinism  he  had  not  long  been  content 
with  its  arid  provender,  but  turned  to  the  English  disciples  of 
Positivism — George  Henry  Lewes,  Buckle,  Mill — and  was  absorb¬ 
ing  Comte  with  the  help  of  Voltaire  and  Goethe.  In  June,  i860, 
two  months  before  taking  his  examinations  for  advanced  standing 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


205 


at  Harvard,  he  came  upon  a  prospectus  of  Herbert  Spencer’s  pro¬ 
posed  system  of  philosophy,  and  this  boy  of  eighteen  was  one  of  the 
first  dozen  Americans  to  subscribe  to  the  undertaking.  It  was  a 
golden  day  in  his  life,  that  was  to  determine  his  whole  intellectual 
development.  He  became  a  devoted  disciple  of  Spencer,  dedicating 
his  labors  to  the  great  cause  of  evolution.  To  that  end  he  felt  called 
to  study  prodigiously.  As  a  Harvard  undergraduate  he  found  it 
difficult  to  treat  his  conventional  instructors  with  due  respect,  for 
while  his  classmates  were  struggling  with  Greek  roots  he  was  ex¬ 
ploring  the  whole  field  of  philology  and  rioting  in  Comtean  soci¬ 
ology.  Instead  of  exhausting  his  energies  with  the  usual  under¬ 
graduate  themes,  he  w’rote  in  his  junior  year,  at  the  age  of  nineteen, 
a  critical  examination  of  Buckle’s  History  of  Civilization  for  the 
National  Quarterly  Review;  and  while  preparing  for  his  final  exam¬ 
inations  he  wrote  a  learned  article  on  “  The  Evolution  of  Language  ” 
that  was  accepted  by  The  North  American  Review. 

Such  intellectual  precocity,  suggesting  to  timid  souls  a  lack  of 
respect  for  orthodox  opinions,  was  not  without  its  dangers.  From 
his  first  entrance  to  Harvard  he  was  marked  by  certain  tutors  as  a 
dangerous  influence.  Positivism  and  evolution  were  in  ill  repute  in 
the  college  circles,  and  he  was  eventually  summoned  before  the 
faculty  and  admonished  for  undermining  the  faith  of  Harvard 
undergradugtes.  Outside  the  college  he  was  becoming  known  as  the 
“young  atheist  of  Cambridge.”  The  reasons  for  such  a  reputation 
were  quite  sufficient  to  Unitarian  dogmatists  who  had  forgotten 
the  cardinal  principle  of  Unitarianism — the  principle  of  devout  free 
thought — for  young  John  Fiske  had  already  gathered  a  huge  pile  of 
combustible  materials  that  threatened  the  established  orthodoxy. 
Before  entering  Harvard  he  had  planned  to  write  a  history  of  early 
Christianity,  but  his  interest  in  science  drew  him  into  other  fields — 
the  new  sociological  interpretation  of  history  that  he  discovered  in 
Grote’s  History  of  Greece,  and  the  broad  field  of  scientific  specula¬ 
tion  that  opened  to  him  in  Humboldt’s  Cosmos.  To  this  latter 
field  he  turned  greedily,  reading  amongst  other  works  Cuvier’s 
Regne  Animal  distribue  d’apres  son  Organisation,  Herschel’ s  Outlines 
of  Astronomy,  Laplace ’s  Systeme  du  Monde,  Agassiz’s  Zoology  and 
his  Essay  on  the  Classification  of  the  Animal  Kingdom  (1857),  and 
with  the  joy  of  a  great  discovery  Darwin’s  Origin  of  Species 
(1859).  From  Agassiz’s  defense  of  special  creation  he  dissented 
vigorously,  and  this  dissent  prepared  him  for  an  enthusiastic  re- 


206 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


ception  of  Darwin’s  careful  exposition.  Certainly  no  other  young 
student  in  America  followed  so  closely  or  so  intelligently  the  un¬ 
folding  of  the  English  school  of  evolutionary  thought.  In  solid 
acquisition  and  in  intellectual  curiosity  he  was  far  in  advance  of 
Henry  Adams,  then  a  young  diplomat  in  London. 

Upon  his  graduation  in  1863  he  determined  upon  the  law,  read 
through  the  two-year  course  of  the  Harvard  Law  School  in  nine 
months,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  waited  two  years  for  clients  who 
never  came,  threw  it  over,  and  turned  to  his  first  love,  the  life  of  the 
scholar.  He  had  his  eye  on  a  chair  at  Harvard,  but  so  long  as  the 
old  orthodox  regime  lasted  no  opening  offered  there.  In  the  first 
year  of  President  Eliot’s  administration  (1869)  an  opportunity  was 
provided  and  he  was  invited  to  give  a  course  of  lectures  in  Holden 
Chapel  on  the  Positive  Philosophy.  The  opposition  was  still  too 
strong  to  permit  the  offer  he  sought — a  chair  in  history — but  he  was 
eventually  given  a  place  as  Assistant  Librarian,  where  he  spent 
five  years  amongst  the  books  of  Gore  Hall.  Driven  to  other  means 
of  support  he  turned  to  lecturing,  was  received  with  immense  ap¬ 
plause  in  London,  and  thereafter  to  the  end  of  his  life  he  suffered 
much  of  his  vast  energy  to  drain  off  into  that  most  fruitless  of  jobs 
for  a  creative  mind.  A  certain  genial  egoism  was  to  blame  for  his 
playing  willingly  the  role  of  lackey  to  women’s  clubs.  He  liked  to 
talk  to  sympathetic  audiences,  and  he  was  greatly  effective  on  the 
platform.  The  inevitable  result  was  that  he  fell  short  in  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  the  fine  promise  of  his  early  years.  His  style  became 
diffuse,  his  materials  picturesque  rather  than  solid,  his  thinking 
flabby.  Pretty  much  all  his  significant  work  was  done  before  he  was 
forty. 

The  greater  part  of  Fiske’s  intellectual  life,  despite  his  later  in¬ 
cursions  into  certain  waste  places  of  history,  was  dedicated  to  the 
indoctrination  of  the  American  people  in  the  principle  of  evolution 
as  that  principle  was  outlined  in  Spencer’s  Synthetic  Philosophy. 
He  was  a  man  of  one  idea,  but  that  idea  was  so  vast  and  germinal, 
so  comprehensive  in  its  implications  and  so  constructive  in  its  sug¬ 
gestions,  as  to  set  afoot  the  greatest  intellectual  revolution  in 
western  civilization.  He  called  himself  a  philosopher,  but  he  meant 
by  the  term  not  a  metaphysician,  but  a  cosmic  historian  whose 
business  was  to  interpret  the  universe  in  the  light  of  the  great  laws 
that  science  was  revealing.  By  i860  science  had  revealed  three  such 
general  laws:  the  law  of  gravitation,  the  law  of  biological  variation 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


207 


and  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  and  the  law  of  the  conservation  of 
energy;  and  from  them  Spencer  had  deduced  the  principle  of  a 
unitary  cosmos,  with  a  common  force  sustaining  both  the  organic 
and  the  inorganic,  working  to  a  single  “  far-off"  divine  event,  to 
which  the  whole  creation  moves.”  An  intimate  friend  of  Fiske’s, 
and  an  ardent  Spencerian,  puts  the  intellectual  situation  in  these 
terms: 

The  conceptions  of  the  Universe  generally  held  at  the  time  when  Fiske 
was  in  college  were  fragmentary  and  chaotic,  each  phenomenon  or  each 
group  of  phenomena  being,  like  language,  a  special  creation  of  an  anthropo¬ 
morphic  God,  turning  out  different  jobs  piecemeal  like  a  man.  The  con¬ 
ception  of  one  power  behind  all  had  been  a  dream  of  not  a  few  philosophers 
and  poets,  but  as  a  fact  comprehensible  by  the  average  mind,  it  was  not 
known  until  the  discovery  about  i860  of  the  Conservation  of  Force.  About 
the  same  time  was  discovered  the  unity  of  all  organic  life,  in  its  descent 
from  protoplasm,  and  the  identity  of  its  forces  with  those  of  the  inorganic 
universe.  The  nebular  cosmogony,  the  persistence  of  force  and  the  bio¬ 
logic  genesis,  united  together,  showed  the  power  evolving,  sustaining  and 
carrying  on  the  entire  universe  known  to  us,  to  be  one,  and  constantly 
acting  in  one  unified  process;  and  that  every  detail — from  the  most  mi¬ 
nute  known  to  the  chemist,  physicist  and  biologist,  up  to  the  greatest 
known  to  the  geologist  and  astronomer,  and  including  all  known  to  the 
psychologist,  economist,  and  historian — -was  caused  by  a  previous  detail. 
It  having  been  established  that  the  same  causes  always  produced  the  same 
results,  these  uniformities  were  recognized  as  Laws,  and  it  was  also  recog¬ 
nized  that  conduct  in  conformity  with  these  laws  produced  good,  and 
conduct  counter  to  them  produced  evil.  .  .  . 

These  great  discoveries  were  at  once  grasped  by  Fiske’s  great  intelli¬ 
gence,  and  welcomed  with  enthusiasm.  To  their  dissemination  he  mainly 
devoted  his  next  twenty  years,  and  to  their  illustration  in  the  origins  and 
foundation  of  our  national  commonwealth,  the  rest  of  his  career.13 

While  still  at  Harvard,  as  a  result  of  the  publication  of  his  two 
undergraduate  essays  already  referred  to,  he  was  sought  out  by 
Edward  L.  Youmans  and  urged  to  join  with  him  in  spreading  the 
new  evolutionary  philosophy.14  Youmans  was  an  ardent  proselyti- 
zer  who  had  volunteered  for  the  job  of  instructing  the  American 
people  in  the  meaning  of  science.  He  attached  himself  to  Spencer 
as  spokesman  and  publicity  agent,  and  was  on  the  lookout  for 
helpers.  Encouraged  thus  by  Youmans,  Fiske  threw  himself 
impetuously  into  the  work  of  furthering  the  new  philosophy  of 

13  Henry  Holt,  Garrulities  of  an  Octogenarian  Editor,  with  Other  Essays  somewhat 
Biographical  and  Autobiographical,  Boston,  1923,  pp.  327-328. 

14  See  John  Spencer  Clark,  Life  and  Letters  of  John  Fiske ,  Vol.  I,  pp.  273-278. 


208 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


evolution.  As  the  task  unfolded  before  his  maturing  mind  it  came 
to  involve  three  major  problems:  to  dissociate  in  the  popular  mind 
the  potential  theism  of  Spencer’s  First  Principles  from  the  material¬ 
ism  of  Comte’s  Positivism,  with  which  it  was  widely  confused;  to 
elaborate  the  teleological  implications  of  evolution  and  demon¬ 
strate  that  the  grand  objective  of  all  natural  processes  was  “the 
production  of  happiness,  and  that,  despite  occasional  lapses,  all 
records  of  them  prove  that,  on  the  whole,  they  tend  not  only  to 
produce  happiness,  but  to  increase  it”;15  and  finally  to  apply  the 
principles  of  the  cosmic  philosophy  to  historical  writing  and  reveal 
how  the  law  of  evolution  determines  the  forms  of  social  institutions 
— to  do  more  adequately  in  the  field  of  American  history  what 
Buckle  had  tried  to  do  in  a  larger  field  without  the  aid  of  evolution. 

In  all  his  intellectual  interests  and  attitudes  Fiske  was  a  complete 
New  England  Victorian,  but  scarcely  a  British  Victorian.  In  his 
erection  of  the  doctrine  of  progress  into  a  cosmic  law,  and  in  his 
resultant  optimism,  he  was  at  one  with  Spencer  and  the  English 
group.  But  he  was  a  son  of  New  England  before  he  was  an  evolu¬ 
tionist,  and  although  he  had  broken  with  the  grotesque,  anthropo¬ 
morphic  dogmas  of  Calvinism,  he  remained  profoundly  religious, 
and  like  Henry  Drummond  he  sought  to  transfuse  science  with 
spiritual  qualities.  He  was  effectively  a  Unitarian,  the  leader  of  the 
Cambridge  intellectuals  who  were  carrying  on  the  work  that 
Theodore  Parker  would  have  done  had  he  lived  twenty  years 
longer — the  work  of  bridging  the  chasm  between  science  and  reli¬ 
gion.  To  that  end  his  vast  concern  with  teleology — that  God  is 
the  great  wellspring  out  of  which  flows  the  unfolding  cosmos,  and 
that  the  unfolding  is  guided  and  controlled  to  beneficent  ends. 
Natural  law,  working  in  a  realm  of  causation,  and  shaping  matter 
to  forms  more  and  more  complex,  to  John  Fiske  was  no  other  than 
the  beneficent  purpose  known  to  theology  as  Divine  Providence. 

Pretty  much  all  that  he  had  to  say  on  the  question  is  contained  in 
the  four  volumes  of  Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,  published  when 
he  was  only  thirty-two.  Written  with  great  enthusiasm  and 
complete  confidence,  it  was  an  attempt  to  summarize  and  restate 
the  conception  of  cosmic  evolution  as  Spencer  had  defined  it  in 
First  Principles,  and  partly  elaborated  it  in  his  Biology  and  Psychol¬ 
ogy.  It  was  a  timely  presentation,  and  with  its  lucid  exposition  of 
the  evidence  drawn  from  the  several  fields  of  science  it  furthered 

15  Henry  Holt,  op.  cit.,  p.  328. 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


209 


the  spread  of  the  evolutionary  philosophy.  But  it  sought  to  do 
more.  Not  content  with  arraying  in  due  order  the  scientific  proofs 
of  a  vast  unitary  cosmos — as  Spencer  had  done — Fiske  essayed  the 
role  of  apologist  and  supplemented  the  facts  of  science  with  onto¬ 
logical  and  teleological  speculations.  Whereas  Spencer  had  re¬ 
mained  agnostic,  refusing  to  speculate  on  the  unknowable,  and 
clearly  implying  a  deterministic  cosmos,  Fiske  took  high  theistic 
ground,  asserting  that  evolution  implies  the  existence  of  a  creative 
mind,  vaster  than  the  anthropomorphic  conceptions  of  theology 
and  far  nobler,  whose  cosmic  plan  unfolding  in  the  material  uni¬ 
verse  compels  a  belief  in  a  benevolent  God,  and  a  belief  also  in  the 
“eternal  source  of  a  moral  law  which  is  implicated  with  each  action 
of  our  lives,  and  in  obedience  to  which  lies  our  only  guarantee  of  the 
happiness  which  is  incorruptible.”  And  this  “eternal  Power,  not 
ourselves,  that  makes  for  righteousness” — to  use  Arnold’s  phrase 
which  Fiske  wTas  fond  of  quoting — is  making  also  for  altruism  and 
the  spirit  of  love  that  lies  at  the  heart  of  Christianity;  for  is  not  the 
prolongation  of  infancy  with  its  demands  on  altruism — a  principle 
that  was  Fiske’s  contribution  to  evolution,  of  which  he  was  justly 
proud — a  master  biological  device  for  individual  variation?  In 
consequence  the  evolutionist  becomes  not  only  a  theist,  but  a 
Christian  in  the  truest  meaning  of  the  term.  The  fatherhood  of 
God  and  the  brotherhood  of  man — to  which  New  England  Uni- 
tarianism  had  come  to  restrict  its  dogmas — are  in  reality  “two  great 
interrelated  cosmic  truths — the  existence  of  righteousness  as  an 
active  principle  in  the  Infinite  Power  or  Reality  back  of  the  cosmos, 
and  its  correlative  manifestation  in  the  altruistic  consciousness  of 
man.”16 

Such  speculation  concerning  the  unknowable  exercised  an  in¬ 
creasing  fascination  for  Fiske  as  his  deeply  religious  nature  slowly 
colored  the  acquisitions  of  the  scientist,  and  in  a  succession  of 
tracts — The  Destiny  of  Man  (1884),  The  Idea  of  God  (1885), 
Through  Nature  to  God  (1899),  and  Life  Everlasting  (1900)— he 
definitely  rejected  the  negative  attitude  of  agnosticism  that  was  a 
common  mark  of  the  English  evolutionary  school,  and  turned  to 
outline  the  religious  faith  of  an  evolutionist.  George  Eliot’s  dictum 
that  God  is  unknowable  and  immortality  is  unthinkable,  was  too 
thin  a  diet  for  his  robust  nature;  instead  he  elaborated  the  argu¬ 
ment  that  faith  in  God  and  immortality  is  reasonable  in  the  light  of 
18  John  Spencer  Clark,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  p.  50. 


210 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


the  evolving  cosmos  that  science  was  revealing.  To  John  Fiske 
that  cosmos  was  not  bleak  and  impersonal,  a  vast  congeries  of 
physical  forces  that  reduced  man  to  the  status  of  a  flea  on  the 
epidermis  of  earth,  but  the  expression  rather  of  a  benevolent  will 
unfolding  in  accordance  with  a  divine  purpose.  “The  process  of 
evolution  is  itself  the  working  out  of  a  mighty  Teleology,  of  which 
our  finite  understandings  can  fathom  but  the  scantiest  rudiments.” 
To  Henry  Holt  this  recovery  of  teleology  was  Fiske’s  great  contri¬ 
bution  to  evolutionary  thought. 

He  did  more  just  there  than  any  modern  philosopher,  perhaps  than  any 
philosopher,  to  show  that  this  teleology  is  beneficent,  and  to  restore  in  this 
way  the  attitude  of  mind  which  it  may  not  yet  be  too  late  to  call  Faith 
in  God  and  Immortality.17 

No  doubt  it  was  due  to  such  emphasis  on  the  theistic  implications 
of  evolution  that  the  doctrine  was  so  quickly  accepted  in  New  Eng¬ 
land  amongst  the  Unitarians  and  liberals;  but  for  Fiske  it  marked 
the  end  of  his  intellectual  leadership.  After  the  battle  had  been 
won  he  turned  away  to  engage  in  less  fruitful  activities,  no  longer 
followed  keenly  the  new  discoveries  of  science,  and  finally  set  him¬ 
self  to  write  the  history  of  America.  The  venture  on  the  whole  was 
not  fortunate.  In  his  attempt  to  reinterpret  the  American  past  he 
suffered  from  grave  handicaps,  an  inadequate  knowledge  and  an 
inadequate  philosophy.  He  was  led  into  the  field  of  history  by  his 
interest  in  the  English  school  of  Grote  and  Maine  and  Stubbs  and 
Freeman,  and  his  ultimate  purpose  was  to  present  “the  drama  of 
American  civilization,  of  which  the  political  organization  of  the 
United  States  was  the  crowning  feature,  as  an  evolutionary  de¬ 
velopment  from  antecedent  causes  and  of  great  significance  to 
the  future  civilization  of  the  world.”  18  But  for  this  undertaking 
he  was  inadequately  equipped  and  his  conscious  search  for  a  Com- 
tean  continuity  in  social  growth  did  him  a  real  disservice.  The 
economics  of  historical  change  he  seems  never  to  have  considered, 
and  his  analyses  of  social  forces  are  never  acute  or  penetrating. 
Although  he  attempted  to  apply  sociological  evolution  to  history 
he  was  really  little  more  than  a  political  and  military  historian 
with  a  special  fondness  for  wars  and  the  details  of  battle  strategy. 
In  his  first  venture,  American  Political  Ideas — written  for  his 
London  lectures  of  1880 — he  simplified  American  political  develop- 

17  Henry  Holt,  op.  cit.,  p.  339. 

18  John  Spencer  Clark,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  p.  456. 


DISINTEGRATION  AND  REINTEGRATION 


211 


merit  to  two  germinal  ideas — the  town  meeting  and  the  principle 
of  federation,  and  these  two  conceptions  he  traces  back  to  the 
Teutonic  folkmote  and  the  Teutonic  principle  of  shire  representa¬ 
tion.  The  theme  with  which  he  deals  is  thus  stated  in  the  preface: 

The  government  of  the  United  States  is  not  the  result  of  special  creation, 
but  of  evolution.  As  the  town-meetings  of  New  England  are  lineally  de¬ 
scended  from  the  village  assemblies  of  the  early  Aryans;  as  our  huge  fed¬ 
eral  union  was  long  ago  foreshadowed  in  the  little  leagues  of  Greek  cities 
and  Swiss  cantons;  so  the  great  political  problem  which  we  are  (thus  far 
successfully)  solving  is  the  very  same  problem  upon  which  all  civilized 
peoples  have  been  working  ever  since  civilization  began.  How  to  insure 
peaceful  concerted  action  throughout  the  Whole,  without  infringing  upon 
local  and  individual  freedom  in  the  Parts, — this  has  ever  been  the  chief 
aim  of  civilization,  viewed  on  its  political  side;  and  we  rate  the  failure  or 
success  of  nations  politically  according  to  their  failure  or  success  in  at¬ 
taining  this  supreme  end.  When  thus  considered  in  the  light  of  the  com¬ 
parative  method  our  American  history  acquires  added  dignity  and  inter¬ 
est,  and  a  broad  and  rational  basis  is  secured  for  the  detailed  treatment  of 
political  questions.19 

Only  a  New  England  historian  could  write  so  naively  as  that, 
for  only  to  a  New  Englander  does  the  town  meeting  become  a 
germinal  source  of  American  democracy.  Not  a  great  historian, 
Fiske  ceased  to  be  in  his  wandering  later  years  a  great  intellectual 
influence.  The  rare  promise  of  his  young  manhood  he  never  ful¬ 
filled,  but  like  his  generation  he  suffered  his  energies  to  be  dissipated 
and  he  ended  in  a  somewhat  blowsy  optimism.  To  Henry  Holt  he 
was  a  very  great  and  learned  man,  but  to  a  later  generation  it  is 
difficult  to  make  out  his  vast  stature.  Nevertheless  as  a  purveyor 
of  Victorian  science  to  the  American  people  he  did  a  useful  and 
important  work. 

19  John  Fiske,  American  Political  Ideas,  Preface,  pp.  4-5. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS 


In  the  welter  of  change  that  resulted  from  the  revolutionary  transi¬ 
tions  of  the  Gilded  Age,  one  man  at  least  stood  apart,  skeptical 
about  the  worth  of  the  current  revolutions,  unconvinced  that  all 
the  hurly-burly  meant  a  rational  progress.  To  Henry  Adams 
skepticism  early  became  a  habit.  Doubt  persistently  dogged  his 
footsteps  and  the  more  critically  he  examined  the  ways  of  his 
generation  of  Americans,  the  more  certain  it  seemed  to  him  that  any 
were  unworthy  the  name  of  civilization.  He  was  not  at  home  in  the 
new  world  of  the  Gilded  Age;  and  as  he  watched  the  disintegrations 
of  the  older  New  England  in  which  he  had  been  brought  up,  an  in¬ 
curable  nostalgia  seized  upon  him  and  he  set  about  seeking  another 
home  where  he  might  live  the  good  life  he  had  not  lived  heretofore. 
The  America  of  the  Gilded  Age  was  alien  to  him;  its  gods  were  not 
his  gods,  nor  its  ends  his  ends.  And  so  began  for  him  a  long  pil¬ 
grimage  of  the  spirit  that  was  to  carry  him  far  and  return  him  at 
last  with  no  solider  gains  than  a  handful  of  curious  relics  in  his 
pilgrim’s  scrip. 

The  sturdy  New  England  character,  with  its  self-sufficing  in¬ 
dividualism  and  granite  integrity,  never  came  to  finer  flower  than 
in  the  Braintree-Quincy  house  of  Adams.  Intellectually  curious, 
given  to  rationalism,  retaining  much  of  the  eighteenth-century 
solidity  of  intellect  and  honest  realism,  refusing  to  barter  principle 
for  the  good  will  of  men,  the  Adams  line  produced  no  more  charac¬ 
teristic  offshoots  than  came  in  the  fourth  generation.  In  Charles 
Francis  Adams,  Jr.,  Henry  Adams,  and  Brooks  Adams,  the  family 
virtues  of  independence,  intellectual  integrity,  and  disinterested 
criticism,  found  abundant  expression.  All  three  were  children  of  an 
earlier  century,  endowed  with  the  solidest  Yankee-Puritan  qualities 
of  mind  and  heart,  unyielding  as  the  rock  ledges  of  their  native 
field  s;  and  they  found  the  experience  of  living  in  the  late  nineteenth 
century,  of  adjusting  their  eighteenth-century  minds  to  the  de¬ 
mands  of  a  sordid  capitalistic  order,  a  difficult  business.  Though 
they  tried  to  bridge  the  chasm  between  the  two  worlds,  though  they 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  213 


honestly  sought  some  working  compromise  that  would  suffer  them 
to  share  in  the  work  of  their  generation,  they  met  with  failure.  It 
was  not  possible  for  the  House  of  Adams,  with  its  old-fashioned 
rectitude,  to  accept  the  ways  of  the  Gilded  Age,  and  in  the  end  they 
turned  aside  from  the  main-traveled  road  to  follow  their  own  paths. 

i 

CHARLES  FRANCIS  ADAMS— THE  BUSINESS  FAILURE 

Of  the  three  Charles  Francis  Adams  most  nearly  succeeded  in 
his  experiment  of  a  rapprochement  with  capitalism,  with  the  result 
that  his  life  came  nearest  to  shipwreck.  Perhaps  there  was  less  of 
the  Adams  granite  in  his  character.  He  refused  to  turn  rebel  but 
consciously  sought  to  win  the  prizes  offered  by  his  generation, 
training  himself  to  serve  financial  interests,  making  overtures  to 
business,  and  achieving  a  very  considerable  financial  success.  Yet 
nothing  was  more  incongruous  than  an  Adams  serving  as  lackey 
to  State  Street,  and  when  after  abundant  experience  he  came 
finally  to  realize  it  he  turned  away  to  pick  up  the  scattered  threads 
of  a  life  largely  wasted.  For  years  he  had  suffered  from  a  long  mal¬ 
adjustment.  When  he  quitted  the  army  at  the  close  of  the  war  with 
the  brevet  rank  of  brigadier-general,  he  found  himself  adrift.  The 
world  of  his  youth  was  gone  and  the  future  seemed  drab  and  un¬ 
promising.  Intellectually  he  was  caught  between  tides.  The  tradi¬ 
tional  idealisms  had  burnt  out  in  the  bitter  struggle,  and  in  the 
sterile  post-war  years  his  Puritan  nature  found  no  adequate  nour¬ 
ishment.  The  crusading  ardor  was  gone,  and  the  new  world  of 
science  had  not  yet  risen  on  the  horizon  of  young  men  who  had 
given  their  youth  to  the  army.  In  1865  he  came  upon  John  Stuart 
Mill’s  essay  on  Auguste  Comte,  which  he  said  revolutionized  his 
whole  mental  attitude — “I  emerged  from  the  theological  stage,  in 
which  I  had  been  nurtured,  and  passed  into  the  scientific.  .  .  . 
From  reading  that  compact  little  volume  of  Mill’s  ...  I  date  a 
changed  intellectual  and  moral  life.”  Yet  from  this  accidental 
foray  into  Victorian  rationalism  he  got  little  more  than  a  sense  of 
release  from  a  dead  Puritanism.  Creative  intellectual  enthusiasms 
were  not  to  be  his  portion. 

Disillusioned  with  the  law,  over  which  he  had  been  pottering, 
and  wanting  to  ally  himself  with  the  dominant  forces  of  his  genera¬ 
tion,  he  “fixed  on  the  railroad  system  as  the  most  developing  force 


214 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


and  largest  field  of  the  day.”  He  delved  into  the  history  of  certain 
railways  and  established  a  reputation  as  a  student  of  transportation. 
For  upwards  of  a  quarter  century — from  1866  to  1890 — as  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  different  public  commissions  and  finally  as  president  of  the 
Union  Pacific  system — Jay  Gould’s  road — he  devoted  his  best 
energy  to  the  work,  only  to  be  disillusioned  in  the  end.  In  1912  he 
wrote  this  confession: 

Indeed,  as  I  approach  the  end,  I  am  more  than  a  little  puzzled  to  account 
for  the  instances  I  have  seen  of  business  success — money-getting.  It 
comes  from  a  rather  low  instinct.  Certainly,  as  far  as  my  observation 
goes,  it  is  rarely  met  with  in  combination  with  the  finer  or  more  interesting 
traits  of  character.  I  have  known,  and  known  tolerably  well,  a  good  many 
“successful”  men — “big”  financially — -men  famous  during  the  last  half- 
century;  and  a  less  interesting  crowd  I  do  not  care  to  encounter.  Not  one 
that  I  have  ever  known  would  I  care  to  meet  again,  either  in  this  world 
or  the  next;  nor  is  one  of  them  associated  in  my  mind  with  the  idea  of 
humor,  thought,  or  refinement.  A  set  of  mere  money-getters  and  traders, 
they  were  essentially  unattractive  and  uninteresting.  ...  In  the  course 
of  my  railroad  experiences  I  made  no  friends,  apart  from  those  in  the  Bos¬ 
ton  direction;  nor  among  those  I  met  was  there  any  man  whose  acquaint¬ 
ance  I  valued.  They  were  a  coarse,  realistic,  bargaining  crowd.1 

Yet  not  till  he  had  reached  his  late  fifties  did  he  finally  cut  the 
ties  that  held  him  to  the  “bargaining  crowd,”  and  turn  to  the 
business  of  salvaging  the  remnant  of  his  days.  He  gave  himself 
over  with  zest  to  the  writing  of  Massachusetts  history,  but  it  was 
then  too  late  to  do  notable  work.  He  had  laid  too  many  offerings 
on  an  altar  he  had  come  to  loathe.  Not  a  lifelong  student  like 
Henry,  he  had  been  unable  to  gather  great  stores  of  knowledge. 
Not  a  militant  rebel  like  Brooks,  he  had  never  been  given  to  search¬ 
ing  inquiries  into  the  laws  of  civilization.  And  so  when  he  found 
himself  free  at  last,  he  set  himself  to  the  business  of  local  chronicles. 
That  was  better  than  nothing;  it  was  the  one  thing  in  his  life  he  took 
solid  pride  in;  the  work  was  honestly  and  capably  done;  but  it  was 
small  savings  from  a  lifetime  of  conscientious  work.  His  venture 
into  the  realm  of  business  had  been  a  disaster. 

ir 

HENRY  ADAMS— INTELLECTUAL 

From  a  similar  disaster  Henry  Adams  was  saved  by  an  early  dis¬ 
illusionment.  His  efforts  at  rapprochement  were  little  more  than  a 
gesture.  While  casting  about  after  the  war  for  a  promising  opening 

1  Autobiography,  pp.,  190-195. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  215 


for  a  career  he  hit  upon  finance  as  a  likely  field  and  published  a 
number  of  essays  that  drew  attention  to  him.  But  it  was  quite  im¬ 
possible  for  him  to  go  forward  along  such  lines.  He  was  too  com¬ 
pletely  the  intellectual,  too  aloof  from  his  generation  in  spirit  and 
will,  to  ally  himself  with  the  economic  masters  of  the  Gilded  Age. 
Sooner  or  later  he  would  go  his  own  w7ay,  and  luckily  good  fortune 
took  the  matter  in  hand  promptly.  No  suitable  opportunity  offer¬ 
ing,  he  was  dragooned  by  family  and  friends  into  an  assistant- 
professorship  at  Harvard,  where  he  spent  seven  years  trying  to  ex¬ 
plain  to- himself  and  his  students  the  meaning  of  the  Middle  Ages. 
Those  years  were  his  introduction  to  history.  The  passion  of  the 
student  was  in  his  blood,  and  he  turned  with  zest  to  brood  over  the 
scanty  records  of  past  generations,  seeking  a  clue  to  the  meaning  of 
man’s  pilgrimage  on  earth,  trying  to  arrange  the  meaningless  frag¬ 
ments  in  some  sort  of  rational  pattern,  in  the  hope  of  discovering 
an  underlying  unity  in  what  seemed  on  the  face  only  a  meaningless 
welter  of  complexity  and  irrationality.  A  rationalist,  he  followed 
his  intellect  in  an  eager  quest  for  the  law  of  historical  evolution, 
and  he  ended  fifty  years  later  in  mysticism.  It  was  a  natural  out¬ 
come  for  a  lifetime  of  rationalizing — a  compensation  for  the  mor¬ 
dant  dissatisfactions  that  issued  from  the  restless  play  of  mind. 

Dissatisfied  with  his  labors  he  quitted  the  Harvard  post  in  1879 
and  thereafter  made  his  home  at  Washington  in  the  atmosphere  of 
politics.  From  the  Middle  Ages  he  turned  to  the  American  past  and 
set  out  to  explore  the  period  during  which  the  first  Adams  had 
played  his  part.  He  could  not  deal  with  narrow  parochial  themes; 
he  would  not  fall  into  the  “sink  of  history — antiquarianism,”  that 
satisfied  Charles  Francis  Adams.  From  the  beginnings  of  his  in¬ 
tellectual  life  he  had  been  concerned  with  the  ideas  and  ideals  that 
presumably  lie  behind  periods  and  civilizations;  so  he  went  back  to 
what  he  regarded  as  the  great  age  of  American  political  history,  to 
inquire  into  the  meaning  of  the  struggle  between  Federalism  and 
Jeffersonianism  for  control  of  the  venture  in  republicanism.  But 
finding  little  satisfaction  there,  as  he  had  earlier  found  none  in 
Victorian  England,  where  he  had  studied  closely  contemporary 
English  statesmen— Palmerston  and  Lord  Russell  and  Gladstone — 
only  to  convince  himself  that  they  were  bankrupt  of  ideas  and 
morality,  and  had  nothing  to  teach  concerning  the  good  life,  he 
abandoned  the  field,  threw  over  his  familiar  studies,  and  set  about 
the  great  business  of  reeducating  himself. 


216 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


From  his  long  studies  in  the  American  past  one  significant  thing 
had  emerged — he  had  come  to  understand  the  source  of  certain  of 
his  dissatisfactions  with  current  American  ideals  that  set  him 
apart  from  his  fellows.  He  had  gone  back  to  his  own  origins  and 
had  traced  the  rise  of  the  defiant  Adams  prejudices  that  were  as 
strong  in  the  fourth  generation  as  they  had  been  in  the  first.  The 
Adams  family  was  eighteenth-century — Henry  Adams  had  come 
to  understand — and  he  himself  in  mind  and  education  and  preju¬ 
dices,  was  of  that  earlier  time.  He  was  a  child  of  Quincy  rather 
than  Boston — a  simple  world  with  simple  virtues  that  capitalism 
and  industrialism  were  destroying  in  the  name  of  progress.  From 
such  village  loyalties  he  could  not  rid  himself.  Perhaps  in  reason  he 
should  not  have  preferred  that  earlier  homespun  world;  but  affec¬ 
tion  does  not  heed  logic,  and  as  Henry  Adams  traced  the  decline  of 
Quincy  to  Hamilton’s  financial  policy  that  started  the  new  capital¬ 
ism  on  its  triumphant  career,  he  was  filled  with  bitterness.  It  was 
a  vulgar  order  that  was  rising  and  an  evil  day.  Since  1865  the 
bankers  had  ruled  America,  and  they  were  coming  finally  to  cajole 
the  American  people  into  accepting  their  vulgar  ideals  and  putting 
their  trust  in  a  bankers’  paradise.  As  he  watched  the  temples  of 
the  new  society  rising  everywhere  in  the  land,  his  gorge  rose  at  the 
prospect.  He  had  no  wish  to  dwell  in  a  bankers’ paradise.  Dislike 
of  a  capitalistic  society  was  in  his  blood.  From  father  to  son  all 
the  Adamses  had  distrusted  capitalism  and  hated  State  Street. 
The  “only  distinctive  mark  of  all  the  Adamses,”  he  said  late  in 
life,  “since  old  Sam  Adams’s  father  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  be¬ 
fore,  had  been  their  inherited  quarrel  with  State  Street,  which  had 
again  and  again  broken  out  into  riot,  bloodshed,  personal  feuds, 
foreign  and  civil  war,  wholesale  banishments  and  confiscations, 
until  the  history  of  Florence  was  hardly  more  turbulent  than 
that  of  Boston.”2 

And  so  when  at  the  climax  of  the  capitalistic  revolution  he 
watched  the  change  going  on  noisily  all  about  him,  when  the  transi¬ 
tion  to  the  bankers’  paradise  was  called  progress  and  capitalistic 
feudalism  was  hailed  as  the  advent  of  Utopia,  he  seemed  to  himself 
a  somewhat  pathetic  anachronism.  Shades  of  the  prison  house  were 
falling  about  him.  “He  had  hugged  his  antiquated  dislike  of  bank¬ 
ers  and  capitalistic  society,”  he  said  bitterly,  “until  he  had  be¬ 
come  little  better  than  a  crank.” 

2  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams,  p.  21. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  217 


He  had  known  for  years  that  he  must  accept  the  regime,  but  he  had 
known  a  great  many  other  disagreeable  certainties — like  age,  senility,  and 
death — against  which  one  made  what  little  resistance  one  could.  .  .  .  For 
a  hundred  years,  between  1793  and  1893,  the  American  people  had  hesi¬ 
tated,  vacillated,  swayed  forward  and  back,  between  two  forces,  one  simply 
industrial,  the  other  capitalistic,  centralizing,  and  mechanical.  In  i893> 
the  issue  came  on  the  single  gold  standard,  and  the  majority  at  last  de¬ 
clared  itself,  once  for  all,  in  favor  of  the  capitalistic  system  with  all  its 
necessary  machinery.  All  one’s  friends,  all  one’s  best  citizens,  reformers, 
churches,  colleges,  educated  classes,  had  joined  the  banks  to  force  sub¬ 
mission  to  capitalism;  a  submission  long  foreseen  by  the  mere  law  of  mass. 
Of  all  forms  of  society  or  government,  this  was  the  one  he  liked  least,  but 
his  likes  and  dislikes  were  as  antiquated  as  the  rebel  doctrine  of  State 
rights.  A  capitalistic  system  had  been  adopted,  and  if  it  were  to  be  run 
at  all,  it  must  be  run  by  capital  and  by  capitalistic  methods.3 

But  while  he  clung  tenaciously  to  his  obsolete  prejudices  in 
favor  of  an  earlier  century,  the  pugnacious  realism  of  that  century 
was  oozing  out  of  him.  The  middle  years  of  his  life,  between  the 
acceptance  of  the  Harvard  post  in  1870  and  the  final  break  with 
Victorianism  in  1892,  were  intellectually  an  unhappy  period.  He 
was  losing  his  grasp  on  realities  and  becoming  narrowly  and  ex¬ 
clusively  political-minded.  It  was  not  good  for  him  to  live  daily 
in  the  presence  of  politics.  In  so  “far  as  he  had  a  function  in  life,” 
he  said  of  the  Henry  Adams  of  1877,  “it  was  as  stable-companion 
to  statesmen,  whether  they  liked  it  or  not.”4  The  term  “states¬ 
men”  was  of  course  only  a  polite  euphemism  for  the  breed  of  pol¬ 
iticians  who  played  their  sordid  game  under  his  critical  eyes.  He 
was  rarely  under  any  illusions  in  regard  to  them  except  when 
blinded  by  friendship.  Certainly  his  etchings  of  Grant  and  Blaine 
and  Sherman  and  Conkling  and  other  servants  of  democracy 
were  done  with  acid. 

Yet  in  all  his  penetrating  comment  on  men  and  measures  there  is 
a  curious  failure  to  take  into  account  the  economic  springs  of 
action.  He  had  let  slip  the  clue  old  John  Adams  had  followed  so 
tenaciously.  An  acute  historian,  not  thus  wanting,  would  never 
have  traced  the  triumph  of  the  gold  standard  to  the  “mere  law  of 
mass,”  would  never  have  substituted  a  physical  determinism  for  an 
economic,  would  never  have  confused  the  principle  of  mass  with  a 
minority.  How  far  an  intelligent  man  and  a  competent  historiar 
could  go  astray  in  his  criticism  of  current  ways  is  suggested  by  the 
curious  novel  Democracy,  that  he  wrote  in  1880  while  living  in  the 

a  Ibid.,  pp.  343-344-  4  Ibid->  P-  3  r7- 


218 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


daily  companionship  of  John  Hay  and  Clarence  King.  In  dealing 
with  the  phenomena  of  political  corruption  he  had  none  of  the 
acuteness  of  old  John  Taylor  of  Carolina,  who  would  have  put  his 
finger  unerringly  on  the  cause,  or  of  the  first  Adams.  If  he  had 
written  Democracy  after  he  had  studied  the  funding  operations  of 
the  Federalists  under  Hamilton’s  leadership,  very  likely  he  would 
have  dealt  with  the  problem  more  searchingly;  but  in  1880  Henry 
Adams  revealed  no  more  critical  intelligence  than  did  Godkin  or 
Lowell  or  other  critics  of  the  Gilded  Age. 

The  historical  work  done  during  those  middle  years  at  Washing¬ 
ton  was  abundant  and  excellent,  marked  by  rigorous  use  of  sources, 
a  dispassionate  attitude  towards  partisan  issues,  and  excellent 
form.  It  was  easy  for  an  Adams  to  take  middle  ground  between 
Jefferson  and  Hamilton,  however  much  his  sympathies  inclined  to 
the  former.  In  all  this  work,  however,  in  the  Life  of  Albert  Gallatin 
(1879),  in  John  Randolph  (1882),  as  well  as  in  the  nine-volume 
History  of  the  United  States  during  the  Administrations  of  Jefferson 
and  Madison  (1889-1891),  the  point  of  view  remains  too  narrowly 
political,  with  the  result  that  it  fails  to  thrust  into  adequate  relief 
the  economics  of  the  great  struggle  between  agrarianism  and  cap¬ 
italism;  and  without  that  clue  the  interpretation  is  wanting  in 
substantial  realism. 

By  1891  he  was  convinced  that  he  had  got  all  he  could  from  the 
curdled  milk  of  politics,  and  he  became  dissatisfied  with  his  work. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  was  a  growing  realization  of  the 
inadequacy  of  his  analysis  of  social  forces  that  determined  him  to 
abandon  the  field  he  had  tilled  so  long  and  set  about  the  business 
of  reeducating  himself.  If  Mont-Saint-Michel  and  Chartres  and 
The  Education  tell  anything  about  Henry  Adams  they  reveal  that 
his  dissatisfactions  welled  up  from  deep  springs  within  himself — 
from  the  consciousness  of  his  failure  to  penetrate  beneath  the 
surface,  to  probe  the  hidden  forces  that  move  the  puppets  on  the 
historical  stage.  He  had  long  been  seeking  an  adequate  philosophy 
of  history — for  'a  unity  behind  the  multiplicity — and  in  these  early 
years  of  the  nineties  he  was  stimulated  by  Brooks  Adams,  who  was 
then  deep  in  his  theory  of  the  law  of  civilization  and  decay  and  had 
come  to  lean  heavily  on  the  principle  of  economic  determinism.5 
“Brooks  Adams  had  taught  him,”  he  said  later,  “that  the  relation 
between  civilizations  was  that  of  trade,”  and  stimulated  by  this 

6  Ibid.,  pp.  338-339. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  219 


rediscovery  of  the  philosophy  of  the  first  Adams  he  set  about  the 
business  of  orienting  himself  to  the  realm  of  science,  of  substituting 
for  a  meaningless  political  interpretation  a  broader  philosophical 
interpretation. 

Very  likely  it  was  his  reading  in  the  sociology  of  the  Enlighten¬ 
ment  that  first  turned  his  thought  to  the  philosophy  of  history— 
chiefly  Turgot  and  Comte.  Speaking  of  the  years  1867-1868  he 
said  he  “became  a  Comteist,  within  the  limits  of  evolution.”6  He 
had  long  been  interested  in  such  clues  as  science  offered — in  the 
geological  theories  of  Sir  Charles  Lyell  and  the  biological  deductions 
of  Darwin.  But  the  theory  of  biological  evolution  with  its  implica¬ 
tions  of  a  benevolent  progress  from  the  simple  to  the  complex, 
failed  to  satisfy  him;  and  he  turned  to  the  physical  sciences  for  a 
guide,  discovering  as  the  ultimate  reality  behind  all  appearances — 
force.  This  physical  principle  he  transferred  to  the  field  of  sociol¬ 
ogy.  Coal-power,  electrical  power,  he  concluded,  were  to  civiliza¬ 
tion  what  the  gaseous  theory  was  to  physics.  It  was  a  creative 
suggestion  and  it  revolutionized  his  conception  of  history.  It  runs 
through  all  his  later  speculations  and  provided  the  basis  of  his 
thinking.  “Adams  never  knew  why,”  he  said,  “knowing  nothing  of 
Faraday,  he  began  to  mimic  Faraday’s  trick  of  seeing  lines  of 
force  all  about  him,  where  he  had  always  seen  lines  of  will.” 7  “To 
evolutionists  may  be  left  the  processes  of  evolution;  to  historians 
the  single  interest  is  the  law  of  reaction  between  force  and  force — 
between  mind  and  nature — the  law  of  progress.”8  “The  great 
division  of  history  into  phases  by  Turgot  and  Comte  first  affirmed 
this  law  in  its  outlines  by  asserting  the  unity  of  progress.”9 

Thus  by  the  aid  of  the  physical  sciences  Henry  Adams  came  back 
to  the  philosophy  of  determinism — a  conception  that  may  lead 
either  to  pantheism  or  to  mechanism  as  one’s  temperament  deter¬ 
mines.  In  such  a  choice  there  would  be  no  doubt  which  way  Henry 
Adams  would  go;  he  must  somehow  reconcile  determinism  and 
progress,  he  must  discover  unity  in  multiplicity  and  that  unity 
and  progress  he  found  in  a  mystical  pantheism.  Continuous 
movement,  universal  cause,  and  interchangeable  force.  This  was 
pantheism,  but  the  Schools  were  pantheist  .  .  .  and  their  deity 
was  the  ultimate  energy,  whose  thought  and  action  were  one.”1® 


6  Ibid.,  p.  225. 

7  Ibid.,  p.  426. 

8  Ibid.,  p.  493. 


9  Ibid.,  p.  493. 

1C  Ibid.,  pp.  428-429. 


220 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


How  creatively  this  pantheistic  mysticism  was  to  determine  his 
later  thinking  is  sufficiently  revealed  in  the  pages  of  Mont-Saint- 
Michel  and  Chartres.  With  incredible  labor  Henry  Adams  had  at 
last  made  his  way  out  of  the  Sahara  of  politics  in  which  he  had  long 
wandered. 

Phrased  in  less  transcendental  terms  his  philosophy  of  history,  as 
he  came  finally  to  understand  it,  was  expressed  thus: 

The  work  of  domestic  progress  is  done  by  masses  of  mechanical  power — 
steam,  electric,  furnace,  or  other — which  have  to  be  controlled  by  a  score 
or  two  of  individuals  who  have  shown  capacity  to  manage  it.  The  work  of 
internal  government  has  become  the  task  of  controlling  these  men,  who 
are  socially  as  remote  as  heathen  gods,  alone  worth  knowing,  but  never 
known,  and  who  could  tell  nothing  of  political  value  if  one  skinned  them 
alive.  Most  of  them  have  nothing  to  tell,  but  are  forces  as  dumb  as  their 
dynamos,  absorbed  in  the  development  or  economy  of  power.  They  are 
trustees  for  the  public,  and  whenever  society  assumes  the  property,  it 
must  confer  on  them  that  title;  but  the  power  will  remain  as  before,  who¬ 
ever  manages  it,  and  will  then  control  society  without  appeal,  as  it  con¬ 
trols  its  stokers  and  pit-men.  Modern  politics  is,  at  bottom,  a  struggle 
not  of  men  but  of  forces.  The  men  become  every  year  more  and  more 
creatures  of  force,  massed  about  central  power-houses.  The  conflict  is  no 
longer  between  the  men,  but  between  the  motors  that  drive  the  men,  and 
the  men  tend  to  succumb  to  their  own  motive  forces.  This  is  a  moral  that 
man  strongly  objects  to  admit,  especially  in  mediaeval  pursuits  like  poli¬ 
tics  and  poetry,  nor  is  it  worth  while  for  a  teacher  to  insist  upon  it.11 

From  a  civilization  thus  tyrannized  over  by  coal-power  and  elec¬ 
trical  power,  he  turned  away  to  discover  if  possible  a  civilization  in 
which  men  had  lived  the  good  life  that  he  longed  for;  and  in  his 
second  incursion  into  medieval  times  he  found  what  he  had  long 
been  seeking.  Two  centuries,  from  1050  to  1250,  came  to  represent 
for  him  in  the  evening  of  his  days  the  crown  and  glory  of  all  human 
endeavor;  the  first  century  with  its  Norman  Mont-Saint-Michel 
and  its  Chanson  de  Roland,  with  its  forthright  strength  and  sim¬ 
plicity,  its  uncritical  acceptance  of  life  and  God,  its  hope  encom¬ 
passed  by  a  sufficing  unity — a  strong,  naive,  credulous  world,  yet 
with  men’s  minds  buttressed  like  their  cathedrals  by  a  faith  that 
held  in  equilibrium  the  soaring  arches  of  their  aspirations,  with 
every  cranny  and  nook  flooded  with  radiant  color:  and  the  second 
century,  that  expressed  itself  in  the  cathedral  of  Chartres,  with  its 
adoration  of  the  Virgin,  its  courtly  love  of  Guillaume  de  Lorris  and 
Marie  de  Champagne,  its  passionate  mysticism  of  Saint  Louis  and 

11  Ibid..,  pp.  421-422. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  221 

Saint  Bernard  and  Saint  Francis,  and  its  soaring  scholasticism  of 
1  homas  Aquinas — a  tender,  feminine  age,  that  worshiped  woman 
and  erected  its  altars  to  Our  Lady  of  Love  rather  than  to  Our  Lady 
of  Sorrows,  that  found  in  Isolde  the  ideal  woman  and  expressed  it¬ 
self  in  Eleanor  of  Guienne  and  Blanche  of  Castile,  in  Helo'ise  and 
Marie  de  Champagne,  more  adequately  than  in  Richard  Coeur-de- 
Lion,  till  it  finally  went  the  way  of  mortality  “with  the  death  of 
Queen  Blanche  and  of  all  good  things  about  the  year  1250”: — to 
such  idealization  of  medievalism  did  this  child  of  Puritanism  come 
in  the  wistful  twilight  of  his  days.  He  had  never  evaded  life,  nor 
professed  himself  satisfied  with  mean  or  cheap  substitutes,  but  had 
sought  persistently  till  he  had  come  to  believe  that  the  good  life  had 
been  lived  once,  though  it  might  not  ever  be  lived  again.  So  much 
at  least  was  clear  gain,  even  though  it  should  end  in  wistfulness. 

Mont-Saint-Michel  and  Chartres  is  a  beautiful  book,  the  more 
beautiful  because  of  its  wistfulness;  and  the  theme  that  runs  through 
its  pages  is  a  denial  of  the  values  that  embodied  for  his  countrymen 
the  sum  of  all  excellence.  It  is  an  account  of  certain  happy  genera¬ 
tions — so  few  amongst  the  countless  many — who  worshiped  in  love, 
before  fear  had  come  to  the  western  world  and  crept  into  the 
message  of  the  church;  a  love  that  elevated  Mother  Mary  above  the 
Christ  of  the  Cross,  and  that  in  her  shrine  at  Chartres  would  allow 
no  hint  of  sorrow  or  suffering  to  appear,  but  represented  her  as  look¬ 
ing  out  upon  the  world  with  a  gracious  and  regal  kindliness  and 
mercy,  quick  to  succor  and  to  forgive — the  spirit  of  love  that  suffices 
life  in  all  its  needs.  Mont-Saint-Michel  and  Chartres  is  rich  and 
tender  and  wise,  perhaps  beyond  anything  else  that  his  generation 
of  Americans  wrote,  with  a  mellow  scholarship  that  walks  modestly 
because  it  has  learned  how  little  it  knows.  Yet  in  its  every  implica¬ 
tion  it  is  a  sharp  and  searching  criticism  of  Boston  and  America  of 
the  nineteenth  century.  It  repudiates  every  ideal  of  a  generation 
that  had  gambled  away  the  savor  of  life — that  does  not  compre¬ 
hend  “and  never  shall,”  the  greatness  of  that  earlier  time,  “the 
appetite”  for  living,  the  “greed  for  novelty,”  “the  fun  of  life.”  12 
It  was  precisely  these  things,  unimportant  though  they  might  seem 
to  the  acquisitive  mind,  that  Henry  Adams  had  missed  in  his  own 
life  and  passionately  resented  having  missed.  To  come  to  know 
great  men  and  great  deeds  and  great  ages  is  perhaps  of  doubtful 
expediency  for  one  who  must  live  amongst  small  men;  and  Henry 

12  Ibid..,  p.  139. 


222 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


Adams  was  forced  to  pay  a  heavy  penalty  for  his  catholic  under¬ 
standing  and  sympathy. 

The  profound  suggestiveness  of  Mont-Saint-Michel  and  Chartres 
lies  in  the  skill  with  which  the  brilliant  threads  of  medieval  art  and 
thought  and  aspiration  are  woven  into  a  single  pattern,  and  the 
splendor  of  its  unity  traced  to  a  mystical  elan  that  found  its  highest 
expression  in  faith.  It  was  the  ideal  of  love  that  he  discovered  in  the 
golden  twelfth  century — love  above  law,  above  logic,  above  the 
church  and  the  schools:  a  love  that  explains  for  him  the  passionate 
worship  of  Mother  Mary,  together  with  the  new  “ courtoisie”  that 
sought  to  shape  manners  and  morals  to  humane  ends.  The  human¬ 
ity  of  the  Virgin  set  her  above  the  Trinity,  as  the  humanity  of  Saint 
Francis  set  him  above  Thomas  Aquinas,  for  all  the  latter’s  soaring 
scholasticism.  To  one  who  entered  those  bygone  times  through  the 
portals  of  Chartres  cathedral,  it  was  natural  to  interpret  the  total 
age  in  the  light  of  the  gentle  smile  of  the  Mother  of  God,  and  to  feel 
her  presence  as  a  transforming  spirit  amongst  men.  Has  any  other 
Yankee  interpreted  so  lovingly  the  mission  of  the  Virgin,  as  Henry 
Adams  analyzed  it  in  such  a  passage  as  this? 

True  it  was,  although  one  should  not  say  it  jestingly,  that  the  Virgin 
embarrassed  the  Trinity;  and  perhaps  this  was  the  reason,  behind  all  the 
other  excellent  reasons,  why  men  loved  and  adored  her  with  a  passion 
such  as  no  other  deity  has  ever  inspired:  and  why  we,  although  utter 
strangers  to  her,  are  not  far  from  getting  down  on  our  knees  and  praying 
to  her  still.  Mary  concentrated  in  herself  the  whole  rebellion  of  man  against 
fate;  the  whole  protest  against  divine  law;  the  whole  contempt  for  human 
law  as  its  outcome;  the  whole  unutterable  fury  of  human  nature  beating 
itself  against  the  walls  of  its  prison-house,  and  suddenly  seized  by  a  hope 
that  in  the  Virgin  man  had  found  a  door  of  escape.  She  was  above  law; 
she  took  feminine  pleasure  in  turning  hell  into  an  ornament;  she  delighted 
in  trampling  on  every  social  distinction  in  this  world  and  the  next.  She 
knew  that  the  universe  was  as  unintelligible  to  her,  on  any  theory  of 
morals,  as  it  was  to  her  worshippers,  and  she  felt,  like  them,  no  sure  con¬ 
viction  that  it  was  any  more  intelligible  to  the  Creator  of  it.  To  her,  every 
suppliant  was  a  universe  in  himself,  to  be  judged  apart,  on  his  own  merits, 
by  his  love  for  her, — by  no  means  on  his  orthodoxy,  or  his  conventional 
standing  in  the  Church,  or  according  to  his  correctness  in  defining  the 
nature  of  the  Trinity.  The  convulsive  hold  which  Mary  to  this  day  main¬ 
tains  over  human  imagination — as  you  can  see  at  Lourdes — was  due  much 
less  to  her  power  of  saving  soul  or  body  than  to  her  sympathy  with  people 
who  suffered  under  law, — divine  or  human, — justly  or  unjustly,  by  acci¬ 
dent  or  design,  by  decree  of  God  or  by  guile  of  Devil.  She  cared  not  a 
straw  for  conventional  morality,  and  she  had  no  notion  of  letting  her 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  223 

friends  be  punished,  to  the  tenth  or  any  other  generation,  for  the  sins  of 
their  ancestors  or  the  peccadilloes  of  Eve. 

So  Mary  filled  heaven  with  a  sort  of  persons  little  to  the  taste  of  any  re¬ 
spectable  middle-class  society,  which  has  trouble  enough  in  making  this 
world  decent  and  pay  its  bills,  without  having  to  continue  the  effort  in 
another.  Mary  stood  in  a  Church  of  her  own,  so  independent  that  the  Trin¬ 
ity  might  have  perished  without  much  affecting  her  position;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  Trinity  could  look  on  and  see  her  dethroned  with  almost  a 
breath  of  relief.  .  .  .  Mary’s  treatment  of  respectable  and  law-abiding 
people  who  had  no  favours  to  ask,  and  were  reasonably  confident  of  getting 
to  heaven  by  the  regular  judgment,  without  expense,  rankled  so  deeply 
that  three  hundred  years  later  the  Puritan  reformers  were  not  satisfied 
with  abolishing  her,  but  sought  to  abolish  the  woman  altogether  as  the 
cause  of  all  evil  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  The  Puritans  abandoned  the  New 
Testament  and  the  Virgin  in  order  to  go  back  to  the  beginning,  and  renew 
the  quarrel  with  Eve.13 

Thus  at  last,  in  another  land  and  a  remote  age,  Henry  Adams 
found  the  clue  that  explained  for  him  his  own  failure  and  the  source 
of  the  dissatisfactions  that  had  tracked  him  doggedly  through  his 
far  wanderings.  He  had  come  to  understand  the  reasons  for  the 
sterility  of  his  Massachusetts  past,  and  the  last  shreds  of  his 
Puritan-Federalist  heritage  were  cast  off.  In  comparison  with  the 
vision  that  came  to  him  in  the  choir  of  Chartres,  how  unspeakably 
poor  and  mean  were  the  activities  he  had  portrayed  in  Democracy, 
or  even  those  he  had  dealt  with  in  his  history  of  the  early  days  of  the 
republic.  He  had  discovered  the  highest  existence  in  emotional 
response  to  noble  appeal;  the  good  life  was  the  unified  life,  possible 
only  on  a  grand  scale  in  those  rare  and  great  periods  of  social  elan 
when  the  individual  is  fused  in  an  encompassing  unity.  Of  that 
golden  age  of  the  Transition — so  he  finally  cast  up  the  account— 
“the  sum  is  an  emotion — clear  and  strong  as  love  and  much  clearer 
than  logic  whose  charm  lies  in  its  unstable  balance.” 

The  Transition  is  the  equilibrium  between  the  love  of  God — which  is 
faith — and  the  logic  of  God — which  is  reason;  between  the  round  arch  and 
the  pointed.  One  may  not  be  sure  which  pleases  most,  but  one  need  not 
be  harsh  toward  people  who  think  that  the  moment  of  balance  is  exquisite. 
The  last  and  highest  moment  is  seen  at  Chartres,  where,  in  1200,  the  charm 
depends  on  the  constant  doubt  whether  emotion  or  science  is  uppermost. 
At  Amiens,  doubt  ceases;  emotion  is  trained  in  school,  Thomas  Aquinas 
reigns.14 

Of  all  the  elaborate  symbolism  which  has  been  suggested  for  the  Gothic 
cathedral,  the  most  vital  and  most  perfect  may  be  that  the  slender 

n  Mont-Saint-Michel,  pp.  276-277.  14  Ibid.,  pp.  321-322. 


224  CHANGING  AMERICA 

nervure,  the  springing  motion  of  the  broken  arch,  the  leap  downwards  of 
the  flying  buttress, — -the  visible  effort  to  throw  ofF  a  visible  strain, — 
never  let  us  forget  that  Faith  alone  supports  it,  and  that,  if  Faith  fails, 
Heaven  is  lost.  The  equilibrium  is  visibly  delicate  beyond  the  line  of 
safety;  danger  lurks  in  every  stone.  The  peril  of  the  heavy  tower,  of  the 
restless  vault,  of  the  vagrant  buttress;  the  uncertainty  of  logic,  the  in¬ 
equalities  of  the  syllogism,  the  irregularities  of  the  mental  mirror, — all 
these  haunting  nightmares  of  the  Church  are  expressed  as  strongly  by  the 
Gothic  cathedral  as  though  it  had  been  the  cry  of  human  suffering,  and 
as-no  emotion  had  ever  been  expressed  before  or  is  likely  to  find  expression 
again.  The  delight  of  its  aspiration  is  flung  up  to  the  sky.  The  pathos  of 
its  self-distrust  and  anguish  of  doubt  is  buried  in  the  earth  as  its  last 
secret.  You  can  read  out  of  it  whatever  else  pleases  your  youth  and  con¬ 
fidence;  to  me,  this  is  all.15 

One  may  enter  the  past,  of  course,  through  such  portals  as  one 
chooses;  but  one  is  likely  to  choose  the  portals  that  promise  to  open 
upon  the  world  of  one’s  desires.  It  was  a  fortunate  accident,  no 
doubt,  that  led  Henry  Adams  to  Chartres  to  study  the  cathedral 
glass  under  the  guidance  of  John  La  Farge;  nevertheless  it  finally 
determined  for  him  his  total  interpretation  of  the  Middle  Ages  and 
of  all  history,  and  that  interpretation  followed  naturally  a  subtle 
ancestral  bias.  Even  in  his  rebellion  against  his  past  he  could  not 
get  away  from  it,  but  like  Ruskin  and  John  Henry  Newman  he 
came  to  affirm — whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  who  shall  say? — that 
the  singular  glory  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  the  mystical  elan  that 
came  to  expression  in  the  adoration  of  the  Virgin.  As  a  child  of 
generations  of  Puritans  he  came  back  finally,  in  the  twilight  of  his 
studies,  to  the  great  ideal  of  faith.  And  yet  it  is  not  without  sugges¬ 
tion  that  William  Morris,  who  more  nearly  than  any  other  modem 
expressed  in  his  daily  life  the  spirit  of  the  Middle  Ages,  never  con¬ 
cerned  himself  much  with  the  medieval  church — neither  its  cathe¬ 
drals  nor  its  scholasticism  nor  its  miracles — never  talked  about  an 
age  of  faith,  would  scarcely  have  understood,  indeed,  what  was 
meant  by  the  drive  of  a  mystical  elan;  but  discovered  the  secret  of 
that  earlier  civilization  in  the  gild  rather  than  the  church,  and 
traced  the  source  of  the  haunting  beauty  that  clings  to  all  its  works 
to  the  psychology  of  craftsmanship  that  found  delight  in  shaping 
the  raw  material  to  the  craftsman’s  dreams. 

1  he  difference  between  Morris  and  Adams  is  great  enough,  and 
at  bottom  it  is  the  difference  between  the  artist  and  the  intellectual; 
yet  it:  is  a  pity  that  Henry  Adams,  with  his  wide  acquaintance  in 

16  Ibid.,  p.  383. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  225 


England,  should  never  have  known  the  one  Victorian  he  should 
most  have  delighted  in — the  nineteenth-century  craftsman  who 
found  in  his  workshop  the  good  life  the  historian  dreamed  of,  and 
was  unhappy  because  it  had  been  lost.  Perhaps  it  would  not  have 
greatly  changed  the  latter’s  interpretation.  He  was  not  a  pagan  in 
temperament  to  enter  sympathetically  into  the  medieval  world  that 
Morris  had  discovered  and  of  which  the  Church  was  only  a  dra¬ 
pery — a  drapery  that  never  quite  covered  a  frank  joie  de  vivre  that 
was  an  emotion  far  more  realistic  and  human  than  any  mystical 
elan,  and  that  persisted  long  after  the  apogee  of  faith  in  the  early 
twelfth  century,  filling  all  the  later  Middle  Ages  with  its  abundant 
beauty  till  it  was  finally  destroyed  by  the  economic  revolution  that 
came  out  of  the  Reformation.  But  at  any  rate  he  might  have  been 
led  by  such  knowledge  to  set  the  craftsman  beside  the  poet  and  the 
schoolman  and  the  mystic — the  nameless  artist  who  wrought  such 
marvels  beside  the  patron  who  took  care  to  have  his  name  and  his 
arms  emblazoned  on  window  and  wall  to  remind  posterity  of  his 
generosity;  and  certainly,  his  interpretation  of  the  Middle  Ages 
would  not  have  suffered  by  such  addition.  Instead,  an  excessive 
intellectualism  drove  him  back  upon  the  naive. 

The  disillusion  of  Henry  Adams  is  abundantly  instructive  to  the 
student  of  our  flamboyant  transition,  so  different  from  the  golden 
Transition.  Here  was  an  honest  man  and  an  able — none  honester 
and  none  abler  in  his  generation — who  devoted  his  life  to  finding 
a  path  out  of  the  maze  of  middle-class  America,  that  should  lead 
to  a  rational  and  humane  existence.  He  was  never  overconfident 
of  his  conclusions.  All  arrogant  dogmatisms  he  had  long  since  left 
behind;  they  had  become  for  him  pathetically  futile  and  foolish. 
Creeds  and  faiths,  whether  in  religion  or  politics  or  economics,  he 
no  longer  subscribed  to;  but  a  certain  residuum  remained,  from  his 
long  meditations — a  sense  of  interfusing  unity,  mystical,  pantheis¬ 
tic,  that  his  lurking  skepticism  dealt  tenderly  with.  “ Inter  vania 
nihil  vamus  est  homine,”  he  asserted  as  a  skeptic,  and  as  a  mystic 
he  replied,  “Man  is  an  imperceptible  atom  always  trying  to  be¬ 
come  one  with  God.  If  ever  modern  science  achieves  a  definition 
of  energy,  possibly  it  may  borrow  the  figure:  Energy  is  the  inherent 
effort  of  every  multiplicity  to  become  unity.  Ifi  In  these  later 
years  he  called  himself  half  whimsically  a  conservative  Christian 
Anarchist”  17  and  the  explanation  probably  is  to  be  found  in  his 
16  Mont-Saint-M ichel,  p.  332.  17  The  Education ,  p.  405- 


226 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


shift  from  intellectualism  to  emotion  as  the  crown  of  a  satisfying 
life.  “The  two  poles  of  social  and  political  philosophy  seem  neces¬ 
sarily  to  be  organization  or  anarchy;  man’s  intellect  or  the  forces  of 
nature.”  18  In  rare  and  happy  periods — as  in  the  glorious  Transi¬ 
tion — freedom  finds  its  fullest  life  in  a  spontaneous  drawing  to¬ 
gether  of  the  whole;  but  as  the  social  elan  dies  away,  institutions, 
organization,  remain.  Thomas  Aquinas  follows  Saint  Francis, 
form  remains  after  emotion  has  subsided.  Nevertheless  the  free 
man  must  cling  to  his  freedom,  in  spite  of  society,  in  spite  of  the 
political  state. 

Absolute  liberty  is  absence  of  restraint;  responsibility  is  restraint; 
therefore,  the  ideally  free  individual  is  responsible  only  to  himself.  This 
principle  is  the  philosophical  foundation  of  anarchism,  and,  for  anything 
that  science  has  yet  proved,  may  be  the  philosophical  foundation  of  the 
universe;  but  it  is  fatal  to  all  society  and  is  especially  hostile  to  the  State. 19 


Though  he  lived  in  the  midst  of  a  centralizing  politics  and  found 
his  friends  in  such  servants  of  centralization  as  John  Hay  and 
Henry  Cabot  Lodge,  Henry  Adams  had  no  faith  in  the  dominant 
ideals.  He  was  never  a  friend  to  an  acquisitive  society  with  its 
engrossing  political  state.  In  the  light  of  his  favorite  dictum  that 
“Power  is  poison,”  he  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  an  old-fashioned 
Jeffersonian;  it  is  another  evidence  of  the  persistence  of  his  eight¬ 
eenth-century  mind.  He  was  an  arch-individualist  who  would  go 
his  own  way  and  reach  his  own  conclusions,  quite  unconcerned 
that  his  views  were  wholly  at  variance  with  those  of  his  genera¬ 
tion.  How  could  it  be  otherwise?  How  should  men  who  lived  in 
the  counting-house  understand  even  the  language  of  this  pilgrim 
returned  from  other  and  greater  worlds?  It  was  foolish  to  talk  of 
what  he  had  seen.  And  so  when  he  wrote  Mont-Saint-Michel  and 
Chartres  he  published  it  privately,  and  was  incredulous  when  it 
was  proposed  to  republish  it  and  give  it  to  the  world.  What  had 
he,  or  the  twelfth  century,  to  say  to  the  land  of  Theodore  Roosevelt 
and  Pierpont  Morgan?  Was  not  this  America  of  theirs  peopled  by 
the  descendants  of  the  bourgeoisie  who,  six  hundred  years  before, 
resentful  at  having  been  cheated — as  they  supposed — in  their 
heavy  investments  in  shrines  and  churches  of  Our  Lady,  had  turned 
away  from  all  such  unprofitable  business,  and  put  their  savings 
in  lands  and  houses  and  ships  and  railways  and  banks — of  which 


18  Mont-Saint-Michel,  p.  344. 


19  Ibid.,  p.  372. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  227 

things  politics  was  the  sluttish  servant?  How  should  one  who  had 
known  Saint  Francis  and  Eleanor  of  Guienne  take  such  men  or 
such  a  world  seriously? 

in 

BROOKS  ADAMS— REBEL 

The  difference  between  Henry  Adams  and  Brooks  Adams  is, 
perhaps,  sufficiently  revealed  in  the  distinction  between  the  intel¬ 
lectual  and  the  rebel.  The  youngest  of  the  brothers  was  a  militant 
nonconformist,  a  searching  and  outspoken  critic  of  all  the  faiths  of 
his  generation.  In  Brooks  Adams  the  family  skepticisms  were 
pointed  and  barbed,  and  the  family  distrust  of  capitalism  issued 
in  a  broadside  attack  upon  the  hateful  system.  Few  Americans 
of  his  day  were  so  little  pleased  with  the  bankers’  Utopia  dreamed 
of  by  the  middle  class,  or  subjected  the  capitalistic  mind  to  such 
critical  analysis.  Not  content  with  rejecting  that  Utopia,  he  pur¬ 
sued  his  studies  in  the  history  of  western  civilization  with  a  view 
to  determining  whether  the  economic  mind,  instead  of  being  the 
friend  and  ally  of  a  human  society — as  it  professed  to  be — were 
not  rather  the  foul  wellspring  of  a  disintegrating  egoism  that  must 
destroy  every  civilization  that  yields  to  its  siren  appeal.  In  the 
theory  he  eventually  elaborated,  the  capitalistic  mind  proves  to  be 
a  greedy  spider  spinning  his  web  to  catch  the  simple  imaginative 
minds — warrior  and  priest  and  artist  and  craftsman — and  suck 
them  dry.  The  sterile  middleman  becomes  master  of  society  and 
with  the  inevitable  enslavement  of  the  producer,  and  the  drying-up 
of  production  at  its  source,  civilization  withers  and  decays,  to  be 
followed  by  another  cycle  in  the  long  struggle  between  the  creative 
and  acquisitive  instincts. 

None  but  a  congenital  rebel  could  have  arrived  at  such  conclu¬ 
sions  from  the  studies  in  which  his  youth  was  passed.  As  a  son  of 
the  house  of  Adams  the  profession  of  the  law  was  the  predestined 
path  to  politics  and  diplomacy,  and  like  Charles  and  Henry  he 
devoted  his  younger  years  to  the  ancestral  study,  receiving  such 
training  as  the  Harvard  Law  School  could  give.  He  made  greater 
progress  than  his  brothers,  eventually  getting  so  far  as  to  write 
legal  treatises;  but  finding  such  work  a  bit  arid  he  supplemented 
his  legal  studies  with  the  writing  of  Massachusetts  chronicles.  His 
dissatisfactions  seem  to  have  culminated  in  the  late  eighties,  dur¬ 
ing  the  lean  years  that  preceded  the  crash  of  1893;  and  he  turned 


228  CHANGING  AMERICA 

away  from  local  chronicles  to  speculate  on  the  deeper  causes  of 
social  vigor  and  decline.  The  result  was  the  publication  in  1895  of 
The  Law  of  Civilization  and  Decay,  a  study  in  social  dynamics  that 
took  its  point  of  departure  from  psychology,  and  based  its  conclu¬ 
sions  on  physics  and  economics.  Before  Henry  Adams  he  elabo¬ 
rated  the  theory  that  civilization  is  the  product  of  social  energy, 
and  social  energy  obeys  the  physical  law  of  mass,  accelerating  or 
retarding  in  ratio  to  the  density  of  population  reduced  to  order.  As 
society  draws  together  in  great  centers  its  activity  increases  until 
exhaustion  finally  slows  it  down;  whereupon  follows  a  period  of 
disintegration  that  breaks  up  the  integrated  mass  and  disperses 
its  energy.  The  social  ebb  and  flow,  therefore,  is  always  from  de¬ 
centralization  to  centralization  and  back  again  to  decentralization, 
and  as  it  flows  it  thrusts  into  the  foreground  different  types  of 
mind  that  express  themselves  in  diverse  ideals. 

The  master  types  that  appear  and  disappear  in  this  ceaseless 
flux  are  determined  by  two  psychological  drives  that  always  and 
everywhere  shape  human  activity — fear  and  greed:  the  one  cul¬ 
minating  in  the  social  rule  of  the  priest,  the  other  in  the  social 
rule  of  the  usurer.  Decentralization  with  its  isolation  breeds  the 
imaginative  mind  which,  seeing  more  devils  than  vast  hell  can 
hold,  turns  to  the  priest  for  succor — to  one  who  deals  in  miracles 
and  professes  to  be  able  to  fend  off  malignant  powers,  and  who  in 
consequence  grows  rich  by  his  traffic  in  relics  and  rises  to  economic 
power.  But  imagination  produces  as  well  the  creative  mind  that 
finds  in  isolation  the  promptings  to  revery,  expresses  its  dreams  in 
terms  of  beauty,  and  fashions  a  realm  of  art  in  which  to  dwell. 
Priest,  artist,  and  warrior, — shrine,  cathedral,  and  castle — were 
the  creation  of  medieval  times,  the  naive  products  of  the  golden 
age  of  decentralization.  Whereas  centralization,  with  the  rubbing 
away  of  singularity  by  daily  contact  and  the  greater  rewards  that 
lie  open  to  activity,  breeds  automatically  the  economic  mind — a 
mind  that  is  necessarily  unimaginative,  practical,  competitive, 
acquisitive,  skeptical,  preferring  administration  to  creation,  and 
setting  exploitation  as  the  single  object  of  activity.  And  since 
centralization  offers  increasing  rewards  to  greed,  the  economic 
mind  subdues  the  imaginative,  and  the  money-lender  with  his 
control  of  wealth  rises  to  mastery.  As  he  expropriates  the  resources 
of  society  he  inevitably  dominates  the  political  state.  His  wealth 
enables  him  to  maintain  a  hired  police  to  safeguard  his  gains,  until 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  229 


expropriation  having  run  its  course,  the  police  fail  to  hold  in 
check  the  mass  of  the  exploited,  and  an  unmartial  class  discovers 
that  money  can  no  longer  buy  security  against  the  strength  of 
numbers.  The  usurer  is  overthrown,  his  wealth  is  expropriated, 
and  the  social  cycle  must  be  run  again. 

This  suggestive  theory,  which  he  works  out  with  conspicuous 
skill  in  his  interpretation  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  rise  of  capital¬ 
ism,  implies  a  perennial  conflict  between  fear  and  greed,  that  turns 
finally  upon  the  relative  development  of  the  arts  of  attack  and  of 
defense.  Centralization,  it  is  clear,  results  from  the  superiority 
of  the  former;  when  attack  is  superior  to  defense  the  lesser  strong¬ 
holds  of  exploitation  must  fall  and  the  defeated  must  become  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  coalescing  masters.  After  the  disruption  of  the  Roman 
Empire  western  Europe  created  its  feudal  system,  by  means  of 
which  the  baron  in  his  stout  castle  flouted  the  centralizing  ambi¬ 
tions  of  the  impotent  monarchy;  and  it  was  not  till  the  wealth  of 
the  church  and  of  the  bourgeoisie  was  thrown  on  the  side  of  the 
king,  and  the  development  of  the  art  of  attack  through  the  use  of 
gunpowder,  that  the  rise  of  the  monarchical  state  was  possible. 
But  having  aided  the  king  to  reduce  the  power  of  the  barons, 
thereby  rendering  trade  secure  on  a  large  scale,  the  bourgeoisie 
turned  against  the  medieval  church  with  its  vast  wealth  that 
invited  expropriation.  In  the  primitive  age  of  faith,  under  the 
dominion  of  fear,  the  burgesses  had  spent  their  money  prodigally 
to  build  shrines  and  churches  and  cathedrals — in  France  alone 
between  the  years  1170  and  1270,  eighty  cathedrals  and  nearly 
five  hundred  large  churches  had  been  built,  that  by  a  calculation 
made  in  1840,  would  cost  a  billion  dollars  to  replace  20 — but  with 
the  development  of  the  economic  mind  such  amazing  expenditures 
seemed  wasteful,  and  the  bourgeoisie  looked  about  for  a  cheaper 
way  of  salvation.  The  money  cost  to  the  worshipers  of  saints  and 
relics  was  a  sharp  prod  to  their  skepticism  as  to  the  efficacy  of  such 
worship.  This  explains  for  Brooks  Adams  the  origins  of  the  Refor¬ 
mation;  it  was  due  to  the  economic  dissatisfaction  of  the  burgess 
class;  the  church  had  grown  rich  and  grasping  from  its  monopoly 
power.  Speaking  of  the  rise  of  English  Lollardry,  he  argued: 

The  Lollards  were  of  the  modern  economic  type,  and  discarded  the 
miracle  because  the  miracle  was  costly  and  yielded  an  uncertain  return 
.  gifts  as  an  atonement  for  sin  were  a  drain  on  savings,  and  the  econo- 
20  See  Henry  Adams,  Mont-Saint-Michel,  pp.  94“9S- 


230 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


mist  instinctively  sought  cheaper  methods  of  propitiation.  The  monied 
class,  therefore,  proceeded  step  by  step,  and  its  first  experiment  was  to 
suppress  all  fees  to  middle-men,  whether  priests  or  saints,  by  becoming 
their  own  intercessors  with  the  deity  .  .  .  [and]  as  the  tradesman  replaced 
the  enthusiast,  a  dogma  was  evolved  by  which  mental  anguish,  which  cost 
nothing,  was  substituted  for  the  offering  which  was  effective  in  proportion 
to  its  money  value.  This  dogma  was  “Justification  by  Faith,”  the  corner¬ 
stone  of  Protestantism.  .  .  . 

But  the  substitution  of  a  mental  condition  for  a  money  payment  led 
to  consequences  more  far-reaching  than  the  suppression  of  certain  clerical 
revenues,  for  it  involved  the  rejection  of  the  sacred  tradition  which  had 
not  only  sustained  relic  worship,  but  which  had  made  the  Church  the 
channel  of  communication  between  Christians  and  the  invisible  world. 
That  ancient  channel  once  closed,  Protestants  had  to  open  another,  and 
this  led  to  the  deification  of  the  Bible.  .  .  .  Thus  for  the  innumerable 
costly  fetishes  of  the  imaginative  age  were  substituted  certain  writings 
which  could  be  consulted  without  a  fee.  The  expedient  was  evidently  the 
device  of  a  mercantile  community,  .  .  .  and  made  an  organized  priest¬ 
hood  impossible.  When  each  individual  might  pry  into  the  sacred  mys¬ 
teries  at  his  pleasure,  the  authority  of  the  clergy  was  annihilated.21 

With  warrior  and  priest  superseded  by  the  tradesman  as  the 
dominant  type — the  imaginative  mind  by  the  economic — came  the 
inevitable  triumph  of  greed  over  fear.  The  ancient  defenses  of  the 
church  were  razed  and  it  stood  naked  to  its  enemies.  In  presence 
of  the  skepticism  of  the  burgesses  it  could  no  longer  sell  its  miracles 
in  the  open  market,  could  no  longer  persuade  men  that  it  was  God’s 
vicegerent  with  powers  of  binding  and  loosing;  and  with  its  divine 
sanctions  gone,  its  wealth-hoards  lay  unprotected  before  the  cupid¬ 
ity  of  king,  noble,  and  commoner.  The  spoliation  of  the  monas¬ 
teries  was  the  prelude  to  the  long  movement  of  the  Reformation  in 
England,  and  made  possible  its  success.  So  long  as  the  church  re¬ 
tained  its  lands  and  treasure  it  could  not  easily  be  overturned;  so  a 
greedy  King  and  greedy  nobles  took  effective  measures  to  disarm 
it,  and  having  got  their  hands  on  the  substantial  plunder  they  left 
to  Genevan  ministers  the  lesser  business  of  disputing  over  the  form 
and  doctrine  of  the  new  church.  The  revolution  had  already  been 
accomplished;  and  this  revolution — the  transfer  from  priest  to  lay¬ 
man  of  a  third  of  the  wealth  of  England — was  but  prelude  to  still 
greater  revolutions  that  were  preparing,  and  which  began  with  the 
pouring  into  England  of  the  gold  and  silver  from  the  Spanish  treas¬ 
ure-ships.  The  spoiling  of  Rome  and  the  spoiling  of  the  Spaniard 
were  both  buccaneering  adventures  undertaken  by  zealous  Protes- 
21  The  Law  of  Civilization  and  Decay,  pp.  150-151. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  231 

tants.  Drake  and  Hawkins — pirate  and  slaver — were  “hot  gospel¬ 
lers,’’  ready  to  fight,  plunder,  or  rape  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
profit  of  England;  and  it  was  such  men  who  diverted  to  London  the 
flood  of  Spanish-American  silver  that  issued  from  the  rich  mines  of 
Potosi. 

Potosi  was  discovered  in  1545,  and  from  that  event  Adams  dates 
the  rise  of  the  commercial  activity  that  was  to  prepare  the  way  for 
the  Industrial  Revolution,  which  came  to  flower  two  centuries  later. 
This  vast  upheaval  that  destroyed  the  older  feudal  England,  was 
the  immediate  outcome  of  the  plundering  of  India  that  brought  to 
London  the  vast  treasure-hoards  of  the  East.  The  eviction  of  the 
peasants  from  their  lands  had  already  provided  a  plentiful  supply 
of  cheap  labor,  the  machinery  of  credit  and  exchange  had  been 
created,  and  with  this  immense  influx  of  capital  the  Industrial 
Revolution  was  a  matter  of  course.  The  manufacturers  seized 
control  of  England  and  ruled  till  approximately  1810,  when  their 
authority  was  disputed  by  the  financiers  who  gradually  displaced 
them.  The  Bank  Act  of  1844,  which  yielded  the  control  of  the 
currency  to  the  bankers,  marked  the  definite  transfer  of  sovereignty 
to  Lombard  Street;  Samuel  Lloyd,  the  banker,  completed  the 
work  begun  in  1523  by  Thomas  Cromwell,  burgess-adventurer — the 
work  of  bringing  England  under  the  authoritative  sway  of  the 
principle  of  greed.  Since  1844  western  civilization  has  lain  helpless 
under  the  heel  of  the  usurer,  who  levies  his  tax  upon  production  by 
expanding  and  contracting  the  currency  at  will,  and  rules  society 
through  his  control  of  the  political  state.  The  triumph  of  the 
economic  mind  is  complete. 

The  aristocracy  which  wields  this  autocratic  power  is  beyond  attack, 
for  it  is  defended  by  a  wage-earning  police,  by  the  side  of  which  the  legions 
were  a  toy — a  police  so  formidable  that,  for  the  first  time  in  history,  re¬ 
volt  is  hopeless  and  is  not  attempted.  The  only  question  which  preoccu¬ 
pies  the  ruling  class  is  whether  it  is  cheaper  to  coerce  or  bribe.22 


The  Law  of  Civilization  and  Decay  is  an  extraordinarily  provoca¬ 
tive  study,  the  main  principles  of  which  he  elaborated  and  applied 
in  later  historical  studies,  the  result  of  which  was  to  emphasize  for 
him  the  determining  influence  of  economics  and  geography  in  the 
rise  and  fall  of  empires.23  Equipped  thus  with  a  comprehensive 


22  Ibid.,  p.  292. 

23  See  America  s  Economic  Supremacy, 
York,  1902. 


New  York,  1900;  The  New  Empire,  New 


232 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


philosophy  of  history,  he  turned  in  a  later  work  to  examine  certain 
aspects  of  the  play  of  social  forces  in  America,  in  the  light  of  uni¬ 
versal  social  experience.  The  particular  object  of  his  inquiry  in 
The  Theory  of  Social  Revolutions  is  the  machinery  of  social  control 
developed  in  America  during  the  movement  of  capitalistic  centrali¬ 
zation,  and  its  probable  adequacy  to  meet  the  future  stresses  of 
acceleration.  The  problem  of  security  for  the  capitalistic  order 
resolves  itself,  he  decides,  into  the  problem  of  a  sufficient  protective 
police;  and  since  every  non-military  master  class  must  depend  upon 
some  form  of  mercenary  Swiss  guard,  the  solution  in  America  has 
assumed  a  form  not  uncommon  in  earlier  European  experience,  but 
which  every  European  country  has  learned  at  bitter  cost  to  reject. 
In  the  face  of  a  strong  anti-militaristic  public  sentiment  that  forbids 
a  coercive  army  and  navy,  the  financial  masters  have  had  recourse 
to  the  courts;  and  it  is  the  eventual  effect  of  such  perversion  of  the 
courts  to  non-judicial  ends  that  he  considers  in  this  frank  inquiry. 

Historically,  he  points  out,  the  courts  have  at  times  exercised  two 
diverse  functions,  the  judicial  and  the  political;  and  the  problem  of 
justice  and  equity  before  the  law,  it  has  been  found  by  long  and 
bitter  experience,  resolves  itself  into  the  total  separation  of  the  one 
from  the  other.  The  judicial  function  is  that  of  impartial  arbitra¬ 
ment  in  accordance  with  an  established  corpus  juris;  it  is  judgment 
and  not  will.  The  enactment  of  the  law,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a 
political  function,  residing  in  the  legislature.  When  therefore,  the 
courts  exercise  the  political  function,  they  not  only  assert  that  the 
judicial  will  is  sovereign,  but  they  engage  in  a  perilous  struggle  for 
mastership  and  involve  themselves  in  all  the  passions  of  partisan 
objectives.  Every  “dominant  class,  as  it  has  arisen,  has  done  its 
best  to  use  the  machinery  of  justice  for  its  own  benefit.”  The  temp¬ 
tation  to  such  perversion  is  perennial;  it  is  the  particular  and  beset¬ 
ting  temptation  of  an  unmartial  monied  class;  and  in  times  of  social 
stress  it  becomes  acute.  In  revolutionary  crises— as  in  England 
under  Lord  Chief-Justice  Jeffreys  and  in  France  under  the  Revolu¬ 
tionary  Tribunal — the  political  function  overrides  the  judicial,  the 
last  protection  of  the  individual  is  swept  away,  and  society  lies 
helpless  before  the  ruling  power.  Thus  to  pervert  the  legitimate 
functions  of  the  courts  is  a  dangerous  game  to  play — most  danger¬ 
ous  for  a  non-military  group  for  whom  the  courts  are  protectors; 
and  yet  it  is  precisely  this  game  that  capitalism  in  America,  heed¬ 
less  of  the  teachings  of  experience,  has  long  been  playing.  Using  the 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  233 


courts  as  a  police  power  it  has  brought  contempt  upon  them  and 
thereby  weakened  the  arm  upon  which  alone  it  can  hope  to  rely  in 
periods  of  acute  stress.  In  short,  capitalism  has  assumed  the  func¬ 
tions  of  sovereignty  in  America,  but  it  has  refused  to  assume  the 
responsibilities  of  sovereignty.  To  gain  immediate  ends  it  has  shut 
its  eyes  to  future  consequences;  and  what  those  future  consequences 
are  likely  to  be  Brooks  Adams  is  at  pains  to  point  out. 

The  kernel  of  his  argument,  obviously,  lies  in  the  thesis  that  the 
federal  courts  have  assumed  political  functions;  and  into  this 
question  he  delves  with  the  equipment  of  the  lawyer  added  to  that 
of  the  philosophical  historian.  “Politics,”  he  asserts  realistically, 
“is  the  struggle  for  ascendancy  of  a  class  or  a  majority.”  Under 
the  “American  system,  the  Constitution  ...  is  expounded  by 
judges,  and  this  function,  wThich,  in  essence,  is  political,  has  brought 
precisely  that  quality  of  pressure  on  the  bench  which  it  has  been 
the  labor  of  a  hundred  generations  of  our  ancestors  to  remove.”24 
Hence,  “from  the  outset,  the  American  bench,  because  it  deals 
with  the  most  fiercely  contested  of  political  issues,  has  been  an 
instrument  necessary  to  political  success.  Consequently,  political 
parties  have  striven  to  control  it,  and,  therefore,  the  bench  has 
always  had  an  avowed  partisan  bias.”25  From  so  anomalous  a 
situation  two  curious  developments  have  resulted:  in  the  role  of 
guardians  of  the  Constitution  the  courts  have  assumed  sovereign 
powers  over  the  legislature,  and  at  the  same  time,  by  a  clever  non¬ 
judicial  hocus-pocus  they  have  declared  themselves  superior  to  the 
Constitution,  possessed  of  the  prerogative  of  dispensation.  How 
the  first  came  into  being  Adams  traces  in  detail  from  the  time  of 
Marbury  vs.  Madison  in  1803,  when  Marshall  asserted  a  super¬ 
visory  jurisdiction  over  Congress,  to  Standard  Oil  Company  vs. 
United  States  in  1911,  when  the  Court  amended  an  act  of  Congress 
that  Congress  had  declined  to  amend.  How  the  second  came  into 
being  is  a  curious  story.  It  arose,  according  to  Adams,  from  the 
rigidity  of  a  written  constitution,  that  having  been  interpreted 
narrowly  must  somehow  be  stretched  to  meet  public  needs.  In 
such  an  emergency  the  “Supreme  Court  of  New  York  imagined 
the  theory  of  the  Police  Power,’  saying  in  effect,  in  our  discre¬ 
tion,  we  suspend  the  operation  of  the  Constitution,  in  this  instance, 
by  calling  your  act  an  exercise  of  a  power  unknown  to  the  framers 
of  the  Constitution.”26 

24  The  Theory  of  Social  Revolution,  p.  45.  25  Ibid.,  pp.  47-48-  26  Ibid.,  p.  12& 


234 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


In  other  words,  having,  by  the  assumption  of  sovereignty,  nulli¬ 
fied  the  legislative  power  from  which  relief  would  naturally  come, 
and  having  awakened  a  hostile  public  opinion  by  its  narrow  inter¬ 
pretation  of  contractual  rights,  the  court  was  embarrassed  and 
looked  about  for  a  loophole  of  escape;  and  the  most  convenient 
loophole  was  the  novel  doctrine  of  judicial  prerogative: 

No  legislature  could  intervene,  and  a  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  which 
the  judges  could  not  withstand;  therefore,  the  Court  yielded,  declaring 
that  if  impairing  a  contract  were,  on  the  whole,  for  the  public  welfare, 
the  Constitution,  as  Marshall  interpreted  it,  should  be  suspended  in  favor 
of  the  legislation  which  impaired  it.  They  called  this  suspension  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  the  “Police  Power.”  It  followed,  as  the  “Police  Power”  could 
only  come  into  operation  at  the  discretion  of  the  Court,  that,  therefore, 
within  the  limits  of  judicial  discretion,  confiscation,  however  arbitrary 
and  to  whatever  extent,  might  go  on.27 

The  effect  of  the  adoption  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States 
of  the  New  York  theory  of  the  Police  Power  was  to  vest  in  the  judiciary, 
by  the  use  of  this  catch-word,  an  almost  unparallelled  prerogative.  They 
assumed  a  supreme  function  which  can  only  be  compared  to  the  Dispensing 
Power  claimed  by  the  Stuarts,  or  to  the  authority  which,  according  to  the 
Council  of  Constance,  inheres  in  the  Church,  to  “grant  indulgences  for 
reasonable  causes.”  I  suppose  nothing  in  modern  judicial  history  has  ever 
resembled  this  assumption.  .  .  ,28 

It  is  this  amazing  principle  of  the  judicial  prerogative  which 
sets  the  Courts  above  the  Constitution  and  grants  them  the  priv¬ 
ilege  of  dispensing  Indulgences,  that  has  perverted  their  functions 
from  the  judicial  to  the  political.  If  Indulgences  are  for  sale,  natu¬ 
rally  the  wealthy  will  buy  them.  And  since  corporate  wealth  is  re¬ 
garded  by  the  judiciary  with  a  more  than  friendly  eye,  it  rarely 
finds  difficulty  in  securing  such  Indulgences  as  it  seeks.  The 
Courts  have  become,  in  consequence,  not  so  much  the  Swiss  Guards 
of  capitalism,  as  a  pliant  sovereign  lord  who  dispenses  rewards  to 
his  favorites.  The  capitalist  is  the  most  lawless”  of  citizens.  In 
his  attitude  towards  the  state  he  is  essentially  anarchistic;  he 
evades  or  nullifies  a  law  that  he  does  not  like,  while  clamorous  for 
the  enforcement  of  a  law  that  works  in  his  favor. 

If  the  capitalist  has  bought  some  sovereign  function,  and  wishes  to 
abuse  it  for  his  own  behoof,  he  regards  the  law  which  restrains  him  as  a 
despotic  invasion  of  his  constitutional  rights,  because,  with  his  specialized 
mind,  he  cannot  grasp  the  relation  of  a  sovereign  function  to  the  nation 

Ibid.,  p.  93.  28  Jfcrf  }  pp  g!_g2. 


THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ADAMS  235 

as  a  whole.  He,  therefore,  looks  upon  the  evasion  of  a  law  devised  fcr 
public  protection,  but  inimical  to  him,  as  innocent  or  even  meritorious. 

This  attitude  of  capital  has  had  a  profound  effect  upon  shaping  the 
American  legal  mind.  The  capitalist,  as  I  infer,  regards  the  constitutional 
form  of  government  which  exists  in  the  United  States,  as  a  convenient 
method  of  obtaining  his  own  way  against  a  majority,  but  the  lawyer  has 
learned  to  worship  it  as  a  fetish.  Nor  is  this  astonishing,  for,  were  written 
constitutions  suppressed,  he  would  lose  most  of  his  importance  and  much 
of  his  income.  Quite  honestly,  therefore,  the  American  lawyer  has  come  to 
believe  that  a  sheet  of  paper  soiled  with  printers’  ink  and  interpreted  by 
half-a-dozen  elderly  gentlemen  snugly  dozing  in  armchairs,  has  some  in¬ 
herent  and  marvellous  virtue  by  which  it  can  arrest  the  march  of  omnipo¬ 
tent  Nature.  And  capital  gladly  accepts  this  view  of  American  civiliza¬ 
tion,  since  hitherto  capitalists  have  usually  been  able  to  select  the  magis¬ 
trates  who  decide  their  causes.29 

The  skepticisms  of  the  House  of  Adams  came  to  their  frankest 
expression  in  the  writings  of  Brooks  Adams.  The  passion  for  social 
justice  had  brought  him  at  last  to  a  philosophy  of  history  that 
made  him  a  trenchant  critic  of  the  American  of  his  generation.  He 
rejected  alike  the  humanitarian  optimism  that,  from  Condorcet  to 
Herbert  Spencer,  had  inspired  generous  souls  with  hope  for  future 
progress — and  that  even  Henry  Adams  clung  to — and  the  economic 
optimism  that  from  the  beginnings  of  the  westward  movement  had 
inspired  acquisitive  souls  with  the  hope  of  continuous  gain.  Nothing 
perhaps  marked  him  more  clearly  as  a  rebel  than  his  denial  of  the 
god  worshiped  by  his  fellows.  The  gospel  of  progress  was  for  him 
no  more  than  a  fetish  of  the  economic  mind.  In  the  ebb  and  flow  of 
civilizations  under  the  attraction  of  fear  and  greed,  what  justifica¬ 
tion  was  there  for  faith  in  a  benevolent  progress?  His  lot  had  been 
cast,  unfortunately,  in  an  age  of  capitalism,  when  the  acquisitive 
mind  was  triumphing  over  the  imaginative,  the  banker  over  the 
priest  and  craftsman  and  mystic;  but  he  could  see  no  reason  in 
heaven  or  earth  to  brag  of  that  fact,  and  he  would  have  held  himself 
a  fool  to  apply  the  term  progress  to  the  spread  of  greed  that  was 
crowning  the  usurer  as  master  of  men.  A  thorough  skeptic,  with  the 
comfortable  illusions  of  his  generation  dissipated,  he  was  in  worse 
plight  than  Henry  Adams,  for  he  had  created  no  golden  twelfth  cen¬ 
tury  as  a  refuge  against  the  present. 

But  if  he  was  un'der  no  illusions,  he  was  under  no  intellectual 
tyrannies;  he  had  cleared  his  mind  of  all  middle-class  fetishes  and 
could  look  out  calmly  upon  a  mad  world.  After  a  century  and  a 

29  Ibid.,  pp.  213-215. 


236 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


quarter  this  youngest  of  the  House  of  Adams  was  still  true  to  the 
sturdy  intellectual  honesty  of  his  race.  He  refused  to  cry  up  a 
fool’s  paradise  where  his  fellows  were  crowning  the  banker  as 
king — professing  to  serve  high  ends  while  seeking  vulgar  profits: 
he  would  not  shut  his  eyes  to  disagreeable  truth  or  hold  his  tongue. 
In  Brooks  Adams  one  can  almost  hear  the  voice  of  the  first  Adams 
elaborating  his  doctrine  of  determinism,  pointing  out  to  a  romantic 
generation  the  unpleasant  realities  that  confuted  its  optimism,  ex¬ 
patiating  on  the  abundant  follies  of  men  that  lay  snares  in  their  own 
path,  yet  clinging  to  a  faith  in  justice  that  has  become  old-fash¬ 
ioned.  Possibly  Brooks  Adams  is  not  to  be  reckoned  a  great  figure, 
but  he  was  an  honest  man  and  worthy  of  his  name — no  mean  ac¬ 
complishment,  for  all  in  all  the  Adams  family  is  the  most  distin¬ 
guished  in  our  history. 


CHAPTER  III 
VICTORIAN  REALISM 


It  was  not  till  the  eighties  that  the  movement  of  realism  in  fiction 
began  to  excite  wide  interest,  and  then  began  a  brisk  and  often 
acrimonious  discussion  of  the  merits  and  shortcomings  of  the  new 
technique  that  filled  the  pages  of  the  literary  magazines.  The 
prejudices  against  it  were  many  and  robust.  To  most  Victorians 
realism  meant  Zola,  sex,  and  the  exploitation  of  the  animal,  and  all 
the  pruderies  of  the  Age  of  Innocence  rose  up  in  protest  against 
defiling  letters  with  such  themes.  The  judgment  of  Aldrich’s  on 
realism — “A  miasmatic  breath  blown  from  the  slums” — was  a 
characteristic  Yankee  echo  of  Tennyson’s  condemnation,  “wallow¬ 
ing  in  the  slough  of  Zolaism.”  All  the  high  priests  of  the  genteel 
rallied  to  combat  such  a  desecration  of  literature,  and  when  it 
knocked  at  the  door  of  a  respectable  magazine  in  the  person  of 
Stephen  Crane’s  Maggie  the  editor  could  do  nothing  else  than  turn 
it  into  the  street.  In  the  late  nineties,  when  Jude  the  Obscure  ap¬ 
peared  in  one  of  the  family  magazines,  even  the  great  reputation  of 
Hardy  was  reckoned  a  poor  excuse  for  such  an  oflFense  to  morality. 

American  taste  was  still  romantic,  and  from  his  villa  at  Florence, 
F.  Marion  Crawford  regularly  sent  forth  heavy  romances  that  were 
regarded  as  contributions  to  our  literature.  In  defense  of  his  wares 
he  threw  into  the  discussion  of  realism  a  compact  little  volume, 
The  Novel;  JVhat  It  Is,  in  which  he  defined  the  novel  as  a  pocket 
drama,  the  chief  interest  of  which  lies  in  the  plot — a  retort  courte¬ 
ous  to  Howells’s  contention  that  plot  is  childish  and  a  story  ends 
well  that  ends  faithfully;  wedding  bells  at  the  end  are  of  no  interest 
to  grown  men  and  women,  but  rather  what  life  brings  after  the 
wedding  bells.  To  the  aid  of  Crawford  came  the  brilliant  Scot, 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  the  literary  idol  of  America  in  the  nine¬ 
ties,  whose  brave  tales  were  on  every  center-table.  A  confirmed 
romantic,  Stevenson  could  not  resist  breaking  a  lance  in  the  cause, 
and  his  Humble  Remonstrance  was  a  persuasive  defense  of  the 
perennial  appeal  of  romance. 

But  in  spite  of  protests  the  spirit  of  realism  spread  quietly 

237 


238 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


through  the  lesser  works  of  fiction  and  the  high-flown  romantic  was 
laid  away  in  the  grave  of  John  Esten  Cooke.  The  new  realism  was 
a  native  growth,  sprung  from  the  soil,  unconcerned  with  European 
technique.  In  its  earlier  expression  it  inclined  to  a  romantic  or 
idyllic  coloring,  but  as  it  developed  it  came  to  rely  more  and  more 
on  the  beauty  of  truth.  This  primitive  realism  issued  chiefly  from 
the  local  color  school  of  the  short  story,  but  it  was  supplemented 
by  the  sociological  school.  The  influence  of  Lowell  and  the  Atlantic 
Monthly  on  the  development  of  the  realistic  short  story  had  been 
encouraging,  and  in  the  next  decade  that  development  was  to  go 
forward  swiftly.  With  the  exploitation  of  local  materials  came  a 
sharp  division  on  sectional  lines,  and  as  Howells  pointed  out,  Amer¬ 
ica  was  soon  parceled  out  geographically  into  local  groups.  Edward 
Eggleston  in  southern  Indiana,  George  Washington  Cable  in  New 
Orleans,  Charles  Egbert  Craddock  in  eastern  Tennessee,  James 
Lane  Allen  in  Kentucky,  Octave  Thanet  in  Arkansas,  Sarah  Orne 
Jewett  and  Mary  Wilkins  Freeman  in  New  England,  were  represen¬ 
tative  of  the  new  concern  for  local  truth  in  fiction  that  was  to  tell 
against  the  romantic.  In  fixing  attention  on  narrow  and  homely 
fields  they  were  turning  towards  realism,  for  the  charm  of  their 
work  lay  in  fidelity  to  the  milieu,  the  exact  portrayal  of  character 
and  setting.  With  the  spread  of  an  interest  in  the  local  the  vogue 
of  the  strange  and  the  remote  declined  and  a  quiet  sobriety  of  tone 
displaced  the  romantic.  The  way  was  being  prepared  for  a  more 
adequate  realism.  “Nothing  could  testify  with  more  force,”  said 
H.  H.  Boyesen  in  1894,  “to  the  fact  that  we  have  outgrown  roman¬ 
ticism  than  this  almost  unanimous  desire,  on  the  part  of  our 
authors,  to  chronicle  the  widely  divergent  phases  of  our  American 
civilization.”  1 

But  that  waited  upon  profound  changes  in  the  American  outlook 
on  life.  In  the  seventies  and  eighties  conditions  were  not  ripe  for  it 
and  the  naturalism  that  in  France,  Russia,  Germany,  and  Scan¬ 
dinavia,  was  carrying  everything  before  it,  was  still  alien  to  the 
American  temper.  It  was  not  so  much  that  it  offended  our  innate 
Puritanism  as  that  it  seemed  to  us  belied  by  the  open  facts  of 
American  life.  The  psychology  of  the  dispersion  still  marked  us. 
Although  we  were  feverishly  building  great  cities  we  were  still 
emotionally  a  country  people,  far  from  urban-minded.  We  still 
thought  in  terms  of  the  slack  earlier  freedoms,  uncritical  of  our 
1  Literary  and  Social  Silhouettes,  p.  73. 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


239 


ways,  untroubled  about  the  future.  For  the  American  born  before 
the  Civil  War,  naturalism  was  impossible;  his  mind  had  not  been 
shaped  by  the  industrial  city  or  come  under  the  dominion  of  science. 
The  traditional  outlook  on  life  was  unchanged;  he  still  clung  to  the 
old  moralities,  the  old  verities,  the  old  faith  in  the  goodness  of  life 
in  America.  The  intellectual  revolution  must  be  gone  through  with 
before  naturalism  should  be  at  home  in  America,  a  native  expres¬ 
sion  of  native  conditions;  and  it  would  then  be  a  vehicle  only  for 
writers  born  and  bred  in  the  new  city  environment.  In  the  mean¬ 
while — in  the  genial  years  when  the  earlier  optimisms  still  veiled 
the  harsher  realities  of  science  and  industrialism — the  movement  of 
realism  got  under  way  in  the  work  of  two  distinguished  craftsmen 
who,  bred  up  in  Victorian  culture,  interpreted  life  in  terms  of  the 
middle  and  upper  classes.* 


n 

HENRY  JAMES  AND  THE  NOSTALGIA  OF  CULTURE 

There  is  a  suggestion  of  irony  in  the  fact  that  one  of  our  earliest 
realists,  who  was  independent  enough  to  break  with  the  romantic 
tradition,  should  have  fled  from  the  reality  that  his  art  presumably 
would  gird  itself  up  to  deal  with.  Like  his  fellow  spirit  Whistler, 
Henry  James  was  a  lifelong  pilgrim  to  other  shrines  than  those  of 
his  native  land,  who  dedicated  his  gifts  to  ends  that  his  fellow 
Americans  were  indifferent  to.  Life,  with  him,  was  largely  a  matter 
of  nerves.  In  this  world  of  sprawling  energy  it  was  impossible  to 
barricade  himself  securely  against  the  intrusion  of  the  unpleasant. 
His  organism  was  too  sensitive,  his  discriminations  too  fine,  to 
subject  them  to  the  vulgarities  of  the  Gilded  Age,  and  he  fled  from 
it  all.  He  early  convinced  himself  that  the  American  atmosphere 
was  uncongenial  to  the  artist.2  The  grotesqueries  of  the  frontier 
irruption,  the  crude  turmoil  released  by  the  new  freedoms,  were  no 
materials  to  appeal  to  one  in  search  of  subtleties,  to  one  who  was  a 
lover  of  nocturnes  in  gray.  And  so,  like  Whistler,  he  sought  other 

*  The  first  subsection  of  this  chapter  in  the  Contents  is  entitled  “William  James 
and  Pragmatism.”  None  of  this  appears  in  the  manuscript,  and  it  seems  likely  that 
Professor  Parnngton  planned  to  transfer  the  subject  to  a  later  part  of  the  book. 
The  numbering  is,  however,  left  as  it  is  given  in  the  Contents  —Publisher. 

2  “Civilization  at  its  highest  pitch  was  the  master  passion  of  his  mind,  and  his 
preoccupation  with  the  international  aspects  of  character  and  custom  issued  from 
the  conviction  that  the  rawness  and  rudeness  of  a  young  country  were  not  incapable 
of  cure  by  contact  with  more  developed  forms.”  Pelham  Edgar,  Henry  James,  Man, 
Author,  pp.  4-0-41- 


240 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


lands,  there  to  refine  a  meticulous  technique,  and  draw  out  ever 
thinner  the  substance  of  his  art. 

The  explanation  of  the  curious  career  of  Henry  James,  seeking  a 
habitation  between  worlds  and  finding  a  spiritual  home  nowhere, 
is  that  he  was  never  a  realist.  Rather  he  was  a  self-deceived  ro¬ 
mantic,  the  last  subtle  expression  of  the  genteel,  who  fell  in  love 
with  culture  and  never  realized  how  poor  a  thing  he  worshiped. 
It  was  the  first  mistake  of  Henry  James  that  he  romanticized 
Europe,  not  for  its  fragments  of  the  medieval  picturesque,  but  for  a 
fine  and  gracious  culture  that  he  professed  to  discover  there.  With 
the  naivete  of  the  Age  of  Innocence  he  assumed  that  an  aristocratic 
society — shall  we  say  that  of  Mayfair  or  the  Quartier  Saint  Ger¬ 
main? — is  a  complex  of  subtle  imponderables  that  one  comes  to 
understand  and  embody  only  through  heritage;  and  it  was  an  as¬ 
sumption  even  more  romantic  that  these  imponderables  were  so 
subtly  elusive  as  to  escape  any  but  the  subtlest  art.  Like  Edith 
Wharton  he  erected  this  suppositious  culture  into  an  abstract 
tertium  quid,  something  apart  from  social  convention  or  physical 
environment,  something  embodied  in  the  choicer  spirits  of  a  class 
that  for  generations  presumably  had  cherished  them.  Born  of  an 
unconscious  inferiority  complex  in  presence  of  a  long-established 
social  order  to  which  he  was  alien,  this  romanticization  of  European 
culture  worked  to  his  undoing,  for  it  constrained  the  artist  to  a 
lifelong  pursuit  of  intangible  realities  that  existed  only  in  his  imag¬ 
ination.  The  gracious  culture  that  James  persistently  attributed  to 
certain  choice  circles  in  Europe  was  only  a  figment  of  his  romantic 
fancy  a  fact  that  after  long  rambling  on  the  Continent  and  nearly 
forty  years  unbroken  residence  in  England,  he  came  finally  to 
recognize.  It  was  this  failure  to  find  the  substance  of  his  dream 
that  imparted  to  his  work  a  note  of  wistfulness.  He  had  quitted 
the  land  of  his  birth  to  seek  his  spiritual  home  elsewhere,  yet  in¬ 
creasingly  he  came  to  question  the  wisdom  of  his  act.  He  suffered 
the  common  fate  of  the  der acini;  wandering  between  worlds,  he 
found  a  home  nowhere.  It  is  not  well  for  the  artist  to  turn  cosmo¬ 
politan,  for  the  flavor  of  the  fruit  comes  from  the  soil  and  sunshine 
of  its  native  fields. 

The  spirit  of  Henry  James  marks  the  last  refinement  of  the  gen¬ 
teel  tradition,  the  completest  embodiment  of  its  vague  cultural 
aspirations.  All  his  life  he  dwelt  wistfully  on  the  outside  of  the 
realm  he  wished  to  be  a  free  citizen  of.  Did  any  other  professed 


VICTORIAN  REALISM  241 

realist  ever  remain  so  persistently  aloof  from  the  homely  realities 
of  life?  From  the  external  world  of  action  he  withdrew  to  the  inner 
world  of  questioning  and  probing;  yet  even  in  his  subtle  psycho¬ 
logical  inquiries  he  remained  shut  up  within  his  own  skull-pan.  His 
characters  are  only  projections  of  his  brooding  fancy,  externaliza- 
tions  of  hypothetical  subtleties.  He  was  concerned  only  with 
nuances.  He  lived  in  a  world  of  fine  gradations  and  imperceptible 
shades.  Like  modern  scholarship  he  came  to  deal  more  and  more 
with  less  and  less.  It  is  this  absorption  in  the  stream  of  psychical 
experience  that  justifies  one  in  calling  Henry  James  a  forerunner  of 
modern  expressionism.  Yet  how  unlike  he  is  to  Sherwood  Ander¬ 
son,  an  authentic  product  of  the  American  consciousness! 

hi 

WILLIAM  DEAN  HOWELLS  AND  THE  REALISM  OF  THE 

COMMONPLACE 

From  such  nostalgia,  that  left  a  note  of  wistfulness  in  his  pages, 
William  Dean  Howells  w7as  saved  by  his  frank  and  undivided 
loyalties.  Intellectually  and  emotionally  he  was  native  to  the 
American  soil,  and  however  widely  he  might  range  he  remained 
always  a  conscious  American.  He  had  no  wish  to  Europeanize  his 
mind;  he  felt  no  secret  hankerings  for  the  ways  of  Mayfair  or  the 
culture  of  the  Quartier  Saint  Germain.  The  homely  American 
reality  satisfied  the  needs  of  his  art,  and  he  accepted  it  with  the 
finality  of  Walt  Whitman.  If  he  failed  to  depict  it  in  all  its  sprawl¬ 
ing  veracity,  if  much  of  its  crude  robustness  never  got  into  his 
pages,  the  lack  was  due  to  no  self-imposed  alienation,  but  to  the 
temperament  of  the  artist  and  the  refined  discretions  of  his  envi¬ 
ronment. 

The  current  school  of  realism  is  inclined  to  deal  harshly  with 
Howells.  His  quiet  reticences,  his  obtrusive  morality,  his  genial 
optimism,  his  dislike  of  looking  ugly  facts  in  the  face,  are  too  old- 
fashioned  today  to  please  the  professional  purveyors  of  our  current 
disgusts.  They  find  his  writings  as  tedious  as  the  gossip  of  old 
ladies.  To  their  coarser  palates  his  respectable  commonplace  is 
as  flavorless  as  biscuit  and  tea.  Yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
for  years  he  was  reckoned  new-fashioned.  Whatever  may  be  one’s 
final  judgment  on  his  work  it  is  certain  that  for  twenty  years  he  was 
a  prophet  of  realism  to  his  generation,  the  leader  of  a  movement  to 


242 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


turn  American  literature  from  the  path  of  romanticism  and  bring  it 
face  to  face  with  the  real  and  actual.  It  was  not  his  fault  that  the 
ways  of  one  generation  are  not  those  of  another,  and  it  is  well  to 
remember  that  if  his  realism  seems  wanting  to  a  generation  bred  up 
on  Theodore  Dreiser,  it  seemed  a  debasement  of  the  fine  art  of 
literature  to  a  generation  bred  up  on  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich.  Re¬ 
alism  like  dress  changes  its  modes. 

The  Howells  we  know  best  was  not  a  simple  child  of  the  frontier, 
like  Mark  Twain,  whom  all  could  laugh  with  and  love  because  the 
sallies  of  his  wit  awakened  a  native  response.  He  did  not  remain 
completely  native  to  the  older  folk-ways.  He  was  rather  a  com¬ 
posite  of  the  ideals  reckoned  excellent  by  the  post-war  generation — 
an  American  Victorian,  kindly,  urbane,  tolerant,  democratic, 
accepting  America  as  a  land  that  God’s  smile  rests  on,  and  con¬ 
vinced  that  here,  wedded  to  a  generous  democracy,  culture  must 
eventually  produce  offspring  finer  than  the  world  has  hitherto 
known.  Bred  up  in  the  mystical  Swedenborgian  faith,  he  shrank 
from  all  fleshliness  and  loved  purity  with  the  devotion  of  a  Galahad. 
A  child  of  the  Ohio  frontier,  he  retained  to  the  last  the  western 
feeling  of  democratic  equality.  An  adopted  son  of  Brahmin  Cam¬ 
bridge,  he  immersed  himself  in  culture — Italian,  English,  Yankee — 
and  served  the  ideal  of  excellence  with  a  lifelong  devotion;  a 
reverent  pilgrim  to  the  shrine  of  truth,  he  followed  such  paths  as 
his  generation  knew  to  lay  his  art  at  the  high  altar.  In  all  these 
things — in  his  ample  culture,  his  kindly  democracy,  his  high  stand¬ 
ards  of  workmanship — as  well  as  in  the  instinctive  reverences  of  a 
clean  and  sweet  nature,  he  was  an  embodiment  of  the  best  in 
American  life,  a  child  of  Jacksonian  democracy  who  made  use  of 
his  freedoms  to  serve  the  excellent  cause  of  culture. 

But  he  was  much  more  than  that,  and  if  the  critics  who  are  wont 
to  damn  his  Victorian  squeamishness  would  penetrate  to  the  inner 
core  of  Howells  they  would  discover  an  intellectual,  alert  and  sensi¬ 
tive  to  changing  currents  of  thought,  seeing  with  his  own  eyes, 
pursuing  his  own  ends,  who  wrought  out  for  himself  a  culture  that 
was  individual  and  native.  If  he  was  not,  like  Henry  Adams, 
plagued  with  an  itch  of  curiosity,  he  traveled  widely  in  the  realm 
of  the  mind.  Culture  meant  to  him  open-mindedness,  familiarity 
with  diverse  schools  of  thought,  a  willingness  to  venture  upon  the 
unorthodox  and  to  defend  the  unpopular.  He  was  never  a  child  of 
the  Gilded  Age.  He  was  unsoiled  by  its  vulgarity,  unconcerned 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


243 


with  its  sordid  ambitions.  Neither  at  heart  was  he  a  child  of 
Brahmin  culture.  He  loved  Lowell  and  Norton  and  Godkin  and 
Aldrich,  and  he  wanted  to  be  approved  by  them;  but  he  ranged  far 
more  widely  than  they,  into  places  they  thought  indiscreet.  The 
mature  Howells  came  to  stand  apart,  from  Brahminism,  dissatisfied 
with  a  literary  Toryism,  convinced  that  a  sterile  genteel  tradition 
could  not  suffice  the  needs  of  American  literature.  His  very  drift 
toward  realism  was  a  negation  of  the  Brahmin  influence.  On  the 
whole  it  was  unfortunate  that  he  lived  so  long  in  the  Cambridge 
atmosphere.  The  New  England  influence  may  not  have  been  a 
factor  in  shaping  his  too  leisurely  technique,  but  certainly  it  post¬ 
poned  the  day  of  his  intellectual  release.  If  he  had  removed  to  New 
York  a  decade  earlier,  before  his  literary  method  hardened  into 
rigidity,  his  technique  might  have  changed  with  his  more  radical 
intellectual  outlook  and  become  the  vehicle  of  a  more  adequate 
realism  than  he  ever  achieved. 

But  the  significant  thing  is  that  the  mind  of  Howells  refused  to 
imprison  itself  in  Brahmin  orthodoxies,  but  set  forth  on  perilous 
expeditions  while  Lowell  and  Norton  were  discreetly  evading  the 
intellectual  heresies  raging  outside  their  libraries.  While  Henry 
James  was  moving  towards  aristocratic  Mayfair,  Howells  was 
journeying  towards  the  proletarian  East  Side.  The  scientific  revolu¬ 
tion  seems  early  to  have  washed  in  upon  him,  undermining  the 
theological  cosmos  of  his  youth  and  turning  him  into  a  liberal 
freethinker.  His  scientific  views  very  likely  came  to  him  second¬ 
hand,  through  the  medium  of  literature;  but  with  his  wide  reading 
in  Continental  fields — Spanish,  French,  German,  Scandinavian — 
he  could  not  fail  to  become  saturated  with  the  evolutionary  view 
then  permeating  all  current  letters.  In  this  he  was  only  following 
with  John  Fiske  and  Henry  Holt  and  Henry  Adams  the  path  of  a 
new  orthodoxy;  nevertheless  in  applying  the  scientific  spirit  to 
fiction  and  espousing  an  objective  realism,  he  quite  definitely  broke 
with  Brahmin  tradition.  And  when,  under  the  guise  of  fiction,  he 
turned  to  social  questions,  and  wove  into  the  placid  texture  of  his 
work  the  vexing  problem  of  social  justice,  he  ventured  on  perilous 
ground  where  his  Brahmin  friends  would  not  follow.  To  espouse  the 
teachings  of  Herbert  Spencer  was  one  thing,  to  espouse  the  teach¬ 
ings  of  Karl  Marx  was  quite  another. 

Howells  came  late  to  an  interest  in  sociology^  heldjback  bx~the~, 
strong  literary  and  aesthetic  cast  of  his  mind.  But  in  the  eighties, 


244 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


when  he  had  reached  middle  life,  .he  was  no  longer  able  to  ignore  or 
evade  the  economic  maladjustments  of  the  Gilded  Age.  The  social  _ 
unrest  that  was  coming  to  bloody  issue  in  strikes  and  lockouts  gave 
Jiim  acute  concern^  and  slowly  under  pressure  of  a^sensitive  social 
conscience  there  began  a  quiet  intellectual  revolution  that  was  to, 
transform  the  detached  observer  of  the  American  scene  into  a 
Marxian  socialist.  A  democrat,  a  lover  of  his  kind,  a  just  soul 
endowed  with  a  tender  conscience,  an  idealist  who  dreamed  of  a 
brotherhood  of  free  men  who  should  create  in  America  a  civiliza¬ 
tion  adequate  to  human  needs,  what  else  could  he  do?  He  loved 
peace  but  war  was  all  about  him.  And  so  in  the  mid-afternoon  of 
life  he  turned  to  the  work  of  spreading  the  gospel  of  social  democ¬ 
racy  in  the  America  of  the  Gilded  Age.  He  had  no  private  or  per¬ 
sonal  causes  to  serve.  He  had  not,  like  Godkin  and  Dana,  given 
hostages  to  fortune  in  the  shape  of  a  newspaper  or  magazine;  he  had 
no  call  to  be  partisan  to  his  own  interests.  He  was  free  to  plead  the 
cause  of  justice  in  his  own  way  and  at  his  own  time.  It  is  easy  for 
the  later  radical  to  sneer  at  him  as  a  parlor  socialist  who  talked  well 
but  carefully  refrained  from  disturbing  the  capitalistic  machine 
from  which  he  drew  his  income;  but  that  is  to  ignore  the  courage  of 
the  artist  in  confronting  a  hostile  world.  He  stood  stoutly  for  the 
rights  of  workingmen  that  the  passions  of  the  times  swept  rudely 
away.  When  the  Haymarket  Riot  in  Chicago  brought  its  shameful 
hysteria,  and  all  respectable  America  was  crying  for  blood,  Howells 
was  one  of  the  few  intellectuals  who  spoke  for  justice,  one  of  the  few 
Avbo  held  aloof  from  the  mob  spirit,  thereby  bringing  on  his  head  a 
wave  of  criticism.  It  was  a  brave  thing  in  1886  to  speak  for  the 
“Chicago  anarchists.” 

But  it  was  not  till  his  removal  to  New  York,  where  he  found  him¬ 
self  at  the  center  of  the  great  revolution,  that  he  set  about  seriously 
studying  the  ways  of  plutocracy.  For  the  student  of  Cambridge  so¬ 
ciety  it  involved  a  mental  upheaval.  The  urbanity  of  his  literary- 
manner  conceals  for  most  readers  the  intensity  of  emotion  that 
underlies  his  quiet  style;  yet  it  is  clear  enough  that  having  examined 
the  ways  of  private  capitalism  and  considered  its  works,  he  rejected 
it.  Thenceforth  to  the  end  of  his  life  he  hated  the  thing  and  quietly 
preached  against  it.  His  affections  went  back  fondly  to  the  earlier 
agricultural  order  that  had  shaped  his  youth,  and  in  the  character 
of  Drytoos,  in  A  Hazard  of  New  Fortunes ,  he  suggests  the  moral  de¬ 
generation  that  he  believed  followed  in  the  train  of  the  substitution 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


245 


of  a  speculative  capitalist  economy  for  the  wholesomer  agrarian 
economy.  But  though,  remembering  his  frontier  youth,  he  might 
prefer  the  older  ways.,  he  was  realist  enough  to  understand  that 
capitalism  was  the  order  of  his  generation,  and  he  turned  eagerly  to 
explore  the  new  proletarian  philosophies  that  came  out  of  Germany. 
Howells  was  the  first  distinguished  American  man  of  letters  to  es¬ 
pouse  Marxian  socialism.  For  a  cultivated  American  in  the  Gilded 
Age  to  sympathize  with  proletarian  theory  and  to  proclaim  himself 
a  socialist,  was  enough  to  excite  amazement  in  his  fellows.  In  the 
eighties  American  social  thought  was  still  naive  and  provincial. 
Old-world  theories  were  as  alien  as  old-world  institutions,  and  in 
spite  of  the  wide  interest  aroused  by  Looking  Backward,  the  intelli¬ 
gent  American  in  1890  knew  as  little  about  Marxianism  as  he 
knows  today  about  Bolshevism. 

The  doubts  and  hesitations  that  troubled  Howells  during  these 
years  of  changing  outlook,  are  skillfully  dramatized  in  A  Hazard  of 
New  Fortunes.  The  story  of  the  removal  of  the  Marshes  from  New 
England  to  New  York,  told  with  more  than  usual  leisureliness,  is  the 
story  of  the  transition  from  the  peacefulness  of  his  earlier  literary 
life  to  the  anxieties  of  his  later  thought.  Slowly  into  a  story  of  the 
familiar  Howells  commonplace  comes  the  note  of  social  dissension. 
Antagonistic  social  philosophies  meet  and  clash,  and  the  movement 
draws  inevitably  to  the  great  climax  of  the  strike  that  brings 
tragedy  into  the  scene.  Of  the  mood  that  grew  upon  him  as  he 
wrote  he  afterwards  said: 

It  became,  to  my  thinking,  the  most  vital  of  my  fictions;  through  my 
quickened  interest  in  the  life  about  me,  at  a  moment  of  great  psychological 
import.  We  had  passed  through  a  period  of  strong  emotioning  in  the 
direction  of  humaner  economic^,  ,  .  .  the  rich  seemed  not  so  much  to  de¬ 
spise  the  poor,  and  the  poor  did  not  so  hopelessly  repine.  That  shedding 
of  blood  which  is  for  the  remission  of  sins  had  been  symbolized  by  the 
bombs  and  scaffolds  of  Chicago,  and  the  hearts  of  those  who  felt  this  bound 
up  with  our  rights,  the  slavery  implicated  in  our  liberty,  were  thrilling 
with  griefs  and  hopes  hitherto  strange  to  the  average  American  breast. 
Opportunely  for  me  there  was  a  great  street-car  strike  in  New  York,  and 
the  story  began  to  find  its  way  to  issues  nobler  and  larger  than  those  of 
the  love-affairs  common  to  fiction.3 

The  years  of  unrest  marked  by  the  great  agrarian  revolt  were 
years  of  great  intellectual  activity  for  Howells,  during  which  his 

3  Quoted  in  “  The  Social  Consciousness  of  William' Dean  Howells,”  New  Republic. 
Vol.  26,  p.  193- 


246 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


thought  ripened  and  mellowed.  His  own  liberal  spirit  drew  to  him 
the  liberal  spirits  of  the  younger  generation,  and  he  became  the 
counselor  and  friend  of  many  of  the  young  rebels  of  the  day.  His 
sympathy  went  out  to  all  who  were  concerned  at  the  injustice  of 
the  world.  He  questioned  the  right  of  none  to  uphold  his  creed,  nor 
sought  to  impose  his  own  beliefs  upon  others.  As  he  watched  the 
great  struggle  of  the  times  his  heart  was  always  on  the  side  of  the 
weak  and  exploited.  Very  likely  he  knew  little  about  the  economics 
of  money  and  finance,  over  which  rival  partisans  were  quarreling 
savagely,  but  he  understood  the  human  side  of  the  farmers’  prob¬ 
lem  and  it  was  always  the  balance  in  the  human  ledger  that 
weighed  with  him. 

He  was  a  friend  of  Hamlin  Garland  and  rejoiced  when  Main- 
Travelled  Roads  was  given  to  the  world,  writing  for  it  an  introduc¬ 
tion  warmly  and  tenderly  sympathetic.  As  an  artist  he  grew  con¬ 
cerned  lest  under  the  stimulus  of  B.  O.  Flower  the  zeal  of  the 
propagandist  should  submerge  the  art  of  the  story-teller;  but  he 
had  no  quarrel  with  the  “causes”  that  were  fermenting  in  the  mind 
of  the  young  Populist,  and  would  not  lessen  one  whit  the  ardor  of 
his  social  faith.  Throughout  the  passionate  campaign  of  1896,  that 
brought  most  of  his  friends  to  a  blind  and  scurrilous  partisanship 
of  the  gold  standard,  his  heart  kept  his  mind  just  and  his  sympathy 
for  the  unrequited  producers  served  as  counterbalance  to  the  shrill 
vituperation  of  his  friend  Godkin.  He  had  thought  too  long  and  too 
honestly  to  be  moved  by  the  claque  of  the  press. 

It  was  in  the  black  days  of  the  panic  of ’93  that  he  seems  to  have 
brooded  most  thoughtfully  over  the  ways  of  capitalistic  America, 
and  in  the  following  year  he  published  The  Traveller  from  Altruria , 
the  first  of  his  two  Utopian  romances  in  which  he  subjected  the 
system  of  capitalism  to  critical  analysis.  It  is  a  clever  book  that 
quite  disarms  the  reader.  Howells  delivers  no  broadside  attack  on 
the  capitalistic  system,  and  he  suggests  its  mean  and  selfish  ex¬ 
ploitation  with  such  genial  urbanity,  such  sly  satire,  as  to  arouse  no 
sleeping  lions.  The  concern  in  his  heart  is  belied  by  the  twinkle  in 
his  eye.  He  hints  that  the  Altrurian  critic  is  only  the  figment  of  a 
dream,  and  he  smilingly  suggests  the  sources  of  the  Altrurian 
commonwealth  in  the  long  line  of  Utopian  dreamers  from  Plato 
and  Sir  1  homas  More  to  Bellamy  and  William  Morris.  But  the 
urbanity  is  only  a  mask.  Protected  by  it  Howells  delivers  many  a 
shrewd  thrust  at  the  ways  of  capitalism.  American  democracy  does 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


247 


not  show  to  advantage  under  his  analysis.  The  Altrurian  comes 
upon  the  canker  of  social  injustice  in  every  chink  and  cranny  of 
life — a  canker  that  is  slowly  destroying  democratic  America;  and 
Howells  takes  a  sly  pleasure  in  contrasting  our  democratic  profes¬ 
sions  with  our  plutocratic  practice.  There  is  a  delightful  irony  in 
his  attack  on  the  professional  classes — the  professor,  the  minister, 
the  writer — for  their  quick  defense  of  the  exploiting  classes.  What 
may  we  expect  of  the  science  of  economics,  he  suggests,  when  our 
academic  economists  are  only  apologists  for  the  existing  order? 

The  Traveller  from  Altryiria  is  a  shrewd  analysis  of  American  life 
set  against  a  Marxian  background,  and  in  forecasting  the  future 
Howells  follows  the  Marxian  law  of  concentration.  The  Age  of 
Accumulation,  with  its  gigantic  monopolies  gathered  in  ever  fewer 
hands,  prepared  the  way  for  a  new  order  when  industrialism, 
grown  overbig,  falls  into  the  control  of  the  state  as  naturally  as  the 
harvest  is  gathered  into  the  granary.  There  was  no  need  of  a  class 
war.  When  the  times  were  ripe  political  means  sufficed,  for  the 
democracy  retained  the  effective  weapon  of  the  vote.  Thirteen 
years  later  Howells  completed  his  Utopian  venture  with  Through  the 
Eye  of  the  Needle ,  in  which  he  sketches  in  fuller  detail  the  order  of 
life  in  Altruria.  It  was  not  till  men  learned  that  cooperation  is  a 
better  social  cement  than  competition,  altruism  than  egoism,  that 
the  new  order  was  possible;  and  in  this  later  work  he  depicts  the 
kindly,  rational  society  that  emerged  when  men  left  off  fighting 
each  other  and  turned  to  working  together  instead.  On  every  page 
the  influence  of  William  Morris  is  revealed — not  only  in  the  rejec¬ 
tion  of  an  urban  society  founded  on  the  machine  and  a  return  to  a 
decentralized  anarchistic  order,  but  in  the  emphasis  on  the  psy¬ 
chology  of  work  and  the  satisfactions  that  spring  from  free  creative 
labor.  Through  the  Eye  of  the  Needle  is  curiously  reminiscent  of 
News  from  Nowhere  and  suggests  how  sympathetically  Howells 
followed  English  social  thought  in  its  reaction  against  industrialism. 

It  was  while  he  was  thus  engaged  that  he  put  into  compact  form 
his  speculations  on  the  theory  of  realism.  For  more  than  a  decade 
he  had  been  the  most  distinguished  advocate  of  realism  in  America, 
and  for  longer  still  his  successive  novels  had  revealed  to  a  critical 
world  what  substance  and  form  he  believed  the  realistic  novel 
should  possess.  The  immediate  sources  of  his  theory  are  obscure, 
though  it  is  clear  enough  that  the  work  of  Jane  Austen  was  a  creative 
influence.  From  the  school  of  French  and  Russian  naturalism,  then 


248 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


at  the  height  of  its  vigor,  he  drew  back  in  repulsion,  and  it  was  not 
till  after  his  technique  was  matured  that  Tolstoi  became  an  influ¬ 
ence  in  his  intellectual  life.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  his 
realism  was  a  native  growth,  the  result  of  temperament  unfolding 
through  quiet  years  of  reading  in  the  English  classics.  A  quizzical 
observer  with  the  gift  of  humor  is  not  likely  to  run  into  romanticism, 
and  a  youthful  passion  for  Pope  and  Heme  is  not  the  best  prepara¬ 
tion  for  it.  His  intense  dislike  of  the  romantic,  that  led  him  to  an 
inadequate  and  partial  conception  of  it,  seems  to  have  sprung  from 
certain  instinctive  feelings  and  convictions  that  strengthened  with 
the  years:  a  deep  and  sincere  love  of  truth,  a  native  sympathy  with 
the  simple  homely  phases  of  life,  a  quiet  loyalty  to  American  fact, 
and  a  sharp  distrust  of  the  aristocratic  spirit.  Endowed  with  such 
feelings  he  came  to  ascribe  his  own  partisanships  to  literary  meth¬ 
ods;  the  romantic  became  for  him  the  aristocratic,  and  the  real¬ 
istic  became  the  democratic.  As  an  American  he  was  content 
to  take  the  common  stuff  of  life,  as  he  found  it  in  America,  and 
depict  it  in  unpretentious  sincerity.  Plain  American  life  was 
not  only  worthy  of  literature,  he  was  convinced,  but  the  only 
material  worthy  of  American  literature.  The  path  to  the  uni¬ 
versal  runs  as  directly  through  the  commonplace  American  parlor 
as  through  the  hall  of  the  medieval  baron  or  the  drawing-room 
of  Mayfair. 

In  Criticism  and  Fiction  (1894),  Howells  ascribes  the  rise  of 
modern  realism  to  the  twin  sources  of  science  and  democracy.  From 
science  it  derives  its  passion  for  truth,  for  “realism,”  he  asserts, 
“is  nothing  more  and  nothing  less  than  the  truthful  treatment  of 
material.”  “We  must  ask  ourselves  before  we  ask  anything  else, 
Is  it  true? — true  to  the  motives,  the  impulses,  the  principles,  that 
shape  the  life  of  actual  men  and  women.”  The  question,  what  is 
essential  truth,  that  has  been  the  apple  of  discord  amongst  the  real¬ 
ists,  Howells  answers  in  democratic  fashion  by  appealing  to  the  av¬ 
erage.  The  “foolish  man,”  he  says,  “wonders  at  the  unusual,  but 
the  wise  man  at  the  usual.”  The  realist,  therefore,  will  deal  objec¬ 
tively  with  the  usual  and  common  rather  than  with  the  unusual  or 
strange,  and  in  so  doing  he  draws  closer  to  the  common  heart  of 
humanity,  and  learns  the  respect  for  simple  human  nature  that  is 
the  source  and  wellspring  of  democracy.  In  delineating  truthfully 
the  prosaic  lives  of  common  people  realism  reveals  the  essential 
dignity  and  worth  of  all  life.  The  romantic,  on  the  other  hand,  is 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


249 


aristocratic.  “It  seeks  to  withdraw  itself,  to  stand  aloof;  to  be  dis¬ 
tinguished  and  not  to  be  identified.”  “  I  he  pride  of  caste  has  be¬ 
come  the  pride  of  taste,”  and  romance  is  the  last  refuge  of  the 
aristocratic  spirit  that,  defeated  elsewhere,  has  taken  refuge  in 
culture.  Not  aloofness,  but  comradeship,  is  the  need  of  the 
world;  not  distinction,  but  identity.  Realism  is  the  child  of 
democracy  because  the  realist  is  one  who  “feels  in  every  nerve 
the  equality  of  things  and  the  unity  of  men,”  and  the  great  artist 
is  one  with  a  talent  “robust  enough  to  front  the  everyday  world 
and  catch  the  charm  of  its  work-worn,  care-worn,  brave,  kindly 
face.” 

To  this  characteristic  conception  that  realism  is  democratic 
Howells  adds  certain  other  dicta  that  to  his  own  generation  seemed 
as  true  as  to  ours  they  seem  doubtful:  that  art  must  serve  morality, 
that  it  must  teach  rather  than  amuse,  and  that  truthfulness  to 
American  life  requires  a  note  of  cheerfulness.  Art  cannot  flout  the 
“eternal  amenities,”  Howells  asserted,  for  “morality  penetrates  all 
things,  it  is  the  soul  of  all  things.”  Nor  can  it  stand  aloof,  disdain¬ 
ing  the  office  of  teacher,  for  unless  it  “tends  to  make  the  world 
better  and  kinder”  it  is  empty  and  futile;  and  it  can  do  this  only 
“from  and  through  the  truth.”  But  the  truth  that  will  uplift 
society  does  not  dwell  in  the  kennel  and  pigsty;  it  will  not  be  come 
upon  by  exploring  the  animal  in  man,  or  in  wrapping  the  shroud  of 
pessimism  about  life.  In  America  at  least,  realism  must  concern  it¬ 
self  with  the  “large  cheerful  average  of  health  and  success  and 
happy  life,”  for  after  all  “the  more  smiling  aspects  of  life”  are 
“the  more  American.”  From  such  postulates  Howells  developed 
his  familiar  technique,  which  in  minimizing  plot,  rejecting  the  un¬ 
usual  and  strange  and  heroic,  reduced  his  stories  to  the  drab  level 
that  bores  so  many  of  his  readers,  and  evokes  the  criticism  that  in 
elaboration  of  the  commonplace  he  evades  the  deeper  and  more 
tragic  realities  that  reach  to  the  heart  of  life. 

The  criticism  is  just.  More  than  any  other  thing  this  concern  for 
the  usual  weakens  Howells’s  work  and  renders  it  trivial.  He  does 
not  probe  the  depths  of  emotional  experience.  Neither  the  life  of 
the  spirit  nor  the  passions  of  the  flesh  is  the  stuff  from  which  he 
weaves  his  stories.  The  lack — and  allowing  for  all  his  solid  excel¬ 
lence  it  remains  grave — sprang  in  part  from  his  own  timid  nature 
that  recoiled  from  the  gross  and  the  unpleasant,  and  in  part  from 
the  environment  in  which  he  perfected  his  technique.  For  years  he 


250 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


lived  in  an  atmosphere  of  complacent  convention,  a  society  domi¬ 
nated  by  women,  culture,  and  conscience.  Cambridge  and  Boston 
in  the  seventies  and  eighties  were  still  in  the  Age  of  Innocence 
greatly  concerned  with  erecting  defenses  against  the  intrusion  of 
the  unpleasant,  reverencing  the  genteel,  in  life  and  letters,  soberly 
moral  and  making  much  of  the  eternal  verities.  In  such_a  world  of 
refined  manners  and  narrow  outlook  what  should  the  realist  do  but 
report  faithfully  of  what  he  saw  and  heard  ?  And  so  Howells, 
perforce,  became  a  specialist  in  women’s  nerves,  an  analyst  of  the 
tenuous  New  England  conscience,  a  master  of  Boston  small-talk. 
It  was  such  materials  that  shaped  his  leisurely  technique  until  it 
falls  about  his  theme  with  the  amplitude  of  crinoline. 

Through  these  chronicles  of  the  Age  of  Innocence  runs  a  persist¬ 
ent  note  of  the  neurotic.  There  are  more  scruples  to  a  page  of 
Howells  than  in  any  other  writer  except  Henry  James— for  the 
most  part  filmy  cobwebs  invisible  to  the  coarser  vision  of  a  later 
generation.  The  action  percolates  through  the  sand  of  small-talk, 
welling  up  from  the  tiniest  springs  and  stopped  by  the  smallest 
obstruction.  Like  Franklin’s  two-headed  snake  his  characters  are 
in  danger  of  dying  from  thirst  because  of  much  argument  over  the 
right  path  to  water.  It  is  hard  to  weave  a  substantial  fabric  from 
such  gossamer  threads,  and  when  in  The  Rise  of  Silas  Lapham  end¬ 
less  pages  are  devoted  to  the  ethical  subtleties  of  a  woman’s  accept¬ 
ing  the  hand  of  a  man  who  the  family  had  believed  was  in  love  with 
her  sister,  or  when  in  April  Hopes  the  fantastic  scruples  of  a  neuro¬ 
tic  girl  are  elaborated  with  a  refinement  of  art  worthy  of  a  Fra  An¬ 
gelico  Madonna,  the  stuff  is  too  filmy  to  wear  well.  Commonplace 
men  and  neurotic  women  are  poor  materials  from  which  to  fashion 
an  adequate  realism,  and  with  the  passing  of  the  Age  of  Inno¬ 
cence  the  scruples  of  Howells  went  out  of  fashion. 

The  fault,  in  part  at  least,  must  be  traced  to  the  artist’s  deep 
reverence  for  New  England.  From  his  youth  he  had  cherished  an 
exalted  notion  of  the  sufficiency  of  New  England  culture,  and  had 
accepted  its  parochialisms  as  ultimate  standards.  To  a  bookish  lad, 
inclined  to  be  too  consciously  literary,  such  loyalty  to  a  declining 
school  could  only  accentuate  his  native  aloofness  from  life.  His 
four  years  at  Venice  had  been  given  over  to  an  ardent  pursuit  of 
culture,  as  culture  was  understood  by  Lowell  and  Norton.  It  was 
the  natural  impulse  of  a  sensitive  mind,  conscious  of  its  limitations, 
reveling  for  the  first  time  in  the  wealth  that  had  been  denied  his 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


251 


frontier  boyhood.  His  poetic  Venetian  Days  was  an  infallible  pass¬ 
port  to  Boston  favor,  and  when  after  his  return  he  was  taken  up 
by  the  Atlantic  group  he  carried  with  him  to  Boston  an  unconscious 
inferiority  complex  that  did  his  genius  an  evil  turn.  It  was  natural 
for  the  self-taught  western  youth  to  be  reverent  in  presence  of  the 
great  of  earth;  but  it  is  not  well  for  the  artist  to  be  humble  in  the 
presence  of  his  masters.  Unless  he  is  something  of  a  rebel,  given  to 
questioning  the  dogmas  of  the  schools,  he  will  never  ripen  into 
creative  originality. 

An  inferiority  complex  is  a  common  mark  of  the  frontier  mind 
that  finds  itself  diffident  in  presence  of  the  old  and  established,  and 
Howells  suffered  from  it  greatly.  For  years  his  keen  eyes  lacked 
their  usual  shrewdness  in  judging  Boston  ways,  and  to  the  end  of 
his  life  he  overestimated  the  greatness  of  the  men  to  whom  his 
youthful  loyalty  had  gone  out.  Not  only  did  he  accept  Lowell  and 
Holmes  and  Longfellow  at  the  Boston  rating,  but  he  regarded  the 
lesser  group  of  cultivated  Boston  gentlemen  with  partial  eyes.  It 
would  have  been  far  better  for  his  art  if  like  Hamlin  Garland  he 
had  never  been  received  within  the  charmed  circle;  if  he  had  had 
to  make  his  way  alone.  To  justify  his  acceptance  Howells  felt  that 
he  must  prove  himself  as  completely  Bostonian  as  the  best,  and  in 
consequence  he  sloughed  off  his  western  heritage,  perverted  his 
genius,  and  shaped  his  realism  to  the  slender  materials  discovered  in 
Back  Bay  drawing-rooms.  The  genteel  tradition  was  in  the  way  of 
strangling  his  realism. 

Subjected  to  such  refinements  his  realism  in  the  end  became  little 
more  than  technique — a  meticulous  transcription  of  New  England 
conventions,  the  casual  action  submerging  itself  in  an  endless 
stream  of  talk.  No  doubt  Howells  was  true  to  what  he  saw;  cer¬ 
tainly  no  one  has  ever  fixed  more  exactly  the  thin  substance  of  the 
Age  of  Innocence.  Nevertheless  the  fidelity  of  his  observation,  the 
refinement  of  his  prose  style,  and  the  subtlety  of  his  humor  that 
plays  lambently  about  the  edges  of  his  words,  do  not  compensate 
for  the  slightness  of  his  materials.  The  record  he  has  left  is  not 
that  of  a  great  soul  brooding  over  the  meaning  of  life,  puzzled, 
uncertain,  yet  tender  toward  the  victims  that  fate  has  seized  and 
crushed.  He  was  restrained  by  too  many  inhibitions  to  deal  frankly 
with  natural  human  passions.  He  felt  deeply  and  tenderly,  but  he 
was  too  diffident  to  let  himself  go.  It  is  likely  that  Howells  never 
realized  the  inadequacy  of  his  temperament  and  the  futility  of  his 


252 


CHANGING  AMERICA 


method  to  any  serious  realism.  Even  in  his  acutest  study  A 
Hazard  of  New  Fortunes,  which  comes  upon  brutal  economic  reality, 
the  story  is  entangled  in  a  mass  of  minute  detail  and  never  quite 
breaks  through.  The  indecisions,  the  repetitions,  the  whimsical 
descriptions,  the  drifting  talk,  are  all  true  to  life,  but  they  are  not 
essential  or  vital  truth.  The  real  issue  toward  which  the  story 
moves— the  problem  of  social  justice  and  the  contrasting  systems  of 
wage-slavery,  bond-slavery,  and  social  democracy — is  obscured  in 
a  welter  of  asides  and  never  quite  reaches  the  front  of  the  stage.  He 
is  more  effective  in  such  works  as  Indian  Summer,  when  he  deals 
with  characters  on  vacation  who  play  whimsically  with  love,  and 
in  April  Hopes,  when  he  dwells  fondly  on  the  infinitely  eloquent 
trivialities  of  young  love-making.  In  such  studies  the  minute  fidel¬ 
ity  to  word  and  gesture,  the  humorous  playing  with  invisible  scru¬ 
ple,  is  a  pleasant  substitute  for  solider  material. 

Howells  had  real  gifts,  of  which  he  made  the  most.  Refinement, 
humor,  sympathy — fidelity  to  external  manner  and  rare  skill  in 
catching  the  changing  expression  of  life — a  passion  for  truth  and 
a  jealous  regard  for  his  art:  he  had  all  these  qualities,  yet  they 
were  not  enough  to  make  him  a  great  realist.  He  belonged  to  the 
Age  of  Innocence  and  with  its  passing  his  works  have  been  laid 
away.  He  has  had  no  followers  to  keep  his  method  alive.  If  one 
may  hazard  an  explanation  of  the  lot  that  has  befallen  him,  it 
would  be  this.  Howells  the  artist  mistook  his  calling.  He  was  not 
by  temperament  a  novelist.  He  lacked  the  sense  of  drama,  a  grasp 
of  the  rough  fabric  of  life,  the  power  to  deal  imaginatively  with  the 
great  and  tragic  realities.  His  genius  was  rather  that  of  a  whimsical 
essayist,  a  humorous  observer  of  the  illogical  ways  of  men.  He  was 
an  eighteenth-century  spirit — a  subtler  Goldsmith — set  down  in 
another  age  and  an  uncongenial  world.  In  his  later  years  he  must 
have  come  to  realize  this,  for  more  and  more  he  turned  to  the 
essay  form.  There  his  quiet  humor  and  shrewd  observation  fitted 
his  sinuous  prose  style  to  a  nicety.  In  such  sketchy  autobiography 
as  My  Literary  Passions,  and  more  whimsically  in  such  genial 
travel  essays  as  Certain  Delightful  English  Towns,  his  refined  art 
arrived  at  its  most  perfect  expression.  Not  an  original  genius  like 
Mark  Twain,  far  from  a  turbulent  soul  like  Herman  Melville, 
Howells  was  the  reporter  of  his  generation — the  greatest  literary 
figure  of  a  drab  negative  age  when  the  older  literary  impulse  was 
slackening,  and  the  new  was  slowly  displacing  it.  He  marks  the 


VICTORIAN  REALISM 


253 


transition  between  the  earlier  idealism  and  the  later  naturalism. 
A  humane  and  lovable  soul,  he  was  the  embodiment  of  all  that 
was  kindly  and  generous  in  an  America  that  was  not  wholly  given 
over  to  the  ways  of  the  Gilded  Age — an  America  that  loved  beauty 
and  served  culture  even  amidst  the  turmoil  of  revolution. 


BOOK  TWO:  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW:  STORM  CLOUDS 


BOOK  TWO 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW:  STORM  CLOUDS 

The  quarter-century  between  the  panic  of  1873  that  rudely  dis¬ 
turbed  the  revelry  of  the  Great  Barbecue,  and  the  campaign  of 
1896  that  broke  the  agrarian  opposition  to  capitalism,  was  marked 
by  a  fierce  agrarian  attempt  to  nullify  in  America  the  law  of  con¬ 
centration.  The  silent  drift  toward  plutocracy  was  too  evident  to 
escape  comment  even  in  the  Gilded  Age,  and  the  ideal  of  plutoc¬ 
racy  was  too  repugnant  to  a  people  drenched  in  Jeffersonian  and 
Jacksonian  prejudices  to  escape  bitter  hostility.  The  pursuit  of 
wealth  was  an  accepted  democratic  right,  but  it  was  assumed  to 
be  a  fair  race  and  no  favors.  The  use  of  the  political  state  by  greater 
wealth  to  lay  handicaps  on  lesser  wealth  had  not  been  in  the  reckon¬ 
ing,  and  the  law  of  progress  that  diminished  the  number  of  bene¬ 
ficiaries  from  the  national  policy  of  preemption  and  exploitation 
had  not  been  so  interpreted.  Something  was  wrong  with  a  progress 
that  augmented  poverty  as  it  increased  wealth,  and  with  the  alarm¬ 
ist  cry  in  their  ears — the  rich  are  growing  richer  and  the  poor 
poorer — the  untutored  democracy  of  the  seventies  and  the  eighties 
turned  to  question  the  drift  of  tendency  that  quite  evidently  was 
transforming  a  democratic  people  into  a  vast  engulfing  plutocracy. 
An  older  agrarian  America  was  confronted  by  a  younger  capital¬ 
istic  one,  and  the  conflict  of  ideals  and  purposes  was  certain  to 
bring  on  a  bitter  debate. 

In  the  fierce  struggle  that  turmoiled  the  politics  of  three  decades 
the  democracy  went  into  battle  as  ill-equipped  intellectually  as 
it  had  been  a  hundred  years  before  in  the  struggle  over  the  Con¬ 
stitution.  It  was  reaping  the  harvest  of  the  long  Jacksonian  slack¬ 
ness  that,  content  with  the  vote,  had  given  no  thought  to  the  ul¬ 
timate  program  of  democracy  but  had  suffered  the  lawyers  to  have 
their  way.  The  Enlightenment  had  long  since  been  submerged  by 
Whiggish  ambitions,  and  since  the  days  of  the  Abolition  Movement 
there  had  been  no  serious  consideration  of  political  theory.  The 
success  of  the  Jacksonian  revolution  had  brought  about  its  un¬ 
doing.  The  abstract  principle  of  democracy  having  won  common 

257 


258 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


acceptance,  it  was  assumed  to  be  competent  to  shift  for  itself. 
But  unfortunately  a  supposedly  democratic  state  was  functioning 
under  a  Constitution  designed  to  thwart  democracy,  and,  inter¬ 
preted  by  lawyers,  it  buttressed  the  rights  of  property  far  more 
securely  than  the  rights  of  man.  Within  this  fundamental  law 
capitalism  had  long  been  entrenching  itself.  Its  stronghold  could 
not  be  taken  by  frontal  attack  and  its  flanks  were  protected  by  the 
courts  that  had  assumed  the  high  prerogative  of  voiding  statutory 
enactments  by  judicial  decree.  As  a  result  in  no  other  country 
was  capitalism  so  safeguarded  from  hostile  attack;  it  plowed  its 
fields  and  gathered  its  harvests  secure  from  disturbance. 

Unfortunately  the  political  state  did  not  realize  that  it  was  not 
in  reality  the  democracy  it  professed  to  be.  The  most  intelligent 
liberalism  of  the  times,  failing  to  take  into  account  the  economic 
basis  of  politics,  was  satisfied  to  spend  its  energy  in  Civil  Service 
Reform  and  similar  tinkering  with  the  political  machinery,  con¬ 
vinced  that  it  was  only  necessary  to  recover  the  old  aristocratic 
sense  of  responsibdity  in  political  agents  to  perfect  a  democratic 
government.  Not  till  another  generation  did  liberalism  come  to 
understand  that  the  democratic  program  was  still  largely  unful¬ 
filled,  and  set  about  in  all  earnestness  to  complete  it;  but  that  did 
not  happen  till  the  philosophy  of  democracy  had  been  far  more 
adequately  explored  and  the  simple  faith  of  Jacksonianism  had 
been  instructed  by  the  experience  of  other  lands.  Popular  discon¬ 
tent  with  the  drift  toward  plutocracy  was  intensified  by  the  suc¬ 
cessive  economic  crises  that  marked  the  transition  from  agrarian¬ 
ism  to  capitalism.  The  gospel  of  progress,  it  seems,  had  not  taken 
due  account  of  the  price  that  must  be  paid  in  social  disturbances, 
and  the  breakdowns  of  1873-1879  and  1887-1896  with  their  harsh 
dislocations  aroused  a  spirit  of  revolt  that  issued  in  broad  popular 
movements.  Those  movements  spun  the  thread  of  liberalism 
that  runs  through  the  years  from  the  Gilded  Age  to  the  World 
War  a  thread  woven  of  the  earlier  liberalism  that  came  from 
the  frontier,  and  the  new  collectivistic  theories  that  came  from 
Europe.  In  the  eighties  and  nineties  it  was  still  largely  native 
agrarian,  but  in  the  early  years  of  the  new  century  it  drew  heavily 
on  the  proletarian  philosophies  of  Europe — seeking  to  apply  old- 
world  experience  to  American  problems.  Through  it  all  runs  in¬ 
creasingly  a  note  of  sobering  realism.  After  a  hundred  years  politi¬ 
cal  romanticism  was  slowly  dying  in  America. 


PART  ONE:  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER  RISES 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 

i 

DEMOCRATIC  REACTIONS  TO  PLUTOCRACY 

The  Middle  Border  was  the  first  to  recover  from  the  heady  roman¬ 
ticisms  of  Whiggery.  The  malady  of  preemption  and  exploitation 
quickly  ran  its  course  there  and  after  the  first  enthusiasm  of  settle¬ 
ment  had  subsided — the  staking  of  claims,  the  scramble  over  town- 
sites,  the  bidding  for  railway  lines — the  farmer  settled  down  amidst 
his  corn  and  wheat  and  cattle  and  hogs  to  learn  what  sort  of  living 
the  prairies  might  provide.  With  his  feet  on  the  sobering  earth  he 
was  no  middle-class  adventurer,  no  buccaneer  lying  in  wait  for  the 
golden  argosies  of  Spain,  but  a  sober  realist  kept  sane  by  wind  and 
weather  and  kept  honest  by  his  daily  occupation  of  tilling  and 
reaping. 

As  the  first  wave  of  settlers  spread  over  the  prairies  a  mood  of 
buoyant  hopefulness  colored  their  dreams.  The  earlier  conquest  of 
the  Inland  Empire  had  entailed  exhausting  labor  in  preliminary 
clearings,  and  the  stumpage  from  great  forests  remained  for  years 
to  obstruct  clean  tillage;  but  here  in  the  Middle  Border  were  tree¬ 
less  fields  of  black  soil,  level,  uncluttered  by  stones,  inviting  the 
plow.  For  ages  the  prairie  grass  had  been  growing  there,  tall  as  a 
horseman  in  the  bottoms  and  plentiful  on  the  uplands;  and  as  the 
unmarked  seasons  passed,  the  potash  from  the  decaying  vegetation 
added  a  richer  fertility  to  the  soil.  In  natural  productiveness  it  was 
the  fairest  portion  of  America,  and  as  the  land-hungry  settlers 
made  their  pitch  there,  filing  on  broad  homesteads  and  building 
their  cabins,  a  mood  of  buoyant  expectation  filled  the  land.  It 
was  not  the  flamboyant  spirit  of  the  Gilded  Age,  but  the  hopeful¬ 
ness  of  those  who  within  a  few  short  years  were  to  transform  a 
wilderness  into  the  world’s  granary.  In  his  wistful  account  of  the 
glamour  that  lay  upon  the  prairies  in  those  first  pioneer  years — a 
glamour  that  soon  passed  like  the  morning  dews — Hamlin  Garland 
was  no  frontier  romantic  but  a  sober  historian. 

259 


260 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


But  as  the  seventies  gave  place  to  the  eighties  a  subtle  change 
came  over  the  mood  of  the  Middle  Border.  Disappointment  and 
disillusion  settled  upon  a  land  that  before  had  smiled  in  the  spring 
sunshine.  The  harvest  was  not  fulfilling  the  expectations  of  the 
seedtime.  The  changed  mood  came  in  part  from  the  harsh  toil  and 
meager  living  that  were  the  necessary  price  the  frontiersman  must 
pay  for  his  small  winnings.  It  is  no  holiday  job  to  subdue  an  un¬ 
tamed  land  and  wrest  abundance  and  comfort  from  a  virgin  soil. 
Only  for  the  young  who  can  project  their  hopes  into  the  future  is  it 
endurable;  for  the  middle-aged  and  the  old  it  is  a  heart-breaking 
task.  The  history  of  the  western  frontier  is  a  long  drab  story  of 
hardship  and  privation  and  thwarted  hopes,  of  men  and  women 
broken  by  the  endless  toil,  the  windows  of  their  dreams  shuttered 
by  poverty  and  the  doors  to  an  abundant  life  closed  and  barred  by 
narrow  opportunity.  It  is  true  that  the  prairies  took  no  such  toll  as 
the  forests  had  taken;  the  mean  and  squalid  poverty  through  which 
Lincoln  passed  was  not  so  common  in  the  Middle  Border  as  it  had 
been  along  the  earlier  frontier.  Nevertheless  a  fierce  climate  and  a 
depressing  isolation  added  their  discomforts  to  a  bleak  existence. 
The  winds  were  restless  on  the  flat  plains,  and  the  flimsy  wooden 
houses,  stark  and  mean,  unprotected  by  trees  and  unrelieved  by 
shrubbery,  were  an  ill  defense  against  their  prying  fingers.  In 
winter  the  blizzards  swept  out  of  the  North  to  overmaster  the  land, 
and  in  summer  the  hot  winds  came  up  from  the  Southwest  to  sear 
the  countrysides  that  were  rustling  with  great  fields  of  corn.  Other 
enemies  appeared,  as  it  were,  out  of  a  void.  Endless  flights  of  grass¬ 
hoppers  descended  like  a  plague  of  locusts,  and  when  they  passed 
the  earth  was  bare  and  brown  where  the  young  wheat  had  stood. 
Armies  of  chinch-bugs  came  from  nobody  knew  where,  and  swarm¬ 
ing  up  the  tender  corn-stalks  left  them  sucked  dry  and  yellow.  It 
is  nature  s  way,  to  destroy  with  one  hand  what  it  creates  with  the 
other;  and  for  years  the  western  farmers  were  fighting  plagues  that 
had  possessed  the  prairies  before  the  settlers  came. 

I  he  disillusion  of  the  Middle  Border  deepened  into  gloom  as  the 
widespread  economic  depression  of  the  times  added  its  discourage¬ 
ments.  A  period  of  falling  prices  was  curtailing  industry  and  forcing 
down  the  market  values  of  all  produce,  from  such  depressions  a 
debtor  community  always  suffers  most  severely,  for  falling  produce- 
prices  mean  rising  money-values  and  a  shifting  standard  of  value 
for  deferred  payments.  The  farms  of  the  Middle  Border  were 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


261 


heavily  encumbered  to  provide  tools  and  livestock  and  buildings, 
and  the  earnings  were  consumed  by  the  interest  that  went  East  to 
the  mortgage-holders.  Debt  was  a  luxury  the  farmer  could  ill 
afford,  and  when  the  debt  was  silently  augmenting  by  the  rising 
value  of  the  dollar  he  was  forced  to  consider  his  situation.  The 
plight  into  which  he  had  fallen  was  graphically  summed  up  in  the 
phrase  “ten-cent  corn  and  ten  per  cent  interest” — a  phrase  that 
was  to  become  a  spark  to  all  the  tinder  that  was  gathering  from 
frontier  hardships  and  disappointments.  Falling  market-values 
were  at  the  bottom  of  his  troubles.  The  prices  of  his  staples  were 
sinking  below  the  cost  of  production.  With  four-cent  eggs,  five- 
cent  butter,  ten-cent  corn,  and  fifty-cent  wheat,  with  more  hogs  and 
cattle  than  the  stockyards  would  take,  and  with  debts  contracted 
at  interest-rates  fixed  by  a  higher  scale  of  values,  the  economic  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  Middle  Border  was  becoming  desperate,  and  in  the 
later  eighties  a  sullen  bitterness  took  possession  of  the  land.  As  the 
farmer  sat  by  the  kitchen  stove  and  stoked  the  fire  with  great  ears 
of  corn  that  were  cheaper  than  coal,  he  had  ample  time  to  contem¬ 
plate  his  lot.  Ungathered  crops  for  which  there  was  no  market 
would  not  pay  interest.  There  was  coming  to  be  “too  much  hog  in 
the  dollar,”  as  one  commentator  remarked  quaintly.  The  Middle 
Border,  all  too  clearly,  was  strangling  from  its  own  productiveness. 

It  was  easy  for  newspaper  critics,  armed  with  the  wisdom  of  the 
Board  of  Trade,  to  point  out  that  overproduction  was  the  trouble 
with  the  western  farmer,  and  that  so  vast  a  development  of  staple 
crops  resulting  from  sowing  the  prairie  states  to  corn  and  wheat  was 
certain  to  bring  on  disastrous  market  slumps.  It  was  true.  Produc¬ 
tion  had  outrun  consumption;  quantity  output  had  brought  on  a 
glut.  But  it  was  also  true — as  the  armchair  critics  were  not  so  care¬ 
ful  to  point  out — that  other  causes  contributed  equally  to  the  de¬ 
flation  of  the  western  farmer,  the  result  of  which  was  to  despoil  him 
of  the  last  moiety  of  his  earnings.  He  was  in  the  grip  of  a  complex 
middleman  organization  that  gouged  him  at  every  turn.  1  he  gap 
between  producer  and  consumer  was  widening  to  a  chasm.  1  he 
railways  charged  twenty  cents  a  bushel  cartage  for  wheat  from  the 
Mississippi  to  Chicago,  and  fifty-two  and  a  half  cents  to  the  Atlan¬ 
tic  seaboard.  The  elevator  companies  fixed  monopoly  tolls,  swin¬ 
dled  the  farmer  in  their  grain-gradings,  and  combined  to  force  down 
the  market  price  at  harvest  time  and  raise  it  after  the  crop  came 
under  their  control.  The  “Livestock  Ring,”  managed  by  the  rail- 


262 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


ways,  controlled  the  Union  Stock  Yards  at  Chicago  and  squeezed 
the  marginal  profits  from  the  farmer’s  cattle  and  hogs.1  When  on 
the  other  hand  he  bought  implements  or  groceries  or  household 
goods  he  was  at  the  mercy  of  a  non-competitive  market,  protected 
by  patent-rights  and  tariffs,  to  which  were  added  extortionate 
transportation  and  middleman  charges. 

It  was  his  own  fault,  of  course.  Due  to  his  own  political  slackness 
the  farmer  had  allowed  himself  to  become  the  common  drudge  of 
society.  All  the  exploiting  classes  had  their  hands  in  his  pockets. 
His  was  the  only  considerable  economic  group  that  exerted  no 
organized  pressure  to  control  the  price  he  sold  for  or  the  price  he 
paid.  While  capitalism  had  been  perfecting  its  machinery  of  ex¬ 
ploitation  he  had  remained  indifferent  to  the  fact  that  he  himself 
was  the  fattest  goose  that  capitalism  was  to  pluck.  He  had  helped 
indeed  to  provide  the  rope  for  his  own  hanging.  He  had  voted  away 
the  public  domain  to  railways  that  were  now  fleecing  him;  he  took 
pride  in  the  county-seat  towns  that  lived  off  his  earnings;  he  sent 
city  lawyers  to  represent  him  in  legislatures  and  in  Congress;  he 
read  middle-class  newspapers  and  listened  to  bankers  and  politi¬ 
cians  and  cast  his  votes  for  the  policy  of  Whiggery  that  could  have 
no  other  outcome  than  his  own  despoiling.  And  now  in  the  middle 
eighties  he  began  to  feel  the  rope  about  his  neck,  and  realized  the 
predicament  he  was  in.  It  was  not  alone  the  local  middlemen,  or 
even  the  railways — he  had  come  to  believe — that  were  to  blame. 
It  was  the  money-power  of  the  East,  the  grip  of  Wall  Street,  that 
was  strangling  him — a  power  that  controlled  the  government  at 
Washington,  that  manipulated  the  currency  system,  and  that  was 
engaged  in  a  scheme  to  augment  its  holdings  by  forcing  up  the  value 
of  the  dollar  and  automatically  increasing  the  value  of  the  indebted¬ 
ness  it  had  gathered  in  its  vaults.  Clearly  it  was  high  time  for  the 
deflated  fanner  to  get  into  politics  on  his  own  account  if  he  were  to 
save  himself  from  beggary,  and  so  during  the  Gilded  Age  began  a 
great  agrarian  revolt  against  capitalism  that  was  to  turmoil  the 
next  quarter  of  a  century — a  revolt  that  was  to  mark  the  last 
effective  organization  of  the  farmers  to  combat  the  new  order,  the 
last  flare-up  of  an  old-fashioned  agrarian  America  before  it  was 
submerged  by  the  middle  class. 

1  See  Nevins,  The  Emergence  of  Modern  America,  pp.  163-164 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


263 


ii 

THE  FARMER  CONSIDERS  POLITICS 

By  the  early  seventies  it  was  becoming  clear  to  the  Middle 
Border  that  the  policy  of  Whiggery  took  no  account  of  the  needs 
of  the  farmer.  Government  was  indifferent  to  him,  whether  at  the 
capital  of  his  state  or  at  Washington,  and  governmental  programs 
— whether  in  the  matter  of  protective  tariffs  and  land-grants,  in  its 
unconcern  at  monopoly  extortion,  or  in  the  contraction  of  the 
currency  with  a  view  to  the  resumption  of  specie  payments— ran 
so  counter  to  his  interests  that  the  dullest  began  to  question  the 
fairness  of  the  state.  It  had  ceased  to  concern  itself  with  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  the  whole.  The  combination  of  paternalism  and  laissez  faire 
that  marked  the  Whiggery  of  the  times  could  be  interpreted  by 
the  suspicious  farmer,  indeed,  only  as  a  surrender  of  government  to 
capitalism.  It  had  lost  all  pretense  of  fairness  in  the  distribution  of 
governmental  favors,  and  withheld  or  granted  aid  with  the  single 
objective  of  furthering  the  interests  of  powerful  groups.  It  sanc¬ 
tioned  the  use  of  the  state  by  business  interests  for  purposes  of 
exploitation,  and  declined  to  exercise  its  power  in  the  interests  of 
the  consumer.  It  granted  tariffs  and  subsidies,  yet  refused  to  regu¬ 
late  the  monopoly  power  it  had  created.  It  was  no  longer  a  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  people  but  a  government  of  business,  concerned  for 
the  interests  of  exploitation,  and  if  the  farmer  were  to  gain  a 
hearing  he  must  first  make  himself  feared. 

Of  necessity,  therefore,  the  agrarian  program  entailed  a  political 
struggle  of  great  bitterness.  There  would  be  no  adequate  relief 
granted  until  the  farmers  had  wrested  control  of  government  from 
the  class  that  was  exploiting  them.  The  battle  between  agrarianism 
and  capitalism,  in  consequence,  from  the  outset  was  a  struggle  for 
control  of  the  political  state,  that  beginning  in  single  common¬ 
wealths  was  eventually  carried  to  the  federal  government.  Hope  of 
effective  aid  from  state  governments  quickly  proved  illusory,  for 
when  the  Illinois  farmers  passed  a  law  to  curb  the  railways  the 
federal  courts  set  aside  their  enactment  and  bade  the  farmers — to 
use  a  later  phrase — go  home  and  slop  the  hogs.  They  must  not 
meddle  with  matters  beyond  their  comprehension.  In  consequence 
of  such  slaps  in  the  face  the  farmers  fell  to  perfecting  their  organiza¬ 
tions  and  arousing  class  cohsciousness  until  there  issued  from  the 
long  debates  of  the  Grange  and  the  Farmers’  Alliance  the  great 


264 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


movement  of  Populism  that  proposed  to  reach  as  far  as  Washing¬ 
ton,  install  there  the  representatives  of  the  producing  classes,  and 
refashion  the  political  state  in  accordance  with  the  democratic 
needs  of  the  plain  people. 

So  ambitious  a  program  needed  time,  not  only  for  the  farmers  to 
organize  but  to  clarify  their  policy.  They  were  ill  equipped  for  a 
serious  struggle.  With  the  rise  of  capitalism  agriculture  had  been 
steadily  falling  in  social  prestige.  As  a  result  of  the  decline  of  the 
landed  squirearchy  in  the  North  and  the  overthrow  of  the  planta¬ 
tion  economy  in  the  South,  agriculture  had  lost  its  traditional 
leaders  who  had  furnished  the  brains  and  supplied  the  spokesmen 
in  earlier  political  struggles.  In  the  seventies  agriculture  was  no 
longer  reckoned  a  pursuit  peculiarly  suitable  to  gentlemen.  The 
business  man  had  risen  in  social  prestige  as  the  farmer  declined, 
and  instead  of  being  recruited  from  the  natural  leaders  of  society 
agriculture  sufFered  a  draining-off  of  the  more  energetic  and  capable 
to  the  cities,  leaving  the  farms  in  the  hands  of  the  less  ambitious, 
who  were  supplemented  in  the  seventies  and  eighties  by  European 
peasants  who  settled  great  portions  of  the  Middle  Border.  With 
this  loss  of  social  prestige  came  a  new  urban  contempt  for  farm 
life  that  expressed  itself  in  “Hayseed”  cartoons,  and  in  the  heed¬ 
lessness  of  politicians  who  were  quick  to  transfer  allegiance  from  a 
decaying  to  a  rising  order. 

The  farmers  of  the  Middle  Border,  drawn  from  many  common¬ 
wealths  and  with  a  high  percentage  of  aliens,  were  far  from  a 
homogeneous  class-conscious  group  like  the  southern  planters. 
Race,  language,  and  cultural  antecedents  held  them  apart,  in¬ 
tensifying  the  aloofness  that  was  a  common  characteristic  of  the 
frontier.  Week-days  they  stuck  to  their  plows  and  Sundays,  un¬ 
like  the  New  England  farmer,  they  were  little  given  to  church¬ 
going.  The  landholdings  were  commonly  a  homestead  of  a  hundred 
and  sixty  acres,  often  running  to  an  entire  section  of  six  hundred 
and  forty  acres.  Much  land  was  held  idle  by  speculators,  with  the 
result  that  the  isolation  of  the  farmer — dwelling  convenient  to  his 
fields  rather  than  to  neighbors — deepened  the  suspicious  individual¬ 
ism  that  was  an  obsession  of  the  agrarian  mind,  and  unfitted  him 
for  effective  cooperative  effort.  No  political  or  social  philosophy 
answerable  to  his  needs  was  at  hand,  no  intellectual  leaders  like 
Jefferson  or  John  Taylor  to  adapt  old-world  theory  to  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  Middle  Border,  no  commanding  figure  like  Old  Hickory 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


265 


to  marshal  the  scattered  hosts.  The  Physiocratic  theory  with  its 
prestige  of  distinguished  advocates  and  its  elaborate  social  eco¬ 
nomics  had  never  taken  root  in  the  Middle  Border;  although  certain 
of  its  prejudices — that  the  farmer  is  the  sole  producer  and  the  sterile 
middleman  must  somehow  be  got  rid  of — had  taken  possession  of 
the  western  mind  and  largely  influenced  the  ultimate  program. 
But  if  the  western  farmer  inherited  no  ready-made  philosophy  he 
was  daily  prodded  by  harsh  reality.  He  got  up  and  went  to  bed 
under  the  prick  of  economic  necessity,  and  this  made  of  him  a 
realist  a-nd  an  opportunist,  eager  to  apply  homely  remedies  to 
homely  ills.  With  the  discipline  got  from  hard  times  he  was  not 
easily  gulled  by  bright  young  city  lawyers  with  their  handbooks  of 
capitalistic  economics.  The  new  agrarianism  of  the  prairies,  in 
consequence,  was  a  hard-headed,  homespun  theory,  fashioned  on 
the  farms,  intended  to  serve  the  producer  rather  than  the  middle¬ 
man.  It  had  behind  it  none  of  the  high  authority  of  the  schools, 
and  naturally  it  was  mocked  and  scoffed  at  by  all  the  spokesmen — 
editors,  lawyers,  bankers,  scholars,  intellectuals — of  the  prosper¬ 
ous  middle  class.  The  farmer  had  to  make  his  way  against  the 
embattled  prejudices  and  contempt  of  the  rest  of  America. 

But  before  he  could  become  a  power  in  political  councils  he  must 
organize  and  use  his  voting  strength  as  a  unit;  and  as  early  as  the 
late  sixties  the  work  of  organization  was  got  under  way.  It  began 
as  a  social  movement  with  the  Grange  that  spread  widely  through 
the  South  and  Middle  West  and  even  gained  foothold  in  the  East, 
bringing  together  in  social  groups  the  farmer  families  of  the  neigh¬ 
borhood.  It  professed  to  stand  outside  politics  and  strove  to 
awaken  an  interest  in  cooperative  buying  and  selling,  but  the 
community  gatherings  were  certain  to  find  politics  waiting  for 
them  at  the  schoolhouse  door,  and  after  the  program  of  coopera¬ 
tion  had  been  discussed  the  talk  ran  easily  into  political  debate. 
From  the  Grange  issued  in  the  eighties  the  Farmers’  Alliance, 
more  consciously  political  in  its  objective,  active  in  arousing  the 
farmers  to  political  action;  and  with  the  hard  times  that  came  with 
the  turn  of  the  decade  the  different  groups  merged  in  the  broad 
movement  of  Populism — a  militant  political  uprising  with  a  definite 
party  program  and  organization.  The  flare-up  came  swiftly  and 
in  the  first  years  of  the  nineties  the  prairies  were  aflame  and  even 
the  cotton-fields  of  the  South  were  fired.  Populism  swept  from 
township  to  township,  a  militant  agrarian  movement,  providing 


266 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


its  own  leaders — Tom  Watson  in  Georgia,  General  Weaver  in 
Iowa,  Ignatius  Donnelly  in  Minnesota,  sockless  Jerry  Simpson  in 
Kansas,  with  Hamlin  Garland,  and  B.  O.  Flower,  and  other  intel¬ 
lectuals  rallying  to  the  farmers’  standard.  It  set  up  the  banner  of 
agrarian  democracy,  summoned  its  followers  and  drilled  them  for 
the  battles  that  lay  ahead.  Huge  meetings  gathered  of  the  farmers 
of  a  county  and  day-long  they  listened  to  speeches  that  came 
straight  from  the  hay-fields  and  the  corn-rows,  speeches  that  were 
an  echo  of  the  daily  experience  of  the  farmer  and  the  farmer’s 
wife. 

It  was  Mary  Ellen  Lease  of  Kansas  who  struck  from  the  common 
bitterness  a  phrase  that  embodied  the  militant  spirit  of  Populism. 
Week  after  week  she  traveled  the  prairie  country  urging  the  farmers 
to  “raise  less  corn  and  more  hell,”  and  at  her  call  the  sunburned 
faces  settled  into  grim  purpose.  The  farmers  had  become  class¬ 
conscious.  They  were  enlisted  in  a  class  struggle.  They  used  the 
vocabulary  of  realism,  and  the  unctuous  political  platitudes  and 
sophistries  of  county-seat  politicians  rolled  off  their  minds  like 
water  from  a  duck’s  back.  They  were  fighting  a  great  battle — they 
believed— against  Wall  Street  and  the  eastern  money-power;  they 
were  bent  on  saving  America  from  the  plutocracy;  and  they  swept 
over  the  county-seat  towns,  burying  the  old  machine  politicians 
under  an  avalanche  of  votes,  capturing  state  legislatures,  electing 
Congressmen  and  Senators,  and  looking  forward  to  greater  power. 
In  1896  Populism  gained  control  of  the  Democratic  party  and 
entered  on  its  great  campaign  to  establish  the  principle  of  democ¬ 
racy  at  Washington.  It  was  the  last  mortal  struggle  between 
agrarianism  and  capitalism,  and  to  understand  it  one  must  turn 
back  to  the  long  agitation  over  the  money  question. 

in 

THE  GREENBACK  MOVEMENT 

If  in  the  early  nineties  the  currency  question  had  come  to  over¬ 
shadow  the  questions  of  the  tariff  and  railway  regulation,  it  was 
because  that  problem  lay  at  the  heart  of  the  struggle  between  the 
rival  agrarian  and  capitalistic  economies.  The  control  of  the  na¬ 
tional  monetary  system  by  the  bankers  was  vital  to  the  smooth 
functioning  of  a  capitalistic  order,  and  to  assure  such  control  it  was 
desirable  that  monetary  standards  and  emissions  of  currency  Jae 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


267 


removed  from  the  sphere  of  political  action  and  lodged  in  the  hands 
of  business.  The  problem  was  difficult,  for  the  right  to  “coin  money 
and  to  regulate  the  value  thereof”  were  functions  of  sovereignty 
specifically  recognized  in  the  Constitution;  and  it  was  a  series  of 
moves  designed  to  transfer  such  functions  to  private  groups  that 
brought  on  a  long  political  debate  over  systems  of  currency. 

The  intellectual  background  against  which  the  struggle  was  set 
may  be  sketched  briefly.  Despite  the  long  battle  over  the  Bank  in 
Jackson’s  time,  little  serious  thinking  on  the  principles  of  money 
and  currency  had  been  done  in  America.  Financiers  and  economists 
alike  followed  the  current  English  school,  and  since  the  appearance 
of  the  famous  Bullion  Report  of  1 8 1 1  that  school  had  adhered  to 
the  intrinsic-value  theory  of  money.  While  accepting  banknotes  as 
a  useful  medium  of  exchange,  the  English  classical  economists  held 
that  only  coin  is  real  money,  and  that  the  issue  of  notes  must  bear 
a  definite  ratio  to  the  amount  of  coin  and  bullion  in  the  vaults. 
Money  is  not  a  creature  of  the  law.  Government  cannot  create  it. 
Rather  it  is  a  convenient  token  of  labor  done,  and  the  stamp  of  the 
mint  is  only  a  certification  of  weight  and  fineness.  There  are  but 
two  ways,  indeed,  in  which  government  can  acquire  money — 
through  taxation  and  by  borrowing.  The  “natural  operation  of  the 
specie  standard”  was  reckoned  one  of  the  fundamental  “laws  of 
trade,”  and  for  government  to  tamper  with  it — -setting  aside  the 
intrinsic-value  principle  by  the  emission  of  irredeemable  paper 
money — was  to  violate  the  sanctity  of  contracts,  cheat  creditors, 
increase  prices,  and  disorder  business.  1  he  law  of  supply  and  de¬ 
mand  answered  all  the  needs  of  money  regulation. 

This  was  no  more  than  the  application  of  the  current  theory  of 
laissez  faire  to  the  problem  of  currency.  But  between  the  Bullion 
Report  of  i8ii  and  the  Parliamentary  Bank  Act  of  1844,  English 
theory  and  practice  had  undergone  two  important  modifications: 
the  vast  development  of  credit  had  suggested  a  free  use  of  bank¬ 
notes  based  on  securities  other  than  coin  or  bullion,  and  the  bime¬ 
tallic  standard  had  been  superseded  by  the  gold  standard.  By  the 
terms  of  the  Act  of  1844  all  banknotes  were  to  be  issued  against 
securities  and  gold  and  silver  coin  and  bullion  in  the  bank  vaults. 
The  margin  of  issue  was  fixed  at  fourteen  million  pounds  sterling. 
The  total  amount  of  banknotes  thus  “issued  on  the  Credit  of  such 
Securities,  Coin  and  Bullion,”  might  not  be  increased,  but  within 
the  limits  set  the  Bank  was  free  to  increase  or  decrease  issues  at 


268 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


will.  The  Act  further  provided  that  “whereas  it  is  necessary  to 
limit  the  Amount  of  Silver  Bullion  on  which  it  shall  be  lawful 
...  to  issue  Bank  of  England  notes,”  it  should  “not  be  lawful  for 
the  Bank  of  England  to  retain  in  .  .  .  said  Bank  at  any  time  an 
Amount  of  Silver  Bullion  exceeding  One  Fourth  Part  of  the  Gold 
Coin  and  Bullion.”  ...  2  That  gold  should  eventually  have 
thrust  silver  aside  was  natural.  In  addition  to  its  convenience  as  a 
commodity  for  international  shipment,  it  was  less  in  quantity,  not 
widely  dispersed  or  popularly  held,  and  therefore  more  easily 
controlled  by  the  money-brokers.  With  the  function  of  govern¬ 
ment  restricted  to  coining  such  gold  as  came  to  the  mint,  the  whole 
business  of  currency  emissions,  with  the  attendant  power  of  infla¬ 
tion  and  deflation  of  credit,  would  lie  in  the  hands  of  the  bankers 
who  became  the  custodians  of  the  national  monetary  system. 

During  the  bitter  discussions  of  currency  policies  that  followed 
the  dislocations  of  the  Civil  War,  the  two  most  authoritative 
spokesmen  in  America  on  the  subject  were  Senator  John  Sherman 
of  Ohio,  for  years  Chairman  of  the  Senate  Committee  on  Finance, 
and  David  A.  Wells,  statistician,  special  Commissioner  of  the  Reve¬ 
nue  Bureau,  and  a  scholar  deservedly  distinguished  as  an  econo¬ 
mist.  In  their  views  on  the  currency  question  both  were  followers  of 
the  classical  English  school.  In  two  speeches  in  the  Senate,  of  Janu¬ 
ary  27,  1869,  and  January  24,  1870,  the  former  stated  his  position 
definitely.  “Let  us,”  he  said,  “recognize  as  an  axiom  that  nothing 
but  coin  is  real  money  before  we  undertake  to  deal  with  the  cur¬ 
rency”;  and  in  another  place,  narrowing  his  definition  in  terms  of 
the  English  Bank  Act,  he  asserted,  “We  must  .  .  .  recognize  the 
immutable  law  of  currency;  and  that  is,  there  is  but  one  true 
standard,  and  that  standard  is  gold.”  3  The  weakness  of  paper 
money,  he  believed,  was  its  instability;  the  ratio  of  exchange  with 
gold  fluctuates  too  greatly  to  make  it  a  safe  or  convenient  medium 
of  business.  Last  year  the  fluctuation  in  paper  money  amounted 
to  forty-five  per  cent.  Gold,  however,  remained  as  stable  as  the 
eternal  hills,  because  it  was  not  only  the  product  of  labor,  but  it  was 
labor  and  value  itself.  4  One  may  make  of  such  an  assertion  what 
one  will,  but  it  is  clear  that  John  Sherman  thought  ill  of  the  green¬ 
backs,  and  wanted  substituted  for  them  a  system  of  banknotes. 

2  The  Statutes  at  Large:  7^8  Victoriae,  Vol.  84,  pp.  188-189. 

3  Speeches  and  Reports  on  Finance  and  Taxation,  pp.  188,  190. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  233. 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


269 


It  is  impossible  [he  argued]  to  give  a  currency  issued  by  a  Government 
the  flexibility  to  meet  the  movement  of  the  exchanges.  ...  It  must  have 
a  flexibility  which  will  enable  it  to  be  increased  in  certain  periods  of  the 
year,  and  to  flow  back  again  into  the  vaults  of  the  bank  at  others.  I  am 
convinced  .  .  .  that  in  time  it  will  be  wise  to  retire  our  United  States 
notes  and  all  forms  of  Government  circulation,  and  depend  upon  notes 
issued  by  private  corporations.5 

Brief  as  these  passages  are,  they  suffice  to  make  clear  Sherman’s 
position.  He  accepted  without  question  the  English  theory  and 
practice,  and  he  wished  to  shape  American  legislation  in  conformity 
with  them.  The  experience  of  the  Civil  War,  and — shall  we  add — 
his  intimate  connections  with  Wall  Street,6  had  confirmed  him  in 
his  preference  for  a  laissez-faire  policy  in  currency  matters.  He 
would  establish  the  gold  standard,  encourage  the  issue  of  bank¬ 
notes,  and  turn  over  the  custodianship  of  the  national  currency  to 
private  interests. 

The  position  of  David  A.  Wells  was  essentially  similar.  Wells 
wrote  much  and  skillfully  and  he  seems  to  have  been  the  chief  au¬ 
thority  on  whom  such  intellectuals  as  Godkin  and  Dana  relied  for 
materials  for  their  editorials  on  the  currency  question.  Indirectly, 
therefore,  through  the  medium  of  editors  and  newspaper  writers 
his  opinions  came  to  have  wide  influence.  During  the  discussion  of 
resumption  of  specie  payments  in  the  seventies  his  pen  was  par¬ 
ticularly  active.  Amongst  other  things  he  then  wrote  The  Crema¬ 
tion  Theory  of  Specie  Resumption,  in  which  he  advocated  a  policy 
of  progressive  contraction  by  the  expedient  of  burning  annually  a 
fixed  sum  in  greenbacks;  Robinson  Crusoe’ s  Money,  an  exposition  of 
the  bullion  theory  of  money  for  popular  reading,  illustrated  by 
Nast  and  containing  some  witty  thrusts  at  such  well-known  expan¬ 
sionists  as  Ben  Butler,  Wendell  Phillips,  Henry  C.  Carey,  and 
Senator  O.  P.  Morton;  Contraction,  in  which  he  defended  the  thesis, 
“He  who  is  not  in  favor  of  contracting  the  currency  is  not  in  favor 
of  paying  it,  and  he  who  is  not  in  favor  of  paying  it  is  a  repudiator”; 
and  certain  other  papers  later  gathered  into  his  Practical  Economics 
(1885). 

Wells  was  an  uncompromising  bullionist  and  his  theory  of  money 
is  as  simple  as  the  doctrine  of  laissez  faire  on  which  it  rests.  Honest 
money  represents  labor  and  therefore  possesses  intrinsic  value.  The 

6  “Speech  of  January  24,  1870,”  ibid.,  pp.  225-226. 

« This  laid  him  open  to  frequent  and  often  bitter  attack.  See,  among  many,  Mrs. 
Marion  Todd,  Pnzaro  and  John  Sherman  Chicago,  1891. 


270 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


experience  of  the  ages  has  demonstrated  that  of  all  commodities 
gold  and  silver  are  the  most  convenient  for  the  purpose  and  in  con¬ 
sequence  they  have  come  to  be  accepted  universally  as  real  money. 
Every  dollar’s  worth  of  gold  represents  a  dollar’s  worth  of  labor, 
always  and  everywhere,  measured  by  the  test  of  the  world’s  needs. 
It  is  foolish  for  politicians  and  theorists  to  worry  their  poor  heads 
over  the  supply  of  money,  or  attempt  to  predetermine  the  quantity 
best  suited  to  the  needs  of  business.  The  amount  of  money  in  cir¬ 
culation  will  always  be  regulated  by  the  law  of  supply  and  demand. 
There  is  limitless  gold  locked  up  in  the  treasure-house  of  nature,  and 
just  so  much  is  unlocked  by  human  labor  as  the  immediate  needs  of 
the  world  require.  Gold  can  neither  be  inflated  nor  deflated,  for, 
“There  is  one  and  the  same  law  governing  alike  the  supply  of  gold 
and  of  wheelbarrows.  They  are  both  tools  or  commodities,  and  the 
country  will  have  and  use  all  of  either  that  it  can  use  profitably.”  7 
Let  government  keep  its  hands  off  and  money  will  regulate  itself. 
“The  value  of  the  gold  dollar  is  fixed  and  cannot  be  altered.  The 
value  of  the  paper  dollar  is  constantly  fluctuating.”  8  That  busines 
conditions  would  be  seriously  affected  by  the  withdrawal  of  the 
greenbacks,  or  that  injustice  would  be  done  to  debtors,  Wells  re¬ 
fused  to  believe.  When  the  poison  is  withdrawn  from  the  system  a 
state  of  health  reestablishes  itself.  “  I  also  count  as  an  absurdity  the 
idea  that  the  business  of  the  country  is  likely  to  be  unfavorably 
affected  by  a  deficiency  of  currency  consequent  upon  contraction  in 
the  manner  proposed.”  9  The  gold  to  take  its  place  would  be  pro¬ 
vided  automatically  by  the  infallible  law  of  supply  and  demand. 
Thus  triply  armed  with  the  logic  of  economic  theory  Wells  pro¬ 
nounced  for  deflation,  immediate  and  drastic: 

I  desire  the  federal  government  to  get  out  of  and  abandon  forever  and 
as  soon  as  possible  this  whole  business  of  creating  and  issuing  paper 
money,  be  it  redeemable  or  irredeemable,  for  I  believe  as  long  as  the  fed¬ 
eral  government  continues  to  recognize  anything  as  money  except  hard 
matter-of-fact  “labor  representing”  gold  and  silver,  just  so  long  the 
country  will  not  have  [a]  stable  and  unfluctuating  currency.  .  .  .10 

Such  neat  logic  was  out  of  date  on  the  day  that  Wells  penned  it. 
The  needs  of  business  had  outgrown  the  bullion  theory  of  money 

7  Practical  Economics,  p.  54. 

8  The  Cremation  Theory  of  Specie  Resumption,  p.  10. 

8  Ibid..,  p.  10. 

10  Ibid.,  p.  13. 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


271 


and  credit  was  taking  the  place  of  a  metallic  currency.  The  fiction 
of  a  gold  standard  would  be  adhered  to  till  another  seismic  disloca¬ 
tion  proved  its  utter  inadequacy  to  a  world  in  confusion  and  it 
would  be  unofficially  abandoned.  Yet  it  was  such  logic  that  pre¬ 
vailed  in  America  in  post-war  days,  bringing  acute  distress  upon 
the  country  as  a  whole  and  particular  hardship  to  the  Middle  Bor¬ 
der;  and  it  prevailed  because  the  banking  interests  followed  a  sel¬ 
fish  and  narrow  policy  marked  out  for  them  by  the  English  theory 
and  practice. 

The  financing  of  the  war  had  been  wasteful  and  slovenly  beyond 
all  precedent,  and  it  had  been  fiercely  criticized  by  the  agrarians. 
It  was  a  system,  said  the  militant  Greenbacker,  Thaddeus  Stevens, 
the  like  of  which  “no  human  folly  had  ever  before  witnessed.”  11 
When  the  wai  was  over  and  the  reorganization  of  the  public  finances 
was  up  for  settlement,  the  bankers  were  shrewd  enough  to  make  the 
confusion  serve  their  interests.  Their  great  objective  was  to  get 
back  once  more  the  control  of  the  national  credit  that  the  war  had 
taken  from  them.  The  National  Bank  Act  of  1863 — foolishly  op¬ 
posed  by  shortsighted  state-bank  advocates  who  were  jealous  of 
local  rights — had  been  the  first  great  step.  By  the  provisions  of  the 
act  the  national  banks  were  permitted  to  issue  currency  on  the 
security  of  government  bonds,  in  such  quantities  as  they  chose,  on 
highly  favorable  terms,  and  the  result  was  to  drive  out  of  circula¬ 
tion  the  wild-cat  issues  of  state  banks.  But  the  crux  of  the  problem 
was  the  question  of  the  greenbacks  that  the  necessities  of  the  war 
had  forced  upon  the  government.  The  greenbacks  were  reckoned 
political  money,  the  control  of  issues  of  which  lay  wholly  with  Con¬ 
gress.  At  any  moment,  responding  to  popular  demand,  Congress 
might  deflate  the  bankers  by  the  emission  of  new  bills.  At  the  time 
of  first  issue  the  financial  interests  had  succeeded  in  vitiating  the 
greenbacks  by  writing  into  the  bill  a  repudiation  of  the  issue  by  the 
government  itself,  and  no  sooner  was  the  war  over  than  they  set 
about  the  business  of  retiring  them.  Their  objective  was  the  same 
end  that  English  bankers  had  reached  in  1844. 

In  the  reorganization  three  broad  policies  were  insisted  upon  by 
the  banking  interests:  the  speedy  retirement  of  the  greenbacks,  in 
order  to  take  government  out  of  the  credit  market,  the  refunding  of 
all  debts  on  a  gold  basis,  and  an  immediate  return  to  specie  pay¬ 
ments.  The  result  was  a  drastic  policy  of  deflation  that  brought 
11  J.  A.  Woodburn,  The  Life  of  Thaddeus  Stevens,  p.  573 


272 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


further  turmoil  to  the  country.  In  ten  years  the  money  in  circula¬ 
tion  was  reduced  from  somewhat  over  $2,100,000,000  to  a  little 
over  a  billion,  or  from  fifty-eight  dollars  per  capita  in  1865  to 
seventeen  dollars  per  capita  in  1876. 12  The  inevitable  results 
followed,  a  swift  appreciation  in  the  value  of  the  dollar  and  the 
automatic  increase  in  the  debt  of  the  country,  both  public  and 
private,  with  the  fall  of  commodity  prices.  Within  a  decade, 
measured  in  commodity  values,  the  liabilities  of  the  American 
people  were  nearly  doubled  by  the  simple  device  of  changing  the 
standard  of  deferred  payments.  Gold  might  remain  as  stable  as 
the  eternal  hills,  but  somehow  all  other  commodities  were  shrinking 
daily.  “Them  steers,”  Solon  Chase  indeed  said  aptly,  “while  they 
grew  well,  shrank  in  value  as  fast  as  they  grew.”  This  remarkable 
result  was  brought  about,  it  is  well  to  remember,  by  the  plea  for 
honest  money  and  the  plighted  faith  of  the  nation.  Keeping  the 
public  faith,  it  would  seem,  meant  permitting  the  creditors  to 
change  the  terms  of  their  payments  after  the  contract  was  made. 
“Who  are  these  reasoners,”  cried  Thaddeus  Stevens,  in  disgust, 
“who  talk  so  learnedly  of  the  laws  of  finance  and  the  morality  of 
human  dealings,  whose  consciences  are  so  raw  and  stick  out  so 
far  from  their  excited  coverings  that  no  pharmaceutist  can  heal 
their  inward  wound?”13 

As  a  debtor  community  the  Middle  Border  felt  the  pinch  of  de¬ 
flation  acutely,  and  in  consequence  the  money  question  was  thrust 
sternly  upon  agrarian  attention.  On  this  issue  it  came  finally  to 
fight  its  great  battle,  pitting  its  homespun  experience  against  the 
authority  of  the  bankers  and  the  teaching  of  the  schools.  To  the 
bankers’  argument  that  note  issues  should  be  taken  out  of  politics 
and  lodged  in  the  hands  of  business  men,  it  replied  that  the  issue 
of  currency  was  a  function  of  sovereignty,  and  to  surrender  it  to 
private  corporations,  as  was  done  by  the  National  Bank  Act,  was 
undemocratic.  The  monetary  system  of  the  nation  must  not  be¬ 
come  the  football  of  class  interests.  To  the  argument  of  the  bullion- 
ists  that  gold  was  the  only  fixed  and  stable  standard  for  deferred 
payments,  it  replied  that  the  gold  standard  was  too  narrow  a  base 
on  which  to  erect  a  monetary  system  for  an  expanding  country, 
that  it  was  notoriously  susceptible  to  manipulation,  and  that  it 
had  been  devised  by  Lombard  Street  in  the  interests  of  capitalism. 
Since  the  days  of  the  great  struggle  over  the  Bank  a  remarkable 
12  Ibid.,  p.  573.  13  Ibid..,  pp.  573-574. 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


273 


change  had  come  over  the  agrarian  mind  in  its  thinking  on  mone¬ 
tary  affairs.  In  their  distrust  of  all  banks  and  bank-issues  Jackson 
and  Benton  had  swung  sharply  back  to  the  bullion  theory  of  money. 
They  were  militant  hard-money  men.  But  in  the  intervening  years 
a  new  and  revolutionary  conception  had  been  slowly  making  its 
way  to  recognition.  In  the  minds  of  obscure  economists  the  quan¬ 
titative  theory  of  money  had  risen  to  challenge  the  bullion  theory. 
In  unorthodox  pamphlets  and  newspaper  discussion  it  was  being 
pointed  out  that  the  value  of  money  is  dependent  on  the  amount 
in  circulation,  that  gold  and  silver  are  commodities  fluctuating  in 
value  like  other  commodities,  and  that  it  is  the  plain  duty  of  the 
state  to  regulate  the  per  capita  circulation  in  accordance  with 
business  needs.  To  allow  the  bankers  to  erect  a  monetary  system  on 
gold  is  to  subject  the  producer  to  the  money-broker  and  measure 
deferred  payments  by  a  yardstick  that  lengthens  or  shortens 
from  year  to  year.  The  only  safe  and  rational  currency  is  a  na¬ 
tional  currency  based  on  the  national  credit,  sponsored  by  the 
state,  flexible,  and  controlled  in  the  interests  of  the  people  as  a 
whole.14 

By  far  the  most  suggestive  of  these  obscure  pamphleteers  was 
Eleazar  Lord,  a  New  York  banker,  who  for  thirty-five  years  was  a 
propagandist  for  a  new  currency  system  and  who  watched  the 
bungling  of  the  war  finance  with  acute  concern.15  With  the  un¬ 
democratic  nature  of  banknotes  he  was  not  concerned.  As  a  banker 
he  accepted  them  as  desirable  and  wished  to  establish  them  on  a 
sound  national  basis.  He  was  in  ardent  sympathy  with  the  patri¬ 
otic  nationalism  of  Henry  C.  Carey.  The  loose  system  of  state-bank 
issues  seemed  to  him  chaotic  and  he  was  earnest  in  espousal  of  a 
common  national  system.  Lord  was  an  acute  and  stimulating 
thinker  on  monetary  matters.  He  was  one  of  the  first  Americans  to 
understand  the  significance  of  credit,  and  he  was  realist  enough  to 
foresee  that  the  system  of  the  future  would  be  a  credit  system. 
This  was  the  clue  to  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  bullion  theory  of 
money,  which  he  attacked  with  vigor,  and  to  his  acceptance  of  the 

14  See,  amongst  many,  Homo’s  Letters  on  a  National  Currency,  Washington,  1817; 
Currency  Explosions,  their  Cause  and  Cure,  New  York,  1858;  Our  Currency:  Some  of 
Its  Evils,  and  the  Remedies  for  them,  by  a  Citizen  of  North  Corohna,  Raleigh, 

^His  titles  are:  Credit,  Currency  and  Banking,  New  York,  1828;  A  Letter  on  the 
National  Currency,  New  York,  1861;  Six  Letters  on  the  Necessity  and  Practicability  of 
a  National  Currency,  etc..  New  York,  1862;  and  National  Currency:  A  Review  of  the 
National  Banking  Law,  New  York,  1863. 


274 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


quantitative  theory.16  He  had  the  scantest  respect  for  Sherman’s 
dogma  that  gold  is  as  stable  as  the  eternal  hills  because  it  is  “labor 
and  value  itself,”  or  for  Wells’s  belief  that  the  law  of  supply  and 
demand  automatically  produces  gold  enough  to  meet  the  needs  of 
business.  He  would  treat  gold  and  silver  as  commodities  varying 
in  price  with  supply  and  demand,  and  make  no  attempt  to  relate 
the  money  scale  to  their  fluctuations.  For  years,  he  said,  America 
accepted  the  English  “standard  of  currency,  their  aristocratic  defi¬ 
nition  of  wealth,  and  their  distinction  between  capital  and  credit,” 
to  its  disaster. 

The  so-called  specie  basis,  whenever  there  is  a  foreign  demand  for  coin, 
proves  to  be  a  mere  fiction,  a  practical  humbug;  and  whenever,  by  an  excess 
of  imports,  this  pretended  basis  is  exported  to  pay  foreign  debts,  the 
bank-notes  are  withdrawn  from  circulation  or  become  worthless,  the  cur¬ 
rency  for  the  time  is  annihilated,  prices  fall,  business  is  suspended,  debts 
remain  unpaid,  panic  and  distress  ensue,  men  in  active  business  fail, 
bankruptcy,  ruin,  and  disgrace  reign.17 

To  provide  a  safe,  flexible,  and  convenient  currency,  Lord  pro¬ 
posed  a  system  of  national  banknotes,  based  on  the  wealth  of  the 
country  and  responsive  to  the  needs  of  a  business  world  founded  on 
credit. 

Necessity  must  teach  us  whether  we  can  and  must  have  a  currency  of 
purely  representative  value,  wholly  disconnected  from  the  precious 
metals,  as  a  basis  and  standard,  or  prolong  the  conflict  between  coin  and 
paper,  commerce  and  exchange.  The  existing  theory  on  the  subject  is  too 
firmly  fixed  by  education,  prescription,  prejudice  and  interest,  to  be  over¬ 
thrown.  .  .  .  Such  words  as  safe,  secured,  national,  uniform,  economical, 
inalienable,  when  predicated  of  any  thing  but  gold  as  currency,  are  to  the 
specie-paying  theorist  mere  sounds  devoid  of  significance.  .  .  .  Credit 
must  triumph.  Can  any  one  blame  the  well-meaning  theorist  if  he  mani¬ 
fests  some  degree  of  doubt  and  alarm  in  view  of  the  extent  to  which  the 
actual  use  of  credit,  and  of  the  confidence  in  the  use  of  credit,  has  already 
attained?  18 

In  the  writings  of  these  obscure  economists  are  to  be  found  the 
seeds  of  the  later  agrarian  program.  Some  of  them  were  clear¬ 
headed  and  able  men,  but  they  underestimated  the  power  of  the 
banking  group.  They  failed  to  realize  that  in  a  capitalistic  society 

16  From  what  source  Lord,  and  the  other  amateur  economists,  derived  their  theory 
16  n°l  clear.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  to  assume  that  it  was  from  Ricardo  and  the 
English  economists.  For  an  analysis  and  rejection  of  the  Quantity  theory,  see  T.  Law- 
rence  Laughlin,  The  Principles  of  Money,  Chapter  VIII. 

17  A  Review  of  the  National  Bankine  Law,  p.  8. 

18  Ibid.,  p.  34- 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER  275 

no  monetary  system  would  be  tolerated  that  was  not  to  the  bankers’ 
liking,  and  that  if  it  were  to  their  liking  they  would  easily  convince 
the  public  that  it  was  the  only  honest  and  just  system.  It  was  this 
lesson  that  the  Greenbackers  and  Free  Silver  men  were  to  learn. 
No  sooner  was  the  issue  joined  between  paper  money  and  the  gold 
standard  than  a  scurrilous  hue  and  cry  was  raised  by  the  “sound- 
money”  men.  The  bitter  dispute  that  marked  American  polities 
for  more  than  a  score  of  years  is  a  classic  example  of  the  distortion 
of  fact  for  partisan  ends  that  seems  to  be  an  inevitable  consequence 
of  referring  a  matter  of  policy  to  a  democratic  electorate.  Denun¬ 
ciation  took  the  place  of  exposition,  and  hysteria  of  argument;  and 
in  this  revel  of  demagoguery  the  so-called  educated  classes — law¬ 
yers  and  editors  and  business  men — were  perhaps  the  most  shame¬ 
less  purveyors  of  humbuggery.  Stripped  of  all  hypocrisy  the  main 
issue  was  this:  Should  the  control  of  currency  issues — with  the  dele¬ 
gated  power  of  inflation  and  deflation — lie  in  the  hands  of  private 
citizens  or  with  the  elected  representatives  of  the  people?  It  is  a 
question  on  which  wide  disagreement  may  well  exist,  for  it  involves 
important  differences  of  social  and  political  theory.  But  the  signifi¬ 
cant  thing  is  that  throughout  the  years  when  the  subject  was  de¬ 
bated  in  every  newspaper  and  on  every  stump  the  real  issue  was 
rarely  presented  for  consideration.  The  bankers  did  not  dare  to 
present  it,  for  too  much  was  at  stake  and  once  it  was  clearly  under¬ 
stood  by  a  suspicious  electorate  their  case  was  lost.  Hence  the 
strategy  of  the  money  group  was  to  obscure  the  issue,  an  end  they 
achieved  by  dwelling  on  the  single  point  of  inflation  and  charging 
the  agrarians  with  a  dishonest  policy  of  repudiation. 

Certainly  in  the  minds  of  many  conscientious  men  the  fear  of 
repudiation  was  very  real  and  acute,  and  their  fears  made  timid 
souls  panicky.  The  newspapers  took  their  cue  from  this  bogey  and 
beat  the  drums  so  loudly  in  the  cause  of  “honest  money”  that  all 
hope  of  calm  discussion  was  lost.  I  he  issue  became  so  distorted 
from  class  feeling  that  later  historians  find  it  difficult  to  view  the 
question  dispassionately.  So  late  as  1916  Joseph  Gilpin  Pyle  in  his 
Life  of  James  J.  Hill  could  still  speak  of  the  Greenback  movement 
as  a  vicious  scheme  of  “inflation,  the  boon  of  the  demagogue  and 
the  dream  of  the  great  debtor  class  in  this  new  country,”  who  “in¬ 
creased  ...  by  the  opening  up  of  the  West  on  borrowed  capital, 
welcomed  any  measure  that  might  give  them  a  specious  justifica¬ 
tion  for  discharging  their  obligations  with  something  worth  less 


276 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


than  what  they  had  promised  to  pay.”  Describing  the  genesis  of 
the  free  silver  movement,  he  said: 

Hence  grew  up  a  formidable  coalition  between  mine  owners,  debtors 
unable  or  unwilling  to  pay,  ambitious  politicians,  honest  theorists  led 
captive  by  barren  and  unpractical  abstractions,  and  a  host  of  men  too  ig¬ 
norant  to  inform  themselves,  too  impassioned  by  what  they  heard  to  wish 
to  know  the  truth.19 

Obviously  it  was  not  so  simple — or  so  wicked — as  that.  To 
determine  the  justice  of  the  charge  of  repudiation  certain  facts 
must  be  borne  in  mind.  The  gist  of  the  money  problem  pressing  so 
heavily  on  the  Middle  Border  was  the  question  of  stabilizing  the 
currency  with  a  view  to  stabilizing  prices.  Under  the  prick  of  war- 
necessities  a  sharp  inflation  of  prices  had  taken  place.  With  the 
drastic  contraction  of  the  currency  following  the  war,  prices  fell  as 
sharply.  From  1873  to  1896  a  world-wide  appreciation  in  the  value 
of  gold,  aggravated  by  recurrent  economic  crises,  further  de¬ 
pressed  the  market  values  of  commodities,  rendering  the  question 
of  the  solvency  of  the  Middle  Border  increasingly  doubtful.  Falling 
prices  are  only  the  obverse  of  rising  money-values,  and  to  stop  the 
one  it  was  proposed  to  cheapen  the  other,  either  through  the  issue 
of  greenbacks  as  proposed  by  the  Greenback  party,  or  through  the 
free  coinage  of  silver  as  proposed  in  the  plank  of  the  Democratic 
platform  of  1896.  It  was  not  a  question  of  repudiation  in  favor 
of  debtors,  but  a  question  of  correcting  an  unjust  deflation  that 
favored  the  creditor  class. 

iv 

GREENBACKISM  AND  PETER  COOPER 

The  opposition  to  the  program  and  methods  of  the  rising 
plutocracy  was  not  confined  to  the  farmers  of  the  Middle  Border. 
It  was  nourished  by  a  widespread  distrust  of  banks  and  bank- 
currencies  that  was  a  heritage  of  the  Jacksonian  struggle.  Amongst 
the  leaders  of  the  Greenback  movement  were  many  eastern  men, 
some  of  wide  industrial  experience,  whose  economic  views  and 
prejudices  were  a  hold-over  from  the  days  of  John  Taylor,  and 
who  discovered  in  the  post-war  finances  the  same  class  manipula¬ 
tions  of  public  credit  that  marked  the  funding  operations  of  Wash¬ 
ington’s  administration.  Men  as  dissimilar  as  Horace  Greeley, 
Thaddeus  Stevens,  Wendell  Phillips,  Henry  C.  Carey,  and  Peter 

19  Vol.  I,  p.  485. 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


277 


Cooper,  made  common  cause  with  the  western  farmers  in  seeking 
to  wrest  control  of  government  from  the  bankers,  and  establish 
what  they  conceived  to  be  a  just  democratic  economy.  Picturesque 
militants  grown  old  in  warfare,  they  were  of  an  earlier  generation, 
inheritors  of  the  ideals  of  simpler  times  before  production  for  con¬ 
sumption  had  been  superseded  by  consumption  for  profit,  ardent 
equalitarians  who  would  not  see  their  hopes  frustrated  and 
America  become  a  plutocracy  without  a  struggle.  Greeley,  Carey, 
and  Phillips  have  been  considered  elsewhere;  Stevens  was  the  last 
of  the  rugged  equalitarians  who  followed  their  principles  to  the 
bitter  end;  and  Peter  Cooper  was  an  unregenerate  Jeffersonian  who 
dedicated  his  last  years  to  combating  Wall  Street,  accepting  in  1876, 
at  the  age  of  85,  nomination  for  the  presidency  by  the  National 
Independent  Party,  commonly  called  the  Greenback  Party. 

Like  Thaddeus  Stevens  an  ironmaster,  grown  wealthy  by  a  long 
life  of  useful  and  adventurous  industry,  builder  of  the  first  Ameri¬ 
can  locomotive  that  made  possible  the  success  of  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  railway,  Peter  Cooper  was  the  most  picturesque  figure  in 
New  York  City  in  the  seventies.  With  Bryant  he  shared  the  dis¬ 
tinction  of  being  the  patriarch  of  Broadway.  Bred  up  amidst  stern 
and  harsh  conditions,  at  a  period  when,  he  said,  within  his  “own 
recollection  unmarried  white  men  could  be  sold  for  debt  in  the 
State  of  Connecticut,”  20  he  was  not  hardened  by  the  struggle  for 
subsistence.  A  tender  social  conscience  mellowed  an  old-fashioned 
probity  and  gave  character  and  dignity  to  a  simple  rugged  nature. 
Transparently  honest,  with  a  certain  innate  austerity  softened  by  a 
homely  courtesy,  he  was  not  a  reed  to  sway  in  every  vagrant  breeze, 
but  a  great  oak  with  fibers  toughened  by  the  storms  of  years. 
Like  Horace  Greeley,  whom  he  much  resembled  in  honest  kindli¬ 
ness,  he  carried  the  burdens  of  his  country  on  his  heart,  and  in  the 
midst  of  abundant  prosperity  still  reckoned  himself  his  brother’s 
keeper.  By  “nature  and  temperament  a  radical  reformer,”  his 
strongest  instinct  was  a  quick  sense  of  justice.  He  was  oppressed  by 
the  poverty  and  misery  he  saw  about  him,  and  he  gave  so  gen¬ 
erously  to  all  good  causes  that  he  was  known  to  his  generation  as 
“the  greatest  philanthropist  in  the  world.”  His  chief  accomplish¬ 
ment  was  the  founding  of  Cooper  Union  for  free  instruction  in 
“practical  art  and  science,”  on  which  he  expended  a  fortune.21  But 

20  Ideas  for  a  Science  of  Good  Government,  p.  iii. 

21  Political  and  Financial  Opinions  of  Peter  Cooper ,  p.  23. 


278 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


he  was  not  one  to  salve  his  conscience  with  a  gift  of  superfluous 
wealth.  His  heart  was  as  open  as  his  pocketbook,  and  he  must 
explore  to  its  hidden  sources  the  infection  that  was  breeding  social 
injustice  in  the  new  world.  His  private  interests  never  blinded  him 
to  his  larger  duties,  but  he  gave  his  time  and  strength  as  readily  as 
his  money  to  whatever  cause  he  espoused. 

Such  a  man  was  morally  incapable  of  the  buccaneering  exploita¬ 
tion  that  marked  the  Gilded  Age.  Between  Peter  Cooper  and  Jim 
Fisk  was  an  impassable  gulf;  they  were  products  of  different  worlds 
and  different  economies.  The  speculative  middleman  who  thrust 
himself  between  the  producer  and  the  consumer,  with  no  sense  of 
responsibility  to  either,  but  concerned  only  with  immediate  profit, 
was  a  figure  to  excite  the  wrath  of  an  older-fashioned  industrialist 
who  had  been  taught  that  the  only  just  reward  is  the  reward  that 
comes  from  productive  labor;  and  in  the  days  of  the  great  barbecue 
Peter  Cooper  became  deeply  concerned  for  the  future  of  America. 
It  was  the  new  breed  of  bankers  with  their  control  of  the  money 
system  that  were  to  blame,  he  came  to  believe,  and  he  would  have 
reckoned  himself  false  to  the  obligations  of  citizenship  if  he  failed 
to  protest  against  their  selfish  manipulation  of  the  public  credit. 
He  had  watched  the  callous  juggling  of  the  national  finances  by  the 
money-lenders  during  the  Civil  War,  and  had  seen  a  debt  of  some 
th  ree  billions  nearly  doubled  in  the  decade  after  Appomattox  by 
the  bond-holders.  The  new  system  of  National  Banks  that  issued 
from  the  emergencies  of  war  had  come  to  control  the  financial 
policy  of  the  country,  and  to  Peter  Cooper  it  seemed  that  their  pur¬ 
pose  was  to  perpetuate  a  debt  that  enabled  them  to  tax  the  produc¬ 
tive  labor  of  America  and  to  squeeze  wealth  from  a  calculating  ex¬ 
pansion  and  contraction  of  the  currency.  To  surrender  to  such 
mercenaries  the  sovereign  power  of  issuing  and  regulating  money 
seemed  to  him  the  abdication  of  sovereignty,  and  in  so  far  as  he 
could  he  felt  called  in  honor  to  prevent  it. 

It  needed  rare  courage  and  complete  self-sacrifice  to  take  up  the 
gage  of  battle  and  in  his  old  age  to  renew  the  war  that  Andrew  Jack- 
son  had  engaged  in  forty  years  before.  His  good  name  and  his 
honorable  career  could  not  save  him  from  the  gibes  of  politicians  or 
the  caustic  criticism  of  honest  men.  It  was  a  losing  fight  at  best. 

1  he  struggle  had  been  venomous  in  Jackson’s  day  when  the  money- 
power  was  in  its  infancy;  and  now  that  the  banking  interests  had 
grown  mighty  it  was  as  hopeless  as  the  charge  of  the  Light  Brigade 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


279 


The  cause  had  been  lost  on  the  day  when  Congress  wrote  into  the 
bill  establishing  a  legal  tender  for  war  purposes  the  single  word 
“except,”  thereby  invalidating  the  greenback  for  interest  payments 
on  bonds  and  duties  on  imports — an  act  that  “drew  tears  from  the 
eyes  of!  haddeus  Stevens”;  and  the  bankers  who  could  assert  their 
control  in  war  times  had  no  intention  a  dozen  years  later  of  suffer¬ 
ing  that  control  to  pass  from  hands  that  had  grown  enormously 
stronger. 

Yet  Peter  Cooper  refused  to  consider  the  outlook  hopeless.  With 
all  the  resources  he  could  command  he  threw  himself  into  the 
struggle.  He  scattered  “more  than  a  million  of  documents” 
broadcast — most  of  the  matter  of  which  he  wrote;  he  appealed  to 
Congress  and  the  President,  he  challenged  candidates,  he  cited  the 
opinions  of  the  Fathers,  and  when  he  was  buried  under  an  avalanche 
of  votes — as  Horace  Greeley  had  been  four  years  before — he  pre¬ 
served  his  faith  in  the  “people’s  cause”  and  to  the  last  day  of  his 
life  kept  up  the  great  battle.  “I  always  have  been,  am,  and  ever 
shall  be  with  the  poor  toilers  and  producers;  therefore  I  desire 
Congress  to  legislate  for  the  poor  as  well  as  for  the  rich,  who  can 
take  care  of  themselves,”  22  he  wrote  in  his  ninety-second  year,  and 
the  spirit  that  stirred  in  his  old  veins  appears  from  such  a  comment 
as  this: 

I  consider  the  persistent  class  legislation  of  Congress  since  the  war,  a 
worse  despotism  than  that  of  Great  Britain  before  the  Revolution;  be¬ 
cause  it  reduces  the  laboring  classes  to  periodic  distress  and  starvation, 
that  are  worse  than  any  despotism  ever  was;  for  monopolizing  corpora¬ 
tions,  whether  in  the  shape  of  banks  or  railroads,  have  no  soul.23 

Peter  Cooper’s  political  philosophy  was  simple  and  transparent. 
His  teachers  were  Albert  Gallatin,  Henry  C.  Carey,  and  George 
William  Curtis,  and  from  them  he  drew  three  major  ideas  that  had 
emerged  from  three  generations  of  American  experience:  the  need 
for  a  national  monetary  system  based  on  legal  tender;  the  necessity 
for  a  protective  tariff;  and  the  need  for  an  effective  civil  service. 
The  first  was  an  adaptation  of  the  old  agrarian  dislike  of  bank¬ 
notes;  the  second  came  out  of  Clay’s  American  System  as  it  had 
been  elaborated  by  Henry  C.  Carey  in  the  fifties;  and  the  third 
issued  from  the  Civil  Service  Reform  movement  of  the  seventies. 
The  exigencies  of  the  political  situation,  however,  thrust  into  the 

22  Ideas  for  a  Science  of  Good  Government,  p.  272.  23  Ibid.,  p.  271. 


280 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

foreground  the  money  question,  and  nine-tenths  of  his  writings  deal 
with  that  pregnant  issue.  As  an  ardent  Jacksonian  he  was  deeply 
suspicious  of  the  rising  money-power,  with  its  corporations  and 
monopolies,  its  land-grants  and  railways  and  banks,  for  behind 
them  he  saw  the  specter  of  aristocracy.  “In  America,”  he  said  in 
1882,  “we  have  no  aristocrats  except  those  who  have  sprung  up  in 
a  night — as  toad-stools  do  in  a  dung-hill.”  24  But  class  legislation 
must  end  in  creating  classes,  and  at  another  time  he  said,  “  There 
is  fast  forming  in  this  country  an  aristocracy  of  wealth — the  worst 
form  of  aristocracy  that  can  curse  the  prosperity  of  any  country. 

.  .  .  Such  an  aristocracy  is  without  soul  and  without  patriotism. 
Let  us  save  our  country  from  this,  its  most  potent,  and,  as  I  hope, 
its  last  enemy.”  25 

His  deep  interest  in  political  measures  was  quickened  by  an 
anxious  concern  at  the’hard  times  that  resulted  from  the  policy  of 
drastic  currency  deflation.  That  matters  were  going  ill  in  America 
during  the  middle  seventies  every  fool  knew,  and  Peter  Cooper  was 
only  giving  expression  to  the  common  knowledge  in  describing  to 
President  Hayes,  in  a  letter  dated  August  6,  1876,  the  “appalling” 
economic  situation.  That  it  was  equally  bad  in  England  he  did  not 
point  out. 

More  than  two  hundred  thousand  men,  within  the  last  few  weeks,  have 
joined  in  “strikes”  on  the  various  railroad  lines,  the  workshops  and  the 
mines  of  the  country,  on  account  of  the  further  reduction  in  their  wages, 
already  reduced  to  the  living  point.  That  some  of  these  strikes  have  been 
attended  with  lawless  and  unjustifiable  violence,  only  shows  the  intensity 
of  the  evils  complained  of,  and  the  despair  of  the  sufferers.  For  four  years 
past,  since  the  “panic  of  1873,”  millions  of  men  and  women,  in  this  hitherto 
rich  and  prosperous  country,  have  been  thrown  out  of  employment,  or 
living  on  precarious  and  inadequate  wages,  have  felt  embittered  with  a  lot, 
in  which  neither  economy  nor  industry,  nor  a  cheerful  willingness  to  work 
hard,  can  bring  any  alleviation.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  enforced 
idleness  has  made  tramps  of  so  many  of  our  laboring  population,  or  induced 
them  to  join  the  criminal  and  dangerous  classes?  26 

After  pointing  out  the  disastrous  effects  of  such  hard  times  on 
mining,  railways,  real  estate,  and  the  western  farmers,  he  asserted 
that  the  bankers,  although  they  also  were  embarrassed,  were  “very 
patient  with  their  troubles.  .  .  for  they  know,  that  money  is 
appreciating  in  value  all  the  time.”  He  then  uncovers  the  kernel  of 

24  Ibid.,  p.  261.  26  Ibid.,  p.  123.  26  Ibid.,  pp.  117-1x8. •» 


THE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  FARMER 


281 


his  thought — that  it  is  a  sovereign  duty  of  government  to  provide 
an  adequate  national  currency. 

This  bondage  has  its  manifold  centre  and  its  secret  force  in  more  than 
two  thousand  banks,  that  are  scattered  through  the  country.  All  these 
banks,  are  organized  expressly  to  loan  out  their  own  money  and  the  money 
of  all  those,  who  will  entrust  them  with  deposits.  These  loans  are  made  to 
men,  whose  business-lives  will  soon  become  dependent  on  money,  bor¬ 
rowed  from  corporations,  that  have  a  special  interest  of  their  own.  Such 
a  power  of  wealth,  under  the  control  of  the  selfish  instincts  of  mankind, 
will  always  be  able  to  control  the  action  of  our  Government,  unless  that 
Government  is  directed  by  strict  principles  of  justice  and  of  the  public 
welfare.  The  banks  wdl  favor  a  course  of  special  and  partial  legislation, 
in  order  to  increase  their  power  .  .  .  they  will  never  cease  to  ask  for  more, 
as  long  as  there  is  more,  that  can  be  wrung  from  the  toiling  masses  of  the 
American  people. 

Such  a  power  should  never  be  allowed  to  go  out  from  the  entire  and 
complete  control  of  the  people’s  Government.  The  struggle  with  this 
money-power,  intrenched  in  the  special  privileges  of  banks,  has  been  going 
on  from  the  beginning  of  the  history  of  this  country.  It  has  engaged  the 
attention  of  our  wisest  and  most  patriotic  statesmen.  Franklin,  Jefferson, 
Webster,  Calhoun,  Jackson,  have  all  spoken  of  the  danger  of  such  a  power 
and  the  necessity  of  guarding  against  it.27 

The  solution  he  offered  for  the  vexing  monetary  problem  ac¬ 
corded  with  that  of  the  Greenback  Party,28  namely,  refusal  to 
recharter  those  banks  “ deceitfully  styled  national  ”  and  the  retire¬ 
ment  of  all  bank  currency;  the  abandonment  of  the  policy  of  cur¬ 
rency  contraction;  the  issue  of  legal-tender  notes  to  the  amount  last 
found  necessary  for  the  functions  of  industry  and  business;  the 
rejection  of  a  specie  basis,  the  notes  to  be  interconvertible  with 
government  bonds  bearing  interest  at  3.65  per  cent;  issued  on 
demand  in  any  amount  in  exchange  for  legal-tender  notes;  and  the 
establishment  of  a  Postal  Savings  Bank.  No  man  ever  believed 
more  ardently  in  the  sufficiency  of  his  program  than  Peter  Cooper. 
It  was  a  suggestive  proposal,  that  only  a  knave  would  call  the 
visionary  scheme  of  a  fool.  He  was  tireless  in  explanation  and 
argument,  the  quality  of  which  may  be  judged  from  the  following 
passage  from  a  letter  to  Hayes  and  Tilden  written  during  the  cam¬ 
paign  of  1877: 

The  worth  or  exchangeable  value  of  gold  is  as  uncertain  as  other  products 
of  human  labor,  such  as  wheat  or  cotton.  The  exchangeable  value  of  any¬ 
thing  depends  on  its  convertibility  into  something  else  that  has  value  at  the 

27  Ibid.,  pp.  109-110.  28  See  Ibid.,  pp.  59-60. 


282 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

option  of  the  individual.  This  rule  applies  to  paper  money  as  to  anything 
else.  But  how  shall  Government  give  an  exchangeable  value  to  a  paper 
currency?  Can  it  be  done  by  a  standard  which  is  beyond  its  control  and 
which  naturally  fluctuates,  while  the  sign  of  exchange  indicated  by  the 
paper  remains  the  same?  .  .  . 

...  we  must  trust  our  Government  with  this  whole  function  of  providing 
the  standards  and  measures  of  exchange,  as  we  trust  it  with  the  weights 
and  measures  of  trade.  .  .  .  We  must  require  the  Government  to  make 
this  currency,  at  all  times,  and,  at  the  option  of  the  individual,  convertible. 
But  the  currency  must  be  convertible  into  something  over  which  the  Gov¬ 
ernment  has  entire  control,  and  to  which  it  can  give  a  definite  as  well  as 
a  permanent  value.  This  is„  its  own  interest-bearing  bonds.  These  are,  in 
fact,  a  mortgage  upon  the  embodied  wealth  of  the  whole  country.  The 
reality  of  their  value  is  as  sound  and  as  permanent  as  the  Government 
itself,  and  the  degree  of  their  value  can  be  determined  exactly  by  the  rate 
of  interest  the  Government  may  think  proper  to  fix.29 

The  Jeffersonianism  of  Peter  Cooper,  like  the  Jeffersonianism 
of  the  Middle  Border,  had  taken  a  bias  from  the  confident  national¬ 
ism  that  during  the  fifties  so  deeply  colored  American  thought.  To 
assure  an  adequate  national  economy,  superior  in  its  self-sufficiency 
to  European- — and  especially  English — policies,  was  a  persuasive 
program  that  Henry  C.  Carey  devoted  his  later  life  to  formulating, 
and  that  men  like  Horace  Greeley  and  Peter  Cooper  disseminated 
amongst  their  wide  agrarian  following.  That  such  a  program  im¬ 
plied  a  paternalistic  government  did  not  trouble  them.  Peter 
Cooper  accepted  paternalism  as  a  necessary  governmental  func¬ 
tion.  He  would  have  the  state  build  and  own  the  great  western 
railway  systems;  he  would  use  the  national  domain  for  the  benefit 
of  the  settler;  he  would  not  turn  over  the  state  to  plunderers  nor 
the  resources  of  the  nation  to  speculators.  An  honest  man  with  a 
sensitive  social  conscience,  he  would  have  no  hand  in  the  great 
barbecue  that  wasted  more  than  it  consumed;  but  the  times  were 
heedless  of  the  counsels  of  honest  men,  and  he  was  loved  and 
laughed  at  and  ignored.  Like  Franklin  in  the  Constitutional  Con¬ 
vention,  he  had  outlived  his  generation  and  was  thrust  aside  by  the 
new  economy  that  was  taking  over  the  custodianship  of  America.* 

29  The  Political  and  Financial  Opinions  of  Peter  Cooper ,  pp.  22-23. 

*  In  his  original  plan  Professor  Parrington  included  here  a  discussion  entitled 
“Bimetallism:  A  heritage  of  Jacksonian  democracy;  Ignatius  Donnelly,  ‘Coin’ 
Harvey,”  but  from  the  references  in  the  next  chapter  it  seems  evident  that  as  he 
worked  out  his  plan  he  decided  to  omit  this. — Publisher. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  DEMOCRACY  OF  THE  AGE  OF  INNOCENCE 


i 

CAPITALISTIC  ENCROACHMENTS 

With  its  heritage  of  Jacksonianism  it  was  natural  for  the  agrarian 
movement  to  attempt  to  carry  further  the  exploration  of  the  demo¬ 
cratic  principle,  seeking  to  complete  the  program  that  had  been 
left  unfulfilled  by  the  Fathers.  There  were  few  as  yet  who  ques¬ 
tioned  the  finality  of  democracy  as  a  political  system  or  its  ade¬ 
quacy  to  all  social  needs.  The  growing  evils  of  American  life  were 
traced  unhesitatingly  to  an  imperfect  democratic  control  of  the 
forces  of  exploitation.  If  the  plutocracy  were  making  gains  at  the 
expense  of  the  plain  people  it  was  due  to  defective  governmental 
machinery,  and  the  immediate  problem  was  the  readjustment  of 
that  machinery.  There  must  be  an  extension  of  democratic  control 
over  the  economics  of  society.  The  great  principle  of  laissez  faire, 
that  had  proved  so  useful  in  the  earlier  struggle  against  aristocratic 
paternalisms,  was  become  a  shield  and  buckler  for  the  plutocracy 
that  was  rising  from  the  freedoms  of  a  let-alone  policy.  To  curb 
the  ambitions  of  that  plutocracy  and  preserve  the  democratic  be¬ 
quest  for  the  common  benefit  of  all,  was  therefore  the  immediate 
problem  of  the  times. 

To  this  end  two  things  remained  to  be  achieved :  to  wrest  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  government  from  the  hands  of  the  plutocracy  that  was 
befouling  it,  and  to  use  it  for  democratic  rather  than  plutocratic 
ends.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  were  many.  Entrenched  behind 
the  checks  and  balances  of  a  complex  constitution  the  plutocracy 
could  not  easily  be  dislodged  from  power;  even  if  it  were  driven  out 
of  the  legislative  and  executive  branches  of  government  it  would 
find  aid  and  succor  in  the  judiciary,  where  a  masterful  corporation 
law  was  interpreted  by  a  bench  tender  toward  all  property  rights, 
and  jealous  of  its  sovereign  prerogative  of  reviewing  all  legislative 
enactments.  A  surprising  change  had  come  over  the  attitude  of  the 
governing  class  towards  democracy.  Having  gained  control  of  the 

283 


284 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

machinery  of  government  the  plutocracy  found  no  cause  to  quarrel 
with  a  situation  wholly  to  its  liking.  It  had  mastered  the  gentle  art 
of  guiding  the  majority  will,  and  secure  — as  it  believed — in  its  con¬ 
trol  of  the  political  state,  it  counted  on  an  indefinite  continuation 
of  the  policy  of  preemption  and  exploitation.  From  such  a  group, 
whether  in  Wall  Street  or  at  Washington,  no  new  theories  of  gov¬ 
ernment  were  to  be  expected.  Business  men  wanted  to  be  let  alone. 
They  clung  to  the  anarchism  of  the  Enlightenment  and  were  stout 
in  defense  of  the  principle  of  individual  initiative.  So  late  as  1916  a 
group  of  confirmed  individualists  reissued  Spencer’s  Man  V ersus 
the  State,  with  an  introduction  by  Elihu  Root,  to  combat  the  rising 
spirit  of  governmental  control.  They  regarded  the  American  sys¬ 
tem  of  government  as  adequate  and  final,  and  wanted  no  subversive 
changes.  The  Constitution  had  been  completed  by  the  post-war 
enactments  that  fixed  the  status  of  the  negro,  and  for  a  generation 
thereafter — except  for  the  silent  changes  wrought  by  the  judiciary 
— it  remained  static.  East  of  the  Allegheny  Mountains  popular  in¬ 
terest  in  political  theory  had  come  to  an  end.  A  group  of  academic 
thinkers  like  John  W.  Burgess  and  Woodrow  Wilson,  an  occasional 
intellectual  like  Brooks  Adams,  isolated  radicals  like  Johann  Most 
and  small  Marxian  groups  in  Chicago  and  New  York,  and  leaders 
of  the  new  proletarian  movement  like  Terence  V.  Powderly,  were 
still  acutely  concerned  about  political  theory;  but  these  men  and 
their  theories  counted  for  little  in  the  stodgy  mass  of  capitalistic 
America.  The  political  phase  had  passed  over  into  the  economic; 
politics  was  wholly  divorced  from  reality. 

But  throughout  the  Middle  Border  and  on  to  the  Pacific  Coast 
the  spirit  of  political  democracy  was  alive  and  vigorous.  There  the 
older  frontier  Jacksonianism  still  lingered.  For  upwards  of  a  half  a 
century  creative  political  thinking  in  America  was  largely  western 
agrarian,  and  from  this  source  came  those  democratic  ideas  that 
were  to  provide  the  staple  of  a  later  liberalism.  The  conscious  ob¬ 
jective  of  this  great  movement  was  to  complete  the  work  begun 
by  Jacksonianism,  and  create  a  political  machinery  that  should 
enable  the  democracy  to  withstand  the  shock  of  the  Industrial 
Revolution.  Many  thinkers  contributed  to  the  work— U’Ren 
of  Oregon,  Jerry  Simpson  of  Kansas,  Tom  Watson  of  Georgia, 
“Coin”  Harvey  of  Arkansas,  General  Weaver  of  Iowa,  Ignatius 
Donnelly  of  Minnesota,  Henry  D.  Lloyd  of  Chicago,  to  name  a 
handful  out  of  the  mass — homespun  realists  who  have  been  for- 


DEMOCRACY  OF  THE  AGE  OF  INNOCENCE 


285 


gotten  by  a  later  generation,  but  whose  labors  were  given  to  the 
necessary  work  of  refashioning  the  political  machinery  of  America, 
and  whose  program  provided  the  materials  for  the  later  Progressive 
party.  They  were  commoners,  men  of  the  people,  unversed  in  the 
dogmas  of  the  schools,  idealists  who  drew  their  inspiration  from  the 
Declaration  of  Independence;  they  spoke  for  an  older  America  that 
feared  the  rising  plutocracy,  and  they  were  casting  about  for  ways 
and  means  to  cut  its  claws.  From  their  labors  came  the  Greenback 
Movement,  the  Farmers’  Alliance,  Populism;  and  from  them  came 
in  turn  the  Progressive  Movement  that  reaped  what  they  had 
sown. 

n 

THIRD-PARTY  MOVEMENTS 

It  is,  perhaps,  not  extreme  to  interpret  the  political  history  of 
America  since  1790  as  largely  a  struggle  between  the  spirit  of  the 
Declaration  of  Independence  and  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution, 
the  one  primarily  concerned  with  the  rights  of  man,  the  other  more 
practically  concerned  with  the  rights  of  property.  The  humani¬ 
tarian  idealism  of  the  Declaration  has  always  echoed  as  a  battle-cry 
in  the  hearts  of  those  who  dream  of  an  America  dedicated  to 
democratic  ends.  It  cannot  be  long  ignored  or  repudiated,  for 
sooner  or  later  it  returns  to  plague  the  councils  of  practical  politics. 
It  is  constantly  breaking  out  in  fresh  revolt.  When  the  major 
parties  have  grown  callous  and  indifferent  to  the  wishes  of  the 
common  people,  it  has  reformulated  its  principles  in  third-party 
platforms.  Without  its  freshening  influence  our  political  history 
would  have  been  much  more  sordid  and  materialistic.  With  the 
exception  of  such  sporadic  outbursts  as  Antimasonry  and  Know- 
nothingism,  the  third-party  movements  of  the  nineteenth  century 
were  democratic  movements,  inspired  by  a  sense  of  social  justice, 
founded  on  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and  promulgated  to 
recall  the  American  people  to  their  heritage  of  idealism.  The 
Locofoco  party,  the  Freesoil  party,  the  early  Republican  party, 
the  Greenback  party,  the  Populist  party,  the  Progressive  party, 
however  they  differed  in  immediate  programs,  have  had  a  common 
objective,  namely,  to  set  man  above  property  as  the  great  object  of 
governmental  concern,  and  preserve  in  America  the  democratic 
principle  of  equal  opportunity. 

Despite  the  fact  that  they  failed  in  their  immediate  objectives 


286 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


they  served  the  larger  purpose  of  reminding  the  major  parties  that 
America  professes  to  be  a  democratic  country,  and  that  party 
platforms  must  be  brought  to  square  with  that  fact.  Thus  inter¬ 
preted  the  history  of  party  struggle  since  1790  falls  into  three  broad 
phases:  the  Jeffersonian  movement  that  established  the  ideal  of 
political  democracy;  the  Jacksonian  movement  that  established 
equalitarianism  crudely  in  practice;  and  the  successive  third- 
party  movements  that  attempted,  in  successive  reactions,  to  regain 
such  ground  as  had  been  lost,  to  extend  the  field,  and  to  perfect 
the  machinery  of  democratic  government.  Since  the  rise  of  the 
slavery  controversy  the  major  parties,  allied  with  masterful 
economic  groups,  have  persistently  ignored  the  Declaration  of 
Independence,  and  repudiated  in  practice  the  spirit  of  democracy. 
To  prevent  if  possible  so  grave  a  treason  to  our  traditional  ideals, 
to  assert  the  rights  of  the  common  man  against  the  encroachments 
of  a  class,  has  been  therefore  the  common  mission  of  the  third- 
party  movements.  The  significance  of  their  somewhat  scanty 
success  is  something  the  thoughtful  American  may  interpret  as  he 
will. 

Since  Civil  War  days,  discontent  has  been  endemic  in  the. Middle 
Border,  and  it  has  broken  out  in  three  great  political  upheavals: 
the  Greenback  movement  of  the  seventies;  the  Populist  movement 
of  the  eighties  and  nineties;  and  the  Non-Partisan  League  move¬ 
ment  of  the  second  decade  of  the  present  century.  Issuing  from  a 
profound  resentment  at  the  exploitation  from  which  the  farmer  suf¬ 
fered,  they  mark  a  persistent  drift  away  from  the  old  Jacksonian 
individualism  and  an  advance  toward  a  socialized  conception  of  the 
political  state.  Disciplined  by  hard  times  the  farmers  were  learn¬ 
ing  a  lesson  from  capitalistic  Whiggery;  if  the  political  state  had 
proved  serviceable  to  business  why  should  it  not  prove  serviceable 
to  agriculture?  Why  should  not  a  democratic  state  consider  the 
producers  as  well  as  the  middleman?  Why  should  it  not  provide  a 
national  currency,  a  national  system  of  transportation,  a  demo¬ 
cratic  banking  system,  a  standard  system  of  grain-grading,  public 
elevators,  crop  insurance,  and  the  like?  Why  should  the  farmer  be 
squeezed  at  every  turn  by  private  companies  who  did  badly  what 
the  state  could  do  well?  By  1917,  in  short,  the  Middle  Border  had 
got  far  from  the  simple  individualism  of  earlier  days  and  was  well 
advanced  toward  state  socialism;  and  it  was  only  the  ruthless 
opposition  of  the  business  interests,  that  had  no  wish  to  see  thgir 


287 


DEMOCRACY  OF  THE  AGE  OF  INNOCENCE 

private  preserves  thus  rudely  invaded,  that  put  a  stop  to  the 
movement. 

Back  of  all  these  agrarian  programs  was  the  greater  problem  of 
the  popular  control  of  the  political  state.  How  could  the  undisci¬ 
plined  majority  hold  in  check  the  disciplined  minority?  How  could 
poverty  meet  wealth  on  an  equal  footing?  The  control  of  politics 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  machine,  and  the  machine  served 
property  interests.  Legislatures  were  bought  and  sold  like  corner 
lots;  senatorships  went  to  the  highest  bidder;  judges  were  more 
responsive  to  the  wishes  of  bankers  than  to  those  of  farmers.  To 
break  the  power  of  the  machine  there  must  be  an  extension  of  demo¬ 
cratic  control,  and  to  that  end  new  machinery  must  be  provided. 
Hence  the  vast  agrarian  concern  with  political  machinery.  From 
the  agrarian  agitation — supplemented  by  proletarian  and  middle- 
class  recruits — has  come  the  Australian  ballot,  the  Initiative  and 
the  Referendum,  the  Recall,  the  Direct  Primary,  and  popular 
election  of  Senators.  The  only  important  agrarian  principle  that 
has  not  been  adopted  is  the  principle  of  proportional  representa¬ 
tion.  If  agrarianism  lost  its  great  battle  over  the  currency,  it  won 
the  battle  over  the  income  tax.  Nullified  by  a  scandalous  court 
decision  after  it  had  been  long  accepted,  the  income  tax  was 
finally  established  by  the  tedious  method  of  constitutional  amend¬ 
ment — an  outcome  that  owed  much  to  the  Middle  Border.  In 
casting  up  the  accounts  of  American  democracy,  the  largest  sums 
must  be  credited  to  the  Middle  Border,  as  in  earlier  years  they  were 
credited  to  the  Jacksonian  frontier.  Whether  the  new  machinery  is 
useful  or  merely  cumbersome,  there  is  much  disagreement,  but 
it  is  agrarian  in  origin  and  it  came  from  an  honest  attempt  to 
democratize  American  politics.* 

*The  Contents  here  calls  for  a  third  section  on  the  “Populistic  Program”  (see 
p.  xxxiv  for  details)  and  a  fourth  on  “William  Jennings  Bryan.” — Publisher. 


CHAPTER  III 

LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER* 


iii 

HAMLIN  GARLAND  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 

It  was  not  till  the  end  of  the  eighties  that  the  bitterness  of  the 
frontier  began  to  creep  into  literature.  Its  slackness  and  drab 
poverty  had  got  into  the  pages  of  The  Hoosier  Schoolmaster,  as  its 
neighborliness  had  got  into  Riley;  but  in  these  earlier  studies  there 
was  no  brooding  sense  of  social  injustice,  of  the  wrongs  done  the 
Middle  Border  by  unjust  laws,  of  the  hardships  that  are  increased 
by  the  favoritism  of  government.  In  the  year  1887,  however,  came 
a  significant  change  of  temper.  Three  very  different  writers — 
Harold  Frederic,  Joseph  Kirkland,  and  Hamlin  Garland — turned 
to  the  theme  of  farm  life,  and  dealt  with  it  in  a  mordantly  realistic 
vein.  It  was  the  first  conscious  literary  reaction  to  the  subjection 
of  agriculture  to  capitalistic  exploitation  and  it  was  marked  by  the 
bitterness  of  a  decaying  order. 

Seth’s  Brother’s  Wife,  by  Harold  Frederic,  is  a  drab  tale  of  farm 
life  in  upper  York  State,  as  bitter  as  any  tale  of  the  western  border. 
It  is  a  story  of  defeat,  of  flight  from  country  to  town.  The  blight  of 
failure  is  upon  the  farming  community — a  blight  that  embitters 
old  and  young;  and  the  sketches  of  country  louts,  of  soured  lives, 
of  broken  men  and  women,  do  not  make  pleasant  reading.  No 
gentle  idyllic  light  rests  on  the  landscape  such  as  Sarah  Orne 
Jewett  discovers  on  the  fields  and  villages  of  New  England.  Sabrina 
Fairchild,  an  old  maid  embittered  by  the  family  failure,  yet  cling¬ 
ing  to  the  family  pride  and  hopeful  that  the  family  prestige  will  be 
restored,  is  a  pathetic  and  desolate  figure,  gaunt  and  sharp-tongued; 
at  mortal  feud  with  another  pathetic  old  woman,  who  with  her 
husband  had  emigrated  from  Massachusetts  years  before,  and  held 
herself  proudly  above  the  mean  and  vulgar  neighborhood  in  which 

*  In  Professor  Parrington’s  plan  the  section  given  here  was  to  be  preceded  by  a 
first  section  on  Edward  Eggleston  and  frontier  Realism,”  and  a  second  on  “Whit¬ 
comb  Riley  and  Folk  Romance.” — Publisher.  „ 

288 


LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 


289 


they  had  settled.  The  slack  servants,  gossipy  and  impudent,  the 
petty  lives,  the  grasping  ways  unrelieved  by  any  grace  or  beauty, 
and  set  in  a  world  of  petty  machine  politics,  make  a  drab  and  un¬ 
attractive  picture.  Harold  Frederic  quite  evidently  hates  this 
countryside  that  bred  him.  He  will  not,  like  Hamlin  Garland,  take 
up  the  battle  for  it  against  the  town.  He  sees  no  hope  in  political 
programs;  he  is  no  Populistic  agrarian  fighting  for  justice;  he  wants 
only  to  escape  from  it  to  the  city,  where  life  may  be  lived  more 
generously.  The  “trail  of  the  serpent  is  over  it  all,”  he  remarks, 
“rich  and  poor,  big  and  little.  The  nineteenth  century  is  a  century 
of  cities;  they  have  given  their  own  twist  to  the  progress  of  the  age 
— and  the  farmer  is  almost  as  far  out  of  it  as  if  he  lived  in  Alaska. 
Perhaps  there  may  have  been  a  time  when  a  man  could  live  in 
what  the  poet  calls  daily  communion  with  Nature  and  not  starve 
his  mind  and  dwarf  his  soul,  but  this  isn’t  the  century  .  .  .  get 
out  of  it  as  soon  as  you  can.”1 

Much  less  bitter  and  hopeless  is  Zury:  The  Meanest  Man  in 
Spring  County  (1887),  by  Joseph  Kirkland,  son  of  Matilda  Kirk¬ 
land,  who  a  generation  before  had  written  sketches  of  the  Michigan 
frontier.  In  the  preface  the  author  points  out  that  his  study  is  “a 
palpable  imitation  of  Thomas  Hardy’s  ‘Far  from  the  Madding 
Crowd,’  ”  an  “attempt  to  reproduce,  on  American  soil,  the  un¬ 
flinching  realism  ...  of  life  down  in  actual  contact  with  the  soil 
itself.”  It  is  a  tale  of  pioneer  days  in  Illinois,  in  the  second  quarter 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  it  draws  a  full-length  portrait  of  the 
son  of  a  Pennsylvania  immigrant  who  struggles  up  from  mean  be¬ 
ginnings  to  prosperity.  The  niggardliness  of  frontier  life  is  drawn 
unsparingly — the  harsh  struggle  for  subsistence — but  there  is  no 
outcry  against  governmental  favoritisms  or  the  law’s  injustice.  It 
is  nature  that  must  be  fought  and  conquered,  and  the  battle  needs 
strong  men  who  must  subdue  their  finer  natures  and  more  generous 
impulses  to  the  work  of  acquisition.  Zury  Prouder  is  a  masterful 
fellow  who  bends  every  energy  to  the  business  of  accumulation.  He 
makes  one  hand  wash  the  other,  and  by  dint  of  saving  and  squeez¬ 
ing  and  trading  and  foreclosing  he  slowly  amasses  wealth  and 
power.  He  is  a  thrifty  farmer  as  well  as  a  shrewd  trader,  but  his 
soul  is  seared  by  the  frontier  meanness — squeezed  into  land  and 
stock  and  mortgages,  consumed  with  the  passion  for  grabbing.  It 
was  a  reaction  from  the  skimpiness  of  his  youth.  The  bitterness  of 

1  Chapter  IV,  pp.  26-27. 


290 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


poverty  had  entered  his  heart  as  a  boy,  and  his  life  took  shape  from 
the  youthful  resolve — 

“  Dad,  I’m  goin’  t’own  a  mortgage  ’fore  I  die;  mind  what  I  say.” 

“Hope  ye  will,  Zury,”  his  father  replies.  “Yew’ll  have  a  holt  of  the 
right  eend  of  the  poker  then;  ’n’  t’other  feller  he’ll  have  a  holt  o’  the  hot 
part,  same’s  we’ve  got  naow.” 

“You  bet!  An’  it’ll  sizzle  his  hands,  tew,  afore  I’ll  ever  let  up  on  him.” 

But  Kirkland  will  not  let  Zury  remain  a  crabbed  and  hard-fisted 
son  of  the  frontier.  As  the  frontier  hardships  grow  less  the  soul  that 
has  been  seared  by  poverty  is  awakened  to  more  generous  impulses. 
Late  in  life  Zury  is  taken  in  hand  by  a  Boston  woman  who  had  come 
out  as  a  schoolteacher  years  before,  and  whom  Zury  had  given  up 
for  a  bride  with  a  rich  farm,  but  to  whom  he  eventually  returns. 
Under  her  care  the  plates  of  mail  are  stripped  from  his  heart,  his 
better  nature  expands,  and  the  meanest  man  in  Spring  County 
ripens  into  a  kindly  and  lovable  old  age.  What  poverty  and  hard¬ 
ship  had  warped  and  twisted,  love  straightens  out  and  ennobles; 
the  meanness  of  the  frontier  is  washed  away  as  the  rich  soil  yields 
a  more  abundant  life.  It  is  not  a  great  book,  but  it  is  vigorous  and 
honest,  and  its  earlier  chapters  contain  some  admirable  bits  of 
realism.  As  one  of  the  first  stories  of  the  western  farmer  it  is  secure 
of  a  place  in  the  history  of  our  American  fiction. 

It  was  this  same  year,  1887,  that  Hamlin  Garland,  alone  and 
brooding  over  his  studies  at  the  Boston  Public  Library,  wrote  his 
first  sketches  of  life  in  the  Middle  Border.  The  romance  was  fading 
from  the  prairies  when  he  took  up  his  pen.  The  Golden  West  of 
Mark  Twain  and  the  bucolic  West  of  Whitcomb  Riley  had  both 
slipped  into  the  past  and  the  day  that  was  rising  was  to  bring  its 
discouragements  that  seared  men’s  hopes  as  the  hot  winds  seared 
the  fields  of  rustling  corn.  The  burdens  of  the  western  farmer  were 
heavy  on  his  shoulders  and  he  could  foresee  no  time  when  they 
would  be  lighter.  Depression  had  settled  on  the  Middle  Border,  and 
Hamlin  Garland  returning  to  the  familiar  fields  from  his  Boston 
studies  felt  the  depression  in  every  fiber  of  his  being.  This  was  his 
land  and  his  people.  1  he  blight  laid  upon  men  and  women  and 
children  by  the  drab  pioneer  life  was  a  familiar  fact  to  him.  The 
Garlands  and  the  McClintocks  had  suffered  from  it  as  their  neigh¬ 
bors  suffered,  and  a  rebellious  wrath  filled  his  heart  as  he  contem¬ 
plated  the  Middle  Border — the  barnyards  where  tired  men  did  the 
evening  chores,  the  ungainly  houses  where  tired  women  stood  over 


291 


LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 

hot  stoves,  the  fertile  acres  that  produced  more  than  the  markets 
consumed.  It  was  a  life  without  grace  or  beauty  or  homely  charm — 
a  treadmill  existence  that  got  nowhere.  If  this  were  the  Valley  of 
Democracy  then  the  democracy  was  a  mean  thing  and  hopeless, 
and  having  himself  escaped  frpm  it  he  would  do  what  he  could  to 
help  others  escape.  In  the  completeness  of  his  disillusion  the 
glamour  of  romance  was  swept  away  and  he  proposed  to  set  down 
in  honest  plain  words  the  manner  of  life  lived  by  these  Middle 
Border  folk,  and  the  sort  of  earnings  won  by  their  toil.  He  would 
speak  frankly  out  of  the  common  bitter  experience.  The  way  to 
truth  was  the  way  of  realism. 

To  a  later  generation  that  never  knew  the  pioneer  hardships  of 
the  Middle  Border,  Hamlin  Garland  seems  strangely  remote  and 
old-fashioned;  yet  his  intellectual  antecedents  are  both  ancient  and 
honorable.  At  bottom  he  is  an  idealist  of  the  old  Jeffersonian  breed, 
an  earnest  soul  devoid  of  humor,  who  loves  beauty  and  is  mightily 
concerned  about  justice,  and  who,  discovering  little  beauty  and 
finding  scant  justice  in  the  world  where  fate  first  set  him,  turned 
rebel  and  threw  in  his  lot  with  the  poor  and  the  exploited.  As  a 
young  man,  consumed  with  a  desire  to  speak  for  his  people,  he  es¬ 
poused  a  somber  realism,  for  only  by  and  through  the  truth  could 
he  hope  to  dislodge  from  men’s  minds  the  misconceptions  that  stood 
in  the  way  of  justice.  The  Middle  Border  had  no  spokesman  at  the 
court  of  letters  and  if  he  could  gain  a  hearing  there  he  must  not  be¬ 
tray  his  father’s  household  by  glossing  ungainly  reality;  he  must 
depict  the  life  of  the  western  farmer  as  it  was  lived  under  the  sum¬ 
mer  sun  and  the  winter  cold,  what  harvests  were  brought  to  crib 
and  what  sort  of  wealth  was  finally  gathered. 

And  yet  in  the  light  of  his  total  work  one  hesitates  to  call  Garland 
a  realist.  Perhaps  more  justly  he  might  be  called  a  thwarted  ro¬ 
mantic,  and  his  early  rebellious  realism  be  traced  to  its  source  in  a 
passionate  refusal  to  be  denied  the  beauty  that  should  be  a  portion 
of  any  rational  way  of  living;  for  when  later  he  found  himself  in  a 
land  of  nobler  horizons,  unsoiled  as  yet  by  crude  frontier  exploita¬ 
tion,  when  he  looked  out  upon  vast  mountain  ranges  and  felt  the 
warm  sun  on  the  gray  plains,  he  discovered  there  the  romance  of  his 
dreams  and  fell  to  describing  the  strange  splendors  with  the  gusto  of 
a  naive  romantic.  Main-Travelled  Roads  and  Prairie  Folks  are  the 
protest  of  one  oppressed  with  the  meanness  of  a  world  that  takes 
such  heavy  toll  of  human  happiness;  Her  Mountain  Lover  is  the  ex- 


292 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

pression  of  a  frank  romantic  who  glories  in  the  nobility  of  nature’s 
noblemen;  and  The  Captain  of  the  Gray-Horse  Troop  is  a  tale  in 
which  romance  is  justified  by  ethics  and  the  hero  discovers  in  the 
protection  of  a  weaker  race  the  deepest  satisfactions  of  life.  Beauty 
is  excellent,  but  beauty  should  walk  hand  in  hand  with  service — 
not  art  for  art’s  sake,  but  art  subdued  to  the  higher  good  of  hu¬ 
manity. 

Between  these  extremes  of  a  stark  realism  and  an  ethical  roman¬ 
ticism,  stand  two  books,  separated  by  many  years  and  great 
changes,  that  embody  in  more  finished  form  the  theme  which  after 
all  was  the  master  passion  of  Garland’s  life — the  Middle  Border  and 
the  rebellions  it  bred.  Rose  of  Dutchers  Coolly  is  a  full-length  por¬ 
trait  of  an  idealist  in  revolt  against  the  narrowness  of  farm  life,  and 
A  Son  of  the  Middle  Border  is  an  idyll  of  the  past,  autobiography 
done  in  mellower  years  when  the  passions  of  youth  have  been  sub¬ 
dued  to  less  exigent  demands.  These  books,  together  with  the 
sketches  of  Main-Travelled  Roads  and  the  militant  critical  theory 
of  Crumbling  Idols,  contain  pretty  much  the  whole  of  Hamlin 
Garland  that  after  years  have  cared  to  remember — the  saga  of 
the  Middle  Border  in  the  days  of  its  great  rebellion  when  the 
earlier  hopes  of  boundless  prosperity  were  turning  to  ashes  in  the 
mouth. 

The  striking  originality  of  Garland’s  work,  that  sets  it  apart  from 
other  studies  of  the  local-color  school,  sprang  from  the  sincerity  of 
his  reaction  to  environment.  His  intellectual  development  followed 
the  needs  of  his  ardent,  inquisitive  nature.  After  quitting  the  little 
Academy  at  Osage,  Iowa,  he  went  forth  in  quest  of  an  education 
that  should  explain  to  him  the  meaning  of  life  as  he  had  known  it. 
In  this  search  he  was  singularly  fortunate.  He  was  his  own  mentor 
and  he  took  what  he  needed.  Boston  had  long  been  the  Mecca  of 
his  dreams  and  when  he  found  himself  there — having  made  a  pious 
pilgrimage  as  Howells  had  done  a  generation  earlier — he  threw  him¬ 
self  upon  his  studies  with  ascetic  zeal.  Fortunately  he  enrolled  in 
the  Boston  Public  Library  instead  of  at  Harvard,  and  his  formless 
radicalisms  there  found  food  in  plenty.  Though  he  lived  in  Boston 
some  ten  years  and  made  friends,  he  never  penetrated  the  inner 
literary  sanctuary.  A  somewhat  forlorn  outsider,  unknown  and  un¬ 
vouched  for,  he  found  no  welcome  as  Howells  and  Twain  had  found, 
and  he  never  entered  the  pleasant  circles  where  Holmes  and  Lowell 
and  Fields  and  Norton  and  Aldrich  and  Howells  held  sway.  "" 


LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 


293 


Perhaps  that  fact  unconsciously  determined  his  scornful  rejec¬ 
tion  of  the  Boston  genteel  in  literature;  at  any  rate  his  denial  of  the 
sovereignty  of  the  New  England  literary  rulers  left  him  free  to  fol¬ 
low  other  masters  who  seemed  to  him  more  significant.  In  his  bleak 
little  room  his  ear  had  caught  the  greater  voices  then  sounding  in 
Europe  and  America.  His  masters  were  men  of  intellectual  horizons 
unbounded  by  Beacon  Street  and  Harvard  Square:  Taine  and  Ibsen 
and  Bjornson,  Turgenev  and  Tolstoi,  Zola  and  Millet,  Darwin 
and  Spencer  and  Fiske,  Walt  Whitman  and  Henry  George,  and  the 
later  Howells  with  his  deeper  sociological  concern  and  graver 
realism.  His  three  great  masters  came  finally  to  be  Whitman, 
Spencer,  and  Henry  George.  To  these  greater  names  should  be 
added  that  of  Edward  Eggleston,  who  had  been  his  boyhood  idol, 
and  that  of  Joseph  Kirkland,  who  did  much  to  stimulate  and  guide 
his  earliest  sketches.  He  did  not  absorb  all  these  men  had  to  give. 
He  could  not  stretch  his  provincial  mind  suddenly  to  compass  the 
intellectual  realm  of  his  masters.  But  something  he  got  and  that 
something,  woven  into,  the  fabric  of  his  thinking,  was  to  make  him 
free.  It  was  the  best  school  of  the  times,  and  from  his  studies  Ham¬ 
lin  Garland  emerged  an  uncompromising  radical,  one  of  a  group  of 
eager  young  men  who  gathered  about  B.  O.  Flower,  and  in  the 
sympathetic  pages  of  the  Arena  published  their  divers  radicalisms 
to  a  hostile  world.  He  was  ready  to  proclaim  new  social  and  literary 
creeds,  ready  to  go  forth  to  do  battle  for  democratic  justice  and  a 
democratic  art. 

The  gist  of  Garland’s  new  literary  creed  is  set  forth  in  Crumbling 
Idols ,  written  in  the  earliest  years  of  the  nineties,  when  Chicago 
was  preparing  the  setting  for  the  World  s  lair,  and  gathered  into 
book  form  in  1894.  It  is  realism  modified  by  the  local-color  school, 
by  French  impressionism,  and  by  Whitman— intensely  individual¬ 
istic,  ardently  social,  and  militantly  democratic.  It  would  sweep 
away  every  fetish  of  great  reputations  and  authoritative  schools, 
and  insist  that  the  artist  confront  the  life  that  he  knows  and  tell 
of  it  truthfully.  Following  the  French  example  he  calls  this  icon¬ 
oclastic  realism,  Veritism.  “The  theory  of  the  veritist,”  he  says,  is, 
after  all,  a  statement  of  his  passion  for  truth  and  for  individual 
expression,”  and  he  then  goes  on: 

Art,  I  must  insist,  is  an  individual  thing, — the  question  of  one  man  fac¬ 
ing  certain  facts  and  telling  his  individual  relations  to  them.  His  first 
care  must  be  to  present  his  own  concept.  1  his  is,  I  believe,  the  essence 


294 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


of  veritism.  “Write  of  those  things  of  which  you  know  most,  and  for  which 
you  care  most.  By  so  doing  you  will  be  true  to  yourself,  true  to  your 
locality,  and  true  to  your  time.”  2 

But  Veritism  in  the  hands  of  a  disciple  of  Taine,  Whitman, 
Henry  George,  and  Herbert  Spencer  must  take  on  ethical  values 
and  serve  the  common  well-being.  All  art,  he  insists,  is  “socio¬ 
logic,”  and  realism  is  harsh  because  it  is  hopeful. 

Because  the  fictionist  of  to-day  sees  a  more  beautiful  and  peaceful  future 
social  life,  and,  in  consequence,  a  more  beautiful  and  peaceful  literary  life, 
therefore  he  is  encouraged  to  deal  truthfully  and  at  close  grapple  with  the 
facts  of  his  immediate  present.  His  comment  virtually  amounts  to  satire 
or  prophesy,  or  both.  Because  he  is  sustained  by  love  and  faith  in  the  fu¬ 
ture,  he  can  be  mercilessly  true.  He  strikes  at  thistles,  because  he  knows 
Lhe  unrotted  seed  of  loveliness  and  peace  needs  but  sun  and  the  air  of 
freedom  to  rise  to  flower  and  fragrance. 

The  realist  or  veritist  is  really  an  optimist,  a  dreamer.  He  sees  life  in 
terms  of  what  it  might  be,  as  well  as  in  terms  of  what  it  is;  but  he  writes 
of  what  is,  and,  at  his  best,  suggests  what  is  to  be,  by  contrast.  .  .  .  He 
aims  to  hasten  the  age  of  beauty  and  peace  by  delineating  the  ugliness 
and  warfare  of  the  present;  but  ever  the  converse  of  his  picture  rises  in 
the  mind  of  the  reader.  He  sighs  for  a  lovelier  life.  He  is  tired  of  warfare 
and  diseased  sexualism,  and  Poverty  the  mother  of  Envy.  He  is  haggard 
with  sympathetic  hunger,  and  weary  with  the  struggle  to  maintain  his 
standing  place  on  this  planet,  which  he  conceives  was  given  to  all  as  the 
abode  of  peace.  With  his  hate  in  his  heart  and  this  ideal  in  his  brain  the 
modern  man  writes  his  stories  of  life.  They  are  not  always  pleasant,  but 
they  are  generally  true,  and  always  they  provoke  thought.3 

It  is  an  excellent  self-portrait  of  the  young  realist  of  that  early 
time  when  all  the  rebellions  of  his  blood  cried  out  for  expression — 
the  troubled  years  between  1887  and  1893  when  the  Border  was 
rising  and  the  son  of  the  Border  found  the  flames  of  his  discontent 
fanned  by  many  winds.  From  such  roots  came  the  most  acrid 
tales  that  had  as  yet  fruited  in  American  fiction.  Few  as  were  the 
stories  ot  M  ain-Travelled  Roads  and  Prairie  Folks ,  they  constitute  a 
landmark  in  our  literary  history,  for  they  were  the  first  authentic 
expression  and  protest  of  an  agrarian  America  then  being  sub¬ 
merged  by  the  industrial  revolution.  No  other  man  in  our  literature 
had  known  so  intimately  the  Middle  Border  as  Hamlin  Garland — 
its  restless  swarmings  from  the  old  hive,  never  pausing  long  enough 
to  gather  the  honey  of  the  new  fields,  its  heedless  venturings  for  the 
reputed  gold  that  lay  beyond  the  farthest  sunsets.  He  had  re- 
2  Chapter  III,  p.  35.  3  Chapter  IV,  pp.  5 1—53- 


LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER  295 

sponded  to  the  spell  that  kept  the  pioneer  moving  West;  the  allure¬ 
ment  of  the  untamed  prairie,  the  poetry  of  dawn  and  twilight.  But 
the  poignant  spell  had  been  broken  for  him  by  the  drab  realities 
that  lay  between  the  dawn  and  the  twilight — the  crushing  round 
of  toil  that  took  such  heavy  toll  of  men’s  development  and  wom¬ 
en’s  happiness.  He  was  familiar  with  the  blight  as  well  as  the 
bloom  of  the  frontier.  He  had  seen  his  uncle  David  McClintock 
broken  by  the  Border — the  great  wistful  man  with  the  soul  of  a 
musician;  he  had  seen  his  mother  fail  under  the  burden — the 
cheerful,  uncomplaining  wife,  joining  with  her  rich  voice  in  the 
pioneer’s  song  of  “O’er  the  hills  in  legions,  Boys!”  And  after  the 
disillusion  of  his  final  defeat  on  the  bleak  Dakota  plains — by  1883 
woodland  and  meadow  were  pretty  much  alienated  from  the  public 
domains  and  only  plains  and  deserts  and  mountain  valleys  and 
forests  remained — his  eyes  were  opened  at  last.  “I  clearly  per¬ 
ceived,”  he  said  afterwards,  “that  our  Song  of  Emigration  had 
been,  in  effect,  the  hymn  of  fugitives!”  So  he  turned  his  face  to  the 
East  to  seek  the  land  of  desire  in  Boston. 

That  chapter  of  his  life  was  ended.  He  had  learned  that  the  old 
romantic  tales  of  the  Border  were  lies  to  him,  whatever  they  may 
have  been  to  earlier  generations;  but  he  had  yet  to  naturalize  him¬ 
self  in  the  realm  of  ideas,  and  analyze  the  experiences  of  his  youth 
in  the  light  of  current  social  liberalisms.  He  had  begun  that  work  in 
1883  on  his  raw  Dakota  claim  where  his  leisure  hours  were  given  to 
Taine’s  theory  of  literary  determinism,  and  Henry  George’s  new 
gospel  of  single-tax;  and  he  carried  it  rapidly  forward  during  three 
years  of  eager  reading.  During  those  quiet  months  in  Boston  when 
he  was  making  himself  at  home  in  the  world  of  contemporary 
thought,  he  sketched  the  first  of  the  stories  of  western  life  which 
later  he  gathered  together  in  Main-Travelled  Roads  and  Prairie 
Folks.  “You’re  the  first  actual  farmer  in  American  fiction,”  said 
his  friend  Kirkland,  “now  tell  the  truth  about  it.”  This  handful  of 
short  stories,  fierce  in  the  repressed  passion  of  the  writer’s  heart,  was 
Garland’s  reply  to  the  old  romantic  myths  of  the  West.  In  these 
acrid  pages  life  is  not  bucolic,  it  does  not  chew  the  cud  of  con¬ 
tentment  “knee-deep  in  June,”  but  it  is  stained  with  dust  and 
sweat,  lacerated  by  raw  nerves,  depressed  by  a  sense  of  economic 
failure. 

Of  the  lives  of  these  labor-burdened  men  and  women  he  intended 
to  tell  the  whole  truth.  But,  as  he  confessed  later,  he  could  not. 


296 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

“Even  my  youthful  zeal  faltered  in  the  midst  of  a  revelation  of  the 
lives  led  by  the  women  on  the  farms  of  the  middle  border.  Before 
the  tragic  futility  of  their  suffering,  my  pen  refused  to  shed  its  ink. 
Over  the  hidden  chamber  of  their  maternal  agonies  I  drew  the  veil.” 
It  was  hard  for  him  to  view  it  all  with  the  calm  detachment  of  the 
objective  realist;  the  Border  life  was  too  deeply  and  intimately  per¬ 
sonal  to  him,  it  had  marked  him  too  harshly.  And  yet  in  the  sense 
of  conveying  the  spirit  of  reality  he  succeeded  greatly,  and  these 
earliest  tales  remain  notable  work  which  later  years  have  not  for¬ 
gotten.  The  subdued  words  of  the  Prologue  offer  the  fittest  of 
commentaries  on  the  spirit  in  which  they  were  done. 

The  Main-travelled  road  in  the  West  (as  everywhere)  is  hot  and  dusty 
in  summer,  and  desolate  and  drear  with  mud  in  fall  and  spring,  and  in 
winter  the  winds  sweep  across  it;  but  it  does  sometimes  cross  a  rich  meadow 
where  the  songs  of  the  larks  and  bobolinks  and  blackbirds  are  tangled. 
Follow  it  far  enough,  it  may  lead  past  a  bend  in  the  river  where  the  water 
laughs  eternally  over  its  shallows.  Mainly  it  is  long  and  weariful,  and  has 
a  dull  little  town  at  one  end  and  a  home  of  toil  at  the  other.  Like  the  main- 
travelled  road  of  life  it  is  traversed  by  many  classes  of  people,  but  the 
poor  and  the  weary  predominate. 

Main-Travelled  Roads,  in  its  harsh  objectivity,  belonged  to  the 
earlier  eighties,  to  the  time  when  the  spirit  of  unrest  was  still  ob¬ 
scurely  fermenting  in  the  western  mind,  before  it  had  clarified  in 
definite  agrarian  movements  and  measures.  It  is  clouded  by  doubt 
and  harassed  by  uncertainty.  No  hope  offers  a  way  out  of  the 
weary  tangle.  Its  psychology  is  that  of  the  first  mood  of  dejection 
that  came  with  the  failure  of  western  agriculture  with  its  virgin 
fields,  its  new  machinery,  and  its  specialized  crops,  to  adjust  itself 
to  the  new  capitalistic  order.  The  simple  agrarian  mind  had  not 
learned  to  play  the  new  game.  The  sons  of  the  Middle  Border  were 
children  of  the  Gilded  Age  as  truly  as  Colonel  Sellers  or  Commodore 
Vanderbilt;  they  were  plungers  and  speculators  in  land  and  crops; 
but  they  were  no  match  for  the  Main  Street  plungers  and  specula¬ 
tors;  and  when  bankruptcy  instead  of  riches  rewarded  their  hard¬ 
ships,  they  were  embittered.  Out  of  that  very  natural  bitterness 
sprang  the  movement  of  Populism  that  proposed  to  take  govern¬ 
ment  out  of  the  hands  of  Main  Street  and  make  it  serve  agriculture. 
It  was  the  understanding  of  this  fact  that  made  Howells  so  sym¬ 
pathetic  a  critic  of  Garland.  But  he  would  encourage  the  artist 
rather  than  the  reformer.  ■» 


LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 


297 


.  .  .  these  stories  are  full  of  the  bitter  and  burning  dust,  the  foul  and 
trampled  slush,  of  the  common  avenues  of  life,  the  life  of  the  men  who  hope¬ 
lessly  and  cheerlessly  make  the  wealth  that  enriches  the  alien  and  the 
idler,  and  impoverishes  the  producer. 

If  any  one  is  still  at  a  loss  to  account  for  that  uprising  of  the  farmers 
of  the  West  which  is  the  translation  of  the  Peasants’  War  into  modern 
and  republican  terms,  let  him  read  Alain-Travelled  Roads,  and  he  will  begin 
to  understand.  .  .  .  The  stories  are  full  of  those  gaunt,  grim,  sordid, 
pathetic,  ferocious  figures,  whom  our  satirists  find  so  easy  to  caricature 
as  Hayseeds,  and  whose  blind  groping  for  fairer  conditions  is  so  grotesque 
to  the  newspapers  and  so  menacing  to  the  politicians.  They  feel  that  some¬ 
thing  is  wrong,  and  they  know  that  the  wrong  is  not  theirs.  The  type 
caught  in  Mr.  Garland’s  book  is  not  pretty;  it  is  ugly  and  often  ridiculous; 
but  it  is  heart-breaking  in  its  rude  despair.4 

Too  soon,  however,  the  wull  to  remain  objective  weakened  and 
his  wTork  took  on  a  different  note.  “Obscurely  forming  in  my 
mind,”  he  says  of  the  year  1889,  “wTere  two  great  literary  concepts 
— that  truth  was  a  higher  quality  than  beauty,  and  that  to  spread 
the  reign  of  justice  should  everywhere  be  the  design  and  intent  of 
the  artist.  The  merely  beautiful  in  art  seemed  petty,  and  success 
at  the  cost  of  the  happiness  of  others  a  monstrous  egotism.”  5  With 
this  ethical  conception  of  art  he  returned  in  1889  to  the  old  home, 
after  a  six  years’  absence,  to  experience  a  poignant  reaction  to  the 
change  that  had  come  over  the  Border.  “Another  dry  year  was 
upon  the  land  and  the  settlers  were  deeply  disheartened,”  he  wrote 
later.  “The  holiday  spirit  of  eight  years  before  had  entirely  van¬ 
ished.  In  its  place  was  a  sullen  rebellion  against  government  and 
against  God.”  6 

Every  house  I  visited  had  its  individual  message  of  sordid  struggle  and 
half-hidden  despair.  ...  All  the  gilding  of  farm  life  melted  away.  The 
hard  and  bitter  realities  came  back  upon  me  in  a  flood.  Nature  was  as 
beautiful  as  ever.  The  soaring  sky  was  filled  with  shining  clouds,  the 
tinkle  of  the  bobolink’s  fairy  bells  rose  from  the  meadow,  a  mystical  sheen 
was  on  the  odorous  grass  and  waving  grain,  but  no  splendor  of  cloud,  no 
grace  of  sunset,  could  conceal  the  poverty  of  these  people,  on  the  contrary, 
they  brought  out,  with  a  more  intolerable  poignancy,  the  gracelessness  of 
these  homes,  and  the  sordid  quality  of  the  mechanical  routine  of  these 
lives.  I  perceived  beautiful  youth  becoming  bowed  and  bent.  I  saw  lovely 
girlhood  wasting  away  into  thin  and  hopeless  age.  Some  of  the  women  I 
had  known  had  withered  into  querulous  and  complaining  spinsterhood, 

4  Introduction  to  M ain-Tr avelled  Roads. 

6  A  Son  of  the  Middle  Border,  Chapter  XXVIII,  p.  374. 

6  Ibid.,  Chapter  XXIX. 


298  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

and  I  heard  ambitious  youth  cursing  the  bondage  of  the  farm.  “Of  such 
pain  and  futility  are  the  lives  of  the  average  man  and  woman  of  both  city 
and  country  composed,”  I  acknowledged  to  myself  with  candor,  Why 
lie  about  it?”  7 

In  such  a  mood  the  call  of  social  justice  was  too  insistent  to  be 
denied.  “With  William  Morris  and  Henry  George  I  exclaimed, 
‘Nature  is  not  to  blame.  Man’s  laws  are  to  blame’!”  And  so  the 
young  man  of  twenty-nine  threw  himself  into  the  agrarian  cause. 
He  took  the  platform  with  Mary  Ellen  Lease  and  was  glad  of  the 
farmets’  approval  of  the  new  doctrine  of  less  corn  and  more  hell. 
Under  the  urging  of  his  friend  Flower  he  planned  to  put  the  Popu¬ 
list  movement  into  fiction  and  wrote  A  Spoil  of  Office.  The  familiar 
Iowa  backgrounds  are  in  the  story — the  harsh  lives  and  bent  weary 
figures  of  men  and  women — but  there  is  also  an  idealized  heroine 
who  suggests  what  life  may  become  when  injustice  is  done  away 
with  and  the  blighting  toil  is  lessened — a  figure  who,  as  Grange 
lecturer  and  Farmers’  Alliance  speaker,  may  have  been  suggested 
by  Mary  Ellen  Lease.  Much  inferior  as  it  is  to  Main-Travelled. 
Roads — a  social  tract  rather  than  a  work  of  art — we  cannot  well 
spare  it  from  our  Middle  Border  literature,  for  it  has  captured  and 
preserves  for  later  times  the  spirit  of  the  passionate  uprising  of  the 
farmers,  and  it  recalls  the  vast  hopes  that  fermented  in  that  revolt 
— not  well  grounded,  perhaps,  but  warm  and  human.  “The  heart 
and  center  of  this  movement,”  says  Ida  Wilbur,  “is  a  demand  for 
justice,  not  for  ourselves  alone,  but  for  the  toiling  poor  wherever 
found.  .  .  .  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  legislating  for  the  farmer; 
it  is  a  question  of  the  abolition  of  industrial  slavery.”  8  There  are 
echoes  of  an  older  and  simpler  America  in  these  pages,  of  discon¬ 
tents  that  were  put  down  but  not  removed — Jacksonianisms, 
Greenbackisms,  anti-monopolistic  crusades.  Yet  they  look  forward 
to  a  time  when  beauty  and  well-being  shall  be  the  common  portion 
of  those  who  do  the  work  of  the  world.  The  way,  alas,  is  “long  and 
weary,  and  thousands  and  millions  of  us  must  die  on  the  road,  I  am 
afraid,”  says  the  heroine;  but  go  forward  they  must,  along  other 
paths  than  the  path  of  capitalism. 

Less  significant  is  Jason  Edwards:  An  Average  Man  (1891),  that 
is  an  elaboration  of  the  note,  “The  air  is  full  of  revolt  against  things 
as  they  are.”  It  is  a  single-tax  reply  to  the  question  of  a  young  girl, 
“Are  there  any  happy  people  in  the  world — any  working  people,  I 
7  Ibid.,  Chapter  XXVIII,  pp.  364-365.  8  Ibid.,  p.  245.  •» 


LITERATURE  AND  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 


299 


mean?  Are  they  all  cross  and  tired  and  worried  and  full  of  care,  as 
we  are  here?”  The  story  is  two  chapters  in  the  life  of  a  working¬ 
man — his  struggle  in  Boston  as  a  mechanic,  and  his  struggle  in 
Minnesota,  whither  he  flees  for  a  refuge  on  a  homestead.  Defeat 
awaits  him  in  the  end,  and  the  conclusion  is  an  illustration  of  Henry 
George’s  thesis  that  poverty  is  the  entail  of  land  rent.  In  this  and 
in  other  studies  done  under  the  influence  of  B.  O.  Flower,  whose  ap¬ 
petite  for  reform  literature  was  insatiable,  Hamlin  Garland  had 
ceased  to  be  an  objective  realist  and  turned  propagandist,  bringing 
down  on  his  head  the  criticisms  of  conservative  readers.  One  of  his 
friends  went  so  far  as  to  expostulate  over  the  folly  of  his  course. 
“It  is  a  mistake  for  you  to  be  associated  with  cranks  like  Henry 
George  and  writers  like  Whitman,”  he  said.  “It  is  a  mistake  to  be 
published  in  the  Arena.  Your  book  should  have  been  brought  out  by 
one  of  the  old  established  firms.  If  you  will  fling  away  your  radical 
notions  and  consent  to  amuse  the  governing  classes,  you  will  suc¬ 
ceed.”  9 

It  is  the  agrarian  background  of  Garland’s  mind  that  makes  him 
seem  old-fashioned  to  a  generation  that  has  forgotten  the  agrarian 
roots  of  our  past  growth.  He  was  so  deeply  colored  by  this  earlier 
native  America  that  he  never  outgrew  it;  and  when  the  Populistic 
revolt  had  died  down,  when  this  last  organized  agrarian  rebellion 
against  the  exploiting  middle  class  had  become  only  an  episode  in 
our  history,  he  had  outlived  his  day.  He  was  too  deeply  stirred  by 
Whitman’s  romantic  faith  in  democracy,  too  narrowly  a  disciple 
of  Henry  George’s  Jeffersonian  economics,  to  fit  into  an  industrial¬ 
izing  America.  Despite  his  discipleship  to  European  realism  he 
refused  to  go  with  the  group  of  young  left-wing  naturalists  who 
were  boldly  venturing  on  new  ways  of  fiction.  He  would  not  follow 
the  path  of  naturalism.  Of  Norris’s  McTeague  he  said,  “What  avail 
is  this  study  of  sad  lives?  for  it  does  not  even  lead  to  a  notion  of 
social  betterment.”10  He  could  not  bring  himself  to  accept  the 
major  criteria  of  naturalism  as  they  were  exemplified  in  the  work  of 
Zola  and  Strindberg  and  Hauptmann.  A  native  Jeffersonian, 
inspired  by  Whitman  and  instructed  by  Henry  George  and  Herbert 
Spencer,  would  reject  the  somber,  mechanistic  background  of 
naturalist  thought.  He  had  learned  his  science  of  the  Victorian 
evolutionists,  with  their  grandiose  conception  of  a  far-flung  benefi- 

9  A  Son  of  the  Middle  Border ,  Chapter  XXXI,  p.  4U7- 

10  Critic,  Vol.  42,  pp.  216-218. 


300 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

cent  progress  from  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous,  and  the 
backgrounds  of  his  mind  were  radiant  with  promise.  Neither  a 
mechanistic  science  nor  a  regimented  industrialism  had  risen  in  his 
outlook  to  bank  the  fires  of  his  hope.  No  impersonal  determinism 
had  chilled  his  belief  in  man  as  a  free-will  agent  in  a  moral  universe. 
The  vast  bleak  chemical  cosmos  that  bewildered  Theodore  Dreiser 
did  not  rise  before  him  to  dwarf  the  individual  nor  overwhelm  his 
aspirations.  Like  a  French  romantic  of  a  hundred  years  before,  he 
remained  a  confirmed  optimist  who  believed  that  the  future  will 
correct  the  mistakes  of  the  past,  and  the  peace  and  beauty  for 
which  the  human  race  longs  lie  immediately  ahead.  The  art  of  the 
young  man  was  becoming  old-fashioned  in  the  world  of  Stephen 
Crane;  his  ideals  were  Victorian  in  the  days  of  Mark  Hanna.  And 
so  after  the  agrarian  revolt  had  failed  and  America  lay  fat  and 
contented  in  the  lap  of  McKinley  prosperity,  he  found  himself  a 
man  without  a  country,  an  alien  in  an  industrializing  order,  and  he 
turned  away  to  the  newer  West  and  the  romance  he  had  always 
sought.  While  America  was  driving  towards  regimentation  he 
traveled  backward  in  time  to  recover  a  vanishing  world  of  individ¬ 
ualism,  and  the  distance  rapidly  widened  between  them. 

In  those  romantic  wanderings  through  Colorado  and  California 
and  into  the  far  Northwest  he  found  a  new  interest  in  the  frontiers¬ 
man’s  exploitation  of  the  Indian,  and  in  The  Captain  of  the  Gray- 
Horse  Troop  and  The  Eagle  Heart  he  has  wedded  his  social  ethics  to 
French  romanticism,  and  endowed  man  in  a  state  of  nature  with 
exalted  social  responsibilities.  The  old  theme  is  dressed  in  new 
clothes  and  Captain  Curtis  of  the  Gray-Horse  Troop  becomes  an 
Indian  agent  fighting  the  lawless  and  cruel  encroachment  of  the 
frontiersmen  upon  the  Indian  rights;  but  the  theme  remains. 
Garland  hated  the  frontier  as  fiercely  as  Cooper  hated  it,  and  like 
him  he  loved  the  clean  free  spaces;  but  when  after  his  long  and 
somewhat  futile  rambles  he  returned  to  the  Middle  Border,  he 
found  there  a  new  light  upon  the  familiar  fields  and  in  that  light  he 
wrote  his  saga  of  the  Garlands  and  the  McClintocks.  This  was  to 
be  his  great  bequest  to  American  letters.  To  have  sought  the  spirit 
of  the  Middle  Border  in  its  hopes  and  its  defeat,  to  have  written 
the  history  of  the  generation  that  swept  across  the  western  prairies, 
is  to  compress  within  covers  a  great  movement  and  a  great  ex¬ 
perience — one  of  the  significant  chapters  in  our  total  American 
history.  „ 


PART  TWO:  PROLETARIAN  HOPES* 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

From  the  welter  of  unrest  of  the  later  years  of  the  century,  with  its 
labor  struggles,  its  agrarian  bitterness,  its  concern  over  the  exhaus¬ 
tion  of  the  public  lands  and  a  pinching  monetary  system,  its  acute 
distrust  of  monopolies  and  corporate  power,  sprang  a  very  natural 
eagerness  to  forecast  the  future  and  blaze  new  roads  that  might 
lead  to  the  democratic  Canaan.  Whither  the  main-traveled  road 
would  lead,  discerning  idealists  knew  only  too  well.  To  bog  down 
in  a  mire  of  plutocracy  wTould  be  a  sorry  ending  to  the  great  ex¬ 
periment;  yet  the  mud  was  deepening  with  every  mile  of  advance 
and  unless  another  highway  appeared  the  situation  was  unpromis¬ 
ing.  The  crux  of  the  problem  seemed  to  reside  in  an  extension  of  the 
powers  of  the  political  state,  converting  to  social  ends  powers  that 
hitherto  had  been  serving  private  gain.  The  plutocracy  was  point¬ 
ing  the  way.  If  the  political  state  were  fairly  dedicated  to  demo¬ 
cratic  ends,  why  should  not  society  go  forward  toward  a  true  com¬ 
monwealth,  founded  on  a  social  economy  and  dedicated  to  common 
justice  and  the  common  well-being?  There  was  need  only  to 
subordinate  private  interests  to  collective  interests,  and  sub¬ 
stitute  cooperation  for  the  present  mad  scramble  of  selfish  in¬ 
dividualism. 

In  elaboration  of  this  pregnant  thought  a  surprising  number  of 
social  romances  appeared  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  century, 
that  were  native  counterparts  of  the  greater  studies  in  collectivism 
by  European  thinkers.  A  recent  study  lists  forty-eight  titles  of 
Utopian  romances  written  between  1884  and  1900.1  Of  these  several 
are  communistic,  and  the  rest  are  socialistic;  yet  in  keeping  with 
the  American  temper  none  openly  makes  use  of  the  terms,  and  few 
apply  the  Marxian  doctrine  of  the  class  war.  Their  appeal  was 
directed  primarily  to  the  middle  class  of  small  business  and  profes- 

*  The  first  chapter  of  this  section  was  to  have  been  “  Plutocracy  and  the  Working¬ 
man,”  the  second  “The  Rise  of  the  Left.”  For  the  contents  see  p.  xxxv. — Publisher . 

1  Allyn  B.  Forbes,  The  Literary  Quest  for  Utopia,  1880-1900.  “Social  Forces,’' 
Vol.  VI,  No.  2,  December,  1927. 


301 


302 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 

sianal  men,  and  they  were  content  to  rely  on  political  means  to 
achieve  economic  ends.  Troubled  as  was  the  American  mind  by  the 
rise  of  a  cutthroat  exploitation,  it  was  not  yet  ready  to  entertain 
ideas  of  direct  action  or  trust  the  proletariat  to  enforce  its  will  by 
mass  strength.  In  one  story,  to  be  sure — Ignatius  Donnelly’s 
Ccesars  Column  (1890) — there  is  a  gloomy  picture  of  the  downfall 
of  civilization  caused  by  the  class  struggles;  but  the  temper  of 
Donnelly  had  lost  its  genial  optimism  through  his  long  immersion  in 
under-dog  contests  and  had  grown  mordant  and  gloomy. 

1 

EDWARD  BELLAMY  AND  “  LOOKING  BACKWARD” 

When  in  1888  Edward  Bellamy  published  Looking  Backward,  he 
gave  a  huge  impetus  to  the  Utopian  romance.  Third  in  the  list  of 
titles  collected  by  Mr.  Forbes,  it  was  to  have  a  wide  influence  on  the 
thought  of  the  times.  It  made  instant  appeal  and  successive  edi¬ 
tions  were  issued  to  meet  the  popular  demand.  Not  since  Uncle 
Tom’s  Cabin  had  an  American  novel  reached  so  many  readers,  and 
Bellamy  became  at  once  a  national  figure,  the  prophet  of  a  new 
industrial  order.  There  is  abundant  evidence  to  the  effect  produced 
upon  thoughtful  readers.  E.  C.  Stedman,  the  first  critic  of  the 
times,  spoke  of  it  as  a  “remarkable  and  fascinating  novel”; 
Frances  E.  Willard  called  it  “a  revelation  and  an  evangel”;  and 
Howells  remarked  on  “the  extraordinary  effect  which  Mr.  Bel¬ 
lamy’s  romance  has  had  with  the  public.”  More  significant  still. 
Looking  Backward  speedily  became  the  source  and  inspiration  for 
a  series  of  social  organizations  that  beginning  at  Boston  soon  spread 
over  the  country.  The  N ationalist  was  established  as  the  organ  of 
the  movement  and  thousands  of  eager  men  and  women  threw  them¬ 
selves  into  the  work  of  reshaping  American  society  to  conform  to 
the  new  social  ideal.  No  doubt  the  enthusiasm  was  naive,  no  doubt 
it  sprang  from  a  social  inexperience  that  underestimated  the  com¬ 
plexity  of  the  problem,  yet  the  sources,  clearly,  were  a  sharp  dis¬ 
trust  of  private  capitalism  and  an  idealistic  faith  in  cooperation. 
In  a  pronouncement  of  the  Boston  “Nationalist  Club,”  January  9, 
1889,  the  cause  was  rested  on  two  fundamental  truths— “The  prin¬ 
ciple  of  competition  is  .  .  .  the  application  of  the  brutal  law  of 
the  survival  of  the  strongest  and  most  cunning”;  and,  “The  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Humanity  is  one  of  the  eternal  truths 


303 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

that  govern  the  world’s  progress  on  lines  which  distinguish  human 
nature  from  brute  nature.”  2 

It  is  not  easy  to  trace  the  origins  of  Bellamy’s  interest  in  collec¬ 
tivism  or  the  sources  of  his  thought.  A  journalist  and  lawyer,  he 
had  studied  in  Germany,  where  presumably  he  had  come  in  contact 
with  Marxian  socialism.  Writing  in  the  Nationalist  for  May,  1889, 
he  commented  thus  on  the  origins  of  Looking  Backward: 

I  never  had,  previous  to  the  publication  of  the  work,  any  affiliations 
with  any  class  or  sect  of  industrial  or  social  reformers  nor,  to  make  my 
confession  complete,  any  particular  sympathy  with  undertakings  of  the 
sort.  It  is  only  just  to  myself  to  say,  however,  that  this  should  not  be 
taken  to  indicate  any  indifference  to  the  miserable  condition  of  the  mass 
of  humanity,  seeing  that  it  resulted  rather  from  a  perception  all  too  clear 
of  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  social  problem  and  a  consequent  skepticism 
as  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  proposed  solutions  which  had  come  to  my 
notice. 

In  undertaking  to  write  Looking  Backward  I  had,  at  the  outset,  no  idea 
of  attempting  a  serious  contribution  to  the  movement  of  social  reform. 
The  idea  was  of  a  mere  literary  fantasy,  a  fairy  tale  of  social  felicity.  There 
was  no  thought  of  contriving  a  house  which  practical  men  might  live  in, 
but  merely  of  hanging  in  mid-air,  far  out  of  the  reach  of  the  sordid  and 
material  world  of  the  present,  a  cloud-palace  for  an  ideal  humanity.3 

That  the  impulse  did  not  come  from  the  Marxians  is  sufficiently 
clear  from  his  explanation  of  the  idea  of  an  industrial  army.  “The 
idea  of  committing  the  duty  of  maintaining  the  community  to  an 
industrial  army,  precisely  as  the  duty  of  protecting  it  is  entrusted  to 
a  military  army,”  came  to  him,  he  said,  from  the  object-lesson  of 
European  militarism.  But  however  little  he  owed  to  the  Marxians 
it  is  clear  that  Bellamy — the  literary  amateur  who  had  dabbled  in 
Hawthornesque  fantasies — possessed  a  warm  social  conscience  and 
a  vigorous  inquiring  mind;  and  once  his  attention  had  been  drawn 
to  the  evils  of  industrialism  he  would  respond  with  the  same  direct 
competence  that  marked  the  thinking  of  Henry  George.  Nine  years 
before  Looking  Backward  he  had  dealt  with  a  sociological  theme. 
In  1879  he  wrote  The  Duke  of  Stockbridge,  A  Romance  of  Shay’s  Re¬ 
bellion,  for  the  Berkshire  Courier,  which  was  reissued  in  book  form 
in  1900.  It  was  a  hasty  piece  of  work  that  falls  off  greatly  in  the 
latter  part;  yet  in  its  sympathy  for  the  agrarian  rebels  and  its 
probing  of  the  economic  sources  of  the  post-Revolutionary  unrest, 
it  was  far  removed  from  the  temper  of  Federalist  historians.  It  is 
an  account  of  the  tyranny  of  property  rule — of  the  exploitation 
2  Nationalist,  Vol.  I,  p.  18.  3  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  I. 


304 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


of  the  debtor  farmer  by  the  creditor  gentleman  made  possible  by 
the  economic  maladjustments  resulting  from  the  war.  A  bitter 
discontent  is  in  the  hearts  of  the  common  people.  Hatred  of  lawyers 
and  courts  and  process-servers,  has  taken  the  place  of  hatred  of 
Tories.  Soldiers  who  had  conquered  Cornwallis  were  returning 
home  only  to  be  conquered  by  writs  and  imprisoned  by  sheriffs.  The 
exactions  of  a  brutal  law  fell  upon  helpless  victims;  taxes  outran 
incomes  and  there  was  no  money  to  pay.  Economic  injustice  was 
daily  whetting  the  edge  of  class  bitterness.  The  animus  of  Shays ’s 
Rebellion  is  compressed  into  a  few  paragraphs  that  suggest  how 
clearly  Bellamy  had  analyzed  the  social  struggle. 

“I  use  ter  think  ez  there  wuzn’t  no  sech  varmint  ez  a  tory;  but  I  didn’t 
know  nothin’  ’bout  lawyers  and  sheriffs  them  times.  I  calc’late  ye  could 
cut  five  tories  aout  o’  one  lawyer  an’  make  a  dozen  skunks  aout  o’  what 
wuz  left  over.” 

“I  hearn  as  haow  Squire  Woodbridge  says  taxes  is  ten  times  what  they 
wuz  afore  the  war,  an’  its  sartin  that  there  ain’t  one  shillin’  inter  folks’ 
pockets  ter  pay  ’em  with  where  there  wuz  ten  on  ’em  in  them  days.  .  .  . 
It  seems  darn  curis,  bein’  as  we  fit  ag’in  the  red  coats  jest  ter  git  rid  o’ 
taxes.”  4 

So  felt  the  agrarian.  Now  for  the  gentleman: 

“That  is  the  trouble  nowadays,  .  .  .  these  numskulls  must  needs  have 
matters  of  government  explained  to  them,  and  pass  their  own  judgment 
on  public  affairs.  And  when  they  cannot  understand  them,  then,  forsooth, 
comes  a  rebellion.  I  think  none  can  deny  seeing  in  these  late  troubles  the 
first  fruits  of  those  pestilent  notions  of  equality,  whereof  we  heard  so  much 
from  certain  quarters,  during  the  late  war  of  independence.  I  would  that 
Mr.  Jefferson  and  some  of  the  other  writers  of  disturbing  democratic 
rhetoric  might  have  been  here  in  the  State  the  past  winter,  to  see  the  out¬ 
come  of  their  preaching.”  6 

Nine  years  after  Looking  Backward  Bellamy  published  Equality, 
a  critical  examination  of  economic  history  with  a  view  to  creating 
an  adequate  social  economics.  The  earlier  work  had  drawn  the 
outlines  of  the  democratic  society  of  the  future,  the  later  supplied  a 
justification  and  a  commentary.  The  great  theme  involved  a  two¬ 
fold  problem:  an  analysis  of  the  failure  of  social  justice  under 
private  capitalism,  and  a  defense  of  the  working  of  social  capital¬ 
ism.  I  he  two  threads  are  closely  interwoven,  and  the  effect  is 
heightened  by  the  contrasts  resulting  from  setting  the  two  social 

4  The  Duke  of  Stockbridge,  Chapter  II,  pp.  22,  28. 

6  Ibid.,  Chapter  XXVI,  p.  349.  ■» 


305 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

orders  over  against  each  other.  Innumerable  questions,  touching 
diverse  phases,  are  propounded  and  answered.  The  apologist  of 
private  capitalism  is  pursued  into  every  stronghold  of  his  logic; 
he  is  assailed  by  a  hundred  vivid  analogies  which  seek  to  lay  bare 
the  folly  of  a  social  system  that  breeds  waste  only  to  breed  poverty, 
that  puts  a  premium  upon  greed  and  yet  takes  away  the  security 
of  possession,  that  bids  the  workers  fight  each  other  instead  of 
uniting  for  the  common  welfare.  But  men  must  see  a  better  before 
they  will  leave  a  worse,  and  so  there  is  drawn  the  picture  of  another 
commonwealth  that  must  arise  when  men  shall  put  off  the  ass’s 
head  from  their  shoulders,  and  set  intelligently  to  work.  America 
is  moving  towards  such  a  commonwealth,  Bellamy  is  persuaded, 
and  yet  how  slow  it  is  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  democracy!  It  holds 
back  from  its  own  good,  loath  to  probe  the  depths  of  the  revolution¬ 
ary  philosophy  of  liberty,  equality,  fraternity.  Julian  West  awakes 
in  this  new  world;  his  eyes  are  opened;  the  ass’s  head  is  gone;  he 
knows  for  the  first  time  the  goodness  of  life  in  a  rational  society. 
And  when  in  a  hideous  nightmare  he  returned  to  the  old  Boston  he 
had  lived  in  before  he  fell  asleep,  he  tasted  for  the  first  time  the  full 
iniquity  of  the  old  pigsty  arrangement.  “I  have  been  in  Golgotha,” 
he  cried,  “I  have  seen  Humanity  hanging  on  a  cross!”  It  is  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  good  that  must  destroy  the  evil. 

It  was  as  a  political  economist  that  Bellamy  attacked  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  a  democratic  society,  and  his  radicalism  begins  and  ends 
with  the  interpretation  he  puts  on  the  phrase.  He  was  far  from 
being  a  political  economist  of  the  schools.  His  contempt  for  the 
older  classical  dogmas  was  measureless.  Manchesterism  with  its 
fetish  of  laissez  faire  he  reckoned  no  better  than  a  pseudo-science. 
“  ‘There  were  no  political  economists  before  the  Revolution,’  ” 
remarks  one  of  the  scholars  of  the  later  age.6  Such  books  as  the 
Wealth  of  Nations,  properly  speaking,  should  be  called  “Examina¬ 
tions  into  the  Economic  and  Social  Consequences  of  trying  to  get 
along  without  any  Political  Economy.”  Before  we  shall  get  for¬ 
ward  we  must  examine  our  terms. 

Economy  .  .  .  means  the  wise  husbanding  of  wealth  in  production  and 
distribution.  Individual  economy  is  the  science  of  this  husbandry  when 
conducted  in  the  interest  of  the  individual  without  regard  to  any  others. 
Family  economy  is  this  husbandry  carried  on  for  the  advantage  of  a  family 
group  without  regard  to  other  groups.  Political  economy,  however,  can 

6  Equality,  Chapter  XXII,  p.  189. 


306 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


only  mean  the  husbandry  of  wealth  for  the  greatest  advantage  of  the  po¬ 
litical  or  social  body,  the  whole  number  of  the  citizens  constituting  the 
political  organization.  This  sort  of  husbandry  necessarily  implies  a  public 
or  political  regulation  of  economic  affairs  for  the  general  interest.  But 
before  the  Revolution  there  was  no  conception  of  such  an  economy,  nor 
any  organization  to  carry  it  out.  All  systems  and  doctrines  of  economy 
previous  to  that  time  were  distinctly  and  exclusively  private  and  individual 
in  their  whole  theory  and  practice.  While  in  other  respects  our  forefathers 
did  in  various  ways  and  degrees  recognize  a  social  solidarity  and  a  political 
unity  with  proportionate  rights  and  duties,  their  theory  and  practice  as 
to  all  matters  touching  the  getting  and  sharing  of  wealth  were  aggressively 
and  brutally  individualistic,  antisocial,  and  unpolitical.7 

A  social  arrangement  based  on  an  individual  economy  must 
necessarily  result  in  such  monstrosities  as  the  system  of  private 
capitalism  with  its  cash  nexus.  It  is  no  other  than  an  organized 
system  of  social  warfare,  with  all  the  appalling  waste  of  war. 
Habit  has  blinded  our  eyes  or  we  should  see  the  utter  bankruptcy 
of  individual  competition,  that  prides  itself  on  its  “famous  process 
for  beggaring  a  nation.”  “Were  these  serious  men  I  saw  about  me,” 
cried  Julian  West  as  he  watched  the  folly  of  Washington  Street, 
with  its  thousand  shops  madly  bidding  against  each  other,  its  vul¬ 
gar  advertising  and  cheating  and  swindling,  “or  children,  who  did 
their  business  on  such  a  plan?  Could  they  be  reasoning  beings,  who 
did  not  see  the  folly  which,  when  the  product  is  made  and  ready  for 
use,  wastes  so  much  of  it  in  getting  it  to  the  user?  If  people  eat 
with  a  spoon  that  leaks  half  its  contents  between  bowl  and  lip,  are 
they  not  likely  to  go  hungry?  ”  8  What  is  it  but  such  folly  which 
prevents  society  from  doing  the  thousand  things  which  cry  aloud 
to  be  done?  So  long  as  men  must  fight  each  other  for  individual 
subsistence  how  shall  they  be  able  to  join  forces  to  fight  the  com¬ 
mon  enemies,  cold,  hunger,  disease?  Our  individualism  keeps  us 
poverty-stricken;  we  are  too  poor  to  destroy  the  social  squalor,  too 
poor  to  save  our  own  lives. 

If  competition  entails  irretrievable  waste,  he  points  out,  the 
system  of  competitive  profit  involves  economic  suicide.  It  is  a 
pistol  which  private  industrialism  points  at  its  own  head.  The 
struggle  for  profit  is  the  hidden  cancer  that  is  eating  out  the  heart 
of  modern  society,  and  Bellamy  examines  it  searchingly  in  the 
chapter,  “Economic  Suicide  of  the  Profit  System.”  9  Under  private 

7  Ibid,  p.  189. 

8  Looking  Backward,  Chapter  XXVIII,  p.  314. 

9  Equality,  Chapter  XXII.  * 


307 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

industrialism  profits  are  the  oil  to  the  wheels  of  industry,  which 
turn  in  response  to  the  market.  By  the  market  is  meant  those  who 
have  money  to  buy  with;  and  demand  is  brisk  or  slack  according  to 
the  diffusion  of  economic  means.  When  the  buyers  are  satisfied  and 
abstain  from  further  purchases,  the  market  becomes  glutted  and 
the  wheels  of  production  cease  to  turn  “though  starving  and 
naked  mobs  might  riot  in  the  streets.”  Profits,  however,  must 
come  out  of  somebody’s  pocket;  and  the  greater  they  are  the  more 
the  pocket  that  pays  is  emptied;  unless  replenished  by  other  profits, 
taken  from  still  other  pockets,  it  ceases  to  be  able  to  buy  in  like 
proportion.  In  consequence  the  market  slacks  off  and  the  wheels  of 
industry  run  slower.  The  manufacturer  takes  his  profits  out  of  his 
workmen,  the  merchant  takes  his  out  of  the  public — which  is  an¬ 
other  term  for  the  workman;  he  who  takes  most  grows  rich  fastest 
and  is  most  successful.  Obviously,  however,  such  riches  are  acquired 
at  the  expense  of  the  public  capacity  to  buy;  and  such  lessening 
capacity  is  ominous  of  gluts  and  crises  to  ensue,  with  losses  which 
must  be  made  good  by  greater  profits  when  the  wheels  turn  again. 
It  is  only  too  clear  that  society  is  suffering  from  a  chronic  dyspepsia 
of  its  industrial  system;  it  cannot  digest  its  food.  The  current 
maxim  that  a  fair  exchange  is  no  robbery — so  confidently  urged — 
cannot  apply  to  the  profit  system,  for  if  the  exchange  is  fair  there  is 
no  profit,  and  if  there  is  no  profit  there  will  be  no  exchange.  The 
further  maxim  that  demand  governs  supply  and  supply  keeps  pace 
with  demand,  refers  only  to  the  profit-market,  and  quite  overlooks 
the  important  detail  of  social  need. 

The  stupidity  of  such  a  system  Bellamy  never  tires  of  pointing 
out.  His  striking  analogy  of  the  stage-coach  has  become  a  classic; 
the  less  known  parable  of  the  water-tank  10  is  equally  vivid;  a 
hundred  other  shafts  are  directed  at  the  profit-theory  which  under¬ 
lies  our  individual  economy.  Until  the  sway  of  such  anarchy  is 
broken,  until  society  learns  to  regulate  its  industrialism  on  the 
principles  of  a  wise  political  economy,  there  can  be  no  hope  of 
betterment.  To  create  and  apply  this  wise  political  economy  is  the 
urgent  business  of  democracy  if  it  is  not  to  perish.  It  must  be  such 
an  economy  as  shall  satisfy  both  our  ethical  ideals  and  our  material 
needs.  It  must  embody  the  spirit  of  democratic  solidarity  and  it 
must  look  beyond  the  demands  of  the  profit-market  to  the  well¬ 
being  of  all.  It  must  substitute  cooperation  for  competitive  war- 
10  Equality,  Chapter  XXIII,  p.  195. 


308 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


fare.  The  criminal  waste  which  keeps  the  gray  wolves  forever  snarl¬ 
ing  at  the  threshold  of  society,  must  cease;  the  specter  of  poverty 
which  disorders  the  lives  of  men  and  distempers  their  hopes,  must 
be  banished  by  the  united  strength  of  all.  If  democracy  cannot 
achieve  such  a  democratic  political  economy  it  must  flounder 
through  deepening  bogs  until  finally  it  sinks  in  the  morass  of  plutoc¬ 
racy. 

The  fatal  mistake  of  democracy  heretofore  has  been  the  insuffi¬ 
ciency  of  its  program.  It  is  incredible  how  limited  has  been  its 
vision  and  how  few  and  how  minor  have  been  its  greatest  revolu¬ 
tions.  To  overthrow  monarchy  was  excellent,  but  it  did  not  bring 
in  democracy;  rather,  the  unchecked  sway  of  plutocracy.  “‘The 
people,  indeed,  nominally  were  sovereigns;  but  as  these  sovereigns 
were  individually  and  as  a  class  the  economic  serfs  of  the  rich,  and 
lived  at  their  mercy,  the  so-called  popular  government  became  the 
mere  stalking-horse  of  the  capitalists.’  ”n  Political  revolutions  have 
proved  heretofore  to  be  mere  flashes  in  the  pan;  not  until  the  eco¬ 
nomic  revolution  has  been  effected  will  the  old  tyranny  be  blown 
to  pieces: 

The  second  phase  in  the  evolution  of  the  democratic  idea  began  with 
the  awakening  of  the  people  to  the  perception  that  the  deposing  of  kings, 
instead  of  being  the  main  end  and  mission  of  democracy,  was  merely  pre¬ 
liminary  to  its  real  programme,  which  was  the  use  of  the  collective  so¬ 
cial  machinery  for  the  indefinite  promotion  of  the  welfare  of  the  people  at 
large.  .  .  . 

Which  amounts  to  saying  .  .  .  that  there  never  was  a  democratic  gov¬ 
ernment  properly  so  called  before  the  twentieth  century.  .  .  .  The  so- 
called  republics  of  the  first  phase  we  class  as  pseudo-republics  or  negative 
democracies.  .  .  . 

Regarded  as  necessary  steps  in  the  evolution  of  society  from  pure  mon¬ 
archy  to  pure  democracy,  these  republics  of  the  negative  phase  mark  a 
stage  of  progress;  but  if  regarded  as  finalities  they  were  a  type  far  less 
admirable  on  the  whole  than  decent  monarchies.  In  respect  especially  to 
their  susceptibility  to  corruption  and  plutocratic  subversion  they  were  the 
worst  kind  of  government  possible.  .  .  .  How  could  intelligent  men  de¬ 
lude  themselves  with  the  notion  that  the  most  portentous  and  revolution¬ 
ary  idea  of  all  time  had  exhausted  its  influence  and  fulfilled  its  mission  in 
changing  the  title  of  the  executive  of  a  nation  from  king  to  President,  and 
the  name  of  the  national  Legislature  from  Parliament  to  Congress?  .  .  . 
1  he  American  people  fancied  that  they  had  set  up  a  popular  government 
when  t hey  separated  from  England,  but  they  were  deluded.  In  conquering 
the  political  power  formerly  exercised  by  the  king,  the  people  had  but 

11  Equality,  Chapter  II,  p.  21. 


309 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

taken  the  outworks  of  the  fortress  of  tyranny.  The  economic  system  which 
was  the  citadel  and  commanded  every  part  of  the  social  structure  remained 
in  possession  of  private  and  irresponsible  rulers,  and  so  long  as  it  was  held, 
the  possession  of  the  outworks  was  of  no  use  to  the  people,  and  only  re¬ 
tained  by  the  sufferance  of  the  garrison  of  the  citadel.  The  Revolution 
came  when  the  people  saw  that  they  must  either  take  the  citadel  or  evacu¬ 
ate  the  outworks.12 

The  significance  of  the  title  of  Bellamy’s  supplementary  volume 
should  now  be  clear.  The  problem  of  democracy  always  and 
everywhere  is  the  problem  of  achieving  economic  equality.  With¬ 
out  that  all  talk  of  liberty  and  fraternity,  all  equality  before  the 
law,  is  empty  and  sinister  mockery.  How  can  a  man  call  himself 
citizen  who  must  beg  a  fellow  citizen  to  become  his  master?  How 
shall  the  wage-taker  treat  his  boss  as  a  brother?  Of  what  worth  is 
equality  before  the  law  to  one  without  a  job?  Democracy  and 
servitude  cannot  lie  down  together.  Wage-slavery  debases  the 
dignity  of  man;  it  puts  upon  him  the  greatest  of  indignities,  servi¬ 
tude  to  things;  it  cheats  him  of  his  right  to  life,  liberty,  and  happi¬ 
ness;  it  is  the  evil  thing  which  degrades  human  society  to  the  level 
of  the  pigsty,  and  puts  a  premium  upon  the  hoggish  instincts  of 
men.  It  sows  suspicion  and  hate  between  equals,  changes  the 
unsuccessful  into  cringing  sycophants,  sets  its  heel  upon  the  weak 
and  the  helpless.  The  thing  were  too  monstrous  to  be  conceivable 
were  it  not  the  everyday  fact  of  life — more  than  that,  were  it  not 
the  ideal  of  a  supposedly  democratic  society,  apologized  for  by  our 
plutocratic  culture,  defended  by  all  that  accounts  itself  respectable, 
buttressed  by  the  formidable  turrets  of  the  law,  written  down  as  a 
major  premise  in  our  treatises  on  political  science:  and  all  in  the 
sacred  name  of  individual  enterprise.  It  is  familiarity  that  blinds 
us  to  its  evils,  and  makes  its  victims  only  callous  or  sullen.  And 
it  endures  because  men  are  deceived  by  its  half-truths,  seduced  by 
its  specious  freedoms,  led  astray  by  its  fatuous  promises.  Being 
taught  to  set  the  privilege  of  fighting  above  the  privilege  of  helping, 
how  should  they  not  account  their  egoism  more  sacred  than  their 
altruism  ? 

When  men  shall  leave  off  bounding  their  democratic  horizons  by 
the  old  political  economy  and  the  old  law,  Bellamy  was  persuaded, 
they  will  see  more  clearly.  The  political  science  of  private  property 
conceived  of  government  as  a  police  power  to  safeguard  the  stake  of 


12  Ibid.,  Chapter  II,  pp.  19,  20,  21,  22. 


310 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


the  individual  in  society.  Very  well,  democracy  needs  only  to  re¬ 
define  the  terms  “stake-in-society”  and  “police  power”  to  arrive  at 
a  competent  philosophy.  The  definition  of  the  former  is  ready  to 
hand  in  the  familiar  words  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence — the 
stake  of  every  man  in  society  is  no  less  than  his  life,  his  liberty,  and 
his  happiness.  To  secure  him  in  this  stake  is  the  primary  function 
of  government.  The  property  interpretation  of  the  stake-in-society 
principle  was  sound  in  its  assumption  of  the  economic  as  the 
determining  basis;  we  need  only  to  democratize  the  interpretation 
to  arrive  at  our  end. 

“The  primal  principle  of  democracy  is  the  worth  and  dignity  of  the  in¬ 
dividual.  That  dignity,  consisting  in  the  quality  of  human  nature,  is  essen¬ 
tially  the  same  in  all  individuals,  and  therefore  equality  is  the  vital  prin¬ 
ciple  of  democracy.  To  this  intrinsic  and  equal  dignity  of  the  individual 
all  material  conditions  must  be  made  subservient,  and  personal  accidents 
and  attributes  subordinated.  The  raising  up  of  the  human  being  without 
respect  of  persons  is  the  constant  and  only  rational  motive  of  the  demo¬ 
cratic  policy.  Contrast  with  this  conception  that  precious  notion  of  your 
contemporaries  as  to  restricting  suffrage.  Recognizing  the  material  dis¬ 
parities  in  the  circumstances  of  individuals,  they  proposed  to  conform  the 
rights  and  dignities  of  the  individual  to  his  material  circumstances  instead 
of  conforming  the  material  circumstances  to  the  essential  and  equal  dig¬ 
nity  of  man." 

“In  short .  .  .  while  under  our  system  we  conformed  men  to  things,  you 
think  it  more  reasonable  to  conform  things  to  men?” 

“That  is,  indeed,”  replied  the  doctor,  “the  vital  difference  between  the 
old  and  the  new  orders.”  13 

As  a  preliminary  to  this  necessary  end  of  conforming  things  to 
men  there  must  be  a  reinterpretation  of  the  functions  of  the  state. 
Here  again  Bellamy’s  political  economy  gives  a  surprising  twist  to 
the  current  police  theory  of  government. 

“In  my  day  ...  it  was  considered  that  the  proper  functions  of  govern¬ 
ment,  strictly  speaking,  were  limited  to  keeping  the  peace  and  defending 
the  people  against  the  public  enemy,  that  is  to  the  military  and  police 
powers.” 

“And  in  heaven’s  name,  who  are  the  public  enemies?”  exclaimed  Dr. 
Leete.  “Are  they  France,  England,  Germany,  or  hunger,  cold,  and  naked¬ 
ness?”  14 

The  plutocratic  interpretation  of  the  police  power  signifies  no 
other  than  the  protection  of  the  individual  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 

13  Ibid.,  Chapter  III,  p.  26. 

14  Looking  Backward,  Chapter  VI,  p.  59.  •» 


311 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

fruits  of  his  exploitation — that  his  right  to  keep  and  use  what  he 
has  got  must  be  held  more  sacred  than  the  welfare  of  society;  that 
the  law,  the  military,  the  police,  shall  defend  him  in  his  right  to  do 
with  his  winnings  as  he  will.  The  democratic  interpretation  of  the 
police  power,  on  the  other  hand,  holds  that  the  state  must  intervene 
to  the  end  that  property  shall  serve  a  social  and  not  a  private  inter¬ 
est;  that  the  weak  shall  not  be  exploited  by  individual  enterprise; 
that  all  shall  be  protected  in  their  right  to  life,  liberty,  and  happi¬ 
ness.  It  demands  an  ethical  basis  for  the  social  economy.  The  legal 
maxim  that  a  man  may  do  as  he  will  with  his  own,  is  open  to  ques¬ 
tion.  The  matter  of  ownership  ceases  to  be  a  legal  question  of  title, 
and  becomes  a  moral  question  of  right  and  justice.  Land,  the 
machinery  of  production,  the  profits  of  organized  industry,  coal, 
ores,  oil,  lumber — are  such  things  justly  subject  to  private  pre¬ 
emption  ?  Shall  the  corhplex  structure  of  society  be  bottomed  on  the 
law  of  contract,  or  on  the  ethics  of  social  justice  ?  Substitute  one  for 
the  other  and  a  revolution  is  accomplished. 

Our  ethics  of  wealth  is  .  .  .  extremely  simple.  It  consists  merely  in  the 
law  of  self-preservation,  asserted  in  the  name  of  all  against  the  encroach¬ 
ments  of  any.  It  rests  upon  a  principle  which  a  child  can  understand  as 
well  as  a  philosopher,  and  which  no  philosopher  ever  attempted  to  refute — 
namely,  the  supreme  right  of  all  to  live,  and  consequently  to  insist  that 
society  shall  be  so  organized  as  to  secure  that  right.15 

Thus  in  the  political  science  of  democracy  the  old  police  theory 
of  government  merges  in  an  all-embracing  trustee  theory.  To  a 
paternal  state  is  entrusted  the  protection  of  the  interests  of  society. 
That  the  welfare  of  all  shall  be  faithfully  served,  it  is  essential  that 
the  common  will  control  and  direct  the  machinery  for  the  produc¬ 
tion  and  distribution  of  wealth.  The  anarchy  of  individualism  must 
give  place  to  an  ordered  regimentation,  under  a  centralized  au¬ 
thority.  The  social  meaning  of  property  must  be  probed  to  the 
bottom  and  the  exact  line  between  public  and  private  rights  be 
marked  off.  This  brings  Bellamy  to  his  fundamental  principle — the 
collectivistic  organization  of  industry  as  the  sine  qua  non  of  a  demo¬ 
cratic  society.  How  effectively  such  a  centralized  state  must  wage 
war  upon  poverty,  how  adequately  it  must  protect  the  citizen 
against  the  common  enemies  of  cold,  hunger,  and  nakedness,  it  was 
the  purpose  of  Looking  Backward  and  Equality  to  picture.  “A  hor- 

16  Eauality,  Chapter  XI,  p.  74. 


312 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


rible  cockney  dream,”  William  Morris  called  Looking  Backward ; 
and  by  way  of  answer  sketched  his  News  from  Nowhere,  loveliest 
of  Utopias  with  its  anarchistic  freedom  set  in  country  fields. 
Morris  was  an  artist  with  an  ample  share  of  Ruskinian  prejudice 
against  the  machinery  that  Bellamy  so  greatly  developed;  never¬ 
theless  Bellamy  was  far  more  modern  and  realistic  in  his  under¬ 
standing  of  the  part  the  machine  will  play  in  the  society  of  the 
future.  To  socialize  the  machine — to  put  upon  it  the  slave-work 
of  society,  surely  means  much  to  human  freedom. 

Looking  Backward  is  a  brief  for  no  particular  school  of  socialism, 
although  it  inclines  somewhat  to  Fabianism.  Not  through  strikes, 
boycotts  and  lockouts,  was  the  great  change  brought  about,  but  in 
consequence  of  the  spread  of  social  intelligence  and  social  ethics. 
Unionism  was  not  the  father  of  the  Revolution,  nor  agrarianism  its 
mother.  Direct  action  and  violence  in  any  form  rather  hindered 
than  helped.  Class  propaganda  was  too  narrow  and  too  selfish. 
The  anarchists  with  their  “red  flag  and  talk  about  burning,  sack¬ 
ing,  and  blowing  people  up,”  retarded  the  Revolution  by  frighten¬ 
ing  the  timid  and  making  “a  thousand  enemies  of  their  professed 
cause  to  one  friend.”  “The  labor  parties,  as  such,  never  could  have 
accomplished  anything  on  a  large  or  permanent  scale.” 

It  was  not  till  a  rearrangement  of  the  industrial  and  social  system  on  a 
higher  ethical  basis,  and  for  the  more  efficient  production  of  wealth,  was 
recognized  as  the  interest,  not  of  one  class,  but  equally  of  all  classes,  of 
rich  and  poor,  cultured  and  ignorant,  old  and  young,  weak  and  strong, 
men  and  women,  that  there  was  any  prospect  that  it  would  be  achieved. 
Then  the  national  party  arose  to  carry  it  out  by  political  methods.16 

To  wait  for  the  consent  of  all  would  seem  to  the  impatient  a  long 
postponement  of  the  millennium;  yet  the  postponement,  Bellamy 
argued,  need  not  be  long.  The  overreaching  greed  of  private  cap¬ 
italism  was  daily  hastening  it.  The  new  order  must  come  about 
speedily  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  two  forces;  the  compulsion 
of  economic  fact,  and  the  stimulus  of  ideas.  As  the  monopolistic 
tendencies  of  private  capitalism  open  the  eyes  of  the  dullest  to  the 
growth  of  a  plutocratic  power  beyond  the  control  of  the  majority, 
a  quick  fear  of  the  impending  tyranny  must  lead  men  to  question 
the  larger  scope  and  ultimate  significance  of  the  whole  system. 
Under  the  lash  of  this  fear  their  minds  will  open  to  ideas  which  have 


16  Looking  Backward,  Chapter  XXIV. 


313 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

long  been  knocking  in  vain  for  admission.  The  sources  of  monopo¬ 
listic  power  will  be  examined,  and  the  successive  steps  by  which  the 
few  have  gained  control  of  the  machinery  of  production  will  become 
clear.  Already  the  fertile  idea  of  the  unearned  increment  which  the 
land-taxers  have  got  hold  of  and  are  spreading  widely,  has  prepared 
the  way  for  the  revolutionary  doctrine  of  the  social  fund.  Let  the 
common  man  once  understand  how  small  a  portion  of  wealth  is 
produced  by  his  private  effort,  and  how  large  a  portion  by  the 
agency  of  social  organization  with  its  heritage  of  experience  and  in¬ 
vention,  and  he  will  understand  how  unjustly  private  capitalism 
appropriates  what  it  has  not  earned.  The  conclusion  that  wealth 
should  belong  to  him  who  produces  it,  is  a  deduction  of  the  most 
elementary  ethics;  and  since  the  production  of  wealth  in  quantity 
is  a  consequence  of  the  social  organization  and  social  heritage,  the 
conviction  becomes  irresistible  that  such  wealth  belongs  to  society 
and  cannot  justly  be  appropriated  by  the  individual.17  Let  such  an 
idea  spread  widely  and  the  way  is  prepared  for  the  taking  over  by 
the  state  of  the  machinery  of  production,  and  the  assumption  by  it 
of  the  obligation  of  universal  trusteeship.  Then  will  come  the  Revo¬ 
lution.  Cooperation  will  take  the  place  of  competition;  production 
and  distribution  for  the  common  well-being  will  destroy  the  malevo¬ 
lent  trinity  of  rent,  interest,  and  profit,  which  have  so  long  held 
the  world  in  poverty;  the  intelligent  strength  of  all  will  stand  be¬ 
tween  the  individual  and  cold,  hunger,  and  nakedness.  The  noble 
words  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  will  no  longer  be  a 
catch-vote  and  a  mockery  to  the  exploited  multitude,  hut  a  reality. 
The  democratic  ideal,  with  its  social  philosophy  summarized  in  the 
phrase,  “the  only  wealth  is  life,”  will  destroy  the  last  vestiges  of 
ancient  tyranny  and  men  will  be  free.  Rooted  in  economic  equality 
the  fine  flower  of  individualism  will  expand  as  it  cannot  now  in  un¬ 
fertile  soil;  a  generous  and  unstinted  culture  will  spread  the  spirit 
of  kindliness  through  society,  and  a  new  and  nobler  art  and  religion 
will  go  hand  in  hand  with  the  new  fellowship. 

Only  too  clearly  Edward  Bellamy  was  an  incorrigible  idealist. 
He  looked  into  the  future  with  more  confident  eyes  than  most  of 
us;  he  saw  in  the  East  the  quickening  of  a  new  day  where  we  see 
only  darkness.  A  child  of  the  Enlightenment,  he  put  his  trust  in  the 
natural  goodness  of  men.  They  are  not  inherently  base  and  ignoble, 
but  the  victims  of  an  evil  system  that  breeds  what  is  base  and  lg- 

17  See  Equality,  Chapter  XIII— “  Private  Capital  Stolen  from  the  Social  Fund.” 


314 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


noble.  “The  folly  of  men,  not  their  hard-heartedness,  was  the  great 
cause  of  the  world’s  poverty.  It  was  not  the  crime  of  man,  nor  of 
any  class  of  men,  that  made  the  race  so  miserable,  but  a  hideous, 
ghastly  mistake,  a  colossal  world-darkening  blunder.”  18  In  an 
arid  land  shall  we  waste  the  little  store  of  water,  or  shall  we 
regulate  it  strictly,  that  the  desert  may  be  brought  to  bloom  as  a 
garden? 

The  labor  of  men,  I  explained,  was  the  fertilizing  stream  which  alone 
rendered  earth  habitable.  It  was  but  a  scanty  stream  at  best,  and  its  use 
required  to  be  regulated  by  a  system  which  expended  every  drop  to  the 
best  advantage,  if  the  world  were  to  be  supported  in  abundance.  But  how 
far  from  any  system  was  the  actual  practice!  Every  man  wasted  the  pre¬ 
cious  fluid  as  he  wished,  animated  only  by  the  equal  motives  of  saving  his 
own  crop  and  spoiling  his  neighbor’s,  that  his  might  sell  the  better.  What 
with  greed  and  what  with  spite,  some  fields  were  flooded  while  others  were 
parched,  and  half  the  water  ran  wholly  to  waste.  In  such  a  land,  though 
a  few  by  strength  or  cunning  might  win  the  means  of  luxury,  the  lot  of 
the  great  mass  must  be  poverty,  and  of  the  weak  and  ignorant  bitter 
want  and  perennial  famine. 

Let  but  the  famine-stricken  nation  assume  the  function  it  had  neglected, 
and  regulate  for  the  common  good  the  course  of  the  life-giving  stream,  and 
the  earth  would  bloom  like  one  garden,  and  none  of  its  children  lack  any 
good  thing.  I  described  the  physical  felicity,  mental  enlightenment,  and 
moral  elevation  which  would  then  attend  the  lives  of  all  men.  With  fer¬ 
vency  I  spoke  of  that  new  world,  blessed  with  plenty,  purified  by  justice 
and  sweetened  by  brotherly  kindness,  the  world  of  which  I  had  indeed 
but  dreamed,  but  which  might  so  easily  be  made  real.  But  when  I  had 
expected  now  surely  the  faces  around  me  to  light  up  with  emotions  akin 
to  mine,  they  grew  ever  more  dark,  angry,  and  scornful.  Instead  of  en¬ 
thusiasm,  the  ladies  showed  only  aversion  and  dread,  while  the  men  in¬ 
terrupted  me  with  shouts  of  reprobation  and  contempt.  “Madman!” 
“Pestilent  fellow!”  “Fanatic!”  “Enemy  of  society!”  were  some  of  their 
cries,  and  the  one  who  had  before  taken  his  eyeglass  to  me  exclaimed, 
“He  says  we  are  to  have  no  more  poor.  Ha!  ha!” 

“Put  the  fellow  out!”  exclaimed  the  father  of  my  bethrothed,  and  at 
the  signal  the  men  sprang  from  their  chairs  and  advanced  upon  me.”  19 

Like  Henry  George’s  noble  study  of  social  poverty,  Looking 
Backward  is  a  suggestive  document  of  a  generation  that  saw  its 
finer  spirits  repelled  by  the  vulgar  individualism  of  the  Gilded  Age. 
In  the  long  run,  no  doubt,  its  influence  was  slight  and  the  hopes  of 
the  Bellamy  Nationalists,  like  the  hopes  of  the  Single-taxers,  were 


M 


18  Looking  Backward,  Chapter  XXVIII,  p.  328. 

19  Ibid,  pp.  328-9. 


315 


THE  QUEST  OF  UTOPIA 

doomed  to  disappointment.  Nevertheless  it  remains  as  a  testimony 
to  the  fact  that  in  a  blatant  world  of  preemption,  exploitation,  and 
progress,  were  some  who  were  concerned  for  a  juster  social  order 
than  the  Gilded  Age  dreamed  of — a  true  commonwealth  that  free 
men  might  build  if  they  would.* 

*  Ac  this  point  was  to  come  a  second  section  entitled  “After  Bellamy;  ‘Natural¬ 
ism’;  Tourgee’s  Murvale  Eastman." — Publisher. 


CHAPTER  IV 


THE  DARKENING  SKIES  OF  LETTERS 

So  late  as  1893,  *n  spite  of  the  stark  ugliness  of  Hamlin  Garland’s 
pictures  of  the  Middle  Border,  American  realism  was  still  unlike  in 
temper  those  somber  etchings,  burnt  into  dark  patterns  by  the 
caustic  acids  of  European  experience,  that  came  from  the  hands  of 
Russian  and  German  and  French  naturalists — sketches  that  in 
their  bitter  gloom  seemed  tragically  untrue  to  the  homelier  experi¬ 
ence  of  America.  In  appraising  such  difference  in  temper  Howells 
ascribed  it  to  the  gulf  that  separated  American  well-being  from  the 
poverty  and  injustice  of  European  societies.  American  realism  was 
hopeful  because  American  life  was  hopeful.  The  novelist  in  this 
singularly  favored  land  must  reflect  the  temper  of  a  people  made 
kindly  by  an  abundant  prosperity  and  democratic  justice,  and  in 
the  sincerity  of  his  realism  he  will  necessarily  concern  himself  with 
the  “more  smiling  aspects  of  life,  which  are  the  more  American.” 
Whoever  should  strike  a  “note  so  profoundly  tragic  in  American 
fiction”  as  was  struck  in  Dostoevsky’s  Crime  and  Punishment,  he 
asserted  in  1891,  “would  do  a  false  and  mistaken  thing.”  1  And 
in  a  later  work  he  spoke  casually  of  our  “  gay  American  horizons  ” — 
surely  the  most  romantic  phrase  ever  applied  to  a  sad  and  joyless 
people  by  a  professed  realist. 

But  while  Howells  was  thus  summing  up  the  achievements  of 
American  realism  and  somewhat  overconfidently  forecasting  its 
future  temper,  he  was  in  fact  writing  the  history  of  a  past  phase. 
Already  the  clouds  were  gathering  upon  our  “gay”  horizons,  and 
the  current  optimisms  were  finding  less  food  to  feed  on.  The  eco¬ 
nomics  of  this  happy  America  were  coming  to  be  regarded  by  vast 
numbers  as  a  class  economics,  forecasting  a  less  democratic  future. 
Young  men  born  in  the  early  seventies,  when  Mr.  Howells  was 
entering  upon  his  new  realistic  studies,  were  coming  to  intellectual 
maturity  in  a  very  different  age;  a  new  science  and  a  consolidating 
economics  were  creating  a  somber  temper  that  was  eventually  to 
produce  in  An  American  Tragedy,  a  story  not  greatly  unlike  that 

1  Criticism  and  Fiction,  p.  128.  „ 

316 


THE  DARKENING  SKIES  OF  LETTERS  317 

Russian  tale  which  Mr.  Howells,  a  short  generation  before,  had 
pronounced  impossible  to  American  experience.  Stephen  Crane  and 
Frank  Norris  and  Theodore  Dreiser  were  the  intellectual  children 
of  the  nineties,  and  their  art  was  a  reflection  of  that  sober  period  of 
American  disillusion. 

The  artist,  of  course,  in  his  creative  work  is  only  mediately  in¬ 
fluenced  by  the  current  science  and  philosophy;  yet  even  in  his 
aloofness  from  the  specific  problems  of  the  laboratory  and  the  study 
he  can  scarcely  escape  the  pervasive  influence  of  the  Zeitgeist.  And 
so,  after  Hamlin  Garland,  the  realistic  novel  again  took  a  new 
course  from  the  shifting  winds  of  scientific  doctrine.  The  genera¬ 
tion  that  succeeded  the  rebellious  son  of  the  Middle  Border  came 
too  late  to  maturity  to  share  his  faith  in  the  benevolent  universe  of 
Herbert  Spencer,  and  got  little  comfort  from  a  promised  Utopia 
that  only  awaited  the  enactment  of  certain  statutory  laws — laws 
that  would  assure  economic  justice  to  all — to  lay  open  its  hospitable 
realm.  Far-reaching  changes  were  coming  over  the  temper  of  scien¬ 
tific  thought.  The  conclusions  of  the  physical  sciences  were  ravag¬ 
ing  the  orderly  preserves  of  biological  evolution,  with  its  cardinal 
doctrine  of  organic  growth  and  historical  continuity;  the  hurrying 
march  of  scientific  investigation  was  leaving  far  behind  the  benevo¬ 
lent  universe  conceived  of  by  Victorian  thinkers  and  was  coming 
out  upon  higher  and  bleaker  tablelands  of  speculation.  The  uni¬ 
verse  that  unfolded  itself  to  chemistry  and  physics  was  vaster  and 
colder  than  biological  evolution  with  its  doctrine  of  the  conserva¬ 
tion  of  energy,  had  imagined — a  vibrating  mechanism  shot  through 
with  energy,  that  revealed  itself  in  action  and  reaction,  impersonal, 
amoral,  dwarfing  all  the  gods  dreamed  of  hitherto;  a  universe  in 
which  the  generations  of  men  have  shrunk  to  a  pin-point  in  limit¬ 
less  space  and  all  teleological  hopes  and  fears  become  the  emptiest 
of  futilities.  It  was  the  conception  of  determinism  that  after  long 
denial  was  at  last  coming  to  wide  acceptance — a  conception  that 
underlay  the  thinking  of  such  diverse  men  as  Comte  and  Spencer 
and  Marx,  a  conception  implicit  in  the  doctrine  of  continuity,  in  the 
law  of  causality,  in  the  Marxian  law  of  concentration;  and  now  dis¬ 
encumbered  of  its  teleological  wrappings,  disillusioned  with  the 
doctrine  of  progress,  it  was  to  shape  the  new  intellectual  attitude 
towards  life. 

In  presence  of  such  an  extraordinary  intellectual  revolution  the 
old  anthropomorphisms  of  metaphysics  and  ethics  were  doomed, 


318 


THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW 


and  from  the  revelations  of  physics  and  chemistry  and  psychology 
must  come  an  endeavor  after  a  fresh  evaluation  of  man’s  duty  and 
destiny  in  a  universe  of  immeasurable  energy.  An  ethics  that  should 
square  with  the  new  data  of  science  must  take  its  departure  from 
the  bleak  fact  of  a  depersonalized  universe,  wherein  man  is  but  a 
single  form  of  imprisoned  energy,  localized  for  a  brief  instant  and 
rising  to  momentary  consciousness  in  the  eternal  flux,  about  and 
through  whom  flows  the  energy  of  an  unprobed  universe.  As  this 
mechanistic  conception  found  lodgment  in  minds  prepared  by  a  me¬ 
chanical  economics,  the  last  remaining  vestiges  of  the  old  French 
romanticism  were  swept  away;  a  benevolent,  egocentric  universe 
was  become  unthinkable;  progress  was  no  longer  the  inherent  law  of 
matter  and  of  life;  but  instead,  everywhere  change,  disintegration 
and  reintegration,  a  ceaseless  and  purposeless  flux  to  what  final 
end  the  human  mind  could  not  forecast.  Thus  at  a  stroke  the  be¬ 
nevolent  cosmos  of  the  fathers,  wherein  for  generations  men  had 
been  providing  themselves  with  sure  refuges,  was  swept  away; 
and  with  its  passing  passed  the  old  faiths — faith  in  freedom  of  the 
will,  in  a  purposive  providence,  in  a  universe  that  had  been  long  in 
travail  to  bring  forth  man,  its  last  and  dearest  offspring  for  whom 
all  things  work  together  for  good.  And  with  the  decay  of  the 
traditional  faiths  the  younger  generation  was  left  to  wander  as  best 
it  might  upon  the  bleak  tablelands  of  impersonal  energy.  Spencer’s 
“ultimate  of  ultimates,”  the  Permanence  of  Force,  that  follows  the 
law  of  evolution  and  dissolution,  had  given  way  to  Faraday’s 
electro-energy  that  is  indifferent  to  purpose. 

The  intellectual  backgrounds  were  thus  preparing  for  a  gloomier 
realism  than  Howells’s  or  Garland’s,  a  realism  that  took  its  depar¬ 
ture  from  two  postulates:  that  men  are  physical  beings  wTho  can  do 
no  other  than  obey  the  laws  of  a  physical  universe;  and  that  in  the 
vast  indifterentism  of  nature  they  are  inconsequential  pawns  in  a 
game  that  to  human  reason  has  no  meaning  or  rules.  To  assume 
that  fate  which  rules  human  destiny  is  malignant,  is  to  assume  a 
cosmic  interest  in  man  which  finds  no  justification  in  science;  Man 
at  best  is  only  an  inconsequential  atom  in  a  mechanical  flux,  or  at 
worst,  as  Jurgen  puts  it  picturesquely,  only  a  bubble  in  fermenting 
swill.  Such  a  conception,  of  course,  made  slow  headway  against  the 
traditional  order  of  thought;  and  if  it  had  not  been  aided  by  a 
changing  economics  it  would  have  found  few  to  follow  a  line  of 
reasoning  that  led  to  such  unpleasant  conclusions.  The  mind  of»the 


319 


THE  DARKENING  SKIES  OF  LETTERS 

artist  is  more  susceptible  to  concrete  social  fact  than  to  abstract 
physical  principle,  and  the  swift  centralizing  of  economics  in  the 
eighties  and  the  nineties  provided  the  stimulus  for  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  reversal  of  thought  marked  by  the  contrast  between  Emer¬ 
son  and  Theodore  Dreiser.  Emerson  was  the  apotheosis  of  two  cen¬ 
turies  of  decentralization  that  destroyed  the  pessimism  brought  to 
the  new  world  by  refugees  from  the  old,  and  found  its  inevitable 
expression  in  the  exaltation  of  the  individual,  free  and  excellent, 
the  child  of  a  beneficent  order;  whereas  Dreiser  was  the  first  spokes¬ 
man  of  a  later  America  once  more  falling  within  the  shadow  of  the 
pessimism  that  springs  from  every  centralized  society  shut  up 
within  the  portals  of  a  static  economics;  that  dwarfs  the  individual 
and  nullifies  his  will,  reducing  him  from  a  child  of  God  to  a  serf. 

Oddly  enough  it  was  in  the  West  that  the  new  spirit  first  ex¬ 
pressed  itself  most  adequately;  amidst  a  society  that  was  taking 
its  first  steps  away  from  the  traditional  philosophy  of  the  disper¬ 
sion.  Frank  Norris  in  California,  Dreiser  in  Indiana,  Sherwood 
Anderson  in  Ohio,  Masters  and  Sandburg  and  Vachel  Lindsay  in 
Illinois,  were  the  spokesmen  of  the  resentment  welling  up  in  the 
American  heart  at  the  loss  of  the  older  freedom  and  individual 
dignity.* 

♦The  manuscript  ends  here.  The  first  section  of  this  chapter  was  to  be  “Edwin 
Markham  and  ‘The  Man  with  the  Hoe.’  ”  The  second  was  to  be  on  “The  Rise  of 
Naturalism:  Stephen  Crane;  Frank  Norris.”  The  first  item  of  the  addenda  gives 
material  on  this  subject  and  on  the  two  authors.  The  third  would  have  been  “  Fic¬ 
tion  Discovers  the  City.” — Publisher. 


ADDENDA 


The  material  given  here  comes  from  various  sources,  as  indicated 
by  the  notes.  The  syllabus  referred  to  is  that  for  Professor  Par- 
rington’s  lectures  at  the  University  of  Washington,  The  American 
Novel  Since  i8qo  (1925).  The  order  here  follows  that  of  the  con¬ 
tents  of  this  book. 


ADDENDA 


NATURALISM  IN  AMERICAN  FICTION  * 

Naturalism  originated  in  France.  Term  first  used  by  Zola.  Chief 
example — Flaubert’s  Mme.  Bovary.  Contrast  between  Zola  and 
Flaubert  reveals  two  diverse  tendencies  of  the  movement — a  socio¬ 
logical  study  of  background,  with  a  multitude  of  characters  dwarfed 
by  the  milieu;  and  psychological  study  of  individual  character. 

Naturalism  a  child  of  nineteenth-century  thought— offspring  of 
Darwin,  Marx,  Comte,  Taine.  The  scientific  movement  created  a 
scientific  attitude  of  mind  and  emphasized  the  law  of  causation. 
From  this  emerged  two  fruitful  ideas:  (i)  biological  determinism, 
(2)  economic  determinism.  So  Zola  and  Flaubert.  Influence  of 
Claude  Bernard — “We  take  men  from  the  hands  of  the  physiolo¬ 
gist  solely  ...  to  solve  scientifically  the  question  of  how  men  be¬ 
have  in  society.” 

The  criteria  of  naturalism  are: 

1.  Objectivity.  Seek  the  truth  in  the  spirit  of  the  scientist.  “We 
naturalists,  we  men  of  science,”  Zola  says,  accepting  Bernard’s 
position,  “we  must  admit  of  nothing  occult;  men  are  but  phenom¬ 
ena  and  the  conditions  of  phenomena.” 

2.  Frankness.  A  rejection  of  Victorian  reticence.  The  total  man 
and  woman  must  be  studied — the  deeper  instincts,  the  endless  im¬ 
pulses.  The  three  strongest  instincts  are  fear,  hunger,  sex.  In  the 
life  of  the  ordinary  person,  the  third  is  most  critical,  hence  the 
naturalist  makes  much  of  it. 

3.  An  amoral  attitude  toward  material.  The  naturalist  is  not  a 
judge,  he  holds  no  brief  for  any  ethical  standards.  He  records  what 
happens.  He  “must  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  in¬ 
herent  in  man,  show  the  machinery  of  his  intellectual  and  sensory 
manifestations,  under  the  influence  of  heredity  and  environment, 
such  as  physiology  shall  give  them  to  us,  and  then  finally,  to  ex¬ 
hibit  man  living  in  social  conditions,  produced  by  himself,  which 
he  modifies  daily  and  in  the  heart  of  which  he  is  undergoing  con¬ 
stant  transformation.”  (Zola.)  This  is  difficult  to  accept.  Puri¬ 
tanism. 

*  Notes  for  a  lecture  delivered  at  the  University  of  California  in  1922. — Publisher. 

32  3 


324 


ADDENDA 


4.  A  philosophy  of  determinism.  This  is  the  vital  principle  of 
naturalism,  setting  it  off  from  realism.  The  scientist  has  turned 
philosopher.  It  is  the  residuum  of  much  pondering  over  life  and  its 
meaning,  and  may  result  from: 

a.  Sociological  emphasis — study  of  heredity  and  environment. 

b.  A  broader  mechanistic  philosophy — Flaubert,  Dreiser. 

c.  Fatalism:  a  world  of  malignant  chance — Hardy. 

5.  A  bias  toward  pessimism  in  selecting  details.  A  reaction  from 
the  romantic  conception  of  a  purposive  will. 

Romance  springs  from  the  longings  of  a  baffled  and  thwarted 
will,  creating  a  world  as  we  should  like  it  wherein  to  find  refuge. 
But  the  naturalist  will  tolerate  no  such  refuge.  He  will  envisage  the 
truth,  and  the  truth  that  he  sees  is  that  the  individual  is  impotent 
in  the  face  of  things.  Hence  it  is  as  the  victim,  the  individual  de¬ 
feated  by  the  world,  and  made  a  sardonic  jest  of,  that  the  naturalist 
chooses  to  portray  man.  Always  that  conception  creeps  in.  It  is 
seen  and  felt  throughout  the  texture  of  the  story — a  fate  lurking  in 
the  background  and  visible  to  the  reader — and  at  some  dramatic 
moment  the  conviction  comes  home  to  the  victim  and  is  crystallized 
in  bitter  words  wrenched  from  his  baffled  will.  The  business  of  the 
story  is  to  lead  him  up  to  this  crystallization. 

There  are  two  main  forms — (1)  Life  is  a  trap.  (2)  Life  is  mean. 
So  Strindberg’s  Countess  Julie:  “Everything  is  wreckage,  that 
drifts  over  the  water  until  it  sinks,  sinks.”  So  Ray  Pearson  in 
Sherwood  Anderson’s  Winesburg ,  Ohio:  “Tricked,  by  Gad,  tricked 
by  life  and  made  a  fool  of.”  So  D.  H.  Lawrence:  “We  are  pros¬ 
tituted,  oh,  prostituted  by  life.”  To  Ma  Westcott  “Life  is  duty. 
It  is  a  lie.”  This  pressure  may  come  from  without — milieu — or 
from  within  imperious  desires — but  the  outcome  is  usually  hope¬ 
less  sorrow  sometimes  stolid  resignation,  sometimes  fierce  pro¬ 
test,  but  with  no  other  end  than  annihilation.  An  exception  is 
Maugham’s  Of  Human  Bondage. 

6.  A  bias  in  selection  of  characters.  The  naturalist  commonly 
chooses  one  of  three  types: 

a.  Characters  of  marked  physique  and  small  intellectual  activity 

persons  of  strong  animal  drives.  They  range  all  the  way  from 

morons  like  Norris  s  McTeague,  Zola’s  Nana,  and  Dreiser’s 
Jennie  Gerhardt  to  natures  like  Hardy’s  Tess,  and  Sallie  in  Of  Hu¬ 
man  Bondage. 

b.  Characters  of  excited,  neurotic  temperament,  at  the  mefcy 


325 


NATURALISM  IN  AMERICAN  FICTION 

of  moods,  driven  by  forces  that  they  do  not  stop  to  analyze.  Such 
are  Strindberg’s  Countess  Julie,  Sue,  Emma  Bovary,  and  the  hero 
in  Of  Human  Bondage.  Sometimes  this  is  aggravated  by  some 
physical  defect,  like  a  club-foot. 

c.  An  occasional  use  of  a  strong  character  whose  will  is  broken. 
Thus  Hardy’s  Jude  and  the  doctor  in  Strindberg’s  By  the  Open  Sea. 
But  such  are  comparatively  infrequent. 

Naturalism  is  pessimistic  realism,  with  a  philosophy  that  sets 
man  in  a  mechanical  world  and  conceives  of  him  as  victimized  by 
that  world.  Certain  unconscious  exaggerations  of  naturalism.  Since 
men  are  victimized  either  by  outer  forces — the  milieu — or  by  inner 
drives — impulses  and  instincts — the  naturalist  from  much  brooding 
is  subject  to  certain  temptations: 

1.  From  concern  over  a  devastating  milieu  he  may  end  in  desir¬ 
ing  to  change  that  milieu  to  the  end  that  men  may  achieve  happi¬ 
ness.  Hence  he  tends  to  lose  his  objectivity  and  scientific  detach¬ 
ment,  and  becomes  a  partisan  to  a  cause.  Such  was  the  fate  of  Zola. 
The  philosopher  of  naturalism,  in  practice  he  abandoned  his 
principles  and  became  a  reformer,  attacking  the  church,  the  capital¬ 
istic  order,  etc.  His  /’ accuse  letter  is  characteristic  of  this.  Nana, 
almost  alone,  preserves  the  naturalistic  attitude.  This  was  the 
failure  of  the  first  group  of  American  naturalists — Frank  Norris, 
Robert  Herrick,  Jack  London. 

2.  From  much  study  of  inner  drives  of  low-grade  characters  the 
naturalist  is  in  danger  of  creating  grotesques.  Behavioristic 
psychology  may  prove  to  be  a  further  temptation,  in  creating  a 
“sex  complex.”  So  Masters’s  Spoon  River  Anthology,  Sherwood 
Anderson,  D.  H.  Lawrence,  Frank  Norris.  Most  common  in  the 
later  American  naturalists.  So  Brander  Matthews. 

3.  From  much  emphasis  on  animal  impulses  the  naturalist  may 
turn  man  into  an  animal.  Men  are  more  than  sex-driven  creatures 
— the  city  is  more  than  the  slums.  There  are  sewers,  but  why  not 
accept  the  sewer  without  messing  over  its  contents  as  they  flow  to 
disintegration?  This  is  the  commonest  objection  to  naturalism. 
So  Meredith:  “The  naturalist  sees  the  hog  in  nature,  and  takes 
nature  for  the  hog.”  It  is  certainly  an  overcorrection— a  reaction 
against  the  complacent  optimism  of  romanticism— against  too 
much  shutting  of  the  eyes  to  slums  and  filth  and  sewers.  lo  a 
mechanist  like  Dreiser,  who  traces  life  and  conduct  back  to  chemis¬ 
try,  or  to  the  behaviorist,  who  traces  it  to  ducts  and  glands,  it  is 


326 


ADDENDA 


rational.  The  charge  may  be  true  of  Zola,  of  De  Maupassant,  of 
Anderson,  of  Lawrence,  but  it  is  not  true  of  Hardy,  of  Maugham. 

Naturalism  and  the  Conception  of  Tragedy.  Naturalistic  books 
are  almost  inevitably  tragedies,  but  the  philosophy  of  naturalism 
that  underlies  them  has  played  havoc  with  the  Aristotelian  concep¬ 
tion  of  tragedy.  As  Ludwig  Lewisohn  says,  it  has  “rendered  the 
traditional  principle  of  tragedy  wholly  archaic.”  According  to  the 
Aristotelian  tradition,  tragedy  results  when  an  essentially  noble 
character  of  heroic  proportions  transgresses  an  immutable  moral 
law  by  a  self-originating  will  and  suffers  the  punishment  dealt  by 
poetic  justice.  So  Macbeth,  Othello,  Lear,  Hamlet.  But  this 
assumes  two  thing:  (i)  an  eternally  changeless  moral  law;  (2)  the 
existence  of  a  purposive  will.  Both  of  these  the  naturalist  refuses 
to  accept.  Compare  Hardy. 

It  became  clear  that  the  self-originating  element  in  human  action  is 
small.  The  individual  acts  in  harmony  with  his  character,  which  is  largely 
the  result  of  complex  and  uncontrollable  causes.  It  became  even  clearer 
that  among  the  totality  of  moral  values  an  absolute  validity  can  be  as¬ 
signed  to  a  few  only.  Hence  the  basic  conception  of  tragic  guilt  was  under¬ 
mined  from  within  and  from  without.  The  transgression  of  an  immutable 
moral  law  by  a  self-originating  will  was  seen  to  be  an  essentially  meaning¬ 
less  conception,  since  neither  eternally  changeless  moral  law  nor  an  un¬ 
caused  volition  is  to  be  found  in  the  universe  that  we  perceive.1 

The  tragedy  of  naturalism  lies  in  the  disintegration  and  the  pity 
or  irony  with  which  we  contemplate  man  and  his  fate  in  the  world. 

Naturalism  and  the  Traditional  American  Temper.  The  two  most 
characteristic  qualities  of  the  American  temper  are  Puritanism  and 
optimism — the  belief  in  the  supremacy  of  the  moral  law,  and  the 
conviction  that  this  is  a  good  world  that  man  shapes  to  his  will. 

1  his  is  to  be  explained  historically:  the  former  is  traditionally  Eng¬ 
lish,  the  latter  a  product  of  new-world  economics — a  decentralized  so¬ 
ciety.  Pessimistic  determinism  results  inevitably  from  the  sense  of 
social  pressure  on  the  individual.  Social  complexity  entails  a  feeling 
of  coercive  regimentation  by  forces  too  strong  to  contend  against, 
lhese  forces  are  both  internal  and  external:  environment  or  the 
social  machine;  heredity  or  the  physical  machine.  The  most  com¬ 
plete  dwarfing  of  the  individual  will  and  significance  takes  place  in 
the  most  crowded  societies,  producing  a  corresponding  philosophy 
and  psychology.  So  the  fatalism  of  the  Orient  and  the  dream  of 
1  Ludwig  Lewisohn,  Modern  Drama,  New  York,  1915,  p.  3. 


NATURALISM  IN  AMERICAN  FICTION  327 

Nirvana.  The  first  widespread  philosophy  of  determinism  among 
English  people  was  spread  by  Calvinism.  Predestination  was  an 
alien  thought,  the  last  expression  of  a  world  depressed  by  Roman 
regimentation  and  degeneration.  Augustine  preached  that  men  are 
evil,  and  men  are  doomed.  This  old-world  dogma  was  brought  to 
America,  where  regimentation  was  impossible.  A  free  economics 
created  a  free-will  philosophy  and  psychology.  The  will  to  succeed. 
This  flowered  in  Emerson.  Philosophical  optimism.  The  world  is 
good,  man  is  good:  let  him  stand  upon  his  instincts  and  there  abide 
and  the  whole  world  will  come  round  to  him.  “Trust  thyself.” 
Since  Emerson’s  time  a  new  world  has  been  emerging.  The  old 
shadow  is  falling  across  the  American  mind.  Determinism  is  in 
the  air. 

Complexity  and  American  Determinism.  Complexity  springs 
from: 

1.  Machine  industrialism.  The  bigness  of  the  economic  machine 
dwarfs  the  individual  and  creates  a  sense  of  impotency. 

2.  The  great  city  reduces  the  individual  to  a  unit.  By  machine 
methods  of  transportation  and  quantity  output  individual  differ¬ 
ences  are  worn  away.  We  dress,  live,  think,  work,  play,  alike.  The 
Saturday  Evening  Post  is  fast  regimenting  the  American  mind. 
Standardization. 

3.  Centralization  of  wealth  is  creating  a  caste  regimentation. 

4.  A  mechanistic  psychology.  Behaviorism:  stimulus  and  re¬ 
sponse;  ducts  and  glands.  The  individual  conceived  as  a  mecha¬ 
nism  driven  by  instincts  and  habits. 

America  today  is  the  greatest,  most  complex  machine  the  world 
has  ever  known.  Individualism  is  giving  way  to  regimentation, 
caste,  standardization.  Optimism  is  gone;  pessimism  is  on  the 
horizon.  The  psychology  of  naturalism  is  being  prepared. 

Three  American  writers  began  an  experiment  in  naturalism  in  the 
middle  nineties — Stephen  Crane,  Frank  Norris,  and  Harold  Fred¬ 
eric.  The  early  death  of  all  three  stopped  the  movement,  which  was 
speedily  overwhelmed  by  the  romantic  deluge  and  the  muckraking 
zeal.  Crane  was  tubercular  and  died  at  twenty-nine;  Norris  was 
cut  down  in  the  early  thirties;  Harold  Frederic  removed  to  England, 
where  he  died. 


328 


ADDENDA 


i 

STEPHEN  CRANE  * 

Stephen  Crane  was  the  genius  of  his  generation.  His  work  began 
with  Maggie:  A  Girl  of  the  Streets  (1893).  “It  was  the  first  bit  of 
naturalism  in  American  letters  ...  an  episodic  bit  of  slum  fiction 
ending  with  the  tragic  quality  of  Greek  drama.”  “The  first  ironical 
novel  ever  written  by  an  American.”  It  was  privately  printed  at 
first,  and  not  published  until  1896.  It  is  detached,  objective, 
amoral,  dealing  with  a  world  without  virtues  but  tyrannized  by 
taboos.  It  is  a  bit  of  life,  beginning  and  ending  casually.  Here  is 
the  end : 

In  a  room  a  woman  sat  at  a  table,  eating  like  a  fat  monk  in  a  picture. 
A  soiled,  unshaven  man  pushed  open  the  door  and  entered. 

“Well,”  said  he,  “Mag’s  dead.”  * 

It  is  a  world  without  virtue  and  yet  one  that  uses  the  social 
taboo  to  condemn  Mag — the  only  pure  one  of  the  lot.  The  story 
was  an  attack  on  everything  that  was  respectable  in  American  liter¬ 
ature — a  notable  achievement  in  a  world  of  shoddy  romanticism. 
It  was  an  affront  to  every  instinct  of  the  genteel  tradition,  and  was 
rejected  by  a  public  steeped  in  that  same  shoddy  romanticism. 

Crane’s  next  novel  was  the  first  great  American  war  story — 
The  Red  Badge  of  Courage  (1894).  It  was  a  tour  de  force,  inspired 
by  Zola’s  Le  debacle,  but  more  by  Tolstoi — War  and  Peace  and 
perhaps  Sebastopol.  The  individual  is  caught  between  the  external 
war  machine  and  the  inner  instinct  machine.  There  is  a  conflict  of 
impulses — fear,  pride,  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  chiefly  the 
fear  of  fear.  The  hero  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  crowd  psychology  and 
blind  chance.  Crane  follows  Tolstoi  in  assuming  that  victories  are 
accidents,  the  outcome  of  a  blind  clash  of  unintelligent  forces, 
rather  than  due  to  strategy  and  generalship.  The  study  is  psycho¬ 
logical — that  of  the  fear  of  the  recruit,  his  feeling  that  he  alone  is 
marked  as  the  target  of  the  enemy.  The  impression  of  helplessness 
is  the  same  as  in  Maggie — both  are  atoms  among  a  host  of  other 
atoms. 

Short  Stories.  The  best  are  “The  Blue  Hotel,”  “The  Experiment 
in  Misery,”  “The  Open  Boat.”  The  first  is  a  story  of  social  re¬ 
sponsibility  and  social  guilt.  The  murder  of  the  Swede  is  just  part 

*  From  lecture  notes  and  the  syllabus. — Publisher. 

1  Stephen  Crane,  Works,  New  York,  1926,  Vol.  10,  p.  216. 


NATURALISM  IN  AMERICAN  FICTION 


329 


of  the  backwash  of  a  topsy-turvy  life:  the  victim  of  things.  “Every 
sin  is  the  result  of  a  collaboration.”  The  second  is  a  story  of  a 
“hobo” — down-and-outer,  who  hears  “the  war  of  the  city  in  his 
ear.”  “The  protest  of  the  wretch  who  feels  the  touch  of  the  im¬ 
perturbable  granite  wheels,  and  who  then  cries  with  an  impersonal 
eloquence,  with  a  strength  not  from  him,  giving  voice  to  the  wail 
of  a  whole  section,  a  class,  a  people.”  3 

2 

FRANK  NORRIS  * 

The  most  stimulating  and  militant  of  our  early  naturalists — the 
only  one  who  wrote  consciously  with  a  definite  creed.  He  had 
thought  out  a  naturalistic  philosophy  under  the  inspiration  of  Zola. 
“He  was  never  without  a  yellow  paper-covered  novel  of  Zola  in  his 
hand,”  wrote  his  brother  of  him.  His  two  chief  novels  reveal  the 
twin  tendencies  as  revealed  in  Nana  and  Le  debacle:  The  study  of 
the  individual  in  his  reaction  to  environment,  and  the  study  of 
social  forces  and  their  impact  upon  a  group  of  related  individuals. 

His  Work.  Falls  into  three  groups:  (i)  Romance— Blix,  Moran  of 
the  Lady  Letty;  (2)  Naturalism — McTeague ,  Handover  and  the  Brute; 
(3)  The  Pit  and  A  Deal  in  Wheat.  Between  the  two  latter  groups 
stands  The  Octopus.  The  dates  of  the  earlier  works  uncertain. 
Commonly  believed  that  Norris  began  as  a  romantic  and  worked 
out  of  it  slowly.  Another  view  that  he  wrote  romances  as  a  means 
of  arriving,  side  by  side  with  his  serious  work.  Thus  he  seems  to 
have  begun  McTeague  about  1894- — although  it  was  not  published 
till  1899. 

Theory.  His  passion  for  truth  more  ardent — or  more  noisy — 
than  Crane’s:  his  objectivity  less.  The  strong  conviction  of  a 
deterministic  universe  was  on  him,  but  he  never  quite  attained  the 
scientific  detachment.  His  nature  large  and  eager.  Like  Zola  he 
loved  large  canvases.  This  induced  him  rather  to  the  sociological 
than  to  the  individualistic  study.  The  Octopus  more  representative 
of  his  genius  than  McTeague.  Man  in  society,  his  theme:  not  mere 
men  and  women  as  ends  in  themselves.  This  grew  on  him — the 
second  phase.  The  novelist  must  deal  “with  elemental  forces, 
motives  that  stir  whole  nations.  These  cannot  be  handled  as 
abstractions  in  fiction.  .  .  .  The  social  tendencies  must  be  ex- 
3  ibid.,  Vol.  n,  p.  21.  *  Lecture  notes—  Publisher. 


330 


ADDENDA 


pressed  by  means  of  an  analysis  of  the  characters  of  the  men  and 
women  who  compose  that  society,  and  the  two  must  be  combined 
and  manipulated  to  evolve  the  purpose — to  find  the  value  of  x .”4 
Above  all,  avoid  propaganda. 

Unskillfully  treated,  the  story  may  dwindle  down  and  degenerate  into 
mere  special  pleading,  and  the  novelist  becomes  a  polemicist,  a  pam¬ 
phleteer,  forgetting  that  although  his  first  consideration  is  to  prove  his  case, 
his  means  must  be  living  human  beings,  not  statistics,  and  that  his  tools 
are  not  figures,  but  pictures  of  life  as  he  sees  it.  .  .  . 

Consider  the  reverse — Fecondite,  for  instance.  The  purpose  for  which 
Zola  wrote  the  book  ran  away  with  him.  He  really  did  care  more  for  the 
depopulation  of  France  than  he  did  for  his  work.  Result — -sermons  on  the 
fruitfulness  of  women,  special  pleading,  a  farrago  of  dry,  dull  incidents, 
overburdened  and  collapsing  under  the  weight  of  a  theme  that  should  have 
intruded  only  indirectly.5 

He  never  quite  arrives  at  the  amoral  attitude.  Ethical  values 
persist  in  intruding  themselves,  sometimes  quite  incidentally,  as  in 
McTeague,  but  increasingly,  as  in  The  Octopus  and  The  Pit. 

“mcteague” 

Dedicated  to  Gates.  The  first  considerable  contribution  to 
naturalism  by  an  American  writer.  His  carefully  written  work  over 
which  he  labored  five  years. 

Theme.  A  study  in  character  disintegration  that  follows  upon 
economic  pressure.  The  unmaking  of  a  man  and  woman  by  the 
caprice  of  events.  The  characters  are  simple.  McTeague  is  heavy 
and  stupid,  slow  in  his  movements  but  a  blind  bull  when  aroused. 
Trina  neat  and  pretty  but  with  unhappy  potentialities  in  her 
thrift.  In  neither  is  there  a  will-to-power  strong  enough  to  give 
strength  of  character. 

The  Note  of  Determinism.  A  world  of  chance  that  victimizes 

them.  The  note  struck  by  the  lottery  and  the  $5,000.  By  chance 

McTeague  became  a  dentist,  met  Trina,  proposed.  But  the  chance 

that  was  making  a  man  of  him  and  a  woman  of  Trina  was  preparing 

their  downfall  through  Marcus  Schouler.  The  wrestling-match  was 

the  turning-point.  The  two  disintegrate  together,  each  aggravating 

the  weakness  of  the  other.  As  Trina’s  neatness  was  pulling  Mac 

up  and  making  him  self-respecting,  so  her  thrift  grew  into  miserli- 

4  The  Responsibilities  of  the  Novelist,  “The  Novel  with  a  ‘Purpose,’”  Garden 
Uty,  N.  Y.,  1928,  Vol.  7,  p.  22. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  22.  ^ 


NATURALISM  IN  AMERICAN  FICTION 


331 


ness  under  pressure  of  his  failure  to  provide,  and  this  embittered 
the  essentially  fair  and  generous  nature  of  Mac. 

Inner  Drives.  Little  sex  in  the  book  after  the  first  complication. 
Both  Mac  and  Trina  caught  unexpectedly,  yet  handled  differently. 
The  latter  pure  naturalism.  “The  Woman  is  awakened,  and,  start¬ 
ing  from  her  sleep,  catches  blindly  at  what  first  the  newly  awakened 
eyes  light  upon.  It  is  a  spell,  a  witchery,  ruled  by  chance  alone, 
inexplicable — a  fairy  queen  enamored  of  a  clown  with  ass’s  ears.”  6 
But  in  McTeague,  oddly  enough,  the  same  instinct  is  judged  and 
pronounced  evil.  Norris  abandons  the  amoral  attitude  and  argues 
that  heritage  from  the  lower  life  is  evil.  It  is  the  weeds  that  spring 
up  and  stifle,  as  in  Sherwood  Anderson’s  “Seeds.” 

Below  the  fine  fabric  of  all  that  was  good  in  him  ran  the  foul  stream  of 
hereditary  evil,  like  a  sewer.  The  vices  and  sins  of  his  father  and  his 
father’s  father,  to  the  third  and  fourth  and  five  hundredth  generation, 
tainted  him.  The  evil  of  an  entire  race  flowed  in  his  veins.  Why  should  it 
be?  He  did  not  desire  it.  Was  he  to  blame?  7 

The  entire  handling  of  sex  in  Trina,  from  the  first  frightened 
yielding  to  the  later  docile  submission  to  Mac’s  brutality,  his 
sadism,  is  admirably  handled  from  the  point  of  view  of  modern 
psychology.  Norris  was  not  a  psychologist  but  in  this  he  succeeded 
surprisingly. 

Romantic  Elements.  Yet  even  in  this  severe  study  Norris  has 
yielded  to  his  romantic  tendencies. 

1.  His  patent  effort  to  give  dramatic  unity  to  the  whole  through 
the  symbol  of  gold.  An  exaggeration  that  is  almost  Dickens-like, 
with  its  warping  singleness.  The  gold  tooth,  the  $5,000,  Trina ’s 
twenty-dollar  gold  pieces,  the  imaginary  gold  plate  of  Maria 
Macapa,  the  absurd  canary  in  the  gilt  cage,  the  discovery  of  the 
gold  mine.  The  wonder  is  that  he  didn’t  give  Trina  gold  hair 
instead  of  black. 

2.  The  use  of  a  minor  action:  Maria  Macapa  and  old  Zerkow. 
The  same  pursuit  of  a  phantom  and  the  same  outcome  in  murder. 
McTeague  and  Trina  are  real;  Maria  and  Zerkow  are  grotesques. 

3.  The  use  of  foils:  Old  Grannis  and  Miss  Baker.  Justified  in 
romantic  literature  by  contrast.  The  self-effacing,  timid  drawing 
together  contrasted  with  the  brute  directness  of  McTeague.  They 
do  not  marry,  and  preserve  their  dream  world. 

«  Frank  Norris,  Complete  Works,  New  York,  n.  d.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  58. 

7  Ibid.,  p.  22. 


332 


ADDENDA 


4.  The  use  of  the  revenge  motive:  Marcus  Schouler — the  dra¬ 
matic  pursuit  into  Death  Valley  and  the  end. 

“VANDOVER  AND  THE  BRUTE” 

An  unfinished  work — but  a  huge  and  terrible  torso. 

Theme.  Revealed  in  the  title.  The  two  natures  of  man  and  the 
sloughing-oflf  of  the  higher  till  the  wolf  is  left.  Done  with  a  terrible 
directness,  till  the  naked  man  is  on  all  fours,  padding  up  and  down 
in  his  room.  A  grim  and  sordid  theme  but  not  quite  achieved.  The 
thing  got  away  from  him.  If  he  had  chiseled  it  as  he  chiseled 
McTeague ,  holding  it  off  objective  and  amoral,  it  would  have  been 
a  tremendous  piece.  But  it  is  insufficiently  motivated. 

Determinism.  A  study  in  will.  Vandover  set  over  against  Charlie 
Geary  and  Dolly  Haight.  The  latter  a  victim  of  momentary  weak¬ 
ness;  the  former  a  victim  of  constitutional  pliability.  A  sensuous 
egotism  that  grows  and  consumes.  Geary  alone  survives — the 
egoist  who  drives  forward  ruthlessly.  A  study  of  the  slow,  long 
descent — a  chain  of  circumstances  that  finally  binds  him  hand  and 
foot.  His  props  knocked  away  one  by  one — partly  by  fate,  partly 
by  himself:  his  father,  the  girl  whom  he  loves,  his  concern  for 
respectable  opinion,  his  art,  his  money.  The  conclusion  intensely 
dramatic — more  so  than  the  romance  of  McTeague. 

The  comment  of  Garland  on  McTeague  applies  equally  to  Van¬ 
dover:  What  avail  is  this  study  of  sad  lives?  for  it  does  not  even 

lead  to  a  notion  of  social  betterment.”  His  interest  is  “not  that  of 
the  ethical  teacher.” 

“the  octopus” 

McTeague  and  Vandover  are  of  the  city  and  its  sordid  evil  ways. 
They  are  studies  in  psychology.  The  Octopus  is  of  the  great  Cali¬ 
fornia  valleys  and  the  evils  that  have  come  into  the  farm  life  with 
the  railroad.  It  is  a  study  in  economics — the  first  of  a  long  series  of 
such  studies.  One  can  easily  see  how  the  theme  caught  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  Norris,  how  his  mind  felt  the  relief  from  the  narrow  world 
and  sordid  wretchedness  of  V andover.  A  certain  magnificence  in 
Norris  responded  to  the  epic  breadth  of  the  valleys— they  fired  his 
imagination  the  vast  sweep  and  power  of  nature:  the  rich  soil, 
the  brilliant  sun  that  lays  its  palpitating  heat  upon  the  land,  the 
quick  response  in  flowers  and  fruit.  The  land  is  eager  to  produce; 
its  fruitfulness  is  overpowering.  There  is  an  epic  sweep  of  life  and 


NATURALISM  IN  AMERICAN  FICTION 


333 


reproduction  here;  and  this  epic  of  the  soil  is  linked  with  the  trag¬ 
edy  wrought  by  the  Southern  Pacific — the  economic  machinery 
of  man ’s  making.  The  facts  were  well  known  and  they  took  hold  of 
Norris’s  imagination.  His  sympathy  is  aroused  and  yet  instead  of 
attacking  the  railroad  he  weaves  it  into  his  deterministic  philos¬ 
ophy. 

Theme.  Ostensibly  the  wheat.  Norris  planned  a  huge  trilogy  of 
its  growing  ( The  Octopus ),  marketing  (The  Pit),  consumption  (The 
Wolf — never  written).  In  reality,  the  impotence  of  unimportant 
individuals  in  the  struggle  with  things  as  they  are.  In  The  Octopus 
the  individual  is  dwarfed  by  the  vast  spaces,  he  is  crumpled  and 
despoiled  by  the  railroad.  The  flock  of  sheep  destroyed  by  the 
tram  is  only  a  symbol  of  the  men  and  women  of  the  valley,  under 
the  wheels  of  modern  industrialism. 

Action.  A  huge  canvas  with  crowding  figures  and  abundant 
action.  “The  canvas  swarms  with  actualities — plowing,  planting, 
harvesting,  sheep-herding,  merry-making,  rabbit-killing,  love, 
labor,  birth,  death” — all  keyed  high  and  swept  into  a  palpitating 
background.  A  “strongly  interwrought  group  of  episodes,”  that 
fall  into  certain  series  of  developments  too: 

1.  The  atrophy  of  Magnus  Derrick,  which  might  well  be  a  story 
in  itself. 

2.  The  development  of  Annixter,  “out  of  an  absolute,  yet  not 
gross,  materiality,”  through  the  love  of  Hilma  Tree;  and  then  their 
final  annihilation. 

3.  A  host  of  background  characters — supernumeraries — that 
give  a  sense  of  epic  sweep. 

The  Note  of  Romance.  The  riot  of  color,  of  life,  arouse  the  latent 
romance  of  his  nature.  He  cannot  remain  detached  but  projects 
himself  into  the  story  in  the  person  of  Vanamee.  He  returns  to  the 
use  of  the  symbol  as  in  McTeague — the  wheat.  He  allows  his  villain 
to  perish  melodramatically.  How  much  more  convincing  is  the 
figure  of  Charlie  Geary  setting  Vandover  to  work  than  S.  Behrman 
in  the  hold  of  the  vessel. 

In  the  end  he  abandons  the  amoral  attitude.  After  proclaiming 
the  doctrine  of  determinism— that  the  railroads  are  the  masters — 
not  the  puppets  of  men — he  takes  refuge  in  a  moral  order.  In  the 
large  balance,  the  wheat  remains,  rectifying  wrong — saving  other 
lives  to  make  good  what  it  here  destroys.  “The  larger  view  always 
and  through  all  shams,  all  wickednesses,  discovers  the  Truth  that 


334 


ADDENDA 


will,  in  the  end,  prevail,  and  all  things,  surely,  inevitably,  resist- 
lessly,  work  together  for  good.”  8  Nevertheless  in  contemplating 
the  injustice  done  by  the  railroads,  Norris  neither  demands  nor 
expects  relief. 

The  Octopus  exemplifies  Norris’  theory  of  broad-scale  work.  It 
“draws  conclusions  from  a  whole  congeries  of  forces,  social  develop¬ 
ment,  race  impulses.”  It  “devotes  itself  not  to  the  study  of  men 
but  of  man.” 


SIDNEY  LANIER* 

An  original  nature.  Rejects  both  the  genteel  tradition  and  the 
ideals  of  the  rising  middle  class.  An  artist  to  whom  life  means 
beauty. 

He  revivifies  nature— is  almost  pagan  in  his  adoration  of  the 
beauty  of  the  sun  and  water.  A  half-personification  of  the  sun- 
myth.  He  is  essentially  religious.  To  Longfellow  and  Tennyson 
nature  is  pretty  embroidery;  to  Emerson  it  is  a  dwelling-place  of 
the  oversoul;  to  Lanier  it  is  an  object  of  adoration.  See  “The 
Marshes  of  Glynn.” 

He  attacks  industrialism — the  first  of  the  poets  to  cry  out  against 
it  as  a  deadly  blight  on  life  and  civilization.  See  “Corn,”  “The 
Symphony,”  “The  Jacquerie.” 

He  seeks  a  new  religion,  recognizing  a  quantitative  element. 

8  Frank  Norris,  The  Octopus ,  New  York,  1906,  p.  652. 

*  Lecture  notes. — Publisher. 


THE  INCOMPARABLE  MR.  CABELL  * 


The  successive  volumes  of  James  Branch  Cabell  have  provided 
the  tribe  of  critical  Jeffries  with  a  rich  vein  of  diversion.  They  have 
recognized  no  closed  season  in  their  full-lunged  pursuit  of  the 
strange  heirs  of  Mr.  Cabell’s  invention,  and  such  Homeric  absurd¬ 
ities  of  comment  have  been  flung  at  him,  that  he  is  in  a  fair  way  to 
become  our  classic  example  of  the  fatuousness  of  contemporary 
estimates.  As  whimsical  as  Bernard  Shaw,  as  provocative  as 
Chesterton,  he  is  more  incomprehensible  than  either  to  all  readers 
who  do  not  choose  to  like  what  they  have  not  always  liked.  Pro¬ 
fessing  to  be  a  romancer,  and  defending  the  glory  of  romance  with 
inimitable  witchery  of  phrase,  he  writes  no  romance  that  lovers  of 
convention  can  understand.  The  lovely  fabrics  of  his  tales  of 
Poictesme  are  all  shimmer  and  sheen,  woven  of  magic  and  veiling 
mysteries,  instead  of  the  correct  taffeta  and  grosgrain;  and  the 
brilliant  stuff  of  his  tales  of  gallantry  is  fashioned  of  wit  and  poetry, 
instead  of  the  customary  wigs  and  sword  play.  Those  to  whom 
romance  suggests  When  Knighthood  Was  in  Flower,  will  find  only 
obscurities  and  coarseness  in  Figures  of  Earth  (1921)  and  Jurgen 
(1919,  enl.  ed.  1921);  and  those  who  delight  in  the  stage  rufflings 
of  Monsieur  Beaucaire,  will  discover  only  a  libertine  in  The  Cords 
of  Vanity  (1909,  rev.  ed.  1920).  And  if  the  reader  boggles  at  such 
tales  what  can  he  hope  to  make  of  that  strange,  ironical  whimsy, 
The  Cream  of  the  Jest  (191 7,  rev.  ed.  1922)?  One  needs  to  walk 
warily  in  dealing  with  Mr.  Cabell,  or  the  jest  of  which  he  is  such  a 
master  will  turn  sardonically  upon  the  critic.  In  all  his  thinking 
vague  hinterlands  lie  behind  the  commonplace,  cryptic  meanings 
lurk  behind  the  obvious;  and  the  credulous,  easy-going  reader  finds 
himself  puzzled,  and  at  last  floundering  quite  hopelessly  in  a  land 
of  bogs  and  marsh-lights.  And  yet  was  ever  another  writer  born  to 
us  Americans  so  insistent  upon  being  understood?  He  has  elabo¬ 
rated  his  views  of  life  and  art  at  length,  and  repeated  them  in  suc¬ 
cessive  volumes  over  nearly  a  score  of  years;  and  finally  in  what 
may  have  been  a  mood  of  sheer  disgust  at  the  stupidity  of  those  who 
buy  books,  he  reelaborated  his  philosophy  and  wrote  it  out  in  good 
*  Reprinted  by  permission  from  The  Pacific  Review,  December,  1921. — Publisher 

335 


336 


ADDENDA 


set  terms  within  the  covers  of  a  single  volume.  Beyond  Life  is  an 
essay  altogether  remarkable  for  its  haunting  beauty  of  phrase,  its 
honest  agnosticism,  its  brooding  irony.  It  is  enough  to  turn  one 
cynic  to  consider  that  so  noble  a  book  should  have  called  forth  from 
a  reputable  gentleman,  presumably  of  good  taste  and  sound  judg¬ 
ment,  the  comment  that  it  “contains  cheap  and  shallow  pessimistic 
observations  on  human  limitations.” 

That  Beyond  Life  (1919),  with  other  of  Mr.  Cabell’s  books,  con¬ 
tains  “observations  on  the  limitations  of  human  nature,”  is  quite 
obvious;  for  Mr.  Cabell  deals  in  comedy,  and  what  is  to  become  of 
comedy  if  it  shall  not  observe  those  limitations  and  laugh  at  them? 
That  it  is  even  pessimistic  may  likewise  be  argued  with  some  plau¬ 
sibility;  but  to  assert  that  it  is  cheap  and  shallow  is  preposterous. 
An  inquisitive  mind,  deeply  concerned  with  ultimate  values,  cannot 
be  cheap  and  shallow.  And  yet  the  fault  of  such  widespread  mis¬ 
interpretation  may  lie  in  part  at  Mr.  Cabell’s  own  doorstep.  An 
inveterate  jester,  his  sallies  often  carry  implications  far  beyond  the 
obvious;  his  strange  whimsies  spring  from  depths  of  thought  and 
emotion  beyond  the  understanding  of  the  careless.  His  attitude 
towards  life  is  an  odd  mixture  of  the  modern  and  the  medieval: 
there  is  a  medieval  simplicity  and  frankness,  a  naive  wonder  at  the 
mystery  that  underlies  the  common,  an  incorrigible  idealism;  and 
this  medieval  attitude  is  drenched  in  modern  agnosticism.  He 
passes  easily  from  a  broad  Chaucerian  humor  that  laughs  frankly 
at  the  relations  of  men  and  women,  to  a  mystical  idealization  of 
those  relations;  and  the  problem  of  reconciling  the  humor  and  the 
ideal  becomes  a  serious  business  with  him.  He  hates  the  cant  and 
dishonesty  of  our  bourgeois  existence,  and  he  refuses  to  take  seri¬ 
ously  the  host  of  petty  concerns  that  most  of  us  are  very  serious 
about.  If  he  were  less  the  artist  he  would  join  the  disaffected  and 
turn  to  rend  this  foolish  world;  but  the  spirit  of  comedy  saves  him 
and  he  contents  himself  with  a  jest.  But  the  Cabellian  jest  un¬ 
covers  depths  of  meditation  that  reveal  the  philosopher  and  the 
poet.  In  his  own  large  meaning  of  th6  word  Mr.  Cabell  is  an  econo¬ 
mist.  He  is  greatly  dissatisfied  with  the  “futile  body-wasting,” 
which  under  the  “dynamic  illusion  known  as  common  sense” 
passes  for  life,  and  is  concerned  to  discover  what  abiding  increment 
a  man  may  get  from  his  body  during  its  brief  existence  as  an  entity. 
His  mind  is  haunted  with  a  sense  of  realities  that  lie  beneath  the 
surface  appearances,  and  that  insist  on  trickling  from  his  pen  in 


THE  INCOMPARABLE  MR.  CABELL 


337 


strange  comments.  It  is  a  careless  reader  who  is  deceived  or  put 
off  the  scent  by  his  whimsical  vocabulary,  who  insists  on  conven¬ 
tional  meanings  for  words  which  Mr.  Cabell  chooses  to  use  otherwise 
than  conventional  persons  use  them.  Romance  and  realism— words 
with  which  he  plays  constantly  and  upon  which  he  hangs  his  philos¬ 
ophy — do  not  signify  the  spurious  romance  of  childish  minds,  or  the 
shoddy  realism  of  practical  minds.  If  one  must  insist  upon  translat¬ 
ing  his  vocabulary  into  ordinary  terms,  let  us  understand  that  to 
Mr.  Cabell  romance  and  realism  mean  idealism  and  conventional¬ 
ism;  and  to  the  profound  distinction  between  these  two  attitudes 
towards  life,  he  dedicates  his  work. 

I  have  called  Mr.  Cabell  a  poet,  and  the  justification  lies  in  his 
persistent  idealization  of  life  in  terms  of  beauty.  At  his  birth  he  was 
endowed  by  an  unkind  fate  with  imagination.  Now  imagination 
may  be  a  very  pretty  and  amiable  gift,  highly  useful  for  gilding 
one’s  egoism,  putting  honey  in  thistles,  proving  itself  practical  by 
arraying  life  in  gay  robes  in  order  that  it  may  seem  an  altogether 
lovely  and  desirable  mistress;  or  it  may  prove  a  decidedly  parlous 
faculty  to  play  with.  It  can  summon  bogies,  and  terrors  that  are 
vaster  and  more  real  than  bogies.  A  brooding  imagination  can  work 
havoc  with  one’s  complacency.  When  Carlyle  was  in  a  mood  to 
enjoy  his  nerves  he  would  let  his  imagination  range  beyond  the 
comfortable  confines  of  convention,  to  consider  the  universe  and 
the  position  of  man  therein — the  black  flow  of  time  and  the  terrify¬ 
ing  immensity  of  background  against  which  man  is  set;  and  he 
would  come  back  to  dinner  with  Jane  Welsh  Carlyle  with  a  sick 
stomach  and  an  ill  temper.  It  was  not  very  gallant,  but  it  was  very 
natural  to  a  man  unnerved  by  what  he  had  contemplated.  Con¬ 
sidered  with  open  eyes  reality  is  too  overpowering  for  weak  man, 
and  because  he  could  not  relieve  the  tension  with  a  jest,  Carlyle’s 
imagination  inflicted  chronic  dyspepsia  upon  him.  To  conventional 
persons  the  dyspepsia  and  Jane  Welsh  Carlyle’s  sharp  replies  to 
her  husband’s  ill  humor,  seem  the  important  reality,  and  the  over¬ 
powering  visions  of  time  and  space  that  were  at  the  root  of  the 
family  discord,  seem  no  other  than  romance.  In  this  curious  world 
of  convention  all  things  are  topsy-turvy,  and  it  needs  a  tremendous 
effort  of  will  to  set  them  only  a  little  right. 

To  this  effort  Mr.  Cabell’s  life  work  has  been  dedicated  with 
unruffled  urbanity.  Like  Carlyle  he  chooses  to  roam  far  in  his 
philosophic  quests,  and  like  Thoreau  he  comes  home  at  nightfall 


338 


ADDENDA 


with  little  more  than  a  handful  of  stardust  in  his  wallet.  He  loves 
to  sally  forth  on  the  greatest  of  adventures— the  pursuit  of  reality 
where  it  lies  broadcast,  hidden  from  practical  eyes  that  refuse  to 
see.  He  is  impelled  by  the  old  wonder  that  has  haunted  men  from 
the  beginning  of  their  long  upward  climb;  the  wonder  and  the  fear 
of  life.  Now  to  anyone  but  a  fool  or  a  poet,  only  too  plainly  life  is 
petty  and  gross  and  inconsequential,  from  the  moment  when  with 
superfluous  blood  and  pain  we  are  brought  into  the  world,  to  the 
time  when  we  return  by  an  unlovely  process  to  chemical  elements. 
It  is  compounded  of  vanity,  as  the  old  poet  long  ago  observed. 
The  practical,  about  which  we  make  so  much  pother  and  over  which 
we  chatter  so  foolishly,  is  only  an  illusion  which  men  hug  because 
it  keeps  them  in  self-conceit.  Mr.  Cabell  refuses  to  accept  any  such 
illusions  at  their  face  value.  He  will  not  be  humbugged  by  foolish 
persons  who  pretend  to  talk  wisely.  What  is  man?  he  insists  on 
asking:  A  parasite  on  the  thin  rind  of  a  planet  that  swings  silently 
through  interstellar  space — “an  ape  who  chatters  to  himself  of 
kinship  with  the  archangels  while  filthily  he  digs  for  groundnuts.” 
If  this  is  the  reality  to  which  the  philosopher  must  come  finally — 
and  like  Hamlet  Mr.  Cabell  does  not  shirk  the  contemplation  of 
graveyard  facts — then  must  the  thoughtful  man  accept  logically 
a  frank  pessimism,  and  on  this  foundation  build  such  a  hut  as  may 
best  shelter  him  for  the  few  days  of  his  unintelligible  life.  Over  this 
sorry  conclusion  Mr.  Cabell  broods  much,  and  because  he  is  a 
human  being  with  a  will  to  enjoy  life  and  think  well  of  himself,  he 
uses  every  faculty  to  scramble  out  of  the  pit  and  find  a  pleasanter 
refuge  for  the  brief  time  of  his  existence.  The  idealist  in  him 
engages  the  pessimist,  and  like  so  many  other  moderns  he  goes  out 
in  quest  of  that  which  may  keep  him  sane.  It  is  true  that  man  is  an 
ape  reft  of  his  tail  and  grown  rusty  at  climbing,  but  is  that  the 
whole  story?  It  is  evident  that  men  in  all  times  have  refused  to 
believe  that  they  are  not  something  other  than  apes — their  very 
dreams  seem  to  belie  a  conclusion  so  mean  and  ignoble.  Is  there  not 
some  deeper  elan  vital,  some  hidden  impulse  that  drives  man  for¬ 
ward  and  upward  even  while  his  mind  is  on  groundnuts?  “Yet 
more  clearly  do  I  perceive,”  argues  the  idealist,  “that  this  same 
man  is  a  maimed  god.  .  .  .  He  is  under  penalty  condemned  to 
compute  eternity  with  false  weights  and  to  estimate  infinity  with  a 
yardstick;  and  he  very  often  does  it.  .  .  .  There  lies  the  choice 
which  every  man  must  make — or  rationally  to  accept  his  bwn 


THE  INCOMPARABLE  MR.  CABELL 


339 


limitations?  or  stupendously  to  play  the  fool  and  swear  that  he  is  at 
will  omnipotent.” 

This  would  seem  to  be  a  hard  choice,  but  Mr.  Cabell  does  not 
hesitate.  He  patches  up  his  agnosticism  with  the  will  to  believe, 
on  the  pragmatic  grounds  that  it  seems  to  work.  For  man  “ra¬ 
tionally  to  accept  his  own  limitations,”  is  to  defeat  everything 
worth  while  in  life;  it  is  to  yield  the  battle  to  a  black  pessimism. 
Whereas  “stupendously  to  play  the  fool  and  swear  that  he  is  at 
will  omnipotent,”  may  end  in  creating  the  will  to  omnipotence,  and 
the  fool  in  some  preposterous  fashion  may  prove  that  he  is  indeed 
divine.  Let  man  but  accept  his  logical  limitations  and  he  returns 
to  the  ape  reft  of  more  than  his  tail,  fallen  to  gibbering  in  the  mud, 
refusing  to  take  hold  of  that  rope  of  sand  by  which  miraculously  he 
has  drawn  himself  forward  hitherto.  For  accepting  his  limitations 
means  contenting  himself  with  material  fact,  and  “the  trouble  with 
facts  seems  to  be,  that  if  one  treats  them  out  of  relation  to  the  rest 
of  life,  they  become  lies.”  In  the  “stupefying  mist  of  common 
sense”  men  walk  blindly.  The  practical,  the  conventional,  are 
alien  to  the  deeper  reality  which  is  shadowed  forth  by  emotions 
and  dreams;  which  refuses  to  disclose  itself  nakedly,  but  hides 
behind  symbols,  haunting  the  mind  even  while  one  is  pottering 
among  inconsequential.  This  deeper  reality  itself  may  be  but  a 
dream,  but  nevertheless  it  possesses  the  power  of  creating  a  will  to 
believe,  upon  which  hangs  man’s  destiny.  Hence  the  tales  which 
we  tell  ourselves  are  significant  because  through  some  occult  proc¬ 
ess  they  foreshadow  the  thing  that  may  be;  they  prod  the  foolish 
will  to  omnipotence  to  believe  that  we  shall  outgrow  the  ape.  For 
grown  rusty  at  climbing,  the  ape-man  “however  dimly,  feels  him¬ 
self  to  be  a  symbol,  and  the  frail  representative  of  Omnipotence  in  a 
place  that  is  not  home;  and  so  strives  blunderingly,  from  mystery 
to  mystery,  with  pathetic  makeshifts,  not  understanding  any¬ 
thing,  greedy  in  all  desires,  and  honeycombed  with  poltroonery, 
and  yet  ready  to  give  all,  and  to  die  fighting,  for  the  sake  of  that 
undemonstrable  idea.” 

It  is  because  he  is  terrified  at  the  meanness  of  what  practical 
men  call  reality,  that  Mr.  Cabell  turns  away  from  it  to  find  the 
true  life  in  dreams.  Not  only  are  they  pleasanter,  they  are  more 
useful;  they  are  all  that  man  has  to  aid  him  in  the  appalling  task  of 
getting  himself  out  of  the  slime,  that  he  may  walk  in  green  field  . 
We  need  to  turn  Prospero’s  words  around — our  dreams  are  such 


340 


ADDENDA 


stuff  as  we  are  made  on.  They  alone  are  real  and  salutary,  foi 
amid  all  their  ramblings  they  seem  dimly  to  suggest  some  end; 
amidst  their  rank  egoisms  they  seem  to  foreshadow  a  purpose:  and 
may  not  that  end  and  purpose  be  the  eventual  creation  of  a  life  for 
man  that  shall  be  worthy  of  his  dreams?  It  is  illogical  to  assume 
that  man  can  pull  himself  up  by  his  own  bootstraps,  but  how  else 
shall  he  pull  himself  up?  Is  not  man  the  inveterate  romancer  some¬ 
how  blindly  creating  a  noble  romance  of  man?  “To  what  does  the 
whole  business  tend?”  he  asks  at  the  conclusion  of  Beyond  Life, 
“ — why,  how  in  heaven’s  name  should  I  know?  We  can  but  be 
content  to  note  that  all  goes  forward,  toward  something.  ...  It 
may  be  that  we  are  nocturnal  creatures  perturbed  by  rumors  of  a 
dawn  which  comes  inevitably,  as  prologue  to  a  day  wherein  we  and 
our  children  have  no  part  whatever.  It  may  be  that  when  our 
arboreal  propositus  descended  from  his  palm  tree  and  began  to  walk 
upright  about  the  earth,  his  progeny  were  forthwith  committed 
to  a  journey  in  which  today  is  only  a  way-station.  Yet  I  prefer 
to  take  it  that  we  are  components  of  an  unfinished  world,  and 
that  we  are  but  as  seething  atoms  which  ferment  toward  its  mak¬ 
ing,  if  merely  because  man  as  he  now  exists  can  hardly  be  the 
finished  product  of  any  Creator  whom  one  could  very  heartily 
revere.  We  are  being  made  into  something  quite  unpredictable,  I 
imagine:  and  through  the  purging  and  the  smelting,  we  are  sus¬ 
tained  by  an  instinctive  knowledge  that  we  are  being  made  into 
something  better.  For  this  we  know,  quite  incommunicably,  and 
yet  as  surely  as  we  know  that  we  will  have  it  thus.  And  it  is  this 
will  that  stirs  in  us  to  have  the  creatures  of  earth  and  the  affairs  of 
earth,  not  as  they  are,  but  ‘as  they  ought  to  be,’  which  we  call 
romance.  But  when  we  note  how  visibly  it  sways  all  life  we  per¬ 
ceive  that  we  are  talking  about  God.” 

From  this  persistent  will  to  romance — the  incorrigible  propensity 
to  follow  the  dynamic  illusion  of  dreams  that  is  so  deep  an  instinct 
of  human  nature — Mr.  Cabell  deduces  a  conception  of  art  that  to 
careless  readers  seems  whimsically  perverse;  and  from  it  likewise 
emerges  the  lambent  irony  that  plays  like  diffused  lightning  about 
the  horizons  of  his  thought.  The  function  of  art  in  society,  he 
insists,  is  to  comfort  and  inspire  man  with  its  divine  beauty. 
Without  the  artist  this  is  but  a  grim  and  forbidding  place  where 
men  live;  and  unless  every  man  is  somewhat  the  artist,  and  seeks 
his  compensations  in  the  lure  of  romance,  it  must  remain  grirmand 


THE  INCOMPARABLE  MR.  CABELL 


341 


forbidding.  It  is  therefore  the  privilege  and  the  duty  of  the  artist 
“to  prevaricate  tenderly  about  the  universe”;  to  create  for  life  a 
meaning  that  is  not  apparent,  by  clothing  it  in  beauty  and  adducing 
for  it  a  noble  significance.  It  is  his  mission  to  lure  men  away  from 
the  contemplation  of  facts  which  terrify  or  debase,  from  all  ignoble 
and  depressing  realism,  to  pursue  the  ideal  and  entice  the  imagina¬ 
tion  to  enter  and  dwell  in  a  world  as  it  ought  to  be.  The  artist, 
therefore,  is  a  Moses  in  the  wilderness,  pointing  men  to  the  Prom¬ 
ised  Land,  and  even  enabling  them  to  go  forward  and  taste  its 
fruits  while  they  still  dwell  in  the  wilderness. 

Now  of  all  the  dreams  which  lure  men,  the  one  universal  and 
potent  dream,  Mr.  Cabell  asserts  with  Freudian  understanding,  is 
the  woman  dream.  Its  roots  are  deep  in  the  ape-animal;  it  drives 
men  inexorably,  for  upon  it  depends  the  very  existence  of  the  race. 
And  therefore,  a  shrewd  mother-nature  has  somehow  transmuted 
its  base  materials  into  the  very  stuff  of  romance,  commingling  with 
it  all  high  and  generous  impulses,  making  of  it  the  loveliest  dream 
that  visits  man’s  weak  head.  In  consequence  of  which  ironic  trans¬ 
mutation  this  lovely  dream  “hoodwinks  humanity  through  the 
dynamic  illusion  known  as  love,  in  order  that  humanity  may  en¬ 
dure,  and  the  groans  of  a  lover  be  perpetuated  in  the  wails  of  an 
infant.”  Considered  in  one  light  this  is  the  very  “cream  of  the 
jest”  that  nature  perpetrates  upon  man;  but  considered  in  another 
light,  does  it  not  turn  out  to  be  the  supreme  jest  which  man  has 
perpetrated  upon  nature?  For  once  he  has  been  taught  the  alpha¬ 
bet  of  romance,  through  the  crude  necessity  of  race  preservation, 
he  has  gone  far  in  his  studies,  and  turned  romancer  on  a  great  scale. 
From  this  raw  material  of  biological  sex-love  he  has  woven  the 
fabrics  of  his  religion,  of  his  art,  of  his  idealism;  he  has  dipped  it  in 
gleaming  dyes,  twisted  it  to  quaint  patterns,  fashioned  from  it 
lovely  robes  to  cover  what  is  ugly.  It  is  the  wellspring  and  source  of 
all  romance. 

Through  this  open  door  of  woman-worship  Mr.  Cabell  chooses 
to  enter  his  world  of  deeper  realities.  “There  is  in  every  human 
being  that  which  demands  communion  with  something  more  fine 
and  potent  than  itself,”  and  this  something  more  fine  and  potent  he 
seeks  in  the  woman  of  his  dreams.  It  was  so  when  the  world  was 
young,  and  it  will  be  so  as  long  as  there  is  youth  left  in  the  world. 
In  early  times  this  object  of  adoration  was  the  witch-woman,  the 
Circes  and  Calypsos  of  ancient  tales;  later  it  became  the  lady-mis- 


342 


ADDENDA 


tress  of  chivalric  ideals;  today  it  is  the  dream  maiden  whom  the 
young  man  woos  but  never  finds  in  marriage,  and  not  finding  her  is 
impelled  to  turn  to  the  ever-young  and  ever-lovely  Helens  and 
Ettarres  of  old  romance.  A  good  half  of  Mr.  Cabell’s  work  is  given 
over  to  this  curious  celebration  of  woman-worship.  It  is  elaborated 
in  Domnei  (1920),  in  Jurgen,  in  Figures  of  Earth.  In  the  strange 
tales  of  the  land  of  Poictesme  the  drama  flows  from  the  balking  and 
thwarting  of  this  woman  quest  by  the  Dame  Niafers  and  Dame 
Lisas  of  the  commonplace  world,  to  man’s  undoing.  Nevertheless 
“the  long,  high,  fruitless  questing  does  not  ever  end,  but,  rather,  is 
temporarily  remitted  for  the  society  of  Dame  Niafer  and  of  Dame 
Lisa.  For  .  .  .  one  perceives  that,  even  in  remote  Poictesme,  those 
aging  nympholepts,  Dom  Manuel  and  Jurgen — they  also — were 
heartened  to  endure  the  privileges  of  happily  married  persons  by  a 
sure  faith,  discreetly  left  unvoiced,  that  these  hard-won,  fond, 
wearisome,  and  implacable  wives  were,  after  all,  just  temporary 
makeshifts.  By  and  by  would  Freydis  and  Helen  return,  at  their 
own  season.” — For  the  dream  persists  in  the  very  face  of  present 
fact,  and  in  this  lies  man’s  hope.  “In  youth  all  men  that  live  have 
been  converts  if  but  in  transitory  allegiance,  to  that  religion  of  the 
world’s  youth — to  the  creed  of  domnei,  or  woman-worship.”  Now 
it  is  “the  very  essence  of  domnei,  that  the  woman  one  loves  is  prov¬ 
identially  set  between  the  lover’s  apprehension  and  God,  as  the 
mobile  and  vital  image  and  corporeal  reminder  of  Heaven,  as  a 
quick  symbol  of  beauty  and  holiness,  of  purity  and  perfection.  In 
her  the  lover  views  all  qualities  which  can  be  comprehended  by 
merely  human  faculties.”  “  If  but  in  honor,  his  heart  stays  bound  to 
his  first  and  only  real  love,  that  woman  of  whom  he  never  tires. 
Her  coming  is  not  yet.  He  can  but  wait,  sustained  by  his  sure 
faith  .  .  .  that  some  day  her  glory  will  be  apparent,  and  he  will 
enter  gladly  into  her  secret  kingdom,  and  will  find  her  kisses  all  that 
in  youth  he  foreknew  to  be  not  impossible.  .  .  .  And  meanwhile 
this  prescience,  somehow,  informs  all  art  .  .  .  and  makes  it  to  him 
a  vital  thing.  .  .  .  And  there  seems  to  be  no  beauty  in  the  world 
save  those  stray  hints  of  her,  whose  ultimate  revealment  is  not 
yet.  .  .  .  And  it  is  very  often  through  desire  to  express  his  faith 
in  this  withheld  perfection,  of  which  he  has  been  conscious  in 
broken  glimpses  from  afar,  that  he  turns  artist.  .  .  .  For  every  art 
is  a  confession  of  faith  in  that  which  is  not  yet.” 

But  however  adroitly  man  has  turned  the  jest  against  nature, 


THE  INCOMPARABLE  MR.  CABELL 


343 


and  erected  a  noble  palace  from  base  materials,  the  jest  remains, 
mixed  with  the  mortar,  and  the  structure  cannot  endure  for  long.  It 
is  insubstantial,  and  at  any  moment  the  cloud-capped  towers  may 
disintegrate  and  the  dream  palace  disappear,  leaving  not  a  rack 
behind.  There  remains  only  the  jest.  This  unhappy  ending  Mr. 
Cabell  foresees,  and  hence  emerges  the  profound  irony  that  under¬ 
lies  all  his  writing.  To  such  disillusionment  must  all  things  come. 
Life  is  no  more  than  a  comedy,  played  by  puppets;  bitter,  with 
more  tears  than  laughter  in  it;  yet  because  tears  are  futile  and  un¬ 
nerving,  what  remains  for  the  gallant  gentleman  but  to  confront 
life  with  a  jest?  Mr.  Cabell  does  not  wholly  forego  his  chivalric 
ideal  even  while  he  is  contemplating  the  vanity  of  all  endings  in  the 
light  of  their  beginnings.  As  Horvendile  the  clerk,  he  clings  to  it, 
even  though  he  is  doomed  to  walk  the  streets  of  Lichfield,  Virginia, 
in  the  form  of  Felix  Kennaston,  who  passes — to  his  own  incredu¬ 
lous  amusement — as  a  personage  of  some  importance,  with  two 
automobiles  and  money  in  four  banks.  He  possesses  the  magic  sigil 
of  Scoteia,  by  the  potency  of  which  he  can  send  forth  his  soul  to 
meet  Ettarre,  and  recover  the  raptures  that  Felix  Kennaston  no 
longer  knows.  But  the  sigil  of  Scoteia  turns  out  to  be  the  half-top 
of  a  pomade  glass  from  his  wife’s  dressing-table;  the  potency  is 
gone;  and  he  remains  at  last  no  more  than  a  respectable  citizen 
with  his  automobiles  and  money  in  four  banks.  The  Cream  of  the 
Jest  reduces  the  chivalric  ideal  to  pure  irony. 

By  a  transition  more  natural,  perhaps,  to  a  Virginian  than  to 
another  American,  Mr.  Cabell  turns  from  the  contemplation  of 
chivalry  to  the  study  of  gallantry;  and  shifts  the  theme  of  his  ro¬ 
mances  from  the  ecstatic  adoration  of  the  Woman,  whom  to  possess 
is  to  lose,  to  the  gay  pursuit  and  enjoyment  of  women.  In  “The 
Rivet  in  Grandfather’s  Neck”  he  chooses  to  set  a  decidedly  shabby 
and  roue  gallantry  over  against  a  somewhat  futile  and  antiquated 
southern  chivalry.  He  loves  both  the  gallant  and  the  gentleman, 
and  he  spares  neither;  they  are  equally  the  descendants  of  that 
Cavalier  ideal  which  flourished  so  rankly  in  the  soil  of  the  old 
planter  society;  nevertheless  the  quaint  and  lovable  Rudolph 
Musgrave  with  his  gentle  heroics  comes  off  distinctly  better  than 
his  brilliant  half-brother,  the  novelist  John  Charteris.  One  might, 
indeed,  wonder  at  Mr.  Cabell’s  treatment  of  the  artist  Charteris, 
were  it  not  so  distinctly  Shavian.  It  is  odd  how  similar  is  his  con¬ 
ception  of  the  artist  to  the  definition  of  Shaw — one  who  wriggles 


344  ADDENDA 

into  the  confidence  of  women  to  learn  their  secrets  only  to  betray 
them.  Nevertheless  Jack  Charteris,  the  brilliant  thinker  and  talker 
of  Beyond  Life,  mouthpiece  of  the  Cabellian  philosophy,  deserves 
better  treatment  than  he  gets  in  the  story  of  this  sorry  escapade;  he 
comes  quite  too  near  the  likeness  of  the  mountebank  Sheridan.  In 
The  Cords  of  Vanity  gallantry  reveals  itself  more  attractively;  it  is 
gilded  with  youth  and  wit  and  poetry.  It  is  Congreve  at  his  best, 
scintillating,  brilliant,  with  a  delightful  affectation  of  pose  and 
gesture;  and  it  is  Marlowe  also,  with  its  galloping  wit  steeped  in 
pure  poetry.  There  is  the  true  Elizabethan  rapture  of  fine  words 
and  lovely  images  and  quaint  conceits.  Meantime,  says  young 
Robert  Townsend,  “  being  in  love,  I  refined  upon  the  notions  of 
love  with  the  ingenuity  of  an  Elizabethan.’5  There  you  have  the 
spirit  of  the  book.  It  is  more  than  a  pretty  piece  of  paganism;  it  is 
the  brightest  tale  of  gallantry  in  our  literature,  masterly  in  the 
restrained  irony  of  its  inimitable  conclusion. 

It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  mood  which  finally  will  receive 
dramatization  from  Mr.  Cabell  cannot  be  summed  up  in  the  ideal 
of  gallantry.  What  that  mood  is  one  finds  revealed  at  length  by 
John  Charteris  in  Beyond  Life.  It  is  the  quintessence  of  irony 
distilled  from  long  observation  of  human  life,  but  it  is  not  Con¬ 
greve,  much  less  is  it  Sheridan.  Those  shameless  and  selfish  roues 
began  as  artists  but  they  ended  as  mountebanks;  life  taught  them 
cynicism  and  not  tenderness;  it  sharpened  their  wit  and  dulled 
their  sympathy.  The  higher  irony  lay  quite  beyond  their  natures. 
But  with  Mr.  Cabell  tenderness,  sympathy,  an  ardent  concern  for 
the  inevitable  failure  that  lies  in  wait  upon  aspiration,  are  so  strong 
and  urgent  that  under  the  governance  of  a  mind  less  intellectual, 
they  must  inevitably  run  into  sentimentality.  But  there  is  in  Mr. 
Cabell  something  of  the  intellectual  austerity  of  Matthew  Arnold, 
and  it  conducts  him  to  the  same  ends.  Consider  such  a  passage  as 
this:  “Through  a  merciful  dispensation,  we  are  one  and  all  of  us 
created  very  vain  and  very  dull.  .  .  .  Vanity  it  is  that  pricks  us 
indefatigably  to  play  the  ape  to  every  dream  romance  induces;  yet 
vanity  is  but  the  stirrup-cup:  and  urgent  need  arises  that  human 
dullness  retain  us  (as  it  does)  securely  blinded,  lest  we  observe  the 
wayside  horrors  of  our  journey  and  go  mad.  One  moment  of  clear 
vision  as  to  man’s  plight  in  the  universe  would  be  quite  sufficient 
to  set  the  most  philosophic  gibbering.  Meanwhile  with  bandaged 
eyes  we  advance:  and  human  sanity  is  guided  by  the  braven.and 


345 


THE  INCOMPARABLE  MR.  CABELL 

pitiable  and  tireless  dullness  of  mankind.  .  .  .  Yet  how  varied  are 
the  amiable  activities  of  human  dullness,  which  tend  alike  to  pro¬ 
tect  and  to  enliven  human  progress!  Dullness  it  is,  of  course,  that 
brews  and  quaffs  Dutch  courage;  .  .  .  that  fosters  salutary  op¬ 
timism  as  to  the  destiny  of  mankind,  in  flat  defiance  of  everything 
mankind  can  do,  and  does  unblushingly.  .  .  .  And  finally  dullness 
it  is  that  lifts  up  heart  and  voice  alike,  to  view  a  parasite  infesting 
the  epidermis  of  a  midge  among  the  planets,  and  cries,  Behold,  this 
is  the  child  of  God,  All-mighty  and  All-worshipful,  made  in  the  likeness 
of  his  Bather!  .  .  .  These  and  how  many  other  wholesome  miracles 
are  daily  brought  about  by  our  dullness,  by  our  brave  and  pitiable 
and  tireless  dullness,  by  our  really  majestic  dullness,  in  firm  alliance 
with  the  demiurgic  spirit  of  romance.  .  .  .  For  that  to  which 
romance  conducts,  in  all  the  affairs  of  life  ...  is  plain  enough — 
distinction  and  clarity,  and  beauty  and  symmetry,  and  tenderness 
and  truth  and  urbanity.” 

Here  then  is  the  note  that  still  awaits  adequate  dramatization  in 
a  comedy  greater  than  he  has  yet  written — a  cosmic  irony  suffused 
with  tenderness  and  truth  and  urbanity.  Above  all,  urbanity. 
Mr.  Cabell  has  played  too  long  with  the  ideal  of  gallantry;  he  has 
devoted  too  much  precious  time  to  creating  Millamants  to  fall  in 
love  with;  he  has  listened  too  credulously  to  the  voice  of  Congreve. 
“I  have  read,”  says  Charteris,  out  of  Congreve,  “that  the  secret  of 
gallantry  is  to  accept  the  pleasures  of  life  leisurely,  and  its  in¬ 
conveniences  with  a  shrug;  as  well  as  that,  among  other  requisites, 
the  gallant  person  will  always  consider  the  world  with  a  smile  of 
toleration,  and  his  own  doings  with  a  smile  of  honest  amusement, 
and  Heaven  with  a  smile  which  is  not  distrustful — being  thoroughly 
persuaded  that  God  is  kindlier  than  the  genteel  would  regard  as 
rational.”  Surely  the  cosmic  irony  that  loves  men’s  dullness  be¬ 
cause  it  alone  can  preserve  them  from  madness,  and  retorts  upon 
the  cosmic  terrors  with  a  jest,  is  higher  than  gallantry  and  more 
enduring.  It  arrives  at  tolerance  for  all  human  shortcomings;  it 
embraces  high  and  low  in  its  sympathies;  it  achieves  urbanity  as  a 
final  goal.  It  is  the  stuff  of  which  great  literature  is  made.  And  Mr. 
Cabell  is  creating  great  literature.  A  self-reliant  intellectual,  rich 
in  the  spoils  of  all  literatures,  one  of  the  great  masters  of  English 
prose,  the  supreme  comic  spirit  thus  far  granted  us,  he  stands  apart 
from  the  throng  of  lesser  American  novelists,  as  Mark  Twain  stood 
apart,  individual  and  incomparable. 


THE  PROBLEM  NOVEL  AND  THE  DIVERSION  FROM 

NATURALISM  * 

No  sooner  was  naturalism  fairly  under  way  than  it  was  well-nigh 
submerged  under  a  wave  of  social  speculation  and  inquiry.  The  years 
1903-1917  were  a  distinctive  period— a  time  of  extraordinary  fer¬ 
ment,  when  America  was  seeking  to  readjust  her  ideals  and  insti¬ 
tutions  to  a  revolutionary  economic  order  that  had  come  upon  her. 
The  popular  phase  was  revealed  in  the  muckracking  movement, 
a  movement  which  instructed  the  American  middle  class  in  certain 
elements  of  economics — particularly  the  close  connection  between 
economics  and  politics.  But  underneath,  an  intellectual  revolution 
was  in  progress,  setting  steadily  towards  a  new  social  philosophy. 
The  old  America  had  been  intensely  conservative,  naively  pro¬ 
vincial  and  self-satisfied,  compassed  by  a  complacence  founded  on 
optimism — the  gospel  of  the  business  man.  The  new  America  was 
eager  and  hopeful,  impatient  to  square  institutions  to  the  new 
conditions.  The  total  movement  was  profoundly  democratic— a 
new  Jacksonianism  rising  in  protest  against  a  menacing  plutocracy. 

1.  The  Movement  of  Criticism.  The  work  of  a  vigorous  social 
idealism.  Passed  through  three  broad  phases: 

a.  Political.  The  movement  of  Progressivism,  1903-1912.  An 
attempt  to  democratize  the  machinery  of  government  to  the  end 
that  the  will  of  the  majority  shall  prevail.  Its  impulse  and  much 
of  its  program  came  from  Populism;  and  it  resulted  in  a  clarification 
of  the  issue  between  republicanism  and  democracy.  An  attack  on 
the  representative  system  and  the  checks  and  balances  of  the 
Fathers.  It  gave  rise  to  a  critical  examination  of  the  spirit  and 
purpose  of  the  Constitution.1 

b.  Economic.  A  growing  conviction  that  talk  of  political  democ¬ 
racy  is  futile  except  in  so  far  as  it  leads  to  economic  democracy. 
That  power  is  economic  in  origin  and  that  those  who  control  the 
economics  will  control  the  government.  The  gospel  of  economic 
determinism.  Certain  conclusions  emerged : 

*  Lecture  notes. — Publisher. 

1  See  J.  Allen  Smith,  The  Spirit  of  American  Government;  W.  A.  White,  The  Old 
Order  Changeth.  •» 


346 


THE  PROBLEM  NOVEL 


347 


1.  That  capitalism  is  no  longer  competitive  but  monopolistic. 

2.  That  laissez-faire  ism  no  longer  suffices. 

3.  That  centralization  has  submerged  the  individual  citizen; 
that  he  is  impotent  before  the  leviathan  corporation;  and  that 
henceforth  the  struggle  is  to  be  between  organized  groups  for  the 
control  of  the  state.2 

c.  Literary.  An  examination  and  rejection  of  traditional  literary 
and  cultural  ideas.  An  attack  upon: 

1.  Puritan  reticence  and  smug  respectability. 

2.  Middle-class  optimism  and  sentimentality. 

Led  by  H.  L.  Mencken,  Ludwig  Lewisohn,  and  the  younger  in¬ 
tellectuals.  The  bias  aristocratic. 

2.  The  Incoming  of  Old-World  Thought.  The  breaking-down  of 
the  older  provincialism  and  the  reception  of  new  ideas. 

a.  The  philosophy  of  collectivism.  Derived  chiefly  from  Ger¬ 
many  and  England;  largely  Marxian  and  Fabian.  The  conviction 
that  the  state  must  absorb  the  trust.  Later  the  appearance  of 
syndicalism  and  guild  socialism,  based  on  a  distrust  of  the  bureau¬ 
cratic,  omnicompetent  state.  Anarchism  has  remained  alien  in 
spirit.3 

b.  The  new  aristocracy.  A  reversion  from  an  easy-going  Jack- 
sonianism  based  on  the  doctrine  of  equalitarianism.  A  direct  denial 
of  that  doctrine  and  the  theory  of  leadership.  In  business  the 
doctrine  of  the  expert  and  the  rule  of  efficiency.  In  philosophy  the 
doctrine  of  the  intellectual  aristocrat — a  suggestion  of  Nietzsche 
and  the  will  to  power.  Thus  Mencken  joins  hands  with  Judge  Gary 
in  upholding  the  ethics  of  the  strong.  The  total  result  an  effective 
denial  of  our  traditional  ideal  of  democracy. 

c.  The  problem  novel.  All  this  ferment  entered  into  literature, 
tyrannizing  in  its  insistence.  Old  forms  became  old-fashioned  over¬ 
night.  The  novel  was  so  useful  that  it  was  drafted  by  the  new 
crusading  enthusiasm.  Romance  and  naturalism  alike  were  swept 
away;  the  political  novel  and  the  economic  novel  took  their  place 
to  arouse  public  opinion  to  action.  It  was  the  glorification  of  prop¬ 
aganda.  Except  for  James  Branch  Cabell  and  Edith  Wharton 
not  a  writer  escaped.  There  is  something  pathetic  in  the  way  the 

2  Representative  books  are:  C.  A.  Beard,  An  Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Con¬ 
stitution  (1913)  and  The  Economic  Basis  of  Politics  (1922);  Walter  Lippman,  Public 
Opinion  (1922). 

3  See  Bertrand  Russell,  Proposed  Roads  to  Freedom  (1919);  Richard  Roberts,  The 
Unfinished  Programme  of  Democracy  (1920). 


348 


ADDENDA 


harmless  bleating  romantics  were  dragged  at  the  chariot  wheels  of 
social  problems.  Booth  Tarkington,  Mary  Johnston,  Winston 
Churchill,  William  Allen  White,  were  sacrificed  equally  with  poten¬ 
tial  naturalists  like  Robert  Herrick,  Upton  Sinclair,  and  Ernest 
Poole.  Their  careers  may  be  seen  from  Churchill,  Poole,  and  Her¬ 
rick. 

i.  Winston  Churchill.  [The  most  representative  of  the  spirit  of 
Progressivism.]  A  conscientious  middle-class  romantic.  Churchill 
was  a  faithful  reflector  of  middle-class  movements.  His  work  falls 
into  three  phases: 

[a.  Romantic  historical  tales.  Richard  Carvel  (1899)  the  type  of 
Cavalier  romance.  A  blend  of  Thackeray’s  Henry  Esmond  and 
The  Virginians,  John  Paul  Jones  added  for  extra  historical 
flavor.  A  double  background:  (1)  the  old  South  of  the  Revolu¬ 
tion  with  a  Loyalist  villain  and  a  patriot  hero;  (2)  the  London 
of  Brooks  Club  and  a  gaming  aristocracy,  with  Charles  Fox.  The 
heroine  another  edition  of  Beatrix  Esmond  the  hero  another 
Henry  Esmond.  The.  Crisis  (1910)  a  romance  of  the  borderland 
of  the  Civil  War:  a  fire-eating  Southern  heroine  and  a  sober 
Yankee-Puritan  hero.  The  Crossing  (1904)  a  romance  of  the  set¬ 
tlement  of  the  Inland  Empire.  A  theme  not  yet  adequately 
dealt  with  in  American  fiction.  The  story  breaks  in  two:  the 
first  half  Churchill’s  best  work  in  romance;  the  last  half  his 
worst.*] 

b.  Political  novels.  Coincided  with  the  rise  of  the  Progressive 
movement.  Coniston  (1906)  a  study  of  the  legislative  boss  in  New 
Hampshire.  A  reflection  of  his  experience  in  the  state  legislature. 
How  the  “interests,”  and  in  particular  the  railroads,  manage  to 
put  their  bills  through.  Jethro  Bass  sells  political  control  to  the 
highest  bidder. 

Mr.  Crewe’s  Career  (1908):  the  same  theme  a  generation  later. 
Consolidation  of  the  railroads  has  brought  about  absentee  dicta¬ 
torship  of  state  politics.  The  boss  has  removed  to  New  York  and 
manages  the  legislature  through  his  local  lawyer.  The  philosophy 
of  big-business  prosperity  rests  on  property  rights,  held  in  trustee¬ 
ship  by  the  corporations  that  fill  the  empty  dinner  pails,  make  and 
unmake  business  confidence.  The  revolt  of  the  younger  generation 
— Austen  Vane  and  Victoria  Flint,  in  whom  stirs  a  new  social 


A» 


conscience. 


*  From  the  syllabus. — Publisher. 


THE  PROBLEM  NOVEL 


349 


c.  Economic  novels.  Began  with  The  Inside  of  the  Cup  (1913),  a 
venture  in  higher  criticism  and  social  interpretation.  So  compare 
Robert  Elsmere  (1888).  An  attack  on  old  dogmas  and  an  attempt  to 
discover  the  democratic  springs  of  Christianity.  The  clash  between 
the  reborn  Son  of  God  and  an  unregenerate  society,  and  the  need 
to  establish  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  this  world.  The  church  today 
controlled  by  business  subscriptions.  The  solution  to  be  sought  in  a 
free  pulpit,  supported  by  the  common  people,  preaching  a  new 
social  Christianity. 

A  Far  Country  (1915),  a  study  in  the  emptiness  of  the  profit 
motive.  A  background  of  banking — J.  P.  Morgan  and  Company. 
The  dissatisfaction  of  the  prodigal  son  who  has  wasted  his  intel¬ 
lectual  and  moral  patrimony — the  lawyer  who  sells  his  brain  to  rise 
and  loses  the  things  that  make  life  worth  while.  His  conversion 
brings  the  call  to  self-education. 

The  Dwelling  Place  of  Light  (1917),  a  study  of  the  blighting  effect 
of  industrialism  on  the  native  Yankee  stock  that  has  failed  to  rise 
into  the  exploiting  class.  The  restlessness  of  modern  life  due  to  the 
failure  of  normal  instincts  to  find  satisfaction  in  daily  existence — 
an  emptiness  due  to  loss  of  beauty,  freedom,  creative  craftsman¬ 
ship.  The  search  for  compensation  brings  death  and  not  life.  A 
background  of  the  Lawrence  strike  and  syndicalism. 

2.  Robert  Herrick.  The  most  promising  of  the  potential  natural¬ 
ists.  An  intellectual  fascinated  by  the  crude  materialism  of  Chicago 
in  the  late  nineties.  Suffered  from  the  inhibitions  of  a  Puritan 
idealism;  the  problems  of  this  raw  world  cried  aloud  for  solution — 
the  woman  question,  the  labor  question,  the  problem  of  the  pro¬ 
fessions — and  warped  him  away  from  naturalism,  making  him  an 
easy  victim  of  the  new  social  enthusiasm.  The  key  to  his  thought — 
economic  determinism. 

The  Memoirs  of  an  American  Citizen  (1905).  His  best  work  and 
the  nearest  approach  to  naturalism.  A  detailed  study  of  the 
American  business  man — the  captain  of  industry  who  rises  in  a 
competitive  society  by  his  own  will.  The  competitive  order,  he 
perceives,  requires  an  ethics  different  from  the  Christian  ideal. 
The  survival  of  the  fittest  means  the  survival  of  the  strongest,  the 
most  cunning  and  unscrupulous.  The  realist  who  deals  with  facts 
discovers  that  he  lives  in  a  world  of  pigs — little  pigs  of  the  village, 
larger  hogs  of  the  city.  To  get  in  the  trough  a  man  must  have 
fingers  and  toes  and  use  them.  The  world  belongs  to  the  strong. 


350 


ADDENDA 


That  which  gives  dignity  is  bigness:  the  larger  the  hog,  the  more 
imposing.  Little  business  is  dirty  and  petty,  but  big  business  may 
become  poetic.  To  grind  a  mess  of  sausages  is  messy,  but  to  provide 
sausages  for  every  breakfast  table  in  America  is  grandiose.  To 
realize  his  ambition  Van  Harrington  plays  fast  and  loose  with 
conventional  ethics,  but  unlike  Frank  Cowperwood  he  seeks  a  new 
ethics.  As  a  superman  his  work  will  be  justified  by  its  creativeness, 
by  its  service  to  humanity. 

A  Life  for  a  Life  (1910).  In  certain  other  of  his  work  Herrick 
betrays  naturalistic  tendencies,  notably  in  The  Web  of  Life  (1900), 
where  he  considers  the  problem  of  social  complexity  and  how  it 
binds  the  life  of  men  and  women  and  determines  their  fate.  But  in 
A  Life  for  a  Life  he  surrenders  wholly  to  the  problem.  His  theme 
is  how  the  predatory  egoism  of  the  profit-struggle  may  be  cured, 
and  he  presents  alternative  solutions:  syndicalism  and  Chris¬ 
tianity.  The  cure  lies  in  individual  self-conquest — breaking 
through  the  web  of  “things  as  they  are”  and  choosing  life  instead 
of  power. 

Herrick  was  on  the  threshold  of  naturalism.  He  felt  the  complex¬ 
ity  of  life  and  the  determining  force  of  that  complexity;  but  he 
failed  to  achieve  the  attitude  of  objectivity. 

3.  Ernest  Poole.  The  Harbor  (1915).  The  culmination  of  the 
novel  of  naturalistic  propaganda  and  the  most  widely  read.  A 
dramatic  record  of  a  changing  industrial  order,  traced  through 
three  stages:  (1)  The  old  world  of  small  competitive  business  that  is 
dead;  (2)  The  present  world  of  corporation  control;  (3)  The  world  of 
syndicalistic  control  that  struggles  to  be  born. 

Against  this  changing  world  stands  the  young  idealist  troubled 
in  his  loyalties,  who  sets  up  different  gods  to  worship:  (1)  The  idol 
of  art— aloofness  from  the  mass  struggle;  (2)  The  idol  of  efficiency 
by  the  supermen  who  rule  in  trusteeship;  (3)  The  idol  of  mass 
solidarity  and  workers’  control — the  conclusion  that  is  on  the  dawn 
of  realization:  “The  world  for  all  the  workers.”  Conclusion.  The 
ferment  of  social  thought,  shot  through  with  Marxianism,  famil¬ 
iarized  the  American  novelists  with  one  doctrine  important  for  the 
naturalist — the  doctrine  of  economic  determinism.  In  none  of  them 
did  it  pass  over  into  a  larger  conception  of  philosophical  determin¬ 
ism,  and  this  sets  the  limitation  to  their  naturalism.  The  common 
zeal  for  reform  or  revolution,  moreover,  kept  them  from  objec¬ 
tivity.  In  none  is  there  the  calm  detachment  and  the  amoral 


THE  PROBLEM  NOVEL 


351 


presentation  of  material  without  which  naturalism  sinks  into  prop¬ 
aganda.  Their  position  presupposes  a  large  confidence  in  individ¬ 
ual  initiative — a  confidence  in  the  power  of  men  to  alter  the 
world  they  live  in.  It  is  admirable,  but  it  is  not  the  way  of  the 
naturalists,  who  do  not  seek  to  change  what  they  regard  as  an 
essentially  unresponsive  world  that  changes  only  after  its  own  way. 


JACK  LONDON:  THE  NOVELIST  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT* 

Experienced  the  harsh  contacts  of  a  seasonal  worker  and  tramp. 
Became  a  Marxian  socialist  and  revolutionist,  preaching  the  war 
of  the  classes  in  The  Iron  Heel  (1908),  The  Revolution  (1910),  and 
other  works.  A  man  of  strong  vital  energy  with  a  philosophy 
shaped  by  Darwin,  Spencer,  and  Nietzsche.  Emphasizes  a  pas¬ 
sionate  will-to-power,  a  superman  of  swift  and  violent  action. 

The  Call  of  the  Wild  (1903);  a  study  in  atavism,  brilliant,  poetic, 
set  against  a  wild  Alaska  background.  The  resurgence  of  the 
primitive  wolf-instincts  in  a  domesticated  dog. 

The  Sea  Wolf  (1904);  the  frankest  statement  in  American  litera¬ 
ture  of  the  unbridled  will-to-power,  egoistic,  amoral.  A  malignant 
ferocity  in  a  philosophical,  herculean  sea  captain,  whose  body  is 
destroyed  by  paresis,  but  whose  malignancy  is  unconquered. 

Martin  Eden  (1909);  autobiographical.  So  compare  John  Barley¬ 
corn  (1913).  The  former  deals  with  his  struggle  to  educate  himself, 
to  write,  and  to  gain  recognition.  A  background  of  his  experience 
at  the  University  of  California.  A  profound  contempt  for  bourgeois 
standards  of  life  and  thought.  The  note  of  revolution  and  the  laps¬ 
ing  of  the  will-to-live. 

London  carries  to  the  extreme  the  “elemental”  of  Norris, 
translating  it  into  the  primitive  and  abysmal.  A  potential  natural¬ 
ist  in  his  amoral  attitude  and  his  underlying  pessimism,  but  carried 
away  by  zeal  of  revolution.  Lacks  restraint  and  finish. 

*  From  the  syllabus. — Publisher. 


352 


UPTON  SINCLAIR* 


The  most  insistent  and  outspoken  of  the  muckrakers.  Began  as 
a  novelist,  but  his  art  submerged  by  propaganda — a  profound 
suspicion  of  capitalism  and  all  its  ways. 

The  Jungle  (1906);  a  story  of  the  packing  houses  and  the  im¬ 
migrant:  the  technique  of  “speeding  up”  and  the  labor  scrap-heap. 
The  social  consequences  of  the  profit  principle — saving  everything 
but  the  squeal  of  the  hog  and  the  health  of  the  laborer. 

King  Coal  (1917);  a  story  of  the  Rockefeller  coal  fields  in 
Colorado  and  the  miners’  union.  Probably  his  most  skillful  story. 

Numerous  other  titles,  among  them:  The  Brass  Check,  an  exami¬ 
nation  of  the  American  newspaper — the  charge  that  these  are  the 
tools  of  plutocracy;  The  Goose  Step,  an  examination  of  the  American 
university — the  charge  that  these  serve  wealth;  The  Goslings,  an 
attack  upon  the  public  school  as  an  agent  of  capitalism. 

*  From  the  syllabus. — Publisher. 


353 


THEODORE  DREISER:  CHIEF  OF  AMERICAN 
NATURALISTS  * 

Against  this  background  of  eager  ferment  and  various  propa¬ 
ganda  stands  Theodore  Dreiser,  who  is  of  this  changing  world  and 
yet  apart  from  it:  the  most  detached  and  keenly  observant  of  all 
our  writers,  a  huge  figure  of  ungainly  proportions — a  heavy-footed 
peasant  with  unslaked  curiosity  and  a  boundless  pity,  who  is 
determined  to  examine  critically  “this  animal  called  man”  and 
portray  him  truthfully.  He  tramps  across  fields  straight  to  his 
objective,  messing  sadly  the  neat  little  beds  of  American  conven¬ 
tion,  peering  into  the  secret  places  that  are  marked  “Not  Open  To 
The  Public,”  keeping  nothing  hidden,  ashamed  of  nothing,  apolo¬ 
gizing  for  nothing.  Not  since  Walt  Whitman  has  there  been  another 
such  frank  and  detached  projection  of  reality,  such  insistence  that 
the  world  shall  stop  and  consider  those  facts  which  convention  has 
politely  agreed  to  ignore.  Naturally  a  great  hue  and  cry  of  the 
Pharisees  has  been  raised  against  him.  The  respectable  middle 
class  will  have  none  of  this  peasant  directness  and  brutal  truth.  He 
has  entered  our  bourgeois  society  “murmurous  of  morality”  with 
an  alien  philosophy,  which  he  must  defend.  At  every  moment  he 
feels  under  the  necessity  of  assisting  the  truth  as  he  sees  it,  and 
instead  of  suffering  his  portrayal  to  stand  on  its  own  feet  he  props 
it  up  with  argument  and  interminable  debate.  The  artist  suffers 
at  the  hands  of  the  disputant. 

The  Man  and  his  Philosophy.  Marked  by  an  immense  and  open- 
eyed  curiosity  that  ends  in  agnosticism.  His  anthropocentric 
conceptions: 

I  have  lived  now  to  my  fortieth  year  and  have  seen  a  good  deal  of  life. 
.  .  .  But  I  am  one  of  those  curious  persons  who  cannot  make  up  their 
minds  about  anything.  I  read  and  read.  ...  But  I  find  that  one  history 
contradicts  another,  one  philosopher  drives  out  another.  Essayists,  in  the 
main,  point  out  flaws  and  paradoxes  in  the  current  conception  of  things, 
novelists,  dramatists  and  biographers  spread  tales  of  endless  disasters,  or 
silly  illusions  concerning  life,  duty,  opportunity  and  the  like.  And  I  sit 
here  and  read  and  read,  when  I  have  time,  wondering.1 

*  Lecture  notes  .—Publisher.  1  Hey  Rub- a- Dub- Dub,  New  York,  1920,  p.  » 

354 


THEODORE  DREISER 


355 


“Nothing  is  proved,  all  is  permitted,”  he  says  in  The  Titan.  Men 
will  do  what  they  think  they  can  get  away  with.  In  briefest  terms 
his  philosophy  may  be  phrased  thus: 

1.  1  he  world  is  without  reason  or  meaning  to  us.  Why  we  are 
here  and  to  what  end  is  unknowable. 

2.  Men  are  chemical  compounds,  existing  in  a  world  where  they 
play  about  like  water-flies,  skipping  restlessly  and  unintelligently 
as  their  legs  drive  them,  whom  the  universe  in  its  vast  indifference 
suffers  for  a  time. 

3.  Men  divide  into  the  strong  and  the  weak;  not  the  good  and 
the  bad.  I  he  will  to  power,  the  desire  for  pleasure,  drive  men  on 
their  courses.  What  restrains?  Moral  codes  and  social  conventions, 
often  useful,  often  harmful. 

A  metaphysical  idealism  will  always  tell  him  that  it  is  better  to  pre¬ 
serve  a  cleanly  balance,  and  the  storms  of  circumstance  will  teach  him  a 
noble  stoicism.  Beyond  this  there  is  nothing  which  can  reasonably  be  im¬ 
posed  upon  the  conscience  of  man.2 

4.  Hence  the  profound  need  of  sympathy  and  mercy. 

Let  no  one  underestimate  the  need  of  pity.  We  live  in  a  stony  universe 
whose  hard,  brilliant  forces  rage  fiercely.  From  the  prowling  hunger  of 
the  Hyrcan  tiger  to  the  concentric  grip  of  Arcturus  and  Canopus  there  is 
the  same  ruthless,  sightless  disregard  of  the  individual  and  the  minor 
thing.  Life  moves  in  an  ordered  hierarchy  of  forces  of  which  the  lesser  is 
as  nothing  to  the  greater  .  .  .  And  in  the  midst  of  the  rip  of  desperate 
things — in  odd  crannies  and  chance  flaws  between  forces — there  spring 
and  blossom  these  small  flowers  of  sentiment.  Tenderness!  Mercy!  Affec¬ 
tion!  Sorrow!  The  Hindus  worship  an  image  of  pain.  And  well  they  may. 
It  is  a  classic  amid  the  painless,  the  indifferent— Nirvana.  Blessed  are  the 
merciful,  for  they  shall  receive  mercy!  No,  no.  Blessed  are  the  merciful, 
for  they  create  mercy.  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  the  ideal.3 

His  Attitude  toward  his  Material.  Dreiser  possesses  a  vast  and 
terrifying  imagination.  Like  James  Branch  Cabell  he  broods  over 
the  plight  of  man  in  the  universe.  But  he  does  not  seek  refuge  in 
the  ideal.  He  will  confront  things  as  they  are.  The  very  chemistry 
of  decaying  flesh  fascinates  him.  It  is  a  phenomenon  of  this  im¬ 
personal  and  relentless  universe.  Compared  with  the  realities  of 
time  and  space  and  force — what  is  man  and  what  are  his  puny 
efforts  and  ideals? 

The  damnable  scheme  of  things  which  we  call  existence  brings  about 
conditions  whereby  whole  masses  suffer  who  have  no  cause  to  suffer,  and 
2  The  Financier ,  New  York.  c.  1912,  p.  250.  3IbiJ.,  p.  4.09. 


356  ADDENDA 

.  .  .  whole  masses  joy  who  have  no  cause  for  joy.  .  .  .  We  suffer  for  our 
temperaments,  which  we  did  not  make,  and  for  our  weaknesses  and  lacks, 
which  are  no  part  of  our  willing  or  doing.4 

His  Objectivity.  The  larger  view  of  life  gives  detachment.  Only 
one  who  has  emerged  from  the  jungle  can  see  the  whole  in  broad 
perspective.  In  no  other  American  writer,  except  Whitman,  is 
such  complete  detachment  achieved.  His  life  is  a  long  process  of 
stripping  away  group  illusions,  of  casting  off  group  conventions. 
And  for  this  the  mass  cannot  forgive  him,  for  the  mass  live  in  the 
strait-jacket  of  custom,  thinking  in  no  other  terms  than  group  or 
tribal  terms,  worshiping  the  communal  idols,  clinging  to  the  tribal 
taboos.  They  cannot  achieve  individuality  themselves  and  they 
hate  Dreiser.  It  puts  him  outside  the  tribe,  for  the  first  law  of  the 
tribe  is  tribal-mindedness.  Whoever  is  not  of  us  is  against  us. 
Whoever  questions  the  validity  of  the  tribal  sanctions  is  an  enemy 
and  must  be  destroyed.  It  is  in  vain  that  Dreiser  asserts  vehe¬ 
mently  that  he  is  telling  the  truth.  Another  version  of  the  truth 
than  the  tribal  version  is  not  wanted. 

The  significance  of  Dreiser  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  is  an  individual 
apart — one  who  has  broken  with  the  group  and  sits  in  judgment  on 
the  group  sanctions.  He  is  an  anarchist  who  will  be  partisan  to  no 
taboos.  This  is  a  rare  and  perilous  thing  to  do.  He  stands  outside. 

His  Amoral  Attitude.  It  is  on  this  score  that  Dreiser  stands  con¬ 
demned  by  our  bourgeois  censors.  His  amoral  attitude  is  strangely 
metamorphosed  into  immorality.  His  indifference  to  the  common 
preachments,  his  inability  to  accept  Christian  maxims,  his  refusal 
to  do  lip  service  to  creeds — this  is  set  down  as  evidence  of  vicious¬ 
ness,  for  ipso  facto  there  can  be  no  other  moral  standards  than  the 
tribal  standards.  What  is  Dreiser’s  justification?  This,  that  in  the 
physical  universe  he  can  discover  no  morality — no  justice,  mercy, 
pity,  but  everywhere  great  and  indifferent  force.  And  in  society — 
in  the  instincts  of  men  and  in  their  hidden  desires  and  secret  acts 
— a  disregard  of  conventional  morality.  Society  is  steeped  in  hy¬ 
pocrisy. 

He  saw  no  morals  anywhere — nothing  but  moods,  emotions,  needs, 
greeds.  People  talked  and  talked,  but  they  acted  according  to  their  ne¬ 
cessities  and  desires.5 

But  in  frankly  revealing  the  hypocrisy  of  men  Dreiser  is  no  cynic. 
There  is  in  him  a  profound  morality — the  morality  of  truth  and  pity 
4  Ibid.,  p.  479.  6  The  Financier ,  p.  432. 


THEODORE  DREISER 


357 


and  mercy.  Let  us  not  stone  men  for  their  sins  but  deal  generously 
and  kindly  with  them.  What  he  protests  against  is  superimposed 
codes.  There  is,  for  him,  “in  Nature,  no  such  thing  as  the  right  to 
do,  or  the  right  not  to  do.”6 

But  is  there  not  social  expediency?  To  which  the  individual  for 
his  own  good  should  conform?  Experience  has  taught  men  some 
excellent  things. 

His  Work.  Dreiser  has  given  us  full-length  portraits  of  two 
women — Sister  Carrie  and  Jennie  Gerhardt — and  of  two  men— 
Eugene  Witla  and  Frank  Cowperwood.  These  constitute  his  major 
contribution  and  on  them  his  reputation  rests.*  In  addition  there  is 
Hey  Rub-a-Dub-Dub,  a  book  of  essays  in  which  his  philosophy  is  set 
forth,  a  naturalistic  play,  The  Hand  of  the  Potter — a  study  in  pa¬ 
thology  where  the  hand  of  the  potter  slipped — a  book  of  travel,  and 
some  short  stories.  Of  his  four  major  characters  the  two  women  are 
passive  and  pliable,  easily  made  victims  of  circumstance.  Of  the 
two  men  one — Eugene  Witla — is  weak,  and  the  other — Frank 
Cowperwood — is  the  supreme  example  in  American  literature  of 
the  will  to  power. 

The  Financier  and  The  Titan.  A  colossal  study  of  the  American 
business  man,  in  two  volumes  of  a  total  of  1332  pages.  Compared 
with  this  all  other  studies  are  crude  and  unconvincing.  Here  the’ 
thing  has  been  done  once  for  all. 

“These  crude  and  greedy  captains  of  finance  had  to  be  given 
some  kind  of  literary  embodiment,  and  Dreiser  has  hammered  a 
raw  epic  out  of  their  lives.”7 

Where  did  Dreiser  get  his  intimate  and  detailed  information 
concerning  high  finance?  Where  his  knowledge  of  such  a  character? 
Out  of  his  own  powerful  mind.  Cowperwood  a  portrait  of  Charles 
Yerkes.  Two  periods:  his  Philadelphia  life  to  1873;  his  Chicago 
life  to  1898.  In  both  he  molds  circumstance  to  his  advantage;  in 
both  he  is  caught  by  chance  and  fails. 

The  Man.  Driven  by  three  impulses:  love  of  power,  love  of 
women,  love  of  art.  There  is  in  him  a  unity  of  character  and  an 
inevitability  of  development  that  are  overwhelming.  Dreiser  does 
not  judge,  apologize,  praise,  or  condemn;  he  is  content  to  permit  the 

6  Hey  Rub-a-Dub-Dub,  p.  87. 

*  When  this  was  written  of  course  The  American  Tragedy ,  A  Book  about  Myself 
Dreiser’s  poems,  Moods  Cudenced  and  Declaimed,  and  his  further  books  of  travel 
had  not  been  published. — Publisher. 

7  Randolph  Bourne,  History  of  a  Literary  Radical,  p.  203. 


358 


ADDENDA 


character  to  develop.  From  first  to  last  he  is  detached  and  objec¬ 
tive.  He  presents  Cowperwood  as  a  magnificent  physical  and  men¬ 
tal  machine:  a  born  fighter  and  leader,  strong,  alert,  with  a  cool 
resourceful  mind.  A  pronounced  hardness  that  goes  with  strength 
— contempt  for  the  weakling,  impatience  with  the  inefficient.  In 
his  sex  passages  there  is  no  glamour  of  romance.  They  are  direct 
and  brutal — but  more  moral  than  glamorous.  Nevertheless  great 
personal  charm — the  magnetism  of  a  virile  mind  and  indomitable 
will.  To  men  he  is  an  inspiration,  to  women  a  fascination.  And  yet 
a  frank  egoist,  self-centered,  imperturbable. 

The  fate  of  the  individualist:  in  pitting  his  will  against  life 
Cowperwood  feared  chance,  which  undid  him  in  Philadelphia.  But 
his  very  prevision,  which  carried  him  to  triumph,  brought  his 
downfall.  The  many  are  stronger  than  the  superman.  And  in  the 
end,  failure.  Strength  endures  for  so  short  a  time  and  is  so  weak. 
Age,  weakness,  social  forces — these  undermine  the  strong.  A  vast 
irony.  Cowperwood  is  punished  not  because  he  is  evil  but  because 
he  is  a  man. 

Cowperwood' s  Philosophy.  From  his  youth  up  life  was  a  puzzle 
to  him.  Nothing  was  certain,  for  beyond  and  above  all  was  a  blind, 
irrational  chance.  Nevertheless  within  reasonable  limits  it  was 
plain  enough  that  strength  and  intelligence  prevail.  This  lesson 
he  first  learned  from  the  squib  and  the  lobster,  and  it  became  his 
guiding  principle.  When  chance  had  brought  him  within  the 
shadow  of  the  penitentiary,  he  summed  it  up: 

It  is  a  grim,  bitter  world  we  are  all  born  into.  .  .  .  Who  was  to 
straighten  out  the  matter  of  the  unjust  equipment  with  which  most  people 
began?  Who  was  to  give  them  strong  minds  in  place  of  feeble  ones,  able 
bodies  instead  of  wretched  ones?  Where  were  they  to  get  pure-tendencies 
instead  of  impure  ones,  as  the  world  looked  on  these  things?  .  .  .  Some 
were  sent  into  the  world  with  a  great  lust  and  great  ability  for  wealth 
like  himself,  a  mind  swuft  to  see,  a  body  strong  to  endure;  and  some  were 
sent  half  equipped,  almost  shapeless  and  formless.  .  .  .  Strength  and 
weakness — there  lay  the  key,  the  answer.8 

Stuart  Sherman  on  Dreiser: 

By  eliminating  distinctively  human  motives  and  making  animal  in¬ 
stincts  the  supreme  factors  in  human  life,  Mr.  Dreiser  reduces  the  problem 
of  the  novelist  to  the  lowest  possible  terms.  .  .  .  His  philosophy  quite 
excludes  him  from  the  field  in  which  the  great  realist  must  work.  He  has 
deliberately  rejected  the  novelist’s  supreme  task — understanding  and 

8  The  Financier,  p.  660. 


THEODORE  DREISER 


359 


presenting  the  development  of  character;  he  has  chosen  only  to  illustrate 
the  unrestricted  flow  of  temperament.  He  has  evaded  the  enterprise  of 
representing  human  conduct;  he  has  confined  himself  to  representation 
of  animal  behavior.9 

And  the  two  novels  he  says  are  “like  a  club  sandwich  composed 
of  slices  of  business,  alternating  with  erotic  episodes.”  It  is  true, 
but  the  failure  is  one  of  art  that  does  not  merge  them.  What  would 
Sherman  have?  Shall  these  impulses  be  eliminated  from  literature, 
or  from  human  nature  itself? 

8  Stuart  P.  Sherman,  On  Contemporary  Literature,  New  York,  1923,  p.  94.  In  the 
syllabus  Professor  Parrington  says:  “The  most  intelligent  estimates  of  Dreiser  are 
in  Randolph  Bourne,  History  of  a  Literary  Radical;  H.  L.  Mencken,  Prefaces;  and 
Carl  Van  Doren,  Contemporary  American  Novelists.  All  other  commentators  are 
stupid.” 


SINCLAIR  LEWIS:  OUR  OWN  DIOGENES* 


As  the  row  of  his  pudgy  orange-backed  volumes  lengthens  on 
the  shelf,  it  becomes  evident  that  Sinclair  Lewis  is  the  bad  boy  of 
American  letters  whose  thoughts  are  on  bent-pins  while  the  deacon 
is  laboring  in  prayer.  His  irrepressible  satire  belongs  to  a  new  and 
irritatingly  effective  school.  He  has  studied  the  technique  of  the 
realists,  and  under  the  beguiling  pretense  of  telling  the  truth 
objectively  and  dispassionately,  he  insists  on  revealing  to  us  un¬ 
accommodated  man  as  a  poor,  bare,  forked  animal,  who  like 
Jurgen  persists  in  thinking  himself  a  monstrous  clever  fellow.  He 
is  maliciously  severe  on  all  respectable  dignities.  In  his  hands  the 
noble  homo  sapiens  of  common  repute  is  translated  into  an  ignoble 
homo  libidinus  et  ventosissimus — an  unattractive  animal  that  runs 
in  herds,  serves  its  belly,  and  has  a  taking  way  with  the  dams. 
The  free-born  American  citizen,  master  of  the  earth  and  its  destiny, 
is  little  flattered  by  the  portrait  he  draws,  and  Mr.  Lewis  finds 
himself,  in  consequence,  persona  non  grata  in  any  convention  of 
Elks  or  Rotarians. 

The  method  he  has  chosen  to  adopt  is  a  clever  advance  over  the 
technique  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  pricking  balloons  was 
the  business  of  every  wit.  Those  older  satirists — nagging  souls  like 
Pope  and  bold  bad  fellows  like  Churchill — were  mainly  concerned 
to  annoy  their  victims  with  pin-pricks.  They  were  too  completely 
the  gentleman  to  grow  chummy  with  base  fellows  whom  they 
frankly  despised;  and  in  consequence  they  never  discovered  half 
the  possibilities  of  the  gentle  art  of  satire.  Sinclair  Lewis  is  wiser 
than  they  were.  He  has  learned  that  before  one  can  effectively  im¬ 
pale  one’s  victim,  one  must  know  all  his  weaknesses  and  take  him 
off  his  guard.  So  he  ingratiatingly  makes  up  to  George  F.  Babbitt 
of  Zenith,  drinks  chummily  with  him,  swaps  greasy  jokes,  learns 
all  the  hidden  vanities  and  secret  obscenities  that  slip  out  in  the 
confidences  of  the  cups,  beguiles  him  into  painting  his  own  por¬ 
trait  in  the  manly  midnight  hours;  and  when  the  last  garment  that 
covers  his  nakedness  is  stripped  off,  the  flashlight  explodes  and  the 

*  Published  as  Number  Five  of  University  of  Washington  Chapbooks,  1927. — 
Publisher.  ■» 


360 


SINCLAIR  LEWIS  361 

camera  has  caught  the  victim  in  every  feature  of  his  mean  and 
vacuous  reality. 

No  doubt  it  is  an  ungentlemanly  thing  to  do — a  calculating  be¬ 
trayal  of  trusting  human  nature  done  in  the  sacred  name  of  art;  and 
it  is  certain  that  the  unhappy  victim  will  hate  the  artist  when  he 
sees  the  developed  print  next  morning.  Yet  the  picture  is  ex¬ 
traordinarily  lifelike.  All  the  unlovely  details  of  fat  stomach  and 
flabby  muscles  are  sharply  revealed.  It  is  too  late  to  put  on  one’s 
clothes,  and  homo  sapiens  in  the  person  of  George  F.  Babbitt  is 
revealed  as  a  shambling,  two-legged  animal,  for  the  world  to  laugh 
at.  The  method  is  immensely  clever;  it  is  the  last  word  in  the  tech¬ 
nique  of  despoiling  one’s  victim  of  adventitious  dignity,  without 
which  life  becomes  a  mean,  bleak  affair;  but  it  is  scarcely  charitable. 
To  think  well  of  oneself  and  to  wish  to  impose  that  good  opinion 
upon  others,  are  common  human  weaknesses  that  every  tailor 
blesses.  Without  clothes  man  is  only  a  caricature  of  the  godlike, 
and  the  artist  who  betrays  our  nakedness  to  our  enemies  is  very  far 
from  a  gentleman.  The  confidences  of  the  cups  must  be  held 
sacred,  for  if  we  cannot  drink  without  fear  of  our  babbling  being 
reported,  what  becomes  of  goodfellowship? 

But  the  charge  of  betraying  goodfellowship  leaves  Sinclair  Lewis 
unconcerned.  His  satire  knows  no  compunctions.  An  irreverent 
soul,  he  dares  the  wrath  not  only  of  George  F.  Babbitt,  but  of  the 
innumerable  clubs  to  which  Babbitt  belongs.  A  buoyant  scoffer, 
he  does  not  permit  even  the  organized  wrath  of  the  Chamber  of 
Commerce  to  disturb  his  equanimity.  He  provokes  respectable 
people  on  principle,  and  he  has  laid  a  devilish  plan  to  work  system¬ 
atically  through  our  sacred  American  decalogue,  smashing  one 
commandment  after  another.  Already  behind  him  is  strewn  a  sorry 
wreckage  of  established  creeds  and  authoritative  slogans — a  wreck¬ 
age  that  delights  the  wicked  and  gives  aid  and  comfort  to  all  evil- 
wishers  in  our  comfortable  and  excellent  society.  Not  even  a 
banker  is  sacred  to  him.  Rotarians  and  Kiwanians,  Billy  Sundays 
and  Billy  Bryans,  voluble  Congressmen  and  silent  Presidents,  even 
our  venerable  Constitution  itself,  he  scoffs  at  and  makes  merry 
over.  And  to  add  insult  to  injury,  he  prospers  in  his  sins.  His  cal¬ 
culating  wickedness  returns  him  a  fattening  bank  account.  His 
impudent  satires  sell  like  bargain-counter  silk  stockings.  We  pay 
handsomely  to  see  ourselves  most  unhandsomely  depicted.  If  we 
would  only  take  a  lesson  from  the  strategy  of  the  heathen  Chinese, 


362 


ADDENDA 


we  might  boycott  Mr.  Lewis’s  wares  and  reduce  him  to  the  beggary 
that  is  more  becoming  to  wickedness  than  a  wanton  prosperity. 
But  a  Christian  people  will  not  go  to  school  to  the  heathen,  and  so 
Mr.  Lewis  prospers  in  his  wickedness  and  waxes  vulgarly  rich. 

Now  what  is  the  tremendous  discovery  that  Sinclair  Lewis  makes 
so  much  of,  and  that  we  pay  so  great  a  price  to  learn  ?  It  is  no  other 
than  this:  that  the  goodly  United  States  of  America  are  peopled  by 
a  mighty  herd,  which  like  those  earlier  herds  that  rumbled  about 
the  plains,  drives  foolishly  in  whatever  direction  their  noses  point — 
a  herd  endowed  with  tremendous  blind  power,  with  big  bull  leaders, 
but  with  minds  rarely  above  their  bellies  and  their  dams.  In  the 
mass  and  at  their  own  romantic  rating  they  are  distinctly  imposing 
— big-necked,  red-blooded,  lusty,  with  glossy  coats  got  from  rich 
feeding-grounds,  and  with  a  herd  power  that  sweeps  majestically 
onward  in  a  cloud  of  dust  of  its  own  raising,  veritable  lords  and 
masters  of  a  continent.  But  considered  more  critically  and  resolved 
into  individual  members,  they  appear  to  the  realist  somewhat 
stupid,  feeble  in  brain  and  will,  stuffed  with  conceit  of  their  own 
excellence,  esteeming  themselves  the  great  end  for  which  creation 
has  been  in  travail,  the  finest  handiwork  of  the  Most  High  who 
spread  the  plains  for  their  feeding-grounds:  with  a  vast  respect  for 
totems  and  fetishes;  purveyors  and  victims  of  the  mysterious  thing 
called  Bunk,  who  valiantly  horn  to  death  any  audacious  heretic 
who  may  suggest  that  rumbling  about  the  plains,  filling  their 
bellies,  bellowing  sacred  slogans,  and  cornering  the  lushest  grass,  are 
scarcely  adequate  objectives  for  such  immense  power:  a  vast 
middleman  herd,  that  dominates  the  continent,  but  cannot  reduce 
it  to  order  or  decency. 

Consider,  suggests  Mr.  Lewis,  what  this  rumbling  herd  signifies 
in  the  light  of  rational  and  humane  ideals.  What  sort  of  custodians 
of  civilization  are  these  lumbering  mobsters  with  their  back- 
slappings  and  bellowings?  What  becomes  of  the  good  life  in  a 
society  that  flowers  in  Rotarian  conventions?  The  banker  has 
reduced  America  to  the  level  of  a  banker’s  Utopia,  and  now  bids  us 
admire  his  handiwork.  Other  societies,  aristocratic  and  feudal, 
honored  the  priest  and  knight  and  artist  above  the  usurer  and 
tradesman;  other  generations  professed  to  serve  truth  and  beauty 
and  godliness  in  their  daily  lives;  but  the  great  American  herd  cares 
nothing  for  such  things.  In  the  name  of  democracy  priest  and 
knight  and  artist  are  turned  lackeys  to  merchants  and  realtors,  to 


SINCLAIR  LEWIS 


363 


men  who  would  not  recognize  faith  or  chivalry  or  imagination  if 
they  met  them  on  the  golf  course,  and  who  understand  democracy 
as  little  as  they  understand  Christianity.  In  this  land  of  material 
abundance  the  good  life  is  reduced  to  being  measured  in  commis¬ 
sions  and  percentages;  civilization  comes  to  flower  in  the  broker; 
the  mahogany  desk  is  the  altar  at  which  We  sacrifice  in  a  land  of 
triumphant  materialism.  “God  help  the  country,”  said  Fenimore 
Cooper,  years  ago  when  the  herd  was  small,  “that  has  only  com¬ 
mercial  towns  for  its  capitals.”  “Such  a  country  is  past  helping,” 
retorts  Sinclair  Lewis.  “God  cannot  help  it,  or  the  Devil.  In  the 
name  of  George  F.  Babbitt  and  Dr.  Almus  Pickerbaugh  and  the 
Reverend  Elmer  Gantry,  what  can  be  expected  of  such  a  country? 
A  people  that  worships  the  great  god  Bunk  shall  have  its  reward!” 

To  prove  his  amiable  thesis  Mr.  Lewis  has  been  at  enormous 
pains  to  gather  his  materials  at  their  sources.  He  has  taken  upon 
himself  to  become  a  specialist  in  depicting  the  genus  Americanus. 
He  has  loafed  along  Main  Street,  played  poker  in  back  rooms  with 
wicked  young  men,  drunk  in  respectable  clubs,  and  exchanged 
hearty  back-slappings  with  the  sons  of  Rotary.  He  has  devoted 
days  to  the  smoking-compartments  of  Pullmans,  garnering  the 
ripest  wisdom  and  choicest  stories  of  traveling  salesmen.  He  has 
listened  to  philosophic  brokers  discourse  on  ethics,  studied  political 
and  constitutional  theory  with  realtors,  learned  all  about  Bolshe¬ 
vism  from  presidents  of  Chambers  of  Commerce,  been  instructed  in 
the  elements  of  economics  by  Republican  Congressmen,  discovered 
the  fallacies  in  Darwinian  evolution  from  clerical  fundamentalists 
and  the  superiority  of  Fascism  over  democracy  from  the  greatest 
captains  of  industry.  No  field  of  American  experience  has  escaped 
his  minute  investigation,  no  authority  has  eluded  his  catechizing. 
In  the  course  of  his  studies  he  has  come  to  master  the  lusty  Ameri¬ 
can  language  in  its  subtlest  shades  and  manliest  nuances,  from  the 
comic  supplement  to  Dunn  and  Bradstreet,  and  he  talks  easily  with 
Main  Street  in  its  own  vernacular.  His  rich  and  copious  vocabulary 
fills  a  commonplace  scholar  with  envy,  and  his  ebullient  slang,  his 
easy  slovenliness  of  enunciation,  inflict  on  the  simple-minded  user 
of  the  King’s  English  a  hopeless  inferiority  complex. 

Thus  amply  equipped  with  all  the  resources  of  scholarship,  he  has 
written  four  learned  treatises  in  exemplification  of  the  thesis  that 
the  genus  Americanus  is  cousin-german  to  the  scoffing  Mr.  Menc¬ 
ken’s  lately  discovered  boobus  Americanus.  The  introductory 


364  ADDENDA 

study,  Main  Street,  provided  a  comprehensive  background  and 
setting  for  the  full-length  portraits  he  was  to  draw  later.  Gopher 
Prairie,  situated  in  the  heart  of  agricultural  America— in  Meredith 
Nicholson’s  Valley  of  Democracy  where  the  old-fashioned,  kindly, 
neighborly,  wholesome,  democratic  virtues  are  presumed  to  thrive 
in  a  congenial  habitat — becomes  in  his  unsympathetic  analysis  a 
place  that  William  Allen  White  would  not  recognize  as  his  home 
town.  Here,  he  tells  us,  is  respectability  made  sluggish  and  sterile. 
Here  is  “slavery  self-sought  and  self-defended.”  Here  is  “dullness 
made  God.”  Here,  diluted  and  spread  over  a  vast  territory,  the 
spirit  of  Babbitt  has  erupted  in  cheap  and  pretentious  county-seats, 
parasites  on  the  producing  hinterland  over  whose  politics  and  credit 
and  morals  Main  Street  tradesmen  have  set  up  a  strict  custodian¬ 
ship — futile  and  complacent  and  drab,  mere  echoes  of  the  greater 
cities  that  lie  on  the  horizon  and  to  which  the  sons  of  Main  Street 
turn  for  light  and  guidance. 

It  is  these  greater  cities  that  constitute  the  true  capitals  of  our 
red-blooded  Americans  who  proclaim  themselves  “the  greatest 
race  in  the  world” — fruitful  centers  from  which  radiates  the  phi¬ 
losophy  of  pep,  punch,  and  progress  for  the  upbuilding  and  en¬ 
lightenment  of  the  world.  Of  these  centers  the  hustling  and  mighty 
Zenith  is  the  wonder  and  admiration  of  all  right-minded  citizens; 
it  is  the  brightest  and  bloomiest  sunflower  of  the  great  American 
garden.  And  in  Zenith  dwells  George  F.  Babbitt,  realtor,  Sinclair 
Lewis’s  full-length  portrait  of  a  hero  sprung  from  the  loins  of 
America,  the  completest  embodiment  of  the  triumphant  American 
genius  that  is  conquering  the  earth.  Babbitt  as  an  upstanding  he- 
member  of  the  great  herd  is  a  marvel,  the  apotheosis  of  the  reg¬ 
nant  middle  class,  the  finished  product  of  our  snappy  civilization. 
Other  lands,  no  doubt,  have  produced  men  accounted  great.  Plato 
and  Saul  of  Tarsus,  St.  Francis  and  Leonardo,  Pascal  and  Galileo 
and  Hegel,  were  no  doubt  esteemed  in  their  own  times  and  by  their 
own  cities;  but  Zenith  does  not  go  in  for  out-of-date  merchandise; 
it  is  up-to-the-minute  and  it  specialized  in  George  F.  Babbitts. 
And  so  when  the  Reverend  Elmer  Gantry  rises  to  influence  in 
Gopher  Prairie,  he  is  called  to  Zenith  as  its  spiritual  counselor,  and 
becomes  the  custodian  of  the  Zenith  moralities,  the  apostle  of 
Zenith  Bunk,  the  devotee  of  the  Zenith  Mumbo  Jumbo.  And 
through  Zenith  passes  also  Martin  Arrowsmith  the  rebel,  the 
perverse  outlandish  scientist  who  refuses  to  worship  Mumbo 


SINCLAIR  LEWIS 


365 


Jumbo,  on  his  solitary  way  to  discover  reality  in  a  world  of  Zenith 
chicanery.  Babbitt,  Gantry,  Arrowsmith — these  are  the  figures  that 
Sinclair  Lewis  comes  upon  in  his  exploration  of  the  land  of  the  free 
and  the  home  of  the  brave.  A  somewhat  curious  showing  at  the  best. 

So  slashing  an  attack  upon  our  common  creed  and  practice  has 
naturally  aroused  vigorous  protest.  Human  nature  does  not  like  to 
have  its  idols  assailed;  even  the  devotees  of  Mumbo  Jumbo  will 
defend  their  god  against  the  heretics;  and  Sinclair  Lewis  has  become 
the  target  for  many  a  shaft.  The  critics  have  pressed  home  their 
counter  attack  with  ardor.  They  insist  that  he  is  suffering  from  an 
aggravated  case  of  astigmatism,  and  that  in  consequence  he  does 
not  see  eye  to  eye  with  those  of  normal  vision.  The  world  is  out  of 
focus  to  him — askew  in  all  its  structural  lines;  and  this  distorted 
vision  prompts  those  jaundiced  opinions  and  malicious  judgments 
in  regard  to  the  ideals  cherished  by  our  best  citizens.  He  has  de¬ 
liberately  cultivated  a  spleen  that  makes  him  dislike  his  neighbors 
because  they  are  comfortable  and  contented.  Diogenes  railing  at 
mankind  gained  a  vast  reputation,  but  it  is  a  nice  question  if 
Diogenes  was  a  useful  citizen.  What  did  he  do  to  further  the  well¬ 
being  of  his  community?  How  much  time  and  money  did  he  give 
to  charity  and  the  upbuilding  of  his  city?  For  all  his  talking  Mr. 
Lewis  does  not  seem  to  know  what  the  good  life  is.  He  rails  at 
Babbitt  for  not  being  Plato,  but  does  he'  understand  the  A  B  C  of 
service?  To  take  a  homely  figure:  the  family  cow,  standing  knee- 
deep  in  June  and  chewing  the  cud  of  contentment,  would  excite  his 
Diogenic  scorn.  As  a  fault-finder  and  knocker,  Brindle  is  not  the 
equal  of  Diogenes;  but  to  criticize  her  mentality  and  manners,  for¬ 
getful  of  the  fact  that  from  the  contented  chewing  of  a  plentiful  cud 
will  come  a  plentiful  supply  of  milk  and  cream  and  butter  to 
sweeten  the  bread  of  life,  is  a  somewhat  sorry  business.  In  her 
modest,  democratic  sphere  she  is  devoted  to  service,  and  if  there  is 
a  nobler  function,  Rotary  humbly  confesses  it  had  not  discovered 
it.  One  must  not,  of  course,  press  too  far  the  analogy  between 
Brindle  and  Babbitt;  the  figure  is  useful  only  to  suggest  that  even 
in  the  lowliest  spheres  Mr.  Lewis  completely  fails  to  understand 
the  fine  ethical  values  that  underlie  and  animate  the  common 
American  life  at  which  he  rails.  How,  then,  shall  he  understand 
them  in  the  higher?  Comfort  and  service  are  excellent  things  in 
themselves,  and  if  they  can  be  merged  in  everyday  experience, 
surely  the  good  life  is  in  the  way  of  achievement. 


366 


ADDENDA 


The  point  is  of  vast  importance,  for  it  is  here  that  Diogenes 
Lewis,  his  critics  assert,  has  totally  misread  the  meaning  and  faith 
of  America.  Here  in  this  prosperous  land  the  union  between  com¬ 
fort  and  service — or  to  put  it  in  more  dignified  phrase,  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  Hellenism  and  Hebraism — has  been  achieved  in  practice. 
A  rich  and  abundant  life,  motivated  by  a  fine  sense  of  ethical  re¬ 
sponsibility  and  disciplined  by  a  democratic  public  school,  is,  in 
sober  fact,  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  America  that  sets 
our  country  apart  from  all  other  lands  in  western  civilization.  Call 
it  a  Babbitt  warren  if  you  will,  nevertheless  where  else  has  the  in¬ 
dustrial  revolution  been  brought  so  completely  and  happily  under 
dominion  to  the  democratic  ideal,  or  been  so  ennobled  by  ethical 
values?  Here  it  has  scattered  its  wealth  amongst  the  plain  people 
with  a  bountiful  hand,  until  the  poorest  family  enjoys  its  nickel- 
plated  plumbing,  its  flivver,  its  telephone,  its  radio,  its  movies,  its 
funnies,  and  all  the  thousand  aids  to  comfort  and  intelligence 
which  a  few  generations  ago  were  denied  kings — the  result  of  all 
which  is  a  standard  of  living  that  our  forefathers  would  have  en¬ 
vied.  Our  Hellenism  is,  happily,  not  Greek.  That,  as  every  school¬ 
boy  in  America  knows,  was  established  in  slavery;  whereas  our 
modern  Hellenism  is  established  in  democracy  and  ennobled  by  a 
sensitive  social  conscience.  Here  the  master  serves.  The  richest 
and  greatest  amongst  us — our  Judge  Garys  and  Andrew  Mellons — 
are  servants  of  the  nameless  public,  and  dedicate  their  creative 
genius  to  the  common  democratic  prosperity.  Our  Hellenism,  in 
short,  is  engrafted  on  a  sturdy  Hebraic  root  and  flowers  in  right¬ 
eousness — in  charity,  in  education,  in  free  clinics  and  hospitals,  in 
scientific  foundations,  in  great  public  libraries,  in  all  the  vast  gifts 
that  wealth  freely  offers  to  the  cause  of  social  amelioration.  The 
Puritan  strain  is  fortunately  still  the  American  strain,  and  we  owe 
much  to  those  excellent  origins  that  Mr.  Lewis  scoffs  at  without 
understanding.  Comfort  and  service — Hellenism  and  Hebraism: 
if  this  is  not  the  good  life,  where  shall  one  find  it?  In  Bolshevik 
Russia?  After  all  Diogenes  Lewis  is  no  more  important — or  useful 
— than  the  gad-fly  that  Brindle  brushes  from  her  glossy  sides  as  she 
chews  her  cud.  What  gad-fly  ever  produced  butter? 

If  Sinclair  Lewis  is  unimpressed  by  such  arguments  it  is  because 
he  is  quite  disillusioned  with  the  current  ideal  of  material  progress. 
His  dreams  do  not  find  their  satisfaction  in  good  roads  and  cheap 
gasoline.  He  would  seem  to  be  an  incorrigible  idealist  who  has  been 


SINCLAIR  LEWIS 


367 


bred  up  on  the  vigorous  Utopianisms  of  the  late  nineteenth  century. 
In  the  golden  days  before  the  deluge  he  had  gone  blithely  to  school 
to  all  the  current  idealisms  that  flourished  in  the  land — to  Jeffer¬ 
sonian  democracy  and  to  Marxian  socialism;  and  in  the  well- 
stocked  pharmacopoeias  of  hopeful  young  liberals  he  professed  to 
discover  specifics  for  all  our  social  ills.  But  the  war  destroyed  his 
faith  in  nostrums  and  removed  his  Utopia  to  a  dim  and  foggy 
future.  He  has  not  yet  traveled  so  far  in  disillusion  as  Mr.  Cabell, 
who  has  seen  fit  to  dwarf  man  to  the  compass  of  a  flea  on  the  epi¬ 
dermis  of  earth;  nor  has  he  achieved  the  irony — or  the  technique — 
of  Clarence  Darrow,  who  suggests  casually:  “Of  course  I  know  that 
Confucius  was  as  great  a  philosopher  as  Billy  Sunday,  and  that  as 
a  thinker  Buddha  was  the  equal  of  Billy  Bryan.  But  still  all 
orthodox  people  know  that  Confucius  and  Buddha  were  spurious 
and  the  Billy  brothers  genuine.”  He  has  not  even  achieved  the 
smug  satisfaction  of  the  psychologists  who  impose  their  preposter¬ 
ous  intelligence  tests  on  simple  folk  and  triumphantly  discover 
morons  in  respectable  neighbors.  Some  lingering  faith  in  our  poor 
human  nature  he  still  clings  to.  In  the  great  American  mass  that 
human  nature  is  certainly  foolish  and  unlovely  enough.  It  is  too 
often  blown  up  with  flatulence,  corroded  with  lust,  on  familiar 
terms  with  chicanery  and  lying;  it  openly  delights  in  hocus-pocus 
and  discovers  its  miracle-workers  in  its  Comstocks  and  Aimee 
Semple  McPhersons.  But  for  all  its  pitiful  flabbiness  human  nature 
is  not  wholly  bad,  nor  is  man  so  helpless  a  creature  of  circumstance 
as  the  cynics  would  have  us  believe.  There  are  other  and  greater 
gods  than  Mumbo  Jumbo  worshiped  in  America,  worthier  things 
than  hocus-pocus;  and  in  rare  moments  even  Babbitt  dimly  per¬ 
ceives  that  the  feet  of  his  idol  are  clay.  There  are  Martin  Arrow- 
smiths  as  well  as  Elmer  Gantrys,  and  human  nature,  if  it  will,  can 
pull  itself  out  of  the  trap.  Bad  social  machinery  makes  bad  men. 
Put  the  banker  in  the  scullery  instead  of  the  drawing-room;  exalt 
the  test-tube  and  deflate  the  cash  register;  rid  society  of  the  dicta¬ 
torship  of  the  middle  class;  and  the  artist  and  the  scientist  will  erect 
in  America  a  civilization  that  may  become  what  civilization  was  in 
earlier  days,  a  thing  to  be  respected.  For  all  his  modernity  and  the 
disillusion  learned  from  Pullman-car  philosophers,  Sinclair  Lewis 
is  still  an  echo  of  Jean  Jacques  and  the  golden  hopes  of  the  En¬ 
lightenment — thin  and  far  off,  no  doubt,  but  still  an  authentic  echo. 

Whether  we  like  Mr.  Lewis’s  technique  or  not,  whether  we  agree 


368 


ADDENDA 


with  his  indictment  of  middle-class  ideals  or  dissent  from  it,  his 
writings  are  suggestive  documents  symptomatic  of  a  dissatisfied 
generation  given  over  to  disillusion.  The  optimistic  dreams  of 
middle-class  capitalism  are  not  so  golden  as  they  seemed  to  us 
before  the  war;  and  these  pudgy  novels  are  slashing  attacks  on  a 
world  that  in  mouthing  empty  shibboleths  is  only  whistling  to  keep 
up  its  courage.  The  faith  of  America  is  dead.  These  brisk  pages 
are  filled  with  the  doings  of  automata — not  living  men  but  the  sim¬ 
ulacra  of  men,  done  with  astonishing  verisimilitude,  speaking  an 
amazingly  realistic  language,  professing  a  surprising  lifelikeness;  yet 
nevertheless  only  shells  from  which  the  life  has  departed,  without 
faith  or  hope  or  creative  energy,  not  even  aware  that  they  are  dead. 

It  is  this  consciousness  of  sketching  in  a  morgue  that  differenti¬ 
ates  Mr.  Lewis  from  the  earlier  satirists  of  middle-class  America, 
who  in  the  hopeful  years  before  the  war  were  busily  engaged  in  re¬ 
building  the  American  temple.  The  preceding  generation — earnest 
souls  like  Robert  Herrick  and  Jack  London  and  Upton  Sinclair — 
were  as  well  aware  of  the  shortcomings  of  our  industrial  order  as  Sin¬ 
clair  Lewis,  and  hated  them  as  vigorously.  From  the  days  of  Emer¬ 
son  and  George  Ripley,  of  Carlyle  and  Ruskin,  capitalistic  society 
had  been  persistently  subjected  to  sharp  and  devastating  analysis; 
its  drabness  and  regimentation,  its  sterility  and  emptiness  and  joy¬ 
lessness,  had  been  pointed  out  by  many  pens.  The  Victorians  long 
ago  discovered  that  no  generous  or  humane  civilization  was  to  be 
expected  from  the  hands  of  Plugson  of  Undershot — that  the 
banker  conceiving  of  human  felicity  in  terms  of  eight  per  cent,  is  a 
mean  and  shabby  fellow  in  comparison  with  St.  Francis  or  Michel¬ 
angelo.  Long  before  Sherwood  Anderson,  William  Morris  had 
observed  that  the  workman  no  longer  sings  in  the  factory  as  in 
other  days  he  sang  over  his  tool,  and  concluded  that  the  creation 
of  beauty  is  more  important  for  human  happiness  than  figuring 
profits  from  mass  production. 

But  those  earlier  analysts  were  dealing  with  causes  of  which  they 
could  only  forecast  the  ultimate  consequences,  whereas  Sinclair 
Lewis  is  dealing  with  effects.  Plugson  of  Undershot  is  now  the 
universal  dictator.  Before  the  war  there  was  still  life  and  hope  in 
western  civilization;  it  was  not  yet  reduced  to  being  a  common 
Babbitt  warren,  with  its  Billy  Sundays  and  Almus  Pickerbaughs, 
its  artists  and  editors  and  scientists,  on  the  Plugson  pay-roll.  What 
emerges  from  the  drab  pages  of  Sinclair  Lewis  that  is  suggestive  L 


SINCLAIR  LEWIS 


369 


the  authoritative  pronouncement  that  the  effects  forecast  by  the 
earlier  critics  have  become  in  our  day  the  regnant  order  of  things. 
Babbitt  is  the  son  of  Plugson  of  Undershot,  and  Babbitt  is  a  walk¬ 
ing  corpse  who  refuses  to  be  put  decently  away  to  make  room  for 
living  men.  An  empty  soul,  he  is  the  symbol  of  our  common  emp¬ 
tiness.  Historically  he  marks  the  final  passing  in  America  of  the 
civilization  that  came  from  the  fruitful  loins  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury.  For  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  western  civilization  had  sus¬ 
tained  its  hopes  on  the  rich  nourishment  provided  by  the  great  age 
of  the  Enlightenment.  Faith  in  the  excellence  of  man,  in  the  law  of 
progress,  in  the  ultimate  reign  of  justice,  in  the  conquest  of  nature, 
in  the  finality  and  sufficiency  of  democracy,  faith  in  short  in  the 
excellence  of  life,  was  the  great  driving  force  in  those  earlier,  sim¬ 
pler  days.  It  was  a  noble  dream — that  dream  of  the  Enlightenment 
— but  it  was  slowly  dissipated  by  an  encompassing  materialism 
that  came  likewise  out  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Faith  in  ma¬ 
chinery  came  to  supersede  faith  in  man;  the  Industrial  Revolution 
submerged  the  hopes  of  the  French  Revolution.  And  now  we  have 
fallen  so  low  that  our  faith  in  justice,  progress,  the  potentialities  of 
human  nature,  the  excellence  of  democracy,  is  stricken  with  per¬ 
nicious  anemia,  and  even  faith  in  the  machine  is  dying.  Only 
science  remains  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  romantic  creed,  and 
science  with  its  psychology  and  physics  is  fast  reducing  man  to  a 
complex  bundle  of  glands,  at  the  mercy  of  a  mechanistic  universe. 
Babbitt,  to  be  sure,  has  not  yet  discovered  the  predicament  he  is  in, 
but  Martin  Arrowsmith  knows;  and  while  Babbitt  is  whistling 
somewhat  futilely,  Arrowsmith  is  hard  at  work  in  the  laboratory 
seeking  a  new  philosophy  to  take  the  place  of  the  old.  1  he  outlook 
is  not  promising,  but  until  a  new  faith  emerges  from  the  test-tube 
Sinclair  Lewis  will  wander  in  the  fogs  of  disillusion. 

But  enough  of  such  crape-hanging  at  a  time  when  our  best  minds 
are  engaged  in  the  great  work  of  stabilizing  prosperity.  What 
are  test-tubes  in  comparison  with  the  infallible  statistics  patrioti¬ 
cally  disseminated  by  the  National  City  Bank?  To  parade  such 
heresies  in  the  face  of  the  progressive  American  public  is  enough  to 
damn  any  man,  genius  or  not.  We  want  no  carpers  or  cynics  in  our 
congenial  membership.  We  must  all  get  together  to  put  across  the 
drive  for  a  bigger  and  richer  and  better  America;  and  so,  reluc¬ 
tantly,  despite  the  fact  that  in  many  ways  he  is  a  good  fellow,  we 
blackball  Sinclair  Lewis. 


SHERWOOD  ANDERSON:  A  PSYCHOLOGICAL 
NATURALIST  * 

Unlike  our  earlier  naturalists  in  handling  of  material  and  dra¬ 
matic  interests.  Concerned  with  inner  life  rather  than  outer,  with 
hidden  drives  rather  than  environment.  Accepts  the  main  criteria 
of  naturalism:  determinism,  distortion,  pessimism.  A  lean  and 
sparing  writer  whose  symbolisms  are  obscure  and  puzzling.  A 
single  theme:  the  disastrous  effect  of  frustrations  and  repressions 
that  create  grotesques.  Due  to  (i)  Crude,  narrow  environment 
that  drives  to  strange  aberrations;  (2)  Repressed  instincts  that 
break  forth  in  abnormal  action.  The  consequence  a  black  loneli¬ 
ness — the  hunger  of  fellowship  and  its  denial.  Limited  in  scope  to 
episodic  crises — hence  his  better  stories  short.  Many  failures: 
Marching  Men;  Windy  McPherson  s  Son;  Poor  White  (1920);  Many 
Marriages  (1923) — a  clumsy  account  of  a  Babbitt  gone  on  a  psy¬ 
chological  spree;  Horses  and  Men  (1923)— some  more  Grotesques; 
see  in  particular  “A  Chicago  Hamlet.” 

Winesburg,  Ohio  (1918).  A  prose  Spoon  River  Anthology,  with  an 
excellent  collection  of  grotesques.  Sharp  vignettes;  lonely,  thwarted 
lives,  “confused  and  disconcerted  by  the  facts  of  life.”  A  back¬ 
ground  of  earlier  America,  crude  and  ugly,  that  drives  to  religious 
fanaticism  in  Steve  Bentley;  to  passionate  rebellion  in  Kate  Swift; 
to  bitter  irony  in  Ray  Pearson.  Note  the  deterministic  conclusion 
of  “The  Untold  Lie” — “Tricked,  by  Gad,  that’s  what  I  was; 
tricked  by  life  and  made  a  fool  of”;  and  the  pessimism:  .  .  .  “he 
shouted  a  protest  against  his  life,  against  all  life,  against  everything 
that  makes  life  ugly.” 

The  Triumph  of  the  Egg  (1921).  A  strange  and  difficult  book 
with  its  subtle  symbolisms.  The  theme  is  the  common  hunger  for 
romance  and  fellowship  that  confuses  itself  with  sex  and  is  un¬ 
satisfied.  Suggested  in  prefatory  poem:  “I  have  a  wonderful  story 
to  tell  but  know  no  way  to  tell  it.” 

I.  The  Egg.  An  epitome  of  his  philosophy  of  grotesques.  The 
egg  breeds  life  that  is  futile,  and  life  reproduces  the  egg.  A  morbid 
disgust  that  would  bottle  the  egg,  and  the  failure. 

*  The  notes  that  follow  are  from  the  syllabus. — Publisher.  „ 

370 


SHERWOOD  ANDERSON 


371 


2.  Out  of  Nowhere  Into  Nothing.  Theme  is  the  “white  wonder  of 
life” — what  it  is  and  the  part  it  plays  in  shaping  life;  a  sex  illusion 
that  in  its  mystic  appeal  to  youth  guarantees  the  perpetuation  of  the 
race.  To  age  there  is  no  “white  wonder,”  but  the  life  processes  are 
dirty,  and  lead  to  final  imprisonment  in  a  common  trap.  Hence  the 
“white  wonder”  is  the  supreme  jest  of  nature,  sardonic,  beguiling, 
gathering  its  victims  who  eagerly  run  their  predetermined  course. 

3.  Brothers.  A  suggestion  of  the  true  “white  wonder  of  life” — 
the  brotherhood  of  man  in  a  lonely  world — “beyond  words,  beyond 
passion — the  fellowship  in  living,  the  fellowship  in  life.”  But  men 
cannot  break  through  the  walls  of  themselves  to  grasp  it,  and  the 
dirt  of  the  world  destroys  its  beauty.  “The  whole  story  of  man¬ 
kind’s  loneliness,  of  the  effort  to  reach  out  to  unattainable  beauty, 
tried  to  get  itself  expressed  from  the  lips  of  a  mumbling  old  man, 
crazed  with  loneliness.”  “We  have  different  names  but  we  are 
brothers.”  “Already  I  have  written  three  hundred,  four  hundred 
thousand  words.  Are  there  no  words  that  lead  into  life?”  See  con¬ 
clusion  of  “The  Man  in  the  Brown  Coat.” 

A  Story  Teller  s  Story  (1924).  An  attempt  to  lay  bare  the  emo¬ 
tional  life  of  one  seeking  to  be  an  artist  in  America;  to  plumb  his 
own  consciousness,  to  escape  from  a  world  he  hates.  Such  escape 
comes  from  reaching  down  “through  all  the  broken  surface  distrac¬ 
tions  of  modern  life  to  that  old  craft  out  of  which  culture  springs.” 
He  must  pull  himself  free  from  a  deadening  and  devastating  routine 
of  an  industrial  society  with  its  empty  ambitions.  And  having 
found  his  craft  he  finds  a  recompense  in  life.  “I  sang  as  I  worked,  as 
in  my  boyhood  I  had  often  seen  old  craftsmen  sing  and  as  I  had 
never  heard  men  sing  in  factories.  And  for  what  I  had  written  at 
such  times  I  had  been  called  unclean  by  men  and  women  who  had 
never  known  me,  could  have  no  personal  reasons  for  thinking  me 
unclean.  Was  I  unclean?  Were  the  hands  that,  for  such  brief 
periods  of  my  life,  had  really  served  me,  had  they  been  unclean  at 
such  moments  of  service?”  A  stimulating  and  suggestive  document 
of  modern  life. 

The  note  of  determinism  in  Anderson  expressed  in  two  images, 
the  wall  and  escape — running  to  get  away  from  what  holds  us  fast. 
But  in  running  away  from  the  old  self  to  find  a  new,  we  carry  the 
old  self  with  us.  Anderson  one  of  the  three  or  four  most  important 
men  now  writing  fiction  in  America.  Compare  with  D.  id.  Law¬ 
rence. 


A  NEW  ROMANCE 


The  new  romance  and  the  new  naturalism  both  spring  from  a 
common  root — hatred  of  the  meanness  and  ugliness  of  modern 
life;  but  romance  seeks  to  evade  and  forget  what  naturalism  ex¬ 
amines  curiously.  It  is  a  defense  mechanism  against  things  as  they 
are  and  springs  from: 

1.  Disgust  at  the  verisimilitude  of  naturalism  that  parades  the 
crude  ugliness  of  life  as  if  it  were  the  reality.  The  dream  more  im¬ 
portant  than  the  fact,  for  our  real  existence  is  within  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  removed  from  material  futilities,  where  we  may  satisfy  our 
hunger  for  beauty,  for  far-ranging  adventure,  for  ideal  existence. 

2.  The  impulse  to  free  creation.  Real  life  overshadowed  and 
darkened  by  a  sense  of  impotence;  men  are  flies  caught  in  the  web 
of  circumstance.  But  in  romance  the  will  is  unshackled  and  the 
free  imagination  plays  with  time  and  space,  shaping  fate  to  its 
liking  in  terms  of  beauty,  dwelling  in  a  world  as  we  should  like  it 
to  be.  Romance  hence  is  the  ideal  cosmos  of  the  ego. 

3.  The  spirit  of  youth  that  has  brooded  over  life  and  refuses  to 
abandon  its  dreams.  The  inevitable  outcome  irony,  an  undertone 
of  sadness,  a  recognition  of  the  pessimism  against  which  it  desires 
to  be  a  defense.  This  the  final  note.  So  compare  the  Eros  et  mors  o( 
old  romance.  .  .  .* 

*  Cabell  omitted,  as  there  is  a  fuller  discussion  of  him  given. — Publisher. 


372 


1917-1924* 


Introduction:  With  the  entry  of  America  into  the  war  came  a 
sharp  change  in  literary  development.  Regimentation  due  to  war 
psychology  destroyed  the  movement  of  social  criticism  which  dom¬ 
inated  fiction  between  1903  and  1917.  The  liberal  movement  in 
economics  and  politics  came  to  an  abrupt  end,  and  the  problem 
novel  ceased  to  be  written.  Almost  overnight  it  became  old-fash¬ 
ioned.  The  year  1918  sterile.1  With  the  year  1919  began  a  new 
literary  period.  Three  major  movements: 

1.  A  resurgence  of  naturalism,  inspired  by  psychology  rather 
than  by  economics,  with  a  tendency  to  impressionism  in  handling: 
represented  by  Sherwood  Anderson. 

2.  A  new  romanticism,  seeking  ideal  beauty  as  a  defense  against 
reality  and  emerging  in  irony:  represented  by  James  Branch  Cabell. 

3.  A  new  criticism:  A  revolt  of  the  young  intellectuals  against 
the  dominant  middle  class — its  Puritanism,  its  Victonanism,  its 
acquisitive  ideals:  represented  by  Sinclair  Lewis. 

I 

THE  SMALL  TOWN  IN  FICTION 

The  first  expression  of  the  new  literature.  Chiefly  a  middle- 
western  development — and  a  late  phase  of  the  literature  of  the 
local.  A  reaction  from  the  “economic  city,”  with  its  centralizing 
economics,  which  dominated  the  problem  novel.  Two  antagonistic 
interpretations:  (1)  The  romantic  small  town,  or  the  theory  of  a 
kindly,  democratic  world;  (2)  The  realistic  small  town,  or  the 
theory  of  a  petty,  competitive  world. 

I.  The  Romantic  Interpretation  of  the  Small  Town.  A  hold-over 
from  an  earlier  period.  Derives  from  Riley;  elaborated  and  de¬ 
fended  by  Meredith  Nicholson,  The  Valley  of  Democracy  (1918). 
According  to  this  theory  the  middle-western  village  is:  (1)  A  land 
of  economic  well-being,  uncursed  by  poverty  and  unspoiled  by 
wealth;  (2)  A  land  of  “folksiness” — the  village  a  great  family  in  its 

*  From  the  syllabus. — Publisher. 

1  For  a  statement  of  the  reaction  of  a  young  intellectual  to  the  war,  see  Randolph 
Bourne,  Untimely  Papers ,  1919. 


373 


374 


ADDENDA 


neighborliness,  friendliness,  sympathy;  (3)  Primarily  middle-class, 
and  therefore  characteristically  American,  wholesome,  and  human 
in  spite  of  its  prosaic  shortcomings;  (4)  The  home  of  American 
democracy,  dominated  by  the  spirit  of  equality,  where  men  are 
measured  by  their  native  qualities.2 

WILLIAM  ALLEN  WHITE:  A  SON  OF  THE  MIDDLE  BORDER 

Product  of  middle-class,  Puritan  Kansas.  Dominated  by  senti¬ 
ment,  believes  in  the  essential  fairness  of  men.  Two  major  ideas: 
(1)  Belief  in  the  excellence  of  western  village  life;  (2)  Fear  lest  this 
life  be  submerged  by  industrialism.  A  romantic  and  political  Pro¬ 
gressive.  Formulated  his  political  theory  in  The  Old  Order  Changeth 
(1910) — thesis,  that  America  is  changing  from  representative 
republicanism  to  democracy.  The  problem  is  to  make  business 
honest.  Not  an  intellectual.  His  plots  resemble  Thackeray’s — 
leisurely,  gossipy,  confidential  asides,  a  large  canvas,  many  figures, 
a  long  period  of  time.  His  attitude  admirably  expressed  in  Emporia 
and  New  York  (1906). 

At  the  Court  of  Boyville  (1899).  The  romance  of  youth  set  against 
the  background  of  the  small  town.  A  world  of  dreams  and  loveli¬ 
ness:  adventures  that  await  beyond  the  horizon;  the  glory  of  pig¬ 
tails  and  overalls.  The  democracy  of  the  vacant  lot:  rivalry  in 
marbles  and  hand-springs — the  leadership  of  the  capable.  Sincerer 
work  than  Tarkington’s  Penrod.  Contrast  with  Garland’s  Son  of 
the  Middle  Border ,  and  Mark  Twain’s  Tom  Sawyer. 

A  Certain  Rich  Man  (1909).  His  plunge  into  the  problem  novel. 
Theme:  fear  of  the  economic  city  that  draws  the  villager  into  its 
web.  A  contrast  between  the  two  worlds  and  two  social  ideals — the 
friendly  democracy  of  the  older  America  threatened  by  economic 
centralization. 

In  the  Heart  of  a  Fool  (1918).  One  of  the  last  of  the  problem  novels. 
Theme — the  invasion  of  the  small  town  by  industrialism  and  the 
disintegration  of  village  virtues.  The  story  of  an  idealist  who  op¬ 
poses  the  ends  of  Main  Street  and  his  destruction  by  the  herd. 
A  suggestion  of  Sinclair  Lewis.  The  conclusion— the  excellence 
of  love  and  the  foolishness  of  selfishness.  The  background 
characters,  studies  in  the  reaction  of  the  older  ideal  to  the  new 
egoism. 

2  For  a  criticism  of  Nicholson,  see  Randolph  Bourne,  The  History  of  a  Literary 
Radical,  p.  128. 


1917-1924 


375 


BOOTH  TARKINGTON:  THE  DEAN  OF  AMERICAN  MIDDLE-CLASS  LETTERS 

Possesses  the  virtues  of  cleverness,  optimism,  humor,  respect¬ 
ability.  Honors  all  the  Victorian  taboos.  Life  is  an  agreeable 
experience — to  the  successful,  hence  it  is  well  to  rise.  His  chief 
theme,  middle-class  romance  as  exemplified  in  the  “valley  of 
democracy”:  courtship  of  nice  young  people  through  the  agencies 
of  parties  and  picnics.  A  skillful  writer,  with  a  light  touch,  but  his 
art  destroyed  by  love  of  popularity — a  novel  ends  well  that  ends 
happily.  A  perennial  sophomore,  purveyor  of  comfortable  litera¬ 
ture  to  middle-class  America.3 

The  Gentleman  from  Indiana  (1899).  A  dramatization  of  the 
“good,  dear  people”  theme.  The  college  man  who  goes  back  to 
his  people  to  live  and  work  with  them.  A  satisfying  life  results 
from  merging  individual  life  in  the  common  village  life.  A  flabby 
and  somewhat  saccharine  philosophy. 

Alice  Adams  (1921).  The  story  of  an  instinctive  actress  and  her 
competitive  struggle  for  social  position  and  a  man.  A  clever,  at¬ 
tractive,  lovable  girl  defeated  by  her  background — led  into  foolish 
little  deceits  to  keep  up  appearances — victim  of  middle-class 
conventionality.  Shabby  parlors  versus  conservatories  as  settings 
for  proposals.  The  Adams  family  has  fallen  behind  their  acquaint¬ 
ances  in  the  business  of  rising  in  the  world,  and  Alice  sinks  to  a 
lower  social  scale.  An  overrated  book. 

The  Midlander  (1923).  A  contribution  to  booster  literature  and 
an  unconscious  satire  on  the  emptiness  of  the  middle-class  mind. 
A  real-estate  venture  and  what  came  of  it.  The  conception  that 
“man  is  a  wealth-and-comfort-producing  machine.”  Supposed  to 
be  tragedy,  but  the  tragedy  lies  in  preferring  the  imported  to  the 
domestic  article — choosing  a  New  York  girl  instead  of  a  local  one. 
The  suburb  thrives,  the  automobile  business  goes  forward,  and 
the  gods  of  getting  on  smile  in  the  end.4 

The  other  numerous  titles  of  Tarkington  signify  nothing  except 
to  lovers  of  comfortable  literature.  The  clever  Hoosier  has  ceased 
to  be  an  artist — the  great  failure  irt  contemporary  American  fiction. 

DOROTHY  CANFIELD  (FISHER) 

A  clever  dramatizer  of  the  obvious:  believes  in  the  Woman 
Triumphant,  and  discovers  in  the  right  education  of  children — ■ 
particularly  girls — the  solution  of  all  problems.  Two  main  themes' 

3  See  Mr.  Cabell’s  criticism  in  Beyond  Life,  pp.  301-307. 

4  For  a  review  see  the  Nation,  March  19,  1924- 


376 


ADDENDA 


1.  A  protest  against  the  demands  of  “social  life.”  The  Squirrel 
Cage  (1912).  A  contribution  to  the  problem  novel.  A  William 
Morris  suggestion  of  the  sufficiency  of  handicraft  as  an  escape  from 
social  demands.  An  arraignment  of  the  American  home  where  the 
father  scarcely  knows  the  children  and  the  mother  is  shut  away 
from  the  outside  world. 

The  Bent  Twig  (1915).  A  study  of  university  community  life — 
the  struggle  between  plain  living  and  high  thinking — of  social 
pleasure  and  no  thinking. 

2.  The  defense  of  the  village.  The  belief  that  community 
fellowship — a  gathering  to  watch  a  century  plant  bloom — breeds 
an  artistic  spirit  finer  than  old-world  art  and  culture  can  offer. 
Especially  a  Vermont  town  is  ideal  for  the  proper  bringing  up  of 
children.  The  Brimming  Gup  (1920).  A  story  of  the  right  bringing 
up  of  children.  Rough  Hewn  (1922).  The  love  of  art  and  travel 
which  leads  inevitably  to  a  Vermont  town  and  marriage.  Raw 
Material  (1923).  Sketches.  The  point  of  view  given  in  “Paul 
Meyer” — the  folly  of  thinking  that  a  normal  girl  should  prefer 
philology  to  matrimony. 

II 

THE  REALISTIC  SMALL  TOWN  AND  THE  NEW 
NATURALISM 

The  work  of  the  younger  intellectuals,  more  disciplined  than  the 
muckrakers,  with  wider  culture  and  severer  standards.  Concerned 
for  civilization,  the  things  of  the  spirit,  a  free  creative  individual¬ 
ism,  rather  than  political  liberalism.  A  searching  criticism  of  the 
triumphant  middle  class,  its  ideals  and  its  habitat,  the  town  and 
city;  the  repressive  tyrannies  of  its  herd  mind;  the  futility  of  its 
materialism.  Back  of  the  novelists  is  a  group  of  essayists,  young 
critics  of  established  ways:  Van  Wyck  Brooks,  Ludwig  Lewisohn, 
Randolph  Bourne,  H.  L.  Mencken.  They  embody  a  reaction  from: 
(1)  The  acquisitive  ideal  of  a  machine  civilization.  (2)  “The  great 
illusion  of  American  civilization,  the  illusion  of  optimism” — the 
staple  of  middle-class  business  morale.  (3)  The  sentimentalism  of 
“comfortable  literature,”  that  evades  reality  and  weakens  the 
intellectual  fiber.  (4)  The  inhibitions  of  a  Puritanism  that  has  lost 
its  sanctions.  (5)  The  White-Tarkington  doctrine  of  the  “beautiful 
people”  and  “folksy  village.” 

The  movement  began  with  Masters’s  Spoon  River  Anthology 


1917-1924 


377 


(1915)-  An  earlier  work  is  E.  W.  Howe’s  Story  of  a  Country  Town 
(1883): — stark,  grim,  unrelieved,  revealing  the  “smoldering  dis¬ 
content  of  an  inarticulate  frontier.” 

ZONA  GALE - THE  TRANSITION  FROM  ROMANCE  TO  REALISM 

I.  Friendship  Village  romance.  The  Loves  of  Pelleas  and  Etarre 
(1907).  Everyone  is  helpful,  everyone  loves,  or  wants  to,  or  is 
unhappy  for  lack  of  it.  Friendship  Village  (1908).  A  world  where 
there  is-  no  sorrow,  or  sickness,  and  where  brotherly  love  rules. 
Of  the  “folksy”  school. 

II.  The  shift  to  realism.  Miss  Lulu  Bett  (1920).  A  homely  village 
tragedy  of  the  repressed  soul  that  rebels  under  the  irritation  of 
domestic  pin-pricks.  Plebeian  characters,  thin,  cheap,  tiresome; 
set  in  a  shoddy  world  and  rubbing  each  other’s  nerves.  Deacon 
Dwight  a  sadist;  Miss  Lulu  a  grotesque.  Treated  from  the  outside 
in  contrast  with  Sherwood  Anderson’s  method.  Faint  Perfume 
(1923).  A  glorification  of  martyrdom.  The  conviction  that  life  is 
hard,  and  the  excellence  of  the  economy  of  pain.  A  partial  return 
to  the  Friendship  Village  note,  but  like  Miss  Lulu  Bett  in  the  picture 
of  a  self-worshiping  family.* 


DONN  BYRNE  t 

American  born  but  Irish  bred.  His  early  work,  The  Stranger's 
Banquet  (1919),  half  problem  novel — -industrialism — which  offered 
little  scope  for  the  Celtic  wistfulness  in  which  he  conceives  romance 
to  lie. 

Messer  Marco  Polo  (1921).  The  romance  of  distant  times  and 
places,  of  unfamiliar  backgrounds  and  lovely  worlds:  medieval 
Venice  and  its  pageantry;  a  far  quest  over  burning  sands;  the 
loveliness  of  little  Golden  Bells  at  the  court  of  Kubla  Khan;  the 
ardor  of  love  that  tangles  itself  in  religion.  A  wistfulness  and 
beauty  of  phrase  that  remind  one  of  Synge’s  Riders  to  the  Sea. 
The  loveliest  romance  of  recent  years.5 

The  Wind  That  Bloweth  (1922).  A  rich  fabric — Gaelic  folk;  the 
woman  of  the  boulevard;  the  white  sun-baked  road  to  Damascus; 

*  Sinclair  Lewis  omitted,  as  fuller  material  has  been  given. — Publisher. 

t  From  the  third  section  in  the  syllabus,  which  deals  with  “A  New  Romance.”— 

Publisher.  . 

6  See  Cabell’s  review  of  Messer  Marco  Polo  in  Straws  and  Prayer-Books,  pp.  52-59 
The  writer’s  full  name  is  Brian  Oswald  Donn-Byrne. 


378 


ADDENDA 


the  fire  of  revolution;  the  crack  of  cordage  as  the  ship  rounds  the 
Horn — a  saga  of  the  unquiet  heart. 

The  Changeling  (1923).  Short  stories  of  quaint  places,  forgotten 
people;  the  Bible  and  love  of  Ireland.  Done  with  excellent  crafts¬ 
manship. 

Blind  Raftery  (1924).  A  tale  of  a  blind  harpist  in  Dean  Swift’s 
Ireland  and  of  his  wife,  Hilaria,  who  sings  the  song  of  the  women 
of  the  streets  in  Cadiz.  Life  teaches  them  a  philosophy  expressed 
by  the  harpist  in  these  words:  “We  sit  a  little  while  by  ourselves 
in  an  apart,  dark  place,  and  we  learn  truths,  of  how  certain  things 
one  believes  to  be  good  are  but  vulgar  selfish  things,  and  how 
certain  things  the  small  think  evil  are  but  futile  accidents.  And 
we  learn  to  be  kind;  such  wisdom  comes  when  we  are  dead.  And 
those  who  have  never  died  in  life  .  .  .  are  pleasant  shallow  people, 
soulless  as  seals.” 


ROBERT  NATHAN 

Began  like  Donn  Byrne  with  a  problem  study — Peter  Kindred 
(1919).  A  dual  personality  cut  asunder  and  embodied  in  two  char¬ 
acters:  David  the  romantic  fades  out  of  the  story,  and  Peter 
becomes  a  modern,  absorbed  in  eugenics.  A  background  of  Phillips 
Exeter  and  Harvard. 

Autumn  (1921).  An  idyll  of  loneliness,  with  a  commentary  on 
materialism,  done  in  simple,  wistful  language. 

1.  Mr.  Jeminy,  a  village  philosopher,  disciple  of  Boethius  and 
St.  Francis,  half  pagan  and  yet  Christian.  Troubled  over  the 
poverty  of  the  world  that  does  not  amass  “love,  peace,  the  quiet 
of  the  heart,  the  work  of  one's  hand.” 

2.  A  village  background.  Mr.  Jeminy  wished  to  teach  the  chil¬ 
dren  the  secret  of  happiness  instead  of  the  folly  of  plus  and  minus, 
and  was  turned  out  of  his  school.  An  echo  of  Main  Street  in  its 
commentary  on  village  narrowness,  hardness,  gossip.  A  frigid 
Puritanism  that  disapproves  Mr.  Jeminy  for  speaking  disrespect¬ 
fully  of  God  and  denies  happiness  to  Mrs.  Wicket  who  is  under 
God’s  sentence  of  unhappiness. 

3.  A  note  of  determinism.  A  world  of  grotesques — all  are 
hemmed  in  and  cramped,  longing  for  fresh  experience  and  strange 
adventures,  all  are  unhappy.  So  Aaron  Bade  with  his  flute  and  his 
“awkward  thoughts  and  clumsy  feelings.”  Margaret  Bade  with 
her  conviction,  “Life  is  so  much  spilt  milk”;  Farmer  Barly  with  his 


1917-1924 


379 


commentary,  “Folks  are  queer  crotchets”;  Anna  Barly  with  her 
yearning  for  the  “white  wonder  of  life”  and  the  trap.  An  indict¬ 
ment  of  New  England  for  its  destruction  of  natural  happiness  and 
the  simple  joy  of  life. 

4.  A  profound  irony.  The  end  of  Mr.  Jeminy’s  hopefulness  is 
disillusion.  “Here  within  this  circle  of  hills,  is  to  be  found  faith, 
virtue,  passion,  and  good  sense.  In  this  valley  youth  is  not  without 
courage,  or  age  without  wisdom.”  The  outcome  disproves  this 
faith.  Of  his  many  pupils,  “Not  one  is  tidy  of  mind,  or  humble  of 
heart.  Not  one  has  learned  to  be  happy  in  poverty,  or  gentle  in 
good  fortune.”  Life  as  a  whole  is  futile.  The  dead  alone  can  ask 
God  the  meaning  of  life.  “  But  for  us,  who  remain,  it  has  no  mean¬ 
ing.”  The  tale  is  Robert  Frost  done  in  prose — compare  “Mending 
Wall.” 

The  Puppet  Master  (1923).  The  most  graceful  fantasy  in  Ameri¬ 
can  literature.  Papa  Jonas,  the  puppet  creator  and  master,  watches 
the  love  of  Annabelle  Lee,  a  rag  doll  with  shoe-button  eyes,  and 
Mr.  Aristotle,  a  red-nosed,  philosopher-clown  puppet;  and  of 
Mary  Holly  and  Christopher  Lane,  the  poet.  The  theme  is  love — 
“Love  is  a  man’s  soul:  it  does  not  grow  like  his  hopes,  it  does  not 
break  like  his  heart.  .  .  .  But  love  goes  by  after  a  while.”  Papa 
Jonas  is  Mr.  Jeminy,  converted  to  the  Stoic  philosophy  but  lacking 
love.  The  note  of  determinism  persists,  but  the  Stoic  attitude  over¬ 
comes.  “Yes,”  he  said  slowly,  “one  must  make  the  best  of  what 
one  has.” 

JOSEPH  hergesheimer:  a  sophisticated  romantic 

Began  as  a  painter.  After  fourteen  years’  apprenticeship  was 
accepted  by  the  Saturday  Evening  Post,  and  began  a  career  in 
popularity  that  rivals  Tarkington’s.  Possesses  the  virtues  and 
vices  of  the  Post  school.  In  earlier  work  a  colorist,  painting  statu- 
esques  against  artfully  arranged  backgrounds;  a  connoisseur  of 
fabrics  and  poses  and  nature  settings — nearly  as  “much  concerned 
with  the  stuffs  as  with  the  stuff  of  life.”  In  Cytherea  the  setting  a 
sophisticated  manipulation  of  the  theme,  as  the  hot  Cuban  night 
in  Cobra  with  its  naked  primitive  passions.  A  dabbler  in  psy¬ 
chology  that  develops  into  a  crude  Freudianism,  particularly  in 
Cytherea.  Always  a  hint  of  artistic  insincerity;  something  of  a 
poseur  yet  a  sensuous  artist  nature.  His  gorgeous  prose  style  spotty 
and  streaked  by  amazing  crudeness. 


ADDENDA 


380 

The  Three  Black  Pennys  (1917).  A  study  in  the  breaking  out  of 
willfulness  in  successive  generations,  set  against  a  background  of 
the  history  of  iron-making  in  Pennsylvania.  An  elaboration  of 
Tubal  Cain.  An  anticlimax  arranged  for  dramatic  significance, 
suggesting  the  decay  of  romance  in  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  of 
American  industrial  development.  The  first  episode  is  Herge- 
sheimer  at  his  best.  Howat  Penny  a  study  in  moods  that  make 
him  “angry  at  life”;  but  swept  on  by  the  will  to  possess.  Ludowica 
Winscomb  embodies  a  favorite  theme — the  suggestion  of  an  older 
culture  contrasted  with  the  crude  American  reality.  So  compare 
Taou  Yuen. 

Linda  Condon  (1919).  A  study  in  the  decay  of  surface  beauty — 
an  empty  form  caught  in  the  web  of  a  shallow  mother  and  the 
demands  of  stronger  natures,  but  preserved  by  lack  of  emotional 
concern.  Handled  skillfully,  with  a  somewhat  forced  unity  symbol¬ 
ized  by  Linda’s  straight  black  bang;  but  the  story  leaves  one  with 
a  sense  of  unconcern  for  Linda  and  her  fate.  The  ending  melo¬ 
dramatic.  Note  Van  Doren’s  curious  comment— “  nearly  the 
most  beautiful  American  novel  since  Hawthorne  and  Henry 
James.” 

Java  Head  (1919).  The  story  of  an  exotic  that  languishes  in  an 
uncongenial  habitat.  A  contrast  in  backgrounds:  the  romance  of 
old  Salem  in  the  days  of  the  clipper  ship;  the  romance  of  a  far  older 
East  that  makes  Salem  seem  raw  and  crude.  Taou  Yuen  a  decora¬ 
tive  lay  figure,  with  aristocratic  suggestions  beyond  anything  the 
West  knows.  The  dramatic  significance  of  opium,  that  hangs  like  a 
pall  over  the  East  and  brings  degeneration  and  death  to  Puritan 
Salem.  The  end  with  its  cheap  love  adventure,  a  conscious  satire 
on  western  life.  Hergesheimer’s  best  work.  A  romantic  atmos¬ 
phere  got  without  archaic  trappings  of  speech  and  manners;  never¬ 
theless  makes  much  of  costume. 

Balisand  (1924).  A  romance  of  a  Virginia  Federalist  in  the  days 
of  the  Revolution  and  after.  A  rich  background  of  plantation  life, 
with  a  touch  of  somewhat  cheap  mysticism.  Of  the  school  of 
Washington  rather  than  Jefferson.  A  better  work  than  The  Bright 
Shawl  or  Cytherea. 

His  other  titles  signify  little.  Yet  see  the  Saturday  Evening  Post 
for  a  series  of  furniture  stories.  Characteristic  of  his  concern  for  the 
“stuffs  of  life.”  See  in  particular,  “Mahogany”  (Vol.  195,^00. 


1917-1924 


381 


53 »  January,  1923);  “Pewter”  (Vol.  196,  no.  23,  January,  1924); 
“Oak”  (Vol.  196,  no.  3,  July,  1923). 6 

IV 

CERTAIN  OTHER  WRITERS 

EDITH  WHARTON — THE  GENTEEL  TRADITION  AND  THE  NEW 

PLUTOCRACY 

A  temperamental  aristocrat,  endowed  with  keen  intelligence  and 
ripe  culture.  Observes  the  ways  of  a  wealthy  society  without  cul¬ 
ture  and  unconcerned  with  standards.  A  protest  against  the 
domination  of  the  middle  class.  Mrs.  Wharton  isolated  in  America 
by  her  native  aristocratic  tastes.  The  older  New  York  society 
without  real  distinction,  bound  by  convention  and  with  middle- 
class  concern  for  respectability;  the  new  society  a  vulgar  plutoc¬ 
racy;  outside  both  a  pushing  nouveau-riche  class  eager  to  climb. 
Hence  she  turns  to  the  authentic  aristocracy  of  Europe  for  satis¬ 
faction  of  her  genteel  tastes.  In  spirit  she  belongs  to  the  ancien 
regime.  The  highest  law  of  society  is  convention,  but  it  must  be 
noble,  not  vulgar. 

The  House  of  Mirth  (1905).  A  story  of  New  York’s  gilded  society, 
and  how  it  served  one  of  its  daughters.  Lily  Bart,  trained  for 
social  leadership  in  a  plutocracy,  a  finished  and  costly  parasite, 
seeking  a  market  for  her  beauty,  yet  restrained  by  instinctive 
refinement  from  seeing  the  game  through.  Lacking  money  she  is 
caught  in  a  web  of  convention  and  destroyed.  In  her  world  conven¬ 
tion  is  the  social  law,  and  the  tragedy  flows  from  her  inability  to 
rise  above  it  or  to  keep  it  wholly.  The  contrast  between  Selden 
and  Trenor — the  aristocrat  and  the  plutocrat — characteristic  of 
Mrs.  Wharton. 

Ethan  Frame  (1911).  A  dramatization  of  the  “narrow  house” 
theme — life  held  relentlessly  in  the  grip  of  poverty  and  duty.  A 
bleak  and  joyless  existence  that  seeks  escape  and  suffers  lingering 
tragedy.  Thereafter  a  stern  isolation  and  iron  repression.  Mrs. 
Wharton’s  finest  work. 

The  Custom  of  the  Country  (1915).  A  study  of  the  social  climber. 
The  best  of  a  series  of  novels  satirizing  the  encroachments  on  New 
York  exclusiveness  by  the  rising  plutocracy  and  its  daughters.  The 
western  plutocracy  of  pork  presumably  more  vulgar  than  the 

6  For  a  striking  characterization  of  Hergesheimer,  see  The  Bookman,  May,  1922 
For  an  appreciation,  see  Cabell,  Straws  and  Prayer-Books,  pp.  195-221. 


382 


ADDENDA 


eastern  plutocracy  of  Wall  Street,  yet  between  them  the  older 
gentry  crushed.  So  compare  Boyesen,  Social  Strugglers  (1893); 
Robert  Grant,  Unleavened  Bread  (1900).  Undine  Spragg,  like 
Selma  White,  pushing,  heartless,  vulgar,  showy,  is  set  over  against 
Ralph  Marvell,  a  refined  “dabbler  with  life”;  Peter  Van  Dcgen, 
the  “plunger”;  and  Elmer  MofFatt,  the  self-made  man.  She  em¬ 
bodies  all  that  Mrs.  Wharton  most  hates;  all  climbers  are  vulgar, 
she  believes,  both  men  and  women. 

The  Age  of  Innocence  (1920).  A  study  of  the  older  world  of  the 
eighteen-seventies.  A  loving  yet  satirical  picture  of  a  Pharisaic 
society,  “wholly  absorbed  in  barricading  self  against  the  un 
pleasant”;  that  lives  secluded,  protected  by  its  taboos,  and  fears 
reality.  A  sterile  world  of  clan  conventions  and  negations;  a 
decadent  Victorianism.  The  Van  der  Luydens  of  Skuytercliff  are 
of  the  same  stuff  as  the  Dagonets  in  The  Custom  of  the  Country; 
and  the  dilettante  Newland  Archer  is  another  Ralph  Marvell.  Into 
this  dead  world  enters  Ellen  Olenska  with  her  vivid  old-world 
experiences,  who  threatens  to  rebel,  yet  finally  yields  to  the  clan 
taboos.  The  book  fades  out  like  the  lives  of  the  Van  der  Luydens. 
An  admirable  work. 

Old  New  York  (1924).  Four  carefully  done  tales  that  sketch 
New  York  in  the  forties,  fifties,  sixties,  and  seventies.  A  return  to 
her  best  manner,  with  the  finish  of  The  Age  of  Innocence. 

Her  other  later  work  not  important.  Glimpses  of  the  Moon  (1922) 
inconsequential;  and  A  Son  at  the  Front  (1923) — an  attempt  to 
document  the  reactions  of  an  artist  with  a  son  in  the  army — only 
half  successful. 

Mrs.  Wharton  a  finished  artist  who  grasps  her  material  firmly; 
an  intellectual  attitude,  de.ighting  in  irony.  Unaffected  by  the 
problem  novel,  and  schools  of  naturalism  or  romanticism.  Not  a 
thinker  like  Cabell,  wnosc  irony  springs  from  an  imagination  that 
contemplates  man  in  his  relation  tc  cosmic  forces,  but  an  observer 
whose  irony  springs  from  noting  the  clash  between  men  and  social 
convention.  The  last  of  ou;  literary  aristocrats  of  the  genteel 
tradition.  Her  attitude  expressed  in  the  words,  “  Je  suis  venue  trop 
tard  dans  un  monde  trop  vulgaire.” 

WILLA  CATHER:  EPICS  OF  WOMEN 

The  Middle  Border  of  Hamlin  Garl  id  seen  through  different 
eyes.  She  looks  back  lovingly  to  a  pioneer  West,  as  the  cradle  of 


1917-1924 


383 


heroic  lives.  An  epic  breadth  of  prairie  spaces  and  industrious 
years,  with  a  note  of  regret — Optima  dies  prima  fugit.  Against  this 
background  she  sets  her  immigrant  women,  with  their  vigor  and 
wealth  of  life,  and  considers  how  the  West  has  dealt  with  them. 
Peasant  heroines,  with  their  strong  natures  hidden  under  queer 
speech  and  garb,  set  in  a  waste  of  wild  red  grass,  bitter  winters, 
burning  summers,  virgin  soil  and  great  loneliness.  A  long-ignored 
theme — the  lot  of  the  immigrant  who  has  come  on  a  desperate 
adventure — the  struggle  of  their  children  with  the  soil.  Compare 
The  Jungle,  for  the  industrial  exploitation  of  the  immigrant. 

Has  matured  slowly.  The  Troll  Garden  (1905),  and  Alexander’ s 
Bridge  (1910),  are  inconsequential.  Her  real  work  done  late. 
Belongs  to  no  school.  Is  neither  naturalistic  nor  romantic.  Is 
unconcerned  with  problems.  Except  for  a  single  attack  on  the 
ugliness  of  the  small  western  town — “The  Sculptor’s  Funeral”  in 
The  Troll  Garden — she  ignores  middle-class  America  and  its 
Main  Streets.  An  individual  artist,  sincere,  capable;  an  excellent 
craftsman. 

0  Pioneers  (1913).  The  story  of  Alexandra  Bergson,  a  daughter 
of  the  Middle  Border;  calm,  tenacious,  capable;  loving  the  soil 
and  bringing  it  to  abundant  productiveness.  The  new  world  had 
brought  out  diverse  qualities  in  the  Swedish  peasant  family;  the 
older  brothers  common,  dull,  vulgarized  by  Americanization;  the 
younger  brother  suggestive  of  the  better  side  of  American  oppor¬ 
tunity.  Alexandra  the  directing  mind  and  controlling  will.  Over 
against  her  is  set  the  Bohemian  Marie  Tovesky,  childlike  in  her 
spontaneous  enthusiasm.  The  tragic  ending  handled  with  great 
skill.  Thrown  about  the  whole,  a  harsh  Nebraska  countryside 
through  changing  periods.  One  who  had  not  lived  through  similar 
experiences  and  loved  the  memory  could  not  write  so. 

The  Song  of  the  Lark  (1915).  The  story  of  Thea  Kronberg,  who 
by  virtue  of  fierce  energy  and  iron  strength  rises  to  triumph  as  an 
artist.  There  are  no  romantic  stage-effects,  only  the  passionate 
struggle  of  a  tenacious  will.  Thea  a  peasant  nature  of  vast  solidity. 
The  most  convincing  story  of  artist  life  written  by  an  American. 
A  changing  background:  the  mean  little  Colorado  town,  the 
loneliness  of  Chicago,  Europe,  the  great  spaces  of  the  Southwest. 

My  Antonia  (1918).  The  story  of  Antonia  Shimerda:  an  opulent 
peasant  nature  with  strong  mother  instinct,  thwarted  by  meager 
opportunities  and  vulgar  environment.  Her  life  runs  a  narrow 


384 


ADDENDA 


round:  the  early  pioneer  experience  with  its  loneliness  and  black 
tragedy;  the  town  experience  of  the  hired  girl,  who  lives  eagerly; 
the  later  life  of  a  hard-working  mother  on  a  lonely  farm.  Antonia 
“a  rich  mine  of  life  like  the  founder  of  early  races,”  loving,  gener¬ 
ous,  eager,  yet  belonging  to  the  soil.  To  vulgarize  such  natures  by 
cramming  them  into  a  conventional  mold,  passes  for  Americaniza¬ 
tion — this  the  implied  thesis. 

One  of  Ours  (1922).  The  story  of  Claude  Wheeler,  with  strength 
imprisoned  by  a  society  that  opens  its  opportunities  to  Main  Street 
natures  like  Bayliss  Wheeler.  A  suggestion  of  naturalism  in  the 
handling  of  the  theme:  Claude  caught  by  the  negative  character 
Enid  Royse  because  he  fails  to  appreciate  the  complementary 
strength  of  Gladys  Farmer — a  true  Cather  woman,  enmeshed  in 
Gopher  Prairie.  A  futile,  ironical  ending:  better  to  die  in  battle 
than  be  destroyed  by  the  pettiness  of  Gopher  Prairie.  The  war 
atmosphere  seems  curiously  old-fashioned. 

The  Lost  Lady  (1923).  A  change  of  theme.  The  story  of  Mrs. 
Forester,  an  embodiment  of  traditional  feminine  charm,  quite 
superior  to  such  incidents  as  age  or  loyalty — a  type  of  woman  out¬ 
side  Miss  Cather’s  experience  and  understanding.* 

V 

SOME  WAR  BOOKS 

The  late  war  the  first  in  our  history  that  has  produced  an  after- 
math  of  searching  criticism  in  fiction  or  drama.  The  romantic 
note  dominant  in  all  earlier  accounts,  particularly  of  the  Revolu¬ 
tion  and  the  Rebellion.  Such  stories  written  by  men  who  took  no 
part  in  them.  The  Civil  War  produced  only  one  book  of  realistic 
criticism,  that  was  mutilated  by  the  publisher  to  temper  its  cyni¬ 
cism,  and  that  enjoyed  no  popularity — The  Recollections  of  a  Pri¬ 
vate,  by  Warren  Goss.  The  late  war  is  producing  a  considerable 
group,  all  realistic  and  critical;  the  romantic  note  has  not  yet  ap¬ 
peared. 

JOHN  DOS  PASSOS 

Three  Soldiers  (1921).  A  naturalistic  handling  of  war  that  serves 
as  a  commentary  on  One  of  Ours.  The  most  notable  American  work 
on  the  theme  since  Stephen  Crane’s  The  Red  Badge  of  Courage. 

*  See  remarks  on  Miss  Cather  in  the  introduction  to  the  text  edition  of  Ole 
Rolvaag’s  Giants  in  the  Earth,  which  follows  these  syllabus  notes. — Publisher.  "* 


1917-1924 


385 


Similar  in  temper  to  Henri  Barbusse,  Under  Fire,  but  dealing  with 
the  barracks  and  the  drill  field.  Compare  with  Andreas  Latzko, 
Men  in  War — impressionistic  in  handling.  Dos  Passos  a  young 
artist  from  the  university,  an  idealist  who  enlists  and  is  disillu¬ 
sioned.  A  study  of  the  war  machine  and  the  effect  of  regimentation 
on  different  types  of  men — the  contrast  between  army  discipline 
and  a  lax  individualism,  and  the  disasters  that  may  ensue  from 
sudden  change.  Fuselli  a  low-grade  character  who  wants  to  rise; 
Chrisfield  a  solid  animal  who  becomes  sullen;  Andrews  a  highly 
nervous  organism,  to  whom  routine  is  killing.  Coarse  episodes  set 
in  a  brilliant  background:  the  glamour  of  militarism  gone. 

E.  E.  CUMMINGS 

The  Enormous  Room  (1922).  A  brilliant  revelation  of  the  tortures 
endured  by  an  artist  unjustly  imprisoned  in  a  French  military 
prison.  Supplements  Three  Soldiers  in  destroying  the  appeal  of 
military  glamour.  An  attack  particularly  on  the  common  notion  of 
heroic,  chivalrous  France. 

THOMAS  BOYD 

Through  the  Wheat  (1923).  An  impressionistic  handling  of  the 
reactions  of  a  normal  American  soldier,  Private  Hicks,  to  the  war. 
The  keynote  is  numbness — a  deadly  numbness  which  offers  the  sole 
defense  of  the  normal  mind  against  the  horrors  it  confronts.  Its 
matter-of-factness,  detached  point  of  view,  and  the  ordinariness  of 
the  hero,  set  it  apart  from  Three  Soldiers  and  The  Enormous  Room. 
An  excellent  bit  of  impressionism. 

LAURENCE  STALLINGS 

Plumes  (1924).  A  story  of  war  by  one  who  has  suffered  mutila¬ 
tion  from  it.  The  theme — -“If  you  are  smashed  badly  .  .  .  and  if 
you  have  any  intelligence  you  must  remake  a  world  to  live  in.” 
A  study  of  post-war  disillusionment,  naturalistically  handled.  So 
compare  the  play  in  which  he  collaborated — What  Price  Glory? 

VI 

YOUTH  IN  REVOLT— CERTAIN  PURVEYORS  OF  THE 

HECTIC 

A  group  of  youthful  poseurs  at  the  mercy  of  undigested  reactions 
to  Nietzsche,  Butler,  Dadaism,  Vorticism,  Socialism;  overbalanced 
by  changes  in  American  critical  and  creative  standards,  and  in  love 
with  copious  vocabularies  and  callow  emotions.  Given  to  satirizing 


386 


ADDENDA 


the  educational  methods  of  alma  mater;  quick  to  espouse  new 
causes;  enthusiastic  for  revolt  as  a  profession.  A  prolific  movement 
which  as  yet  has  accomplished  nothing  seriously  creative. 

F.  SCOTT  FITZGERALD 

This  Side  of  Paradise  (1921);  The  Beautiful  and  the  Damned 
(1922).  A  bad  boy  who  loves  to  smash  things  to  show  how  naughty 
he  is;  a  bright  boy  who  loves  to  say  smart  things  to  show  how  clever 
he  is.  Precocious,  ignorant — a  short  candle  already  burnt  out. 

STEPHEN  VINCENT  BENET  AND  FLOYD  DELL 

Benet:  Heavens  and  Earth  (1920);  The  Beginning  of  Wisdom 
(1921);  Young  People’s  Pride  (1923);  Jean  Hugenot  (1923).  Floyd 
Dell:  Moon  Calf  (1921);  Briary  Bush  (1922);  Janet  March  (1923). 

Luminaries  of  the  school  which  holds  that  the  sufficient  tests  of 
intellectual  emancipation  are  rolled  hose,  midnight  discussions, 
black  coffee,  and  the  discarding  of  wedding  rings.  Floyd  Dell  the 
most  serious  and  ablest  of  the  group. 

BEN  HECHT 

Eric  Dorn  (1921);  Gargoyles  (1922).  An  almost  naturalistic  dis¬ 
trust  of  formal  education,  love,  and  government,  and  an  unsub¬ 
stantiated  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  revolt  in  general  and  the  romance 
of  city  streets  in  particular.  A  burnt-out  rocket.  His  last  books — 
1 00 1  Afternoons  in  Chicago  (1923)  and  Florentine  Dagger  (1924) 
worse  than  inconsequential. 


OLE  ROLVAAG’S  “GIANTS  IN  THE  EARTH”  * 


The  dramatic  contrast  between  Per  Hansa,  type  of  the  natural 
pioneer  who  sees  the  golden  light  of  promise  flooding  the  wind¬ 
swept  plains,  and  Beret,  child  of  an  old  folk  civilization  who 
hungers  for  the  home  ways  and  in  whose  heart  the  terror  of  lone¬ 
liness  gathers,  penetrates  to  the  deeper  reality  of  life  as  it  was 
lived  for  three  hundred  years  on  the  American  frontier.  It  is  not 
a  late  or  rare  phenomenon;  it  is  only  late  and  rare  in  literature. 
We  have  been  used  to  viewing  the  frontier  in  broad  and  generous 
perspective  and  have  responded  most  sympathetically  to  the  epic 
note  that  runs  through  the  tale  of  the  conquest  of  the  continent. 
It  is  the  great  American  romance  that  gives  life  and  drama  to 
our  history.  It  was  this  epic  quality  that  de  Tocqueville  felt  when 
he  discovered  the  poetry  of  America  in  the  silent  march  of  a  race 
toward  the  far-off  Pacific,  hewing  its  way  triumphantly  through 
forests  and  mountains  to  arrive  at  its  objective.  But  the  emo¬ 
tional  side,  the  final  ledger  of  human  values,  we  have  too  little 
considered — the  men  and  women  broken  by  the  frontier,  the  great 
army  of  derelicts  who  failed  and  were  laid  away,  like  the  Norse 
immigrant  lad,  in  forgotten  graves.  The  cost  of  it  all  in  human 
happiness— the  loneliness,  the  disappointments,  the  renunciations, 
the  severing  of  old  ties  and  quitting  of  familiar  places,  the  appalling 
lack  of  those  intangible  cushions  for  the  nerves  that  could  not  be 
transported  on  horseback  or  in  prairie  schooners:  these  imponder¬ 
ables  too  often  have  been  left  out  of  the  reckoning  in  our  tradi¬ 
tional  romantic  interpretation.  But  with  the  growth  of  a  maturer 
realism  we  are  beginning  to  understand  how  great  was  the  price 
exacted  by  the  frontier;  and  it  is  because  Giants  in  the  Earth,  for 
the  first  time  in  our  fiction,  evaluates  adequately  the  settlement 
in  terms  of  emotion,  because  it  penetrates  to  the  secret  inner  life 
of  men  and  women  who  undertook  the  heavy  work  of  subduing 
the  wilderness,  that  it  is — quite  apart  from  all  artistic  values — a 
great  historical  document. 

*  Introduction  to  the  text  edition  of  Rolvaag’s  Giants  in  the  Earth.  Copyright 
1929  by  Harper  and  Brothers,  by  whose  permission  it  is  reprinted  here. — Publisher. 

387 


388 


ADDENDA 


If  in  one  sense  the  conquest  of  the  continent  is  the  great  Amer¬ 
ican  epic,  in  another  sense  it  is  the  great  American  tragedy.  The 
vastness  of  the  unexplored  reaches,  the  inhospitality  of  the  wilder¬ 
ness,  the  want  of  human  aid  and  comfort  when  disaster  came, 
these  were  terrifying  things  to  gentle  souls  whom  fate  had  not 
roughhewn  for  pioneering.  Fear  must  have  been  a  familiar  visitor 
to  the  heart  of  the  pioneer  woman,  and  for  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years  this  fear  of  the  dark  wilderness  was  one  reason  why  the 
settlements  clung  to  the  more  hospitable  seaboard.  There,  at 
least,  was  an  outlook  toward  the  old  home.  But  with  the  crossing 
of  the  Allegheny  Mountains,  following  the  Revolutionary  War, 
the  frontier  spirit  came  into  its  own.  A  spirit  of  restlessness  took 
possession  of  men,  and  the  thin  line  of  settlements  advanced 
swiftly,  overrunning  the  Inland  Empire  with  its  interminable 
forests  and  malarial  swamps,  sprawling  rudely  from  the  Great 
Lakes  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  To  subdue  the  land  was  no  easy 
task.  Upon  the  old  and  the  weak  the  wilderness  laid  a  ruthless 
hand,  and  even  of  the  strength  of  the  young  it  took  heavy  toll. 
Tragedy  was  always  lurking  at  the  door  of  the  backwoods  cabin. 
In  Beveridge’s  Life  of  Lincoln  there  is  a  grim  story  of  the  hardships 
suffered  by  the  Lincoln  family  in  Indiana  that  leaves  no  room  for 
romance — husband,  wife,  two  children,  and  later  an  old  couple, 
were  forced  to  pig  together  all  winter  in  a  brush  camp  open  on 
one  side  to  the  weather,  with  only  a  fire  in  front  for  cooking  and 
heating — a  mode  of  life  below  that  of  the  Indian  in  his  skin  teepee. 
And  then  a  mysterious  disease  fell  upon  them,  virulent  and  fateful, 
and  the  old  couple  were  taken  from  their  cots  on  the  ground  and 
put  away  beneath  the  soil  to  find  what  rest  they  might  there. 
That  men  should  break  and  women  go  mad  under  such  strain  is 
no  more  than  may  be  expected  of  human  nature.  Beret,  the  wife 
of  Per  Hansa,  brooding  in  her  sod-hut  in  Dakota,  afraid  of  life 
and  of  her  own  thoughts,  and  turning  for  comfort  to  a  dark  re¬ 
ligion,  is  a  type  of  thousands  of  frontier  women  who — as  the  his¬ 
torian  Ridpath  said  of  his  parents — “toiled  and  suffered  and  died 
that  their  children  might  inherit  the  promise.” 

Very  likely  we  should  have  felt  the  tragedy  of  the  frontier  long 
ago  if  we  had  been  as  much  concerned  with  inner  experience  as 
with  outward  act,  if  we  had  been  psychologists  as  well  as  chron¬ 
iclers.  But  we  have  been  too  prone  to  romanticize  the  objective 


OLE  ROLVAAG 


389 


reality  and  disguise  slatternly  ways  with  the  garb  of  backwoods 
independence.  The  realistic  eighteenth  century  made  no  such 
mistake.  Such  infrequent  glimpses  of  the  first  frontier  as  we 
catch  in  our  early  literature  suggest  a  swift  descent  into  gross¬ 
ness  as  the  settlements  were  left  behind.  In  the  Journal  of  Madam 
Sarah  Knight,  which  dates  from  the  opening  years  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century,  are  brief  notes  of  what  fell  under  her  sharp  eyes 
on  a  horseback  trip  from  Boston  to  New  York.  The  sketches  she 
has  penciled  are  far  from  bucolic.  Certain  of  the  figures  that 
emerge  casually  from  her  pages  are  no  other  than  decivilized  gro¬ 
tesques — animal-like  creatures  for  whom  returning  to  a  state  of 
nature  meant  living  filthily  in  mean  huts,  traveling  back  centuries 
toward  the  primitive  ways  of  the  cavemen.  Of  the  emotional 
reactions  of  these  early  children  of  the  wilderness  Madam  Knight 
tells  us  nothing;  so  casual  an  observer  would  have  no  opportunity 
to  penetrate  beneath  the  unlovely  surface. 

A  quarter  century  later  Colonel  William  Byrd,  the  first  gentle¬ 
man  of  Virginia,  wrote  his  graphic  History  of  the  Dividing  Line, 
an  account  of  a  boundary  survey  run  between  the  colonies  of 
Virginia  and  South  Carolina.  As  the  survey  leaves  the  seacoast 
behind  and  approaches  the  frontier,  the  same  characteristics  ap¬ 
pear  that  Madam  Knight  noted — a  rough  and  surly  independence, 
a  dislike  of  established  law  and  order,  and  a  shiftless  way  of  life 
that  is  content  to  subsist  off  the  country.  “Lubberland,”  Colonel 
Byrd  called  the  Carolina  backwoods  where  a  new  race  of  poor 
whites  was  springing  up — a  rude  decivilized  existence  that  bore 
heavily  on  the  women  and  was  heedless  of  the  common  amenities 
of  social  life.  In  Letters  from  an  American  Farmer  (1773)  written 
by  St.  John  de  Crevecoeur,  a  cultivated  Norman  who  established 
himself  in  the  colonies  after  serving  in  the  French  army  under 
Montcalm,  the  same  sharp  judgment  is  passed  on  the  frontier. 
Crevecoeur  was  of  the  romantic  school  of  Rousseau  and  eloquent 
in  praise  of  life  lived  close  to  nature,  yet  even  he  discovers  the 
frontier  to  be  a  blot  on  colonial  civilization,  the  abode  of  rude 
and  lawless  figures  who  precede  by  a  decade  the  sober  army  of 
occupation. 

In  the  eighteenth  century  the  testimony  is  clear  that  the  fron¬ 
tiersmen — or  “borderers,”  as  they  were  commonly  called — were 
rough  bumptious  fellows  who  fled  the  settlements  partly  because 
of  a  dislike  of  ordered  and  seemly  ways.  The  colonial  gentry,. 


390 


ADDENDA 


men  like  the  Rev.  Timothy  Dwight,  held  them  in  deep  contempt 
and  rejoiced  when  they  quitted  the  settlements  and  plunged  deep 
into  the  wilderness  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  church  and  state. 
Lawlessness,  shiftlessness,  a  passion  like  Jurgen’s  to  follow  after 
their  own  wishes  and  their  own  desires,  seem  to  have  been  the 
characteristics  of  these  rude  men  and  slatternly  women,  as  the 
aristocratic  eighteenth  century  judged  them.  That  is  very  far 
from  the  whole  story,  to  be  sure.  Our  later  historians  have  made 
clear  that  from  this  same  leveling  frontier  issued  the  spirit  of 
American  democracy,  and  that  from  these  rough  individualists 
came  the  great  movement  of  Jacksonianism  that  swept  away  the 
class  distinctions  of  an  earlier  century.  Accepting  so  much,  and 
recognizing  the  part  played  by  the  frontier  in  shaping  the  institu¬ 
tions  and  the  psychology  of  America,  it  remains  true,  neverthe¬ 
less,  that  the  lot  of  the  backwoodsman  was  hard  and  the  price  he 
paid  in  civilization  for  his  freedom  was  great.  The  sod  house  of 
the  Dakota  plains  was  only  a  late  adaptation  of  the  primitive 
huts  that  were  strung  along  the  earlier  frontier.  What  loneliness 
filled  the  hearts  of  the  drab  women  who  made  hoecakes  and  dressed 
deer  skins,  what  rebellions  at  their  lot  stirred  dumbly  within  them, 
no  record  remains  to  tell  and  no  literature  has  cared  to  concern 
itself  about. 

It  was  not  till  the  nineteenth  century  that  authentic  accounts 
of  the  frontier,  written  by  men  who  had  come  out  of  it,  began  to 
appear,  yet  even  then  in  too  scant  volume.  In  Longstreet’s  Georgia 
Scenes,  Joseph  G.  Baldwin’s  Flush  Times  of  Alabama  and  Missis¬ 
sippi,  and  Davy  Crockett’s  Autobiography ,  the  frontier  is  painted 
in  homely  colors  that  time  cannot  fade.  Their  brisk  pages  seem 
to  have  been  dipped  in  the  butternut  dye-pot  of  the  backwoods 
cabin.  By  far  the  most  significant  of  them  is  the  braggart  but 
naively  truthful  narrative  of  the  life  of  Cane-brake  Davy  who  in 
his  several  removals  followed  the  advancing  frontier  the  length 
of  the  State  of  Tennessee.  Davy  would  seem  to  have  been  the 
authentic  backwoodsman,  and  the  life  of  the  individual  may  be 
taken  as  a  description  of  the  genus.  Restless,  assertive,  unsocial, 
buoyantly  optimistic  and  obsessed  with  the  faith  that  better  land 
lay  farther  west,  cultivating  a  bumptious  wit  that  was  a  defense 
mechanism  against  the  meanness  of  daily  life,  he  was  only  an 
improvident  child  who  fled  instinctively  from  civilization.  As  a 
full-length  portrait  of  the  Jacksonian  leveler,  in  the  days  When 


OLE  ROLVAAG 


391 


the  great  social  revolution  was  establishing  the  principles  of  an 
equalitarian  democracy,  the  picture  is  of  vast  significance.  But 
it  is  incomplete.  Concerning  the  wife  and  daughters  who  were 
dragged  at  his  heels  in  the  successive  removals,  the  narrative  is 
silent.  It  is  a  man’s  tale,  unenriched  by  the  emotional  experiences 
of  a  woman,  and  as  such  it  tells  only  half  the  story  of  the  frontier. 

The  Autobiography  was  the  last  pungent  note  of  realism  before 
the  romantic  revolution  swept  over  American  literature;  and  it 
was  not  till  two  generations  later,  when  the  war  was  over  and  the 
glories  of  the  Gilded  Age  were  fading,  that  the  frontier  came  to 
realistic  expression  again  in  the  works  of  Hamlin  Garland.  Main- 
Travelled  Roads ,  the  first  chapter  in  the  tale  of  the  Middle  Border, 
is  a  prologue  to  Giants  in  the  Earth ,  telling  the  story  of  the  prairie 
settlement  in  the  idiom  of  the  generation  that  undertook  the  great 
adventure.  In  these  brief  tales  is  compressed  the  harsh  temper  of 
the  eighties,  when  the  spirit  of  revolt  was  running  like  wildfire 
across  the  prairies  and  the  Middle  Border  was  arming  for  battle. 
For  a  decade  or  more  the  farmers’  affairs  had  been  out  of  kilter, 
and  a  note  of  discontent  had  begun  to  appear  in  fiction.  Before 
Garland,  western  life  had  been  dealt  with  by  Edward  Eggleston 
in  The  Hoosier  Schoolmaster  and  The  Circuit  Rider ,  and  more 
searchingly  by  Ed  Howe  in  The  Story  of  a  Country  Town — a  drab 
commentary  on  life  in  Atchison,  Kansas,  in  the  early  eighties. 
But  it  is  in  Joseph  Kirkland’s  Zury ,  The  Meanest  Man  in  Spring 
County  (1887),  that  a  deep  sense  of  the  meanness  of  frontier  life 
is  first  adequately  felt.  The  harsh  constrictions  of  pioneer  existence 
tightened  about  Zury  as  a  boy  when  his  father  was  struggling 
with  debt,  turning  a  naturally  generous  nature  into  a  skinflint 
mortgage  grabber.  He  early  learned  that  he  must  fight  to  survive, 
and  as  a  result  his  life  was  shut  up  in  a  narrow  round  of  sordid 
accumulation.  It  was  the  poverty  of  the  frontier,  in  Kirkland’s 
eyes,  that  was  the  great  hardship. 

Hamlin  Garland’s  more  adequate  story  of  the  Middle  Border, 
beginning  militantly  with  Main-Travelled  Roads  (1887-92)  and 
flowering  in  the  idyllic  saga  of  the  Garlands  and  McClintocks 
(1914),  is  a  chronicle  that  grows  more  significant  as  the  times  it 
deals  with  draw  further  into  the  past.  Throughout  his  interpre¬ 
tation  run  two  dominant  notes:  the  promise  of  future  fulfillment 
when  the  prairies  have  been  brought  under  the  plow — the  Per 
Hansa  note  of  pioneer  optimism;  and  then  later,  rising  slowly 


392 


ADDENDA 


into  a  ground  swell,  a  note  of  discouragement  suggesting  the  utter 
futility  of  a  laborious  existence.  Underlying  Main-Travelled,  Roads 
is  a  mood  of  bitterness  that  springs  from  a  deep  sense  of  failure — 
a  mood  that  grew  harsher  with  the  economic  depression  of  the 
Middle  Border  in  the  eighties.  The  harvest  was  not  fulfilling 
the  expectations  of  seed  time,  and  the  bow  of  promise  was  gone 
from  the  prairie  fields.  The  figures  of  bitter  men  and  despondent 
women  fill  his  pages  and  darken  the  colors  of  his  realism.  It  is 
the  cost  of  it  all  that  depresses  him — the  toll  exacted  of  human 
happiness.  These  early  studies  of  Garland’s  strike  the  first  note 
of  the  tragedy  of  the  frontier.  Starkly  objective,  they  are  sociolog¬ 
ical  sketches,  the  militant  expression  of  a  rebellious  mood  that 
had  been  deepening  since  the  panic  of  1873  burst  the  romantic 
bubble  of  frontier  hopes.  The  history  of  two  decades  of  economic 
maladjustment,  with  their  Granger  Populism,  their  passionate 
resentment  at  the  favoritisms  of  government,  their  blind  striking 
out  at  the  plutocracy  that  was  visibly  rising  amid  the  American 
democracy,  is  compressed  within  a  few  acrid  tales  that  proposed 
to  tell  the  plain  truth  about  life  on  the  Middle  Border  farm. 
Main-Travelled  Roads  is  as  complete  an  expression  of  the  mood 
of  the  last  years  of  the  century — the  outlook  upon  life,  the  eco¬ 
nomic  and  political  problems,  the  objective  treatment  of  materials 
— as  Giants  in  the  Earth  is  an  expression  of  the  vastly  different 
outlook  and  mood  of  our  own  day. 

For  a  generation  before  1917,  when  the  movement  was  brought 
to  a  sudden  stop,  the  mind  of  America  was  deeply  concerned  with 
problems  of  sociology.  The  growing  spirit  of  realism  was  absorbed 
in  politics  and  economics  and  concerned  itself  little  with  subjective 
analysis.  The  intellectuals  were  busily  examining  the  Constitution 
in  the  light  of  its  economic  origins  and  interpreting  American 
history  in  the  light  of  frontier  experience.  The  novelists,  reflecting 
the  current  interests,  were  fascinated  by  the  phenomena  of  in¬ 
dustrialism  and  were  studying  curiously  the  new  race  of  captains 
of  industry  who  were  weaving  a  strange  pattern  of  life  for  America. 
The  city  had  already  come  to  dwarf  the  country.  Chicago  bestrode 
the  Middle  Border  like  a  colossus,  and  the  novelists  found  material 
for  their  realism  in  the  cut-throat  ways  of  business  men.  Their 
stories — harsh  and  strident  as  the  grinding  wheels  on  the  over¬ 
head  “Loop” — were  set  against  a  background  of  sprawling  Cities 


OLE  ROLVAAG 


393 


hastening  to  grow  big,  where  the  battles  of  giants  were  fought 
and  where  the  milieu — a  vast  network  of  impersonal  forces — was 
more  significant  than  the  individual  men  and  women  who  were 
borne  onward  in  the  stream  of  tendency  to  submerge  or  rise  as 
chance  determined.  A  note  of  stark  determinism  runs  through 
much  of  the  work;  but  it  was  a  determinism  of  environing  forces — 
the  objective  world  of  the  machine — rather  than  of  character,  and 
in  consequence  the  deeper  concern  of  fiction  was  sociological,  the 
understanding  of  this  impersonal  machine  order  and  the  subduing 
of  it  to  democratic  ends.  In  such  a  world  the  farmer  and  the 
probletns  of  the  Middle  Border  were  become  as  old-fashioned  as 
ox-carts. 

Ten  years  later,  when  Giants  in  the  Earth  was  published,  such 
objective  treatment  of  materials  was  no  longer  the  vogue.  Since 
the  war  a  revolutionary  shift  of  interest  has  taken  place,  a  shift 
from  the  sociological  to  the  psychological.  It  is  no  longer  the 
world  of  objective  fact  that  obtrudes  as  the  significant  reality, 
but  the  subtler  world  of  emotional  experience,  the  furtive  inner 
life  of  impulse  and  desire  that  Sherwood  Anderson  probes  so 
curiously.  The  change  of  theme  was  first  marked,  perhaps,  by 
Spoon  River  Anthology ,  with  its  mordant  sketches  of  stunted  and 
thwarted  lives  that  Mr.  Masters  professes  to  regard  as  the  natural 
harvest  of  a  sterile  village  life.  Spoon  River  Anthology  is  bitter 
in  its  sardonic  rebellion  against  the  genial  optimisms  of  the  “Valley 
of  Democracy.”  From  the  epic  thrust  of  expansion  issued,  as  its 
natural  progeny,  a  race  of  abortive  grotesques,  starved  figures 
which  suggest  to  Mr.  Masters  the  cost  in  human  values  of  severing 
the  ties  of  kin  and  kind  and  throwing  aside  like  an  old  shoe  the 
creative  wealth  of  social  experience.  The  soil  of  the  frontier  village 
is  too  thin  for  men  and  women  to  strike  deep  root  and  grow  to 
generous  stature. 

Since  the  publication  of  Spoon  River  Anthology ,  concern  for 
psychological  values  has  pretty  much  taken  possession  of  our 
literature.  In  the  lovely  pages  of  Willa  Cather’s  0  Pioneers!  and 
My  Antonia  there  is  revealed  a  warm  sympathy  with  the  emotional 
life  of  pioneer  women  and  a  poignant  understanding  of  their  bleak 
lot.  But  the  analysis — as  in  Hamlin  Garland’s  work — draws  back 
from  the  threshold  of  final  tragedy,  pausing  before  it  has  pene¬ 
trated  to  the  hidden  core  of  futility.  The  waste  of  all  finer  values 
exacted  bv  the  prairies  is  suggested  by  the  queer  figures  of  lonely 


394 


ADDENDA 


immigrants  who  fade  in  the  uncongenial  environment,  but  it  is 
not  thrust  into  the  foreground  to  dominate  the  scene.  The  vast 
stretches  of  the  prairies  are  there — stern,  inhospitable,  breeding 
a  dumb  homesickness  in  alien  hearts — where  the  red  grass  bends 
before  the  restless  winds  and  the  forces  of  nature  are  not  easily 
tamed;  but  in  the  end  the  prairie  is  subdued  and  the  scars  it  has 
laid  on  men’s  lives  are  forgotten.  Since  Willa  Cather,  others  have 
dealt  with  the  West — Ruth  Suckow,  Margaret  Wilson,  and  Her¬ 
bert  Quick,  to  name  a  few — yet  in  none  of  their  work  is  there  the 
profound  insight  and  imaginative  grasp  of  the  theme  that  gives 
to  Giants  in  the  Earth  so  great  a  sense  of  tragic  reality. 

In  this  creative  return  to  the  theme  of  the  great  American  ad¬ 
venture  the  causes  of  human  failure  lie  deeper  than  politics  or 
economics.  They  are  to  be  found  in  the  impersonal  forces  of  nature 
that  are  too  powerful  for  the  human  will  to  cope  with;  and  in  the 
hidden  weakness  of  fearful  souls  that  cannot  live  when  their  roots 
have  been  pulled  up  from  the  congenial  home  soil.  For  all  his 
titanic  labors,  Per  Hansa,  the  viking,  is  struck  down  at  last. 
There  are  few  nobler  passages  in  our  fiction — the  more  telling  for 
its  restraint — than  the  final  scene  where,  driven  inexorably  by 
circumstance,  Per  Hansa  sets  forth  into  the  February  blizzard  to 
fetch  a  minister  to  the  bedside  of  his  stricken  comrade.  The  note 
of  determinism  is  there,  subtle,  pervasive.  The  Norns  of  his  fathers 
had  decreed  that  it  should  be  so — in  the  urgings  of  the  mystical 
Beret,  in  the  dumb  pleadings  of  the  dying  Hans  Olsa  and  his 
broken-hearted  wife.  Per  Hansa  the  strong,  the  capable  one  who 
never  failed,  who  was  cunning  enough  to  outwit  fate  itself — Per 
Hansa  would  go  out  into  the  storm  and  return  with  the  minister 
who  would  point  the  way  to  heaven  to  the  troubled  Hans  Olsa. 
And  so,  driven  by  all  the  imperatives  of  fate,  he  sets  out,  skis 
on  his  feet  and  others  at  his  back,  to  face  the  last  great  adventure. 
The  blinding  snow  quickly  wraps  him  about,  the  cold  grips  his 
heart,  and  Per  Hansa  is  seen  no  more  until  on  a  soft  May  day, 
when  the  wheat  is  green  in  his  fields  and  the  corn  is  ready  for 
planting,  he  is  found  seated  by  a  haystack,  his  skis  beside  him 
and  his  face  turned  to  the  untrodden  West.  For  all  the  heroic 
labors  of  Per  Hansa,  for  all  the  tragic  loneliness  of  Beret,  the  end 
is  futility. 

And  Beret,  the  sick  one,  likewise  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Norns. 
She  had  sinned  through  love  of  Per  Hansa,  and  in  the  long  brooding 


OLE  ROLVAAG 


395 


hours  on  the  Dakota  plains  her  mind  gives  way.  She  cannot  rise 
to  Per  Hansa’s  delight  in  the  newborn  son.  Peder  Victorious — 
symbol  of  Per  Hansa’s  buoyant  faith — for  her  is  only  another 
evidence  of  sin.  This  dark  land  of  Dakota  is  marked  by  God’s 
displeasure,  and  life  for  her  becomes  a  silent  struggle  of  renun¬ 
ciation  and  atonement.  A  primitive  Norse  Calvinist,  victimized 
by  a  brooding  imagination  that  sees  more  devils  than  vast  hell 
can  hold,  she  dwells  “on  the  border  of  utter  darkness”  where  the 
forces  of  good  and  evil  struggle  for  the  human  soul.  Across  the 
gloomy  Puritanism  of  her  nature  fall  the  shadows  of  an  older  and 
darker  faith,  and  in  her  nostalgia  the  old  Northland  superstitions 
merge  with  the  somber  Northland  religion  to  her  undoing.  The 
tragedy  of  Beret  works  itself  out  in  the  tender  corridors  of  her 
own  heart  and,  as  Professor  Commager  has  suggested,  it  is  as 
universal  as  the  tragedy  of  Goethe’s  Margarethe.  In  his  portrayal 
of  the  “sick  soul”  of  Beret  hungering  for  the  far  homeland  the 
Norse  artist  has  achieved  a  triumph.  The  epic  conquest  of  the 
continent  must  be  read  in  the  light  of  women’s  sufferings  as  well 
as  in  that  of  men’s  endurance.  In  whichever  light  it  is  read,  it 
becomes  something  far  more  suggestive  than  a  drab  tale  of  frontier 
poverty  or  a  sordid  tale  of  frontier  exploitation;  it  becomes  vital 
and  significant  as  life  itself. 

Giants  in  the  Earth  is  a  great  and  beautiful  book  that  suggests 
the  wealth  of  human  potentialities  brought  to  America  year  after 
year  by  the  peasant  immigrants  who  pass  through  Ellis  Island 
and  scatter  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  Written  in  Nor¬ 
wegian,  and  stemming  from  a  rich  old-world  literary  tradition, 
it  is  at  the  same  time  deeply  and  vitally  American.  The  very 
atmosphere  of  the  Dakota  plains  is  in  its  pages,  and  it  could  have 
been  written  only  by  one  to  whom  the  background  was  a  familiar 
scene.  The  artist  has  lived  with  these  peasant  folk;  he  is  one  of 
them,  and  he  penetrates  sympathetically  to  the  simple  kindly 
hearts  hidden  to  alien  eyes  by  the  unfamiliar  folk  ways.  To  gather 
up  and  preserve  in  letters  these  diverse  folk  strains  before  they 
are  submerged  and  lost  in  the  common  American  mores ,  would 
seem  to  be  a  business  that  our  fiction  might  undertake  with  profit. 

Ole  Edvart  Rolvaag  is  himself  a  viking  of  the  Per  Hansa  strain. 
Born  of  fisher  folk,  22  April,  1876,  on  the  island  of  Donna  at  the 
very  edge  of  the  Arctic  circle,  he  took  his  name,  following  a  com- 


396 


ADDENDA 


mon  Norwegian  custom,  from  the  name  of  a  cove  on  the  shores  of 
which  he  was  brought  up.  It  is  a  land  barren  except  for  the  gorse 
and  heather,  and  the  long  winter  nights  and  the  restless  sea  were 
certain  to  bring  the  imagination  under  their  somber  spell.  At  the 
age  of  fourteen,  discouraged  from  further  schooling  by  the  family 
that  contrasted  him  unfavorably  with  a  brilliant  brother,  he 
turned  fisherman,  and  for  five  years  went  off  to  the  Lofoten  Islands 
some  two  hundred  miles  away  for  the  winter  catches.  Distrustful 
of  the  future,  he  made  his  great  decision  to  come  to  America, 
landing  in  New  York  in  1896  with  only  a  railway  ticket  to  South 
Dakota.  In  the  great  West,  still  turmoiled  by  the  agrarian  up¬ 
heaval  of  the  nineties,  he  joined  an  uncle  who  had  provided  him 
transportation  money,  tried  his  hand  at  farming,  worked  at  other 
jobs,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  not  having  found  himself,  he 
turned  once  more  to  the  formal  business  of  schooling.  In  the  fall 
of  1899  he  entered  Augustana  College,  a  preparatory  school  in 
Canton,  South  Dakota.  From  there  he  went  to  St.  Olaf  College, 
Northfield,  Minnesota,  graduating  in  1905  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
eight.  After  a  year  at  the  University  of  Oslo  in  Norway,  he  joined 
the  staff  of  St.  Olaf  College,  where  he  is  now  Professor  of  Nor¬ 
wegian  Literature.  In  the  larger  sense,  however,  his  education 
has  been  got  from  life,  which  he  seems  to  have  lived  with  a  rich 
and  daring  intensity;  and  it  is  his  own  venturesome  experience, 
certainly,  that  finds  expression  in  the  creative  realism  and  brood¬ 
ing  imagination  of  his  work.  Intellectually  and  artistically  he  is 
of  the  excellent  old-world  culture.  How  greatly  his  professional 
studies  determined  his  literary  technique  only  a  competent  Nor¬ 
wegian  critic  can  judge;  yet  it  is  worth  while  comparing  Giants  in 
the  Earth  with  Johan  Bojer’s  The  Emigrants — a  work  which,  when 
announced  as  being  in  preparation,  dramatically  influenced  his 
own  novel. 


THE  SHORT  STORY* 


Introduction.  With  the  ferment  of  the  seventies  and  eighties  a 
new  school  of  literature,  that  was  effectively  a  denial  of  the  genteel 
tradition:  it  was  effectively  a  popularization — a  taking  it  out  of  the 
severe  realm  of  the  Atlantic  Monthly.  It  was  an  appeal  to  the 
middle  class.  From  Henry  James  to  Hamlin  Garland  a  steady 
shift  from  right  to  left.  This  implied: 

1.  A  shift  from  genteel  to  homely  material. 

2.  A  shift  to  realism  from  the  earlier  sentimentality.  This 
genteel  tradition  constantly  cropping  out  anew — in  Margaret  De¬ 
land,  in  a  changed  form  in  Zona  Gale.  It  has  been  strongest  in 
New  England — from  Rose  Terry  Cooke  through  Sarah  Orne 
Jewett  to  Mary  Wilkins. 

The  short  story  commonly  believed  to  be  peculiarly  representa¬ 
tive  of  our  genius — the  stripping-away  of  the  superfluous  and  the 
love  of  technical  refinement.  Derived  from  Poe  and  Hawthorne: 
both  artists  yet  far  removed  from  the  tendencies  which  have  con¬ 
trolled  the  development  of  the  short  story  since. 

Theme.  The  American  short  story  has  dealt  largely  with  the  two 
great  themes  of  all  romance,  love  and  adventure.  The  form  con¬ 
stitutes  the  great  staple— is  largely  provided  by  women  for  women. 
The  handling  of  this  love  theme  reveals  the  inevitable  shift  from 
the  genteel  tradition  to  middle-class  efficiency,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
change  is  revealed  in  the  changing  dress  of  the  heroine.  In  the 
seventies,  crinoline,  innumerable  flounces  of  white  muslin,  lace 
parasols — no  tan,  no  freckles,  but  a  gentle  pallor.  Such  dress  and 
such  heroines  will  exude  sentiment.  It  will  concern  itself  with  at¬ 
mosphere.  Action  brisk  and  efficient  will  appear  unladylike,  almost 
vulgar.  What  a  change  when  the  heroine  clothes  herself  in  a  silk 
flour-sack — showing  silk  stockings,  bare  arms  and  neck — cultivat¬ 
ing  tan  and  freckles,  bobbing  her  hair,  going  in  for  automobiles  and 
golf  and  tennis!  The  older  heroine  dwelt  in  a  world  of  sentiment 
without  sex;  the  present-day  heroine  lives  in  a  world  of  sex  interest 
without  sentiment.  The  more  flounces  in  life  and  literature,  the 

*  Lecture  notes.  This  subject  was  not  included  in  the  contents,  but  contains  some 
matter  of  interest. — Publisher. 


397 


398 


ADDENDA 


less  the  animal  is  exposed.  Hence  action  has  superseded  sentiment 
— plot  has  superseded  atmosphere.  The  hero  becomes  a  Hart, 
Schaffner  and  Marx  young  business  man  and  the  middle-class  note 
is  struck  loudly  in  the  honk  of  the  motor-car.  The  genteel  tradition 
is  laid  away  with  the  flowers. 

Major  Influences  during  the  Sixties.  Through  the  fifties  and 
sixties  literature  uncertain  and  halting.  The  style  largely  set  by 
old-world  fashions.  Three  in  particular: 

1.  Influence  of  Charlotte  and  Emily  Bronte.  A  sort  of  senti¬ 
mental  and  mawkish  passion.  Stilted  style,  as  in  Harriet  Beecher 
Stowe.  This  fell  in  with  the  Irving  note  of  the  picturesque  and  was 
exploited  in  Godey’s  Lady's  Book. 

2.  Influence  of  Dickens.  At  its  height  in  the  fifties:  an  emphasis 
upon  the  vulgar — plain  and  homely  characters.  Exploited  in  the 
Atlantic  by  Lowell.  So  Rose  Terry  Cooke  in  Miss  Lucinda  (1861). 

3.  Influence  of  the  French  realistic  movement:  Balzac,  Flaubert. 
Only  a  faint  beginning.  Still  a  lot  of  romance  stuff  but  given  a  local 
color  and  garnished  with  humor. 

Counter  Tendencies.  The  inevitable  development  of  the  middle- 
class  city  and  the  middle-class  magazine,  persistently  affected  by 
certain  throw-backs  to  an  older  American  tradition.  America  is  of 
the  city  today,  but  day  before  yesterday  it  was  still  country,  and  in 
the  backgrounds  of  our  minds  is  a  country  setting  and  love  of  sim¬ 
ple  people.  Three  main  tendencies: 

1.  The  discovery  of  the  local.  The  picturesqueness  of  the  strange 
and  remote  in  character,  manners,  speech.  The  charm  of  dialect 
and  interest  in  out-of-the-way  places.  This  a  reaction  from  too 
much  pavement  and  the  rubbing-down  of  individual  differences 
from  city  contact.  “Characters”  are  bred  in  isolated  places.  This 
the  dominant  note  in  the  short  story  from  1870  to  1900:  to  follow 
it  from  Bret  Harte  on  is  almost  to  write  a  history  of  the  short 
story.  It  does  not  dominate  the  longer  story.  Constance  Fenimore 
Woolson. 

2.  The  discovery  of  “human  interest.”  The  feeling  that  men  in 
the  rough — with  the  bark  on — may  prove  more  interesting  than 
the  products  of  an  artificial  civilization.  This  had  been  spread  by 
Dickens  and  by  certain  of  the  Atlantic  writers. 

3.  The  growing  interest  in  realism.  At  first  confused  with  the 
commonplace — so  Pattee  in  his  comment  on  Rose  Terry  Cooke’s 
Miss  Lucinda.  A  good  deal  of  this  earlier  work  is  only  another  form 


THE  SHORT  STORY 


399 


of  romance — little  affected  by  the  rising  French  movement.  Real¬ 
ism  was  to  come  slowly  and  late.  All  three  of  these  made  against 
the  genteel  tradition. 

Henry  James.  His  position  peculiar.  From  his  youth  d'eracine — 
his  father  hated  American  vulgarity,  American  journalism,  and 
would  not  permit  his  son  to  take  root.  He  grew  up  with  an  aristo¬ 
cratic  conception  of  civilization — his  sole  interest  lay  in  such  civ¬ 
ilization,  and  the  manners  of  the  polite  society  of  that  civilization. 
No  other  American  has  so  hated  and  feared  contamination  from  the 
vulgar.  He  was  thus  the  last  flower  of  the  Genteel  Tradition,  trans¬ 
planted  to  an  environment  more  congenial.  As  the  middle-class 
became  more  clamorous,  he  withdrew  to  the  Continent,  to  England, 
where  the  older  ideas  still  lingered.  There  in  the  spirit  of  the  realist 
he  wrote  with  refined  art  and  persistent  detachment — even  to  a 
punctilious  and  princely  refinement.  As  Mr.  Howells  says,  “To 
enjoy  his  work,  to  feel  its  rare  excellence,  both  in  conception  and 
expression,  is  a  brevet  of  intellectual  good  form.” 

His  IVorld.  Always  that  of  the  spender,  of  assured  position.  His 
main  interest  lies  in  women;  their  refinement  appeals  to  his  refine¬ 
ment — no  flappers  or  vulgarians  but  elegantly  gowned  women  who 
never  did  the  family  washing.  He  is  concerned  with  that  which  is 
dearest  to  the  heart  of  aristocracy — standards  of  excellence.  And 
in  this  he  was  true  to  his  conception  of  civilization,  for  civilization 
begins  after  a  competence  has  been  assured.  Those  who  are  strug¬ 
gling  to  acquire  have  not  the  leisure,  the  inclination,  for  civiliza¬ 
tion.  Hence  Daisy  Miller  is  a  type  of  much  of  his  work — the  con¬ 
trast  between  civilized  Europe  and  uncivilized  America,  the  one 
with  standards  of  culture  and  manners  and  the  other  vulgarian. 
And  his  interest  in  American  women  results  from  the  fact  that 
they  alone  in  America  care  for  civilization  and  are  painfully  seek¬ 
ing  to  achieve  it. 

His  Realism.  The  beginnings  of  the  movement  which  has  been 
called  psychological  realism,  concerning  itself  with  motives  and 
processes  of  thought— the  inner  life.  Developed  by  Bourget  and 
far  more  fully  by  Dorothy  Richardson  in  such  a  book  as  Pilgrimage , 
the  inner  life  of  Miriam  Henderson  in  many  volumes.  Far  removed 
from  later  psychological  fiction  founded  on  Freudian  theory — as  in 
D.  H.  Lawrence,  Sherwood  Anderson.  Again  the  genteel  tradition 
dealing  with  people  who  in  the  main  have  genteel  impulses  only. 
James  held  in  horror  this  later  naturalism — it  was  merely  vulgarian. 


400 


ADDENDA 


The  Spirit  of  the  Local.  Into  this  prim  world  with  its  incipient 
realism  came  the  note  of  the  Far  West:  Mark  Twain  and  Bret 
Harte,  who  set  a  new  style — the  romantic,  picturesque,  human- 
interest  story.  This  is  a  part  of  the  Pike  County  idea  of  literature — 
a  native  rogue-tale  but  with  touches  of  sentiment  and  shortened  to 
effective  form.  This  followed  by  Eggleston’s  Hoosier  Schoolmaster 
(1871)  and  this  in  turn  by  the  flood  of  local  work  of  the  eighties. 
The  most  notable  the  work  of  Charles  Egbert  Craddock,  Joel 
Chandler  Harris,  Sarah  Orne  Jewett,  and  Mary  Wilkins.  The  first 
discovered  the  hill  people,  the  second  discovered  the  Negro — his 
primitive  folk-poetry.  In  the  work  of  the  last,  a  struggle  between 
the  genteel  tradition  and  realism — and  the  final  triumph  of  the 
latter. 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM  * 


Liberals  whose  hair  is  growing  thin  and  the  lines  of  whose  figures 
are  no  longer  what  they  were,  are  likely  to  find  themselves  today 
in  the  unhappy  predicament  of  being  treated  as  mourners  at  their 
own  funerals.  When  they  pluck  up  heart  to  assert  that  they  are  not 
yet  authentic  corpses,  but  living  men  with  brains  in  their  heads, 
they  are  pretty  certain  to  be  gently  chided  and  led  back  to  the 
comfortable  armchair  that  befits  senility.  Their  counsel  is  smiled 
at  as  the  chatter  of  a  belated  post-Victorian  generation  that  knew 
not  Freud,  and  if  they  must  go  abroad  they  are  bidden  take  the 
air  in  the  garden  where  other  old-fashioned  plants — mostly  of  the 
family  Democratici — are  still  preserved.  It  is  not  pleasant  for  them. 
It  is  hard  to  be  dispossessed  by  one’s  own  heirs,  and  especially 
hard  when  those  heirs,  in  the  cheerful  ignorance  of  youth,  forget 
to  acknowledge  any  obligations  to  a  hard-working  generation  that 
laid  by  a  very  substantial  body  of  intellectual  wealth,  the  income 
from  which  the  heirs  are  spending  without  even  a  “Thank  you.” 
If  therefore  the  middle-aged  liberal  occasionally  grows  irritable 
and  indulges  in  caustic  comment  on  the  wisdom  of  talkative  young 
men  it  may  be  set  dowm  as  the  prerogative  of  the  armchair  age  and 
lightly  forgiven. 

Yet  in  sober  fact  there  are  the  solidest  reasons  for  such  irritation. 
The  younger  liberals  who  love  to  tweak  the  nose  of  democracy  are 
too  much  enamored  of  what  they  find  in  their  own  mirrors.  They 
are  indisputably  clever,  they  are  spouting  geysers  of  smart  and 
cynical  talk,  they  have  far  outrun  their  fathers  in  the  free  handling 
of  ancient  tribal  totems — but  they  are  afflicted  with  the  short 
perspective  of  youth  that  finds  a  vanishing-point  at  the  end  of  its 
own  nose.  There  is  no  past  for  them  beyond  yesterday.  They  are 
having  so  good  a  time  playing  with  ideas  that  it  does  not  occur  to 
them  to  question  the  validity  of  their  intellectual  processes  or  to 
inquire  into  the  origins  of  the  ideas  they  have  adopted  so  blithely. 
Gaily  engaged  in  smashing  bourgeois  idols,  the  young  intellectuals 
are  too  busy  to  realize  that  it  was  the  older  generation  that  pro- 

*  This  was  apparently  not  intended  as  the  introduction  to  Part  I  of  Book  Three, 
but  covers  much  of  the  ground  indicated  there. — Publisher. 

401 


402  ADDENDA 

vided  them  with  a  hammer  and  pointed  out  the  idols  to  be  smashed. 
It  is  the  way  of  youth. 

Middle-aged  liberals — let  it  be  said  by  way  of  defense — at  least 
know  their  history.  They  were  brought  up  in  a  great  age  of  liberal¬ 
ism — an  age  worthy  to  stand  beside  the  golden  forties  of  last  cen¬ 
tury — and  they  went  to  school  to  excellent  teachers.  Darwin, 
Spencer,  Mill,  Karl  Marx,  Haeckel,  Taine,  William  James,  Henry 
George,  were  masters  of  which  no  school  in  any  age  need  feel 
ashamed;  nor  were  such  tutors  and  undermasters  as  Ruskin, 
William  Morris,  Matthew  Arnold,  Lester  Ward,  Walt  Whitman, 
Henry  Adams,  to  be  dismissed  as  incompetent.  To  the  solution  of 
the  vexing  problems  entailed  by  industrialism — in  America  as  well 
as  in  Europe — was  brought  all  the  knowledge  that  had  been  ac¬ 
cumulating  for  a  century.  It  was  a  time  of  reevaluations  when 
much  substantial  thinking  was  done;  when  the  flood  of  light  that 
came  with  the  doctrine  of  biological  evolution  lay  brilliant  on  the 
intellectual  landscape  and  the  dullest  mind  caught  some  of  the  re¬ 
flection.  Few  of  the  young  scholars  attended  the  lectures  of 
Friedrich  Nietzsche,  and  behavioristic  psychology  had  not  yet  got 
into  the  curriculum;  but  Ladd  and  James  were  inquiring  curiously 
into  the  mechanism  of  the  brain,  and  animal  psychology  was  pre¬ 
paring  the  way  for  the  later  Freudians.  It  was  the  end  of  an  age 
perhaps,  the  rich  afterglow  of  the  Enlightenment,  but  the  going 
down  of  the  sun  was  marked  by  sunset  skies  that  gave  promise  of 
other  and  greater  dawns. 

To  have  spent  one’s  youth  in  such  a  school  was  a  liberal  educa¬ 
tion.  The  mind  opened  of  its  own  will.  Intellectual  horizons  were 
daily  widening  and  the  new  perspectives  ran  out  into  cosmic  spaces. 
The  cold  from  those  outer  spaces  had  not  yet  chilled  the  enthusi¬ 
asms  that  were  a  heritage  from  the  Enlightenment,  and  the  social 
idealism  begotten  by  the  democratic  nature  school  still  looked  con¬ 
fidently  to  the  future.  They  were  ardent  democrats — the  young 
liberals  of  the  nineties — and  none  doubted  the  finality  or  sufficiency 
of  the  democratic  principle,  any  more  than  Mill  or  Spencer  had 
doubted  it.  All  their  history  and  all  their  biology  justified  it,  and 
the  business  of  the  times  was  to  make  it  prevail  in  the  sphere  of 
economics  as  it  prevailed  in  the  realm  of  the  political.  The  cure 
for  the  evils  of  democracy  was  held  to  be  more  democracy,  and 
when  industrialism  had  been  brought  under  its  sway — when  Amer¬ 
ica  had  become  an  economic  democracy — a  just  and  humane  qv- 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM  403 

ilization  would  be  on  the  threshold  of  possibility.  To  the  achieve¬ 
ment  of  that  great  purpose  the  young  liberals  devoted  themselves 
and  the  accomplishments  of  the  next  score  of  years  were  the  work 
of  their  hands.  Certain  intellectuals  had  been  democrats — Paine 
and  Jefferson  and  Emerson  and  Thoreau  and  Whitman  and  Mel¬ 
ville — but  they  were  few  in  comparison  with  the  skeptical  Whigs 
who  professed  democracy  only  to  bind  its  hands.  The  Republican 
party  had  not  been  democratic  since  former  days  —  and  as  Henry 
Adams  said  in  1880,  it  was  accounted  foolishness  to  believe  in  it  in 
1880.  Autocracy  was  a  toy  to  distract  the  voting  man  from  the 
business  of  money-getting. 

It  was  from  such  a  school — richer  in  intellectual  content,  one 
might  argue,  than  any  the  younger  liberals  have  frequented — that 
the  ferment  of  twenty  years  ago  issued;  a  school  dedicated  to  the 
ideals  of  the  Enlightenment  and  bent  on  carrying  through  the  un¬ 
fulfilled  program  of  democracy.  Democratic  aspirations  had  been 
thwarted  hitherto  by  the  uncontrolled  play  of  the  acquisitive  in¬ 
stinct;  the  immediate  problem  of  democracy  was  the  control  of 
that  instinct  in  the  common  interest.  Economics  had  controlled 
the  political  state  to  its  narrow  and  selfish  advantage;  it  was  for  the 
political  state  to  resume  its  sovereignty  and  extend  its  control  over 
economics.  So  in  the  spirit  of  the  Enlightenment  the  current  lib¬ 
eralism  dedicated  itself  to  history  and  sociology,  accepting  as  its 
immediate  and  particular  business  a  reexamination  of  the  American 
past  in  order  to  forcast  an  ampler  democratic  future.  It  must  trace 
the  rise  of  political  power  in  America  in  order  to  understand  how 
that  power  had  fallen  into  the  unsocial  hands  of  economics.  The 
problem  was  difficult.  American  political  history  had  been  grossly 
distorted  by  partisan  interpretation  and  political  theory  had  been 
dissipated  by  an  arid  constitutionalism.  The  speculative  thinker 
had  long  been  dispossessed  by  the  eulogist  and  the  lawyer,  both  of 
whom  had  subsisted  on  a  thin  gruel  of  patriotic  myths.  Even  the 
social  historians,  though  dealing  in  materials  rich  in  suggestion,  had 
been  diffident  in  the  matter  of  interpretation,  without  which  his¬ 
tory  is  no  more  than  the  dry  bones  of  chronicle.  Inheriting  no  ade¬ 
quate  philosophy  of  historical  evolution,  the  young  school  of  his¬ 
torians  must  first  provide  themselves  with  one,  in  the  light  of  which 
the  American  past  should  take  on  meaning,  and  the  partisan 
struggles,  hitherto  meaningless,  should  fall  into  comprehensible 
patterns. 


404 


ADDENDA 


That  necessary  work  was  to  engage  them  for  years,  but  in  the 
meanwhile,  as  critical  realists,  their  immediate  business  was  with 
facts  and  the  interpretation  of  facts.  John  Fiske  a  few  years  be¬ 
fore  had  essayed  to  interpret  the  rise  of  democracy  in  America  by 
analogy  from  biological  evolution,  tracing  the  source  of  American 
democracy  to  the  New  England  town  meeting,  which  he  explained 
as  a  resurgence  of  ancient  Teutonic  folk-ways.  The  theory  was 
tenuous  and  it  was  not  till  Professor  Turner  drew  attention  to  the 
creative  influence  of  the  frontier  on  American  life  that  the  historians 
were  provided  with  a  suggestive  working  hypothesis.  Before  that 
hypothesis  could  be  adequately  explored,  however,  and  brought 
into  just  relations  to  a  comprehensive  philosophy  of  history,  the 
rise  of  liberalism  was  well  under  way,  marked  by  a  rich  ferment  of 
thought  that  made  the  early  years  of  the  new  century  singularly 
stimulating.  That  ferment  resulted  from  pouring  into  the  vial  of 
native  experience  the  reagent  of  European  theory — examining  the 
ways  of  American  industrialism  in  the  light  of  continental  social¬ 
ism;  and  the  result  was  an  awakening  of  popular  interest  in  social 
control  of  economics,  a  widespread  desire  to  bring  an  expanding 
industrialism  into  subjection  to  a  rational  democratic  program, 
that  was  to  provide  abundant  fuel  to  the  social  unrest  that  had 
burst  forth  in  sporadic  flames  for  a  generation.  The  great  move¬ 
ment  of  liberalism  that  took  possession  of  the  American  mind  after 
the  turn  of  the  century — a  movement  not  unworthy  to  be  compared 
with  the  ferment  of  the  eighteen  forties — was  the  spontaneous 
reaction  of  an  America  still  only  half  urbanized,  still  clinging  to 
ideals  and  ways  of  an  older  simpler  America,  to  an  industrialism 
that  was  driving  its  plowshare  through  the  length  and  breadth 
of  the  familiar  scene,  turning  under  the  rude  furrows  what  before 
had  been  growing  familiarly  there.  It  was  the  first  reaction  of 
America  to  the  revolutionary  change  that  followed  upon  the 
exhaustion  of  the  frontier-— an  attempt  to  secure  through  the 
political  state  the  freedoms  that  before  had  come  from  unpre¬ 
empted  opportunity. 

For  a  quarter  of  a  century  following  the  great  westward  expan¬ 
sion  of  the  late  sixties  America  had  been  drifting  heedlessly  towards 
a  different  social  order.  The  shambling  frontier  democracy  that 
had_s.uifLced.an  earlier  time  was  visibly  Ere aklrTg “down  in  presence 
of  the  imperious  power  of  a  centralizing  capitalism.  The  railways 
were  a  dramatic  embodiment  of  the'  new  machine  civilization  that 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM 


405 


was  running  head  on  into  a  primitive  social  organism  fashioned  by 
the  old  domestic  economy,  and  the  disruptions  and  confusions  were 
a  warning  that  the  country  was  in  for  vast  changes.  New  masters, 
new  ways.  The  rule  of  the  captain  of  industry  had  come.  The 
farmers  had  long  been  in  ugly  mood,  but  their  great  rebellion  was 
put  down  in  1896,  and  never  again  could  they  hope  to  wrest 
sovereignty  from  capitalism.  The  formal  adoption  of  the  gold 
standard  in  1900  served  notice  to  the  world  that  America  had  put 
away  its  democratic  agrarianism,  that  a  shambling  Jacksonian 
individualism  had  had  its  day,  and  that  henceforth  the  destiny  of 
the  country  lay  in  the  hands  of  its  business  men.  Capitalism  was 
master  of  the  country  and  though  for  the  present  it  was  content  to 
use  the  political  machinery  of  democracy  it  was  driving  towards  an 
objective  that  was  the  negation  of  democracy. 

The  immediate  reaction  to  so  broad  a  shift  in  the  course  of 
manifest  destiny  was  a  growing  uneasiness  amongst  the  middle 
class — small  business  and  professional  men — who  looked  with  fear 
upon  the  program  of  the  captains  of  industry.  Industrialization 
brought  its  jars  and  upsets.  The  little  fish  did  not  enjoy  being 
swallowed  by  the  big,  and  as  they  watched  the  movement  of 
economic  centralization  encroaching  on  the  field  of  competition 
they  saw  the  doors  of  opportunity  closing  to  them.  It  was  to  this 
great  body  of  petite  bourgeoisie  that  members  of  the  lesser  intel¬ 
lectuals — journalists,  sociologists,  reformers — were  to  make  appeal. 
The  work  was  begun  dramatically  with  the  spectacularly  advertised 
Frenzied  Finance,  written  by  Thomas  W.  Lawson,  and  appearing  as 
a  series  in  McClure’s  Magazine  in  1903.  The  immense  popular 
success  of  the  venture  proved  that  the  fire  was  ready  for  the  fat, 
and  at  once  a  host  of  volunteer  writers  fell  to  feeding  the  flames. 
The  new  ten-cent  magazines  provided  the  necessary  vehicle  of 
publicity,  and  enterprising  editors  were  soon  increasing  their  cir¬ 
culations  with  every  issue.  As  it  became  evident  how  popular  was 
the  chord  that  had  been  struck,  more  competent  workmen  joined 
themselves  to  the  group  of  journalists:  novelists — a  growing  army 
of  them — essayists,  historians,  political  scientists,  philosophers,  a 
host  of  heavy-armed  troops  that  moved  forward  in  a  frontal 
attack  on  the  strongholds  of  the  new  plutocracy.  Few  writers  in  the 
years  between  1903  and  1917  escaped  being  drawn  into  the  move¬ 
ment — an  incorrigible  romantic  perhaps,  like  the  young  James 
Branch  Cabell,  or  a  cool  patrician  like  Edith  Wharton;  and  with 


406 


ADDENDA 


such  popular  novelists  as  Winston  Churchill,  Robert  Herrick, 
Ernest  Poole,  David  Graham  Phillips,  Upton  Sinclair,  and  Jack 
London  embellishing  the  rising  liberalism  with  dramatic  heroes 
and  villains,  and  dressing  their  salads  with  the  wickedness  of  Big 
Business;  with  such  political  leaders  as  Bob  La  Follette  and  Theo¬ 
dore  Roosevelt  and  Woodrow  Wilson  beating  up  the  remotest 


villages  for  recruits;  with  such  scholars  as  Thorstein  Veblen, 
Charles  A.  Beard,  and  John  Dewey,  and  such  lawyers  as  Louis 
Brandeis,  Frank  P.  Walsh,  and  Samuel  Untermyer,  the  movement 
gathered  such  momentum  and  quickened  such  a  ferment  as  had 
not  been  known  before  in  the  lands  since  the  days  of  the  Abolition 
controversy.  The  mind  and  conscience  of  America  were  stirred  to 
their  lowest  sluggish  stratum,  and  a  democratic  renaissance  was 
all  aglow  on  the  eastern  horizon. 

At  the  core  it  was  a  critical  realistic  movement  that  spread 
quietly  amongst  intellectuals,  but  the  nebulous  tail  of  the  comet 


blazed  across  the  sky  for  all  to  wonder  at:  and  it  was  the  tail  rather 
than  the  core  that  aroused  the  greatest  immediate  interest.  Lincoln 
Steffens,  Charles  Edward  Russell,  Ida  Tarbell,  Gustavus  Myers, 
and  Upton  Sinclair  were  read  eagerly  because  they  dealt  with 
themes  that  many  were  interested  in — the  political  machine, 
watered  stock,  Standard  Oil,  the  making  of  great  fortunes,  and  the 
like — and  they  invested  their  exposures  with  the  dramatic  interest 
of  a  detective  story.  Up  to  1910  it  was  largely  a  muckraking  move¬ 
ment— to  borrow  President  Roosevelt’s  picturesque  phrase;  a 
time  of  brisk  housecleaning  that  searched  out  old  cobwebs  and 
disturbed  the  dust  that  lay  thick  on  the  antiquated  furniture.  The 
Gilded  Age  had  been  slovenly  and  such  a  housecleaning  was  long 
overdue.  There  was  a  vast  amount  of  nosing  about  to  discover 
bad  smells,  and  to  sensitive  noses  the  bad  smells  seemed  to  be 
everywhere.  Evidently  some  hidden  cesspool  was  fouling  American 
life,  and  as  the  inquisitive  plumbers  tested  the  household  drains 
they  came  upon  the  source  of  infection — not  one  cesspool  but 
many,  under  every  city  hall  and  beneath^  every  state  capitol — dug 
secretly  by  politicians  in  the  pay  of  respectable  business  men.  It 
was  these  cesspools  that  were  poisoning  the  national  household, 
and  there  would  be  no  health  in  America  till  they  were  filled  in  and 
no  others  dug. 

It  was  a  dramatic  discovery  and  when  the  corruption  of  Ameri¬ 
can  politics  was  laid  on  the  threshold  of  business — like  a  bastard 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM 


407 


on  the  doorsteps  of  the  father — a  tremendous  disturbance  resulted. 
There  was  a  great  fluttering  and  clamor  amongst  the  bats  and  owls, 
an  ominous  creaking  of  the  machine  as  the  wrenches  were  thrown 
into  the  well-oiled  wheels,  and  a  fierce  sullen  anger  at  the  hue  and 
cry  set  up.  To  many  honest  Americans  the  years  between  1903  and 
1910  were  abusive  and  scurrilous  beyond  decency,  years  when  no 
man  and  no  business,  however  honorable,  was  safe  from  the  pil¬ 
lory;  when  wholesale  exposure  had  grown  profitable  to  sensation- 
mongers,  and  great  reputations  were  lynched  by  vigilantes  and  rep¬ 
utable  corporations  laid  under  indictment  at  the  bar  of  public 
opinion.  Respectable  citizens  did  not  like  to  have  their  goodly  city 
held  up  to  the  world  as  “corrupt  and  contented”;  they  did  not 
like  to  have  their  municipal  housekeeping  brought  into  public  dis¬ 
repute  no  matter  how  sluttish  it  might  be.  It  was  not  pleasant  for 
members  of  great  families  to  read  a  cynical  history  of  the  origins  of 
their  fortunes,  or  for  railway  presidents  seeking  political  favors  to 
find  on  the  newsstand  a  realistic  account  of  the  bad  scandals  that 
had  smirched  their  roads.  It  was  worse  than  unpleasant,  it  was 
hurtful  to  business.  And  so  quietly,  and  as  speedily  as  could  be 
done  decently,  the  movement  was  brought  to  a  stop  by  pressure  put 
on  the  magazines  that  lent  themselves  to  such  harmful  disclosures. 
Then  followed  a  campaign  of  education.  Responding  to  judicious 
instruction,  conducted  in  the  columns  of  the  most  respectable 
newspapers,  tbe  American  public  was  soon  brought  to  understand 
that  it  was  not  the  muck  that  was  harmful,  but  the  indiscretion  of 
those  who  commented  in  print  on  the  bad  smells.  It  was  reckoned 
a  notable  triumph  for  sober  and  patriotic  good  sense. 

So  after  a  few  years  of  amazing  activity  the  muckraking  move¬ 
ment  came  to  a  stop.  But  not  before  it  had  done  its  work;  not 
before  the  American  middle  class  had  been  indoctrinated  in  the 
elementary  principles  of  political  realism  and  had  rediscovered 
the  social  conscience  lost  since  the  days  of  the  Civil  War.  Many 
a  totem  had  been  thrown  down  by  the  irreverent  hands  of  the 
muckrakers,  and  many  a  fetish  held  up  to  ridicule,  and  plutocracy 
in  America  would  not  recover  its  peace  of  mind  until  at  great  cost 
the  totems  should  be  set  up  again  and  the  fetishes  reanointed  with 
the  oil  of  sanctity.  The  substantial  result  of  the  movement  was  the 
instruction  it  afforded  in  the  close  kinship  between  business  and 
politics — a  lesson  greatly  needed  by  a  people  long  fed  on  romantic 
unrealities.  It  did  not  crystallize  for  the  popular  mind  in  the  broad 


408 


ADDENDA 


principle  of  economic  determinism;  that  remained  for  certain  of 
the  intellectuals  to  apply  to  American  experience.  But  with  its 
sordid  object — service — it  punished  the  flabby  optimism  of  the 
Gilded  Age,  with  its  object-lessons  in  business  politics;  it  revealed 
the  hidden  hand  that  was  pulling  the  strings  of  the  political  pup¬ 
pets;  it  tarnished  the  gilding  that  had  been  carefully  laid  on  our 
callous  exploitation,  and  it  brought  under  common  suspicion 
the  captain  of  industry  who  had  risen  as  a  national  hero  from  the 
muck  of  individualism.  It  was  a  sharp  guerilla  attack  on  the  sacred 
American  System,  but  behind  the  thin  skirmish-line  lay  a  volunteer 
army  that  was  making  ready  to  deploy  for  a  general  engagement 
with  plutocracy. 

With  the  flood  of  light  thrown  upon  the  fundamental  law  by  the 
historians,  the  movement  of  liberalism  passed  quickly  through  suc¬ 
cessive  phases  of  thought.  After  the  first  startled  surprise  it  set 
about  the  necessary  business  of  acquainting  the  American  people 
with  its  findings  in  the  confident  belief  that  a  democratic  electorate 
would  speedily  democratize  the  instrument.  Of  this  first  stage  the 
late  Professor  J.  Allen  Smith’s  The  Spirit  of  American  Government 
(1907)  was  the  most  adequate  expression,  a  work  that  greatly  in¬ 
fluenced  the  program  of  the  rising  Progressive  Party.  But  changes 
came  swiftly  and  within  half  a  dozen  years  the  movement  had 
passed  from  political  programs  to  economic,  concerned  not  so 
greatly  with  political  democracy  as  with  economic  democracy.  Of 
this  second  phase  Professor  Beard’s  notable  study,  An  Economic 
Interpretation  of  the  Constitution  (1913),  was  the  greatest  intellec¬ 
tual  achievement.  Underlying  this  significant  work  was  a  philos¬ 
ophy  of  politics  that  set  it  sharply  apart  from  preceding  studies — 
a  philosophy  that  unsympathetic  readers  were  quick  to  attribute 
to  Karl  Marx,  but  that  in  reality  derived  from  sources  far  earlier 
and  for  Americans  at  least  far  more  respectable.  The  current  con¬ 
ception  of  the  political  state  as  determined  in  its  form  and  activities 
by  economic  groups  is  no  modern  Marxian  perversion  of  political 
theory;  it  goes  back  to  Aristotle,  it  underlay  the  thinking  of  Har¬ 
rington  and  Locke  and  the  seventeenth-century  English  school,  it 
shaped  the  conclusions  of  Madison  and  Hamilton  and  John  Adams, 
it  ran  through  all  the  discussions  of  the  Constitutional  Convention, 
and  it  reappeared  in  the  arguments  of  Webster  and  Calhoun.  It 
was  the  main-traveled  road  of  political  thought  until  a  new  highway 
was  laid  out  by  French  engineers,  who,  disliking  the  bog  of  eco- 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM  409 

nomics,  surveyed  another  route  by  way  of  romantic  equalitarian- 
ism.  The  logic  of  the  engineers  was  excellent,  but  the  drift  of 
politics  is  little  influenced  by  logic,  and  abstract  equalitarianism 
proved  to  be  poor  material  for  highway  construction.  In  divorcing 
political  theory  from  contact  with  sobering  reality  it  gave  it  over 
to  a  treacherous  romanticism.  In  seeking  to  avoid  the  bog  of 
economics  it  ran  into  an  arid  desert. 

To  get  back  once  more  on  the  main-traveled  road,  to  put  away 
all  profitless  romanticisms  and  turn  realist,  taking  up  again  the 
method  of  economic  interpretation  unused  in  America  since  the 
days  of  Webster  and  Calhoun,  became  therefore  the  business  of  the 
second  phase  of  liberalism  to  which  Professor  Beard  applied  him¬ 
self.  The  earlier  group  of  liberals  were  ill  equipped  to  wage  suc¬ 
cessful  war  against  plutocracy.  Immersed  in  the  traditional  equal- 
itarian  philosophy,  they  underestimated  the  strength  of  the  enemies 
of  democracy.  They  did  not  realize  what  legions  of  Swiss  Guards 
property  can  summon  to  its  defense.  They  were  still  romantic 
idealists  tilting  at  windmills,  and  it  was  to  bring  them  to  a  sobering 
sense  of  reality  that  The  Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Constitution 
was  written.  If  property  is  the  master  force  in  every  society  one 
cannot  understand  American  institutional  development  until  one 
has  come  to  understand  the  part  property  played  in  shaping  the 
fundamental  law.  Interpreted  thus  the  myths  that  had  gathered 
about  the  Constitution  fell  away  of  themselves  and  the  document 
was  revealed  as  English  rather  than  French,  the  judicious  expres¬ 
sion  of  substantial  eighteenth-century  realism  that  accepted  the 
property  basis  of  political  action,  was  skeptical  of  romantic  ideal¬ 
isms,  and  was  more  careful  to  protect  title-deeds  to  legal  holdings 
than  to  claim  unsurveyed  principalities  in  Utopia.  If  therefore 
liberalism  were  to  accomplish  any  substantial  results  it  must  ap¬ 
proach  its  problems  in  the  same  realistic  spirit,  recognizing  the 
masterful  ambitions  of  property,  recruiting  democratic  forces  to 
overmaster  the  Swiss  Guards,  leveling  the  strongholds  that  prop¬ 
erty  had  erected  within  the  organic  law,  and  taking  care  that  no 
new  strongholds  should  rise.  The  problem  confronting  liberalism 
was  thej>roblem  of  the  subjection  of  property  to  social  justice. 

Yet  interesting  as  was  the  muckraking  tail  of  the  comet,  far  more 
significant  was  the  core — the  substantial  body  of  knowledge 
gathered  by  the  scholars  and  flung  into  the  scale  of  public  opinion. 
The  realities  of  the  American  past  had  been  covered  deep  with 


410 


ADDENDA 


layers  of  patriotic  myths,  provided  in  simpler  days  when  the  young 
Republic,  suffering  from  a  natural  inferiority  complex,  was  building 
up  a  defense  against  the  acrid  criticism  of  Tory  Europe.  Those 
myths  had  long  since  served  their  purpose  and  had  become  a  con¬ 
venient  refuge  for  the  bats  and  owls  of  the  night;  it  was  time  to. strip 
them  away  and  apply  to  the  past  objective  standards  of  scholar¬ 
ship,  and  to  interpret  it  in  the  light  of  an  adequate  philosophy  of 
history.  To  this  work,  so  essential  to  any  intelligent  understanding 
of  the  American  experiment,  a  group  of  historians  and  political 
scientists  turned  with  competent  skill,  and  the  solid  results  of  their 
labor  remained  after  the  popular  ferment  subsided,  as  a  foundation 
for  later  liberals  to  build  on. 

The  journalistic  muckrakers  had  demonstrated  that  America 
was  not  in  fact  the  equalitarian  democracy  it  professed  to  be,  and 
the  scholars  supplemented  their  work  by  tracing  to  its  historical 
source  the  weakness  of  the  democratic  principle  in  governmental 
practice.  America  had  never  been  a  democracy  for  the  sufficient 
reason  that  too  many  handicaps  had  been  imposed  upon  the  ma¬ 
jority  will.  The  democratic  principle  had  been  bound  with  withes 
like  Samson  and  had  become  a  plaything  for  the  Philistines.  From 
the  beginning — -the  scholars  discovered — democracy  and  property 
had  been  at  bitter  odds;  the  struggle  invaded  the  Constitutional 
Convention,  it  gave  form  to  the  party  alignment  between  Ham¬ 
ilton  and  Jefferson,  Jackson  and  Clay,  and  then  during  the  slavery 
struggle,  sinking  underground  like  a  lost  river,  it  nevertheless  had 
determined  party  conflicts  down  to  the  present.  In  this  ceaseless 
conflict  between  the  man  and  the  dollar,  between  democracy  and 
property,  the  reasons  for  persistent  triumph  of  property  were 
sought  in  the  provisions  of  the  organic  law,  and  from  a  critical 
study  of  the  Constitution  came  a  discovery  that  struck  home  like 
a  submarine  torpedo — the  discovery  that  the  drift  toward  plutoc¬ 
racy  was  not  a  drift  away  from  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution,  but 
an  inevitable  unfolding  from  its  premises;  that  instead  of  having 
been  conceived  by  the  fathers  as  a  democratic  instrument,  it 
had  been  conceived  in  a  spirit  designedly  hostile  to  democracy; 
that  it  was,  in  fact,  a  carefully  formulated  expression  of  eighteenth- 
century  property  consciousness,  erected  as  a  defense  against  the 
democratic  spirit  that  had  got  out  of  hand  during  the  Revolution, 
and  that  the  much-praised  system  of  checks  and  balances  was  de¬ 
signed  and  intended  for  no  other  end  than  a  check  on  the  political 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM 


411 


power  of  the  majority — a  power  acutely  feared  by  the  property 
consciousness  of  the  times. 

It  was  a  startling  discovery  that  profoundly  stirred  the  liberal 
mind  of  the  early  years  of  the  century;  yet  the  really  surprising 
thing  is  that  it  should  have  come  as  a  surprise.  It  is  not  easy  to 
understand  today  why  since  Civil  War  days  intelligent  Americans 
should  so  strangely  have^confused  the  Declaration  of  Independence 
and  the  Constitution,  and  have  come  to  accept  them  as  comple¬ 
mentary  statements  of  the  democratic  purpose  of  America.  Their 
unhkeness  is  unmistakable:  the  one  a  classical  statement  of  French 
humanitarian  democracy,  the  other  an  organic  law  designed  to 
safeguard  the  minority  under  republican  rule.  The  confusion  must 
be  charged  in  part  to  the  lawyers  who  had  taken  over  the  custodian¬ 
ship  of  the  Constitution,  and  in  part  to  the  florid  romantic  temper 
of  the  middle  nineteenth  century.  When  the  fierce  slavery  struggle 
fell  into  the  past,  whatever  honest  realism  had  risen  from  the  pas¬ 
sions  of  the  times  was  buried  with  the  dead  issue.  The  militant 
attacks  on  the  Constitution  so  common  in  Abolitionist  circles  after 
1835,  and  the  criticism  of  the  Declaration  that  was  a  part  of  the 
southern  argument,  were  both  forgotten,  and  with  the  Union  re¬ 
established  by  force  of  arms,  the  idealistic  cult  of  the  fundamental 
law  entered  on  a  second  youth.  In  the  blowsy  Gilded  Age  the  old 
myths  walked  the  land  again,  wrapped  in  battle-tom  flags  and 
appealing  to  the  blood  shed  on  southern  battlefields.  It  was  not 
till  the  advent  of  a  generation  unblinded  by  the  passions  of  civil 
war  that  the  Constitution  again  was  examined  critically,  and  the 
earlier  charge  of  the  Abolitionists  that  it  was  designed  to  serve 
property  rather  than  men,  was  heard  once  more.  But  this  time 
with  far  greater  weight  of  evidence  behind  it.  As  the  historians 
dug  amongst  the  contemporary  records  they  came  upon  a  mass  of 
fact  the  Abolitionists  had  been  unaware  of.  The  evidence  was 
written  so  plainly,  in  such  explicit  and  incontrovertible  words — 
not  only  in  Elliott's  Debates ,  but  in  the  minutes  of  the  several  State 
Conventions,  in  contemporary  letters  and  memoirs,  in  newspapers 
and  pamphlets  and  polite  literature — that  it  seemed  incredible  that 
honest  men  could  have  erred  so  greatly  in  confusing  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  with  the  Declaration. 

With  the  clarification  of  its  philosophy  the  inflowing  waters  of 
liberalism  reached  flood-tide;  the  movement  would  either  recede  or 
pass  over  into  radicalism.  On  the  whole  it  followed  the  latter 


412 


ADDENDA 


course,  and  the  years  immediately  preceding  1917  were  years  when 
American  intellectuals  were  immersing  themselves  in  European 
collectivistic  philosophies — in  Marxianism,  Fabianism,  Syndical¬ 
ism,  Guild  Socialism.  New  leaders  were  rising,  philosophical 
analysts  like  Thorstein  Veblen  who  were  mordant  critics  of  Ameri¬ 
can  economics.  The  influence  of  socialism  was  fast  sweeping  away 
the  last  shreds  of  political  and  social  romanticism  that  so  long  had 
confused  American  thinking.  The  doctrine  of  economic  determin¬ 
ism  was  spreading  widely^  and  in  the  ITgTi t  of  that  doctrine  the  deep 
significance  of  the  industrial  revolution  was  revealing  itself  for  the 
first  time  to  thoughtful  Americans.  In  its  reaction  to  industrialism 
America  had  reached  the  point  Chartist  England  had  reached  in  the 
eighteen-forties  and  Marxian  Germany  in  the  eighteen-seventies. 
That  was  before  a  mechanistic  science  had  laid  its  heavy  dis¬ 
couragements  on  the  drafters  of  democratic  programs.  Accept¬ 
ing  the  principle  of  economic  determinism,  liberalism  still  clung  to 
its  older  democratic  teleology,  convinced  that  somehow  economic 
determinism  would  turn  out  to  be  a  fairy  godmother  to  the  prole¬ 
tariat  and  that  from  the  imperious  drift  of  industrial  expansion 
must  eventually  issue  social  justice.  Armed  with  this  faith  liberal¬ 
ism  threw  itself  into  the  work  of  cleaning  the  Augean  stables,  and 
its  reward  came  in  the  achievements  of  President  Wilson’s  first 
administration. 

Then  the  war  intervened  and  the  green  fields  shriveled  in  an 
afternoon.  With  the  cynicism  that  came  with  post-war  days  the 
democratic  liberalism  of  1917  was  thrown  away  like  an  empty 
whiskey-flask.  Clever  young  men  began  to  make  merry  over  de¬ 
mocracy.  It  was  preposterous,  they  said,  to  concern  oneself  about 
social  justice;  nobody  wants  social  justice.  The  first  want  of  every 
man,  as  John  Adams  remarked  a  hundred  years  ago,  is  his  dinner, 
and  the  second  his  girl.  Out  of  the  muck  of  the  war  had  come  a 
great  discovery — so  it  was  reported — the  discovery  that  psychology 
as  well  as  economics  has  its  word  to  say  on  politics.  From  the 
army  intelligence  tests  the  moron  emerged  as  a  singular  com¬ 
mentary  on  our  American  democracy,  and  with  the  discovery  of 
the  moron  the  democratic  principle  was  in  for  a  slashing  attack. 
Almost  overnight  an  army  of  enemies  was  marshaled  against  it. 
The  eugenist  with  his  isolated  germ  theory  flouted  the  perfectional 
psychology  of  John  Locke,  with  its  emphasis  on  environment  as 
the  determining  factor  in  social  evolution — a  psychology  on  which 


A  CHAPTER  IN  AMERICAN  LIBERALISM  413 

the  whole  idealistic  interpretation  was  founded;  the  beardless 
phdosopher  discovered  Nietzsche  and  in  his  pages  found  the  fit 
master  of  the  moron — the  biological  aristocrat  who  is  the  flower 
that  every  civilization  struggles  to  produce;  the  satirist  discovered 
the  flatulent  reality  that  is  middle-class  America  and  was  eager  to 
thrust  his  jibes  at  the  complacent  denizens  of  the  Valley  of  De¬ 
mocracy.  Only  the  behaviorist,  with  his  insistence  on  the  plastic¬ 
ity  of  the  new-born  child,  offers  some  shreds  of  comfort  to  the 
democrat;  but  he  quickly  takes  them  away  again  with  his  simplifi¬ 
cation  of  conduct  to  imperious  drives  that  stamp  men  as  primitive 
animals.  If  the  mass — the  raw  materials  of  democracy — never 
rises  much  above  sex  appeals  and  belly  needs,  surely  it  is  poor  stuff 
to  try  to  work  up  into  an  excellent  civilization,  and  the  dreams  of 
the  social  idealist  who  forecasts  a  glorious  democratic  future  are 
about  as  substantial  as  moonshine.  It  is  a  discouraging  essay. 
Yet  it  is  perhaps  conceivable  that  our  current  philosophy — the 
brilliant  coruscations  of  our  younger  intelligentsia — may  indeed 
not  prove  to  be  the  last  word  in  social  philosophy.  Perhaps — is  this 
lese-majeste — wThen  our  youngest  liberals  have  themselves  come  to 
the  armchair  age  they  will  be  smiled  at  in  turn  by  sons  who  are 
still  cleverer  and  who  will  find  their  wisdom  as  foolish  as  the  wisdom 
of  1917  seems  to  them  today.  But  that  lies  on  the  knees  of  the  gods. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[Professor  Parrington  left  no  bibliography  apart  from  the  works  mentioned  in  the 
text.  It  has  been  possible  to  formulate  one  with  some  certainty  by  reference  to  his 
personal  library,  theses  written  under  his  supervision,  and  the  record  of  the  books 
he  borrowed  from  the  University  of  Washington  Library.  In  the  two  earlier  volumes 
the  bibliography  is  rigidly  selective.  Needless  to  say,  I  have  not  presumed  such 
knowledge  of  his  intentions.  All  the  pertinent  material  which  it  is  known  that  he 
used  is  included. — E.  H.  Eby.] 

BOOK  I:  PART  I 

I.  The  American  Scene.  For  history  of  the  period  see  Allan  Nevins,  The 
Emergence  of  Modern  America,  1865-1878  (in  the  series  A  History  of  Ameri¬ 
can  Life,  Vol.  VIII,  New  York,  1927);  E.  P.  Oberholtzer,  History  of  the 
United  States  since  the  Civil  War  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1917-1926);  Frederick 
L.  Paxson,  Recent  History  of  the  United  States  (Boston  and  New  York,  c. 
1921). 

For  economic  backgrounds  see  Harold  Underwood  Faulkner,  American 
Economic  History  (New  York  and  London,  1924);  Gustavus  Meyers,  History 
of  Great  American  Fortunes  (3  vols.,  Chicago,  1910);  Robert  Irving  War- 
shaw,  Jay  Gould:  The  Story  of  a  Fortune  (New  York,  1928);  and  for  the  part 
played  by  railroads  see  John  P.  Davis,  The  Union  Pacific  Railway  (New 
York,  1894);  C.  E.  Russell,  Stories  of  Great  Railroads  (Chicago,  1912);  and 
Charles  Francis  Adams,  Jr.,  and  Henry  Adams,  Chapters  of  Erie  and  Other 
Essays  (Boston,  1871). 

For  political  corruption  see  Don  Carlos  Seitz,  The  Dreadful  Decade  (Indianap¬ 
olis,  1926);  and  Denis  Tilden  Lynch,  “Boss"  Tweed:  The  Story  of  a  Grim 
Generation  (New  York,  1927). 

For  journalism  see  Allan  Nevins,  The  Evening  Post:  A  Century  of  Journalism 
(New  York,  c.  1922);  and  Frank  M.  O’Brien,  The  Story  of  the  Sun  (New 
York,  c.  1918). 

General  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  Personal  Memoirs  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1885-1886). 
For  biography  see  W.  E.  Woodward,  Meet  General  Grant  (New  York, 
J928)- 

Jay  Cooke.  See  E.  P.  Oberholtzer,  Jay  Cooke,  Financier  of  the  Civil  War 
(2  vols.  Philadelphia,  c.  1907). 

Charles  A.  Dana,  Recollections  of  the  Civil  War  (New  York,  1902);  J.  H.  Wil¬ 
son,  Life  of  Charles  A.  Dana  (New  York,  1907). 

II.  The  Culture  of  the  Seventies.  For  valuable  sidelights  on  culture  in  the 
decade  see  Constance  Mayfield  Rourke,  Trumpets  of  Jubilee  (New  York, 
c.  1927);  Paxton  Hibben,  Henry  Ward  Beecher:  An  American  Portrait 
(New  York,  c.  1927);  Horace  Greeley,  Recollections  of  a  Busy  Life  (New 
York,  1868);  James  Parton,  The  Life  of  Horace  Greeley  (Boston,  c.  1896); 
Lewis  Mumford,  The  Golden  Day:  A  Study  in  American  Experience  and 
Culture  (New  York,  1926);  and  his  Sticks  and  Stones,  A  Study  of  American 
Architecture  and  Civilization  (New  York,  c.  1924). 

For  history  of  literature  see  Fred  Lewis  Pattee,  A  History  of  American  Litera¬ 
ture  since  1870  (New  York,  1915);  his  Sidelights  on  American  Literature 

415 


416 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(New  York,  1922);  his  The  Development  of  the  American  Short  Story  (New 
York  and  London,  1923);  and  Carl  Van  Doren,  The  American  Novel  (New 
York,  1921). 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich,  Prose  Works  (7  vols.,  Boston,  1897);  The  Poems  of 
Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  (2  vols.,  Boston,  c.  1907).  For  his  life  see  Ferris 
Greenslet,  The  Life  of  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  (Boston  and  New  York,  1908). 

Mrs.  Elizabeth  Stuart  Ward  (Phelps),  The  Silent  Partner  (Boston,  c.  1899); 
A  Singular  Life  (Boston  and  New  York,  1899);  Chapters  from  a  Life  (Bos¬ 
ton  and  New  York,  1896). 

Sarah  Orne  Jewett.  A  Country  Doctor  (Boston  and  New  York,  c.  1884);  A 
Native  of  Winby  and  Other  Tales  (Boston  and  New  York,  c.  1893);  Deep- 
haven  (Boston  and  New  York,  1894).  Tales  of  New  England  (Boston  and 
New  York,  1894);  The  Life  of  Nancy  (Boston  and  New  York,  1895);  The 
Queen’s  Twin  and  Other  Stories  (Boston  and  New  York,  1899);  The  Country 
of  Pointed  Firs  (Boston  and  New  York,  c.  1910).  For  her  life  see  The 
Letters  of  Sarah  Orne  Jewett  (Boston  and  New  York,  1911). 

Mrs.  Mary  E.  (Wilkins)  Freeman,  A  Humble  Romance,  and  Other  Stories 
(New  York,  1887);  The  New  England  Nun,  and  Other  Stories  (New  York, 
1891);  The  Pot  of  Gold,  and  Other  Stories  (Boston,  c.  1892);  Pembroke;  a 
Novel  (New  York,  c.  1894);  People  of  Our  Neighborhood  (New  York,  1901); 
The  Portion  of  Labor  (New  York,  c.  1901).  Young  Lucretia,  and  Other 
Stories  (New  York,  1903);  By  the  Light  of  the  Soul  (New  York  and  London, 
I9°7)-  _ 

Walt  Whitman,  Leaves  of  Grass  (Inclusive  edition  edited  by  Emory  Holloway, 
Garden  City,  New  York,  1927);  The  Complete  Prose  Works  of  Walt  Whit¬ 
man  (New  York,  1898);  The  Half-breed  and  Other  Stories  (New  York,  1927); 
Autobiographia:  or,  the  Story  of  a  Life  (New  York,  1892);  The  Gathering  of 
Forces  (New  York  and  London,  1920);  and  The  Uncollected  Poetry  and 
Prose  of  Walt  Whitman  (2  vols.,  Garden  City,  New  York,  1921).  For  Whit¬ 
man’s  life  see  Horace  Traubel,  With  Walt  Whitman  in  Camden  (3  vols., 
New  York,  1908-1914);  Emory  Holloway,  Whitman  (New  York,  1926); 
John  Addington  Symonds,  Walt  Whitman:  a  Study  (London,  1893);  Leon 
Bazalgette,  W alt  Whitman,  the  Man  and  his  Work  (Garden  City,  New  York, 
1920);  John  Burroughs,  Whitman:  a  Study  (Boston  and  New  York.  c. 
1924);  Bliss  Perry,  Walt  Whitman:  his  Life  and  Work  (Boston  and  New 
York,  1906);  and  J.  Johnston,  M.  D.,  and  J.  W.  Wallace,  Visits  to  Walt 
Whitman  (New  York,  1918). 

For  critical  studies  of  his  work  see  Norman  Foerster,  American  Criticism, 
PP-  157-222  (New  York,  1928);  Basil  De  Selincourt,  Walt  Whitman;  a 
Critical  Study  (London,  1914);  Horace  Traubel  (ed.),  In  re  Walt  Whitman 
(Philadelphia,  1893). 

Samuel  Langhorne  Clemens  (Mark  Twain),  The  Writings  of  Mark  Twain 
(25  vols.,  New  York  and  London,  c.  1910-1911);  The  Mysterious  Stranger, 
and  Other  Stories  (New  York  and  London,  1922);  What  is  Man ?  (New 
York,  1917). 

For  his  life  see  Mark  Twain’s  Autobiography  (New  York  and  London,  1924); 
Albert  Bigelow  Paine,  Mark  Twain,  a  Biography  (3  vols.  New  York,  c. 
1912);  \an  Wyck  Brooks,  The  Ordeal  of  Mark  Twain  (New  York,  c.  1920); 
W.  D.  Howells,  My  Mark  Twain  (New  York,  c.  1910). 

III.  Changing  Theory.  For  a  general  history  of  economic  theory  see,  Charles 
Gide  and  Charles  Rist,  A  History  of  Economic  Doctrines  from  the  Time  of 
the  Physiocrats  to  the  Present  Day  (Authorized  translation  from  the  second 
revised  and  augumented  edition  of  1913,  Boston,  New  York,  Chicago, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  417 

1913);  The  Trend  of  Economics  (Edited  by  R.  G.  Tugwell,  New  York, 
1924). 

For  material  covered  in  this  section  see  Francis  Wayland,  Elements  of  Politi¬ 
cal  Economy  (New  York,  1837);  Henry  Charles  Carey,  Principles  of  Social 
Science  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1858-1860);  his  The  Harmony  of  Interests: 
Agricultural ,  Manufacturing,  and  Commercial  (2nd  ed.,  New  York,  1852); 
and  his  Miscellaneous  Works  (Philadelphia,  1875).  Francis  A.  Walker, 
The  Wages  Question,  a  Treatise  on  Wages  and  the  Wages  Class  (New  York, 
1891);  his  Land  and  Its  Rent  (Boston,  1891);  and  his  Political  Economy 
(New  York,  1888). 

For  a  general  treatment  of  political  theories  see  William  A.  Dunning,  A  History 
of  Political  Theories  from  Rousseau  to  Spencer  (New  York,  1920);  Charles 
E.  Merriam,  History  of  American  Political  Theories  (New  York,  1920); 
and  his  American  Political  Ideas:  Studies  in  the  Development  of  American 
Political  Thought,  1865-1917  (New  York,  1920). 

Theodore  Dwight  Woolsey,  Political  Science:  or,  the  State  Theoretically  and 
Practically  Considered  (New  York,  1900);  and  his  Communism  and  Socialism 
in  Their  History  and  Theory  (New  York,  1894). 

John  W.  Burgess.  Political  Science  and  Comparative  Constitutional  Law 
(2  vols.,  Boston  and  London,  1896-1898);  and  his  The  Sanctity  of  the  Law; 
Wherein  Does  It  Consist?  (Boston  and  New  York,  c.  1927). 

J.  Allen  Smith,  The  Growth  and  Decadence  of  Constitutional  Government  (New 
York,  1930)  is  an  invaluable  aid  to  those  wishing  to  get  Parnngton’s  view¬ 
point  in  political  theory. 

Henry  George,  The  Writings  of  Henry  George  (Memorial  edition,  10  vols., 
New  York,  1898-1900).  See  particularly  Progress  and  Poverty  (Vols.  I  and 
II),  and  Henry  George,  Jr.,  The  Life  of  Henry  George  (Vol.  X). 

Henry  D.  Lloyd,  Wealth  Against  Commonwealth  (New  York,  c.  1894);  Lords 
of  Industry  (New  York  and  London,  1910);  Man  the  Social  Creator  (New 
York,  1906);  Strike  of  Millionaires  Against  Miners,  or  the  Story  of  Spring 
Valley,  with  an  Open  Letter  to  Millionaires  (Chicago,  1890).  lor  his  life  see 
Caroline  Augusta  Lloyd,  Henry  Demaresi  Lloyd,  1847-1905  (2  vols.,  New 
York  and  London,  1912).  (Parrington  tad  intended  to  discuss  Lloyd.) 

IV.  The  Beginnings  of  Criticism.  Wendell  Phillips,  Speeches,  Lectures,  and 
Letters  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1891-1892).  For  his  life  see  Carlos  Martyn,  W endell 
Phillips,  the  Agitator  (Revised  ed.,  New  York,  1890);  and  Charles  Edward 
Russell,  The  Story  of  Wendell  Phillips  (Chicago,  c.  1914). 

George  William  Curtis,  Nile  Notes  of  a  Huwadji  (New  York,  1851);  Trumps 
(New  York,  1861);  Potiphar  Papers  (New  York,  1854);  Prue  and  I  (New 
York,  n.  d.);  Orations  and  Addresses  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1894);  From  the 
Easy  Chair  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1894-1902);  Early  Letters  of  George  William 
Curtis  to  John  S.  Dwight;  Brook  Farm  and  Concord  (New  York  and  London, 
1898).  For  his  life  see  Edward  Cary,  George  William  Curtis  (Boston  and 
New  York,  1894). 

Edwin  Lawrence  Godkin,  Reflections  and  Comments ,  1865-1895  (New  York, 
1895);  Unforseen  Tendencies  of  Democracy  (Boston,  1893);  Problems  of 
Modern  Democracy;  Political  and  Economic  Essays  (Third  ed.,  New  York, 
1898).  For  his  life  see,  The  Life  and  Letters  of  Edwin  Lawrence  Godkin 
(Ed.  by  Rollo  Ogden,  2  vols..  New  York  and  London,  1907).  See  also 
Gustav  Poliak,  The  Nation,  Fifty  Years  of  American  Idealism:  the  New 
York  Nation,  1865-1915  (New  York,  1 91 5). 

The  political  novel:  Mark  Twain  and  Charles  Dudley  Warner,  The  Gilded 
Age  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1873);  Henry  Adams,  Democracy  (New  York, 


418 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1880);  F.  Marion  Crawford,  An  American  Politician  (New  York,  1884). 
See  also  Albion  W.  Tourgee,  A  Fool’s  Errand.  (New  York,  1880). 

The  economic  novel:  John  Hay,  The  Bread-lVinners  (New  York,  1883);  H.  F. 

Keenan,  The  Moneymakers  (New  York,  1885). 

The  sociological  novel:  Hjalmar  Hjorth  Boyessen,  The  Mammon  of  Unright¬ 
eousness  (New  York,  1891);  his  The  Golden  Calf  (New  York,  1892);  and  his 
Social  Smugglers  (New  York,  1893);  Robert  Grant,  Unleavened  Bread  (New 
York,  1900);  Samuel  Merwin  and  H.  K.  Webster,  Calumet  K  (New  York, 

1901) ;  and  their  Short  Line  War  (New  York,  1899).  Francis  Churchill 
Williams,  J.  Develin-Boss  (New  York,  1901);  Elliot  Flower,  The  Spoilsman 
(Boston,  1903);  Winston  Churchill,  Coniston  (New  York,  1907);  and  his 
Mr.  Crewe’s  Career  (New  York,  1908);  Will  Payne,  Mr.  Salt  (Boston  and 
New  York,  1903);  and  his  The  Money  Captain  (New  York,  1898). 

For  general  accounts  see  Carl  Van  Doren,  The  American  Novel  (New  York, 
1921);  Fred  Lewis  Pattee,  A  History  of  American  Literature  since  1870 
(New  York,  1915);  John  Curtis  Underwood,  Literature  and  Insurgency 
(New  York,  1914);  and  W.  D.  Howells,  Criticism  and  Fiction  (New 
York,  1891). 

For  material  dealing  with  Henry  Adams  and  John  Hay  see  William  Roscoe 
Thayer,  The  Life  and  Letters  of  John  Hay  (2  vols.,  Boston  and  New  York, 
c.  1915).  See  also  the  bibliography  on  Henry  Adams,  Part  II,  section  II. 

BOOK  I:  PART  II 

I.  Disintegration  and  Reintegration.  For  a  general  survey  of  philosophical 

thought  during  the  period  see  W.  H.  Hudson,  Philosophies  Ancient  and 
Modern  (London,  1908);  Woodbridge  Riley,  American  Thought  from  Puri¬ 
tanism  to  Pragmatism  (New  York,  1915);  William  Archibald  Dunning, 
A  History  of  Political  Theories  from  Rousseau  to  Spencer  (New  York,  1920). 
Condorcet,  Isidore,  August  Marie  Francois  Xavier,  Ouvres  (Paris,  1847). 
See  also  A  General  View  of  Positivism  (Translated  by  H.  J.  Bridges,  London, 
c.  1908). 

Herbert  Spencer,  Works  (18  vols.,  New  York,  1915);  see  also  his  Illustrations 
of  Universal  Progress;  a  Series  of  Discussions  (New  York,  1890). 

Ernst  Heinrich  Haeckel,  The  Riddle  of  the  Universe  at  the  Close  of  the  Nine¬ 
teenth  Century  (New  York  and  London,  1900);  and  his  History  of  Creation 
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1914). 

John  Fiske,  American  Political  Ideas,  Viewed  from  the  Standpoint  of  Uni¬ 
versal  History  (New  York,  1899);  Darwinism  and  Other  Essays  (New  ed. 
rev.  and  enl.,  Boston,  1892);  The  Destiny  of  Man,  Viewed  in  the  Light  of  his 
Origin  (18  ed.,  Boston  and  New  York,  1892);  Essays  Historical  and  Literary 
(2  vols.,  New  York  and  London,  1902);  Excursions  of  an  Evolutionist 
(Boston  and  New  York,  1892);  The  Idea  of  God  as  Affected  by  Modern  Knowl¬ 
edge  (Boston  and  New  York,  1892);  Life  Everlasting  (Boston  and  New  York, 

1902) ;  Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,  Based  on  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution, 
with  Criticisms  of  the  Positive  Philosophy  (4  vols.,  Boston  and  New  York, 
c.  1903);  Through  Nature  to  God  (Boston  and  New  York,  1899);  Unseen 
World  and  Other  Essays  (nth  ed.,  Boston,  1876).  For  his  life  see  J.  S. 
Clark,  Life  and  Letters  of  John  Fiske  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1917);  and  Henry 
Holt,  Garrulities  of  an  Octogenarian  Editor,  with  Other  Essays  Somewhat 
Biographical  and  Autobiographical  (Boston  and  New  York,  1923). 

II.  The  Skepticisms  of  the  House  of  Adams.  Henry  Adams,  The  Degredation 

of  the  Democratic  Dogma  (New  York,  1020I;  Democracy,  a  Novel  (New 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


419 


York,  1880);  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams  (New  York,  1918);  History  of 
the  United  States  during  the  Administration  of  Jefferson  and  Madison  (9  vols., 
New  York,  1890-1898);  John  Randolph  (Boston,  1895);  Letters  to  a  Niece 
and  Prayer  to  the  Virgin  of  Chartres;  with  a  Niece’s  Memoirs  by  Mabel  La 
Farge  (Boston  and  New  York,  1920);  Life  of  Albert  Gallatin  (Philadelphia, 
1880);  Mont-Saint-Michel  and  Chartres  (Boston  and  New  York,  1913). 

Brooks  Adams,  America’s  Economic  Supremacy  (New  York,  1900);  Law  of 
Civilization  and  Decay:  an  Essay  on  History  (New  York,  1895);  The  New 
Empire  (New  York,  London,  1902);  The  Theory  of  Social  Revolutions  (New 
York,  1913). 

Charles  Francis  Adams,  Jr.,  and  Henry  Adams,  Chapters  of  Erie  and  Other 
Essays  (Boston,  1871);  Charles  Francis  Adams,  Jr.,  Charles  Francis  Adams 
1835-1915;  an  Autobiography  (Boston  and  New  York,  1916).  See  also 
W.  C.  Ford,  A  Cycle  of  Adams  Letters ,  1861-1865  ( 2  vols.,  Boston  and  New 
York,  1920). 

III.  Victorian  Realism.  For  material  in  Parrington’s  introduction  to  Chapter 
III  see  Francis  Marion  Crawford,  The  Novel:  What  It  Is  (New  York,  1908); 
and  H.  H.  Boyessen,  Literary  and  Social  Silhouettes  (New  York,  1894). 

Henry  James,  The  Novels  and  Tales  of  Henry  James  (24  vols.,  New  York, 
1907-1909);  Views  and  Reviews  (Boston,  1908);  The  Letters  of  Henry  James 
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1920).  For  criticism  and  biography  see  Pelham  Edgar, 
Henry  James,  Man  and  Author  (Boston  and  New  York,  1927);  Rebecca 
West,  Henry  James  (New  York,  c.  1916);  Van  Wyck  Brooks,  The  Pilgrim¬ 
age  of  Henry  James  (New  York,  1925). 

William  Dean  Howells,  A  Hazard  of  New  Fortunes  (New  York,  1891);  A 
Modern  Instance  (Boston  and  New  York,  1881);  Through  the  Eye  of  the 
Needle  (New  York  and  London,  1907);  A  Traveler  from  Altruria  (New  York, 
1908);  The  Rise  of  Silas  Lapham  (Boston,  c.  191 2) ;  April  Hopes  (New  York, 
1888);  Certain  Delightful  English  Towns;  with  Glimpses  of  the  Pleasant 
Country  Between  (New  York  and  London,  1906);  Indian  Summer  (Boston, 
c.  1914);  Venetian  Life  (19th  ed.,  new  and  enl.,  Boston,  c.  1907);  Criticism 
and  Fiction  (New  York,  1891);  Literary  Friends  and  Acquaintance  (New 
York  and  London,  1901);  Literature  and  Life  (New  York  and  London, 
1902);  My  Literary  Passions  (New  York,  c.  1895).  For  his  life  see  Life  in 
Letters  of  William  Dean  Howells  (2  vols.,  Garden  City,  N.  Y.,  1928);  Years 
of  My  Youth  (New  York,  c.  1916).  For  critical  estimates  see  Delmar  Gross 
Cooke,  William  Dean  Howells;  a  Critical  Study  (New  York,  c.  1922); 
Oscar  W.  Firkins,  William  Dean  Howells  (Cambridge,  Mass.,  1924);  Alex¬ 
ander  Harvey,  William  Dean  Howells;  a  Study  of  the  Achievement  of  a  Lit¬ 
erary  Artist  (New  York,  1917). 

BOOK  II:  PART  I 

I.  The  Plight  of  the  Farmer.  For  general  surveys  of  the  Agrarian  movement 
see  Solon  Justus  Buck,  The  Granger  Movement  (In  Harvard  Historical 
Studies,  Vol.  XIX,  Cambridge,  1913);  and  his  The  Agrarian  Crusade  (New 
Haven,  c.  1920);  F.  E.  Haynes,  Third  Party  Movements  since  the  Civil  War 
(Iowa  City,  Iowa,  c.  1916);  F.  J.  Turner,  The  Frontier  in  American  History 
(New  York,  1920). 

For  discussions  of  the  currency  see  Homo’s  Letters  on  a  National  Currency 
(Washington,  1817);  Currency  Explosions,  their  Cause  and  Cure  (New  York, 
1858);  Our  Currency:  Some  of  Its  Evils,  and  the  Remedies  for  Them  (By  a 
Citizen  of  North  Carolina,  Raleigh,  N.  C.,  i860;  D.  H.  Robertson,  Money 


420 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(New  York,  c.  1922);  J.  Lawrence  Laughlin,  The  Principles  of  Money, 
(New  York,  191 1). 

David  Ames  Wells,  Practical  Economics;  a  Collection  of  Essays  Respecting 
Certain  of  the  Recent  Economic  Experiences  of  the  United  States  (New 
York,  1885);  Robinson  Crusoe’s  Money  (New  ed.  New  York,  1896);  The 
Cremation  Theory  of  Specie  Resumption  (New  York,  1875);  Contraction  of 
Legal  Tender  Notes  vs.  Repudiation  and  Disloyalty  (New  York,  1876). 

Eleazar  Lord,  Credit ,  Currency  and  Banking  (New  York,  1828);  A  Letter  on  the 
National  Currency  (New  York,  1861);  Six  Letters  on  the  Necessity  and 
Practicability  of  the  National  Currency,  etc.  (New  York,  1862);  National  Cur¬ 
rency:  A  Review  of  the  National  Banking  Law  (New  York,  1863). 

Peter  Cooper,  Ideas  for  a  Science  of  Good  Government  (New  York,  1883); 
The  Political  and  Financial  Opinions  of  Peter  Cooper  (New  York,  1877). 

William  Hope  Harvey,  Coin’s  Financial  School  (Chicago,  c.  1894);  and  J.  A. 
Woodburn,  The  Life  of  Thaddeus  Stevens  (Indianapolis,  c.  1913.) 

III.  Hamlin  Garland  and  the  Middle  Border.  For  studies  of  the  Middle 
Border  see  D.  A.  Dondore,  The  Prairie  and  the  Making  of  Aliddle  America: 
Four  Centuries  of  Description  (Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa,  1926);  Lucy  Lockwood 
Hazard,  The  Frontier  in  American  Literature  (New  York,  1927). 

For  early  realism  of  the  Middle  Border  see  Harold  Frederick,  Seth’s  Brother’s 
Wife  (London,  1898);  and  Joseph  Kirkland,  Zury:  The  Meanest  Alan  in 
Spring  County  (Boston  and  New  York,  1887). 

Hamlin  Garland,  Back-Trailers  from  the  Middle  Border  (New  York,  1928); 
Boy  Life  on  the  Prairie  (Revised  ed.,  New  York  and  London,  c.  1899); 
The  Captain  of  the  Gray  Horse  Troop:  a  Novel  (New  York,  c.  1902);  Crum¬ 
bling  Idols  (Chicago,  1894);  A  Daughter  of  the  Aliddle  Border  (New  York, 
1921);  The  Eagle’s  Heart  (New  York,  1900);  Jason  Edwards,  An  Average 
Man  (New  York,  1897);  Main-Travelled  Roads  (New  York,  c.  J 891) ; 
Her  Alountain  Lover  (New  York,  1901);  Prairie  Folk  (New  and  rev.  ed., 
New  York,  1899);  Rose  of  Dutches’ s  Cooly  (New  York,  c.  1899);  A  Son  of 
the  Middle  Border  (New  York,  1917);  A  Spoil  of  Office  (New  York,  1897); 
Trailmakers  of  the  Middle  Border  (New  York,  1926). 

BOOK  II:  PART  II 

II  The  Quest  of  Utopia.  Edward  Bellamy,  The  Duke  of  Stockbridge;  a  Ro¬ 
mance  of  Shay’s  Rebellion  (New  York  and  Boston,  1901);  Equality  (3d  ed.. 
New  York,  1897);  Looking  Backward,  2000-1887  (Boston,  c.  1889);  see  also 
The  Nationalist,  a  Alonthly  Alagazine  (Vols.  1-3,  May,  1889,  to  April,  1891. 
Edited  by  H.  W.  Austin). 

For  general  material  see  Allvn  B.  Forbes,  The  Literary  Quest  for  Utopia, 
1880-1900  ( Social  Forces,  Vol.  VII,  1927,  pp.  179-189).  Lewis  Mumford, 
The  Story  of  Utopias  (New  York,  c.  1922);  J.  O.  Hertzler,  The  History  oj 
Utopian  Thought  (New  York,  1923). 


INDEX 


Adams,  Brooks,  212,  214,  218,  227-236, 
284. 

Adams,  Charles  Francis,  212,  213-214, 
215,  227. 

Adams,  Henry,  54,  90,  94,  96,  170,  171, 
173,  203,  206,  212,  214-227,  228, 
235,  242,  243,  402,  403. 

Adams,  John,  xxviii,  177,  217,  408,  412. 
Adams,  Sam,  51,  216. 

Addison,  Joseph,  vi. 

Agassiz,  Louis,  191,  205. 

Age  of  Innocence,  The,  382. 

Alcott,  Louisa  M.,  50. 

Aldrich,  Thomas  Bailey,  53,  54-60,  65, 
86,  92,  102,  178,  237,  242,  243, 
292. 

Alexander  s  Bridge,  383. 

Alice  Adams,  375. 

Allen,  James  Lane,  238. 

American  Commonwealth,  1 20. 

American  Political  Ideas,  210. 

American  Politician,  An,  169,  171. 
American  Tragedy,  An,  316. 

Ames,  Fisher,  160. 

Ames,  Oakes,  169. 

Anderson,  Sherwood,  xv,  241,  319,  324, 
325.  326,  33L  361,  370-371,  373, 
377,  393,  399- 
April  Hopes,  250,  252. 

Aquinas,  Thomas,  221,  222,  223,  226. 
Arena,  293,  299. 

Aristocratic  Opinions  of  Democracy,  159. 
Armour,  Philip,  15. 

Arnold,  Matthew,  xxvii,  65,  83,  160,  209, 
344,  402. 

At  the  Court  of  Boymlle,  374. 

Atlantic  Monthly,  The,  52,  54,  57,  61, 
238,  251,  397,  398- 

Bakunin,  Mikhail,  139. 

Baldwin,  Joseph  G.,  92,  390. 

Balls  and,  381. 

Balzac,  Honore  de,  398. 

Banks,  General  Nathaniel  Prentiss,  39. 
Barbusse,  Henri,  385. 

Baring,  Alexander,  133. 

Barnum,  P.  T.,  12,  14,  27. 

Bartram,  William,  I91- 
Bastiat,  Frederic,  105,  106,  139. 

Baxter,  Richard,  67. 

Beard,  Charles  A.,  xin,  406,  4o8>  4°9- 
Beautiful  and  Damned,  The,  386. 


Beecher,  Henry  Ward,  12,  14,  75,  90, 
202. 

Beginning  of  Wisdom,  The,  386. 

Bellamy,  Edward,  xii,  246,  302-315. 
Bells,  The,  54. 

Benet,  Stephen  Vincent,  386. 

Bent  Twig,  The,  376. 

Bentham,  Jeremy,  156,  157. 

Benton,  Thomas  A.,  25,  71,  273. 

Berger,  Victor,  xii. 

Bergh,  Henry,  12. 

Berkeley,  Bishop  George,  109. 

Berkshire  Courier,  The,  303. 

Bernard,  Claude,  323. 

Beveridge,  Albert  J.,  388. 

Beyond  Life,  336,  340,  344. 

Beyond  the  Toll-Gate,  64. 

Biddle,  Nicholas,  104. 

Biglow  Papers,  56. 

Bjornson,  Bjornstjerne,  293. 

Blaine,  James  G.,  12,  38,  154,  217. 
Blanc,  Louis,  105,  139. 

Blanche  of  Castile,  221. 

Blind  Raftery,  378. 

Blix,  329. 

Bloomer,  Amelia,  52. 

Bojer,  Johan,  396. 

Boker,  George  Henry,  52, 

Bourget,  Paul,  180,  399. 

Bourne,  Randolph,  xiii,  376. 

Boutwell,  George  Sewall,  41,  169. 

Boyd,  Thomas,  385. 

Boyesen,  Hjalmar  Hjorth,  181, 182,  184, 
238,  282. 

Brandeis,  Louis,  406. 

Brass  Check,  The,  353. 

Breadwinners,  The,  1 73>  !74>  x77»  *78* 
179. 

Briary  Bush,  The,  386. 

Brimming  Cup,  The,  376. 

Brisbane,  Albert,  125. 

Bronte,  Charlotte,  398. 

Bronte,  Emily,  398. 

Brook  Farm,  43,  47,  60,  147,  148,  151, 
152,  201. 

Brooklyn  Eagle,  71. 

Brooks,  Van  Wyck,  89,  376. 

Brothers,  371- 
Brown,  Alice,  62. 

Browning,  Robert,  201. 

Bryan,  William  Jennings,  xi,  46,  166, 
178,  361,  367. 


421 


INDEX 


422 

Bryant,  William  Cullen,  41,  54,  108, 1 50, 
277. 

Bryce,  James,  120. 

Buchanan,  James,  30. 

Buckle,  Henry  Thomas,  204,  205,  208. 
“Buffalo  Bill,”  16,  17. 

Burgess,  John  W.,  120,  122,  124-125, 
130,  284. 

Burke,  Edmund,  144. 

Butler,  Ben,  12,  13,  14,  169,  269,  386. 
Butler  s  Analogy,  198. 

By  the  Open  Sea,  325. 

Byrd,  Col.  William,  389. 

Byrne,  Donn,  377-378. 

Cabell,  James  Branch,  xiii,  91,  100,  3 3 5— 
345.  347.  355.  367.  373.  382,  405- 
Cable,  George  Washington,  xii,  238 
Caesars  Column,  302. 

Cairnes,  John  Elliott,  124. 

Calhoun,  John  C.,  xxviii,  119,  120,  130, 
281,  408,  409. 

Call  of  the  Wild,  The,  352. 

Calumet  K,  1 86. 

Cameron,  Senator  Simon,  12. 

Canfield  (Fisher),  Dorothy,  376. 
“Captain  Kidd,”  12,  45. 

Captain  of  the  Gray-Horse  Troop,  The, 
292,  300. 

Carey,  Henry  C.,  22,  23,  103,  105-111, 
112,  113,  1 16,  269,  273,  276,  277, 
279,  282. 

Carey,  Matthew,  105. 

Carlyle,  Jane  Welsh,  337. 

Carlyle,  Thomas,  65,  83,  139,  337,  368. 
Carnegie,  Andrew,  15,  87. 

Carver,  Captain,  16,  17,  92. 

Castelar,  Emilio,  177,  178. 

Cather,  Willa,  65,  383-384,  393,  394. 
Central  Pacific  Railway,  127. 

Century  Magazine,  173. 

Certain  Delightful  English  Towns,  252. 
Certain  Rich  Man,  A,  374. 

Champagne,  Marie  de,  220. 

Changeling,  The,  378. 

Channing,  William  Ellery,  viii,  72,  76, 
121,  I30,  13 1,  140. 

Chanson  de  Roland,  220. 

Chase,  Salmon  P.,  32,  34,  35,  272. 
Chatterton,  Thomas,  54. 

Chesterton,  Gilbert  K.,  335. 

Christian  Union  (Beecher),  38m 
Churchill,  Winston,  xiv,  186,  348-349, 
360,  406. 

Circuit  Rider,  The,  391. 

Claflin,  Tennessee,  12. 

Clay,  Henry,  20,  22,  23,  104,  105,  139, 
279,  410. 

Clemens,  Olivia,  90,  92. 

Cleveland,  Grover,  46,  59,  154. 


Cceur-de-Lion,  Richard,  221. 

“Coffee  House  Wits,”  48. 

Coin,  The,  334. 

Colfax,  Schuyler,  38. 

Communism  and  Socialism,  123. 
Comstock,  Anthony,  xvi,  12,  14,  75, 
367. 

Comte,  Auguste,  195,  196,  197,  198, 
204,  208,  213,  219,  317,  323. 
Condorcet,  Marquis  de,  194,  195,  196, 
198,  199,  235. 

Congreve,  William,  344,  345. 

Coniston,  186,  348. 

Conkling,  Roscoe,  12,  217. 

Connecticut ,  Yankee  in  King  Arthur's 
Court,  The,  91,  97,  98,  99. 
Contraction,  269. 

Cooke,  Henry,  32,  34,  35,  38,  42. 

Cooke,  Jay,  29,  31-43. 

Cooke,  John  Esten,  238. 

Cooke,  Pitt,  32,  33. 

Cooke,  Rose  Terry,  62,  397,  398. 
Cooper,  James  Fenimore,  175,  300,  363. 
Cooper,  Peter,  22,  69,  no,  125,  140, 
160,  276-282. 

Cords  of  Vanity,  The,  335,  344. 
Cornwallis,  General  Charles,  304. 
Cosmos,  205. 

Country  Doctor,  A,  63. 

Country  of  the  Painted  Firs,  64,  65. 
Craddock,  Charles  Egbert,  238,  400. 
Crane,  Stephen,  xii,  55,  237,  300,  317, 
327,  328-329,  385. 

Crawford,  F.  Marion,  171,  172,  237. 
Cream  of  the  Jest,  The,  335,  343. 

Credit  Mobilier,  24,  38,  39,  40,  137,  160, 
162. 

Cremation  Theory  of  Specie  Resumption, 
The,  269. 

Crevecoeur,  St.  John  de,  389. 

Crime  and  Punishment,  316. 

Crisis,  The,  348. 

Criticism  and  Fiction,  248. 

Crockett,  Davy,  15,  16,  92,  390. 
Cromwell,  Thomas,  231. 

Crossing,  The,  348. 

Crumbling  Idols,  292,  293. 

Cummings,  E.  E.,  385. 

Curtis,  Burrill,  147. 

Curtis,  George  William,  138,  147-154, 
172,  279. 

Custom  of  the  Country,  The,  382. 

Cuvier,  Georges,  205. 

Cytherea,  380,  381. 

Daily  News  (London),  155. 

Daisy  Miller,  399. 

Dana,  Charles  A.,  43-47,  151,  152,  154, 
244,  269. 

Darrow,  Clarence,  367. 


INDEX 


423 


Darwin,  Charles,  198,  204,  205,  206,  293, 
323,  352,  402. 

Data  of  Ethics ,  198. 

Deadlock,  399. 

Deal  in  Wheat,  ^,329. 

Debacle,  Le,  328,  329. 

Debs,  Eugene  V.,  xii. 

Deland,  Margaret,  397. 

DeLeon,  Daniel,  xii. 

Dell,  Floyd,  386. 

Democracy,  94,  169,  170,  171,  173,  217, 
218,  223. 

Destiny  of  Man,  The,  209. 

Dewey,  John,  406. 

Dickens,  Charles,  331,  398. 

Disraeli,  Benjamin,  148. 

Domnei,  34.2. 

Donnelly,  Ignatius,  12,  266,  284,  302. 
Dos  Passos,  John,  385. 

Dostoevsky,  Feodor,  316. 

Douglas,  Stephen  A.,  25. 

Drake,  Sir  Francis,  231. 

Dreiser,  Theodore,  xiv,  193,  198,  241, 
300,  317,  319.  324»  325.  354“ 
359- 

Drew,  Daniel,  12,  13,  14,  84. 
Drummond,  Henry,  208. 

Dugdale,  R.  L.,  191. 

Duke  of  Stockbridge,  The,  303. 

Dwelling  Place  of  Light,  The,  349- 
Dwight,  Timothy,  120,  191,  390. 


Eagle  Heart,  The,  300. 

Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Constitu¬ 


tion,  An,  408,  409. 

Education  of  Henry  Adams,  The,  203, 
218. 

Egg,  The,  370.  . 

Eggleston,  Edward,  xi,  238,  293,  391, 


400. 

Eleanor  of  Guienne,  221,  227. 

Elements  of  Political  Economy,  104,  ill, 


L3- 

Eliot,  George,  209. 

Elliott’s  Debates,  411. 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  viu,  5°,  52>  53, 
70,  72,  75,  76,  78,  80,  82,  88,  1 21, 

13 1,  204,  319,  327,  334,  3°3>  4°3- 
Emigrants,  The,  396. 

Emporia  and  New  York,  374- 
Engels,  Friedrich,  76,  105,  139. 
Enormous  Room,  The,  385. 

Equality,  304,  3 1 1. 

Erik  Dorn,  386.  .  . 

Essay  on  the  Classification  of  the  Animal 
Kingdom,  205. 

Ethan  Frome,  382. 

Evans,  George  Henry,  125,  140. 

Evening  Post,  71,  108. 

Evolution  of  Language,  205. 


Faint  Perfume,  377. 

Far  Country,  A,  349. 

Far  from  the  Madding  Crowd,  289. 
Faraday,  Michael,  219. 

Fessenden,  William  Pitt,  35. 

Fields,  James  Thomas,  65,  292. 

Figures  of  Earth,  335,  342. 

Financier,  The,  357. 

Fink,  Mike,  92. 

First  Principles,  208. 

Fisk,  Jim,  12,  13,  14,  27,  84,  137,  278. 
Fiske,  John,  13,  197,  203-21 1,  243,  293, 
404. 

Fitzgerald,  F.  Scott,  386. 

Flaubert,  Gustave,  64,  323,  324,  398. 
Florentine  Dagger,  386. 

Flower,  B.  O.,  246,  266,  293,  298,  299. 
Flower,  Elliott,  186. 

Flush  Times  of  Alabama  and  Missis¬ 
sippi,  92,  390. 

Foundation  of  the  Labor  Movement,  The, 

145.  .  . 

Fourier,  Francois  Charles  Marie,  151. 
Fra  Lippo  Lippi,  201.  _ 

Franklin,  Benjamin,  viii,  191,  201,  250, 
281,  282. 

Frederic,  Harold,  xii,  288,  289,  327. 
Freeman,  Edward  Augustus,  210. 
Freeman,  Mary  Wilkins,  62,  63,  66,  68, 
238. 

Frenzied  Finance,  405. 

Freud,  Sigmund,  401. 

Friendship  Village,  377. 

Frost,  Robert,  xiv,  379. 

Fuller,  Henry  B.,  xii. 

Fuller,  Margaret,  151. 

Gale,  Zona,  xv,  377,  397. 

Gallatin,  Albert,  279. 

Gargoyles,  386. 

Garland,  Hamlin,  xi,  89,  198,  246,  251, 
259,  266,  288-300,  316,  317,  318, 
332.  374-  383,  3?i,  392,  393- 
Garrison,  William  Lloyd,  141,  142. 
Gary,  Judge  Elbert  Henry,  347,  366. 
Gentleman  from  Indiana,  The,  375. 
George,  Henry,  12,  52,  104,  io5»  III> 
1 16,  125-136,  293,  294,  295,  298, 

299,  3°3>  3H>  4°2- 
Georgia  Scenes,  92,  390. 

Giants  in  the  Earth,  387-396. 

Gilded  Age,  The,  91,  92,  93.  169- 
Gilder,  Richard  W.,  87. 

Gladstone,  W.  E.,  160,  215. 

Glasgow,  Ellen,  xiii. 

Glimpses  of  the  Moon,  382. 

Godkin,  Edwin  Laurence,  10,  48,  82, 
138,  152,  154-168,  178,  218,  243, 
244,  246,  269. 

Godwin,  Parke,  125,  140. 


INDEX 


424 

Godwin,  William,  xxviii,  72,  189,  200. 
Goethe,  Johann  Wolfgang  von,  204,  395. 
Golden  Calf,  The,  182. 

Gulden  House,  The,  184. 

Goldsmith,  Oliver,  252. 

Goose  Step,  The,  353. 

Goslings,  The,  353. 

Goss,  Warren,  385. 

Gough,  John  B.,  12. 

Gould,  Jay,  12,  13,  14,  84,  137,  189, 
214. 

Grady,  Henry  W.,  xii. 

Grammarian’s  Funeral,  The,  56. 

Grant,  General  Ulysses  S.,  20,  27-31, 
35>  37,  38,. 43,  46,  169,  217- 
Grant’s  Memoirs,  31. 

Grant,  Robert,  xii,  180,  182,  382. 

Gray,  Asa,  191. 

Gray  Alan,  The,  64. 

Greeley,  Horace,  20,  22,  23,  43,  87,  108, 
125,  128,  140,  143,  276,  277,  279, 
282. 

Greene,  Ann  Terry,  141. 

Grote,  George,  156,  157,  205,  210. 

Haeckel,  Ernst,  202,  203,  402. 

Hagar,  180. 

Hall,  G.  Oakey,  12,  13,  14. 

Halleck,  Fitz-Greene,  56. 

Hamilton,  Alexander,  152,  216,  218,  408, 
410. 

Hanna,  Marcus  A.,  15,  43,  300. 

Hand  of  the  Potter,  The,  357. 

Harbor,  The,  350. 

Harding,  Rebecca,  61. 

Hardy,  Thomas,  237,  289,  324,  325, 
326. 

Harmony  of  Interests:  Agricultural, 
Manufacturing  and  Commercial, 
The,  106. 

Harper’s  Weekly,  148,  150,  152. 
Harrington,  James,  xxviii,  130,  408. 
Harris,  Joel  Chandler,  xii,  40x0. 

Harte,  Bret,  93,  396,  400. 

Harvey,  “Coin,”  125,  164,  284. 
Hauptmann,  Gerhart,  299. 

Hawkins,  Sir  John,  231. 

Hawthorne,  Nathaniel,  53,  70,  151,  303, 
380,  397- 

Hay,  Clarence  Leonard,  173,  174,  175. 
Hay,  John,  171,  373,  174,  175,  176,  177, 
178,  179,  218,  226. 

Hayes,  Rutherford  B.,  38m  280,  281. 
Hazard  of  New  Fortunes,  A,  244,  245, 
252. 

Heavens  and  Earth,  386. 

Hecht,  Ben,  386. 

Hegel,  Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich,  78, 
124,  364. 

Heine,  Heinrich,  248. 


Helper,  Hilton  R.,  125,  140. 

Henry  Esmond,  348. 

Her  Mountain  Lover,  291. 

Hergesheimer,  Joseph,  379-381- 
Herrick,  Robert,  xiv,  182,  325,  348, 
349-350,  368,  406.  _ 

Herschel,  Sir  John  Frederick,  205. 

Hey  Rub-a-Dub-Dub,  357. 

Hickok,  Wild  Bill,  16,  17,  92. 

Histoire  de  la  Litterature  Anglaise,  vii. 
History  of  Greece,  205. 

History  of  the  Dividing  Line,  The,  389. 
History  of  the  Progress  of  the  Human 
Mind,  194. 

History  of  the  United  States  During 
the  Administration  of  Jefferson  and 
Madison,  218. 

Hoar,  Ebenezer,  141. 

Holmes,  Oliver  Wendell,  52,  53,  55,  251, 

292. 

Holt,  Henry,  157,  210,  21 1,  243. 

Hoosier  Schoolmaster,  The,  288,  391, 
400. 

Horace,  148. 

Horses  and  Men,  370. 

House  of  Mirth,  The,  180,  381. 

Howe,  E.  W.,  xi,  377,  391. 

Howells,  William  Dean,  32,  87,  88,  89, 
99,  179,  18 1,  237,  238,  241-253,  292, 

293,  296,  302,  316,  317,  318,  399. 
Huckleberry  Finn,  57,  65,  91,  92,  94. 
Humble  Remonstrance,  237. 

Humble  Romance,  A,  66. 

Humboldt,  Alexander,  205. 

Huneker,  James,  xiv. 

Huntington,  Collis  P.,  15,  25. 

Ibsen,  Henrik,  293. 

Idea  of  God,  The,  209. 

Illinois  Central  Railroad,  25,  165. 

In  the  Heart  of  a  Fool,  374. 

Indian  Summer,  252. 

Industrial  Revolution,  168,  171,  189, 
193,  231. 

Ingersoll,  Robert,  12. 

Innocents  Abroad,  9. 

Inside  of  the  Cup,  The,  349. 

Iron  Heel,  The,  352. 

Irving,  Washington,  398. 

Jackson,  Andrew,  26,  267,  273,  278,  281, 
410. 

James,  Henry,  54,  181,  239-241,  243, 
250,  380,  397,  399, 

James,  Jesse,  16. 

James,  William,  402. 

Janet  Alarch,  386. 

Jason  Edwards:  an  Average  Man,  298 
Java  Head,  380. 

J .  Devlin — Boss,  186. 


INDEX 


425 


Jean  Hugenot ,  386. 

Jefferson,  Thomas,  viii,  ix,  x,  26,  72,  83, 
125,  130,  152,  199,  200,  201,  218, 
264,  281,  304,  381,  403,  410. 

Jeffries,  Lord  Chief  Justice,  232. 

Jewett,  Sarah  Orne,  57,  63,  64,  66,  238, 
288,  397,  400. 

Joan  of  Arc,  91,  99. 

John  Barleycorn,  352. 

John  Randolph,  218. 

Johnson,  Andrew,  19,  20,  30. 

Johnston,  Mary,  180,  348. 

Jude  the  Obscure,  237. 

Jungle,  The,  353,  383. 

Jurgen,  335,  342.  • 

Kansas  Situation,  The,  164. 

Keats,  John,  54. 

King,  Clarence,  171,  173,  218. 

King  Coal,  353. 

Kingsley,  Charles,  139. 

Kipling,  Rudyard,  56,  59,  166,  167. 
Kirkland,  Joseph,  288,  289,  290,  293, 
295,  391. 

Kirkland,  Matdda,  289. 

Knight,  Madam  Sarah,  389. 

Kossuth,  Lajos  (Louis),  15 1,  156. 

Labor  Question,  The,  45. 

Ladd,  Georue  Trumbull,  402. 

La  Farge,  John,  224. 

La  Follette,  Robert,  xiii,  406. 

Lamarck,  Jean  Baptiste,  198. 

Langdon,  Olivia,  87,  88. 

Lanier,  Sidney,  xiii,  56,  334. 

Laplace,  Pierre  Simon,  205. 

Latzko,  Andreas,  385. 

Law  of  Civilization  and  Decay,  The,  228, 
231. 

Lawrence,  D.  FL,  324,  323,  326,  371,  399- 
Lawson,  Thomas  W.,  405. 

Lease,  Mary  Ellen,  266,  298. 

Leaves  of  Grass,  73 >  74'  79>  82. 

Le  Conte,  191. 

Leggett,  William,  71,  72- 

Letters  from  an  American  Farmer,  389. 

Lewes,  George  Henry,  204. 

Lewis,  Sinclair,  xv,  xvi,  360-369,  373» 
374. 

Lewisohn,  Ludwig,  326,  3 47>  37^- 
Lieber,  Francis,  119,  120. 

Life  Everlasting,  209. 

Life  for  a  Life,  A,  350. 

Life  in  the  Iron  Mills,  61. 

Life  of  Albert  Gallatin,  218. 

Life  of  James  J.  Hill,  275- 
Life  of  Lincoln,  388. 

Life  on  the  Mississippi,  IS*  91- 
Lincoln,  Abraham,  19,  26,  27,  30,  31, 
87,  99,  176,  177.  260. 


Linda  Condon,  380. 

Lindsay,  Vachel,  319. 

List,  Friedrick,  105,  108. 

Lloyd,  Henry  D.,  xiii,  284. 

Lloyd,  Samuel,  231. 

Locke,  John,  xxviii,  98,  130,  13 1,  193, 
199,  201,  408,  412. 

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,  226. 

London,  Jack,  xiv,  198,  325,  352,  368, 
406. 

London  Times,  The,  38m 
Longfellow,  Henry  Wadsworth,  52,  53, 

ST  55>  57'  2Si'  334- 
Longstreet,  Gus,  92,  390. 

Looking  Backward,  xii,  254,  302-315. 
Lord,  Eleazer,  273,  274. 

Lorris,  Guillaume  de,  220. 

Lost  Lady,  The,  384. 

Loves  of  Pelleas  and  Etarre,  377. 

Lowell,  James  Russell,  52,  55,  65,  66, 
138,  141,  150,  161,  218,  238,  243, 
250,  251,  292,  398. 

Lyell,  Sir  Charles,  219. 

Mabie,  Hamilton  W.,  57. 

McClure’s  Magazine,  405. 

McCullock  (Secretary  of  the  Treas¬ 
ury),  35- 

McKinley,  William,  165,  176,  300. 
McPherson,  Aimee  Semple,  xvi,  367. 

Me  Teague,  299,  329,  330-332,  333- 
Madame  Bovary,  323. 

Madison,  James,  233,  408. 

Maggie:  A  Girl  of  the  Streets,  55'  237> 
328. 

Main  Street,  364,  378. 

Maine,  Sir  Henry  James  Sumner,  210. 
Main-Travelled  Roads,  246,  291,  292, 
294,  295,  296,  297,  298,  391. 
Malthus,  Thomas  Robert,  104,  132. 
Mammon  of  Unrighteousness,  180,  182, 
184. 

Man  versus  the  State,  200,  284. 

Man  with  the  Hoe,  The,  xu. 

Mansfield,  Josie,  13. 

Many  Marriages,  370. 

Marching  Men,  370. 

Marie  Antoinette,  96. 

Marjorie  Daw,  57. 

Markham,  Edwin,  vii. 

Marlowe,  Christopher,  344. 

Marshall,  John,  233,  234. 

Marshes  of  Glynn,  334. 

Martin  Eden,  352. 

Marx,  Karl,  76,  105,  in,  112,  114,  116, 
123,  124,  128,  130,  139,  243,  317. 
323,  402,  408. 

Masters,  Edgar  Lee,  xiv,  3191  325>  377 

393- 

Mather,  Cotton,  ix,  191. 


426 


INDEX 


Mather,  Increase,  191. 

Matthews,  Brander,  325. 

Maugham,  Somerset,  324,  326. 
Maupassant,  Guy  de,  326. 

Mazzini,  Giuseppe,  15 1. 

Mellon,  Andrew,  366. 

Melville,  Herman,  14,  252,  403. 
Memoirs  of  an  American  Citizen,  The, 
349- 

Men  in  War,  385. 

Mencken,  H.  L.,  xiv,  347,  363,  376. 
Meredith,  George,  325. 

Merwin,  Samuel,  186. 

Messer  Marco  Polo,  377. 

Midlander,  The,  375. 

Mill,  John  Stuart,  113,  114,  122,  124, 
129,  130,  155,  156,  157,  158,  160, 
161,  167,  168,  197,  200,  204,  213, 
402. 

Millet,  Jean  Francois,  293. 

Minister  s  Wooing,  The,  64. 

Miss  Lucinda,  398. 

Miss  Lulu  Bett,  377. 

Mr.  Crewe’s  Career,  186,  348. 

Mr.  Salt,  187. 

Money  Captain,  The,  187. 

Monsieur  Beaucaire,  335. 

Mont-Saint- Michel  and  Chartres,  218, 
220,  221,  222,  226; 

Moody,  Dwight  L.,  12,  13,  14. 

Moon  Calf,  386. 

Moran  of  the  Lady  Letty,  329. 

More,  Sir  Thomas,  246. 

Morgan,  J.  Pierpont,  226,  349. 

Morgan,  Lewis  H.,  191. 

Morris,  Nelson,  15. 

Morris,  William,  48,  68,  96,  139,  224, 
225,  246,  247,  298,  312,  368,  376, 
402. 

Morton,  Sarah  Wentworth,  62. 

Morton,  Senator  O.  P.,  269. 

Most,  Johann,  284. 

Motley,  John  Lothrop,  52. 

Murfree,  Mary,  xii. 

My  Antonia,  384,  393. 

My  Literary  Passions,  252. 

Myers,  Gustavus,  xiii,  406. 

Mysterious  Stranger,  The,  91,  100. 

Nana,  325,  329. 

Nasby,  Petroleum  V.,  92. 

Nathan,  Robert,  378-379. 

Nation,  The,  154-168. 

National  Quarterly  Review,  205. 
Nationalist,  The,  302,  303. 

Newman,  John  Henry,  224. 

New  York  Sun,  43,  44. 

New  York  Tribune,  22,  108. 

News  from  Nowhere,  247,  3 1 2. 
Nicholson,  Meredith,  xi,  364,  373. 


Nietzsche,  Friedrich,  347,  352,  386,  402, 
412. 

Nile  Notes  of  a  Howadji,  148. 

Norris,  Frank,  xii,  18 1,  188,  299,  317, 
319,  324,  325,  327,  329-334.  352. 
North  American  Review,  159,  205. 
Northern  Pacific  Railway,  16,  29,  37. 
Norton,  Charles  Eliot,  150,  152,  160, 
161,  243,  250,  292. 

Novel;  What  It  Is,  The,  237. 

Noyes,  John  Humphrey,  74. 

Octopus,  The,  329,  330,  332—334- 
Of  Human  Bondage,  324,  325. 

Ohio  State  Journal,  32. 

Old  New  York,  382. 

Old  Order  Changeth,  The,  374. 

Old-Town  Folks,  64. 

One  of  Ours,  384,  385. 

loot  Afternoons  in  Chicago,  386. 

0  Pioneers,  383,  393. 

Origin  of  Species,  The,  205. 

Otis,  Harrison  Gray,  58. 

Our  Land  and  Land  Policy;  National 
and  State,  130. 

Our  National  Debt  a  National  Blessing, 

4°. 

Out  of  Nowhere  into  Nothing,  371. 
Outlines  of  Astronomy,  205. 

Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,  208. 
Owen,  Robert,  15 1. 

Pacific  Railroad,  25,  144. 

Page,  Thomas  Nelson,  xii. 

Paine,  Robert  Treat,  59. 

Paine,  Tom,  viii,  71,  72,  73,  125,  126, 
130,  132,  136,  401. 

Palmerston,  Henry  John  Temple,  215. 
Parker,  Theodore,  viii,  51,  76,  81,  131, 
147,  204,  208. 

Parkman,  Francis,  52. 

Passage  to  India,  A,  Si. 

Pattee,  Fred  Lewis,  398. 

Payne,  Will,  187. 

Pearl  of  Orr’s  Island '.  The,  64. 

Pembroke,  63,  66. 

Penrod,  374. 

Peter  Kindred,  378. 

Phelps,  Elizabeth  Stuart,  61,  62,  66,  68. 
Phillips,  David  Graham,  406. 

Phillips,  Wendell,  22,  50,  58,  125,  139, 
140-147,  150,  269,  276,  277. 
Phoenix,  John,  92. 

Pilgrim  s  Progress,  14. 

Pillsbury,  Charles  A.,  15. 

Pit,  The,  329,  330,  333. 

Plato,  246,  364. 

Plumes,  386. 

Poe,  Edgar  Allan,  xxi,  54,  56, 172,  397. 
Poganuc  People,  64.  „ 


INDEX 


427 


Political  Economy ,  129. 

Political  Justice,  200. 

Political  Science  and  Constitutional  Law, 
120. 

Political  Science,  or  the  State,  120. 
Ponkapog  Papers,  57. 

Poole,  Ernest,  348,  350-351,  406. 

Poor  White,  370. 

Pope,  Alexander,  vi,  248,  360. 

Porter,  General  Horace,  38n. 

Portion  of  Labor,  The,  62,  66,  68. 
Potiphar  Papers,  148. 

Powderley,  Terence  V.,  xi,  160,  284. 
Practical  Economics,  269. 

Prairie  Folks,  291,  294,  295. 

Price,  Richard,  193,  195. 

Priestly,  Joseph,  73,  193,  195. 

Prince  and  the  Pauper,  The,  91,  97- 
Progress  and  Poverty,  116,  126,  128,  129, 

G2-  .  ^ 

Progress  of  Democracy  in  Europe,  177. 
Proudhon,  Pierre  Joseph,  105,  139. 

Prue  and  I,  149. 

Psychology,  208. 

Puppet  Master,  The,  379. 

Putnam’s  Magazine,  148,  149. 

Quesnay,  Francois,  127. 

Quick,  Herbert,  394. 

Quincey,  Edmund,  50,  141. 

Quincey,  Josiah,  51. 

Raw  Material,  376. 

Recessional,  56. 

Recollections  of  a  Private ,  The,  385. 

Red  Badge  of  Courage,  The,  328,  385. 
Regne  Animal  distribue  d’apres  son  Or¬ 
ganisation,  205. 

Reid,  Whitelaw,  87.  _ 

Responsibilities  of  the  Novelist,  The,  188. 
Revolution,  The,  352. 

Ricardo,  David,  104,  106,  ill,  112,  113, 
1 14,  1 16,  124,  126,  132,  163,  274m 
Richard  Carvel,  348. 

Richardson,  Dorothy,  399. 

Riders  to  the  Sea,  378. 

Rights  of  Man,  The,  132. 

Riley,  James  W.,  xi,  56,  288,  290,  373. 
Riley,  Woodbridge,  197. 

Ripley,  George,  15 1,  368. 

Rise  of  Silas  Lapham,  The,  250. 

'  Rittenhouse,  David,  191. 

Rivet  in  Grandfather  s  A  eck.  The,  343* 
Robert  Elsmere,  349. 

Robinson  Crusoe’s  Money,  269.  _ 
Robinson,  Edward  Arlington,- xiv. 
Rockefeller,  John  D.,  15- 
Rogers,  Henry  H.,  90. 

Rolvaag,  Ole,  387-396. 

Roosevelt,  Theodore,  xm,  226,  4°4- 


Root,  Elihu,  284. 

Rose  of  Dutches’ s  Cooly,  292. 

Rough  Hewn,  376. 

Roughing  It,  15,  91,  92,  98,  100. 
Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  xxviii,  367,  389. 
Ruskin,  John,  133,  139,  224,  368,  402. 
Russell,  Charles  Edward,  xiii,  406. 
Russell,  Lord  William,  215. 

Sage,  Russell,  12. 

Saint-Simon,  105,  151,  I9^>  I9^- 
Sandburg,  Carl,  xiv,  319. 

Sankev,  Ira  David,  13. 

Santayana,  George,  53. 

Saturday  Evening  Post,  The,  327,  379, 
381. 

Scarlet  Letter,  The,  65. 

Schurz,  Karl,  155. 

Scott,  Evelyn,  xv. 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  96. 

Sea  Wolf,  The,  352. 

Sebastopol,  328. 

Sedgwick,  Catherine,  62. 

Sellers,  Colonel  Beriah,  20,  21,  22,  23, 
25»  29,  37,  88,  92,  93,  94,  1 16,  169, 
296. 

Seth’s  Brother’s  Wife,  288. 

Shaw,  Anna,  149. 

Shaw,  George  Bernard,  335,  343. 

“Shaw  Memorial  Ode,”  58. 

Sheridan,  Richard  Brimsley,  344. 
Sherman,  General  William  Tecumseh, 
29,  217. 

Sherman,  Senator  John,  32,  34,  38n, 
268,  269. 

Sherman,  Stuart  P.,  274,  358,  359. 

Short  Line  War,  The,  186. 

Sidney,  Sir  Philip,  89. 

Silent  Partner,  The,  61,  62. 

Silliman  s  Journal,  191- 
Simons,  A.  M.,  xiii. 

Simpson,  Jerry,  266,  284. 

Sinclair,  Upton,  xiv,  348,  368,  406. 
Sismondi,  Jean  Charles,  105. 

Sisters’  Tragedy,  The,  55. 

Smith,  Adam,  107. 

Smith,  J.  Allen,  vii,  xvii,  408. 

Social  Strugglers,  The,  182,  184, 185,  382. 
Son  at  the  Front,  A,  382. 

Son  of  the  Middle  Border,  A,  292,  374- 
Song  of  Myself,  81. 

Song  of  the  Lark,  The,  384. 

Sorel,  Albert,  139. 

Spencer,  Herbert,  80,  122,  193,  I97>  r98* 
199,  200,  201,  202,  203,  205,  206, 
207,  208,  209,  235,  253,  284,  293, 
294,  299,  3 1 7,  3 1 8,  3  5  2,  402. 

Spirit  of  American  Government,  l  he,  408 
SpofFord,  Harriet  Prescott,  62. 

Spoil  of  Office,  A,  298. 


428 


INDEX 


Spoilsmen,  The,  1 86. 

Spoon  River  Anthology,  325,  370,  377, 

.393- 

Squirrel  Cage,  The,  376. 

Stallings,  Laurence,  386. 

Stanford,  Leland,  15,  127. 

Starting  from  Paumanok,  73,  79. 

State,  The,  120. 

Stedman,  Edmund  Clarence,  52,  53,  302. 
Steffens,  Lincoln,  187,  406. 

Stevens,  Thaddeus,  69,  143,  160,  271, 
272,  276,  277,  279. 

Stevenson,  Robert  Louis,  237. 

Stewart,  A.  T.,  29. 

Stiles,  Ezra,  191. 

Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,  52,  53. 

Story  of  a  Bad  Boy,  57. 

Story  of  a  Country  Town,  The,  377,  391. 
Story  Teller’s  Story,  A,  371. 

Stowe,  Harriet  Beecher,  62,  63,  64, 
398. 

Stranger’s  Banquet,  The,  377. 

Strindberg,  August,  299,  324,  325. 
Stubbs,  William,  210. 

Suckow,  Ruth,  394. 

Sumner,  Charles,  150. 

Sunday,  Billy,  361,  367,  368. 

Swift,  Jonathan,  vi,  89,  155,  378. 
Sydney,  Algernon,  146. 

Synge,  John  M.,  378. 

Synthetic  Philosophy,  201,  206. 

Sy steme  du  Monde,  205. 

Taine,  Hippolyte,  vii,  89,  293,  294,  295, 
323,  402. 

Talmadge,  T.  DeWitt,  12. 

Tarbell,  Ida,  406. 

Tarkington,  Booth,  xi,  348,  374,  375, 

377.  379- 

Tatler,  The,  149. 

Taylor,  Bayard,  38m 
Taylor,  John,  xxvii,  125,  127,  218,  264, 
276. 

Tennyson,  Lord  Alfred,  54,  202,  237, 

334- 

Thackeray,  William  Makepeace,  148, 
179,  348.  374- 
Lhanet,  Octave,  238. 

Thayer,  William  Roscoe,  171. 

Theory  of  Social  Revolution,  The,  232. 
This  Side  of  Paradise,  386. 

Thoreau,  Henry  David,  viii,  50,  72,  73, 
76,  148,  189,  337,  403. 

Three  Black  Pennys,  The,  380. 

Three  Soldiers,  383. 

Through  Nature  to  God,  209. 

Through  the  Eye  of  the  Needle,  247. 
Through  the  Wheat,  385. 

Tilden,  Samuel  Joves,  281. 

Tilton,  Libby,  13. 


Titan,  The,  355. 

To  Have  and  to  Hold,  180. 

Tocqueville,  Alexis  de,  156,  158,  160, 

387- 

Tolstoi,  Leo,  64,  65,  248,  293.  328. 

Tom  Sawyer,  94,  95,  100,  374. 

Train,  George  Francis,  12. 

Traubel,  Horace,  85. 

Traveller  from  Altruria,  The,  246,  247. 
Tribune,  38n,  43,  44,  128. 

Triumph  of  the  Egg,  The,  370. 

Troll  Garden,  The,  383. 

Trumps,  149. 

Turgenev,  Ivan,  64,  293. 

Turgot,  Anne  Robert  Jacques,  193,  195, 
199,  219. 

Turner,  Frederick  Jackson,  159,  404. 
Twain,  Mark,  vi,  10,  14,  15,  31,  53,  54, 
SS,  86-101,  102,  123,  169,  242,  252, 
290,  292,  345,  374,  400. 

Tweed,  Boss,  12,  13,  14,  137,  152. 
Twitched,  Joe,  87. 

Uncle  Tom’s  Cabin,  302. 

Under  Fire,  385. 

Union  Pacific,  16,  24,  39,  103,  214. 
Unguarded  Gates,  58. 

Unleavened  Bread,  180,  182,  382. 
Untermyer,  Samuel,  406. 

U’Ren,  William  S.,  284. 

Valley  of  Democracy,  373. 

Vanderbilt,  Cornelius,  12,  14,  27,  296. 
Van  Doren,  Carl,  380. 

Handover  and  the  Brute,  329,  332. 

Vanity  Fair,  148. 

Veblen,  Thorstein,  193,  406,  412. 
Venetian  Days,  25 1. 

Virginians,  The,  348. 

Voltaire,  204. 

Wade,  Ben,  38m 
Walker,  Amasa,  hi. 

Walker,  Francis  A.,  103,  111-117. 

Wall  Street,  12,  14,  no,  163,  181,  185, 
189,  262,  266,  269,  277,  284,  382. 
Walsh,  Frank  P„  406. 

Ward,  Artemus,  92. 

Ward,  Lester  F.,  198,  402. 

War  and  Peace,  328. 

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,  87,  169,  184. 
Washburn,  C.  C„  15.  4 

Washington  Chronicle,  38m 
Washington,  George,  381. 

Watson,  Tom,  266,  284. 

Wayland,  Francis,  104,  105,  in,  133. 
Wealth  of  Nations,  305. 

Weaver,  General  James  Baird,  2 66, 
284. 

Web  of  Life,  The,  350.  •# 


INDEX 


429 


Webster,  Daniel,  xxviii,  119,  281,  408, 
409. 

Webster,  H.  K.,  186. 

Wells,  David  A.,  103,  108,  268,  269,  270, 
274. 

Wharton,  Edith,  xii,  180,  240,  347,  381- 
383.  4°5- 

What  is  Man? ,  91. 

What  Price  Glory?,  386. 

When  Knighthood  Was  in  Flower,  335. 

Whistler,  James  McNeil,  239. 

White,  Maria,  141. 

White,  William  Allen,  xi,  348,  364,  374, 
377- 

Whitman,  Walt,  13,  14,  54,  55>  SN  69— 
86,  87,  88,  90,  102,  189,  241,  293, 
294,  299,  354-  356,  402,  403. 

Whittier,  John  Greenleaf,  52,  141. 

Wilbur,  Ida,  298. 

Wilkins,  Mary,  395,  4°°. 

Willard,  Frances  E.,  302. 

Williams,  Francis  Churchill,  186. 

Williams,  Roger,  viii,  ix,  121. 

Wilson,  Margaret,  394. 

Wilson,  Woodrow,  xiii,  120,  284,  406, 
412. 


Wind  Bloweth,  The,  378. 

Windom,  William,  38m 
Windy  McPherson  s  Son,  370. 

Winesburg,  Ohio,  63,  324,  370. 

Winter,  William,  53. 

Winthrop,  John,  121. 

Wise,  John,  155. 

Wolf,  The,  333. 

Wood,  Fernando,  12,  14. 

Woodberry,  George  E.,  58. 

Woodhull,  Victoria,  12,  13,  202. 
Woodward,  W.  W.,  xiii. 

W'oolsey,  Theodore  Dwight,  119,  120- 
124,  130. 

Woolson,  Constance  Femmore,  398. 
Wright,  Fanny,  71,  73,  14°- 

Youmans,  Edward  L.,  207. 

Young  People’s  Pride,  386. 

Zola,  Emile,  64,  179,  180,  188,  237,  293, 
299,  323,  324,  325,  326,  328,  329, 
330- 

Zoology,  205.  . 

Zury,  The  Meanest  Man  in  Spring 
County,  289,  391. 


Date  Due 


TRENT  UN  VERS  TY 


0 


64 


0045279  7 


PS88  .P3  v.3 


Parringt-nn,  V erilQTl  LauL& 

author 


Main  currents  in  AmsT-icaa 
thought 


DATE  DUE 

BORROWER'S  NAMe197^4-64 

_ 

_ 

:  - _ _  ■  — 

f ’ARR/aIG-soa/ 


197464 


The  first  two  volumes  of  Professor  Parrington’s  great  study  Main  Currents  ' 
in  American  Thought,  which  brought  him  the  Pulitzer  Prize  for  History  in 

1928,  carried  his  interpretation  down  from  the  Puritan  heritage  to  the  close 
of  what  he  called  “the  Romantic  revolution  in  America,”  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Civil  War  period.  The  present  volume,  which  is  concerned  with  the 
triumphal  emergence  of  a  society  based  on  material  values,  was  not  fully 
elaborated  —  the  individual  estimates  of  numerous  figures  important  to  an 
understanding  of  the  time  had  not  been  written  —  when  the  author  died  in 

1929.  That  it  was  published  nonetheless  —  it  first  appeared  in  1930  —  is  a 
tribute  to  the  author’s  brilliance. 


Vernon  L.  Farrington 


Main  Currents  in  American  Thought 

The  Beginnings  of  Critical  Realism  ? 
in  America  (1860-1920) 

»! 

“The  volume  as  it  stands  is  a  superb  fragment.  ...  If  he  had  lived  to  finish 
this  third  volume  it  would  have  been  the  best  treatment  of  these  matters  ever 
written.  Even  as  a  fragment  it  is  still  the  best.”  -Carl  Van  Doren 

“Professor  Parrington’s  work  will  stand  unquestionably  as  a  vital  and  orig¬ 
inal  contribution  to  our  cultural  history.  No  critic,  it  may  be  ventured,  can 
henceforth  work  in  the  same  field  without  debt  to  the  author.” 

—New  York  Times 


“One  may  well  regret  that  the  author  did  not  live  to  complete  his  great  study 
of  American  thought,  but  even  in  its  present  form  it  is  a  stimulating  and 
valuable  contribution  towards  an  evaluation  of  American  intellectual 
history.”  —Current  History  v 


Vernon  Louis  Parrington  (1871-1929)  graduated  from  Harvard  University  and 
taught  at  the  University  of  Washington.  Among  his  writings  are  Sinclair  Lewis  — 
Our  Own  Diogenes,  an  edition  of  The  Connecticut  Wits,  and  important  articles 


in  the  Cambridge  History  of  American  Literature,  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica, 
and  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography.  The  first  two  volumes  of  his  MAIN 
CURRENTS  IN  AMERICAN  THOUGHT  -  The  Colonial  Mind  (1602-1800) 
and  The  Romantic  Revolution  in  America  ( 1800-1860 )  -  are  available  in  paper- 
bound  Harvest  editions 


A  HARBINGER  BOOK  /  HARCOURT,  BRACE  &  WORLD,  INC. 


